Dionysius of Halicarnassus: Roman Antiquities, Vol. 2 (Books III-V; Spelman, 1758)
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (Edward Spelman, trans.)

Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/romanantiquitie02polygoog
Edition: Edward Spelman's English translation (London, 1758), via Internet Archive scan. The standard public-domain English Dionysius; complete with translator's preface, notes, and dissertations. (Note: 18th-century orthography; the scan renders the long s as f.)
Public domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel library, 2026-10-09.

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS,
Tranflated  into  English;

WITH

NOTES  and  DISSERTATIONS.

mm —  i— ■■■■■  irr  —  ■  >  TT-rrm-ni —■ — — - rmrfirfnrrt — —


EDWARD  SPELMAN,  Efq.-


VOL.  IL

LONDON,

Printed,  and  fold  by  the  Bookfellers  of  London  and  Wejlminjier .

MD  CCLVIII.


'  /  s


.  v  "


£  3  i  c  •  x  v


j  1  C3  j  .  i  l  .  ■  .


:  1  .  o


*  :  .  n  *

l


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES


DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.


THE  THIRD  BOOK.


AFTER  the  death  of  Numa  Pompilius,  the  fenate,
being,  again,  inverted  with  the  whole  power  of  the
commonwealth,  refolved  to  retain  the  fame  form  of
government ;  and  the  people  not  opportng  their  refolution,
they  appointed  fome  of  the  oldeft  fenators  to  govern,  as
Interreges,  during  a  certain  number  of  days;  by  whom,
purfuant  to  the  unanimous  dertre  of  the  people,  Tullus
Hoftilius  was  chofen  king ;  whofe  defcent  was  as  follows :
A  man  of  diftinguifhed  birth,  and  great  fortune,  whofe
name  was  Hoftilius,  had  removed  to  Rome  from  Medullia,
a  city  built  by  the  Albans,  which  Romulus,  after  he  had
poftefled  himfelf  of  it  by  compolition,  made  a  colony  of  the
Romans ;  and  married  a  Sabine  woman,  the  daughter  of
Herftlius,  the  fame  who  advifed  her  country-women  to  go
in  quality  of  deputies  to  their  fathers  in  favor  of  their
hulbands,  when  the  Sabines  were  making  war  againft  the
Vol.  II.  'A  Romans,


2  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

Romans,  and  who  was  looked  upon  as  the  chief  caufe  of
the  alliance  then  concluded  by  the  leaders  of  the  two
nations.  This  man,  having  had  a  fhare  in  the  many  wars
Romulus  was  ingaged  in,  and  1  performed  great  actions  in
the  feveral  battles  with  the  Sabines,  was  llain,  leaving  an
only  fon,  who  was  then  an  infant ;  and  was  buried  by  the
kings  in  the  principal  part  of  the  forum,  and  honoured  with
a  pillar,  and  an  infcription,  teflifying  his  valor.  His  only
fon,  being  arrived  to  manhood,  and,  having  married  a
woman  of  diftin&ion,  had  by  her  Tullus  Hoftilius,  a  man
of  activity,  who  was  chofen  king  by  the  votes  of  the  people,
given  according  to  law,  the  gods  by  favourable  auguries
confirming  their  choice.  The  year,  in  which  he  entered
upon  the  government,  was  the  fecond  of  the  twenty  feventh
Olympiad,  in  which  Eurybates,  an  Athenian,  won  the  prize
of  the  ftadium,  Leoftratus  being  archon.  Immediately


Annotations  on  the  Third  Book.

*•  e„  rom  XocCms  juux<x‘?,  aro-  ingagements.  Our  author,  a  little
0vjj<nc«.  I  agree  with  Cafaubon  in  plac-  before,  gives  to  the  grandfather  of
ing  the  comma  after  rather  Tullus  Hoftilius,  the  name  of  Hofti-

than  after  roJ«i;apvo?.  It  ftands  thus  lius  only  ;  to  which  the  Vatican  ma¬
in  all  the  editions,  ^yctKet  *{>yot  emoSet^-  nufcript  prefixes  the  name  of  Tullius,
ctMsvof,  £v  roitg  which  I  look  upon  to  be  a  miftake,

ctiroQv*i<ntet  *,  the  abfurdity  of  which  becaufe  a  Livy  calls  him  Hoftus  Ho*
pointing  he  has  not  obferved,  but  I  ftilius,  who,  he,  afterwards,  b  fays,
think  it  very  glaring  ;  becaufe,  though  was  grandfather  to  this  king  of  the
a  man  may,  very  well,  be  faid  to  have  Romans  :  Inde  Tullum  Hojiilium ,  ne~
performed  great  adions  in  feveral  in-  potem  Hoftilii ,  cujus  in  infimd  arce  clara
gagements,  I  do  not  fee  how  he  can  -pugna  adverfus  Sabinos  fuerat ,  regem
be  faid  to  have  been  (lain  in  feveral  populus  jujfit.  Patres  auffores  fafti.


upon


*  B.  i.  c.  1 2.


b  lb.  C.  22.


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC ARN  ASSE NS  I S.  3

upon  his  acceffion,  he  gained  the  hearts  of  the  2  lowed,
and  pooreft  fort  of  the  people,  by  an  action,  of  all  others,  the
mod  magnificent.  It  was  this;  The  kings,  his  predecef-
fors,  were  pofleffed  of  particular  demains,  confiding  of  very
fertil  lands  of  a  large  extent,  the  revenues  of  which,  not
only,  fupplied  them  with  victims  for  the  facrifices,  but
furnifhed  their  tables  with  great  affluence :  Thefe  lands
Romulus  had  conquered,  and  difpoflefled  the  former  owners
of  them:  And  he  dying  without  children,  Numa  Pom-
pilius,  his  fuccedor,  had  enjoyed  them:  They  were,  no
longer,  public  lands,  but  the  demains  of  the  king  in  pof-
fefflon.  Thefe  lands  Tullus  caufed  to  be  divided,  equally,
among  fuch  of  the  Romans,  as  had  none  of  their  own,  lay¬
ing,  that  his  own  patrimony  was  fufficient  both  for  the  fa¬
crifices,  and  for  the  expence  of  his  table.  By  this  adt  of
humanity,  he  relieved  the  poorer  fort,  and  freed  them  from
the  neceflity  of  being  fervants  to  others.  And,  to  the  end
that  none  might  want  a  habitation,  he  added  the  Caelian
hill  to  the  city,  where  thofe  Etonians,  who  were  unprovided
with  dwellings,  had  as  much  ground  allotted  to  them  as
was  fufficient,  and  built  houfes ;  and  he  himfelf  fixed  his
habitation  in  this  place.  Thefe  are  the  memorable  adtions
of  this  king,  relating  to  his  civil  adminiftration.  0

2‘  To  Bylinov.  and  Baikov,  are  t?<t< tu(>cc  Jiygyyfvyg  wav’  A^vaioig

words  derived  from  die  government  aroA<7««?,  01  uvro^uloilot  sxeyovlo  ©HTE2,
of  the  Athenians,  who  were  divided  y.ca  ©HTIKON  tsa«v.  Ouloi  &  ytiJtytag
into  four  parts  •,  the  lowed:,  or  pooreft  ytletxw  ^  a*  t?{*lsvov1o.  Har-

of  which  were  called  B-Jeg.  Thefe  pocration;  for  which  he  quotes  Ari-
were  incapable  of  any  magiftracies,  ftotle,  and  Ariftophanes.
and  never  ferved  in  their  armies  j

A  2


II.  His


ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I  T I E  S  OF  Book  III.

II.  His  military  exploits  are  many,  and,  defervedly,  ce¬
lebrated  ;  of  which  I  fhall,  now,  give  an  account,  and  begin
with  the  Alban  war.  The  caufe  of  the  difunion,  and  dif-
folution  of  the  bond  of  affinity  between  the  two  cities,  was
an  Alban,  whofe  name  was  Cluilius,  their  chief  magiftrate  ;
who,  grieving  at  the  profperity  of  the  Romans,  and  unable
to  contain  his  envy ;  and,  being  withal,  by  nature,  arrogant
and  rafh,  refolved  to  ingage  the  two  cities  in  a  war:  But,
finding  it  impoflible  to  perfuade  the  Albans  to  allow  him,
without  juft  and  urgent  reafons,  to  lead  an  army  againft  the
Romans,  he  had  recourfe  to  the  following  ftrategem  :  He
permitted  the  pooreft,  and  boldeft  of  the  Albans  to  plunder
the  territories  of  the  Romans,  promifing  them  impunity ;
and,  by  this  means,  he  procured  many,  from  the  hopes  of
advantages  unattended  with  danger,  or  the  fear  of  reftitution,
to  carry  on  a  plundering  war  in  the  neighbouring  country:
And,  in  this,  he  took  very  proper  meafures,  as  it  appeared
by  the  event:  For  he  concluded  that  the  Romans  would
not  fuffer  their  country  to  be  ravaged,  but  would  run  to
arms,  which  would  furnifti  him  with  an  opportunity  of
accufing  them  to  the  people  as  the  aggreflbrs  in  the  war  ;
and  he  promifed  himfelf  alfo,  that  the  greateft  part  of  the
°Albans,  envying  the  profperity  of  their  colony,  would,
willingly,  countenance  thefe  accufations,  and  enter  into  a
war  with  them,  which  happened  accordingly.  For  the
profligate  of  each  city  ravaging  one  another’s  country,  and,
at  laft,  a  Roman  army  having  made  an  incurfion  into  the
territories  of  the  Albans,  and  killed,  and  taken  prifoners,


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  5

many  of  the  robbers,  Cluilius  aftembled  the  people,  and
inveighed  againft  the  Romans  with  great  bitternefs;  fhewed
them  many,  who  were  wounded ;  produced  the  relations
of  thofe,  who  had  been  taken  prifoners,  or  killed ;  and,  at
the  fame  time,  adding  many  circumftances  of  his  own  in¬
vention,  it  was  refolved,  on  his  motion,  that  an  embafly  fhould
firft  be  fent  to  demand  juftice  for  what  had  happened  3
and,  if  the  Romans  refufed  it,  that  an  army  fhould  march
againft  them.

D

III.  Upon  the  arrival  of  the  embafladors  at  Rome,  Tullus,
fufpe&ing  they  came  to  demand  juftice,  refolved  to  prevent
them,  with  a  defign  to  turn  upon  the  Albans  the  reproach
of  diffolving  the  alliance  fubfifting  between  them,  and  their
colony.  For  there  had  been  a  treaty  entered  into  by  the
two  cities  in  the  reign  of  Romulus,  wherein,  among  other
articles,  this  was,  alfo,  ftipulated,  that  neither  of  them  fhould
begin  a  war ;  but,  if  either  complained  of  any  injury,  they
were  to  fue  for  juftice  in  that  city,  which  had  committed
the  injury,  and,  if  they  could  not  obtain  juftice,  they
were,  in  that  cafe,  to  enter  upon  a  war  founded  on  neceflity,
the  treaty  being  looked  upon  as  at  an  end.  Tullus,  therefore,
taking  care  that  the  Romans  fhould  not  be  the  firft  called

o

upon  to  do  juftice,  and,  by  refufing  it,  become  obnoxious
to  the  Albans,  ordered  the  moft  coniiderable  of  his  friends
to  entertain  the,  embafladors  of  the  Albans  with  the  greateft
civility,  and  to  detain  them  at  their  houfes,  while  he  himfelf,
pretending  to  be  employed  in  fame  neceffary  affairs,  put  oft'
their  audience.  The  next  night,  he  fent  fome  Romans  of

diftin<ftion3


ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I T I E  S  OF  Book  III.

diftinclion,  with  proper  directions,  to  Alba,  together  with  the
Feciales,  to  demand  juftice  of  the  Albans  for  the  injuries  the
Romans  had  received  from  them :  Thefe,  having  performed
their  journey  before  fun-rife,  found  Cluilius  in  the  market¬
place,  which  was  crouded  with  the  morning  affembly  of  the
people  :  And,  having  fet  forth  the  injuries,  which  the  Ro¬
mans  had  received  from  the  Albans,  they  defired  he  would
perform  the  articles  of  the  treaty  entered  into  by  the  two  cities.
But  Cluilius  alledged  that  the  Albans  had  firft  fent  deputies
to  Rome  to  demand  juftice,  who  had  not  even  been  vouch-
fafedananfwer;  and,  ordering  the  Romans  to  depart,  as  hav¬
ing  tranfgreffed  the  terms  of  the  alliance,  he  declared  war
againft  them.  Upon  this,  the  chief  of  the  embafly,  before
he  departed,  deftred  he  would  anfwer  this  fingle  queftion,
whether  he  would  own  that  thofe  had  broken  the  treaty,
who,  being  firft  called  upon  to  do  juftice,  had  refufed  to
comply  with  any  part  of  their  obligation :  Which  Cluilius
allowing,  “  I  atteft,  therefore,  fays  he,  thofe  gods,  whom
“  we  called  upon  as  witneffes  to  our  treaty,  that  the
“  Romans,  having  been  firft  refufed  juftice,  have  a  right  to
“  make  war  upon  the  tranfgreflors  of  that  treaty:  And,
C£  that  you  elude  our  demand  of  juftice,  appears  from  every
“  circumftance  of  this  affair  :  For  you,  being  firft  called
€£  upon  to  do  juftice,  refufed  it,  and  have  firft  declared  war
C£  againft  us :  ExpeCt,  therefore,  to  fee  the  injury  you  have
C£  done  us,  foon,  revenged  by  the  fword.”  Tullus,  being
informed  by  the  embaffadors  at  their  return  to  Rome  of
what  had  pafled,  ordered  the  Albans  to  be  introduced,  and

to


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN A  SS.EN SIS.  7

to  acquaint  him  with  the  reafons  of  their  coming ;  and  they
informing  him  of  what  they  had  received  in  command  from
Cluilius,  and  threatening  war  in  cafe  they  did  not  obtain
juftice ;  “  I,  fays  he,  have  prevented  you  in  this ;  and,  hav-
u  ing  obtained  nothing  the  treaty  diredts,  it  is  plain  that  you
“  have  firft  violated  that  treaty,  and  made  no  account  of  it ;
“  for  which  reafon,  I  declare  a  juft,  and  neceftary  war  againft
<£  the  Albans.”

IV.  After  thefe  pretences,  they  both  prepared  themfelves
for  the  war ;  and,  not  only,  armed  their  own  forces,  but,
alfo,  called  in  to  their  afliftance  Thofe  of  their  fubjedts.
When  every  thing  was  ready,  the  two  armies  drew  near  to
each  other,  and  incamped  at  the  diftance  of  forty  ftadia  from
Rome :  The  Albans,  at  the  3  Cluilian  ditches  (for^  they
ftill  preferve  the  name  of  the  man,  who  caufed  them  to  be
made)  and  the  Romans,  a  little  on  this  fide ;  having  chofen
a  more  convenient  place  for  their  camp.  When  the  twTo


3-  ka oiXiou  rotfppis.  This  is  the  name
given  to  thefe  ditches  both  by  our
c  author,  and  d  Plutarch,  when  they
fpeak  of  Coriolanus,  who  incamped  at
the  fame  place.  On  the  other  hand,
c  Livy  calls  them,  f  in  both  places,
fojfas  Cluilias.  But  I  cannot  help
thinking  that  our  author  is  more  con-
fiftent  with  himfelf  than  Livy  *,  be-
caufe  the  latter,  in  fpeaking  of  the
principal  Albans,  brought  to  Rome
by  Tullus,  after  the  deftruction  of
their  city,  mentions  the  s  Cloelii ,
whom  h  our  author,  in  treating  of  the


fame  tranfaftion,  ftill  calls  KaoiAw  *,
who  were,  probably,  of  the  fame  fa¬
mily  with  this  chief  magiftrate  of  the
Albans,  who  gave  name  to  thefe
ditches.  But,  as  this  is,  only,  con¬
jecture,  I  have  chofen  to  follow  Livy,
whom  I  look  upon  as  the  lured:  guide
in  what  concerns  the  names,  at  lead,
both  of  the  perfons,  and  things,  that
occur  in  the  Roman  hiftory.  1  Cluver
fays,  that  thefe  ditches  were  in  theAp-
pian  way,  about  the  place,  now,  called,
Cafal  Ritondo,.


c  B.  viii.  c.  22.  d  Life  of  Coriolan.  eB.  i.c.  23.  *B.  ii.  C.  39.  S  IT.  i.  c.  30.

h  B.  iii.  c.  29.  » Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  4.


armies


t  ROMAN  AN  TIQJJITIE  S  OF  Book  III-

armies  came  in  fight,  and  each  found  the  other’s  forces  nei¬
ther  inferior  in  number,  nor  ill  armed,  nor,  from  a  want  of
any  other  preparation,  contemptible,  the  ardor  of  a  prefent
ingagement,  which  the  expectation  of  defeating  the  enemy
at  the  firft  onfet  had,  before,  infpired,  began  to  abate ;  and
they  thought  of  defending  themfelves  by  raifing  their  in-
trenchments,  rather  than  of  preventing  each  other  by  a
fudden  attempt.  At  the  fame  time,  the  4  moft  confiderable
of  both  armies,  as  the  moft  capable  of  making  proper  re¬
flections,  cenfured  their  commanders  :  And  the  time  being
fpent  in  vain  (lor  no  aCtion  of  any  moment  had  happened)
they  harrafled  one  another  with  incurfions  of  the  light¬
armed  men,  and  fkirmiflies  of  the  horfe.  Whereupon,  Clui-
lius,  who  was  looked  upon  as  the  caufe  of  the  war,  im¬
patient  at  lying  idle,  refolved  to  march  out  with  his  army,
and  provoke  the  enemy  to  battle  ;  and,  if  they  declined  it,
to  attack  their  intrenchments  :  Having,  therefore,  made  the
neceflary  preparations,  both  for  an  ingagement,  and  an.  attack
upon  the  enemy’s  camp,  if  that  fhould  be  purfued,  when
night  came  on,  he  went  to  fleep  in  the  general’s  tent,

+•  Xagisgaloig,  Ariftotle,  in  his  ethics,  the  period  thus;  E/<rij«  Tg  avlaiv  roig
orten  ufes  ^x^nvjtg  for  wen  of  education.  %<xgitgcdoig  kxIx/ ueju^ig  tuv  tv  tsAm,  hxi
This  period  is,  certainly,  faulty  :  Por-  a oyie/xog  ug  a  tu  Kodlig-a  (3aAtv0y.tvur.
tus  has  endeavoured  to  reftore  it ;  but  There  is  an  expreffion,  made  ufe  of  by
not  with  great  fuccefs.  I. have  endea-  1  our  author,  not  unlike  to  this  ;  where
voured  to  make  the  belt  fenfe  I  can  of  he  fpeaks  of  the  difcouragement  of  the
of  the  words,  as  they,  now,  ftand  ;  Romans  after  the  death  of  Brutus,  and
but  cannot  help  thinking,  that  the  of  the  confequence  of  that  dilcourage-
fame  words,  if  thrown  into  ano:her  ment ;  zxt  a oyt<rpog  sj-oAA oig,  ug

ilrudture,  may  be  capable  of  a  very  x^etyov  c(p»<r/v  e*A itt&v  tov  ^xgxnx.
clear  fenfe :  1  would,  therefore,  read

1  B.  v.  c.  1 6.


attended


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  A  S  SENS  IS.  9

attended  with  his  ufual  guard  ;  and,  about  day  break,  was
found  dead,  no  figns  appearing  on  his  body  either  of  wounds,
ftrangling,  poifon,  or  any  other  violent  death.

V.  This  accident  appearing,  as  it  really  was,  very  ex¬
traordinary,  and  the  caufe  of  it  being  inquired  into  (for  no
preceding  indifpofition  could  be  alledged)  thofe,  who  afcribe
all  human  events  to  divine  providence,  faid  that  his  death
was  occafioned  by  the  anger  of  the  gods,  becaufe  he  had
kindled  up  an  unjuft,  and  unnecefiary  war  between  the
mother- city,  and  her  colony  :  But  others,  who  looked  upon
the  war  as  a  gainful  trade,  and  thought  themfelves  deprived
of  great  advantages  by  his  death,  attributed  it  to  human
treachery,  and  envy ;  accufing  fome .  of  his  fellow-citizens
of  a  contrary  faction,  to  have  taken  him  off  by  a  fecret,
and  undifcoverable  poifon  :  Some  alledged  that,  being  over¬
come  with  grief,  and  defpair,  he  had  put  himfelf  to  death,
fince  all  his  enterprifes  were  become  difficult  and  impracti¬
cable  ;  and  that  nothing  he  had  promifed  himfelf  from  the
beginning,  when  he  firft  entered  upon  the  adminiftration
of  the  public  affairs,  had  fucceeded  according  to  his  defire.
But  thofe,  who  were  not  influenced  either  by  friendfhip,  or
enmity  to  the  general,  and  who  formed  the  founded:  judge¬
ment  of  what  had  happened,  were  not  of  opinion  that  either
the  anger  of  the  gods,  the  envy  of  the  contrary  party,  or
the  defpair  of  his  affairs  had  put  an  end  to  his  life;  but  the
necefiity  of  nature,  and  fate,  he  having  finifhed  the  deftined
courfe,  which  is  marked  out  for  every  one  at  his  birth.
Thus  died  Cluilius,  before  he  had  performed  any  confiderable
Vol.  II.  B  action.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

affion.  In  his  place,  Metius  Fufetius  was  chofen  general
by  the  army,  and  invefted  with  5  abfolute  power  ;  a  man
without  either  ability  to  conduct  a  war,  or  conftancy  to  pre-
ferve  a  peace ;  who,  though  he  had  been,  at  firft,  no  lefs
earned  than  any  of  the  Albans  in  creating  a  difference
between  the  two  cities,  and  was,  for  that  reafon,  after  the
death  of  Cluilius,  honoured  with  the  command,  yet,  after
he  had  obtained  it,  and  perceived  the  many  difficulties,  and
embarraffments,  with  which  the  public  affairs  were  attended,
he  changed  his  meafures,  and  refolved  to  delay,  and  put
off  the  decffion  of  the  conteft,  obferving  that  neither  all  the
Albans  were  now,  equally,  inclined  to  the  war,  nor  that  the
victims,  when  he  offered  facrifice  concerning  the  battle,
promifed  fuccefs :  At  laft,  being  informed  of  a  danger,  which
threatened  both  the  Albans,  and  Romans,  from  a  foreign
enemy,  and  which,  if  they  did  not  avert  it  by  putting  an
amicable  end  to  the  prefent  war,  could  not  fail  to  deftroy
both  armies,  he  firft  fent  heralds  to  the  enemy,  and  deter¬
mined  to  invite  them  to  an  accommodation.  The  danger
he  apprehended  was  this.

VI.  In  the  reign  oi  Romulus,  the  Veientes,  and  Fide-
nates,  who  inhabit  large  and  populous  cities,  had  been  in¬
frared  in  a  war  with  the  Romans  for  command,  and  fove-

tD  O

s-  vT fdqyof  ctvloxpxluf.  Livy  calls  that  we  muft  read  Fufetius,  and  not
him  a  dictator,  of  which  the  Greek  is  Suffetius,  as  it  flood  in  the  editions  of
a  paraphrafe.  k  Sigonius,  in  a  note  that  hiftorian.
upon  this  paffage  ol  Livy,  has  fhewn,

k  B.  i.  c.  23.


reign  ty,


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  n

reignty,  in  which  6  having  loft  many  armies,  and  been  de¬
prived  of  part  of  their  territories,  they  were  conftrained  to
become  fubjedts  to  the  conquerors.  Concerning  which
tranfadtions  I  have  given  a  particular  account  in  the  pre¬
ceding  book.  But,  having  enjoyed  an  uninterrupted  peace
during  the  reign  of  Numa,  they  had,  greatly,  encreafed  in
populoufnefs,  wealth,  and  every  other  happinefs.  Elated,
therefore,  with  this  profperity,  they,  again,  afpired  at  liberty,
aflumed  higher  thoughts,  and  prepared  themfelves  to  fhake
off*  the  Roman  yoke.  For  fome  time,  the  delign  of  their
revolt  lay  concealed ;  but,  in  the  Alban  war,  it  broke  out :
For,  being  informed  that  the  Romans  were  marched  out
with  all  their  forces  to  ingage  the  Albans,  they  looked  upon
this  as  the  moft  favourable  opportunity  of  invading  them  ;
and,  by  the  means  of  the  moft  powerful  among  themfelves,
entered  into  a  fecret  confpiracy,  the  refult  of  which  was,
that  all,  who  were  capable  of  bearing  arms,  fhould  repair
to  Fidenae  with  fecrecy,  and  few  at  a  time,  in  order  to
give  the  lefs  umbrage  to  thofe,  againft  whom  the  deftgn  was
formed ;  and  that  they  fhould  ftay  there,  expecting  the
time,  when  the  armies  of  the  Romans,  and  Albans,  fhould
march  out  of  their  camps  in  order  to  ingage;  of  which

Ev  w  -zs-oKKxt  u7TcXtffccvl£s  Jwocixeit.  part  of  their  territories,  were  conftrain-
All  the  editions,  and  manufcripts  have  ed  to  become  fubjedts  to  the  conquer-
uuQoltpci  after  iwayue,  which  can  ne-  ors  •,  fince  fryiaOtvleg,  and  qvayxat&firav
v'er  be  allowed  a  place  here,  and  muft  can  relate  only  to  uyQolefoi :  But,  if
have  been  inferted  by  the  tranfcribers  :  this  word  is  difcarded,  the  others  will,
For,  if  it  fhould  ftand,  the  fenle  would  very  naturally,  relate  to  the  Veientes,
run  thus :  In  which,  both ,  having  loft  and  Fidenates.
many  armies,  and  been  deprived  of

B  2


certain


ROMAN  ANTIQJJIT1ES  OF  Book  IIL

certain  fcouts,  to  be  ported  on  the  hills  for  that  purpofe,
fhonld  give  them  notice  by  fignals ;  which,  as  foon  as  they
perceived,  they  were  all  to  take  arms,  and  advance  againft
them  with  all  expedition  (the  diftance  from  Fidenae  to  the
camps  being  but  two,  or  three  hours  march  at  rnoft)  and,
appearing  in  the  field  at  the  time,  when,,  probably,  the
battle  would  be  over,  they  were  to  treat  both  armies
as  enemies ;  and,  whether  the  Romans,  or  the  Albans,
had  the  victory,  to  put  the  conquerors  to  the  fword.
Thefe  refolutions  the  chiefs  of  thofe  cities  had  determined
to  put  in  execution.  If,  therefore,  the  Albans,  from  a
contempt  of  the  Romans,  had,  boldly,  ventured  upon  an
ingagement,  and  refolved  to  put  the  whole  upon  the  iflue
of  one  battle,  nothing  could  have  hindered  the  treachery,
contrived  againft  them,  from  remaining  fecret,  and  both
their  armies  from  being  deftroyed.  But  this  dilatory  man¬
ner  of  carrying  on  the  war,  contrary  to  the  general  expec¬
tation,  and  the  length  of  time  they  employed  in  their  pre¬
parations,  confounded  the  counfels  of  their  enemies  :  For,
fome  of  the  confpirators,  either  feeking  their  private  ad¬
vantage,  or  envying  their  leaders,  and  thofe,  who  had  been
the  authors  of  the  undertaking,  or  fearing  the  information
of  others,  -which  has  often  happened  in  confpiracies,  where
there  are  many  accomplices,  and  of  which  the  execution  has
been  long  delayed ;  or  being  compelled  by  the  fuggeftion
of  their  own  minds,  which  could  not  confent  that  a  wicked
defign  fhould  be  attended  with  fuccefs,  informed  the  Ro¬
mans,  and  Albans  of  the  treachery.

'  4


vir.


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  SS  ENS  IS.  13

VII.  Fufetius,  upon  this  intelligence,  grew  Hill  more
defirous  of  making  an  accommodation,  both  tides  having,
now,  no  choice  left  of  any  other  meafure.  The  king  of
the  Romans,  alfo,  had  information  given  him  of  this  con-
fpiracy  by  his  friends  in  Fidenae  ;  fo  that,  without  further
delay,  he  hearkened  to  the  overture  made  by  Fufetius.
When  both  of  them  met  in  a  place  between  the  two  camps,
each  being  attended  with  his  council,  confiding  of  perfons
of  good  judgement,  they  firft  embraced  according  to  their
former  cuftom ;  and,  having  received  one  another  with  that
benevolence,  which  is  ufual  among  friends,  and  relations,
they  began  to  treat  of  an  accommodation.  The  Alban  firft
fpoke  in  the  following  manner  :  “It  feems  to  me  neceffary
“  that  I  fhould  firft  afiign  the  reafons  why,  being  neither
“  overcome  by  you  in  battle,  hindered  from  fupplying  my
u  army  with  provifions,  nor  reduced  to  any  other  neceffity,
“  I  have  determined  to  make  the  firft  ftep  towards  an  ac-
“  commodation,  to  the  end  you  may  not  imagine  that  either
“  a  diffidence  in  my  own  ftrength,  or  a  belief  that  yours
“  is  not  to  be  overcome,  makes  me  feek  a  fpecious  pretence
“to  put  an  end  to  the  war:  For,  fhould  you  entertain
“  fuch  an  opinion  of  us,  you  would  load  us  with  intolerable
“  conditions,  and,  as  if  you  were,  already,  victorious  in  the
“  war,  fubrnit  to  nothing,  that  is  reafonable  :  To  the  end,
“  therefore,  that  you  may  not  form  falfe  conjectures  of  the
“  reafons,  that  lead  me  to  defire  an  end  of  the  war,  hear  the
“  true  ones.  My  country,  having  appointed  me  dictator,
“  as  foon  as  I  had  received  the  command,  I  confidered

“  what


Book  111.


14  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

“  what  were  the  caufes,  which  had  difturbed  the  peace  of
u  our  cities ;  and  finding  them  frivolous,  and  inconfider-
u  able,  and  of  too  little  confequence  to  diffolve  fo  great  a
££  friendfhip,  and  affinity,  I  concluded  that  neither  the
££  Albans,  nor  you,  were  governed  by  the  bell:  counfels :
££  And  I  was  further  confirmed  in  this,  and  convinced  of
u  the  folly  of  us  both,  after  I  had  entered  upon  the  ad-
“  miniftration,  and  became  acquainted  with  every  man’s
<£  particular  views :  For,  I  found  that  the  Albans  were  not,
“  either  in  their  private  conversations,  or  in  public  aflem-
££  blies,  unanimous  for  the  war ;  but  the  divine  omens,
<£  whenever  I  confulted  the  vidims  concerning  the  battle,
“  being  Hill  attended  with  far  greater  difficulties  than  thofe
<£  founded  on  human  reafoning,  created  in  me  great  difmay,
“  and  anxiety.  Thefe  confiderations,  therefore,  withheld
“  me  from  ingaging  in  any  adion,  and  led  me  to  draw  out
“  the  war  by  procraftinations,  and  delays,  from  an  opinion
u  that  you  would  make  the  firft  ftep  towards  an  accommo-
“  dation  :  And,  indeed,  this  became  you,  Tullus,  who  are
<£  our  colony,  and  not  to  ftay  till  your  mother-city  fet  the
“  example:  For  the  founders  of  cities  have  a  right  to  as
u  great  refped  from  their  colonies,  as  parents  from  their
tc  children  :  But,  while  we  kept  ourfelves  at  a  diftance,  and
cc  obfervedone  another,  expeding  which  ffiould  firft  propofe
“  reafonable  terms,  another  motive,  more  urgent  than  any
64  arguments  drawn  from  human  reafon,  impofes  on  us  the
44  neceffity  of  a  reconciliation  :  The  caufe  of  this  neceffity
4£  I  had  information  of,  while  it  was  yet  a  fecret  to  you ;

££  for


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  RN  A  S  SE  N  S I  S.  15

“  for  which  reafon,  I  refolved,  no  longer,  to  conflder  the
“  decency,  that  ought  to  have  led  you  to  fue  to  us  for  peace :
“  For  know,  Tullus,  that  dreadful  defigns  are  formed  againft
££  us,  and  inevitable  treachery  threatens  both,  of  us ;  which,
££  like  a  torrent,  or  a  conflagration,  was  deiigned,  with  eafe,
££  to  overwhelm,  and  deftroy  us.  The  authors  of  thefe
££  wicked  projects  are  the  chiefs  of  the  Fidenates,  and
££  Veientes,  who  have  confpired  together.  Concerning  the
££  manner,  in  which  their  defigns  were  to  have  been  put  in
££  execution,  and,  by  what  means,  I  came  to  the  knowledge
££  of  their  fecret  counfels,  I  fhall  inform  you.”

VIII.  Having  faid  this,  he  gave  to  one,  who  was  prefent,
the  letters  brought  to  him,  by  a  certain  perfon,  from  his
friends  at  Fidenae,  and  deflred  him  to  read  them  ;  and,  at
the  fame  time,  produced  the  perfon,  who  had  brought  thofe
letters.  After  they  were  read,  and  the  man  had  informed
them  of  every  thing  he  had  learned  by  word  of  mouth  from
the  perfons,  who  writ  thofe  letters,  all  prefent  were  feized
with  aftonifliment,  as  may  well  be  imagined  upon  the  in¬
formation  of  fo  great,  and  fo  unexpected  a  danger  :  When
Fufetius,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  continued  his  difcourfe  :

££  You  have  heard,  Romans,  the  reafons,  which  induced  me
££  to  defer  coming  to  an  ingagement  with  you,  and  have,

££  now,  determined  me  firfl:  to  propofe  an  agreement.  After
££  this,  confider,  now,  with  yourfelves,  whether,  in  order  to
££  revenge  the  feizure  of  fome  oxen,  and  fheep,  you  ought
££  to  retain  a  difpofltion  to  carry  on  an  implacable  war
£C  againft  your  founders,  and  fathers,  in  which,  whether

££  conquered,


16  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

u  conquered,  or  conquering,  you  are  fure  to  be  deftroyed ;
£c  or,  laying  afi.de  your  enmity  to  your  relations,  to  march
S£  with  us  againft  the  common  enemy ;  who,  without
u  having  either  differed,  or  feared,,  any  mifchief,  have  con-
u  fpired,  not  only,  7  to  revolt  from  you,  but,  alio,  to  invade
u  you ;  and  That  not  openly,  according  to  the  received  laws
“  of  war,  but  privately,  and  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  their
u  treachery  could  lead:  be  fufpecled,  and  avoided.  But  I
<c  need  fay  no  more  to  convince  you  that  we  ought  to  lay
“  afide  our  enmity,  and  march,  with  all  pofilble  alacrity,
“  againft  thefe  wicked'  men  (for  it  would  be  madnefs  to
“  think  otherwife)  fince  you  are,  already,  refolved,  and  will
“  purfue  that  refolution:  But,  in  what  manner,  fuch  terms
u  of  accommodation  may  be  agreed  upon,  as  may  be  hon-
“  ourable,  and  advantageous  to  both  cities  (for,  probably,
“  you  have  been  long  impatient  to  hear  this)  I  ftiall,  now,
“  endeavour  to  explain.  I  am  of  opinion  that  thofe  are
“  the  beft  terms,  and  the  moft  becoming  relations,  and
“  friends,  in  which  there  is  no  rancor,  nor  remembrance
“  of  paft  injuries  ;  but  a  fincere,  and  general  remiffion
£C  of  every  thing,  that  has  been  either  done,  or  fuffered  on

7*  Ou  ftovsv  otp'  vfMM  onrosa,-  tated  Thucydides,  without  copying

c nv,  aKAx  xxi  eircivotsoi<riv.  I  he  beauty  him.  In  the  fpeech,  fpoken  by  Cleon
of  this  fentence  is,  intirely,  owing  to  to  exafperate  the  Athenians  againft
the  Vatican  rhanufcript,  which  has  the  Mitylenaeans,  he  lays  of  the  latter,
reftored  the  word  rozoanv,  that  was  f7ra,nsvi<ruv  pahhov,  tj  amt ij&xv ;  the  fenfe
wanting  in  all  the  editions.  I  am  fur-  of  which  is,  very  well,  exprelfed  by
p rifed  that  none  of  the  commentators  Hobbes,  and  rather  warred  upon  us ,
have  taken  notice  in  what  manner  1  our  than  revolted  from  us.
author  has,  upon  this  occafion,  imi-

‘  B.  iii-  c.  39.


“  both


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  R  N  A  SSEN  SIS.  17

“  both  fides ;  lefs  honourable  are  thofe  conditions,  by  which,
<£  indeed,  the  generality  of  the  nation  are  acquitted  of  all
“  imputation,  but  thofe,  who  have  injured  one  another,  are
u  compelled  to  undergo  fuch  a  trial,  as  reafon,  and  law
“  diredh  Now,  my  opinion  is,  that  we  ought  to  make
“  choice  of  thofe  conditions  of  peace,  which  are  the  more
<£  honourable,  and  more  becoming  great  minds;  and,  by  a
C£  decree,  abolifh  the  memory  of  all  part  injuries.  However,
“  if  you  do  not  approve  of  thefe  conditions,  Tullus,  but
“  rather  chufe  that  the  accufers,  and  theaccufed,  fhould,  in
“  a  legal  manner,  receive  fatisfaftion  from,  and  give  fatif-
cc  fa&ion  to,  one  another,  the  Albans  are,  alio,  ready  to
££  confent  to  thefe  terms,  after  a  reconciliation.  But  if,

££  befides  thefe,  you  have  any  other  conditions  to  propofe,

££  which  are  either  more  honourable,  or  more  juft,  the
u  fooner  you  communicate  them,  the  more  I  fhall  think
u  myfelf  obliged  to  you.”

IX.  After  Fufetius  had  done  fpeaking,  the  king  of  the
Romans  anfwered  him  in  the  following  manner :  ££  We,

££  alfo,  Fufetius,  looked  upon  it  as  a  great  misfortune  to
cc  find  ourfelves  under  a  neceffity  of  deciding  a  war,  between
<£  relations,  by  blood,  and  daughter ;  and,  when,  we  per-
“  formed  the  facrifices  preparatory  to  war,  we  were  forbidden
<c  by  them  to  begin  an  ingagement.  We  have,  alfo,  been,
u  very  lately,  informed  of  the  private  confpiracies,  entered
“  into  by  the  Fidenates,  and  Veientes,  againft  us  both,  by
cc  our  friends  redding  among  them  :  Neither  are  we  un-
£C  provided  againft  thofe  deftgns;  but  prepared,  not  only,
Vol.  II.  ,  C  u  to


1 3  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

<£  to  fuffer  no  mifchief  ourfelves,  but  to  punifh  the  authors
££  of  them  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  their  treachery  deferves.
“  Nor  were  we  lefs  difpofed  than  you  to  put  an  end  to  the  war
“  amicably,  rather  than  by  the  fword.  We  did  not,  indeed,
“  think  proper  firft  to  fend  embailadors  to  propofe  an  ac-
a  commodation,  becaufe  we  did  not  begin  the  war,  but  were
c<  only  prepared  to  defend  ourfelves  againft  thofe,  who  did
cc  begin  it:  And,  upon  your  laying  down  your  arms,  we,
((  chearfully,  receive  your  propofal ;  and,  without,  nicely,
“  examining  the  conditions  of  the  peace,  we  accept  of  thofe,
££  that  are  the  beft,  and  the  moft  becoming  great  minds ;
££  and  remit  all  the  injuries,  and  offences  we  have  received
“  from  the  city  of  Alba,  if  thofe  deferve  to  be  called  the
“  public  offences  of  the  city,  of  which  your  general  Cluilius
“  alone  was  guilty,  who  has  received  no  contemptible
“  punifhment  from  the  gods  for  the  wrongs  he  did  us  both.
<c  Let  alloccafions,  therefore,  of  public  and  private  complaints
u  be,  mutually,  forgiven  ;  and,  fince  you  entertain  the  fame
“  fentiments,  let  no  memory  of  paft  injuries,  any  longer,
t£  remain.  But  it  is  not  enough,  barely,  to  confider  how
“  we  may  compofe  our  prefent  enmity ;  we  muff,  alfo,  find
u  means  to  prevent  any  future  rupture:  For  the  defign  of
u  our  prefent  meeting  is  not  to  obtain  a  delay,  but  an  end,
(£  of  our  evils.  By  what  means,  therefore,  the  peace  may
“  be  rendered  durable,  and,  by  what  meafu res,  to  be  purified
t£  by  each  of  us,  we  may  eftablifli  a  prefent  and  everlafting
££  friendfhip  between  both,  you,  Fufetius,  have  omitted  to
t£  inform  us ;  but  I  fhall  endeavour  to  explain,  by  way  of

u  addition


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  19

“  addition  to  what  you  have  faid.  If,  on  one  fide,  the
u  Albans  would  ceafe  to  envy  the  Romans  the  advantages
££  they  have  obtained,  not  without  great  dangers,  and  labor:
££  For  it  muft  be  allowed  that,  without  having  received  any
££  fort  of  provocation  from  u?,  you  hate  us  for  this  reafon
££  alone,  that  you  think  us  happier  than  yourfelves  :  And
££  if,  on  the  other  fide,  the  Romans  would  ceafe  to  fufpedt
££  the  Albans,  as  if  they  were,  eternally,  forming  defigns  to
££  their  prejudice,  and  to  guard  againft  them,  as  againft
££  their  enemies :  For  none  can  be  firm  friends  to  thofe,
££  who  hate  them.  How  then  fhall  each  of  thefe  things  be
££  eftetfted  ?  Not  by  inferting  them  in  the  treaty,  nor  by  our
££  fwearing  upon  the  altars  to  the  obfer vance  of  them  (tor
££  thefe  are  fmall  and  wreak  aflurances)  but  by  looking  upon
C£  the  profperity  of  each,  as  common  to  both:  Since  the
£*  only  cure  for  envy  is  to  look  upon  the  profperity  of  the
c£  envied  perfon  as  one’s  own.  And,  in  order  to  accom-
<£  plifh  this,  I  think  the  Romans  ought  to  communicate  to
££  the  Albans  all  the  advantages  they  either,  now,  pofiefs,  or
c£  may,  hereafter,  acquire  :  That  the  Albans  ought,  chear-
££  fully,  to  accept  this  offer;  and,  that  all  of  you,  if  poflible,
“  or,  at  leaft,  the  greateft  part,  and  the  moft  confiderable
C£  become  inhabitants  of  Rome:  s  Was  it  any  diigrace  to

8-  O j  y»o  Ay  XxGivci;  utv  x.ctiTvppt)\ioie  period  are  written  with  an  interroga¬
ted?  etc.  The  Latin  tranflators,  tion,  this  abfurdity  vanilhes,  and  the
by  rendering  this  period  without  an  example  of  the  Sabines,  and  Tyrrhe-
interrogation,  have  madeTullus  invite  nians  is,  very  properly,  urged  to  i ti¬
the  Albans  to  remove  to  Rome  for  gage  the  Albans  to  do  the  fame.  The
this  extraordinary  reafon  ;  becaufe  the  French  tranflators  have  rather  evad  d
Sabines,  and  Tyrrhenians  had  dilgrac-  the  difficulty,  than  given  the  author’s
ed  themfelves  by  removing  thither  :  fenfe  of  this  period.

Whereas,  if  both  the  members  of  this

C  2i


C£  the


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

a  tlie  Sabines,  .and  Tyrrhenians  to  leave  their  own  cities,
cc  and  fettle  among  us?  And  will  it  be  any  to  you,  who
“  are  our  neareft  relations,  to  do  the  fame  ?  However,  if
u  you  do  not  think  proper  to  inhabit  the  fame  city  with  us,
“  which  is,  already,  large,  and  will,  in  time,  be  much
“  larger,  but  are  fond  of  the  habitation  of  your  anceftors,
u  do  this  at  lead,  appoint  one  fenate  to  condder  of  what
“  may  be  of  advantage  to  each  city,  and  give  the  fovereignty
“  to  That,  which  is  the  more  powerful,  and  in  a  condition
a  to  do  more  good  to  the  weaker.  This  is  my  opinion  :
“  And,  if  thefe  things  are  carried  into  execution,  I  conclude
u  we  fhall  then  be  lading  friends ;  but,  while  we  inhabit
cc  two  cities  of  equal  eminence,  as  at  prefent,  no  harmony
u  can,  ever,  fubfid  between  us.”

X.  Fufetius,  hearing  this,  defired  time  to  condder  of  it ;
and,  withdrawing  from  the  affembly  with  the  Albans,  who
were  prefent,  he  confulted  with  them  whether  they  fhould
accept  the  conditions ;  and,  having  taken  their  opinions,
he  returned  to  the  affembly,  and  fpoke  in  the  following
manner  :  “  We  cannot  refolve,  Tullus,  to  abandon  our

“  country,  nor  to  defert  the  temples  of  our  fathers,  the  ha-
c£  bitations  of  our  progenitors,  and  the  place,  which  our
“  anceftors  have  poffeffed  near  five  hundred  years ;  and  this,
“  without  being  compelled  to  it  either  by  war,  or  any  other
u  calamity  inflidled  by  the  hand  of  heaven:  But  we  are
«  not  averfe  to  the  eftablifhment  of  one  fenate,  and  that
a  one-  of  the  two  cities  fhould  have  the  fovereignty  over
«  the  other  :  And,  if  you  think  proper,  let  this  condition,

c<  alfo,


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  21

“  alfo,  be  inferted  in  the  treaty ;  and  let  every  caufe  of
“  war  be  removed.'’  This  being  agreed  upon,  there  arofe
a  conteft  between  them,  which  of  the  two  cities  fhould
have  the  command ;  and  many  harangues  were  made  by
both  of  them  upon  this  fubjed  ;  each  contending  that  his
own  city  fhould  have  the  fovereignty  over  the  other :  The
reafons,  alledged  by  the  Alban,  were  thefe  :  ££  Wedeferve,
££  Tullus,  to  be  the  fovereigns,  even  of  all  Italy,  becaufe
££  we  are  a  Greek  nation,  and  the  moft  coniiderable  of  all,
££  that  inhabit  this  country:  But,  the  fovereignty  of  the
££  Latine  nation,  if  of  no  other,  we  think  ourfelves,  not
£C  without  reafon,  intitled  to,  according  to  the  law  received
££  by  all  men,  which  was  didated  by  nature,  that  the  an-
££  ceftors  fhall  command  their  pofterity.  And,  above  all
££  our  colonies,  of  whom  we  have,  hitherto,  no  reafon  to
££  complain,  we  think  we  ought  to  have  the  command  of
££  your  city,  we  having  fent  a  colony  thither  fo  lately,  that
££  the  pofterity  of  our  families,  which  compofed  it,  are  not
££  yet  extind,  nor  worne  out  by  time  ;  it  being  then  but  the
££  9  third  generation  before  the  prefen t.  But,  whenever  nature,
££  inverting  human  rights,  fhall  order  young  men  to  have
££  the  command  over  their  elders,  and  pofterity  over  their
££  progenitors,  we  fhall  then  admit  that  the  metropolis  may
££  be  commanded  by  its  colony;  but  not  before:  This  is
££  one  argument  we  offer  to  fupport  our  title  to  the  com-
££  mand,  from  which  we  fhall  not,  willingly,  depart.
<£  Another  is  (which  we  deftre  you  will  not  look  upon  either

9*  Tjj  ymci  srgo  r«v7>jf.  See  the  14th  annotation  on  the  firft  book.

u


as


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

££  as  anaccufation,  or  a  reproach,  but  flowing  from  neceflity)
££  that  the  Alban  nation  has,  to  this  day,  continued  the
<£  fame  it  was  under  the  founders  of  the  city  ;  neither  can
££  it  be  faid,  that  we  have  communicated  the  privileges  of
££  our  city  to  any  one  people,  except  the  Greeks,  and
££  Latines  :  Whereas,  you  have  corrupted  the  purity  of
£C  your  government  by  admitting  Tyrrhenians,  Sabines,  and
££  fome  others  without  any  fixed  fettlement,  together  with
££  great  numbers  of  Barbarian  vagabonds :  So  that,  the
££  genuine  race  of  thofe,  who  went  from  hence,  is  become
££  a  fmall,  rather,  the  lead:,  part  of  your  people,  in  compa-
££  rifon  of  thofe  you  have  admitted  among  you,  and  of
C£  foreigners.  And,  if  we  fiiould  yield  the  fovereignty  to
C£  you,  the  fpurious  would  have  the  command  over  the
C£  legitimate,  Barbarians  over  Greeks,  and  foreigners  over
££  natives.  Neither  can  you  fay  this  in  your  defence,  that
££  you  have  not  admitted  this  croud  of  flrangers  to  any
<£  fhare  in  the  adminiftration  of  affairs;  and  that  you,  who
££  are  the  natives,  have  the  government,  and  command,  of
££  the  city  ;  fo  far  from  it,  that  you,  even,  chufe  foreigners  for
££  your  kings;  and  the  greateft  part  of  your  fenate  confifis
££  of  flrangers:  To  none  of  which  things  you  can  fay
££  that  you,  willingly,  fubmit:  For  what  man  of  fuperior
££  rank,  willingly,  fuffers  himielf  to  be  commanded  by  his
££  inferiors?  It  would,  therefore,  be  great  folly,  and
££  meannefs  in  us  to  fuffer,  willingly,  thofe  evils,  which
££  you  mud  own  you  fubmit  to  through  neceffity.  The
££  lafl  argument  I  fhall  make  ufe  of  is  this :  The  city  of

Alba


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  23

“  Alba  has  made  no  alteration  in  any  part  of  its  conftitu-
“  tion,  but  has  obferved,  with  exacftnefs,  all  the  cuftoms,
u  and  regulations  of  our  anceftors,  though  it  be,  now,  the
“  eighteenth  generation  ftnce  it  was  inhabited  :  Whereas,
“  your  city,  being  lately  built,  and  compofed  of  many
“  nations,  is  without  order,  and  difcipline ;  and  requires  a
u  great  length  of  time,  and  various  turns  of  fortune,  to  be
“  regulated,  and  freed  from  thofe  troubles,  and  diflenftons,
“  with  which  it  is,  now,  agitated ;  and  every  one  muff
cc  allow,  that  regularity  ought  to  have  the  command  over
u  confuiion,  an  approved  conftitution  over  one  that  is  un-
“  tried,  and  health  over  ficknefs.  And  you  do  wrong  in
C£  endeavouring  to  eftablifti  maxims  contrary  to  thefe.”

XI.  After  Fuietius  had  ended,  Tullus  thus  replied  ;
“  The  right  you  derive  from  nature  and  the  virtue  of  your
u  anceftors,  Fufetius,  and  you,  Albans,  is  common  to  us
“  both  :  For  both  of  us  boaft  of  our  being  defcended  from
u  the  fame  progenitors :  :o  that,  neither  of  us  ought  to
<c  claim  any  preeminence,  or  fuffer  any  diminution  on  that
u  account :  As  to  your  allegation,  that,  by  a  kind  of  necef-
“  fary  law  of  nature,  all  mother- cities  ought,  without  ex-
“  ception,  to  have  the  command  over  their  colonies,  we  do
“  not  allow  it  to  be  founded  either  on  truth,  or  juftice  :
“  For  there  are  many  nations,  in  which  the  mother- cities
“  are  fo  far  from  having  the  command  over  their  colonies,
u  that  they  are  fubjedl  to  them.  The  city  of  Sparta  is  the
“  greateft,  and  the  moft  undeniable  inftance  of  this ;  which
“  pretends,  not  only,  to  the  command  of  all  Greece,  but,

“  even  3,


<54  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

££  even,  to  That  of  the  Doric  nation,  of  which  ftie  is
<£  a  colony.  But,  why  fhould  I  mention  others  ?  When
££  you,  who  have  planted  our  colony,  are  yourfelves  a
“  colony  of  the  Lavinienfes.  If,  therefore,  it  is  a  law  of
££  nature  that  the  mother-city  fhould  have  the  command
££  over  its  colony,  have  not  the  Lavinienfes  the  earlieft  right
c<  to  command  us  both  ?  This  is  a  fufficient  anfwer  to  your
££  iirft  argument,  which  carries  with  it  the  moil  fpecious
££  appearance.  But  fince,  Fufetius,  you  undertake  to  com-
ct  pare  the  manners  of  the  tv/o  cities,  and  aflert  that  the
££  nobility  of  the  Albans  has  always  continued  the  fame,
C£  while  ours  has  been  corrupted  by  a  mixture  with
££  foreigners,  pretending  that  the  fpurious  ought  not  to
££  have  the  command  over  the  legitimate,  nor  Grangers  over
££  natives,  know,  that,  even,  in  alledging  this  reafon,  you
££  are  the  moft  miftaken  :  For,  we  are  fo  far  from  being
££  afhamed  of  having  communicated  the  rights  of  our  city
££  to  all,  who  are  defirous  of  them,  that  we,  even,  place  our
££  chief  glory  in  this  addon ;  of  which  inftitution,  worthy
££  to  be  imitated,  we  are  not  the  authors,  but  have  taken
££  the  example  of  it  from  the  city  of  Athens,  a  city  of  the
££  greateft  reputation  among  the  Greeks;  whofe  reputation
££  is,  in  a  great  meafure,  if  not,  principally,  owing  to  this
££  inftitution;  which,  as  it  has  been  to  us  thefource  of  many
££  advantages,  we  have  no  reafon  either  to  complain,  or
££  repent  of,  as  of  an  error  in  our  conducft  :  With  us,  the
££  magiftracy,  the  dignity  of  fenator,  and  other  honors  are
a  enjoyed,  not  by  men  of  great  fortunes,  nor  by  thofe,  who

££  can


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  25
<(  can  fhewa  long  lift  of  anceftors,  all  natives  of  the  country;
“  but,  by  fuch,  as  are  worthy  of  them:  For  we  look  upon
“  the  nobility  of  men  to  confift  in  nothing  but  in  virtue  ;
u  all  the  reft  of  the  people  are  the  body  of  the  common-
<6  wealth,  adminiftring  ftrength,  and  power  to  the  refolu-
“  tions  of  the  better  fort:.  It  is  owing  to  this  humanity,
u  that  our  city,  from  being  fmall  and  contemptible,  is  be-
“  come  large  and  formidable  to  its  neighbours  ;  and  it  is
“  this  inftitution,  which  you  condemn,  Fufetius,  that  has
“  laid  the  foundation  of  that  fovereignty,  wrhich  none  of  the
“  Latines  prefume  to  difpute  with  us :  For  the  power  of
“  cities  confifts  in  the  force  of  arms ;  and  This,  in  the
“  number  of  citizens ;  while  fmall  and  ill-peopled,  and,  for
“  that  reafon,  weak  cities,  are  fo  far  from  commanding
cc  others,  that  they  cannot  command  themfelves.  Upon  the
cc  whole,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  a  man  may  then  be  allowed
u  to  cenfure  the  conftitution  of  other  cities,  and  to  extol
“  his  own,  when  he  can  fhew,  that  his  own,  by  following
u  the  maxims  he  advances,  is  grown  flourifhing  and  great;
“  and  that  the  cities  he  cenfures,  by  not  purfuing  them,
“  are  become  unfortunate.  However,  this  is  not  the  fltua-
“  tion  of  our  affairs :  But  your  city,  from  a  more  illuftrious
“  rife,  and  attended  with  greater  advantages  than  ours,  is
“  contracted  to  a  fmall  habitation ;  while  we,  from  fmall
“  beginnings,  have,  in  a  fhort  time,  rendered  Rome  the
“  moft  confiderable  of  all  her  neighbouring  cities,  by  ad-
“  hering  to  the  very  inftitu tions  you  condemn.4  As  to  our
<c  diffenfions,  fince  thefe,  alfo,  Fufetius,  have  fallen  under
Vol.  II.  D  “  your


2  6


Book  III.


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF
a  your  cenfure,  the  end  of  them  is  not  to  deftroy,  and
“  impair  the  commonwealth,  but  to  preferve,  and  improve
a  it.  There  is  an  emulation  between  the  youth,  and  thofe
tc  of  a  more  advanced  age,  and.  bet  ween  the  foreigners,
££  and  natives,  which  of  them  fhall  do  the  greateft  fervices
££  to  the  public.  In  fhort,  thofe,  who  pretend  to  command
££  others,  ought  to  be  indued  with  thefe  two  qualities,
“  ftrength  in  war,  and  prudence  in  counfels  ;  both  which
<£  we  polfefs :  And,  that  this  is  no  empty  boaft,  experience,
“  more  powerful  than  any  reafoning,  teftifies  in  our  favor.
“  It  is  certain  that  Rome  could  not  have  arrived  to  this
“  greatnefs,  and  power  in  the  third  generation  after  its
££  foundation,  by  any  other  means,  than  by  the  excefs  both  of
“  valor,  and  wifdom.  The  behaviour  of  many  Latin  cities
<£  is  fufficient  to  fhew  its  ftrength  ;  thefe,  though  your  own
££  colonies,  have  defpifed  your  city,  and  fubmitted  to  us,
££  chufing  rather  to  be  commanded  by  the  Romans,  than
<£  the  Albans ;  becaufe  they  look  upon  us  as  capable  both
C£  of  doing  good  to  our  friends,  and  harm  to  our  enemies ;
<£  and  upon  you,  as  capable  of  neither.  I  had  many  other
££  reafons,  Fufetius,  of  equal  ftrength  to  alledge  againft  your
££  pretenftons;  but,  feeing  arguments  are  of  little  weight,
££  and  that,  whether  I  fay  more,  or  lefs,  as  you  will  endeavour
££  to  confute  it,  the  effed  will  be  the  fame;  for  which
££  reafon,  I  fhall  make  an  end  of  fpeaking  before  you,  who
££  are  both  our  adverfaries,  and  judges.  However,  I  con-
££  ceive  there  is  but  one  way  of  deciding  our  differences,
££  which  is  the  belt,  and  has  been  made  ufe  of  by  many

££  nations,

v  I


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  RN  AS  S  EN  SI  S.  27

“  nations,  both  Barbarians,  and  Greeks,  when  a  conteft  has
“  arifen  between  them,  either  for  the  fovereignty,  or  con-
u  cerning  lands  ;  this  I  fliall  propofe,  and  then  conclude.
cc  Let  each  of  us  fight  the  battle  with  fome  part  of  our
“  armies,  and  con  trad  the  fate  of  the  war  to  the  fmalleft
“  number;  and  let  us  give  to  that  city,  the  fovereignty  over
<c  the  other,  whofe  citizens  fhall  overcome  their  adverfaries :
“For  thofe  contefts,  which  cannot  be  determined  by  argu-
“  ments,  muft  be  decided  by  arms.”

XII.  Thefe  were  the  reafons,  urged  by  both  the  generals,
to  fupport  the  pretenfions  of  their  refpedive  cities  to  the
fovereignty  ;  the  conclufion  of  which  was  fuch  as  Tullus
had  propofed  :  For  both  the  Albans,  and  Romans,  who
were  prefent  at  the  affembly,  being  defirous  to  put  a  fpeedy
end  to  the  war,  refolved  to  decide  the  conteft  by  arms.
This  being  agreed  to,  the  next  queftion  was  concerning  the
number  of  the  combatants ;  in  this,  the  generals  were  not
of  the  fame  opinion.  Tullus  defired  that  the  fate  of  the
war  might  be  decided  by  the  fmalleft  number,  that  the
braveft  man  among  the  Albans  fhould  fight  the  braveft  of
the  Romans  in  fingle  combat ;  and  he,  chearfully,  offered
himfelf  to  fight  for  his  own  country,  inviting  the  Alban  to
emulate  him,  and  reprefenting  to  him  that  the  combats  of
generals,  for  fovereignty,  and  power,  were  glorious,  not  only,
to  the  perfons,  who  conquered  brave  men,  but,  alfo,  to  thofe,
who  were  conquered  by  the  brave  :  He,  alfo,  enumerated
the  generals,  and  kings,  who  had  expofed  their  lives  for
their  country,  efteeming  it  a  reproach  to  them  to  have  a

D  2  greater


28  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  III.

greater  fhare  of  honors  than  others,  and  a  lefs  of  dangers.
The  Alban  agreed  to  the  committing  the  fate  of  the  cities
to  a  few  perfons,  but  did  not  approve  of  deciding  it  by  a
fingle  combat.  He  owned  that,  when  leaders  of  armies
feek  to  eftabliffi  their  own  power,  it  is  both  glorious  and
necefiary  for  them  to  ingage  in  fingle  combat,  in  order  to
acquire  it;  but,  when  the  cities  themfelves  are  contending
for  fuperiority,  he  thought  it,  not  only,  hazardous,  but,
even,  diffionourable  for  them  to  truft  their  fate  to  the  de-
cifion  of  a  lingle  combat,  whether  the  event  proved  fortunate,
or  other  wife:  For  which  reafon,  he  propofed  that  three
chofen  men  of  each  city  fhould  fight  in  the  prefence  of
all  the  Albans,  and  Romans ;  alledging  that  this  number
was,  of  all  others,  the  moft  proper  to  decide  any  conteft,  as
containing  in  itfelf  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end.
This  propofal  being  approved  of  both  by  the  Romans,  and
Albans,  the  aflembly  broke  up*  and  both  returned  to  their
own  camps.

XIII.  After  this,  the  generals  afiembled  their  refpe&ive
armies,  and  gave  them  an  account  as  well  of  the  difcourfes,
which  had  paffed  between  them,  as  upon  what  terms  they  had
agreed  to  put  an  end  to  the  war :  And  both  armies  having,
with  great  approbation,  ratified  the  agreement,  entered  into
by  their  chiefs,  there  arofe  a  wonderful  emulation  among
the  officers,  and  foldiers,  many,  earneftly,  defiring  to  obtain
the  honors  due  to  the  conquerors  in  this  combat,  and  ex-
preffing  this  emulation,  not  only,  by  their  words,  but,  alfo,
by  their  actions :  So  that,  the  leaders  found  great  difficulty


in


f


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I S.  29

in  the  choice  of  the  propereft  perfons :  For,  if  any  was
renowned  for  the  nobility  of  his  anceftors,  or  remarkable
for  his  ftrength  of  body,  famous  for  fome  brave  a&ion,  or
diftinguifhed  by  fome  other  adventure,  or  bold  achievement,
he  infilled  upon  being  the  firft  of  the  three  champions.
This  emulation,  which  was  running  to  a  great  height  in
both  armies,  was  fuppreffed  by  the  general  of  the  Albans,
who  called  to  mind  that  a  particular  providence  of  the  gods,
long  fince,  forefeeing  this  combat  between  the  two  cities,
had  directed  their  future  champions  to  be  born  of  no  obfcure
families,  brave  in  war,  beautiful  in  their  perfons,  and  di¬
ftinguifhed  from  the  generality  of  mankind  by  their  birth,
which,  from  the  extraordinary  circumftances  attending  it,
was  unufual  and  wonderful.  For  Sicinius,  an  Alban,  hav¬
ing,  about  the  fame  time,  married  his  twin  daughters  to
10Horatius,  a  Roman,  and  to  Curatius,  an  Alban,  and  their
wives,  being  with  child  at  the  fame  time,  each  of  them  was
brought  to  bed,  at  her  firft  lying-in,  of  three  male  children.
All  thefe  children,  their  parents,  looking  upon  the  event  as
a  happy  omen  both  to  their  cities,  and  families,  brought  up
till  they  arrived  to  manhood.  To  thefe  youths  the  gods,  as

10*  Ogtxliw  Tivt  P wfjcaiw,  Kxgaltu  to  cI'amen  in  re  tam  clard  error  manet  utrius
ytvos  Aa Qoivu.  Livy,  in  giving  an  ac-  populi  Horatii ,  utrius  Curiatii  fuerint .
count  of  this  remarkable  incident,  fays  Auttores  utroque  trahunt :  plures  tame  a
the  Roman  hiftorians  were  divided  in  invenio ,  qui  Romanos  Horatios  vocent ;
their  opinions  concerning  the  names  , bos  ut  fequar ,  inclinat  animus.  Sigonius
of  the  Roman,  and  Alban  champions:  fays,  upon  this  occafion,  that  we  ought
However,  10  he  fays, „  the  major  part  to  read  Cur  alii,  with  our  author,  in¬
make  the  Horatii  to  have  been  Ro-  (lead  of  Curiatii  •,  the  former  reading
mans  j  which  opinion  he  has  adopted:  being  fupported  by  the  manuferipts.

i.  c.  24,


I  laid;


Book  III.


30  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

I  faid  before,  had  given  beauty,  and  ftrength,  and  a  great-
nefs  of  mind,  not  inferior  to  That,  which  men  of  the
happieft  difpofition  could  boaft  of :  And,  to  thefe,  Fufetius
refolved  to  commit  the  combat  for  the  fovereignty ;  then,
defiring  a  conference  with  the  king  of  the  Romans,  he  fpoke
to  him  as  follows:

XIV.  “  Tullus,  fome  god,  who  watches  over  the  fafety
u  of  both  cities,  feems,  as  upon  many  other  occafions,  fb  in
££  what  relates  to  this  combat,  to  give  us  evident  marks  of
C£  his  benevolence:  For  it  looks,  intirely,  like  a  wonderful
u  inftance  of  divine  favor,  that  the  champions,  who  are  to
£C  ingage  in  ike  common  caufe,  fiiould  be  found  inferior  to
<£  none  in  birth,  brave  in  arms,  and  beautiful  in  their  per-
cc  fons ;  and,  befides,  that  they  fhould  be  born  of  one  father,
€£  and  mother,’  and,  what  is  yet  more  wonderful,  that  they
<£  fhould  come  into  the  world  the  fame  day  :  Thefe  are  the
cc  Horatii  with  you,  and  the  Curatii  with  us.  Why,  there-
C£  fore,  do  we  not  embrace  this  fo  great  a  providence  of  the
C£  gods ;  and  each  of  us  invite  thefe  three  twin- brothers  to
“  ingage  in  this  combat  for  the  fovereignty?  For  all  the
££  other  advantages,  which  we  expedt  in  the  beft  qualified
££  champions,  are  united  in  thefe;  to  which  may  be  added
££  that,  as  they  are  brothers,  they  will  be  more  unwilling
££  than  any  others,  either  among  the  Romans,  or  Albans,
££  to  forfake  their  companions  in  diftrefs:  And,  by  this
££  means  alfo,  the  emulation  of  the  reft  of  the  youth,  which
££  cannot,  eafily,  be  appeafed  by  any  other,  will,  foon,  be
<£  fuppreffed.  For  I  make  no  doubt  but  there  are  many

££  among


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENS1S,  31

u  among  you,  as  well  as  among  the  Albans,  who  are  ain-
<£  bitious  of  the  chara&er  of  brave  men,  whom  we  fliall,

“  eafily,  prevail  upon  to  defift  from  their  pretenfions,  if  we
u  inform  them  that  a  kind  of  providential  incident  has
“  prevented  all  human  competition,  and  has  itfelf  furnifhed
u  us  with  champions  qualified  to  ingage  upon  equal  terms
“  in  the  caufe  of  the  cities :  For  they  will  then  not  look
<c  upon  themfelves  as  inferior  to  the  three  twin-brothers
“  in  bravery,  but  only  in  a  happinefs  of  nature,  and  in  their
“  concurrence  with  the  defign  of  fortune,  equally,  inclined
£C  to  both  parties.”

XV.  After  Fufetius  had  faid  this,  and  his  propofal  been
received  with  a  general  approbation  (for  the  moft  confider-
able  both  of  the  Romans,  and  Albans  were  prefen t  at  the
conference)  Tullus,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  fpoke  as  follows;
“  Your  reafons,  Fufetius,  feem,  in  general,  to  be  juft :  For  it
<c  muft  be  fome  wonderful  accident,  that  has  produced  both
u  at  Rome,  and  at  Alba,  in  our  time,  a  fimilitude  of  birth
“  never  known  before  ;  but  one  thing  you  feem  not  to  have
“  attended  to,  which  will  create  a  great  unwnllingnefs  in
“  the  youths,  if  we  defire  them  to  fight  with  one  another :
“  For  the  mother  of  our  Horatii  is  filler  to  the  mother  of
“  your  Curatii;  and  the  young  men  have  been  brought  up
“  in  the  arms  of  both  the  women,  and  cherifh,  and  love
u  one  another  no  lefs  than  they  do  their  own  brothers.
“  Confider,  therefore,  whether,  as  they  are 11  coufin-ger mains,

”•  A The  reader  will  ob-  fi.es  coufingermains,  not  brothers  *,  which
ierve  that  <»<$i\(pQiy  in  this  place,  figni-  is  no  uncommon  ufe  of  this  word.

“  and


32  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

“  and  have  been  brought  up  together,  it  would  not  be  im-
u  pious  in  us  to  put  arms  in  their  hands,  and  invite  them
“  to  mutual  daughter:  For  the  impiety  of  domeftic  murder,
“  if  they  are  reduced  to  a  neceffity  of  committing  it,  will,
“  defervedly,  fall  upon  us,  who  are  the  authors  of  that  ne-
c<  ceflity.”  To  this  Fufetius  anfwered;  u  I  am  not  unac-
u  quainted,  Tullus,  with  the  affinity  of  the  youths ;  neither
a  did  I  propofe  to  compel  them  to  fight  with  their  coufins,
cc  unlefs  they  themfelves  were  inclined  to  it :  But,  as  foon
<c  as  this  thought  came  into  my  mind,  I  fent  for  the  Curatii,
“  and  founded  them  in  private,  that  I  might  be  fatisfied
cc  whether  they  were  willing  to  ingage  in  the  combat ;  and,
“  upon  their  receiving  the  propofal  with  an  incredible,  and
u  wonderful  alacrity,  I  determined  to  difclofe  my  defign,
u  and  communicate  it  to  you;  and  I  advife  you  to  do  the
“  fame  yourfelf ;  and,  fending  for  the  three  twin- brothers,
u  who  are  with  you,  to  inform  yourfelf  of  their  difpofition  ;  if
u  they,  alfo,  are  willing  to  expofe  their  perfons  in  the  fervice
“  of  their  country,  accept  the  favourable  offer  ;  but,  if  they
“  decline  it,  ufe  no  compulfion.  However,  I  may  venture  to
“  foretel  the  fame  concurrence  on  their  part :  If,  therefore,
“  they  are,  as  we  have  been  informed,  like  to  the  few  nature
“  has,  the  moft  favourably,  diftinguifhed,  and  brave  in
“  arms  (for  the  reputation  of  their  valor  has  reached  us  alfo)
“  they  will,  moft  chearfully,  accept  the  combat  for  their
cc  country,  even  without  compulfion.”

XVI.  Tullus,  having  approved  of  this  advice,  made  a
truce  for  ten  days,  in  order  to  have  time  to  deliberate,  to

inform


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  R  N  A  SS  E  N  SIS.  33


inform  himfelf  of  the  dilpofition  of  the  Horatii,  and  to  give
an  anfwer;  and  then  returned  to  the  city.  He  fpent  the
following  days  in  confulting  with  the  moft  confiderable
men,  and  the  greateft  part  of  them  inclining  to  accept  the
propofals  of  Fufetius,  he  fent  for  the  three  brothers,  and
fpoke  to  them  in  the  following  manner :  “  Horatii,  Fufe-
“  tius,  the  Alban,  informed  me,  at  a  conference,  the  laft
“  time  we  affembled  before  the  camp,  that,  by  the  divine
u  providence,  three  brave  champions  were  12  born  for  each
city,  than  whom  we  could  find  none,  either  more  valiant,
cc  or  more  proper  for  the  fervice;  and  that  thefe  were  the
<c  Curatii,  among  the  Albans,  and  you,  among  the  Romans :
“  He  added  that,  upon  notice  of  this,  he  had  himfelf  firft
“  inquired  whether  your  coufins  were  willing  to  devote  their
“  perfons  to  the  fervice  of  their  country  ;  and  that,  finding
“  them  very  defirous  to  ingage  in  the  caufe  of  the  public,  he
<c  could,  now,  make  this  propofal  with  confidence,  defiring
u  me,  alfo,  to  inquire  of  you,  whether  you  are  willing


J2’  reysvvt&ai.  I  have  differed  from
all  the  tranflators  in  rendering  this
■word  *,  to  which  they  have  agreed  to
give  the  fignification  of  were,  and  I,
That  of  were  horn  \  both  which,  to  be
fure,  the  word  will  admit  of.  But,  as
the  birth  of  the  Horatii,  and  Curatii
has  been,  all  along,  treated  as  the  ef-
fedl  of  a  particular  providence  ;  and,
as  Fufetius,  whofe  fpeech  is,  here,  al¬
luded  to,  had  faid  that  their  extraor¬
dinary  birth  feemed  the  effedt  of  fome
particular  favor  from  heaven,
srctvl  ci7nx<nv  tonev  tvi^yitrioc,  I  have  not
fcrupled  to  apply  the  word  to  their

VOL.  II.


birth.  This  I  am  confirmed  in  by  the
tenfe  of  this  verb,  which  being,  what
the  grammarians  call,  plufquam  per -
feffum,  is  much  more  applicable  to
their  birth,  then,  long  fince,  paffed,
than  to  any  circumftances,  at  that
time,  affedting  them.  I  know  it  may
be  faid  that  ysyevvtio&at  would,  in  that
cafe,  have  been  more  proper  than
That  it  would  have  been
as  proper  I  do  not  deny  but  I  know
that  the  latter  has  the  fame  fignifica¬
tion  •,  the  only  difference  being  that
the  former  is  derived  from  ytnau,  and
the  other  from  yivoy,zt.

E


cc


to


34  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

<(  to  hazard  your  perfons  in  fighting  for  your  country
“  with  the  Curatii ;  or,  whether  you  chufe  to  yield  this
u  honor  to  others.  As  I  am  acquainted  with  your  vir-
“  tue,  and  courage,  which  are  not  concealed  from  public
“  notice,  I,  reafonably,  concluded  that  you,  of  all  others,
“  would  embrace  this  danger,  in  hope  of  obtaining  the
“  honor  due  to  the  conquerors :  But,  fearing  left  your
“  affinity  to  the  three  Alban  brothers  might  prove  an  ob-
<c  ftacle  to  your  alacrity,  I  defired  time  to  confider  of  it;
<c  and,  for  that  purpofe,  made  a  truce  for  ten  days.  When
“  I  came  hither,  I  aflembled  the  fenate,  and  laid  the  matter
cc  before  them  for  their  confideration :  And,  it  being  the
“  opinion  of  the  majority,  if  you,  willingly,  accepted  the
“  combat,  which  is  glorious  in  itfelf,  and  worthy  of  you,
c<  and  which  I  myfelf,  for  the  fake  of  the  public,  was  de-
“  firous  to  ingage  in  alone,  to  praife  your  refolution,  and
“  accept  the  favor  :  But,  if,  to  avoid  the  guilt  of  domeftic
“  murder  (for  they  cannot  think  you  capable  of  being  ac-
cc  tuated  by  an  unworthy  motive)  you  defire  that  thofe,  who
u  are,  no  way,  related  to  them,  fhould  be  invited  to  accept
u  the  combat,  to  ufe  no  compulfion  :  This  is  the  refolution
“  of  the  fenate,  who  will  neither  be  offended  with  you,  if
u  you  fhew  a  backwardnefs  to  the  undertaking,  nor  think
“  themfelves  under  a  fmall  obligation  to  you,  if  you  prefer
<c  your  country  to  your  affinity;  may  you  take  fuch  a
u  refolution,  as  becomes  you!”

XVII.  The  youths,  hearing  this,  withdrew  ;  and,  after
a  ffiort  conference,  returned  to  give  their  anfwer ;  and

the


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSE  NS  I  S.  35

the  eldeft,  in  the  name  of  the  reft,  fpoke  as  follows :
“  If  vve  were  free,  and  foie  mafters  of  our  own  refolu-
u  tions,  Tullus,  and  you  had  referred  it  to  us  to  deli-
“  berate  concerning  the  combat  with  our  coufins,  we
“  fhould,  without  longer  delay,  have  given  you  our  thoughts
“  upon  it:  But,  ftnce  our  father  is  alive,  without  whofe
“  advice  we  do  not  think  it  proper  to  fay,  or  do  the  leaft
<c  thing,  we  defire  you  will  give  us  a  fhort  time  to  confult
£C  him,  before  we  return  our  anfwer.”  Tullus  commended
their  filial  piety  ;  and,  ordering  them  to  do  what  they
propofed,  they  went  to  their  father ;  and,  having  acquainted
him  with  the  propofals  of  Fufetius,  and  with  what  Tullus
had  faid  to  them,  and,  laft  of  all,  with  their  own  anfwer,
they  defired  his  advice ;  who  thus  replied :  “  You  fhew
“  your  piety,  my  children,  in  conducting  your  lives  by  my
cc  directions,  and  in  doing  nothing  without  my  advice :  But
“  it  is,  now,  time  it  fhould  appear  that  you  are  capable  of
u  taking  your  own  refolu tions  concerning  yourfelves  in
“  matters  of  this  nature.  Imagine,  therefore,  that  I  am,
“  now,  dead,  and  let  me  know  what  you  yourfelves  would
cc  chufe  to  do,  if,  without  your  father,  you  were  to  delibe-
“  rate  upon  your  own  affairs.”  To  this  the  eldeft  made
anfwer;  “  Father,  we  would  accept  this  combat  for  the
“  fovereignty,  and  refolve  to  fuffer  whatever  the  gods  fhould
“  ordain:  For  we  had  rather  die,  than  live  unworthy  both
“  of  you,  and  of  our  anceftors.  We  fhall  not  firft  break  the
u  bonds  of  affinity,  that  unite  us  to  our  coufins ;  but,  fince
fortune  has,  already,  diflolved  them,  we  fhall  acquiefce  in  it.

E  %  For,


36  ROMAN  ANTI  QJCJ I  T I E  $  OF  Book  III.

cc  For,  if  the  Curatii  fet  a  lefs  value  upon  their  relation  to
“  us,  than  upon  their  honor,  the  Horatii,  alfo,  fhall  prefer
“  their  virtue  to  their  affinity.”  Their  father,  greatly,
rejoiced  to  find  them  in  this  difpofition  ;  and,  lifting  up  his
hands  to  heaven,  faid  he  thought  himfelf  under  a  great  ob¬
ligation  to  the  gods  for  having  given  him  children  of  fuch
worth,  and  bravery.  Then,  taking  each  of  them  in  his
arms,  and  embracing  them  in  the  mo  ft  tender  manner,
“  You  have  my  confent,  alfo,  fays  he,  my  brave  children;

4 c  go  to  Tullus,  and  return  him  both  a  pious,  and  a  generous
“  anfwer.”  The  youths  went  away  pleafed  with  the  exhor¬
tation  of  their  father ;  and,  going  to  the  king,  they  accepted
the  combat.  Tullus,  upon  this,  aflembled  the  fenate ;  and,
having  enlarged  on  the  praifes  of  the  youths,  fent  embaf-
fadors  to  the  Alban,  to  acquaint  him  that  the  Romans  ac¬
cepted  his  propofal,  and  had  chofen  the  Horatii  to  fight  for
the  fovereignty.

XVIII.  As  my  fubje<ft  requires  an  exacft  defer iption  of
this  combat,  and  that  the  incidents  attending  it,  which  re¬
ferable  13  theatrical  changes  of  fortune,  ffiould  not  be  related

I3*  -ric40>5  S-ealgiKxi?  soixolx  mgind&ai?.  unexpected,  and  contrary  change  of
I  think  I  may  venture  to  affirm  that  fortune  and  this  is  the  definition
all  the  tranflators  have  miftaken  the  given  of  it  by  n  Ariftotle,  in  his  Art
fenfe  of  arefnrelei*.  The  Latin  tranf-  of  poetry  •,  e?i  Sz  zrt^ireleiet  y.ev  j  ETZ
lators  have  faid,  cafus  tragkis  fimtles  •,  TO  ENANTION  rmmr^otTlo[ji.Evuv  fxel»looht)*
L  Jay,  incidents  ft  extraordinaire*,  qu’ils  for  which,  he  quotes  the  Oedipus  of
ont  'plus  Pair  du  theatre  que  de  Vbiftoire  •,  Sophocles,  where  the  meffienger,  who
and  M.  *  *  *,  tragiques  avantures.  comes  to  inform  Oedipus  of  the  death
However,  zrtftirelet*  fignifies  neither  of  Polybus,  and,  to  deliver  him  from
eafus,  incidents ,  nor  aventures,  but  an  his  apprehenfion  of  murdering  his

n  C.  11.


Ill


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I S.  37

in  a  curfory  manner,  I  fhall  endeavour,  as  far  as  I  am  able,
to  give  an  account  of  every  circumftance  relating  to  it.
When  the  time  came,  in  which  the 14  terms  of  the  agree-
ment  were  to  be  performed,  the  Romans  came  out  of  the
city  with  their  wdiole  army  :  The  youths  came  with  them,
after  they  had  offered  up  their  prayers  to  the  gods  of  their
anceftors.  They  advanced,  accompanied  by  the  king,  and
attended  with  the  acclamations  of  the  whole  people,  who
ftrewed  flowers  upon  their  heads.  By  this  time,  the  Albans,
alfo,  had  marched  out  of  their  camp  wdth  their  forces :  Both
armies  being  now  incamped  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  one
another,  they  appointed  the  interval  between  the  two  camps
for  the  field  of  battle,  which  was,  alfo,  the  boundary,  that
feparated  the  territories  of  the  Romans,  from  Thofe  of  the
Albans,  where  each  of  them  had,  before,  incamped.  They
began  by  offering  facrifice,  and  fwore  by  the  victims  that
were  burning,  to  acquiefce  in  whatever  fate  the  event  of  the
combat  between  the  relations  fliould  allot  to  each  city  :
That  they  w'oukl,  inviolately,  obferve  the  agreement ;  and
that  neither  they,  nor  their  pofterity,  would  endeavour  to


father,  and  committing  inceft  with  his
mother,  does  juft  the  contrary,  by  ac¬
quainting  him  who  he  is.  The  unex¬
pected  changes  of  fortune  from  one
extreme  to  another,  which  are  to  be
found  in  the  following  relation  of  this
combat,  will,  fufficiently,  juftify  both
the  definition  Ariftotle  has  given  of
and  the  application  our
author  has  made  of  it.  I  fulped  much
that  we  ought  to  read  k<x1<*  ravltjv,  in-
ftead  0 f  fAtl*  T*vht',  which  ftands  in  all


the  editions,  and  manufcripts ;  becaufe
thefe  theatrical  changes  of  fortune,
really,  happened  during  the  combat,
and  not  after  it.

J4*  Ev  w  t sAos  eJet  A aCetv  t as  o/j.oAofias.
I  do  not  underftand  how  M.  ***  came
to  render  this  la  treve  de  dix  jours  etant
fur  le -point  d’ expirer :  It  is  plain  that
thefe  words  relate  to  the  agreement ,
made  by  the  two  nations,  to  commit
their  fate  to  the  decifion  of  this  com¬
bat.


elude


33  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

elude  any  part  of  it.  After  they  had  performed  every  thing
relating  to  the  worfhip  of  the  gods,  both  the  Romans,  and
Albans,  15  took  their  arms,  and  came  out  of  their  camps  to
be  fpedlators  of  the  combat,  leaving  an  interval  of  three,  or
four  ftadia  for  the  field  of  battle  :  And,  prefently,  appeared
the  Alban  general  conducting  the  Curatii,  and  the  king  of
the  Romans,  the  Horatii :  They  were  all  armed  in  the  moft
gallant  manner;  and,  withal,  drefledlike  men  going  to  die.
When  they  came  near  to  one  another,  they  gave  their  fwords
to  their  armour-bearers ;  and,  running  to  each  other,  em¬
braced,  and  wept,  uttering  fuch  exprefiions  of  tendernefs,
that  all  the  fpectators  melted  into  tears,  and  accufed  both
themfelves,  and  their  leaders  of  infenfibility  in  confining  the
combat  for  the  fovereignty  of  the  cities  to  kindred  blood,
and  the  guilt  of  domeftic  flaughter,  when  they  might  have
chofen  any  other  perfons  to  decide  it.  The  youths,  after
their  embraces  were  over,  received  their  fwords  from  their
armour-bearers ;  and  thofe,  who  attended  them,  being  retired,
they  drew  up  according  to  their  age,  and  began  the  combat.

w  Qcpivoi  ret  oirKu.  I  am  fenfible  thefe  words,  armifque  in  foro  pofitis
that  this  expreflion  has  various  figni-  juft  as  both  the  Latin  translators  have
ncations :  I  have  given  it  the  fame  rendered  this  expreflion  in  our  author,
fenfe,  in  which  °  Thucydides  ufes  this  in  which  they  are  followed  by  the
expreflion,  when  he  fays  that  the  The-  French  tranflators.  But,  it  does  not
bans,  after  they  had  entered  Plataea  in  feem  reafonable  to  me,  that  either  the
the  night,  »o<  k  te  -n^v  ayo^av  -rot,  Thebans,  who  had  been  introduced
0  7r\u,  etc.  which  Hobbes  has  tranflated,  into  Plataea,  in  order  to  make  them-
with  great  propriety,  and  making  a  felves  matters  of  it ;  or  the  Romans,
ftand  with  their  arms  in  the  market  place  j  and  Albans,  upon  this  occaflon,  Should
though  Valla,  who  has  tranflated  be  unarmed.

Thucydides  into  Latin,  has  rendered

0  B.  ii.  c.  2.


XIX.  For


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALI C ARN  A  S  S  E  N S  I  S.  39

XIX.  For  fome  time,  both  armies  were  quiet  and  filent:
After  which,  general  acclamations  were  raifed  by  both,  and
alternate  exhortations  to  the  combatants ;  thefe  were  followed
by  vows,  and  lamentations,  and  repeated  expreffions  of  every
other  agony ;  the  former  being  caufed  by  what  pafled  before
their  eyes,  and  the  latter  by  their  apprehenfions  of  the  event ;
their  imagination  reprefenting  to  them  more  things,  than
happened  in  reality:  For,  the  great  diftance  rendering
the  fight  imperfed,  the  partiality  of  each  fide  to  their  own
champions  reprefented  every  thing,  that  pafled,  as  done
according  to  their  own  fenfe  of  it ;  and  the  frequent  attacks,
and  retreats  of  the  combatants,  with  their  many,  and  fudden
returns  to  the  charge,  confounded  the  judgement  of  the
fpedators ;  and  this  lafted  a  confiderable  time.  For  the  cham¬
pions,  on  both  fides,  were  equal  both  in  ftrength  of  body,
and  in  courage;  and  being  covered  with  the  choiceft  armour,,
no  part  of  their  bodies  was  left  expofed,  which,  if  wounded,
could  bring  on  prefent  death :  So  that,  many,  as  well  of  the
Romans,  as  Albans,  from  their  contention,  and  fympathy
to  their  own  champions,  infenfibly  became  partakers  both
of  their  dangers,  and  ardor,  and  deftred  rather  to  be  adors
in,  than  fpedators  of,  the  combat.  At  laft,  the  eldeft  of  the
Albans,  doling  with  his  adverfary,  and  giving,  and  receiving
many  wounds,  by  fome  means,  ran  him  through  the  groin :
The  Roman,  already,  fainting  with  his  other  wounds,  and
this  laft  proving  mortal,  his  limbs,  no  longer,  fupported  him,
and  he  fell  down  dead  :  When  the  fpedators  faw  this,  they
gave  a  general  fhout,  the  Albans,  as  already  vidorious ;  the

Romans*


40  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

Romans,  as  vanquished  :  For  they  concluded  that  their  two
champions  would  be,  eafily,  difpatched  by  the  three  Albans .
In  the  mean  time,  the  Roman,  who  fought  by  the  fide  of
the  fallen  champion,  feeing  the  Alban  rejoicing  in  his  fuc-
cefs,  immediately  ran  at  him  ;  and,  after  many  wounds
received  on  both  Sides,  happened  to  plunge-  his  fword  in  his
throat,  and  killed  him.  Fortune  having,  in  a  Short  time,
made  a  great  alteration  both  in  the  State  of  the  combat,  and
in  the  difpofition  of  the  Spectators;  and  the  Romans  being
recovered  from  their  former  dejeCtion,  and  the  Albans  ceafing
to  exult,  another  viciflitude  of  fortune,  by  giving  a  check
to  the  fuccefs  of  the  Romans,  funk  their  hopes,  and  raifed
the  confidence  of  their  enemies :  For  the  Alban  falling,  his
brother,  who  Stood  next  to  him,  clofed  with  the  Roman,
who  had  Slain  him,  and  both  happened  to  wound  one  an¬
other  in  a  defperate  manner  at  the  fame  time ;  the  Alban
running  the  Roman  through  the  interval  between  the  Shoul¬
ders  into  his  bowels;  and  the  Roman,  throwing  himfelf
under  the  Shield  of  his  adverfary,  cut  afunder  one  of  his
hams.

XX.  The  Roman,  having  received  a  mortal  wound,  died
inftantly  ;  and  the  other,  being  wounded  in  the  ham,  was
fcarce  able  to  Stand ;  but  halted,  and,  frequently,  leaned
upon  his  Shield :  However,  he  yet  made  a  Shew  of  refiftance;
and,  with  his  Surviving  brother,  advanced  towards  the  Ro¬
man,  who  Stood  his  ground ;  and  they  Surrounding  him,
one  attacked  him  before,  and  the  other  behind.  The  Ro¬
man,  who  was  yet  unhurt,  being  thus  incompafTed,  and


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  41

obliged  to  fight  with  two  adverfaries,  who  attacked  him  on
both  fides,  fearing  he  might,  eafily,  be  deftroyed,  refolved
to  divide  his  enemies,  and  ingage  them  feparately  ;  this  he
thought  might  be  effected  with  the  greateft  eafe,  if  he  pre¬
tended  to  fly:  For  he  found  he  fhould  not  be  purfued  by
both  the  brothers,  but  only  by  one  of  them,  the  other  being
lame.  With  this  view,  he  fled  as  faft  as  he  could ;  neither
was  he  difappointed  in  his  expectation :  For  the  Alban,
who  was  not  wounded  mortally,  purfued  him  clofe;
while  the  other,  not  being  able  to  follow,  advanced  much
flower  than  was  requifite.  Upon  this,  the  Albans  encouraged
their  champions ;  and  the  Romans  reproached  their  com¬
batant  with  cowardice ;  the  firft  finging  fongs  of  triumph,
and  crowning  themfelves  with  garlands,  as  if  the  victory
was  their  own ;  and  the  others  lamenting,  as  if  fortune
would,  no  more,  revifit  them:  When  the  Roman,  watching
his  opportunity,  turned  quick ;  and,  before  the  Alban  was
aware  of  it,  made  a  ftroke  at  his  arm,  and  cut  it  off  at  the
elbow;  and  his  hand  falling  to  the  ground  together  with
his  fvvord,  the  Roman  aimed  a  fecond  blow  at  him,  which,
taking  place,  killed  him  upon  the  fpot :  And,  running  from
him  to  the  other,  who  was  half  dead  and  languifhing,  he
difpatched  him  alfo :  Then,  taking  the  fpoils  from  the
bodies  of  his  coufins,  he  haftened  to  the  city,  to  give  his
father  the  firft  news  of  his  victory.

XXI.  However,  it  was  ordained  that  even  he,  as  he  was
a  man,  fhould  not  be,  completely,  happy ;  but  fhould  feel
fome  ftroke  of  envious  fortune,  who,  having,  in  a  fhort  time,
Vol.  II.  F  raifed


42  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

raifed  him  from  a  low  rank  to  greatnefs,  and  to  a  wonderful
and  unexpected  fplendor,  the  fame  day  plunged  him  in
the  afflicting  calamity  of  being  the  murderer  of  his  lifter  :
For,  when  he  arrived  near  the  gates,  he  faw  a  multitude  of
people  of  all  conditions  coming  out  of  the  city,  and,  among
t  hem,  his  lifter :  At  the  firft  light  of  her,  he'  was  under  fome
concern  that  a  virgin  ripe  for  marriage,  Ihould  leave  her
houle,  and,  withdrawing  herfelf  from  the  care  of  her  mother,
mingle  with  a  multitude  of  unknown  perfons :  After  many
ill-grounded  fufpicions,  he,  at  laft,  inclined  to  fentiments  of
good-nature,  and  humanity,  concluding  that,  being  delirous,
in  the  firft  place,  to  embrace  her  furviving  brother,  and,
after  that,  to  receive  an  account  from  him  of  the  gallant
behaviour  of  her  deceafed  brothers,  fhe  had  broken  through
the  rules  of  decency  to  gratify  a  womanifh  inclination.
However,  fhe  was  not  induced,,  by  her  affeCtion  to  her
brothers,  to  venture  out  in  this  unufual  manner,  but  by  her
ungoverned  love  for  one  of  her  coufins,  to  whom  her  father
had  promifed  her  in  marriage,  her  paffion  being,,  till  then,
a  fecret ;  and,  being  informed  by  fome  perfon,  who  came
from  the  camp,  of  the  circumfcances  of  the  combat,  fhe
could,  no  longer,  contain  herfelf ;  but  flew  out  of  the  houfe,
like  a  mad  woman,  and  ran  to  the  gates,  without  regarding
her  nurfe,  who  called  to  her  to  return,  and  followed  her.
When  fhe  came  out  of  the  city,  and  faw  her  brother  exulting
in  his  fuccefs,  and  adorned  with  the  garlands  of  victory,
with  which  the  king  had  crowned  him,  and  his  friends
carrying  the  Ipoils  of  the  flain,  among  which  was  an  iin-

broidercd


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  43

broidered  robe,  which  fhe  herfelf  with  the  afiiftance  of  her
mother,  had  wrought,  and  fent  as  a  prefen t  to  her  lover  to
be  worne  by  him  on  their  nuptial-day  (for  it  is  the  cuftom
of  the  Latines  to  wear  imbroidered  robes  on  their  wedding-
days.)  As  foon,  therefore,  as  fhe  faw  this  robe  ftained  with
blood,  fhe  tore  her  garment,  beat  her  breaft  with  both  her
hands,  lamented,  and  called  upon  her  coufin  :  So  that,  all
prefent  were  ftruck  with  aftonifihtnent.  After  fhe  had  be¬
wailed  the  death  of  her  lover,  fhe  fixed  her  eyes  upon  her
brother,  and  faid  ;  “  Doft  thou  rejoice,  moft  execrable

cc  man,  in  the  murder  of  thy  coufins,  and  in  depriving  thy
“  miferable  fitter  of  her  lover  ?  Unfortunate  wretch  !  thou
“  haft  not  the  leaft  pity  for  thy  relations,  who  are  flain,
cc  and  whom  thou  ufeft  to  call  thy  brothers ;  but,  as  if
u  thou  hadft  performed  fome  great  aftion,  thou  art  mad
<£  with  joy,  and  crowned  for  being  the  author  of  fuch  mif-
u  chiefs.  Of  what  wild  beaft  haft  thou  the  heart?”  “  I
u  have  the  heart,  fays  he,  of  a  citizen,  who  loves  his  coun-
“  try,  and  knows  how  to  punifh  her  enemies  whether
u  foreign,  or  domeftic;  among  whom  I  reckon  even  thee,
<c  who,  knowing  that  the  greateft  happinefs,  and  the  greateft
“  mifery  have  happened  to  us  at  the  fame  time,  the  victory
“  of  thy  country,  which  I,  thy  brother,  bring  with  me,
tc  and  the  death  of  thy  brothers ;  doft  neither  rejoice  in  the
“  common  happinefs  of  thy  country,  wicked  wretch,  nor
“  grieve  at  the  calamities  of  thy  own  family,  but,  forget-
tc  ting  the  death  of  thy  brothers,  thou  lamenteft  That  of
a  thy  lover;  neither  doft  thou  conceal  the  corruption  of

F  2  C£  thy


Book  III.


44  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

“  thy  heart,  but  expofeft  it  to  the  whole  world  :  At  the
c<  fame  time,  thou  reproached  me  with  my  valor,  and  my
<c  crowns  of  vi&ory ;  O  thou  pretender  to  virginity,  thou
u  enemy  to  thy  brothers,  and  difgrace  to  thy  anceftors  !
“  Since,  therefore,  thou  doff  not  lament  the  lofs  of  thy
u  brothers,  but  of  thy  coufins,  and  that  thy  body  is  with
“  the  living,  but  thy  mind  with  the  dead,  go  to  him,.
u  whom  thou  calleft  upon,  and  ceafe  to  difhonor  either  thy

father,  or  thy  brothers.”  Having  faid  this,  l6he  preferved
no  moderation  in  his  deteftation  of  vice,  but,  in  his  paftion,
ran  his  fword  through  her  ftdes;  and,  having  killed  his
lifter,  he  went  to  his  father :  But  fo  averfe  to  vice,  and  fo
exalted  were  the  manners,  and  minds  of  the  Romans  at  that
time,  and,  to  compare  them  with  the  actions,  and  lives
of  Thofe  of  our  age,  fo  cruel  and  fevere,  and  fo  little  differ¬
ing  from  a  favage  fiercenefs,  that  the  father,  when  informed
of  this  heinous  fad:,  was  fo  far  from  refenting  it,  that  he
looked  upon  it  as  a  glorious,  and  becoming  a&ion ;  neither

l6*  Oux  £^uA«|ev  «v  tw  [M<rQ7row,(>cp  ro  ferves  commendation,  and  the  ex-
Portus,  and  the  two  French  tremes,  cenfure ;  ookk<x>  to  yt  rocrxlov  Jy-
tranflators  have  rendered  p<ro7rov>j£ov  Aok,  ou  jj  pev  y.wvi  I|<f  S7rcavt1ti,  xa 0’  »*v  ois
his  refentment  againji  the  wickednefs  of  QgytfypzQci,  non  scp’  otg  <5«,  xou  ug
his  fijier :  But  this  is  not  the  fenle.  xou  zvoovla.  too  toicovIoo'  oh  <T  vVs^oAoc/,  xou
Mi<ro7rovygov  is  here  ufed  generally,  and  £AA«4'ei«')  ^ixlou.  Horatius  carried  his
fignifies  a  deteftation  of  vice,  in  oppo-  deteftation  of  vice  too  far  in  punching
fition  to  a  love  of  virtue.  And,  when  it  fo  feverely  :  This  was  not  ug
our  author  fays  that  Horatius  prefer-  I  have  had  fome,  and  fhall  have  more,
ved  no  moderation  in  his  deteftation  of  opportunities  of  Brewing  the  applica-
vice,  I  am  convinced  that  he  alludes  tion  our  author  makes  of  Ariftotle’s
to  the  maxims  of p  Ariftotle,  as  laid  ethics.  We  fhall,  prefently,  meet  with
down  in  his  Ethics  j  where  he  fays,  in  ^cott-ov^#,  again,  ufed  in  the  fenfe  I
fpeaking  of  anger,  that  the  mean  de-  have  given  to  it  upon  this  occafion.

r  B.  iv.  c.  5.


would


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H A  L I  C  ARN  A  $  S  E  N  S I  S.  45

would  he  fuffer  his  daughter’s  body  to  be  brought  into  the
houfe,  nor  allow  her  to  be  buried  in  the  monument  of  her
anceftors,  or  to  be  honoured  with  a  funeral  pomp,  with
perfonal  ornaments,  or  any  other  cuftomary  folemnity  ;  but
fhe  lay  expofed  in  the  place,  where  fire  was  flain,  and
the  pafiengers,  covering  her  with  ftones,  and  earth,  buried
her  as  a  corpfe  deftitute  of  all  regard.  Thefe  are  inftances
of  this  man’s  feverity ;  to  which  I  fhall  add  the  following :
The  fame  day  this  happened,  he  offered  to  the  gods  of  his
anceftors  the  facrifices  he  had  vowed,  as  after  fome  great,
and  fortunate  events,  and  gave  his  relations  a  magnificent
entertainment,  as  upon  the  greateft  feftivals  ;  making  lefs
account  of  his  private  calamities,  than  of  the  general  ad¬
vantages  of  his  country.  This,  not  only  Horatius,  but
many  other  confiderable  Romans,  after  him,  are  faid  to  have
done;  that  is,  they  have  offered facrifice,  worne  crowns,  and
triumphed,  immediately  after  the  death  of  their  children,
when,  through  their  means,  the  commonwealth  has  prof-
pered.  Of  whom  I  fhall  make  mention  in  a  proper  place.

XXII.  After  the  combat  of  the  three  twin-brothers,  the  Ro¬
mans,  who  were  in  the  camp,  17  buried,  in  a  fpiendid  manner,


J7*  T oiQcts  zs’oiyjiToifMvot,  etc.  q  Cluver
has  fhewn  that  the  monument,  now  to
be  feen  beyond  Albano  in  the  road  to
Aricia  on  the  right  of  the  Appian  way,
is  not  the  fame  the  Romans  erected  in
honor  of  the  two  Horatii ;  though
he  fays  the  Italians  are,  generally,  of
this  opinion.  The  reafons  he  gives  to
iiipport  his  aflertion  are  unanfwerable:


They  are  drawn,  partly,  from  Livy,
and,  partly,  from  our  author  ;  from
both  it  appears  that  the  Horatii,  and
Curatii  were  buried  feparately,  that  is,
in  the  places  where  each  of  them  fell ;
and  that  their  iepulchres  were  between
Alba  and  Rome,  and,  even,  between
the  Cluilian  ditches,  and  the  latter.


Hie


S  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  in.  c.  4.


46  R  O  M  A  N  A  N  T  1  QU  I T  I  E  S  OF  Book  III

the  Roratii,  who  were  llain,  in  the  places,  where  they  fell  *
and,  having  offered  facrifice  to  the  gods  in  acknowledgment
for  their  victory,  palled  their  time  in  rejoicings.  On  the
other  fide,  the  Albans,  afflided  with  what  had  happened,
cenfured  the  conduct  of  their  general  ;  and  the  greateft  part
of  them  paffed  that  night  in  a  negled  of  their  perfons,  and
without  taking  any  fuftenanee.  The  next  day,  the  king  of  the
Romans  called  them  together,  and  comforted  them  with  an
affurance  that  he  would  lay  no  command  upon  them,  that
was  either  difhonourable,  grievous,  or  unbecoming  relations;
but  that,  as  he  was  king  of  both  cities,  he  would  confult
the  honor,  and  intereft  of  both  with  the  greateft  impar¬
tiality  ;  and,  having  continued  Fufetius,  their  general,  in
the  fame  command,  and  made  no  innovation,  or  change  in
their  government,  he  marched  home  with  his  army.  After
he  had  celebrated  the  triumph,  which  the  fenate  had  de¬
creed  for  him,  and  entered  upon  the  adminiftration  of  affairs,
feme  perfons  of  no  fmall  diftindion  brought  Horatius  before
him,  and  accufed  him  of  domeftic  murder  in  the  perfon  of
his  lifter  ;  and  being  admitted  to  fupport  their  accufation,
they  made  a  long  fpeech,  quoting  the  laws,  that  allowed  no
perfon  to  be  put  to  death  without  a  trial ;  and  giving  inftan-
,ces  of  the  anger  of  all  the  gods  againft  thofe  cities,  which  had
neglected  to  punifh  criminals.  On  the  other  fide,  the  father
fpoke  in  favor  of  the  youth,  and  accufed  his  daughter,
alledging  that  the  ad  was  a  punilhment,  not  a  murder ;
and  added  that  he  was  the  proper  judge  of  the  calamities  of
his  own  family,  as  being  father  to  them  both.  A  great  deal

having


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  E  NS  I  S.  47

having  been  laid  on  both  ftdes,  the  king  was  under  great
difficulty  what  judgement  to  pronounce  in  the  caufe  :  For
he  did  not  think  it  juftifiable  in  him  either  to  acquit  a
perfon  of  murder,  who  confefted  he  had  put  his  fifter  to
death  without  trial,  and  that  for  what  the  laws  had  not
adjudged  to  be  capital ;  left,  by  fo  doing,  he  fhould  transfer
the  malediftion,  and  guilt  from  the  criminal  to  his  own
family ;  or  to  punifh  as  a  murderer,  a  perfon,  who  had,
voluntarily,  expofed  his  life  for  the  fervice  of  his  country,
and  inverted  her  with  fo  great  power ;  efpecially,  as  he  was
acquitted  by  his  father,  to  whom  both  nature,  and  the  law
had  given,  in  the  firft  inftance,  the  right  of  refenting  the
death  of  his  own  daughter.  Not  knowing,  therefore,  how
to  aft  in  the  affair  before  him,  he,  at  laft,  refolved  to  leave
the  determination  of  it  to  the  people.  The  Roman  people
being,  upon  this  occafton,  judges,  for  the  ftrft  time,  in  a
caufe  of  a  18  capital  nature,  adhered  to  the  determination  of


l8‘  TtVOfAiVOS  B’CCVult)(p0gl4  XeiffUi)i

toJe  zJPtolov  0  ?uy.xiwv  Jtipog  This

muft  not  be  underftood  as  if  the  Ro¬
man  people  derived  their  right  of
judging  capital  crimes,  in  the  laft  in-
ftance,  from  this  tranfadtion  •,  but  that
this  was  the  firft  time  they  exercifed
that  right.  This  will  appear  from
r  Livy,  who,  upon  this  occafion,  gives
us  the  very  words  of  the  law,  (-.carmen
legis ,  as  he  calls  them  very  properly)
by  which  there  had  been  an  appeal
given  to  the  people,  originally,  from
the  fentence  of  the  Duumviri ;  Duum¬
viri  perduellionem  judicent  •,  ft  a  Duum¬


viri  s  provccarit,  provocations  cert  at  0  :  Si
vincent ,  caput  cbnubito :  infelici  arbori
re  fie  fufpertdito  :  verberato  vel  intra
pomoeriumr  vel  extra pcmoerium.  This
law  continued  in  force  as  long  as  the
liberty  it  was  d’efigned  to  fupport :
For  v/e  find  that s  Julius  Caefar,  when
he  was  edile,  luborned  a  man  to  accufe
Rabirius  of  the  death  of  Saturninus  ;
and,  being  himfelf  appointed  one  of
the  Duumviri,  he  condemned  him
with  the  fame  injuftice,  with  which,
he  had  procured  him  to  be  profecuted.
It  is  well  known  that  Rabirius,  like
I  loratius,  appealed  to  the  people  from


rB.  i.  c.  26,  s  Suetonius  Life  of  C<efar,  c,  iz.


the


4»  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  111.


the  father,  and  acquitted  Horatius  of  the  murder.  However,
the  king  did  not  look  upon  the  judgement,  thus  paffed
upon  him  by  men,  as  a  fufficient  atonement  for  thofe,  who
defire  to  acquit  themfelves  of  their  duty  to  the  gods ;  but,
fending  for  the  pontifs,  he  ordered  them  to  appeafe  the  gods,
and  the  genius’s,  and  to  purify  the  perfon  of  Horatius  with
thofe  luftrations,  with  which  the  law  had  appointed  invo¬
luntary  homicide  to  be  expiated.  Upon  this,  the  pontifs
erecded  two  altars;  one  to  Juno,  to  whom  the  care  of
lifters  is  allotted ;  and  the  other  to  a  certain  god,  or  genius
of  the  country,  called,  in  their  language,  19  Genius  Curatius ,
from  the  name  of  his  coufins,  who  had  been  flain  by  him :
And,  having  offered  certain  facrifices  upon  them,  among
mother  expiations,  they,  laft  of  all,  led  Horatius  under  the
10  yoke.  It  is  a  cuftom  among  the  Romans,  when  the
enemy  deliver  up  their  arms,  and  fubmit  to  their  power,  to
fix  two  pieces  of  wood  upright  in  the  ground,  and  faften  a


the  fentence  of  the  Duumviri  ;  that
Cicero  defended  him,  and  that  Metel-
lus  faved  him  from  the  violence  of
Caefar’s  mob,  by  diffolving  the  af-
lembly.  I  am  furprifed  to  find  B-ava-
?v<po£ov  K(ji<riv  rendered  by  le  Jay,  une
matiere  criminelle ;  and  by  M.  **  *,
un  proces  criminel ;  when  the  words,
plainly,  fignify  not  only  a  criminal ,
but  a  capital  caufe.

J9*  rev'i*.  This  is  the  reading  I  have
followed  inftead  of  I«vk,  which  Hands
in  all  the  editions,  and  manufcripts.
I  was  induced  to  it  by  a  note  in  Hud-
fon,  in  which  very  good  reafons  are
given  for  this  alteration  •,  which  note

{ B.  i.  c.  26.


M.  ***  has  tranflated  without  the  leaft
acknowledgment  to  the  perfon,  from
whom  he  took  it.

20,  Zvyov.  The  yoke,  under  which
Horatius  was  led  by  the  pontifs,  was
called,  as  11  Livy,  alfo,  fays,  Sororium
tigillum ,  and  was,  always,  kept  in  re¬
pair.  The  defcription,  given  by  our
author  of  the  Jngum ,  exadtly,  agrees
with  That  given  of  it  by  “Livy  in  an¬
other  place,  where  he  fays  that  L.
Quintius  Cinrinnatus,  then  dictator,
caufed  the  Aequi,  who  had  fubmitted
to  him,  to  pafs  under  the  yoke  :
Tribus  hafiis  jugum  fit  \  humi  fixis  dua-
bus ,  fuperque  eas  tranfverfd  und  dcligata.

VB.  iii.  c.  25.


third


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SI  S.  49

third  to  the  top  of  them  tranfverfely ;  then  to  lead  the  cap¬
tives  under  this,  and  after  that,  to  grant  them  their  liberty,
and  leave  to  return  home  :  This  they  call  a  yoke.  And  this
was  the  laft  of  the  expiatory  ceremonies,  made  ufe  of,  upon
that  occafion,  by  thofe,  who  purified  the  perfon  of  Flora  tins.
All  the  Romans  look  upon  the  place  in  the  city,  where  they
performed  this  expiation,  as  holy.  This  place  is  in  the
ftreet,  that  leads  from  the  Carinae  down  to  the  Cyprian-
ftreet,  where  the  altars,  then  eredted,  ftill  remain  ;  and,  over
them,  a  beam  is  extended,  and  fixed  in  each  of  the  oppofite
walls ;  which  beam  lies  over  the  heads  of  the  paftengers,  who
go  out  of  this  ftreet,  and  is  called,  in  the  Roman  language,
Sororium  tigillum ,  The  fifier s  beam .  In  this  place,  is  ftill  pre¬
fer  ved  the  monument  of  this  man’s  misfortune,  which  is  hon¬
oured  by  the  Romans  with  annual  facrifices.  The  other  mo¬
nument,  ere&ed  in  memory  of  the  bravery  he  fhewed  in  the
combat,  is  an  angular  pillar,  ftandingat  the  entrance  into  one
of  the  two  portico’s  in  the  forum,  upon  which  were  placed
the  fpoils  of  the  three  Alban  brothers  :  The  arms  are  de¬
faced  by  length  of  time ;  but  the  pillar  ftill  preferves  its
name,  and  is  called  Pila  Horatia ,  The  Horatian  Pillar .
There  is  alfo  a  law  among  them,  enabled  upon  the  occafion
of  this  event,  which  they  obferve  to  this  day,  and  which
renders  the  honor,  and  glory  of  thefe  perfons  immortal  :
This  law  ordains  that,  whenfoever  three  male  children  are
born  at  a  birth,  they  fhall  be  maintained  at  the  expence  of
the  public,  till  they  are  men.  Such  was  the  conclufion
of  the  incidents  relating  to  the  family  of  the  Horatii,  which
Vol.  II.  G  had


5o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

had  been  attended  with  wonderful,  and  unexpe&ed  viciffi-
tudes  of  fortune.

XXIII.  The  king  of  the  Romans,  having  employed  a
year  in  making  the  neceffary  preparations  of  war,  refolved
to  lead  out  his  army  againft  the  city  of  the  Fidenates :  His
pretence  for  the  war  was,  that  this  people,  being  called  upon
to  juftify  themfelves  in  relation  to  the  treacherous  defign
they  had  formed  againft  the  Romans,  and  Albans,  had  re-
fufed  to  obey ;  and,  immediately,  taking  arms,  fhutting
their  gates,  and  bringing  in  the  auxiliary  forces  of  the
Veientes,  openly,  revolted ;  and  that,  when  the  embafiadors
fent  from  Rome,  demanded  the  caufe  of  their  revolt,  they
had  anfwered,  that  there  was  nothing  of  a  public  nature
fubfifting  between  them,  and  the  city  of  Rome,  lmce  the
death  of  Romulus,  king  of  the  Romans,  with  whom  they
had  entered  into  a  treaty  of  friendfhip,  mutually,  confirmed
by  oaths.  Tullus,  laying  hold  of  this  pretence,  not  only
armed  his  own  forces,  but  fent  to  his  allies  for  their  affiftance.
The  moft  numerous,  as  well  as  the  beft  auxiliary  troops
were  brought  to  him,  from  Alba,  by  Metius  Fufetius,  who
were  armed  in  fo  gallant  a  manner,  as  to  excel  all  the  other
allied  forces.  Tullus,  therefore,  making  no  doubt  but  that
Metius  refolved  to  afllft  him,  in  carrying  on  the  war,  with
alacrity,  and  the  greateft  fincerity,  commended  him,  and
communicated  to  him  all  his  defigns.  But  this  man,  who
was  accufed  by  his  citizens  of  want  of  conduct  in  the
former  war,  and,  alfo,  of  treachery,  finding  himfelf  con¬
tinued  in  the  fovereignty  of  the  city  for  the  third  year,  by

the


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A LIC AR N  A SS E NS  I  S.  51

the  appointment  of  Tullus,  he  grew  uneafy  to  fee  the  ma-
giftracy,  with  which  he  was  invefted,  fubjedt  to  That  of
another  perfon;  and,  defiring  to  command  rather  than  to
obey,  he  formed  a  defign  of  an  execrable  nature  :  For,
having  fent  embafiadors,  privately,  to  the  enemies  of  the
Romans,  whilft  they  were  yet  wavering  in  their  refolution
to  revolt,  he  encouraged  them  to  declare  themfelves  without
hefitation,  by  ingaging  to  fall  upon  the  Romans  himfelf
during  the  battle:  And  thefe  operations,  and  defigns  he
kept  fecret  from  all  the  world.  Tullus,  as  foon  as  his  own
army,  and  That  of  his  allies  were  in  readinefs,  marched
againft  the  enemy;  and,  having  pafled  the  river  21  Anio,
he  incamped  near  Fidenae  :  But,  finding  a  confiderable
army  both  of  the  Fidenates,  and  of  their  allies,  drawn  up
before  the  city,  he  lay  quiet  that  day  ;  and  the  next,  he
fent  for  Fufetius  the  Alban,  and  his  other  principal  friends,
and  held  a  council  with  them  concerning  the  operations  of
the  war :  And  they  being  all  of  opinion  to  ingage  imme¬
diately,  and  lofe  no  time,  he  appointed  the  poft,  and  the
command  of  all  his  officers ;  and,  having  fixed  the  next
day  for  the  battle,  he  broke  up  the  aflembly.  In  the  mean
time,  Fufetius  (for  his  treachery  was  ftill  a  fecret  to  many
even  of  his  own  friends)  calling  together  the  moil  con-

ai*  Aviyjvcc.  This  reading  is  owing  Teverone ,  rifes  on  a  hill  three  Roman
to  "Cluver*,  and,  as  it  approaches,  miles  eaft  of  the  ancient  city,  called
nearly,  to  the  Latin  declination  of  the  Treba,  now  'Treva,  and  falls  into  the
word,  I  have  preferred  it  to  Avnjvcv  in  Tiber  a  little  above  the  Pons  Milvius ,
the  editions,  and  to  AW#  in  the  Va-  now  called,  Ponts  Mollo.
tican  manufcript.  The  Anio,  now

w  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  io.

G  2


iiderable


5  2  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I  T I E  S  OF  Book  III.

fiderable  tribunes,  and  centurions  among  the  Albans,  he  fpoke
to  them  in  the  following  manner  ;

XXIV.  “  Tribunes,  and  centurions,  I  am  going  to  im-
“  part  to  you  great,  and  unexpected  things,  which  I  have,
“  hitherto,  concealed  :  I  beg  of  you  to  keep  them  fecret,
“  otherwife  you  will  ruin  me  j  and,  if  you  think  the  fuccefs
cc  of  them  will  be  of  advantage  to  you,  affift  me  in  the
cc  execution  of  them.  The  fhortnefs  of  the  time  will  not
“  allow  me  to  fay  many  things ;  for  which  reafon,  I  fhall
u  mention  only  Thofe,  that  are  moft  neceflary.  From  the
€£  time  we  became  fubjeCl  to  the  Romans,  to  this  day,  I
<£  have  led  a  life  full  of  fhame,  and  grief,  though  honoured
“  by  their  king  with  the  fovereign  command,  this  being  the
<£  third  year  I  have  been  pofiefled  of  it,  and  may,  if  I  pleafe,
c<  enjoy  it  as  long  as  I  live.  But  I  look  upon  it  as  the
c<  greateft  of  all  evils  to  be  the  only  happy  man  in  an  un-
“  happy  commonwealth  ;  and,  finding  that,  contrary  to
“  all  the  rights  mankind  look  upon  as  facred,  we  have  been
££  deprived  by  them  of  the  fovereign ty,  I  confidered  of  the
“  means  to  recover  it  without  expofing  ourfelves  to  any
“  great  calamity:  After  many,  and  various  reafonings  upon
“  this  fubjeCt,  the  only  meafure  I  could  think  of,  that  promifed
“  fuccefs,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  feemed  the  eafieft  and  the  leaf!:
<c  dangerous,  was  to  take  advantage  of  the  firft  war,  raifed
<l  againft  them  by  their  neighbours :  For  I  forefaw  that,
“  in  fuch  a  fituation,  they  would  want  the  afliftance  of
“  their  allies,  and,  particularly,  of  us :  And,  after  that,  I
a  fuppofed  you  would,  without  much  difficulty,  be  con-

“  vinced


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  53,

“  vinced  that  it  is  more  glorious,  as  well  as  more  juft  for
“  you  to  fight  for  your  own  liberty,  than  for  their  power.
“  After  I  had  confidered  thefe  things,  I,  underhand,  con-
u  trived  a  war  to  be  raifed  againft  the  Romans  by  their  own
“  fubjeds,  encouraging  the  Veientes,  and  Fidenates  to  take
“  arms,  by  a  promife  of  my  afiiftance:  Hitherto,  thefe
<c  intrigues,  and  my  preparations  to  attack  the  Romans  with
“  advantage,  have  been  concealed  from  them*  Now,  confi-
<c  der  the  many  benefits  we  fhall  receive  from  this  meafure  :
4£  Firft,  by  not  having,  openly,  taken  a  refolution  to  revolt,
u  in  which  there  was  a  double  danger,  either  to  be  hurried
u  on  unprepared,  and,  trufting  to  our  own  ftrength  onlyr
“  to  hazard  the  whole ;  or,  while  we  were  making  pre-
c<  parations,  and  foliciting  afiiftance,  to  be  prevented  by
Ci  thofe,  who  were,  already,  prepared,  we  fhall,  now,  be  ex~
“  pofed  to  neither  of  thefe  difficulties,  but  extrad  whatever
is  ufeful  from,  both :  In  the  next  place,  we  fhall  not
“  attempt,  by  force,  to  deftroy  the  great,  and  almoft  invin-
tc  cible  power,  and  fortune  of  our  enemies,  but,  by  thofe
“  means,  by  which  all  overbearing  men,  and  thofe,  who  can
<c  hardly  be  fubdued  by  force,  are  taken,  that  is,  by  fraud
“  and  artifice ;  a  method,  of  which  this  will  neither  be
<(  the  firft,  nor  the  only  example.  Befides,  as  our  own
“  forces  are  inferior  to  the  whole  power  of  the  Romans,
<c  and  their  allies,  I  have  fecured  the  afiiftance  of  the
“  Fidenates,  and  the  Veientes,  whofe  great  numbers  you
“  fee  before  you ;  and  I  have,  alfo,  taken  the  neceilary
<c  precautions,  that  thefe  auxiliaries,  while  they  afiift  us,


54  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookHI.

€£  may,  with  all  poflible  confidence,  be  depended  on  in
cc  adhering  to  our  alliance  :  For  our  territories  will  not  be
££  the  fcene  of  action  ;  but,  while  the  Fidenates  are  fighting
u  for  their  own  country,  they  will,  at  the  fame  time,
£C  defend  ours.  Add  to  this,  that  we  fhall  have,  alfo,  this
c£  advantage,  which  all  men  look  upon  as  moft  agreeable,
“  and  of  which  there  are  few  examples  in  paft  ages,  that,
<£  while  we  receive  a  benefit  from  our  allies,  we  fhall  be
u  thought  to  confer  one  on  them.  And,  if  our  enterprife
u  fucceeds,  as  we  have  reafon  to  expect,  the  Fidenates,  and
££  the  Veientes,  in  delivering  us  from  a  grievous  fubjedtion,
££  will  think  themfelves  as  much  obliged  to  us,  as  if  we
<£  had  delivered  them  from  the  like  fubjedtion.  Thefe  are
££  the  meafures  which  I  have  concerted  with  great  care,
££  and  which  I  look  upon  as  fufficient  to  embolden,  and
u  excite  you  to  revolt.  I  fhall,  now,  inform  you  of  the
££  manner,  in  which  I  propofe  to  carry  them  into  execution.
££  Tullus  has  affigned  me  my  poft  under  the  hill,  and  given
tc  me  the  command  of  one  of  the  wings :  When  we  are
££  going  to  ingage  the  enemy,  I  will  quit  my  poft,  and
££  begin  to  march  up  the  hill ;  you  are  then  to  follow  me
££  with  your  troops,  in  their  proper  order.  When  I  have
f£  gained  the  top  of  the  hill,  and  am,  fecurely,  ported,
c£  obferve  in  what  manner  I  propofe  to  conduct  the  fequel
££  of  this  enterprife.  If  the  event  anfwers  my  expectation,
££  and  I  fee  the  enemy  grow  bold  from  a  confidence  of  our
££  aftiftance,  and  the  Romans  difheartened,  and  terrified
££  from  an  apprehenfion  of  being  betrayed  by  us,  and  (as


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C ARN  A  S  S  E N S  I  S.  55

££  may  be  expected)  preparing  rather  to  fly,  than  to  fight,
££  I  will  fall  upon  them ;  and,  as  I  fhall  come  down,  from
£C  an  eminence,  to  the  plain,  and,  with  an  army  in  heart,
££  and  good  order,  attack  men  trembling,  and  difperfed,  I
££  will  cover  the  field  with  dead  bodies :  For  the  apprehen-
££  fion,  though  ill-grounded,  of  the  treachery  of  allies,  or
££  of  an  attempt  from  frefh  enemies,  is  fatal  in  war  ;  and
££  we  know  that  many  great  armies  have  been,  utterly,  de-
££  ftroyed  by  no  other  formidable  circumftance  fo  much,
cc  as  by  a  vain  fear.  But  our  attempt  will  prove  no  vain
££  report,  no  unfeen  terror,  but  an  adtion,  of  all  others,  the
££  moft  dreadful,  both  in  appearance,  and  reality.  However,
<c  if  I  find  things  fall  out  contrary  to  my  expectations  (for
££  I  think  myfelf  obliged  to  take  notice  of  thofe  incidents,

££  alfo,  that,  often,  happen  contrary  to  our  opinions ;  fince
££  many  even  improbable  things  befal  us  in  the  courfe  ot
££  our  lives)  I  fhall  then,  alfo,  endeavour  to  act  contrary
££  to  what  I,  before,  propofed  :  For  I  fhall  lead  you  againft
££  the  enemy  in  conjunction  with  the  Romans,  aflift  thefe
££  in  gaining  the  victory,  and  pretend  that  I  poffeffed  myfelf
££  of  the  eminence  with  an  intention  to  furround  the  former;
££  which  pretence,  as  my  actions  agree  with  it,  cannot  fail
££  of  gaining  credit :  So  that,  without  partaking  in  the
££  dangers  of  either  fide,  we  fhall  have  a  fhare  in  the  good
££  fortune  of  both.  Thefe,  therefore,  are  my  refolutions,
££  which,  with  the  affiftance  of  the  gods,  I  defign  to  purlue,
££  as  the  moft  advantageous,  not  only  to  the  Albans,  but
££  to  the  reft  of  the  Latines.  It  is  your  duty,  in  the

£  £  firfi;


$6  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ  I  T  I E  S  OF  Book  III.

“  firft  place,  to  obferve  fecrecy  ;  next,  to  keep  your  ranks ;
££  to  yield  a  quick  obedience  to  the  orders  you  fhall  receive ;
££  to  fight,  bravely,  yourfelves ;  and  to  infufe  the  fame
C£  alacrity  into  all,  who  are  under  your  command,  remem-
u  bering  that  we  do  not  contend  for  liberty  upon  the  fame
u  terms  with  thofe,  who  have  been  accuftomed  to  obey,
££  and  who  have  received  that  form  of  government  from
€£  their  anceftors  :  For  we  are  free  ourfelves,  and  defcended
££  from  freemen ;  and  to  us  our  anceftors  have  left  an  here-
£C  ditary  command  over  our  neighbours,  as  a  fyftem  of
££  government,  preferved  by  them  near  five  hundred  years,
££  of  which  let  us  not  deprive  our  pofterity.  Let  no  one
££  entertain  a  fear  left,  by  purfuing  what  I  propofe,  he  fhould
££  diffolve  the  treaties,  and  tranfgrefs  the  oaths,  by  which
<£  they  were  confirmed  ;  on  the  contrary,  let  him  confider
C£  that  he  willreftore  thofe  treaties,  which  the  Romans  have
u  violated,  to  their  primitive  force ;  thofe  important  treaties,
*£  I  mean,  which  human  nature  has  eftablifhed,  and  the
,€£  general  law  both  of  the  Greeks,  and  Barbarians  con-
££  firmed,  that  parents  fhall  command,  and  give  laws  to,
££  their  children,  and  mother-cities,  to  their  colonies :  Thefe
££  treaties,  which  are  infeparable  from  human  nature,  we,
££  who  defire  they  may,  for  ever,  remain  inviolate,  do  not
££  tranfgrefs  ;  neither  have  we  reafon  to  apprehend  that  the
“  wrath  of  the  gods,  or  the  genius’s  will  purfue  us,  as  guilty
££  of  an  impious  a£lion,  if  we  repine  at  being  (laves  to  our
^£  own  pofterity  ;  but  thofe,  who  have  difthlved  them  from
*4£  the  beginning,  and  attempted,  by  an  unjuftifiable  adion,

. ££  to


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  57

u  to  fet  up  the  law  of  man  above  That  of  heaven ;  and
“  the  anger  of  the  gods  will,  with  all  juftice,  oppofe  them,
“  not  us;  and  the  indignation  of  men  will  fall  upon  them,
u  rather  than  upon  us.  If,  therefore,  you  are  of  opinion
u  that  thefe  refolutions  will  be  the  moll  advantageous  to  all
“  of  you,  let  us  purfue  them,  calling  the  gods,  and  genius’s
“  to  our  affiftance :  But,  if  any  of  you  are  of  a  contrary
cc  opinion,  and  entertain  one  of  thefe  two  fentiments,  either
“  that  we  ought  never  to  recover  the  ancient  dignity  of  our
“  city,  or  that,  in  expectation  of  a  more  favourable  oppor-
“  tunity,  we  fhould  defer  our  undertaking  for  the  prefent,
cc  let  him  make  no  difficulty  to  propofe  his  thoughts  to  the
“  aflembly:  iFor  we  ffiall  purfue  whatever  refolution  you
“  ffiall,  unanimoufly,  approve  of.”

XXV.  The  aflembly  having  approved  of  this  advice,
and  promifed  to  obferve  all  his  orders,  he  took  an  oath
from  each  of  them  for  the  performance  of  their  promife,
and  then  diflolved  the  aflembly.  The  next  day,  the  army
both  of  the  Fidenates,  and  their  allies,  marched  out  of  their
camp  at  fun- rife,  and  drew  up  in  order  of  battle :  On  the
other  fide,  the  Romans  came  out  againfl:  them,  and  drew
up  alfo.  Tullus  himfelf,  and  the  Romans  formed  the  left
wing,  which  was  oppofite  to  the  Veientes :  For  thefe  were
pofted  on  the  right  of  the  enemy:  Metius  Fufetius,  and
the  Albans  were  placed  on  the  fide  of  the  hill,  in  the  right
wing  of  the  Roman  army,  over-againft  the  Fidenates.  When
the  two  armies  drew  near  to  one  another,  and,  before  they
came  within  reach  of  each  other’s  weapons,  the  Albans,
Vol.1I;  H  fepa-


58  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  III.

feparating  themfelves  from  the  reft  of  the  army,  marched
up  the  hill  in  good  order.  The  Fidenates,  feeing  this,
and  not  doubting  but  the  Albans  would  perform  the  pro-
mife  they  had  made  to  them  of  betraying  the  Romans,
attacked  the  latter,  now,  with  the  greater  confidence :  And
the  right  wing  of  the  Romans,  being  left  naked  by  their
allies,  was  broken,  and  very  much  diftrefled :  But  the
left,  where  Tullus  himfelf  fought  at  the  head  of  the
chofen  horfe,  maintained  the  fight  with  great  bravery.  In
the  mean  time,  a  man  rode  up  to  thofe,  who  were  fighting
under  the  king,  and  faid,  u  Tullus,  our  right  wing  fuffers  ;
cc  For  the  Albans,  having  quitted  their  poft,  are  marching
“  up  the  hill  in  all  hafte ;  and  the  Fidenates,  who  flood
“  oppofite  to  them,  outflank  our  wing  now'  it  is  left  naked,
cc  and  are  going  to  furround  us.”  The  Romans,  hearing
this,  and  feeing  the  Albans  marching  in  hafte  up  the  hill,
were  afraid  the  enemy  fhould  furround  them  :  So  that,  they
could  not  refolve  either  to  fight,  or  ftand  their  ground.
Upon  this  occafion,  they  fay,  Tullus,  with  great  prefence  of
mind  in  fo  great,  and  fo  unlooked  for  a  misfortune,  made  ufe
of  a  ftrategem,  by  which  he,  not  only,  preferved  the  Roman
army,  that  was  threatened  with  manifeft  ruin,  but,  alfo,
broke,  and  deftroyed  all  the  meafures  of  the  enemy  :  For,
as  foon  as  he  received  this  account,  he  raifed  his  voice  fo  as
to  be  heard  by  the  enemy,  and  faid,  “  Romans,  the  victory
“  is  ours:  For  the  Albans  have  pofiefled  themfelves  of  the
“  next  hill,  as  you  fee,  by  my  orders ;  to  the  end  that,
“  getting  behind  the  enemy,  they  may  fall  upon  them  :

u  Confider,


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENS  IS.  59
c£  Confider,  therefore,  that  we  have  our  greateft  foes  in
“  our  power,  fome  attacking  them  in  front,  and  others
“  in  the  rear  ;  where,  being  unable  either  to  advance,  or
cc  retire,  and  inclofed  between  the  river  on  one  fide,  and
“  the  hill  on  the  other,  they  will  receive  exemplary  punifti-
u  ment :  Fall  on,  then,  with  the  greateft  contempt  of  the
“  enemy.”

XXVI.  This  he  repeated  riding  through  all  the  ranks :
Immediately,  the  Fidenates  were  afraid  of  a  counter- treachery,
fufpe&ing  the  Alban  had  made  ufe  of  this  ftrategem  to  fur-
prife  them,  fince  they  did  not  fee  him  either  face  the  enemy
in  conjunction  with  them,  or  charge  the  Romans  prefently,
according  to  his  promife:  On  the  other  fide,  thefe  words,
pronounced  by  Tullus,  encouraged  the  Romans,  and  filled
them  with  confidence;  and,  giving  a  great  fhout,  they  all
together  attacked  the  enemy.  Upon  this,  the  Fidenates  gave
way,  and  fled  to  their  city  in  diforder  :  While  they  were
in  this  fear,  and  confufion,  the  king  of  the  Romans  de¬
tached  the  horfe  after  them,  who  purfued  them  fome  time  ;  *
when,  finding  they  were  difperfed,  and  had  neither  the  in¬
tention,  nor  the  power  to  get  together  again,  he  gave  over
the  purfuit,  and  marched  againft  thofe,  who  were  yet  un¬
broken,  and  flood  their  ground.  And  here,  the  foot  fought
with  great  bravery,  and  the  horfe  diftinguifhed  themfelves
ftill  more:  For  the  Veientes,  who  were  polled  on  this  fide,
received  the  charge  of  the  Roman  horfe  without  any  fliew
of  fear,  and  maintained  the  fight  a  confiderable  time :  But,
hearing  their  left  wing  was  beaten,  and  that  the  whole  army

H  2  of


Book  III.


60  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

of  the  Fidenates,  their  allies,  fled  in  diforder,  fearing  to  be
furrounded  by  the  troops,  that  were  returning  from  the  purfuit,
they,  alfo,  broke  their  ranks,  and  fled,  endeavouring  to  fave
themfelves  by  palling  the  river:  Thofe,  among  them,
therefore,  who  were  ftrongeft,  leaft  difabled  by  their  wounds,
and  could  fwim,  got  over  the  river  without  their  arms ;
while  all,  who  wanted  any  of  thefe  advantages,  were  (wal¬
lowed  up  in  the  eddies :  For  the  ftream  of  the  Tiber  near
Fidenae  is  rapid,  and  has  many  windings.  Tullus  fent  a
detachment  of  the  horfe  to  put  to  death  thofe  of  the  enemy,
who  were  prefling  to  the  river;  while  he  himfelf  led  the
reft  of  the  army  to  the  camp  of  the  Veientes,  and  took  it
by  ftorm.  This  was  the  fituation  of  the  Romans,  after  they
had  been,  unexpectedly,  preferved  from  deftru&ion.

XXVII.  When  the  Alban  obferved  the  victory  of  Tullus
to  be,  now,  manifeft,  he,  alfo,  marched  with  his  own  troops
down  the  hill,  and  purfued  thofe  of  the  Fidenates,  who  fled,
to  the  intent  that  all  the  Romans  might  be  witnefles  of  his
performing  fome  part  of  the  duty  of  an  ally,  and  deftroyed
many  of  the  enemy,  who  were  difperfed  in  the  flight.
However,  Tullus,  underftanding  his  delign,  and  detefting
his  double  treachery,  thought  it  not  proper  to  reproach  him
v/ith  it,  till  he  had  him  in  his  power:  But,  addrefling  him¬
felf  to  feveral  perfons  prefent,  he  pretended  to  applaud  the
retreat  he  had  made  to  the  eminence,  as  if  it  had  flowed
from  the  befl:  deiign  ;  and,  fending  a  party  of  horfe  to  him,
deftred  he  would  fhew  his  zeal  to  the  laft,  and  go  in  queft
of  thofe  Fidenates,  being  many  in  number,  who,  unable  to

get


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  ARN  A  S  SEN  SI  S.  61

get  into  the  city,  were  difperfed  about  the  country,  and  put
them  to  death.  Fufetius,  imagining  that  he  had  fucceeded
in  one  of  his  two  defigns,  and  that  Tullus  was  unacquainted
with  his  artifice,  received  the  commiftion  with  joy;  and,
riding  about  the  country  a  confiderable  time,  put  all  he
found  to  the  fword  :  And,  the  fun  being  now  fet,  he  came
with  his  horfe  to  the  Roman  camp  from  the  purfuit,  and
pafled  the  following  night  in  rejoicing  with  the  reft.  Tullus,
having  ftaid  in  the  camp  of  the  Veientes  till  the  firft  watch,
and  examined  the  moft  confiderable  of  the  prifoners  con¬
cerning  the  authors  of  the  revolt ;  as  foon  as  he  found  that,
even,  Metius  Fufetius,  the  Alban,  was  one  of  the  confpi-
rators,  and  confidered  that  his  actions  agreed  with  the
information  of  the  prifoners,  he  mounted  his  horfe;  and,
taking  with  him  the  moft  faithful  of  his  friends,  rode  to
Rome :  Then,  fending  to  the  lioufes  of  the  fenators,  he
afiembled  them  before  midnight,  and  informed  them  of
the  treachery  of  the  Alban,  producing  the  prifoners  as
witneftes ;  and,  by  what  ftrategem,  he  himfelf  had  defeated
the  defigns  both  of  their  enemies,  and  of  the  22  Albans  :
He  defired  them,  now  the  war  was  ended  in  the  moft
fuccefsful  manner,  to  confider  what  remained  to  be  done,
and  in  what  manner  the  traitors  ought  to  be  punifhed,
and  the  city  of  Alba  rendered  more  circumfped  for  the
future.  The  fenate  were  unanimous  in  their  opinion  that

•  <  *  .  J  A  ■  •  *  '  —  >  t  J  ..  *  ..  I

Z2,  Tag  AASavag.  I  have  fubflitiited  manufcripts  •,  be'caufe  the  Fidenates
AtGxvxg  in  the  room  of  which  were,  before,  included  under  the  name

is  the  reading  of  all  the  editions,  and  of  woA^uioi.


it


frt  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

it  was  both  juft  and  necefiary  to  punifh  the  authors  ol  this
wicked  defign;  but  in  great  perplexity  to  find  out  the
eafteft,  and  fhfeft  means  of  effe&ing  it^  For  they  thought  it
impoflible  to  put  to  death  a  great  number  of  brave  Albans
in  a  clandeftine,  and  private  manner  ;  and,  if  they  fhould
attempt,  openly,  to  apprehend,  and  punifh  the  guilty,  they
had  reafon  to  fear  the  Albans  would  not  fuffer  it,  but  would
run  to  arms ;  and  they  were  unwilling  to  have  a  war,  at
the  fame  time,  with  the  Fidenates,  and  Tyrrhenians,  and
the  Albans,  who,  as  allies,  had  come  to  their  afliftance.
While  they  were  in  this  perplexity,  Tullus  delivered  an
opinion  the  laft,  which  was,  unanimoufly,  approved  of,  and,
concerning  which  I  fhall  fpeak  prefently.

XXVIII.  The  diftance  between  Fidenae,  and  Rome,  be¬
ing  forty  ftadia,  Tullus  rode  full  fpeed  to  the  camp  ;  and,
fending  for  Marcus  Horatius,  the  furvivor  of  the  three
•brothers,  before  it  was  quite  day,  he  gave  him  a  party  of
horfe,  and  foot,  all  chofen  men,  and  commanded  him  to
go  to  Alba,  and  to  enter  the  city  as  a  friend  ;  and  that,  as
foon  as  he  had  fecured  the  fubmiffion  of  the  inhabitants,
he  fhould  demolifh  the  city  to  the  foundations,  without
fparing  any  buildings,  whether  private,  or  public,  except
the  temples :  And,  as  to  the  citizens,  he  was  neither  to  kill,
nor  injure  any  of  them,  nor  to  deprive  them  of  their  effedts.
After  he  had  fent  away  Horatius  with  this  commiftiom  he
affembled  the  tribunes,  and  centurions ;  and,  having  ac¬
quainted  them  with  the  refolutions  of  the  fenate,  he  placed
them  as  a  guard  about  his  perfon.  Soon  after,  the  Alban


came


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  63

came  to  exprefs  his  joy  in  the  common  victory,  and  to
congratulate  Tullus  upon  it.  The  latter,  ftill  concealing
his  defign,  commended  him  as  a  perfon,  to  whom  great
rewards  were  due;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  defired  him  to
write  down  the  names  of  fuch  of  the  Albans,  as  had  dif-
tinguifhed  themfelves  in  the  battle,  and  bring  the  lift  to
him,  to  the  end  that  they,  alfo,  might  have  their  fhare  in  the
fruits  of  the  victory.  The  Alban,  pleafed  with  this,  gave
him  a  lift  of  his  moft  intimate  friends,  who  were  the  ac¬
complices  in  his  fecret  defigns.  Then,  the  king  of  the
Romans  commanded  all  the  troops  to  aflemble  without  arms.
When  they  were  afiembled,  he  ordered  the  general  of  the
Albans,  together  with  his  tribunes  and  centurions,  to  ftand
clofe  to  the  tribunal ;  next  to  thefe,  he  placed  the  reft  of
the  Albans ;  and,  behind  the  Albans,  the  troops  of  the  other
allies :  All  thefe  he  encompaffed  with  Romans,  of  whom
the  moft  refolute  had  fvvords  concealed  under  their  garments.
When  Tullus  found  he  had  the  advantage  over  his  ad-
verfaries,  he  rofe  up,  and  fpoke  as  follows :

XXIX.  u  Romans,  and  you  my  friends,  and  confederates,
“  we  have,  with  the  afliftance  of  the  gods,,  taken  revenge
“  on  the  Fidenates,  and  their  allies,  who  have  dared,  openly,
£C  to  make  war  againft  us ;  fo  that,  they  will  either  ceafe
cc  for  the  future  to  difturb  us,  or  they  will  receive  a  feverer
“  chaftifement  than,  hitherto,  they  have  felt.  It  is,  now,
“  time,  fince  our  firft  enterprife  has  fucceeded  to  our  wifh;
“  to  punifh  thofe  enemies  alfo,  who  call  themfelves  our
“  friends,  and  were  taken  into  this  war  to  afiift  us  in  an-

“  noying


Book  111.


64  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

u  noying  our  common  enemies,  but  have  broken  their  faith ;
u  and,  entering  into  clandeftine  treaties  with  thofe  enemies,
44  have  attempted  to  deftroy  us  all:  For  thefe  are  much
44  more  dangerous  than  open  enemies,  and  defer ve  a  feverer
£C  punifhment:  Since  it  is  both  eafy  to  guard  againft  the
ftrategems  of  the  latter,  and,  when  they  attack  as  enemies,
u  poffible  to  repulfe  them :  But,  when  friends  ad  the  part
u  of  enemies,  it  is  neither  eafy  to  guard  againft  them,  nor
44  poffible,  for  thofe,  who  are  furprifed,  to  repulfe  them  :
sc  And  fuch  are  the  allies,  fent  by  the  city  of  Alba  to  cir-
1£  cum  vent  us,  although  they  have  received  no  injury  from
44  us,  but  many  confiderable  benefits :  For,  as  we  are  their
44  colony,  we  have  not  difmembered  any  part  of  their  em-
44  pire,  but  have  raifed  our  own  ftrength,  and  power,  out  of
44  the  acquifitions  we  have  made  from  our  own  enemies  :
44  And,  by  making  our  city  a  rampart  againft  the  moft
4  4  confiderable,  and  moft  warlike  nations,  we  have,  effectually,
44  fecured  them  from  a  war  with  the  Tyrrhenians,  and
44  Sabines.  In  the  profperity,  therefore,  of  our  city  they
44  ought,  of  all  others,  the  moft  to  rejoice,  and  grieve  at  our
44  calamities,  not  lefs  than  at  their  own.  However,  thefe
44  people  have  envied,  not  only,  us  thofe  advantages  we
44  enjoy,  but,  alfo,  themfelves  that  happinefs  they  enjoyed,
44  through  our  means ;  and,  at  laft,  unable,  any  longer,  to
44  contain  their  diffembled  hatred,  they  declared  war  againft
44  us :  But,  finding  us  well  prepared  to  receive  them,  and
44  themfelves  in  no  condition  to  annoy  us,  they  invited  us
44  to  a  reconciliation,  and  friendffiip,  and  propofed  the
■  'i't  -•  44  deciding


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  A  SS  ENSIS.  65

“  deciding  of  our  conteft  for  the  fovereignty  by  three  per-
“  fons  from  each  city  :  Thefe  conditions,  alfo,  we  accepted,
u  and,  having  gained  the  victory,  became  mafters  of  their
“  city.  After  this,  in  what  manner  did  we  behave  ourfelves
<c  towards  them  ?  Why,  when  we  had  it  in  our  power  to
cc  take  hoftages  from  them  ;  to  leave  a  garrifon  in  their
“  city ;  to  take  off  fome  of  the  principal  authors  of  the
cc  war  between  the  two  cities,  and  banifh  others ;  to  change
cc  the  form  of  their  government  according  to  our  own  in-
<c  terefl;  to  punifli  them  with  the  forfeiture  of  a  part  of
“  their  lands,  and  effe6ls ;  and,  which  was  the  eafieft  thing
“  of  all,  to  difarm  them,  by  which  means  we  fhould  have
“  added  ftrength  to  our  government ;  we  did  not  think  fit
“  to  do  any  thing  of  this  kind,  but,  confulting  our  piety  to
c<  our  mother-city,  rather  than  the  fecurity  of  our  power,
“  and  preferring  the  good  opinion  of  all  the  world,  to  our
u  private  advantage,  we  allowed  them  to  enjoy  every  thing
“  they  could  call  their  own,  and  fuffered  Metius  Fufetius,
cc  whom  they  themfelves  had  honoured  with  the  chief
“  magiftracy,  as  the  moft  deferving  man, 23  to  be  fure,  of  all
“  the  Albans,  to  adminifter  the  public  affairs  to  this  time  :
<c  For  which  favors,  you  fhall  hear  what  returns  they  made
“  at  a  time,  when  the  attachment  of  our  friends,  and  allies
was  more  neceflary  to  us  than  ever :  They  entered  into

a3*  a>].  Neither  of  the  Latin  tranf-  fentence.  The  Latin  language  afforded
lators,  nor  Mr.  *  *  *,  (for  le  Jay  has  the  former  a  happy  manner  of  tranf-
Jeft  it  out)  have  attended  to  the  Irony  lating  this  Irony  ^  Albanorum  fcilicet
expreffed  by  this  word  which,  in  praejiantijfmum .
my  opinion,  gives  great  life  to  the

'  VOL.  II.


I


a  private


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

<c  a  private  league  with  our  common  enemies,  by  which
u  they  ingaged  to  fall  upon  us  in  conjunction  with  them ;
“  and,  when  the  two  armies  approached  each  other,  they
“  quitted  their  poft,  and  ran  to  the  next  hills,  making  hafte,
“  early,  to  poffefs  themfelves  of  a  place  of  ftrength ;  and,
“  if  their  defign  had  fucceeded  according  to  their  defire,
<c  nothing  could  have  prevented  us,  when  furrounded  both
“  by  our  enemies,  and  our  friends,  from  being  all  deftroyed,
<c  and  the  fruit  of  the  many  battles  we  had  fought  for  the
“  fovereignty  of  our  city,  from  being,  in  one  day,  loft,
“  But,  fince  their  defign  has  mifcarried,  in  the  firft  place,
“  through  the  benevolence  of  the  gods  (for  I  am  one  of
“  thofe,  who  afcribe  all  great,  and  good  actions  to  them)
“  and,  next  to  that,  by  the  ftrategem  I  made  ufe  of,  which
u  did  not,  a  little,  contribute  to  infpire  both  the  enemy  with
<c  fear,  and  our  own  army  with  confidence  :  For  what  I
“  faid  during  the  battle,  that  the  Albans  had  poffefied
<c  themfelves  of  the  eminences,  by  my  orders,  with  a  view  of
“  furrounding  the  enemy,  was  all  a  fiction,  and  a  ftrategem
“  contrived  by  myfelf :  Since,  I  fay,  our  affairs  have  taken
<c  a  happy  turn,  we  fhould  not  behave  ourfelves  with  a
“  becoming  fpirit,  if  we  did  not  take  revenge  on  thefe
“  traitors;  who,  befides  their  obligation,  which,  from  their
<c  confanguinity  to  us,  they  ought  to  have  preferved  invio-
“  late,  have,  lately,  entered  into  treaties  with  us,  confirmed
<c  by  mutual  oaths :  Yet,  v/ithout  fearing  the  gods,  whom  they
“  had  called  upon  to  bear  witnefs  to  thefe  treaties,  or  regarding
<c  juftice  itfelf,  and  the  indignation  of  men  ;  without  con-

u


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  67

“  fidering  the  greatnefs  of  the  danger,  if  their  treachery
“  fhould  not  fucceed  according  to  their  wifh,  they  have,
C£  in  conjunction  with  our  greateft  adverfaries,  and  our
cc  greateft  enemies,  endeavoured  to  deftroy  us,  who  are  both
cc  their  colony,  and  their  benefactors,  in  the  moft  miferable,
<c  and  moft  flagitious  manner.”

XXX.  While  he  was  fpeaking,  the  Albans  had  recourfe
to  lamentations,  and  intreaties  of  every  kind ;  the  common
people  faying  they  had  no  knowledge  of  the  intrigues  of
Metius ;  and  their  commanders  pretending  they  had  no
notice  of  his  fecret  counfels,  till  the  very  time  of  the  battle,
when  it  was  not  in  their  power  either  to  prevent  his  orders,
or  to  refufe  obedience  to  them:  And  fome,  even  afcribed
their  ingagement  to  an  involuntary  necefllty,  grounded  on
their  affinity,  or  relation  to  Metius.  To  whom  the  king,
having  commanded  them  to  keep  ftlence,  thus  addrefled
himfelf;  “  Neither  am  I,  men  of  Alba,  unacquainted  with
any  thing  you  urge  in  your  defence  ;  but  am  of  opinion
that  the  generality  of  you  had  no  knowledge  of  this
treachery ;  my  reafon  is,  that  fecrets  are,  prefently,  di-
<c  vulged,  when  many  are  made  acquainted  with  them.  I  am,
<c  alfo,  of  opinion  that,  only,  a  fmall  number  of  the  tribunes,
cc  and  centurions  were  accomplices  in  the  confpiracy  formed
“  againft  us,  and  that  the  greateft  part  of  them  were  de-
<c  ceived,  and  forced  into  it  by  an  involuntary  necefllty.
<c  But,  if  nothing  of  all  this  were  true,  and,  if  all  the  Albans,
iC  as  well  you,  here  prefent,  as  thofe,  who  are  left  in  the
«c  city,  had  an  inclination  to  hurt  us  5  and,  that  you  had


cc


cc


cc


I  2


cc


not


ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  III.

“  not  now,  for  the  firft  time,  but,  long  ftnce,  taken  this
“  refolution,  yet  the  Romans  would  think  themfelves  ob-
u  liged,  on  account  of  their  relation  to  you,  to  bear,  even,
C£  this  your  injuftice.  But,  the  only  fecurity,  and  provifton
“  againft  your  being  either  forced,  or  feduced,by  your  leaders
{£  into  any  unjuft  deftgns  againft  us  for  the  future,  will  be
<£  for  us  all  to  become  citizens  of  the  fame  city,  and  to  look
“  upon  the  fame  country  as  our  own,  in  whofe  profperity,
<£  and  adverfity,  every  one  will  have  that  fhare,  which  for-
“  tune  allots  to  him:  For,  while  each  of  us,  as,  atprefent,
“  confiders  the  advantages,  and  difadvantages  of  the  other
££  with  a  view  to  their  different  interefts,  there  can  be  no
“  permanent  friendfhip  between  us,  particularly,  when  the
“  aggreffors,  if  they  fucceed,  are  to  gain  an  advantage,  and,
tc  if  they  fail,  to  be  fecured,  by  their  affinity,  from  every
<£  kind  of  chaftifement ;  while  thofe,  againft  whom  the
“  attempt  is  formed,  if  they  are  fubdued,  are  to  fuffer  the
“  worft  of  treatment ;  and,  if  they  efcape,  are  not  to  retain
“  the  fame  refentment  againft  the  aggreffors,  as  againft
«  enemies,  which  is  the  cafe  at  prefent.  Know,  then,  that
<£  the  Romans,  laft  night,  came  to  the  following  refolutions,
“  I  myfelf  having  affembled  the  fenate,  and  taken  down
t£  their  decree  in  writing,  by  which  it  is  ordered  that  your
<£  city  be  demoliffied  ;  and  that  no  buildings,  either  public,
“  or  private,  be  left  ftanding,  except  the  temples ;  that  all
u  the  inhabitants  continue  in  the  pofleffion  of  the  lands
«  they,  now,  enjoy,  and,  alfo,  of  their  flaves,  cattle,  and
other  effe&s,  and,  from  this  time,  reftde  at  Rome  ;  that

<£  fuch


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  69

“  fuch  of  your  lands,  as  belong  to  the  public,  be  divided
<c  among  thofe  of  the  Albans,  who  have  none,  except  the
“  facred  pofieflions,  out  of  which  the  facrifices  to  the  gods.
“  are  provided  ;  that  I  take  care  to  appoint  the  places  in
iC  the  city  for  the  conftrudtion  of  the  houfes,  in  which  you,
“  who  are  to  remove,  are,  for  the  future,  to  dwell,  and  affift
“  the  poorer  fort  in  the  expence  of  building  ;  that  your
“  common  people  be  incorporated  with  ours,  and  diftributed
u  among  the  tribes,  and  curiae  ;  that  the  following  families
<c  be,  not  only,  admitted  to  a  feat  in  the  fenate,  and  a  fhare  in
<c  the  magiftracy,  but,  alfo,  to  the  rank  of  patricians,  to  wit,
“  24the  Julii,  theServilii,  the  Geganii,  theMetilii,  the  Curatii,
tc  theQuindii,  and  the  Cloelii:  And  that  Metius,  and  his  ac-
u  complices  in  the  treachery,  fufFer  fuch  punifhments,  as
“  we  fhall  ordain,  when  we  come  to  fit  in  judgement  upon
“  each  of  the  criminals :  For  we  fliall  deprive  none  of  them
<(  either  of  a  trial,  or  of  the  liberty  of  making  their  de-
u  fence.”

*4*  etc.  There  is  a  note  in

Hudfon  upon  this  occafion,  which
M.  *  *  *  has  trandated,  as  he  has  the
three  following,  without  the  lead
acknowledgment  to  the  perfon,  from
whom  he  had  them.  In  this  note,
it  is  faid  that  Livy  calls  this  fami¬
ly  Tullios :  But,  in  my  edition  of
Livy  publifhed  by  Gronovius,  and
printed  at  Amlterdam  in  1679,  they
are  called  Julii,  which,  to  be  lure,
is  the  true  reading.  Livy  omits
the  Metilii.  Sigonius  has  fhewn,  in
a  note  upon  this  padage  of  Livy,
that  we  mud,  always,  read  Quindtus,

Quindtius,  Quindtiiius,  and  Quindti-


lianus,  indead  of  Quintus,  etc.  Though
I  do  not  think  that  either  Livy,  or
our  author  would  have  inferted  the
Julii  among  the  Alban  families,  who
removed  to  Rome  upon  this  occafion,
and  were  admitted  into  the  fenate,  un-
lefs  they  had  been  judibed  in  it  by  the
authority  of  the  bed  hidorians ;  yet  I
cannot  help  taking  notice  that  they
both  agree  in  placing  them  at  the  head
of  thofe  families.  However,  the  pro¬
per  place  for  the  Julian  family  is  at
the  head  of  that  long  lid  of  ufurpers,
who  have  rendered  their  names  detect¬
able  to  all  ages  by  fubverting  the  li¬
berties  of  their  fellow-fubjedts.


70  ROMAN  ANTI  Q_U  I T I E  S  OF  Book  Ilf.

XXXI.  After  Tullus  had  done  fpeaking,  the  poorer  fort
of  the  Albans  were,  very  well,  fatisfied  to  become  inha¬
bitants  of  Rome,  and  to  have  lands  allotted  to  them  ;
and  received  this  declaration  with  great  acclamations.
But  thofe  among  them,  who  were  diftinguifhed  by  their
dignities,  and  fortunes,  were  grieved  to  leave  the  city,  in
which  they  had  received  their  birth,  and  to  abandon  the
houfes  of  their  anceftors,  and  pafs  the  reft  of  their  lives  in  a
foreign  country :  But  thefe,  being  reduced  to  the  laft  ex¬
tremity,  had  nothing  to  fay.  Tullus,  finding  how  the  com¬
mon  people  were  difpofed,  ordered  Metius  to  make  his
defence,-  if  he  had  any  thing  to  alledge  in  his  juftification  :
But  he,  unable  to  juftify  himfelf  againft  the  accufers,  and
witnefles,  faid,  that  the  Alban  fenate  had,  privately,  given
him  thefe  orders,  when  he  took  the  field  with  his  army  ;
and  defired  the  Albans,  for  whom  he  had  endeavoured  to
recover  the  fovereignty,  to  aftift  him  ;  and  to  fufter  neither
their  city  to  be  demolifhed,  nor  the  moft  illuftrious  of  their
countrymen  to  be  dragged  away  to  punifhment.  Upon
this,  there  was  a  tumult  in  the  aftembly,  and  fome  of  them
running  to  arms,  thofe,  who  had  furrounded  them,  upon  a
fignal  given,  held  up  their  fwords  :  This  ftriking  a  terror
into  all,  Tullus  rofe  up  again,  and  faid  ;  “  Albans,  you  are
“  prevented  from  committing  frefh  diforders,  and  excefles :
u  For,  if  you  offer  to  ftir,  you  fhall  all  be  put  to  death  by
u  thefe  men  (pointing  to  thofe,  who  had  their  fwords  in
“  their  hands  :)  Accept,  therefore,  the  terms,  that  are  granted
u  to  you,  and  be,  from  this  time,  Romans ;  fince  one  of

“  thefe


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C A RN  A  S  S  E  N S  I  S.  71

“  thefe  two  things  you  mutt  fubmit  to,  either  to  live  at
“  Rome,  or  to  have  no  other  country:  For,  early  this
“  morning,  Marcus  Horatius  went  to  Alba,  fent  thither  by
<c  me  to  demolifh  your  city  from  the  foundations,  and  to
“  remove  all  the  inhabitants  to  Rome.  Look  upon  thefe
<c  orders,  therefore,  as,  in  a  manner,  executed;  ceafe  to
“  court  deftru&ion,  and  obey.  As  for  Metius  Fufetius,

“  who  has,  not  only,  laid  fnares  for  us  in  fecret,  but,  even
<c  now,  has  dared  to  call  the  turbulent,  and  feditious  to
u  arms,  Ifhall  punifh  him  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  his  wicked,
iC  and  deceitful  heart  deferves.”  At  thefe  words,  that  part
of  the  aflembly,  which  was  inflamed,  now  fubdued  by  irre-
fiftible  neceflity,  was  terrified :  Fufetius  only  fhewed  his
refentment  ftill,  and  called  out,  appealing  to  the  treaties,
which  he  himfelf  was  convidted  of  having  violated;  and,
even  in  this  diftrefs,  abated  nothing  of  his  fiercenefs :  Him
the  Lictors  feized  by  the  order  of  Tullus  ;  and,  tearing  oft
his  clothes,  rent  his  body  with  many  ftripes.  After  he  had
been,  fufficiently,  punifhed  in  this  manner,  they  brought
two  chariots,  each  drawn  by  two  horfes;  then,  with  long
traces,  fattened  his  arms  to  one  of  them,  and  his  feet  to  the
other ;  and  the  coachmen  driving  their  chariots  oppofite
ways,  the  wretch  was  dafhed  againft  the  ground;  and,  be¬
ing  dragged  by  each  in  a  contrary  direction,  was  foon  torne
in  pieces :  This  was  the  miferable,  and  fhameful  end  of  Me¬
tius  Fufetius.  His  friends,  and  accomplices  were  tried  by
judges  appointed  by  the  king,  who  put  fuch  of  them  to

death


7  2  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF'  Book  III.

death  as  were  found  guilty,  purfuant  to  the  law  made  againft
deferters,  and  traitors.

XXXII.  In  the  mean  time,  Marcus  Horatius,  who  had
been  fent  with  the  chofen  men  to  demolifh  the  city  of  Alba,
having  foon  performed  his  march,  and,  finding  the  gates
open,  and  the  walls  unguarded,  eafily,  made  himfelf  ma¬
iler  of  the  city ;  then,  aflembling  the  people,  he  informed
them  of  every  thing,  which  had  happened  during  the  bat¬
tle,  and  read  to  them  the  decree  of  the  fenate.  Upon  this,
the  inhabitants  had  recourfe  to  fupplications,  and  intreated
him  to  give  them  time  to  fend  embaffadors  to  Rome :  But
Horatius,  refufing  to  grant  any  delay,  demolifihed  the
houfes,  and  the  walls,  and  every  other  building,  both  pub¬
lic,  and  private ;  but  conducted  the  inhabitants  to  Rome
with  great  care,  and  allowed  them  to  carry  their  effects
with  them.  Thefe,  Tullus,  being  arrived  from  the  camp,
diftributed  among  the  tribes,  and  the  curiae  of  the  Romans ;
aflifled  them  in  building  houfes  in  fuch  parts  of  the  city,  as
they  themfelves  defired ;  divided  a  fufficient  quantity  of  the
lands,  belonging  to  the  public,  among  the  poorer  fort;
and,  by  other  adls  of  humanity,  recovered  that  people  from
their  confternation.  25  The  city  of  Alba,  which  had  been


z5'  H  |UEV  Jy]  A\Gxvu>v  sro?u?,  etc.  I
have,  upon  a  former  occafion, x  fhewn
that  Alba- Longa  did  not  Hand  in  the
fame  place,  where  Alb  am  now  hands.
y  Livy  makes  Alba  to  have  fubfifted
400  years  at  the  time  of  its  deftrubtion;
unaque  hora  quadringentorum  annorum
(tpus,  quibus  Alba  fieterat ,  excidio  ac  minis
x  See  21 5th  annot.  on  the  firft  book.


dedit :  Faber  lays,  in  a  note  upon  this
paffage,  die  ere  debuit  quingentorum :
But  That,  we  fhall  find,  is  too  much.
z  Virgil  makes  Jupiter  fay  to  Venus,

Hie  jam  tercentum  totos  regnabitur  annos
Gente  fub  Heftoria :  donee  regina  facer  doSy
Marte  gravis  y  geminam  partu  dabit  Iliaprolem .

y  B.  i.  c.  29.  1 B.  i.  272,


built


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  73

built  by  Afcanius,  the  foil  of  Aeneas,  and  Creufa,  the  for¬
mer  being  the  fon  of  Anchifes,  and  the  latter  the  daughter
of  Priamus,  having  fubfifted  four  hundred  and  eighty  feven
years  from  its  foundation,  during  which  time  it  had,  greatly,
encreafed  in  populoufnefs,  riches,  and  every  other  profpe-
rity,  had  founded,  by  its  colonies,  the  . thirty  cities  of  the
Latines,  and,  all  that  time,  been  fovereign  of  that  nation,
being  demolifhed  by  its  laft  colony,  remains  uninhabited
to  this  day.  Tullus,  after  an  intermiflion  of  the  war  dur¬
ing  the  following  winter,  as  foon  as'  the  Ipring  came  on,
marched  with  his  army  againft  the  Fidenates.  Thefe
had,  publicly,  received  no  kind  of  affifcance  from  any  of
the  cities  in  alliance  with  them :  However,  they  fo  far  re¬
lied  on  certain  mercenaries,  who  had  reforted  to  them  from
many  places,  that  they  had  the  confidence  to  come  out  of
their  city ;  and,  having  ingaged  the  Romans  in  a  pitched
battle,  and  loft  many  of  their  men  in  the  action,  they
were,  again,  fhut  up  within  their  walls.  But  Tullus,  hav¬
ing  incompaffed  the  city  with  a  line,  fortified  with  palif-


Virgil  computes  to  the  birth  of  Ro¬
mulus  :  To  which  computation,  if  we
add  105  years  for  the  life  of  Romulus,
the  interregnum  of  one  year  after  his
death,  the  reign  of  Numa,  and  the  fix
firft  years  of  Tullus,  the  whole  will
amount  to  405  years,  which  exceeds
the  computation  of  Livy  but  five  years.
However,  the  duration  of  Alba,  to
which  our  author  allows  48  7,  will  be
found,  exaflly,  to  agree  with  the  num¬
ber  of  years  comprifed  between  its


foundation,  and  deftru&ion ;  as  the
reader  will  fee,  if  he  pleafes  to  confider
that  Alba  was  built  by  Afcanius  in
the  twenty  fifth  year  of  his  reign ;  and,
if,  to  the  thirteen  years  Afcanius  reign¬
ed  after  he  had  built a  Alba,  we  add
the  reigns  of  the  Alban  king?,  who
fucceeded  him,  the  reign  of  Romulus,
the  interregnum  of  one  year,  the  reign
of  Numa,  and  the  fix  firlb  years  of
Tullus,  the  whole  will  amount,  ex¬
actly,  to  487  years.


a  See  the  225th  annot.  on  the  firft  book.

K


VOL.  II.


fades


74  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  HI.

fades  and  a  ditch,  and  reduced  thofe  within  to  the  laft  ex¬
tremity,  they  were  obliged  to  furrender  themfelves  to  the
king  upon  his  own  terms.  Tullus,  being,  by  this  means,
mafter  of  the  city,  he  put  to  death  the  authors  of  the  revolt,
and  pardoned  all  the  reft ;  and,  having  left  them  in  the  en¬
joyment  of  their  fortunes  in  the  fame  manner  as  before,  and
reftored  to  them  their  ancient  form  of  government,  he  dif-
banded  his  army.  After  which,  he  went  to  Rome,  and  ce¬
lebrated  his  fecond  triumph,  attended  with  the  cuftomary
trophies,  and  facrifices,  as  a  thankfgiving  to  the  gods  for
his  victory.

XXXIII.  After  this  war,  another  broke  out  from  the
Sabine  nation  ;  the  beginning,  and  occafion  of  which  was
this :  There  is  a  temple,  honoured  in  common  by  the  Sa¬
bines,  and  the  Latines ;  it  is  held  in  the  greateft  reverence,
and  dedicated  to  a  goddefs,  called  26  Feronia,  whom  fome
authors,  tranflating  the  word  into  Greek,  call  Avbo<pogo?y
Flower-bearer  \  others,  Lover  of  garlands ,  and

others,  ®eg<Te<povn,  Proferpina .  To  this  temple  many  peo¬
ple  ufed  to  refort  from  the  neighbouring  cities,  on  the  ap¬
pointed  feftivals,  fome  to  perform  their  vows,  and  offer
facrifice  to  the  goddefs ;  others  to  trade  upon  the  occafion  of
this  folemnity,  as  merchants,  artificers,  and  hufbandmen ;
thefe  being  the  moft  celebrated  fairs  of  all  Italy.  At  this  fo¬
lemnity,  certain  Romans,  of  no  obfcure  name,  happened
to  be  prefent,  and  were  feized  by  fome  of  the  Sabines,  who
imprifoned  them,  and  took  away  their  money :  And,  when
a6;  This  temple  is  mentioned  in  the  49th  chapter  of  the  fecond  book.

an


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN ASSENS  IS.  75
an  embafly  was  fent  upon  this  occafion,  they  refufed  to  do
juftice,  and  retained  both  the  perfons,  and  their  monies ;
and,  in  their  turn,  accufed  the  Romans  of  having  received
the  fugitive  Sabines,  by  eredting  an  afylum,  of  which  I
gave  an  account  in  the  preceding  book.  The  two  nations,
being  ingaged  in  a  war  by  thefe  accufations,  they  both  took
the  field  with  numerous  armies,  and  came  to  a  general  in-
gagement;  and  the  fight  being  maintained  with  equal  ani-
mofity,  they  were  parted  by  the  night,  the  victory  remain¬
ing  doubtful.  The  following  days,  both  of  them,  being
informed  of  the  number  of  the  {lain,  and  wounded,  were
unwilling  to  hazard  another  battle,  but  left  their  camps,
and  retired.  After  which,  they  pafied  the  remainder  of
that  year  without  a&ion.  Then,  having  encreafed  their
forces,  they,  again,  marched  againft  one  another,  and
came  to  aningagement  near  the  city  of  27  Eretum,  at  the  dis¬
tance  of  one  hundred  and  feven  ftadiafrom  Rome,  in  which,
many  fell  on  both  fides ;  and  that  battle,  alfo,  continuing
doubtful  for  a  confiderable  time,  Tullus,  lifting  up  his  hands
to  heaven,  made  a  vow  to  the  gods,  if  he  overcame  the  Sa¬
bines  that  day,  to  inftitute  feftivals  in  honor  of  Saturn,  and
Rhea,  to  be  performed  at  the  expence  of  the  public,  (which

27*  Hgjov.  This  city,  which,  for-  exceed  chat  number  of  miles  j  and  not
merly,  belonged  to  the  Sabines,  is,  i^novla,  Udlov,  with  the  Vatican
now,  called,  Monte  Ritondo.  b  Cluver,  manufcript ,  Which  mull,  alfo,  be
who  meafured  the  diftance,  fays  it  is  obferved  in  the  third  chapter  of  the
a  little  above  thirteen  Roman  miles  eleventh  book  ;  where  the  diftance
from  Rome  :  So  that,  we  muft  read  between  Rome,  and  Eretum  will,
s&Sia  iir\<n  non  faoflov,  which,  very  little,  again,  be  mentioned.

b  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  8.

K  2


the


76  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

the  Romans  celebrate  every  year,  after  they  have  got  home  all
the  fruits  of  the  earth)  and  to  double  the  number  of  the  Salii.
Thefe  are  perfons  of  noble  families,  who,  at  appointed
times,  dance  armed  to  the  found  of  a  flute,  and  ling  cer¬
tain  hymns  of  their  country,  as  I  mentioned  in  the  laft  book:
Immediately  after  this  vow,  the  Romans  were  filled  with  a
kind  of  confidence,  and,  like  frefh  troops,  falling  on  thofe,
that  are  tired,  they  broke  them  when  it  was  late  in  the  even¬
ing,  and  forced  the  firfl:  ranks  to  begin  the  flight;  then,
purfuing  them  as  they  fled  to  their  camp,  they  were  encoun¬
tered  by  many  more  ready  to  defend  the  ditches :  However,
even  That  did  not  difcourage  them ;  but,  having  ftaid  there  the
following  night,  and  cleared  the  intrenchments  of  thofe,
who  defended  them,  they  made  themfelves  mafters  of  their
camp.  After  this  a&ion,  they  ravaged  as  much  of  the
country  of  the  Sabines  as  they  thought  fit,  nobody,  now,  ap¬
pearing  to  proted  it,  and  then  returned  home.  The  king
of  the  Romans  triumphed  a  third  time,  upon  the  occafion
of  this  victory.  And,  not  long  after  this,  the  Sabines
fending  embafladors  to  him,  he  put  an  end  to  the  war;
having  firfl;  received  from  them  the  captives  they  had  taken
in  their  incurfions,  together  with  the  deferters ;  and  levied
the  penalty,  which  the  Roman  fenate,  eftimating  the  da¬
mage  at  a  certain  fum  of  money,  had  impofed  upon  them
for  the  cattle,  the  beafts  of  burden,  and  the  other  effe&s
they  had  taken  from  the  huibandmen.

XXXIV.  The  Sabines  having  ended  the  war  upon  thefe

conditions,  and  ere&ed  pillars  in  their  temples,  on  which

the


BookllT.  DIONYSIUS  HA  L I C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  SI  S.  77

the  articles  of  the  treaty  were  infcribed,  as  foon  as  they
faw  the  Romans  ingaged  in  a  war,  not  likely  to  be  foon
determined,  againft  the  cities  of  the  Latines,  who  had  all
entered  into  a  confederacy  againft  them  (the  caufes  of  which
I  fhall,  prefen tly,  mention)  they,  willingly,  laid  hold  of  this
opportunity, .  and  forgot  thofe  oaths,  and  treaties,  as  much
as  if  they,  never,  had  been  made :  And,  looking  upon
this  as  a  favourable  juncture  to  recover  from  the  Romans
many  times  more  money,  than  they  had  paid  them,  they
went  out,  at  firft,  in  fmall  numbers,  and,  privately,  and
plundered  the  neighbouring  country:  Afterwards,  many
aflembled  together,  and  in  an  open  manner;  and  their  firft
attempt  fucceeding,  and  no  afliftance  appearing  to  defend
the  hufbandmen,  they  defpifed  their  enemies,  and  propofed
to  attempt  even  Rome  itfelf ;  for  which  purpofe,  they  drew
together  an  army  out  of  every  city ;  they,  alfo,  treated  of  a
confederacy  with  the  cities  of  the  Latines,  but  were  not  able
to  ingage  that  nation  in  their  friendfhip,  and  alliance:  For
Tullus,  being  informed  of  their  defign,  made  a  truce  with
the  Latines,  and  determined  to  march  againft  the  Sabines ;
and,  at  the  fame  time,  armed  all  the  forces  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  which,  fince  their  union  with  the  Albans,  were
double  the  number  they  were  before,  and  fent  to  his  other
allies  for  all  the  troops  they  could  furnifh.  The  Sabines
had,  already,  aflembled  their  powers  ;  and,  when  the  two
armies  drew  near,  they  incamped  near  a  place,  called,  "The

-8-  ya»j  jcjtjc vfyuv.  c  Livy,  in  fpeak-  malitiofa  ;  probably,  becaufe  it  was  a
ing  of  this  battle,  calls  this  wood  filva  receptacle  for  robbers.

c  B.  i.  c.  30.


wood


78  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

wood  of  the  malefaSlors ,  leaving  a  fmall  interval  between
them.  The  next  day,  they  ingaged,  and  the  light  conti¬
nued  doubtful  for  a  long  time ;  but,  when  it  grew  late  in  the
evening,  the  Sabines  gave  way,  unable  to  ftand  before  the
Roman  horfe,  and  many  of  them  were  llain  in  the  flight.
The  Romans,  having  taken  off  the  fpoils  from  the  dead,
plundered  their  camp,  and  ravaged  the  beft  part  of  the  coun¬
try,  returned  home.  This  was  the  event  of  the  war,  that
happened  between  the  Romans,  and  the  Sabines  in  the  reign
of  Tullus.

XXXV.  The  cities  of  the  Latines  began,  now,  to  quarrel
with  the  Romans  for  the  firft  time ;  the  reafon  of  which
was,  that  the  city  of  Alba  being  demolifhed,  they  refufed  to
yield  the  fovereignty  to  the  Romans,  who  had  fubverted  it.
For, fifteen  years  being  paffed  fince  the  deftrudtion  of  Alba,  the
king  of  the  Romans,  fending  embaffadors  to  the  thirty  cities,
which  were  both  the  colonies,  and  fubjedts  of  Alba,  fum-
moned  them  to  obey  the  orders  of  the  Romans,  as  having
fucceeded  to  the  Albans  in  the  command  over  the  Latines,
as  well  as  in  other  things,  of  which  they  had  been  in  pof-
feflion.  He  fhewed  them  that  there  were  two  methods  of
acquifition,  by  which  men  became  mafters  of  what  had  be¬
longed  to  others;  one,  the  effedt  of  neceflity,  the  other,  of
choice :  And  that  the  Romans  had,  by  both  thefe  methods,
acquired  the  command  over  thofe  cities,  which  had  been
fubjedt  to  the  Albans :  For  thefe,  having  been  at  war  with
the  Romans,  the  latter  had  conquered  them  by  their  arms ;
and,  after  the  others  had  loll  their  own  city,  the  Romans

had


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENS  IS.  79

had  yielded  to  them  a  part  of  theirs :  So  that,  it  was  but
reafonable  that  the  Albans,  both  necefiarily,  and  volun¬
tarily,  fliould  yield  to  the  Romans  the  fovereignty  they  had
exercifed  over  their  fubje&s.  The  cities  of  the  Latines  gave
no  anfwer,  feparately,  to  the  embafladors ;  but,  in  a  general
aflembly  of  the  whole  nation  held  at 29  Ferentinum,  they
parted  a  vote  not  to  yield  the  fovereignty  to  the  Romans :
And,  immediately,  chofe  two  generals,  whom  they  inverted
with  abfolute  power  with  regard  both  to  peace  and  war:
Tliefe  were  Ancus  Publicius  of  the  city  of  30  Cora,  and

31  Spurtus  Vecilius  of  Lavinium.  Thefe  were  the  caufes  of  the
war  between  the  Romans,  and  their  countrymen  :  It  lafted
five  years ;  and  was  carried  on  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  became

32  fellow  citizens,  and  was  agreeable  to  the  manners  of  the
ancients:  For,  as  their  armies  never  came  to  a  general  in-
gagement,  no  great  calamity,  nor  general  daughter,  happened ;
none  of  their  cities,  when  conquered,  was  either  rafed,


29*  Ev  $££8v1»v(jj.  d  This  town,  called,
by  the  Romans,  Ferentinum ,  and,  by
the  Italians,  Marino ,  lies  about  thir¬
teen  miles  fouth  eaft  of  Rome.

3°*  k o£ots-  e  This  town  is,  ftill,  call¬
ed,  Cora-.  If  it  belonged  to  the  La-
tines,  as  our  author  thinks,  it  lay  very
near  the  territories  of  the  Yolfci.

31*  Portus  quotes  Feftus,

upon  this  occafion,  for  faying  that  the
ancients  ufed  /,  for  r;  as  Spufius  for
Spurius.  I  could  not  give  myfelf  leave
to  mention  this  obfervation  without
mentioning  Portus,  as  M.  *  *  *  has
done.


32 3*  noA/Iijcw.  M.  *'**  muft  not  be
excufed  for  tranflating  this,  eile  fe  ft
avec  politique ,  which  has  not  the  lead
pretence  to  a  tranQation  of  stsa finos.
Le  Jay  has  left  it  out,  chufing  rather
not  to  inform,  than  to  millead,  his
readers.  The  Latin  language  has  fur-
nifhed  Portus,  and  Sylburgius  with  a
very  proper  verfion  of  this  word,  by
civili  modo ;  as  the  Roman  authors  fay
civile  ingenium.  Neither  the  French
language,  nor  ours  can  exprefs  this
without  a  circumlocution,  which  the
reader  wiil  accept,  when  the  fenfe  of
an  author  is  conveyed  to  him.


d  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  10.  eId.  B.  iii.  c.  8.

inrtaved.


8  o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

inllaved,  or  fuftered  any  other  irreparable  mifchief :  But,
making  incurfions  into  one  another’s  country,  when  the
corn  was  ripe,  they  foraged  it ;  then,  returning  home  with
their  armies,  they  exchanged  prifoners.  However,  one  city
of  the  Latin  nation,  called  Medullia,  where,  formerly,  the
Romans  had  planted  a  colony  in  the  reign  of  Romulus,  as
I  faid  in  the  preceding  book,  and  which  had  revolted  to
their  countrymen  the  Latines,  the  king  of  the  Romans  re¬
duced  by  a  liege,  and  taught  them  not  to  innovate  for  the
future.  But  no  other  calamity,  the  general  confequence  of
war,  was  felt  by  either  of  them,  during  all  that  time.  For
this  reafon,  a  reconciliation  was  eafy ;  which,  meeting  with
no  rancor  on  either  lide,  and  the  Romans  fhewing  a  great
inclination  to  it,  a  peace  was  concluded.

XXXVI.  Thefe  were  the  actions  Tullus  Hoftilius  per¬
formed  during  his  reign;  a  man  worthy  of  uncommon  praife
for  his  courage  in  war,  and  his  prudence  in  the  article  of
danger  ;  but,  above  both  thefe  qualifications,  that,  being  not
precipitate  in  entering  into  a  war,  when  he  was  once  ingaged,
he,  fteadily,  purfued  it,  till  he  gained  all  poffible  advantages
over  his  adverfaries.  After  he  had  reigned  thirty  two  years,
he  perifhed  in  a  fire,  that  confumed  his  palace,  together
with  his  wife,  children,  and  all  his  domeftics.  Some  lay
that  his  palace  was  fet  on  fire  by  lightning,  the  gods  being
angry  with  him  for  his  negledl  of  certain  holy  ceremonies :
For,  it  is  allowed  that,  in  his  reign,  fome  facrifices,  peculiar
to  that  country,  wTere  intermitted,  and  others,  foreign  to  the
Romans,  introduced.  But  the  greateft  part  derive  this

misfortune


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  Si

misfortune  from  human  treachery,  and  aferibe  it  to  Marcius,
who  fucceeded  him  in  the  kingdom.  For  they  lay  that  he,
being  grandfon  to  Numa  Pompilius  by  his  daughter,  was
uneafy  to  fee  himfelf,  though  defeended  from  the  roval
family,  in  the  condition  of  a  private  man ;  and,  finding
Tull  us  had  children,  he  was,  exceedingly,  apprehenfive
left,  upon  the  death  of  Tullus,  they  fhould  fucceed  him  in
the  kingdom :  They  add  that,  from  thefe  confiderations,
and  the  readinefs  he  found  in  many  of  the  Romans  to  afiift
him  in  his  pretenfions  to  the  kingdom,  he  had,  long  fince,
formed  a  defign  againft  the  king  ;  and  that,  being  received
into  the  friendfhip  of  Tullus,  and,  chiefly,  confided  in  by
him,  he  was  expecting  a  proper  opportunity  to  execute  his
treacherous  purpofe  :  That  Tullus,  propofing  to  perform
fome  facrifice  at  his  houfe,  with  which  he  would  have  only
his  intimate  friends  acquainted,  there  happened  that  day  to
be  a  violent  tempeft,  attended  with  fuch  a  ftorm  of  rain,  and
wind,  and  fo  great  a  darknefs,  thatthofe,  who  were  upon  guard
before  the  palace,  left  the  place  :  That  Marcius,  looking
upon  this,  as  a  favourable  opportunity,  entered  the  houfe,
together  with  his  friends,  who  had  fwords  under  their  gar¬
ments  ;  and,  having  killed  the  king  with  his  children,  and
all  the  reft,  who  were  prefent,  he  fet  fire  to  the  houfe  in
feveral  places ;  and  that,  after  he  had  done  this,  he  fpread
the  report  that  the  palace  was  burnt  with  lightning.  But,
for  my  part,  I  do  not  adopt  this  relation,  nor  do  I  think  it
either  true,  or  probable ;  but,  rather,  adhere  to  the  former,
and  look  upon  this  unhappy  end  of  Tullus  to  have  been  a
Vol»  II,  L  judge-


82  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  .  Book  III.

judgement  of  the  gods :  For,  it  is  neither  probable  that  an
adion,  in  which  fo  many  were  concerned,  could  be  kept
fecret ;  neither  could  the  author  of  it  be  certain  that,  after
the  death  of  Tullus  Hoftilius,  the  Romans  would  chufe
him  for  their  king  ;  neither,  if  he  had  been  affured  of  the
aftiftance  of  men,  would  the  gods  have  concurred  in  their
delufion :  For,  after  the  tribes  fhould  give  their  votes,
it  would  be  necefiary  that  the  gods,  by  aufpicious  omens,
fhould  approve  their  choice  ;  and,  which  of  the  gods,  or
genius’s  could,  without  injuftice,  admit  a  man  impure,  and
Rained  with  the  murder  of  perfons  of  fo  great  dignity,  to
approach  their  altars,  begin  their  facrifices,  and  perform  the
other  religious  ceremonies  ?  For  thefe  reafons,,  I  do  not  at¬
tribute  this  fad;  to  the  treachery  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of
the  gods:  However,  let  every  one  judge  as  he  pleafes.

XXXVII.  After  the  death  of  Tullus  Hoftilius,  the  In-
terreges  appointed  by  the  fenate  according  to  the  cuftom
of  the  Romans,  chofe  Marcius  furnamed  Ancus,  king  of
the  city ;  and  the  decree  of  the  fenate  being  confirmed  by
the  people,  and  approved  by  the  gods,  Marcius,  after  he  had
performed  every  thing  the  law  required,  entered  upon  the
government,  in  the  fecond  year  of  the  thirty  fifth  Olympiad,
in  which  Sphaerus,  a  Lacedaemonian,  gained  the  prize,  when
Damafias  exercifed  the  annual  archonfhip  at  Athens.  ThL
king,  finding  many  of  the  religious  ceremonies,  inftituted
by  Numa  Pompilius,  his  grandfather  by  the  mother’s  fide,
fallen  into  negled ;  and  feeing  the  greateft  part  of  the  Ro¬
mans  addided.  both  to  the  love  of  war,  and  a  defire  of  gain,

and,


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  ARN  ASSE  NS  I  S.  83

and,  no  longer,  employed  in  the  culture  of  their  lands,  he
aflembled  the  people,  and  exhorted  them  to  return  to  the
worfhip  of  the  gods,  as  praCtifed  by  them  in  Numa’s  reign,
reprefenting  to  them  that  it  was  owing  to  their  negleCt  of
the  gods  that  difeafes,  and  many  peftilential  diftempers  had
fallen  upon  the  city,  by  which  no  fmall  number  of  the
people  were  deftroyed;  and  that  Hoftilius,  their  former
king,  not  having  preferved  that  regard  to  them,  which  his
duty  obliged  him  to,  had  laboured  long  under  a  complica¬
tion  of  diftempers,  attended  even  with  the  lofs  ofhisunder-
ftanding,  till,  being  decayed  both  in  body,  and  mind,  he,
and  his  family  were  deftroyed  by  a  fad  cataftrophe.  He,
then,  commended  the  fyftem  of  government,  introduced
by  Numa.  among  the  Romans,  as  full  of  greatnefs,  and
moderation,  by  which  every  one  was  fupplied  with  daily
plenty,  flowing  from  the jufteft  employments;  this  conftitution
he  advifed  them  to  reftore,  by  applying  themfelves  to  agri¬
culture,  and  grafing,  and  to  thofe  occupations,  that  were
free  from  the  injuftice  of  rapine,  and  violence,  and  to  de-
fpife  the  advantages  arifing  from  war.  By  thefe,  and  the
like  difcourfes,  he  raifed  in  all  a  great  delire  of  tranquillity,
unknown  to  war,  and  of  honeft  induftry :  After  this,  he
fent  for  the  pontifs,  and,  receiving  from  them  the  collections
of  religious  rites,  which  Pompilius  had  compofed,  he
caufed  them  to  be  written  on  boards,  and  expofed  them  in
the  forum  to  be  conlidered  by  every  one.  Thefe  have  flnce
been  deftroyed  by  time :  For  brazen  pillars  being  not,  yet,
in  ufe,  the  laws,  and  religious  inftitutions  were,  then,

L  2  in-


84  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III,

33ingraved  on  oaken  boards:  But,  after  the  expulfion  of
the  kings,  they  were,  again,  written  out  for  the  ufe  of  the
public  by  Caius  Papirius,  a  pontif,  who  had  the  fuper-


33*  Ev  livoiig  t^^otrloylo  coivtcri.
The  boards,  on  which  the  laws  of
Solon  were  written,  were  called  «fcv?? ;
from  whence,  came  the  expreffion
cog  ev  tm  A^ovi  TL  here  is  a  re¬

markable  ftory,  told  by  Livy,  which
f  Plutarch  has,  in  a  great  meafure,
taken  from  him,  concerning  fourteen
books  of  Numa.  He  fays  that,  as
fome  men  were  digging  at  the  foot  of
the  Janiculum  (where  our  author  fays
Numa  was  buried)  they  found  two
done  coffins,  eight  feet  long,  and  four
broad  •,  each  having  an  infcription  on
it  in  Latin,  and  Greek,  by  which  it
appeared,  that  Numa  had  been  buried
in  one,  and  his  books  depofited  in  the
other.  The  coffin,  in  which  Numa’s
body  had  been  laid,  was  quite  empty,
without  any  remains  of  a  human  bo¬
dy,  or  any  thing  elfe.  In  the  other,
were  two  bundles,  tied  tip  with  waxed
cords*,  each  containing  feven  books,
all  intire,  and  very  freffi  :  Seven  of
thefe  books  were  in  Latin,  and  related
to  the  pontifical  law  *,  the  other  feven
were  in  Greek,  and  contained  the  dis¬
cipline  of  fuch  wifdom  (to  ufe  *  Livy’s
own  words)  as  could  be  known  in  that
age  •,  feptem  Graeci  de  difciplina  fapien-
tiae ,  quae  illius  aeiatis  ejje potuit.  The
ground,  in  which  thefe  coffins  were
found,  belonged  to  one  L.  Petilius ;
and  the  books  having  been  read,  fir  ft,
by  his  friends,  and,  afterwards,  by
many  others,  Q Petilius,  then  praetor

f  Life  of  Numa,  E.  ii.  c.  76.


of  the  city,  fent  for  them  ;  and,  hav¬
ing  perufed  them,  found  they  tended
to  deftroy  the  eftabliffied  religion  ;
pleraque  dijfolvendarum  religionum  ejfe.
Upon  which,  the  affair  being  laid  be¬
fore  the  fenate,  the  books  were,  pub¬
licly,  burned  by  their  order.  This
happened  in  the  confulfhip  of  P.  Cor¬
nelius  Cethegus,  and  M.  Baebius
Tamphilus,  in  the  573d  year  of  Rome:
So  that,  within  the  fpace  of  lefs  than
500  years,  the  religion  of  the  Romans
was  fo  much  altered,  that  the  books
of  Numa,  who  founded  a  great  part
of  that  religion,  were  looked  upon  a,s
deftructive  to  the  religion  then  in
fafiiion.  But  this  is  not  at  all  furpri-
fing,  fince  the  fame  revolutions  in
religion  have  happened  in  moft  coun¬
tries  within  the  fame  period.  But,  to
return  to  the  religious  inftitutions  of
Numa,  which  his  grandfon  Marcitis
caufed  to  be  written  on  tables,  and
hung  up  in  the  forum  ;  thefe  could
not  be  the  fame  with  the  feven  books
de  jure  pontificio,  as  h  Livy  calls  them,
found  in  one  of  thefe  coffins  ;  becaule
di  zciPi  r uv  hgcov  0 -vFygaQcii,  which  are
the  words  made  ufe  of  by  our  author
to  deicribe  thefe  inftitutions,  do  not
feem  to  imply  a  treatife  on  the  pon¬
tifical  law,  but,  rather,  a  collection  of
religious  rites  :  This  is  further  con¬
firmed  by  the  addition  of  the  word
ewiswotlo,  which  confines  the  general
fenfe  of  <rvfyga$cu  to  fuch  a  collection.

£  B.  xl.  c.  29.  Id',  ib.

in-


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  UN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  Ss

in  tendance  of  all  matters  relating  to  divine  worfhip.
After  Marcius  had  re-eftablifhed  thofe  religious  rites,  which
had  been  negleCed,  and  fent  the  idle  people  to  their  proper
employments,  he  commended  the  careful  hufbandmen,  and
reprimanded  thofe,  who  managed  their  lands  ill,  as  citizens
not  to  be  depended  on.

XXXVIII.  Having  thus  fettled  the  civil  government,
and  pleafed  himfelf  with  the  hope  of  palling  his  whole  life,
like  his  grandfather,  without  war,  and  vexation,  he  faw  his
deligns  croffed  by  fortune,  and  was,  contrary  to  his  incli¬
nations,  forced  to  be  a  warriour,  and  to  lead  a  life,  in  every
part  of  it,  full  of  danger,  and  nnealinefs.  For  he  had  no
fooner  entered  upon  the  adminiftration,  and  made  tranquil¬
lity  the  principle  of  his  government,  but  the  Latines,  de-
fpiilng  him,  and  looking  upon  him,  as  incapable  of  con¬
ducing  an  army  through  want  of  courage,  each  nation  fent
bands  of  robbers  into  that  part  of  the  country,  that  lay  next
to  them,  from  whom  many  of  the  Romans  received  con-
fiderable  damage  :  And,  when  embaffadors  came  from  the
king,  and  fummoned  them  to  make  fatisfaCion  to  the
Romans,  according  to  the  treaties,  they  pretended  to  have
no  knowledge  of  the  robberies  complained  of,  as  having
been  committed  without  the  general  content  of  the  nation;
and  that  they  were  under  no  obligation  of  giving  an  ac¬
count  of  their  conduC  to  the  Romans :  For,  they  faid,  they
had  entered  into  no  treaties  with  Them,  but  with  Tullus ;
and  that,  by  the  death  of  Tullus,  their  treaties  of  peace
were  diffolved.  Marcius,  therefore,  compelled  by  thefe

anfwers


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

anfwers  of  the  Latines,  led  out  his  army  againft  them  ;
and,  fitting  down  before  the  city  of 34  Politorium,  he  took
it  by  capitulation,  before  the  arrival  of  any  fuccours  from
the  reft  of  the  Latine  cities.  However,  he  did  not  treat  the
inhabitants  with  any  feverity;  but,  allowing  them  to  enjoy
their  fortunes,  he  transferred  every  one  of  them  to  Rome,
and  diftributed  them  among  the  tribes.

XXXIX.  The  next  year,  the  Latines,  having  fent  a  new
colony  to  the  city  of  Politorium,  which  was,  then,  unin¬
habited,  and  cultivating  the  lands  of  the  Politorini,  Marcius
put  himfelf,  again,  at  the  head  of  his  army,  and  marched
againft  them :  And  the  Latines  coming  out  of  the  city,
and  drawing  up  in  order  of  battle,  he  defeated  them,  and
took  their  town  a  fecond  time.  After  which,  he  burned
the  houfes,  and  rafed  the  walls,  to  the  end  that  the  enemy
might  not,  again,  make  war  upon  him  from  thence,  nor
cultivate  the  lands ;  and,  then  returned  home  with  his  army.
The  next  year,  the  Latines  marched  againft  the  city  of
Medullia,  in  which  there  was  a  Roman  colony  ;  and,
befieging  it,  attacked  the  walls  on  all  fides,  and  took  it  by
ftorm.  At  the  fame  time,  Marcius  took  35  Tellenae,  a  con-
fiderable  city  of  the  Latines,  after  he  had  overcome  the  inha¬
bitants  both  in  a  pitched  battle,  and  in  an  afiault  upon  the
town  :  Upon  which,  he  transferred  the  prifoners  to  Rome,

34*  rio\i1w§iov.  All  the  commenta-  torium  was  a  city  of  the  Latines,  not
tors,  with  great  reafon,  agree  in  add-  far  from  Laurentum.
ing  the  name  of  this  city,  which  is  35-  TiKtevou.  Tellcne,  or  ’Tellenae
wanting  in  all  the  editions  :  But  the  was  a  city  of  the  Latines  to  the  north
fequel  (hews  it  can  be  no  other.  Pali-  of  Politorium.


without


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  SEN  S  I  S.  87

without  taking  any  thing  from  them,  and  divided  among
them  a  place  in  the  city  to  build  houfes.  And,  after  Me-
dullia  had  been  three  years  fubjeft  to  the  Latines,  he  retook
it  the  fourth  year,  having  overcome  the  inhabitants  in  many
confiderable  battles.  Not  long  after  this,  he  took  the  city
of  the  36  Ficanenfes,  which  he  had  taken  three  years  before
by  capitulation,  and,  in  transferring  all  the  inhabitants  to
Rome,  and  doing  no  other  harm  to  the  city,  he  feemed  to
have  a  died  with  more  clemency,  than  prudence  :  For  the
Latines,  fending  a  colony  thither,  and  poflefling  themfelves
of  the  lands  of  the  Ficanenfes,  they  enjoyed  the  profits  of
them  :  So  that,  Marcius  was  obliged  to  lead  his  army,  a
fecond  time,  againft  this  city  ;  and,  having,  with  great  dif¬
ficulty,  made  himfelf  mafter  of  it,  to  burn  the  houfes,  and
rafe  the  walls.

XL.  After  this,  the  Latines,  and  Romans  fought  two
battles  with  numerous  armies  :  In  the  firft,  after  they  had
been  ingaged  a  confiderable  time,  without  any  advantage
on  either  fide,  they  parted,  each  returning  to  their  own
camp  :  But,  in  the  laft,  the  Romans  gained  the  victory,
and  purfued  the  Latines  to  their  intrenchments.  After  tliefe
actions,  there  was  no  pitched  battle  fought  between


36*  ®ix.oivoiiwv.  All  the  editions,  and
manufcripts  have  $<JV<uwv,  which  can
have  no  place  here  ;  becaufe,  our  au¬
thor  will,  prefently,  fpeak  of  the  re¬
volt  of  the  Fidenates.  Lapus  reads
^ucoAvgwv,  which,  I  find,  Hudfon  ap¬
proves  of :  But,  I  am  convinced  it


ought  to  be  $iKoivoiict)v,  becaufe  1  Livy
joins  the  taking  of  Ficana  to  That  of
Teliene  y  additi  eodem ,  baud  ita  multo
pcjly  F ellenis  Ficandque  captisy  novi  cives
Ficana  was  a  city  of  the  Latines,  and
lay  to  the  north  of  OJiia.


*  B.  i.  c.  33,


diem  1


8S  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

them ;  but  continual  incurfions  were  made  by  both  on
thofe  lands,  that  lay  next  to  them ;  and  frequent  ingage-
ments  happened  between  the  horfe,  and  light-armed  foot,
who  ranged  the  country;  in  which,  the  Romans  had,  ge¬
nerally,  the  advantage,  having  feveral  detachments  of  their
army  in  the  field,  properly,  ported  in  advantageous  places,
of  which  Tarquinius,  the  Tyrrhenian,  had  the  command.
About  the  fame  time,  the  Fidenates,  alfo,  revolted  from  the
Romans :  They  did  not,  indeed,  openly,  declare  war  againft
them ;  but  ravaged  their  country  in  fmall  numbers,  and,
privately,  by  incurfions.  Againft  thefe  Marcius  led  out  his
army  prepared  for  expedition  ;  and,  before  the  Fidenates  had
made  the  neceflary  preparations  for  war,  he  incamped  near
their  city.  The  Fidenates,  at  firft,  pretended  not  to  know
what  injuries  they  had  committed,  to  draw  the  Roman  army
againft  them ;  and,  when  the  king  told  them,  he  was  come
to  punifh  them  for  the  ravages,  and  damages  they  had  com¬
mitted  on  the  lands  of  the  Romans,  they  excufed  themfelves
by  alledging  that  the  public  had  no  fhare  in  thefe  injuries ;
and  defired  time  to  take  cognizance  of  this  matter,  and  to
find  out  the  guilty ;  and  confumed  many  days,  performing
no  part  of  their  ingagement,  but  imployed  themfelves,  in,
privately,  fending  to  their  allies  for  afliftance,  and  in  making
preparation  of  arms.

XLI.  Marcius,  having  intelligence  of  their  defigns,  or¬
dered  mines  to  be  carried  on,  from  his  own  camp,  quite
under  the  walls  of  the  place  ;  and,  when  the  work  was  ac-
compliftied,  he  led  out  his  army,  and  approached  the  city,

at


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICA  RNASSEN  SIS.  89

at  a  different  place  from  That,  where  the  walls  were  un¬
dermined  ;  his  men  being  provided  with  fealing  ladders,
and  other  engines  proper  for  an  affault.  The  Fidenates
ran,  in  great  numbers,  to  thofe  parts  of  the  city,  that  were
attacked,  and  repulfed  the  aftaults  with  bravery ;  while  the
Romans,  who  were  appointed  for  that  purpofe,  having
opened  the  mouths  of  the  mines,  were,  already,  within  the
walls ;  and,  deftroying  all,  who  oppofed  them,  threw  open
the  gates  to  the  befiegers.  Many  of  the  Fidenates  being
flam  in  the  taking  of  the  place,  Marcius  ordered  the  reft  to
deliver  up  their  arms,  and  gave  public  notice  that  all  fhould
repair  to  a  certain  place  in  the  city ;  after  which,  he  caufed
a  few  of  them,  who  had  been  the  authors  of  the  revolt,  to
be  whipped,  and  put  to  death  ;  and,  having  given  leave  to
his  foldiers  to  plunder  all  their  houfes,  and  left  a  fufficient
garrifon  there,  he  marched  with  his  army  againft  the  Sabines :
For  thefe,  alfo,  had  broken  the  treaty  of  peace,  which  they
had  entered  into  with  Tullus;  and,  making  incurftons  into
the  territories  of  the  Romans,  laid  wafte  the  neighbouring
country.  Marcius,  having  information  by  the  fpies,  and
deferters,  of  the  proper  time  to  execute  the  defign  he  had
formed ;  while  the  Sabines  were  difperfed  about  the  country,
and  employed  in  plundering  it,  he  marched  in  perfon  with
the  foot  to  the  enemy’s  camp,  which  was,  weakly,  guarded,
and  took  it  at  thefirft  onfet:  He,  then,  ordered  Tarquinius
to  go  at  the  head  of  the  horfe,  with  all  expedition,  againft
thofe,  who  were  difperfed  in  pillaging  the  country.  The
Sabines,  upon  intelligence  that  the  Roman  horfe  were
Vol.  II.  M  coming


9o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

coming  againft  them,  left  their  plunder,  and  the  booty
they  were  carrying  away,  and  fled  to  their  camp  ;  when,,
finding  That,  alfo,  in  the  pofieflion  of  the  foot,  they
were  at  a  lofs  which  way  to  go,  and  endeavoured  to  reach
the  woods,  and  mountains ;  but,  being  purfued  by  the
light-armed  foot,  and  the  horfe,  fome  few  efcaped,  but  the
greatefl:  part  of  them  were  deftroyed.  And,  after  this  mif-
fortune,  fending,  again,  embafladors  to  Rome,  they  obtained
fuch  terms  of  peace  as  they  defired  :  For  the  war,  which
was  renewed  between  the  Romans,  and  the  Latine  cities,
rendered  both  a  truce,  and  a  peace  with  their  other  enemies
neceflary.

XLII.  About  the  fourth  year  after  this  war,  Marcius,
king  of  the  Romans,  putting  himfelf  at  the  head  of  his
national  forces,  and  fending  for  as  many  auxiliaries  as  he
could  obtain  from  his  allies,  marched  againfl:  the  Veientes,
and  laid  wafte  a  great  part  of  their  country  :  Thefe  had,  the
year  before,  been  the  aggrefiors,  by  making  an  incurfion
into  the  Roman  territories,  where  they  feized  many  effedls,
and  put  many  perfons  to  death.  The  Veientes  came  out
againfl:  him  with  a  great  army,  and  incamped  near  the  city
of  the  Fidenates,  beyond  the  river  Tiber:  Upon  which,
Marcius  marched  with  all  poflible  expedition ;  and,  being
fuperior  in  horfe,  he  firfi:  feized  the  pafs,  that  led  to  their
country ;  then,  forcing  them  to  come  to  a  battle,  he  over¬
came  them,  and  made  himfelf  mafter  of  their  camp.
Having  fucceeded  in  this  war,  alfo,  according  to  his  defire,
he  returned  to  Rome  ;  and,  performing  the  proceflion  in

acknow-


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  91

acknowledgment  to  the  gods  for  his  vidlory,  he  triumphed
in  the  ufual  manner.  The  fecond  year  after  this  war,  the
Veientes,  having  broken  the  truce  they  had  made  with
Marcius,  and  inlifting  upon  having  all  thofe  cities  reftored
to  them,  which  they  had  furrendered  by  treaties  in  the
reign  of  Romulus,  he  fought  another  battle  with  them,
more  conliderable  than  the  former,  near  the  37  fait  pits,
which  he  gained  with  eafe ;  and,  from  that  time,  con¬
tinued  in  pofleftion  of  the  cities  in  queftion  without  further
conteft.  Tarquinius,  general  of  the  horfe,  by  his  gallant
behaviour  in  this  atftion,  gained  the  cuftomary  rewards,  due
to  thofe,  whofe  courage  is  the  moft  confpicuous ;  and
Marcius,  looking  upon  him  as  the  braveft  man  in  his  army,
among  other  honors,  with  which  he  continued  to  diftin-
guifh  him,  made  him  both  a  patrician,  and  a  fenator.  -
Marcius  was,  alfo,  ingaged  in  a  war  with  the  Volfci,  they
too  having  committed  robberies  upon  the  lands  of  the  Ro¬
mans  :  Upon  which,  he  marched  againft  them  with  a  great
army ;  and,  having  made  himfelf  mafter  of  a  conliderable
booty,  he  fate  down  before  one  of  their  cities,  called  38  Velitrae,
and  furrounded  it  with  a  ditch,  and  a  rampart,  planted  with

37*  r cug  AKoag.  The  tranflators  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber,  which  had

are,  here,  divided  as  ufual ;  Portus  has  been  ceded  by  the  Veientes,  when  they
faid,  ad  Allas ,  and  le  Jay,  pres  d'Alles ;  made  a  peace  with  Romulus.  Befides,
Sylburgius,  ad  Salinas ,  and  M.  *  *  *,  I  know  of  no  city  in  Italy  called  Allue.
aupres  des  Salines.  kI  make  no  doubt  3s*  Oug>u7 gxtg.  1  Velitrae  was  a  city
but  this  is  a  tranflation  of  the  true  belonging  to  the  Volfci ;  now  called
reading.  The  place,  where  this  battle  Velitri ,  Belitri ,  and  Belletri.
was  fought,  was  near  the  fait  pits  at

k  See  the  55th  chap,  of  the  fecond  book  j  and  the  1 1  tth  annot.  on  the  fame.  1  Ciuver,  ItaJ.
Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  8.

M  2  palifades ;


92  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

palifades ;  and,  being  mafter  of  the  open  country,  pre¬
pared  to  give  an  aflault  to  the  town ;  but  the  elders  com¬
ing  out  of  it  with  the  enfigns  of  fuppliants,  and  ingaging
both  to  repair  the  damages  they  had  done  in  fuch  a  manner
as  the  king  fhould  appoint,  and  to  deliver  up  the  guilty  to
be  punifhed,  he,  firft,  made  a  truce,  and',  having  received
a  voluntary  fatisfadlion,  he  concluded  a  treaty  of  peace,  and
friendship  with  them.

XLIII.  Again,  fome  others  of  the  Sabine  nation,  who
had  not,  yet,  felt  the  Roman  power,  inhabiting  a  great,  and
opulent  city,  without  any  provocation  from  the  Romans,
but,  in  envy  to  their  prolperity,  which  encreafed  beyond
expe&ation,  they,  being  a  very  warlike  people,  began,  at
firft,  with  robberies,  and  incurfions  made  by  fmall  bodies;
afterwards,  being  allured  by  the  booty,  they,  openly,  made
war  upon  them,  and  ravaged  a  great  part  of  the  neighbour¬
ing  country  :  But  they  were  not  allowed  either  to  carry  off
their  booty,  or  to  retire  with  impunity:  For  the  king  of  the
Romans,  haftening  to  the  relief  of  the  country,  pitched  his
camp  near  to  theirs,  and  forced  them  to  come  to  an  ingage-
ment :  A  great  battle,  therefore,  was  fought,  and  many  fell
on  both  fides ;  but  the  Romans,  through  their  patience  of
labor,  and  perfeverance  in  toil,  to  which  they  had  been  long
accuftomed,  gained  the  victory,  and  fhewed  themfelves  far
fuperior  to  the  Sabines ;  and,  purfuing  them  clofe,  as  they
fled  difperfed,  and  in  diforder,  to  their  camp,  they  put  many
to  the  fword  :  Then,  having,  alfo,  made  themfelves  mafters
of  their  camp,  which  was  full  of  all  forts  of  booty,  and  re¬
covered


•  -  »

Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  SI  S.  93

covered  the  captives  the  Sabines  had  taken  in  their  incur-
fions,  they  returned  home.  Thefe  are  the  military  actions
of  this  king,  which  the  Roman  authors  have  thought  worthy
of  notice  :  Thofe,  that  relate  to  the  civil  adminiftration,  are
as  follows.

XLIV.  In  the  firft  place,  he  made  no  fmall  addition  to
the  city,  by  inclofing  mount  Aventine  within  its  walls :
This  is  a  hill  of  a  moderate  height  about  eighteen  ftadia  in
circumference  ;  which  was,  then,  full  of  trees  of  every  kind,
particularly,  of  many  beautiful  laurels,  from  which  one
part  of  the  hill  was  called  Lauretum  by  the  Romans ;  but
the  whole  is,  now,  covered  with  houfes ;  where,  among  many
other  temples,  ftands  That  of  Diana.  It  was  feparated
from  one  of  the  two  hills,  that  flood  within  the  city  of
Rome,  called  the  Palatine  hill,  round  which  the  firft  city
was  built,  by  a  deep,  and  narrow  valley ;  but,  in  after  times,
this  valley  between  the  two  hills,  was  quite  filled  up.
Marcius,  obferving  that  the  Aventine  hill,  upon  the  ap¬
proach  of  an  enemy,  might  be  made  ufe  of  to  annoy  the
city,  incompafled  it  with  a  wall,  and  a  ditch ;  and  fettled,
in  this  place,  thofe  he  had  transferred  from  Tellenc,  and
Politorium,  which  he  had  taken.  This  is  recorded  as  one
of  the  actions  of  this  king  relating  to  the  civil  adminiftra¬
tion,  which  was  a  work  both  of  great  beauty,  and  effect ;
and  ferved,  not  only,  to  aggrandize  the  city  by  the  addition
of  another  city,  but,  alfo,  to  render  it  lefs  expofed  to  the
enterprizes  of  great  armies.


XLV*


94  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

XLV.  The  other  was,  ftill,  of  greater  confequence,  as  it
increafed  the  happinefs  of  the  city  by  fupplying  it  with  all
the  conveniences  of  life,  and  encouraged  its  inhabitants  to
undertake  greater  things :  For  the  river  Tiber,  falling  from
the  Apennine  hills,  and  running  clofe  by  Rome,  difcharges
itfelf  into  the  Tyrrhene  fea,  whole  fhore  lies 39  expofed  to  the
weather  without  havens;  and  this  river  is  of  fmall,  or  inconfi-
derable  advantage  to  Rome,  by  not  having,  at  its  mouth,  any
ftrong  place  to  receive  the  commodities  brought  thither
either  by  fea,  or  by  the  river  from  the  country,  and  to  ex¬
change  them  with  the  merchants ;  but,  as  it  is  navigable
quite  up  to  its  fource  for  large  boats,  and,  even,  to  Rome
for  trading  fhips  of  great  burden,  he  refolved  to  build  a
fea-port  at  the  entrance  of  it,  and  to  make  ufe  of  the  mouth
itfelf  of  the  river  fora  haven  ;  lince  the  Tiber  is  very  large,
where  it  falls  into  the  fea,  and  forms  great  bays,  equal  to
Thofe  of  the  beft  fea-ports.  But  the  moft  wonderful  thing
is,  that  its  mouth  is 40  not  flopped  up  with  fand  banks,


39f  Ai fiahyg  sr£o<r€;/M?.  Cafaubon  has
{hewn,  both  in  this  place,  and  in  a
note  upon  a  fimilar  paffage  in  the
fourth  book  of  Strabo,  that  all  the
tranflators  have  niiftaken  the  fenfe  of
m-forexue,  in  rendering  it  vicina,  conti-
gua:  So  far  I  agree  with  him;  but  I
am  not  of  his  opinion,  whea  he  fays
that  upon  thefe  occafions,

has  the  fame  fignification  with

or  vecrfyaxit  ’  f°r  which>  he  gives  a
reafon,  1  think,  too  much  {trained,
viz.  that  aifiothog  zf^oaxyg  is  calkd,
becaule  it  is  zs-^oco^g  afrog  ;  that  is,
as  he  explains  it,  the  feamen  mult  ufe


great  attention  not  to  ftrike  upon  the
rocks.  I  fhould,  rather,  derive  this
fenfe  of  the  word  from  fuch  a  fhore
being  expofed  to  the  weather ;  which
does  no  violence  to  the  common  ac¬
ceptation  of  the  word.  The  explica¬
tion  Suidas  gives  of  from

fome  author,  will  juftify  my  conjec¬
ture  :  E7 r<  t ctSi  rye  motels  op/xeiv  ax
eJwtzvlo,  Sioc  to  nP02EXEI2  etvou  cckIus
TOI2  ETH2IAI2.

40,  Ou)c  057 roKheitlcu  Tg  go^otjog  uVo  rye
B’otAonliag  Shvo?  zy.<P%ot,T\oy,ivog.  So  this
fentence  {lands  in  all  the  editions,  and
manufcripts :  But  I  much  fufped  that

accu-


/


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  SS  ENS  I  S.  95

accmmulated  by  the  Tea,  which  is  an  inconvenience,  that
happens,  even,  to  many  great  rivers ;  neither  does  it,  by
wandering  through  fens,  and  marfhes,  fpend  itfelf  in  dif¬
ferent  places,  before  its  ftream  mixes  with  the  fea  ;  but  is,
every  where,  navigable,  and  difcharges  itfelf  at  one  genuine
mouth;  and,  notwithftanding  the  violence  of  the  weft
wind,  to  which  that  coaft  is  much  expofed,  repels  the  furge,
that  comes  from  the  main.  Ships,  therefore,  with  oars,
how  great  foever,  and  merchant  fhips  of  the  burden  of
41  three  thoufand  bufhels,  enter  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,


it  ought  to  be  slu(pf«T7ojM£v«.  Cafaubon,
and,  after  him,  M.  *  *  *,  oppofe  the
authority  of  Strabo  to  That  of  our
author,  when  he  fays  that  the  mouth
of  the  Tiber  is  not  {topped  up  with
fand  brought  in  by  the  fea.  I  have
that  paffage  of  ra  Strabo,  now,  before
me,  and  cannot  find  that  he  contra¬
dicts  Dionyfius  :  The  words  of  Strabo
are  thefe  ;  Xly/cs,  zee  Af?  aAifMvas  3‘U  t>jv

ST  OCfT^COO'lV}  y]V  0  T  iQiglS  ‘Zff£CCCCCil£VCi?£1y

srAjj'Ofc’jUSvo?  z%  t&)v  otKKcov  zr oiccuuv.  Our
author  fays,  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber
is  free  from  fand  banks  accumulated
by  the  fea;  and  Strabo,  that  Oitia
is  a  bad  port,  by  reafon  of  the  mud,
which  the  Tiber,  fwelled  by  many
rivers,  brings  down  with  it.  Where
is  the  contradidtion  ?  But,  if  the  rea¬
fon,  given  by  Strabo,  is  well  grounded,
it  will  be  an  objection  againit  every
port,  that  ftands  at  the  mouth  of  great
rivers ;  fince,  there  are  few  large  ri¬
vers,  that  do  not  receive  many  others,
before  they  fall  into  the  fea.  But,  I
believe,  where  one  port  is  rendered


dangerous  by  the  mud  brought  down
the  river,  twenty  are  rendered  lb  by
the  banks  of  fand,  gradually,  accu¬
mulated  by  the  fea.  It  muft  be  ofa-
lerved  that  the  Tiber,  juft  before  it
falls  into  the  Tyrrhene  fea,  divides
itfelf  into  two  branches,  which  form
an  ifland,  called,  Infula  facra  :  Oftia.
was  built  on  the  left  of  thefe  branches,
which  our  author  calls  yw^iov  ;
the  other  being  much  fmaller  ; '  for
which  reafon,  the  Italians  give  it  the.
diminutive  name  of n  Fiumicine .

41*  M effli  T£i<TXsXio(po£uv.  Sylbur-
gius,  and  Portus  are  divided  in  their
opinions  concerning  the  burden  of
thefe  fhips :  The  former  thinks
they  carried  three  thoufand  men ;
Portus  fays  this  cannot  be,  becaufe  he
never  faw,  nor  read  of  a  fhip  large
enough  to  carry  fo  many  men.  But,
if  he  had  read  the  account  given  by
0  Athenaeus  of  the  fhips-  of  Ptolemy
Philopator,  and  Hiero,  he  would  nave
found  they  carried  many  more.  How¬
ever,  I  have  another  reafon,  whiclv


PB.  v.  p.  354.  n  Cluver,  Ital.  Anticp  E.  iii.  c.  3,


0  B.  v.  c.  9.  and  t  j.


9  6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

and  arc  rowed,  and  towed  up  to  Rome.  Thofe  of  a  larger
frze  ride  at  anchor  at  the  mouth,  where  they  are  unladed,
and  laded  by  lighters :  Upon  the  elbow  of  land,  that  lies
between  the  river,  and  the  fea,  the  king  built  a  city,  and
incompaffed  it  with  a  wall ;  which  city,  from  its  fituation,
lie  called  Oftia,  as  we  fbould  call  it,  ©i a  door :  And,
by  this  means,  he  made  Rome,  not  only,  an  inland  town,
but,  alfo,  a  fea-port,  and  gave  it  a  tafte  of  thofe  advantages,
that  flow  from  a  maritime  commerce.

XLVI.  He,  alfo,  furrounded  mount  Janiculum  with  a  wall,
which  is  a  high  hill  lying  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Tiber;
and  placed  there  a  fufficient  garrifon  for  the  fecurity  of
thofe,  who  ufe  the  navigation  of  the  river  :  For  the  Tyr¬
rhenians,  being  mafters  of  all  the  country  lying  on  the  other
fide  of  the  river,  plundered  the  merchants.  He  is,  alfo,
faid  to  have  built  the  wooden  bridge  over  the  Tiber,  which
mud  be  framed  without  brafs,  or  iron,  being  held  together
with  the  wood-work  alone  :  This  bridge  they  prefer ve  to
this  day,  looking  upon  it  as  holy  ;  and,  if  any  part  of  it  is
decayed,  the  pontifs  repair  it,  offering  up,  at  the  fame  time,

induces  me  to  think  that  three  thou-  thefe  fhips  will  juft  amount  to  feventy
fand  [x ihpvoi  was  the  burden  of  thefe  five  tun,  allowing  forty  bufhels  to  the
fhips.  p  Julius  Pollux,  in  treating  of  tun,  which,  at  a  medium  between
ftiips,  fpeaks  of  a  j AvgiotQogos  vowr,  winter,  and  fummer  corn,  I  believe,
which,  certainly,  cannot  mean  a  fhip  will  appear,  pretty,  exaft.  Now,  this
capable  of  carrying  ten  thoufand  men,  burden  of  feventy  five  tun  feems  to
but  ten  thoufand  ptSifMot,  Now,  if  agree  with  what  our  author  fays,  pre-
we  fuppole  a  ptfopvos  to  be  the  fame  fently  after,  viz.  that  the  greater  /hips
meafure  with  our  bufhel,  as  it  is,  lay  at  anchor  at  the  mouth  of  the
generally,  thought,  the  ^burden  of  river.

pB.  i.  c.  9.


certain


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  9?

certain  facrifices  peculiar  to  their  country.  After  this  king
had,  during  his  reign,  performed  thefe  things,  which  de-
ferve  a  place  in  hiftory,  and  been  twenty  four  years  in  pofi
feffion  of  the  kingdom,  he  died ;  leaving  to  his  fucceffors
the  city  of  Rome  not  a  little  improved.  He  left  two  fonss
one,  a  child,  and  the  other,  a  youth.

XLVII.  After  the  death  of  Ancus  Martius,  the  fenate,
being  impowered  by  the  people  to  eftablifh  what  form  of
government  they  thought  fit,  again  refolved  to  continue  the
fame,  and  appointed  interreges :  Thefe,  having  aflembled
the  people  in  order  to  the  election,  chofe  Lucius  Tarquinius
for  their  king ;  and  the  ordinance  of  the  people  being  con¬
firmed  by  the  divine  omens,  Tarquinius  entered  upon  the
government  about  the  fecond  year  of  the  forty  firft  Olym¬
piad,  in  which,  Cleonidas,  the  Theban,  won  the  prize,
Heniochides  being  archon  at  Athens.  I  fhall,  now,  give
fuch  an  account,  as  I  find  in  the  Roman  annals,  of  the
anceftors  of  this  Tarquinius;  of  his  country ;  of  the
reafons  of  his  removing  to  Rome ;  and,  by  what  qualifica¬
tions,  he  came  to  be  their  king.  There  was  a  certain
Corinthian,  by  name,  Damaratus,  of  the  family  of  the
42  Bacchiadae,  who,  ingaging  in  commerce,  failed  to  Italy

42*  BaiJt %iu2uv.  This  is  the  true  for  five  generations,  to  Bacchis,  the
reading  •,  and,  by  this  name,  they  are  fon  of  Prumnis.  From  that  time,  the
called  by q  Paufanias.  Aletes,  defend-  Bacchiadae  reigned  five  other  genera¬
ted  from  Hercules,  having  conquered  tions  to  Teleftes,  the  fon  of  Ariftode-
Corinth,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  mus.  Teleftes  being  killed  by  Arieus,
Dorians,  became  king  of  that  city,  and  Perantas,  there  were  no  more
where  he,  and  his  defendants  reigned  kings  at  Corinth  j  but  annual  magi-

%  KejiA  c.  4*

N


VOL.  II.


Ill


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

in  a  fnip  of  his  own,  which  he  himfelf  had  freighted  ;  and,
having  fold  the  cargo  in  the  Tyrrhenian  cities,  which  were,
at  that  time,  the  moft  flourifhing  of  all  Italy  ;  and  gained
conliderably  by  that  means,  he  did  not  think  fit,  from  that
time,  to  put  into  any  other  ports ;  but,  conftantly,  ufed  the
fame  fea,  carrying  Greek  commodities  to  Tyrrhenia,  and
Thofe  of  Tyrrhenia  to  Greece  ;  by  which  means,  he  became
exceeding  rich.  But  there  happening  a  fedition  at  Corinth,
and  Cypfelus  having  eflablifhed  his  tyranny  upon  the  ruin
of  the  Bacchiadae,  Damaratus,  being  pofleffed  of  great
riches,  did  not  think  himfelf  fafe  under  a  tyranny ;  parti¬
cularly,  as  he  was  of  the  family,  who  had  governed  during
the  oligarchy ;  but,  imbarking  with  all  the  effects  he  could
get  together,  he  failed  from  Corinth :  And  having,  from
his  continual  intercourfe  with  the  Tyrrhenians,  many  valu¬
able  friends  among  them,  particularly  at 43  Tarquinii,  a  large,


ftrates,  called  Prytanes,  of  the  Family
of  the  Bacchiadae,  were  fubftituted  in
their  room,  till  Cypfelus,  the  fon  of
Eeti'on,  made  himfelf  tyrant,  and  ex¬
pelled  the  Bacchiadae.  I  have  been
the  more  particular  in  giving  this
hiftory  of  the  Bacchiadae,  becaufe  Pe-
tavius  has  been  guilty  of  a  miftake,
which  he  fupports  by  this  very  paffage
of  rPaufanias,  and,  by  his  authority,
has  milled  many  other  authors :  His
words  are  thefe ;  ac  deinceps  Aletae
pojleri  rerum  potiti  funt ;  quorum  ulti-
mus  Teleftes  a  Paufania  recenfetur.
Now,  it  is  certain,  that  Paufanias
makes  Teleftes  to  have  been  the  laft
king  defcended  from  Bacchis,  and  not


the  laft  of  Thofe,  who  were  defcended
from  Aletes.  But,  in  order  to  enable
the  reader  the  better  to  decide  this
queftion,  I  fhall  lay  before  him  the
paffage  ofPaufanias  in  his  own  words  ;
AAvlqg  Si  avlog  T£  kou  oi  aroyovoi  fixa-
tevxtrtv  ig  ptv  tov  Tl^afAvtSog  a n

yiveag  vszvlz.  A  no  tuIx  Si  oi  BoMXiotScti.
HOthypiVOl  Zfivli  OiAAttS  yiViO if,  ig  TiAifW
tov  AgigoSq/ux.

43*  Ev  Tagnwmg.  This  city  is,  often,
mentioned  by  the  Roman  hiftorians*
s  Strabo  fays  it  was  built  by  Tarcon,
from'  whom  it  received  its  name.
Tarquinii,  or  rather  the  ruins  of  it,
are  called,  to  this  day, 1  Par  queue.


*  Rationar.  Temp.  B.  i.  c.  13.  *  B.  v.  p.  336.  ‘  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  3.

and


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC APvN ASSENS  IS.  99
and  flourifhing  city  at  that  time,  he  built  a  houfe  there,  and
married  a  woman  of  illuftrious  birth  :  By  her,  he  had  two
fons,  to  whom  he  gave  Tyrrhenian  names,  calling  one,
Aruns,  and  the  other,  Lucumo  ;  and,  having  inftrudted
them  both  in  the  Greek,  and  Tyrrhenian  learning,  when
they  were  men  he  married  them  to  two  women  of  the  beft
families.

XLVIII.  Not  long  after,  theeldeft  of  his  fons  died  with¬
out  lawful  iffue :  And,  a  few  days  after,  Damaratus  himfelf
died  of  grief,  leaving  his  furviving  fon  Lucumo  heir  to  all
his  fortunes ;  who,  having  inherited  the  great  riches  of  his
father,  afpired  to  the  adminiftration  of  the  public  affairs,
and  to  be  confidered  as  one  of  the  firft  rank  in  the  city  :
But,  being  defeated  in  all  his  pretenflons  by  the  people  of
the  country,  and  excluded,  not  only,  from  the  fuff,  but,
even,  from  the  middle  rank,  he  refented  the  difgrace ;  and,
hearing  that  the  Romans,  willingly,  received  all  ftrangers,
and,  communicating  to  them  the  privileges  of  Roman  citi¬
zens,  honoured  every  man  according  to  his  merit,  he  refolved
to  remove  thither  with  all  his  riches,  and  to  take  his  wife,
and  fuch  of  his  friends,  and  domeftics  with  him,  as  were
willing  to  attend  him ;  and  many  were  defirous  to  accom¬
pany  him  in  his  removal.  When  they  came  to  the  hill,
called  Janiculum,  from  whence  the  city  of  Rome  is,  fuff,
difcovered  by  thofe,  who  come  from  Tyrrhenia,  an  eagle,
defending  on  a  fudden,  took  his  cap  from  his  head,  and
flew  up,  again,  with  it ;  then,  riling  in  a  circular  flight,  hid
itfelf  in  the  bofom  of  the  ambient  air ;  and,  prefently,

N  2  placed


ICO  x.  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III;
placed  the  cap  on  his  head  in  the  fame  manner  it  was  be¬
fore.  This  prodigy  caufed  a  general  wonder,  and  aftonifli-
ment,  when  the  wife  of  Lucumo,  by  name,  Tanaquil,  who
had  been  well  inftrufted  by  her  parents  in  the  knowledge
of  the  Tyrrhenian  augury,  took  him  alide,  and,  imbracing
him,  gave  him  great  hopes  of  riling  from  a  private  ftation
to  the  royal  dignity  :  She  advifed  him,  however,  to  confider
by  what  means  he  might  render  himfelf  worthy  to  receive
this  dignity  from  the  free  choice  of  the  Romans.

XLIX.  Lucumo  was  pleafed  with  the  omen;  and,  as
foon  as  he  approached  the  gates,  he  befought  the  gods  to
accomplilh  the  predi&ion,  and  that  his  arrival  might  be
attended  with  good  fortune  ;  then,  entered  the  city.  After
this,  being  introduced  to  Marcius,  then  king  of  the  Romans,
he  acquainted  him,  firft,  who  he  was,  and,  then,  told  him
that,  being  defirous  to  fettle  at  Rome,  he  had  brought  with
him  all  his  paternal  fortune,  which,  as  it  exceeded  the  con¬
dition  of  a  private  perfon,  he  faid  he  propofed  to  dedicate
to  the  ufe  of  the  king,  and  of  the  commonwealth  :  And,
having  met  with  a  favourable  reception  from  the  king,  who
admitted  him,  and  the  Tyrrhenians  his  followers,  into  one
44  of  the  tribes,  and  one  of  the  curiae,  he  built  a  houfe  upon

44'  K#7«;£0g«resvloff  —  (pv\v,v  ti  xcu  fuite  en  une  tribu  et  en  une  curie  particu-
Qfulpocv.  M.  *  *  *  ftands  fingle,  in  Here.  This  cannot,  poffibly,  be  ;  be-
rendering  this  paflage,  and  miftak-  caufe  there  were,  at  this  time,  but
ing  the  fenfe  of  it :  He  makes  the  three  tribes,  as  inftituted  by  Romulus,
king  of  the  Romans  create  a  particular  and  fo  they  continued  all  the  reign  of
tribe,  and  curia  for  the  reception  of  Marcius,  viz.  the  Ramnenfes,  Tati-
Lucumo,  and  his  followers  ;  Marciusy  enfes,  and  Luceres.  And,  as  to  the
fays  he,  lere$ut  avec  beaucoup  d? amitie,  curiae,  their  number  was  never  en-
fj  le  feparant  lui  et  les  Tyrrheniens  de  fa  created  during  the  whole  time  of  the

a  place.


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  ioi

a  place,  which  was  allotted  to  him  in  the  city,  as  fufficient
for  that  purpofe,  and  received  his  portion  of  land.  After
he  had  fettled  thefe  things,  and  was  become  a  citizen  of
Rome,  he  was  informed  that  every  Roman  had  fome
45  common  name,  and,  added  to  this,  another,  derived  from
their  family,  and  anceftors ;  and,  being  defirous  to  referable
them  in  this  alfo,  he  took  the  name  of  Lucius  inftead  of
Lucumo,  as  a  common  name,  and  That  of  Tarquinius,  as
a  family  name,  from  the  city,  in  which  he  was  born,  and
brought  up.  In  a  very  fhorf  time,  he  gained  the  friendfhip
of  the  king,  by  prefen  ting  him  with  thofe  things,  which,
he  knew,  he  wanted  moft,  and  by  fupplying  him  with  what
money  he  had  occafion  for  to  carry  on  his  wars.  In  all
military  expeditions,  he  diftinguifhed  himfelf  by  his  bravery
beyond  any  either  of  the  foot,  or  horfe  ;  and,  upon  all
occalions,  where  good  counfel  was  required,  his  advice
was  held  equal  to  That  of  the  moft  prudent.  The  favor
of  the  king  did  not  deprive  him  of  the  benevolence  of
the  Romans;  for  he,  not  only,  ingaged  many  of  the  pa¬
tricians  by  his  benefadions ;  but,  alfo,  gained  the  affedions
of  the  people  by  his  affable  behaviour,  his  agreeable  con-

V

commonwealth.  Upon  reading  this  a  Jeparate  tribe,  and  curia,
gentleman’s  tranflation  a  fecond  time,  45*  k oivov  t t  c\o^oc.  The  Romans
I  am  not  fure  but  his  intention  may  be  had,  not  only,  two  names,  diftinguifh-
that  Marcius  placed  Lucumo,  and  his  ed  by  the  appellations  of  praenomen ,
followers,  in  the  fame  tribe,  and  the  and  nomen ,  but,  often,  a  third,  and,
fame  curia,  which  is  true  *,  and,  in  even,  a  fourth,  called  cognomen ,  and
that  cafe,  I  muft  retradt  my  cenfure  :  agnomen :  And,  in  many  ancient  in-
But  the  word  feparant ,  which  he  has,  fcriptions,  the  father’s  name  is  taken
unluckily,  made  ufe  of,  looks  as  if  he  notice  of*,  as  M.  Tullius,  M.  F„
meaned  that  Marcius  placed  them  in  Cicero.

verfationj


io2  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

verfation,  his  liberality,  and  other  inftances  of  his  bene¬
volence.

L.  This  was  the  character  of  Tarquinius;  and,  for  thefe
reafons,  he  was,  during  the  life  of  Marcius,  the  mod  illus¬
trious  of  all  the  Romans ;  and,  after  his  death,  by  all  judged
worthy  to  fucceed  him.  The  firft  war  he  undertook,  after
he  entered  upon  the  government,  was  againft  the 46  Apiolani,
a  people  fo  called,  who  inhabited  a  city  of  no  fmall  note
among  the  Latines  :  For  the  Apiolani,  and  all  the  reft  of
the  Latines,  looking  upon  the  treaties  of  peace  to  be  dif-
folved  by  the  death  of  Ancus  Marcius,  infefted  the  Roman
territories  by  robberies,  and  devaluations ;  for  which  injuries,
Tarquinius,  deiiring  to  take  revenge,  marched  againft  them
at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army,  and  ravaged  the  moft
fruitful  part  of  their  country ;  and  the  neighbouring  Latines,
coming  to  the  affiftance  of  the  Apiolani,  with  a  confiderable
force,  he  fought  two  battles  with  them ;  and,  having  the
advantage  in  both,  he  laid  fiege  to  their  city ;  and  caufed
his  troops  to  affault  the  walls  fucceftively.  The  befieged
being  but  few,  oppofed  to  many,  and  having  no  refpite,
were,  at  laft,  fubdued.  The  city  being  taken  by  ftorm,
the  greateft  part  of  the  Apiolani  were  flain  fighting  :  But
a  few,  who  had  delivered  up  their  arms,  were  fold,  together
with  the  reft  of  the  booty ;  their  wives,  and  children  were
carried  away  to  flavery  by  the  Romans,  and  the  city  was
plundered,  and  burned  :  After  the  king  had  done  this,  and
rafed  the  walls  from  the  foundations,  he  returned  home

*6*  A;r<c?u*voif.  I  can  find  nothing  concerning  this  people.

K  with


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  NS  I  S.  ioj

with  his  army.  Soon  after,  he  undertook  another  expedi¬
tion  againft  the  city  of  the  47  Cruftumerini :  This  was  a  colony
of  the  Latines,  and,  in  the  reign  of  Romulus,  had  fnbmitted
to  the  Romans;  but,  after  Tarquinius  was  declared  king,
they  began,  again,  to  incline  to  the  Latines.  However,  he
was  under  no  neceffity  of  making  ufe  either  of  a  liege,  or'
of  any  other  work  of  difficulty  to  reduce  them  :  For  the
Cruftumerini,  being  fenfible  both  of  the  numbers  of  the
forces,  that  were  marching  againft  them,  and  of  their  own
weaknefs,  and  no  fuccours  coming  to  them  from  the  reft  of
the  Latines,  opened  their  gates ;  and  the  moft  ancient,  and
moft  dignified  of  the  citizens,  coming  to  Tarquinius,  delivered
up  the  city  to  him,  defiring  that  he  would  ufe  them  with1
clemency,  and  moderation.  This  fell  out  according  to  his
wifh;  and,  entering  the  city,  he  put  none  of  the  Cruftumerini
to  death,  punifhing  only  a  very  few,  who  had  been  the
authors  of  the  revolt,  with  perpetual  banifhment ;  and  to
all  the  reft  he  allowed  the  enjoyment  of  their  fortunes,  and
of  the  rights  of  Roman  citizens,  as  before :  But,  in  order  to  •
prevent  any  innovations  for  the  future,  he  left  a  Roman j
garrifon  in  their  city.

LI.  The 48  Nomentani,  alfo,  having  formed  the  fame
defign,  met  with  the  fame  fate  :  For  they,  fending  bands
of  robbers  into  the  territories  of  the  Romans,  ingaged
themfelves  in  an  open  war  againft  them,  in  confidence  of
the  affiftance  of  the  Latines ;  but,  upon  the  approach  of

4-7“  'Kt’xsvptguiuv.  See  the  66th  an-  4s*  N ooiAwlavoi?.  See  the  104^  an-*
Dictation  on  the  fecond  book.  notation  on  the  fecond  book.


Tar.


i©4


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.


Tarquinius  with  his  army,  and  the  fuccours  of  the  Latines
not  coming  in  time,  they  found  themfelves  unable  to  refill
fo  great  a  power  with  their  own  forces  ;  and,  coming  out
of  the  town  with  the  enfigns  of  fuppliants,  they  furrendered.
The  inhabitants  of 49  Collatia  refolved  to  try  the  fortune  of
a  battle  with  the  Roman  army ;  and,  for  that  purpofe3
came  out  of  their  city  :  But,  being  worfted  in  every  in-
gagement,  and  having  many  of  their  men  wounded,  they
were,  again,  forced  to  take  refuge  in  their  city  ;  from  whence,
they  fent  to  the  Latine  cities  for  fuccours :  But  they  being
backward  in  relieving  them,  and  the  enemy  attacking  their
walls  in  many  places,  they  were,  at  laft,  obliged  to  deliver
up  their  town  :  However,  they  were  not  ufed  with  the
fame  moderation,  with  which  the  Nomentani,  and  Cruftu-
merini  had  been  treated  :  For  the  king  difarmed  them,  and
fined  them  in  a  fum  of  money  ;  and,  leaving  a  fufficient
garrifon  in  the  city,  he  appointed  his  brother’s  fon,  Tar-
quinius  Aruns,  to  be  their  governor,  and  inverted  him  with
an  abfolute  power  over  them  for  life :  This  perfon,  being
born  after  the  death  both  of  his  father  Aruns,  and  of  his
grandfather  Damaratus,  had  fucceeded  to  neither  in  that
part  of  their  refpe&ive  fortunes,  which,  other  wife,  would
have  fallen  to  his  fhare  ;  for  this  reafon,  he  was  furnamed


49*  Ko/\Aa7/av.  So  we  muft  read  the
name  of  this  city,  from  the  Vatican
manufcript,  and  not  KoA«7«*v,  as  it
Hands  in  all  "the  editions.  This  v  town
Hood  near  the  left  of  the  Anio  (the
Teverone)  about  fix  miles  from  Rome.


Collatia  was,  very  probably,  built  by
the  Alban  kings,  fince  w  Virgil  makes
Anchifes  fay  to  Aeneas,

At,  qui  umbrata  gerunt  clnxli  tempora  querca ,

Hi  tibi  Momentum,  et  Gabios ,  urbemque  Fidenam\
Hi  Collatinas  imponent  moenibus  area.


f  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  8.  *  B.  vi,  f,  773.

Egerius  s


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  A  S  S E N S I S.  105

5°Egerius:  For,  by  that  name,  the  Romans  call  poor  men,
and  beggars.  But,  from  the  time  he  received  the  government
of  this  city,  he  himfelf  had  the  furname  of  Collatinus,  and
all  his  defcendants  were  called  fo  after  him.  After  the
furrender  of  Collatia,  the  king  led  his  army  againft
51  Corniculum,  which  was,  alfo,  a  city  of  the  Latines ;  and,
having  ravaged  the  country  with  great  fecurity,  none  ap¬
pearing  to  defend  it,  he  marched  to  the  city  itfelf,  inviting
the  inhabitants  to  enter  into  a  league  of  friendfhip  with  him :
But  they,  relying  on  the  ftrength  of  their  walls,  and  expecting
fuccours  from  many  of  their  neighbours,  refufed  all  conditions
of  peace :  Upon  which,  he  inverted  the  city  on  all  fides,  and
afiaulted  the  walls.  The  Corniculani  made  a  long,  and  a  brave
refiftance,  wounding  many  of  the  bertegers ;  but,  being
worne  out  with  continual  labour,  and,  no  longer,  unanimous
(for  fome  were  for  delivering  up  the  town,  and  others  for
holding  out  to  the  laft)  their  diftrefs  was  encreafed  by  this
divifion,  and  the  town  taken  by  ftorm.  The  braveft  of  the
people  were  flain  fighting,  while  the  enemy  were  taking  the
town  ;  and  the  reft,  who  owed  their  prefervation  to  their
cowardife,  were  fold  for  flaves,  together  with  their  wives,
and  children ;  and  their  city  was  plundered  by  the  con¬
querors,  and  burned.  The  Latines,  refenting  this  proceed-
ing,  pafled  a  vote  to  march  with  united  forces  againft  the

s°*  x  Livy,  alio,  derives  the  $*•  K ogvuthov.  r  Corniculum  was  a

name  of  this  nephew  of  Tarquinius  city  of  the  Latines,  and  lay  between
■i ab  egendo  •,  puero  poji  avi  mortem  in  Ficulea,  and  Tibur,  near  the  place,
nullam  fortem  bonorum  nato ,  ab  inopia  where,  now,  Hands  Cafale.

Egerio  inditum  nomen.

•  *  B.  i.  c.  34.  7  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  ii.  c.  9,

Vol.  II.  O  Romans;


io6  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  III.

Romans ;  and,  having  raifed  a  great  army,  they  made  an
irruption  into  the  moft  fruitful  part  of  their  country ;  from
whence,  they  carried  off  many  captives,  and  made  them-
felves  mailers  of  a  great  booty.  Upon  this,  Tarquinius
marched  out  againft  them  with  an  army  prepared  for  ex¬
pedition,  and  ready  for  action:  But,  they  having  retired
before  he  could  come  up  with  them,  he  penetrated  into
their  country,  and  treated  it  in  the  fame  manner.  Many  of
thefe  advantages,  and  difadvantages  happened,  alternately,  to
each  in  the  incuriions  they  made  into  one  another’s  country.
However,  they,  once,  fought  a  pitched  battle  with  all  their
forces  near  the  city  of  Fidenae  ;  in  which,  many  fell  on
both  fides ,  but  the  Romans  gained  the  victory,  and  forced
the  Latines  to  abandon  their  camp  by  night,  and  retire  into
their  towns.

LI I.  After  this  battle,  Tarquinius  led  his  army  in  good
order  to  their  cities,  offering  terms  of  friendfhip  ;  and  they,
having  no  national  army  affembled  for  their  defence,  nor
confiding  in  their  own  preparations,  received  his  propofals ;
and  fome  of  them  delivered  up  their  cities,  finding  that  of
thofe,  which  were  taken  by  llorm,  the  inhabitants  were
made  flaves,  and  the  cities  rafed ;  while  the  others,  who
furrendered  by  capitulation,  were  treated  with  no  other
fe verity,  than  to  be  obliged  to  yield  obedience  to  the  con¬
querors.  Firft,  therefore,  Fidenae,  a  city  of  great  note,
fubmitted  upon  certain  conditions ;  then,  Camerium  did  the
fame:  Their  example  was  followed  by  fome  other  fmall
towns,  and  ftrong  fortreffes.  The  reft  of  the  Latines,  being

alarmed


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  107

alarmed  at  this,  and  fearing  left  he  fhould  reduce  the  whole
nation,  held  an  aflembly  at 52  Ferentinum,  and  palled  a  vote,
not  only,  to  draw  their  own  forces  together  out  of  every
city,  but,  alfo,  to  call  in  the  aftiftance  of  the  moft  warlike
of  their  neighbours  ;  and,  to  that  end,  they  fent  embafia-
dors  to  the  Tyrrhenians,  and  Sabines,  to  defire  fuccours.
The  Sabines  promifed  that,  as  foon  as  they  fhould  be
informed  they  had  made  an  incurfion  into  the  Roman  ter¬
ritories,  they  themfelves  would,  alfo,  take  arms,  and  ravage
that  part  of  their  country,  which  lay  next  to  them  :  The
Tyrrhenians  ingaged  to  fend  them  whatever  fuccours  they
fhould  want:  However,  they  were  not  all  of  the  fame
opinion:  For  only  five  cities  agreed  to  it;  that  is,  the
53  Clufini,  the  5+Arretini,  the  55  Volaterrani,  the  s6  Rufellani,
and  the  57  Vetulonienfes.

L1II.  The  Latines,  elevated  with  thefe  hopes,  raifed  a
great  army  of  their  own  forces ;  and,  having  encreafed  it
with  the  auxiliary  troops  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  they  made  an
irruption  into  the  Roman  territories :  And,  at  the  fame

52*  Ev  Qegevlivu.  Seethe  29th  anno-  Volterra ,  is  a  confiderable  city  of
tation  on  this  book.  Etruria.  It  ftands  upon  a  very  high

53*  KAscrivoi.  z  Clufium  was  a  city  hill  near  the  river  Caecina ,  which  ftill
of  great  note  in  Etruria.  It  is,  now,  retains  its  name,
called  Chiuftj  and  Chiuci ,  and  ftands  s6’'-?w£\Koivci.  c Rufellae,  now,  called
near  the  river  Clanis,  known,  now,  by  Grofeto ,  or  GroJJeto ,  lies,  a  little,  to  the
by  the  name  of  la  Chiana.  weft  of  the  river Umbro,  now,  Ombrone ,

5+*  Affyflivoi.  a  Arretium,  now,  A-  not  far  from  the  fea.
rezzo ,  lies  at  the  foot  of  theAppennine,  57*  OvflvAwiciloii.  ^  Vetulonii ,  now,

near  the  river  Arms,  now  called,  I’Ar-  Vetulia ,  ftands  between  the  fea,  and  a
no.  river,  formerly,  called  Lynceus ,  and,

55*  OvoAofleffavoi.  b  Volaterrae ,  now,  at  this  time,  Cornia.

2  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  if  c.  3.  *  Id.  ib.  b  Id.  ib.  c  Id.  ib.  a  Id.  ib.

O  2  time,


108  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  Ilf.

time,  the  cities  of  the  Sabine  nation,  which  had  ingaged  to
partake  with  them  in  the  war,  laid  wafte  the  country,  that
was  next  to  them.  The  king  of  the  Romans,  who,  in  the
mean  time,  had,  alfo,  prepared  a  numerous,  and  brave  army,
marched,  immediately,  againft  the  enemy :  But,  thinking
it  unfafe  to  attack  the  Sabines,  and  the  Latines  at  the  fame
time,  and  to  divide  his  forces  into  two  bodies,  he  determined
to  lead  his  whole  army  againft  the  latter,  and  incamped
near  them.  At  firft,  they  were  both  unwilling  to  hazard
a  general  ingagement,  being  alarmed  at  each  other’s  pre¬
parations  :  However,  the  light-armed  men,  coming  down
from  both  camps,  fkirmifhed,  continually,  with  one  another,
and  this,  generally,  happened  without  any  advantage  on  either
fide.  Thefe  fkirmifhes  producing,  by  degrees,  in  both  armies
an  eager nefs  for  adtion,  each  fupported  their  own  men,  at
firft,  in  fmail  numbers,  till,  at  laft,  they  were  all  forced
to  come  out  of  their  camps.  The  troops,  which  now,
ingaged,  being  ufed  to  adtion,  and,  nearly,  equal  in  the
number  both  of  horfe,  and  foot,  equally  eager  for  the  battle,
and  fenfible  of  the  extreme  danger  they  ran,  fought  on  both
fides  with  memorable  bravery,  till  night  parted  them  leaving
the  vidtory  undecided.  But  the  different  counfels  of  each
after  the  adtion,  fhewed  which  of  them  had  the  advantage :
For  the  next  day,  the  Latines  ftirred,  no  more,  out  of  their
camp ;  while  the  king  of  the  Romans,  leading  out  his  troops
into  the  plain,  fhewed  himfelf  ready  to  renew  the  fight ;
and,  for  a  long  time,  kept  his  army  in  order  of  battle  :
But  the  enemy  not  coming  out  againft  him,  he  took  the


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICA RN  ASSE NS  I  S.  109

fpoils  from  their  dead,  and,  carrying  off  his  own,  led  back
his  army,  with  great  exultation,  to  his  camp.

LIV.  Some  days  after  this,  the  Latines  having  received  a
reinforcement  from  the  Tyrrhenians,  a  fecond  battle  was
fought,  much  greater  than  the  former,  in  which  Tarquinius
gained  a  moft  fignal  vidory  ;  and  he  himfelf  was  allowed
by  all  to  have  been  the  caufe  of  it :  For  the  Roman  army
being,  already,  diftrefled,  and  the  left  wing  broken,  Tar¬
quinius,  as  foon  as  he  was  informed  of  this  diforder  (for  he
happened  then,  to  be  fighting  on  the  right)  took  with  him.
the  beft  troops  of  horfe,  and  the  flower  of  the  foot ;  and,,
turning,  marched  behind  his  own  army  ;  then,  palling  by
his  left  wing,  advanced  beyond  his  own  line  of  battle  ;  after
which,,  wheeling  to  the  58  right,  and,  ordering  his  men  to
clap  fpurs  to  their  horfes,  he  charged  the  Tyrrhenians  in
flank:  For  thefe  fought  on  the  enemy’s  right  wing,  and  had
put  to  flight  thofe,  who  flood  oppofite  to  them  :  This  unex¬
pected  appearance  filled  the  enemy  with  aftonilhment,  and
confulion.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Roman  foot,  alfo,  having
recovered  themfelves  from  their  former  fear,  advanced  againft
the  enemy  :  Upon  which,  there  followed  a  great  daughter
of  the  Tyrrhenians,  and  their  right  wing  was,  intirely,  routed.
Tarquinius,  having  ordered  the  commanders  of  the  foot  to
follow  flowly,  and  in  good  order,  himfelf  led  the  horfe  full

58,  Em  fop.  This  is  a  term  in  ta&ics  tv  ctevJcc.  La  pique  a  la  main,  in  Ie
among  the  horfe,  fignifying,  to  the  Jay,  is  a  wretched  tranflation  of  gjrt
right  \  as-  e<p*  n'viav  fignifies,  to  the  left :  ioov  ;  but,  I  find,  he  has  tranflated
The  reafon  of  both  is  obvious.  The  infejtis  haftis  in  Portus.  M.  *  *  *  has  •
firft  was,  alfo,  in  ufe  among  the  foot ;  rendered  it  very  properly,
but,  inftead  of  the  latter,  they  faid


r  i  o


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.
Jpeed  to  the  enemy’s  camp  ;  and,  arriving  there  before  thofe,
who  were  endeavouring  to  fave  themfelves  by  flight,  he  took
their  camp  at  the  fir  ft  onfet.  For  the  troops,  which  had  been
left  there,  being  neither  acquainted  with  the  misfortune,
that  had  befallen  their  own  people,  nor  able,  from  the
fuddennefs  of  the  attack,  to  diftinguifh  the  horfe  that  ad¬
vanced,  fuffered  them  to  enter.  The  camp  of  theLatines
being  taken,  thofe  of  the  enemy,  who  were  retiring  thither
from  the  defeat  of  their  army,  59  as  to  a  fafe  retreat,  were
flain  by  the  horfe,  who  had  poflefled  themfelves  of  it :
While  others,  endeavouring  to  efcape  from  the  camp  into
the  plain,  were  met  by  the  Roman  foot,  and  cut  to  pieces ;
the  greateft  part  of  them,  being  prefled  by  one  another,
and  trodden  under  foot,  periflied  among  the  palifades,  or  in
the  trenches,  in  the  moft  miferable,  and  defencelefs  manner  :
So  that,  thofe,  who  were  left  alive,  finding  no  means  of
faving  themfelves,  were  obliged  to  furrender  to  the  con¬
querors.  Tarquinius,  having  made  himfelf  mafter  of  many
prifoners,  and  a  great  booty,  fold  the  former,  and  gave  the
plunder  of  the  camp  to  the  foldiers.

LV.  After  this  fuccefs,  he  led  his  army  to  the  cities  of  the
Latines,  with  a  defign  to  reduce  thofe  by  force,  that  refufed
to  furrender  :  But  he  found  himfelf  under  no  neceflity  of
laying  fiege  to  any  of  them  :  For  all  had  recourfe  to  fuppli-
cations,  and  prayers ;  and,  fending  embafladors  to  him  from
the  whole  nation,  they  defired  him  to  put  an  end  to  the

59*  e if  av<p»\n  xxluQvyriv.  I  am  afraid  the  tranfcribers  have  left  out  wV,
which  the  fenfe  feems  to  require.


war


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LIC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SIS.  m

war  upon  fuch  conditions  as  he  thought  fit,  and  delivered
up  their  cities  to  him.  The  king,  being  mafter  of  their
cities  upon  thefe  terms,  treated  them  all  with  the  greateft
clemency,  and  moderation  :  For  he  put  none  of  the  Latines
to  death,  forced  none  into  banifhment,  nor  laid  a  muldf
upon  any  of  them ;  but  allowed  them  to  enjoy  their  lands,
and  to  govern  themfelves  according  to  the  conftitution  of
their  country.  However,  he  ordered  them  to  deliver  up  to
the  Romans  the  deferters,  and  captives,  without  ranfom  ;  to
reftore  to  their  mailers  the  Haves  they  had  taken  in  their
incurfions ;  to  repay  the  money  they  had  forced  from  the
hulbandmen  ;  and  repair  every  other  damage,  or  lofs,  they
had  occafioned  in  their  irruptions.  Upon  their  performing
thefe  conditions,  and  yielding  obedience  to  all  the  com¬
mands  of  the  Romans,  they  were  to  be  looked  upon  as  their
friends,  and  allies.  This  was  the  event  of  the  war  between
the  Romans,  and  the  Latines;  and  Tarquinius  triumphed’
for  the  victory  he  obtained  in  this  war.

LVI.  The  following  year,  he  led  his  army  agafnft  the
Sabines,  who  had,  long  before,  been  informed  of  his  defign,
and  preparations  againft  them  ;  and  difdaining  to  fuffer  the
war  to  be  brought  into  their  own  country,  they  met  him.
with  an  army,  fufficiently,  prepared  to  oppofe  him  :  And  a
battle  being  fought  upon  the  confines,  which  l'afled  till
night,  neither  army  had  the  advantage,  both  having  fuffered
exceedingly.  The  following  days,  neither  the  general  of  the
Sabines,  nor  the  king  of  the  Romans  drew  their  forces  out
of  their  camp;  but  both,  decamping,  returned  home,  without

doing,


11%


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

doing  any  injury  to  one  another’s  territories.  The  defign
of  both  was  the  fame,  that  is,  to  invade  each  other’s  country
in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring  with  a  greater  force.  After
they  had  made  their  preparations,  the  Sabines  firft  took  the
field,  ftrengthened  with  a  fufficient  body  of  Tyrrhenian
auxiliaries,  and  incamped  near  Fidenae,  at  the  confluence
of  the  Anio,  and  the  Tiber  :  They  formed  two  camps  oppo-
fite,  and  near,  to  each  other,  the  united  ftreamofboth  rivers
running  between  them,  over  which  was  laid  a  wooden  bridge,
built  on  boats,  and  rafts,  which  afforded  a  quick  communi¬
cation  between  both,  and  made  them  one  camp.  Tarquinius,
being  informed  of  their  irruption  into  the  Roman  territories,
marched  out,  alfo,  with  the  Roman  army,  and  pitched  his
camp  a  little  above  theirs,  near  the  river  Anio,  upon  a  hill,
ftrongly,  fituated.  But,  though  both  armies  had  all  the
defire  imaginable  to  come  to  an  action,  no  pitched  battle,
either  great,  or  fmall,  was  fought  :  For  Tarquinius  prevented
it  by  a  ftrategem,  and,  thereby,  ruined  the  affairs  of  the
Sabines,  and  made  himfelf  mafter  of  both  their  camps :  The
ffrategem  he  made  ufe  of  was  this.

LVII.  Having  provided  boats  and  rafts  in  that  river,  near
which  he  himfelf  lay  incamped,  he  filled  them  with  dry
wood,  fafcines,  fulphur,  and  pitch;  and,  taking  the  ad¬
vantage  of  a  favourable  wind,  about  the  time  of  the  morning
6owatch,  he  ordered  the  combuftible  matter  to  be  fet  on  fire,

6o*  tuv  iwO<v>jv  (pvhuwv.  It  is  Romans, 'the  night  was  divided  into
^allowed  by  all  authors,  who  have  four  guards,  which  they  called  Vigiliat\
written  upon  this  fubjedt,  that,  accord-  the  firft  mounted  at  fix  a  clock  in  the
ing  to  the  military  difcipline  of  the  evening, according  to  our  computation

and


BookHI.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  u3

and  fome  few  putting  themfelves  in  a  pofture  of  defence,  he
made  himfelf  mafter  of  it  without  any  trouble.  While
this  was  doing,  another  part  of  the  Roman  army  took  the
camp  of  the  Sabines  alfo,  that  lay  on  the  other  fide  of  the
river:  This  detachment,  having  been  fent  by  Tarquinius
about  the  firft  watch,  had  paffed  the  river,  formed  by  the
other  two,  in  boats,  and  rafts,  at  a  place,  where  their  paf-
fage  was  not  likely  to  be  difcovered  by  the  Sabines ;  and
had  approached  the  other  camp  at  the  fame  time  they  faw
the  bridge  on  fire;  for  this  was  the  fignal  for  the  attack.
Some  of  thofe,  who  were  found  in  the  camps,  were  /lain
fighting  by  the  Romans ;  others  threw  themfelves  into  the
confluence  of  the  rivers  ;  and,  not  being  able  to  difengage
themfelves  from  the  whirlpools,  were  fwallowed  up  ;  and
not  a  few  of  them  perifhed  in  the  flames,  while  they  were
endeavouring  to  fave  the  bridge.  Tarquinius,  having  made
himfelf  mafter  of  both  the  camps,  gave  leave  to  the  foldiers
to  divide  among  themfelves  the  booty,  that  was  found  in
them ;  but  the  prifoners,  who  were  many  in  number,  both
of  the  Sabines  themfelves,  and  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  he  carried
to  Rome,  where  he  kept  them  under  a  ftri<ft  guard.

LVIII.  The  Sabines,  fubdued  by  this  calamity,  grew 61  fen  -


of  time,  and  went  off  at  nine  ;  the  fe-
cond  were  relieved  at  twelve  •,  the
third,  at  three ;  and  the  fourth  con¬
tinued  upon  duty  till  fix.  From  this
cuftom,  were  derived  thefe  phrafes,
prima ,  fecunda ,  tertia ,  et  quart  a  vigilia.

^1‘  ^Lyv(/)<ny.ot.')(jY'i<T(x,v,  T.  his  is  a  very
elegant,  and  a  very  expreffive  word,
and  is  well  explained  by  the  Greek
fcholiaft  upon  the  following  paffage  of


c  Ariftophanes,  where  Pifthetaerus  is
propofing  to  the  birds  to  build  a  city
in  the  air :

KawraT  a.v  ra?  stiwspjkjj,  tij»  rov  At’mratW.

Km  p.tv  f/.y  <pn ,  tBchtirvi,  (/.■/)$’  iv$V(  fNflS  J-
MAXHtH

j  ’

legov  •to'oXs jAOt  &£uv$civ  avia.

TNnSIM  AXH  2A  I  to,  yvovla  on
vrgog  K^enlovocs  «v] w  vf  ticvyouroci.


*  Op.  f.  555-

P  fi.ble


VOL.  II.


7 1 4  ROMAN  ANT  IQJJ  I  TIE  S  OF  Book  III.

Able  of  their  own  vveaknefs;  and,  fending  embafladors,
concluded  a  truce,  and  a  league  for  fix  years.  But  the
Tyrrhenians,  relenting  the  many  defeats  they  had  received
from  the  Romans,  and  that  Tarquinius  had,  not  only,  re-
fufed  to  reftore  their  prifoners  when  they  fent  an  embafiy  to
demand  them,  but,  alfo,  retained  them  as  hoftages,  palfed  a
\'ote  that  all  the  Tyrrhene  cities  fhould  make  war  upon  the
Romans  with  united  forces ;  and  that,  if  any  one  refufed  to
take  a  fhare  in  the  war,  That  city  fhould  have  none  in  their
confederacy.  After  they  had  made  this  decree,  they  led
out  their  forces ;  and,  palling  the  Tiber,  incamped  near
Fidenae,  which  city  they  made  themfelves  matters  of  by
treachery,  there  being  a  fedition  among  the  inhabitants ;
and,  having  taken  a  great  many  prifoners,  and  carried  off  a
confiderable  booty  from  the  Roman  territories,  they  returned
home,  leaving  a  fufficient  garrifon  in  Fidenae  :  For  they
looked  upon  this  city,  as  the  moft  convenient  place  to  carry
on  the  war  againft  the  Romans.  On  the  other  fide,  T arquinius
prepared  himfelf  for  the  infuing  campaign,  by  arming  all
the  Romans,  and  by  adding  to  them  as  many  auxiliaries  as
he  could  procure;  and  took  the  field  in  the  beginning  of
the  fpring,  before  the  enemy  could  march  againft  him  with
an  army  drawn  out  of  all  their  cities,  as  they  had  done  the
preceding  year :  Then,  having  divided  his  whole  army  into
two  bodies,  he  put  himfelf  at  the  head  of  the  Roman  troops,
and  led  them  againft  the  cities  of  the  Tyrrhenians :  The
command  of  the  allies,  confuting,  chiefly,  of  the  Latines,
he  gave  to  Egerius,  his  relation,  and  ordered  him  to  march

againft


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  n5

againd  the  enemy  in  Fidenae.  The  army,  compofed  of
auxiliary  troops,  having,  through  a  contempt  or  the  enemy,
incamped  in  a  difad  van  tageous  poft  not  far  from  Fidenae,  was
very  near  being,  totally,  dedroyed  :  For  the  garrifon,  having,
privately,  fent  for  frefh  fuccours  from  the  Tyrrhenians,  and
watched  their  opportunity,  made  a  fally ;  and,  the  enemy’s
camp  being  ill  defended,  they  podeded  themfelves  of  it  at
the  fird  onfet,  and  made  a  great  daughter  of  thofe,  who
were  out  upon  a  forage.  But  the  Roman  army,  com¬
manded  by  Tarquinius,  after  they  had  laid  wade,  and
ravaged  the  country  of  the  Veientes,  and  carried  off  a
great  booty,  notwithftanding  thefe  were  reinforced  by  a
numerous  body  of  Tyrrhenians  drawn  out  of  all  their  cities,
came  to  an  ingagement  with  them,  and  gained  an  incon-
tedable  victory.  After  which,  they  marched  through  the
enemy’s  country,  and  plundered  it  fecurely  ;  and,  having
made  many  prifoners,  and  poffeffed  themfelves  of  a  con-
ffderable  booty,  it  being  a  plentiful  country,  they  returned  *
home  at  the  end  of  the  dimmer.

LIX.  The  Veientes,  therefore,  having  differed,  greatly,
in  the  laft  a&ion,  ftirred,  no  more,  out  of  their  city,  but
differed  their  country  to  be  laid  wade  before  their  eyes.
Tarquinius  made  three  incurdons  into  the  territories  of
the  Veientes ;  and,  having  deprived  them  of  the  product
of  their  lands,  during  three  years,  rendered  the  greated
part  of  their  country  defolate;  and,  being  incapable
to  do  any  farther  damage  to  it,  he  led  his  army  againd
the  city  of  the  Caeretani,  which  was,  before,  called

P  2  Agylla,


u6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III;

Agylla,  while  it  was  inhabited  by  the  Pelafgi ;  but,  falling
under  the  power  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  it  changed  its  name
to  Caere :  This  city  was  as  flourifhing,  and  populous,  as
any  in  all  Tyrrhenia  ;  and,  upon  this  occalion,  fent  out  a
confiderable  army  to  defend  their  country;  which,  after
deftroying  many  of  the  enemy,  and  loling  ftill  more  of  their
own  men,  retired  into  the  city.  The  Romans,  being  mafters
of  their  country,  which  afforded  them  plenty  of  every  thing,
continued  there  many  days ;  and,  when  it  was  time  to
depart,  they  carried  away  all  the  booty  they  were  able,  and
returned  home.  Tarquinius,  after  his  expedition  againft


6a*  A yvMet.  This  Tufcan  city,  af¬
terwards,  called  Caere ,  and,  now,  Cer-
v'eteri ,  hands  within  four  miles  of  the
fea.  f  Strabo  fays  that  this  city  changed
its  name  from  Agylla  to  Caere ,  upon
the  following  occalion.  The  Pelafgi,
who  came  from  Thefialy,  having  built
Agylla,  and,  then,  inhabiting  it,  the
Lydians,  who,  fince  their  arrival  in
Italy,  were  called  Tyrrhenians,  mak¬
ing  war  upon  the  Pelafgi,  befieged
this  city ;  and,  one  of  the  Lydians,
coming  to  the  walls,  afked  the  name
of  it  •,  but,  inftead  of  an  anfwer,  re¬
ceived  the  falutation  %teige9  which
name  the  Tyrrhenians  gave  to  the  city,
after  they  had  taken  it.  This  ftory,
whether  true,  or  falfe,  can  only  tend
to  the  amufement  of  the  reader  :  But
what  follows  may  ferve  for  his  inftruc-
tion,  that  is,  if  he  has  been  as  much
puzzled  as  myfelf  with  an  expreffion,
often  to  be  met  with  in  the  ancient
authors,  viz.  in  Caerites  tabulas  referri 9
which  took  its  origin  from  the  inha¬


bitants  of  this  city.  They  had,  it
feems,  given  refuge  to  the  Veftals,
and  their  images,  at  the  time  of  the
Gallic  invafion  :  In  return  for  this
hofpitality,  the  Roman  people  granted
to  them  the  privileges  of  the  city  with¬
out  the  right  of fuffrage:  From  whence,
thofe  Romans,  who  were  deprived  of
this  right  by  the  cenfors  for  any  mif-
demeanor,  were  faid  in  Caerites  tabulas
referri :  So  that,  the  privilege,  granted
by  the  Romans  to  the  inhabitants  of
Caere ,  became  a  mark  of  ignominy,
when  inflidted  on  the  former.  g  Hinc
tabulae  Caerites  appellatae ,  vice  verfa ,
in  quas  cenfores  referri  jubebant ,  quos
notae  caufd  fujfragiis  privabant.  And
h  Horace,  when  he,  ironically,  advifes
to  lay  afide  decency,  and  live  in  luch
a  manner,  as  to  deferve  this  animad-
verfion  of  the  cenfors,  fays,

Quid deceat ,  quid  nony  obliti\  Caerite  cei  a
Digni.


i  B.  v.  p.  337.  6  Gellius,  B.  xvi.  c.  13.


B.  i.  Epift.  6.  f.  62.


the


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H A L I C ARN  A S  SE N  S I  S.  1 17

the  Veientes  had  fucceeded  according  to  his  defire,  marched
with  his  army  againft  the  enemy,  who  were  in  Fidenae,
being  deiirous  both  to  drive  out  the  garrifon,  and  to  punifti
thofe,  who  had  delivered  up  the  city  to  the  Tyrrhenians.
Upon  this,  there  was,  not  only,  a  pitched  battle  fought  be¬
tween  the  Romans,  and  the  garrifon,  that  fallied  out  of  the
city,  but,  alfo,  a  fharp  conflid  in  the  attacks,  that  were
made  upon  the  walls :  However,  the  city  was  taken  by
ftorm,  and  the  garrifon,  together  with  the  reft  of  the  Tyr¬
rhenian  prifoners,  were  kept  in  chains  under  a  guard ;  but,
of  the  Fidenates,  who  appeared  to  have  been  the  authors
of  the  revolt,  fome  were  whipped,  and  beheaded  in  public ;
others  condemned  to  perpetual  banifhment,  and  their
fortunes  diftributed  by  lot  among  thofe  Romans,  who  were
left  both  to  inhabit,  and  garrifon  the  city.

LX.  The  laft  battle  between  the  Romans,  and  Tyrrhe¬
nians  was  fought  near  the  city  of  Eretum  in  the  territory  of
the  Sabines :  For  the  Tyrrhenians  had  been  prevailed  on
by  fome  perfons  there,  who  were  indifpofed  to  the  Romans,
to  march  through  that  country  in  their  expedition  againft
the  latter,  upon  aflurance  given  them  that  they  fhould  be
joined  by  the  Sabines ;  becaufe  the  fix  years  truce,  which
thefe  had  made  with  Tarquinius,  was,  already,  expired  ;
and  their  cities  being,  fufficiently,  fupplied  with  a  numerous
youth,  which  had  grown  up  fmce  the  laft  war,  many  of
the  Sabines  were  deiirous  to  repair  their  former  defeats.
But  their  attempt  did  not  fucceed  according  to  their  defire,
the  Roman  army  appearing  fooner  than  they  expected ;

neither


IIS  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

neither  was  it  poftlble  for  the  Sabines  to  fend  public  fuccours
to  the  Tyrrhenians  from  any  of  their  cities :  So  that,  the
only  afliftance  they  received,  confided  of  a  few  voluntiers
allured  by  the  greatnefs  of  their  pay.  This  battle,  the
greateft  of  any,  that  had  yet  happened  between  the  two
nations,  gave  a  wonderful  afcendant  to  the  Romans,  who
there  gained  a  moft  glorious  vidtory  ;  for  which  both  the
fenate,  and  people  decreed  the  honors  of  a  triumph  to
Tarquinius :  On  the  other  fide,  it  broke  the  fpirits  of  the
Tyrrhenians ;  who,  having  fent  out  the  whole  ftrength  of
every  city  into  the  field,  faw  but  few  of  all  that  number  return
in  fafety  :  For  fome  of  them  were  flain  in  the  a&ion ;
others,  having,  in  their  flight,  ingaged  themfelves  in  im¬
palpable  faftnefles,  furrendered  themfelves  to  the  conquerors.
The  leading  men,  therefore,  of  their  cities,  having  felt  fo
great  a  calamity,  adted  as  became  prudent  men :  For,
Tarquinius  taking  the  field  againft  them  with  another  army,
they  met  in  a  general  aflembly,  and  pafied  a  vote  to  treat
with  him  concerning  peace  :  And,  fending  to  him  the  moft
ancient,  and  moft  dignified  perfons  of  every  city,  they  gave
them  full  powers  to  fettle  the  conditions  of  it.

LXI.  The  king,  after  he  had  heard  the  many  arguments
they  made  ufe  of  to  perfuade  clemency,  and  moderation,
and  been  put  in  mind  of  his  affinity  to  their  nation,  faid  he
defired  to  be  informed  by  them  but  of  one  thing,  whether
they,  ftill,  contended  for  an  equality,  and  were  come  to  make
peace  upon  certain  conditions ;  or  whether  they  acknow¬
ledged  themfelves  to  be  overcome,  and  were  ready  to  deliver

up


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  ENS  I  S.  119

up  their  cities  to  him.  And  they  anfwering  that  they,  not
only,  delivered  up  their  cities  to  him,  but  fhould,  alfo,  be
fatisfied  with  a  peace  upon  any  terms;  he  was,  greatly,
pleafed  with  their  anfwer,  and  faid;  “  Hear,  then,  upon
u  what  conditions  I  fhall  put  an  end  to  the  war,  and  what
“  favors  I  propofe  to  confer  on  you  ;  I  defire  neither  to
“  put  any  of  the  Tyrrhenians  to  death,  to  banifh  any  of
u  them,  nor  punifh  any  with  the  lofs  of  their  pofTeffions ;
C£  I  impofe  no  garrifons,  nor  tributes,  upon  any  of  your  cities,
<c  but  allow  each  of  them  to  enjoy  their  own  laws,  and  their
<c  ancient  form  of  government :  But,  in  return  for  all  thefe
“  favors,  I  think,  I  have  a  right  to  expert  one  thing  from
<c  you,  that  is,  the  fovereignty  of  your  cities,  which  I
“  fhall  obtain,  even,  againft  your  will,  as  long  as  I  am  more
u  powerful  in  arms :  However,  I  had  rather  enjoy  it  with
<£  your  confent,  than  without  it :  Inform  your  cities  of  this;
“  and  I  promife  to  grant  you  a  fufpenfion  of  arms,  till  your
<c  return.”

LXII.  The  embafiadors,  having  received  this  anfwer,
departed  ;  and,  after  a  few  days,  returned,  not  with  empty
words,  but  with  the  enfigns  of  fovereignty,  with  which  they
ufed  to  decorate  their  own  kings:  Thefe  were  63  a  crown

63*  Ziipoivov  t £  xzva‘0v>  etc.  The  Mafinifla  by  Scipio  •,  Ibi  MafiniJJam
reader  will  obferve  that  thefe  were  primum  regem  appellation,  eximiifque
triumphal  ornaments,  ki  ufe  among  crnatum  landibus ,  aured  corona ,  a  urea
the  Romans,  the  terms  of  which  our  patera ,  fella  curuli ,  et  fcipione  eburneo
author  has  trandated  into  Greek.  They  toga  pitta,  et  pahnatd  tunica  donat.
are  mentioned  as  fuch  by  1  Livy,  where  Addit  verbis  honor em^  neque  magnificen-
he  fpeaks  of  the  prefents  made  to  tins  quicquam  triumpho  apud  Romanos

*  B,  xxx.  c.  15.


of


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

of  gold  ;  an  ivory  throne ;  a  fcepter,  on  the  head  of  which
was  an  eagle ;  a  purple  veft  wrought  with  gold ;  and  a
purple  robe  imbroidered,  like  thofe  worne  by  the  kings  of
Lydia,  andPerlia,  with  this  difference,  that  theirs  were  four-
fquare,  and  this  femicircular  :  This  kind  of  robe  is,  by  the
Romans,  called  Toga>  and,  by  the  Greeks,  u  Tn&zvvo;  ;  but
I  know  not  from  whence  they  have  taken  the  name :  For
it  does  not  feem  to  me  to  be  a  Greek  word.  According
to  feme  hiftorians,  they  alfo  brought  with  them  the  twelve
axes,  taking  one  from  every  city :  For  it  feems  to  be  a
Tyrrhenian  cuftom  for  each  king  of  the  feveral  cities  to  be
preceded  by  a  lidtor,  bearing  an  ax  together  with  a  bundle  of
rods ;  and,  when  the  twelve  cities  undertake  any  military
expedition  in  common,  to  deliver  the  twelve  axes  to  the
perfon,  who  commands  in  chief.  However,  all  authors  do
not  agree  with  thofe,  who  are  of  this  opinion ;  but  maintain
that,  long  before  the  reign  of  Tarquinius,  twelve  axes  were


neque  triumph  antibus  ampliorem  eo  or -
natu  eJJ'e.  In  the  paftage  of  our  author,
now  before  us,  we  find  he  has  rendered
tunicam  palmatam ,  by  yjhma,  tsoqQvqw
;  and  togam piftam,  by  7rgg<-
QoKcuqv  aro£<pv£tfv  sro/it/Aov.  This  deferves
the  more  to  be  taken  notice  of,  becaufe
Portus,  and  Sylburgius  ought  to  have
rendered  the  Greek  words  by  fuch,  as
were  in  Latin,  peculiarly,  adapted  to
the  defeription  of  thefe  triumphal
robes.  As  for  the  French  tranflators,
they  have  followed  their  refpe&ive
guides  without  any  fufpicion  of  their
inaccuracy.

64-  T nQtmv,  There  is  a  note  in


Hudfon  upon  this  occafion,  in  which
it  is  wondered  much  that  our  author
did  not  know  the  origin  of  this  word  ;
lince  Suidas  fays,  from  Artemidorus,
that  this  kind  of  robe  was  fo  called
from  Temenus,  an  Arcadian,  who
was  the  inventor  of  it.  This  note
M.  *  *  *  has  tranflated,  and  wonders
juft  as  much  as  the  author  of  that  note.
I  muft,  alfo,  wonder  in  my  turn,  that
either  Artemidorus,  whofe  ovet^oKcflmoi,
the  interpretation  of  dreams ,  k  Voffius,
defervedly,  calls  opus  vaniffimum ,  or  his
tranferiber,  Suidas,  fhould  be  thought
to  have  known  any  thing  Dionyfius  of
Halicarnaftus  was  ignorant  of.


k  De  Hift.  Graec.  B„  i.  c.  22.


carried


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNA  S  S E N  S I S.  121

carried  before  the  kings  of  Rome ;  and  that  Romulus  in-
flituted  this  cuftom  as  foon  as  he  entered  upon  the  govern¬
ment.  But  nothing  forbids  us  to  believe  that  the  Tyrrhe¬
nians  were  the  authors  of  this  invention ;  that  Romulus
borrowed  the  ufe  of  it  from  them;  and  that  the  twelve
axes,  alfo,  were  brought  to  Tarquinius,  together  with  the
other  royal  ornaments,  as  the  Romans,  even  at  this  day,  give
fcepters,  and  diadems  to  kings,  in  confirmation  of  their
power  :  Since,  without  receiving  thofe  ornaments  from  the
Romans,  thefe  kings  make  ufe  of  them.

LXIII.  However,  Tarquinius  did  not  ufe  thefe  honors,
as  foon  as  he  received  them,  as  the  greateft  part  of  the
Roman  authors  write ;  but,  referring  the  matter  to  the  fe-
nate,  and  people,  he  left  them  to  determine  whether  he
fhould  accept  them,  or  not ;  and  they  being  unanimous
for  it,  he  then  accepted  them ;  and,  from  that  time,  till
he  died,  always  wore  a  crown  of  gold,  and  a  purple  robe
imbroidered,  and  fate  on  a  throne  of  ivory,  with  a  fcepter
of  the  fame  in  his  hand,  and  twelve  li&ors,  bearing  the
axes,  and  rods,  attended  on  him,  when  he  fate  in  judge¬
ment  ;  and  preceded  him,  when  he  went  abroad.  Thefe
ornaments  were  retained  by  all  his  fucceflors ;  and,  after
the  expulfion  of  the  kings,  by  the  annual  confuls,  except
the  crown,  and  the  imbroidered  robe  ;  thefe  alone  were
taken  from  them,  as  feeming  offenfive,  and  invidious :
But,  when  they  return  with  victory  from  a  war,  and  are
honoured  with  a  triumph  by  the  fenate,  they  ftill  wear  both
Vql.  II.  a  crown


12  Z


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF


Book  III.


a  65  crown  of  gold,  and  a  purple  robe  imbroidered.
This,  therefore,  was  the  event  of  the  war  between  Tar-
quinius,  and  the  Tyrrhenians,  after  it  had  lafted  nine
years.

LXIV.  The  nation  of  the  Sabines  being,  now,  the
only  one  left  able  to  contend  with  the  Romans  for  the
fovereignty,  and  being  well  fupplied  with  warlike  men,
and  inhabiting  a  large,  and  fertil  country  in  the  neighbour¬
hood  of  Rome,  Tarquinius  was,  extremely,  deftrous  of  fub-
duing  thefe  alfo,  and  declared  war  againft  them  :  His  caufe
of  complaint  againft  their  cities  was,  that  they  had  refufed
to  deliver  up  thofe,  who  had  promifed  the  Tyrrhenians,  if
they  entered  their  country  with  an  army,  to  conciliate  to
them  the  minds  of  their  countrymen,  and  alienate  them
from  the  Romans.  The  Sabines,  not  only,  chearfully  ac¬
cepted  the  declaration  of  war,  being  unwilling  to  be  deprived
of  the  moft  powerful  of  their  citizens ;  but,  before  the
Roman  army  entered  their  territories,  they  themfelves  in¬
vaded  Thofe  of  the  Romans.  As  foon  as  Tarquinius  had
intelligence  that  the  Sabines  had  pafled  the  river  Anio,  and


XgvroQofva.  This  muft  not  be
underftood  of  the  crown,  which  the  ge¬
nerals,  who  triumphed,  a&ually  wore  j
but  of  That,  which  a  flave  held  over
their  heads,  during  their  triumphal
proreflion.  The  former  was  of  laurel-,
that  is,  of  a  particular  kind  of  laurel,
called  by  m  Pliny,  ft er ills.  1  have  feen
this  plant  in  the  phyfic  garden  at
Chelfea.  Its  leaves  are  much  fmaller
than  Thofe  of  the  common  laurel,  and


curled  at  their  edges  :  Sterilem  vero
earurn  ( quod  maxime  miror )  triumphalem ,
eaque  dicunt  triumph  antes  uti.  The
crown,  carried  by  the  flave,  was  of
gold,  very  large,  and  fet  with  precious
{tones.  This  is  the  triumphal  crown
mentioned  by  n  Juvenal  :

Magnaeque  coronae

Tantum  orbcm,  quanto  cervix  non  fujjicit  ulla  :

Shiippe  tenet  fudans  hanc  pub/icus,  et  Jibi  conful

Ne  placeat,  curru  fervus  port  at  ur  eodem.

n  Sat.  10.  f.  39.


m  B.  xv.  c.  30.


that


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  S'ENSIS.  123

that  all  the  country  round  their  camp  was  laid  wafte,  he
took  with  him  fuch  of  the  Roman  youth  as  were  beft  pre¬
pared  for  a  fudden  march,  and  led  them,  with  all  poflible
expedition,  againft  that  part  of  the  enemy,  that  was  dif-
perfed  in  plundering ;  and,  having  killed  many  of  them,
and  taken  away  all  their  booty,  he  pitched  his  camp  near  to
theirs ;  and,  having  remained  quiet  there  for  a  few  days,
till  both  the  remainder  of  his  army  from  Rome,  and  the
auxiliary  forces  of  his  allies  had  joined  him,  he  came  down
into  the  plain  with  a  delign  to  ingage  the  enemy.

LXV.  The  Sabines,  feeing  the  Romans  advancing  to  the
combat  with  alacrity,  they,  alfo,  led  out  their  army,  being
not  inferior  to  the  enemy  either  in  numbers,  or  courage ;
and,  ingaging,  fought  with  all  poffible  refolution,  while  they
had  no  other  enemy  to  encounter  but  thofe,  who  charged
them  in  front :  But,  feeing  another  army  of  the  enemy  ad¬
vancing  in  good  order  to  attack  them  in  the  rear,  they  de-
ferted  their  ftandards,  and  fled:  The  troops,  that  appeared
behind  the  Sabines,  were  chofen  men  of  the  Romans,  both
horfe,  and  foot,  whomTarquiniushad  placed  in  an  ambufeade,
the  night  before,  in  proper  places :  The  unexpected  appear¬
ance  of  thefe  troops  ftruck  fuch  a  terror  into  the  Sabines,  that
they  acted,  no  longer,  like  brave  men ;  but,  looking  upon
themfelves  as  circumvented  by  this  flrategem  of  the  enemy,
and  fallen  under  an  irreflftible  calamity,  they  endeavoured
to  fave  themfelves  fome  one  way,  and  feme  another  ;  and,
being  purfued  by  the  Roman  horfe,  and  farrounded  on  all
Tides,  the  greateft  daughter  of  them  was  in  this  rout :  So

Q_2  ,  that,


124  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

that,  very  few  efcaped  into  the  neighbouring  cities,  and
the  greateft  part  of  thofe,  who  were  not  flain  in  the  battle,
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans :  For  the  forces,  that
were  left  in  the  camp,  had  not  the  courage  either  to  repulfe
the  affault  of  the  enemy,  or  to  hazard  an  ingagement ;
but,  aftoniftied  at  the  unexpected  misfortune,  furrendered
both  themfelves,  and  their  camp,  without  ftriking  a  blow.
The  Sabine  cities,  looking  upon  themfelves  as  circumvented
by  a  ftrategem,  and  that  the  enemy  had  gained  the  victory
rather  by  artifice,  than  valor,  were  preparing  to  fend,  again,
a  more  numerous  army  into  the  field,  and  a  more  expe¬
rienced  commander :  But  Tarquinius,  being  informed  of
their  defign,  prevented  them ;  and,  before  their  forces  were
all  aflembled,  he  got  his  army  together,  and  pafted  the  river
Anio.  The  Sabine  general,  upon  intelligence  of  this,  led
out  his  new  raifed  army  with  all  expedition,  and  incamped
near  the  Romans  upon  a  high,  and  craggy  hill :  However,
he  judged  it  not  advifeable  to  ingage  in  a  battle,  till  he  was
joined  by  the  reft  of  the  Sabine  forces ;  but,  by  fending,
continually,  fome  of  the  horfe  againft  the  enemy’s  foragers,
and  placing  ambufcades  in.  the  woods,  and  vallies,  he
hindered  the  Romans  from  making  excurfions  into  the
country.

LXVI.  While  the  Sabine  general  was  conducing  the  war
in  this  manner,  there  happened  many  ikirmifhes  between
fmall  parties  both  of  the  light-armed  foot,  and  the  horfe,
but  no  general  adtion.  The  time  being  thus  protradled,
Tarquinius  grew  uneafy  at  the  delay,  and  refolved  to  lead

his


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSE N S  I  S.  125

his  army  againft  their  camp,  and  attacked  it  feveral  times :
But,  finding  it  not  eafy  to  be  taken  by  force,  by  reafon  of
its  ftrength,  he  determined  to  reduce  thofe  within  by  fa¬
mine;  and,  by  building  forts  upon  all  the  roads,  that  led
to  the  camp,  and,  hindering  them  from  going  out  to  get
wood  for  themfelves,  and  forage  for  their  horfes,  and  from
receiving  many  other  neceflaries  out  of  the  country,  he
reduced  them  to  fo  great  a  want  of  all  things,  that  they
were  obliged  to  take  the  opportunity  of  a  tempeftuous  night,
attended  with  rain,  and  ftorms  of  wind,  and  to  quit  their
camp  in  a  fhameful  manner,  leaving  behind  them  their
beafts  of  burden*  their  tents,  their  wounded,  and  all  their
warlike  ftores.  The  next  day,  the  Romans,  being  informed
of  their  flight,  took  pofleflion  of  their  camp  without  op¬
position  ;  and,  having  made  themfelves  inafters  of  their
tents,  their  beafts  of  burden,  and  their  effects,  returned  to
Rome  with  the  prifoners.  This  war  continued  five  years
without  intermiflion,  in  which,  they  both,  continually,
plundered  one  another’s  country,  and  were  ingaged  in
many  a&ions,  fome  of  greater,  and  fome  of  leffer  confe-
quence,  the  advantage  of  which  was,  fometimes,  even  on
the  fide  of  the  Sabines ;  but,  much  oftener,  on  That  of
the  Romans :  However,  the  following  battle  put  a  final  end
to  the  war.  For  the  Sabines  did  not,  as  before,  take  the  field
fuccefllvely,  but  all,  who  were  of  an  age  to  bear  arms,
appeared  together:  And  all  the  Romans,  being  joined
by  the  auxiliary  troops  of  the  Latines,  the  Tyrrhenians,  and
the  reft  of  their  allies,  advanced  to  meet  them.  The  general

of


126  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  Ill.

of  the  Sabines,  dividing  his  forces,  formed  two  camps:
And  the  king  of  the  Romans  divided  his  into  three  bodies,
which  he  difpofed  in  three  different  camps,  nor  far  afunder  ;
and  took  upon  himfelf  the  command  of  the  Roman  troops ;
to  his  nephew,  Aruns,  he  gave  That  of  the  Tyrrhenian
auxiliaries ;  and  appointed  a  man  of  courage,  and  confum-
mate  prudence,  but  a  foreigner,  and  an  exile,  to  command
the  Latines,  and  the  reft  of  the  allies ;  this  perfon’s  furname
was  Servius,  and  his  family  name  Tullius;  after  the  death
of  Lucius  Tarquinius  without  iffue  male,  the  Romans,  ad¬
miring  the  man  both  for  his  military,  and  political  accom-
plifhments,  chofe  him  for  their  king :  I  fhall  give  an  ac¬
count  of  the  birth  of  this  perfon,  of  his  education,  and  his
fortunes,  and  of  the  manifeftation  made  by  the  gods  of  his
future  greatnefs,  when  I  come  to  that  part  of  the  hiftory.

LXVII.  Both  armies,  therefore,  having  made  the  necef-
fary  preparations  for  the  combat,  ingaged.  The  Romans
were  pofted  on  the  left  wing,  the  Tyrrhenians  on  the  right,
and  the  Latines  in  the  center :  And  a  fharp  battle  infuing,
which  lafted  the  whole  day,  the  Romans  were,  by  far,  fu-
perior ;  and,  having  killed  many  of  the  enemy,  who  behaved
themfelves  with  great  bravery,  and  taken  many  more  of  them
prifoners  in  the  rout,  they  pofieffed  themfelves  of  both  their
camps,  where  they  found  great  riches :  And,  now,  being
mafters  of  all  the  open  country  without  fear  of  an  enemy,
they  laid  it  wafte  with  fire,  and  fword,  and  every  kind  of
feverity  ;  and,  decamping  at  the  end  of  the  fummer,  they
returned  home.  Tarquinius  triumphed  for  the  third  time


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SI  $.  127

during  his  reign,  upon  the  occafion  of  this  victory.  The
following  year,  when  the  king  was  preparing  to  lead  his  army,
once  more,  againft  the  cities  of  the  Sabines,  purfuant  to  the
refolution  he  had  taken  to  make  himfelf  mafter  of  them  by
lieges,  there  was  not  one  of  thofe  cities,  that,  from  this  time,
took  any  brave,  or  vigorous  refolution ;  but  all,  unani-
mouily,  determined,  before  the  danger  of  Slavery,  and  de¬
molition  approached,  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  :  And  the
mofl:  considerable  among  the  Sabines  came  from  every  city
to  T  arquinius,  who  had,  already,  taken  the  field  with  all
his  forces,  to  deliver  up  their  cities  to  him,  and  to  defire
him  to  make  peace  with  them  upon  reafonable  terms.
Tarquinius,  willingly,  accepted  this  Subjection  of  the  nation
unattended  with  the  hazard  of  a  battle,  and  concluded  a
league  of  peace,  and  friendship  with  them  upon  the  fame
conditions,  which  he  had,  before,  granted  to  the  Tyrrhenians
upon  their  fubmiffion,  and  reftored  their  captives  to  them
without  ranfom.

LX VIII.  Thefe  are  the  military  actions  of  Tarquinius,
which  are  recorded  in  hiftory  :  Thofe  that  relate  to  peace,
and  to  the  civil  administration,  are  as  follows ;  neither  do  I
defign  to  pafs  thefe  over  in  filence.  As  foon  as  he  had
entered  upon  the  government,  being  defirous  to  gain  the
affections  of  the  people  after  the  example  of  his  predecefiors,
he  ingaged  them  by  this  obligation  :  He  chofe  60  a  hundred

66*  E 7riXt%cce  avfyae  hotlov.  Thefe  gentium  \  probably,  becaufe  they  were,
hundred  fenators,  added  by  Tarqui-  originally,  plebeians,  though  he  does
nius,  are  called  by  n  Livy  minorum  not  fay  fo :  centum  in  patres  legit ,  qui

n  B.  i.  c.  35.


perfects


528  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

perfons  out  of  the  whole  body  of  the  plebeians,  who  were
acknowledged  by  all  to  be  pofleffed  of  fome  military,  or
political  accompliftiment ;  and,  having  made  them  patri¬
cians,  he  raifed  them  to  the  dignity  of  fenators ;  and,  upon
this  occafion,  the  Roman  fenate,  which,  till  then,  had  con-
lifted  only  of  two  hundred  perfons,  was*  firft,  encreafed  to
three  hundred.  After  that,  he  added  to  the  four  holy
virgins,  who  have  the  cuftody  of  the  perpetual  lire,  two
others:  For  the  facrifices,  performed  by  the  city,  at  which
thefe  priefteffes  of  Vefta  were  obliged  to  be  prefen t,  being,
now,  encreafed,  four  were  not  thought  fufficient :  The
example  of  Tarquinius  was  followed  by  the  reft  of  the
kings,  and,  to  this  day,  lix  priefteftes  of  Vefta  are,  always,
appointed.  He  feems,  alfo,  to  have  firft  inftituted  the
punifhments,  which  are  inflidted  by  the  pontifs  on  thofe
virgins,  who  do  not  preferve  their  virginity,  being  induced
to  it  either  by  his  own  judgement,  or,  as  fome  think,  by  a
dream, which  the  interpreters  of  the  holy  things  fay  was  found,
after  his  death,  among  the  Sibylline  oracles :  For,  in  his
reign,  a  prieftefs,  by  name,  Pinaria,  the  daughter  of  Publius,
was  difcovered  to  have  approached  the  altars  with  impurity.

deinde  minorum  gentium  funt  appellati.  been  put  to  death  by  Tarquinius  Su-
However,  it  is  certain  that  they  had,  perbus :  Traditumque  inde  fertur ,  ut
in  all  refpe&s,  the  lame  prerogatives  in  fenatumvocarentur ,  qui  patres,  quique
with  the  other  two  hundred  fenators  :  confcripti  effent :  confcriptos  videlicet  in
As  had,  alfo,  thofe  fenators,  whom  novum  fenatum  appellabant  leftos.  But,
0  Livy,  in  another  place,  calls,  con-  in  procefs  of  time,  all,  who  fpoke  in
fcriptos ,  who  were  chofen  into  the  fe-  the  fenate,  addrelfed  themfelves  to  the
nate,  after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,  fathers,  under  the  denomination  of
to  fupply  the  places  of  thofe,  who  had  Patres  confcripti.

•  B.ii.  c.  i.

I  gave


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  ttt)
I  gave  an  account,  in  the  preceding  book,  of  the  manner
of  punifliing  thofe  virgins,  who  are  debauched.  Tarqui-
nius,  alio,  adorned  the  forum,  where  juftice  is  admini-
ftered,  the  aflemblies  of  the  people  held,  and  other  civil
matters  tranfadted,  by  furrounding  it  with  fhops,  and  por¬
ticos.  Befides  this,  he  was  the  firft,  who  built  the  walls  of
the  city  (of  which  the  ftru&ure  was  extemporary  and  mean)
with  ftones,  regularly,  fquared,  each  being  a  tun  weight.  He,
alfo,  began  the  linking  of  the  67  fewers :  Thefe  are  trenches,
through  which  the  water,  colleded  from  every  ftreet,  is
conveyed  into  the  Tiber;  a  wonderful  work,  exceeding  all
defcription  :  And,  in  my  opinion,  the  three  molt  magnificent
works  in  Rome,  by  which  the  greatnefs  of  the  Roman  em¬
pire,  chiefly,  appears,  are  the  aqueduds,  the  paved  ways,
and  the  fewers  :  I  fay  this,  not  only,  with  regard  to  their
tifefulnefs,  concerning  which  I  fliall  Ipeak  in  its  proper  place  ;
but,  alfo,  with  refped  to  the  greatnefs  of  the  expence,
of  which  we  may  judge  by  one  of  thole  works,  rely-


67*  Tag  vnovipw.  Thefe  common-
chores,  called  by  the  Romans,  Cloacae ,
are  fpoken  of  by  many  authors  as  a
ftupendous  work.  p  Pliny  calls  it
Qperum  omnium  ditlu  maximum ,  fuffojfis
montibus ,  atque  urbe  penfili ,  fubterque
navigald.  He,  then,  fhews  the  firm-
nefs  of  thefe  arches^,  which  neither  the
conflict  between  the  feven  rivers,  that
were  derived  into  them,  and  the  Tiber,
when  it  overflowed,  nor  the  fall  of
houfesby  acc'dent,  and  fire,  nor  earth¬
quakes  could  difiolve  :  And  concludes
that  they  had  remained  impregnable

p  B.  xxxvi.  c.  15.


for  eight  hundred  years,  that  is,  From
the  time  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  to  his
own.  He  fays,  a  little  after,  that  thefe
Cloacae  were  fo  fpacious,  that  a  large
load  of  hay  might  pafs  under  them  ;
Amplitudinem  cavis  earn  fuijfe  proditur>
ut  vehem  foeni  large  onujlam  tranfmit -
teret.  This  q  Strabo-,  alio,  fays,  but
the  paflfage  is  very  much  corrupted.
1  find,  by  a  note  of  Harduin  upon  this
paflfage  of  Pliny,  that  Marlianus,  who
meafured  thefe  arches,  fays  they  are
fixteen  feet  in  width.

sB.  v.  p.  360.

R


VOL.  II.


mg


Book  TIL


730  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF
ing  on  the  authority  of  Caius  Acilius,  who  fays  that  the
fewers,  being  once  negledted,  and  rendered  impaffable  for
the  water,  the  cenfors  put  out  the  cleaning,  and  repairing
of  them  at  a  cs  thoufand  talents.

LXIX.  Tarquinius,  alfo,  built  the  69  greateft  circus,  which
lies  between  the  Aventine,  and  Palatine  hills ;  and  was  the


6g-  XtAim  Tx\0iv1uiv.  According  to
Arbuthnot’s  tables,  which  are  thought
very  corredf,  the  common  Attic  ta¬
lent,  containing  60  minae,  amounted
to  193/.  15J.  fterling;  confequently,
a  thoufand  talents  will  make  193,750
pounds  of  our  money.  I  know  very
well  that  fome  talents  contained  70,
80,  and,  even,  100  minae:  But,  in
all  probability,  our  author  underftood
the  common  Attic  talent.  Le  Jay,
in  tranflating  this  paffage,  has  thought
fit  to  employ  the  cenfors  in  cleaning
thefe  common- fhores ;  his  words  are
thefe  ;  les  cenfeurs  qui  enlreprirent  de  les
reparer  et  de  les  retablir  re$eurent  mille
talents  pour  les  frais  quil  leur  falloit
faire.  It  is  not  poffible  he  could  have
miftaken  the  fenfe  of  the  word  ui&u<rxi>
if  he  had  confulted  the  Greek  text;
but,  inftead  of  that,  he  has,  according
to  his  cuftom,  tranQated  the  Latin  of
Portus,  which  he  has,  unfortunately,
miftaken.  Portus  fays,  a  cenforibus
purgandas  et  reficiendas  mille  talentis
locatas  fuijfe  :  Now,  le  Jay  has  rendered
this,  as  if  the  fignification  of  the  words
was,  a  cenforibus  purgandas ,  inftead  of,
a  cenforibus  locatas.  The  author,  who
is  here  quoted  by  Dionyfius,  is  called
C.  Aquilius,  by  the  Latin  tranflators,

t  Life  of  Romulus.  s  De  Oflic.  B.  Hi.  c.  32.
w  Life  of  Julius  Caefar,  c.  39.  XB.  xxxvi.  c


who  are  followed  by  the  French  :  The
editions  call  him  Acylius,  and  the  Va¬
tican  manufcript  Acillius.  It  is  odd
that,  in  all  this  variety,  we  fhould  not
difcover  the  true  name  of  this  hifto-
rian,  who  is  quoted  by  r  Plutarch,  and
called  Trios  AmAtos *,  and  by  5  Cicero,
Acilius ,  qui  Graece  feripfit  bijloriam :
This  hiftory,  by  what  he  quotes  from
it,  muft  have  related  to  the  war  of
Annibak  Thefe  annals,  as1  Livy  calls
them,  were  tranfiated  out  of  Greek
into  Latin  by  Claudius  :  Autilor  eft
Claudius ,  qui  annales  Acilianos  ex  Graeco
in  Latinum  fermonem  vertit.  v  Voftius
fays  that  the  name  of  this  hiftorian
was  Acilius  Glabrio  ;  that  he  was  a
provincial  quaeftor  in  the  year  of  Rome
551,  and  tribune  of  the  people  in  556.

Tov  fXiyisov  ruv  l7i7roc^op,a)v.  This
is  a  tranflation  of  the  Circus  maximus
at  Rome.  I  cannot  help  thinking  that
our  author  deferibes  this  circus  as  it
was  in  his  time,  becaufe  he  fpeaks  of
the  euripus,  which,  we  are  aflured
by  w  Suetonius,  was  added  by  Julius
Caefar ;  fpatio  circi  ab  utrdque  parte
produblo ,  et  in  gyrum  euripo  addito.
x  Pliny  fays  that  the  circus  maximus
could  contain  260,000  men,  adfedem
cclx  millium.  But,  as  this  number  is

1 B.  xxv.  c.  39.  v De.  Hill.  Graec.  B.  i.  c.  17.

firft.


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  131

firfl,  who  ere&ed  covered  feats  round  it :  For,  till  then,  the
fpedlators  ftood  on  fcaffolds,  fupported  by  poles  :  And,
dividing  the  places  among  the  thirty  curiae,  he  affigncd  to
each  curia  a  particular  part ;  fo  that,  every  fpe&ator  was
feated  in  the  place,  that  belonged  to  him.  This  work,  alfo,
became,  in  time,  one  of  the  moft  beautiful,  and  moil  ad¬
mirable  ftru&ures  in  Rome  :  The  circus  is  three  ftadia,  and
a  half  in  length,  and  70  four  hundred  feet  in  breadth ;  round
the  two  greater  (ides,  and  one  of  the  leffer,  runs  a  canal,  ten
feet  deep,  and  as  many  broad,  to  receive  the  water ;  behind
the  canal,  porticos  are  erected  three  (lories  high,  of  which
the  lowed  has  done  feats,  as  in  the  theatres,  raifed  a  little
above  the  level  of  the  ground;  and  the  two  upper  porticos,


expreffed  by  letters,  there  may  have
been  fome  miftake  in  the  tranfcribers  •,
which  I  am  the  more  inclined  to  be¬
lieve,  becaufe  I  find,  by  a  note  of
Harduin  upon  this  paffage,  that  it  is
different,  in  different  manufcripts.
y  Juvenal,  indeed,  fays  it  held  all
Rome,  but  That,  no  doubt,  is  a  poe¬
tical  exaggeration  ;

ac  mihi  pace

Immenfae  nimiaeque  licet  ft  dicer e  plebis  ;

Totam  bvdie  Rom  am  circus  capit.

I  need  not  acquaint  the  reader  that
gv£i7rof,  a  word  taken  from  the  [freight
between  Euboea,  now  Negropont,  and
the  continent,  which  was  fo  called,
fignifies  a  canal ,  both  in  Greek,  and
Latin.

7°  Ttr^cuv  kta tfywv.  I  can,  by  no
means,  approve  of  quatre  arpents  in  the
French  tranfiators.  It  is  very  well


known  that  their  arpent ,  like  our  acre ,
is  a  fquare  meafure  •,  whereas,  wKtQgov
is  a  meafure  of  length,  containing  the
fixth  part  of  a  ftadium,  or  100  Greek
feet :  to  tx  <-<x.Six  ixJov  Suidas.

I  am  fenfible  that  the  arpent  is  differ¬
ent,  in  different  parts  of  France  :  But,
let  us  take  a  Paris  arpent ,  for  example,
and  fee  how  their  four  arpents  will
agree  with  the  breadth  of  the  circus,
as  defcribed  by  our  author.  An  ar¬
pent  of  Paris  contains  a  fquare  of  2  200
French  feet-,  four  times  this  will  make
8800  feet:  Now,  if  this  number  is
defigned  for  a  meafure  of  leng-.h,  it  is
plain  that  it  is,  vaftly,  too  much  for
the  breadth  of  the  circus  ;  and,  if  we
are  to  take  the  fquare  root  of  8800
feet,  it  will  be  much  too  little:  For
the  neareft  fquare  root,  in  round  num¬
bers,  is  9  4.  j  and  our  author  fays  the
breadth  of  the  circus  was  400  feet.


>  Sat.  xi.  f.  193.


R  2


wooden


132  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

wooden  feats :  The  two  larger  porticos  are  connected  into
one,  and  joined  together  by  means  of:  the  leffer,  and,  meet¬
ing,  form  a  femicircular  figure ;  fo  that  71  all  three  conftitute
one  amphitheatrical  portico  of  eight  ftadia,  capable  of  re¬
ceiving  one  hundred  and  fifty  thoufand  perfons :  The  other


lefier  fide  is  left  uncovered,
ftarting-places  for  the  horfes,

71*  [/.lav  (k  t uv  Tgiuv  yfVi&Cll  $QXV
ctptyiQtulfiov  ok!o)  s -uStuv.  I  know  no¬
thing,  that  deferved  more  to  be  ex¬
plained  by  the  commentators,  than
thispafiage:  Yet  all  are  filent.  Our
author  fays  that  the  amphitheatre,
formed  by  the  two  larger,  and  one  of
the  leifer  porticos,  contained  eight
ftadia,  which  it,  certainly,  does.  Each
of  the  larger  porticos  contained,  as  we
have  feen,  three  ftadia  and  a  half  in
length :  Both,  therefore,  contained
feven  ftadia.  The  breadth  of  the  cir¬
cus,  our  author  has  told  us,  was  four
hundred  feet,  which  muft  beconfidered
as  the  chord  of  the  femicircle  he  fpeaks
of :  Conlequently,  this  femicircle  will
contain,  in  its  periphery,  600  feet,
which  is  juft  the  mealureof  a  ftadium,
and  completes  the  eight  ftadia,  of
which  the  amphitheatre  confifted.  I
know,  very  well,  that  the  periphery
of  a  circle  is  to  its  diameter,  fome-
thing  more  than  three  to  one  ;  and,
confequently,  that  the  periphery  of
this  femicircle  is  to  its  chord  half  that
more  than  600  to  400  :  But,  I,  alfo,
know  that  hiftorians  do  not  confider
fractions  in  fo  minute  a  manner,  as
mathematicians.

72,  A ia  y.iag  0V7 rAiiyog.  TcirKtiy^  or
vVttAjjI  fignifies,  no  doubt,  repagulum ,


and  contains  feveral  arched
which  are  all  opened  72  at  one

as  the  Latin  tranflators  have  render¬
ed  it.  This  word,  alfo,  fignifies  the
ftarting-places,  which  our  author  has
before  mentioned,  and  called  them
l7T7ra,(piffet(,  in  Latin,  carceres.  So
that,  I  fhould  think  he  would  not
have  exprefled  the  fame  thing  again
by  the  word  iWAvjf  :  This,  the refore,
muft  either  fignify  repagulum ,  the  bar ,
that  was  opened  when  the  horfes  were
to  ftart,  or  the  fignal  for  them  to  ft  art.
Now,  I  believe,  every  chariot,  that
was  to  run,  had  one  of  thele  carceres
allotted  to  it,  which  was  fecured  by  a
bar  :  But  I  cannot  think  that  one  bar
ferved  for  all  of  them;  which  muft
have  been  the  cafe,  if  uWaj?|,  in  this
place,  ftgnifies  a  bar  ;  becaufe  our  au¬
thor  fays  they  were  all  opened  Sue  fxixg
vc-TrAYiyos,  by  one  bar.  I  am,  therefore,
of  opinion,  that  thefe  words  here  fig¬
nify,  at  one  fignal.  There  is  an  ex-
prefiion  in  Ariftophanes,  not  unlike  to
this,  which,  in  my  opinion,  will  ferve
to  explain  it.  Every  one,  who  has
read  his  comedy  called  Lyfiftrate,  muft
remember  the  unnatural  confpiracy
entered  into  by  the  women,  not  to
admit  their  hufbands  to  their  beds,
till  they  fhould  make  peace  :  This
confpiracy  of  the  women,  and,  what
is  ftill  more  extraordinary,  their  ad-

fignal:


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  133

fignal :  On  the  outfide  of  the  circus,  runs  another  portico
of  one  fiory,  which  has  fhops  in  it,  and  habitations  over  them :
In  this  portico,  are  entrances,  and  afcents  for  the  fpe&ators
at  every  fhop,  contrived  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  fo  many
thoufand  perfons  may  go  in,  and  out,  without  any  molefta-
tion.

LXX.  This  king,  alfo,  deligned  to  build  a  temple  to
Jupiter,  Juno,  and  Minerva,  in  performance  of  the  vow  he
had  made  to  the  gods  in  the  laft  battle  againft  the  Sabines :
Having,  therefore,  furrounded  the  hill,  on  which  he  propofed
to  place  the  temple,  with  73  high  piles  in  many  places  (for,
as  it  was  neither  eafy  of  accefs,  nor  even,  but  craggy,  and
ending  in  a  point,  there  was  great  difficulty  in  rendering  it
fit  for  the  purpofe)  he  filled  up  the  interval  between  the
piles,  and  the  top  of  the  hill  with  earth  ;  and,  by  levelling
it,  made  it  very  fit  to  receive  the  temple.  But  he  was
prevented  by  death  from  laying  the  foundations  of  it :  For


hering  to  it,  caufed  a  great  uproar  at
Sparta,  of  which  the  herald,  fent  from
thence  to  Athens  to  treat  of  a  peace,
thus  explains  the  caufe  z  *,

E7r«7c4  eT  at  t ca  Kola,  rav  S7rugictv
Tuvana?,  «7ro  MIAS  ITnAATlAOS
A/TJjAaov  rw;  avbgccs  citto  r cov  vo’ccotuv.

'They  had  all  driven  their  hujbands  from
their  embraces  with  one  crack  of  a
whip.

73*  AmA^jOtwairiv  vilyjActc.  The  two
French  tranflators  are  divided  in  ren¬
dering  thefe  words  :  .Le  Jay  has  faid,
de  graft cs  -pou.tr es  *,  and  M.  *  *  *,  de
battles  murailles.  The  reafon  of  which


I  prefume,  to  have  been,  becaufe  Por-
tus  had  fai d,fudibus  •,  and  Sylburgius,
celfts  fubftrublionibus.  However,  I
make  no  doubt  but  here

ought  to  be  rendered,  piles ■  j  becaufe
we  find  in  a  Livy  that  a  wall  of  free
ftone  was,  afterwards,  erefted  in  this
place,  which  would  have  been  unne-
ceflary,  if  Tarquinius  Prifcus  had  built
a  wall  there  before  :  Eodem  anno  ne
privatis  t  ant  urn.  cperibus  crefceret  urbs ,
capitolium  quoque  faxo  quadrato  fub-
ftrublum  eft ;  opus  vet  in  hac  magnifi -
cent  id  urbis  confpiciendum.  This  was  in
the  366th  year  of  Rome.


y.  998.  aB.  vi.  c.  4.


he


134  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

he  lived  but  four  years  after  the  end  of  the  laft  War  :
However,  many  years  after,  Tarquinius,  the  third  king
after  him,  who  was  dethroned,  laid  the  foundations  of  this
ftrudture,  and  built  a  great  part  of  it ;  but  even  he  did  not
complete  the  work,  which  was  fininiflied  under  thofe  an¬
nual  magiftrates,  who  were  confuls  the  third  year  after  his
expul  fton.  It  is  proper  to  relate,  alfo,  the  incidents,  that  pre¬
ceded  the'building  of  it,  which  all  the  writers  of  the  Roman
hiftory  have  given  an  account  of.  When  Tarquinius  was
preparing  to  build  the  temple,  he  called  the  augurs  together,
and  ordered  them,  firft,  to  confult  the  gods  concerning  the
place  itfelf,  which  was  the  moft  proper  of  all  the  city  to  be
confecrated,  and  the  moft  acceptable  to  the  gods ;  and,  upon
their  naming  the  hill,  that  commands  the  forum,  which
was,  then,  called  the  Tarpeian,  and,  now,  the  Capitoline
hill,  he  ordered  them,  again,  to  declare,  after  they  had  con-
fulted  the  gods,  in  which  part  of  the  hill  the  foundations
ought  to  be  laid  ;  in  this  there  was  no  fmall  difficulty  :  For
there  were  upon  the  hill  many  altars,  both  of  the  gods,  and
genius’s,  not  far  diftant  from  one  another,  which  were  to  be
removed  to  fome  other  place,  and  the  whole  area  cleared
for  the  temple,  that  was  propofed  to  be  built  there.  The
augurs  thought  proper  to  confult  the  gods,  to  whom  thefe
altars  were  confecrated,  concerning  every  one  of  them;  and,
if  they  gave  their  confent,  then  to  remove  them  :  The  reft
of  the  gods,  therefore,  and  genius’s  gave  them  leave  to  re¬
move  their  altars ;  but  Terminus,  and  Juventus,  although
the  augurs  befought  them  with  great  earneftnefs,  and  im¬
portunity,


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H A L I C  ARN  A S  SE N  S I  S.  135


portunity,  could  not  be  prevailed  on  to  leave  their  places ;
for  which  reafon,  their  altars  were  included  within  the
circuit  of  the  temple,  and  one  of  them,  now,  ftands  in
the  portico  of  the  chapel  of  Minerva,  and  the  other,  in  the
chapel  itfelf  near  to  the  ftatue  of  that  goddefs :  From  hence,
the  augurs  concluded  that  no  time  would  ever  remove  the
boundaries  of  the  Roman  empire,  or  impair  its  vigor  ;  and
both  have  proved  true  to  this  age,  which  is,  now,  the  twenty
fourth  generation.

LXXI.  The  moft  celebrated  of  the  augurs,  who  removed
the  altars,  and  marked  out  the  area  for  the  temple  of  Ju¬
piter,  and,  in  other  things,  foretold  the  will  of  the  gods  to
the  people  by  his  prophetic  art,  was  himfelf  called,  by  his
common,  and  firft  name,  nNavius,  and,  by  his  family  name,
Attius,  and  is  allowed  to  have  been  the  moft  favoured  by
the  gods  of  any  of  his  profeffion,  and  to  have  gained  the
greateft  reputation  by  it ;  fome  extraordinary  inftances  of
his  prophetic  knowledge  being  incredible  I  fhall  felecft  one,
which  appears  to  me  the  moft  wonderful ;  but  I  fhall,  firft,
give  an  account,  by  what  accident,  and,  by  what  opportu¬
nities  vouchfafed  to  him  by  the  gods,  he  arrived  to  fo  great
a  reputation,  that  he  furpafled  all  the  augurs  of  his  age,  and
rendered  them  difregarded..  His  75  father  was  a  poor  man,

7+*  To  y.oivcv  o\op*.  See  the  45th  an-  tion  to  prove  the  truth  of  it ;  but  only
notation  on  this  book.  to  fhew  that  it  was  a  tradition  fup-

7  5*  riev>K  otv'lco  t ytxio.  This  ported  by  the  authority  of  their  bell

ftory  is  related  by  b  Cicero,  with  very  writers,
little  variation :  Which  I  do  not  men-

b  De  Divinat  B,  i.  c.  i 7,

who


t36  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  0  P  Book  III.

who  cultivated  a  fmall  piece  of  land,  whom  Navius,  then  £
boy,  affifted  in  thofe  things  his  age  could  bear;  and,  among
other  employments,  ufed  to  drive  the  fwine  out  to  pafture,
and  tend  them  ;  and,  falling  afleep  one  day,  when  he  waked,
lie  miffed  fome  of  the  fwine  :  At  fuff,  he  wept,  apprehend¬
ing  his  father  would  beat  him ;  then,  going  to  a  chapel,
dedicated  to  the  heroes,  that  flood  in  the  field,  he  befought
them  to  aflift  him  in  finding  his  fwine,  with  a  promife  that,
if  they  were  found,  he  would  offer  up  to  them  the  largeft
bunch  of  grapes  in  the  place-.  Having  found  the  fwine
fhortly  after,  and,  being  defirous  to  accomplifil  his  vow,  he
he  was  at  a  lofs  how  to  difcover  the  largeft  bunch  of  grapes  l
In  this  anxiety,  he  prayed  to  the  gods  to  diredl  him  by  fome
omen,  to  what  he  fought  $  then,  by  the  infoiration  of  the
gods,  he  divided  the  vineyard  into  two  parts,  one  being  on
his  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  his  left  j  after  which,  he
obferved  the  omens  attending  each ;  and,  there  appearing
in  one  of  them  fuch  birds  as  he  defired,  he,  again,  divided
That  into  two  parts,  and  diftinguifhed  the  birds,  that  came
to  it,  in  the  fame  manner  :  Having  continued  this  method
of  dividing  the  places,  and,  coming  to  the  laft  vine,  that  was
pointed  out  by  the  birds,  he  found  a  monftrous  bunch  of
grapes,  and  was  difcovered  by  his  father,  as  he  was  carrying
it  to  the  chapel  of  the  heroes ;  and,  upon  his  admiring  the
fize  of  it,  and  inquiring  whence  he  had  it,  the  boy  informed
him  of  the  whole  matter  from  the  beginning :  His  father,
upon  this,  concluded,  as  the  truth  was,  that  his  fon  had
fome  innate  principles  of  the  prophetic  art  in  him  ;  and,

carrying


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  137

carrying  him  to  the  city,  put  him  to  fchool  :  After  he  was,
fufficiently,  inftruCted  in  common  learning,  he  placed  him
under  the  mod;  celebrated  mafter,  among  the  Tyrrhenians,
to  learn  the  augural  art :  Navius,  who  had  the  principles  of
the  prophetic  art  implanted  in  him  by  nature,  being,  now,
improved  by  his  education  among  the  Tyrrhenians,  far
furpafled,  as  I  faid,  all  the  other  augurs :  And  thofe  of  that
profeffion  in  the  city,  always,  called  him  to  affift  at  their
confultations  relating  to  the  public,  though  he  was  not  of
their  college,  induced  to  it  by  the  fuccefs  of  his  predictions,
and  foretold  nothing  without  his  approbation.

LXXII.  This  Navius,  whenTarquinius  was,  once,  defirous
to  create  three  new  76  tribes  out  of  the  horfe  he  had,  before,
levied,  and  to  give  his  own  name,  and  the  names  of  his  friends
to  thefe  additional  tribes,  alone,  violently,  oppofed  it,  and
would  not  allow  any  of  the  inftitutions  of  Romulus  to  be
altered  :  The  king,  refenting  this  oppolition,  and  being
difpleafed  with  Navius,  endeavoured  to  bring  his  profeffion
under  an  abfolute  difrepute;  and  to  fhew  him  to  be  a  vain
man,  whofe  predictions  were  void  of  all  truth :  In  this  view,
he  called  Navius  to  the  tribunal,  many  people  being  prefentin
the  forum ;  and,  having  acquainted  thofe  about  him  in  what
manner  he  expected  to  fhew  the  augur  to  be  a  falfe  prophet ;
when  he  appeared,  he  received  him  with  great  civility,  and
faid,  <c  This  is  the  time,  Navius,  for  you  to  fhew  the  cer-
tainty  of  your  prophetic  art ;  for  I  have  in  my  thoughts
<c  a  great  undertaking,  and  would  know  whether  it  be
76*  OvAck?.  See  the  fifteenth  annotation  on  the  fecond  book.

Vol.  II.  S


prac-


138  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III*

u  practicable,  or  not :  Go,  therefore,  confult  your  au (pices,  and
u  return  prefently ;  I  fhall  lit  here  in  expectation  of  you.”
The  augur  did  as  he  was  ordered ;  and,  returning  foon  after,
allured  the  king  that  the  aufpices  were  favourable,  and  that
the  thing  was  practicable.  Upon  this,  Tarquinius  fell  a
laughing ;  and,  taking  out  a  razor,  and  a  hone  from  under
his  robe,  faid  to  him,  “  You  are,  now,  convicted,  Navius,
“  of  impoling  on  us,  and  of  making  life  of  the  name  of  the
“  gods  to  fupport  an  apparent  fallhood,  lince  you  dare  affirm
“  that  even  impoffible  things  are  practicable  :  I  wanted  to
“  know,  by  the  rules  of  your  art,  whether,  if  I  flrike  the
“  hone  with  this  razor,  I  fhall  cut  it  afunder  ?  ”  This  railing
a  great  laughter  in  all,  who  flood  round  the  tribunal,  Na¬
vius,  unmoved  at  their  raillery,  and  noife,  “  Strike  the  hone,
C£  confidently,  fays  he,  as  you  propofed,  Tarquinius:  For  if
“  will  be  cut  afunder;  if  not,  lam  ready  to  fubmit  to  any
“  punifhment.”  The  king,  furprifed  at  the  confidence  of
the  augur,  ffruck  the  razor  againfl  the  hone  ;  and  the  edge
of  the  razor  making  its  way  quite  through  the  flone,  cut,
not  only,  the  hone  afunder,  but,  alfo,  part  of  his  hand,  that
held  it.  All  who  faw  this  wonderful,  and  incredible  faCt,
were  amazed,  and  gave  a  general  fhout:  While  Tarquinius,
afhamed  of  having  made  this  trial  of  his  art,  and  deliring
to  repair  the  indecency  of  his  reproaches,  in  the  firft  place
defifted  from  his  purpofe  relating  to  the  tribes  ;  and,  after
that,  in  order  to  recover  the  good  will  of  Navius  himfelf,
as  of  a  perfon  the  moll  acceptable  of  all  men  to  the  gods,
among  many  other  in  fiances  of  benevolence,  by  which  he


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  139

gained  his  afte&ion,  he  erected  a  brazen  ftatue  of  him  in  the
forum,  to  eternize  his  memory  with  pofterity.  This  ftatue  is,
ftill,  remaining,  and  ftands  before  the  fenate  houfe,  near  to
the  77  holy  fig-tree :  It  is  lefs  than  a  middle  fized  man,  and
has  a  veil  over  its  head :  At  a  fmall  diftance  from  this  ftatue,
both  the  hone,  and  the  razor  are  faid  to  be  7S  buried  under
a  certain  altar  ;  the  place  is  called 79  Qaeotg,  Puteus ,  by  the
Romans.  And  this  is  the  account  given  of  this  augur.


77-  <rvwc.  There  is  a  note  of
Portus  in  Hudfon,  upon  this  pafiage,
which  M.  *  *  *  has  tranfiated  :  In  this
note,  it  is  alledged  that  Lapus  has  faid
prope  facrum  tempi um  *,  which  gives
reafon  to  believe  that  he  read  itgx  o-yxx.
However,  the  common  reading,  in  my
opinion  is  the  true  one  •,  fince  we  find
by  Feftus  that  this- fig-tree  was  called
Ficus  Navi  a  \  and  that  Tarquinius
planted  it  in  memory  of  this  extraor¬
dinary  event.  They  called  this  fig-tree
holy ,  becaufe  the  liberty  of  the  Roman
people  was  thought  to  depend  upon  its
prosperity  ;  or,  to  ufe  the  words  of  the
lame  author,  divinis  etiam  refponfis  pro-
mittentibus ,  quamdiu  ea  viveret ,  liber-
tatem  populi  Romani  incolumem  manfu-
ram  :  ideoque  coli ,  et  fubferi  ex  illo  tem¬
pore  coeptam.

7s-  For  this  word,  which

is,  certainly,  the  true  reading,  we  are
obliged  to  the  Vatican  manufcript  •,
yeyeaipQcti  being  in  all  the  editions,
which  can  have  no  place  here.  There
is  a  note,  upon  this  occafion,  in  Hud¬
son,  which  M.  *  *  *  has,  alfo,  tranf¬
lated  without  any  acknowledgement  to
him  :  In  this  note,  a  pafiage  of  c  Cicero


is~quoted,  which  fupports  the  reading
of  the  Vatican  manufcript ;  cotem  au-
tem  illam ,  et  novaculam  defofiam  in
comitio ,  fupraque  impojitum  puteal  ac-
cepimus.

79*  up.  It  appears,  by  a  note  in
Hudfon,  that  Jof.  Scaliger  finds  fault
with  our  author  for  calling  puteal
<Pg«x% ;  fince  puteal ,  as  he  fays,  does
not  fignify  <p>££«£,  but  zru^/x.  Qgedloc.
In  the  fame  note,  Hudfon  fays  that
Chimentellius  juftifies  Dionyfius  for
ufing  this  word.  As  I  have  not  this
author  myfelf,  neither  can  I  get  a  fight
of  his  work  in  the  country,  I  fhall  lay
before  the  reader  what  occurs  to  me
concerning  the  fignification  of  puteal ,
and  puteus  by  which  he  will  be  able
to  determine,  in  fome  meafure,  what
judgement  he  ought  to  form  of  this
criticifm  of  Scaliger.  The  words
quoted  from  Cicero  in  the  laft  note,
lhew,  indeed,  that  a  puteal  was  eredted
over  the  place,  where  the  hone,  and
the  razor  were  buried  :  And  I  agree,
intirely,  with  Scaliger  that  puteal  docs
not  fignify  Qfeetf,  but  a ruiux  (p^fTor,
the  cover  of  a  well.  This,  I  know,  is
one  fignification  of  the  word,  and,  in


c  De  Divinat.  B.  i.  c.

s  2


Lxxm.


1 4  o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III.

LXXIIL  Tarquinius,  being  now,  through  age,  obliged
to  defift  from  war  (for  he  was  eighty  years  old)  loft  his  life
by  the  treachery  of  the  fons  of  Ancus  Marcius:  They  had,
before,  endeavoured  to  dethrone  him,  and  had,  often,  at¬
tempted  it,  in  hope  that,  when  he  was  removed,  the  govern¬
ment  would  devolve  upon  them,  as  a  fucceilion  from  their
father,  and  that  the  Romans  would,  eafily,  be  prevailed  on
to  confirm  it :  But,  failing  in  their  expectation,  they  formed
a  treacherous  defign  againft  him  not  to  be  avoided,  which
heaven  did  not  fuffer  to  go  unpunished.  I  fhall,  alfo,
relate  the  method  they  took  to  execute  their  treachery.
Navius,  that  celebrated  augur,  who,  as  I  faid,  had  oppofed
the  kins;,  when  he  was  defirous  to  encreafe  the  number  of
the  tribes,  while  he  was  in  the  greatefl;  credit  for  his  art,
and  exceeded  all  the  Romans  in  power,  whether  through
the  envy  of  fome  antagonift  in  his  own  profefiion,  the  trea¬
chery  of  enemies,  or  any  other  accident,  difappeared  on  a
fudden,  and  none  of  his  friends  could  either  guefs  at  the
manner  of  his  death,  or  find  his  body :  The  people  being

this  fenfe,  d  Cicero  ufes  it,  when  he  thele  things  were  buried,  may  be¬
wares  to  Atticus  to  fend  him putealia  doubted;  but,  certain  it  is  by  this
fmllata  duo ,  which  e  Dr.  Middleton  coin,  that  a  puteal  was  either  an  altar,
has,  very  properly,  tranflated,  the  co-  or,  very  much,  refembled  one  ;  for
vers  of  two  of  his  wells,  or  fountains,  which  reafon,  our  author  fays  they
But  this  is  not  the  only  fignification  were  buried  uVo  @upu  nvi.  This  altar,
of  puteal  :  It  fignifies,  alfo,  an  altar ,  or  puteal ,  was,  therefore,  erected  over
like  That,  which  is  reprefented  f  in  an  the  puteus,  or  hole  in  the  ground,  where
old  coin  of  Libo,  who  erefted  the  the  hone,  and  the  razor  were  buried  *,
puteal ,  called  by  2  Horace,  puteal  Li-  and  this  puteus  is,  very  properly,  call-
bonis.  Whether  this  was  the  fame  with  ed,  by  our  author,

That  ere&ed  over  the  place,  where

d  B,  i  Let.  10.  e  Life  of  Cicero,  vel.  i.  p.  1 44.  fAuguftin.  Dialog,  iv.  tEpift.  19.  B.  i.  jr,  8.

uneafy


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICAR N  ASSE  NS  I  S.  141

uneafy  at,  and  refen  ting,  this  misfortune ;  and,  withal,
entertaining  feveral  fufpicions  againft  feveral  perfons,  the
fons  of  Marcius,  who  obferved  this  difpofition  of  the  mul¬
titude,  fixed  the  imputation  of  the  guilt  upon  Tarquinius,
without  any  other  proof,  or  argument  to  fupport  their  ac-
cufation,  than  thefe  two  probable  circum fiances :  The  firft,
that  the  king,  defigning  to  introduce  many  innovations  in
the  government,  had  a  mind  to  take  off  a  perfbn,  who  was
fure  to  oppole  him,  as  he  had  done  upon  former  occahons :
The  other  was,  that  an  accident  of  fo  dreadful  a  nature  hav¬
ing  happened,  he  had  caufed  no  inquiry  to  be  made  after  the
authors,  but,  intirely,  aegle<fted  the  matter ;  which,  they
faid,  no  innocent  man  would  have  done  :  And,  having
formed  a  ftrong  faction,  both  of  the  patricians,  and  ple¬
beians,  among  whom  they  had  diftributed  their  fortunes^
they  poured  out  their  accufations  againft  Tarquinius,  and
exhorted  the  people  not  to  buffer  a  guilty  perfon  to  approach
the  altars,  and  defile  the  royal  dignity,  efpecially,  fince  he
was  not  a  Roman,  but  a  foreigner,  whom  no  country  would
own.  Thefe  men,  who  wanted  no  abilities,  nor  eloquence,
by  urging  thefe  things  in  the  harangues  they  made  in  the
forum,  inflamed  the  minds  of  many  of  the  plebeians,  who,
when  he  came  into  the  forum,  endeavoured  to  drive  him
from  thence,  as  an  impure  perfon :  However,  they  were  not
’  ftrong  enough  to  prevail  over  the  truth,  or  to  perfuade  the
people  to  depofe  him :  But,  after  Tarquinius  himfelf
had  made  the  beft  defence  poffible,  and  refuted  the  accu-
fation,  and  Tullius,  his  fon-in-law,  to  whom  he  had

given


t


HZ  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  III,

given  one  of  his  two  daughters  in  marriage,  a  very  popular
man,  had  raifed  the  compaffion  of  the  Romans,  they  were
looked  upon  as  calumniators,  and  wicked  men,  and  left  the
forum  with  great  ignominy.

LXXIV.  Having  failed  in  this  attempt,  and,  being
through  the  means  of  their  friends,  reftored  to  the  favor  of
Tarquinius,  who,  by  reafon  of  the  obligations  he  had  re¬
ceived  from  their  father,  bore  their  folly  with  temper,  look¬
ing  upon  their  repentance  as  fufficient  to  reform  their  ralli-
nefs,  they  continued  three  years  in  this  affectation  of  friend¬
ship  :  But,  as  foon  as  they  thought  a  favourable  opportu¬
nity  prefented  itfelf,  they  contrived  the  following  device
againft  him.  They  dreffed  up  two  youths,  the  boldeft  of
their  accomplices,  like  fhepherds ;  and,  arming  them  with
bills,  fent  them  at  noon  to  the  king’s  palace,  with  proper
inftru&ions  relating  to  what  they  were  to  fay,  and  do,  and,
in  what  manner,  they  were  to  proceed  in  this  enterprife  :
When  they  came  near  the  palace,  they  abufed  one  another,
as  if  they  had  received  fome  injury;  and,  proceeding  to
blows,  both,  with  a  loud  voice,  implored  the  king’s  aflift-
ance;  and  many  of  their  accomplices,  who  had  the  appearance
of  countrymen,  being  prefent,  and  taking  part  with  each  of
them  in  the  quarrel,  gave  teftimony  in  their  favor  :  And,
when  the  king  ordered  them  to  be  brought  before  him,  and
commanded  them  to  inform  him  of  the  fubjeCt  of  their
difpute,  they  pretended  their  conteft  arofe  about  fome  goats,
and  both  of  them  bawling  at  the  fame  time,  and  expreiling
the  vehemence  of  their  pafTion  in  a  rufiic  manner,  without

faying


Book  III.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  143

faying  any  thing  to  the  purpofe,  they  raifed  a  general
laughter  :  When  they  thought  that,  by  being  defpifed,  they
had  a  proper  opportunity  of  putting  their  defign  in  execu¬
tion,  they  wounded  the  king  in  the  head  with  their  bills ;
after  which,  they  endeavoured  to  efcape  out  of  the  palace.
But  this  a&ion  having  occafioned  an  outcry,  and  afliftance
coming  from  many  parts,  they,  not  being  able  to  make  their
efcape,  were  apprehended  by  thofe,  who  purfued  them.
When,  being  put  to  the  torture,  and  forced  to  declare  the
authors  of  the  confpiracy,  they,  afterwards,  met  with  the
punifhment  they  deferved.  Tarquinius,  therefore,  from
whom  the  Romans  had  received  many  confiderable  advan¬
tages,  ended  his  life  in  this  manner,  after  a  reign  of  thirty
eight  years.


The  end  of  the  Third  book.


T  H  E


THE


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES

O  F

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.

THE  FOURTH  BOOK.

T-1  A  R QU I NI U  S,  dying  in  the  manner  I  have  men¬
tioned,  left  two  'grandfons  who  were  infants,  and
two  daughters,  already,  married.  He  was  fucceeded
in  the  kingdom  by  Tullius,  one  of  his  fons-in-law,  in  the
fourth  year  of  the  fiftieth  Olympiad,  when  Epitelides,  a
Lacedaemonian,  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium ;  Archeftratides

Annotations  on  the  Fourth  Book.

»•  Since  our  author  has  it  is  not  clear  whether  they  were  his

employed  fo  many  arguments  to  prove  Tons,  or  grandfons;  but  rather  inclines
that  Lucius  Tarquinius,  and  his  bro-  to  think  them  his  Tons,  upon  the  au-
ther,  were  not  the  Tons,  but  the  grand-  thority  of  the  greateft  number  of  hi-
fons  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus,  it  is  fome-  Itorians.  However,  I  believe  the  rea-
thing  extraordinary  that  all  the  edi-  fons,  alledged  by  our  author,  will  clear
tions,  and  manufcripts,  fhould  call  up  this  point  of  hiftory.  All  this
them  fa,  inftead  of  ifuvx?,  which  laft  makes  it  plain  that  we  mull  read  vjavxe,
reading  I  have  made  no  difficulty  to  as  Cafaubon  has,  very  well,  obferved.
follow  in  the  tranflation.  a  Livy  fays

3  B.  i,  c.  46.


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  145
being  archon  at  Athens.  This  is  the  proper  place  to  men¬
tion  thofe  particulars  relating  to  Tullius,  which  we,  at  firft,
omitted,  and  to  give  an  account  both  of  his  parents,  and  of
the  actions  he  performed,  while  he  was  yet  a  private  perfon,
and  before  his  acceflion  to  the  government.  Concerning
his  family,  therefore,  the  relation  I  think  the  moft  probable
is  this  :  There  lived  at  Corniculum,  a  city  of  the  Latine
nation,  a  man  of  the  royal  family,  named  T ullius,  who  was
married  to  Ocrifia,  a  lady  far  excelling  all  thofe  of  her  fex  in
Corniculum,  both  in  beauty,  and  modefty.  When  this  city
was  taken  by  the  Romans,  Tullius  himfelf  was  flain  fighting
for  his  country ;  and  Ocrifia,  then  with  child,  was  feledled
from  the  fpoils,  and  given  to  Tarquinius,  then  king  of  the
Romans,  who  prefented  her  to  his  wife  :  She,  being  informed
of  every  thing,  that  related  to  this  woman,  manumitted  her
foon  after,  and  diftinguifhed  her  above  all  other  women  by
the  marks  of  tendernefs,  and  regard  fhe  continued  to  beftow
upon  her.  While  Ocrifia  was  yet  a  flave,.  fhe  was  brought
to  bed  of  a  boy,  to  whom,  when  he  was  brought  up,  his
mother  gave  the  name  of  Tullius,  from  his  father,  as  his
proper,  and  family  name  ;  and,  alfo,  the  name  of  Servius,
as  a  common,  and  appellative  name,  from  her  own  condition,
hecaufe  fhe  was  a  flave,  when  fhe  was  brought  to  bed  of
him  :  Which  appellation,  if  tranflated  into  Greek,  would
be  exprefled  by  A shioc.  Servile .

II.  There  is  another  tradition  concerning  his  birth?
mentioned  in  the  writings  of  this  nation,  which,  though  it,
fabulouily,  exalts  him,  we  have  met  with  in  many  Roman

Vol.  II.  T  hiftories ;


1 46  ROMAN  A  N  TIQJJI  TIES  OF  Book  IV.

Jiiftories;  and  the  account  of  it,  if  the  gods,  and  genius’s
will  allow  it  to  be  related,  is  as  follows:  They  fay  that,
from  the  altar  in  the  palace,  on  which  the  Romans  offer
facrifices,  and  confecrate  the  firft  offerings  of  their  evening
meals,  a  man’s  privy  member  rofe  up  above  the  fire  ;  and
that  Ocrifia  firft  faw  it,  as  fhe  was  carrying  the  cuftomary
cakes  to  the  fire,  and,  immediately,  informed  the 2  king,
and  queen  of  it :  That  Tarquinius,  upon  hearing  this,  and,
afterwards,  feeing  the  prodigy,  was  aftonifhed :  But  Tana-
quil,  who  was,  otherwife,  a  woman  of  fenfe,  and  inferior  to
none  of  the  Tyrrhenians  in  the  knowledge  of  the  prophetic
art,  told  him,  it  was  ordained  by  fate  that  the  child,  fore¬
told  by  the  prodigy  feen  upon  the  altar  of  the  palace,  and
fprung  from  the  woman,  who  conceived  by  the  phantom,
fhould  be  of  a  condition  fuperior  to  human  nature :  And
the  other  augurs  affirming  the  fame  thing,  the  king  thought
fit  that  Ocrifia,  to  whom  the  prodigy  had  firft  appeared,
fhould  converfe  with  him  :  After  which,  this  woman,  being
dreffed  like  a  bride,  was  fhut  up  alone  in  the  room,  in
which  the  prodigy  had  been  feen ;  and  one  of  the  gods,  or
genius’s,  whether  Vulcan,  as  they  think,  or  the  hero,  ta
whom  the  lioufe  was  dedicated,  having  had  converfation
with  her,  and,  afterwards,  difappearing,  fhe  conceived  by
him,  and  was  delivered  of  Tullius  at  the  proper  time.
This  fabulous  account,  which  feems  not  altogether  credible,
is  the  lefs  dilbelieved  by  reafon  of  another  manifeftation  of  the

*•  T«  This  could  not  well  tranflators  have  rendered  it.  However,

be  rendered  otherwife  than  the  king ,  it  muft  be  remembered,  that  the  wives
and  the  queen,  as,  I  find,  the  French  of  the  Roman  kings  were  not  queens.

gods


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  147

gods  relating  to  this  man,  which  is  wonderful  and  extra¬
ordinary.  For  he,  falling  afleep,  as  he  was  fitting  in  the
portico  of  the  palace  about  noon,  a  fire  fhone  from  his  head :
This,  his  mother,  and  the  king’s  wife,  as  they  were  walking
in  the  portico,  faw,  as  well  as  all,  who  then  happened  to  be
prefen t  with  them :  And  the  flame  continued  to  fhine  quite
round  his  head,  till  his  mother,  running  to  him,  waked  him  ;
and,  when  his  fleep  was  ended,  the  flame  difappeared.
Thefe  are  the  accounts,  that  are  given  of  his  birth.

III.  The  memorable  actions  he  performed  before  his
acceffion,  in  confideration  of  which  Tarquinius  admired
him,  and  the  Roman  people  honoured  him  next  to  the  king,
are  thefe.  Being  very  young  at  the  time,  when  Tarquinius
undertook  his  firft  expedition  againfl:  the  Tyrrhenians,  and
in  the  horfe,  he  was  thought  to  have  behaved  himfelf  with
fo  much  bravery,  that  he,  prefently,  gained  an  univerfal
reputation  ;  and,  preferably  to  any  other  perfon,  received
the  prize  of  valor.  Afterwards,  when  another  expedition
was  undertaken  againfl:  the  fame  nation,  and  a  fharp  battle
fought  near  the  city  of  Eretum,  he  was  judged  to  have
fhewn  greater  bravery  than  any  man,  and  was,  again,
crowned  by  the  king  in  teftimony  of  his  having  deferved
the  fame  reward.  When  he  was  at  moil  twenty  years  old,
he  was  appointed  to  command  the  auxiliary  forces,  fent  by
the  Latines,  and  aflifted  Tarquinius  in  obtaining  the  fove-
reignty  over  the  Tyrrhenians.  In  the  fir  ft  war  againfl:  the
Sabines,  being  general  of  the  horfe',  he  put  to  flight  That
of  the  enemy,  purfuing  them  as  far  as  the  city  of  Antemnae,

T  2  and,


148  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

and,  again,  received  the  fame  cuftomary  rewards  for  thefuperior
bravery  lie  had  ilievvn  upon  this  occafion.  He  was  ingaged
in  many  other  actions  againft  the  fame  nation,  fometimes
commanding  the  horfe,  and,  fometimes,  the  foot ;  in  all
which  he  fhevved  himfelf  a  man  of  the  greateft  courage,  and,
always,  was  the  firft  perfon  crowned  upon  thefe  occafions.
And,  when  that  nation  came  to  furrender  themfelves,  and
deliver  up  their  cities  to  the  Romans,  he  was  looked  upon
by  Tarquinius  as  the  chief  author  of  this  fovereignty  alfo,
and  crowned  by  him  with  the  crowns,  ufually,  given  upon
a  victory.  Befides,  he  had  the  3  jufteft  thoughts  of  civil
government,  and  was  inferior  to  none  in  his  manner  of
expreffing  them ;  and  poflefled,  in  an  eminent  degree,  the
power  of  accommodating  himfelf  to  perfons  of  all  conditions,
and  all  characters.  In  confederation  of  thefe  accomplifh-
ments,  the  Romans  thought  proper  to  tranflate  him,  by  their
votes,  from  a  plebeian,  to  the  rank  of  a  patrician,  an  honor
they  had  conferred  on  Tarquinius,  and,  before  that,  on
Numa  Pompilius:  The  king,  alfo,  made  him  his  fon-in-law,
giving  him  one  of  his  two  daughters  in  marriage ;  and,  what¬
ever  bufinefs  his  infirmities,  or  his  age,  rendered  him  inca¬
pable  of  attending  to  himfelf,  he  ordered  Tullius  to  tranfadfc
it;  and  committed  to  his  care,  not  only,  the  private  affairs  of

3*  Hv  Si  kcu  (pemeett  ra  &oK?]iKct  l^^vivcroa  rocvja.  If  Thucydides  has
c-m7&>7<*V,  etc.  This  thought  our  au-  the  advantage  of  the  expreffion,  our
thor  has  taken  from  b  Thucydides,  author  has,  certainly,  That  of  decen-
though  he  has  exprefifed  it  in  other  cy  ;  fmce  the  former  makes  Pericles
words :  Thofe  of  the  latter  are,  os  give  himfelf  thefe  qualifications,  and
aSzvos  qwctiv  atonal  m y\oo\ou  rg  rot,  foovla,  the  latter  gives  them  to  another.

b  B.  ii.  c.  60.


his


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  E  NS  I  S.  149

his  own  family,  but,  alfo,  Thofe,  that  related  to  the  public.
In  all  thefe  employments,  he  was  found  to  have  acted  with
integrity,  and  juflice;  the  people  finding  no  difference  be¬
tween  the  adminiftration  of  Tarquinius,  and  That  of
Tullius;  fo  effectually  did  he  gain  their  affections  by  the
favors  he  conferred  upon  them.

IV.  This  perfon,  therefore,  being,  fufficiently,  formed'
by  nature  for  command,  and,  alfo,  fupplied  by  fortune
with  many,  and  great  opportunities  of  attaining  it,  as  foon
as  Tarquinius  was  flain  by  the  treachery  of  the  fans
of  Marcius,  who*  thereby,  fought  to  recover  the  kingdom
their  father  had  been  pofiefled  of,  as  was  fbewn  in  the  pre¬
ceding  book,  he  looked  upon  himfelf  to  be  called  to  the
royal  dignity  by  the  very  fituation  of  affairs  ;  and,  being  a
man  of  activity,  he  did  not  let  flip  the  opportunity.  The
perfon,  to  whofe  affiftance  he  owed  the  pofiefilon  of  the
regal  power,  and*  who  was  the  author  of  all  his  good  for¬
tune,  was  the  wife  of  the  deceafed  king,  who  fup  ported
him  both  as  he  was  her  fon-in-law,  and,  as  fhe  found,  by
many  oracles,  it  was  ordained  by  fate  that  this  man
fhould  be  king  of  the  Romans.  It  happened  that  her  own
fon,  a  youth,  was,  lately,  dead,  and  that  his  two  fons
were  left  infants :  She,  therefore,  reflecting  on  the  defo-
lation  of  her  family,  and  being  under  the  greatefl:  apprehen-
fions  left,  if  the  fons  of  Marcius  pofibffed  themfelves  of
the  fovereignty,  they  fhould  deftroy  thefe  infants,  and  ex¬
tirpate  all  the  royal  family,  firfi:  ordered  the  gates  of  the
palace  to  be  fhut,  and  a  guard  to  be  placed  there,  with

orders


■I$0  ROMAN  ANTIQJLJI  TIE  S  OF  BookIV.

orders  to  fuller  none  to  pafs  in,  or  out ;  then,  caufing  every
one  to  leave  the  room,  in  which  they  had  laid  Tarquinius
juft  ready  to  expire,  except  Ocrifia,  Tullius,  and  her  daugh¬
ter,  who  was  married  to  Tullius,  fhe  directed  the  children
-to  be  brought  thither  by  their  nurfes,  and  fpoke  to  the
others  in  the  following  manner :  “  Tarquinius,  the

u  king,  O  Tullius,  by  whom  you  were  brought  up,  and
u  educated,  and  who  honoured  you  more  than  any  of  his
cc  friends,  and  relations,  has,  by  an  impious  aflaflination,
u  finiftied  his  deftined  courfe,  without  having  made  either
cc  any  difpofttion  of  his  private  affairs,  or  any  regulation
“  concerning  Thofe,  which  relate  to  the  public,  and  to  the
u  civil  adminiftration ;  and  without  having  had  it  in  his
u  power  even  to  embrace  any  of  us,  or  to  take  his  laft  farewel
“  of  any  :  And  thefe  unfortunate  orphans  are  left  deftitute,
£C  and  in  imminent  danger  of  their  lives :  For,  if  the  power
cC  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  Marcii,  the  murderers  of  their
£C  grandfather,  they  will  be  put  to  death  by  them  in  the
iC  moft  miferable  manner ;  even,  the  lives  of  you,  to  whom
“  Tarquinius  gave  his  daughters  in  preference  to  them,
cc  will  not  be  fafe,  fhould  his  murderers  poflefs  themfelves
“  of  the  fovereignty,  any  more  than  the  lives  of  the  reft  of
“  his  friends,  and  relations,  or  of  us  miferable  women  ;
<c  but  they  will  endeavour  to  deftroy  us  all,  both  openly,
<c  and  privately.  Thefe  things,  therefore,  being  conftdered
“  by  us,  we  ought  not  to  fuller  the  wicked  murderers  of
iC  Tarquinius,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  the  enemies  of  us  all,
“  to  obtain  fo  great  a  power ;  but  to  oppofe,  and  prevent

u  them.


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSI  S.  T?r

“  them,  upon  this  occafion,  by  art,  and  deceit ;  for  thefe
c<  are  neceflary  at  prefent ;  and,  when  our  firft  attempt
“  has  fucceeded,  then  to  attack  them,  even,  openly  with
<c  our  whole  force,  and  with  arms,  if  thefe,  alfo,  fhall  be
<c  found  neceffary :  But  that  will  not  be  the  cafe,  provided
“  we,  now,  take  proper  meafures :  What  are  they  ?  Let
<c  us,  in  the  firft  place,  conceal  the  king’s  death,  and  caufe
c<  a  report  to  be  fpread  among  all  the  people,  that  he  ha&
ct  received  no  mortal  wound;  and  let  the  phyficians  give
*c  out  that  they  expedt  to  reftore  him  to  his  health  in  a  few
<c  days :  After  which,  I  will  appear  in  public,  and  acquaint
“  the  people,  as  from  Tarquinius,  that  he  has  committed
cc  to  one  of  his  two  fons-in-law,  naming  you,  Tullius,  the
“  care,  and  guardianfhip,  both  of  his  private  affairs,  and  of
“  Thole  of  the  public,  till  he  is  recovered  of  his  wounds  ;
u  and  the  Romans  will  be  fo  far  from  being  difpleafed,  that
“  they  will  rejoice,  in  feeing  the  government  of  the  city
“  vefted  in  you,  to  whom  it  has,  already,  been,  often,  com-
<c  mitted.  When  we  have  difperfed  the  prefent  danger  (for
u  the  power  of  our  enemies  will  be  at  an  end  the  moment
“  the  king  is  reported  to  be  alive)  do  you  affume  the  rods,
<c  and  the  military  power,  and  call  thofe,  who  formed  the
“  defign  of  affaflinating  Tarquinius,  before  the  people  ;
u  beginning  with  the  fons  of  Marcius,  and  fummon  them
<(  to  take  their  trial.  After  you  have  punifhed  all  thefe,  if
u  they  fubmit  to  be  tried,  with  death  ;  or,  if  they  fly  from
“  juftice,  which  I  rather  believe  they  will  do,  with  perpetual
*c  baniftiment,  and  the  confifcation  of  their  eftates,  then

4C  fettls


152  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

££  fettle  every  thing,  that  relates  to  the  ad  min  ill:  ration  of
££  affairs;  conciliate  the  affections  of  the  people  by  an  obliging
C£  affability ;  take  great  care  that  no  injuftice  be  committed,
“  and  gain  the  favor  of  the  poorer  fort,  by  conferring  oil
££  them  fome  marks  of  beneficence,  and  liberality.  After-
££  wards,  when  we  fee  a  proper  time,  let  us  fay  that  Tarqui-
££  nius  is  dead,  and  make  a  public  funeral  for  him.  It  is  but
££  juft,  Tullius,  that  you,  who  have  been  brought  up,  and
££  educated  by  us ;  have  partaken  of  every  advantage,  that
££  children  receive  from  their  parents,  and  are,  aClually,
££  married  to  our  daughter,  if,  befides  this,  you  become
££  king  of  the  Romans,  fhould,  at  leaft,  for  my  fake,  to
££  whofe  afliftance  you  will  owe  that  dignity,  ffiew  all  the
££  benevolence  of  a  father  to  thefe  infants  ;  and,  when  they
££  come  to  be  men,  and  are  capable  of  the  adminiftration  of
££  affairs,  that  you  declare  the  eldeftking  of  the  Romans.”

V.  Having  faid  this,  and  thrown  each  of  the  children  into
the  arms  both  of  her  fon-in-law,  and  her  daughter,  and
raifed  the  greateft  compaffion  in  them  both,  it  being  now
time,  fhe  went  out  of  the  room,  and  ordered  the  fervants
to  get  every  thing  ready  for  dreffing  the  king’s  wounds,
and  to  call  the  phyiicians.  The  night  being  paffed,  the  next
day,  the  people  flocking  in  great  numbers  to  the  palace,
fhe  appeared  at  one  of  the  windows,  that  looked  upon
the  ftreet  before  the  gates  ;  and,  firft,  acquainted  them
who  the  perfons  were,  who  had  formed  the  defign  of  mur¬
dering  the  king,  and  produced  the  aflafiins,  employed  by
them,  in  chains  :  Then,  finding  that  many  lamented  the

mif-


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  SENSIS.  153

misfortune,  and  were  exafperatcd  at  the  authors  of  it,  fhe,
at  laft,  told  them  that  they  had  reaped  no  fruit  from  their
wicked  defign,  as  not  having  been  able  to  kill  Tarquinius.
This  being  received  with  a  general  joy,  fhe,  then,  prefented
Tullius  to  them,  as  the  perfon  appointed  by  the  king  to  take
care  of  all  his  affairs,  both  public  and  private,  till  he  himfelf
recovered.  The  people,  therefore,  went  away,  greatly,
rejoicing  that  the  condition  of  the  king  was  not  dangerous ;
and  continued  for  a  long  time  in  that  opinion.  After  this,
Tullius,  attended  by  a  ftrong  body  of  men,  and,  alfo,  with
the  king’s  li&ors,  went  to  the  forum,  and  caufed  proclama¬
tion  to  be  made  for  the  Marcii  to  appear,  and  take  their
trial:  But  they  not  obeying,  he  pronounced  fentence  of
perpetual  banifhment  againft  them  ;  and,  having  confifcated
their  eftates,  he,  now,  fecurely  poffeffed  the  fovereignty  of
Tarquinius.

VI.  I  fhall  fufpend  the  narration  of  what  follows,  that  I
may  give  the  reafons,  which  have  induced  me  to  difagree
with  4Fabius,  and  the  reft  of  the  hiftorians,  who  affirm
that  the  infants  Tarquinius  left,  were  his  fons,  to  the  end
that  thofe,  who  have  read  their  hiftories,  may  not  think  I
advance,  without  due  confideration,  that  they  were  his
grandfons,  and  not  his  fons :  For  thofe  writers  have,  very
inconfiderately,  and,  negligently,  publifhed  this  account  of
them,  without  examining  any  of  the  impoffibilities,  and
abfurdities,  that  deftroy  the  truth  of  it :  Every  one  of  which

$*€1  of.  See  the  21*  annotation  on  the  firft  book.

Vol.  II.  U


I  fhall


154  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  IV.

I  fhall  endeavour  to  point  out  in  a  few  words.  Tarquinius
removed  from  Tyrrhenia,  with  all  his  family,  at  an  age  the
moft  capable  of  reflexion :  For  it  is  faid  that  he,*  then,
afpired  to  a  fliare  in  the  government,  to  dignities,  and  to
the  adminiftration  of  affairs;  and  that  he  removed  from
thence,  becaufe  he  was  not  allowed  to  partake  of  any  of
thefe  honors ;  any  other  might,  therefore,  fuppofe  him  to
have  been  thirty  years  old  at  leaf!:,  when  he  left  Tyrrhenia  :
For,  at  this  age,  generally,  the  laws  call  thofe  to  the  magiftra-
cy,  who  deflre  it,  and  to  the  adminiftration  of  public  affairs:
But  I  will  fuppofe  him  five  whole  years  younger  than  this,
and  allow  him  to  have  been  but  five  and  twenty,  when  he
removed.  Certainly,  all  the  Roman  hiftorians  agree  that  he
carried  his  wife,  a  Tyrrhenian,  with  him,  whom  he  had
married,  while  his  father  was  yet  alive.  He  came  to  Rome
in  the  firft  year  of  the  reign  of  Ancus  Marcius,  as  5  Gellius
writes ;  but,  according  to  5  Licinnius,  in  the  eighth  year.
However,  let  him  have  come  to  Rome  the  year  Licinnius
writes,  and  not  before :  For  he  could  not  have  come  thither
after  that  time  ;  fince,  in  the  ninth  year  of  the  reign  of
Ancus,  he  was  fent  by  the  king  to  command  the  horfe  in
the  war  againft  the  Latines,  as  both  thofe  hiftorians  agree.
Nov/,  if  he  was  no  more  than  twenty  five  years  old,  when
he  came  to  Rome  ;  and,  having  been  received  into  the
friendfliip  of  Ancus,  then  king,  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign,
lived  with  him  the  remaining  feventeen  years  (for  Ancus

* •  TiKXiofi  Ai K/vv<of.  See  die  2  5th  annotation  on  the  firft  book.

reigned


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  155

reigned  twenty  four  years,  and  he  himfelf  reigned  thirty
eight,  as  all  agree)  he  mu  ft  have  been  fourfcore  years  old,
when  he  died :  For  this  appears  by  computing  the  number
of  years :  His  wife  was  five  years  younger,  as  may  well  be
fuppofed  ;  fo  that,  fhe  was  in  her  feventy  fifth  year,  when
Tarquinius  died ;  and,  if  fhe  was  brought  to  bed  of  her
youngeft,  and  laftfon,  when  fhe  was  fifty  years  old  (for,
after  this  time,  a  woman  is  incapable  of  bearing  children,
this  being  the  end  of  their  conceiving,  as  thofe  authors
write,  who  have  examined  thefe  things)  this  fon  could  not
have  been  lefs  than  five  and  twenty  years  old  when  his  fa¬
ther  died,  and  Lucius  the  elder,  not  lefs  than  twenty  feven  ;
the  fons,  therefore,  Tarquinius  left  by  this  woman  could
not  be  infants :  And,  certainly,  if  her  fons  had  been  men
grown  when  their  father  died,  it  cannot  be  imagined  that
either  their  mother  would  have  been  fo  wicked,  and  fo  void
of  fenfe,  as  to  deprive  her  own  children  of  the  fovereignty
their  father  had  left  them,  and  give  it  to  a  ftranger,  and
to  the  fon  of  a  flave  ;  or  that  they  themfelves,  thus  deprived
of  their  paternal  dignity,  would  have  borne  the  injuftice  in
fo  abjedt,  and  fupine  a  manner,  and  that  at  an  age,  when
their  faculties  both  of  fpeaking,  and  a&ing,  were  in  their
utmoft  vigor  :  For  Tullius,  being  the  fon  of  a  ilave,  could
not  have  the  advantage  of  them  in  birth,  or  much  excel
them  in  the  dignity  of  age;  being  only  three  years  older
than  one  of  them  :  For  which  reafons,  they  would  not,
willingly,  have  yielded  the  fovereignty  to  him.

U  2


VII.


156  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book IV.

VII.  This  opinion,  is  fubjeft  to  fome  other  abfurdities>
which  all  the  Roman  hiftorians  have  been  ignorant  of,  ex¬
cept  one,  whom  I  fhall  name  prefently  :  For  it  is  allowed
that  Tullius,  having  fucceeded  to  the  kingdom  after  the
the  death  of  Tarquinius,  enjoyed  it  four  and  forty  years :
So  that,  if  the  eldeft  of  the  Tarquinii  was- twenty  feven  years
old  when  he  was  deprived  of  the  fovereignty,  he  muft  have
been  above  feventy,  when  he  killed  Tullius :  But  the  hi¬
ftorians  fay,  that  he  was  then  in  the  vigor  of  his  age ;  and
add,  that  he  himfelf  carried  Tullius  in  his  arms  out  of  the
fenate,  and  threw  him  down  the  ftairs  :  And  his  expulfion
happened  in  the  five  and  twentieth  year  after  this.  The  fame
year,  he  is  introduced  making  war  againft  the  6  Ardeates,
and  performing  every  thing  himfelf.  Now,  it  is  not  rea-
fonable  to  fuppofe  that  a  man  of  ninety  fix  years  of  age,
could,  perfonally,  aflift  at  the  operations  of  war.  After  he  is
deprived  of  the  government,  he,  ftill,  makes  war  againft  the
Romans,  and  continues  to  do  fo  no  lefs  than  fourteen  years,
he  himfelf  being  prefent,  as  they  fay,  upon  all  occafions ;
which  is  contrary  to  the  general  fenfe  of  mankind :  Thus,
according  to  them,  he  muft  have  lived  above  one  hundred
and  ten  years ;  which  is  a  length  of  life  unknown  to  our
climate.  Some  of  the  Roman  hiftorians,  being  fenfible  of

6 •  A^s «I«f.  c  Ardea  was,  formerly,  five  from  the  Tyrrhene  fea.  d  While
a  city  of  great  note,  and  the  capital  of  Tarquinius  was  befieging  Ardea,  the
the  Rutuli.  It  is,  now,  a  village,  and  revolution  happened  at  Rome,  by
retains  its  name.  It  lies  twenty  Ro-  which  he  was  banifhed,  and  monarchy
man  miles  fouth  eaft  of  Rome,  and  profcribed.

c  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  5.  “Sec  the  fixty  fourth  chapter  of  this  book.

thefe


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSE  NS  I  S.  157

thefe  abfurdities,  have  endeavoured  to  folve  them  by  others ;
alledging  that,  not  Tanaquil,  but  one  Gegania,  of  whom
we  read  nothing  in  hiftory,  was  the  mother  of  thefe  children.
Again,  the  marriage  of  Tarquinius  is  unfeafonable,  he  being
then  very  near  fourfcore  years  old,  and  the  begetting  chil¬
dren,  in  men  of  that  age,  incredible.  Neither  was  he  child—
lefs,  fo  as  to  wifh  for  children  at  any  rate  ;  for  he  had  two
*  daughters,  and  thefe,  already,  married.  Confidering,  there¬
fore,  all  thefe  impoffibilities,  and  abfurdities,  I  agree  with
7  Pifo  Frugi,  and  affirm  that  thefe  children  were  not  the
fons,  but  the  grandfons  of  Tarquinius  :  For  he  is  the  only
hiftorian,  who  has  maintained  this  opinion,  which  he  has
afferted  in  his  annals ;  unlefs  the  children  were  the  king’s
grandfons  by  birth,  and  his  fons  by  adoption ;  and  this  may
have  milled  all  the  other  Roman  hiflorians.  Thefe  things
being  premifed,  it  is  time  to  refume  the  narration  we'  have
interrupted.

VIII.  When  Tullius  thought  he  had  fecured  to  himfelf

O

the  poffeffion  of  the  kingdom,  by  having  received  the  go¬
vernment  of  it,  and  expelled  the  faction  of  the  Marcii,  he
celebrated  the  funeral  of  Tarquinius  in  a  magnificent  man¬
ner,  as  if  he  had,  juft  before,  died  of  his  wounds,  and  adorned
his  memory  with  a  noble  monument,  and  all  other  honors ;
and,  from  that  time,  as  guardian  of  the  royal  children,  he  took
upon  himfelf  the  adminiftration,  and  care,  both  of  their
private  fortunes,  and  the  public  affairs  of  the  city.  But  thefe
proceedings  were  not  agreeable  to  the  patricians,  who  could
7*  n«<ra y.  See  the  25th  annotation  on  the  firft  book.


not


1 53  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

not  fee,  without  indignation,  and  refentment,  that  Tullius
had,  artfully,  obtained  a  kind  of  regal  power,  without  either
the  concurrence  of  the  fenate,  or  any  other  requifite  ordained
by  the  law.  And  the  moft  powerful  of  them,  often,  met  to¬
gether,  and  difcourfed  with  one  another  concerning  the  means
of  putting  an  end  to  this  illegal  government  ;  and  they
came  to  this  refolution,  that  the  firft  time  Tullius  aflembled
the  fenate,  they  would  compel  him  to  lay  afide  the  rods,
and  the  other  enflgns  of  royalty  ;  and  that,  after  this  was
done,  they  would  appoint  thofe  magiftrates,  called  interreges,
and,  by  their  means,  chufe  a  perfon,  according  to  the  laws,
who  fhould  govern  the  city.  While  they  were  taking  thefe
refolutions,  Tullius,  having  notice  of  their  deflgn,  applied
himfelf  to  flatter,  and  court  the  poorer  fort,  in  hopes  of
retaining  the  power  by  their  means ;  and,  having  aflembled
the  people,  he  placed  the  children  before  the  tribunal,  and
fpoke  in  the  following  manner  :

IX.  “  I  think  myfelf  under  a  great  obligation,  citizens,
“  to  take  care  of  thefe  infants:  For  Tarquinius,  their
“  grandfather,  received  me,  when  I  was  deprived  both  of
“  my  father,  and  my  country,  and  brought  me  up,  being
ci  no  lefs  tender  of  me,  than  of  his  own  children  :  He,  alfo,
u  gave  me  one  of  his  two  daughters  in  marriage;  and,
<c  during  the  whole  courfe  of  his  life,  continued  to  honor,
“  and  love  me,  as  you,  alfo,  know,  with  the  fame  afledHon,
u  as  if  I  had  been  his  own  fon :  And,  after  the  treacherous
<c  defign  formed  againft  him  was  executed,  he  intrufted  me
a  with  the  care  of  thefe  children,  if  he  fhould  happen  to

“  die.


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALiC  A  R  N  A  S$  EN  SIS.  159

££  die.  Who,  therefore,  will  think  me  pious  towards  the
<c  gods,  or  juft  towards  men,  if  I  abandon,  and  betray  the
££  orphans,  to  whom  I  am  fo  much  obliged  ?  But  I  am
££  refolved,  as  far  as  I  am  able,  neither  to  betray  the  truft
“  repofed  in  me,  nor  to  abandon  the  children  in  the  forlorn
“  condition,  to  which  they  are  reduced.  You,  alfo,  ought
££  in  juftice  to  remember  the  benefits  their  grandfather  con-
£C  ferred  upon  the  commonwealth,  in  reducing  to  your
££  obedience  fo  many  cities  of  the  Latines,  your  rivals  for
££  the  fovereignty;  in  making  all  the  Tyrrhenians,  the
££  moft  powerful  of  your  neighbours,  your  fubje&s ;  and  in
££  forcing  the  Sabine  nation  to  fubmit  to  you  ;  all  which  he
££  effe&ed  with  many,  and  great  dangers.  Y/hile,  therefore,
££  he  himfelf  was  living,  it  became  you  to  give  him  thanks  for
££  the  advantages  you  had  received  from  him;  and,  now  he  is
££  dead,  it  becomes  you  to  make  a  grateful  return  to  his
££  pofterity,  and  not  to  bury  the  remembrance  of  the  bene-
££  fits,  together  with  the  perfons  of  your  benefa&ors.  Look
££  upon  yourfelves,  therefore,  to  have  been  all  left  the
££  common  guardians  of  thefe  infants ;  and  confirm  to
££  them  the  fovereignty  their  grandfather  left  them  :  For
££  they  will  not  receive  fo  great  an  advantage  from  my  fingle
££  guardianfhip,  as  from  the  joint  affiftance  of  you  all.  I  am
£S  under  a  neceffity  of  faying  thefe  things,  becaufe  I  hear
££  that  fome  people  are  confpiring  againfl  them,,  and  defire
£C  to  transfer  the  kingdom  to  others.  I  defire  you,  alfo,

££  Romans,  to  call  to  mind  the  many  battles  I  have  fought
££  for  your  fovereignty  ;  thefe,  which  are  neither  inconfi-

££  derable


1 60  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

££  derable  in  themfelves,  nor  few  in  number,  I  need  not
££  relate,  becaufe  you  are  acquainted  with  them  :  But,
u  whatever  acknowledgements  they  may  claim  from  you,  I
<£  defire  you  will  pay  them  to  thefe  children  :  For  the  defign
<£  of  protecting  the  poflerity  of  Tarquinius,  not  of  fecuring
£C  the  fovereignty  to  myfelf  (of  which,  if  that  was  my  aim,  I
££  am  not  lefs  worthy  than  any  other)  has  led  me  to  take
££  upon  myfelf  the  adminiftration  of  the  public  aiTairs.
££  Behold  me  in  the  pofture  of  a  fuppliant,  and  let  me
££  intreat  you  not  to  abandon  thefe  orphans,  who  are,  now,
££  indeed,  only  in  danger  of  lofing  the  fovereignty;  but,  if
££  this  firft  attempt  of  their  enemies  fucceeds,  will  be,  alfo,
C£  expelled  the  city  :  However,  concerning  thefe,  I  need  fay
££  no  more,  fince  you  both  know,  and  will  perform,  your
££  duty.  I  flhall,  now,  acquaint  you  with  the  benefits  I  myfelf
££  propofe  to  confer  upon  you,  and  with  the  reafons,  that
££  induced  me  to  call  you  together.  Thofe  among  you,
££  who  have  contracted  debts,  and,  through  poverty,  are
££  unable  to  difcharge  them,  as  they  are  citizens,  and  have
££  undergone  many  labours  in  the  fervice  of  their  country,
££  I  defire  to  relieve;  and,  to  the  end  that  fuch,  as  have
££  fecured  the  common  liberty,  may  not  be  deprived  of  their
££  own,  I  will  myfelf  fupply  them  with  money  to  pay  their
<£  debts.  As  to  thofe,  who  fhall,  from  this  time,  contraCi:
££  debts,  I  will  not  fuffer  them  to  be  carried  to  prifon  on
££  account  of  thofe  debts ;  but  will  provide  a  law,  that  no
<£  man  fhall  lend  money  on  the  fecurity  of  the  perfons  of
4£  free  men  :  For  I  look  upon  the  pofleflion  of  the  fortunes

“  of


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN ASSENS  IS.  161

tc  of  the  debtor  to  be  a  fufficient  fecurity  to  the  creditor;
“  and,  in  order  to  lighten,  for  the  future,  the  burden  of  the
“  taxes  you  pay  to  the  public,  by  which  the  poor  are  op-
<c  prefled,  and  obliged  to  contrail  debts,  I  will  order  all  the
<c  citizens  to  give  in  a  valuation  of  their  pofleflions,  and
“  every  one  to  pay  his  fhare  of  the  taxes,  according  to
cc  that  valuation,  which  I  hear  is  pra&ifed  in  the  greateft,
“  and  belt  governed  cities.  And  I  look  upon  it  in  itfelf
ic  to  be  both  juft,  and  advantageous  to  the  public,  that  thole,
“  who  have  great  pofleflions,  fliould  pay  great  taxes ;  and
“  thofe,  who  have  fmall  pofleflions,  fmall  ones.  I  am,  alio,
“  of  opinion  that  the  public  lands,  which  you  have  con-
<c  quered  by  your  arms,  and  now  enjoy,  fhould  not,  as  they
<c  now,  are,  be  poflefied  by  thofe,  who  have  the  leaft  fhame,
cC  and  who  are  not  intitled  to  them  either  by  gift,  or  pur-
cC  chafe ;  but,  by  thofe  among  you,  who  have  no  lands  of
<c  their  own,  to  the  end  that,  as  you  are  free  men,  you  may
“  not  be  fervants  to  others,  nor  cultivate  their  lands,  inftead
u  of  your  own:  For  a  generous  fpirit  cannot  dwell  in  the
u  breafts  of  men  in  want  of  daily  fuftenance.  But,  above  all
“  thefe  things,  I  have  determined  to  render  our  conftitution
“  equal,  and  common  to  all;  and  that2jufticebe,  impartially,
<c  adminiftered  to  all,  and  againft  all :  For  fome  are  arrived
“  to  that  degree  of  infolence,  that  they  take  upon  them-
“  felves  to  infult  the  common  people,  and  do  not  look  upon

s*  A ixaix  oftoict.  I  have  given  the  this  pafTage,  to  opouos  <xy.(potv  dK^ootS-a^
fame  fenfe  to  o^oux,  in  this  place,  that  which,  he  tells  his  judges,  was  part  of
*  Demofthenes  has  given  to  opoiw  in  the  oath  they  had  taken.

*  I7fg»  ri <p-

X


VOL.  II.


4<  the


! 6 2  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  W.

u  the  poor  among  you  to  be,  even,  free  men.  To  the  end*
u  therefore,  that  great  men  may  receive  juftice  from,  and
<c  do  juftice  to,  their  inferiors,  I  will  provide  fuch  laws,  as
<c  (ball,  without  diftincftion,  prevent  violence,  and  preferve
u  juftice ;  and  I  myfelf  will  never  ceafe  to  fipport  the
“  9  equality  of  all  the  citizens.”

X.  While  he  was  fpeaking,  the  aflembly,  greatly,  extolled
him,  fome  for  his  fidelity,  and  juftice  to  his  benefactors ;
others,  for  his  humanity,  and  generality  to  the  poor ;  and
others  for  his  moderation,  and  public  fpirit  towards  thofe
of  an  inferior  rank  ;  but  all  loved,  and  admired  him  for
making  the  laws,  and  juftice,  the  rules  of  his  government.
After  the  aftembly  was  diffolved,  the  following  days  he
ordered  a  lift  to  be  made  of  all  the  infolvent  debtors,  toge¬
ther  with  the  fum  each  of  them  owed  refpeCtively  ;  and  this
lift  being  delivered  to  him,  he  commanded  tables  to  be
placed  in  the  forum ;  and,  in  the  prefence  of  all  the  citizens*
paid  the  money  to  their  creditors.  Having  done  this,  he  pub-
liftred  a  royal  edid,  by  which  it  was  ordained,  that  all  thofe,
who  enjoyed  the  profits  of  the  public  lands,  and  had  converted
them  to  their  own  ufe,  fhould  quit  pofleftion  within  a  limited

9*  Icviyo^ou;-  Portus  has  tranflated  neither  has  he  propofed  to  redrefs  this
this,  aequalem  dicendi  lihertatem ,  which,  complaint :  But  he  has  complained  of
though  it  may  be  the  literal  fenfe  of  the  infolence  of  the  great  men  ;  and,
the  word,  is  not,  I  think.  That,  in  to  reform  this,  he  has  promifed  to
which  our  author  has  taken  it-,  fince  introduce  an  equal  form  of  govern-
it  has  no  relation  either  to  the  evils  ment,  an  equal  adrniniftration  of
Tullius  fays  the  people  had  reafon  to  juftice,  and  equal  laws.  I  have,  there-
complain  of,  or  to  the  remedies  he  fore,  underftood  dntxvlm  itryiyo^ia,  in
propo'es  for  thofe  evils.  Among  diefe  this  place,  to  relate  to  an  equality  of
evils,  he  has, never,  mentioned  their  be-  all  the  citizens,
ing  deprived  of  an  equal  liberty  offpeech ,

time*


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  163
time,  and  that  thofe  citizens,  who  had  no  lands,  fhould  give
in  their  names  to  him.  He,  alfo,  compiled,  and  renewed
fome  old  laws  ena&ed  by  Romulus,  and  Numa  Pompilius,
which  had  been  neglected ;  and  others  he  himfelf  eftablifhed.
While  he  was  purfuing  thefe  meafures,  the  patricians,  find¬
ing  they  tended  to  deftroy  the  power  oi  the  fenate,  were,
highly,  offended,  and  entered  upon  counfels  contrary  to
Thofe  they  had,  before,  refolved  on  :  For,  at  firft,  they  had
determined  to  deprive  him  of  his  illegal  power  ;  to  appoint
interreges ;  and,  by  their  means,  to  chufe  a  perfo'n,  qualified
by  law,  to  govern  :  Whereas,  they,  now,  thought  it  moft
advifeable  to  acquiefce  under  their  prefent  circumftances,
and  to  be  pafiive :  For  they  concluded  that,  if  the  fenate
brought  the  man  they  propofed  into  the  adminiftration  of
the  public  affairs,  the  people,  when  they  came  to  give  their
votes,  would  oppofe  them;  and,  if  they  left  the  election
of  the  king  to  the  people,  all  the  curiae  would  chufe  Tullius,
and,  confequently,  he  would  appear  to  have  a  legal  title  to
govern.  They  thought  it,  therefore,  better  for  them  to
fuffer  him  to  continue  in  the  poffeflion  of  the  fovereignty
by  ftealth,  and  by  deceiving,  rather  than  perfuading  the
citizens,  and,  openly,  receiving  it.  But  none  of  their  defigns
fucceeded;  fo  artfully  did  Tullius  defeat  them,  and,  con¬
trary  to  their  defire,  kept  poffeflion  of  the  kingdom.  For,
having,  long  before,  caufed  a  report  to  be  fpread  about  the
city,  that  the  patricians  were  forming  treacherous  defigns
againft  him,  he  came  into  the  forum,  meanly  dreffed,  and
with  a  countenance  full  of  forrow,  his  mother  Ocrifia,

X  2  Tanaquil,


1 64  ROMAN  ANTIQJCJITIES  OF  Book  IV.

Tanaquil,  the  wife  of  Tarquinius,  and  all  the  royal  family
attending  him  ;  and  the  people  flocking,  in  great  numbers,
to  fo  unexpected  a  fight,  he  aflembled  all  the  citizens,  and,
afcending  the  tribunal,  {poke  to  them  in  this  manner:

XI.  “  The  children  of  Tarquinius  are,  no  longer,  the
<c  only  perfons  expofed  to  the  feverity  of  their  enemies,  but
“  my  life,  alfo,  is,  now,  in  danger;  and  I  have  reafon  to
“  fear  that  I  fihall  be,  cruelly,  requited  for  my  juftice.  For
“  the  patricians  have  formed  treacherous  defigns  againft  me,
u  and  I  have  received  information  that  fome  of  them  have
u  confpired  to  kill  me,  without  being  able  to  charge  me
<c  with  any  crime  ;  but,  refenting  the  benefits  I  have  con-
<c  ferred,  and  am  prepared  to  confer  upon  the  people,  they
“  look  upon  thofe  benefits  as  fo  many  injuries,  undefervedly,
“  accumulated  upon  themfelves.  Some  of  thefe  are  ufurers^
<c  who  complain  of  me  for  not  fuffering  the  poorer  fort
“  among  you  to  be  carried  to  prifon  by  them  for  non-pay-
“  ment  of  their  debts,  and  to  be  deprived  of  their  liberty;.
“  others  are  fuch,  as  rob  the  public,  and  enjoy  the  lands
<c  you  have  purchafed  with  your  blood  :  Thefe,  finding
<c  themfelves  obliged  to  quit  the  pofleflion  of  thofe  lands,  are
“  as  angry  as  if  they  were 10  deprived  of  their  paternal  eftates,


10*  ritrTrig  Ten  xoa

a  rtx,  ccAAo^itf  uttoSiSovIes.  This  com¬
plaint,  too  common  in  cafes  of  refti-
tution,  is  loft  in  all  the  editions,  and
manufcripts,  without  excepting,  even.
That  of  the  Vatican,  though  this  be¬
gins  the  following  fentence  with  oi  Si
avetpwa  tcuv  etc^o^m.  1  am  furprifed
none  of  the  tranflators,  or  commen¬


tators,  faw  that  the  text  was  here  cor¬
rupted,  and  that  oi  tu  «aao7^/<»  cmoSi-
Sovltg  could  not  belong  to  Si  Si  caH/usvot
t m  earQog&ov.  I  have  made  no  other
alteration  in  the  words  of  the  text,
than  That  of  o»  into  ov,  which,  how¬
ever  final],  is  fufficient  to  do  juftice
to  Dionyiius,  by  ftriking  out  a  noble
thought  from  confufton.


c<  and


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  165

“  and  not  compelled  to  reftore  Thofe,  that  belong  to  others :

“  And  others,  who  have  contributed  nothing  to  the  expences
<£  of  the  wars,  think  it  hard  to  be  obliged  to  give  in  a
<c  valuation  of  their  pofleftions,  and  to  pay  taxes  in  pro-
£C  portion  to  that  valuation.  But  the  general  complaint  of
“  them  all  is,  that,  from  this  time,  they  will  be  taught  to
<c  live  according  to  written  laws ;  and  both  to  do  juftice
cc  to  you  without  diftindtion,  and  receive  it  from  you  ;  and
u  not  to  abufe  the  poor  in  the  manner  they  now  do,  as  if
<c  they  were  flaves  they  had  purchafed  with  their  money;
cc  Thefe  complaints  they  have  communicated  to  one  another,
“  and  have  come  to  a  refolution,  which  they  have  confirmed
“  by  their  oaths,  to  recal  the  banifiied  men,  and  to  reftore
£C  the  kingdom  to  Marcius  fons,  againft  whom  you  have
£C  decreed  an  interdidfion  of  fire,  and  water,  for  having  afiaf-
€C  finated  Tarquinius,  your  king,  a  worthy  man,  and  a  lover
cc  of  his  country ;  and,  after  they  had  committed  fo  wicked
“  an  a dt,  for  having  fled  from  juftice,  and  contrived  to  baniftr
“  themfelves.  And,  if  I  had  not  received  early  information
“  of  thefe  defigns,  they  had,  with  the  afiiftance  of  a  foreign
“  force,  introduced  the  banifhed  men  into  the  city,  in  the
“  middle  of  the  night.  You  all  know  what  would  have
“  been  the  confequence  of  this,  without  my  acquainting-
“  you  with  it:  That  the  Marcii,  fupported  by  the  patricians,
u  having  obtained  the  power  without  any  trouble,  would,'
firft,.  have  feized  me,  as  the  guardian  of  the  royal  family ,
u  and  the  perfon,  who  pronounced  fen tence  againft  them;
iC  and,  after  that,  have  deftroyed  thefe  children,  and  all  the

u  other


1 66  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

C£  other  relatians,  and  friends  of  Tarquinius ;  and,  as  they
“  are  of  an  exceeding  favage,  and  tyrannical  nature,  they
u  would  have  treated  our  wives,  mothers,  daughters,  and
£C  all  the  female  fex,  like  Haves.  If  it  is  your  pleafure,  alfo,
“  Romans,  to  recal  the  aflaffins,  and  make  them  kings ;
££  to  banifh  the  fons  of  your  benefactors,  and  to  deprive
££  them  of  the  kingdom  their  grandfather  left  them,  we  fhall
££  fubmit  to  our  fate.  But  we  all,  together  with  our  wives,
£C  and  children,  make  Application  to  you,  by  all  the  gods,
££  and  genius’s,  who  watch  over  the  affairs  of  men,  that,
££  in  return  for  the  many  benefits  Tarquinius,  the  grand-
“  father  of  thefe  children,  never  ceafed  to  confer  upon  you ;
££  in  return  for  the  many  fervices  I  myfelf  have,  as  far  as  I
££  have  been  able,  done  you,  you  will  grant  us  this  fingle
“  favor,  to  declare  your  own  fentiments :  For,  if  you  think
££  any  other  perfons  more  worthy  of  this  honor,  the  children,
ct  with  all  the  other  relations  of  Tarquinius,  fhall  withdraw
££  themfelves  from  your  city  :  As  for  myfelf,  I  fhall  take  a
££  more  generous  refolution  :  For  I  have,  already,  lived  long
C£  enough  both  for  virtue,  and  for  glory ;  and,  if  I  am
££  difappointed  of  your  favor,  which  I  look  upon  as  the
££  greateft  of  all  advantages,  I  will  never  live  difregarded
££  among  any  other  people.  Take,  then,  the  rods,  and  give
££  them,  if  you  think  fit,  to  the  patricians;  my  prefence  fhall
££  give  you  no  trouble.”

XII.  While  he  was  faying  this,  and  offering  to  leave  the
tribunal,  they  all  raifed  a  vaft  clamor ;  and,  mixing  tears
with  their  in  treaties,'  befought  him  to  ftay,  and  continue  in

the


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  S I S.  167

the  adminiftration  of  affairs  without  fearing  any  man.
After  which,  fome  of  his  emiflaries,  who  had  placed  them-
felves  in  different  parts  of  the  forum,  cried  out  that  they
ought  to  make  him  king ;  and,  defiring  the  curiae  might
be  called  together,  infifted  upon  its  being  put  to  the  vote.
After  thefe  had  fet  the  example,  the  whole  body  of  the
people  were  of  the  fame  opinion  :  Tullius,  feeing  this,
refolved  not  to  let  flip  the  opportunity,  but  told  them  that
he  thought  himfelf  under  great  obligations  to  them  for  re¬
membering  the  fervices  they  had  received  from  him ;
and,  having  affured  them  he  would  yet  do  them  many
more,  if  they  thought  proper  to  make  him  king,  he  ap¬
pointed  a  day  for  the  election  ;  and,  ordered  all  the  inhabi¬
tants  of  the  country,  as  well  as  Thofe  of  the  city,  to  be  prefent
at  it.  The  people  being  afiembled  on  the  day  appointed,,
he  called  the  curiae,  and  took  the  votes  of  each  curia,  one
by  one  :  And,  being  by  all  the  curiae  judged  worthy  of
the  royal  dignity,  he,  then,  accepted  it  from  the  plebeians,
without  fhewmg  any  regard  to  the  fenate,  who  refufed  to
confirm  the  proceedings  of  the  people  according  to  their
cuftom.  Being  advanced  to  the  fovereignty  by  thefe
means,  he  became  the  author  of  many  civil  inffitutions  $
and  carried  on  a  great,  and  memorable  war  againft  the
Tyrrhenians.  But  I  fhall,  firft,  give  an  account  of  his  civil
inftitutions.

XIII.  As  foon  as  he  was  invefled  with  the  government,
he  divided  the  public  lands  among  fuch  of  the  Romans,  as,

having


1 6 8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.


"having  no  lands  of  their  own,  cultivated  Thofe  of  others.
After  which,  he  confirmed,  in  an  aflembly  of  the  curiae,
both  the  laws  concerning  private  contra&s,  and  Thofe  re¬
lating  to  injuries :  Thefe  were  about  fifty  in  number  ;  of
which  I  need  not  make  any  mention  at  prefent.  He,  alfo,
added  "two  hills  to  the  city,  That  called  the  Viminal,  and
the  Efquiline  hill ;  each  of  which  form  in  extent  a  con-
fiderable  city:  Thefe  he  divided  among  fuch  of  the  Ro¬
mans,  as  had  no  houfes,  to  the  intent  that  they  might  build
there;  and  he  himfelf  fixed  his  habitation  in  the  moft
convenient  part  of  the  Efquiline  hill.  This  king  was  the
laft,  who  enlarged  the  circumference  of  the  city  by  the  addi¬
tion  of  thefe  two  hills  to  the  other  five,  having  firft  confulted
the  aufpices,  as  the  lav/  directed,  and  performed  the  other
religious  rites.  Further  than  this  the  city  has  not,  fince,  been
extended,  the  gods,  as  they  fay,  not  allowing  it :  But  all  the
inhabited  parts  round  it,  which  are  many,  and  large,  are  open,
and  without  walls,  and  very  much  expofed  to  the  invafion


xi*  sjtvset.  This  word  has  been,
already,  explained  in  the  eighteenth
annotation  on  the  fecond  book.  Here
it,  evidently,  fignifies  thofe  among  the
Romans,  who,  having  no  laads  of
their  own,  cultivated  Thofe  of  others,
me  pj&va  x.Atj^ov  e%ov7<xf,  *  at

a  Tag  iJt&e  yiui^favhxej  as  TulllUS
had  defcribed  them  in  his  fpeech  to  the
people,  when  he  acquainted  them  with
his  defign  of  dividing  the  public  lands
among  thofe,  who  had  none  of  their
own.  This  promife  he,  now,  performs.

fB.  i.  c.  44.  eB.  ii.


12‘  Auo  \o<$xe Ov'iuivotXiov,  xai  I<rxuA»vov.
f  Livy,  alfo,  fays  that  Servius  Tullius
added  the  Mons  Viminalis ,  and  Efqui-
linus  to  the  city  *,  and  that  he  himfelf
lived  upon  the  latter  in  order  to  dignify
the  place  ;  ibique  ipfe ,  ut  loco  dignitas
fieret ,  habitat.  It  is  true  that  sLivy
fays  he  added,  alfo,  the  Mons  Quiri-
nalis  :  But  we  have,  already,  feen  by
our  author,  that  this  was  done  by
Romulus,  and  Tatius-,  which  is  con¬
firmed  by h  Strabo  as  to  Romulus.

c.  50.  h  B.  v.  p.  358.

of


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  SENS  I  S.  169

of  an  enemy.  And,  whoever  confiders  thefe  buildings,  and
defires  to  examine  the  extent  of  Rome,  he  will,  neceffarily,
be  milled,  for  want  of  a  certain  boundary,  that  might  di-
ftinguifh  the  fpot,  to  which  the  city  extends,  and  where  it
ends  ;  fo  conne&ed  are  the  buildings  within  the  walls  to
Thofe  without,  that  they  appear  to  the  fpe&ators  like  a  city
of  an  immenfe  extent.  But,  if  any  one  is  delirous  to
meafure  the  circumference  of  it  by  the  wall,  which,  though
hard  to  be  difcovered  by  reafon  of  the  buildings,  that  fur-
round  it  in  many  places,  yet  preferves,  in  feveral  parts  of  it,
fome  traces  of  the  ancient  ftrudture ;  and,  to  compare  it  with
the  circumference  of  the  city  of  Athens,  the  circuit  of  Rome
will  not  appear  much  greater,  than  That  of  the  other.
But,  concerning  the  extent,  and  beauty  of  the  city  of  Rome
in  its  prefent  condition,  I  fhall  fpeak  in  a  more  proper
place.

XIV.  After  Tullius  had  furrounded  the  feven  hills  with
one  wall,  he  divided  the  city  into  four  regions,  giving  to
them  the  names  of  the  hills :  The  firft  he  called  the  Pala¬
tine,  the  fecond  the  Suburran,  the  third  the  Colline,  and
the  fourth  the  Efquiline  region ;  by  which  means,  he  made
the  city  to  contain  four  tribes,  which  had,  till  then,  confifted
but  of  three  ;  and  he  ordered  that  the  citizens  inhabiting
each  of  the  four  regions,  like  perfons  living  in  villages,
fhould  neither  take  another  houfe,  give  in  their  names  for
foldiers  in  any  other  place,  nor  pay  their  contributions  ap¬
propriated  to  military  ufes,  and  other  purpofes,  which  every
man  was  bound  to  pay  for  the  fervice  of  the  commonwealth;
Vol.  II.  Y  neither


i ;o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

neither  did  he,  after  this,  levy  foldiers,  as  before,  according
to  the  divifion  of  the  13  three  national,  but  according  to
That  of  the  four  local,  tribes  eftablifhed  by  himfelf ;  and,
over  each  tribe,  he  appointed  commanders,  in  the  nature
of  chiefs  of  tribes,  or  villages,  whom  he  ordered  to  take  an
account  of  the  houfe  every  man  lived  in.  After  this,  he
commanded  chapels  to  be  eredted  in  every  ftreet,  by  the
inhabitants  of  the  neighbourhood,  to  the  heroes,  whole
ftatues  are  placed  in  the  14 porticos  of  thofe  chapels;  and
made  a  law  that  facrifices  fhould  be  performed  to  them
every  year,  each  family  contributing  a  cake.  He  dire&ed,
alfo,  that  the  perfons,  who  attended,  and  aflifted  thofe,  who
performed  the  facrifices  in  thefe  porticos  on  behalf  of  the
neighbourhood,  fhould  not  be  free  men,  but  Haves ;  the

which  he  is  followed  by  the  French
tranfiators.  Sylburgius  has  faid  geniis
compitalibus.  I  have  given  the  fame
fenle  to  wgovcoTrtoi,  that 1  Aefchylus  gives
to  srfomia  in  this  verfe,  •

ITPONAIA^  sv  Aa  you;  'nrgspGivtlxt.

Upon  which,  the  Greek  fcholiaft  quotes
the  following  verfe  from  Callimachus  j

X’  r,  ria^stf,  AtXQot  n>  Iff  tfyvoflo  UP0NA1HN.

Pallas  was,  alfo,  called  zrgo vxix,  as  we
find  in  Harpocration,  who  gives  this
realon  for  it,  Six  to  zet^o  th  \xn  iS^voS-xi,
becaufe  her  temple  was  placed  before
That  of  Apollo  at  Delphi.  This  I
take  to  be  the  fenle  of  which

is,  thus,  explained  by  k  Julius  Pollux,

U^0VU7TUH,  T«  KT£0  TUV  Q'VgWVt

kE.  ii.  c.  4.  fegm.  53,

miniftry


33'  K ou  nx  eh  xxlx  r otf  rg&s  rat

yivixag  xIiuJikoCj  u;  a r^oh^ov,  no. lx

ra?  T£<rsra^af  t«?  T07T/it«f,  xxi  txc  C<p>‘

savin  Sixl  ayQ&cx ?  £7roial o.  This,  and  the
next  period,  are  tranfpofed  by  M.***.
I  fhall  defer  entering  into  a  detail  of
the  tribes,  till  I  come  to  the  trial  of
Coriolanus.  In  the  mean  time,  it  will
be  fuffieient  to  take  notice  that  the
three  national  tribes ,  Kxi  ytvmxiy  were
the  Ramnenfes ,  Ratienfes ,  and  Luceres ,
inftituted  by  Romulus  j  and  the  four
local  tribes ,  to7tikxi  ,  thofe,  juft

now,  mentioned  by  our  author.  I
much  fufpedt  that  the  laft  kxi  was  added
by  the  tranfcibers.

34*  Hjwi  ar^ovw7r;o<f.  The  tranfiators
are  much  divided  in  rendering  this
pafiage.  Portus  has  faid  laribus,  in

‘Eumenid.  jfr.  21.


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  AS  SENSIS.  i  yt

miniftry  of  flaves  being  looked  upon  as  more  acceptable  to
the  heroes,  than  That  of  free  men  :  Which  fefti  val  the
Romans,  flail,  continue  to  celebrate  in  a  very  folemn,  and
magnificent  manner,  a  few  days  after  the  Saturnalia,  calling
it 15  Compitalia ,  from  Compita ,  which,  in  their  language,
fignifies  Streets :  In  which,  they  preferve  the  ancient  cufcom
of  performing  thefe  propitiatory  facrifices  to  the  heroes,  by
the  miniftry  of  flaves ;  and,  during  thefe  days,  they  take
away  every  badge  of  their  flavery,  to  the  end  that  the  flaves,
being  foftened  by  this  inftance  of  humanity,  which  has
fomething  great,  and  folemn  in  it,  fhould  render  themfelves
more  acceptable  to  their  mafters,  and  be  lefs  fenfible  of  the
feverity  of  their  condition.

XV.  Tullius,  alfo,  divided  the  whole  country  into  fix
and  twenty  parts,  as  Fabius  writes,  which  he,  alfo,  calls
Tribes  ;  and,  adding  the  four  city  tribes  to  them,  he  makes
the  number  of  both  to  amount  to  thirty.  Cato  makes  the
whole  number  of  tribes  to  have  been  the  fame  under  Tullius.
But,  according  to  Venonius,  Tullius  divided  the  country
into  16  one  and  thirty  tribes :  So  that,  with  the  four  city

Ts-  KofxTrflaM*.  This  was  a  move-  I  fuppofe,  not,  conftantly,  on  the
able  feaft  among  the  Romans.  We  fourth  of  the  nones  of  January  ;  fince
find,  here,  that  it  was  celebrated  a  few  111  Cicero  fays  to  Atticus,  Ego  quoniam
days  after  the  1  Saturnalia  :  Now,  the  in  1.  non.  Januar.  Compitalitius  dies ■
laft  feftival  was  begun  to  be  celebrated,  ejl ,  nolo  eo  die  in  Albanum  venire ,  ne
in  our  author’s  time,  on  the  fixteenth  molejlus  fim  familiae.
before  the  calends  of  January,  the  l6>  E<$  /wav  k<u  t^hxkovIoi.  cpvAa?.  There
•feventeenth  of  December,  after  Julius  is  a  note  in  Hudfon  upon  this  occa-
Caefar  had  reformed  the  calendar,  fion,  in  which  Sigonius  is  quoted  for  a
Before  that,  the  Compitalia  were,  tho*,  reading  in  the  manufcript  of  Cardinal

1  Macrob.  Saturn.  B.  i.  c.  10.  ,n  Ad  Attic.  B.  vii.  Epift.  7.

Y  2


tribes,


172  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookIV,

tribes,  the  number  of  thirty  five  tribes,  which  fubfifts  to  this
day,  was  completed.  Fie  deferves  the  more  to  be  credited  in
not  fixing  the  number  of  the  parts,  into  which  the  country
was  divided.  After  Tullius,  therefore,  had  divided  the
country  into  a  certain  number  of  parts,  whatever  that  was,
he  built  places  of  refuge  upon  fuch  eminences,  as  could  beft
provide  for  the  fecurity  of  the  hufbandmen;  to  which
he  gave  a  Greek  appellation,  calling  them  Uotyoi,  Hills .
To  thefe  places  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  repaired


upon  the  appearance  of  an

Beflarion,  which,  as  it  reftores  this
paffage,  otherwife  very  obfcure,  I  have
followed  in  the  tranflation.  It  is  fome-
thing  very  furprifing  that  M.  *  *  *
fhould  have  tranflated  this  note  with¬
out  mentioning  Hudfon’s  name.  Ve-
nonius,  here  quoted,  is  fuppofed  to  be
the  fame  hiftorian  Atticus  fpeaks  of,
when  he  is  endeavouring  to  perfuade
r‘  Cicero  to  write  hiftory.  It  is  not
certain  when  he  lived.  I  /hall  ffiew,
when  we  come  to  the  trial  of  Corio-
lanus,  that  it  is  impoffibie  there  could
have  been  five  and  thirty  tribes  in  the
time  of  Sernas  Tullius,  as  Venonius
afferted.  But  here  arifes  a  difficulty  :
The  Vatican  manufcript,  which  agrees
with  the  other  in  every  thing  but  in
the  Name  of  Venonius,  who  is  called,
there,  Ennonius,  applies  ct^ioyri^olt^og  to
Ennonius,  and  Sigonius  applies  it  to
Cato :  Now,  I  think  it  applicable  to
neither  with  regard  to  this  fadt ;  not
to  Cato,  becaufe  he  afferts  that  there
was  the  whole  number  of  tribes  in  the
reign  of  Tullius  :  Nor  to  Venonius,
or  Ennonius,  becaufe  he  fays  that

*  JDe  Leg.  B.  i.  c.  z


enemy,  and,  generally,  paffed

Tullius  divided  the  country  into  thirty
one  tribes.  Whereas,  the  author,  to
whom  Dionyfius  gives  the  charadter
of  «|»07r<rc7ff0f,  does  not  fix  the  num¬
ber  of  parts,  into  which  the  country
was  divided,  ogiget  tojv  fxoi^m  tov
*,  or,  which  is  the  fame  thing,
does  not  fix  the  number  of  tribes  :
For,  it  appears  throughout  that  the
country  was  divided  by  Tullius,  into
as  many  parts,  as  there  were  ruftic
tribes.  Since,  therefore,  the  epithet
of  «|<o7r<5’o?f^of  is  not  applicable,  upon
this  occafion,  either  to  Cato,  or  Ve¬
nonius,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that
the  name  of  the  author,  to  whom  Dio¬
nyfius  applied  it,  is  loft  in  all  the
editions,  and  manufcripts.  Befides,  it
feems  ftrange  that  he  ffiould  commend
the  authority  of  Cato,  or  Venonius,
and  yet  follow  neither,  which  it  is
plain  he  has  not  done  :  For  0  he  fays
there  were  no  more  than  one,  or  two
and  twenty  tribes,  when  Coriolanus
was  tried,  that  is,  eighty  feven  years
after  the  time  he,  now,  fpeaks  of.


°B.  vii.  c.  64.


the


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN  ASSE  NS  I  S.  373

the  night  there.  Thefe,  alfo,  had  their  governors,  vvhofe
duty  it  was  to  take  an  account  of  the  names  of  all  the
huibandmen,  who  belonged  to  the  fame  village,  and  of
the  lands,  by  the  culture  of  which  they  maintained  them-
felves.  And,  whenever  there  was  occalion  to  fummon  the
huibandmen  to  take  arms,  or  to  colled  the  contributions,
that  were  affeffed  on  each  of  them,  thefe  governors  were  to
bring  the  men  together,  and  levy  the  money ;  and,  to  the
end  that  the  number  of  thefe  hufbandmen  might  be,,  eafily,
found,  and,  clearly,  computed,  he  ordered  them  to  ered
altars  to  the  gods,  who  prefided  over,  and  were  guardians  or,
the  village,  whom  he  direded  them  to  honor  by  common
facrifices  every  year  ;  at  which  they  were  all  to  aflemble  3
and,  upon  this  occafion  alfo,  he  appointed  a  feftival  of  great
folemnity,  called  17  Paganalia ;  and  compofed  laws  concern¬
ing  thefe  facrifices,  which  the  Romans  obferve  to  this  day.
To  the  expence  of  this  facrifice,  and  of  this  congregation,
he  ordered  all  thofe  of  the  fame  village  to  contribute,  by
paying  each  of  them  a  certain  piece  of  money  ;  one  fort  of
which  was  to  be  paid  by  the  men,  another  by  the  women,
and  a  third  by  the  children  :  When  thefe  pieces  of  money


l7'  n*yctmXioi.  This  feftival  is
thought  to  have  been  celebrated  by
the  Roman?,  on  the  fixth  before  the
nones  of  May,  the  fecond  of  that
month,  after  they  had  done  lowing
their  fummer  corn,  which  feems  late
for  their  climate  ^  fince,  in  many  parts
of  England,  that  feed  time  is  over  by


the  fecond  of  May.  However,  this
feftival  is  thus  defcribed  by  p  Ovid  *,

Villi  ce^da  requiem  terrae, femente  per  aft  dr
Da  requiem ,  terram  qui  coluere ,  viris.
Vagus  agatfefium.  Pagum  lufirate,ccloni\
Et  date  paganis  annua  lib  a  focis.


realtor.  jEL  i.  f,  66 j.


were


174  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.


were  told  by  thofe,  who  prefided  at  the  facrifices,  the  number
of  people,  diftinguifhed  by  their  fex,  and  age,  became
known.  Being,  alfo,  defirous,  as  18  Lucius  Pifo  writes  in  the
firft  book  of  his  annals,  to  know  the  number  of  the  inha¬
bitants  of  Rome,  and  of  all,  who  were  born,  and  died,  and
arrived  to  the  age  of  manhood,  he  fixed  the  value  of  the
piece  of  money,  which,  for  each  of  them  refpedlively,  was
to  be  paid  by  their  relations  into  the  treafury  of  Uithyia
(called,  by  the  Romans,  19  Juno  Lucina)  for  thofe  who  were
born;  into  That  of  Venus  (called,  by  them,  20  Libitina)
fituated  in  a  grove,  for  fuch  as  died ;  and  into  the  treafury
of 21  Juventus,  for  thofe,  who,  then,  arrived  to  the  age  of
manhood  :  By  which  pieces  of  money,  he  could,  every  year,
know  both  the  number  of  all  the  inhabitants,  and  which  of
them  had  attained  the  military  age.  After  he  had  eftablifhed
thefe  things,  he  ordered  all  the  Romans  to  regifter  their
names,  and  give  in  a  valuation  of  their  poffeflions,  and,  at


A evjcjof  n«<rwv.  See  the  25th  an¬
notation  on  the  firft  book.

J9‘  H £<xv  pwc (pogov.  The  Latin  tranf-
lators  have  rendered  this,  very  proper¬
ly,  Juno  Lucina.  q  Cicero  fhews  her  to
be  the  fame  goddefs  with  the  Diana  of
the  Greeks  Luna  eft  Lucina.  Itaque ,
ut  apud  Graecos ,  Dianam ,  eamque  Luci-
feram,yfc,  apud  noftros ,  Junonem  Lu-
cinam  in  pariendo  invocant.  She  is
reprefented  on  the  reverfe  of  a  medal
of  Fauftina  Aug.  Pii,  like  a  matron,
holding, in  her  right  hand, a  patera,  and,
in  her  left,  a  fpear,  with  this  infcription,

IVNONI  LVCINAE.

sDe  Nat.  Deor.  B.  ii.c,  27.


20 *  AiSiltvtjv.  This  goddels,  every
body  knows,  prefided  over  funerals.
The  regifter  of  the  dead,  kept  by  the
treafurers  of  Venus  Libitina,  is  called,
by  r  Suetonius,  Ratio  Libitinae ;  Pefti-
lentia  unius  autumni ,  quo  triginta  June -
rum  millia  in  rationem  Libitinae  ve-
nerunt.

21  *  N«o7»j7or.  This  goddefs  was
called,  by  the  Romans,  Juventus ,
Juventas ,  and  Juventa.  She  is  re¬
prefented  like  Flora  ;  and,  I  believe,
often,  miftaken  for  her  by  the  anti¬
quaries.

*

/

r  Life  of  Nero,  c.  39.


the


BooklV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  A  R  N  A  SSENSIS.  175

the  fame  time,  to  take  the  oath  appointed  by  law,  that  they
had  given  in  a  true,  and,  in  all  refpedts,  a  juft  valuation.
They  were,  alfo,  to  fet  down  the  names  of  their  parents,-
with  their  own  age,  and  the  names  of  their  wives,  and  chil-
dren ;  and  every  man  was  to  declare  in  what  part  of  the
city,  or,  in  what  village  in  the  country,  he  lived :  And  the
punifhment  he  ordained  againft  thofe,  who  failed  to  regifter
all  thefe  particulars,  was,  that  their  pofleflions  fhould  be
forfeited,  and  themfelves  whipped,  and  fold  for  flaves :
Which  law  continued,  long,  in  force  among  the  Romans.

XVI.  After  all  had  given  in  the  account  required,  he
took  the  regifter ;  and,  obferving  both  the  number,  and  the
greatnefs  of  their  fortunes,  he  introduced  the  wifeft  of  all
inftitutions,  from  whence  the  Romans  derive  the  greateft
advantages,  as  the  effedls  of  it  have  fhewn;:  the  inftitution-
was  this :  He  felecfed  from  the  whole  number  of  the  citi¬
zens,  one  part,  confifting  of  thofe,  whofe  pofteftions  were  the
largeft,  and  amounted  to  no  lefs  than  22  one  hundred  minae  ;
of  thefe  he  formed  eighty  centuries,  whom  he  ordered  to  be
armed  with  23  Argolic  bucklers,  with  pikes,  brazen  helmets,
corflets,  greaves,  and  fwords :  Thefe  centuries  he  divided
into  two  bodies,  of  forty  centuries  each ;  the  firft  of  which
confifted  of  the  younger  fort,  whom  he  appointed  to  take  the
field  in  time  of  war  ;  and  the  other,  of  the  elder  fort,  whofe:

22-  EkuIov  /uvuiv.  According  to  Ar-  reading  of  the  Vatican  manufcript;.
buthnot,  a  mina  amounted  to  3l.4s.7d.  and,  certainly,  preferable  to  a^yv^uas
fterling  :  Confequently,  one  hundred  in  Stephens’s  edition.  Concerning
minae  will  make  322/.  i8j.  4 d.  thefe  bucklers,  fee  the  59th  annotation*

23*  A cmJaj.  AqyoAiKM.  This  is  the  on  the  firft  book.


i76  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookIV.

duty  it  was,  when  the  others  were  in  the  field,  to  remain
in  the  city,  and  defend  it.  This  was  the  firft  clafs.  In  an
engagement,  the  youth  were  ported  in  the  firft  line,  and
charged  firft.  A  iter  that,  from  thofe,  who  were  left,  he
took  another  part,  whofe  poffeflions,  upon  the  regifter,
were  24  under  ten  thoufand  drachmae,'  but  not  lefs  than
feventy  five  minae.  Of  this  part  he  formed  twenty  centuries,
whofe  arms  he  ordered  to  be  the  fame  with  Thofe  of  the
former,  except  the  corflets,  which  he  did  not  fuffer  them  to
wear  ;  and,  25  inftead  of  bucklers,  gave  them  ftiields :  Thefe


4,4 •  Ots  V}V  tvlof  [MV  jUVOlUV  c jU«0V
h  srevjs  l£$oy.viKOvl ot  juvwv  to  t

Our  author  reckons,  now,  by  drach¬
mae,  as  he  reckoned  before,  by  minae:
One  hundred  drachmae  make  one
mina  •,  confequently,  10,000  drachmae
make  100  minae,  or  322  /.  i8j.  4  d.
which  was  the  qualification  of  the  firft
clafs  ♦,  as  75  minae,  or  242  l.  %s.  9  d.
of  our  money,  was  the  qualification
of  the  fecond  •,  that  is,  the  qualifica¬
tion  of  the  fecond  clafs  was  a  fourth
lefs  than  That  of  the  firft.  I  find  that
le  Jay  has  underftood  all  along  that
the  members  of  the  firft  clafs  were  to
have  one  hundred,  and  Thofe  of  the
fecond  feventy  five  minae  annually ;
and  has  tranflated  thefe  paflages  ac¬
cording  to  that  fuppofition.  But  there
is  not  the  leaft  word  in  the  Greek  text
to  juftify  his  tranflation  :  Neither  can
it  be  imagined  that,  fo  early  as  the
reign  of  Servius  Tullius,  a  fufficient
number  could  have  been  found  of
men  poflefied  of  322  pounds  a  year  to
complete  the  eighty  centuries  of  the
Jirft  clafs.

s  B.  ii.  jr,  734.


25*  Avh  tojv  ctCTTiioev  u7rt$cdx.e  Svgtxs.
Arms  was  the  Clypeus ,  and  Svgeoe  the
Scutum  ;  as  the  Latin  tranflators  have,
very  well,  rendered  this  pafiage.  I
have  fhewn  in  a  note,  juft  before  re¬
ferred  to,  that  the  former  was  round,
and  the  latter  oblong.  I  know  it  is,
generally,  thought  that  the  u<r7rn,  fo
early  as  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war,
was  made  of  brafs  :  To  lupport  this,
the  following  verfe  of s  Virgil  is  quot¬
ed,  where  Anchifes  fays  to  his  fon,  as
they  were  making  their  efcape  from
Troy,

ArdentesClypeos^atque  asra  micantia  cerno.

To  this  I  fhall  oppofe  the  only  autho¬
rity,  that  can  be  oppofed  to  Virgil,  I
mean,  That  of  1  Homer,  who,  ex¬
prefly,  fays  that  the  bucklers,  both  of
the  Trojans,  and  Greeks,  were  made
of  leather,

A cT  ad  ftJwAw  Tgwt;  nai  S101  A^otiQi
Ayxv  ahAv,Kuv  ay,$i  s-yGirtri  B0EIA2
ASniAAS  ETKTKAOTX.

This  pafiage  anfwers  a  double  purpofc:

*11.  e.  f,  451.

centuries.


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  177


centuries,  alfo,  lie  divided  into  thofe,  who  were  above  forty
five  years  old,  and  thofe,  who  were  of  the  *6  military  age,


It  fhews,  not  only,  the  matter,  but,
alfo,  the  fhape  of  their  bucklers.  I
muff,  likewiie,  think  that,  if  the  a<nu~
& Ef  A fyo\ixou,  which  were  given  to  the
foldiers  of  the  firft  ciafs,  had  been  of
brafs,  our  author  would  have  applied
that  epithet  to  them,  as  well  as  to
their  which  he  has  not  done.

I  know  that v  Livy  fays  all  their  de-
fenuve  weapons  were  of  brafs  •,  Galea ,
clypeus ,  ocreae ,  lorica ,  omnia  ex  aere.
But,  it  is  very  poffible  that  he  may-
have  faid  this  with  relation  to  fubfe-
quent  times,  rather  than  to  That  of
Servius  Tullius  :  For  I  am  ready  to
own  that,  in  later  ages,  their  bucklers
were  made  of  brafs,  and  other  metal.
We  come,  now,  to  the  f cut  urn ,  S-vgtog.
This  was,  certainly,  made  of  thin
boards,  covered  with  neats  leather.
Pliny  fays  the  aquatic  trees  afforded
the  beft  wood  for  this  purpofe,  parti¬
cularly,  the  willow,  and  the  fig-tree  :
The  reafon  he  gives  for  it,  is,  that  the
wood  of  thefe  trees  is,  not  only,  the
lighted:  of  all  others,  but,  when  pierced
with  any  weapon,  contrails  itfelf  pre-
fently,  and  fhuts  up  its  own  wound  ;
which  makes  it  more  difficult  for  a
fword  to  pafs  through  it.  '"Quorum
plaga  contrahit  fe  protinus ,  clauditque
fuum  vulnus ,  et  ob  id  contumacius  tranf-
mittit  ferrum.  In  quo  genere  funt  ficus ,
falix ,  tilia,  betula ,  fambucus ,  populus
utraque.  Levifiima  ex  bis  ficus  et  falix ,
ideoque  utilifiimae.  For  this  reafon,  »?«<*,
which  fignifies  a  willow,  is  taken  by  the
poets  for  a  fhield,  as  j is  taken  for  a


Ipear,  becaufe  thefe  were  made  of  afh  ;

AAA\  (*>  zedlgwaiv  k  Ojuug

Ev  y  t  up  very  ^ooAkovcJJov  ITEAN  x.

IlviAiaUx  MEAtl  N,r>;V  Xagt  <$<AtoZ«rO£sXeg&,'V

(K  : .

The  Romans  ufed  many  forts  of
fhields,  mod:  of  which  are  reprefented
on  the  pillar  of  Trajan,  together  with
their  arms  both  offend ve, and  defendve.
The  reader  may,  alfo,  nnd  there  a
very  remarkable  kind  of  fhield,  called
by  2  Dion  Cadius,  ueiri Si;  oh  koiAou  cu-
Ayvoetfus  •,  thefe  were,  particularly,  ufed
in  forming  the  tefiudo.  Thefe  fhields
refembled  a  large  tube,  cut  in  two,
lengthwife.  It  is  remarkable  that  the
French  language  has  no  word  to  ex-
prefs  a  fhield  ;  which  has  obliged  the
two  French  trandators,  I  dare  fay,
very  much  againfl  their  will,  to  render
thefe  words,  avli  toiv  utnrtSoov  oo7Ti^uK€
au  lieu  de  boucliers prefque  ronds ,
il  leur  en  donna  d* autre s  plus  longs  que
larges ,  and,  le  bouclier  dune  forme  dif  -
ferente.

z6*  ZTgdliUClUOV  Yj AlKtOiV.  This  divi-
don,  plainly,  fhews  that  the  military
age  ended  at  forty  dve  years  complete:
It  is  not  fo  certain  when  it  began.
Many  are  of  opinion  that  it  was  at  the
end  of  the  fixteenth  year  ;  but  I  rather
think  that  the  military  age  did  not
begin,  I  mean  in  the  time  of  the  com¬
monwealth,  when  the  laws  were  in
vigor,  till  the  feventeenth  year  was
completed,  when  the  manly  gown,
toga  virilis ,  was  received.


B.  i.  c.  43.


aB.  xlix.  p.  468.

VOL.  II.


w  B.  xvi.  c.  40.


*  Eurip.  Troades,  jfr.  1 1  gz,  y Iliad,  v.  f.  143.


z


con-


1 7s  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.
conflituting  ten  centuries  of  the  younger  fort,  whofe  duty
it  was  to  ferve  their  country  in  the  field ;  and  ten  of  the
cider,  to  whom  he  committed  the  defence  of  the  walls.
This  was  the  fecond  clafs :  Their  poll  in  battles  was  in  the
fecond  line.  Of  thofe,  who  were  left,  he  formed  a  third
clafs,  confifting  of  fiich,  whofe  pofiefiions  were  under  feven
thoufand  five  hundred  drachmae,  but  not  lefs  than  fifty
minae  :  The  armour  of  thefe  he  diminiflhed,  not  only,  by
taking  away  the  corflets,  as  from  the  fecond,  but,  alfo,  the
greaves  :  He  formed,  likewife,  twenty  centuries  of  thefe,
dividing  them  like  the  former,  according  to  their  age,  and
afiigning  ten  centuries  to  the  younger  fort,  and  ten  to  the
elder.  In  a&ions,  the  poll:  of  thefe  centuries  was  in  the
third  line.

XVII.  Again,  he  took  from  thofe,  who  were  left,  fuch,
whofe  pofiefiions  were  lefs  than  five  thoufand  drachmae,  and
amounted  to  five  and  twenty  minae  ;  and  of  thefe  he  formed
a  fourth  clafs :  This  he,  alfo,  divided  into  twenty  centuries;
ten  of  which  he  compofed  of  fuch,  as  were  in  the  vigor  of
their  age  ;  and  the  other  ten  of  thofe,  who  were  part  it,  in
the  fame  manner  as  the  former :  He  ordered  the  arms  of  thefe
to  be  fhields,  fwords,  and  pikes ;  and  their  pofi:  in  engage¬
ments  to  be  in  the  27  laft  line.  The  filth  clafs  he  formed

Xracriv — vV<*V.  This  feems  con-  fourth  line,  confifting  of  the  fourth
trary  to  the  received  opinion,  which  clafs.  For  the  fifth  clafs  were,  cer-
fuppofes  the  Roman  armies  to  have  tainly,  light  armed  men,  who,  as  he
been  drawn  up  only  in  three  lines,  fays,  £ ra&ug  tggahvovlo-,  and  thefe
called  the  Hajlati ,  Principes,  and  Pri-  I  look  upon  to  have  been  called  by  the
arii :  Whereas,  our  author  fpeaks  of  a  Romans  Accenfi ,  as  the  fourth  line

of


r


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  II A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  179

of  thofe,  vvliofe  pofiofiions  were  from  twenty  five,  to  twelve
minae  and  a  half ;  which  he  divided  into  thirty  centuries :
Thefe  were,  alfo,  diftinguifhed  according  to  their  age  ;
fifteen  of  thefe  centuries  being  allotted  to  the  elder  fort,  and
fifteen  to  the  younger.  Thefe  he  armed  with  darts,  and
flings ;  and  placed  out  of  the  line  of  battle.  He  ordered
four  unarmed  centuries  to  follow  thofe,  who  were  armed ;
two  of  which  confifled  of  armourers,  and  carpenters,  and  of
thofe,  whofe  bufinefsit  was  to  prepare  every  thing,  that  might
be  of  ufe  in  time  of  war  ;  and  the  other  two  of  trumpeters,
and  blowers  of  the  horn,  and  of  fuch,  as,  with  any  other
inftruments,  founded  the  charge.  The  artificers  were
divided,  according  to  their  age,  into  two  centuries,  and
added  to  the  centuries  of  the  fecond  clafs ;  That  confiding
of  the  elder  artificers,  following  the  elder  centuries ;  and
That  of  the  younger,  the  younger  centuries.  The  trum¬
peters,  and  blowers  of  the  horn  were  added  to  the  fourth
clafs ;  and  one  of  their  centuries,  alfo,  confided  of  the  elder
fort,  and  the  other,  of  the  younger.  Out  of  all  the  cen¬
turies  the  braved  men  were  chofen  to  command  them  :

were  called  Rorarii.  aLivy,  in  defcrib-  cundum  Rorarios  minus  roboris  aetate
ing  the  method  of  the  Romans  in  fatti/que.  The  fifth  clafs  had  no  cer-
drawing  up  their  armies,  gives  the  firft  tain  poll,  but  ftood  in  the  rear  of  the
line  to  the  Hajlati ;  Primaacies  Haftati  army,  ready  to  receive  the  command
erant  •,  the  fecond  to  the  Principes ;  of  the  general,  who,  fometimes,  or-
Robuftior  inde  aetas —quibus  Principibus  dered  them  to  charge  in  one  place,
eft  nomen.  He,  then,  comes  to  the  and,  fometimes,  in  another :  Thefe
\ J’riarii ;  Primum  vexillum  Triarios  Livy  calls  Accenfos  *,  Pentium  Accenfos,
ducebat  ;  veteranum  militem  fpeffatae  minimae  fiduciae  manam :  eo  et  in  poftre-
virtutis.  Next  to  thefe,  were  pofted  mam  aciem  rejiciebantur .
the  Rorarii ,  or  the  fourth  clafs ;  Se-

*  E.  viii.  c.  8.

Z  2


And


i  So  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.


And  each  of  thefe  commanders  took  care  that  his  century
fir ou Id  yield  a  ready  obedience  to  orders.

XVIII.  This  was  the  difpofition,  which  completed  the
army,  both  of  the  28  heavy  armed,  and  light  armed,  foot :
As  for  the  horfe,  he  chofe  them  out  of  fuch,  as  had  the
greateft  poffeflions,  and  were  of  diftinguifhed  birth.  Of
thefe  he  formed  eighteen  centuries,  and  added  them  to  the
fir  ft  fourfcore  centuries  of  the  heavy  armed  foot.  Thefe
centuries  of  horfe  were,  alfo,  commanded  by  perfons  of  the
greateft  diftindtion.  Of  the  reft  of  the  citizens,  whofe  pof-
leftions  did  not  amount  to  twelve  minae  and  a  half,  being
more  in  number  than  the  former,  he  compofed  one  century,
and  freed  them  from  ferving  in  the  army,  and  from  all  forts
of  taxes.  Thus,  there  were  fix  divifions  which  the  Romans


call  Clajfes ,  deriving  the  term  from  the  Greek  word,
which  fignifies  a  Summons :  (For,  inftead  of  the  verb,  which
we  ufe  in  the  imperative  mood,  KocXeiy  Cedi ,  they  fay  29  Ka  A# ,


*8-  Qaho'J'ytlwv.  The  Latin  tranfla-
tors  have  rendered  this,  Legionariorum.
This  I  will  not  find  fault  with,  be-
caufe  I  know  that  b  Caelar  ufes  that
word  for  the  foot  of  a  legion.  Whe¬
ther  this  will  juftify  the  French  tranf-
iators  in  rendering  it  des  legionaires ,
muft  be  left  to  the  reader.  Our  author
has  been  treating  of  the  Roman  foot,
and,  now,  proceeds  to  treat  of  their
horfe.  It  is  certain  that  the  Roman
legions  confifted  both  of  foot,  and
horfe  •,  c  and,  equally,  certain  that  the
Macedonian  phalanx  confifted  only  of
foot.  The  Greek  hiftorians,  and  the
niafters  of  ta&ics,  conftantly,  oopofe


QTrhtlca  to  ;  and  our  author,  in
this  paftage,  has  oppofed  <pu\otfyi1cti  to
xJyiAoi  for  which  reafon,  I  have  given
the  famefenfeto  which  the

former  give  to  oVa flat.

29*  KaAx.  This  is  a  farther  proof  of
what  our  author  has  been,  all  along,
contending  for,  that  the  Romans  were,
originally,  Greeks.  There  is  an  ob-
fervation  ofServius  upon  the  following
verfe  of d  Virgil,  which  deferves  to  be
mentioned  upon  this  occafion  ;

Romuleoque  recens  horrebat  regia  culmo.
Curiam  Calabriam  dicit,  quam  Romulus
texerat  culmis  •,  ad  quam  calabatur,  id
eft ,  vocabatur  fenaius.


b  Hell.  Gall.  B.  i.  c.  4 z.  c  Livy,  B.  xxxvii.  c.  40.  d  Aeneid.  B.  viii.y\  654.

Cala\


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALI C  AR  N  A  S  S  E  NS  I  S.  181

Cala  y  and  the  Claffes  they,  anciently,  called  Calefes )  the  cen¬
turies,  of  which  thefe  dalles  confifted,  amounting  to  one
hundred  and  ninety  three.  The  firft  clafs  contained  ninety
eight  centuries  with  the  horfe;  the  fecond,  twenty  two,
with  the  artificers ;  the  third,  twenty  ;  again,  the  fourth
contained  twenty  two,  with  the  trumpeters,  and  blowers  of
the  horn ;  the  fifth,  thirty ;  and  the  laft  of  all  one  century,
confifting  of  the  poor  citizens.

XIX.  In  confequence  of  this  difpofition,  he  railed  foldiers
according  to  the  divifion  of  the  centuries ;  and  taxes,  in
proportion  to  their  pofteffions :  For,  whenever  he  had  oc-
cafion  to  raife  ten  thouland,  or,  as  it  happened,  twenty
thoufand  men,  he 30  divided  that  number  among  the  hundred
and  ninety  three  centuries,  and  ordered  each  century  to
furnilli  the  number  of  men,  that  fell  to  its  fhare.  As  to
the  expence,  neceftary  to  fupply  the  army  with  provifions,
and  for  other  military  ufes,  he,  firft,  computed  how  much
money  would  be  fufficient  to  anfwer  that  expence  ;  and
having,  in  like  manner,  divided  that  fum  among  the  hundred
and  ninety  three  centuries,  he  ordered  every  man  to  pay  his

30,  Kul&Jiacigcov  to  srA>j So? rag  Ualov  where  it  is  faid  that,  after  Tullius  had
*mv>j>iov7«V^  Both  the  Latin  computed  the  expence,  that  was  ne~

tranQators  have  rendered  to  srA>?Sof,  in  ceflary  for  their  military  preparations,
this  place,  as  if  our  author  underftood  he  divided,  that  fum ,  among  the  193
it  of  the  people,  who,  upon  this  oc-  centuries.  For  rov  otvjov  T^oniv

cafion,  were  divided  into  the  hundred  t*?  taoclov  e*vevwovlc xlgeif  Ao%xf,  which
and  ninety  three  centuries.  I  have  are  the  words  there  made  ufe  of,  are
taken  it  in  the  fame  fenfe  as  if  the  fcarce  Greek,  unlefs  rtjv  ^uttxv^v,  which
Greek  words  had  been  to  sj-a >560?  tuv  precedes,  is  underftood.  The  French
rexhcjuv  tuv  KxluAiX^y^°^ivblJv^he  num-  tranflators,  I  dare  fay,  faw.  the  diff¬
er  of  the  foldiers  to  be  raifed.  I  think  culty  of  this  pafiage,  by  their  leaving
myfelf  juftified  in  this  by  what  follows,  it  out.


I'Ba  ROMAN  ANTIQJUITIES  OF  BooklV.

fliare  towards  it,  in  proportion  to  his  poffeflions :  Thus  it
happened  that  thofe,  who  had  the  largeft  poffefilons,  being
fewer  in  number,  but  diftributed  into  more  centuries,  were
obliged  to  ferve  oftener,  and  without  any  intermiflion,  and
to  pay  greater  taxes,  than  the  reft ;  that  thofe,  who  had  fmall,
and  moderate  pofteffions,  being  more  in  number,  31  but


31*  Eijtocnv  g xutIog-i  This  can

never  be  the  true  reading,  any  more
than  «)coir<u  aciv  zAonloariv  in  the  Vatican
manufcript :  Becaufe  I  do  not  think
that  either  of  thefe  fignify  viginti  cen-
turiis  inferior  es,  which  is  the  fenfe  the
Latin  tranflators  have  given  to  thefe
words  •,  fince  to  exprefs  this  fenfe,  it
muft  have  flood  thus  in  the  Greek  ;
eiKoiri  a o-guv  tAonlom.  But,  even,  in  this
cafe,  I  cannot  underfland  how  thofe,
who  had  fmall,  or  moderate  pofTeflions,
were  fewer  than  the  members  of  the
firft  clafs  by  twenty  centuries.  I  have
read  a  note  of  M.  *  *  *,  upon  this
paflage,  in  which  he  explains  it  thus :
The  firft  clafs  confided  of  eighty  cen¬
turies,  the  fecond,  third,  and  fourth,
of  twenty  each  :  In  the  firft,  were  the
rich  citizens ;  and,  in  the  other  three,
Thofe  of  moderate  fortunes  :  Confe-
quently,  fays  he,  the  citizens  of  mode¬
rate  fortunes  made  twenty  centuries
lefs  than  the  rich,  who  compofed  the
firft  clafs  of  eighty  centuries.  I  ap¬
plaud  this  gentleman’s  diligence,
though  I  cannot  admit  of  his  expli¬
cation.  He  himfelf  own  that,  in  this
comparifon,  Dionyfius  takes  no  notice
either  of  the  eighteen  centuries  of
horfe,  that  were  added  to  the  firft  clafs,
or  of  the  four  centuries  of  artificers,
and  trumpeters' that  were  added  to  the
fecond,  and  fourth  clafs.  But  this  is
not  all ;  Here  is  no  notice  taken  of


the  thirty  centuries  of  the  fifth  clafs  ;
which  is,  alone,  fufficient  to  render
this  explication  imaginary.  Inftead,
therefore,  of  endeavouring  to  explain
what  is  inexplicable,  I  will  endeavour
to  reftore  the  text,  in  fuch  a  manner,
as  to  make  the  whole  period  confident
with  itfelf.  Dionyfius  tells  us  that
three  things  refulted  from  this  method
of  raifing  men  by  the  divifion  of  the
people  into  centuries,  and  money,  by
levying  it  in  proportion  to  every  man’s
poffefilons  :  The  firft  was,  that  the
rich,  being  fewer  in  number,  and
divided  into  more  centuries,  ferved
without  intermiffion ,  and  paid  greater
taxes  than  the  reft  :  The  fecond,  that
thofe  of  moderate  fortunes,  being  more
in  number,  and  diftributed  into  fewer
centuries,  ferved  fuccejfmely ,  and  paid
fmall  taxes :  And  the  third,  that  the
poor  neither  ferved,  nor  paid  any
taxes.  This  is  certainly  the  fenfe,  and
thefe  the  confequences  flowing  from
this  regulation  :  In  order,  therefore,
to  adapt  the  text  to  this  fenfe,  we  have
no  more  to  do,  than  to  repeat  the
fame  words  our  author  himfelf  has
made  ufe  of  in  the  firft  member  of
this  period,  and  to  read  ron  Jg  rot  puga

K<xi  [xzlgioi  xg^jUgvcuf,  57A «o<ri  fx gv  y<nv,  etg
£A<*t7ov#£  Jg  Ao%X(  jUSjuegiiruiyoifyggailivscB-ai
TS  OAlftXXI?  ZK  SuxSogJi Jf,  KCti  CTUV-

T£A«v  eirtyoguf.

diftributed


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALI  C  ARN  A  S  SEN  SI  S.  183

diftributed  into  fewer  centuries,  ferved  feldom,  and  fuccef-
fively,  and  paid  fmall  taxes ;  and  that  thofe,  whofe  pofief-
fions  were  not  fufficient  to  maintain  them,  were  difcharged
of  every  thing,  that  was  burdenfome.  Tullius  made  none
of  thefe  regulations  without  reafon,  but,  from  a  perfuafion
that  all  men  look  upon  riches  as  the  prize  contended  for  in
war,  and  that  the  defire  of  preferving  them  induces  all  men
to  fubmit  to  the  hardfhips  of  it :  He  thought  it,  therefore,
reafonable  that  thofe,  who  had  rnoft  to  loie,  fhould  fuffer
the  greateft  hardfhips,  both  in  their  perfons,  and  in  their
fortunes ;  that  thofe,  who  had  lefs  to  lofe,  fhould  be
lefs  burdened  in  refpedt  to  both  ;  and  that  thofe,  who  had
nothing  at  flake,  fhould  be  difcharged  from  every  burden  ;
from  32  taxes,  by  reafon  of  their  poverty ;  and  from  the
fervice,  becaufe  they  paid  no  taxes :  For,  at  that  time,  the


32'  Tuiv  /u.sv  et<r(p.o^uv  aTroXvojXivxe  Six  t>jv
cnrc^iav.  It  appears,  by  a  note  in  Hud-
fon,  that  fxiv,  which  Sylburgius  excepts
againft,  is  fupported  by  the  authority
of  the  Vatican  manufcript,  which  fup-
plies  the  paffage  in  this  manner,  twv

fMiV  ei<TpO(jUV  Ci7TCAV0fMVXf  SlX  T^V  X7T0(>IXV ,

t cuv  Ss  ffialeuiiv  Six  ryv  eicr$o(>xv.  Upon
this,  I  fliall  make  two  observations  :
The  firft,  that,  after  Hudfcn  had  con¬
tended  for  reading  y.tv  from  the  au¬
thority  of  the  Vatican  manufcript,  he
has  omitted  that  particle  in  giving  the
words  of  that  manufcript :  The  fecond,
that  Six  Ttjv  eta(poodv,  plainly,  contra¬
dicts  v/hat  our  author  has,  before,  af-
ferted,  viz.  that  the  fixth  clafs,  that
is,  the  poor,  were  exempted  both  from


ferving,  and  paying  taxes,  rgetletxt  rs
<XTfAucr?,  xxi  vrctrys  enrtyogots

0^ :  I  would,  therefore,  read  the
paflage  in  this  manner,  twv
cc7roAuo(usvx?  Six  ryv  xzo^ixVf  toiv  Ss  s'^x-
Tetuv  Six  Tyjv  ax,  eurtpo^xv.  The  learned
reader  will  not  be  furprifed  at  the  ufe
of  the  negative  particle  cv  before  a
fubftantive,  when  he  reflects  that  he
has  read,  in  a  remark  of e  Thucydides
upon  the  letter  of  Themiftocles  to
Artaxerxes,  rav  OT  SixKvcriv.

This  kind  ot  expreffion  our  author
has,  not  only,  taken  notice  of  in  his
f  critical  works,  but,  alfo,  imitated  in
the  following  paflage,  st7rei1xKx1x<p£ov>i-
coivltg  t m  P uppiuev  Aixxvoi  tjjj  OT
(7n%ag>i<re<vf.


‘Thucyd.  B.  i.  c.  137.  f  n^»  Gexofr.  ihu[x,  c.  5.  s  B.  x.  c.  43.

Romans


i$4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

Romans  received  no  pay  from  the  public,  but  ferved  at  their
own  expence ;  from  whence  he  concluded  it  to  be  unrea-
fonable  either  that  thofe  men  fhould  be  charged  with  taxes,
who  were  fo  far  from  having  wherewithal  to  pay  them,
that  they  wanted  daily  neceffaries ;  or  that  fuch,  as  contri¬
buted  nothing  to  the  public  taxes,  fhould,  like  mercenary
troops,  be  maintained  in  the  field  at  the  expcnce  of  others.

XX.  Having,  by  this  means,  laid  the  whole  burden  both
of  the  dangers,  and  expences  upon  the  rich,  and  feeing  they
were  difeontented  at  it,  he  contrived,  by  another  method,
to  relieve  their  uneafinefs,  and  mitigate  their  refentment,  by
granting  to  them  an  advantage,  the  defign  of  which  was  to
throw  the  whole  power  of  the  commonwealth  into  their
hands,  and  to  take  it  from  the  poor ;  the  confequence  of
which  meafure  the  common  people  were  not  aware  of :
The  advantage  he  gave  them  related  to  the  aflemblies  of
the  people,  where  matters  of  the  greateft  moment  were  en-  .
acted  by  the  latter.  I  have  faid  before,  that,  by  the  ancient
laws,  three  things  were  fubjedt  to  the  power  of  the  people ;
all  of  the  greateft  confequence,  and  necefiity :  Thefe  were
the  ele&ion  of  magiftrates,  both  civil,  and  military  ;  the
ena&ing,  and  repealing  of  laws ;  and  the  declaring  war,
and  making  peace :  In  the  determination  of  all  which,  they
voted  by  their  curiae  ;  and  citizens  of  the  fmallefl:  fortunes
had  an  equal  vote  with  Thofe  of  the  greateft ;  the  rich
being  but  few  in  number,  as  may  well  be  fuppofed,  and  the
poor  much  more  numerous,  the  latter  carried  every  thing
by  a  majority  of  votes.  Tullius,  obferving  this,  transferred

this


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  1S5

this  majority  from  the  poor,  to  the  rich :  For,  whenever  he
thought  proper  to  have  magiftrates  appointed,  a  law  confi-
dered,  or  war  to  be  declared,  lie  affembled  the  people  by  cen¬
turies,  inftead  of  aflembling  them  by  curiae  :  And  he  firft
called  the  centuries  of  the  fir  ft  clafs  to  give  their  votes:
Thefe  were  the  eighteen  centuries  of  horfe,  and  the  four-
fcore  centuries  of  foot:  As  thefe  centuries  amounted  to
three  more  than  all  the  reft,  if  they  agreed,  their  opinion,
carried  it,  and  the  affair  was  decided  :  But,  in  cafe  all  thele
did  not  agree,  then  he  called  the  twenty  two  centuries  of
the  fecond  clafs  ;  and,  if  the  votes  were  ftill  divided,  he
called  the  centuries  of  the  third  clafs ;  and,  in  the  fourth
place,  Thofe  of  the  fourth  clafs ;  and  33  this  he  continued  to


33*  K <n  t«7’  iTTOiei  Ty  yivtcS-cu

inlet  xcu  twsv^Kovloi  I

cannot  approve  of  the  correction  of
Sylburgius,  who  prefers  £f,  to  inlet
becaufe  97,  not  96,  was  the  majority
of  193  centuries.  I  fufpeCt  much  that
oluo4'fi$oi,  or  was  the  word

made  ufe  of  by  our  author  upon  this
occafion,  and  not  lao^y^oi •,  becaufe  I
never  met  with  the  latter  ufed  in  this
fenfe  by  him,  or  any  other  writer.
And  he  himfeif  ufes  the  word  in  ano¬
ther  fenfe  a  few  lines  before.  When
8  I  fay  this,  I  would  not  be  underftood
to  aftert  that  lo-o^fpoi  was,  never,  ufed
to  fignify  confentientes  \  I  only  fay,  I
never  met  with  the  word  taken  in  that
fenfe.  Before  I  leave  the  fubjeCt  of
this  paffage,  I  mult  beg  leave  to  make
a  few  obfervations  on  the  method  of
voting  in  the  Comitia  Centuriata ,  by


which  the  fate  of  the  greatefl  part  of
the  then  known  world  was,  once,  de¬
termined.  The  whole  number  of  cen¬
turies  amounted  to  193  ;  of  thefe  the
firft  clafs  alone  contained  98,  which,
if  they  all  agreed,  was  a  majority  of
three  ;  but,  if  they  difagreed,  the  pre-
fidingmagiftrate  called  the  fecond  clafs,
and  loon,  till  97  centuries  were  of  the
fame  opinion :  This  was  the  fmalleft
majority  •,  but,  when  this  was,  once,
obtained,  it  was  in  vain  to  call  any
more:  However,  it  might,  poffibly,
happen  that,  after  the  fifth  clafs  had
voted,  the  192  centuries,  contained  in
thofe  five  clalfes,  were,  equally, divided,
that  is,  96  on  each  fide  :  In  this  cafe,
the  vote  of  the  fixth  clafs  decided  the
queftion.  After  this  ftate  of  the  cafe,
I  believe  the  reader  will  agree  with  me,
that  the  cenfure,  pafied  upon  our  au-


s  See  the  eighty  third  annotation  on  the  fecond  book.

A  a


VOL.  II.


do,


1 86


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

do,  till  ninety  feven  centuries  concurred  in  the  fame  opi¬
nion  :  And  if,  after  the  centuries  of  the  fifth  clafs  had  been
called  to  give  their  votes,  this  happened  not  to  be  the  cafe,
and  that  the  opinions  of  the  hundred  and  ninety  two  cen¬
turies  were  equally  divided,  he,  then,  called  the  laft  century,
confifting  of  a  great  number  of  thofe  citizens,  who  were
poor,  and,  for  that  reafon,  difcharged  of  the  obligation  both
of  ferving,  and  paying  taxes ;  and,  with  which  fide  foever
this  century  joined,  That  fide  carried  it ;  but  this  feldom
happened,  and  was  next  to  impofiible  :  Generally,  the
queftion  was  determined  by  calling  the  firft  clafs,  it  being,
rarely,  neceftary  to  call  the  fourth :  So  that,  the  fifth,  and
laft  were  fuperfluous.

XXL  In  eftabliftiing  this  inftitution,  which  gave  fo
great  an  advantage  to  the  rich,  Tullius  concealed  his  in¬
tentions  from  the  people,  as  I  faid,  and,  by  this  ftrategem?
took  the  power  of  the  commonwealth  out  of  the  hands


thor  by  M.  ***,  is  very  ill  grounded.
He  fays  that  Dionyfius  was  in  too
much  hafte  (s' eft  trop  prejfe)  in  avert¬
ing  that  they  took  the  votes  of  the
firlt,  fecond,  third,  and  fourth  clafies,
till  97  were  of  the  lame  opinion,  be¬
fore  he  had  faid  that  they  took  the
votes  of  the  fixth  clafs..  The  reafon
he  gives  for  this  cenfure  is,  that,  till
they  had  taken  the  votes  of  the  fifth,
and  the  fixth  clafies,  there  could  not  be
97  on  one  fide,  and  96  on  the  other.
But  the  misfortune  of  this  reafoning
is,  that  he  makes  Dionyfius  afiert  an
abfurdity,  and  then  quarrels  with  him
for  averting  it.  When  our  author


fays  they  called  the  frit,  fecond,  third,
and  fourth  clafies  to  give  their  votes,
till  97  centuries  were  of  the  fame  opi¬
nion,  he  does  not  fay  that,  when  this
happened,  there  were  96  centuries  of
the  other  opinion.  On  the  contrary,
he  fays  that,  after  the  fifth  clafs  had
voted,  it  might  happen  that  the  192
centuries  were,  equally,  divided,  that
is,  that  there  were  96  on  each  fide  :
Upon  which,  the  fixth  clafs  was  called,
whofe  vote  decided  the  queftion  *,  and
then,  and  not  till  then,  there  were  96
centuries  on  one  fide,  and  97  on  the
other.


of


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SIS.  187

of  the  poor :  For  they  all  thought  they  had  an  equal
fhare  in  the  government,  becaufe  every  fingle  man  was
afked  his  opinion,  each  in  his  own  century:  But  they
were  deceived  in  this,  that  the  whole  century,  whether
it  confifted  of  a  fmall,  or  of  a  very  great,  number  of
citizens,  had  but  one  vote  ;  and,  alfo,  in  this,  that  the
centuries,  which  firft  gave  their  votes,  confifted  of  men  of
the  greateft  fortunes ;  which  centuries,  though  more  in
number  than  all  the  reft,  yet  contained  fewer  citizens:
But  above  all,  in  that  the  poor,  who  were  very  numerous,
had  but  one  vote,  and  were  the  laft  called.  This  beinq
eftablifhed,  the  rich,  though  obliged  to  pay  great  taxes,
and  expofed,  without  intermiffion,  to  the  dangers  of  war,
yet,  when  they  faw  themfelves  the  arbiters  of  the  greateft
affairs,  and  had  taken  the  whole  power  out  of  the  hands  of
thofe,  who  were  not  under  the  fame  obligations,  they  bore
thefe  burdens  the  more  eafily  :  And  the  poor,  who  had
the  leaft  fhare  in  the  government,  finding  themfelves  dis¬
charged  both  of  taxes,  and  of  the  fervice,  prudently,  and,
quietly,  fubmitted  to  this  diminution  of  their  power :  And
the  commonwealth  itfelf  had  the  benefit  of  feeing  the  fame
perfons,  who  were  to  refolve  upon  what  fhould  be  for  her
advantage,  take  the  greateft  fhare  of  the  dangers  attend¬
ing  thofe  refolutions,  and  appointed  to  carry  them  into
execution.  This  inftitution  was  obferved  by  the  Romans
for  many  generations ;  but  has  been  altered  in  our  time,
and  changed  to  a  more  popular  form  ;  fome  great  neceffity
having  forced  this  change,  which  has  not  been  effected  by  a

A  a  2  dillo-


i  83


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

difiolution  of  the  centuries,  but  by  their  not  being  34  called
to  vote  in  the  exa 61  order,  that  was,  anciently,  obferved  ;
which  I  myfelf  have  taken  notice  of,  having  been,  often,
prefent  at  the  elections  of  their  magiftrates.  But  this  is  not
a  proper  place  to  confider  thefe  things.

XXII.  Tullius,  therefore,  having  completed  the  cenfus,
affembled  all  the  citizens  in  arms,  in  the  largeft  field  before
the  city ;  and  drew  up  the  horfe  in  their  refpective  troops,
and  the  foot  in  their  lines,  placing  the  bodies  of  light
armed  forces,  each  in  their  own  centuries :  After  which,
he  performed  an  expiatory  facrifice  with  a  bull,  a  ram,  and


34-  TV  >cAjj This  reading  of  the
Vatican  manufcript  is,  I  think,  pre¬
ferable  to  xgitrsus,  which  ftands  in  all
the  editions,  but  can  have  no  place
here  j  fince  our  author  fays  he  made
this  obfervation  by  having  been,  often,
prefent  at  the  elections  of  their  magi¬
ftrates,  at  which  the  centuries  pro¬
nounced  no  judgement,  properly,  fo
called.  As  our  author  feems  to  defer
to  another  opportunity  the  entering
into  a  detail  of  the  popular  alteration,
made  in  calling  the  centuries  to  give
their  votes,  and,  as  nothing  of  this
kind  appears  in  that  part  of  his  hiftory,
which  remains,  1  lufpedt  that  altera¬
tion  was  made,  when  all  the  centuries
came  to  draw  lots  which  fhould  be,
firft,  called  to  vote  :  This,  certainly,  was
more  popular,  than  for  the  centuries
of  the  firft  clafs,  always,  to  vote  firft.
When,  or  upon  what  occafion,  this
method  of  drawing  lots  was  introduced,
I  cannot  find  j  but  many  palfages  in


the  ancient  authors  fhew  that  this  was
become  the  conftant  practice,  when¬
ever  the  Comitia  Centuriata  were  held.
The  century,  to  whofe  lot  it  fell  to
vote  firft,  was  called  h  Praerogativa  j
Praerogativa  Veturia  juniorum  decla-
ravit  confutes  P.  JVLanlium  Pot  qua  turn,
et  T.  Otacilium .  The  firft  century,
therefoie,  that  voted,  was  called  Prae~
rogativa ,  and  the  reft  jure  vocatae,  I
fuppofe,  becaufe  they  were  called  in
their  turn.  1  Galena  juniorum ,  quae  forte
Praerogativa  erat ,  <g.  Fulvium ,  et  £>.
Fabium  confides  dixerat ,  eodemque  jure
vocatae,  inclinaffent ,  ni,  etc.  7 'he  po¬
pularity  of  this  method  of  drawing  lots
will  beft  appear  when  it  is  confidered
that,  in  all  eledtions,  the  vote  of  the
Prerogative  century,  generally,  govern¬
ed  Thole  of  all  the  reft  ;  k  auftoritatem
Praerogativae  cmnes  centuriae  fecutae
funt.  Of  this  many  inftances  are  to
be  found  in  the  Roman  authors,  be-
fides  Thofe,  already,  mentioned.


Livy,  B.  xxvi.  c.  22.  1  Id.  B.  xxvii.  c.  6.  k  Id.  B.  xxvi.  c.  22.

a  boar


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNA  S  SENS  IS.  189

a  boar :  Thefe  victims  he  ordered  to  be  led  three  times  round
the  army;  and,  then,  facrificed  them  to  Mars,  to  whom
that  field  is  confecrated.  The  Romans  are,  to  this  day,
purified  by  this  expiatory  facrifice,  after  the  cenfus  is  per¬
formed,  by  thofe,  who  are  inverted  with  the  moft  facred
magiftracy  ;  which  purification  they  call  35  Luftrum .  The
number  of  all  the  Romans,  who,  then,  regiftered  their


35*  A The  Luftrum  was  a  dif¬
ferent  thing  from  the  Cenfus:  The  latter
was  performed,  originally,  in  the  fo¬
rum  ;  and  the  former,  always,  in  the
Campus  Martins.  I  faid  the  Cenfus
was,  at  firft,  performed  in  the  forum,
till  in  the  year  of  Rome  319,  in  the
confulfhip  of  C.  Julius  for  the  fecond
time,  and  of  Proculus,  or  Lucius  Vir-
ginius,  a  public  hail  was  ereffed  in
the  Campus  Martius  for  that  purpofe  :

1  Eo  anno  C.  Furius  Pacilus ,  et  M.  Ge-
ganius  Macerinus ,  cenfores ,  villam  pub¬
lic  am  in  Campo  Martio  probaverunt ,
ibique  primum  cenfus  populi  eft  alius.
The  facrifice  of  the  boar,  the  ram,
and  the  bull,  was  called,  by  the  Ro¬
mans,  Suo’vet.aurilia ,  and  is  reprefented
on  the  Trajan  pillar.  There  is,  cer¬
tainly,  a  miftake  in  the  Greek  text  of
for  jcc^w  :  For  the  name  alone
fhews  that  a  goat  was  not  facriHced
upon  this  occalion.  As  many  men  of
learning  are  of  opinion,  that  the  Lu¬
ftrum ’,  like  the  Olympiad,  contained
only  four  years  complete,  I  fhall  pro¬
duce  fome  few  authorities,  out  of  a
great  many,  to  fhew  that  the  Luftrum
contained  five  years  complete.  m  Ho¬
race,  in  his  ode  to  Venus  fays,


Define  dulcium
Mater  faeva  cupidinum
Circa  luflra  decern  fleflere  mollibus
Jam  durum  imperiis.

If  a  Luftrum  contained  no  more  than
four  years,  Horace  was,  then,  but
forty  years  old,  which  is  too  early  to
complain.  Pope  fhews  himfelf  of  this
opinion  in  his  imitation  of  this  ode  •,

Ah  found  no  more  thy  foft  alarms ,

Nor  circle  fober  fifty  with  thy  charms.

n  Ovid  fpeaks  more  clearly,  when,  in
his  epiftle  to  Brutus,  he  calls  a  Luftrum
a  quinquennial  Olympiad,

In  Scythia  nobis  quinquennis  Olympias
alia  eft  j

Et  tempus  luftri  tranft  in  alter  ins.

However,  there  is  a  paffage  in  0  Pliny,
which,  in  my  opinion,  will  decide  this
queftion  :  He,  there,  ufes  quinquen¬
nium ,  for  Luftrum :  FI  is  words  are
thefe  ;  Qua  in  re  et  illud  adnotare  fuc -
currit  unum  omnino  quinquennium  fu-
iJJ'e,  quo  fenator  nullus  moreretur  ;  cum
Flaccus ,  et  Albinus  cenfores  luftrum
condidere  ufque  ad  proximo s  cenfores ,  ab
anno  urbis  quingentefmo  feptuagefmo  no-


l  Livy,  B.  iv.  c.  22.  m  Ode  i.  B.  iv.  c  Ex  Por.to,  B.  iv.  Epifh  6.  f.  5.

«>  Nat.  Hift.  B.  vii.  c.  48.

fortunes*


r9o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

fortunes,  was,  as  appears  by  the  books  relating  to  that  cen-
fus,  eighty  four  thoufand  feven  hundred.  This  king,  alfo,
took  no  fmall  care  to  encreafe  the  number  of  the  citizens ;
and,  to  that  end,  difcovered  a  method  unobferved  by  all  the
kings  before  him:  For  they,  by  receiving  foreigners,  and
communicating  to  them  the  rights  of  citizens,  without  re¬
jecting  any  man,  of  what  nation,  or  condition  foever,  had,
indeed,  rendered  the  city  populous  :  But  Tullius  commu¬
nicated  thofe  rights,  even,  to  the  manumitted  Haves,  unlefs
they  themfelves  chofe  to  return  to  their  own  country :  For
he  ordered  thefe,  alfo,  to  regifter  their  fortunes  together
with  all  the  free  men,  and  diftributed  them  among  the
four  city  tribes,  in  which  the  body  of  freed  men,  how
numerous  foever,  continue  to  be  ranked,  even,  to  this  day :
Befides  this,  he  admitted  them  to  every  other  privilege,
which  the  reft  of  the  plebeians  enjoy.

XXIII.  The  patricians  being  uneafy  at  this,  and,  hardly,
fubmitting  to  it,  he  aflembled  the  people,  and  told  them
that,  in  the  firft  place,  he  wondered  at  thofe,  who  were
difpleafed  with  this  inftitution,  for  imagining  that  free  men


no.  I  find,  by  p  Livy,  that  the  cenfors
Pliny  fpeaks  of  were  chofen  in  the
confulfhip  of  Sp.  Poftumius  Albinus,
and  Q^Mucius  Scaevola,  in  the  year
Pliny  mentions,  that  is,  the  579th,  and
performed  the  duties  of  their  fund  ion
that  year.  From  thefe  cenfors,  to  the
next,  whom  Pliny  does  not  name,
there  was  an  interval  of  five  years,  or  a
luftrum.  Thefe  cenfors  were  ^  C.  Clau¬
dius  Pulchcr,  and  Titus  Sempronius

r  B.  xli.  c.  27.


Gracchus,  eleded  to  that  office  in  the
confulfhip  of  Q.  Marcius  Philippus
for  the  fecond  time,  and  Cn.  Servilius
Caepio,  and  in  the  year  of  Rome  584.
By  which  it  appears  that  there  were
five  years  complete,  from  the  firft
cenfors  to  the  laft.  I  know  thatfome
Fafti  confidant  advance  thefe  two  con-
fulfhips  one  year  ;  but  we  fee  they  are
contradided  by  Pliny.


‘lid.  B.  xliii.  c.  14.


were


Book  IV,  DIONYSIUS  HAL1CARNASSENSIS.  191

were  diflinguifihed  from  flaves  by  their  nature,  and  not  by
their  condition  ;  and  fecondly,  for  not  making  the  manners,
rather  than  the  fortune,  of  men  the  meafure  of  their  merit ;
particularly,  when  they  faw  how  unftable  a  thing  fortune
is,  and  how  fubjedl  to  fudden  changes,  and  that  it  is  not
eafy  to  fay,  how  long,  even,  the  happieft  man  will  enjoy  a
continuance  of  her  favors.  He  defired  them,  alfo,  to  con-
fider  how  many  people,  both  Barbarians,  and  Greeks,  from
being  flaves,  had  become  free  ;  and  how  many,  from  being
free,  had  become  flaves:  He  told  them,  he  fhould  think
them  guilty  of  a  great  weaknefs,  if,  after  they  had
granted  liberty  to  fuch  of  their  flaves  as  deferved  it,  they
envied  them  the  rights  of  citizens :  And  advifed  them,
if  they  thought  them  bad  men,  not  to  make  them  free  ;
and  if  good  men,  not  to  defpife  them,  becaufe  they  were
foreigners :  He  added,  that  they  would  be  guilty  of  an  ab-
furdity,  and  of  ignorance,  to  communicate  the  rights  of
citizens  to  all  foreigners,  without  diflinguifhing  their  con¬
dition,  or  inquiring  whether  any  of  them  had  been  manu¬
mitted,  or  not ;  and  to  look  upon  fuch  as  had  been  flaves
among  themfelves,  as  unworthy  of  this  favor :  And  he  faid>
that  they,  who  thought  themfelves  wifer  than  the  reft  of
the  world,  did  not  fee  what  lay  before  them,  was  obvious  to
every  one,  and  manifeft  to  the  moft  ignorant;  which  was,,
that,  as  the  mailers  would  take  great  care  not,  eafily,  to
manumit  any  of  their  flaves,  for  fear  of  granting  the  greatefl
of  human  bleffings  without  diftindlion  ;  fo  the  flaves  would
ferve  their  mafters  with  greater  affiduity,  when  they  knew

that*


t


1 92  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I T I E  S  OF  Book  IV.

that,  if  they  were  thought  worthy  of  liberty,  they  fhould,
prefently, become  citizens  of  a  great,  and  flourifhingcity,  and
receive  both  thefe  benefits  from  their  m afters :  He  concluded
with  fhewing  the  advantage,  that  would  refult  from  this  in-
ftitution  ;  he  put  thofe,  who  were  acquainted  with  the  con-
fequence  of  it,  in  mind,  and  informed  the  ignorant,  that,  to
a  city,  which  aimed  at  fovereignty,  and  thought  herfeft
worthy  of  great  things,  no  one  point  was  fo  neceflary  as
populoufnefs,  to  the  endfhe  might  find,  in  her  own  citizens,
a  conftant  fupply  for  every  war  ;  and  might  not  be  exhaufted
with  the  expence  of  hiring  mercenary  troops ;  for  which
reafon,  he  faid,  the  former  kings  had  communicated  the  rights
of  citizens  to  all  foreigners ;  and,  that,  if  they  enadted  this
law  alfo,  great  numbers  of  youth,  fprung  from  thofe,  who
were  manumitted,  would  be  taken  into  the  fervice;  by
which  means,  the  city  would,  never,  want  national  forces ;
but  would  have  armies,  continually,  fupplied  with  numbers
fufficient  to  make  war,  even,  againft  all  mankind,  if  necef-
fary :  That,  befides  this  advantage  to  the  public,  the  richeft
men  would,  in  particular,  be,  greatly,  benefited  by  fuffering
their  freed  men  to  be  admitted  into  the  public  aflemblies,
where,  by  their  votes,  and  other  gratifications  of  a  public
nature,  they  would  receive  a  return  in  thofe  matters,  in
which  they,  chiefly,  wanted  their  afliftance,  and  leave  the
children  of  thefe  freed  men,  as  fo  many  clients  to  their
pofterity.  Thefe  reafons  of  Tullius  induced  the  patricians
to  fufter  this  cuftom  to  be  introduced  into  the  common¬
wealth  ;  and,  to  this  day,  it  is  looked  upon  as  one  of  the

facred


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  i93
facred,  and  immovable  laws,  and  as  fitch  continues  to  be
obferved  by  the  Romans.

XXIV.  Since  I  am  come  to  this  part  of  the  hiftory,  1
think  it  neceffary  to  give  an  account  of  the  cuftoms,  which,
at  that  time,  prevailed  among  the  Romans,  with  regard  to
Haves ;  to  the  intent  that  no  one  may  accufe  either  the  king,
who  firft  undertook  to  make  freed  men  citizens;  or  the
Romans,  who  received  that  law,  for  having  proftituted  an
honourable  diftindtion.  The  Romans  acquired  their  Haves
by  the  jufteft  means  :  For  they  either  purchafed  them  of
the  public,  at  an  open  fale,  as  part  of  the  fpoils,  or  the
general  permitted  his  men  to  keep  the  prifoners  they  had
taken,  together  with  the  reft  of  the  booty;  or  elfe  they
acquired  their  Haves,  by  buying  them  of  thofe,  who,  by  the
means  I  have  mentioned,  had  obtained  the  pofleftion  of
them :  So  that,  neither  Tullius,  who  eflablifhed  this  cuftom,
nor  thofe,  who  received,  and  obferved  it,  thought  they  did
a  thing,  in  itfelf,  difhonourable,  or  detrimental  to  the  public,
if  thofe,  who  had  loft  both  their  country,  and  their  liberty  by
the  fate  of  war,  and  behaved  themfelves  well  to  fuch,  as  had,
firft,  inflaved  them,  or  to  fuch,  as  had  purchafed  them  from
the  former,  had  both  thofe  advantages  reftored  to  them  by
their  mafters.  Some  of  thefe  Haves  obtained  their  liberty  in  a
gratuitous  manner,  as  a  reward  of  their  merit ;  and  this  was
the  moft  honourable  method  of  being  difcharged  from  their
mafters :  Others,  though  fewer,  paid  a  ranfom,  railed  by
lawful,  and  honeft  labor.  But  thefe  things  are,  now,  changed :
For  all  affairs  are  in  fo  great  a  confufion,  and  the  privileges  of
Vol.  II.  B  b  the


i94  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.
the  city  are  fo  much  debafed,  and  fullied,  that  fome,  who
have  raifed  a  fortune  by  robbery,  houfebreaking,  proftitution,
and  all  other  wicked  means,  purchafe  their  liberty  with  the
money  fo  acquired ;  and,  prefently,  become  Romans  :
Others,  who  have  been  privy  to,  and  accomplices  with  their
matters  in,  poifonings,  murders,  and  in  crimes  committed
againft  the  gods,  or  the  public,  receive  from  them  their
liberty,  as  a  reward  for  thefe  fervices  :  Some  are  made  free
with  this  view,  that,  after  they  have  received  the  monthly
allowance  of  corn,  given  by  the  public,  or  fome  other  gra¬
tification  diftributed  by  the  men  in  power  among  the  poorer
fort,  they  may  bring  it  to  thofe,  who  granted  them  their
liberty  :  And  others  owe  their  liberty  to  the  levity,  and
vanity  of  their  matters.  I  myfelf  have  known  fome,  who  have
ordered  all  their  flaves  to  be  made  free,  after  their  death,
with  a  defign  of  being  called  good  men,  when  they  wer e
dead,  and  that  many  people  might  attend  their  funerals  with
caps  upon  their  heads ;  in  which  procefiions,  fome  male¬
factors  have  been  feen  (as  many,  who  knew  it,  would  fay
publicly)  juft  come  out  of  jail,  who  had,  for  their  crimes,
deferved  ten  thoufand  deaths.  Upon  thefe  occafions  how¬
ever,  the  greateft  part  of  the  citizens  are  grieved  to  fee  the
badges  of  liberty,  thus,  defiled,  and  condemn  the  cuftom,
looking  upon  it  as  unbecoming  a  city,  which  is  the  fove-
reign  of  all  others,  and  thinks  herfelf  worthy  of  being  miftrefs
of  the  world,  to  adopt  fuch  citizens.  One  might,  with
reafon,  condemn  many  other  cuftoms  alfo,  which  were,
wifely,  inftituted  by  the  anceftors  of  this  people,  but  are,

now,


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  195

now,  fhamefully,  abufed  by  their  pofterity.  However,  I  am
not  of  opinion  that  this  law  ought  to  be  repealed,  left,  by
that  means,  fome  greater  evil  fhould  break  out  to  the  detri¬
ment  of  the  public :  But  I  affirm  that  it  ought  to  be  re¬
formed  as  much  as  poffible ;  and  that  great  fcandals,  and
ftains,  hard  to  be  wiped  off,  fhould  not  be  introduced  into
the  commonwealth  :  And  I  could  wifh  that  the  cenfors,
rather  than  any  other  perfons,  or,  if  that  could  not  be,  that
the  confuls  would  take  upon  themfelves  the  care  of  this
matter,  which  requires  the  contrail  of  fome  great  magiftracy ;
and  that  thefe  fhould  inquire  into  thecharadters  of  the  perfons,
who  are,  every  year,  made  free;  for  what  reafon,  and  how
they  have  been  manumitted  ;  as  they  inquire  into  the  man¬
ners  of  the  knights,  and  fenators;  after  which,  they  fhould
incorporate  among  the  tribes  fuch  of  them,  as  they  found
worthy  to  be  citizens,  and  allow  them  to  remain  in  the  city ;
from  whence  they  fhould  expel  the  profligate,  and  corrupt,
under  the  fpecious  pretence  of  fending  them  to  fome  colony.
Thefe  things,  therefore,  as  the  fubjedt  required  it,  I  thought
it  both  neceflary,  and  juft  to  alledge  to  thofe,  who  cenfure
the  cuftoms  of  the  Romans.

XXV.  But  Tullius  did,  not  only,  flhew  himfelf  a  friend
to  the  people  in  thofe  inftitutions,  by  which  he  feemed  to
lefien  the  authority  of  the  fenate,  and  patricians ;  but,  alfo,
in  thofe,  by  which  he  diminifhed  the  royal  power,  half  of
which  he  himfelf  took  away  :  For,  whereas  the  kings,
his  predeceffors,  thought  proper  to  have  all  forts  of  caufes
brought  before  them,  and  determined  all  fuils  both  of  a

B  b  2  private.


196  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

private,  and  public  nature,  as  they  themfelves  thought  fit ;
he  diftinguifhed  thofe,  which  related  to  the  public,  from
fuch,  as  concerned  private  perfons;  and  he  himfelf  took
cognizance  of  all  crimes,  in  which  the  public  was  interefled  ;
and,  in  private  caufes,  he  appointed  private  perfons  to  be
the  judges,  whofe  jurifdi&ion  was  both  limited,  and  regu¬
lated  by  the  laws,  which  he  himfelf  had  efliablifhed.  The'
government  of  the  city  being,  now,  by  his  means,  modelled
in  the  beft  manner,  he  was  defirous  to  eternize  his  memory
with  pofterity  by  fome  illuftrious  enterprife  :  When,  there¬
fore,  he  confidered  the  monuments  both  of  ancient  kings,
and  legiflators,  by  which  they  gained  reputation,  and  glory,
he  could  not  think  that  great  praife  was  due  either  to  the
36  Aflyrian  woman,  for  having  built  the  walls  of  Babylon  ;
or  to  the  Egyptian  kings,  for  having  raifed  the  37  pyramids
in  Memphis ;  or  to  any  other  prince,  for  whatever  work
he  might  have  erected  in  oftentation  of  his  riches,  and  of  the
number  of  workmen  he  could  command :  All  thefe  things

o


36'  TV  Ai re'J^av  £X«y>jv  ywcinux..  The
French  trandators  fay  this  was  Semi-
ramis,  who,  I  know,  is  faid  by  qJuftin,
and  many  other  authors,  to  have  built
the  walls  of  Babylon.  But  the  learned
r  Ulher  treats  this  as  a  fable,  and  fays
they  were  built  many  years  after  by
Rebuchadnefar,  and  his  daughter-in-
law  Nicotris  ;  fo  that,  our  author  may,
poffibly,  mean  the  latter.

37*  T m  tv  Mfjuipei  zrvga/uiJicv.  So
much  has  been  faid  both  by  ancient,
and  modern  writers  concerning  thefe

s  B.  i.  c.  2.  1 P.  25.


pyramids,  that  it  would  be  a  vain  at¬
tempt  to  add  any  thing  to  their  rela¬
tions.  8  Herodotus  has  given  us  the
names  of  the  Egyptian  kings,  who
built  thefe  pyramids,  and  defcribed
them  fo  exactly,  that  thofe  accounts  of
modern  travellers  are  molt  efteemed,
that  come  neared  to  his  defcription.
He  has  told  us  they  were  defigned  as.
burying  places  for  the  kings,  who
built  them  ;  which  is  confirmed  by
the  relations  of  the  molt  judicious
travellers.


s  In  Euterpe,  c.  124,  125,  126,  127.


lie


Book  IV\  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASS  ENS  IS.  r97

he  efteemed  as  mean,  and  of  fhort  duration,  as  trifles,  and
deluflons  of  the  flght,  of  no  advantage  to  the  condud  of
life,  or  to  the  adminiftration  of  public  affairs,  and  tending
only  to  the  acquifltion  of  a  vain  applaufe  :  But  he  looked
upon  thofe  works  of  the  mind  to  deferve  praife,  and  imi¬
tation,  of  which  the  advantages  are  enjoyed  by  the  greateft
number  of  people,  and  for  the  greateft  length  of  time.
For  which  reafon,  he  admired,  above  all  works  of  this,  nature,
the  thought  of  38  Amphidyon  the  brother  of  Hellen;  who,,
feeing  the  Greek  nation  weak,  and  eafy  to  be  extirpated  by
the  neighbouringBarbarians,.  aflembled  the  former  in  a  general
council,  and  convention  of  the  whole  nation,  called  from
him  the  Amphidyonic  council ;  and,  exclufive  of  the  par¬
ticular  laws,  by  which  every  city  was  governed,  appointed
others  common  to  them  all,  which  they  call  the  Amphic-
tyonic  laws,  by  the  advantage  of  which  they  lived  in  mutual
friendship,  and,  fulfilling  the  obligations  of  confanguinity
by  their  adions,  rather  than  their  profeftions,  continued
troublefome,  and  formidable  neighbours  to  the  Barbarians.
His  example  was  followed  by  the  Ionians,  who,  leaving

38-  AftpHtWef  m  EAA>jvcf.  Amphic-  that  we  ought  to  fupply  the  paflage
tyon  was  the  fon  of  Deucalion,  and  with  the  word  Ah Acp*  ;  which  may
elder  brother  to  Hellen,  as  it  is,  ge-  have  been  omitted  by  the  tranfcriber.
nerally,  fuppofed  •,  though  fome  au-  The  inftitution  of  this  council  by  Am-
thors  make  Hellen  the  elder.  For  phidyon  is  taken  notice  of  in  the
which  reafon,  M.  *  *  *  thinks  that  Parian  marble,  by  which  we  find  that
T*  Eaa>jvo?  fignifies  Amphic-  it  preceded  the  taking  of  Troy  v  313
tyon  the  Greek  But,  when  Amphidyon  years.  The  council  met  at  Thermo*
inftituted  the  Amphidyonic  council,  pylae,  from  whence  this  aflembly  was,
the  Greeks  were  called  t  r^anco/,  not  called  YlvAxict.

EAA>;ve?.  I  am,  therefore,  of  opinion

t  See  the  197th  annot.  on  the  firft  book.  r  See  the  fifth,  and  twenty  fifth  Epoc.

turoPe»;


198  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

Europe,  fettled  in  the  39  maritime  parts  of  Caria  ;  and,  alfo,
by  the  Dorians,  who  built  cities  near  the  fame  place,  and
erected  temples  at  the  public  expence  ;  the  lonians  building
the  temple  of  Diana  in  Ephefus ;  and  the  Dorians  That  of
Apollo  in  40  Triopium  :  In  which  temples,  they  affembled
with  their  wives,  and  children,  at  the  appointed  times,  facri-
ficed  all  together,  and  celebrated  a  common  feftival,  in  which,
prizes  were  run  for  by  horfes,  and  contended  for  by  gymnic
combatants,  and  by  mailers  of  mulic ;  and  offerings  were  made


39*  Tci  uagxQaKccrlix  peg}]  tvs  Katgicif.

Cafaubon  has  a  note  upon  this  occafion,
which  M.  *  *  *  has  tranfiated,  though
with  a  proper  acknowledgement.  In
this  note,  the  former  contends  that  we
ought  to  read  A cixg  ;  becaufe  none  of
the  ancient  authors  fay  that  the  lonians
came  into  the  maritime  parts  of  Caria.

I  am  forry  to  find  myfelf  obliged  to
differ  from  the  learned  Cafaubon :
However,  it  is  certain  that  the  Ionian
colony,  not  only,  came  into  the  mari¬
time  parts  of  Caria,  but  that  two  cities
of  Caria,  viz.  w  Myiis,  and  Priene,
built  by  the  lonians,  were  two  of  the
twelve  cities,  that  repaired  to  the  fefti¬
val  called,  x  Panionia ,  that  was  cele¬
brated  at  Panionium ,  near  Mycale,  a
promontory  of  Caria  ;  which  feftival
was,  afterwards,  removed  to  Ephefus.
It  is,  alfo,  to  be  obferved  that  Miletus,
a  lea  port  of  Caria,  was  inhabited  by
the  lonians.  The  Ionian  migration  is
mentioned  in  the  y  Parian  marble,  be¬
fore  quoted  ;  the  words  of  which  I
fliall  lay  before  the  reader  •,  both  to
confirm  what  I  have  advanced  relating
to  Caria,  and  to  give  the  names  of  the

w  Herodotus,  in  Clio,  c.  147.  *Id.  ib.  c.


twelve  Ionian  cities,  which  conftituted
the  affembly  at  Panionium.  A<p  4

N^Aguf  ctiKitri  MtAtflov  sv  Kxgix  A xov  ctfeigas
Iftjvwr,  ol  zxJtFciv  Etptuot',  KA

/u-s vug,  Tzo)v,  xoa  A eSfdW,  kou  KoAotpwva,
<&ooKouatv,  X»o vy

kou  r a  IIxviMiot  eftvtlo,  tit j  IiFHHHAIII
(3oi<n\zvovlos  A9>j vuv  [mv  NjjAsoj?  TgeuTnai-
J'skxIh  By  this,  it  appears  that  the
Ionic  migration  was  only  132  years
after  the  taking  of  Troy.  However,  I
find  fome  chronologifts  make  it  140.

4°*  Ev  T oioTTiu.  This  is  the  true
reading  without  all  doubt.  Triopium
was  a  city  of  Caria,  and  a  promontory
of  the  fame  name,  now  called,  Capo
Chio.  Plere,  the  Dorians  had  a  temple
dedicated  to  Apollo  :  To  this  temple,
the  five  Doric  cities  reforted  for  the
fame  purpofes,  as  the  twelve  Ionic
cities  to  Panionium.  z  Herodotus
gives  us  the  names  of  thefe  five  Doric
cities,  viz.  Lindus,  Ialyflus,  Camirus,
Cos,  and  Cnidus.  He  lays,  alfo,  that,
in  this  place,  a  game  was  celebrated
in  honor  of  the  T riopian  Apollo  ;  and
that  the  prizes,  given  to  the  vigors,
were  brazen  tripods.

148.  y  Epoch.  28.  2  In  Clio,  c.  144.

to


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  SI  S.  199

to  the  gods  in  the  name  of  the  public.  After  they  had  all  af-
fifted  at  this  fpedtacle,  celebrated  the  feftival,  and  received  from
one  another  every  inftance  of  benevolence,  if  a  city  had  any
complaint  againft  another,  judges,  appointed  for  that  pur-
pofe,  took  cognizance  of  it ;  after  which,  they  confulted
together  concerning  the  means  both  of  carrying  on  the  war
againft  the  Barbarians,  and  of  cementing  the  national  union.
Thefe,  and  the  like  examples,  infpired  Tullius,  alfo,  with  a
delire  of  forming  a  general  council,  and  affembly  of  all  the
Latine  cities;  left,  if  they  were  ingaged  in  feditions,  and
mutual  wars,  they  might  be  deprived  of  their  liberty  by  the
neighbouring  Barbarians.

XXVI.  After  he  had  taken  this  refolution,  he  fent  for
the  moft  confiderable  men  of  every  city,  intimating  to  them
that  he  delired  their  advice  in  an  affair  of  great  confequence,
and  of  a  common  concern.  When  they  were  all  come,  he
held  an  affembly  confiding  both  of  the  Roman  fenate,  and
of  thofe,  who  came  from  the  cities,  and  made  a  fpeech,
exhorting  them  to  concord  ;  in  which,  he  difplayed  the
beauty  of  harmony,  when  eftablifhed  among  a  number
of  cities,  and  the  deformity  of  difcord  intervening  among
relations:  He  told  them  alfo,  that  unanimity  ftrengthened
the  weak  ;  and  that  mutual  envy  depre/led,  and  weakened,
even,  the  ftrongeft.  After  this,  he  made  it  appear  that  the
Latines  ought  to  have  the  command  over  their  neighbours;
and  that,  as  they  were  Greeks,  they  ought  to  give  laws  to
Barbarians ;  and  that  the  Romans  were  in  titled  to  the  pre¬
eminence  over  all  the.  Latines,  not  only  by  the  greatnefs  of

,  their


-200  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

their  city,  and  the  fuperiority  of  their  actions,  but,  alfo,  by  a
vifible  preference  of  the  divine  providence,  by  which  they  had
arrived  to  lo  great  a  fplendor.  Having  faid  this,  he  advifed
them  to  build  an  inviolable  temple  at  Rome,  at  the  public
expence ;  to  which  the  cities  fhould  repair  every  year,  and
offer  up  both  their  private,  and  public  facrifices ;  and,  alfo,
celebrate  feftivals  at  fuch  times,  as  they  fhould  appoint  ;
and,  if  a  difference  fhould  arife  between  any  of  thefe  cities,
this  communion  of  facrifices  would  be  a  means  to  compofe
it,  they  fubmitting  the  determination  of  their  complaints  to
the  reft  of  the  cities.  After  he  had  explained  thefe,  and
the  many  other  advantages  they  would  reap  from  the  ap¬
pointment  of  a  general  council,  he  prevailed  on  all,  who
were  prefent  at  this  confutation,  to  confent  to  it :  After
which,  with  the  money  arifing  from  the  contributions  of
all  the  cities,  he  built  the  temple  of  Diana,  which  ftands
upon  mount  Aventine,  the  greateft  of  all  the  hills  in  Rome.
At  the  fame  time,  he  compofed  laws  relating  to  the  mutual
rights  of  the  cities,  and  ordered  in  what  manner  every  thing
elfe,  that  concerned  the  feftival,  and  the  general  affembly,
fhould  be  performed.  And  to  the  end  that  no  length  of  time
fhould  deface  thefe  laws,  he  erected  a  brazen  pillar,  upon
which  he  ordered  to  be  ingraved  both  the  decrees  of  the  coun¬
cil,  and  the  names  of  the  cities,  which  had  afiifted  at  it.  This
pillar  is  ftill  to  be  feen  in  the  temple  of  Diana  with  the  in-
fcription  in  Greek  characters,  which  are  the  fame,  that  were,
anciently,  ufed  in  Greece.  This  alone  is  a  proof  of  no  fmall
weight,  that  the  founders  of  Rome  were  not  Barbarians  :

For,


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSE NS  I  S.  201

For,  if  they  had  been  fo,  they  would  not  have  made  ufe  of
41  Greek  characters.  Thefe  are  the  mo  ft  confiderable,  and
1110ft  confpicuous  aCtions,  that  are  recorded  of  this  king,
relating  to  the  civil  adminiftration,  beftdes  many  others  of
lefs  note,  and  certainty.  His  military  actions  were  directed
againft  one  nation  only,  which  was  That  of  the  Tyrrhenians,
of  which  I  fhall,  now,  give  an  account.

XXVII.  After  the  death  of  Tarquinius,  thofe  cities,
which  had  yielded  the  fovereignty  to  him,  difdaining  to
fubmit  to  Tullius,  as  he  was  a  man  of  mean  birth  ;  and
withall  promiling  to  themfelves  great  advantages  from  the
difguft,  conceived  by  the  patricians  againft  their  prince,
refufed  to  obferve  their  treaties.  The  Veientes  were  the
'authors  of  this  revolt ;  and,  when  Tullius  fent  embafladors
to  expoftulate  with  them  upon  this  occafton,  they  replied
that  they  had  never  yielded  the  fovereignty  to  him,  nor
entered  into  any  treaty  of  friendfhip,  and  alliance  with  him.


41*  Ou  yet £  etv  EAAjjv/koi?  e^uvlo
y^ot/x^etcrtv,  ovltt  BctgGotgoi.  This  is,
indeed,  a  Itrong  proof  of  what  Dio-
nyfius  has,  all  along,  aflerted,  viz.
that  the  Romans  were,  originally,
Greeks ;  fince,  I  believe,  there  never
was  any  nation  in  the  world,  except
the  Jews  after  their  captivity,  who
writ  their  own  language  in  foreign
chara&ers.  It  may  feem  a  paradox
to  afiert  that  the  Roman  letters,  and,
confequently,  Thofe,  we,  and  our
neighbours,  at  this  day,  make  ufe  of,
were  the  ancient  Phoenician  characters,
brought  by  Cadmus  into  Greece,  ufed
there  for  many  ages,  carried  from

VOL.  II.


thence  by  the  Greek  colonies  into  Italy,
adopted  by  the  Romans,  and,  by  them,
difperfed  with  their  conquefts  over  all
the  weftern  world:  Yet,  this  alfertion,
as  extraordinary  as  it  may  appear  at
firft  fight,  I  think,  I  can  prove  to  be
founded  on  truth,  by  the  authority  of
the  beft  writers,  and  the  concurrent
teftimony  of  the  moll  authentic  in-
fcriptions.  But  I  find  this  difcuffion
will  be  much  too  long  for  a  note  *,  and,
therefore,  defire  the  reader  will  give
me  leave  to  refer  him  to  a  fmall  dif-
fertation  on  this  fubjedt,  which  he  will
find  at  the  end  of  this  book.

C  c


Thefe


20  2  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  IV.

Thefe  having  fet  the  example,  the  Caeretani,  and  Tarqui-
nienfes  followed  it,  and,  at  laft,  all  Tyrrhenia  was  in  arms.
This  war  lafted  twenty  years  without  intermiffion,  during
which  time,  both  of  them  made  many  irruptions  into  one
another’s  territories  with  great  armies,  and  many  pitched
battles  were,  fucceffively,  fought  between  them  :  But  Tul¬
lius,  having  had  the  advantage  in  all  the  battles,  in  which
he  was  ingaged,  as  well  againft  the  feveral  cities,  as  againft
the  whole  nation,  and  been  honoured  with  three  moft
fplendid  triumphs,  he,  at  laid,  forced  thofe,  who  refufed  to
obey,  willingly  to  receive  the  42  yoke.  In  the  twentieth
year,  therefore,  of  the  war,  the  twelve  cities.,  again,  affembled
together;  and,  finding  themfelves  exhaufted  by  the  war
both  of  men,  and  money,  determined  to  yield  the  fove-
reignty  to  the  Romans  upon  the  fame  terms  they  had  before
fubmitted  to :  And  deputies,  fent  by  all  the  cities,  arrived
with  the  fymbols  of  fuppliants ;  and,  delivering  up  their
cities  to  Tullius,  begged  of  him  not  to  treat  them  with
feverity.  Upon  which,  Tullius  told  them  that,  by  their
folly,  and  their  impieties  to  the  gods,  whom  they  had  called
upon  as  witneffes  to  their  treaties,  and  yet  had  violated  thofe
treaties,  they  deferved  many  fevere  punifhments ;  however,
fince  they  acknowledged  their  fault,  and  were  come,  with  the
marks  of  fuppliants,  and  with  intreaties,  to  deprecate  the  re-
fentment  they  had  merited,  they  fhould,  now,  feel  the  whole
effect  of  the  clemency,  and  moderation  of  the  Romans.


42.*  XtfAivov.  Literally,  the  bridle.
When  a  people  are  inflaved,  it  is  not


very  material  which  of  thefe  two  they
are  forced  to  receive.


Having


BookXV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SIS.  203

Having  faid  this,  he  put  an  end  to  the  war ;  and  allowed
the  greateft  part  of  the  cities  to  ufe  the  fame  form  of  go¬
vernment  as  before,  without  reftraining  them  in  any  degree,
or  preferving  the  leaft  refentment  for  paft  injuries ;  and,
alfo,  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their  lands,  while  they  obferved
the  conditions  of  the  treaties,  prefcribed  to  them  by  Tar-
quinius :  But,  as  to  the  three  cities  of  the  Caeretani,  the
Tarquinienfes,  and  the  Veientes,  who  had,  not  only,  been
the  authors  of  the  revolt,  but,  alfo,  induced  the  reft  to
make  war  upon  the  Romans,  he  punifhed  them  by  feizing
their  lands ;  which  he  divided  among  thofe,  who  had,  lately,
come  to  fettle  at  Rome :  After  thefe  a&ions  both  in  peace,
and  war,  he  built  two  temples  to  Fortune,  who  feemed  to
have  favoured  him  all  his  life  ;  one  in  the  market,  called
the  Boarian  market ;  the  other,  on  the  banks  of  the  river
Tiber  ;  which  he  called 43  Forth  Fortunae ,  as  it  is  called  by


43'  Av<Jk>« #v.  The  Latin  tranflators
have  called  this,  Templum  Fortunae
virilis ,  in  which  they  have  been  fol¬
lowed  by  the  French  tranflators.  Vi-
rilis  feems,  at  firft  view,  fo  obvious  a
tranflation  of  «v<5§«or,  that  I  am  not  at
all  furprifed  it  impofed  upon  them ;
particularly,  fince  Servius  Tullius  did,
really,  build  a  temple  to  Fortuna  Vi-
rilis ,  which  was  the  temple  eredted
by  him  in  the  forum  Boarium.  This
temple,  though  faid  by  our  author  to
have  been  dedicated  to  Fortune  gene¬
rally,  I  fliall  prove  to  have  been  the
temple  of  Fortuna  Virilis ,  and  That  on
the  banks  of  the  Tiber,  which  is  the
temple  in  queftion,  to  have  been  the


temple  of  Fors  Fortuna ,  which  he  has
tranflated  To No  author  is
fo  exaft  as  Ovid  in  defcribing,  not
only,  the  Roman  feftivals,  but,  alfo,
the  occaflons,  that  gave  birth  to  thofe
feftivals. a  He  fays  that  ServiusTullius
inftituted  a  feftival,  called  Matralia ,
and  built  a  temple  to  Matuta ,  in  the
forum  Boarium ;

//<?,  bonae  matres  ( vejirum  Matralia  fejlum )
Flavaque  Tbebanae  reddita  liba  deae.
Pontibus ,  et  magno  j  unci  a  eji  celeberrimaclrco
Area  ;  quae  pofito  de  Bove  nomen  habct.
Hac  ibi  luce  ferunt  Matutae  facra  parenti
Sceptriferas  Servi  te?npla  dedijfe  mantis.

After  this,  he  comes  to  the  feftival  of


a  Eaftorum,  B.  vi.  f.  475.

C  C  2


the


204  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

the  Romans,  even  to  this  day.  And  being,  now,  advanced
in  years,  and  not  far  from  a  natural  death,  he  was,  treache-
roufly,  llain  by  Tarquinius,  his  fon-in-law,  and  by  his  own
daughter  :  I  flhall,  alfo,  relate  the  manner,  in  which  this
treacherous  a&ion  was  executed ;  after  I  have  refumed  fame


few  things,  that  preceded  it.

Fortuna  Virilis ,  which,  he  fays,  was
celebrated  on  the  fame  day  with  the
Matralia ,  and,  in  the  fame  place,  and,
alfo,  founded  by  the  fame  perfon,  that
is,  by  Servius  Tullius,  whofe  ftatue
ftood  in  this  temple  with  its  head
veiled  j b

Lux  eadem ,  Fortuna,  ejl ,  auclorq ;  locufque

Sed  fuperinjedtis  quis  latet  aede  togis  ?
Servius  eft  j

Now,  it  is  very  well  known  that  the
Matralia  were  celebrated  on  the  third
day  before  the  ides  (the  eleventh)  of
June  ;  on  which  day  was,  alfo,  cele¬
brated  the  fealt  of  Fortuna  Virilis.

Ovid,  then,  gives  the  reafon  of  this
appellation,  which  he  derives  from  the
fame  extraordinary  tradition,  that  is
related  by  our  author  in  the  beginning
of  this  book,  concerning  the  cuSoiov
which  was  feen  by  Ocrifia,  and,
from  which,  the  name  of  Virilis  was
given  to  this  goddefs.  c

Arferat  hoc  templum  :  Signo  tamen  illepcpercit
Ignis  :  Opem  nato  Mulciber  ipfe  tulii.
Namque  pater  T'ulli  Vulcanus ,  Ocrifia  mater ,
Praefgnis  facie  Corniculana  fuit.
llanc  fecum  Tanaquil ,  facris  de  more  paratis ,
Jufft  in  ornatum  funder e  vina  focum.


Hie  inter  cineres  obfeoeni  forma  virilis

Jut  fuit ,  aut  vifa  efl  :  Sed  fuit  ilia  magis.
fufa  foco  captiva fovet ;  conceptus  ab  ilia
Servius  a  Coelo  femina  gentis  habet.

Signa  dedit  genitor,  turn  cum  caput  igne  corufco
Contigit ,  inque  coma  fammeus  arft  apex .

All  the  circumftances  of  this  tradition
are  the  fame  both  in  Dionyfius,  and
Ovid.  As  to  the  temple  of  Fors  For¬
tuna ,  for  that  is  the  name,  not  Fortis
Fortuna ,  it  ftood  on  the  weftern  bank
of  the  Tiber  ;  and  her  feftival  was  ce¬
lebrated  on  the  eighth  of  the  calends
of  July  (the  twenty  fourth  of  June)  all
this  will,  alfo,  appear  from d  Ovid  :

ffuam  cito  venerunt  Fortunae  Fortis  honores /
Pof  feptem  luces  Junius  adius  erit.

Ite ,  Deam  laeti  Fortem  celebrate ,  fhtirites  :

In  Tiberis  ripa  munera  regis  habet.

Pars  pede ,  pars  etiam  celeri  decurrite  cymbd.
Nec  pudeat  potos  inde  redire  domum.

By  all  thefe  circumftances,  the  temple
ol  Fors  Fortuna  can  be  no  other  than
That,  which  our  author  fays,  Servius
Tullius  eredted  on  the  banks  of  the
Tiber  j  which  temple  he  had,  no  doubt,
often  heard  the  Romans  call  Templum
Fortis  Fortunae ,  and  this  might  in¬
duce  him  to  trandate  it  vaav  Tv^s


avty&ce  f.

b  Failorum,  B.  vi.  jr.  569.  c  Id.  ib.  f.  625.  d  Id.  ib.  f.  773.


XXVIII.


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  205

XXVIII.  Tullius  had  two  daughters  by  his  wife  Tar-
quinia,  whom  Tarquinius,  the  king,  had  given  to  him  in
marriage:  Thefe,  when  marriageable,  he  difpofed  of  to  the
nephews  of  their  mother,  who  were,  alfo,  the  grandfons  of
Tarquinius ;  and  gave  the  eldeft  of  his  daughters  to  the  eldeft
of  her  nephews ;  and  the  youngeft,  to  the  youngeft ;  look¬
ing  upon  this  difpolition  as  the  moft  fuitable  to  their  huf-
bands  :  But  it  happened  that  each  of  his  fons-in-law  was
matched  to  a  character  different  from  his  own  :  For  the
wife  of  Lucius,  the  elder  of  the  two  brothers,  who  was  of  a
bold,  infolent,  and  tyrannical  nature,  was  a  good  woman,
modeft,  and  fond  of  her  father :  On  the  other  fide,  the  wife
of  Aruns,  the  younger  brother,  a  man  of  great  mildnefs,  and
prudence,  was  a  wicked  woman,  hated  her  father,  and  was
capable  of  any  rafh  adion.  In  this  fituation,  each  of  the
hufbands  followed  the  didlates  of  his  own  nature,  while  his
wife  endeavoured  to  infpire  him  with  contrary  fentiments :
For,  when  the  wicked  hufband  defired  to  dethrone  his
father-in-law,  and  was  forming  defigns  of  every  kind  to
effect  it,  his  wife,  by  her  prayers,  and  tears,  endeavoured  to
prevail  on  him  to  defift  :  And,  when  the  mild  hufband
thought  himfelf  obliged  to  abftain  from  all  attempts  againft
the  life  of  his  father-in-law,  and  to  wait  till  he  fhould  end
his  days  by  the  courfe  of  nature,  and  difcountenanced
the  unjuft  defigns  of  his  brother,  his  wicked  wife,  by  her
remonftrances,  and  her  reproaches,  and,  by  reviling  him
with  a  want  of  fpirit,  fought  to  feduce  him  to  a  contrary
difpofition  :  But,  when  neither  the  intreaties  of  the  virtuous


20(5  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

wife,  fupported  by  the  be  ft  advice,  made  any  impreftion  oil
her  unjuft  hufoand  ;  nor  the  inftigations  of  the  wicked  wife
could  invite  a  man  of  no  evil  difpofttion  to  impious  aftions,
but  each  of  them  followed  the  impulfe  of  his  own  nature,
and  thought  his  wife  troublefome,  becaufe  her  fentiments
differed  from  his  own,  nothing  remained,  than  for  the  former
to  bewail  her  own  condition,  and  fubmit  to  her  ill  fortune ;
and  for  the  all-daring  woman,  to  exprefs  her  refentment,
and  endeavour  to  get  rid  of  her  hufband  :  At  laft,  this
wicked  woman,  grown  defperate,  and  thinking  the  difpoft¬
tion  of  her  filter’s  hufband  to  be  the  moft  fuitable  to  her
own,  ftie  fends  for  him,  pretending  that  fhe  wanted  to  fpeak
with  him  concerning  fome  affair  of  importance.

XXIX.  And,  when  he  came,  fhe  ordered  every  one  to
withdraw,  that  fhe  might  confer  with  him  in  private.
“  May  I,  fays  fhe,  Tarquinius,  declare,  with  freedom,  and
€C  without  danger,  all  my  thoughts  concerning  our  common
“  interefts  ?  And  will  you  not  divulge  what  you  fhall  hear  ?
cC  Or  would  it  not  be  more  prudent  in  me  to  be  ftlent,  and
cc  not  communicate  counfels,  that  require  fecrecy  ?  ”  Tar¬
quinius,  upon  this,  deftred  her  to  fay  what  fhe  thought  fit ;
and,  having  given  her  afturances  of  his  fecrecy  by  fuch
oaths,  as  fhe  herfelf  had  propofed,  Tullia,  laying  afide  all
fhame  from  that  moment,  faid  to  him;  cc  How  long,  Tar-
u  quinius,  do  you  defign  to  fuffer  yourfelf  to  be  deprived
of  the  kingdom  ?  Is  it,  becaufe  you  are  defeended  from
u  mean,  and  obfeure  anceftors,  that  you  refufe  to  entertain
cc  high  thoughts  of  yourfelf?  But  every  one  knows  that,


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  207

C£  formerly,  your  44  anceftors,  who  were  Greeks,  and  de-
(£  fcended  from  Hercules,  exercifed  the  fovereign  power  in
“  the  flourifliing  city  of  Corinth,  as  I  am  informed,  for
u  many  generations ;  and  that  your  grandfather,  Tarquinius,

C£  having  left  Tyrrhenia  to  fettle  at  Rome,  was,  by  his  virtue,
cc  raifed  to  be  king  of  this  city  ;  whofe  kingdom,  as  well
“  as  fortunes,  you,  who  are  the  eldeft  of  his  grandfons,
“  ought  to  inherit:  Or  can  it  be  faid  that  you  are  rendered
“  incapable  of  performing  the  functions  of  a  king  through
“  the  weaknefs,  and  deformity  of  your  perfon  ?  But  you
<£  are  indued  both  with  ftrength,  equal  to  thofe,  whom  na-
<£  ture  has  the  moft  favoured,  and  with  beauty,  worthy  your
££  royal  birth  :  Or  is  it  neither  of  thefe,  but  your  youth,  as*
fi£  yet  weak,  and  far  from  being  capable  of  proper  reflexions,
££  that  difcourages  you  from  entering  into  the  adminiftration
“  of  affairs,  when  you  want  not  many  years  of  being  fifty  ?
“  However,  this  is  the  age,  in  which  the  judgement  is  in
££  its  greateft  perfection.  But  fay,  Is  it  the  high  birth  of
“  the  perfon,  who  governs,  and  his  popularity  among  the
“  moft;  confiderable  citizens,  by  which  he  is  guarded  againft
<c  all  attempts,  that  forces  you  to  fubmit  ?  But  neither
“  of  thefe  circumftances,  are  in  his  favor  ;  of  which  you-
C£  yourfelf  are  not  ignorant :  And  your  behaviour  fhews-
££  you  to  be  a  bold  man,  and  fond  of  danger ;  qualities,.
££  moft  neceffary  to  thofe,  who  defire  to  reign.  You  have

44*  n^ofovojff  vfxuv  —  a^oci  Ko^/v^.  the  third  book,  and  the  forty  feventh
See  the  forty  fecond  annotation  on  chapter  of  the  fame,

££  riches


2o 8  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  BookIV.

cc  riches  fufficient,  numerous  friends,  and  many  other  great
“  opportunities,  to  encourage  you  to  this  attempt :  Why,
“  therefore,  do  you  defer  it,  and  wait  till  a  proper  feafon,
“  fpontaneoufly,  prefents  itfelf,  and  offers  you  the  kingdom
<c  without  your  own  folicitation  ?  This,  you  fay,  will  happen
C£  after  the  death  of  Tullius :  As  if  fortune  will  wait  our
iC  delays,  or  nature  difpenfe  death  according  to  every  man’s
“  age;  and  that  the  events  of  all  human  affairs  were  not
“  obfcure,  and  difficult  to  be  forefeen.  But  I  will  declare,
“  freely,  even,  though  you  fhould  call  me  bold  for  it,  the
“  reafon  why  you  are  without  ambition,  or  a  third:  of  glory ;
<c  you  have  a  wife,  whofe  difpofition  is,  in  all  refpedts,
“  unlike  your  own;  and  who,  by  her  allurements,  and
“  inchantments,  has  foftened  you  ;  and  you  will,  infenfibly,
“  be  transformed  by  her,  from  a  man  of  fpirit,  to  a  wretch
“  of  no  value :  Juft  fo,  have  I  a  pufillanimous  hufband,
“  who  has  nothing  of  a  man  in  him  ;  who  depreffes  my
“  fpirit,  which  is  worthy  of  great  things ;  and  waftes  the
“  charms  of  my  perfon  :  But,  if  fortune  had  directed  that
“  I  fhould  have  been  your  wife,  and  you  my  hufband,  we
“  had  not  lived  fo  long  in  a  private  ftation.  Why,  there-
“  fore,  do  not  we  ourfelves  correct  this  error  of  fortune,  by
c<  exchanging  our  nuptial  ingagements  ?  Do  you  get  rid  of
tc  your  wife,  and  I  will  do  the  fame  by  my  hufband:
“  And,  when,  by  their  deaths,  we  are  united,  we  may,
“  then,  with  fecurity,  confider  of  what  remains  to  be  done;
C£  after  we  have  removed  thofe  objedts,  that  are,  now,  uneafy

“  to


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC  ARN  ASSENS  IS.  209

<(  to  us :  For,  though 45  other  ads  of  injuftice  may  make  us
“  tremble  ;  yet,  when  a  kingdom  is  in  view,  none  are  blamed
“  for  daring  to  commit  every  crime.”

XXX.  While  Tullia  was  faying  this,  Tarquinius,  readily,
accepts  the  conditions ;  gives  her,  that  moment,  aflurances
for  his  performance  of  them  ;  receives  the  fame  from  her ;
and,  having  tafted  the  firft-fruits  of  his  execrable  nuptials,
he  departed.  Not  long  after  this,  the  eldeft  daughter  of
Tullius,  and  the  younger  Tarquinius  both  died  by  the  fame
means.  Here  again,  I  find  myfelf  obliged  to  make  mention
of  Fabius,  and  to  fhew  him  guilty  of  negligence  in  his  in¬
quiries  into  chronology:  For,  when  he  comes  to  the  death
of  Aruns,  he  commits,  not  only,  one  error  (as  I  faid  before)
in  faying  that  he  was  the  fon  of  Tarquinius ;  but,  alfo,
another,  in  affirming  that,  after  his  death,  he  was  buried  by
his  mother  Tanaquil,  who  could  not,  poffibly,  have  been
alive  at  that  time :  For,  it  has  been  fhewn  at  find,  that,
when  Tarquinius  died,  Tanaquil  was  feventy  five  years  of
age  ;  to  which  feventy  five  years,  if  forty  more  are  added
(for  we  find,  in  the  annals  of  thole  times,  that  Aruns  died
in  the  fortieth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tullius)  Tanaquil  muff
have  been  one  hundred  and  fifteen  years  old  :  So  few  marks
of  a  laborious  inquiry  after  truth  do  we  find  in  that  author's

45-  K oti  yct%  savr*  etc.  There  fome  obfervations  upon  this  pafiage  of
is  a  note  in  Sylburgius,  upon  this  oc-  Euripides.  The  two  French  tranf-
cafion,  in  which,  he  lhews  that  this  lators  have  rendered  this  note  of  Syl-
wicked  maxim  is  taken  from  the  Phoe-  burgius  in  their  language,  though,
nififae  of  Euripides.  If  the  reader  without  the  lead:  acknowledgement  to
pleafes  to  turn  to  the  130th  annota-  the  perfon,  from  whom  they  tranflated
lion  on  the  firft  book,  he  will  find  it.

Vol.  II.  D  d  hiftory.


210  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

hiftory.  After  this  adlion,  Tarquinius,  prefently,  married
Tullia,  and,  when  both  her  father  refu fed  to  allow  of  the
marriage,  and  her  mother  to  approve  of  it,  he  contented
himfelf  with  her  own  confent.  As  foon  as  thefe  impious,
and  fanguinary  minds  were  joined,  they  formed  a  defign  to
dethrone  T ullius,  if  he  did  not,  willingly,  refign  his  power ;
to  which  end,  they  aflembled  thofe  of  their  fa&ion ;  inviting
to  it  fuch  of  the  patricians,  as  were  enemies  to  the  king,
and  to  his  popular  inftitutions ;  and,  corrupting  thofe  among
the  people,  who  had  no  regard  for  juftice  :  In  the  profecu-
tion  of  all  which  defigns,  they  adted  openly.  Tullius,  being
apprifed  of  their  intrigues,  was  full  of  refentment,  and  afraid
left  he  fhould  feel  the  effedts  of  them,  before  he  was  pre¬
pared  to  reftft ;  neither  was  it  the  leaft  of  his  afflictions  to
find  himfelf  obliged  to  take  arms  againft  his  own  daughter,
and  his  fon-in-law ;  and  to  punifh  them  as  enemies :  To
prevent  which,  he,  often,  invited  Tarquinius  to  confer  with
him,  in  the  prefence  of  his  friends ;  and,  fometimes,  accufing,
fometimes,  remonftrating,  and,  at  others,  perfuading  him  to
undertake  nothing  to  his  prejudice;  when  he  faw  he  gave  no
.  attention  to  what  he  faid,  but  infifted  on  pleading  his  caufe
before  the  fen  ate,  he  called  the  fenators  together,  and  faid
to  them ;  “  Fathers,  I  have  difcovered  that  Tarquinius  has
“  formed  a  faction  againft  me,  and  is  endeavouring  to  de-
£C  throne  me  :  I  defire,  therefore,  that  he  will  let  me  know,
<c  in  the  prefence  of  you  all,  what  detriment  he  has  received
“  from  me;  or  what  injury  I  have  done  to  the  common-
“  wealth  to  deferve  that  he  fhould  form  thefe  defigns  againft

“  me.


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENSIS.  211

“  me.  Anfwer  me,  then,  Tarquinius,  without  concealing
u  any  thing,  and  fay  what  you  have  to  accufe  me  of,  fince
“  you  have  chofen  the  fenate  to  judge  between  us.”

XXXI.  Upon  which,  Tarquinius  replied  ;  “  My  anfwer,
<c  Tullius,  will  be  fhort,  and  founded  on  juftice;  and,  for
cc  that  reafon,  I  chofe  to  lay  it  before  the  fenate.  Tarqui-
“  nius,  my  grandfather,  obtained  the  fovereignty  of  the
“  Romans  by  fighting  many  confiderable  battles  in  their
<c  defence:  He  being  dead,  I  am  his  fucceflor,  according  to
<c  the  laws  received  by  all  the  Greeks,  and  Barbarians ;  and
“  I  ought,  in  juftice,  to  inherit,  not  only,  his  fortunes,  but
“  his  kingdom,  in  the  fame  manner,  as  all  other  fucceflors
C£  inherit  the  eftates  of  their  grandfathers.  You  have,  indeed,
iC  delivered  up  to  me  the  fortunes  he  left ;  but  you  deprive
“  me  of  the  kingdom,  and  have  kept  the  pofleflion  of  it  for
<c  fo  long  a  time,  after  you  had  obtained  it  in  an  unjuftifi-
“  able  manner :  For,  neither  did  the  interreges  appoint  you
c<  king,  nor  the  fenate  pafs  a  vote  in  your  favor  ;  neither
£C  did  you  obtain  this  power  by  a  legal  election  of  the  people,
“  as  my  grandfather,  and  all  the  kings  before  him,  obtained
“  it.  But  you  gained  the  foverignty  by  hiring,  and  corrupt-
iC  ing  by  every  method  you  could  devife,  a  number  of
“  vagabonds,  and  beggars,  men  rendered  infamous  by  being
u  condemned,  or  burdened  with  debts,  who  had  no  regard
“  for  the  public;  and,  by  declaring,  even  then,  that  you
“  did  not  feek  the  power  for  yourfelf ;  and  pretending  that
<c  you  referved  it  for  us,  who  were,  then,  orphans,  and  in-
'  “  fants;  and  you  ingaged  before  all  the  world  that,  when

D  d  2  “  we


2  I  2


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

u  we  arrived  to  manhood,  you  would  furrender  the  power
“  to  me,  as  to  the  elder  brother :  You  ought,  therefore,  if
“  you  defired  to  do  juftice,  when  you  delivered  up  to  me
cc  the  palace  of  my  grandfather,  to  have  reftored  his  king-
“  dom  together  with  his  fortunes,  after  the  example  of
u  thofe  honeft,  and  good  guardians,  who,  having  taken
u  upon  themfelves  the  care  of  royal  orphans,  have,  truly,
“  and,  juftly,  reftored  to  them  the  kingdoms  of  their  fathers,
“  and  anceftors,  when  they  came  to  be  men.  But,  if  you
“  thought  I  had  not  yet  attained  a  proper  degree  of  pru-
<c  dence,  and  that,  by  reafon  of  my  youth,  I  was  unequal
<c  to  the  government  of  fo  confiderable  a  city,  yet,  when  I
“  arrived  to  the  age  of  thirty  years,  and  my  body,  and  mind
u  were  in  the  greateft  vigor,  you  ought  to  have  put  the  go-
u  vernment  of  the  city  into  my  hands,  at  the  lame  time
“  you  gave  me  your  daughter  in  marriage :  For,  at  that
“  age,  you,  alfo,  firft  took  upon  yourfelf  the  adminiftration
“  both  of  our  family,  and  of  the  kingdom.

XXXII.  “  And,  if  you  had  done  this,  you  would,  in  the
££  firft  place,  have  gained  the  character  of  a  pious,  and  juft
“  man  ;  and,  after  that,  you  would  have  been  my  counfellor,
<£  and  have  had  a  fharein  all  honors ;  you  would  have  been
<£  called  my  benefa&or,  my  father,  and  my  preferver ;  and
<£  have  received  every  other  diftinguifhing  appellation,  which
<£  mankind  give  to  the  authors  of  worthy  adtions;  inftead
<£  of  depriving  me  of  my  right  for  four  and  forty  years  to-
<£  gether,  without  being  able  to  charge  me  with  any  defedt
u  either  in  my  perfon,  or  underftanding.  After  this  ufage,

“  you


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  EN$  IS.  213

cc  you  have  the  aflurance  to  aik  me  what  ill  treatment  pro-
“  vokes  me  to  look  upon  you  as  my  enemy,  and,  for  what
u  reafon,  I  accufe  you  ?  But  anfwer  me  yourfelf,  Tullius,
“  and  fay,  for  what  reafon,  you  think  me  unworthy  to  in-
“  herit  the  honors  of  my  grandfather ;  and  what  fpecious
<c  pretence  you  have  to  alledge  for  depriving  me  of  them.
cc  Is  it  that  you  look  upon  me  as  fuppofititious,  and  illegi-
“  timate,  and  not  his  lawful  Ion  ?  If  fo,  why  did  you  ad  as
<c  guardian  to  one,  who  was  a  ftranger  to  his  blood,  and
“  why  did  you  reftore  his  palace  to  him,  as  foon  as  he  came
“  to  be  a  man  ?  Or  is  it,  that  you  ftill  look  upon  me  as  an
“  orphan  child,  and  incapable  of  adminiflring  the  affairs  of
“  the  public,  when  I  am  near  fifty  years  of  age  ?  Lay  afide,
“  then,  46  the  affedation  of  your  fhamelefs  queftions,  and
“  ceafe,  at  laft,  to  be  an  ill  man.  However,  if  you  have

46-  Ei£wv«<*v.  I  do  not  look  upon  Ut ,  apud  Platonem ,  Socrates  in  coelnm
interrogations  ironiques,  in  M.  ***,  to  effert  laudibns  Protagoram ,  Hippiam ,
exprefs  the  fenfe  of  This  Prodicum ,  Gorgiam^  caeteros ;  fe  autem

word,  in  Greek,  conveys  two  ideas  :  omnium  rerum  infcium  fingit  et  rudem ,
The  firft,  when  a  perfon  gives  to  an-  decet  hoc  nefcio  qiiomodo  ilium.  Now,
other  a  merit  he  has  not  *,  and  the  fe-  I  do  not  think  that  irony ,  either  in
cond,  when  he  conceals  a  merit  he  French,  or  Fmglifh,  is  ufed  in  the  laft
himfelf  is  poffeffed  of.  Socrates  is  of  the  two  fignifications,  which  Cicero
reprefented  as  ufing  both  with  fuccefs :  has  given  to  it.  In  the  paffage  before
Of  which  Atticus,  or,  rather6  Cicero,  us,  a^uveia  is,  indeed,  taken  in  a  dif-
gives  this  account:  Ego,  inquit,  ironiam  ferent  fenfe  from  either  of  thofe  two
illam ,  quam  dicunt  in  So  crate  fuijfe,  qua  mentioned  here  by  Cicero:  For,  in
ille  in  Platonis ,  et  Xenophontis ,  et  Aef-  this  place,  it  fignifies  a  concealment  of
chinis  libris  utitur,  facet  am  et  elegantem  the  obvious  anfwers,  which  Tullius
puto.  Eft  enim  et  minime  inepti  hominis ,  himfelf  is  fuppofed  to  have  known  that
et  ejufdem  etiam  faceti,  cum  de  fapientid  Tarquinius  might  make  to  the  quef-
difceptetur ,  hanc  fibi  ipfum  detrahere ,  eis  tions  he  had,  juft  before,  put  to  him<
tribuere  illudentem ,  quieamfibi  arrogant.

eIn  Bruto,  c.  85,


214  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

u  any  reafons  to  alledge  againfl  what  I  have  faid,  I  am  ready
££  to  leave  the  determination  of  our  conteft  to  thefe,  who
<£  are  prefent,  than  whom  you  can  find  none  in  the  city
“  better  qualified  to  decide  it.  But  if,  from  this  tribunal,
u  you  fly  (as  it  is  cuftomary  with  you)  to  the  rabble  you
<c  have  deluded,  I  will  not  fuffer  it:  For  I  am  prepared,
“  not  only,  to  defend  my  caufe  by  my  words ;  but,  if  thefe
£C  fail  to  convince  you,  to  fupport  it  by  my  actions.”

XXXIII.  When  he  had  done  fpeaking,  Tullius  replied  in
the  following  manner ;  “  Fathers,  fays  he,  it  feems  that,  as
“  a  man,  I  ought  to  expedl  every  thing,  however  extraordi-
££  nary ;  and  to  look  upon  nothing  as  ftrange,  fince  Tar-
££  quinius  defires  to  dethrone  even  me,  who  received  him,
££  when  he  was  an  infant ;  and,  when  his  enemies  were
££  forming  defigns  againfl:  his  life,  preferved  him,  and  brought
<£  him  up ;  and,  when  he  came  to  be  a  man,  honoured  him
££  fo  far  as  to  make  him  my  fon-in-law ;  and  defigned  to
££  make  him  heir  to  all  my  fortunes  at  my  death  :  But,  fince
££  every  thing  has  happened  to  me  contrary  to  my  expedta-
cc  tion,  and  that  I  myfelf  am  accufed  of  having  wronged
<£  him,  I  fhall,  afterwards,  lament  my  own  misfortune,  and,
££  at  prefent,  plead  my  caufe  againfl:  him.  I  took  upon
££  myfelf,  Tarquinius,  the  guardianfhip  of  your  brother,  and
££  of  yourfelf,  when  you  were  left  infants,  not  voluntarily,
£C  but  compelled  to  it  by  the  fituation  of  affairs ;  fince  thofe,
C£  who  claimed  the  kingdom,  had,  openly,  aflaffinated  your
a  grandfather  ;  and  were  faid  to  form  fecret  defigns  both
* £  againfl:  you,  and  the  reft  of  his  relations  3  and  all  your  friends

u


ac-


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S'.  215-

“  acknowledged  that,  if  once  they  got  the  power  into
cc  their  hands,  they  would  not  have  left,  even,  one  branch
“  of  the  Tarquinian  family  alive  :  Neither  was  there  any
u  other  perfon  to  take  care  of,  and  guard,  you  againft  their
“  enterprizes,  but  a  woman,  the  mother  of  your  father;
u  and  file,  byreafon  of  her  great  age,  flood  herfelfin  need  of
<c  other  guardians :  So  that,  I  was  the  only  perfon  left  to  take
“  care  of  you  in  your  deftitute  condition,  though  you,  now,
“  call  me  a  ftranger,  and,  in  no  degree,  related  to  your
<c  family  :  However,  by  taking  upon  rnyfelf  the  condud:  of
“  your  affairs,  though  in  this  fftuation,  I,  not  only,  brought
cc  the  aflaflins  of  your  grandfather  to  punifhment,  and  bred
<c  you  up  till  you  were  men ;  but,  as  I  had  no  heir  male,
<c  defigned  to  leave  you  all  my  fortunes.  You  have,  now,
<c  Tarquinius,  the  account  of  my  guardianfhip,  and  you  will
<c  not  pretend  to  fay  that  any  part  of  it  is  mifreprefented.

XXXIV.  “  Concerning  the  royal  dignity,  fince  this  is  the
“  point  you  accufe  me  of,  learn  by  what  means  I  obtained
“  it ;  and,  for  what  reafons,  I  fhall  refign  it  neither  to  you,
“  nor  to  any  other  perfon.  When  I  took  upon  rnyfelf  the
“  government  of  the  city,  finding  there  were  fome  defigns
“  forming  againft  me,  I  deffred  to  furrender  it  to  the  people ;
“  and,  having  aflembled  them  all  together,  I  offered  to  refign
“  the  government  to  them;  preferring  a  quiet  life,  free
u  from  danger,  to  this  envied  fovereignty,  the  fource  of
“  greater  pains,  than  pleafures.  But  the  Romans  would  not
“  fuffer  me  to  execute  my  defign ;  neither  did  they  think
^  fit  to  place  the  government  in  any  other  hands,  but  con-

“  tinned


2 1 6  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

£<  tinued  it  in  mine;  and,  by  their  votes,  conferred  the  royal
tc  dignity  on  me  ;  a  dignity,  which  belonged  to  them,  Tar-
“  quinius,  not  to  you ;  in  the  fame  manner  as  they  con-
C£  ferred  the  fame  dignity  upon  your  grandfather,  who  was
“  a  foreigner,  and,  in  no  degree,  related  to  the  king,  his
c£  predeceffor ;  though  Ancus  Marcius,  the  former  king,
££  left  fons,  then,  in  the  vigor  of  their  age ;  not  grand-
“  children,  and  infants,  as  you,  and  your  brother  were  left
££  by  Tarquinius.  But,  if  it  were  a  general  law  that  the
££  heirs  to  the  pofTefllons,  and  fortunes  of  deceafed  kings,
££  fhould,  alfo,  be  heirs  to  their  dignities,  Tarquinius,  your
££  grandfather,  would  not  have  fucceeded  to  the  fovereignty
u  upon  the  death  of  Ancus,  but  the  elder  of  his  fons.  How-
££  ever,  the  people  of  Rome  did  not  call  the  heir  of  the  father,
<£  but  the  perfon,  who  was  worthy  of  the  command,  to  reign
££  over  them:  For  they  looked  upon  the  private  fortunes
££  to  belong  to  thofe,  who  had  acquired  them  ;  but  the  royal
££  dignity  to  thofe,  who  had  conferred  it ;  and  that  the
'£  former,  upon  the  death  of  the  perfons  in  pofleflion,  ought
££  to  defcend  to  fuch,  as  are  intitled  to  them,  either  by  their
££  relation  to,  or  the  will  of,  the  deceafed  ;  but  that  the
££  latter,  when  the  perfons,  who  received  it,  die,  returns  to
££  thofe,  who  gave  it.  Uniefs  you  have  any  thing  of  this
££  kind  to  alledge,  that  your  grandfather  received  the  fove-
“  reignty  upon  certain  conditions ;  as,  that  he  fhould  not
C£  be  deprived  of  the  poffeffion  of  it  himfelf ;  and  have
££  power  to  leave  it  to  you,  who  are  his  grandfons  ;  and  that
“  the  people,  fhould  not  have  the  right  to  take  it  from  you,

££  and


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSENSIS.  217

“  and  confer  it  upon  me  :  If  you  have  any  fuch  thing  to
iC  alledge,  why  do  you  not  produce  the  con  trad;?  How-
£<  ever,  this  you  cannot  fay.  But,  if  I  did  not  obtain  the
££  power  in  the  moft  jtiftifiable  manner,  as  you  fay,  having
££  neither  been  eleded  by  the  interreges,  nor  received  the
“  adminiftration  from  the  fenate,  and  that  other  things,
“  required  by  the  law,  were  not  obferved ;  if  this  is  fo,
££  I  wrong  thefe,  not  you ;  and  deferve  to  be  dethroned  by
“  them,  not  by  you  :  But  the  truth  is,  I  wrong  neither
€£  thefe,  nor  any  one  elfe.  The  length  of  my  reign,  which
“  has,  now,  lafted  47  forty  four  years,  witneffes  that  the
<£  power  was  both,  then,  juftly  given  to  me,  and  is,  now,
*£  juftly,  vefted  in  me ;  during  which  time,  none  of  the
*c  Romans,  ever,  thought  I  reigned  unjuftly,  neither  did
<£  the  people,  nor  the  fenate,  ever  endeavour  to  dethrone
i£  me.

XXXV.  “  But,  to  omit  thefe  things,  and  give  an  anfwer
<c  to  what  you  alledge:  If  I  had  deprived  you  of  the  power,
i£  that  was  depolited  in  my  hands  by  your  grandfather  in
<£  truft  for  you ;  and,  contrary  to  all  the  eftablifhed  rules  of
<£  juftice,  had  withheld  your  kingdom  from  you,  you  ought
<£  to  have  applied  yourfelf  to  thofe,  who  conferred  the  power
<£  on  me,  and  to  have  vented  your  indignation,  and  reproaches

47*  TiTjot^ciMvIottlei,  This  is,  cer-  years  he  had  reigned  with  a  view  to
tainly,  a  miftake  in  the  tranfcriber ;  diminidi  the  envy  of  his  ufurpation  :
becaufe  Tarquinius  had,  juft  before.  But  this  is  juft  the  contrary  :  For,  as
reproached  Tullius  with  having  kept  he  appeals  to  the  length  of  his  un-
him  out  of  his  right,  during  four  and  difturbed  reign  in  fupport  of  his  right,
forty  years.  Td«§1a),  therefore,  is,  cer-  he  ought  rather  to  have  encreafed,  than
tainly,  left  out.  Portus  fuppofes  that  diminifhed  the  number  of  years  he  had
Tullius  lefiened  the  number  of  the  reigned.

Vol.  II.  E  e


“  both


2 1 8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

“  both  againft  me,  for  continuing  in  the  poffeflion  of  it,  when
“  it  did  not  belong  tome;  and  againft  them,  for  having  con-
“  ferred  on  me  a  power,  that  belonged  to  others :  For  you
“  would,  eafily,  have  prevailed  on  them  to  do  you  juftice,  if
“  you  could  have  (hewn  you  had  a  right.  However,  if  you
“  could  not  confide  in  fuch  an  allegation,  but  were  of  opinion
“  that  I  governed  unjuftly,  and  that  you  were  a  fitter  perfon
“  to  be  intrufted  with  the  care  of  the  commonwealth,  you
“  ought  to  have  done  this ;  to  have  inquired  into  the  errors
“  of  my  government;  to  have  difplayed  the  number  of  your
“  own  addons ;  and  to  have  fummoned  me  to  a  decifion  of
“  our  eonteft:  None  of  which  you  did.  But,  after  fo  great
“  a  length  of  time,  as  if  recovered  from  a  long  fit  of  drunk-
<c  ennefs,  you  come,  now,  to  accufe  me ;  and,  even  now,
<c  you  accufe  me  in  an  improper  place  :  For  here  you  ought
“  not  to  alledge  thefe  things  (I  defire,  Fathers,  you  will  not
“  be  offended  at  what  I  have  faid;  for  it  was  only  with  a
“  view  of  expofing  his  calumny,  not  of  infringing  your
“  jurifdidion)  but  you  ought  to  have  defired  me  to  call  an
c<  affembly  of  the  people,  and  there  to  have  accufed  me:
“  However,  fince  you  have  declined  this,  I  will  do  it  for
“  you  ;  and,  having  called  the  people  together,  I  will  ap-
<£  point  them  judges  of  the  crimes  you  accufe  me  of;  and,
“  attain,  leave  it  to  them  to  determine  which  of  us  two  is

o  '

“  the  fittefb  perfon  to  govern;  and,  whatever  they  fhall,
<c  unanimoufly,  order  me  to  do,  I  fhall  fubmit  to.  This  is
u  a  fufiicient  anfwer  to  his  allegations  ;  fince  the  effedt  of
u  many,  or  few  reafons,  when  urged  againft  unreafonable

a  adver-


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ABIC  ARN  ASSENS  I  S.  219

“  adverfaries,  is  the  fame:  For  words  cannot  perfuade  them
“to  be  juft.  ■

XXXVI.  C£  But,  I  am  furprifed,  Fathers,  to  find  any  ol
“  your  number  ddirous  to  dethrone  me,  and  confpiring
“  with  this  man  againft  me:  I  would,  willingly,  inquire
“  of  them  what  injury  provokes  them  to  attack  me ;  and
“  what  actions  of  mine  they  are  offended  at.  Is  it  becaufe
“  they  know  that  great  numbers,  during  my  reign,  have
“  been  put  to  death  without  a  trial;  banifhed  their  country;
“  deprived  of  their  fortunes ;  or  involved  in  any  other  un-
u  deferved  calamity  ?  Or,  having  none  of  thefe  tyrannical
“  crimes  to  accufe  me  of,  are  they  acquainted  with  any
“  abufes  I  have  been  guilty  of  to  married  women,  or  inful ts
“  on  their  maiden  daughters,  or  any  other  flagitious  at-
“  tempt  upon  the  perfon  of  a  free  man  ?  If  I  have  been
“  guilty  of  any  of  thefe  crimes,  I  deferve  to  be  deprived,  at
“  the  fame  time,  both  of  my  dignity,  and  of  my  life.  But
“  I  am  proud  above  meafure;  and,  by  being  grievous  to
“  my  fubjedts,  am  become  odious  to  them ;  fo  that,  none
“  of  them  can  bear  the  arrogance  of  my  adminiftration.
“  Which  of  my  predeceflors  ever  ufed  his  power  with  the
“  fame  moderation  I  have  ufed  mine,  who  have  treated  all
“  my  fubjedts  with  the  fame  benevolence  an  indulgent  father
“  fhews  to  his  own  children  ?  Who  have,  even,  leflened  the
“  power  you  gave  me,  which  was  the  fame  your  anceflors,
“  fucceflively,  conferred  on  former  kings ;  and  have  appoint-
“  ed  laws,  which  you  all  confirmed,  relating  to  matters  of
“  the  greateft  confequence,  by  which  I  granted  to  you  the

E  e  2  “  privilege


220  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

£C  privilege  of  doing  juftice  to,  and  of  receiving  it  from,  one
“  another ;  and,  to  thefe  rules,  which  I  prefcribed  to  others,
“  you  faw  me,  like  a  private  perfon,  firft  yield  obedience  :
cc  Neither  have  I  made  myfelf  the  judge  of  all  forts  of
cc  crimes,  but  Thofe  of  a  private  nature  I  fubmitted  to  your
“  jurifdiction ;  which  was,  never,  done  by  any  of  the  former
<£  kings.  By  this  it  appears  that  no  crime  has  drawn  upon
<c  me  the  ill  will  of  fome  people,  but  that  the  benefits  I  have
(S  conferred  on  the  plebeians  excite  your  unjuft  refentment,
“  concerning  which  I  have,  often,  given  you  my  reafons ;
“  fo  that,  there  is  no  necefiity  for  me,  now,  to  repeat  them.
C£  If  you  are  of  opinion  that  this  man,  when  invefted  with
cc  the  power,  will  adminifler  it  better  than  myfelf,  I  fhall
“  not  envy  the  commonwealth  a  better  governor :  And,
“  after  I  have  furrendered  the  fovereignty  to  the  people,,
“  from  whom  I  received  it,  and  am  become  a  private  perfon,
((  I  fhall  endeavour  to  make  it  appear  to  all  the  world,  that
“  I  know  both  how  to  command  with  prudence,  and  how
“  to  obey  with  modefty.’1

XXXVII.  After  this  fpeech,  which  covered  the  confpi-
rators  with  fhame,  Tullius  difmifled  the  aflembly:  Upon
which,  he  ordered  the  heralds  to  go  through  every  ftreet,
and  call  the  people  together  :  And,  all  the  citizens  flocking
to  the  forum,  he  afcended  the  tribunal,  and  made  a  long
and  pathetic  harangue,  in  which  he  enumerated  all  the
military  a&ions  he  had  performed,  as  well  during  the  life  of
Tarquinius,  as  after  his  death  ;  and  entered  into  the  detail
of  all  his  inftitutions,  from  which  the  commonwealth  ap-


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  A  S  S  EN  SIS.  221

peared  to  have  reaped  many  conflderable  advantages.  And
every  thing  he  faid  being  received  with  great  applaufe,  and
all  the  people,  earneftly,  deflring  to  know  for  what  reafon
he  mentioned  thefe  things,  at  laft,  he  faid,  that  Tarquinius
accufed  him  of  continuing  in  the  unjuft  pofleflion  of  the
royal  dignity,  which  he  alledged  to  belong  to  him ;  that
his  grandfather,  at  his  death,  had  left  him  the  fovereignty
together  with  his  fortunes ;  and  that  the  people  had  it  not
in  their  power  to  confer  on  any  perfon  the  property  of  an¬
other.  This  railing  a  general  clamor,  and  indignation  among
the  people,  he  ordered  them  to  be  ftlent,  and  deftred  they
would  entertain  no  difpleafure,  nor  refentment  at  what  he
had  faid ;  but,  if  Tarquinius  had  any  thing  to  alledge  in
fupport  of  his  pretenftons,  that  they  would  fend  for  him ;
and,  after  they  had  heard  him,  if  they  found  him  wronged,
or  worthier  to  command,  inveft  him  with  the  government
of  the  commonwealth  :  As  for  himfelf,  he  faid,  he,  now,
reftgned  it,  and  reftored  it  to  thofe,  to  whom  it  belonged,
and,  from  whom,  he  had  received  it.  After  he  had  faid
this,  and  offered  to  defcend  from  the  tribunal,  there  was  a
general  outcry;  and  they  all  begged  of  him,  with  tears,
not  to  furrender  the  fovereignty  to  any  one :  And  fome  of
them  called  out  to  ftone  Tarquinius  ;  who,  fearing  the
the  violence,  with  which  he  was  threatened,  left  the  forum,
and  fled  with  thofe  of  his  fa&ion  ;  while  the  people,  in
a  body,  conduced  Tullius  to  his  palace  with  joy,  applaufe,
and  acclamations*


XXXVIIL


ROMAN  AMTTQJJITIES  OF  BookIV.

XXXVIII.  When  Tarquinius  found  himfelf  difappointed
in  this  attempt  alfo  ;  and  that  the  fenate,  upon  whom  he
had,  chiefly,  depended,  gave  him  no  afliftance,  he  grew
inconfolable ;  and,  remaining  at  home  for  fome  time,  con-
verfed,  only,  with  his  dependents.  Afterwards,  his  wife  ad-
viflng  him,  no  longer,  to  relax,  or  be  foftened  ;  but,  inftead
of  words,  to  proceed  to  adtions ;  and,  firft,  to  obtain  a  re¬
conciliation  with  Tullius  by  the  interceflion  of  friends,  to
the  end  that,  looking  upon  him  as,  firmly,  attached  to  him,
he  might  be,  the  lefs,  upon  his  guard  againft  his  intrigues ;
he  approved  of  her  advice ;  and,  pretending  to  repent  of
his  paft  behaviour,  by  the  means  of  his  friends,  earneftly,
befought  Tullius  to  forgive  him.  He,  eafily,  fucceeded  with
a  man,  both  inclined,  by  his  nature,  to  a  reconciliation  with
his  enemies,  and  averfe  to  an  implacable  conteft  with  his
daughter,  and  his  fon-in-law  ;  and,  as  foon  as  he  faw  a
favourable  opportunity,  when  the  people  were  difperfed
about  the  country  in  getting  in  their  harveft,  he  appeared
in  public,  attended  by  his  friends  with  fwords  under  their
garments ;  and,  giving  the  axes  to  fome  of  his  domeftics,
he  himfelf  afliimed  the  royal  robes,  and  all  the  other
enfigns  of  royalty  :  Then,  going  to  the  forum,  he  flood
before  the  fenate  houfe,  and  ordered  the  herald  to  af-
femble  the  fenators.  Many  of  the  patricians,  who  were
acquainted  with  his  defign,  and  had  incited  him  to  it,  were,
by  his  appointment,  ready  in  the  forum ;  thefe,  therefore,
joined  him.  In  the  mean  time,  a  perfon  went  to  the  palace,
and  informed  Tullius  that  Tarquinius  appeared  in  public

with


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALI C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  223

with  the  royal  robes,  and  had  ordered  the  fenators  to  af-
femble  :  Upon  which,  being  aftonifhed  at  his  rafhnefs,  he
came  out  of  his  palace  with  more  hafte,  than  prudence,
attended  with  a  fmall  retinue  ;  and,  going  into  the  fenate,
and  feeing  Tarquinius  feated  on  the  throne,  with  all  the
enligns  of  royalty ;  “  Who,  fays  he,  moft  wicked  man,
“  gave  you  authority  to  afliime  thefe  robes  ?  ”  To  which
the  other  replied;  “  Your  boldnefs,  and  impudence,  Tullius;
u  who,  though  you  are  not  fo  much  as  a  free  man,  but  a
“  Have,  and  the  fan  of  a  Have,  whom  my  grandfather  chofe
“  out  of  the  reft  of  the  captives,  have  dared  to  make  your-
“  felf  king  of  the  Romans.”  When  Tullius  heard  this,  he
was  fo  much  exafperated  with  the  reproach,  that  he  loft  all
regard  to  himfelf,  and  ran  at  him,  with  a  defign  of  forcing
him  to  quit  the  throne.  Tarquinius  was  pleafed  to  fee  this ;
and,  leaping  from  his  feat,  feized  the  old  man,  who  cried
out,  and  called  upon  his  fervants  to  aflift  him  :  Tarquinius,
then,  carried  him  out  of  the  fenate ;  and,  being  a  man  of
great  vigor,  and  ftrength,  he  lifted  him  up,  and  threw  him
down  the  flairs,  that  lead  from  the  fenate  to  the  place,  where
the  affemblies  of  the  people  are  held.  The  old  man  raifed
himfelf  from  the  ground  with  great  difficulty  ;  and,  feeing
the  place  crouded  with  the  friends  of  Tarquinius,  and  none
of  his  own  near  him,  he  lamented  his  misfortune,  and  went
away,  covered  with  blood,  and  difordered  in  every  part  with
the  fall,  while  a  few  of  the  people  fupported,  and  con¬
ducted  him.


XXXIX*


224  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

XXXIX.  The  following  a&ions,  that  are  recorded  of
his  impious  daughter,  are,  not  only,  dreadful  to  hear,  but,
at  the  fame  time,  aftonifhing  and  incredible  :  For,  being
informed  that  her  father  was  gone  to  the  fenate,  and  anxious
to  know  the  event  of  this  affair,  fhe  went  in  her  chariot  to
the  forum;  where,  hearing  what  had  palled,  and  feeing
Tarquinius  ftanding  upon  the  flairs  before  the  fenate,  fhe
was  the  firft  perfon,  who  faluted  him  king  ;  which  (he  did
with  a  loud  voice,  and  prayed  to  the  gods  that,  for  the
advantage  of  Rome,  he  might  long  poffefs  the  kingdom  :
And,  after  all  the  reft,  who  had  aflifted  him  in  his  enter-
prize,  had,  alfo,  faluted  him  king,  fhe  took  him  aftde,  and
faid  to  him;  “  The  firft  ftep  you  have  taken,  Tarquinius,
“  has  been  well  conducted  :  But  it  is  impoflible  for  you,
<£  fecurely,  to  enjoy  the  kingdom,  while  Tullius  lives :  For,
“  by  his  harangues,  he  will,  again,  inflame  the  people  againft
“  you,  if  he  lives  but  the  leaft  part  of  this  day :  You  know
“  how  attached  the  whole  body  of  the  people  are  to  him.
“  Send,  therefore,  proper  perfons  to  deftroy  him,  before  he
“  reaches  his  palace,  and  take  him  out  of  the  way.”  Hav¬
ing  faid  this,  fhe,  again,  went  into  her  chariot,  and  departed.
Tarquinius,  upon  this  occafton  alfo,  approved  of  the  advice,
given  him  by  his  moft  impious  wife,  and  fent  fome  of  his
domeftics  after  him,  armed  with  fwords ;  who,  making
great  hafte,  overtook  Tullius  near  his  palace,  and  flew  him.
While  his  body  lay  bleeding  with  frefh  wounds,  and  pal¬
pitating,  his  daughter  appeared;  and,  the  ftreet,  through
which  her  chariot  was  to  pafs,  being  very  narrow,  the  mules

were


2>


Book  IV.  DIONYSUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  225
were  frightened  at  the  fight  of  the  body,  and  the  coach¬
man,  moved  wich  the  miferable  fpedacle,  flopped  fhort,  and
looked  at  his  miftrefs ;  and,  upon  her  afking  why  he  did
not  drive  on,  “  Do  you  not  fee,  fays  he,  Tullia,  your  father
“  lie  dead,  and  that  there  is  no  other  paflage,  but  over  his
“  body?”  This  provoked  her  to  that  degree,  that  fhe
fnatched  up  her  footftool,  and  threw  it  at  the  coachman,
faying,  £C  Wretch,  drivre,  then,  over  the  body.”  Upon  which,
the  coachman,  more  grieved  at  the  horrid  fcene,  than  at
the  ftroke  he  had  received,  forced  the  mules  over  his  body.
This  ftreet,  which  was,  before,  called  the  48  Orbian  flreet ,  is,
from  this  horrid,  and  deteftable  fad,  called  by  the  Romans,
in  their  own  language,  Vicus  feeler atus^  The  impious  freet .

XL.  Thus  Tullius  died,  after  he  had  reigned  49  four  and
forty  years.  The  Romans  fay  this  perfon  was  the  firft,  who
altered  the  cuftoms,  and  laws  of  their  country,  by  receiving


48*  o,o£i 0?.  Sylburgius  contends  that
we  ought  to  read  *,  which  read¬
ing  he  fupports  from  the  authority  of
fVarro,  who  fays  that  the  Sabines,
who  inhabited  this  ftreet,  gave  it  the
name  of  the  Cyprian  jlreet ,  becaufe
Cyprum,  in  their  language,  fignified
fortunate ,  of  which  ohZtcs  is  a  tranf-
lation.  This  note  both  the  French
tranQators  have  copied,  and,  according
to  their  cuftom,  taken  no  notice  of
Sylburgius.  I  have  no  great  objection
to  this  reading  :  But,  as  the  Vatican
manufeript  has  o^iof,  I  have  chofen  to
follow  it  •,  particularly,  fince  Feftus
fays  that  Tarquinius,  and  his  execrable
wife  palled  over  the  orbius  clivus  to

f  De  Ling.  Lat.  B.  iv.  e  B


take  pofteflion  of  the  palace  of  Tullius,
after  he  was  (lain  •,  Orbius  Clivus
videtur  appellatus  ejje  ah  orbibus,  per
enjus  flexuojos  orbes  T ullia ,  filia  Servii
' Tullii  regis ,  et  L.  'Tarquinius  Superbus ,
gener ,  interfebio  rege ,  properaverunt
ten  dentes  una  in  regiae  domus  pojfejjionem.
s  Livy  calls  this  ftreet,  Virbius  clivus  ;
but  I  lufpedt  that  to  be  an  error  in  the
tranferibers,  and  that  it  ought  to  be
orbius.

49*  Et>j  t trla/jci  j icii  TerJa^anovIa.  Thus
we  muft,  certainly,  read  this  fentence
with  Lapus,  and  Gelenius,  which  is
confirmed  by  hLivy,  who  fays,  Servius
Tullius  regnavit  annos  quatuor  et  qu&-
draginta,

.  i.  c.  48.

F  f


VOL.  II.


1 B.  i.  c.  4?.


the


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

the  fovereignty,  not  from  the  fenate,  and  people  jointly,  like
all  the  former  kings,  but,  from  the  people  alone  •>  the  poorer  fort
of  whom  he  had  gained  by  bribery,  and  corruption,  and  many
other  kinds  of  flattery.  This  is  true  :  For,  before  his  time,
upon  the  demife  of  a  king,  the  cuftom  was  for  the  people
to  grant  the  fenate  a  power  of  fettling  fuch  a  form  of  go¬
vernment,  as  they  fhould  think  fit ;  and  the  fenate  created
interreges,  who  chofe  a  perfon,  the  beft  qualified  for  that
dignity,  whether  he  was  an  inhabitant  of  the  country  be¬
longing  to  the  Romans,  a  Roman  citizen,  or  a  foreigner  r
And,  if  the  fenate  approved  of  the  perfon  fo  chofen,  and
the  people,  by  their  votes,  confirmed  the  election  ;  and,  if
the  auguries,  alfo,  gave  their  fanCtion  to  it,  the  perfon,  fa
ele&ed,  took  pofleflion  of  the  royal  dignity :  But,  if  any
one  of  thefe  were  wanting,  they  nominated  another,  and,
then,  a  third,  in  cafe  the  fecond  had  not  the  inconteftable
concurrence  both  of  the  gods,  and  men.  Whereas  Tullius,
at  firft,  aflumed  the  title  of  guardian  to  the  royal  family,  as
I  faid  before  t  After  which,  he  gained  the  affections  of  the
people  by  fome  inftances  of  benevolence,  and  was,  by  them
alone,  appointed  king.  But,  as  he  was  a  man  of  great  mild-
nefs,  and  moderation,  by  his  fubfequent  adtions  he  wiped
off*  the  imputation  of  not  having  obferved  the  laws  in  all
refpe&s;  and  gave  room  for  many  to  believe  that,  50  if  he

5°*  E<  (tv,  9-cnlov  avj^sfcf,  etc.  1  Livy  delivering  his  country  :  Idipfum  tam
gives  the  fame  teftimony  to  this  ge-  mite,ac  moderatum  imperiumrtamen  quia
nerous  defign  of  Tullius,  with  this  ad-  unius  ejfet,  deponere  earn  in  animo  habu -
dition,  that  he  calls  it  a  defign  of  ijfe  qutdam  auftom  funty  ni  fcelus  intef-

i.  c.  48.


had


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALI C  ARN  AS  SEN  SI  S.  227

had  not  been  prevented  by  death,  he  would  have  changed
the  government  to  a  democracy :  And  it  is  faid  that,  for
this  reafon  chiefly,  fome  of  the  patricians  entered  into  the
confpiracy,  that  was  formed  againft  him  ;  and  that,  being
unable,  by  any  other  means,  to  fubvert  his  power,  they
blended  their  caufe  with  That  ol  Tarquinius,  and  fupported
his  deflgn  of  feizing  the  fovereignty;  with  a  view  both  of
leflening  the  power  of  the  people,  which  had  received  no
fmall  addition  from  the  inftitutions  of  Tullius,  and  of  re¬
covering  the  authority  they  had,  before,  enjoyed.  The  death
of  Tullius  having  occafloned  a  great  tumult,  and  a  general
lamentation  in  the  city,  Tarquinius  was  afraid  left,  if  the  body
was  carried  through  the  forum  (according  to  the  cuftom  of
the  Romans)  adorned  with  the  royal  robes,  and  the  other
marks  of  dignity  ufed  in  funerals,  fome  violence  might  be  of¬
fered  him  by  the  people,  before  he  had  fecured  his  authority ;
for  which  reafon,  he  would  not  fuffer  any  of  the  ufual  cere¬
monies  to  be  performed  in  honor  of  him  :  So  that,  the  wife
of  Tullius,  who  was  daughter  of  the  firft  Tarquinius,  with  a
few  of  her  friends,  carried  the  body  out  of  the  city  in  the
night,  as  if  it  had  been  That  of  an  ordinary  perfon ;  and,
greatly,  lamenting  the  fate  both  of  herfelf,  and  of  her
hulband;  and  pouring  out  a  thoufand  imprecations  againft
her  fon-in-law,  and  her  daughter,  fhe  buried  it :  Then,

tinurn  liberandae  patriae  confilia  agitanti  ways,  forer  upon  thefe  occafions,  than
intervenijfet.  Let  it  never  be  forgotten  lawful  fovereigns,  whofe  original  right
that  this  hiftorian  himfelf  lived  under  depends  upon  the  choice  ol  the  peo-
the  government  of  a  fingle  perfon,  pie,  and  its  continuance  upon  their
and,  even,  of  an  ufurper  j  who  are,  al-  approbation.

F  f  2  returning


ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  IV.

returning  home  from  the  fepulchre,  fhe  lived  but  one  day
after  the  funeral,  dying  the  following  night.  The  manner
of  her  death  is  not,  generally,  known :  Some  fay  that,  dis¬
regarding  life  from  an  excefs  of  grief,  fhe  died  by  her  own
hand  :  Others,  that  the  compafiion,  and  love  fhe  exprefied
for  her  hufband  provoked  her  fon-in-law,  and  daughter  to
put  her  to  death.  For  the  reafons,  therefore,  I  have  men¬
tioned,  the  body  of  Tullius  was  deprived  of  a  royal  funeral,,
and  of  a  ftately  monument ;  but  his  actions  have  eternized
his  memory  to  all  fucceeding  generations.  There  happened
another  prodigy,  befides  That  before  fpoken  of,  which  fhews
that  this  perfon  was  acceptable  to  the  gods ;  and,  by  which
alfo,  a  general  belief  of  that  fabulous,  and  incredible  opinion
concerning  his  birth  was  eftablifhed :  For,  in  the  51  temple
of  Fortune,  which  he  himfelf  had  built,  there  ftood  a  ftatue
of  Tullius,  made  of  wood,  and  gilt ;  which,  when  every
thing  elfe  was  deftroyed  by  fire,  remained  unhurt:  And,,
even  to  this  day,  the  temple  itfelf,  and  every  thing  in  it,  which
were  reftored  to  their  former  condition  after  the  fire,  plainly,,
appear  to  be  the  work  of  modern  artifts  ;  and  the  ftatue,
as  before,  is  of  ancient  workmanfhip  :  For  this  ftill  remains,
and  great  veneration  is  paid  to  it  by  the  Romans.  And  thefe
are  all  the  things  we  find  recorded  of  Tullius.

XLI.  He  wasfucceeded  in  the  kingdom  by  Lucius  Tar-
quinius,  who  gained  the  pofleffion  of  it,  not  by  the  laws,
but  by  arms,  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  fixty  firft  Olympiad,

5I#  Ev  ya.%  r co  vxw  tjjj  etc.  related  by  Ovid  in  the  forty  third  an-

This  prodigy,  or  rather,  tradition  is  notation  upon  this  book.

in


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  229

in  which  Agatharchus  of  Corcyra  won  the  prize  of  the
ftadium  ;  Thericles  being  then  archon  at  Athens.  This
man,  defpifing  both  the  people,  and  the  patricians,  by  whom
he  had  been  raifed  to  the  fovereignty ;  and  confounding,
and  dedroying  the  cuftoms,  the  laws,  and  the  whole  frame
of  the  Roman  conditution,  by  which  the  former  kings  had
ruled  the  commonwealth,  transformed  the  government  into
an  avowed  tyranny.  And,  firft,  he  placed  a  guard  about
his  perfon,  confiding  of  the  mod  daring  men,  both  natives,
and  foreigners :  Thefe  were  armed  with  fwords,  and  fpears ;
and,  being  poded  round  the  palace  in  the  night ;  and,  in
the  day  time,  attending  him  whitherfoever  he  went,  effec¬
tually  fecured  him  from  the  attempts  of  confpirators.
Secondly,  he  did  not,  often,  appear  in  public  ;  but,  never,
at  dated  times;  and,  then  only,  when  he  was  lead  expected.
He,  generally,  held  his  councils,  relating  to  the  public
affairs,  at  his  own  palace  ;  at  which  none  but  his  mod
intimate  friends  affided ;  and  feldom  in  the  forum  :  And
none  were  differed  to  have  accefs  to  him,  unlefs  he  himfelf
fent  for  them  :  Neither  did  he  receive  thofe,  who  approached
him,  with  benevolence,  or  mildnefs ;  but,  as  a  tyrant,  with
feverity,  and  paffion  ;  and,  in  his  looks,  fate  terror,  indead
of  affability.  He,  alfo,  determined  all  controverfies,  not
according  to  judice,  and  law,  but  according  to  his  own
humour.  For  thefe  reafons,  the  Romans  gave  him  the
furname  of  Superbus ,  which,  in  our  language,  fignifies
T Ttt^poLvoQ)  Proud ;  and  his  grandfather  they  called  Prifcus ,
as  we  fhould  fay  EF goFsvs&gcc,  The  elder  :  For  both  his  names
were  the  fame  with  Thofe  of  the  younger.


XLIL


23o  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

NLII.  When  he  thought  he  had,  now,  fecured  his  power,
he  fuborned  the  moft  profligate  of  his  fadtion  to  accufe
many  conflderable  men  of  capital  crimes,  for  which  he  caufed
them  to  be  tried.  He  began  with  fuch,  as  were  his  enemies,
and  did  not  approve  of  the  deprivation  of  Tullius ;  and,
then,  accufed  all  he  thought  uneafy  under  the  change  ;  and
thofe,  who  had  great  riches.  When  the  accufers  brought
thefe  men  to  their  trial,  they  charged  them,  one  after  an¬
other,  with  fidtitious  crimes  ;  but,  chiefly,  with  a  confpi-
racy  againft  the  king  ;  while  he  himfelf  fate  as  judge,  and
condemned  fome  of  them  to  death,  and  others  to  banifh-
ment ;  and,  feizing  the  fortunes  of  both,  divided  a  fmall
portion  of  thefe  confifcations  among  the  accufers,  but  re-
ferved  the  greateft  part  to  himfelf.  Upon  this,  many  men
of  great  power,  before  they  were  condemned  of  the  crimes
they  flood  accufed  of,  knowing  the  motives  of  their  perfe¬
ction,  refolved,  voluntarily,  to  leave  the  city  to  the  tyrant ;
and  the  number  of  thefe  was  much  greater  than  of  the  others  s
Some,  who  were  men  of  note,  were  feized  in  their  houfes,
and  in  the  country,  and,  even,  privately,  murdered  by  him,
whofe  bodies  could  not  be  found.  After  he  had  taken  off
the  moft  valuable  part  of  the  fenate  by  death,  and  banifli-
ment,  he  conftituted  another  himfelf,  by  filling  up  the
vacant  feats  with  his  own  friends :  But,  even,  thefe  men  were
not  allowed  by  him  to  do,  or  fay  any  thing,  but  what  he
himfelf  commanded :  So  that,  the  fenators,  who  were  left
of  Thofe,  who  had  been  elected  into  the  fenate  in  the  reign
of  Tullius,  having,  till  then,  been  in  an  oppofition  to  the

intereft


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN  SIS.  ir,
intereft  of  the  plebeians,  and  expected  the  alteration  in  the
form  of  government  would  have  turned  to  their  advantage  (for
Tarquinius  had,  privately,  made  them  fuch  promifes  with  a
view  of  deluding,  and  amufing  them)  when  they  found
they  had,  no  longer,  any  fhare  in  the  government,  and  that
they  themfelves  were  deprived  of  their  liberty,  as  well  as  the
plebeians,  they  lamented  their  condition,  the  preflures  of
which  they  fufpefted  would  ftill  be  aggravated ;  but,  having
no  power  to  oppofe  the  meafures,  that  were,  then,  purfued,
they  were  forced  to  fubmit.

XLIII.  The  plebeians,  feeing  this,  looked  upon  them,  asy
juftly,  punifhed,  and  were  fo  weak,  as  to  rejoice  in  their
fufferings  from  an  imagination  that  the  fenators  alone  would
feel  the  weight  of  th£  tyranny,  while  they  fhould  be  free
from  the  danger  of  it :  But,  not  long  after,  they  themfelves
were,  ftill  more  feverely,  treated:  For  the  laws  of  Tullius,
by  which  juftice  was,  equally,  adminiftered  to  all  the  citi¬
zens,  and,  by  which,  they  were  fecured  from  being  injured
by  the  patricians,  as  before,  in  their  private  tranfa&ions
with  them,  were  all  taken  away  by  Tarquinius,  who  did
not  leave,  even,  the  tables,  on  which  they  were  written ;  but
ordered  thefe  alfo,  to  be  taken  out  of  the  forum,  and  de-
ftroyed.  After  this,  he  abolifhed  the  method  of  taxing
every  man  in  proportion  to  his  pofleftions ;  and  revived  the
ancient  cuftomof  taxation:  And,  when  he  wanted  to* raife
money,  the  pooreft  citizen  contributed  as  much  to  it,  as-
the  rich.  This  alteration  ruined  a  great  number  of  ple¬
beians  ;  every  man  being,  prefently,  obliged  to  pay


232  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

52  ten  drachmae  for  his  particular  fhare  of  the  fir  ft  tax.  He,
then,  forbid  the  holding  of  any  of  the  affemblies,  to  which,
before,  the  inhabitants  of  the  villages,  the  members  of  the
curiae,  or  the  neighbours  both  in  the  city,  and  in  the  coun¬
try,  ufed  to  refort,  in  order  to  perform  religious  ceremonies,
and  facrifices ;  left  a  number  of  people,  when  met  together,
might  form  fecret  confpiracies  to  dethrone  him.  He  had,
in  many  places,  fpies,  and  inquirers  into  every  thing,  that
wasfaid,  and  done,  who  were  undifcovered  by  the  generality
of  the  people;  and,  by  infinuating  themfelves  into  the
company  of  their  neighbours,  and,  fometimes,  by  reviling
the  tyrant  themfelves,  founded  every  man’s  fentiments  :
After  which,  they  informed  the  tyrant  of  all,  who  were
diffatisfied  with  the  prefent  fituation  of  affairs ;  and  thofe,
who  were  convicted  of  this  crime,  were  punifhed  in  a  fevere,
and  unrelenting  manner.

XL IV.  Neither  was  he  fitisfied  with  thefe  illegal  vexa¬
tions  of  the  people;  but,  feleCting  from  among  them  fuch,
as  were  of  approved  fidelity  to  himfelf,  and  fit  for  war,  he
compelled  the  reft  to  work  at  the  buildings  in  the  city  ;
looking  upon  monarchies  to  be  expofed  to  the  greateft
danger,  when  the  worft,  and  the  pooreft  fort  of  the  citizens
live  in  idlenefs :  He  was,  alfo,  induced  to  this  by  his  defire  of
perfecting,  during  his  own  reign,  the  works  his  grandfather
had  left  half  finifhed;  and,  not  only,  to  carry  on  the
common  fhores  to  the  river,  which  the  other  had  begun,

52,  J!ex «.  By  Arbuthnot’s  quently,  ten  drachmae  will  amount  to

tables,  a  drachma  makes  feven  pence  fix  (hillings,  five  pence,  and  one  half-
three  farthings  of  our  money  5  confe-  penny.

but,


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  233

but,  alfo,  to  furround  the  circus,  which  had  been  carried
up  no  higher  than  the  plinth,  with  covered  porticos.  In
thefe  undertakings,  all  the  poor  were  fet  to  work ;  and,
during  that  time,  he  fupplied  them  with  provilions  in  a
fparing  manner :  Some  of  them  were  employed  in  cutting
down  timber ;  others  in  driving  the  waggons,  that  were
loaded  with  it ;  and  fome  in  carrying  the  burdens  them-
felves  upon  their  fhoulders ;  others  in  digging  fubterraneous
drains,  and  conduits,  and  turning  arches  in  them ;  in  railing
porticos,  and  ferving  the  feveral  workmen,  who  were  em¬
ployed  in  thefe  things ;  and  founders,  carpenters,  and  mafons
were  taken  from  all  the  private  buildings,  and  forced  to
continue  in  the  fervice  of  the  public.  Thus,  the  people,
being  worne  out  in  thefe  works,  had  no  reft :  So  that,  the
patricians,  feeing  their  hardfhips,  and  fervitude,  rejoiced  in
their  turn,  and  forgot  their  own  miferies ;  but  neither  of
them  endeavoured  to  put  a  flop  to  thefe  proceedings.

XLV.  Tarquinius,  confidering  that  princes,  who,  inftead
of  deriving  their  power  from  the  law,  have  obtained  it  by
arms,  ought  to  ftrengthen  themfelves,  not  only,  with  a
national,  but,  alfo,  with  a  foreign,  fupport,  earnefUy  endea¬
voured  to  gain  the  friendfhip  of  Octavius  Mamilius,  the  moft
illuftrious,  and  moft  powerful  man  of  the  Latin  nation,  by
giving  his  daughter  to  him  in  marriage :  This  perfon  was
defcended  from  Telegonus,  the  fon  of  Ulyfles,  and  Circe,
and  lived  in  the  city  of  Tufculum ;  he  was  looked  upon
as  a  man  of  lingular  prudence  in  civil  affairs,  and  a
good  commander.  Having  gained  the  friendfhip  of  this

Vol.  II.  G  g  perfon,


234  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

perfon,  and,  by  his  means,  That  of  the  moft  confiderable
magiftrates  in  every  city,  he,  now,  refolved  to  try  his  ftrength
in  foreign  wars,  and  to  march  with  his  army  again  ft  the
Sabines,  who  refufed  to  obey  his  orders,  and  looked  upon
themfelves  as  dilingaged  from  their  treaties  by  the  death  of
Tullius,  with  whom  they  had  entered  into  thofe  treaties*
After  he  had  taken  this  refolution,  he  fent  meffengers  to
invite  to  the  council  at  53  Ferentinum,  all  thofe,  who  had
been  accuftomed  to  be  prefent  there  on  the  behalf  of  the
Latin  nation; .and  appointed  a  day,  pretending  his  defign
was  to  confult  with  them  concerning  fome  affairs  of  great
importance  to  the  public  :  Thefe,  therefore,  appeared ;  but
Tarquinius,  who  had  fummoned  them,  did  not  come  at
the  time  appointed.  After  the  deputies  had  been,  long*
affembled,  and  the  greateft  part  of  them  looked  upon  this
behaviour  as  an  infult,  a  certain  perfon,  who  lived  in  the
city  of 54  Gorilla,  a  powerful  man,  both  by  his  riches,  and
his  friends,  and  indued  with  military  bravery,  as  well  as  civil
eloquence,  whofe  name  was  Turnus  Herdonius,  'being  a
rival  to  Mamilius  for  power,  and,  through  Mamilius,  an
enemy  to  Tarquinius,  becaufe  he  had  chofen  him  for  his
fon-in-law  preferably  to  himfelf,  greatly  inveighed  againft

53*  Ev  See  the  twenty  ninth  Atovvno;’  Tilaglai  Pajua’ixtK  Af>%ouoKofictsy.

annotation  on  the  third  book.  which,  I  dare  fay,  is  the  paffage,  now,.

54*  Ev  woAw  Ko£<aajj.  I  do  not  look  before  us  j  to  K o^aauvoi.  Ko-

upon  this  city  to  have  been  the  fame  ^icAAa,  sroA<f  Itooa tas.  Aiowcno $•.  to
with  Corioli ,  though  I  find  fome  learned  ityvuov  Ko^uoAAoivof.  k  Livy  makes  Her-
men  are  of  that  opinion  ;  becaufe  the  donius  to  have  been  of  Aricia.  ‘Turnus
abridger  of  Stephanus  diftinguifhes  Herdonius  ab  Aricia  forodter  in  abfen-

thefe  cities  j  Ko^iaa#,  araAi?  Adhvuv.  tern  Tarquinium  erat  invettus.

\

k  B.  i.  c.  50.


Tar-


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN ASSENSIS.  235

Tarquinius ;  and,  having  enumerated  all  the  other  a&ions
of  the  man,  on  which  any  marks  of  pride,  and  arrogance
could  be  fixed,  he  laid  a  particular  ftrefs  upon  his  not  ap¬
pearing  at  an  afiembly,  which  he  himfelf  had  fummoned,
when  all  the  reft  were  prefent.  But  Mamilius  excufed
Tarquinius ;  and,  attributing  his  delay  to  fome  necefiary
occafion,  defired  the  afiembly  might  be  adjourned  to  the
next  day  ;  which  the  deputies  of  the  Latines  were  prevailed
on  to  confent  to.

XLVI.  The  next  day,  Tarquinius  appeared,  and  the
afiembly  being  held,  he  excufed  his  delay  in  few  words,  and,
prefently,  entered  upon  the  argument  of  the  fovereignty,
which  he  infilled  he  had  a  right  to,  fince  Tarquinius,  his
grandfather,  had  acquired  it  by  the  right  of  war,  and  en¬
joyed  it ;  and,  then,  produced  the  treaties,  entered  into
between  Tarquinius,  and  the  cities  relating  thereto.  And,
having  faid  a  great  deal  in  favor  of  his  right,  and  concerning
the  treaties,  and  promifed  great  advantages  to  the  cities,  in
cafe  they  adhered  to  the  terms  of  thofe  treaties,  he,  at  laft,
endeavoured  to  prevail  upon  them  to  join  him  with  their
forces  in  his  expedition  againft  the  Sabines.  When  he  had
done  fpeaking,  T urnus  rofe  up ;  and,  after  he  had  cenfured
his  not  appearing  at  the  afiembly  the  day  before,  he  dif-
fuaded  the  deputies  from  yielding  to  him  the  fovereignty,
which,  he  faid,  he  was  not  intitled  to  in  juftice,  neither
was  it  confident  with  the  intereft  of  the  Latines  to  yield  it
to  him;  and  dwelt,  long,  upon  both  thefe  points:  He  faid
that  the  treaties  they  had  made  with  his  grandfather,  when

G  g  2  they


236  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

they  granted  to  him  the  fovereignty,  were  diffolved  by
his  death,  it  not  having  been  added  to  thofe  treaties  that
the  fame  grant  fhould  defcend  to  his  pofterity ;  and  (hewed
that  the  man,  who  pretended  to  inherit  the  grants,  made  to
his  grandfather,  was,  of  all  men,  the  moft  unjuft,  and  moft:
abandoned :  And,  having  laid  open  all  the -enormous  adfions  he
had  been  guilty  ofin  order  to  poflefs  himfelfof  the  fovereignty
of  Rome,  he,  at  laft,  fhewed  them,  that  he  did  not,  even,
hold  That  according  to  the  laws,  and  with  the  confent  of
the  people,  like  the  former  kings,  but,  with  arms,  and
violence  ;  and  that,  having  eftablifhed  a  tyranny,  he  had  put
fome  of  the  citizens  to  death,  banifhed  others,  deprived
others  of  their  fortunes,  and  taken  from  them  all  the  liberty
both  of  fpeaking,  and  acfting  ;  and  he  faid  that  it  would  be
an  inftance  of  great  folly,  and  madnefs  to  expedt  any  thing
good,  and  beneficent  from  a  wicked,,  and  impious  mind  j  and
to  imagine  that  a  man,  who  had  not  fpared  fuch,  as  were
neareft  to  him  both  in  blood,  and  friendfhip,  would  fpare
thofe,  who  were  ftrangers  to  him  in  both ;  and  he  advifed
them,  before  they  received  the  yoke  of  flavery,  to  learn,
from  the  misfortunes  of  others,  what  they  themfelves  were
to  expe<ft,  and,  vigoroufty,  to  oppofe  the  receiving  it.

XLVII.  After  Turnus  had,  thus,  inveighed  againit  Tar-
quinius,  many  being,  greatly,  afte&ed  with  his  difcourfe,
the  latter  defired  the  following  day  might  be  appointed
for  his  defence ;  and,  having  obtained  his  requeft,  and  the
council  being  difmifted,  he  affembled  his  moft  intimate
friends,  and  confulted  with  them  what  was  to  be  done  in

the


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  237

the  prefent  jun&ure.  While  thefe  were  fuggefting  to  him
the  points  he  fhould  inftft  upon  in  his  defence,  and  conft-
dering  the  meafures  he  was  to  take  to  gain  the  affedions
of  the  people,  Tarquinius  himfelf  faid  that  nothing  of  this
kind  was  of  any  ufe  upon  this  occafton ;  and  declared  an.
opinion  peculiar  to  himfelf,  which  was,  not  to  clear  himfelf
of  the  accufation,  but  to  deftroy  the  accufer.  This  refolu-
tion  being  applauded  by  all,  and  the  means  of  carrying  it
into  execution  debated,  he  formed  a  defign  for  that  pur-
pofe,  the  55  leaft  likely  of  all  others  to  be  forefeen  by  any
man,  and  guarded  againft :  For,  having  found  out  the  1110ft


S5*  H ki?x  Jvvxuiv'j)  &t<reiv  ttgovoioiv
av^coTTtvtjv  kxi  (puAajcijv.  Thus  translated
by  le  Jay  *,  Tar  quin  fur  le  champ  leur
decouvrit  fori  projet,  qui  ne  feroit  jamais
venu  dans  la  penfee  a  d’autres  qua  lui.
The  other  French  translator  has  ren¬
dered  the  paflfage  almoft  in  the  fame
words  •,  il  emploia  des  moiens ,  qui  ne
feroient  jamais  venus  dans  la  penfee  de
tout  autre  que  lui.  It  muft  be  owned
that  both  thefe  are  very  faithful  ver¬
sions  of  the  Latin  translation  ofPortus,
ex  compofto  rem  ejl  aggrefjus ,  quae  nun-
quam  in  mentem  aliis  venire  potuiffet
but,  if  the  reader  pleafes  to  compare
them  with  the  Greek  text,  he  will  find
nothing  there  to  juStify  this  translation.
Before  I  clofe  this  note,  I  muft  give
my  reafons  for  differing  from  the
translators,  both  French  and  Latin,  in
rendering  this  paflfage,  a  few  lines  be¬
fore,  i Jiacv  Si  yvupviv  cciriSnw  :  They
have  given  this  fenfe  to  it,  Tarquinius
delivered  his  own  opinion  ;  as  il  our  au¬
thor  had  faid  vlx  y^py,\.  I  know


very  well  that  iSiot  will  bear  the  fenfe
they  have  afcribed  to.it:  But,  if  it
had  been  ufed  in  that  fenfe  upon  this
occafion,  the  particle  -njv,  muft,  necef-
farily,  have  been  prefixed  to  it,  as  it  is  in
this  expreffion  t/\\i  iau7*  yvcauyv.  I  have
therefore  taken  tSios  in  another  Signi¬
fication,  in  which,  every  man,  who  is
acquainted  with  the  Greek  language,
knows  it  is,  frequently,  ufed  ;  and,  in
my  opinion,  can  be  only  taken  here
without  the  particle  ;  that  is,  I  have
rendered  it  peculiar,  as  the  opinion  de¬
livered  by  Tarquinius  was  fuited  to
the  fierce,  and  Sanguinary  character  of
the  man.  This  fenfe  of  the  word  is,
alfo,  favoured  by  a  reflexion  of  Livy
upon  this  wicked  contrivance  of  Tar¬
quinius  :  1  He  fays  that  his  defign  in
it  was  to  Strike  the  fame  terror  into  the
Latines,  'as  he  had  infufed  into  the
Romans  •,  confejlim  Turno  necem  machi-
natur,  ut  eundem  terrorem,  quo  civiunr
animos  domi  opprejferat ,  Latinis  inji-
ceret.  *  f

profligate


J£.  i,  c.  51,


23 8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

profligate  among *t!iofe  fervants  of  Turnus,  who  conduced
his  fumpter  horfes  with  the  baggage,  he  corrupted  them
with  money,  and,  by  that  means,  prevailed  upon  them  to
carry  a  number  of  fwords,  which  he  gave  them,  into  the
houfe,  where  their  mafter  lodged,  and  to  hide  them  among
his  baggage.  The  next  day,  the  a'flerhbly  being  fitting,
Tarquinius  rofe  up,  and  faid  that  a  fhort  defence  was  fuffi-
cient  to  anfwer  every  thing,  which  had  been  alledged  againft
him,  and  confented  that  his  accufer  himfelf  fhould  be  the
judge  of  all  the  accufations  he  had  been  charged  with.
“  For  Turnus,  fays  he,  gentlemen,  who  compofe  this  af-
££  fembly,  did,  as  a  judge,  acquit  me  himfelf  of  every  thing
u  he  now  charges  me  with,  when  he  defired  my  daughter
“  in  marriage;  but,  being rejected  as  he  deferved  (for  who
C£  in  his  fenfes  would  have  refufed  Mamilius,  a  perfon  of  the
4C  higheft  birth,  and  greateft  merit  among  the  Latines,  to
4£  take  this  man  for  his  fon-in-law,  who  cannot  count  above
4£  five  generations  in  his  family  ?)  in  refentment  for  this,  he,
££  now,  comes  to  accufe  me :  Whereas,  if  he  knew  me  to  be
C£  fuch  a  man  he  now  defcribes  me,  he  ought  not  to  have
££  defired  me  for  a  father-in-law  ;  and,  if  he  thought  me  a
c£  man  of  worth,  when  he  defired  me  to  give  him  my
<£  daughter  in  marriage,  he  ought  not,  now,  to  traduce  me,
££  as  a  wicked  man.  So  much  concerning  myfelf.  But
££  you,  gentlemen,  who  are  expofed  to  the  greateft  of  all
£C  dangers,  are  not,  now,  to  confider  whether  I  am  a  good,
€£  or  a  bad  man,  (for  this  you  may  inquire  into  afterwards)
u  but  to  provide  both  for  your  own  fafety,  and  the  liberty

“  of


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICA  RN  AS  SEN  SIS.  239

<c  of  your  refpe&ive  countries :  For,  defigns  are  formed
“  againft  the  principal  perfons  of  every  city,  and  againft
“  their  magiftrates  by  this  fine  demagogue  ;  and  he  is  pre-
“  pared,  after  he  has  put  the  moft  conftderable  of  you  to
cc  death,  to  make  himfelf  king  of  the  Latines ;  and  is
“  come  hither  with  this  view.  I  do  not  fpeak  this  from
“  conjecture,  but  from  my  certain  knowledge,  having,  laft
cc  night,  received  information  of  it  from  one  of  the  accom-
(C  plices  in  his  confpiracy :  And  I  will  give  you  an  incon-
“  teftble  proof  of  what  I  fay,  if  you  will  go  to  his  lodging,.
5£  by  fhewing  you  the  arms,  that  are  concealed  there/’

XL VII I.  After  he  had  faid  this,  they  were  all  in  fear  for
their  own  fafety,  and  cried  out  to  him  to  prove  the  faCt,  and
not  to  impofe  upon  them.  And  Turnus,  unapprized  of  the
treachery,  chearfully  fubmittedtothe  examination,  and  invited
the  deputies  to  fearch  his  lodging,  faying,  that  one  of  thefe
two  things  ought  to  infue  from  it,  either  that  he  himfelf  be
put  to  death,  if  he  were  found  to  have  provided  more  arms
than  were  neceflary  for  his  journey,  or  that  the  perfon,  who
had  accufed  him  falfely,  be  punifhed.  This  was  approved
of ;  and  thofe,  who  went  to  his  lodging,,  found  the  fwords,
which  had  been  hid  among  his  baggage  by  the  fervants.
After  which,  they  would  not  fuffer  Turnus  to  lay  any  thing
more  in  his  defence,  but  call;  him  into  a  pit ;  and,  burying
him  alive,  foon  difpatched  him.  The  whole  affembly  ap¬
plauded  Tarquinius,  as  a  common  benefactor  to  their  cities,
for  having  faved  the  lives  of  the  moft  conliderable  men  ;
and  appointed  him  fovereign  of  the  nation  upon  the  lame

terms


Mo  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book IV.


terms  they  had,  firft,  granted  that  dignity  to  his  grandfather ;
and,  after  him,  to  Tullius;  and,  having  ingraved  the  treaty
on  pillars,  and  confirmed  it  by  their  oaths,  they  diffolved  the
affembly.

XLIX.  After  Tarquinius  had  obtained  the  fovereignty  over
the  Latines,  he  fent  embaffadors  to  the  cities  of  the  Hernici,
and  to  Thofe  of  the  Volfci,  to  invite  them,  alfo,  to  enter
into  a  treaty  of  friendship,  and  alliance  with  him.  The
former,  unanimoufly,  voted  in  favor  of  the  alliance  :  But,
of  the  latter,  the  56  Echetrani,  and  57  Antiates,  only,  accepted
the  invitation.  And,  to  the  end  that  the  treaty,  made  by
him  with  thofe  cities,  might  continue  for  ever,  Tarquinius
refolved  to  appoint  a  temple  in  common  to  the  Romans,
the  Latines,  the  Hernici,  and  to  fuch  of  the  Volfci,  as  had
entered  into  the  alliance,  with  this  view,  that,  reforting  to¬
gether  to  the  appointed  place,  they  might  celebrate  a  gene¬
ral  feftival,  and  fhare  in  the  feaft,  and  common  facrifices.
This  propofal  being,  chearfully,  accepted  by  all  of  them,  he
chofe  for  their  aflembly  a  place,  nearly,  in  the  middle  of  the
nation,  being  a  high  hill,  which  commands  the  city  of  the


56,  E^/I z*\oi.  Their  city  is,  always,
called  Ecetra  by  Livy,  and  belonged
to  the  Volfci.  It  flood  upon  the
mountains  almoft  to  the  eafl  of  Ana-
gnia.

57*  Avhctlcci.  Antium  was  the  capital
of  the  Volfci.  The  promontory,  on
which  this  city,  formerly,  flood,  is,
ftill,  called  m  Capo  d’Anzo.  Antium
was  famous  for  its  temple  of  Fortune ;


0  Diva,gralum  quae  regis  Antium,

fays  n  Horace,  when  Auguflus  was  de-
figning  to  do  us  the  honor  of  a  vifit.
This  temple  was  adorned  with  moft
magnificent  prefents :  I  have  not  heard
that  the  church  of  S.  Biagio,  which  is
built  on  the  fame  fpot,  and  for  the
fame  purpofe,  has  had  the  fame  fuc-
cefs.


Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  7.


"B.i,  Od.  35.


Albans :


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  241
Albans :  Upon  this  hill,  he  enacted  that  an  annual  feftival
£hould  be  celebrated  ;  during  which,  they  were  to  abftain
from  all  atfts  of  hoftility  againft  all  men,  and  to  perform
common  facrifices  to  Jupiter,  called  Latiaris ,  and  feaft  to¬
gether  ;  and  he  appointed  the  (hare  each  city  was  to  contri¬
bute  towards  thefe  facrifices,  and  the  portion  each  of  them
was  to  receive.  The  cities,  that  partook  of  this  feftival,
and  facrifice,  were  forty  feven.  And  thefe  feftivals,  and
facrifices  the  Romans  perform  to  this  day,  and  call  them,
58  Ferias  Latinas>  1 *he  Latin  Feftivals.  And  fome  of  the
cities,  that  partake  of  them,  carry  thither  lambs ;  fome,
cheefes ;  others,  a  certain  meafure  of  milk  ;  and  others,
fomething  of  this  nature,  as  a  kind  of  cake :  And  there  being
one  bull,  facrificed  in  common  by  all  of  them,  each  city
receives  its  appointed  fhare  :  The  facrifices  they  offer  are  for
the  good  of  all ;  and  the  Romans  have  the  fuperintendence
over  them.

L.  After  he  had  ftrengthened  his  government  with  thefe
alliances  alfo,  he  refolved  to  lead  an  army  againft  the  Sabines ;
and,  having  made  choice  of  fuch  of  the  Romans,  as  he,  leaft,
fufpe&ed  of  any  defign  to  ufe  the  arms  they  were  to  be
trufted  with  for  aflerting  their  liberty,  and  added  to  them


58*  A otlivxg.  Thefe  holy  days  were
called  Feriae  Latinae ,  and,  alfo,  fimply,
Latinae.  The  confuls,  and  praetors,
were  obliged  to  celebrate  thefe  on  the
Alban  hill  before  they  went  to  their
provinces.  The  fame  paffage  in  0  Livy
that  confirms  the  firft  of  thefe  affer-
tions,  will,  alfo,  confirm  the  other  :

eB.  xxv.  c.  13.


Romae  confutes ,  praetorefque  ufquc  ante
diem  v.  cal.  Mai.  Latinae  tenuerunt.  eo
die  perpetrato  facro  in  monte ,  in  fuas
qulfque  provincias  proficifcuntur.  I  have
laid  Jupiter  Latiaris ,  becaufe  he  is
called  fo  by  the  fame  p  author :  Jovique
Latiari  folenne  facrum  in  monte  facerct.


VOL.  11.


P  B.  xxi.  c.  63.

H  h


the


242  ROMAN  ANTIQJJJTIES  OF  Book  IV.

the  auxiliary  forces  of  his  allies,  which,  many  times,  ex¬
ceeded  the  number  of  his  own  troops,  he  laid  wafte  the
enemy’s  country  ;  and,  having  defeated  thofe,  who  oppofed
him,  in  an  ingagement,  he  marched  againft  the  Pome-
tini,  who  inhabited  the  city  of  59  Suefla,  the  moft  flou-
rifhing  people  of  all  their  neighbours ;  and,  through  the
excefs  of  their  profperity,  looked  upon  as  troublefome,  and
grievous  to  them  all.  The  reafons  of  his  making  war  upon
this  people,  was,  that,  having  complained  of  fome  robberies,
and  fpoils  they  had  committed,  and  demanded  fatisfa&ion,
they  had  returned  a  haughty  anfwer  :  And  now,  as  they
expected  the  war,  they  were  ready,  and  in  arms  to  receive
him.  Tarquinius,  ingaged  their  army  upon  the  frontiers
of  their  country,  and  killed  many  of  them  ;  and,  having
put  the  reft  to  flight,  and  fhut  them  up  within  the  walls  of
their  town,  and  they  not  ftirring  out,  after  that,  to  hazard
another  ingagement,  he  incamped  near  the  city;  and,
furrounding  it  with  a  ditch,  fortified  with  palifades,  he  af-
faulted  the  walls  without  intermiflion.  The  inhabitants
fuftained  the  aflaults,  and  bore  the  fatigues  of  a  fiege  for  a
confiderable  time ;  but,  their  proviiions  failing,  their  ftrength
being  fpent,  and  they  without  fuccours,  or  reft,  the  fame
men  being  both  night,  and  day  upon  duty,  they  were  taken
by  ftorm.  Being,  now,  mafter  of  the  town,  he  put  to  death
all  he  found  in  arms,  and  abandoned  to  his  foldiers  their
wives,  and  children,  and  fuch,  as  buffered  themfelves  to  be.

59*  2xe<r<rav.  This  was  a  city  of  the  diftinguifh  it  from  Suejfa  Arunca ,  that
Volfci,  and  called  Suejfa  Pometia ,  to  lay  on  the  eaft  of  the  Liris.


made


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I  C  ARN  A  S  S  E  N  SI  S.  243

made  prifoners,  together  with  a  multitude  of  fervants,  not
eafy  to  be  numbered ;  and  he,  alfo,  gave  them  leave  to  carry
away  all  the  plunder  both  of  the  town,  and  country.  As  to
the  lilver,  and  gold,  that  was  found  there,  he  ordered  it  all
to  be  brought  to  one  place ;  and,  having  referved  a  tenth
part  of  it  to  Co  build  a  temple,  he  diftributed  the  reft
among  his  foldiers.  The  quantity  of  ftlver,  and  gold,  taken
upon  this  occafton,  was  fo  conftderable,  that  every  one  of  the
foldiers  received,  for  hisfhare,  61  five  minae  of  filver  ;  and  the
tenth  part,  referved  for  the  gods,  amounted  to  no  lefs  than
62  four  hundred  talents.

LI.  While  he  was  at  Suefla,  he  received  the  news  that
the  choice  of  the  Sabine  youth  had  made  an  irruption  into
the  territories  of  the  Romans  in  two  bodies,  and  were  laying
wafte  their  country;  one  of  them  being  incamped  near
Eretum ;  and  the  other,  near  Fidenae  ;  and  that,  unlefs
fome  forces  were  fent  againft  them,  every  thing  there  would

6o‘  Ei?  MxJecr>ievtjv  tyx.  This  was  the  took  from  Fabius  ;  becaufe  ^  Livy
temple  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter,  the  quotes  him  for  faying  that  the  fum
figure  of  which  our  author  will  defcribe  amounted  to  400  talents:  eo  magis
in  this  book.  Fabio ,  'praeterquam  quod  antiquior  eft,

6l‘  YltrU  pva?  According  to  crediderim ,  quadringenta  ea  fola  talenta

Arbuthnot’s  tables,  the  mina  amounted  fuiJJ'e.  Livy,  indeed,  makes  the  whole
to  3/.  4  s.  yd.  of  our  money;  confe-  of  the  booty,  taken  at  Suejfa ,  to  have
quently,  each  foldier  received  1 61.  amounted  to  no  more :  Whereas,  our
is.  lid.  author  makes  this  fum  to  be  only  the

62 *  Tt1  gaxoricov  a  pnov  ysvicSat  tx^ocvIojv.  tenth  part  of  the  gold,  and  filver,  taken
According  to  the  foregoing  tables,  a  there :  If  fo,  the  whole  muff  have
talent  was  worth  193  /.  15  s.  of  our  amounted  to  77 5,000  pounds  ;  which
money  •,  confequently,  400  talents  will  is  much  more  likely  ;  fince  Dionyfius
amount  to  77,500  pounds  fterling.  reprefents  Suejfa  Pomelia  to  have  been
This  account,  I  imagine,  our  author  the  moft  flourifhing  city  in  thofe  parts.

sB.  i.  c.  55.

H  h  2  be


244  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

be  destroyed.  When  Tarquinius  heard  this,  he  left  a  fmall
part  of  his  army  at  SueiTa,  to  guard  both  the  fpoils,  and  the
baggage ;  and  led  the  reft  of  the  forces,  prepared  for  expe¬
dition,  againft  that  body  of  the  Sabines,  which  was  polled  near
Eretum ;  and  incamped  upon  an  eminence,  within  a  fmall
diftance  of  the  enemy  :  And  the  generals  of  the  Sabines
refolving  to  fend  for  the  forces,  that  lay  near  Fidenae,  and
to  come  to  an  ingagement  the  next  morning  by  break  of
day,  Tarquinius  had  notice  of  their  defign  (for  the  meflen-
ger,  who  was  carrying  the  letter  from  thefe  generals  to  the
others,  had  been  taken)  and  availed  himfelf  of  this  fortunate
incident,  by  the  following  ftrategem:  He  divided  his  army
into  two  bodies,  and  fent  one  of  them,  privately  in  the  night,
to  pofiefs  themfelves  of  the  road,  that  leads  from  Fidenae  to
Eretum  ;  and,  drawing  up  the  other  by  fun  rife,  he  marched
out  of  his  camp  with  a  defign  to  ingage.  The  Sabines,
feeing  the  fmall  number  of  the  enemy,  and  not  doubting
but  their  other  army  from  Fidenae  would,  prefently,  come
up,  boldly  marched  outagainft  them.  Thefe  armies,  there¬
fore,  ingaged,  and  the  battle  was  for  a  long  time  doubtful:
When  the  forces,  which  had  been  detached  by  Tarquinius
the  night  before,  turned  back,  and  prepared  to  attack  the
Sabines  in  the  rear.  Thefe,  feeing  them  advance,  and
knowing  them  by  their  arms,  and  their  enfigns,  were  con¬
founded  ;  and,  throwing  down  their  arms,  endeavoured  to
fave  themfelves  by  flight:  But  this  was  impracticable;  the
greateft  part  of  them  being  furrounded  by  the  enemy  ;  and
the  Roman  horfe,  prefling  upon  them  on  all  ftdes,  flopped

their


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  SS  EN  S  IS.  245

their  paflage  :  So  that,  only  a  few  faved  themfelves  by  flying
from  the  danger  :  But  the  greateft  part  were  either  killed
by  the  enemy,  or  furrendered.  Neither  was  there  any  re-
flftance  made,  even,  by  thofe,  who  were  left  in  the  camp,
which  was  taken  at  the  firft  onfet;  where,  together  with
the  effects  of  the  Sabines,  all  Thofe  belonging  to  the  Ro¬
mans,  befides  many  prifoners,  were  taken  undamaged,  and
reftored  to  the  owners.

LII.  After  Tarquinius  had  fucceeded  in  his  firft  defign,
he  marched  againft  the  reft  of  the  Sabines,  who  were  in-
camped  near  Fidenae,  and  who  had  not  yet  received  intel¬
ligence  of  the  defeat  of  their  companions.  It  happened  that
thefe,  alfo,  had  quitted  their  camp,  before  the  enemy  ap¬
proached,  and  were,  already,  upon  their  march ,  when,
coming  near  to  the  Roman  army,  they  faw  the  heads  of
their  commanders  fixed  upon  pikes  (for  the  others  expofed
them  to  their  fight  in  order  to  ftrike  them  with  terror,)
and,  finding  their  other  army  was  deftroyed,  they,  no  longer,
fhewed  any  figns  of  bravery ;  but,  having  recourfe  to  fup-
piications,  and  intreaties,  they  furrendered.  The  Sabines,
having  loft  both  their  armies  in  fo  fhameful,  and  weak  a
manner,  were  reduced  to  great  ftreights ;  and,  fearing  left
their  cities  fhould  be  taken  by  a  fudden  attempt,  fent  em-
baffadors  to  treat  of  a  peace,  offering  to  fubmit  to  Tarqui¬
nius,  and  pay  tribute  for  the  future  :  Who,  having  made
peace  with  them,  and  received  the  fubmiffion  of  their  cities,
upon  the  fame  terms  they  had  defired,  returned  to  Suefla.
From  thence,  he  marched,  with  the  forces  he  had  left  there,

the


246  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.
the  fpoils  he  had  taken,  and  the  reft  of  his  baggage,  to  Rome  ;
bringing  back  his  army  loaded  with  riches.  After  that,  he
made  many  incurftons,  alfo,  into  the  country  of  the  Volfci  ;
fometimes,  with  his  whole  army,  and,  fometimes,  with  part
of  it ;  and  made  himfelf  mafter  of  a  conftderable  booty.
But,  while  moft  of  his  undertakings  fucceeded  to  his  wifh,
a  war  broke  out  from  his  neighbours,  which  proved,  not
only,  of  long  continuance  (for  it  lafted  feven  years  without
intermillion)  but,  alfo,  conftderable  by  the  afflicfting,  and
unexpected  circumftances,  with  which  it  was  attended.
From  what  caufes  it  fprung,  and  by  what  event  it  was  con¬
cluded,  ftnce  it  was  brought  to  a  period  by  a  deceitful  arti¬
fice,  and  an  unexpected  ftrategem,  fhall  be  related  in  the
feweft  words  poffible.

LIII.  There  was  a  city  of  the  Latines,  which  had  been
founded  by  the  Albans,  and  was  diftant  from  Rome  one
hundred  ftadia,  ftanding  upon  the  road,  that  leads  to
63Praenefte:  The  name  of  this  city  was  Gabii :  All  the
parts  of  it  are  not,  now,  inhabited,  but,  only,  Thole,- that
lie  next  the  road,  and  are  deftgned  for  the  reception  of
ftrangers  :  But  it  was  then  very  populous,  and  inferior  to
none  in  extent.  One  may  judge  both  of  its  extent,  and
magnificence,  by  obferving  the  ruins  of  the  buildings  in

many  places,  and  the  circumference  of  the  walls,  the  greateft

*

63-  rr^ivss-ov,  VetGms.  Praenejle ,  now  but  a  few  ruins  are  to  be  feen  •,  near
called,  r Paleftrhia,  lies  twenty  Roman  which  ruins,  there  is,  now,  an  inn,
miles  to  the  north  eaft  of  Rome  j  and,  ftanding  on  the  road,  called  by  the
about  half  way  between  them,  ftood  Italians,  VGfieria  del  Finocchio.
the  city  of  Gabii,  of  which  nothing

r  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii  p.  950,  and  956.


part


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  247
part  of  which  is,  ftill,  ftanding.  In  this  city,  fome  of  the
Pometini,  who  had  efcaped  from  Suefla,  when  Tarquinius
took  their  town,  and  many  of  the  banifhed  Romans  had
taken  refuge.  Thefe,  by  earneftly  intreating  the  Gabini  to
revenge  the  injuries  they  had  received ;  and,  by  promiiing
great  rewards,  if  they  were  reftored  to  their  country ;  and,
alfo,  by  flie wing  the  deftrudtion  of  the  tyrant,  not  only,
poflible,  but  eafy  to  be  effected  by  the  concurrence  of  thofe
at  Rome,  prevailed  upon  them,  with  the  afiiftance  of  the
Volfci  (for  thefe,  alfo,  had  fent  embaffadors  to  them,  and
defired  their  alliance)  to  enter  into  a  war  againft  Tarquinius.
After  this,  both  the  Gabini,  and  the  Romans  made  incur-
fions  into,  and  laid  wafte,  one  another’s  territories  with
great  armies  ;  and,  as  it,  generally,  happens,  fometimes,
encountered  in  fmall  parties,  and,  at  others,  with  all  their
forces ;  in  which  actions,  the  Gabini,  often,  put  the  Romans
to  flight ;  and,  after  they  had  purfued  them  to  the  gates  of
Rome,  and  killed  many,  they  ravaged  their  country  with
impunity.  On  the  other  fide,  the  Romans,  often,  defeated
the  Gabini;  and,  having  fhut  them  up  within  their  walls,
carried  off  their  Raves,  together  with  a  great  booty.

LIV.  Thefe  things  happening  perpetually,  both  of  them
were  obliged  to  fortify  the  fafinefles  of  their  refpedtive  ter¬
ritories,  and  to  place  a  guard  there  for  the  fecurity  oi  the
hufbandmen  :  From  whence,  they  fallied  out  in  a  body  ;
and,  falling  upon  the  parties,  that  went  out  to  plunder,  and
the  fmall  detachments  from  the  grand  army,  which,  from  a
contempt  of  the  enemy,  obferved  no  order,  as  is  ufual  in

forages,,


24S  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

forages,  they  cut  them  in  pieces :  And  both  of  them  were,
alfo,  obliged,  from  an  apprehenfton  of  the  fudden  affaults
of  the  other,  to  fortify  thofe  parts  of  their  towns,  that  were
weak,  and  eafy  to  be  fcaled,  with  walls,  and  ditches.  Tar-
quinius  was,  particularly,  atftive  in  taking  thefe  precautions,
and  employed  a  great  number  of  workmen  in  ftrengthening
thofe 64  parts  of  the  city  walls,  that  lay  next  to  the  town  of
Gabii,  by  widening  the  ditch,  railing  the  walls,  and  encreaf-
ing  the  number  of  the  towers :  For,  in  this  part,  the  city
feemed  to  be  the  weakeft,  the  reft  of  the  circuit  being,
tolerably,  feeure,  and  difficult  of  accefs.  However,  a
misfortune,  common  to  all  cities  in  long  wars,  when  the
country  is  laid  wafte  by  the  continual  incurfions  of  the  enemy,
and  the  fruits  of  the  earth  deftroyed,  threatened  both,  which
was,  a  fcarcity  of  all  proviftons,  and  dreadful  apprehenfions
of  future  calamities :  But  the  want  of  neceffaries  was,  more
fenfibly,  felt  by  the  Romans,  than  by  the  Gabini ;  and  the
poorer  fort  among  the  former,  who  fuffered  moft  by  it,
thought  a  treaty  ought  to  be  entered  into  with  them,  and  an
end  put  to  the  war  upon  their  own  terms.

LV.  While  Tarquinius  was  labouring  under  thefe  mis¬
fortunes,  and  neither  willing  to  make  peace  upon  dis¬
honourable  terms,  nor  able  to  fupport  himfelf,  any  longer,

64*  Ka:<  rK  vroxtas  rot,  ixs  Tu£ivs  aggere  Tar  quint  i  Superbi  inter  prima
Qfgovla  tx  I  find,  Sylburgius  op  ere  mirabili .  namque  eum  muris  aequa-

has  quoted  a  pafiage  out  of  s  Pliny  wit,  qua  maxime  patebat  aditu  piano.
upon  this  oecafion,  which  relates  to  This  rampart  was  ere&ed  between  the
this  rampart,  raifed  by  Tarquinius  for  gates  Efquilina,  and  Collina,  that  part
the  defence  of  the  city  againft  the  Ga-  of  Rome  lying  next  to  Gabii.
bini :  Claudilur  ab  orient e  ( urbs  Romae )

sNat.  Hift.  B.  iii.  c.  5,


but


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSE  NS  I S.  249

but  was  contriving  all  forts  of  fchemes,  and  framing  guiles
of  every  kind,  65  Sextus,  the  eldeft:  of  his  fons,  communi-


65’  OsT{£i rCvlalos  otvla  rwv  ifuv — os
evcpct.  Our  author,  and  Livy  differ,
in  many  things,  relating  to  Sextus
Tarquinius.  The  former  makes  him,
as  we  fee,  the  eldeft  fon  of  Tarquinius;
and  the  latter,  the  youngeft  ;  1  Sextus
filius  ejus  qui  minimus  ex  tribus  erat .
Livy  lays  that  Sextus  was  (lain  at
Gabii ,  prefently  after  his  father’s  ex¬
pul  (ion  ;  u  Sextus  Tarquinius  Gabios,
tanquam  in  regnum  fuum  profefitus ,  ab
ultoribus  veterum  Jimultatum ,  quas  fibi
ipfe  caedibus  rapinifque  conciverat ,  inter-
fecftus  eft.  On  the  other  fide,  w  our
author  introduces  Sextus  fourteen  years
after,  at  the  battle,  fought  near  the
lake  Regillus ,  in  which  he  commanded
the  left  wing  of  the  Latines,  and  was
there  flain.  j^nd,  here,  I  cannot  help
taking  notice  of  a  paffage  in  our  au¬
thor  relating  to  this  battle,  which  will
confirm  what  x  I,  before,  afferted,  viz.
that  his  hiftory  appeared  before  That
of  Livy.  In  defcribing  this  battle,
Dionyfius,  very  juftly,  cenfures  Licin-
nius,  and  Gellius  for  faying  that  Tar¬
quinius,  the  father,  then,  near  ninety
years  of  age,  was  prefent  at  this  battle,
fought  on  horfeback,  and  was  wounded
there.  This  y  Livy,  who,  very  pro¬
bably,  followed  thofe  authors,  alfo,  af-
ferts ;  Tarquinius  Superbus ,  quanquam
jam  aetate  et  viribus  erat  gravicr ,  equum
infejlus  admifit ;  ibiufque  ab  later e,  con -
curfu  fuorum ,  receptus  in  tutum  ejl .
Now,  if  the  hiftory  of  Livy  had,  then,

*B.  i.  c.  53.

y  B.  ii.  c.  19.
ing  chapter.

Vo L.  II.


been  publifhed,  as  he  laid  himfelf  open
to  the  fame  cenfure,  he  would,  no
doubt,  have  had  his  fhare  in  it.  When
Dionyfius,  and  Livy  difagree,  I  know
no  other  hiftorian  of  authority  enough
to  decide  the  difference.  But,  as  the
former  is,  juftly,  looked  upon  to  be
more  diligent  and  exadt,  I  believe  his
opinion  will,  generally,  have  the  pre¬
ference.  This  ftrategem  of  Sextus
Tarquinius,  and  the  filent  method,  by
which  his  father  advifed  him  to  take
off  the  principal  men  at  Gabii,  verify
2  an  obiervation  of  Thucydides,  that
the  fame,  or  the  like  incidents  happen,
frequently,  in  the  courfe  of  human
affairs.  This  gave  occafion  to  our
author,  in  his  remarks  upon  that  paf¬
fage  of a  Thucydides,  to  fay  that  hiftory
is  philofophy  derived  from  examples ,
<Vo£i&  (piKocotyiot,  e?iv  ex  ztragaJ'&fjuccluv.
This  impofition  of  Sextus  bears  fo
great  an  analogy  with  That,  made  ufe
of  by  Zopyrus,  in  all  its  circumftances,
as  well  as  in  the  event,  that  I  am  in¬
clined  to  think  a  fhort  account  of  it
from  b Herodotus  will  not  be  difpleaf-
ing  to  the  reader.  The  city  of  Baby¬
lon  had  revolted  from  Darius,  the  fon
of  Hyftafpes  ;  and,  expecting  to  be
befieged  by  him,  had  furnifhed  their
magazines  with  fo  great  a  quantity  of
provifions,  that  Darius  lay  before  it  a
year  and  feven  months  without  any
hopesof  reducing  it.  This  dilappoint-
ment  gave  him  great  anxiety  ;  when


w  B.  vi.  c.  1 2.  x  See  the  eighth  annot.  on  the  £rft  book.
a  .Ek  te%».  c.  ii.  b  In  Thalia,  c.  1 52,  and  the  follow -

I  i  cated


u  Id.  ib.  c.  60.
z  B.  i.  c.  22.


250  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  TV.

cated  to  him,  in  private,  a  defign  he  had  formed;  and
his  father,  who  thought  the  enterprife  bold,  and  full  of
danger,  but  not  impoflible  to  be  accomplifhed,  having  given
him  leave  to  ad  as  he  thought  fit,  he  pretended  a  difference
with  his  father  about  putting  an  end  to  the  war;  and*
having  been  whipped  with  rods,  by  his  order,  in  the  forum,
and  received  other  indignities  to  render  the  thing  notorious,
he,  firft,  fent  fome  of  his  moft  intimate  friends,  as  deferters,
to  inform  the  Gabini,  in  confidence,  that  he  had  refolved  to
repair  to  them,  and  make  war  againft  his  father,  provided
he  had  affurances  given  him  that  they  would  proted  him,
as  well  as  the  reft  of  the  Roman  fugitives,  and  not  deliver
him  up  to  his  father,  with  a  view  of  putting  an  end  to  their
private  quarrels  with  the  greater  advantage.  The  Gabini
receiving  this  propofal  with  joy,  and  ingaging  themfelves  not
to  offer  any  ill  treatment  to  him,  contrary  to  the  laws  of
hofpitality,  he  went  over  to  them,  attended  with  many  of  his
friends,  and  clients,  as  deferters :  And,  in  order  to  encreafe


Zopyrus,  a  man  of  great  diftindion
among  the  Perfians,  and  the  fon  of
Megabyzus,  one  of  the  feven  Perfian
noblemen,  who  deltroyed  the  Magi,
and  put  an  end  to  that  ufurpation,  re¬
folved  to  take  the  city,  and  to  have
the  foie  merit  of  taking  it.  To  this
purpofe,  he  cut  off  his  own  nofe,  and
ears,  disfigured  his  hair  (which  was*
and,  ftill,  is  a  mark  of  the  greateft
ignominy  among  the  eaftern  nations)
and  tore  his  body  with  whips.  In  this
condition,  he  prefented  himfelf  before
Darius,  and  afked  him  leave  to  defert  to
the  Babylonians,  not  doubting  but  the


ignominious  treatment,  he  fhould  tell
them,  he  had  received  from  his  prince*
would  fo  far  recommend  him  to  their
confidence,  that,  in  a  fhort  time,  he
fhould  be  intruded  with  the  command
of  their  forces,  and,  by  that  means,  be
enabled  to  deliver  up  the  city  to  Darius.
All  his  expectations  were  anfwered  ;
and,  by  this  flrategem,  his  prince  be¬
came  matter  of  Babylon;  and,  as  a
punifhment  for  her  revolt,  pulled  down
the  gates,  and  rafed  thofe  famous  walls*
that  are  fo  much  celebrated  in  ancient
hiftory.


their


Book  IV\  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  251

their  confidence  in  the  reality  of  his  revolt  from  his  father,
he  carried  a  great  deal  of  filver,  and  gold  with  him.  Many,
afterwards,  flocked  to  him  from  Rome,  pretending  to  fly
from  the  tyranny  of  Tarquinius;  and,  by  this  time,  he  had
a  ftrong  body  of  men  about  him.  The  Gabini  looked  upon
the  numbers,  who  came  over  to  them,  as  a  great  acceflion
of  ftrength,  and  made  no  doubt  of  reducing  Rome  in  a  fhort
time:  Their  delufion  was,  ftill,  encreafed  by  the  addons  of
this  rebel  to  his  father,  who,  continually,  made  excurfions
into  the  country,  and,  always,  returned  with  a  great  booty.
For  his  father,  knowing  beforehand,  to  what  parts  he  would
dired  his  march,  took  care  there  fhould  be  a  great  deal  of
plunder  in  thofe  places,  and  that  the  country  fhould  be  un¬
guarded  ;  and,  always,  fent  thither  thofe  citizens  he  fufpeded,
as  to  certain  deftrudion.  All  this  induced  the  Gabini  to  con-
fider  the  man,  as,  firmly,  attached  to  their  intereft,  and  as  a
great  commander ;  and  many,  alfo,  being  corrupted  by  him,
they  created  him  general  with  unlimited  authority.

LVI.  After  Sextus  had  obtained  fo  great  power  by
treachery,  and  impofition,  he  fent  one  of  his  domeftics  to
his  father,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Gabini,  both  to
inform  him  of  the  dignity  he  was  invefted  with,  and  to  re¬
ceive  his  diredions  concerning  his  future  condud.  Tarqui¬
nius,  who  was  unwilling  that,  even,  the  fervant  fhould  be
acquainted  with  the  diredions  he  fent  to  his  fon,  carried  the
former  into  a  garden,  that  lay  before  the  palace  :  It  happened
that,  in  this  garden,  there  were  poppies  growing,  then  full
of  heads,  and  fit  to  be  gathered  5  and,  walking  among  thefe,

I  i  2  he


252  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

he  was  obferved,  always,  to  ftrike  off  the  heads  of  the  talleft
poppies  with  his  ftick.  After  he  bad  done  this,  he  fent  away
the  meffenger  without  giving  him  any  anfwer,  though,  of¬
ten,  required  ;  in  which,  he  feems  to  me  to  have  imitated
the  thought  of  6b  Thrafybulus,  the  Milefian  :  For  he  returned
no  anfwer  to  Periander,  then  tyrant  of  Corinth,  by  the  mef¬
fenger  he  fent  to  him  to  know,  what  meafures  would  be  the
firmed:  fupport  of  his  power  ;  but,  ordering  the  man  to
follow  him  into  a  field  of  wheat,  and  breaking  off  the  ears,
that  flood  above  the  reft,  he  threw  them  upon  the  ground  ;
thereby,  intimating  that  Periander  ought  to  cut  off,  and
deftroy  the  moft  confiderable  of  the  citizens.  Tarquinius,
therefore,  having  done  fomething  like  this,  Sextus  underftood
his  meaning,  and  that  he  advifed  him  to  put  to  death  the
moft  eminent  of  the  Gabini:  Upon  which,  he  afiembled
the  people ;  and,  after  he  had  faid  a  great  deal  concerning
himfelf,  he  told  them,  that  he,  and  his  friends,  having  fled
to  them  upon  the  affurances  they  had  given  him,  he  was  in
danger  of  being  feized  by  fome  people,  and  delivered  up  to
his  father ;  that  he  was  ready  to  refign  his  power  ;  and  de-

66*  TV  GgocffvGvte  t*  Jixvaiocv.  the  fame  advice  to  Periander,  whom

This  ftory  is  told  by  c  Herodotus  in  he  fuppofes  Thrafybulus  to  have  con-
thefame  manner  as  our  author  relates  fulted.  The  reflexion  Ariftotle  makes
it.  Diogenes  Laertius,  alfo,  attributes  is  very  fingular,  though,  polfibly,  not
this  advice  to  Thrafybulus,  and  gives  ill  grounded  :  He  fays,  that  the  coun-
the  letter,  which,  d  he  fays,  Thrafybu-  fel,  given  by  Periander,  is  advantage  -
lus  writ  to  Periander,  upon  this  occa-  ous,  not  only,  to  tyrannies,  and  oli-
fion,  to  whom  he  explains  his  intention  garchies,  but,  alfo,  to  democracies,  in
in  breaking  off  the  higheft  ears  of  corn .  which  the  oftracifm  had  the  fame  effedt
All  this  makes  it  the  more  extraor-  of  depreffing,  and  banifhing  the  moft
dinary  to  find  e  Ariftotle  attributing  eminent  citizens.

«  In  Clio,  c.  80.  d  Life  of  Periander.  e  n^i  <a oAfl.  B.  iii.  c.  9.


fired


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  253

fired  to  quit  their  city,  before  any  mifchief  befel  him ;  and,
in  faying  this,  he  wept,  and  lamented  his  fate,  like  a  man,
whom  the  fear  of  death  throws  into  a  real  agony.

LVII.  The  people,  being  inflamed  by  his  difcourfe,
earneftly  defired  he  would  name  thofe,  who  had  a  defign  to
betray  him  :  Upon  which,  he  named  Antiftius  Petron,  a  man
of  the  greateft  difiindion  among  the  Gabini,  who,  by  the
many  wife  inftitutions  he  had  been  the  author  of  in  time  of
peace;  and,  by,  often,  commanding  their  armies,  was  be¬
come  the  moft  illuftrious  of  all  the  citizens  :  And,  when
this  perfon  endeavoured  to  clear  himfelf,  and,  from  the  con-
fcioufnefs  of  his  innocence,  fubmitted  to  any  examination,
the  other  faid,  he  would  fend  fome  of  his  friends  to  fearch
his  houfe  ;  and  that  he  himfelf  would  ftay  with  him  in
the  affembly,  till  the  perfons,  fent  for  that  purpofe,  fhould
return.  It  feems,  he  had  bribed  fome  of  the  domeftics  of
Petron  to  hide,  in  their  mailer’s  houfe,  fome  letters  pre¬
pared  for  his  deftrudlion,  and  fealed  with  the  feal  of  T ar-
quinius.  The  perfons,  fent  to  fearch  his  houfe  (for  Petron
refufed  nothing,  but  fuffered  his  houfe  to  be  fearched)  hav¬
ing  difcovered  the  letters  in  the  place,  where  they  had  been
hidden,  appeared  in  the  aflembly  with  many  letters  fealed
up  ;  and,  among  them,  one  addreffed  to  Antiftius ;  when
Sextus  faid  he  knew  his  father’s  feal,  and,  breaking  open  the
letter,  gave  it  to  the  fecretary,  and  ordered  him  to  read  it.
The  purport  of  the  letter  was,  that  Antiftius  fhould  ufe  his
utmoft  endeavours  to  deliver  up  his  fon  to  him  aiive ;  but,
if  that  were  impoflible,  that  he  fhould  fend  his  head  :  And,

if


254  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

if  he  performed  either  of  thefe  fervices,  Tarquinius  affined
him  that  he  would  grant  both  to  him,  and  to  thofe,  who  had
affifted  him  in  the  adtion,  belides  the  rewards  he  had,  al¬
ready,  promifed,  the  rights  of  Roman  citizens,  admit  them
all  into  the  number  of  the  patricians,  and  bellow  on  them
houfes,  lands,  and  many  other  conliderable  prefents.  The
Gabini,  upon  hearing  thefe  things,  were  fo  incenfed  againft
Antillius,  who,  llruck  with  the  unexpected  misfortune,  and
a  fenfe  of  his  mifery,  was  unable  to  fay  the  leaf!  thing  in  his
defence,  that  they  Honed  him  to  death ;  and  appointed
Sextus  to  inquire  into,  and  punilh,  the  crimes  of  his  ac¬
complices.  In  confequence  of  which,  he  committed  the
guard  of  the  gates  to  his  own  creatures,  left  any  of  the  ac-
cufed  fhould  make  their  efcape ;  and,  fending  perfons  to
the  houfes  of  the  moll  conliderable  Gabini,  put  many
worthy  men  to  death.

LVIII.  While  thefe  things  were  in  agitation,  there  being
a  tumult  in  the  city,  the  confequence  of  fo  great  an  evil,
Tarquinius  was  informed,  by  letters,  of  all  that  paffed ;  and,
marching  thither  with  his  army,  approached  the  city  about
the  middle  of  the  night ;  when  the  gates  being  opened
by  thofe,  who  were  prepared  to  receive  him,  he  entered
with  his  forces,  and  made  himfelf  mailer  of  the  city  without
any  trouble.  When  this  calamity  came  to  be  known,  all  the

citizens  lamented  their  condition  from  the  conlideration  of

✓  *  t

the  cruelty,  and  flavery  they  were  expofed  to,  and  expedted
all  the  feverity,  that  tyrants,  ufually,  inflidt  upon  their  pri-
foners ;  and,  as  the  bell,  that  could  happen  to  them,  they,

already,


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  255

already,  condemned  themfelves  to  flavery,  to  the  lofs  of  their
fortunes,  and  to  fuch  like  calamities:  However,  Tarqui-
nius,  though  a  wicked  man,  and  inexorable  in  punifhing  his
enemies,  did  not  a cfl,  in  any  degree,  in  the  manner  they  had
expected,  and  feared:  For  he  neither  put  to  death,  nor
banifhed  any  of  the  Gabini,  nor  punifhed  any  of  them  with
ignominy,  or  the  lofs  of  their  fortunes :  But,  calling  the
people  together,  and  a&ing  the  part  of  a  king,  rather  than
of  a  tyrant,  he  told  them  that  he  reftored  their  city  to  them,
and  allowed  them  to  enjoy  the  fortunes  they  were  poflefied
of;  and,  befides,  that,  he  granted  to  all  of  them  the  rights
of  Roman  citizens :  All  which  flowed  from  a  view  of
ftrengthening  himfelf  in  the  pofleflion  of  the  government  of
Rome,  not  from  a  deflre  of  gratifying  the  Gabini  :  For  he
looked  upon  the  fidelity  of  thofe,  who,  contrary  to  their
expectation,  had  been  preferved,  and  had  recovered  their
fortunes,  as  the  greateft  fupport  both  of  himfelf,  and  his
family.  And,  to  the  end  that  no  fear  might  remain  with
them  for  the  future,  nor  any  doubt  of  the  liability  of  his
conceflions,  he  ordered  the  terms  of  their  mutual  friendfhip
to  be  fet  down  in  writing  ;  and,  having  ratified  the  treaty
immediately,  in  the  aflembly  of  the  people,  he  took  an  oath
upon  the  victims  to  obferve  it.  There  is,  now,  to  be  feen
at  Rome,  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Fidius  (whom  the  Romans
call  *  Sancus)  a  monument  of  this  treaty,  which  is  a  wooden
fhield,  covered  with  the  hide  of  the  ox,  that  was  facrificed,
when  they  confirmed  that  treaty  by  their  oaths ;  upon  which

*  See  the  eighty  eighth  annotation  on  the  fecond  book.


J


fhieldj


256  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookIV.

fhield,  are  infcribed,  in  ancient  characters,  the  terms  of  the
convention,  then,  entered  into.  After  Tarquinius  had  per¬
formed  thefe  things,  he  created  his  fon  Sextus  king  of  the
Gabini,  and  withdrew  his  army.  And  this  was  the  event  of
the  wrar  with  the  Gabini.

LIX.  After  this  tranfa&ion,  Tarquinius  gave  the  people
a  refpite  from  military  expeditions,  and  wars ;  and,  being
defirous  to  perform  the  vows,  made  by  his  grandfather,
employed  himfelf  in  building  temples :  For  the  latter,  whilffc
he  was  ingaged  in  an  aCtion,  during  his  laft  war  with  the
Sabines,  made  a  vow  to  build  temples  to  Jupiter,  Juno,  and
Minerva,  if  he  gained  the  victory ;  and  had  levelled  the  rock,
on  which  he  propofed  to  ereCt  the  temples  to  thefe  deities,
both  with  piles,  and  high  mounds,  as  I  mentioned  in  the
former  book  :  But  he  was  prevented  by  death  from  building
the  temples.  Tarquinius,  therefore,  propofing  to  ered  this
ftructure  with  the  tenth  part  of  the  fpoils,  taken  at  Suefia,
appointed  all  the  artificers  to  this  work.  Upon  which  oc¬
casion,  it  is  faid  there  happened  a  wonderful  prodigy  in  the
ground,  where  they  were  finking  the  foundations ;  which
was,  that,  alter  the  work  had  been  carried  down  to  a  great
depth,  there  was  found  the  head  of  a  man,  newly,  killed,
with  the  face  like  That  of  a  living  man,  and  the  blood,
which  flowed  from  the  abfciflion,  warm  and  frefh.  Tar¬
quinius,  feeing  this  prodigy,  ordered  the  workmen  to  leave
oft' digging;  and,  aflembling  the  Roman  foothfayers,  in¬
quired  of  them  the  fignification  of  this  prodigy  :  But  they,
being  unable  to  return  any  anfwer,  declared  that  the  Tyr¬
rhenians


Book  IV.  DION  YSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  257

rhenians  were  the  only  mailers  of  this  fcience ;  and,  upon
inquiry,  he  learned  of  them  who  was  the  ableft  foothfayer
among  the  Tyrrhenians,  and  fent  the  molt  coniiderable  of
the  citizens  to  him  in  quality  of  embaffadors.

LX.  When  thefe  came  to  the  houfe  of  the  foothfayer,
they  were  met  by  a  youth  ;  and,  after  acquainting  him  that
they  were  embafladors,  fent  from  Rome,  who  wanted  to
fpeak  with  the  foothfayer,  they  defired  he  would  introduce
them  to  him  :  The  youth  replied,  “  The  perfon  you  want
“  to  fpeak  with  is  my  lather;  he  is  bufy  at  prefent;  but,  in
<c  a  little  time,  you  may  be  admitted  to  him  :  And,  while
u*  you  wait  for  him,  acquaint  me  with  the  realbn  of  your
u  coming :  For,  if,  through  inexperience,  you  are  in  danger
cc  of  committing  a  miftake  in  Hating  the  quellion,  when  you
u  have  been  informed  by  me,  you  will  have  the  advantage
<£  of  avoiding  it;  a  proper  queftion  being  not  the  leaft  part
u  of  the  67  prophetic  doctrine.”  The  embafladors  refolved

67*  Tcov  tv  /Ltxvhxy  Bsu^iuoilccv.  f  Cicero  anfwers,  as  well  as  their  cjueftions ;
has  tranflated  percepta  :  For  rien  tf eft  plus  important  pour  vous,  que

fo  we  muft  read  the  word,  in  the  fol-  d’ejlre  juftes  dans  vos  reponfes,  fays  le
lowing  paffage ;  not  praecepta ,  as  it  Jay  :  And  his  countryman,  c*eft  le
Hands  in  molt  editions ;  percepta  ap-  principal  que  de  bien  faireles  demandes  et
petto ,  quae  dicuntur  Graece  les  reponfes.  Now,  there  is  no  fuch

I  have  faid  dottrine ;  not  only  becaufe  word  here  as  onrcKgicrtg,  nor  any  thing
this  word  comprehends  all  the  theorems  like  it  in  this  part  of  the  Greek  text  to
of  every  art,  but  alfo,  becaufe  I  can  juftify  them  in  mentioning  anfwers.
think  of  no  other  Englilh  word  to  By  the  way,  it  appears,  very  plainly,
convey  this  idea.  The  French  tranf-  that  this  young  fellow  was  fent  by  the
lators  have  rendered  this  palfage  in  a  Tufcan  impoftor  to  fift  the  Roman
very  extraordinary  manner;  they  have,  deputies,  before  they  were  admitted  to
without  any  authority  from  the  Greek  him  ;  a  practice,  very  common  with
text,  cautioned  the  Roman  embaffadors  modern  conjurers,
againft  committing  any  miftake  in  their

f  De  fato,  c.  6.

K  k  -  tm


Vol.  II.


25B  ROMAN  ANTIQJLJI  TIE  S  OF  BooklV.

to  follow  his  dire&ions,  and  related  the  prodigy  to  him  s
Which  when  the  youth  heard,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  he  faid ;
“  Hear  me,  Romans ;  my  father  will  interpret  this  prodigy
“  to  you,  and  will  tell  you  no  fahity:  For  that  is  a  thing
“  a  foothfayer  muft  not  do  ;  and,  to  the  end  that  you  may
“  be  guilty  of  no  error,  nor  inftncerity,  either  in  what  you
u  are  to  fay  to  him,  or  in  the  anfwers  you  are  to  make
“  to  his  queflions  (for  it  is  of  confequence  to  you  to  be  ac-
u  quainted  with  thefe  things  beforehand)  receive  thefe  in-
u  flrudions  from  me:  After  you  have  related  the  prodigy
cc  to  him,  he  will  tell  you  that  he  does  not,  thoroughly,
“  underftand  what  you  fay,  and  will  circumfcribe,  with  his
<c  flick,  acertain  fpot  of  ground,  and,  then,  tell  you,  this  is  the
<c  Tarpeian  hill,  and  this  part  of  it  looks  to  the  eaft;  this  to
<c  the  weft ;  this  is  the  northern,  and  this  the  contrary  part :
“  Thefe  he  will  point  out  to  you  with  his  flick  ;  and,  then,
<c  afk  you  in  which  of  thefe  parts  the  head  was  found,
“  What  anfwer,  therefore,  do  I  advife  you  to  make  ?  Do
<c  not  allow  that  the  prodigy  was  found  in  any  of  the  places
“  he  {hall  inquire  after,  when  he  points  them  out  with  his
cc  flick;  but  fay  that  it  appeared  among  you  at  Rome  on
“  the  Tarpeian  hill.  If  you  adhere  to  thefe  anfwers,  and
“  do  not  fuffer  yourfelves  to  be  milled  by  him,  he,  well-
u  knowing  that  fate  cannot  be  changed,  will  tell  you  what
“  the  prodigy  portends,  and  hide  nothing  from  you.”

LXI.  The  embafladors,  having  received  thefe  inftrudtions,
as  foon  as  the  old  man  was  at  leifure,  and  they  were  called
in,  related  the  prodigy  to  the  foothfayer ;  who,  endeavouring

to


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H A  L I  C  ARN  A  S  SE N  SI  S.  259

to  miflead  them,  drew  circular  lines  upon  the  ground;  and,
then,  other  ftraight  lines ;  and,  pointing  to  every  fingle
place,  afked  them  where  the  head  was  found.  The  embaf-
fadors,  who  were  not,  at  all,  difturbed  at  this,  adhered  to
the  anfwer,  fuggefted  to  them  by  the  foothfayer’s  foil,
naming,  always,  Rome,  and  the  Tarpeian  hill ;  and  delired
the  interpreter  of  the  prodigy  not  to  appropriate  the  omen
to  his  own  country,  but  to  anfwer  in  the  moft  fincere,  and
juft  manner.  The  foothfayer,  finding  it  impofiible  for  him
either  to  impofe  upon  the  embaftadors,  or  to  appropriate  the
omen,  faid  to  them;  cc  Romans,  tell  your  fellow-citizens  it
cc  is  ordained  by  fate  that  the  place,  in  which  you  found  the
<c  head,  fhall  be  the  head  of  all  Italy.”  Since  that  time,
the  place  is  called  the  Capitoline  hill ,  from  the  head,  that  was
found  there :  For  the  Romans  call  Kstpothoc;,  Capita ,  Heads .
Tarquinius,  being  informed  of  thefe  things  by  the  em_
bafladors,  fet  the  artificers  to  work ;  and  built  the  greateft
part  of  the  temple ;  but  was  expelled  before  he  could  finifti
it :  However,  in  the  third  confulfhip,  the  Romans  com¬
pleted  the  ftrudture.  It  flood  upon  a  high  rock,  and  was
6S  eight  hundred  feet  in  circuit,  each  fide  containing  near

68,  rsfv  ar?e/oJbv.  If  the  ever,  to  his  advantage,  that,  if  I  think

defcriptionofRome,  which,  no  doubt,  myfelf  obliged  to  make  fome  obferva-
our  author  gave  his  readers,  according  tions  on  this  temple,  he  is  not  obliged
to  his  promil'e,  had  not  been,  unfortu-  to  read  them.  We  find,  here,  that  the
nately,  loft  in  one  of  the  nine  books,  capitol  was,  nearly,  a  fquare  building
which  we  have  not,  both  my  trouble  containing  200  feet  in  length,  and  185
in  adding  to,  and  explaining,  this  fhort  fome  inches  in  breadth  ;  though  le
defcription  of  the  capitol  would  have  Jay  has  thought  fit  to  make  it  eight
been  fpared,  and  That  of  the  reader  in  acres,  (  arpents  )  in  circumference,
perufing  it  j  with  this  difference,  how-  which  he  has  explained,  in  a  note,  to

K  k  2  two


260  ROMAN  AN  T  I QJJ  I  T  IE  S  OF  Book  IV.
two  hundred:  Since,  upon  comparing  the  length  with  the


make  1840  feet,  b  I  have,  already,
taken  notice  of  this  error  in  translating
srAs&fov,  un  arpent'',  and  Shewn  the
Greek  word  to  fignify  a  meafure  of
length,  containing  100  feet.  Another
obfervation  I  am  to  make  relates  to  a
word,  which  I  appreherid  to  be  wanting
in  t.he  text.  Our  author  fays  that  the
firft  temple  differed  from  the  laft  in
nothing  but  tjj  TE  sroAv7gA««  ;  which
conjunction  Shews,  plainly,  that  fome-
thing  preceded  it :  This  hiatus  muft
be  filled  up,  and  I  have  Supplied  it  by
/ugf«Ao7r^7r«»  :  My  reafon  for  Supplying
it  with  this  word,  befides  the  propriety
of  it,  which  feems  to  be  explained  by
the  vaft  number  of  columns  with  which
this  temple  (as  we  are,  prefently  after,
told)  was  Surrounded,  is,  that  our  au¬
thor,  in  Speaking  of  the  cloacae, made  by
Tarquinius  Prifcus,  joins  thefe  two  ex-
prefIions,,ug/kA07r££?r£s'«7#
and  tuv  ava\ufAotluv  5toAv7sA«#k.  An¬
other  thing  I  Shall  Speak  to,  is  the  word
eiilo?,  which,  I  am  Sorry  to  fay,  none
of  the  translators  have  underftood  :
Portus  has  Said,  fub  iifdem  pinnaculis  ;
Sylburgius,/^  eodem  laqueari ;  M.***,
fous  un  mime  fdite  ;  and  le  Jay,  fous  la
mime  couverture.  Ail  of,  and  A  (luy.cc  were
terms  of  architecture  among  theGreeks,
Signifying  what  we  call,  a  pediment ,
from  its  refemblance  to  an  eagle  with
her  wings  half  extended.  In  this  fenfe,
the  word  is  ufed  by  h  Ariftophanes  ;

Ttff  y<xf>  vyuv  oiya^f  s^t^oysv  aietcn.

Which  is,  thus,  explained- by  1  Julius
Pollux  in  Speaking  of  architecture.


called,  by  k  Vitruvius,  fajligium  ;  and
fo  the  Latin  tranflators  ought  to  have
rendered  it  in  this  place.  I  had  the
curiofity  to  fee  howPerrault  had  trans¬
lated  this  term  in  his  verfion  of  Vitru¬
vius,  and  find  he  has  rendered  it,  very
properly,  by  fronton :  If  the  French
translators  of  Dionyfius  had  confuted
that  verfion,  I  am  apt  to  think  they
would  have  rendered  it  in  the  fame
manner.  The  burning  of  the  capitol.
Said  by  our  author  to  have  happened
in  the  generation  before  him,  fell  out
in  the  year  671  of  Rome,  in  the  con¬
sulship  of  L.  Scipio,  and  Cn.  Norbanus.
After  that,  it  was  rebuilt  by  Sylla  upon
the  fame  foundations,  and  confecrated
by  Lutatius  Catulus.  It  was,  a  feconcl
time,  confumed  by  fire  in  the  time  of
Vitellius,  when  Sabinus,  brother  to
Vefpafian,  was,  by  the  Soldiers  of  Vi¬
tellius,  befieged,  and  taken  there.

1  Iifdem  rurfus  vejligiis fitum  efi ,  pojlquam
interjedlo  ccccxxv  annorum  fpatio ,  L.
Scipione ,  Cn.  Norbano  confulibus ,  flagra -
verat.  Cur  am  v  iff  or  Sulla  fufeepit ,  neque
tamen  dedicavit :  hoc  folum  j elicit ati  ejus
negatum.  Lutatii  Catuli  nomen ,  inter  tot
Caefarum  opera ,  ufque  ad  Vitellium  man-
fit  ,  ea  tunc  aedes  cremebatur.  The  ca¬
pitol  was,  again,  rebuilt  by  Vefpafian,
and,  again,  destroyed  by  fire,  imme¬
diately,  after  his  death.  m  Domitian,
his  fon,  rebuilt,  and  confecrated  it.

Outtriraffioivoi  avufafuv

«7 r«eh  yevcyfvov  — -  uyu  yct%  ru  tsA i\j\ytcrcti
Ov$<r7ru<ri<XYGv  to  K-xttIIuAicv.  0

Jg  t hallos  Iros  v7ro  Aoyiltoiva  xcu  cavili-
Afcro $->j  KOit  KuGttguQq.


5 tfcctroyzv  tyoKri  AETI2MA.  Ados  is

6  See  the  feventieth  annotation  on  the  third  book.  k  C^t9.  p.  1 1 10.  »  B.  vii.  c.  27.

k  B.  iii.  c.  2,  *  Tacit.  Hill,  B.  iii.  c.  72.  ?'  Plutarch.  Life  of  Poplicola.

width.


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASS  EN  S  IS.  261

width  of  it,  the  former  does  not  exceed  the  latter  by  quite
fifteen  feet.  For  the  temple,  that  was  built,  in  the  time  of
our  fathers,  upon  the  fame  foundations  with  the  firft,  which
was  confumed  by  fire,  is  found  to  differ  from  the  ancient
temple  in  nothing,  but  in  magnificence,  and  the  richnefs  of
the  materials,  having  three  rows  of  columns  in  the  fouth
front,  and  two  on  each  fide  :  The  body  is  divided  into  three
temples,  parallel  to  one  another,  the  partition  walls  forming
their  common  fides :  The  middle  temple  is  dedicated  to
Jupiter;  and,  on  one  fide,  ftands  That  of  Juno  ;  and,  on
the  other,  That  of  Minerva:  And  all  three  have  but  one
pediment,  and  one  roof.

LXII.  It  is  faid  that,  during  the  reign  of  Tarquinius,,
another  very  wonderful  felicity,  alfo,  happened  to  the  Ro¬
mans,  conferred  upon  them  by  the  favor  either  of  fome
god,  or  genius  ;  the  advantage  of  which  was  not  of  fhort
duration  ;  but,  in  all  fubfequent  ages,  they  were,  often,
refcued  by  it  from  great  calamities.  A  certain  woman,  not
of  that  country,  came  to  the  tyrant  in  order  to  fell  him  nine
books  of  the  69  Sibylline  oracles :  But  Tarquinius,  not  being
willing  to  purchafe  the  books  at  the  price,  that  was  aiked
for  them,  (he  went  away,  and  burned  three  of  them  :  And,
not  long  after,  bringing  the  remaining  books,  fhe  demanded
the  fame  price  for  them.  Upon  this,  fhe  was  thought  to  be*
out  of  her  fenfes :  and,  being  laughed  at  for  afking  the  fame
price  for  fewer  books,  which  fhe  could  not  get  for  a  greater
number,  fhe,  again,  went  away,  and  burned  half  of  thofe,

69*  Si CvAAaw  i<rpuv.  See  the  155th  annotation  on  the  firft  book.

that


262  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

that  were  left;  and,  bringing  the  remaining  three  books,
aiked  the  fame  price  for  thefe.  Tarquinius,  wondering  at  the
defign  of  the  woman,  fent  for  the  augurs ;  and,  acquainting
them  with  the  matter,  afked  them  what  he  fhould  do  in  it.
Thefe,  knowing,  by  certain  figns,  that  he  had  rejedted  a
favor,  fent  him  by  the  gods ;  and,  declaring  it  to  be  a  great
misfortune  that  he  had  not  purchafed  all  the  books,  directed
him  to  pay  the  woman  all  the  money  fhe  aiked,  and  to  get
the  remainder  of  the  oracles  into  his  pofleffion.  The  wo¬
man,  having  delivered  the  books,  and  defired  him  to  take
great  care  of  them,  difappeared.  Tarquinius  committed  thefe
books  to  the  cuftody  of  two  perfons  of  diftindtion,  whom  he
chofe  among  the  citizens,  and  added  to  them  two  public
officers ;  one  of  whom,  by  name,  Marcus  Aetilius,  being
thought  to  want  fidelity,  and,  alfo,  accufed,  by  one  of  the
public  officers,  of  having  murdered  his  father,  he  ordered
him  to  be  fewed  up  in  a  70  neats  leather  bag,  and  thrown  into
the  fea.  But,  after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,  the  com¬
monwealth,  taking  upon  herfelf  the  fuperintendence  of  thefe
oracles,  committed  the  care  of  them  to  perfons  of  the  greateft
diftindtion,  who  are  intrufted  with  it  during  life  ;  and  ex-
cufed  from  bearing  arms,  and  from  all  civil  employments ;


7°'  Ei<  ccty.ch  (ffoc^/u;  /3o«ov.  This  bag,
made  of  neats  leather,  was  called  cul-
Uus,  by  the  Romans,  and  was  the  pu-
nihiment  ordained  by  their  law'for  the
dreadful  crime  of  parricide  :  Into  this
bag  the  criminal  was  put,  together  with
a  monkey,  a  cock,  and  a  lerpent,  and,


then,  thrown  into  the  fea.  n  Juvenal
fays  that  Nero  defervedto  be,  doubly,
puniihed  in  this  manner  *

Cujus  fupplicio  non  debuit  una  parari
Simla,  nec ferpens  unus ,  nec  culleus  units.


n  Sat,  viii.  f.  113.


and


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I S.  263

and  appointed  public  officers  to  affift  them  in  the  execution
of  their  truft;  in  whofe  abfence  fhe  does  not  allow  the
others  to  infped:  the  oracles.  Upon  the  whole,  there  is
nothing  religious,  or  facred  in  the  poffeffion  of  the  Romans,
of  which  they  are  fo  careful  as  of  the  Sibylline  oracles.
Thefe  they  confult  by  order  of  the  fenate,  when  the  com¬
monwealth  is  rent  by  fedition,  or  fome  great  misfortune  has'
happened  to  them  in  their  wars,  or  fome  prodigies,  and
fignal  appearances  have  been  feen,  which  cannot,  eafily,  be
explained,  as  it  has,  often,  happened.  Thefe  oracles  remained
in  the  cuftody  of  ten  men,  preferved  in  a  ftone  cheft,  and
hidden  under  ground  in  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter
until  the  time  of  the  war,  called  the  Marlic  war.  But  the
temple  being  71  burned,  after  the  expiration  of  the  hundred
and  leventy  third  Olympiad,  either  by  defign,  as  fome  think,
or  by  accident,  thefe  oracles,  together  with  all  the  offerings
confecrated  to  that  god,,  were  confumed  by  the  fire.  Thofe,
which  are,  now,  extant,  have  been  collected  from  many
places ;  fome,  from  the  cities  of  Italy ;  others,  from  Erythrae
in  Afia,  embafiadors  having  been  fent  thither,  by  order  of
the  fenate,  to  copy  them;  and  others  were  brought  from
other  cities,  tranfcribed  by  private  perfons ;  of  which  fome
are  found  to  be  inferted  among  the  Sibylline  oracles :  How¬
ever,  they  are  difcoverable  by  what  they  call  the  72  acroftics.

71*  Epr^c&ivlos  m  volx.  This  was  the  fary  at  this  time)  that  the  modern  Si-
firft  fire,  fpoken  of  in  the  former  note,  bylline  oracles,  fpoken  of  before,  are

72*  Tom  xoi\x[Azvoue  °This  an  impofture;  fince  it  is  plain  that

is  a  proof  (if  any  proof  at  all  is  necef-  none  of  them  are  written  in  acroftics ,

®  See  the  155th  annotation  on  the  firfl  book.


)


The


264  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

The  obfervations  I  have  made  upon  this  fubjedt  are  taken
from  the  theological  eflay  of  Terentius  Varro.

LXIIL  After  Tarquinius  had  performed  thefe  adtions
both  in  peace,  and  war,  he  founded  two  colonies ;  one  of
which  he  planted  at  a  place,  called  73  Signia,  not  with  defign,
but  by  accident ;  the  foldiers,  who  were  in  winter  quarters
there,  having  formed  their  camp  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  not
to  differ,  in  any  refpedl,  from  a  city.  But  it  was  with  defign
that  he  fettled  a  colony  at 74  Circeii ;  becaufe  the  place  was,
advantageoufly,  fituated  in  regard  both  to  the  plain  of  the
Pometini,  which  is  the  largeft  of  all  the  country  of  the
Latines,  and  to  the  fea,  that  is  contiguous  to  it.  For  it  is  a
rock,  in  the  nature  of  a  peninfula,  reafonably  high,  and  runs
into  the  Tyrrhene  fea  ;  which  rock,  itisfaid,  was  inhabited
by  Circe,  the  daughter  of  the  fun  :  He  affigned  both  thefe
colonies  to  two  of  his  fons,  as  their  founders,  giving  Circeii
to  Aruns ;  and  Signia  to  Titus.  And,  being,  now,  no  longer,
in  any  fear  of  lofing  his  power,  he  was,  by  reafon  of  an


as  fome  of  thefe  Sibylline  oracles,
certainly,  were  ;  and  of  both  it  may
be,  truly,  faid,  that  one  impofture
was  grafted  upon  another.  p  Cicero,
as  well  as  our  author,  fays  the  Si¬
bylline  verfes,  I  mean.  Thole  col¬
lected  after  the  firft  oracles  were  burn¬
ed,  were  in  acrojlics ;  turn  vero  ea,  quae
aKcofiX'?  dicitur ,  cum  deinceps  ex  primis
•uerfuum  Uteris  aliquid  connetiitur — atque
in  Sibyllinis  ex  primis  verfuum  cujufque
fententiae  Uteris  illius  fententiae  carmen
omne  pertexitur.

73*  s tfvice.  Thus  we  muft  read  the


name  of  this  .town  with  the  Vatican
manufcript ;  becaufe  we  find,  by
q  Livy,  that  Tarquinius  planted  a  co¬
lony  at  Signia.  Signiam  Circeiofque  co-
lonos  mifit.  r  Signia  flood  to  the  eafl
of  SueJJ'a  Pometia ,  and  is,  now,  called
Segni.

74*  YLi^oux.  In  Latin,  Circeii ,  a
town  Handing  on  a  promontory,  run¬
ning  into  the  Tufcan  fea,  called  Cir-
caeum.  Some  of  the  ruins  of  this  town
are,  Hill,  to  be  feen,  and  are  called,  by
the  inhabitants,  s  La  cittd  vecchia.


f  De  Divinat.  B.  ii.  c.  54.  a  B.  i.  c.  56.  »  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  c.  2.  s  Id.  ib.  c.  7.

abufe.


BookIV*.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  264
abufe,  committed  by  Sextus,  his  eldeft  fon,  upon  the  perfon
of  a  woman,  whom  he  ravifhed,  expelled  both  from  the
fovereignty,  and  the  city.  Of  this  calamity,  fo  fatal  to  his
family,  heaven  had  forewarned  him  by  many  omens ;  par¬
ticularly,  by  this  laft :  Two  eagles,  coming  in  the  fpring  to
a  place  near  the  palace,  made  their  airy  upon  the  top  of  a
high  palm  tree;  and,  while  the  young  eagles  were,  yet,
unfledged,  a  flock  of  vulturs,  flying  to  the  airy,  deftroyed  it,
and  killed  the  young  ones :  When  the  eagles  returned  from
prey,  the  vulturs  tore  them  with  their  beaks,  and  talons;
and,  ftriking  them  with  their  wings,  drove  them  from  the
palm  tree.  Tarquinius,  feeing  thefe  omens,  ufed  all  poflible
precautions  to  avert  his  deftiny,  but  proved  unable  to  con¬
quer  fate:  For  the  patricians  confpiring  againfthim,  and  the
people  concurring  with  them,  he  was  dethroned.  Who  the
authors  were  of  this  infurre&ion  againft  him,  and,  by  what
means,  they  got  the  government  into  their  hands,  I  fliall
endeavour  to  relate  in  few  words.

LXIV.  Tarquinius  was,  then,  befieging  the  city  of  the
75  Ardeates ;  his  pretence  for  it  was,  that  they  had  received
the  Roman  fugitives,  and  were  affifting  them  in  their  en¬
deavours  to  return  to  Rome  :  However,  the  truth  w^as,  that
he  had  formed  an  infidious  defign  againft  this  city,  the  moft
flourifhing  in  all  Italy,  in  order  to  poflefs  himfelf  of  its  riches.
But,  as  the  Ardeates,  bravely,  defended  themfelves,  and  the
ftege  was  of  long  continuance,  both  the  Romans,  who  were
in  the  camp,  being  fatigued  with  the  length  of  it,  and
75*  A^izluv.  See  the  feventh  annotation  on  this  book.

Vol.  II.  L  1


Thole,


266  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

Thofe,  at  Rome,  exhaufted  with  taxes,  were  ready  to  revolt
on  the  firft  opportunity.  At  this  time,  Sextus,  the  eldeft
fon  of  Tarquinius,  being  fent  by  his  father  to  a  city,  called
76  Collatia,  to  execute  fome  commifiion,  relating  to  the  pre¬
fen  t  war,  lodged  at  the  houfe  of  Lucius  Tarquinius,  his
relation,  furnamed  Collatinus :  This  man  is  faid  by  Fabius
to  have  been  the  fon  of  Egerius,  whom  I  have,  before,
{hewn  to  have  been  the  fon  of  the  brother  of  Tarqui¬
nius,  the  firft  king  of  that  name,  and  that,  being  appointed
governor  of  Collatia,  he  was,  not  only,  called  Collatinus
himfelf  from  his  living  in  that  city,  but,  alfo,  left  the  fame
furnametohis  pofterity.  But,  for  my  part,  lam  perluaded  that
he,  alfo,  was  the  grandfon  of  Egerius,  if  he  was  of  the  fame
age  with  the  fons  of  Tarquinius,  as  Fabius,  and  the  greateft
part  of  the  hiftorians  have  afferted:  For  chronology  confirms
the  opinion  I  have  embraced.  Now,  it  happened  that  Col¬
latinus  was,  then,  at  the  camp ;  but  his  wife,  who  was  a
Roman  lady,  and  the  daughter  of  Lucretius,  a  perfon  of
diftin&ion,  received  him,  as  a  relation  of  her  hufband,  with
great  chearfulnefs,  and  civility.  This  lady,  who  excelled  all
the  Roman  women  in  beauty,  as  well  as  virtue,  Sextus  un¬
dertook  to  deflower  ;  a  defign  he  had,  long  before,  enter¬
tained,  when  he  ufed  to  vifit  his  relation ;  and  thought  he
had,  now,  a  proper  opportunity  of  carrying  it  into  execution.
Going,  therefore,  to  bed  after  fupper,  he  contained  himfelf
great  part  of  the  night;  and,  when  he  thought  all  the
family  was  aileep,  he  got  up ;  and,  coming  to  the  room,,
?6*  KoAA See  the  forty  ninth  annotation  on  the  third  book.

where


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN ASSE NS  I S.  267

where  he  knew  Lucretia  lay,  without  being  difcovered  by
her  domeftics,  who  lay  afleep  at  the  door,' he  went  into  the
room  with  a  fword  in  his  hand.

LXV.  And,  coming  to  her  bed  fi.de,  the  noife  waked  her ;
and  file  afking  who  it  was,  he  told  her  his  name,  and  bid  her
be  filent,  and  ftay  in  the  room ;  threatening,  at  the  fame  time,
to  kill  her,  if  flie  offered  either  to  efcape,  or  cry  out :  Having
terrified  her  by  thefe  means,  he  propofed  two  things  to  her,
and  ordered  her  to  chufe  which  of  them  {he  liked  befc;
u  Death  with  difhonor,  or  life  with  happinefs :  For,  fays  he,
“  if  you  canrefolve  to  gratify  me,  I  will  make  you  my  wife ;
cc  and,  with  me,  you  fhall  reign,  at  prefent,  over  the  city  my
“  father  has  given  me,  and,  after  his  death,  over  the  Romans,
cc  the  Latines,  the  Tyrrhenians,  and  all  the  other  nations  he
<c  commands :  Since  I  am,  well,  affured  of  fucceeding  my  fa-
<c  ther  in  his  kingdom,  as  juftice  requires,  being  his  eldeft  fon :
ic  And  why  Ihould  I  mention  the  many  advantages,  which
<c  attend  royalty,  all  which  you  {hall  {hare  with  me,  when
<c  you  are  fo  well  acquainted  with  them  ?  But,  if  you  en-
u  deavour  to  refill:  from  a  defire  of  preferving  your  virtue,  I
iC  will,  firft,  kill  you,  and,  then,  flab  one  of  your  fervants ;
cc  and,  having  laid  both  your  bodies  together,  give  out  that  I
u  caught  you  in  the  foul  embraces  of  your  fervant,  and  pu-
“  nifhed  you  to  revenge  the  dilhonor  of  my  relation :  So  that,
“  your  death  will  be  attended  with  Ihame,  and  reproach,  and
t£  your  body  will  be  deprived  both  of  burial,  and  every  other
<c  cuftomary  rite.”  And,  thus,  repeating  his  threats,  and
intreaties,  and  fwearing  to  effect  every  part  of  what  he  faid?

L  1  2  Lucretia,


268  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  IV.

Lucretia,  fearing  the  ignominy  of  the  death  he  had  threat¬
ened  her  with,  was  forced  to  yield,  and  to  fuffer  him  to
acqomplifh  his  defire.

LXVI.  When  it  was  day,  Sextus,  having  gratified  his
wicked,  and  deftru&ive  pafiion,  returned  to  the  camp.  But
Lucretia,  grievoufly  refenting  what  had  happened,  went  into
her  chariot  in  all  hafte,  dreffed  in  black,  with  a  dagger  hidden
under  her  robes ;  and  drove  to  Rome,  without  faying  a
word  to  any  perfon,  who  faluted  her  upon  the  road ;  or
making  anfwer  to  thofe,  who  inquired  into  the  caufe  of  her
diforder ;  but  continued  thoughtful,  with  her  eyes  caft
down,  and  full  of  tears.  When  fhe  came  to  her  father’s
houfe,  where  there  happened  to  be  fome  of  her  relations,
fhe  threw  herfelf  at  his  feet,  and,  embracing  his  knees,  wept
for  fome  time,  without  faying  a  word :  And,  when  he  raifed
her  up,  and  aiked  her  what  had  befallen  her,  “  I  fly  to  you
“  for  refuge,  fays  fhe,  under  a  dreadful,  and  irreparable
“  abufe  j  revenge  me,  and  negleft  not  your  daughter,  who
“  has  fuffered  worfe  than  death.”  Her  father,  and  all  pre-
fent  were  ftruck  with  wonder  at  hearing  this,  and  defired
her  to  let  them  know  who  had  abufed  her,  and  in  what
manner  :  “  O  father,  fays  fhe,  you  will,  foon,  hear  my  mif-
t£  fortunes ;  but,  firft,  grant  me  the  favor  I  afk  of  you  :
tc  Send  for  as  many  oi  your  friends,  and  relations,  as  you
a  can,  to  the  end  they  may  hear  the  dreadfuL  injury  from
t£  me,  who.  have  fuffered  it,  and  not  from  others.  And,
«  when  you  are  informed  of  the  fhameful,  and  fevere  necef-
«  fity  I  was  reduced  to,  you  will  confult  with  them  in  what

“  manner


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL  IC  A  RN  A  S  SEN  S  IS.  269

«  manner  you  fhall  revenge  both  me,  and  yourfelf ;  but  let
<£  the  intermediate  time  be  fhort.”

LX VII.  Thefe  perfons,  who  were  all  of  the  greateft
diftin&ion,  being  fent  for  by  a  quick,  and  hafty  meffage,
came  to  the  houfe,  as  fhe  defired ;  to  whom  fhe  related  the
whole  matter  from  the  beginning ;  and,  then,  having  em¬
braced  her  father,  and  recommended  herfelf  to  him,  and  to
all  prefent  with  many  in  treaties,  and  begged  both  of  the
gods,  and  genius’s  to  grant  her  a  fpeedy  departure  out  of
life,  fhe  drew  the  dagger  fhe  had  concealed  under  her  robes ;
and,  plunging  it  into  her  breaft  with  one  ftroke,  pierced  her
heart.  Upon  this,  the  women  beat  their  breads,  and  filled
the  houfe  with  their  fhrieks,  and  lamentations ;  when  her
father,  running  to  the  body,  embraced  it ;  and,  calling  upon
his  daughter,  fomented  the  wound  in  hopes  of  her  recovery;
while  fhe,  palpitating,  and  agonizing  in  his  arms,  expired.
This  dreadful  fcene  ftruck  the  Romans,  who  were  prefent,
with  fo  much  horror,  and  compaffion,  that  they  cried  out
unanimoufly,  they  would  rather  die  ten  thoufand  deaths  in
defence  of  their  liberty,  than  fuffer  fuch  abufes  to  be  com¬
mitted  by  the  tyrants.  There  was  among  them  a  certain
perfon,  by  name,  Publius  Valerius,  a  defendant  of  one  of
thofe  Sabines,  who  came  to  Rome  with  Tatius ;  and  a  man
of  activity,  and  prudence :  This  perfon  was  fent  by  them  to
the  camp  both  to  acquaint  the  hufband  of  Lucretia  with
what  had  happened,  and,  jointly  with  him,  to  ingage  the
foldiers  to  revolt  from  the  tyrants.  He  was,  no  fooner,  out
of  the  gates,  than  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  Collatinus,

who


270  -ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookIV.

who  was  coming  to  town  from  the  camp,  and  knew  nothing
of  the  misfortunes  of  his  family :  And,  with  him,  came
Lucius  Junius,  furnatned  Brutus ,  which,  tranflated  into  the
Greek  language,  (ignifies  HA/O iogy  a  Fool :  Of  whom  it  is
neceflary  to  premife  a  fhort  account  (lince  the  Romans  fay
that  he  was  the  principal  inftrument  in  the  expulfion  of  the
tyrants)  and  to  fhew  who  he  was,  and  of  whom  defcended  ;
and,  for  what  reafon,  this  furname  was  given  to  him,  which
was,  in  no  degree,  fuited  to  his  character.

LX VIII.  The  father  of  this  perfon  was  Marcus  Junius,
defcended  from  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  colony,  planted  in
Italy  by  Aeneas,  and  a  man,  who,  for  his  virtue,  was  ranked
among  the  moft  illuftrious  of  the  Romans :  His  mother  was
77  Tarquinia,  a  daughter  of  Tarquinius,  the  firft  king  of  that
name;  and  he  himfelf  was  brought  up,  and  educated  in  all


77*  TotgMvioi,  ra  vrfolesov

|S x<rt\tuig  T<x£jcovj*  S'vfal^.  Here  again,
our  author  differs  from  Livy,  who
makes  the  mother  of  Brutus  to  have
been  the  fijler  of  Tarquinius  Superbus.
1  L.  Junius  Brutus ,  Tarquinia  forore
regis  natus ,  juvenis  longe  alius  ingenio
quarn  cujus  fimulationem  induerat.  This
queftion  depends  upon  another,  which
our  author  has,  already,  difcufied,  and,
in  my  opinion,  inconteftably,  proved
that  Tarquinius  Superbus  was  not  the
fon,  but  the  grandfon,  of  Tarquinius
Prifcus.  Livy,  in  order  to  fupport  the
other  opinion,  calls  Brutus,  a  young
man,  even,  in  the  fame  chapter,  in
which  he  mentions  the  preparations
for  the  fiege  of  Ardea,  during  which,
all  authors  agree,  that  the  revolution

1 B.  i.  c.  56.


happened  at  Rome.  Now,  the  part
Brutus  a£ts  in  this  revolution  is  very
far  from  fhewing  that  he  was,  then,
a  young  man.  Nay,  “Livy  himfelf
proves  that  he  was  not,  when  he  fays
that,  during  the  courfe  of  the  fame
year,  the  ions  of  Brutus  entered  into
the  confpiracy  for  reftoringTarquinius,
and  loft  their  lives  for  it.  This  extra¬
ordinary  fcene,  where  the  father  fits  in
judgement  upon  his  own  fons,  con¬
demns  them  to  lofe  their  heads,  and
prefides  at  the  execution  of  this  ter¬
rible  fentence,  is  defcribed  in  fuch
pompous  language  by  that  hiftorian,
that  want  of  accuracy  is  either  extin-
guiihed  by  the  glare  of  fo  much  elo¬
quence,  or  forgiven  in  confideration  of
its  charms.

u  B.  ii.  c.  5.


the


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C A RN  A  S  S E N  S I  S.  271

the  learning  his  country  could  afford,  his  mind  being  formed
for  the  eafy  reception  of  every  noble  accomplifhment.  After
Tarquinius  had  caufed  Tullius  to  be  flam,  he  put  this  man’s
father  to  death  privately,  together  with  many  other  worthy
men ;  not  for  any  crime,  but  becaufe  he  was  in  poffeffion  of
the  inheritance  of  an  ancient  family,  inriched  by  his  an-
ceftors,  the  fpoils  of  which  he  coveted  ;  and,  with  him,  his
eldeft  fon,  in  whom  there  appeared  a  generous  fpirit,  un¬
likely  to  fuffer  the  death  of  his  father  to  go  unrevenged :
Upon  this,  Brutus,  being  yet  a  youth,  and,  intirely,  deftitute
of  all  adiftance  from  his  family,  took  a  refolution,  of  all
others,  the  wifeft ;  which  was  to  counterfeit  folly,  and
continued,  from  that  time,  in  the  affe&ation  of  it ;  from
whence  he  acquired  this  furname,  till  he  faw  the  proper
time  to  throw  it  off.  This  preferved  him  from  the  feverity
of  the  tyrant,  when  many  good  men  were  deflroyed.

LXIX.  For  Tarquinius,  defpifing  his  feeming,  not  real,
folly,  took  all  his  inheritance  from  him ;  and,  allowing  him
a  fmall  maintenance  for  his  daily  fupport,  kept  him  in  his
palace,  as  an  orphan,  who  flood  in  need  of  guardians,  and
fuffered  him  to  live  with  his  own  fons,  not  in  honor  to  him,
as  a  relation,  which  was  the  pretence  he  made  ufe  of  to  his
friends ;  but  to  the  intent  that,  by  faying  many  foolifh
things,  and,  by  acting  the  part  of  a  real  fool,  he  might  divert
the  youths :  And,  when  he  fent  two  of  his  fons,  Titus,  and
Aruns  to  confult  the  Delphic  oracle  concerning  the  plague
(for  fome  uncommon  diflemper  had  happened  in  his  reign,
which  affected  the  children  of  both  fexes,  of  whom  many

died ;


272  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

died;  but  it  fell  with  the  greateft  feverity  upon  breeding
women,  in  whom  it  was  difficult  to  be  cured,  as  it  deftroyed
the  mothers  in  labor  together  with  their  infants)  defiring,
therefore,  to  learn  from  the  god  both  the  caufe  of,  and  the
remedy  for,  this  diftemper,  he  fent  Brutus,  alfo,  with  the
youths  at  their  defire,  to  the  end  they  might  have  fomebody
to  78  laugh,  at,  and  abufe.  When  they  were  arrived  at  the
oracle,  and  had  received  anfwers  to  the  bufinefs  they  were
fent  upon,  they  made  their  offerings  to  the  god,  and  laughed,
mightily,  at  Brutus  for  offering  a  wooden  ftaff  to  Apollo,
(for  he  had  hollowed  the  whole  length  of  it  like  a  tube,  and,
privately,  inferring  a  golden  rod,  made  an  offering  of  it)
after  which,  they  inquired  of  the  god,  which  of  them  was
deftined  to  fucceed  to  the  fovereignty  of  Rome ;  and  the
god  anfwered,  The  perfon,  who  fhould,  firft,  kifs  his  mother.
The  youths,  therefore,  unacquainted  with  the  fenfe  of  the
oracle,  agreed  together  to  kifs  their  mother  at  the  fame  time,
defiring,  jointly,  to  pofiefs  the  kingdom:  While  Brutus,
underftanding  the  meaning  of  the  god,  as  foon  as  he  landed
in  Italy,  fell  upon  the  earth,  and  kiffed  it,  looking  upon
That  as  the  common  mother  of  all.  Thefe  things,  there¬
fore,  had  happened  to  this  perfon,  before  the  time  I  am
fpeaking  of.

LXX.  Then  it  was,  that,  hearing  Valerius  relate  every
thing,  which  had  befallen  Lucretia,  together  with  her  violent

78*  hot  KotlotcmuTrleiv  kou  uegtvGgigetv  Tarquiniis  duflus  Delphos ,  ludibrium
tXonv.  This  is,  molt  beautifully,  ex-  verius  quam  comes.
prejOTed  in  w  Livy :  Is  (Brutus)  Turn  a

w  JB.  i.  c.  56.


death,


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  273

death,  he  lifted  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  and  faid  ;  “  O
“  Jupiter,  and  all  you  gods,  who  infpedt  human  adlions,  is
cc  the  time,  now,  come,  in  expedition  of  which  I  have  pre-
u  ferved  this  difguife  ?  Has  fate  ordained  that  the  Romans
“  fhall,  by  me,  and,  through  me,  be  delivered  from  this
cc  accurfed  tyranny  ?  ”  Having  faid  this,  he  went,  in  all
hafte,  to  the  houfe  together  with  Collatinus,  and  Valerius.
When  they  came  in,  Collatinus,  feeing  Lucretia  lying  upon
the  door,  and  her  father  embracing  her,  fetched  a  deep  figh ;
and,  throwing  his  arms  about  the  dead  body,  luffed  it,  and
called  upon  her ;  and,  grown  wild  through  excefs  of  grief,
talked  to  her,  as  if  die  had  been  alive.  While  he,  and  her
father,  in  his  turn,  were  pouring  forth  their  lamentations,
and  the  whole  family  was  overwhelmed  with  wailing,  and
tears,  Brutus,  looking  on  them,  faid ;  “  You  will  have  many
“  other  opportunities,  Lucretius,  Collatinus,  and  all  of  you,

“  who  are  related  to  this  lady,  to  bewail  her  fate ;  let  us,
u  now,  condder  how  to  revenge  her:  For  This  the  prefent
“  time  requires.”  His  advice  was  approved  of ;  and,  dtting
down  by  themfelves,  and  ordering  their  domeftics  to  with¬
draw,  they  confulted  together  what  they  were  to  do.  Brutus,
drft,  fpoke  concerning  himfelf ;  and  told  them  that  his  folly,
which  was,  generally,  believed  to  be  real,  was,  only,  affumed ;
and,  having  informed  them  of  the  reafons,  which  had  in-  >
,duced  him  to  fubmit  to  this  difguife,  they  looked  upon  him
as  the  wifeft  of  all  men :  After  which,  by  many  powerful
arguments,  he  prevailed  upon  them  all  to  join  in  the  refo-
lution  of  expelling  both  Tarquinius,  and  his  fans.  When
Vol.  II.  M  m  he


274  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

he  found  they  all  concurred  in  the  fame  fentiments,  he  told
them  that  neither  words,  nor  promifes,  but  adtions  only
could  accomplifh  what  was  requifite;  and  that  he  himfelf
would  be  the  firft  adtor.  Having  faid  this,  he  took  the
dagger,  with  which  Lucretia  had  ftabbed  herfelf ;  and,  going
to  the  body  (for  it,  ftill,  lay  in  view,  a  moft  miferable
fpedlacle)  he  fwore  “  By  Mars,  and  all  the  other  gods,  that
<c  he  would  do  every  thing  in  his  power  to  dethrone  Tar-
u  quinius ;  and  that  he  would  neither  be  reconciled  to  the
££  tyrants  himfelf,  nor  fuffer  any  others  to  be  reconciled  to
<£  them ;  but  would  look  upon  every  man  of  different  fen-
<£  timents  as  an  enemy,  and,  till  death,  purfue,  with  unre-
<£  lenting  hatred,  both  the  tyranny,  and  its  abettors  ;  and*
“  if  he  tranfgrefled  this  oath,  he  prayed  that  he,  and  his
££  children  might  die  the  fame  death  with  Lucretia.”

LXXI.  Having  faid  this,  he  called  upon  all  the  reft,  alfo*.
to  take  the  fame  oath  ;  and  they,  no  longer,  hefitating,
rofe  up ;  and,  receiving  the  dagger  from  one  another,  fwore*
After  they  had  taken  the  oath,  they  confidered  in  what
manner  they  fhould  begin  their  enterprife  :  When  Brutus
fuggefted  thefe  things  to  them;  ££  Firft,  let  us  place  a  guard
££  at  the  gates,  that  Tarquinius  may  have  no  intelligence  of
££  what  is  faying,  or  doing  in  the  city  againft  the  tyranny*
££  till  every  thing,  on  our  fide,  is  in  readinefs.  After  that*
££  let  us  carry  the  body  of  this  lady,  ftained  as  it  is  with
<£  blood,  into  the  forum  ;  and,  expofing  it  to  the  public
££  view,  call  the  people  together  :  When  they  are  aflembled,
££  and  we  fee  the  forum  crouded,  let  Lucretius,  and  Colla-

£C  tinus


k


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  275

“  tinus  afcend  the  tribunal ;  and,  having  deplored  their
“  misfortunes,  relate  every  thing,  that  has  palled.  In  the
£C  next  place,  let  all  the  reft  of  us,  fucceffively,  ftand  up,
“  inveigh  againft  the  tyranny,  and  invite  the  citizens  to
<c  liberty.  All  the  Romans  will  be  tranfported  to  fee  us,
£C  who  are  patricians,  the  authors  of  liberty  :  For  they  have
“  fuffered  many  dreadful  injuries  from  the  tyrant,  and  want
“  but  a  fmall  incitement  to  revolt :  And,  when  we  find  the
cc  people  inflamed  with  the  defire  of  extirpating  monarchy,
“  let  us  propofe  a  vote  to  them,  That  Tarquinius  fhall,  no
“  longer,  reign  over  the  Romans ;  and  let  us  fend  this  decree
<c  to  the  camp  with  all  expedition :  For,  when  thofe,
<c  who  have  arms  in  their  hands,  hear  that  the  whole  city  is
“  alienated  from  the  tyrant,  they  will  become  zealous  for
“  the  liberty  of  their  country,  and  be,  no  longer,  retained
c<  by  bribes,  or  able  to  bear  the  abufes  of  the  fons,  and  flat-
<c  terers  of  Tarquinius,”  After  he  had  faid  this,  Valerius
replied  ;  “You  feem  to  me,  Junius,  to  reafon  well  in  gene-
<c  ral ;  but,  concerning  the  aflembly  of  the  people,  I  defire
“  to  know  who  fhall  afiemble  them  according  to  law,  and
<c  propofe  the  vote  to  the  curiae.  This  is  the  bufinefs  of  a
“  magiftrate,  and  none  of  us  are  inverted  with  any  magi-
“  ftracy.”  To  this  Brutus  anfwered,  “  I  fhall  afiemble  the
“  people,  Valerius :  For  I  am  79  commander  of  the  Celeres,

79-  T m  yai£  a^uv  vpi.  becaufe  y  Livy,  as  well  as  our  author,

Concerning  the  inftitution,  and  duty  fays  that  Brutus  was,  at  this  time,
of  the  celeres  feeB.  ii.  c.  13.  x  Plutarch  commander  of  the  Celeres  *,  praeco  ad
is  not  to  be  regarded,  when  he  afferts  tribunumQt\zmm,in  quo  turn  magijlratii
that  Numa  difbanded  thele  guards  *,  forte  Brutus  eraty  populum  advocavit.

x  Life  of  Numa.  r  B.  i.  c.  59.

M  2


u  and


276  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

“  and  I  have  a  power,  by  law,  of  calling  .an  affembly  of  the
u  people,  when  I  pleafe :  Tarquinius  gave  this  magiftracy,
“  which  is  of  the  greateft  confequence,  to  me,  as  to  a  fool,
C£  and,  from  a  preemption  that  I  fhould  either  not  be  fen-
“  ftble  of  the  power  annexed  to  it,  or,  if  I  were,  not  know
tc  how  to  ufe  it.  And  I  myfelf  will  pronounce  the  firft
“  harangue  againft  the  tyrant.”

LXXII.  As  foon  as  they  heard  thefe  refolutions,  they  all
applauded  him  for  commencing  with  a  principle,  that  was
both  juft  in  itfelf,  and  fupported  by  law ;  and  defired  him  to
acquaint  them  with  the  reft  of  his  defigns :  Upon  which,  he
faid ;  “  Since  you  have  refolved  to  purfue  thefe  meafures,
“  let  us  further  conftder  what  kind  of  magiftracy  fhali
“  govern  the  commonwealth,  after  the  expulfion  of  the
«  kings,  and  by  whom  created ;  and,  ftrft  of  all,  what
“  Soform  of  government  we  fhali  conftitute,  when  we  are
«  freed  from  the  tyrant:  For  it  is  better  to  weigh  every


s°»  o zsroA Unas  hofot,  etc.  I  am
furprifed  that  none  of  the  commenta¬
tors  obferved  this  fcene  to  bear  a  near
refemblance  to  That  in  2  Herodotus,
where  five  of  the  feven  Perfian  noble¬
men,  who  deftroyedthe  magi,  are  in¬
troduced  confulting  upon  the  form  of
government  they  were  to  eftabhfh ;
die  other  two  having  been  wounded
by  one  of  the  magi.  In  this  conful-
tation,  Otanes,  who  had,  firft,  formed
the  defign  of  freeing  his  country  from
this  ufurpation,  propofes  a  democracy,
Megabyzus,  an  oligarchy ;  and  Darius
a  monarchy  ;  and  all  three  fupport


their  feveral  opinions  by  enumerating,
all  the  advantages,  that  flow  from  each
of  thefe  conflitutions,  and  difplaying-
the  evils  of  the  other  two.  But  not
one  of  thefe  Perfians  leems  to  have  had
the  leafl:  thought  of  forming  a  govern¬
ment  compofed  of  all  three,  by  which
the  advantages  of  the  three  conflitu¬
tions  might  be  preferved,  and  the
evils,  incident  to  each,  avoided.  How¬
ever,  this  did  not  efcape  our  author,
who,  both  in  this  fpeech  of  Brutus,
and,  on  many  other  occafions,  gives
the  preference  to  a  mixed  govern¬
ment.

(C


a  In  Thalia,  c.  80.


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  277

thing,  before  we  attempt  an  action  of  this  nature,  and  to
“  leave  nothing  unexamined,  or  undetermined.  Let  every
“  one  of  you  declare  his  opinion  concerning  thefe  things.”
Alter  this,  many  fpeeches  were  made  by  feveral  of  them :
Some  were  of  opinion  they  ought  to  reeftablifh  monarchy ;
and  thefe  recounted  the  great  benefits  the  commonwealth
had  received  from  the  former  kings.  Others,  that  they
ought,  no  longer,  to  intruft  the  government  to  a  fingle
perfon  ;  and  thefe  enumerated  the  tyrannical  exceftes,  which
many  kings,  and  Tarquinius,  in  the  laft  place,  hadexercifed
againft  their  own  people ;  and  faid,  that  the  fovereign
power  ought  to  be  vefted  in  the  fenate,  according  to  the
practice  of  feveral  Greek  cities.  Others  liked  neither  of
thefe  forms  of  government ;  but  advifed  them  to  conftitute
a  democracy,  like  That  at  Athens;  alledging  the  infolence,
and  avarice  of  the  few,  and  the  feditions,  ufually,  raifed  by
the  inferior  fort  againft  their  fuperiors ;  and  thefe  faid
that  an  equality  of  laws  was  a  conftitution,  of  all  others,  the
moft  fecure,  and  moft  becoming  a  free  people.

LXXIII.  The  choice  appearing  to  all  of  them  intricate,
and  hard  to  be  determined,  by  reafon  of  the  evils,  with
which  each  of  thefe  conftitutions  is  attended  ;  Brutus  clofed
the  conference  by  faying,  “  I  am  of  opinion,  Lucretius,
“  Collatinus,  and  all  of  you  hereprefent,  who  are,  not  only,
cc  good  men  yourfelves,  but  defcended  from  good  men,  that
“  we  ought  not,  at  prefent,  to  conftitute  any  new  form  of
“  government:  For  the  time,  to  which  we  are  reduced  by
4£  the  prefent  fituation  of  affairs,  is  fhort ;  in  which,  it  is  not


f


278  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.
“  eafy  to  change  the  form  of  our  conftitution ;  and  the  very
<<  attempt  to  change  it,  though  we  fhould  proceed  in  it
“  upon  the  wifeft  motives,  is  doubtful,  and  not  without
“  danger.  Afterwards,  when  you  are  delivered  from  the
u  tyranny,  you  may,  with  greater  freedom,  and,  at  leifure,
<c  if  you  think  fit,  chufe  That  form  of  government,  which
«  fhall  appear  to  you  more  preferable  than  any  other;  if,
“  indeed,  any  is  preferable  to  That,  which  Romulus,  Pom-
“  pilius,and  all  the  fucceeding  kings  inftituted,  and  delivered
££  down  to  us ;  by  the  means  of  which,  we  have,  to  this
££  time,  continued  to  be  a  great,  and  flourifhing  people,
££  obeyed  by  many  fubje&s.  But  I  advife  you  to  lay  hold
££  on  this  opportunity  to  corre(rt  the  evils,  with  which  mo-
4C  narchies  are,  generally,  attended,  and,  by  which,  they
££  degenerate  into  a  tyrannical  cruelty,  and  are  abhorred  by
4£  all  mankind;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  take  effectual  care
££  that  they  may,  never,  return  upon  you.  What  are  thefe
££  evils  ?  In  the  firft  place,  fince  the  people,  in  general,
££  confider  the  names  of  things ;  and,  influenced  by  them,
t£  either  admit  fome,  that  are  hurtful,  or  reject  others,  that
u  are  ufeful ;  of  which  monarchy  happens  to  be  one,  I
££  advife  you  to  change  the  name  of  the  government,  and
££  not  to  call  thofe,  who  fhall,  for  the  future,  be  inverted
u  with  the  power  over  all  the  citizens,  either  kings,  or
££  monarchs;  but  to  give  them  a  more  modeft,  and  humane
££  appellation :  In  the  next  place,  not  to  fubmit  every  thing
£C  to  the  determination  of  a  Angle  perfon;  but  to  commit
££  the  power,  enjoyed  by  the  kings,  to  two  magifl rates ;

“  which


Book-IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I  S.  279

which  I  am  informed  has  been  pradlifed  by  the  Lacedae-
<c  monians  for  many  generations,  who,  by  this  conftitution,
u  are  the  beft  governed,  and,  the  moft  flourifhing  people
<c  among  the  Greeks :  For  they  will  be  lefs  arrogant,  and
“  vexatious,  when  the  power  is  divided  between  two,  and
u  each  of  them  has  an  equal  fhare  of  it ;  and  this  equality
iC  of  power,  and  honor  will  be  the  moft  effectual  means  to
<c  create  in  both  a  refpedt  for  one  another,  to  hinder  them
c<  from  leading  a  life  of  pleafure,  and  infpire  each  of  them
cc  with  an  emulation  of  a  virtuous  character.

LXXIV.  “  I  am,  alfo,  of  opinion  that,  if  the  fight  of  any
“  enfigns  of  royalty,  which  are  numerous,  is  uneafy  to  the
“  people,  and  invidious,  they  ought  to  be  retrenched,  and
iC  others  to  be  taken  away;  I  mean,  thofe  fcepters,  and
“  golden  crowns,  the  purple  and  embroidered  robes ;  unlefs
iC  upon  feftivals,  and  in  triumphs,  when  they  will  wear  them
cc  in  honor  of  the  gods :  For,  if  they  are  feldom  ufed,  they
u  will  give  no  uneafinefs:  But  I  think  you  ought  to  retain
<c  the  ivory  chair,  in  which  the  magiftrates  will  fit  in  judge-
“  ment;  and,  alfo,  the  white  robe,  furrounded  with  a  border
<£  of  purple,  together  with  the  twelve  axes,  to  be  carried  before
“  them,  when  they  appear  in  public.  There  is  one  thing
“  more  I  fhall  recommend  to  you,  which,  in  my  opinion,
“  will  be  of  greater  advantage,  than  all  I  have  mentioned,
iC  and  the  moft  effectual  means  to  prevent  thofe,  who  fhall
u  be  inverted  with  this  power,  from  committing  great  ex-
“  cefles,  which  is,  that  the  fame  perfons  be  not  magiftrates
a  during  life  (for  a  magiftracy,  unlimited  in  time,  and  not

“  obliged


2So  ROMAN  ANT  I QJJ I  TIES  OF  Book  IV.

<c  obliged  to  give  ail  account  of  its  actions,  is  a  public
££  grievance,  and  productive  of  tyranny)  I  propofe,  therefore,
C£  that,  after  the  example  of  the  Athenians,  the  exercife  of
u  this  magiftracy  be  reduced  to  the  compafs  of  a  year  :  For
“  this  inftitution,  by  obliging  the  lame  perfon  both  to  com-
<c  mand,  and  to  obey  alternately,  and,  by  removing  him  from
c  c  the  magiftracy,  before  his  mind  is  corrupted,  reftrains  men  of
C£  haughty  tempers,  and  does  not  fuffer  their  minds  to  grow
C£  intoxicated  with  power.  If  we  eftablifti  thefe  things,  we
C£  fhall  enjoy  all  the  benefits,  that  flow  from  monarchy,  and
ct  be  free  from  the  evils,  that  attend  it.  And  to  the  end  that
cc  the  name  of  kingly  power,  to  which  this  nation  has  been,
u  always,  accuftomed,  and  which  was  introduced  among  us
C£  with  favourable  auguries,  and  the  approbation  of  the
££  gods,  may  be  preferved  for  the  fake  of  religious  worfhip,
££  let  there  be,  always,  a  kind  of  king,  who  fhall  enjoy  this
££  honor,  during  life;  and,  free  from  all  military  avocations,
££  have  the  fuperintendance  of  the  facrifices,  like  the  king,
££  and  no  other  employment.

LXXV.  ££  Now,  hear  from  me  the  manner,  in  which
££  every  one  of  thefe  things  fhall  be  effected  :  I  will  call  the
££  people  together,  as  I  faid,  fince  I  have  that  power  by
£C  law ;  and  will  propofe  a  vote  to  banifh  Tarquinius,  with
u  his  wife,  and  children  ;  and  that  both  they,  and  their
££  pofterity  be,  for  ever,  debarred  from  entering  either  into
c£  the  city  of  Rome,  or  the  territories  thereunto  belonging  :
Li  And,  alter  the  citizens  have  pafled  this  vote,  I  will  explain
4C  to  them  the  form  of  government  we  propofe  to  eftablifti ;

££  and,


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSEN  SIS.  281

u  and,  having  created  an  interrex  for  the  defignation  of  the
“  magiftrates,  who  are  to  enter  upon  the  admin iftration  of
“  the  public  affairs,  I  myfelf  will  refign  the  command  of  the
<c  celeres :  The  interrex,  appointed  by  me,  will  affemble  the
££  people  in  their  centuries ;  and,  having  nominated  the  per-
<c  fons  to  be  inverted  with  the  annual  magiftracy,  let  him  take
<£  the  votes  of  the  citizens  concerning  them  :  And,  if  the  major
££  part  of  the  centuries  are  of  opinion  that  the  nomination  of
“  the  perfons,  made  by  the  interrex,  be  confirmed,  and  the
u  auguries  are  favourable,  let  thefe  afliime  the  axes,  and  the
“  other  enfigns  of  royalty,  and  take  care  that  our  country
<c  may  enjoy  its  liberty,  and  the  Tarquinii,  from  thenceforth,
“  never  return  :  For  you  are  fenfible  they  will  employ
<£  perfuafion,  violence,  and  fraud,  and  every  other  means  to
“  recover  their  power,  unlefs  we  are  upon  our  guard.  Thefe
i£  are  the  things  of  the  greateft  moment,  that  I  have  to
“  propofe  to  you  at  prefen t,  and  to  advife  you  to  purfue.
<£  As  for  particular  emergencies,  which  are  many,  and  not
<£  ealy  to  be,  now,  difcufled  with  accuracy  (for  we  are  re-
“  duced  to  a  point  of  time)  I  think  we  ought  to  leave  them
C£  to  the  magiftrates  themfelves,  who  are  to  govern  :  But  I
<c  am  clearly  of  opinion  that  thefe  magiftrates  ought  to  con-
<£  fult  the  fenate  in  every  thing,  as  the  kings,  formerly,  did,
“  and  do  nothing  without  your  advice;  and  that  they  ought
“  to  lay  before  the  people  the  decrees  of  the  fenate,  accord-
tc  ing  to  the  practice  of  your  anceftors,  without  derogating,
u  in  the  leaft,  from  that  authority  the  former  were,  before,
t£  poffeffed  of :  For  this  will  give  the  greateft  fecurity,  and
“  reputation  to  their  magiftracy.”

Vol.  II.  N  n


LXXVI.


282  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

LXXVI.  After  Junius  Brutus  had  delivered  this  opinion,
they  all  applauded  it ;  and,  prefently,  confulting  about  the
perfons,  who  were  to  enter  upon  the  government,  they  de¬
termined  to  appoint  Spurius  Lucretius,  the  father  of  the
lady,  who  had  laid  violent  hands  upon  herfelf,  to  be  the
interrex ;  and  that  Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  and  Lucius  Tar-
quinius  Collatinus  fhould  be  nominated  by  him  to  exercife
the  power,  before,  veiled  in  the  kings  :  And  that  thefe
magiftrates  fhould  be  called,  in  their  language,  81  Confides ;
which  name,  being  tranflated  into  the  Greek  language,
lignifies  XvftSstec,  or  Counfellors  :  For  the  Romans

call  XvpSxX Conflict ,  Counfels  :  In  procefs  of  time,  they
came  to  be  called,  by  the  Greeks,  Ttt ocjoi,  Superiors ,  from
the  greatnefs  of  their  power,  becaufe  they  command  all  the
citizens,  and  are  the  firft  in  dignity.  For  the  ancients  called
that,  which  was  fuperior,  and  chief,  vroclov.  After  thefe  con-
fultations,  and  refolutions,  they  prayed  to  the  gods  to  aflift
them  in  the  purfuit  of  their  holy,  and  juft  defigns,  and  went
to  the  forum  :  They  were  followed  by  their  domeftics,  who
carried  upon  a  bier,  covered  with  black  cloth,  the  body  of
Lucretia,  difordered,  and  ftained  with  blood  ;  and,  directing
them  to  expofe  it  upon  a  high,  and  confpicuous  place  before
the  fenate,  they  called  the  people  together.  And,  not  only,
thofe,  who  happened,  then,  to  be  in  the  forum,  but  great

8l*  K ovo-aXtff.  The  power,  and  duty  litiae  fummumjus  habento:  nemini  paren-
of  the  confirs  is,  finely,  defcribed  by  to.  Ollis  falus  populi  fuprema  lex  ejlo.
a  Cicero  :  Regio  imperio  duo  [unto  :  lique  eundem  magifiratum ,  ni interfuer in t  decern
praeeundo ,  judicando ,  confulendo ,  prae-  anni ,  ne  quis  capito .  Aevitatem  annali
tores ,  judices ,  confides  appellantcr.  Mi-  lege  fervanto.

a  De  Legib.  B.  iii.  c.  3.


numbers,


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  283

numbers,  alfo,  from  all  parts  of  the  city,  flocking  to  the  place
(for  the  heralds  had  gone  through  all  the  ftreets  to  fummon
them  thither)  Brutus  afcended  the  tribunal,  from  whence  it  was
the  cuftom  for  thofe,  who  aflembled  the  people,  to  acquaint
them  with  the  reafons  of  it ;  and,  having  placed  the  patri¬
cians  near  him,  he  fpoke  as  follows ;

LXXVII.  u  Citizens,  my  intention  being  to  fpeak  to
u  you  concerning  neceffary,  and  glorious  things,  I  fliall,  firft,
“  mention  a  few  circumftances  relating  to  myfelf :  For  to
“  fome,  rather,  indeed,  to  many  of  you,  I  am  very  well
C£  aflured  that  I  fliall  appear  to  be  difordered  in  my  under-
“  ftanding,  when  I,  a  man  of  an  unfound  mind,  and  who,
<c  as  fuch,  ftand  in  need  of  a  guardian,  attempt  to  Ipeak  to
<c  matters  of  the  greateft  importance.  Know  then,  that  the
“  general  opinion  you  all  entertained  of  me,  as  of  a  fool,
<c  was  falfe,  and  contrived  by  me,  and  by  me  alone :  The
“  fear  of  my  life  compelled  me  to  live  in  a  manner  deroga-
<c  tory  both  to  my  nature,  and  condition ;  though  agreeable
<c  to  the  defire  of  Tarquinius,  and  to  my  own  fecurity :
“  For  Tarquinius,  having  put  my  father  to  death  at  his
“  acceflion  to  the  government,  that  he  might  pofiefs  himfelf
“  of  his  fortunes,  which  were  very  confiderable ;  and,
cc  having,  privately,  murdered  my  elder  brother,  who  would
cc  have  revenged  his  father’s  death,  if  he  had  not  been  taken
<c  off*,  made  it  plain  that  he  did  not  defign  to  Ipare  even
<{  myfelf,  now,  left  deftitute  of  my  nearefl:  relations,  if  I  had
“  not  counterfeited  folly:  This  difguife,  finding  credit  with
<c  the  tyrant,  faved  me  from  the  fame  treatment  they  had

N  n  2  “  ex-


2  S4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

«  experienced,  and  lias  preferred  me  to  this  day ;  and
«  having  worne  it  five  and  twenty  years,  the  time  I  wifhed
<c  for,  and  expected,  being  come,  I,  now,  for  the  firft  time,
4£  throw  it  off.  So  much  concerning  myfelf.

LXXVIII.  “  As  to  the  affairs  of  the  public,  in  relation  to
s£  which  I  called  you  together,  this  is  the  fituation  of  them.
“  Tarquinius,  having  poffeffed  himfelf  of  the  fovereignty,
contrary  to  the  laws,  and  cuftoms  of  this  nation,  which
u  fovereignty ,  howfoever  acquired,  he  has  not  exercifed  either
<c  with  reputation,  or  in  a  manner  fuitable  to  the  royal
c<  dignity  ;  but  has  furpaffed,  in  haughtinefs,  and  excefs,  all
<c  the  tyrants  the  world  ever  faw ;  we,  the  patricians,  af-
<£  fembled  for  that  purpofe,  have  refolved  to  deprive  him  of
<£  his  dignity  :  This  ought  to  have  been  done  long  ago ;
“  but,  having,  now,  a  proper  opportunity  to  effed  it,  we
“  have  called  you  together,  citizens,  to  the  end  that,  after
££  we  have  declared  our  own  refolution,  we  may  deffre  your
“  affiftance  in  giving  liberty  to  our  country,  which  we  have
C£  not,  hitherto,  been  able  to  enjoy,  ffnce  Tarquinius  ufurped
£C  the  fovereignty ;  neither  fhall  we,  hereafter,  enjoy  it,  if,
££  upon  this  occalion,  we  want  refolution.  Had  I  as  much
“  time,  as  I  could  wifh,  or  was  to  fpeak  to  thofe,  who  were
“  unacquainted  with  the  many  ads  of  injuftice  the  tyrant
£C  has  been  guilty  of,  I  would  enumerate  them  all,  in  order
“  to  convince  every  one  of  you  that  he  has  deferved,  not
<(  only,  one,  but  many  deaths :  But,  ffnce  the  time,  afforded
<<  me  by  the  prefent  fftuation  of  affairs,  is  fhort,  in  which,
“  few  things  are  to  be  faid,  and  many  to  be  done,  and  that

“  I


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  285

cc  I  am  fpeaking  to  thofe,  who  are  acquainted  with  his
“  a&ions,  I  Aiall  put  you  in  mind  of  Thofe  only,  that  are
“  the  moft  confiderable,  and  the  moft  obvious,  and  admit
€C  not  of  the  leaft  excufe.

LXXIX.  “  This  is  that  Tarquinius,  citizens,  This  is  the
“  man,  who,  before  he  was  in  poffefTion  of  the  fovereignty,
“  deftroyed  his  own  brother  Aruns  by  poifon,  becaufe  he
“  would  not  confent  to  be  wicked,  in  which  crime  he  was
a  afiifted  by  his  brother’s  wife,  the  lifter  of  his  own,  whom
tc  this  enemy  of  the  gods,  had,  long  before,  debauched  :
cc  This  is  the  man,  who,  at  the  fame  time,  and,  by  the  fame
“  poifon,  took  off  his  wife,  a  woman  of  virtue,  and  a  parent
cc  of  their  common  children ;  and  did  not,  even,  vouchfafe
<c  to  difown  the  imputation  of  both  thefe  poifonings  by  a
“  mourning  habit,  and  a  fhort  affe&ation  of  grief ;  but,
“  prefen tly  after  he  had  performed  thele  wonderful  achieve-
“  ments,  and  before  the  fires,  which  had  received  their
“  miferable  bodies,  were  extinguifhed,  he  gave  an  enter-
“  tainment  to  his  friends,  celebrated  his  nuptials,  and,  lead-
iC  ins  the  murderefs  of  her  hufband,  as  a  bride,  to  the  bed  of
<c  her  fifter,  performed  the  abominable  contract  he  had  made
<c  with  her;  and  was  the  firft,  and  the  only  man,  who  ever
<c  introduced  into  the  city  of  Rome  fuch  impious,  and  exe-
“  crable  crimes,  unknown  to  any  nation  in  the  world,
“  either  Greeks,  or  Barbarians.  But,  in  how  infamous,  and
<(  dreadful  a  manner,  did  he  treat  both  his  father,  and  mo-
<c  ther, in-law,  when,  already,  near  their  end?  He  murdered
“  Servius  Tullius  publicly,  the  mildeft  of  all  your  kings,  the

“  greateft


286  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BooklV.

«  greateft  benefa&or  to  you  ;  and  would  not  fuffer  his  body
“  to  be  honoured  with  the  cuftomary  rites  either  of  a  funeral,
“  or  of  burial ;  and  Tarquinia,  the  wife  of  Tullius,  whom,
“  as  fhe  was  the  filler  of  his  father,  and  had,  always,  Ihewn
a  great  tendernefs  for  him,  he  was  obliged  in  duty  to  honour
a  as  his  mother,  he  caufed  to  be  llrangled  in  a  miferable
£C  manner,  without  allowing  her  time  to  mourn  her  dead
“  hufband,  or  perform  the  cuftomary  facrifices  for  him,
“  when  buried:  Thus,  he  treated  thofe,  by  whom  he  was
<c  preferred,  by  whom  he  was  educated ;  and  whom,  after
their  death,  he  was  to  have  fucceeded,  if  he  had  ftaid  but
“  a  fhort  time,  till  nature  had  put  an  end  to  their  lives.

LXXX.  “  But,  why  do  I  cenfure  thefe  excefles,  when  I
“  have  fo  many  others  to  accufe  him  of  (belides  Thofe  he
iC  has  been  guilty  of  to  his  relations,  and  to  his  father,  and
4C  mother,  in-law)  which  he  has  committed  againft  his  country,
“  and  againft  us  all  ?  If  they  ought  to  be  called  excefles,  and
u  not  the  fubverlion,  and  extinction  of  all  nations,  and  all
u  families.  Firft,  as  to  the  fovereignty,  that  I  may  begin  with
u  That ;  How  did  he  obtain  it  ?  Did  he,  in  this,  follow  the
“  example  of  the  former  kings  ?  Far  from  it.  They  were
“  all  advanced  to  the  fovereignty  by  us,  according  to  the
u  laws,  and  cuftoms  of  this  nation ;  firft,  by  a  decree  of  the
u  fenate,  where,  by  our  conftitution,  all  refolutions  con-
“  cerning  the  public  affairs  muft,  firft,  be  taken ;  then,  by
£<  the  creation  of  the  interreges,  to  whom  the  fenate  grants
u  the  power  of  diftinguifhing  among  thofe,  who  are  worthy
u  of  the  fovereignty,  the  moft  worthy ;  and,  after  both  thefe,

“  by


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  287

<c  by  a  vote  of  the  people  in  their  election  of  magiftrates,
u  from  which  vote  the  law  requires  that  all  affairs  of  the
u  greateft  moment  fhould  receive  their  fandlion ;  and,  in  the
laft  place,  by  the  approbation  of  theauguries,  without  which,
iC  human  diligence,  and  forefight  are  of  no  avail :  But  fay,
<c  which  of  you  knows  any  one  of  thefe  things  to  have  been
<c  obferved,  when  Tarquinius  obtained  the  fovereignty  ?  What
<c  previous  order  of  the  fenate  ?  What  nomination  of  the
“  interreges  ?  What  vote  of  the  people  ?  What  favourable
cc  auguries?  I  do  not  afk  whether  all  thefe  were  obferved
<c  (though  it  was  neceflary  to  a  regular  election  that  nothing,
<c  founded  either  in  cuftom,  or  in  law,  fliould  be  omitted)
“  but,  if  it  can  be  fhewn  that  any  one  of  them  was  obferved,
“  I  will  be  contented  not  to  infill  upon  Thofe,  that  were
“  omitted.  How,  then,  did  he  acquire  the  fovereignty  ?
cc  By  arms,  by  violence,  and  the  confpiracies  of  wicked  men,
<c  according  to  the  cuftom  of  tyrants ;  and  drew  from  you,
“  inflead  of  your  confent,  your  indignation.  But,  after  he
iC  had  pofieffed  himfelf  of  the  fovereignty,  howfoever  ac-
<c  quired,  did  he  ufe  it  in  a  manner  becoming  a  king,  in
<c  imitation  of  his  predeceflbrs,  the  whole  tenor  of  whofe
“  words,  and  actions  tended  to  aggrandize  the  city,  and
iC  leave  it  more  flour ifhing  to  poflerity,  than  they  them-
iC  felves  had  received  it  ?  What  man  in  his  fenfes  can  fay
“  this,  when  he  fees  in  how  miferable,  and  cruel  a  manner
u  we  have  all  been  treated  ?

LXXXI.  “  I  fhall  fay  nothing  of  the  calamities  we,  who
“  are  patricians,  fuffer,  which,  even,  our  enemies  could  not

“  hear


238  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

“  hear  without  tears ;  fince,  from  a  numerous  body,  we
cc  are  reduced  to  a  few ;  from  fplendor,  to  obfcurity  ;  and,
c<  from  an  affluent  profperity,  to  poverty,  and  extreme  want.
u  Of  all  thofe  illuftrious  men,  thofe  formidable  warriors,
“  and  great  ftatefmen,  by  whofe  means  our  city,  once,  flou-
C£  rifhed,  fome  are  put  to  death,  and  others  banifhed.  But
u  what  is  your  condition,  plebeians  ?  Has  not  Tarquinius
“  taken  away  your  laws  ?  Has  he  not  abolifhed  your  meet-
u  ings  on  account  of  religion,  and  facrifices  ?  Has  he  not
u  put  an  end  to  your  elections  of  magiftrates;  to  your  right
“  of  voting ;  and  to  your  aflemblies  for  the  affairs  of  the
£C  public?  Does  he  not  force  you,  like  flaves,  purchafed
“  with  money,  to  labour  in  a  fhameful  manner,  to  cut  ftones,
cc  faw  timber,  carry  burdens,  and  wafte  your  ftrength  in
“  deep  pits,  and  fubterraneous  caverns,  without  allowing
“  you  the  leaft  refpite  from  your  miferies  ?  What  then,  will
“  be  the  end  of  our  calamities  ?  How  long  fhall  we  fubmit
“  to  thefe  things  ?  And  when  fhall  we  recover  our  native
“  liberty?  When  Tarquinius  dies?  To  be  fure.  Shall  we
u  be  in  a  better  condition  then  ?  Shall  we  not  be  in  a  worfe  ?
“  For,  inftead  of  one  Tarquinius,  we  fhall  have  three;  all
u  far  more  abominable,  than  their  father.  Since  he,  who,
“  from  a  private  man,  became  a  tyrant,  and  began  late  to
“  be  wicked,  is  a  perfect  mafter  in  all  tyrannical  mifchief ;
“  what  kind  of  men  may  we  expedt  thefe  will  prove,  who
<£  are  fprung  from  him  ;  whofe  race  is  wicked,  whole
iC  education  is  wicked,  and  who,  never,  had  an  opportunity
of  feeing,  or  hearing  any  adtion,  that  had  the  appearance

“  of


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSEN  SIS.  289

u  of  liberty,  or  moderation?  To  the  end,  therefore,  you
<c  may  not  guefs  at  their  accurfed  natures,  but  know  with
<c  certainty  what  kind  of  whelps  the  tyranny  of  Tarquinius
<c  nurfes  up  for  your  deftru&ion,  behold  the  adion  of  one
iC  of  them,  the  eldeft  of  the  three.

LXXXII.  “  This  lady  is  the  daughter  of  Spurius
cc  Lucretius,  whom  the  tyrant,  when  he  went  to  the  war,
“  appointed  governor  of  the  city,  and  the  wife  of  Tarqui-
<c  nius  Collatinus,  a  relation  of  the  tyrant’s,  who  has  under-
<c  gone  many  hardfhips  for  their  fake.  This  lady,  who  de-
€t  fired  to  preferve  her  virtue,  and  loved  her  hufband,  as
becomes  a  good  wife,  Sextus  being,  laft  night,  entertained
“  at  her  houfe,  as  a  relation,  and  Collatinus,  then  abfent,
“  and  in  the  camp,  could  not  efcape  the  ungovernable  in-
<c  folence  of  the  tyranny ;  but,  like  a  captive,  under  the
<c  power  of  neceflity,  fubmitted  to  thofe  things,  that  ought
<c  not  to  be  offered  to  a  woman  of  free  condition*  Re-
iC  fenting  this  ufage,  and,  looking  upon  the  abufe  as  into-
“  lerable,  fhe  acquainted  her  father,  and  the  reft  of  her
<c  relations  with  the  neceflity  fhe  had  been  reduced  to ;  and,
“  having  intreated,  and  conjured  them  all,  in  the  moft
*•'  earneft  manner,  to  revenge  the  indignity  fhe  had  fuffered,
fhe  drew  the  dagger  fhe  had  concealed  in  her  bofom,
“  and,  in  her  father’s  fight,  citizens,  plunged  it  in  her  bowels.
<c  O  thou  admirable  woman!  great  are  the  praifes  you  de-
u  ferve  for  your  generous  refolution ;  you  are  gone ;  you
<c  are  dead;  you  were  unable  to  bear  the  tyrannical  infult,
<c  and  defpifed  all  the  pleafures  of  life  to  avoid  being,  any
Vol.  II.  O  o  “  longer,


290  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

“  longer,  expofed  to  the  like  abufe:  After  this,  Lucretia,
u  when  you,  who  were  formed  a  woman,  have  fhe wn  the
a  refolution  of  a  brave  man,  fhall  we,  who  were  bom
“  men,  fhew  lefs  courage,  than  women  ?  To  you,  after
<c  you  were  deprived  of  yourfpotlefs  chaftity,  through  force,
u  by  the  tyranny  of  one  night,  death  appeared  more  amia-
“  ble,  and  to  promife  greater  happinefs  than  life  ;  and  fhall
“  not  we  adopt  the  fame  fentiments,  whom  Tarquinius,,
“  not,  by  a  tyranny  of  one  day  only,  but  of  twenty  five
“  years,  has  deprived  of  all  the  pleafures  of  life,  in  depriving
cc  us  of  our  liberty  ?  We  cannot  live  under  thefe  miferies,
<c  citizens;  we,  who  are  the  defendants  of  thofe  men,  who
“  thought  themfelves  worthy  to  give  laws  to  others;  and
“  expofed  themfelves  to  many  dangers  for  the  fake  of  power,
<c  and  fame :  So  that,  we  have  all  no  other  choice,  than  of  life
“  with  liberty,  or  of  death  with  glory.  For  the  opportunity
u  we  wifhed  for,  now  prefents  itfelf ;  Tarquinius  is  abfent
<c  from  the  city,  the  patricians  are  the  authors  of  the  enter-
cc  prife,  and  no  want  of  any  thing,  if  we  enter  upon  the
c<  a&ion  with  alacrity ;  not  of  men,  money,  arms,  generals,
cc  nor  of  any  other  military  preparation  :  For  the  city  is
“  full  of  all  thefe.  Confider,  then,  what  a  fhame  it  would
“  be  for  us,  who  aim  at  giving  laws  to  the  Volfci,  the
<c  Sabines,  and  feveral  other  nations,  to  fuffer  ourfelves  to
<£  be  the  fiaves  of  others;  and  to  undertake  many  wars  to
<c  gratify  the  ambition  of  Tarquinius,  and  not  one  to  recover
u  our  own  liberty.


LXXXIIL


Book  IV.’  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  SS  EN  S  IS.  291

LXXXIII.  “  What  fupport,  therefore,  what  affiftance
<c  can  we  promife  ourfelves  in  this  enterprife  ?  This  remains
“  to  be  explained.  Our  firft  fupport  is  derived  from  a
<c  dependence  upon  the  gods,  whofe  religion,  temples,  and
£C  altars  Tarquinius  pollutes  with  hands,  ftained  with  blood,
<c  and  defiled  with  all  the  crimes  he  has  committed  againft
C£  his  fubjeds,  every  time  he  begins  the  facrifices,  and  liba-
“  tions.  The  next  flows  from  our  dependence  upon  our-
“  felves,  who  are  neither  few  in  number,  nor  unfkilled  in
£C  war.  Befides  thefe  advantages,  we  may  exped  the  aflif-
(C  tance  of  our  allies ;  who,  while  they  are  not  called  upon
u  by  us,  think  it  improper  to  enter  into  our  affairs ;  but,  if
“  they  fee  us  ading  the  part  of  brave  men,  will,  chearfully,
“  aflift  us  in  the  war  :  For  tyranny  is  odious  to  all,  who
“  defire  to  be  free.  But,  if  any  of  you  are  afraid  left  the
c<  citizens,  who  are  in  the  camp  with  Tarquinius,  fliould
cc  aflift  him,  and  make  war  upon  us,  they  have  no  reafon

for  that  fear  :  For  the  tyranny  is  grievous  to  them  alfo  ;
<c  and  the  defire  of  liberty  is  implanted  by  nature  in  the
“  minds  of  all  men,  and  every  pretence  for  a  change  is
“  fufficient  for  thofe,  who  are  compelled  to  bear  hardships ;
<c  and,  if  you,  by  your  votes,  order  them  to  aflift  their
“  country,  neither  fear,  nor  favor,  nor  any  other  motives,
£C  that  compel,  or  perfuade  men  to  commit  injuftice,  will
“  retain  them  with  the  tyrants.  But,  if  the  love  of  tyranny
iC  is  rooted  in  any  of  them,  through  an  evil  difpofition,  or
iC  a  corrupt  education,  as  they,  certainly,  are  not  many,  we
u  will  apply,  even  to  thefe  men,  motives  of  fo  great  force,

O  o  2  “  as


292  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

<c  as  to  transform  them  from  wicked,  to  good,  citizens :  For
<c  we  have  here  their  children,  wives,  and  parents,  as  hoftages,
u  which  are  dearer  to  every  man,  than  his  own  life  :  By
“  ingaging  to  reftore  thefe  to  them,  if  they  will  defert  the
“  tyrant ;  and,  by  palling  a  vote  for  the  impunity  of  the
:c  crimes  they  have  been  guilty  of,  we  fhall,  eafily,  prevail
u  upon  them  to  join  us.  March  therefore,  citizens,  with
u  confidence,  and  hopes  of  fuccefs,  to  this  aCtion,  the  moft
<c  glorious  you  were,  ever,  ingaged  in.  To  your  afiiftance,
<c  therefore,  O  gods  of  our  anceftors,  the  propitious  guardians
“  of  this  land  ;  to  yours,  O  genii,  to  whom  the  care  of  our
“  fathers  was  allotted ;  and,  to  yours,  O  Rome,  the  moft
“  favoured  by  the  gods  of  all  other  cities,  in  which  we
iC  received  our  birth,  and  education,  we  dedicate  our  coun-
<l  fels,  our  words,  our  actions,  and  our  lives ;  ready  to  fuffer
a  every  thing,  that  heaven,  and  fate  fhall  decree.  But  I
u  forefee  that  our  glorious  enterprife  will  be  crowned  with
u  fuccefs.  May  all,  here  prefent,  imboldened  with  the  fame
u  confidence,  and  united  in  the  fame  fentiments,  both  pre-
<c  ferve  you,  and  be  preferved  by  you!  ”

LXXXIV.  While  Brutus  was  fpeaking,  every  thing  he
faid  was  received  by  the  people  with  continual  acclamations,,
flgnifying  both  their  approbation,  and  concurrence :  The
greateft  part,  even,  wept  with  pleafure,  in  hearing  a  fpeech,
that  was  wonderful  and  unexpected  ;  and  various  paflions,
in  no  degree  refembling  one  another,  affeCted  the  mind  of
each:  For  they  were  mixed  with  pains,  and  pleafures ;  the
former,  arifing  from  the  miferies  they  had  fuffered  ;  and  the

latter,


BookIV.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSEN  SI  S.  293

latter,  from  the  happinefs  they  expected  :  And  anger  was
joined  with  fear  ;  That  exciting  them  to  defpife  their  own
fafety  in  order  to  be  revenged  on  the  author  of  thofe  hated
actions ;  while  This,  by  reprefenting  to  them  the  difficulties,,
that  would  occur  in  fubverting  the  tyranny,  infpired  them
with  a  backwardnefs  to  theenterprife.  But,  when  he  had  done
fpeaking,  they  all  cried  out,  as  with  one  voice,  to  let  them
have  arms.  Then,  Brutus,  charmed  with  their  alacrity,  faid  •
“  Firft,  hear  the  refolution  of  our  afiembly,  and  confirm  it ::
“  For  we  have  determined  that  the  Tarquinii,  and  all  their
<c  pofterity  fiiall  be  banifhed  both  from  the  city  of  Rome,
<c  and  from  all  the  territories  belonging  to  the  Romans ;
cc  that  no  perfon  fhall  prefume  to  fay,  or  do  any  thing
c<  tending  to  their  reftoration  ;  and,  if  any  one  fhall  be  found
<c  to  have  atfted  contrary  to  thefe  determinations,  that  he
<c  be  put  to  death.  If  you  are  of  opinion  that  this  refolution
iC  be  confirmed,  divide  yourfelves  into  your  curiae,  and  give
<c  your  votes :  And  let  the  enjoyment  of  this  right  be  the
c<  beginning  of  your  liberty.”  Thefe  things  were  complied
with ;  and  all  the  curiae  having  given  their  votes  for  the
22  banifhment  of  the  tyrants,  Brutus,  again,  flood  up,  and


I  fhall  dole  my  annotations
upon  this  book  with  making  fome
obfervations  on  a  pafiage,  contained
in  a  nore  of  M.  *  *  *,  relating  to  the
dethron  ng  of  Tarquinius.  That  gen¬
tleman  fays  that  this  king  was  a.  tyrant,
not  only,  in  his  ad  mini  ft  ration,  but,
alfo,  in  his  uiurpation  :  And  that  the
cendud  of  the  Romans  in  dethroning
him  muft  not  .be  alledged  as  an  ex^


ample  of  the  right  of  the  people,  ex-
ercifed  againft  a  lawful  fovereign,  who
abufes  his  power.  II  ne  faut  pas  donner  >
la  conduit  e  des  Romainsqui  le  detronerent ,
comme  I'exemple  d'un  droit  des  peuples
exerce  contre  un  fouverain  legitime  qui
abufe  de  fonpouvoir.  To  this  obferva-
tion  I  fhall  give  two  anfwers  ;  the  firft,.
grounded  on  fad,  and  the  other,  on
right.  As  to  the  firft,  it  is  certain  that

faid:  5;


294  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

faid  ;  cc  Since  you  have  confirmed  the  firft  refolution,  in
u  fuch  a  manner  as  became  you,  hear,  alfo,  what  we  have
“  further  refolved  concerning  the  form  of  our  government.


the  Romans  did  not  dethrone  Tarqui-
nius  for  his  ufurpation,  but  for  his
tyranny.  His  predeceffor  was  not  lefs
an  ufurper,  than  himfelf-,  notwith-
ftanding  which,  the  Romans  were  fo
much  pleafed  with  the  mildnefs  of  his
government,  received  fo  much  benefit
from  the  wife  laws  he  had  eftablifhed,
and  gained  fo  many  advantages  over
their  neighbours  under  his  conduft,  as
a  general,  that,  during  a  reign  of  no
lefs  than  forty  four  years,  we  hear  of
no  infurreftion  againft  him.  And,
even,  Tarquinius  himfelf,  notwith-
ftanding  his  ufurpation,  was  fuffered
to  reign  twenty  five  years,  till  the
brutal  ad:  of  his  fon  filled  up  the
meafure  of  the  iniquities,  committed
by  his  tyrannical  family,  and  brought
on  their  expulfion  ;  an  addon  liable  to
this  only  cenfure,  that  it  was,  too  long,
delayed.  As  to  the  point  of  right,  we
muft  confider  that  the  government  of
the  Romans  was,  at  that  time,  a  limit¬
ed  monarchy,  confiding  of  a  king,  a
fenate,  and  the  people :  Now,  as  the
king  affumed  the  whole  power  to  him¬
felf,  and  excluded  the  other  two  orders
from  any  (hare  in  it,  it  is  plain  that  he
altered  the  whole  frame  of  the  govern¬
ment,  and  transformed  it,  from  a
limited  monarchy,  to  a  tyranny  :  If,
then,  Tarquinius,  inftead  of  being  an
ufurper,  had  been  a  lawful  fovereign,
and  had  abufed  the  truft  repofed  in
him  by  fo  many  repeated  ads  of  ty¬
ranny,  can  it  in  juftice  be  fuppofed
that  the  fenate,  and  people  ought  to
have  been  without  a  Remedy,  and


that,  chained  hand  and  foot,  they  muft
have  lain  expofed  to  the  avarice,  the
cruelty,  and  .the  caprice  of  an  infulting
tyrant  ?  But,  fay  the  abettors  of  ty¬
ranny,  if  you  give  the  fenate,  and
people  a  right  to  expel  their  lawful
fovereign,  becaufe  he  is  a  tyrant,  you
conftitute  them  judges  in  their  own
caufe,  which  is  contrary  to  natural
juftice,  and  impower  them,  not  only,
to  determine  the  crime,  but,  alfo,  the
punifhment,  due  to  that  crime.  This
muft  be  acknowledged  ;  but  it  muft,
alfo,  be  acknowledged  that  it  is,  equal¬
ly,  unjuft,  and  much  more  abfurd  to
conftitute  a  tyrant  the  judge  of  his  own
tyranny,  and  to  expeft  that  the  op-
preffor  Ihould  pronounce  in  favor  of
the  opprefled.  Since,  therefore,  in  this
cafe,  one  of  thefe  two  things  muft,
unavoidably,  happen  •,  either  the  peo¬
ple  muft  be  inflaved,  or  the  tyrant
expelled  ;  it  is  eafy  to  determine  which
is  the  moft  reafonable  facrifice  ;  it  be¬
ing  much  more  equitable  that  one  man
fhould  be  deprived  of  the  power  he
has  abufed,  than  that  millions  fhould
be  deprived  of  the  liberty  they  are  in-
titled  to.  Thefe  were  the  fentiments
of  the  Romans,  and  muft  be  the  fenti¬
ments  of  every  people,  who  defire  to
preferve  their  liberties:  Their  govern¬
ment  was  a  limited  monarchy,  and
they,  very  well,  knew  that  there  is  no
difference  between  a  limited,  and  an
abfolute,  monarchy,  unlefs  the  former
gives  a  right  to  the  people  to  inforcc
thofe  limitations.


“  After


Book  IV.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  295

“  After  we  had  confidered  what  magistracy  fhould  be  in  veiled
“  with  the  fovereign  power,  we  came  to  a  refolution  to  chufe
“  no  more  kings ;  but  to  appoint  two  annual  magiftrates,
<£  to  be  veiled  with  the  kingly  power,  fuch  as  you  yourfelves
<£  fhali  chufe  in  the  comitia  centuriata,  to  be  held  for  the
<c  eledion  of  magiflrates :  If,  therefore,  it  is  your  pleafure
££  that  this,  alfo,  do  pafs,  give  your  votes.”  The  people
approved  of  this  refolution  likewife,  which  was  not  oppofed  by
a  fingle  vote.  After  that,  Brutus  flood  up,  and  created  Spurius
Lucretius  the  interrex  to  prefide  at  the  eledion,  according  to
the  laws,  in  that  cafe,  eftablifhed.  And  he,  having  difmilled
the  afiembly,  ordered  all  the  people  to  go,  immediately,
in  arms  to  the  field,  where  they  ufed  to  chufe  their  magi¬
flrates.  When  they  came  thither,  he  nominated  two  perfons
to  perform  the  fundions,  which  had  belonged  to  the  kings :
Thefe  were  Brutus,  and  Collatinus ;  and  the  people,  being
called  to  give  their  votes  in  their  centuries,  confirmed  their
magiflracy.  Thefe  were  the  tranfadions,  that  palled  in  the
city  at  that  time.

LXXXV.  As  foon  as  Tarquinius  heard  by  the  firfl  mef-
fengers,  who  had  found  means  to  get  out  of  the  city  before
the  gates  were  fhut,  that  Brutus  was  keeping  the  people
together  by  haranguing  them,  and  by  inviting  them  to
liberty,  which  was  all  the  information  they  could  give  him,
he  took  his  fonswith  him,  and  thofe  of  his  friends,  in  whom
he  mofl  confided ;  and,  without  communicating  his  defign
to  any  other  perfons,  rode  with  all  fpeed,  in  hopes  of  pre¬
venting  the  revolt.  But,  finding  the  gates  fhut,  and  the

battle-


296  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  IV.

battlements  full  of  armed  men,  he  returned  to  the  camp
with  the  fame  fpeed  he  came,  bewailing,  and  refen  ting  his
his  misfortune :  But  every  thing  there,  alfo,  was,  now,  in  a
bad  condition :  For  the  confuls,  forefeeing  that  he  would,
quickly,  prefent  himfelf  before  the  city,  had  fent  letters  to
thofe  in  the  camp  by  other  roads,  in  which  they  exhorted
them  to  revolt  from  the  tyrant,  and  acquainted  them  with
the  votes,  paffed  by  thofe  in  the  city.  Titus  Herminius,  and
Marcus  Horatius,  who  had  been  appointed  by  the  king  to  '
command  in  his  abfence,  having  received  thefe  letters,  read
them  in  an  affembly  of  the  foldiers ;  and,  afking  them,  in  their
feveral  centuries,  what  refolution  they  thought  fit  to  take,
after  thefe  had,  unanimoufly,  declared  their  opinion  to  look
upon  the  votes,  paffed  by  thofe  in  the  city,  as  valid,  they  re-
fufed  to  admit  Tarquinius,  when  he  returned.  After  the  king
found  himfelf  difappointed  of  this  hope  alfo,  he  fled,  with  a
fmall  retinue,  to  the  city  of  the  Gabini,  of  which,  as  I  faid
before,  he  had  appointed  Sextus,  the  el  deft  of  his  fons,  to  be
king  :  He  was,  now,  grown  grey  with  age,  and  had  reigned
twenty  five  years.  In  the  mean  time,  Herminius,  and  Ho¬
ratius,  having  made  a  truce  with  the  Ardeates  for  fifteen
years,  returned  home  with  the  army.  Thus,  monarchy,
after  it  had  continued  from  the  building  of  Rome  two  hun¬
dred  and  forty  four  years,  having  degenerated  into  tyranny
under  the  laft  king,  was,  for  thefe  reafons,  and  by  thefe
perfons,  abrogated.


The  end  of  the  Fourth  book.


-


-r


D  I  S  S  E  R  T  ATION

O  N  T  H  E

GREEK  and  ROMAN  CHARACTERS.


IS  AID,  in  the  forty  firft  note,  that  it  might  be  proved,  by  the
authority  of  the  beft  ancient  writers,  and  the  concurrent  teftimony
of  the  moft  authentic  infcriptions,  that  the  ancient  Greek,  and
modern  Roman  characters  were,  originally,  the  fame.  I  begin  with
the  authority  of  the  ancient  writers.  a  Pliny,  in  fpeaking  of  the  ori¬
gin  of  letters,  fays  ;  tc  Veter es  Grcecas  (liter as)  fuijfe  eafde?n  pen}
“  quae  nunc  funt  Latinse,  indicio  erit  Delphica  tabula  antiqui  aeris,  quae
<c  eft  hodie  in  palatio,  dono  principum  Minervae  dicata  in  bibliotheca
“  cum  infcriptione  tali  ;

yAVSIKRAJ  ES.  TISyAy^E/JO.  MESA  I  OS.  ^/VEQEKE/*.

If  the  reader  turns  to  this  pafTage  in  Pliny,  he  will  find  a  great  ab~
furdity  in  all  the  editions :  That  author  proves,  by  this  Greek  in-
fcription  in  Latin  characters,  that  the  old  Greek  and  Latin  letters  were,

3  Nat.  Hift.  B.  vii.  c.  58.


VOL.  II.


nearly,


DISSERTATION  ON  THE


nearly,  the  fame  ;  but  all  the  editions  give  this  infcription  in  common
Greek  characters,  which  proves,  direCtly,  the  contrary.  The  great
b  Scaliger  gives  the  infcription  thus  j

yV/t  VS!  ERA  TES .  T/SAyM  ENO.  A  THEN  A 10  S.

If  the  reader  pleafes  to  compare  the  characters  made  ufe  of  by  me,
with  the  old  Ionic  infcriptions  prefently  to  be  exhibited,-'  he  will  fee
the  reafon  why  I  have  differed  from  that  great  man.  The  next  au¬
thority  I  dial  1  make  ufe  of  is  That  of  c  Tacitus,  who,  in  giving  the
reafons,  that  induced  Claudius  to  add  three  letters  to  the  Roman  al¬
phabet,  fays  j  Aborigines  Arcade  ab  Evandro  didicerunt.  Et  jormce
Uteris  Latinisy  quce  •veterrimis  Grcecorum .  This  paffage,  not  only,
proves  my  affertion,  but,  alfo,  confirms  what d  our  author  has,  already,
told  us,  viz.  That  Evander  was  the  firfl  perfon,  who  introduced  the
ufe  of  letters  into  Italy.  e  He  had,  before,  fixed  the  arrival  of  Evan¬
der  in  that  country  to  the  fixtieth  year  before  the  Trojan  war.  Thefe
letters  had  been  brcfUght  into  Greece  by  Cadmus  from  Phoenicia,  as
we  find  by  f  Herodotus,  who  fays  that  he  himfelf  faw  feveral  infcrip¬
tions  in  thefe  Cadmean  letters  on  tripods  in  the  temple  of  the  Ifmenian
Apollo  at  Thebes  in  Boeotia.  Thefe  infcriptions  are.  three  ;  and,  as
they  contain  Greek  verfes  of  very  great  antiquity,  the  firft  being  about
five  hundred  years  older  than  Homer,  I  fhall  give  them  in  the  old
Ionic  characters,  in  which  they  were,  certainly,  ingraved ;  becaufe
Herodotus  fays  the  Cadmean  letters,  in  which  they  were  written,  bore
a  very  near  refemblance  to  the  Ionic  characters,  ret  7ro)\Xa  cpoia,  tefla
hkti  I  anno  in;

k  In  bis  notes  on  Eufebius.  c  Anna],  B.  xi.  c.  14 ;  ^  See  B.  i.  c,  33,.

«  ib,  c.  3I0  f  In  Terpfichore,  c.  58,  and  59.


I.


GREEK  AND  ROMAN  CHARACTERS.  299
lyAsVmtTP YOy^^M^AETHEKE/v.  EO^^rO.  TELEBO/40/V.

2.  SPA  I  OS.  ry^MAPHEQ^^E.  HEPEBOLORy\  rOLLO/VI.
/SlhESAS.yys/E  THE  EE.  TEJ/V.  rEPIKALL  ESy4/l A  L^A .

3.  yAO&MA*  TPiroD^yvrg/v.  e vspo ro/^y roL lo^l

myARPHEOyV. ^A/SETHEPE.  TEJ/V.  rERIPA LL ES.  /JAALSA.

I  mutt,  again,  defire  the  reader  to  compare  theie  letters  with  the
old  Ionic  characters,  in  the  following  infcriptions ;  after  which,  I  be¬
lieve  he  will  be  of  opinion  that  the  letters  I  have  made  ufe  of  refem-
ble  more  thofe  characters,  and,  confequently,  the  Roman  letters,  than
Thofe,  in  which  Scaliger  has  exhibited  thefe  verfes.  I  have,  alio,  dif¬
fered  from  him  in  writing  ^  JKPP ElEO  jJ ,  with  a  fingle  O,  in

the  firft  fyllable,  inftead  of  an  Omicron  Ypfilon,  which  he  has  made
ufe  of,  becaufe  I  find,  by  the  Herodian  infcription,  that  O  fupplies
the  place  of  OY,  not  only  in  the  end  of  a  word,  but,  alfo,  in  the
beginning  of  it ;  as  ohvi  for  ouhvi*  The  arrival  of  Cadmus  in  Greece,
which  was  attended  with  the  introduction  of  letters  into  that  country,
was  too  remarkable  an  asra  to  have  efcaped  the  notice  of  the  s  Parian
marble,  where  it  is  fet  down  in  thefe  words ;  A<p’  x  Kafyog  0  Ayyvogog  etg
Qyjga 55  aQinejo  ntzjct  Xgyrpov,  £  injure  ttjv  K ctcjpetciv  ejv]  XHHIaLI  (3oi<ritevoy]og
AQrivav  ApQtnjvovog,  By  this,  Cadmus  arrived  in  Greece  310  years  be¬
fore  the  taking  of  Troy,  h  and  23  before  Mofes  led  the  Ifraelites  out
of  iEgypt.  We  have,  now,  feen  by  whom,  and  when,  letters  were
introduced  among  a  people  who,  certainly,  made  a  better  ufe  of  them
than  any  other  nation  in  the  world.  Let  us,  next,  confider  what
thefe  letters  were,  and,  then,  compare  them  with  the  Roman  letters  $
by  which,  it  will  appear  that  thefe  are  the  fame,  or,  nearly,  the  fame
in  their  power,  their  order,  and  their  fhape  with  Thofe,  brought  into

g  Epoch.  7.  h  Selden’s  canon  chron.

p  P  2


Greece


DISSERTATION  ON  THE


3°°

Greece  by  Cadmus.  The  reader  has,  already,  obferved  that  Hero¬
dotus  fays  the  Cadmean  characters  he  faw  in  the  temple  of  Apollo  at
Thebes  were  very  like  the  Ionic  letters:  The  reafon  of  this  he  had,

1  juft  before,  affigned,  which  was,  that  the  Ionians,  being  neighbours
to  the  Phoenicians,  not  in  Alia  Minor,  as  it  is  generally  thought,  but
in  Greece  (k  for  the  Ionic  migration  happened'  442  years  after  the  ar¬
rival  of  Cadmus  in  that  country)  they  learned  the  ufe  of  letters  from
them  ;  and,  lince  the  Phoenicians  had  brought  thefe  letters  into  Greece,
they  did  them  the  juftice  to  call  the  letters  they  made  ufe  of,  though
with  a  fmall  variation,  Phoenician  letters.  It  was  neceffary  to  pre-
mife  this,  in  order  to  juftify  the  ufe  I  lhall  make  of  the  Ionic  infcrip-
tions :  The  firft  will  be  Thofe  on  two  pillars,  once  belonging  to  He-
rodes  Atticus,  a  man  of  learning  in  the  time  of  Trajan,  and  now  to
be  feen  in  the  palace  Farnefe.  I  fhall  take  thefe  from  a  tranfcript  of
them  exhibited  in  a  1  letter  from  a  young  Englifh  painter  at  Rome  to
his  father  at  London,  in  which  letter  the  author  fays  thefe  infcrip-
tions  were  communicated  to  him  by  a  learned  friend  of  his  father  to
be  tranfmitted  to  the  latter.  The  reafon  of  my  taking  thefe  infcrip-
tions  from  this  letter,  is,  becaufe  they  are  much  more  elegantly  tran-
fcribed  there,  than  in  the  delineations  given  of  them  either  by  Scaliger,
Gruter,  or  Montfaucon ;  the  laid  has  cenfured  Scaliger  for  alferting
that  thefe  Ionic  characters  were  in  common  ufe  fo  late  as  the  time  of
Herodes  Atticus;  and  m fays  that  no  traces  of  them  are  to  be  found
in  any  monuments,  but  in  Thofe  of  great  antiquity  before  the  time
of  Alexander  the  Great:  For  which  reafon,  he  is  of  opinion  that
Herodes  Atticus,  who  was  a  man  of  learning,  and  a  lover  of  anti¬
quity,  caufed  thefe  inscriptions,  which  exhibit  the  old  Ionic  letters,
to  be  ingraved  on  pillars  in  his  Triopian  Villa,  in  order  to  perpetuate
thofe  characters.  Thefe  infcriptions,  therefore,  I  fhall  make  ufe  of.

i  Herodot.  Terpfich.  c.  58.  k  Parian  Marb.  epoch.  7,  and- 28.  Seld.  canon

chron.  1  Letter  22d.  Palaeogr.  Graec.  p.  140.


I


The


j'act'  p


(.n.  /?  The  sz?

^Siy/mmM'/V'  r_JnsJor^im/v:

EI^EXOElAO$

HOIAE:  EN  TOI:TTOPEMOI:ArEOAN0N:  E  N  K  Y  r  MDV-ENAI  A
YrTOI:EN(pOlN  IK  Eli  ENAH  E  Y^INi  EN  A.I  Al  N  EliMEAA^

ENTO:  AYT O-EN  fAYTO:


^T^ATEAON:  ©ANY  ITO  <►  AKT  YrTO<>


GREEK  AND  ROMAN  CHARACTERS.  30^

The  next  is  an  Athenian  infcription  given  by  n  Montfaucon  :  It  is  writ¬
ten,  like  the  two  fird,  in  old  Ionic  characters  (which  (hews  they
were  in  common  ufe  at  the  time  of  this  infcription)  and  may  be,
thus,  tranflated  ;  ‘The  names  of  the  Athenians  belonging  to  the  tribe
Erechtheis ,  who  lojl  their  lives  in  the  wars  of  Cyprus ,  /Egypt ,  Phoenicia ,
Halice ,  and  JEgina :  The  three  words,  that  follow,  are  at  the  head
of  fo  many  columns,  on  which  are  ingraved  the  names  of  the  flain.
In  order  to  fupport  the  authenticity  of  this  infcription,  Montfaucon  has
tranfcribed  the  relations,  given  by  Thucydides  of  thefe  wars.  From
all  which,  that  learned  monk  concludes  that  this  monument  was
ereCted  0  in  the  time  of  the  Peloponnefian  war.  In  this  I  cannot  agree
with  him  ;  becaufe  every  one  of  the  battles,  mentioned  in  the  in¬
fcription,  happened  feveral  years  before  that  war,  and  are  related  by
Thucydides  among  the  military  operations  of  the  Greeks/  and  Barba¬
rians,  which,  he  himfelf  fays,  fell  out  during  the  50  years ,  tioat  in¬
tervened  between  the  retreat  cf  Xerxes ,  and  the  beginning  of  the  Pelo¬
ponnefian  war.  After  Thucydides  has  given  an  account  of  all  the
battles,  mentioned  in  the  infcription,  he  has  thefe  words ;  p  v,u  h
^v[X7ruP,ot)  ocrcc  oi  E Kkqns  rs  a\Krjhyg>  acu  TxrQog  rev  Bag/3agoy,  sys-

vejo  s v  fjart  7r£v]t}KovloL  pahis-a,  p(}ot£u  Tr^TB  aifb*  <xmxco()i]<retog,  kui  rtjg
tAb  tx  7rotey,x.  And  we  find,  by  him,  that,  after  the  Athenians  had
reduced  Eubcea  (the  reduction  of  which  was  fubfequent  to  all  the
battles  referred  to  in  the  infcription)  they  made  a*1  truce  of  30  years
with  the  Lacedemonians  ;  and  that,  in  the  r  1 4th  year  of  this  truce,
the  latter  refolved  upon  the  Peloponnefian  war,  or,  which  is  the  fame
thing,  that  the  30  years  truce  was  diffolved.  The  inscriptions  on  the
two  Macedonian  coins,  exhibited  alfo  by  s  Montfaucon,  are  the  next
and  laft  inferiptions  I  fhall  make  ufe  of :  The  firft  is  fuppofed  to  be

O  Id.  ib,  p.  134.  p  B.  i.  c.  128.  1  B.  i,  c.  115,

r  ib.  c.  87.  s  Palaeogr.  Graec.  p.  122.


the


»  Id.  ib.  p.  135.


'302  DISSERTATION  ON  THE

the  coin  of  the  firft  Amintas,  the  eighth  from  Caranus,  and  the  ninth
king  of  Macedon.  The  iecond  is,  certainly,  a  Macedonian  coin  from
the  infcription  on  one  fide  of  it ;  and,  by  That  on  the  reverfe,  it
appears  to  be  of  the  higheft  antiquity.  If,  in  difcuffing  this  Subject,
I  differ  from  Scaliger,  and  Montfaucon  in  fome  particulars,  I  fhall  give
my  reafons  for  it,  with  all  the  deference  that' is  due  to  men  of  their
fuperior  learning.  As  the  view  of  them  both  was  to  fhew  the  analogy
between  the  Phoenician,  and  Ionic  letters,  and  not  between  the  laff,
and  Thofe  of  the  Romans,  it  is  very  natural  that,  our  views  being
different,  our  methods  of  purfuing  thofe  views  fhould  alfo  differ.  I
find  neither  of  them  have  made  ufe  of  the  Sigean  infcription,  which,
though  vaftly  older  than  That  of  Herodes  Atticus,  may,  very  poffi-
bly,  be  neither  older,  nor  more  authentic,  than  the  infcriptions,  from
which  he  copied  his  Ionic  letters :  However,  as  there  is  very  little
difference  between  thefe,  and  the  letters  in  the  Sigean  infcription ;
and,  as  I  have  taken  but  one  letter,  viz.  the  S  from  that  infcription
(where  it  is  inverted)  which  one  of  the  Macedonian  coins,  and  the
Delian  infcription  would  have  furnifhed  me  with,  I  chofe  not  to  in¬
cumber  this  little  Effay  with  that  infcription.


Latin


GREEK  AND  ROMAN  CHARACTERS.  303


Latin  Letters.

Ionic  Letters.


A.

from  the  Herodian  infcription.

B.

B.

from  the  firft  Macedonian  coin.

C.

/•

from  the  Herodian  infcription.

D.

D.

from  the  fame.

E.

E.

from  the  fame.

F.

F.

the  /Eolic  digamma.

H.

H.

from  the  Herodian  infcription.

I.

1.

from  the  fame.

K.

R.

from  the  fame.

L.

L.

from  the  fecond  Macedonian  coip.

M.

from  the  Herodian  infcription.

N.

from  the  fame.

O.

O,

from  the  fame.

P.

p.

from. the  fame.

R.

F.

from  the  fame.

S.

s.

from  the  fecond  Macedonian  coin*

T.

T.


from  the  Herodian  infcription.

U.

V.

from  the  fame.

Y.

V;.

k —

from  the  Athenian  infcription.

Moft


DISSERTATION  ON  THE


3°4

Moft  of  thefe  Ionic  letters  correfpond,  fo  exactly,  with  the  Roman
letters,  that  I  fhall  only  take  notice  of  two,  viz.  the  J*,  and  P,
which  feem  to  differ  from  them  :  After  which,  I  fhall  fhew  in  what
manner  the  Romans  expreffed  the  powers  of  the  double  letters,  in¬
vented  by  Palamedes,  and  Simonides,  by  two  letters,  which  had  the
fame  effedt.  This  will  further  confirm  the  analogy  contended  for,
between  the  Greek  and  Roman  letters ;  fince  the  ancient  Greeks,  be¬
fore  the  invention  of  thefe  chara&ers,  fupplied  the  want  of  them  by
the  fame  letters.

I  fhall  not  pretend  to  reduce  the  fhape  either  of  the  ancient,  or
modern  Gamma,  to  the  Roman  C,  as  fome  men  of  learning,  and
Scaliger  in  particular,  have  done  with  regard  to  the  Phoenician,  and
Ionic  letters :  But  I  contend,  and  doubt  not  to  prove,  that  the  Ro¬
man  C,  however  different  from  the  j*  in  its  fhape,  fupplied  the  pow¬
er  of  it  in  the  Roman  language  :  For  it  is  certain  that  the  Romans
had  not,  originally,  the  letter  G,  but,  inftead  of  it,  made  ufe  of  a  C:
Thus,  Gaius  was  pronounced  Gains ;  which  is  the  reafon  that  all
Greek  authors  write  the  former  This  is  confirmed  by  an

obfervation  of  1  Quintilian,  who  fays,  qucedam  aliter  fcribt ,  aliter
nunciari  j  nam,  Gaius  C  literd  notatur.  But  the  Duilian  infcription,
mentioned  in  a  u  former  note,  puts  this  matter  out  of  all  doubt :  There
we  find  rem  cerens,  for  rem  gerens  ;  Car  t  acini  enfeis,  for  Carthagini-
enfes  j  and  macijiratos ,  for  magifiratus .  As  to  the  Ionic  P,  a  little
rounding  of  the  angles,  and  bringing  that.'femicircle  to  the  perpendi¬
cular,  would,  without  great  violence,  particularly  to  an  antiquary,
form  a  Roman  P.  However,  the  place  of  this  letter  in  the  Roman
alphabet,  and  its  power  in  the  Roman  language,  perfectly,  agree  with
the  Ionic  p.  The  reader  will  not  be  furprifed  to  fee  the  Roman  F

t  Inft.  Orat.  B.  i.  c.  7.  u  See  the  526  Annot  on  the  2d  book.


ftand


GREEK  AND  ROMAN  CHARACTERS.  305

Rand  in  the  fame  place  in  the  Roman  alphabet  with  theiEolic  digam¬
ma,  when  he  confiders  what  our  author  has,  w  already,  told  us,  viz.
that  the  Roman  language  was,  chiefly,  iEolic.  This  Digamma  the
iEolians,  alfo,  learned  from  the  Phoenicians :  For  the  x  the  Vau
of  the  latter  is,  plainly,  the  digamma  of  the  /Eolians  ;  allowance  be¬
ing  made  for  their  different  way  of  writing  5  fince  every  body  knows
that  the  Phoenicians,  and  the  eafiern  nations,  writ  from  the  l  ight  to
the  left.  Another  infiance  of  the  conformity  between  the  Ionic,  and
Roman  letters,  mufi  not  be  omitted  :  In  both  the  H  Rands  for  an  af-
pirate  only  :  And,  to  carry  this  conformity  Rill  farther,  in  both  it  is
ufed  for  an  afpirate,  not  only,  in  the  beginning,  but,  alfo,  in  the
middle  of  words ;  as  Ej^HODI  in  the  Herodian  infcription,  and
Jnhto ,  Anhelo ,  and  many  other  words  in  Latin.  I  wonder  how  the
Greeks,  with  their  delicate  ears,  came  to  lofe  this  beauty,  which  the
Romans  preferved.  The  laR  obfervation  I  fhall  make  upon  thefe  in-
fcriptions  is,  that,  in  the  word  AESILLAS,  which  moR  people  would
take  for  a  Latin,  rather  than  a  Greek  infcription,  the  diphthong  AE,
which  the  Latines  adopted,  is  employed  inRead  of  the  Greek  diph¬
thong  AI ;  which,  however,  was  in  ufe  fo  early  as  the  time  of  the
Sigean  infcription.

I,  now,  come  to  the  fix  double  confonants,  and  two  double  vow¬
els,  faid  to  have  been  invented  by  Palamedes  during  the  fiege  of  Troy,
and  by  Simonides,  about  feven  hundred  years  after  that  period  :
Z,  0,  4>,  X  are  the  Palamedean  letters,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of
l  Montfaucon,  who  afcribes  s  'to  Palamedes,  and  Z  to  Simonides ;
and  H,  H,  T,  XI,  are  faid  to  have  been  invented  by  Simonides  j  but
this  cannot  be,  becaufe  we  find  the  letter  H,  in  the  Sigean  infcription,
which  is,  certainly,  older  than  Simonides  j  in  That,  as  well  as  in  the

w  B.  1.  c.  90.  x  Montfaucon.  Pakeogr.  p.  128.  y  Pabeogr.  Grxc.  p.  117.

Vol.  II.  P  p  *  Hero-


DISSERTATION  ON  THE


3°6

Herodian  infcription,  it  hands  for  an  afpirate  only  :  Simonides,  there¬
fore,  could  not  have  invented  that  letter  j  all  he  can  be  fuppofed  to
have  done  is,  to  have  altered  the  power  of  it,  and  to  have  transform¬
ed  it,  from  an  afpirate,  to  a  double,  or  long  E,  as  his  n  was  to  repre¬
fen  t  a  double,  or  long  O.  Neither  do  I  believe  that  Palamedes  invent¬
ed  the  Z,  I  mean,  the  found  of  it,  though  he  might  invent  the  let-
er;  fince  the  Phoenicians,  Syrians,  and  Chaldeans  had,  originally,  the
found  of  that  letter,  called,  by  the  latter,  kJT?  Zita,  which  is  almofi
the  fame  name,  which  the  Greeks  gave  to  it.  Before  the  invention  of
the  fix  double  confonants,  Z,  0,  cj>,  X,  H,  T,  the  Xonians  expreffed
their  power  by  SD,TH,  PH,  KH,  KS,  PS.  In  this,  alfo,  the  Romans
imitated  the  lonians  with  regard  to  four  of  them  ;  as  for  the  other-
two,  they  ufed  them  in  the  fame  manner,  as  the  more  mddern  Greeks,
in  all  the  words  they  took  from  them.  I  fhall  give  examples  of  both:
Of  the  four,  are  thefe  words,  'Theatrum,  Phalerce ,  Chimcera ,  Pfittacus ;
and  of  the  others,  Xenium ,  Zephyr  us .  I  am  forced  to  make  ufe  of
Greek  words,  becaufe  I  know  of  no  Latin  words,  beginning  with  thefe
double  confonants,  that  are  not  either  Greek,  or  derived  from  that
language.  Our  author,  in  his  juftly  admired  z  treatife  of  the  compofi-
tion  of  words,  makes  but  three  double  confonants,  all  which  are  in¬
cluded  in  the  eight  femivowels ;  thefe  three  are,  Z,  S,  T ;  and  he
gives  this  reafon  for  their  being  called  double,  becaufe  they  are  com¬
pounded,  Z,  of  X  A  ;  H,  of  K  1 5  and  T,  of  IIS.  He  confines  their
number  to  three ;  becaufe  he  calls  X,  <I>,  and  0,  afpirate  mutes,  etfpcfta
$ct<rzu  :  The  reafon  of  which,  I  imagine  to  be  this,  though  he  does
not  fay  fo,  that  each  of  them  includes  the  afpirate  H  ;  being  com¬
pounded  of  K  H,  II  H,  and  T  H.

Thus  I  have  gone  through  the  talk  1  propofed  to  myfelf,  and  am,
intirely,  convinced  that  the  old  Greek  and  Roman  letters  were,  origi-

*  Edit,  of  Hudfon,  p.  22,  and  23.

pally,


GREEK  AND  ROMAN  CHARACTERS.  307

nally,  the  fame :  This  I  mention,  becaufe  nothing  elfe  could  juftify
my  endeavours  to  convince  the  reader  of  it.  By  what  has  been  faid,
we  may  obferve  the  flow  progrefs  of  letters,  from  their  firft  appearance
in  Europe,  under  Cadmus,  to  their  being  introduced  into  Italy  by
Evander,  which  comprehends  no  lefs  than  250  years:  And,  what  is
more  extraordinary,  they  had,  but aa  lately,  been  known  in  Arcadia,
when  Evander  went  from  thence  to  Italy.  This  can,  only,  be  account¬
ed  for  by  the  predatory  genius  of  the  Greeks,  which  prevailed  during
that  interval,  and  led  them  rather  to  prey  upon  their  neighbours,  than
to  cultivate  the  liberal  arts  5  but  they  no  fooner  applied  themfelves  to
thefe,  than  they  advanced  as  fwiftly  to  the  empire  of  learning,  as  the
Romans  did,  afterwards,  to  That  of  the  World  j  with  this  difference,
that  captive  Greece  polifhed  her  conquerors,  whofe  power  is,  long  fince,
diffolved,  whereas  the  literary  fovereignty  of  the  Greeks  will  be  ac¬
knowledged,  as  long  as  their  language  fhall  be  underftood.


Dion.  Rom.  Ant,  B,  1.  c.  33.


T  H  E


.  '


i


<$•


.  ,y .  •  ;  .  i  o  •  ,  :r.  -  I  l\.  -  :

.

-

r<  ■  .  -  ■  i  i '

■  F  *SVi  ik


•  .  '  r  J  .  ■  .  '

i  i;yuj  c  .  «.  :  i  ih,  >  '

■

'

;  I  t  ■  -  J  '

.


■  •  N  ‘


"}


»-  -


;  , '


r:i  v


—


. . — . .  . . .  ■  -  ■  - — - - -

T  H  E

ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES

O  F

DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.

♦

/

THE  FIFTH  BOOK.

MONARCHY,  therefore,  having  continued  two
hundred  and  forty  four  years  from  the  foundation
of  Rome,  and,  under  the  laft  king,  degenerated
into  tyranny,  was,  for  thefe  reafons,  and  by  thefe  perfons,
abolished  juft  before  the  fixty  eighth  Olympiad,  in  which
Ifchomachus  of  Croton  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium,
Ifagoras  being  annual  archon  at  Athens.  An  ariftocracy
being,  now,  eftablifhed,  and  Lucius  Junius  Brutus,  and
Lucius  Tarquinius  Collatinus,  the  firft  confuls,  invefted
with  the  regal  power,  when  there  yet  remained  about  1  four

Annotations  on  the  Fifth  Book.

*•  Tf rlagm  nvuv  pyvuv  tov  tvtxvlov  it  would  be  very  eafy  to  afcertain  the
iKuvov  v7ro\enrofjcevM.  If  we  could,  cer-  month  of  the  year,  when  the  two  firft
tainly,  know  when  the  Roman  year  be-  confuls  entered  upon  their  magiftracy  ;
gan,  at  this  time,  among  the  Romans,  becaufe  we  find,  by  this  paftage,  that

Vol.  II.  Qjj  months


310  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

months  to  complete  that  year  (which  magiftrates  the


four  months  were  then  wanting  to
complete  the  year.  a  Plutarch  is  of
opinion  that  the  firft  confuls  were
chofen  on  the  kalends  of  January.
And  this  opinion,  I  find,  M.  *  *  *  has
efpouled.  However,  it  is  liable  to
many  objections:  For,  if,  as  Plutarch
fays,  in  the  fame  place,  the  Roman
year  began,  according  to  the  inftitu-
tion  of  Romulus,  on  the  firft  of  March,
and,  according  to  That  of  Numa,  on
the  firft  of  January;  and,  if,  accord¬
ing  to  our  author,  four  months  were
wanting  to  complete  the  year,  when
the  firft  confuls  entered  upon  their
magiftracy,  it  is  plain  they  did  not
enter  upon  it  on  the  firft  day  of  Ja¬
nuary.  Befides,  it  is  allowed  by  all
authors  that  this  day  was  not  the  fixed
day  for  the  confuls  to  begin  their  ad-
miniftration  till  the  confulfhip  of
Fulvius  Nobiiior,  and  T.  Annius
Lufcus,  in  the  year  of  Rome  601.
Le  Jay  thinks  the  Roman  year  began
the  firft  of  October,  and,  confequen.tly,
that  the  firft  confuls  began  their  ma¬
giftracy  on  the  firft  day  of  June.
This  opinion  he  fupports  by  a  proof,
which,  he  fays,  admits  of  no  anfwer  :
This  proof  is  taken  from  Livy,  who
fays  that,  when  it  was  propofed  to  re-
ftore  to  the  Tarquins  their  effeCts,  the
Romans  pulled  up  the  ripe  corn,  that
was  growing  in  the  field  between  Rome,
and  the  Tiber,  and  threw  it  into  the
river.  From  whence  he  concludes  that,
as  June  is  the  time,  when  the  harveft
begins  to  be  ripe,  that  muft  be  the
month,  when  the  firft  confuls  began
their  magiftracy.  But  this  argument,

a  Roman.  Quaeft.  p.  268.


which  he  thinks  unanfwerable,  may
be  turned  againft  him.  This  I  fhall
ftiew,  even,  from  Livy,  from  whom
he  derives  his  proof.  This  hiftorian,
therefore,  fays,  that,  after  the  Tarquins
were  expelled,  and  Brutus,  and  Col-
latinus  chofen  confuls,  the  firft  thing
thefe  magiftrates  did,  was  to  make
the  people  take  an  oath,  that  they
would  fuffer  no  more  kings  at  Rome b.
After  which,  they  fupplied  the  vacan¬
cies  in  the  fenate,  occafioned  by  the
murders  of  Tarquinius.  The  next
thing  of  moment  was  the  refignation
of  Collatinus,  and  the  election  of
Valerius  in  his  room.  Then,  follows
the  embaffy,  fent  by  Tarquinius,  to
delire  his  effeCts  might  be  reftored  to
him.  This  embaffy  occafioned  a  debate
of  fome  days  continuance  in  the  fenate:
In  the  mean  time,  the  embafladors  in-
gaged  many  of  the  Roman  youth  in  a
confpiracy  to  reftore  the  tyrant,  and,
among  the  reft,  the  conful’s  fons.  After
thefenate  had  ordered  the  effeCts  of  Tar¬
quinius  to  be  reftored,  the  embafladors
ftaid  fome  time  at  Rome,  pretending
to  be  employed  in  preparing  carriages
to  tranfport  them.  However,  they
made  ufe  of  this  delay  to  hold  frequent
meetings  with  the  confpirators,  and
to  procure  letters  from  them  to  Tar¬
quinius.  This  produced  a  difcovery,
and  the  difcovery  occafioned  the  aban¬
doning  thefe  effeCts,  and,  among  the
reft,  the  corn,  to  the  people.  Now,
it  is  fubmitted  to  the  reader  whether
all  thefe  tranfaCtions  did  not,  probably,
take  up  more  time  than  is  requifite
to  bring  corn  to  its  maturity  after  it

b  B.  ii.  c.  i,  2,  3,4,  5.

Romans,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  311
Romans,  in  their  own  language,  call  Confutes ,  as  I  faid )


begins  to  be  ripe,  as  le  Jay  fays.  In
the  common  courfe  of  things,  they
muft  have  taken  up  fome  weeks,  and,
pofTibly,  two,  or  three  months  from
the  creation  of  the  confuls.  There  is
another  argument,  made  ufe  of  by  le
Jay,  which  would,  molt  certainly,
prove,  that  the  firft  confulfhip  ended
with  the  month  of  September  (for  he
fuppofes  that  it  lafted  fixteen  months)
if  the  fad  was  as  he  ftates  it.  He  af-
ferts,  from  Plutarch,  and  Livy,  that
Horatius  confecrated  the  capitol  on  the
ides  of  September  in  the  laji  month  of
his  confulfhip,  though  Livy  does  not
mention  any  month.  But  the  misfor¬
tune  is,  that  neither  of  thefe  authors
fay  that  this  happened  in  the  laji  month
of  that  confulfhip.  I  have  thofe  paf-
fages  of  c  Plutarch,  and  d  Livy,  now,
before  me,  and  neither  of  them  fay
one  word  of  it.  They  take  notice,
indeed,  of  the  account  brought  to
Horatius  of  the  death  of  his  fon,  when
he  was  going  to  confecrate  the  capitol;
but,  once  more,  I  aver  that  neither  of
thofe  authors  fay  that  Horatius  per¬
formed  this  confecration  in  the  laji
month  of  his  confulfhip.  I  acknow¬
ledge  that  I  find  it  eafier  to  objed  to
the  opinions  of  Plutarch,  and  le  Jay,
than  to  advance  one  of  my  own,  that
fhall  be  liable  to  no  objedions.  How¬
ever,  the  firft  thing,  that  feems  necef-
fary,  is  to  fix  the  time,  when  the  year
began,  at  that  period,  among  the  Ro¬
mans.  I  fhall  not  take  upon  me  to
fhew  when  the  inftitution  of  Numa,
by  which  the  year  began  on  the  firft
of  January,  was  altered  :  All  I  can

*  Life  of  Poplicola.  d


pretend  to  do,  is  to  fhew  that  there  is
great  reafon  to  believe  the  beginning
of  the  year  fell  out,  at  the  time  we  are
fpeaking  of,  on  the  firft  of  Auguft.
This  is  certain  that  47  years  after  the
expulfion  of  the  kings,  that  is,  in  the
year  of  Rome  291,  the  Romans  began
their  year  on  that  day.  This  we  know
from  eLivy,  who  fays,  that  L.  Aebu-
tius,  and  P.  Servilius,  the  confuls  of
that  year,  entered  upon  their  magi-
ftracy  on  the  firft  of  Auguft,  which
was ,  then,  the  beginning  of  the  year  :
creati  confides  L.  Aebutins ,  P.  Servilius
kalendis  fextilibus ,  ut  tunc  principium
anni  agebatur,  confulatum  ineunt.  As
therefore,  neither  Livy,  nor  any  other
author  fpeaks  of  any  alteration  made
in  the  beginning  of  the  year  from  the
expulfion  of  the  kings  to  the  year  of
Rome  291,  we  have  reafon  to  think
that  the  Romans  began  their  year  on
the  fame  day  in  the  former  of  thefe
periods.  If  this  is  fo,  the  firft  confuls
muft  have  entered  on  their  magiftracy
on  the  firft  day  of  April,  fince  our
author  fays  they  began  it  four  months
before  the  end  of  that  year.  There
is  one  objedion  againft  the  day  I  have
affigned  for  the  beginning  of  the  firft
confulfhip,  which  I  think  myfelf  ob¬
liged  not  to  conceal  from  the  reader,
which  is,  that  the  regifugium ,  the  day
on  which  the  Tarquins  were  baniflied,
was,  in  the  old  Roman  calendar,  on
the  fixth  before  the  calends  of  March
(the  twenty  fourth  of  February)  fo
that,  if  there  was  no  interval  between
the  banifhment  of  the  Tarquins,  and
the  creation  of  the  firft  confuls,  thefe

B.  ii.  c.  8.  f  B.  iii,  c.  6.

Qei  2  they,


312  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.


they,  aflifted  by  the  2  other  citizens,  who,  having  made  a
truce  with  the  Ardeates  a  few  days  after  the  expulfion  of
the  tyrant,  left  the  camp,  and  came  to  the  city  in  great
numbers,  affembled  the  people;  and,  having  infilled  long
upon  the  advantages  of  unanimity,  they  confirmed,  by
another  vote,  every  thing,  which  thofe  in  the  city  had,
before,  decreed,  condemning  the  Tarquinii  to  perpetual
banifhment.  After  which,  they  purified  the  city,  and  en¬
tered  into  an  ingagement,  confirmed  by  their  oaths,  and
the  performance  of  a  facrifice,  and  they  themfelves,  {landing
upon  the  vidlims,  firfl  fwore,  and  prevailed  upon  the  reft
of  the  citizens  likewife  to  fwear,  that  they  would  never  re¬
ft  ore  Tarquinius,  their  late  king,  his  fons,  or  their  pofterity;
and  that,  from  thenceforth,  they  would  neither  create  any
perfon  king  of  the  Romans,  nor,  fuffer  others  to  attempt  it.


mu!l  have  been  created  on  the  fame
day.  As  for  the  other  feltival,  cele¬
brated  by  the  Romans  on  the  ninth
before  the  calends  of  June  (the  twenty
fourth  of  May)  and  marked  in  their
calendar  by  thefe  letters  QR.  C.  F.
which  le  Jay  miftakes  for  the  regifu-
gium ,  in  order  to  adapt  it  to  his  own
fyftem,  it  relates,  only,  to  the  rex
facrificus ,  or  facrorum ,  who  was  ap¬
pointed  after  the  expulfion  of  the
kings,  ne  ubiubi  regum  dejiderium  ejfet ,
as  f  Livy  fays  ;  and  thole  letters  fig-
nify,  according  to  s  Varro,  Quando
Rex  Comitiavit  Fas.

vruoocAuColhs  zvoAAxs  tA%vluv

«?  TJJV  ZffOAlV  T ti)V  CCTTO  [Ail a,  T Ocq

vttqvSus  rus  yevo[Aiva.$  avion  zv£>o?  A  (*  Hied  us.
This  lejay  has,  ftrangely,  tranllated:


He  fuppofes  that  the  people,  who
came  to  Rome  in  great  numbers  from
the  camp,  were  not  Romans,  but  a
colony  of  the  Ardeates,  who,  after
the  former  had  made  a  truce  with
them,  came  to  refide  at  Rome  :  His
words  are  thefe  :  La  treve  faite  avec
Us  Ardeates  attira  dans  Rome  un  grand
nombre  de  nouveaux  habitants,  qtii firent
alliance  avec  Us  Remains.  If  the  reader
is  at  a  lofs  to  guefs  how  he  could  mif-
take  the  words  of  the  Greek  text,
which  are  very  eafy,  I  can  explain  it :
Fie  never  confidered  the  Greek  text  at
all  j  but  tranllated  the  Latin  tranfla-
tion  of  Portus,  who  has,  thus,  render¬
ed  the  beginning  of  this  paffage,  af-
fumptis  in  focietatem  aliis  multis.


f  B.  ii.  c.  2.  £  De  Ling.  Lat.  v.  4.


And


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARNASSENSIS.  313

And  this  oath  they  took,  not  only  for  themfelves,  but,  alfo,
for  their  children,  and  pofterity.  However,  fince  it  ap¬
peared  that  the  kings  had  been  the  authors  of  many  con-
fiderable  advantages  to  the  commonwealth,  they  defired  to
preferve  the  name  of  that  magiftracy,  as  long  as  their  city
fhould  fubfift,  and  ordered  the  priefts,  and  augurs  to  chufe
among  the  elders  the  perfon  they  looked  upon  as  the  moft
proper  for  that  office,  who  was  to  have  the  fuperintendence
in  affairs  of  religion,  and  in  nothing  elfe,  and  be  difcharged
of  all  military,  and  civil  functions,  and  that  his  title  fhould
be  the  3  king  of  religious  matters.  The  firft  perfon  ap¬
pointed  to  this  office  was  Manius  Papirius,  a  patrician,  and
a  lover  of  quiet.

II.  After  the  confuls  had  fettled  thefe  things,  they  were  afraid
(as  I  imagine)  left  the  generality  of  the  people  fhould  enter¬
tain  an  ill  grounded  opinion  of  their  new  form  of  government,
and  imagine  that,  as  each  of  the  confuls  was  attended  with
the  twelve  axes,  like  the  kings,  the  city  had  two  fovereigns
inftead  of  one  ;  and,  in  order  to  quiet  the  fears  of  the
citizens,  and  to  leflen  the  envy  of  their  power,  they  refolved
that  one  of  the  confuls  fhould  be  preceded  by  the  twelve
axes,  and  the  other  by  twelve  li&ors  with  the  fafces  only ;
or,  as  fome  write,  with  clubs  alfo :  And  that  the  ufe  of  the
axes  fhould  be  alternate,  each  of  them  being  attended  with
them,  fucceffively,  for  the  fpace  of  one  month.  By  this,
and  feveral  other  inftitutions  of  the  like  nature,  they  ingaged

3*  fioitritev;.  In  Latin,  rex  fa -  reafon  for  his  creation,  as  the  reader
crorum ,  and  rex  facrlfcus :  Thus  he  is  has  feen  in  the  firft  note,
called  by  Livy,  who  gives  the  fame

the


3T4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V .

the  plebeians,  and  the  lower  fort  of  people  to  defire  a  con¬
tinuance  of  the  prefent  fettlement:  For  they  reftored  the
laws,  introduced  by  Tullius,  concerning  private  contracts;
which  laws  appeared  humane,  and  popular,  and  had  all
been  abrogated  by  Tarquinius :  They,  alfo,  ordered  the
facrifices,  both  in  the  city,  and  in  the  country,  which  the
people,  and  the  tribes,  affembling  together,  ufed  to  of¬
fer  up  in  common,  to  be  renewed  in  the  fame  manner,  as
they  had  been  performed  in  the  reign  of  Tullius :  They
reftored  to  the  people  their  right  of  holding  affemblies  upon
affairs  of  the  greateft  confequence ;  of  giving  their  votes ;
and  of  doing  every  thing  they  were  intitled  to  do  by  former
cuftoms.  Thefe  actions  of  the  confuls  pleafed  the  generality
of  the  people ;  who,  from  a  long  flavery,  now  faw  them-
felves  in  a  ftate  of  unexpected  liberty.  Notwithftanding
this,  there  were  fome,  and  thefe  no  obfcure  perfons,  who,
either  through  folly,  or  ambition,  longed  for  a  return  of  the
4  evils  refulting  from  tyranny  :  Thefe  formed  a  confpiracy

Twv  tv  rvfdmJi  kockuv.  Thefe  which  I  Jfhall  lay  before  the  reader  in
abettors  of  tyranny  difregarded  the  h  his  own  words :  Erant  in  Romans
evils  refulting  from  it,  becaufe  they  juventute  adolefcentes  aliquot,  nec  ii  tenui
looked  upon  them  as  general  to  all  :  loco  orti ,  quorum  in  regno  libido  folutior
But  they  fet  a  value  upon  the  advan-  fuerat ,  aequales  fodalefque  adolefcentium
tages  they  expefted  from  it,  becaufe  Tarquiniorum  \  ajjueti  more  regio  vivere.
they  looked  upon  thefe  as  peculiar  to  Earn  turn  aequato  jure  omnium  licentiam
themfelves,  without  confidering  that,  quaerentes ,  libertatem  aliorum  in  fuam
even,  the  gratifications,  they  promifed  vertijje  fervitutem  inter fe  conquer eb ant ur.
themfelves  from  the  tyrant,  were  ren-  Regem  homincm  ejfe ,  a  quo  impetres ,  ubi
dered  infecure  by  the  tyranny.  Livy  jus,  ubi  injuria  opus  Jit :  _ejfe  gratiae
makes  fome  reflexions  on  the  motives,  locum,  ejfe  beneficio  *,  et  irafci  et  ignofcere
that  gave  birth  to  this  confpiracy,  pojfe :  inter  amicum  et  inimicum  difcrimen

h  B.  ii.c.  3.


to


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALI C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  315

to  betray  the  city,  to  reftore  Tarquinius,  and  to  kill  the  con-
fuls.  Who  the  heads  of  this  confpiracy  were,  and,  by  what
unexpected  accidents,  they  were  difcovered,  while  they
imagined  all  mankind  to  be  ignorant  of  their  deligns,  I
fliall,  now,  relate,  after  I  have  refumed  fome  few  things,
that  were  previous  to  this  tranfadtion.

III.  Tarquinius,  after  his  expuliion,  ftaid  a  fliort  time
in  the  city  of  the  Gabini,  both  to  receive  fuch,  as  came  to
him  from  Rome,  to  whom  the  tyranny  was  a  more  deferable
thing  than  liberty,  and  to  wait  the  event  of  the  hopes  he  had
formed  of  being  reftored  to  the  fovereignty  by  the  affiftance
of  the  Latines  :  But  their  cities  not  hearkening  to  his  felici¬
tations,  nor  being  willing  to  make  war  with  the  Romans  upon
his  account,  he  defpaired  of  any  affiflance  from  them,  and
took  refuge  in  a  city  of  Tyrrhenia,  from  whence  his  family
by  his  5  grandmother’s  fide,  originally,  came  ;  and,  having
corrupted  the  moft  conliderable  of  the  Tarquinienfes,  and
been  by  them  introduced  to  the  affembly  of  the  people,  he
renewed  the  memory  of  his  connexion  with  their  city ;
recounted  the  favors  his  grandfather  had  conferred  on  all
the  Tyrrhenian  cities,  and  reminded  them  of  the  treaties

nojfe.  Leges ,  rem  fur  dam ,  inexorabilem  n^o?  pj Igoc.  This  mult,  certainly,

ejfe,  falubriorem  melwremque  inopi  quam  be  ztqos  :  Becaufe  Tanaquil,

polenti :  nihil  laxamenti,  nec  veniae  ha-  who  was  of  Tarquinii,  was  grand-
bere,Jimodum  excejferis\  periculofum  ejfe  mother,  not  mother,  to  Tarquinius
in  tot  humanis  erreribns  fold  innocentid  Superbus,  as  our  author  has  proved
uivere.  I  have,  contrary  to  my  cuftom,  at  large.  The  commentators  might
tranferibed  this  whole  paffage,  becaufe  have  taken  notice  of  this  :  Indeed,  le
I  look  upon  it  to  contain  the  fineft  Jay  fuppofes  him  to  have  been  the
contrail  between  tyranny,  and  liberty,  adopted  fon  of  Tanaquil.
that  ever  I  met  with.


Book  V.


316  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

they  had  entered  into  with  him.  After  all  this,  he  lamented
the  misfortunes,  which  had  happened  to  him  ;  that,  in  one
day,  he  had  fallen  from  the  height  of  felicity  ;  and  that  he,
and  his  three  fons,  being,  now,  wanderers,  and  in  want  of
neceffaries,  were  forced  to  fly  for  refuge  to  thofe,  who  had,
once,  been  his  fubje&s.  Having  related  thefe  things  in  a
very  pathetic  manner,  accompanied  with  tears,  he  prevailed
upon  the  people,  firft,  to  fend  embafladors  to  Rome,  to
propofe  terms  of  accommodation  on  his  behalf,  in  hope  that
the  men  in  power  there  would  fupport  his  intereft,  and
promote  his  reftoration.  The  embafladors  being  appointed
by  his  direction,  he  inftrudted  them  in  every  thing  they
were  to  fay  ;  and,  giving  them  letters  from  the  fugitive  Ro¬
mans,  who  were  with  him,  containing  intreaties  to  their
relations,  and  friends,  he  gave  them  fome  gold  alfo,  and
fent  them  to  Rome.

.  1

IV.  When  thefe  men  arrived  there,  they  faid  in  the
fenate,  that  Tarquinius  deflred  leave  to  come  to  Rome  in
fafety  with  a  fmall  retinue,  and  to  addrefs  himfelf,  in  the
firft  place,  to  the  fenate,  as  it  was  reafonable ;  and,  after
that,  if  the  fenate  allowed  it,  to  an  aflembly  of  the  people
alfo,  and  there  give  an  account  of  all  his  actions,  from  the^
time  of  his  acceffion  to  the  fovereignty ;  and,  if  any  one
accufed  him,  to  fubmit  himfelf  to  the  judgement  of  all  the
Romans :  And,  after  he  had  cleared  himfelf,  and  convinced
them  all,  that  he  had  done  nothing  worthy  of  banifliment,
if  they  thought  proper  to  reftore  him  to  the  fovereignty,  he
would  exercife  it  upon  fuch  conditions,  as  they  fliould  think

fit


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  317

fit  to  prefcribe :  However,  if  they  wTere  refolved,  no  longer,
to  live  under  a  monarchy  as  formerly,  but  to  chufe  fome
other  form  of  government,  he  defired  hemightrefideat  Rome,
which  was  his  country,  enjoy  his  own  houfe,  and  live  under
an  equality  with  the  reft  of  the  citizens,  difcharged  however
from  banifhment,  and  wandering.  Having  propofed  thefe
things,  they  begged  of  the  fenate,  particularly,  by  the  right,
to  which  all  men  are  intitled,  to  deprive  no  man  of  the
opportunity  of  defending  himfelf,  and  of  being  tried  ;  and
to  give  him  leave  to  make  his  defence,  of  which  they  them-
felves  would  be  the  judges  :  But,  if  they  did  not  think  fit
to  grant  him  this  favor,  they  defired  the  fenate  to  a6t  with
moderation,  from  a  regard  to  the  city,  that  interceded  in
his  behalf,  in  conferring  upon  her  a  favor,  by  which,  as  they
themfelves  could  not  be  injured,  fo  they  would  be  looked
upon  to  do  a  great  honor  to  the  city,  that  received  it :
That,  being  men,  they  ought  not  to  raife  their  thoughts
above  the  condition  of  men,  nor  entertain  immortal  refent-
ments  in  mortal  minds ;  but  to  fuffer  themfelves  to  do  an
act  of  clemency,  even  contrary  to  their  inclination,  for  the
fake  of  thofe,  who  intreated  them ;  and  to  confider,  that  it
is  the  part  of  wife  men  to  give  up  their  enmities  to  their
friendfhips;  and  That  of  weak  men,  and  Barbarians  to
confound  their  friends  with  their  enemies.

V.  After  they  had  done  fpeaking,  Brutus  rofe  up,  and
faid ;  “  Concerning  the  return  of  the  Tarquinii  to  this  city,
<c  Tyrrhenians,  fay  no  more  :  For  the  vote  is,  already,  pafied,
<c  which  condemns  them  to  perpetual  banifhment ;  and  we
Vol.  II.  R  r  ct  have


Book  V.


318  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

“  have  all  of  us  fworn  by  the  gods  neither  to  reftore  the
“  tyrants  ourfelves,  nor  to  fuffer  any  others  to  reftore  them.
££  But,  if  you  defire  any  thing  elfe  of  us,  that  is  reafonable,
££  which  v/e  can  grant  without  violating  either  our  oaths,
£C  or  the  laws,  let  us  know  it.”  After  this,  the  embafladors
advanced,  and  faid ;  ££  The  event  of  our  firft  eflay  has  been
££  unexpeded :  For,  addrefling  you  as  embafladors  on  the
<£  behalf  of  a  fuppliant,  who  defires  to  give  you  an  account
a  of  his  adions,  and  afking,  as  a  private  favor,  a  right,  that
££  is  common  to  all  men,  even  this  we  have  not  been  able

✓  v>

££  to  obtain.  Since,  then,  you  have  taken  your  refolution,
££  we  infiftj  no  longer,  upon  his  return:  But  we  call  upon
£C  you  to  do  a  right  of  another  kind,  concerning  which  our
<£  country  has  given  us  inftrudions ;  neither  is  there  any  law,
££  or  oath,  that  can  hinder  you  from  doing  it ;  that  is,  to
££  reftore  to  the  king  the  fortunes  his  grandfather  poflefled,
££  who  never  took  any  thing  from  you,  either  by  force,  or
££  fraud ;  but,  having  inherited  them  from  his  father,  he
££  brought  them  to  your  city:  For,  all  that  he  defires  is  to
££  have  his  fortunes  reftored  to  him,  and  to  live,  happily,
££  in  fome  other  place,  without  giving  you  any  trouble.”
After  the  embafladors  had  faid  this,  they  withdrew.  Of  the
two  confuls,  Brutus  advifed  the  retaining  the  fortunes  of  the
tyrants  in  order  to  punifli  them  for  the  many  great  injuries
they  had  done  to  the  commonwealth,  and  for  the  advantage,
that  would  refult  from  it  in  depriving  the  former  of  a  fupply
for  the  war;  and  he  fhewed  that  the  Tarquinii  would  not
be  contented  with  the  reftitution  of  their  fortunes,  nor

fubmit


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  319

fubmit  to  lead  a  private  life,  but  would  bring  a  foreign
war  upon  the  Romans,  and  attempt,  by  force,  to  recover
the  fovereignty.  But  Collatinus  advifed  the  contrary,  faying
that  the  perfons,  not  the  fortunes  of  the  tyrants  had  injured
the  commonwealth  ;  and  defired  them  to  avoid  both  thefe
things  ;  the  firft,  not  to  give  room  to  the  world  to  entertain
this  finifter  opinion  of  them,  as  if  they  had  expelled  the
Tarquinii  for  the  fake  of  their  riches ;  and  the  other,  not
to  give  the  tyrants  themfelves  a  juft  caufe  of  war  by  depriving
them  of  their  property :  For  he  faid  it  was  uncertain  whe¬
ther,  if  they  received  their  fortunes,  they  would,  after  that,
attempt  to  make  war  upon  them  in  order  to  their  reftoration ;
but  certain  that,  if  they  were  deprived  of  their  fortunes,
they  would  never  be  quiet.

VI.  6  Each  of  the  confuls  alledging  thefe  reafons,  and
many  fpeaking  in  favor  of  both,  the  fenate  was  at  a  lofs
what  to  refolve  upon,  and  fpent  many  days  in  this  conft-
deration ;  the  opinion  of  Brutus  feeming  the  moft  advan¬
tageous,  and  That  of  Collatinus  the  moft  juft :  At  laft,
they  determined  that  the  people  fhould  be  the  judges  both
of  the  advantage,  and  the  juftice.  Many  things  having  been
faid  upon  that  occafion  by  each  of  the  confuls,  when  the
curiae,  that  were  thirty  in  number,  were  called  to  give  their
votes,  they  inclined  to  the  one  fide  with  fo  fmall  a  biafs,

6*  Twix  tuv  vnoilav,  etc.  Theocca-  confultatio  tenuit ;  ne  nonreddita ,  belli
fion  of  this  debate  in  the  fenate  is  re-  caufa ,  reddita ,  belli  materiel)  et  adju-
lated  by 1  Livy  in  very  few,  but  very  mentum  ejfent.
fjgnificant  words :  Per  aliquot  dies  ea

*  B.  ii.  c.  3.

R  r  2  that


320  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

that  thofe  curiae,  that  were  for  reftoring  the  effe&s,  carried
it  but  by  7  one  vote  againft  thofe,  that  were  for  retaining
them.  The  Tyrrhenians,  having  received  their  anfwer
from  the  confuls,  and  given  great  commendations  to  the
citizens  for  having  preferred  juftice  to  profit,  gave  notice  to
Tarquinius  to  fend  fome  perfons  to  receive  the  effeds,  while
they  themfelves  ftaid  in  the  city,  pretending  to  be  employed
in  colleding  the  furniture,  and  difpofing  of  thofe  things,
that  could  not  be  removed  ;  but  in  reality,  with  no  other
view,  than  to  form  parties  there,  and  to  carry  on  intrigues
purfuant  to  the  inftrudions  of  the  tyrant :  For  they  em¬
ployed  themfelves  in  delivering  letters  from  the  fugitives  to
their  friends  in  the  city,  and  in  receiving  others  from  thefe
to  the  fugitives:  And,  in  difcourfing  with  feveral  of  the
citizens,  and  founding  their  fentiments,  if  they  found  any,
through  weaknefs,  poverty,  or  a  defire  of  being  reftored  to
the  advantages  they  had  enjoyed  under  the  tyranny,  eafy  to
be  infnared,  thefe  they  endeavoured  to  corrupt  by  fuggefting
hopes,  and  giving  them  money.  And  fome  there  would  be,
as  may  well  be  imagined  in  a  large,  and  populous  city,  who
preferred  a  worfe,  to  a  better,  conftitution,  not  of  the  ob-
fcurer  fort  only,  but  even  among  the  men  of  diftindlion :  Of
this  number  were  the  two  Junii,  Titus,  and  Tiberius,  the
fons  of  Brutus,  the  conful,  then  juft  arrived  to  manhood;  and,

7#  Mi »  vj/ucw.  I  pay  the  greatelt  one  vote.  The  fmalleft  majority  there
deference  imaginable  to  the  learning,  could  be  was  of  two  votes,  viz.  fixteen
judgement,  and  eloquence  of  our  au-  againft  fourteen.  However,  I  believe
thor :  But,  figures  exclude  all  defe-  he  meaned  that,  when  fixteen  curiae
rence.  Among  the  thirty  curiae  there  concurred,  they  made  one  vote  more
could  not  have  been  a  majority  of  only  than  half  their  number.


with


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  321

with  them,  the  two8  Vitellii,  Marcus,  and  Manius,  brothers
to  the  wife  of  Brutus,  men  capable  of  adminiftring  the
affairs  of  the  public ;  and,  alfo,  the  Aquillii,  Lucius,  and
Marcus,  fons  to  the  fifter  of  Collatinus,  the  other  conful,
of  the  fame  age  with  the  fons  of  Brutus :  At  the  houfe  of
the  Aquillii,  their  father  being  dead,  the  confpirators,  gene-/
rally,  met,  and  conful  ted  together  concerning  the  reftoration
of  the  tyrants.

VII.  From  many  other  circumftances,  the  affairs  of  the
Romans  feem  to  me  to  be  raifed  by  the  hand  of  providence
to  the  flourifhing  condition  they  are,  now,  arrived  to ;  but,
particularly,  by  what  happened  upon  this  occafion  :  For
fuch  folly,  and  providential  madnefs  pofTeffed  thofe  unfor¬
tunate  men,  that  they  fufFered  themfelves  to  fend  letters  to
the  tyrant,  written  in  their  own  hand,  in  which  they  fet
down,  not  only,  the  number  of  their  accomplices,  but,  alfo,
the  time,  when  they  propofed  to  make  the  attempt  upon
the  confuls :  To  this  they  had  been  induced  by  the  letters
they  had  received  from  the  tyrant,  in  which  he  defired  to
know  beforehand  the  names  of  the  Romans,  whofe  zeal  he
ought  to  recompenfe,  after  he  was  reftored  to  the  fovereignty,
Thefe  letters  the  confuls  pofleffed  themfelves  of  by  the  fol¬
lowing  accident.  The  principal  confpirators  were  affembled
at  the  houfe  of  the  Aquillii,  the  fons  of  the  fifter  of  Collatinus,
having  been  invited  thither  under  a  pretence  of  performing
fome  religious  rites,  and  facrifices.  After  the  entertainment,.

*•  Owteaaio/.  Sigonius  has  proved,  read  Vitellii  inftead  of  Gellii,  and,  alfo*
in  his  notes  upon  Livy,  that  we  muft  Aquillii  with  a  double  L

they


Book  V.


322  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF

they  ordered  the  fervants  to  go  out  of  the  room,  and  to  with¬
draw  from  the  door  of  the  mens  apartment ;  becaufe  they
were,  then,  debating  about  the  means  of  reftoring  the  tyrants ;
and  fetting  down,  under  their  own  hands,  their  refolutions,  in
the  letters,  which  the  Aquillii  were  to  deliver  to  the  Tyrrhenian
embaffadors,  and  thefe  to  Tarquinius.  In  the  mean  time,
one  of  the  fervants,  who  was  their  cupbearer,  and  a  captive
taken  at  Caenina,  by  name,  9  Vindicius,  fufpedting,  by  their
ordering  the  fervants  to  withdraw,  that  they  were  confulting
fome  mifchief,  ftaid  alone  without  the  door,  and,  not  only,
heard  their  difcourfe,  but,  looking  through  a  crevice  of  the
door,  faw  the  letters  they  were  all  writing  :  And,  going  out
of  the  houfe,  about  midnight,  as  if  he  had  been  fent  by  his
mafters  upon  fome  bufinefs,  he  was  unwilling  to  go  to  the
confuls,  left  they,  defiring  to  ftifle  the  affair  from  a  tender-
nefs  to  their  relations,  might  order  the  informer  to  be  put
to  death ;  but  applied  to  Publius  Valerius,  one  of  the  four,
who  had,  firft,  fub verted  the  tyranny  :  This  perfon  gave
him  his  hand  as  a  pledge  of  his  faith  ;  and  the  other,  hav¬
ing  received  this  affurance  of  his  fecurity,  confirmed  by
oaths,  informed  him  of  all  he  had  both  heard,  and  feen.
Upon  this  information,  Valerius  loft  no  time,  but  went  to
the  houfe  of  the  Aquillii  about  break  of  day,  attended  with


9*  OuVvJociof.  Thus  we  muft  read  the  print  of  Vindicius,  in  the  attitude
this  name  with  the  Vatican  manufcript,  of  liftening  to  the  difcourfe  of  the  con-
becaufe  he  is  fo  called,  alfo,  by  k  Livy  ;  fpirators.  The  ftatue,  from  whence  it
Vindicio  ipfi  nomen  fuijfe.  The  reader  is  taken,  is  allowed  to  be  one  of  the
may  have  feen  the  ftatue,  or,  at  leaft,  fineft  at  Rome.

kB.ii.  c.  5.


a  con-


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  SENS  I  S.  323

a  confiderable  number  both  of  his  clients,  and  friends ;  and,
going  into  the  houfe  without  difficulty,  as  if  he  came  upon
fome  other  bufinefs,  the  youths  being  ftill  there,  he  got*
pofteffion  of  the  letters ;  and,  feizing  their  perfons,  carried
them  before  the  confuls.

VIII.  I  am  afraid  left  the  great,  and  aftonifhing  actions
of  Brutus,  one  of  the  confuls,  which  I  am,  now,  to  relate,
and  in  which  the  Romans  place  their  greateft  pride,  fhould
appear  cruel  and  incredible  to  the  Greeks ;  fince  it  is  na¬
tural  for  all  men  to  meafure  whatever  is  faid  of  others,  by
their  10  own  confcioufnefs,  and  to  render  credible  things
incredible  with  regard  to  themfelves :  However,  I  fhall
relate  them.  As  foon,  therefore,  as  it  was  day,  Brutus
afcended  the  tribunal ;  and,  calling  his  eyes  upon  the  letters
of  the  confpirators,  when  he  found  Thofe  written  by-  his
fons,  each  of  which  he  difcovered  by  their  feals,  and,  after
he  had  opened  them,  by  their  writing,  he,  firft,  commanded
both  their  letters  to  be  read  by  the  fecretary,  in  the  hearing


10>  Awo  to3v  iJiwv  araO&w.  This  read¬
ing,  for  which  we  are  obliged  to  the
Vatican  manufcript,  is,  in  my  opinion,
preferable  to  omo  rcov  oinetuv  in  all  the
editions.  But,  in  order  to  form  a
judgement  of  the  merit  of  the  Vatican
reading,  we  muft  confider  that  this
fentiment  of  our  author  is,  vifibly,  an
imitation  of  a  paflage  in  1  Thucydides,
though  expreffed  in  other  words  ;  Pe¬
ricles,  in  the  celebrated  £7rtla®tog  A ofe?,
fays  •,  y<xf>  avticlot  oi  £7 rctivoi-

eun  zrzgi  ereguv  teFopfvot,  a  oVov  oiv  acti  otvlog

1 B.  ii.  c.  35.


IxflSfo?  onflcci  Ixacvof  etvoa  fyxtrxm  dv  tjxy, n'
t ui  Je  vsrt^dXKovii  tzviuiv  (pOovyvJef,  j ion

ciTn^atuv.  Upon  comparing  the  two’
palfages,  it  will  be  found  that  our  au¬
thor  has  exprefied  e?  o<rov  av  xai  ccdjog
inois’oc  c irjai,  by  «7ro  twu  arafiwv.

But,  if  our  author  has  imitated  Thu¬
cydides,  m  Salluft  has  translated  him  :
Ubi  de  magnd  virtute  atque  gloria  bono-
rum  memores ,  quae  fibi  quifque  facilia
fa5lu  putat ,  aequo  arinmo  accipit  ifupra 9}
veluti  fidla  pro  falfis  ducit


®  Bell.  Catil.  c.  3.


of


Book  V.


324  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

of  all,  who  were  prefent;  and,  then,  ordered  his  fons  to
make  their  defence,  if  they  had  any  thing  to  fay.  But,
neither  of  them  daring  to  have  recourfe  to  an  impudent
denial  of  the  fact,  they  both  flood  felf-condemned,  and
wept.  Brutus,  after  a  fhort  paufe,  rofe  up;  and,  command¬
ing  iilence,  while  every  one  was  waiting  for  the  event,  faid,
He  condemned  his  fons  to  death.  Upon  which,  they  all  cried
out,  faying,  they  would  not  fuffer  fuch  a  man  to  be  punifhed
with  the  lofs  of  his  fons,  and  delired  to  fave  the  lives  of  the
youths  in  conlideration  of  their  father.  But  he,  regardlefs
of  their  cries,  and  lamentations,  ordered  the  lidtors  to  lead
them  to  death ;  while  the  youths  wept,  and  begged,  and
called  upon  him  in  the  moft  tender  terms.  Even  this  feemed
aftonifhing  to  all,  that  neither  the  intreaties  of  the  citizens,
nor  the  companion  to  his  children  fhould  make  any  im-
predion  upon  this  man.  But  his  unrelenting  deportment
with  regard  to  every  article  of  their  punifhment,  was  ftill
more  aftonifhing:  For  he  would  not  fuffer  his  fons  to  be
carried  to  any  other  place,  and  put  to  death  privately ;  nei¬
ther  would  he  himfelf  ftir  from  the  forum  to  avoid  the
dreadful  fpectacle,  till  they  were  executed,  or  allow  them
to  undergo  the  fentence,  pronounced  againft  them,  without
ignominy  ;  but  caufed  every  circumftance  of  their  punifh¬
ment,  eftablifhed  by  the  laws,  and  cuftoms  againft  male¬
factors,  to  be  obferved :  And,  after  they  had  been  whipped
in  the  forum,  in  the  light  of  all  the  citizens,  he  himfelf  being
,  prefent  when  all  this  was  performed,  he,  then,  allowed  their
heads  to  be  cut  off  with  the  axes.  But  the  moft  extraordi¬
nary,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HA  L I C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  SI  S.  325

nary,  and  the  moft  aftonifhing  part  of  this  man’s  deport¬
ment,  was,  that  he,  never,  turned  his  head  aiide,  nor  died  a
tear  ;  and,  while  all  prefent  at  this  fpe&acle  wept,  he  was
the  only  perfon,  who  was  obferved  not  to  lament  the  death
of  his  children,  to  bewail  the  deftitute  condition  of  his
family,  nor  to  betray  any  other  figns  of  foftnefs ;  but,
without  tears,  without  fighs,  without  emotion  to  the  laft,
he  bore  his  calamity  with  firmnefs.  So  great  a  ftrength  of
mind  was  he  indued  with,  fo  conftant  in  his  refolutions,
and  fo  much  fuperior  to  all  thofe  paffions,  that  diforder
human  reafon.

IX.  After  he  had  caufed  his  fons  to  be  put  to  death,
he,  prefently,  called  the  nephews  of  his  collegue,  the
Aquillii,  at  whofe  houfe  the  meetings  of  the  confpirators
had  been  held:  And,  ordering  the  fecretary  to  read  their
letters,  that  all  prefent  might  hear  them,  he  told  them  they
might  make  their  defence.  When  the  youths  were  brought
before  the  tribunal,  whether  by  the  fuggeftion  of  their
friends,  or  having  concerted  it,  they  threw  themfelves  at
the  feet  of  their  uncle,  in  hopes  of  being  faved  by  his  means.
Upon  which,  Brutus  ordered  the  lidtors  to  lead  them  to
death,  if  they  refufed  to  make  their  defence  :  When  Col-
latinus,  ordering  them  to  forbear  awhile  till  he  had  talked
with  his  collegue,  took  him  aiide,  and,  earneftly,  intreated
him  to  fpare  the  youths ;  fometimes,  excuhng  them,  and
alledging  that,  through  the  ignorance  of  their  youth,  and
the  evil  converfation  of  their  friends,  they  had  been  be¬
trayed  into  this  madnefs;  and  fometimes,  begging  of  him
Vol.  II.  S  s  to


326  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Eook  V.

to  gratify  him  in  faving  the  lives  of  his  relations,  as  it  was
the  only  favor  he  afked  of  him,  and  the  only  trouble  he
fhould,  ever,  give  him ;  and,  at  others,  fhewing  him  the
danger  of  creating  a  difturbance  in  the  city,  if  they  attempted
to  punifh  with  death  all  thofe,  who  appeared  to  have  given
any  affiftance  to  the  fugitives  in  promoting  their  reftoration  ;
thefe  being  very  numerous,  and  fome  of  no  obfcure  families.
But  not  being  able  to  prevail,  he  defired  him,  at  laft,  not  to
condemn  them  to  die,  but  to  inflict  a  moderate  punifhment
on  them,  faying,  it  was  abfurd  to  punifh  the  tyrants  them-
felves  with  banifhment  only,  and  their  friends  with  death.
And,  when  the  other  would  not  confent,  even,  to  moderate
the  punifhment,  or  to  put  off  the  trials  of  the  confpirators
(for  this  was  the  laft  favor  his  collegue  afked)  but  threatened,
and  fwore  he  would  put  them  all  to  death  that  very  day,
Collatinus,  full  of  refentment  that  he  was  not  able  to  obtain
any  thing  he  had  afked,  faid,  “  Since,  therefore,  you  are  in-
“  exorable  and  cruel,  I,  who  am  poflefledof  the  fame  power
<c  with  yourfelf,  acquit  the  youths.”  Brutus,  exafperated  at
this,  replied,  “  Not  while  I  am  alive,  Collatinus,  fhall  you
<c  have  power  to  acquit  the  traitors  to  their  country  :  So  far
<c  from  it,  that  you  yourfelf  fhall,  foon,  be  brought  to  con-
<£  dign  punifhment.”

X.  Having  faid  this,  and  appointed  a  guard  over  the
youths,  he  affembled  the  people;  and  the  forum  being
crouded  (for  the  cataftrophe  of  his  fons  was,  by  this  time,
divulged  through  the  whole  city)  he  afcended  the  tribunal ;
and,  placing  the  moft  dignified  perfons  of  the  fenate  near

him,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARNASSENS  IS.  327

him,  fpoke  as  follows ;  <c  I  could  have  wilhed,  citizens,
“  that  Collatinus,  my  collegue,  had  the  fame  fentiments
lt  with  myfelf  in  every  thing ;  and  that,  not  by  his  words
iQ  only,  but  by  his  a&ions  alfo,  he  had  fhewn  his  hatred,
“  and  enmity  to  the  tyrants :  But,  fince  I  have  difcovered
cc  in  him  fentiments  contrary  to  my  own,  and  that  he  is
u  united  to  the  Tarquinii,  as  well  by  inclination,  as  birth  ;
<c  and  that  he  is  endeavouring  a  reconciliation  with  them,
<c  and,  inftead  t)f  the  public  good,  confiders  his  private
u  advantage,  I  have,  not  only,  prepared  myfelf  to  hinder
“  him  from  carrying  his  mifchievous  defigns  into  execution,
“  but,  alfo,  defire  you  to  affift  me  in  it.  I  fhall,  firft,  inform
u  you  of  the  dangers  the  commonwealth  has  been  expofed
“  to,  and,  then,  in  what  manner  each  of  us  has  behaved
“  himfelf  in  thofe  dangers.  Some  of  the  citizens,  affem-
“  bling  at  the  -houfe  of  the  Aquillii,  who  are  fons  to  the
<c  fifter  of  Collatinus,  among  whom  were  my  two  fons,
“  and  the  brothers  of  my  wife,  and  fome  others,  no  obfcure
<c  men,  they  entered  into  an  agreement,  and  confpiracy  to
<(  kill  me,  and  reftore  Tarquinius  to  the  fovereignty ;  and,
“  having  written  letters,  containing  thefe  things,  under  their
“  own  hands,  and  fealed  them  with  their  own  feals,  they
iC  were  going  to  fend  them  to  the  fugitives.  Of  all  thefe
Ci  circumftances,  through  the  favor  of  fome  god,  infor-
<c  mat  ion  was  given  us  by  this  man  :  He  is  a  Have  be-
<c  longing  to  the  Aquillii,  at  whofe  houfe  they  met  laft
“  night,  and  writ  the  letters ;  and  the  letters  themfelves  we
u  have  in  our  pofleflion.  I  myfelf  have  punifhed  Titus,

S  s  2  “  and


328  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookV.

u  and  Tiberius,  my  Tons;  and  neither  the  law  we  have
“  made,  nor  the  oath  we  have  taken,  has,  in  any  degree,
u  been  violated  through  my  clemency.  But  Collatinus  takes
“  the  Aquillii  out  of  my  hands,  and  fays  he  will  not  allow
“  thofe,  who  have  entered  into  the  fame  counfels  with  my
“  fons,  to  undergo  the  fame  punishment.'  And,  it  thefe  are
“  not  to  Suffer,  it  will  be  impoffible  for  me  to  puniSh  either
cc  the  brothers  of  my  wife,  or  the  reft  of  the  traitors  to  their
cc  country:  For,  what  law  can  I  alledge  againft  thefe,  if  I
“  difcharge  the  others  ?  Of  what,  then,  do  you  think  thefe
a  things  are  the  indications  ?  Whether,  of  a  love  to  the
commonwealth,  or  of  a  reconciliation  with  the  tyrants  ?
<c  Of  a  confirmation  of  the  oaths,  which,  after  us,  you  all
<c  have  taken,  or  of  a  violation  of  thofe  oaths,  and  of  per-
“  jury  ?  And,  though  he  had  efcaped  our  difcovery,  he
“  would  have  lain  open  to  thofe  imprecations,  and  been
u  chaftifed  by  thofe  gods,  whom,  by  his  perjury,  he  had
u  offended.  But,  Since  he  is  difcovered,  we  ourfelves  ought
<£  to  puniSh  him;  who,  but  a  few  days  before,  perfuaded
u  you  to  reftore  the  effeds  to  the  tyrants,  to  the  end  that  we
u  might  not  make  ufe  of  that  fupply  in  the  war  againft  our
‘£  enemies,  but  our  enemies,  againft  us ;  and,  now,  he  thinks
“  that  thofe,  who  have  confpired  to  reftore  the  tyrants,  ought
“  to  be  exempt  from  punifhment,  with  a  view,  no  doubt,  of
“  gratifying  them,  that,  if  they  Should  return,  either  by  trea-
“  chery,  or  by  war,  he  may,  upon  the  merit  of  thefe  favors,  as
iC  their  friend,  obtain  every  thing  from  them  he  defires.  After
this.  Shall  I,  who  have  not  Spared  my  own  children,  fpare

“  y  ow,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A L IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  S I  S.  329

<c  you,  Collatinus,  who  are  with  us,  indeed,  in  perfon,  but
“  with  our  enemies,  in  inclination  ;  and  who  defire  to  five
“  thofe,  who  have  betrayed  their  country  ;  and  to  deftroy
“  me,  who  am  the  defender  of  it?  Why?  Far  from  it:
“  But,  to  prevent  you  from  effecting  any  thing  of  this  kind
Cl  for  the  future,  I  deprive  you  of  your  magiftracy,  and
“  command  you  to  retire  to  fome  other  city.  Thefe  que-
“  ftions  mu  ft  be  decided  by  you,  citizens ;  in  order  to  which
“  I  fhall  afiemble  you,  immediately,  in  your  centuries,  and
“  take  your  votes:  Be  affured,  however,  that  either  Colla-
“  tinus,  or  Brutus  muft  be  your  conful.”

XI.  While  he  was  fpeaking,  Collatinus  cried  out,  and
exprefled  his  refentment ;  and,  interrupting  him  at  every
word,  called  him  a  deftgning  man,  and  a  betrayer  of  his.
friends ;  and,  by  endeavouring,  fometimes,  to  clear  himfelf  of
the  accufations;  and,  at  others,  by  interceding  for  his  nephews,
and,  not  fuffering  his  affair  to  be  put  to  the  vote,  he  in¬
flamed  the  indignation  of  the  people,  and  every  thing  he  faid
raifed  dreadful  tumults.  The  citizens,  being,  now,  exafpe-
rated  againft  him,  refufed  either  to  hear  his  defence,  or  to
admit  his  intreaties;  but  called  out  to  have  their  votes
taken;  when  Spurius  Lucretius,  his  father-in-law,  a  man
efteemed  by  the  people,  fearing  the  event,  and  that  he  fhould
be,  ignominioufly,  deprived,  not  only,  of  the  magiftracy,  but
of  his  country,  deflred  both  the  confuls  to  give  him  leave
to  fpeak  (he  being  the  firft  perfon,  who,  ever,  obtained  this
liberty,  as  the  Roman  hiftorians  fay ;  it  not  being,  at  that
time,  cuftomary  for  a  private  perfon  to  fpeak  in  an  affembly

of


330  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

of  the  people)  and,  addrefling  his  intreaties  to  the  confuls
jointly,  advifed  Collatinus  not  to  perfift  in  his  oppofttion,
nor  to  retain  the  magiftracy  contrary  to  the  defire  of  the
citizens,  which  he  had  received  by  their  confent ;  but,  if
thofe,  who  had  given  it,  thought  fit  to  refume  the  magi¬
ftracy,  to  refign  it  voluntarily ;  and  not  to  clear  himfelf  of
the  accufations  brought  againft  him,  by  his  words,  but  by
his  adtions ;  to  remove,  with  all  his  effedts,  to  fome  other
part  of  the  world,  till  the  commonwealth  was  in  a  ftate  of
fecurity,  fince  the  good  of  the  people  feemed  to  require  it ;
and  to  confider  that,  when  other  crimes  are  committed,  all
men,  indeed,  fhew  their  refentment ;  but,  when  treafon  is
fufpedted,  they  look  upon  it  as  the  more  prudent  part,  though
even  their  fears  are  vain,  rather  to  guard  againft  the  treafon,
than,  by  defpifing  it,  to  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  undone.  He,
then,  exhorted  Brutus  not  to  expel  his  collegue  from  his
country  with  fhame,  and  ignominy,  in  concert  with  whom
he  had  formed  the  beft  refolutions  in  favor  of  the  common¬
wealth;  but,  if  he  himfelf  were  willing  to  refign  the  magi¬
ftracy,  and  leave  his  country  voluntarily,  not  only  to  give  him
leave  to  remove  all  his  effedts  at  his  leifure,  but  to  add  fome
benefadlion  from  the  public,  to  the  end  that  this  favor,  con¬
ferred  upon  him  by  the  people,  might  be  a  comfort  to  him
under  his  afflidtion.

XI L  Thefe  exhortations  being,  thus,  addrefled  to  both
the  confuls,  and  fupported  by  the  approbation  of  the  peo¬
ple,  Collatinus,  greatly  lamenting  his  misfortune,  in  being
obliged,  through  the  compaflion  he  had  fhewn  to  his  rela¬
tions,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN ASSENS  IS.  33r

tions,  to  leave  his  country,  11  refigned  the  magiftracy  :  And
Brutus,  applauding  him  for  having  taken  the  belt,  and  the
moft  advantageous  refolution  both  to  himfelf,  and  to  the  com¬
monwealth,  exhorted  him  not  to  entertain  any  refentment
either  againft  him,  or  againft  his  citizens;  and,  when  he
removed  to  another  place,  to  look  upon  the  city  he  had
left,  as  his  country  ;  and,  never,  to  join  with  her  enemies  in
any  counfels,  or  a&ions  that  might  be  diredled  againft  her  ;
and,  upon  the  whole,  to  confider  his  removal,  as  a  pere¬
grination,  not  as  anexpulfion,  or  a  banifhment;  and,  though
his  perfon  continued  with  thofe,  who  received  him,  to  let
his  inclination  remain  with  thofe,  who  difmifted  him.  After
this  exhortation,  he  prevailed  upon  the  people  to  make  him
a  prefent  of  12  twenty  talents,  and  he  himfelf  added  five  more

”*  AttoI^Hou  ryv  ctt>%W'  Both  the  fign,  that  looks  as  if  that  hiftorian
French  translators  have  obferved  that  was  fo  much  employed  in  the  beauties
the  reafons,  given  by  Livy  for  the  of  his  ftyle,  as  not  to  attend  to  the
depofition  of  Collatinus,  are  not,  in  confiftency  of  his  hiftory.  He  had,
any  degree,  fo  well  founded  as  Thofe,  before,  acquainted  his  readers  that  the
alledged  by  Dionyfius.  This  mult  be  mother  of  Brutus  was  filler  to  Tar-
allowed.  And  I  fhall  add,  that  the  quinius  Superbus,  0  Lucius  Junius  Bru-
oppofition  given  by  Collatinus  to  the  tus  Tarquinid  forore  regis  natus  ;  and,
punilhment  of  his  nephews,  after  yet,  in  this  fpeech,  he  makes  Brutus
Brutus  had  facrificed  his  own  fons  to  fay  to  Collatinus  that  the  family ,  of
the  liberty  of  his  country,  was,  cer-  which  he  was  defcended,  was  obnoxi-
tainly,  a  better  reafon  to  depofe  him,  ous  to  liberty  ;  p  Regium  genus,  re~
than  becaufe  his  name  happened  to  gium  nomen ,  non  folum  in  civitate ,  fed
be  Tarquinius  Collatinus,  which  ".Livy  etiam  in  imperio  ejfe  *,  id  officer e,  id  oh-
tells  us  was  the  Gnly  thing  that  drew  fare  libertati.

upon  him  this  difgrace  •,  Confulis  enim  I2,  Em o<ri  Tu\avla.  Tw’enty  talents
alterius ,  cum  nihil  aliud  offenderit,  make  3875  pounds  of  our  money  j
nomen  etiam  invifum  civitati  fuit.  If  confequently,  the  prefent,  made  by
this  reafon  is  extraordinary,  there  is  Brutus  himfelf  to  Collatinus  of  five*
another,  urged  againft  him  by  Brutus,  talents,  will  amount  to  968  /.  15  /.
in  Livy,  when  he  advifes  him  to  re-

nB.  ii.  c.  2.  °B.  i.  c.  56.  PB.  ii.  c.  2*


out


332  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.
out  of  his  private  fortune.  Tarquinius  Collatinus,  after
this  difgrace,  retired  to  Lavinium,  the  metropolis  of  the
Latin  nation,  where  he  died  in  an  advanced  age.  And
Brutus,  refolving  not  to  continue  alone  in  the  magiftracy,
nor  to  give  room  to  the  citizens  to  fufpeCt  that  the  delire
of  monarchy  had  induced  him  to  banifh  his  collegue,  im¬
mediately  affembled  the  people  in  the  field,  where  they,
ufually,  chofe  their  kings,  and  their  other  magiftrates,  and
appointed  for  his  collegue  Publius  Valerius,  who  was,  as  I
faid  before,  of  Sabine  extraction,  a  man  worthy  both  of
praife,  and  admiration,  for  the  many  great  qualifications  he
poffeflfed,  but,  particularly,  for  his  frugality :  For  he  was  a
kind  of  felf-taught  philofopher,  as  he  fhewed  himfelf  upon
many  occafions,  of  which  I  fhall,  foon,  give  an  account.

XIII.  After  this,  Brutus,  and  his  collegue,  a&ed,  in  every
thing,  with  great  unanimity,  and,  immediately,  put  to  death
all,  who  had  confpired  to  reftore  the  fugitives  ;  and,  alfo,
honoured  the  Have,  who  had  given  information  of  the  con-
fpiracy,  not  only  with  13  his  liberty,  but  with  the  privileges
of  a  Roman  citizen,  and  a  large  fum  of  money.  After  which,
they  introduced  three  inftitutions,  all  of  the  greateft  reputa¬
tion,  and  advantage  to  the  public,  by  which  they  created  an
nniverfal  harmony  among  the  citizens,  and  weakened  the

13*  E tevQtouxs  t£  >c«i  vroxfletois  p.eUJ'oc'w  q  ille  primum  dicitur  vindifta  liberatus *,
diuYicxv.  Livy  fays  that  Vindicius  was  quidam  quoque  vindidtae  nomen  ab  illo
the  firft  man,  who  was  made  free  by  traftum  put  ant.  VindiRa ,  or  Feftuca ,
the  method  in  life  among  the  Romans,  properly  fignifies  the  rod,  by  the  im-
'  called  VindiRa ,  which  was  thought  by  pofition  of  which  the  Have  was  declared
fume  to  have  been  fo  called  from  him  ;  by  the  praetor  to  be  free.

/

ii.  c.  5.


fadions


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  MALIC  ARNASSENSIS.  333

fa&ions  of  their  enemies.  The  inftitutions,  introduced  by  thefe
confuls,  were  as  follows :  In  the  firft  place,  they  made  choice
of  the  moft  diftinguifhed  among  the  plebeians;  and,  having
made  them  patricians,  they,  with  thefe, 14  completed  the  fenate
to  the  number  of  three  hundred.  After  that,  they  expofed  the
effects  of  the  tyrants  in  public  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  citizens,
giving  to  every  one  as  much  of  them  as  they  could  feize ;
and,  dividing  the  lands,  they  had  poffeffed,  among  thofe,
who  had  none,  refer ved  only  one  field,  which  lies  between
the  city,  and  the  river :  This  field  their  anceftors  had,  by  a
public  decree,  confecrated  to  Mars,  as  a  meadow  for  horfes,
and  the  propereft  place  for  the  youth  to  perform  their  exer-
cifes  in  arms ;  and,  even  before  this,  it  had  been  confecrated
to  this  god:  But  Tarquinius  had  appropriated  it  to  his  own
ufe,  and  fown  it ;  the  greateft  proof  of  which  is,  the  refo-
lution,  then,  taken  by  the  confuls,  in  relation  to  that  corn :
For,  having  given  leave  to  the  people  to  carry  away  every
thing,  that  belonged  to  the  tyrants,  they  would  not  fuffer
them  to  take  away  the  corn,  which  had  grown  in  this  field,
and  was  yet  lying  upon  the  floors,  whether  in  the  firaw,  or
threfhed  ;  but,  looking  upon  it  as  impure,  and  improper  to
be  carried  into  their  houfes,  they  determined  it  fliould  be

,4.  Koil  «£  «v1«»  t„v  author,  is  againft  him  j  both  of  them

I  am  at  a  lofs  to  guefs  averting,  in  fo  many  words,  that  the
J,Jr  authoritv  r  Plutarch  had  for  af-  vacancies  in  the  fenate  were  fupplied
fertino-  that  Valerius  filled  up  the  va-  before  the  death  of  Brutus.  Concern-
cancies  in  the  fenate  after  the  death  of  ing  this  fupply  of  the  Roman  fenate
Brutus  and  while  he  himfelf  was  foie  fee  the  fixty  iixth  annotation  on  the
conful For  5  Livy,  as  well  as  our  third  book.

*  In  Poplicola.  SB.  ii.  c.  i.

T  t


Vol.  II.


thrown


334  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

thrown  into  the  river :  And  there,  ftill,  remains  a  monument,
which  manifefts  that  tranfa£tion,  being  a  confiderable  ifland,
confecrated  to  Aefculapius,  and  wafhed  on  all  fides  by  the
river ;  which  ifland,  they  fay,  was  formed  by  the  heap  of
rotten  ftraw,  confolidated  by  the  mud,  which  the  ftream
was,  conftantly,  accumulating.  The  third  thing  they  did
was  to  grant  leave  to  all  the  Romans,  who  had  fled  from
the  city  with  the  tyrant,  to  return,  upon  the  terms  of  im¬
punity,  and  a  general  amnefty,  limiting  the  time  to  twenty
days :  But,  if  they  did  not  return  within  the  term  appointed,
they  condemned  them  to  perpetual  banifhment,  and  the
confifcation  of  their  eftates.  Thefe  inftitutions  ingaged  all,
who  enjoyed  any  part  whatever  of  the  pofTeffions  belonging
to  the  tyrants,  to  undergo  any  danger  rather  than  be  dif-
poffeffed  of  thofe  advantages ;  and,  by  freeing  from  fear
thofe,  who,  apprehending  a  neceffary  punifhment,  as  due  to
the  crimes  they  had  been  guilty  of  under  the  tyranny,  had
fubmitted  to  one,  that  was  voluntary,  made  them  embrace
the  intereft  of  the  commonwealth,  preferably,  to  That  of
the  tyrants.

XIV.  After  they  had  regulated  thefe  things,  and  made
the  neceffary  preparations  for  the  war,  they,  for  fome  time,
kept  their  forces  in  the  plains  near  the  city,  difpofed  under
their  refpedlive  enfigns,  and  leaders,  where  they  performed
their  exercife.  All  which  was  occafioned  by  the  advice  they
had  received,  that  the  fugitives  were  railing  an  army  againft
them  in  all  the*cities  of  Tyrrhenia,  and  that  two  of  thefe
cities,  the  Tarquinienfes,  and  theVeientes,  had,  openly,

declared


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  335

declared  in  favor  of  their  reftoration,  and  both  levied  con-
fiaerable  armies  to  promote  it;  and,  that,  in  the  other
cities,  fome  voluntiers  were  raifed  by  their  friends,  and,  alfo,
mercenaries.  When  the  Romans  heard  the  enemy  had,
already,  taken  the  field,  they  refolved  to  meet  them ;  and,
before  the  latter  came  up,  they  pafled  the  river  ;  and,
marching  forward,  incamped  near  the  Tyrrhenians  in  a
meadow,  called  15  Vinius,  near  a  grove  confecrated  to  the
heroe,  Horatus.  Both  armies  were,  nearly,  equal  in  number,
and,  equally,  eager  for  the  ingagement.  At  firft,  therefore,
there  was  a  fmall  fkirmifh  between  the  horfe,  who  charged
as  foon  as  they  came  in  fight  of  one  another,  and  before  the
foot  were  incamped  :  In  which,  having  tried  each  other’s
ftrength,  and  neither  conquering,  nor  conquered,  they  retired
to  their  refpedtive  camps.  After  that,  the  foot,  and  horfe
of  both  armies  being  drawn  up  in  the  fame  manner,  the  foot
in  the  center,  and  the  horfe  on  the  wings,  they  came  to  a
general  ingagement.  Valerius,  the  laft  ele&ed  conful,  com¬
manded  the  right  wing  of  the  Romans,  and  flood  oppofite
to  the  Veientes;  and  Brutus  the  left,  having  before  him  the
forces  of  the  Tarquinienfes,  commanded  by  the  fons  of
Tarquinius,  the  late  king.

XV.  When  the  armies  were  ready  to  ingage,  one  of  the
fons  of  Tarquinius,  by  name,  Aruns,  the  moft  remarkable

of  his  brothers  both  for  the  ftrength  of  his  body,  and  the

\

*5*  Ev  ^ajxcovi  x.u.\x[mvu  Ovivw.  ‘Plu-  Jilva  Arfm.  Thefe  varieties  are,  pro-
tarch  calls  this  meadow,  A«r««ov  Anpwoc,  bably,  owing  to  the  errors  of  the  tran-
and  the  grove,  Ov^ov  aAcog ;  and u  Livy,  fcribers.

1  In  Poplicola.  u  B.  ii.  c.  7.

T  t  2


vigor


336  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V,

vigor  of  his  mind,  advanced  before  the  ranks  of  the  Tyr¬
rhenians  ;  and,  riding  up  fo  near  to  the  Romans,  that  all
of  them  might  know  his  perfon,  and  hear  his  voice,  threw
out  abufive  words  againft:  Brutus,  their  commander,  calling
him  a  wild  beaft,  and  ftained  with  the  blood  of  his  children ;
and,  reproaching  him,  at  the  fame  time,  with  cowardice,  and
pulillanimity,  challenged  him  to  decide  the  general  quarrel
by  a  fmgle  combat.  Brutus,  impatient  of  thefe  reproaches,
and  deaf  to  the  remonftrances  of  his  friends,  rufhedupon  the
fate,  that  was  prepared  for  him  :  For  both,  being,  equally*
hurried  on  by  paffion,  and  confidering  only  what  they  de-
fired  to  effecft,  not  what  they  might  fuffer,  pufhed  their
horfes  with  all  their  force  againft  one  another ;  and  each,
with  unerring  fpears,  piercing  the  buckler,  and  corflet  of
his  enemy,  one  hid  the  point  in  his  fide,  and  the  other  in
his  loins  ;  and  their  horfes,  joining  their  chefts  with  the
violence  of  the  motion,  rofe  upon  their  hind  feet ;  and,
throwing  back  their  heads,  flung  their  riders,  who,  falling
to  the  ground,  lay  agonizing,  while  ftreams  of  blood  gufhed
from  their  wounds.  When  the  two  armies  faw  their  leaders
fall,  they  ingaged  with  fhouts,  and  the  noife  of  arms,  and  a
mod  violent  battle  infued  both  of  the  foot,  and  horfe ;  the
event  or  which  was  alike  to  both  :  For  the  Romans,  who
were  on  the  right  wing,  which  was  commanded  by  Vale¬
rius,  the  other  conful,  defeated  the  Veientes ;  and,  purfuing
them  to  their  camp,  covered  the  plain  with  dead  bodies :
While  the  Tyrrhenians,  who  were  pofted  on  the  enemy’s  right
wing,  and  commanded  by  Titus,  and  Sextus,  the  fons  of

Tarquinius,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  337

Tarquinius,  put  the  left  of  the  Romans  to  flight ;  and,
advancing  to  their  camp,  attempted  to  take  it  by  ftorm  :
But,  many  of  them  being  wounded,  they  were  repulfed  by
thofe,  who  had  been  left  to  guard  it:  Thefe  guards  were
called  the  Triarii ,  being  veteran  troops,  and  experienced  in
many  wars,  and  are,  always,  the  laft  employed,  when  every
other  hope  is  defperate,  in  actions  of  the  greateft  confe-
quence.

XVI.  The  fun  being,  now,  near  fetting,  both  armies  re-<
tired  to  their  own  camps,  not  fo  much  elated  with  their
victory,  as  dejedted  with  the  numbers  they  had  loft;  and,
if  it  fhould  be  neceflary  to  renew  the  battle,  not  thinking
thofe,  who  were  left,  fufficient  for  that  purpofe,  the  greateft
part  of  them  being  wounded.  But  there  was  a  greater  de¬
jection,  and  defpair  among  the  Romans,  occaftoned  by  the
death  of  their  commander ;  and  many  of  them  were  of
opinion  that  the  beft  thing  they  could  do,  was  to  quit  their
camp  before  the  day  appeared.  While  they  were  conflder-
ing  thefe  things,  and  difcourfing  of  them  among  themfelves,
nearly  about  16  the  firft  watch,  a  voice  was  heard  from  the
grove,  near  which  they  were  incamped,  calling  aloud  to
both  armies  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  be  heard  by  all  of  them,
whether  from  the  heroe,  to  whom  the  grove  was  confe-
crated,  or  from  Faunus,  as  he  is  called  :  For  the  Romans
attribute  to  this  genius  the  panic,  and  other  appearances,
which  fhew  themfelves  to  men,  at  different  times,  in  different
fhapes,  infpiring  terrors ;  and  they  fay  that  all  voices,  which

*6*  IT^»  tjj v  srg« 7jjw  jv.  See  thefixtieth  annotation  on  the  third  book.

difturb


338  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookV.

difturb  the  minds  of  the  hearers,  are  the  work  of  this  god.
However,  the  voice  of  this  genius  exhorted  the  Romans  to
take  courage,  as  having  gained  the  victory ;  and  declared
that  the  lofs  of  the  enemy  exceeded  theirs  by  one  man.  It
is  faid  that  Valerius,  encouraged  by  this  voice,  marched  to
the  enemy’s  camp,  while  it  was,  yet,  dark  night,  and  having
killed  many  of  them,  and  driven  the  reft  out  of  the  camp,
made  himfelf  mafter  of  it.

XVII.  This  was  the  event  of  that  battle  :  The  next  day,
the  Romans,  having  ftripped  the  enemy’s  dead  men,  and
buried  their  own,  returned  home.  The  moft  confiderable
knights  carried  the  body  of  Brutus  to  Rome  with  many
praifes,  and  tears,  and  adorned  it  with  crowns  in  token  of
his  fuperior  bravery.  They  were  met  by  the  fenate,  who
had,  before,  decreed  a  triumph  in  honor  of  their  general,  and,
alfo,  by  all  the  people,  who  received  the  army  with  bowls
of  wine,  and  tables  fpread  with  vidluals.  When  they  came
into  the  city,  the  conful  17  triumphed,  according  to  the
cuflom  ufed  by  the  kings,  when  they  performed  the  procef-
fions  attended  with  trophies,  and  facrifices ;  and,  having
confecrated  the  fpoils  to  the  gods,  he  pafled  that  day,  as  a
feftival,  and  gave  an  entertainment  to  the  moft  conliderable


17‘  YloiMrsvircis  0  v7rxlof-  This  was
the  firft  confular  triumph ;  and  in  thefe
words  it  ftands  recorded  :  P.  Paler.
Volufi  F.  Poplicola  Cof.  primus  de  Veien-
tihus  et  Farquinienfibus.  an.  ccxliv.
kal.  Mart.  Valerius  triumphed  the
tlay  after  the  battle,  as  our  author  tells
us  :  And  *  Plutarch  fays  the  battle  was


fought  on  the  day  before  the  calends
of  March  *,  Totvlyjv  rt]v  /uot^v  Aefxcn  ytvt-
cQ-oit  ar^o  pa?  xaActvSu >v  Matgltx  :  Where
he  has  tranflated  pridie  by  pa?.
By  this  means,  the  infeription,  and
the  relations,  given  by  our  author,
and  Plutarch,  are  all  connedted.


w  Sigon.  in  Faft.  et  Triumph.


x  In  Poplicola.


of


339'


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H ALI C A RN  A  S  S  E N  S  I  S.

of  the  citizens.  The  day  after,  he  appeared  in  a  mourning
habit ;  and,  placing  in  the  forum  the  body  of  Brutus,  pro¬
perly  adorned,  upon  a  magnificent  bier,  he  called  the  people
together;  and,  afcending  the  tribunal,  made  his  funeral  oration.

I  cannot,  certainly,  affirm  whether  Valerius  was  the  firft,
who  introduced  this  cuftom  among  the  Romans,  or  whether
he  found  it,  already,  eftabliffied  by  the  kings.  But  I  am
informed  by  general  hiftory,  as  delivered  down  by  the  moft
ancient  poets,  and  the  moft  celebrated  hiftorians,  that  it  was
an  ancient  invention  of  the  Romans  to  celebrate  the  virtues
of  illuftrious  men  at  their  funerals ;  and  that  the  Greeks
were  not  the  authors  of  it :  For  thefe,  indeed,  give  an  ac¬
count  of  funeral  games,  both  gymnic,  and  equeftrian,  per¬
formed  in  honor  to  famous  men  by  their  friends ;  as,  to
Patroclus,  by  Achilles ;  and,  before  that,  by  Hercules  to
Pelops :  But  none  of  them  make  any  mention  of  funeral
orations,  fpoken  in  praife  of  the  deceafed ;  except  the  Athe¬
nian  tragedy- writers,  who,  in  flattery  to  their  city  upon  the
occafion  of  thofe,  who  were  18  buried  by  Thefeus,  invented

l8,  Totg  vVo  Qvia-iug  Sctnlo y.tvot?.  Ca-  alludes  to  the  htUsg  of  Euripides,  in
faubon  has  a  note  upon  this  paffage,  which  Adraftus  makes  the  panegyric
which  M.  ***  has  appropriated  with-  of  the  five  generals,  who  fell  before
out  any  acknowledgement.  In  this  Thebes,  in  the  prefence  of  Thefeus,
note,  the  former  thinks  our  author  has  when  he  was  going  to  perform  their
exprefifed  himfelf  obfcurdy  •,  and  afks  funeral  rites.  As  to  the  flattery,  which,
this  queftion  *,  Who  are  thofe,  whom  our  author  fays,  the  tragic  poets  be-
Thefeus  buried  ?  This  queftion  is,  flowed  upon  the  Athenians  upon  this
eafily,  anfwered,  when  we  confider  account,  the  acknowledgement,  made
that  Dionyfius  fpeaks  of  fome  tragic  by  Adraftus  to  Thefeus  for  this  in¬
poets,  who  flattered  the  Athenians  up-  fiance  of  his  humanity,  will,  fufficient-
on  the  occafion  of  thofe,  whom  The-  ly,  explain  it  5
feus  buried.  By  this,  it  is  plain  he


this


340  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

this  fable  alfo :  19  For  it  was  late  before  the  Athenians  added
to  the  law  the  funeral  panegyric,  which,  they,  firft,  inftituted
either  in  honor  of  thofe,  who  died  in  defence  of  their  country
at  Artemifium,  Salamis,  and  Plataeae,  or  on  account  of  the
actions  performed  at  Marathon  :  Now,  the  affair  of  Mara¬
thon,  if  the  orations  in  praife  of  the  difeafed,  really,  began
from  thence,  was  later  than  the  funeral  of  Brutus  by  fixteen
years.  But  if  any  one,  without  inquiring  into  the  authors
of  thefe  funeral  panegyrics,  defires  to  confider  the  law  itfelf,
and  to  be  informed  in  which  of  the  two  nations  it  is  arrived
to  the  greateft  excellence,  he  will  find  this  inftitution  to  be
founded  on  greater  wifdom  among  the  Romans,  than  among


y  '0H(TcU,  %VVHr[AiV  WCtvii'  <)V  A

Aii^axcts  sc&Aa,  ieo/uevtiv  euegyelaiv,
Xxeiv  t  ahjpcv  y  e£o, ugv,  yevvaiot  yxg

TlxQovhs,  V[ACtS  Oivlltyxv  c(peiAOfMV.

I  fhall  add  the  anfwer  of  Thefeus  in
order  to  introduce  the  reply  of  Adra-
ftus,  by  which,  I  believe,  it  will,  plain¬
ly,  appear  that  this  is  the  paffage  al¬
luded  to  by  our  author  ;

0K<r.  T 1  it;  arc0‘  vyiv  otAA'  uTTvofycrcu
Ai$-  Xoctg.  a^ios  yu^  xxi  <rv,  nut  vroAis  <t£0ev.

*9'  OL  yx$  zsoli  AQqvutot  zzqoff.s'l  stray
tov  6r»' a(ptov  ziratvov  tw  voyco.  I  fll all,

firft,  obferve  that  our  author  ufes  here
the  fame  expreflion.with  z  Thucydides
in  the  n ri\a(pios  Aofoe ,  pronounced,  as
he  fays,  by  Pericles  ;  whole  words  are,

i7rc>.ivb(ri  rdv  Ztrgoc&evla,  TUi  vouui  tov  Aofov

to  vie  :  And,  then,  confider  who  intro¬
duced  this  cuftom  among  the  Athe¬
nians.  The  Greek  fcholi aft  (ays  it  was

Solon  •,  tcv  votxoQ f tfVy  itjAovoli  tov  XoAu'vx.

yjr.u  7.6.  1  B.  ii.


But  this  is  contradi&ed  by  our  author,
who,  we  find,  fays  it  was,  firft,  prac-
tifed  in  honor  of  thofe,  who  loft  their
lives  at  Artemifium,  Salamis,  and
Plataeae,  or  at  Marathon.  All  thefe
battles,  every  body  knows,  were  fought
feveral  years  after  the  time  of  Solon.
In  this,  Dionyfius  is  fupported  by
a  Diodorus  Sicuius,  who  fays  this  law
was,  firft,  ena&ed  by  the  Athenians,
after  the  total  overthrow  of  the  Per-
fians  at  Plataeae.  This  Cafaubon  ob-
ferved  before  me  •,  but,  as  he  has  con¬
tented  himfelf  with  giving  the  fenfe  of
this  paffage  of  Diodorus  Siculus  in
Latin,  I  fhall  lay  his  own  words  before
the  reader  for  his  greater  fatisfavftion  :

OfAQlWi  ii  i CXt  0  TUV  aQ  viva  1  tov  itiy.cs  ex,o<ruytTt
tus  txQxs  twv  iv  t u  Tli^tTiv.u)  nrcAfjUoi  t t-
AsvlvJ<ra>luiv1  xai  tov  afcova  tov  err^a^iov  role
nPilTON  iTTOitjre.  X1X1  vouov  £0^,  Aefetv
ifttayiov  T CIS  iyyotna,  ^  xnioyevois  txs
aige9ev1xs  reov  f>)logav.

c.  55.  a  B.  ii.  c.  33.

the


Book V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN ASSENSIS.  341

the  Athenians,  for  this  reafon ;  becaufe  the  latter  feeni  to
have  ordained  thefe  orations  to  be  pronounced  at  the  funerals
of  thofe,  who  died  in  war;  imagining  that  they  ought  to
be  deemed  good  men  from  the  fingle  virtue,  that  appeared
at  their  death,  though,  in  other  refpedts,  they  had  no  fort
of  merit :  Whereas,  the  Romans  have  appointed  this  honor
to  be  paid  to  all  illuftrious  men,  whether,  in  commanding
armies,  or,  prefiding  in  the  civil  admin  iftration,  they  had
given  wife  counfels,  and  performed  great  a&ions;  and  not
to  the  former  only,  when  they  died  in  the  operations  of  war,
but  to  the  latter,  alfo,  in  what  manner  foever  they  died :
For  they  were  of  opinion  that  good  men  deferved  praife  for
every  virtue  they  had  fhewn  during  their  lives,  and,  not  for
the  fingle  glory  of  their  deaths.

XVIII.  Thus  died  Junius  Brutus,  who  fubverted  mo¬
narchy,  and  was  the  firft  conful :  Though  it  was  late  before
he  appeared  with  diftindlion,  and  flourifhed  but  a  fhort
time,  yet  he  was  looked  upon  as  the  moft  illuftrious  of  all
the  Romans.  20  He  left  no  children,  either  male,  or  female,

20*  Tiviotv  ali  ocojivx.  Kotlahnrav  vk  fore  him  their  authorities  in  their  own
B-^etoiv.  Sylburgius  obierves  that,  words.  Thofe  of  b  Cicero  are  as  fol-
when  Cicero  makes  the  firft  Brutus  lows  *,  Quis  enim  putet  aut  celeritatem
the  author  of  the  Junian  family,  he  ingenii  L.  Brulo  Mi,  nolilitatis  vejlrae
fays  this  only  in  favor  of  M.  Brutus,  principi ,  defuijfe?  This  is,  indeed,  lo
whom  he  honoured  to  a  degree  of  fu-  curfory  an  obfervation,  and  feems  fo
perftition.  This  obfervation  I  find  both  like  a  compliment  to  his  friend  Brutuc,
the  French  tranflators  have  adopted,  that  no  great  ftrefs  can  be  laid  upon  it.
But,  in  order  to  enable  the  reader  to  The  next  authority  is  That  of  PIu-
form  a  judgement  of  what  other  au-  tarch,  who  begins  the  Life  of  Marcus
thors  have  faid  for,  or  againft  the  Brutus  in  thefe  words.  St

opinion  of  Dionyfius,  I  fhall  lay  be-  arfofovo?  w  Ixvioi  B^flcj,  ov  omswocv  gv

b  Brutus,  c.  14.

U  u


VOL.  II.


as


Book  V.


342  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

as  thofe  authors  write,  who  hare  inquired  into  the  hiftory
of  the  Romans  with  the  greateft  fuccefs,  of  which  they
bring  many  arguments ;  but,  above  all,  This,  which  is  not,
eafily,  refuted,  that  he  was  of  a  patrician  family  ;  whereas,
thofe,  who  faid  they  were  defcended  from  that  family,  as  the
junii,  and  Bruti,  were  all  plebeians,  and  bore  thofe  magi-
ftracies,  to  which  the  plebeians  might,  by  law,  be  admitted ;
fuch  as  the  offices  of  edile,  and  tribune  of  the  people;  but
none  of  them  were  inverted  with  the  confular  dignity,  of
which  the  patricians,  only,  were  capable:  And  it  was  late
before  they  obtained  this  magiftracy,  that  is,  when  the
plebeians  were  allowed  to  enjoy  it.  But  I  leave  thefe  things


Ksc7Ttlu\iui  ^ahxxv  ot  zaaXai  Taixaioi  y.i<rov

TWU  j0#CM?WV,  iCTrXVfAtVQV  /3i£ai-

elalec  xoclaAv<ra\I  a  Ta^KVVtai.  Some  lines
after,  Plutarch  quotes  the  authority  of
Pofidonius,  the  philofopher,  in  fupport
of  his  opinion.  On  the  other  fide,
Dion  Caffius  confirms  what  our  author
fays,  and  affects,  that  the  confpirators
abufed  this  fimilitude  of  names,  in
order  to  ingage  M.  Brutus  in  their
defign  of  putting  Caefar  to  death :
^  T  fiay.y.ala  te  yap ,  tjj  0 fxtevv u i 00  avia  ry
srfof  r ov  zsuvv  Bgzlov  tov  rxc  TxgKvvixt
xalaAvaavlx  KATAXPflMENOI, '  ZtroAA#
et-tliOurav,  (pqjui^evlif  avlov  YEYAOS  onro-

ytVOV  iXMVX  (1VUl‘  U.[A(pO li£X(  yag  T

TX$  [XOVXi  01  y$VC[£tVX$  [A£i(>%Kia  ill  OvJxff

aTrfyll&vi,  xxi  adi  tryo\ov  v7rthi7rilo.  And,
then,  he  fays  the  confpirators  writ  un¬
der  the  flattie  of  the  firfit  Brutus,  Eds
Would  you  were  alive!  I  find
M.  *  *  *  thinks  that  the  argument,
urged  by  our  author,  viz.  that  the

£  B.  xliv.  p.  27S.  d


firft  Bruti  were  patricians,  and  the
latter  plebeians,  is  not  unanfwerable  ;
becaufe,  he  fays,  it  appears  from  Sue¬
tonius  that  lome  patrician  families
were  become  plebeians.  This  is  cer¬
tain  •,  but  that  muft  have  happened  by
adoption  :  In  which  cafe,  the  name  of
the  adopter  is,  always,  in  fome  ihape,
or  other,  borne,  jointly,  with  That  of
the  adopted.  If,  therefore,  any  of  the
family  of  the  firft  Brutus,  had  been
adopted  by  plebeians,  the  names  of
thefe  would  have  been  borne,  by  the
adopted,  jointly,  with  their  own.  We
find  an  d  inflance  of  this,  even,  in  the
family  of  the  Bruti ;  of  whom  the  fa¬
mous  M.  Brutus,  being  adopted  by
Servilius  Caepio,  v/as  called,
Caepio  Brutus;  and  D.  Brutus,  an¬
other  of  thofe  brave  Romans,  being

7  O

adopted  by  A.  Poftumius  Albinus,
was  called,  A.  Poftumius  Albinus
Brutus.

Cicero,  Philippic  x.  c.  11.


to


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  343

I

to  the  confideration  of  thofe  perfons,  whofe  bufinefs,  and
intereft  it  is  to  difcover  the  certainty  of  them.

XIX.  After  the  death  of  Brutus,  his  collegue  became
fufpedted  by  the  people  of  a  defign  to  make  himfelf  king:
The  firft  ground  of  their  fufpicion  was  his  continuing  alone
in  the  magiftracy,  when  he  ought,  immediately,  to  have
chofen  a  collegue,  as  Brutus  had  done,  after  he  had  expelled
Collatinus :  And  the  other,  that  he  had  built  a  houfe  in  an
invidious  place;  having  chofen,  for  that  purpofe,  a  hill,
conftderably  high  and  fteep,  called,  by  the  Romans,  21  Velia,
which  commands  the  forum.  But  the  conful,  being  in¬
formed  by  his  friends  that  thefe  things  difpleafed  the  people,
appointed  a  day  for  the  election,  and  chofe  for  his  collegue
Spurius  Lucretius,  who  died  within  a  few  days  after  he  had
been  in  pofleftion  of  that  magiftracy.  In  his  place,  he  chofe
Marcus  Horatius ;  and  removed  his  houfe  from  the  top  to
the  bottom  of  the  hill,  to  the  end  that  the  Romans,  as  he
himfelf  faid  in  22  one  of  his  fpeeches  to  the  people,  might
ftone  him  from  the  hill,  if  they  found  him  guilty  of  any
crime :  And,  deftring  to  give  the  plebeians  a  certain  af-

2I*  Ehuav.  See  the  twentieth  chapter  a  paflage  in  this  fpeech,  a  few  lines
of  the  firft  book.  before,  which  I  cannot  help  tranfcrib-

ns  a vjoff  fKKhtifi t(p> j.  This  ing;  Adeone  eji  fundata  leviter  jides,  ut
thought  is  not  in  the  fine  fpeech  of  ubi  fim ,  quam  qui  Jim ,  magis  referat  ?
Valerius  to  the  people,  in e  Livy,  upon  Thefe  jealoufies  of  a  free  people  are
this  occafion.  Though  he  makes  him  excufable  ;  and  every  wife  magiftrate
fay  fomething,  that  feems  to  allude  to  will  look  upon  them  in  the  fame  light
it:  Deferam  non  in  ■planum  modo  aedes,  Valerius  did,  that  is,  rather  as  fears,
fed  colli  etiam  fubjiciam  ;  ut  vos  fupra  than  fufpicions.
fufpettum  me  civem  habit etis.  There  is

e  B.  ii.  c.  7.

CJ  U  2


fu  ranee


344  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  BookV.

furance  of  liberty,  he  took  the  axes  from  the  rods,  and  in-
ftituted  a  cuftom,  which  has  been  followed  by  all  the  con-
fills  after  him,  even  to  this  day,  that,  when  they  are  out  of
the  city,  they  ufe  the  axes ;  and,  in  the  city,  the  rods  only.
Fie,  alfo,  introduced  moft  beneficent  laws,  which  gave  relief
to  the  plebeians ;  by  one  of  which  he,  exprefsly,  forbid  the
exercife  of  any  magiftracy  over  the  Romans,  unlefs  received
from  the  people ;  making  it  capital  for  any  one  to  tranf-
grefs  this  law,  with  impunity  to  the  perfon,  who  fhould  kill
the  criminal.  And,  in  the  other,  this  was  written  :  That,
if  a  magiftrate  fhould  condemn  any  Roman  to  be  put  to
death,  whipped,  or  fined,  the  private  perfon  might  appeal,
from  fuch  magiftrate,  to  the  people ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,
be  liable  to  no  punifhment,  till  the  people  had  pafled  a  vote
concerning  him.  Thefe  inftitutions  gained  him  the  efteem
of  the  plebeians,  who  gave  him  the  furname  of  Poplicola,
which,  in  the  Greek  language,  fignifies,  ir)poxr}ir)f  One,  whoj
takes  care  of  the  people.  Thefe  were  the  things  performed
by  the  confuls  this  year.

XX.  The  year  after,  Valerius  was  appointed  conful  for  the
fecond  time,  and,  with  him,  Lucretius ;  in  whofe  confulfhip,
nothing  remarkable  pafled,  befides  the  cenfus,  and  the  impo-
fition  of  taxes  for  the  fupport  of  the  wars,  according  to  the
plan  introduced  by  Tullius,  which  had  been  difcontinued
during  all  the  reign  of  Tarquinius,  and  was,  then,  renewed,
for  the  fir  ft  time,  by  thefe  confuls  :  By  this  cenfus,  it
appeared  that  the  number  of  Roman  citizens,  arrived  to
manhood,  amounted  to  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  thou-

fand.


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSEN  SI  S.

fand.  After  which,  an  army  of  Romans  was  fent  to  a  place,
called  23  Signia,  in  order  to  garrifon  that  caftle,  which  lies
convenient  to  reftrain  the  excurfions  from  the  cities  both  oi
the  Latines,  and  Hernici,  from  whence  they  expelled  a  war.

XXI.  Publius  Valerius,  furnamed  Poplicola,  being  inverted
with  the  fame  magiftracy  the  third  time,  and,  with  him,
Marcus  Horatiusfor  the  fecond  time,  the  king  of  the 24  Clufini


23*  £vfxv{<ov.  By  a  note  in  Hudfon,
it  appears  that  Gelenius  reads  this
ZJkvyn  •,  Plutarch,  in  his  life  of  Pop¬
licola,  XiUhHsfict  •,  the  Vatican  manu-
fcript,  Ticnow^iov  *,  and  Lapus,  Signia  ;
which,  I  find, f  Cluver  thinks  the  bet¬
ter  reading,  fince  the  other  names  were
never  heard  of.  Concerning  Signia,
fee  the  feventy  third  annotation  on  the
fourth  book.

24‘  KAa< navuv.  b  Clufium,  anciently,
Camars,  a  city  of  great  note  in  Tyr-
rhenia,  is,  now,  called  h  Cbiujt ,  or
Chiuci ,  as  I  have  faid.  It  (lands  on
the  fouth  eaft  end  of  a  long  lake,
through  which,  the  river  Clanis ,  now,
la  Chiana ,  runs,  before  it  falls  into  the
Tiber.  5  Pliny,  from  Varro,  gives  a
defcription  of  an  extravagant  labyrinth
eredled  here  by  this  Porfena  for  the
place  of  his  burial,  fome  particulars  of
which  I  fhall  here  take  notice  of,  in
order  to  fhew  that  the  ancient  Tufcans,
as  well  as  the  Chinefe,  were  polfefTed
with  the  impertinent  folly  of  hanging
bells  on  the  outfides  of  their  buildings.
This  monument  was  a  fquare  flru&ure,
each  fide  containing  three  hundred
feet,  and  fifty  in  height.  Within  this
fquare  building  was  the  labyrinth ;

fItal.  Antiq.  B.  iii  p.  1020.  £  Livy,  B  x

Nat.  B.  xxxvi.  c.  13.  k  Aeneid.  B.  viii.  f.  (


and,  upon  the  fquare,  flood  five  pyra¬
mids,  one  at  each  corner,  and  the  fifth
in  the  middle ;  each  of  thefe  was
feventy  five  feet  fquare  at  the  bottom,
and  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  height ;
On  the  top  of  thefe  pyramids,  there
was  a  ball  of  brafs,  and  over  that,  one
umbrella  ( petafus  units)  that  covered
them  all :  From  this  umbrella,  hung
fmall  bells,  faflened  to  it  with  chains.
This  minute  tafle  will,  I  dare  fay,
fatisfy  the  reader’s  curiofity,  and  make
him  very  indifferent  concerning  the
remainder  of  the  defcription.  As  to
Porfena,  who  was  buried  there,  he  was
called  Lars.  M.  ***  quotes  Servius
upon  this  verfe  of k Virgil,

Nec  non  \ tarquinium  ejeftum  Porfenna

Ac  tip  ere,  [ jubebat

to  fhew  that  Lars  was  a  title  of  honor,
given  by  the  Tyrrhenians  to  their
kings.  I  have  that  note  of  Servius,
now,  before  me,  and  can  find  nothing
of  that  kind  there.  However,  I  ana
of  the  fame  opinion  for  another  reafoiu
^ivy,  who  calls  Porfena,  Lars,  gives
the  fame  title  to  Tolumnius,  king  of
the  Veientes,  a  people,  alfo,  of  Tyr-
rhenia.

.  c.  25.  h  Cluver,  B.  ii.  p.  566.

>46.  1  B.  ii.  c.  9.  B.  iv.  c.  17.


1  Hilt


346  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

ill  Tyrrhenia,  by  name,  Lars,  and  furnamed  Porfena,  pro-
mifed  the  Tarquinii,  who  had  fled  to  him,  that  he  would
either  effedt  a  reconciliation  between  them,  and  the  Romans,
upon  the  terms  of  their  return,  and  reftoration  to  the  fove-
reignty,  or,  that  he  would  recover,  and  reftore  to  them  the
fortunes  they  had  been  deprived  of ;  and,  having  fent  em-
bafladors,  the  year  before,  to  Rome  with  intreaties,  mixed
with  threats,  could  obtain  neither  a  reconciliation,  nor  leave
for  them  to  return,  the  fenate  alledging  the  imprecations,
and  oaths,  by  which  they  had  bound  themfelves  not  to  re¬
ceive  them ;  neither  could  he  recover  their  fortunes,  thofe,
to  whom  they  had  been  diftributed,  and  allotted,  refuflng  to
reftore  them  :  Porfena,  who  was  in  his  nature  haughty,  and
whofe  mind  was  corrupted  both  with  his  riches,  and  the
greatnefs  of  his  power,  pretended  that  he  had  been  infulted
by  the  Romans,  and,  injurioufly,  treated,  becaufe  he  had
fucceeded  in  neither  of  his  demands ;  and,  thinking  he  had,
now,  a  favourable  opportunity  of  fubverting  the  power  of
the  Romans,  which  he  had,  long  before,  defigned,  he  de¬
clared  war  againft  them.  In  this  war  he  was  aflifted,  with
all  poftible  zeal,  by  Octavius  Mamilius,  the  fon-in-law  of
Tarquinius,  who  marched  out  of  Tufculum  at  the  head  of
all  the  Camerini,  and  Antemnates,  who  were  of  the  Latin
nation,  and  had,  already,  openly  revolted  from  the  Romans :
He,  alfo,  ingaged,  by  his  credit,  many  voluntiers  belonging
to  the  other  Latin  cities,  that  were  not  willing  to  make
open  war  upon  an  allied,  and  a  powerful  people,  without
great  neceflity.


XXII.


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  347

XXII.  The  Roman  confuls,  being  informed  of  thele
things,  ordered,  in  the’  firft  place,  all  the  hufbandmen  to
remove  their  effects,  cattle,  and  Haves  out  of  the  country  to
the  neighbouring  mountains,  in  the  faftneffes  of  which  they
built  caftles,  fufficiently,  ftrong  to  proted  thofe,  who
fled  thither.  After  that,  they  ftrengthened,  with  more
effedual  fortifications,  and  guards,  the  hill,  called  Janicul  11m,
which  is  a  high  mountain  near  Rome,  lying  on  the  other
fide  of  the  river  Tiber,  and  took  care,  above  all  things,  that
the  enemy  might  not  poflefs  themfelves  of  fo  convenient  a
poft  to  annoy  the  city;  and  there  they  laid  up  their  pro-
vifions  for  the  war.  They,  alfo,  regulated  the  affairs  of  the
city  upon  a  more  popular  plan,  by  introducing  many  bene¬
ficent  inftitutions,  in  favor  of  the  poorer  fort,  left  they,  in¬
duced  by  private  advantages  to  betray  the  caufe  of  the
public,  might  go  over  to  the  tyrants :  For  they  difcharged
them  of  all  the  public  impofitions  they  had  been  fubjed  to
under  the  kings,  and,  alfo,  of  all  contributions  for  military
ufes,  and  the  expences  of  wars ;  looking  upon  it  as  a  fuffi-
cient  advantage  to  the  public,  to  make  ufe  of  their  perfons
only  in  defending  their  country.  And,  with  their  army,
long  fince,  difciplined,  and  ready  for  adion,  they  incamped
in  the  field,  that  lies  before  the  city.  But  Porfena,  advanc¬
ing  with  his  forces,  took  the  ]aniculum  by  florm,  having
terrified  the  guards  appointed  to  defend  it,  and  placed  there
a  garrifon  of  Tyrrhenians.  After  which,  he  approached  the
city  in  expedation  of  taking  That  alfo,  without  any  trouble:
But,  when  he  came  near  the  bridge,  and  faw  the  Romans

drawn


343  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.
drawn  up  before  the  river,  he  prepared  for  battle,  in  ex¬
pectation  of  overwhelming  them  with  numbers,  and  led  on
his  army  with  great  contempt  of  the  enemy.  His  left  wing
was  commanded  by  the  fons  ofTarquinius,  Titus  and  Sextus,
who  had  with  them  the  Roman  fugitives,  and  the  choiceft
troops  of  the  Gabini,  with  a  good  body  of  foreigners,  and
mercenaries ;  and  the  right,  by  Mamilius,  the  fon-in-law  of
Tarquinius,  under  whofe  conduCt  the  Latines,  who  had
revolted  from  the  Romans,  were  drawn  up.  Porfena,  the
king,  placed  himfelf  in  the  center.  On  the  fide  of  the
Romans,  the  right  wing,  which  flood  oppofite  to  the  Tar-
quinii,  was  commanded  by  Spurius  Lartius,  and  Titus
Herminius ;  and  the  left,  by  Marcus  Valerius,  brother  to
Poplicola,  one  of  the  confuls,  and  Titus  Lucretius,  the
conful  of  the  former  year,  who  were  to  ingage  Mamilius,
and  the  Latines.  The  two  confuls  had  the  command  of
the  center.

XXIII.  When  the  two  armies  charged,  they  both  fought
bravely,  and  fuftained  the  fhock  for  a  confiderable  time  ;
the  Romans  having  the  advantage  of  their  enemies  both  in
experience,  and  perfeverance  ;  and  the  Tyrrhenians,  and
Latines  being  much  fuperior  in  number.  And,  many  being
killed  on  both  fides,  fear  feized  the  Romans;  firft,  Thofe
on  the  left  wing,  when  they  faw  their  two  commanders,
Valerius,  and  Lucretius,  carried  out  of  the  field  wounded  :
After  which,  Thofe  on  the  right  wing,  who  had,  already,
the  advantage  over  the  forces  commanded  by  the  Tarquinii,
feeing  the  flight  of  their  friends,  were  poflefled  with  the

fame


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSEN  SI  S.  349

lame  terror.  And  all  of  them,  haftening  to  the  city,  and,
endeavouring  to  force  their  way,  in  a  body,  over  the  fame
bridge,  the  enemy  made  a  ftrong  attack  upon  them ;  and
the  city,  having  no  walls  in  that  part  next  the  river,  was
very  near  being  taken  by  ftorm,  which  had,  certainly,  hap¬
pened,  if  the  purfuers  had  entered  it  at  the  fame  time  with
thofe,  who  fled :  But  three  men  put  a  flop  to  the  purfuit  of
the  enemy,  and  faved  the  whole  army ;  two  of  thefe  were
Spurius  Lartius,  and  Titus  Herminius,  among  the  elders,
who  had  the  command  of  the  right  wing ;  and,  of  the
younger,  Publius  Horatius,  who  was  called  Codes,  from
the  lofs  of  one  of  his  eyes,  which  had  been  ftruck  out  in  a
battle,  a  perfon,  of  all  men,  the  moft  remarkable  for  the  fine
proportion  of  his  limbs,  and  for  his  bravery:  This  man  was
nephew  to  Marcus  Horatius,  one  of  the  confuls,  but  derived
his  high  birth  from  Marcus  Horatius,  one  of  the  three
brothers,  who  overcame  the  three  Albans,  when  the  two
cities,  contending  for  the  fovereignty,  agreed  not  to  decide
the  conteft  with  all  their  forces,  but  with  three  men  on  each
fide,  as  I  have  related  in  one  of  the  former  books.  Thefe
three,  without  other  afliftance,  placing  their  backs  againft
the  bridge,  flopped  the  paflage  of  the  enemy  for  a  confider-
able  time,  and  flood  their  ground,  while  a  fhower  of  all
forts  of  weapons  fell  upon  them,  and  numbers,  alfo,  prefled
them  fword  in  hand,  till  the  whole  army  pafied  the  river.

XXIV.  When  they  judged  their  own  men  to  be  in  fafety,
two  of  them,  Herminius,  and  Lartius,  their  defenfive  arms
being,  now,  rendered  ufelefs  by  continual  ftrokes,  retreated

Vol.  II.  X  x  leifurely ;


350  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

leifurely ;  while  Horatius  alone,  though,  not  only,  the  confuls,
but  the  reft  of  the  people,  folicitous,  above  all  things,  to  pre¬
fer  ve  fuch  a  man  for  his  country,  and  his  parents,  called  to
him  from  the  city  to  retire,  could  not  be  prevailed  on,  but  re¬
mained  upon  the  fame  fpot,  where  he  firft  flood,  and  dire&ed
Herminius  and  Lartius  to  defire  the  conhils,  as  from  him,  to
order  that  part  of  the  bridge,  which  was  next  the  city  imme¬
diately  to  be  cut  off  (for  there  was  but  one  bridge  at  that  time,
which  was  built  of  wood,  and  mortifed  together  with  timber
alone,  without  iron,  which  the  Romans  preferveeven  to  this
day  in  the  fame  condition)  and  that,  when  the  greateft  part  of
the  bridge  was  broken  down,  and  little  of  it  remained,  they
fhould  give  him  notice  of  it  by  fome  fignals,  or  by  fpeaking
louder  than  ordinary :  As  to  the  reft,  he  told  them,  he  would
take  care  of  it.  Having  given  thefe  dire&ions  to  thefe  two
perfons,  he  flood  upon  the  bridge  ltfelf;  and,  when  the
enemy  advanced  upon  him,  he  flruck  fome  of  them  with
his  fword  ;  and,  beating  down  others  with  his  fhield,  he  re¬
pul  fed  all,  who  attempted  to  pafs  the  bridge  :  For  thefe,
looking  upon  him  as  a  mad  man,  and  one,  who  had  devoted
himfelf  to  dehriKhion,  durft,  no  longer,  approach  him  :
At  the  fame  time,  it  was  not  eafy  for  them  to  come  near
him,  becaufe  the  river  defended  him  on  the  right,  and  left,
and,  before  him,  lay  a  heap  of  arms,  and  dead  bodies.
But,  handing  all  at  a  dihance,  they  threw  fpears,  darts,  and
large  hones  at  him  ;  and  thofe,  who  were  not  fupplied  with
thefe,  threw  the  fwords,  and  bucklers  of  the  flain.  But  he
fought  hill,  making  ufe  of  their  own  weapons  againh  them ;

and>


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  SS  EN  S  I  S.  351

*  t

i  and,  throwing  thefe  among  the  crowd,  he  could  not  faii,  as
may  well  be  fuppofed,  to  hit  fomebody.  And  now,  over¬
whelmed  with  miffive  weapons,  and,  having  a  great  number
of  wounds  in  many  parts  of  his  body,  but  one,  particularly,
occafioned  by  a  fpear,  which,  palling  over  the  top  of  his
thigh,  pierced  the  forepart  of  oneofhis  hips,  and,  putting  him
to  great  pain,  impeded  his  motion.  When,  hearing  thofe
behind  him  call  out  that  the  greateft  part  of  the  bridge  was
broken  down,  he  leaped,  writh  his  arms,  into  the  river  ;
and,  fwimming  crofs  the  ftream  with  great  difficulty  (for  the
current,  being  divided  by  the  piles,  ran  fvvift,  and  formed
large  eddies)  he  landed,  without  lofing  any  of  his  arms.

XXV.  This  a&ion  gained  him  immortal  glory:  For  the
Romans,  immediately,  crowned  him,  and  conduced  him  into
the  city  with  fongs,  as  one  of  the  heroes ;  and  all  the  inhabi¬
tants  ran  out  of  their  houfes,  defiring  to  have  the  laft  fight
of  him,  before  he  died :  For  it  was  thought  he  could  not,
long,  furvive  his  wounds.  And,  when  he  was  recovered,
the  people  ere&ed  25  a  brazen  ftatue  of  him  all-armed  in  the
moft  confpicuous  part  of  the  forum ;  and  gave  him  as  much

25*  Eixova  We  find  the  fame  circumaravit ,  datum.  Privata  quoque

account  in  Livy,  both  of  this  great  inter  publicos  honores  ftudia  eminebant :
action,  performed  by  Horatius  Codes,  nam  in  magnd  inopid  pro  domefticis  copiis
and  of  the  honors,  with  which  it  was  anus  quifque  ei  aliquid ,  fraudans  fe  ipfe
rewarded.  After  he  has  defcribed  the  vidiw  fuo,  contulit.  This  ftatue,  ftill,
glorious  ftandhe  made  upon  the  bridge,  remained  in  “  Piiny’s  time,  as  he  him-
m  he  clofes  his  narration  with  thele  felf  tells  us  ;  alia  caufa ,  alia  audioritas
words  •,  Rem  aufus  plus  faniae  habitu -  M.  Horatii  Coclitis  jlatuae^  quae  durat
ram  in  pofteros,  quam  fidei.  Grata  erga  hodieque,  cum  hojles  a  ponte  fublicio
tantam  virtutem  civitas  fuit  •,  Jlatua  in  folus  arcuijjet.
comitio  pofita ;  agri  quantum  uno  die

mB.  ii.  c.  10.  uNat.  Hift.  B.  xxxiv.  c.  c»

X  X  2


of


352  ROMAN  ANTIQJUITIES  OF  BookV.

of  the  public  land,  as  he  himfelf  could  plow  round,  in  one
day,  with  a  yoke  of  oxen :  Belides  thefe  things,  bellowed
upon  him  by  the  public,  every  particular  man,  and  woman
in  the  city,  at  a  time  when  they  were  all  the  moll  oppreffed  by
a  dreadful  fcarcity  of  neceffary  provilions,  gave  him  as  much
as  would  maintain  each  of  them  one  day,  the  number  of
people,  in  the  whole,  amounting  to  more  than  three  hundred
thoufand.  Thus,  Horatius,  who  had  fhewn  fo  great  valor
upon  that  occalion,  was  looked  upon  by  the  Romans  with
all  poffible  admiration ;  but  rendered  ufelefs,  by  his  lamenefs,
in  the  fubfequent  affairs  of  the  commonwealth ;  and,  by
reafon  of  this  calamity,  he  obtained  neither  the  confulfhip,
nor  any  other  military  command.  This  man,  therefore,  by
the  wonderful  adtion  he  performed  for  his  country,  in  that
ingagement,  deferves  all  the  praife,  that  can  be  bellowed
upon  men  famous  for  their  courage.  To  him  I  fhall  add
Caius  Mucius,  furnamed  Cordus,  a  man  born  of  illuffrious
parents ;  who,  alfo,  undertook  a  great  adfion,  concerning
which  I  fhall  fpeak  prefently,  after  I  have  related  the  dread¬
ful  circumllances,  to  which  the  city  was,  at  that  time,
reduced.

XXVI.  For,  after  that  action,  the  king  of  the  Tyrrhenians,
incamping  on  the  neighbouring  hill,  from  whence  he  had
driven  the  guard  of  the  Romans,  made  himfelf  mailer  of  all
the  country  on  that  fide  of  the  river  Tiber.  Andthefons  of
Tarquinius,  with  Mamilius,  his  fon-in-law,  having  tranf-
ported  the  forces  under  their  command,  in  rafts,  and  boats,
to  the  other  lide  of  the  river,  that  leads  to  Rome,  incamped


m


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  353

in  a  ftrong  poft :  And,  making  excursions  from  thence,  they
laid  wafte  the  territories  of  the  Romans,  demolifhed  their
country  houfes,  and  carried  off  their  herds  of  cattle,  when
they  came  out  of  the  fortrefles  for  pafture.  The  whole
country  being  in  the  power  of  the  enemy,  and  no  provilions
at  all  brought  to  the  city  by  land,  and  but  fmall  quantities
by  the  river,  a  fcarcity  of  all  forts  of  neceffaries  was,  pre-
fently,  felt  by  fo  many  thoufand  people,  living  upon  the
ftores,  before,  laid  in,  which  were  inconfiderable.  After
which,  many  flaves,  leaving  their  matters,  deferted  daily,
and  the  rnoft  profligate  of  the  common  people  went  over
to  the  tyrants.  The  confuls,  feeing  thefe  things,  refolved  to
intreat  thofe  of  the  Latines,  who  yet  refpedled  the  relation,
that  was  between  them,  and  the  Romans,  and  feeined  to
perfevere  in  their  friendfhip,  to  fend  fuccours  to  them  im¬
mediately  :  And  they,  alfo,  refolved  to  fend  embafladors
both  to  Cumae  in  Campania,  and  to  the  cities  fituated  in
the  Pometine  plain,  to  defire  leave  to  export  corn  from
thence.  The  Latines  refufed  to  fend  fuccours,  alledging  that
it  was  not  lawful  for  them  to  make  war  either  againft  the
Tarquinii,  or  the  Romans,  fince  they  had  entered  into  a
common  treaty  of  friendfhip,  confirmed  by  their  oaths,
with  both  of  them.  But  Lartius,  and  Herminius,  the
embafladors,  who  had  been  fent  to  convey  the  corn,  having
filled  a  great  many  boats  with  all  forts  of  provifions,  brought
them  from  the  fea  up  the  river  in  a  dark  night,  without  the
knowledge  of  the  enemy.  But  thefe  provifions,  alfo,  being,
foon,  confumed,  and  the  people  opprefled  with  the  fame

fcarcity*


354  •  ROMAN  AN-T  I QJLJ  I  T  IE  S  OF  BookV.

fcarcity,  Porfena,  informed  by  the  deferters  that  the  citizens
differed  by  the  famine,  fent  a  herald  to  them,  commanding
them  to  receive  Tarquinius,  if  they  defired  to  be  freed  from
war,  and  famine.

XXVII.  But  the  Romans  difdaining  thefe  commands,  and
chufing  to  bear  every  dreadful  calamity'  rather  than  fubmit
to  them,  Mucius  forefaw  that  one  of  thefe  two  evils  would
befal  them,  either  that  they  would,  foon,  be  forced  from  their
refolutions  by  a  want  of  neceflaries,  or,  if  they  perifhed  in
them,  that  they  would  perifh  by  the  moft  deplorable  of  all
deaths;  and,  defiring  theconfuls  toaflemble  the  fenate  upon
his  account,  as  having  fomething  to  propofe  to  them  of  great
moment,  and  neceftity,  when  they  were  met,  he  fpoke  to  them,
as  follows;  “  Fathers,  having  a  defign  to  venture  upon  an
u  undertaking,  by  which  the  city  will  be  freed  from  the  pre-
“  fent  evils,  I  place  great  confidence  in  the  fuccefs  of  the
“  adion,  and  believe  Ifhall,  eafily,  effed  it.  But,  concerning
“  my  own  life,  I  have  fmall  hopes  of  furviving  the  accom-
a  plifhment  of  this  adion,  or,  to  fay  the  truth,  none  at  all.
£l  In  expofing  myfelf  to  fo  great  a  danger,  I  do  not  defire  that
S£  the  elevation  of  mind,  with  which  the  hope  of  great  things
L<  has  infpired  me,  fhould  be  concealed  from  all  the  world,  if
u  I  fhould  happen  to  mifcarry  in  the  undertaking  ;  but  ra-
<c  ther  for  great  adions,  to  gain  great  applaufe,  by  which
u  I  fhall  exchange  a  mortal  body,  for  an  immortal  glory.

It  is  not  fafe  to  communicate  my  defign  to  the  people,  left
a  any  one,  for  his  own  advantage,  fhould  inform  the  enemy
u  of  a  thing,  which  ought  to  be  concealed  with  the  fame

u  care,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC AR N  A S SENS  I S.  355
“  care,  as  a  fecret  myftery :  But  you,  who,  I  am  perfuaded,
<c  will  keep  the  fecret  inviolable,  are  the  firft,  and  the  only
u  perfons,  to  whom  I  difclofe  it  :  And,  from  you,  the  reft
“  of  the  citizens  will  be  informed  of  it  at  a  proper  feafon.
<c  My  enterprife  is  this :  I  propofe  to  go  to  the  camp  of  the
“  Tyrrhenians  as  a  deferter  :  If  I  am  difbelieved  by  them,
u  and  put  to  death,  the  number  of  the  reft  of  my  country-
“  men  will  be  leflened  by  the  lofs  of  one  citizen  only:  But,
“  if  I  can  enter  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  I  undertake  before
£C  you  to  kill  their  king:  And,  when  Porfena  is  dead,  the
“  war  will  be  at  an  end.  As  for  myfelf,  I  fhall  be  ready  to
“  fufter  whatever  heaven  fhall  decree,  when  I  reflecft  that
“  you  are  privy  to  my  defign,  and  will  bear  witnefs  of  it  to
“  the  people  :  But  I  go  with  the  afliirance  that  a  fate  more
“  favourable  to  my  country  will  be  my  guide.”

XXVIII.  26  After  he  had  received  the  praifes  of  the  fenate,


2 6*  Efl'AMVjOtr*?  Si  V7T0  TUV  tV  TO)  CViSglCti,

0  Livy,  alfo,  fays  that  the  propofal  to
affafiinate  Porfena  was  received  by  the
fenate  with  approbation,  Approbant
Patres.  Hefeems,  indeed,  fenfible  that
the  adion,  propofed  to  the  fenate,  was
criminal,  and  could,  only,  be  excufed
by  the  condition,  to  which  the  city  of
Rome  was,  at  that  time,  reduced  :  For-
tunfi  turn  urbis  crimen  ajfirmante,  fena-
tum  adiit.  However,  no  diftrefs,  no
approbation,  even,  of  a  Roman  fenate,
no  authority  of  hiftorians,  whether
prophane,  or  thofe  called  facred,.
who  mention  fome  events  like  this,
though  of  a  worfe  complexion,  which,
I  hope,  are  underftood  to  be  related
as  fads,  rather  than  propofed  as  ex-

0  B.  ii,  c.  12.


amples,  can  juftify  the  immorality,
and  bafenefs  of  affafTi mating  an  enemy.
Dionyfius  feems,  induftrioufly,  to  have
omitted  a  romantic  circumftance  in
this  fcene  of  Mucius,  which  Livy,  and
many  authors,  after  him,  defcribe  with
great  oftentation  ;  I  mean,  his  holding
his  hand  in  the  fire,  to  let  Porfena  fee-
how  defpicable  a  thing  the  body  is  tO'
men,  who  aim  at  great  glory;  p  Entibi
inquit,  ut  fentias  qiiam  vile  corpus  fit  iisy
qm  magnam  gloriam  vident.  This  is  a
truth  every  general  of  an  army  has
many  opportunities  ofbeing  convinced
of,  without  fo  incredible,  and  fo  (hock¬
ing  a  proof  as  this,  which  is  too  hor¬
rid,  even  for  tragedy,  much  more  ibr
hifbory.
rid,  ib,


and


356  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.
and  favourable  omens  had  countenanced  his  enterprife,  he
paffed  the  river;  and,  arriving  at  the  camp  of  the  Tyrrhe¬
nians,  he  entered  it,  having  deceived  the  guard  at  the  gates,
who  took  him  for  one  of  their  own  country,  by  his  not  appear¬
ing  to  have  any  arms,  and  by  his  fpeaking  the  Tyrrhenian
language,  which  he  had  been  taught,  when  a  child,  by  his
nurfe,  who  was  a  Tyrrhenian.  When  he  came  to  the  forum,
and  to  the  general’s  tent,  he  perceived  a  man  remarkable
both  for  the  fize  of  his  perfon,  and  the  ftrength  of  his  body,
drefled  in  a  purple  robe,  and  fitting  in  the  general’s  tribunal
and  many  armed  men  ftanding  round  him  :  Having  never
feen  the  king  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  he  miftook  this  man  for
Porfena  :  But,  it  feems,  he  was  the  king’s  fecretary,  who
fate  in  the  tribunal,  while  he  was  taking  an  account  of  the
numbers  of  the  foldiers,  and  diftributing  their  pay  amongft
them.  Making  his  way,  therefore,  to  this  man  through  the
crowd,  and  afcending  the  tribunal  (for,  as  he  feemed  un¬
armed,  nobody  hindered  him)  he  drew  the  dagger  he  had
concealed  under  his  garment,  and  ftruck  the  man  on  the
head :  And,  the  fecretary  being  killed  with  one  ftroke,  he
was,  prefently,  feized  by  thofe,  who  flood  round  the  tribunal,
and  brought  before  the  king,  who  had,  already,  been  in¬
formed,  by  others,  of  his  fecretary’s  death.  As  foon  as  Por¬
fena  faw  him,  he  faid  ;  “  Thou  moft  wicked  of  all  men,
“  who  art  fure  to  fuffer,  prefently,  the  punifhment  thou
<c  defer veft,  fay,  Who  art  thou  ?  And,  from  whence  thou
“  comeft  ?  And,  what  afliftance  didft  thou  depend  on  to  dare

«  to  commit  fuch  an  a<ftion  ?  Didft  thou  propofe  to  kill  my

< c


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  A  RN  A  SSENSIS.  357

“  fecretary  only,  or  me  alfo?  Who  are  thy  accomplices  in
‘  this  attempt,  or  privy  to  it  ?  Conceal  no  part  of  the
“  truth,  left  torture  force  it  from  thee.”

XXIX.  Mucius,  without  difcovering  any  fear,  either  by
a  change  of  color,  a  mournful  look,  or  any  other  diford er
incident  to  men,  who  are  going  to  die,  faid  to  him ;  “  I  am
“  a  Roman  of  no  mean  birth  ;  who,  defirous  to  free  my
“  country  from  the  war,  came  into  your  camp,  as  a  deferter,
£C  with  a  defign  to  kill  you ;  well  knowing  that,  whether  I
“  fucceeded,  or  failed  in  the  attempt,  I  fhould  die  ;  how-
“  ever,  I  refolved  to  facriftce  my  life  to  my  country,  from
c<  which  I  received  it,  and  to  exchange  a  mortal  body,  for
£C  an  immortal  glory  :  But,  being  difappointed  of  my  hope,
“  I  killed  your  fecretary  by  miftake,  inftead  of  you,  milled
cc  by  the  purple,  the  feat,  and  the  other  enfigns  of  dignity.
cc  Death,  therefore,  to  which  I  coudemned  myfelf,  when  I
<c  undertook  this  adlion,  I  do  not  deprecate  :  But,  if  you
“  think  fit  to  remit  the  tortures,  and  the  other  indignities,
a  and  give  me  affurance  of  it  by  the  gods,  I  promife  to  re-
a  veal  to  you  a  matter  of  great  moment,  which  concerns
cc  your  own  fafety.”  This  he  faid  with  a  defign  to  circum¬
vent  the  king  ;  who,  being  loft  in  amazement,  and,  at  the
fame  time,  forming  ill- grounded  conje&ures  of  dangers  from
feveral  people,  gave  him,  upon  oath,  the  affurance  he  de-
fired.  After  which,  Mucius,  having  thought  of  an  artifice
of  the  neweft  kind,  that  could  not,  evidently,  be  difcovered,
faid  ;  “  O  king,  we  are  three  hundred  Romans,  all  of  the
“  fame  age,  and  all  patricians,  who  have  confpired  to  kill

Vol.  II.  .  Yy  cc  you ;


358  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

ic  you ;  to  effedt  which,  we  have  bound  ourfelves  by  mutual
a  oaths :  And,  when  we  were  considering  of  the  means  to
*c  execute  our  defign,  we  refolved  not  to  make  the  attempt
“  all  together,  but  one  by  one;  nor  to  communicate  to  one
<£  another  when,  where,  how,  or  with  what  advantages  each
iC  of  us  was  to  attack  you  :  This  was  thought  the  more  ef-
££  fedtual  means  to  prevent  a  difeovery.  After  we  had  fet-
“  tied  thefe  things,  we  drew  lots;  and  it  fell  to  my  lot
<c  to  make  the  firft  attempt :  Be  afiured,  therefore,  that
C£  many  brave  men  will  be  induced,  by  a  thirft  of  glory,  to
“  purfue  the  fame  defign,  and  Some  one,  I  hope,  with  better
“  fortune:  Confider,  now,  by  what  means,  you  may,  fuffi-
££  ciently,  Secure  yourfeft  againft  their  Several  attacks.”

XXX.  The  king,  having  heard  thefe  things,  commanded
his  guards  to  take  Mucius  away,  and  bind  him,  taking  care
he  did  not  efcape  :  While  he  himfelf  aflfembled  thofe  of  his
friends  he  1110ft  confided  in  ;  and,  ordering  his  fon  Aruns
to  fit  down  by  him,  confidered  with  them,  in  what  manner,
he  Should  prevent  the  defigns  of  thefe  men.  All  the  reft
advifed  precautions  fo  weak,  they  Seemed  to  underftand
nothing  of  the  meafures,  that  ought  to  be  taken  :  When  his
fon  delivered  his  opinion  laft,  in  which  there  was  more
wifdom,  than  could  be  expected  from  his  age :  He  defired
his  father  not  to  confider  what  precautions  he  Should  ufe  to
prevent  a  misfortune,  but  what  he  Should  do  not  to  Stand
in  need  of  precautions.  They  all  admiring  his  advice,  and
defiring  to  know  how  this  might  be  effedted,  ££  If,  fays  he,
c£  inftead  of  enemies,  you  make  thefe  men  your  friends ;

<£  and


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN  ASSE NS  I S.  359

<c  and  fet  a  greater  value  on  your  own  life,  than  on  the  refto-
u  ration  of  the  Tarquinii,  and  their  fugitives.”  The  king
laid  his  advice  was  the  beft,  that  could  be  offered ;  but,  that
the  means  of  making  an  honourable  peace  with  them  was  a
matter,  that  deferved  confideration ;  faying  it  would  be  a
great  fliame  to  him,  if,  after  he  had  defeated  them  in  battle,
and,  actually,  kept  them  fhut  up  within  their  walls,  he
fhould  retire  without  effe&ing  any  thing  he  had  promifed
to  the  Tarquinii,  as  if  he  was  conquered  by  thofe  he  had
overcome,  and  fled  from  thofe,  who  durft,  no  longer,  even
ftir  out  of  their  gates :  And,  that  the  only  thing,  that  could
enable  him  to  put  an  honourable  end  to  the  war,  was  for  the
enemy  to  fend  fome  perfons  to  him  to  treat  of  a  peace.

XXXI.  This  the  king  faid  then  to  his  fon,  and  to  thofe  pre-
fent :  But,  a  few  days  after,  he  himfelf  was  obliged  to  propofe
terms  of  accommodation,  for  this  reafon  :  His  foldiers  being
difperfed  about  the  country,  and  carrying  off  the  proviflons,
that  were  coming  to  the  city,  and  doing  this  frequently,
the  Roman  confuls  furprifed  them  by  an  ambufcade ;  and,
killing  feveral,  took  many  more  of  them  prifoners.  Upon
this,  the  Tyrrhenians  grew  uneafy ;  and,  meeting  together,
communicated  their  complaints  to  one  another,  accuf-
ing  both  the  king,  and  the  other  commanders  of  prolonging
the  war,  and  deflred  to  return  home.  The  king,  therefore,
finding  that  a  peace  would  be  acceptable  to  them  all,  fent
fome  of  his  moft  intimate  friends,  as  embaffadors,  to  treat  of
it.  And  fome  fay  that  Mucius,  alfo,  was  fent  with  them,
having  given  the  king  an  aflurance,  upon  oath,  that  he  would

Y  y  2  '  return :


360  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

return :  But  others  fay,  that  he  was  kept  in  the  camp  as  an
hoftage,  till  the  peace  fhould  be  concluded  ;  and  this,  pof-
fibly,  is  the  trueft  account.  The  inftru&ions,  given  by  the
king  to  the  embaffadors,  .were  thefe  :  Not  to  make  the  leaft
mention  of  the  reftoration  of  the  Tarquinii;  but,  to  delire
the  reftitution  of  their  fortunes ;  particularly,  of  all  Thofe
Tarquinius  the  elder  left,  and  they  themfelves  had,  juftly,
acquired,  and  poffeffed  :  But,  if  that  could  not  be,  then,  to
delire  that  as  many  of  their  lands,  houfes,  and  cattle,  as
pollible,  lliould  be  reftored,  together  with  the  value  of  the
produce  of  the  lands,  from  the  time  the  Romans  had  been  in
poffellion  of  them  ;  leaving  it  to  them  to  determine  whether
thofe,  who  poffefled,  and  enjoyed  them,  fhould  pay  it,  or
the  public.  So  far  their  inftrudtions  related  to  the  Tarquinii.
Then,  for  himfelf,  they  were  to  delire,  upon  his  putting  an
end  to  the  war,  the  reftitution  of 27  the  feven  villages  (this
territory,  formerly,  belonged  to  the  Tyrrhenians,  but  the
Romans  had  taken  it  from  them  by  the  right  of  war,  and
were  then  in  poffeffion  of  it)  and,  in  order  to  perpetuate  the
attachment  of  the  Romans  to  the  Tyrrhenians,  they  were  to
demand  of  them  the  foils  of  their  moft  iliuftrious  families  to
remain  with  them  as  hoftages.

XXXII.  When  the  embaffadors  came  to  Rome,  the
fenate,  by  the  advice  of  Poplicola,  one  of  the  confuls,  and
from  a  belief  that  the  people,  and  the  poorer  fort  particu¬
larly,  labouring  under  a  want  of  neceffaries,  would,  even
chearfully,  accept  of  a  peace  upon  any  terms,  refolved  to

27*  Evict  zr&ftr.  See  the  110th  annotation  on  the  ftcond  book.


grant


BooffV.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  361

grant  every  thing,  that  Porfena  propofed.  But  the  people,
who  ratified  every  other  article  of  the  fenate’s  decree,  would
not  hear  of  reftoring  the  effects ;  on  the  contrary,  they
voted  that  110  reftitution  fhould  be  made  to  the  Tarquinii,
either  by  the  public,  or  by  private  perfons ;  and  that  em-
baffadors  fhould  be  fent  to  king  Porfena  concerning  thefe
things,  who  fhould  defire  him  to  accept  the  hoftages,  and
the  territory  he  infifted  on ;  and,  concerning  the  eftecfts,  that
he  himfelf,  as  judge  between  the  Tarquinii,  and  the  Ro¬
mans,  having  heard  both,  fhould  determine  what  he  thought
juft,  without  regard  either  to  favor,  or  enmity.  The  Tyr¬
rhenians  returned  to  the  king  with  thefe  anfwers,  and,  with
them,  the  embaffadors,  appointed  by  the  people ;  taking
with  them  twenty  children  of  the  beft  families,  as  hoftages
for  their  country,  the  confuls  being  the  firft  to  give  their
children  for  that  purpofe ;  Marcus  Horatius  delivering  his
fon  to  them,  and  Publius  Valerius  his  daughter,  who  was,
already,  marriageable.  When  thefe  arrived  at  the  camp,  the
king  was  pleafed ;  and,  giving  great  commendations  to  the
Romans,  agreed  with  them  upon  a  ceffation  of  arms  for  a
certain  number  of  days;  and  took  upon  himfelf  the  part  of
a  judge.  But  the  Tarquinii  were  grieved  to  find  them-
felves  difappointed  of  the  hopes  they  had  entertained  of
greater  things ;  having  expected  to  be  reftored  by  the  king  to
the  fovereignty  :  However,  they  were  obliged  to  acquiefce
in  the  prefect  difpofition,  and  accept  the  terms,  that  were
offered.  The  perfons,  who  were  fent  to  defend  the  caufe  of
the  commonwealth  together,  with  the  1110ft  ancient  fenators,

beincr


Book  V.


362  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF

being  come  from  the  city  at  the  appointed  time,  the  king
feated  himfelf  upon  the  tribunal  with  his  friends ;  and,  or¬
dering  his  fon  to  lit  as  judge  with  him,  he  gave  them  leave
to  fpeak.

XXXIII.  While  the  caufe  was  pleading,  a  meflenger
brought  an  account  of  the  flight  of  the-  virgins,  who  were
hoftages :  For,  having  deflred  leave  of  their  guards  to  go
to  the  river,  and  bathe,  after  they  had  obtained  it,  they  told
the  men  to  withdraw  a  little,  till  they  had  bathed,  and
drefled  themfelves,  left  they  fhould  fee  them  naked  ;  and,
the  men  having  gratified  them  in  this  alfo,  the  virgins,  follow¬
ing  the  advice,  and  example  of  Cloelia,  fwam  crofs  the  river,
and  returned  to  Rome.  Upon  this  occafion,  Tarquinius,
loudly,  accufed  the  Romans  of  a  breach  of  their  oaths,  and
of  perfidy  ;  and,  exafperating  the  king,  reprefented  to  him
that  he  ought  to  pay  no  regard  to  the  falfe  men,  who  had
deceived  him.  On  the  other  fide,  the  conful  cleared  the
Romans  of  this  accufation,  by  alledging  that  the  virgins  had
done  this  of  themfelves,  without  orders  from  their  parents ;
and  that  he  would,  foon,  convince  him  that  thefe  had
been  guilty  of  no  treachery  ;  which  fo  far  prevailed  with
the  king,  that  he  gave  him  leave  to  go  to  Rome,  and  bring
back  the  virgins  according  to  his  promife:  Upon  which,
Valerius  departed  in  order  to  bring  them  to  the  camp.  In
the  mean  time,  Tarquinius,  and  his  fon-in-law,  in  contempt
of  all  the  rules  of  juftice,  formed  a  wicked  defign,  by  fending,
privately,  a  party  of  horfe  to  poflefs  themfelves  of  the  road,
with  orders  to  feize  the  virgins,  as  they  were  bringing  to  the

camp,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  EN  S I  S.  363

camp,  together  with  the  conful,  and  the  reft  of  their  com¬
pany,  with  a  view  of  retaining  their  perfons,  as  pledges  for
the  effects  taken  by  the  Romans  from  Tarquinius,  without
waiting  the  event  of  the  caufe.  But  heaven  did  not  fuffer
their  treachery  to  fucceed  :  For,  while  the  horfe,  defigned  to'
furprife  them  in  their  return,  were  going  out  of  the  camp  of
the  Latines,  the  Roman  conful  prevented  them,  and  arrived
with  the  virgins :  And,  juft  as  he  came  to  the  gates  of  the
Tyrrhenian  camp,  he  was  overtaken  by  the  horfe  of  the
other  camp,  who  purfued  him  :  Where  a  fkirmifh  infuing,
the  Tyrrhenians,  foon,  perceived  it  5  and,  prefen tly,  the
king’s  fon  came,  with  a  body  of  horfe,  to  their  afliftance,
and  the  foot,  pofted  before  the  camp,  haftened,  alfo,  to  their
relief.

XXXIV .  Porfena,  refenting  this  attempt,  aflembled  the
Tyrrhenians,  and  acquainted  them,  that  the  Romans,  having
appointed  him  judge  of  the  accufations,  brought  againft  them
by  Tarquinius,  before  the  caufe  was  determined,  the  fugitives,
juftly  expelled,  had,  during  a  truce,  been  guilty  of  a  wicked
attempt  upon  the  inviolable  perfons  both  of  embaftadors,  and
of  hoftages  :  For  which  reafon,  he  faid,  the  Tyrrhenians  de¬
clared  the  Romans  to  be  difcharged  of  thofe  accufations ;
and,  at  the  fame  time,  renounced  all  intercourfe  of  hofpi-
tality  with  the  Tarquinii,  and  Mamilius;  and  ordered  them,
that  very  dayy  to  go  out  of  their  camp.  Thus,  the  Tar¬
quinii,  who,  at  firft,  had  entertained  great  hopes  either  of
exerciling  their  tyranny,  again,  in  the  city  by  the  afliftance
of  the  Tyrrhenians,  or,  at  leaft,  of  having  their  effects  reftored

to


364  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

to  them,  were  difappointed  of  both,  by  their  wicked  attempt
upon  the  perfons  of  the  embafiadors,  and  of  the  hoftages;
and  went  out  of  the  camp  with  fhame,  and  the  deteftation
of  all  men.  After  which,  the  king  of  the  Tyrrhenians,
ordering  the  Roman  hoftages  to  be  brought  to  the  tribunal,
returned  them  to  the  conful,  faying,  that  he  depended  more
upon  the  faith  of  the  commonwealth,  than  upon  any  hoftages:
And  to  one  of  the  virgins,  by  whofe  perfualion  the  reft  had
fwam  over  the  river,  he  gave  great  commendations,  as  to  a
perfon,  who  had  fhewn  a  fpirit  fuperior  both  to  her  fex,  and
age ;  and,  after  congratulating  the  city  of  Rome  for  pro¬
ducing,  not  only,  brave  men,  but,  alfo,  virgins  like  men,  he
made  her  a  prefent  of  a  war-horfe  adorned  with  magnificent
trappings.  Having  difmifted  the  aflembly,  he  entered  into
a  treaty  of  peace,  and  friendfhip  with  the  Roman  embaf-
fadors,  which  was  confirmed  by  mutual  oaths ;  and,  having
entertained  them,  he  reftored,  without  ranfom,  as  a  prefent
to  the  commonwealth,  all  the  prifoners  he  had  taken,  the
number  of  whom  was  very  conftderable  :  And  the  place,
where  his  army  lay,  being  not,  like  a  camp,  prepared  for  a
fhort  ftay  in  a  foreign  country,  but,  fufficiently,  adorned
with  buildings,  both  private  and  public,  though  it  is  not
the  cuftom  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  when  they  decamp  from  an
enemy’s  country,  to  leave  thefe  buildings  ftanding,  but  to
burn  them,  he  would  not  fuffer  this  to  be  done,  but  left
them  in  the  fame  pofture  ;  and,  by  this  means,  made  a  pre¬
fent  to  the  commonwealth  of  no  fmall  value;  which  ap¬
peared  by  the  fale,  made  by  the  quaeftors,  after  the  king’s

departure.


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  1C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  365

departure.  And  this  was  the  event  of  the  war  between  the
Romans,  and  the  Tyrrhenians,  commanded  by  Lars  Porfena,
king  of  the  Clufini ;  in  which  the  commonwealth  had  been
expofed  to  great  dangers.

XXXV.  After  the  departure  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  the
Roman  fenate  ordered  a  throne  of  ivory,  a  fcepter,  and  a
crown  of  gold  with  a  triumphal  robe,  fuch  as  their  kings
had  been  adorned  with,  to  be  fent  as  prefents  to  Porfena.
And  to  Mucius,  who  had  taken  a  refolution  to  die  for  his
country,  and  who  was  looked  upon  as  the  chief  inftrument
in  putting  an  end  to  the  war  (as,  before,  to  Horatius,  for
having  repulfed  the  enemy  from  the  bridge)  they  gave  as
much  of  the  public  lands,  lying  beyond  the  Tiber,  as  he
could  plow  round  in  one  day.  And  this  place,  even  now?
is  called  the  Mucian  meadows .  Thefe  were  the  rewards  they
gave  to  the  men.  To  Cloelia  they  ordered  23  a  brazen  ftatue
to  be  ere&ed ;  which  was  eretfted,  accordingly,  by  the  fathers
of  the  virgins  in  the  Via  facra ,  the  holy  way ,  that  leads  to  the
forum.  This  ftatue  we  did  not  find  ftanding  :  But  it  was
faid  that,  a  fire  happening  in  the  houfes  next  adjoining,  the


'Lrota'i])  eniovog  This  was

an  equeftrian  ftatue,  and  the  firft,  that
was  erefted  at  Rome  *,  ^  Pace  redinte-
gratd ,  Romani  novam  in  femind  virtu -
tem,  novo  genere  honoris,  ftatua  eque-
ftri,  donavere.  In  fummd  facrd  via  fuit
pofta  virgo  infidens  equo.  Our  author
fays  this  ftatue  was  not  in  being  in  his
time.  If  it  was  deftroyed  by  fire  before
his  coming  to  Rome,  another  refem-


bling  it  muft  have  been  erected  in  the
fame  place  ;  becaufe  Seneca  fays,  in  fo
many  words,  that  the  equeftnan  ftatue
of  Cloelia  ftood  in  the  via  facrd  fo
many  years  after  our  author’s  time  :
r  Equefiri  infidens  fiatuae  in  facra  via,
celeberrimo  locoy  Cloelia  exprobrat  ju-
venibus  nojlris  pulvinum  afcendentibus ,
in  ed  illos  urbe  fic  ingredi ,  in  qua  etiam
feminas  equo  donavimus .

ftatue


y0L.  11.


sLivy,  B.  ii.  c.  13.


r  Ad  Marc.  c.  16.

Z  z


Book  V.


366  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF


ftatue  was  deflroyed.  This  year,  the  temple  of  the  Capi-
toline  Jupiter  was  fimfhed ;  of  which  I  gave  a  particular
defcription  in  the  preceding  book.  This  temple  was
confecrated  by  Marcus  Horatius,  one  of  the  confuls,  and
infcribcd  with  his  name  before  the  arrival  of  his  collegue  ;
Valerius  happening,  at  that  time,  to  be  in  the  field  with  an
army  employed  in  fecuring  the  country :  For,  as  foon  as  the
men  left  the  fortreffes,  and  went  into  the  plains,  Mamilius
fent  bands  of  robbers,  and,  greatly,  annoyed  the  hufband-
men.  Thefe  tranfadions  happened  in  the  third  confulfhip.

XXXVI.  The  confuls  for  the  fourth  year,  Spurius  Lartius,
and  Titus  Herminius,  paffed  their  magiftracy  without  war.
In  their  confulfhip,  Aruns,  fon  to  Porfena,  king  of  the
Tyrrhenians,  died  in  the  fecond  year  of  the  war  he  was
ingaged  in  with  the  30  Aricini :  For,  as  foon  as  the  peace  was
made  with  the  Romans,  his  father  gave  him  one  half  of  his
army,  with  which  he  marched  againft  the  Aricini,  with  a
view  of  eftablifhing  a  particular  government  for  himfelf :
And,  when  he  was  near  taking  their  city,  fuccours  came  to
the  Aricini  from  Antium,  Tufculum,  and  31  Cumae  of  Cam-

ag.  Tuv  avitgumv  kxi  jv.  opinion  that  it  received  its  name  from

See  the  fixty  eighth  annotation  on  the  waves  ;  becaufe  that  part  of

fourth  book.  °  the  Campanian  fliore,  on  which  it

30.  A^vaiv  arcAiv.  *  Aricia  Hands  flood,  was  very  rocky,  and  expofed
near  the  Appian  road,  thirteen  Roman  to  the  winds,  which,  generally,  pro¬
miles  to  the  fouth  eafl  of  Rome.  It  duced  a  high  fea.  However,  he  tells
is,  now,  called  La  Riccia .  us,  in  the  fame  place,  that  Cumae  was  a

?  31  •  Kujmjj.  1  Cumae  was,  formerly,  a  colony  of  the  Chalcidenfes  in  Euboea,
city  of  great  note-,  but  has,  long  fince,  and  that  it  was  the  moft  ancient  city
lain  in  ruins,  which  are,  ftill,  called  both  of  Italy,  and  Sicily  ;  Kvpj
Cumae.  v  Strabo  fays  fome  are  of  chwv  x«i  Kv[axiuv  zraAouol  uIqv  k!

*  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.  iii.  p.  920.  *  Id.  B,  iv.  p.  1102.  *  B.  v.  p.  372,  373.

pania  ^


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC ARN  A  S  S E N S  I S.  367

pania;  and,  ingaging  an  army  fuperior  in  number,  lie  put
moft  of  them  to  flight,  and  purfued  them  to  the  city  ;  but
was  overcome  by  the  Cumani,  commanded  by  Ariftodemus,
furnamed  Malachus,  and  loft  his  life  :  And  the  Tyrrhenian
army  making,  no  longer,  any  reflftance  after  his  death,  was
forced  to  fly.  Many  of  them  were  killed  in  the  purfuit  by
the  Cumani ;  but  many  more,  difperfing  themfelves  about
the  country,  fled  into  the  territories  of  the  Romans,  which
were  not  far  diftant,  having  loft  their  arms,  and  being  unable,
by  reafon  of  their  wounds,  to  proceed  further.  Thefe  the
Romans  brought  into  the  city  upon,  waggons,  and  in  chariots,
and  other  carriages,  fome  of  them  half  dead  ;  and,  carrying
them  to  their  own  houfes,  recovered  them  by  fupplies  of
victuals,  by  medicines,  and  every  other  inftance  of  humanity,
the  effecft  of  great  compaflion  :  So  that,  many  of  them,
ingaged  by  thefe  favors,  had  no  deftre  to  return  home  ;  but
chofe  to  continue  with  their  benefactors.  To  thefe  the
fenate  gave  a  place,  in  the  city,  to  build  houfes ;  being
a  valley,  lying  between  the  Palatine,  and  Capitoline  hills,
about  four  ftadia  in  length ;  which,  even  to  this  day,  is
called  by  the  Romans,  in  their  language,  Vicus  Tufcus,  the
habitation  of  the  ' Tyrrhenians ;  and,  through  this,  there  is  a
paflage  from  the  forum  to  the  great  circus.  In  confideration
of  thefe  favors,  they  received  from  their  king  an  acknow-


HTXi rwv  yxfj  &gt<r£vlo?vi  ruv  re

xwv,  xxt  t<«jv  IraA uthJu>v.  Virgil  alludes
to  its  origin,  when  he  fays,

JEt  tandem  Euboi'cis  Cumarum  allabitur  oris.


As  to  Ariftodemus,  I  /hall  rerer  the
reader  to  a  digreHion  concerning  him,
which  he  will  find  in  the  feventh  book,
of  this  hifLory  ;  chapter  the  third.


*  B.  vi.  2.

Z  z  2


ledgement


Book  V.


368  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

ledgement  of  no  fmall  value,  which  gave  them  the  greateffc
fatisfadfion ;  this  was  the  territory  beyond  the  Tiber,  which
they  had  refigned,  when  they  put  an  end  to  the  war ;  and,
upon  this  occafion,  they  performed  facrifices  to  the  gods  at
a  great  expence,  which  they  had  vowed  to  offer  up,  when¬
ever  they  fhould,  again,  be  mafters  of  the  feven  villages.

XXXVII.  The  fifth  year  after  the  expedition  of  the  king,
the  fixty  ninth  olympiad  v/as  celebrated,  in  which  32  Ifcho-
machus  of  Croton  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium  for  the
fecond  time,  Aceftorides  being  archon  at  Athens,  and  Marcus
Valerius,  brother  of  Valerius  Poplicola,  and  Publius  Poftu-
mius,  furnamed  Tubertus,  confuls  at  Rome.  In  their  con-
fulfhip,  another  war  was  raifed  againft  the  Romans  by  their
neareft  neighbours,  which  began  by  depredations,  but  pro¬
ceeded  to  many  confiderable  ingagements:  However,  it  ended
in  an  honourable  peace  in  the  fourth  confulfhip  after  thefe
perfons,  having  been  carried  on,  during  that  whole  interval,
without  intermiffion  :  For,  fome  of  the  Sabines,  imagining
that  the  commonwealth,  weakened  by  the  defeat  fhe  had
received  from  the  Tyrrhenians,  would,  never,  be  able  to
recover  her  ancient  dignity,  aftaulted  thofe,  who  came  down
into  the  country  from  the  fortreffes,  by  the  bands  of  robbers
they  had  placed  in  different  parts,  and  did  great  damage  to
the  hufbandmen.  For  which,  the  Romans,  fending  em-
bafladors,  before  they  had  recourfe  to  arms,  demanded  fatif-

s2,  Hv  tv  Mat  s-<x&ovI<rxoiua.xogK£o'Juvioi-  becaufe  our  author  told  us,  in  the  be>
rut  to  fcvlefov.  So,  I  find,  by  a  note  in  ginningof  this  book,  that  Ifchomachus
Hudfon,  Meurfius  has  corredted  this  of  Croton  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium
paflage,  with  whom  I,  intirely,  agree,  at  the  preceding  Olympiad.

fadlion^


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  R  N  A  SSE  N  SIS.  369

faction,  and  that,  for  the  future,  they  would  not  moled:  the
hufbandmen  contrary  to  judice :  And,  having  received
haughty  anfwers,  they  declared  war  againd  them.  The  fird
expedition  was  conduded  by  Valerius,  one  of  the  confuls,
who,  with  the  horfe,  and  a  chofen  body  of  light-armed  foot,
fell,  fuddenly,  upon  thofe,  who  were  laying  w^ade  the  coun¬
try;  and,  great  numbers  of  them  being  furprifed,  while  they
were  plundering,  many  of  them  were  put  to  death,  as  may
well  be  imagined,  they  being  in  no  order,  nor  expeding  the
aflault.  The  Sabines,  after  this,  fending  a  confiderable  army
againd  the  Romans,  commanded  by  a  general  experienced
in  war,  thefe,  again,  came  out  againd  them  with  all  their
forces,  under  the  condud  of  both  the  confuls.  Podumius
incamped  on  the  eminences  near  Rome,  fearing  led  fome
fudden  attempt  might  be  made  upon  the  city  by  the  fugitives :
And  Valerius  poded  himfelf  not  far  from  the  enemy,  near
the  river  Anio,  which,  after  paffing  through  the  city  of
33  Tibur,  falls  in  a  vad  torrent  from  a  high  rock  ;  and,  run-

33*  Ejc  t»j?  sroAtw?  jU£»  I  have  Roman  miles,  runs  through  Tibur,

given  a  long  truce  to  le  Jay,  not  for  known,  now,  by  the  name  of  'Tivoli.
want  of  opportunities  to  cenfure  his  Anio  in  monte  Trebanorum  ortus ,  fays
tranflation,  but  for  fear  of  tiring  my  y  Pliny.  The  cataract,  here  taken  no-
readers  with  thofe  cenfures :  How-  tice  of,  is  mentioned  by  many  ancient
ever,  I  muft  break  the  truce,  to  make  writers,  and  is,  at  this  day,  the  admi-
fome  obiervations  upon  his  tranfla-  ration  of  all  travellers.  This  cataradly
lion  of  this  paflfage,  which  he  has  I  imagine,  gave  occafion  to  z  Horace
rendered,  fur  les  bords  du  Teveron ,  to  call  the  river,  praeceps  Anio :  In
qui  prend  fa  fource  d'une  ville  qu'on  explaining  which  paffage,  Dacier  has
appelle  Tibur.  It  is  well  known  that  committed  the  fame  miftake  with  le
the  xAnio,  now,  called  Teverone,  Jay;  his  words  are,  la  fource  de  I’Ani-
rifes  from  the  mountains  above  Treba ,  on ,  qui  efi  le  T everon  dd aujourd'hui ,  efi,
and,  after  a  courfe  of  about  thirty  four  dans  les  mont agues  de  Tibur  ou  Tivoli.

*  Cluver,  Ital.  Antiq.  B.ii.  p.  713.  y  Nat.  Hift.  E.  iii.  c.  12.  2B.  i.  Od.  7.


mng


370  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

nitig  through  a  plain  belonging  to  the  Sabines,  and  the
Romans,  ferves  as  a  boundary  to  both  their  territories  :
After  which,  the  Anio,  whofe  water  charms  both  the  eye,
and  the  tafte,  mixes  its  ftream  with  the  Tiber.

XXXVIII.  On  the  other  fide  of  the  river,  was  placed  the
camp  of  the  Sabines,  near  the  river  likewife,  upon  a  gentle
defcent,  and  not,  *  very  ftrongly,  fituated.  At  firft,  both
armies  obferved  one  another  with  caution,  and  were  unwil¬
ling  to  pafs  the  river,  and  begin  the  ingagement  :  But,  after¬
wards, being  inflamed  with  heat,  and  pique,  rather  than  guided
by  reafon,  and  a  view  of  advantage,  they  came  to  a  battle  :
For,  going  to  the  river  for  water,  and  leading  their  horfes
thither  to  drink,  they  went,  by  degrees,  a  good  way  into
the  river  ;  which  was  then  low,  as  not  yet  fwelled  with  the
winter’s  rains :  So  that,  they  paffed  it  without  having  the
water  much  above  their  knees.  And  firft,  a  fkirmifh  happen¬
ing  between  fmall  parties,  fome  ran  out  of  each  camp  to
affift  their  companions:  Then,  others,  again,  to  relieve  thofe
on  each  fide,  who  were  overpowered.  And,  fometimes,  the
Romans  forced  the  Sabines  from  the  river ;  fometimes,  the
Sabines  drove  the  Romans  from  it.  When,  many  being
killed,  and  wounded,  and  an  eagernefs  for  the  ingagement
pofleffing  all  of  them,  as  it,  generally,  happens,  when  unfea-
fonable  fkirmifhes  are  buffered,  the  generals  of  both  armies
grew,  equally,  defirous  to  pafs  the  river.  But  the  Roman
conful,  prevented  the  enemy ;  and,  having  paffed  it  with
his  army,  began  the  attack,  while  the  Sabines  were  yet
arming  themfelves,  and  forming.  Neither  were  thefe  back¬
ward


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  371

ward  in  ingaging;  but,  elated  with  a  contempt  of  the
enemy,  becaufe  they  had  neither  both  the  confuls,  nor  the
whole  Roman  army  to  ingage  with,  they  joined  in  the  battle
with  all  the  intrepidity,  and  eagernefs  imaginable.

XXXIX.  A  warm  action  infuing,  and  the  right  wing  of
the  Romans,  commanded  by  Valerius,  gaining  ground  upon
the  enemy,  and  advancing  ftill,  while  the  left  was,  already,
preffed,  and  forced  towards  the  river,  the  conful,  Poftumiusjr
who  commanded  in  the  other  camp,  being  informed  of  what
palled,  led  out  his  army :  And,  while  he,  with  the  foot,
marched,  flowly,  on,  he  fent  before  him,  in  all  hafte,  Spurius
Lartius,  his  legate,  one  of  the  confuls  of  the  preceding  year,
with  all  his  horfe  ;  who,  riding  full  fpeed,  palled  the  river  with
eafe,  as  no  one  oppofed  him,  and,  wheeling  round  the  right
wing  of  the  enemy,  charged  the  Sabine  horfe  in  flank  :
Hence  infued  a  great  ingagement  of  the  horfe  on  both  hides,
who  fought  hand  to  hand  a  confiderable  time.  In  the  mean
while,  Poftumius  came  up  with  the  foot ;  and,  attacking
That  of  the  enemy,  killed  many  with  his  own  hand,  and
put  the  reft  in  diforder :  And,  if  night  had  not  come  on,
the  whole  army  of  the  Sabines,  being  furrounded  by  the
Romans,  now,  become  fuperior  in  horfe,  had  been,  totally,
deftroyed :  But,  the  darknefs  preferved  thofe,  who  fled,  they
being  without  arms,  and  few  in  number,  and  brought  them
home  in  fafety.  The  confuls  made  themfelves  mailers  of
their  camp  without  reflftance,  which  had  been  abandoned
by  the  troops  appointed  to  defend -it,  as  foon  as  they  faw
the  defeat  of  their  own  army :  Where,  finding  a  great  booty „


372  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  V.

they  left  it  to  the  difcretion  of  the  foldiers,  and  returned
home  with  their  forces.  Upon  this  occafion,  the  common¬
wealth,  recovering  itfelf,  for  the  fir  ft  time,  from  the  defeat
received  by  the  Tyrrhenians,  was  reftored  to  her  former
fpirit,  and  dared,  as  before,  to  aim  at  the  fovereignty  over
her  neighbours.  The  Romans  decreed  a  triumph,  jointly,
to  both  the  confuls ;  and,  as  a  particular  gratification  to
V alerius,  ordered  that  a  place  fhould  be  granted  to  him  for
his  habitation  in  the  beft  part  of  the  Palatine  hill ;  and  that
the  charges  of  the  building  fhould  be  defrayed  by  the  public.
The  34  ftreet  door  of  thishoufe,  near  to  which  ftands  a  brazen
bull,  is  the  only  door  in  Rome,  either  of  public,  or  private
houfes,  that  opens  outwards.

XL.  Thefe  confuls  were  fucceeded  by  Publius  Valerius,
furnamed  Poplicola,  chofen  conful  for  the  fourth  time,  and
by  Titus  Lucretius,  now,  collegue  to  Valerius  for  the  fecond
time.  In  their  confulfhip,  all  the  Sabines,  holding  a  general
aftembly  of  their  cities,  refolved  upon  a  war  againft  the
Romans,  alledging  that  the  treaties  they  had  made  with
them,  were  difioived  by  the  expulfion  of  Tarquinius,  with
whom  they  had  entered  into  thofe  treaties,  and  fworn  to  the
obfer vance  of  them.  They  had  been  prevailed  on  to  take


34-  ka Kncthf  $v£<m.  So  this  muft  be
read  with  the  Vatican  manufcript,  or
k.a eicixhg :  For  xA^<r/aJ'sf  in  all  the  edi¬
tions  is,  certainly,  an  error  of  the
tranfcriber,  as  it  is  in  Hefychius,  by
whole  authority,  this  reading  is  en¬
deavoured  to  be  fupported.  KhKn&See
Svqcti  were  doors  large  enough  to  admit

*  B.  iv.  Segm.  125.


coaches,  or  carts,  as  a  Julius  Pollux  ex¬
plains  the  word  ;  xca  B-vgoct  pet  fa
xx\xfAtvcti  xhtaxAtiy  ar^o?  to  kxi
rxg  dfxx^xg  «<rfAotv»«w,  xxi  ix  CKSvotpoga.
b  The  fame  author  fhews  that  *aw nafa
fignifies  the  fame  thing.  Ka«c r<ov,  u u^x
to  xuAeio&ai'  a  xxi  xi  Svgxiy  KA«sr<«&f.


b  B.  ix.  Segm.  50.


this


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HA  LI  C  ARN  A  S  SEN-SI  S.  373

this  ftep  by  Sextus,  one  of  the  fons  of  Tarquinius,  who,  by
courting,  and  preffing  the  men  of  power  in  every  city  in
perfon,  had  created  a  general  animofity  in  the  nation  againft
all  the  Romans,  and  ingaged  two  cities,  Fidenae,  and
Cameria,  to  revolt  from  them,  and  to  enter  into  a  confede¬
racy  with  the  Sabines :  In  conlideration  of  which  fer vices,
they  appointed  him  general  with  abfolute  power,  and  gave
him  leave  to  raife  forces  in  all  their  cities,  looking  upon  the
defeat  they  had  received  in  the  laft  ingagement,  to  be  owing
to  the  weaknefs  of  their  army,  and  the  incapacity  of  their
general.  While  they  were  employed  in  thefe  preparations,
Fortune,  defigning  to  ballance  the  lofles  of  the  Romans
with  advantages,  inftead  of  the  allies,  who  had  deferted
them,  prefented  to  them  an  unexpected  acceffion  of  ftrength
from  among  their  enemies ;  which  was  this  :  A  certain
perfon  of  the  Sabine  nation,  who  lived  in  a  city,  called
35  Rigillum,  and  was  of  a  good  family,  and  had  great  riches,
byname,  36  ACtius  Claufus,  deferted  to  them,  bringing  with
him  many  relations,  and  friends,  and,  alfo,  a  great  number
of  clients,  who  rerjioved  with  their  families,  and  were  not


35*  p yjfiA^ov.  All  we  know  of  the
town,  called  by  the  Roman  authors,
Regillum,  is,  that  it  belonged  to  the
Sabines.

36,  AkIios  KAavi rof.  So  I  have  cor¬
rected  this  name  upon  the  authority
of  Sigonius,  who  contends  that  we
mu  ft  read  Afiius  Claufus ,  c  in  Livy,
inftead  of  Atta  Claufus ,  which,  in
moll  editions,  is  the  name  of  this
Sabine,  who  deferted  to  the  Romans

*B.  ii.  c.


upon  this  occafion,  and  was  the  firft
of  the  Claudian  family  ;  which,  though
it  produced  fome  great  men,  yet  was
much  more  fertile  in  tyrants,  of  whom
Appius  Claudius,  the  decemvir,  was
one  :  This  family,  alfo,  gave  birth  to
a  crafty,  bloody  tyrant  in  Tiberius,  to
a  wanton  tyrant  in  Caligula,  and  to  a
ftupid  tyrant  in  Claudius.

Quid  debeas ,  0  Roma ,  Neronibus  ?

6.


VoL.  II.


A  a  a


lefs


374  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

lefs  than  five  thoufand  able  to  bear  arms.  The  reafon,  that
compelled  him  to  remove  to  Rome  is  faid  to  have  been  this :
The  men  of  power,  in  the  principal  cities,  having  an  averfion
to  this  man,  grounded  on  a  political  emulation,  defigned
to  try  him  for  treafon,  becaufe  he  was  not  inclined  to  the
war  againfi  the  Romans ;  but,  alone,  oppofed,  in  public,
thofe,  who  were  of  opinion  that  the  treaties  were  diffolved  ;
and  would  not  fuffer  the  inhabitants  of  his  own  town  to
look  upon  the  decrees,  made  by  the  reft  of  the  nation  upon
thatoccafion,  to  be  valid.  Apprehending,  therefore,  the  event
of  this  trial  (for  he  was  to  have  been  tried  by  the  reft  of  the
cities)  he  came  over  to  the  Romans  with  all  his  riches,  and
his  friends ;  and,  by  adding  no  fmall  weight  to  their  affairs,
was  looked  upon  as  the  principal  inftrument  in  the  fuccefs
of  this  war.  In  confideration  of  which,  the  fenate,  and
people  admitted  him  into  the  number  of  the  patricians,  and
gave  him  leave  to  chufe  as  much  of  the  city  as  he  thought
fit  to  build  on:  They,  alfo,  granted  to  him  lands,  belonging
to  the  public,  that  lay  between  Fidenae,  and  37  Ficulea,  to  be
divided  among  his  followers ;  of  whom,  in  procefs  of  time,
a  tribe,  called  Claudia,  was  compofed ;  which  name  it  has
preferved  to  this  day.

37-  ftiKute u(.  This,  I  believe,  is  the  fays  that  the  lands,  that  were  given  to
true  reading,  riot  n mvhaf,  as  it  hands  the  clients  of  Claufus,  lay  on  the  other
in  the  editions,  nor  Ilmeh#?,  as  we  find  fide  of  the  Anio  •,  hiscivitas  data ,  ager-
it  in  the  Vatican  manufcript.  Ficulea  que  tram  Anienem.  I  find,  in  e  Clover
lay  about  three  Roman  miles  from  that  a  church,  called  S.  Vafile,  is,  now
Fidenae,  on  the  other  fide  of  the  Anio  to  be  feen  on  the  fpot,  where,  former-
with  reiped  to  Rome  •,  and  d  Livy  ly,  Ficulea  flood.

*  Jtal,  Antig..  B.ii.  p.  66o,


dB.  ii.  c.  16.


XLI,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  AS  S  EN  S  I  S.  375

XLI.  After  all  the  neceflary  preparations  were  made  on
both  fides,  the  Sabines,  firft,  led  out  their  forces,  and
formed  two  camps ;  one  of  which  was  in  the  open  field,
not  far  from  Fidenae ;  and  the  other,  in  Fidenae  itfelf,
which  they  defigned  both  as  a  guard  to  the  citizens,  and  a
refuge  to  thofe,  who  lay  incamped  without  the  city,  if  any
misfortune  fhould  befal  them.  After  that,  the  Roman  confuls,
hearing  the  Sabines  were  coming  againft  them,  they,  alfo,
marched  out  with  all  the  youth,  and  incamped  afunder;
Valerius  near  the  camp  of  the  Sabines,  that  lay  in  the  field  ;
and  Lucretius,  not  far  diftant,  upon  a  hill,  from  whence  he
had  a  profpecft  of  the  other  camp.  The  defign  of  the  Romans
was,  fince  the  fate  of  the  war  would,  foon,  be  decided  by
an  open  battle,  prefently  to  ingage  the  enemy.  On  the
other  fide,  the  general  of  the  Sabines,  apprehending  the
confequence  of  an  open  battle  againft  the  boldnefs,  and
conftancy  of  men  prepared  to  face  every  danger,  refolved  to
attack  them  by  night:  And,  having  prepared  every  thing,
that  could  be  of  ufe  to  fill  up  the  ditch,  and  mount  the
intrenchments,  he  propofed,  when  all  things  were  ready
for  the  attack,  to  afiemble  the  beft  of  his  forces,  after  the  firft
fleep,  and  lead  them  to  the  camp  of  the  Romans.  He,  alfo,
gave  notice  to  the  troops  incamped  in  Fidenae,  that,  as  foon
as  they  found  his  men  were  come  out  of  the  camp,  they*
alfo,  fhould  march  out  of  the  city  with  light  arms ;  and,
having  formed  an  ambufcade  in  proper  places,  if  any
fuccours  were  coming  to  Valerius  from  the  other  camps
they  fhould  rife  up,  and,  getting  behind  them,  attack  them

A  a  a  2  with


376  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookV,

with  ffiouts,  and  a  great  noife.  This  was  the  defign  of
Sextus,  who  communicated  it  to  his  officers,  and  they,  alfo,
approving  of  it,  he  waited  for  the  hour  appointed :  When  a
deferter  came  to  the  Roman  camp,  and  informed  the  conful
of  his  plan  :  And,  prefently  after,  a  party  of  horfe  brought
in  fome  Sabine  prifoners  they  had  taken,' as  they  went  out
to  get  wood.  Thefe,  being  examined  apart  concerning  the
defigns  of  their  general,  faid  that  he  was  ordering  ladders,
and  portable  bridges  to  be  got  ready :  But  where,  and  when
he  propofed  to  make  ufe  of  them,  they  faid  they  did  not
know.  After  this  information,  Valerius  fent  his  brother
Marcus  to  the  other  camp,  to  acquaint  Lucretius,  who  had
the  command  of  it,  with  the  defigns  of  the  enemy  ;  and,
alfo,  with  That  he  had  formed  of  attacking  them.  And  he
himfelf,  affembling  the  tribunes,  and  centurions,  and  in¬
forming  them  of  what  he  had  learned  both  from  the  deferter,
and  the  prifoners,  exhorted  them  to  behave  themfelves  with
gallantry,  from  this  affurance,  that  they  could  not  wifh  for  a
better  opportunity  to  take  a  glorious  revenge  upon  their
enemies ;  and,  after '  letting  them  know  what  each  of  them
was  to  do,  and  giving  the  word,  he  difmifled  them  to  their
commands.

XLII.  It  was  not,  yet,  midnight,  when  the  Sabine  general
was  marching  to  the  camp  at  the  head  of  his  choiceft  troops,
having  ordered  all  his  men  to  keep  filence,  and  to  make  no
noife  with  their  arms,  that  the  enemy  might  not  be  apprized
of  their  march,  before  they  were  arrived  at  the  intrenchments.
When  thofe  in  the  front  approached  the  camp,  and  neither

faw


JBookV.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  EN  SI  S.  377

\

faw  any  lights,  nor  heard  the  voice  of  the  fentinels,  they
thought  the  Romans  guilty  of  a  great  neglect  in  appointing
no  guards,  and  giving  themfelves  up  to  deep  in  their  camp  :
And,  filling  up  many  parts  of  the  ditches  with  fafcines,  they
pafled  over  without  oppofition.  The  Romans,  who,  all
this  time,  lay  in  feparate  bodies  all  round  between  the
ditches,  and  the  palifades,  and  were  unperceived  by  reafon  of
the  darknefs,  killed  them  as  they  paffed  over,  and  fell  into
their  hands.  For  fome  time,  the  deftru&ion  of  thofe,  who
led  the  way,  was  not  perceived  by  their  companions  in  the
rear  :  But,  when,  the  moon  riling,  light  appeared,  and  thofe,
who  approached  the  ditch,  faw,  not  only,  heaps  of  their
own  men  lying  dead  near  it,  but,  alfo,  ftrong  bodies  of  the
enemy  advancing  to  attack  them,  they  threw  down  their
arms,  and  fled  :  When  the  Romans,  giving  a  great  fhout,
which  was  the  fignal  to  thofe  in  the  other  camp,  fallied  out
upon  them  all  at  once.  Lucretius  hearing  the  fhout,  fent
the  horfe  to  reconnoitre  if  there  was  any  ambufcade  of
the  enemy,  and  he  himfelf  followed,  prefently  after,  with
the  choiceft  foot :  The  horfe,  meeting  with  thofe,  who  had
been  fent  from  Fidenae  to  place  themfelves  in  ambufcade,
put  them  to  flight,  and  the  foot  purfued  fuch,  as  had  ap¬
proached  their  camp,  with  great  daughter,  thefe  preferving
neither  their  arms,  nor  their  ranks.  In  thefe  a&ions,  of
the  Sabines,  and  their  allies,  there  fell  about  thirteen  thou-
fand  ;  four  thoufand  two  hundred  being  made  prifoners
and  their  camp  was  taken  the  fame  day.


XLIIL


378  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

XLIII.  Fidenae,  after  a  few  days  fiege,  was  taken  in  that
very  part,  where  it  was  thought  the  moft  difficult  of  accefs,
and  which,  for  that  reafon,  was  defended  by  few  men :  But
the  inhabitants  were  not  made  flaves,  nor  was  the  city  de¬
mo!  iffied  ;  neither  were  there  many  men  killed  after  the
city  was  taken  :  For  the  confuls  looked  upon  the  lofs  of
their  effects,  and  their  fiaves,  and  of  the  men,  who  had  been
{lain  in  the  action,  as  a  fufficient  puni (lament  for  an  of¬
fending  city,  inhabited  by  their  own  countrymen  ;  and  that
a  feverity,  ufual  with  the  Romans,  inflicfted  on  the  authors
of  the  revolt,  would  be  a  moderate  precaution,  yet  fufficient
to  reftrain  the  inhabitants,  after  the  taking  of  their  city,
from  being,  eafily,  perfuaded  to  run  to  arms  for  the  future.
Having,  therefore,  affembled  all  the  Fidenates,  who  were
prifoners,  in  the  forum,  and  inveighed,  ftrongly,  againft  their
folly,  faying  that  all  of  them,  who  were  men  grown,  de-
ferved  to  be  put  to  death,  ftnce  neither  the  favors  they  had
received  could  make  them  grateful,  nor  their  fufferings  re¬
claim  them,  they  ordered  the  moft  confiderable  to  be,  pub¬
licly,  whipped  with  rods,  and,  then,  put  to  death;  and
allowed  the  reft  to  live  in  the  city,  as  before,  placing  a  gar-
rifon  there,  appointed  by  the  fenate,  to  cohabit  with  them  ;  -
and,  feizing  fome  part  of  their  lands,  they  granted  it  to  this
garrifon.  After  they  had  fettled  thefe  things,  they  withdrew
their  army  from  the  enemy’s  country,  and  celebrated  the
triumph  which  the  fenate  had  decreed  for  them.  Thefe  were
the  tranfa&ions  of  their  confulffiip.


XLIV.


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  IS.  379
XLIV.  Publius  Poftumius,  furnamed  Tubertus,  being
chofen  conful  for  the  fecond  time,  and,  with  him,  Agrippa
Menenius  Lanatus,  the  Sabines  made  a  third  irruption  into
the  Roman  territories  with  a  greater  army,  before  the  Re¬
mans  were  aware  of  it,  and  advanced  to  the  walls  of  Rome  :
In  this  incurfion,  many  of  the  latter  loft  their  lives,  not
only,  of  the  hufbandmen,  on  whom  this  unexpected  mif-
fortune  fell,  before  they  could  take  refuge  in  the  neighbour¬
ing  fortreffes,  but,  alfo,  of  the  citizens,  who,  at  that  time,
lived  at  Rome:  For  Poftumius,  one  of  the  confuls,  looking
upon  this  infult  of  the  enemy  as  not  to  be  borne,  took  the
firft  men  he  met  with,  and  marched  out  to  the  relief  of  the
country  with  greater  eagernefs,  than  prudence.  Whom  the
Sabines,  obferving  to  advance  with  great  contempt  of  the
enemy,  without  order,  and  feparated  from  one  another,
contrived  to  encreafe  that  contempt,  by  retiring  rather
haftily,  than  leifurely,  as  if  they  fled,  till  they  came  into
thick  woods,  where  the  reft  of  their  army  lay  in  wait  for  the
Romans :  Then,  facing  about,  they  attacked  their  purfuers ;
and,  at  the  fame  time,  the  others  came  out  of  the  wood*
and,  giving  a  great  fhout,  joined  in  the  attack.  The  Sabines,
who  were  very  numerous,  advancing,  with  great  regularity,
upon  men,  who  obferved  no  difeipline,  but  were  difordered,
and  out  of  breath  with  running,  killed  fuch  of  them,  as  flood
their  ground,  and  the  reft  endeavouring  to  fave  themfelves
by  flight,  they  cut  off  their  retreat  to  the  city,  and  forced
them  to  take  refuge  upon  the  ridge  of  a  hill,  deftitute  of
proviflonsj.andftiut  them  up  there :  Then,  refting  their  arms


near


;8o  '  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

near  the  place  (for  it  was  now  dark)  they  kept  guard  the
whole  night  to  prevent  their  efcape.  When  the  news  of
this  misfortune  was  brought  to  Rome,  there  was  a  great
tumult,  many  of  the  citizens  running  to  the  walls,  and  a
general  apprehenfion  left  the  enemy,  elated  with  their  fuc-
cefs,  fhould  enter  the  city  in  the  night :  They  commiferated
the  flain,  and  exprefied  their  compafiion  for  thofe,  who
furvived,  as  for  men  in  imminent  danger  of  being  fubdued
through  a  want  of  neceflaries,  unlefs  they  were,  prefently,
relieved  :  They  palled  that  night,  therefore,  without  deep
under  difmal  apprehenfions.  The  next  day,  the  other  conful,
Menenius,  having  armed  all  the  youth,  marched  out  with
them  in  great  order,  and  difcipline,  to  the  affiftance  of
thofe  upon  the  hill.  When  the  Sabines  faw  them  advancing,
they  withdrew  their  army  from  the  hill,  contented  with  their
prefent  fuccefs ;  and,  without  flaying  long  in  the  field,  they
returned  home,  greatly,  elated,  and  carrying  with  them  a
great  booty  in  cattle,  ilaves,  and  money.

XLV.  The  Romans,  refenting  this  defeat,  which  they
attributed  to  Poflumius,  one  of  the  confuls,  refolved  to  in¬
vade  the  territories  of  the  Sabines,  immediately,  with  all
their  forces,  not  only,  from  their  impatience  to  repair  the
fhameful,  and  unexpected  defeat  they  had  received,  but,
alfo,  from  their  indignation  at  the  embafiy  full  of  abufe,
and  haughtinefs,  lately,  fent  to  them  by  the  enemy:  For,
as  if,  already,  victorious,  and  having  it  in  their  power  to
take  Rome  without  any  trouble,  if  the  Romans  refufed  to
obey  their  commands,  they  ordered  them  to  reftore  the

*  Tarquinii,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  381

Tarquinii,  to  yield  the  fovereignty  to  the  Sabines,  and  to
fettle  fuch  a  form  of  government,  and  enadt  fuch  laws,  as
the  conquerors  fhould  think  fit  to  impofe.  The  anfwer,
given  to  the  embafladors,  was,  to  acquaint  their  nation  that
the  Romans  commanded  the  Sabines  to  lay  down  their  arms,
to  deliver  up  their  cities  to  them,  and  to  return  to  the  con¬
dition  of  fubjedls,  as  they  had  been  before  ;  and,  after  they
had  complied  with  thefe  things,  then  to  come,  and  beg
pardon  for  the  injuries,  and  damages  they  had  done  them  in
their  former  incurfions,  if  they  defired  to  obtain  peace,  and
their  friendfhip :  And  that,  in  cafe  they  refufed  to  yield
obedience  to  thefe  orders,  they  might  expedt  to  fee  the
war  foon  brought  to  the  gates  of  their  cities.  Thefe  orders
being  given,  and  received,  both  of  them  made  preparations
of  every  thing  neceffary  for  the  war,  and  led  out  their
forces ;  Thofe  of  the  Sabines  confiding  of  the  chofen
youth  of  all  their  cities,  whom  they  had  armed  in  a  diftin-
guifhing  manner.  On  the  other  fide,  the  Romans  drew  out
all  their  forces,  not  only,  from  their  city,  but,  alfo,  from  the
fortreffes;  looking  upon  thofe  above  the  military  age,  and
the  number  of  their  fervants,  as  a  fufficient  guard  both  to
the  city,  and  to  the  fortrefles  in  the  country :  Both  armies
approaching,  they  incamped  at  a  fmall  diftance  from  one
another  near  the  city  of  Eretum,  which  belongs  to  the  Sabine
nation.

XLVI.  When  both  of  them  obferved  the  condition  of
the  enemy,  of  which  they  judged  by  the  compafs  of  the
camps,  and  the  information  of  the  prifoners,  the  Sabines
Vol.  II.  B  b  b  grew


Book  V.


382  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

grew  full  of  confidence,  and  contempt  for  the  fmall  number
of  their  adverfaries ;  and  the  Romans  were  feized  with  fear
at  the  fight  of  the  multitude  they  had  to  encounter:  How¬
ever,  they  recovered  their  fpirits,  and  entertained  fome  hopes
of  victory  from  many  omens,  fent  to  them  from  heaven;
but,  particularly,  from  this  laft,  which  they  faw,  when  they
were  going  to  ingage.  From  the  javelines,  that  were  fixed
in  the  ground  before  their  tents  (thefe  are  38  miffive  weapons,
ufed  by  the  Romans,  which  they  dart  againft  the  enemy  in


38.  Efi  Se  Pajuaiwv.  This

weaDon  was  peculiar  to  the  Romans,
and  called  Pilum.  As  the  fhape  of  it  was
fmaular,  and  the  effett  very  confidera-
ble^I  fhall  give  a  defcription  of  it  from
f  Polybius, who  is  known  to  be  very  ex-
aft  in  defcribing  the  arms  of  the  Ro¬
mans  I  Twv  cJ *  utrtrwv  eun v  oi  fMv  01

&  hi-nioi.  TUV  Si  f£f iuli{u)v,  0*  piv  s^cfyuAoi

wahawoitoiv  W**  Tflv  C1  ^

T e^xfuvoi,  T»jv  sr Aevguv.  oi  yi  v  AiTrloi
0-iguyioit  soman  vs  (po^n  [Xila

toi vvrcoetgijjaevMV.  diravlay  Si  raluv  ra  A*
to  jwjKOf  argo<r«^os-ai

gKots-oi?  $*Ao?  ffityw  aFxir'ulov,  itrov  iftov
TO  jWJJKOJ  TC4?  |VA01?,'  *  T))V  evJ*(T4V,  Ti^V

cceQabigcvlai  fiiGaia ?,  £»ff
pi(rov  rcov  %\jKoov  ivSiovlts,  *co  tfvxvuic  rais

AxGtn  tael onrigOVtoGI i(  wgi  ^  ttfgoltgcv  Tflv

JfiTjW.ou  ?v  TAM?  amX^AosoS-ijvai,  >7

TOV  (T/d^OV  ^«veo&06l,  ovj#  TO

IV  to)  aruO/wevi,  k«»  tjj  ar£'0f  to  £v>ov
T/itaiv  "I  he  fubftance  of

which  is  (for  I  fhall  not  extend  this
note  by  a  literal  tranflation  of  it)  that
the  fhaft  of  this  weapon  was  three
inches  diameter,  and  three  cubits  long
(our  author  fays  only  three  feet,  which


I  take  to  be  an  error  in  the  tranfcriber)
to  this  was  fixed  the  head  of  the  wea¬
pon,  which  was  of  iron,  extending  one
cubit  and  a  half,  and  bearded  at  the
point,  the  other  half  being  let  into  the
fhafc,  to  which  it  was  fattened  by  fe-
veral  bolts.  So  that,  the  length  of  the
Pilum  was  fix  feet,  and  nine  inches.
I  do  not  trouble  the  reader  with  the
fractions,  that  conftitute  the  difference
between  our  feet,  and  Thofe  of  the
Greeks,  which  may  be  feen  in  Arbuth-
not.  I  mutt  obferve  that  all  the  tranf-
lators  of  our  author  have  been  milled
by  the  words  I* dligx  t«v  which

hand  in  all  the  editions,  and  are,  very
properly,  corre&edin  the  Vatican  ma-
nulcript,  by  w  9-«7g^  tuv  uk^uv.  There
is  another  miftake,  alfo,  which,  in  my
opinion,  they  have  all  been  let  into  by
the  pointing  in  the  editions,  where
the  comma  is  placed  after
which' ought  to  come  after  -sroSw,
otherwife,  the  fenfe  will  be,  as  they
have  rendered  it,  that  the  iron  part  of
this  weapon  was  not  lefs  than  three
feet  long,  which  is  nine  inches  longer
than,  even,  Polybius  makes  it.


f  B.  vi.  p.  469.


the


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  3  S  E  N  S I  S.  383

the  beginning  of  an  ingagement,  being  long  (laves,  large
enough  to  fill  the  hand,  of  not  lefs  than  three  feet  in  length,
having,  at  one  of  the  ends,  iron  tucks,  pointing  forward,
and,  with  the  iron,  are  equal,  in  length,  to  common  javelins)
from  thefe  javelins,  at  the  top  of  the  tucks,  flames  iflued,  and
the  blaze  fpread  itfelf  through  the  whole  camp,  like  That
of  torches,  and  lafted  great  part  of  the  night :  From  this
fight,  they  concluded,  as  the  interpreters  of  prodigies  in¬
formed  them,  and  was  obvious  to  every  man,  that  heaven
fignified  to  them  a  fpeedy,  and  confpicuous  victory  ;  becaufe
every  thing  yields  to  fire,  and  there  is  nothing,  that  is  not
confumed  by  it.  Since,  therefore,  this  fire  iflued  out  of  their
offenfive  weapons,  they  came,  boldly,  out  of  their  camp ;
and,  ingaging  the  Sabines,  fought  with  enemies,  many  times,
fuperior  to  them  in  number,  placing  their  hopes  in  their
confidence  :  Befides,  their  long  experience,  joined  to  their
love  of  labor,  encouraged  them  to  defpife  every  danger.
Firft,  therefore,  Poftumius,  who  commanded  the  left  wing,
defiring  to  repair  the  difgrace  of  his  former  defeat,  forced
the  right  of  the  enemy  to  give  way,  fhewing  no  regard  to
his  own  prefervation  from  a  defire  of  vi&ory  ;  but,  like  a
man  diftradted,  and  feeking  death,  threw  himfelf  into  the
midft  of  the  enemy :  And  the  right  wing,  commanded  by
Menenius,  which  fullered  already,  and  was  giving  ground,
when  they  found  that  the  forces  under  Poftumius  had  the
advantage  over  Thofe,  who  flood  oppofite  to  them,  re¬
covered  themfelves,  and  attacked  the  enemy.  And  now,
both  wings  of  the  Sabines,  giving  way,  fled  outright  :

B  b  b  2  Neither


3 84  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

Neither  did  Thofe,  who  were  polled  in  the  center,  when
their  flanks  were  left  naked,  Hand  their  ground ;  but,  being
prefled  by  the  Roman  horfe,  that  charged  them  in  feparate
troops,  they  were  driven  off  the  field  ;  and  all  of  them  flying
towards  their  camps,  the  Romans  purfued  them,  and,  en¬
tering  with  them,  made  themfelves  mailers  of  them  both.
The  army  of  the  enemy  had  been,  totally,  deftroyed,  had  not
the  night  come  on,  and  their  defeat  not  happened  in  their
own  territories :  For  thofe,  who  fled,  were  under  lefs  dif¬
ficulty  in  finding  their  way  home  in  fafety,  by  being  ac¬
quainted  with  the  country,  than  their  purfuers  in  overtaking
them,  by  being  unacquainted  with  the  pafies.

XLVII.  The  next  day,  the  confuls,  having  burned  their
own  dead,  gathered  together  the  fpoils  (for  there  were  fome
found  belonging,  alfo,  to  the  living,  which  they  had  thrown
away  in  their  flight)  and  carried  off  many  captives,  and
effedls,  hefides  Thofe,  that  were  plundered  by  the  foldiers :
Thefe  being  fold  for  the  ufe  of  the  public,  all  the  citizens
received  the  contributions  they  had  each  of  them  paid  to
equip  the  foldiers.  Thus,  both  the  confuls,  having  gained
a  nioft  glorious  vidlory,  returned  to  Rome;  and  both  of
them  were  honoured  with  triumphs  by  the  fenate,  Menenius,
with  the  greater,  and  mod  honourable,  entering  the  city  in
a  royal  chariot ;  and  Poffumius  with  the  leffer,  and  inferior
triumph,  which  they  call  39  E votapov,  Ovationem ;  being  an

39*  E uaifl-^ov.  Cafaubon  reads  yaw,  Greek  word  :  For  which  reafon,  in-
or  oCafnv,  neither  of  which  words  has  Bead  of  which  fignifies  one

any  fgnifkation  in  Greek,  and  our  of  thefe  Bacchanalian  companions,  I
author  fays  this  was,  originally,  a  would  read  with  Portus,  which

obfcure


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC  A  RN  A  SSENSIS.  385

obfcure  derivation  from  the  Greek  word  :  For  it  was,  firft,
fo  called  from  what  happened  upon  that  occafion,  according
to  my  opinion,  which  I  find  confirmed  by  many  Roman
hiftories ;  the  fenate  having,  as  Licinius  writes,  then  firft,
invented  this  fort  of  triumph:  It  differs  from  the  other,
firft,  in  this,  that  the  general,  who  triumphs  in  the  manner,
called  the  Ovation ,  enters  the  city  on  foot,  followed  by  the
army,  and  not  in  a  chariot,  like  the  other ;  and,  in  the  next
place,  becaufe  he  is  not  attired  in  an  embroidered  robe,
diftingu idled  with  gold,  with  which  the  other  is  adorned  ;
neither  does  he  wear  a  gold  crown,  but  is  clothed  in  a  white
gown,  bordered  with  purple  (which  is  worne  by  the  confuls,
and  praetors,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  Romans)  and
crowned  with  laurel ;  he  is,  alfo,  inferior  to  the  other  in  not


fignifies  the  ceremony  itfelf.  Both
thefe  words  are  derived  from  tvoi,
which  was  the  acclamation,  made  ufe
of  upon  thofe  occafions  s,

Of  s or,  svoi.

From  hence,  alfo,  Bacchus  was  called

hr

Euior,

SiQilui  C  E UiOf.

Our  author  fays  that  the  perfon,  who
was  honoured  with  the  ovation,  was
crowned  with  laurel.  However,1  Pliny,
not  to  mention  Gellius,  who  is  not  of
authority  enough  to  be  quoted  in  fuch
company,  fays  he  was  crowned  with
myrtle  •,  bellicis  quoque  fe  rebus  inferuit
(myrtus)  triumphanfque  deSabinis  Poftu-
mius  Tubertus  in  confulatu.  ( qui  primus
omnium  ovans  ingrejjus  urbem  eft,  quo-

SEurip.  Bax&awjfr.  1 41.  hId,  ib.  f.  566,


niam  rem  leviter  fine  cruore  gefTerat)
myrto  Veneris  vibiricis  coronatus  inceftit.
—  Haec  poftea  ovantium  fuit  corona *
Whether  Pliny  is  in  the  right,  or  not,
in  what  he  fays  concerning  the  myrtle
crown,  it  is  certain  that  he  is  not  fo  in
regard  to  the  reafon  he  gives  for  this  ova¬
tion  :  For,  if  this  had  been  the  reafon,
the  fenate  would  not  have  decreed  the
greater  triumph  to  his  collegue.  Our
author  gives  a  much  better  for  the
diftindtion,  that  was  made  between
them.  It  may  feern  very  ftrange,  but
it  is  true,  that  k  Pliny  himfelf,  in  an¬
other  place,  fays  that,  in  the  ovation,
the  perfon,  who  was  honoured  with  it,
was  crowned  with  olive  ^  oleae  honbrem
Romana  may  eft  as  magnum  praebuit ,  tur-
mas  equitum  Idibus  Juliis  ex  ed  coronando :
item  miner ibus  triumphis  ovantes.

*  Nat.  Hift.  B.  xv.  c,  29.  k  Id.  ib.  c  4.

holding


Book  V.


386  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

holding  a  fcepter ;  but  every  thing  elfe  is  the  fame  :  The
reafon  why  this  inferior  honor  was  decreed  to  Poftumius,
though  he  had  diftinguifhed  himfelf  more  than  any  man  in
the  laid;  ingagement,  was  the  great,  and  fhameful  defeat  he
had,  before,  received  in  the  excurfton  he  made  againft  the
enemy,  in  which  he,  not  only,  loft  many  of  his  men,  but,
narrowly,  efcaped  being  taken  prifoner  himfelf,  together
with  thofe,  who  had  furvived  that  defeat.

XLVIII.  In  the  confulfhip  of  thefe  perfons,  Publius
Valerius,  furnamed  Poplicola,  died  of  ftcknefs;  a  man
efteemed  fuperior  to  all  the  Romans  of  his  time  in  every
kind  of  virtue.  I  need  not  relate  all  the  actions  of  this  per-
fon,  by  which  he  deferved  both  to  be  admired,  and  remem¬
bered  ;  becaufe  they  have  been,  already,  taken  notice  of  in
the  beginning  of  this  book;  but  I  think  myfelf  obliged  not
to  omit  one  thing,  which  mod  deferves  admiration  of  all,
that  can  be  faid  in  his  praife,  and  has  not,  yet,  been  men¬
tioned  :  For  I  look  upon  it  as  the  greateft  duty  of  an
hiftorian,  not  only,  to  relate  the  military  a&ions  of  illuftri-
ous  generals,  and  the  glorious,  and  falutary  inftitutions  they
have  invented  in  favor  of  their  commonwealths,  but,  alfo,
to  give  an  account  of  their  private  lives,  when  they  have
pafled  them  with  moderation,  and  temperance,  and  a  ftridt
adherence  to  the  cuftoms,  and  difcipline  of  their  country.
This  perfon,  therefore,  was  one  of  the  four  ftrft  patricians,
who  expelled  the  kings,  and  confifcated  their  fortunes ;
was  four  times  conful ;  vi&orious  in  two  wars  of  the  greateft
confequence ;  triumphed  for  both ;  the  ftrft  time,  for  his

victory


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALIC ARN  ASSE NS  I  S.  387

vidtory  over  the  Tyrrhenians,  and  the  fecond,  for  That
over  the  Sabines ;  and,  though  he  had  fuch  opportunities  of
amaffing  riches,  which  none  could  have  traduced  as  fhameful
and  unjuft,  yet  he  never  fuffered  himfelf  to  be  overcome  by
avarice,  which  fubdues  all  men,  and  forces  them  to  a<ft
unworthily ;  but  contented  himfelf  with  the  fmall  eftate  he
had  inherited  from  his  anceftors,  leading  a  life  of  tempe¬
rance,  and  moderation,  fuperior  to  every  paffion ;  and,  with
this  fmall  fortune,  he  brought  up  his  children  in  a  manner
worthy  of  their  birth ;  making  it  plain  to  all  men,  that  Fie
is  rich,  who  wants  few  things,  not  w7ho  pofleffes  many.
The  poverty  of  this  perfon,  which  appeared  after  his  death,
was  a  certain,  and  indubitable  argument  of  the  moderation
he  had  fhewn  during  the  whole  courfe  of  his  life  :  For,  he
did  not,  even,  leave  fortune  enough  to  provide  for  his  fune¬
ral,  and  burial  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  became  a  man  of  his
dignity :  So  that,  his  relations  were  going  to  carry  him  out
of  the  city,  like  one  of  the  vulgar,  in  order  to  burn  his
body,  and  bury  it :  When  the  fenate,  being  informed  of
their  poverty,  decreed  that  he  fhould  be  buried  at  the  ex¬
pence  of  the  public,  and  appointed  a  place  in  the  city,
under  the  hill,  called40  Velia,  near  the  lorum,  where  his  body

4°*  T<p’  EAiu$.  This,  I  dare  fay,  is  nineteenth  chapter  of  this  book.  'Livy
the  true  reading,  not  Jtto  sa?*?,  as  it  fays,  alfo,  that  Poplicola  was  buried  at
ftands  in  the  editions,  and  manufcripts,  the  expence  of  the  public.  P.  Valerius s
which,  I  find,  all  the  tranilators  have  omnium  confenfu  princeps  belli  pacifque
followed,  except  le  Jay,  who  has  left  it  artibus ,  —  moritur,  gloria,  ingenti ,  copiis
out:  However,  M.  ***  has  taken  familiar  ibus  adeo  exiguts^  ut  funeri  fump-
notice  of  this  reading  in  his  notes,  tus  deejfet :  de  publico  eft  elatus-.
Yelia  is  the  hill,  Ao<po?  rv\ ;  Luxere  matronae  ut  Brutum.

afcgacfy  mentioned  by  our  author  in  the

'B.  ii,  c.  16.


fhould


388  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

fhould  be  burned,  and  buried  ;  which  was  a  diftindion
none  of  the  illuftrious  Romans,  befides  himfelf,  have,  to  this
day,  received  :  This  place  is,  as  it  were,  facred  and  dedi¬
cated  to  his  pofterity,  as  a  place  of  burial;  an  advantage,
greater  than  any  riches,  or  royal  dignities,  in  the  eyes  of
all  men,  who  make  virtue,  not  fhameful  pleafures,  the
meafure  of  happinefs.  Thus  Valerius  Poplicola,  who  had
aimed  at  the  poffefiion  of  nothing  more,  than  would  fupply
his  neceflary  wants,  was  honoured  by  his  country  with  afplen-
did  funeral,  equal  to  Thofe  of  the  richeft  kings ;  and  all  the
Roman  matrons,  with  a  general  confent,  laying  afide  both
their  gold,  and  purple,  mourned  for  him  during  awholeyear,
as  they  had  done  for  Junius  Brutus,  and  as  it  is  the  cuftom  for
them  to  mourn  after  the  funerals  of  their  neareft  relations.

XLIX.  The  next  year,  Spurius  Caffius,  furnamed  Vifcel-
linus,  and  Opiter  Virginius  Tricoftus  were  appointed  confuls :
In  whofe  confuKhip,  the  war  with  the  Sabines  was  ended
after  a  great  battle,  fought  near  the  city  of  Cures ;  in  which
battle,  about  ten  thoufand  three  hundred  Sabines  were  killed,
and  near  four  thoufand  taken  prifoners.  The  Sabines,  ftruck
with  this  laft  misfortune,  fent  embaffadors  to  the  conful  to
treat  of  a  peace.  But  Caffius  referring  them  to  the  fenate,
they  came  to  Rome;  and,  after  great  intreaties,  with  dif¬
ficulty,  obtained  a  reconciliation,  and  a  peace,  by  agreeing
to  give,  not  only,  as  much  corn  to  the  army,  as  Caffius
had  ordered,  but  each  of  them  a  certain  fum  of  money,  and
to  yield  to  the  Romans  ten  thoufand  acres  of  fown  land.
Spurius  Caffius  triumphed  for  the  vidory  he  had  obtained


in


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENSIS.  389

in  this  war.  The  other  conful,  Virginius,  marched  againft
the  city  of  the  Camerini,  which  had  withdrawn  itfelf  from
the  alliance  of  the  Romans  during  this  war :  He  took  half
the  other  army  with  him,  and  acquainted  no  perfon  with  the
deftination  of  his  march,  which  he  performed  that  night,
that  he  might  fall  upon  the  inhabitants,  both  unprepared,
and  unapprized  of  his  delign ;  which  fell  out  accordingly  :
For  it  was  day  break,  before  any  of  them  knew  of  his
approaching  their  walls ;  and,  before  he  incamped,  he
applied  the  battering  rams;  and,  advancing  the  ladders,  put
in  pra&ice  every  method,  ufed  in  fieges.  The  Camerini,
aftonifbed  at  his  fudden  arrival,  and  fome  of  them  being
willing  to  open  the  gates,  and  receive  the  conful,  and  others
infifting  upon  their  defending  themfelves  with  all  their
power,  and  not  fuffering  the  enemy  to  enter  their  city  ;
while  they  continued  in  this  confufion,  and  divifion,  the
conful,  having  cut  down  the  gates,  and  fcaled  the  lowed:
parts  of  the  fortifications,  took  the  city  by  ftorm  :  That
day,  therefore,  and  the  following  night,  he  buffered  his  men
to  carry  away  the  effedts  of  the  inhabitants :  The  day  after,
he  ordered  the  prifoners  to  be  brought  together  to  one  place ;
and,  having  put  to  death  all  the  authors  of  the  revolt,  he
fold  the  reft  of  the  people,  and  demolifhed  the  city.

L.  In  the  feventieth  Olympiad,  when  Niceas  of  Opus  in
Locris  won  the  prize  of  the  ftadium,  41  My  ms  being  archon

4**  Mvgx.  The  Vatican  cal!s  this  the  Athenian  archons,  that  Myrus
archon  Smyrus :  But  that  is  a  miftake;  fucceeded  Acefiorides,  and  was  fol-
becaufe  we  find,  in  the  fuccefiion  of  lowed,  as  we  (hall  fee,  by  Hipparchus.

Vol.  II.  C  c  c  at


Book  V.


390  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

at  Athens,  Poftumus  Cominius,  and  Titus  Lartius  were
created  confuls.  In  whofe  confulfhip,  the  cities  of  the
Latines  withdrew  themfelves  from  the  friendfhip  of  the
Romans,  Odavius  Mamilius,  the  fon-in-law  of  Tarquinius,
having  prevailed  upon  the  mofi  considerable  men  of  every
city,  partly,  by  promifes  of  great  gifts,  and,  partly,  by  in¬
treaties,  to  afiift  him  in  reftoring  the  fugitives.  And  a
general  afiembly  was  held  of  all  the  cities  at  Ferentinumy
except  Rome  (for  the  latter  was  the  only  city  they  had
not  fummoned,  as  ufual,  to  fend  deputies  thither)  in  which
affembly,  the  cities  were  to  give  their  votes  concerning  the
war,  to  chufe  their  generals,  and  to  confider  of  other
preparations.  Now,  it  happened  that,  at  this  time,  Marcus.
Valerius,  a  confular  perfon,  was  fent  embafiador,  by  the
Romans,  to  the  neighbouring  cities,  to  intreat  them  not  to
enter  into  any  new  meafures :  Forfomeof  their  people,  fent
out  by  the  men  in  power,  were  plundering  the  neighbouring
fields,  and  doing  great  damage  to  the  hufbandmen.  This
perfon,  hearing  there  was,  then,  a  general  afiembly  of  the
cities,  at  which  they  were  all  to  vote  for  the  war,  came  to  the
afiembly ;  and,  defiring  the  prefidents  to  give  him  leave  to*
be  heard,  faid,  that  he  was  fent  embafiador,  from  the  com¬
monwealth,  to  the  cities,  that  were  fending  out  bands  of
robbers,  to  defire  they  would  find  out  the  men,  who  were
guilty  of  thefe  devaluations,  and  deliver  them  up  to  be
pimifhed  according  to  the  law,  which  they  had  inferted  in
the  convention,  when  they  entered  into  a  league  of  friend-
fhip ;  and  to  defire  them  to  take  care,  for  the  future,  that

no


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN A S S E N S I S.  391

no  offence  might  be  countenanced  by  the  public  to  inter¬
rupt  their  friendfhip,  and  affinity  :  When,  obferving  all  the
cities  were  affembled  in  order  to  declare  war  againft  the
Romans  (which  he  difcovered  by  many  tokens,  but,  parti¬
cularly,  becaufe  the  Romans  were  the  only  perfons  they  had
not  fummoned  to  be  prefent  at  the  aflembly,  there  being  an
exprefs  article  in  the  treaty,  that  all  the  Latin  cities  ffiouid
fend  their  deputies  to  the  general  aftemblies,  when  fummoned
by  the  prefidents)  he  faid,  he  wondered  what  provocation,
or  what  caufe  of  complaint  againft  the  Romans,  had  induced
thefe  deputies  to  fuffer  Rome  to  be  the  only  city  they  had
not  fummoned  to  their  affembly,  which  ought  to  have  been
the  fir  ft  to  fend  her  deputies  thither,  and  the  fir  ft  to  be  afked
her  opinion  ;  as  being  in  pofteffion  of  the  fovereignty  of  the
nation,  which  fhe  had  received  from  them  with  their  own
confent,  in  confideration  of  the  many  great  benefits  they
had  received  from  her.

LI.  After  he  had  faid  this,  the  Aricini,  defiring  leave  to
fpeak,  accufed  the  Romans  of  having,  though  relations,
drawn  upon  them  a  war  from  the  Tyrrhenians,  and  expofed
all  the  Latin  cities,  as  far  as  in  them  lay,  to  be  deprived
of  their  liberty  by  the  former.  And  Tarquinius,  the
late  king,  put  the  cities  in  mind  of  the  treaties  of  friendfhip,
and  alliance  they  had  entered  into  with  him  in  the  name  of
the  whole  nation,  and  defired  the  cities  to  fulfil  their  oaths,
and  reftore  him  to  the  fovereignty.  The  fugitives,  alfo,  of
Fidenae,  and  Cameria,  lamenting,  the  former,  the  taking
of  their  city,  and  their  own  banifhment ;  and  the  latter,  the

C  c  c  2  inflavin  o-


392  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  V.

inflaving  their  countrymen,  and  the  fubverfion  of  their  city,
exhorted  them  to  declare  war.  And,  laid  of  all,  Mamilius,
the  fon-in-law  of  Tarquinius,  a  man,  at  that  time,  of  the
greateft  power  among  the  Latines,  rofe  up,  and  inveighed
againft  the  Romans  in  a  long  fpeech.  But  Valerius  an-
fwering  all  his  accufations,  and  feeming  fuperior  in  the
juftice  of  his  caufe,  the  deputies  fpent  that  day  in  hearing
the  accufations,  and  the  apologies,  without  coming  to  any
refolution.  However,  the  next  day,  the  prefidents  did  not
admit  the  Roman  42  embafiador,  any  more,  to  the  aflembly ;
but,  allowing  Tarquinius,  Mamilius,  the  Aricini,  and  all  the
refl,  who  were  defirous  of  accufing  the  Romans,  to  fay  what
they  thought  fit,  after  they  had  heard  them  all,  they  de¬
creed  that  the  Romans  had  violated  the  treaties,  and  gave
this  anfwer  to  Valerius,  that,  feeing  the  Romans  had  dif-
folved  the  affinity,  that  fubfifted  between  them,  by  their
repeated  adts  of  injuftice,  they  fhould  confider,  at  leifure,  in
what  manner  they  ought  to  punifli  the  aggreflbrs.  While
thefe  things  were  in  agitation,  there  was  a  confpiracy  formed
againft  the  city  43  itfelf,  feveral  flaves  having  agreed  together
to  poffefs  themfelves  of  the  places  of  ftrength,  and  to  fet  fire
to  many  parts  of  it :  But,  information  being  given  by  the
accomplices,  the  confuls,  immediately,  ordered  the  gates  to
be  fhut,  and  all  the  places  of  ftrength  to  be  poftefled  by  the

Tcv  ar^<rSewI»jy.  This  is  in  the  the  Vatican  manufeript,  I  have  altered
plural  number  in  all  the  editions,  and  to  which  the  tranfition  from  one
manuferipts  i  but,  as  no  other  embaf-  fubjedt  to  another  feems  to  require,
fadorbut  Valerius  has  been  mentioned,  and  which,  I  believe,  was  changed  to
I  have  altered  it  to  the  fingular.  by  the  careleflhefs  of  the  tran-

43*  EvSuf.  This  word,  which  is  in  feribers.

knights*


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S  IS.  393


knights.  And  fome  of  the  confpirators  being,  foon,  taken
in  their  houfes,  and  others  brought  up  from  the  country,
thofe,  whom  the  informers  declared  to  have  been  concerned
in  the  confpiracy,  were  all  torne  with  whips,  and  tortures,
and,  then,  crucified,  Thefe  were  the  tranfa&ions  of  this
confulfhip.

LII.  Servius  Sulpicius  Camerinus,  and  Manius  Tullius
Longus  being  appointed  confuls,  fome  oftheFidenates,  having
fent  for  foldiers  from  the  Tarquinii,  poflefled  themfelves  of
the  citadel  at  Fidenae;  and,  putting  to  death  fome,  who
would  not  concur  in  their  meafures,  and  banifhing  others,
caufed  the  city  to  revolt,  again,  from  the  Romans;  and,
when  embafladors  came  to  them  from  Rome,  they  attempted
to  treat  them  like  enemies :  But,  being  hindered  by  the
elders  from  effecting  it,  they  drove  them  out  of  the  city,
without  vouchfafing  either  to  hear  what  they  had  to
fay,  or  to  fay  any  thing  to  them.  The  Roman  fenate,
being  informed  of  this,  did  not  defire,  as  yet,  to  make
war  upon  the  whole  nation  of  the  Latines,  becaufe  they
understood  that  all  of  them  did  not  approve  of  the  refolu-
tions  taken  by  the  leading  men  in  the  affembly ;  that  the
common  people,  in  every  city,  were  averfe  to  the  war ;  and
that  the  number  of  thofe,  who  defired  the  league  fhould
fubfift,  was  fuperior  to  fuch,  as  alledged  it  had  been  violated  :
However,  they  refolved  to  fend  Manius  Tullius,  one  of  the
confuls,  againft  the  Fidenates  with  a  confiderable  army  :
Who,  having  laid  wafte  their  country  with  great  fecurity,
none  offering  to  defend  it,  incamped  near  the  walls,  and


394  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

placed  guards  to  prevent  the  inhabitants  from,  receiving
provifions,  arms,  or  any  other  affiftance.  The  Fidenates,
thus,  fhut  up  within  their  walls,  fent  embaffadors  to  the
cities  of  the  Latines  to  defire  that  fuccours  might,  fpeedily,
be  fent  to  them.  Upon  this,  the  leading  men  of  the  Latines,
holding  an  aflembly  of  the  cities,  and,  again,  giving  leave  to
the  Tarquinii,  and  to  the  embafladors  of  the  befieged,  to
fpeak,  called  upon  the  deputies  to  deliver  their  opinions,
beginning  with  the  mod  ancient,  and  the  mod  illuftrious,
in  what  manner  they  ought  to  make  war  againft  the  Romans :
And  many  fpeeches  having  been  made,  firft,  concerning  the
war  itfelf,  whether  they  ought  to  give  their  fan&ion  to  it,
the  mod  turbulent  of  the  deputies  were  for  reftoring  the
king,  and  advifed  to  aftift  the  Fidenates,  defiring  to  have
the  fupreme  command  of  the  armies,  and  the  adminiftration
of  great  affairs  :  But  thefe  things  were,  particularly,  preffed
by  thofe,  who  aimed  at  domination,  and  tyranny  in  their  own
countries,  in  which  they  expe&ed  the  affiftance  of  the
Tarquinii,  if  they  recovered  the  fovereignty  of  the  Romans.
On  the  other  fide,  the  men  of  the  greateft  fortunes,  and  of
the  greateft  equity,  were  of  opinion,  that  the  cities  ought  to
adhere  to  the  treaties,  and  not,  haftily,  take  up  arms :  And
thefe  were  in  the  greateft  credit  with  the  people.  Thofe,
who  preffed  for  a  war,  being,  thus,  defeated  by  the  advifers
of  peace,  prevailed,  however,  fo  far  at  laft,  that  they  in-
gaged  the  affembly  to  fend  embaffadors  to  Rome  to  induce,
and,  at  the  fame  time,  to  advife  the  Romans,  to  receive  the
Tarquinii,  and  the  reft  of  the  fugitives  upon  the  terms  of

impunity,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  395

impunity,  and  a  general  amnefty;  and,  having  confirmed
thefe  conceffions  upon  oath,  to  reftore  their  ancient  form
of  government,  and  withdraw  their  army  from  Fidenae,
fince  they  could  not  fuffer  their  relations,  and  friends  to  be
deprived  of  their  country :  And,  in  cafe  the  Romans  fhould
fubrnit  to  neither  of  thefe  things,  then,  to  deliberate  con¬
cerning  the  war.  They  were  not  ignorant  that  the  Romans
would  fubrnit  to  neither,  but  delired  to  have  a  fpecious
pretence  for  breaking  with  them,  and  expedted  to  gain  their
oppofers,  in  the  mean  time,  by  courting,  and  obliging  them.
The  deputies,  having  palled  thefe  votes,  and  limited  a  year’s
time  for  the  Romans  to  take  their  refolutions,  and  for
themfelves  to  make  their  preparations,  and  appointed  fuch
embaffadors  as  Tarquinius  thought  proper,  difmiffed  the
afiembly.

LIII.  The  Latines  being  difperfed  about  their  cities,
Mamilius,  and  Tarquinius,  obferving  the  generality  of  the
people  were  become  44  remifs  by  this  truce,  abandoned  the
hopes  of  a  foreign  affiftance,  as  not  altogether  to  be  depended
on ;  and,  changing  their  fyftem,  formed  a  delign  of  railing,
in  Rome  itfelf,  a  civil  war,  againft  which  their  enemies  were*

44*  AvarsTrl cdneitri.  The  Latin  tranf-  cation,  m  Thucydides  will  befl  explain
lators  feem  not  to  have  underflood  the  it  in  the  character,  given  of  the  Athe~
fenfe  of  this  word  (I  fay  nothing  of  the  nians  by  the  Corinthian  ambaffa-
French  tranflators,  becaufe  they  have  dors;  Kgxhvlu  te  tuv  efcfywv,  s;t<  arA«s-cv
both  tranflated  the  others)  and  have  t?te%orTou9  xcci  vmwjusvoi,  tn  tAax^cv
faid  pronam:  Whereas,  the  literal  fig-  AN  A  ninTOY2I.  Hobbes  has  given
nification  of  the  word  is  juft  thereverfe;  the  fenfe  of  the  word,  though  inele-
fince  c<v«7n7r1wv  and  uVho?  are  fynony-  gantly  enough:  He  has  faid,  fall  off
mous.  And,  as  to  the  figurative  fignifi-  the  leafi.

m  B.  i.  c.  70.


unguarded^


396  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

unguarded,  by  fomenting  a  fedition  of  the  poor  againft  the  rich.
Before  this,  a  great  part  of  the  common  people  werediflatisfied,
and,  no  longer,  entertained,  efpecially  the  poorer  fort,  and
thofe,  who  were  opprefled  with  debts,  the  beft  affe&ions  for
the  commonwealth  :  For  the  creditors  were  immoderate  in
the  ufe  of  their  power ;  and,  laying  the  perfons  of  their
debtors  in  chains,  treated  them  like  flaves  they  had  pur-
chafed.  Tarquinius,  hearing  this,  fent  fome  unfufpe&ed
perfons  to  Rome  with  money,  in  company  with  the  em-
bafladors  of  the  Latines ;  who,  converfing  with  the  poorer
fort,  and  thofe,  who  were  boldeft,  and,  by  giving  fome
money  to  them,  and  promifing  more,  if  the  Tarquinii  re¬
turned,  corrupted  a  great  many  of  the  citizens :  And,  thus,
a  confpiracy  was  formed  againft  the  ariftocracy,  not,  only,
of  indigent  freemen,  but,  alfo,  of  profligate  flaves,  ingaged
by  the  hopes  of  liberty,  who,  being  exalperated  by  the  pu-
nifhment  of  their  fellow-flaves  the  year  before,  and,  fecretly,
incenfed  againft  their  matters,  by  whom  they  were  diftruft-
ed,  and  fufpeded,  as  if  they  themfelves,  alfo,  would  lay
hold  on  the  firft  opportunity  to  deftroy  them,  willingly,
hearkened  to  thofe,  who  invited  them  to  enter  into  the
confpiracy.  The  plan  of  which  was  this:  The  heads  of  the
confpiracy  were  to  take  the  opportunity  of  a  dark  night,
and  make  themfelves  mafters  of  the  fortrefies,  and  the  other
ftrong  places  of  the  city ;  and,  when  the  flaves  found  the
former  were  in  pofleflion  of  thofe  places  of  advantage  (which
was  to  be  made  known  to  them  by  a  fhout)  they  were  to
kill  their  mafters,  while  they  were  afleep ;  and,  having-

done


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  ASSEN  SI  S.  397

done  this,  to  plunder  the  houfes  of  the  rich,  and  open  the
gates  to  the  tyrants.

LIV.  But  the  fame  Divine  "Providence,  which  has,  at  all
times,  preferved  this  city,  and,  to  this  day,  watches  over  it,
difcovered  their  counfels;  information  being  given  to  Sul-
picius,  one  of  the  confuls,  by  two  brothers, 45  Publius,  and
Marcus  Tarquinius  of  Laurentum,  who  were  the  heads  of
the  confpiracy,  and  forced  by  heaven  to  difcover  it :  For
frightful  appearances  haunted  them  in  their  fleep,  threatning
them  with  grievous  chaftifements,  if  they  did  not  defift,  and .
abandon  the  attempt ;  and  they  thought  themfelves  purfued,
and  beaten  by  fome  demons ;  that  their  eyes  were  torne  out,
and,  at  laft,  that  they  buffered  many  miferable  punifliments :
From  which  dreams  they  waked  with  fear,  and  trembling,
and  thefe  terrors  would  not,  even,  allow  them  to  compofe
themfelves.  At  fir  ft,  they  endeavoured  to  deprecate  the
anger  of  thefe  demons,  who  haunted  them,  with  averting,
and  expiatory  facrifices ;  but,  finding  no  relief,  they  had
recourfe  to  divination;  and,  keeping  fecret  the  deiign  of
the  confultation,  they  defired,  only,  to  know  whether  it


45*  Ano  Tciqkvvioi,  TlozKio^  kcii  M agKot.
If  there  is  no  error  in  the  text,  it  is
very  extraordinary  that  we  have  never
heard  of  thefe  Tarquinii  before  •,  and,
fince  we  have  not,  that  our  author
fhould  give  no  account  of  them,  when
he  produces  them  upon  the  ft  age  for
the  firft  time.  Le  Jay,  with  great
modefty,  offers  a  conjecture  to  folve
this  difficulty  :  He  fuppofes  them  to
have  been  the  Tons  of  Aruns,  the  bro-

VOL.  II.


ther  of  Tarquinius  Superbus ;  and
that,  to  avoid  the  perfecution  of  their
uncle,  they  retired  to  Laurentum  after
the  murder  of  their  father.  I  am  fo
far  from  objecting  to  his  difcovery,
that  I  cannot  fay  whether  I  am  more
pleafed  with  the  diligence  of  his  in¬
quiry,  or  charmed  with  the  modefty,
with  which  he  communicates  the  fuc-
cefs  of  it.


Ddd


were,


398  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

were,  now,  a  proper  time  to  execute  what  they  propofed :
And  the  foothfayer  anfwering  that  they  were  treading  a
wicked,  anddeftrudive  path ;  and  that,  if  they  did  not  change
their  refolutions,  they  would  die  a  moft  fhameful  death,
fearing  left  others  fhould  prevent  them  in  revealing  the
fecret,  they  themfelves  gave  information  of  the  confpiracy
to  the  conful,  who  was,  then,  at  Rome.  The  conful,
having  commended  them,  and  promifed  them  great  rewards,
if  they  confirmed  their  words  by  their  actions,  kept  them  in
his  houfe,  without  acquainting  any  one  with  what  had
happened :  And,  introducing  to  the  fenate  the  embafladors
of  the  Latines,  to  whom  he  had,  till  then,  delayed  giving
an  anfwer,  he  informed  them  of  the  refolutions  of  that  body.
££  Friends,  and  relations,  fays  he,  acquaint  the  general
“  afiembly  of  the  Latines  at  your  return,  that  the  Roman
££  people  did  not  either,  before,  confent  to  the  reftoration
“  of  the  tyrants  at  the  inftance  of  the  Tarquinienfes,  or,
“  afterwards,  yield  to  all  the  Tyrrhenians,  who  interceded
“  in  their  favor ;  and  who,  led  by  Porfena,  brought  upon
££  them  the  moft  grievous  of  all  wars;  but  fubmitted  to  fee
££  their  lands  laid  wafte,  their  country-houfes  on  fire,  and
<£  themfelves  fhut  up  within  their  walls  for  the  fake  of  li-
££  berty,  and  of  not  being  commanded  to  ad  other  wife  than
££  they  thought  fit.  And  we  wonder,  Latines,  that  you,
££  who  are  acquainted  with  thefe  things,  fhould,  neverthe-
££  lefs,  come  to  us  with  orders  to  receive  the  tyrants,  and  to
“  raife  the  fiege  of  Fidenae ;  and,  if  we  refufe  to  obey  you,
“  threaten  us  with  a  war.  Ceafe,  then,  to  colour  your

££  hatred


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  AR  N  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  399

u  hatred  with  thefe  frivolous,  and  improbable  pretences :
<c  And  if,  for  thefe  reafons,  you  are  determined  to  diffolve
<c  the  bonds  of  our  affinity,  and  to  declare  war,  no  longer
“  defer  it.”

LV.  Having  given  this  anfwer  to  the  embafladors,  and
ordered  them  to  be  conduced  out  of  the  city,  he,  then,  laid
before  the  fenate  every  thing  relating  to  the  fecret  confpiracy,
which  he  had  learned  from  the  informers.  And,  being  in¬
verted  by  them  with  46abfolute  authority  to  inquire  after  the
accomplices  in  thefe  private  counfels,  and  to  punifh  the
offenders,  he  did  not  proceed  in  a  haughty,  and  tyrannical
manner,  as  any  other  might  have  done  under  the  like  ne-
ceffity,  but  took  reafonable,  and  fafe  meafures,  and  fuch,  as
were  agreeable  to  the  form  of  government,  then,  eftabliffied  :
For  he  would  not  fuffer  the  citizens  to  be  feized  in  their
own  houfes,  and  from  thence  hurried  to  death,  or  torne
from  the  embraces  of  their  wives,  children,  and  parents ;  but
conrtdered  the  compaffion,  which  this  violent  parting  between
the  guilty,  and  their  neareft  relations,  would  raife  in  the  breads
of  the  latter ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  apprehended  left  fome

+6,  E|s<nav  avloag ctl o$a.  This  was  a  I  fhall  lay  his  account  of  it  before  the
kind  of  iovereign  power  granted  to  the  reader  in  his  own  words  :  Itaque ,  quod
confuls  by  the  fenate  in  times  of  great  plerumque  in  atroci  negotio  folet,  fenatus
danger.  With  this  power  Cicero,  and  decrevit  darent  operam  confutes  ne  quiu
his  collegue,  were  inverted  upon  the  refpublica  detrimenti  caperet :  eo  permit
difeovery  of  Catiline’s  confpiracy.  The  titur  exercitum  parare ,  helium  gerere
extent  of  this  power  is  deferibed,  upon  coercere  omnibus  modis  focios  atque  cives  ;
that  occafion,  in  fo  particular  a  man-  domi  militiaeque  imperium,  atque  judicium
nerby  "Salluft,  that  it  may  ferve  as  a  fummum  habere,  aliter  fine  populi  juffuy
rule  for  all  others :  For  which  reafon,  nullius  earum  rerum  confuli  jus  ejt.

»  Bell.  Cat.  c.  29.

D  d  d  2


of


4oo  ROMAN  ANTI  QJJ I  T  IE  S  OF  BookV.

of  the  offenders,  being  driven  to  defpair,  might  have  recourfe
to  arms ;  and,  when  forced  to  fly  to  illegal  means,  might
imbrue  their  hands  in  civil  blood:  Neither  did  he  think  it
proper  to  appoint  tribunals  to  try  them,  becaufe  he  con¬
cluded  they  would  all  deny  the  fad:,  and  that  no  certain,
and  indubitable  proof  of  it,  befldes  the  information  he  had
received,  could  be  laid  before  the  judges,  to  which  they
would  give  credit,  and  condemn  the  citizens  to  death  ;  but
he  thought  of  a  new  method  of  circumventing  the  perfons,
who  had  been  guilty  of  thefe  innovations,  by  which,  in  the
firfc  place,  the  heads  of  the  confpirators  would  themfelves,
without  compulfion,  come  to  the  fame  place;  and,  after
that,  be  convicted  by  indubitable  proofs,  againft  which  they
would  be  left,  even,  without  any  defence  :  Befldes,  as  they
would  be  brought  together,  not  in  an  unfrequented  place,
nor  convicted  by  a  few  witneffes,  but  in  the  forum,  and
their  guilt  made  manifefl:  to  all  the  world,  they  would  fuffer
the  punifhment  they  deferved,  which  would  be  attended
with  no  difturbance  in  the  city,  nor  infurredtion  of  other
people,  which,  often,  happen,  when  innovators  arepuniflied,
particularly  in  dangerous  times.

LVI.  Some  other  hiftorian  might,  poflibly,  think  it  fuf-
ficient  to  fay,  in  a  fummary  way,  that  the  conful  feized
the  confpirators,  and  put  them  to  death ;  as  if  no  more
than  a  bare  relation  of  the  fadt  were  required  :  But  I,  who
efteem,  even,  the  manner  of  their  apprehenflon  to  be  worthy
of  hiPcory,  have  determined  not  to  omit  it ;  becaufe  I  confider
that  thofe,  who  read  hiftory,  do  not  receive  a  fufKcient

advantage


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I  S.  40 1

advantage  by  being  informed  only  of  the  event  or  things :
For  every  man  debres  to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  caufes
alfo,  and  the  manner,  of  all  tranfaddons,  and  with  the  views
of  the  adtors,  and  the  interpobtion  of  heaven  upon  thofe
occabons,  and  to  hear  every  circumftance  that,  ufually,
attends  thofe  events ;  and  I  obferve  that  the  knowledge  of
thefe  things  is,  abfolutely,  necefiary  for  public  minifters,  to
the  end  they  may  have  examples  before  them  to  make  ufe
of  upon  every  occabon.  The  manner  of  apprehending  the
confpirators,  contrived  by  the  conful,  was  this :  He  ordered
thofe  among  the  fenators,  who  were  in  the  vigor  of  their
age,  to  afiemble  the  friends  they  mod  confided  in,  together
with  their  relations ;  and,  when  the  bgnal  fhould  be  given,
to  poffefs  themfelves  of  the  ftrong  places  of  the  city,  where
each  of  them  happened  to  dwell :  He,  alfo,  commanded  the
knights  to  poft  themfelves  in  the  mod  convenient  houfes
round  the  forum  with  their  fvvords,  and  there  to  remain  in  a
readinefs  to  obey  his  orders :  And,  to  the  end  that,  while  he
was  apprehending  the  confpirators,  neither  their  relations,  nor
any  of  the  other  citizens  might  raife  a  difturbance,  nor  any
civil  blood  be  fhed  by  reafon  of  this  commotion,  he  fent  letters
to  the  conful,  who  was  employed  in  the  bege  of  Fidenae,  de-
bring  him  to  come  to  the  city,  in  the  beginning  of  the  night,
with  the  chofen  troops  of  his  army,  and  to  pob  them  upon
an  eminence  near  the  walls,  with  their  arms  in  their  hands.

LVII  Flaving  made  thefe  preparations,  he  ordered  the
informers  to  appoint  the  heads  of  the  confpiracy  to  come
into  the  forum  about  midnight,  with  thofe  of  their  friends


402  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  BookV.

they  mofl:  confided  in,  to  be  informed  there  of  the  order,
the  place,  and  the  word,  and  of  every  thing  each  of  them
was  to  do.  This  was  executed  :  And,  when  all  the  heads
of  the  confpiracy,  with  their  friends,  were  aflembled  in  the
forum,  the  fignals,  unknown  to  them,  were  given ;  and,
prefently,  the  ftrong  places  were  full  of  men,  who  had  taken
arms  in  defence  of  their  country,  and  all  the  parts  round
the  forum  guarded  by  the  knights :  So  that,  not  a  Angle
paflage  was  left  for  any,  who  might  endeavour  to  efcape.
And,  at  the  fame  time,  Manius,  the  other  conful,  having
decamped  from  Fidenae,  was  marching  with  his  army  to
the  plain  of  Mars.  As  foon  as  day  appeared,  the  confuls,
furrounded  with  armed  men,  afcended  the  tribunal ;  and,
ordered  the  cryers  to  fummon  the  people,  in  every  ftreet,
to  come  to  the  affembly  ;  and,  all  the  citizens  flocking
thither,  they  acquainted  them  with  the  confpiracy  formed
to  reftore  the  tyrant,  and  placed  the  informers  in  a  confpi-
cuous  part  of  the  forum.  After  that,  they  gave  the  accufed
an  opportunity  of  making  their  defence,  if  any  of  them
deflred  to  objedl  to  the  information ;  and  none  attempting
to  deny  the  fa£t,  they  withdrew  from  the  forum  to  the  fe-
nate,  to  afk  the  opinion  of  the  fenators  concerning  them  ;
and,  having  caufed  the  decree  to  be  written  out,  they  re¬
turned  to  the  affembly,  and  read  the  previous  decree  of  the
fenate  ;  the  tenor  of  which  was;  that  to  the  Tarquinii,
who  had  given  information  of  the  confpiracy,  be  granted
the  rights  of  Roman  citizens;  and,  to  each  of  them,  ten

thoufand


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSENS  IS.  403

thoufand  47  drachmae  of  filver,  and  twenty  acres  of  the
public  lands :  And,  that  the  confpirators  be  feized,  and  put
to  death,  if  the  people  (hall  be  of  the  fame  opinion.  Their
affembly  having  confirmed  the  decree  of  the  fenate,  the
confuls  ordered  the  people  to  withdraw  from  the  forum,
and  called  the  litflors  to  attend  with  their  fwords ;  who,
furrounding  the  confpirators,  where  they  flood  in  a  body,
put  them  all  to  death.  After  the  confuls  had  caufed  thefe
to  be  executed,  they  received  no  more  informations  againft
any,  who  had  entered  into  the  fame  defigns ;  but  acquitted
every  one,  who  had  efcaped  the  prefent  punifhment,  to  the
end  that  all  caufe  of  difturbance  might  be  removed.  In
this  manner,  thofe,  who  had  formed  that  confpiracy,  were
put  to  death.  After  which,  the  fenate  ordered  all  the  citizens
to  be  purified,  becaufe  they  had  been  under  a  neceffity  of
giving  their  votes  for  fhedding  civil  blood ;  it  not  being
lawful  for  them  to  enter  the  temples,  and  partake  of  the
facrifices,  before  the  abomination  was  expiated,  and  the
calamity  difcharged  by  the  cuftomary  luftrations.  After  all
thefe  ceremonies  were  performed  by  the  interpreters  of
religious  matters,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  their  country3
the  fenate  determined  to  offer  up  facrifices  of  thankfigiving,
and  to  celebrate  games,  and  dedicated  three  holy  days  to  thefe
things.  And  Manius  Tullius,  one  of  the  confuls,  falling
from  his  confecrated  chariot  in  the  circus,  during  the  pro-

47-  3'z*xP*s'  Ten  thoufand  drachmae  make  322  1.  18  s.  4<d.  of  our

money,  as 0 1  have,  already,  (hewn.

•  See  the  twenty  fourth  annotation  on  the  fourth  booh,

ceffiorij ,


4o4  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.
cefiion,  and  the  holy  games,  called  after  the  name  of  the
city,  and  dying  the  third  day  after,  Sulpicius  continued  alone
in  the  magiftracy  during  the  reft  of  the  time,  which  was  not
long.

LVIII.  Publius  Veturius  Geminus,  and  Titus  Aebutius
Elva  were  appointed  confuls  for  the  following  year.  Of
thefe,  Aebutius  had  the  care  of  the  civil  affairs,  which
feemed  to  require  no  fmall  attention,  left  fome  other  attempt
fhould  be  made  by  the  poorer  fort.  And  Veturius,  march¬
ing  out  with  one  half  of  the  army,  laid  wafte  the  lands  of
the  Fidenates  without  oppofttion ;  and,  fitting  down  before
the  town,  attacked  it  without  ceafing  :  But  not  being  able
to  take  it  by  a  ftege,  he  furrounded  the  town  with  pali-
fades,  and  a  ditch,  defigning  to  reduce  the  inhabitants  by
famine.  The  Fidenates  were,  already,  in  great  diftrefs,
when  fuccours  from  the  Latines  arrived,  which  Sextus  Tar-
quinius  fent,  together  with  corn,  arms,  and  other  military
fupplies.  All  which  fo  far  raifed  their  confidence,  that  they
ventured  to  come  out  of  the  town  with  no  inconfiderable
forces,  and  to  incamp  in  the  field.  The  line  of  contraval-
lation  was,  now,  of  no  further  ufe  to  the  Romans,  and  a
battle  feemed  neceffary  :  Which  was  fought  near  the  city,
and,  for  fome  time,  continued  doubtful :  But  the  Fidenates,
though  fuperior  in  number,  being,  at  laft,  forced  to  give
way  to  the  unwearied  conftancy  of  the  Romans,  which  they
had  acquired,  to  a  great  degree,  by  long  experience,  were
put  to  flight :  However,  as  they  had  not  far  to  retreat ;  and,
as  thofe,  who  were  upon  the  walls,  repulfed  the  purfuers,

their


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  IC  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  405

their  lofs  was  not  confiderable.  After  this  action,  the  auxi¬
liary  troops,  difperfing  themfelves,  departed,  without  having
done  any  fervice  to  the  inhabitants :  And  the  city  fell,  again,
into  the  fame  diftrefs,  and  laboured  under  a  fcafcity  of
provifions.  About  the  fame  time,  Sextus  Tarquinius  marched
with  an  army  of  Latines  to  Signia,  then  in  the  pofleffion  of
the  Romans,  in  expedlation  of  taking  the  place  by  ftorm.  But
the  garrifon  making  a  brave  refiftance,  he  prepared  to  force
them  to  quit  the  place  by  famine,  and  ftaid  a  confiderable
time  there  without  performing  any  thing  remarkable :  And,
finding  himfelf  difappointed  of  this  hope  alfo,  by  the  provi-
fions,  and  fuccours  the  confuls  fent  to  the  garrifon,  he  raifed
the  fiege,  and  departed  with  his  army.

LIX.  The  following  year,  the  Romans  created  48  Titus
Lartius  Flavus,  and  Quintus  Cloelius  Siculus,  confuls.  Of
thefe,  Cloelius  was  appointed  by  the  fenate  to  the  admini-
ftration  of  the  civil  affairs,  and,  with  one  half  of  the  army,
to  guard  againft  thofe,  who  might  be  difpofed  to  innovate,
being  looked  upon  as  a  mild,  and  popular  man.  Lartius
marched  with  his  forces  ready  for  adtion,  to  make  war
againft  the  Fidenates,  and  carried  with  him  every  thing
necefiary  for  a  fiege.  The  Fidenates  being,  now,  reduced  to

Tilof  Aagliot  The  name  T.  Lartius  Flavus  II.  This  is  con-

of  this  conful  is  Titus  Lartius  Flavus,  firmed  by  pLivy,  who  calls  this  con-
not  Largius,  as  it  (lands  in  both  the  ful  T.  Lartius  in  both  places.  This
Latin,  and,  confequently,  in  both  the  deferved  the  more  to  be  cleared  up,
French,  tranllations.  He  had  been  becaufe  T.  Lartius  was  the  firft  dic-
conful  three  years  before  with  Poftu-  tator  j  a  magiflracy,  which,  often,
mus  Cominius :  For  which  reafon,  he  faved,and,  at  laft,  deftroyed,  the  com-
is,  thus,  fet  down  in  th eFaJli  confulares ,  monwealth.

pB.  ii.  c.  18.  and  21.

Fee


VOL.  II.


great


406  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF  Book  V.

great  diftrefs  by  the  length  of  this  war,  and  in  want  of  all
neceflary  provifions,  he  prefled  them  hard  by  undermining
the  foundations  of  the  walls,  railing  mounds,  applying  his
warlike  engines,  and  continuing  the  attacks  night,  and  day ;
by  which  means,  he  expected,  foon,  to  take  the  city  by  ftorm.
For  the  Latines,  in  confidence  of  whofe  afliftance  alone  the
Fidenates  fupported  the  war,  were  not,  any  longer,  in  a
condition  to  relieve  them  ;  no  one  of  thofe  cities  having
fufficient  ftrength  to  raife  the  fiege  :  Neither  was  there,  as
yet,  any  army  on  foot  raifed  by  the  whole  nation  ;  but,  to
the  embafiadors,  who  came,  frequently,  from  Fidenae,  the
leading  men  in  the  cities,  always,  gave  the  fame  anfwers,
that  fuccours  fhould  foon  be  fent  to  them.  However,  no
effects  of  thefe  promifes  appearing,  the  expectation,  raifed  of
fuccours,  went  no  farther  than  words :  Notwithftanding  this,
the  Fidenates  did  not  altogether  defpair  of  being  aflifted  by
the  Latines ;  but  fupported  themfelves  with  conftancy,  under
all  their  dreadful  circumftances,  by  their  confidence  in  thofe
hopes.  Above  all  the  evils  they  fuffered,  famine  was  a  thing
not  to  be  encountered ;  and  this  deftroyed  many  of  the
inhabitants.  Being,  now,  wearied  out  with  their  calamities,
they  fent  embafiadors  to  the  conful  to  defire  a  ce  flat  ion  of
arms  for  a  certain  number  of  days,  in  order  to  deliberate,
during  that  time,  concerning  the  conditions,  upon  which
they  fhould  enter  into  a  league  of  friendfhip  with  the  Ro¬
mans  :  But  this  time  was  not  defired  by  them  for  deliberat¬
ing,  but  for  foliciting  fuccours,  as  appeared  by  fome  of  the
defer  ter  s,  lately  come  over  to  the  Romans :  For,  the  night

before^


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  SENS  I  S.  407

before,  they  had  fent  the  moft  confiderable  of  their  citizens,
and  fuch,  as  had  greateft  intereft  in  the  cities  of  the  Latines,
to  that  nation  with  the  enfigns  of  fuppliants.

LX.  Lartius,  who  was,  before,  apprized  of  thefe  things,
ordered  thofe,  who  defired  a  truce,  to  lay  down  their  arms,
and  open  their  gates ;  and,  then,  to  apply  to  him  ;  other-
wife,  he  told  them,  they  were  to  expect  neither  peace,  nor
truce,  nor  any  other  inftance  of  humanity,  or  moderation
from  the  Romans.  He,  alfo,  took  care  that  the  embafla-
dors,  fent  to  the  Latin  nation,  might  not  return  to  the  city,
by  reinforcing  the  guards,  that  were  polled  on  all  the  roads,
which  led  thither :  So  that,  the  befieged,  defpairing  of
affiftance  from  their  allies,  were  compelled  to  have  recourfe
to  a  fupplication  of  their  enemies :  And,  aftembling  to¬
gether,  they  determined  to  fubmit  to  fuch  conditions  of
peace,  as  the  conqueror  had  prefcribed.  However,  the  com¬
manders,  at  that  time,  were,  in  their  whole  behaviour,  fo
obedient  to  the  civil  power,  and  fo  averfe  from  tyrannical
preemption  (which  few  of  thofe,  in  our  days,  who  are
fubjecft  to  be  elated  with  the  greatnefs  of  their  power,  have
been  able  to  avoid)  that,  being  mafter  of  the  town,  he  did
nothing  by  his  own  authority ;  but,  having  ordered  the
inhabitants  to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  left  a  garrifon  in
the  citadel,  he  himfelf  went  to  Rome  ;  and,  afiembling  the
fenate,  referred  it  to  them  to  confider  how,  or  in  what
manner,  thofe,  who  had  furrendered  themfelves,  ought  to  be
treated.  When  the  fenate,  admiring  the  man  for  the  honor
he  had  done  them,  decreed  that  the  moft  confiderable  among

E  e  e  2  the


Book  V.


408  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

the  Fidenates,  and  thole,  who  had  been  the  authors  of  the
revolt,  to  be  declared  by  the  conful,  fhould  be  whipped  with
rods,  and  beheaded :  And,  concerning  the  reft,  they  gave
him  authority  to  do  every  thing  he  fhould  think  fit.  Lar-
tius,  having,  by  this  means,  the  foie  power  vefted  in  him,
ordered  fome  few  of  the  Fidenates,  who'  were  accufed  by
thofe  of  the  oppofite  party,  to  be  put  to  death  in  a  public
manner,  and  confifcated  their  fortunes :  And,  to  all  the
others,  he  granted  the  poflefiion  both  of  the  city,  and  of  their
effects :  He,  alfo,  took  from  them  one  half  of  their  lands,
which  was  divided,  by  lot,  among  thofe  Romans,  who  were
left  in  the  city,  as  a  garrifon  to  the  citadel.  Having  fettled
thefe  things,  he  returned  home  with  his  army.

LXI.  When  the  Latines  heard  that  Fidenae  was  taken,
every  city  was  alarmed,  and  full  of  fears,  and  exprefted  their
refentment  againft  thofe,  who  were  at  the  head  of  the  public
affairs ;  accufing  them  of  having  betrayed  their  allies :
And  a  general  aflembly  being  held  at  Ferentinum,  the  ad-
vifers  of  the  war  inveighed,  bitterly,  againft  thofe,  who  had
difluaded  it ;  particularly,  Tarquinius,  and  his  fon-in-law,
Mamilius,  together  with  the  magiftrates  of  Aricia.  By  whofe
harangues,  all  the  deputies  of  the  Latin  nation  were  deluded
into  a  refolution  to  join  in  a  war  againft  the  Romans.  And,  to
the  end  that  no  one  city  might  either  betray  the  public  caufe,
or  be  reconciled  to  them  without  the  concurrence  of  all  the
reft,  they  confirmed  their  agreement  by  mutual  oaths,  and
voted  that  thofe,  who  violated  that  agreement,  fhould  be
excluded  from  their  alliance,  be  accurfed,  and  common


enemies*


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  S I S.  409

enemies.  The  deputies,  who  figned  the  treaty,  and  fwore
to  the  obfervance  of  it,  were  fent  from  the  following  people  :
The  49  Ardeates,  Aricini,  Bovillani,  50  Bubetani,  Ccrani,
Forentani,  Gabini,  Laurentes,  Lanuvini,  Lavinienfes,  Labicani,
Nomentani,  Norbani,  Praeneftini,  Pedani,  Querquetulani,
Satricani,  Scapteni,  Setini,  Telleni,  Tiburtini,  Tufculani,
Tolerinenfes,  Tricrinenfes,  Veliterni,  Circaeenfes,  Corio-
lani,  Corbienfes,  Cabani,  and  Phortinienfes :  They  refolded
that  as  many  of  the  youth,  belonging  to  all  thefe  cities,
fhould  take  arms,  as  their  commanders,  Odlavius  Mamilius,
and  Sextus  Tarquinius  fhould  judge  neceffary  (for  they  had
appointed  thefe  to  be  their  generals,  and  invefted  them  with
abfolute  authority)  and,  to  the  end  they  might  appear  to
have  a  fpecious  pretence  for  the  war,  they  fent  the  moft
conhderable  men  of  every  city  to  Rome,  as  embaffadors ;
who,  being  introduced  into  the  fenate,  faid,  that  the  Romans
were  accufed  by  the  citizens  of  Aricia  for  having,  not,  only,
granted  a  fafe  paffage  through  their  territories  to  the  Tyr¬
rhenians,  when  they  made  war  upon  the  inhabitants  of

4s*  A^ialuv.  The  reader  may  have  of  the  Aequi,  and  of  the  Volfci:  But,
obferved  that  moft  of  thefe  cities  have,  then,  it  muft  be  remembered  that  our
already,  been  taken  notice  of  in  the  ^  author  has,  already,  told  us  that  the
notes.  Of  the  reft,  fome  were  of  fo  country  pofiefled  by  the  Aborigines,
little  note,  that  the  place,  where  they  and  the  reft  of  the  Greeks,  who  were
flood,  is  not  known-,  of  fome,  the  incorporated  with  them,  all  of  whom
names  only  are  to  be  found ;  and  of  were,  afterwards,  called  Latini,  ex-
others,  not  fo  much  as  the  names,  tended  from  the  Tiber,  to  the  Liris.
We  are,  however,  obliged  to  the  Va-  s°*  B h&vImm.  Thefe,  I  imagine  to
tican  manufeript,  at  leaft,  for  the  be  the  fame  people  with  the  Bubetani ,
names  of  fix  cities,  to  complete  the  mentioned  by  r  Pliny,  who  places  them
number  of  thirty.  It  is  certain  that  in  Latium.
fome  of  thefe  cities  lay  in  the  territories

a  B.  i.  c.  9.  rNat.  Hift.  B.  iii.  c.  5,

Aricia.,


Book  V.


410  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

Aricia,  but,  alfo,  affifted  them  with  every  thing,  that  was
necefiary  for  them  to  carry  on  the  war ;  and,  having  received
fuch  of  the  Tyrrhenians,  as  fled  from  the  defeat,  they  had  pre-
ferved  them  all,  when  they  were  wounded,  and  without  arms ;
when  they  could  not  be  ignorant  that  the  war,  carried  on
by  them,  threatened  the  whole  nation  and  that,  if  they
had,  once,  made  themfelves  mafters  of  the  city  of  Aricia,
nothing  could  have  hindered  them  from  inflaving,  alfo,  all
the  other  cities :  If,  therefore,  they  would  appear  before  the
general  tribunal  of  the  Latines ;  and,  pleading  there  to  the
accufations,  brought  againft  them  by  the  inhabitants  of
Aricia,  fubmit  to  the  determination  of  all  the  members,
they  faid  the  Romans  might  avoid  a  war  :  But,  if  perflfting
in  their  ufual  arrogance,  they  refufed  to  yield  to  their  relations
in  any  thing,  that  was  juft  and  reafonable,  they  threatened
them  with  a  vigorous  war  from  all  the  Latines.

LXII.  Thefe  invitations  of  the  embafiadors  could  not
prevail  with  the  fenate  to  plead  their  caufe  with  the  inha¬
bitants  of  Aricia,  of  the  merits  of  which  their  accufers  would
be  thejudges,  who  would  not  confine  their  judgement  even  to
thefe  impofitions,  but  add  others  to  them  ftill  more  grievous ;
for  which  reafons,  they  decreed  to  accept  the  war.  The
bravery,  indeed,  and  experience  of  the  Roman  troops  gave
them  no  room  to  apprehend  any  misfortune  to  the  common¬
wealth;  but  they  were  afraid  of  the  numbers  of  their
enemies;  and,  fending  embafiadors  to  various  parts,  they
invited  the  neighbouring  cities  to  enter  into  their  alliance;
while  the  Latines,  alfo,  fent  embafiadors  to  the  fame,  cities

to


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSE NS  I  S.  411

to  crofs  their  negotiations;  and,  loudly,  exclaimed  againft
the  Romans.  The  Hernici,  affembling  together,  gave
fufpicious,  and  ambiguous  anfwers  to  the  embaffadors  of  both
nations,  faying  they  would  not,  at  prefent,  •  enter  into  the
alliance  of  either,  but  confider,  at  leifure,  which  of  the  two
nations  had  the  jufteft  pretenfions  to  their  affiftance ;  and
that  they  fhould  take  a  year’s  time  for  that  confideration.
The  Rutuli  declared,  openly,  they  would  affift  the  Latines  •
and  to  the  Romans  they  ingaged  to  prevail  with  the  Latines
to  moderate  their  demands,  and  that  they  would  mediate  a
peace  between  them,  provided  the  former  agreed  to  lay  afide
their  animofity.  The  Volfci  faid  they,  even,  wondered  at
the  impudence  of  the  Romans,  who,  though  confcious  of
the  many  injuries  they  had  done  them,  particularly,  of  the
laft,  in  taking  from  them  the  beft  part  of  their  territories,
of  which  they  were,  ftill,  in  pofleffion,  had,  never thelefs,
the  boldnefs  to  invite  them,  who  were  their  enemies,  to  enter
into  their  alliance  :  And  they  advifed  them,  firft,  to  reftore
their  lands  to  them,  and,  then,  to  require  juffice  from  them,
as  from  their  friends.  The  Tyrrhenians  defeated  the  ex¬
pectations  of  both,  by  alledging  that  they  had,  lately,  entered
into  treaties  with  the  Romans,  and  that  there  was  an  affinity,
and  friendffiip,  actually,  fubfifting  between  them,  and  the
Tarquinii.  Notwithftanding  thefe  anfwers,  the  Romans
abated  nothing  of  their  fpirit,  which,  often,  happens  to
thofe,  who  are  entering  into  a  dangerous  war,  and  defpair
of  any  affiftance  from  their  allies ;  but,  trufting  to  their
national  forces  only,  they  grew  much  more  eager  for  the


mo-age-

&  o


412  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V,

ingage  men  t,  being  confcious  of  the  necefiity  they  were  under
of  behaving  themfelves,  bravely,  in  the  article  of  danger,
and  fure,  if  they  fucceeded,  of  owing  the  vidtory  to  their
own  valor,  without  communicating  the  glory  of  it  with
others.  Such  an  excefs  of  fpirit,  and  confidence  had  they
acquired  from  the  many  adtions  they  had  been  ingaged  in.

LXIII.  While  they  were  preparing  every  thing,  that  was
neceflary  for  the  war,  and  beginning  to  raife  forces,  they
fell  into  great  perplexity,  when  they  found  that  all  the  citi¬
zens  did  not  fhew  the  fame  chearfulnefs  for  the  fervice  :
For  the  poorer  fort,  and,  particularly,  thofe,  who  were  un¬
able  to  pay  their  debts,  being  many  in  number,  when  called
upon  to  take  arms,  refufed  to  obey,  or  to  join  with  the
patricians  in  any  undertaking,  unlefs  they  pafled  a  vote  for
the  abolition  of  their  debts :  Some  of  them  threatened,  even,
to  leave  the  city,  and  exhorted  one  another  to  lay  afide  their
fondnefs  of  living  in  a  city,  that  allowed  them  no  fhare  in
any  thing,  that  was  valuable.  At  firft,  the  patricians  en¬
deavoured,  by  intreaties,  to  prevail  upon  them  to  change  their
refolutions ;  but,  finding  their  intreaties  of  no  avail  to  in-
fpire  them  with  greater  modefty,  they,  then,  aflembled  in
the  fenate  to  confider  what  juftifiable  method  could  be  found
out  to  put  an  end  to  the  prefent  difturbance.  Thofe  fena-
tors,  therefore,  who  were  of  a  mild  difpofition,  and  of  mo¬
derate  fortunes,  advifed  to  remit  the  debts  of  the  poorer  fort,
and  to  purchafe,  at  a  fmall  price,  the  benevolence  of  their
fellow-citizens,  from  which  they  were  fure  to  derive  great
advantages,  both  private,  and  public.


LXIV.


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I  C  ARN  A  S  SE  N  S I  S.  413

LX IV.  The  author  of  this  advice  was  Marcus  Valerius,
the  fon  of  Valerius,  one  of  thofe,  who  deftroyed  the  tyranny,
and,  from  his  love  to  the  people,  was  called  Poplicola :  Fie
flie wed  them  that,  where  the  rewards  men  fight  for,  are
equal,  the  emulation,  with  which  they  are  led  on  to  action,  *
is  equal  alfo ;  while  thofe,  who  expedt  no  rewards,  are
infpired  with  no  bravery.  He  told  them,  alfo,  that  the
poorer  fort  of  people  were  inflamed,  and,  going  about  the
forum,  ufed  thefe  difcourfes :  What  advantage  fhall  we  gain
by  overcoming  our  foreign  enemies,  if  we  are  liable  to  be
dragged  to  prifon  by  our  creditors  ?  And  by  inverting  the
commonwealth  with  fovereignty,  if  we  ourfelves  cannot  fe-
cure  even  the  liberty  of  our  own  perfons  ?  He,  then,  fhewed
them  that  this  was  not  the  only  danger,  which  hung  over
them,  if  the  people  fhould  be  exafperated  againft  the  fenate,
left  they  fhould  leave  the  city  in  the  prefent  exigence,
which  every  one,  who  defired  the  prefer vation  of  the  com¬
monwealth,  ought  to  tremble  at;  but  that  there  was  another
danger,  alfo,  ftill  more  formidable,  which  was,  left  they,
feduced  by  the  inticements  of  the  tyrants,  fhould  take  up
arms  againfc  the  patricians,  and  give  their  aftiftance  to  the
reftoration  of  Tarquinius.  That  while  they  only  talked,  and
threatened,  and  had  proceeded  to  no  outrageous  action,
he  advifed  them  to  prevent  the  effect  of  thofe  threats,  by
reconciling  the  people  to  the  government  with  this  relief,
Alice  they  would  neither  be  the  flrft,  who  had  adopted  fuch
a  meafure,  nor  incur  any  conflderable  difreputation  by  it ;
but  were  able  to  quote  others,  who  had  fubmitted,  not  only,
Vol.  II.  F  f  f  to


ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.


to  this,  but  to  many  other  things  ftill  more  grievous,  when
they  had  no  other  remedy  :  T  hat  neceffity  was  ftronger
than  human  nature;  and  that  all  men,  then,  confidered


decency,  when  they  were  in  poffeffion  of  fecurity.

LXV.  After  he  had  enumerated  many  examples,  taken
from  many  cities,  he,  at  laft,  laid  before  them  That  of  the
city  of  Athens,  then  in  the  greateft  repute  for  wifdom,
which,  not  very  long  before,  but  in  the  time  of  their  fa¬
thers,  had,  by  the  51  advice  of  Solon,  decreed  an  abolition  of
debts  in  favor  o i  the  poorer  fort;  and  that  no  one,  then,
cenfured  this  inftitution,  or  called  the  author  of  it  a  flatterer
of  the  people,  or  a  bad  man ;  but  all  commended  both  the
great  prudence  of  thofe,  who  were  perfuaded  to  enadf  it,
and  the  great  wifdom  of  the  perfon,  who  perfuaded  them
to  it.  What  man  of  fenfe,  therefore,  can  blame  the
Romans,  who  are  not  expofed  to  a  trivial  danger,  but  to
That  of  being,  again,  delivered  up  to  a  cruel  tyrant,  more


51*  2o\u)vos  This  law  of

Solon  was  called,  by  him,
literally,  the  flaking  off  a  burden  and
was,  in  effebt,  an  abolition  of  debts.
This  law  was  one  of  thofe,  which
Solon  meaned,  when,  being  afked  if
he  had  given  the  bed  laws  to  the
Athenians,  he  anfwered,  5  the  be  ft  they
would  receive.  Our  author  makes  Va¬
lerius  fay  that  this  law  was  enabled  in
the  time  of  their  fathers ;  and  Plutarch,
from  Phanias,  affirms  that  Solon  died
in  the  archonfhip  of  Hegeftratus,  who,
as  appears  by  the  tables  of  the  Athe¬
nian  archons,  bore  that  magiftracy  in


the  fecond  year  of  the  fifty  fifth  Olym¬
piad,  and  we  are,  now,  in  the  firft  year
of  the  feventy  firft  Olympiad  :  So  that,
there  will,  be  about  fixty  three  years
from  the  death  of  Solon  to  this  period.
But  we  find  in  Plutarch  that  Solon
enabled  this  law,  when  he  himfelf  was
archon ;  and,  by  the  fame  tables,  it
appears  that  his  archonfhip  coincides
with  the  fourth  year  of  the  forty  fifth
Olympiad,  that  is,  thirty  feven  years
before  his  death,  and  a  hundred  years
before  this  period  *,  which  falls  in  with
the  beginning  of  the  preceding  gene¬
ration.


s  Plutarch’s  Life  of  Solon.

favage


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALIC  ARN  A  S  S  EN  S  I  S.  4*5

favage  than  any  wild  bead,  if,  by  this  inftance  of  humanity,
they  can  ingage  the  poor,  inftead  of  enemies,  to  become
joint  fupporters  of  the  commonwealth  ?  To  thefe  foreign
examples,  he,  at  laft,  added  fome,  that  were  domeftic  ;  and,
put  them  in  mind  of  the  diftrefs,  they  had  been,  lately,
reduced  to,  when  their  country  being  in  the  power  of  the
Tyrrhenians,  and  themfelves  fhut  up  within  their  walls,
and  in  great  want  of  neceflary  proviiions,  they  did  not  form
wild  defigns,  like  men  diftra&ed,  and  feeking  death  ;  but,
yielding'to  the  preffures  of  that  juncture,  and  fuffering  ne-
ceffity  to  teach  them  their  intereft,  they  fubmitted  to  deliver
up  to  king  Porfena  the  children  of  the  moft  confiderable
perfons,  as  hoftages,  which  they  had,  never,  yielded  to
before ;  to  be  deprived  of  part  of  their  territories,  by  the
ceffion  of  the  feven  villages  to  the  Tyrrhenians;  to  confent
that  their  enemy  fhould  be  the  judge  of  the  accufations
brought  againft  them  by  the  tyrant ;  and  to  fupply  the
Tyrrhenians  with  proviiions,  arms,  and  every  thing  elfe
they  infilled  on,  as  the  conditions  of  their  putting  an  end
to  the  war.  Having  made  ufe  of  thefe  examples,  he  fhewed
them  that  it  was  not  the  part  ol  the  fame  prudence  to  refufe
no  terms  infilled  on  by  their  enemies,  and  to  make  war,
for  a  trivial  concern,  upon  their  own  citizens,  who  had
fignalized  themfelves  in  many  battles  for  the  fovereignty,
when  the  kings  were  in  pofifeffion  of  the  government,  and
fhewn  great  chearfulnefs  in  affifling  the  patricians  to  free
their  country  from  the  tyrants,  and  would,  ftill,  Ihew  greater
zeal  in  what  remained  to  be  done,  if  invited  to  it ;  and,

F  f  f  2  though


Book  V.


416  ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF

though  labouring  under  poverty,  would,  freely,  expofe  their
perfons,  and  lives,  which  were  all  they  had  left,  to  any
dangers  for  her  fake.  Then  he  faid  that,  it  the  people  had,
through  modefty,  forborne  to  fay  any  thing  of  this  kind,
or  to  declare  it  to  the  fenate,  the  patricians  ought  to
make  proper  reflexions  upon  their  fltuation  ;  and  whatever
wants,  either  public,  or  private,  they  knew  any  of  them  to
labour  under,  to  relieve  them  chearfully,  and  to  conflder
that  it  will  fhew  great  pride  in  them  to  demand  their  per¬
fons,  and  refufe  them  money;  and  to  publifh  to  all  the  world
that  they  make  war  to  preferve  the  common  liberty,  while
they  deprive  thofe,  who  aflifted  them  in  preferving  it,  of
their  own ;  without  being  able  to  reproach  them  with  any
crime,  but  only  with  poverty,  which  deferved  compaflion,
rather  than  hatred.

LXVI.  This  advice  of  Valerius  was  approved  of  by  many;
when  Appius  Claudius  Sabinus,  being  called  upon  in  his
turn,  advifed  contrary  meafures,  and  told  them  that  the
fedition  would  not  be  taken  away,  if  they  decreed  an  abo¬
lition  of  debts,  but  would  become  more  dangerous,  by  being
transferred  from  the  poor,  to  the  rich  :  For  it  was,  already,
plain  to  every  one,  that  thofe,  who  were  to  be  deprived  of
their  money,  would  refent  it;  and,  as  they  were,  not  only,
citizens,  but,  alfo,  dignified  perfons,  and  had  ferved  their
country  upon  all  occaflons,  when  it  fell  to  their  lot,  they
would  not  bear  that  the  money,  left  them  by  their  fathers,
together  with  what  they  themfelves  had,  by  their  induftry,
and  frugality,  acquired,  fliould  be  confifcated  for  the  benefit

of


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L IC  A  R  N  AS  S  EN  SI  S.  417

of  the  moft  profligate,  and  m oft  lazy  of  the  citizens.  That
it  would  be  a  great  folly  in  them  to  gratify  the  worfe  part
of  the  commonwealth,  at  the  expence  of  the  better  ;  and,  by
dividing  the  fortunes  of  others  among  the  moft  unjuft  of  all
the  citizens,  to  take  them  away  from  thofe,  who  had,  juftly,
acquired  them.  He  deflred  them,  alfo,  to  conflder  that
governments  are  not  fubverted  by  thofe,  who  are  poor,  and
without  power,  wThen  they  are  52  compelled  to  do  juftice,
but,  by  the  rich,  and  fuch,  as  are  capable  of  adminiftring
the  affairs  of  the  public,  when  they  are  infulted  by  their
inferiors,  and  cannot  obtain  juftice.  However,  if  thofe,  who
are  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  their  contra&s,  fhould  enter¬
tain  no  refentment,  but  fubmit,  with  feme  degree  of  mild-
nefs,  and  indolence,  to  the  lofs,  yet,  even  in  that  cafe,
he  faid,  it  would  neither  be  right,  nor  fafe  for  them  to
gratify  the  poor  with  fuch  a  gift,  by  which  all  commerce
would  be  banifhed  from,  and  mutual  hatred  introduced
into,  the  community  ;  which  would,  by  that  means,  be
reduced  to  a  want  of  neceflaries,  without  which  cities  cannot


52,  T <34  JiKatx  zcci&v  ocvayKotfyiAMwv.

The  Latin  tranflators  have  miftaken
thefenfe  of  this  pafiage,  and,  by  mif-
taking  it,  have  milled  their  followers,
the  French  translators :  Portus  has
faid,  quod  ipfd  necejfitate  coaffi  in  officio
contineantur  •,  and  le  Jay,  et  qu’il  eft
aife  de  contenir  dans  le  devoir ;  Sylbur-
gius,  quando  hi  neceftitate  contineantur
in  officio •,  and  M.  ***,  parce  qu’il  eft
facile  de  les  retenir  dans  les  homes  du
devoir.  The  reader  will,  eafily,  fee
that  the  French  verfions  are  tran na¬
tions  of  the  Latin,  and,  equally,  erro¬


neous.  Without  infilling  upon  it  that
t a  hiKoaa  e ro/Hv  cannot  be  made  to  fig-
nify  vVeasttv,  as  I  might,  eafily,  do,  I
ihall  obferve  that,  here,  is,  vifibly,  a
contrail  between  -rs?  vnvrFlag  t ct  hixcuot
zzroi&v  ccvctFxoi^ojMvxf,  and,  mf  £V7r0gXf9
o' rav  T«y  Jtxaiuv  TvF^xvuim.  AppillS
fays,  very  finely,  I  think,  though  I  am
far  from  adopting  all  his  conclufions,
that  governments  are  not  in  fo  much
danger  of  being  fubverted  by  the  poor,
when  they  are  compelled  to  do  juftice,
as  by  the  rich,  when  they  cannot  ob¬
tain  it.

be


4i  8  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V,

be  inhabited;  while  neither  the  hufbandmen  would,  any
longer,  fow,  and  plant  their  lands,  the  merchants  ufe  the
fea,  and  import  foreign  provifions,  nor  the  poor  employ
themfelves  in  any  other  juPc  occupation  :  For  none  of  the
rich  would  throw  away  their  money  to  fupply  thofe,  who
wanted  it,  with  the  means  of  carrying  on  any  of  thefe  things.
Thus,  riches  would  be  envied,  and  induftry  deftroyed  ;  and
the  prodigal  be  in  a  better  condition,  than  the  frugal ;  the
unjuft,  than  the  juft  ;  and  thofe,  who  appropriated  to  them-
.  felves  the  fortunes  of  others,  would  have  the  advantage  of
thofe,  who  preferved  their  own.  Thefe  were  the  things,
that  created  feditions  in  cities,  mutual  daughters  without
end,  and  every  other  fort  of  mifchief ;  by  which  the  happieft
lofe  their  liberties,  and  the  lefs  happy  are,  totally,  de-

LXVII.  But,  above  all,  he  delired  that  they,  who  were
inftituting  a  new  form  of  government,  would  take  care  that
no  bad  cuftom  gained  admittance  there:  For  he  told  them
that,  of  whatever  nature  the  public  inftitutions  of  cities
were,  fuch  would,  moft  affuredly,  be  the  manners  of  pri¬
vate  men  :  And  that  no  worfe  inftitution  could  be  eftab-
liftied  either  in  cities,  or  in  private  families,  than  for  every
man  to  make  his  paftions  the  conftant  principles  of  his
conduct,  and  for  fuperiors  to  grant  every  thing  to  their
inferiors,  either  through  favor,  or  necefilty  :  For  the  defires
of  fenfelefs  men  are,  never,  fatisfied,  when  they  obtain  what
they  demanded,  but,  prefently,  covet  other  things  of  greater
importance,  and  know  no  bounds ;  which  is  a  failing  the

common


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H ALIC ARN  ASSExNS  IS.  419

common  people  are,  particularly,  fubjed:  to;  For  there  are
many  exceffes,  which  each  of  them,  by  himfelf,  may  either  be
afhamed,  or,  being  reftrained  by  his  fuperiors,  afraid  to  commit ;
yet,  being  together,  they  fortify  their  own  fentiments,  when
they  find  them  efpoufed  by  their  companions,  and  venture
upon  thofe  exceffes  with  lefs  remorfe :  For  which  reafon,
he  faid,  they  ought  to  oppofe  the  infatiable,  and  unlimited
defires  of  a  fenfelefs  multitude,  while  they  were,  yet,  in  their
infancy,  and  weak,  and  not  fuffer  them  to  grow  up,  and
gain  ftrength,  till  they  are  unable  to  reftrain  them  ;  For  all
men  are  more  outrageous,  when  deprived  of  conceffons,
than  when  they  are  difappointed  of  their  hopes.  This  he
confirmed  by  many  examples,  and  laid  before  them  the  fate
of  fome  Greek  cities,  which,  having  been  prevailed  upon,  by
fome  unfeafonable  junctures,  to  relax,  and  give  admittance
to  the  beginnings  of  evil  inftitutions,  were,  no  longer,  able
to  put  an  end  to,  and  abolifh,  them ;  by  which  means,
they  were  compelled  to  fubmit  to  fhameful,  and  irreparable
mifchiefs.  He  faid,  the  commonwealth  refembled  every
particular  man  ;  the  fenate  bearing  fome  refemblance  to  the
foul,  and  the  people,  to  the  body:  If,  therefore,  they  buf¬
fered  the  fenfelefs  people  to  govern  the  fenate,  they  would
a d  like  thofe,  who  fubjed  the  foul  to  the  body,  and  live
under  the  influence  of  their  paflions,  not  of  their  reafon :
Whereas,  if  they  accuftomed  the  people  to  be  governed,  and
led  by  the  fenate,  they  would  ad  like  thofe,  who  fubjed
the  body  to  the  foul,  and  lead  the  beft,  not  the  moft
voluptuous,  lives.  He  fhewed  them  that  no  great  mifchiet

would


420  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

would  befal  the  commonwealth,  if  the  poor,  diflatisfied
with  them  for  not  granting  an  abolition  of  their  debts,
fhould  refufe  to  take  arms  in  its  defence,  faying  there  were,
extremely,  few,  who  had  nothing  left  but  their  perfons,  and
who,  if  prefent  in  the  armies,  would  not  prove  a  wonder-
ful  advantage  to  their  caufe,  or  a  lofs  to  it,  if  abfent;
putting  them  in  mind  that  thofe,  whofe  fortunes  were  of  the
leaft  value,  were  ported  in  the  rear  in  all  actions,  and  that
they  were  placed  there  only  to  add  to  the  number  of  the
forces,  that  were  difpofed  in  the  lines  of  battle,  and  to  ftrike
the  enemy  with  terror,  as  having  no  other  arms  but  flings,
which  are  of  the  leaft  ufe  in  action.

LXVIII.  He  faid  that  thofe,  who  thought  it  reafonable
to  commiferate  the  poverty  of  the  citizens,  and  who  advifed
to  relieve  fuch  of  them,  as  were  unable  to  pay  their  debts,
ought  to  inquire  what  it  was,  that  had  made  them  poor,
when  they  had  inherited  the  lands  their  fathers  left  them,
and  gained  great  advantages  from  the  wars ;  and  when,
lately,  each  of  them  had  received  his  fhare  of  the  confifcations
of  the  tyrants ;  and,  after  that  inquiry,  they  ought  to  look
upon  fuch  of  them,  as  they  found  had  abandoned  themfelves
to  gluttony,  and  the  moft  fhameful  pleafures,  and,  by  fuch
means,  had  confumed  their  fortunes,  as  a  difgrace,  and
damage  to  the  city,  and  to  efteem  it  as  a  great  benefit  to
the  commonwealth,  if  they  would,  voluntarily,  withdraw
from  this  city,  and  perifh  in  fome  other :  And,  as  to  thofe
among  them,  whom  they  fhould  find  to  have  loft  their
fubftance  through  the  unkindnefs  of  fortune,  thefe,  he  advifed

them,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  AL IC  A  RN  A  S  S  EN  S  IS.  421

them,  to  relieve  with  their  own  money.  And,  he  faid,  their
creditors  could  beft  diftinguifh,  and  afiiffc  thefe  ;  and  that
they  themfelves  might  relieve  their  misfortunes,  not
compelled  by  others,  but,  voluntarily  ;  to  the  end  that,
inftead  of  their  money,  the  gratitude  of  their  debtors  might
accrue  to  them,  as  a  noble  debt.  But,  to  extend  the  relief
to  all,  of  which  the  profligate  will  have  an  equal  fhare  with
the  deferving,  and  to  confer  benefits,  not  at  their  own  ex¬
pence,  but  at  That  of  others ;  and  not  to  leave  to  thofe,
whofe  money  they  take  away,  even  the  obligation  of  this
favor,  does  not,  in  any  degree,  become  the  virtue  of  the
Romans.  He  faid  that,  above  all  thefe,  and  many  other
confiderations,  it  was  a  grievous  thing,  and  not  to  be  fuf-
fered  by  the  Romans,  who  were  aiming  at  fovereignty,  to
give  up  what  their  anceftors  had,  with  many  labors,  ac¬
quired,  and  left  to  their  pofterity ;  and  to  do  this,  not  by
choice,  nor  convinced  by  reafon,  nor  at  a  proper  feafon  for
taking  the  beft  refolutions,  and  fuch,  as  are  moft  advan¬
tageous  to  the  commonwealth ;  but,  as  if  the  city  was
taken,  or  expected  to  be  taken,  and,  contrary  to  their  opi¬
nion,  to  beftow  this  benefit  on  thofe,  from  whom  they  ex¬
pected  little,  or  no  affiftance,  but  were  in  danger  of  receiving
the  moft  fhameful  treatment.  That  it  was  far  better  to
fubmit  to  the  commands  of  the  Latines,  as  the  more  rea-
fonable,  and  not,  even,  to  try  the  fortune  of  a  war,  than,
by  yielding  to  the  defires  of  thofe,  who  are  of  no  ufe  upon
any  occafion,  to  deftroy  public  faith,  which  their  anceftors
Vol.  II.  G  g  g  had


Book.  V.


422  ROMAN  ANTXQJJITIES  OF

had  appointed  to  be  honoured  with  a  53  temple,  and  annual
facrifices,  when  they  could  expert  no  other  advantage  from
it,  than  That  of  adding  to  their  forces  a  body  of  flingers.
The  fubftance  of  his  opinion  was  this ;  to  accept  the  fervice
of  fuch  citizens,  as  fhould  be  willing  to  take  a  fhare  in  the
fortune  of  the  war,  upon  the  fame  terms  with  every  other
Roman  :  And  to  reject  the  offers,  of  thofe  who  infilled  upon
any  terms  whatever  in  taking  arms  for  their  country,  as  of
no  ufe,  if  they  entered  into  the  fervice :  For,  when  they
knew  this,  he  faid,  they  would  come  of  their  own  accord,
and  fhew  themfelves  obedient  to  thofe  perfons,  whofe  deli¬
berations  tended  mod  to  the  benefit  of  the  commonwealth  :
It  being  the  character  of  all  fenfelefs  men,  when  flattered,
to  infult,  and,  when  terrified,  to  fubmit.

LXIX.  Thefe  were  the  oppofite  opinions,  delivered  upon
that  occafion;  befides  which,  there  were  many  between
both  :  For  fome  of  the  fenators  advifed  to  remit  the  debts
of  thofe  only,  who  had  no  fortune,  and  that  the  creditor
fhould  be  at  liberty  to  feize  the  effects  of  the  debtor,  but
not  his  perfon.  Others  were  of  opinion  that  the  public
fhould  difcharge  the  debts  of  the  infolvents,  to  the  end  that
the  credit  of  the  poor  might  be  preferved  by  this  favor  of
the  public,  and  the  creditors  receive  no  injustice.  And
others  thought  it  more  expedient  to  ranfom  the  perfons  of

1  t  *

53.  — ,  yjv  ifgx  x»1ct<nttvtja  etc.  author  gave  us  an  account  in  the  fe-

This  relates  to  the  temple  eredted  by  cond  book,  chapter  feventy  five.

Numa  flir«  JnporHx  :  Of  which  our


thofe


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  EN  S I S.  423

thpfe  debtors,  who  were,  already,  deprived  of  their  liberty*
or  iliould,  hereafter,  be  deprived  of  it  on  account  of  their
debts,  by  fubftituting  captives  in  their  room,  and  afllgning
them  over  to  their  creditors.  Thefe  opinions  having  been
debated,  it  was  carried  to  make  no  decree,  at  prefent,  con*
cerning  thefe  matters :  But,  after  the  wars  were  ended  in
the  moft  fuccefsful  manner,  that  the  confuls  fhould,  then,
propofe  this  affair,  and  take  the  votes  of  the  fenators :  And
that,  in  the  mean  time,  there  fhould  be  no  money  exacted
by  virtue  either  of  any  contract,  or  any  judgement ;  and
that  all  other  fuits  fhould  ceafe,  and  no  courts  of  juflice  be
held,  nor  the  magiftrates  take  cognizance  of  any  thing,  but
what  related  to  the  war  :  When  this  decree  was  brought  to
the  people,  it  allayed,  in  fome  meafure,  the  civil  commo¬
tion  ;  but  did  not,  intirely,  eradicate  the  fpirit  of  fedition :
For  fome  of  the  lower  fort  did  not  look  upon  the  hopes,
given  by  the  fenate,  which  contained  nothing  exprefs,  nor
certain,  as  a  fuflicient  relief;  but  defired  they  would  either
grant  them  an  abolition  of  their  debts  immediately,  if  they
wanted  them  to  take  a  fhare  in  the  dangers  of  the  war,  or
not  to  impofe  upon  them  by  deferring  it  to  another  oppor¬
tunity  :  For  the  fentiments  of  men,  they  faid,  when  defiring
a  favor,  were  very  different  from  Thole  of  the  fame  men,
after  they  had  obtained  it.

LXX.  While  the  affairs  of  the  public  were  in  this  fitua-
tion,  the  fenate,  confidering  what  means  would  be  the  moft
effectual  to  prevent  the  plebeians  from  railing  frefh  diftur-
bances,  refolved  to  abolifh  the  confular  power  for  the  prefent,

G  g  g  2  and


424  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

and  to  create  fome  other  magiftrate  to  be  inverted  with  the
power,  not  only,  of  war,  and  peace,  but  of  all  other  matters
with  abfblute  authority,  and  fubjetrt  to  no  account  either  of
his  counfels,  or  actions ;  and,  that  the  duration  of  this  new
magiftracy  fhould  be  limited  to  fix  months ;  after  the  ex¬
piration  of  which  time,  the  confuls  were,  again,  to  govern.
The  reafons,  that  compelled  the  fenate  to  fubmit  to  a  volun¬
tary  tyranny,  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  brought
upon  them  by  their  tyrant,  were  various ;  but  the  chief  in¬
ducement  was  the  law,  introduced  by  the  conful  Publius
Valerius,  called  Poplicola,  which  I  mentioned  before,  and,
by  which,  he  rendered  invalid  the  determination  of  the
confuls,  by  ordering  that  no  Roman  fhould  be  punidied
before  he  was  tried,  and  granted  to  fuch,  as  were  leading  to
punifhment  by  their  orders,  a  right  to  appeal  to  the  judge¬
ment  of  the  people  ;  and,  until  the  people  had  pafled  their
votes  upon  them,  they  were  to  enjoy  thefecurity  both  of  their
perfons,  and  fortunes ;  and  he  ordained  that,  if  any  perfon
attempted  to  tranfgrefs  any  of  thefe  provifions,  he  might  be
put  to  death  with  impunity.  The  fenate  confidered  that,
while  this  law  remained  in  force,  the  poor  could  not  be
compelled  to  obey  the  magiftrates,  becaufe  they  would,
probably,  difregard  the  punifhments,  which  they  were  not,
prefently,  to  undergo  •,  but,  then  only,  when  condemned
by  the  people :  But,  when  this  law  was  repealed,  all  men
would  be  under  the  greatefc  neceflity  of  obeying  orders.
And,  to  the  end  the  poor  might  give  no  oppofition,  as  they
would  not  fail  to  do,  if  an  open  attempt  were  made  to

repeal


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  LI  C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SIS.  425

repeal  a  law,  that  was  fo  much  in  their  favor,  the  fenate
refolded  to  introduce  a  magiftracy  of  equal  power  with  a
tyranny,  which  fhould  be  fuperior  to  all  the  laws.  Thus
they  palTed  a  decree,  by  which  they  impofed  upon  the  poor,
and,  filently,  repealed  the  law,  that  fecured  their  liberty.
The  decree  of  the  fenate  was  to  this  efFed :  That  Lartius,
and  Cloelius ,  who  were ,  then ,  confids ,  and  every  other  perfon,
who  was  invefied  with  any  magiftracy,  or  with  the  ad -
miniftration  of  the  public  affairs ,  fhould  refign  their  power  ;
and  that  a  fingle  per f on,  to  be  chofen  by  the  fenate,  and  ap¬
proved  of  by  the  people,  fhould  be  invefied  with  the  whole
power  of  the  commonwealth,  and  govern  during  the  fpace  of
ftx  months  only,  and  that  his  magiftracy  fhould  be  fuperior  to-
That  of  the  confuls.  The  plebeians,  not  knowing  the  im¬
portance  of  this  decree,  confirmed  the  refolutions  of  the
fenate,  this  magiftracy  being,  in  reality,  fuperior  to  a
legal  monarchy,  and  confented  that  the  fenate,  after  de¬
liberating  among  themfelves,  fhould  make  choice  of  the
perfon  to  be  inverted  with  it.

LXXI.  After  this,  the  leading  men  of  the  fenate  em¬
ployed  their  whole  attention  in  inquiring  into,  and,  pre-
vioully,  confidering,  the  qualities  requifite  in  the  perfon  to
be  intrufted  with  the  government:  For  they  looked  upon  it
that  the  prefent  jundure  of  affairs  required  a  man  both  of
adivity,  and  great  experience  in  military  affairs;  and  be~
fides,  that  he  fhould  be  indued  with  prudence,  and  mo¬
deration,  and  not  fufFer  himfelf  to  be  intoxicated  with  the
greatnefs  of  his  power  :  But,  above  all  thefe  qualities,  and

others


426  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

others  required  in  a  great  general,  that  he  fhould  know  how
to  govern  with  firmnefs,  and  remit  nothing  to  the  difobe-
dient ;  a  character  they,  then,  flood,  particularly,  in  need  of.
The  fenate,  obferving  all  the  qualities  they  required  to  be
united  in  Titus  Lartius,  one  of  the  confuls  (for  Cloelius,
who  excelled  in  all  political  virtues,  had  no  a&ivity,  nor
inclination  for  war,  no  genius  for  command,  nor  talents  to
infpire  terror,  but  was  a  mild  punifher  of  the  difobedient)
were,  however,  afhamed  to  deprive  one  of  them  of  a
magiftracy  he  was,  legally,  pofteffed  of,  and  to  invert  the
other  with  the  power  of  both,  a  power  fuperior  in  fplendor
to  the  royal  dignity.  Befides,  they  were  under  fecret  ap-
prehenfions  left  Cloelius,  looking  upon  the  preference,  given
to  his  collegue,  as  a  difhonor  cart  upon  himfelf  by  the  fenate,
might  change  his  fentiments,  and,  becoming  a  patron  of  the
people,  totally  fubvert  the  government.  And  all  being
afhamed  to  lay  their  thoughts  before  the  fenate,  and  this
lafting  fome  time,  at  laft,  a  perfon  of  the  greateft  age,  and
dignity  among  the  confular  fenators  delivered  an  opinion,
by  which  he  preferved  an  equal  fhare  of  honor  to  both  the
confuls,  and  found  out  a  means  of  having  the  perfon  the  moft
proper  for  the  command  to  be  appointed  by  themfelves.
Fie  faid  that,  fince  the  fenate  had  decreed,  and  the  people,
in  confirmation  thereof,  had  voted  that  the  power  of  this
magiftracy  fhould  be  committed  to  a  fingle  perfon,  two
things  remained,  that  required  no  fmall  confideration,  and
care;  the  firft,  who  fhould  be  the  perfon,  to  whom  this
magiftracy,  of  equal  power  with  a  tyranny,  fhould  be  com-
'  mitted ;


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H ALICARN  ASSE NS  I  S.  '427

mitted ;  and  the  other,  by  what  legal  authority  he  fhould
be  appointed  ;  his  opinion,  therefore,  was,  that  one  of  the
prefent  confuls,  either  by  confent  of  his  collegue,  or  by  lot,
fhould  chufe,  among  all  the  Romans,  the  perfon  he  thought
the  moft  capable  of  governing  the  commonwealth  in  the
beft,  and  moft  advantageous  manner :  And  that,  in  the  pre¬
fent  juncture,  it  was  unnecefiary  to  create  interreges,  whom
it  had  been  cuftomary,  while  they  lived'  under  a  regal  go¬
vernment,  tointruft,  folely,  with  the  nomination,  of  the  future
kings,  fince  the  commonwealth  was,  already,  provided  with
a  legal  magiftracy.

LXXII.  This  opinion  being  applauded  by  all,  another
fenator  rofe  up,  and  faid ;  £c  Fathers,  I  think  this,  alfo,
u  ought  to  be  added  to  what  is  propofed ;  that,  as  two
“  perfons  of  the  greateft  worth  have,  at  prefent,  the  admi-
“  niftration  of  the  public  affairs,  than  whom  you  can  find.
“  none  more  deferving,  one  of  them  may  have  the  power  of
“  the  nomination,  and  the  other  be  elected  by  his  collegue  ;
a  they  themfelves  confidering  together,  which  is  the  properer
“  perfon  ;  to  the  end  that,  as  the  honor  is  equal,  the  fatif-
“  faction  may  be  equal  alfo;  to  the  one,  in  having  declared
<c  his  collegue  to  be  the  moft  deferving;  and,  to  the  other,
“  in  having  been  declared  fo  by  his  collegue:  For  each
“  of  them  is  pleafing,  and  honourable.  I  am  convinced,
“  therefore,  that,  if  this  claufe  were  not  added  to  what  is
“  propofed,  they  themfelves  would  have  thought  proper  to
“  ad  in  this  manner  :  But  it  is  better  it  fhould  appear
t£  that,  even,  you  do  not  approve  of  any  other  condud

This:


42B  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

This  being  applauded  of  by  all,  and  no  other  claufe  added,
the  decree  palled.  After  the  confuls  had  received  the  power
of  determining  which  of  them  was  the  fitter  perfon  to
command,  they  did  a  thing  both  admirable  in  itfelf,  and
above  all  human  imagination :  For  each  of  them  declared
not  himfelf  worthy  of  the  command,  but  the  other ;  and
they  continued  all  that  day  enumerating  one  another’s
virtues,  and  intreating  that  they  themfelves  might  not  have
the  command :  So  that,  all,  who  were  prefent  in  the  fenate,
were  in  great  perplexity.  When  the  fenate  was  difmified,
the  relations  of  each,  and  the  moft  dignified  among  the’trther
fenators,  came  to  Lartius,  and  continued  intreating  him  till
late  at  night,  and  reprefenting  that  the  fenate  placed  all
their  hopes  in  him,  and  that  his  indifference  for  the  command
was  prejudicial  to  the  commonwealth.  But  he  was  unmoved;
and,  in  his  turn,  continued  to  ufe  many  prayers,  and  in¬
treaties  to  each  of  them.  The  next  day,  the  fenate  was,
again,  affembled,  and  he  ftill  refilling,  and,  contrary  to
the  advice  of  all  the  fenators,  ftill  adhering  to  his  refo-
lution,  Cloelius  rofe  up  ;  and,  having  nominated  him,  ac¬
cording  to  the  cuftom  of  the  interreges,  he  himfelf  abdicated
the  confulfhip.

L  XX 1 1 1.  This  perfon  was  the  firft,  who  was  appointed  a
monarch  at  Rome,  with  abfolute  authority  in  war,  in  peace,
and  in  all  other  affairs.  They  call  this  54  magiftrate  a

54*  Ovopx  J fuulu  TiQivlou  $irl Ulufx.  probably,  omitted  by  our  author,  may,
There  are  many  particulars  relating  without  impropriety,  find  a  place  in
to  this  high  office,  which,  though  a  note.  Dionyfius  has  explained  the
too  minute  for  hiftory,  and,  as  fuch,  intention  of  the  fenate  in  creating  a

dictator,


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L  I C  A  RN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I S.  429

dictator,  either  from  the  power  he  has  of  ordering,  and
didating  to  others  thofe  things,  that  are  juft  and  honour¬
able,  as  he  thinks  proper  (for  the  Romans  call  commands,
and  injunctions  of  things  juft  and  injuft,  EdiBay  Edi&s )
or,  as  fome  write,  from  the  nomination,  which  was,  then,
introduced  ;  iincehe  did  not  receive  the  magiftracy  from  the
people,  according  to  the  cuftoms  of  the  nation,  but  by  the
appointment  of  a  fingle  perfon :  For  they  did  not  think  proper
to  give  an  invidious,  and  hateful  name  to  any  magiftracy,  that


dictator,  which  was  to  take  away  the
appeal,  given  to  the  people  from  the
confuls  by  the  Valerian  law.  This
view  would  have  been  difappointed,
if  there  had,  ftill,  been  an  appeal  from
the  didtator,  as  there  was,  before,  from
the  confuls  •,  which,  in  my  opinion,
plainly,  (hews  there  was  not.  How¬
ever,  the  people  afterwards,  recovered
this  right,  fo  eflential  to  their  liberty  :
For,  afterthe  abrogation  of  the  decem-
virate,  that  is,  in  the  year  of  Rome  306,
fifty  years  afterthe  creation  of  the  firft
dictator,  L.  Valerius,  a  defendant  of
Valerius  Poplicola,  and  M.  Horatius
being  confuls,  a  law  was  enadted,  by
which  it  was  made  capital  to  create  a
magiftrate  without  an  appeal  to  the
people  •,  *  ne  quis  ullum  magijlratum  fine
provocatione  crearet.  qui  creajfet ,  eum
jus  fafque  ejfet  occidi :  neve  ea  caedes
capitalis  noxae  haberetur.  So  that,  from
this  time,  there  lay  an  appeal  to  the
people,  even,  from  the  didtators.  We
find,  by  the  law  patted  both  by  the
fenate,  and  people  for  the  creation  of
a  didtator,  that  all  magiftrates  were,

*  Livy,  B.  iii.  c.  5  5.  v  Polyb.  B.  iii.  p.  238
Maxim.  >  Cicer.  Phil.  i.  c.  1.

VOL.  II.


upon  that  occafion,  to  lay  down  their
employments  :  But  this  related  only
to  the  magiftracies,  then,  in  being.
For  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  after
their  inflitution,  did  not  lay  down  their
office  upon  the  nomination  of  a  dicta¬
tor.  v  Ouloj  (0  JtKl&loog)  <f  avIoKgdlaig
5-^alvjfo?,  «  xdlxfa9s'j7of  tsrct^ot^pyjfMx,  fix-
^.v^aS  on  c rv[x£ouvei  tzxtrcx,;  rac  tv  rif

P^?,nAHN  TI1N  AHMAPXf2N4.
The  next  thing,  I  fhali  obferve,  con¬
cerning  the  didtators,  is  very  fingular:
It  feems,  they  were,  always,  appointed
in  the  night  •,  w  noble  deinde  filentio ,  ut
mos  eft,  L.  Papirium  diblatorem  dicit.
This  was  fcarce  worth  taking  notice  of,
any  more  than  what  x  Plutarch  fays,
that  the  didtators  were  forbidden,  by
an  old  law,  to  mount  a  horfe.  How¬
ever,  the  beft  thing,  that  can  be  faid
of  this  magiftracy,  too  powerful  for  a
free  people,  is,  that,  after  the  death  of
y  Julius  Caefar,  in  whom  it  had  been
made  perpetual,  it  was,  absolutely,
abolifhed :  I  fay  abfolutely,  becaufe
the  moft  audacious  of  his  fucceftors
never  ventured  to  revive  it.

v/  Livy,  B.  ix.  c.  3  8.  *  Life  of  Fabius

H  hh


was


Book  V.


43°


ROMAN  ANTIQJJITIES  OF


was  to  govern  a  free  people,  as  well  for  the  fake  of  the
fubjetfts,  left  they  might  be  alarmed  by  odious  appellations,
as  from- a  regard  to  the  magiftrates  themfelves,  left  they
might  either  receive  fome  filent  injury  from  others,  or
commit  fuch  a£ts  of  injuftice  againft  others,  as  powers,  fo
extenftve,  naturally,  fuggeft.  For  this  reafon,  the  power,
with  which  the  didator  is  inverted,  does,  leaft  of  all,  appear
by  the  name  :  For,  the  didatorfhip  is  an  eledive  tyranny.
The  Romans  feem  to  me  to  have  taken  this  inftitution,
alfo,  from  the  Greeks  :  For  the  magiftrates,  anciently  called,
by  the  Greeks,  A iju[avw1<xi,  Preftdents ,  as  Theophraftus  writes
55  in  his  treatife  concerning  kingly  government,  were  a  kind
of  eledive  tyrants  :  Thefe  were  chofen  by  the  cities,  not
for  an  unlimited  time,  nor  conftantly ;  but,  at  fuch  junc¬
tures,  '  and,  for  fo  long  a  time,  as  they  thought  convenient :
In  the  fame  manner,  as  the  Mitylenaeans,  formerly,  56  chofe
Pittacus  to  oppofe  the  banifhed  men,  headed  by  Alcaeus,
the  poet.


55*  fig  tv  TOig  zregi  $xct\&txg  Igo^et
Qtofyat yof.  This  book  is  mentioned  by
z  Diogenes  Laertius  in  the  catalogue
of  his  works.  From  whom,  alfo,  we
know  that  Theophraftus  was  adifciple,
ftrft,  of  Plato,  and,  afterwards,  of
Ariftotle,  whom  he  fucceeded  in  his
fchool  at  Athens  in  the  114th  Olym¬
piad  :  He  was,  alfo,  the  matter  of
Menander.  Thefe  fa£ts  give  a  great
idea  of  Theophraftus,  which  is  con¬
firmed  by  the  concurrent  teftimony  of
all  writers,  and  by  the  few  of  his
numerous  works,  that  remain.  Theo¬


phraftus  lays,  the  A nrv^oa  were
Tivgf  Tv^avvfMwf  This  is  a  fmall  deviation
from  the  defeription  given  of  this
magiftracy  by  his  mafter  a  Ariftotle,
who  fays  of  it ;  fj-,  St  t*Q’,  ug  dnhwg
«7r«v,  dtgtlyi  t vgocvvig.

56'  E<Aov  tov  Tlnlaxov  zr^og txs (pvfccSctg.

b  Pittacus  held  this  magiftracy  ten
years,  and,  then,  refigned  it.  He  lived
ten  years  after  this,  and  died  in  the
third  year  of  the  fifty  fecond  Olympiad.
It  is  no  wonder  that  Alcaeus,  whom
we  find  at  the  head  of  the  banifhed
men,  was  a  declared  enemy  to  Pitta-


*•  Life  of  Theophraftus.  a  I7tg»  -sroTul.  B.  iii.  c.  i  o.


l’Diag.  Laert.  Life  of  Pittac.

LXXIV.


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  A  S  S  E  N  S  I  S.  431

LX XIV.  The  foil,  who  had  recourfe  to  this  inftitution,
learned  the  advantage  of  it  by  experience :  For,  57  in  the
beginning,  all  the  Greek  cities  were  governed  by  kings,  not,
like  the  Barbarous  nations,  defpotically,  but  according  to
the  laws,  and  cuftoms  of  each  city ;  and  he  was  the  beft
king,  who  was  the  moft  juft,  the  moft  obfervant  of  the  laws,
and  did  not,  in  any  degree,  depart  from  the  eftabliflbed
cuftoms.  This  appears  from  Homer,  who  calls  kings,
kiwaxotee,  The  minijlers  of  juflice ,  and  58  QsfAKroxotec,  The
mimjlers  of  the  laws .  And  kingly  governments  continued
for  a  long  time  fubjedt  to  certain  limitations,  like  59  That  of
the  Lacedaemonians :  But  fome  of  the  kings  tranfgreffing
their  powers,  and,  feldom,  regarding  the  laws,  but  govern¬


ed,  againft  whom  he  employed  all
the  powers  of  poetry,  the  only  arms
he  had  left.  Ariftotle,  in  the  place
above  quoted,  has  prefer ved  a  lmall
fragment  of  Alcaeus,  which  I  fhall
tranferibe  the  rather  becaufe  it  is  not
in  the  fmall  collection  of  his  remains.
EIHTIM^  TAP  O  T I  tov  KOMOTTalgifce

TInl/XKOV  zsoAiug  rag  X'XfiKx  xai

juovo?  igxcovlo  Tt^avvoy,  pzy  tvxntoyjig

aoMttg.  And  c  Horace,  who  was  a
great  admirer  of  Alcaeus,  whom  he
had  chofen  for  his  model  in  Lyric
poetry,  gives  a  great  character  of  his
manner  of  writing,  when  he  fays,

Et  te  fonantem  plenius  aureo ,

Jllcaee ,  pledlro  dura  navis ,

Dura  fugae  mala ,  dura  belli.

57*  K ecT  uqxotg  pfv  yx^  xTtxffX  zsoAig
EAA#f  (GetriAivtlo.  See  the  twenty  fe-

c  Ode  xiii.  B.  ii.


venth  annotation  on  the  fecond  book.

58*  ©f^is-oTToAtff.  Sylburgius  obferves
that  this  word  is  not  to  be  found  in
Homer ;  which,  I  believe,  is  true.
If  fo,  the  following  verfes  in  that  poet
muft  have  milled  our  author,  unlefs
he  had  met  with  the  word  in  fome
manuferipts  of  Homer,  which  may
have  differed,  in  fome  few  words,  from
Thofe  made  ufe  of  by  the  moderns  :
The  verfes,  I  mean,  are  in  the  angry
fpeech  of  Achilles  to  Agamemnon,  in
which,  fpeaking  of  his  feepter,  d  he
fays,

vuv  u\>  t£  fjt.iv  ijee  A^xiuv
Ev  ■zrcAuy.ystpogixiri  Jixxo’^’oAo/,  om  Siphon
U^og  Aicj  eigvoilai.

S9’  Ka0«7rf^>  v  AaxtJxi/uoviuv.  See  the
thirtieth  annotation  on  the  fecond
book.

d Iliad,  u.  jfr.  237.

H  h  h  2  ing,


Book  V.


432  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

ing,  in  moft  things,  according  to  their  own  humor ;  the
people,  in  general,  grew  diftatisfied  with  the  inftitution  itfelf,
and  abolifhed  this  form  of  government ;  and,  enabling  laws,
and  chufing  magiftrates,  they  made  ufe  of  thefe  as  the
guardians  of  their  cities.  But  afterwards,  when  neither  the
laws  had  ftrength  enough  by  themfelves  to  fupport  juftice,
nor  the  magiftrates,  intrufted  with  the  care  of  them,  to
fupport  the  laws,  and  length  of  time  introducing  many
innovations,  they  found  themfelves  obliged  to  chufe,  not
the  beft  inftitutions,  but  fuch,  as  beft  fuited  the  prefent
junctures ;  and  this,  not  only,  under  inevitable  calamities,
but,  alfo,  in  immoderate  profperity;  by  which,  when  the
conftitution  became  corrupted,  and  required  a  fpeedy,  and
uncontrolable  remedy,  they  were  reduced  to  a  neceflity  of
reftoring  the  kingly,  and  tyrannical  powers,  concealed  under
fome  fpecious  appellations.  Thefe  the  60  Theflalians  called
A^C,  Commanders ,  and  the  Lacedaemonians,  61  A
Reformers ,  as  being  afraid  of  calling  them  Tyra7/its ,  or  Kings  *

6o*  05t7«Ao<  —  There  is  a

note  in  Hudfon,  in  which  it  is  faid,
that  Xenophon,  and  Homer  call  thefe
-raf*?  :  But  that  is  no  reafon  why  they
might  not,  alfo,  be  called  a^x°l :  For
thefe  words  are,  often,  ufed  fynony-
moufly.  But  I  have  fomething  more
conclufive  to  offer  in  favor  of  our
author’s  affertion.  e  Homer  himfelf,
in  fpeaking  of  the  Theffalians,  who
went  to  the  fiege  of  Troy,  calls  Prote-
filaus,  who  had  commanded  them,  and
was  killed,  their  ,

wo$£oy  yt  [asv  APXON.

*  Iliad  j2.  703.

and,


6l‘  Agorot?.  Thefe  muff  not  be
confounded  with  the  Agporai,  or  go¬
vernors,  fent  by  the  Lacedaemonians
to  the  cities,  that  were  fubjebt  to  their
obedience.  As  the  Lacedaemonians
were  not  writers,  we  are  too  much
unacquainted  with  their  inward  date,
to  know  when,  or,  upon  what  occa-
fions,  they  created  thefe ctqftorcit,  whom
our  author  compares  with  the  Roman
dictators.  It  gives  me  fome  pain  to
fee  here  a  great  number  of  notes  either
abdradted,  or  tranflated  word  for  word
from  Cafaubon,  by  M.  *  *  *,  without
the  lead;  acknowledgement.


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  A  L I C  A  R  N  A  S  S  E  N  SIS.  433

and,  looking  upon  it  as  a  crime  to  reftore  thofe  powers  they
had  abolifhed  with  oaths,  curfes,  and  the  approbation  of  the
gods.  My  opinion,  therefore,  is,  as  I  faid,  that  the  Romans
took  this  example  from  the  Greeks  themfelves.  However,  Li-
cinius  thinks  they  took  the  didatorftiip  from  the  Albans ;  thefe
being,  as  he  fays,  the  firft,  who,  when  the  royal  family  was
extinct  upon  the  death  of  Ainulius,  and  Mumitor,  created
annual  magiftrates,  with  the  fame  power  the  kings  had,
before,  enjoyed,  and  called  thefe  magiftrates,  dictators.  For
my  part,  I  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  inquire  from
whence  the  Romans  took  the  name,  but,  from  whence  they
took  the  example  of  the  power  comprehended  under  that
name.  However,  concerning  this,  it  may,  poflibly,  be  un~
neceffary  to  fay  any  thing  further.

LXXV.  I  fhall,  now,  endeavour  to  give  an  account,  in
few  words,  of  the  adminiftration  of  Lartius,  the  firft  dictator,
and,  in  what  manner  he  adorned  that  magiftracy ;  becaufe
I  look  upon  thefe  things  to  be  of  the  greateft  ufe  to  the
readers,  as  they  will  open  a  large  field  of  noble,  and  profit¬
able  examples,  not  only,  to  legiflators,  and  patrons  of  the
people,  but,  alfo,  to  all  others,  who  afpire  at  the  magiftracy,
and  the  adminiftration  of  the  public  affairs:  For  I  am
not  going  to  relate  the  inftitutions,  and  cuftoms  of  an  un¬
admired,  and  mean  commonwealth,  or  the  counfels,  and
adions  of  men  unknown,  and  unworthy  to  be  known,  which
might  make  our  endeavours,  if  employed  upon  fmall,  and
frivolous  objeds,  to  appear  tedious,  and  trifling  ;  but  I  am
treating  of  that  commonwealth,  which  prefcribes  rules  of


Book  V.


434  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF

juftice,  and  honor  to  all  mankind,  and  of  thofe  magiftrates,
who  have  raifed  her  to  that  dignity :  Which  is  a  fubjed
philofophers  may  defire  to  know,  and  ftatefmen  approve  of.
As  foon,  therefore,  as  Lartius  was  inverted  with  this  power,
he  appointed  Spurius  Cafllus,  63  general  of  the  horfe,  the
fame  who  had  been  conful  about  the  feventieth  Olympiad.
This  cuftom  has  been  obferved  by  the  Romans  to  this  day,
and  no  dictator  has,  hitherto,  continued  in  the  magiftracy
without  a  general  of  the  horfe.  After  that,  dertring  to  fhew
the  greatnefs  of  the  power  he  was  inverted  with,  and  for  a
terror,  rather  than  for  ufe,  he  ordered  the  li<rtors  to  carry  in
the  city  the  axes  with  the  rods :  This  had  been  an  eftablifhed
cuftom  with  the  kings,  but  difufed  by  the  confuls,  fince
Valerius  Poplicola,  when  conful,  firft  leftened  the  envy  of
that  magiftracy;  which  cuftom  the  dictator,  now,  revived.
And,  having  by  this,  and  the  other  enfigns  of  royal  dignity,
terrified  the  turbulent,  and  the  authors  of  innovations,  he,
firft,  ordered  all  the  Romans,  purfuant  to  the  wifeft  of  all
the  inftitutions  eftablifhed  by  Servius  Tullius,  the  moft
popular  king,  to  regifter  the  valuation  of  their  fortunes,
each  in  their  refpe&ive  tribes,  adding  the  names  of  their
wives,  with  the  names,  and  age  of  their  children,  and  their
own  age.  And  all  of  them  having  delivered  in  this  regifter
in  a  fhort  time,  by  reafon  of  the  greatnefs  of  the  punifh-
ment  (for  the  difobedient  were  to  lofe  both  their  fortunes,

and  the  rights  of  Roman  citizens)  there  were  found  of  the

♦

62-  Iirir*tx*iv-  This  officer  was  called,  by  the  Romans,  magijler  equitum  \  and
was  appointed  by  the  di&ator.

Romans


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  HALICARN  ASSENS  I  S.  435

Romans  arrived  to  the  age  of  manhood,  one  hundred  and
fifty  thoufand,  feven  hundred.  After  that,  he  feparated
thofe,  who  were  of  the  military  age,  from  their  elders;
and,  diftributing  the  former  into  centuries,  he  formed  lour
bodies  of  foot,  and  horfe,  of  which  he  kept  That,  which
confided  of  the  choiceft  men,  about  his  perfon ;  and,  of  the
remaining  three  bodies,  he  ordered  Cloelius,  who  had  been
his  collegue  in  the  confulfhip,  to  chufe  which  he  thought
fit;  Spurius  Caffius,  the  general  of  the  horfe,  to  take  the
third ;  and  Spurius  Lartius,  his  brother,  That,  which  was  left.
This  body,  together  with  the  elders,  was  ordered  to  day  in
the  city,  as  a  guard  to  it.

LXXVI.  When  he  had  prepared  every  thing,  that  was1
neceffary  for  the  war,  he  took  the  field  with  his  forces ;  and
formed  three  feveral  camps  in  thofe  pades,  through  which
he  had  reafon  to  believe  the  Latines  would,  chiefly,  attempt
an  irruption.  Fie  confidered  that  it  is  the  part  of  a  prudent
general,  not  only,  to  drengthen  himfelf,  but,  alio,  to  weaken
his  enemy;  and,  above  all,  to  bring  wars  to  a  happy  period
without  a  battle,  and  without  trouble ;  but,  if  that  cannot
be  done,  then  with  the  lead  expence  of  men :  And,  looking
upon  thofe  wars,  as  the  word  of  all  others,  and  the  moll:
affli&ing,  which  people  are  forced  to  undertake  againfii
their  relations,  and  friends,  he  was  of  opinion  they  ought  to
be  put  an  end  to  by  an  accommodation,  in  which,  clemency
fhould  have  a  greater  (hare,  than  judice.  And,  fending  fome
unfufpeded  perfons  to  the  moft  confiderable  of  the  Latines,
he  perfuaded  them  to  endeavour  to  edablifii  a  friend  (hip

between


436  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.

between  the  two  nations.  He  Tent,  alfo,  embafladors,  openly,
both  to  the  feveral  cities,  and  to  the  whole  nation  ;  and,  by
that  means,  eafily,  brought  them  all  to  entertain,  no  longer,
the  fame  inclinations  for  the  war:  But  he,  chiefly,  gained
their  affection,  and  divided  them  from  their  leaders  by  the
following  favor.  Mamilius,  and  Sextus,  being  inverted  with
the  fovereign  command  over  the  Latines,  kept  their  forces
all  together  in  the  city  of  Tufculum,  and  were  preparing
to  march  to  Rome:  However,  they  delayed  their  march
for  a  confiderable  time,  either  becaufe  they  ftaid  for  the
forces  of  fome  of  the  cities,  which  had  not,  yet,  joined  them,
or  becaufe  the  victims  were  not  favourable :  During  this
delay,  fome  of  their  men,  leaving  the  main  body,  dif-
perfed  themfelves  about  the  country,  and  plundered  the
territories  of  the  Romans.  Lartius,  being  informed  of  this,
fent  Cloelius  after  them  with  a  detachment  of  choice  men,
both  horfe,  and  light  armed;  who,  falling  upon  them
unexpectedly,  killed  fome  in  the  action,  and  took  the
reft  prifoners:  Thefe  Lartius  recovered  of  their  wounds;
and,  having  gained  their  affections  by  many  other  inftances
of  humanity,  he  fent  them  to  Tufculum  in  a  body  without
ranfom  ;  and,  with  them,  fome  of  the  moft  diftinguifhed
among  the  Romans,  as  embafladors :  Thefe  procured  the
army  of  the  Latines  to  be  difbanded,  and  a  truce  for  a  year
to  be  concluded  between  the  two  nations.

LXXVII.  After  Lartius  had  effected  thefe  things,  he
returned  to  Rome  with  his  army;  and,  having  appointed
con  fills,  he  laid  down  his  magiftracy  before  the  whole  time

of


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H A L I  C  ARN  A S SE N  SI  S.  437

of  it  was  expired,  without  having  put  any  of  the  Romans
to  death,  banifhed  any,  or  inflicted  other  feverities  on  any
of  them.  This  example,  fet  by  Lartius,  has  been  emulated
by  all  his  fucceiTors  in  the  fame  power,  till  the  third  gene¬
ration  before  this :  For  we  find  no  inftance  of  any  one  of
them  in  hiftory,  who  did  not  ufe  it  with  moderation,  and
as  became  a  citizen  ;  the  commonwealth  having,  often,
found  it  neceflary  to  abolifh  the  legal  magiftracies,  and  to
intruft  the  whole  power  to  a  fingle  perfon.  And,  if  in
foreign  wars  alone,  the  dictators  fhewed  themfelves  hu¬
mane  governors  of  the  commonwealth,  and  uncorrupted
with  the  greatnefs  of  their  power,  it  might  the  lefs  be
wondered  at ;  but  all,  who  have  had  this  magiftracy  con¬
ferred  upon  them,  in  order  either  to  fupprefs  civil  diflenfions,
which  have  been  many  and  very  dangerous,  or  to  defeat
the  attempts  of  thofe,  who  were  fufpeCted  of  aiming  at  the
kingly  power,  and  tyranny,  or  to  prevent  numberlefs  other
calamities,  have  been  free  from  cenfure,  and  imitated  the
firft  perfon,  who  was  invefted  with  it:  So  that,  all  men
were  of  this  opinion,  that  the  diCtatorftrip  was  the  only
remedy  for  every  diftemper,  otherwife  incurable;  and  the
laft  hope  of  prefervation,  when  all  others  were  rendered
defperate  by  certain  conjunctures.  But,  in  the  time  of  our
fathers,  full  four  hundred  years  after  the  diCtatorfhip  of  Titus
Lartius,  this  magiftracy  became  obnoxious  and  odious  to  all
men  under  63  Cornelius  Sulla,  the  firft  and  only  dictator,

63‘  Ko^vtjTwo?  SoAAtf.  This  man,  after  tor,  that  is,  he  created  himfelf  fo,  after
his  return  to  Rome,  and  the  defeat  of  an  intermiffion  of  this  magiftracy,  for
all  his  adverfaries,  was  created  didta-  one  hundred  and  twenty  years.  This

Vol.  II.  I  i  i  who


438  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES  OF  Book  V.


who  exercifed  his  power  with  feverity,  and  cruelty :  So  that,
the  Romans,  then  firft,  became  fenlible  of  what  they  had,
all  along,  been  ignorant  of,  that  the  di&atorfhip  is  a  real
tyranny :  For  he  compofed  the  fenate  of  obfcure  men  ;
reduced  the  power  of  the  tribunes  of  the  people  to  the
lowed:  degree ;  difpeopled  whole  cities ;  abolifhed  fome
kingdoms,  and  ere&ed  others ;  and  was  guilty  of  many
other  exorbitancies,  which  it  would  be  endlefs  to  enumerate :
And,  befides  the  citizens,  who  were  flain  in  battle,  he  put
no  lefs  than  64  four  thoufand  to  death,  after  they  had  fur-


monfter  of  cruelty  fet  the  example  of
a  profcription,  et  utinam  ultimus  !  as
Paterculus  fays,  very  well,  upon  that
occafion.  I  am  aftonifhed  when  I  read,
in  f  Plutarch,  the  grants  he  extorted
from  his  fellow-citizens :  Thefe  were
an  impunity  for  all  his  crimes  the
power  of  life,  and  death  ;  of  confiscat¬
ing  the  fortunes  of  whom  he  pleafed  ;
of  planting  colonies;  of  building,  and
deftroying  cities;  and  of  giving  to,
and  taking  away  kingdoms  from,
whom  he  thought  fit.  This  example
of  a  profcription  was  improved,  after¬
wards,  by  the  triumvirs,  of  whom  the
all-praifed  Auguftus  was  one ♦,  and,
though  he  made,  or  affeded  to  make,
fome  oppofition  to  it  at  firft  ;  yet,
when,  once,  the  profcription  was  fet
on  foot,  he  exercifed  it  with  greater
feverity,  than  either  of  the  other  two ;
s  utroque  acerbius  exercuit  and,  when
they,  often,  fuffered  their  refentment
to  be  difarmed  by  favor,  and  intreaties,
he  alone  infilled  with  vehemence  that
none  of  their  adverfaries  fhould  be
fpared  ;  namque  illis  in  multorum  faepe


perfonam  per  gratiam  et  preces  exorabi-
libus ,  folus  magnopere  contendit  ne  cut
parceretur.  Upon  this  occafion,  the
great  Roman  orator,  ftatefman,  philo-
fopher,  and  patriot  fell  a  facrifice  to
the  ingratitude,  the  policy,  or  pufil-
lanimity  of  an  ambitious  boy.  This
coalition  of  the  triumvirs,  the  confe-
quence  of  the  reception  of  Antony  by
Lepidus,  was  the  crifis,  that  gave  the
fatal  ftroke  to  the  liberty  of  the  Ro¬
mans  ;  who,  after  a  long  feries  of  fuf-
ferings  under  a  fucceffion  of  ulurpers,
molt  of  whom  treated  them  with  all
the  wantojinefs  of  cruelty,  that  power
could  fuggeft,  or  fubmifiion  encourage,
left  their  pofterity  reduced,  at  laft,  to
pradifethe  low  arts  of  deceiving  thofe
nations,  whom  their  anceflors  had  con¬
quered.

64*  Til%oiKia£ihiuv.  The  Vatican
manufcript  has  tj7 ;  I  be¬
lieve  both  numbers  have  been  miftaken
by  the  tranfcribers.  h  Plutarch  fays,
that  Sulla  murdered  in  the  circus  three
thoufand  men,  who  had  furrendered ;
together  with  fix  thoufand  prifoners.


r  Life  of  Sulla.  sSueton.  Life  of  Auguftus,  c.  27.  11  Life  of  Sulla.

rendered


Book  V.  DIONYSIUS  H  ALICARN  ASSEN  SIS.  439
rendered  to  him,  fome  of  whom  he,  firft,  tortured.  Whe¬
ther  all  thefe  adtions  were  neceflary,  or  advantageous  to  the
commonwealth,  This  is  not  the  time  to  inquire  :  All  I  have
undertaken  to  fhew,  is,  that  the  name  of .  dictator  was
rendered  odious  and  terrible  by  thefe  excefles.  This  happens,
not  only,  to  powers,  but,  alfo,  to  other  things,  which  by  all
men  are  the  moft  contended  for,  and  admired :  For  they
all  appear  noble  and  profitable,  when,  nobly,  ufed ;  but
bafe  and  unprofitable,  when  they  fall  into  bad  hands.  Of
this  nature  is  the  caufe;  which,  to  all  good  things,  has
annexed  fome  congenial  evils.  But  another  time  may  be
more  proper  for  a  difcourfe  of  this  kind.  The  confuls  for
the  following  year  were  Aulus  Sempronius  Atratinus,  and
Marcus  Minucius,  who  entered  upon  their  magiftracy  in  the
feventy  firft  Olympiad,  in  which  Tificrates  of  Croton  won
the  prize  of  the  ftadium,  Hipparchus  being  archon  at
Athens.


The  end  of  the  Fifth  book.


ERRATA  in  VOL.  II.


PAGE  2.  L.  15.  for  in  which,  read  at  which.

P.  1 1 .  L.  1  q.  f.  by  the  means,  r.  by  means.
P.  2 1 .  L.  1 1 .  f.  Latine.  r.  Latin.

P.  22.  L.  22.  f.  you  can  fay.  r.  can  you  fay.

Jb.  L.  25.  f.  be  great  folly,  r.  be  a  great
folly.

P.  29  L.  i.  f.  if  any.  r.  if  any  one.

P  41.  laft  line.  f.  fortune,  r.  Fortune..

P.  43.  L.  1.  a  comma  after  her  [elf.

Jb.  L.  5.  no  pundlum  after  days.

P.  49.  L.  8.  no  hyphen  after  Cyprian.

P.  50.  L.  17.  f.  of.  r.  on.

P.  54.  L.  9.  f.  on.  r.  upon.

P.  55.  L.  14.  no  comma  after  incidents.

P.  65.  L.  16.  no  comma  after  world.

P.  70.  laft  line  but  one.  no  colon  after  hands.

P.  72.  6.  no  comma  after  eafily.

P.  75.  L.  1.  f.  they.  r.  the  latter.

P.  77.  L.  5.  f.  of.  r.  on.

P.  90.  L.  10.  f.  Latine.  r.  Latin.

P.  94.  L.  7.  f.  is.  r.  was.

P.  97.  L.  7.  f.  Ancus  Martius.  r.  Ancus  Mar-
cius.

lb.  L.  1 5.  f.  in  which,  r.  at  which.

P.  99.  L.  9.  f.  lawful  ilfue.  r.  certain  blue,
lb.  L.  26.  f.  defcending.  r.  (looping.

Ib.  laft  line.  f.  itfelf.  r.  herfelf.

P.  103.  L.  2.  f.  Cruftumerini.  r.  Cruftumeri.

and  again  in  L.  8.  x  5.  and  P.  104.  L.  14.
P.  104.  L.  10.  f.  Latine.  r.  Latin.

P.  106.  laft  line  but  two.  f.  Camerium.  r.  Ca-
meria.

P.  1 1 2.  laft  line,  after  fire,  infert  the  fol¬
lowing  lines  (omitted  by  Miftake)  “  and
the  boats,  and  rafts  to  fall  down  the
dream  :  thefe  foon  pafled  the  intermediate
(pace;  and,  being  driven  upon  the  bridge,
fet  fire  to  it  in  many  places.  The  Sabines,
feeing  a  vaft  flame  break  out  on  a  fudden,
ran  to  give  their  afiiftance,  and  tried  all
means  pofiible  to  extinguifh  the  fire  :
while  they  were  thus  employed,  Tarquinius
appeared  early  in  the  morning,  marching  at
the  head  of  the  Roman  Army  in  order  of
battle;  and,  attacking  one  of  the  camps,
the  greateft  part  of  the  guards  having  left
their  pofts  to  run  to  the  fire.

P.  126.  L.  8.  f.  furname.  r.  praenomen.

P.  134.  L.  5.  f.  fininifhed,  r.  finiftied.

P.  145.  L.  7.  f.  Latine.  r.  Latin.

P.  146.  L.  14.  f.  the  phantom,  r.  that  phantom.


P.  154.  L.  17.  and  18.  f.  Licinnius.  r.  Licinius,
P.  1 6 1 .  laft  line  but  two.  f.  adminiftered.  r.
adminiftred.

P.  165.  L.  2.  f.  others,  r.  fome.

P.  1 66.  L.  I.  f.  relatians.  r.  relations.

P.  170.  C.  2.L.  10.  ftrike  out  alfo.

P.  171.0.  2.  L.  1.  no  comma  before,  nor  after
not.

P.  173.  C.  2.  L.  1.  after  May-  add  thefe
Words  :  For  which  reafon,  this  feftival  muft
have  been  celebrated  a  great  deal  earlier  in
the  Year.

P.  i  77.  C  z.  L.  2.  f.  a.  r.  u.

P.  191.  L.  6.  no  comma  before,  nor  after  erven.
P.  196.  C.  2.  L.  7.  f.  are  mod.  r.  are  the  moft;
P.  199  L.  10  f.  Latine.  r.  Latin.

P.  201.  C.  1.  laft  line.  f.  many.  r.  fome.

P.  203.  C.  2.  L.  I  1.  f.  reddita.  r.  reddite.

P.  204.  C.  x .  L.  1 6.  f  of.  r.  for.

P.  21 1.  L.  21.  f.  foverignty.  r.  fovereignty.

P.  213.  L.  8.  f.  fon.  r.  iflue.

P.  2  2 1 .  L .  2  3 .  f.  the  the  violence,  r.  the  violence.
P.  229.  L.  i.  f.  in  which,  r.  at  which.

P.  23  i .  L.  x.  f.  expedted.  r.  expecting.

P.  240.  L.  1.  a  comma  after  grandfather.

lb.  L.  10.  f.  Echetrani.  r.  Ecetrani.

P.  248.  laft  line,  no  comma  after  himfelf.

P.  280.  L.  x8.  f.  fuperintendance.  r.  fuperin-
tendence.

P.  309.  L.  5.  f.  in  which,  r.  at  which.

P.  333.  L.  8.  no  comma  after  lands.

P.  342.  L.  8.  f.  edile.  r.  aedile.

P.  3  50.  L.  7.  a  comma  after  city.

P.  354.  L.  9.  perilhed.  r.  perfifted.

P.  3  55*  G.  !•  L.  I.  f.  crviUpni)  r.  avvB^nj.

P.  357.  L.  16.  f.  coudemned.  r.  condemned.
P.  361 .  laft  line,  a  comma  after  commonwealth
and  none  after  together.

P.  367.  L.  4.  f.  Malachus.  r.  Malaeus.

P.  368.  L.  8.  f.  in  which,  r.at  which.

P.  371.  L.  7.  f.  the  left.  r.  their  left.

P.  373.  L.  1  7.  f.  Rigillum.  r.  Regillum.

1b.  C.  2.  L.  4.  f.  fertile,  r.  fertil.

P.  382.  L.  7.  f.  javelines.  r.  javelins.

Ib.  C.  1.  L.  26.  f.  three,  r.  four.

P.  391.  L.  22.  f. former,  r. latter.

P.  422.  L.  7.  no  comma  after  offers.

P.  427.  L.  9.  no  comma  after  nomination.

P.  428.  L.  1.  f.  applauded,  of  r.  approved  of.
P.  432.  C.  2.  L.9.  amoral,  r.  up[/.oroti.

P.  439.  L.  15.  f.  in  which,  r.  at  which.
