Extant Fragments of Dionysius (Dionysius of Alexandria)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf06.iv.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

  Extant Fragments

 The Works of Dionysius.

 Extant Fragments.

 ------------------------

 Part I.--Containing Various Sections of the Works.

 ------------------------

 I.--From the Two Books on the Promises. [612]

 ------------------------

 1. But as they produce a certain composition by Nepos, [613] on which
 they insist very strongly, as if it demonstrated incontestably that
 there will be a (temporal) reign of Christ upon the earth, I have to
 say, that in many other respects I accept the opinion of Nepos, and
 love him at once for his faith, and his laboriousness, and his patient
 study in the Scriptures, as also for his great efforts in psalmody,
 [614] by which even now many of the brethren are delighted. I hold the
 man, too, in deep respect still more, inasmuch as [615] he has gone to
 his rest before us. Nevertheless the truth is to be prized and
 reverenced above all things else. And while it is indeed proper to
 praise and approve ungrudgingly anything that is said aright, it is no
 less proper to examine and correct anything which may appear to have
 been written unsoundly. If he had been present then himself, and had
 been stating his opinions orally, it would have been sufficient to
 discuss the question together without the use of writing, and to
 endeavour to convince the opponents, and carry them along by
 interrogation and reply. But the work is published, and is, as it seems
 to some, of a very persuasive character; and there are unquestionably
 some teachers, who hold that the law and the prophets are of no
 importance, and who decline to follow the Gospels, and who depreciate
 the epistles of the apostles, and who have also made large promises
 [616] regarding the doctrine of this composition, as though it were
 some great and hidden mystery, and who, at the same time, do not allow
 that our simpler brethren have any sublime and elevated conceptions
 either of our Lord's appearing in His glory and His true divinity, or
 of our own resurrection from the dead, and of our being gathered
 together to Him, and assimilated to Him, but, on the contrary,
 endeavour to lead them to hope [617] for things which are trivial and
 corruptible, and only such as what we find at present in the kingdom of
 God. And since this is the case, it becomes necessary for us to discuss
 this subject with our brother Nepos just as if he were present.

 2. After certain other matters, he adds the following statement:--Being
 then in the Arsinoitic [618] prefecture--where, as you are aware, this
 doctrine was current long ago, and caused such division, that schisms
 and apostasies took place in whole churches--I called together the
 presbyters and the teachers among the brethren in the villages, and
 those of the brethren also who wished to attend were present. I
 exhorted them to make an investigation into that dogma in public.
 Accordingly, when they had brought this book before us, as though it
 were a kind of weapon or impregnable battlement, I sat with them for
 three days in succession from morning till evening, and attempted to
 set them right on the subjects propounded in the composition. Then,
 too, I was greatly gratified by observing the constancy of the
 brethren, and their love of the truth, and their docility and
 intelligence, as we proceeded, in an orderly method, and in a spirit of
 moderation, to deal with questions, and difficulties, and concessions.
 For we took care not to press, in every way and with jealous urgency,
 opinions which had once been adopted, even although they might appear
 to be correct. [619] Neither did we evade objections alleged by others;
 but we endeavoured as far as possible to keep by the subject in hand,
 and to establish the positions pertinent to it. Nor, again, were we
 ashamed to change our opinions, if reason convinced us, and to
 acknowledge the fact; but rather with a good conscience, and in all
 sincerity, and with open hearts [620] before God, we accepted all that
 could be established by the demonstrations and teachings of the Holy
 Scriptures. And at last the author and introducer of this doctrine,
 whose name was Coracion, in the hearing of all the brethren present,
 made acknowledgment of his position, and engaged to us that he would no
 longer hold by his opinion, nor discuss it, nor mention it, nor teach
 it, as he had been completely convinced by the arguments of those
 opposed to it. The rest of the brethren, also, who were present, were
 delighted with the conference, and with the conciliatory spirit and the
 harmony exhibited by all.

 3. Then, a little further on, he speaks of the Revelation of John as
 follows:--Now some before our time have set aside this book, and
 repudiated it entirely, criticising it chapter by chapter, and
 endeavouring to show it to be without either sense or reason. They have
 alleged also that its title is false; for they deny that John is the
 author. Nay, further, they hold that it can be no sort of revelation,
 because it is covered with so gross and dense a veil of ignorance. They
 affirm, therefore, that none of the apostles, nor indeed any of the
 saints, nor any person belonging to the Church, could be its author;
 but that Cerinthus, [621] and the heretical sect founded by him, and
 named after him the Cerinthian sect, being desirous of attaching the
 authority of a great name to the fiction propounded by him, prefixed
 that title to the book. For the doctrine inculcated by Cerinthus is
 this: that there will be an earthly reign of Christ; and as he was
 himself a man devoted to the pleasures of the body, and altogether
 carnal in his dispositions, he fancied [622] that that kingdom would
 consist in those kinds of gratifications on which his own heart was
 set,--to wit, in the delights of the belly, and what comes beneath the
 belly, that is to say, in eating and drinking, and marrying, and in
 other things under the guise of which he thought he could indulge his
 appetites with a better grace, [623] such as festivals, and sacrifices,
 and the slaying of victims. But I, for my part, could not venture to
 set this book aside, for there are many brethren who value it highly.
 Yet, having formed an idea of it as a composition exceeding my capacity
 of understanding, I regard it as containing a kind of hidden and
 wonderful intelligence on the several subjects which come under it. For
 though I cannot comprehend it, I still suspect that there is some
 deeper sense underlying the words. And I do not measure and judge its
 expressions by the standard of my own reason, but, making more
 allowance for faith, I have simply regarded them as too lofty for my
 comprehension; and I do not forthwith reject what I do not understand,
 but I am only the more filled with wonder at it, in that I have not
 been able to discern its import. [624]

 4. After this, he examines the whole book of the Revelation; and having
 proved that it cannot possibly be understood according to the bald,
 literal sense, he proceeds thus:--When the prophet now has completed,
 so to speak, the whole prophecy, he pronounces those blessed who should
 observe it, and names himself, too, in the number of the same: "For
 blessed," says he, "is he that keepeth the words of the prophecy of
 this book; and I John who saw and heard these things." [625] That this
 person was called John, therefore, and that this was the writing of a
 John, I do not deny. And I admit further, that it was also the work of
 some holy and inspired man. But I could not so easily admit that this
 was the apostle, the son of Zebedee, the brother of James, and the same
 person with him who wrote the Gospel which bears the title according to
 John, and the catholic epistle. But from the character of both, and the
 forms of expression, and the whole disposition and execution [626] of
 the book, I draw the conclusion that the authorship is not his. For the
 evangelist nowhere else subjoins his name, and he never proclaims
 himself either in the Gospel or in the epistle.

 And a little further on he adds:--John, moreover, nowhere gives us the
 name, whether as of himself directly (in the first person), or as of
 another (in the third person). But the writer of the Revelation puts
 himself forward at once in the very beginning, for he says: "The
 Revelation of Jesus Christ, which He gave to him to show to His
 servants quickly; and He sent and signified it by His angel to His
 servant John, who bare record of the Word of God, and of his testimony,
 and of all things that he saw." [627] And then he writes also an
 epistle, in which he says: "John to the seven churches which are in
 Asia, grace be unto you, and peace." The evangelist, on the other hand,
 has not prefixed his name even to the catholic epistle; but without any
 circumlocution, he has commenced at once with the mystery of the divine
 revelation itself in these terms: "That which was from the beginning,
 which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes." [628] And on
 the ground of such a revelation as that the Lord pronounced Peter
 blessed, when He said: "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona; for flesh and
 blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
 heaven." [629] And again in the second epistle, which is ascribed to
 John, the apostle, and in the third, though they are indeed brief, John
 is not set before us by name; but we find simply the anonymous writing,
 "The elder." This other author, on the contrary, did not even deem it
 sufficient to name himself once, and then to proceed with his
 narrative; but he takes up his name again, and says: "I John, who also
 am your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and
 patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos for the
 Word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ." [630] And likewise
 toward the end he speaks thus: "Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings
 of the prophecy of this book; and I John who saw these things and heard
 them." [631] That it is a John, then, that writes these things we must
 believe, for he himself tells us.

 5. What John this is, however, is uncertain. For he has not said, as he
 often does in the Gospel, that he is the disciple beloved by the Lord,
 or the one that leaned on His bosom, or the brother of James, or one
 that was privileged to see and hear the Lord. And surely he would have
 given us some of these indications if it had been his purpose to make
 himself clearly known. But of all this he offers us nothing; and he
 only calls himself our brother and companion, and the witness of Jesus,
 and one blessed with the seeing and hearing of these revelations. I am
 also of opinion that there were many persons of the same name with John
 the apostle, who by their love for him, and their admiration and
 emulation of him, and their desire to be loved by the Lord as he was
 loved, were induced to embrace also the same designation, just as we
 find many of the children of the faithful called by the names of Paul
 and Peter. [632] There is, besides, another John mentioned in the Acts
 of the Apostles, with the surname Mark, whom Barnabas and Paul attached
 to themselves as companion, and of whom again it is said: "And they had
 also John to their minister." [633] But whether this is the one who
 wrote the Revelation, I could not say. For it is not written that he
 came with them into Asia. But the writer says: "Now when Paul and his
 company loosed from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia: and John,
 departing from them, returned to Jerusalem." [634] I think, therefore,
 that it was some other one of those who were in Asia. For it is said
 that there were two monuments in Ephesus, and that each of these bears
 the name of John.

 6. And from the ideas, and the expressions, and the collocation of the
 same, it may be very reasonably conjectured that this one is distinct
 from that. [635] For the Gospel and the Epistle agree with each other,
 and both commence in the same way. For the one opens thus, "In the
 beginning was the Word;" while the other opens thus, "That which was
 from the beginning." The one says: "And the Word was made flesh, and
 dwelt among us; and we beheld His glory, the glory as of the
 Only-begotten of the Father." [636] The other says the same things,
 with a slight alteration: "That which we have heard, which we have seen
 with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled,
 of the Word of life: and the life was manifested." [637] For these
 things are introduced by way of prelude, and in opposition, as he has
 shown in the subsequent parts, to those who deny that the Lord is come
 in the flesh. For which reason he has also been careful to add these
 words: "And that which we have seen we testify, and show unto you that
 eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us:
 that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you." [638] Thus he
 keeps to himself, and does not diverge inconsistently from his
 subjects, but goes through them all under the same heads and in the
 same phraseologies, some of which we shall briefly mention. Thus the
 attentive reader will find the phrases, "the life," "the light,"
 occurring often in both; and also such expressions as fleeing from
 darkness, holding the truth, grace, joy, the flesh and the blood of the
 Lord, the judgment, the remission of sins, the love of God toward us,
 the commandment of love on our side toward each other; as also, that we
 ought to keep all the commandments, the conviction of the world, of the
 devil, of Antichrist, the promise of the Holy Spirit, the adoption of
 God, the faith required of us in all things, the Father and the Son,
 named as such everywhere. And altogether, through their whole course,
 it will be evident that the Gospel and the Epistle are distinguished by
 one and the same character of writing. But the Revelation is totally
 different, and altogether distinct from this; and I might almost say
 that it does not even come near it, or border upon it. Neither does it
 contain a syllable in common with these other books. Nay more, the
 Epistle--for I say nothing of the Gospel--does not make any mention or
 evince any notion of the Revelation and the Revelation, in like manner,
 gives no note of the Epistle. Whereas Paul gives some indication of his
 revelations in his epistles; which revelations, however, he has not
 recorded in writing by themselves.

 7. And furthermore, on the ground of difference in diction, it is
 possible to prove a distinction between the Gospel and the Epistle on
 the one hand, and the Revelation on the other. For the former are
 written not only without actual error as regards the Greek language,
 but also with the greatest elegance, both in their expressions and in
 their reasonings, and in the whole structure of their style. They are
 very far indeed from betraying any barbarism or solecism, or any sort
 of vulgarism, in their diction. For, as might be presumed, the writer
 possessed the gift of both kinds of discourse, [639] the Lord having
 bestowed both these capacities upon him, viz., that of knowledge and
 that of expression. That the author of the latter, however, saw a
 revelation, and received knowledge and prophecy, I do not deny. Only I
 perceive that his dialect and language are not of the exact Greek type,
 and that he employs barbarous idioms, and in some places also
 solecisms. These, however, we are under no necessity of seeking out at
 present. And I would not have any one suppose that I have said these
 things in the spirit of ridicule; for I have done so only with the
 purpose of setting right this matter of the dissimilarity subsisting
 between these writings. [640]

 [612] In opposition to Noëtus, a bishop in Egypt. Eusebius, Hist.
 Eccl., vii. 24 and 25. Eusebius introduces this extract in the
 following terms: "There are also two books of his on the subject of the
 promises. The occasion of writing these was furnished by a certain
 Nepos, a bishop in Egypt, who taught that the promises which were given
 to holy men in the sacred Scriptures were to be understood according to
 the Jewish sense of the same; and affirmed that there would be some
 kind of a millennial period, plenished with corporeal delights, upon
 this earth. And as he thought that he could establish this opinion of
 his by the Revelation of John, he had composed a book on this question,
 entitled Refutation of the Allegorists. This, therefore, is sharply
 attacked by Dionysius in his books on the Promises. And in the first of
 these books he states his own opinion on the subject; while in the
 second he gives us a discussion on the Revelation of John, in the
 introduction to which he makes mention of Nepos." [Of this Noëtus, see
 the Philosophumena, vol. v., this series.]

 [613] As it is clear from this passage that this work by Dionysius was
 written against Nepos, it is strange that, in his preface to the
 eighteenth book of his Commentaries on Isaiah, Jerome should affirm it
 to have been composed against Irenæus of Lyons. Irenæus was certainly
 of the number of those who held millennial views, and who had been
 persuaded to embrace such by Papias, as Jerome himself tells us in the
 Catalogus and as Eusebius explains towards the close of the third book
 of his History. But that this book by Dionysus was written not against
 Irenæus but against Nepos, is evident, not only from this passage in
 Eusebius, but also from Jerome himself, in his work On Ecclesiastical
 Writers, where he speaks of Dionysius.--Vales. [Compare (this series,
 infra) the comments of Victorinus of Petau for a Western view of the
 millennial subject.]

 [614] tes polles psalmodias. Christophorsonus interprets this of psalms
 and hymns composed by Nepos. It was certainly the practice among the
 ancient Christians to compose psalms and hymns in honour of Christ.
 Eusebius bears witness to this in the end of the fifth book of his
 History. Mention is made of these psalms in the Epistle of the Council
 of Antioch against Paul of Samosata, and in the penultimate canon of
 the Council of Laodicea, where there is a clear prohibition of the use
 of psalmoi idiotikoi in the church, i.e., of psalms composed by private
 individuals. For this custom had obtained great prevalence, so that
 many persons composed psalms in honour of Christ, and got them sung in
 the church. It is psalms of this kind, consequently, that the Fathers
 of the Council of Laodicea forbid to be sung thereafter in the church,
 designating them idiotikoi, i.e., composed by unskilled men, and not
 dictated by the Holy Spirit. Thus is the matter explained by Agobardus
 in his book De ritu canendi psalmos in Ecclesia.--Vales. [See vol. v.,
 quotation from Pliny.]

 [615] taute mallon he proanepausato: it may mean, perhaps, for the way
 in which he has gone to his rest before us.

 [616] katepangellomenon, i.e., diu ante promittunt quam tradunt. The
 metaphor is taken from the mysteries of the Greeks, who were wont to
 promise great and marvellous discoveries to the initiated, and then
 kept them on the rack by daily expectation, in order to confirm their
 judgment and reverence by such suspense in the conveyance of knowledge,
 as Tertullian says in his book Against the Valentinians.--Vales. [Vol.
 iii. p. 503.]

 [617] Reading elpizein anapeithonton for elpizomena peithonton, with
 the Codex Mazarin.

 [618] en men oun to 'Arsenoeite. In the three codices here, as well as
 in Nicephorus and Ptolemy, we find this scription, although it is
 evident that the word should be written 'Arsinoeite , as the district
 took its name from Queen Arsinoe.--Vales.

 [619] hei kai phainointo. There is another reading, hei kai me
 phainointo, although they might not appear to be correct.
 Christophorsonus renders it: ne illis quæ fuerant ante ab ipsis
 decreta, si quidquam in eis veritati repugnare videretur, mordicus
 adhærerent præcavebant.

 [620] heplomenais tais kardiais. Christophorsonus renders it, puris
 erga Deum ac simplicibis animis; Musculus gives, cordibus ad Deum
 expansis; and Rufinus, patefactis cordibus. [The picture here given of
 a primitive synod searching the Scriptures under such a presidency, and
 exhibiting such tokens of brotherly love, mutual subordination (1 Pet.
 v. 5), and a prevailing love of the truth, is to me one of the most
 fascinating of patristic sketches. One cannot but reflect upon the
 contrast presented in every respect by the late Council of the
 Vatican.]

 [621] This passage is given substantially by Eusebius also in book iii.
 c. 28.

 [622] The text gives oneiropolein, for which for which oneiropolei or
 oneiropolei is to be read.

 [623] di' hon euphemoteron tauta oethe porieisthai. The old reading was
 euthumoteron ; but the present reading is given in the mss., Cod. Maz.,
 and Med., as also in Eusebius, iii. 28, and in Nicephorus, iii. 14. So
 Rufinus renders it: et ut aliquid sacratius dicere videretur, legales
 aiebat festivitates rursum celebrandas. [These gross views of
 millennial perfection entailed upon subsequent ages a reactionary
 neglect of the study of the Second Advent. A Papal aphorism, preserved
 by Roscoe, embodies all this: "Sub umbilico nulla religio." It was
 fully exemplified, even under Leo X.]

 [624] [The humility which moderates and subdues our author's pride of
 intellect in this passage is, to me, most instructive as to the limits
 prescribed to argument in what Coleridge calls "the faith of reason."]

 [625] Rev. xxii. 7, 8.

 [626] diexagoges legomenes. Musculus renders it tractatum libri;
 Christophorsonus gives discursum; and Valesius takes it as equivalent
 to oikonomian, as diexagagein is the same as dioikein.

 [627] Rev. i. 1, 2.

 [628] 1 John i. 1.

 [629] Matt. xvi. 17.

 [630] Rev. i. 9.

 [631] Rev. xxii. 7, 8.

 [632] It is worth while to note this passage of Dionysius on the
 ancient practice of the Christians, in giving their children the names
 of Peter and Paul, which they did both in order to express the honour
 and affection in which they held these saints, and to secure that their
 children might be dear and acceptable to God, just as those saints
 were. Hence it is that Chrysostom in his first volume, in his oration
 on St. Meletius, says that the people of Antioch had such love and
 esteem for Meletius, that the parents called their children by his
 name, in order that they might have their homes adorned by his
 presence. And the same Chrysostom, in his twenty-first homily on
 Genesis, exhorts his hearers not to call their children carelessly by
 the names of their grandfathers, or great-grandfathers, or men of fame;
 but rather by the names of saintly men, who have been shining patterns
 of virtue, in order that the children might be fired with the desire of
 virtue by their example.--Vales. [A chapter in the history of
 civilization might here be given on the origin of Christian names and
 on the motives which should influence Christians in the bestowal of
 names. The subject is treated, after Plato, by De Maistre.]

 [633] Acts xiii. 5.

 [634] Acts xiii. 13.

 [635] This is the second argument by which Dionysius reasoned that the
 Revelation and the Gospel of John are not by one author. For the first
 argument he used in proof of this is drawn from the character and usage
 of the two writers; and this argument Dionysius has prosecuted up to
 this point. Now, however, he adduces a second argument, drawn from the
 words and ideas of the two writers, and from the collocation of the
 expressions. For, with Cicero, I thus interpret the word suntaxin. See
 the very elegant book of Dionysius Hal. entitled Peri suntaxeos
 onomaton--On the Collocation of Names; although in this passage
 suntaxis appears to comprehend the disposition of sentences as well as
 words. Further, from this passage we can see what experience Dionysius
 had in criticism; for it is the critic's part to examine the writings
 of the ancients, and distinguish what is genuine and authentic from
 what is spurious and counterfeit.--Vales.

 [636] John i. 14.

 [637] 1 John i. 1, 2.

 [638] 1 John i. 2, 3.

 [639] The old reading was, ton logon, ten gnosin. Valesius expunges the
 ten gnosin, as disturbing the sense, and as absent in various codices.
 Instead also of the reading, ton te tes sophias, ton te tes gnoseos,
 the same editor adopts ton te tes gnoseos, ton te tes phraseos, which
 is the reading of various manuscripts, and is accepted in the
 translation. Valesius understands that by the hekateron logon Dionysus
 means the logos endiathetos and the logos prophorikos, that is, the
 subjective discourse, or reason in the mind, and the objective
 discourse, or utterance of the same.

 [640] [The jealousy with which, while the canon of New Testament
 Scripture was forming, every claim was sifted, is well illustrated in
 this remarkable essay. Observe its critical skill and the fidelity with
 which he exposes the objections based on the style and classicality of
 the Evangelist. The Alexandrian school was one of bold and original
 investigation, always subject in spirit, however, to the great canon of
 Prescription.]

 II.--From the Books on Nature. [641]

 ------------------------

 I. In Opposition to Those of the School of Epicurus Who Deny the
 Existence of a Providence, and Refer the Constitution of the Universe
 to Atomic Bodies.

 Is the universe one coherent whole, as it seems to be in our own
 judgment, as well as in that of the wisest of the Greek philosophers,
 such as Plato and Pythagoras, and the Stoics and Heraclitus? or is it a
 duality, as some may possibly have conjectured? or is it indeed
 something manifold and infinite, as has been the opinion of certain
 others who, with a variety of mad speculations and fanciful usages of
 terms, have sought to divide and resolve the essential matter [642] of
 the universe, and lay down the position that it is infinite and
 unoriginated, and without the sway of Providence? [643] For there are
 those who, giving the name of atoms to certain imperishable and most
 minute bodies which are supposed to be infinite in number, and positing
 also the existence of a certain vacant space of an unlimited vastness,
 allege that these atoms, as they are borne along casually in the void,
 and clash all fortuitously against each other in an unregulated whirl,
 and become commingled one with another in a multitude of forms, enter
 into combination with each other, and thus gradually form this world
 and all objects in it; yea, more, that they construct infinite worlds.
 This was the opinion of Epicurus and Democritus; only they differed in
 one point, in so far as the former supposed these atoms to be all most
 minute and consequently imperceptible, while Democritus held that there
 were also some among them of a very large size. But they both hold that
 such atoms do exist, and that they are so called on account of their
 indissoluble consistency. There are some, again, who give the name of
 atoms to certain bodies which are indivisible into parts, while they
 are themselves parts of the universe, out of which in their undivided
 state all things are made up, and into which they are dissolved again.
 And the allegation is, that Diodorus was the person who gave them their
 names as bodies indivisible into parts. [644] But it is also said that
 Heraclides attached another name to them, and called them "weights;"
 [645] and from him the physician Asclepiades also derived that name.
 [646]

 [641] Against the Epicureans. In Eusebius, Præpar. Evangel., book xiv.
 ch. 23-27. Eusebius introduces this extract in terms to the following
 effect: It may be well now to subjoin some few arguments out of the
 many which are employed in his disputation against the Epicureans by
 the bishop Dionysius, a man who professed a Christian philosophy, as
 they are found in the work which he composed on Nature. But peruse thou
 the writer's statements in his own terms.

 [642] ousian.

 [643] apronoeton.

 [644] ton ameron.

 [645] onkous.

 [646] ekleronomese to onoma. Eusebius subjoins this remark: taut'
 eipon, hexes anaskeuazei to dogma dia pollon, atar de dia touton, =
 having said thus much, he (Dionysius) proceeds to demolish this
 doctrine by many arguments, and among others by what follows.--Gall.

 II. A Refutation of This Dogma on the Ground of Familiar Human
 Analogies.

 How, shall we bear with these men who assert that all those wise, and
 consequently also noble, constructions (in the universe) are only the
 works of common chance? those objects, I mean, of which each taken by
 itself as it is made, and the whole system collectively, were seen to
 be good by Him by whose command they came into existence. For, as it is
 said, "God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was very
 good." [647] But truly these men do not reflect on [648] the analogies
 even of small familiar things which might come under their observation
 at any time, and from which they might learn that no object of any
 utility, and fitted to be serviceable, is made without design or by
 mere chance, but is wrought by skill of hand, and is contrived so as to
 meet its proper use. And when the object falls out of service and
 becomes useless, then it also begins to break up indeterminately, and
 to decompose and dissipate its materials in every casual and
 unregulated way, just as the wisdom by which it was skilfully
 constructed at first no longer controls and maintains it. For a cloak,
 for example, cannot be made without the weaver, as if the warp could be
 set aright and the woof could be entwined with it by their own
 spontaneous action; while, on the other hand, if it is once worn out,
 its tattered rags are flung aside. Again, when a house or a city is
 built, it does not take on its stones, as if some of them placed
 themselves spontaneously upon the foundations, and others lifted
 themselves up on the several layers, but the builder carefully disposes
 the skilfully prepared stones in their proper positions; while if the
 structure happens once to give way, the stones are separated and cast
 down and scattered about. And so, too, when a ship is built, the keel
 does not lay itself, neither does the mast erect itself in the centre,
 nor do all the other timbers take up their positions casually and by
 their own motion. Nor, again, do the so-called hundred beams in the
 wain fit themselves spontaneously to the vacant spaces they severally
 light on. But the carpenter in both cases puts the materials together
 in the right way and at the right time. [649] And if the ship goes to
 sea and is wrecked, or if the wain drives along on land and is
 shattered, their timbers are broken up and cast abroad anywhere,--those
 of the former by the waves, and those of the latter by the violence of
 the impetus. In like manner, then, we might with all propriety say also
 to these men, that those atoms of theirs, which remain idle and
 unmanipulated and useless, are introduced vainly. Let them,
 accordingly, seek for themselves to see into what is beyond the reach
 of sight, and conceive what is beyond the range of conception; [650]
 unlike him who in these terms confesses to God that things like these
 had been shown him only by God Himself: "Mine eyes did see Thy work,
 being till then imperfect." [651] But when they assert now that all
 those things of grace and beauty, which they declare to be textures
 finely wrought out of atoms, are fabricated spontaneously by these
 bodies without either wisdom or perception in them, who can endure to
 hear [652] them talk in such terms of those unregulated [653] atoms,
 than which even the spider, that plies its proper craft of itself, is
 gifted with more sagacity?

 [647] Gen. i. 31.

 [648] The text is, all' oude apo ton mikron ton sunethon kai para podas
 nouthetounton, etc. We adopt Viger's suggestions and read
 nouthetountai.

 [649] The text is, hekateras sunekomise kairion, for which Viger
 proposes eis ton hekateras, etc.

 [650] The text gives, horatosan gar tas atheatous ekeinoi, kai tas
 anoetous noeitosan, ouch homoios ekeino, etc. The passage seems
 corrupt. Some supply phuseis as the subject intended in the atheatous
 and anoetous; but that leaves the connection still obscure. Viger would
 read, with one ms., athetous instead of athaetous, and makes this then
 the sense: that those Epicureans are bidden study more closely these
 unregulated and stolid (anoetous) atoms, not looking at them with a
 merely cursory and careless glance, as David acknowledges was the case
 with him in the thoughts of his own imperfect nature, in order that
 they may the more readily understand how out of such confusion as that
 in which they are involved nothing orderly and finished could possibly
 have originated. [P. 86, note 2, infra.]

 [651] Ps. cxxxix. 16. The text gives, to akatergaston sou idosan hoi
 ophthalmoi mou. This strange reading, instead of the usual to
 akatergaston mou eidon (or idon) hoi ophthalmoi sou, is found also in
 the Alexandrine exemplar of the Septuagint, which gives, to
 akatergaston sou eidosan hoi ophthalmoi mou, and in the Psalter of S.
 Germanus in Calmet, which has, imperfectum tuum viderunt oculi mei.
 Viger renders it thus: quod ex tuis operibus imperfectum adhuc et
 impolitum videbatur, oculi tandem mei perviderunt; i.e., Thy works,
 which till now seemed imperfect and unfinished, my eyes have at length
 discerned clearly; to wit, because being now penetrated by greater
 light from Thee, they have ceased to be dim-sighted. See Viger's note
 in Migne.

 [652] [The reproduction of all this outworn nonsense in our age claims
 for itself the credit of progressive science. It has had its day, and
 its destiny is to be speedily wiped out by the next school of thinkers.
 Meanwhile let the believer's answer be found in Isa. xxxvii. 22, 23.]

 [653] arrhuthmous.

 III. A Refutation on the Ground of the Constitution of the Universe.

 Or who can bear to hear it maintained, that this mighty habitation,
 which is constituted of heaven and earth, and which is called "Cosmos"
 on account of the magnitude and the plenitude of the wisdom which has
 been brought to bear upon it, has been established in all its order and
 beauty by those atoms which hold their course devoid of order and
 beauty, and that that same state of disorder has grown into this true
 Cosmos, Order? Or who can believe that those regular movements and
 courses are the products of a certain unregulated impetus? Or who can
 allow that the perfect concord subsisting among the celestial bodies
 derives its harmony from instruments destitute both of concord and
 harmony? Or, again, if there is but one and the same substance [654] in
 all things, and if there is the same incorruptible nature [655] in
 all,--the only elements of difference being, as they aver, size and
 figure,--how comes it that there are some bodies divine and perfect,
 [656] and eternal, [657] as they would phrase it, or lasting, [658] as
 some one may prefer to express it; and among these some that are
 visible and others that are invisible,--the visible including such as
 sun, and moon, and stars, and earth, and water; and the invisible
 including gods, and demons, and spirits? For the existence of such they
 cannot possibly deny however desirous to do so. And again, there are
 other objects that are long-lived, both animals and plants. As to
 animals, there are, for example, among birds, as they say, the eagle,
 the raven, and the phoenix; and among creatures living on land, there
 are the stag, and the elephant, and the dragon; and among aquatic
 creatures there are the whales, and such like monsters of the deep. And
 as to trees, there are the palm, and the oak, and the persea; [659] and
 among trees, too, there are some that are evergreens, of which kind
 fourteen have been reckoned up by some one; and there are others that
 only bloom for a certain season, and then shed their leaves. And there
 are other objects, again--which indeed constitute the vast mass of all
 which either grow or are begotten--that have an early death and a brief
 life. And among these is man himself, as a certain holy scripture says
 of him: "Man that is born of woman is of few days." [660] Well, but I
 suppose they will reply that the varying conjunctions of the atoms
 account fully for differences [661] so great in the matter of duration.
 For it is maintained that there are some things that are compressed
 together by them, and firmly interlaced, so that they become closely
 compacted bodies, and consequently exceedingly hard to break up; while
 there are others in which more or less the conjunction of the atoms is
 of a looser and weaker nature, so that either quickly or after some
 time they separate themselves from their orderly constitution. And,
 again, there are some bodies made up of atoms of a definite kind and a
 certain common figure, while there are others made up of diverse atoms
 diversely disposed. But who, then, is the sagacious discriminator,
 [662] that brings certain atoms into collocation, and separates others;
 and marshals some in such wise as to form the sun, and others in such a
 way as to originate the moon, and adapts all in natural fitness, and in
 accordance with the proper constitution of each star? For surely
 neither would those solar atoms, with their peculiar size and kind, and
 with their special mode of collocation, ever have reduced themselves so
 as to effect the production of a moon; nor, on the other hand, would
 the conjunctions of these lunar atoms ever have developed into a sun.
 And as certainly neither would Arcturus, resplendent as he is, ever
 boast his having the atoms possessed by Lucifer, nor would the Pleiades
 glory in being constituted of those of Orion. For well has Paul
 expressed the distinction when he says: "There is one glory of the sun,
 and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one
 star differeth from another star in glory." [663] And if the coalition
 effected among them has been an unintelligent one, as is the case with
 soulless [664] objects, then they must needs have had some sagacious
 artificer; and if their union has been one without the determination of
 will, and only of necessity, as is the case with irrational objects,
 then some skilful leader [665] must have brought them together and
 taken them under his charge. And if they have linked themselves
 together spontaneously, for a spontaneous work, then some admirable
 architect must have apportioned their work for them, and assumed the
 superintendence among them; or there must have been one to do with them
 as the general does who loves order and discipline, and who does not
 leave his army in an irregular condition, or suffer all things to go on
 confusedly, but marshals the cavalry in their proper succession, and
 disposes the heavy-armed infantry in their due array, and the
 javelin-men by themselves, and the archers separately, and the slingers
 in like manner, and sets each force in its appropriate position, in
 order that all those equipped in the same way may engage together. But
 if these teachers think that this illustration is but a joke, because I
 institute a comparison between very large bodies and very small, we may
 pass to the very smallest.

 Then we have what follows:--But if neither the word, nor the choice,
 nor the order of a ruler is laid upon them, and if by their own act
 they keep themselves right in the vast commotion of the stream in which
 they move, and convey themselves safely through the mighty uproar of
 the collisions, and if like atoms meet and group themselves with like,
 not as being brought together by God, according to the poet's fancy,
 but rather as naturally recognising the affinities subsisting between
 each other, then truly we have here a most marvellous democracy of
 atoms, wherein friends welcome and embrace friends, and all are eager
 to sojourn together in one domicile; while some by their own
 determination have rounded themselves off into that mighty luminary the
 sun, so as to make day; and others have formed themselves into many
 pyramids of blazing stars, it may be, so as to crown also the whole
 heavens; and others have reduced themselves into the circular figure,
 so as to impart a certain solidity to the ether, and arch it over, and
 constitute it a vast graduated ascent of luminaries, with this object
 also, that the various conventions of the commoner atoms may select
 settlements for themselves, and portion out the sky among them for
 their habitations and stations.

 Then, after certain other matters, the discourse proceeds thus:--But
 inconsiderate men do not see even things that are apparent, and
 certainly they are far from being cognisant of things that are
 unapparent. For they do not seem even to have any notion of those
 regulated risings and settings of the heavenly bodies,--those of the
 sun, with all their wondrous glory, no less than those of the others;
 nor do they appear to make due application of the aids furnished
 through these to men, such as the day that rises clear for man's work,
 and the night that overshadows earth for man's rest. "For man," it is
 said, "goeth forth unto his work, and to his labour, until the
 evening." [666] Neither do they consider that other revolution, by
 which the sun makes out for us determinate times, and convenient
 seasons, and regular successions, directed by those atoms of which it
 consists. But even though men like these--and miserable men they are,
 however they may believe themselves to be righteous--may choose not to
 admit it, there is a mighty Lord that made the sun, and gave it the
 impetus [667] for its course by His words. O ye blind ones, do these
 atoms of yours bring you the winter season and the rains, in order that
 the earth may yield food for you, and for all creatures living on it?
 Do they introduce summertime, too, in order that ye may gather their
 fruits from the trees for your enjoyment? And why, then, do ye not
 worship these atoms, and offer sacrifices to them as the guardians of
 earth's fruits? [668] Thankless surely are ye, in not setting solemnly
 apart for them even the most scanty first-fruits of that abundant
 bounty which ye receive from them.

 After a short break he proceeds thus:--Moreover, those stars which form
 a community so multitudinous and various, which these erratic and ever
 self-dispersing atoms have constituted, have marked off by a kind of
 covenant the tracts for their several possessions, portioning these out
 like colonies and governments, but without the presidency of any
 founder or house-master; and with pledged fealty and in peace they
 respect the laws of vicinity with their neighbours, and abstain from
 passing beyond the boundaries which they received at the outset, just
 as if they enjoyed the legislative administration of true princes in
 the atoms. Nevertheless these atoms exercise no rule. For how could
 these, that are themselves nothing, do that? But listen to the divine
 oracles: "The works of the Lord are in judgment; from the beginning,
 and from His making of them, He disposed the parts thereof. He
 garnished His works for ever, and their principles [669] unto their
 generations." [670]

 Again, after a little, he proceeds thus:--Or what phalanx ever
 traversed the plain in such perfect order, no trooper outmarching the
 others, or falling out of rank, or obstructing the course, or suffering
 himself to be distanced by his comrades in the array, as is the case
 with that steady advance in regular file, as it were, and with
 close-set shields, which is presented by this serried and unbroken and
 undisturbed and unobstructed progress of the hosts of the stars? Albeit
 by side inclinations and flank movements certain of their revolutions
 become less clear. Yet, however that may be, they assuredly always keep
 their appointed periods, and again bear onward determinately to the
 positions from which they have severally risen, as if they made that
 their deliberate study. Wherefore let these notable anatomizers of
 atoms, [671] these dividers of the indivisible, these compounders of
 the uncompoundable, these adepts in the apprehension of the infinite,
 tell us whence comes this circular march and course of the heavenly
 bodies, in which it is not any single combination of atoms that merely
 chances all unexpectedly to swing itself round in this way; [672] but
 it is one vast circular choir that moves thus, ever equally and
 concordantly, and whirls in these orbits. And whence comes it that this
 mighty multitude of fellow-travellers, all unmarshalled by any captain,
 all ungifted with any determination of will, and all unendowed with any
 knowledge of each other, have nevertheless held their course in perfect
 harmony? Surely, well has the prophet ranked this matter among things
 which are impossible and undemonstrable,--namely, that two strangers
 should walk together. For he says, "Shall two come to the same lodging
 unless they know each other?" [673]

 [654] ousias.

 [655] phuseos.

 [656] akerata.

 [657] aionia.

 [658] makraiona.

 [659] persea, a sacred tree of Egypt and Persia, the fruit of which
 grew from the stem.

 [660] Job xiv. 1.

 [661] The text gives diaphthoras, for which Viger suggests diaphoras.

 [662] philokrinon.

 [663] 1 Cor. xv. 41.

 [664] apsuchon.

 [665] agelarches.

 [666] Ps. civ. 23.

 [667] [Our author touches with sagacity this crux of theory: whence
 comes force, the origin and the perpetuation of impetus? Christianity
 has thus anticipated the defects of "modern science."]

 [668] tais epikarpois.

 [669] archas.

 [670] Ecclus. xvi. 26, 27.

 [671] ton atomon tomeis.

 [672] houto sphendonisthentos.

 [673] This sentence, which is quoted as from the Scriptures, is found
 nowhere there, at least verbatim et ad litteram. [Amos iii. 3.]

 IV. A Refutation of the Same on the Grounds of the Human Constitution.

 Further, those men understand neither themselves nor what is proper to
 themselves. For if any of the leaders in this impious doctrine only
 considered what manner of person he is himself, and whence he comes, he
 would surely be led to a wise decision, like one who has obtained
 understanding of himself, and would say, not to these atoms, but to his
 Father and Maker, "Thy hands have made me and fashioned me." [674] And
 he would take up, too, this wonderful account of his formation as it
 has been given by one of old: "Hast Thou not poured me out as milk, and
 curdled me as cheese? Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and
 hast fenced me with bones and sinews. Thou hast granted me life and
 favour, and Thy visitation hath preserved my spirit." [675] For of what
 quantity and of what origin were the atoms which the father of Epicurus
 gave forth from himself when he begat Epicurus? And how, when they were
 received within his mother's womb, did they coalesce, and take form and
 figure? and how were they put in motion and made to increase? And how
 did that little seed of generation draw together the many atoms that
 were to constitute Epicurus, and change some of them into skin and
 flesh for a covering, and make bone of others for erectness and
 strength, and form sinews of others for compact contexture? And how did
 it frame and adapt the many other members and parts--heart and bowels,
 and organs of sense, some within and some without--by which the body is
 made a thing of life? For of all these things there is not one either
 idle or useless: not even the meanest of them--the hair, or the nails,
 or such like--is so; but all have their service to do, and all their
 contribution to make, some of them to the soundness of bodily
 constitution, and others of them to beauty of appearance. For
 Providence cares not only for the useful, but also for the seasonable
 and beautiful. [676] Thus the hair is a kind of protection and covering
 for the whole head, and the beard is a seemly ornament for the
 philosopher. It was Providence, then, that formed the constitution of
 the whole body of man, in all its necessary parts, and imposed on all
 its members their due connection with each other, and measured out for
 them their liberal supplies from the universal resources. And the most
 prominent of these show clearly, even to the uninstructed, by the proof
 of personal experience, the value and service attaching to them: the
 head, for example, in the position of supremacy, and the senses set
 like a guard about the brain, as the ruler in the citadel; and the
 advancing eyes, and the reporting ears; and the taste which, as it
 were, is the tribute-gatherer; [677] and the smell, which tracks and
 searches out its objects: and the touch, which manipulates all put
 under it.

 Hence we shall only run over in a summary way, at present, some few of
 the works of an all-wise Providence; and after a little we shall, if
 God grant it, go over them more minutely, when we direct our discourse
 toward one who has the repute of greater learning. So, then, we have
 the ministry of the hands, by which all kinds of works are wrought, and
 all skilful professions practised, and which have all their various
 faculties furnished them, with a view to the discharge of one common
 function; and we have the shoulders, with their capacity for bearing
 burdens; and the fingers, with their power of grasping; and the elbows,
 with their faculty of bending, by which they can turn inwardly, upon
 the body, or take an outward inclination, so as to be able either to
 draw objects toward the body, or to thrust them away from it. We have
 also the service of the feet, by which the whole terrestrial creation
 is made to come under our power, the earth itself is traversed thereby,
 the sea is made navigable, the rivers are crossed, and intercourse is
 established for all with all things. The belly, too, is the storehouse
 of meats, with all its parts arranged in their proper collocations, so
 that it apportions for itself the right measure of aliment, and ejects
 what is over and above that. And so is it with all the other things by
 which manifestly the due administration of the constitution of man is
 wisely secured. [678] Of all these, the intelligent and the
 unintelligent alike enjoy the same use; but they have not the same
 comprehension of them. [679] For there are some who refer this whole
 economy to a power which they conceive to be a true divinity, [680] and
 which they apprehend as at once the highest intelligence in all things,
 and the best benefactor to themselves, believing that this economy is
 all the work of a wisdom and a might which are superior to every other,
 and in themselves truly divine. And there are others who aimlessly
 attribute this whole structure of most marvellous beauty to chance and
 fortuitous coincidence. And in addition to these, there are also
 certain physicians, who, having made a more effective examination into
 all these things, and having investigated with utmost accuracy the
 disposition of the inward parts in especial, have been struck with
 astonishment at the results of their inquiry, and have been led to
 deify nature itself. The notions of these men we shall review
 afterwards, as far as we may be able, though we may only touch the
 surface of the subject. [681] Meantime, to deal with this matter
 generally and summarily, let me ask who constructed this whole
 tabernacle of ours, so lofty, erect, graceful, sensitive, mobile,
 active, and apt for all things? Was it, as they say, the irrational
 multitude of atoms? Nay, these, by their conjunctions, could not mould
 even an image of clay, neither could they hew and polish a statue of
 stone; nor could they cast and finish an idol of silver or gold; but
 arts and handicrafts calculated for such operations have been
 discovered by men who fabricate these objects. [682] And if, even in
 these, representations and models cannot be made without the aid of
 wisdom, how can the genuine and original patterns of these copies have
 come into existence spontaneously? And whence have come the soul, and
 the intelligence, and the reason, which are born with the philosopher?
 Has he gathered these from those atoms which are destitute alike of
 soul, and intelligence, and reason? and has each of these atoms
 inspired him with some appropriate conception and notion? And are we to
 suppose that the wisdom of man was made up by these atoms, as the myth
 of Hesiod tells us that Pandora was fashioned by the gods? Then shall
 the Greeks have, to give up speaking of the various species of poetry,
 and music, and astronomy, and geometry, and all the other arts and
 sciences, as the inventions and instructions of the gods, and shall
 have to allow that these atoms are the only muses with skill and wisdom
 for all subjects. For this theogony, constructed of atoms by Epicurus,
 is indeed something extraneous to the infinite worlds of order, [683]
 and finds its refuge in the infinite disorder. [684]

 [674] Ps. cxix. 73.

 [675] Job x. 10-12. [The milky element (sperma) marvellously changed
 into flesh, and the embroidery of the human anatomy, are here admirably
 brought out. Compare Ps. cxxxix. 12-16; also p. 86, note 1, supra.]

 [676] [Eccles. iii. 11. Note the force of the word Cosmos. Coleridge's
 Aids to Reflection, p. 251, ed. New York, 1840. Also, Coleridge's fancy
 about the to kalon quasi kaloun.

 [677] edode osper phorologousa.

 [678] The text is, kai ta alla di' hoson emphanos he dioikesis tes
 anthropeiou memechanetai dianomes. Viger proposes diamones for
 dianomes, and renders the whole thus: "ac cætera quorum vi humanæ
 firmitatis et conservationis ratio continetur."

 [679] The text is, hon homoios tois aphrosin echontes hoi sophoi ten
 krisin, ouk ischousi ten gnosin. We adopt Viger's suggestion, and read
 chresin for krisin.

 [680] We read, with Viger, theoteta for atheoteta. The text gives hoi
 men gar eis hen an oiethosin atheoteta, etc., which might possibly mean
 something like this: There are some who refer the whole economy to a
 power which these (others) may deem to be no divinity (but which is)
 the highest intelligence in all things, and the best benefactor, etc.
 Or the sense might be = There are some who refer this most intelligent
 and beneficent economy to a power which they deem to be no divinity,
 though they believe the same economy to be the work of a wisdom, etc.

 [681] The text is, hemeis de husteron hos an oioi te genometha, kan
 epipoles, anatheoresomen. Viger renders it thus: "Nos eam postea,
 jejune fortassis et exiliter, ut pro facultate nostra, prosequemur." He
 proposes, however, to read epi pollois (sc. rhemasi or logois) for
 epipoles.

 [682] The text is, cheirourgiai touton hup' anthropon heurentai
 somatourgoe. Viger proposes somatourgoi, "handicrafts for the
 construction of such bodies have been discovered by men."

 [683] kosmon. [See note 6, p. 88, supra.]

 [684] akosmian.

 V. That to Work is Not a Matter of Pain and Weariness to God.

 Now to work, and administer, and do good, and exercise care, and such
 like actions, may perhaps be hard tasks for the idle, and silly, and
 weak, and wicked; in whose number truly Epicurus reckons himself, when
 he propounds such notions about the gods. But to the earnest, and
 powerful, and intelligent, and prudent, such as philosophers ought to
 be--and how much more so, therefore, the gods!--these things are not
 only not disagreeable and irksome, but ever the most delightful, and by
 far the most welcome of all. To persons of this character, negligence
 and procrastination in the doing of what is good are a reproach, as the
 poet admonishes them in these words of counsel:--

 "Delay not aught till the morrow." [685]

 And then he adds this further sentence of threatening:--

 "The lazy procrastinator is ever wrestling with miseries." [686]

 And the prophet teaches us the same lesson in a more solemn fashion,
 and declares that deeds done according to the standard of virtue are
 truly worthy of God, [687] and that the man who gives no heed to these
 is accursed: "For cursed be he that doeth the works of the Lord
 carelessly." [688] Moreover, those who are unversed in any art, and
 unable to prosecute it perfectly, feel it to be wearisome when they
 make their first attempts in it, just by reason of the novelty [689] of
 their experience, and their want of practice in the works. But those,
 on the other hand, who have made some advance, and much more those who
 are perfectly trained in the art, accomplish easily and successfully
 the objects of their labours, and have great pleasure in the work, and
 would choose rather thus, in the discharge of the pursuits to which
 they are accustomed, to finish and carry perfectly out what their
 efforts aim at, than to be made masters of all those things which are
 reckoned advantageous among men. Yea, Democritus himself, as it is
 reported, averred that he would prefer the discovery of one true cause
 to being put in possession of the kingdom of Persia. And that was the
 declaration of a man who had only a vain and groundless conception of
 the causes of things, [690] inasmuch as he started with an unfounded
 principle, and an erroneous hypothesis, and did not discern the real
 root and the common law of necessity in the constitution of natural
 things, and held as the greatest wisdom the apprehension of things that
 come about simply in an unintelligent and random way, and set up chance
 [691] as the mistress and queen of things universal, and even things
 divine, and endeavoured to demonstrate that all things happen by the
 determination of the same, although at the same time he kept it outside
 the sphere of the life of men, and convicted those of senselessness who
 worshipped it. At any rate, at the very beginning of his Precepts [692]
 he speaks thus: "Men have made an image [693] of chance, as a cover
 [694] for their own lack of knowledge. For intellect and chance are in
 their very nature antagonistic to each other. [695] And men have
 maintained that this greatest adversary to intelligence is its
 sovereign. Yea, rather, they completely subvert and do away with the
 one, while they establish the other in its place. For they do not
 celebrate intelligence as the fortunate, [696] but they laud chance
 [697] as the most intelligent." [698] Moreover, those who attend to
 things conducing to the good of life, take special pleasure in what
 serves the interests of those of the same race with themselves, and
 seek the recompense of praise and glory in return for labours
 undertaken in behalf of the general good; while some exert themselves
 as purveyors of ways and means, [699] others as magistrates, others as
 physicians, others as statesmen; and even philosophers pride themselves
 greatly in their efforts after the education of men. Will, then,
 Epicurus or Democritus be bold enough to assert that in the exertion of
 philosophizing they only cause distress to themselves? Nay, rather they
 will reckon this a pleasure of mind second to none. For even though
 they maintain the opinion that the good is pleasure, they will be
 ashamed to deny that philosophizing is the greater pleasure to them.
 [700] But as to the gods, of whom the poets among them sing that they
 are the "bestowers of good gifts," [701] these philosophers scoffingly
 celebrate them in strains like these: "The gods are neither the
 bestowers nor the sharers in any good thing." And in what manner,
 forsooth, can they demonstrate that there are gods at all, when they
 neither perceive their presence, nor discern them as the doers of
 aught, wherein, indeed, they resemble those who, in their admiration
 and wonder at the sun and the moon and the stars, have held these to
 have been named gods, [702] from their running [703] such courses:
 when, further, they do not attribute to them any function or power of
 operation, [704] so as to hold them gods [705] from their constituting,
 [706] that is, from their making objects, [707] for thereby in all
 truth the one maker and operator of all things must be God: and when,
 in fine, they do not set forth any administration, or judgment, or
 beneficence of theirs in relation to men, so that we might be bound
 either by fear or by reverence to worship them? Has Epicurus then been
 able, forsooth, to see beyond this world, and to overpass the precincts
 of heaven? or has he gone forth by some secret gates known to himself
 alone, and thus obtained sight of the gods in the void? [708] and,
 deeming them blessed in their full felicity, and then becoming himself
 a passionate aspirant after such pleasure, and an ardent scholar in
 that life which they pursue in the void, does he now call upon all to
 participate in this felicity, and urge them thus to make themselves
 like the gods, preparing [709] as their true symposium of blessedness
 neither heaven nor Olympus, as the poets feign, but the sheer void, and
 setting before them the ambrosia of atoms, [710] and pledging them in
 [711] nectar made of the same? However, in matters which have no
 relation to us, he introduces into his books a myriad oaths and solemn
 asseverations, swearing constantly both negatively and affirmatively by
 Jove, and making those whom he meets, and with whom he discusses his
 doctrines, swear also by the gods, not certainly that he fears them
 himself, or has any dread of perjury, but that he pronounces all this
 to be vain, and false, and idle, and unintelligible, and uses it simply
 as a kind of accompaniment to his words, just as he might also clear
 his throat, or spit, or twist his face, or move his hand. So completely
 senseless and empty a pretence was this whole matter of the naming of
 the gods, in his estimation. But this is also a very patent fact, that,
 being in fear of the Athenians after (the warning of) the death of
 Socrates, and being desirous of preventing his being taken for what he
 really was--an atheist--the subtle charlatan invented for them certain
 empty shadows of unsubstantial gods. But never surely did he look up to
 heaven with eyes of true intelligence, so as to hear the clear voice
 from above, which another attentive spectator did hear, and of which he
 testified when he said, "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
 firmament showeth His handiwork." [712] And never surely did he look
 down upon the world's surface with due reflection; for then would he
 have learned that "the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord" [713]
 and that "the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof;" [714] and
 that, as we also read, "After this the Lord looked upon the earth, and
 filled it with His blessings. With all manner of living things hath He
 covered the face thereof." [715] And if these men are not hopelessly
 blinded, let them but survey the vast wealth and variety of living
 creatures, land animals, and winged creatures, and aquatic; and let
 them understand then that the declaration made by the Lord on the
 occasion of His judgment of all things [716] is true: "And all things,
 in accordance with His command, appeared good." [717]

 [685] Hesiod's Works and Days, v. 408.

 [686] Ibid., v. 411.

 [687] theoprepe.

 [688] amelos. Jer. xlviii. 10.

 [689] The text gives, dia to tes peiras alethes. We adopt Viger's
 emendation, aethes.

 [690] ["Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas." But see Hippolytus
 (vol. v.), and compare Clement, vol. ii. pp. 565-567, this series.]

 [691] tuchen.

 [692] hupothekon.

 [693] eidolon.

 [694] prophasin.

 [695] phusei gar gnome tuche machetai. Viger refers to the parallel in
 Tullius, pro Marcello, sec. 7: "Nunquam temeritas cum sapientia
 commiscetur, nec ad consilium casus admittitur."

 [696] eutuche.

 [697] Fortune, tuchen.

 [698] emphronestaten.

 [699] trephontes.

 [700] The text gives, hedu on autois einai to philosophein. Viger
 suggests hedion for hedu on.

 [701] doteras eaon. See Homer, Odyssey, viii. 325 and 335.

 [702] theous.

 [703] dia to theein.

 [704] demiourgian autois e kataskeuen.

 [705] theopoiesosin.

 [706] ek tou theinai.

 [707] poiesai.

 [708] The text gives, ohus en to keno kateide theous. Viger proposes
 tous for hous.

 [709] sunkroton.

 [710] For atomon Viger suggests atmon, "of vapours."

 [711] Or, giving them to drink.

 [712] Ps. xix. 1.

 [713] Ps. xxxiii. 5.

 [714] Ps. xxiv. 1.

 [715] Ecclus. xvi. 29, 30.

 [716] The text is, epi te panton krisei. Viger suggests ktisei, "at the
 creation of all things."

 [717] The quotation runs thus: kai panta kata ten autou prostaxin
 pephene kala. Eusebius adds the remark here: "These passages have been
 culled by me out of a very large number composed against Epicurus by
 Dionysius, a bishop of our own time." [Among the many excellent works
 which have appeared against the "hopelessly blinded" Epicureans of this
 age, let me note Darwinism tested by Language, by E. Bateman, M.D.
 London, Rivingtons, 1877.]

 III.--From the Books Against Sabellius. [718] On the Notion that Matter
 is Ungenerated. [719]

 ------------------------

 These certainly are not to be deemed pious who hold that matter is
 ungenerated, while they allow, indeed, that it is brought under the
 hand of God so far as its arrangement and regulation are concerned; for
 they do admit that, being naturally passive [720] and pliable, it
 yields readily to the alterations impressed upon it by God. It is for
 them, however, to show us plainly how it can possibly be that the like
 and the unlike should be predicated as subsisting together in God and
 matter. For it becomes necessary thus to think of one as a superior to
 either, and that is a thought which cannot legitimately be entertained
 with regard to God. For if there is this defect of generation which is
 said to be the thing like in both, and if there is this point of
 difference which is conceived of besides in the two, whence has this
 arisen in them? If, indeed, God is the ungenerated, and if this defect
 of generation is, as we may say, His very essence, then matter cannot
 be ungenerated; for God and matter are not one and the same. But if
 each subsists properly and independently--namely, God and matter--and
 if the defect of generation also belongs to both, then it is evident
 that there is something different from each, and older and higher than
 both. But the difference of their contrasted constitutions is
 completely subversive of the idea that these can subsist on an equality
 together, and more, that this one of the two--namely, matter--can
 subsist of itself. For then they will have to furnish an explanation of
 the fact that, though both are supposed to be ungenerated, God is
 nevertheless impassible, immutable, imperturbable, energetic; while
 matter is the opposite, impressible, mutable, variable, alterable. And
 now, how can these properties harmoniously co-exist and unite? Is it
 that God has adapted Himself to the nature of the matter, and thus has
 skilfully wrought it? But it would be absurd to suppose that God works
 in gold, as men are wont to do, or hews or polishes stone, or puts His
 hand to any of the other arts by which different kinds of matter are
 made capable of receiving form and figure. But if, on the other hand,
 He has fashioned matter according to His own will, and after the
 dictates of His own wisdom, impressing upon it the rich and manifold
 forms produced by His own operation, then is this account of ours one
 both good and true, and still further one that establishes the position
 that the ungenerated God is the hypostasis (the life and foundation) of
 all things in the universe. For with this fact of the defect of
 generation it conjoins the proper mode of His being. Much, indeed,
 might be said in confutation of these teachers, but that is not what is
 before us at present. And if they are put alongside the most impious
 polytheists, [721] these will seem the more pious in their speech.

 [718] In Eusebius, Præpar. Evangel., book vii. ch. 19.

 [719] Eusebius introduces this extract thus: "And I shall adduce the
 words of those who have most thoroughly examined the dogma before us,
 and first of all Dionysius indeed, who, in the first book of his
 Exercitations against Sabellius, writes in these terms on the subject
 in hand." [Note the primary position of our author in the refutation of
 Sabellianism, and see (vol. v.) the story of Callistus.]

 [720] patheten.

 [721] pros tous atheotatous polutheous.

 IV.--Epistle to Dionysius Bishop of Rome. [722]

 ------------------------

 From the First Book.

 1. There certainly was not a time when God was not the Father. [723]

 2. Neither, indeed, as though He had not brought forth these things,
 did God afterwards beget the Son, but because the Son has existence not
 from Himself, but from the Father.

 And after a few words he says of the Son Himself:--

 3. Being the brightness of the eternal Light, He Himself also is
 absolutely eternal. For since light is always in existence, it is
 manifest that its brightness also exists, because light is perceived to
 exist from the fact that it shines, and it is impossible that light
 should not shine. And let us once more come to illustrations. If the
 sun exists, there is also day; if nothing of this be manifest, it is
 impossible that the sun should be there. If then the sun were eternal,
 the day would never end; but now, for such is not really the state of
 the case, the day begins with the beginning of the sun, and ends with
 its ending. But God is the eternal Light, which has neither had a
 beginning, nor shall ever fail. Therefore the eternal brightness shines
 forth before Him, and co-exists with Him, in that, existing without a
 beginning, and always begotten, He always shines before Him; and He is
 that Wisdom which says, "I was that wherein He delighted, and I was
 daily His delight before His face at all times." [724]

 And a little after he thus pursues his discourse from the same point:--

 4. Since, therefore, the Father is eternal, the Son also is eternal,
 Light of Light. For where there is the begetter, there is also the
 offspring. And if there is no offspring, how and of what can He be the
 begetter? But both are, and always are. Since, then, God is the Light,
 Christ is the Brightness. And since He is a Spirit--for says He, "God
 is a Spirit" [725] --fittingly again is Christ called Breath; for "He,"
 [726] saith He, "is the breath of God's power." [727]

 And again he says:--

 5. Moreover, the Son alone, always co-existing with the Father, and
 filled with Him who is, Himself also is, since He is of the Father.

 [722] Fragments of a second epistle of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria,
 or of the treatise which was inscribed the "Elenchus et Apologia." [A
 former epistle was written when Dionysius (of Rome) was a presbyter.]

 [723] And in what follows (says Athanasius) he professes that Christ is
 always, as being the Word, and the Wisdom, and the Power.

 [724] Prov. viii. 30.

 [725] John iv. 24.

 [726] Scil. Wisdom.

 [727] Wisd. vii. 25.

 From the Same First Book.

 6. But when I spoke of things created, and certain works to be
 considered, I hastily put forward illustrations of such things, as it
 were little appropriate, when I said neither is the plant the same as
 the husbandman, nor the boat the same as the boatbuilder. [728] But
 then I lingered rather upon things suitable and more adapted to the
 nature of the thing, and I unfolded in many words, by various carefully
 considered arguments, what things were more true; which things,
 moreover, I have set forth to you in another letter. And in these
 things I have also proved the falsehood of the charge which they bring
 against me--to wit, that I do not maintain that Christ is
 consubstantial with God. For although I say that I have never either
 found or read this word in the sacred Scriptures, yet other reasonings,
 which I immediately subjoined, are in no wise discrepant from this
 view, because I brought forward as an illustration human offspring,
 which assuredly is of the same kind as the begetter; and I said that
 parents are absolutely distinguished from their children by the fact
 alone that they themselves are not their children, or that it would
 assuredly be a matter of necessity that there would neither be parents
 nor children. But, as I said before, I have not the letter in my
 possession, on account of the present condition of affairs; otherwise I
 would have sent you the very words that I then wrote, yea, and a copy
 of the whole letter, and I will send it if at any time I shall have the
 opportunity. I remember, further, that I added many similitudes from
 things kindred to one another. For I said that the plant, whether it
 grows up from seed or from a root, is different from that whence it
 sprouted, although it is absolutely of the same nature; and similarly,
 that a river flowing from a spring takes another form and name: for
 that neither is the spring called the river, nor the river the spring,
 but that these are two things, and that the spring indeed is, as it
 were, the father, while the river is the water from the spring. But
 they feign that they do not see these things and the like to them which
 are written, as if they were blind; but they endeavour to assail me
 from a distance with expressions too carelessly used, as if they were
 stones, not observing that on things of which they are ignorant, and
 which require interpretation to be understood, illustrations that are
 not only remote, but even contrary, will often throw light.

 [728] From Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 18. [See remarks on
 inevitable discrepancies of language and figurative illustrations at
 this formative period, vol. iv. p. 223.]

 From the Same First Book.

 7. It was said above that God is the spring of all good things, but the
 Son was called the river flowing from Him; because the word is an
 emanation of the mind, and--to speak after human fashion--is emitted
 from the heart by the mouth. But the mind which springs forth by the
 tongue is different from the word which exists in the heart. For this
 latter, after it has emitted the former, remains and is what it was
 before; but the mind sent forth flies away, and is carried everywhere
 around, and thus each is in each although one is from the other, and
 they are one although they are two. And it is thus that the Father and
 the Son are said to be one, and to be in one another.

 From the Second Book.

 8. The individual names uttered by me can neither be separated from one
 another, nor parted. [729] I spoke of the Father, and before I made
 mention of the Son I already signified Him in the Father. I added the
 Son; and the Father, even although I had not previously named Him, had
 already been absolutely comprehended in the Son. I added the Holy
 Spirit; but, at the same time, I conveyed under the name whence and by
 whom He proceeded. But they are ignorant that neither the Father, in
 that He is Father, can be separated from the Son, for that name is the
 evident ground of coherence and conjunction; nor can the Son be
 separated from the Father, for this word Father indicates association
 between them. And there is, moreover, evident a Spirit who can neither
 be disjoined from Him who sends, nor from Him who brings Him. How,
 then, should I who use such names think that these are absolutely
 divided and separated the one from the other?

 After a few words he adds:--

 9. Thus, indeed, we expand the indivisible Unity into a Trinity; and
 again we contract the Trinity, which cannot be diminished, into a
 Unity.

 [729] Ex Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 17.

 From the Same Second Book.

 10. But if any quibbler, from the fact that I said that God is the
 Maker and Creator of all things, thinks that I said that He is also
 Creator of Christ, let him observe that I first called Him Father, in
 which word the Son also is at the same time expressed. [730] For after
 I called the Father the Creator, I added, Neither is He the Father of
 those things whereof He is Creator, if He who begot is properly
 understood to be a Father (for we will consider the latitude of this
 word Father in what follows). Nor is a maker a father, if it is only a
 framer who is called a maker. For among the Greeks, they who are wise
 are said to be makers of their books. The apostle also says, "a doer
 (scil. maker) of the law." [731] Moreover, of matters of the heart, of
 which kind are virtue and vice, men are called doers (scil. makers);
 after which manner God said, "I expected that it should make judgment,
 but it made iniquity." [732]

 11. That neither must this saying be thus blamed; [733] for he says
 that he used the name of Maker on account of the flesh which the Word
 had assumed, and which certainly was made. But if any one should
 suspect that that had been said of the Word, even this also was to be
 heard without contentiousness. For as I do not think that the Word was
 a thing made, so I do not say that God was its Maker, but its Father.
 Yet still, if at any time, discoursing of the Son, I may have casually
 said that God was His Maker, even this mode of speaking would not be
 without defence. For the wise men among the Greeks call themselves the
 makers of their books, although the same are fathers of their books.
 Moreover, divine Scripture calls us makers of those motions which
 proceed from the heart, when it calls us doers of the law of judgment
 and of justice.

 [730] Ibid., 4. 20.

 [731] Rom. ii. 13; James iv. 12. The Greek word poietes meaning either
 maker or doer, causes the ambiguity here and below.

 [732] Isa. v. 7.

 [733] Athanasius adds (ut supra, 4. 21), that Dionysius gave various
 replies to those that blamed him for saying that God is the Maker of
 Christ, whereby he cleared himself.

 From the Same Second Book.

 12. In the beginning was the Word. [734] But that was not the Word
 which produced the Word. [735] For "the Word was with God." [736] The
 Lord is Wisdom; it was not therefore Wisdom that produced Wisdom; for
 "I was that" says He, "wherein He delighted." [737] Christ is truth;
 but "blessed," says He, "is the God of truth."

 [734] John i. 1. [For rhema, see vol. ii. p. 15, this series.]

 [735] Ex Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 25. [P. 94, notes 1, 2,
 infra.]

 [736] John i. 1. [For rhema, see vol. ii. p. 15, this series.]

 [737] Prov. viii. 30.

 From the Third Book.

 13. Life is begotten of life in the same way as the river has flowed
 forth from the spring, and the brilliant light is ignited from the
 inextinguishable light. [738]

 [738] Ex Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 18.

 From the Fourth Book.

 14. Even as our mind emits from itself a word, [739] --as says the
 prophet, "My heart hath uttered forth a good word," [740] --and each of
 the two is distinct the one from the other, and maintaining a peculiar
 place, and one that is distinguished from the other; since the former
 indeed abides and is stirred in the heart, while the latter has its
 place in the tongue and in the mouth. And yet they are not apart from
 one another, nor deprived of one another; neither is the mind without
 the word, nor is the word without the mind; but the mind makes the word
 and appears in the word, and the word exhibits the mind wherein it was
 made. And the mind indeed is, as it were, the word immanent, while the
 word is the mind breaking forth. [741] The mind passes into the word,
 and the word transmits the mind to the surrounding hearers; and thus
 the mind by means of the word takes its place in the souls of the
 hearers, entering in at the same time as the word. And indeed the mind
 is, as it were, the father of the word, existing in itself; but the
 word is as the son of the mind, and cannot be made before it nor
 without it, but exists with it, whence it has taken its seed and
 origin. In the same manner, also, the Almighty Father and Universal
 Mind has before all things the Son, the Word, and the discourse, [742]
 as the interpreter and messenger of Himself.

 [739] Ex Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 25. [P. 94, notes 1, 2,
 infra.]

 [740] Ps. xlv. 1.

 [741] Emanant. [P. 49, supra, and vol. iii. p. 299, this series.]

 [742] Sermonem. [So Tertullian, Sermo, vol. iii. p. 299, note 19.]

 About the Middle of the Treatise.

 15. If, from the fact that there are three hypostases, they say that
 they are divided, there are three whether they like it or no, or else
 let them get rid of the divine Trinity altogether. [743]

 [743] Ex Basilio, lib. de Spir. Sancto, chap. 29.

 And Again:

 For on this account after the Unity there is also the most divine
 Trinity. [744]

 [744] Ibid. cap. penult., p. 61.

 The Conclusion of the Entire Treatise.

 16. In accordance with all these things, the form, moreover, and rule
 being received from the elders who have lived before us, we also, with
 a voice in accordance with them, will both acquit ourselves of thanks
 to you, and of the letter which we are now writing. And to God the
 Father, and His Son our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Holy Spirit, be
 glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. [745]

 [745] Of the work itself Athanasius thus speaks: Finally, Dionysius
 complains that his accusers do not quote his opinions in their
 integrity, but mutilated, and that they do not speak out of a good
 conscience, but for evil inclination; and he says that they are like
 those who cavilled at the epistles of the blessed apostle. Certainly he
 meets the individual words of his accusers, and gives a solution to all
 their arguments; and as in those earlier writings of his he confuted
 Sabellius most evidently, so in these later ones he entirely declares
 his own pious faith. [Conf. Hermas, vol. iii. p. 15, note 7, with note
 2, supra.]

 V.--The Epistle to Bishop Basilides. [746]

 ------------------------

 Canon I.

 Dionysius to Basilides, my beloved son, and my brother, a
 fellow-minister with me in holy things, and an obedient servant of God,
 in the Lord greeting.

 You have sent to me, most faithful and accomplished son, in order to
 inquire what is the proper hour for bringing the fast to a close [747]
 on the day of Pentecost. [748] For you say that there are some of the
 brethren who hold that that should be done at cockcrow, and others who
 hold that it should be at nightfall. [749] For the brethren in Rome, as
 they say, wait for the cock; whereas, regarding those here, you told us
 that they would have it earlier. [750] And it is your anxious desire,
 accordingly, to have the hour presented accurately, and determined with
 perfect exactness, [751] which indeed is a matter of difficulty and
 uncertainty. However, it will be acknowledged cordially by all, that
 from the date of the resurrection of our Lord, those who up to that
 time have been humbling their souls with fastings, ought at once to
 begin their festal joy and gladness. But in what you have written to me
 you have made out very clearly, and with an intelligent understanding
 of the Holy Scriptures, that no very exact account seems to be offered
 in them of the hour at which He rose. For the evangelists have given
 different descriptions of the parties who came to the sepulchre one
 after another, [752] and all have declared that they found the Lord
 risen already. It was "in the end of the Sabbath," as Matthew has said;
 [753] it was "early, when it was yet dark," as John writes; [754] it
 was "very early in the morning," as Luke puts it; and it was "very
 early in the morning, at the rising of the sun," as Mark tells us. Thus
 no one has shown us clearly the exact time when He rose. It is
 admitted, however, that those who came to the sepulchre in the end of
 the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week,
 [755] found Him no longer lying in it. And let us not suppose that the
 evangelists disagree or contradict each other. But even although there
 may seem to be some small difficulty as to the subject of our inquiry,
 if they all agree that the light of the world, our Lord, rose on that
 one night, while they differ with respect to the hour, we may well seek
 with wise and faithful mind to harmonize their statements. The
 narrative by Matthew then, runs thus: "In the end of the Sabbath as it
 began to dawn toward the first day of the week, [756] came Mary
 Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the sepulchre. And, behold, there
 was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from
 heaven, and came and rolled back the stone, and sat upon it. And his
 countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow: and for
 fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men. And the
 angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye
 seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here; for He is risen, as He
 said." [757] Now this phrase "in the end" will be thought by some to
 signify, according to the common use [758] of the word, the evening of
 the Sabbath; while others, with a better perception of the fact, will
 say that it does not indicate that, but a late hour in the night, [759]
 as the phrase "in the end" [760] denotes slowness and length of time.
 Also because he speaks of night, and not of evening, he has added the
 words, "as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week." And the
 parties here did not come yet, as the others say, "bearing spices," but
 "to see the sepulchre;" and they discovered the occurrence of the
 earthquake, and the angel sitting upon the stone, and heard from him
 the declaration, "He is not here, He is risen." And to the same effect
 is the testimony of John. "The first day of the week," says he, "came
 Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and
 seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre." [761] Only, according
 to this "when it was yet dark," she had come in advance. [762] And Luke
 says: "They rested the Sabbath-day, according to the commandment. Now,
 upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they came
 unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared; and
 they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre." [763] This phrase
 "very early in the morning" [764] probably indicates the early dawn
 [765] of the first day of the week; and thus, when the Sabbath itself
 was wholly past, and also the whole night succeeding it, and when
 another day had begun, they came, bringing spices and myrrh, and then
 it became apparent that He had already risen long before. And Mark
 follows this, and says: "They had bought sweet spices, in order that
 they might come and anoint Him. And very early (in the morning), the
 first day of the week, they come unto the sepulchre at the rising of
 the sun." [766] For this evangelist also has used the term "very
 early," which is just the same as the "very early in the morning"
 employed by the former; and he has added, "at the rising of the sun."
 Thus they set out, and took their way first when it was "very early in
 the morning," or (as Mark says) when it was "very early;" but on the
 road, and by their stay at the sepulchre, they spent the time till it
 was sunrise. And then the young man clad in white said to them, "He is
 risen, He is not here." As the case stands thus, we make the following
 statement and explanation to those who seek an exact account of the
 specific hour, or half-hour, or quarter of an hour, at which it is
 proper to begin their rejoicing over our Lord's rising from the dead.
 Those who are too hasty, and give up even before midnight, [767] we
 reprehend as remiss and intemperate, and as almost breaking off from
 their course in their precipitation, [768] for it is a wise man's word,
 "That is not little in life which is within a little." And those who
 hold out and continue for a very long time, and persevere even on to
 the fourth watch, which is also the time at which our Saviour
 manifested Himself walking upon the sea to those who were then on the
 deep, we receive as noble and laborious disciples. On those, again, who
 pause and refresh themselves in the course as they are moved or as they
 are able, let us not press very hard: [769] for all do not carry out
 the six days of fasting [770] either equally or alike; but some pass
 even all the days as a fast, remaining without food through the whole;
 while others take but two, and others three, and others four, and
 others not even one. And to those who have laboured painfully through
 these protracted fasts. and have thereafter become exhausted and
 well-nigh undone, pardon ought to be extended if they are somewhat
 precipitate in taking food. But if there are any who not only decline
 such protracted fasting, but refuse at the first to fast at all, and
 rather indulge themselves luxuriously during the first four days, and
 then when they reach the last two days--viz., the preparation and the
 Sabbath--fast with due rigour during these, and these alone, and think
 that they do something grand and brilliant if they hold out till the
 morning, I cannot think that they have gone through the time on equal
 terms with those who have been practising the same during several days
 before. This is the counsel which, in accordance with my apprehension
 of the question, I have offered you in writing on these matters. [771]

 [746] Containing explanations which were given as answers to questions
 proposed by that bishop on various topics, and which have been received
 as canons. [The Scholium, p. 79, is transposed from here.]

 [747] aponestizesthai dei. Gentianus Hervetus renders this by
 jejunandus sit dies Paschæ; and thus he translates the word by
 jejunare, "to fast," wherever it occurs, whereas it rather means
 always, jejunium solvere, "to have done fasting." In this sense the
 word is used in the Apostolic Constitutions repeatedly: see book v.
 chap. 12, 18, etc. It occurs in the same sense in the 89th Canon of the
 Concilium Trullanum. The usage must evidently be the same here: so that
 it does not mean, What is the proper hour for fasting on the day of
 Pentecost? but, What is the hour at which the ante-paschal fast ought
 to be terminated--whether on the evening preceding the paschal festival
 itself, or at cockcrowing, or at another time?--Gall. See also the very
 full article in Suicer, s.v.

 [748] I give the beginning of this epistle of Dionysius of Alexandria
 also as it is found in not a few manuscripts, viz., epesteilas moi...te
 tou pascha perilusei,--the common reading being, ten tou pascha
 hemeran. And the perilusis tou pascha denotes the close of the paschal
 fast, as Eusebius (Hist. Eccles. v. 23) uses the phrase tas ton asition
 epiluseis,--the verbs periluein, apoluein, epiluein, kataluein, being
 often used in this sense.--Cotelerius on the Apostolic Constitutions,
 v. 15.

 [749] aph' hesperas.

 [750] [Note this and the Nicene decision which made the Alexandrian
 bishop the authority concerning the paschal annually, vol. ii.
 Elucidation II. p. 343.]

 [751] panu memetremenen.

 [752] kata kairous enellagmenous.

 [753] Matt. xxviii. 1.

 [754] John xx. 1.

 [755] te epiphoskouse mia Sabbaton.

 [756] te epiphoskouse eis mian Sabbaton.

 [757] Matt. xxviii. 1-6.

 [758] koinoteta.

 [759] nukta batheian.

 [760] opse, late.

 [761] John xx. 1.

 [762] para touto...proeleluthei.

 [763] Luke xxiii. 56; xxiv. 1, 2.

 [764] orthrou batheos.

 [765] proupophainomenen auten eothinen emphanizei.

 [766] Mark xvi. 1, 2.

 [767] pro nuktos engus ede mesouses anientas.

 [768] hos par' oligon prokataluontas ton dromon.

 [769] [1 Tim. iv. 8. Mark the moderation of our author in contrast with
 superstition. But in our days the peril is one of an opposite kind.
 Contrast St. Paul, 2 Cor. xi. 27.]

 [770] That is, as Balsamon explains, the six days of the week of our
 Lord's passion.

 [771] To these canons are appended the comments of Balsamon and
 Zonaras, which it is not necessary to give here.

 Canon II.

 The question touching women in the time of their separation, whether it
 is proper for them when in such a condition to enter the house of God,
 I consider a superfluous inquiry. For I do not think that, if they are
 believing and pious women, they will themselves be rash enough in such
 a condition either to approach the holy table or to touch the body and
 blood of the Lord. Certainly the woman who had the issue of blood of
 twelve years' standing did not touch the Lord Himself, but only the hem
 of His garment, with a view to her cure. [772] For to pray, however a
 person may be situated, and to remember the Lord, in whatever condition
 a person may be, and to offer up petitions for the obtaining of help,
 are exercises altogether blameless. But the individual who is not
 perfectly pure both in soul and in body, shall be interdicted from
 approaching the holy of holies.

 [772] Matt. ix. 20; Luke viii. 43.

 Canon III.

 Moreover, those who are competent, and who are advanced in years, ought
 to be judges of themselves in these matters. For that it is proper to
 abstain from each other by consent, in order that they may be free for
 a season to give themselves to prayer, and then come together again,
 they have heard from Paul in his epistle. [773]

 [773] Referring to the relations of marriage, dealt with in 1 Cor. vii.
 5, etc.

 Canon IV.

 As to those who are overtaken by an involuntary flux in the night-time,
 let such follow the testimony of their own conscience, and consider
 themselves as to whether they are doubtfully minded [774] in this
 matter or not. And he that doubteth in the matter of meats, the apostle
 tells us, "is damned if he eat." [775] In these things, therefore, let
 every one who approaches God be of a good conscience, and of a proper
 confidence, so far as his own judgment is concerned. And, indeed, it is
 in order to show your regard for us (for you are not ignorant,
 beloved,) that you have proposed these questions to us, making us of
 one mind, as indeed we are, and of one spirit with yourself. And I, for
 my part, have thus set forth my opinions in public, not as a teacher,
 but only as it becomes us with all simplicity to confer with each
 other. And when you have examined this opinion of mine, my most
 intelligent son, you will write back to me your notion of these
 matters, and let me know whatever may seem to you to be just and
 preferable, and whether you approve of my judgment in these things.
 [776] That it may fare well with you, my beloved son, as you minister
 to the Lord in peace, is my prayer.

 [774] diakrinontai.

 [775] Rom. xiv. 23. [Gr. katakekritai = is condemned = self-condemned.
 Wordsworth cites Cicero, De Officiis, i. 30.]

 [776] [The entire absence of despotic authority in these episcopal
 teachings is to be noted. 2 Cor. i. 24.]

 Part II.--Containing Epistles, or Fragments of Epistles.

 ------------------------

 Epistle I.--To Domitius and Didymus. [777]

 ------------------------

 1. But it would be a superfluous task for me to mention by name our
 (martyr) friends, who are numerous and at the same time unknown to you.
 Only understand that they include men and women, both young men and
 old, both maidens and aged matrons, both soldiers and private
 citizens,--every class and every age, of whom some have suffered by
 stripes and fire, and some by the sword, and have won the victory and
 received their crowns. In the case of others, however, even a very long
 lifetime has not proved sufficient to secure their appearance as men
 acceptable to the Lord; as indeed in my own case too, that sufficient
 time has not shown itself up to the present. Wherefore He has preserved
 me for another convenient season, of which He knows Himself, as He
 says: "In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of
 salvation have I helped thee." [778]

 2. Since, however, you have been inquiring [779] about what has
 befallen us, and wish to be informed as to how we have fared, you have
 got a full report of our fortunes; how when we--that is to say, Gains,
 and myself, and Faustus, and Peter, and Paul--were led off as prisoners
 by the centurion and the magistrates, [780] and the soldiers and other
 attendants accompanying them, there came upon us certain parties from
 Mareotis, who dragged us with them against our will, and though we were
 disinclined to follow them, and carried us away by force; [781] and how
 Gaius and Peter and myself have been separated from our other brethren,
 and shut up alone in a desert and sterile place in Libya, at a distance
 of three days' journey from Parætonium.

 3. And a little further on, he proceeds thus:--And they concealed
 themselves in the city, and secretly visited the brethren. I refer to
 the presbyters Maximus, Dioscorus, Demetrius, and Lucius. For Faustinus
 and Aquila, who are persons of greater prominence in the world, are
 wandering about in Egypt. I specify also the deacons who survived those
 who died in the sickness, [782] viz., Faustus, Eusebius, and Chæremon.
 And of Eusebius I speak as one whom the Lord strengthened from the
 beginning, and qualified for the task of discharging energetically the
 services due to the confessors who are in prison, and of executing the
 perilous office of dressing out and burying [783] the bodies of those
 perfected and blessed martyrs. For even up to the present day the
 governor does not cease to put to death, in a cruel manner, as I have
 already said, some of those who are brought before him; while he wears
 others out by torture, and wastes others away with imprisonment and
 bonds, commanding also that no one shall approach them and making
 strict scrutiny lest any one should be seen to do so. And nevertheless
 God imparts relief to the oppressed by the tender kindness and
 earnestness of the brethren.

 [777] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vii. 11.

 [778] Isa. xlix. 8.

 [779] Reading epeide punthanesthe, for which some codices give epei
 punthanesthai.

 [780] strategon. Christophorsonus would read strategou in the sense of
 commander. But the word is used here of the duumviri, or magistrates of
 Alexandria. And that the word strategos was used in this civil
 acceptation as well as in the common military application, we see by
 many examples in Athanasius, Ammianus Marcellinus, and others. Thus, as
 Valesius remarks, the soldiers (stratioton) here will be the band with
 the centurion, and the attendants (hupereton) will be the civil
 followers of the magistrates.

 [781] This happened in the first persecution under Decius, when
 Dionysius was carried off by the decision of the prefect Sabinus to
 Taposiris, as he informs us in his epistle to Germanus. Certainly any
 one who compares that epistle of Dionysius to Germanus with this one to
 Domitius, will have no doubt that he speaks of one and the same event
 in both. Hence Eusebius is in error in thinking that in this epistle of
 Dionysius to Domitius we have a narrative of the events relating to the
 persecution of Valerian,--a position which may easily be refuted from
 Dionysius himself. For in the persecution under Valerian, Dionysius was
 not carried off into exile under military custody, nor were there any
 men from Mareotis, who came and drove off the soldiers, and bore him
 away unwillingly, and set him at liberty again; nor had Dionysius on
 that occasion the presbyters Gaius and Faustus, and Peter and Paul,
 with him. All these things happened to Dionysius in that persecution
 which began a little before Decius obtained the empire, as he testifies
 himself in his epistle to Germanus. But in the persecution under
 Valerian, Dionysius was accompanied in exile by the presbyter Maximus,
 and the deacons Faustus, and Eusebius, and Chæremon, and a certain
 Roman cleric, as he tells us in the epistle to Germanus.--Valesius.

 [782] en te noso. Rufinus reads neso, and renders it, "But of the
 deacons, some died in the island after the pains of confession." But
 Dionysius refers to the pestilence which traversed the whole Roman
 world in the times of Gallus and Volusianus, as Eusebius in his
 Chroniconand others record. See Aurelius Victor. Dionysius makes
 mention of this sickness again in the paschal epistle to the
 Alexandrians, where he also speaks of the deacons who were cut off by
 that plague.--Vales.

 [783] peristolas ektelein. Christophorsonus renders it: "to prepare the
 linen cloths in which the bodies of the blessed martyrs who departed
 this life might be wrapped." In this Valesius thinks he errs by looking
 at the modern method of burial, whereas among the ancient Christians
 the custom was somewhat different, the bodies being dressed out in full
 attire, and that often at great cost, as Eusebius shows us in the case
 of Astyrius, in the Hist. Eccles., vii. 16. Yet Athanasius, in his Life
 of Antonius, has this sentence: "The Egyptians are accustomed to attend
 piously to the funerals of the bodies of the dead, and especially those
 of the holy martyrs, and to wrap them in linen cloths: they are not
 wont, however, to consign them to the earth, but to place them on
 couches, and keep them in private apartments."

 Epistle II.--To Novatus. [784]

 ------------------------

 Dionysius to Novatus [785] his brother, greeting. If you were carried
 on against your will, as you say, you will show that such has been the
 case by your voluntary retirement. For it would have been but dutiful
 to have suffered any kind of ill, so as to avoid rending the Church of
 God. And a martyrdom borne for the sake of preventing a division of the
 Church, would not have been more inglorious than one endured for
 refusing to worship idols; [786] nay, in my opinion at least, the
 former would have been a nobler thing than the latter. For in the one
 case a person gives such a testimony simply for his own individual
 soul, whereas in the other case he is a witness for the whole Church.
 And now, if you can persuade or constrain the brethren to come to be of
 one mind again, your uprightness will be superior to your error; and
 the latter will not be charged against you, while the former will be
 commended in you. But if you cannot prevail so far with your recusant
 brethren, see to it that you save your own soul. My wish is, that in
 the Lord you may fare well as you study peace.

 [784] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vi. 45.

 [785] Jerome, in his Catalogus, where he adduces the beginning of this
 epistle, gives Novatianus for Novatus. So in the Chronicon of Georgius
 Syncellus we have Dionusios Nauatiano. Rufinus' account appears to be
 that there were two such epistles,--one to Novatus, and another to
 Novatianus. The confounding of these two forms seems, however, to have
 been frequent among the Greeks. [See Lardner, Credib., sub voce Novat.
 Wordsworth thinks the Greeks shortened the name, on the grounds which
 Horace notes ad vocem "Equotuticum." Satires, I. v. 87.]

 [786] We read, with Gallandi, kai en ouk adoxutera tes heneken tou me
 idololatreusai (sic) ginomenes, he heneken tou me schisai marturia.
 This is substantially the reading of three Venetian codices, as also of
 Sophronius on Jerome's De vir. illustr., ch. 69, and Georgius Syncellus
 in the Chronogr., p. 374, and Nicephorus Callist., Hist. Eccles., vi.
 4. Pearson, in the Annales Cyprian., Num. x. p. 31, proposes thusai for
 schisai. Rufinus renders it: "et erat non inferior gloria sustinere
 martyrium ne scindatur ecclesia quam est illa ne idolis immoletur."

 Epistle III.--To Fabius, [787] Bishop of Antioch.

 ------------------------

 1. The persecution with us did not commence with the imperial edict,
 but preceded it by a whole year. And a certain prophet and poet, an
 enemy to this city, [788] whatever else he was, had previously roused
 and exasperated against us the masses of the heathen, inflaming them
 anew with the fires of their native superstition. Excited by him, and
 finding full liberty for the perpetration of wickedness, they reckoned
 this the only piety and service to their demons, [789] namely, our
 slaughter.

 2. First, then, they seized an old man of the name of Metras, and
 commanded him to utter words of impiety; and as he refused, they beat
 his body with clubs, and lacerated his face and eyes with sharp reeds,
 and then dragged him off to the suburbs and stoned him there. Next they
 carried off a woman named Quinta, who was a believer, to an idol
 temple, and compelled her to worship the idol; and when she turned away
 from it, and showed how she detested it, they bound her feet and
 dragged her through the whole city along the rough stone-paved streets,
 knocking her at the same time against the millstones, and scourging
 her, until they brought her to the same place, and stoned her also
 there. Then with one impulse they all rushed upon the houses of the
 God-fearing, and whatever pious persons any of them knew individually
 as neighbours, after these they hurried and bore them with them, and
 robbed and plundered them, setting aside the more valuable portions of
 their property for themselves, and scattering about the commoner
 articles, and such as were made of wood, and burning them on the roads,
 so that they made these parts present the spectacle of a city taken by
 the enemy. The brethren, however, simply gave way and withdrew, and,
 like those to whom Paul bears witness, [790] they took the spoiling of
 their goods with joy. And I know not that any of them--except possibly
 some solitary individual who may have chanced to fall into their
 hands--thus far has denied the Lord.

 3. But they also seized that most admirable virgin Apollonia, then in
 advanced life, and knocked out all her teeth, [791] and cut her jaws;
 and then kindling a fire before the city, they threatened to burn her
 alive unless she would repeat along with them their expressions of
 impiety. [792] And although she seemed to deprecate [793] her fate for
 a little, on being let go, she leaped eagerly into the fire and was
 consumed. They also laid hold of a certain Serapion in his own house;
 [794] and after torturing him with severe cruelties, and breaking all
 his limbs, they dashed him headlong from an upper storey to the ground.
 And there was no road, no thoroughfare, no lane even, where we could
 walk, whether by night or by day; for at all times and in every place
 they all kept crying out, that if any one should refuse to repeat their
 blasphemous expressions, he must be at once dragged off and burnt.
 These inflictions were carried rigorously on for a considerable time
 [795] in this manner. But when the insurrection and the civil war in
 due time overtook these wretched people, [796] that diverted their
 savage cruelty from us, and turned it against themselves. And we
 enjoyed a little breathing time, as long as leisure failed them for
 exercising their fury against us. [797]

 4. But speedily was the change from that more kindly reign [798]
 announced to us; and great was the terror of threatening that was now
 made to reach us. Already, indeed, the edict had arrived; and it was of
 such a tenor as almost perfectly to correspond with what was intimated
 to us beforetime by our Lord, setting before us the most dreadful
 horrors, so as, if that were possible, to cause the very elect to
 stumble. [799] All verily were greatly alarmed, and of the more notable
 there were some, and these a large number, who speedily accommodated
 themselves to the decree in fear; [800] others, who were engaged in the
 public service, were drawn into compliance by the very necessities of
 their official duties; [801] others were dragged on to it by their
 friends, and on being called by name approached the impure and unholy
 sacrifices; others yielded pale and trembling, as if they were not to
 offer sacrifice, but to be themselves the sacrifices and victims for
 the idols, so that they were jeered by the large multitude surrounding
 the scene, and made it plain to all that they were too cowardly either
 to face death or to offer the sacrifices. But there were others who
 hurried up to the altars with greater alacrity, stoutly asserting [802]
 that they had never been Christians at all before; of whom our Lord's
 prophetic declaration holds most true, that it will be hard for such to
 be saved. Of the rest, some followed one or other of these parties
 already mentioned; some fled, and some were seized. And of these, some
 went as far in keeping their faith as bonds and imprisonment; and
 certain persons among them endured imprisonment even for several days,
 and then after all abjured the faith before coming into the court of
 justice; while others, after holding out against the torture for a
 time, sank before the prospect of further sufferings. [803]

 5. But there were also others, stedfast and blessed pillars of the
 Lord, who, receiving strength from Himself, and obtaining power and
 vigour worthy of and commensurate with the force of the faith that was
 in themselves, have proved admirable witnesses for His kingdom. And of
 these the first was Julianus, a man suffering from gout, and able
 neither to stand nor to walk, who was arranged along with two other men
 who carried him. Of these two persons, the one immediately denied
 Christ; but the other, a person named Cronion, and surnamed Eunus, and
 together with him the aged Julianus himself, confessed the Lord, and
 were carried on camels through the whole city, which is, as you know, a
 very large one, and were scourged in that elevated position, and
 finally were consumed in a tremendous fire, while the whole populace
 surrounded them. And a certain soldier who stood by them when they were
 led away to execution, and who opposed the wanton insolence of the
 people, was pursued by the outcries they raised against him; and this
 most courageous soldier of God, Besas by name, was arranged; and after
 bearing himself most nobly in that mighty conflict on behalf of piety,
 he was beheaded. And another individual, who was by birth a Libyan, and
 who at once in name and in real blessedness was also a true Macar,
 [804] although much was tried by the judge to persuade him to make a
 denial, did not yield, and was consequently burned alive. And these
 were succeeded by Epimachus and Alexander, who, after a long time [805]
 spent in chains, and after suffering countless agonies and inflictions
 of the scraper [806] and the scourge, were also burnt to ashes in an
 immense fire.

 6. And along with these there were four women. Among them was
 Ammonarium, a pious virgin, who was tortured for a very long time by
 the judge in a most relentless manner, because she declared plainly
 from the first that she would utter none of the things which he
 commanded her to repeat; and after she had made good her profession she
 was led off to execution. The others were the most venerable and aged
 Mercuria, and Dionysia, who had been the mother of many children, and
 yet did not love her offspring better than her Lord. [807] These, when
 the governor was ashamed to subject them any further to profitless
 torments, and thus to see himself beaten by women, died by the sword,
 without more experience of tortures. For truly their champion
 Ammonarium had received tortures for them all.

 7. Heron also, and Ater, [808] and Isidorus [809] who were Egyptians,
 and along with them Dioscorus, a boy of about fifteen years of age,
 were delivered up. And though at first he, the judge, tried to deceive
 the youth with fair speeches, thinking he could easily seduce him, and
 then attempted also to compel him by force of tortures, fancying he
 might be made to yield without much difficulty in that way, Dioscorus
 neither submitted to his persuasions nor gave way to his terrors. And
 the rest, after their bodies had been lacerated in a most savage
 manner, and their stedfastness had nevertheless been maintained, he
 consigned also to the flames. But Dioscorus he dismissed, wondering at
 the distinguished appearance he had made in public, and at the extreme
 wisdom of the answers he gave to his interrogations, and declaring
 that, on account of his age, he granted him further time for
 repentance. And this most godly Dioscorus is with us at present,
 tarrying for a greater conflict and a more lengthened contest. A
 certain person of the name of Nemesion, too, who was also an Egyptian,
 was falsely accused of being a companion of robbers; and after he had
 cleared himself of this charge before the centurion, and proved it to
 be a most unnatural calumny, he was informed against as a Christian,
 and had to come as a prisoner before the governor. And that most
 unrighteous magistrate inflicted on him a punishment twice as severe as
 that to which the robbers were subjected, making him suffer both
 tortures and scourgings, and then consigning him to the fire between
 the robbers. Thus the blessed martyr was honoured after the pattern of
 Christ.

 8. There was also a body of soldiers, [810] including Ammon, and Zeno,
 and Ptolemy, and Ingenuus, and along with them an old man, Theophilus,
 who had taken up their position in a mass in front of the tribunal; and
 when a certain person was standing his trial as a Christian, and was
 already inclining to make a denial, these stood round about and ground
 their teeth, and made signs with their faces, and stretched out their
 hands, and made all manner of gestures with their bodies. And while the
 attention of all was directed to them, before any could lay hold of
 them, they ran quickly up to the bench of judgment [811] and declared
 themselves to be Christians, and made such an impression that the
 governor and his associates were filled with fear; and those who were
 under trial seemed to be most courageous in the prospect of what they
 were to suffer, while the judges themselves trembled. These, then, went
 with a high spirit from the tribunals, and exulted in their testimony,
 God Himself causing them to triumph gloriously. [812]

 9. Moreover, others in large numbers were torn asunder by the heathen
 throughout the cities and villages. Of one of these I shall give some
 account, as an example. Ischyrion served one of the rulers in the
 capacity of steward for stated wages. His employer ordered this man to
 offer sacrifice; and on his refusal to do so, he abused him. When he
 persisted in his non-compliance, his master treated him with contumely;
 and when he still held out, he took a huge stick and thrust it through
 his bowels and heart, and slew him. Why should I mention the multitudes
 of those who had to wander about in desert places and upon the
 mountains, and who were cut off by hunger, and thirst, and cold, and
 sickness, and robbers, and wild beasts? The survivors of such are the
 witnesses of their election and their victory. One circumstance,
 however, I shall subjoin as an illustration of these things. There was
 a certain very aged person of the name of Chæremon, bishop of the place
 called the city of the Nile. [813] He fled along with his partner to
 the Arabian mountain, [814] and never returned. The brethren, too, were
 unable to discover anything of them, although they made frequent
 search; and they never could find either the men themselves, or their
 bodies. Many were also carried off as slaves by the barbarous Saracens
 [815] to that same Arabian mount. Some of these were ransomed with
 difficulty, and only by paying a great sum of money; others of them
 have not been ransomed to this day. And these facts I have related,
 brother, not without a purpose, but in order that you may know how many
 and how terrible are the ills that have befallen us; which troubles
 also will be best understood by those who have had most experience of
 them.

 10. Those sainted martyrs, accordingly, who were once with us, and who
 now are seated with Christ, [816] and are sharers in His kingdom, and
 partakers with Him in His judgment [817] and who act as His judicial
 assessors, [818] received there certain of the brethren who had fallen
 away, and who had become chargeable with sacrificing to the idols. And
 as they saw that the conversion and repentance of such might be
 acceptable to Him who desires not at all the death of the sinner, [819]
 but rather his repentance, they proved their sincerity, and received
 them, and brought them together again, and assembled with them, and had
 fellowship with them in their prayers and at their festivals. [820]
 What advice then, brethren, do you give us as regards these? What
 should we do? Are we to stand forth and act with the decision and
 judgment which those (martyrs) formed, and to observe the same
 graciousness with them, and to deal so kindly with those toward whom
 they showed such compassion? or are we to treat their decision as an
 unrighteous one, [821] and to constitute ourselves judges of their
 opinion on such subjects, and to throw clemency into tears, and to
 overturn the established order? [822]

 11. But I shall give a more particular account of one case here which
 occurred among us: [823] There was with us a certain Serapion, an aged
 believer. He had spent his long life blamelessly, but had fallen in the
 time of trial (the persecution). Often did this man pray (for
 absolution), and no one gave heed to him; [824] for he had sacrificed
 to the idols. Falling sick, he continued three successive days dumb and
 senseless. Recovering a little on the fourth day, he called to him his
 grandchild, and said, "My son, how long do you detain me? Hasten, I
 entreat you, and absolve me quickly. Summon one of the presbyters to
 me." And when he had said this, he became speechless again. The boy ran
 for the presbyter; but it was night, and the man was sick, and was
 consequently unable to come. But as an injunction had been issued by
 me, [825] that persons at the point of death, if they requested it
 then, and especially if they had earnestly sought it before, should be
 absolved, [826] in order that they might depart this life in cheerful
 hope, he gave the boy a small portion of the Eucharist, [827] telling
 him to steep it in water [828] and drop it into the old man's mouth.
 The boy returned bearing the portion; and as he came near, and before
 he had yet entered, Serapion again recovered, and said, "You have come,
 my child, and the presbyter was unable to come; but do quickly what you
 were instructed to do, and so let me depart." The boy steeped the
 morsel in water, and at once dropped it into the (old man's) mouth; and
 after he had swallowed a little of it, he forthwith gave up the ghost.
 Was he not then manifestly preserved? and did he not continue in life
 just until he could be absolved, and until through the wiping away of
 his sins he could be acknowledged [829] for the many good acts he had
 done?

 [787] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vi. 41, 42, 44. Certain codices read
 Fabianus for Fabius, and that form is adopted also by Rufinus. Eusebius
 introduces this epistle thus: "The same author, in an epistle written
 to Fabius bishop of Antioch, gives the following account of the
 conflicts of those who suffered martyrdom at Alexandria."

 [788] kai phthasas ho kakon, etc. Pearson, Annales Cyprian. ad ann.,
 249 § 1, renders it rather thus: "et prævertens malorum huic urbi vates
 et auctor, quisquis ille fuit, commovit," etc.

 [789] eusebeian ten threskeian daimonon. Valesius thinks the last three
 words in the text ( = service to their demons) an interpolation by some
 scholiast. [Note threskeian = cultus, James i. 27.]

 [790] Heb. x. 30.

 [791] [To this day St. Apollonia is invoked all over Europe; and votive
 offerings are to be seen hung up at her shrines, in the form of teeth,
 by those afflicted with toothache.]

 [792] ta tes asebeias kerugmata. What these precisely were, it is not
 easy to say. Dionysius speaks of them also as dusphema rhemata in this
 epistle, and as atheoi phonai in that to Germanus. Gallandi thinks the
 reference is to the practice, of which we read also in the Acts of
 Polycarp, ch. 9, where the proconsul addresses the martyr with the
 order: loidoreson ton Christon--Revile Christ. And that the test
 usually put to reputed Christians by the early persecutors was this
 cursing of Christ, we learn from Pliny, book x. epist. 97. [Vol. i. p.
 41.]

 [793] Or, shrink from.

 [794] ephestion, for which Nicephorus reads badly, 'Ephesion.

 [795] epipolu.

 [796] athlious. But Pearson suggests athlous, ="when insurrection and
 civil war took the place of these persecutions." This would agree
 better with the common usage of diadechomai.

 [797] ascholian tou pros emas thumou labonton. The Latin version gives
 "dum illorum cessaret furor." W. Lowth renders, "dum non vacaret ipsis
 furorem suum in nos exercere."

 [798] This refers to the death of the Emperor Philip, who showed a very
 righteous and kindly disposition toward the Christians. Accordingly the
 matters here recounted by Dionysius took place in the last year of the
 Emperor Philip. This is also indicated by Dionysius in the beginning of
 this epistle, where he says that the persecution began at Alexandria a
 whole year before the edict of the Emperor Decius. But
 Christophorsonus, not observing this, interprets the metabolen tes
 basileias as signifying a change in the emperor's mind toward the
 Christians, in which error he is followed by Baronius, ch. 102.--Vales.

 [799] In this sentence the Codex Regius reads, to prorrhethen hupo tou
 Kuriou hemon parabrachu to phoberotaton, etc., ="the one intimated
 beforetime by our Lord, very nearly the most terrible one." In Georgius
 Syncellus it is given as e para brachu. But the reading in the text,
 apophainon, "setting forth," is found in the Codices Maz., Med., Fuk.,
 and Savilii; and it seems the best, the idea being that this edict of
 Decius was so terrible as in a certain measure to represent the most
 fearful of all times, viz., those of Antichrist.--Vales.

 [800] apenton dediotes.

 [801] hoi de demosieuontes hupo ton praxeon egonto. This is rendered by
 Christophorsonus, "alii ex privatis ædibus in publicum raptati ad
 delubra ducuntur a magistratibus." But demosieuontes is the same as ta
 demosia prattontes, i.e., decurions and magistrates. For when the edict
 of Decius was conveyed to them, commanding all to sacrifice to the
 immortal gods, these officials had to convene themselves in the
 court-house as usual, and stand and listen while the decree was there
 publicly recited. Thus they were in a position officially which led
 them to be the first to sacrifice. The word praxeis occurs often in the
 sense of the acts and administration of magistrates: thus, in Eusebius,
 viii. 11; in Aristides, in the funeral oration on Alexander, ta d' eis
 praxeis te kai politeias, etc. There are similar passage also in
 Plutarch's Politika parangelmata, and in Severianus's sixth oration on
 the Hexameron. So Chrysostom, in his eighty-third homily on Matthew,
 calls the decurions tous ta politika prattontas. The word
 demosieuontes, however, may also be explained of those employed in the
 departments of law or finance; so that the clause might be rendered,
 with Valesius: "alii, qui in publico versabantur, rebus ipsis et
 reliquorum exemplo, ad sacrificandum ducebantur." See the note in
 Migne.

 [802] ischurizomenoi here for diischurizomenoi .--Vales.

 [803] pros to hexes apeipon. It may also mean, "renounced the faith in
 the prospect of what was before them."

 [804] A blessed one. Alluding to Matt. v. 10, 12.

 [805] meta polun. But Codices Med., Maz., Fuk., and Savilii, as well as
 Georgius Syncellus, read met' ou polun, "after a short time."

 [806] xusteras.

 [807] Here Valesius adds from Rufinus the words kai 'Ammonarion hetera,
 "and a second Ammonarium," as there are four women mentioned.

 [808] In Georgius Syncellus and Nicephorus it is given as Aster.
 Rufinus makes the name Arsinus. And in the old Roman martyrology, taken
 largely from Rufinus, we find the form Arsenius.--Vales.

 [809] In his Bibliotheca, cod. cxix., Photius states that Isidorus was
 full brother to Pierius, the celebrated head of the Alexandrian school,
 and his colleague in martyrdom. He also intimates, however, that
 although some have reported that Pierius ended his career by martyrdom,
 others say that he spent the closing period of his life in Rome after
 the persecution abated.--Ruinart.

 [810] suntagma stratiotikon. Rufinus and Christophorsonus make it
 turmam militum. Valesius prefers manipulum or contubernium. These may
 have been the apparitors or officers of the præfectus Augustalis.
 Valesius thinks rather that they were legionaries, from the legion
 which had to guard the city of Alexandria, and which was under the
 authority of the præfectus Augustalis. For at that time the præfectus
 Augustalis had charge of military affairs as well as civil.

 [811] bathron. Valesius supposes that what is intended is the seat on
 which the accused sat when under interrogation by the judge.

 [812] thriambeuontos autous. Rufinus makes it, "God thus triumphing in
 them;" from which it would seem that he had read di' autous. But
 thriambeuein is probably put here for thriambeuein poiein, as
 basileuein is also used by Gregory Nazianzenus.

 [813] That is, Nilopolis or Niloupolis. Eusebius, bishop of the same
 seat, subscribed the Council of Ephesus.--Reading.

 [814] to 'Arabion oros. There is a Mons Arabicusmentioned by Herodotus
 (ii. 8), which Ptolemy and others call Mons Troïcus.--Vales.

 [815] This passage is notable from the fact that it makes mention of
 the Saracens. For of the writers whose works have come down to us there
 is none more ancient than Dionysius of Alexandria that has named the
 Saracens. Ammianus Marcellinus, however, writes in his fourteenth book
 that he has made mention of the Saracens in the Acts of Marcus.
 Spartianus also mentions the Saracens in his Niger, and says that the
 Roman soldiers were beaten by them.--Vales. ["The barbarous Saracens:"
 what a nominis umbra projected by "coming events," in this blissfully
 ignorant reference of our author! Compare Robertson, Researches, on the
 conquest of Jerusalem.]

 [816] As to the martyrs' immediate departure to the Lord, and their
 abode with Him, see Tertullian, On the Resurrection of the Flesh, ch.
 xliii., and On the Soul, v. 55. [Vol. iii. p. 576; Ib., p. 231.]

 [817] That the martyrs were to be Christ's assessors, judging the world
 with Him, was a common opinion among the fathers. So, after Dionysius,
 Eulogius, bishop of Alexandria, in his fifth book, Against the
 Novatians. Photius, in his Bibliotheca, following Chrysostom, objects
 to this, and explains Paul's words in 1 Cor. vi. 2 as having the same
 intention as Christ's words touching the men of Nineveh and the queen
 of the south who should rise up in the judgment and condemn that
 generation.

 [818] sundikazontes. See a noble passage in Bossuet, Préface sur
 l'Apocal , § 28.

 [819] Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

 [820] Dionysius is dealing here not with public communion, such as was
 the bishop's prerogative to confer anew on the penitent, but with
 private fellowship among Christian people.--Vales.

 [821] adikon poiesometha is the reading of Codices Maz., Med., Fuk.,
 and Savil., and also of Georgius Syncellus. Others read adekton
 poiesometha, "we shall treat it as inadmissible."

 [822] The words kai ton Theon paroxunomen, "and provoke God," are
 sometimes added here; but they are wanting in Codices Maz., Med., Fuk.,
 Savil., and in Georgius Syncellus.

 [823] Eusebius introduces this in words to the following effect:
 "Writing to this same Fabius, who seemed to incline somewhat to this
 schism, Dionysius of Alexandria, after setting forth in his letter many
 other matters which bore on repentance, and after describing the
 conflicts of the martyrs who had recently suffered in Alexandria,
 relates among other things one specially wonderful fact, which I have
 deemed proper for insertion in this history, and which is as follows."

 [824] That is, none either of the clergy or of the people were moved by
 his prayers to consider him a proper subject for absolution; for the
 people's suffrages were also necessary for the reception into the
 Church of any who had lapsed, and been on that account cut off from it.
 And sometimes the bishop himself asked the people to allow absolution
 to be given to the suppliant, as we see in Cyprian's Epistle 53, to
 Cornelius [vol. v. p. 336, this series], and in Tertullian On Modesty,
 ch. xiii. [vol. iv. p. 86, this series]. Oftener, however, the people
 themselves made intercession with the bishop for the admission of
 penitents; of which we have a notable instance in the Epistle of
 Cornelius to Fabius of Antioch about that bishop who had ordained
 Novatianus. See also Cyprian, Epistle 59 [vol. v. p. 355].--Vales.

 [825] In the African Synod, which met about the time that Dionysus
 wrote, it was decreed that absolution should be granted to lapsed
 persons who were near their end, provided that they had sought it
 earnestly before their illness. See Cyprian in the Epistle to
 Antonianus [vol. v. p. 327, this series].--Vales.

 [826] aphiesthai. There is a longer reading in Codices Fuk. and Savil.,
 viz.: ton theion doron tes metadoseos axiousthai kai houtos aphiesthai,
 "be deemed worthy of the imparting of the divine gifts, and thus be
 absolved."

 [827] Valesius thinks that this custom prevailed for a long time, and
 cites a synodical letter of Ratherius, bishop of Verona (which has also
 been ascribed to Udalricus by Gretserus, who has published it along
 with his Life of Gregory VII.), in which the practice is expressly
 forbidden in these terms: "And let no one presume to give the communion
 to a laic or a woman for the purpose of conveying it to an infirm
 person."

 [828] apobrexai. Rufinus renders it by infundere. References to this
 custom are found in Adamanus, in the second book of the Miracles of St.
 Columba, ch 6; in Bede, Life of St. Cuthbert, ch. 31, and in the poem
 on the life of the same; in Theodorus Campidunensis, Life of St.
 Magnus, ch. 22; in Paulus Bernriedensis, Life of Gregory VII., p. 113.

 [829] homologethenai. Langus, Wolfius, and Musculus render it
 confiteri, "confess." Christophorsonus makes it in numerum confessorum
 referri, "reckoned in the number of confessors:" which may be allowed
 if it is understood to be a reckoning by Christ. For Dionysius alludes
 to those words of Christ in the Gospel: "Whosoever shall confess me
 before men, him will I confess also before my Father."--Vales.

 Epistle IV.--To Cornelius the Roman Bishop. [830]

 ------------------------

 In addition to all these, he writes likewise to Cornelius at Rome after
 receiving his Epistle against Novatus. And in that letter he also shows
 that he had been invited by Helenus, bishop in Tarsus of Cilicia, and
 by the others who were with him--namely, Firmilian, bishop in
 Cappadocia, and Theoctistus in Palestine--to meet them at the Council
 of Antioch, where certain persons were attempting to establish the
 schism of Novatus. In addition to this, he writes that it was reported
 to him that Fabius was dead, and that Demetrianus was appointed his
 successor in the bishopric of the church at Antioch. He writes also
 respecting the bishop in Jerusalem, expressing himself in these very
 words: "And the blessed Alexander, having been cast into prison, went
 to his rest in blessedness."

 [830] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vi. 46.

 Epistle V.--Which is the First on the Subject of Baptism Addressed to
 Stephen, Bishop of Rome. [831]

 ------------------------

 Understand, however, my brother, [832] that all the churches located in
 the east, and also in remoter districts, [833] that were formerly in a
 state of division, are now made one again; [834] and all those at the
 head of the churches everywhere are of one mind, and rejoice
 exceedingly at the peace which has been restored beyond all
 expectation. I may mention Demetrianus in Antioch; Theoctistus in
 Cæsareia; Mazabanes in Ælia, [835] the successor of the deceased
 Alexander; [836] Marinus in Tyre; Heliodorus in Laodicea, the successor
 of the deceased Thelymidres; Helenus in Tarsus, and with him all the
 churches of Cilicia; and Firmilian and all Cappadocia. For I have named
 only the more illustrious of the bishops, so as neither to make my
 epistle too long, nor to render my discourse too heavy for you. All the
 districts of Syria, however, and of Arabia, to the brethren in which
 you from time to time have been forwarding supplies [837] and at
 present have sent letters, and Mesopotamia too, and Pontus, and Syria,
 and, to speak in brief, all parties, are everywhere rejoicing at the
 unanimity and brotherly love now established, and are glorifying God
 for the same.

 The Same, Otherwise Rendered. [838]

 But know, my brother, that all the churches throughout the East, and
 those that are placed beyond, which formerly were separated, are now at
 length returned to unity; and all the presidents [839] of the churches
 everywhere think one and the same thing, and rejoice with incredible
 joy on account of the unlooked-for return of peace: to wit, Demetrianus
 in Antioch; Theoctistus in Cæsarea; Mazabenes in Ælia, after the death
 of Alexander; Marinus in Tyre; Heliodorus in Laodicea, after the death
 of Thelymidres; Helenus in Tarsus, and all the churches of Cilicia;
 Firmilianus, with all Cappadocia. And I have named only the more
 illustrious bishops, lest by chance my letter should be made too
 prolix, and my address too wearisome. The whole of the Syrias, indeed,
 and Arabia, to which you now and then send help, and to which you have
 now written letters; Mesopotamia also, and Pontus, and Bithynia; and,
 to comprise all in one word, all the lands everywhere, are rejoicing,
 praising God on account of this concord and brotherly charity.

 [831] In the second chapter of the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical
 History, Eusebius says: "To this Stephen, Eusebius wrote the first of
 his epistles on the matter of baptism." And he calls this the first,
 because Dionysius also wrote other four epistles to Xystus and
 Dionysius, two of the successors of Stephen, and to Philemon, on the
 same subject of the baptizing of heretics.--Gallandi.

 [832] Eusebius introduces the letter thus: "When he had addressed many
 reasonings on this subject to him (Stephen) by letter, Dionysius at
 last showed him that, as the persecution had abated, the churches in
 all parts opposed to the innovations of Novatus were at peace among
 themselves." [See vol. v. p. 275.]

 [833] kai eti prosotero. These words are omitted in Codices Fulk, and
 Savil., as also by Christophorsonus; but are given in Codices Reg.
 Maz., and Med., and by Syncellus and Nicephorus.

 [834] Baronius infers from this epistle that at this date, about 259
 a.d., the Oriental bishops had given up their "error," and fallen in
 with Stephen's opinion, that heretics did not require to be
 rebaptized,--an inference, however, which Valesius deems false.
 [Undoubtedly so.]

 [835] The name assigned by the pagans to Jerusalem was Ælia. It was so
 called even in Constantine's time as we see in the Tabula Peutingerorum
 and the Itinerarium Antonini, written after Constantine's reign. In the
 seventh canon of the Nicene Council we also find the name Ælia. [Given
 by Hadrian a.d. 135.]

 [836] The words koimethentos 'Alexandrou are given in the text in
 connection with the clause Marinos en Turo. They must be transposed
 however as in the translation; for Mazabanes had succeeded Alexander
 the bishop of Ælia, as Dionysius informs us in his Epistle to
 Cornelius. So Rufinus puts it also in his Latin version.--Vales.

 [837] Alluding to the generous practice of the church at Rome in old
 times in relieving the wants of the other churches, and in sending
 money and clothes to the brethren who were in captivity, and to those
 who toiled in the mines. To this effect we have the statement of
 Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, in his Epistle to Soter, which Eusebius
 cites in his fourth book. In the same passage, Eusebius also remarks
 that this commendable custom had been continued in the Roman church up
 to his own time; and with that object collections were made there, of
 which Leo Magnus writes in his Sermones.--Vales. [Note this to the
 eternal honour of this See in its early purity.]

 [838] [In vol. v., to illustrate the history of Cyprian, reference is
 made to this letter; and in the Clark edition another rendering is
 there given (a preferable one, I think) of this same letter, which I
 have thought better to reserve for this place. It belongs here, and I
 have there noted its appearance in this volume.]

 [839] [proestotes. See Euseb., Hist. Eccles., book viii. capp. 2, 3 and
 4; also vol. v., this series, as above mentioned.]

 Epistle VI.--To Sixtus, Bishop. [840]

 ------------------------

 1. Previously, indeed, (Stephen) had written letters about Helanus and
 Firmilianus, and about all who were established throughout Cilicia and
 Cappadocia, and all the neighbouring provinces, giving them to
 understand that for that same reason he would depart from their
 communion, because they rebaptized heretics. And consider the
 seriousness of the matter. For, indeed, in the most considerable
 councils of the bishops, as I hear, it has been decreed that they who
 come from heresy should first be trained in Catholic doctrine, and then
 should be cleansed by baptism from the filth of the old and impure
 leaven. Asking and calling him to witness on all these matters, I sent
 letters.

 And a little after Dionysius proceeds:--

 2. And, moreover, to our beloved co-presbyters Dionysius and Philemon,
 who before agreed with Stephen, and had written to me about the same
 matters, I wrote previously in few words, but now I have written again
 more at length.

 In the same letter, says Eusebius, [841] he informs Xystus [842] of the
 Sabellian heretics, that they were gaining ground at that time, in
 these words:--

 3. For since of the doctrine, which lately has been set on foot at
 Ptolemais, a city of Pentapolis, impious and full of blasphemy against
 Almighty God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; full of unbelief
 and perfidy towards His only begotten Son and the first-born of every
 creature, the Word made man, and which takes away the perception of the
 Holy Spirit,--on either side both letters were brought to me, and
 brethren had come to discuss it, setting forth more plainly as much as
 by God's gift I was able,--I wrote certain letters, copies of which I
 have sent to thee.

 [840] Dionysius mentions letters that had been written by him as well
 to the Presbyters Dionysius and Philemon as to Stephen, on the baptism
 of heretics and on the Sabellian heresy.

 [841] Lib. vii. ch. 6.

 [842] [i.e., Sixtus II.]

 Epistle VII.--To Philemon, a Presbyter. [843]

 ------------------------

 I indeed gave attention to reading the books and carefully studying the
 traditions of heretics, to the extent indeed of corrupting my soul with
 their execrable opinions; yet receiving from them this advantage, that
 I could refute them in my own mind, and detested them more heartily
 than ever. And when a certain brother of the order of presbyters sought
 to deter me, and feared lest I should be involved in the same wicked
 filthiness, because he said that my mind would be contaminated, and
 indeed with truth, as I myself perceived, I was strengthened by a
 vision that was sent me from God. And a word spoken to me, expressly
 commanded me, saying, Read everything which shall come into thy hands,
 for thou art fit to do so, who correctest and provest each one; and
 from them to thee first of all has appeared the cause and the occasion
 of believing. I received this vision as being what was in accordance
 with the apostolic word, which thus urges all who are endowed with
 greater virtue, "Be ye skilful money-changers." [844]

 Then, says Eusebius, he subjoins some things parenthetically about all
 heresies:--

 This rule and form I have received from our blessed Father Heraclus:
 For thou, who came from heresies, even if they had fallen away from the
 Church, much rather if they had not fallen away, but when they were
 seen to frequent the assemblies of the faithful, were charged with
 going to hear the teachers of perverse doctrine, and ejected from the
 Church, he did not admit after many prayers, before they had openly and
 publicly narrated whatever things they had heard from their
 adversaries. Then he received them at length to the assemblies of the
 faithful, by no means asking of them to receive baptism anew. Because
 they had already previously received the Holy Spirit from that very
 baptism.

 Once more, this question being thoroughly ventilated, he adds:--

 I learned this besides, that this custom is not now first of all
 imported among the Africans [845] alone; but moreover, long before, in
 the times of former bishops, among most populous churches, and that
 when synods of the brethren of Iconium and Synades were held, it also
 pleased as many as possible, I should be unwilling, by overturning
 their judgments, to throw them into strifes and contentious. For it is
 written, "Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark, which thy
 fathers have placed." [846]

 [843] Of Sixtus, bishop of Rome. [a.d. 257].

 [844] 1 Thess. v. 21. [Euseb., vi. 7. The apostle is supposed to refer
 to one of the reputed sayings of our Lord, ginesthe dokimoi trapezitai
 = examinatores, i.e., of coins, rejecting the base, and laying up in
 store the precious. Compare Jer. xv. 19.]

 [845] [I find that it is necessary to say that the "Africans" of Egypt
 and Carthage were no more negroes than we "Americans" are redmen. The
 Carthaginians were Canaanites and the Alexandrians Greeks. I have seen
 Cyprian's portrait representing him as a Moor.]

 [846] Deut. xix. 14.

 Epistle VIII.--To Dionysius. [847]

 ------------------------

 For we rightly repulse Novatian, who has rent the Church, and has drawn
 away some of the brethren to impiety and blasphemies; who has brought
 into the world a most impious doctrine concerning God, and calumniates
 our most merciful Lord Jesus Christ as if He were unmerciful; and
 besides all these things, holds the sacred laver as of no effect, and
 rejects it, and overturns faith and confession, which are put before
 baptism, and utterly drives away the Holy Spirit from them, even if any
 hope subsists either that He would abide in them, or that He should
 return to them.

 [847] At that time presbyter of Xystus, and afterwards his successor.
 He teaches that Novatian is deservedly to be opposed on account of his
 schism, on account of his impious doctrine, on account of the
 repetition of baptism to those who came to him.

 Epistle IX.--To Sixtus II. [848]

 ------------------------

 For truly, brother, I have need of advice, and I crave your judgment,
 lest perchance I should be mistaken upon the matters which in such wise
 happen to me. One of the brethren who come together to the church, who
 for some time has been esteemed as a believer, and who before my
 ordination, and, if I am not deceived, before even the episcopate of
 Heraclas himself, had been a partaker of the assembly of the faithful,
 when he had been concerned in the baptism of those who were lately
 baptized, and had heard the interrogatories and their answers, came to
 me in tears, and bewailing his lot. And throwing himself at my feet, he
 began to confess and to protest that this baptism by which he had been
 initiated among heretics was not of this kind, nor had it anything
 whatever in common with this of ours, because that it was full of
 blasphemy and impiety. And he said that his soul was pierced with a
 very bitter sense of sorrow, and that he did not dare even to lift up
 his eyes to God, because he had been initiated by those wicked words
 and things. Wherefore he besought that, by this purest laver, he might
 be endowed with adoption and grace. And I, indeed, have not dared to do
 this; but I have said that the long course of communion had been
 sufficient for this. For I should not dare to renew afresh, after all,
 one who had heard the giving of thanks, and who had answered with
 others Amen; who had stood at the holy table, and had stretched forth
 his hands [849] to receive the blessed food, and had received it, and
 for a very long time had been a partaker of the body and blood of our
 Lord Jesus Christ. Henceforth I bade him be of good courage, and
 approach to the sacred elements with a firm faith and a good
 conscience, and become a partaker of them. But he makes no end of his
 wailing, and shrinks from approaching to the table; and scarcely, when
 entreated, can he bear to be present at the prayers.

 [848] Of a man who sought to be introduced to the Church by baptism,
 although he said that he had received baptism, with other words and
 matters among the heretics.

 [849] [Vol. v. See a reference to Cyril's Catechetical Lectures.]

 Epistle X.--Against Bishop Germanus. [850]

 ------------------------

 1. Now I speak also before God, and He knoweth that I lie not: it was
 not by my own choice, [851] neither was it without divine instruction,
 that I took to flight. But at an earlier period, [852] indeed, when the
 edict for the persecution under Decius was determined upon, Sabinus at
 that very hour sent a certain Frumentarius [853] to make search for me.
 And I remained in the house for four days, expecting the arrival of
 this Frumentarius. But he went about examining all other places, the
 roads, the rivers, the fields, where he suspected that I should either
 conceal myself or travel. And he was smitten with a kind of blindness,
 and never lighted on the house; for he never supposed that I should
 tarry at home when under pursuit. Then, barely after the lapse of four
 days, God giving me instruction to remove, and opening the way for me
 in a manner beyond all expectation, my domestics [854] and I, and a
 considerable number of the brethren, effected an exit together. And
 that this was brought about by the providence of God, was made plain by
 what followed: in which also we have been perhaps of some service to
 certain parties.

 2. Then, after a certain break, he narrates the events which befell him
 after his flight, subjoining the following statement:--Now about sunset
 I was seized, along with those who were with me, by the soldiers, and
 was carried off to Taposiris. But by the providence of God, it happened
 that Timotheus was not present with me then, nor indeed had he been
 apprehended at all. Reaching the place later, he found the house
 deserted, and officials keeping guard over it, and ourselves borne into
 slavery.

 3. And after some other matters, he proceeds thus:--And what was the
 method of this marvellous disposition of Providence in his case? For
 the real facts shall be related. When Timotheus was fleeing in great
 perturbation, he was met [855] by a man from the country. [856] This
 person asked the reason for his haste, and he told him the truth
 plainly. Then the man (he was on his way at the time to take part in
 certain marriage festivities; for it is their custom to spend the whole
 night in such gatherings), on hearing the fact, held on his course to
 the scene of the rejoicings, and went in and narrated the circumstances
 to those who were seated at the feast; and with a single impulse, as if
 it had been at a given watchword, they all started up, and came on all
 in a rush, and with the utmost speed. Hurrying up to us, they raised a
 shout; and as the soldiers who were guarding us took at once to flight,
 they came upon us, stretched as we were upon the bare couches. [857]
 For my part, as God knows, I took them at first to be robbers who had
 come to plunder and pillage us; and remaining on the bedstead on which
 I was lying naked, save only that I had on my linen underclothing, I
 offered them the rest of my dress as it lay beside me. But they bade me
 get up and take my departure as quickly as I could. Then I understood
 the purpose of their coming, and cried, entreated, and implored them to
 go away and leave us alone; and I begged that, if they wished to do us
 any good, they might anticipate those who led me captive, and strike
 off my head. And while I was uttering such vociferations, as those who
 were my comrades and partners in all these things know, they began to
 lift me up by force. And I threw myself down on my back upon the
 ground; but they seized me by the hands and feet, and dragged me away,
 and bore me forth. And those who were witnesses of all these things
 followed me,--namely, Caius, Faustus, Peter, and Paul. These men also
 took me up, and hurried me off [858] out of the little town, and set me
 on an ass without saddle, and in that fashion carried me away.

 4. I fear that I run the risk of being charged with great folly and
 senselessness, placed as I am under the necessity of giving a narrative
 of the wonderful dispensation of God's providence in our case. Since,
 however, as one says, it is good to keep close the secret of a king,
 but it is honourable to reveal the works of God, [859] I shall come to
 close quarters with the violence of Germanus. I came to Æmilianus not
 alone; for there accompanied me also my co-presbyter Maximus, and the
 deacons Faustus and Eusebius and Chæremon; and one of the brethren who
 had come from Rome went also with us. Æmilianus, then, did not lead off
 by saying to me, "Hold no assemblies." That was indeed a thing
 superfluous for him to do, and the last thing which one would do who
 meant to go back to what was first and of prime importance: [860] for
 his concern was not about our gathering others together in assembly,
 but about our not being Christians ourselves. From this, therefore, he
 commanded me to desist, thinking, doubtless, that if I myself should
 recant, the others would also follow me in that. But I answered him
 neither unreasonably nor in many words, "We must obey God rather than
 men." [861] Moreover, I testified openly that I worshipped the only
 true God and none other, and that I could neither alter that position
 nor ever cease to be a Christian. Thereupon he ordered us to go away to
 a village near the desert, called Cephro.

 5. Hear also the words which were uttered by both of us as they have
 been put on record. [862] When Dionysius, and Faustus, and Maximus, and
 Marcellus, and Chæremon had been placed at the bar, Æmilianus, as
 prefect, said: "I have reasoned with you verily in free speech, [863]
 on the clemency of our sovereigns, as they have suffered you to
 experience it; for they have given you power to save yourselves, if you
 are disposed to turn to what is accordant with nature, and to worship
 the gods who also maintain them in their kingdom, and to forget those
 things which are repugnant to nature. What say ye then to these things?
 for I by no means expect that you will be ungrateful to them for their
 clemency, since indeed what they aim at is to bring you over to better
 courses." Dionysius made reply thus: "All men do not worship all the
 gods, but different men worship different objects that they suppose to
 be true gods. Now we worship the one God, who is the Creator of all
 things, and the very Deity who has committed the sovereignty to the
 hands of their most sacred majesties Valerian and Gallienus. Him we
 both reverence and worship; and to Him we pray continually on behalf of
 the sovereignty of these princes, that it may abide unshaken."
 Æmilianus, as prefect, said to them: "But who hinders you from
 worshipping this god too, if indeed he is a god, along with those who
 are gods by nature? for you have been commanded to worship the gods,
 and those gods whom all know as such." Dionysius replied: "We worship
 no other one." Æmilianus, as prefect, said to them: "I perceive that
 you are at once ungrateful to and insensible of the clemency of our
 princes. Wherefore you shall not remain in this city; but you shall be
 despatched to the parts of Libya, and settled in a place called Cephro:
 for of this place I have made choice in accordance with the command of
 our princes. It shall not in any wise be lawful for you or for any
 others, either to hold assemblies or to enter those places which are
 called cemeteries. And if any one is seen not to have betaken himself
 to this place whither I have ordered him to repair, or if he be
 discovered in any assembly, he will prepare peril for himself; for the
 requisite punishment will not fail. Be off, therefore, to the place
 whither you have been commanded to go." So he forced me away, sick as I
 was; nor did he grant me the delay even of a single day. What
 opportunity, then, had I to think either of holding assemblies, or of
 not holding them? [864]

 6. Then after some other matters he says:--Moreover, we did not
 withdraw from the visible assembling of ourselves together, with the
 Lord's presence. [865] But those in the city I tried to gather together
 with all the greater zeal, as if I were present with them; for I was
 absent indeed in the body, as I said, [866] but present in the spirit.
 And in Cephro indeed a considerable church sojourned with us, composed
 partly of the brethren who followed us from the city, and partly of
 those who joined us from Egypt. There, too, did God open to us a door
 [867] for the word. And at first we were persecuted, we were stoned;
 but after a period some few of the heathen forsook their idols, and
 turned to God. For by our means the word was then sown among them for
 the first time, and before that they had never received it. And as if
 to show that this had been the very purpose of God in conducting us to
 them, when we had fulfilled this ministry, He led us away again. For
 Æmilianus was minded to remove us to rougher parts, as it seemed, and
 to more Libyan-like districts; and he gave orders to draw all in every
 direction into the Mareotic territory, and assigned villages to each
 party throughout the country. But he issued instructions that we should
 be located specially by the public way, so that we might also be the
 first to be apprehended; [868] for he evidently made his arrangements
 and plans with a view to an easy seizure of all of us whenever he
 should make up his mind to lay hold of us.

 7. Now when I received the command to depart to Cephro, I had no idea
 of the situation of the place, and had scarcely even heard its name
 before; yet for all that, I went away courageously and calmly. But when
 word was brought me that I had to remove to the parts of Colluthion,
 [869] those present know how I was affected; for here I shall be my own
 accuser. At first, indeed, I was greatly vexed, and took very ill; for
 though these places happened to be better known and more familiar to
 us, yet people declared that the region was one destitute of brethren,
 and even of men of character, and one exposed to the annoyances of
 travellers and to the raids of robbers. I found comfort, however when
 the brethren reminded me that it was nearer the city; and while Cephro
 brought us large intercourse with brethren of all sorts who came from
 Egypt, so that we were able to hold our sacred assemblies on a more
 extensive scale, yet there, on the other hand, as the city was in the
 nearer vicinity, we could enjoy more frequently the sight of those who
 were the really beloved, and in closest relationship with us, and
 dearest to us: for these would come and take their rest among us, and,
 as in the more remote suburbs, there would be distinct and special
 meetings. [870] And thus it turned out.

 8. Then, after some other matters, he gives again the following account
 of what befell him: --Germanus, indeed, boasts himself of many
 professions of faith. He, forsooth, is able to speak of many adverse
 things which have happened to him! Can he then reckon up in his own
 case as many condemnatory sentences [871] as we can number in ours, and
 confiscations too, and proscriptions, and spoilings of goods, and
 losses of dignities, [872] and despisings of worldly honour, and
 contemnings of the laudations of governors and councillors, and patient
 subjections to the threatenings of the adversaries, [873] and to
 outcries, and perils, and persecutions, and a wandering life, and the
 pressure of difficulties, and all kinds of trouble, such as befell me
 in the time of Decius and Sabinus, [874] and such also as I have been
 suffering under the present severities of Æmilianus? But where in the
 world did Germanus make his appearance? And what mention is made of
 him? But I retire from this huge act of folly into which I am suffering
 myself to fall on account of Germanus; and accordingly I forbear giving
 to the brethren, who already have full knowledge of these things, a
 particular and detailed narrative of all that happened.

 [850] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vi. 40, vii. 11.

 [851] houdemian ep' emautou ballomenos. In Codex Fuk. and in the
 Chronicon of Syncellus it is ep' emauto. In Codices Maz. and Med. it is
 ep' emauton. Herodotus employs the phrase in the genitive
 form--ballomenos eph' heautou pepreche, i.e., seipsum in consilium
 adhibens, sua sponte et proprio motu fecit.

 [852] halla kai proteron. Christophorsonus and others join the
 proteron, with the diogmou, making it mean, "before the persecution."
 This is contrary to pure Greek idiom, and is also inconsistent with
 what follows; for by the autes horas is meant the very hour at which
 the edict was decreed, diogmos here having much the sense of "edict for
 the persecution."--Vales.

 [853] There was a body of men called frumentarii milites, employed
 under the emperors as secret spies, and sent through the provinces to
 look after accused persons, and collect floating rumors. They were
 abolished at length by Constantine, as Aurelius Victor writes. They
 were subordinate to the judges or governors of the provinces. Thus this
 Frumentarius mentioned here by Dionysius was deputed in obedience to
 Sabinus, the præfectus Augustalis.--Vales.

 [854] oi paides. Musculus and Christophorsonus make it "children."
 Valesius prefers "domestics."

 [855] apenteto tis ton choriton. In Codices Maz., Med., Fuk., and
 Savil., apenta is written; in Georgius Syncellus it is apentato.

 [856] choriton rendered indigenarum by Christophorsonus, and incolarum,
 "inhabitants," by the interpreter of Syncellus; but it means rather
 "rustics." Thus in the Greek Councils the ton choron presbuteroi,
 presbyteri pagorum, are named. Instead of choriton, Codices Maz., Med.,
 and Fuk. read chorikon; for thus the Alexandrians named the country
 people, as we see in the tractate of Sophronius against Dioscorus, and
 the Chronicon of Theophanes, p. 139.

 [857] astroton skimpodon.

 [858] phoraden exegagon. The phoraden may mean, as Valesius puts it, in
 sella, "on a stool or litter."

 [859] Tobit xii. 7.

 [860] to teleutaion epi to proton anatrechonti, i.e., to begin by
 interdicting him from holding Christian assemblies, while the great
 question was whether he was a Christian at all, would have been to
 place first what was last in order and consequence.

 [861] Acts v. 29.

 [862] hupemnematisthe.

 [863] agraphos.

 [864] Germanus had accused Dionysius of neglecting to hold the
 assemblies of the brethren before the persecutions broke out, and of
 rather providing for his own safety by flight. For when persecution
 burst on them, the bishops were wont first to convene the people, in
 order to exhort them to hold fast the faith of Christ; there infants
 and catechumens were baptized, to provide against their departing this
 life without baptism, and the Eucharist was given to the
 faithful.--Vales.

 [865] aisthetes meta tou Kuriou sunagogs.

 [866] hos eipon. Codices Maz. and Med. give eipein, "so to speak;" Fuk.
 and Savil. give hos eipen ho apostolos, "as the apostle said." See on 1
 Cor. v. 3.

 [867] [Acts xiv. 27; Rev. iii. 8. If the author here quotes the
 Apocalypse, it is noteworthy. Elucidation, p. 110.]

 [868] hemas de mallon en hodo kai protous katalephthesomenous etaxen.

 [869] ta Kollouthionos, supplying mere, as Dionysius has already used
 the phrase ta mere tes Libues. This was a district in the Mareotic
 prefecture. Thus we have mention made also of ta Boukolou, a certain
 tract in Egypt, deriving its name from the old masters of the soil.
 Nicephorus writes Kolouthion, which is probably more correct; for
 Kollouthion is a derivative from Colutho, which was a common name in
 Egypt. Thus a certain poet of note in the times of Anastasius,
 belonging to the Thebaid, was so named, as Suidas informs us. There was
 also a Coluthus, a certain schismatic, in Egypt, in the times of
 Athanasius, who is mentioned often in the Apologia; and Gregory of
 Nyssa names him Acoluthus in his Contra Eunomium, book ii.--Vales.

 [870] kata meros sunagogai. When the suburbs were somewhat distant from
 the city, the brethren resident in them were not compelled to attend
 the meetings of the larger church, but had meetings of their own in a
 basilica, or some building suitable for the purpose. The Greeks, too,
 gave the name proasteion to places at some considerable distance from
 the city, as well as to suburbs immediately connected with it. Thus
 Athanasius calls Canopus a proasteion; and so Daphne is spoken of as
 the proasteion of Antioch, Achyrona as that of Nicomedia, and Septimum
 as that of Constantinople, though these places were distant some miles
 from the cities. From this place it is also inferred that in the days
 of Dionysius there was still but one church in Alexandria, where all
 the brethren met for devotions. But in the time of Athanasius, when
 several churches had been built by the various bishops, the
 Alexandrians met in different places, kata meros kai dieremenos , as
 Athanasius says in his first Apology to Constantius; only that on the
 great festivals, as at the paschal season and at Pentecost, the
 brethren did not meet separately, but all in the larger church, as
 Athanasius also shows us--Vales.

 [871] apophaseis.

 [872] Maximus, in the scholia to the book of Dionysius the Areopagite,
 De coelesti hierarchia, ch. 5, states that Dionysius was by profession
 a rhetor before his conversion: ho goun megas Dionusios ho 'Alexandreon
 episkopos, ho apo rhetoron, etc.--Vales.

 [873] ton enantion hapeilon.

 [874] This Sabinus had been prefect of Egypt in the time of Decius; it
 is of him that Dionysius writes in his Epistle to Fabius, which is
 given above. The Æmilianus, prefect of Egypt, who is mentioned here,
 afterwards seized the imperial power, as Pollio writes in his Thirty
 Tyrants, who, however, calls him general (ducem), and not prefect of
 Egypt.--Vales.

 Epistle XI.--To Hermammon. [875]

 ------------------------

 1. But Gallus did not understand the wickedness of Decius, nor did he
 note beforehand what it was that wrought his ruin. But he stumbled at
 the very stone which was lying before his eyes; for when his
 sovereignty was in a prosperous position, and when affairs were turning
 out according to his wish, [876] he oppressed those holy men who
 interceded with God on behalf of his peace and his welfare. And
 consequently, persecuting them, he persecuted also the prayers offered
 in his own behalf.

 2. And to John a revelation is made in like manner: [877] "And there
 was given unto him," he says, "a mouth speaking great things, and
 blasphemy; and power was given unto him, and forty and two months."
 [878] And one finds both things to wonder at in Valerian's case; and
 most especially has one to consider how different it was with him
 before these events, [879] --how mild and well-disposed he was towards
 the men of God. For among the emperors who preceded him, there was not
 one who exhibited so kindly and favourable a disposition toward them as
 he did; yea, even those who were said to have become Christians openly
 [880] did not receive them with that extreme friendliness and
 graciousness with which he received them at the beginning of his reign;
 and his whole house was filled then with the pious, and it was itself a
 very church of God. But the master and president [881] of the Magi of
 Egypt [882] prevailed on him to abandon that course, urging him to slay
 and persecute those pure and holy men as adversaries and obstacles to
 their accursed and abominable incantations. For there are, indeed, and
 there were men who, by their simple presence, and by merely showing
 themselves, and by simply breathing and uttering some words, have been
 able to dissipate the artifices of wicked demons. But he put it into
 his mind to practise the impure rites of initiation, and detestable
 juggleries, and execrable sacrifices, and to slay miserable children,
 and to make oblations of the offspring of unhappy fathers, and to
 divide the bowels of the newly-born, and to mutilate and cut up the
 creatures made by God, as if by such means they [883] would attain to
 blessedness.

 3. Afterwards he subjoins the following:--Splendid surely were the
 thank-offerings, then, which Macrianus brought them [884] for that
 empire which was the object of his hopes; who, while formerly reputed
 as the sovereign's faithful public treasurer, [885] had yet no mind for
 anything which was either reasonable in itself or conducive to the
 public good, [886] but subjected himself to that curse of prophecy
 which says, "Woe unto those who prophesy from their own heart, and see
 not the public good!" [887] For he did not discern that providence
 which regulates all things; nor did he think of the judgment of Him who
 is before all, and through all, and over all. Wherefore he also became
 an enemy to His Catholic Church; and besides that, he alienated and
 estranged himself from the mercy of God, and fled to the utmost
 possible distance from His salvation. [888] And in this indeed he
 demonstrated the reality of the peculiar significance of his name.
 [889]

 4. And again, after some other matters, he proceeds thus:--For Valerian
 was instigated to these acts by this man, and was thereby exposed to
 contumely and reproach, according to the word spoken by the Lord to
 Isaiah: "Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their own
 abominations in which their souls delighted; I also will choose their
 mockeries, [890] and will recompense their sin." [891] But this man
 [892] (Macrianus), being maddened with his passion for the empire, all
 unworthy of it as he was, and at the same time having no capacity for
 assuming the insignia of imperial government, [893] by reason of his
 crippled [894] body, [895] put forward his two sons as the bearers, so
 to speak, of their father's offences. For unmistakeably apparent in
 their case was the truth of that declaration made by God, when He said,
 "Visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the
 third and fourth generation of them that hate me." For he heaped his
 own wicked passions, for which he had failed in securing satisfaction,
 [896] upon the heads of his sons, and thus wiped off [897] upon them
 his own wickedness, and transferred to them, too, the hatred he himself
 had shown toward God.

 5. [898] That man, [899] then, after he had betrayed the one and made
 war upon the other of the emperors preceding him, speedily perished,
 with his whole family, root and branch. And Gallienus was proclaimed,
 and acknowledged by all. And he was at once an old emperor and a new;
 for he was prior to those, and he also survived them. To this effect
 indeed is the word spoken by the Lord to Isaiah: "Behold, the things
 which were from the beginning have come to pass; and there are new
 things which shall now arise." [900] For as a cloud which intercepts
 the sun's rays, and overshadows it for a little, obscures it, and
 appears itself in its place, but again, when the cloud has passed by or
 melted away, the sun, which had risen before, comes forth again and
 shows itself: so did this Macrianus put himself forward, [901] and
 achieve access [902] for himself even to the very empire of Gallienus
 now established; but now he is that no more, because indeed he never
 was it, while this other, i.e., Gallienus, is just as he was. And his
 empire, as if it had cast off old age, and had purged itself of the
 wickedness formerly attaching to it, is at present in a more vigorous
 and flourishing condition, and is now seen and heard of at greater
 distances, and stretches abroad in every direction.

 6. Then he further indicates the exact time at which he wrote this
 account, as follows:--And it occurs to me again to review the days of
 the imperial years. For I see that those most impious men, whose names
 may have been once so famous, have in a short space become nameless.
 But our more pious and godly prince [903] has passed his septennium,
 and is now in his ninth year, in which we are to celebrate the
 festival. [904]

 [875] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vii. 1, 10, 23. Eusebius introduces this
 extract thus: "In an epistle to Hermammon, Dionysus makes the following
 remarks upon Gallus" the Emperor.

 [876] kata noun is the reading in the Codices Maz., Med., Fuk, and
 Savil., and adopted by Rufinus and others. But Robertus Stephanus, from
 the Codex Regius, gives kata rhoun, "according to the stream," i.e.,
 favourably.

 [877] Eusebius prefaces this extract thus: "Gallus had not held the
 government two full years when he was removed, and Valerian, together
 with his son Gallienus, succeeded him. And what Dionysius has said of
 him may be learned from his Epistle to Hermammon, in which he makes the
 following statement."

 [878] exousia kai menes tessarakontaduo. Rev. xiii. 5. Baronius
 expounds the numbers as referring to the period during which the
 persecution under Valerian continued: see him, under the year 257 a.d.,
 ch. 7. [See Introductory Note, p. 78, supra. Here is a quotation from
 the Apocalypse to be noted in view of our author's questionings, part
 i., i. 5, p. 83, supra.]

 [879] The text is, kai touton malista ta pro autou hos houtos esche
 sunnoein; heos epios, etc. Gallandi emends the sentence thus: kai autou
 ta malista pro touton, hos ouch houtos esche, sunnoein, eos epios, etc.
 Codex Regius gives hos men epios. But Codices Maz. and Med. give heos
 epios, while Fuk. and Savil. give eos gar epios.

 [880] He means the Emperor Philip who, as many of the ancients have
 recorded, was the first of the Roman emperors to profess the Christian
 religion. But as Dionysius speaks in the plural number, to Philip may
 be added Alexander Severus, who had an image of Christ in the chapel of
 his Lares, as Lampridius testifies, and who favoured and sustained the
 Christians during the whole period of his empire. It is to be noted
 further, that Dionysius says of these emperors only that they were said
 and thought to be Christians, not that they were so in
 reality.--Gallandi

 [881] archisunagogos.

 [882] Baronius thinks that this was that Magus who, a little while
 before the empire of Decius, had incited the Alexandrians to persecute
 the Christians, and of whom Dionysius speaks in his Epistle to Fabius.
 What follows here, however, shows that Macrianus is probably the person
 alluded to.

 [883] eudaimonesontas. So Codices Maz., Med., Fuk. and Savil. read:
 others give eudaimonesantas. It would seem to require eudaimonesonta,
 "as if he would attain;" for the reference is evidently to Valerian
 himself.

 [884] By the autois some understand tois basileusi; others better, tois
 daimosi. According to Valesius, the sense is this: that Macrianus
 having, by the help and presages of the demons, attained his hope of
 empire, made a due return to them, by setting Valerian in arms against
 the Christians.

 [885] epi ton katholou logon. The Greeks gave this name to those
 officials whom the Latins called rationales, or procuratores summæ rei.
 Under what emperor Macrianus was procurator, is left uncertain here.

 [886] ouden eulogon oude katholikon ephronesen. There is a play here on
 the two senses of the word katholikos , as seen in the official title
 epi ton katholou logon, and in the note of character in oude
 katholikon. But it can scarcely be reproduced in the English.

 [887] ouai tois propheteuousin apo kardias auton kai to katholou me
 blepousin. The quotation is probably from Ezek. xiii. 3, of which
 Jerome gives this interpretation: Vae his qui prophetant ex corde suo
 et omnino non vident.

 [888] Robertus Stephanus edits tes heautou ekklesias, "from his
 Church," following the Codex Medicæus. But the best manuscripts give
 soterias.

 [889] A play upon the name Macrianus, as connected with makran, "at a
 distance." [This playfulness runs through the section.]

 [890] empaigmata.

 [891] Isa. lxvi. 3, 4.

 [892] Christophorsonus refers this to Valerian. But evidently the
 houtos de introduces a different subject in Macrianus; and besides,
 Valerian could not be said to have been originally unworthy of the
 power which he aspired to.

 [893] ton basileion hupodunai kosmon.

 [894] anapero.

 [895] Joannes Zonaras, in his Annals, states that Macrianus was lame.

 [896] hon etuchei. So Codex Regius reads. But Codices Maz., Med., and
 Fuk. give eutuchei, "in which he succeeded."

 [897] exomorxato.

 [898] Eusebius introduces the extract thus: He (Dionysius) addressed
 also an epistle to Hermammon and the brethren in Egypt; and after
 giving an account of the wickedness of Decius and his successors, he
 states many other circumstances, and also mentions the peace of
 Gallienus. And it is best to hear his own relation as follows.

 [899] This is rightly understood of Macrianus, by whose treachery
 Valerian came under the power of the Persians. Aurelius Victor,
 Syncellus, and others, testify that Valerian was overtaken by that
 calamity through the treachery of his generals.

 [900] Isa. xlii. 9.

 [901] prostas. But Valesius would read prosstas, adstans.

 [902] prospelasas is the reading of three of the codices and of
 Nicephorus; others give propelasas.

 [903] [Rom. xiii. 4, 6. St. Paul's strong expressions in this place
 must explain these expressions. A prince was, quoad hoc, comparatively
 speaking, godly and pious, as he "attended continually to this very
 thing." So, "most religious," in the Anglican Liturgy.]

 [904] Who ever expressed himself thus,--that one after his seven years
 was passing his ninth year? This septennium (eptaeteris ) must
 designate something peculiar, and different from the time following it.
 It is therefore the septennium of imperial power which he had held
 along with his father. In the eighth year of that empire, Macrianus
 possessed himself of the imperial honour specially in Egypt. After his
 assumption of the purple, however, Gallienus had still much authority
 in Egypt. At length, in the ninth year of Gallienus, that is, in 261,
 Macrianus the father and the two sons being slain, the sovereignty of
 Gallienus was recognised also among the Egyptians. And then Gallienus
 gave a rescript to Dionysius, Pinna, and Demetrius, bishops of Egypt,
 to re-establish the sacred places,--a boon which he had granted in the
 former year. The ninth year of Gallienus, moreover, began about the
 midsummer of this year; and the time at which this letter was written
 by Dionysius, as Eusebius observes, may be gathered from that, and
 falls consequently before the Paschal season of 262 a.d.--Pearson, p.
 72. Gall.

 Epistle XII.--To the Alexandrians. [905]

 ------------------------

 1. To other men, indeed, the present state of matters would not appear
 to offer a fit season for a festival: and this certainly is no festal
 time to them; nor, in sooth, is any other that to them. And I say this,
 not only of occasions manifestly sorrowful, [906] but even or all
 occasions whatsoever which people might consider to be most joyous.
 [907] And now certainly all things are turned to mourning, and all men
 are in grief, and lamentations resound through the city, by reason of
 the multitude of the dead and of those who are dying day by day. For as
 it is written in the case of the first-born of the Egyptians, so now
 too a great cry has arisen. "For there is not a house in which there is
 not one dead." [908] And would that even this were all!

 2. Many terrible calamities, it is true, have also befallen us before
 this. For first they drove us away; and though we were quite alone, and
 pursued by all, and in the way of being slain, we kept our festival,
 even at such a time. And every place that had been the scene of some of
 the successive sufferings which befell any of us, became a seat for our
 solemn assemblies,--the field, the desert, the ship, the inn, the
 prison,--all alike. The most gladsome festival of all, however, has
 been celebrated by those perfect martyrs who have sat down at the feast
 in heaven. And after these things war and famine surprised us. These
 were calamities which we shared, indeed, with the heathen. But we had
 also to bear by ourselves alone those ills with which they outraged us,
 and we had at the same time to sustain our part in those things which
 they either did to each other or suffered at each other's hands; while
 again we rejoiced deeply in that peace of Christ which He imparted to
 us alone.

 3. And after we and they together had enjoyed a very brief season of
 rest, this pestilence next assailed us,--a calamity truly more dreadful
 to them than all other objects of dread, and more intolerable than any
 other kind of trouble whatsoever; [909] and a misfortune which, as a
 certain writer of their own declares, alone prevails over all hope. To
 us, however, it was not so; but in no less measure than other ills it
 proved an instrument for our training and probation. For it by no means
 kept aloof from us, although it spread with greatest violence among the
 heathen.

 4. To these statements he in due succession makes this
 addition:--Certainly very many of our brethren, while, in their
 exceeding love and brotherly-kindness, they did not spare themselves,
 but kept by each other, and visited the sick without thought of their
 own peril, and ministered to them assiduously, and treated them for
 their healing in Christ, died from time to time most joyfully along
 with them, lading themselves with pains derived from others, and
 drawing upon themselves their neighbours' diseases, and willingly
 taking over to their own persons the burden of the sufferings of those
 around them. [910] And many who had thus cured others of their
 sicknesses, and restored them to strength, died themselves, having
 transferred to their own bodies the death that lay upon these. And that
 common saying, which else seemed always to be only a polite form of
 address, [911] they expressed in actual fact then, as they departed
 this life, like the "off-scourings of all." [912] Yea, the very best of
 our brethren have departed this life in this manner, including some
 presbyters and some deacons, and among the people those who were in
 highest reputation: so that this very form of death, in virtue of the
 distinguished piety and the steadfast faith which were exhibited in it,
 appeared to come in nothing beneath martyrdom itself.

 5. And they took the bodies of the saints on their upturned hands,
 [913] and on their bosoms, and closed [914] their eyes, and shut their
 mouths. And carrying them in company, [915] and laying them out
 decently, they clung to them, and embraced them, and prepared them duly
 with washing and with attire. And then in a little while after they had
 the same services done for themselves, as those who survived were ever
 following those who departed before them. But among the heathen all was
 the very reverse. For they thrust aside any who began to be sick, and
 kept aloof even from their dearest friends, and cast the sufferers out
 upon the public roads half dead, and left them unburied, and treated
 them with utter contempt when they died, steadily avoiding any kind of
 communication and intercourse with death; which, however, it was not
 easy for them altogether to escape, in spite of the many precautions
 they employed. [916]

 [905] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vii. 22. Eusebius prefaces the 21st
 chapter of his seventh book thus: "When peace had scarcely yet been
 established, he (Dionysius) returned to Alexandria. But when sedition
 and war again broke out, and made it impossible for him to have access
 to all the brethren in that city, divided as they then were into
 different parties, he addressed them again by an epistle at the
 Passover, as if he were still an exile from Alexandria." Then he
 inserts the epistle to Hierax; and thereafter, in ch. xxii., introduces
 the present excerpt thus: "After these events, the pestilence
 succeeding the war, and the festival being now at hand, he again
 addressed the brethren by letters, in which he gave the following
 description of the great troubles connected with that calamity."

 [906] ouch hopos ton epilupon is the reading of Codices Maz., Med., and
 Savil.; others give, less correctly, epiloipon.

 [907] The text gives, all' oud' ei tis perichares hon oietheien
 malista, which is put probably for the mere regular construction, hon
 hoiointo an malista perichare. Nicephorus reads, ei tis perichares on
 oitheie. The idea is, that the heathen could have no real festal time.
 All seasons, those apparently most joyous, no less than those evidently
 sorrowful, must be times void of all real rejoicing to them, until they
 learn the grace of God.

 [908] Ex. xii. 30.

 [909] Dionysius is giving a sort of summary of all the calamities which
 befell the Alexandrian church from the commencement of his episcopal
 rule: namely, first, persecution, referring to that which began in the
 last year of the reign of Philip; then war, meaning the civil war of
 which he speaks in his Epistle to Fabius; then pestilence, alluding to
 the sickness which began in the time of Decius, and traversed the land
 under Gallus and Volusianus.--Vales.

 [910] anamassomenoi tas algedonas. Some make this equivalent to
 mitigantes. It means properly to "wipe off," and so to become
 "responsible" for. Here it is used apparently to express much the same
 idea as the two preceding clauses.

 [911] mones philophrosunes echesthai.

 [912] The phrase peripsema panton refers to 1 Cor. iv. 13. Valesius
 supposes that among the Alexandrians it may have been a humble and
 complimentary form of salutation, ego eimi peripsema sou; or that the
 expression peripsema panton had come to be habitually applied to the
 Christians by the heathen.

 [913] huptiais chersi. [See Introductory Note, p. 77.]

 [914] kathairountes.

 [915] homophorountes.

 [916] Compare Defoe, Plague in London.]

 Epistle XIII.--To Hierax, a Bishop in Egypt. [917]

 ------------------------

 1. But what wonder should there be if I find it difficult to
 communicate by letter with those who are settled in remote districts,
 when it seems beyond my power even to reason with myself, and to take
 counsel with [918] my own soul? For surely epistolary communications
 are very requisite for me with those who are, as it were, my own
 bowels, my closest associates, and my brethren--one in soul with
 myself, and members, too, of the same Church. And yet no way opens up
 by which I can transmit such addresses. Easier, indeed, would it be for
 one, I do not say merely to pass beyond the limits of the province, but
 to cross from east to west, than to travel from this same Alexandria to
 Alexandria. For the most central pathway in this city [919] is vaster
 [920] and more impassable even than that extensive and untrodden desert
 which Israel only traversed in two generations; and our smooth and
 waveless harbours have become an image of that sea through which the
 people drove, at the time when it divided itself and stood up like
 walls on either side, and in whose thoroughfare the Egyptians were
 drowned. For often they have appeared like the Red Sea, in consequence
 of the slaughter perpetrated in them. The river, too, which flows by
 the city, has sometimes appeared drier than the waterless desert, and
 more parched than that wilderness in which Israel was so overcome with
 thirst on their journey, that they kept crying out against Moses, and
 the water was made to stream for them from the precipitous [921] rock
 by the power of Him who alone doeth wondrous things. And sometimes,
 again, it has risen in such flood-tide, that it has overflowed all the
 country round about, and the roads, and the fields, as if it threatened
 to bring upon us once more that deluge of waters which occurred in the
 days of Noah.

 2. But now it always flows onward, polluted with blood and slaughters
 and the drowning struggles of men, just as it did of old, when on
 Pharaoh's account it was changed by Moses into blood, and made putrid.
 And what other liquid could cleanse water, which itself cleanses all
 things? How could that ocean, so vast and impassable for men, though
 poured out on it, ever purge this bitter sea? Or how could even that
 great river which streams forth from Eden, [922] though it were to
 discharge the four hearts into which it is divided into the one channel
 of the Gihon, [923] wash away these pollutions? Or when will this air,
 befouled as it is by noxious exhalations which rise in every direction,
 become pure again? For there are such vapours sent forth from the
 earth, and such blasts from the sea, and breezes from the rivers, and
 reeking mists from the harbours, that for dew we might suppose
 ourselves to have the impure fluids [924] of the corpses which are
 rotting in all the underlying elements. And yet, after all this, men
 are amazed, and are at a loss to understand whence come these constant
 pestilences, whence these terrible diseases, whence these many kinds of
 fatal inflictions, whence all that large and multiform destruction of
 human life, and what reason there is why this mighty city no longer
 contains within it as great a number of inhabitants, taking all parties
 into account, from tender children up to those far advanced in old age,
 as once it maintained of those alone whom it called hale old men. [925]
 But those from forty years of age up to seventy were so much more
 numerous then, that their number cannot be made up now even when those
 from fourteen to eighty years of age have been added to the roll and
 register of persons who are recipients of the public allowances of
 grain. And those who are youngest in appearance have now become, as it
 were, equals in age with those who of old were the most aged. And yet,
 although they thus see the human race constantly diminishing and
 wasting away upon the earth, they have no trepidation in the midst of
 this increasing and advancing consumption and annihilation of their own
 number.

 [917] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., vii. 21. The preface to this extract in
 Eusebius is as follows: "After this he (Dionysius) wrote also another
 Paschal epistle to Hierax, a bishop in Egypt, in which he makes the
 following statement about the sedition then prevailing at Alexandria."

 [918] Or, for.

 [919] mesaitate tes poleos. Codex Regius gives ton poleon. The sedition
 referred to as thus dividing Alexandria is probably that which broke
 out when Æmilianus seized the sovereignty in Alexandria. See Pollio's
 Thirty Tyrants.

 [920] apeiros. But Codices Fuk. and Savil. give aporos,
 "impracticable."

 [921] akrotomou. It may perhaps mean "smitten" here.

 [922] 'Edem.

 [923] Written Geon in Codex Alexandrinus, but Geon in Codex Vaticanus.

 [924] ichoras.

 [925] homogerontas.

 Epistle XIV.--From His Fourth Festival Epistle. [926]

 ------------------------

 Love is altogether and for ever on the alert, and casts about to do
 some good even to one who is unwilling to receive it. And many a time
 the man who shrinks from it under a feeling of shame, and who declines
 to accept services of kindness on the ground of unwillingness to become
 troublesome to others, and who chooses rather to bear the burden of his
 own grievances than cause annoyance and anxiety to any one, is
 importuned by the man who is full of love to bear with his aids, and to
 suffer himself to be helped by another, though it might be as one
 sustaining a wrong, and thus to do a very great service, not to
 himself, but to another, in permitting that other to be the agent in
 putting an end to the ill in which he has been involved.

 [926] ek tes d' heortastikes epistoles. From the Sacred Parallels of
 John of Damascus, Works, ii. p. 753 C, edit. Paris, 1712. In his
 Ecclesiastical History, book vii. ch. 20, Eusebius says: "In addition
 to these epistles, the same Dionysius also composed others about this
 time, designated his Festival Epistles, and in these he says much in
 commendation of the Paschal feast. One of these he addressed to
 Flavius, and another to Domitius and Didymus, in which he gives the
 canon for eight years, and shows that the Paschal feast ought not to be
 kept until the passing of the vernal equinox. And besides these, he
 wrote another epistle to his co-presbyters at Alexandria."

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 (Apocalypse, note 7, p. 105, and note 9, p. 106.)

 The moderation of Dionysius is hardly less conspicuous than his
 fearlessness of inquiry in the questions he raises about the
 Apocalypse. [927] He utterly refuses to reject it. [928] He testifies
 to the value set upon it by his fellow-Christians. Only, he doubts as
 to (the John) the "inspired person" who was its author, and with
 critical skill exposes the inferiority of the Greek of the Apocalypse
 to that of the Gospel and Epistles of St. John. Obviously he accepts it
 as part of the canon, only doubting as to the author. Modestly he owns
 that it passes his understanding. So Calvin forbore to comment upon it,
 and owned to "headache" when he came to it.

 [927] P. 84, note 6.

 [928] P. 82, note 6.
