Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (trans. John Parker), The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite (1897)
==========================================================================
The complete Dionysian corpus in Parker's pioneering English translation — Divine Names, Mystical Theology, Letters, and the Celestial and Ecclesiastical Hierarchies. The fountainhead of Christian negative theology and angelology. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

BR
<b5

E5

EMMAlUia

STOR


ras


WPi


THE  LIBRARY

o£

VICTORIA  UNIVERSITY

Toronto


THE   WORKS   OF

DIONYSIUS  THE  AREOPAGITE.

PART    I.

DIVINE  NAMES,  MYSTIC  THEOLOGY,

LETTERS,   &c.

NOW  FIRST   TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH,
FROM   THE   ORIGINAL   GREEK,

BY   THE

REV.  JOHN    PARKER,  M.A.

Author  of  "  Christianity  Chronologically  Confirmed."  ^
«  Why  am  I  a  Christian?"    " Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  <


"  How  charming  is  Divine  Philosophy  !
Not  harsh  and  crabbed,  as  dull  fools  suppose,
But  musical  as  is  Apollo's  lute."


Sames  fatter  atiB  Co.

6   SOUTHAMPTON-STREET,    STRAND,    LONDON

AND    27    BROAD-STREET,    OXFORD.
1897.


BR

65
tiffi

E5

EMMANUEL


My  thanks  are  due  to  Miss  M.  C.  Dawes,  M.A.,for  careful
revision  of  the  translation.


-tor


54^55


I


DEDICATED

TO

L'ABBE   J.    FABRE   D'ENVIEU,

HON.    CANON   OF   ST.  DENIS,

IN    THANKFUL    RECOGNITION

OF    THE

CONFIRMATION     GIVEN     TO     THE     FAITH,

BY    HIS

"LIVRE   DU    PROPHETE   DANIEL."


Felix  es  Gallia  !  quce,  tantos  et  tales  meruisti  suscipere
sacerdotes.


\


;


PRINCIPAL   WORKS   ON   DIONYSIUS
THE   AREOPAGITE.


Editions.
Venice.     Antwerp.     Migne  (Paris).

Translations.
Syriac.     Sergius  of  Ras'ain,    a.d.    530.    B.  Mus.    Add.

12151-2,  22370.
Latin.      Johannes  Scotus.

Johannes  Sarracinus.

Ambrosius  Camaldulensis.

Balthasar  Corderius.

Ficinnus.

Fabure  Stapulensis.
Paraphrase.     Cel.  and  Ecc.  Hier.,  Dean  Colet.
French.     Frere  Jean  de  St.  Frangois.

Monseigneur  Darboy.

L'Abbe  Dulac.
German.  Dr.  Ceslaus  Maria  Schneider.

Dean  Colet  by  Rev.  J.  H.  Lupton.
Rev.  J.  Parker.


English


Commentaries.
John  of  Scythopolis,  490.
Joseph  Huzaja.
Phocas,     bar.     Sergius

Edessa.
John,  Bishop  of  Dara.
Theodore,    bar.   Zarudi

Edessa.
Hugo  of  St.  Victor.
John  of  Salisbury.
Robert  of  Lincoln.
St.  Thomas  Aquinas.
Albertus  Magnus.
Dionysius  Carthusianus.


of


of


Scholia.
Dionysius,  Bishop  of  Alex-
andria, A.D.  250.
Sergius  of  Ras'ain.
Maximus.
Pachymera.


BOOKS   TO   BE   READ.


Vindicise  Areopagaticae,  1702.

Hilduinus  Areopagatica,  9th  Century,  Galenus,  1563.

L'Abbe  Darras,   St.  Denis,   premier  eveque  de   Paris,

1863.    Vives.     Paris.
J.  Baltenweck,  La  question  de  Pauthenticite'  des  Merits

Rixheim,  J.  Sutter.
Vidieu,  St.  Denis  l'Areopagite,  1889.     Firmin  Didot.
Canon  Bernard,  St.  Trophime  d' Aries,  1888.
Schneider,  "  Areopagitica,"  Regensburg,  1884.     Manz.
Jahn,  "  Dionysiaca,"  1889.     Altona.
Millet,  "  Responsio  ad  De  duobus  Dionysiis,"  1642.
Pearson,  "  Ignatii  vindicias,"  with  two  letters  of  "Vos-

sius."     Cambridge.
Erasmus,  "  Ratio  verse,  religionis,"  and  "  Institutio."
Hippolytus,  "  Refutation  of  all  heresies,"    1859.     Got-

tingen.
Dexter's  Chronicon,  Migne,  Tom.  31.
Myrothecum  sacrorum  Elaeochrismaton,  1625-7.
The  Conversion  of  India,  George  Smith,  C.I.E.,  John

Murray,  1893.

WORKS   AGAINST   GENUINENESS.
Launoy,  1660.
Daille\  1666.
Montet,  1848.
Hipler,  1861.

Nirschl,  1888,  Histpolit  Blatter,  p.  172 — 184,  and  p.  257 —
270'.

a  See  Science  de  Dieii,    Schneider  II.  vol.  p.  2-29.     Manz,
1886.


WORKS   AGAINST   GENUINENESS.  Vll

In  British  Museum  there  are  about  30  Editions,  and
40  Treatises,  and  the  Book  of  Hierotheus  (Add.  Rich.
7189),  translation  of  which  is  promised  by  Professor
A.  L,  Frothingham.     Leyden,  E.  J.  Brill.

In  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  Paris,  12  Editions.

Avignon,  16  Editions,  between  1498  and  1600.

Leyden,  superb  MSS.  with  marginal  scholia,  15th
century.

In  Rome  there  are  many  editions.  Unfortunately  the
Codex  produced  at  the  Greek  and  Latin  Council,  in  the
Lateran,  a.d.  660,  is  not  in  the  Vatican,  the  whole
Library  in  the  tower  of  Santa  Francisca  having  been
destroyed  in  12 19.  There  is,  in  the  Vatican,  a  letter
in  Latin  from  Dionysius  to  St.  Paul,  in  which  he  speaks
of  the  beauty  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  no  doubt  as  seen
in  death.  There  is  another  pathetic  letter  to  Timothy
describing  the  martyrdom  of  St.  Paul,  and  his  own  deso-
lation. In  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  Paris,  there  is
an  autobiography  in  Syriac,  in  which  it  is  stated  that
when  St.  Paul  described  the  Crucifixion  in  his  speech
at  Athens,  Dionysius  sent  to  fetch  his  notes,  made  in
Egypt,  which  were  publicly  read  and  found  to  agree  with
St.  Paul,  both  as  to  day  and  hour.  It  says,  St.  Paul's
visit  to  Athens  was  fourteen  years  after  the  darkness
in  Egypt,  which  would  place  the  conversion  of  Diony-
sius A.D.  44.


CONTENTS.


Principal  Works  on  Dionysius  the  Areo
pagite     .


Books  to  be  Read

Works  against  Genuineness

Preface  to  the  "  Divine  Names  "
Divine  Names
Note. — Ignatius


Preface  to  Mystic  Theology  .
Mystic  Theology  .


Preface  to  the  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite
Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

Preface  to  Liturgy      ....
Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius,    Bishop   of   the
Athenians        ....

Objections  to  Genuineness


VI

id.

ix
i

128

129
130

139
141

185

187
202


PREFACE  TO  THE   -DIVINE
NAMES."


The  Treatise  on  "Divine  Names"  was  written
by  Dionysius,  at  the  request  of  Timothy,  and  at  the
instigation  of  Hierotheus,  to  express,  in  a  form  more
easily  understood,  the  more  abstract  Treatise  of
Hierotheus,  who  was  his  chief  instructor  after  St.  Paul.
Its  purpose  is  to  explain  the  epithets  in  Holy  Scripture
applied  alike  to  the  whole  Godhead— Father,  Son,
and  Holy  Ghost.  It  does  not  pretend  to  describe
the  unrevealed  God,  Who  is  beyond  expression  and
conception,  and  can  only  be  known  through  that
union  with  God,  "by  which  we  know,  even  as  we
are  known."  Holy  Scripture  is  the  sole  authority,
beyond  which  we  must  neither  think  nor  speak
of  Almighty  God.  The  Treatise,  being  written  by
one  of  the  most  learned  Greeks,  the  phraseology
is,  naturally,  that  of  Plato  and  Aristotle ;  but  Plato
and  Aristotle  are  not  authorities  here.  When  Plato
treated  his  Hebrew  instructor  with  such  reverence,
and  was  so  versed  in  the  Pentateuch,  we  need  not
be  sensitive  as  to  the  admission  of  Plato's  authority.
But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  on  the  question  of  Ex-
emplars a  and  some  other  points,  the  opinions  of  Plato
are  expressly  refuted.  The  phrase  of  Luther,  "  Plato-
nising,  rather  than  Christianising,"  proves  only  a  very

•   C.  V.  §  2.


X  PREFACE   TO   THE

meagre  acquaintance  with  Dionysius.  The  Greek
language  is  moulded  in  a  marvellous  manner  to
express  the  newly  revealed  Christian  Faith  in  its
most  exalted  form,  in  a  style  which  DaiHe*  confesses
to  be  always  of  the  same  "  colour ; "  and  Pearson,
"always  like  itself."  Jahn  has  followed  Dionysius
step  by  step  in  order  to  trace  the  connection  be-
tween the  language  of  Plato  and  Dionysius,  for  the
purpose  of  exploding  the  puerile  supposition  that
such  complex  writings  as  these  could  have  been
evolved  from  the  elementary  treatises  of  Proclus
and  Plotinus.  Most  probably,  some  of  the  lost
writings  of  Dionysius  are  in  part  preserved  in  those
writers  and  in  Clement  of  Alexandria ;  but  Dionysius
is  the  Master,  not  Pupil !  The  works  are  very  dis-
tinct and  precise  upon  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  and
the  Hypostatic  Union.  Like  St.  Paul,  Dionysius
affirms  that  He,  Who  made  all  things,  is  God ;
and  further  that  Jesus  is  God,  by  some  startling
phraseology.  He  speaks  of  James,  "the  Lord's
brother  b,"  as  "  brother  of  God."  David,  from  whom
was  born  Christ  after  the  flesh,  is  called  "father
of  Godc."  When  speaking  of  the  entombment  of
the  Blessed  Virgin,  he  speaks  of  her  body  as  the
"Life-springing"  and  "God-receptive  body;"  thus
testifying  that  Jesus,  born  of  a  pure  Virgin,  is  Life
and  God.  He  describes  the  miracles  of  Jesus  as
being,  as  it  were,  the  new  and  God-incarnate  energy
of  God  become   Man.     The   newly   coined  words

b  'A5c\<p69eos.  c  QeoiraTop.


PREFACE   TO    THE    "DIVINE    NAMES."  XI

indicate  an  original  thinker  moulding  the  Greek
language  to  a  newly  acquired  faith.  There  are  two
words,  "  Agnosia  "  and  "  Divine  Gloom/'  which  illus-
trate a  principle  running  through  these  writings, —
that  the  negative  of  abstraction  denotes  the  super-
lative positive.  "  Divine  Gloom "  is  the  darkness
from  excessive  light;  "Agnosia "is  neither  ignorance
nor  knowledge  intensified:  but  a  supra-knowledge
of  Him,  Who  is  above  all  things  known.  It  is  "  the
most  Divine  knowledge  of  Almighty  God,  within
the  union  beyond  mind,  when  the  mind,  having
stood  apart  from  all  existing  things,  and  then,  having
dismissed  itself,  has  been  united  to  the  superluminous
rays— thence  and  there,  being  illuminated  by  the
unsearchable  wisdom."  In  the  Mystic  Theology,
Dionysius  exhorts  Timothy  thus, — "  But,  thou,  O
dear  Timothy,  leave  behind  both  sensible  percep-
tion, and  intellectual  efforts,  and  all  objects  of  sense
and  intelligence ;  and  all  things  being  and  not  being,
and  be  raised  aloft  as  far  as  attainable,  ayvoaara^ —
unknowingly  d, — to  the  union  with  Him  above  every
essence  and  knowledge.  For  by  the  resistless  and
absolute  ecstacy  from  thyself,  in  all  purity,  thou  wilt
be  carried  high  to  the  super-essential  ray  of  the
Divine  darkness,  when  thou  hast  cast  away  all,  and
become  liberated  from  all."  Thus,  we  must  pass
beyond  all  things  known,  and  all  things  being,  and
lie  passive  under  the  illuminating  ray  of  God,  if
we   would   attain   the  highest   conception   of  Him,

d  As  beyond  knowledge.


Xll  PREFACE   TO    THE

"  Who  passeth  all  understanding."  God  "  unknown  ''
is  still  the  God  of  Dionysius,  and  He  is  still  to  be
worshipped  unknowingly.  There  is  a  tradition  that
Dionysius  erected  the  altar  in  Athens  "to  God
unknown,"  as  author  of  the  inexplicable  darkness,
which  he  observed  in  Egypt,  and  found  afterwards
from  St  Paul  to  have  been  contemporaneous  with
the  Crucifixion.  Did  St  Paul  adapt  his  discourse
at  Athens  to  the  conversion  of  Dionysius?

The  only  heresiarch,  whom  Dionysius  mentions
by  name,  is  Elymas,  the  Sorcerer,  Simon  Magus,
a  man  of  great  intellectual  attainments  and  a  con-
siderable author.  Flavius  Clemens  and  Eugenius,
Bishop  of  Toledo,  were  disciples  of  Simon  before
their  conversion  to  Christ.  The  tenets  of  Elymas
are  described  by  Hippolytus.  He  formed  an  eclec-
tic system  from  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Christian
Faith,  and  with  Cerinthus  and  Carpocrates  origi-
nated many  heresies  to  which  the  apostolic  epistles
allude,  and  which  in  later  times  became  prominent
in  the  Church.  In  refuting  these  heresies,  by  mani-
festation of  the  truth,  Dionysius  anticipated  many
errors — ancient  and  modern.

Jerome  informs  us  (Scr.  Ecc.  46)  that  Pantsenus6,
one  of  the  most  celebrated  Christian  philosophers
of  Alexandria,  was  sent,  a.d.  193,  by  Demetrius,
Bishop  of  that  city,  to  India,  at  the  request  of  a

e  Conversion  of  India,  p.  12.  Pressense,  The  Earlier  Years
of  Christianity,  Vol.  II.  p.  271.  The  History  of  Mathura
(Muttra),  by  F.  S.  Growse,  on  the  glorification  of  the  Divine

Name.


PREFACE    TO    THE    "DIVINE    NAMES."  Xill

delegation  from  India  for  that  purpose.  Pantaenus
discovered,  on  his  arrival,  that  St.  Bartholomew  (one
of  the  twelve)  had  preached  the  coming  of  Jesus
Christ,  in  that  country.  Pantaenus  found  a  copy  of
the  Hebrew  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  in  India.  Now,
by  the  extract,  contained  in  the  Scholia  of  Maximus,
from  the  Scholia  of  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  (250)
upon  the  Divine  Names,  and  also  by  the  extract
from  a  letter  of  the  same  Dionysius,  recently  dis-
covered in  the  British  Museum f  (Nos.  12151-2),
we  know  that  the  writings  of  Dionysius  the  Areo-
pagite  were  known  and  treasured  in  Alexandria
a  few  years  after  the  death  of  Pantaenus.  Can  we
reasonably  doubt  that  Pantaenus  took  the  writings
of  Dionysius,  and  the  more  abstract  works  of  Hiero-
theus,  to  India?  Have  we  not  here  an  explanation
of  the  remarkable  similarity  between  the  Hindu  phi-
losophy, as  expressed  by  Sankara^  in  the  eighth,  and
Ramanuja  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  the  "  Divine
Names  ?  "  Sankara  treats  of  the  Supreme  as  "  abso-
lutely One  ;  "  Ramanuja  as  "  non-dual,  with  quali-
fication." Both  these  truths  are  combined  and  ex-
pressed in  Dionysius.

I  cannot  but  believe  that  many  of  the  beautiful  ex-
pressions about  Vishnu,  the  Redeemer,  in  the  Rama-
yana  of  Tulsi-das  are  Christian  Truths  under  a  Hindu
dress  h.     Many  learned  Hindus  affirm  that  it  is  need-

f  Vidieu,  p.  73.

«  Ankara's  doctrine,  Sir  Monier  Williams,  "  Brahmanism,"
p.  55.  Ramanuja' s  explained,  "Brahmanism,"  p.  119,  &c.
J,  Murray.

h  At  Council  of  Nicea  in  325,  Johannes,  the  Metropolitan


Xiv  PREFACE   TO   THE    "DIVINE   NAMES."

less  for  them  to  become  Christian,  because  they  have
a  more  exalted  conception  of  the  Supreme  God  than
Christians  themselves.  I  submit  that  the  "  Divine
Names  "  will  be  instrumental  in  bringing  India  to  the
Christian  Faith,  in  the  best  and  only  effectual  way—
by  communities  and  not  by  individuals— through  the
most  learned  and  devout,  and  not  through  the  most
ignorant.

Dionysius  was  first  converted,  and  then,  through
him,  those  who  naturally  and  properly  followed  his
lead.

Lucius  Flavius  Dexter.

Dexter  was  a  friend  of  Jerome.  Jerome  even  ad-
dresses him  as  "films  amicus,"  and  describes  him
as  "  clarus  apud  saeculum  et  Christi  fidei  deditus."

Dexter  became  Prefect  of  the  Pretorian  Oriental
Guards,  and  was  one  of  the  most  illustrious  states-
men of  his  time.  He  resided  two  years  in  Toledo.
From  the  archives  of  the  Church  of  Toledo  and  other
cities  he  compiled  a  chronicle  from  a.d.  i  to  a.d.  430,
giving  a  brief  summary  of  the  Church  events  in  Spain.
That  chronicle  he  dedicated  to  Jerome,  who  enrolled
both  Chronicle  and  Author  amongst  his  "  illustrious
men."  It  was  at  the  request  of  Dexter  that  Jerome
wrote  his  book  on  Ecclesiastical  Writers.  Among
the  earliest  Bishops  of  Toledo,  Dexter  describes  a  re-
markable man,— Marcellus—  surnamed  Eugenius,  on
account  of  his  noble  birth.

of  Persia,  signed  also  as  "of  the  great  India."     Merv  was  an
Episcopa  See,  a.d.  334.     Con.  of  India,  pp.  IS — 31-


PREFACE   TO    THE    "  DIVINE    NAMES."  XV

Bivarius  says  he  was  of  the  house  and  family  of
Caesar,  being  uncle  to  the  Emperor  Hadrian.  Mar-
cellus  was  consecrated  Bishop  by  Dionysius  the  Areo-
pagite  at  Aries,  and  sent  to  Toledo.  Respecting
him,  Dexter  records  that  Dionysius  dedicated  the
books  of  the  Divine  Names  to  him,  u.c.  851,  a.d.  98.
Dexter  further  records  that  Dionysius  surnamed
Marcellus,  Timothy,  on  account  of  his  excellent
disposition.  Polycrates,  Bishop  of  Ephesus,  relates
that  Timothy,  Bishop  of  Ephesus,  to  whom  the
works  of  Dionysius  were  originally  dedicated,  was
martyred  during  the  reign  of  Nerva,  a.d.  96-97.
Upon  the  return  of  Dionysius  to  Gaul,  after  his  visit
to  St.  John,  released  from  Patmos,  we  find  him  calling
his  friend  Marcellus,  Timothy,  and  presenting  the
books  of  the  "Divine  Names"  to  him,  a.d.  98;  in
order  that  he  might  still  have  a  Timothy  on  earth, —
"  in  vivis  " — although  his  first  Timothy,  "  migravit  ad
Christum,"  a.d.  97.

This  touch  of  nature,  preserved  in  a  chronicle,
written  more  than  1400  years  ago,  by  an  illustrious
statesman,  who  was  son  of  a  Bishop  celebrated  for
learning  and  sanctity,  may  fairly  be  deemed,  by  an
unprejudiced  mind,  reasonable  proof  that  the  "Divine
Names  "  were  written  previous  to  a.d.  98.

N.B.  As  the  result  of  some  research  I  affirm  that
our  Saviour's  last  commission  is  the  Key  to  Church
history  in  the  first  century.  As  He  commanded  the
Apostles  to  preach  the  Gospel  throughout  the  world,
so  the  Gospel  was  preached  when  St.  Paul  wrote  his


Xvi  PREFACE   TO    THE    "DIVINE   NAMES.

Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  Chap.  I.  v.  23  (row  kt)PvX-
Oeuros  iv  Trdat]  Kriaei),  and  with  such  success  amongst
the  most  learned  and  noble,  that,  but  for  the  cruel
massacre  of  Flavius '  Clemens  and  his  family  for  the
Christian  Faith,  there  would  have  been  a  Christian
Emperor  in  the  first  century.  As  Jesus  said,  "  Ye
shall  be  witnesses  of  Me  unto  the  uttermost  parts
of  the  earth "  (Acts  Chap.  I.  v.  8),  so  the  Apostles
planted  the  Church  of  Christ  in  Gaul,  Spain  and
Britain,  with  its  threefold  ministry ;  and  by  the  end
of  the  second  century  there  was  an  organised  Church
throughout  each  of  those  territories  \

Dr.  Schneider  informs  me  "  that  in  Germany  they
now  admit  that  the  external  proofs  are  in  favour
of  genuineness  of  Dionysius,  but  they  confine  them-
selves to  the  internal  proofs.  They  pretend  that
the  doctrine  is  too  clear  and  precise  to  have  been
written  in  the  apostolic  age."

How  could  the  chief  Areopagite,  the  convert  and
companion  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  familiar  friend  of
St.  John,  Theologus,  have  understood  theology  ! !

i  Burton,  Ecc.  Hist.,  Vol.  I.  p.  367-

*  Mansi  I.  698,  Jaffi.  Regesta  Rom.  Pon.  2nd  Ed.,  p.  10,
by  Ewald.


DIONYSIUS    THE    AREOPAGITE,
ON   DIVINE    NAMES.


CAPUT   I.
To  my  Fellow  Presbyter,  Timothy,

DlONYSIUS    THE    PRESBYTER.

What  is  the  purpose  of  the  discourse,  and  what  the
tradition  concerning  Divine  Names.

Section  I,

Now  then,  O  Blessed  One,  after  the  Theological
Outlines*,  I  will  pass  to  the  interpretation  of  the
Divine  Names,  as  best  I  can.

But,  let  the  rule  of  the  Oracles  be  here  also
prescribed  for  us,  viz.,  that  we  shall  establish  the
truth  of  the  things  spoken  concerning  God,  not
in  the  persuasive  words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in
demonstration  of  the  Spirit-moved  power  of  the
Theologians,  by  aid  of  which  we  are  brought  into
contact  with  things  unutterable  and  unknown,  in
a  manner  unutterable  and  unknown,  in  propor-
tion to  the  superior  union  of  the  reasoning  and
intuitive  faculty  and  operation  within  us.  By  no
means  then  is  it  permitted  to  speak,  or  even  to
think,  anything,  concerning  the  superessential  and
hidden  Deity,  beyond  those  things  divinely  revealed
to  us  in  the  sacred  Oracles  b.     For  Agnosia  (supra-

■  Cap.  3.  Mystic  Theology.  b  lb.  c.  I.  s.  3.


2  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

knowledge)  of  its  superessentiality  above  reason  and
mind  and  essence — to  it  must  we  attribute  the  super-
essential  science,  so  far  aspiring  to  the  Highest,  as
the   ray  of  the   supremely  Divine   Oracles   imparts
itself,  whilst  we  restrain  ourselves  in  our  approach  to
the  higher  glories  by  prudence  and  piety  as  regards
things  Divine.     For,  if  we  must  place  any  confidence
in   the   All  Wise   and   most   trustworthy  Theology,
things  Divine  are  revealed  and  contemplated  in  pro-
portion to  the  capacity  of  each  of  the  minds,  since
the  supremely  Divine  Goodness  distributes  Divinely
its    immeasurableness    (as    that   which    cannot    be
contained)   with    a    justice   which    preserves    those
whose  capacity  is  limited.     For,  as  things  intelligible
cannot    be    comprehended    and    contemplated    by
things  of  sense,  and  things  uncompounded  and  un-
formed by  things  compounded  and  formed  ;  and  the
intangible    and    unshaped    formlessness    of    things
without   body,   by  those   formed   according   to   the
shapes  of  bodies  ;  in  accordance  with  the  self- same
analogy  of  the  truth,  the  superessential  Illimitability
is  placed  above  things  essential,  and  the  Unity  above
mind  above  the  Minds  j    and  the  One  above  con-
ception is  inconceivable  to  all  conceptions  ;    and  the
Good   above   word   is   unutterable   by  word — Unit
making  one  every  unit,  and  superessential   essence
and    mind    inconceivable,   and    Word    unutterable,
speechlessness0   and  inconception d,    and    nameless-
ness— being  after  the  manner  of  no  existing  being,
and   Cause   of  being   to   all,  but  Itself  not   being,

c  a\oyia.  d  aforjaia.


on  Divine  Names.  3

as  beyond  every  essence,   and  as   It  may  manifest
Itself  properly  and  scientifically  concerning  Itself.

Section  II.
Concerning  this  then,  as  has  been  said,  the  super-
essential  and  hidden  Deity,  it  is  not  permitted  to
speak  or  even  to  think  beyond  the  things  divinely
revealed  to  us  in  the  sacred  Oracles.  For  even  as
Itself  has  taught  (as  becomes  Its  goodness)  in  the
Oracles,  the  science  and  contemplation  of  Itself
in  Its  essential  Nature  is  beyond  the  reach  of  all
created  things,  as  towering  superessentially  above
all.  And  you  will  find  many  of  the  Theologians,
who  have  celebrated  It,  not  only  as  invisible  and
incomprehensible,  but  also  as  inscrutable  and  un-
traceable, since  there  is  no  trace  of  those  who  have
penetrated  to  Its  hidden  infinitude.  The  Good
indeed  is  not  entirely  uncommunicated  to  any  single
created  being,  but  benignly  sheds  forth  its  super-
essential  ray,  persistently  fixed  in  Itself,  by  illumin-
ations analagous  to  each  several  being,  and  elevates
to  Its  permitted  contemplation  and  communion  and
likeness,  those  holy  minds,  who,  as  far  as  is  lawful
and  reverent,  strive  after  It,  and  who  are  neither  im-
potently  boastful  towards  that  which  is  higher  than
the  harmoniously  imparted  Divine  manifestation,  nor,
in  regard  to  a  lower  level,  lapse  downward  through
their  inclining  to  the  worse,  but  who  elevate  them-
selves determinately  and  unwaveringly  to  the  ray
shining  upon  them ;  and,  by  their  proportioned  love


4  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

of  permitted  illuminations,  are  elevated  with  a  holy
reverence,  prudently  and  piously,  as  on  new  wings.

Section  III.
Following  then,  these,  the  supremely  Divine  stand-
ards, which  also  govern  the  whole  holy  ranks  of  the
supercelestial    orders, — whilst   honouring   the    unre-
vealed  of  the  Godhead  which  is  beyond  mind  and
matter,  with  inscrutable  and  holy  reverence  of  mind,
and   things  unutterable,  with  a  prudent   silence,  we
elevate  ourselves  to  the  glories  which  illuminate  us
in  the  sacred  Oracles,  and  are  led  by  their  light  to
the   supremely    Divine    Hymns,   by   which   we    are
supermundanely   enlightened   and    moulded   to   the
sacred  Songs  of  Praise,  so  as  both  to  see  the  su-
premely Divine  illuminations  given   to  us  by  them,
according  to  our  capacities,  and  to  praise  the  good-
giving  Source  of  every  holy  manifestation  of  light,  as
Itself   has   taught   concerning   Itself   in  the  sacred
Oracles.     For  instance,  that  It  is  cause  and  origin
and  essence  and  life  of  all  things  j  and  even  of  those
who   fall  away  from   It,  both   recalling   and   resur-
rection ;     and  of  those  who  have  lapsed  to  the  per-
version of  the  Divine  likeness,  renewal  and  reforma-
tion ;    of  those  who  are  tossed  about  in  a  sort  of  ir-
religious unsteadiness,  a  religious  stability ;    of  those
who  have  continued  to  stand,  steadfastness  :  of  those
who  are  being  conducted  to  It,  a  protecting  Con-
ductor ;  of  those  being  illuminated,  illumination  ;  of
those  being  perfected,  source  of  perfection  ;  of  those
being  deified,  source  of  deification ;    of  those  being


on  Divine  Names.  5

simplified,  simplification ;  of  those  being  unified,
unity;  of  every  origin  superessentially  super-original
origin ;  and  of  the  Hidden,  as  far  as  is  right,  bene-
ficent communication  ;  and,  in  one  word,  the  life  of
the  living,  and  essence  of  things  that  be  ;  of  all  life  and
essence,  origin  and  cause ;  because  Its  goodness  pro-
duces and  sustains  things  that  be,  in  their  being e.

Section  IV.
These  things  we  have  learned  from  the  Divine
Oracles,  and  you  will  find  all  the  sacred  Hymnology,
so  to  speak,  of  the  Theologians  arranging  the  Names
of  God  with  a  view  to  make  known  and  praise  the
beneficent  progressions  of  the  Godhead.  Hence,  we
see  in  almost  every  theological  treatise  the  Godhead
religiously  celebrated,  both  as  Monad  and  unity,  on
account  of  the  simplicity  and  oneness  of  Its  super-
natural indivisibility  from  which,  as  an  unifying
power,  we  are  unified,  and  when  our  divided  diver-
sities have  been  folded  together,  in  a  manner  super-
mundane, we  are  collected  into  a  godlike  unit  and
divinely-imitated  union;  but,  also  as  Triad,  on
account  of  the  tri-personal  manifestation  of  the
superessential  productiveness,  from  which  all  pater-
nity in  heaven  and  on  earth  is,  and  is  named ;  also,
as  cause  of  things  existing,  since  all  things  were
brought  into  being  on  account  of  Its  creative  good-
ness, both  wise  and  good,  because  all  things,  whilst
preserving  the  properties  of  their  own  nature  unim-

e  Sia  riji/  avTTJs  els  rb  etuai  ra  tvra  irapaKTiK^v  kuI  (Twox^k^v
ayadSTTfra.


6  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

paired,  are  filled  with  every  inspired  harmony  and
holy  comeliness,  but  pre-eminently,  as  loving  towards
man,  because  It  truly  and  wholly  shared,  in  one  of  Its
Persons  (subsistences),  in  things  belonging  to  us,
recalling  to  Itself  and  replacing  the  human  extremity,
out  of  which,  in  a  manner  unutterable,  the  simplex
Jesus f  was  composed,  and  the  Everlasting  took
a  temporal  duration,  and  He,  Who  is  superessen-
tially  exalted  above  every  rank  throughout  all  nature,
became  within  our  nature,  whilst  retaining  the
unchangeable  and  unconfused  steadfastness  of  His
own  properties.  And  whatever  other  divinely-wrought
illuminations,  conformable  to  the  Oracles,  the  secret
tradition  of  our  inspired  leaders  bequeathed  to  us  for
our  enlightenment,  in  these  also  we  have  been  in-
itiated ;  now  indeed,  according  to  our  capacity,
through  the  sacred  veils  of  the  loving-kindness
towards  man,  made  known  in  the  Oracles  and  hier-
archical traditions,  which  envelop  things  intellectual
in  things  sensible,  and  things  superessential  in  things
that  are;  and  place  forms  and  shapes  around  the
formless  and  shapeless,  and  multiply  and  fashion  the
supernatural  and  formless  simplicity  in  the  variedness
of  the  divided  symbols;  but,  then,  when  we  have
become  incorruptible  and  immortal,  and  have  reached
the  Christlike  and  most  blessed  repose,  according  to
the  Divine  saying,  we  shall  be  "  ever  with  the  Lord,"
fulfilled,  through  all-pure  contemplations,  with  the
visible  manifestation  of  God  covering  us  with  glory,
in  most  brilliant  splendours,  as  the  disciples  in  the


on  Divine  Names.  7

most    Divine    Transfiguration,  and    participating   in
His  gift  of  spiritual  light,  with  unimpassioned  and
immaterial  mind  ;   and,   even  in  the  union  beyond
conception,  through  the  agnostic  and  most  blessed
efforts  after  rays  of  surpassing  brilliancy,  in  a  more
Divine    imitation   of  the  supercelestial  minds.     For
we  shall  be  equal  to  the  angels,  as  the  truth  of  the
Oracles  affirms,  and  sons  of  God,  being  sons  of  the
resurrection.     But  now,  to  the  best  of  our  ability,
we  use  symbols  appropriate  to   things   Divine,  and
from  these  again  we  elevate  ourselves,  according  to
our  degree,  to  the  simple  and  unified  truth  of  the
spiritual  visions  ;  and  after  our  every  conception  of
things  godlike,  laying  aside  our  mental  energies,  we
cast  ourselves,  to  the  best  of  our  ability,  towards  the
superessential   ray,  in  which  all   the  terms  of  every
kind  of  knowledge  pre-existed  in  a  manner  beyond
expression,  which  it  is  neither  possible  to  conceive
nor  express,  nor  entirely  in  any  way  to  contemplate,
on   account  of    Its    being   pre-eminently   above   all
things,    and    super-unknown,    and    Its   having    pre-
viously contained  within  Itself,   superessentially,  the
whole  perfections  of  all  kinds  of  essential  knowledge
and  power,  and  Its  being  firmly  fixed  by  Its  absolute
power,   above    all,   even    the    supercelestial   minds.
For,  if  all  kinds  of  knowledge  are  of  things  existing,
and  are  limited  to  things  existing,  that,  beyond  all
essence,  is  also  elevated  above  all  knowledge.

Section  V.
And  yet,  if  It  is  superior  to  every  expression  and
every   knowledge,  and   is   altogether  placed  above


8  Dionysius  the  Areopagtte,

mind  and  essence, — being  such  as  embraces  and
unites  and  comprehends  and  anticipates  all  things,
but  Itself  is  altogether  incomprehensible  to  all,  and
of  It,  there  is  neither  perception  nor  imagination,
nor  surmise,  nor  name,  nor  expression,  nor  contact,
nor  science  ; — in  what  way  can  our  treatise  thoroughly
investigate  the  meaning  of  the  Divine  Names,  when
the  superessential  Deity  is  shewn  to  be  without
Name,  and  above  Name  ?

But,  as  we  said  when  we  put  forth  the  Theological
Outlines,  it  is  not  possible  either  to  express  or  to
conceive  what  the  One,  the  Unknown,  the  Super-
essential  self-existing  Good  is, — I  mean  the  threefold
Unity,  the  alike  God,  and  the  alike  Good.  But  even
the  unions,  such  as  befit  angels,  of  the  holy  Powers,
whether  we  must  call  them  efforts  after,  or  recep-
tions from,  the  super-Unknown  and  surpassing
Goodness,  are  both  unutterable  and  unknown,  and
exist  in  those  angels  alone  who,  above  angelic  know-
ledge, are  deemed  worthy  of  them.  The  godlike
minds  (men)  made  one  by  these  unions,  through
imitation  of  angels  as  far  as  attainable  (since  it  is
during  cessation  of  every  mental  energy  that  such
an  union  as  this  of  the  deified  minds  towards  the
super-divine  light  takes  place)  celebrate  It  most  ap-
propriately through  the  abstraction  of  all  created
things — enlightened  in  this  matter,  truly  and  super-
naturally  from  the  most  blessed  union  towards  It —
that  It  is  Cause  indeed  of  all  things  existing,  but
Itself  none  of  them,  as  being  superessentially  elevated
above  all.  To  none,  indeed,  who  are  lovers  of  the
Truth  above  all  Truth,  is  it  permitted  to  celebrate


on  Divine  Names.  9

the  supremely-Divine  Essentiality— that  which  is  the
super-subsistence  of  the  super-goodness, — neither  as
word  or  power,  neither  as  mind  or  life  or  essence,
but  as  pre-eminently  separated  from  every  condition,
movement,  life,  imagination,  surmise,  name,  word,
thought,  conception,  essence,  position,  stability,
union,  boundary,  infinitude,  all  things  whatever.  But
since,  as  sustaining  source  of  goodness,  by  the  very
fact  of  Its  being,  It  is  cause  of  all  things  that  be,  from
all  created  things  must  we  celebrate s  the  benevolent
Providence  of  the  Godhead  ;  for  all  things  are  both
around  It  and  for  It,  and  It  is  before  all  things,  and
all  things  in  It  consist,  and  by  Its  being  is  the  pro-
duction and  sustenance  of  the  whole,  and  all  things
aspire  to  It— the  intellectual  and  rational,  by  means
of  knowledge— things  inferior  to  these,  through  the
senses,  and  other  things  by  living  movement,  or
substantial  and  habitual  aptitude.

Section  VI.

The  theologians,  having  knowledge  of  this,  cele-
brate It,  both  without  Name  and  from  every  Name.
Without  name,  as  when  they  say  that  the  Godhead
Itself,  in  one  of  those  mystical  apparitions  of  the
symbolical  Divine  manifestation,  rebuked  him  who
said,  "What  is  thy  name?"  and  as  leading  him
away  from  all  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Name,  said
this,  "  and  why  dost  thou  ask  my  Name  ?  "  and  this
(Name)  "  is  wonderful."

And  is  not  this  in  reality  the  wonderful  Name,

8  in  TrixvTwv  rS>v  alriarwv  v/xv7)T60P.


io  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

that  which  is  above  every  Name — the  Nameless— that
fixed  above  every  name  which  is  named,  whether  in
this  age  or  in  that  which  is  to  come  ?  Also,  as
"many  named,"  as  when  they  again  introduce  It  as
saying,  "  I  am  He,  Who  is— the  Life— the  Light— the
God — the  Truth."  And  when  the  wise  of  God  them-
selves celebrate  Him,  as  Author  of  all  things,  under
many  Names,  from  all  created  things— as  Good— as
Beautiful — as  Wise— as  Beloved— as  God  of  gods—
as  Lord  of  lords— as  Holy  of  Holies — as  Eternal — as
Being— as  Author  of  Ages— as  Provider  of  Life— as
Wisdom— as  Mind— as  Word— as  Knowing— as  pre-
eminently possessing  all  the  treasures  of  all  know-
ledge— as  Power — as  Powerful — as  King  of  kings—
as  Ancient  of  days — as  never  growing  old — and  Un-
changeable— as  Preservation — as  Righteousness — as
Sanctification — as  Redemption — as  surpassing  all
things  in  greatness — and  as  in  a  gentle  breeze. — Yea,
they  also  say  that  He  is  in  minds,  and  in  souls,  and
in  bodies,  and  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  at  once,
the  same  in  the  same — in  the  world — around  the
world — above  the  world — supercelestial,  superessen-
tial,  sun,  ,  star — fire — water — spirit — dew — cloud —
self-hewn  stone  and  rock — all  things  existing — and
not  one  of  things  existing.

Section  VII.

Thus,    then,    the    "Nameless"  befits    the    cause

of  all,  which  is  also  above  all,  as  do  all  the  names

of  things  existing,  in  order  that  there  may  be  strictly

a  kingly  rule  over  the  whole;    and  that  all  things


on  Divine  Names.  1 1

may  be  around  It  and  dependent  upon  It,  as  cause,
as  beginning,  as  end.  And  Itself,  according  to  the
Divine  saying,  may  be  the  "  all  in  all,"  and  truly
sung  as  of  all,  producing,  directing  and  perfecting  and
sustaining  guard,  and  shrine,  and  turning  towards  It-
self, and  that  uniformly,  irresistibly  and  pre-eminently.
For  It  is  not  only  cause  of  sustenance,  or  life,  or  per-
fection,—so  that  from  this  or  that  forethought  alone
the  Goodness  above  Name  should  be  named,  but  It
previously  embraced  in  Itself  all  things  existing,  abso-
lutely and  without  limit,  by  the  complete  benefactions
of  His  one  and  all-creating  forethought,  and  by  all
created  things  in  joint  accord  It  is  celebrated  and

named.

Section  VIII.

Further  also,  the  Theologians  do  not  honour  alone
the  Names  of  God  which  are  given  from  universal  or
particular  Providences,  or  objects  of  His  forethought ;
but  also  from  certain  occasional  Divine  Visions,  in
the  sacred  temples  or  elsewhere,  which  enlightened
the  initiated  or  the  Prophets,  they  name  the  surpas-
sing bright  Goodness  which  is  above  Name,  after  one
or  other  causes  and  powers,  and  clothe  It  in  forms
and  shapes  of  man,  or  fire,  or  electron,  and  celebrate
Its  eyes  and  ears,  and  locks  of  hair,  and  countenance,
and  hands,  and  back,  and  wings,  and  arms,  and  hinder
parts  and  feet.  Also  they  assign  to  It  crowns h  and
seats,  and  drinking  vessels  and  bowls,  and  certain
other  things  mystical,  concerning  which,  in  our  Sym-
bolic Theology,  we  will  speak  as  best  we  can.     But

h  Letter  to  Titus.


1 2  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

now,  collecting  from  the  Oracles  so  much  as  serves
the  purpose  of  our  present  treatise,  and  using  the
things  aforesaid,  as  a  kind  of  Canon,  and  keeping  our
eyes  upon  them,  let  us  advance  to  the  unfolding  of
the  Names  of  God,  which  fall  within  the  range  of  our
understanding,  and,  what  the  hierarchical  rule  always
teaches  us  throughout  every  phase  of  theology,  let  us
become  initiated  (to  speak  authoritatively)  in  the
godlike  contemplations  with  a  god-enlightened  con-
ception. And  let  us  bring  religious  ears  to  the
unfoldings  of  the  Holy  Names  of  God,  implanting
the  Holy  in  the  Holy,  according  to  the  Divine
tradition,  and  removing  it  from  the  laughter  and
jeers  of  the  uninitiated ;  yea,  rather,  if  certain  men
really  are  such,  purifying  them  from  their  fighting
against  God  in  this  matter.  Be  it  thine,  then,  to
guard  these  things,  O  excellent  Timothy,  according
to  the  most  holy  leading,  and  to  make  the  things
Divine  neither  spoken  nor  known  to  the  uninitiated.
For  myself,  may  Almighty  God  give  me  to  celebrate,
in  a  manner  worthy  of  God,  the  numerous  beneficent
Names  of  the  uncalled  and  unnamed  Deity  ;  and
may  He  not  take  away  a  word  of  truth  from  my
mouth.


CAPUT    II,

Section  I.

Concerning  common  and  distinctive  theology,  and

what  is  the  Divine  Unioti  and  distinction.

Let  then  the  self-existent  Goodness  be  sung  from

the  Oracles  as  defining  and  manifesting  the  whole


on  Divine  Names.  13

supremely-Divine-Subsistence  in  its  essential  nature.
For,  what  else  is  there  to,  learn  from  the  sacred
theology,  when  it  affirms  that  the  Godhead  Itself,
leading  the  way,  says,  "Why  dost  thou  ask  me
concerning  the  Good? — None  is  Good  except  God
alone."  Now,  this,  we  have  thoroughly  demon-
strated elsewhere,  that  always,  all  the  God-becoming
Names  of  God,  are  celebrated  by  the  Oracles,  not
partitively,  but  as  applied  to  the  whole  and  entire
and  complete  and  full  Godhead,  and  that  all  of  them
are  referred  impartitively,  absolutely,  unreservedly,
entirely,  to  all  the  Entirety  of  the  entirely  complete
and  every  Deity.  And  verily  as  we  have  mentioned
in  the  Theological  Outlines,  if  any  one  should  say
that  this  is  not  spoken  concerning  the  whole  Deity,
he  blasphemes,  and  dares,  without  right,  to  cleave
asunder  the  super-unified  Unity.

We  must  affirm,  then,  that  this  is  to  be  received
respecting  the  whole  Deity.  For  even  the  essen-
tially Good  Word  Himself  said,  "I  am  Good1."
And  a  certain  one  of  the  God-rapt  Prophets  cele-
brates the  Spirit  as  "the  GoodJ."  And  again  this,
"  I  am  He,  Who  isk."  If  they  shall  say  that  this  is
said,  not  of  the  whole  Deity,  but  should  violently
limit  it  to  one  part,  how  will  they  understand  this  ?
"  These  things,  saith  He,  Who  is,  Who  was,  Who  is
to  come,  the  Almighty  V  and  "  Thou  art  the  same  m,"
and  this,  "  Spirit  of  truth,  which  is,  which  proceedeth
from  the  Father n."  And  if  they  say  that  the  su-
premely  Divine   Life   is   not   coextensive   with   the

»  Matt.  xx.  15.  J  Neh.  ix.  20.  k  Ex.  iii.  14.

1  Rev.  i.  8.  m  Heb.  i.  12.  n  John  xv.  26.


J4  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

whole,  how  is   the   sacred    Word   true   which  said,
"  As  the  Father  raiseth  the  dead  and  maketh  alive,
so  also  the  Son  maketh  alive  whom  He  will  °,"  and
that  "the  Spirit  is  He,  Who  maketh  alivep?"    But,
that  the  whole  Deity  holds  the  Lordship  over  the
whole,  one  can  scarcely  say,  as  I  think  how  many
times,  in  reference   to   the  Paternal    Deity,   or  the
Filial,  the  word  "Lord"  is  repeated  in  the  Word
of  God,  as  applied  to  Father  and  Son  \     But  the
Spirit  also   is  Lordr.     And  "the  beautiful  and  the
wise"   are   also  sung   respecting   the   whole   Deity.
And    the    light,   and    the  deifying,    and    the    cause,
and  whatever  pertains  to  the  whole   Godhead,  the
Oracles   introduce   into    all   the    supremely    Divine
hymnody— collectively,   when    they    say   "all   things
are  from  Almighty  God  ; "  but,  specifically,  as  when
they  say,  "all  things  were  made  through  Him  and
to    Him,"   and    "all   things    in    Him   consist,"   and
"  Thou  shalt  send  forth  Thy  Spirit,  and  they  shall
be   made."    And,   that   one  may  speak   summarily,
the   supremely  Divine  Word    Himself  said,  "  I  and
the  Father  are  One,"  and  "all  that  the  Father  hath
are  Mine,"  and,  "All  Mine  are  Thine,  and  Thine,
Mine"     And  again,  whatever  pertains  to  the  Father
and  Himself,  He  attributes  to  the  supremely  Divine
Spirit,   collectively  and  in  common— the   works   of
God — the  homage,  the  fontal   and    ceaseless   cause
and   the   distribution   of  the   goodly  gifts.     And   I
think,  none  of  those,  who  have  been  nourished  in
the   Divine  Oracles  with  unprejudiced  conceptions,

0  John  v.  21.  p  lb.  vi.  63.  1   1  Cor.  i.  30.

r  2  Cor.  iii.  17.


on  Divine  Names.  1 5

will  oppose  this,  that  all  things  befitting  God  belong

to  the  whole  Godhead,   according   to    the    divinely

perfect  Word.     Since,  then,   we   have  demonstrated

and   defined  these   things   from   the    Oracles, — here

indeed  partially,  but  elsewhere  sufficiently — we   will

undertake  to  unfold  every  Divine  Name  whatsoever,

which  is  to  be  received  as  referring  to   the   whole

Deity.

Section    II.

But  if  any  one  should  say  that  we  introduce
in  so  doing  a  confusion,  in  disparagement  of  the
distinction  which  befits  God,  we  do  not  think  that
such  a  statement  as  this  is  itself  sufficient  to  con-
vince that  it  is  true.  For,  if  there  is  any  one  who
has  placed  himself  entirely  in  opposition  to  the
Oracles,  he  will  be  also  entirely  apart  from  our
philosophy;  and,  if  he  has  no  care  for  the  divine
Wisdom  of  the  Oracles,  how  shall  we  care  for  his
guidance  to  the  theological  science?  But,  if  he
regards  the  truth  of  the  Oracles,  we  also,  using  this
canon  and  illumination,  will  advance  unwaveringly
to  the  answer,  as  best  we  can,  by  affirming  that
theology  transmits  some  things  as  common,  but
others  as  distinctive ;  and  neither  is  it  meet  to  divide
the  common,  nor  to  confuse  the  distinctive;  but
that  following  It  according  to  our  ability,  we  ought
to  rise  to  the  Divine  splendours ;  for,  by  taking
thence  the  Divine  revelations,  as  a  most  excellent
canon  of  truth,  we  strive  to  guard  the  things  lying
there,  in  their  native  simplicity  and  integrity  and
identity— being   ourselves   guarded  in  our  guard  of


1 6  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

the  Oracles,  and   from   these   receiving  strength  to
guard  those  who  guard  them.

Section  III.
The  (Names)  then,  common  to  the  whole  Deity,
as  we  have  demonstrated  from  the  Oracles,  by  many
instances  in  the  Theological  Outlines,  are  the  Super-
Good,  the  Super-God,  the  Superessential,  the  Super-
Living,  the  Super-Wise,  and  whatever  else  belongs
to  the  superlative  abstraction ;  with  which  also,  all
those  denoting  Cause,  the  Good,  the  Beautiful,  the
Being,  the  Life-producing,  the  Wise,  and  whatever
Names  are  given  to  the  Cause  of  all  Good,  from
His  goodly  gifts.  But  the  distinctive  Names  are
the  superessential  name  and  property  of  Father
and  Son  and  Spirit,  since  no  interchange  or  com-
munity in  these  is  in  any  way  introduced.  But  there
is  a  further  distinction,  viz.,  the  complete  and  un-
altered existence  of  Jesus  amongst  us,  and  all  the
mysteries  of  love  towards  man  actually  existing
within  it.

Section  IV.

But  it  is  rather  necessary,  I  suppose,  to  resume
and  to  set  forth  the  complete  fashion  of  the  Divine
union  and  distinction,  in  order  that  the  whole  dis-
course may  be  seen  at  a  glance  to  reject  everything
ambiguous   and   indistinct,   and  to   define   critically
a.and  distinctly  the  proper  Names,  as  far  as  possible,
think-,  as  I   said  elsewhere,  the  sacred  instructors  of
the  Divpological  tradition  call  the  "  Divine  Unions  "
0  John  vH  and  unrevealed  sublimities  of  the  super-


on  Divine  Names.  17

unutterable  and  super-unknown  Isolation;  but  the
"  distinctions,"  the  goodly  progressions  and  manifes-
tations of  the  Godhead ;    and,  following  the  sacred
Oracles,  they  mention  also  properties  of  the  aforesaid
"Union;"   and  again  of  the  distinction,  that  there
are   certain    specific   unions   and   distinctions.     For
example,   with   regard   to   the    Divine    Union,    that
is,  the  Superessentiality,  there  is  kindred  and  com-
mon to  the  One-springing  Triad,  the  superessential
sustaining  Source,  the  super-Divine  Deity,  the  super-
good  Goodness,  the  supreme  identity  of  the  whole
supreme    Idiosyncrasy,    the   Oneness   above   source
of  one  ;  the  Unspeakable ;  the  Much-speaking,  the
Agnosia,    the    Comprehended    by   all,    the  Placing
of  all,   the  Abstraction  of  all,   that  which  is  above
all   affirmation    and    abstraction,    the    abiding    and
steadfastness   in    each    other,    if  I   may   so    speak,
wholly   super-united   and   in   no   part    commingled
of    the    One-springing    Persons,   just    as    lights   of
lamps  (to  use  sensible  illustrations  familiar  to  our
capacity),  when  in  one  house,  are  both  wholly  dis-
tinct in  each  other  throughout,  and  keep  the  distinc-
tion from  each  other  specifically  and  perfectly  main-
tained,   being   one   in    distinction   and    distinct    in
union ;   and  then,  indeed,  we  may  see  in  a  house,
in  which  are  many  lamps,  the  lights  of  all  united
to  form  one  certain  light  and  lighting  up  one  com-
bined 8  radiance ;  and,  as  I  suppose,  no  one  would
be  able  to  distinguish  in  the  air  containing  all  the
lights  the  light  of  one  or  other  lamp  from  the  rest,

•  aSiaKpiTov,
C


1 8  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

and  to  see  one  without  the  other,  since  whole  in
whole  are  mixed  together  without  being  mingled.
But,  if  any  one  were  to  take  out  from  the  chamber
one  particular  burner,  the  whole  light  belonging
to  it  will  depart  with  it ;  no  particle  of  the  other
lights  being  drawn  along  with  it,  nor  any  of  its  own
light  left  with  the  other.  For  there  was,  as  I  said,
the  complete  union  of  all  with  all,  unmingled  through-
out, and  in  no  part  confused,  and  this  actually  in
a  body,  the  air,  the  light  even  itself  being  dependent
on  the  material  fire.  Whence  we  affirm  that  the
superessential  Union  is  fixed  above  not  only  the
unions  in  bodies,  but  also  above  those  in  souls  them-
selves, and  in  minds  themselves,  which,  in  a  manner
unmingled  and  supermundane,  the  Godlike  and  super-
celestial  Illuminations,  whole  through  whole,  possess,
as  beseems  a  participation  analagous  to  those  who
participate  in  the  Union  elevated  above  all.

Section  V.
But  there  is  a  distinction  in  the  superessential
nomenclature  of  God,  not  only  that  which  I  have
mentioned,  namely,  that  each  of  the  One-springing
Persons  is  fixed  in  the  union  itself,  unmingled  and
unconfused ;  but  also  that  the  properties  of  the
superessential  Divine  Production  are  not  conver-
tible in  regard  to  one  another.  The  Father  is  sole
Fountain  of  the  superessential  Deity,  since  the
Father  is  not  Son,  nor  the  Son,  Father;  since  the
hymns  reverently  guard  their  own  characteristics  for
each  of  the  supremely  Divine  Persons.     These  then


on  Divine  Names.  1 9

are  the  unions  and  distinctions  within  the  unutterable
Union  and  sustaining  Source.  But,  if  the  goodly
progression  of  the  Divine  Union,,  multiplying  itself
super-uniquely  through  Goodness,  and  taking  to
itself  many  forms,  is  also  a  Divine  distinction,  yet,
common  within  the  Divine  distinction,  are  the  re-
sistless distributions,  the  substance-giving,  the  life-
giving,  the  wise-making,  and  the  other  gifts  of  the
Goodness,  Cause  of  all,  after  which  from  the  par-
ticipations and  those  participating  are  celebrated
the  things  imparticipatively  participated.  And  this
is  kindred  and  common,  and  one,  to  the  whole
Divinity,  that  it  is  all  entire,  participated  by  each
of  the  Participants,  and  by  none  partially.  Just
as  a  point  in  a  circle's  centre  participates  in  all
the  circumjacent*  straight  lines  in  the  circle,  and
as  many  impressions  of  a  seal  participate  in  the
archetypal  seal,  and  in  each  of  the  impressions
the  seal  is  whole  and  the  same,  and  in  none  partial
in  any  respect.  But  superior  to  these  is  the  im-
partibility  of  the  Deity — Cause  of  all — from  the  fact
that  there  is  no  contact  with  it.  Nor  has  it  any
commingled  communion  with  the  things  partici-
pating.

Section  VI.

And  yet  some  one  might  say  the  seal  is  not  whole
and  the  same  in  the  images  throughout.  But  of
this  the  seal  is  not  the  cause,  for  it  imparts  itself
all  and  the  same  to  each ;  but  the  difference  of  the
recipients  makes  the  figures  dissimilar,  since  the
1  The  radii.


20  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

archetype  is  one  and  complete  and  the  same.  For
instance,  if  the  wax  were  soft  and  impressionable,
and  smooth  and  unstamped,  and  neither  unimpres-
sionable and  hard,  nor  running  and  dissolving,  it
will  have  the  figure  clear  and  sharp  and  fixed.  But
if  it  should  lack  any  of  the  aforesaid  aptitudes,  this
will  be  the  cause  of  the  non-participative  and  un-
figured  and  indistinct,  and  whatever  else  arises  from
inaptitude  for  reception.  Further,  there  is  a  dis-
tinction from  the  goodly  work  of  God  towards  us,
in  that  the  superessential  Word  was  invested  with
being  amongst  us— from  us — wholly  and  truly,  and
did  and  suffered  whatever  things  are  choice  and
pre-eminent  in  His  human  work  of  Godu.  For  in
these,  the  Father  and  the  Spirit  in  no  respect  com-
municated, except  perhaps,  one  might  say,  as  regards
the  benign  and  philanthropic  purpose,  and  as  regards
all  the  pre-eminent  and  unutterable  work  of  God
which  the  unchangeable,  qua  God  and  Word  of  God,
did  when  He  had  been  born  amongst  us.  Thus
we,  too,  strive  to  unite  and  distinguish  in  the  Word
the  things  Divine,  as  the  things  Divine  themselves
are  united  and  distinguished.

Section  VII.
Now  we  have  set  forth  in  the  Theological  Outlines
whatever  Divine  Causes  we  have  found  in  the
Oracles,  of  these  unions,  and  distinctions,  by  treat-
ing each  separately,  according  to  our  ability;  by
explaining  some  things,  by  the  infallible  Word,  and

n  ttjj  iLvBpwiriKrjs  ainov  Oeovpytas.


on  Divine  Names.  2 1

unfolding  them;  and  by  conducting  the  religious
and  unpolluted  mind  to  the  bright  visions  of  the
Oracles ;  but  others,  as  being  full  of  mystery,  by  ap-
proaching them  according  to  the  Divine  tradition,
which  is  superior  to  mental  energy.  For  all  the
Divine  properties,  even  those  revealed  to  us,  are
known  by  the  participations  alone ;  and  themselves,
such  as  they  are  in  their  own  source  and  abode,  are
above  mind  and  all  essence  and  knowledge.  For
instance,  if  we  have  named  the  superessential  Hid-
denness,  God,  or  Life,  or  Essence,  or  Light,  or  Word
(\6yos),  we  have  no  other  thought  than  that  the
powers  brought  to  us  from  It  are  deifying,  or
essentiating,  or  life-bearing,  or  wisdom-imparting;
but  to  Itself  we  approach  during  the  cessation  of  all
the  intellectual  energies,  seeing  no  deification,  or  life,
or  essence  whatever,  such  as  is  strictly  like  the  Cause
pre-eminently  elevated  above  all.  Again,  that  the
Father  is  fontal  Deity,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  and  the
Spirit  are,  if  one  may  so  speak,  God-planted  shoots,
and  as  it  were  Flowers  and  superessential  Lights  of
the  God-bearing  Deity,  we  have  received  from  the
holy  Oracles ;  but  how  these  things  are,  it  is  neither
possible  to  say,  nor  to  conceive.

Section  VIII.
But.  up  to  this  point,  our  utmost  power  of  mental
energy  carries  us,  namely,  that  all  divine  paternity
and  sonship  have  been  bequeathed  from  the  Source
of  paternity  and  Source  of  sonship— pre-eminent
above   all— both   to  us   and    to   the    supercelestial


22  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

powers,  from  which  the  godlike  become  both  gods,
and   sons   of  gods,    and   fathers   of  gods,   and   are
named  Minds,  such  a  paternity  and  sonship  being
of  course  accomplished  spiritually,  i.e.  incorporeally,
immaterially,    intellectually— since    the    supremely
Divine  Spirit  is  seated  above  all  intellectual  imma-
teriality, and   deification,  and   the   Father  and  the
Son  are  pre-eminently  elevated  above  all  divine  pater-
nity and   sonship.     For  there  is  no  strict  likeness,
between   the  caused  and   the  causes.     The  caused
indeed  possess  the  accepted  likenesses  of  the  causes,
but  the  causes  themselves  are  elevated  and  estab-
lished above  the  caused,  according  to  the  ratio  of
their  proper  origin.     And,  to  use  illustrations  suit-
able to  ourselves,  pleasures  and  pains  are  said  to  be
productive  of  pleasure  and   pain,  but   these  them-
selves  feel   neither   pleasure   nor   pain.     And    fire,
whilst  heating  and  burning,  is  not  said  to  be  burnt
and  heated.    And,  if  any  one  should  say  that  the  self-
existent  Life  lives,  or  that  the  self-existent  Light  is
enlightened,  in  my  view  he  will  not  speak  correctly,
unless,   perhaps,   he   should   say  this  after   another
fashion,  that  the  properties  of  the  caused  are  abun-
dantly and  essentially  pre-existent  in  the  causes.

Section  IX.
Further  also,  the  most  conspicuous  fact  of  all
theology— the  God-formation  of  Jesus  amongst  us—
is  both  unutterable  by  every  expression  and  unknown
to  every  mind,  even  to  the  very  foremost  of  the  most
reverend  angels.    The  fact  indeed  that  He  took  sub-


on  Divine  Names.  23

stance  as  man,  we  have  received  as  a  mystery,  but
we  do  not  know  in  what  manner,  from  virginal
bloods,  by  a  different  law,  beyond  nature,  He  was
formed,  and  how,  with  dry  feet,  having  a  bodily  bulk
and  weight  of  matter,  He  marched  upon  the  liquid
and  unstable  substance  x ;  and  so,  with  regard  to  all
the  other  features  of  the  super-physical  physiology  of
Jesus.  Now,  we  have  elsewhere  sufficiently  spoken
of  these  things,  and  they  have  been  celebrated  by
our  illustrious  leader,  in  his  Theological  Ele7tients,  in
a  manner  far  beyond  natural  ability — things  which
that  illustrious  man  acquired,  either  from  the  sacred
theologians,  or  comprehended  from  the  scientific
search  of  the  Oracles,  from  manifold  struggles  and
investigations  respecting  the  same,  or  was  instructed
from  a  sort  of  more  Divine  Inspiration,  not  only
having  learnt,  but  having  felt  the  pangs  of  things
Divine,  and  from  his  sympathy  with  them,  if  I  may
so  speak,  having  been  perfected  to  their  untaught
and  mystic  union  and  acceptance.  And  that  we
may  display,  in  fewest  words,  the  many  and  blessed
visions  of  his  most  excellent  intelligence,  the  follow-
ing are  the  things  he  says,  concerning  the  Lord
Jesus,  in  the  Theological  Elements  compiled  by  him.

Section  X.
From  the  Theological  Elements  of  the  most  holy

Hierotheus.
Deity  of  the  Lord  Jesus, —  the  Cause  and  Com-
pleting of  all,  which  preserves  the  parts  concordant

x  Letter  IV.


24  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

with  the  whole,  and  is  neither  part  nor  whole,  and
whole  and  part,  as  embracing  in  Itself  everything
both  part  and  whole,  and  being  above  and  before —
is  perfect  indeed  in  the  imperfect,  as  source  of  per-
fection, but  imperfect  in  the  perfect,  as  superperfect,
and   pre-perfect — Form    producing  form,   in    things
without  form,  as  Source  of  form — formless  in  the
forms,  as  above  form, — Essence,  penetrating  without
stain   the   essences   throughout,  and   superessential,
exalted  above  every  essence— setting  bounds  to  the
whole    principalities    and    orders,    and    established
above  every  principality  and  order.      It  is  measure
also  of  things  existing,  and  age,  and  above  age,  and
before  age— full,  in  things   that  need,  superfull   in
things  full,  unutterable,  unspeakable,   above  mind,
above  life,  above  essence.     It  has  the  supernatural,
supernaturally,— the   superessential,  superessentially.
Hence,  since   through   love   towards  man,   He   has
come  even  to  nature,  and  really  became  substantial,
and  the  Super-God  lived  as  Man r  (may  He  be  mer-
ciful with  regard  to  the  things  we  are  celebrating,
which  are  beyond  mind  and  expression),  and  in  these
He  has  the  supernatural  and  super-substantial,  not
only  in  so  far  as  He  communicated  with  us  without
alteration  and  without  confusion,  suffering  no  loss
as  regards   His  superfulness,  from  His  unutterable
emptying  of  Himself— but  also,  because  the  newest
of  all  new  things,  He  was  in  our  physical  condition
super-physical — in  things  substantial,  super-substan-
tial,   excelling    all    the    things — of   us — from    us —
above  us.

t  Letter  IV.


on  Divine  Names.  25

Section  XL
This  then  is  sufficient  on  these  matters,  let  us  now
advance  to  the  purpose  of  the  discourse  by  unfolding,
to  the  best  of  our  ability,  the  kindred  and  common
Names  of  the  Divine  distinction.  And,  in  order
that  we  may  first  distinctly  define  everything,  in
order,  we  call  Divine  distinction,  as  we  have  said,
the  goodly  progressions  of  the  Godhead.  For,  by
being  given  to  all  things  existing,  and  pouring  forth
the  whole  imparted  goods  in  abundance,  It  is  dis-
tinguished uniformly,  and  multiplied  uniquely,  and
is  moulded  into  many  from  the  One,  whilst  being
self-centred.  For  example,  since  Almighty  God  is
superessentially  Being,  but  the  Being  is  bequeathed
to  things  being,  and  produces  the  whole  Essences ;
that  One  Being  is  said  to  be  fashioned  in  many  forms,
by  the  production  from  Itself  of  the  many  beings,
whilst  It  remains  undiminished,  and  One  in  the  mul-
tiplicity, and  Unified  during  the  progression,  and
complete  in  the  distinction,  both  by  being  super-
essentially exalted  above  all  beings,  and  by  the
unique  production  of  the  whole ;  and  by  the  un-
lessened  stream  of  His  undiminished  distributions.
Further,  being  One,  and  having  distributed  the  One,
both  to  every  part  and  whole,  both  to  one  and  to
multitude,  He  is  One,  as  it  were,  superessentially,
being  neither  a  part  of  the  multitude,  nor  whole
from  parts ;  and  thus  is  neither  one,  nor  partakes  of
one,  nor  has  the  one.  But,  beyond  these,  He  is
One,  above  the  one,  to  things  existing — One,  and
multitude  indivisible,  unfilled  superfulness,  producing


2  6  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

and  perfecting  and  sustaining  every  one  thing  and
multitude.  Again,  by  the  Deification  from  Itself,  by
the  Divine  likeness  of  many  who  become  gods,  ac-
cording to  their  several  capacity,  there  seems,  and  is
said  to  be,  a  distinction  and  multiplication  of  the
One  God,  but  He  is  none  the  less  the  Supreme
God,  and  super-God,  superessentially  One  God,—
undivided  in  things  divided,  unified  in  Himself,  both
unmingled  and  unmultiplied  in  the  many.  And
when  the  common  conductor  of  ourselves,  and  of
our  leader  to  the  Divine  gift  of  light,-  he,  who  is
great  in  Divine  mysteries— the  light  of  the  world-
had  thought  out  this  in  a  manner  above  natural
ability, — he  speaks  as  follows,  from  the  inspiration  of
God,  in  his  sacred  writings—"  For,  even  if  there  are
who  are  called  gods,  whether  in  heaven  or  upon
earth,  as  there  are  gods  many  and  lords  many ;  but
to  us  there  is  One  God,  the  Father,  from  Whom  are
all  things,  and  we  unto  Him,— and  One  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  through  Whom  are  all  things,  and  we,  through
Him z."  For,  with  regard  to  things  Divine,  the  unions
overrule  the  distinctions,  and  precede  them,  and  are
none  the  less  unified,  even  after  the  self-centred  and
unified  distinction.  These,  the  mutual  and  common
distinctions,  or  rather  the  goodly  progressions  of  the
whole  Deity,  we  will  endeavour  to  the  best  of
our  ability  to  celebrate  from  the  Names  of  God,
which  make  them  known  in  the  Oracles; — first,
having  laid  down,  as  we  have  said,  that  every  bene-
ficent Name  of  God,  to  whichever  of  the  supremely
1  I  Cor.  viii.  5,  6.


on  Divine  Names.  27

Divine  Persons  it  may  be  applied,  is  to  be  under-
stood with  reference  to  the  whole  Supremely  Divine
wholeness  unreservedly.

♦

CAPUT    III.
What  is   the  power   of  prayer,    and  concerning   the
blessed  Hierotheus,    and  concerning   reverence   and
covena?ii  in  the  Word  of  God.
Section  I.
First,  with  your  permission,  let  us  examine  the
all-perfect  Name  of  Goodness,  which   is  indicative
of  the  whole  progressions  of  Almighty  God,  having
invoked  the  supremely  good,  and  super-good  Triad—
the  Name   which   indicates   Its   whole   best    Provi-
dences.    For,   we   must   first    be   raised    up    to    It,
as  Source  of  good,  by  our  prayers ;  and  by  a  nearer
approach  to  It,  be  initiated  as  to  the  all  good  gifts
which  are  established  around  It.     For  It  is  indeed
present  to  all,  but  all  are  not  present  to   It.     But
then,  when  we  have  invoked  It,  by  all  pure  prayers
and  unpolluted  mind,  and  by  our  aptitude  towards
Divine  Union,  we  also  are  present  to  It.     For,  It  is
not  in  a  place,  so  that   It  should   be  absent  from
a    particular   place,    or   should   pass   from    one    to
another.     But  even  the  statement  that  It  is  in  all
existing  beings,  falls  short  of  Its  infinitude  (which  is)
above  all,  and  embracing  all.     Let  us  then  elevate
our  very  selves  by  our  prayers  to  the  higher  ascent
of  the   Divine   and   good   rays,— as  if  a   luminous
chain  being  suspended   from   the   celestial  heights,


28  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

and  reaching  down  hither,  we,  by  ever  clutching
this  upwards,  first  with  one  hand,  and  then  with
the  other,  seem  indeed  to  draw  it  down,  but
in  reality  we  do  not  draw  it  down,  it  being  both
above  and  below,  but  ourselves  are  carried  up-
wards to  the  higher  splendours  of  the  luminous
rays.  Or,  as  if,  after  we  have  embarked  on  a  ship,
and  are  holding  on  to  the  cables  reaching  from  some
rock,  such  as  are  given  out,  as  it  were,  for  us  to
seize,  we  do  not  draw  the  rock  to  us,  but  ourselves,
in  fact,  and  the  ship,  to  the  rock.  Or  to  take
another  example,  if  any  one  standing  on  the  ship
pushes  away  the  rock  by  the  sea  shore,  he  will  do
nothing  to  the  stationary  and  unmoved  rock,  but
he  separates  himself  from  it,  and  in  proportion
as  he  pushes  that  away,  he  is  so  far  hurled  from  it.
Wherefore,  before  everything,  and  especially  theology,
we  must  begin  with  prayer,  not  as  though  we  our-
selves were  drawing  the  power,  which  is  everywhere
and  nowhere  present,  but  as,  by  our  godly  reminis-
cences and  invocations,  conducting  ourselves  to,
and  making  ourselves  one  with,  it.

Section  II.
Perhaps  also,  this  is  worthy  of  apology,  that  whilst
our  illustrious  leader,  Hierotheus,  is  compiling  his
Theological  Elements,  in  a  manner  above  natural
capacity,  we,  as  if  those  were  not  sufficient,  have
composed  others,  and  this  present  theological  treatise.
And  yet,  if  that  man  had  deigned  to  treat  systemati-
cally  all   the    theological    treatises,   and   had  gone


on  Divine  Names.  29

through  the  sum  of  all  theology,  by  detailed  ex-
positions, we  should  not  have  gone  to  such  a  height
of  folly,  or  stupidity,  as  to  have  attempted  alone
theological  questions,  either  more  lucidly  or  divinely
than  he,  or  to  indulge  in  vain  talk  by  saying  super-
fluously the  same  things  twice  over,  and  in  addition
to  do  injustice  to  one,  both  teacher  and  friend,  and
that  we,  who  have  been  instructed  from  his  dis-
courses, after  Paul  the  Divine,  should  filch  for  our
own  glorification  his  most  illustrious  contemplation
and  elucidation.  But,  since  in  fact,  he,  whilst
teaching  things  divine,  in  a  manner  suitable  to
presbyters,  set  forth  comprehensive  definitions,  and
such  as  embraced  many  things  in  one,  as  were
suitable  to  us,  and  to  as  many  as  with  us  were
teachers  of  the  newly-initiated  souls,  commanding  us
to  unfold  and  disentangle,  by  language  commen-
surate with  our  ability,  the  comprehensive  and
uniform  compositions  of  the  most  intellectual  ca-
pacity of  that  illustrious  man ;  and  you,  yourself,
have  oftentimes  urged  us  to  this,  and  sent  back
the  very  book,  as  being  of  transcendent  value ;
for  this  reason,  then,  we  too  distinguish  him  as
a  teacher  of  perfect  and  presbyterial  conceptions
for  those  who  are  above  the  common  people,  even
as  certain  second  Oracles,  and  next  to  the  Anointed
of  God.  But  for  people,  such  as  we  are,  we  will
transmit  things  Divine,  according  to  our  capacity.
For,  if  strong  meat  belongs  to  the  perfect,  how  great
perfection  is  required  that  the  same  should  feed
others.     Correctly,  then,  we  have  affirmed  this,  that


30  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

the  self-perceptive  vision  of  the  intelligible  Oracles,
and  their  comprehensive  teaching,  needs  presbyterial
power;  but  the  science  and  the  thorough  teaching
of  the  reasons  which  lead  to  this,  fittingly  belong
to  those  purified  and  hallowed  persons  placed  in
a  subordinate  position.  And  yet,  we  have  insisted
upon  this  with  the  utmost  care,  that,  as  regards
the  things  that  have  been  thoroughly  investigated
by  him,  our  divine  leader,  with  an  accurate  elucida-
tion, we  should  not,  in  any  way,  handle  the  same
tautologically,  for  the  same  elucidation  of  the  Divine
text  expounded  by  him.  For,  amongst  our  inspired
hierarchs  (when  both  we,  as  you  know,  and  yourself,
and  many  of  our  holy  brethren,  were  gathered
together  to  the  depositing  a  of  the  Life-springing  and
God-receptive  body,  and  when  there  were  present
also  James,  the  brother  of  God,  and  Peter,  the
foremost  and  most  honoured  pinnacle  of  the  Theo-
logians, when  it  was  determined  after  the  depositing,
that  every  one  of  the  hierarchs  should  celebrate,
as  each  was  capable,  the  Omnipotent  Goodness
of  the  supremely  Divine  Weakness),  he,  after  the
Theologians,  surpassed,  as  you  know,  all  the  other
divine  instructors,  being  wholly  entranced,  wholly
raised  from  himself,  and  experiencing  the  pain  of
his  fellowship  with  the  things  celebrated,  and  was
regarded  as  an  inspired  and  divine  Psalmist  by  all,
by  whom  he  was  heard  and  seen  and  known,  and
not  known.  And  why  should  I  say  anything  to  thee
concerning  the  things  there  divinely  spoken?    For,

»  ix\  tt\v  deiav.


on  Divine  Names.  3 1

if  I  do  not  forget  myself,  many  a  time  do  I  remember
to  have  heard  from  thee  certain  portions  of  those
inspired  songs  of  praise;  such  was  thy  zeal,  not
cursorily,  to  pursue  things  Divine.

Section  III.
But  to  pass  over  the  mystical  things  there,  both
as  forbidden  to  the  multitude  and  as  known  to  thee,
when  it  was  necessary  to  communicate  to  the  multi-
tude, and  to  bring  as  many  as  possible  to  the  sacred
knowledge  amongst  ourselves,  he  so  excelled  the
majority  of  sacred  teachers,  both  by  use  of  time  and
purity  of  mind,  and  accuracy  of  demonstrations,  and
by  his  other  sacred  discourses,  that  we  should
scarcely  have  dared  to  look  so  great  a  sun  straight
in  the  face.  For  we  are  thus  far  conscious  in  our-
selves, and  know,  that  we  may  neither  advance  to
understand  sufficiently  the  intelligible  of  Divine
things,  nor  to  express  and  declare  the  things  spoken
of  the  divine  knowledge.  For,  being  far  removed
from  the  skill  of  those  divine  men,  as  regards  theolo-
gical truth,  we  are  so  inferior  that  we  should  have,
through  excessive  reverence,  entirely  come  to  this —
neither  to  hear  nor  to  speak  anything  respecting  divine
philosophy,  unless  we  had  grasped  in  our  mind,
that  we  must  not  neglect  the  knowledge  of  things
divine  received  by  us.  And  to  this  we  were  per-
suaded, not  only  by  the  innate  aspirations  of  the
minds  which  always  lovingly  cling  to  the  permitted
contemplation  of  the  supernatural,  but  also  by  the
most  excellent  order  itself  of  the  Divine  institutions,


32  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

which  prohibits  us,  on  the  one  hand,  from  much
inquisition  into  things  above  us,  as  above  our
degree,  and  as  unattainable ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,
persistently  urges  us  to  graciously  impart  to  others
also  whatever  is  permitted  and  given  to  us  to  learn.
Yielding  then  to  these  considerations,  and  neither
shirking  nor  flinching  from  the  attainable  discovery
of  things  Divine,  but  also  not  bearing  to  leave
unassisted  those  who  are  unable  to  contemplate
things  too  high  for  us,  we  have  brought  ourselves
to  composition,  not  daring  indeed  to  introduce  any-
thing new,  but  by  more  easy  and  more  detailed
expositions  to  disentangle  and  elucidate  the  things
spoken  by  the  Hierotheus  indeed.


CAPUT   IV.

Concerning  Good,  Light,  Beauty,  Love,  Ecstasy,
Jealousy,  and  that  the  Evil  is  neither  existent,  nor
from  existent,  nor  in  things  being.

Section  I.

Be  it  so  then.  Let  us  come  to  the  appellation
"  Good,"  already  mentioned  in  our  discourse,  which
the  Theologians  ascribe  pre-eminently  and  exclusively
to  the  super-Divine  Deity,  as  I  conjecture,  by  calling
the  supremely  Divine  Subsistence,  Goodness  ;  and
because  the  Good,  as  essential  Good,  by  Its  being,
extends  Its  Goodness  to  all  things  that  be.

For,  even  as  our  sun — not  as  calculating  orchoos-
ing,  but  by  its  very  being,  enlightens  all  things  able


on  Divine  Names.  33

to  partake  of  its  light  in  their  own  degree — so  too
the  Good — as  superior  to  a  sun,  as  the  archetype  par
excellence,  is  above  an  obscure  image — by  Its  very
existence  sends  to  all  things  that  be,  the  rays  of  Its
whole  goodness,  according  to  their  capacity.  By
reason  of  these  (rays)  subsisted  all  the  intelligible
and  intelligent  essences  and  powers  and  energies.
By  reason  of  these  they  are,  and  have  their  life,  con-
tinuous and  undiminished,  purified  from  all  corrup-
tion and  death  and  matter,  and  generation;  and
separated  from  the  unstable  and  fluctuating  and
vacillating  mutability,  and  are  conceived  of  as  in-
corporeal and  immaterial,  and  as  minds  they  think
in  a  manner  supermundane,  and  are  illuminated  as  to
the  reasons  of  things,  in  a  manner  peculiar  to  them-
selves ;  and  they  again  convey  to  their  kindred
spirits  things  appropriate  to  them ;  and  they  have
their  abiding  from  Goodness ;  and  thence  comes  to
them  stability  and  consistence  and  protection,  and
sanctuary  of  good  things;  and  whilst  aspiring  to  It,
they  have  both  being  and  good  being  ;  and  being
conformed  to  It,  as  is  attainable,  they  are  both
patterns  of  good,  and  impart  to  those  after  them,
as  the  Divine  Law  directs,  the  gifts  which  have  passed
through  to  themselves  from  the  Good.

Section  II.
Thence  come  to  them  the  supermundane  orders,
the  unions  amongst  themselves,  the  mutual  penetra-
tions, the  unconfused  distinctions,  the   powers  ele-
vating the  inferior  to  the  superior,  the  providences

D


34  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

of  the  more  exalted  for  those  below  them  ;  the  guard-
ings  of  things  pertaining  to  each  power;  and  un-
broken convolutions  around  themselves  ;  the  identities
and  sublimities  around  the  aspiration  after  the  Good  ;
and  whatever  is  said  in  our  Treatise  concerning  the
angelic  properties  and  orders.  Further  also,  whatever
things  belong  to  the  heavenly  Hierarchy,  the  purifi-
cations befitting  angels,  the  supermundane  illumina-
tions, and  the  tilings  perfecting  the  whole  angelic
perfection,  are  from  the  all-creative  and  fontal  Good-
ness ;  from  which  was  given  to  them  the  form  of
Goodness,  and  the  revealing  in  themselves  the  hidden
Goodness,  and  that  angels  are,  as  it  were,  heralds
of  the  Divine  silence,  and  project,  as  it  were,
luminous  lights  revealing  Him  Who  is  in  secret.
Further,  after  these — the  sacred  and  holy  minds — the
souls,  and  whatever  is  good  in  souls  is  by  reason  of
the  super-good  Goodness — the  fact  that  they  are  intel-
lectual—that they  have  essential  life — indestructible —
the  very  being  itself — and  that  they  are  able,  whilst
elevated  themselves  to  the  angelic  lives,  to  be  con-
ducted by  them  as  good  guides  to  the  good  Origin
of  all  good  things,  and  to  become  partakers  of  the
illuminations,  thence  bubbling  forth,  according  to  the
capacity  of  each,  and  to  participate  in  the  goodlike
gift,  as  they  are  able,  and  whatever  else  we  have
enumerated  in  our  Treatise  concerning  the  soul.
But  also,  if  one  may  be  permitted  to  speak  of  the
irrational  souls,  or  living  creatures,  such  as  cleave
the  air,  and  such  as  walk  on  earth,  and  such  as
creep  along  earth,  and  those  whose  life  is  in  waters,


on  Divine  Names.  35

or  amphibious,  and  such  as  live  concealed  under
earth,  and  burrow  within  it,  and  in  one  word,  such  as
have  the  sensible  soul  or  life,  even  all  these  have  their
soul  and  life,  by  reason  of  the  Good.  Moreover,  all
plants  have  their  growing  and  moving  life  from  the
Good ;  and  even  soulless  and  lifeless  substance  is  by
reason  of  the  Good,  and  by  reason  of  It,  has  in-
herited its  substantial  condition.

Section  III.
But,  if  the  Good  is  above  all  things  being,  as
indeed  it  is,  and  formulates  the  formless,  even  in
Itself  alone,  both  the  non-essential  is  a  pre-eminence
of  essence,  and  the  non-living  is  a  superior  life,  and
the  mindless  a  superior  wisdom,  and  whatever  is  in
the  Good  is  of  a  superlative  formation  of  the  form-
less, and  if  one  may  venture  to  say  so,  even  the  non-
existent itself  aspires  to  the  Good  above  all  things
existing,  and  struggles  somehow  to  be  even  itself
in  the  Good, — the  really  Superessential — to  the  ex-
clusion of  all  things.

Section  IV.
But  what  slipped  from  our  view  in  the  midst  of
our  discourse,  the  Good  is  Cause  of  the  celestial
movements  in  their  commencements  and  termin-
ations, of  their  not  increasing,  not  diminishing,  and
completely  changeless,  course  b,  and  of  the  noiseless
movements,  if  one  may  so  speak,  of  the  vast  celestial
transit,  and  of  the  astral  orders,  and  the  beauties  and

b    cupulas.


36  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

lights,    and    stabilities,    and    the    progressive    swift
motion  of  certain  stars,  and  of  the  periodical  return
of  the  two  luminaries,  which  the  Oracles  call  "great,"
from  the  same  to  the  same  quarter,  after  which  our
days   and   nights   being  marked,   and   months   and
years  being  measured,  mark  and  number  and  arrange
and    comprehend    the    circular  movements   of  time
and  things  temporal.     But,  what  would  any  one  say
of  the  very  ray  of  the  sun  ?    For  the  light  is  from  the
Good,  and  an  image  of  the  Goodness,  wherefore  also
the  Good  is  celebrated  under  the  name  of  Light ;  as
in  a  portrait  the  original  is  manifested.     For,  as  the
goodness  of  the  Deity,  beyond  all,  permeates  from
the   highest   and   most    honoured    substances   even
to  the  lowest,  and  yet  is  above  all,  neither  the  fore-
most   outstripping    its    superiority,   nor    the   things
below  eluding  its  grasp,  but  it  both  enlightens  all
that  are  capable,  and  forms  and  enlivens,  and  grasps,
and  perfects,  and  is  measure  of  things  existing,  and
age,  and  number,  and  order,  and  grasp,  and  cause,
and  end ;  so,  too,  the  brilliant  likeness  of  the  Divine
Goodness,    this    our   great  sun,    wholly   bright   and
ever  luminous,  as  a  most  distant  echo  of  the  Good,
both  enlightens  whatever  is  capable  of  participating
in  it,  and  possesses  the  light  in  the  highest  degree
of  purity,  unfolding  to  the  visible  universe,  above
and  beneath,   the   splendours   of  its  own  rays,  and
if  anything  does  not  participate  in  them,  this  is  not
owing   to   the  inertness  or  deficiency  of  its  distri-
bution of  light,  but  is  owing  to  the  inaptitude  for
light-reception   of  the  things  which  do  not  unfold


on  Divine  Names.  37

themselves  for  the  participation  of  light.  No  doubt
the  ray  passing  over  many  things  in  such  condition,
enlightens  the  things  after  them,  and  there  is  no
visible  thing  which  it  does  not  reach,  with  the  sur-
passing greatness  of  its  own  splendour.  Further
also,  it  contributes  to  the  generation  of  sensible
bodies,  and  moves  them  to  life,  and  nourishes,  and
increases,  and  perfects,  and  purifies  and  renews  ;
and  the  light  is  both  measure  and  number  of  hours,
days,  and  all  our  time.  For  it  is  the  light  itself,
even  though  it  was  then  without  form,  which  the
divine  Moses  declared  to  have  fixed  that  first  Triad  c
of  our  days.  And,  just  as  Goodness  turns  all  things
to  Itself,  and  is  chief  collector  of  things  scattered,
as  One-springing  and  One-making  Deity,  and  all
things  aspire  to  It,  as  Source  and  Bond  and  End,
and  it  is  the  Good,  as  the  Oracles  say,  from  Which
all  things  subsisted,  and  are  being  brought  into  being
by  an  all-perfect  Cause ;  and  in  Which  all  things
consisted,  as  guarded  and  governed  in  an  all-con-
trolling route ;  and  to  Which  all  things  are  turned,
as  to  their  own  proper  end ;  and  to  Which  all  aspire
— the  intellectual  and  rational  indeed,  through  know-
ledge, and  the  sensible  through  the  senses,  and
those  bereft  of  sensible  perception  by  the  innate
movement  of  the  aspiration  after  life,  and  those  with-
out life,  and  merely  being,  by  their  aptitude  for  mere
substantial  participation  ;  after  the  same  method  of
its  illustrious  original,  the  light  also  collects  and
turns  to  itself  all  things  existing — things  with  sight
c  See  Dulac,  Theology  anticipates  Science.


38  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

—things  with  motion— things  enlightened— things
heated— things  wholly  held  together  by  its  brilliant
splendours— whence  also,  Helios,  because  it  makes
all  things  altogether  (doWij),  and  collects  things
scattered.  And  all  creatures,  endowed  with  sensible
perceptions,  aspire  to  it,  as  aspiring  either  to  see,
or  to  be  moved  and  enlightened,  and  heated,  and
to  be  wholly  held  together  by  the  light.  By  no
means  do  I  affirm,  after  the  statement  of  antiquity,
that  as  being  God  and  Creator  of  the  universe,  the
sun,  by  itself,  governs  the  luminous  world,  but
that  the  invisible  things  of  God  are  clearly  seen
from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  being  understood
by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  His  eternal
power  and  Deity.

Section  V.
But  we  have  spoken  of  these  things  in  our  Sym-
bolical Theology.  Let  us  now  then  celebrate  the
spiritual  Name  of  Light,  under  Which  we  contem-
plate the  Good,  and  declare  that  He,  the  Good,
is  called  spiritual d  Light,  on  the  ground  that  He  fills
every  supercelestial  mind  with  spiritual  light,  and
expels  all  ignorance  and  error  from  all  souls  in
which  they  may  be,  and  imparts  to  them  all  sacred
light,  and  cleanses  their  mental  vision  from  the
mist  which  envelops  them,  from  ignorance,  and  stirs
up  and  unfolds  those  enclosed  by  the  great  weight  of
darkness,  and  imparts,  at  first,  a  measured  radiance ;
then,  whilst  they  taste,  as  it  were,  the  light,  and

d  The  Greek  word  is  vorirbv,  which  in  connection  with  <pus
is  rendered  here  "  spiritual  light."


071  Divine  Names.  39

desire  it  more,  more  fully  gives  Itself,  and  more
abundantly  enlightens  them,  because  "  they  have
loved  much,"  and  ever  elevates  them  to  things  in
advance,  as  befits  the  analogy  of  each  for  aspiration.

Section  VI.
The  Good  then  above  every  light  is  called  spiri-
tual Light,  as  fontal  ray,  and  stream  of  light  welling
over,  shining  upon  every  mind,  above,  around e,  and
in  the  world,  from  its  fulness,  and  renewing  their
whole  mental  powers,  and  embracing  them  all  by
its  over-shadowing;  and  being  above  all  by  its
exaltation ;  and  in  one  word,  by  embracing  and
having  previously  and  pre-eminently  the  whole
sovereignty  of  the  light-dispensing  faculty,  as  being
source  of  light  and  above  all  light,  and  by  compre-
hending in  itself  all  things  intellectual,  and  all  things
rational,  and  making  them  one  altogether.  For
as  ignorance  puts  asunder  those  who  have  gone
astray,  so  the  presence  of  the  spiritual  light  is  col-
lective and  unifying  of  those  being  enlightened,
]x)th  perfecting  and  further  turning  them  towards
the  true  Being,  by  turning  them  from  the  many
notions  and  collecting  the  various  views,  or,  to
speak  more  correctly,  fancies,  into  one  true,  pure
and  uniform  knowledge,  and  by  filling  them  with
light,  one  and  unifying.

Section  VII.
This  Good  is  celebrated  by  the  sacred  theologians,
both  as  beautiful  and  as  Beauty,  and  as  Love,  and  as

e  See  Book  of  Hierotheus,  c.  2.


40  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

Beloved ;  and  all  the  other  Divine  Names  which
beseem  the  beautifying  and  highly-favoured  come-
liness. But  the  beautiful  and  Beauty  are  not  to  be
divided,  as  regards  the  Cause  which  has  embraced
the  whole  in  one.  For,  with  regard  to  all  created
things,  by  dividing  them  into  participations  and
participants,  we  call  beautiful  that  which  participates
in  Beauty;  but  beauty,  the  participation  of  the
beautifying  Cause  of  all  the  beautiful  things.  But,
the  superessential  Beautiful  is  called  Beauty,  on
account  of  the  beauty  communicated  from  Itself  to
all  beautiful  things,  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  each,
and  as  Cause  of  the  good  harmony  and  brightness  of
all  things  which  flashes  like  light  to  all  the  beautifying
distributions  of  its  fontal  ray,  and  as  calling  (koKovv)
all  things  to  Itself  (whence  also  it  is  called  Beauty)
(kqXXos),  and  as  collecting  all  in  all  to  Itself.  (And
it  is  called)  Beautiful,  as  (being)  at  once  beautiful  and
super-beautiful,  and  always  being  under  the  same
conditions  and  in  the  same  manner  beautiful,  and
neither  coming  into  being  nor  perishing,  neither
waxing  nor  waning ;  neither  in  this  beautiful,  nor  in
that  ugly,  nor  at  one  time  beautiful,  and  at  another
not;  nor  in  relation  to  one  thing  beautiful,  and  in
relation  to  another  ugly,  nor  here,  and  not  there,  as
being  beautiful  to  some,  and  not  beautiful  to  others ;
but  as  Itself,  in  Itself,  with  Itself,  uniform,  always
being  beautiful,  and  as  having  beforehand  in  Itself
pre-eminently  the  fontal  beauty  of  everything  beau-
tiful. For,  by  the  simplex  and  supernatural  nature  of
all  beautiful  things,  all  beauty,  and  everything  beau-


on  Divine  Names.  4 1

tiful,  pre-existed  uniquely  as  to  Cause.  From  this
Beautiful  (comes)  being  to  all  existing  things, — that
each  is  beautiful  in  its  own  proper  order;  and  by
reason  of  the  Beautiful  are  the  adaptations  of  all  things,
and  friendships,  and  inter-communions,  and  by  the
Beautiful  all  things  are  made  one,  and  the  Beautiful
is  origin  of  all  things,  as  a  creating  Cause,  both  by
moving  the  whole  and  holding  it  together  by  the  love
of  its  own  peculiar  Beauty ;  and  end  of  all  things,
and  beloved,  as  final  Cause  (for  all  things  exist  for
the  sake  of  the  Beautiful)  and  exemplary  (Cause),
because  all  things  are  determined  according  to  It.
Wherefore,  also,  the  Beautiful  is  identical  with  the
Good,  because  all  things  aspire  to  the  Beautiful  and
Good,  on  every  account,  and  there  is  no  existing
thing  which  does  not  participate  in  the  Beautiful  and
the  Good.  Yea,  reason  will  dare  to  say  even  this,
that  even  the  non-existing  participates  in  the  Beautiful
and  Good.  For  then  even  it  is  beautiful  and  good,
when  in  God  it  is  celebrated  superessentially  to  the
exclusion  of  all.  This,  the  one  Good  and  Beautiful,
is  uniquely  Cause  of  all  the  many  things  beautiful
and  good.  From  this  are  all  the  substantial  begin-
nings of  things  existing,  the  unions,  the  distinctions,
the  identities,  the  diversities,  the  similarities,  the
dissimilarities,  the  communions  of  the  contraries,  the
commingling  of  things  unified,  the  providences  of
the  superior,  the  mutual  cohesions  of  those  of  the
same  rank;  the  attentions  of  the  more  needy,  the
protecting  and  immoveable  abidings  and  stabilities  of
their  whole  selves  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  com-


42  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

munions  of  all  things  among  all,  in  a  manner  peculiar
to  each,  and  adaptations  and  unmingled  friendships
and  harmonies  of  the  whole,  the  bl endings  in  the
whole,  and  the  undissolved  connections  of  existing
things,  the  never-failing  successions  of  the  generations,
all  rests  and  movements,  of  the  minds,  of  the  souls,
of  the  bodies.  For,  that  which  is  established  above
every  rest,  and  every  movement,  and  moves  each
thing  in  the  law  of  its  own  being  to  its  proper  move-
ment, is  a  rest  and  movement  to  all.

Section  VIII.
Now,  the  divine  minds f  are  said  to  be  moved  cir-
cularly indeed,  by  being  united  to  the  illuminations
of  the  Beautiful  and  Good,  without  beginning  and
without  end;  but  in  a  direct  line,  whenever  they
advance  to  the  succour  of  a  subordinate,  by  accom-
plishing all  things  directly;  but  spirally,  because
even  in  providing  for  the  more  indigent,  they  remain
fixedly,  in  identity,  around  the  good  and  beautiful
Cause  of  their  identity,  ceaselessly  dancing  around.

Section  IX.
Further,  there  is  a  movement  of  soul,  circular
indeed, — the  entrance  into  itself  from  things  without,
and  the  unified  convolution  of  its  intellectual  powers,
bequeathing  to  it  inerrancy,  as  it  were,  in  a  sort
of  circle,  and  turning  and  collecting  itself,  from  the
many  things  without,  first  to  itself,  then,  as  having
become  single,  uniting  with  the  uniquely  unified
powers,  and  thus  conducting  to  the  Beautiful  and
f  Angels.


on  Divine  Names.  43

Good,  which  is  above  all  things  being,  and  One  and
the  Same,  and  without  beginning  and  without  end.
But  a  soul  is  moved  spirally,  in  so  far  as  it  is
illuminated,  as  to  the  divine  kinds  of  knowledge,  in
a  manner  proper  to  itself,  not  intuitively  and  at  once,
but  logically  and  discursively;  and,  as  it  were,  by
mingled  and  relative  operations;  but  in  a  straight
line,  when,  not  entering  into  itself,  and  being  moved
by  unique  intuition  (for  this,  as  I  said,  is  the
circular),  but  advancing  to  things  around  itself,  and
from  things  without,  it  is,  as  it  were,  conducted
from  certain  symbols,  varied  and  multiplied,  to  the
simple  and  unified  contemplations.

Section  X.
Of  these  three  motions  then  in  everything  per-
ceptible here  below,  and  much  more  of  the  abidings
and  repose  and  fixity  of  each,  the  Beautiful  and
Good,  which  is  above  all  repose  and  movement,
is  Cause  and  Bond  and  End  ;  by  reason  of  which,
and  from  which,  and  in  which,  and  towards  which,
and  for  sake  of  which,  is  every  repose  and  move-
ment. For,  both  from  It  and  through  It  is  both
Essence  and  every  life,  and  both  of  mind  and  soul
and  every  nature,  the  minutiae,  the  equalities,  the
magnitudes,  all  the  standards  and  the  analogies  of
beings,  and  harmonies  and  compositions;  the  en-
tireties, the  parts,  every  one  thing,  and  multitude,
the  connections  of  parts,  the  unions  of  every  multi-
tude, the  perfections  of  the  entireties,  the  quality,
the  weight,  the  size,  the  infinitude,  the  compounds,


44  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

the  distinctions,  every  infinitude,  every  term,  all  the
bounds,  the  orders,  the  pre-eminences,  the  elements,
the  forms,  every  essence,  every  power,  every  energy,
every  condition,  every  sensible  perception,  every
reason,  every  conception,  every  contact,  every
science,  every  union,  and  in  one  word,  all  things
existing  are  from  the  Beautiful  and  Good,  and  in  the
Beautiful  and  Good,  and  turn  themselves  to  the
Beautiful  and  Good.

Moreover,  all  things  whatever,  which  are  and
come  to  being,  are  and  come  to  being  by  reason
of  the  Beautiful  and  Good;  and  to  It  all  things
look,  and  by  It  are  moved  and  held  together,  and
for  the  sake  of  It,  and  by  reason  of  It,  and  in  It,  is
every  source  exemplary,  final,  creative,  formative,
elemental,  and  in  one  word,  every  beginning,  every
bond,  every  term,  or  to  speak  summarily,  all  things
existing  are  from  the  Beautiful  and  Good ;  and  all
things  non-existing  are  superessentially  in  the  Beauti-
ful and  Good ;  and  it  is  of  all,  beginning  and  term,
above  beginning  and  above  term,  because  from  It,
and  through  It,  and  in  It,  and  to  It,  are  all  things,
as  says  the  Sacred  Word.

By  all  things,  then,  the  Beautiful  and  Good  is
desired  and  beloved  and  cherished ;  and,  by  reason
of  It,  and  for  the  sake  of  It,  the  less  love  the  greater
suppliantly  ;  and  those  of  the  same  rank,  their  fellows
brotherly ;  and  the  greater,  the  less  considerately  ;
and  these  severally  love  the  things  of  themselves
continuously;  and  all  things  by  aspiring  to  the
Beautiful  and  Good,  do  and  wish  all  things  whatever


on  Divine  Names.  45

they  do  and  wish.  Further,  it  may  be  boldly  said
with  truth,  that  even  the  very  Author  of  all  things,
by  reason  of  overflowing  Goodness,  loves  all,  makes
all,  perfects  all,  sustains  all,  attracts  all ;  and  even
the  Divine  Love  is  Good  of  Good,  by  reason  of  the
Good.  For  Love  itself,  the  benefactor  of  things
that  be,  pre-existing  overflowingly  in  the  Good,  did
not  permit  itself  to  remain  unproductive  in  itself,
but  moved  itself  to  creation  s,  as  befits  the  overflow
which  is  generative  of  all.

Section  XL
And  let  no  one  fancy  that  we  honour  the  Name
of  Love  beyond  the  Oracles,  for  it  is,  in  my  opinion,
irrational  and  stupid  not  to  cling  to  the  force  of  the
meaning,  but  to  the  mere  words ;  and  this  is  not  the
characteristic  of  those  who  have  wished  to  compre-
hend things  Divine,  but  of  those  who  receive  empty
sounds  and  keep  the  same  just  at  the  ears  from
passing  through  from  outside,  and  are  not  willing  to
know  what  such  a  word  signifies,  and  in  what  way
one  ought  to  distinctly  represent  it,  through  other
words  of  the  same  force  and  more  explanatory,  but
who  specially  affect  sounds  and  signs  without  mean-
ing, and  syllables,  and  words  unknown,  which  do
not  pass  through  to  the  mental  part  of  their  soul,
but  buzz  without,  around  their  lips  and  ears,  as
though  it  were  not  permitted  to  signify  the  number
four,  by  twice  two,  or  straight  lines  by  direct  lines,
or  motherland  by  fatherland,  or  any  other,  which
signify  the  self-same  thing,  by  many  parts  of  speech.
*  Creation  through  Goodness  not  necessity.


46  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

We  ought  to  know,  according  to  the  correct
account,  that  we  use  sounds,  and  syllables,  and
phrases,  and  descriptions,  and  words,  on  account
of  the  sensible  perceptions ;  since  when  our  soul  is
moved  by  the  intellectual  energies  to  the  things
contemplated,  the  sensible  perceptions  by  aid  of
sensible  objects  are  superfluous  ;  just  as  also  the
intellectual  powers,  when  the  soul,  having  become
godlike,  throws  itself,  through  a  union  beyond  know-
ledge, against  the  rays  of  the  unapproachable  light,
by  sightless  efforts.  But,  when  the  mind  strives  to
be  moved  upwards,  through  objects  of  sense,  to
contemplative  conceptions,  the  clearer  interpreta-
tions are  altogether  preferable  to  the  sensible  per-
ceptions, and  the  more  definite  descriptions  are
things  more  distinct  than  things  seen ;  since  when
objects  near  are  not  made  clear  to  the  sensible  per-
ceptions, neither  will  these  perceptions  be  well  able
to  present  the  things  perceived  to  the  mind.  But
that  we  -may  not  seem,  in  speaking  thus,  to  be
pushing  aside  the  Divine  Oracles,  let  those  who  libel
the  Name  of  Love  (*Epu>Tos)  hear  them.  "Be  in
love  with  It,"  they  say,  "and  It  will  keep  thee —
Rejoice  over  It,  and  It  will  exalt  thee — Honour
It,  in  order  that  It  may  encompass  thee," — and  what-
ever else  is  sung  respecting  Love,  in  the  Word
of  God.

Section  XII.
And  yet  it   seemed   to   some   of  our  sacred   ex-
pounders that  the   Name  of  Love  is  more  Divine
than  that  of  loving-kindness  (dydTnjs).     But  even  the


on  Divine  Names.  47

Divine  Ignatius h  writes,  "  my  own  Love  (Zpa>s)  is
crucified  ;"  and  in  the  introductions  to  the  Oracles
you  will  find  a  certain  One  saying  of  the  Divine
Wisdom,  "  1  became  enamoured  of  her  Beauty."
So  that  we,  certainly,  need  not  be  afraid  of  this
Name  of  Love,  nor  let  any  alarming  statement  about
it  terrify  us.  For  the  theologians  seem  to  me  to
treat  as  equivalent  the  name  of  Loving-kindness,
and  that  of  Love  ;  and  on  this  ground,  to  attribute,
by  preference,  the  veritable  Love,  to  things  Divine,
because  of  the  misplaced  prejudice  of  such  men  as
these.  For,  since  the  veritable  Love  is  sung  of  in
a  sense  befitting  God,  not  by  us  only,  but  also  by
the  Oracles  themselves,  the  multitude,  not  having
comprehended  the  Oneness  of  the  Divine  Name
of  Love,  fell  away,  as  might  be  expected  of  them,
to  the  divided  and  corporeal  and  sundered,  seeing
it  is  not  a  real  love,  but  a  shadow,  or  rather  a  falling
from  the  veritable  Love.  For  the  Oneness  of  the
Divine  and  one  Love  is  incomprehensible  to  the
multitude,  wherefore  also,  as  seeming  a  very  hard
name  to  the  multitude,  it  is  assigned  to  the  Divine
Wisdom,  for  the  purpose  of  leading  back  and  re-
storing them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  veritable  Love  ;
and  for  their  liberation  from  the  difficulty  respecting
it.  And  again,  as  regards  ourselves,  where  it  hap-
pened often  that  men  of  an  earthly  character  ima-
gined something  out  of  place,  (there  is  used)  what
appears  more  euphonius  \    A  certain  one  says,  "  Thy

h  See  note,  p.  128.

1  tvQa   Ka\  6.tottov  ri  iroWdms  l\v   olrjdTjvai  ruvs    xatJLai£faovs
Kara  rb  Sokovv  sixpTj^erepov.


48  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

affection  fell  upon  me,  as  the  affection  of  the
women."  For  those  who  have  rightly  listened  to
things  Divine,  the  name  of  Loving-kindness  and  of
Love  is  placed  by  the  holy  theologians  in  the  same
category  throughout  the  Divine  revelations,  and  this
is  of  a  power  unifying,  and  binding  together,  and
mingling  pre-eminently  in  the  Beautiful  and  Good  ;
pre-existing  by  reason  of  the  beautiful  and  good,  and
imparted  from  the  beautiful  and  good,  by  reason
of  the  Beautiful  and  Good  ;  and  sustaining  things
of  the  same  rank,  within  their  mutual  coherence,
but  moving  the  first  to  forethought  for  the  inferior,
and  attaching  the  inferior  to  the  superior  by  respect.

Section  XIII.
But  Divine  Love  is  extatic,  not  permitting  (any)
to  be  lovers  of  themselves,  but  of  those  beloved.
They  shew  this  too,  the  superior  by  becoming  mind-
ful of  the  inferior ;  and  the  equals  by  their  mutual
coherence ;  and  the  inferior,  by  a  more  divine  re-
spect towards  things  superior.  Wherefore  also,  Paul
the  Great,  when  possessed  by  the  Divine  Love,  and
participating  in  its  extatic  power,  says  with  inspired
lips,  "  I  live  no  longer,  but  Christ  lives  in  me."  As
a  true  lover,  and  beside  himself,  as  he  says,  to  Al-
mighty God,  and  not  living  the  life  of  himself,  but
the  life  of  the  Beloved,  as  a  life  excessively  esteemed.
One  might  make  bold  to  say  even  this,  on  behalf
of  truth,  that  the  very  Author  of  all  things,  by  the
beautiful  and  good  love  of  everything,  through  an
overflow  of  His  loving  goodness,  becomes  out  of
Himself,  by  His  providences  for  all  existing  things,


on  Divine  Names.  49

and  is,  as  it  were,  cozened  by  goodness  and  affection
and  love,  and  is  led  down  from  the  Eminence  above
all,  and  surpassing  all,  to  being  in  all,  as  befits  an
extatic  superessential  power  centred  in  Himself.
Wherefore,  those  skilled  in  Divine  things  call  Him
even  Jealous,  as  (being)  that  vast  good  Love  towards
all  beings,  and  as  rousing  His  loving  inclination  to
jealousy, — and  as  proclaiming  Himself  Jealous — to
Whom  the  things  desired  are  objects  of  jealousy,
and  as  though  the  objects  of  His  providential  care
were  objects  of  jealousy  for  Him.  And,  in  short,  the
lovable  is  of  the  Beautiful  and  Good,  and  Love  pre-
existed both  in  the  Beautiful  and  Good,  and  on
account  of  the  Beautiful  and  Good,  is  and  takes
Being.

Section  XIV.
But  what  do  the  theologians  mean  when  at  one
time  they  call  Him  Love,  and  Loving-kindness,  and
at  another,  Loved  and  Esteemed?  For,  of  the  one,
He  is  Author  and,  as  it  were,  Producer  and  Father  ;
but  the  other,  He  Himself  is;  and  by  one  He  is
moved,  but  by  the  other  He  moves  ;  or  (when  they
say),  that  He  Himself  is  Procurer  and  Mover  of  Him-
self and  by  Himself.  In  this  sense,  they  call  Him
esteemed  and  loved,  as  Beautiful  and  Good  :  but
again  Love  and  Loving-kindness,  as  being  at  once
moving  and  conducting  Power  to  Himself; — the
alone — self  Beautiful  and  Good,  by  reason  of  Itself,
and,  being,  as  it  were,  a  manifestation  of  Itself
through  Itself,  and  a  good  Progression  of  the  sur-

E


50  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

passing  union,  and  a  loving  Movement,  simplex,  self-
moved,  self-operating,  pre-existing  in  the  Good,  and
from  the  Good  bubbling  forth  to  things  existing,
and  again  returning  to  the  Good,  in  which  also
the  Divine  Love  indicates  distinctly  Its  own  un-
ending and  unbeginning,  as  it  were  a  sort  of  ever-
lasting circle  whirling  round  in  unerring  combination,
by  reason  of  the  Good,  from  the  Good,  and  in  the
Good,  and  to  the  Good,  and  ever  advancing  and
remaining  and  returning  in  the  same  and  throughout
the  same.  And  these  things  our  illustrious  initiator
divinely  set  forth  throughout  His  Hymns  of  Love,
of  which  we  may  appropriately  make  mention,  and,
as  it  were,  place  as  a  certain  sacred  chapter  to  our
treatise  concerning  Love.

Section  XV.
Extract  from  the  "Hymns  of  Love?  by  the  most  holy

Hierotheus : —

Love,  whether  we  speak  of  Divine,  or  Angelic,
or  intelligent,  or  psychical,  or  physical,  let  us  regard
as  a  certain  unifying  and  combining  power,  moving
the  superior  to  forethought  for  the  inferior,  and
the  equals  to  a  mutual  fellowship,  and  lastly,  the
inferior  to  respect  towards  the  higher  and  superior.

Section  XVI.
Of  the  same,  from  the  same  Erotic  Hymns.
Since   we   have   arranged    the    many   loves    from
the   one,   by   telling,   in   due   order,   what    are   the


on  Divine  Names.  5  r

kinds  of  knowledge  and  powers  of  the  mundane
and  super-mundane  loves;  over  which,  according
to  the  defined  purpose  of  the  discourse,  the  orders
and  ranks  of  the  mental  and  intelligible  loves  pre-
side ;  next  after k  which  are  placed  the  self-existent
intelligible  and  divine,  over  the  really  beautiful
loves  there  which  have  been  appropriately  celebrated
by  us  ;  now,  on  the  other  hand,  by  restoring  all
back  to  the  One  and  enfolded  Love,  and  Father
of  them  all,  let  us  collect  and  gather  them  together
from  the  many,  by  contracting  It  into  two  Powers
entirely  lovable,  over  which  rules  and  precedes
altogether  the  Cause,  resistless  from  Its  universal
Love  beyond  all,  and  to  which  is  elevated,  according
to  the  nature  of  each  severally,  the  whole  love  from
all  existing  things.

Section  XVII.
Of  the  same,  from  the  same  Hym?is  of  Love.
Come  then,  whilst  collecting  these  again  into  one,
let  us  say,  that  it  is  a  certain  simplex  power,  which
of  itself  moves  to  a  sort  of  unifying  combination
from  the  Good,  to  the  lowest  of  things  existing,
and  from  that  again  in  due  order,  circling  round
again,  through  all  to  the  Good  from  Itself,  and
through  Itself  and  by  Itself,  and  rolling  back  to  Itself
always  in  the  same  way.

Section  XVIII.
And   yet,   any  one   might   say,   "if  the   Beautiful
and   Good   is   beloved   and   desired,    and   esteemed
k  i.e.  in  ascending  order.


5  2  Diony sius  the  Areopagite,

by  all  (for  even  that  which  is  non-existing  desires  It,
as  we  have  said,  and  struggles  how  to  be  in  It ;  and
Itself  is  the  form-giving,  even  of  things  without  form,
and  by  It  alone,  even  the  non-existing  is  said  to  be,
and  is  superessentially)— "  How  is  it  that  the  host
of  demons  do  not  desire  the  Beautiful  and  Good,
but,  through   their  earthly  proclivities,  having  fallen
away    from    the    angelic    identity,    as    regards    the
desire  of  the  Good,  have  become  cause  of  all  evils
both   to  themselves  and  to  all  the  others   who    are
said   to   be   corrupted?    and    why,    in    short,    when
the  tribes  of  demons  have  been  brought  into  being
from  the  Good,  are   they  not   like   the   Good?    or
how,  after  being  a  good  production  from  the  Good,
were    they    changed?    and  what   is   that  which  de-
praved them,  and  in  short,  what  is  evil  ?    and  from
what  source  did  it  spring?    and  in  which  of  things
existing  is  it?    and  how  did  He,  Who  is  Good,  will
to  bring  it  into  being?  and  how,  when  He  willed  it,
was   He  able?    And  if  evil   is  from  another  cause,
what  other  cause  is  there  for  things  existing,  beside
the  Good?  Further,  how,  when  there  is  a  Providence,
is   there  evil,   either   coming   into   existence   at   all,
or  not  destroyed?    And  how  does  any  existing  thing
desire  it,  in  comparison  with  the  Good  ?

Section    XIX. l
Such   a   statement   as   this   might   be    alleged  by
way  of  objection.     We,  however,  on  our  part,  will

1  Plato,  Theaet.


on  Divine  Names.  53

pray  the  objector  to  look  to  the  truth  of  the  facts,
and  will  make  bold  to  say  this  first.  The  Evil  is
not  from  the  Good,  and  if  it  is  from  the  Good,
it  is  not  the  Evil.  For,  it  is  not  the  nature  of  fire
to  make  cold,  nor  of  good  to  bring  into  being
things  not  good  ;  and  if  all  things  that  be  are  from
the  Good  (for  to  produce  and  to  preserve  is  natural
to  the  Good,  but  to  destroy  and  to  dissolve,  to  the
Evil),  there  is  no  existing  thing  from  the  Evil,  nor  will
the  Evil  itself  be,  if  it  should  be  evil  even  to  itself.
And,  if  it  be  not  so,  the  Evil  is  not  altogether  evil,
but  has  some  portion  of  the  Good,  in  consequence
of  which  it  wholly  is.  Now,  if  the  things  existing
desire  the  Beautiful  and  Good,  and  whatever  they  do,
they  do  for  the  sake  of  that  which  seems  good,
and  every  purpose  of  things  existing  has  the  Good
for  its  beginning  and  end  (for  nothing  looking  to
the  Evil  qua  evil,  does  what  it  does),  how  shall
the  Evil  be  in  things  existing;  or,  wholly  being,
how  has  it  been  seduced  from  such  a  good  yearning  ?
Also  if  all  the  things  existing  are  from  the  Good,
and  the  Good  is  above  all  things  existing,  then  there
is  existing  in  the  Good  even  the  non-existing ;  but
the  Evil  is  not  existing ;  and,  if  this  be  not  the  case,
it  is  not  altogether  evil,  nor  non-existing,  for  the
absolutely  non-existing  will  be  nothing,  unless  it
should  be  spoken  of  as  in  the  Good  superessentially.
The  Good,  then,  will  be  fixed  far  above  both  the
absolutely  existing  and  the  non-existing;  but  the
Evil  is  neither  in  things  existing,  nor  in  things  non-
existing,  but,  being  further  distant  from  the  Good  than


54  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

the  non-existing  itself,  it  is  alien  and  more  unsub-
stantial.    Where  then  is  the  Evil?    some  one  may
perchance  say.     For  if  the  Evil  is  not,— virtue  and
vice  are  the  same,  both  universally  and  particularly.
Or,   not   even    that   which    opposes   itself  to   virtue
will  be  evil,  and  yet  sobriety  and  license,  and  right-
eousness and  unrighteousness,  are  contraries.     And
I,  by  no  means,  speak  in  reference  to  the  just  and
unjust  man,  and  the  temperate  and  intemperate  man  ;
but  also,  long  before  the  difference  between  the  just
man  and  his  opposite  is  made  manifest  externally,
in  the   very  soul   itself  the   vices  stand  altogether
apart  from  the  virtues,  and  the  passions  rebel  against
the  reason ;  and  from  this  we  must  grant  some  evil
contrary  to  the  Good.     For  the  Good  is  not  contrary
to  Itself,  but  as  the  product  from  one  Source  and
one  Cause,  It  rejoices  in  fellowship  and  unity  and
friendship.     Nor  yet  is  the  lesser  good  opposed  to
the   greater,   for   neither  is   the   less   heat   or   cold
opposed  to  the  greater.     The  Evil m  then  is  in  things
existing,   and   is   existing,  and   is   opposed,   and   is
in  opposition   to,  the  Good;   and   if  it   is  the  de-
struction   of    things   existing,    this   does   not   expel
the  Evil  from  existence ;    but  it  will  be,  both  itself
existing,    and   generator   of  things    existing.     Does
not  frequently  the  destruction  of  one  become  birth
of  another?    and   the   Evil  will   be  contributing   to
the  completion  of  the  whole,  and  supplying  through
itself  non-imperfection  to  the  whole.

■  Theaet.,  176a.


on  Divine  Names.  55

Section  XX.
Now  to  all  this  true  reason  will  answer,  that  the
Evil  qua  evil  makes  no  single  essence  or  birth,  but
only,  as  far  as  it  can,  pollutes  and  destroys  the  sub-
sistence of  things  existing.  But,  if  any  one  says,
that  it  is  productive  of  being,  and  that  by  destruc-
tion of  one  it  gives  birth  to  another,  we  must  truly
answer,  that  not  qua  destruction  it  gives  birth,  but
qua  destruction  and  evil,  it  destroys  and  pollutes
only,  but  it  becomes  birth  and  essence,  by  reason
of  the  Good ;  and  the  Evil  will  be  destruction  in-
deed, by  reason  of  itself;  but  producer  of  birth  by
reason  of  the  Good  ;  and  qua  evil,  it  is  neither  ex-
isting, nor  productive  of  things  existing;  but,  by
reason  of  the  Good,  it  is  both  existing  and  good-ex-
isting, and  productive  of  things  good.  Yea,  rather
(for  neither  will  the  same  by  itself  be  both  good  and
evil,  nor  the  self-same  power  be  of  itself  destruction  and
birth— neither  as  self-acting  power,  nor  as  self-acting
destruction),  the  absolutely  Evil  is  neither  existing
nor  good,  nor  generative,  nor  productive  of  things
being  and  good ;  but  the  Good  in  whatever  things
it  may  be  perfectly  engendered,  makes  them  perfect
and  pure,  and  thoroughly  good, — but  the  things
which  partake  of  it  in  a  less  degree  are  both  imper-
fectly good,  and  impure,  by  reason  of  the  lack  of  the
Good.  And  (thus)  the  Evil  altogether,  is  not,  nor  is
good,  nor  good  producing ;  but  that  which  ap-
proaches more  or  less  near  the  Good  will  be  pro-
portionately good ;  since  the  All-perfect  Goodness,
in  passing  through  all,  not  only  passes  to  the  All-


5 6  Dionysins  the  Areopagite,

good  beings  around  Itself,  but  extends  Itself  to  the
most  remote,  by  being  present  to  some  thoroughly,
to  others  subordinately,  but  to  the  rest,  in  the  most
remote  degree,  as  each  existing  thing  is  able  to  par-
ticipate in  It.  And  some  things,  indeed,  participate
in  the  Good  entirely,  whilst  others  are  deprived  of
It,  in  a  more  or  less  degree,  but  others  possess  a
more  obscure  participation  in  the  Good ;  and  to  the
rest,  the  Good  is  present  as  a  most  distant  echo.
For  if  the  Good  were  not  present  according  to  the
capacity  of  each,  the  most  Divine  and  honoured
would  occupy  the  rank  of  the  lowest.  And  how
were  it  possible  that  all  should  participate  in  the
Good  uniformly,  when  not  all  are  in  the  same  way
adapted  to  its  whole  participation  ?

Now,  this  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  the  power
of  the  Good,  that  It  empowers,  both  things  de-
prived, and  the  deprivation  of  Itself,  with  a  view  to
the  entire  participation  of  itself.  And,  if  one  must
make  bold  to  speak  the  truth,  even  the  things  fight-
ing against  It,  both  are,  and  are  able  to  fight,  by  Its
power.  Yea  rather,  in  order  that  I  may  speak  sum-
marily, all  things  which  are,  in  so  far  as  they  are,
both  are  good,  and  from  the  Good  j  but,  in  so  far  as
they  are  deprived  of  the  Good,  are  neither  good,  nor
do  they  exist.  For,  even  with  regard  to  the  other
conditions,  such  as  heat  or  cold,  there  are  things
which  have  been  heated,  and  when  the  heat  has
departed  from  them,  many  of  them  are  deprived
both  of  life  and  intelligence  (now  Almighty  God  is
outside   essence,   and   is,    superessentially),  and,  in


on  Divine  Names.  57

one  word,  with  regard  to  the  rest,  even  when
the  condition  has  departed,  or  has  not  become
completely  developed,  things  exist,  and  are  able
to  subsist;  but  that  which  is  every  way  deprived
of  the  Good,  in  no  way  or  manner  ever  was,  or
is,  or  will  be,  nor  is  able  to  be.  For  example,
the  licentious  man,  even  if  he  have  been  deprived
of  the  Good,  as  regards  his  irrational  lust,  in  this
respect  he  neither  is,  nor  desires  realities,  but  never-
theless he  participates  in  the  Good,  in  his  very
obscure  echo  of  union  and  friendship.  And,  even
Anger  participates  in  the  Good,  by  the  very  move-
ment and  desire  to  direct  and  turn  the  seeming
evils  to  the  seeming  good.  And  the  very  man,  who
desires  the  very  worst  life,  as  wholly  desirous  of  life
and  that  which  seems  best  to  him,  by  the  very  fact
of  desiring,  and  desiring  life,  and  looking  to  a  best
life,  participates  in  the  Good.  And,  if  you  should
entirely  take  away  the  Good,  there  will  be  neither
essence,  nor  life,  nor  yearning,  nor  movement,  nor
anything  else.  So  that  the  fact,  that  birth  is  born
from  destruction,  is  not  a  power  of  evil,  but  a  pre-
sence of  a  lesser  good,  even  as  disease  is  a  defect  of
order,  not  total — for,  if  this  should  be,  not  even  the
disease  itself  will  continue  to  exist,  but  the  disease
remains  and  is,  by  having  the  lowest  possible  order
of  essence,  and  in  this  continues  to  exist  as  a  para-
site. For  that  which  is  altogether  deprived  of  the
Good,  is  neither  existing,  nor  in  things  existing;
but  the  compound,  by  reason  of  the  Good  in  things
existing,  and  in  consequence  of  this  in  things  exist-


58  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

ing,  is  also  existing  in  so  far  as  it  participates  in  the
Good.  Yea  rather,  all  things  existing  will  so  far  be,
more  or  less,  as  they  participate  in  the  Good  ;  for,
even  as  respects  the  self-existing  Being,  that  which
in  no  ways  is  at  all,  will  not  be  at  all ;  but  that
which  partially  is,  but  partially  is  not,  in  so  far  as  it
has  fallen  from  the  ever  Being,  is  not  ;  but  so  far
as  it  has  participated  in  the  Being,  so  far  it  is,  and
its  whole  being,  and  its  non-being,  is  sustained
and  preserved.  And  the  Evil, — that  which  has
altogether  fallen  from  the  Good — will  be  good,
neither  in  the  more  nor  in  the  less;  but  the
partially  good,  and  partially  not  good,  fight  no
doubt  against  a  certain  good,  but  not  against
the  whole  Good,  and,  even  it  is  sustained  by
the  participation  of  the  Good,  and  the  Good
gives  essence  even  to  the  privation  of  Itself,  wholly
by  the  participation  of  Itself;  for,  when  the  Good
has  entirely  departed,  there  will  be  neither  anything
altogether  good,  nor  compound,  nor  absolute  evil.
For,  if  the  Evil  is  an  imperfect  good,  (then)  by  the  en-
tire absence  of  the  Good,  both  the  imperfect  and  the
perfect  Good  will  be  absent;  and  then  only  will  be,
and  be  seen,  the  Evil,  when  on  the  one  hand,  it  is
an  evil  to  those  things  to  which  it  was  opposed,  and,
on  the  other,  is  expelled  from  other  things  on  ac-
count of  their  goodness.  For,  it  is  impossible  that
the  same  things,  under  the  same  conditions  in  every
respect,  should  fight  against  each  other.  The  Evil
then  is  not  an  actual  thing.


on  Divine  Names.  5  9

Section  XXI.

But  neither  is  the  Evil  in  things  existing.  For,
if  all  things  existing  are  from  the  Good,  and  the
Good  is  in  all  things  existing,  and  embraces  all,
either  the  Evil  will  not  be  in  things  existing,  or  it
will  be  in  the  Good  ;  and  certainly  it  will  not  be  in
the  Good,  for  neither  is  cold  in  fire,  nor  to  do
evil  in  Him,  Who  turns  even  the  evil  to  good.  But,
if  it  shall  be,  how  will  the  Evil  be  in  the  Good  ?
If  forsooth,  from  Itself,  it  is  absurd  and  impossible.
For  it  is  not  possible,  as  the  infallibility  of  the
Oracles  affirms,  that  a  "  good  tree  should  bring  forth
evil  fruits,"  nor  certainly,  vice  versa.  But,  if  not
from  Itself,  it  is  evident  that  it  will  be  from  another
source  and  cause.  For,  either  the  Evil  will  be  from
the  Good,  or  the  Good  from  the  Evil ;  or,  if  this
be  not  possible,  both  the  Good  and  the  Evil  will
be  from  another  source  and  cause,  for  no  dual  is
source,  but  a  Unit  will  be  source  of  every  dual.
Further,  it  is  absurd  that  two  entirely  contraries
should  proceed  and  be  from  one  and  the  same,  and
that  the  self-same  source  should  be,  not  simplex  and
unique,  but  divided  and  double,  and  contrary  to
itself,  and  be  changed ;  and  certainly  it  is  not  pos-
sible that  there  should  be  two  contrary  sources  of
things  existing,  and  that  these  should  be  contending
in  each  other,  and  in  the  whole.  For,  if  this  were
granted,  even  Almighty  God  will  not  be  in  repose,
nor  free  from  disquietude,  if  there  were  indeed  some-
thing  bringing   disturbance   even   to    Him.     Then,


60  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

everything  will  be  in  disorder,  and  always  fighting ;
and  yet  the  Good  distributes  friendship  to  all  ex-
isting things,  and  is  celebrated  by  the  holy  theo-
logians, both  as  very  Peace,  and  Giver  of  Peace.
Wherefore,  things  good  are  both  friendly  and  har-
monious, every  one,  and  products  of  one  life,  and
marshalled  to  one  good  ;  and  kind,  and  similar,  and
affable  to  each  other.  So  that  the  Evil  is  not  in
God,  and  the  Evil  is  not  inspired  by  God.  But
neither  is  the  Evil  from  God,  for,  either  He  is  not
good,  or  He  does  good,  and  produces  good  things  ;
and,  not  once  in  a  way,  and  some ;  and  at  another
time  not,  and  not  all ;  for  this  would  argue  transition
and  change,  even  as  regards  the  very  Divinest  thing
of  all,  the  Cause.  But,  if  in  God,  the  Good  is  sus-
taining essence,  God,  when  changing  from  the  Good,
will  be  sometimes  Being,  and  sometimes  not  Being.
But,  if  He  has  the  Good  by  participation,  He  will
then  have  it  from  another ;  and  sometimes  He  will
have  it,  and  sometimes  not.  The  Evil,  then,  is  not
from  God,  nor  in  God,  neither  absolutely  nor  oc-
casionally.

Section  XXII.

But  neither  is  the  Evil  in  Angels ;  for  if  the  good-
like angel  proclaims  the  goodness  of  God,  being  by
participation  in  a  secondary  degree  that  which  the
Announced  is  in  the  first  degree  as  Cause,  the  Angel
is  a  likeness  of  Almighty  God — a  manifestation  of
the  unmanifested  light — a  mirror  untarnished — most
transparent — without     flaw — pure— without     spot —


on  Divine  Names.  6 1

receiving,  if  I  may  so  speak,  the  full  beauty  of  the
Good-stamped  likeness  of  God — and  without  stain,
shedding  forth  undefiledly  in  itself,  so  far  as  is
possible,  the  goodness  of  the  Silence,  which  dwells
in  innermost  shrines.  The  Evil,  then,  is  not  even
in  Angels.  But  by  punishing  sinners  are  they  evil  ?
By  this  rule,  then,  the  punishers  of  transgressors
are  evil,  and  those  of  the  priests  who  shut  out
the  profane  from  the  Divine  Mysteries.  And  yet,
the  being  punished  is  not  an  evil,  but  the  becoming
worthy  of  punishment;  nor  the  being  deservedly
expelled  from  Holy  things,  but  the  becoming  ac-
cursed of  God,  and  unholy  and  unfit  for  things  un-
dented.

Section  XXIII.
But,  neither  are  the  demons  evil  by  nature ;  for,
if  they  are  evil  by  nature,  neither  are  they  from  the
Good,  nor  amongst  things  existing;  nor,  in  fact,
did  they  change  from  good,  being  by  nature,  and
always,  evil.  Then,  are  they  evil  to  themselves
or  to  others?  If  to  themselves,  they  also  destroy
themselves;  but  if  to  others,  how  destroying,  or
what  destroying ?— Essence,  or  power,  or  energy?
If  indeed  Essence,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  not  con-
trary to  nature;  for  they  do  not  destroy  things
indestructible  by  nature,  but  things  receptive  of
destruction.  Then,  neither  is  this  an  evil  for  every
one,  and  in  every  case ;  but,  not  even  any  existing
thing  is  destroyed,  in  so  far  as  it  is  essence  and
nature,   but   by   the   defect   of  nature's   order,   the


62  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

principle  of  harmony  and  proportion  lacks  the  power
to  remain  as  it  was.  But  the  lack  of  strength  is  not
complete,  for  the  complete  lack  of  power  takes  away
even  the  disease  and  the  subject;  and  such  a  disease
will  be  even  a  destruction  of  itself;  so  that,  such
a  thing  is  not  an  evil,  but  a  defective  good,  for  that
which  has  no  part  of  the  Good  will  not  be  amongst
things  which  exist.  And  with  regard  to  the  destruc-
tion of  power  and  energy  the  principle  is  the  same.
Then,  how  are  the  demons,  seeing  they  come
into  being  from  God,  evil?  For  the  Good  brings
forth  and  sustains  good  things.  Yet  they  are  called
evil,  some  one  may  say.  But  not  as  they  are  (for  they
are  from  the  Good,  and  obtained  a  good  being),  but,
as  they  are  not,  by  not  having  had  strength,  as  the
Oracles  affirm,  "to  keep  their  first  estate."  For  in
what,  tell  me,  do  we  affirm  that  the  demons  become
evil,  except  in  the  ceasing  in  the  habit  and  energy
for  good  things  Divine  ?  Otherwise,  if  the  demons
are  evil  by  nature,  they  are  always  evil ;  yet  evil
is  unstable.  Therefore,  if  they  are  always  in  the
same  condition,  they  are  not  evil ;  for  to  be  ever  the
same  is  a  characteristic  of  the  Good.  But,  if  they
are  not  always  evil,  they  are  not  evil  by  nature,  but
by  wavering  from  the  angelic  good  qualities.  And
they  are  not  altogether  without  part  in  the  good,
in  so  far  as  they  both  are,  and  live  and  think,  and
in  one  word — as  there  is  a  sort  of  movement  of
aspiration  in  them.  But  they  are  said  to  be  evil,
by  reason  of  their  weakness  as  regards  their  action
according   to   nature.     The   evil   then,  in  them,  is


on  Divine  Names.  63

a  turning  aside  and  a  stepping  out  of  things  befitting
themselves,  and  a  missing  of  aim,  and  imperfection
and  impotence,  and  a  weakness  and  departure,  and
falling  away  from  the  power  which  preserves  their
integrity  in  them.  Otherwise,  what  is  evil  in  demons  ?
An  irrational  anger — a  senseless  desire — a  headlong
fancy. — But  these,  even  if  they  are  in  demons,  are
not  altogether,  nor  in  every  respect,  nor  in  them-
selves alone,  evils.  For  even  with  regard  to  other
living  creatures,  not  the  possession  of  these,  but
the  loss,  is  both  destruction  to  the  creature,  and
an  evil.  But  the  possession  saves,  and  makes  to
be,  the  nature  of  the  living  creature  which  possesses
them.  The  tribe  of  demons  then  is  not  evil,  so
far  as  it  is  according  to  nature,  but  so  far  as  it  is
not ;  and  the  whole  good  which  was  given  to  them
was  not  changed,  but  themselves  fell  from  the  whole
good  given.  And  the  angelic  gifts  which  were
given  to  them,  we  by  no  means  affirm  that  they
were  changed,  but  they  exist,  and  are  complete,  and
all  luminous,  although  the  demons  themselves  do
not  see,  through  having  blunted  their  powers  of
seeing  good.  So  far  as  they  are,  they  are  both  from
the  Good,  and  are  good,  and  aspire  to  the  Beautiful
and  the  Good,  by  aspiring  to  the  realities,  Being,
and  Life,  and  Thought ;  and  by  the  privation  and
departure  and  declension  from  the  good  things  be-
fitting them,  they  are  called  evil,  and  are  evil  as
regards  what  they  are  not :  and  by  aspiring  to  the
non-existent,  they  aspire  to  the  Evil.


64  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

Section  XXIV.
But  does  some  one  say  that  souls  are  evil?  If
it  be  that  they  meet  with  evil  things  providentially,
and  with  a  view  to  their  preservation,  this  is  not
an  evil,  but  a  good,  and  from  the  Good,  Who  makes
even  the  evil  good.  But,  if  we  say  that  souls  become
evil,  in  what  respect  do  they  become  evil,  except
in  the  failure  of  their  good  habits  and  energies  ;  and,
by  reason  of  their  own  lack  of  strength,  missing  their
aim  and  tripping?  For  we  also  say,  that  the  air
around  us  becomes  dark  by  failure  and  absence  of
light,  and  yet  the  light  itself  is  always  light,  that
which  enlightens  even  the  darkness.  The  Evil,
then,  is  neither  in  demons  nor  in  us,  as  an  existent
evil,'  but  as  a  failure  and  dearth  of  the  perfection
of  our  own  proper  goods.

Section  XXV.
But  neither  is  the  Evil  in  irrational  creatures,
for  if  you  should  take  away  anger  and  lust,  and  the
other  things  which  we  speak  of,  and  which  are  not
absolutely  evil  in  their  own  nature,  the  lion  having
lost  his  boldness  and  fierceness  will  not  be  a  lion  j
and  the  dog,  when  he  has  become  gentle  to  every
body,  will  not  be  a  dog,  since  to  keep  guard  is
a  dog's  duty,  and  to  admit  those  of  the  household,
but  to  drive  away  the  stranger.  So  the  fact  that
nature  is  not  destroyed  is  not  an  evil,  but  a  destruc-
tion of  nature,  weakness,  and  failure  of  the  natural
habitudes   and   energies   and   powers.     And,   if  all


on  Divine  Names.  65

things  through  generation  in  time  have  their  per-
fection, the  imperfect  is  not  altogether  contrary  to
universal  nature.

Section  XXVI.
But  neither  is  the  Evil  in  nature  throughout,  for  if
all  the  methods  of  nature  are  from  universal  nature,
there  is  nothing  contrary  to  it.  But  in  each  indi-
vidual (nature)  one  thing  will  be  according  to  nature,
and  another  not  according  to  nature.  For  one  thing
is  contrary  to  nature  in  one,  and  another  in  another11,
and  that  which  is  according  to  nature  to  one,  is  to
the  other,  contrary  to  nature.  But  malady  of  nature,
that  which  is  the  contrary  to  nature,  is  the  deprivation
of  things  of  nature.  So  that  there  is  not  an  evil
nature;  but  this  is  evil  to  nature,  the  inability  to
accomplish  the  things  of  one's  proper  nature.

Section  XXVII.
But,  neither  is  the  Evil  in  bodies.  For  deformity
and  disease  are  a  defect  of  form,  and  a  deprivation  of
order.  And  this  is  not  altogether  an  evil,  but  a  less
good ;  for  if  a  dissolution  of  beauty  and  form  and
order  become  complete,  the  body  itself  will  be  gone.
But  that  the  body  is  not  cause  of  baseness  to  the  soul
is  evident,  from  the  fact  that  baseness  continues  to
coexist  even  without  a  body,  as  in  demons.  For  this
is  evil  to  minds  and  souls  and  bodies,  (viz.)  the
weakness  and  declension  from  the  habitude  of  their
own  proper  goods.

n    AAAp  yap  &\\o  irapa,  (pvaiv.
F


66  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

Section  XXVIII.
But  neither  (a  thing  which  they  say  over  and  over
again)  is  the  evil  in  matter,  so  far  as  it  is  matter
For  even  it  participates  in  ornament  and  beauty  and
form.     But  if  matter,  being  without  these,  by  itself
is  without  quality  and  without  form,  how  does  matter
produce  anything— matter,  which,  by  itself,  is  impas-
sive?   Besides  how  is  matter  an  evil?    for,  if  it  does
not  exist  in  any  way  whatever,  it  is  neither  good  nor
evil ;   but  if  it  is  any  how  existing,  and  all  things
existing  are  from  the  Good,  even  it  would  be  from
the  Good ;  and  either  the  Good  is  productive  of  the
Evil,  or  the  Evil,  as  being  from  the  Good,  is  good  5  or
the  Evil  is  capable  of  producing  the  Good;    or  even
the  Good,  as  from  the  Evil,  is  evil ;    or  further,  there
are  two  first  principles,  and  these   suspended  from
another  one  head.     And,  if  they  say  that  matter  is
necessary,  for  a  completion  of  the  whole  Cosmos,
how  is  matter  an  evil?  For  the  Evil  is  one  thing,  and
the  necessary  °  is  another.     But,  how  does  He,  Who
is  Good,  bring  anything  to  birth  from  the  Evil?    or,
how  is  that,  which  needs  the  Good,  evil?   For  the
Evil  shuns  the  nature  of  the  Good.     And  how  does
matter,   being   evil,    generate   and   nourish   nature?
For  the  Evil,  qud  evil,  neither  generates,  nor  nour-
ishes, nor  solely  produces,  nor  preserves  anything.

But,  if  they  should  say,  that  it  does  not  make  base-
ness in  souls,  but  that  they  are  dragged  to  it,  how
will  this  be  true?  for  many  of  them  look  towards  the

0  Jahn,  p.  66.


on  Divine  Names.  67

good ;  and  yet  how  did  this  take  place,  when  matter
was  dragging  them  entirely  to  the  Evil  ?  So  that  the
Evil  in  souls  is  not  from  matter,  but  from  a  disordered
and  discordant  movement.  But,  if  they  say  this
further,  that  they  invariably  follow  matter,  and  un-
stable matter  is  necessary  for  those  who  are  unable  to
stand  firmly  by  themselves,  how  is  the  Evil  necessary,
or  the  necessary  an  evil  ?

Section  XXIX.
But  neither  is  it  this  which  we  affirm — the  "  priva-
tion fights  against  the  Good  by  its  own  power p "  ;  for
the  complete  privation  is  altogether  powerless,  and
the  partial  has  the  power,  not  in  respect  of  privation,
but  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  a  complete  privation.  For,
whilst  privation  of  good  is  partial,  it  is  not,  as  yet,  an
evil,  and  when  it  has  become  an  accomplished  fact,
the  nature  of  the  evil  has  departed  also.

Section  XXX.
But,  to  speak  briefly,  the  Good  is  from  the  one
and  the  whole  Cause,  but  the  Evil  is  from  many  and
partial  defects.  Almighty  God  knows  the  Evil  qua
good;  and,  with  Him,  the  causes  of  the  evils  are
powers  producing  good  i.  But,  if  the  Evil  is  eternal,
and  creates,  and  has  power,  and  is,  and  does,
whence  do  these  come  to  it?  Is  it  either  from
the  Good,  or  by  the  Good  from  the  Evil,  or  by
both  from  another  cause?  Everything  that  is  ac-
cording   to   nature    comes   into   being  from   a   de-

»  Jahn,  p.  67.  1  Out  of  evil  forth  producing  good.


68  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

fined  cause.  And  if  the  Evil  is  without  cause,
and  undefined,  it  is  not  according  to  nature.  For
there  is  not  in  nature  what  is  contrary  to  nature  ;
nor  is  there  any  raison  d'etre  for  want  of  art  in  art.
Is  then  the  soul  cause  of  things  evil,  as  fire  of
burning,  and  does  it  fill  everything  that  it  happens
to  touch  with  baseness  ?  Or,  is  the  nature  of  the  soul
then  good,  but,  by  its  energies,  exists  sometimes  in
one  condition,  and  sometimes  in  another  ?  If  indeed
by  nature,  even  its  existence  is  an  evil,  and  whence
then  does  it  derive  its  existence  ?  Or,  is  it  from  the
good  Cause  creative  of  the  whole  universe  ?  But,  if
from  this,  how  is  it  essentially  evil  ?  For  good  are  all
things  born  of  this.  But  if  by  energies,  neither  is  this
invariable,  and  if  not,  whence  are  the  virtues  ?  Since
it  (the  soul)  comes  into  being  without  even  seeming
good.  It  remains  then  that  the  Evil  is  a  weakness
and  a  falling  short  of  the  Good.

Section  XXXI.

The  Cause  of  things  good  is  One.  If.the  Evil  is
contrary  to  the  Good,  the  many  causes  of  the  Evil,
certainly  those  productive  of  things  evil,  are  not
principles  and  powers,  but  want  of  power,  and  want
of  strength,  and  a  mixing  of  things  dissimilar  without
proportion.  Neither  are  things  evil  unmoved,  and
always  in  the  same  condition,  but  endless  and  un-
defined, and  borne  along  in  different  things,  and
those  endless.  The  Good  will  be  beginning  and  end
of  all,  even  things  evil,  for,  for  the  sake  of  the
Good,  are  all  things,  both  those  that  are  good,  and


on  Divine  Na?nes.  69

those  that  are  contrary.  For  we  do  even  these  as
desiring  the  Good  (for  no  one  does  what  he  does
with  a  view  to  the  Evil),  wherefore  the  Evil  has  not
a  subsistence,  but  a  parasitical  subsistence,  coming
into  being  for  the  sake  of  the  Good,  and  not  of  icself.

Section  XXXII.
It  is  to  be  laid  down  that  being  belongs  to  the
Evil  as  an  accident  and  by  reason  of  something  else,
and  not  from  its  own  origin,  and  thus  that  that  which
comes  into  being  appears  to  be  right,  because  it
comes  into  being  for  the  sake  of  the  Good,  but  that
in  reality  it  is  not  right  for  the  reason  that  we  think
that  which  is  not  good  to  be  good.  The  desired
is  shewn  to  be  one  thing,  and  that  which  comes
to  pass  is  another.  The  Evil,  then,  is  beside  the
path,  and  beside  the  mark,  and  beside  nature,  and
beside  cause,  and  beside  beginning,  and  beside  end,
and  beside  limit,  and  beside  intention,  and  beside
purpose.  The  Evil  then  is  privation  and  failure,
and  want  of  strength,  and  want  of  proportion,  and
want  of  attainment,  and  want  of  purpose ;  and  with-
out beauty,  and  without  life,  and  without  mind,  and
without  reason,  and  without  completeness,  and  with-
out stability,  and  without  cause,  and  without  limit,
and  without  production;  and  inactive,  and  without
result,  and  disordered,  and  dissimilar,  and  limitless,
and  dark,  and  unessential,  and  being  itself  nothing
in  any  manner  of  way  whatever.  How,  in  short,
can  evil  do  anything  by  its  mixture  with  the  Good  ?
For  that  which  is  altogether  without  participation


7o  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

in  the  Good,  neither  is  anything,  nor  is  capable  of
anything.  For,  if  the  Good  is  both  an  actual  thing
and  an  object  of  desire,  and  powerful  and  effective,
how  will  the  contrary  to  the  Good,— that  which  has
been  deprived  of  essence,  and  intention,  and  power,
and  energy,— be  capable  of  anything  ?  Not  all  things
are  evil  to  all,  nor  the  same  things  evil  in  every
respect.  To  a  demon,  evil  is  to  be  contrary  to
the  good-like  mind— to  a  soul,  to  be  contrary  to
reason— to  a  body,  to  be  contrary  to  nature.

Section  XXXIII.
How,  in  short,   are  there  evils  when  there  is  a
Providence?     The   Evil,  qud   evil,   is   not,   neither
as  an  actual  thing  nor  as  in  things  existing.     And
no  single  thing  is  without  a  Providence.    For  neither
is  the  Evil  an  actual  thing  existing  unmixed  with
the  Good.     And,  if  no  single  thing  is  without  par-
ticipation in  the  Good,  but  the  lack  of  the  Good
is   an  evil,  and  no  existing  thing  is  deprived  ab-
solutely  of   the   Good,   the    Divine   Providence   is
in  all  existing  things,  and  no  single  thing  is  without
Providence.     But  Providence,  as  befits  Its  goodness,
uses  even  evils  which  happen  for  the  benefit,  either
individual  or  general,  of  themselves  or  others,  and
suitably   provides  for   each   being.     Wherefore   we
will  not  admit  the  vain  statement  of  the  multitude,
who  say  that  Providence  ought  to  lead  us  to  virtue,
even  against  our  will.     For  to  destroy  nature  is  not
a  function  of  Pro*tfence.      Hence,  as  Providence
is  conservative  of  therfeture  of  each,  it  provides  for


on  Divine  Names.  7 1

the  free,  as  free ;  and  for  the  whole,  and  individuals,
according  to  the  wants  of  all  and  each,  as  far  as  the
nature  of  those  provided  for  admits  the  providential
benefits  of  its  universal  and  manifold  Providence,
distributed  proportionably  to  each.

Section  XXXIV.
The  Evil,  then,  is  not  an  actual  thing,  nor  is  the
Evil  in  things  existing.  For  the  Evil,  qua  evil,  is
nowhere,  and  the  fact  that  evil  comes  into  being
is  not  in  consequence  of  power,  but  by  reason  of
weakness.  And,  as  for  the  demons,  what  they  are
is  both  from  the  Good,  and  good.  But  their  evil
is  from  the  declension  from  their  own  proper  goods,
and  a  change — the  weakness,  as  regards  their  iden-
tity and  condition,  of  the  angelic  perfection  befitting
them.  And  they  aspire  to  the  Good,  in  so  far  as  they
aspire  to  be  and  to  live  and  to  think.  And  in  so
far  as  they  do  not  aspire  to  the  Good,  they  aspire
to  the  non-existent ;  and  this  is  not  aspiration,  but
a  missing  of  the  true  aspiration.

Section  XXXV.
Now  the  Oracles  call  conscious  transgressors  those
who  are  thoroughly  weak  as  regards  the  ever  memor-
able knowledge  or  the  practise  of  the  Good,  and
who,  knowing  the  will,  do  not  perform  it, — those
who  are  hearers  indeed,  but  are  weak  concerning
the  faith,  or  the  energy  of  the  Good.  And  for  some,
it  is  against  their  will  to  understand  to  do  good,
by  reason  of  the  deviation  or  weakness  of  the  will.


7  2  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

And   in   short,  the  Evil  (as  we  have  often   said)  is
want  of  strength  and  want  of  power,  and  defect,
either  of  the  knowledge,  or  the  never  to  be  forgotten
knowledge,    or  of   the   faith,   or   of   the   aspiration,
or  of  the  energy  of  the  Good.     Yet,  some  one  may
say,  the    weakness   is   not   punishable,  but  on  the
contrary  is  pardonable.     Now,  if  the   power   were
not  granted,   the  statement  might  hold  good;   but,
if  power  comes  from  the  Good,  Who  giveth,  accord-
ing  to  the   Oracles,   the   things   suitable  to  all  ab«
solutely,  the   failure   and  deviation,  and  departure
and    declension   of  the    possession   from   the   Good
of  our  own  proper  goods  is  not  praiseworthy.     But
let  these  things  suffice  to  have  been  sufficiently  said
according  to  our  ability  in  our  writings  "  Concerning
just  and  Divine  chastisement"  throughout  which  sacred
treatise  the  infallibility  of  the  Oracles  has  cast  aside
those  sophistical  statements  as  senseless  words,  speak-
ing injustice  and  falsehood  against  Almighty  God,
But   now,  according  to  our  ability,  the  Good   has
been  sufficiently  praised,  as  really  lovable,— as  be-
ginning and  end  of  all— as  embracing  things  exist-
ing—as giving  form  to  things  not  existing— as  Cause
of  all  good  things— as  guiltless   of  things  evil— as
Providence   and   Goodness    complete— and  soaring
above  things  that  are  and  things  that  are  not— and
turning   to  good   things   evil,  and    the  privation  of
Itself— as  by  all  desired,  and  loved,  and  esteemed,
and  whatever  else,  the  true  statement,  as  I  deem,
has  demonstrated  in  the  preceding.


on  Divine  Names.  73

CAPUT   V.

Concerning  Being — in  which  also  concerning
Exemplars.

Section  I,
Let  us  now  then  pass  to  the  name  "  Being  " — given
in  the  Oracles  as  veritably  that  of  Him,  Who  verit-
ably is.  But  we  will  recall  to  your  remembrance
this  much,  that  the  purpose  of  our  treatise  is  not
to  make  known  the  superessential  Essence — qua
superessential — -(for  this  is  inexpressible,  and  un-
knowable, and  altogether  unrevealed,  and  surpassing
the  union  itself),  but  to  celebrate  the  progression
of  the  supremely  Divine  Source  of  Essence,  which
gives  essence  to  all  things  being.  For  the  Divine
Name  of  the  Good,  as  making  known  the  whole
progressions  of  the  Cause  of  all,  is  extended,  both
to  things  being,  and  things  not  being,  and  is  above
things  being,  and  things  not  being.  But  the  Name
of  Being  is  extended  to  all  things  being,  and
is  above  things  being; — and  the  Name  of  Life
is  extended  to  all  things  living,  and  is  above  things
living ;  and  the  Name  of  Wisdom  is  extended  to
all  the  intellectual  and  rational  and  sensible,  and
is  above  all  these.

Section  II.
The  treatise,  then,  seeks  to  celebrate  these,  the
Names    of  God,   which   set  forth   His    Providence.
For  it  does  not  profess  to  express  the   very  super-
essential   Goodness,    and    Essence,    and    Life,   and


74  Dionysius  the  Areopagite^

Wisdom,  of  the   very   superessential    Deity,  Which
is    seated    above    all    Goodness,   and    Deity,    and
Essence,  and  Wisdom,  and  Life,— in  secret  places,
as  the  Oracles  affirm.     But  it  celebrates  the  bene-
ficial Providence,  which  has  been  set  forth  as  pre-
eminently Goodness  and  Cause  of  all  good  things,
and  as  Being,  and  Life,  and  Wisdom,— the  Cause
essentiating  and  vivifying,  and  wise-making,  of  those
who  partake   of  essence,  and  life,  and   mind,   and
reason,  and  sense.     But  it  does  not  affirm  that  the
Good  is  one   thing,  and   the  Being  another;   and
that  Life  is  other  than  Wisdom  ;  nor  that  the  Causes
are  many,  and  that  some  deities  produce  one  thing
and  others  another,  as  superior  and  inferior;   but
that  the  whole  good  progressions  and  the  Names
of  God,  celebrated  by  us,  are  of  one  God ;  and  that
the   one   epithet  makes  known  the  complete   Pro-
vidence of  the  one  God,  but  that  the  others  are
indicative  of  His  more  general  and  more  particular
providences.

Section  III.
Yet,  some  one  might  say,  for  what  reason  do
we  affirm  that  Life  is  superior  to  Being,  and  Wisdom
to  Life  ?  Things  with  life  no  doubt  are  above  things
that  merely  exist— things  sensible  above  those  which
merely  live,— and  things  rational  above  these,— and
the  Minds r  above  the  rational,  and  are  around  God,
and  are  more  near  to  Him.  Yet,  things  which
partake  of  greater  gifts  from  God,  must  needs  be

■  Angels.


on  Divine  Names.  75

better  and  superior  to  the  rest.  But  if  any  one
assumed  the  intellectual  to  be  without  being,  and
without  life,  the  statement  might  hold  good.  But
if  the  Divine  Minds  are  both  above  all  the  rest
of  beings,  and  live  above  the  other  living  beings,
and  think  and  know,  above  sensible  perception  and
reason,  and,  beyond  all  the  other  existing  beings,
aspire  to,  and  participate  in,  the  Beautiful  and  Good,
they  are  more  around  the  Good,  participating  in  It
more  abundantly,  and  having  received  larger  and
greater  gifts  from  It.  As  also,  the  rational  creatures
excel  those  of  sensible  perception,  by  their  superiority
in  the  abundance  of  reason,  and  these,  by  their
sensible  perception,  and  others,  by  their  life.  And
this,  as  I  think,  is  true,  that  the  things  which
participate  more  in  the  One  and  boundless-giving
God,  are  more  near  to  Him,  and  more  divine,
than  those  who  come  behind  them  (in  gifts).

Section  IV.
Now,  since  we  are  speaking  of  these  things,  come
then,  and  let  us  praise  the  Good,  as  veritably  Being,
and  giving  essence  to  all  things  that  be.  He,  Who
is,  is  superessential,  sustaining  Cause  of  the  whole
potential  Being,  and  Creator  of  being,  existence,
subsistence,  essence,  nature ;  Source  and  Measure
of  ages,  and  Framer  of  times,  and  Age  of  things  that
be,  Time  of  things  coming  into  being,  Being  of  things
howsoever  being,  Birth  of  things  howsoever  born.
From  Him,  Who  is,  is  age,  and  essence,  and  being,
and  time,  and  birth,  and   thing  born ;    the  realities


7  6  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

in  things  that  be,  and  things  howsoever  existing
and  subsisting.  For  Almighty  God  is  not  relatively
a  Being,  but  absolutely  and  unboundedly,  having
comprehended  and  anticipated  the  whole  Being
in  Himself.  Wherefore,  He  is  also  called  King  of
the  ages,  since  the  whole  being  both  is,  and  is
sustained,  in  Him  and  around  Him.  And  He
neither  was,  nor  will  be,  nor  became,  nor  becomes,
nor  will  become— yea  rather,  neither  is.  But  He
is  the  Being  to  things  that  be,  and  not  things  that
be  only,  but  the  very  being  of  things  that  be,
absolutely  from  before  the  ages.  For  He  is  the
Age  of  ages— the  Existing  before  the  ages.

Section  V.
Summing  up,  then,  let  us  say,  that  the  being
to  all  beings  and  to  the  ages,  is  from  the  Pre-
existing. And  every  age  and  time  is  from  Him.
And  of  every  age  and  time,  and  of  everything,
howsoever  existing,  the  Pre-existing  is  Source  and
Cause.  And  all  things  participate  in  Him,  and
from  no  single  existing  thing  does  He  stand  aloof.
And  He  is  before  all  things,  and  all  things  in  Him
consist.  And  absolutely,  if  anything  is,  in  any  way
whatsoever,  it  both  is,  and  is  contemplated,  and
is  preserved  in  the  Pre-existing.  And,  before  all  the
other  participations  in  Him,  the  being  is  pre-sup-
posed.  And  self-existent  Being  has  precedence  of
the  being-  self-existent  Life;  and  the  being  self-
existent  Wisdom  ;  and  the  being  self-existent  Divine
Likeness;   and  the  other  beings,  in  whatever  gifts


o?i  Divine  Names.  77

participating,  before  all  these  participate  in  being;
yea,  rather,  all  self-existent  things,  of  which  existing
things  participate,  participate  in  the  self-existent
Being.  And  there  is  nothing  existent,  of  which  the
self-existent  Being  is  not  essence  and  age.  Natur-
ally, then,  more  chiefly  than  all  the  rest,  Almighty
God  is  celebrated  as  Being,  from  the  prior  of  His
other  gifts  ;  for  pre-possessing  even  pre-existence,  and
super-existence,  and  super-possessing  being,  He  pre-
established  all  being,  I  mean  self-existent  being ;  and
subjected  everything,  howsoever  existing,  to  Being
Itself.  And  then,  all  the  sources  of  beings,  as
participating  in  being,  both  are,  and  are  sources,
and  first  are,  and  then  are  sources.  And,  if  you
wish  to  say,  that  the  self-existent  Life  is  source  of
living  things,  as  living ;  and  the  self-existent  Simi-
litude, of  things  similar  as  similar;  and  the  self-
existent  Union,  of  things  united,  as  united ;  and
the  self-existent  Order,  of  things  ordered,  as  ordered  •
and  of  the  rest,  as  many  as,  by  participating  in  this
or  that,  or  both,  or  many,  are  this  or  that,  or  both,
or  many,  you  will  find  the  self-existent  participations
themselves,  first  participating  in  being,  and  by  their
being,  first  remaining; — then  being  sources  of  this
or  that,  and  by  their  participating  in  being,  both
being,  and  being  participated.  But,  if  these  are
by  their  participation  of  being,  much  more  the
things  participating  in  them.

Section  VI.
The    self-existent    Super-goodness    then,    as    pro-
jecting the  first  gift  of  self-existent  being,  is  cele-


78  Dio?iysius  the  Areopagite,

brated  by  the  elder  and  first  of  the  participations ;
and  being  itself  is  from  It,  and  in  It;  as  also  the
sources  of  things  being,  and  all  the  things  that
be,  and  the  things  howsoever  sustained  by  being,
and  that  irresistibly,  and  comprehensively  and  uni-
formly. For  even  in  a  monad,  every  number  pre-
exists in  the  form  of  a  unit,  and  the  monad  holds
every  number  in  itself  singly.  And  every  number
is  united  in  the  monad,  but  so  far  as  it  advances
from  the  monad,  so  far  it  is  distributed  and  mul-
tiplied. And  in  a  centre,  all  the  lines8  of  the  circle
coexist  within  one  union,  and  the  point  holds  all
the  straight  lines  in  itself,  uniformly  united,  both
to  each  other,  and  to  the  one  source  from  which
they  proceeded,  and  in  the  centre  itself  they  are
completely  united  ;  but  standing  slightly  distant  from
it,  they  are  slightly  separated ;  but  when  more  apart,
more  so.  And  in  one  word,  the  nearer  they  are
to  the  centre,  the  more  they  are  united  to  it  and
to  each  other?  and  the  more  they  stand  apart  from
it,  the  more  they  stand  apart  from  each  other.

Section  VII.
But  all  the  proportions  of  nature  individually
are  comprehended  in  the  whole  nature  of  the  whole,
within  one  unconfused  union;  and  in  the  soul,
the  powers  of  each  several  part  are  provident  of
the  whole  body  in  a  uniform  fashion.  There  is
nothing  out  of  place  then,  that,  by  ascending  from
obscure  images  to  the  Cause  of  all,  we  should  con-
»  i.e.  the  radii.


on  Divine  Names.  79

template,  with  supermundane  eyes,  all  things  in
the  Cause  of  all,  even  those  contrary  to  each  other,
after  a  single  fashion  and  unitedly.  For  It  is  Source
of  things  existing,  from  which  are  both  being  itself,
and  all  things  however  being;  every  source,  every
term,  every  life,  every  immortality,  every  wisdom,
every  order,  every  harmony,  every  power,  every
protection,  every  stability,  every  endurance,  every
conception,  every  word,  every  sensible  perception,
every  habit,  every  standing,  every  movement,  every
union,  every  mingling,  every  friendship,  every  agree-
ment, every  difference,  every  limit,  and  whatever
other  things  existing  by  being,  characterize  all  things
being.

Section  VIII.
And  from  the  same  Cause  of  all,  are  the  higher
and  lower  intellectual*  essences  of  the  godlike
angels  ;  and  those  of  the  souls  ;  and  the  natures
of  the  whole  Cosmos  ;  all  things  whatsoever  said  to
be  either  in  others,  or  by  reflection.  Yea,  even
the  all  holy  and  most  honoured  Powers  veritably
being,  and  established,  as  it  were,  in  the  vestibule
of  the  superessential  Triad,  are  from  It,  and  in  It ;
and  have  the  being  and  the  godlike  being  ;  and
after  them,  as  regards  Angels,  the  subordinate,  sub-
ordinate^, and  the  remotest,  most  remotely,  but  as
regards  ourselves,  supermundanely.  And  the  souls,
and  all  the  other  beings,  according  to  the  same  rule,
have  their  being,  and  their  well-being ;  and  are,  and
are  well ;  by  having  from  the  Pre-existing  their  being
*  Maximus,  Scholia,  cap.  4,  sec.  I.


80  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

and  their  well-being.     And  in  It  are  both  being  and
well-being;    and   from    It,    beginning;    and    in    It,
guarded;  and  to  It,  terminated.     And  the  preroga-
tives of  being  he  distributes  to  the  superior  beings,
which   the   Oracles   call   even    eternal.     But   being
itself  never   at   any  time   fails  all    existing   beings.
And  even  self-existent  being  is  from  the  Pre-existent,
and  of  Him  is  being,  and  He  is  not  of  being ;— and
in    Him    is    being,  and   He   is  not  in   being;    and
being  possesses  Him,  and  not  He  possesses  being  ;
and  He  is  both  age  and  beginning,  and  measure  of
being;  being  essentiating  Source,  and  Middle  and
End,  of  pre-essence,  and  being  and  age  and  all  things.
And  for  this  reason,  by  the  Oracles,  the  veritably
Pre-existing  is  represented  under  many  forms,  accord-
ing to  every  conception  of  beings,  and  the  "  Was  "
and  the  "  Is,"  and  the  "  Will  be,"  and  the  "  Became,"
and  the  "  Becomes,"  and  the  "  Will  become,"  are
properly    sung   respecting   Him.     For  all  these,   to
those  who  think  worthily  of  God,  signify  by  every
conception  His  being  superessentially,  and  Cause  in
every  way  of  things  existing.     For  He  is  not  this,
but  not  that;  nor  is  He  in  some  way,  but  not  in
some  other;  but  He  is  all  things,  as  Cause  of  all,
and  containing  and  pre-holding  in  Himself  all  govern-
ments, all  controls,  of  all  existing  things.     And  He
is  above  all,  as  superessentially  super-being  before  all.
Wherefore,   also,  all   things  are  predicated  of  Him
and  together,  and  He  is  none  of  them  all ;  of  every
shape,  of  every  kind,  without  form,  without  beauty,
anticipating   in   Himself,   beginnings   and    middles,


on  Divine  Names.  Si

and  ends  of  things  existing,  irresistibly  and  pre-
eminently ;  and  shedding  forth  without  flaw,  (the
light  of)  being  to  all,  as  beseems  a  One  and  super-
united  Cause.  For,  if  our  sun,  at  the  same  time
that  he  is  one  and  sheds  a  uniform  light,  renews
the  essences  and  qualities  of  sensible  creatures,
although  they  are  many  and  various,  and  nourishes
and  guards,  and  perfects  and  distinguishes,  and
unites,  and  fosters,  and  makes  to  be  productive,  and
increases,  and  transforms,  and  establishes,  and  makes
to  grow,  and  awakens,  and  gives  life  to  all ;  and  each
of  the  whole,  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  itself,  par-
ticipates in  the  same  and  one  sun ;  and  the  one
sun  anticipated  in  himself,  uniformly,  the  causes  of
the  many  participants ;  much  more  with  regard  to
the  Cause  of  it  and  of  all  things,  ought  we  to  con-
cede that  It  first  presides  over,  as  beseems  One
superessential  Oneness,  all  the  exemplars  of  things
existing;  since  He  produces  even  essences,  as  be-
seems the  egression  from  essence.  But,  we  affirm
that  the  exemplars  are  the  methods  in  God,  giving
essence  to  things  that  be,  and  pre-existing  uniformly,
which  theology  calls  predeterminations,  and  Divine
and  good  wills,  which  define  and  produce  things
existing  ;  according  to  which  (predeterminations)  the
Superessential  both  predetermined  and  brought  into
existence  everything  that  exists.

Section  IX.
But,  if  the  Philosopher  Clemens  thinks  good,  that
the  higher  amongst  beings  should  be  called   exem-


82;  Dionysius  the  Areop  agile,

plars  in  relation  to  something,  his  statement  advances,
not  through  correct  and  perfect  and  simple  names.
But,  when  we  have  conceded  even  this,  to  be  cor-
rectly said,  we  must  call  to  mind  the  Word  of  God,
which  says,  "  I  have  not  shewn  thee  these  things  for
the  purpose  of  going  after  them,  but  that  through
the  proportionate  knowledge  of  these  we  may  be  led
up  to  the  Cause  of  all,  as  we  are  capable."

We  must  attribute,  then,  all  existing  things  to  It,
as  beseems  One  Union  pre-eminent  above  all,  since
by  starting  from  Being,  the  essentiating  Progression
and  Goodness,  both  penetrating  all,  and  filling  all
things  with  Its  own  being,  and  rejoicing  over  all
things  being,  pre-holds  all  things  in  Itself,  rejecting
all  duplicity  by  an  one  superfluity  of  simplicity.
But  It  grasps  all  things  in  the  same  way,  as  beseems
its  super-simplified  Infinity,  and  is  participated  in  by
all  uniquely,  even  as  a  voice,  whilst  being  one  and
the  same,  is  participated  in  by  many  ears  as  one.

Section  X.
The  Pre-existing  then  is  beginning  and  end  of
existing  things  ;  beginning  indeed  as  Cause,  and  end
as  for  whom ;  and  term  of  all,  and  infinitude  of  all
infinitude ;  and  term,  especially,  of  things  that  are,
as  it  were,  opposed.  For  in  One,  as  we  have  often
said,  He  both  pre-holds  and  sustains  all  existing
things,  being  present  to  all,  and  everywhere,  both  as
regards  the  one,  and  the  same,  and  as  the  every  same,
and  issuing  forth  to  all,  and  abiding  in  Himself;
and  standing  and  moving,  and  neither  standing  nor


on  Divine  Names.  83

moving ;  neither  having  beginning,  or  middle,  or
end ;  neither  in  any  of  the  existing  things,  nor  being
any  of  the  existing  things.  And  neither  does  any  of
the  things  eternally  existing,  or  those  temporarily
subsisting,  entirely  come  up  to  Him,  but  He  towers
above  time  and  eternity,  and  all  things  eternal  and
temporal.  Wherefore  also,  He  is  Eternity  itself,  and
things  existing,  and  the  measures  of  things  existing,
and  things  measured  through  Him  and  from  Him.
But  let  us  speak  of  these  things  more  opportunely  on
another  occasion.


CAPUT   VI.

Concerning  Life.
Section  I.
Now  let  us  sing  the  Eternal  Life,  from  which
comes  the  sdf^existmg  Lite,  and  every  life;  and
from  which,  to  all  things  however  partaking  of  life,
is  distributed  the  power  to  live  appropriately  to  each.
Certainly  the  life  and  the  immortality  of  the  im-
mortal Angels,  and  the  very  indestructibility  of  the
angelic  perpetual  motion,  both  is,  and  is  sustained
from  It,  and  by  reason  of  It.  Wherefore,  they  are
also  called  living  always  and  immortal;  and  again,
not  immortal,  because  not  from  themselves  have  they
their  immortality  and  eternal  life;  but  from  the
vivifying  Cause  forming  and  sustaining  all  life  ;  and
as  we  said  of  Him,  Who  is,  that  He  is  Age  even
of  the  self-existing  Being,  so  also  here  again  (we  say)
that  the   Divine   Life,  which   is  above  life,  is  life-


84  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

giving  and  sustaining  even  of  the  self-existing  Life  j
and  every  life  and  life-giving  movement  is  from  the
Life  which  is  above  every  life,  and  all  source  of  all
life.  From  It,  even  the  souls  have  their  indestructi-
bility, and  all  living  creatures,  and  plants  in  their
most  remote  echo  of  life,  have  their  power  to  live.
And  when  It  is  "taken  away,"  according  to  the
Divine  saying,  all  life  fails,  and  to  It  even  things
that  have  failed,  through  their  inability  to  participate
in  It,  when  again  returning,  again  become  living
creatures.

Section  II.

And  It  gives  chiefly  to  the  self-existing  Life  to  be
a  life,  and  to  every  life,  and  to  the  individual  life,
that  each  should  be  conformable  to  that  which
nature  intended  it  to  be.  And  to  the  supercelestial
lives  It  gives  the  immaterial  and  godlike,  and  un-
changeable immortality;  and  the  unswerving  and
undeviating  perpetual  movement ;  whilst  extending
Itself  through  excess  of  goodness,  even  to  the  life  of
demons  u.  For,  neither  has  this  its  being  from  another
cause,  but  from  It  life  has  both  its  being  and  its
continuance.  Further,  It  bequeaths  even  to  men
the  angelic  life,  so  far  as  is  possible  to  compound
being,  and  through  an  overflowing  love  towards  man
turns,  and  calls  us  back  to  Itself,  even  when  we
are  departing  from  It ;  and,  what  is  still  more  Divine,
promises  to  transfer  even  our  whole  selves  (I  mean
souls,  and  bodies  their  yoke-fellows),  to  a  perfect  life

u  Rom.  xi.  29,  "For  the  gifts  of  God  are  without  repent-
ance."


on  Divine  Names.  85

and  immortality ;— a  fact  which  perhaps  seems  to
Antiquity  contrary  to  nature,  but  to  me,  and  to  thee,
and  to  the  truth,  both  Divine  and  above  nature.
But,  by  "  above  nature,"  I  understand  our  visible
nature,  not  the  all-powerful  nature  of  the  Divine
Life.  For,  to  this,  as  being  nature  of  all  the  living
creatures,  and  especially  the  more  Divine,  no  life  is
against  nature,  or  above  nature.  So  that  the  con-
tradictory statements  of  Simon's  folly  on  this  matter,
let  them  be  far  repelled  from  a  Divine  assembly,
and  from  thy  reverent  soul.  For  this  escaped  him,
as  I  imagine,  whilst  thinking  to  be  wise,  that  the
right-thinking  man  ought  not  to  use  the  visible
reason  of  the  sensible  perception,  as  an  ally  against
the  invisible  Cause  of  all ;  and  this  must  be  our
reply  to  him,  that  his  statement  is  against  nature,  for
to  It  nothing  is  contrary.

Section  III.
From  It,  both  all  living  creatures  and  plants
draw  their  life  and  nourishment ;  and  whether  you
speak  of  intellectual,  or  rational,  or  sensible,  or
nourishing,  or  growing,  or  whatever,  life,  or  source
of  life,  or  essence  of  life,  from  It,  which  is  above
every  life,  it  both  lives  and  thrives;  and  in  It,  as
Cause,  uniformly  pre-existed.  For  the  super-living,
and  life-springing  Life  is  Cause  both  of  all  life,  and  is
generative,  and  completive,  and  dividing  of  life,  and
is  to  be  celebrated  from  every  life,  in  consequence  of
its  numerous  generation  of  all  lives,  as  Manifold,
and  contemplated,  and  sung  by  every  life  ;    and  as


86  Dionysius  the  Areopapte,

without  need,  yea,  rather,  superfull  of  life,  the  Self-
living,  and  above  every  life,  causing  to  live  and  super-
living,  or  in  whatever  way  one  might  extol  the
life  which  is  unutterable  by  human  speech.


CAPUT   VII.

Concerning  Wisdom,  Mind,  Reason,  Truth,  Faith.

Section  I,
Come  then,  if  you  please,  let  us  sing  the  good
and  eternal  Life,  both  as  wise,  and  as  wisdom's  self;
yea,    rather,    as    sustaining    all   wisdom,    and   being
superior    to   all    wisdom   and    understanding.     For,
not  only  is  Almighty  God  superfull  of  wisdom,  and
of  His  understanding  there  is  no  number,   but  He
is  fixed  above   all   reason   and   mind   and   wisdom.
And,  when  the  truly  divine  man,  the  common  sun
of  us,  and  of  our  leader,  had  thought  this  out,  in
a  sense  above  nature,  he  says,  "the  foolishness  of
God  is  wiser  than  men,"  (meaning)  not  only  that  all
human  intelligence  is  a  sort  of  error,  when  tried  by
the  stability  and  durability  of  the  Divine  and  most
perfect  conceptions,  but  that  it  is  even  usual  with
the  theologians  to  deny,  with  respect  to  God,  things
of  privation,  in  an  opposite  sense.    Thus,  the  Oracles
declare,  the  All-luminous  Light,  invisible,  and  Him,
Who  is  often  sung,  and  of  many  names,  to  be  un-
utterable and  without  name,  and  Him,  Who  is  present
to  all,  and  is  found  of  all,  to  be  incomprehensible
and  past  finding  out.     In  this  very  way,  even  now,  the


on  Divine  Names.  87

Divine  Apostle  is  said  to  have  celebrated  as  "  foolish-
ness of  God,"  that  which  appears  unexpected  and
absurd  in  it,  (but)  which  leads  to  the  truth  which  is
unutterable  and  before  all  reason.  But,  as  I  else-
where said,  by  taking  the  things  above  us,  in  a  sense
familiar  to  ourselves,  and  by  being  entangled  by
what  is  congenial  to  sensible  perceptions,  and  by
comparing  things  Divine  with  our  own  conditions,
we  are  led  astray  through  following  the  Divine  and
mystical  reason  after  a  mere  appearance.  We  ought
to  know  that  our  mind  has  the  power  for  thought,
through  which  it  views  things  intellectual,  but  that
the  union  through  which  it  is  brought  into  contact
with  things  beyond  itself  surpasses  the  nature  of
the  mind.  We  must  then  contemplate  things  Di-
vine, after  this  Union,  not  after  ourselves,  but  by
our  whole  selves,  standing  out  of  our  whole  selves,
and  becoming  wholly  of  God.  For  it  is  better  to
be  of  God,  and  not  of  ourselves.  For  thus  things
Divine  will  be  given  to  those  who  become  dear
to  God.  Celebrating  then,  in  a  superlative  sense,
this,  the  irrational  and  mindless  and  foolish  Wisdom,
wei  affirm  that  It  is  Cause  of  all  mind  and  reason,
and  all  wisdom  and  understanding ;  and  of  It  is
every  counsel,  and  from  It  every  knowledge  and
understanding ;  and  in  It  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom
and  knowledge  are  hidden.  For,  agreeably  to  the
things  already  spoken,  the  super-wise,  and  all-wise
Cause  is  a  mainstay  *  even  of  the  self-existing  Wisdom,
both  the  universal  and  the  individual.

1  See  Caput  XL,  Section  VI.


88  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

Section  II.
From  It  the  contemplated  and  contemplating
powers  of  the  angelic  Minds  have  their  simple
and  blessed  conceptions;  collecting  their  divine
knowledge,  not  in  portions,  or  from  portions,  or
sensible  perceptions,  or  detailed  reasonings,  or
arguing  from  something  common  to  these  things,
but  purified  from  everything  material  and  multitu-
dinous, they  contemplate  the  conceptions  of  Divine
things  intuitively,  immaterially  and  uniformly,  and
they  have  their  intellectual  power  and  energy  re-
splendent with  the  unmixed  and  undefiled  purity,
and  see  at  a  glance  the  Divine  conceptions  indi-
visibly  and  immaterially,  and  are  by  the  Godlike
One  moulded,  as  attainable  by  reason  of  the  Divine
Wisdom,  to  the  Divine  and  Super-wise  Mind  and
Reason.  And  souls  have  their  reasoning  power,  in-
vestigating the  truth  of  things  by  detailed  steps  and
rotation,  and  through  their  divided  and  manifold
variety  falling  short  of  the  single  minds,  but,  by  the
collection  of  many  towards  the  One,  deemed  worthy,
even  of  conceptions  equal  to  the  angels,  so  far
as  is  proper  and  attainable  to  souls.  But,  even  as
regards  the  sensible  perceptions  themselves,  one
would  not  miss  the  mark,  if  one  called  them  an
echo  of  wisdom.  Yet,  even  the  mind  of  demons,
qud  mind,  is  from  It;  but  so  far  as  a  mind  is  ir-
rational, not  knowing,  and  not  wishing  to  attain
what  it  aspires  to,  we  must  call  it  more  properly
a  declension  from  wisdom.  But,  since  the  Divine
Wisdom  is  called  source,  and  cause,  and  mainstay,


on  Divine  JVames.  89

and  completion  and  guard,  and  term  of  wisdom
itself,  and  of  every  kind,  and  of  every  mind  and
reason,  and  every  sensible  perception,  how  then  is
Almighty  God  Himself,  the  super-wise,  celebrated  as
Mind  and  Reason  and  Knowledge?  For,  how  will
He  conceive  any  of  the  objects  of  intelligence,
seeing  He  has  not  intellectual  operations?  or  how
will  He  know  the  objects  of  sense,  seeing  He  is
fixed  above  all  sensible  perception  ?  Yet  the  Oracles
affirm  that  He  knoweth  all  things,  and  that  nothing
escapes  the  Divine  Knowledge.  But,  as  I  have  been
accustomed  to  say  many  times  before,  we  must  con-
template things  Divine,  in  a  manner  becoming  God.
For  the  mindless,  and  the  insensible,  we  must  attribute
to  God,  by  excess — not  by  defect,  just  as  we  attribute
the  irrational  to  Him  Who  is  above  reason ;  and
imperfection,  to  the  Super-perfect,  and  Pre-perfect ;
and  the  impalpable,  and  invisible  gloom,  to  the  light
which  is  inaccessible  on  account  of  excess  of  the
visible  light.  So  the  Divine  Mind  comprehends
all  things,  by  His  knowledge  surpassing  all,  having
anticipated  within  Himself  the  knowledge  of  all,
as  beseems  the  Cause  of  all;  before  angels  came
to  being,  knowing  and  producing  angels ;  and  know-
ing all  the  rest  from  within ;  and,  so  to  speak,  from
the  Source  Itself,  and  by  bringing  into  being.  And,
this,  I  think,  the  sacred  text  teaches,  when  it  says,
"  He,  knowing  all  things,  before  their  birth."  For,
not  as  learning  existing  things  from  existing  things,
does  the  Divine  Mind  know,  but  from  Itself,  and
in  Itself,  as  Cause,  it  pre-holds  and  pre-comprehends


90  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

the  notion  and  knowledge,  and  essence  of  all  things  \
not  approaching  each  several  thing  according  to  its
kind,  but  knowing  and  containing  all  things,  within
one  grasp  of  the  Cause ;  just  as  the  light,  as  cause,
presupposes  in  itself  the  notion  of  darkness,  not
knowing  the  darkness  otherwise  than  from  the  light.
The  Divine  Wisdom  then,  by  knowing  Itself,  will
know  all  things ;  things  material,  immaterially,  and
thing6  divisible,  indivisibly,  and  things  many,  uni-
formly; both  knowing  and  producing  all  things  by
Itself,  the  One.  For  even,  if  as  becomes  one  Cause,
Almighty  God  distributes  being  to  all  things  that
be,  as  beseems  the  self-same,  unique  Cause,  He  will
know  all  things,  as  being  from  Himself,  and  pre-
established  in  Himself,  and  not  from  things  that  be
will  He  receive  the  knowledge  of  them ;  but  even
to  each  of  them,  He  will  be  provider  of  the  know-
ledge of  themselves,  and  of  the  mutual  knowledge
of  each  other.  Almighty  God,  then,  has  not  one  know-
ledge, that  of  Himself,  peculiar  to  Himself,  and  an-
other, which  embraces  in  common  all  things  existing  ;
for  the  very  Cause  of  all  things,  by  knowing  Itself,
will  hardly,  I  presume,  be  ignorant  of  the  things
from  Itself,  and  of  which  It  is  Cause.  In  this  way
then,  Almighty  God  knows  existing  things,  not  by
a  knowledge  of  things  existing,  but  by  that  of
Himself.  For  the  Oracles  affirm,  that  the  angels
also  know  things  on  the  earth,  not  as  knowing
them  by  sensible  perceptions,  although  objects  of
sensible  perception,  but  by  a  proper  power  and
mature  of  the  Godlike  Mind.


on  Divine  Names.  9  r

Section  III.
In  addition  to  these  things,  we  must  examine  how
we  know  God,  Who  is  neither  an  object  of  intel-
lectual nor  of  sensible  perception,  nor  is  absolutely
anything  of  things  existing.  Never,  then,  is  it  true
to  say,  that  we  know  God ;  not  from  His  own  nature
(for  that  is  unknown,  and  surpasses  all  reason  and
mind),  but,  from  the  ordering  of  all  existing  things,
as  projected  from  Himself,  and  containing  a  sort
of  images  and  similitudes  of  His  Divine  exemplars,
we  ascend,  as  far  as  we  have  power,  to  that  which
is  beyond  all,  by  method  and  order  in  the  abstraction
and  pre-eminence  of  all,  and  in  the  Cause  of  all.
Wherefore,  Almighty  God  is  known  even  in  all,  and
apart  from  all.  And  through  knowledge,  Almighty
God  is  known,  and  through  agnosia.  And  there  is,
of  Him,  both  conception,  and  expression,  and  science,  /

and  contact,  and  sensible  perception,  and  opinion,
and  imagination,  and  name,  and  all  the  rest.  And
He  is  neither  conceived,  nor  expressed,  nor  named.
And  He  is  not  any  of  existing  things,  nor  is  He
known  in  any  one  of  existing  things,  And  He  is  all
in  all,  and  nothing  in  none.  And  He  is  known  to
all,  from  all,  and  to  none  from  none.  For,  we
both  say  these  things  correctly  concerning  God,  and
He  is  celebrated  from  all  existing  things,  according
to  the  analogy  of  all  things,  of  which  He  is  Cause.
And  there  is,  further,  the  most  Divine  Knowledge
of  Almighty  God,  which  is  known,  through  not
knowing  (agnosia)  during  the  union  above  mind;
when  the  mind,  having  stood  apart  from  all  existing


92  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

things,  then  having  dismissed  also  itself,  has  been
made  one  with  the  super-luminous  rays,  thence  and
there  being  illuminated  by  the  unsearchable  depth
of  wisdom.  Yet,  even  from  all  things,  as  I  said,
we  may  know  It,  for  It  is,  according  to  the  sacred
text,  the  Cause  formative  of  all,  and  ever  harmo-
nizing all,  and  (Cause)  of  the  indissoluble  adapta-
tion and  order  of  all,  and  ever  uniting  v  the  ends  of
the  former  to  the  beginnings  of  those  that  follow,
and  beautifying  the  one  symphony  and  harmony
of  the  whole.

Section  IV.
But  Almighty  God  is  celebrated  in  the  holy
Oracles  as  "  Logos  "  ;  not  only  because  He  is  pro-
vider of  reason  and  mind  and  wisdom,  but  because
He  anticipated  the  causes  of  all,  solitarily  in  Him-
self, and  because  He  passes  through  all,  as  the
Oracles  say,  even  to  the  end  of  all  things;  and
even  more  than  these,  because  the  Divine  Word
surpasses  every  simplicity,  and  is  set  free  from  all,  as
the  Superessential.  This  "  Logos  "  is  the  simple  and
really  existing  truth,  around  which,  as  a  pure  and
unerring  knowledge  of  the  whole,  the  Divine  Faith
is — the  enduring  foundation  of  the  believers — which
establishes  them  in  the  truth,  and  the  truth  in  them,
by  an  unchangeable  identity,  they  having  the  pure
knowledge  of  the  truth  of  the  things  believed.  For,
if  knowledge  unites  the  knowing  and  the  known,  but
ignorance  is  ever  a  cause  to  the  ignorant  person  of

?  True  theory  of  evolution.


on  Divine  Names.  93

change,  and  of  separation  from  himself,  nothing  will
move  one  who  has  believed  in  the  truth,  according
to  the  sacred  Logos,  from  true  Faith's  Sanctuary
upon  which  he  will  have  the  steadfastness  of  his
unmoved,  unchangeable  identity.  For,  well  does
he  know,  who  has  been  united  to  the  Truth,  that
it  is  well  with  him  although  the  multitude  may  ad-
monish him  as  "  wandering."  For  it  probably  escapes
them,  that  he  is  wandering  from  error  to  the  truth,
through  the  veritable  faith.  But,  he  truly  knows
himself,  not,  as  they  say,  mad,  but  as  liberated  from
the  unstable  and  variable  course  around  the  mani-
fold variety  of  error,  through  the  simple,  and  ever
the  same,  and  similar  truth.  Thus  then  the  early
leaders  z  of  our  Divine  Theosophy  are  dying  every
day,  on  behalf  of  truth,  testifying  as  is  natural,  both
by  every  word  and  deed,  to  the  one  knowledge  of
the  truth  of  the  Christians,  that  it  is  of  all,  both
more  simple  and  more  Divine,  yea  rather,  that  it
is  the  sole  true  and  one  and  simple  knowledge
of  God.


CAPUT   VIII.

Concerning  power,  justice,  preservation,  redemption,

in  which  also  concerning  inequality.

Section  I.

But  since  the  theologians  sing  the  Divine  truth

fulness  and  super-wise  wisdom,  both  as  power  and

z  First  persecution  of  Nero.


94  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

as  justice,  arid  designate  It  preservation  and  re-
demption, come  then,  let  us  unfold  these  Divine
Names  also,  as  best  we  can.  Now,  that  the  God-
head is  pre-eminent  above,  and  surpasses  every
power,  howsoever  being  and  conceived,  I  do  not
suppose  any  of  those  nourished  in  the  Divine
Oracles  does  not  know.  For  on  many  occasions
the  -Word  of  God  attributes  the  Lordship  to  It,
even  when  distinguishing  It  from  the  supercelestial
powers  themselves.  How  then  do  the  theologians
sing  it  also  as  a  Power,  which  is  pre-eminent  above
every  power?  or  how  ought  we  to  understand  the
name  of  power  as  applied  to  It  ?

Section  II.
We  say,  then,  that  Almighty  God  is  Power,  as  pre-
having,  and  super-having,  every  power  in  Himself,
and  as  Author  of  every  power,  and  producing  every-
thing as  beseems  a  Power  inflexible  and  unencom-
passed,  and  as  being  Author  of  the  very  existence  of
power,  either  the  universal  or  particular,  and  as
boundless  in  power,  not  only  by  the  production  of
all  power,  but  by  being  above  all,  even  the  self,
existent  Power,  and  by  His  superior  power,  and
by  His  bringing  into  existence,  ad  infinitum,  endless
powers  other  than  the  existing  powers  ;  and  by  the
fact  that  the  endless  powers,  even  when  brought  into
existence  without  end,  are  not  able  to  blunt  the
super-endless  production  of  His  power-making  power;
and  by  the  unutterable  and  unknown,  and  incon-
ceivable nature  of  His  all-surpassing  power,  which,


on  Divine  Names.  95

through  abundance  of  the  powerful,  gives  power  even
to  weakness,  and  holds  together  and  preserves  the
remotest  of  its  echoes;  as  also  we  may  see  even
with  regard  to  the  powerful  insensible  perception,
that  the  super-brilliant  lights  reach  even  to  obscure
visions,  and  they  say,  that  the  loud  sounds  enter
even  into  ears  which  are  not  very  well  adapted  to  the
reception  of  sounds.  For  that  which  does  not  hear
at  all  is  not  hearing ;  and  that  which  does  not  see  at
all  is  not  sight.

Section    III.

The  distribution,  then,  of  boundless  power,  from
Almighty  God,  passes  to  all  beings,  and  there  is  no
single  being  which  is  utterly  deprived  of  the  pos-
session of  some  power  ;  but  it  has  either  intellectual,
or  rational,  or  sensible,  or  vital,  or  essential  power  ;
yea  even,  if  one  may  say  so,  self-existent  being  has
power  to  be  from  the  superessential  Power.

Section   IV.

From  It,  are  the  godlike  powers  of  the  angelic
ranks  ;  from  It,  they  have  their  immutability,  and  all
their  intellectual  and  immortal  perpetual  movements ;
and  their  equilibrium  itself,  and  their  undiminishable
aspiration  after  good,  they  have  received  from  the
Power  boundless  in  goodness  ;  since  It  commits  to
them  the  power  to  be,  and  to  be  such,  and  to  aspire
always  to  be,  and  the  power  itself  to  aspire  to  have
the  power  always.


96  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

Section  V.
But  the  gifts  of  the  unfailing  Power  pass  on,  both
to   men   and  living  creatures,  and  plants,  and  the
entire   nature    of   the  universe;   and   It  empowers
things  united  for  their  mutual  friendship  and  com-
munion, and  things  divided  for  their  being  each  with-
in their  own  sphere  and  limit,  without  confusion,  and
without  mingling ;  and  preserves  the  order  and  good
relations  of  the  whole,  for  their  own  proper  good,
and  guards  the  undying  lives  of  the  individual  angels
inviolate ;    and  the  heavenly  and  the  life-giving  and
astral    bodies*    and   orders    without   change:     and
makes  the  period  of  time  possible  to  be ;  and  dis-
perses the  revolutions  of  time  by  their  progressions,
and   collects   them   together  by  their  returns;    and
makes   the   powers   of  fire   unquenchable,   and   the
rills   of  water   unfailing;    and    sets   bounds    to   the
aerial  current,  and  establishes  the  earth  upon   no-
thing ;    and  guards  its  life-giving  throes  from  perish-
ing ;    and  preserves  the  mutual  harmony  and  ming-
ling of  the  elements  without  confusion,  and  without
division ;  and  holds  together  the  bond  of  soul  and
body;     and    arouses   the   nourishing    and    growing
powers  of  plants ;  and  sustains  the  essential  powers
of  the  whole ;    and  secures  the  continuance  of  the
universe    without    dissolution,    and    bequeaths    the
deification  Itself,  by  furnishing  a  power  for  this  to
those  who  are  being  deified.     And  in  a  word,  there
is  absolutely  no  single  thing  which  is  deprived  of

*  ovoia.%.


on  Divine  Names.  97

the    overruling   surety   and   embrace  of  the  Divine

Power.     For  that  which    absolutely  has   no  power,

neither  is,  nor  is  anything,  nor  is  there  any  sort  of
position  of  it  whatever.

Section  VI.
Yet  Elymas,  the  Magician,  says,  "if  Almighty
God  is  All-powerful,  how  is  He  said  by  your  theo-
logian, not  to  be  able  to  do  some  thing  "  ?  But  he
calumniates  the  Divine  Paul,  who  said,  "that  Al-
mighty God  is  not  able  to  deny  Himself."  Now  in
advancing  this,  I  very  much  fear  lest  I  should  incur
ridicule  for  folly,  as  undertaking  to  pull  down  frail
houses,  built  upon  the  sand  by  little  boys  at  play ;
and  as  being  eager  to  aim  at  the  theological  in-
telligence of  this,  as  if  it  were  some  inaccessible
mark.  For,  the  denial  of  Himself,  is  a  falling  from
truth,  but  the  truth  is  an  existent,  and  the  falling
from  the  truth  is  a  falling  from  the  existent.  If,  then,
the  truth  is  an  existent,  and  the  denial  of  the  truth  a
falling  from  the  existent,  Almighty  God  cannot  fall
from  the  existent,  and  non-existence  is  not ;  as  any
one  might  say,  the  powerless  is  not  powerful;  and
ignorance,  by  privation,  does  not  know.  The  wise
man,  not  having  understood  this,  imitates  those
inexperienced  wrestlers,  who,  very  often,  by  as-
suming that  their  adversaries  are  weak,  according  to
their  own  opinion,  and  manfully  making  a  show  of
fight  with  them,  when  absent,  and  courageously  beat-
ing the  air  with  empty  blows,  think  that  they  have
overcome  their  antagonists,  and  proclaim  themselves


98  Diony sius  the  Areopagite,

victors  (though)  not  yet  having  experienced  their
rivals'  strength.  But  we,  conjecturing  the  meaning
of  the  Theologian  to  the  best  of  our  ability,  celebrate
the  Super-powerful  God,  as  Omnipotent,  as  blessed,
and  only  Lord  ;  as  reigning  in  the  kingdom  of  Eter-
nity itself;  as  in  no  respect  fallen  from  things  exist-
ing ;  -but  rather,  as  both  super-having  and  pre-having
all  existing  things,  as  beseems  Power  superessential ;
and  as  having  bequeathed  to  all  things  being,  the
power  to  be,  and  this  their  being  in  an  ungrudging
stream,  as  beseems  abundance  of  surpassing  power.

Section  VII.
But  further,  Almighty  God  is  celebrated  as  justice,
as    distributing    things    suitable    to    all,    both    due
measure,  and  beauty,  and  good  order,  and  arrange-
ment, and  marking  out  all  distributions  and  orders
for  each,  according  to  that  which  truly  is  the  most
just  limit,  and  as  being  Cause  for  all  of  the  free
action    of  each.     For   the  Divine  Justice   arranges
and   disposes  all   things,  and  preserving  all  things
unmingled   and   unconfused,   from   all,  gives  to  all
existing  beings  things  convenient  for  each,  according
to   the  dueb  falling  to   each  existing  thing.     And,
if  we   speak    correctly,   all    those   who    abuse    the
Divine  Justice,  unconsciously  convict  themselves  of
a  manifest  injustice.     For  they  say,  that  immortality
ought  to  be  in  mortals,  and  perfection  in  the  im-
perfect,  and    imposed   necessity   in    the    free,   and


on  Divine  Names.  99

identity  in  the  variable,  and  perfect  power  in  the
weak,  and  the  temporal  should  be  eternal,  and
things  moveable  by  nature,  unchangeable,  and  that
temporary  pleasures  should  be  eternal ;  and  in  one
word,  they  assign  the  properties  of  one  thing  to
another.  They  ought  to  know  that  the  Divine
Justice  in  this  respect  is  really  a  true  justice,  be-
cause it  distributes  to  all  the  things  proper  to  them-
selves, according  to  the  fitness  of  each  existing
thing,  and  preserves  the  nature  of  each  in  its  own
order  and  capacity.

Section  VIII.
But  some  one  may  say,  it  is  not  the  mark  of  justice
to  leave  pious  men  without  assistance,  when  they
are  ground  down  by  evil  men.  To  which  we  must
reply,  that,  if  those  whom  you  call  pious  do  indeed
love  things  on  earth,  which  are  zealously  sought
after  by  the  earthly,  they  have  altogether  fallen  from
the  Divine  Love.  And  I  do  not  know  how  they
could  be  called  pious,  when  they  unjustly  treat
things  truly  loveable  and  divine,  which  do  not  at
once  surpass  in  influence  in  their  estimation  things
undesirable  and  unloveable.  But,  if  they  love  the
realities,  they  who  desire  certain  things  ought  to
rejoice  when  they  attain  the  things  desired.  Are
they  not  then  nearer  the  angelic  virtues,  when,  as
far  as  possible,  by  aspiration  after  things  Divine,
they  withdraw  from  the  affection  for  earthly  things,
by  being  exercised  very  manfully  to  this,  in  their
perils,  on  behalf  of  the  beautiful  ?    So  that,  it  is  true


i  oo  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

to  say,  that  this  is  rather  a  property  of  the  Divine
Justice — not  to  pamper  and  destroy  the  bravery  of
the  best,  by  the  gifts  of  earthly  things,  nor,  if  any  one
should  attempt  to  do  this,  to  leave  them  without
assistance,  but  to  establish  them  in  the  excellent  and
harsh  condition,  and  to  dispense  to  them,  as  being
such,  things  meet  for  them.

Section  IX,
This  Divine  Justice,  then,  is  celebrated  also  even
as  preservation  of  the  whole,  as  preserving  and
guarding  the  essence  and  order  of  each,  distinct  and
pure  from  the  rest ;  and  as  being  genuine  cause
of  each  minding  its  own  business  in  the  whole.  But,
if  any  one  should  also  celebrate  this  preservation,
as  rescuing  savingly  the  whole  from  the  worse,  we
will  entirely  accept  this  as  the  cantique  of  the
manifold  preservation,  and  we  will  deem  him  worthy
to  define  this  even  as  the  principal  preservation
of  the  whole,  which  preserves  all  things  in  them-
selves, without  change,  undisturbed  and  unswaying
to  the  worse ;  and  guards  all  things  without  strife
and  without  war,  each  being  regulated  by  their  own
methods ;  and  excludes  all  inequality  and  minding
others'  business,  from  the  whole  j  and  maintains  the
relations  of  each  from  falling  to  things  contrary,  and
from  migrating.  And  since,  without  missing  the
mark  of  the  sacred  theology,  one  might  celebrate
this  preservation  as  redeeming  all  things  existing,
by  the  goodness  which  is  preservative  of  all,  from
falling  away  from  their  own  proper   goods,  so  far


on  Divine  Names.


101


as  the  nature  of  each  of  those  who  are  being  pre-
served admits  ;  wherefore  also  the  Theologians  name
it  redemption,  both  so  far  as  it  does  not  permit
things  really  being  to  fall  away  to  non-existence,  and
so  far  as,  if  anything  should  have  been  led  astray
to  discord  an  (J  disorder,  and  should  suffer  any  di
minution  of  the  perfection  of  its  own  proper  goods,
even  this  it  redeems  from  passion  and  listlessness
and  loss ;  supplying  what  is  deficient,  and  paternally
overlooking  the  slackness,  and  raising  up  from  evil  ;
yea,  rather,  establishing  in  the  good,  and  filling
up  the  leaking  good,  and  arranging  and  adorning
its  disorder  and  deformity,  and  making  it  complete,
and  liberating  it  from  all  its  blemishes.  But  let
this  suffice  concerning  these  matters,  and  concerning
Justice,  in  accordance  with  which  the  equality  of
all  is  measured  and  defined,  and  every  inequality,
which  arises  from  deprivation  of  the  equality,  in  each
thing  severally,  is  excluded.  For,  if  any  one  should
interpret  inequality  as  distinctions  in  the  whole,
of  the  whole,  in  relation  to  the  whole,  Justice  guards
even  this,  not  permitting  the  whole,  when  they  have
become  mingled  throughout,  to  be  thrown  into  con-
fusion, but  keeping  all  existing  things  within  each
particular  kind,  in  which  each  was  intended  by  nature
to  be.


102  D  ion y  si  its  the  Areopagite,

CAPUT   IX.

Concerning  great,  small,  same,  different,  similar,
dissi?nilar,  standing,  movetnent,  equality.

Section  I.
But  since  even  the  great  and  the  small  are  at-
tributed to  the  Cause  of  all,  and  the  same,  and  the
different,  and  the  similar,  and  the  dissimilar,  and
the  standing,  and  the  movement.  Come !  and  let
us  gaze  upon  these  images  of  the  Divine  Names,
such  as  have  been  manifested  to  us.  Almighty  God,
then,  is  celebrated  in  the  Oracles  as  great,  both
in  greatness  and  in  a  gentle  breeze,  which  manifests
the  Divine  littleness;  and  as  the  same,  when  the
Oracles  declare  "  thou  art  the  same " ;  and  as  dif-
ferent, when  He  is  depicted,  by  the  same  Oracles,
as  of  many  shapes  and  many  forms  ;  and  as  similar,
as  mainstay  of  things  similar  and  similitude ;  and
as  dissimilar  to  all,  as  the  like  of  whom  there  is  not ;
and  as  standing,  and  unmoved,  and  seated  for  ever ;
and  as  moving,  as  going  forth  to  all ;  and  whatever
other  Divine  Names,  of  the  same  force  with  these,
are  celebrated  by  the  Oracles.

Section  II.
Almighty  God,  then,  is  named  great  in  reference
to  His  own  peculiar  greatness,  which  imparts  itself
to  all  things  great ;  and  overflows,  and  extends  itself
outside  of  all  greatness;  embracing  every  place,
surpassing  every  number,  going  through  every  infi-
nitude, both  in  reference  to  its  super-fulness,  and


on  Divine  Names.  103

mighty  operation,  and  its  fontal  gifts,  in  so  far  as
these,  being  participated  by  all  in  a  stream  of  bound-
less gifts,  are  altogether  undiminished,  and  have
the  same  superfulness,  and  are  not  lessened  by
the  impartations,  but  are  even  still  more  bubbling
over.  This  Greatness  then  is  infinite,  and  without
measure  and  without  number.  And  this  is  the  pre-
eminence as  regards  the  absolute  and  surpassing
flood  of  the  incomprehensible  greatness.

Section  III.
But  little,  i.e.  fine,  is  affirmed  respecting  Him, —
that  which  leaves  behind  every  mass  and  distance,
and  penetrates  through  all,  without  hindrance.  Yet
the  little  is  Elemental c  Cause  of  all,  for  nowhere
will  you  find  the  idea  of  the  little  unparticipated.
Thus  then  the  little  must  be  received  as  regards
God  as  penetrating  to  all,  and  through  all,  without
impediment ;  and  operating,  and  piercing  through,
to  "  a  dividing  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  joints  and
marrow";  and  "discerning  thoughts  and  intents  of
heart,"  yea  rather — all  things  that  be.  For  there
is  not  a  creature  unmanifest  in  His  sight.  This
littleness  is  without  quality  and  without  quantity,
without  restraint,  without  limit,  without  bound,  com-
prehending all  things,  but  itself  incomprehensible.

Section  IV.
But  the  same  is  superessentially  everlasting,  incon-
vertible, abiding  in  itself,  always  being  in  the  same

c  Atomic  theory.


104  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

condition  and  manner ;  present  to  all  in  the  same
manner,  and  itself  by  itself,  upon  itself,  firmly  and
purely  fixed  in  the  most  beautiful  limits  of  the  super-
essential  sameness,  without  changing,  without  falling,
without  swerving,  unalterable,  unmingled,  immaterial,
most  simplex,  self-sufficient,  without  increase,  without
diminution,  unoriginated,  not  as  not  yet  come  into
being,  or  unperfected,  or  not  having  become  from
this,  or  that,  nor  as  being  in  no  manner  of  way
whatever,  but  as  all  unoriginated,  and  absolutely
unoriginated,  and  ever  being;  and  being  self-com-
plete, and  being  the  same  by  itself,  and  differ-
entiated by  itself  in  one  sole  and  same  form  ;  and
shedding  sameness  from  itself  to  all  things  adapted
to  participate  in  It ;  and  assigning  things  different
to  those  different ;  abundance  and  cause  of  identity,
preholding  identically  in  itself  even  things  contrary,
as  beseems  the  One  and  unique  Cause,  surpassing
the  whole  identity.

Section  V.
But  the  different,  since  Almighty  God  is  present
to  all  providentially,  and  becomes  all  in  all,  for  the
sake  of  the  preservation  of  all,  resting  upon  Himself,
and  His  own  identity  within  Himself,  standing,  as
beseems  an  energy,  one  and  ceaseless,  and  imparting
Himself  with  an  unbending  power,  for  deification
of  those  turned  to  Him.  And  we  must  suppose  that
the  difference  of  the  manifold  shapes  of  Almighty
God,  during  the  multiform  visions,  signifies  that
certain  things   are   different    from    the   phenomena


on  Divine  Names,  105

under  which  they  appear.  For,  as  when  language
depicts  the  soul  itself,  under  a  bodily  form,  and
fashions  bodily  members  around  the  memberless,  we
think  differently  of  the  members  attributed  to  it,  as
befits  the  soul's  memberless  condition ;  and  we  call
the  mind  head,  and  opinion  neck, — as  intermediate
between  rational  and  irrational — and  anger,  breast ;
and  lust,  belly  j  and  the  constitution,  legs  and  feet  ;
using  the  names  of  the  members  as  symbols  of  the
powers.  Much  more  then,  as  respects  Him,  Who  is
beyond  all,  is  it  necessary  to  make  clear  the  differ-
ence of  forms  and  shapes  by  reverent  and  God-
becoming,  and  mystic  explanations.  And  if  you
wish  to  apply  the  threefold  shapes  of  bodies  to  the
impalpable  and  shapeless  God,  you  must  say,  that
the  Progression  of  Almighty  God,  which  spreads  out
to  all  things,  is  a  Divine  extension  ;  and  length,  the
power  extending  itself  over  the  whole;  and  depth,
the  hiddenness  and  imperceptiond  incomprehensible
to  all  creatures.  But,  that  we  may  not  forget  our-
selves, in  our  explanation,  of  the  different  shapes  and
forms,  by  confounding  the  incorporeal  Divine  Names
with  those  given  through  symbols  of  objects  of  sense,
we  have  for  this  reason  spoken  concerning  these
things  in  the  Symbolic  Theology.  But  now,  let  us
suppose  the  Divine  difference,  as  really  not  a  sort
of  change  from  the  superimmovable  identity,  but  as
the  single  multiplication  of  itself,  and  the  uniform
progressions  of  its  fecundity  to  all

d  ayvuaiav.


106  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

Section  VI.
But  similar,  if  any  one  might  speak  of  Almighty
God  as  the  same,  as  being  wholly  throughout,  similar
to  Himself— abidingly  and  indivisibly  ;  we  must  not
despise  the  Divine  Name  of  the  Similar;  but  the
Theologians  affirm  that  the  God  above  all,  in  His
essential  nature,  is  similar  to  none;    but  that  He
bequeaths  a  Divine  similarity  to  those  who  turn  to
Him,  Who  is  above  every  limit  and  expression,  by
imitation  according  to  their  capacity.     And  there  is
the  power  of  the  Divine  similitude,  which  turns  all
created  things  to  the   Cause.    These  things,   then,
must  be  said  to  be  similar  to  Almighty  God,  both
after  a  Divine  likeness  and  similitude.     For,  neither
must  we  say  that  Almighty  God  is  similar  to  them,
because  neither  is  a  man  like  his  own  image.     For,
with  regard  to  those  of  the  same  rank,  it  is  possible
that  these  should  be  similar  to  each  other,  and  that
the  similarity  corresponds  to  each,  and  that  both  are
similar  to  each  other,  after  a  preceding  appearance
of  like.    But,  with  respect  to  the  Cause  and  the  things
caused,  we  do  not  accept  the  correspondence.     For,
the  being    similar   is  bequeathed,   not  to  these,   or
those,  alone,  but   to   all   those  who   participate   in
similarity.     Almighty  God  becomes  Cause  of  their
being  similar,  and  is    mainstay  of  the    self-existing
Similarity  itself;  and  the  similar  in  all  is  similar  to
a  sort  of  footprint  of  the  Divine  Similarity  and  com-
pletes their  Oneness.


on  Divine  Names.  107

Section  VII.
And  what  must  we  say  concerning  this  ?  For  the
Word  of  God  Itself  extols  the  fact  that  He  is  dissimi-
lar, and  of  the  same  rank  with  none ;  as  "  different "
even  from  everything,  and,  what  is  more  paradoxical,
says  there  is  nothing  that  is  similar  to  Him.  Yet
the  expression  is  not  contrary  to  the  similarity  to-
wards Him,  for  the  same  things  are  both  similar  to
God,  and  dissimilar — the  former  as  regards  the  re-
ceived imitation e  of  the  inimitable,  the  latter  as
regards  the  dependence  of  the  things  caused  upon
the  cause,  and  their  being  inferior  in  degrees,  endless
and  incalculable.

Section  VIII.
But  what  also  do  we  say  concerning  the  Divine
standing,  i.e.  seat?  What  other  than  that  Almighty
God  remains  Himself,  in  Himself,  and  is  abidingly
fixed  in  unmoved  identity,  and  is  firmly  established
on  high  •  and  that  He  acts  according  to  the  same
conditions,  and  in  reference  to  the  same  object,  and
in  the  same  way;  and  that  He  exists  altogether,  as
beseems  the  immutability  from  Himself;  and  as  be-
seems the  immovability  Itself,  entirely  immovable,
and  that  superessentially.  For  He  is  Cause  of  the
standing  and  sitting  of  all,  Who  is  above  all  sitting
and  standing,  and  in  Him  all  things  consist,  being
kept  from  falling  out  of  the  state  of  their  own  proper
goods.

e  Letter  2.


1 08  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

Section  IX.
But  what  again,  when  the  Theologians  say,  that
the  unmoved  goes  forth  to  all,  and  is  moved?  Must
we  not  understand  this  in  a  sense  befitting  God?
For  we  must  reverently  suppose  that  He  is  moved,
not  as  beseems  carriage,  or  change,  or  alteration,
or  turning,  or  local  movement,  or  the  straight,  or  the
circular,  or  that  from  both  (curvative),  or  the  intel-
lectual, or  the  spiritual,  or  the  physical,  but  that
Almighty  God  brings  into  being  and  sustains  every-
thing, and  provides  in  every  way  for  everything ;
and  is  present,  to  all,  by  the  irresistible  embrace  of
all,  and  by  His  providential  progressions  and  opera-
tions to  all  existing  things.  But  we  must  concede  to
our  discourse,  to  celebrate  in  a  sense  becoming  God,
even  movements  of  God,  the  immovable.  And  the
straight  must  be  considered  (to  be)  the  unswerving
and  the  undeviating  progression  of  the  operation,  and
the  production  from  Himself  of  the  whole ;  and  the
curvative — the  steady  progression  and  the  productive
condition  ;  and  the  circular-rthe  same,  and  the  hold-
ing together  the  middle  and  extremities,  which  en-
compass and  are  encompassed, — and  the  turning  to
Him  of  the  things  which  proceeded  from  Him.

Section  X.
But,  if  any  one  should  take  the  Divine  Name  in
the  Oracles,  of  fl  the  same,"  or  that  of  "  justice,"  in
the  sense  of  •" the  equal"  we  must  say,  that  Almighty
God  is  equal,  not  only  as  indivisible  and  unswerving,
but  also   as   going  forth   to   all,    and   through   all,


on  Divine  Names.


109


equally ;  and  as  foundation  of  the  self-existent
Equality,  in  conformity  with  which,  He  equally
effects  the  same  passage,  through  all  things  mutually,
and  the  participation  of  those  who  receive  equally,
according  to  the  aptitude  of  each  ;  and  the  equal  gift
distributed  to  all,  according  to  due  ;  and  according
as  He  has  anticipated  pre-eminently  and  uniquely
in  Himself,  every  equality,  intelligible,  intelligent,
rational,  sensible,  essential,  physical,  voluntary,  as
beseems  the  Power  over  all,  which  is  productive  of
every  equality.


CAPUT  X.

Concerning    Sovereign    Lord,  "Ancient  of  days"  in
which  also,  concerning  Age  and  Time f.

Section  I.
The  time,  then,  is  come  for  our  discourse,  to  sing
the  God  of  many  Names,  as  "  Sovereign  Lord,"  and
as  "  Ancient  of  days."  For  He  is  called  the  former,
by  reason  that  He  is  an  all-controlling  basis,  binding
and  embracing  the  whole,  and  establishing  and  sup-
porting, and  tightening,  and  completing  the  whole.
Continuous  in  itself,  and  from  itself,  producing  the
whole,  as  it  were  from  a  Sovereign  root,  and  turning
to  itself  the  whole,  as  to  a  sovereign  parent  stock,
and  holding  them  together  as  an  all-embracing  basis
of  all,  securing  all  the  things  embraced,  within  one
grasp  superior  to  all,  and  not  permitting  them,  when

f  Dulac,  p.  226.


1 10  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

fallen  from  itself  to  be  destroyed,  as  moved  from  an
all-perfect  sanctuary.  But  the  Godhead  is  called
Sovereign,  both  as  controlling  and  governing  the
members  of  His  household,  purely,  and  as  being
desired  and  beloved  by  all,  and  as  placing  upon  all
the  voluntary  yokes,  and  the  sweet  pangs  of  the
Divine  and  Sovereign,  and  in  dissolvable  love  of  the
Goodness  itself.


Section  II.

But  Almighty  God  is  celebrated  as  "  Ancient  of
days"  because   He  is  of  all  things  both  Age  and
Time, — and  before  Days,  and  before  Age  and  Time.
And  yet  we  must  affirm  that  He  is  Time  and  Day,
and  appointed  Time,  and  Age,  in  a  sense  befitting
God,  as  being  throughout  every  movement  unchange-
able and  unmoved,  and  in  His  ever  moving  remain-
ing in  Himself,  and  as  being  Author  of  Age  and
Time  and  Days.     Wherefore,  in  the  sacred  Divine
manifestations  of  the  mystic  visions,   He  is   repre-
sented as  both  old  and  young  ;    the  former  indeed
signifying  the  "Ancient"  and  being  from  the  begin-
ning, and  the  latter  His  never  growing  old ;  or  both
teaching  that  He  advances  through  all  things  from
beginning  to  end, — or  as  our  Divine  initiator  says,
"  since  each  manifests  the  priority  of  God,  the  Elder
having  the  first  place  in  Time,  but  the  Younger  the
♦priority  in  number;    because  the  unit,  and   things
near  the  unit,  are  nearer  the  beginning  than  numbers
further  advanced.


on  Divine  Names.


in


Section  III.
But  we  must,  as  I  think,  see  from  the  Oracles  the
nature  of  Time  and  Eternity,  for  they  do  not  always
(merely)  call  all  the  things  absolutely  unoriginated
and  really  everlasting,  eternal,  but  also  things  im-
perishable and  immortal  and  unchangeable,  and
things  which  are  in  like  fashion,  as  when  they  say,
"  be  ye  opened,  eternal  doors,"  and  the  like.  And
often  they  characterize  the  things  the  most  ancient
by  the  name  of  Eternity;  and  again  they  call  the
whole  duration  of  our  time  Eternity,  in  so  far  as  the
ancient  and  unchangeable,  and  the  measurement  of
existence  throughout,  is  a  characteristic  of  Eternity.
But  they  call  time  that  concerned  in  generation  and
decay  and  change,  and  sometimes  the  one,  and
sometimes  the  other.  Wherefore  also,  the  Word  of
God  says  that  even  we,  who  are  bounded  here  by
time,  shall  partake  of  Eternity,  when  we  have  reached
the  Eternity  which  is  imperishable  and  ever  the  same.
But  sometimes  eternity  is  celebrated  in  the  Oracles,
even  as  temporal,  and  time  as  eternal.  But  if  we
know  them  better  and  more  accurately,  things  spiri-
tual5 are  spoken  of  and  denoted  by  Eternity,  and
things  subject  to  generation  by  time.  It  is  necessary
then  to  suppose  that  things  called  eternal  are  not
absolutely  co-eternal  with  God,  Who  is  before
Eternity,  but  that  following  unswervingly  the  most
august  Oracles,  we  should  understand  things  eternal
and  temporal  according  to  the  hopes  recognized  by

S  t<x  ovTa — actual.


1 1 2  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

them,  but  whatever  participates  partly  in  eternity
and  partly  in  time,  as  things  midway  between  things
spiritual  and  things  being  born.  But  Almighty  God
we  ought  to  celebrate,  both  as  eternity  and  time,  as
Author  of  every  time  and  eternity,  and  "  Ancient  of
days/'  as  before  time,  and  above  time ;  and  as
changing  appointed  seasons  and  times;  and  again
as  being  before  ages,  in  so  far  as  He  is  both  before
eternity  and  above  eternity  and  His  kingdom,  a  king-
dom of  all  the  Ages.     Amen.


CAPUT   XL

Concerning  Peace,  and  what  is  jneant  by  the  self-existent
Being ;  what  is  the  self-existent  Life,  and  what  the
self-existent  Power,  and  such  like  expressions.

Section  I.
Come,  then,  let  us  extol  the  Peace  Divine,  and
Source  of  conciliation,  by  hymns  of  peace  !  For  this
it  is  which  unifies  all,  and  engenders,  and  ejects  the
agreement  and  fellowship  of  all.  Wherefore,  even
all  things  aspire  to  it,  which  turns  their  divided  mul-
tiplicity into  the  thorough  Oneness,  and  unifies  the
tribal  war  of  the  whole  into  a  homogeneous  dwelling
together,  by  the  participation  of  the  divine  Peace.
With  regard,  then,  to  the  more  reverend  of  the  con-
ciliating powers,  these  indeed  are  united  to  them-
selves and  to  each  other,  and  to  the  one  Source
of  Peace  of  the  whole ;  and  the  things  (that  are)
under  them,  these  they  unite  also  to  themselves  and


on  Divine  Names.    ,  113

to  each  other,  and  to  the  One  and  all-perfect  Source
and  Cause  of  the  Peace  of  all,  which,  passing  in-
divisibly  to  the  whole,  limits  and  terminates  and
secures  everything,  as  if  by  a  kind  of  bolts,  which
bind  together  things  that  are  separated ;  and  do  not
permit  them,  when  separated,  to  rush  to  infinity  and
the  boundless,  and  to  become  without  order,  and
without  stability,  and  destitute  of  God,  and  to  depart
from  the  union  amongst  themselves,  and  to  become
intermingled  in  each  other,  in  every  sort  of  con-
fusion. Concerning  then,  this,  the  Divine  Peace  and
Repose,  which  the  holy  Justus  calls  unutterableness,
and,  as  compared  with  every  known  progression,  im-
mobility, how  it  rests  and  is  at  ease,  and  how  it  is  in
itself,  and  within  itself,  and  entire,  and  to  itself
entire  is  super-united,  and  when  entering  into  itself,
and  multiplying  itself,  neither  loses  its  own  Union,
but  even  proceeds  to  all,  whilst  remaining  entire
within,  by  reason  of  excess  of  its  Union  surpassing
all,  it  is  neither  permitted,  nor  attainable  to  any
existing  being,  either  to  express  or  to  understand.
But,  having  premised  this,  as  unutterable  and  un-
knowable, as  being  beyond  all,  let  us  examine  its
conceived  and  uttered  participations,  and  this,  as
possible  to  men,  and  to  us,  as  inferior  to  many  good
men.

Section  II.

First  then,  this  must  be  said,  that  It  is  mainstay

of  the  self-existent  Peace,  both  the  general  and  the

particular;  and  that  It  mingles  all  things  with  each

other  within   their   unconfused   union,    as   beseems

1


ii4  Dionysius  the  Areopagite^

which,  united  indivisibly,  and  at  the  same  time  they
severally  continuously  unmingled  stand,  as  regards
their  own  proper  kind,  not  muddled  through  their
mingling  with  the  opposite,  nor  blunting  any
of  their  unifying  distinctness  and  purity.  Let  us
then  contemplate  a  certain  One  and  simple  nature
of  the  peaceful  Union,  unifying  all  things  to  Itself,
and  to  themselves,  and  to  each  other;  and  preserving
all  things  in  an  unconfused  grasp  of  all,  both  un-
mingled and  mingled  together ;  by  reason  of  which
the  divine  Minds,  being  united,  are  united  to  their
own  conceptions,  and  to  the  things  conceived ;  and
again  they  ascend  to  the  unknowable  contact  of
things  fixed  above  mind ;  by  reason  of  which,  souls,
by  uniting  their  manifold  reasonings,  and  collecting
them  together  to  an  One  intellectual  Purity,  advance
in  a  manner  proper  to  themselves,  by  method  and
order,  through  the  immaterial  and  indivisible  con-
ception, to  the  union  above  conception  ;  by  reason
of  which,  the  one  and  indissoluble  connection  of  all
is  established,  within  its  Divine  Harmony,  and  is
harmonized  by  complete  concord  and  agreement
and  fellowship,  being  united  without  confusion,  and
held  together  without  division.  For  the  fulness  of
the  perfect  Peace  passes  through  to  all  existing
things,  as  beseems  the  most  simple,  and  unmingled
presence  of  Its  unifying  power,  making  all  One.
and  binding  the  extremes  through  the  intermediate
to  the  extremes,  which  are  yoked  together  in  an  one
connatural  friendship  ;  and  bestowing  the  enjoyment
1  Ttself,  even  to  the  furthest  extremities  of  the  whole,


on  Divine  Names.  115

and  making  all  things  of  one  family,  by  the  unities,
the  identities,  the  unions,  the  conjunctions  of  the
Divine  Peace,  standing  of  course  indivisibly,  and
showing  all  in  one,  and  passing  through  all,  and
not  stepping  out  of  Its  own  identity.  For  It  ad-
vances to  all,  and  imparts  Itself  to  all,  in  a  manner
appropriate  to  them,  and  there  overflows  an  abund-
ance of  peaceful  fertility ;  and  It  remains,  through
excess  of  union,  super-united,  entire,  to  and  through-
out Its  whole  self.


Section   III.

But  how,  some  one  may  say,  do  all  things  aspire
to  peace,  for  many  things  rejoice  in  diversity  and
division,  and  would  not,  at  any  time,  of  their  own
accord,  be  willingly  in  repose.  Now,  if  in  saying
this,  he  affirms,  that  the  identity  of  each  existing
thing  is  diversity  and  division,  and  that  there  is
no  existent  thing  whatever,  which  at  any  time  is
willing  to  destroy  this  (identity),  neither  would  we
in  any  way  contradict  this,  but  would  delare  even
this  an  aspiration  after  peace.  For  all  things  love
to  dwell  at  peace,  and  to  be  united  amongst  them-
selves, and  to  be  unmoved  and  unfallen  from  them-
selves, and  the  things  of  themselves.  And  the
perfect  Peace  seeks  to  guard  the  idiosyncrasy  of
each  unmoved  and  unconfused,  by  its  peace-giving
forethought,  preserving  everything  unmoved  and
unconfused,  both  as  regards  themselves  and  each
other,   and   establishes   all   things  by   a   stable  and


1 1 6  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

unswerving   power,    towards   their   own    peace   and
immobility.

Section  IV.
And  if  all  things  in  motion  desire,  not  repose,
but  ever  to  make  known  their  own  proper  movement,
even  this  is  an  aspiration  after  the  Divine  Peace  of
the  whole,  which  preserves  all  things  from  falling
away  of  their  own  accord,  and  guards  the  idiosyn-
crasy and  moving  life  of  all  moving  things  unmoved
and  free  from  falling,  so  that  the  things  moved,  being
at  peace  amongst  themselves,  and  always  in  the
same  condition,  perform  their  own  proper  functions.

Section  V.
But  if,  in  affirming  the  diversity  as  a  falling  from
peace,  he  insists  that  peace  is  not  beloved  by  all,
verily  there  is  no  existing  being  which  has  entirely
fallen  from  every  kind  of  union  ;  for,  the  altogether
unstable  and  infinite,  and  unestablished,  and  without
limit,  is  neither  an  actual  thing,  nor  in  things  actual.
But  if  he  says,  that  those  are  inimical  to  peace,  and
good  things  of  peace,  who  rejoice  in  strife  and  anger
and  changes  and  disturbances,  even  these  are  con-
trolled by  obscure  images  of  a  peaceful  aspiration ;
being  vexed  by  tumultuous  passions,  and  ignorantly
aspiring  to  calm  them,  they  imagine  that  they  will
pacify  themselves  by  the  gratification  of  things  which
ever  elude  them,  and  they  are  disturbed  by  the  non-
attainment  of  the  pleasures  which  overpowered  them.
What  would  any  one  say  of  the  peaceful  stream  of


on  Divine  Names.  i  t  7

love  towards  man  in  Christ,  according  to  which  we  have
learned  no  longer  to  wage  war,  either  with  ourselves,
or  each  other,  or  with  angels,  but  that  with  them,
according  to  our  power,  we  should  also  be  fellow-
workers  in  Divine  things,  after  the  purpose  of  Jesus,
Who  worketh  all  in  all,  and  forms  a  peace  unutterable
and  pre-determined  from  Eternity,  and  reconciles  us
to  Himself,  in  Spirit,  and  through  Himself  and  in
Himself  to  the  Father;  concerning  which  super-
natural gifts  it  is  sufficiently  spoken  in  the  Theological
Outlines,  whilst  the  Oracles  of  the  sacred  inspiration
furnish  us  with  additional  testimony.

Section  VI.
But,  since  you  once  asked  me  by  letter,  what
in  the  world  I  consider  the  self-existent  Being,  the
self-existent  Life,  the  self-existent  Wisdom,  and  said
that  you  debated  with  yourself  how,  at  one  time,
I  call  Almighty  God,  self-existent  Life,  and  at
another,  Mainstay  of  the  self-existent  Life,  I  thought
it  necessary,  O  holy  man  of  God,  to  also  free  you
from  this  difficulty,  so  far  as  lay  in  my  power.  And
first  then,  in  order  that  we  may  now  resume  that
which  I  have  said  a  thousand  times  already,  there
is  no  contradiction  in  saying  that  Almighty  God
is  self-existent  Power,  or  self-existent  Life,  and  that
He  is  Mainstay  of  the  self-existent  Life  or  Peace
or  Power.  For  the  latter,  He  is  named  from  things
existing,  and  specially  from  the  first  existing,  as
Cause  of  all  existing  things  ;  and  the  former,  as  being
above   all,  even  the  first   existing  of  beings,   being


!  j  8  Diony sites  the  Apeopagite,

above  superessentially.     But  you  say,  what   in   the
world  do  we  call  the  self-existent  Being,  or  the  self-
existent  Life,  or  whatever  we  lay  down  to  be  ab-
solutely  and    originally    and   to    have    stood    forth
primarily  from   God?     And   we   reply,   this   is    not
crooked  but  straight,  and  has  a  simple  explanation.
For  we  do  not  say  that  the  self-existent  Being,  as
Cause  of  the  being  of  all  things,  is  a  sort  of  Divine
or  angelic  essence  (for  the  Super-essential  alone  is
Source  and  Essence  and  Cause  of  the  existence  of
all  things,  and  of  the  self-existent  Being),  nor  that
another   Deity,  besides   the   Super-divine,   produces
Life  for  all  that  live,  and  is  a  Life  Causative  of  the
self-existent    Life;    nor    to   speak    summarily,    that
essences  and  personalities  originate  and  make  exist-
ing things,  so  that  superficial  people  have  named  them
both  gods,  and  creators  of  existing  things,— whom,
to  speak  truly  and  properly,  neither  they  themselves
knew  (for  they  are  non-existent),  nor  their  fathers,—
but  we  call  self-existent  Being,  and  self-existent  Life,
and  self-existent  Deity,  as  regards  at  least  Source,
and  Deity,  and  Cause,  the  One  Superior  and  Super-
essential  Source  and  Cause;  but  as  regards  Imparta-
tion,  the  providential  Powers,  that  issue  forth  from
God   the  unparticipating,  (these   we   call)   the   self-
existent  essentiation,  self-existent  living,  self-existent
deification,  by  participating  in  which  according  to
their   own   capacity,  things  existing,   both  are,  and
are  said  to  be,  existing,  and  living,  and  full  of  God—
and  the  rest  in  the  same  way.     Wherefore  also,  He
is  called  the  good  Mainstay  of  the  first  of  these,  then


on  Divine  Names.  119

of  the  whole  of  them,  then  of  the  portions  of  them,
then  of  those  who  participate  in  them  entirely,  then
of  those  who  participate  in  them  in  part.  And  why
must  we  speak  of  these  things,  since  some  of  our
divine  instructors  in  holy  things,  affirm  that  the
Super-good  and  Super-divine  self-existent  Goodness
and  Deity,  is  Mainstay  even  of  the  self-existent
Goodness  and  Deity ;  affirming  that  the  good-making
and  deifying  gift  issued  forth  from  God ;  and  that
the  self-existent  beautifying  stream,  is  self-existent
beauty,  and  whole  beauty,  and  partial  beauty,  and
things  absolutely  beautiful,  and  things  partially
beautiful,  and  whatever  other  things  are  said  and
shall  be  said  after  the  same  fashion,  which  declare
that  providences  and  goodnesses  issuing  forth  from
God  the  unparticipating,  in  an  ungrudging  stream,
are  participated  by  existing  things,  and  bubble  over
in  order  that  distinctly  the  Cause  of  all  may  be
beyond  all,  and  the  Superessential  and  Supernatural
may,  in  every  respect,  be  above  things  of  any  sort
of  essence  and  nature  whatever.


CAPUT    XII.

Concerning  Holy  of  Holies,  King  of  Kings,  Lord  of
Lords,  God  of  Gods.

Section  I.
But   since   whatever   we   have   to    say   on   these
matters  has  reached,  in  my  opinion,  a  fitting  con-
clusion, we  must  sing  Him  of  endless  names,  both


120  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

as  Holy  of  Holies  and  King  of  Kings  ;  and  as  ruling
eternity  and  for  ever  and  beyond,  and  as  Lord  of
Lords,  and  God  of  Gods.  And  first  we  must  say,
what  we  think  Holiness  Itself  is ;  and  what  Kingdom,
and  what  Lordship,  and  what  Divinity,  and  what
the  Oracles  wish  to  denote  by  the  duplication  of
the  names.

Section  II.
Holiness  then  is  (so  far  as  we  can  say)  the  purity
free  from  every  pollution,  and  all  perfect,  and  al-
together unstained;  Kingdom  is  the  assignment  of
every  limit  and  order,  and  ordinance  and  rank ;  and
Lordship  is  not  only  the  superiority  over  the  worse,
but  also  the  perfect  possession,  in  every  respect,
of  the  Beautiful  and  Good;  and  a  true  and  un-
swerving stability.     Wherefore   Lordship  is  parallel

tO    TO    KvpOS    KOI    TO     KVpiOV,    KOI    TO    KVpKTTOV  h  ',    and    Deity

is  the  Providence  watching  over  all,  and  with  perfect
goodness  both  circumscribing  and  grasping  all,  and
filling  with  Itself,  and  surpassing  all  things  which
enjoy  Its  forethought.

Section  III.
These  things,  then,  must  be  sung  absolutely,   re-
specting  the    Cause    surpassing   all,    and   we   must
add  that  It  surpasses  Holiness,  and  Lordship,  and
Kingdom,  and  most  simplex1  Deity.     For,  from  It,

h  The  rendering  of  which  may  be,  the  lordly,  and  the  lord-
lier, and  the  lordliest.
1  Letter  2.


on  Divine  Names.  121

individually  and  collectively,  were  born  and  dis-
tributed every  untarnished  distinctness  of  every  spot-
less purity,  the  whole  arrangement  and  regulation
of  things  existing,  whilst  It  excludes  want  of  harmony
and  want  of  equality,  and  want  of  symmetry,  and
rejoices  over  the  well-ordered  identity  and  rectitude,
and  leads  round  things,  deemed  worthy  to  participate
in  Itself.  From  It  is  all  the  perfect  and  complete
possession  of  all  good  things,  every  good  fore-
thought, watching  and  sustaining  the  objects  of  Its
forethought,  imparting  Itself,  as  befits  Its  goodness,
for  deification  of  those  who  are  turned  to  It.

Section  IV.

But  since  the  Cause  of  all  is  super-full  of  all,  as
beseems  the  One  superfluity  which  surpasses  all,  He
is  sung  as  Holy  of  Holies  and  the  rest,  as  beseems
an  overflowing  Cause,  and  a  towering  Pre-eminence.
As  one  might  say,  so  far  as  the  things  which  are, —
holy  or  divine,  or  lordly,  or  kingly, — surpass  the  things
which  are  not,  and  the  self-existent  participations,
their  participants ;  to  such  an  extent  is  seated  above
all  things  that  be,  He  Who  is  above  all  things  that
be,  and  the  unparticipating  Cause  of  all  the  par-
ticipants and  the  participations.  But  Holy  and
Kings  and  Lords  and  Gods,  the  Oracles  call  the
higher  orders  in  each,  through  whom  the  inferior
in  participating  the  gifts  from  God,  multiply  the
simplicity  of  their  distribution  around  their  own
diversities,    the    variety    of    which,     the     superior


122  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

orders   carefully  and  divinely  collect  to  their   own
Oneness.


CAPUT  XIII.
Concerning  Perfect  and  One.
Section  I.
So  much  then  on  these  matters;  but  let  us  now
at  last,  with  your  good  pleasure,  approach  the  most
difficult  subject  in  the  whole  discourse.  For  the
Word  of  God  predicates  everything,  singly  and
collectively,  respecting  the  Cause  of  all,  and  extols
Him  both  as  Perfect  and  as  One\  He  is  then
perfect  not  only  as  self-perfect,  and  solitarily  sepa-
rated within  Himself,  by  Himself,  and  throughout
most  perfect,  but  also  as  super-perfect,  as  beseems
His  pre-eminence  over  all,  and  limiting  every  in-
finitude, and  surpassing  every  term,  and  by  none
contained  or  comprehended;  but  even  extending
at  once  to  all,  and  above  all,  by  His  unfailing
gratuities  and  endless  energies.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  He  is  called  perfect,  both  as  without  increase,
and  always  perfect,  and  as  undiminished,  as  pre-
holding  all  things  in  Himself,  and  overflowing  as
beseems  one,  inexhaustible,  and  same,  and  super-full,
and  undiminished,  abundance,  in  accordance  with
which  He  perfects  all  perfect  things,  and  fills  them
with  His  own  perfection.

k  Kal  ws  rcXfiov  avrb  Kal  us  fv  apvfxvet.  It  should  be  noted
that  where  He,  Him  and  His  are  used  in  this  Section,  the
Neuter  is  used  in  the  Greek.


on  Divine  Names.  123


Section  II.


But  One,  because  He  is  uniquely  all,  as  beseems
an  excess  of  unique  Oneness,  and  is  Cause  of  all
without  departing  from  the  One.  For  there  is  no
single  existing  being,  which  does  not  participate
in  the  one,  but  as  every  number  participates  in  an
unit,  and  one  dual  and  one  decade  is  spoken  of,
and  one  half,  and  one  third  and  tenth,  so  everything,
and  part  of  everything  participates  in  the  one,  and
by  the  fact  that  the  One  is,  all  existing  things  are.
And  the  Cause  of  all  is  not  One,  as  one  of  many,
but  before  every  one  and  multitude,  and  determina-
tive of  every  one  and  multitude.  For  there  is  no
multitude  which  does  not  partake  in  some  way
or  other  of  the  one.  Yea,  that  which  is  many  by
parts,  is  one  in  the  whole;  and  the  many  by  the
accidents,  is  one  by  the  subject;  and  the  many
by  the  number  or  the  powers,  is  one  by  the  species,
and  the  many  by  the  species,  is  one  by  the  genus ;
and  the  many  by  the  progressions,  is  one  by  the
source.  And  there  is  no  single  thing  which  does
not  participate  in  some  way  in  •  the  one,  which
uniformly  pre-held  in  the  uniqueness  throughout
all,  all  and  whole,  all,  even  the  things  opposed.
And  indeed,  without  the  one  there  will  not  be
a  multitude,  but  without  the  multitude  there  will
be  the  one,  even  as  the  unit  previous  to  every
multiplied  number ;  and,  if  any  one  should  suppose,
that  all  things  are  united  to  all,  the  All  will  be  one
in  the  whole.


I24  Dionysius  the  Areopagite^

Section  III.
Especially  must  this  be  known,  that  according
to  the  pre-conceived  species  of  each  one,  things
united  are  said  to  be  made  one,  and  the  one  is
elemental  of  all;  and  if  you  should  take  away
the  one,  there  will  be  neither  totality  nor  part,
nor  any  other  single  existing  thing.  For  the  one,
uniformly,  pre-held  and  comprehended  all  things
in  itself.  For  this  reason,  then,  the  Word  of  God
celebrates  the  whole  Godhead,  as  Cause  of  all,  by
the  epithet  of  the  One,  both  one  God  the  Father,
and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  one  and  the  same
Spirit,  by  reason  of  the  surpassing  indivisibility  of
the  whole  Divine  Oneness,  in  which  all  things'  are
uniquely  collected,  and  are  super-unified,  and  are
with  It  superessentially.  Wherefore  also,  all  things
are  justly  referred  and  attributed  to  It,  by  Which
and  from  Which,  and  through  Which,  and  in  Which,
and  to  Which,  all  things  are,  and  are  co-ordinated,
and  abide,  and  are  held  together,  and  are  filled,
and  are  turned  towards  It.  And  you  would  not
find  any  existing  thing,  which  is  not  what  it  is,
and  perfected  and  preserved,  by  the  One,  after  which
the  whole  Deity  is  superessentially  named.  And  it
is  necessary  also,  that  we  being  turned  from  the
many  to  the  One,  by  the  power  of  the  Divine  One-
ness, should  celebrate  as  One  the  whole  and  one
Deity — the  one  Cause  of  all — which  is  before  every
one  and  multitude,  and  part  and  whole,  and  limit
and  illimitability,  and  term  and  infinity,  which  bounds
all   things   that  be,   even  the  Being   Itself,  and   is


on  Divine  Names.  125

uniquely  Cause  of  all,  individually  and  collectively,
and  at  the  same  time  before  all,  and  above  all,
and  above  the  One  existing  Itself,  and  bounding
the  One  existing  Itself;  since  the  One  existing — that
in  things  being — is  numbered,  and  number  partici-
pates in  essence ;  but  the  superessential  One  bounds
both  the  One  existing,  and  every  number,  and  Itself
is,  of  both  one  and  number,  and  every  being,  Source
and  Cause,  and  Number  and  Order.  Wherefore  also,
whilst  celebrated  as  Unit  and  Triad,  the  Deity  above
all  is  neither  Unit  nor  Triad,  as  understood  by  us
or  by  any  other  sort  of  being,  but,  in  order  that
we  may  celebrate  truly  Its  super-oneness,  and  Divine
generation,  by  the  threefold  and  single  name  of  God,
we  name  the  Deity,  Which  is  inexpressible  to  things
that  be,  the  Superessential.  But  no  Unit  nor  Triad,
nor  number  nor  unity,  nor  productiveness,  nor  any
other  existing  thing,  or  thing  known  to  any  existing
thing,  brings  forth  the  hiddenness,  above  every  ex-
pression and  every  mind,  of  the  Super-Deity  Which
is  above  all  superessentially.  Nor  has  It  a  Name,
or  expression,  but  is  elevated  above  in  the  in-
accessible. And  neither  do  we  apply  the  very  Name
of  Goodness,  as  making  it  adequate  to  It,  but
through  a  desire  of  understanding  and  saying  some-
thing concerning  that  inexpressible  nature,  we  con-
secrate the  most  august  of  Names  to  It,  in  the  first
degree,  and  although  we  should  be  in  accord  in
this  matter  with  the  theologians,  yet  we  shall  fall
short  of  the  truth  of  the  facts.  Wherefore,  even
they  have  given  the  preference  to  the  ascent  through


i26  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

negations,  as  lifting  the  soul  out  of  things  kindred
to  itself,  and  conducting  it  through  all  the  Divine
conceptions,  above  which  towers  that  which  is  above
every  name,  and  every  expression  and  knowledge,
and  at  the  furthest  extremity  attaching  it  to  Him,
as  far  indeed  as  is  possible  for  us  to  be  attached
to  that  Being.

Section  IV.
We  then,  having  collected  these  intelligible  Divine
Names,  have  unfolded  them  to  the  best  of  our  ability,
falling  short  not  only  of  the  precision  which  belongs
to  them,  (for  this  truly,  even  Angels  might  say)  nor
only  of  their  praises  as  sung  by  Angels  (and  the  chief
of  our  Theologians  come  behind  the  lowest  of  them),
nor  indeed  of  the  Theologians  themselves,  nor  of
their  followers  or  companions,  but  even  of  those  who
are  of  the  same  rank  as  ourselves,  last  and  sub-
ordinate to  them  ;  so  that,  if  the  things  spoken  should
be  correct,  and,  if  we,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  have  really
reached  the  perception  of  the  unfolding  of  the  Divine
Names,  let  the  fact  be  ascribed  to  the  Author  of  all
good  things,  Who,  Himself,  bestows  first  the  power
to  speak,  then  to  speak  well.     And  if  any  one  of  the
Names  of  the  same  force  has  been  passed  over,  that
also  you  must  understand   according  to  the   same
methods.     But,  if  these  things  are  either  incorrect  or
imperfect,  and  we  have  wandered  from  the  truth,
either  wholly  or  partially,  may  it  be  of  thy  brotherly
kindness  to  correct  him,  who  unwillingly  is  ignorant,
and  to  impart  a  word  to  him,  who  wishes  to  learn,


on  Divine  Names.  127

and  to  vouchsafe  assistance  to  him,  who  has  not
power  in  himself;  and  to  heal  him,  who,  not  wil-
lingly, is  sick;  and  having  found  out  some  things
from  thyself,  and  others  from  others,  and  receiving  all
from  the  good  to  transfer  them  also  to  us.  By  no
means  grow  weary  in  doing  good  to  a  man  thy  friend,
for  thou  perceivest,  that  we  also  have  kept  to  our-
selves none  of  the  hierarchical  communications
transmitted  to  us,  but  have  transmitted  them  without
flaw,  both  to  you  and  to  other  holy  men,  yea,  and  will
continue  to  transmit  them,  as  we  may  be  sufficient  to
speak,  and  those  to  whom  we  speak,  to  hear,  doing
injury  in  no  respect  to  the  tradition,  if  at  least  we
do  not  fail  in  the  conception  and  expression  thereof.
But,  let  these  things  be  held  and  spoken  in  such
way,  as  is  well  pleasing  to  Almighty  God ;  and
let  this  indeed  be  our  conclusion  to  the  intelligible
Divine  Names.  But  I  will  now  pass  to  the  Symbolic
Theology1^  with  God  for  my  Guide.

1  See  letter  to  Titus.
27  October,  1896.


NOTE.


IGNATIUS.

"  My  love  is  crucified."

Upon  this  passage  I  differ  from  all  the  com-
mentators that  I  know.  I  believe  the  passage  to
have  been  written  and  inserted  in  the  text  by  Diony-
sius  when  writing  this  letter,  which  must  have  been
before  a.d.  98.  I  do  not  think  it  a  quotation  from  the
letter  of  Ignatius  written  just  previous  to  his  martyr-
dom. I  think  Dionysius  quoted  some  previous  writing
of  Ignatius,  in  which  he  spoke  of  our  Saviour  as  "  My
Love,  Which  is  mine."  That  is  the  sense  in  this
passage,  to  shew  the  exalted  use  of  Love.  In  the
letter  of  Ignatius  to  the  Romans,  he  seems  to  use
"  love "  in  the  sense  of  human  passion  or  fire,  and
says  that  that  is  crucified  in  him.  In  any  case,  there
is  no  chronological  difficulty.  Ignatius  was  martyred
a.d.  107,  Dionysius,  a.d.  119.


PREFACE    TO    MYSTIC
THEOLOGY.


Mystic  Theology  is  like  that  ladder  set  up  on
the  earth  whose  top  reached  to  Heaven  on  which
the  angels  of  God  were  ascending  and  descending,
and  above  which  stood  Almighty  God.  The  Angel
ascending  is  the  "negative"  which  distinguishes
Almighty  God  from  all  created  things.  God  is  not
matter — soul,  mind,  spirit,  any  being,  nor  even  being
itself,  but  above  and  beyond  all  these.  The  Angel
descending  is  the  "Affirmative."  God  is  good,  wise,
powerful,  the  Being,  until  we  come  to  Symbolic
Theology,  which  denotes  Him  under  material  forms
and  conditions.  Theology  prefers  the  negative  be-
cause Almighty  God  is  more  appropriately  presented
by  distinction  than  by  comparison.


MYSTIC   THEOLOGY.


CAPUT    I.
What  is  the  Divine  Gloom  ?
Section  I.
Triad  supernal,  both  super-God  and  super-good,
Guardian  of  the  Theosophy  of  Christian  men,  direct
us  aright  to  the  super-unknown  and   super-brilliant
and   highest  summit  of  the  mystic  Oracles,  where
the  simple  and  absolute  and  changeless  mysteries  of
theology  lie  hidden  within  the  super-luminous  gloom
of  the  silence,  revealing  hidden  things,  which  in  its
deepest  darkness  shines  above  the  most  super-bril-
liant, and  in  the  altogether  impalpable  and  invisible,
fills  to  overflowing  the  eyeless  minds  with  glories  of
surpassing  beauty.     This  then  be  my  prayer;    but
thou,  O  dear  Timothy,  by  thy  persistent  commerce
with  the  mystic  visions,  leave  behind  both  sensible
perceptions  and  intellectual  efforts,  and  all  objects  of
sense  and  intelligence,  and  all  things  not  being  and
being,  and  be  raised  aloft  unknowingly  to  the  union,
as  far  as  attainable,  with  Him  Who  is  above  every
essence  and  knowledge.     For  by  the  resistless  and
absolute  ecstasy  in  all  purity,  from  thyself  and  all,
thou  wilt  be  carried  on  high,  to  the  superessential  ray
of  the  Divine  darkness,  when  thou  hast  cast  away  all,
and  become  free  from  all.


Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  &>c  131

Section  II.
But  see  that  none  of  the  uninitiated  listen  to  these
things — those  I  mean  who  are  entangled  in  things
being,  and  fancy  there  is  nothing  superessentially
above  things  being,  but  imagine  that  they  know,
by  their  own  knowledge,  Him,  Who  has  placed  dark-
ness as  His  hiding-place.  But,  if  the  Divine  ini-
tiations are  above  such,  what  would  any  one  say
respecting  those  still  more  uninitiated,  such  as  both
portray  the  Cause  exalted  above  all,  from  the  lowest
of  things  created,  and  say  that  It  in  no  wise  excels
the  no-gods  fashioned  by  themselves  and  of  manifold
shapes,  it  being  our  duty  both  to  attribute  and  affirm
all  the  attributes  of  things  existing  to  It,  as  Cause  of
all,  and  more  properly  to  deny  them  all  to  It,  as
being  above  all,  and  not  to  consider  the  negations  to
be  in  opposition  to  the  affirmations,  but  far  rather
that  It,  which  is  above  every  abstraction  and  defi-
nition, is  above  the  privations.

Section  III.
Thus,  then,  the  divine  Bartholomew  says  that  Theo-
logy is  much  and  least,  and  the  Gospel  broad  and
great,  and  on  the  other  hand  concise.  He  seems  to  me
to  have  comprehended  this  supernaturally,  that  the
good  Cause  of  all  is  both  of  much  utterance,  and  at
the  same  time  of  briefest  utterance  and  without
utterance;  as  having  neither  utterance  nor  concep-
tion, because  It  is  superessentially  exalted  above
all,  and  manifested  without  veil  and  in  truth,  to  those
alone  who  pass  through  both  all  things  consecrated


!  32  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,

and  pure,  and  ascend  above  every  ascent  of  all  holy
summits,   and    leave  behind   all   divine   lights  and
sounds,  and  heavenly  words,  and  enter  into  the  gloom,
where  really  is,  as  the  Oracles  say,  He  Who  is  beyond
all.     For  even  the  divine  Moses  is  himself  strictly
bidden  to  be  first  purified,  and  then  to  be  separated
from  those  who  are  not  so,  and  after  entire  cleansing
hears  the  many-voiced  trumpets,  and  sees  many  lights,
shedding  pure  and  streaming  rays ;  then  he  is  separ-
ated from  the  multitude,  and  with  the  chosen  priests
goes  first  to  the  summit  of  the  divine  ascents,  al-
though even  then  he  does  not  meet  with  Almighty  God
Himself,  but  views  not  Him  (for  He  is  viewless)  but
the  place  where  He  is.     Now  this  I  think  signifies
that  the  most  Divine  and  Highest  of  the  things  seen
and  contemplated  are  a  sort  of  suggestive  expression
of  the   things   subject   to  Him  Who  is  above  all,
through  which  His  wholly  inconceivable  Presence  is
shown,  reaching  to  the  highest  spiritual  summits  of
His  most  holy  places ;  and  then  he  (Moses)  is  freed
from  them  who  are  both  seen  and  seeing,  and  enters
into  the  gloom  of  the  Agnosia;    a  gloom  veritably
mystic,  within  which   he   closes   all   perceptions   of
knowledge  and  enters  into  the  altogether  impalpable
and  unseen,  being  wholly  of  Him  Who  is  beyond  all,
and  of  none,  neither  himself  nor  other;    and  by  in-
activity of  all  knowledge,  united  in  his  better  part  to
the  altogether  Unknown,  and  by  knowing  nothing,
knowing  above  mind.


on  Mystic  Theology.  133


CAPUT    II.

How  we  ought  both  to  be  united  and  render  praise
to  the  Cause  of  all  and  above  all.

Section  I.
We  pray  to  enter  within  the  super-bright  gloom,
and  through  not  seeing  and  not  knowing,  to  see  and
to  know  that  the  not  to  see  nor  to  know  is  itself
the  above  sight  and  knowledge.  For  this  is  veri-
tably to  see  and  to  know  and  to  celebrate  super-
essentially  the  Superessential,  through  the  abstraction
of  all  existing  things,  just  as  those  who  make  a  life-
like statue,  by  extracting  all  the  encumbrances  which
have  been  placed  upon  the  clear  view  of  the  con-
cealed, and  by  bringing  to  light,  by  the  mere  cutting
away*,  the  genuine  beauty  concealed  in  it.  And,  it  is
necessary,  as  I  think,  to  celebrate  the  abstractions  in
an  opposite  way  to  the  definitions.  For,  we  used  to
place  these  latter  by  beginning  from  the  foremost  and
descending  through  the  middle  to  the  lowest,  but,  in
this  case,  by  making  the  ascents  from  the  lowest  to
the  highest,  we  abstract  everything,  in  order  that,
without  veil,  we  may  know  that  Agnosia,  which  is
enshrouded  under  all  the  known,  in  all  things  that
be,  and  may  see  that  superessential  gloom,  which  is
hidden  by  all  the  light  in  existing  things.

■  i.e.  the  abstraction.


*34


Diony sius  the  Areopagiie,


CAPUT   III.

What  are  the  affirmative  expressions  respecting  God,

and  what  the  negative.

Section  I.
In  the  Theological  Outlines,  then,  we  celebrated  the
principal   affirmative  expressions   respecting   God-
how  the  Divine  and  good  Nature  is  spoken  of  as
One— how  as  Threefold— what  is  that  within  it  which
is  spoken  of  as  Paternity  and   Sonship— what  the
Divine  name  of  "the  Spirit"  is  meant  to  signify-
how  from  the  immaterial  and  indivisible  Good  the
Lights  dwelling  in  the  heart  of  Goodness  sprang  forth,
and  remained,  in  their  branching  forth,  without  de-
parting from  the  coeternal  abiding  in  Himself  and
in  Themselves  and  in  each  other —how  the  super-
essential  Jesus  takes  substance  in  veritable  human
nature -and  whatever  other  things,  made  known  by
the  Oracles,  are  celebrated  throughout  the  Theological
Outlines;    and    in    the   treatise   concerning  Divine
Names,  how  He  is  named  Good— how  Being— how
Life  and  Wisdom   and   Power— and  whatever  else
belongs  to  the  nomenclature  of  God.    Further,  in  the
~  Symbolical  Theology,  what  are  the  Names  transferred
from  objects  of  sense  to  things  Divine?— what  are
the   Divine  forms?— what  the  Divine  appearances,
and  parts  and  organs?— what  the  Divine  places  and
ornaments?— what  the  angers?— what  the  griefs?—
and  the  Divine  wrath?— what  the  carousals,  and  the
ensuing  sicknesses  ?— what  the  oaths,— and  what  the


on  Mystic  Theology.  135

curses? — what  the  sleepings,  and  what  the  awak-
ings  ? — and  all  the  other  Divinely  formed  representa-
tions, which  belong  to  the  description  of  God,
through  symbols.  And  I  imagine  that  you  have
comprehended,  how  the  lowest  are  expressed  in  some-
what more  words  than  the  first  For,  it  was  necessary
that  the  Theological  Outlines,  and  the  unfolding  of  the
Divine  Names  should  be  expressed  in  fewer  words
than  the  Symbolic  Theology ;  since,  in  proportion  as
we  ascend  to  the  higher,  in  such  a  degree  the  ex-
pressions are  circumscribed  by  the  contemplations  of
the  things  intelligible.  As  even  now,  when  entering
into  the  gloom  which  is  above  mind,  we  shall  find,  not
a  little  speaking,  but  a  complete  absence  of  speech,
and  absence  of  conception.  In  the  other  case,  the
discourse,  in  descending  from  the  above  to  the  lowest,
is  widened  according  to  the  descent,  to  a  propor-
tionate extent;  but  now,  in  ascending  from  below  to
that  which  is  above,  in  proportion  to  the  ascent,  it
is  contracted,  and  after  a  complete  ascent,  it  will
become  wholly  voiceless,  and  will  be  wholly  united
to  the  unutterable.  But,  for  what  reason  in  short,
you  say,  having  attributed  the  Divine  attributes  from
the  foremost,  do  we  begin  the  Divine  abstraction
from  things  lowest?  Because  it  is  necessary  that
they  who  place  attributes  on  that  which  is  above
every  attribute,  should  place  the  attributive  affirma-
tion from  that  which  is  more  cognate  to  it ;  but  that
they  who  abstract,  with  regard  to  that  which  is  above
every  abstraction,  should  make  the  abstraction  from
things  which  are  further  removed  from  it.     Are  not


136


Dionysius  the  Areopagite,


life  and  goodness  more  (cognate)  than  air  and  stone?
and  He  is  not  given  to  debauch  and  to  wrath,  more
(removed)  than  He  is  not  expressed  nor  conceived.


CAPUT   IV.

That  the  pre-eminent  Cause  of  every  object  of  sensible
perception  is  none  of  the  objects  of  sensible  perception.
Section  I.
We  say  then  that  the  Cause  of  all,  which  is  above
all,  is  neither  without  being,  nor  without  life— nor  with-
out reason,  nor  without  mind,  nor  is  a  body — nor  has
shape— nor  form— nor  quality,  or  quantity,  or  bulk—
nor  is  in  a  place — nor  is  seen — nor  has  sensible  con-
tact—nor perceives,  nor  is  perceived,  by  the  senses —
nor  has  disorder  and  confusion,  as  being  vexed  by
earthly  passions,— nor  is  powerless,  as  being  subject
to  casualties  of  sense,— nor  is  in  need  of  light;—
neither  is  It,  nor  has  It,  change,  or  decay,  or  divi-
sion, or  deprivation,  or  flux,— or  any  other  of  the
objects  of  sense.


CAPUT   V.

That  the  pre-eminent  Cause  of  every  object  of  intelligible
perception  is  no  fie  of  the  objects  of  intelligible  percep-
tion.

On  the  other  hand,  ascending,  we  say,  that  It
is  neither  soul,  nor  mind,  nor  has  imagination,  or
opinion,  or  reason,  or  conception;    neither  is  ex-


on  Mystic  Theology.  137

pressed,  nor  conceived  ;  neither  is  number,  nor  order,
nor  greatness,  nor  littleness;   nor  equality,  nor   in-
equality ;  nor  similarity,  nor  dissimilarity ;    neither  is
standing,    nor   moving;    nor   at   rest;     neither   has
power,  nor  is  power,  nor  light ;    neither  lives,  nor  is
life ;    neither  is  essence  nor  eternity,  nor  time ;    nei-
ther is  Its  touch  intelligible,  neither  is  It  science,  nor
truth  ;    nor  kingdom,  nor  wisdom ;    neither  one,  nor
oneness  ;  neither  Deity,  nor  Goodness ;  nor  is  It  Spirit
according  to  our  understanding;    nor  Sonship,  nor
Paternity ;  nor  any  other  thing  of  those  known  to  us,
or  to  any  other  existing  being ;    neither  is  It  any  of
non-existing  nor  of  existing   things,   nor  do  things
existing  know  It,  as  It  is;    nor  does  It  know  existing
things,  qua  existing ;  neither  is  there  expression  of  It,
nor  name,  nor  knowledge ;  neither  is  It  darkness,  nor
light;    nor  error,   nor  truth;    neither  is   there  any
definition  at  all  of  It,  nor  any  abstraction.    But  when
making  the  predications  and  abstractions  of  things
after  It,  we  neither  predicate,  nor  abstract  from  It ;
since  the  all-perfect  and  uniform  Cause  of  all  is  both
above  every  definition  and  the  pre-eminence  of  Him,
Who  is  absolutely  freed  from  all,  and  beyond  the
whole,  is  also  above  every  abstraction.


PREFACE   TO   THE    LETTERS

OF    DIONYSIUS    THE

AREOPAGITE.


These  Letters  attest  the  existence  of  the  writings,
and  the  wisdom  spoken  among  the  perfect,  in  the
Apostolic  Age. — To  Gaius,  who  is  commemorated
by  St.  John  and  St.  Paul,  we  owe  the  explanation
of  Agnosia,  and  valued  teaching  on  the  Personality
of  our  Lord;  to  Dorotheus  we  are  indebted  for
a  fuller  explanation  of  the  Divine  Gloom ;  to  Sosi-
pater,  twice  mentioned  in  the  Acts  and  Romans,
we  owe  the  wisest  letter  ever  penned  for  the  in-
struction of  the  Christian  Apologist  and  Missionary.
The  Letter  to  Polycarp  touches  on  those  mysterious
signs  in  the  heavens,  by  which  Almighty  God  shewed
His  universal  power.  Dionysius  shews  his  reverence
for  God's  holy  word,  by  never  seeking  to  explain
away,  or  to  substitute  what  seems  a  less  miracle  for
a  greater.  The  trifold  Mithra  commemorated  amongst
the  Babylonians  shews  that  Hezekiah's  sign  was  not
merely  visible  and  observed  in  Judea.  The  King,
as  High  Priest  of  his  people,  was  already  robed  for
evening  prayer,  when  he  observed  the  sun  gone
back ;  and  one  day  became  almost  three,  i.e.  thirty-
two  hours  instead  of  thirty-six.  Dionysius  describes
the  darkness  at  the  time  of  the  Crucifixion,  as  it


140       PREFACE  TO  THE  LETTERS,  ETC.

appeared  in  Egypt,  and  is  recorded  by  Phlegon.
We  do  not  explain  and  interpret  the  facts  recorded
in  the  Gospel,  by  denying  them,  or  by  treating  the
same  testimony  outside  the  Gospel  as  superstitious.

To  Demophilus,  we  owe  a  knowledge  of  Church-
law  and  order,  which  teaches  the  Christian  duty
of  being  "  sent,"  and  which  should  teach  clergy  to
obey  their  Bishop,  and  not  merely  the  Act  of  uni-
formity. To  Titus,  we  owe  the  preservation  of  the
sum  of  the  Symbolic  Theology.  From  the  letter  to
St.  John  in  Patmos,  we  learn  the  love  between
St.  John  and  Dionysius,  and  that  St.  John  was  then
called  the  "Sun  of  the  Gospel."  From  the  letter
to  Apollophanes,  we  know  that  the  prayers  of  Diony-
sius for  the  conversion  of  his  friend  did  not  fall
to  the  ground.  Apollophanes  was  tutor  to  Polemon,
who  again  was  tutor  to  Aristides,  who  presented
his  "Apology"  to  the  Emperor  Hadrian.  The
conversion  of  Statonice,  the  wife  of  Apollophanes,
was  the  cause  of  St.  Paul's  being  cast  into  chains
at  Philippi,  where  the  messengers  from  Corinth  found
him,  through  whom  he  sent  the  Epistle  recently
brought  to  light a.

*  See  "Correspondence  of  St.  Paul,"  Carriere  et  Berger,
p.  20.     Fishbacher,  Paris.

Cannes,
Ciratmcision,  1897.


LETTERS   OF    DIONYSIUS
THE   AREOPAGITE.


LETTER    I.


To  Gains  Therapeutes.
Darkness  becomes  invisible  by  light,  and  specially
by  much  light.  Varied  knowledge  (al  yvdxreis),  and
especially  much  varied  knowledge,  makes  the  Ag-
nosia* to  vanish.  Take  this  in  a  superlative,  but
not  in  a  defective  sense,  and  reply  with  superla-
tive truth,  that  the  Agnosia,  respecting  God,  escapes
those  who  possess  existing  light,  and  knowledge
of  things  being;  and  His  pre-eminent  darkness  is
both  concealed  by  every  light,  and  is  hidden  from
every  knowledge.  And,  if  any  one,  having  seen
God,  understood  what  he  saw,  he  did  not  see  Him,
but  some  of  His  creatures  that  are  existing  and
known.  But  He  Himself,  highly  established  above
mind,  and  above  essence,  by  the  very  fact  of  His
being  wholly  unknown,  and  not  being,  both  is  super-
essentially,  and  is  known  above  mind.  And  the
all-perfect  Agnosia,  in  its  superior  sense,  is  a  know-
ledge of  Him,  Who  is  above  all  known  things.

LETTER    II.

To  the  same  Gains  Therapeutes.
How  is  He,  Who  is  beyond  all b,  both  above  source
of  Divinity  and  above  source  of  Good  ?  Provided  you
*  C.  I.  §  i.  b  C.  II.  §  6.


142  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

understand  Deity  and  Goodness,  as  the  very  Actuality
of  the  Good-making  and  God-making  gift,  and  the
inimitable  imitation  of  the  super-divine  and  super-
good  (gift),  by  aid  of  which  we  are  deified  and
made  good.  For,  moreover,  if  this  becomes  source
of  the  deification  and  making  good  of  those  who
are  being  deified  and  made  good,  He, — Who  is  super-
source  of  every  source,  even  of  the  so-called  Deity
and  Goodness,  seeing  He  is  beyond  source  of  Divinity
and  source  of  Goodness,  in  so  far  as  He  is  in-
imitable, and  not  to  be  retained— excels  the  imita-
tions and  retentions,  and  the  things  which  are
imitated  and  those  participating.


LETTER  III.
To  the  same  Gains.
"  Sudden  "  is  that  which,  contrary  to  expectation,
and  out  of  the,  as  yet,  unmanifest,  is  brought  into  the
manifest.  But  with  regard  to  Christ's  love  of  man,
I  think  that  the  Word  of  God  suggests  even  this,
that  the  Superessential  proceeded  forth  out  of  the
hidden,  into  the  manifestation  amongst  us,  by  having
taken  substance  as  man.  But,  He  is  hidden,  even
after  the  manifestation,  or  to  speak  more  divinely,
even  in  the  manifestation,  for  in  truth  this  of  Jesus
has  been  kept  hidden,  and  the  mystery  with  respect
to  Him  has  been  reached  by  no  word  nor  mind,
but  even  when  spoken,  remains  unsaid,  and  when
conceived  unknown.


Letters  of  Dionysins  the  Areopagite.  143

LETTER    IV. c

To  the  same  Gains  Therapeutes.

How,  you  ask,  is  Jesus,  Who  is  beyond  all,  ranked
essentially  with  all  men  ?  For,  not  as  Author  of
men  is  He  here  called  man,  but  as  being  in  absolute
whole  essence  truly  man.  But  we  do  not  define
the  Lord  Jesus,  humanly,  for  He  is  not  man  only,
(neither  superessential  nor  man  only),  but  truly  man,
He  Who  is  pre-eminently  a  lover  of  man,  the  Super-
essential,  taking  substance,  above  men  and  after
men,  from  the  substance  of  men.  And  it  is  nothing
less,  the  ever  Superessential,  super-full  of  super-
essentiality  y  disregards  the  excess d  of  this,  and  having
come  truly  into  substance,  took  substance  above
substance,  and  above  man  works  things  of  man.
And  a  virgin  supernaturally  conceiving,  and  un-
stable water,  holding  up  weight  of  material  and
earthly  feet,  and  not  giving  way,  but,  by  a  super-
natural power  standing  together  so  as  not  to  be
divided,  demonstrate  this.  Why  should  any  one
go  through  the  rest,  which  are  very  many  ?  Through
which,  he  who  looks  with  a  divine  vision,  will  know
beyond  mind,  even  the  things  affirmed  respecting
the  love  towards  man,  of  (the  Lord)  Jesus, — things
which  possess  a  force  of  superlative  negation.  For,
even,  to  speak  summarily,  He  was  not  man,  not  as
not  being  man,  but  as  being  from  men  was  beyond
men,  and  was  above  man,  having  truly  been  born
man,  and  for  the  rest,  not  having  done  things  Divine

c  C.  II.  §  6.


144  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

as  God,  nor  things  human  as  man,  but  exercising
for  us  a  certain  new  God-incarnate  energy  of  God
having  become  man.


LETTER  V.
To  Dorotheus,  Leitourgos.
The  Divine  gloom  is  the  unapproachable  light
in  which  God  is  said  to  dwell e.  And  in  this  gloom,
invisiblef  indeed,  on  account  of  the  surpassing  bright-
ness, and  unapproachable  on  account  of  the  excess
of  the  superessential  stream  of  light,  enters  every  one
deemed  worthy  to  know  and  to  see  God,  by  the  very
fact  of  neither  seeing  nor  knowing,  really  entering
in  Him,  Who  is  above  vision  and  knowledge,  knowing
this  very  thing,  that  He  is  after  all  the  object  of
sensible  and  intelligent  perception,  and  saying  in  the
words  of  the  Prophet,  "  Thy  knowledge  was  regarded
as  wonderful  by  me ;  It  was  confirmed  ;  I  can  by  no
means  attain  unto  it  s j "  even  as  the  Divine  Paul  is
said  to  have  known  Almighty  God,  by  having  known
Him  as  being  above  all  conception  and  knowledge.
Wherefore  also,  he  says,  "  His  ways  are  past  finding
outh  and  His  Judgements  inscrutable,"  and  His  gifts
"  indescribable  l,"  and  that  His  peace  surpasses  every
mindj,  as  having  found  Him  Who  is  above  all,
and  having  known  this  which  is  above  conception,
that,  by  being  Cause  of  all,  He  is  beyond  all.

e  i  Tim.  vi.  6.  £  lb.  i.  17.  *  Ps.  cxxxix.  6.

h  Rom.  xi.  33.  l  2  Cor.  ix.  15.  *  Phil.  iv.  7.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  145

LETTER   VI.

To  Sopatros^ — Priest.

Do  not  imagine  this  a  victory,  holy  Sopatros,  to
have  denounced  l  a  devotion,  or  an  opinion,  which  ap-
parently is  not  good.  For  neither — even  if  you  should
have  convicted  it  accurately — are  the  (teachings)  of
Sopatros  consequently  good.  For  it  is  possible,  both
that  you  and  others,  whilst  occupied  in  many  things
that  are  false  and  apparent,  should  overlook  the  true,
which  is  One  and  hidden.  For  neither,  if  anything
is  not  red,  is  it  therefore  white,  nor  if  something
is  not  a  horse,  is  it  necessarily  a  man.  But  thus  will
you  do,  if  you  follow  my  advice,  you  will  cease  in-
deed to  speak  against  others,  but  will  so  speak  on
behalf  of  truth,  that  every  thing  said  is  altogether
unquestionable.

LETTER   VII.

Section  I.

To  Poly  carp — Hierarch.

I,  at  any  rate,  am  not  conscious,  when  speaking

in  reply  to  Cxreeks  or  others,  of  fancying  to  assist

good  men,  in  case  they  should  be  able  to  know  and

speak  the  very  truth,  as  it  really  is  in  itself.    For,  when

this  is  correctly  demonstrated  in  its  essential  nature,

according  to  a  law  of  truth,  and  has  been  established

without  flaw,   every  thing   which  is  otherwise,    and

simulates  the  truth,  will  be  convicted  of  being  other

k  Acts  xx.  4;  Rom.  xvi.  21.  1  Tit.  iii.  9.

L


146  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

than  the  reality,  and  dissimilar,  and  that  which  is
seeming  rather  than  real.  It  is  superfluous  then,
that  the  expounder  of  truth  should  contend  with
these  or  those™.  For  each  affirms  himself  to  have
the  royal  coin,  and  perchance  has  some  deceptive
image  of  a  certain  portion  of  the  true.  And,  if  you
refute  this,  first  the  one,  and  then  the  other,  will
contend  concerning  the  same.  But,  when  the  true
statement  itself  has  been  correctly  laid  down,  and
has  remained  unrefuted  by  all  the  rest,  every  thing
which  is  not  so  in  every  respect  is  cast  down  of
itself,  by  the  impregnable  stability  of  the  really  true.
Having  then  as  I  think  well  understood  this,  I  have
not  been  over  zealous  to  speak  in  reply  to  Greeks  or
to  others ;  but  it  is  sufficient  for  roe  (and  may  God
grant  this),  first  to  know  about  truth,  then,  having
known,  to  speak  as  it  is  fitting  to  speak.

Section  II.
But  you  say,  the  Sophist  Apollophanes  rails  at  me,
and  calls  me  parricide,  as  using,  not  piously,  the
writings  of  Greeks  against  the  Greeks.  Yet,  in  reply
to  him,  it  were  more  true  for  us  to  say,  that  Greeks
use,  not  piously,  things  Divine  against  things  Divine,
attempting  through  the  wisdom  of  Almighty  God  to
eject  the  Divine  Worship.  And  I  am  not  speaking  of
the  opinion  of  the  multitude,  who  cling  tenaciously
to  the  writings  of  the  poets,  with  earthly  and  im-
passioned proclivities,  and  worship  the  creature11
rather  than  the  Creator;  but  even  Apollophanes
■  Greeks  or  others.  n  I  Cor.  ii.  7.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  147

himself  uses  not  piously  things  Divine  against  things
Divine  ;  for  by  the  knowledge  of  things  created,  well
called  Philosophy  by  him,  and  by  the  divine  Paul
named  Wisdom  of  God,  the  true  philosophers  ought
to  have  been  elevated  to  the  Cause  of  things  created
and  of  the  knowledge  of  them.  And  in  order  that
he  may  not  improperly  impute  to  me  the  opinion
of  others,  or  that  of  himself,  Apollophanes,  being
a  wise  man,  ought  to  recognise  that  nothing  could
otherwise  be  removed  from  its  heavenly  course  and
movement,  if  it  had  not  the  Sustainer  and  Cause  of
its  being  moving  it  thereto,  who  forms  all  things,
and  "  transforms  them  °  "  according  to  the  sacred  text.
How  then  does  he  not  worship  Him,  known  to  us
even  from  this,  and  verily  being  God  of  the  whole,
admiring  Him  for  His  all  causative  and  super-in-
expressible power,  when  sunP  and  moon,  together
with  the  universe,  by  a  power  and  stability  most
supernatural,  were  fixed  by  them  to  entire  immobility,
and,  for  a  measure  of  a  whole  day,  all  the  constellations
stood  in  the  same  places ;  or  (which  is  greater  than
even  this),  if  when  the  whole  and  the  greater  and
embracing  were  thus  carried  along,  those  embraced
did  not  follow  in  their  course  ;  and  when  a  certain
other  dayi  was  almost  tripled  in  duration,  even  in
twenty  whole  hours,  either  the  universe  retraced
contrary    routes    for    so    long    a    time,    and    (was)

0  Dan.  ii.  21.     See  note,  p.  184.

v  Joshua  x.  12 — 14  ;  Eccl.  xlvi.  4 ;  Isaiah  xxviii.  21.

q  Of  twelve  hours  :  2  Kings  xx.  9 — 11  ;  Isaiah  xxxviii.  8.


148  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

turned  back  by  the  thus  very  most  supernatural
backward  revolutions;  or  the  sun,  in  its  own
course,  having  contracted  its  five-fold  motion  in
ten  hours,  retrogressively  again  retraced  it  in  the
other  ten  hours,  by  traversing  a  sort  of  new  route.
This  thing  indeed  naturally  astounded  even  Baby-
loniansr,  and,  without  battle,  brought  them  into
subjection  to  Hezekiah,  as  though  he  were  a  some-
body equal  to  God,  and  superior  to  ordinary  men.
And,  by  no  means  do  I  allege  the  great  works  in
Egypt 8,  or  certain  other  Divine  portents,  which  took
place  elsewhere,  but  the  well-known  and  celestial
ones,  which  were  renowned  in  every  place  and  by  all
persons.  But  Apollophanes  is  ever  saying  that  these
things  are  not  true.  At  any  rate  then,  this  is  re-
ported by  the  Persian  sacerdotal  legends,  and  to
this  day,  Magi  celebrate  the  memorials  of  the  three-
fold Mithrus  K  But  let  him  disbelieve  these  things,
by  reason  of  his  ignorance  or  his  inexperience.  Say
to  him,  however,  "What  do  you  affirm  concerning
the  eclipse,  which  took  place  at  the  time  of  the
saving  Cross*?"  For  both  of  us  at  that  time,  at
Heliopolis,  being  present,  and  standing  together,
saw  the  moon  approaching  the  sun,  to  our  surprise
(for  it  was  not  appointed  time  for  conjunction);
and  again,  from  the  ninth  hour  to  the  evening,
supernaturally  placed  back  again  into  a  line  opposite

r  Isaiah  xxxix.  I  ;  2  Kings  xx.  12  ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  31.
8  Ex.  vii.  14.  *  See  Dulac.  u  Mark  xv.  33;  Luke

xxiii.  44.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  149

the  sun.  And  remind  him  also  of  something  further.
For  he  knows  that  we  saw,  to  our  surprise,  the  con-
tact itself  beginning  from  the  east,  and  going  towards
the  edge  of  the  sun's  disc,  then  receding  back,  and
again,  both  the  contact  and  the  re-clearing v,  not  taking
place  from  the  same  point,  but  from  that  diametri-
cally opposite.  So  great  are  the  supernatural  things
of  that  appointed  time,  and  possible  to  Christ  alone,
the  Cause  of  all,  Who  worketh  great  things  and
marvellous,  of  which  there  is  not  number.

Section  III.
These  things  say,  if  occasion  serves,  and  if  possi-
ble, O  Apollophanes,  refute  them,  and  to-  me,  who
was  then  both  present  with  thee,  and  saw  and
judged  and  wondered  with  thee  at  them  all.  And
in  truth  Apollophanes  begins  prophesying  at  that
time,  I  know  not  whence,  and  to  me  he  said,
as  if  conjecturing  the  things  taking  place,  "  these
things,  O  excellent  Dionysius,  are  requitals  of  Divine
deeds."  Let  so  much  be  said  by  us  by  letter;  but
you  are  capable,  both  to  supply  the  deficiency,  and
to  bring  eventually  to  God  that  distinguished  man,
who  is  wise  in  many  things,  and  who  perhaps  will
not  disdain  to  meekly  learn  the  truth,  which  is  above
wisdom,  of  our  religion.

*  The  contact  or  adumbration  refers  to  the  moon,  the
re-clearing  to  the  sun.  See  notes  on  this  letter  in  Ant.  Ed.
and  Schema,  p.  258,  vol.  2.


1 5  o  Litters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

LETTER   VIII.

To  Demophilus,  Therapeutes.

About  minding  one's  own  business,  and  kindness.
Section  I.

The  histories  of  the  Hebrews  say,  O  noble  De-
mophilus, that  even  that  holy,  distinguished  Moses
was  deemed  worthy  of  the  Divine  manifestation  on
account   of  his   great   meekness w.     And,  if  at  any
time  they  describe  him  as  being  excluded  from  the
vision x  of  God,  they  do  not  cast  him  out  from  God
for  his  meekness.     But  they  say  that  when  speaking
very    rashly,    and    opposing   the    Divine    Counsels,
Jehovah  was  angry  with  him  with  wrath.     But  when
they  make   him   proclaimed   by  his   God-discerned
deserts,    he    is    proclaimed,   from    his    pre-eminent
imitation   of  the   Good.      For  he   was   very  meek,
and   on   this   account  is  called   "Servant  of  God,"
and  deemed  more   fit   for   vision   of  God  than  all
Prophets.     Now,  when  certain  envious  y  people  were
contending  with  him  and  Aaron,   about    the    High
Priesthood  and  government  of  the  tribes,   he  was
superior  to  all  love   of  honour,  and   love  of  rule,
and  referred  the  presidency  over  the  people  to  the
Divine  judgment.     And,    when    they    even    rose   up
against   him,  and   reproaching  him   concerning  the
precedency,  were  threatening  him,  and  were  already
almost  upon  him,  the  meek  man  invoked  the  Good
for    preservation,   but    very   suitably    asserted    that

•  Num.  xii.  3-8.        x  Ex.  iv.  14.        y  Num.  xvi.  i-u.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  1 5 1

he  would  be  guiltless  of  all  evils  to  the  governed.
For  he  knew  that  it  is  necessary,  that  the  familiar
with  God  the  Good  should  be  moulded,  as  far  as
is  attainable,  to  that  which  is  specially  most  like
the  Good,  and  should  be  conscious  within  himself
of  the  performance  of  deeds  of  good  friendship.
And  what  made  David  z,  the  father  of  God,  a  friend
of  God  ?  Even  for  being  good  and  generous  towards
enemies  a.  The  Super-Good,  and  the  Friend  of  Good
sayS — «  1  have  found  a  man  after  mine  own  heart."
Further  also,  a  generous  injunction  was  given,  to
care  for  even  one's  enemy's  beasts  of  burden b.  And
Jobc  was  pronounced  just,  as  being  free  from  injury.
And  Joseph d  did  not  take  revenge  upon  the  brethren
who  had  plotted  against  him  ;  and  Abel,  at  once,
and  without  suspicion,  accompanied  the  fratricide.
And  the  Word  of  God  proclaims  all  the  good  as
not  devising  evil  things e,  not  doing  them f,  but
neither  being  changed  from  the  good,  by  the  base-
ness of  others  s,  but,  on  the  contrary,  after  the  ex-
ample of  God  h,  as  doing  good  to,  and  throwing  their
shield  over  the  evil;  and  generously  calling  them
to  their  own  abundant  goodness,  and  to  their  own
similitude.  But  let  us  ascend  higher,  not  proclaiming
the  gentleness  of  holy  men,  nor  kindness  of  philan-
thropic angels,  who  take  compassion  upon  nations,
and   invoke  good1  on  their  behalf,  and  punish  the

z  Matt.  i.  I — 16.       a  I  Sam.  xxiv.  7,  xiii.  14.       b  Ex.  xxiii.  4.

c  Job  i.  8.  d  Gen.  1.  21.  e  I  Cor.  xiii.  5.

i  Ps.  xv.  3.  b  Rom.  xii.  21.  h  Matt.  v.  45.

1  Zech.  i.  12.


1 5  2  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

destructive  and  devastating  mobs,  and,  whilst  being
grieved  over  calamities,  yet  rejoice  over  the  safety
of  those  who  are  being  called  back  to  things  good  k  ;
nor  whatever  else  the  Word  of  God  teaches  concern-
ing the  beneficent  angels ! ;  but,  whilst  in  silence  wel-
coming the  beneficent  rays  of  the  really  good  and
super-good  Christ,  by  them  let  us  be  lighted  on  our
path,  to  His  Divine  works  of  Goodness.  For  as-
suredly is  it  not  of  a  Goodness  inexpressible  and
beyond  conception,  that  He  makes  all  things  existing
to  be,  and  brought  all  things  themselves  to  being,
and  wishes  all  things  ever  to  become  near  to  Himself,
and  participants  of  Himself,  according  to  the  apti-
tude of  each  ?  And  why  ?  Because  He  clings  lovingly
to  those  who  even  depart  from  Him,  and  strives01  and
beseeches  not  to  be  disowned  by  those  beloved  who
are  themselves  coy;  and  He  bears  with  those  who
heedlessly  reproach  Him n,  and  Himself  makes
excuse  for  them,  and  further  promises  to  serve
them,  and  runs  towards  and  meets0  even  those
who  hold  themselves  aloof,  immediately  that  they
approach  j  and  when  His  entire  self  has  embraced
their  entire  selves,  He  kisses  them,  and  does  not
reproach  them  for  former  things,  but  rejoices  over
the  present,  and  holds  a  feast,  and  calls  together
the  friends,  that  is  to  say,  the  good,  in  order  that
the  household  may  be  altogether  rejoicing.  (But,
Demophilus,  of  all  persons  in  the  world,  is  at  enmity

k  Luke  xv.  7.  !  Ps.  xci.  II.  m  Matt.  vi.  19.

n  Luke  xxiii.  34.  °  lb.  xv.  20.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  153

with,  and  very  justly  rebukes,  and  teaches  beautiful
things  to,  good  men,  and  rejoices.)  "  For  how,"  He
says,  "  ought  not  the  good  to  rejoice  over  safety  of
the  lost,  and  over  life  of  those  who  are  dead."  And,
as  a  matter  of  course,  He  raises  upon  His  shoulders
that  which  with  difficulty  has  been  turned  from  error,
and  summons  the  good  angels  to  rejoicing,  and
is  generous  to  the  unthankful,  and  makes  His  sun
to  rise  upon  evil  and  good,  and  presents  His  very
soulp  as  an  offering  on  behalf  of  those  who  are
fleeing  from  Him.

But  thou,  as  thy  letters  testify,  I  do  not  know  how,
being  in  thy  senses,  hast  spurned  one  fallen  down
before  the  priest,  who,  as  thou  sayest,  was  unholy  and
a  sinner.  Then  this  one  entreated  and  confessed
that  he  has  come  for  healing  of  evil  deeds,  but  thou
didst  not  shiver,  but  even  insolently  didst  cover  with
abuse  the  good  priest,  for  shewing  compassion  to
a  penitent,  and  justifying  the  unholy.  And  at  last,
thou  saidst  to  the  priest,  "  Go  out  with  thy  like  "  ;
and  didst  burst,  contrary  to  permission,  into  the
sanctuary,  and  defiledst  the  Holy  of  holies,  and  writest
to  us,  that  "  I  have  providentially  preserved  the  things
sacred,  which  were  about  to  be  profaned,  and  am
still  keeping  them  undented."

Now,  then,  hear  our  view.  It  is  not  lawful  that
a  priest  should  be  corrected  by  the  Leitourgoi,  who
are  above  thee,  or  by  the  Therapeutae,  who  are  of  the
same  rank  with  thee ;  even  though  he  should  seem  to

p  1  John  10,  11.


154  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

act  irreverently  towards  things  Divine,  and  though  he
should  be  convicted  of  having  done  some  other  thing
forbidden.     For,  if  want  of  order,  and  want  of  regu-
lation, is  a  departure  from  the  most  Divine  insti-
tutions and  decrees,  it  is  not  reasonable  that  the
divinely  transmitted   order   should   be   changed  on
God's   behalf.     For   Almighty  God   is   not   divided
against  Himself,  for,  "how  then  shall  His  kingdom
stand*?"    And  if  the  judgment  is   of  God,   as  the
Oracles  affirm r,  and  the  priests  are  angels  and  inter-
preters, after  the  hierarchs,  of  the  Divine  judgments,
learn  from  them  through  whom  thou  wast  deemed
worthy  to  be  a  Therapeutes,  through  the  intermediate
Leitourgoi,  when  opportunity  serves,  the  things  Divine
suitable  for  thyself8.    And  do  not  the  Divine  Symbols
proclaim  this,  for  is  not  the  Holy  of  holies  altogether
simply  separated  from  all,  and  the  order  of  the  con-
secrators  is  in  closer  proximity  to  it  than  the  rank  of
the  priests,  and  following  these,  that  of  the  Leitourgoi.
But  the  gates  of  the  sanctuary  are  bounded  by  the
appointed  Therapeutae,  within  which  they  are  both
ordained,    and    around    which    they    stand,   not   to
guard  them,  but  for  order,  and  teaching  of  themselves
that  they  are  nearer  the  people  than  the  priesthood.
Whence   the   holy  regulation   of  the  priests  orders
them  to  participate  in  things  Divine,  enjoining  the
impartation  of  these  to   others,  that  is  to  say,  the
more   inward.     For   even   those  who  always   stand

*  Matt.  xii.  26.  r  Is.  xxx.  18.

■  Ec.  Hier.  c.  6.  part  2.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  155

around  the  Divine  Altar,  for  a  symbolical  purpose,  see
and  hear  things  Divine  revealed  to  themselves  in  all
clearness ;  and  advancing  generously  to  things  out-
side the  Divine  Veils,  they  shew,  to  the  subject  Thera-
peutae,  and  to  the  holy  people,  and  to  the  orders
under  purification,  according  to  their  meetness,  things
holy  which  had  been  beautifully  guarded  without  pol-
lution, until  thou  didst  tyrannically  burst  into  them,
and  compelledst  the  Holy  of  holies,  against  its  will,  to
be  strutted  over  by  thee,  and  thou  sayest,  that  thou
holdest  and  guardest  the  sacred  things,  although  thou
neither  hast  known,  nor  heard,,  nor  possessest  any  of
the  things  belonging  to  the  priests ;  as  neither  hast
thou  known,  the  truth  of  the  Oracles,  whilst  cavilling
about  them  each  day  to  subversion  of  the  hearers.
And  even  if  some  civil  Governor  undertook  what  was
not  commanded  him  by  a  King,  justly  would  any  one
of  the  subordinates  standing  by  be  punished  who
dared  to  criticise  the  Governor,  when  justifying,  or
condemning  any  one;  (for  I  do  not  go  so  far  as  to  say
to  vituperate),  and  at  the  same  time  thought  to  cast
him  from  his  government ;  but  thou,  man,  art  thus  rash
in  what  concerns  the  affairs  of  the  meek  and  good,
and  his  hierarchical  jurisdiction.  We  are  bound  to
say  these  things,  when  any  one  undertakes  what  is
above  his  ranky  and  at  the  same  time  thinks  that  he
acts  properly..  For  this  is  not  within  the  powers  of
any  one.  For.  what  was  O^ias 4  doing  out  of  place,
when  offering  incense  to  Almighty  God  ?  and  what
Saul u  in  sacrificing  ?

2  Chron.  xxvi.  16—19.  u  l  Sam«  xiii-  l9*


156  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

Yea,    further,  what   were   those    domineering    de-
mons x,  who  were  truly  proclaiming  the  Lord  Jesus
God  ?   But  every  one  who  meddles  with  other  people's
business,  is  outlawed  by  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  each
one  shall  be  in  the  rank  of  his  own  service,  and  alone
the  High  Priest  *  shall  enter  into  the  Holy  of  holies,
and  once  only  throughout  the  year*,  and  this  in  the
full  legal  hierarchical  purification  a.    And  the  priests  h
encompass  the  holy  things,  and  the  Levites  must
not  touch  the  holy  things,  lest  they  die.     And  Je-
hovah was  angry  with  wrath  at  the  rashness  of  Ozias,
and   Mariamc   becomes    leprous,    because    she   had
presumed  to  lay  down  laws  for  the  lawgiver.     And
the  demons  fastened  on  the  sons  of  Sceva,  and  He
says,  "  I  did  not  send  them,  yet  they  ran,  and  I  spake
not   to   them    yt    they    prophesied d."      "And    the
profane e  who  sacrifices  to  me  a  calf,  (is)  as  he  who
slays  a  dog,"  and   to   speak  briefly,   the  all-perfect
justice  of  Almighty  God  does  not  tolerate  the  dis-
regarded of  law,  but  whilst  they  are  saying  "  in  Thy f
Name,  we  ourselves  did  many  wonderful  works,"  He
retorts,  "  And  I  know  you  not  j    go  from  Me  all  ye
workers    of    lawlessness."     So   that    it   is   not   per-
missible, as  the  holy  Oracles  say,   even  to  pursue
things  that  are  just,  when  not  according  to  order  «,
but  each  must  keep  to  himself h,  and  not  meditate
things  too  high  and  too  deep  for  him1,  but  con-

*  Mark  iii.  II.  *  Lev.  xyi,  2.  *  Ex.  xxx.  10.
■  lb.  xix.  21.             b  Num.  iv.  15.             c  lb.  xii.  10.

d  Jen  xxiii.  21.         e  Is.  xlvi.  3.         f  Matt.  vii.  23.

*  Deut.  xvi.  20.        b  1  Tim.  iv.  16.         *  Rom.  xii.  3—6.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areofiagite.  157

template  alone  things  prescribed  for  him  according
to  order.

Section  II.

"What  then,"  thou  sayest,  "is  it  not  necessary  to
correct  the  priests  who  are  acting  irreverently,  or  con-
victed of  something  else  out  of  place,  but  to  those
only,  who  glory  in  law,  shall  it  be  permitted  to  dis-
honour Almighty  God k,  through  the  transgression  of
the  Law  ?  "  And  how  are  the  priests  interpreters x  of
Almighty  God  ?  For,  how  do  they  announce  to  the
people  the  Divine  virtues,  who  do  not  know  the
power  of  them  ?  or  how  do  they,  who  are  in  dark-
nessm,  communicate  light?  Further,  how  do  they
impart  the  Divine  Spirit,  who,  by  habit  and  truth  do
not  believe  whether  there  is  a  Holy  Spirit n  ?  Now  I
will  give  thee  an  answer  to  these  things.  For  truly  my
Demophilus  is  not  an  enemy,,  nor  will  I  tolerate  that
thou  shouldst  be  overreached  by  Satan.

For  each  rank  of  those  about  God,  is  more  god-
like than  that  which  stands  further  away.  And  those
which  are  somewhat  nearer  to  the  true  light,  are  at
once  more  luminous,  and  more  illuminating ;  and  do
not  understand  the  nearness  topically,  but  according
to  God-receptive  aptitude.  If,  then,  the  order  of  the
priests  is  the  illuminating,  entirely  has  he  fallen  from
the  priestly  rank  and  power,  who  does  not  illuminate,
or  perhaps  rather  (he  becomes)  the  unilluminated.


k  Rom.  ii.  23.  x  Mai.  ii.  7.  m  Eph.  iv.  18.

n  Acts  xix.  2.


1 5  8         'Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

And  he  seems,  to  me  at  least,  rash  who,  being  such,
undertakes  the  priestly  functions,  and  has  no  fear,
and  does  not  blush,  when  performing  things  Divine,
contrary  to  propriety,  and  fancying  that  God  does
not  know  the  very  things  of  which  he  is  conscious  in
himself,  and  thinks  to  mislead  Him  Who  is  falsely
called  by  him  Father,  and  presumes  to  repeat  his
cursed  blasphemies  (for  I  would  not  say  prayers)  over
the  Divine  symbols,  after  the  example  of  Christ.
This  one  is  not  a  priest— No  !— but  devilish— crafty
—a  deceiver  of  himself— and  a  wolf  to  the  people  of
God,  clothed  in  sheep's  clothing.

Section  III.

But,  it  is  not  to  Demophilus  that  it  is  permitted

to  put  these  things  straight.     For,  if  the  Word  of

God  commands  to  pursue  just  things  justly0  (but

to  pursue  just  things  is,  when  any  one  wishes  to

distribute  to  each  one  things  that  are  meet),  this

must  be  pursued  by  all  justly,  not  beyond  their  own

meetness  or  rankP;  since  even  to  angels  it  is  just

that  things  meet  be  assigned  and  apportioned,  but  not

from  us,  O  Demophilus,  but  through  them  to  us,  of

God,  and  to  them  through  the  angels  who  are  still

more  pre-eminent.     And  to  speak  shortly,  amongst

all  existing  things  their  due  is  assigned  through  the

first  to  the  second,  by  the  well-ordered  and  most

just  forethought  of  all.     Let  those,  then,  who  have

been  ordered  by   God   to   superintend  others,  dis-

o  Deut.  xvi.  20.  p  2  Cor-  xiii«  Ia


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  159

tribute  after  themselves  their  due  to  their  in-
feriors. But,  let  Demophilus  apportion  their  due
to  reason  and  anger  and  passion ;  and  let  him  not
maltreat  the  regulation  of  himself,  but  let  the  superior
reason  bear  rule  over  things  inferior.  For,  if  one
were  to  see,  in  the  market-place,  a  servant  abusing
a  master,  and  a  younger  man,  an  elder ;  or  also  a  son,
a  father;  and  in  addition  attacking  and  inflicting
wounds,  we  should  seem  even  to  fail  in  reverence  if
we  did  not  run  and  succour  the  superior,  even  though
perhaps  they  were  first  guilty  of  injustice ;  how  then
shall  we  not  blush,  when  we  see  reason  maltreated  by
anger  and  passion,  and  cast  out  of  the  sovereignty
given  by  God ;  and  when  we  raise  in  our  own  selves
an  irreverent  and  unjust  disorder,  and  insurrection
and  confusion?  Naturally,  our  blessed  Law-giver
from  God  does  not  deem  right  that  one  should
preside  over  the  Chufch  of  God,  who  has  not  .already
well  presided  over  his  own  house q.  For,  he  who  has
governed  himself  will  also  govern  another  ;  and  who,
another,  will  also  govern  a  house ;  and  who,  a  house,
also  a  city ;  and  who,  a  city,  also  a  nation.  And
to  speak  briefly  as  the  Oracles  affirm,  "he  who  is
faithful  in  little,  is  faithful  also  in  much,"  and  "he
who  is  unfaithful  in  little,  is  unfaithful  also  in
much."

Section  IV.

Thyself,  then,  assign  their  due  limit  to  passion  and
anger  and  reason.     And   to  thyself,   let  the  divine

*  1  Tim.  iii.  5.


160  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

Leitourgoi  assign  the  due  limit,  and  to  these,  the
priests,  and  to  the  priests,  hierarchs,  and  to  the
hierarchs,  the  Apostles  and  the  successors  of  the
Apostles.  And  if,  perchance,  any,  even  among  these,
should  have  failed  in  what  is  becoming,  he  shall
be  put  right  by  the  holy  men  of  the  same  rank;
and  rank  shall  not  be  turned  against  rank,  but
each  shall  be  in  his  own  rank,  and  in  his  own
service.  So  much  for  thee,  from  us,  on  behalf  of
knowing  and  doing  one's  own  business.  But,  con-
cerning the  inhuman  treatment  towards  that  man,
whom  thou  callest  "  irreverent  and  sinner,"  I  know
not  how  I  shall  bewail  the  scandal  of  my  beloved.
For,  of  whom  dost  thou  suppose  thou  wast  or-
dained Therapeutes  by  us?  For  if  it  were  not  of
the  Good,  it  is  necessary  that  thou  shouldst  be
altogether  alien  from  Him  and  from  us,  and  from
our  whole  religion,  and  it  is  time  for  thee  both  to
seek  a  God,  and  other  priests,  and  amongst  them
to  become  brutal  rather  than  perfected,  and  to  be
a  cruel  minister  of  thine  own  fierceness.  For,
have  we  ourselves,  forsooth,  been  perfected  to  the
altogether  Good,  and  have  no  need  of  the  divine
compassion  for  ourselves r,  or  do  we  commit  the
double  sin8,  as  the  Oracles  say,  after  the  example
of  the  unholy,  not  knowing  in  what  we  offend,
but  even  justifying  ourselves  and  supposing  we  see,
whilst  really  not  seeing1?  Heaven  was  startled  at
this,  and  I  shivered,  and  I  distrust  myself.      And

r  Luke  xvi.  10.  »  Jer.  ii.  13—35.  *  Rom.  i.  27.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  161

unless  I  had  met  with  thy  letters  (as  know  well
I  would  I  had  not),  they  would  not  have  persuaded
me  if  indeed  any  other  had  thought  good  to  persuade
me  concerning  thee,  that  Demophilus  supposes,  that
Almighty  God,  Who  is  good  to  all,  is  not  also  compas-
sionate towards  men,  and  that  he  himself  has  no  need
of  the  Merciful  or  the  Saviour u;  yea  further,  he  de-
poses those  priests  who  are  deemed  worthy,  through
clemency,  to  bear  the  ignorances  x  of  the  people,  and
who  well  know,  that  they  also  are  compassed  with
infirmity  y.  But,  the  supremely  Divine  Priest  pur-
sued a  different  (course),  and  that  as  the  Oracles
say,  from  being  separate2  of  sinners,  and  makes
the  most  gentle  tending  of  the  sheep a  a  proof  of
the  love  towards  Himself;  and  He  stigmatizes  as
wicked b,  him  who  did  not  forgive  his  fellow-servant
the  debt,  nor  impart  a  portion  of  that  manifold
goodness,  graciously  given  to  himself ;  and  He  con-
demns him  to  enjoy  his  own  deserts,  which  both
myself  and  Demophilus  must  take  care  to  avoid.
For,  even  for  those  who  were  treating  Him  impiously,
at  the  very  time  of  His  suffering,  He  invokes  re-
mission from  the  Father ;  and  He  rebukes  even  the
disciples,  because  without  mercy  they  thought  it  right
to  convict  of  impiety  the  Samaritans0  who  drove  Him
away.  This,  indeed,  is  the  thousand  times  repeated
theme  of  thy  impudent  letter  (for  thou  repeatest  the
same  from  beginning  to  end),  that  thou  hast  avenged,

"  Heb.  vii.  27.  *  lb.  ix.  7.  r  lb.  vii.  28.

z  lb.  26.      a  John  xxi.  15 — 17.       b  Matt,  xviii.  32.

c  Luke  xviii.  34.

M


162  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

not  thyself,  but  Almighty  God.     Tell  me  (<}ost  thou
avenge)  the  Good  by  means  of  evil  ?
Section  V.
Avaunt!    We  have  not  a  High  Priest,  "Who  can-
not  be   touched   with    our  infirmities,   but   is   both
without   sin  and  merciful."     "He   shall  not   strive
nor  cry,  and  is   Himself  meek,  and   Himself  pro-
pitiatory for  our  sins ;   so  that  we  will  not  approve
your  unenviable   attacks,  not  if  you   should   allege
a  thousand  times  your  Phineas  and  your  Elias.    For,
when  the  Lord  Jesus  heard  these  things,  He  was
displeased    with    the    disciples,   who   at   that    time
lacked   the  meek  and  good  spirit.     For,   even   our
most  divine  preceptor d  teaches  in  meekness  those
who  opposed  themselves  to  the  teaching  of  Almighty
God.     For,    we   must   teach,   not   avenge   ourselves
upon,  the  ignorant,  as  we  do  not  punish  the  blind,
but  rather  lead  them  by  the  hand.     But  thou,  after
striking  him  on  the  cheek,  rushest  upon  that  man,
who  is  beginning  to  rise  to  the  truth,  and  when  he
is  approaching  with  much  modesty,  thou  insolently
kickest  him  away  (certainly,  this  is  enough  to  make
one  shudder),  whom  the  Lord  Christ,  as  being  good,
seeks,  when  wandering  upon  the  mountains,  and  calls
to  Him,  when  fleeing  from  Him,  and  when,  with
difficulty,  found,  places  upon   His    shoulders.     Do
not,  I  pray,  do  not  let  us  thus  injuriously  counsel
for  ourselves,  nor  drive  the  sword  e  against  ourselves.
For  they,  who  undertake  to  injure f  any  one,  or  on

i  2  Tim.  ii.  24.  •  Matt.  xxvi.  51-2.  f  lb.  vi.  28.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  163

the  contrary  to  do  them  good,  do  not  always  effect
what  they  wish,  but  for  themselves,  when  they  have
brought  into  their  house  s  vice  or  virtue,  will  be  filled
either  with  Divine  virtues,  or  ungovernable  passions.
And  these  indeed,  as  followers  and  companions  of
good  angels  h,  both  here  and  there,  with  all  peace  and
freedom  from  all  evil,  will  inherit  the  most  blessed
inheritances  for  the  ever-continuing  age,  and  will
be  ever  with  God,  the  greatest  of  all  blessings1;
but,  the  other  will  fall  both  from  the  divine  and
their  own  peace,  and  here,  and  after  death,  will
be  companions  with  cruel  demons k.  For  which
reason,  we  have  an  earnest  desire  to  become  com-
panions of  God1,  the  Good,  and  to  be  ever  with  the
Lord,  and  not  to  be  separated,  along  with  the  evil,
from  the  most  Just  One,  whilst  undergoing  that  which
is  due  from  ourselves,  which  I  fear  most  of  all,  and
pray  to  have  no  share  in  anything  evil.  And,  with
your  permission,  I  will  mention  a  divine  vision  of
a  certain  holy  man,  and  do  not  laugh,  for  I  am
speaking  true.

Section  VI.
When  I  was  once  in  Crete,  the  holy  Carpus m
entertained  me, — a  man,  of  all  others,  most  fitted,
on  account  of  great  purity  of  mind,  for  Divine  Vision.
Now,  he  never  undertook  the  holy  celebrations  of
the  Mysteries,  unless  a  propitious  vision  were  first
manifested   to   him   during   his  preparatory   devout

s  Eph.  ii.  20.  h  Ps.  xci.  II.  *  lb.  lxxiii.  28.

k  Jer.  vi.  14.  x  1  Thess.  iv.  13.  m  2  Tim.  iv.  13.


1 64  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

prayers.      He   said   then,   when   some    one   of  the
unbelievers  had  at  one  time  grieved  him  (and  his
grief  was,  that  he  had   led  astray   to   ungodliness
a  certain  member  of  the  Church,  whilst  the  days  of
rejoicing  were  still  being  celebrated  for  him)  ;  that
he  ought  compassionately  to  have  prayed  on  behalf
of  both,  and  taking  God,  the  Saviour,  as  his  fellow-
helper,  to  convert  the   one,  and  to   overcome   the
other  by  goodness0,  and  not  to  have  ceased  warning
them  so  long  as  he  lived  until  this  day;  and  thus
to  lead  them  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  so  that  the
things  disputed  by  them  might  be  clearly  determined,
and  those,  who  were  irrationally  bold,  might  be  com-
pelled to  be  wiser  by  a  judgment  according  to  law.
Now,  as  he  had  never  before  experienced  this,  I  do
not  know  how  he  then  went  to  bed  with  such  a
surfeit  of  ill-will  and  bitterness.     In  this  evil   con-
dition  he  went  to  sleep,  for  it  was   evening,  and
at  midnight  (for  he  was  accustomed  at  that  appointed
hour   to   rise,  of  his   own   accord,  for   the   Divine
melodies)    he    arose,    not    having    enjoyed,    undis-
turbed, his  slumbers,  which   were  many   and   con-
tinually broken ;    and,  when  he  stood  collected  for
the   Divine   Converse,   he   was   guiltily   vexed  and
displeased,  saying,  that  it  was  not  just  that  godless
men,  who  pervert  the  straight  ways  of  the  Lord,
should  live.     And,  whilst  saying  this,  he  besought
Almighty  God,  by  some   stroke  of  lightning,   sud-
denly,  without    mercy,    to    cut   short   the   lives   of
them  both.      But,  whilst  saying  this,  he  declared,
u  Rom.  xi.  21.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  165

that  he  seemed  to  see  suddenly  the  house  in  which
he  stood,  first  torn  asunder,  and  from  the  roof
divided  into  two  in  the  midst,  and  a  sort  of  gleam-
ing fire  before  his  eyes  (for  the  place  seemed  now
under  the  open  sky)  borne  down  from  the  hea-
venly region  close  to  him ;  and,  the  heaven  itself
giving  way,  and  upon  the  back  of  the  heaven,
Jesus,  with  innumerable  angels,  in  the  form  of
men,  standing  around  Him.  This  indeed,  he  saw,
above,  and  himself  marvelled ;  but  below,  when
Carpus  had  bent  down,  he  affirmed  that  he  saw
the  very  foundation  ripped  in  two,  to  a  sort  of  yawn-
ing and  dark  chasm,  and  those  very  men,  upon
whom  he  had  invoked  a  curse,  standing  before  his
eyes,  within  the  mouth  of  the  chasm,  trembling,
pitiful,  only  just  not  yet  carried  down  by  the  mere
slipping  of  their  feet ;  and  from  below  the  chasm,
serpents,  creeping  up  and  gliding  from  underneath,
around  their  feet,  now  contriving  to  drag  them  away,
and  weighing  them  down,  and  lifting  them  up,  and
again  inflaming  or  irritating  with  their  teeth  or  their
tails,  and  all  the  time  endeavouring  to  pull  them
down  into  the  yawning  gulf;  and  that  certain  men
also  were  in  the  midst,  co-operating  with  the  ser-
pents against  these  men,  at  once  tearing  and  push-
ing and  beating  them  down.  And  they  seemed
to  be  on  the  point  of  falling,  partly  against  their
will,  partly  by  their  will;  almost  overcome  by  the
calamity,  and  at  the  same  time  resigned.  And
Carpus  said,  that  he  himself  was  glad,  whilst  look-
ing below,  and  that  he  was  forgetful  of  the  things


1 66  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

above ;  further,  that  he  was  vexed  and  made  light
of  it,  because  they  had  not  already  fallen,  and
that  he  often  attempted  to  accomplish  the  fact,
and  that,  when  he  did  not  succeed,  he  was  both
irritated  and  cursed.  And,  when  with  difficulty  he
raised  himself,  he  saw  the  heaven  again,  as  he  saw
it  before,  and  Jesus,  moved  with  pity  at  what  was
taking  place,  standing  up  from  His  super-celestial
throne,  and  descending  to  them,  and  stretching
a  helping  hand,  and  the  angels,  co-operating  with
Him,  taking  hold  of  the  two  men,  one  from  one
place  and  another  from  another,  and  the  Lord  Jesus
said  to  Carpus,  whilst  His  hand  was  yet  extended,
"  Strike  against  Me  in  future,  for  I  am  ready,  even
again,  to  suffer  for  the  salvation  of  men ;  and  this
is  pleasing  to  Me,  provided  that  other  men  do  not
commit  sin.  But  see,  whether  it  is  well  for  thee
to  exchange  the  dwelling  in  the  chasm,  and  with
serpents,  for  that  with  God,  and  the  good  and
philanthropic  angels."  These  are  the  things  which
I  heard  myself,  and  believe  to  be  true.

TITUS.

Zenas,  one  of  the  seventy-two  disciples,  who  was
versed  in  the  science  of  law,  wrote  a  life  of  Titus,
and  says  that  he  was  descended  from  the  family
of  Minos,  King  of  Crete.  Titus  gave  himself  to  the
study  of  Homer  and  Philosophy  till  his  twentieth
year,  when  he  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  which
told  him  to  quit  this  place  and  save  his  soul.     He


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  167

waited  one  year,  to  test  the  truth  of  the  voice,  and
then  had  a  revelation  which  bade  him  read  the
Hebrew  Scriptures.  Opening  Isaiah,  his  eye  fell
on  chapter  xli.  w.  1—5.  He  was  then  sent  to  Jeru-
salem by  the  pro-consul  of  Crete  to  report  upon  the
reality  of  the  miracles  said  to  be  performed  by  Jesus
Christ.  He  saw  our  Saviour,  and  His  miracles,  and
believed ;  and  became  one  of  the  seventy-two.  He
witnessed  the  Passion  and  Ascension  ;  the  Apostles
consecrated  him,  and  sent  him  with  Paul,  whom
he  attended  to  Antioch,  to  Seleucia  and  to  Crete,
where  Rutilus,  pro-consul,  was  baptized,  and  Titus
appointed  Bishop.  In  a.d.  64,  St.  Paul  addressed
his  Epistle  to  Titus,  and  about  the  same  time  Dio-
nysius also,  this  letter.  Dexter  records  that  Titus
visited  Spain,  and  that  Pliny,  the  younger,  was
converted  to  the  Faith  by  Titus.  He  consecrated
the  second  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  and  died  at  the
age  of  94.

LETTER   IX.

To  Titus,  Hierarchy  asking  by  letter  ivhat  is  the  house

of  wisdom,  what  the  bowl,  and  what  are  its  meats

and  drinks  ?

Section  I.

I  do  not  know,  O  excellent  Titus,  whether  the  holy
Timothy  departed,  deaf  to  some  of  the  theological
symbols  which  were  explained  by  me.  But,  in  the
Symbolic  Theology,  we  have  thoroughly  investigated
for  him  all  the  expressions  of  the  Oracles  concerning
God,  which  appear  to  the  multitude  to  be  monstrous.


1 68  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

For  they  give  a  colour  of  incongruity  dreadful  to  the
uninitiated  souls,  when  the  Fathers  of  the  unutterable
wisdom  explain  the  Divine  and  Mystical  Truth,  unap-
proachable by  the  profane,  through  certain,  certainly
hidden  and  daring  enigmas.  Wherefore  also,  the  many
discredit  the  expressions  concerning  the  Divine  Mys-
teries. For,  we  contemplate  them  only  through,  the
sensible  symbols  that  have  grown  upon  them.  We
must  then  strip  them,  and  view  them  by  themselves
in  their  naked  ,_purity.  For,  thus  contemplating
them,  we  should  reverence  a  fountain  of  Life  flowing
into  Itself — viewing  It  even  standing  by  Itself,
and  as  a  kind  of  single  power,  simple,  self-moved,
and  self-worked,  not  abandoning  Itself,  but  a  know-
ledge surpassing  every  kind  of  knowledge,  and  always
contemplating  Itself,  through  Itself.  We  thought
it  necessary  then,  both  for  him  and  for  others,  that  we
should,  as  far  as  possible,  unfold  the  varied,  forms
of  the  Divine  representations  of  God  in  symbols.
For,  with  what  incredible  and  simulated  monstro-
sities are  its  external  forms  filled?  For  instance,
with  regard  to  the  superessential  Divine  generation,
representing  a  body0  of  God  corporally  generating
God ;  and  describing  a  word  flowing  out  into  air
from  a  man's  heart p,  which  eructates  it,  and  a  breath,
breathed q  forth  from  a  mouth ;  and  celebrating  God-
bearing1"  bosoms  embracing  a  son  of  God,  bodily;
or   representing   these  things   after  the   manner   of


0  Ps.  ex.  3  ;  ii.  7.         p  lb.  xlv.  I.         «  lb.  xxxiii.  6.
r  John  i.  18.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  169

plants s,  and  producing  certain  trees  *,  and  branches  u,
and  flowers  x  and  roots,  as  examples  ;  or  fountains  of
waters  ?,  bubbling  forth  ;  or  seductive  light  produc-
tions of  reflected  splendours z ;  or  certain  other  sacred
representations  which  explain  superessential  descrip-
tions of  God ;  but  with  regard  to  the  intelligible  pro-
vidences of  Almighty  God,  either  gifts,  manifesta-
tions, or  powers,  or  properties,  or  repose,  or  abidings,
or  progressions,  or  distinctions,  or  unions,  clothing
Almighty  God  in  human  forma,  and  in  the  varied
shape  of  wild  beasts b  and  other  living  creatures0,
and  plants,  and  stones d;  and  attributing  to  Him
ornaments  e  of  women,  or  weapons  of  savages  ;  and
assigning  working  in  clay f,  and  in  a  furnaces,  as
it  were  to  a  sort  of  artisan ;  and  placing  under  Him,
horses11  and  chariots  and  thrones;  and  spreading
before  Him  certain  dainty  meats  delicately  cooked x ;
and  representing  Him  as  drinkingk,  and  drunken1,  and
sleeping  m,  and  suffering  from  excess  n.  What  would
any  one  say  concerning  the  angers0,  the  griefs p,
the  various  oaths  %  the  repentances r,  the  curses,  the
revenges,  the  manifold  and  dubious  excuses  for  the
failure  of  promises s,  the  battle  of  giants  in  Genesis  \
during  which   He  is  said   to   scheme  against  those

■  Isaiah  xi.  10.  e  John  xv.  I.  u  Jer.  xxiii.  5.

*  Cant.  xi.  1.  *  John  iv.  14.  z  lb.  i.  4.
»  Ps.  cxlv.  16.  b  Hosea  xiii.  8.  c  Matt.  iii.  16.
d  Ez.  x.  I.  e  Apoc.  i.  13—16.  f  Job  x.  9.

*  Ps.  lxvi.  10.  h  Hab.  iii.  8.  l  Luke  xxii.  30.
k  Cant.  v.  I.  '  Jer.  xlvi.  10.  m  Ps.  xliv.  23.
■  lb.  lxxviii.  65.  °  Ex.  xv.  7.  p  Judges  x.  16.
1  Gen.  xxii.  16.       *  lb.  vi.  6.       "lb.  xii.  1—3.       l  lb.  xi.  9.


170  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

powerful  and  great  men,  and  this  when  they  were
contriving  the  building,  not  with  a  view  to  injustice
towards  other  people,  but  on  behalf  of  their  own
safety?  And  that  counsel  devised  in  heaven  to
deceive  and  mislead  Achab u  j  and  those  mundane
and  meritricious  passions  of  the  Canticles;  and  all
the  other  sacred  compositions  which  appear  in  the
description  of  God,  which  stick  at  nothing,  as  pro-
jections, and  multiplications  of  hidden  things,  and
divisions  of  things  one  and  undivided,  and  formative
and  manifold  forms  of  the  shapeless  and  unformed ;
of  which,  if  any  one  were  able  to  see  their  inner
hidden  beauty,  he  will  find  every  one  of  them
mystical  and  Godlike,  and  filled  with  abundant
theological  light.  For  let  us  not  think,  that  the
appearances  of  the  compositions  have  been  formed
for  their  own  sake,  but  that  they,  shield  the  science
unutterable  and  invisible  to  the  multitude,  since
tilings  all-holy  arc  not  within  the  reach  of  the
profane,  but  are  manifested  to  those  only  who
are  genuine  lovers  of  piety,  who  reject  all  childish
fancy  respecting  the  holy  symbols,  and  are  capable
to  pass  with  simplicity  of  mind,  anil-  aptitude  of  con-
templative faculty,  to  the  simple  and  supernatural
and  elevated  truth  of  the  symbols.  Besides,  we
must  also  consider  this,  that  the  leaching,  .handed
down  by.Jthe_Th£ologians  is  two-fold— one,  secret
and  mystical — the  other,  open  and  better  known —
one,    symbolical    and    initiative— the    other/ philo-

n  1  Kings  xxii.  20.


Letters  of  Diovysius  the  Areopagite.  171

sophic  and  demonstrative ;— and  the  unspoken  is
intertwined  with  the  spoken.  The  one  persuades,
and  desiderates  the  truth  of  the  things  expressed,
the  other  acts  and  implants  in  Almighty  God,  by
instructions  in  mysteries  not  learnt  by  teaching.
And  certainly,  neither  our  holy  instructors x,  nor
those  of  the  law?,  abstain  from  the  God-befitting
symbols,  throughout  the  celebrations  of  the  most
holy  mysteries.  Yea,  we  see  even  the  most  holy
Angels z,  mystically  advancing  things  Divine  through
enigmas;  and  Jesus  Himself a,  speaking  the  word
of  God  in  parables,  and  transmitting  the  divinely
wrought  mysteries,  through  a  typical  spreading  of  a
table  b.  For,  it  was  seemly,  not  only  that  the  Holy
of  holies  should  be  preserved  undefiled  by  the  multi-
tude, but  also  that  the  Divine  knowledge  should  illu-
minate the  human  life,  which  is  at  once  indivisible
and  divisible,  in  a  manner  suitable  to  itself;  and
to  limit  the  passionless  part  of  the  soul  to  the
simple,  and  most  inward  visions  of  the  most  godlike
images  ;  but  that  its  impassioned  part  should  wait
upon,  and,  at  the  same  time,  strive  after,  the  most
Divine  coverings,  through  the  pre-arranged  represen-
tations of  the  typical  symbols,  as  such  (coverings)  are,
by  nature,  congenial  to  it.  And  all  those  who  are
hearers  of  a  distinct  theology  without  symbols,  weave
in  themselves  a  sort  of  type,  which  conducts  them
to  the  conception  of  the  aforesaid  theology.

x  Apoc.  5,  y  Is.  60.  z  Zech.  iii.  4.

*  Matt.  xiii.  34.  b  lb.  xxvi.  26.


1 7  2  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

Section  II.
But  also  the  very  order  of  the  visible  universe  sets
forth  the  invisible  things  of  Almighty  God,  as  says
both    Paul   and    the    infallible   Word.     Wherefore,
also,  the  Theologians  view  some  things  politically0
and  legallyd,  but  other   things,  purely  and  without
flaw;    and  some  things  humanly e,  and  mediately f,
but  other  things  supermundanely e  and  perfectly11;
at  one  time  indeed,  from  the  laws  which  are  mani-
fest1,  and  at  another,    from  the  institutions  which
are   unmanifestk,    as  befits   the   holy    writings   and
minds  and  souls  under  consideration.     For  the  whole
statement  lying  before  them,  and  all  its  details,  does
not  contain  a  bare  history,  but  a  vivifying  perfection.
We  must  then,  in  opposition  to  the  vulgar  conception
concerning  them,  reverently  enter  within  the  sacred
symbols,  and  not  dishonour  them,  being  as  they  are,
products  and  moulds  of  the  Divine  characteristics,
and  manifest  images  of  the  unutterable  and  super-
natural visions.     For,  not  only  are  the  superessential
lights,   and   things   intelligible,    and,    in   one   word,
things  Divine,  represented  in  various  forms  through
the  typical  symbols,  as  the  superessential  God,  spoken
of  as  fire  \  and  the  intelligible  Oracles  of  Almighty
God,  as  flames  of  firem  ;  but  further,  even  the  god-
like  orders   of  the  angels,  both  contemplated   and

c  Ex.  iii.  10  ;  xviii.  14—  27-  d  Ib'  xx'  3~ x7-

*  Eph.  v.  23.  f  Ps.  viii.  4.  B  EPh-  iv«  24-

*  Ib.  13.  l  Ex.  xxxi.  18.  k  Heb.  x.  16.

1  Ueut.  iv.  24.  m  Ps-  cxix.  140.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  173

contemplating,  are  described  under  varied  forms,
and  manifold  likenesses,  and  empyrean  shapes".
And  differently  must  we  take  the  same  likeness  of
fire,  when  spoken  with  regard  to  the  inconceivable
God°;  and  differently  with  regard  to  His  intelli-
gible providences  or  words;  and  differently  re-
specting the  Angels.  The  one  as  causal,  but  the
other  as  originated,  and  the  third  as  participative,
and  different  things  differently,  as  their  contempla-
tion, and  scientific  arrangements  suggest.

And  never  must  we  confuse  the  sacred  symbols
hap-hazard,  but  we  must  unfold  them  suitably  to
the  causes,  or  the  origins,  or  the  powers,  or  the
orders,  or  the  dignities  of  which  they  are  explanatory
tokens.  And,  in  order  that  I  may  not  extend  my
letter  beyond  the  bounds  of  propriety,  let  us  come
at  once  to  the  very  question  propounded  by  you  ;
and  we  affirm  that  every  nourishment  is  perfective
of  those  nourished,  filling  up  their  imperfection  and
their  lack,  and  tending  the  weak,  and  guarding  their
lives,  making  to  sprout,  and  renewing  and  be-
queathing to  them  a  vivifying  wellbeing;  and  in
one  word,  urging  the  slackening  and  imperfect,  and
contributing  towards  their  comfort  and  perfection.

Section  III.
Beautifully  then,  the  super-wise  and  Good  Wisdom
is  celebrated  by  the  Oracles,  as  placing  a  mystical
bowlP,  and  pouring  forth  its  sacred  drink,  but  first

»  Ps.  civ.  4.  °  Luke  xii.  49.  p  ?™v.  ix.  2.


1 74  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

setting  forth  the  solid  meats,  and  with  a  loud  voice
Itself  benignly  soliciting  those  who  seek  It.     The
Divine  Wisdom,  then,  sets  forth  the  two-fold  food ;
one  indeed,  solid  and  fixed,  but  the  other  liquid
and  flowing  forth ;  and  in  a  bowl  furnishes  Its  own
providential    generosities.     Now    the    bowl,    being
spherical  and  open,  let  it  be  a  symbol  of  the  Pro-
vidence  over  the   whole,   which    at   once   expands
Itself  and  encircles  all,  without  beginning  and  with-
out end.     But  since,  even  while  going  forth  to  all,
It  remains  in  Itself,  and  stands  fixed  in  unmoved
sameness  ;  and  never  departing  from  Itself,  the  bowl
also  itself  stands  fixedly  and  unmovably.    But  Wisdom
is  also  said  to  build  a  house  for  itself,  and  in  it  to  set
forth  the  solid  meats  and  drinks,  and  the  bowl,  so
that   it    may  be  evident  to  those  who   understand
things  Divine  in  a  manner  becoming  God,  that  the
Author  of  the  being,  and  of  the  well  being,  of  all
things,  is   both   an  all-perfect   providence,  and   ad-
vances   to    all,    and   comes    into    being    in    every-
thing S  and  embraces  them  all;   and  on  the  other
hand,    He,    the    same,   in  the    same,  par  excellence,
is    nothing   in   anything   at   all,    but    overtops   the
whole,  Himself  being   in    Himself,  identically  and
always ;    and  standing,  and  remaining,  and  resting,
and  ever  being  in  the  same  condition  and  in  the
same   way,   and   never   becoming   outside   Himself,
nor   falling   from    His    own    session,   and   unmoved
abiding,  and  shrine,— yea  even,  in  it,  benevolently

q  yfyperai  kv  t<£  irayrl.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  175

exercising  His  complete  and  all-perfect  providences,
and  whilst  going  forth  to  all,  remaining  by  Himself
alone,  and  standing  always,  and  moving  Himself;
and  neither  standing,  nor  moving  Himself,  but,  as
one  might  say,  both  connaturally  and  supernaturally,
having  His  providential  energies,  in  His  steadfastness,
and  His  steadiness  in  His  Providence.

Section  IV.
But  what  is  the  solid  food  and  what  the  liquid  ?
For  the  Good  Wisdom  is  celebrated  as  at  once  be-
stowing and  providing  these.  I  suppose  then,  that
the  solid  food  is  suggestive  of  the  intellectual  and
abiding  perfection  and  sameness,  within  which,
things  Divine  are  participated  as  a  stable,  and
strong,  and  unifying,  and  indivisible  knowledge,  by
those  contemplating  organs  of  sense,  by  which  the
most  Divine  Paul,  after  partaking  of  wisdom,  im-
parts his  really  solid  nourishment ;  but  that  the  liquid
is  suggestive  of  the  stream,  at  once  flowing  through
and  to  all;  eager  to  advance,  and  further  con-
ducting those  who  are  properly  nourished  as  to
goodness,  through  things  variegated  and  many  and
divided,  to  the  simple  and  invariable  knowledge  of
God.  Wherefore  the  divine  and  spiritually  perceived
Oracles  are  likened  to  dew,  and  water,  and  to  milk,
and  wine,  and  honey;  on  account  of  their  life-pro-
ducing power,  as  in  water ;  and  growth-giving,  as  in
milk  ;  and  reviving,  as  in  wine  ;  and  both  purifying  and
preserving,  as  in  honey.  For  these  things,  the  Divine
Wisdom  gives  to  those  approaching  it,  and  furnishes


1 7  6  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

and  fills  to  overflowing,  a  stream  of  ungrudging  and
unfailing  good  cheer.  This,  then,  is  the  veritable
good  cheer;  and,  on  this  account,  it  is  celebrated,
as  at  once  life-giving  and  nourishing  and  perfecting.

Section  V.
According  to  this  sacred  explanation  of  good  cheer,
even  Almighty  God,  Himself  the  Author  of  all  good
things,  is  said  to  be  inebriated,  by  reason  of  the
super-full,    and   beyond   conception,    and    ineffable,
immeasurableness,   of  the  good  cheer,  or  to  speak
more  properly,  good  condition   of  Almighty   God.
For,  as  regards  us,  in  the  worst  sense,  drunkenness
is  both  an  immoderate  repletion,  and  being  out  of
mind  and  wits  ;  so,  in  the  best  sense,  respecting  God,
we  ought  not  to  imagine  drunkenness  as  anything
else  beyond  the  super-full  immeasurableness  of  all
good  things  pre-existing  in  Him  as  Cause.    But,  even
in  respect  to  being  out  of  wits,  which  follows  upon
drunkenness,   we   must   consider   the   pre-eminence
of  Almighty   God,    which    is    above  conception,  in
which  He  overtops  our  conception,  as  being  above
conception  and  above  being  conceived,  and  above
being  itself;    and  in  short,  Almighty  God  is  inebri-
ated with,  and  outside  of,  all  good  things  whatever,
as   being   at   once  a  super-full   hyperbole   of  every
immeasurableness  of  them  all ;  and  again,  as  dwell-
ing outside  and  beyond  the  whole.     Starting  then
from  these,  we  will  take  in  the  same  fashion  even
the    feasting    of    the    pious,    in    the    Kingdom    of
Almighty   God.     For  He  says,   the   King   Himself


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  1 7  7

will  come  and  make  them  recline,  and  will  Himself
minister  to  themr.  Now  these  things  manifest  a
common  and  concordant  communion  of  the  holy,
upon  the  good  things  of  God,  and  a  church  of  tie
first  born s,  whose  names  are  written  in  heavens ;
and  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  by  all  good
things,  and  replete  with  all  good  things;  and  the
reclining,  we  imagine,  a  cessation  from  their  many
labours,  and  a  life  without  pain ;  and  a  godly  citizen-
ship in  light  and  place  of  living  souls,  replete  with
every  holy  bliss,  and  an  ungrudging  provision  of
every  sort  of  blessed  goods ;  within  which  they  are
filled  with  every  delight;  whilst  Jesus  both  makes
them  recline,  and  ministers  to  them,  and  furnishes
this  delight ;  and  Himself  bequeaths  their  everlasting
rest;  and  at  once  distributes  and  pours  forth  the
fulness  of  good  things.

Section  VI.
But,  I  well  know  you  will  further  ask  that  the
propitious  sleep  of  Almighty  God,  and  His  awaken-
ing \  should  be  explained.  And,  when  we  have  said,
that  the  superiority  of  Almighty  God,  and  His
incommunicability  with  the  objects  of  His  Pro-
vidence is  a  Divine  sleep,  and  that  the  attention
to  His  Providential  cares  of  those  who  need  His
discipline,  or  His  preservation,  is  an  awakening,  you
will  pass  to  other  symbols  of  the  Word  of  God.
Wherefore,  thinking  it  superfluous  that  by  running

r  Luke  xii.  37.  ■  Heb.  xii.  23.  l  Ps.  xliv.  23.

N


178  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  A reopagite.

through  the  same  things  to  the  same  persons,  we
should  seem  to  say  different  things,  and,  at  the  same
time,  conscious  that  you  assent  to  things  that  are
good,  we  finish   this  letter  at  what  we  have  said,
having  set  forth,  as  I  think,  more  than  the  things
solicited  in  your  letters.     Further,  we  send  the  whole
of  our   Symbolical  Theology,  within  which  you  will
find,  together  with  the  house  of  wisdom,  also  the
seven  pillars  investigated,  and  its  solid  food  divided
into  sacrifices  and  breads.    And  what  is  the  mingling
of  the  wine  ;  and  again,  What  is  the  sickness  arising
from  the  inebriety  of  Almighty  God?    and  in  fact,
the  things  now  spoken  of  are  explained  in  it  more
explicitly.     And    it   is,   in    my  judgment,   a  correct
enquiry  into  all  the  symbols  of  the  Word  of  God,
and  agreeable  to  the  sacred .  traditions  and  truths
of  the  Oracles.

LETTER   X.

To  John,  Theologos,  Apostle  and  Evangelist,
imprisoned  in  the  Isle  of  Pat  mo  s.
I  salute  thee,  the  holy  soul !  O  beloved  one  !  and
this  for  me  is  more  appropriate  than  for  most.  Hail !
O  truly  beloved!  And  to  the  truly  Loveable  and
Desired,  very  beloved !  Why  should  it  be  a  marvel,
if  Christ  speaks  truly,  and  the  unjust  banish  His
disciples  from  their  cities  u,  themselves  bringing  upon
themselves  their  due,  and  the  accursed  severing
themselves,  and   departing  from   the  holy.     Truly

u  Matt,  xxiii.  34.


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  179

things  seen  are  manifest  images  of  things  unseen.
For,  neither  in  the  ages  which  are  approaching,  will
Almighty  God  be  Cause*  of  the  just  separations
from  Himself,  but  they  by  having  separated  them-
selves entirely  from  Almighty  God ;  even  as  we
observe  the  others,  becoming  here  already  with
Almighty  God,  since  being  lovers  of  truth,  they
depart  from  the  proclivities  of  things  material,  and
love  peace  in  a  complete  freedom  from  all  things
evil,  and  a  Divine  love  of  all  things  good ;  and  start
their  purification y,  even  from  the  present  life,  by
living,  in  the  midst  of  mankind,  the  life2  which
is  to  come,  in  a  manner  suitable  to  angels,  with
complete  cessation  of  passion,  and  deification  and
goodness,  and  the  other  good  attributes.  As  for
you  then,  I  would  never  be  so  crazy  as  to  imagine
that  you  feel  any  suffering  ;  but  I  am  persuaded  that
you  are  sensible  of  the  bodily  sufferings  merely  to
appraise  them.  But,  as  for  those  who  are  unjustly
treating  you,  and  fancying  to  imprison,  not  correctly,
the  sun  of  the  Gospel,  whilst  fairly  blaming  them,
I  pray  that  by  separating  themselves  from  those
things  which  they  are  bringing  upon  themselves  they
may  be  turned  to  the  good,  and  may  draw  you
to  themselves,  and  may  participate  in  the  light.
But  for  ourselves,  the  contrary  will  not  deprive  us
of  the  all-luminous  ray  of  John,  who  are  even  now
about  to  read  the  record,  and  the  renewal  of  this,
thy  true  theology:   but  shortly  after  (for  I  will  say

x  Matt.  xiii.  49.  r  2  Cor.  iv.  11.         ■  Phil.  iii.  20.


180  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

it,  even  though  it  be  rash),  about  to  be  united  to  you
yourself.  For,  I  am  altogether  trustworthy,  from
having  learned,  and  reading  the  things  made  fore-
known to  you  by  God,  that  you  will  both  be  liberated
from  your  imprisonment  in  Patmos,  and  will  return
to  the  Asiatic  coast,  and  will  perform  there  imi-
tations of  the  good  God,  and  will  transmit  them
to  those  after  you.

LETTER   XI.
Dionysius  to  Apollophanes,  Philosopher.
At  length  I  send  a  word  to  thee,  O  Love  of  my
heart,  and  recall  to  thy  memory  the  many  anxieties
and  solicitudes,  which  I  have  formerly  undergone
on  thy  account.     For  thou  rememberest  with  what
a  mild  and  benevolent  disposition  I  have  been  ac-
customed to  rebuke  thy  obstinacy  in  error,  although
with  scant  reason,  in  order  that  I  might  uproot  those
vain  opinions  with  which  thou  wast  deceived.     But
now,  adoring  the  supreme  toleration  of  the  Divine
long-suffering  towards   thee,   I    offer   thee  my  con-
gratulations, O  part  of  my  soul,  now  that  you  are
turning  your  eyes  to  your  soul's  health.     For,  even
the   very   things   which   formerly  you    delighted   to
spurn,  you  now  delight   to   affirm;   and   the   things
that  you  used  to  reject  with  scorn,  you  now  delight
to  enforce.     For,  often  have  I  set  before  you,  and
that  with  great  precision,   what   even  Moses  com-
mitted to  writing,  that  man  was  first  made  by  God,
from  mud,  and  the  sins  of  the  world  were  punished


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagtte.  181

by  the  flood,  and  in  process  of  time,  that  the  same
Moses,  united  in  friendship  with  God,  performed
many  wonders,  both  in  Egypt  and  the  exodus  from
Egypt,  by  the  power  and  action  of  the  same  God.
Nor  Moses  only,  but  other  divine  prophets  sub-
sequently, published  similar  things,  not  infrequently,
who  long  before  foretold  that  God  should  take
the  nature  of  man  from  a  Virgin.  To  which  state-
ment of  mine,  not  once,  but  often,  you  replied,  that
you  did  not  know  whether  these  things  were  true,  and
that  you  were  entirely  ignorant,  even  who  that  Moses
was,  and  whether  he  was  white  or  black.  Further,
that  you  rejected  with  scorn  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  Who  is  God  of  all  Majesty— which  you  used
to  call  mine.  Further,  that  Paul,  the  globe  trotter,
and  a  scatterer  of  words,  who  was  calling  people
from  things  terrestrial  to  things  celestial,  you  were
unwilling  to  receive.  Lastly,  you  reproach  me,
as  a  turncoat,  who  had  left  the  customs  of  my
country's  religion,  and  was  leading  people  to  ini-
quitous sacrilege,  and  urged  me  to  unlearn  the
things  in  which  I  was  placing  my  trust  ;  or,  at  least,
that  I  should  put  away  other  people's  things,  and
deem  it  sufficient  to  keep  what  was  my  own,  lest
I  should  be  found  to  detract  from  the  honour  due
to  divine  deities,  and  the  institutions  of  my  fathers.
But,  after  the  supernal  light  of  the  paternal  glory
of  His  own  will  sent  the  rays  of  His  own  splendour
upon  the  darkness  of  your  mind,  at  once  He  put
into  my  inmost  heart,  that  I  should  recall  to  your
mind  the  whole  counsel  of  God.     How,  for  instance,


,  8  2  Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.

when  we  were   staying   in  Heliopolis  (I  was  then
about  twenty-five,  and  your  age  was  nearly  the  same
as  mine),  on  a  certain  sixth  day,  and  about  the  sixth
hour  the  sun,  to  our  great  surprise,  became  obscured,
through  the  moon  passing  over  it,  not  because  it
is   a  god,  but  because   a   creature   of  God,  when
its  very  true   light  was  setting,  could  not  bear  to
shine     Then   I   earnestly  asked   thee,  what  thou,
O  man  most  wise,  thought  of  it.    Thou,  then,  gave
such  an  answer  as  remained   fixed   in   my  mind,
and  that  no  oblivion,  not  even  that  of  the  image
of  death,  ever  allowed  to  escape.     For,  when  the
whole  orb  had  been  throughout  darkened,  by  a  black
mist  of  darkness,  and  the  sun's  disk  had  begun  again
to  be  purged  and  to  shine  anew,  then  taking  the
table  of  Philip  Aridsus,  and  contemplating  the  orbs
of  heaven,   we    learned,   what   was   otherwise  well
known,  that  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  could  not,  at  that
time,   occur.      Next,   we   observed    that  the  moon
approached  the  sun  from  the  east,  and  intercepted
its  rays,  until   it  covered   the  whole  ;  whereas,  at
other  times,  it  used   to   approach    from   the   west.
Further  also,  we  noted  that  when  it  had  reached  the
extreme  edge  of  the  sun,  and  had  covered  the  whole
orb    that  it  then  went  back  towards  the  east,  al-
though that  was  a  time  which  called  neither  for  the
presence  of  the  moon,  nor  for  the  conjunction  of
the  sun.     I  therefore,  O  treasury  of  manifold  learn-
ing since  I  was  incapable  of  understanding  so  great
a  mystery,   thus    addressed   thee-"  What  thinkest
thou  of  this  thing,  O  Apollophanes,  mirror  of  learn-


Letters  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.         183

ing  ?  "    "  Of  what  mysteries  do  these  unaccustomed
portents  appear  to  you  to  be  indications?"    Thou
then,   with   inspired   lips,  rather   than   with    speech
of  human  voice,  ""These  are,  O  excellent  Dionysius,"
thou  saidst,  "changes   of  things  divine."     At   last,
when  I  had  taken  note  of  the  day  and  year,  and  had
perceived   that,   that   time,    by   its    testifying   signs,
agreed   with   that   which    Paul   announced    to    me,
once  when  I  was  hanging  upon  his  lips,  then  I  gave
my  hand  to  the  truth,  and  extricated  my  feet  from
the  meshes    of  error.     Which  truth,   henceforth,    I,
with  admiration,  both  preach  and  urge  upon  thee —
which  is  life  and  way,  and  true  light, — which  lighteth
every  man  coming  into  this  world, — to  which  even
thou  at  last,  as  truly  wise,  hast  yielded.     For  thou
yieldedst  to  life  when  thou  renounced  death.     And
surely  thou  hast,  at  length,  acted  in  the  best  possible
manner,  if  thou  shalt  adhere  henceforth  to  the  same
truth,  so  as  to  associate  with  us  more  closely.     For
those  lips  will  henceforth  be   on  our  side,  by  the
splendour   of  whose   words,    as   blunting    the    edge
of  my  mind,  thou  hast  been  accustomed  by  pretexts
brought  from  various   quarters,  and  by  a  gorgeous
glow  of  eloquence,  to  vex   the  innermost  recesses
of  our  breast; — yea,   even   sometimes  to  probe  us
sharply  by  occasional  stings  of  malice.     Wherefore
as  formerly,  as  thou  thyself  used  to  say,  the  know-
ledge of  Christian  doctrine,  although  savoury,  was
not   savoury   to   thee,   but  when   you  had   brought
yourself  to  it,  merely  to  taste,  it  shrank  from  your
mental   palate,  and   as   it   were,   disdained   to   find


1 84  Letters  of  Diotiysius  the  Areopagite,

a  resting-place  in  your  stomach ;  so  now,  after  you
have  acquired  a  heart,  intelligent  and  provident,
elevate  thyself  to  things  supernal,  and  do  not  sur-
render, for  things  that  are  not,  things  which  really
are.  Therefore  in  future,  be  so  much  more  obsti-
nate against  those  who  have  urged  you  to  the  false,
as  you  showed  yourself  perverse  towards  us,  when
we  invited  you,  with  all  our  force,  to  the  truth.  For
thus,  I,  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  Whose  Presence  is  my
being  and  my  life,  will  henceforth  die  joyful,  since
thou  also  livest  in  Him.


End  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.    May  his  prayer
be  with  us !

NOTE,  p.  147-

The  "twenty  hours"  which  made  one  day  almost
equal  to  three  are  reckoned  thus.     A  degree  repre-
sents an  hour.     The  Sun  went  down  ten  degrees  =
ten  hours.     The  Sun  had  then  run  already  a  course
of  ten  hours,  from  6  a.m.  to  4  p.m.     In  returning
there  were  ten  hours  more,  and  in  retracing  the  route
ten  hours  more,  which  together  make  thirty  hours.
The  two  hours,  to  complete  the  day  of  twelve  hours,
make   thirty-two   hours.     The   thirty-two   hours   are
four  hours  less  than  thirty-six,  the  time  of  three  days
qf  twelve   hours   each.     One    day  was  thus   nearly
equal  to  three.     Whatever  we  may  think  the  facts,
the  Babylonians  commemorated  the  threefold  Mythra
— the  Sun— in  consequence.     See  Dulac.


PREFACE    TO    LITURGY.


This  Liturgy  gives  the  doctrine  of  Dionysius  in
a  liturgical  form.  The  Greek  original  might  be
restored  from  the  writings  of  Dionysius.  No  one
could  reasonably  doubt  that  the  Author  of  the
Writings  and  the  Liturgy  was  the  same.  This
Liturgy  should  be  compared  with  the  Coptic
Liturgy  of  Dionysius,  Bishop  of  Athens,  disciple
of  Paul,  and  with  the  Liturgy  of  St.  Basil,  adapted
from  this,  as  used  by  the  Uniat  Copts,  translated
by  the  Marquess  of  Bute.  In  my  opinion,  this
Liturgy  was  written  for  the  Therapeutae  near  Alex-
andria, described  by  Philo  in  his  "contemplative
life,"  who  were  Christians ;  who  occupied  themselves
with  the  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Names,  and
the  heavenly  Hierarchy.  It  was  written  not  earlier
than  the  death  of  James,  Apostle  and  Martyr,
a.d.  42,  and  probably  not  later  than  a.d.  67  ;  when
Dionysius,  at  the  request  of  St.  Paul,  left  Athens
to  meet  the  Apostle  at  Rome,  for  the  purpose  of
being  sent  by  him  to  Gaul.  A  note  of  primitive
antiquity  is  found  in  the  description  of  the  Church,
as  "  from  one  end  of  the  earth  to  the  other."
There  is  no  "  one,  only,  holy,  Catholic,  and  Apostolic
Orthodox  Church,"  as  in  the  later  Liturgy  of  St.
Basil.    Some  expressions  are  obscure,  from  the  Latin


i86


PREFACE   TO   LITURGY.


Version,  and  it  would  be  rash,  without  profound
study,  to  venture  to  suggest  the  Greek  text.  In
consequence  of  this,  and  other  Liturgies,  and  his
excellent  writings,  Dionysius  was  frequently  com-
memorated in  the  diptychs  as  one  of  the  Doctors
of  the  Church.


LITURGY   OF   ST.  DIONYSIUS,
BISHOP    OF    THE    ATHENIANS2


ist.  The  Prayer  before  the  Paxb.

Pr.c  "  O  Lord  God,  Who  art  simplex,  not  com-
pound, and  hidden  in  essence  sublime !  God  the
Father,  from  Whom  all  paternity  which  is  in  heaven
and  earth  is  named d,  Source  of  Divinity,  of  those
who  participate  in  the  Divine  Nature,  and  Perfector
of  those  who  attain  perfection  ;  Good  above  all  good,
and  Beautiful  above  all  beautiful ;  Peaceful  repose,
Peace,  Concord  and  Union  of  all  souls ;  compose
the  dissensions  which  divide  us  from  one  another,
and  lead  them  back  to  an  union  with  charity,  which
has  a  kind  of  similitude  to  Thy  sublime  essence  :
and  as  Thou  art  One  above  all,  and  we,  one,,  through
the  unanimity  of  a  good  mind ;  that  we  may  be
found  before  Thee  simplex  and  not  divided,  whilst
celebrating  this  mystery;  and  that  through  the
embraces  of  Charity  and  bonds  of  Love,  we  may
be  spiritually  one,  both  with  ourselves  and  with
one  another,  through  that  Thy  Peace  pacifying  all ;
through  the  Grace  and  Compassion  and  Love  to-
wards man  of  Thine  Only-begotten  Son;    through

a  Liturgiarum  Orien.  Collectio  E.  Renaudoti.  Par,  1847.  T.  ii.
p.  201.

b  D.  N.,  C.  I.  §4;  C.  II.  §  11.

c  Pr.  =  Priest.     D.  =  Deacon.     P.  =  Populus.

d  C.  II.  §  5.


1 8 8  Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius,

Whom,   and    with   Whom   is   due   to   Thee,    glory,
honour  and  dominion,  with  Thy  most  holy  Spirit."
P.    "Amen."     Pr.    "Pax"  (to  all).     P.   "And  with
thy  spirit."     D.    "Let  each  one  give   the   Peace."
P.  "All."     D.  "Post."     P.  "  Before  Thee,  O  Lord."
Pr.    "  Giver  of  Holiness,    and   distributor  of  every
good,  O  Lord,  Who  sanctifiest  every  rational  creature
with  sanctification,  which  is  from  Thee;    sanctify,
through   Thy    Holy   Spirit,    us    Thy    servants,    who
bow  before  Thee ;    free  us  from  all  servile  passions
of  sin,  from  envy,  treachery,  deceit,  hatred,  enmities,
and  from  him,  who  works  the  same,  that  we  may
be  worthy,  holily  to  complete  the  ministry  of  these
life-giving  Sacraments,  through  the  heavenly  Pontiff,
Jesus    Christ,   Thine    Only-begotten    Son,   through
Whom,  and  with  Whom,  is  due  to  Thee,  glory  and
honour."     P.    "Amen."     Pr.    "Essentially  existing,
and  from  all  ages;    Whose  nature  is  incomprehen-
sible, Who  art  near  and  present  to  all,  without  any
change  of  Thy  sublimity;    Whose   goodness   every
existing  thing  longs  for  and  desires ;  the  intelligible
indeed,   and   creatures   endowed   with    intelligence,
through   intelligence;    those   endowed    with    sense,
through  their  senses ;  Who,  although  Thou  art  One
essentially,    nevertheless   art   present    with   us,   and
amongst  us,  in  this  hour,  in  which  Thou  hast  called
and  led  us  to  these  Thy  holy  mysteries ;   and  hast
made  us  worthy  to  stand  before  the  sublime  throne
of  Thy  majesty,  and  to  handle  the  sacred  vessels
of  Thy  ministry  with  our  impure  hands  :  take  away
from   us,   O  Lord,   the  cloke   of  iniquity  in  which


Bishop  of  the  Athenians.  iSg

we  are  enfolded,  as  from  Jesus,  the  son  of  Josedec
the  High  Priest,  Thou  didst  take  away  the  filthy
garments,  and  adorn  us  with  piety  and  justice,  as
Thou  didst  adorn  him  with  a  vestment  of  glory ;
that  clothed  with  Thee  alone,  as  it  were  with
a  garment,  and  being  like  temples  crowned  with
glory,  we  may  see  Thee  unveiled  with  a  mind
divinely  illuminated,  and  may  feast,  whilst  we,
by  communicating  therein,  enjoy  this  sacrifice  set
before  us  ;  and  render  to  Thee  glory  and  praise."
P.  "Amen."  D.  "Let  us  stand  becomingly."  P.
"  The  Mercies  of  God."  Pr.  "Charity."  P.  "And
with  thy  spirit."  Pr.  "Lift  up  your  hearts."  P.
"We  lift  them  to  the  Lord."  Pr.  "Let  us  give
thanks  to  the  Lord."  P.  "It  is  meet  and  right."
Priest  {bending  tow),  "  For  truly  the  celebration  of
Thy  benefits,  O  Lord,  surpasses  the  powers  of  mind,
of  speech,  and  of  thought;  neither  is  sufficient  every
mouth,  mind  and  tongue,  to  glorify  Thee  worthily.
For,  by  Thy  word  the  heavens  were  made,  and  by
the  breath  of  Thy  mouth  all  the  celestial  powers  ;
all  the  lights  in  the  firmament,  sun  and  moon,  sea
and  dry  land,  and  whatever  is  in  them.  The  voice-
less, by  their  silence,  the  vocal,  by  their  voices,
words  and  hymns,  perpetually  bless  Thee  ;  because
Thou  art  essentially  good  and  beyond  all  praise,
existing  in  Thy  essence  incomprehensibly.  This
visible  and  sensible  creature  praises  Thee,  and  also
that  intellectual,  placed  above  sensible  perception.
Heaven  and  earth  glorify  Thee.  Sea  and  air  pro-
claim Thee.     The  sun,  in  his  course,  praises  Thee ;


1 90  Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius,

the  Moon,  in  her  changes,  venerates  Thee.  Troops
of  Archangels,  and  hosts  of  Angels  ;  those  virtues,
more  sublime  than  the  world  and  mental  faculty,
send  benedictions  to  Thine  abode.  Rays  of  light,
eminent  and  hidden,  send  their  sanctus  to  Thy
glory.  Principalities  and  Orders  praise  Thee,  with
their  Jubilate.  Powers  and  dominions  venerate
Thee.  Virtues,  Thrones  and  Seats  inaccessible  exalt
Thee.  Splendours  of  light  eternal — mirrors  without
flaw — holy  essences — recipients  of  wisdom  sublime —
beyond  all,  investigators  of  the  will  hidden  from  all,
in  clearest  modulations  of  inimitable  tones,  and  by
voices  becoming  a  rational  creature ;  many  eyed
Cherubim  of  most  subtle  movement,  bless  Thee.
Seraphin,  furnished  with  six  wings  intertwined,  cry
Sanctus  unto  Thee.  Those  very  ones,  who  veil
their  faces  with  their  wings,  and  cover  their  feet
with  wings,  and  flying  on  every  side,  and  clapping
with  their  wings,  (that  they  may  not  be  devoured
by  Thy  devouring  fire)  sing  one  to  another  with
equal  harmony  of  all,  sweet  chants,  pure  from  every
thing  material,  rendering  to  Thee,  eternal  glory ;
crying  with  one  hymn,  worthy  of  God,  and  saying,"
P.  "  Holy,  holy,  holy."  Priest  {bending)—"  Holy  art
Thou,  O  God  the  Father,  Omnipotent,  Maker  and
Creator  of  every  creature— Invisible  and  visible,  and
sensible ;  Holy  art  Thou,  O  God,  the  Only-begotten
Son,  Power  and  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  Lord  and
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  Holy  art  Thou,  O  God,
the  Holy  Spirit,  Perfector  and  Sanctifier  of  Saints.
Triad,    Holy  and    undivided — co-essential    and    of


Bishop  of  the  A  thenians.  191

equal  glory,  Whose  compassion  towards  our  race
is  most  effusive.  Thou  art  holy,  and  making  all
things  holy.  Who  didst  not  leave  that,  our  very
race,  in  exile  from  Paradise,  although  in  the  mean-
time involved  in  every  kind  of  sin,  but  wast  mani-
fested to  it  by  the  Word,  Who,  in  the  presence
of  the  world,  suffered  extreme  poverty ;  it  in  very
truth,  He,  the  Word,  took,  being  made  like  to  it
in  all  things,  sin  excepted,  that  it  might  make  Him
prepared  beforehand  unto  holiness,  and  disposed
for  this  life-giving  feast.  {Raising  his  voice)  Who
being  conceived,  formed  and  configured  by  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  from  virgin  blood  of  the  Virgin  Mary,
holy  genitrix  of  God,  was  born  indeed  Man,  and
from  the  pure  and  most  holy  body  of  the  same,
and  receiving  Deity  in  Flesh,  whilst  the  law  and
properties  of  nature  were  preserved,  but  in  a  manner
beyond  nature,  and  was  acknowledged  God  in  the
Spirit,  and  Man  in  the  flesh  ;  and  inasmuch  as  the
Word  existed  before  the  ages,  from  Thee,  as  was
worthy  of  God,  was  born,  and  by  power  and  miracles,
such  as  became  the  Maker  of  all,  was  testified  that
He  was  such,  from  the  very  fact  that  He  has  freely
imparted  a  complete  healing  and  a  perfect  salvation
to  the  whole  human  race.  Likewise,  in  the  end
and  consummation  of  His  dispensation  on  our  be-
half, and  before  His  saving  Cross,  He  took  bread
into  His  pure  and  holy  hands,  and  looked  to  Thee,
O  God  the  Father;  giving  thanks,  He  blessed,
sanctified,  brake  and  gave  to  His  disciples,  the
holy  Apostles,  saying,  "Take  and  eat  from  it  and


1 9  2  Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius,

believe  that  it  is  my  body,  that  same,  which  for
you  and  for  many  is  broken  and  given,  for  the
expiation  of  faults,  the  remission  of  sins,  and  eternal
life."  P.  "Amen."  Pr.  "Likewise,  in  the  same
manner,  over  the  cup  also,  which  He  mingled  with
wine  and  water,  He  gave  thanks,  blessed,  sanctified,
and  gave  to  the  same  disciples  and  holy  apostles,
saying,  '  Take,  drink  from  it,  all  of  you,  and  believe
that  this  is  My  blood  of  the  new  covenant,  which
is  shed  and  given  for  you  and  for  many,  for  the
expiation  of  faults,  remission  of  sins,  and  eternal  life.'"
P.  "Amen."

Pr.  "  Himself  also,  through  the  same  holy  Apostles,
gave  a  precept  to  the  whole  company  and  congrega-
tion of  the  faithful,  saying,  '  This  do  to  the  memory
of  Me,  and  as  oft  as  ye  shall  eat  this  bread  and
drink  the  commixture  which  is  in  this  cup,  and  shall
celebrate  this  feast,  ye  shall  perform  a  commemor-
ation of  My  death  until  I  come.' "  P.  "  Of  Thy
death,  O  Lord,  we  perform  a  memorial."  Pr.  "  Obey-
ing, then,  Thy  sovereign  precept,  and  celebrating
a  commemoration  of  Thy  death  and  resurrection,
through  this  sacrifice  in  perpetual  mystery,  we  await
also  Thy  second  coming,  the  renovation  of  our  race,
and  the  vivification  of  our  mortality.  For,  not
simply,  but  with  glory  worthy  of  God,  in  Spirit
ineffable,  Thou  wilt  terribly  come,  and  seated  upon
the  lofty  throne  of  Thy  majesty,  Thou  wilt  exact  the
acknowledgment  of  Thy  royal  power,  from  all
things  created  and  made:  and  justly,  Thou  wilt
take°  vengeance    for   Thy   image   upon    those   who


Bishop  of  the  Athenians.  193

have  corrupted  it  through  evil  passions.  This  sac-
rifice, here  celebrated,  we  commemorate   to   Thee,

0  Lord,  and  the  sufferings  which  Thou  didst  endure
on  the  Cross  for  us.  Be  propitious,  O  Good,  and
Lover  of  men,  in  that  hour  full  of  fear  and  trembling,
to  this  congregation  of  those  adoring  Thee,  and
to  all  sons  of  the  holy  Church,  bought  by  Thy
precious  blood.  May  coals  of  fire  be  kept  from
those  who  are  tinged  with  Thy  blood,  and  sealed
by  Thy  sacraments  in  Thy  holy  Name,  as  formerly
the  Babylonian  flame  from  the  youths  of  the  house
of  Hanania;  for  neither  do  we  know  others  beside
Thee,  O  God,  nor  in  other  have  we  hope  of  attain-
ing salvation,  since  indeed  Thou  art  the  Helper  and
Saviour  of  our  race ;  and  on  this  account,  our  wise
Church,  through  all  our  lips  and  tongues,  implores
Thee,  and  through  Thee,  and  with  Thee,  Thy  Father,
saying  " —

P.  "Have  mercy."  Pr.  "We  also."  D.  "How
tremendous  is  this  hour."  {The  Priest  bending,  says
the  prayer  of  the  invocation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.)
Pr.  "  I  invoke  Thee,  O  God  the  Father,  have  mercy
upon  us,  and  wash  away,  through  Thy  grace,  the
uncleanness  of  my  evil  deeds ;  destroy,  through  Thy
mercy,  what    I    have   done,   worthy    of  wrath ;    for

1  do  not  extend  my  hands  to  Thee  with  presump-
tion, for  I  am  not  able  even  to  look  to  heaven
on  account  of  the  multitude  of  my  iniquities  and
the  filth  of  my  wickedness.  But,  strengthening  my
mind,  in  Thy  loving-kindness,  grace  and  long-suffer-
ing, I  crave  Thy  holy  Spirit,  that  Thou  wouldst  send

O


194  Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius,

Him  upon  me,  and  upon  these  oblations,  here  set
forth,  and  upon  Thy  faithful  people."  Pr.  "Hear
me,  O  Lord."  P.  "  Kyrie  eleison,"  three  times.
Pr.  "Through  His  alighting  upon  them,  and  His
overshadowing,  may  He  make  this  bread  indeed,
living  body,  and  procuring  life  to  our  souls;  body
salutary — body  celestial— body  saving  our  souls  and
bodies — body  of  our  Lord  God  and  Saviour,  Jesus
Christ — for  remission  of  sins,  and  eternal  life,  for
those  receiving  it."  P.  "Amen."  Pr.  "And  the
commixture,  which  is  in  this  cup,  may  He  make
living  blood,  and  procuring  life  to  all  our  souls;
blood  salutary — blood  celestial — blood  saving  our
souls  and  bodies — blood  of  our  Lord  God  and
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  for  remission  of  sins  to  those
receiving  them."  P.  "Amen."  Pr.  "Further,  ac-
cording to  the  tradition,  and  Divine  recommendation
of  those,  who  were  eye  witnesses  of  Thy  mysteries,
and  interpreters  of  Thy  wonderful  acts,  we  offer  this
Eucharist  before  Thee,  O  Lord,  and  through  it
we  commemorate  Thy  charity  towards  us,  and  the
universal  dispensation  of  Thine  Only-begotten  One,
in  this  world,  that  Thou  wouldst  also  be  reminded
through  it  of  Thy  mercy,  cognate  and  natural  to
Thee,  which,  at  all  hours,  is  shed  upon  Thy  creatures,
and  wouldst  snatch  us  from  the  wrath,  reserved  for
the  wicked ;  and  from  the  punishments  of  those  who
work  iniquity ;  and  from  the  cruel  attack  of  demons,
,  .who  attack  our  souls,  when  we  shall  go  hence;  and
/ouldst  make  us  worthy  of  Thy  kingdom,  and  the
ntations  of  those  who  have  kept  Thy  precepts ;


Bishop  of  the  Athenians.  195

and  we  will  render  to  Thee,  glory  and  the  giving
of  thanks,  &c."  P.  "  Amen."  Pr.  (bending)  "  By
Thy  words,  that  cannot  lie,  and  by  Thy  most  true
teachings,  Thou  hast  said,  O  Lord,  that  great  is  the
joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  Re-
joice then  now,  O  Lord,  in  the  conversion  of  Thy
servants,  who  stand  here  before  Thee;  add  also,
exultation  over  us,  to  the  souls  of  the  pious  and
just  Fathers  —  Patriarchs  —  Prophets  —  Apostles  —
Preachers  —  Evangelists  —  Martyrs  —  Confessors  —
Zealots  of  Divine  Worship — Benefactors — Givers  of
Alms — of  those  who  minister  to  the  necessities  of
the  poor — and  from  all,  may  there  be  one  act  of
praise  to-day,  before  Thee,  at  this  holy  Altar,  and
in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem."  (Elevating  his  voice)
"And  on  account  of  these,  and  other  things  of  the
same  kind,  may  Thy  holy  Church,  which  is  from  one
end  of  the  earth  to  the  other,  be  established,  and
preserved  in  tranquillity  and  peace,  in  doctrines
evangelical  and  apostolical,  by  Divine  Hierarchs,
rightly  dispensing  the  word  of  truth,  and  instructing,
by  the  dogmas  of  true  religion  :  through  holy  Priests,
who  embrace  the  word  of  life,  and  carry  themselves
illustriously  in  dispensing  Thy  celestial  mysteries  :
through  Deacons,  who  are  modest,  and  perform  the
pure  and  royal  ministry  without  flaw,  through  true,
faithful  ones,  who  occupy  themselves  in  words  and
acts  worthy  of  a  Christian  ;  through  choirs  of  virgins
of  each  sex,  bearing  about  in  their  members  the  life-
giving  mortification  of  Thy  Only-begotten  Son.  And
from  hence,  in  one  troop,  may  we  all  be  sent  to  that


196  Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius,

Church,  the  Jerusalem  of  the  firstborn,  whose  names
are  written  in  the  heavens,  and  there  let  us  spiritually
glorify  Thee,  O  God  the  Father,  and  Thine  Only-
begotten  Son,  and  Thy  Holy  Spirit."  P.  "Amen."
Pr.  "Assist  also,  O  Lord,  all  those  who  assist  Thy
Holy  Church,  by  offerings— by  tenths— by  ministry —
and  by  oblations ;  and  those  also,  who  ask  the
prayers  of  our  littleness,  give  to  them  the  object
of  those  their  prayers,  O  Lord,  Lover  of  men."
{Raising  his  voice)  "Send  also  perfect  attention
and  full  health  to  all  those  who  have  the  charge
of  the  poor,  who  provide  food  for  orphans  and
widows,  and  visit  the  infirm  and  afflicted.  Restore
to  them,  here  indeed  abundance  and  goods,  there
also  delights  incorruptible,  because  thou  art  Lord
of  each  age,  and  distributor  of  immense  reward.
And  to  Thee  beseems  beneficence,  both  here  and
there,  and  to  Thine  Only-begotten  Son."  P.  "  Amen."
Pr.  {bending)  "  Restrain,  O  King  of  Kings,  the  wrath
of  kings,  mitigate  the  fury  of  soldiers,  take  away
wars  and  seditions,  cast  down  the  pride  of  heretics,
and  the  sentences  pronounced  against  us  by  Justice,
may  Thy  love  for  mankind  overcome,  and  turn  into
the  gentleness  of  benignity";  {raising  his  voice)
"  Tranquillity  and  Peace  from  Thee,  concede  to  the
earth  and  all  its  inhabitants,  visit  it  with  Thy  benefits
and  the  care  of  Thy  mercy,  with  a  good  and  temper-
ate condition  of  atmosphere,  copiousness  of  fruits,
and  abundance  of  crops,  and  variety  of  flowers;
preserve  it  from  all  pests  of  fury,  and  all  unjust
attacks  of  enemies,  both  spiritual  and  sensible,  that


Bishop  of  the  Athenians.  197

without  any  injury  of  passion,  we  may  sing  perpetual
hymns  of  praise,  to  Thee  and  to  Thine  Only-begotten
Son."  P.  "Amen."  Pr.  {bending)  "At  this  altar,
and  at  that  more  exalted  one  in  heaven,  may  there
be  a  good  remembrance  of  all  those,  who,  out  of  the
world,  have  pleased  Thee — chiefly  indeed  of  the
Holy  genitrix  of  God,  of  John  the  Messenger,  Baptist
and  Forerunner,  of  Peter  and  Paul,  and  of  the  holy
company  of  the  Apostles,  of  Stephen  also,  and  of
the  whole  multitude  of  Martyrs,  and  of  all  those,
who,  before  them,  with  them  and  after  them,  have
pleased,  and  do  please  Thee."  {Raising  his  voice)
"And  since  indeed  Thou  art  Omnipotent,  to  the
company  of  those  beloved  ones  and  to  Thy  family,
join  our  weakness,  O  Lord,  to  that  blessed  con-
gregation, to  this  Divine  part,  that,  through  them
may  be  received  our  oblations  and  prayers,  before
the  lofty  throne  of  Thy  Majesty,  inasmuch  as  we
are  weak  and  infirm,  and  wanting  in  confidence
before  Thee.  Forsooth,  our  sin  and  our  righteous-
ness are  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  ocean,
broad  and  immense,  of  Thy  mercy.  Looking  then,
into  the  hearts  of  each,  send  to  each  one  good
returns  for  their  petitions,  that  in  all  and  in  each
may  be  adored  and  praised,  Thy  Majesty,  and  that
of  Thine  Only-begotten  Son."  P.  "Amen."  Pr.
{bending)  "Remember,  O  Lord,  all  Bishops,  Doctors
and  Prelates  of  Thy  holy  Church,  those,  who  from
James,  Apostle,  Bishop  and  Martyr,  to  this  present
day,  have  pleased,  and  do  please  Thee."  {Raising
his  voice)  "Engraft  in  us,  O  Lord,  their  true  faith,


198  Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius,

and  their  zeal  for  the  true  religion ;  their  sincere
charity  without  defect ;  their  morals  without  stain ;
in  order  that,  adhering  to  their  footsteps,  we  may
be  partakers  of  their  reward,  and  of  the  crowns  of
victory  which  are  prepared  for  them  in  Thy  heavenly
kingdom,  and  there,  together  with  them,  we  may
sing  to  Thee,  Glory  unceasing,  and  to  Thy  Only-
begotten  Son."  P.  "Amen."  Pr.  (pending)  "Re-
member, O  Lord,  all  those  who  are  fallen  asleep,
who  have  laid  themselves  down  in  Thy  hope,  in
the  true  faith.  More  especially,  and  by  name,
our  Fathers,  Brothers  and  Masters,  and  those,  on
behalf  of  whom,  and  by  favour  of  whom,  this  holy
oblation  is  offered,"  {raising  his  voice)  "join,  O  Lord,
their  names,  with  the  names  of  Thy  Saints  in  the
blessed  habitation  of  those,  who  feast  and  rejoice
in  Thee ;  not  recalling  against  them  the  memory
of  their  sins,  nor  bringing  to  their  memory  the
things  which  they  have  foolishly  done.  For  no
one  is  tied  to  the  flesh,  and  at  the  same  time,
innocent  in  Thy  sight.  For  One  alone  has  been
seen  on  earth  without  sin,  Jesus  Christ,  Thine  Only-
begotten  Son;  Simplex e,  who  came  to  composition,
through  whom  we  also  have  hope  of  obtaining
mercy."  P.  "  Keep  quiet."  Pr.  {bending)  "  Re-
mitting our  and  their  voluntary  sins,  knowingly
or  ignorantly  committed.  Be  propitious,  O  Lord,
Lover  of  men."  {Raising  his  voice)  "And  grant
to  us  a  peaceful  end,  departure  with  mercy,  that
we  may  stand  without  fault  on  the  right  hand ;  and,

•  D.  N.,  C.  I.  §  4.


Bishop  of  the  Athenians.  199

with  open  face,  and  confidence,  run  to  meet  the
arising  of  Thine  Only-begotten  Son,  and  His  second
and  glorious  manifestation  from  heaven;  and  may
hear  from  Him,  that  blessed  voice,  which  He  shall
pronounce  at  the  last  day  to  the  Blessed."  "  Blessed
of  my  Father  receive  the  inheritance  of  the  heavenly
kingdom,"  "  that  in  this,  as  in  all,  may  be  glorified
and  praised,  Thy  most  venerated  Name."  P.  "  That,
&c."  Pr.  "Peace."  P.  "And  with  thy  spirit."
The  Priest  breaks  the  Host,  and  says  the  prayer,
before  "Our  Father."  Pr.  "Father  of  all,  and
Beginning,  Which  is  above  all  things — Light  eternal,
and  Fountain  of  Light,  Which  illuminates  all  natures
endowed  with  reason ;  Who  callest  the  poor  from
the  dust,  and  raisest  the  beggar  from  the  dunghill ;
and  hast  called  us,  .lost,  rejected,  and  infirm,  to
the  liberty  and  household  dignity  of  Thy  sons,
through  Thy  beloved  Son,  grant  to  us,  that  we  may
appear  in  Thy  sight,  holy  sons,  and  not  unworthy
of  the  name  ;  and  may  also  perform  all  our  ministry
after  a  blameless  manner  ;  and  with  purity  of  soul,
and  cleanness  of  intellect,  and  with  a  godly  mind,
whenever  we  invoke  Thee,  God  the  Father  Omni-
potent, holy  and  heavenly,  we  pray  and  say,  Our
Father,  which  art  in  heaven."  P.  "  Hallowed  be
Thy  Name,  &c."  Pr.  "Free  us,  Thy  servants  and
sons,  from  all  temptations,  most  difficult,  and  sur-
passing our  forces  ;  and  from  all  griefs,  which  can
bring  loss  to  our  body  or  soul.  Guard  us,  at  the
same  time  from  the  evil  one,  and  from  his  universal
power,  and  from  his  most  pernicious  devices.     For


200  Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius,

Thou  art  King  of  all,  and  to  Thee  we  render  glory."
P.   "Amen."     Pr.    "Peace,"      P.    "And  with   thy
spirit."    D.   "Before"  (Ante).     P.    " Before   Thee,
O   Lord."     (Coram.)     Pr.    "Look,  O   Lord,  upon
Thy  faithful  people,  who  bend  before  Thee,  and
await  Thy  gift,    and   contemplate    the    deposit   of
the  Sacraments  of  Thy  Only-begotten,  O  God  the
Father.     Take   not  away  Thy  grace  from  us,  and
cast  us   not   away   from    Thy   ministry,   and    from
participation   in   Thy   sacraments,   but  prepare   us,
that  we  may  be  pure  and  without  flaw,  and  worthy
of  this  feast;   and  that,  with  a  conscience  unblam-
able, we  may  ever   enjoy  His  precious   body  and
blood;    and   in   a  life,  glorious   and   endless,  may
recline  in  a  spiritual  habitation,  and  may  feast  at
the  table  of  Thy  kingdom,  and  may  render  to  Thee
glory   and    praise."      P.    "Amen."      Pr.    "Peace."
P    -And  with  thy  spirit."     D.   "With   fear."     Pr.
-Holy  things  to  holy   persons."     P.    ''One^holy
Father."      D.    "Let    us    stand    becomingly."      P.
"Before  Thee."      Pr.    "We  give  thanks  to  Thee,
O  Lord,  and  with  grateful   mind  we  acknowledge
Thy  loving-kindness;  because,  from  nothing,  Thou
hast  led  us  forth  to  that  which  we  are,  and  hast
made  us  members  of  Thy  household,  and  sons  of
Thy  sacraments;  and  hast  entrusted  this  religious
ministry  to  us,  and  hast   made  us  worthy  of  this
spiritual  table.     Preserve  in  us,  O  Lord,  the  deposit
of  Thy  Divine  Mysteries,  that  we  may  frame  and
complete  our  life  in  Thy  sight,  after   the   fashion
of  the   angels;   that  we  may  be  secured   and   in-


Bishop  of  the  Athenians.  201

separable  through  the  reception  of  Thy  holy  (mys-
teries) ;  performing  Thy  great  and  perfect  will,  and
may  be  found  ready  for  that  last  consummation,  and
to  stand  before  Thy  Majesty,  and  may  be  made
worthy  of  the  pleasure  of  Thy  kingdom,  through
the  grace,  mercy  and  love  towards  man,  of  Thy
Only-begotten  Son,  through  Whom,  and  with  Whom,
is  due  to  Thee,  glory,  honour,  &c."  P.  "  Amen."
Pr.  "Peace."  P.  "And  with  thy  spirit."  D.
"After"  (Post).  P.  "Before  Thee,  O  Lord."  Pr.
"  O  Christ,  the  King  of  Glory,  and  Father  of  the
Age  to  come ;  Holy  Sacrifice ;  heavenly  Hierarch  ;
Lamb  of  God,  Who  takest  away  the  sin  of  the
world,  spare  the  sins  of  Thy  people,  and  dismiss
the  foolishness  of  Thy  flock.  Preserve  us,  through
the  communication  of  Thy  Sacraments,  from  every
sin,  whether  it  be  committed  by  word,  or  thought,
or  deed ;  and  from  whatever  makes  us  far  from
the  familiarity  of  Thy  household,  that  our  bodies
may  be  guarded  by  Thy  body,  and  our  souls  re-
newed through  Thy  sacraments.  And  may  Thy
benediction,  O  Lord,  be  in  our  whole  man,  within
and  without ;  and  may  Thou  be  glorified  in  us,  and
by  us,  and  may  Thy  right  hand  rest  upon  us,  and
that  of  Thy  blessed  Father,  and  of  Thy  most  holy
Spirit."     P,  "Amen."     D.  "  Bless,  G  Lord."

Cannes,
Christmas,  1896.


OBJECTIONS  TO  GENUINENESS.


The  most  plausible  objection  to  the  genuineness
of  these  writings  is  thus  expressed  by  Dupin :
"  Eusebius  and  Jerome  wrote  an  accurate  catalogue
of  each  author  known  to  them — with  a  few  obscure
exceptions, — and  yet  never  mention  the  writings  of
the  Areopagite."  Great  is  the  rejoicing  in  the  House
of  the  Anti-Areopagites  over  this  proof  ; — but  what
are  the  facts?  Eusebius  acknowledges  that  innu-
merable works  have  not  come  to  him— Jerome  dis-
claims either  to  know  or  to  give  an  accurate  catalogue
either  of  authors  or  works.  The  Library  of  Caesarea
contained  three  hundred  thousand  volumes,  accord-
ing to  the  modest  computation  of  Doublet,  according
to  Schneider,  many  more — Jerome  says  there  are
some  writings,  so  illustrious  in  themselves,  that  they
will  not  suffer  from  not  being  mentioned  by  him  ;
Jerome  follows  Dionysius  on  the  Heavenly  Hier-
archy; Jerome's  Catalogue  of  Illustrious  Men  con-
tains one  hundred  and  thirty-five  names.

Josephus  is  mentioned  for  his  testimony  to  Christ
— Seneca,  for  his  correspondence  with  St.  Paul —
Philo,  for  his  description  of  the  Therapeutae  of
Alexandria.  Yet  Dupin  would  have  the  unwary  infer
that  Jerome  gives  a  full  catalogue  of  each  Author
known  to  him,  with  a  few  obscure  exceptions.

The  "  Ecclesiastical  History  "  of  Eusebius  treats  of


Objections  to  Geiiirineness.  203

the  nature  of  Christ,  the  companions  of  the  Apostles,
the  Martyrdoms — the  succession  of  Bishops — the
persecutions — -the  folk-lore  of  the  Church  to  the
fourth  Century.  The  Book  would  fill  about  125
pages,  yet  Dupin  would  have  us  believe  that  he  gives
a  complete  catalogue ;  He  does  not  give  the  writings
of  Hymenals  and  Narcissus,  of  Athenagoras,  and
Pantaenus,  nor  a  complete  list  of  Clement,  Origen,
and  Dionysius  of  Alexandria.  His  silence,  in  my
opinion,  is  owing  to  "  odium  theologicum."  Accord-
ing to  Eusebius,  Jesus  is  Sn-ro's ;  according  to  Dio-
nysius, Jesus  is  tinXovs;  both  true  when  properly
understood,  but  when  misunderstood—"  Hinc  la-
chrymae  illae " — Dupin  formed  his  premise  for  his
conclusion,  not  from  facts  a.

Fallacy  of  Names.

Pearson,  Daille,  Blundellum,  Erasmus,  Valla,
Westcott,  Lupton,  pronounce  against  the  genuine-
ness. Who  are  you?  But  Pearson  demolishes
Daille ;  Vossius  pulverises  Blundellum ;  Erasmus
repudiates  Valla.  Dr.  Westcott,  following  Dupin,
assumes  the  non-genuineness,  but  his  literary  instinct
places  his  Article  on  Dionysius  before  that  on  Origen.
Dean  Colet  bumps  the  scale  against  Mr.  Lupton.

Pearson,  in  the  xth  Chapter  of  Ignatii  Vindiciae,
gives  the  shortest  and  best  summary  in  favour  of  the
genuineness.  Speaking  of  the  scholars  of  his  own
day,  he  says,  "  No  one  is  so  ignorant  as  not  to  know
that  these  writings  were  recognised  as  genuine  by  the
a  Vidieu,  page  107.


204  Objections  to  Genuineness.

best  judges  in  the  sixth,  fifth,  fourth,  and  third
centuries."  Unhappily,  he  also  said,  Every  "eru-
dite "  person  regarded  them  in  his  day  as  written  in
the  fourth  century,  and  he  assumed  the  date  of
Eusebius'  death,  as  the  date  of  the  works,  to  account
for  his  silence.  Hence  every  inerudite  person,  who
wished  to  pass  for  erudite,  maintained  that  opinion
for  his  own  reputation.  But  when  Pearson  had  re-
surveyed  the  evidence,  he  confessed,  with  shame,
that  though  he  had  given,  what  seemed  to  him  a  true
opinion,  he  left  the  decision  of  the  whole  matter  to
the  judgment  of  a  more  learned  person.

Erasmus,  in  his  "  Institutio  "  of  a  Christian  Prince,
writes  thus :— "  Divus  ille  Dionysius  qui  fecit  tres
Hierarchias."  In  his  prime  work,  "ratio  verae  reli-
gionis,"  Erasmus  not  only  enumerates  the  "Divine
Names,"  the  "Mystic  and  Symbolic  Theology,"  but
calls  them,  not  Stoic,  not  Platonic,  not  Aristotelian,
but  "celestial"  philosophy.  He  so  moulds  Dionysius
into  his  book,  that  it  becomes  Dionysius  writing
elegant  Latin.  The  only  reason  which  outweighed
with  him  all  external  testimony,  was,  that  Erasmus
could  not  imagine  that  any  man,  living  in  apostolic
times,  and  so  far  removed  from  the  age  of  Erasmus,
could  possibly  have  penned  such  a  mirror  of  apostolic
doctrine.  How  could  the  Areopagite,  though  dis-
ciple of  Paul,  and  familiar  friend  of  John  Theologus,
possibly  be  so  learned  as  the  author  of  these  writings?
Such  is  the  testimony  of  the  two  Theologians  who
have  been  permitted  to  be  doubtful  of  the  genuine-
ness.


Objections  to  Genuineness.  205

Gregory  of  Tours  b.
Gregory  is  the  great  authority  of  those  who  think
that  the  St.  Denis  of  France  is  not  identical  with
Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  The  authority  is  worthy
of  their  critical  acumen.  Gregory  collects  the  more
obscure  martyrdoms,  in  Gaul,  under  Nero,  and  sub-
sequent Emperors.  He  gives  several  martyrdoms
under  Nero,  and  thus  proves  the  Apostolic  Evangeli-
sation of  Gaul.  Gregory  quotes,  and  misquotes,  and
misunderstands  the  ancient  document c,"  Concerning  d
seven  men  sent  by  St.  Peter  into  Gaul,— in  Gallias —
to  preach."  "Under  Claudius  — sub  CLDIO—
Peter  the  Apostle  sent  certain  disciples  into  Gaul  to
preach, — they  were,  Trophimus,  Paulus,  Martial,
Austremonius,  Gatianus,  Saturninus,  Valerius,  and
many  companions." — These  men  were  sent  a.d.  42  —
43.  Gregory  omits  Valerius,  and  inserts  Dionysius
—who  was  not  converted  to  the  Christian  Faith  till
a.d.  44  or  49.  Then  Gregory  misreads  "  Claudio  "  for
"  consulibus  Decio,"  and  adds,  "Grato"  as  the  fellow-
consul.  Thus  a  disciple  of  the  Apostles,  sent  by
Clement,  successor  of  Peter,  arrives  in  Gaul  a.d.  250,
and  the  identical  names  of  his  companions  recur
miraculously  in  the  third  century.  At  the  very  time
that  Trophimus e  is  thus  supposed  to  have  arrived  at
Aries,  we  have  a  letter  from  Cyprian,  a.d.  254,
urging  Pope  Stephen  to   depose   Marcion,   15th   or

b  L'Abbe  Darras.     St.  Denys  1' Areopagite,  p.  34-
c  Ibid.,  p.  51.

d  See  Monuments  inedits  de  M.  Faillon,  t.  ii.  p.  375-
e  Darras,  p.  14.


2o6  Objections  to  Genuineness.

1 8th  Bishop  of  Aries  from  Trophimus.  Such  is  the
basis  upon  which  our  critical  friends  build  their
house  upon  the  sand.

The  Peres  Bolandistes.
The  Peres  Bolandistes  are  a  wonder  in  Christen-
dom. They  are  critical,  and  yet  follow  the  gross
blunder  of  Gregory  of  Tours.  They  belong  to  the
papal  obedience,  and  yet  prefer  Gregory  of  Tours
when  wrong,  to  Gregory  XIII.,  when  right.  They
pronounce  the  solemn  declaration  of  Pope  John
XlXth,  "that  Martial  of  Limoges  was  an  apostolic
man',"  as  of  no  historic  value.  They  think  that
St.  John  Damascene  did  not  possess  the  same
critical  apparatus  for  proving  the  authenticity  of  the
writings  of  Dionysius,  that  we  possess  in  the  xixth
Century.  Their  "  actes  authentiques  6  "  of  Dionysius
acknowledge  that  he  was  sent  to  Gaul  by  Clement,
successor  of  Peter;  and  yet  they  affirm  that  he
arrived  in  Gaul,  a.d.  250.  After  Clement  I.,  who
succeeded  Peter  and  Paul,  there  was  not  another
Clement,  Bishop  of  Rome,  for  a  thousand  years h.
Happily,  Les  petits  Bolandistes  are  more  rational
and  critical  than  their  Peres.

General  Objection.
11  The  style,  the  theological  learning,  the  language
and   allusions,  prove  the  writings  written  after  the
apostolic  age."

1  See  Surius.  *  Darras,  293—300.

h  Clement  I.,  a.d.  67,  CI.  II.  1046.


Objections  to  Genuineness.  207

Is  the  Epistolary  style  the  proof?  St.  Paul,
St.  John,  St.  Peter,  St.  Luke,  and  nearly  the  whole
of  the  New  Testament  is  written  under  the  form
of  Epistles.  The  Epistle  of  St.  James,— the  first
written  in  the  Canon  of  the  New  Testament, — will
bear  comparison  with  the  book  of  Job  for  ornate
diction.  Consult  the  marginal  references  to  the
Epistle  of  St.  Peter,  to  see  the  scriptural  knowledge
of  the  Apostles.  Men  use  the  testimony  of  the
High  Priests,  that  the  Apostles  were  unlearned  and
ignorant  men,  but  omit  their  testimony  that  they
took  knowledge  of  them,  that  they  had  been  with
Jesus ;  and  the  further  testimony,  that  Jesus  opened
their  understanding,  that  they  should  understand
the  testimony  of  the  Scriptures,  respecting  Himself;
and  further,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  recall  to
them  whatever  He  had  said  to  them.  Those  who
would  rather  assume  twenty  miracles,  than  acknow-
ledge one  natural  fact,  surmise,  that  a  Syrian,  in
the  ivth  century,  may  have  written  Greek  permeated
with  technical  expressions  of  Plato  and  Aristotle.
There  is  not  a  single  allusion  to  persons  or  events
after  the  first  century,  unless  it  be  supposed  that
the  Epistle  of  Ignatius,  a.d.  108,  is  quoted.  The
works  abound  in  names  recorded  in  the  New  Testa-
ment. The  Apostolic  Epistles  allude  to  the  leaven
of  heresy  already  working.  The  Antwerp  edition
gives  about  five  hundred  references  to  Holy  Scripture
in  the  Writings  of  Dionysius.  He  quotes  every  book
in  the  Bible,  except  the  two  last  particular  Epistles
of  St.  John,  or  John  Presbyter.     Dionysius   writes


208


Objections  to  Genuineness.


four  letters  to  Gaius,  to  whom  St.  John  wrote  his
third  Epistle.  We  have,  therefore,  in  the  writings
of  this  Apostolic  man,  a  proof  that  the  Canonical
Scriptures  were  quoted  as  the  Oracles  of  God,  in
the  first  century,  and  a  triumphant  testimony  that
Faith  is  more  trustworthy  than  criticism.


Thanks  be  to  God  !


©trjcr  Mtorks  brr  same  JUtrjnr.

HOLY   SCRIPTURES   IN   CHURCH   OF   ROME.

APOSTOLIC   TRADITIONS  ACCORDING  TO  THE

COUNCIL  OF  TRENT.

THE  CELESTIAL  AND    ECCLESIASTICAL  HIER-
ARCHY.


printea  b^  3amea  parfcer  ani>  Co.,  Crown  Hart>,  ©rfort.


THE  WORKS   OF
DIONYSIUS  THE  AREOPAGITE.

PART    II.
THE   HEAVENLY   HIERARCHY,

AND

TriE  ecclesiastical  hierarchy.

NOW  FIRST  TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH,
FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  GREEK,

BY  THE

REV.   JOHN    PARKER,    M.A.

Author  -of  "  Christianity  Chronologically  Confirmed,"  &c.


Sames  $arfter  an*  Co.

6  SOUTH AMPTON*STREET,   STRAND,   LONDON;

AND   27  BROAD-STREET,    OXFORD.
1899*


CONTENTS.


DlONYSlUS       THE        AREOPAGITE        AND        THE

Alexandrine  School         .  ,

On  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy
On  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy   .
Appendix  i—

Lists  of  Bishops      ,

Apostolic   Traditions   generally    in
abeyance     .....

Index


page

V

I

67
163

167
168


TO

THE    MEMORY
OF

EDWARD   BOUVERIE   PUSEY,

THEOLOGIAN  \
OF    THE
CHURCH    OF    BRITAIN.


BOOKS  TO   BE   READ,


1st.  "The  doctrine  of  the  Lord,  through  the  Twelve
Apostles,  to  the  Gentiles."    Spence,  Nisbet.

2nd.  "  The  Apostolic  Constitutions."  Lagarde.  Williams
and  Norgate,  1862.

3rd.   "  Coptic  Constitutions."    Lagarde.     Tattam,  1845.

4th.   Justin  Martyr — for  Liturgy.

5th.  Hippolitus,  "  Refutation  of  all  heresies."  Duncker.
Gottingen,  1859.

6th.  Hierocles  on  "Golden  Verses"  of  Pythagoras.
Roger  Daniel.     London,  1654.

7th.  "Ecclesiastical  History  (in  Greek)  from  establish-
ment of  the  Church  to  our  own  time*"  By
Professor  Kyriakos.     Athens,  1898.

8th.  "St.  Denys,  l'Areopagite,  premier  Eveque  de
Paris."     Darras,  1863.        Vives,  Paris.

9th.   Gale's  "  Court  of  the  Gentiles."    Hall,  Oxon,  1672.

10th.  Dexter's  Chronicle.     Migne,  T.  31.

nth.  Monuments  inedits.    Faillon.


DIONYSIUS  THE  AREOPAGITE


THE   ALEXANDRINE   SCHOOL.


ALEXANDRIA  became  the  home  of  Christian
Philosophy,  but  Athens  was  its  birthplace.  Pan-
taenus  and  Ammonius-Saccus  were  chief  founders
of  the  Alexandrine  School.  They  were  both  Chris-
tian. They  both  drew  their  teaching  from  the  Word
of  God,  "  the  Fountain  of  Wisdom,"  and  from  the
writings  of  Hierotheus,  and  Dionysius  the  Areopa-
gite — Bishops  of  Athens.  For  several  centuries  there
had  been  a  Greek  preparation  for  the  Alexandrine
School.  As  the  Old  Testament  was  a  Schoolmaster,
leading  to  Christ,  so  the  Septuagint,  Pythagoras,
Plato,  Aristobulus,  Philo,  and  Apollos  were  heralds
who  prepared  the  minds  of  men  for  that  fulness  of
light  and  truth  in  Jesus  Christ,  which,  in  Alexandria,
clothed  itself  in  the  bright  robes  of  Divine  Philo-
sophy.

Pantaenus  was  born  in  Athens,  a.d.  120,  and  died
in  Alexandria,  a.d.  213.  He  was  Greek  by  nation-
ality, and  Presbyter  of  the  Church  in  Alexandria  by
vocation.  First,  Stoic,  then  Pythagorean,  he  became
Christian  some  time  before  a.d.  186,  at  which  date
he  was  appointed  chief  instructor  in  the  Didaskeleion,
b


vi  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

by  Demetrius,  Bishop  of  Alexandria.  Pantaenus
recognised  the  preparation  for  the  Christian  Faith
in  the  Greek  Philosophy.  Anastasius-Sinaita  describes
him  as  "  one  of  the  early  expositors  who  agreed  with
each  other  in  treating  the  first  six  days  of  Creation
as  prophetic  of  Christ  and  the  whole  Church."

Eusebius  says,  that  Pantaenus  expounded  the
treasures  of  the  Divine  dogmas  preserved  direct,
as  from  father  to  son,  from  St.  Paul  and  other
Apostles.  Photius  records  that  Pantaenus  was  pupil
of  those  who  had  seen  the  Apostles,  but  that  he
certainly  had  not  listened  to  any  of  them  themr
selves.  Now,  if  Pantaenus  was  pupil  of  those  who
had  seen  the  Apostles,  and  yet  had  not  listened
to  their  oral  teaching,  it  is  natural  to  infer  that  he
was  pupil  through  their  writings.  I  am  a  pupil  of
Dr.  Pusey,  but  I  never  listened  to  his  oral  teach-
ing ;  I  am  pupil  through  his  writings.  Now,  there
exist,  to  this  day,  the  writings  of  two  Presbyters  who
had  seen  the  Apostles — both  converts  to  the  faith
through  St.  Paul, — whose  writings  contain  the  trea-
sures of  the  Divine  dogmas,  received  from  St.  Paul
and  the  other  Apostles.  Those  two  Presbyters  are
Hierotheus  and  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  both  or-
dained Bishop  of  Athens  by  St.  Paul.  Dionysius
the  Areopagite  expressly  calls  St.  Paul  his  "  chief
initiator,"  and  as  such,  gives  his  teaching  on  the
holy  Angels,  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  Heavenly
Hierarchy ;  and  frequently  describes  St.  Paul  as  his
"  chief  instructor."

If,  then,  we  can  prove  that  the  writings  of  Diony^


and  the  Alexandrine  School  vii

sius  existed  before,  and  were  known  in  Alexandria,
when  Pantaenus  delivered  his  lectures  in  that  city>
we  may  fairly  infer  that  Pantaenus  would  know>  and
knowing,  would  use,  the  writings  penned  by  the
Chief  of  his  own  Areopagus,  and  Bishop  of  his  own
Athens.

Historical  criticism  does  not  permit  us  to  reject
probabilities,  merely  because  they  confirm  the  Chris-
tian Faith.

Dexter,  in  his  Chronicle,  collected  from  the
Archives  of  Toledo  and  other  churches  in  Spain,
gives  this  testimony  : —

"  U.C.  851  (a.d.  98).  Dionysius  Areopagita  dicat
Eugenio  Marcello,  dicto,  propter  ingenii  excellen-
tiam,  Timotheo,  libros  de  Divinis  Notninibus."

Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  writing  to  Pope  Sixtus  II.,
c.  250,  respecting  the  writings  of  Dionysius  the
Areopagite,  affirms  "that  no  one  can  intelligently
dispute  their  paternity — that  no  one  penetrated  more
profoundly  than  Dionysius  into  the  mysterious  depths
of  Holy  Scripture — that  Dionysius  was  disciple  ot
St.  Paul,  and  piously  governed  the  Church  of
Athens."  If,  then,  the  Bishops  of  Alexandria  and
Rome  exchanged  letters  only  a  few  years  after  the
death  of  Pantaenus,  and  only  seven  years  after  the
death  of  Ammonius,  and  in  those  letters  affirmed
the  writings  to  be  undoubtedly  written  by  Dionysius
the  Areopagite,  it  would  be  the  height  of  absurdity
to  affirm  that  such  writings  were  unknown  to  Pan-
taenus and  Ammonius.

But  we  do  not  need  to  base  our  proof  on  mere


viii  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

supposition.  Routh  gives  two  fragments  of  Pan-
taenus.  The  second  is  a  distinct  echo  of  Dionysius.
In  Divine  Names  (c.  7),  Dionysius  discusses  how
Almighty  God  knows  existing  things,  and  explains
the  text ;  "/fe,  knowing  all  things  before  their  birth"
as  proving  that  "  not  as  learning  existing  things
from  existing  things,  but  from  Himself,  and  in  Him-
self, as  Cause,  the  Divine  Being  pre-holds  and  pre-
comprehends  the  notions  and  essence  of  all  things,
not  approaching  each  several  thing  according  to  its
kind,  but  knowing  and  containing  ail  things  within
one  grasp  of  the  cause.  Thus  Almighty  God  knows
existing  things,  not  by  a  knowledge  of  existing  things,
but  by  that  of  Himself."  Dionysius,  c.  V.  s.  8,
speaking  of  creation,  declares  that  the  Divine  and
good  volitions  of  Almighty  God  define  and  produce
existing  things.

Pantaenus  teaches  the  same :  "  Neither  does  He
know  things  sensible  sensibly  (ala-BrjTas),  nor  things
intelligible  intellectually.  For  it  is  not  possible  that
He,  Who  is  above  all  things,  should  comprehend
things  being,  after  things  being  (kotu  to.  ovto),  but  we
affirm  that  He  knows  things  being,  as  His  own
volitions  ....  yea,  as  His  own  volitions,  Almighty
God  knows  things  being,  since  by  willing  (OtXvv),
He  made  all  things  being."

In  Mystic  Theology,  c.  V.,  Dionysius  says,  "  Al-
mighty God  does  not  know  existing  things,  qua  exist-
ing." The  teaching  of  Ammonius-Saccus  is  the  same  ;
Ammonius  uses  the  word  PoCXrjpa,  Dionysius  and
Pantaenus,  BeX^ra,  of  God,  as  Source  of  Creation.


and  the  Alexandrine  School.  ix

But,  though  the  known  fragments  of  Pantaenus  are
few,  we  possess  abundant  writings  of  two  pupils,,
Clement  of  Alexandria  and  Origen,  from  which  we
may  gather  the  teaching  of  their  master.  Clement
speaks  of  Pantaenus  as  his  "great  instructor  and
collaborator."  Such  is  the  similarity  between  the
writings  of  Clement  and  Dionysius,  that  some  have
hazarded  the  conjecture  that  Clement  the  Philosopher,
mentioned  by  Dionysius,  was  Clement  of  Alexandria  !
I  give  only  one  familiar  illustration.  Clement  writes :
"As  then,  those  riding  at  anchor  at  sea,  drag  the
anchor,  but  do  not  drag  it  to  themselves,  but  them-
selves to  the  anchor,  thus  those  who  are  drawn  to
God  in  the  gnostic  life,  find  themselves  unconsciously
led  to  God."  Dionysius,  D.  N.,  c.  III.  s.  i,  says,
"  or,  as  if  after  we  have  embarked  on  ship,  and  are
holding  on  to  the  cable,  attached  to  some  rock,  we
do  not  draw  the  rock  to  us,  but  ourselves,  and  the
ship,  to  the  rock.  Wherefore,  before  everything,  and
especially  theology,  we  must  begin  with  prayer ;  not
as  though  we  ourselves  were  drawing  the  power,
which  is  everywhere,  and  nowhere  present,  but  as,
by  our  godly  reminiscences  and  invocations,  con-
ducting ourselves  to,  a.nd  making  ourselves  one  with
It."

Origen  confessed  that  Pantaenus  was  his  superior
in  the  philosophy  of  the  schools,  and  that  he  moulded
his  teaching  upon  the  model  of  Pantaenus.  Do  the
writings  of  Origen  bear  the  stamp  of  Dionysius  and
Hierotheus?  Origen,  on  the  resurrection  of  the
body,    says,.  "  For   how   doe?    it   npt   seem   absurd


x  Dionysins  the  Areopagite

that  this  body  which  has  endured  scars  for  Christ,
and,  equally  with  the  soul,  has  borne  the  savage
torments  of  persecutions,  and  has  also  endured  the
suffering  of  chains,  and  rods,  and  has  been  tortured
with  fire,  beaten  with  the  sword,  and  has  further
suffered  the  cruel  teeth  of  wild  beasts,  the  gallows
of  the  cross,  and  divers  kinds  of  punishments,— that
this  should  be  deprived  of  the  prizes  of  such  contests.
If  forsooth,  the  soul  alone,  which  not  alone  conten-
ded, should  receive  the  crown,  and  its  companion
the  body,  which  served  it  with  much  labour,  should
attain  no  recompense,  for  its  agony  and  victory, —
how  does  it  not  seem  contrary  to  all  reason,  that
the  flesh,  resisting  for  Christ  its  natural  vices,  and
its  innate  lust,  and  guarding  its  virginity  with  im-
mense labour,— that  one,  when  the  time  for  rewards
has  come,  should  be  rejected  as  unworthy  and  the
other  should  receive  its  crown  ?  Such  a  fact  would
undoubtedly  argue  on  the  part  of  God,  either  a  lack
of  justice  or  a  lack  of  power."  Dionysius  (E.  H.,
c.  VII.)  says,  "Now  the  pure  bodies  of  the  holy
souls,  enrolled  together  as  yoke-fellows,  and  fellow
travellers,  which  together  strove  during  the  divine
contests,  throughout  the  Divine  Life,  in  the  unmoved
steadfastness  of  the  souls,  will  together  receive  their
own  resurrection.  For,  having  been  made  one  with
the  holy  souls,  to  which  they  were  united  during  this
present  life,  by  having  become  members  of  Christ,
they  will  receive  in  return  the  godlike  and  incor-
ruptible immortality  and  blessed  inheritance."  Dio-
nysius (D.  N.,  c.  VI.  s.  2)  says,  "  what  is  still  more


and  the  Alexandrine  School.  xi

divine,  It  promises  to  transfer  our  whole  selves
(I  mean  souls  and  bodies,  their  yoke-fellows),  to
a  perfect  life  and  immortality.  Others  again  do
this  injustice  to  bodies,  that,  after  having  toiled
with  the  holy  souls,  they  unjustly  deprive  them  of
the  holy  retributions,  when  they  have  come  to  the
goal  of  their  most  divine  course."  "  For  if  the  man
have  passed  a  life  dear  to  God  in  soul  and  body,
the  body  which  has  contended  throughout  the  Divine
struggles  will  be  honoured  together  with  the  devout
soul."

To  shew  that  Origen  knew  the  works  of  Hiero-
theus,  we  give  an  extract  from  his  letter  to  Gregory  :
"  Would  that  you  might  both  participate  in  and
continually  augment  this  part,  so  that  you  may
not  only  say,  '  we  are  partakers  of  Christ,'  but  also
partakers  of  God."  Papias a,  Bishop  of  Hierapolis
(fragment  V.)  says,  "the  Presbyters,  the  disciples
of  the  Apostles,  say  that  this  is  the  gradation  and
method  of  those  who  are  saved,  and  that  they
advance  through  steps  of  this  nature,  and  that,
moreover,  they  ascend  through  the  Spirit  to  the
Son,  and  through  the  Son  to  the  Father  ;  and  that,
in  due  time,  the  Son  will  yield  up  His  work  to  the
Father."  Who  the  Presbyters,  the  disciples  of  the
Apostles  were,  we  may  gather  from  the  three  last
chapters  of  the  "  Book  of  Hierotheus b,"  in  which
the  very  same  doctrine  is  taught.  Is  it  not,  then,
a  legitimate  inference,  that  when  Photius  says  "  that

a  c.  140.  b  Br.  Mus.  (Ad.  Rich.  7189).


xii  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

Pantaenus  was  a  pupil  of  the  Presbyters  who  had  seen
the  Apostles"  he  designated  Hierotheus  and  Dionysius
the  Areopagite,  generally  known  under  that  title  ?


Ammonius-Saccus  was  born  of  Christian  parents
in  Alexandria,  and  died  in  that  city,  a.d.  242.

Anastasius  Sinaita  calls  him  "the  Wise,"  and
Hierocles,  "the  taught  of  God."  Besides  being
famous  for  his  expositions  of  Holy  Scripture,  he
wrote  the  " Diatesseron,"  or  "Harmony  of  the
Gospels,"  contained  in  the  Bib.  Patrum.  In  a.d.
236,  he  wrote  the  agreement  between  Moses  and
Jesus.  He  was  the  great  conciliator,  who  sought
the  good  in  every  system,  and  to  make  all  one  in
Christ.  Pressense  beautifully  describes  him  as  a  man
who  wished  to  believe  and  to  know — to  adore  and  to
comprehend— to  conciliate  the  Greek  Philosophy  with
the  Mysteries  of  the  East.  He  wrote  a  commentary
on  the  golden  verses  of  Pythagoras,  which  Hierocles
published,  as  well  as  reproduced  his  other  works.
The  titles  of  his  books,  mentioned  by  Photius,  such
as  "Providence"  and  "Free  Will,"  recall  those  of
the  lost  books  of  Dionysius,  of  which  we  have  only
a  summary  in  his  known  works.     (Cod.  251 — 214.)

Ammonius  was  surnamed  Saccus  from  having
been  a  corn  carrier.  Virgil,  Shakespere,  Milton,
were  great  geniuses  in  themselves,  but  when  we
know  the  sources  from  which  they  drew,  we  can
better  understand  their  achievements.

Dionysius  was  indebted  to  Hierotheus— Ammonius


and  the  Alexandrine  School.  xiii

drew  from  Dionysius.  This  we  shall  shew,  not  as
we  might,  by  his  works  as  described  by  Photius,  but
from  Plotinus,  his  disciple,  in  order  that  we  may
have  the  prevailing  proof,  to  some  minds,  of  testi-
mony not  necessarily  Christian.

Plotinus  was  born  in  Lycopolis,  a.d.  205,  and  died
in  Campagna,  a.d.  270.  At  the  age  of  29,  he  began
to  search  for  truth,  in  the  schools  of  Alexandria.
He  wandered  from  teacher  to  teacher,  but  could
find  no  rest  until  he  was  persuaded  to  go  and  hear
Ammonius-Saccus.  After  listening  to  him,  he  ex-
claimed, "  This  is  what  I  sought."

Plotinus  remained  under  him  eleven  years,  until
the  death  of  Ammonius,  a.d.  242.  In  a.d.  244,
Plotinus  began  to  teach  in  Rome.  Plotinus  was  not
a  refined  scholar.  Porphyry,  therefore,  committed
his  teaching  to  writing.  Porphyry  was  regarded  as
the  greatest  enemy  to  the  Christian  Faith  in  the
early  centuries.  Persecutors  burned  the  bodies  of
Christians,  but  Porphyry  sought  to  undermine  their
faith  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  by  quibbles  of  unbelief,
which  have  been  revived  to-day  as  "New  Criticism."
Porphyry  wrote  against  the  Holy  Scriptures  with
a  bitterness  engendered  by  a  conviction  of  their
truth.  Now,  it  is  a  startling  fact,  that  though  the
teaching  of  Plotinus  comes  to  us  through  Porphyry,
there  is  not  a  word  in  the  Enneades,  in  which  the
teaching  of  Plotinus  is  given,  against  the  Christian
Faith.  It  is  true  that  Eutochius  published  another
version  of  the  teaching  of  Plotinus,  on  the  ground
that  his  teaching  was  coloured  by  Porphyry,  but  we


xiv  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

prefer  to  rest  our  proof  on  Porphyry,  as  not  being
prejudiced  in  favour  of  the  truth.

Let  us  then  first  see  what  Plotinus  teaches  re-
specting the  Holy  Trinity.  He  says,  "We  need
not  go  beyond  the  three  Hypostaseis  "  (Persons).  It
is  true  that  Plotinus  presents  that  Trinity  as  "One,"
"Mind,"  and  "Soul,"  whereas  Dionysius  gives  the
formula  "  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit."  Occasionally
Plotinus  uses  "  Logos "  instead  of  "  Mind."  But
even  this  substitution  of  "One"  for  "Father"  may
be  traced  to  Dionysius,  who  speaks  of  the  Triad,
evapxiKrj  and  even  ivapxLK&v  vTroaTaafav,  "  One  spring-
ing." The  "  One  "  represents  the  Father.  Plotinus
says,  "  We  may  represent  the  first  principle,  '  One,'
as  source,  which  has  no  other  origin  than  Itself,  and
which  pours  Itself  in  a  multitude  of  streams  without
being  diminished  by  what  it  gives."  Dionysius  speaks
of  the  "  Father "  as  sole  source  of  Godhead,  and
says  that  "  the  Godhead  is  undiminished  by  the  gifts
imparted."  In  Chap.  XII.  of  Divine  Names,  Dio-
nysius treats  of  "  One  "  and  "  Perfect "  as  applied
to  Almighty  God.

Let  us  now  hear  Plotinus  on  the  "  Beautiful "
Enneades  (I.  6-7).  Plotinus  says,  "The  soul  ad-
vances in  its  ascent  towards  God,  until  being  raised
above  everything  alien,  it  sees  face  to  face,  in  His
simplicity,  and  in  all  His  purity,  Him  upon  Whom
all  hangs,  to  Whom  all  aspire,  from  Whom  all  hold
existence,  life  and  thought.  What  transport  of  love
must  not  he  feel  who  sees  Him  !  with  what  ardour
ought  he  not  to  desire  to  be  united  to  Him  !    He,


and  the  Alexandrine  School.  xv

who  has  not  seen  Him,  desires  Him  as  the  Good  ;
he  who  has  seen  Him,  admires  Him  as  the  sovereign
Beauty ;  and  struck  at  once  with  astonishment  and
pleasure,  disdains  the  things  which  heretofore  he
called  by  the  name  of  Beauty.  This  is  what
happens  to  those  to  whom  have  appeared  the
forms  of  gods  and  demons ; — they  no  longer  care
for  the  beauty  of  other  bodies.  What  think  you,
then,  should  he  experience  who  has  seen  the
Beautiful  Himself, — the  Beautiful  surpassing  earth
and  heaven !  The  miserable  is  not  he,  who  has
neither  fresh  colour  nor  comely  form,  nor  power,
nor  royalty  ;  it  is  alone  he,  who  sees  himself  ex-
cluded from  the  possession  of  Beauty— a  possession
in  comparison  with  which  he  ought  to  disdain
royalty,  rule  of  the  whole  earth,  of  the  sea,  and
heaven  itself,  if  he  should  be  able,  by  abandoning,
by  despising  all  these,  to  rise  to  the  contemplation
of  the  Beautiful,  face  to  face."  Plotinus  also  re-
cognised, "  that  the  eye  soiled  with  impurity  could
never  bear  the  sight,  or  attain  to  the  vision  of  that
Beauty.  We  must  render  the  organs  of  vision
analogous  and  like  to  the  object  that  they  would
contemplate.  Every  man  ought  to  begin  by  ren-
dering himself  beautiful  and  divine  to  obtain  a  vision
of  the  Beautiful  and  the  Deity."  Well  might  St.
Augustine  say,  that  "with  the  change  of  a  few
words,  Plotinus  became  concordant  with  Christ's
religion."  No  wonder  that  Gregory  and  Basil  quoted
so  largely  from  Plotinus.  Let  us  now  hear  what
Dionysius   says  of  the   "Good    and    Beautiful": —


xvi  Doinysius  the  Areopagite

"Goodness  turns  all  things  to  Itself;  all  things
aspire  to  It,  as  source  and  bond  and  end.  From
this  Beautiful  comes  being  to  all  existing  things.
All  things  aspire  to  the  Beautiful  and  Good,— and
there  is  no  existing  thing  which  does  not  partici-
pate in  the  Beautiful  and  Good."  Read  the  Fourth
Chapter  of  the  Divine  Names.

Porphyry  records  that  Plotinus  attained  to  that
vision  of  the  Beautiful  three  times  during  his  life.
How  that  vision  of  the  Beautiful  is  to  be  attained,
Dionysius  describes  in  the  "  Mystic  Theology  :  "—
"But  thou,  O  dear  Timothy,  by  thy  persistent  com-
merce with  the  mystic  visions,  leave  behind  both
sensible  perceptions  and  intellectual  efforts,  and  all
objects  of  sense  and  intelligence,  and  all  things  not
being  and  being,  and  be  raised  aloft  agnostically  to
the  union,  as  attainable,  with  Him  Who  is  above
every  essence  and  knowledge.  For  by  unchecked
and  absolute  extasy,  in  all  purity,  from  thyself,  and
all,  thou  wilt  be  carried  on  high  to  the  superessential
Ray  of  the  Divine  Darkness,  when  thou  hast  cast
away  all  and  become  free  from  all."  Ammonius  had
such  extasy  during  his  lectures,  in  which  he  seemed
to  have  Divine  visions.

Plotinus  differs  from  Dionysius  in  regarding  crea-
tion as  an  act  of  necessity,  whereas  Dionysius  regards
it  as  an  act  of  love.  Plotinus  treats  evil  as  "an
elongation  from  God."  Dionysius  speaks  of  Al-
mighty God  as  immanent  in  matter  the  most
elongated  from  spirit.  Plotinus  traces  evil  to  matter;
Dionysius  to  the  fallacious  choice  of  a  free  agent.


and  the  Alexandrine  School.  xvii

May  it  not  be  that  the  pagan  colouring  of  Porphyry
in  these  respects  led  Eutochius  to  give  a  more
faithful  and  consistent  account  of  the  teaching  of
Plotinus.

But  the  crowning  proof  that  Dionysius  was  the
source  from  which  the  Alexandrine  School  drew
much  of  its  wisdom,  is  Proclus  (450 — 485).  Suidas
affirmed  long  ago  that  Proclus  cribbed  whole  pas-
sages from  Dionysius.  Professor  Stiglmayr  fills  seven
pages  with  parallel  passages.

.  Vacherot  describes  certain  chapters  of  the  "Divine
Names  "  as  extracts  from  Proclus,  word  for  word,
and  says  the  whole  doctrine  of  Dionysius  seems  to
be  a  commentary  upon  the  Theology  of  Alexandria.
Barthe'lemy  St.  Hilaire  says  that  Dionysius  and
Scotus  Erigena,  almost  entirely  implanted,  in  the
middle  age,  the  doctrine  of  Neo-Platonism.  Matter
is  more  profound;  Professor  Langen  finds  in  Diony-
sius the  "characteristics  of  Neo-Platonic  speculation."
The  similarity  of  doctrine  is  denied  by  none.  Which
writings  appeared  first  ?  that  is  the  question.

Dexter  commemorates  the  "  Divine  Names "
a.d.  98°.

Polycarp  quotes  Dionysius  verbatim  as  "  a  certain
one."  Jerome  quotes  him  as  "  quidam  Graeco-
rum."  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  (a.d.  250),  writing
to  Sixtus  II.,  declares  that  no  one  can  intelligently
doubt  that  the  writings  are  those  of  Dionysius,  the
convert  of  St.  Paul,  Bishop  of  Athens.

c  From  Tabularia  of  Toledo,  a.d.  98.


xviii  Diony sius  the  Areopagite

Tertullian  expresses  the  Agnosia  "nihil  scire
omnia  scire."  Origen  quotes  him  by  name.  Theo-
dore (a.d.  420)  answers  objections, — whom  Photius
approved.  Gregory  calls  Dionysius  "an  ancient  and
venerable  Father."  The  Second  Council  of  Nicea
quotes  the  very  words  contained  in  the  "Eccle-
siastical Hierarchy,"  c.  I.  s.  4,  as  those  of  the  great
Dionysius.  Bishop  Pearson  proves  that  the  best
judges  in  the  sixth,  fifth,  fourth  and  third  centuries
regarded  the  writings  as  written  by  Dionysius  the
Areopagite.  German  scholars  to-day  admit  that  the
external  testimony  is  in  favour  of  their  genuineness.

Yet  eccentric  critics,  on  account  of  the  precise
theology,  cannot  believe  that  the  works  were  written
by  a  learned  Greek, — Chief  of  the  Areopagus— who
forsook  all  to  follow  Christ, — the  convert  and  dis-
ciple of  St.  Paul, — the  familiar  friend  of  St.  John
and  other  Apostles,  to  whom  our  Saviour  revealed
the  mysteries  of  the  Father ;  but  those  critics  can
believe  that  an  unknown  man,  whose  century  no  one
can  fix,  and  possibly  a  Syrian,  may  have  gleaned
from  writers  of  the  first  four  centuries  these  theo-
logical pearls  expressed  in  Greek  in  a  style  unique
and  always  .like  itself.  They  can  believe  that  the
Author  of  these  Divine  writings  would  incorporate
fictitious  allusions  to  persons  and  events  of  the
apostolic  age,  to  add  lustre  to  incomparable  works,
and  to  impute  them  to  another.  They  can  believe
that  writings,  so  composed)  were  foisted  upon  a
credulous  Christendom,  so  that  Dionysius  of  Alex-
andria,   Maximus,    St.    John    Damascene^   and    the


and  the  Alexandrine  School.  xix

Council  of  Nicea,  accepted  them  as  the  genuine
works  of  Dionysius.  I  do  not  belong  to  that  school.
Only  unbelief  could  believe  anything  so  incredible.
Rational  men  will  not  hazard  the  surmise  that  works
known  in  the  first  century  were  gleaned  from  writings
composed  four  hundred  years  afterwards.

The  tone  of  the  Alexandrine  School  may  be
further  illustrated  from  Amelius  and  Dionysius  the
Sublime.  Amelius  attended  Plotinus  twenty-four
years  as  companion  and  pupil.  Eusebius  gives  an
extract  from  his  writings,  in  which  Amelius  says,
"  This  plainly  was  the  Word,  by  Whom,  being  Eter-
nal, things  becoming  became,  as  Heraclitus  would
say."  It  was  probably  he  who  said,  "  the  Prologue
of  St.  John's  Gospel  ought  to  be  written  in  gold,
and  placed  in  the  most  conspicuous  place  in  every
church."  De  Civ.  Dei,  LX.  c.  29.  Dionysius,  the
famous  secretary  of  Zenobia,  attended  the  lectures
of  Arnmonius-Saccus.  He  was  the  "arbiter"  of  all
literary  questions.  He  expresses  his  admiration,
De  sub.  L.  9,  of  the  diction  of  Moses  in  the  de-
scription of  the  six  days'  creation,  and  numbers
St.  Paul  amongst  the  most  brilliant  Greek  orators,
as  a  man  who  propounded  a  "dogma  beyond  demon-
stration."

We  claim  that  the  testimony  of  these  illustrious
men,  and  the  extracts  from  Pantaenus,  Ammonius,
and  their  disciples,  justify  the  conclusion  that  the
Alexandrine  School  was  Biblical,  Christian,  and
Philosophical,   that    its    Philosophy   was   a    Divine


xx  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  C°r>c.

Philosophy  of  the  Faith,  not  a  pagan  philosophy
against  the  Faith,  and  that  the  main  sources  of  its
Divine  Philosophy  were  the  writings  of  Hierotheus
and  Dionysius,  Bishops  of  Athens.

JOHN   PARKER.
Cannes,
Epiphany,  1899.


For  sketch  of  Life,  Internal  Evidence  of  date,  and  External
Testimony  to  genuineness  during  first  nine  centuries,  see
"  Celestial  and  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy."  (Skeffington,
2s.  6<f.)


DIONYSIUS  THE  AREOPAGITE

ON    THE

HEAVENLY    HIERARCHY.


CAPUT    I.

To  my  Fellow  Presbyter  Timothy  a.

Dionysius  the  Presbyter.

That  every  divine  illumination,  whilst  going  forth
lovingly  to  the  objects  of  its  forethought  under
various  forms,  remains  si?nplex.  Nor  is  this  all.
It  also  unifies  the  things  illuminated.

Section  I.

"  Every  good  gift b  and  every  perfect  gift  Is  from
above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  Lights."

Further  also,  every  procession  of  illuminating  light,

proceeding  from  the  Father,  whilst  visiting  us  as  a

gift   of  goodness,  restores  us  again  gradually  as  an

unifying  power,  and  turns  us  to  the  oneness  of  our

conducting  Father,  and  to  a  deifying  simplicity.    Forc

all  things  are  from  Him,  and  to  Him,  as  said  the

Sacred  Word.

Section  II.

Invoking  then  Jesus,  the  Paternal  Light,  the  Real,
the  True,  "which  lightethd  every  man  coming  into

*  I  Pet  v.  I.  b  James  i.  17.  c  Rom.  xi.  36.

d  John  i.  9

B


2  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

the  world,"  "  through e  Whom  we  have  access  to  the
Father,"  Source  of  Light,  let  us  aspire,  as  far  as  is
attainable,  to  the  illuminations  handed  down  by  our
fathers  in  the  most  sacred  Oracles,  and  let  us  gaze,
as  we  may,  upon  the  Hierarchies  of  the  Heavenly
Minds  manifested  by  them  symbolically  for  our  in-
struction. And  when  we  have  received,  with  im-
material and  unflinching  mental f  eyes,  the  gift  of
Light,  primal  and  super-primal,  of  the  supremely  Di-
vine Father,  which  manifests  to  us  the  most  blessed
Hierarchies  of  the  Angels  in  types  and  symbols,  let
us  then,  from  it,  be  elevated  to  its  simple  splendour?.
For  it  never  loses  its  own  unique  inwardness,  but
multiplied  and  going  forth,  as  becomes  its  goodness,
for  an  elevating  and  unifying  blending  of  the  objects
of  its  care,  remains  firmly  and  solitarily  centred  within
itself  in  its  unmoved  sameness ;  and  raises,  accord-
ing to  their  capacity,  those  who  lawfully  aspire  to  it,
and  makes  them  one,  after  the  example  of  its  own
unifying  Oneness.  For  it  is  not  possible  that  the
supremely  Divine  Ray  should  otherwise  illuminate
us,  except  so  far  as  it  is  enveloped,  for  the  purpose  of**
instruction,  in  variegated  sacred  veils,  and  arranged
naturally  and  appropriately,  for  such  as  we  are,  by
paternal  forethought.

Section  III.
Wherefore,  the  Divine  Institution  of  sacred  Rites,
having  deemed  it  worthy  of  the  supermundane  imi-

«  Rom.  v.  2.  f  Syr.  Doc.  p.  61,  Clark.

*  Plato  Rep.  6,  7— II,  1 2 1— 126.     Read  Allegory  of  Cave.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  3

tation  of  the  Heavenly  Hierarchies,  and  having  de-
picted the  aforesaid  immaterial  Hierarchies  in  ma-
terial figures  and  bodily  compositions,  in  order  that
we  might  be  borne,  as  far  as  our  capacity  permits,
from  the  most  sacred  pictures  to  the  instructions
and  similitudes  without  symbol  and  without  type,
transmitted  to  us  our  most  Holy  Hierarchy.  For  \
it  is  not  possible  for  our  mind  to  be  raised  to  that
immaterial  representation  and  contemplation  of  the
Heavenly  Hierarchies,  without  using  the  material
guidance  suitable  to  itself,  accounting  the  visible11
beauties  as  reflections  of  the  invisible  comeliness/'
and  the  sweet1  odours  of  the  senses  as  emblems  of
the  spiritual  distribution;  and  the  material k  lights
as  a  likeness  of  the  gift  of  the  immaterial  enlighten-
ment ;  and  the  detailed  sacred  instructions l,  of  the
feast  of  contemplation  within  the  mind  j  and  the
ranks m  of  the  orders  here,  of  the  harmonious  and
regulated  habit,  with  regard  to  Divine  things;  and
the  reception  of  the  most  Divine  Eucharist,  of  the
partaking0  of  Jesus,  and  whatever  other  things  were
transmitted  to  Heavenly  Beings  supermundanely,  but
to  us  symbolically.

For  the  sake,  then,  of  this  our  proportioned  deifi-
cation, the  philanthropic  Source  of  sacred  mysteries,
by  manifesting  the  Heavenly  Hierarchies  to  us,
and  constituting  our  Hierarchy  as  fellow-ministers
with  them,  through  our  imitation  of  their  Godlike

t  ps.  xix.  '  Num.  xv.  3.  k  Luke  ii.  9.

1  John  vii.  14.  m  Rom.  xiii.  I,  2,  ■  I  Cor.  x.  16.


4  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

priestliness0,  so  far  as  in  us  lies,  described  under
sensible  likeness  the  supercelestial  Minds,  in  the
inspired  compositions  of  the  Oracles,  in  order  that
It  might  lead  us  through  the  sensible  to  the  intel-
ligiblep,  and  from  inspired  symbols  to  the  simple  {-
sublimities  of  the  Heavenly  Hierarchies.


CAPUT    II.

That  Divine  and  Heavenly  things  are  appropriately
revealed,  even  through  dissimilar  symbols.

Section  I.
It  is  necessary  then,  as  I  think,  first  to  set  forth
what  we  think  is  the  purpose  of  every  Hierarchy,
and  what  benefit  each  one  confers  upon  its  followers;
and  next  to  celebrate  the  Heavenly  Hierarchies  ac-
cording to  their  revelation  in  the  Oracles ;  then  fol-
lowing these  Oracles,  to  say  in  what  sacred  forms
the  holy  writings  of  the  Oracles  depict  the  celestial
orders,  and  to  what  sort  of  simplicity  we  must  be
carried  through  the  representations ;  in  order  that  we
also  may  not,  like  the  vulgar,  irreverently  think  that
the  heavenly  and  Godlike  minds  are  certain  many-
footed  *  and  many-faced r  creatures,  or  moulded  to
the  brutishness  of  oxen8,  or  the  savage  form  of  lions \
and  fashioned  like  the  hooked  beaks  of  eagles u,  or
the  feathery  down  of  birds1,  and  should  imagine  that
there  are  certain  wheels J  of  fire  above  the  heaven,

°  i  Pet  ii.  9.  p  „oVo.  *  Ezek.  i.  7.  •  Ibid.  i.  6.

•  Ibid.  i.  10.  *  Ibid.  »  Ibid.  *  Ibid.  i.  6-8.

y  Dan.  vii.  9.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  r

or  material  thrones2  upon  which  the  Godhead  may
recline,  or  certain  many-coloured  a  horses,  and  spear-
bearing  leaders  of  the  host b,  and  whatever  else  was
transmitted  by  the  Oracles  to  us  under  multifarious
symbols  of  sacred  imagery.

And  indeed,  the  Word  of  God  e  artlessly  makes
use  of  poetic  representations  of  sacred  things,  re-
specting the  shapeless  minds,  out  of  regard  to'  our
intelligence,  so  to  speak,  consulting  a  mode  of  edu-
cation proper  and  natural  to  it,  and  moulding  the
inspired  writings  for  it.

Section  II.
But  if  any  one  think  well  to  accept  the  sacred  com-
positions as  of  things  simple  and  unknown  in  their
own  nature,  and  beyond  our  contemplation,  but
thinks  the  imagery  of  the  holy  minds  in  the  Oracles
is  incongruous,  and  that  all  this  is,  so  to  speak,  a
•rude  scenic  representation  of  the  angelic  names;
and  further  says  that  the  theologians  ought,  when
they  have  come  to  the  bodily  representation  of  crea-'
tures  altogether  without  body,  to  represent  and  dis-  ;
play  them  by  appropriate  and,  as  far  as  possible,
cognate  figures,  taken,  at  any  rate,  from  our  most
honoured  and  immaterial  and  exalted  beings,  and
ought  not  to  clothe  the  heavenly  and  Godlike  simple
essences  with  the  many  forms  of  the  lowest  creatures
to  be  found  on  the  earth  (for  the  one  would  perhaps
be  more  adapted  to  our  instruction,  and  would  not

*  Dan.  vii.  9.  •  Zech.  i.  8.  b  joshua  v#  ^  ^  .

2  Mace.  iii.  25.  «  QeoXoyia.


6  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

degrade   the   celestial   explanations   to   incongruous
dissimilitudes;    but   the   other   both   does   violence
without  authority  to  the  Divine  powers,  and  likewise
leads  astray  our  minds,  through  dwelling  upon  these
irreverent  descriptions) ;    and  perhaps  he  will  also
think  that  the  super-heavenly  places  are  filled  with
certain  herds  of  lions,  and  troops  of  horses,  and  bel-
lowing songs  of  praise,  and  flocks  of  birds,  and  other
living  creatures,  and  material  and  less  honourable
things,    and   whatever   else   the   similitudes   of  the
1/  Oracles,    in    every   respect   dissimilar,   describe,  for
a  so-called  explanation,  but  which  verge  towards  the
absurd,  and  pernicious,  and  impassioned;  now,  in  my
opinion,  the  investigation  of  the  truth  demonstrates
the  most  sacred  wisdom  of  the  Oracles,  in  the  de-
scriptions of  the  Heavenly  Minds,  taking  forethought,
as  that  wisdom  does,  wholly  for  each,  so  as  neither,
as  one  may  say,  to  do  violence  to  the  Divine  Powers,
nor  at  the  same  time  to  enthral  us  in  the  grovelling
passions  of  the  debased  imagery.     For  any  one  might
say  that  the  cause  why  forms  are  naturally  attributed
to  the  formless,  and  shapes  to  the  shapeless,  is  not
alone  our  capacity  which  is  unable  immediately  to
elevate  itself  to  the  intelligible  contemplations,  and
that  it  needs  appropriate  and  cognate  instructions
which  present  images,  suitable  to  us,  of  the  formless
and  supernatural  objects  of  contemplation ;  but  fur-
ther, that  it  is  most  agreeable  to  the  revealing  Oracles
to   conceal,    through   mystical   and  sacred   enigmas,
and  to  keep  the  holy  and  secret  truth  respecting  the
supermundane  minds  inaccessible  to  the  multitude.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  7

For  it  is  not  every  one  that  is  holy,  nor,  as  the  Ora-
cles affirm,  does  knowledge  belong  to  all  d.

Section  III.

But  if  any  one  should  blame  the  descriptions  as
being  incongruous,  by  saying  that  it  is  shameful  to
attribute  shapes  so  repugnant  to  the  Godlike  and
most  holy  Orders,  it  is  enough  to  reply  that  the
method  of  Divine  revelation  is  twofold  ;  one,  in-
deed, as  is  natural,  proceeding  through  likenesses
that  are  similar,  and  of  a  sacred  character,  but  the
other,  through  dissimilar  forms,  fashioning  them  into
entire  unlikeness  and  incongruity.  No  doubt,  the
mystical  traditions  of  the  revealing  Oracles  some-
times extol  the  august  Blessedness  of  the  super-
essential  Godhead,  as  Word e,  and  Mind  f,  and  Es-
sence g,  manifesting  its  God-becoming  expression  and
wisdom,  both  as  really  being  Origin,  and  true  Cause
of  the  origin  of  things  being,  and  they  describe  It  as
light  h,  and  call  it  life.  While  such  sacred  descrip-
tions are  more  reverent,  and  seem  in  a  certain  way
to  be  superior  to  the  material  images,  they  yet,  even
thus,  in  reality  fall  short  of  the  supremely  Divine  simili-
tude. For  It  is  above  every  essence  and  life.  No  light,
indeed,  expresses  its  character,  and  every  description
and  mind  incomparably  fall  short  of  Its  similitude.

But  at  other  times  its  praises  are  supermundanely
sung,  by  the  Oracles  themselves,  through  dissimilar
revelations,  when  they  affirm  that  it  is  invisible1,  and

-'   i  Cor.  viii.  7.  e  John  i.  I.  f  Ps.  cxxxvi.  5.

s  Exod.  iii.  14.  h  John  i.  4.  l  I  Tim.  vi.  16.


/


8  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

infinite1,  and  incomprehensible ';  and  when  there  is
signified,  not  what  it  is,  but  what  it  is  not.     For  this,
as  I  think,  is  more  appropriate  to  It,  since,  as  the
secret  and  sacerdotal  tradition  taught,  we  rightly  de-
scribe its  non-relationship  to  things  created,  but  we
do   not  know  its  superessential,  and  inconceivable,
and   unutterable  indefinability.     If,  then,  the   nega-
tions respecting  things  Divine  are  true,  but  the  afTlr-
mations  are  inharmonious,  the  revelation  as  regards
things  invisible,  through  dissimilar  representations,  is
more  appropriate  to  the  hiddenness  of  things  unutter-
able.    Thus  the  sacred  descriptions  of  the  Oracles
'honour,  and  do  not  expose  to  shame,  the  Heavenly
Orders,  when  they  make  them  known  by  dissimilar
pictorial  forms,  and  demonstrate  through  these  their
supermundane  superiority  over  all  material   things.
And  I  do  not  suppose   that  any  sensible  man  will
gainsay  that  the  incongruous  elevate  our  mind  more
than  the  similitudes ;  for  there  is  a  likelihood,  with
regard  to  the  more  sublime  representations  of  heaven-
ly things,  that  we  should  be  led  astray,  so  as  to  think
that  the  Heavenly  Beings  are  certain  creatures  with
the  appearance  of  gold,  and  certain  men  with  the
appearance  of  light"1,  and  glittering  like  lightning",
handsome  °,  clothed  in  bright  shining  raiment,  shed-
ding forth  innocuous  flame,  and  so  with  regard  to  all
the  other  shapes  and  appropriate  forms,  with  which
the  Word  of  God  has  depicted  the  Heavenly  Minds.
In  order  that  men  might  not  suffer  from  this,  by

k  Ps.  cxlv.  13.  1  Rom.  xi.  33.;  jer.  h.  ,s.

■  Acts  i.  10.  »  Matt,  xxviii.  3.  •  Acts  vi.  15.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  g

thinking  they  are  nothing  more  exalted  than  their  beau-
tiful appearance,  the  elevating  wisdom  of  the  pious
theologians  reverently  conducts  to  the  incongruous
dissimilarities,  not  permitting  our  earthly  part  to  rest
fixed  in  the  base  images,  but  urging  the  upward
tendency  of  the  soul,  and  goading  it  by  the  unseem-
liness of  the  phrases  (to  see)  that  it  belongs  neither
to  lawful  nor  seeming  truth,  even  for  the  most
earthly  conceptions,  that  the  most  heavenly  and
Divine  visions  are  actually  like  things  so  base.
Further  also  this  must  particularly  be  borne  in  mind,
that  not  even  one  of  the  things  existing  is  altogether
deprived  of  participation  in  the  beautiful,  since,  as
is  evident  and  the  truth  of  the  Oracles  affirms,  all
things  are  very  beautiful  p.

Section  IV.
It  is,  then,  possible  to  frame  in  one's  mind  good
contemplations  from  everything,  and  to  depict,  from
things  material,  the  aforesaid  dissimilar  similitudes,
both  for  the  intelligible  and  the  intelligent;  since
the  intelligent  hold  in  a  different  fashion  things
which  are  attributed  to  things  sensible  differently.
For  instance,  appetite,  in  the  irrational  creatures,  takes
its  rise  in  the  passions,  and  their  movement,  which
takes  the  form  of  appetite,,  is  full  of  all  kinds  of
unreasonableness.  But  with  regard  to  the  intelli-
gent, we  must  think  of  the  appetite  in  another
fashion,  as  denoting,  according  to  my  judgment,
their  manly  style,  and  their  determined  persistence.
p  Gen.  i.  31.


io  Dionysius  the  Areopagitc

in   their  Godlike  and    unchangeable    steadfastness.
In  like  manner  we  say,  with  regard  to  the  irrational
creatures,  that  lust  is  a  certain  uncircumspect  and
earthly  passionate  attachment,  arising  incontinently
from   an   innate    movement,   or  intimacy  in   things
subject  to  change,  and  the  irrational  supremacy  of
the  bodily  desire,  which  drives  the  whole  organism
towards  the  object  of  sensual  inclination.     But  when
we  attribute  "lust"  to  spiritual  beings,  by  clothing
them  with  dissimilar  similitudes,  we  must  think  that
it   is   a  Divine  love  of  the   immaterial,  above   ex-
pression and  thought,  and  the  inflexible  and  deter-
mined longing  for  the  supernally  pure  and  passionless
contemplation,    and    for   the    really   perpetual    and
intelligible  fellowship  in  that  pure  and  most  exalted
splendour,  and  in  the  abiding  and  beautifying  come-
liness.    And    'incontinence'   we  may   take  for   the
persistent  and  inflexible,  which  nothing  can  repulse,
on  account  of  the  pure  and  changeless  love  for  the
Divine  beauty,  and  the  whole  tendency  towards  the
really   desired.     But   with   regard   to    the   irrational
living  beings,   or  soulless   matter,   we  appropriately
call  their  irrationality  and  want  of  sensible  percep-
tion a  deprivation  of  reason  and  sensible  perception.
And  with  regard  to  the  immaterial  and  intelligent
beings,  we  reverently  acknowledge  their  superiority,
as   supermundane   beings,   over  our  discursive   and
bodily   reason,  and   the  material  perception   of  the
senses  which  is  alien  to  the  incorporeal  Minds.     It
is,  then,  permissible  to  depict  forms,  which  are  not
discordant,  to  the  celestial  beings,  even  from   por-


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  1 1

tions  of  matter  which  are  the  least  honourable,  since
even  it,  having  had  its  beginning  from  the  Essentially
Beautiful,  has  throughout  the  whole  range  of  matter
some  echoes  of  the  intellectual  comeliness;  and  it
is  possible  through  these  to  be  led  to  the  imma-
terial archetypes — things  most  similar  being  taken,
as  has  been  said,  dissimilarly,  and  the  identities  being
defined,  not  in  the  same  way,  but  harmoniously,  and
appropriately,  as  regards  the  intellectual  and  sensible
beings.

Section   V.

We  shall  find  the  Mystic  Theologians  enfolding
these  things  not  only  around  the  illustrations  of
the  Heavenly  Orders,  but  also,  sometimes,  around
the  supremely  Divine  Revelations  Themselves.  At
one  time,  indeed,  they  extol  It  under  exalted  ima-
gery as  Sun  9  of  Righteousness,  as  Morning'  Star
rising  divinely  in  the  mind,  and  as  Light*  illuming
without  veil  and  for  contemplation;  and  at  other
times,  through  things  in  our  midst,  as  Fire ',  shedding
its  innocuous  light;  as  Water",  furnishing  a  fulness
of  life,  and,  to  speak  symbolically,  flowing  into  a  belly,
and  bubbling  forth  rivers  flowing  irresistibly ;  and
at  other  times,  from  things  most  remote,  as  sweet-
smelling  ointment1,  as  Head  Corner-stone 7.  But
they  also  clothe  It  in  forms  of  wild  beasts,  and  attach
to  It  identity  with  a  Lion  %  and  Panther  a,  and  say  that
it  shall  be  a  Leopard  b,  and  a  rushing  Bearc.     But,

*»  Mai.  iv.  2.  r  Num.  xxiv.  17  ;  2  Pet.  i.  19.  ■  John  i.  5.
1  Exod.iii.  2.  u  John  vii.  38.  x  Cant.  i.  2.  1  Eph.  ii.  20.
»  Iloi.  xiii.  8.  *  Ibid.  7.  b  Ibid.  8.  c  ibid.


12  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

I  will  also  add,  that  which  seems  to  be  more  dis-
honourable than  all,  and  the  most  incongruous,  viz.
that  distinguished  theologians  have  shewn  it  to  us
as  representing  Itself  under  the  form  of  a  wormd.
Thus  do  all  the  godly-wise,  and  interpreters  of  the
secret  inspiration,  separate  the  holy  of  holies e  from
the  uninitiated  and  the  unholy,  to  keep  them  un-
defined, and  prefer  the  dissimilar  description  of
holy  things,  so  that  Divine  things  should  neither
be  easily  reached  by  the  profane,  nor  those  who
diligently  contemplate  the  Divine  imagery  rest  in
the  types  as  though  they  were  true*  and  so  Divine
things  should  be  honoured  by  th/  true  negations,
and  by  comparisons  with  the  lowest  things,  which
are  diverse  from  their  proper  resemblance.  There  is
then  nothing  absurd  if  they  depict  even  the  Heavenly
Beings  under  incongruous  dissimilar  similitudes,  for
causes  aforesaid.  For  probably  not  even  we  should
have  come  to  an  investigation,  from  not  seeing  our
way, — not  to  say  to  mystic  meaning  through  an
^  accurate  enquiry  into  Divine  things,— unless  the
deformity  of  the  descriptions  representing  the  Angels
had  shocked  us,  not  permitting  our  mind  to  linger
in  the  discordant  representations,  but  rousing  us
utterly  to  reject  the  earthly  proclivities,  and  accus-
toming us  to  elevate  ourselves  through  things  that
are  seen,  to  their  supermundane  mystical  meanings.
Let  these  things  suffice  to  have  been  said  on  account
of  the  material  and  incongruous  descriptions  of  the
holy  Angels  in  the  Holy  Oracles.     And  next,  it  is

d  Ps.  xxii.  6.  e  £7*0  ruv  ayiwv.


on  the  Heavenly  HierarcJiy.  13

necessary  to  define  what  we  think  the  Hierarchy  is
in  itself,  and  what  benefit  those  who  possess  a
Hierarchy  derive  from  the  same.  But  let  Christ
lead  the  discourse— if  it  be  lawful  to  me  to  say— He
Who  is  mine,— the  Inspiration  of  all  Hierarchical
revelation.  And  thou,  my  son,  after  the  pious  rule
of  our  Hierarchical  tradition,  do  thou  religiously
listen  to  things  religiously  uttered,  becoming  inspired
through  instruction  in  inspired  things;  and  when
thou  hast  enfolded  the  Divine  things  in  the  secret
recesses  of  thy  mind,  guard  them  closely  from  the  /
profane  multitude  as  being  uniform,  for  it  is  not
lawful,  as  the  Oracles  say,  to  cast  to  swine  the
unsullied  and  bright  and  beautifying  comeliness   of

the  intelligible  pearls.

♦

CAPUT  III.

What  is  Hierarchy  ?  and  what  the  use  of  Hierarchy  ?
Section  I.
Hierarchy  is,  in  my  judgment,  a  sacred  order
and  science  and  operation,  assimilated,  as  far  as
attainable,  to  the  likeness  of  God,  and  conducted
to  the  illuminations  granted  to  it  from  God,  ac-
cording to  capacity,  with  a  view  to  the  Divine  imi-
tation. Now  the  God-becoming  Beauty,  as  simple,
as  good,  as  source  of  initiation,  is  altogether  free
from  any  dissimilarity,  and  imparts  its  own  proper
light  to  each  according  to  their  fitness,  and  perfects
in  most  Divine  initiation,  as  becomes  the  undeviat-
ing  moulding  of  those  who  are  being  initiated  har-
moniously to  itself.


14  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

Section  II.
The  purpose,  then,  of  Hierarchy  is  the  assimila-,(.
tion  and  union,  as  far  as  attainable,  with  God,  hav-
ing Him  Leader  of  all  religious  science  and  opera-
tion, by  looking  unflinchingly  to  His  most   Divine
comeliness,  and  copying,  as  far  as  possible,  and  by    <c-
perfecting  its  own  followers  as  Divine  images,  mirrors
most  luminous  and  without  flaw,  receptive    oT*the
primal  light  and  the  supremely  Divine  ray,  and  de-
voutly filled  with  the  entrusted  radiance,  and  again.
spreading  this  radiance  ungrudgingly  to  those  after
it,  in   accordance  with   the  supremely  Divine  regu-  "
lations.     For  it  is  not  lawful  for  the  Mystic  Rites
of  sacred  things,  or  for  things  religiously  done,  to
practise  anything  whatever  beyond  the  sacred  regu-
lations of  their  own  proper  function.    Nor  even  must
they  attempt  otherwise,  if  they  desire  to  attain  its
deifying  splendour,  and  look  to  it  religiously,  and
are  moulded  after  the  example  of  each  of  the  holy
minds.    He,  then,  who  mentions  Hierarchy,  denotes
a  certain  altogether  Holy  Order,  an  image  of  the  su-
premely Divine  freshness,  ministering  the  mysteries
of  its  own  illumination  in  hierarchical  ranks,  and
sciences,  and  assimilated  to  its  own  proper  Head
as  far  as  lawful.

For  each  of  those  who  have  been  called  into  the
Hierarchy,  find  their  perfection  in  being  carried  to  ^
the  Divine  imitation  f  in  their  own  proper  degree;
and,  what  is  more  Divine  than  all,  in  becoming  a

f  Eph.  v.  i.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  15

fellow-worker  b  with  God,  as  the  Oracles  say,  and
in  shewing  the  Divine  energy  in  himself  manifested
as  far  as  possible,  f  For  it  is  an  Hierarchical  regu-
lation that  some  are  purified  and  that  others  purify'1 ;
that  some  are  enlightened  and  others  enlighten 1 ;
that  some  are  perfected  and  others  perfect;  the
Divine  imitation  will  fit  each  one  in  this  fashion.
The  Divine  blessedness,  to  speak  after  the  manner
of  men,  is  indeed  unstained  by  any  dissimilarity k,
and  is  full  of  invisible  light1 — perfect™,  and  needing
no  perfection  ;  cleansing,  illuminating,  and  perfect-
ing, yea,  rather  a  holy  purification,  and  illumination,
and  perfection — above  purification,  above  light,  pre-
eminently perfect,  self-perfect  source  and  cause  of
every  Hierarchy,  and  elevated  pre-eminently  above
every  holy  thing.

Section  III.
It  is  necessary  then,  as  I  think,  that  those  who
are  being  purified  should  be  entirely  perfected,  with-
out stain,  and  be  freed  from  all  dissimilar  confusion;
that  those  who  are  being  illuminated  should  be  filled
with  the  Divine  Light,  conducted  to  the  habit  and
faculty  of  contemplation  in  all  purity  of  mind  ;  that
those  who  are  being  initiated  should  be  separated
from  the  imperfect,  and  become  recipients  of  that
perfecting  science  of  the  sacred  things  contemplated.
Further,  that  those  who  purify  should  impart,  from
their  own  abundance  of  purity,  their  own  proper  holi-
ness ;    that    those    who    illuminate,    as   being   more

*  I  Cor.  iii.  9.  h  Ps.  li.  9.  5  Ibid.  cxix.  18.

k  Deut.  vi.  4.  '  John  xii.  46.  ■  ■  Matt.  v.  48.


1 6  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

luminous  intelligences,  whose  function  it  is  to  re-
ceive and  to  impart  light,  and  who  are  joyfully  filled
with  holy  gladness,  that  these  should  overflow,  in  pro-
portion to  their  own  overflowing  light,  towards  those
who  are  worthy  of  enlightenment ;  and  that  those
who  make  perfect,  as  being  skilled  in  the  impartation
of  perfection,  should  perfect  those  being  perfected,
through  the  holy  instruction,  in  the  science  of  the
holy  things  contemplated.  Thus  each  rank  of  the
Hierarchical  Order  is  led,  in  its  own  degree,  to  the
Divine  co-operation,  by  performing,  through  grace
and  God-given  power,  those  things  which  are  natur-
ally and  supernaturally  in  the  Godhead,  and  accom-
plished by  It  superessentially,  and  manifested  hier-
archically, for  the  attainable  imitation  of  the  God-
loving  Minds  n.


CAPUT   IV.
What  is  meant  by  the  appellation  "  Angels  ?  "
Section  I.
Now  that  the  Hierarchy  itself  has  been,  in  my
judgment,  sufficiently  defined,   we  must  next  extol
the  Angelic  Hierarchy,   and  we  must  contemplate,
with  supermundane  eyes,  its  sacred  formations,  de-
picted in  the  Oracles,  in  order  that  we  may  be  borne
aloft  to  their  Divinely  resplendent  simplicity,  through
the  mystic  representations,  and  may  extol  the  source
of  all  Hierarchical  science  with  God-becoming  rever-
ence and  with  thanksgivings.     First  of  all,  however,
•  The  Holy  Angels.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  i  y

let  this  truth  be  spoken  -that  it  was  through  good-
ness that  the  superessential  Godhead,  having  fixed
all  the  essences  of  things  being,  brought  them  into
being.     For  this  is  the  peculiar  characteristic  of  the
Cause  of  all  things,  and  of  goodness  surpassing  all,
to  call  things  being  to  participation  of  Itself,  as  each
order  of  things  being  was  determined  from  its  own
analogy.     For  all  things  being  share  in  a  Providence,
which   bubbles  forth  from  the  superessential  Deity,
Cause  of  all  things.     For  they  would  not  be,  unless
they  had  participated  in  the  Essence  and  Origin  of
things  being.    All  things  then,  without  life,  participate
in  It  by  their  being.      For  the  being  of  all  things  is
the  Deity,  above  being ;  things  living  participate  in
its  life-giving  power,  above  all  life;    things  rational
and  intellectual  participate  in  its  self-perfect  and  pre-
eminently perfect  wisdom,  above  all  reason  and  mind.
It  is  evident,  then,  that  all  those  Beings  are  around
It,  which  have  participated  in  It,  in  many  forms.

Section  II.
The  holy  orders,  then,  of  the  Heavenly  Beings
share  in  the  supremely  Divine  participation,  in  a
higher  degree  than  things  which  merely  exist,  or
which  lead  an  irrational  life,  or  which  are  rational
like  ourselves.  For  by  moulding  themselves  intel-
ligibly to  the  Divine  imitation,  and  looking  super-
mundanely  to  the  supremely  Divine  likeness,  and
striving  to  mould  their  intellectual  appearance,  they
naturally  have  more  ungrudging  communications  with
It,  being  near  and  ever  moving  upwards,  as  far  as-


1


l8  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

lawful,  elevating  themselves  with  the  intensity  of  the
Divine  unswerving  love,  and  receiving  the  primal
illuminations  without  earthly  stain,  and  ranging  them-
selves to  these,  and  having  their  whole  life  intel-
lectual. These,  then,  are  they  who,  at  first  hand,
and  under  many  forms,  participate  in  the  Divine,
and,  at  first  hand,  and  under  many  fonns,  make
known  the  supremely  Divine  Hiddenness.  Where-
fore, beyond  all,  they  are  deemed  pre-eminently  worthy
of  the  appellation  Angelic,  on  the  ground  that  the
supremely  Divine  illumination  comes  to  them  at
/  first  hand,  and,  through  them,  there  pass  to  us  mani-
festations above  us.  Thus,  then,  the  Law,  as  the
Word  of  God  affirms,  was  given  to  us  through  the
ministration  of  Angels  ° ;  and  Angels  led  our  illus-
trious fathers  p  before  the  Law,  and  after  the  Law,
to  the  Divine  Being,  either  by  leading  *  them  to  what
was  to  be  done,  and  by  converting  them  from  error,
and  an  unholy  life,  to  the  straight  way  of  truth r,  or
by  making  known  to  them  sacred  ordinances8,  or
hidden  visions,  or  supermundane  mysteries*,  or  cer-
tain Divine  predictions  through  the  Prophets  u.

Section  III.

But  if  any  one  should  say  that  Divine  manifes-
tations were  made  directly  and  immediately  to  some
holy  men x,  let  him  learn,  and  that  distinctly,  from
the  most  Holy  Oracles,  that  no  one  hath  seen,  nor

°  Gal.  iii.  18.  p  Acts  vii.  53.  1  Gen.  xxii.  12.

'  Acts  x.  3.  .  Dan.  vii.  16.  *  Ibid.  10.

■  2  Cor.  xii.  2.  x  Matt.  ii.  13.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  I9

ever  shall  see,  the  "  hidden  "  rb  Kp<,cf>iop  of  Almighty
God  as  it  is  in  itself y.     Now  Divine  manifestations
were  made  to  the  pious  as  befits  revelations  of  God,
that  is  to  say,  through  certain  holy  visions  analogous
to  those  who  see  them.     Now  the  all-wise  Word  of
God  (Theologia)  naturally  calls  Theophany  that  par-
ticular vision  which  manifests  the  Divine  similitude
depicted  in  itself  as  in  a  shaping  of  the  shapeless,
from  the  elevation  of  the  beholders   to  the   Divine
Being,  since  through  it  a  divine  illumination  comes
to  the  beholders,  and  the  divine  persons  themselves
are    religiously   initiated    into    some    mystery.      But
our  illustrious  fathers  were  initiated  into  these  Divine
visions,  through  the  mediation  of  the  Heavenly  Powers.
Does  not  the  tradition  of  the  Oracles  describe  the
holy   legislation    of  the   Law,    given    to    Moses,    as
coming    straight   from    God,   in    order   that   it   may
teach  us  this  truth,  that  it  is  an  outline  of  a  Divine
and  holy  legislation  ?   But  the  Word  of  God,  in  its
Wisdom,    teaches    this    also— that    it    came    to    us
through    Angels,   as    though    the    Divine   regulation
were  laying  down  this  rule,  that,  through  the  first,
the  second  are  brought  to  the  Divine  Being.     For
not  only  with   regard   to   the   superior  and  inferior
minds,   but  even  for  those  of  the   same  rank,  this
Law   has    been    established    by   the    superessential
supreme   ordinance,    that,    within    each    Hierarchy,
there   are   first,    and   middle,    and    last    ranks    and
powers,  and   that  the   more  divine   are  instructors

7  John  i.  18 ;  i  John  iv.  12 ;   1  Tim.  vi.  16.


so  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

and  conductors  of  the  less,  to  the  Divine  access,
and  illumination,  and  participation.

Section  IV.
But  I  observe  that  Angels  first  were  initiated  in  the
Divine  mystery  of  the  love  of  Jesus  towards  man,  then,
through  them,  the  gift  of  its  knowledge  passed  to  us.
Thus,  for  example,  the  most  divine  Gabriel  instructed
Zachariah2,  the  Hierarch,  that  the  son  who  was  to  be
born  to  him,  beyond  hope,  by  Divine  grace,  should
be  a  prophet  of  the  a  God-incarnate  work  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  to  be  manifested  to  the  world  for  its
salvation,  as  becomes  the  Divine  goodness ;  and
he  revealed  to  Mary b,  how,  in  her,  should  be  born
the  supremely  Divine  mystery  of  the  unutterable  God-
formation.  Yet  another  Angel  instructed  Joseph0,
how,  in  very  truth,  should  be  fulfilled  the  things
Divinely  promised  to  his  ancestor  David.  Another
declared  glad  tidings  to  the  shepherds d,  as  being
purified  by  their  separation  from  the  multitude,  and
their  quiet  life,  and,  with  him,  a  multitude  of  the
Heavenly  Host  announced  to  those  on  earth  that
often-sung  doxology.  Let  us  then  ascend  to  the'
highest  manifestations  of  light  contained  in  the
Oracles,  for  I  perceive  that  even  Jesus  himself e,
the  superessential  Cause  of  the  super-heavenly  Beings,
J  when  He  had  come  to  our  condition,  without  change f,
did    not    overstep   che   good   order  which    becomes'

Luke  l.  II — 20.  '  avdpiKTJs  rov  'irjtroC  deovpyias.

b  Luke  i.  26-38.  c  Matt.  i.  20—23.  d  Luke  ii.  8  —  14.

Phil.  ii.  6 — 8.  f  irpbs  rb  KaQ'  ^aas  a/ueraj9oA.a>s.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  2 1

mankind,  which  Himself  arranged  and  took,  but
readily  subjected  Himself  to  the  dispositions  of  the
Father  and  God,  through  Angels;  and,  through
their  mediation,  was  announced  to  Joseph  the  de-
parture of  the  Son  to  Egypt  s,  which  had  been
arranged  by  the  Father,  and  again  the  return  to
Judaea h  from  Egypt.  And  through  Angels  we  see
Him  subjecting  Himself  to  the  Father's  decrees.
For  I  forbear  to  speak,  as  addressing  one  who
knows  the  teaching  of  our  hierarchical  tradition,
both  concerning  the  Angel*  who  strengthened  the
Lord  Jesus,  or  that  even  Jesus  Himself,  when  He
had  come  to  manifest  the  good  work  of  our  bene-
ficent salvation,  was  called  k  Angel l  of  Great  Coun-
sel. For,  as  He  Himself  says,  after  the  manner
of  an  Angel,  "Whatsoever  He  heard  from  the  Father,
He  announced  to  usm."


CAPUT  V.


For  what  reason  all  the  Heavenly  Beings  are  called,
in  conwwn,  Angels.

This,  then,  in  our  judgment,  is  the  reason  for
the  appellation  Angelic  in  the  Oracles.  We  must
now,  I  suppose,  enquire  for  what  reason  the  theo-
logians call  all n  the  Heavenly  Beings  together  "  An-
gels;"   but  when    they   come    to   a   more   accurate

«  Matt.  ii.  13.  »>  Ibid.  19,  20.  *  Luke  xxii.  43.

k  C.  ii.  30.         l  Isa.  ix.  6.        m  John  xv.  15.         n  Ps.  ciii.  20 ;
Matt.  xxv.  31.


2  2  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

description  of  the  supermundane  orders,  they  name
exclusively,  "angelic   rank,"  that   which   completes
k/    the   full   tale  of  the  Divine  and   Heavenly  Hosts.
•  Before  this,  however,  they  range  pre-eminently,  the
Orders   of  Archangels,    and    the   Principalities,  the
Authorities,  and    Powers,   and  as  many  Beings   as
the  revealing  traditions  of  the  Oracles  recognize  as
superior  to  them  °.     Now,  we  affirm  that  throughout
every  sacred  ordinance  the  superior  ranks  possess
the  illuminations  and  powers  of  their  subordinates,
but  the  lowest  have  not  the  same  powers  as  those
who   are   above   them.     The   theologians   also   call
the  most  holy  ranks  of  the  highest  Beings  "  Angels,"
for  they  also   make   known   the   supremely  Divine
illumination.     But   there   is  no  reason  to  call   the
lowest   rank  of  the   celestial    Minds,    Principalities,
or  Thrones,  or  Seraphim.     For  it  does  not  possess
the  highest  powers,  but,  as  it  conducts  our  inspired
Hierarchs  to  the  splendours  of  the  Godhead  known
to  it;    so  also,   the   saintly  powers   of  the   Beings
above  it  are  conductors,  towards  the  Divine  Being,
of  that  Order  which  completes  the  Angelic  Hier-
archies.    Except  perhaps  some  one  might  say  this
also,  that  all  the  angelic  appellations  are  common,  as
regards  the  subordinate  and  superior  communication
of  all  the  celestial  powers  towards  the  Divine  like-
ness, and  the  gift  of  light  from  God.     But,  in  order
that   the  question   may  be   better  investigated,   let
us  reverently  examine  the  saintly  characteristics  set
forth  respecting  each  celestial  Order  in  the  Oracles.
•  Isa.  vi.  2.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  23

CAPUT  VI.

Which  is  the  first  Order  of  the  Heavenly  Beings  ?
which  the  middle  ?  and  which  the  last  ?

How  many,  and  of  what  sort,  are  the  Orders  of
the  supercelestial  Beings,  and  how  the  Hierarchies
are  classified*  amongst  themselves,  I  affirm,  the
deifying  Author  of  their  consecration  alone  distinctly
knows  ;  and  further,  that  they  know  their  own  pro-
per powers  and  illuminations,  and  their  sacred  and
supermundane  regularity.  For  it  is  impossible  that
we  should  know  the  mysteries  of  the  supercelestial
Minds  and  their  most  holy  perfections,  except,  some
one  might  say,  so  far  as  the  Godhead  has  revealed
to  us,  through  them,  as  knowing  perfectly  their  own
condition.  We,  then,  will  utter  nothing  as  from
ourselves,  but  whatever  angelic  visions  have  been
gazed  upon  by  the  holy  Prophets  of  God,  we,  as
initiated  in  these,  will  set  forth  as  best  we  can.
The  Word  of  God  has  designated  the  whole  Heavenly
Beings  as  nine,  by  appellations,  which  shew  their
functions.  These  our  Divine  Initiator  divides  into
three  threefold  Orders.  He  also  says  that  that
which  is  always  around  God  is  first,  and  is  declared
by  tradition  to  be  united  closely  and  immediately
to  Him,  before  all  the  rest.  For  he  says  that  the
teaching  of  the  Holy  Oracles  declares,  that  the  most
Holy  Thrones,  and  the  many-eyed  <*  and  many-
winged1'  hosts,  named  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Cheru-
bim8 and  Seraphim6,   are    established    immediately

p  reKovvrai.  1  Ezek.  i.  18.  *  Ibid.  6.

■  Ibid.  x.  l  Isa.  vi.  2.


2  4  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

around  God,  with  a  nearness  superior  to  all.  This
threefold  order,  then,  our  illustrious  Guide  spoke
of  as  one,  and  of  equal  rank,  and  really  first
Hierarchy,  than  which  there  is"  not  another  more
Godlike  or  immediately  nearer  to  the  earliest  illu-
minations of  the  Godhead.  But  he  says  that  which
is  composed  of  the  Authorities,  and  Lordships,  and
Powers  is  second;  and,  as  respects  the  lowest  of
the  Heavenly  Hierarchies,  the  Order  of  the  Angels
and  Archangels  and  Principalities  is  third.


CAPUT    VII.

Concerning  the  Seraphim  and  Cherubim  and  Thrones,
and  concerning  their  first  Hierarchy.

Section  I.
We,  whilst  admitting  this  as  the  arrangement  of
the  holy  Hierarchies,  affirm,  that  every  appellation  of
the  celestial  Minds  denotes  the  Godlike  characteristic
of  each ;  and  those  who  know  Hebrew  affirm,  that
the  holy  designation  of  the  Seraphim  denotes  either
that  they  are  kindling  or  burning;  and  that  of  Che-
rubim, a  fulness  of  knowledge  or  stream  of  wisdom.
Naturally,    then,   the  first   (order)  of  the   Heavenly
Hierarchies    is    ministered"    by   the    most    exalted
Beings,  holding,  as  it  does,  a  rank  which  is  higher
than  all,  from  the  fact,  that  it  is  established  imme-
diately around  God,  and  that  the  first-wrought  Di-
vine manifestations  and  perfections  pass  earlier  to


lepovyetrcu.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  2$

it,  as  being  nearest.     They  are  called,  then,  "  Burn-
ing," and  Thrones,   and   Stream   of  Wisdom by  a

name    which    sets    forth    their    Godlike    conditions.
The   appellation  of  Seraphim   plainly  teaches   their
ever  moving  around   things   Divine,  and  constancy,
and  warmth,  and  keenness,  and  the  seething  of  that
persistent,  indomitable,  and  inflexible  perpetual  mo-
tion, and  the  vigorous  assimilation  and  elevation  of
the  subordinate,  as  giving  new  life   and   rekindling
them  to  the  same  heat;   and  purifying  through  fire
and  burnt-offering,  and  the  light-like  and  light-shed-
ding characteristic  which  can  never  be  concealed  or
consumed,  and  remains  always  the  same,  which  de-
stroys and  dispels   every  kind  of  obscure  darkness.
But  the  appellation  of  the  Cherubim  denotes  their
knowledge  and  their  vision  of  God,  and  their  readi-
ness  to   receive  the  highest  gift  of  light,  and  their
power  of  contemplating  the  super-Divine  comeliness
in    its    first   revealed    power,   and   their  being  filled
anew  with  the  impartation  which  maketh  wise,  and
their  ungrudging   communication    to   those    next   to
them,    by   the    stream   of  the   given   wisdom.     The
appellation    of  the    most    exalted   and   pre-eminent
Thrones    denotes    their    manifest    exaltation    above
every  grovelling  inferiority,  and  their  supermundane
tendency  towards  higher  things ;  and  their  unswerv-
ing separation  from  all  remoteness;    and  their  in-
variable and  firmly-fixed  settlement  around  the  verit-
able Highest,  with  the  whole  force  of  their  powers  ;
and   their  receptivity  of  the   supremely   Divine   ap-
proach, in  the  absence   of  all  passion  and   earthly


26  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

tendency,  and  their  bearing  God;   and  the  ardent
expansion  of  themselves  for  the  Divine  receptions.

Section  II.
This  then,  is  the  revelation  of  their  names,  so
far  as  we  can  give  it ;  and  we  ought  to  say  what  we
think  their  Hierarchy  is.  For  I  suppose  we  have
sufficiently  shewn  above,  that  the  purpose  of  every
Hierarchy  is  an  unswerving  devotion  to  the  divine
imitation  of  the  Divine  Likeness,  and  that  every
Hierarchical  function  is  set  apart  for  the  sacred  re-
ception and  distribution  of  an  undefiled  purification,
and  Divine  Light,  and  perfecting  science.

And  now  I  pray  that  I  may  speak  worthily  of  the
most  exalted  Minds-how  the  Hierarchy  amongst
them  is  exhibited  through  the  Oracles.
'    One  must  consider,  then,  that  the  Hierarchy  is
akin,  and  in  every  respect  like,  to  the  first  Beings,
who  are  established  after  the  Godhead,  who  gave
them  Being,  and  who  are  marshalled,  as  it  were,  in
Its   very  vestibule,  who  surpass   every  unseen  and
seen  created  power.     We  must  then  regarfthem  as
pure,  not  as  though  they  had  been  freed  from  unholy
stains  and  blemishes,  nor  yet  as  though  they  were
unreceptive   of  earthly  fancies,  but  as  far  exalted
above  every  stain  of  remissness  and  every  inferior
holiness,  as  befits  the  highest  degree  of  purity-es-
tablished above  the  most  Godlike  powers,  and  cling-
ing unflinchingly  to  their  own  self-moved  and  same-
moved  rank  in  their  invariable  love  of  God,  conscious
•  in  no  respect  whatever  of  any  declivity  to  a  worse


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  27

condition,  but   having   the  unsullied  fixity  of  their
own  Godlike  identity —never  liable  to  fall,  and  always
unmoved;  and  again,  as  "contemplative,"  not  con-
templators  of  intellectual  symbols  as  sensible,  nor  as
being  led  to  the  Divine  Being  by  the  varied  texture
of  holy  representations  written  for  meditation,  but
as  being  filled  with  all   kinds   of  immaterial  know-
ledge  of  higher  light,  and  satiated,  as  permissible,
with  the  beautifying  and   original  beauty  of  super-
essential  and  thrice   manifested  contemplation,   and
thus,  being  deemed  worthy  of  the  Communion  with
Jesus,   they  do    not    stamp   pictorially  the   deifying
similitude  in  divinely-formed  images,  but,  as  being
really   near   to    Him,    in    first    participation    of  the
knowledge  of  His  deifying  illuminations ;  nay  more,
that  the  imitation  of  God   is  given  to  them  in  the
highest  possible  degree,  and  they  participate,  so  far
as  is  allowable  to  them,  in  His  deifying  and  philan-
thropic virtues,  in  the  power  of  a  first  manifestation ;
and,   likewise  as  "perfected,"  not  as  being  illumi-
nated with  an  analytic  science  of  sacred  variety,  but
as  being  filled   with  a   first  and  pre-eminent  deifi-
cation, as  beseems  the  most  exalted  science  of  the
works  of  God,  possible  in  Angels.     For,  not  through
other  holy  Beings,    but   being  ministered   from   the
very  Godhead,  by  the  immediate  elevation  to  It,  by
their  power,  and  rank,  surpassing  all,  they  are  both
established   near  the  All-Holy  without  any  shadow
of  turning,  and  are  conducted  for  contemplation  to
the  immaterial  and  intelligible  comeliness,  as  far  as
permissible,   and   are    initiated    into   the    scientific


2g  Dionysius  the  Areopngite

methods  of  the  works  of  God,  as  being  first  and
around  God,  being  ministered,  in  the  highest  degree,
from  the  very  source  of  consecration.

Section  III.
This,  then,  the  theologians  distinctly  shew  (viz.)
that  the  subordinate  Orders  of  the  Heavenly  Being.
S  taught  by  the  superior,  in  due  order,  the  «
sciences ;  and  that  those  who  are  h.gher  than  all  are
Uuminated  from  Godhead  itself,  as  far  as  perm'SStble,
in  revelations  of  the  Divine  mysteries.     For    hey  m-
troduce  some  of  them  as  being  religiously  instructed
by  those  of  a  higher  rank,  that  He,  Who  was  raised
to"  Heaven ,  as  Man,  is  Lord  of  the  Heavenly  Powers
and  King  of  Glory  ;  and  others,  as  quest.on.ng  Jesus
•Himself,  as  desiring  to  be  instructed  m  the  science
of  His  Divine  work  on  our  behalf,  and  Jesus  Him-
self teaching  them  immediately,  and I  shewing  to .then,
at  first  hand,  His  beneficent  work  out  of  love  to
man     For  «  ,»  He  says,  "am  speaking  of  righteous-
Tss'and  judgment  of  Salvation  V     Now  I  am  as-
tonished that  even  the  first  of  the  Beings  ,n  Heaven,
and  so  far  above  all,  should  reverently  strive  after
the  supremely  Divine  illuminations,  as  intermediate
Beings"    Fo/ they  do  not  ask  directly,  "Wherefore
are  Thy  garments  red*?"   but  they  first  raise  the
'    question  among  themselves,  shewing  that  they  desire
to  learn,  and  crave  the  deifying  knowledge,  and  not
anticipating  the  illumination  given  after   a  Divine

procedure.

.  r  Ua   lxiii    I.  Ibld*  2*

*  Ps.  xxiv.  7— I0-  lsa'


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy .  29

The  first  Hierarchy,  then,  of  the  Heavenly  Minds
is  purified,  and  enlightened,  and  perfected,  by  being
ministered  from  the  very  Author  of  initiation,  through
its  elevation  to  It  immediately,  being  filled,  ac-
cording to  its  degree,  with  the  altogether  most  holy
purification  of  the  unproachable  Light  of  the  pre-
perfect  source  of  initiation,  unstained  indeed  by
any  remissness,  and  full  of  primal  Light,  and  per-
fected by  its  participation  in  first-given  knowledge
and  science.  But  to  sum  up,  I  may  say  this,  not
inappropriately,  that  the  reception  of  the  supremely
Divine  Science  is,  both  purification,  and  enlighten-
ment, and  perfecting, — purifying,  as  it  were,  from
ignorance,  by  the  knowledge  of  the  more  perfect
revelations  imparted  to  it  according  to  fitness,  and
enlightening  by  the  self- same  Divine  knowledge,
through  which  it  also  purifies,  that  which  did  not
before  contemplate  the  things  which  are  now  made
manifest  through  the  higher  illumination  ;  and  per-
fecting further,  by  the  self-same  Light,  through  the
abiding  science  of  the  mysteries  made  clearly
manifest.

Section  IV.

This,  then,  according  to  my  science,  is  the  first
rank  of  the  Heavenly  Beings  which  encircle  and
stand  immediately  around  God;  and  without  sym-
bol, and  without  interruption,  dances  round  His
eternal  knowledge  in  the  most  exalted  ever-moving
stability  as  in  Angels;  viewing  purely  many/ and
blessed  contemplations,  and  illuminated  with  simple


3°  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

and   immediate   splendours,  and  filled  with   Divine
nourishment,-many  indeed  by  the  first-given  pro-
fusion,  but   one  by  the  unvariegated  and  unifying
oneness  of  the  supremely  Divine  banquet,  deemed
worthy  indeed  of  much  participation  and  co-opera-
tion with  God,  by  their  assimilation  to  Him    as  far
as  attainable,  of  their  excellent  habits  and  energies
and  knowing  many  Divine  things  pre-eminently,  and
participating  in  supremely  Divine  science  and  know-
ledge, as  is  lawful.    Wherefore  the  Word  of  God  has
transmitted   its  hymns  to  those  on  earth,  in  which
are  Divinely  shewn  the  excellency  of  its  most  exalted
illumination.     For  some  of  its   members,   to   speak
after  sensible  perception,  proclaim   as  a  "voice  ot
many  waters,"  "Blessed   is   the    glory  of  the  Lord
from   His   place  *  f  and  others  cry  aloud  that  fre-
quent and  most  august  hymn  b  of  God,  "  Holy,  Holy,
Holy,  Lord  of  Sabaoth,  the  whole  earth  is  full'of  His
glory  c.»     These  most  excellent  hymnologies  of  the
supercelestial   Minds  we   have   already  unfolded  to
the  best  of  our  ability  in  the  "  Treatise  concerning
the    Divine  Hymns,"  and   have   spoken  sufficiently
concerning  them  in   that  Treatise,   from   which,  by
way  of  remembrance,  it  is  enough   to  produce  so
much  as  is  necessary  to  the  present  occasion,  namely,
"  That  the  first  Order,  having  been  illuminated,  from
this  the  supremely  Divine  goodness,  as  permissible,
in  theological  science,  as  a  Hierarchy  reflecting  that
Goodness  transmitted  to  those  next  after  it,"  teach-
ing briefly  this,  "That  it  is  just  and  right  that  the
'  Ezek.  iii.  12.  b  e*o\oylw.  %  Isa.  i.  3.


o?i  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  3  x

august  Godhead  —  Itself  both  above  praise,  and
all-praiseworthy — should  be  known  and  extolled  by
the  God-receptive  minds,  as  is  attainable;  for  they
as  images  of  God  are,  as  the  Oracles  d  say,  the  Di-
vine places  of  the  supremely  Divine  repose e ;  and
further,  that  It  is  Monad  and  Unit  tri-subsistent f,
sending  forth  His  most  kindly  forethought  to  all
things  being,  from  the  super-heavenly  Minds  to  the
lowest  of  the  earth ;  as  super-original  Origin  and
Cause  of  every  essence,  and  grasping  all  things  super-
essentially  in  a  resistless  embrace.


CAPUT    VIII.

Concerning  Lordships  and  Powers   and  Authorities,
and  concerning  their  middle  Hierarchy.

Section  I.
Let  us  now  pass  to  the  middle  Order  of  the
Heavenly  Minds,  gazing,  as  far  as  we  may,  with
supermundane  eyes  upon  those  Lordships,  and  the
truly  terrible  visions  of  the  Divine  Authorities  and
Powers.  For  each  appellation  of  the  Beings  above
us  manifests  their  God-imitating  characteristics  of  the
Divine  Likeness.  I  think,  then,  that  the  explanatory
name  of  the  Holy  Lordships  denotes  a  certain  un-
slavish  elevation,  free  from  all  grovelling  subserviency,
as  becomes  the  free,  not  submitting  itself  in  any
way  whatever  to  one  of  the  tyrannical  dissimilarities,
as  a  cruel  Lordship ;  superior  to  every  kind  of  cring-
ing slavery,  indomitable  to  every  subserviency,,  and
elevated  above  every  dissimilarity,  ever  aspiring  to
d  Isa.  lxvi.  1.  •  Acts  vii.  49.  '  Heb.  i.  3.


\/


32  Diony sius  the  Areopagite

the   true   Lordship,    and    source   of  Lordship  ;    and
moulding,  as  an  image  of  goodness,  itself,  and  those
after  it,  to  its  Lordly  bearing,  as  attainable,  turning
itself  wholly  to  none  of  the  things  that  vainly  seem,  but
to  the  Lordly  Being,  and  ever-sharing  in  the  Lordly
Likeness    of  God,    to    its    utmost   ability;   and    the
appellation   of  the   Holy   Powers   denotes   a   certain
courageous     and_unflinching    virility,    for   all    those"
Godlike  energies  within  them— not  feebly  weak   for
the    reception    of  any   of  the    Divine    illuminations
vouchsafed  to  it— vigorously  conducted  to  the  Divine
imitation,    not     forsaking     the    Godlike    movement
through  its  own  unmanliness,  but  unflinchingly  look-
ing to  the  superessential  and  powerful-making  power,
and  becoming  a  powerlike  image  of  this,  as  far  as  is
attainable,  and  powerfully  turned  to  this,  as  Source  of
Power,    and   issuing   forth   to  those   next  in  degree,
in  gift  of  Power,  and  in  likeness  to  God;  and ''that
the  appellation  of  the  Holy  Authorities,  of  the  same
rank  as  the  Divine  Lordships  and  Powers,  (denotes)
the  beautiful  and  unconfused  good  order,  with  regard
to  the  Divine  receptions,  and  the  discipline  oAhe
supermundane  and  intellectual  authority,  not  using
the  authoritative  powers   imperiously  for  base    pur-
poses, but  conducted  indomitably,  with  good  order,
towards  Divine  things,  and  conducting  those  after  it
benignly,  and  assimilated,  as  far  as  permissible,  to  the
Authoritative  Source  of  authority,  and  making  this
visible,  as  is  possible  to  Angels,  in  the  well-ordered
ranks    of  the   authoritative   power   within    it.      The
middle  Order  of  the  Heavenly  Minds  having  these
Godlike  characteristics,  is  purified  and  illuminated


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  33

and  perfected  in  the  manner  described,  by  the  Divine
illuminations  vouchsafed  to  it  at  second  hand,  through
the  first  Hierarchical  Order,  and  passing  through  this
middle  as  a  secondary  manifestation.

Section  II.
No  doubt,  as  regards  that  message,  which  is  said
to_pass  through  one  angel  to  another,  we  may  take
it  as  a  symbol  of  a  perfecting  completed  from  afar,
and  obscured  by  reason  of  its  passage  to  the  second
rar>k.  For,  as  men  skilled  in  our  sacred  initiations
say,  the  fulness  of  Divine  things  manifested  directly
to  ourselves  is  more  perfecting  than  the  Divine  con-
templations imparted  through  others.  Thus,  I  think,
the  immediate  participation  of  the  Angelic  ranks
elevated  in  first  degree  to  God,  is  more  clear  than
those  perfected  through  the  instrumentality  of  others.
Wherefore  by  our  sacerdotal  tradition,  the  first  Minds
are  named  perfecting,  and  illuminating,  and  purifying
Powers  of  the  subordinate,  who  are  conducted,
through  them,  to  the  superessential  Origin  of  all
things,  and  participate,  as  far  as  is  permissible  to
them,  in  the  consecrating  purifications,  and  illumi-
nations, and  perfections.  For,  this  is  divinely  fixed
absolutely  by  the  Divine  source  of  order  that,
through  the  first,  the  second  partake  of  the  su-
premely Divine  illuminations.  This  you  will  find
declared  by  the  theologians  in  many  ways.  For,  when
the  Divine  and  Paternal  Love  towards  man  whilst
chastening,  in  a  startling  manner,  His  people  Israel,
for  their  religious  preservation,  after  delivering  them

D


34  Dionysius  the  AreopagUe

to   terrible   and   savage   nations   for    correction,    by
various    leadings    of  His    guided    people   to   better
things,  both  liberated  them   from  their  misery,  and
mildly  led  them  back,  through  His  compassion,  to
their   former    state  of  comfort;    one  of  the  theolo-
gians,  Zechariah,   sees   one  of  the   first   Angels,   as
I  think,  and  near  God,  (for  the  Angelic  appellation
is  common,   as   I  said,  to   them   all),  learning  from
God  Himself  the  comforting  words,  as  they  are  called,
concerning  this  matter ;  and  another  Angel,  of  inferior
rank,   advancing  to  meet   the  first,  as  for  reception
and  participation  of  enlightenment ;  then,  by  him  in-
structed in  the  Divine  purpose  as  from  a  Hierarch,
and  charged  to   reveal  to  the  theologian  that  Jeru-
salem should  be  abundantly  occupied  by  a  multitude
of  people  e.     And   another  theologian,  Ezekiel,  says
that  this  was  righteously  ordained  by  the  glorious  Deity
Itself,  seated  above  the  Cherubim  h.     For  Paternal
Love  towards  man,  conducting  Israel  as  we  have  said
through  chastisement  to  better  things,  by  a  righteous-
ness worthy  of  God,  deemed  right  to  separate  the
guilty  from  the  guiltless.     This   is  first  revealed  to
one  after  the  Cherubim  * ;  him  who  was  bound  about
the  loins  with  a  sapphire  J,  and  wore  displayed  the
robe  coming   down  to  the  feet,  as   a  Hierarchical
symbol.     But   the   Divine  Government   enjoins  the
other  Angels,  who  bore  the  battle-axes k,  to  be  in-
structed from  the  former,  as  to  the  Divine  judgment
in  this  matter.     For,  to  one,  He  said  that  he  should
*  Zech.  i.  8—17.  •«  Ezek.  ix.  3.  >  Ibid.  3.

J  Ibid.  x.  1.  *  Ibid.  ix.  2.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  35

go  through  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  and  place  the
sign  upon  the  forehead  of  the  innocent  men,  but  to
the  others;  "Go  into  the  city  after  him  and  strike,
and  draw  not  back  your  eyes,  but  to  every  one  upon
whom  is  the  sign  draw  not  near."

What  would  any  one  say  concerning  the  Angel,
who  said  to  Daniel ',  "  The  word  has  gone  forth  ?  "
or  concerning  him  the  first,  who  took  the  fire  from
the  midst  of  the  Cherubim,  or  what  is  more  remark-
able than  this  for  shewing  the  good  order  amongst
the  Angels,  that  the  Cherubim  casts  the  fire  into
the  hands  m  of  him  who  wears  the  sacred  vestment ;
or  concerning  Him  Who  called  the  most  divine
Gabriel,  and  said  to  him,  "Make  this  man  under-
stand the  vision","  or  whatever  else  is  recorded  by
the  holy  theologians  concerning  the  Godlike  order
of  the  Heavenly  Hierarchies;  by  being  assimilated
to  which,  as  far  as  possible,  the  discipline  of  our
Hierarchy  will  have  the  Angelic  comeliness,  as  it
were,  in  reflection,  moulded  through  it,  and  con-
ducted to  the  superessential  Source  of  order  in  everv
Hierarchy.

♦

CAPUT    IX.

Concerning  the  Principalities,  Archangels,  and  Angels,
and  concerning  their  last  Hierarchy.

Section  I.
There   remains   for  our  reverent   contemplation
a  Division  which  completes  the  Angelic  Hierarchies,

1  Dan.  ix.  23.  m  Ezek.  x.  2—7.  ■  Dan.  viii.  16.


3*>  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

that  divided  into  the  Godlike  Principalities,  Arch-
angels, and  Angels.  And  I  think  it  necessary,  to
declare  first  the  meaning  of  their  sacred  appellations
to  the  best  of  my  ability.  For  that  of  the  Heavenly
Principalities  manifests  their  princely  and  leading
function,  after  the  Divine  example,  with  order  re-
ligious and  most  befitting  the  Princely,  and  their
being  wholly  turned  to  the  super-princely  Prince,
and  leading  others  in  princely  fashion,  and  being
moulded,  as  far  as  possible,  to  that  prince-making
Princedom  Itself,  and  to  manifest  its  superessential
princely  order,  by  the  regularity  of  the  princely
powers.

Section  II.

The  (Order)  of  the  Holy  Archangels  is  of  the
same  rank  with  the  heavenly  Principalities.  For
there  is  one  Hierarchy  and  Division,  as  I  said,
of  them  and  the  Angels.  But  since  thereis  not
a  Hierarchy  which  does  not  possess  first  and  middle
and  last  powers,  the  holy  order  of  Archangels  oc-
cupies the  middle  position  in  the  Hierarchy  between
the  extremes,  for  it  belongs  alike  to  the  most  holy
Principalities  and  to  the  holy  Angels  ;  to  the  Prin-
cipalities because  it  is  turned  in  a  princely  fashion
to  the  superessential  Princedojn,  and  is  moulded
to  It  as  far  as  attainable,  and  unites  the  Angels
after  the  fashion  of  its  own  well-regulated  and  mar-
shalled and  invisible  leadings;  and  it  belongs  to
the  Angels,  because  it  is  of  the  messenger  Order,
receiving  hierarchically  the  Divine  illuminations  from


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  37

the  first  powers,  and  announcing   the  same  to  the
Angels    in    a   godly   manner,   and,   through   Angels,
manifesting   to    us,    in    proportion    to    the   religious
aptitude  of  each  of  the  godly  persons  illuminated.
For  the  Angels,  as  we  have  already  said,  complete
the  whole  series  of  Heavenly  Minds,  as  being  the
last  Order  of  the  Heavenly  Beings  who  possess  the
Angelic  characteristic;    yea,  rather,    they   are   more
properly  named  Angels  by  us  than  those  of  higher
degree,   because'  their    Hierarchy   is   occupied   with
the    more    manifest,   and    is    more  particularly   con-
cerned with  the  things  of  the  world.     For  the  very
highest    Order,    as    being    placed    in    the   first  rank
near  the  Hidden  One,  we  must  consider  as  directing
in    spiritual  things   the  second,   hiddenly;    and   that    v
the  second,  which  is  composed   of  the   holy  Lord-
ships and  Powers  and  Authorities,  leads  the  Hier-
archy   of    the    Principalities    and    Archangels    and
Angels,  more  clearly  indeed  than  the  first  Hierarchy,
but    more   hiddenly   than    the    Order   after   it,   and   -
the  revealing  order  of  the  Principalities,  Archangels,
and  Angels,  presides,  through  each  other,  over  the
Hierarchies  amongst  men,,  in  order  that  the  eleva-
tion,  and   conversion,   and   communion,   and   union
with  God  may  be  in  due  order;  and,  further,  also
that  the  procession  from  God  vouchsafed   benignly
to  all  the  Hierarchies,  and  passing  to  all  in  common,
may  be  also  with  most  sacred  regularity.     Hence,
the  Word  of  God   has  assigned   our  Hierarchy   to
Angels,  by  naming  Michael  as  Ruler  of  the  Jewish
people,    and   others   over   other   nations.     For   the


38  Diony sins  the  Areopagite

Most  High  established  borders  of  nations  according
to  number  of  Angels  of°  God.

Section  III.
But  if  any  one  should  say,  "  How  then  were  the
people   of   the    Hebrews   alone   conducted    to   the
supremely  Divine  illuminations?"  we  must  answer,
that  we  ought  not  to  throw  the  blame  of  the  other
nations  wandering   after   those   which  are   no  gods
upon  the  direct  guidance  of  the  Angels,  but  that
they  themselves,  by  their  own  declension,  fell  away
from  the  direct  leading  towards  the  Divine  Being,
through  self-conceit  and  self-will,  and  through  their
irrational"  veneration  for  things  which  appeared  to
them   worthy   of  God.     Even   the    Hebrew   people
are  said   to  have  suffered  the  same  thing ;  for  He
says,  "Thou<i  hast    cast   away  knowledge   of  God,
and'hast  gone  after  thine  own  heart  V     For  neither
1  have  we  a,  life  governed  by  necessity,  nor  on  account
'  oflne  free  will  of  those  who  are  objects  of  pro-
vidential care,  are  the  Divine  rays  of  the  providential
illumination    blunted;    but   the    inaptitude    of    the
mental  visions  makes  the    overflowing  light-gift  of
the   paternal  goodness,   ehher  altogether  unpartic^
pitted  or  inpenetrable  to  Jheir  resistance,  or  makes
the    participations    of  the    one    fontal   ray,   diverse,
small,  or  great,  obscure,  or  brilliant,  although  that
ray  is  one  and  simple,  and  always  the  same  and  ever
overflowing ;  for  even  if,  over  the  other  nations  (from

"  Deut.  xxxii.  8.  p  ava\6y<f.     I  suggest  &\oyV.

*  Hoseaiv.  6.  r  Jer.  xvi.  12.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  39

whom  we  also  have  emerged  to  that  boundless  and
bounteous  sea  of  Divine  Light,  which  is  readily
expanded  for  the  ready  reception  of  all),  certain  not-
alien  gods  were  wont  to  preside  ;  yet  there  is  one
Head  of  all,  and  to  this,  the  Angels,  who  religiously
direct  each  nation,  conduct  those  who  follow  them.
Let  us  consider  Melchizedek  s  as  being  a  Hierarch,
most  dear  to  God ;  (not  of  gods  which  are  not,  but
of  the  truly  most  high  God);  for  the  godly -wise
did  not  call  Melchizedek  simply  dear  to  God,  but
also  Priest,  in  order  that  they  may  clearly  shew
to  the  wise,  that  not  only  was  he  himself  turned
to  the  true  God,  but  further  that  he  was  guide  to
others,  as  Hierarch  of  the  elevation  to  the  true  and
only  Godhead.

Section  IV.

Let  me  also  recall  this  to  your  Hierarchical  judg-
ment—that both  to  Pharaoh  *,  from  the  Angel  who
presided  over  the  Egyptians,  and  to  the  Babylonian  u
Prince,  from  his  own  Angel,  the  watchful  and  ruling
care  of  the  Providence  and  Lordship  over  all,  was
interpreted  in  visions;  and  for  those  nations,  the
worshippers  of  the  true  God  were  appointed  leaders,
for  the  interpretation  of  things  shaped  by  Angelic
visions  revealed  from  God  through  Angels  to  holy
men  akin  to  the  Angels,  Daniel  and  Joseph.  For
there  is  one  Prince  and  Providence  over  all.
And  never  must  we  think  that  the  Godhead  is
leader    of   Jews    by   lotx,    and    that   Angels,   inde-

•  Gen.  xiv.  18  ;  Heb.  vii.  1.  *  Gen.  xli.  1—7.

tt  Dan.  ii.  1.  *  a-roKAripwTiKws.


40  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

pendently,  or   as  of  equal    rank,  or  in    opposition,
or  that  certain   other  gods,  preside  over  the  other
nations.     But  that  particular  phrase  of  the  Divine
Word    must  be    accepted  according  to   the  follow-
ing sacred  intention ;   not  as  though   God   had  di-
vided  government   amongst  men,  with   other  gods,
or   Angels,    and    had    been    elected    by    lot    to    the
government   and    leadership   of   Israel,   but   in   this
sense — whilst  the  one  Providence  of  Highest  over
all,  assigned  all  mankind,  savingly,  to  the  directing
conduct   of  their   own    Angels,    yet    Israel,    almost
v/  alone  in    comparison   with    all,   turned   himself  to
the    Light-gift,   and   recognition   of  the   true    Lord-
Hence  the   Word  of   God,   as   shewing  that    Israel
elected   himself  for  the   worship   of  the   true  God,
says  this,   "He  became2  Lord's  portion;"    and  as
indicating  that    he  was   assigned    equally  with    the
other  nations,  to   one   of  the   holy  Angels,  for  the
recognition,  through  him,  of  the  Head  of  all,  said
"That    Michael*    became    leader   of    the    (Jewish)
people,"  demonstrating  distinctly  that  there  is  one
Providence  of  the  whole,  superessentially  established
above  all   the  powers,   unseen   and   seen,   and   that
all  the  Angels  who  preside  over  each  nation,  elevate,
as  far  as  possible,   those  who  follow  them  with  a
willing  mind,  to  It  as  their  proper  Head.

*  4xtaTpa<p6P7os — iir€arpa<p€iroi{?).  »  Deut.  xxxii.  9.

•  Dan.  x.  21.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  41

CAPUT    X.

A  Repetition  and  Summary  of  the  Angelic  discipline.
Section  I.
We  have  concluded,  then,  that  the  most  reverend
Order  of  the  Minds  around  God,  ministered  by  the
perfecting  illumination  through  its  immediate  ele-
vation to  it,  is  purified,  and  illuminated,  and  per-
fected by  a  gift  of  light  from  the  Godhead,  more
hidden  and  more  manifest — more  hidden,  indeed,
as  being  more  intelligible,  and  more  simplifying,
and  more  unifying ;  more  manifest,  as  being  a  first
gift  and  a  first  manifestation,  and  more  complete,
and  more  affused  to  it  as  transparent.  And  from
this  (Order)  again,  in  due  degree,  the  second,  and
from  the  second,  the  third,  and  from  the  third,  our
Hierarchy,  is  reverently  conducted  to  the  super-
original  Origin  and  End  of  all  good  order,  accord-
ing to  the  self-same  law  of  well-ordered  regularity,
in  Divine  harmony  and  proportion.

Section  II.
Now  all  Angels  are  interpreters  of  those  above
them,  the  most  reverend,  indeed,  of  God,  Who
moves  them,  and  the  rest,  in  due  degree,  ot
those  who  have  been  moved  by  God.  For,  to  such
an  extent  has  the  superessential  harmony  of  all
things  provided  for  the  religious  order  and  the
regulated  conduct  of  each  of  the  rational  and  in-
tellectual beings,  that  each  rank  of  the  Hierarchies
has  been  placed  in  sacred  order,  and  we  observe


42  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

every  Hierarchy  distributed  into  first,  and  middle,
and  last  Powers.  But  to  speak  accurately,  He  dis-
tinguished each  Division  itself,  by  the  same  Divine
harmonies ;  wherefore  the  theologians  say  that  the
most  Divine  Seraphim  cry  one  to  another  \  in-
dicating distinctly,  as  I  think  by  this,  that  the'  first
impart  their  knowledge  of  divine  things  to  the
second.

Section  III.
I  might  add  this  not  inappropriately,  that  each
heavenly  and  human  mind  has  within  itself  its  own
special  first,  and  middle,  and  last  ranks,  and  powers,
manifested  severally  in  due  degree,  for  the  aforesaid
particular  mystical  meanings  of  the  Hierarchical
illuminations,  according  to  which,  each  one  par-
ticipates, so  far  as  is  lawful  and  attainable  to  him,
in  the  most  spotless  purification,  the  most  copious
light,  the  pre-eminent  perfection.  For  there  is  no-
thing that  is  self-perfect,  or  absolutely  without  need
of  perfecting,  except  the  really  Self-perfect  and  pre-
eminently Perfect.

♦

CAPUT    XL

For  what  reason  all  the  Heavetily  Beings,  in  common,
are  called  Heavenly  Powers.

Section  I.

Now   that   we   have   defined   these   things,   it  is

worthy    of  consideration    for   what    reason    we   are

accustomed  to  call  ;all  the  Angelic  Beings  together,

b  Isa.  vi.  3.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  43

Heavenly  Powers.  For  it  is  not  possible  to  say,
■as  we  may  of  the  Angels,  that  the  Order  of  the
holy  Powers  is  last  of  all.  The  Orders  of  the
superior  Beings  share  in  the  saintly  illumination
of  the  last;  but  the  last  in  no  wise  of  the  first;
and  on  this  account  all  the  Divine  Minds  are  called
Heavenly  Powers,  but  never  Seraphim  and  Thrones
and  Lordships.  For  the  last  do  not  enjoy  the  whole
characteristics  of  the  highest.  For  the  Angels,  and
those  above  the  Angels — Archangels,  and  Princi-
palities, and  Authorities, — placed  by  the  Word  of
Gcd  after  the  Powers,  are  often  in  common  called
by  us,  in  conjunction  with  the  other  holy  Beings,
Heavenly  Powers.

Section  II.

But  we  affirm  that,  whilst  often  using  the  appel-
lation, Heavenly  Powers,  for  all  in  common,  we  do
not  introduce  a  sort  of  confusion  of  the  character-
istics of  each  Order.  But,  inasmuch  as  all  the
Divine  Minds,  by  the  supermundane  description
given  of  them,  are  distributed  into  three, — into  es-
sence, and  power,  and  energy, — when  we  speak  of
them  all,  or  some  of  them,  indiscriminately,  as
Heavenly  Beings  or  Heavenly  Powers,  we  must  con-
sider that  we  manifest  those  about  whom  we  speak
in  a  general  way,  from  their  essence  or  power  sever-
ally. For  we  must  not  apply  the  superior  character-
istic of  those  holy  Powers,  whom  we  have  already
sufficiently  distinguished,  to  the  Beings  which  are
entirely  inferior  to  them,  so  as  to  overthrow  the
unconfused  order  of  the  Angelic  ranks.     For  accord-


44  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

rng  to  the  correct  account  which  we  have  already
frequently  given,  the  superior  Orders  possess  abund-
antly the  sacred  characteristics  of  the  inferior,  but
the  lowest  do  not  possess  the  superior  completeness
of  the  more  reverend,  since  the  first-manifested
illuminations  are  revealed  to  them,  through  the
first  Order,  in  proportion  to  their  capacity.


CAPUT    XII.

Why  the  Hierarchs  amongst  men  are  called  Angels.

Section  I.
But  this  is  sometimes  also  asked  by  diligent
contemplators  of  the  intelligible  Oracles ;  Inasmuch
as  the  lowest  Orders  do  not  possess  the  complete-
ness of  the  superior,  for  what  reason  is  our  Hierarch
named  by  the  Oracles,  "Angel  of  the  Sovereign
Lord6?"

Section  II.
Now  the  statement,  as  I  think,  is  not  contrary
to  what  has  been  before  defined;  for  we  say
that  the  last  lack  the  complete  and  pre-eminent
Power  of  the  more  reverend  Divisions  ;  for  they  par-
ticipate in  the  partial  and  analogous,  according  to
the  one  harmonious  and  binding  fellowship  of  all
things.  For  example,  the  rank  of  the  holy  Cheru-
bim participates  in  higher  wisdom  and  knowledge,
but  the  Divisions  of  the  Beings  beneath  them,  par-
ticipate, they  also,  in  wisdom  and  knowledge,  but
nevertheless  partially,  as  compared  with  them,  and
e  Mai.  ii.  7.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  45

in  a  lower  degree.  For  the  participation  of  wisdom
and  knowledge  throughout  is  common  to  all  the
minds  which  bear  the  image  of  God  ;  but  the  being
near  and  first,  or  second  and  inferior,  is  not  common,
but,  as  has  been  determined  for  each  in  its  own
degree.  This  also  one  might  safely  define  respect-
ing all  the  Divine  Minds  ;*  for,  as  the  first  possess
abundantly  the  saintly  characteristics  of  the  inferior,
so  the  last  possess  those  of  the  superior,  not  indeed
in  the  same  degree,  but  subordinately.  There  is,
then,  as  I  think,  nothing  absurd,  if  the  Word  of
God  calls  our  Hierarch,  Angel,  since  he  participates,
according  to  his  own  capacity,  in  the  messenger
characteristic  of  the  Angels,  and  elevates  himself,
as  far  as  attainable  to  men,  to  the  likeness  of  their

revealing  office.

Section  III.

But  you  will  find  that  the  Word  of  God  calls
gods,  both  the  Heavenly  Beings  above  us,  and  the
most  beloved  of  God,  and  holy  men  amongst  us  d,
although  the  Divine  Hiddenness  is  transcendently
elevated  and  established  above  all,  and  no  created
Being  can  properly  and  wholly  be  said  to  be  like
unto  It,  except  those  intellectual  and  rational  Beings
who  are  entirely  and  wholly  turned  to  Its  Oneness
as  far  as  possible,  and  who  elevate  themselves  in-
cessantly to  Its  Divine  illuminations,  as  far  as  attain-
able, by  their  imitation  of  God,  if  I  may  so  speak,
according  to  their  power,  and  are  deemed  worthy
of  the  same  divine  name.

d  Exod.  vii.  I ;  Ps.  lxxxii.  6.


46  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

CAPUT  XIII.

For  what  reason  the  Prophet  Isaiah  is  said  to  have
been  purified  by  the  Seraphim.

Section  I.
Come,  then,  let  us  examine  this  as  best  we  can,
why  the  Seraphim  is  said  to  be  sent  to  one  of
the  Theologians;  for  some  one  may  object,  that
not  one  of  the  inferior  Angels,  but  he,  the  enrolled
amongst   the    most   reverend    Beings,    cleanses    the

Prophet.

Section  II.

Some,  then,  affirm  that,  according  to  the  definition
already   given    of    the    mutual    relation   of  all    the
Minds,    the    Logione    does    not    name    one    of   the
highest  around  God,  as  having  come  for  the  cleans-
ing of  the  Theologian,  but  that  some  one  of  the
Angels,   placed   over   us   as   a   sacred    Minister   of
the  Prophet's  cleansing,  is  called  by  the  same  name
as  the  Seraphim,  on  the  ground  that  the  removal
of  the  faults  spoken  of,  and  the  restoration  of  him
who   was    cleansed    for    the    Divine   mission,   was
through  fire;  and  they  say  that  the  legion 'speaks
simply  of  one  of  the  Seraphim,  not  one  of  those
who  are  established  around  God,  but  one  of  the
Powers  set  over  us  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing.


Section  III.

e


Section  III.
Now  another  man  brought  forward  to  me  a  by
no  means  foolish  defence  of  the  present  posmon.

f    TK,^      T


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  47

For  he  said  that  that  great  one,  whoever  he  was,—
the^ Angel  who  formed   this  vision  for  the  purpose
of  teaching  the  theologian   Divine  things,— referred
his  own  cleansing  function  to  God,  and  after  God,
to  the  first  working  Hierarchy.     And  was  not   this
statement    certainly   true?    For   he    who    said    this
affirmed  that  the  supremely  Divine  Power  in  visiting
all,  advances  and  penetrates  all  irresistibly,  and  yet
is  invisible  to  all,  not  only  as  being  superessentially
elevated   above   all,   but  as  secretly  transmitting  its
providential  energies  to  all ;  yea,  rather,  it  is  mani-
fested to  all  the  intellectual  Beings  in  due  degree
and   by  conducting    Its   own    gift   of  Light    to   the
most  reverend    Beings,   through    them,    as    first     It
distributes    in    due    order    to    the    subordinate,    ac-
cording to  the  power  of  each  Division  to  bear  the
vision    of  God  ;     or    to    speak    more    strictly,    and
through   familiar   illustrations  (for  if  they  fall  short
of   the   Glory  of  God,   Who    is    exalted   above   all
yet  they  are    more    illustrating   for   us\    the    distri-
bution of  the   sun's    ray  passes   with   easy  distribu-
tion to  first  matter,  as  being  more  transparent  than
all,    and,   through    it  with    greater    clearness,   lights
up   its   own   splendours;    but  when   it   strikes  more
dense   materials,  its   distributed   brilliancy  becomes
more  obscure,  from  the  inaptitude  of  the  materials
illuminated  for  transmission   of  the  gift    of  Light
and  from   this  it  is   naturally  contracted,   so  as  to
almost  entirely  exclude  the  passage  of  Light     Again
the  heat  of  fire  transmits  itself  chiefly  to  things  that
are  more  receptive,  and   yielding,   and   conductive


.g  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

to  assimilation  to  itself;   but,  as  regards  repellent
O.POS,,    ^stances    eUHer   it     eaves   none,^
verv  1  ght,   trace   of  its  tiery  energy  ,
when   through  substances   favourable  to   .ts  proper
Ictton,  it  comes  in  contact  with   rtungs   not  con-
"°?_  first    it   perchance    makes    things    easily
"a     ed  to  heating   hot,  and   through  them  heats
proportionately  either  water  or  something  else  which
I   not   easily  heated.     After   the  same   rule,  then
,  of   Nature's  well-ordered    method,   the    regulation
\  o    aU  good  order,  both  visible  and  invisible,  man,
tts  supernatural  the  brightness  of  its  own  gift
of  Ligh     in  first  manifestation  to  the  most  exalted
Beitgs    m   abundant   streams,  and   through   these,
fhe  Beings  after  them  partake  of  the  Divine  ray.
For  these,  as  knowing  God   first,  and  striving  pre-
Imn'nt     after  Divine  virtue,  and  to  become  first-
wTke  s  are  deemed  worthy  of  the  power  and  energy
?or  the  imitation  of  God,  as  attainable    and  these
benevolently  elevate  the  beings  after   them  to  an
eqX    as  far  as  possible,  by  imparting   ungrudg-
nTy   oWm  the  splendour  which  rests  upon  them-
sles,   and    these   again   to   the   subordinate    ad


o?i  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  49

superior  (is  source)  for  each  after  it,  by  the  fact,
that  the  Divine  rays  are  poured  through  it  to  that.
All  the  remaining  Angelic  Beings,  then,  naturally
regard  the  highest  Order  of  the  Heavenly  Minds
as  source,  after  God,  of  every  God-knowledge  and
God-imitation,  since,  through  them,  the  supremely
Divine  illumination  is  distributed  to  all,  and  to  us.
Wherefore,  they  refer  every  holy  energy  of  Divine
imitation  to  God  indeed  as  Cause,  but  to  the  first
Godlike  Minds,  as  first  agents  and  teachers  of  things
Divine.

The  first  Order,  then,  of  the  holy  Angels  possesses,
more  than  all,  the  characteristic  of  fire,  and  the
streaming  distribution  of  supremely  Divine  wisdom,
and  the  faculty  of  knowing  the  highest  science  of
the  Divine  illuminations,  and  the  characteristic  of
Thrones,  exhibiting  their  expansion  for  the  reception
of  God  ;  and  the  ranks  of  the  subordinate  Beings
possess  indeed  the  empyrean,  the  wise,  the  knowing,
the  God-receptive,  faculty,  but  subordinate^,  and
by  looking  to  the  first,  and  through  them,  as  being
deemed  worthy  of  the  Divine  imitation  in  first  oper-
ation, are  conducted  to  the  attainable  likeness  of
God.  The  aforesaid  holy  characteristics,  then,  which
the  Beings  after  them  possess,  through  the  first,  they
attribute  to  those  Beings  themselves,  after  God,  as
Hierarchs.

Section  IV.

He  who  said  this,  used  to  affirm,  that  this  vision
was  shewn  to  the  Theologian  &,  through  one  of  the
«  Isa.  vi.


E


5°  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

holy  and  blessed  Angels  set  over  us,  and  that  from
his  illuminating  direction,   he  was  elevated  to  that
intellectual  contemplation  in  which  he  saw  the  most
exalted  Beings  seated  (to  speak  symbolically)  under
God,   and  with    God,  and   around  *   God,  and  the
super-princejy i  Eminence  elevated  unspeakably  above
them  and  all,   seated   on   high   in  the  midst  of  the
superior  Powers.     The  Theologian  then  learned,  from
the  things  seen,  that,  as  compared  with  every  super-
essential  pre-eminence,  the  Divine  Being  was  seated
incomparably  above  every  visible  and  invisible  power,
yea,  even  that  It  is  exalted  above  all,  as  the  Reality
of  all  things,  as  Absolute— not  even  like  to  the  first
of  created  Beings  ;-further  also,  that  It  is   source
and   essentiating  Cause,   and  unalterable  Fixity  of
the    undissolved    continuance    of   all    things,    from
Which  is  both  the  being  and  the  well-being  of  the
most  exalted  Powers  themselves.     Then  he  revealed
that  the  Godlike  powers  of  the  most  holy  Seraphim
themselves,   whose  sacred   appellation    signifies   the
Fiery,  concerning  which  we   shall   shortly  speak   as
best  we  can,  conducted  the  elevations  of  the  empy-
rean power  to  the  Divine  likeness.     And,  the  holy
Theologian,  by  viewing  the  description  of  free  and
most  exalted   elevation  of  the   sixfold  wings  to   the
Divine  Being  in  first,  middle,  and  last  conceptions,
and  further,  their  endless  feet  and  many  faces,  and
their  extended  wings— one  under  their  feet,  and  the
other  over  their  faces,   as   seen  in  vision,   and  the
perpetual   movement   of  their    middle    wings— was
h  John  i.  i.  i  Or  super-original.


07i  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  5 1

brought  to  the  intelligible  knowledge  of  the  things
seen,  since  there  was  manifested  to  him  the  power
of  the  most  exalted  minds  for  deep  penetration  and
contemplation,  and  the  sacred  reverence  which  they
have,  supermundanely,  for  the  bold  and  courageous
and  unattainable  scrutiny  into  higher  and  deeper
mysteries  j  and  of  the  incessant  and  high-flying
perpetual  movement  of  their  Godlike  energies  in
due  proportion.  But  he  was  also  taught  the  hidden
mysteries  of  that  supremely  Divine  and  much  es-
teemed Hymn  of  Praise— whilst  the  Angel  who
formed  the  vision  imparts,  as  far  as  possible,  his
own  sacred  knowledge  to  the  Theologian.  He  also
taught  him  this,  that  the  participation,  as  far  as
attainable,  in  the  supremely  Divine  and  radiant
purity,  is  a  purification  to  the  pure  however  pure;
and  it  being  accomplished  from  the  very  Godhead
by  most  exalted  causes,  for  all  the  sacred  Minds  by
a  superessential  hiddenness,  is  in  a  manner  more
clear,  and  exhibits  and  distributes  itself,  in  a  higher
degree,  to  the  highest  powers  around  It ;  but  with
regard  to  the  second,  or  us,  the  lowest  mental  powers,
as  each  is,  distant  from,  as  regards  the  Divine  like-^
ness,  so  It  contracts  its  brilliant  illumination  to  the
single  unknowable  of  its  own  hiddenness.  And  it  -
illuminates  the  second,  severally,  through  the  first  ;
and,  if  one  must  speak  briefly,  it  is  firstly  brought
from  hiddenness  to  manifestation  through  the  first
powers.  This,  then,  the  Theologian  was  taught  by
the  Angel  who  was  leading  him  to  Light— that  puri-
fication, and  all  the  supremely  Divine  operations,


J


5  2  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

illuminating  through  the  first  Beings,  are  distributed
to  all  the  rest,  according  to  the  relation  of  each  for
the  deifying  participations.  Wherefore  he  reasonably
attributed  to  the  Seraphim,  after  God,  the  character-
istic of  purification  by  fire.  There  is  nothing,  then,
absurd,  if  the  Seraphim  is  said  to  purify  the  Prophet
For,  as  God  purifies  all,  by  being  cause  of  every  puri-
fication, yea,  rather  (for  I  use  a  familiar  illustration)
just  as  our  Hierarch,  when  purifying  or  enlightening
through  his  Leitourgoi  or  Priests,  is  said  himself
to  purify  and  enlighten,  since  the  Orders  consecrated
through  him  attribute  to  him  their  own  proper  sacred
operations  ;  so  also  the  Angel  who  effected  the  purifi-
cation of  the  Theologian  attributes  his  own  purifying
science  and  power  to  God,  indeed,  as  Cause,  but
to  the  Seraphim  as  first-operating  Hierarch  ;  as  any
one  might  say  with  Angelic  reverence,  whilst  teaching
one  who  was  being  purified  by  him,  "  There  is  a  pre-
eminent Source,  and  Essence,  and  Worker,  and
Cause  of  the  cleansing  wrought  upon  you  from  me,
He  Who  brings  both  the  first  Beings  into  Being,
and  holds  them  together  by  their  fixity  around
Himself,  and  keeps  them  without  change  and  with-
out fall,  moving  them  to  the  first  participations  of
His  own  Providential  energies  (for  this,  He  Who
taught  me  these  things  used  to  say,  shews  the  mis-
sion of  the  Seraphim),  but  as  Hierarch  and  Leader
after  God,  the  Marshal  of  the  most  exalted  Beings,
from  whom  I  was  taught  to  purify  after  the  ex-
ample of  God  —  this  is  he,  who  cleanses  thee
y  y  through  me,  through  whom  the  Cause  and  Creator


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  53

of  all  cleansing  brought  forth  His  own  provident
energies  from  the  Hidden  even  to  us."  These
things,  then,  he  taught  me,  and  I  impart  them
to  thee.  Let  it  be  a  part  of  thy  intellectual  and
discriminating  skill,  either,  to  acquit  each  of  the
causes  assigned^  from  objection,  and  to  honour  this
before  the  other  as  having  likelihood  and  good
reason,  and  perhaps,  the  truth  ;  or,  to  find  out  from
yourself  something  more  allied  to  the  real  truth,  or
to  learn  from  another ;  (God,  of  course,  giving  ex-
pression, and  Angels  supplying  it ;)  and  to  reveal  to
us,  the  friends  of  Angels,  a  view  more  luminous  if
it  should  be  so,  and  to  me  specially  welcome.


CAPUT    XIV.

What  the  traditional  number  of  the  Angels  signifies.
This  also  is  worthy,  in  my  opinion,  of  intellectual
attention,  that  the  tradition  of  the  Oracles  concerning
the  Angels  affirms  that  they  are  thousand  thousands,
and  myriad  myriads,  accumulating  and  multiplying,
to  themselves,  the  supreme  limits  of  our  numbers,
and,  through  these,  shewing  clearly,  that  the  ranks
of  the  Heavenly  Beings  cannot  be  numbered  by  us.
For  many  are  the  blessed  hosts  of  the  supermundane
minds,  surpassing  the  weak  and  contracted  measure-
ment of  our  material  number,  and  being  definitely
known  by  their  own  supermundane  and  heavenly
intelligence  and  science  alone,  which  is  given  to
them  in  profusion  by  the  supremely  Divine  and
Omniscient   Framer   of  Wisdom,    and    essentiating


54  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

Cause    and   connecting    Force,   and    encompassing
Term  of  all  created  things  together  J.


CAPUT    XV.


What  are  the  morphic  likenesses  of  the  Angelic
Powers  ?  what  the  fiery  ?  what  the  anthromor-
phic?  what  are  the  eyes?  what  the  nostrils?
what  the  ears?  what  the  mouths?  what  the
touch?  what  the  eyelids?  what  the  eyebrows?
what  the  prime  ?  what  the  teeth  ?  what  the
shoulders?  what  the  elboivs  and  the  hands?
what  the  heart?  what  the  breasts?  what  the
back?  what  the  feet?  what  the  wings?  what
the  nakedness  ?  what  the  robe  ?  what  the
shining  raiment?  what  the  sacerdotal?  what
the  girdles  ?  what  the  rods  ?  what  the  spears  ?
what  the  battle  -  axes  ?  what  the  measuring
lines  ?  what  the  winds  ?  what  the  clouds  ?  what
the  brass  ?  what  the  electron  ?  what  the  choirs  ?
what  the  clapping  of  hands  ?  what  the  coiours
of  different  stones  ?  what  the  appearance  of  the
lion?  what  the  appearance  of  the  ox?  what  the
appearafice  of  the  eagle  ?  what  the  horses  ?  what
the  varieties  of  coloured  horses  ?  what  the  rivers  ?
what  the  chariots  ?  what  the  wheels  ?  what  the
so-called  joy  of  the  Angels?

Section  I.
Come,  then,  let  us  at  last,  if  you  please,  rest  our
mental  vision  from  the  strain  of  lofty  contemplation,
befitting  Angels,  and  descend  to  the  divided  and
manifold  breadth  of  the  many-shaped  variety  of  the
Angelic  forms,  and  then  return  analytically  from  the
J  Dan.  vii.  jo.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  55

same,  as  from  images,  to  the  simplicity  of  the
Heavenly  Minds.  But  let  this  first  be  made  plain
to  you,  that  the  explanations  of  the  sacredly  de-
picted likenesses  represent  the  same  ranks  of  the
Heavenly  Beings  as  sometimes  ruling,  and,  at  other
times,  as  being  ruled;  and  the  last,  ruling,  and
the  first,  being  ruled ;  and  the  same,  as  has
been  said,  having  first,  and  middle,  and  last  powers
-without  introducing  anything  absurd  into  the  de-
scription, according  to  the  following  method  of
explanation.  For  if  indeed  we  were  to  say  that
some  are  ruled  by  those  above  them,  and  then
that  they  rule  the  same,  and  that  those  above,
whilst  ruling  those  below,  are  ruled  by  those  same
who  are  being  ruled,  the  thing  would  manifestly
be  absurd,  and  mixed  with  all  sorts  of  confusion.
But  if  we  say  that  the  same  rule  and  are  ruled,
but  no  longer  the  self-same,  or  from  the  self-same,
but  that  each  same  is  ruled  by  those  before,  and
rules  those  below,  one  might  say  appropriately  that
the  Divinely  pictured  presentations  in  the  Oracles
may  sometimes  attribute,  properly  and  truly,  the
very  same,  both  to  first,  and  middle,  and  last  powers.
Now  the  straining  elevation  to  things  above,  and
their  being  drawn  unswervingly  around  each  other,
as  being  guardians  of  their  own  proper  powers,  and
that  they  participate  in  the  providential  faculty  to
provide  for  those  below  them  by  mutual  communi-
cation, befit  truly  all  the  Heavenly  Beings,  although
some,  pre-eminently  and  wholly,  as  we  have  often
said,  and  others  partially  and  subordinately.


56  Dionysiics  the  Areopagtte

Section  II.
But  we  must  keep  our  discourse  within  bounds,
and  must  search,  in  our  first  explanation  of  the  types'
for  what  reason  the  Word  of  God  prefers  the  sacred
description    of  fire,  in  preference    to   almost   every
other*.     You   will    find    it,    then,    representing    not
only  wheels  of  fire,  but  also  living  creatures  of  fire1,
and  men,  flashing,  as  it  were,  like  lightning™,  and
placing    around    the    Heavenly    Beings    themselves
heaps  of  coals  of  firen,  and  rivers  of  flame  flowing
with  irresistible  force0;    and   also  it  says   that  the
thrones   are    of  fire*;    and    that    the   most   exalted
Seraphim  glow  with   fire,  it  shews  from  their  appel-
lation, and  it  attributes  the  characteristic  and  energy
of  fire*  to  them,  and  throughout,  above  and  below,
it  prefers  pre-eminently   the   representation    by  the
image  of  fire.     I  think,  then,  the  similitude  of  firer
denotes  the  likeness  of  the  Heavenly  Minds  to  God
in  the  highest  degree;  for  the  holy  theologians  fre-
quently  describe   the   superessential    and    formless
essence  by  fire,  as  having  many  likenesses,  if  I  may
be  permitted  to  say   so,   of  the   supremely   Divine
property,    as    in    things   visible.      For   the   sensible
I   i  fire  is,  so  to  speak,  in  everything,  and  passes  through
everything   unmingled,    and    springs    from    all,    and
whilst    all-luminous,    is,    as    it    were,    hidden,    un-
known,  in  its  essential  nature,   when  there   is    no

*  Dan.  vii.  9.  1  Ezek.  i.  13,  16.  m  Ibid.  |v|>

*  Ibid.  x.  2.         o  Dan>  vil  JOm        p  Ibi(]  9  q  Isa  y.  ^  7

*  Le  Cratyle  de  Platon,  i.  302.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  57

material  lying  near  it  upon  which  it  may  shew  its
proper  energy.  It  is  both  uncontrollable  and  in-
visible, self-subduing  all  things,  and  bringing  under
its  own  energy  anything  in  which  it  may  happen
to  be;  varying,  imparting  itself  to  all  things  near
it,  whatever  they  may  be;  renewing  by  its  rousing
heat,  and  giving  light  by  its  uncovered  illuminations;
invincible,  unmingled,  separating,  unchangeable,
elevating,  penetrating,  lofty;  subject  to  no  grovelling
inferiority,  ever  moving,  self-moving,  moving  other
things,  comprehending,  incomprehended,  needing
no  other,  imperceptibly  increasing  itself,  displaying
its  own  majesty  to  the  materials  receiving  it;  ener-
getic, powerful,  present  to  all  invisibly,  unobserved,
seeming  not  to  be,  and  manifesting  itself  suddenly
according  to  its  own  proper  nature  by  friction,  as  it
were  by  a  sort  of  seeking,  and  again  flying  away  im-
palpably,  undiminished  in  all  the  joyful  distributions
of  itself.  And  one  might  find  many  characteristics
of  fire,  appropriate  to  display  the  supremely  Divine
Energy,  as  in  sensible  images.  The  Godly-wise,
then,  knowing  this,  depict  the  celestial  Beings  from
fire,  shewing  their  Godlikeness,  and  imitation  of
God,  as  far  as  attainable.

Section  III.

But  they  also  depict  them  under  the  likeness
of  men 8,  on  account  of  the  intellectual  faculty,
and   their  having  powers  of  looking   upwards,   and

8  Gen.  xxxii.  24.


58  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

their  straight  and  erect  form,  and  their  innate  faculty
of  ruling  and  guiding,  and  whilst  being  least,  in
physical  strength  as  compared  with  the  other  powers
of  irrational  creatures,  yet  ruling  over  all  by  their
superior  power  of  mind,  and  by  their  dominion  in
consequence  of  rational  science,  and  their  innate
unslavishness  and  indomitableness  of  soul.  It  is
possible,  then,  I  think,  to  find  within  each  of  the
i  many  parts  of  our  body  harmonious  images  of  the
*(  Heavenly  Powers,  by  affirming  that  the  powers  of
vision*  denote  the  most  transparent  elevation  to-
wards the  Divine  lights,  and  again,  the  tender,
and  liquid,  and  not  repellent,  but  sensitive,  and
pure,  and  unfolded,  reception,  free  from  all  passion,
of  the  supremely  Divine  illuminations.

Now  the  discriminating  powers  of  the  nostrils
denote  the  being  able  to  receive,  as  far  as  attainable,
the  sweet-smelling  largess  beyond  conception,  and
to  distinguish  accurately  things  which  are  not  such,
and  to  entirely  reject".

The  powers  of  the  ears  denote  the  participation
and  conscious  reception  of  the  supremely  Divine
inspiration.

The  powers  of  taste  denote  the  fulness  of  the
intelligible  nourishments,  and  the  reception  of  the
Divine  and  nourishing  streams  x.

The  powers  of  touch  denote  the  skilful  discrimi-
nation of  that  which  is  suitable  or  injurious  ?.

*  Ezek.  i.  18 ;  Ibid.  ix.  5.  u  Gen.  viii.  21.

*  Ibid.  xix.  3.  J  Ibid,  xxxii.  25.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  59

The  eyelids  and  eyebrows  denote  the  guarding
of  the  conceptions  which  see  God.

The  figures  of  manhood  and  youth  denote  the
perpetual  bloom  and  vigour  of  life  \

The  teeth  denote  the  dividing  of  the  nourishing
perfection  given  to  us  ;  for  each  intellectual  Being
divides  and  multiplies,  by  a  provident  faculty,  the
unified  conception  given  to  it  by  the  more  Divine
for  the  proportionate  elevation  of  the  inferior.

The  shoulders  and  elbows a,  and  further,  the
hands b,  denote  the  power  of  making,  and  operating,
and  accomplishing.

The  heart  again  is  a  symbol  of  the  Godlike  life,
dispersing  its  own  life-giving  power  to  the  objects
of  its  forethought,  as  beseems  the  good.

The  chest  again  denotes  the  invincible  and  pro-
tective faculty  of  the  life-giving  distribution,  as  being
placed  above  the  heart.

The  back,  the  holding  together  the  whole  pro-
ductive powers0  of  life.

The  feetd  denote  the  moving  and  quickness,  and
skilfulness  of  the  perpetual  movement  advancing
towards  Divine  things.  Wherefore  also  the  Word
of  God  arranged  the  feet  of  the  holy  Minds  under
their  wings e;  for  the  wing  displays  the  elevating
quickness  and  the  heavenly  progress  towards  higher
things,  and  the  superiority  to  every  grovelling  thing
by  reason  of  the  ascending,  and  the  lightness  of
the  wings  denotes  their  being  in  no  respect  earthly,
z  Mark  xvi.  5.  a  Dan.  x.  6.  b  Ibid.  10.

0  Ibid.  5.  d  Isaiah  vi.  2.  e  Ezek.  i.  6.


60  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

but  undefiledly  and  lightly  raised  to  the  sublime;
and  the  naked  and  unshod  denotes  the  unfettered,
agile,  and  unrestrained,  and  free  from  all  external
superfluity,  and  assimilation  to  the  Divine  simplicity,
as  far  as  attainable.

Section  IV.
But  since  again   the   simple  and   variegated  wis-
domf  both  clothes  the  naked,  and   distributes  cer-
tain   implements   to    them    to    carry,    come,    let   us
unfold,  according  to  our  power,  the  sacred  garments
and  implements  of  the  celestial  Minds.     The  shining
and  glowing  raiment,  I  think,  signifies   the  Divine
likeness  after  the  image  of  fire,  and  their  enlighten-
ing *,    in  consequence  of  their  repose  in    Heaven,
where  is  the  Light,  and  their  complete  illuminating
intelligibly,    and    their    being   illuminated    intellec
tuallyh;  and  the  sacerdotal  robe  denotes  their  con-
ducting   to    Divine   and    mystical   visions,   and    the
consecration  of  their  whole   life1.     And  the  girdles
signify  the  guard  over  their  productive  powers,  and
the  collected    habit    of  being   turned    uniformly  to
It,  and  being  drawn  around  Itself  by  an  unbroken
identity,  in  a  well-ordered  circle.

Section  V.
The  rods  signify  the  kingly  and  directing  faculty,
making  all   things  straight     The   spears k  and   the
battle-axes   denote  the   dividing   of    things    unlike,

'  Eph.  iii.  io.  «  John  xx.  12.  h  See  Maximus  D.N.

c.  4.  s.  1.  *  Dan.  x.  5.  k  Gen.  iii.  24.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  61

and  the  sharp  and   energetic  and  drastic  operation
of  the    discriminating    powers.      The    geometrical
and    technical1"    articles  denote   the   founding,  and
building,  and  completing,  and  whatever  else  belongs
to   the   elevating  and    guiding   forethought    for   the
subordinate  Orders.     But  sometimes  the  implements
assigned    to    the   holy   Angels   are   the    symbols    of
God's  judgments  to  ourselves;    some,   representing
His   correcting11  instruction   or   avenging    righteous-
ness0   others,  freedom  from  peril,  or   end   of  edu-
cation,   or    resumption    of    former    well-being,    or
addition   of  other  gifts,  small  or  great,  sensible  or
intelligible  p.     Nor  would  a  discriminating  mind,  in
any  case  whatever,  have   any  difficulty  in  properly
adapting  things  visible  to  things  invisible.

Section  VI.
But  the  fact  that  they  are  named  winds  *  denotes
their  rapid  action,  passing  almost  instantaneously  to
all  things,  and  their  transporting  movement  in  pass-
ing from  above  to  below,  and  again  from  below  to
above,  their  elevating  the  second  to  the  -  height
above,  and  moving  the  first  to  a  common  and  pro-
vident advance  of  the  inferior  Orders.  But  perhaps
some  one  would  say  that  the  appellation  of  wind,
to  the  aerial  spirit,  also  denotes  the  Divine  likeness
of  the  Heavenly  Minds;  for  this  also  bears  a  like-
ness and  type  of  the  supremely  Divine  energy  (as

1Ezek.xi.3.  -Amosvii.7.  »  N™  3i;

o  2  Kings  xxiv.16.  PZech.in.9.  IPs.  civ.  3,

Dan.  vii.  2.


62  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

we  have  demonstrated  more  fully  in  the  symbolic
theology,   in   our  explanation  of  the  four  elements)
in  accordance  with  the  moving  and  life-producing,
and  the  rapid  and  resistless  development  of  Nature',
and  the  Hiddenness  of  the  moving  sources  and  ter-
minations  to   us   unknown    and    invisible.     For  He
says,   "Thou  knowest  not  whence  it   cometh r  nor
whither  it  goeth."     But  also  the  Word  of  God  attri-
butes to  them  the  appearance  of  a  cloud  8,  signifying,
through  this,  that  the  holy  minds  are  filled   super-
mundanely    with    the    hidden   Light,    receiving    the
first  manifestation  without  boasting  over  it  as  such,
which   they  distribute   ungrudgingly  to  the   second,'
as  a  secondary  manifestation,  and  in  proportion  to
capacity ;  yea,  further,  that  the  productive,  and  life-
producing,  and  increasing,  and  perfecting  power  is
enshrined   in   them,  after  the  fashion  of  the   intel-
ligible production  of  showers  *,  which  summons  the
receptive    womb  of  the  earth,   by  fruitful  rains,  to
the  life-giving  pangs  of  birth.

Section  VII.
Also,  the  Word  of  God  attributes  to  the  Heavenly
Beings  a  likeness  to  Brass*,  Electron1,  and  many-
coloured  stones.  Electron,  as  being  partly  like  gold,
partly  like  silver,  denotes  the  incorruptible,  as  in
gold,  and  unexpended,  and  undiminished,  and  spot-
less brilliancy,  and  the  brightness,  as  in  silver,  and
a   luminous   and   heavenly  radiance.      But   to    the

r  John  iii.  8.  a  Ezek.  10.  4.  »  VqVt^  btfpoaKiav.

u  Ezek.  xi.  3.  x  jbid.  viii.  2.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  63

Brass,  according  to  the   reasons   assigned,  must  be
attributed  either  the  likeness  of  fire  or  that  of  gold.

We  must  consider  that  the  many-coloured  appear-
ances of  stones  denote  either  as  white,  the  luminous  ;
or  as  red,  the  fiery ;  or  as  yellow,  the  golden  ;  or  as
green,  the  youthful  and  the  full  grown  ;  and  within
each  likeness  you  will  find  an  explanation  which
teaches  the  inner  meaning  of  the  typical  images.

But  since,  I  think,  according  to  our  power,  this
has  been  sufficiently  said,  let  us  pass  to  the  sacred
explanation  of  the  Divine  representations  of  the
Heavenly  Minds  through  wild  beasts*.  We  must
consider  that  the  shape  of  a  Lion2  signifies  the
leading,  and  robust,  and  indomitable,  and  the  assi-
milation, as  far  as  possible,  to  the  unutterable  God-
head, by  the  concealment  of  the  intellectual  foot-
prints*, and  by  the  mystically  modest  covering  of
the  path,  leading  to  It,  during  Divine  illumination.

Section  VIII.

The  Image  of  the  Oxb  denotes  the  strong  and  the
mature,  turning  up  the  intellectual  furrows  for  the
reception  of  the  heavenly  and  productive  showers;
and  the  Horns,  the  guarding  and  indomitable.

The  representation  of  the  Eagle0  denotes  the
kingly,  and  soaring,  and  swift  in  flight,  and  quick-
ness  in    search    of  the    nourishment  which    makes

y  Ezek.  i.  10.  z  Ibid.

^  The  Lion  was  said  to  erase  his  footsteps  by  his  tail.
b  Ezek.  i.  10.  c  ibid.


64  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

strong,  and  wariness,  and  agility,  and  cleverness  •
and  the  unimpeded,  straight,  and  unflinching  gaze
towards  the  bounteous  and  brilliant  splendour  of  the
Divine  rays  of  the  sun,  with  the  robust  extension
of  the  visual  powers.

That  of  Horses  represents  obedience  and  docility
and  of  those  who  are  white,  brilliancy,  and  as  espe-
cially congenial  to  the  Divine  Light;  but  of  those
who  are  dark  blue,  the  Hidden;  and  of  those  red,
the  fiery  and  vigorous ;  and  of  the  piebald,  the
uniting  of  the  extremes  by  the  power  passing  through
them,  and  joining  the  first  to  the  second,  and  the
second  to  the  first,  reciprocally  and  considerately

Now  if  we  did  not  consult  the  proportion  of  our
discourse,  we  might,  not  inappropriately,  adapt  the
particular  characteristics  of  the  aforesaid  living  crea-
tures,  and   all    their   bodily  representations    to   the
Heavenly  Powers,  upon  the  principle  of  dissimilar
similitudes;  for  instance,  their  appearance  of  anger
to  intellectual  manliness,  of  which  anger  is  the  re-
motest echo,  and  their  desire,  to  the  Divine  love  •
and  to  speak   summarily,  referring  all  the  sensible
perceptions,  and  many  parts  of  irrational  beings,  to
the  immaterial  conceptions  and  unified  Powers'  of
the   Heavenly  Beings.     Now  not  only  is  this  suffi-
cient for  the  wise,  but  even  an  explanation  of  one
of  the  dissimilar  representations  would  be  sufficient
for  the  accurate  description  of  similar  things,  after
the  same  fashion.


on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy.  65

Section  IX.

But  we  must  examine   the  fact  that   rivers d  are
spoken  of,  and  Wheels e  and  Chariots f  attached  to
the  Heavenly  Beings.     The  rivers  of  fire  signify  the
supremely  Divine    streams    furnishing   to    them    an
ungrudging  and  incessant  flow,  and  nourishing  the
productive   powers   of  life  j    the  chariots,    the   con-
joined communion  of  those  of  the  same  rank;   the
wheels  being  winged,  and  advancing  without  turning
and  without  deviation,  the  power  of  their  advancing
energy  within  a  straight  and   direct    path,   towards
the  same  unflinching  and  straight   swoop  g  of  their
every  intellectual  track,  supermundanely  straight  and
direct  way.     Also  it  is  possible  to  explain,  after  an-
other mystical  meaning,  the    sacred  description   of
the  intellectual  wheels  j    for  the  name  Gel,  Gel,  is
given  to  them,  as  the  theologian  says.     This  shews,
according  to   the  Hebrew  tongue,   revolutions  and
revelations.     For  the  Empyrean  and  Godlike  wheels
have  revolutions,   indeed,  by  their  perpetual  move-
ment around  the  Good  Itself;    but  revelations,  by
the  manifestation  of  things  hidden,  and  by  the  ele-
vation of  things  at  our  feet,  and  -by  the  descending
procession    of  the    sublime    illuminations   to  things
below.      There    remains   for    accurate    explanation,
the  statement  respecting  the  rejoicing  of  the   Hea-
venly  Orders h;    for   they  are    utterly  incapable  of
our   impassioned   pleasure.     Now  they  are  said  to

d  Dan.  vii.  10.  e  Ezek.  x.  9.  f  2  Kings  ii.  11.

e  otna{l).  h  Luke  xv.  10.


66  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  (5^.

rejoice  with  God   over  the  discovery  of  what  was
lost,  as  befits  their  Divine  good  nature,  and  that
Godlike  and  ungrudging  rejoicing  over  the  care  and
salvation  of  those  who  are  turned  to  God ;  and  that
joy,  beyond  description,  of  which  also  holy  men  often
partake,  whilst  the  deifying  illuminations  of  the  Deity
rest  upon  them.    Let  it  suffice,  then,  to  have  said  this
much  concerning  the  Divine  representations,  which,
no  doubt,  falls  short  of  their  accurate  explanation,
but  which  will  prevent  us,  I  think,  from  being  ser-
vilely entangled  in  the   resemblance  of  the  types.
But  if  you  should  say  that  we  have  not  mentioned
in  order  the  whole  Angelic  Powers,  or  operations,
or  likenesses,  depicted  in  the  Oracles,  we  answer  in
truth,  that  we   do   not   possess  the   supermundane
V  science  of  some;   and  further,  in  regard  to  them,
we  have  need  of  another  to  conduct  to  light  and  to
reveal.     Other   things,    however,   as   being   parallel
to  the  things  said,  we  have  omitted,  out  of  regard
to  the  symmetry  of  the  discourse ;  and  the  hidden-
ness,  beyond   our  capacity,  we  have  honoured  by
silence.

St.  Michael  and  All  Angels,  1898.


ECCLESIASTICAL    HIERARCHY.


CAPUT    I.

To  my  Fellow  Presbyter  Timothy.

DlONYSIUS    THE    PRESBYTER.

What  is  the  traditional  view  of  the  Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy  and  what  is  its  purpose  $

Section  I.
We  must,  then,  most  pious  of  pious  sons,  demon-
strate  from    the    supermundane   and    most    sacred
Oracles    and   traditions,   that    ours   is   a   Hierarchy
of  the  inspired  and   Divine  and    Deifying   science,
and   of  operation,    and   of  consecration,  for   those
who  have  been  initiated  with  the  initiation  of  the
sacred  revelation  derived  from  the  hierarchical  mys-
teries.    See,  however,  that  you  do  not  put  to  scorn
things   most   holy    (Holy   of  Holies a) ;    but   rather
treat   them    reverently,   and    you   will    honour   the
things  of  the  hidden  God  by  intellectual  and  obscure
researches,  carefully  guarding  them  from  the  par-
ticipation  and    defilement   of  the   uninitiated,   and
reverently  sharing  holy  things  with  the  holy  alone,
by  a  holy  enlightenment.     For  thus,  as  the  Word
of  God  b  has  taught  us  who  feast  at  His  Banquet,
even   Jesus    Himself— the   most   supremely   Divine

a  To"A7ta  tup  'hyivv.  b  ©eoXo^ia.


68  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

Mind  and  superessential,  the  Source  and  Essence,
and  most  supremely  Divine  Power  of  every  Hier-
archy and  Sanctification  and  Divine  operation —
illuminates  the  blessed  Beings  who  are  superior
to  us,  in  a  manner  more  clear,  and  at  the  same
time  more  intellectual,  and  assimilates  them  to  His
own  Light,  as  far  as  possible;  and  by  our  love
of  things  beautiful  elevated  to  Him,  and  which
elevates  us,  folds  together  our  many  diversities,  and
after  perfecting  into  a  uniform  and  Divine  life  and
habit  and  operation,  holily  bequeaths  the  power  of
the  Divine  Priesthood ;  from  which  by  approaching  to
the  holy  exercise  of  the  priestly  office,  we  ourselves
become  nearer  to  the  Beings  above  us,  by  assimi-
lation, according  to  our  power,  to  their  abiding  and
unchangeable  holy  steadfastness ;  and  thus  by  look-
ing upwards  to  the  blessed  and  supremely  Divine c
self  of  Jesus,  and  reverently  gazing  upon  whatever
we  are  permitted  to  see,  and  illuminated  with  the
knowledge  of  the  visions,  we  shall  be  able  to  be-
come, as  regards  the  science  of  Divine  mysteries,
purified  and  purifiers ;  images  of  Light,  and  workers
with  God,  perfected  and  perfecting.

Section  II.

Then  what  is  the  Hierarchy  of  the  Angels d  and
Archangels,  and  of  supermundane  Principalities  and
Authorities,  Powers  and  Lordships,  and  Divine
Thrones,  or  of  the  Beings  of  the  same  ranks  as
the  Thrones— which  the  Word  of  God  declares  to

o  owtV-  avyr}v.  or  apx"hv.  d  See  Epistle  to  Trallians.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  69

be  near,  and  always  about  God,  and  with e  God,
naming  them  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Cherubim  and
Seraphim — by  pondering  the  sacred  ranks  and  di-
visions of  their  Orders  and  Hierarchies,  you  will
find  in  the  books  we  have  written — not  as  befits
their  dignity  but  to  the  best  of  our  ability — and
as  the  Theology  of  the  most  holy  Scriptures  guided,
when  they  extolled  their  Hierarchy.  Nevertheless,  it
is  necessary  to  say  this,  that  both  that,  and  every
Hierarchy  extolled  now  by  us,  has  one  and  the  same
power,  throughout  the  whole  Hierarchical  trans-
action ;  and  that  the  Hierarch  himself,  according
to  his  essence,  and  analogy,  and  rank,  is  initiated  in
Divine  things,  and  is  deified  and  imparts  to  the
subordinates,  according  to  the  meetness  of  each
for  the  sacred  deification  which  comes  to  him  from
God ;  also  that  the  subordinates  follow  the  superior,
and  elevate  the  inferior  towards  things  in  advance ;
and  that  some  go  before,  and,  as  far  as  possible,
give  the  lead  to  others;  and  that  each,  as  far  as
may  be,  participates  in  the  truly  Beautiful,  and
Wise,  and  Good,  through  this  the  inspired  and
sacerdotal  harmony.

But  the  Beings  and  ranks  above  us,  of  whom
we  have  already  made  a  reverent  mention,  are  both
incorporeal,  and  their  Hierarchy  is  both  intelligible
and  supermundane ;  but  let  us  view  our  Hierarchy,
comformably  to  ourselves,  abounding  in  the  variety
of  the  sensible  symbols,  by  which,  in  proportion
to  our  capacity,  we  are  conducted,  hierarchically
e  John  i.  1.


y0  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

according  to  our  measure,  to  the  uniform  deification
—God  and  Divine  virtue.  They  indeed,  as  minds,
think,  according  to  laws  laid  down  for  themselves  ;
but  we  are  led  by  sensible  figures  to  the  Divine
contemplations,  as  is  possible  to  us.  And,  to  speak
truly,  there  is  One,  to  Whom  all  the  Godlike  aspire,
but  they  do  not  partake  uniformly  of  this  One
and  the  Same,  but  as  the  Divine  balance  distributes
to  each  the  meet  inheritance.  Now  these  things
have  been  treated  more  systematically  in  the  Treatise
concerning  "Intelligible  and  Sensible f."  But  now
I  will  attempt  to  describe  our  Hierarchy,  both  its
source  and  essence,  as  best  I  can  ;  invoking  Jesus,
the  source  and  Perfecting  of  all  Hierarchies.

Section  III.
Every  Hierarchy,  then,  is,  according  to  our  august
tradition,  the  whole  account  of  the  sacred   things
falling  under  it,  a  most  complete  summary  of  the
sacred  rites  of  this  or  that  Hierarchy,  as  the  case
may  be.     Our  Hierarchy,   then,  is   called,  and   is,
the  comprehensive  system  of  the  whole  sacred  rites
included  within  it,  according  to  which  the  divine
Hierarch,  being  initiated,  will  have  the  communi-
cation of  all  the  most  sacred  things  within  himself,
as  chief*  of  Hierarchy.     For  as  he  who  speaks  of
Hierarchy  speaks  of  the  order  of  the  whole  sacred
rites   collectively,   so   he,   who   mentions   Hierarch,
denotes   the   inspired   and   godly  man— the  skilled
in  all  sacred  knowledge— in  whom  the  whole  Hier-
'  Ap.  C.  viii.  1 6.  g  eVc^o*.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  7 1

archy  is  clearly  completed   and   recognized  within
himself.

Head  of  this  Hierarchy  is  the  Fountain  of  life,
the  Essence  of  Goodness,  the  one  Triad,  Cause  of
things  that  be,  from  Which  both  being  and  well-
being  come  to  things  that  be,  by  reason  of  good-
ness11. Of  this  most  supremely  Divine  blessedness
— exalted  beyond  all,  the  threefold  Monad,  the
really  Being, — the  Will,  inscrutable  to  us,  but  known
to  Itself,  is  the  rational  preservation  of  beings
amongst  us  and  above  us ;  but  that  (preservation)
cannot  otherwise  take  place,  except  those  who  are
being  saved  are  being  deified.  Now  the  assimi-
lation to,  and  union  with,  God,  as  far  as  attain-
able, is  deification.  And  this  is  the  common  goal
of  every  Hierarchy, — the  clinging  love  towards  God
and  Divine  things  divinely  and  uniformly  minis-
tered; and  previous  to  this,  the  complete  and
unswerving  removal  of  things  contrary,  the  know-
ledge of  things  as  they  are  in  themselves ;  the
vision  and  science  of  sacred  truth ;  the  inspired
communication  of  the  uniform  perfection  of  the
One  Itself,  as  far  as  attainable;  the  banquet  of
contemplation,  nourishing  intelligibly,  and  deifying
every  man  elevated  towards  it.

Section  IV.
Let   us  affirm,   then,   that   the   supremely  Divine
Blessedness,   the   '  essential    Deity,   the    Source    of

h  Creation  through  goodness — not  necessity.
1  77  <puati  ®e6rr]S.


72  Diony sites  the  Areopagite

deification,  from  Which  comes  the  deification  of
those  deified,  bequeathed,  by  Divine  Goodness,  the
Hierarchy,  for  preservation,  and  deification  of  all
rational  and  intellectual  Beings.  And  to  the  super-
mundane and  blessed  inheritances  there  is  be-
queathed something  more  immaterial  and  intellec-
tual (for  Almighty  God  does  not  move  them  to
things  divine,  from  without,  but  intelligibly,  since
they  are  illuminated  as  to  the  most  Divine  will
from  within,  with  brilliancy  pure  and  immaterial),
but  to  us — that  which  has  been  bequeathed  to  them,
uniformly,  and  enveloped,  is  bequeathed  from  the
Divinely  transmitted  Oracles,  in  a  variety  and  mul-
titude of  divisible  symbols,  as  we  are  able  to  re-
ceive it.  For  the  Divinely  transmitted  Oracles  are
essence  of  our  Hierarchy.  And  we  affirm  that  these
Oracles — all  such  as  were  given  from  our  godly
initiators  in  inspired  Letters  of  the  Word  of  God  k —
are  most  august ;  and  further,  whatever  our  leaders
have  revealed  to  us  from  the  same  holy  men,  by  a
less  material  initiation,  and  already  akin,  as  it  were,
to  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy,  from  mind  to  mind,
through  the  medium  of  speech,  corporeal,  indeed,
but  nevertheless  more  immaterial,  without  writing.
Nor  did  the  inspired  Hierarchs  transmit1  these
things,  in  conceptions  clear  to  the  commonalty  of
worshippers,  but  in  sacred  symbols.  For  it  is  not
every  one  that  is  hallowed ;  nor,  as  the  Oracles
affirm,  does  knowledge  belong  to  all m.

fc     ay  loypdcpois  9co\oyiKais  A(\tois.
1  Mark  iv.  II.  m  I  Cor.  viii.  7.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  73

Section  V.
Necessarily,   then,  the   first  leaders  of  our   Hier-
archy, after  having  been  filled  themselves  with  the
sacred  gift,   from  the   superessential   Godhead,  and
sent,  by  the  supremely  Divine  Goodness,  to  extend
the  same  gift   successively,  and,  as  godly,  earnestly
desiring  themselves  the  elevation  and  deification  of
those  after  them,  presented  to  us— by  their  written  and
unwritten  revelations-in  accordance  with  their  sacred
injunctions,  things  supercelestial,  by  sensible  images,
the  enfolded,  by  variety  and  multitude,  and  things  Di-
vine, by  things  human,  and  things  immaterial,  by  things
material,  and  the  superessential,  by  things  belong-
ing to  us.     Nor  did  they  do  this  merely  on  account
of  the  unhallowed,  to  whom  it  is  not  permitted  even
to  touch  the  symbols,  but  because  our  Hierarchy  is,
as  I  said,  a  kind  of  symbol  adapted  to  our  condition'
which  needs  things  sensible,   for  our  more   Divine
elevation  from  these  to  things  intelligible.     Neverthe-
less the  reasons  of  the  symbols  have  been  revealed
to  the  Divine  initiators,  which  it  is  not  permitted  to
explain  to  those  who  are  yet  being  initiated,  know-
ing that  the  Lawgivers  of  things  divinely  transmitted
deliberately  arranged   the    Hierarchy  in  well-estab-
lished and  unconfused  ranks,  and  in  proportionate
and  sacred  distributions  of  that  which  was   conve-
nient  to    each,    according   to    fitness.      Wherefore
trusting  in  thy  sacred  promises  (for  it  is   a   pious
duty   to    recall    them    to    thy    recollection)  — that
since  every  Hierarchical  sacred  word  is  of  binding


74  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

force,  thou  wilt  not  communicate  to  any  other  but
those  Godlike  initiators  of  the  same  rank  with  thy-
self, and  wilt  persuade  them  to  promise,  according
to  hierarchical  regulation,  to  touch  pure  things
purely,  and  to  communicate  the  mysteries  of  God
to  the  godly  alone,  and  things  perfect  to  those
capable  of  perfection,  and  things  altogether  most
holy  to  the  holy,  I  have  entrusted  this  Divine  gift
to  thee,  in  addition  to  many  other  Hierarchical
gifts.


CAPUT    II.

I.   Concerning  things  done  in  Illumination.

We  have,  then,  reverently  affirmed  that  this  is
the  purpose  of  our  Hierarchy,  viz.,  our  assimilation
and  union  with  God,  as  far  as  attainable.  And,
as  the  Divine  Oracles  teach,  we  shall  attain  this
only  by  the  love  and  the  religious  performance  of
the  most  worshipful  Commandments.  For  He  says  :
"He*  that  loveth  Me  will  keep  My  Word,  and
My  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto
him,  and  will  make  Our  abode  with  him."  What,
then,  is  source  of  the  religious  performance  of  the
most  august  commandments?  Our  preparation  for
the  restitution  of  the  supercelestial  rest,  which  forms
the  habits  of  our  souls  into  an  aptitude  for  the
reception  of  the  other  sacred  sayings  and  doings  °,
the  transmission  of  our  holy  and  most  divine  re-
generation p.     For,  as  our   illustrious   Leader  used

n  John  xiv.  23.  0  ibid.  i.  13.  p  ibid.  iii.  5.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  75

to  say,  the  very  first  movement  of  the  mind  towards
Divine  things  is  the  willing  reception  of  Almighty
God,  but  the  very  earliest  step  of  the  religious
reception  towards  the  religious  performance  of  the
Divine  commandments  is  the  unutterable  operation
of  our  being  1  from  God.  For  if  ourr  being  from
God  is  the  Divine  engendering,  never  would  he
know,  and  certainly  never  perform,  any  of  the  Divine
instructions,  who  had  not  had  his  beginning  to  be
in  God.  To  speak  after  the  manner  of  men,  must
we  not  first  begin  to  be,  and  then  to  do,  our  affairs  ?
Since  he,  who  does  not  exist  at  all,  has  neither
movement  nor  even  beginning;  since  he,  who  in
some  way  exists,  alone  does,  or  suffers,  those  things
suitable  to  his  own  nature.  This,  then,  as  I  think,
is  clear.  Let  us  next  contemplate  the  Divine  sym-
bols of  the  birth  in  God.  And  I  pray,  let  no
uninitiated  person  approach  the  sight8;  for  neither
is  it  without  danger  to  gaze  upon  the  glorious
rays  of  the  sun  with  weak  eyes,  nor  is  it  without
pertf  to  put  our  hand  to  things  above  us.  For
right  was  the  priesthood  of  the  Law,  when  rejecting
Osias  *,  because  he  put  his  hand  to  sacred  things ;
and  Korah u,  because  to  things  sacred  above  his
capacity;  and  Nadab x  and  Abihu,  because  they
treated  things,  within  their  own  province,  unholily.

q  rov  ehai  Oetws.  r  See  Baptismal  Offices.

9  C.  2.  s.  62.  t  2  Chron.  xxvi.  16—21.  u  Num.  xvi.

J— 33-  x  Ibid-  iil-  4.


76  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

II.  Mysterio?i  of  Illumination.
Section  I.
The  Hierarch,  then,  wishing  *  that  all  men  what-
soever should  be  saved  by  their  assimilation  towards
God,  and  come  to  recognition  of  truth,  proclaims
to  all  the  veritable  Good  News,  that  God  being
compassionate  towards  those  upon  earth,  out  of
His  own  proper  and  innate  goodness,  deigned  Him-
self to  come  to  us  with  outstretched  arms,  by  reason
of  loving-kindness  towards  men ;  and,  by  the  union
with  Him,  to  assimilate,  like  as  by  fire,  things  that
have  been  made  one,  in  proportion  to  their  aptitude
for  deification.  "For  as  many  as  received  Him,
to  them  gave  He  power2  to  become  children  of
God — to  those  who  believe  on  His  Name,  who  were
begotten,  not  of  bloods,  nor  of  will  of  flesh,  but

of  God  a."

Section  II.

He,  who  has  felt  a  religious  longing  to  participate
in  these  truly  supermundane  gifts,  comes  to  some
one  of  the  initiated,  and  persuades  him  to  act  as
his  conductor  to  the  Hierarch.  He  then  professes
wholly  to  follow  the  teaching  that  shall  be  given
to  him,  and  prays  him  to  undertake  the  superin-
tendence of  his  introduction,  and  of  all  his  after
life.  Now  he,  though  religiously  longing  for  his
salvation,  when  he  measures  human  infirmity  against
the  loftiness  of  the  undertaking,  is  suddenly  seized

y  1  Tim.  ii.  4.  z  John  i.  12,  13.

a  Coptic  Con.  II.  40 ;  Ap.  C.  lib.  viii.  c.  38.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  7  7

with  a  shivering  and  sense  of  incapacity,  neverthe-
less, at  last,  he  agrees,  with  a  good  grace,  to  do
what  is  requested,  and  takes  and  leads  him  to  the
chief  Hierarch.

Section  III.
He,  then,  when  with  joy  he  has  received,  as  the
sheep  upon  his  shoulders,  the  two  men,  and  has
first  worshipped,  glorifies  with  a  mental  thanksgiving
and  bodily  prostration  the  One  beneficent  Source b,
from  Which,  those  who  are  being  called,  are  called,
and  those  who  are  being  saved,  are  saved.

Section  IV.
Then  collecting  a  full  religious  assembly  into
the  sacred  place,  for  co-operation,  and  common
rejoicing  over  the  man's  salvation,  and  for  thanks-
giving for  the  Divine  Goodness,  he  first  chants  a
certain  hymn,  found  in  the  Oracles,  accompanied
by  the  whole  body  of  the  Church;  and  after  this,
when  he  has  kissed  the  holy  table,  he  advances
to  the  man  before  him,  and  demands  of  him,  what
has  brought  him  here?

Section  V.

When  the  man,  out  of  love  to  God,  has  confessed,
according  to  the  instruction  of  his  sponsor,  his  ungod-
liness0, his  ignorance  of  the  really  beautiful,  his  in-
sufficiency for  the  life  in  God,  and  prays,  through  his
holy  mediation,  to  attain  to  God  and  Divine  things,  he
(the  Hierarch)  testifies  to  him,  that  his  approach  ought
to  be  entire,  as  to  God  Who  is  All  Perfect,  and  without

b  Phil.  ii.  13.  c  iQeoT-qra,  Matt.  vi.  24  ;  Eph.  iv.  5.


7 8  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

blemish  ;  and  when  he  has  expounded  to  him  fully  the
godly  course  of  life,  and  has  demanded  of  him,  if  he
would  thus  live, — after  his  promise  he  places  his  right
hand  upon  his  head,  and  when  he  has  sealed  him,
commands  the  priests  to  register  the  man  and  hisv
sponsor.

Section  VI.
When  these  have  enrolled  the  names,  he  makes
a  holy  prayer,  and  when  the  whole  Church  have
completed  this  with  him,  he  looses  his  sandals,  and
removes  his  clothing,  through  the  Leitourgoi.  Then,
when  he  has  placed  him  facing  the  west  and  beating
his  hands,  averted  towards  the  same  quarter,  he
commands  him  thrice  to  breathe  scorn  upon  Satan,
and  further,  to  profess  the  words  of  the  renunciation.
When  he  has  witnessed  his  threefold  renunciation,
he  turns  him  back  to  the  east,  after  he  has  professed
this  thrice ;  and  when  he  has  looked  up  to  heaven,
and  extended  his  hands  thitherward,  he  commands
him  to  be  enrolled  under  Christ,  and  all  the  Divinely
transmitted  Oracles  of  God.  When  the  man  has
done  this,  he  attests  again  for  him  his  threefold
profession,  and  again,  when  he  has  thrice  professed,
after  prayer,  he  gives  thanks,  and  lays  his  hand  upon
him.

Section  VII.
When  the  Deacons  have  entirely  unclothed  him,
the  Priests  bring  the  holy  oil  of  the  anointing.  Then
he  begins  the  anointing,  through  the  threefold  seal-
ing, and  for  the  rest  assigns  the  man  to  the  Priests,
for-  the  anointing  of  his  whole  body,  while  himself


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy \  79

advances  to  the  mother  of  filial  adoption,  and  when
he  has  purified  the  water  within  it  by  the  holy
invocations,  and  perfected  it  by  three  cruciform
effusions  of  the  altogether  most  pure  Murond,  and
by  the  same  number  of  injections  of  the  all  holy
Muron,  and  has  invoked  the  sacred  melody  of  the
inspiration  of  the  God-rapt  Prophets,  he  orders  the
man  to  be  brought  forward;  and  when  one  of  the
Priests,  from  the  register,  has  announced  him  e  and
his  surety,  he  is  conducted  by  the  Priests  near  the
water  to  the  hand  of  the  Hierarch,  being  led  by
the  hand  to  him.  Then  the  Hierarch,  standing
above,  when  the  Priests  have  again  called  aloud
near  the  Hierarch  within  the  water  the  name  of
the  initiated,  the  Hierarch  dips  him  three  times,
invoking  the  threefold f  Subsistence  of  the  Divine
Blessedness,  at  the  three  immersions  and  emersions
of  the  initiated.  The  Priests  then  take  him,  and
entrust  him  to  the  Sponsor  and  guide  of  his  intro-
duction; and  when  they,  in  conjunction  with  him,
have  cast  over  the  initiated  appropriate  clothing,
they  lead  him  again  to  the  Hierarch,  who,  when
he  has  sealed  the  man  with  the  most  Divinely
operating  Muron,  pronounces  him  to  be  hencefor-
ward partaker  of  the  most  Divinely  initiating  Eu-
charist.

d  fivpov  is  the  unguent  prepared  from  myrrh,  fivpocpeyyris  is
shining  with  such  unguent,  and  ixvpoarayris  {fivpov  and  o-rafa)
dripping  with  ditto.     Ap.  Con.  lib.  ii.  c.  14.

e  Syr.  Doc.  p.  60.     Clark.  f     rpiar^v  inroaraav.

Heb.  i.  3.


80  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

Section  VIII.
When  he  has  finished  these  things,  he  elevates
himself  from  his  progression  to  things  secondary,
to  the  contemplation  of  things  *  first,  as  one,  who,
at  no  time  or  manner,  turns  himself  to  any  other
thing  whatever  than  those  which  are  peculiarly  his
own,  but  from  things  Divine  to  Divine, — is  per-
sistently and  always  ranging  himself  under  the
banner  of  the  supremely  Divine  Spirit.

III.   Contemplation.
Section  I.

This  initiation,  then,  of  the  holy  birth  in  God,
as  in  symbols,  has  nothing  unbecoming  or  irreverent,
nor  anything  of  the  sensible  images,  but  (contains)
enigmas  of  a  contemplation  worthy  of  God,  likened
to  physical  and  human  images.  For  how  should
it  appear  misleading?  Even  when  the  very  divine
meaning  of  the  things  done  is  passed  over  in  silence,
hthe  divine  Instruction  might  convince,  religiously
pursuing  as  it  does  the  good  life  of  the  candidate,
enjoining  upon  him  the  purification  from  every  kind
of  evil,  through  a  virtuous  and  Divine  life,  by  the
physical  cleansing  through  the  agency  of  water  in
a  bodily  form.  This  symbolic  teaching  then  of
the  things  done,  even  if  it  had  nothing  more  divine,
would  not  be  without  religious  value,  as  I  think,
introducing  a  discipline  of  a  well-regulated  life,  and
suggesting    mysteriously,    through   the   total   bodily

8  From  outward  signs  to  inward  grace.  h  Catechism.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  81

purification  by  water,  the  complete  purification  from
the  evil  life.

Section  II.
Let  this,  then,  be,  for  the  uninitiated,  a  conducting
guidance  of  the  soul,  which  separates,  as  is  meet
things  sacred  and  uniform  from  multiplicity,  and
apportions  the  harmonious  elevation  to  the  Orders
severally  in  turn.  But  we,  who  have  ascended
by  sacred  gradations  to  the ;  sources  of  the  things
performed,  and  have  been  religiously  taught  these
(sources),  shall  recognize  of  what  moulds  they  are  the
reliefs,  and  of  what  invisible  things  they  are  the
likenesses.  For,  as  is  distinctly  shewn  in  the  Trea-
tise concerning  "Intelligible  and  Sensible,"  sacred
things  in  sensible  forms  are  copies  of  things  intel-
ligible, to  which  they  lead  and  shew  the  way  ;  and
things  intelligible  are  source  and  science  of  things
hierarchical  cognizable  by  the  senses.

Section  III.
Let  us  affirm,  then,  that  the  goodness  of  the
Divine  Blessedness  is  always  in  the  same  condition
and  manner,  unfolding  the  beneficent  rays  of  its  own
light  upon  all  the  intellectual  visions  without  grudg-
ing. Should,  then,  the  self-choosing  self-sufficiency
of  the  contemplators  either  turn  away  from  the  light
contemplated,  by  closing,  through  love  of  evil,  the
faculties  for  enlightenment  naturally  implanted  within
it,  it  would  be  separated  from  the  light  present  to

G


82  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

it,  not  turned  away,  but  shining  upon  it  when  short-
sighted and  turning  its  face  from  light  generously
running  to  it ;  or  should  it  overstep  the  bounds
of  the  visible  given  to  it  in  due  proportion,  and
rashly  undertake  to  gaze  upon  the  rays  superior  to
its  vision,  the  light  indeed  will  do  nothing  beyond
its  proper  functions,  but  it,  by  imperfectly  approach-
ing things  perfect,  would  not  attain  to  things  un-
suitable, and,  by  stupidly  disregarding  the  due.
proportion,  would  fail  through  its  own  fault.

But,  as  I  said,  the  Divine  Light  is  always  unfolded
beneficently  to  the  intellectual  visions,  and  it  is
possible  for  them  to  seize  it  when  present,  and  al-
ways being  most  ready  for  the  distribution  of  things
appropriate,  in  a  manner  becoming  God.  To  this
imitation  the  divine  Hierarch  is  fashioned,  unfolding
to  all,  without  grudging,  the  luminous  rays  of  his
inspired  teaching,  and,  after  the  Divine  example,
being  most  ready  to  enlighten  the  proselyte,  neither
using  a  grudging  nor  an  unholy  wrath  for  former
back-slidings  or  excess,  but,  after  the  example  of
God,  always  enlightening  by  his  conducting  light
those  who  approach  him,  as  becomes  a  Hierarch,
in  fitness,  and  order,  and  in  proportion  to  the
aptitude  of  each  for  holy  things.

Section   IV.

But,  inasmuch  as  the  Divine  Being  is  source  of
sacred  order,  within  which  the  holy  Minds  regulate
themselves,   he,  who  recurs  to  the  proper  view  of


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  83

Nature,  will  see  his  proper  self  in  what  he  was
originally,  and  will  acquire  this,  as  the  first  holy  gift,
from  his  recovery  to  the  light.  Now  he,  who  has
well  looked  upon  his  own  proper  condition  with
unbiassed  eyes,  will  depart  from  the  gloomy  recesses
of  ignorance,  but  being  imperfect  he  will  not,  of  his
own  accord,  at  once  desire  the  most  perfect  union
and  participation  of  God,  but  little  by  little  will
be  carried  orderly  and  reverently  through  things
present  to  things  more  forward,  and  through  these
to  things  foremost,  and  when  perfected,  to  the
supremely  Divine  summit.  An  illustration  of  this
decorous  and  sacred  order  is  the  modesty  of  the
proselyte,  and  his  prudence  in  his  own  affairs  in  hav-
ing the  sponsor  as  leader  of  the  way  to  the  Hierarch.
The  Divine  Blessedness  receives  the  man,  thus  con-
ducted, into  communion  with  Itself,  and  imparts  to
him  the  proper  light  as  a  kind  of  sign,  making  him
godly k  and  sharer  of  the  inheritance  of  the  godly,
and  sacred  ordering  ;  of  which  things  the  Hierarchs
sea1,  given  to  the  proselyte,  and  the  saving  enrolment
of  the  priests  are  a  sacred  symbol,  registering  him
amongst  those  who  are  being  saved,  and  placing
in  the  sacred  memorials,  beside  himself  also  his
sponsor, — the  one  indeed,  as  a  true  lover  of  the
life-giving  way  to  truth  and  a  companion  of  a  godly
guide,  and  the  other,  as  an  unerring  conductor  of
his  follower  by  the  Divinely-taught  directions.


84  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

Section  V.
Yet  it  is  not  possible  to  hold,  conjointly,  qualities
thoroughly  opposed,  nor  that  a  man  who  has  had
a  certain  fellowship  with  the  One  should  have  di-
vided lives,   if  he   clings   to  the   firm    participation
in  the  One ;  but  he  must  be  resistless  and  resolute,
as  regards  all  separations  from  the  uniform.     This
it  is  which  the  teaching  of  the  symbols  reverently
and  enigmatically  intimates,  by  stripping  the  prose-
lyte, as  it  were,  of  his  former  life,  and  discarding
to  the  very  utmost  the  habits  within  that  life,  makes
him  stand  naked  and  barefoot,  looking  away  towards
the  west,  whilst  he   spurns,  by  the  aversion  of  his
hands,   the  participations   in  the   gloomy  baseness,
and  breathes  out,  as  it  were,  the  habit  of  dissimilarity
which   he   had    acquired,  and   professes  the  entire
renunciation  of  everything  contrary  to  the  Divine
likeness.    When  the  man  has  thus  become  invincible
and   separate  from  evil,   it  turns  him  towards  the
east,  declaring  clearly  that  his  position  and  recovery
will  be  purely  in  the  Divine  Light,  in  the  complete
separation  from  baseness ;  and  receiving  his  sacred
promises  of  entire  consort  with  the  One,  since  he
has  become  uniform  through  love  of  the  truth.     Yet
it  is  pretty  evident,  as  I  think,  to  those  versed  in
Hierarchical   matters,  that   things   intellectual1   ac-
quire the  unchangeableness  of  the  Godlike  habit,
by  continuous  and  persistent  struggles  towards  one  m,
and  by  the  entire  destruction  and   annihilation  of


Ta  poepi.  m  John


xvii.  21,


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  85

things  contrary.  For  it  is  necessary  that  a  man
should  not  only  depart  from  every  kind  of  baseness,
but  he  must  be  also  bravely  obdurate  and  ever
fearless  against  the  baneful  submission  to  it.  Nor
must  he,  at  any  time,  become  remiss  in  his  sacred
love  of  the  truth,  but  with  all  his  power  persistently
and  perpetually  be  elevated  towards  it,  always  re-
ligiously pursuing  his  upward  course,  to  the  more
perfect  mysteries  of  the  Godhead.


Section  VI.

Now  you  may  see  the  distinct  illustrations  of  these
things  in  the  religious  rites  performed  by  the  Hier-
arch.  For  the  Godlike  Hierarch  starts  with  the
holy  anointing,  and  the  Priests  under  him  complete
the  Divine  service  of  the  Chrism,  summoning  in
type  the  man  initiated  to  the  holy  contests,  within
which  he  is  placed  under  Christ  as  Umpire :  since,
as  God,  He  is  Institutor  of  the  awards  of  contest,
and  as  wise,  He  placed  its  laws,  and  as  generous,
the  prizes  suitable  to  the  victors  n.  And  this  is  yet
more  Divine,  since  as  good,  He  devotedly  entered
the  lists  with  them,  contending,  on  behalf  of  their
freedom0  and  victory,  for  their  power  over  death*1
and  destruction  \  he  who  is  being  initiated  will
enter  the  contests,  as  those  of  God,  rejoicing,  and
abides  by  the  regulations  of  the  Wise,  and  contends
according   to   them,   without   transgression,   holding


n  I  Cor.  ii.  9.  0  ps#  ixxxviji.  ^

P  2  Tim.  i.  10.  <i  Ps.  xvi.  10.


86  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

fast  the  hope  of  the  beautiful  rewards,  as  being
enrolled  under  a  good  Lord  and  Leader  of  the
awards ;  and  when  after  following  in  the  Divine
footsteps  of  the  first  of  athletes,  through  goodness,
he  has  overthrown,  in  his  struggles  after  the  Divine
example,  the  energies  and  impulses  opposed  to  his
deification,  he  dies  with  Christ — to  speak  mystically
— to  sin,  in  Baptism.

Section  VII.
And  consider  attentively,  I  pray,  with  what  ap-
propriateness the  holy  symbols  are  presented.  For
since  death  is  with  us  not  an  annihilation  of  being,
as  others  surmise,  but  the  separating  of  things  united,
leading  to  that  which  is  invisible  to  us,  the  soul
indeed  becoming  invisible  through  deprivation  of
the  body,  and  the  body,  through  being  buried  in
earth  in  consequence  of  one  of  its  bodily  changes,
becoming  invisible  to  human  ken,  appropriately,  the
whole  covering  by  water  would  be  taken  as  an  image
of  death,  and  the  invisible  tomb.  The  symbolical
teaching,  then,  reveals  in  mystery  that  the  man
baptized  according  to  religious  rites,  imitates,  so
far  as  Divine  imitation  is  attainable  to  men,  by  the
three  immersions  in  the  water,  the  supremely  Divine
death  of  the  Life-giving  Jesus,  Who  spent  three
daysr  and  three  nights  in  the  tomb,  in  Whom,
according  to  the  mystical  and  secret  teaching  of
the  sacred  text,  the  Prince  of  the  world  found
nothing 8.

r    TpiTtlHtpOVVKTOV  TCNpTJS.  8   John  XIV.    3O.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  87

Section  VIII.

Next,  they  throw  garments,  white  as  light,  over
the  man  initiated.  For  by  his  manly  and  Godlike
insensibility  to  contrary  passions,  and  by  his  per-
sistent inclination  towards  the  One,  the  unadorned
is  adorned,  and  the  shapeless  takes  shape,  being-
made  brilliant  by  his  luminous  life.

But  the  perfecting  unction  of  the  Muron  makes
the  man  initiated  of  good  odour,  for  the  holy  per-
fecting of  the  Divine  birth  unites  those  who  have
been  perfected  to  the  supremely  Divine  Spirit.  Now
the  *  overshadowing  which  makes  intelligibly  of  a
good  savour,  and  perfect,  as  being  most  unutterable,
I  leave  to  the  u  mental  consciousness  of  those  who
are  deemed  worthy  of  the  sacred  and  deifying  partici-
pation of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  their  mind.

At  the  conclusion  of  all,  the  Hierarch  calls  the
man  initiated  to  the  most  Holy  Eucharist,  and
imparts  to  him  the  communion  of  the  perfecting
mysteries.


CAPUT    III.
I.   Concerning  things  accomplished  in  the  Synaxis.

Courage,  then,  since  we  have  made  mention  of
this  (Eucharist)  which  we  may  not  pass  over  to
celebrate  any  other  Hierarchical  function  in  pre-
ference   to    it.      For   according   to    our    illustrious

*  iirKpoiTriais.  u  iiuyvwvai  voep&s.


88  Diotiysius  the  Areopagite

Leader,   it  is  x "  initiation  of  initiations,"  and  one
must   first   lay  down  the   Divine  description  of  it,
before  the  rest,  from  the  inspired  and  hierarchical
science  of  the  Oracles,  and  then  be  borne  by  the
supremely  Divine  Spirit  to  its  sacred  contemplation.
First,   let    us   reverently   consider    this;     for   what
reason   that,   which  is  common   also    to   the   other
Hierarchical  initiations,   is  pre-eminently  attributed
to  it,  beyond   the  rest;    and  it  is  uniquely  called,
"  Communion  and  Synaxis,"  when  each  consecrating
function  both  collects  our  divided  lives  into  uniform
deification,   and  gives  communion   and  union  with
the  One,   by  the   Godlike   folding  together  of  our
diversities.     Now  we  affirm   that  the  Perfecting  by
the  communications  of  the  other  Hierarchical  sym-
bols springs   from   the   supremely   Divine  and   per-
fecting  gifts  of  it.     For  it   scarcely   ever  happens,
that  any  Hierarchical  initiation  is  completed  without
the  most  Divine  Eucharist,  as  head  of  the  things
done   in    each,    ministering    the    collecting    of    the
person   initiated   to  the  One,   and    completing   his
communion  with  God,  by  the  Divinely  transmitted
gift  of  the  perfecting  mysteries.     If,  then,  each  of
the   Hierarchical   initiations,    being   indeed    incom-
plete,  will   not   make   perfect  our  communion  and
our  gathering  to  the  One,  even  its  being  initiation
is  precluded  on  account  of  the  lack  of  completeness.
Now  since  the  imparting  of  the  supremely  Divine
mysteries   to   the   man   initiated   is   the    head   and
tail    of  every   initiation,   naturally   then   the    Hier-


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  89

archical  judgment  hit  upon  an  appellation  proper
to  it,  from  the  truth  of  the  facts.  Thus,  for  instance,
with  regard  to  the  holy  initiation  of  the  Divine
birth;  since  it  imparts  first-Light,  and  is  head  of
all  the  Divine  illuminations,  we  celebrate  the  true
appellation  from  the  enlightening  effected.  For,
though  it  be  common  to  all  Hierarchical  functions
to  impart  the  gift  of  sacred  light  to  those  initiated,
yet  it  y  gave  to  me  the  power  to  see  'first,  and  through
its  first  light  I  am  enlightened  to  gaze  upon  the
other  religious  rites.  Having  said  this,  let  us  mi-
nutely investigate  and  examine  hierarchically  the
accurate  administration  and  contemplation  of  the
most  pure  initiation,  in  every  particular.

//   Mysterion7-  of  Synaxis,  that  is,  Communion.

The  Hierarch,  having  completed  a  reverent  prayer,
near  the  Divine  Altar,  starts  with  the  incensing,
and  proceeds  to  every  part  of  the  enclosure  of  the
sacred  place;  he  then  returns  to  the  Divine  Altar,
and  begins  the  sacred  chanting  of  the  Psalms,  the
whole  ecclesiastical  assembly  chanting,  with  him,
the  sacred  language  of  the  Psalter.  Next  follows
the  reading  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  by  the  Leitourgoi.
After  these  readings  the  catechumens  quit  the  sacred
enclosure,    as   well    as    the    "possessed,"   and    the

y  Baptism,  Ap.  C.  lib.  3,  c.  16.

z  See  Traicte  de  la  Liturgie  ou  S.  Messe  selon  l'usage  et  la
forme  des  apostres,  et  de  leur  disciple  Sainct  Denys,  Apostre
des  Francois,  par.  Gilb.  Genebrard,  archevesque  dAix.


9o  Diony sins  the  Areopagite

penitents.     But  those  who  are   deemed   worthy  of
the  sight  and  participation  of  the  Divine  Mysteries
remain.     Of  the  Leitourgoi,   some   stand    near   the
closed  gates  of  the  sanctuary,  whilst  others  perform
some  other  duty  of  their  own   rank.     But   chosen
members  of  the  ministering  Order  with  the  Priests
lay  the  holy  Bread  and  the  Cup  of  Blessing  upon
the    Divine   Altar,    whilst    the   universal    Songa   of
Praise  is  being  professed  beforehand  by  the  whole
body  of  the  Church.     Added  to  these,  the  Divine
Hierarch  makes  a  sacred  prayer,  and  proclaims  the
holy  Peace  to  all.     When  all  have  kissed  each  other,
the   mystical   proclamation   of    the   holy   tablets   is
performed.      When    the    Hierarch    and    the   Priests
have   washed   their   hands   in    water,   the    Hierarch
stands   in   the  midst  of  the   Divine   Altar,  and  the
chosen  Deacons  alone,  with  the  Priests,  stand  around.
The  Hierarch,  when  he  has  sung  the  sacred  works
of  God,   ministers  things   most    divine,   and   brings
to  view  the  things  sung,  through  the  symbols  rever-
ently exposed b,  and  when  he  has  shewn  the  gifts
of  the  works  of  Godc,  he  first  proceeds  to  the  sacred
participation   of  the  same,   and   turns   and   exhorts
the  others.     When  he  has  received  and  distributed
the   supremely  Divine    Communion,    he   terminates
with  a  holy  thanksgiving;  whilst  the  multitude  have
merely  glanced   at   the    Divine   symbols   alone,    he
is  ever  conducted  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  as  becomes

a  Ap.  C.  lib.  8,  s.  12,     Lit.  of  Dionysius,  p.  189.
b  As  in  Denmark.  c  Q^vP1  «W-  Divine  Mysteries  ?


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  9 1

a  Hierarch,  in  the  purity  of  a  Godlike  condition,
to  the  holy  sources  of  the  things  performed,  in
blessed  and  intelligible  visions.


III.   Contemplation.
Section  I.

Here  then,  too,  O  excellent  son,  after  the  images,
I  come  in  due  order  and  reverence  to  the  Godlike
reality  of  the  archetypes,  saying  here  to  those  yet
being  initiated,  for  the  harmonious  guidance  of  their
souls,  that  the  varied  and  sacred  composition  of  the
symbols  is  not  without  spiritual  contemplation  for
them,  as  merely  presented  superficially.  For  the
most  sacred  chants  and  readings  of  the  Oracles
teach  them  a  discipline  of  a  virtuous  life,  and  pre-
vious to  this,  the  complete  purification  from  de-
structive evil ;  and  the  most  Divine,  and  common,
and  peaceful  distribution  of  one  and  the  same,  both
Bread  and  Cup,  enjoins  upon  them  a  godly  fellow-
ship in  character,  as  having  a  fellowship  in  food,
and  recalls  to  their  memory  the  most  Divine  Supper,
and  arch-symbol  of  the  rites  performed,  agreeably
with  which  the  Founder  of  the  symbols  Himself
excludes,  most  justly,  him  who  had  supped  with
Him  on  the  holy  things,  not  piously d  and  in  a  manner
suitable  to  his  character;   teaching  at  once,  clearly

d  John  xiii.  II.     St.  Cyprian  thought  Judas  was'  excluded  ;
St.  Augustine  not.     See  Cornelius  a  Lapide  on  John  xiii.  II
Ap.  C.  5,  s.  14.


92  Dionysius  the  Artopagite

and  Divinely,  that  the  approach  to  Divine  mysteries
with  a  sincere  mind  confers,  on  those  who  draw  nigh,
the  participation  in  a  gift  according  to  their  own
character.

Section  II.

Let  us,  then,  as  I  said,  leave  behind  these  things,
beautifully  depicted  upon  the  entrance  of  the  in-
nermost shrine,  as  being  sufficient  for  those,  who  are
yet  incomplete  for  contemplation,  and  let  us  pro-
ceed from  the  effects  to  the  causes  ;  and  then,  Jesus
lighting  the  way,  we  shall  view  our  holy  Synaxis,
and  the  comely  contemplation  of  things  intelligible,
which  makes  radiantly  manifest  the  blessed  beauty
of  the  archetypes.  But,  oh,  most  Divine  and  holy
initiation,  uncovering  the  folds  of  the  dark  mysteries
enveloping  thee  in  symbols,  be  manifest  to  us  in
thy  bright  glory,  and  fill  our  intellectual  visions  with
single  and  unconcealed  light.

Section   III.

We  must,  then,  in  my  opinion,  pass  within  the  All
Holy  Mysteries,  after  we  have  laid  bare  the  intelligible
of  the  first  of  the  votive  gifts,  to  gaze  upon  its  God-
like beauty,  and  view  the  Hierarch,  divinely  going
with  sweet  fragrance  from  the  Divine  Altar  to  the
furthermost  bounds  of  the  holy  place,  and  again
returning  to  it  to  complete  the  function.  For
the  Blessedness,  supremely  Divine  above  all,  even
if,  through  Divine  goodness,  It  goes  forth  to  the
communion  of  the  holy  who  participate  in  It,  yet


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  93

It  never  goes  outside  its  essential  unmoved  position
and  steadfastness ;  and  illuminates  all  the  Godlike  in
due   degree,   being  always    self-centred,   and   in   no-
wise moved  from  its  own  proper   identity;  so,  too,
the    Divine   initiation    (sacrament)    of  the   Synaxis,
although  it  has  a  unique,  and  simple,  and  enfolded
Source,  is  multiplied,  out  of  love  towards  man,  into
the  holy  variety  of  the  symbols,  and  travels  through
the  whole  range  of  the  supremely  Divine  description  ;
yet  uniformly  it  is  again  collected  from  these,  into
its  own  proper  Monady,  and  unifies  those  who  are
being  reverently  conducted  towards  it.     In  the  same
Godlike  manner,  the  Divine  Hierarch,  if  he  benignly
lowers    to    his    subordinates    his    own   unique   Hier-
archical science,  by  using  the  multiplicities   of  the
holy  enigmas,   yet    again,   as    absolute,    and    not   to
be  held  in  check  by  smaller  things,  he  is  restored  to
his  proper  headship  e  without  diminution,  and,  when
he  has  made  the  intellectual  entry  of  himself  to  the
One,  he  sees  clearly  the  uniform  raisons  d'etre*  of
the  things  done,  as  he  makes  the  goal  of  his  philan-
thropic progress   to  things   secondary  the  more  Di-
vine g  return  to  things  primary.

Section    IV.

The  chanting  of  the  Psalms,  being  co-essential
with  almost  all  the  Hierarchical  mysteries,  was  not
likely  to  be  separated  from  the  most  Hierarchical  of
all.     For  every  holy  and  inspired  Scripture  sets  forth

e  &pxhv-  f  \6yovs.  s  Hieracles,  p.  41.


94  Diony sius  the  Areopagite

for  those  meet  for  deification,  either  the  originated
beginning11  and    ordering  of  things   from    God;    or
the  Hierarchy1  and   polity  of  the  Law;  or  the  dis-
tributions11 and  possessions   of  the   inheritances  of
the  people  of  God ;   or  the  understanding  of  sacred
judges  \  or  of  wise  kings,  or  of  inspired  Priests :  or
philosophy111  of  men  of  old  time,  unshaken"  in  en-
durances   of  the    things   let    loose    in    variety    and
multitude  ;  or  the  treasures  of  wisdom  for  the  conduct
of  life ;  or  songs  and  inspired  °   pictures   of  Divine
Loves ;  or  the  declaratory  predictions  p  of  things  to
come;  qor  the  Theandric  works  of  Jesus1-;  or  the
God-transmitted8   and    God- imitating    polities    and
holy  teachings  of  His  Disciples,  or  the  hidden  and
mystic  gaze  of  the  beloved  and  divinely  sweet  of  the
disciples,   or  the  supermundane  theology  of  Jesus ;
and  implanted   them   in  the  holy  and   Godlike   in-
structions of  the  mystic  rites.     Now  the  sacred  de-
scription  of  the    Divine    Odes*,   whose  purpose   is
to   sing  the  words  and  works  of  God   throughout,
and  to  praise  the  holy  wrords   and  works   of  godly
men,  forms  an  universal  Ode  and  narrative  of  things
Divine,  and  makes,  in  those  who  inspiredly u  recite
it,  a  habit  suitable  for  the  reception  and  distribution
of  every  Hierarchical  mystery.

h  Genesis  i.  *  Leviticus  and  Deut.  k  Numbers.

1  Judges  and  Kings.  m  Proverbs  and  Wisdom.  n  Job.

o  Canticles.  P  Prophets.  9  avdpiitas  'Itjctov  Oeovpylas.

t  Gospels.  s  Acts  and  Epistles.  t  Psalms.

u  ivOiws  IspoKoyovaiv.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  95

Section   V.

When,   then,   the    comprehensive   melody   of  the
holy  Hymns  has  harmonized  the  habits  of  our  souls
to  the  things  which  are  presently  to  be  ministered,
and,   by  the    unison    of  the    Divine   Odes,    as    one
and    concordant    chorus    of    holy    men,   has    estab-
lished   an    accord    with    things    Divine,    and    them-
selvesx,  and  one  another,  the  things,  more  strained
and    obscure    in    the    intellectual    language    of  the
mystic    Psalms,    are    expanded    by    the    most    holy
lections  of  the  inspired  writings,  through  more  full
and  distinct  images   and   narratives.     He,    who    de-
voutly contemplates  these,  will  perceive  the  uniform
and  one  conspiration,  as  being  moved  by  One,  the
supremely  Divine  Spirit.     Hence,  naturally,  in    the
history  of  the  world,  after   the   more   ancient y   tra-
dition, the  new  Covenant  is  proclaimed  ;  the  inspired
and    Hierarchical    order    teaching  this,    as   I    think,
that  the  one  affirmed   the   Divine   works   of  Jesus,
as  to  come ;  but  the   other  accomplished ;  and  as
that  described  the  truth   in   figures,   this   shewed  it
present.     For  the   accomplishment,  within  this,   of
the  predictions  of  that,   established  the   truth,    and
the  work  of  God  is   a  consummation  of  the  Word
of  God.

Section    VI.

Those  who  absolutely  have  no  ear  for  these  sacred
initiations    do   not    even    recognize    the    images,—

x  Republic,  lib.  iv.  ad  finem.     Dulac,  p.  426-7.
y  The  Law  and  the  Prophets.


96  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

unblushingly  rejecting  the  saving  revelation  of  the
Divine  Birth,  and  in  opposition  to  the  Oracles  reply
to  their  destruction,  "Thy  ways  I  do  not  wish  to
know2."

Now  the  regulation  of  the  holy  Hierarchy  permits
the  catechumens,  and  the  possessed,  and  the  peni-
tents, to  hear  the  sacred  chanting  of  the  Psalms,
and  the  inspired  reading  of  the  all-Holy  Scriptures ;
but  it  does  not  invite  them  to  the  next  religious
services  and  contemplations,  but  only  the  eyes  of
the  initiated.  For  the  Godlike  Hierarchy  is  full  of
reverent  justice,  and  distributes  savingly  to  each,
according  to  their  due,  bequeathing  savingly  the
harmonious  communication  of  each  of  the  things
Divine,  in  measure,  and  proportion,  and  due  time.
The  lowest  rank,  then,  is  assigned  to  the  cate-
chumens, for  they  are  without  participation  and
instruction  in  every  Hierarchical  initiation,  not  even
having  the  being  in  God  by  Divine  Birth,  but  are
yet  being  brought  toa  Birth  by  the  Paternal  Oracles,
and  moulded,  by  life-giving  formations,  towards  the
blessed  introduction  to  their  first  life  and  first  light
from  Birth  in  God.  As,  then,  children  after  the
flesh,  if,  whilst  immature  and  unformed,  they  should
anticipate  their  proper  delivery,  as  untimely  born  and
abortions,  will  fall  to  earth  without  life  and  without
light ;  and  no  one,  in  his  senses,  would  say  from
what  he  saw,  that  they,  released  from  the  darkness
of  the  womb,   were  brought  to  the   light   (for   the

z  Job  xxi.  14.
»  See  Plato,  Thet.  i.  114,  115.     Dulac,  429.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  g7

medical  authority,  which  is  learned  in  the  functions
of  the  body,  would  say  that  light  operates  on  things
receptive  of  light) ;  so  also  the  all-wise  science  of
religious  rites  brings  these  first  to  delivery,  by  the
preparatory  nourishment  of  the  formative  and  life-
giving  Oracles  ;  and  when  it  has  made  their  person
ripe  for  Divine  Birth,  gives  to  them  savingly,  in
due  order,  the  participation  in  things  luminous  and
perfecting;  but,  at  present,  it  separates  things  per-
fect from  them  as  imperfect,  consulting  the  good
order  of  sacred  things,  and  the  delivery  and  life
of  the  catechumens,  in  a  Godlike  order  of  the  Hier-
archical rites.

Section  VII.
Now  the  multitude  of  the  possessed  indeed  is
unholy,  but  it  is  next  above  the  catechumens,  which
is  lowest.  Nor  is  that  which  has  received  a  certain
participation  in  the  most  holy  offices,  but  is  yet
entangled  by  contrary  qualities,  whether  enchant-
ments or  terrors,  on  a  par,  as  I  think,  with  the
altogether  uninitiated  and  entirely  uncommunicated
in  the  Divine  initiations;  but,  even  for  them,  the
view  and  participation  in  the  holy,  mysteries  is  con-
tracted, and  very  properly.  For,  if  it  be  true  that
the  altogether  godly  man,  the  worthy  partaker  of  the
Divine  mysteries,  the  one  carried  to  the  very  summit
of  the  Divine  likeness,  to  the  best  of  his  powers,
in  complete  and  most  perfect  deifications,  does  not
even  perform  the  things  of  the  flesh,  beyond  the
most  necessary  requirements  of  nature,  and  then  as

H


98  Diony sius  the  Areopagite

a  parergon,  but  will  be,  at  the  same  time,  a  temple,
and  a  follower,  according  to  his  ability,  of  the
supremely  Divine  Spirit,  in  the  highest  deification,
implanting  like  in  like ; — such  an  one  as  this
would  never  be  possessed  by  opposing  phantoms
or  fears,  but  will  laugh  them  to  scorn,  and  when
they  approach,  will  cast  them  down  and  put  them
to  flight,  and  will  act  rather  than  comply,  and
in  addition  to  the  passionless  and  indomitableness
of  his  own  character,  will  be  seen  also  a  physician
to  others,  for  such  ''possessions"  as  these  b;  (and
I  think  further,  yea,  rather,  I  know  certainly  that
the  most  impartial  discrimination  of  Hierarchical
persons  knows  more  than  they c,  that  such  as  are
possessed  with  a  most  detestable  possession,  by
departing  from  the  Godlike  life,  become  of  one
mind  and  one  condition  with  destructive  demons,
by  turning  themselves  from  things  that  really  are,
and  undying  possessions,  and  everlasting  pleasures,
for  the  sake  of  the  most  base  and  impassioned  folly
destructive  to  themselves;  and  by  desiring  and
pursuing  the  earthly  variableness,  and  the  perish-
able and  corrupting  pleasures,  and  the  unstable
comfort  in  things  foreign  to  their  nature,  not  real
but  seeming;)  these  then,  first,  and  more  properly
than  those,  were  shut  out  by  the  discriminating
authority  of  the  Deacon;  for  it  is  not  permittee!
to  them  to  have  part  in  any  other  holy  function
than  the  teaching  of  the  Oracles,  which  is  likely
to  turn  them  to  better  things.  For,  if  the  super*
b  ^V€pynndruv.  c  The  energoumenoi.


on  the  Eccletiastical  Hierarchy.  99

mundane  Service  of  the  Divine  Mysteries  excludes
those  under  penitence,  and  those  who  have  already
attained   it,   not   permitting   anything  to  come  near
which  is  not  completely  perfect,  and  proclaims,  and
this  in  all  sincerity,  that  "  I  am  unseen  and  uncom-
municated  by  those  who  are  in  any  respect  imper-
fectly weak   as   regards   the   summit    of  the   Divine
Likeness"  (for  that  altogether  most  pure  voice  scares
away   even    those    who    cannot    be    associated   with
the  worthy  partakers  of  the  most  Divine  mysteries) ;
how  much  more,  then,  will   the  multitude  of  those
who  are   under  the  sway  of  their   passions   be   un-
hallowed  and   alien   from    every   sight   and    partici-
pation in  the  holy  mysteries.     When,  then,  the  un-
initiated in   the   mysteries,  and   the  imperfect,  and
with    them    the    apostates    from    the    religious    life,
and    after   them,     those    who    through    unmanliness
are    prone    to    the    fears    and    fancies    of  contrary
influences,   as   not   reaching  through   the  persistent
and  indomitable  inclination  towards  godliness,  the
stability  and  activity  of  a  Godlike  condition  ;  then,
in  addition  to  these,  those  who  have  separated  in-
deed from  the  contrary  life,  but  have  not  yet  been
cleansed  from  its  imaginations  by  a  godly  and  pure
habit  and  love,   and    next,   those  who   are  not   al-
together uniform,  and  to  use  an  expression  of  the
Law,   "entirely  without    spot    and    blemish,"   when
these   have   been    excluded  from  the  divine  temple
and   the   service  which   is   too   high    for  them,   the
all-holy  ministers  and  loving  contemplators  of  things
all-holy,  gazing  reverently  upon  the  most  pure  rite,


ioo  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

sing  in  an  universal  Hymn  of  Praise d  the  Author
and  Giver  of  all  good,  from  Whom  the  saving
mystic  Rites  were  exhibited  to  us,  which  divinely
work  the  sacred  deification  of  those  being  initiated.
Now  this  Hymn  some  indeed  call  a  Hymn  of  Praise,
others,  the  symbol  of  worship,  but  others,  as  I  think,
more  divinely,  a  Hierarchical  thanksgiving,  as  giving
a  summary  of  the  holy  gifts  which  come  to  us  from
God.  For,  it  seems  to  me  the  record e  of  all  the
works  of.  God  related  to  have  been  done  for  us  in
song,  which,  after  it  had  benevolently  fixed  our
being  and  life,  and  moulded  the  Divine  likeness
in  ourselves  to  beautiful  archetypes,  and  placed  us
in  participation  of  a  more  Divine  condition  and
elevation  ;  but  when  it  beheld  the  dearth  of  Divine
gifts,  which  came  upon  us  by  our  heedlessness,  is
declared  to  have  called  us  back  to  our  first  condi-
tion, by  goods  restored,  and  by  the  complete  as-
sumption f  of  what  was  ours,  to  have  made  good  the
most  perfect  impartation  of  His  own,  and  thus  to
have  given  to  us  a  participation  in  God  and  Divine
things.

Section  VIII.

When   the  supremely  Divine  love  towards  Man

has   thus   been    religiously   celebrated,   the    Divine

Bread  is  presented,  veiled,  and  likewise  the  Cup

of  Blessing,  and  the  most  Divine  greeting  is  de-

d  ifjLvo\oyla  Ka6o\iKr}.     The  whole  Psalter  is  said  in  Liturgy
of  St.  James  before  celebration.
6  Liturgy  of  Dionysius,  p.  191.  f  Incarnation.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  101

voutly  performed,  and  the  mystic  and  supermundane
recital  of  the  holy-written  tablets.  Tor  it  is  not
possible  to  be  collected  to  the  One,  and  to  par-
take of  the  peaceful  union  with  the  One,  when
people  are  divided  amongst  themselves.  For  if,
being  illuminated  by  the  contemplation  and  know-
ledge of  the  One,  we  would  be  united  to  an  uni-
form and  Divine  agreement,  we  must  not  permit
ourselves  to  descend  to  divided  lusts,  from  which
are  formed  earthly  enmities,  envious  and  passionate,
against  that  which  is  according  to  nature.  This
unified  and  undivided  life  is,  in  my  opinion,  estab-
lished by  the  holy  service  of  the  "  peace,"  which  es-
tablishes like  in  like,  and  separates  the  Divine  and
unified  visions  from  things  divided.  The  recital  of
the  holy  tablets  after  the  "  peace  "  proclaims  those
who  have  passed  through  life  holily,  and  have
reached  the  term  of  a  virtuous  life  without  falter-
ing, urging  and  conducting  us  to  their  blessed  con-
dition and  Divine  repose,  through  similarity  to  them,
and,  announcing  them  as  living,  and,  as  the  Word
of  God  says,  "  not  dead,  but  as  having  passed  from
death  to  a  most  divine  life  V

Section  IX.

But  observe  that  they  are  enrolled  in  the  holy
memorials,  not  as  though  the  Divine  memory  were
represented  under  the  figure  of  a  memorial,  after
the   manner  of  men ;    but  as   one  might   say,  with

&  I  John  iii.  14.


102  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

reverence  towards  God,  as  beseems  the  august  and
unfailing   knowledge    in    God    of  those   who    have
been  perfected  in  the   likeness  of  God.     For  "  He
knoweth,"  say  the  Oracles,  "them  that  are  Hish,"
and  "precious,  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  is  the  death
of  His  saints1,  "death  of  saints,"  being  said,  instead
of  the  perfection  in   holiness.     And   bear  this  reli-
giously in  mind,  that  when  the  worshipful  symbols
have    been    placed    on    the    Divine    Altar,    through
which  (symbols)  the  Christ  is  signified  and  partaken,
there  is  inseparably  present  the  reading  of  the  re-
gister of  the  holy  persons,  signifying  the  indivisible
conjunction  of  their  supermundane  and  sacred  union
with  Him.    When  these  things  have  been  ministered,
according  to  the  regulations  described,  the  Hierarch,
standing  before  the  most  holy  symbols,  washes  his
hands  with  water,  together  with  the  reverend  order
of  the  Priests.     Because,  as  the  Oracles  testify,  when
a  man  has  been  washed,  he  needs  no  other  washing,
except  that  of  his  extremities  J,  i.e.  his  lowest ;  through
which  extreme  cleansing  he  will  be  resistless'  and
free,  as  altogether  uniform,  in  a  sanctified  habit  of
the    Divine    Likeness,  and  advancing    in   a  goodly
manner  to  things  secondary,  and  being  turned  again
uniquely  to  the  One,  he  will  make  his  return,  with-
out spot  and  blemish,  as  preserving  the  fulness  and
completeness  of  the  Divine  Likeness.

h  2  Tim.  ii.  1 9.  i  ps.  cxvi#  I5

J  John  xiii.  10.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  103

Section  X.

There  was  indeed   the  sacred  laver,  as  we   have
said,  in  the  Hierarchy  of  the  Law k  ;    and  the  pre-
sent cleansing  of  the  hands  of  the  Hierarch  and  the
Priests  suggests  it.     For  it  behoves  those  who  ap-
proach the  most  hallowed  service  to  be  purified  even
to  the   remotest  imaginations  of  the   soul,    through
likeness  to  it,  and,  as  far  as  possible,  to  draw  nigh  ;
for    thus    they   will    shed    around    more    visibly   the
Divine     manifestations,     since    the     supermundane
flashes  permit   their   own    splendour    to    pass    more
thoroughly   and    brilliantly    into    the    brightness    of
mirrors  like  themselves.     Further,  the  cleansing  of
the   Hierarch   and   the   Priests  to  their   extremities,
i.e.  lowest,  takes  place  before  the  most  holy  symbols,
as  in  the  presence  of  Christ,  Who  surveys  all  our
most  secret  thoughts,  and  since  the  utmost  purifi-
cation is  established  under  His  all-surveying  scrutiny,
and  most  just  and  unflinching  judgment,  the  Hierarch
thus  becomes  one  with  the  things  Divine,  and,  when
he  has  extolled  the  holy  works  of  God,  he  ministers
things   most   Divine,   and  brings  to  view  the  things
being  sung1.

Section  XL

We  will  now  explain,  in  detail,  to  the  best  of  our

ability,  certain  works  of  God,  of  which  we   spoke.

For  /  am  not  competent  to  sing  all,  much  less  to

know  accurately,   and  to   reveal   their  mysteries  to

k  Deut.  xxi.  6.  1  As  is  the  use  in  Denmark.


*°4  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

others.     Now  whatever  things  have  been  sung  and
ministered  by  the  inspired  Hierarchy  agreeably  to
the  Oracles,  these  we  will  declare,  as  far  as  attainable
to  us,  invoking  the  Hierarchical  inspiration  to  our
aid.    When,  in  the  beginning,  our  human  nature  had
thoughtlessly  fallen  from  the  good  things  of  God   it
received,   by  inheritance,   the   life   subject  to  many
passions,  and  the  goal  of  the   destructive   death »
Por,  as  a  natural  consequence,  the  pernicious  fallin-
away  from  genuine  goodness  and  the  transgression
or   the   sacred   Law  in   Paradise  delivered   the   man
fretted  with  the  life-giving  yoke,  to  his  own  down-
ward inclinations  and  the  enticing  and  hostile  wiles
of  the  adversary-the  contraries  of  the  divine  goods  •
thence   it   pitiably  exchanged    for   the   eternal,   the
mortal,   and,   having  had  its  own   origin   in   deadly
generations,  the  goal  naturally  corresponded  with  the
beginning  ;   but  having  willingly  fallen  from  the  Di-
vine and  elevating  life,  it  was  carried  to  the  contrary
extremity,-the  variableness  of  many  passions,  and
lead   astray,   and  turned  aside  from   the   strait  way
leading  to  the  true  God,-and  subjected  to  destruc-
tive  and    evil-working   multitudes— naturally  forgot
that  it  was  worshipping,  not  gods,   or  friends,   but
enemies.     Now  when  these  had   treated  it  harshly,
according  to  their  own  cruelty,  it  fell  pitiably  into
danger   of  annihilation    and    destruction;    but    the
boundless  Loving-kindness  of  the  supremely  Divine
goodness  towards  man  did  not,  in  Its  benevolence,
withdraw  from  us  Its  spontaneous  forethought,  but
■  The  Fall.


I


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  105

having  truly  participated  sinlessly  in  all  tilings  be-
longing to  us  n,  and  having  been  made  one  with  our
lowliness  in  connection  with  the  unconfused  and
flawless  possession  of  Its  own  properties  in  full  per-
fection, It  bequeathed  to  us,  as  henceforth  members
of  the  same  family,  the  communion  with  Itself,  and
proclaimed  us  partakers  of  Its  own  beautiful  things  ;
having,  as  the  secret  teaching  holds,  loosed  the
power0  of  the  rebellious  multiplicity,  which  was
against  us;  not  by  force,  as  having  the  upper  hand,
but,  according  to  the  Logion,  mystically  transmitted
to  us,  "in  judgment  and  righteousness  p."

The  things  within  us,  then,  It  benevolently  changed
to  the  entire  contrary.  For  the  lightless  within  our
mind  It  filled  with  blessed  and  most  Divine  Light,
and  adorned  the  formless  with  Godlike  beauties  ;  the
tabernacle  1  of  our  soul  It  liberated  from  most
damnable  passions  and  destructive  stains  by  a  per-
fected deliverance  of  our  being  which  was  all  but
prostrate,  by  shewing  to  us  a  supermundane  eleva-
tion, and  an  inspired  polity  in  our  religious  assimi-
lation to  Itself,  as  far  as  is  possible.

Section  XII.
But  how  could  the  Divine  imitation  otherwise
become  ours,  unless  the  remembrance  of  the  most
holy  works  of  God  were  perpetually  being  renewed
by  the  mystical  teachings  and  ministrations  of  the
Hierarchy?  This,  then,  we  do,  as  the  Oracles  say,

n  Heb.  iv.  15.  °  Ps.  lxxiv.  14.  p  Ibid>  xcv


111.  2.


q  Plato,  Crat.  i.  295.


1 06  Diony sius  the  AreopagiU

"for   Its   remembrance-"      Wherefore   the    Divine
Hierarch,  standing  before  the  Divine  Altar,  extols
the  aforesaid  holy  works  of  God,  which  proceed  from
the  most  divine  forethought  of  Jesus  on  our  behalf,
which  He  accomplished  for  preservation  of  our  race
»>y  the  good  pleasure  of  the  most  Holy  Father  in  the
Holy  Spirit,  according  to   the   Logion ».     When   he
has  extolled   their  majesty,   and   gazed,   with   intel-
lectual  eyes,  upon   their  intelligible  contemplation
he  proceeds  to  their  symbolical   ministration,— and
this,— as  transmitted  from  God.     Whence  after  the
holy  hymns  of  the  works  of  God,  he  piously  and
as  becomes  a  hierarch,  deprecates  his  own  unworthi-
ness  for  a  service  above  his  merits,  first,  reverently
crying  aloud  to  Him,  -Thou  hast  said,  This  do  for
My  remembrance*."     Then,   "having  asked   to  be-
come meet  for  this  the  God-imitating  of  service  and
to  consecrate  things  Divine  by  the  assimilation  to
Christ   Himself,   and   to  distribute   them    altogether
purely,  and  that  those  who  shall  partake  of  things
holy  may  receive  them  holily,  he  consecrates  things
most  Divine,  and  brings  to  view  through  the  svmbols
reverently    exposed    the    things   whose    praises   are
being  sung.     For  when  he  has  unveiled  the  veiled
and  undivided  Bread,  and  divided  it  into  many,  and
has   divided   the   Oneness   of   the   Cup   to   all,    he
symbolically   multiplies   and    distributes    the   unity
completing  in  these  an  altogether  most  holy  minis-
tration.    For  the  "one,"  and  "simple,"  and  "hid-
r  Luk,  xxii.  19.  s  Ps>  xl  6_8  t  Luke  xx.L  ^

u  Prayer  of  humble  access.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  107

den,"  of  Jesus,  the  most  supremely  Divine  Word,
by  His  incarnation  amongst  us,  came  forth,  out  of
goodness  and  love  towards  man,  to  the  compound
and  visible,  and  benevo^ntly  devised  the  unifying
communion,  having  united,  to  the  utmost,  our  low-
liness to  the  most  Divine  of  Himself;  if  indeed  we
have  been  fitted  to  Him;  as  members  to  a  body,
after  the  identity  of  a  blameless  and  Divine  life,  and
have  not,  by  being  killed  through  destructive  passions,
become  inharmonious,  and  unfastened,  and  unyoked,
to  the  godly  and  most  healthy  members.  For,  if  we
aspire  to  communion  with  Him,  we  must  keep  our
eye  fixed  upon  His  most  godly  Life  in  the  flesh,  and
we  must  retrace  our  path  to  the  Godlike  and  blame-
less habit  of  Its  holy  sinlessness  by  assimilation  to
It ;  for  thus  He  will  communicate  harmoniously  to
us  the  communion  with  the  similar.

Section  XIII.

The  Hierarch  makes  known  these  things  to  those
who  are  living  religiously,  by  bringing  the  veiled  gifts
to  view,  by  dividing  their  oneness  into  many,  and  by
making  the  recipients  partakers  of  them,  by  the  ut-
most union  of  the  things  distributed  with  those  who  x
receive  them.  For  he  delineates  in  these  things
under  sensible  forms  our  intelligible  life  in  figures,
by  bringing  to  view  the  Christ  Jesus  from  the  Hidden
within  the  Divine  Being,  out  of  love  to  man,  made
like   unto    us   by    the    all -perfect    and    unconfused

x  7rp2>$  to  iv  ols  yiyvtTai.


108  Dioiiysius  the  Areopagite

incarnation  in  our  race,  from  us,  and  advancing  to
the  divided  condition  of  ourselves,  without  change
from  the  essential  One,  and  calling  the  human  race,
through  this  beneficent  love  of  man,  into  partici-
pation with  Himself  and  His  own  good  things,  pro-
vided we  are  united  to  His  most  Divine  Life  by  our
assimilation  to  it,  as  far  as  possible ;  and  by  this,
in  very  truth,  we  shall  have  been  perfected,  as
partakers  of  God  and  of  Divine  things.


Section  XIV.

Having  received  and  distributed  the  supremely
Divine  Communion,  he  terminates  with  a  holy  thanks-
giving, in  which  the  whole  body  of  the  Church  take
part.  For  the  Communion  precedes  the  imparting,
and  the  reception  of  the  mysteries,  the  mystic  dis-
tribution. For  this  is  the  universal  regulation  and
order  of  the  Divine  Mysteries,  that  the  reverend
Leader  should  first  partake,  and  be  filled  with  the
gifts,  to  be  imparted,  through  him,  from  God'  to
others,  and  so  impart  to  others  also.  Wherefore,
those  who  rashly  content  themselves  with  the  in-
spired instructions,  in  preference  to  a  life  and  con-
dition agreeable  to  the  same,  are  profane,  and
entirely  alien  from  the  sacred  regulation  established.
For,  as  in  the  case  of  the  bright  shining  of  the  sun,
the  more  delicate  and  luminous  substances,  being
first  filled  with  the  brilliancy  flowing  into  them,
brightly  impart  their  overflowing  light  to  things  after
them ;  so  it  is  not  tolerable  that  one,  who  has  not


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  109

become  altogether  Godlike  in  his  whole  character,
and  proved  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  Divine
influence  and  judgment,  should  become  Leader  to
others,  in  the  altogether  divine.

Section  XV.

Meanwhile,  the  whole  order  of  the  Priests  having
been  collected  together  in  hierarchical  order,  and
communicated  in  the  most  Divine  mysteries,  finishes
with  a  holy  thanksgiving,  after  having  recognized
and  sung  the  favours  of  the  works  of  God,  according
to  their  degree.  So  that  those,  who  have  not  par-
taken and  are  ignorant  of  things  Divine,  would  not
attain  to  thanksgiving,  although  the  most  Divine
gifts  are,  in  their  essential  nature,  worthy  of  thanks-
giving. But,  as  I  said,  not  having  wished  even  to
look  at  the  Divine  gifts,  from  their  inclination  to
things  inferior,  they  have  remained  throughout  un-
gracious towards  the  boundless  graces  of  the  works
of  God.  "  Taste  and  see,"  say  the  Oracles,  for,  by
the  sacred  initiation  of  things  Divine,  the  initiated
recognize  their  munificent  graces,  and,  by  gazing  with
utmost  reverence  upon  their  most  Divine  height  and
breadth  in  the  participation,  they  will  sing  the  super-
celestial  beneficent  works  of  the  Godhead  with  gra-
cious thanksgiving.


1 1  o  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

CAPUT     IV.

/.    Concern ino  things  performed  in  the  Muron,  and
concerning  things  perfected  in  it.

So  great  and  so  beautiful  are  the  intelligible
visions  of  the  most  holy  Synaxis,  which  minister
hierarchically,  as  we  have  often  said,  our  partici-
pation in,  and  collection  towards,  the  One.  But
there  is  another  perfecting  Service  of  the  same  rank,
which  our  Leaders  name  "Initiation  of  Muron,"  by
contemplating  whose  parts  in  due  order,  in  accor-
dance with  the  sacred  images,  we  shall  thus  be
borne,  by  hierarchical  contemplations,  to  its  One-
ness through  its  parts.

II.  Mysterion  of  Initiation  of  Muron*.
In   the  same  way  as  in   the   Synaxis,  the  orders
of   the   imperfect   are  dismissed,   that    is,   after  the
hierarchical   procession   has  made  the  whole  circuit
of  the  temple,  attended  with  fragrant  incense ;    and
the  chanting  of  the  Psalms,  and  the  reading  of  the
most  Divine  Oracles.     Then  the  Hierarch  takes  the
Muron    and   places  it,   veiled    under   twelve   sacred
wings,  upon  the  Divine  Altar,  whilst  all  cry  aloud,
with   most  devout   voice,  the  sacred  melody  of  the
inspiration  of  the  God-rapt  Prophets,  and  when  he
has  finished  the  prayer  offered  over  it,  he   uses   it

y  Ap.  C.  iii.  s.  17  ;  viii.  s.  28.  See  note,  p.  68.  The  Greeks
have  two  kinds  of  sacred  oil  or  Unguent,  one  specially  blessed
or  consecrated  by  the  Bishop,  and  another  not  necessarily  so.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy .  1 1  t

in  the  most  holy  mystic  Rites  of  things  being
hallowed,  for  almost  every  Hierarchical  consecra-
tion.

ITT.  Contemplation.
Section  I.
The  elementary  teaching,  then,  of  this  the  per-
fecting service,  through  the  things  done  over  the
Divine  Muron,  shews  this,  in  my  judgment,  that,
that  which  is  holy  and  of  sweet  savour  in  the  minds
of  devout  men  is  covered,  as  with  a  veil,  since  it
Divinely  enjoins  upon  holy  men  to  have  their
beautiful  and  well-savoured  assimilations  in  virtue
to  the  hidden  God  not  seen  for  vain  glory.  For
the  hidden  comeliness  of  God  is  unsullied,  and  is
sweet  beyond  conception,  and  manifested  for  spiri-
tual contemplation  to  the  intellectual  alone,  through
a  desire  to  have  the  unsullied  images  of  virtue  in
souls  of  the  same  pattern.  For  by  looking  away
from  the  undistorted  and  well  imitated  image  of
the  Godlike  virtue  to  that  contemplated  and  fragrant
beauty,  he  thus  moulds  and  fashions  it  to  the  most
beautiful  imitation.  And,  as  in  the  case  of  sensible
images,  if  the  artist  look  without  distraction  upon  the
archetypal  form,  not  distracted  by  sight  of  anything
else,  or  in  any  way  divided  in  attention,  he  will  dupli-
cate, if  I  may  so  speak,  the  very  person  that  is  being
sketched,  whoever  he  may  be,  and  will  shew  the
reality  in  the  likeness,  and  the  archetype  in  the
image,  and  each  in  each,  save  the  difference  of
substance ;   thus,  to  copyists  who  love  the  beautiful


1 1 2  Dionysins  the  Areopagite

in  mind,  the  persistent  and  unflinching  contempla-
tion of  the  sweet-savoured  and  hidden  beauty  will
confer  the  unerring  and  most  Godlike  appearance2
Naturally,  then,  the  divine  copyists,  who  unflinching'
ly  mould  their  own  intellectual  contemplation  to  the
superessentially  sweet  and  contemplated  comeliness,
do  none  of  their  divinely  imitated  virtues  "to  be  seen
of  men  V  as  the  Divine  text  expresses  it;    but  rever-
ently gaze  upon  the  most  holy  things  of  the  Church
veiled  in  the  Divine  Muron  as  in  a  figure.     Where-
fore, these  also,  by  religiously  concealing  that  which
is  holy  and  most  Divine  in  virtue  within  their  God-
like and  God-engraved  mind,  look  away  to  the  arche-
typal conception  alone;  for  not  only  are  they  blind
to  things  dissimilar,  but  neither  are  they  drawn  down
to  gaze  upon  them.     Wherefore,  as  becomes  their
character,  they  do  neither  love  things,  merely  seeming
good  and  just,  but  those  really  being  such ;   nor  do
they  look  to  opinion,  upon  which  the  multitude  ir-
rationally  congratulate    themselves,    but,   after    the
Divine  example,  by  distinguishing  the  good  or  evil
as    it   is   in    itself,   they  are   Divine   images    of  the
most    supremely   Divine    sweetness,    which,    having
the  truly  sweet  within  itself,   is  not  turned  to  the
anomalously   seeming   of    the   multitude,    moulding
Its  genuineness  to  the  true  images  of  Itself.

Section  II.
Come,  then,  since  we  have  viewed  the  exterior
comeliness  of  the  entirely  beautiful  ministration,  let
z  Puto,  Rep.  i.  6,  ii.  116.  a  Matt,  xxiii.  5.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  113

us  now  look  away  to  its  more  godly  beauty  (whilst  it-
self, by  itself,  has  uncovered  the  veils),  gazing  upon  its
blessed  radiance,  shedding  its  bright  beams  openly
around,  and  filling  us  with  the  fragrance  unveiled
to  the  contemplators.  For  the  visible  consecration
of  the  Muron  is  neither  uncommunicated  in,  or  un-
seen by  those  who  surround  the  Hierarch,  but,  on
the  contrary,  by  passing  through  to  them,  and  fixing
the  contemplation  above  the  many,  is  reverently
covered  by  them,  and  by  Hierarchical  direction
kept  from  the  multitude.

For  the  splendour  of  things  all  holy,  by  shedding
its  light  clearly  and  without  symbol  to  men  inspired,
as  being  congenial  to  the  thing  contemplated,  and
perfuming  their  contemplating  perceptions  without
concealment,  advances  not  yet  in  the  same  way  to
the  inferior,  but  by  them  as  deep  contemplators  of
the  thing  contemplated  is  concealed  under  the  enig-
mas of  the  wings,  without  ostentation,  so  that
it  may  not  be  defiled  by  the  dissimilar;  through
which  sacred  enigmas  the  well-ordered  Ranks  of
the  subordinate  are  conducted  to  the  degree  of
holiness  compatible  with  their  powers.

Section  III.
The  holy  consecration,  then,  which  we  are  now
extolling,  is,  as  I  said,  of  the  perfecting  rank  and
capacity  of  the  Hierarchical  functions.  Wherefore
our  Divine  Leaders  arranged  the  same,  as  being
of  the  same  rank  and  effect  as  the  holy  perfecting
of  the  Synaxis,  with  the  same  figures,  for  the  most
1


U4  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

part,  and  with  mystical  regulations  and  lections.
And  you  may  see  in  like  manner  the  Hierarch
bearing  forward  the  sweet  perfume  from  the  more
holy  place  into  the  sacred  precincts  beyond,  and
teaching,  by  the  return  to  the  same,  that  the  par-
ticipation in  things  Divine  comes  to  all  holy  persons,
according  to  fitness,  and  is  undiminished  and  alto-
gether unmoved  and  stands  unchangeably  in  its
identity,  as  beseems  Divine  fixity.  In  the  same
way  the  Psalms  and  readings  of  the  Oracles  nurse
the  imperfect  to  a  life-bringing  adoption  of  sons,
and  form  a  religious  inclination  in  those  who  are
possessed  with  accursed  spirits,  and  dispel  the  op-
posing fear  and  effeminacy  from  those  possessed
by  a  spirit  of  unmanliness ;  shewing  to  them,
according  to  their  capacity,  the  highest  pinnacle
of  the  Godlike  habit  and  power,  by  aid  of  which
they  will,  the  rather,  scare  away  the  opposing
forces,  and  will  take  the  lead  in  healing  others;
and,  following  the  example  of  God,  they  will,
whilst  unmoved  from  their  own  proper  gifts,  not
only  be  active  against  those  opposing  fears,  but
will  themselves  give  activity  to  others ;  and  they
also  impart  a  religious  habit  to  those  who  have
changed  from  the  worse  to  a  religious  mind,  so
that  they  should  not  be  again  enslaved  by  evil,
and  purify  completely  those  who  need  to  become
altogether  pure ;  and  they  lead  the  holy  to  the  Divine
likenesses,  and  contemplations  and  communions  be-
longing to  themselves,  and  so  establish  those  who
are  entirely  holy,  in  blessed  and  intelligible  visions,


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  115

fulfilling   their   uniform   likeness    of  the    One,    and
making  them  one.

Section  IV.

What,  then,  shall  I  say  further  ?  Is  it  not  those
Ranks  already  mentioned,  which  are  not  entirely
pure,  that  the  present  consecrating  service  ex-
cludes without  distinction,  in  the  same  way  as  the
Synaxis,  so  that  it  is  viewed  by  the  holy  alone,
in  figures,  and  is  contemplated  and  ministered,  by
the  perfectly  holy  alone,  immediately,  through  hier-
archical directions?  Now  it  is  superfluous,  as  I
think,  to  run  over,  by  the  same  statements,  these
things  already  so  often  mentioned,  and  not  to  pass
to  the  next,  viewing  the  Hierarch,  devoutly  holding
the  Divine  Muron  veiled  under  twelve  wings,  and
ministering  the  altogether  holy  consecration  upon
it.  Let  us  then  affirm  that  the  composition  of  the
Muron  is  a  composition  of  sweet-smelling  materials,
which  has  in  itself  abundantly  fragrant  qualities,
of  which  (composition)  those  who  partake  become
perfumed  in  proportion  to  the  degree  to  which  they
partake  of  its  sweet  savour.  Now  we  are  persuaded
that  the  most  supremely  Divine  Jesus  is  superessen-
tially  of  good  savour,  filling  the  contemplative  part
of  ourselves  by  bequests  of  Divine  sweetness  for
contemplation.  For  if  the  reception  of  the  sensible
odours  make  to  feel  joyous,  and  nourishes,  with
much  sweetness,  the  sensitive  organs  of  our  nostrils,
— if  at  least  they  be  sound  and  well  apportioned  to
the  sweet  savour — in  the  same  way  any  one  mi^ht


1 1 6  Dionysius  the  Areopagitc

say  that  our  contemplative  faculties,  being  soundly
disposed  as  regards  the  subjection  to  the  worse,  in
the  strength  of  the  distinguishing  faculty  implanted
in  us  by  nature,  receive  the  supremely  Divine  fra-
grance, and  are  filled  with  a  holy  comfort  and  most
Divine  nourishment,  in  accordance  with  Divinely
fixed  proportions,  and  the  correlative  turning  of  the
mind  towards  the  Divine  Being.  Wherefore,  the
symbolical  composition  of  the  Muron,  as  expressing
in  form  things  that  are  formless,  depicts  to  us  Jesus
Himself,  as  a  well-spring  of  the  wealth  of  the  Divine
sweet  receptions  b,  distributing,  in  degrees  supremely
Divine,  for  the  most  Godlike  of  the  contemplators  c,
the  most  Divine  perfumes ;  upon  which  the  Minds,
joyfully  refreshed,  and  filled  with  the  holy  receptions,
indulge  in  a  feast  of  spiritual  contemplation,  by  the
entrance  of  the  sweet d  bequests  into  their  contem-
plative part,  as  beseems  a  Divine  participation.

Section  V.
Now  it  is  evident,  as  I  think,  that  the  distribution
of  the  fontal  perfume  to  the  Beings  above  ourselves,
who  are  more  Divine,  is,  as  it  were,  nearer,  and
manifests  and  distributes  itself  more  to  the  trans-
parent and  wholesome  mental  condition  of  their
receptive  faculty,  overflowing  ungrudgingly  and  en-
tering in  many  fashions;  but  as  regards  the  sub-
ordinate contemplators,  which  are  not  so  receptive,
piously  concealing  the  highest  vision  and  partici-
Cant.  i.  3.  c  T(j„  y0fpQi,t  d  2  Cor.  ii.  14.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  117

pation,  it  is  distributed  in  a  supremely  Divine
proportion,  in  fragrance  corresponding  to  the  re-
cipients. Amongst  the  holy  Beings,  then,  who  are
above  us,  the  superior  order  of  the  Seraphim  is
represented  under  the  figure  of  the  twelve  wings,
established  and  fixed  around  Jesus,  casting  itself
upon  the  most  blessed  contemplations  of  Him,  as
far  as  permissible,  and  filled  reverently  with  the
contemplated  truth  distributed  in  most  pure  re-
ceptions, and,  to  speak  after  the  manner  of  men,
crying  aloud,  with  never  silent  lips,  the  frequent
Hymn  of  Praise e ;  for  the  sacred  knowledge  of
the  supermundane  minds  is  both  untiring,  and  pos-
sesses the  Divine  love  without  intermission,  and
is  at  the  same  time  superior  to  all  baseness  and
forgetfulness.  Hence,  as  I  think,  that  phrase,
"unceasing  cry,"  suggests  their  perpetual  and  per-
sistent science  and  conception  of  things  Divine,
with  full  concord  and  thanksgiving.


Section  VI.
Now  we  have,  as  I  think,  sufficiently  contem-
plated, in  the  description  of  the  super-heavenly
Hierarchy,  the  incorporeal  properties  of  the  Sera-
phim, Divinely  described  in  the  Scriptures  under
sensible  figures  explanatory  of  the  contemplated
Beings,  and  we  have  made  them  evident  to  thy
contemplating  eyes.  Nevertheless,  since  now  also
they   who   stand    reverently   around    the    Hierarch,

e  Isa.  vi.  3.


n8  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

reflect  the  highest  Order,  on  a  small  scale,  we  will
now  view  with  most  immaterial  visions  their  most
Godlike  splendour.

Section  VII.
Their  numberless  faces  then,  and  many  feet,
manifest,  as  I  think,  their  property  of  viewing  the
most  Divine  illuminations  from  many  sides,  and
their  conception  of  the  good  things  of  God  as
ever  active  and  abundantly  receptive;  and  the
sixfold  arrangement  of  the  wings,  of  which  the
Scripture  speaks,  does  not,  I  think,  denote,  as
seems  to  some,  a  sacred  number,  but  that  of  the
highest  Essence  and  Order  around  God  ;  the  first
and  middle  and  last  of  its  contemplative  and  God-
like powers  are  altogether  elevating,  free,  and  su-
ermundane.  Hence  the  most  holy  wisdom  of  the
Oracles,  when  reverently  describing  the  formation
of  the  wings,  places  the  wings  around  their  heads f,
and  middle,  and  feet,  suggesting  their  complete
covering  with  wings,  and  their  manifold  faculty  of
leading  to  the  Really  Being.

Section  VIII.

Now  if  they  cover  their  faces  and  their  feet,  and
fly  by  their  middle  wings  only,  bear  this  reverently
in  mind,  that  the  Order,  so  far  exalted  above  the
highest  beings,  is  circumspect  respecting  the  more
lofty  and  deep  of  its  conceptions,  and  raises  itself,

*  Isa.  vi.  2.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  119

in  due  proportion,  by  its  middle  wings,  to  the  vision
of  God,  by  placing  its  own  proper  life  under  the
Divine  yokes,  and  by  these  is  reverently  directed  to
the  judgment  of  itself.

Section  IX.

And,  as  regards  the  statement  of  Holy  Scripture,
that  "  one  cried  out  to  the  other,"  that  shews,  I
think,  that  they  impart  to  each  other  ungrudgingly
their  own  visions  of  God.  And  this  we  should  deem
worthy  of  religious  recollection,  that  the  Hebrew
word  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  names  the  most  holy
Beings  of  the  Seraphim  by  an  explanatory  epithet,
from  their  glowing  and  seething  in  a  Divine  and
ever -moving  life.

Section  X.

Since,  then,  as  those  who  understand  Hebrew  say,
the  most  Divine  Seraphim  were  named  by  the  Word
of  God,  "Kindling"  and  "Heating,"  by  a  name
expressive  of  their  essential  condition,  they  possess,
according  to  the  symbolical  imagery  of  the  Divine
Muron,  most  elevating  powers,  which  call  it  to
manifestation  and  distribution  of  most  exhilarating
perfumes.  For  the  Being,  sweet  beyond  conception,
loves  to  be  moved  by  the  glowing  and  most  pure
minds  into  manifestation,  and  imparts  Its  most
Divine  inspirations,  in  cheerful  distributions,  to
those  who  thus  supermundanely  call  It  forth.  Thus
the  most  Divine  Order  of  supercelestial  Beings  did


120  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

not   fail  to  recognize  *  the  most  supremely  Divine
Jesus,  when  He  descended  for  the  purpose  of  being
sanctified ;   but  recognizes,  reverently,  Him  lowering
Himself  in  our  belongings,  through  Divine  and  in-
expressible goodness  ;  and  when  viewing  Him  sancti-
fied, in  a  manner  befitting  man,  by  the  Father  h  and
Himself1  and  the  Holy  Spirit k,  recognized  its  own
supreme  Head   as  being  essentially  unchanged,   in
whatever  He  may  do  as  supreme  1  God.     Hence  the
tradition  of  the  sacred  symbols  places  the  Seraphim
near  the  Divine  Muron,  when  it  is  being  consecrated,
recognizing  and  describing  the  Christ  as  unchanged,
in  our  complete™  manhood  in  very  truth.    And  what
is  still  more  divine  is,  that  it  uses  the  Divine  Muron
for  the  consecration  of  every  thing  sacred,  distinctly
shewing,   according   to    the    Logion,   the   Sanctified
Sanctifying,  as  always  being  the  same  with  Himself
throughout  the  whole  supremely  Divine  sanctification.
Wherefore  also  the  consecrating  gift  and  grace   of
the  Divine  Birth  in  God  is  completed  in  the  most
Divine   perfectings   of  the    Muron.     Whence,  as    I
think,   the    Hierarch   pouring   the  Muron  upon   the
purifying  font  in  cruciform  injections,  brings  to  view,
for  contemplative  eyes,  the  Lord  Jesus  descending
even  to  death  itself  through  the  cross  n,  for  our  Birth
in  God,  benevolently  drawing  up,  from  the  old  gulp-
ing of  the  destructive  death,  by  the   same  Divine
and  resistless  descent,  those,  who,  according  to  the

8  I  Tim.  iii.  16.  h  John  x.  36.  I  Ibid.  xvii.  19.

k   Rom.  i.  4.  1  eeapxiKas.  m  ivavepU)Tfhoei.

»  Phil.  ii.  8.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  121

mysterious  saying,  "  are  baptized  into  His  death  °,"
and  renewing  them  to  a  godly  and  eternal  existence  p.

Section  XI.

But  further,  the  perfecting  unction  of  the  Muron
gives  to  him  who  has  been  initiated  in  the  most
sacred  initiation  of  the  Birth  in  God,  the  abiding
of  the  supremely  Divine  Spirit ;  the  sacred  imagery
of  the  symbols,  portraying,  as  I  think,  the  most
Divine  Spirit  abundantly  supplied  by  Him,  Who,  for
our  sakes,  has  been  sanctified  as  man  by  the  su-
premely Divine  Spirit,  in  an  unaltered  condition  of
His  essential  Godhead.

Section  XII.

And  bear  this  also  hierarchically  in  mind,  that  the
Law  of  the  most  pure  initiation  completes  the  sacred
consecration  of  the  Divine  Altar,  by  the  all  pure
effusions  of  the  most  holy  Muron.  And  the  super-
celestial  and  superessential  contemplation  is  source
and  essence,  and  perfecting  power,  of  all  our  deifying
holiness.  For  if  our  most  Divine  Altar  is  Jesus—
the  supremely  Divine  sanctifying  of  the  Godly  Minds
— in  Whom,  according  to  the  Logion,  "  being  sancti-
fied and  mystically  offered  as  a  whole  burnt-offering,
we  have  the  access  V  let  us  gaze  with  supermundane
eyes  upon  the  most  Divine  Altar  itself  (in  which  things
being  perfected,  are  perfected  and  sanctified),  being
perfected  from  the  most  Divine   Muron  itself;    for

0  Rom.  vi.  3.  P  Ibid.  4.  *  Eph.  iii.  12.


122  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

the  altogether  most  holy  Jesus  sanctifies  Himself  on
our  behalf,  and  fills  us  full  of  every  sanctification,
since  the  things  consecrated1-  upon  them  pass  fra-
ternally afterwards  in  their  beneficent  effects  to  us,
as  children  of  God.     Hence,  as  I  think,  the  Divine
Leaders  of  our  Hierarchy,  in  conformity  with  a  Hier-
archical conception  divinely  transmitted,  name  this
altogether    august     ministration    "consecration    of
Muron,"  from   "being  consecrated  thoroughly,"  as
one  might  say,  "  consecration  of  God s,"  extolling  its
divine  consecrating  work  in  each  sense.     For  both
the  being  sanctified  for  our  sakes,  as  becomes  Man,
and  the  consecrating  all  things  as  supreme  God,  and
the  sanctifying  things  being  consecrated,  is   "con-
secration of  Him."     As  for  the  sacred  song  of  the
inspiration  of  the  God-rapt  Prophets,  it  is  called  by
those  who  know  Hebrew,  the  "  Praise  of  God,"  or
"  Praise  ye  the  Lord,"  for  since  every  divine  mani-
festation and  work  of  God  is  reverently  portrayed  in
the  varied  composition  of  the  Hierarchical  symbols,
it  is  not  unfitting  to  mention  the   Divinely  moved
song  of  the  Prophets ;   for  it  teaches  at  once,  dis-
tinctly and  reverently,  that  the  beneficent  works  of
the  Divine  Goodness  are  worthy  of  devout  praise.

r  Observe  the  doctrine  of  the  Atonement,  hr"  avrSiv,  Jesus
and  the  Altar,     eV  avry  is  also  another  reading.
8  re\(Tr)u  ©eov.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  123

CAPUT    V.
/.   Concerning  sacerdotal  Consecrations.
Section  I.
Such,  then,  is  the  most  Divine  perfecting  work  of
the  Muron.     But  it  may  be  opportune,  after  these
Divine    ministrations,    to    set    forth    the    sacerdotal
Orders  and  elections  themselves,  and  their  powers,
and  operations,  and  consecrations,  and  the  triad  of
the  superior  ranks  under  them  ;  in  order  that  the
arrangement  of  our  Hierarchy  may  be  demonstrated,
as  entirely  rejecting  and  excluding  the  disordered,
the  unregulated,  and  the  confused;  and,  at  the  same
time,   choosing  and  manifesting  the   regulated  and
ordered,  and  well-established,  in   the   gradations  of
the  sacred  Ranks  within  it.    Now  we  have  well  shewn,
as  I  think,  in  the  Hierarchies  already  extolled  by  us,
the  threefold  division  of  every  Hierarchy,  when  we
affirmed  that  our  sacred  tradition  holds,  that  every
Hierarchical  transaction   is  divided  into  *  the  most
Divine  Mystic  Rites,  and  u  the  inspired  experts  and.
teachers  of  them,  and  those  who  are  being  religiously
initiated  x  by  them.

Section  II.

Thus  the  most  holy  Hierarchy  of  the  supercelestial

Beings  has,  for  its  initiation,  its  own  possible  and

most°immaterial  conception  of  God  and  things  Divine,

and  the  complete  likeness  to  God,  and  a  persistent

t  T€ACTas.  u  h'Qiovs  iwivrlipovas.  x  rt\ovfi4vovs^


I24  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

habit  of  imitating  God,  as  far  as  permissible.     And
its  illuminators,   and  leaders  to  this   sacred    conse-
cration, are  the  very  first  Beings  around  God.     For
these  generously  and  proportionately  transmit  to  the
subordinate  sacred  Ranks  the  ever  deifying  notions
given  to  them,  by  the  self-perfect  Godhead  and  the
wise-making  Divine  Minds.    Now  the  Ranks,  who  are
subordinate  to  the  first   Beings,  are,  and  are  truly
called,  the  initiated  Orders,  as  being  religiously  con-
ducted, through  those,  to  the  deifying  illumination  of
the  Godhead.     And  after  this,-the  heavenly  and
supermundane   Hierarchy,— the  Godhead  gave  the
Hierarchy  under  the  Law,  imparting  its  most  holy
gifts,  for  the  benefit  of  our  race,  to  them  (as  being
children  according  to  the  Logion  *),  by  faint  images  of
the  true,  and  copies -far  from  the  Archetypes,  and
enigmas  hard  to  understand  %  and  types  having  the
contemplation  enveloped  within,  as  an  analogous  light
not  easily  discerned  b,  so  as  not  to  wound  weak  eyes
by  the  light  shed  upon  them.    Now  to  this  Hierarchy
under  the  Law,  the  elevation  to  spiritual  worship  •  is
an  initiation.    Now  the  men  religiously  instructed  for
that  holy  tabernacled  by  Moses,— the  first  initiated
and  leader  of  the .  Hierarchs  under  the  Law,— were
conductors;  in  reference  to  which  holy  tabernacle-
when  describing  for  purposes  of  instruction  the  Hier-
archy  under   the   Law,— he  called   all    the   sacred
services  of  the  Law  an  image  of  the  type  shewn

7  Gal.  iv.  3.  z  Heb.  x.  1.  a  Num>  xii<  8>

Rom.  11.  20.  c  john  ft  23>  d  Heb>  .x_


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  125

to  him  in  Mount  Sinai e.  But  "  initiated  "  are  those
who  are  being  conducted  to  a  more  perfect  revelation
of  the  symbols  of  the  Law,  in  proportion  to  their
capacity.  Now  the  Word  of  God  calls  our  Hierarchy
the  more  perfect  revelation,  naming  it  a  fulfilment1
of  that,  and  a  holy  inheritance.  It  is  both  heavenly
and  legal,  like  the  mean  between  extremes,  common
to  the  one,  by  intellectual  contemplations,  and  to  the
other,  because  it  is  variegated  by  sensible  signs;  and,
through  these,  reverently  conducts  to  the  Divine
Being.  And  it  has  likewise  a  threefold  division
of  the  Hierarchy,  which  is  divided  into  the  most
holy  ministrations  of  the  Mystic  Rites,  and  into  the
Godlike  ministers  of  holy  things,  and  those  who  are
being  conducted  by  them,  according  to  their  capacity,
to  things  holy.

And  each  of  the  three  divisions  of  our  Hierarchy,
comformably  to  that  of  the  Law,  and  the  Hierarchy,
more  divine  than  ours,  is  arranged  as  first  and  middle
and  last  in  power;  consulting  both  reverent  pro-
portion, and  well-ordered  and  concordant  fellowship
of  all  things  ia  harmonious  rank.

Section  III.
The  most  holy  ministration,  then,  of  the  Mystic
Rites  has,  as  first  Godlike  power,  the  holy  cleansing
of  the  uninitiated ;  and  as  middle,  the  enlightening
instruction  of  the  purified  ;  and  as  last,  and  summary
of  the  former,  the  perfecting  of  those  instructed  in

e  Exod.  xxv.  40.  f  Matt.  v.  17.


126  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

science  of  their  proper  instructions ;  and  the  order  of
the  Ministers,  in  the  first  power,  cleanses  the  un-
initiated through  the  Mystic  Rites ;  and  in  the
second,  conducts  to  light  the  purified ;  and  in  the
last  and  highest  of  the  Ministering  Powers,  makes
perfect  those  who  have  participated  in  the  Divine
light,  by  the  scientific  completions  of  the  illuminations
contemplated.  And  of  the  Initiated,  the  first  power
is  that  being  purified;  and  the  middle  is  that  being
enlightened,  after  the  cleansing,  and  which  contem-
plates certain  holy  things;  and  the  last  and  more
divine  than  the  others,  is  that  enlightened  in  the
perfecting  science  of  the  holy  enlightenment  of  which
it  has  become  a  contemplator.  Let,  then,  the  three-
fold power  of  the  holy  service  of  the  Mystic  Rites
be  extolled,  since  the  Birth  in  God  is  exhibited  in
the  Oracles  as  a  purification  and  enlightening  illumin-
ation, and  the  Rite  of  the  Synaxis  and  the  Muron,
as  a  perfecting  knowledge  and  science  of  the  works
of  God,  through  which  the  unifying  elevation  to  the
Godhead  and  most  blessed  communion  is  reverently
perfected.  And  now  let  us  explain  next  the  sacer-
dotal Order,  which  is  divided  into  a  purifying  and
illuminating  and  perfecting  discipline.

Section  IV.
This,  then,  is  the  all-sacred  Law  of  the  Godhead,
that,  through  the  first,  the  second  are  conducted  to
Its  most  Divine  splendour.  Do  we  not  see  the
material  substances  of  the  elements,  first  approach-
ing, by  preference,  things  which  are  more  congenial


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.


127


to  them,  and,  through  these,  diffusing  their  own
energy  to  other  things?  Naturally,  then,  the  Head
and  foundation  of  all  good  order,  invisible  and
visible,  causes  the  deifying  rays  to  approach  the  more
Godlike  first,  and  through  them,  as  being  more  trans-
parent Minds,  and  more  properly  adapted  for  re-
ception and  transmission  of  Light,  transmits  light  and
manifestations  to  the  subordinate,  in  proportions
suitable  to  them.

It  is,  then,  the  function  of  these,  the  first  contem-
plators  of  God,  to  exhibit  ungrudgingly  to  those
second,  in  proportion  to  their  capacity,  the  Divine
visions  reverently  gazed  upon  by  themselves,  and  to
reveal  the  things  relating  to  the  Hierarchy  (since
they  have  been  abundantly  instructed  with  a  perfect-
ing science  in  all  matters  relating  to  their  own  Hier-
archy, and  have  received  the  effectual  power  of
instruction),  and  to  impart  sacred  gifts  according
to  fitness,  since  they  scientifically  and  wholly  par-
ticipate in  sacerdotal  perfection.

Section  V.
The  Divine  Rank  of  the  Hierarchy  then,  is  the
first  of  the  God-contemplative  Ranks;  and  it  is,  at
the  same  time,  highest  and  lowest;  inasmuch  as
every  Order  of  our  Hierarchy  is  summed  up  and
fulfilled  in  it.  For,  as  we  see  every  Hierarchy
terminated  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  so  we  see  each
terminated  in  its  own  inspired  Hierarch.  Now  the
power  of  the  Hierarchical  Rank  permeates  the  whole


128  Diojiysins  the  Areopagite

sacred  body,  and  through  every  one  of  the  sacred
Ranks  performs   the  mysteries  of  its   proper  Hier-
archy.    But,  pre-eminently,  to  it,  rather  than  to  the
other   Ranks,   the   Divine    institution    assigned    the
more  Divine  ministrations.     For  these  are  the  per-
fecting   images    of    the    supremely    Divine   Power
completing   all   the    most    Divine    symbols   and   all
the   sacred   orderings.     For  though    some    of    the
worshipful  symbols  are  consecrated  by  the  Priests
yet  never  will   the  Priest   effect  the  holy  Birth  in
God  without  the  most  Divine  Muron ;    nor  will   he
consecrate  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  Communion,
unless  the  communicating  symbols  have  been  placed
upon  the  most  Divine  Altar;  and  neither  will  he  be
Priest  himself,  unless  he  has  been  elected  to  this  by
the  Hierarchical  consecrations.     Hence  the  Divine
Institution  uniquely  assigned  the  dedication  of  the
Hierarchical   Ranks,   and   the   consecration   of  the
Divine  Muron   and  the   sacred   completion   of  the
Altar,    to   the   perfecting    powers    of    the    inspired
Hierarchs.

Section  VI.
It  is,  then,  the  Hierarchical  Rank  which,  full  of
the  perfecting  power,  pre-eminently  completes  the
perfecting  functions  of  the  Hierarchy,  and  reveals
lucidly  the  sciences  of  the  holy  mysteries,  and
teaches  their  proportionate  and  sacred  conditions
and  powers.  But  the  illuminating  Rank  of  the
Priests  conducts  those,  who  are  being  initiated
under  the  Rank  of  the  inspired  Hierarchs,  to  the


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  129

Divine  visions  of  the  Mystic  Rites,  and  in  co-opera-
tion with  it,  ministers  its  proper  ministrations.
Whatever  then  this  Rank  may  do,  by  shewing
the  works  of  God,  through  the  most  holy  symbols,
and  perfecting  those  who  draw  nigh  in  the  Divine
contemplations,  and  communion  of  the  holy  rites,
it  yet  refers  those,  who  crave  the  science  of  the
religious  services  contemplated,  to  the  Hierarch.
And  the  Rank  of  the  Leitourgoi  (which  is  puri-
fying and  separates  the  unfit,  previous  to  the
approach  to  the  ministrations  of  the  Priests),
thoroughly  purifies  those  who  are  drawing  nigh,
by  making  them  entirely  pure  from  opposing  pas-
sions, and  suitable  for  the  sanctifying  vision  and
communion.  Hence,  during  the  service  of  the
Birth  in  God,  the  Leitourgoi  strip  him  who  draws
nigh  of  his  old  clothing,  yea  further,  even  take
off  his  sandals,  and  make  him  stand  towards  the
west  for  renunciation;  and  again,  they  lead  him
back  to  the  east  (for  they  are  of  the  purifying
rank  and  power),  enjoining  on  those  who  approach
to  entirely  cast  away  the  surroundings  of  their
former  life,  and  shewing  the  darkness  of  their
former  conduct,  and  teaching  those,  who  have
said  farewell  to  the  lightless,  to  transfer  their  al-
legiance to  the  luminous.  The  Leitourgical  Order,
then,  is  purifying,  by  leading  those  who  have  been
purified  to  the  bright  ministrations  of  the  Priests,
both  by  thoroughly  purifying  the  uninitiated  and  by
bringing  to  birth,  by  the  purifying  illuminations  and
teachings  of  the  Oracles,  and  further,   by  sending

K


13°  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

away  from  the  Priests  the  unholy,  without  respect
of  persons.  Wherefore  also  the  Hierarchical  insti-
tution places  it  at  the  holy  gates,  suggesting  that  the
approach  of  those  who  draw  nigh  to  holy  things
should  be  in  altogether  complete  purification,  and
entrusting  the  approach  to  their  reverent  vision  and
communion  to  the  purifying  powers,  and  admitting
them,  through  these,  without  spot.

Section  VII.
We  have  shewn,  then,  that  the  Rank  of  the  Hier-
archs  is  consecrating  and  perfecting,  that  of  the
Priests,  illuminating  and  conducting  to  the  light;
and  that  of  the  Leitourgoi  purifying  and  discrimi-
nating; that  is  to  say,  the  Hierarchical  Rank  is
appointed  not  only  to  perfect,  but  also  at  the  same
time,  to  enlighten  and  to  purify,  and  has  within  itself
the  purifying  sciences  of  the  power  of  the  Priests  to-
gether with  the  illuminating.  For  the  inferior  Ranks
cannot  cross  to  the  superior  functions,  and,  besides
this,  it  is  not  permitted  to  them  to  take  in  hand
such  quackery  as  that.  Now  the  more  Divine  Orders
know  also,  together  with  their  own,  the  sacred  sciences
subordinate  to  their  own  perfection.  Nevertheless,
since  the  sacerdotal  orderings  of  the  well-arranged
and  unconfused  order  of  the  Divine  operations  are
images  of  Divine  operations,  they  were  arranged  in
Hierarchical  distinctions,  shewing  in  themselves  the
illuminations  marshalled  into  the  first,  and  middle,
and  last,  sacred  operations  and  Ranks  ;  manifesting,
as  I  said,  in  themselves  the  well-ordered  and  uncon-


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  131

fused  character  of  the  Divine  operations.  For  since
the  Godhead  first  cleanses  the  minds  which  He  may
enter,  then  enlightens,  and,  when  enlightened,  per-
fects them  to  a  Godlike  perfection ;  naturally  the
Hierarchical  of  the  Divine  images  divides  itself  into
well-defined  Ranks  and  powers,  shewing  clearly  the
supremely.  Divine  operation  firmly  established,  with-
out confusion,  in  most  hallowed  and  unmixed  Ranks.
But,  since  we  have  spoken,  as  attainable  to  us,  of  the
sacerdotal  Ranks  and  elections,  and  their  powers  and
operations,  let  us  now  contemplate  their  most  holy
consecrations  as  well  as  we  can.

//.  Mysterion  of  Sacerdotal  Consecrations.

The  Hierarch,  then,  being  led  to  the  Hierarchical
consecration,  after  he  has  bent  both  his  s  knees
before  the  Altar,  has  upon  his  head  h  the  God-
transmitted  oracles,  and  the  Hierarchical  hand,
and  in  this  manner  is  consecrated1  by  the  Hier-
arch, who  ordains  him  by  the  altogether  most  holy
invocations.  And  the  Priest,  after  he  has  bent  both
his  knees  before  the  Divine  Altar,  has  the  Hier-
archical right  hand  upon  his  head,  and  in  this
manner  is  dedicated151  by  the  Hierarch,  who  ordains
him  with  hallowing  invocations.  And  the  Leitourgos,
after  he  has  bent  one  of  two  knees  before  the  Divine
Altar,  has  upon  his  head  the  right  hand  of  the  Hier-
arch  who  ordains   him,  being  completed1   by  him

8  &n^)w  T<i>  7ro'Se.  h  Ap.  C.  iv,  s.  20  ;  iv.  s.  IJ  ;  viii.  s.  4.
1  o7roT€A€toi/TOt.  k  ay  i&feai.  l  T<-\eiov/j.ivos.


l3*  Dlonysius  the  Areopagile

with  the  initiating  invocations  of  the  Leitourgoi.
Upon  each  of  them  the  cruciform  seal m  is  impressed,
by  the  ordaining  Hierarch,  and,  in  each  case,'
a  sacred  proclamation  of  name  takes  place,  and
a  perfecting  salutation,  since  every  sacerdotal  person
present,  and  the  Hierarch  who  ordained,  salute  him
who  has  been  enrolled  to  any  of  the  aforenamed
sacerdotal  Ranks.

III.   Contemplation.
Section  I.

These  things,  then,  are  common  both  to  the  Hier-
archs,  and  Priests,  and  Leitourgoi,  in  their  sacerdotal
consecrations,— the  conducting  to  the  Divine  Altar
and  kneeling,— the  imposition  of  the  Hierarchical
hand,— the  cruciform  seal,— the  announcement  of
name,— the  completing  salutation.

And  special  and  select  for  the  Hierarchs  is  the
imposition  of  the  Oracles  upon  the  head,  since  the
subordinate  Ranks  have  not  this;  and  for  the  Priests
the  bending  of  both  knees,  since  the  consecration  of
the  Leitourgoi  has  not  this ;  for  the  Leitourgoi,  as
has  been  said,  bend  the  one  of  two  knees  only.

Section  II.

The  conducting   then    to   the   Divine  Altar,  and

kneeling,  suggests  to  all  those  who  are  being  sacer-

dotally  ordained,  that  their  own  life  is  entirely  placed

under  God,  as  source  of  consecration,  and  that  their

m  a<ppayls.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  133

whole  intellectual  self,  all  pure  and  hallowed,  ap-
proaches to  Him,  and  that  it  is  of  one  likeness,  and,
as  far  as  possible,  meet  for  the  supremely  Divine
and  altogether  most  holy,  both  Victim"  and  Altar,
which  purifies,  sacerdotally,  the  Godlike  Minds.

Section  III.

And  the  imposition  of  the  Hierarchical  hand
signifies  at  once  the  consecrating  protection,  by
which,  as  holy  children,  they  are  paternally  tended,
which  bequeaths  to  them  a  sacerdotal  condition  and
power,  and  drives  away  their  adverse  powers,  and
teaches,  at  the  same  time  also,  to  perform  the  sacer-
dotal operations,  as  those  who,  having  been  conse-
crated, are  acting  under  God,  and  have  Him  as
Leader  of  their  own  operations  in  every  respect.

Section  IV.
And  the  cruciform  seal  manifests  the  inaction  of
all  the  impulses  of  the  flesh,  and  the  God-imitated
life  looking  away  unflinchingly  to  the  manly  most
Divine  life  of  Jesus,  Who  came  even  to  Cross  and
death  with  a  supremely  Divine  sinlessness,  and
stamped  those  who  so  live  with  the  cruciform  image
of  His  own  sinlessness  as  of  the  same  likeness.

Section  V.

And  the  Hierarch  calls   aloud  the  name  of  the
consecrations  and  of  those  consecrated,  the  mystery
denoting  that  the  God-beloved  consecrator  is  mani-
n  Christ.


*34  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

festor  of  the  supremely  Divine  choice,— not  of  his
own  accord  or  by  his  own  favour  leading  those  who
are   ordained   to   the    sacerdotal    consecration,    but
being  moved  by  God  to  all  the  Hierarchical  dedi-
cations.    Thus    Moses,    the   consecrator   under   the
Law,   does   not   lead   even   Aaron,    his   brother,   to
sacerdotal  consecration,  though  thinking  him  both
beloved    of  God   and   fit   for  the  priesthood,   until
moved  by  God  to  this,  he   in   submission  to  God,
Head   of  consecration,    completed    by    Hierarchical
rites   the   sacerdotal  consecration0.       But  even  our
supremely  Divine  and  first  Consecrator  (for  the  most
philanthropic  Jesus,  for  our  sake,  became  even  this),
did  "not  glorify  Himself,"  as  the  Logia  say,  but  He
Who  said  to  Him,  "Thou*  art  Priest  for  ever  after
the  order  of  Melchizedek."     Wherefore  also   whilst
Himself  leading  the  disciples  to  sacerdotal  conse-
cration, although  being  as   God  chief  Consecrator,
nevertheless  He  refers  the  Hierarchical  completion
of  the  work  of  consecration  to  His  altogether  most
Holy  Father,  and  the  supremely  Divine  Spirit,    by
admonishing  the  disciples,  as  the   Oracles   say,   not
to  depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  to  "  await  the  promise
of  the  Father,  which  ye  heard  of  Me,  that  ye  shall
be   baptized   in    Holy  Ghost  V     And   indeed,    the
Coryphaeus   of  the   disciples   himself,   with  the   ten,
of  the  same  rank  and  Hierarchy  with  himself,  when
he  proceeded  to  the  sacerdotal  consecration  of  the
twelfth  of  the  disciples,  piously  left  the  selection  to

°  Exod.  xxix.  4.  P  Ps.  ex.  4.  q  Acts  i.  4,  5.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  135

the  Godhead,  saying,  "Shew1-  whom  Thou  hast
chosen,"  and  received  him,  who  was  divinely  desig-
nated by  the  Divine  lot,  into  the  Hierarchical
number  of  the  sacred  twelve.  Now  concerning
the  Divine  lot,  which  fell  as  a  Divine  intimation
upon  Matthias,  others  have  expressed  another  view,
not  clearly,  as  I  think,  but  I  will  express  my  own
sentiment.  For  it  seems  to  me  that  the  Oracles
name  "  lot  "  a  certain  supremely  Divine  gift,  pointing
out  to  that  Hierarchical  Choir  him  who  was  desig-
nated by  the  Divine  election ;  more  particularly,
because  the  Divine  Hierarch  must  not  perform  the
sacerdotal  acts  of  his  own  motion,  but,  under  God,
moving  him  to  do  them  as  prescribed  by  the  Hier-
archy and  Heaven.

Section  VI.
Now  the  salutation,  for  the  completion  of  the
sacerdotal  consecration,  has  a  religious  significance.
For  all  the  members  of  the  sacerdotal  Ranks  present,
as  well  as  the  Hierarch  himself  who  has  consecrated
them,  salute  the  ordained.  For  when,  by  sacerdotal
habits  and  powers,  and  by  Divine  call  and  dedica-
tion, a  religious  mind  has  attained  to  sacerdotal
completion,  he  is  dearly  loved  by  the  most  holy
Orders  of  the  same  rank,  being  conducted  to  a
most  Godlike  comeliness,  loving  the  minds  similar
to  himself,  and  religiously  loved  by  them  in  return.
Hence  it  is  that  the  mutual  sacerdotal  salutation
is   religiously  performed,   proclaiming  the    religious

r  Acts  i.  24.    Ap.  C.  p.  168.


I36  Dionysius  the  AreopagiU

communion  of  minds  of  like  character,  and  their
loveable  benignity  towards  each  other,  as  keeping
throughout,  by  sacerdotal  training,  their  most  God-
like comeliness.

Section  VII
These  things,  as  I  said,  are  common  to  the  whole
sacerdotal    consecration.     The    Hierarch,    however,
as  a  distinctive  mark,  has  the  Oracles  most  reverently
placed   upon   his   head.     For   since   the   perfecting
power  and  science  of  the  whole  Priesthood  is  be-
queathed to  the  inspired  Hierarchs,  by  the  supremely
Divine  and  perfecting  goodness,  naturally  are  placed
upon  the  heads  of  the  Hierarchs  the  Divinely  trans-
mitted   Oracles,   which   set    forth    comprehensively
and    scientifically    every   teaching    of   God",   work
of  God,  manifestation  of  God,  sacred  word,  sacred
work,  in  one  word,  all  the  Divine  and  sacred  works
and   words   bequeathed   to   our   Hierarchy   by    the
beneficent  Godhead;    since   the  Godlike  Hierarch,
having   participated   entirely   in   the   whole  Hierar-
chical power,  will  not  only  be  illuminated,   in  the
true  and  God-transmitted  science  of  all  the  sacred
words  and  works  committed  to  the  Hierarchy,  but
will   also   transmit   them   to  others  in   Hierarchical
proportions,  and  will  perfect  Hierarchically  in  most
Divine  kinds  of  knowledge  and  the  highest  mystical
instructions,  all  the  most  perfecting  functions  of  the
whole  Hierarchy.     And  the  distinctive  feature  of  the
ordination  of  Priests,  as  contrasted  with  the  ordering

8  -ndaris  Qeo^yias.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  137

of  the  Leitourgoi,  is  the  bending  of  the  two  knees,
as  that  bends  only  the  one,  and  is  ordained  in  this
Hierarchical  fashion.

Section  VIII.
The  bending  then  denotes  the  subordinate  intro-
duction of  the  conductor,  who  places  under  God  that
which  is  reverently  introduced.     And  since,   as   we
have  often  said,  the  three  Orders  of  the  consecrators,
through  the  three  most  holy  Mystic  Rites  and  powers,
preside  over  the  three  ranks  of  those  initiated,  and
minister  their  saving  introduction  under  the  Divine
yokes,  naturally  the  order  of  Leitourgoi  as  only  puri-
fying, ministers  the  one  introduction  of  those  who
are  being  purified,  by  placing  it  under  the   Divine
Altar,    since    in    it   the   minds    being   purified,  are
supermundanely  hallowed.     And    the    Priests   bend
both   their   knees,    since  those  who  are   religiously
brought  nigh  by  them  have  not  only  been  purified,
but  have  been  ministerially  perfected  into  a  contem-
plative habit  and  power  of  a  life  thoroughly  cleansed
by  their  most  luminous  ministrations  through  instruc-
tion.    And  the  Hierarch,  bending  both  his  knees,
has   upon   his   head   the    God-transmitted    Oracles,
leading,  through  his  office   of  Hierarch,   those  who
have   been    purified  by  the   Leitourgic  power,   and
enlightened    by  the   ministerial,    to   the    science    of
the  holy  things  contemplated  by  them  in  proportion
to  their  capacities,  and  through  this  science  perfect-
ing those  who  are  brought  nigh,  into  the  most  com-
plete holiness  of  which  they  are  capable.


x38  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

CAPUT    VI.
/.   Concerning  the  Ranks  of  the  Initiated.
Section  I.
These,  then,  are  the  sacerdotal  Ranks  and  elections
their  powers,   and    operations,    and    consecrations'
We  must  next  explain  the  triad  of  the  Ranks  being
initiated  under  them.     We  affirm  then  that  the  mul-
titudes, of  whom  we  have  already  made  mention,  who
are  dismissed  from  the  ministrations  and  consecra-
tions, are  Ranks  under  purification;   since   one  is
being  yet  moulded  and  fashioned  by  the  Leitourgoi
through  the  obstetric  Oracles  to  a  living  birth;  and
another  is  yet  to  be  called  back  to  the  holy  life,  from
which  it  had  departed,  by  the  hortatory  teaching  of
the  good  Oracles;  and  another,  as  being  yet  terror-
ized, through  want  of  manliness,  by  opposing  fears,
and  being  fortified  by  the  strengthening  Oracles ;  and
another,    as    being  yet    led    back   from   the   worse
to   holy  efforts;  and   another   as   having   been  led
back,  indeed,  but  not  yet  having  a  chaste  fixedness
in  more  Godlike  and  tranquil  habits.     For  these  are
the  Orders  under  purification,   by  the  nursing  and
purifying  power  of  the  Leitourgoi.     These,  the  Lei-
tourgoi    perfect,    by   their  sacred    powers,    for    the
purpose  of  their  being  brought,  after  their  complete
cleansing,    to   the    enlightening   contemplation   and
participation  in  the  most  luminous  ministrations.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  139

Section  II.

And  a  middle  rank  is  the  contemplative,  which
participates  in  certain  Divine  Offices  in  all  purity,
according  to  its  capacity,  which  is  assigned  to  the
Priests  for  its  enlightenment.

For  it  is  evident,  in  my  opinion,  that,  that  having
been  cleansed  from  all  unholy  impurity,  and  having
acquired  the  pure  and  unmoved  steadfastness  of
its  own  mind,  is  led  back,  ministerially,  to  the
contemplative  habit  and  power,  and  communicates
the  most  Divine  symbols,  according  to  its  capability,
filled  with  every  holy  joy  in  their  contemplations
and  communions,  mounting  gradually  to  the  Divine
love  of  their  science,  through  their  elevating  powers.
This,  I  affirm,  is  the  rank  of  the  holy  people,  as
having  passed  through  complete  purification,  and
deemed  worthy,  as  far  as  is  lawful,  both  of  the
reverent  vision,  and  participation  of  the  most  lumi-
nous Mystic  Rites.

Section  III.
Now  the  rank,  higher  than  all  the  initiated,  is
the  sacred  Order  of  the  Monks,  which,  by  reason
of  an  entirely  purified  purification,  through  complete
power  and  perfect  chastity  of  its  own  operations,
has  attained  to  intellectual  contemplation  and  com-
munion in  every  ministration  which  it  is  lawful  for  it
to  contemplate,  and  is  conducted  by  the  most  perfect-
ing powers  of  the  Hierarchs,  and  taught  by  their
inspired  illuminations  and  hierarchical  traditions  the
ministrations  of  the  Mystic  Rites,  contemplated,  ac-


T4°  Dionysius  the  Arcopagite

cording  to  its  capacity,  and  elevated  by  their  sacred
science,  to  the  most  perfecting  perfection  of  which
it  is  capable.    Hence  our  Divine  leaders  have  deemed
them  worthy  of  sacred  appellations,   some,  indeed,
calling  them  "  Therapeutae,"  and  others  "  Monks,"
from  the  pure  service  and  fervid  devotion  to  the  true
God,  and  from  the  undivided  and  single  life,  as  it
were    unifying   them,    in    the    sacred    enfoldings    of
things  divided,  into  a  God-like   Monad,  and  God-
loving  perfection.     Wherefore  the  Divine  institution
accorded  them  a  consecrating  grace,  and  deemed
them  worthy  of  a  certain  hallowing  invocation— not
hierarchical— for  that  is  confined  to  the  sacerdotal
orders  alone,  but  ministrative,  as  being  ministered,
by  the  pious  Priests,  by  the  hierarchial  consecration
in  the  second  degree.

II.  Mysterion  on  Monastic  Consecration.

The  Priest  then  stands  before  the  Divine  Altar,
religiously  pronouncing  the  invocation  for  Monks.
The  ordinand  stands  behind  the  Priest,  neither  bend-
ing both  knees,  nor  one  of  them,  nor  having  upon
his  head  the  Divinely-transmitted  Oracles,  but  only
standing  near  the  Priest,  who  pronounces  over  him
the  mystical  invocation.  When  the  Priest  has  fin-
ished this,  he  approaches  the  ordinand,  and  asks  him
first,  if  he  bids  farewell  to  all  the  distracted— not
lives  only,  but  also  imaginations.  Then  he  sets
before  him  the  most  perfect  life,  testifying  that  it  is
his  bounden  duty  to  surpass  the  ordinary  life.    When


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  14*

the  ordinand  has  promised  steadfastly  all  these  things,
the  Priest,  after  he  has  sealed  him  with  the  sign  of
the  Cross,  crops  his  hair,  after  an  invocation  to  the
threefold  Subsistence  of  the  Divine  Beatitude,  and
when  he  has  stripped  off  all  his  clothing,  he  covers
him  with  different,  and  when,  with  all  the  holy  men
present,  he  has  saluted  him,  he  finishes  by  making
him  partaker  of  the  supremely  Divine  Mysteries.

III.    Contemplatio7i.

Section  I.

The  fact  that  he  bends  neither  knee,  nor  has  upon
his  head  the  Divinely-transmitted  Oracles,  but  stands
by  the  Priest,  who  pronounces  the  invocation,  sig-
nifies, that  the  monastic  Rank  is  not  for  leading  others,
but  stands  by  itself,  in  a  monastic  and  holy  state,
following  the  sacerdotal  Ranks,  and  readily  conducted
by  them,  as  a  follower,  to  the  Divine  science  of
sacred  things,  according  to  its  capacity.

Section  II.

And  the  renunciation  of  the  divided,  not  only  lives,
but  even  imaginations,  shews  the  most  perfect  love  of
wisdom  in  the  Monks,  which  exercises  itself  in  science
of  the  unifying  commandments.  For  it  is,  as  I  said,
not  of  the  middle  Rank  of  the  initiated,  but  of  the
higher  than  all.

Section  III.

Therefore  many  of  the  things,  which  are  done
without  reproach  by  the  middle  Rank,  are  forbidden


M2  Donysius  the  Areopagile

in  every  way  to  the  single  Monks.-inasmuch  as  they
are  under  obligation  to  be  unified  to  the  One  and
to  be  collected  to  a  sacred  Monad,  and  to  be  trans-
formed to  the  sacerdotal  life,  as  far  as  lawful    as
possessmg  an  affinity  to  it  in  many  things,  and  as
being  nearer  to  it  than  the  other  Ranks  of  the  initi
ated.     Now  the  sealing  with  the  sign  of  the  Cross
as  we  have  already  said,  denotes   the  inaction  of
almost  all  the  desires  of  the  flesh.    And  the  cropping
of  the  hair  shews  the  pure  and  unpretentious  life
which   does   not  beautify  the  darkness  within   the
mind,  by  overlaying  it  with  smeared  pretence,  but
that  it  by  itself  is  being  led,  not  by  human  attractions
but  by  single  and  monastic,  to  the  highest  likeness
of  God.

Section  IV.
The  casting  aside  of  the  former  clothing,  and  the
taking  a  different,  is  intended  to  shew  the  transition
from  a  middle  religious  life  to  the  more  perfect :  just
as  durmg  the  holy  Birth  from  God,  the  exchange
of  the  clothing  denoted  the  elevation  of  a  thoroughly
purified  life,  to  a  contemplative  and  enlightened
condition.  And  even  if  now  also  the  Priest,  and  all
the  religious  present,  salute  the  man  ordained,  under-
stand from  this  the  holy  fellowship  of  the  Godlike
who  lovingly  congratulate  each  other  in  a  Divine
rejoicing.

Section  V.
Last  of  all,  the  Priest  calls  the  ordained  to  the
supremely  Divine  Communion,  shewing  religiously


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  143

that  the  ordained,   if  he  would  really  attain  to  the
monastic  and  single  elevation,  will  not  merely  con-
template the  sacred  mysteries  within  them,  nor  come
to  the  communion  of  the  most  holy  symbols,  after  the
fashion  of  the  middle  Rank,  but,  with  a  Divine  know-
ledge of  the  holy  things  received  by  him,  will  come
to  the  reception  of  the  supremely  Divine  Communion,
in  a  manner  different  from  that  of  the  holy  people.
Wherefore,  the   Communion   of  the  most  holy  Eu-
charist  is    also  given  to  the  sacerdotal   Orders,  in
their  consecrating  dedications,  by  the  Hierarch  who
consecrated  them,   at   the  end   of  their  most  holy
sanctifications,  not  only  because  the  reception  of  the
supremely  Divine  Mysteries  is  the  consummation  of
each    Hierarchical    reception,    but   because   all   the
sacred  Orders,  according  to  their  capacity,  partake  of
the  self-same  common  and  most  godly  gifts,  for  their
own    elevation    and   perfection   in    deification.     We
conclude,    then,    that    the   holy    Mystic    Rites    are,
purification,  and  illumination,  and  consecration.    The
Leitourgoi  are  a  purifying  rank,  the  Priests  an  illu-
minating, and  the  Godlike  Hierarchs  a  consecrating.
But  the  holy  people  is  a  contemplative  Order.     That
which  does   not  participate  in  the  sacred  contem-
plation and  communion,  is  a  Rank  being  purified,  as
still  under  course  of  purification.     The  holy  people  is
a  contemplative  Rank,  and  that  of  the  single  Monks
is  a  perfected  Rank.     For  thus  our  Hierarchy,  rever-
ently arranged  in  Ranks  fixed  by  God,  is  like  the
Heavenly  Hierarchies,  preserving,  so  far  as  man  can
do,  its  God-imitated  and  Godlike  characteristics.


144  Dionysiui  the  Areopagite

Section  VI.
But  thou  wilt  say  that  the  Ranks  undergoing  puri-
fication utterly  fall  short  of  the  Heavenly  Hierarchies
(for  it  is  neither  permitted  nor  true  to  say  that  any
heavenly  Ordering  is  defiled),  yea,  I  would  altogether
affirm  myself,  that  they  are  entirely  without  blemish,
and  possess  a  perfect  purity  above  this  world,  unless
I  had  completely  fallen  away  from  a  religious  mind.
For  if  any  of  them  should  have  become  captive  to
evil,  and  have  fallen  from  the  heavenly  and  undefiled
harmony  of  the  divine  Minds,  he  would  be  brought
to  the  gloomy  fall  of  the  rebellious  multitudes.  But
one  may  reverently  say  with  regard  to  the  Heavenly
Hierarchy,  that  the  illuminating  from  God  in  things
hitherto  unknown  is  a  purification  to  the  subordinate
Beings,  leading  them  to  a  more  perfect  science  of  the
supremely  Divine  kinds  of  knowledge,  and  purifying
them  as  far  as  possible  from  the  ignorance  of  those
things  of  which  they  had  not  hitherto  the  science,
conducted,  as  they  are,  by  the  first  and  more  Divine
Beings  to  the  higher  and  more  luminous  splendours
of  the  visions  of  God  :  and  so  there  are  Ranks  being
illuminated  and  perfected,  and  purifying  and  illu-
minating and  perfecting,  after  the  example  of  the
Heavenly  Hierarchy  ;  since  the  highest  and  more
Divine  Beings  purify  the- subordinate,  holy,  and
reverent  Orders,  from  all  ignorance  (in  ranks  and
proportions  of  the  Heavenly  Hierarchies),  and  filling
them  with  the  most  Divine  illuminatings,  and  per-
fecting in  the  most  pure  science  of  the  supremely
Divine  conceptions.     For  we  have  already  said,  and


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  145

the  Oracles  divinely  demonstrate,  that  all  the  hea-
venly Orders  are  not  the  same,  in  all  the  sacred
sciences  of  the  God-contemplating  visions  ;  but  the
first,  from  God  immediately,  and,  through  these,
again  from  God,  the  subordinate  are  illuminated,  in
proportion  to  their  powers,  with  the  most  luminous
glories  of  the  supremely  Divine  ray.


CAPUT    VII.

I.   Concerning  things  performed  over  those  fallen
asleep.

Section  I.

These  things  having  been  defined,  I  think  it
necessary  also  to  describe  the  things  religiously  per-
formed by  us  over  those  who  have  fallen  asleep.
For  neither  is  this  also  the  same  between  the
holy  and  the  unholy;  but,  as  the  form  of  life  of
each  is  different,  so  also,  when  approaching  death,
those  who  have  led  a  religious  life,  by  looking
steadfastly  to  the  unfailing  promises  of  the  Godhead
(inasmuch  as  they  have  observed  their  proof,  in  the
resurrection  proclaimed  by  it),  come  to  the  goal  of
death,  with  firm  and  unfailing  hope,  in  godly  rejoic-
ing, knowing  that  at  the  end  of  holy  contests  their
condition  will  be  altogether  in  a  perfect  and  endless
life  and  safety,  through  their  future  entire  resurrec-
tion *.     For  the  holy  souls,  which  may  possibly  fall

*  Soul  first — body  afterwards.


146  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

during  this  present  life  to  a  change  for  the  worse
in  the  regeneration,  will  have  the  most  Godlike  transi-
tion to  an  unchangeable  «  condition.     Now,  the  pure
bodies  which  are  enrolled  together  as  yoke-fellows
and  companions  of  the  holy  souls,  and  have  fought
together  within   their   Divine   struggles  in   the   un-
changed steadfastness  of  their  souls  throughout  the
divine  life,  will  jointly  receive  their  own  resurrec-
tion * ;  for,  having  been  united  with  the  holy  souls
to  which  they  were  united  in  this  present  life,  by
having  become  members  r  of  Christ,  they  will  receive
in  return  the  Godlike  and  imperishable  immortality
and  blessed  repose  \     In  this  respect  then  the  sleep
of  the  holy  is  in  comfort  and  unshaken  hopes,  as
it  attains  the  goal  of  the  Divine  contests  a.

Section  II.
Now,  amongst  the  profane,  some  b  illogically  think
to  go  to  a  non-existence;    others •  that  the  bodily
blending  with    their  proper   souls  will    be  severed
once  for  all,  as  unsuitable  to  them  in  a  Divine  life
and  blessed  lots,  not  considering  nor  being   suffi-
ciently instructed  in  Divine  science,  that  our  most
Godlike   life   in    Christ   has   already   begun  <*.     But
others e  assign   to   souls  union   with   other   bodies
committing ',  as  I  think,  this  injustice  to  them,  that'
after  (bodies)  have  laboured  together  with  the  godly
*  1  John  iii.  2.  x  ,  Con  xv  ^  y  Ib.d  v.

5?  JV1'       "  2  Tim- iv-  6~8'       b  PIato'  Ph*d-  *•  st
'Ibid.  1.62-3.  ^  Col.  iii.  3,  4.  ep^iJ

1   adiKWVTfs,  Ap.  C.  v.  s.  5 — 7.


on  the  Eccksiatical  Hierarchy.  147

souls,  and  have  reached  the  goal  of  their  most  Divine
course,  they  relentlessly  deprive  them  of  their  right-
eous retributions.  And  others*  (I  do  not  know  how
they  have  strayed  to  conceptions  of  such  earthly
tendency)  say,  that  the  most  holy  and  blessed  repose
promised  to  the  devout  is  similar  to  our  life  in  this
world,  and  unlawfully  reject,  for  those  who  are  equal
to  the  Angels,  nourishments  appropriate  to  another
kind  of  life.  None  of  the  most  religious  men,  how-
ever, will  ever  fall  into  such  errors  as  these;  but,
knowing  that  their  whole  selves  will  receive  the  Christ-
like inheritance,  when  they  have  come  to  the  goal  of
this  present  life,  they  see  more  clearly  their  road  to
incorruption  already  become  nearer,  and  extol  the
gifts  of  the  Godhead,  and  are  filled  with  a  Divine
satisfaction,  no  longer  fearing  the  fall  to  a  worse  con-
dition, but  knowing  well  that  they  will  hold  firmly
and  everlastingly  the  good  things  already  acquired.
Those,  however,  who  are  full  of  blemishes,  and  un-
holy stains,  even  though  they  have  attained  to  some
initiation,  yet,  of  their  own  accord,  have,  to  their  own
destruction,  rejected  this  from  their  mind,  and  have
rashly  followed  their  destructive  lusts,  to  them  when
they  have  come  to  the  end  of  their  life  here,  the  Divine
regulation  of  the  Oracles  will  no  longer  appear  as
before,  a  subject  of  scorn h,  but,  when  they  have
looked  with  different  eyes  upon  the  pleasures  of  their
passions  destroyed,  and  when  they  have  pronounced

g  Matt.  xxii.  28.
h  Republic,  lib.  i.  p.  9.     Cousin,  Paris,  1833.


T48  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

blessed  the  holy  life  from  which  they  thoughtlessly
fell  away,  they  are,  piteously  and  against  their  will,
separated  from  this  present  life,  conducted  to  no  holy
hope,  by  reason  of  their  shameful  life  \

Section  III.
Now,  whilst  none  of  these  attain  the  repose  of
the  holy  men,  he  himself,  when  coming  to  the  end
of  his  own  struggles,  is  filled  with  a  holy  consolation,
and  with  much  satisfaction  enters  the  path  of  the
holy  regeneration.  The  familiar  friends,  however,
of  him  who  has  fallen  asleep,  as  befits  their  divine
familiarity  and  fellowship,  pronounce  him  blessed,
whoever  he  is,  as  having  reached  the  desired  end
crowned  with  victory,  and  they  send  up  odes  of
thanksgiving  to  the  Author  of  victory,  praying  also
that  they  may  reach  the  same  inheritance.  Then
they  take  him  and  bring  him  to  the  Hierarch,  as  to
a  bequest  of  holy  crowns ;  and  he  right  gladly  receives
him,  and  performs  the  things  fixed  by  reverend  men,
to  be  performed  over  those  who  have  piously  fallen
asleep.

II  Mysterion  over  (hose  who  have  religiously
fallen  asleep.

The  Divine  Hierarch  collects  the  reverend  Choir,
and  if  the  person  who  has  fallen  asleep  were  of  the
sacerdotal  rank,  he  lays  him  down  before  the  Divine
Altar,  and  begins  with  the  prayer  and  thanksgiving

i  Ps.  cxii.  io.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  149

to  God ;  but  if  he  belonged  to  the  rank  of  the  chaste
Monks,  or  the  holy  people,  he  lays  him  down  near
the  hallowed  sanctuary,  before  the  sacerdotal  en-
trance. Then  the  Hierarch  finishes  the  prayer  of
thanksgiving  to  God  ;  and  next,  the  Leitourgoi,  after
reading  the  unfailing  promises  concerning  our  holy
resurrection,  contained  in  the  Divine  Oracles,  rever-
ently chant  the  odes  of  the  same  teaching  and  power,
from  the  Oracles  of  the  Psalter k.  Then  the  first
Leitourgos  dismisses  the  catechumens,  and  calls  aloud
the  names  of  the  holy  people,  who  have  already  fallen
asleep ;  amongst  whom  he  deems  the  man,  who  has
just  terminated  his  life,  worthy  of  mention  in  the
same  rank,  and  urges  all  to  seek  the  blessed  consum-
mation in  Christ;  then  the  Divine  Hierarch  advances,
and  offers  a  most  holy  prayer  over  him,  and  after  the
prayer  both  the  Hierarch  himself  salutes  the  defunct,
and  after  him,  all  who  are  present.  When  all  have
saluted,  the  Hierarch  pours  the  oil  upon  the  fallen
asleep,  and  when  he  has  offered  the  holy  prayer  for
all,  he  places  the  body  in  a  worthy  chamber,  with
other  holy  bodies  of  the  same  rank.

III.   Contemplation,

Section  I.

Now,  if  the  profane  should  see  or  hear  that  these
things  are  done  by  us,  they  will,  I  suppose,  split
with  laughter,  and  commiserate  us  on  our  folly.     But

k  See  Burial  Office.


!^o  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

there  is  no  need  to  wonder  at  this.     For,   as  the
Oracles  say,  "  If  they  will  not  believe,  neither  shall
they  understand1."     And  as  for  us,  who  have  con-
templated the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  things  done,
whilst  Jesus  leads  us  to  the  light,  let  us  say,  that,
not  without  reason,  does  the  Hierarch  conduct  to,
and  place  the  man  fallen  asleep,  in  the  place  of  the
same  rank ;    for  it   shews  reverently,  that,  in   the
regeneration,  all  will  be  in  those  chosen  inheritances,
for  which   they  have  chosen  their  own  life  here"1.
For  example,  if  any  one  led  a  Godlike  and  most  holy
life  here,  so  far  as  the  imitation  of  God  is  attainable
by  man,  he  will  be,  in  the  age  to  come,  in  divine
and  blessed  inheritances  ;  but  if  he  led  a  life  inferior
to  the  divine  likeness  in  the  highest  degree,  but,
nevertheless,  a  holy  life,  even  this  man  will  receive
the   holy  and  similar  retributions.     The    Hierarch,
having  given  thanks  for  this  Divine  righteousness,
offers    a   sacred   prayer,   and    extols  the   worshipful
Godhead,  as  subjugating  the  unjust  and  tyrannical
power  against  us  all,  and  conducting  us  back  to  our
own  most  just  possessions11  (or  judgments).

Section  II.

Now,  the  Chants  and  Readings  of  the  supremely

Divine  promises  are  explanatory  of  the  most  blessed

inheritances,  to  which  those,  who  have  attained   a

Divine  perfection,  shall  be  eternally  appointed,  and

l  Wisdom  iii.  9.  m  h**K\w*<rav.     See  Papias,  fragment  5.

n  Kpiuara  in  text.      I  suggest  Kriifxara.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  i 5 l

descriptive  of  him  who  has  religiously  fallen  asleep,
and  stimulative  of  those,  who  are  still  living,  to  the
same  perfection.

Section  III.
Observe,     however,     that     not     all     the      ranks
under   purification   are    customarily    dismissed,    but
only  the    catechumens  are   expelled  from  the  holy
places,  for  this  class  is  entirely  uninitiated  in  every
holy  Rite,  and  is  not  permitted  to  view  any  of  the
religious  celebrations,  great   or  small,   inasmuch  as
it   has   not    participated  in   the  faculty  of  contem-
plating the  holy  mysteries,  through  the   Birth  from
God,  which  is  Source  and  gift  of  light.     The  rest,
however,  of  the  ranks  under  purification,  have  already
been  under  instruction  in  sacred  tradition  ;   but,  as
they  have  foolishly  returned  to  an  evil  course  it  is
incumbent   to    complete   their   proper    elevation    in
advance,   and   they   are   reasonably  dismissed  from
the  supremely  Divine   contemplations  and  commu-
nions,   as    in    holy    symbols;      for    they    will     be
injured,    by   partaking   of  them   unholily,  and   will
come  to  a  greater  contempt  of  the  Divine  Mysteries
and  themselves.

Section  IV.
Naturally,  however,  they  are  present  at  the  things
now  done,  being  clearly  taught  by  seeing  both  the
fearlessness  of  death  amongst  us,  and  the  last  honour
of  the  saints  extolled  from  the  unfailing  Oracles,
and  that  the   sufferings   threatened   to   the   unholy


152  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

like  themselves  will  be  endless  ;  for  it  will  perhaps
be  profitable  for  them  to  have  seen  him,  who  has
religiously  finished  his  course,  reverently  proclaimed
by  the  public  proclamation  of  the  Leitourgoi,  as
being  certainly  companion  of  the  Saints  for  ever0.
And,  perchance,  even  they  will  come  to  the  like
aspiration,  and  will  be  taught  from  the  science  of
the  Liturgy,  that  the  consummation  in  Christ  is
blessed  indeed.

Section  V.

Then  the  Divine  Hierarch,  advancing,  offers  a
holy  prayer  over  the  man  fallen  asleep.  After  the
prayer,  both  the  Hierarch  himself  salutes  him,  and
next  all  who  are  present.  Now  the  prayer  beseeches
the  supremely  Divine  Goodness  to  remit  to  the  man
fallen  asleep  all  the  failings  committed  by  reason  of
human  infirmity,  and  to  transfer  him  in  light p  and
land  of  living  %  into  the  bosom  of  Abraham r,  and
Isaac,  and  Jacob  :  in  a  place  where  grief  and  sorrow
and  sighing  are  no  more.  It  is  evident,  then,  as
I  think,  that  these,  the  rewards  of  the  pious,  are
most  blessed.  For  what  can  be  equal  to  an  im-
mortality entirely  without  grief  and  luminous  with
light.  Especially  if  all  the  promises  which  pass
man's  understanding,  and  which  are  signified  to  us
by  signs  adapted  to  our  capacity,  fall  short,  in  their
description,    of    their   actual   truth.     For   we   must

o  Luke  i.  70.  P  Ps.  lvi.  13.  °.  Ps.  cxvi.  9.

r  Luke  xvi.  22.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  i53

remember  that  the  Logion  is  true,  that  "  Eye  hath
not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  entered  into
the  heart  of  man  to  conceive,  the  things  which  God
hath  prepared  for  them  that  love*  Him."  "  Bosoms  "
of  the  blessed  Patriarchs,  and  of  all  the  other  pious
men,  are,  in  my  judgment,  the  most  divine  and
blessed  inheritances,  which  await  all  godly  men,
in  that  consummation  *  which  grows  not  old,  and
is  full  of  blessedness.

Sfxtion  VI.
But  thou  mayst,  perhaps,  say  that  these  things  are
correctly  affirmed  by  us,  indeed,  but  want  to  know  for
what  reason  the   Hierarch  beseeches  the  supremely
Divine   Goodness,  for  the  remission    of  the    faults
committed  by  the  man  fallen  asleep,  and  his  most
glorious  inheritance,  amongst  godly  men  of  the  same
rank.     For,  if  every  one  shall  receive,  by  the  Divine
justice,   equivalents    for  what   he   has  done    in   the
present  life,  whether  it  be  good  or  different,  and  the
man  fallen  asleep  has  finished  his  own  activities  in
this  present  life,  from  what  prayer  offered  by  the
Hierarch  will  he  be  transferred  to  another  inherit-
ance, than   that  due  to   and    equivalent  for  his  life
here  ?    Now,  well  do  I  know,  following  the  Oracles,
that  each  one  will  have  the  inheritance  equivalent ;
for  the  Lord   says,  he   has   closed   respecting   him,
and  each  one  shall  receive  the  things  done  in  his
body  according-  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it

»  i  Cor.  ii.  9.  fc  Luke  xvi'  22'  3*


154  Donysius  the  Areopagite

be  good,  or  whether  it  be  badu."  Yea,  the  sure
traditions  of  the  Oracles  teach  us  that  the  prayers,
even  of  the  just,  avail  only  for  those  who  are  worthy
of  pious  prayers  x  during  this  present  life,  let  alone  y
(by  no  means)  after  death.  What  forsooth  did  Saul
gain  from  Samuel55?  and  what  did  the  intercession
of  the  Prophet a  profit  the  people  of  the  Hebrews  ?
For,  as  if  any  one,  when  the  sun  is  shedding  its
own  splendour  upon  unblemished  eyes,  seeks  to
enjoy  the  solar  splendour  by  obliterating  his  own
powers  of  vision ;  so  does  he  cling  to  impossible
and  extravagant  expectations,  who  beseeches  the
intercessions  of  holy  men,  and,  by  driving  away
the  holy  efforts  natural  to  the  same,  plays  truant
from  the  most  luminous  and  beneficent  command-
ments, through  heedlessness  of  the  Divine  gifts.

Nevertheless,  according  to  the  Oracles,  I  affirm
that  the  intercessions  of  the  pious b  are,  in  every
respect,  profitable  in  this  present  life,  after  the  fol-
lowing fashion.  If  any  one,  longing  for  holy  gifts,
and  having  a  religious  disposition  for  their  reception,
as  recognizing  his  own  insufficiency,  approaches
some  pious  man,  and  should  prevail  upon  him  to
'  become  his  fellow-helper,  and  fellow-suppliant,  he
will  be  benefitted  in  every  respect,  thereby,  with
a  benefit  superior  to  all ;  for  he  will  attain  the  most
Divine  gifts  he  prays  for,  since  the  supremely  Di-
vine Goodness   assists   him,    as   well   as   his   pious

■  2  Cor.  v.  10.  *  C  si.  s.  13.  4.  37-  y  rfTl  ?6


juera  Qavarov*
b  James  v.  16.


*  1  Sam.  xvi.  I.  a  Jer.  vii.  16.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  155

judgment  of  himself,  and  his  reverence  for  devout
men,  and  his  praiseworthy  craving  for  the  religious
requests  requested,  and  his  brotherly  and  Godlike
disposition.  For  this  has  been  firmly  fixed  by  the
supremely  Divine  decrees,  that  the  Divine  gifts  are
given,  in  an  order  most  befitting  God,  to  those  who
are  meet  to  receive  them,  through  those  who  are
meet  to  distribute  them.

If  any  one,  then,  should  despise  this  sacred  regu-
lation, and  betaking  himself  to  a  wretched  self-con-
ceit, should  deem  himself  sufficient  for  the  supremely
Divine  Converse,  and  look  down  upon  pious  men,
and  if  he  should  further  request  requests,  unworthy
of  God,  and  not  holy,  and  if  he  should  have  his
aspiration  for  things  divine  not  sustained,  and  cor-
relative to  himself,  he  will  fail  in  his  ignorant  request,
through  his  own  fault.  Now,  with  reference  to  the
prayer  mentioned,  which  the  Hierarch  prays  over  the
man  fallen  asleep,  we  think  it  necessary  to  mention
the  tradition  which  has  come  to  us  from  our  inspired
leaders.  The  Divine  Hierarch,  as  the  Oracles  say,
is  interpreter  of  the  supremely  Divine  awards  ;  for  he
is  messenger  c  of  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent.  He  has
learned  then,  from  the  God-transmitted  Oracles,  that
to  those  who  have  passed  their  life  piously,  the  most
bright  and  divine d  life  is  given  in  return,  according
to  their  duee,  by  the  most  just  balances,  the  Divine
Love  towards  man  overlooking,  through  its  goodness,
the  stains  which  have  come  to  them  through  human

c  Malachi  ii.  7.  d  I  John  v.  16.  e  /cot*  a^iow.


J5°  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

infirmity,  since  no  one,  as  the  Oracles  say,  is  pure
from  blemish f.  '

Section  VII.
Now,  the  Hierarch  knew  these  things  to  have  been
promised  by  the  infallible  Oracles;  and  he  asks,  that
these  thmgs  may  come  to  pass,  and  that  the  right-
teous  returns   be  given   to   those   who   have   lived
piously,   whilst   being   moulded   beneficently  to  the
Divine  imitation,  he  beseeches  gifts  for  others    as
favours   to  himself;   and,  whilst  knowing  that  the
promises  will  be  unfailing,  he  makes  known  clearly
to  those  present,  that  the  things  asked  by  him,  ac-
cording to  a  holy  law,  will  be  entirely  realized  for
those  who  have  been  perfected  in  a  Divine  life     For
the  Hierarch,  the  expounder  of  the  supremely  Divine
Justice,  would  never  seek  things,  which  were  not
most  pleasing  to   the  Almighty  God,   and  divinely
promised  to  be  given  by  Him  «.     Wherefore,  he  does
not  offer  these  prayers  over  the  unholy  fallen  asleep
not  only  because  in  this  he  would  deviate  from  his'
office  of  expounder,  and  would  presumptuously  arro-
gate, on  his  own  authority,  a  function  of  the  Hier-
archy, without  being  moved  by  the  Supreme  Legis-
lator, but  because  he  would  both  fail  to  obtain  his
abommable  prayer,  and  he,  not  unnaturally,  would
hear  from  the  just  Oracle,  "  Ye  ask,  and  receive  not
because  ye  ask   amiss".."     Therefore,   the    Divine
Hierarch  beseeches  things  divinely  promised,  and

'Jobxiv.4.  SAp.Cviii.43.  "  James  iv.  3.


071  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  157

dear  to  God,  and  which  will,  in  every  respect,  be
given,  demonstrating  both  his  own  likeness  to  the
good  loving  God,  and  declaring  explicitly  the  gifts
which  will  be  received  by  the  devout.  Thus,  the
Hierarchs  have  discriminating  powers,  as  interpreters
of  the  Divine  Awards,  not  as  though  the  All-Wise
Deity,  to  put  it  mildly,  were  slavishly  following  their
irrational  impulses,  but,  as  though  they,  as  expounders
of  God,  were  separating,  by  the  motion  of  the  Divine
Spirit,  those  who  have  already  been  judged  by  God,
according  to  due.  For  "receive,"  he  says,  "the  Holy
Spirit,  whose  l  faults  ye  may  have  remitted,  they  are
remitted  ;  whose  ye  may  have  retained,  they  are  re-
tained." And  to  him  who  was  illuminated  with  the
Divine  revelations  of  the  most  Holy  Father,  the
Oracles  say,  "  Whatsoever  thou  shalt  have  bound
upon  the  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  the  heavens ;  and
whatsoever  thou  shalt  have  loosed  on  earth,  shall  be
loosed  in  the  heavens  k,"  inasmuch  as  he,  and  every
Hierarch  like  him,  according  to  the  revelations  of
the  Father's  awards  through  him,  receives  those  dear
to  God,  and  rejects  those  without  God,  as  announc-
ing and  interpreting  the  Divine  Will.  Further,  as
the  Oracles  affirm,  he  uttered  that  sacred  and  divine
confession,  not  as  self-moved1,  nor  as  though  flesh
and  blood  had  revealed  it,  but  moved  by  God  Who
revealed  to  him  the  spiritual  meaning  of  Divine
things.  The  inspired  Hierarchs  then  must  so  exer-
cise   their   separations   and   all    their    Hierarchical

1  John  xx.  22,  23.  k  Matt.  xvi.  19.  1  Ibid.  17.


1 5^  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

powers  as  the  Godhead,  the  Supreme  Initiator,  may
move  them;  and  the  others  must  so  cling  to  the
H.erarchs  as  moved  by  God,  in  what  they  may
do  h,erarchically,  "For  he  who  despiseth  you,"  He
says,  "despiseth  Me"."

Section  VIII.
Let  us  now  proceed  to  that,  which  follows  the
prayer  mentioned.     When  the  Hierarch  has  finished
it, .he  first  salutes  the  fallen  asleep,  and  next,  all
who  are  present ;  for  dear  and  honoured  by  all  God-
hke  men  is  he  who  has  been  perfected  in  a  Divine
life.     After  the  salutation,  the  Hierarch  pours  the
oil  upon  the  man   fallen   asleep.     And  remember,
that  during  the  sacred  Birth  from  God,  before  the
most  D.vine  Baptism,  a  first  participation  of  a  holy
symbol  is  given   to   the   man  initiated-the  oil  of
Chrism-after  the    entire   removal    of   the  former
clothing;   and  now,  at  the  conclusion   of  all    the
Oil  is  poured  upon  the  man  fallen  asleep     Then
indeed  the  anointing  with  the  Oil  summoned  the
initiated  to   the   holy  contests;   and   now  the  Oil
poured  upon  him  shews  the  fallen  asleep  to  have
struggled,  and  to  have  been  made  perfect,  through-
out those  same  contests.

Section  IX.
When  the  Hierarch  has  finished  these  things,  he
places  the  body  in  an  honourable  chamber,  with

"  Luke  x.  16.


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  1 5  9

other  holy  bodies  of  the  same  rank.     For  if,  in  soul
and  body,  the  man  fallen  asleep  passed  a  life  dear
to  God,  there  will  be   honoured,  with  the  devout
soul,  the  body  also,  which  contended  with  it  through-
out the  devout  struggles.     Hence  the  Divine  justice
gives  to  it,  together  with  its   own   body,  the  retri-
butive inheritances,  as  companion  and  participator
in  the  devout,  or  the  contrary,  life.     Wherefore,  the
Divine   institution   of    sacred    rites    bequeaths    the
supremely  Divine  participations  to  them  both— to
the    soul,    indeed,    in   pure   contemplation    and    in
science  of  the  things  being  done,  and  to  the  body,
by  sanctifying  the  whole  man,  as  in  a  figure  with
the  most  Divine  Muron,  and  the  most  holy  symbols
of  the   supremely   Divine    Communion,    sanctifying
the  whole  man,  and  announcing,  by  purifications  of
the  whole  man,  that  his  resurrection  will  be  most
complete.

Section  X.
Now,  as  regards  the  consecrating  invocations,  it
is  not  permitted  to  explain  them  in  writing,  nor  may
we  bring  their  mysterious  meaning,  or  the  powers
from  God  working  in  them,  from  secrecy  to  pub-
licity; but,  as  our  sacred  tradition  holds,  by  learning
these,  through  quiet  instructions,  and  being  perfected
to  a  more  Godlike  condition  and  elevation,  through
Divine  love  and  religious  exercises,  thou  wilt  be
borne  by  the  consecrating  enlightenment  to  their
•    highest  science.


l6°  Dionysius  the  Areopagite

Section  XI.
Now   the   fact  that   even    children,  not  vet  able
to  understand  the  things  Divine,  become  recipients
of  the  holy   Birth   in   God,   and   of  the   most  holy
symbols  of  the  supremely  Divine  Communion,  seems
as  you  say,  to  the  profane,  a  fit  subject  for  reason-
able laughter,  if  the  Hierarchs  teach  things  Divine
to  those  not  able  to  hear,  and  vainly  transmit  the
sacred  traditions  to  those  who  do  not  understand
And    this  is   still  more   laughable-that   others,   on
their  behalf,  repeat  the  abjurations  and  the  sacred
compacts.     But  thy  Hierarchical  judgment  must  not
be  too   hard  upon   those  who  are  led  astray,   but
persuasively,  and   for  the  purpose   of  leading  them
to   the  light,   reply  affectionately  to  the   objections
alleged    by   them,    bringing    forward    this    fact,    in
accordance   with   sacred    rule,    that   not   all   things
Divine   are    comprehended  in  our  knowledge,   but
many   of  the  things,    unknown   by   us,   have  causes
beseeming    God,  unknown  to   us  indeed,   but   well
known  to  the  Ranks  above  us.     Many  things  also
escape  even  the  most  exalted  Beings,  and  are  known
distinctly  by   the   All-Wise  and  Wise-making  God-
head alone.    Further,  also,  concerning  this,  we  affirm
the  same  things  which  our  Godlike  initiators  con-
veyed   to    us,   after  initiations  from  the  early "  tra-
dition.    For    they   say,    what   is   also   a   fact,    that

*  &PX«las.  See  Acts  xv.  7,  21,  16 ;  and  Archbishop  Trench
let  even  Dupin  ignorantly  alleged  that  word  as  proof  Post-
Apostolic.     Nov.  Bib.  p.  100  ;  C.  ii.  41


on  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.  1 6 1

infants,  being   brought   up   according   to   a   Divine
institution,  will  attain  a  religious  disposition,  exempt
from  every  error,  and  inexperienced  in  an   unholy
life.     When  our  Divine  leaders  came  to  this   con-
clusion,  it  was    determined   to   admit  infants  upon
the    following   conditions,   viz.  :     that    the    natural
parents    of    the    child    presented,    should    transfer
the  child  to  some   one    of   the   initiated,— a   good
teacher  of   children   in    Divine    things,— and    that
the   child   should   lead  the   rest   of  his   life   under
him,    as   under   a   godfather    and   sponsor,    for   his
religious  safe-keeping.     The  Hierarch  then  requires
him,  when  he  has  promised  to  bring  up  the  child
according   to   the   religious   life,   to   pronounce   the
renunciations  and  the  religious  professions,  not,  as
they  would  jokingly  say,  by  instructing  one  instead
of  another  in  Divine  things  ;    for  he  does  not   say
this,  "  that  on  behalf  of  this  child  I  make,  myself,
the  renunciations  and  the  sacred  professions,''  but,
that   the   child   is    set   apart   and    enlisted;     i.e.    I
promise  to  persuade  the   child,  when  he  has  come
to  a  religious  mind,  through  my  godly  instructions,
to   bid    adieu   wholly   to    things    contrary,   and    to
profess  and  perform  the  Divine  professions.     There
is   here,    then,    nothing    absurd,    in    my    judgment,
provided  the  child  is  brought  up  as  beseems  a  god-
like training,  in  having  a  guide  and  religious  surety,
who  implants  in  him  a  disposition  for  Divine  things,
and  keeps  him  inexperienced  in  things  contrary.

The    Hierarch   imparts   to   the    child   the   sacred
symbols,  in   order   that   he   may  be   nourished    by

M


1 62  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  &*c.

them,  and   may  not   have   any  other  life  but  that
which  always  contemplates  Divine  things ;    and  in
religious   progress   become    partaker   of  them   and
have  a  religious  disposition  in  these  matters,  and  be
devoutly  brought  up   by   his   Godlike    surety.     So
great,  my  son,  and  so   beautiful,  are  the   uniform
visions  of  our  Hierarchy,  which  have  been  presented
to  my  view;    and  from  others,  perhaps,  more  con-
templative  minds,  these  things  have   been  viewed,
not  only  more  clearly,  but  also  more  divinely.     And
to  thee,  as  I  fancy,  more  brilliant  and  more  divine
beauties   will    shine   forth,   by  using   the   foregoing
stepping-stones  to  a  higher  ray.     Impart  then,  my
friend,  thyself  also,  to  me,  more  perfect  enlighten-
ment, and  shew  to  mine  eyes  the  more  comely  and
uniform  beauties  that  thou  mayst  have  been  able  to
see,  for  I  am  confident  that,  by  what  has  been  said,
I  shall  strike  the  sparks0  of  the  Divine  Fire  stored
up  in  thee.

&&anks  foe  t0  ©0tj#

JOHN    PARKER.
All  Saints*  Day,  1898.


0  Bacon,  Advancement  in  Learning,  p.  2.


APPENDIX.


Athens.
Hierotheus

Dionysius  the  Areopagite
Narcissus

Publius  .  118-

Quadratus,  who  presented

Apology  to  Hadrian


A.D.

52


A.D.


LIST   OF   BISHOPS.

Paris.
Dionysius  the  Areopa-
gite    .  •  70—119
Mallo
Martianus
Victor
Maurianus
Martinus


58

67

124

126


Toledo.

1.  Eugenius       .  69 — 121

2.  Melantius

3.  Pelagius

4.  Patrummus

5.  Eusebius

6.  Quintus

7.  Vincentius
Eugenius  Marcellus  was

consecrated  at  Aries
by  Dionysius  the
Areopagite  .     68 — 69

The  list  at  Toledo  is  as  com-
plete as  the  list  at  Milan.


Arles.
St.  Trophimus  .  .     c.  46

Dionysius  the  Areopa-
gite .  .  68—70
St.  Regulus
St.  Felix
Gratius
Ambrosius
Anastinus
Ingenuus
Augustinus
Hieronymus
Savitius
Martianus  a
St.  Marin          .  .       3T4


140
160


From  Saxi

Pontificium

Arelitensium.


Milan.

1.  Anotolone,  G.      .     51—64     5-  St.  Mona,  M.         192—250

2.  Cajo,  R. b    .         .     64—85     6.  St.  Materno,  M.    252—304

3.  Castrinziano,  M.      97— 137     7-  St.  Mirocle,  M.     304—  325

4.  Calivero,  G.  138— 190

136  Bishops  to  1898.     St.  Ambrose,  nth  Bishop,  374—397-

»  a.d.  254  Cyprian  wrote  to  Pope  Stephen  urging  him  to  depose
Marcion,  15th  or  18th  Bishop  from  St.  Trophimus.  See  "Monuments
inedits"  de  M.  Faillon,  t.  II.  p.  375.  and  Darras,  p.  14/  .

b  Gaius  Oppius  was  the  Centurion  of  the  Crucifixion,  and  father  ot
Agothoppius,  mentioned  by  Ignatius.


164  Appendix.

Metropolitans  of  London,  from  King  Lucius  to
Pagan  expulsion,  586,  from  list  of  Jocelyn,  12th
century,  to  be  found  in  Stow,  Ussher,  Godwin,
and  Fasti  of  Le  Neve.

1.  Theonus,  in  time  of  King  Lucius  (186 — 193  a.d,).     He

built  the  church  of  St.  Peter,  Cornhill.

2.  Elvanus,  messenger  from   Lucius  to   Eleutherus,  Bishop

of  Rome,  by  whom  he  was  consecrated.

3.  Cadwr,  or  Cadoc.     Name  occurs  at  Caerleon.

4.  Obinus.     See  Ussher,  Antiq.,  p.  67.    No  date.

5.  Conan.     No  date.

6.  Palladius.     "  Bishop  of  Britain."

7.  Stephanus.     No  date.

8.  Iltutus,  Abbot  of  the  School  of  Llandaff.

9.  Theodwin,  or  Dedwin.     No  date.

10.  Theodred.     No  date.

11.  Hilarius.

12.  Restitutus,  who  attended  Council  of  Aries,  a.d.  314.

13.  Guitelinus.     Mentioned  by  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,    Hist.

VI.  cc.  2—6.

14.  Vodinus.     Put  to  death,  453.

15.  Theonus  2nd.     Translated  from  Gloucester,  542;   fled  to

Wales,  586.     To  these  may  be  added

16.  Fastidius,  Bishop  of  Britain,  a.d.  431.

Metropolitans  of  York,  from  Godwin,  Bishop
of  Llandaff,  1601.

1.  Sampson,  appointed  by  King  Lucius.

2.  Taurinus,  Bishop  of  Evreux,  "  Ebroicensis."

3.  Eborius,  at  Aries,  A.D.  314.

4.  Sampson,  or  Saxo,  expelled  by  Saxons,  and  transferred

his  pall  to  Dol  in  Brittany ;  consecrated,  490.    Geoffrey,
Hist.  VIII.  12,  IX.  8.

5.  Piran,  appointed  by  King  Arthur,  a.d.  522,  in  place  of

Sampson,  a.d.  522.    Ibid.  IX.  8.

6.  Thadiacus  fled  to  Wales,  a.d.  586.    Geoff.  Hist.  XI.  10.


List  of  Bishops.  l65

There  was  also  Faganus,  a  messenger  to  Etatteu. .from
t      ;«o      Pprhaos   it  was  he  who   founded  the   bee   01

SS  -  " wtat  is  now  wells' which  lasted

till  721.


Isle  of  Man.
Amphibalus  was  Bishop  of  Man  before  a.d.  447,  *  which
year  St.  Patrick  consecrated  Germanus  to  Man.

Whithern.
St   Ninian,  Bishop  of  Whithern  (subsequently  in  the  Province
of  YorH  was  consecrated  by  Pope  Siricius,  A.D.  394;  rettred

to  Ireland,  420  ;  died,  432.

Province  of  Caerleon,

1.  Dyfan     )  Missionaries  of  Eleutherus.

2.  Ffagan    )

4.  EdyTeH.     Adelfius  at  Aries  in  3H-     He  is  claimed  also

by  Colchester  and  Lincoln.

5.  Cadwr.

6.  Cynan.

7.  Han.

8.  Llewyr.

9.  Cyhelyn.

10.  Guitelin.  ,   ,      -p.

11.  Tremorinus,  died  about  490,  and  was  succeeded  by  Du-

britius  of  Llandaff,  after  which  the    Primacy  seems  to

have  wavered  between  Llandaff  and  Menevia.     Geoff.

Hist.  VIII.  10.

Dubritius   consecrated    in    449   (Benedict    of  Gloster);    in

490  (Geoffrey),  Bishop  of  Llandaff,  and  became  Metropol  tan

on  the  death  of  Tremorinus,    as   stated  above,  but  hrs   seat

remained  at  Llandaff.


166  Appendix.

St.  David  ,st  Bishop  of  Menevia,  was  consecrated  at
Jerusalem,  with  two  companions c    AD    ,IQ    nnrf  /

as  Metropolitan  on  the  death  of  D^  ^^^
mained  at  St.  David's.  e"

After  him  came  Teilo,  eonsecrated  at  the  same  time  as
St.  David,  at  Jerusalem,  a.d.  5x9,  to  Llandaff.     He  succeeded

Lla„;ff  ;P°litan'S  °ffiCe  °n  St-  Da"d's  death,  etaijn'
Llandaff,  and  consecrating  Ismael  to  St.  David's  as  a  Suffrage

prfalTed  t^^ K*  ^77^'  ^

must  h  H  r"ain  <Migne'  Ser-Graca'  '<"-  "!•) /.here
must  have  been  many  Bishops  in  Britain  before  Kin! V
was  able  to  supersede  the  D,uid  by  the  ChristLn  K,ne.LuCms
Within  ten  years  after  the  arrival  JTJ^TIZZT"*?
first-fruit  of  Britain  was  sen,  to  Rome forest  ut, on  and''  '
secration  He  founded  a  Church  in  Beatenbe^,  Sw LelnT"
For  Bishops  in  France,  see  Gallia  Christiana

"£2S^^*^  «■>   -ford,
A,he0„shatd8Yoerh  7  ""t  '"  **  '°  "*  Archbish°P»  «f

.o 'lSS;K"  ™<"  — ated  to  Llandaff.  and  Patern.  cons«cn,.ed


JOHN  PARKER.


Appendix.  l6?


APOSTOLIC  TRADITIONS

GENERALLY  IN   ABEYANCE.

i.  Washing  of  feet.     St.  John  xiii.  4-U-
a.  Anointing  of  siek  with  prayer  for  healing.     St.
James  v.  i4>  IS-

3.  Anointing  with  Oil  and  Muron  in  Baptism.

4.  Anointing  with  Muron  for  Consecration.
5    Trine  immersion  in  Baptism.

6.  Intense  offered  to  God's  Holy  Name.     Malachi
ii.  11.


INDEX.


D.  =  Vol.  I. ;  H.  =  Vol.  II.


Agnosia,   D.  i,  21-9,  130-3,

141,  144
Angels,    St.  Paul's   teaching,

H.23
Anomia     (Lawlessness),      D.

156-8
Apostles   and  Successors,   D.

160
Archetypes,  D.  36-7;    H.  11,

81,91,92,112

Baptism,  H.  75,  86,  89,  158
Burial,  H.  145 — 159

Consecration,  H.  90,  106
Contemplation,     H.    51,     70,

80,  91,  in,  124,  132,   141,

149

Dedication  of  Monk,  139—41
Deification,    D.   26 — 96,    104,

117;  H.  3.  77>8o,  88,  97
Diptychs ;  H.  90 — 102

Evil.  D.  52—72.

God-Parents ;  H.  160

Hierarch,  D.  160;  H.  44,
69.  72,  79,  89,  no,  131,
136,  148,  157

Holy  Communion,  H.  87 —
109,  90,  97,  106,  108

Incense,  H.  89,  92,  no,  113

Jesus,  D.  16,  21,  22,  23,  117,
124,  142,  143,  149, 156,  162,
165  ;  H.  20,  27,  67,  70,  92,


94,  95,  104,  106,  107,  115,
120,  122,  127,  133,  134

Monad,  D.  5,  no,   123,  124;

H.  31
Muron,  H.  no — 122
Mystic,  D.  21,  31,  167

Nature,  of  God,  D.  91,  124,
134;  of  life,  D.  84,  79;
causes  of  life,  D.  7  ;  corrup-
tion of  life,  D.  64,  65

Oracles,  Mystic,  H.  7 ;  In-
telligible, H.  44  ;  given  by
God,  H.  131  ;  Canon  of
truth,  D.  15 ;  Source  of
Theology,  D.  12 ;  Essence
of  Hierarchy,  H.  72,  96,
n8

Ordination,  Bishop,  Priest,
and  Deacon,  H.  131 -7

Paradeigma,   D.  81  ;    H.  41,

91
Prayer,  D.  27,  28  ;   H.  153—

158  ;  for  ungodly,  154
Providence,     D.    9,    11,     27,

32,  34,  44,  48,  70,  73,  104,

115,    117,    120,    158;     H.

I7>39

Symbolic  Theology,  D.  167
Symbols,    D.  172;     H.  2,  3,
4,  5,  9,  11,  26,  105

Tradition,  D.  6,  16,  21,  170
Triad,  D.  17,  27,  37,  79,  125

Unction,  H.  78,  80,  158


^^  llllM  S       #*»♦



Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.


Usage guidelines


Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.


About Google Book Search


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
ai[http: //books . google. com/|


HARVAR
DIVINI


Aagesioe


I Coleg Rgical | Liby any


HARVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY

νι
From the library of the
REV. HARRISON DUBBS
Pastor of the United Church of Christ
in Gorham, Maine, 1932-1963
se
Given in his memory by his wife,
HELEN J. DUBBS


Bron ysies Yreopag/ dn, Oe uc he


THE CELESTIAL AND ECCLESIASTICAL


_~


HIERARCHY


OF


DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE


NOW FIRST TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH FROM THE
ORIGINAL GREEK,


BY THE


REV. JOHN PARKER, M.A.,


AUTHOR oF ‘CHRISTIANITY CHRONOLOGICALLY CONFIRMED,"
‘“*Wuy ΑΜ I Aa CHRISTIAN?” ETC.


4“. Τῶν γὰρ ἐκείνης προαναῤῥήσεων ἡ κατὰ ταύτην τελεσιουργία τήν ἀλήθειαν
ἐπιστώσατο, καὶ ἔστι τῆς θεολογίας ἡ θεουργία συγκεφαλαίωσις.᾽"
—Ec. Hier. c. iii. 5. 5.


London :
& SON, PICCADILLY, W.


SKEFFINGTON


1894.


Prices 2/6.


PRINCIPAL WORES ON DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE.
Edstions.
VENICE.


ANTWERP.
MIGNE (PARIS).


Translations.
SYRIAC : DARA.
JOHANNES SCOTUS.
LATIN ; JOHANNES SARRACINUS,


AMBROSIUS CAMALDULENSIS.
’ BALTHASAR CORDERIUS.
FICINNUS.
PARAPHRASE: CEL. ἃ Ecc. Higr., DEAN COLET.
FRENCH : FRERE JEAN DE SAINT-FRANCOIS.
MONSEIGNEUR DARBOY.
L’ Asse DULAC.
ENGLISH: Dean Covet, Rev. J. H. Lupron.
Cex. ἃ Ecc. HieR., Rev. J. PARKER.


Commentaries. Scholia.
HuoGo or ST. VICTOR. DIONYSIUS, BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA.
JOHN OF SALISBURY. DARA.
ROBERT OF LINCOLN. MAXIMUS.
St. THOMAS AQUINAS. PACHYMERA.


ALBERTUS MAGNUS.
DIONYSIUS CARTHUSIANUS.


General References.


GALLIA CHRISTIANA. 15 Vols. Paris, 1744.
ANTWERP EDITION, 1633. 2 Vols.
MIGNE’sS EDITION, 1856. 2 Vols.


Ἐπ τους 011.


SKETCH OF LIFE.


SZIONYSIUS was born! in Athens, a.p. 5, nine years
after the birth of Jesus Christ. He was educated first
at Athens, then at Heliopolis, in Egypt. There, at
ws =the age of twenty-five, he witnessed, with Apollophanes,
the miraculous darkness? of the sun, which occurred at the time
of the Crucifixion, A.D. 30.8 Returned to Athens, he married a
woman of noble birth named Damaris, and was elected one of
the nine Archons of Athens. Having filled the office of Archon
without reproach, he was elected member of the Areopagus, a
court of justice consisting of fifty-one citizens of Athens, dis-
tinguished for birth, wealth, intelligence, and character. In a.p.
49,4 nineteen years after the Crucifixion, and ninth of Claudius,
St. Paul was brought before the court of the Areopagus as the
setter forth of strange gods, because he was preaching Jesus and
the Resurrection. The Court of the Areopagus was the guardian
of the religion of Athens, and had condemned Socrates to death,
on the ground that, by teaching one God as supreme, he dis-
honoured the gods of Greece. The Athenians, however, were so
much ashamed of their treatment of that great philosopher, that
no person afterwards was subjected to the same fate for the same
cause. Hence St. Paul escaped. Nor was this all. Dionysius,
with other illustrious men, clave unto Paul, and embraced the
Christian Faith, The moving cause of his conversion was, that
he learned from St. Paul that the darkness which he had observed
in Egypt was coeval 5 with the Crucifixion. He was baptized 3rd
October, a.D. 49, in the forty-fourth year of his age. St. Paul
soon after left Athens, attended by Dionysius, who was his com-
panion for three years,® during which time he was prepared for
the Diaconate, and formed that intimate friendship with Timothy
which lasted until death. Dionysius was present with Hierotheus,
St. Paul, St. Peter, St. James, St. John, and other Apostles at
the funeral rites of the Blessed Virgin, who died at Jerusalem,
A.D. 54,’ twenty-four years after the Ascension, in the seventy-
second year of her age. Dionysius was, in due time, ordained
Priest. Wedo not know the date, but we gather the fact from


1 Ant. Ed. and Vol. p. 252. 3 Ὁ. 256 and 7th letter.
8 Dionysius the Areopagite, p. 19, Skeff. 4 Acts xviii. 2. 5 Letter 7 and 11.
6 p. 281. 7 Ὁ. 293.


A


2 INTRODUCTION.


his letter to Demophilus, in which he intimates that he had
admitted Demophilus to the order of the Therapeute. It was
the priest’s function alone to admit to that order. Dionysius
would seem to have been a member of a College ! of Clergy in
Athens, whose duty was to impart instruction to candidates for
baptism, to study the higher theology, and to impart? such infor-
mation as was needed by the Church at large. Dionysius of
Corinth says that he took the oversight τὴν ἐπισκοπὴν ὃ of the Parish
of Athens. He also wrote letters to individuals who sought
explanations of statements contained in his works in circulation.
He would appear to have travelled to other centres. He was
absent from Athens when Demophilus was guilty of the act of
insubordination, which called forth his instructive letter in rebuke.
The same letter alludes to his visit to Crete, where he was the
guest of Carpus, who afterwards became Bishop of the Troad,
2 Timothy iv. 13. Dionysius was ordained Bishop of Athens by
St. Paul, in succession to Hierotheus, who, most probably,
accompanied St. Paul in his first journey to Spain. St. Paul,
before his martyrdom, sent for Dionysius to Rome to take charge
of the congregations planted by himself in Gaul. Dionysius
arrived too late to see the Apostle alive, but Clement confirmed
the commission, and Dionysius, with Rusticus, Eleutherius, and
others, departed for Gaul. They arrived first at Arles, where
Regulus was appointed Bishop, in succession to Trophimus,® who
had returned to Asia in consequence .of sickness. Dionysius,
with his two companions, ultimately established themselves in
Lutetia Parisiorum, the emporium of trade between Britain and
the Mediterranean. There, as a centre of operations, he remained
till a.D. 96, when he returned to Athens for the purpose of meeting
St. John after his release from Patmos. St. John and Dionysius
met at Ephesus to “speak face to face,” and it is probable that
the last chapter was then added to St. John’s Gospel. The tenth
letter of Dionysius clearly implies that St. John’s Gospel was then
in circulation, and already read by Dionysius. The last chapter
was added to correct an impression prevalent in the Church that
St. John should not die. Dionysius remained in Asia for two
years. Before his return to Gaul St. Timothy died in the reign
of Nerva, 97-98—as Polycrates, a writer of the second century,
and Bishop of Ephesus, affirms. It is probable that Dionysius
revised and completed his works during that time. Upon his
return to Gaul, Dionysius presented a copy of the “ Divine Names ”
to Eugenius Marcellus, as to a second Timothy in pious memory
of the first.®


Through his sanctity, learning, and venerable age, Dionysius


1 Cel. Hier. 13 c. ad finem. 2 See Letters. °% Eusebius Ec. His. c. xxiii.
4 A.D. sg—sixth of Nero. 5 2 Tim. iv. 20. ὃ Vol. 2, Ant. Ed., p. 431.


INTRODUCTION. 8


acquired a commanding influence in Spain, Germany and Britain
(πᾶσι rove ‘Eoreplos μέρεσι]). The Druid Priests? made desperate
efforts to thwart him. His influence became known in Imperial
Rome. Nearly the whole of the last years of the Emperor
Trajan® were spent in the East, for the subjugation of the
Parthian and other kingdoms. In a.p. 115, he left Syria for the
Parthian expedition. In August, A.D. 117, he died at Selinus in
Cilicia, on his return to Rome. Hadrian was proclaimed Emperor
at Antioch, r1th August, 117. He at once arranged matters in
the East, and arrived at Rome, 118 a.p., where, by concessions
to the Senate and gifts to the people, he consolidated his position.
In a.D. 119 he began his tour of the provinces, by passing through
Gaul, on his way to Britain. He then sent the Prefect of Gaul to
allure Dionysius from Christianity to Paganism. In that case, he
was to bring him with honour to the Imperial presence. If he
failed, he was to cut off his head. Dionysius rejected the Imperial
honours, and chose the crown of martyrdom. With his two
companions, united in life, and in death not divided, he joyfully
sealed his testimony in his own blood, and “ migravit ad Christum,”
gth October, Α.Ὁ. 119,4 in the seventieth year of his Christian
course and in the one hundred and fourteenth of his natural life.
The hill on which he suffered is hence called Montmartre. In
order to terrorize Dionysius and his companions, Lisbius, the first-
fruits of Gaul, with his repentant wife, suffered martyrdom a few
days previously. Hence the title, ““ Premier Baron Chretien,”
borne by the noble house of Montmorency,5 as his representatives,
to this day. It is, perhaps, more than a coincidence, that
Monseigneur Darboy, Archbishop of Paris, who had written so
nobly and so bravely in defence of the writings of Dionysius, and
had translated them into French, suffered, as Archbishop, in the
same city, ‘if not on the same mount, on 24th May, 1871.


The East, naturally, commemorates the Baptism of Dionysius
on the 3rd of October. The West, as naturally, commemorates
his martyrdom on the gth of the same month.


THE WORKS OF DIONYSIUS.


If spurious works, throwing light upon the doctrines and services
of the Church in Apostolic times, had been found in an Egyptian
tomb, what a stir the discovery would have made! These works


1 p. 317. * p. 335-9.
8 Trajan and Hadrian in Smith’s Gr. and Roman Biography. 4p. 341.


5 L’Histoire de la Maison de Montmorenci par M. Desarmeaux, Vol. 1, p. 12.
Paris, 1764. Ant. Ed., and Vol., 317.


4 INTRODUCTION.


have been entombed in public libraries the last 150 years—known
and read by only a chosen few. They are not spurious, which
will detract from their interest with some. Further, they show
the New Testament as in circulation and of Divine authority in
the first century. That again will destroy their value with those
Christian advocates who seek to present the Christian Faith under
incredible conditions, and whose logical purpose is to insist at
once upon the necessity and the folly of Faith. Others may say
they are spurious. We must, however, be faithful to Truth and
to glorious “men of old time,” and affirm that they are the genuine
works of Dionysius the Areopagite—the convert and faithful
disciple of St. Paul. The writings of Dionysius are a collection of
letters, written at various intervals, between Α.Ὁ. 58 and 98. The
larger treatises are addressed to Timothy. Dionysius was chief of
a college of Preceptors! at Athens, whose occupation was the
instruction of new converts, and the study of the higher theology.
They were taught the deeper mysteries of the Christian Faith by
Hierotheus, the first local Bishop? of Athens. Hierotheus wrote
several abstract treatises, similar in style to Aristotle’s Ethics,
which were too deep and too compressed to be understood by
ordinary intellects? At the request of Timothy, and by order of
Hierotheus, Dionysius wrote the ‘“‘ Divine Names,” in order that
he might present the teaching of Hierotheus in a form more easily
understood. The letters were begun whilst Dionysius and
Timothy were both Presbyters, and the original superscription was
retained for the whole treatises. Is not this the case with nearly
all the Prophets and with some of St. Paul’s Epistles? When
Dionysius writes to St. John, or Polycarp, or Titus, he addresses
the former as Theologos—Apostle, Evangelist—the latter as
Hierarches, and Gaius as Therapeutes. The appeal to the
Episcopal judgment of Timothy, in the ninth chapter of the
celestial hierarchy, shows that Timothy had become Bishop when
that letter was written. It is worthy of remark that the super-
scription is not attached to the mystic theology—the last of the
works—although it was written to “friend Timothy.” The whole
works probably received their finishing touches between 96-98,
during the two years that Dionysius spent in Asia, when he met
St. John at Ephesus,


1 Divine Names, c. iii., s. 2.


8 The Archbishop of Athens gives me the succession at Athens thus :—
1st Hierotheus, A.D. 52; 2nd, Dionysius; 3rd, Narcissus, one of the seventy ;
th, Publius, from 118-124; sth, Quadratus, who presented Apology to Emperor

rian.

8 Divine Names, c. iii., 8. 2.


INTRODUCTION. 5


EVIDENCE OF DATE IN WRITINGS.


The works are full of personal allusions. Dionysius affirms that
he was converted to the Christian Faith by St. Paul, whose teach-
ing on the holy Angels he transmits. After St. Paul he claims
Hierotheus as his chief instructor, whose abstract treatises he
tries to make more intelligible, whilst preserving his doctrine
with the utmost fidelity. He declares himself to have been
present at the funeral rites of the Blessed Virgin, who died
in Jerusalem, a.D. 54. He mentions Peter, James, and other
Apostles as being present. He reminds Timothy that, after the
Apostles, Hierotheus excelled all others in the hymns by which
on that occasion he extolled the Divine compassion and con-
descension as manifested in the Incarnation. He writes to St.
John when exiled in Patmos; to Titus when Bishop of Crete;
to Polycarp when Bishop of Smyrna. He alludes to Gaius and
Carpus, both mentioned in the New Testament. He mentions
the philosopher Clemens—either Clemens Atrius, to whom the
younger Pliny addressed two of his letters, or Clemens, Bishop of
Rome. He writes at a time when the Psalms were yet read in
Hebrew whenever a person competent to do so was present. He
describes the Chants as sung by the whole Choir. The Antiphonal
singing was introduced by St. Ignatius at Antioch, and became
universal by the time of Constantine. He writes at a time when
the threefold Ministry and Sacrament was the accepted order of
the Church, and before the sevenfold view became dominant at
the end of the second century. He speaks of persecutions and
martyrdoms, and of Apostolic Sees, as already occupied by suc-
cessors of the Apostles. Apollophanes wrote a /effer1 abusing
Dionysius as a “turncoat,” who used the Greek learning against
the Greek Philosophy. Dionysius replies that Polycarp should
remind Apollophanes that he had witnessed with himself the
miraculous darkness in Egypt, which he had discovered to be
coeval with the Crucifixion. The works are Attic in phraseology,
and teem with technical terms of Athenian law. They abound
in newly coined words, expressing with marvellous precision in
the language of Plato and Aristotle the newly revealed Christian
truths. To appropriate the perfect description of Bishop Westcott,
‘they? present the thoughts of one who lived in an age of
transition, and strove to save from the wreck of ancient philosophy
truths which he seemed to find coherent with the Christian Faith.”
Whilst gladly acknowledging the truth in Greek philosophy, he


1 The origin of that letter was no doubt the conversion of Statonice, the wife
of Apollophanes, on account of which St. Paul was cast into chains at Philippi.
The bearers of the letter from the Church at Corinth, complaining of the false
teachers, found St. Paul in chains at Philippi. Correspondence of St. Paul,
Carriére et S. Berger, page 20. Fischbacher, Paris.


3 Religious Thought in the West, p. 189.


β INTRODUCTION.


corrects its errors by teaching that ‘‘ the universe was created, not
by any subordinate or rival power, but by an act of love of the
One Infinite God, and that evil therefore is not inherent in matter,
but due to the will of responsible creatures. He maintains that
God is imminent in the world, and separate, though not alien
from it. That the world was originally and essentially good.”
Further, the “ Ecclesiastical! Hierarchy” was written when the
Bishop was Celebrant, and completed every other Sacrament by
the administration of the Holy Communion; but when the cele-
bration was beginning to be committed to the Priest—when the
Bishop officiated at funerals, and decided, by his own authority,
whether the departed had lived and died in such a manner as to
justify the use and to be benefitted by the rites of Christian burial
—when the Bishop alone consecrated the holy oil—when the
names of those who had previously been buried were recited at a
funeral,? which soon ceased to be practicable—Dionysius wrote at
atime when the term Episcopus® was not yet applied to the
Bishop. He uses the word Hierarches, head of the hierarchy,
for Bishop, Hiereus for Priest, Leitourgos for Deacon. Dionysius
regards the laborious search after truth, by means of intellectual
study, as only an inferior method, and much lower in degree than
that by which, detaching ourselves from everything earthly, we
lie passive in the presence of God, and, without mental effort,
receive the divine communication of light as our spiritual condition
will permit in ever increasing degree as we advance more and
more towards oneness with God. Prayer is better with him than
reading, and repose under the circumambient glory of God is
better than all. Everything false or evil places a barrier to the
passage of the Divine Light, which will not enter until the “strong
man armed” is cast out, and the allegiance to God becomes
entire. Such is the teaching of Dionysius, who writes throughout
with the freedom and fearlessness of conscious truth.


EXTERNAL EVIDENCE.


First Century.—St. Luke records the conversion at Athens
of certain illustrious men, and singles out one of them by name—
Dionysius the Areopagite. He thus marks Dionysius as _pre-
eminently distinguished. Hierotheus was probably one of those
illustrious men. He was an Areopagite, like Dionysius. As
Dionysius was sent to Gaul, so Hierotheus was sent to Spain. He
settled permanently in Segovia, a.p. 69.4 If then, Hierotheus


1 Ecc. Hier., c. v., 8. 5, 6. vi., Mysterion. 2 Ecc. Hier., c. vii., Mysterion.
8 Episcopns applies to external government—Hierarches to spiritual administration.
4 Halloix Life of Hierotheus.


INTRODUCTION. 7


were one of the “illustrious” men from whom Dionysius is
distinguished by name, there must have been some reason for
such distinction. The treatise on the “ Divine Names” was
written about a.D. 58. The ninth chapter of the ‘Celestial
Hierarchy ” was written when Timothy was already a Bishop. The
Acts of the Apostles terminates with St. Paul’s imprisonment at
Rome, A.D. 65. Those treatises, therefore must have been known
to St. Paul and to St. Luke, before a.p. 65. From the letters
preserved, asking the meaning of certain phrases in the writings
of Dionysius, we know that his works were extensively circulated.
I submit, then, that the reason which led St. Luke to distinguish
Dionysius the Areopagite by name, was not merely his noble
birth, deep learning, and exalted position, but also the value of
the works being written by him—worthy, like those of Hierotheus,
to be considered as only second, after the Apostles, because they
contained Apostolic teaching. Literary criticism may fairly infer
a presumptive proof that Dionysius at least wrote some celebrated
works. Plato was described by Numenius, a Pythagorean phil-
osopher, as “ Moses speaking Attic Greek.” If we find Dionysius
writing Christian truths in Attic Greek, it is only what we might
reasonably expect.


Second Century. — Ignatius? in his letter to the Trallians,
enumerates some of the deep mysteries of the Christian Faith,
respecting the holy angels, the extent of the ages, the pre-eminence
of the Cherubin and Seraphin, the exaltation of the Spirit, the
Kingdom of the Lord, and the incomparable nature of the all-
powerful God. He not only quotes the very words found in
Dionysius, but shows a thorough acquaintance with his works. In
the ‘Celestial Hierarchy,” and in the ‘Divine Names,” the
mysteries spoken of by Ignatius are exhaustively described and
explained. What Ignatius merely alludes to, Dionysius writes a
treatise upon in the sixth chapter of the Celestial Hierarchy and
twelfth of Divine Names. We must therefore conclude that
Ignatius quotes from Dionysius, whose works were therefore in
circulation in the early part of the second century.


Third Century.—Anastasius of Antioch® and Maximus‘ the
martyr, both affirm that Dionysius, the famous Bishop of
Alexandria, wrote scholia upon the works of Dionysius the
Areopagite. Maximus, in his commentary on the fifth chapter of
the ‘Celestial Hierarchy,” when speaking upon the word οὐσίας,
as applied in that chapter to the holy Angels, says, ‘‘The great
Dionysius, the Bishop of Alexandria, who had been a rhetorician,
in the scholia which he made upon the blessed Dionysius, his


1 Dionysius was descended from that Ionian Prince who first planted the vine—
in Zante—and taught the use of wine. Hence the name Dionysius.—DOouBLET.


2 Read Ant. Ed., 2 Vol., 390-6 and p. 450. δ ἢ. 452. $1 Vol., p. 70.


8 INTRODUCTION.


namesake, thus speaks. ‘ The external philosophy was accustomed
to call all invisible nature, uncreated, and the personalities, beings—
dyevynroy πᾶσαν ἀόρητον φύσιν, ὁμοίως καὶ οὐσίας τὰς twoordvas—and
hence says that expressions of this kind are used by the holy
Dionysius inappropriately xaraypnorixés, after the manner of the
external philosophers”—the Greeks. Maximus is writing a
commentary upon Dionysius the Areopagite. He alludes to a
word in the text. He says that Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria,
in commenting upon the use of that word in the text, affirms that
the divine Dionysius uses that word in the sense of the Greek
philosophers, and not quite exactly. Maximus further proves that
the Dionysius of Alexandria was the Bishop of the third century,
by describing him as having been a rhetorician—the character-
istic! of the Bishop of Alexandria, who was a pupil of Origen.


Fourth Century.—The first Council of Nicea® directs that in
the reception of a lapsed person, the prayer of Dionysius the
Areopagite should be used. That prayer is alluded to in the last
chapter of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. The Fathers of Nicea,
therefore, regarded Dionysius the Areopagite as an ecclesiastical
authority, and, as so well known, that it was not regarded as
necessary to give the prayer in full. In the same century Dara, a
learned Syrian theologian, wrote a commentary upon the writings
of Dionysius the Areopagite. The Syrian was one of the most
learned portions of the Church. Volumes of most rare theological
learning in Syriac Jie entombed in our libraries.


Fifth Century.—Photius,® Patriarch of Constantinople, describes
a book, written by Theodore (400), in which he answers the
difficulties raised by some against the genuineness of the works of
Dionysius. Photius regarded the objections as inconclusive. In
speaking of the synodical epistle of St. Sophronius, he says,
‘There were found collected the testimony of Ancient Fathers,
Leo ... and Dionysius, disciple of St. Paul, martyr of Christ,
and Bishop of Athens, great in expression, but greater still in
thought.”


Sixth Century.—In the sixth century Gregory‘ the Great not
only quotes Dionysius in a manner which shows the most intimate
acquaintance with his works, but speaks of him thus: “ Dionysius
the Areopagite, the ancient and venerable father.” Gregory’s
writings so breathe the spirit of Dionysius, that some, in their
desire to attribute the works to any author but their own, have
foolishly suggested that Gregory the Great might have written
them, and through humility have attributed them to Dionysius
the Areopagite. Gregory would at least have enjoyed the joke.


1 Smith’s Greek and Roman Biography.
2 Ant. Ed. 2 Vol., p. 461. δ». 305. 4p. 462.


INTRODUCTION. 9


Seventh Century.—The second Council of Nicea! quotes the
very words of Dionysius, as those of ὁ μέγας Διονύσιος, and says
‘‘ that the divinely transmitted oracles are the very essence of our
hierarchy, #.¢., in the true science and knowledge of things divine.”
οὐσία yap τῆς καθ᾽ ἡμας lépapxias ἐστὶ τὰ θεοπαράδοτα Ady.”
Ec. Hier. c. 1., 8. 4.

Eighth Century.—The one man, whose opinion upon the works
of Dionysius is entitled to the greatest consideration and confi-
dence, is St. John Damascene.?, The most learned of the Greek
ecclesiastical writers, he has left, amongst other numerous works,
an Exposition of the Orthodox Faith, gathered from the writers
of previous centuries, in whom none was more versed. He regards
Dionysius as first and best of all. He quotes frequently his very
words, and considers his authority as only second to that of the
Apostles. St. Thomas Aquinas made known to the west the
treasures of theological Jearning contained in St. John Damascene,
and speaks of the works with the same confidence as those of
Dionysius the Areupagite, the convert and faithful disciple of
St. Paul. It must suffice to say that Maximus and Pachymera
wrote Scholia, which remain to this day as a testimony of their
belief in the genuineness and value of Dionysius. Five Greek
Fathers wrote lives and martyrdoms of the Areopagite. Time
and space would fail to tell of St. Ephrem and Constantine the
Philosopher, John of Salisbury and Robert of Lincoln, Peter
Lombard and Alexandre de Hales, Guillame de Paris and Vincent
de Beauvais, St. Anselm and Albert le Grand, Bernard de Clair-
vaux and Scotus Erigena, Bonaventura and Gerson, Denis le
Chartreux and Thomas a Kempis, Dean Colet and Fabure
d’Etaples, Milton and Dante, Bessarion and Budzus, Darboy and
Pusey, Dom Pitra and Dulac—all of whom have either written
commentaries upon, or translated, or reproduced the doctrine of
this Apostolic man.


But has there been no discordant note to mar the celestial
harmony of this illustrious testimony? Oh dear, yes! The
middle ® Age proclaimed its wisdom by its repudiation of Origen.
This modern time displays its advance in learning by its ignorance
of Dionysius. Here are some of the elevating names which have
been rescued from oblivion by their crude objections to the
genuineness of the writings of Dionysius :—Grocinus, Scultetus,
Scaliger, Baumgarten, Morinus, Daillé. These are the dis-
tinguished names under cover of which modern scholars repose
with so much confidence, that they complacently regard, as
ignorant of the early centuries one whose temerity permits him
to affirm in the nineteenth century, that the writings of Dionysius
are genuine.


1p. 461. 2p. 457. 8 Bishop Westcott’s Religious Thought in the West, p. 223.
B


10 INTRODUCTION.


Grocinus! thought the works were not genuine, but with the
instinct of a scholar carefully avoided giving any reason in proof
by which the value of his groceries might be tested.

Scultetus? thought that because certain rites and ceremonies in
the administration of the Sacraments are described in order that
their spiritual] meaning may be explained, the works must have
been written later than the Areopagite. Scultetus, in spite of his
refined knowledge of the Gospel, overlooked the fact that during
forty days our Saviour instructed the Apostles in the things con-
cerning the Kingdom of God; that St. Paul set in order the
Divine Service in the Churches visited by him, and that he quotes
from an existing Liturgy in one of his Epistles.* Dionysius
occupies about six pages in describing the rites and ceremonies
of the Holy Communion, Baptism, and Chrism. Scultetus thought
such rites and ceremonies implied an undue exaltation of Sacra-
ments instituted by Christ Himself. St. Paul said to his converts,
‘* By one Spirit were ye all baptized into one body;” ‘‘ As oft as
ye eat this bread and drink of this cup, ye proclaim the Lord’s
death until He do come.” Baptism and the Lord’s Supper would
doubtless not have held a position so exalted in the Gospel
according to St. Scultetus. |

Scaliger.—Scaliger was a very exalted Episcopalian—when it
served his purpose. Unlike some Episcopalians, he deemed the
dignity of the Episcopate its most essential feature, and a
theological virtue to be the most jealously guarded. Scaliger,
therefore, could not believe that Dionysius the Areopagite, an
older man, and his chief instructor, would address Timothy under
the endearing name of wais—‘‘my son.” St. Paul, it is true, tells
Timothy to “let no man despise his youth,” and to hold his own.
St. Paul sends Timothy, but entreats Titus. But to suppose that
Dionysius, who armed Timothy against the Greek philosophers of
Ephesus, should address a brother presbyter and a future Bishop
as ‘‘ My son,” shewed a familiarity and affection unbecoming the
dignity of the Episcopal order. Daillé could be very hard upon
the Acephaloi, and Scaliger could be very Episcopalian, when it
served their purpose against the truth.


Baumgarten.—The pupils of the Baumgarten Academy were
taught that Dionysius was a Pagan, who ennobled the Christian
religion by introducing the secret doctrines of the Eleusinian
mysteries. Dionysius speaks of himself‘ as being brought, by
his conversion to the Christian religion, from darkness to light.
In the logic of the Baumgarten Academy, the conclusion would
appear to have been not necessarily contained in the premise.


1 Ant. Ed. 2 Vol., p. 405. 5 Ant. Ed., 2 Vol, p. 405. ὃ x Cor. xi. 26.
4 Ecce. Hier., c. iii, part 1.


INTRODUCTION. 11


Morinus.—Morinus! first proves the works written in Asia.
Then by ridiculous assumptions he pretends to prove that they
were written in Gaul. Then, as initiating the new criticism and
as proof of critical acumen he triumphantly asks why, then, were
they not written in Latin and not in Greek. He indicates his
youthful education by not knowing that all early Christian litera-
ture was in Greek, that Arles was the centre of Greek trade before
it became a Roman colony, and that the Druids? used Greek as
their hierographic language.

Daillé.—“ O, that mine enemy would write a book,” was the
despairing aspiration of Job, in the midst of his affliction.
Dionysius, however, in spite of his martyrdom, was more fortunate
in this respect. Daillé® obtained for himself the characteristic of
those “who rush in, where angels fear to tread.” He has the
proud distinction of being the only man in Christendom who
wrote a book‘ to prove that the writings of Dionysius and Ignatius
were unknown to early Christendom, and therefore spurious. He
produces sixty-six so-called arguments (unhappily not 666), “id
que ultimum,” as he says, to show that the Ignatian Epistles were
unknown to any early Father or Historian of the Church. Given
the assumption that every evidence to the contrary is either a
forgery or a fraud, and it is easily done. Bishop Lightfoot, how-
ever, after a more mature examination, demonstrated the futility
of his method, with regard to the Ignatian Epistles, by proving
them to be the genuine writings of the Bishop and Martyr, in spite
of the sixty-six® statements to the contrary, whose very number,
like an army in confusion, becomes a source of weakness. His
method with regard to Dionysius is the same, or even worse, than
his treatment of Ignatius. He modestly only produces 42 against
Dionysius. Here is an example. To establish the assumed
position that the writings of Dionysius were unknown before
A.D. 532, he must deny the assertion of the learned Anastatius,
and the martyr Maximus, that Dionysius, the famous Bishop® of
Alexandria, wrote scholia upon them, about a.p. 250. Maximus,
for the purpose of affirming with greater accuracy that the
Dionysius who wrote the scholia was the famous Bishop of
Alexandria, describes him as having been a rhetorician. That
description corresponds exactly with the account given of him in
Smith’s Greek and Roman Biography.


St. Augustine had been pretty much the same, as also Justin
Martyr and Ambrose of Milan. Daillé was a bitter Presbyterian,
but he affects so much consideration for the dignity of the


1 Gallia Christiana, Tom. 7, p. 12. 2 Ant. Ed., 2 Vol., p. 337-8.
8 Daillé tried to discredit the letter of Polycarp which Jerome refused to translate
lest he should destroy its beauty.
4 Geneva, 1666. 5 De Scriptis Ὁ. et Ign., lib. 2, c. 3. δ Caput 8, lib. 1.


4


12 INTRODUCTION.


Episcopal office, that he cannot bring himself to believe that one
holding the exalted position of Bishop of Alexandria could have
been described as a rhetorician. Maximus merely says he had
been a rhetorician before his consecration. Daillé, having denied
that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria wrote the scholia, was bound
to find some rhetorician of the name of Dionysius to whom the
scholia on the Areopagite might be attributed. But such a man,,.
he confesses, cannot be found, except as he said in the imagination
of Maximus and Pachymera—he should have said except in the
imagination of Daillé. Having fabricated himself this imaginary
thetorician, he imputes fraud to Maximus the Martyr, and to the
learned Pachymera by affirming that they attributed the scholia
of this unknown man to the exalted Bishop of Alexandria, in
order that they might magnify their Dionysius the Areopagite.
That was a famous saying of Tennyson, “ We always impute
ourselves.” Another specimen of the 42—‘‘id que ultimum ”—
statements of Daillé against Dionysius must suffice. ‘‘ Ex duobus
disce omnes.” A Conference! was held at Constantinople in
A.D. 532, between Asiatic and African Divines, to appease the
controversies then disturbing the Church on the hypostatic union,
or one personality of Christ. The Athanasian Creed describes
that personality as ‘‘ one altogether,” “not two.” It is a union
in person, and not an alliance of two personalities. The Council
of Chalcedon declares that out of two whole and perfect natures
there is one Christ. It was a deep mystery. Each side witnessed
toa phase of truth, and each side was liable to lean towards error—
Nestorianism or Monophytism. The African Divines naturally
quoted the phrase from Dionysius θεανδρικὴν ἐνέργειαν as proving
the one Christ. Hypatius, who perhaps leaned to that Nestorian
party which had corrupted? the text of Chalcedon, being unable
to resist the force of the expression, suggested that the works
might have been corrupted. They even waxed sv bold as to
affirm that the works were unknown to Cyril, and were therefore
probably spurious. They were informed that Cyril, in his book
against Theodorus, had spoken highly of the works. They wished
to see the book. They were informed that it was in the library
at Alexandria, but that the African Divines had not thought it
necessary to bring with them a book so well known. There were
at most five persons of the Hypatian party which Daillé calls “ the
Catholic party.” From these premises Daillé draws the triumphant
conclusion that the works of Dionysius were repudiated by the
whole Catholic body.

Fortunately for truth, but unfortunately for Daillé, a Greek and
Latin Council was held at the Lateran, a.D. 660, to defeat the


1 Daillé, lib. i., c. 8. 2 De Fide et Symbolo, p. 27, Heurtley.
8 Ant. Ed., 2 Vol., p. 462. .


INTRODUCTION. 18


attempt of Cyrus to change καινην into μίαν in the letter of Diony-
sius to Gaius. The works were produced from the Vatician
Library, and the original text examined, and the true reading
pronounced to be καινην. There was not a word said against the
genuineness of the works, which were assumed as beyond question
the writings of Dionysius the Areopagite. So trustworthy is Daillé
in saying that the writings attributed to Dionysius were repudiated
by the whole Catholic body.


Laurentius Valla! says that many learned men in his day
thought the works might have been written by Apollinaris the
heretic. It would be impossible to find a more precise refutation
of the heresy of Apollinaris than in the writings of Dionysius.
Erasmus repudiated the opinion of Valla, and said that he did
not believe that the works were written by Apollinaris or any
other heretic. Erasmus said that some learned men thought the
works were written by another Dionysius, but when challenged to
produce the names of such learned men, he could only instance
Valla and Grocinus. He was also careful not to say who the
other Dionysius was. Erasmus apologized for the evident fraud
if the works were not written by Dionysius the Areopagite by
saying that ‘‘ pious people were accustomed to commit forgery for
the glory of God.” It was a lamentable characteristic of that as
of this age, that such idiotic blasphemy could be uttered without
blighting the most illustrious reputation. Dupin? and Tillemont 8
would seem to have followed without serious examination such
reasoning as I have indicated. Such is the blind following of
error in this century, that all reasonable men are said to regard
the writings of Dionysius as spurious. I cannot deny the fact,
but I appeal to all rational men to decide whether that fact reflects
credit upon the good sense and learning of the modern West.


For myself, grateful to Almighty God for the clear vision of the
truth conveyed to my mind by these priceless works, I thankfully
present them to the English people in my native tongue. They
present the Christian Faith and the Christian Service as they
existed in the first century, and before the Church was torn by
schism, and its faith soiled by controversy. They show how an
ideal Christianity may be realized in fact. They present the truth
which men blindly grope after, under the name of evolution,
kenosis, theosophy, and ritualism. They shew the true Atone-
ment as that by which we become at one in ourselves, by becoming
one with God. They show the canonical Scriptures in circulation
in the first century, and therefore as written by those whose name
they bear. As with the Bible, so with Dionysius, the best evidence
of genuineness is in the works themselves, devoutly read and


1p. 405. ® Nouvelle Bibliotheque des Auteurs Ec., p. cxi., Note. Paris, 1688.
8 Tom. 2, p. 236.


14 INTRODUCTION.


ES ........


intelligently understood. No ecclesiastical writer knows his own
mind so well, or expresses that mind so clearly, as Dionysius. No
man states an objection so unflinchingly, or accepts the whole
Bible so thoroughly as he. No man is so ready to admit that
there are some things to be honoured by silence, as being beyond
the mind of man to conceive. No man realized, or expressed so
clearly, the mutual coherence of the Old and New Testament as he.
1 ἡ μὲν ἔφη τὰς ἐσομένας Incdv θεουργίας, 7 δὲ ἐτέλεσε Contains a
volume of theology. No man shews such unfailing charity towards
those who oppose themselves to the truth, or to himself. No one
so clearly presents the Church of Christ, the City of God, as a
reflection of the divine order in God. Everything is a Trinity
with him. Order is God’s first law. Goodness is the cause and
origin of all things, and the mainstay of their continued existence.
Evil is the failure to attain some fancied good—a falling from our
first estate. Without some good? in itself, nothing could continue
to exist.


THANKS BE TO GoD.


1 Ecc. Hier., c. iii., 5. δ. 3 Republic, lib. 1, ad finem.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


CAPUT I.


To my FELLOW PRESBYTER TIMOTHY.
DIONYSIUS THE PRESBYTER.


That every divine illumination, whilst going forth lovingly to the
objects of its forethought under various forms, remains simplex.
Nor is this all. It also unifies the things tlluminated.


ata VIERY good gift! and every perfect gift is from above,
we δηΐ cometh down from the Father of Lights.”
Further also, every procession of illuminating
light proceeding from the Father, whilst visiting us
as a a gift of goodness. restores us again as an unifying power to a
higher spiritual condition, and turns us to the oneness of our
conducting Father, and to a deifying simplicity. For? all things
are from Him, and to Him, as said the Sacred Word. Invoking
then Jesus, the Paternal Light, the Real, the True, “ which hght-
eth 8 every man that cometh into the world,” “through * Whom
we have access to the Father,” Source of Light, let us aspire, as
far as is permissible, to the illuminations handed down by our
fathers in the most sacred oracles, and let us gaze as we may upon
the Hierarchies of the heavenly minds manifested in them sym-
bolically for our instruction. And when we have received, with
an unearthly and unflinching mental vision, the gift of Light,
primal and superprimal, from the supremely divine Father, which
manifests to us the blessed Hierarchies of the Angels in types and
symbols, let us then, from this gift of Light, be restored again to
its unique splendour.’ For this sever loses its own inherent
unity, but multiplied and going forth, as becomes its goodness, to
educate and unite the objects of its care, it remains firmly and
solitarily centred within itself in its unmoved sameness; and
elevates, according to their capacity, those who aspire to itself,
and makes them one after the example of its own unifying One-
ness For it is not possible that the Divine Ray should otherwise
illuminate us, except so far as it is enveloped, for the purpose of
sacred instruction, in variegated veils, and arranged naturally and
appropriately, for such as we are, by paternal forethought.


------.


1 James i. 17. 5 Rom. xi. 36. 8 John i. 9. 4 Rom. v. 2.
5 Plato Rep. 6, 7-11, 121-126. Read Allegory of Cave.


16 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


Wherefore, the sacred institution which fixed the Holy Rites
transmitted to us our most Holy Hierarchy, having deemed it
worthy of a celestial imitation of the Heavenly Hierarchies, and
depicted the aforesaid immaterial Hierarchies in material figures
and bodily forms. in order that we might be borne, as far as our
capacity permits, from the sacred pictures to the mystical meaning
and likenesses without symbol and without type. For it is not
possible for our mind to be raised to that immaterial representa-
tion and contemplation of the Heavenly Hierarchies, without
using the material guidance suitable to itself, by counting the
visible! beauties as reflections of the invisible comeliness; and
the sweet? odours of the senses as emblems of the spiritual
bounties ; and the material ® light, as a likeness of the gift of the
immaterial enlightenment ; and the explicit sacred instructions,4—
of the feast of contemplation within the mind ; and the ranks® of
the orders here—of the harmonious and regulated habit, with
regard to Divine things; and the reception of the most Divine
Eucharist—of the partaking ® of Jesus, and whatever other things
may be transmitted to heavenly Beings supernaturally, but to us
symbolically.

For the sake, then, of this our deification, according to our
capacity, the first institution of sacred mysteries, out of its love for
man, whilst manifesting the Heavenly Hierarchies to us, and
constituting our Hierarchy as fellow-ministers with them. through
an imitation of their Godlike priestliness,’ so far as in us lies,
described under sensible figures the celestial minds, in the
inspired descriptions of the oracles, in order that he might lead
us through the sensible to the spiritual, and from sacred symbols
to the simple sublimities of the Heavenly Hierarchies.


ΕΣ


CAPUT ITI.


That Divine and Heavenly things are appropriately represented,
even through atssimilar symbols.


It is necessary then, as I think, first to set forth what is the
scope of every Hierarchy, and what benefit each confers upon its
followers. Next. to celebrate the Heavenly Hierarchies according
to their description in the oracles. Then, following these oracles,
to say in what sacred forms the divine descriptions of the oracles
depict the celestial orders, and to what kind of naked truth we
must be carried through the representations ; in order that we


1 Ps, xix. 2 Num. xv. 3. 8 Luke ii. 9. 4 John vii. 14.
δ Rom. xiii. 1, 2. 6 x Cor. x. 16. Τ Pet. ii. 9.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 17


may not, like the vulgar, irreverently think that the heavenly and
Godlike minds are a kind of four-footed! and many-faced? crea-
tures, or moulded to the brutish form of oxen, or the savage form
of lions,* and fashioned like the hooked beaks of eagles,® or the
feathery down of birds,® and should imagine that there are a
certain kind of wheels’ of fire above the heaven, or material
thrones ® upon which the Godhead may recline, or certain many-
coloured? horses, and leaders of the host bearing spears,?° and
whatever else the oracles declare to us under multifarious symbols
for our instruction.


And indeed, the Word of God, artlessly, makes use of many
poetic representations of sacred things, out of regard to our in-
telligence, so to speak, consulting a mode of education proper
and natural to it, and moulding its instructive descriptions with
reference to it.


But if anyone think well to accept the sacred compositions on
the ground that things uncompounded are unknown in their own
nature, and cannot be seen, but thinks the imagery of the holy
minds in the oracles is incongruous, and all this is, so to speak, a
rude scenic representation of angelic names; and if he further
says that the theologians when they have come to the bodily
representation of creatures altogether without body, ought to
represent and display them by appropriate and as far as possible
cognate forms taken from the most honoured and immaterial, at
any rate. and exalted beings, and ought not to clothe the heavenly
and Godlike simple essences with the many forms of the lowest
creatures to be found on the earth (for this, too, would perhaps
be more adapted to our instruction, and would not degrade the
celestial explanations to incongruous dissimilitudes), but this other
both does violence to the Divine powers without authority, and
likewise leads astray our minds through dwelling upon these
irreverent descriptions. And perhaps he will also think that the
heavenly places are filled with certain herds of lions, and troops
of horses, and bellowing songs of praise, and flocks of birds. and
other living creatures, and material and less honourable things,
and whatever else the similitudes of the oracles in every respect
dissimilar, describe, for a so-called explanation, but which verge
towards the absurd, and pernicious, and impassioned. Now, in
my opinion, the investigation of the truth demonstrates the most
sacred wisdom of the oracles, in the descriptions of the heavenly
minds, taking forethought, as that wisdom does, wholly for each,
sO as neither, as one may say, to do violence to the Divine
powers, nor at the same time to enthrall us in the grovelling


1 Ezek. i. 7. 3 Ezek. i. 6. 8 Ezek. i. ΣΟ. 4 Ibid. δ Ibid.
6 Ezek. i. 6-8. 7 Dan. vii. 9. 8 Ibid. 9 Zech. i. 8.
10 Joshua v. 13, 14; 2 Macc. iii. 25.
Cc


18 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


passions of the debased imagery. For anyone might say that the
cause why forms are naturally attributed to the formless. and
shapes to the shapeless, is not alone our capacity, which is unable
immediately to elevate itself to the intellectual contemplations,
and needs appropriate and cognate instructions which present
Images suitable to us of the formless and supernatural objects of
contemplation ; but further, that it is most agreeable to the
revealing oracles to conceal, through unutterable and sacred
enigmas. and to keep the holy and secret truth respecting the
celestial minds inaccessible to the multitude. For it is not every
one that is holy, nor, as the oracles affirm, does knowledge belong
to all.! But if anyone blame the descriptions as being incongruous,
and says it is shameful to attribute shapes so repugnant to the
Godlike and most holy Orders, it is enough to reply that the
method of the Divine manifestation is twofold—one, indeed, as is
natural, representing through likenesses that are similar, and of a
sacred character, but the other, through anomalous shapes,
fashioning them into entire unlikeness and incongruity. No
doubt, the mystical teaching of the revealing oracles sometimes
describes the august blessedness of the super-substantial Deity as
word? and mind® and Being,‘ manifesting its God-becoming
reason and wisdom, and as really being existence. and true cause
of the existence of all things. They also describe it as light.®
While such sacred descriptions are more reverent, and seem in a
certain way to be superior to the material images, they yet, even
thus, in reality fall short of the divinely supreme similitude. For
it is above all being and life. No light, indeed, expresses its
character, but every description and mind incomparably falls short
of its similitude.


But at other times its praises are divinely sung by the oracles
themselves, through dissimilar descriptions, when they affirm that
it is invisible® and infinite? and incomprehensible’ ; and when
there is made known, not what it is, but what it is not. For this,
as I think, is more appropriate to it, since, as the secret and
Hierarchical tradition used to teach, we rightly describe .its non-
relationship to things created, but we do not know its super-
substantial, and inconceivable, and unuttérable indefinability. If,
then, the negations respecting things Divine are true, but the
affirmations are inappropriate, the explanation as regards things
invisible, through dissimilar descriptions, is more appropriate to
the hidden mystery of things unutterable. Thus the sacred
descriptions of the oracles honour, and do not expose to shame,
the celestial Orders, when they make them known by dissimilar
pictorial forms, and demonstrate through these their supernatural


21 Cor. viii. 7, ‘Johni.x. 8.5. cxxxvi.5. ‘4 Ex. iii rg. & Johni. 4.
6x Tim. vi. 16. T Ps, cxlv. 13. 8 Rom. xi. 33; Jer. li. rs.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 19


superiority to all material things. But I do not suppose that any
sensible man will gainsay that the dissimilar representations elevate
our mind rather than the similar, for there is a likelihood, with
regard to the more sublime representations of heavenly things.
that we should be led astray so as to think that the celestial
Beings are a certain sort of creatures with the appearance of gold,
and a sort of men with the appearance of light,! and glittering
like lightning,? handsome ® clothed in bright shining raiment,
shedding forth innocuous flame, and so with regard to all the
other shapes and appropriate forms with which the Word of God
has depicted the celestial minds.


In order that men might not suffer from this by thinking they
are nothing more exalted than their beautiful appearance, the
elevating wisdom of the pious theologians reverently conducts to
the misrepresenting dissimilarities. not permitting our earthly part
to rest fixed in the base images, but urging the upward tendency
of the soul, and goading it by the unseemliness of the symbols.
For it is neither lawful, nor has it the appearance of truth. even
to the most earthy conceptions, that the most heavenly and Divine
objects of our contemplation are actually like things so base.
Above all, this must particularly be borne in mind, that not even
one of the things existing is altogether deprived of participation
in the beautiful, since, as is evident and the truth of the oracles
affirms, all things are very beautiful. It is, then, possible to
frame in one’s mind, good contemplations from everything, and
to depict from things material the aforesaid dissimilar similitudes,
both for the intelligible and the intelligent ; since the intelligent
hold in another fashion, things which are attributed to creatures
of sense otherwise. For instance, anger in the irrational creatures
takes its rise in the passions, and their movement which takes the
form of anger is full of all kinds of unreasonableness. But with
regard to the intelligent, we must think of the angry impulse in
another fashion,.as denoting, according to my judgment, their
masculine reasonableness, and the determined persistence in their
Godlike and unchangeable steadfastness. In like manner we say,
with regard to the irrational creatures, that lust is a sort of un-
circumspect and earthy passionate attachment, arising incontinently
from an innate movement, or intimacy in things subject to change,
and the supremacy of the bodily impulse, which drives the whole
organism towards the object of sensual desire. But when we
attribute lust to spiritual beings, by clothing them with dissimilar
similitudes, we must think that this is a craving for the immaterial
above expression and thought, and the inflexible and determined
longing for the supernally pure and passionless contemplation, and
for the perpetual and spiritual fellowship in that pure and most


1 Acts i. ro. 3 Matt. xxviii. 3. ὃ Acts vi. 15. 4 Gen. i. 31.


20 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


exalted glory, and the abiding and beautifying comeliness. And
the incontinence we may take for the persistent and inflexible
craving which nothing can repulse, on account of the pure and
changeless love for the Divine beauty, and the whole tendency
towards the really desirable. With regard to the irrational living
beings, or soulless matter, we appropriately call their irrationality
and want of sensibility a deprivation of reason and sensibility.
With regard to the immaterial and spiritual beings, we rightly
acknowledge their superiority, as celestial beings, over our
transitive and bodily speech ; and the earthly perception, which
is alien to the incorporeal minds. It is, then, permissible to
depict forms which are not appropriate to the celestial Beings,
even from portions of matter which are the least honourable, since
even matter itself had its beginning from the Essential Beauty.
And throughout the whole range of matter there are some echoes
of the spiritual comeliness. And it 15 also possible through these
to be led to the immaterial archetypes—the similitudes being
taken, as has been said, in a different manner, and the same
similitudes being defined, not in the same way, but harmoniously,
and appropriately, as respects the peculiar natures of the spiritual
and sensible beings. Under such descriptions as these, we shall
find the mystic theologians depicting in their sacred sketches, not
only the celestial Orders, but sometimes also the Godhead itself.


At one time, indeed, they celebrate the Godhead under exalted
imagery, as Sun! of Righteousness, as Morning? Star rising
divinely in the mind, and as Light ® shedding spiritual splendour
so that it cannot be hid. At other times through ordinary
phenomena, as Fire,* shedding its innocuous light; as Water,®
furnishing a fulness of life, and, to speak symbolically, flowing
into a body, and bubbling forth rivers which flow with an irresis-
tible force. At other times from things of the lowest type, as
sweet-smelling Myrrh,® as Head Corner-stone.’ But they also
clothe it in forms of wild beasts, and attach to it the properties
of a Lion,’ and Panther,® and say that it shall be a Leopard,!°
and a rushing Bear." But, I will also add, that which seems to
be more dishonourable than all, and the most to misrepresent.
Distinguished theologians have shewn it to us as representing
itself under the form of a worm.!2 Thus do all the godly wise,
who are interpreters of the secret inspiration, separate the most
holy of all things from the uninitiated and the unholy, to keep
them undefiled, and prefer the dissimilar descriptions so that
Divine things should not be easily reached by the profane, and
that those who diligently contemplate the Divine imagery should


1 Mal. iv.2. %Num. xxiv. 17; 2Pet.i.19. *%Johni.5. 4 Ex. iii. 2.
5 John vii. 38. 86 Cant. i.2. ἴ Eph. ii. 20. 8 Hosea xiii. 8 9 Hosea xiii. 7.
10 Hosea xiii. 8. 11 Hosea xiii. 8. 13 Ps, xxii. 6.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 21


not rest in the types as though they were true. And so Divine
things are honoured by negations which teach the truth, and by
comparisons with-the lowest things which are diverse from their
proper representation. For the reasons assigned, there is nothing
absurd if they depict even the celestial Beings under dissimilar
similitudes which misrepresent them. For perhaps not even we
should have come to an investigation, through an accurate inquiry
into Divine things (from its difficulty, no doubt, but also for
instruction), unless the deformity of the descriptions representing
the Angels had shocked us, not permitting us to linger in the
discordant representations, but rousing us utterly to reject the
earthly proclivities, and accustoming us to elevate ourselves
through things that are seen to their celestial meanings. Let
these things suffice to have been said respecting the material and
incongruous descriptions of the holy Angels in the Holy Scriptures.
But next, it is necessary to define what we think the Hierarchy is
in itself, and what benefit those who possess a Hierarchy derive
from the same. But let Christ lead the discourse, if it be per-
mitted to me to say—He Who is mine, the Inspiration of all
Hierarchical teaching. But thou, my son, after the pious rule
of our Hierarchical tradition, do thou religiously listen to things
religiously uttered, becoming inspired through instruction in
inspired things; and when thou hast enfolded the Divine things
in the secret recesses of thy mind, guard them closely from the
profane multitude as being uniform, for it is not permitted, as the
oracles say, to cast to swine the unsullied and bright and beauti-
fying comeliness of the spiritual pearls.


CAPUT 11.
What is Hierarchy? and what the use of Hierarchy?


Hierarchy is, in my judgment, a sacred order and science and
energy—assimilated, as far as permissible, to the likeness of God,
and conducted to the illuminations granted to itself from God,
in due order, with a view to the Divine imitation. Now the
Divine attractiveness, as being uncompounded, as good, as source
of initiation, is altogether free from any dissimilarity. But it
imparts its own proper light to each according to their fitness,
and perfects in most Divine initiation in proportion to the unvary-
ing likeness of those who are being initiated into harmony with
itself. The scope, then, of Hierarchy is the assimilation and one-
ness with God, holding Him as the Leader of all religious science
and energy, looking unflinchingly to His most Divine comeliness,
and moulding itself as far as possible, and perfecting its own


22 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


followers as Divine images, as mirrors luminous and without flaw,
receptive of the primal light and the Divine ray, and devoutly
filled with the radiance committed to itself, but, on the other
hand, spreading this radiance ungrudgingly to those after it, in
accordance with the Divinely-fixed regulations. For it is not
permitted to the initiators in Divine things. nor to those who are
being religiously initiated, to practise anything whatever beyond
the sacred regulations of their own function. Nor even must
they attempt otherwise, if they desire to attain its deifying splen-
dour, and if they regard it in a religious light, and mould themselves
after the example of each of the holy minds. He. then, who
mentions Hierarchy describes a certain, altogether Holy Order,
an image of the Divine Beauty, which performs the mysteries of
its own illumination in due order and with religious science. derived
from the Hierarch and which is assimilated to its own proper
author as far as permissible.


For each of those who have been called into the Hierarchy
find their perfection in being carried to the Divine initiation! in
their own proper degree ; and, what is more Divine than all, as
the oracles say, in becoming a fellow-worker* with God, and in
shewing the Divine energy dwelling in itself, manifested as far as
possible to others. For it is an Hierarchical regulation that some
are purified and that others purify®; that some are enlightened
and others enlighten‘; that some are perfected and others perfect.
So that each one will accomplish the Divine imitation in his own
several manner. The Divine Blessedness, then, to speak after
the manner of men, is unstained by any dissimilarity,5 but is
filled with invisible light *—perfect,’ and needing no perfection ;
cleansing, illuminating and perfecting. Yea, rather it is a holy
purification and illumination and perfection—above purification,
above light, pre-eminently perfect, self-perfection, and cause of
every Hierarchy, but elevated pre-eminently above every holy
thing. It is necessary then—as I think that those who are being
purified should be entirely perfected, so as to be without stain—
that those who are being illuminated should be filled with the
Divine Light, conducted to the habit and faculty of contemplation
in all purity of mind ; that those who are being initiated should
be separated from the profane, and become recipients of that
science which makes perfect the holy men who are initiated into
the highest mysteries.


Further, that those who purify should impart from their own
abundance of purity their own proper holiness ; that those who
illuminate, as being luminous intelligences, whose function it is
to receive and to impart light, and who are joyfully filled with


1 Eph. v. r. 91x Cor. iii. 9. 8 Ps, li. 9. 4 Ps. cxix. 18.
5 Deut. vi. 4. 6 John xii. 46. 7 Matt. v. 48.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 23


holy gladness, that these should impart, in proportion to their
own overflowing light, to those who are worthy of enlightenment.
But that those who make perfect, as being skilled in the imparta-
tion of perfection, should perfect those who are being initiated,
through the holy instruction, in the science of holy men who have
been initiated in the higher mysteries. Thus each rank of the
Hierarchical Order is led in its own degree to the Divine co-
operation by performing, through grace and God-given power,
those mysteries which are essentially and super-essentially in the
Godhead, and are accomplished by It supernaturally, and are
manifested to us through our Hierarchy for its imitation of the
God-loving minds! to the highest permissible extent.


CAPUT IV.
What ἐς meant by the appellation “ Angel” ?


Now that the nature of the Hierarchy has been, in my judg-
ment, sufficiently defined, we must next celebrate the angelic
Hierarchy, and we must contemplate with celestial vision its
sacred descriptions contained in the oracles, in order that we
may be borne aloft through the mystic representations to their
most Godlike simplicity, and may celebrate the Author of all
Hierarchical science, with God-becoming reverence and with
thanksgivings to the origin of mysteries. First of all. however,
let this truth be spoken—that it was through goodness that the
superessential Godhead, having fixed the essence of created things,
brought them into being. For this is the peculiar characteristic
of the cause of all things, and of goodness surpassing all, to call
created things to participation in itself, as each order of existences
was determined from its own analogy. For all created beings that
exist share in a Providence, bubbling forth from the super-
substantial Godhead, Creator of all things. For they would not
be, unless they had participated in the essence and origin of things
created. All things then, without life, participate in it, by their
existence. For the Being of all things is the Godhead, which is
above all Being. Things with life participate in the life-giving
power which is itself above all life. Things rational and in-
tellectual participate in the self-perfect and pre-eminently perfect
wisdom which is above all reason and mind. It is evident, then,
that all those Beings dwell around Him, who have participated in
Him, in many forms. The holy ranks, then, of the heavenly
Beings, share in the participation of the Divine gifts in a higher


1 The Holy Angels.


24 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


degree than things which merely exist, or which lead an irrational
life, or which are rational like ourselves. For by moulding them-
selves intellectually to the Divine imitation, and looking from the
earthly to the Divine likeness, and striving to mould their own
spiritual likeness after its example, they naturally have more un-
grudging communications with it, being near and ever moving
upwards, as far as permissible; they elevate themselves with the
intensity of the Divine unswerving love, and receive the primal
illuminations without earthly stain and by moulding themselves
to these, their whole life becomes spiritual. These, then, are they
who, at first hand, and under many forms, participate in the Divine,
and, at first hand, and under many forms, make known the hidden
mysteries of the Godhead. Wherefore, beyond all, they are
deemed pre-eminently worthy of the angelic appellation on the
ground that the Divine illumination comes to them at first hand,
and through them there pass to us manifestations above our
capacities.

Thus, then, the Law, as the Word of God affirms, was given to
us through the ministration of Angels!; and Angels led our
illustrious fathers 3 before the Law, and after the Law to the Deity.
Either by leading® them to what was to be done, and separating
them from error and an unholy life to the straight way of truth,‘
or by making known to them sacred ordinances,5 or hidden visions
of celestial mysteries,® or certain Divine predictions through the
Prophets.’ But if anyone should say that Divine manifestations
were made directly and immediately to some holy men, let him
learn, and that distinctly, from the most holy oracles, that no one
hath seen. nor ever shall see, the hidden nature of God as it is in
itself.° But Divine manifestations were made to those holy men
as befits revelations of God, that is to say, through certain holy
visions adapted to those who saw them. Now the Word of God,
in the fulness of its wisdom, for the instruction of those who are
contemplating the Divine, naturally names ‘‘ Divine manifesta-
tion,” that special vision which manifests that Divine image,
depicted in itself, as clothing in form things without form. As
though a Divine illumination were made through this to the
spectators, and the godly persons themselves receive some
religious initiation. But our illustrious fathers were instructed in
these Divine visions, through the mediation of the heavenly
powers. Does not the teaching given to us in the oracles describe
the holy legislation of the Law, given to Moses, as coming straight
from God, in order that it may teach us this truth, that it is a
type of a Divine and holy economy. But the Word of God, in its


2 Gal. iii. 18. % Acts vii. 53. 8 Gen. xxii. 12. ‘Actsx.3. 5 Dan. vii. τό.
6 Dan. vii. ro. 1 2 Cor. xii. 2. 8 Matt. ii. 13.
9 John i. 18; τ John iv. τῶ; x Tim. vi. τό.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 25


wisdom, teaches this also—that it came to us by the mediation of
Angels. As though the Divine regulation were laying down this
rule, that through the first, the second are brought to God. For
not only with regard to the superior and inferior minds, but even
amongst those who are of the same rank, this Law has been
established by the supreme Law-giver—that within each Hierarchy
there are first and middle, and last ranks and powers. And that
the more Divine are the instructors and conductors of the inferior,
to the Divine access, and illumination, and participation. But I
observe that Angels first revealed the Divine mystery of the love
of Jesus towards man, since through them the gift of knowledge
passed to us. Thus. for example, the most Divine Gabriel
instructed Zachariah,! the High Priest, that the son who was to
be born by Divine grace, from him, beyond hope, should be a
prophet, of the 2 God-incarnate work of our Jesus to be mani-
fested to the world for its salvation, as becomes the Divine
goodness. But he revealed to Mary,® how, in her, should take
place the Divinely-originated mystery of the unutterable God-
formation. Yet another Angel instructed Joseph? how in very
truth were fulfilled the things Divinely promised to his ancestor
David. Another announced to the shepherds, as being purified
by their separation from the multitude and their quiet life, and
with him a multitude of the heavenly host, announced to those on
earth that often sung doxology. Let us then ascend to the highest
manifestations of light contained in the oracles, for I perceive that
even Jesus® Himself, the supersubstantial cause of the highest
heavenly Beings, after He had come to our condition without
change in Himself, did not overstep the good order which becomes
mankind, which Himself arranged and took, but readily subjected
Himself to the dispositions of the Father and God, through
Angels, and through their mediatiun was announced to Joseph
the departure of the Son to’ Egypt, which had been arranged by
the Father, and again the return to Judza® from Egypt. We see
Him further, subjecting Himself to the Father’s decrees. But I
forbear to speak, as addressing one who knows the teaching of our
hierarchical tradition concerning the Angel® who strengthened
Jesus Himself; or that even Jesus Himself, when He had come
to manifest the good work of our salvation. was called Angel 10 of
Great Counsel. For, as He Himself says, after the manner of an
Angel, ‘‘ Whatsoever He heard from the Father, He declared
to us.” 11


1 Luke i. 11-20. 2 ανδρικῆς τοῦ Inodu Oeovpyias. 8 Luke i. 26-38.
4 Matt. i. 20-23. 5 Luke ii. 8-14. 6 Phil. ii. 6-8. 7 Matt. ii. 13. 58 Matt. ii. 19, 20.
9 Luke xxii. 43. 10 Isa. ix. 6. 11 John xv, 15.


D


26 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


CAPUT V.


For what reason all the heavenly Beings are called by the
common names of Angels.


This, then, in our judgment, is the reason for the angelic
appellation given in the oracles. We must now enquire for what
reason the theologians call all! the heavenly Beings together
*‘ Angels ;” but when they come to a more accurate description
of the celestial orders, they name exclusively as angelic order that
which completes the full tale of the Divine and heavenly hosts.
Before this, however, they range as superior the Orders of Arch-
angels and the Principalities, Authorities, and Powers, and all the
Orders that the revealing tradition of the oracles recognize as
their superior.2 Now, we affirm that throughout every sacred
order the superior ranks possess the illuminations and powers of
the subordinates, but the lowest orders have not the same powers
as those who are above them. The theologians, then, call the
most holy ranks of the highest Beings “ Angels,” for even they
make known Divine illumination. But there is no reason to call
the lowest order of the celestial minds Principalities, or Thrones,
or Seraphin. For this order does not possess the highest powers,
but, as it were, by its own proper function conducts our inspired
Hierarchs to the splendour of the Godhead known to itself. Thus,
then, the saintly powers of the Beings above this act as conductors
towards the Divine of that order which completes the angelic
Hierarchies. Perhaps some may say this also, that all the angelic
appellations are common in so far as all the celestial powers pos-
sess, in a less or a greater degree, a fellowship in the likeness of
God and in the gift of light from God. But, in order that the
question may be thoroughly investigated. let us reverently examine
the saintly characteristics assigned to each celestial order in the
oracles.


CAPUT VI.


Which is the first Order of the celestial Beings? which the
middle? and which the last?


How many, and of what sort are the Orders of the supercelestial
Beings, and how the Hierarchies are initiated amongst themselves,
I affirm the Divine Author of their initiation alone distinctly knows.
Further, that they know their own proper powers and illuminations,


1 Ps, ciii. 20; Matt. xxv. 31. 2 Isa. vi. 2.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 27


and their sacred and supermundane regularity. For it is impos-
sible that we should know the mysteries of the supercelestial
minds and their most holy perfections unless, someone might say,
so far as the Godhead has revealed to us through them who know
perfectly their own condition. We, then, will utter nothing as
from ourselves, but whatever angelic visions have been gazed upon
by the holy Prophets of God, we, as interpreting these, will set
forth as best we can The Word of God has designated the
whole nine celestial Beings by appellations which shew their
functions These our Divine Initiator divides into three three-
fold orders. He also says that the first is that order which
tradition declares to be always around God, and united closely
and immediately to Him before all the rest. For he says that
the teaching of the holy oracles declares that the Most Holy
Thrones and the many-eyed! and many-winged? ranks named
in the Hebrew tongue Cherubin® and Seraphin‘ are established
immediately around God, with a nearness superior to all. This
threefold order, then, our illustrious Guide affirmed to be one,
and of equal rank, and really first, than which there is not
another more God-like or immediately nearer to the earliest
illuminations of the Godhead. But he says that the second is
that which is composed of the Authorities, and Lordships, and
Powers ; and the third, as being the lowest of the celestial
Hierarchies, is the Order of the Angels and Archangels and
Principalities.


CAPUT VII.


Concerning the Seraphin and Cherubin and Thrones, and
concerning their Hierarchy, which ts first.


We, whilst admitting this as the arrangement of the Hierarchies,
affirm that every appellation of the celestial minds denotes the
Godlike characteristic of each ; and those who know Hebrew affirm
that the holy designation of the Seraphin denotes that they are
fiery or burning; but that of Cherubin, a fulness of knowledge
and stream of wisdom. Naturally, then, the first of the heavenly
Hierarchies is ministered® by the most exalted Beings, holding,
as it does, a rank which is higher than all, by the fact that it is
established immediately around God, and that the first-wrought
Divine manifestations and perfections pass earlier to it, as being
nearest. They are called, then, Burning and Thrones. and Stream
of Wisdom—by a name which explains their Godlike dispositions.
The appellation of Seraphin plainly teaches their ever moving


1Evek.i.18  ‘°%Ezeki.6.  ‘%Ezek.x. ὁ Isaiah vi. ἃ.
Ὁ lepoupyécras.


28 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


around things Divine, and constancy, and warmth, and keenness,
and the seething of that persistent, indomitable, and inflexible
perpetual motion, and that vigorous transformation of the subor-
dinate, by precept and example, as giving new life and rekindling
them to the same heat; and purifying through fire and burnt
offering, and the light-like and light-shedding characteristic which
can never be concealed or consumed, and remains always the
same, which destroys and dispels every kind of obscure darkness.
But the appellation of the Cherubin denotes their knowledge
and their vision of God, and their readiness to receive the highest
gift of light, and their power of contemplating the Divine comeli-
ness in its first revealed power, and their being filled with the
impartation which maketh wise, and their ungrudging communica-
tion to those next to them by pouring forth the wisdom given to
themselves. The appellation of the most exalted and pre-eminent
Thrones denotes their manifest exaltation above every grovelling
inferiority, and their celestial tendency towards higher things ;
and their unswerving separation from all remoteness; and their
invariable and firmly-fixed settlement around the veritable Highest,
with the whole force of their powers ; and their capacity for
receiving the approaches of the Godhead, through the absence
of all passion and earthly tendency, and their bearing God; and
the ardent expansion of themselves for the Divine receptions.
This, then, 1s the explanation of their names, so far as we can
give it; but we ought to say what we think their Hierarchy is.
For I suppose we have sufficiently shown above that the purpose
of every Hierarchy is an unswerving devotion to the imitation of
the Divine Likeness, and that every Hierarchical function is set
apart for the sacred reception and distribution of an undefiled
purification, and Divine Light and perfecting science.


But now I pray that I may speak worthily of the most exalted
minds—how their Hierarchy is exhibited through the oracles.


One must consider, then, that the Hierarchy belongs properly,
and is in every respect like, to the first Beings, who are established
after the Godhead, who gave them Being, and who are marshalled,
as it were, in its very vestibule, who surpass every unseen and
seen created power. Now, so far as they are pure, we must
regard them, not as though they have been freed from unholy
stains and blemishes, nor as though they were unreceptive of
earthly fancies, but as far exalted above all stain of inferiority and
every transient holiness in accordance with the highest degree of
purity—established above the most Godlike powers, and clinging
unflinchingly to their own self-moved and same-moved order in
their invariable love of God, conscious in no respect whatever of
any declivity to a worse condition, but having the invariable
fixity of their own godlike identity—never liable to fall, and
always unmoved.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 29


Again, so far as they are contemplative, we must not regard
them as contemplating sensible signs intellectually, nor as being
led to the Divine by the varied texture of holy representations
written for our meditation, but as being filled with all kinds of
unearthly knowledge of higher light, and satiated, as permissible,
with the beautifying and princely beauty superessential and thrice
manifested. Thus, deemed worthy of Communion with Jesus,
they do not stamp the deifying similitude in the bodily forms of
divinely-pictured images, but as being in very truth near to Him
in first enjoyment of the knowledge of His deifying illuminations.
Further, because the imitation of God is given to them in the
highest possible degree, they participate, so far as possible. in His
God-wrought and philanthropic virtues, in the power of a first
manifestation. But, so far as they are perfected, we must not
think of them as being illuminated with a sacred subtlety according
to analytic science, but as being filled with a first and pre-eminent
deification, as following from the most exalted science of the
Divine operations which Angels can possibly possess. For, not
through other holy Beings, but from the very Godhead, are
they directed in spiritual things, by their elevation to Itself
immediately, by their power, and order, and rank surpassing all.
They are both planted near the All-Holy without any shadow of
turning, and are conducted for contemplation to the unearthly,
immaterial, and spiritual comeliness as far as possible, and to the
reasons which make known the Divine operations, and as being
first around God they are instructed from the source of mystery
itself, and supremely directed in Divine mysteries. This, then,
the theologians distinctly shew that the subordinate Orders of the
heavenly Beings are taught by the superior, in due order, the
deifying sciences, and that those who are higher than all are
illuminated from the Godhead itself, as far as permissible, in
revelations of the Divine mysteries. For they introduce some of
them as being religiously instructed by those of a higher rank,
that He, Who was raised to Heaven! as befits man, is the
Lord of the heavenly Powers and King of Glory. Others,
as putting the question to Jesus Himself, and as desiring to
learn exactly the nature of His Divine work on our behalf, and
Jesus, as instructing them directly, and shewing to them at first
hand the work of His goodness out of love to man. “For I,
He says, am pondering over righteousness and judgment of
Salvation.” Now I am astonished that even the first of the
Beings in Heaven, and so far above all others, should reverently
strive after the Divine illuminations, as though they were inter-
mediate Beings. For they do not ask directly, “ Wherefore are
Thy garments red?”® but they first raise the difficulty among


1 Psalm xxiv. 7-10, 3 Isaiah Ixiii. x. 8 Isaiah I xiii. 2.


30 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


---«“---.... -.--........«.ὕὕἍ...»....ὕ....»ὕ»ἡὅ «ἡ - «οὕ... .--


themselves, thus shewing that they desire to learn, and crave the
deifying knowledge, but not impeding the Divine illumination
given to them after a Divine procedure. |

The first Hierarchy, then, of the heavenly minds is purified, and
enlightened, and perfected by being religiously directed by the
Author of initiation Himself, by its elevation to Himself immedi-
ately, and by being filled, according to its degree. with the most
holy purification of the unapproachable Light of the most perfect
source of initiation, and being unstained by any inferiority and
full of primal Light, and perfected by its participation in first-given
knowledge and science. But to sum up, I may say this, not
inappropriately, that the reception of Divine Science is both
purification, and enlightenment, and perfecting—purifying, as it
were, from ignorance, by the knowledge of the more perfect
revelations imparted to it according to its fitness, but enlightening
by the self-same Divine knowledge. through which it also purifies
that order which did not before contemplate the things which are
now made manifest through the higher illumination ; and perfect-
ing further, by the self-same Light the abiding science of the
mysteries made clearly manifest. This, then, according to my
most accurate knowledge, is the first rank of the heavenly Beings
which encircle and stand immediately around God, and without
symbol, and without interruption, dances around His eternal
knowledge in the most exalted and ever-moving stability ; viewing
with pure eyes many and blessed contemplations, but illuminated
with unique and immediate splendours; filled with a Divine
nourishment—numerous indeed in its first-given profusion, but
one in the unvariegated and unifying oneness of the Divine Food.
It is thus deemed worthy of much participation and co-operation
with God, by the assimilation to Him, as far as possible, in
excellent habits and energies. They thus know many Divine
things pre-eminently, and participate in Divine science and know-
ledge to the utmost. Wherefore the Word of God has transmitted
their hymns to those on earth, in which are Divinely shewn the
excellency of its most exalted illumination. For some of them,
to speak after the manner of men, proclaim as the “voice of many
waters,” “‘ Blessed is the glory of the Lord, from His place.”! But
others cry aloud that frequent and most august word of God,
‘Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of Sabaoth,” ‘The whole earth is full
of His glory.”2 These most excellent hymnologies of the super-
celestial minds, we have already unfolded to the best of our ability
in the Treatise concerning the Divine hymns. and have spoken
sufficiently concerning them in that Treatise. from which, by way
of remembrance, it is enough to produce so much as is necessary
to our present purpose, namely, “That the first Order, having


1 Ezek. iii. 12. 3 Isaiah vi. 3.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 31


been instructed in theological science from the Divine Goodness
itself, as a Hierarchy reflecting that Goodness, transmitted it to
the Order next after itself.” To speak briefly, it teaches this—
‘That the august Godhead—itself both above praise. and all
praiseworthy—is rightly eulogised by the minds who receive God,
so far as He is permitted to be known and sung For they,
according to the oracles,! as images of God, are the Divine places
of the Divine repose.2 Yea further, they affirm that He is alone,
and One of three-fold subsistence,* sending forth His most kindly
forethought to all created things, from the supercelestial minds to
the lowest of the earth; as Prince above principality and cause of
all creation, and grasping all things supernaturally in His resist-
less embrace.


CAPUT VIII.


‘Concerning Lordships and Powers and Authorities, and
concerning their middle Hierarchy.


Let us now pass to the middle order of the heavenly minds,
gazing as far as we may, with celestial vision, upon those Lordships
and the truly terrible visions of the Divine Authorities and Powers.
For each appellation of the minds above us denotes those charac-
teristics by which they Divinely imitate the Divine Likeness. I
think, then, that the explanatory name of the Holy Lordships
denotes a certain unslavish tendency to higher things, free from
all grovelling subserviency, which does not submit in any way
whatever to one single imperious force dissimilar to itself, as
befits the freedom of unbending Lordship ; superior to every kind
of cringing slavery, indomitable to every lower tendency, and
elevated above every dissimilarity, ever secking the true Lordship,
and source of Lordship ; and moulding as an image of goodness,
itself and those after it, to His Lordly Likeness, turning itself
wholly to none of the things that vainly seem, but to the Lordly
Being, and ever sharing in the Lordly Likeness of God. The
appellation of the Holy Powers denotes the possession to the
highest possible extent of a certain masculine and unflinching
manliness towards all those Godlike energies within themselves—
not feebly weak, for the reception of any of the [ivine illumina-
tions vouchsafed to it—vigorously conducting itself to the Divine
imitation ; not forsaking the Godlike movement through its own
cowardice, but unflinchingly looking to the superessential and
powerful making Power ; and becoming an image of this, as far
as is permissible, in the likeness of His power, and powerfully


1 [saiah Ixvi. 1. ® Acts vii. 49. 8 Heb. i. 3.


32 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


turning itself to this as Source of Power, but issuing forth to
those next in degree, in its gift of Power and in its likeness to
God. But the appellation of the Holy Authorities denotes their
being of the same rank as the Divine Lordships and Powers,
their beautiful and unconfused good order with regard to the
Divine receptions, and the marshalling of the celestial and spiritual
Authority, not using their authoritative powers imperiously for
base purposes, but conducting themselves in the highest possible
degree towards Divine things in due order, and conducting those
after them benignly ; and being assimilated, as far as permissible
to the Authority giving Source of Authority, and making this
visible, as is possible to Angels, in the well-ordered regulations
of the Authority giving power. ‘lhe middle order of the heavenly
minds, having these Godlike characteristics, is purified and
illuminated in the manner described, through the Divine illumina-
tions vouchsafed to it at second hand, which pass through the
first Hierarchical Order, and through this middle as a secondary
manifestation. Without dwelling upon that message, which is
said to pass through one angel to another, let us take it as a
symbol of a message delivered from afar, and obscured in its
passage so as to become a secondary revelation. For, as men
skilled in our initiation say, the knowledge of Divine things,
manifested directly to ourselves, is more perfect than the Divine
contemplations imparted through others. Thus, I think, with
regard to the angelic ranks, the immediate participation in know-
ledge of those elevated to the nearest proximity to God, is more
clear than that of those who are initiated through the instrumen-
tality of others. Wherefore, by our sacerdotal tradition, the first
minds are named, perfecting. illuminating, and purifying Powers,
of the subordinate on the ground that these are conducted through
them to the superessential Origin of all things ; and are placed
in possession, as far as is permissible to them, of the consecrating
purifications, and illuminations, and perfections. For this is
absolutely fixed by the Divinely-established law of consecration,
that through the first, the second should partake of the Divine
illuminations. This you will find declared by the theologians in
many ways. For when the Divine and Paternal Love towards
man had chastened in a remarkable manner, His people Israel,
with a view to their spiritual salvation, and had delivered them
to terrible and savage nations for correction, by every kind of
providential training to better things, He both liberated them
from their misery, and led them back, through His compassion,
to their former state of comfort. Then, one of the theologians,
Zechariah, saw in a vision one of the first Angels, as I think,
around God (for the name of Angels is common, as I said, to
them all), who learned from God Himself the comforting words,
as we say, concerning this matter. But he saw another Angel, of


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 33


inferior rank, advancing to meet the first Angel, for the purpose
of receiving and explaining an illumination. Then, from him,
instructed as from a Hierarch, and charged to reveal to the
theologian, that Jerusalem should be abundantly occupied by a
multitude of people.! But another theologian, Ezekiel, says that
this was righteously ordained by the glorious Godhead itself,
exalted above the Cherubin.2 For the Paternal Love towards
man, whilst conducting Israel through an education to better
things, by a righteousness worthy of God, decided to separate the
guilty from the guiltless. This is revealed to one first after the
Cherubin 8—He who was bound about the loins with a sap-
phire,* and wore displayed the hierarchical robe coming down to
the feet as a symbol of Hierarchical Office. But the other
Angels, who bore the battle-axe,5 the Divine Government compels
to be instructed from the former, as to the Divine judgment in
this matter. For, to one, He said that he should go through
the midst of Jerusalem, and place the sign upon the forehead of
the just men. But to the others, ‘Go into the city after him
and strike, and spare not your eyes, but to every one upon whom
is the sign draw not near.”


What would any one say concerning the Angel who said to
Daniel,® ** The word has gone forth ?” or concerning him of the
first Order, who took the fire from the midst of the Cherubin ; or
what is more remarkable than this, foreshowing the good order
that reigns amongst the Angels, the Cherubin casts the fire into
the hands? of him wearing the sacred stole; or concerning him
who called the most Divine Gabriel, and said to him, “ Make
this man understand the vision,” ® or whatever else is recorded by
the holy theologians concerning the Godlike Order of the celestial
Hierarchies, to which the good order of our Hierarchy, after being
assimilated to the greatest possible extent, will bear the likeness
of the angelic comeliness, as it were, in reflection, taking its whole
form from this, and conducted to the superessential source of
order in every Hierarchy.


CAPUT IX.


Concerning the Principalities, Archangels and Angels, and con-
cerning their Hierarchy which is last.


There remains for our religious contemplation an Order which
completes the Angelic Hierarchies, which is composed of the
Godlike Principalities, Archangels, and Angels. I think it neces-


1 Zechariah i. 8-17. 2 Ezek. ix. 3. % Ezek. ix.3. ‘ Ezek. χ, :. ὅ Ezek. ix. 2,
4 Dan. ix. 23. 1% Ezek. x, 2-7. 5 Dan. viii, 16.
E


34 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


sary, first to declare the meaning of their sacred appellations. For
the appellation of the heavenly Principalities denotes their ruling
and guiding after the Divine example with religious order most
befitting the Princely Powers, and their being wholly turned to
the Principality above Principality, and their directing others in a
princely fashion, and their being moulded to the distinguished
Principality itself, the Maker of Princedom, and that they make
manifest their superessential Source of order by the regularity of
their princely powers.


The Order of the Holy Archangels is of the same rank with the
heavenly. Principalities. For there is one Hierarchy and rank, as
I said, of themselves and the Angels. But since there is not a
Hierarchy which does not possess first and middle and last powers,
the holy order of Archangels occupies the middle position in the
Hierarchy between the extremes. For it belongs alike to the
most holy Principalities and to the holy Angels. To the Principali-
ties because it 1s turned in a princely fashion to the superessential
Prince, and is moulded to It as far as possible, and unites the
Angels after the fashion of its own well-regulated and marshalled
and invisible Leadership. But it belongs to the Angels because
it is of the prophetic Order, receiving in a sacerdotal fashion the
Divine illumination from the first powers, and conveys the same
to the Angels after the example of God, and through Angels
manifests them to us in proportion to the sacred aptitude of each
one of the godly persons illuminated. For the Angels, as we have
already previously said, complete the whole series of celestial
minds as being the last Order of the heavenly Beings, who possess
the Angelic characteristic. Yea, rather, they are more properly
named Angels by us than those of higher degree. Especially
because their Order is occupied in making known, and is more
particularly concerned with the things of the world. For the
very highest Order, as being placed in the first rank near the
Hidden One, we must consider as directing in spiritual things in
a more hidden fashion than the Order next to itself. But the
second Order, which is composed of the holy Lordships and
Powers and Authorities, directs the Hierarchy of the Principalities
and Archangels and Angels more clearly indeed than the first
Hierarchy, but more hiddenly than the Order after it. We must
bear in mind that the more revealing Order of the Principalities,
Archangels, and Angels presides through each other over the
Hierarchies amongst men, in order that the instruction, and con-
version, and communion, and union with God may be in due order,
and, in short, that the procession from God vouchsafed in a manner
becoming His goodness to all the Hierarchies, and passing to all
in common, may be in a most sacred regularity. Hence, the
Word of God has assigned our Hierarchy to Angels, naming
the distinguished Michael as Ruler ‘of the Jewish people, and


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 35


others over other nations. For the Most High established
borders of nations according to number of Angels of ! God. But
if anyone should say, “ How then were the people of the Hebrews
alone conducted to the Divine illuminations? ” we must answer
that we ought not to throw the blame of the other nations
wandering after those which are no gods, upon the faithful
superintendence of the Angels. But they themselves, by their
own declension, fell away from the faithful conduct towards the
Divine, through self-conceit and self-will, and through their
irrational reverence for things which appeared to themselves
worthy of God. Even the Hebrew people are testified to have
suffered the same thing; for He says, “ Thou? hast cast away
knowledge of God, and hast gone after thine own heart.”® For
neither have we a life governed by necessity, nor, on account of
the free will of those who are objects of providential care, are the
Divine rays of the providential illumination blunted. But the
inaptitude of the mental visions makes the overflowing gift of
Light, which comes from paternal goodness, either altogether un-
participated or impenetrable to their resistance, or makes the
participations of the one fontal ray, diverse, small or great, obscure
or brilliant, although that ray is one and simplex, and always the
same, and ever overflowing. For even over the other nations,
from whom even we have emerged to that boundless and bounteous
sea of Divine Light, which is expanded for the ready reception of
all, there were not placed certain alien gods. But there is one
Prince of all, and to Him the Angels who religiously direct each
nation conduct those who follow them. Let us consider Mel-
chizedek * as being a Hierarch, most dear to God ; not of gods
which are not, but of Him Who is truly most high God. For the
godly wise not only speak of him as being dear to God, but also
as Priest. in order that they may clearly shew to the wise that not
only was he himself turned to the true God, but further, that he
became as Hierarch, a guide to others, in that wisdom which leads
to the true and only Godhead.


Let me also recall this to your Hierarchical judgment—that
both to Pharaoh,5 from the Angel who presided over the Egyp-
tians, and to the Babylonian® Prince, from his own Angel, the
watchful and ruling care of the Providence and Lordship over all
was made known in visions. And leaders who were worshippers
of the true God were appointed over those nations. For the in-
terpretation of things shaped by angelic visions was made known
from God through Angels to holy men akin to the Angels—Daniel
and Joseph. For there is one Prince and Providence over all.
And never must we think that the Godhead guides Jews by lot,


1 Deut. xxxii. 8. 3 Hoseaiv.6. 8 Jer. xvi. r2. Gen. xiv. 18; Heb. vii. 1.
- § Gen. xii. 1-7. 6 Dan. ii. 1.


36 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


but that Angels, independently, or as of equal rank, or as in
opposition, or that certain other gods preside over the other
nations. But that particular phrase of the Divine Word, must be
accepted according to its very religious intention ; not as though
God had divided government amongst men with other gods or
Angels, and had been elected by lot to the government and
leadership of Israel, but in this sense—that, whereas there is
one and the same forethought of the Supreme over all, which
has assigned all men for théir salvation to the elevating guidance
of their own Angels, yet Israel, almost alone in comparison
with the rest, turned itself to the Light-gift, and recognition
of the true Lord. Hence the Word of God, in order to
shew that Israel himself elected for the worship of the true
God, says this, “He became! the Lord’s portion.” But as
shewing that he was distributed equally with the other nations,
to one of the holy Angels, for the recognition through him of the
one Prince over all, he said, “ That Michael 3 was the Leader of
the Jewish people.” From this it is evident that there is one
Providence for the whole, pre-eminently established above all
powers, unseen and seen, and that all the Angels who preside
over each nation elevate as far as possible those who follow them
with a willing mind, to Itself as their proper Head.


CAPUT X.
A Repetition and Summary concerning the Angelic Order.


We have concluded, then, that the most exalted order of the
minds around God, whilst being sanctified by the perfecting
illumination, is purified, and illuminated, and perfected by a gift
of light, at once more hidden and more manifest—more hidden,
indeed, as being more intellectual, and more simplifying, and
more unifying—more manifest, as being a first gift and a first
manifestation, and more complete, and more shed forth to it as
being more transparent. But from this order again, in due
degree, the second, and from the second, the third, and from the
third our Hierarchy is religiously conducted to the Beginning
above beginning, and End of all good order, acccording to the
self-ssame law of well-ordered regularity, in Divine harmony and
proportion. But all Angels are interpreters of those above them.
The very highest, indeed, of God, Who moves them, but the
rest in due order of those who have been moved by God. For,
to such an extent has the superessential harmony of all things
provided for the religious order, and the regulated conduct of


1 Deut. xxxii. 9. 2 Dan. x. 21.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 97


each of the rational and intellectual beings, that each rank of the
Hierarchies has been placed in sacred order, and we observe
every Hierarchy distributed into first and middle and last Powers.
But to speak accurately, He divided each order itself, by the
same Divine harmonies, on which account the theologians say
that the most Divine Seraphin cry one to another,! indicating
distinctly, as I think, by this, that the first impart their theological
knowledge to the second. I might add this not inappropriately,
that each celestial and human mind has within itself its own
special first and middle and last rank and power, corresponding
to the foresaid peculiar instructions of the several Hierarchical
illuminations made known in due order, in accordance with
which each one participates, so far as is lawful and permissible
to himself, in the most spotless purification, the most copious
light, the pre-eminent perfection. ‘For there is nothing that is
self-perfect, or absolutely without need of perfecting, except the
self-perfect and pre-eminently perfect One.


CAPUT XI.


For what reason all the celestial Bangs, in common, are called
celestial Powers.


Now that we have defined these things, it is worthy of con-
sideration for what reason we are accustomed to call all the
angelic Beings together, celestial Powers. For it is not possible
to say, as with regard to the Angels, that the Order of the holy
Powers is last of all. The Orders of the superior Beings share in
the holy illuminations of the last ; but the last in no degree of the
first; and on this account all the holy minds are called celestial
Powers, but never Seraphin and Thrones and Lordships. For
the last do not enjoy the whole characteristics of the highest.
For the Angels, and those above the Angels, Archangels, and
Principalities, and Authorities, whilst being placed after the
Powers, by the Word of God, are often called by us, in conjunc-
tion with the other holy Beings, heavenly Powers. But we affirm
that whilst often using the appellation of celestial Powers for all
in common, we do not introduce a sort of confusion of the
characteristics of each Order. Now, inasmuch as all the Divine
minds are divided into three, in the celestial description given of
them—into substance, and power, and energy—when we speak of
them all, or some of them, indiscriminately, as celestial Beings or
celestial Powers, we must consider that we describe those about
whom we speak in a general way, from the substance or power of


1 Isaiah vi. 3.


38 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


each of them. For we must not apply the superior characteristic
of those holy Powers, whom we have already sufficiently dis-
tinguished, to the Beings which are entirely inferior to them, so
as to overthrow the unconfused order of the angelic ranks.
According to the correct account which we have already frequently
given, the superior Orders possess abundantly the sacred charac-
teristics of the inferior, but the lowest do not possess the superior
completeness of the highest. For the first-manifested illumina-
tions are revealed to them, through the first Order, in proportion
to their capacity.


CAPUT XII.
Why human Hiterarchs are called Angels.


But this is sometimes also asked by diligent readers of the
oracles. Since the lowest Orders do not possess the completeness
of the superior, for what reason is our Hierarch named by the
oracles “ Angel of the Lord Omnipotent” ?! Now the statement,
as I think, is not contrary to what has been before defined, for
we say that the last lack the whole and pre-eminent Power of the
most exalted Orders. For they possess in part and degree accord-
ing to the one harmonious and binding fellowship of all things.
For example, the Order of the holy Cherubin possess wisdom
and knowledge.in a higher degree. But the Orders of the Beings
beneath them possess also themselves wisdom and knowledge, but
nevertheless partially as compared with them and in a lower
degree. For the possession of wisdom throughout is common to
all the spiritual which bear the image of God. But the being
near and first, or second and inferior, i is not common, but as
has been determined for each in its own degtee. This also one
might safely define respecting all the spiritual Minds, for, as the
first possess abundantly the goodly characteristics of the inferior,
so the last possess those goodly qualities, not indeed in the same
degree, but subordinately. There is, then, as I think, nothing
absurd if the Word of God calls our Hierarch Angel, since he
participates, according to his own capacity, in the prophetic
characteristic of the Angels, and elevates himself, as far as possible,
to the likeness of their interpreting powers. But you will find
that the Word of God calls gods, both the celestial Beings above
us, and the holy men? amongst us, who are most beloved of
God,’ although the Divine Hiddenness is transcendently elevated
and established above all ; and no created Being can properly and
entirely be said to be like unto It, except those intellectual and


1 Mal. ii. 7. 3. ἄνδρας. 8 Ex. vii. x; Ps. lxxxii. 6.


-CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 39


rational Beings who are entirely and wholly turned to its Oneness
as far as possible, and who elevate themselves indomitably to its
Divine illuminations by their imitation of God, if I may so speak,
according to their power, and are deemed worthy of the same
appellation as God.


CAPUT XIII.


For what reason the Prophet Isatak is said to have been
purified by the Seraphin.


Come, then, let us examine this as best we can, why one of
the Seraphin ! is said to be sent to one of the theologians. For
some one may object that not one of the inferior Angels, but one
himself enrolled amongst the very highest Beings cleanses the
Prophet. Some, indeed, do affirm that, according to the definition
already given of the mutual relation of all the Minds, this portion
of the Word of God does not name one of the highest around
God as having come for the cleansing of the theologian, but that
some one of the Angels placed over us as a sacred Minister of the
Prophet’s cleansing is called by the same name as the Seraphin,
on the ground that the removal of the fault spoken of and the
restoration of him who was cleansed to the Divine obedience ? was
through fire ; and they say that this oracle speaks simply of one
of the Seraphin, not of those who are established around God,
but of the Powers established over us for the purpose of cleansing.
Now another brought forward to me a by no means foolish defence
of this present position. For he said that that great One, whoever
he might be—the Angel who formed this vision—for the purpose
of teaching the theologian Divine things, referred his own cleansing
function to God, and after God, to the first working Hierarchy.
And was not this statement true? For he who said this affirmed
that the Divine Power passes to all in its frequent visitations,
and penetrates all irresistibly, and yet is invisible to all, not only
as being superessentially elevated above all, but as secretly trans-
mitting its providential energies to all; yea, rather, it is manifested
to all the spiritual Beings in due degree, and conducts its own
gift of Light to the most reverend Beings, through whom, as being
of the first Order, itself distributes in due order to the subordinate
in proportion to the power of each Order to bear the vision of
God. Or to speak more strictly, and through familiar illustrations
(for if they fall short of the Glory of God, Who is exalted above
all, yet they are more instructive to us), the transmission of the
sun’s ray passes most easily to matter of the first Order, as being


1 Isaiah vi. 6-7. 3 Isaiah vi. 7.


40 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


more transparent than all, and through this lights up its own splen-
dour more brilliantly. But when it strikes more dense matter, its
transmitted brilliancy becomes more obscure, from the inaptitude
of the matter illuminated for the transmission of the gift of Light.
And from this it is, little by little, contracted so as to almost perfectly
exclude the passage of Light. Again, the heat of fire transmits
itself chiefly to things that are more receptive, and yielding, and
conducive to assimilation to itself. But, as regards repellent sub-
stances, either it leaves none, or a very light trace of its fiery energy.
More than this, when it comes in contact with things not congenial,
through substances favourable to its proper action—First, if it
chance to enflame things easily changed to its heat, and through
them, either water or some other substance which is not easily
heated, it heats them in proportion to their capacity. After the
same rule, then, of Nature’s well ordered method, the primal
regulation of all good order, both visible and invisible, manifests
supernaturally the brightness of its own gift of Light to the most
exalted Beings in abundant streams of first-manifestation, and
through these the Beings after them partake of the Divine ray.
For these, as first knowing God, and striving pre-eminently after
Divine virtue and to become first-workers, are deemed worthy of
the power and energy for the imitation of God, to the utmost
degree. And these lovingly elevate the beings after them to an
equality with themselves as far as possible, by imparting un-
grudgingly to them the splendour which rests upon themselves,
and these again to those subordinate. Throughout every Order
the first rank imparts its gift to that after it. The Divine Light
thus rests upon all, in due proportion, with providential fore-
thought. There is, then, for all those who are illuminated, a
Source of illumination—God, that is, naturally, and really, and
properly, as Essence of Light, and Cause of Being and Vision
itself. But, by ordinance and by Divine imitation, the superior
Order is successively the Source to that Order which follows it,
by the fact that the Divine rays are poured through this to that.
All the remaining Angels, then, naturally regard the highest Order
of the heavenly minds as Source of every sacred knowledge and
imitation of God, since through them the Divine illumination is
distributed to all, and even to us. Wherefore they refer every
holy energy of Divine imitation to God indeed as Cause, but to
the first Godlike minds as being first authors and teachers of
Divine things.

The first Order, then, of the holy Angels, possess more than all,
the characteristic of fire ; and the distribution of the streams of
Divine wisdom ; and the faculty of knowing the highest science
of the Divine illuminations ; and the characteristic of Thrones,
exhibiting their expansion for the reception of God. But the
ranks of the subordinate Beings possess the faculty of fire, of


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 41


wisdom, of knowledge, of Divine reception—but in a lower
degree. And looking to the first, and through them, as being
worthy of the Divine imitation in the first degree, they are
conducted to the highest possible likeness of God. The aforesaid
holy characteristics, then, which the Beings after them possess
through the first, they attribute to those Beings themselves as
Hierarchs after God.


He who said this, was accustomed to affirm that this vision was
shewn to the Theologian! through one of the holy and blessed
Angels who are set over us, and from his illuminating direction
that he, the Prophet, was elevated to that spiritual vision in which
he saw the most exalted Beings, to speak symbolically, fixed under
God, and with God, and around? God, and the Supreme Eminence
above all eminence, elevated unspeakably above all seated on
high in the midst of the most exalted Beings. The Theologian
then learned, from the things seen, that as compared with every
supéressential pre-eminence. the Divine was seated above every
visible and invisible power, and that He is exalted above all, as
Absolute—not even comparable to the first of created Beings.
Further also. that He is the very Being of all, and Cause of all
cause, and unalterable centre of the undissolved continuance of
all, from Whom is both the being and the well-being of the most
exalted Powers themselves. Then he was instructed in the God-
like qualities of the most holy Seraphin, whose sacred appellation
signifies the Fiery, concerning which we shall shortly speak, so
as to shew as best we can, the hidden mysteries of the empyrion
faculty which leads to Divine imitation. But when the holy
Prophet viewed the free and most exalted restoration to the
Divine, in first, middle, and last conceptions, as depicted in
the representation of the six wings; and further, when he con-
templated their innumerable feet and many faces, and their
extended wings—some under their feet, and the other over
their faces, and their perpetual movement of their middle
wings—he was brought to the intellectual knowledge of the things
seen. Since there was manifested to him the power of the most
exalted minds for deep penetration and numerous contemplation,
and their sacred reverence which they have, above earthly Beings;
for the bold, and courageous, and impossible scrutiny into higher
and deeper mysteries ; and the incessant and high-flying perpetual
movement in their orderly striving after the Divine imitation,
but he was also taught the hidden mysteries of that Divine and
much esteemed heavenly Hymn of Praise—the Angel, whilst
forming the vision, imparting, as far as possible, his own Divine
knowledge to the theologian. He also taught him this, that the
participation, as far as possible, in the Divine and radiant purity,


1 Isaiah vi. 2 John i. 1.


42 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


is a purification to the pure, in whatever degree. But this being
accomplished from the very Godhead by most exalted causes to
all the sacred Minds by a supernatural Hiddenness, is in a manner
more manifest, and exhibits and distributes itself in a higher
degree to the highest powers around itself. But with regard to
the second, or us the lowest intellectual powers, as each is distant
as regards the Divine likeness from itself, so it contracts its
brilliant manifestation to the single unknowableness of its own
hiddenness. But he illuminates the second, severally through the
first ; and, if one must speak briefly, he is firstly brought from
hiddenness to manifestation through the first powers. This, then,
the Theologian was taught by the Angel who was leading him to
Light—that purification, and all the Divine energies, being made
known through the first Beings, are distributed to all the rest,
according to the aptitude of each for the deifying participations.
Wherefore also, the characteristic of purification by fire he natur-
ally attributed to the Seraphin after God. There is nothing, then,
absurd if the Seraphin is said to purify the Prophet. For, as God
purifies all, by being cause of all purification, yea, rather (for I use
a familiar illustration) as our Hierarch, when purifying or enlight-
ening through his Deacons or Priests, is said himself to purify and
enlighten, since the Orders consecrated through him attribute to
him their own proper functions; so also the Angel who effected
the purification of the Prophet attributed his own purifying science
and power to God, as Cause, but to the Seraphin as first-operating
Hierarch. As any one might say with Angelic reverence, whilst
teaching one who was being purified by himself, ‘‘ There is a pre-
eminent Source, and Essence, and Worker, and Cause of the
cleansing wrought upon you from me—He Who brings both the
first Beings into Being, and holds them together by their fixity
around Himself, and keeps them without change and without fall ;
moving them to the first participations of His own Providential
energies. For this He who taught me these things used to say
that this shews the mission of the Seraphin. Now that Hierarch
and Leader after God, the Glory of the most exalted Beings,
from whom I was taught to purify after the example of God—this
is He, Who cleanses thee through me—through Whom the Cause
and Creator of all cleansing brought forth His own provident
energies from the hidden Abyss, even to us.” These things, then,
he taught me, and I impart them to thee. Let it be a part of
thy spiritual and discriminating skill, either that each of the
reasons assigned should be freed from objection, and to honour
one before the other as having likelihood and good reason, and
perhaps the truth: or from yourself, to find out something more
allied to the real truth, or to learn from another; God, of course,
giving the Word, and Angels supplying it; and to reveal to us,
the friends of Angels, a more luminous view, if it should be so,
and one to me specially welcome.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 43


CAPUT XIV.
What the number attributed to the Angels signifies.


This also is worthy, in my opinion, of spiritual consideration—
that the teaching of the oracles concerning the Angels, affirms that
they are thousand thousands, and myriad myriads ; cumulating
and multiplying respecting them the supreme limit of our numbers,
and through these shewing clearly that the ranks of the celestial
Beings cannot be numbered by us; for many are the blessed hosts
of the celestial minds, surpassing the weak and contracted
measurement of our mundane calculation. And being definitely
known to the celestial and heavenly intelligence and science
amongst themselves, which is given to them in profusion by the
supremely Divine and infinitely wise Head, and essential Cause
and connecting Force, and encompassing Term of all created
things together. (Dan. vii. 10.)


CAPUT XV.


What are the corporeal likenesses of the angelic Powers? what the
Jeery? what the likeness to man? what are the eyes? what the
nostrils? what the ears? what the mouths? what the touch?
what the eyelids? what the eyebrows? what the prime? what
the teeth? what the shoulders? what the elbows? what the
hands? what the heart? what the breasts? what the back?
what the feet? what the wings? what the wrestler? what the
robe? what the shining raiment? what the sacerdotal? what
the girdles? what the rods? what the spears? what the battle-
axe? what the measuring lines? what the winds? what the
clouds? what the brass? what the electron? what the choir?
what the clapping of hands? what the colours of transparent
stones? what the likeness of the lion? what the likeness of the
ox? what the likeness of the eagle? what the horses? what the
vartous kinds of coloured horses? what the rivers? what the
chartots of the Angels?


Come, then, let us at last, if you please, rest our mental vision
from the strain of lofty contemplations, which is fit for Angels,
and when we have descended to the divided and manifold picture
of the manifold variety of the angelic forms, let us then return
analytically from the same. as from images, to the naked?! truth of
the celestial minds. Let this first be borne in mind, that the


lend ἁπλότητα.


44 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


explanations of the typical likenesses represent the same ranks of
the celestial Beings. as sometimes ruling, and at other times as
being ruled, and the last as ruling, and the first as being ruled ;
and the ‘same, as has been said, as having first, and middle, and
last powers—without introducing anything absurd into the descrip-
tion, according to the following mode of explanation. For if
indeed we were to say that some are ruled by those above them,
and then that they were ruling the same, and that those above,
whilst ruling those below, are ruled by those same, who are being
ruled, the thing would manifestly be absurd, and mixed with all
sorts of confusion. But if we say that the same rule, and are
ruled, but no longer the same, or from the same, but that each
Order is itself ruled by those above it, but rules those below it,
one might say appropriately that the Divinely pictured forms in
the oracles, the self-same may sometimes properly and truly
apply to both first and middle and last powers. Now the
elevation by being turned to things above, and their being drawn
inflexibly around each other, as being guardians of their own
proper powers, and their possession, with regard to those after
them, of the power to provide for them by a mutual communica-
tion, belongs truly to all the heavenly Beings ; although to some
pre-eminently and wholly, as we have often said, but to others
partially and in a less degree. But we must keep our discourse
within bounds, and must search in our first explanation of the
types for what reason the Word of God prefers the sacred
representation of fire in preference to almost every other.! You
will find it, then, representing not only wheels of fire, but also
living creatures of fire 3; and men flashing like lightning °; and
placing around the heavenly Beings themselves heaps of coals of
fire *; and rivers of flame, flowing with irresistible force.® But
also it says that the thrones are of fire ®; and that the most exalted
Cherubin glows with fire, it shows from their appellation; and it
attributes the characteristic and energy of fire’ to them; and
everywhere, above and below, it prefers pre-eminently the
representation by the image of fire. I think, then, the similitude
of ἔσο, denotes the likeness of the Divine minds to God, in the
highest degree, for the holy theologians frequently describe the
superessential and formless Being by jive, as having many like-
nesses, if I may be permitted to say so, of the Divine character,
in things visible. For the sensible fire is, so to speak, in every-
thing, and passes through everything unmingled, and is exalted
above all, and whilst giving light to everything, is at the same
time concealed, unknown in its essential nature, except when it
may happen to shew its own proper energy in any matter lying


1 Dan. vii. 9. 3 Ezek. i. 13, 16. 8 Ezek. i. 14. 4 Ezek. x. 2.
δ Dan. vii. ro. 8 Dan. vii.9. 7 Isaiah vi. 6,7. § Le Cratyle de Platoni., 302.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 45


near it. Itis both incomprehensible and invisible ; itself subduing
all things, and bringing under its own energy anything in which it
may happen to be; unchangeable, imparting itself to all things
near it, whatever they may be; renewing by its rousing heat, and
giving light by its illuminations which cannot be hid; uncon-
trollable, unmingled, separating, unchangeable, elevating, pene-
trating, lofty, subject to no grovelling inferiority, ever moving,
self-moving, moving other things, comprehending, incomprehended,
needing no other, imperceptibly increasing itself, displaying its
own magnitude to the materials receiving it, energetic, powerful,
present in all, when unobserved seeming not to be, but manifest-
ing itself suddenly, according to its own proper nature by friction,
when, as it were, we seek to find it; and again flying away un-
controllably it remains undiminished, in all the joyful distributions
of itself. And one might find many characteristics of fire, appro-
priate to display the Divine Energy, as it were, in sensible images.
Those, then, who are wise in the things of God, knowing this,
depict the celestial Beings under the image of Fire, shewing their
Godlike nature, and their imitation of God, as far as permissible.


But they also depict them under the likeness of men, on
account of their intellectual nature, and their having the faculty
of looking to things above, and their straight and erect form, and
their innate faculty of ruling and guiding ; and whilst being least
in natural power as compared with the powers of irrational Beings,
yet ruling over all by their superior power of mind, and by their
superiority in rational science, and their innate unslavishness and
indomitableness of soul. It is possible, then, I think, to find
within each of the many parts of our body images harmonious to
the heavenly powers, whilst we affirm that the powers of vision 2
denote the most transparent elevation towards the Divine light ;
and again, the tender liquid and unrepellent, but sensitive, and
pure, and unfolded reception, free from all passion, of the supremely
Divine illuminations.


But the discriminating powers of the nostrils denote the recep-
tive power of the distributed odours, sweet beyond conception,
and the power of distinguishing accurately things which are not
such, and entirely rejecting them.


The powers of the ear denote the conscious participation and
reception of the Divine inspiration.

The powers of taste denote the fulness of the intellectual food,
and the reception of the Divine and nourishing streams.‘


The powers of touch denote the skilful discrimination of that
which is suitable or injurious.5 '
2 Gen. xxxii. 24. 2 Ezek. i. 18; ibidix. 5. °%Gen. viii. ar. 4 Gen. xix. 3.
δ Gen. xxxii. 25.


46 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


The eyelids and eyebrows denote the guarding of the conceptions
which reveal God.


The figures of manhood and youth denote the perpetual bloom
and vigour of life.}


The teeth denote the dividing of the perfect nourishment given
tous. For each intellectual Being divides and multiplies by a
provident faculty the unified conception given to it by the more
Divine Order, in proportion necessary for the instruction of the
inferior.


The shoulders and elbows,? and further, the hands,® denote the
power of making, and striving, and accomplishing.


The heart is a symbol of the Godlike life, dispersing its own
life-giving power to the objects of its forethought after the Divine
likeness.

The chest again denotes the invincible and protective faculty of
the life-giving distribution as being placed above the heart.


The back, the holding together the whole productive powers 4
of life.


The feet 5 denote the movement, and quickness, and skilfulness
of the perpetual movement advancing towards Divine things.
Wherefore also the Word of God represented the feet of the holy
Minds as being placed under their wings®; for the wing displays
the quickness of instruction, and the progress towards the heavenly
and higher things, and the elevation above all earthly things for
love of higher. But the elevation of the wings denotes their
being in no respect earthly, but in all purity raised to the higher
things without hindrance.


But the naked and unshod denotes the unfettered, agile, and
unrestrained, and free from all external superfluity, and their
assimilation to the Divine simplicity as far as attainable.


But since again the simple and variegated wisdom ’ ‘both clothes
the naked and distributes certain implements to them to carry, let
us unfold, according to our power, the sacred garments and imple-
ments of the celestial Minds. The shining and glowing raiment,
I think, signifies the Divine likeness after the image of fire—
brilliant §—and their distribution of Light, in consequence of their
repose in Heaven, where is the Light. And their complete illu-
minating as superior Beings, and their being illuminated as inferior.
But the sacerdotal robe denotes their instruction® in Divine and
mystical visions, and the consecration of their whole life. But
the girdles signify their guard over their productive powers, and
their own collected habit to be turned to Oneness with It, and to


1 Mark xvi. 5. *Dan.x 6. &®Dan.x.10. 4 Dan. x. 5.
S Isaiah vi.2. & Ezek. i.6. ‘Eph iii.ro. %Johnxx.12. ® Dan. x. 5.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 47


encircle It with good order by being drawn around itself by an
unbroken identity.


The rods signify the kingly and directing faculty, making all
things straight. The spears! and the battle-axe? denote the
dividing of things unlike, and the sharp and energetic and drastic
operation of the discriminating powers. The geometrical? and
technical‘ articles denote the founding, and building, and com-
pleting, and whatever else belongs to the instructing and guiding
forethought, for the subordinate Orders. But sometimes the
implements of the holy Angels presented to our view are the
symbols of God’s judgment to ourselves. Some representing His
correcting > instruction or avenging righteousness.° Others free-
dom from peril, or end of education, or resumption of former
well-being, or addition of other gifts, small or great, material or
intellectual.?’ Nor would a discriminating mind, in any case
whatever, have difficulty in properly adapting things visible to
things invisible.

But the fact that they are named winds® denotes their rapid
flight, passing almost instantaneously to all things; and their
movement in passing from above to below, and again from below
to above—their elevating the second to the height above, but
moving the first to a common and provident conduct of the
inferior Orders. But perhaps someone would say that the appella-
tion of wind, to the aerial spirit, also denotes the Divine likeness
of the celestial minds. For this also bears a likeness and type of
the Divine energy (as we have demonstrated more fully in the
symbolic theology, in our explanation of the four elements) in
accordance with the moving and life-producing, and the rapid and
resistless procession of Nature, and the unobserved and invisible
Hiddenness of the moving springs and terminations. For He
says, ‘Thou knowest not whence it cometh ? nor whither it goeth.”
But also the Word of God attributes to them the appearance of a
cloud,?° signifying through this that the holy minds are filled in an
unearthly degree with the hidden Light; receiving the first
manifestation without boasting. which they distribute ungrudgingly
to the second, as a secondary manifestation, and in proportion to
their capacity. Yea, further, that the productive, and _life-
producing, and increasing, and perfecting power is enshrined in
them, in consequence of the spiritual production of showers,
which summon the receptive womb of the earth, by fruitful
showers, to the life-giving pangs of birth.


Also, the Word of God attributes to the celestial Beings a like-
1 Gen. iii. 24. 2 Ezek. ix.2. 8 Ezek. χὶ. 3. ‘Amosvii.7. ὅδ Num. xxii. 31.


6 2 Kings xxiv. 16. 7 Zech. iti. 9. 8 Ps. civ. 3; Dan. vii. 2.
9 John iii. 8. 10 Ezek. x. 4.


48 CELESTIAL HIERARCHY.


ness to Brass,! Electron,? and many-coloured stones. Electron,
as being partly like silver, partly like gold, denotes the incorrup-
tible, as in gold, with unexpended, and undiminished, and spotless
brilliancy, and the brightness as in silver, and a luminous and
celestial radiance. But to the Brass, according to the reasons
assigned, must be attributed either the likeness of fire or that
of gold. .

We must consider the many-coloured appearances of stones,
denotes either, as white, the luminous ; or as red, the fiery ; or as
yellow, the golden ; or as green, the youthful and the full grown ;
and within each likeness you will find an explanation which teaches
the inner meaning of the typical images.


But since, I think, according to our power, this has been
sufficiently said, we will pass to the sacred explanation of the
Divine representations of the celestial minds through wild beasts.
We must consider that the shape of a Lion ® signifies the leading,
and robust, and indomitable, and the assimilation as far as
possible to the unutterable Deity, by the concealment of the
spiritual footsteps, and by the mysteriously secret covering of the
path leading to itself during Divine illumination.


The image of the Ox‘ denotes the strong and the mature, turn-
ing up the spiritual furrows for the reception of the heavenly and
productive powers. The Horns the guarding and indomitable.


The representation of the Eagle 5—the kingly, and soaring, and
swift in flight, and quickness, and wariness, and ayility, and clever-
ness in search of the nourishment which makes strong; and the
unimpeded, straight, and unflinching gaze towards the bounteous
and brilliant splendour of the Divine rays of the sun, with the
robust endurance of its visual powers.


That of Horses represents obedience and docility ; when they
are white, brilliancy, and especially their affinity to the Divine
Light ; when they are black, the Hidden; when they are red, the
fiery ; when they are black and white, the uniting of the extremities.
by the power passing through them, and joining the first to the
second, and the second to the first, by twining or directing. But
if we did not consult the proportion of our discourse, we might,
not inappropriately, adapt the particular characteristics of the
living creatures spoken of, and all their bodily representations to
the heavenly Powers, upon the principle of dissimilar similitudes.
For instance, their appearance of anger—to spiritual manliness, of
which anger is the last echo, but desire—to the Divine love, and
to speak summarily, referring all the senses and many parts of
irrational Beings to the immaterial conceptions and unified Powers
of the celestial Beings. But not only is this sufficient for the


1 Ezek. xi. 3. 3 Ezek. viii. 2. %Ezek.i.10. ‘Ibid. 5 Ibid.


CELESTIAL HIERARCHY. 49


wise, but even an explanation of one of the dissimilar representa-
tions would be sufficient for the accurate description of similar
things after the same fashion. But we must examine the fact that
Rivers! are spoken of, and Wheels? and Chariots,’ as associated
with the heavenly Beings. The rivers of fire signify the Divine
streams providing for them an ungrudging and incessant flow, and
nourishing the productive powers of life. The Chariots the con-
joined communion of those of the same rank in united fellowship.
The wheels as being winged, advancing without turning and
without deviation, denote the power of their advancing energy
within a straight and direct way, whilst their whole intellectual
track is Divinely directed towards the same undeviating and
direct way. But it is possible to interpret in another form the
sacred description of the spiritual wheels, for the name Gel, Gel,
is given to them, as the theologian says. This shows, according to
the Hebrew tongue. revolutions and revelations. For the Divine
wheels of fire have revolutions, by their perpetual movement
around the Goodness itself ; but revelations by the explanation of
things hidden, and by the instruction of things on earth, and by
the descending procession of the sublime illuminations to things
below. There remains for accurate explanation, the statement
respecting the rejoicing of the celestial Orders‘ ; for they are
utterly incapable of our impassioned pleasure. But they are said
to rejoice with God, over the discovery of what was lost, in
accordance with their Divine good nature, and that Godlike and
ungrudging rejoicing over the care and salvation of those who are
turned to God—with that joy beyond description of which also
holy men often partake, whilst the deifying illuminations of the
Deity rest upon them. Let it suffice, then, to have said this
much concerning the Divine representations, which no doubt falls
short of their accurate explanation, but which will prevent us, I
think, from servilely resting in the resemblances of the types. But
if you should say that we have not mentioned the whole Angelic
Powers, depicted in the oracles, or energies. or likenesses, we
answer in truth that we do not possess the celestial knowledge of
some ; and further, with regard to these, we have need of another
instructor to guide us into Light. But other things as being
parallel to the things said, we have omitted, out of regard to the
length of the discourse ; and the hidden mysteries, beyond our
capacity, we have honoured by silence.


1 Dan. vii. 10. ‘%Ezek.x.9. 8.2 Kings ii. 1x. 4 Luke xv. ro.
G


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


CAPUT I.


To my FELLOW PRESBYTER ‘TIMOTHY.
DIONYSIUS THE PRESBYTER.


What ts the traditional vtew of the Ecclestastical Mterarchy,
and what ἐς tts scope?


E must, then, demonstrate, most pious of pious sons,
Δ that ours is a Hierarchy of the inspired and Divine
and Deifying science, and energy and perfection.
) This we will do, from the celestial and most sacred
oracles—for those who have been initiated with the initiation of
the sacred revelation derived from the hierarchical mysteries and
traditions. But see that you do not put to scorn the things the
most holy. Take good heed, and you will then guard the honour
of the hidden things of God by intellectual and obscure definitions,
carefully guarding them from the participation and defilement of
the profane, and communicating them reverently only to persons
the most holy. For thus, as the Word of God has taught us who
feast at His Banquet, even Jesus Himself—the supremely Divine
and superessential Mind, the Head and Being, and most supremely
Divine Power of every Hierarchy and Sanctification and Divine
operation—illuminates the blessed Beings who are superior to us,
in a manner more clear, and at the same time more fresh, and
assimilates them to His own Light in proportion to their ability
to receive. As for ourselves, by the love of things beautiful,
elevated to Himself, and elevating us, He folds together our many
diversities, and by making them into an unified and Divine life,
suitable to a sacred vocation both as to habit and action, He
Himself bequeaths the power of the Divine Priesthood, from
which, by approaching to the holy exercise of the priestly Office,
we become nearer to the Beings above us, by assimilation,
according to our power, to the stability and unchangeableness of
their steadfastness in holy things. Hence, by looking upwards to
the blessed and supremely Divine Glory of Jesus, and reverently
gazing upon whatever we are permitted to seg, and being illu-
minated with the knowledge of the visions, we shall be able to
become, as regards the science of Divine mysteries, both purified
and purifying—images of Light, and workers with God, perfected
and perfecting.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 51


What, then, is the Hierarchy of the Angels! and Archangels,
and supermundane Principalities and Authorities, Powers and
Lordships, Divine Thrones, or Beings of the same ranks as the
Thrones—which the Word of God describes as being near, and
always about God, and with 2 God, naming them in the Hebrew
tongue Cherubin and Seraphin—what pertains to the sacred
Orders and divisions of their ranks and Hierarchies you will find
in the books we have written—not as befits their dignity, but to
the best of our ability—in which we have followed the Word of
God as it describes their Hierarchy in the Holy Scriptures.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to say this, that both that and every
Hierarchy which we are now celebrating has one and the same
power throughout the whole of its hierarchical functions, and that
the Hierarch himself, according to his nature, and aptitude, and
rank, is initiated in Divine things, and deified and imparts to his
subordinates according to the meetness of each, the sacred deifi-
cation which comes to himself from God. Likewise, that the
subordinates follow the superior, but elevate the inferior towards
things in advance ; and that some go before, and, as far as possible,
give the lead to others; and that each, as far as may be, par-
ticipates in Him Who is "the truly Beautiful, and Wise, and Good,
through this Divine and sacerdotal harmony.


But the Beings and ranks above us, of whom we have already
made a reverent mention, are both incorporeal and their Hierarchy
is intellectual and supermundane. But we observe that our
hierarchy, conformably to our nature, abounds in a manifold
variety of material symbols, from which, in proportion to our
capacity, we are conducted by sacerdotal functions to the onelike
deification—God and Divine Virtue. They indeed, as being
minds, perceive, according to laws laid down for themselves, But
we are led by sensible figures to Divine contemplations as is
possible to us. And to speak truly, there is One to Whom all
the Godlike aspire. But they do not partake of this One and the
Same in one manner, but as the Divine ordinance distributes to
each a meet inheritance. Now these things have been treated
more systematically in the Treatise concerning “Intellectual and
Sensible.” But now I will attempt to describe our Hierarchy, and
its head and substance as best I can; invoking Jesus the Head
and Perfection of all Hierarchies. Every Hierarchy, then, is,
according to our august tradition, the whole description of the
sacred things falling under it—a most complete summary of the
sacred rites of this or that Hierarchy, as the case may be. Our
Hierarchy, then, is called and is the systematic account of the
whole sacred rites included within it; according to which the
divine Hierarch, being initiated, will have within himself the


1 See Epistle to Trallians. 2 John i. 1.


52 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


‘participation of the most sacred things, as chief! of Hierarchy.
For as he who speaks of Hierarchy speaks of the order of the
whole sacred rites collectively, so he who mentions Hierarch
denotes the inspired and godly man—one who understands
accurately all sacred knowledge, in whom is completed and
recognized, in its purity, the whole Hierarchy. —


Of this Hierarchy, as supreme Head, is the Triad—the
Fountain of Life—the Essence of Goodness—the One Cause of
things that be—from Whom both being and well-being come to
things that are—through goodness. Of this supremely Divine
blessedness—exalted above all—the threefold One—the really
existing—the will—inscrutable to us, but known to itself—is the
rational salvation of Beings amongst us and above us. But that
salvation cannot otherwise take place, than upon the condition
that those who are being saved become deified. But the deifica-
tion is the assimilation and oneness towards God, as far as
permissible. Now this is the common end of every Hierarchy—
the clinging love towards God and Divine things ; a love divinely
᾿ sanctified into oneness with Him; and for the sake of this, the
complete and unswerving removal of things contrary—the know-
ledge of things as they are in themselves—the vision and clear
knowledge of sacred truth—the Divine participation of the uniform
perfection, the One itself, as far as permissible; the banquet of
contemplation, nourishing intellectually and deifying every man
who elevates himself towards it.


Let us affirm, then, that the Divine Blessedness, the self-existent
Godhead, Source of deification, from Whom comes the deification
of those deified, bequeathed by Divine Goodness the Hierarchy, for
the salvation and deification of all rational and intellectual Beings.
To the supermundane and blessed inheritors it is bequeathed in a
manner more immaterial and intellectual (for God does not move
them to Divine things from without, but intellectually, and they
are illuminated as to the Divine will from within, with a pure and
unearthly brilliancy), but to us—that which is given to them
simply, and uniformly, and enveloped—is given from the Divinely
transmitted oracles, in a variety and multitude of divisible
symbols, as we are able to receive it. For the Divinely trans-
mitted oracles are the very Being of our Hierarchy. But we
affirm that these oracles are most august—all such as were given
from our inspired initiators in Divinely written letters of the Word
of God. And further, whatever our Jeaders have revealed to us
from the same holy men, by a less earthly instruction, very similar
to the Heavenly Hierarchy, from mind to mind; through the
medium of speech, and so corporeal, but nevertheless more


1 Iépapxias ἐπώνυμος.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 53


immaterial—without writing. Nor did the inspired Hierarchs
transmit ! these things in conceptions clear to the commonalty of
the Divine Service, but in sacred symbols. For it is not every
one that is holy, nor as the oracles affirm does knowledge belong
to all.?


Of necessity, then, the first leaders of our Hierarchy, after they
had themselves been filled with the sacred gift from the super-
essential Godhead, and sent by the Divine Goodness to extend
the same gift to those without ; and they themselves as godly,
desiring the instruction and deification of those after them, without
grudging imparted to us—by written and unwritten revelations—
in accordance with sacred injunctions, things supercelestial in
sensible images—the simple and enfolded, in the variegated and
multiform ; the things Divine, in things human, things immaterial
in things material ; the superessential in things earthly. Nor did
they do this on account merely of the unholy, to whom it is not
permitted even to touch the symbols, but because our Hierarchy
is, as I said, a kind of symbol adapted to our condition, which
needs things material for our more Divine elevation from these
to things spiritual. The reasons, however, of the symbols have
been revealed to the Divine initiators, which it is not permitted
to explain to those who are yet being initiated ; as knowing that
the Lawgivers for rites Divinely taught deliberately arranged the
Hierarchy in well-established and unconfused ranks, and in pro-
portionate and sacred distributions of that which was convenient
to each according to capacity. Wherefore, trusting in those Thy
sacred promises, for it is well to recall them to your recollection,
that, since every Hierarchical doctrine is of supreme importance,
you will not commit them to any other but those Godlike initiators
of the same rank with yourself, and will persuade them to promise,
according to the regulation of our Hierarchy, to touch pure things
purely, and to communicate the things of God to the godly alone,
and things perfect to those who are perfecting, and the most holy
things to the holy ; I have entrusted this Divine gift to thee, in
addition to many other Hierarchical gifts.


CAPUT II.
Concerning those who are being initiated tn illumination.


We have, then, reverently affirmed that the scope of our Hier-
archy is this—the assimilation and oneness with God as far as
permissible. But as the Divine oracles teach, we shall attain this
only by the love and the religious performance of the worshipful


1 Mark iv. 11. 21 Cor. viii. 7.


54 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


Commandments. For He says: ‘“ He! that loveth Me will keep
My Commandments, and My Father will love him, and will come
unto him, and make Our abode with him.” What, then, is the
beginning of the religious performance of the most august com-
mandments? The teaching of the sacred and most Divine
regeneration, which forms an aptitude in the habits of our soul for
the reception of the other Divine sayings and doings?; the prepar-
ation of the way for our ascent to the supercelestial rest.2 For, as
our illustrious Leader was used to say, the very first movement of
the mind towards Divine things is the love of God, but the very
earliest approach towards the religious performance of the Divine
commandments is the unutterable creation of our being in God.
For if our * being in God is the Divine engendering, never would
he know, and certainly not perform any of the Divine instructions,
who had not first his beginning to be in God. To speak after the
manner of men, is it not necessary that we should first begin to
be, and then to do what belongs to us? For he who does not
exist at all has neither movement nor even beginning. But he
who actually exists does or suffers only those things suitable
to his own condition. This, then, as I think, is clear. Let us
next contemplate the Divine symbols of the birth in God. And
I pray, let no uninitiated person approach the sight; for neither
is it without danger to gaze upon the glorious rays of the sun
with weak eyes, nor is it without peril to put our hand to things
above us. For right was the priesthood of the Law when rejecting
Osias,5 because he put his hand to sacred things; and Korah,é to
things above his capacity ; and Nadab? and Abihu, because they
treated things within their own province unholily.


Il.—Afystery of Illumination.


The Hierarch, then, wishing 8 that all men whatsoever should
be saved by their assimilation towards God, and come to a recog-
nition of truth, proclaims to all the veritable Gospel—that God
being compassionate towards men upon earth, from His own proper
and inherent goodness, Himself deigned to come to us with out-
stretched arms, on account of loving kindness towards men ; and,
by union with Himself, like as by fire, to assimilate things that
have been made one, in proportion to their aptitude for deification.
‘For as many as received Him, to them gave He power® to
become sons of God—to those believing on His Name, who were
begotten, not from bloods, nor from will of flesh, but from God.”


He who has felt a religious longing to possess these truly


1Jobn xiv. 23. ?Johni.13. §8Johniii.5. | 4See Baptismal Offices.
5 2 Chron. xxvi. 16-21. Num, xvi. 1-33. 7 Num. iii, 4 δ8δ.χ Tim. ii. 4.
9 John i. 12, 13.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 55


celestial gifts, comes to some one of the initiated, and persuades
him to act as his conductor to the Hierarch. He then promises
wholly to follow the teaching that shall be given to him, and prays
him to undertake the superintendence of his introduction, and of
all his life afterwards. But he, though religiously longing for his
salvation, when he measures human infirmity against the loftiness of
the undertaking, is seized with a shivering and sense of incapacity.
Nevertheless, at last, he promises, with a good grace, to do what
is requested, and takes and leads him to the chief Hierarch. He
then benevolently receives the man, as a sheep upon his shoulders,
and admits the two men, and worships and glorifies, with a mental
thanksgiving and bodily prostration, the One Author ! and Finisher
of Good ; from Whom those who are being called are called, and
those who are being saved are saved.


He then collects the whole religious Order into the holy Choir
for co-operation and common rejoicing over the man’s salvation ;
but also for shanksgiving to the Divine Goodness. At the com-
mencement he chants a certain hymn found in the oracles,
accompanied by the whole body of the Church. And after this,
when he has kissed the holy table, he advances to the man
standing before him, and demands of him, what has brought him
here? When the man, out of love to God, has confessed, accord-
ing to the instruction of his sponsor, his ungodliness,? his ignorance
of the truly beautiful, his insufficiency for the Divine life, and
demands through his holy mediation to attain to God and Divine
things, he testifies to him that his approach ought to be entire, as
to God Who is All Perfect, and without blemish. When he has
expounded to him fully the Divine course of life, and has demanded
of him, if he would thus live ; after his promise he places his right
hand upon his head, and when he has sealed him, he commands
the priests to register the man and his sponsor.


When these have enrolled the names, he offers a holy prayer,
and when the whole Church have completed this with him, he
unlooses his sandals and removes his clothing by means of the
Deacons. Then when he has placed him. facing the west, and
whilst he beats with aversion his hands towards the same quarter,
he thrice commands him to breathe scorn upon Satan, and
further, to profess the words of the renunciation. When he has
witnessed his threefold renunciation, he turns him to the east,
after he has confessed this three times, and has looked up to
heaven and extended his hands thitherward, he commands him
to be subject to Christ, and to all the Divinely transmitted oracles
of God. When the man has done this, he witnesses again for
him his threefold confession, and again, when he has thrice


1 Phil. ii. 13. 3 ἀθεότητα; Matt. vi. 24; Eph. iv. s.


56 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


confessed, after prayer, he gives thanks and lays his hand upon
him. When the Deacons have entirely unclothed him, the Priests
bring the holy oil of the chrism. ‘Then he begins the chrism,
through the threefold sealing, and assigns the man to the Priests
for the anointing of his whole body, while he himself advances to
the mother of filial adoption, and dedicates the water within it by
the sacred invocations, and consecrates it by three cruciform
affusions of the holy myrrh. And when he has invoked three
times, as in the injection of the myrrh, the holy melody of the
inspiration of the Divinely rapt Prophets, he orders the man to be
brought forward. When one of the Priests, from the register, has
announced the name of himself and his surety, he is conducted
by the Priests over the water to the hand of the Hierarch, being
led by the hand to him. Then the Hierarch, standing above,
when the Priests have again called aloud, near the Hierarch,
within the water, the name of the initiated, the Hierarch dips him
three times, invoking the threefold! Subsistence of the Divine
Blessedness at the three immersions and emersions of the initiated.
The Priests then take him and entrust him to the Sponsor and
guide of his introduction.


And when they, in conjunction with him, have cast over the
initiated appropriate clothing, they lead him again to the Hierarch,
who, when he has sealed the man with the most Divinely operating
myrrh, declares him henceforward a partaker of the most Divinely
initiating Eucharist.

When he has finished these things, he elevates himself from his
progression to things secondary, to the contemplation of the first ;
as one who at no time or manner turns himself to any other office
than those which are peculiarly his own, but who, by gradual
advance in Divine things, is persistently and always ranging him-
self under the banner of the supremely Divine Spirit.


IIll.— Contemplation.


This initiation, then, of the holy birth in God, as in symbols,
has nothing unbecoming or irreverent, nor anything of sensible
imagery, but enigmas of a contemplation worthy of God, bearing
a likeness to natural images suitable to men. For should it
appear in any particular misleading (even though the more Divine
account of the religious ceremonies were passed over in silence),
its Divine institution might persuade, diligently pursuing, as it
does, the good life of the candidate ; announcing to him, in a
bodily form, the purification from every kind of evil, through a
virtuous and Divine life, by the physical cleansing through the


1 τρισσὴν ὑπόστασνν. Heb. i. 3.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. ‘57


agency of water. This then, even if the symbolic teaching of the
religious rites had nothing more divine, would not be without
religious value, as I think—introducing a discipline of a well-.
regulated life, whilst suggesting through the bodily purification by
water, the complete purification from an evil life. Let this, then,
be for the uninitiated an introductive leading of the soul ; separa-
ting, as is fit, things sacred and unified from multiplicity, and
apportioning our harmonious restoration to the Orders in due
degree. But we who have ascended by just gradations to the
contemplation of the highest mysteries, and have been religiously
taught their hidden meanings, shall recognize of what moulds they
are the reliefs, and of what invisible things they are the likenesses.
For, as is distinctly shewn in the Treatise concerning “ Intelligible
and Sensible,” sensible sacred things are reliefs of things
intelligible, to which they lead and shew the way. But things
intelligible are an archetype and explanation of sacred things,
cognizable by the senses. Let us affirm, then, that the goodness
of the Divine Blessedness is always the same in condition and
object, unfolding the beneficent rays of its own light upon all the
intellectual visions without grudging. Either, then, the self-chosen
freedom of action might turn away from spiritual light, by closing,
through love of evil, the faculties for enlightenment, which
naturally reside within it, and might be separated from the light
present to it, and not turned from it—but illuminating it, whilst
closing itself in darkness—and which generously runs to that
which moves itself away. Or should anyone overstep the bounds
of the vision given to itself, in due proportion, and rashly under-
take to gaze upon the rays superior to its own vision, the light
indeed does nothing beyond its own proper functions. But this,
as imperfectly approaching the perfect, would not attain to things
inappropriate to its condition, but by stupidly disregarding the
due proportion, would fail through its own fault.


But as I said, the Divine Light is always unfolded for beneficent
purposes to intellectual visions, and it is possible for them to seize
it when it is present, and is always most ready for the distribution
of its own gift, in a manner becoming the Deity. To the imitation
of this, the divine Hierarch is fashioned, unfolding to all, without
grudging, the luminous rays of his own divine teaching, and after
the Divine example being most ready to enlighten him who comes
to him, not using malice or an unholy wrath, for former back-
slidings or excess; but, after the example of God, always
enlightening those who approach him, as becomes a Hierarch, in
fitness, and order, and proportion to the aptitude of each for
things Divine.

But inasmuch as the Deity is Origin of that sacred order,
within which move the holy Minds who know themselves, he


H


58 BCCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


who recurs to the proper view of nature will see his proper self
in what he was originally, and will acquire this as the first sacred
gift from his recovery to light. Now he, who has well looked
upon his own proper condition with unbiased eyes, will depart
from the gloomy recesses of ignorance ; yet, whilst being unitiated,
he will not of his own accord at once desire the most perfect
Oneness and participation of God, but little by little, through
things present advancing to things more forward, and through
these to things foremost ; and having been perfected, he will be
carried in order and in a heavenly manner to the Divinely supreme
height. An image of this good order is the modesty of the
person approaching, and his recognition of his own internal
condition in providing the sponsor as leader in his approach to
the Hierarch. The Divine Blessedness receives the man thus
conducted into communion with itself, and imparts to him his
own light, as a kind of sign, making him also a godly sharer of the
inheritance and sacred order of godly men, of which the Hierarch’s
seal, given to the proselyte, is a sacred symbol ; and the enrolment
of the priests, as an image of salvation, registering him amongst
those who are in a state of salvation, and placing in the sacred
memorials his sponsor and himself—the one indeed, as a true
lover and follower of a godly guide in the life-giving journey
towards truth; and the other, as an unerring conductor of his
neophyte to the Divinely taught directions.


But it is not possible to hold conjointly qualities thoroughly
opposed, nor that a man who’ has had a certain fellowship with
the One, should have divided lives, if he clings to the firm par-
ticipation in the One. But he must be resistless and persistent
as regards all separations from the uniform. This it is which the
teaching of the symbols reverently intimates, by stripping the
neophyte, as it were, of his former life, and unloosing to the very
extremities all his habits within that life. It places him naked
and barefoot, looking towards the west, and spurning, by the
aversion of the hands, the participations in the gloomy evil, and
breathing out, as it were, the dissimilar habit which he had
acquired, and proclaiming the entire renunciation as regards
everything contrary to the Divine likeness. When the man has
thus become completely indomitable and separate from evil, he
leads him towards the east, declaring clearly that his position
and recovery will be in the Divine Light, in the complete separa-
tion from evil, receiving his sacred promises of his entire leaning
towards the One, as of a man who has acquired the image of the
One, through love of the truth. But it is pretty evident, as I
think, to those versed in Hierarchical matters, that the spiritual
acquire the unchangeableness of the Godlike habit by continuous
and persistent struggles towards one ; and by the entire destruction
and annihilation of things contrary. For it is necessary that a


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 59


man should not only depart from every kind of evil, but he

must be bravely obdurate and ever disdainful against the baneful

submission to it. Nor must he at any time become remiss in his

sacred love of the truth, but he must, with all his power, persis-

tently and perpetually aspire towards it, always religiously pursuing

ais upward course to the more perfect mysteries of the supreme
odhead.


Now you may perceive the distinct images of these things in
the religious rites performed by the Hierarch. For the Godlike
Hierarch starts with the holy anointing, but the Priests under him
complete the Divine service of the Chrism, summoning the
initiated, in type, to the holy contests within which he is placed
under Christ as Umpire (since as God He is Framer of the laws
of contest) ; as wise, He placed its laws ; but as generous, He fixed
the awards suitable to the victors.! And this is yet more Divine,
inasmuch as being generous, He entered the lists with them, con-
tending, on behalf of their freedom 3 and victory against the power
of death® and destruction,‘ he who is initiated will enter the
contests as those of God rejoicing. But he will remain fixed in
the regulations of the Wise, and will contend, according to them,
without transgression, holding fast the hope of the beautiful
rewards, as being enrolled under a good Lord and Leader of the
contest. But when he has followed in the Divine footsteps of
the first of Athletes as regards goodness, and has overthrown, in
his struggles after the Divine example, the energies and impulses
opposed to his deification, he dies with Christ—to speak mys-
tically—to sin in his Baptism.

But consider this attentively, I pray, with what appropriateness
the holy symbols are presented. For since death is with us, not
an annihilation of being, according to the opinion of others, but
the separation of things united, leading to our being invisible (the
soul becoming invisible through being deprived of the body; but
the body as being buried in earth, in consequence of one of its
various changes, becomes invisible to the sight of man) ;—appro-
priately, then, the whole covering by water is taken as an image
of death and the darkness of thetomb. The symbolical teaching,
then, reveals that the man, baptized according to religious rites,
imitates, so far as Divine imitation is permissible to man, by the
threefold immersions in the water, the supremely Divine death of
the Life-giving Jesus, Who spent three days and three nights in
the tomb, in whom, according to the mystical and secret teaching
of the sacred text, the Prince of this world found nothing.®


Next, they throw garments, white as light, over the initiated.


Δ (ον. ii. 9. 2 Ps, lxxxviii.5. %2Tim.i. 10. ¢ Ps. xvi. 10.
5 τριημερονύκτου ταφῆς. ¢ John xiv. 30.


60 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


For by his manly and Godlike insensibility to contrary passions,
and by his persistent inclination towards the One, the unadorned
is adorned, and the shapeless acquires shape, being made brilliant
by a life entirely reflecting the light.


But the most perfecting unction of the myrrh makes the man
who has been perfected of good odour, for the holy perfection of
the Divine birth unifies those who have been perfected with the
supremely Divine Spirit. Now the spiritual indwelling which
makes perfect, and of a good savour, as being unutterable, I leave
to the spiritual consciousness of those who are deemed worthy of
the sacred and deifying participation of the Holy Spirit within
their mind.


At the conclusion of all, the Hierarch invites him who has
been perfected to the most Holy Eucharist, and imparts to him
the communion of the most perfecting mysteries.


CAPUT III.
Concerning those who are being initiated in the Synaxis.


Courage, then, because we have made mention of this (Eucharist)
we may not pass over it to celebrate any other Hierarchical
functions in preference to this. For according to our illustrious
Leader, it is “‘ initiation of initiations,” and one must first give the
Divine description of this, before the rest, from the inspired and
sacred science of the oracles, and then be borne by the supremely
Divine Spirit to its sacred contemplation. First, let us reverently
consider this. For what reason that which is common to the
other Hierarchical initiations, is pre-eminently attributed to this,
beyond the rest. And why it is uniquely called, “Communion
and Synaxis.” For each consecrating function collects our
divided lives into uniform deification, and gives communion and
oneness with the One, by the Godlike folding together of our
diversities. Now we affirm that the Perfection, which comes
from the participation of the other Hierarchical symbols, springs
from the supremely Divine and perfecting gifts of this Sacrament.
For it scarcely ever happens that any Hierarchical initiation is
celebrated without the most Divine Eucharist, at the head of the
rites celebrated in each, Divinely accomplishing the collecting of
the person initiated to the One, and completing his communion
with God by the Divinely transmitted gift of the perfecting
mysteries. If, then, each of the Hierarchical initiations, as being
incomplete, will not complete our communion and our gathering
to the One, even its being initiation is taken away, on account of
the lack of initiation. For as the impartation of the supremely


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 61


Divine mysteries to the person being initiated is the completion
and head of each initiation, naturally the Hierarchical judgment
hit upon an appellation peculiar to it, from the truth of the facts.
Thus, for instance, with regard to the holy initiation of the Divine
birth ; since it imparts first-Light, and is supreme head of all the
Divine illuminations, we celebrate the true appellation, from the
enlightenment conferred. For though it be common to all
Hierarchical functions to impart the gift of sacred light to those
who are being initiated, yet this gave to me the power of first
sight, and through the primal light of this, I was conducted to the
view of the other religious rites. Having said this, let us minutely
investigate and examine, as becomes the Hierarchy, the perfect
administration and contemplation of the most holy initiation.


II.— Mystery! of Synaxis, that ἐς, Communion.


The Hierarch having completed a reverent prayer, near the
Divine Altar, begins with the incense and proceeds to every part
of the enclosure of the sacred place; he then returns to the
Divine Altar and begins the sacred chanting of the Psalms—the
whole ecclesiastical Order chanting with him the sacred language
of the Psalter. Next follows the reading of the Holy Scriptures
by the Leitourgoi. After these readings, the catechumens quit
the sacred enclosure, as well as the energumenoi and the
penitents. But those who are deemed worthy of the view and
participation of the Divine Mysteries remain. Of the Leitourgoi,
some stand near the closed gates of the sanctuary, whilst others
perform some duty or other of their proper function. But chosen
members of the diaconal Order, with the Priests, place the sacred
Bread upon the Divine Altar, and the Cup of Blessing, whilst the
universal Song ? of Praise is sung by the whole body of the Church.
Afterwards the Divine Hlierarch offers a sacred prayer, and
proclaims the holy Peace to all. When all have greeted each
other, the mystical proclamation of the holy tablets is performed.
When the Hierarch and the Priests have washed their hands in
water, the Hierarch places himself in the midst of the Divine
Altar. But the chosen Deacons alone, after the Priests, stand
around. The Hierarch, when he has celebrated the sacred works
of God, consecrates the most Divine gifts and brings to view the
things celebrated, through the symbols reverently exposed. When
he has shown the free gifts of the works of God, he himself
proceeds to the sacred participation of the same, and turns and
exhorts the others. When he has received and distributed the


1 See Traicté de la Liturgie ou S. Messe selon l’usage et la forme des apostres,
et de leur disciple Sainct Denys, Apostre des Francois, par Gilb. Genebrard,
archevesque d’ Aix.

2 See Appendix. 8 As in Denmark.


, =


62 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


supremely Divine Communion, he terminates with a holy thanks-
giving. Whilst the multitude have merely glanced at the Divine
symbols alone, he himself is ever conducted by the Divine Spirit,
as becomes a Hierarch, in the purity of a Godlike condition, to
the holy archetypes of the rites performed, in blessed and
intellectual visions.


III.—Contemplation.


After the images, I come now, most excellent son, in due order
and reverence, to the Divine reality of the archetypes. To those
yet being initiated, I would say this, for the harmonious guidance
of their souls, that the varied and sacred composition of the
symbols is not without spiritual instruction even to them, when it
is merely presented superficially. For the most sacred chants and
readings of the oracles teach them a discipline of a virtuous life,
and what is more than this, the complete purification from
destructive evil. But the most Divine, and general, and peaceful
distribution of one and the same both Bread and Cup, enjoins
upon them a fellowship in character as well as a fellowship in
food, and recalls to their memory the most Divine Supper, and
arch-symbol of the rites performed, agreeably with which the
Founder of the symbols himself excludes, most justly, him who
had joined in the feast of the heavenly things, not piously,! and in
a manner dissimilar to himself; teaching at once, clearly and
Divinely, that the approach to Divine mysteries with a sincere
mind, confers on those who draw nigh, the participation in a gift
similar to their own character. Let us, then, as I said, leave
behind these things, beautifully depicted upon the propylea of the
innermost shrine, as being sufficient for those who are yet unfit for
contemplation, and let us proceed from the effects to the cause ;
and then, Jesus lighting the way, let us view our holy Synaxis and
the comely contemplation of the spiritual mysteries, which makes
manifest the blessed beauty of the archetypes. But, oh, most
Divine and holy initiation, uncover the folds of the dark mysteries,
enveloping thee in symbols. Be manifest to us in thy bright
glory, and fill our intellectual visions with unique and uncon-
cealed light.


We must, then, in my opinion, pass within the All Holy
Mysteries, after we have laid bare the spiritual conception of the
first of the images, to gaze upon its Godlike beauty, and con-
template with a godly mind the Hierarch, as he goes with
fragrance from the Divine Altar to the furthermost bounds of the
holy place, and is again, at the end, restored to the same. For
the Blessedness, supremely Divine above all, although through


1 John xiii. rz. St. Cyprian thought Judas was excluded ; St. Augustine not.
See Cornelius a Lapide on John xiii. 11.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 68


Divine goodness it goes forth to the communion of those who
participate in itself, yet it never goes outside its essential unmoved
position and _ steadfastness.


Further, it gives to all, according to their capacity, its Godlike
illuminations ; always self-centred, and in no wise moved from its
own proper identity. In the same manner the Divine initiation
of the Synaxis, although it has an unique and simple and enfolded
origin, is multiplied, out of love towards man, into the holy variety
of the symbols, and travels through the whole range of Divine
imagery; yet uniformly it is again collected from these into its
own proper Oneness, and unifies those who are being reverently
conducted towards it. In the same Godlike manner the Divine
Hierarch, even when he benignly deputes to his subordinates his
own unique Hierarchical science, by using the multiplicity of
Divine enigmas; yet again, as absolute, and not to be held in
check by smaller things, he is restored to his own supreme dignity
without diminution. And when he has himself made the spiritual
entry to the Oneness of himself, he sees clearly the uniform
reasons of the religious rites, as he makes the goal of his philan-
thropic progress to things secondary, the more Divine return to
things first. The chanting of the Psalms, which is co-essential to
almost all the Hierarchical mysteries, was not likely to be separated
from the chief of all. For all holy and inspired Scriptures set
forth for those meet for deification, either the originated Begin-
ning ! and Order from God of things created ; or the Priesthood 2
and polity of the Law; or the distributions 8 and possessions of
the inheritance of the people of God; or the understanding of
sacred judges,‘ or wise kings, or inspired Priests; or philosophy 5
of men of old time, indomitable ® in the endurance of evils springing
up in multitude and measure; or the treasures of wisdom for the
conduct of life; or odes or inspired ἴ images of Divine Loves ; or
the prophetical predictions® of things to come; or ®the God-
Incarnate works of Jesus?°; or the administrations 11 and sacred
doctrines of His Apostles given by God for the imitation of God ;
or the hidden 123 and mystic range of view of the beloved and
Divinely sweet disciple ; or the supermundane theology of Jesus.
These, too, are embedded in the holy and Godlike instructions
of the initiations. But the sacred representations of the Divine
odes, whose purpose is to celebrate the words and works of God
throughout, and to praise the holy words and works of godly men,
forms an universal Hymn Narrative of things Divine; which


1Genesisi. ὃ Leviticusand Deut. 8 Numbers. ὁ Judges and Kings.
5 Proverbs and Wisdom. Job. ‘Canticles. 8 Prophets.
9 τὰς dvdpixas Ἰῆσον Geovpyias. Gospels. 11 Acts and Epistles.


18 Either Gospel or Apocalypse of St. John. If latter, it was added in revision
of works, A.D. 96-98.


64 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


makes in those who reverently recite it a habit suitable for the
reception and distribution of every Hierarchical mystery.


When, then, the universal melody of the holy Psalms has harmon-
ized the spiritual condition of our souls to the things which are
presently to be celebrated, and by the unison of the Divine odes,
as one and concordant chorus of things Divine, has established
concord towards things Divine, and ourselves! and one another,
the things more compounded and obscure in the spiritual language
of the mystic Psalms are expanded by the most holy lections of
the inspired compositions, through more full and distinct images
and narratives. He who devoutly contemplates these will perceive
the uniform and one concordant breathing as being moved by
One, the supremely Divine Spirit. Hence, naturally, in the
history of the world, after the more ancient? tradition—the new
Covenant is proclaimed. This inspired order of the Hierarchy
teaches this—that the One affirmed the Divine works of Jesus as
to come; the other accomplished them, in fact. And as that
described the truth in figures, this, on the other hand, shewed it
present. For the accomplishment, in fact, of this established the
truth of the predictions of that, and the work of God is a consum-
mation of the Word of God.


Those who in every respect have no ear for the sacred initiations
do not even recognize their images—unblushingly rejecting the
saving revelation of the Divine Birth, and realizing to their
destruction the words, “Thy ways I do not wish to know.” 8


Now the custom of the holy Hierarchy permits the catechumens
and the penitents to hear the sacred chanting of the Psalms, and
the inspired reading of the all Holy Scriptures ; but it does not
invite these to the next religious services and contemplations, but
only the perfect visions of the perfected. For the Divine-like
Hierarchy is full of reverent justice, and distributes savingly to
each, according to their due, the harmonious participation of each
in things Divine, in measure and proportion and due time. The
lowest rank, then, is assigned to the catechumens, for they are
without participation and instruction, in any of the Hierarchical
functions; not even having the existence in God after Divine
Birth, but are being brought to 4 Birth by the paternal instructions,
and moulded by life-giving formations towards the blessed acqui-
sition of their first life and first light, from Birth in God. As,
then, children after the flesh, if whilst immature and unformed
they should anticipate their proper delivery, as untimely born and
abortions, would fall to the earth without life and without light ;
and no one, in his senses, would say from what he saw, that they


1 Republic, liber iv. ad finem. Dulac, p. 426-7. %The Law. δ Job xxi. 14.
4 See Plato, Theet. i. 114, 115. Dulac 429.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 65


were brought to the light, released from the darkness of the womb
(for the medical authority learned in the functions of the body
would say that light operates on things receptive of light), thus
also science, which knows all about religious rites, brings these
first to delivery by the preparatory nourishment of the formative
and life-giving instructions. But when it has made their condition
ripe for Divine Birth, it gives to them savingly, in due order, the
participation in things luminous and perfecting. But at present
it separates things perfect from things imperfect, consulting the
good order of Divine things, and the delivery and life of the
catechumens in a Godlike order of the sacred rites.


As for the multitude of the energumenoi, that indeed is unholy,
but it is second above the catechumens, which is lowest. Nor is
that on a par, as I think, with the altogether uninstructed and
entirely uncommunicated in the Divine initiations, for it has
received a certain participation in the most holy functions, but is
yet held in chains by contrary qualities, whether enchantments or
terrors. Now, as regards these, the sight and participation in the
holy mysteries is withdrawn, and very properly. For if it be true
that the altogether godly man, the worthy partaker of the Divine
mysteries, who is carried to the very summit of the Divine like-
ness, to the best of his powers, in complete and most perfect
deification, who does not follow the things of the flesh, beyond
the most necessary requirements of nature, nor these, if it should
happen to be superfluous ; who will be, at the same time, a temple
and a follower, according to his ability, of the supremely Divine
Spirit, in the highest deification, labouring to add like to like.
Such an one as this, would not be possessed by opposing
phantoms or fears, but will laugh them to scorn, and when they
approach will throw them and put them to flight, and will act
rather than persuade. And besides this, by the passionless and
indomitableness of his own character, he will be seen to be a
physician to others for similar possessions.! But I think further,
yea, rather, I know certainly, that the most clear decision of the
Hierarchy holds that they are rather possessed with a most
detestable possession, whoever, by departing from the Godlike
life, become of one mind and one condition with destructive
demons ; turning themselves from things that really are, and un-
dying possessions, and everlasting pleasures, for the sake of the
most base folly, destructive to themselves, by desiring and
pursuing the earthly variableness, vexed by many passions, and
the perishable and corrupting pleasures, and the unstable comfort
in things foreign to their nature, not real but seeming. These
first, then, and more properly than those, were shut out by the
discriminating authority of the Deacon, for it is not permitted to


1 ἐνεργημάτων.


66 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


them to have part in any other holy function, than the teaching
of the oracles, in order to turn them to better things. For if the
Divine Service of the heavenly mysteries excludes from view the
penitents and those who have already approached it, not, permitting
anything not completely perfect to draw nigh, but proclaims this,
in all sincerity, that ‘‘I am invisible, and incommunicable to
those who are in any respect imperfectly weak as regards the
attainment of the highest degree of the Divine Likeness ” (for that
most impartial voice scares away also those who cannot be
associated with the worthy partakers of the Divine mysteries),
how much more then will the multitude of those who are under
the sway of their passions, be unholy and alien from every view of,
and participation in, the holy mysteries. After the uninstructed
and uninitiated in the mysteries have been put outside the Divine
Temple, and the holy service above their capacity, and with them
the apostates from the religious life, and next, those who through
want of manliness are easily affected by the fears and fancies of
contrary influences, as not having reached the stability and activity
of a Godlike condition, through the persistent and indomitable
inclination towards godliness; then in addition to these, those
who have separated indeed from the contrary life, but have not
yet been cleansed from its imaginations by a habit and love, godly
and pure ; and next, those who are not altogether uniform, and
to use an expression of the Law, “entirely without spot and
blemish ;” then the sacred ministers of sacred things, who love to
gaze upon sacred rites, contemplate in all purity the most holy
mystery, and celebrate in an universal Hymn of Praise the Author
and Giver of all good, from Whom the mysteries were exhibited
to us, as images of salvation, which divinely work the sacred
deification of the initiated. Now that Hymn some indeed call a
Hymn of Praise, others the symbol of worship, but others, as I
think more Divinely, a Hierarchical thanksgiving, as giving a
summary of the holy gifts which come to us from God. For it
seems to me a systematic record?! of all the works of God, on our
behalf, celebrated in song, which, after it had fixed our being and
life after the pattern of Divine goodness, and moulded the Divine
likeness in ourselves to beautiful archetypes, placed us in
possession of a more Divine condition and elevation. But when
it witnessed the dearth of Divine gifts, which came upon us by
our heedlessness, deigned to call us back to our original
condition by the restoration of our blessings, and by the complete
assumption of ours, to make good the most perfect impartation of
His own, and thus to give to us a participation in God and
Divine things.

When the Divine goodness has thus been religiously celebrated,


1 Note. Appendix, Liturgy of Dionysius.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 67


the Divine Bread is presented, veiled, and likewise the Cup of
Blessing. ‘The most Divine salutation is devoutly performed, and
the instructive and heavenly proclamation of the holy names
written on the tablets. For it is not possible to be collected to
the One, and to partake of the peaceful Oneness of the One, when
people are divided amongst themselves. For if being illuminated
by the contemplation and knowledge of the One, we would be
unitéd to an uniform and Divine agreement, we must not permit
ourselves to descend to divided lusts, from which are formed
earthly enmities, envious and passionate, against that which is
according to nature. This unified and undivided life is, in my
Opinion, established by the Divine Service of the salutation of
peace, which roots like to like, and separates the Divine and
unified visions from things divided. The reading of the holy
tablets, after the salutation, proclaims those who have passed
through life holily and have reached the term of a virtuous life
without faltering, urging and conducting us to their blessed
condition and Divine inheritance through their example. Further,
it announces them as living, and, as the Word of God says, “not
dead, but as having passed from death to a most divine life.” 1
But observe that they are enrolled in the holy memorials, not as
though the Divine memory were represented under the figure of a
memorial, after the manner of men; but, as one might say, with
reverence towards God, within the cherished and _ unfailing
knowledge in God of those who have been perfected in the like-
ness of God. For ‘He knoweth,” say the oracles, ‘those that
are His,”? and, “dear, in the sight of the Lord, is the death of
His saints.”® ‘Death of saints” being said, instead of perfection
in holiness. And bear this religiously in mind, that after the
august symbols, through which Christ is signified and partaken,
have been placed on the Divine Altar, the reading of the register
of the holy persons immediately follows, signifying their inseparable
conjunction with His celestial and sacred Oneness. When these
things have been religiously performed, according to the regula-
tions prescribed, the Hierarch, standing before the most holy
symbols, washes his hands with water, together with the reverend
order of the Priests. Because, as the oracles testify, when a man
has been washed, he needs no other washing, except that of his
extremities. Through this extreme cleansing, in a sanctified
habit of the Divine Likeness, whilst advancing in a goodly
manner to things secondary, he will be resistless and free, as
altogether uniform, and by turning himself uniquely to the One,
he will make his return without spot and blemish, as preserving
the fulness and entirety of the Divine likeness. There was even
the sacred laver, as we have said, in the Hierarchy of the Law.°®


1x John iii. 14. 22 Tim. ii. 19. ὅ Ps. cxvi. x5. ‘Jo. xiii. το. 5 Deut. xxi. 6.


68 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


But now the cleansing of the hands of the Hierarch and the
Priests suggests that. For it behoves those who approach the
most hallowed service to be purified even to the remotest imagina-
tions of the soul, and to approach, as far as possible, through like-
ness to itself. For thus they will shed more visibly the glory of
the Divine manifestations, since the celestial rays permit their own
splendour to pass more thoroughly and brilliantly into the bright-
ness of mirrors like themselves. Further, the cleansing of the
Hierarch and the Priests to their very extremities, takes place
before the most holy symbols, as in the presence of Christ, Who
surveys our innermost thoughts, and because the utmost purifica-
tion is enjoined under his most penetrating scrutiny and just and
unflinching judgment. Thus the Hierarch becomes one with
things Divine, and when he has celebrated the holy works of God,
he consecrates the most Divine symbols, and brings them to view
whilst their praises are sung.


We will now explain, to the best of our ability, the works of
God, of which we have spoken. For we are not competent to
extol the praises of all, much less to know accurately and to reveal
their mysteries to others. But whatever has been sung and
religiously performed by godly Hierarchs, after the oracles, this
we will say, as far as permissible, invoking the Hierarchical
inspiration to our aid. Immediately after our human nature had
thoughtlessly fallen from the good things of God, it was seized by
a life vexed with many passions, and, at last, a ruinous death.
For, as a natural consequence, the pernicious departure from
genuine goodness, and the transgression of the sacred Law laid
down in Paradise, delivered him, when fretted with the life-giving
yoke, to his own downward inclinations, and the enticing and
hostile wiles of the adversary—the adversaries of the good things
of God. Hence, he pitiably exchanged for the eternal, the mortal.
As then the human race had its own origin in corrupted genera-
tions, the end naturally corresponded with the beginning. Now
as mankind had willingly fallen from the Divine and conducted
life, they were carried to the opposite extremity—the variableness
of many passions. Whilst going astray, and turned aside from
the strait way leading to the true God, and being subject to a
destructive and evil-working diversity, they naturally forgot that
they were worshipping, not gods, or friends, but enemies. , Now
when these had used the human race harshly, according to their
own cruelty, it fell into danger of annihilation and destruction.
But the boundless lovingkindness of the supremely Divine good-
ness towards man, did not, in its benevolence, withdraw from us
its spontaneous forethought, but taking upon itself a real participa-
tion of our entire nature, without sin,! and having made itself one


1 Heb. iv. rs.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCRY. 69


with our infirmity, with the unconfused possession of its own
properties, entirely without flaw, it gave to us, as members of the
same family, communion with itself henceforward, and proclaimed
us partakers of his own good things ; having, as the secret teaching
holds, loosed the power! of the rebellious diversity which was
against us; not by force, as having the upper hand, but according
to the Divine saying, mystically transmitted to us, “in judgment
and righteousness.” 2


Our condition, then, he benevolently changed to the contrary.
For the darkness of our mind he filled with perfect and most
Divine light, and adorned that which was without likeness with
Godlike beauties. The tabernacle? of our soul, which was all
but fallen down, he liberated from most damnable passions and
destructive stains through a perfected salvation, and exhibited to
us a supermundane elevation, and a Divine course of life in our
assimilation to his own holiness, as far as permissible. But how
could the Divine imitation otherwise become ours unless the
memory of the most holy works of God were perpetually
renewed by the holy teaching and service of the Hierarchy.
This, then, we do, as the oracles say, ‘‘ for its remembrance.” 4
Wherefore the Divine Hierarch, standing before the Divine Altar,
celebrates the holy works of God, which proceed from the
most godly forethought of Jesus on our behalf, which He com-
pleted for the salvation of our race, by the good pleasure of the
most Holy Father in the Holy Spirit, as the Divine Word
affirms. When he has celebrated their majesty, and gazed, with
intellectual vision, upon the spiritual contemplation, he proceeds
to the Divine service symbolical of them—and this, as transmitted
from God. Hence, after the sacred praise of the works of God,
he deprecates his own unworthiness for a service above his merits.
First, reverently saying aloud, “ Thou hast said, Do this for My
remembrance” ®—then,’ having asked to become meet for this
holy office of Divine imitation, and to consecrate the Divine
symbols, by being made like to Christ Himself, and to distribute
them in perfect holiness ; and that those who shall partake of those
holy mysteries may receive them religiously, he consecrates the
most Divine symbols, and brings the mysteries to view through
the reverent exposition of the symbols, while their praises are
being sung. For when he has unveiled the veiled and undivided
Bread, and divided it into many, and has apportioned the One-
ness of the Cup to all, he symbolically multiplies and distributes
the unity—completing in these a most holy Divine Service. For
the unity and simplicity and hiddenness of Jesus, the Divinely
supreme Word, by His becoming Man amongst us, came forth,


1 Ps, Ixxiv. 14. 2 Ps. xeviii.2. δ Plato Crat.i. 295. 4 Luke xxii. 19.
δ Ps. xl. 6-8. § Luke xxii. 19. 4 Prayer of humble access.


70 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


out of goodness and love towards man, to the compound and
visible, and benevolently devised the communion which makes
us one with Himself, having united in the highest degree our
lowliness to His own Godhead ; if indeed we have been fitted to
Him, as members to a body, after the identity of a blameless and
Divine life ; and have not, by being killed through destructive
passions, become unsuited and unattached and unyoked, as
regards the godly and healthy members. For if we aspire to
communion with Him, we must keep our eye fixed upon His
most godly Life in the flesh, and we must retrace our path to the
Godlike and blameless habit of mind by being made like It in
its holy sinlessness. For thus He will communicate to us an
harmonious likeness to Himself.


The Hierarch makes known these things to those who are living
religiously by bringing the veiled gifts to view, by dividing their
unity into multiplicity, and making the recipients partakers in
them, by the utmost Oneness of the things distributed, with those
who receive them. For he depicts in these things, visibly, by
bringing to Jesus, the Christ, our spiritual life, as in images,
coming as He does from the Hiddenness of the Divine Father ;
and out of love to man, moulded into our likeness from us, by
the perfect and unconfused incarnation in our race, and advancing
to the divided condition of ourselves without divergence from His
essential unity ; and calling the human race, through this beneficent
love of man, into communion with Himself and His own good
things, provided we are united to His most Divine Life by
assimilation to it, as far as permissible. Thus in very truth we
shall have been completed as partakers of God and Divine things.
Having received and distributed the Divine Communion, he
terminates with the singing of the holy thanksgiving, in which the
whole body of the Church take part. For the communion
precedes the distribution—and the reception of the mysteries the
mystical impartation. For this is the regulation and order of the
Divine Mysteries, that the reverend Leader should first partake
and be filled with the gifts to be imparted through him, from God,
to others, and that thus he should impart to others also. Where-
fore, those who rashly content themselves with Divine instructions
in preference to a life and condition agreeable to the same are
profane and entirely alien from the sacred regulation established.
For, as in the case of the bright shining of the sun, the more
delicate and luminous substances being first filled with the brilliancy
flowing into them, impart their overflowing light to things near.
them ; thus it is not tolerable that one who has not become
altogether Godlike in his whole character, and who has not been
proved to govern by the Divine influence and judgment, should
become a Leader to others in what is altogether Divine. When
the whole order of the Priests have been collected together in


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 71


sacerdotal order, and have communicated in the most Divine
mysteries, they finish with a holy thanksgiving, after they have
recognized and celebrated the gifts of the works of God, according
to their degree. So that those who have not partaken or recog-
nized the Divine mysteries would not come to thanksgiving ;
although the most Divine gifts are, in their essential nature,
worthy of thanksgiving. But, as I said, not having wished even
to look at the Divine gifts from their inclination to evil, they have
remained throughout unblessed, as regards the boundless gifts of
the works of God. ‘‘ Taste and see,” say the oracles, for, by the
sacred instruction in Divine things, the instructed recognize their
munificent gifts; and by gazing upon their most Divine height
and breadth in the participation, they extol the supercelestial
beneficent works of the Godhead.


CAPUT IV.


Concerning the inittatory rites in Myrrh, and those who are
perfected in the samme.


So great and so beautiful are the spiritual visions of the most
holy Synaxis, which, as we have often said, accomplish by religious
rites our participation in and collection towards the One. But
there is another perfecting Service that occupies the same rank as
this, which cur Leaders name Initiation of Myrrh. By con-
templating its parts in due order, after the rule of sacred images,
we shall thus be borne, by religious contemplations, to its Oneness
through its parts.


I].—Mystery of Consecration of Myrrh.


In the same way as in the Synaxis, the orders of the imperfect
are dismissed, that is, after the Bishop has made the whole circuit
of the temple, attended with fragrant incense, and the chanting of
the Psalms, and the reading of the most Divine Lections. Then
the Hierarch takes the Myrrh and places it upon the Divine
Altar, veiled under twelve sacred wings, whilst all cry aloud, with
a devout voice, the sacred melody of the inspiration of the God-
rapt Prophets. When the Bishop has finished the prayer offered
over it, he uses it in the most holy perfectings of things that are
hallowed, for the completion of almost every Hierarchical function.


III.— Contemplation.


The introductory teaching, then, ofthis most perfecting function,
through the rites performed respecting the Divine Myrrh, shews
this, in my judgment, that that which is holy and of sweet savour


72 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


in the minds of devout men, is covered, as with a veil, since it is
Divinely enjoined upon holy men, to keep their beautiful and
well-savoured likeness to the virtue of the hidden God, not made
known for the purpose of vain glory. For the hidden and sweet-
savoured comeliness of God is undefiled, and is spiritually
manifested to the spiritual contemplators only, desiring to keep
the unsullied images of virtue in the soul like unto itself. For
when a man gazes, with undistracted vision, upon that spiritual
and fragrant beauty, the unportrayed and well imitated image of
' Godlike virtue moulds and fashions itself to a most glorious
imitation. And, as in material images, if the artist look without
distraction upon the archetypal form, not drawn aside to any other
sight, or in any way distracted, he will duplicate, if I may so
speak, the very thing that is being engraved, whatever it may be,
and will shew the reality in the likeness, and the archetype in the
image—each in each, except as regards difference of substance.
In the same way, to copyists who love the beautiful‘in mind, the
persistent and unflinching contemplation of the sweet-savoured
and hidden beauty, will confer the unerring and most Godlike
appearance.! Naturally, then, the divine copyists, who unflinch-
ingly mould their own spiritual image after the celestial sweet
savour and spiritual comeliness, perform none of their Divinely
imitated virtues ‘to be seen of men,”? as the Divine text expresses
it. But they reverently contemplate the most holy things of the
Church, veiled in the holy Myrrh, as in a figure. Wherefore,
whilst religiously concealing that which is holy and most Divine
in virtue, within their Godlike and God-engraved mind, they look
to the archetypal conception alone. For not only are they blind
to things dissimilar, but neither do they condescend themselves
to gaze upon them. Whercfore, as becomes their character, they
do not love things which merely seem to be good and just, but
such as really are so. Nor do they look to a mere appearance,
upon which the multitude unreasonably congratulate themselves ;
but, after the Divine example, distinguishing the good or evil as
it is in. itself, they are Divine images of the Supremely Divine
Suavity, which, having its true savour within itself, does not turn
itself, to the anomalously seeming of the multitude, but moulds
its genuineness to true images of itself.


Come, then, since we have viewed the exterior comeliness of
this Divine Service, beautiful throughout, let us look to its more
godly beauty. Whilst itself, by itself, has uncovered the veils
thrown around it, let us contemplate its blessed radiance, shedding
its bright beams openly around, and filling us with its fragrance
revealed to spiritual men. For the open consecration of the
Myrrh is neither shut out from, nor invisible to, those who surround


1 Plato, Rep. i. 6—ii. 116. ‘ 2 Matt. xxiii. 5.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 78


the Hierarch—but on the contrary is extended to them. But as
its contemplation is above the reach of the many, they reverently
conceal it ; and by Hierarchical direction, it is kept from the gaze
of the multitude.


For the splendour of things all holy sheds its light clearly and
without symbol to men inspired, as being congenial to the
spiritual, and perfumes their intellectual perceptions without
concealment. But it does not advance in the same way to the
inferior. Further, the deep contemplators of the spiritual conceal
it under the enigmas of the wings, without ostentation, so that it
may not be defiled by the impure. Through these sacred enigmas
the well-ordered ranks of the subordinate are conducted to the
degree of holiness compatible with their powers. The holy con-
secration, then, which we are now extolling, is, as I said, of the
most perfecting order and capacity of the Hierarchical functions.
Wherefore our Divine Leaders arranged this as being of the same
rank and effect, with the holy perfecting of the Synaxis, with the
same figures, for the most part, and mystical regulations and
lections. And you may see in like manner the Hierarch bearing
forward the sweet perfume from the more holy place into the
sacred precincts beyond—and teaching, by the return to the
same, that the participation in things Divine comes to all holy
persons according to their fitness, but that it remains undiminished
and altogether unmoved, and stands unchangeably in its identity
with a Divine fixity. In the same way the hymns and readings
of the lections bring to birth those not yet perfect for the life
bringing adoption of sons. They also form a religious inclination
in those who are possessed with accursed spirits. They dispel
the opposing fear and effeminacy from those possessed by a spirit
of unmanliness ; shewing to them, according to their capacity, the
highest pinnacle of the Godlike habit and power, by following
which they will, the rather, scare away the opposing forces, and
will take the lead in healing others ; and, following the example
of God, whilst unmoved from their own proper gifts, they will
not only be active against those opposing fears, but will themselves
give activity to others. They also impart to those who have
departed from evil to a religious mind, a sacred persistence, so
that they should not be again enslaved by evil. They purify
completely those who need to become altogether pure. They
lead the holy to their own Divine likeness, and contemplation,
and communion. They also establish those who are entirely
holy in blessed and spiritual visions, completing their uniform
likeness of the One, and making them One. What, then, shall
I say further? Is it not those orders that we have mentioned,
which are not entirely pure, that the present religious service
excludes without distinction, in the same way as the Synaxis,
so that it is viewed by the holy alone, in figures, and is con-


K


74 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


templated and ministered by the perfectly holy alone, without
symbols, through instructions given by the Hierarchy? Now this
has already been so often mentioned that it is superfluous, as I
think, to recur to the same statements. Those, then, who see
with a Divine vision may appropriately contemplate the Hierarch.
holding the Divine Myrrh, veiled under twelve wings, and devoutly
completing the holy service of consecration. Let us then affirm
that the composition of the Myrrh is a combination of sweet-
smelling materials, which has in itself abundantly fragrant qualities,
with which those who partake become perfumed, in proportion to
the degree in which they partake of its sweet savour. Now we
are persuaded that the Supremely Divine Jesus is superessentially
of good savour, filling the spiritual part of ourselves with a Divine
sweetness, by spiritual bequests. For if the reception of the
sensible odours makes us feel joyous, and nourishes, with much
sweetness, the sensitive organs of our nostrils—at least, if they be
sound and well apportioned to the sweet savour—in the same
way, anyone might say that our spiritual faculties, being soundly
disposed with regard to the subjection to evil, in the strength of
the distinguishing faculty implanted in us by nature, receive the
sweet savour from God, and are filled with a holy comfort and
most Divine nourishment, in accordance with Divinely fixed
proportions and the suitable turning of the mind towards the
Divine. Wherefore, the symbolical composition of the Myrrh, as
expressing in form things that are formless, depicts to us Jesus
Himself, as being a well-spring of the wealth of the Divine sweet-
ness, distributing in degrees fixed by God, to the most Godlike
of spiritual persons, the most Divine perfumes; from which the
minds, satiated with a most comforting joy, and filled with holy
receptions, enjoy a spiritual nourishment, by the entrance of the
savoury 3 gifts into their spiritual nature, according to a Divine
participation. But it is evident, as I think, that the distribution
of the primal perfume to the Beings above ourselves, as being
more Divine, is, as it were, nearer, and manifests and distributes
itself better to their luminous transparency, and overflows without
stint the healthy capacity of their minds for its reception, and
enters them much more abundantly. But as regards the subor-
dinate minds, which are not so receptive, it piously conceals the
highest vision and participation, and is distributed in a Divinely
fixed proportion, in fragrance corresponding to the recipients.
Amongst the holy Beings, then, who are above us, the highest
exalted order of the Seraphin is represented under the figure of
the twelve wings, as established and fixed around Jesus, giving
itself to the most blessed contemplation as far as permissible, and
filled with spiritual distributions through holy receptions, and, to


1 Cant. i. 3. 3 2 Cor. ii. 14.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 75


speak after the manner of men, crying aloud, with never silent
lips, the frequent Hymn of Praise.!


For the sacred knowledge of the celestial minds is both un-
tiring and possesses the Divine love without intermission, and is
at the same time superior to all baseness and forgetfulness.
Whence, as I think, that phrase, ‘‘ unceasing cry,” suggests their
perpetual and persistent science, and conception of things Divine,
with full determination and thanksgiving. Now we have, as I
think, sufficiently contemplated, in the description of the Heavenly
Hierarchy, the distinctive features of the incorporeal Seraphin,
Divinely described in the Scriptures, under sensible figures,
explanatory of the spiritual Beings; and we have made them
evident to your intellectual vision. Nevertheless, as they who
stand reverently around the Hierarch, reflect that same order, the
highest of all in science, we will now view their most Godlike
glory with unearthly visions.


Their numberless faces then, and many feet, demonstrate, as I
think, their property of viewing the Divine illumination from many
sides, and their conception of the good things of God, as ever
active and abundantly receptive. But the sixfold arrangement of
the wings, of which the Scripture speaks, does not, as I think,
denote a sacred number, but that the first, and second, and last
of the spiritual and Godlike powers of the highest existence and
Order around God are elevating, and entirely free, and super-
mundane. Hence the most holy wisdom of the Scriptures, when
Divinely describing the formation of the wings, places the wings
around the heads,” and the middle, and their feet, suggesting their
complete covering with wings, and their faculty of leading to the
Truly Existing.

But if they cover their heads and their feet, and fly by their
middle wings only ; bear this religiously in mind, that the Order,
so far exalted above the highest Beings, is circumspect respecting
the more lofty and deep of its conceptions, and raises itself, in
due proportion by its middle wings, to the vision of God; placing
its own proper life under the Divine yokes, and by these is well
directed to the knowledge of itself. But as regards the statement
of Holy Scripture, that ‘‘one cried out to the other,” that shows,
I think, that they impart to each other ungrudgingly their own
visions of God. And this we should deem worthy of religious
recollection, that the Hebrew word in the Holy Scriptures names
the most holy Seraphin, by an explanatory appellation signifying
their glowing and seething, in a Divine and ever moving life.


If, then, as those who have learned Hebrew say, the most


--«-΄-΄’----.... ND SR - =


1 Isaiah vi. 3. 2 Isaiah vi. 2.


76 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


Divine Seraphin are named by the Word of God, “glowing” and
‘* heating,” by a name expressive of their essential condition, they
possess, according to the symbolical description of the Divine
Myrrh, ever moving powers, calling into evidence its distribution
of exhilarating perfumes. For the incomprehensible, benign Being
loves to be moved by the glowing and most pure minds into
manifestation, and imparts its most Divine breathings in cheerful
distributions to those who thus devoutly call it forth. Thus the
most exalted Order of celestial Beings did not fail to recognize }
the supremely Divine Jesus when He descended for the purpose
of being sanctified, but contemplates Him lowering Himself in
our nature through Divine and inexpressible goodness ; and when
it had seen Him sanctified in a manner befitting man, from the
Father? and Himself *® and the Holy Spirit,* recognized their own
supreme Head as being essentially unchanged in whatever He
did, according to His supreme Deity. Hence the teaching of
the sacred symbols places the Seraphin near the Divine Myrrh
when it is being consecrated, recognizing and describing the
Christ as unchanged in the complete incarnation amongst us in
the truth of our nature. And what is still more Divine, it uses
the Divine Myrrh for the perfecting of every religious function,
distinctly shewing, according to the Divine saying, the sanctified
Sanctifier as always the same in Himself throughout the whole
course of His Divine Beneficence. Wherefore the completing
gift and grace of the Divine regeneration is completed in the
Divine perfecting of the Myrrh. Hence, as I think, the Hierarch
pouring the Myrrh upon the purifying font, in the form of a cross,
brings to view for contemplative eyes the Jesus descending to
death itself through the cross,® for our birth in God, and drawing
up from the jaws of a destructive death, by the same Divine and
resistless descent, those who, according to the mysterious saying,
‘are baptized into His death,” 6 from the former gulf of a destruc-
tive ’ death, and renewing them to a godly and eternal existence.®


But further, the perfecting unction of the Myrrh gives to him
who has been initiated in the most sacred initiation of the birth in
God, the indwelling of the supremely Divine Spirit; the sacred
imagery of the symbols suggesting, as I think, the gift of the
Divine Spirit, by Him Who for our sakes has been sanctified as
man, by the Divine Spirit, in an unaltered condition of His
essential Godhead. And bear this also most religiously in mind,
that the Law of the most holy completion completes the sacred
consecration of the Divine Altar by pure effusions of the most
holy Myrrh. But the work of God, at once supercelestial and


τ. Tim. iii. 16. %John x. 36. 8 John xvii. τς. ‘Rom.i. 4. ὅ Phil. ii. 8.
ὁ Rom. vi. 3. 7 Rom viii. 2. 8 Rom. vi. 4.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 77


supernatural, is head and being and perfecting power of all the
deifying holiness within ourselves. For if our most Divine Altar
is Jesus—the supremely Divine sanctification of the godly minds—
in Whon, according to the saying, ‘‘ being sanctified and mystically
offered as a whole burnt offering, we have access,”! let us gaze
with celestial eyes upon the self-same Altar (in Whom things being
perfected are perfected and sanctified), as being perfected from
the self-same most Divine Myrrh. For the all-pure Jesus sanctifies
Himself on our behalf and fills us with every purification, since
the things completed? in Him during the Divine economy, pass
afterwards in their beneficent effects to us, as children of God.
Hence, as I think, the Divine Leaders of our Hierarchy in
conformity with an Hierarchical conception received from God,
have wisely named this august service, completing of Myrrh—
from ‘‘ being completed.” As one might say, completing of God—
celebrating its Divine completing work in both senses. For His
completion is both the sanctification of Himself as Man, on our
behalf, and the completing and sanctifying of all things, by His
power as God. As for the sacred melody of the inspiration of
the God-rapt Prophets, it is called by those who know Hebrew,
‘** Praise of God,” or “" Praise ye the Lord.” Since then, every
Divine manifestation and work of God is religiously portrayed in the
varied composition of the Hierarchical symbols, it is not unbefitting
to mention the Divinely moved song of the Prophets, for it teaches
at once, distinctly and reverently, that the beneficent works of the
Divine Goodness are worthy of devout praise.


CAPUT V.


Concerning sacerdotal consecrations.


Such, then, is the most Divine perfecting work of the Myrrh.
But it may be opportune, after these Divine functions, to set forth
the sacerdotal Orders and elections themselves ; their powers, and
energies, and consecrations, and the triad of the superior Orders
under them ; in order that the harmonious Order of our Hier-
archy may be demonstated as entirely rejecting and excluding the
disordered, the unregulated, and the confused ; and, at the same
time, manifesting the regulated, and ordered, and well-established
in the gradations of the sacred orders within itself. Now we have
shewn, as I think, in the Hierarchy already celebrated by us, the
threefold division of every Hierarchy—when we affirmed, as our
sacred tradition holds, that every Hierarchical function is divided


1 Eph. iii. x2. 3 Observe the doctrine of the Atonement.


"


78 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


into (1) the most Divine initiations, and (2) the inspired experts
and teachers of them, (3) and those who are being religiously
initiated by them.


Therefore the most Divine Hierarchy of the heavenly Beings
has for its initiation its own proper and most immaterial conception
of God and things Divine, according to its capacity, and a com-
plete likeness to God, and a persistent habit of imitating God, as
far as permissible. But its illuminators and leaders to this sacred
consecration are the very first Beings around God. For these
generously and proportionately transmit to the sacred ranks,
subordinate to themselves, the knowledge given to themselves,
and always deifying, by the self-subsisting and supreme Deity,
who governs the Divine minds that impart wisdom to man. But
the ranks who are subordinate to the first Beings are, and are
truly called, the initiated orders, as being religiously conducted
through those to the deifying illumination of the supreme Deity.
After this the heavenly and supermundane Hierarchy, the supreme
Deity gave the Hierarchy under the Law, for the purpose of
imparting its most holy gifts, for the benefit of our race, as it
were, to children,! giving an apportioned light, so as not to wound
weak visions ; and copies,? far from the Archetypes, and hard to
understand ® ; and types, whose hidden meaning was not easily
discerned. Now the initiation of the Hierarchy under the Law
is the restitution to spiritual worship. Our conductors to this
were men religiously instructed as to the holy tabernacle® by
Moses, the first initiator and Leader of the Hierarchs under the
Law. Now, in reference to this tabernacle, when describing, for
purposes of instruction, the Hierarchy under the Law, he called
all the sacred services of the Law an image of the type shewn to
him in Mount Sinai.’ But “initiated” are those who are being
conducted from the symbols of the Law, in proportion to their
capacity, to a more perfect revelation. The Word of God calls
our Hierarchy the more perfect revelation, naming it a fulfilment ὃ
of that, and a holy inheritance. It is both celestial and legal,
participating in common, as a mean between extremes—with the
former by spiritual contemplations, and with the latter, because it
is variegated by sensible signs, and through these is reverently led
to the Divine. There is likewise a threefold division of the
Hierarchy, which is divided into the most holy services of the
initiations, and into the Godlike ministers of holy things, and
those who are being conducted by them, according to their
capacity, to the holy rites.


But each of the threefold divisions of our Hierarchy, like that


1Gal.iv.3. %Heb.x.1. ® Num. xii. 8. 4 Rom.ii.a0, ὅ John iv. 93.
6 Heb. ix. rx. 7 Ex. xxv. 40. 8 Matt. v. 17.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 79


of the Law, and of the Hierarchy which is more Divine than ours,
is arranged as first, middle, and last in rank, each carefully
guarding the proportion of religious rites, and the well-ordered
fellowship which keeps in harmonious order and binds all things
together. The most holy service of the initiations, regards the
sacred cleansing of the imperfect as a first Godlike rank—the
illuminating instruction of those who have been purified as the
middle—the perfecting of those who have been instructed in an
exact knowledge of their own revelations as the last, which is a
summary of the two former. The Order of Ministers, in the first
rank, cleanses the uninitiated through the initiations. In the
middle rank, it imparts light to those who have been cleansed ;
and in the last, and highest of the ministering ranks, it completes
those who have been made partakers of the light, by the perfect
skill in the illuminations contemplated. The first rank} of those
who are being initiated is that of those who are being purified ;
the next Is that of those who are being illuminated after purifica-
tion, who contemplate some sacred mysteries? ; but the last,
which is more Divine than the others, is that which is being
illuminated with the most perfecting science of the sacred
illuminations contemplated. The threefold rank of the holy
service of the initiations is celebrated, since the Birth in God is
exhibited in the oracles, as a purification and light-giving illumina-
tion; and the initiation of the Synaxis and the Myrrh, as a
perfecting knowledge and science of the works of God, through
which the unifying elevation and most blessed communion towards
the Godhead is reverently perfected. But now let us next examine
the sacerdotal order, which is divided into a purifying, and
illuminating, and perfecting discipline. This, then, is the sacred
Law of the Deity—that, through the first, the second are con-
ducted to its most Divine Light. Do we not see the material
substances of the elements, first approaching, by preference, things
which are more congenial to themselves, and through these
diffusing their own energy to other things. Naturally, then, the
head and foundation of all good order, invisible. and visible,
causes the Divinely wrought rays to approach first the more
Divine Beings, and through them, as being more transparent
minds, and more properly adapted for reception and transmission
of Light, transmits his light and manifestations to those who are
subordinate, in proportions suitable to them.


It is, then, the function of these, the first contemplators, to
exhibit ungrudgingly to the next order, in proportion to their
capacity, the Divine visions reverently gazed upon by themselves,
and to reveal the things relating to the Hierarchy (since they have
been abundantly instructed with a complete science in all matters


.--....- --..0ὺ0ς0ϑὕ0ζὕ0.ὕ....ὄ.ὃΘ............----...-....--............ὕ..................


1 Plato, Phéd. i. 52. 2 Plato, Phéd. i. 54.


80 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


relating to their own Hierarchy, and have received the effectual
power of instruction), and to impart sacred gifts according to
capacity of reception, since they possess Hierarchical complete-
ness in the highest degree of knowledge and attainment. The
Divine order of the Hierarchs, then, is the first of the contem-
plative orders ; but it is, at the same time, highest and_ lowest ;
inasmuch as every order of our Hierarchy is summed up and
fulfilled in it. For as we see every Hierarchy is terminated in
Jesus, thus we see each order summed up in its own godly
Hierarch. Now the power of the Hierarchical order permeates
the whole sacred body, and through every one of the sacred
Orders performs the mysteries of its proper Hierarchy. But
pre-eminently to this, the Divine institution assigned the more
Divine Services of the Sanctuary, rather than to the other Orders,
for his special work. For these are the perfecting images of the
supremely Divine Power, completing all the most Divine symbols
and all the sacred orders. For though some of the august
symbols are consecrated by the Priests, yet never will the Priest
effect the Divine Birth without the most Divine Myrrh; nor will
he consecrate the mysteries of the Divine Communion, unless the
symbols of Communion have been placed upon the most Divine
Altar. But neither will he be Priest himself, unless he has been
designated to this by the Hierarchical consecrations. Hence the
Divine Institution has uniquely assigned the dedication of the
Hierarchical orders, and the consecration of the Divine Myrrh,
and the complete consecration of the Altar, to the perfecting
powers of the inspired Hierarchs. It is, then, the Hierarchical
Order which is furnished with the perfecting faculty, which pre-
eminently completes the perfecting functions of the Hierarchy,
and reveals lucidly the sciences of the holy mysteries, and teaches
their proportions, and sacred conditions and powers. The
illuminated order of the Priests, however, conducts those who are
being initiated, under the direction of the inspired Hierarch, to
the Divine visions of the initiations, and in co-operation with this,
reverently ministers its own religious ministrations. Whatever
this order may do, in shewing the works of God, through the
most holy symbols, and in perfecting those who draw nigh, in the
Divine contemplations, and in the participation in the hallowed
initiations, it yet sends to the Hierarch those who crave the exact
knowledge of the religious service which they have witnessed.
The Order of the Leitourgoi, that which purifies, whose function
it is to separate the unfit, previous to the Divine Service of the
Priests,- purifies those who are drawing nigh, making them entirely
pure from opposing fashions, and suitable for the sanctifying
vision and communion. For which reason, during the service of
Regeneration, the Leitourgoi strip him who draws nigh of his old
clothing, and even take off his sandals, and make him stand


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 81


towards the west for renunciation. And again, they lead him
back to the east (for they are of the purifying order and function),
commanding those who approach to entirely cast away the
coverings of their former life; and, showing the darkness of their
former conduct, and teaching those who have said farewell to
darkness, to transfer their allegiance to the Light. The Order of
the Leitourgoi, then, is for purification, leading those who have
been purified to the bright services of the Priests, both purifying
and bringing to the Birth the uninitiated, by the purifying
illuminations and teachings of the oracles, and further, sending
away from the Priests the unholy, without respect of persons.
Wherefore the Hierarchical institution places them over the holy
gates, suggesting that the approach of those who come to holy
things must be with complete purification, and conducting the
approach to their reverent vision and communion, through the
purifying functions, and admitting them through these without spot.


We have shewn, then, that the order of the Hierarchs is per-
fecting and completing—that of the Priests illuminating and
conducting to the light—that of the Leitourgoi purifying and
discriminating ; that is to say, the Hierarchical order is appointed
not only to perfect but at the same time to enlighten and to
purify. The rank of the Priests has within itself, along with the
illuminating, the purifying science. For the inferior cannot step
over to the superior functions, and in addition to this it is not
permitted for them to undertake such quackery as that. But the
more Divine Orders, in conjunction with their own, possess also
the sacred science of the subordinate orders. Nevertheless, since
the sacerdotal orders are images of Divine Energies, they are
arranged in Hierarchical distinctions, shewing in themselves the
regulated illuminations into the first and middle and last sacred
energies and orders of the well regulated and unconfused order of
the Divine Energies ; manifesting, as I have said, in themselves
the well ordered and unconfused character of the Divine Energies.
For since the supreme Deity first cleanses the Minds which He
may enter, then enlightens, and when enlightened, perfects them
to a Godlike perfection ; naturally the Hierarchical image of the
Divine divides itself into well defined orders and functions, shewing
clearly the Divine Energies firmly established without confusion
in most hallowed and unmixed ranks. Now, since we have
spoken as permitted to us, of the sacerdotal orders and complete-
ness, their powers and energies, let us now contemplate their
most holy consecrations as well as we can.


Il.—Mystery of sacerdotal consecrations.


The Hierarch, being led to the Hierarchical consecration after
he has bent both his! knees before the Altar, has upon his head


1 ἄμφω τὼ πόδε.


~


82 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


the God-transmitted oracles, and the Hierarch’s right hand, and
in this manner is consecrated! by the Hierarch who consecrates
him with all holy invocations. The Priest, after he has bent both
his knees before the Divine Altar, has the Hierarch’s right hand
upon his head, and in this manner is dedicated 3 by the Hierarch
ordaining him with ‘hallowing invocations. But the Leitourgos,
after he has bent the one of two knees before the Divine Altar,
has upon his head the right hand of the Hierarch who ordains
him, being ordained ® by him with the consecrating invocations
used in the ordination of the Leitourgoi. Upon each of them the
cruciform seal* of the ordaining Hierarch is impressed, and at
each ordination the sacred proclamation of name takes place, and
the concluding salutation, since every sacerdotal person present,
and the Hierarch who ordained, salute him who has been con-
secrated to any of the aforenamed Hierarchical orders.


III.—Contemplation.


These things, then, are common to the Hierarch, and to the
Priests, and to the Leitourgoi—the conducting to the Divine
Altar and kneeling—the imposition of the Hierarch’s right hand
—the cruciform seal—the announcement of name—the completing
salutation.


But the special and select rite for the Hierarchs is the placing
of the oracles upon the head, since the subordinate orders have
not this—but for the Priests the bending of both knees, since the
consecration of the Leitourgoi has not this—for the Leitourgoi,
as has been said, bend the ove of two knees only. The conducting
and kneeling before the Divine Altar suggests to those who are
being sacerdotally consecrated that their own life is entirely placed
under God as Author of consecration, and that their whole
intellectual self approaches to Him all pure and hallowed, and
that it is of one likeness; and, as far as possible, meet for the
Divine and most hallowed Victim® and Altar, which purifies
through religious ministrations the Godlike mind. But the
imposition of the Hierarch’s right hand signifies at once the
protection of the primal consecrator, by whom, as holy children,
they are cherished paternally, whilst it gives them the sacerdotal
habit and function, and drives away their opposing powers. But
it teaches at the same time also that all sacerdotal operations are
effectual in so far as those who have been consecrated are acting
under God, and have Him as Leader in every respect of their
own life. But the signing with the sign of the Cross manifests
the inaction of all the impulses of the flesh, and the life of Divine
imitation which looks unflinchingly to the life of Jesus, at once


1 ἀποτελειουται. 3 ἁγιάξεται. ὃ τελειδυμενος. ‘odpayis. * Christ.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 83


manly and most godly, Who has come even to the Cross and
death, with a supremely Divine sinlessness, and stamps those who
thus live as of the same likeness by the cruciform image of his
own sinlessness.


But the Hierarch calls aloud the name of the consecrations and
of the consecrated. The mysterious meaning of which is, that
the holy consecrator, beloved of God, makes manifest the
supremely Divine choice—not of his own accord, or by his own
favour, leading those who are consecrated to the sacerdotal
consecration, but as being moved by God to all the Hierarchical
dedications. Thus Moses, the consecrator under the Law, does
not lead Aaron, his brother, to sacerdotal consecration, though
thinking him both beloved of God and hallowed, until moved by
God to this, in submission to God as chief consecrator, he
completed by Hierarchical rites the sacerdotal consecration.! But
our supremely Divine and first consecrator (for Jesus, out of His
great love to man, became even this), did ‘not glorify Himself,”
as the Scriptures say, but He Who said to Him, “ Thou? art
Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.’’ Wherefore also
He Himself, when leading the disciples to sacerdotal consecra-
tion, although, being as God, chief consecrator, nevertheless refers
the Hierarchical completion of the work of consecration to His
most holy Father, and the supremely Divine Spirit, by admonish-
ing the disciples not to depart from Jerusalem, but to ‘await the
promise of the Father, which ye heard of me, that ye shall be
baptized in the Holy Ghost.” And indeed, the coryphzus of
the disciples himself, with the ten, of the same rank and Hierarchy
with himself, when he proceeded to the sacerdotal completion of
the number of the disciples to twelve, reverently left the selection
to the Supreme Deity, saying, “ Shew* whom Thou hast chosen,”
and received him, who was Divinely designated by the Divine
choice, into the number of the twelve Hierarchs. Now concerning
the Divine lot, which fell as a Divine intimation upon Matthias,
others have expressed another view, not correctly, as I think, but
I will express my own sentiment. For it seems to me that the
Scriptures name “lot” as a certain gift from God, pointing out to
that Hierarchical Choir, him who was designed by the Divine
election. More particularly because the Divine Hierarch must
not perform the sacerdotal consecration of his own motion ; but,
as subject to God, moving him to accomplish these consecrations,
with religious rites and heavenly intimations.


Now the salutation at the end of the consecration has a religious
significance. For all the members of the sacerdotal orders
present, as well as the Hierarch who has consecrated them, salute


eS A ΄΄Π΄Π“Πἕ . ..-.


1 Ex. xxix. 4. 2 Ps. cx. 4. Ὁ Acts i. 4, 5. 4 Acts i. 24.


84 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


the men ordained. For when by sacerdotal habits and disposi-
tions, and by Divine call and dedication, a religious mind has
attained to sacerdotal consecration, he is dearly loved by the most
holy orders of the same rank ; elevated, as he is, to a most God-
like comeliness; loving the minds similar to himself, and
religiously loved by them in return. Hence it is that the mutual
sacerdotal salutation is performed, proclaiming the religious
communion of minds of like character, and their loving benignity
towards each other, which keeps, by sacerdotal training, their
most Godlike comeliness in complete perfection.


These things, as I said, are common to the whole sacerdotal
consecration. The Hierarch, however, as a distinctive mark, has
the oracles most reverently placed upon his head. For since the
perfecting function and science of the whole Priesthood is conferred
upon the inspired Hierarchs by the supremely Divine and perfect-
ing goodness, naturally the Divinely transmitted oracles are placed
upon the heads of the Hierarchs—oracles which explain com-
pletely and scientifically all theology—work of God, manifestation
of God, sacred word, sacred work: in one word, all the Divine
and sacred works and words bequeathed to our Hierarchy by the
beneficent Deity. Since the Godlike Hierarch, having partaken
entirely of the whole Hierarchical power, will not only be illumin-
ated in the true and God-transmitted science of all the holy words
and works committed to the Hierarchy, but will also transmit
them to others by Hierarchical teaching, and will perfect in most
Divine knowledge and the highest instruction, through his power
as Hierarch, all the most perfecting functions of the whole Priest-
hood. But the distinctive feature of the ordination of Priests, as
contrasted with the ordination of the Leitourgoi, is the bending
of the two knees, as that order bends only the one, and is conse-
crated by this religious symbol. The bending denotes the sub-
missive approach of the man who draws nigh, who places under
God that which is religiously presented. But since, as we have
often said, the three orders of the consecrators, through the three
most holy initiations and functions, preside over the three orders
of the initiated, and accomplish or religiously perform their saving
approach under the Divine yoke, naturally the order of Deacons,
as being merely puritive, religiously performs the ome approach
of those who are being purified, placing it under the Divine
Altar, as though the minds who are being purified were being
transcendently hallowed in himself. But the Priests bend both
their knees, because those who are religiously brought nigh by
them are not only being purified, but have been religiously per-
fected by their most luminous instructions into a contemplative
habit and power. But the Hierarch, bending both his knees, has
upon his head the God-transmitted oracles, as leading, through
his office of Hierarch, those who have been purified by the


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 85


Leitourgoi, and enlightened by the Priests, to the exact knowledge
of the things contemplated by them, in proportion to their
capacities ; and through this knowledge perfecting those who are
brought nigh, into the most complete holiness of which they are
capable. |


CAPUT VI.
Concerning the Ranks of the Initiated.


These, then, are the sacerdotal ranks and vocations, their
powers, and functions, and consecrations. We must next explain
the Triad of the ranks initiated, which are subordinate to them.
We affirm then that the multitudes who are dismissed from the
Divine Services and Consecrations, which we have mentioned, are
Orders undergoing a course of purification; for one is being
moulded and fashioned to a living existence, by the Deacons
through the oracles which bring to birth; another is already called
back to the holy life, from which it had departed, by the whole-
some discipline of the good oracles; another, as being already
terrorized through want of manliness by opposing fears, is being
fortified by the strengthening oracles; another, as being led back
from evil counsels to holy efforts ; and another as having been led
back, indeed, but not yet having a chaste fixedness in more God-
like habits and tranquillity. For these are the Orders under
purification, by the nursing and purifying powers of the Leitourgoi.
These, the Leitourgoi perfect, by their sacred powers, for the pur-
pose of their being brought, after their complete cleansing, to the
contemplation and participation in the most luminous Divine
Services. The middle is the contemplative order, which partici-
pates in certain Divine Offices in all purity, according to its
capacity, and is assigned to the Priests for its enlightenment. For
it is evident, in my opinion, that this order, after having been
cleansed from all unholy impurity, and when it has acquired the
immovable steadfastness of its own mind in perfect purity, is led
back, through priestly functions, to the habit and power of con-
templation, and communicates in the most Divine symbols, filled
with all holy joy in their contemplations and communions,
mounting to the Divine love of their highest knowledge, through
their instructions and functions, as far as their capacity admits.
This, I say, is the order of the holy people, which, as having
passed through complete purification, is deemed worthy, as far as
permissible, both of the reverent vision, and participation of the
most luminous Sacraments. But, the order higher than all the
initiated is the sacred order of the Monks, which, as regards an
entirely purified purification, with all its power and completely


86 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


purified energies, has acquired a spiritual contemplation and
participation in every Divine Service, which it is permissible for it
to contemplate ; and is being conducted by the most perfecting
functions of the Hierarchs, and taught by their inspired illumina-
tions and hierarchical traditions respecting the Divine Services of
the holy Sacraments, viewed by them, according to their capacity,
and elevated by their sacred science, to the most perfecting
perfection of which they are capable. Hence our Divine leaders
have deemed them worthy of sacred appellations. Some, indeed,
call them “ Therapeutz,” but others ‘‘ Monks,” from their pure
service and fervid devotion to the true God; and from the
undivided and unified life, as making them one, by folding
together their divided qualities into a God-like isolation, and
God-loving perfection. Wherefore the Divine institution accorded
them a perfecting grace, and deemed them worthy of a certain
invocation for their consecration—not hierarchical—for that is
confined to the sacerdotal orders alone, but hallowing,! as being
hallowed, by the pious Priests, by the hierarchical consecration in
the second degree.


IJ.—MYsrTERION.
Mystery of Monastic Consecration.


The Priest stands before the Divine Altar and religiously
pronounces the invocation for Monks. The Monk stands behind
the Priest, neither bends both knees, nor one of them, nor has
upon his head the Divinely transmitted oracles; but only stands
near the Priest, whilst he pronounces upon him the mystical
Benediction. When the Priest has finished this, he approaches
the man being consecrated, and asks him first, if he bids farewell
to all distractions—not of life only, but also of imagination. Then
he sets before him the most perfect life, and warns him that it is
his bounden duty to surpass the ordinary life. When the initiated
has promised steadfastly all these things, and the Priest has
signed him with the sign of the Cross, he crops his hair. After
an invocation to the threefold subsistence of the Divine Beatitude,
he strips off all his clothing, and clothes him anew, and with all
the holy men present salutes him, and administers to him the
supremely Divine Mysteries.


III.— Contemplation.


The fact that he bends neither knee, nor has upon his head
the Divinely transmitted oracles, but stands by the Priest, whilst


1 ἱερουργικῆς.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 87


pronouncing the benediction for Monks, signifies that the
monastic order is not for the leading of others, but stands by
itself, in an isolated and holy state, after the sacerdotal orders,
and is readily conducted by them as a follower to the Divine
science of sacred things, according to its capacity. The renuwncia-
tion of the divided, not only lives, but even imaginations, shews
the most perfect love of wisdom in the Monks, which exercises
itself in the exact knowledge of the unifying commandments.
For it is not, as I said, of the middle order of those who are
initiated, but of the higher than all. Therefore many of the
things which are done without reproach by the middle order, are
forbidden in every way to the unified Monks —inasmuch as they
are under obligation to be unified to the One, and to be collected
to a sacred isolation, and to be transformed to the sacerdotal life,
as far as permissible, as possessing an affinity to it in many
things, and as being nearer to it, as compared with the rest of
the ranks of the initiated. But the sealing with the sign of
the Cross, as we have already said, denotes the inaction of
almost all the desires of the flesh. The cropping of the hair
shews the pure and unpretentious life, which does not beautify
the darkness within the mind by overlarding it with smeared
pretence, but shews it leads by itself to the highest likeness of
God, not by human attractions, but by single and monastic.
The casting aside of the former clothing, and taking another,
seems to show a transition from a middle sort of religious life to
the more perfect one; just as, in the holy Birth from God, the
exchange of the clothing denoted the elevation of a purified life
to a contemplative and enlightened condition. But if even now
the Priest and all the religious present salute him who has been
consecrated, bear in mind the holy fellowship of those who carry
the likeness of God, who congratulate each other in a Divine
rejoicing. But, as consummation of all, the Priest invites him
who has been consecrated to the supremely Divine Communion,
shewing through religious ordinance that the consecrated, if he
would really attain to the monastic and uniform elevation, he will
not merely be contemplative of the sacred mysteries in their
essential nature, nor will he come to the communion of the most
holy symbols, after the fashion of the middle rank; but with a
Divine knowledge of the mysteries received by himself, he will
come in a manner different from that of the holy people to the
reception of the supremely Divine Communion. Wherefore, the
Communion of the most holy Eucharist is also given to the sacer-
dotal! Orders, in their dedication to the Priesthood at the conclusion
of their most sacred consecrations by the Hierarch who has con-
secrated them ; not only because the reception of the supremely


1 See Ordinal.


88 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


Divine Mysteries is the consummation of each Hierarchical
reception, but because all the sacred Orders, in accordance with
their capacity, partake of the common and most godly gift,
according to their own elevation and perfection in deification.
We conclude, then, that the holy initiations are, purification, and
illumination, and consecration. The Leitourgoi are a purifying
Order, the Priests an illuminating, and the Godlike Hierarchs a
perfecting Order. The Order which is excluded from the sacred
contemplation and communion, as being already under course of
purification, is an Order being purified. But the Order of the
unified Monks is a purified Order. For thus our Hierarchy,
reverently arranged in ranks fixed by God, is like the Heavenly
Hierarchies, preserving, so far as man can do, its Godlike charac-
teristics and Divine imitation.


. But you will say that the Orders undergoing purification utterly
fall short of the Heavenly Hierarchies (for it is neither permissible
nor true to say that any celestial Order is impure), and I would
altogether affirm myself that they are entirely without blemish, and
possess a purity above this world, unless I had completely fallen
away from a religious mind. For: if any of them should have
become captive to evil, and have fallen from the heavenly,
undefiled harmony of the celestial minds, he would be brought to
the gloomy fall of the rebellious multitudes. But one may
reverently say, with regard to the Heavenly Hierarchy, that the
revelation from God, of things hitherto unknown, is a purification
to the subordinate Beings, leading them to a more perfect science
of the God-derived communications, purifying them from the
ignorance of those things of which they had not hitherto the exact
knowledge, conducted as they are, through the first and more
Divine Beings, to the higher and more luminous splendours of the
visions of God. Thus there are ranks being illuminated, and
being initiated and purified, and purifying and illuminating, and
perfecting, after the example of the Heavenly Hierarchy; as
though the highest and more Divine minds were purifying the
subordinate, holy, and reverent ranks from all ignorance (in ranks
and proportions of the Heavenly Hierarchies), but fitting them
with the most Divine illuminations and perfections, in the most
pure science of the supremely Divine conceptions. For we have
already said, and the oracles Divinely demonstrate that all the
heavenly Orders are not alike, in the sacred knowledge of all the
illuminations that come from God. But, from God immediately,
the first are illuminated ; then through these, but again from God,
the subordinate, in proportion to their powers, are illuminated
with the most luminous glories of the Divine rays.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 89


CAPUT VII.
Concerning the Rites celebrated over those who have fallen asleep.


Having defined these things, I think it necessary to describe the
religious rites celebrated over those who have fallen asleep. For
there is a difference here also between the sacred and the profane.
For, as the form of life is different in each, so also, when approach-
ing death, they differ. Those who have had a religious life, when
they look to the unfailing promises of the Deity, inasmuch as they
have observed their proof, in the resurrection proclaimed by it,
come to the goal of death, with a firm and unfailing hope, in
godly rejoicing, as at the conclusion of holy contests—knowing
that their rewards will be in a perfect and endless life and
salvation, through their future entire resurrection.! For the holy
souls, which may possibly fall, during this present life, to a change
for the worse, in the regeneration will have the most Godlike
transition to an unchangeable? condition. Now, the pure bodies
of the holy souls, which are enrolled together as yoke-fellows and
companions, and fellow-combatants within their Divine struggles,
in the unchanged steadfastness of their souls throughout the divine
life, will jointly receive their own resurrection.’ For, having
been made one with the holy souls to which they were united in
this present life, as having become members ὁ of Christ, they will
receive the Godlike and imperishable immortality, and a blessed
repose.® In this respect, then, the sleep of the just is in comfort and
unshaken hope as it draws nigh the goal of the Divine contests.°
Now, amongst the profane, some’ illogically think to go to a non-
existence ; others,® that the yoke binding the body to its own
proper soul will be severed once for all, not deeming it suitable
to them in a Divine life and blessed repose, inasmuch as they
have not been sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of Divine
things, which teaches that our most Godlike life in Christ has
already begun.® But others!° assign to souls unions with other
bodies, committing, as I suppose, this injustice to them, that,
after they have laboured together with the godly souls, they un-
justly deprive them, when they have reached the goal of the
Divine course, of their righteous retribution. But others,!! I do
not know how they have strayed to conceptions of such earthly
tendency, say, that the most holy and blessed inheritance,
promised to the devout, is similar to our life in this world, and
unlawfully reject, for those who are equal to the Angels, nourish-
ment appropriate to another kind of life. But no one would ever


1Soul first—body afterwards. 21 Johniii.2. δ: Cor. xv. 52. 41 Cor. vi. rs.
5 Heb. iv. rr. 6 2 Tim. iv. 6-8. 7 Plato, Phed. i. 54. 8 Phed. i. 62-3.
9 Col. iti. 3-4. 10 Phed. i. 64. 11 Matt. xxii. 28.
M


90 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


forsake most reverent men, for such vagaries as these. But
knowing that their whole selves will receive the Christlike in-
heritance, when they have come to the goal of this present life,
they see more clearly their road to incorruption as already become
nearer, and praise the gifts of the supreme Godhead and are filled
with a Divine satisfaction, no longer fearing the fall to a worse
condition, but well knowing that they will hold firmly and ever-
lastingly the good things already acquired. But those who are
full of blemishes, full of stains, even though they have attained to
some instruction, yet, of their own accord, have to their own
destruction rejected this from their mind, and have rashly followed
destructive lusts, when they have approached the end of their life
here, the Divine regulation of the oracles will no longer appear to
them as before, a subject of scorn,! but when they have looked
with other eyes upon the pleasures of their passions destroyed,
and have pronounced blessed the holy life from which they
thoughtlessly had fallen away, they are, piteously and against their
will, separated from this present life, conducted to no blessed
hope, in consequence of their shameful life? But, whilst none of
these attain the rest of holy men, the holy man himself, who
comes to the end of his struggles, is filled with a holy consolation,
and with much satisfaction draws nigh to the path of the holy
regeneration. The familiar friends of him who has fallen asleep,
as befits their Divine familiarity and fellowship, pronounce him
blessed, whoever he is, as approaching, in answer to his prayers,
the end crowned with victory. They send up odes of thanks-
giving to the Author of victory, praying also that they themselves
may come to the same inheritance. Then they take him and
bring him to the Hierarch, as to a bequest of holy crowns. He
right gladly receives him, and celebrates the rites fixed by reverend
men, to be celebrated over those who have piously fallen asleep.


I1.—Mysterion® over those who have religiously fallen asleep.


The Divine Hierarch collects the reverend Choir. If the
person who has fallen asleep were of the sacerdotal rank, he
places him low before the Holy Altar, and offers the prayer and
thanksgiving to God. But if he belonged to the rank of the
chaste Monks, he places him near the hallowed sanctuary, before
the sacerdotal entrance. Then the Hierarch finishes the prayer
of thanksgiving to God. Next, the Leitourgoi read the faithful
promises concerning our resurrection, which are contained in the
Divine Lections, and chant the odes of the same teaching and
power, from the Lections contained in the Psalter. Then the


1 Republic, lib. i., p. 9. Cousin, Paris, 1833. 3 Ps. cxii. 10.
8 Instructive Function. 4 See Burial Office.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 91


first Deacon dismisses the catechumens, and calls aloud the
names of the holy people who have already fallen asleep, amongst
whom he deems the man who has just terminated his life worthy
of registration, as being of the same rank, and urges all to seek
the blessed consummation in Christ. Then the Divine Hierarch
advances, and offers a most holy prayer over him, and after the
prayer he salutes the defunct, and after him all who are present.
When all have saluted, the Hierarch pours the oil upon the
defunct, and when he has offered the prayer for all, he places the
body in a worthy grave, with other holy bodies of the same rank.


Il] .—Contemplation.


Now, if the profane should see or hear that these rites were
celebrated by us, they will, I suppose, split with laughter, and
compassionate us for our folly. But we need not wonder at this.
For, as the Scripture saith, ‘If they will not believe, neither shall
they understand.”! Now, let us who have contemplated the
spiritual meaning of the rites celebrated, say—Whilst Jesus leads
us to the light, that not without reason does the Hierarch conduct
to, and place the defunct in the place with those of the same
rank. For it shows spiritually that, in the regeneration, all will be
in that inheritance for which they have chosen their own life here.
For example, if anyone here had a Godlike and most holy life
(so far as the imitation of God is attainable by man), he will be
throughout the age to come in a divine and blessed lot. But if
he lead a life inferior to the divine likeness in its perfection, but,
nevertheless, a holy life, even this man will receive the holy
retributions of the same kind. The Hierarch, having given thanks
for this Divine righteousness, offers a sacred prayer, and celebrates
the worshipful Deity, as subjugating the unjust and tyrannical
power against us all, but conducting us to our own most just
judgments.


Now, the Chants and Readings of the Divine promises are
explanatory of the most blessed inheritances into which those who
have attained a Divine perfection shall be appointed. But the
inheritances which await the defunct, stimulate those who are still
living to a similar perfection. But observe, that not all classes of
those who are under purification are dismissed, but only the
catechumens are put out of the holy place, for this class is entirely
uninstructed in every holy initiation, and is not permitted to view
any of the religious celebrations, great or small, inasmuch as they
have not received the faculty of contemplating the holy mysteries,
through the Birth from God, which is Source and gift of light.
But the other classes of those who are being purified have already
been under instruction in sacred tradition; but, as they have


1 Wisdom iii. 9.


92 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


foolishly returned to an evil course (it being necessary to complete
their training to better things), they are reasonably dismissed from
Divine visions and communions, even under symbols, for they
would be injured, as partaking of them unholily, and would come
to a greater contempt of the Divine Mysteries and themselves.
But it is not unbecoming that they should be present at the
ceremonies now celebrated, as they are clearly taught and see the
uncertainty of death amongst us, and the glories of the saints
chanted from the unfailing oracles, and that the sufferings reserved
to the unholy like themselves will be without end. For it will
perhaps be profitable for them to see him who has religiously
finished his course reverently proclaimed by the public declaration
of the Leitourgoi, as being numbered amongst the saints for ever.”
And, perchance, they also will come to the like condition, and will
learn, from the instruction of the Deacons, that the consummation
in Christ is blessed indeed. Then the Hierarch, advancing, offers
a sacred prayer over the defunct. After the prayer, both the
Hierarch himself salutes him, and next, all who are present. As
for the prayer, it beseeches the supremely Divine Goodness to
remit to the defunct all the failings committed through human
infirmity, and to place him in the light? and land of the living ὅ ; in
the bosom of Abraham,‘ and Isaac, and Jacob; in a place where
grief and sorrow and sighing are no more. It is evident, then, as
I think, that these, the rewards of the holy, are most blessed. For
what can be compared to an immortality, entirely without grief,
and luminous with light. Especially, if all the promises which
pass man’s understanding, and which are signified to us by signs
adapted to our capacity, fall short in their description of the actual
truth. For we must remember that that saying is true, that “ Eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart
of man to conceive, the things God hath prepared for them that
love 5 him.”” ‘* Bosoms” of the blessed Patriarchs, and of the
other holy men are in my judgment the most divine and blessed
inheritance which awaits all godly men, in that consummation °
which grows not old, and is full of blessedness.


But you may, perhaps, say that these things are correctly
affirmed by us, but you want to know for what reason the
Hierarch beseeches the supremely Divine Goodness, asking
remission of the faults committed by the defunct, and his
admission into the brightest inheritance amongst godly men of
the same rank. For, if everyone shall receive, by judgment of
God, equivalents for what he has done in the present life, whether
it be good or otherwise, and the defunct has finished his activity
within this present life, how, from any prayer offered by the


1 Luke i. 70. 3 Ps, lvi. 13. 8 Ps, cxvi. 9. 4 Luke xvi. 22.
5x Cor, ii. 9. 6 Matt. vi. 10,


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 93


Hierarch, will he be transferred to another lot, besides that
suitable to him, as an equivalent for his life here. Now, well do
I know, as following the Oracles, that each one will have the
inheritance which is like for like, for the Lord, he says, hath
concluded respecting him, and each one “shall receive the things
done in his body according to that he hath done, whether it be
good, or whether it be bad.”! Yea, the sure tradition of the
Oracles teaches us that the prayers, even of the just, avail only for
those who are worthy of pious prayers during this present life,
much less? after death. Did the prayers of Samuel procure
anything for Saul "8 or did the intercession of the Prophet 4 bring
any advantage to the people of Israel? For it is as if, when the
sun is shedding its own splendour upon eyes that are sound,
anyone should seek to enjoy the meridian splendour, whilst
obliterating his own powers of vision. Thus does he cling to
impossible and extravagant expectations, who, whilst beseeching
the prayers of holy men, diminishes the holy efforts essential to
the same, and departs from the most luminous and beneficent
commandments through heedlessness of the Divine gifts.


Nevertheless, I affirm, on the authority of the oracles, that the
prayers of the just® are in every respect profitable in this life,
after the following fashion. If anyone, longing for holy gifts
and having a religious disposition for their reception, approaches
some one of the pious men, as being conscious of his own insuffi-
ciency, and should prevail upon him to become his fellow-helper,
and fellow-suppliant, he will be benefitted in every respect, in this
way, with a benefit superior to all. For he will attain the most
Divine gifts he prays for, since the supremely Divine Goodness
assists him, as well as his pious self-knowledge, and his reverence
for devout men, and his craving for the religious gifts requested,
and his brotherly and Godlike disposition. For this has been
firmly fixed by the supremely Divine decrees—that the Divine
gifts are given in an order most befitting God to those who are
meet to receive them, through those who are meet to distribute
them.


If any one then should despise this sacred regulation, and betake
himself to a wretched self-conceit, and should deem _ himself
sufficient for the Divine Converse, and look down upon pious
men, and if he should further request requests unworthy of God,
and not holy, and if he should have a disposition which is not
concordant with the Divine, and similar to himself, he will fail in
his inexperienced request through his own fault. Now, with
reference to the prayer mentioned, which the Hierarch prays over


12 Cor, v. 10. 2 μήτιγε μετα θάνατον. 8. Sam. xvi. 1.
4 Jer. vii. 16, 5 James v. 16.


94 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


the defunct, we think it necessary to mention the tradition which
has come to us from our inspired leaders. The Divine Hierarch,
as the oracles say, is the interpreter of the supremely divine
judgments. For he is messenger! of the Lord God Omnipotent.
He has learned then, from the God-transmitted oracles, that to
those who have passed their life in piety, the most bright and
divine? life is recompensed according to their deserts, by the
most just measures, whilst the Divine Love towards man over-
looks, through its goodness, the blemishes which have come to
them, through human infirmity (since no one, as the oracles say,
is pure and without spot)..


Now, the Hierarch knew these things to have been promised
by the sure oracles. He asks, then, that these things may come
to pass, and that the righteous returns may be given to those who
have lived piously. At the same time, as being moulded as an
image of goodness to the Divine imitation, he beseeches gifts for
others as favours to himself. But, at the same time, he knows
that the promises will be surely fulfilled, and manifests clearly to
those present that the things asked by him, according to Divine
law, will be entirely realized, for those who have been perfected in
a Divine life. For the Hierarch, the expounder of the supremely
Divine Justice, would never seek things which are not most
pleasing to the Most Supreme God, and which were not divinely
promised to be given by Him. Wherefore, he does not offer
these prayers over the unholy departed ; not only because in this
he would deviate from his office of interpreter, and would pre-
sumptuously arrogate, on his own authority, a function of the
Hierarchy, without being moved by the Supreme Legislator, but,
because also, he would fail to obtain his abominable request, and
would, not unnaturally, hear respecting himself, from the Divine
Oracle, ‘Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss.” # There-
fore, the Divine Hierarch beseeches things divinely promised, and
dear to God, and which will, in every respect, be given, and
demonstrates his own likeness to the good loving God, and
declares, as the interpreter of God, the gifts which will be received
by the devout. Thus, the Hierarchs have discriminating powers,
as interpreters of the Divine Judgments. Not, as though the
All-Wise Deity, to put it mildly, were slavishly following their
irrational impulses, but, as though they, as interpreters of God,
were deciding by the motion of the supremely judging Spirit,
those who have already been judged by God according to their
deserts. For receive, he says, the Holy Spirit, “ whose® sins ye
may have remitted, they are remitted ; whose ye may retain, they.


1 Malachi ii. 7. 2 John v. 16, 8 Job xiv. 4.
4 James iv. 3. 5 John xx. 22, 23.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 95


are retained.” And to him who was illuminated with the Divine
revelations of the most Holy Father, the Oracles say, ‘* Whatsoever
thou shalt have bound upon the earth shall be bound in the
heavens ; and whatsoever thou shalt have loosed on earth, shall
be loosed in heaven,” inasmuch as He, and every Hierarch who
is like Him, receives those who are dear to God, according to the
revelations of the Father’s judgments resting upon him, as
announcing and interpreting the Divine Will, and rejects those
who are without God. Further, as the Oracles affirm, He uttered
that sacred and divine saying, not as self-moved,! nor as though
flesh and blood had revealed it, but as one who had been
spiritually taught Divine things by God. The inspired Hierarchs
then, must so exercise their determinations and all their Hierarch-
ical powers as the Godhead, the Supreme Initiator, may move
them. As for the rest, they must so cling to the Hierarchs in
their sacerdotal functions as men moved by God. ‘“ For he that
despises you,” He says, “despiseth Me.’’ 2


Let us now proceed to that which follows the prayer mentioned.
When the Hierarch has finished this, he first salutes the defunct,
and next, all who are present. For dear and honoured, to all
Godlike men, is he who has been perfected in a Divine life.
After the salutation the Hierarch pours the oil upon the defunct.
But remember, that in course of the Birth from God, before the
most Divine Baptism, the oil of Chrism, as a first participation of
the holy symbol, is given to the neophyte, after the entire removal
of the former clothing. But now, at the conclusion of all that is
done, the oil is poured upon the defunct. The first anointing
with the oil summons the initiated to the holy contests; but the
pouring of the oil now shows the defunct to have struggled
through those same contests, and to have been made perfect.


When the Hierarch has finished these things he places the body
in an honourable chamber, with other bodies of holy men of the
same rank. For if, in soul and body, the man has passed a life
dear to God, there will be honoured with the devout soul also
the body which contended with it throughout the devout struggles.
Hence, the Divine justice gives to it, together with its own body,
the reciprocal inheritances, as companions and participators in
the devout or the contrary life. Wherefore, the Divine institution
of sacred things bequeaths the supremely Divine participations to
them both—to the soul, indeed, in a pure contemplation and in
an exact knowledge of the rites celebrated ; to the body, by
sanctifying the whole man, as in a figure, with the most Divine
Myrrh, and the most holy symbols of the Divine Communion,
effecting his complete salvation, and announcing that his resurrec-


1 Matt. xvi. 17. 4 Luke x. τό.


96 ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY.


tion will be most complete by entire sanctification. Now, as
regards the consecrating invocations, it is not permitted to
explain them in writing, nor may we bring their mysterious
meaning, nor the powers working in them from God, from their
secrecy to publicity. But, as our sacred tradition holds, by learn-
ing these, through quiet instructions, and by being perfected to a
more Godlike condition and elevation, through Divine love and
holy duties, you will be borne by the most perfect illumination to
the most exalted knowledge of them.


Now the fact that even children, not yet able to understand the
Divine mysteries, should become recipients of the holy Birth from
God, and of the most holy symbols of the supremely Divine
Communion, seems, as you say, to the profane, a fit subject for
reasonable laughter, upon the supposition that the Hierarchs
teach Divine things to those not able to hear, and vainly transmit
the sacred traditions to those who do not understand. And this
is still more laughable—that others, on their behalf, repeat the
abjurations and the sacred compacts. But your Hierarchical
judgment must not be too hard upon those who are led astray,
but you should persuasively, and for the purpose of leading them
to the light, reply affectionately to the positions alleged by them.
When you have brought forward this fact, in accordance with sacred
rule, that not all Divine: things are comprehended in our know-
ledge, but many of the things unknown by us have causes worthy
of God, which, although unknown to us, are yet well known to the
Orders above us. Many things also escape even the most exalted
Beings, and are known distinctly by the All-Wise and Wisdom-
Giving Deity. Further, also, concerning this, we affirm what our
God-like instructors conveyed to us, what they had learned from
the early! tradition. For they say, what is also a fact, that infants
being brought up according to a Divine institution will attain a
religious disposition exempt from all error, and inexperienced in
an unholy life. When our Divine leaders came to this conclusion,
it was determined to admit infants upon the following conditions,
viz. :—that the parents of the child to be presented should transfer
him to some one of the instructed, who is a faithful teacher of
children in Divine things, so that the child should lead the rest
of his life under his instruction, as under a godfather, and security
for his religious safe-keeping. The Hierarch requires him who
promised to bring up the child according to the religious life, to
pronounce the renunciations and the religious confessions. Not,
as they would jokingly say, as instructing one instead of another
in Divine things. For he does not say this, “on behalf of this
child, I make myself the renunciation and the sacred profession,”


ldpyaius. See Acts xv. 7, 21, 16; and Archbp. Trench. Yet even Dupin
ignorantly alleged that word as proof Post-Apostolic. Nov. Bib., p. 106.


ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY. 97


but that the child renounces and consents itself; ¢.¢., I promise
to persuade the child, when he has come to a frame of mind
capable of religious impressions, through my instructions in
Divine things, to renounce entirely contrary things, and to promise
and perform the Divine confessions. There is nothing absurd,
then, in my judgment, if the child is brought up in a religious
training, in his having a guide and religious surety, who implants
in him a disposition for Divine things, and keeps him inexperienced
in things contrary.


The Hierarch imparts to the child the sacred symbols in order
that he may be nourished by them, and may not have any other
life, besides that of always contemplating Divine things; and that,
being made partaker of them, in a religious progress, he may have
a religious disposition in these matters, and may be devoutly
brought up by his Godlike surety. So great, my son, and so
beautiful, are the uniform visions of our Hierarchy, which have
been presented to my view. But from others, perhaps, of a more
clear-sighted mind, these things have been viewed, not only more
clearly, but also more divinely. And to you, as I fancy, more
brilliant and divine beauties will shine forth, whilst you use the
foregoing as stepping stones to a higher ray. Impart then, my
friend, yourself also, to me, a more perfect illumination, and
show to my eyes the more comely and aniform beauties that you
may have been able to see, for I am confident that, by what
has been said, I shall strike the sparks! of the Divine Fire
which lie dormant in you.


THANKS BE TO Gob.


27th October, 1893. JOHN PARKER.


1 Bacon, Advancement of Learning, p. 2.


Works by same Author.
CHRISTIANITY CHRONOLOGICALLY CONFIRMED. 6d.
Wry aM Ia CaRISTIAN? 2d.
Dionysius THE AREOPAGITE. A Sermon preached in Paris. 1/-.


My ConvErSION τὸ Rituac. 6d.


N


Appendix.


BISHOPS OF PARIS. BISHOPS OF ARLES.
1. Dionysius. 1. Trophimus.
2. Mallo. 2. Regulus.
3. Massus. 3. Martianus.
4. Marcus. 4. Victor.
5. Adventus. 5. Maurianus,
6. Victorinus. 6. Martinus.


Gallia Christiana, Tom. vit., p.4. Tom. t., p. 520.


Note 2.—TZhanksgiving before the consecration, translated from
a Latin Version of the Liturgy of Dionysius the Areopagite.


“‘Sacerdos inclinatus.” For truly the celebration of Thy benefits,
O Lord, exceeds the powers of mind, expression, and thought ;
nor can any lip, or mind, or tongue worthily praise Thee. For by
Thy word the heavens were made, and by the breath of Thy
mouth all the supernal powers, all lights which are in the firma-
ment—sun and moon, sea and dry land, and whatever is in them.
Things without voice, by their silence—things articulate by their
voice through speech and hymns perpetually praise Thee, because
Thou art essentially good, and above praise, existing incompre-
hensibly in Thy essential nature. (Elevating his voice.) This
sensible creation praises Thee, O Lord, as well as those intellectual
Beings placed above our material sense. Heaven and earth
glorify Thee. Sea and air proclaim Thee. The sun in its pre-
destined course praises Thee. The moon in its regulated changes
venerates Thee. The multitudes of Archangels and the hosts of
Angels, and those Virtues, seated above the world and the power
of our conceptions, send their benediction to Thy throne. The
Splendours of exceeding and hidden light send forth their Sanctus
to Thy glory. Principalities and Orders praise Thee with Jubilate
Powers and lordships venerate Thee. Virtues, Thrones, and Seats
inaccessible—bright images of eternal light—mirrors without flaw
—holy beings and recipients of wisdom sublime—pre-eminently
searchers after that will kept secret from all—these exalt Thee by
clear movements of tones inimitable, and by voices worthy of
rational creatures. Many-eyed Cherubin, most highly exalted,
bless Thee. Seraphin, with their enfolded wings, and full of
feathers, call Thee Holy—those same beings who cover their faces
with their wings, and veil their feet with their wings, and flying
around and clapping their wings one to another, in order that they
may not be consumed by Thy devouring heat, sing sweet and


APPENDIX. 99


pure chants in a universal harmony, offering eternal glory to Thee,
crying in a hymn worthy of God, and saying (Populus) “ Holy,
Holy, Holy.”


(Priest bending low.) Holy art Thou, God the Father, Omni-
potent Maker and Creator of every creature, invisible and visible
and sensible. Holy art Thou, Only-Begotten Son—Power and
Wisdom of the Father, Lord and our Saviour Jesus Christ. Holy
art Thou, God the Holy Spirit, Perfecter and Sanctifier of Saints.
Holy and Indivisible Trinity, co-essential and of equal glory,
Whose compassion to our race is abundantly poured forth, Thou
art Holy and sanctifying all: Who hast not left this our race in
exile from Paradise, when it had become entangled in every kind
of sin, but hast been manifested to it by the Word, which endured
extremest poverty before the world. That Nature the Word took,
made in all things like unto it sin excepted, that He might make
it prepared unto holiness, and disposed to this life-giving feast.
(Raising his voice.) Who conceived, formed, and moulded by the
Holy Spirit, both from the Virgin blood of the Virgin Mary, Holy
Mother of God, and from the pure and most holy body of the
same, was born indeed Man, as Author of life, and receiving the
Godhead in the flesh (whilst the law and properties of Nature
were preserved, but in a manner above Nature), was acknowledged
as God in Spirit and Man in flesh. And in so! far as the Word
was before the worlds began, from Thee, in a manner worthy of
God, He was born, and by signs and miracles such as became
the Maker of All, was proved to be such, since He has abundantly
provided complete healing and perfect salvation for the whole
human race. But at the end and completion of His own dispensa-
tion, for our sake, and previous to His own saving Cross, He
took Bread into His own pure holy hands, and looked up to
Thee, God the Father, giving thanks, He blessed, sanctified, and
brake, and gave to His own disciples, the holy Apostles, saying,
“Take and eat from this, and believe? that the same is My Body,
which for you and for many is broken and given for expiation of
faults, remission of sins, and eternal life.”


N.B.—I give this as example from a Liturgy full of interest,
and preserved in the East, as that of Dionysius, Bishop of Athens,
Disciple of St. Paul.


THE END.


——m - a ee ee nm ne ere meee --ὕὄ....-......-...... ......


1 In quantum erat Verbum ante Szxcula.


3 Credite quod corpus meum est illud ipsum quod pro vobis. This is not found
in Greek or Almandrine Liturgies, but only Syriac. igne.


This book is a preservation photocopy.
It is made in compliance with copyright law
and produced on acid-free archival
60# book weight paper
which meets the requirements of
ANSINISO Z39.48-1992 (permanence of paper)


Preservation photocopying and binding
by
Acme Bookbinding
Charlestown, Massachusetts


2003


Minn


The borrower must return this item on or before
the last date stamped below. If another user
places a recall for this item, the borrower will
be notified of the need for an earlier return.


Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt
the borrower from overdue fines.


Andover-Harvard Theological Library
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-5788


BPR? S 7:59


Please handle with care.
Thank you for helping to preserve
library collections at Harvard.
