THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


DIOPHANTUS    OF    ALEXANDRIA 


CAMBRIDGE    UNIVERSITY    PRESS 

:   FETTER   LANE,   E.G. 
C.   F.   CLAY,   MANAGER 


ffiUinburgi):   too,   PRINCES  STREET 

Berlin:   A.  ASHER  AND  CO. 

fl.np>ts:   F.  A.   BROCKHAUS 
£tfaj  gorfe :  G.  P.   PUTNAM'S  SONS 
atrt  Calcutta:   MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,   LTD. 


All  rights  reserved 


DIOPHANTUS    OF    ALEXANDRIA 

A   STUDY   IN  THE   HISTORY 

OF 

GREEK  ALGEBRA 


BY 

SIR   THOMAS    L.    HEATH,    K.C.B., 

SC.D.,    SOMETIME    FELLOW   OF   TRINITY    COLLEGE,    CAMBRIDGE 

SECONT>   EDITION 


WITH   A  SUPPLEMENT  CONTAINING  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  FERMAT'S 

THEOREMS  AND  PROBLEMS  CONNECTED  WITH  DIOPHANTINE 

ANALYSIS   AND    SOME   SOLUTIONS   OF    DIOPHANTINE 

PROBLEMS    BY    EULER 


Cambridge : 

at  the  University  Press 

1910 


(ffamtm&ge: 

PRINTED   BY   JOHN    CLAY,    M.A. 
AT   THE    UNIVERSITY    PRESS 


Library 


PREFACE 

r  I  "'HE  first  edition  of  this  book,  which  was  the  first  English 
•*•  Diophantus,  appeared  in  1885,  and  has  long  been  out  of 
print.  Inquiries  made  for  it  at  different  times  suggested  to  me 
that  it  was  a  pity  that  a  treatise  so  unique  and  in  many  respects 
so  attractive  as  the  Arithmetica  should  once  more  have  become 
practically  inaccessible  to  the  English  reader.  At  the  same  time 
I  could  not  but  recognise  that,  after  twenty-five  years  in  which  so 
much  has  been  done  for  the  history  of  mathematics,  the  book 
needed  to  be  brought  up  to  date,  Some  matters  which  in  1885 
were  still  subject  of  controversy,  such  as  the  date  of  Diophantus, 
may  be  regarded  as  settled,  and  some  points  which  then  had  to 
be  laboured  can  now  be  dismissed  more  briefly.  Practically  the 
whole  of  the  Introduction,  except  the  chapters  on  the  editions  of 
Diophantus,  his  methods  of  solution,  and  the  porisms  and  other 
assumptions  found  in  his  work,  has  been  entirely  rewritten  and 
much  shortened,  while  the  chapters  on  the  methods  and  on  the 
porisms  etc.,  have  been  made  fuller  than  before.  The  new  text  of 
Tannery  (Teubner  1893,  1895)  has  enabled  a  number  of  obscure 
passages,  particularly  in  Books  V  and  VI,  to  be  cleared  up  and, 
as  a  basis  for  a  reproduction  of  the  whole  work,  is  much  superior  to 
the  text  of  Bachet.  I  have  taken  the  opportunity  to  make  my 
version  of  the  actual  treatise  somewhat  fuller  and  somewhat  closer 
to  the  language  of  the  original.  In  other  respects  also  I  thought 
I  could  improve  upon  a  youthful  work  which  was  my  first  essay  in 
the  history  of  Greek  mathematics.  When  writing  it  I  was  solely 
concerned  to  make  Diophantus  himself  known  to  mathematicians, 

833088 


vi  PREFACE 

and  I  did  not  pay  sufficient  attention  to  Fermat's  notes  on  the 
various  problems.  It  is  well  known  that  it  is  in  these  notes  that 
many  of  the  great  propositions  discovered  by  Fermat  in  the 
theory  of  numbers  are  enshrined ;  but,  although  the  notes  are 
literally  translated  in  Wertheim's  edition,  they  do  not  seem  to 
have  appeared  in  English ;  moreover  they  need  to  be  supple- 
mented by  passages  from  the  correspondence  of  Fermat  and  from 
the  Doctrinae  analyticae  Inventum  Novum  of  Jacques  de  Billy. 
The  histories  of  mathematics  furnish  only  a  very  inadequate 
description  of  Fermat's  work,  and  it  seemed  desirable  to  attempt 
to  give  as  full  an  account  of  his  theorems  and  problems  in 
or  connected  with  Diophantine  analysis  as  it  is  possible  to 
compile  from  the  scattered  material  available  in  Tannery  and 
Henry's  edition  of  the  Oeuvres  de  Fermat  (1891  — 1896).  So  much 
of  this  material  as  could  not  be  conveniently  given  in  the  notes 
to  particular  problems  of  Diophantus  I  have  put  together  in 
the  Supplement,  which  is  thus  intended  to  supply  a  missing 
chapter  in  the  history  of  mathematics.  Lastly,  in  order  to  make 
the  book  more  complete,  I  thought  it  right  to  add  some  of  the 
more  remarkable  solutions  of  difficult  Diophantine  problems  given 
by  Euler,  for  whom  such  problems  had  a  great  fascination  ;  the  last 
section  of  the  Supplement  is  therefore  devoted  to  these  solutions. 

T.  L.  H. 
October,  1910. 


CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 

PAGES 

CHAP.    I.       Diophantus  and  his  Works !_i3 

„       II.      The  MSS.  of  and  writers  on  Diophantus          .        .         14 31 

„      III.     Notation  and  definitions  of  Diophantus    .        .        .  32—53 

„      IV.      Diophantus'  methods  of  solution        .        .  -      .        .         54 98 

„       V.      The  Porisms  and  other  assumptions  in  Diopbantus  99—110 

„      VI.     The  place  of  Diophantus m 127 

THE  ARITHMETICA 

BOOK      L                                    129-143 

»        IL                           143-156 

»       IIL         •                                                           •  156—168 

»       IV-                                  168—199 

\7 

V* 200 — 225 


VI. 


•         .         -         .  226—246 

On  Polygonal  numbers 247 2^9 

Conspectus  of  the  Arithmetica 260—266 

SUPPLEMENT 

SECTIONS  I— V.    NOTES,  THEOREMS  AND  PROBLEMS  BY  FERMAT. 

I.       On  numbers  separable  into  integral  squares        .        .  267—277 

II-      Equation  3*-Ayi=\       .......  277—292 

III.  Theorems    and    Problems    on    rational    right-angled 

triangles 293_3,g 

IV.  Other  problems  by  Fermat 318—320 

V.  Fermat's  Triple-equations 321—328 

SECTION  VI.    SOME  SOLUTIONS  BY  EULER 329—380 

INDEX:  I.    GREEK 381—382 

„       II.  ENGLISH 382 — 387 


INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER  I 

DIOPHANTUS  AND  HIS  WORKS 

THE  divergences  between  writers  on  Diophantus  used  to  begin, 
as  Cossali  said1,  with  the  last  syllable  of  his  name.  There  is  now, 
however,  no  longer  any  doubt  that  the  name  was  Diophantar,  not 
Diophanter2. 

The  question  of  his  date  is  more  difficult  Abu'lfaraj,  the 
Arabian  historian,  in  his  History  of  tlte  Dynasties,  places  Diophantus 
under  the  Emperor  Julian  (A.D.  361-3),  but  without  giving  any 
authority;  and  it  may  be  that  the  statement  is  due  simply  to  a 
confusion  of  our  Diophantus  with  a  rhetorician  of  that  name, 
mentioned  in  another  article  of  Suidas,  who  lived  in  the  time  of 
Julian*.  On  the  other  hand,  Rafael  Bombelli  in  his  Algebra, 

1  Cossali,  Origine,  trasporto  in  Italia,  primi  progressi  in  essa  ddr  Algebra  (Parma, 
1797-9),  I.  p.  61  :  "Su  la  desinenza  del  nome  comincia  la  diversita  tra  gli  scrittori." 

1  Greek  authority  is  overwhelmingly  in  favour  of  Diophant<w.  The  following  is  the 
evidence,  which  is  collected  in  the  second  volume  of  Tannery's  edition  of  Diophantus 
(henceforward  to  be  quoted  as  "Dioph.,"  "Dioph.  n.  p.  36"  indicating  page  36  of 
Vol.  ii.,  while  "Dioph.  II.  20"  will  mean  proposition  20  of  Book  II.):  Suidas  s.v. 
'TraTia  (Dioph.  n.  p.  36),  Theon  of  Alexandria,  on  Ptolemy's  Syntaxis  Book  I.  c.  9 
(Dioph.  II.  p.  35),  Anthology,  Epigram  on  Diophantus  (Ep.  xiv.  126;  Dioph.  II.  p.  60), 
Anonymi  prolegomena  in  Introductionem  arithmeticam  Nicomachi  (Dioph.  II.  p.  73), 
Georgii  Pachymerae  paraphrasis  (Dioph.  n.  p.  122),  Scholia  of  Maximus  Planudes 
(Dioph.  n.  pp.  148,  177,  178  etc.),  Scholium  on  larublichus  /«  Nicomachi  arithm.  inirod., 
ed.  PisteUi,  p.  127  (Dioph.  n.  p.  72),  a  Scholium  on  Dioph.  n.  8  from  the  MS.  "A" 
(Dioph.  n.  p.  260),  which  is  otherwise  amusing  (H  ifwxn  aw>  Ai6#arre,  eft;  perk  TOV 
Sarai-a  frexa  Trft  Siv/coXi'as  TUV  re  iXXwr  ffov  tfewpij/uiTwr  KCU  Si)  ecu  TOV  rttporros  ffcwpj- 
ftATm,  "  Your  soul  to  perdition,  Diophantus,  for  the  difficulty  of  your  problems  in  general 
and  of  this  one  in  particular  ")  ;  John  of  Jerusalem  (  loth  c.)  alone  (  Vita  loannis  Damas- 
ceni  xi.  :  Dioph.  n.  p.  36),  if  the  reading  of  the  MS.  Parisinus  1559  is  right,  wrote,  in 
the  plural,  wj  UvOaydpcu.  1}  AIO^OJTOI,  where  however  Aio^oirai  is  dearly  a  mistake  for 


3  \i3dvios,   ffoQurriis  'Arrtox«/s,  rwr    tfl  'louXtoyoO  TOV  /ScurtAlcds 
Qeodoffiov  TOV  -rpfff^vripov  •  Qajryariov  xarp6j,  /ua^TTjj  AIOC><UTOI/. 

H.  D. 


2  INTRODUCTION 

published  in  1572,  says  dogmatically  that  Diophantus  lived  under 
Antoninus  Pius  (138-161  A.D.),  but  there  is  no  confirmation  of  this 
date  either. 

The  positive  evidence  on  the  subject  can  be  given  very  shortly. 
An  upper  limit  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  Diophantus,  in  his 
book  on  Polygonal  Numbers,  quotes  from  Hypsicles  a  definition 
of  such  a  number1.  Hypsicles  was  also  the  writer  of  the  sup- 
plement to  Euclid's  Book  XIII.  on  the  Regular  Solids  known  as 
Book  XIV.  of  the  Elements ;  hence  Diophantus  must  have  written 
later  than,  say,  150  B.C.  A  lower  limit  is  furnished  by  the  fact  that 
Diophantus  is  quoted  by  Theon  of  Alexandria2;  hence  Diophantus 
wrote  before,  say,  350  A.D.  There  is  a  wide  interval  between 
150  B.C.  and  350  A.D.,  but  fortunately  the  limits  can  be  brought 
closer.  We  have  a  letter  of  Psellus  (nth  c.)  in  which  Diophantus 
and  Anatolius  are  mentioned  as  writers  on  the  Egyptian  method 
of  reckoning.  "  Diophantus,"  says  Psellus3,  "  dealt  with  it  more 
accurately,  but  the  very  learned  Anatolius  collected  the  most 
essential  parts  of  the  doctrine  as  stated  by  Diophantus  in  a 
different  way  (reading  erepwf)  and  in  the  most  succinct  form, 
dedicating  (irpoae^xav^a-e)  his  work  to  Diophantus."  It  would 
appear,  therefore,  that  Diophantus  and  Anatolius  were  contem- 
poraries, and  it  is  most  likely  that  the  former  would  be  to  the 
latter  in  the  relation  of  master  to  pupil.  Now  Anatolius  wrote 
about  278-9  A.D.,  and  was  Bishop  of  Laodicea  about  280  A.D.  We 
may  therefore  safely  say  that  Diophantus  flourished  about  250  A.D. 
or  not  much  later.  This  agrees  well  with  the  fact  that  he  is  not 
quoted  by  Nicomachus  (about  100  A.D.),  Theon  of  Smyrna  (about 
130  A.D.)  or  lamblichus  (end  of  3rd  c.). 

1  Dioph.  I.  p.  470-2. 

2  Theo  Alexandrinus  in  primum  librum  Ptolemaei  Mathematicae  Compositionis  (on  c. 
IX.)  :  see  Dioph.  II.  p.  35,   Ka.0'  a  KOI  &i6<pavr6s  0ij<rr  TTJS  yap  parados  d/uera^Tou  o&o-ijs 
/cat  fffTWffrjs  irai/Tore,  TO  iro\\aTT\a(na£'6/j.ei>ov  elSos  CTT'  avrrjv  avrb  TO  eZSoj  &TTCU  K.r.e. 

3  Dioph.  II.  p.  38-9 :  irepl  de  rrjs  aiyvimaKrjs  fj,e668ov  Tatirrjs  Ai6<f>ai>Tos  (j.ev  di^\a^€i> 
aKpi^ffTfpov,  6  54  \oyiibraTos  'AvctToXios  TCI  ffweKTiKurara  /J.^pij  rrjs  KOT'  iKfivov  (iriffTrnj.?)* 
airo\el;a/J.evos  ertpw  (PfWpws  or  eraifnf)  Aio^di'Ty  ffwoTTTiKurara  Trpoffe<p&vr]ffe.     The  MSS. 
read  rr^pw,  which  is  apparently  a  mistake  for  erfyws  or  possibly  for  eralpip.     Tannery  con- 
jectures rif  fralpif,  but  this  is  very  doubtful ;  if  the  article  had  been  there,  Aio^avTy  T£ 
fralpq  would  have  been  better.     On  the  basis  of  eratpy   Tannery   builds   the  further 
hypothesis  that  the  Dionysius  to  whom  the  Arithmetica  is  dedicated  is  none  other  than 
Dionysius  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  Catechist  school  at  Alexandria  232-247  and  was 
Bishop  there  248-265  A.D.     Tannery  conjectures  then  that  Diophantus  was  a  Christian 
and  a  pupil  of  Dionysius  (Tannery,  "Sur  la  religion  des  derniers  mathematicians  de 
1'antiquite,"  Extrait  des  Annales  de  Philosophic   Chretienne,   1896,  p.  13  sqq.).     It   is 
however  difficult  to  establish  this  (Hultsch,  art.  "Diophantos  aus  Alexandreia"  in  Pauly- 
Wissowa's  Real-Encyclopddie  der  classischen  Altertumswissenchaften}. 


DIOPHANTUS   AND    HIS    WORKS  3 

The  only  personal  particulars  about  Diophantus  which  are 
known  are  those  contained  in  the  epigram-problem  relating  to  him 
in  the  Anthology x.  The  solution  gives  84  as  the  age  at  which  he 
died.  His  boyhood  lasted  14  years,  his  beard  grew  at  21,  he 
married  at  33;  a  son  was  born  to  him  five  years  later  and  died,  at 
the  age  of  42,  when  his  father  was  80  years  old.  Diophantus'  own 
death  followed  four  years  later2.  It  is  clear  that  the  epigram  was 
written,  not  long  after  his  death,  by  an  intimate  personal  friend 
with  knowledge  of  and  taste  for  the  science  which  Diophantus 
made  his  life-work3. 

The  works  on  which  the  fame  of  Diophantus  rests  are : 

(1)  The  Arithmetica  (originally  in  thirteen  Books). 

(2)  A  tract  On  Polygonal  Numbers. 

Six  Books  of  the  former  and  part  of  the  latter  survive. 
Allusions  in  the  Aritkmetica  imply  the  existence  of 

(3)  A  collection  of  propositions  under  the  title  of  Porisms; 
in  three  propositions  (3,  5  and  16)  of  Book  V.  Diophantus  quotes 
as  known  certain  propositions  in  the  Theory  of  Numbers,  prefixing 
to  the  statement  of  them  the  words  "  We  have  it  in  the  Porisms 
that "   (e^o/iey   eV  rot?  TLopt,afj,acriv  ort  K.r.e.}. 

A  scholium  on  a  passage  of  lamblichus  where  he  quotes  a 
dictum  of  certain  Pythagoreans  about  the  unit  being  the  dividing 
line  (fj,e06piov)  between  number  and  aliquot  parts,  says  "thus 

Diophantus  in  the  Moriastica* for  he  describes  as  'parts'  the 

progression  without  limit  in  the  direction  of  less  than  the  unit." 
Tannery  thinks  the  Moptacrrucd  may  be  ancient  scholia  (now 
lost)  on  Diophantus  I.  Def.  3  sqq.5;  but  in  that  case  why  should 
Diophantus  be  supposed  to  be  speaking  ?  And,  as  Hultsch 


1  Anthology,  Ep.  xiv.  126;  Dioph.  n.  pp.  60-1. 

2  The  epigram  actually  says  that  his  boyhood  lasted  |  of  his  life;   his  beard  grew 
after  T\  more ;  after  f  more  he  married,  and  his  son  was  born  five  years  later ;  the  son 
lived  to  half  his  father's  age,  and  the  father  died  four  years  after  his  son.     Cantor  ( Gesch. 
d.  Math.   I3,  p.  465)  quotes  a  suggestion  of  Heinrich  Weber  that  a  better  solution  is 
obtained  if  we  assume  that  the  son  died  at  the  time  when  his  father's  age  was  double  his, 
not  at  an  age  equal  to  half  the  age  at  which  his  father  died.     In  that  case 

is  would  substitute   lof  for   14,   i6£  for  21,   25$  for  33,   30!  for   42,  6i£   for   80, 
and  65^  for  84  above.     I  do  not  see  any  advantage  in  this  solution.     On  the  contrary, 
4  think  the  fractional  results  are  an  objection  to  it,  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the 
^nholiast  has  the  solution  84,  derived  from  the  equation 
\x  +  T^X  +  f  x  +  5  +  \x  +  4 = x. 

3  Hultsch,  art.  Diophantos  in  Pauly-Wissowa's  Real-Encyclopadie. 

4  lamblichus  In  Nicomachi  arithm.  introd.  p.  127  (ed.  Pistelli) ;  Dioph.  II.  p.  72. 
jjs  5  Dioph.  n.  p.  72  note. 

I  —  2 


4  INTRODUCTION 

remarks,  such  scholia  would  more  naturally  have  been  quoted 
as  a-yoXia  and  not  by  the  separate  title  Mopiavriicd1.  It  may 
have  been  a  separate  work  by  Diophantus  giving  rules  for  reckon- 
ing with  fractions ;  but  I  do  not  feel  clear  that  the  reference 
may  not  simply  be  to  the  definitions  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Arithmetica. 

With  reference  to  the  title  of  the  Arithmetica,  we  may  observe 
that  the  meaning  of  the  word  dpid^TiKd  here  is  slightly  different 
from  that  assigned  to  it  by  more  ancient  writers.  The  ancients 
drew  a  marked  distinction  between  dpidpijTiKij  and  \OJIO-TIKIJ, 
though  both  were  concerned  with  numbers.  Thus  Plato  states 
that  dpid/j,rjTiKrj  is  concerned  with  the  abstract  properties  of 
numbers  (as  odd  and  even,  etc.),  whereas  \oyia-TiKtj  deals  with  the 
same  odd  and  even,  but  in  relation  to  one  another2.  Geminus  also 
distinguishes  the  two  terms3.  According  to  him  dpiO^riK^  deals 
with  numbers  in  themselves,  distinguishing  linear,  plane  and  solid 
numbers,  in  fact  all  the  forms  of  number,  starting  from  the  unit, 
and  dealing  with  the  generation  of  plane  numbers,  similar  and 
dissimilar,  and  then  with  numbers  of  three  dimensions,  etc. 
\oyiariKij  on  the  other  hand  deals,  not  with  the  abstract  properties 
of  numbers  in  themselves,  but  with  numbers  of  concrete  things 
(ala-drjTwv,  sensible  objects),  whence  it  calls  them  by  the  names  of 
the  things  measured,  e.g.  it  calls  some  by  the  names  /^XtTi??  and 
<£iaXtT?794.  But  in  Diophantus  the  calculations  take  an  abstract 
form  (except  in  V.  30,  where  the  question  is  to  find  the  number 
of  measures  of  wine  at  two  given  prices  respectively),  so  that  the 
distinction  between  XO^IO-TIKIJ  and  dpiQ/jLijTucr/  is  lost. 

We  findjthe  Arithmetica  quoted  under  slightly  different  titles. 
Thus  the  anonymous  author  of  prolegomena  to  Nicomachus" 
Introductio  Arithmetica  speaks  of  Diophantus'  "  thirteen  Books  of 
Arithmetic5."  A  scholium  on  lamblichus  refers  to  "  the  last 
theorem  of  the  first  Book  of  Diophantus'  Elements  of  Arithmetic 

1  Hultsch,  loc.  cit. 

2  Gorgias,  451  B,  C  :  rd  fjxv  &\\a  Kadairep  17  dpiB '^T/TIKT;  i]  hoyicrTiKri  Hxfi'  iff  pi  TO  avrb 
ydp  dffTi,  rb  re  apriov  Kal  TO  irepiTTbv  •   dia<p4pei  5£  roffovrov,  OTL  Kal  irpos  avra  Kal  irpds 
d\\ri\a  TTWJ  ?xfi  TXTjtfous  tiriffKoirel  TO  irepiTrov  Kal  TO  apTiov  i)  \oyiaTiK7]. 

3  Proclus,  Comment,  on  Euclid  I.,  p.  39,  14-40,  7. 

4  Cf.  Plato,  Laws  819  B,  c,  on  the  advantage  of  combining  amusement  with  instruction 
in   arithmetical   calculation,   e.g.   by   distributing   apples   or   garlands   (^Xow   T£   TLVUV 
diavofMl  Kal  ffT€<pdvuv)  and  the  use  of  different  bowls  of  silver,  gold,  or  brass  etc.  (tfudXas 
a/Mi  xpvffov  Kal  X&XKOU  *cai  apytipov  Kal  rotoi/raw  TIV&V  aXXwc  KepawuvTes,  ol  5£  6'Xas  TTWS 
5ia5t56»rcj,  oirep  elirov,  eij  iraidiav  tvapubrrovTes  ras  TUV  dva 

5  Dioph.  II.  p.  73,  26. 


DIOPHANTUS   AND   HIS   WORKS  5 


)1."  A  scholium  on  one  of  the  epigrams 
in  Metrodorus'  collection  similarly  speaks  of  the  "  Elements  of 
Diophantus2." 

None  of  the  MSS.  which  we  possess  contain  more  than  the 
first  six  Books  of  the  Arithmetic^  the  only  variation  being  that 
some  few  divide  the  six  Books  into  seven3,  while  one  or  two  give 
the  fragment  on  Polygonal  Numbers  with  the  number  vm.  The 
idea  that  Regiomontanus  saw,  or  said  he  saw,  a  MS.  containing 
the  thirteen  Books  complete  is  due  to  a  misapprehension.  There 
is  no  doubt  that  the  missing  Books  were  'lost  at  a  very  early  date. 
Tannery4  suggests  that  Hypatia's  commentary  extended  only  to 
the  first  six  Books,  and  that  she  left  untouched  the  remaining 
seven,  which  accordingly  were  first  forgotten  and  then  lost  ;  he 
compares  the  case  of  Apollonius'  Conies,  the  first  four  Books  of 
which  were  preserved  by  Eutocius,  who  wrote  a  commentary  on 
them,  while  the  rest,  which  he  did  not  include  in  his  commentary, 
were  lost  so  far  as  the  Greek  text  is  concerned.  While,  however, 
three  of  the  last  four  Books  of  the  Conies  have  fortunately  reached 
us  through  the  Arabic,  there  is  no  sign  that  even  the  Arabians 
ever  possessed  the  missing  Books  of  Diophantus.  Thus  the 
second  part  of  an  algebraic  treatise  called  the  Fakhrl  by  Abu 
Bekr  Muh.  b.  al-Hasan  al-Karkhl  (d.  about  1029)  is  a  collection  of 
problems  in  determinate  and  indeterminate  analysis  which  not 
only  show  that  their  author  had  deeply  studied  Diophantus,  but  in 
many  cases  are  taken  direct  frcjmjihe  Arithmetica,  with  the  change, 
occasionally,  of  some  of  the  constants.  In  the  fourth  section  of 
this  work,  which  begins  and  ends  with  problems  corresponding  to 
problems  in  Diophantus  Books  II.  and  in.  respectively,  are  25 
problems  not  found  in  Diophantus  ;  but  the  differences  from 
Diophantus  in  essential  features  (e.g.  several  of  the  problems  lead 
to  equations  giving  irrational  results,  which  are  always  avoided 
by  Diophantus),  as  well  as  other  internal  evidence,  exclude  the 
hypothesis  that  we  have  here  a  lost  Book  of  Diophantus5.  Nor  is 
there  any  sign  that  more  of  the  work  than  we  possess  was  known 

1  Dioph.  II.  p.  72,  17  ;  lamblichus  (ed.  Pistelli),  p.  132,  12. 

2  Dioph.  II.  p.  62,  25. 

3  e.g.  Vaticanus  gr.  200,  Scorialensis  0-1-15,  ar»d  the  Broscius  MS.  in  the  University 
Library  of  Cracow  ;  the  two  last  divide  the  first  Book  into  two,  the  second  beginning 
immediately  after  the  explanation  of  the  sign  for  minus  (Dioph.  I.  p.  14,  i). 

4  Dioph.  II.  p.  xvii,  xviii. 

5  See  F.  Woepcke,  Extrait  du  Fakhrl,  traiti  cTAlgtbre  par  Abou  Bekr  Mohammed 
ben  Alhafan  AlkarkhT  (tnanuscrit  952,  supplement  arabe  de  la  bibliotheque  fnipdriale),  Paris, 
1853. 


6  INTRODUCTION 

to  Abu'l  Wafa  al-Buzjam  (940-998  A.D.),  who  wrote  a  "commentary 
(tafslr)  on  the  algebra  of  Diophantus  "  as  well  as  a  "  Book  of 
proofs  of  the  propositions  used  by  Diophantus  in  his  work..." 
These  facts  again  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  lost  Books  were 
lost  before  the  loth  c. 

Tannery's  suggestion  that  Hypatia's  commentary  was  limited 
to  the  six  Books,  and  the  parallel  of  Eutocius'  commentary  on 
Apollonius'  Conies,  imply  that  it  is  the  last  seven  Books,  and  the 
most  difficult,  which 'are  lost.  This  view  is  in  strong  contrast  to 
that  which  Jiad  previously  found  most  acceptance  among  com- 
petent authorities.  The  latter  view  was  most  clearly  put,  and 
most  ably  supported,  by  Nesselmann1,  though  Colebrooke2  had 
already  put  forward  a  conjecture  to  the  same  effect ;  and  historians 
of  mathematics  such  as  Hankel,  Moritz  Cantor,  and  Giinther  have 
accepted  Nesselmann's  conclusions,  which,  stated  in  his  own 
words,  are  as  follows:  (i)  that  much  less  of  Diophantus  is  wanting 
than  would  naturally  be  supposed  on  the  basis  of  the  numerical 
proportion  of  6  to  13;  (2)  that  the  missing  portion  is  not  to  be 
looked  for  at  the  end  but  in  the  middle  of  the  work,  and  indeed 
mostly  between  the  first  and  second  Books.  Nesselmann's  general 
argument  is  that,  if  we  carefully  read  the  last  four  Books,  from  the 
third  to  the  sixth,  we  find  that  Diophantus  moves  in  a  rigidly 
defined  and  limited  circle  of  methods  and  artifices,  and  that  any 
attempts  which  he  makes  to  free  himself  are  futile ;  "  as  often  as 
he  gives  the  impression  that  he  wishes  to  spring  over  the  magic 
circle  drawn  round  him,  he  is  invariably  thrown  back  by  an 
invisible  hand  on  the  old  domain  already  known  ;  we  see,  similarly, 
in  half-darkness,  behind  the  clever  artifices  which  he  seeks  to  use 
in  order  to  free  himself,  the  chains  which  fetter  his  genius,  we  hear 
their  rattling,  whenever,  in  dealing  with  difficulties  only  too  freely 
imposed  upon  himself,  he  knows  of  no  other  means  of  extricating 
himself  except  to  cut  through  the  knot  instead  of  untying  it." 
Moreover,  the  sixth  Book  forms  a  natural  conclusion  to  the  whole, 
in  that  it  consists  of  exemplifications  of  methods  explained  and 
used  in  the  preceding  Books.  The  subject  is  the  finding  of  right- 
angled  triangles  in  rational  numbers  such  that  the  sides  and  area 
satisfy  given  conditions,  the  geometrical  property  of  the  right-angled 
triangle  being  introduced  as  a  fresh  condition  additional  to  the 
purely  arithmetical  conditions  which  have  to  be  satisfied  in  the 

1  Algebra  der  Griechen,  pp.  264-273. 

2  Algebra  of  the  Hindus,  Note  M,  p.  Ixi. 


DIOPHANTUS   AND   HIS   WORKS  7 

problems  of  the  earlier  Books.  But,  assuming  that  Diophantus' 
resources  are  at  an  end  in  the  sixth  Book,  Nesselmann  has  to 
suggest  possible  topics  which  would  have  formed  approximately 
adequate  material  for  the  equivalent  of  seven  Books  of  the 
Arithmetical.  The  first  step  is  to  consider  what  is  actually  wanting 
which  we  should  expect  to  find,  either  as  foreshadowed  by  the 
author  himself  or  as  necessary  for  the  elucidation  or  completion  of 
the  whole  subject.  Now  the  first  Book  contains  problems  leading 
to  determinate  equations  of  the  first  degree  ;  the  remainder  of  the 
work  is  a  collection  of  problems  which,  with  few  exceptions,  lead 
to  indeterminate  equations  of  the  second  degree,  beginning  with 
simpler  cases  and  advancing  step  by  step  to  more  complicated 
questions.  There  would  have  been  room  therefore  for  problems 
involving  (i)  determinate  equations  of  the  second  degree  and  (2) 
indeterminate  equations  of  the  first.  There  is  indeed  nothing  to 
show  that  (2)  formed  part  of  the  writer's  plan ;  but  on  the  other 
hand  the  writer's  own  words  in  Def.  1 1  at  the  beginning  of  the 
work  promise  a  discussion  of  the  solution  of  the  complete  or 
adfected  quadratic,  and  it  is  clear  that  he  employed  his  method  of 
solution  in  the  later  Books,  where  in  some  cases  he  simply  states 
the  solution  without  working  it  out,  while  in  others,  where  the 
roots  are  "  irrational,"  he  gives  approximations  which  indicate 
that  he  was  in  possession  of  a  scientific  method.  Pure  quadratics 
Diophantus  regarded  as  simple  equations,  taking  no  account  of  the 
negative  -root.  Indeed  it  would  seem  that  he  adopted  as  his 
ground  for  the  classification  of  quadratics,  not  the  index  of  the 
highest  power  of  the  unknown  quantity  contained  in  it,  but  the 
number  of  terms  left  in  it  when  reduced  to  its  simplest  form.  His 
words  are1:  "  If  the  same  powers  of  the  unknown  occur  on  both 
sides,  but  with  different  coefficients  (prj  6fjW7r\r)0i)  Se),  we  must 
take  like  from  like  until  we  have  one  single  expression  equal  to 
another.  If  there  are  on  both  sides,  or  on  either  side,  any  terms 
with  negative  coefficients  (ev  eXXefy-eo-t  riva  eiS?)),  the  defects  must 
be  added  on  both  sides  until  the  terms  on  both  sides  have 
none  but  positive  coefficients  (evvTrap^ovra),  when  we  must  again 
take  like  from  like  until  there  remains  one  term  on  each  side. 
This  should  be  the  object  aimed  at  in  framing  the  hypotheses  of 
propositions,  that  is  to  say,  to  reduce  the  equations,  if  possible, 
until  one  term  is  left  equated  to  one  term.  But  afterwards  I  will 

1  Dioph.  I.  Def.  u,  p.  14. 


8  INTRODUCTION 

show  you  also  how,  when  two  terms  are  left  equal  to  one  term, 
such  an  equation  is  solved."  That  is  to  say,  reduce  the  quadratic, 
if  possible,  to  one  of  the  forms  ax*=  bx,  axz=c,  or  bx  =  c\  I  will 
show  later  how  to  solve  the  equation  when  three  terms  are  left  of 
which  any  two  are  equal  to  the  third,  z.^.'the  complete  quadratic 
ax*±  bx  ±  c  —  o,  excluding  the  case  ax"-  +  bx  +  c  =  o.  The  exclusion 
of  the  latter  case  is  natural,  since  it  is  of  the  essence  of  the  work 
to  find  rational  and  positive  solutions.  Nesselmann  might  have 
added  that  Diophantus'  requirement  that  the  equation,  as  finally 
stated,  shall  contain  only  positive  terms,  of  which  two  are  equated 
to  the  third,  suggests  that  his  solution  would  deal  separately  with 
the  three  possible  cases  (just  as  Euclid  makes  separate  cases  of  the 
equations  in  his  propositions  VI.  28,  29),  so  that  the  exposition 
might  occupy  some  little  space.  The  suitable  place  for  it  would 
be  between  the  first  and  second  Books.  There  is  no  evidence 
tending  to  confirm  Nesselmann's  further  argument  that  the  six 
Books  may  originally  have  been  divided  into  even  more  than 
seven  Books.  He  argues  from  the  fact  that  there  are  often  better 
natural  divisions  in  the  middle  of  the  Books  (e.g.  at  II.  19)  than 
between  them  as  they  now  stand ;  thus  there  is  no  sign  of  a 
marked  division  between  Books  I.  and  II.  and  between  Books  II. 
and  in.,  the  first  five  problems  of  Book  II.  and  the  first  four  of 
Book  in.  recalling  similar  problems  in  the  preceding  Books 
respectively.  But  the  latter  circumstances  are  better  explained, 
as  Tannery  explains  them,  ,  by  the  supposition  that  the  first 
problems  of  Books  II.  and  III.  are  interpolated  from  some  ancient 
commentary.  Next  Nesselmann  points  out  that  there  are  a 
number  of  imperfections  in  the  text,  Book  V.  especially  having 
been  "  treated  by  Mother  Time  in  a  very  stepmotherly  fashion  " ; 
thus  it  seems  probable  that  at  V.  19  three  problems  have  dropped 
out  altogether.  Still  he  is  far  from  accounting  for  seven  whole 
Books;  he  has  therefore  to  press  into  the  service  the  lost 
"Porisms"  and  the  tract  on  Polygonal  Numbers. 

If  the  phrase  which,  as  we  have  said,  occurs  three  times  in 
Book  V.,  "We  have  it  in  the  Porisms  that...,"  indicates  that  the 
"Porisms"  were  a  definite  collection  of  propositions  concerning 
the  properties  of  certain  numbers,  their  divisibility  into  a  certain 
number  of  squares,  and  so  on,  it  is  possible  that  it  was  from  the 
same  collection  that  Diophantus  took  the  numerous  other  pro- 
positions which  he  assumes,  either  explicitly  enunciating  them,  or 
implicitly  taking  them  for  granted.  May  we  not  then,  says 


DIOPHANTUS    AND    HIS   WORKS  9 

Nesselmann,  reasonably  suppose  the  "  Porisms  "  to  have  formed 
an  introduction  to  the  indeterminate  and  semi-determinate  analy- 
sis of  the  second  degree  which  forms  the  main  subject  of  the 
Arithmetica,  and  to  have  been  an  integral  part  of  the  thirteen 
Books,  intervening,  probably,  between  Books  I.  and  II.  ?  Schulz*  on 
the  other  hand,  considered  this  improbable,  and  in  recent  years 
Hultsch1  has  definitely  rejected  the  theory  that  Diophantus  filled 
one  or  more  Books  of  his  Arithmetica  exclusively  with  Porisms. 
Schulz's  argument  is,  indeed,  not  conclusive.  It  is  based  on  the 
consideration  that  "  Diophantus  expressly  says  that  his  work  deals 
with  arithmetical  problems*"  \  but  what  Diophantus  actually  says  is 
"  Knowing  you,  O  Dionysius,  to  be  anxious  to  learn  the  solution 
(or,  nerhaps,  '  discovery,'  evpeviv)  of  problems  in  numbers,  I  have 
endeavoured,  beginning  from  the  foundations  on  which  the  study  is 
bufit  up,  to  expound  (v-rrofTrfja-ai  =  to  lay  down)  the  nature  and 
force  subsisting  in  numbers,"  the  last  of  which  words  would  easily 
c°ver 'propositions  in  the  theory  of  numbers,  while  "  propositions," 
°ot T:  pr££Jems,"  is  the  word  used  at  the  end  of  the  Preface,  where 

he  says,  "let  us  now  proceed  to  the  propositions  (7rpoT«<ra<?) 

which  have  been  treated  in  thirteen  Books." 

On  reconsideration  of  the  whole  matter,  I  now  agree  in  the 
view  of  Hultsch  that  the  Porisms  were  not  a  separate  portion  of 
the  Arithmetica  or  included  in  the  Arithmetica  at  all.  If  they  had 
been,  I  think  the  expression  "  we  have  it  in  the  Porisms "  would 
have  been  inappropriate.  In  the  first  place,  the  Greek  mathe- 
maticians do  not  usually  give  references  in  such  a  form  as  this 
to  propositions  which  they  cite  when  they  come  from  the  same 
work  as  that  in  which  they  are  cited  ;  as  a  rule  the  propositions 
are  quoted  without  any  references  at  all.  The  references  in  this 
case  would,  on  the  assumption  that  the  Porisms  were  a  portion  of 
the  thirteen  Books,  more  naturally  have  been  to  particular  pro- 
positions of  particular  Books  (cf.  Eucl.  XII.  2,  "  For  it  was  proved 


1  Hultsch,  loc.  cit, 

2  The  whole  passage  of  Schulz  is  as  follows  (pref.  xxi):  "  Es  ist  daher  nicht  unwahr- 
scheinlich,  dass  diese  Porismen  eine  eigene  Schrift  unseres  Diophantus  waren,  welche 
vorziiglich   die   Zusammensetzung  der   Zahlen   aus  gewissen   Bestandtheilen   zu   ihrem 
Gegenstande  hatten.     Konnte  man  diese  Schrift  als  einen  Bestandtheil  des  grossen  in 
dreizehn  Biichern  abgefassten  arithmetischen  Werkes  ansehen,  so  ware  es  sehr  erklarbar, 
dass  gerade  dieser  Theil,  der  den  blossen  Liebhaber  weniger  anzog,  verloren  ging.     Da 
indess  Diophantus  ausdriicklich  sagt,  sein  Werk  behandele  arithmetisfhe  Probleme,  so  hat 
wenigstens  die  letztere  Annahme  nur  einen  geringen  Grad  von  \Vahrscheinlichkeit." 


io  INTRODUCTION 

in  the  first  theorem  of  the  loth  Book  that...").  But  a  still  vaguer 
reference  would  have  been  enough,  even  if  Diophantus  had  chosen 
to  give  any  at  all  ;  if  the  propositions  quoted  had  preceded  those 
in  which  they  are  used,  some  expression  like  TOVTO  yap  irpo- 
yeypaTTTai,  "  for  this  has  already  been  proved,"  or  SeSeitcrai  yap 
TOVTO,  "  for  this  has  been  shown,"  would  have  sufficed,  or,  if  the 
propositions  occurred  later,  some  expression  like  J>?  efr;?  Sei^BijareTai 
or  Set%#/7£reTat  v$>  fipwv  va-repov,  "as  will  be  proved  in  due  course" 
or  "later."  The  expression  "we  have  it  in  the  Porisms"  (in  the 
plural)  would  have  been  still  more  inappropriate  if  the  "Porisms" 
had  been,  as  Tannery  supposes1,  not  collected  together  as  one  or 
more  Books  of  the  Arithmetica,  but  scattered  about  in  the  work  as 
corollaries  to  particular  propositions2.  And,  as  Hultsch  says,  it  is 
hard,  on  Tannery's  supposition,  to  explain  why  the  three  partv.iiar 
theorems  quoted  from  "  the  Porisms "  were  lost,  while  a  ','air 
number  of  other  additions  survived,  partly  under  the  title  iropia-^. 
(cf.  I.  34,  I.  38),  partly  as  "lemmas  to  what  follows,"  Xf///,/*r 
e^9  (cf.  lemmas  before  IV.  34,  35,  36,  V.  7,  8,  VI.  12,  15).  O> 
other  hand,  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  supposition  that 
Diophantus  was  induced  by  the  difficulty  of  his  problems  to  give 
place  in  a  separate  work  to  the  "  porisms "  necessary  to  their 
solution. 

The  hypothesis  that  the  Porisms  formed  part  of  the  Arithmet- 
ica  being  thus  given  up,  we  can  hardly  hold  any  longer  to 
Nesselmann's  view  of  the  contents  of  the  lost  Books  and  their 
place  in  the  treatise;  and  I  am  now  much  more  inclined  to  the 
opinion  of  Tannery  that  it  is  the  last  and  the  most  difficult  Books 
which  are  lost.  Tannery's  argument  seems  to  me  to  be  very 
attractive  and  to  deserve  quotation  in  full,  as  finally  put  in  the 
preface  to  Vol.  II.  of  his  Diophantus3.  He  replies  first  to  the 
assumption  that  Diophantus  could  not  have  proceeded  to  problems 
more  difficult  than  those  of  Book  V.  "  But  if  the  fifth  or  the  sixth 
Book  of  the  Arithmetica  had  been  lost,  who,  pray,  among  us  would 
have  believed  that  such  problems  had  ever  been  attempted  by  the 
Greeks?  It  would  be  the  greatest  error,  in  any  case  in  which  a 


1  Dioph.  II.  p.  xix. 

2  Thus  Tannery  holds  (loc.  cit.)  that  the  solution  of  the  complete  quadratic  was  given 
in  the  form  of  corollaries  to  I.  27,  30;  and  he  refers  the  three  "porisms"  quoted  in  v.  3, 
5,  16  respectively  to  a  second  (lost)  solution  of  III.  io,  to  III.  15,  and  to  iv.  i,  2. 

3  Dioph.  II.  p.  xx. 


DIOPHANTUS   AND    HIS   WORKS  n 

thing  cannot  clearly  be  proved  to  have  been  unknown  to  all  the 
ancients,  to  maintain  that  it  could  not  have  been  known  to  some 
Greek  mathematician.  If  we  do  not  know  to  what  lengths 
Archimedes  brought  the  theory  of  numbers  (to  say  nothing  of 
other  things),  let  us  admit  our  ignorance.  But,  between  the 
famous  problem  of  the  cattle  and  the  most  difficult  of  Diophantus' 
problems,  is  there  not  a  sufficient  gap  to  require  seven  Books  to 
fill  it?  And,  without  attributing  to  the  ancients  what  modern 
mathematicians  have  discovered,  may  not  a  number  of  the  things 
attributed  to  the  Indians  and  Arabs  have  been  drawn  from 
Greek  sources  ?  May  not  the  same  be  said  of  a  problem  solved  by 
Leonardo  of  Pisa,  which  is  very  similar  to  those  of  Diophantus  but 
is  nc  now  to  be  found  in  the  Arithmetical  In  fact,  it  may  fairly 
be  said  that,  when  Chasles  made  his  reasonably  probable  restitution 
of  the  Porisms  of  Euclid,  he,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  had 
Pappus'  lemmas  to  help  him,  undertook  a  more  difficult  task  than 
he  would  have  undertaken  if  he  had  attempted  to  fill  up  seven 
Diophantine  Books  with  numerical  problems  which  the  Greeks 
may  reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  solved." 

On  the  assumption  that  the  lost  portion  came  at  the  end  of  the 
existing  six  Books,  Schulz  supposed  that  it  contained  new  methods 
of  solution  in  addition  to  those  used  in  Books  I.  to  VI.,  and  in 
particular  extended  the  method  of  solution  by  means  of  the  double 
equation  (Bi7r\rj  tcrori;?  or  SiTrXoia-oTT)?).  By  means  of  the  double 
equation  Diophantus  shows  how  to  find  a  value  of  the  unknown 
which  will  make  two  expressions  (linear  or  quadratic)  containing  it 
simultaneously  squares.  Schulz  then  thinks  that  he  went  on,  in 
the  lost  Books,  to  make  three  such  expressions  simultaneously 
squares,  i.e.  advanced  to  a  triple  equation.  But  this  explanation 
does  not  in  any  case  take  us  very  far. 

Bombelli  thought  that  Diophantus  went  on  to  solve  deter- 
minate equations  of  the  third  and  fourth  degree1;  this  view, 
however,  though  natural  at  that  date,  when  the  solution  of  cubic 
and  biquadratic  equations  filled  so  large  a  space  in  contemporary 
investigations  and  in  Bombelli's  own  studies,  has  nothing  to 
support  it. 

Hultsch2  seems  to  find  the  key  to  the  question  in  the  fragment 
of  the  treatise  on  Polygonal  Numbers  and  the  developments  to 

1  Cossali,  I.  pp.  75,  76.  2  Hultsch,  loc.  fit. 


12  INTRODUCTION 

which  it  might  have  been  expected  to  lead.  In  this  he  differs 
from  Tannery,  who  says  that,  as  Serenus'  treatise  on  the  sections 
of  cones  and  cylinders  was  added  to  the  mutilated  Conies  of 
Apollonius  consisting  of  four  Books  only,  in  order  to  make  up  a 
convenient  volume,  so  the  tract  on  Polygonal  Numbers  was  added 
to  the  remains  of  the  Arithmetical,  though  forming  no  part  of  the 
larger  work1.  Thus  Tannery  would  seem  to  deny  the  genuineness 
of  the  whole  tract  on  Polygonal  Numbers,  though  in  his  text  he 
only  signalises  the  portion  beginning  with  the  enunciation  of  the 
problem  "  Given  a  number,  to  find  in  how  many  ways  it  can  be 
a  polygonal  number "  as  a  "  vain  attempt  by  a  commentator "  to 
solve  this  problem.  Hultsch,  on  the  other  hand,  thinks  we  may 
conclude  that  Diophantus  really  solved  the  problem.  He  points 
out  moreover  that  the  beginning  of  the  tract  is  like  the  beginning 
of  Book  I.  of  the  Arithmetica  in  containing  definitions  and  pre- 
liminary propositions.  Then  came  the  difficult  problem  quoted, 
the  discussion  of  which  breaks  off  in  our  text  after  a  few  pages  ; 
and  to  this  it  would  be  easy  to  tack  on  a  great  variety  of  other 
problems.  Again,  says  Hultsch,  the  supplementary  propositions 
added  by  Bachet  may  serve  to  give  an  approximate  idea  of  the 
difficulty  of  the  problems  which  were  probably  treated  in  Books  VII. 
and  the  following.  And  between  these  and  the  bold  combination 
of  a  triangular  and  a  square  number  in  the  Cattle-Problem 
stretches,  as  Tannery  says,  a  wide  domain  which  was  certainly 
not  unknown  to  Diophantus,  but  was  his  hunting-ground  for  the 
most  various  problems.  Whether  Diophantus  dealt  with  plane 
numbers,  and  with  other  figured  numbers,  such  as  prisms  and 
tetrahedra,  is  uncertain. 

The  name  of  Diophantus  was  used,  as  were  the  names  of  Euclid, 
Archimedes  and  Heron  in  their  turn,  for  the  purpose  of  palming 
off  the  compilations  of  much  later  authors.  Tannery  prints  in 
his  edition  three  fragments  under  the  head  of  "Diophantus 
Pseudepigraphus."  The  first2,  which  is  not  "  from  the  Arithmetic 
of  Diophantus  "  as  its  heading  states,  is  worth  notice  as  containing 
some  particulars  of  one  of  "  two  methods  of  finding  the  square 
root  of  any  square  number";  we  are  told  to  begin  by  writing  the 
number  "  according  to  the  arrangement  of  the  Indian  method,"  t.e. 
according  to  the  Indian  numerical  notation  which  reached  us 
through  the  Arabs.  The  fragment  is  taken  from  a  Paris  MS. 

1  Dioph.  ii.  p.  xviii.  2  Dioph.  n.  p.  3,  3-14. 


DIOPHANTUS   AND    HIS   WORKS  13 

(Supplem.  gr.  387),  where  it  follows  a  work  with  the  title  'Ap^») 
7779  fi€ryd\r)<;  KOI  'Iv8itcfj<;  "^r}(pi(f)opia<;  (i.e.  ifnj<f>o<j>opia<;),  written  in 
1252  and  raided  about  half  a  century  later  by  Maximus  Planudes. 
The  second  fragment1  is  the  work  edited  by  C.  Henry  in  1879  as 
Opusculum  de  multiplicatione  et  divisione  sexagesimalibus  Diophanto 
vel  Pappo  attribuendum.  The  third2,  beginning  with  Aio(j>dvTov 
eTri7re8ofj,6TpiKd,  is  a  compilation  made  in  the  Byzantine  period  out 
of  late  reproductions  of  the  yecof^erpovfieva  and  <nepeop,€rpovfi€va 
of  Heron.  The  second  and  third  fragments,  like  the  first,  have 
nothing  to  do  with  Diophantus. 

1  Dioph.  II.  p.  3,  15-15,  17.  2  Dioph.  n.  p.  15,  18-31,  22. 


CHAPTER   II 

THE  MSS.  OF  AND  WRITERS  ON  DIOPHANTUS 

FOR  full  details  of  the  various  MSS.  and  of  their  mutual 
relations,  reference  should  be  made  to  the  prefaces  to  the  first  and 
second  volumes  of  Tannery's  edition1.  Tannery's  account  needs 
only  to  be  supplemented  by  a  description  given  by  Gollob2  of 
another  MS.  supposed  by  Tannery  to  be  non-existent,  but  actually 
rediscovered  in  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Cracow  (Nr  544). 
Only  the  shortest  possible  summary  of  the  essential  facts  will  be 
given  here. 

After  the  loss  of  Egypt  the  work  of  Diophantus  long  remained 
almost  unknown  among  the  Byzantines  ;  perhaps  one  copy  only 
survived  (of  the  Hypatian  recension),  which  was  seen  by  Michael 
Psellus  and  possibly  by  the  scholiast  to  lamblichus,  but  of  which 
no  trace  can  be  found  after  the  capture  of  Constantinople  in  1 204. 
From  this  one  copy  (denoted  by  the  letter  a  in  Tannery's  table  of 
the  MSS.)  another  MS.  (a)  was  copied  in  the  8th  or  9th  century  ; 
this  again  is  lost,  but  is  the  true  archetype  of  our  MSS.  The 
copyist  apparently  intended  to  omit  all  scholia,  but,  the  distinction 
between  text  and  scholia  being  sometimes  difficult  to  draw,  he 
included  a  good  deal  which  should  have  been  left  out.  For 
example,  Hypatia,  and  perhaps  scholiasts  after  her,  seem  to  have 
added  some  alternative  solutions  and  a  number  of  new  problems  ; 
some  of  these  latter,  such  as  II.  1-7,  17,  18,  were  admitted  into  the 
text  as  genuine. 

The  MSS.  fall  into  two  main  classes,  the  ante-Planudes  class, 
as  we  may  call  it,  and  the  Planudean.  The  most  ancient  and  the 
best  of  all  is  Matritensis  48  (Tannery's  A\  which  was  written  in 
the  1 3th  century  and  belongs  to  the  first  class;  it  is  evidently  a 
most  faithful  copy  of  the  lost  archetype  (a).  Maximus  Planudes 
wrote  a  systematic  commentary  on  Books  I.  and  II.,  and  his  scholia, 

1  Dioph.  I.  pp.  iii-v,  II.  pp.  xxii-xxxiv. 

2  Eduard  Gollob,  "Ein  wiedergefundener  Diophantuscodex  "  in  Zeitschrift  filr  Math. 
u.  Physik,  XLIV.  (1899),  hist.-litt.  Abtheilung,  pp.  137-140. 


THE    MSS.    OF   AND   WRITERS    ON    DIOPHANTUS        15 


which  are  edited  by  Tannery  for  the  first  time,  are  preserved  in  the 
oldest  representative  which  we  possess  of  the  Planudean  class, 
namely,  Marcianus  308  (Tannery's  B^,  itself  apparently  copied 
from  an  archetype  of  the  I4th  century  now  lost,  with  the  exception 
of  ten  leaves  which  survive  in  Ambrosianus  Et  157  sup. 

Tannery   shows   the   relation    of  the    MSS.   in   the   following 
diagram  : 

(a)     Lost  copy  of  the  Hypatian  recension, 
(a)     Lost  copy,  of  eighth  or  ninth  c. 

(FIRST  CLASS) 

1 


(PLANUDEAN   CLASS) 


i.     Matritensis    48  =  A, 
1  3th  c. 

2.     Vaticanusgr.  191=  V, 
second  half  of  i5th  c. 

3.     Vaticanus     gr.    304, 
beginning  of  i6th  c. 

9.      Lost  MS.  of  the    i4th  c.  of  which  ten  leaves 
are  extant  in  Ambrosianus  Et  157  sup. 

i  o.     Marcianus  308  =  B^  , 
beginning  of  i5th  c. 

1  1  .     Guelferbytanus 
Gudianus  i,  i5th  c. 

14.      Ambrosianus 
A  91  sup. 
(1545) 

15.     Vaticanus  gr.  200 
(1545) 

4.     Parisinus  2379  =C 
(after      first      two 
Books), 
middle  of  i6th  c. 

5.     Parisinus  2  3  78  =  />, 
middle  of  i6th  c. 

6.     Neapolitanus 
IIIC  17, 
middle  of  i6th  c. 

7.     Urbinas  gr.  74, 
end  of  1  6th  c. 

8.     Oxon.  Baroccianus 
1  66  (part  of  Book  I. 
only) 

12.     Palatinus  gr.  391, 
end  of  1  6th  c. 

13.     Reginensis      128, 
end  of  1  6th  c. 

1  6.   Scorialensis  T—  I—  1  1 
(1545) 

17.  Parisinus  2485  =  A", 
middle  of  i6th  c. 

1  8.  Scorialensis 
R-III-iS, 
middle  of  i6th  c. 

19.  Ambrosianus 
Q  121  sup.  (part  of 
Book  I.), 
middle  of  i6th  c. 

4.     Parisinus  2379  =  C 
(first  two  Books) 

20.  Taurinensis  C  III  16 

21.  Parisinus  Ars.  8406 
=  X 

22.  Scorialensis  fl-I-i  5, 
middle  of  6th  c. 

23.  ScorialensisR-II-3, 
end  of  1  6th  c. 

? 
24.     Oxon.  Savilianus, 
end  of  1  6th  c. 

-^ 

Auria's  recension  made  up  out  of   MSS.  2,  3,   15  above  and  Xylander's 
translation:  25.     Parisinus  2380  =  Z>. 

26.     Ambrosianus  E  5  sup. 


27.  MS.  (Patavinus)  of  Broscius  (Brozek)  now  at 

28.  Lost  MS.  of  Cardinal  du  Perron. 


Cracow. 


1 6  INTRODUCTION 

The  addition  of  a  few  notes  as  regards  the  most  important  and 
interesting  of  the  MSS.,  in  the  order  of  their  numbers  in  Tannery's 
arrangement,  will  now  sufficiently  complete  the  story. 

1.  The  best  and  most  ancient  MS.,  that  of  Madrid  (Tannery's 
A),  was  unfortunately  spoiled  at  a  late  date  by  corrections  made, 
especially  in  the  first  two  Books,  from  some  MS.  of  the  Planudean 
class,  in  such  a  way  that  the  original  reading  is  sometimes  entirely 
erased  or  made  quite  illegible.     In  these  cases  recourse  must  be 
had  to  the  Vatican  MS.   191. 

2.  The  MS.  Vaticanus  graecus  191  was  copied  from  A  before 
it  had  suffered  the  general  alteration  by  means  of  a  MS.  of  the 
other  class,  though  not  before  various  other  corrections  had  been 
made  in  different  hands  not  easily  distinguished  ;  thus    V  some- 
times has  readings  which  Tannery  found  to  have  arisen  from  some 
correction    in  A.     A   appears  to  have  been  at  Rome   for  a  con- 
siderable period  at  the  time  when  V  was  copied ;  for  the  librarian 
who  wrote  the  old  table  of  contents1  at  the  beginning  of  V  inserted 
in  the  margin  in  one  place2  the  word  a/ofa/^evo?,  which  had  been 
omitted,  direct  from  the  original  (A). 

3.  Vat.  gr.  304  was   copied  from    V,  not  from  A  ;    Tannery 
inferred  this  mainly  from  a  collation  of  the  scholia,  and  he  notes 
that  the  word  ap£a/iei/o<?  above  mentioned  is  here  brought  into  the 
text  by  the  erasure  of  some  letters.     This  MS.  304,   being   very 
clearly  written,  was  used  thenceforward  to  make  copies  from.    The 
next  five  MSS.  do  not  appear  to  have  had  any  older  source. 

4.  The  MS.  Parisinus  2379  (Tannery's  C)  was  that  used  by 
Bachet  for  his  edition.    It  was  written  by  one  loannes  Hydruntinus 
after  1545,  and  has  the  peculiarity  that  the  first  two  Books  were 
copied  from  the  MS.  Vat.  gr.  200  (a  MS.  of  the  Planudean  class), 
evidently  in  order  to  include  the  commentary  of  Planudes,  while 
the  MS.  Vat.  gr.  304  belonging   to   the  pre-Planudes  class   was 
followed  in  the  remaining  Books,  no  doubt  because  it   was  con- 
sidered  superior.     Thus  the  class  of  which  C  is  the  chief  repre- 
sentative is  a  sort  of  mixed  class. 

5.  6.     Parisinus  2378  =  P,   and    Neapolitans  III  C    17,  were 
copied  by  Angelus  Vergetius.     In  the  latter  Vergetius   puts   the 

1  The  MS.    V  was  made  up  of  various  MSS.  before  separated.      The  old  table  of 
contents  has  Aio^dWou  d/ji^ijTcm}-  apfioviicii.  didQopa.     The  appoviKa  include  the  Intro- 
duction to  Harmony  by  Cleonides,  but  without  any  author's  name.     This  fact  sufficiently 
explains  the  error  of  Ramus  in  saying,  Schola  mathematics  Bk  I.  p.  35,  "Scripserat  et 
Diophantus  harmonica. " 

2  Dioph.  i.  p.  2,  5-6. 


THE   MSS.   OF  AND   WRITERS   ON   DIOPHANTUS        17 

numbers  A,  B,  F,  A,  E,  Z,  H  at  the  top  of  the  pages  (as  we  put 
headlines)  corresponding  to  the  different  Books,  implying  that  he 
regarded  the  tract  on  Polygonal  Numbers  as  Book  VII. 

The  other  MSS.  of  the  first  class  call  for  no  notice,  and  we  pass 
to  the  Planudean  class. 

9.  Tannery,  as  he  tells  us,  congratulated  himself  upon  finding 
in  Ambrosianus  Et  157  sup.  ten    pages  of  the  archetype   of  the 
class,  and  eagerly  sought  for  new  readings.     So  far,  however,  as  he 
was  able  to  carry  his  collation,  he  found  no  difference   from  the 
principal  representative  of  the  class  (B^)  next  to  be  mentioned. 

10.  The  MS.  Marcianus  308  (=  B^)  of  the  1 5th  century  formerly 
belonged  to  Cardinal  Bessarion,  and  was  seen  by  Regiomontanus 
at  Venice  in  1464.     It  contains  the  recension  by  Planudes  with  his 
commentary. 

11.  It  seems  certain  that  the  Wolfenbuttel  MS.  Guelferbytanus 
Gudianus    I   (i5th   c.)   was    that    which    Xylander    used    for   his 
translation  ;    Tannery   shows  that,  if  this  was  not  the  MS.  lent 
to  Xylander   by  Andreas   Dudicius  Sbardellatus,  that  MS.  must 
have  been  lost,  and  there  is  no  evidence  in  support  of  the  latter 
hypothesis.     It  is  not  possible  to  say  whether  the  Wolfenbuttel 
MS.    was    copied    from    Marcianus    308   (B^)   or   from   the   com- 
plete MS.  of  which  Ambrosianus  Et  157  sup.  preserves  the  ten 
leaves. 

12.  Palatinus  gr.  391  (end  of  i6th  c.)  has  notes  in  German  in 
the  margin  which  show  that  it  was  intended  to  print  from  it ;  it 
was  written  either  by  Xylander  himself  or  for  him.     It  is  this  MS. 
of  which  Claudius  Salmasius   (Claude   de   Saumaise,    1588-1653) 
told   Bachet  that  it  contained  nothing  more  than  the  six  Books, 
with  the  tract  on  Polygonal  Numbers. 

13.  Reginensis  128  was  copied  at  the  end  of  the  i6th  century 
from  the  Wolfenbuttel  MS. 

14.  15.     Ambrosianus  A  91  sup.  and  Vaticanus  gr.  200  both 
come  from  B^ ;  as  they  agree  in  omitting  V.  28  of  Diophantus,  one 
was  copied  from  the  other,  probably  the  latter  from  the  former. 
They  were  both  copied  by  the  same  copyist  for  Mendoza  in  1545. 
Vat.  gr.  200  has  headings  which  make  eight  Books  ;  according  to 
Tannery  the  first  Book  is  numbered  a',  the  fourth  8OV ;  before  V.  20 
(in  Bachet's  numbering) — should  this  be  IV.  20  ? — is  the  heading 
Ato<£ai/TOL>  6°",  before  the  fifth  Book  Aio<j>dvTov  r°",  before  the  sixth 
At,o(j)dvTov    f0",    and     before   the    tract    on    Polygonal    Numbers 
&.io<f>dvTov  77°" ;  this  wrong  division  occurs  in  the  next  three  MSS. 

H.  D.  2 


i8  INTRODUCTION 

(16,  17,  1 8  in  the  diagram),  all  of  which  seem  to  be  copied  from 
Vat.  200. 

The  MSS.  numbered  20,  21,  22,  23  in  the  diagram  are  of  the 
hybrid  class  derived  from  Parisinus  2379  (C).  Scorialensis  ft-I-15 
and  Scorialensis  R-II-3,  the  latter  copied  from  the  former,  have 
the  first  Book  divided  into  two  (cf.  p.  5  above),  and  so  make 
seven  Books  of  the  Arithmetica  and  an  eighth  Book  of  the 
Polygonal  Numbers. 

27.  The  Cracow  MS.  has  the  same  division  into  Books  as  the 
MSS.  last  mentioned.  According  to  Gollob,  the  collation  of  this 
MS.,  so  far  as  it  was  carried  in  1899,  showed  that  it  agrees  in  the 
main  with  A  (the  best  MS.),  B^  (Marcianus  308)  and  C  (Parisinus 
2379) ;  but,  as  it  contains  passages  not  found  in  the  two  latter,  it 
cannot  have  been  copied  from  either  of  them. 

25.  Parisinus  2380  appears  to  be  the  copy  of  Auria's 
Diophantus  mentioned  by  Schulz  as  having  been  in  the  library  of 
Carl  von  Montchall  and  bearing  the  title  "  Diophanti  libri  sex,  cum 
scholiis  graecis  Maximi  Planudae,  atque  liber  de  numeris  poly- 
gonis,  collati  cum  Vaticanis  codicibus,  et  latine  versi  a  Josepho 
Auria1." 

The  first  commentator  on  Diophantus  of  whom  we  hear  is 
Hypatia,  the  daughter  of  Theon  of  Alexandria  ;  she  was  murdered 
by  Christian  fanatics  in  415  A.D.  According  to  Suidas  she  wrote 
commentaries  on  Diophantus,  on  the  Astronomical  Canon  (sc.  of 
Ptolemy)  and  on  the  Conies  of  Apollonius2.  Tannery  suggests 
that  the  remarks  of  Michael  Psellus  (nth  c.)  at  the  beginning  of 
his  letter  about  Diophantus,  Anatolius,  and  the  Egyptian  method 
of  arithmetical  reckoning  were  taken  bodily  from  some  MS.  of 
Diophantus  containing  an  ancient  and  systematic  commentary  ; 
and  he  believes  this  commentary  to  have  been  that  of  Hypatia.  I 
have  already  mentioned  the  attractive  hypothesis  of  Tannery  that 
Hypatia's  commentary  extended  only  to  our  six  Books,  and  that 
this  accounts  for  the  loss  of  the  rest. 

Georgius  Pachymeres  (1240  to  about  1310)  wrote  in  Greek  a 
paraphrase  of  at  least  a  portion  of  Diophantus.  Sections  25-44  of 

1  Schulz,  Diophantus,  pref.  xliii. 

2  Suidas  s.v.  'firaria:  typa\f/ev  virbnvwa  els  Aufyavrov,  <ets>  rbv  dffrpovofUKbv  Kavdva, 
efc  TO.  KuviKa  'AiroXXowfou  vir&fu>7ifM.     So  Tannery  reads,  following  the  best  MSS. ;  he 
gives  ample  reasons  for  rejecting  Kuster's  conjecture  ets  bioQdvTov  rbv  dffrpovofj.tKi>v  Kavova, 
viz.  (i)  that  the  order  of  words  would  have  been  TOV  Aiotpavrov  derpovofUKov  Kavova, 
(i)  that  there  is  nothing  connecting  Diophantus  with  astronomy,  while  Suidas  mentions, 
s.v.  Qiuv,  a  commentary  et's  rbv  UroXe^aiov  -irpoxeipov  Kavova. 


THE   MSS.   OF  AND  WRITERS   ON   DIOPHANTUS         19 

this  survive  and  are  published  by  Tannery  in  his  edition  of 
Diophantus1.  The  chapters  lost  at  the  beginning  may  have  con- 
tained general  observations  and  introductions  to  the  first  two 
paragraphs  of  Book  I. ;  section  25  begins  with  the  third  paragraph 
(Def.  i),  and  the  rest  of  the  fragment  takes  us  up  to  the  problem 
in  I.  ii. 

Soon  afterwards  Maximus  Planudes  (about  1260-1310)  wrote 
a  systematic  commentary  on  Books  I.,  II.  This  is  also  included  by 
Tannery  in  his  edition2. 

There  are  a  number  of  other  ancient  scholia,  very  few  of  which 
seemed  to  Tannery  to  be  worth  publication3. 

But  in  the  meantime,  and  long  before  the  date  of  Georgius 
Pachymeres,  the  work  of  Diophantus  had  become  known  in  Arabia, 
where  it  was  evidently  the  subject  of  careful  study.  We  are  told 
in  the  Fihrist,  the  main  part  of  which  was  written  in  the  year 
987  A.D.,  (i)  that  Diophantus  was  a  Greek  of  Alexandria  who 
wrote  a  book  "On  the  art  of  algebra4/'  (2)  that  Abu'l  Wafa 
al-Buzjanl  (940-998)  wrote  (a)  a  commentary  (tafsir)  on  the 
algebra  of  Diophantus  and  (b}  a  book  of  "  proofs  to  the  pro- 
positions used  by  Diophantus  in  his  book  and  to  that  which 
he  himself  (Abu'l  Wafa)  stated  in  his  commentary5,"  (3)  that 
Qusta.  b.  Luqa  al-Ba'labakkl  (died  about  912)  wrote  a  "com- 
mentary on  three  and  a  half  Books  of  Diophantus'  work  on 
arithmetical  problems6."  Qusta  b.  Luqa,  physician,  philosopher, 
astronomer,  mathematician  and  translator,  was  the  author  of  works 
on  Euclid  and  of  an  "  introduction  to  geometry  "  in  the  form  of 
question  and  answer,  and  translator  of  the  so-called  Books  XIV.,  XV. 
of  Euclid  ;  other  Arabian  authorities  credit  him  with  an  actual 
"  translation  of  the  book  of  Diophantus  on  Algebra7."  Lastly,  we 
are  told  by  Ibn  abi  Usaibi'a  of  "  marginal  glosses  which  Ishaq  b. 
Yunis  (died  about  1077),  the  physician  of  Cairo,  after  Ibn  al- 
ii aitham,  added  to  the  book  of  Diophantus  on  algebraic  problems." 
The  title  is  somewhat  obscure ;  probably  Ibn  al-Haitham  (about 
965-1039),  who  wrote  several  works  on  Euclid,  wrote  a  commentary 
on  the  Arithmetic*  and  Ishaq  b.  Yunis  added  glosses  to  this 
commentary8. 

Dioph.  ii.  pp.  78-122.  2  Dioph.  II.  pp.  125-255. 

The  few  that  he  gives  are  in  Vol.  II.  pp.  256-260;  as  regards  the  collection  in 
general  cf.  Hultsch  in  Berliner  philologisctie  Wochenschrift,  1896,  p.  615. 

Fihrist,  ed.  Suter,  p.  22.  5  ibid,  p.  39.  6  ibid,  p.  43. 

Suter,  Die  Mathematiker  und  Astroiiomen  der  Araber,  1900,  p.  41. 

Suter,  op.  cit,  pp.  107-8.     Cf.  Bibliotheca  Malhematica  iv3,  1903-4,  p.  296. 

2 2 


20  INTRODUCTION 

To  Regiomontanus  belongs  the  credit  of  being  the  first  to  call 
attention  to  the  work  of  Diophantus  as  being  extant  in  Greek. 
We  find  two  notices  by  him  during  his  sojourn  in  Italy,  whither  he 
journeyed  after  the  death  of  his  teacher  Georg  von  Peurbach, 
which  took  place  on  the  8th  April,  1461.  In  connexion  with 
lectures  on  the  astronomy  of  Alfraganus  which  he  gave  at  Padua 
he  delivered  an  Oratio  introductoria  in  omnes  scientias  mathe- 
maticas1.  In  this  he  observed:  "No  one  has  yet  translated  from 
the  Greek  into  Latin  the  fine  thirteen  Books  of  Diophantus,  in 
which  the  very  flower  of  the  whole  of  Arithmetic  lies  hid,  the  ars 
rei  et  census  which  to-day  they  call  by  the  Arabic  name  of 
Algebra2."  Secondly,  he  writes  to  Bianchini,  in  answer  to  a  letter, 
dated  5th  February,  1464,  that  he  has  found  at  Venice  "Diofantus," 
a  Greek  arithmetician,  who  has  not  yet  been  translated  into  Latin ; 
that  in  his  preface  Diophantus  defines  the  various  powers  up  to 
the  sixth  ;  but  whether  he  followed  out  all  the  combinations  of 
these  Regiomontanus  does  not  know:  "for  not  more  than  six 
Books  are  found,  though  in  the  preface  he  promises  thirteen.  If 
this  book,  which  is  really  most  wonderful  and  most  difficult,  could 
be  found  entire,  I  should  like  to  translate  it  into  Latin,  for  the 
knowledge  of  Greek  which  I  have  acquired  while  staying  with  my 
most  reverend  master  [Bessarion]  would  suffice  for  this...."  He 
goes  on  to  ask  Bianchini  to  try  to  discover  a  complete  copy  and, 
in  the  meantime,  to  advise  him  whether  he  should  begin  to  translate 
the  six  Books3.  The  exact  date  of  the  Oratio  is  not  certain. 
Regiomontanus  made  some  astronomical  observations  at  Viterbo 
in  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1462.  He  is  said  to  have  spent  a 
year  at  Ferrara,  and  he  seems  to  have  gone  thence  to  Venice. 
Extant  letters  of  his  written  at  Venice  bear  dates  from  27th  July, 
1463,  to  6th  July,  1464,  and  it  may  have  been  from  Venice 
that  he  made  his  visit  to  Padua.  At  all  events  the  Oratio  at 
Padua  must  have  been  near  in  time  to  the  discovery  of  the 
MS.  at  Venice. 

Notwithstanding  that  attention  was  thus  called  to  the  work,  it 


1  Printed  in  the  work  Rudimenta  astronomica  Alfragani,  Niirnberg,  1537. 

2  As  the  ars  rei  et  census,  the  solution  of  determinate  quadratic  equations,  is  not  found 
in  our  Diophantus,  it  would  seem  that  at  the  time  of  the  Oratio  Regiomontanus  had  only 
looked  at  the  MS.  cursorily,  if  at  all. 

3  The  letter  to  Bianchini  is  given  on  p.    135  of  Ch.  Th.  v.  Murr's  Memorabilia, 
Norimbergae,  1786,  and  partly  in  Doppelmayer's  Historische  Nachricht  von  den  Niirn- 
bergischen  Mathematicis  und  Kiinstlern  (Niirnberg,  1730),  p.  5,  note  7. 


THE   MSS.   OF  AND  WRITERS   ON   DIOPHANTUS         21 

seems  to  have  remained  practically  a  closed  book  from  the  date  of 
Maximus  Planudes  to  about  1570.  Luca  Paciuolo,  towards  the 
end  of  the  isth  c.,  Cardano  and  Tartaglia  about  the  middle  of  the 
1 6th,  make  no  mention  of  it.  Only  Joachim  Camerarius,  in  a 
letter  published  in  I5561,  mentions  that  there  is  a  MS.  of 
Diophantus  in  the  Vatican  which  he  is  anxious  to  see.  Rafael 
Bombelli  was  the  first  to  find  a  MS.  in  the  Vatican  and  to  conceive 
the  idea  of  publishing  the  work.  This  was  towards  1570,  for  in  his 
Algebra2  published  in  1572  Bombelli  tells  us  that  he  had  in  the 
years  last  past  discovered  a  Greek  book  on  Algebra  written  by  "  a 
certain  Diofantes,  an  Alexandrine  Greek  author,  who  lived  in  the 
time  of  Antoninus  Pius  "  ;  that,  thinking  highly  of  the  contents  of 
the  work,  he  and  Antonio  Maria  Pazzi  determined  to  translate  it ; 
that  they  actually  translated  five  books  out  of  the  seven  into 
which  the  MS.  was  divided  ;  but  that,  before  the  rest  was  finished, 
they  were  called  away  from  it  by  other  labours.  Bombelli  did  not 
carry  out  his  plan  of  publishing  Diophantus  in  a  translation,  but 
he  took  all  the  problems  of  the  first  four  Books  and  some  of  those 
of  the  fifth,  and  embodied  them  in  his  Algebra,  interspersing  them 
with  his  own  problems.  He  took  no  pains  to  distinguish 
Diophantus'  problems  from  his  own ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  former 
he  adhered  pretty  closely  to  the  original,  so  that  Bachet  admits  his 
obligations  to  him,  remarking  that  in  many  cases  he  found 


1  De  Graecis  Latinisque  numerorum  ttotis  et  praeterea  Saracenis  seu  Indicts,  etc.  etc., 
studio  Joachimi  Camerarii,  Papeberg,  1556. 

3  Nesselmann  tells  us  that  he  has  not  seen  this  work  but  takes  his  information  about 
it  from  Cossali.  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  find  in  the  British  Museum  one  of  the  copies 
dated  1579  (really  the  same  as  the  original  edition  of  1572  except  that  the  title-page  and 
date  are  new,  and  a  dedicatory  letter  on  pp.  3-8  is  reprinted ;  there  were  not  two 
separate  editions).  The  title  is  L"  Algebra,  opera  di  Rafael  Bombelli  da  Bologna  diuisa  in 

tre  Libri In  Bologna,  Per  Giovanni  Rossi,  MDLXXIX.  The  original  of  the  passage 

from  the  preface  is  : 

"Questi  anni  passati,  essendosi  ritrouato  una  opera  greca  di  questa  disciplina  nella 
libraria  di  Nostro  Signore  in  Vaticano,  composta  da  un  certo  Diofante  Alessandrino  Autor 
Greco,  il  quale  fu  a  tempo  di  Antonin  Pio,  e  havendomela  fatta  vedere  Messer  Antonio 
Maria  Pazzi  Reggiano,  publico  lettore  delle  Matematiche  in  Roma,  e  giudicatolo  con  lui 
Autore  assai  intelligente  de'  numeri  (ancorche  non  tratti  de'  numeri  irrational!,  ma  solo 
in  lui  si  vede  vn  perfetto  ordine  di  operare)  egli,  ed  io,  per  arrichire  il  mondo  di  cosl  fatta 
opera,  ci  dessimo  a  tradurlo,  e  cinque  libri  (delli  sette  che  sono)  tradutti  ne  habbiamo ;  lo 
restante  non  hauendo  potuto  finire  per  gli  trauagli  auenuti  all'  uno,  e  all'  altro;  e  in  delta 
opera  habbiamo  ritrouato,  ch'  egli  assai  volte  cita  gli  Autori  Indiani,  col  che  mi  ha  fatto 
conoscere,  che  questa  disciplina  appo  -gl'  indiani  prima  fu,  che  a  gli  Arabi."  The  last 
words  stating  that  Diophantus  often  quotes  from  Indian  authors  are  no  doubt  due  to 
Bombelli's  taking  for  part  of  Diophantus  the  tract  of  Maximus  Planudes  about  the  Indian 
method  of  reckoning. 


22  INTRODUCTION 

Bombelli's  translation  better  than  Xylander's  and  consequently 
very  useful  for  the  purpose  of  amending  the  latter1. 

It  may  be  interesting  to  mention  a  few  points  of  notation  in 
this  work  of  Bombelli.  At  the  beginning  of  Book  II.  he  explains 
that  he  uses  the  word  "tanto"  to  denote  the  unknown  quantity, 
not  "cosa"  like  his  predecessors  ;  and  his  symbol  for  it  is  -i,  the 
square  of  the  unknown  (x^)  is  ,£.,  the  cube  d;  and  so  on.  ¥  or  plus 
and  -minus  (piu  and  mend)  he  uses  the  initial  letters  /  and  m. 
Thus  corresponding  to  x+6  we  should  find  in  Bombelli  ii/>.  6, 
and  for  x*  +  $x  —  4,  \^ p.  5-1  m.  4.  This  notation  shows,  as  will  be 
seen  later,  some  advance  upon  that  of  Diophantus  in  one  important 
respect. 

The  next  writer  upon  Diophantus  was  Wilhelm  Holzmann  who 
published,  under  the  Graecised  form  of  his  name,  Xylander,  by 
which  he  is  generally  known,  a  work  bearing  the  title :  Diophanti 
Alexandrini  Rerum  Arithmeticarum  Libri  sex,  quorum  primi  duo 
adiecta  habent  Scholia  Maximi  (tit  coniectura  esf)  Planudis.  Item 
Liber  de  Numeris  Polygonis  sen  Multangulis,  Opus  incomparabile, 
uerae  Arithmeticae  Logisticae  perfectionem  continens,  paucis  adhuc 
uisum.  A  Gut/.  Xylandro  Augustano  incredibili  labore  Latinc 
redditum,  et  Commentariis  explanatum,  inque  lucem  editum,  ad 
Illustriss.  Principem  Ludovicum  Vuirtembergensem.  Basileae  per 
Eusebium Episcopium,  et  Nicolai  Fr.  haeredes.  MDLXX  V.  Xylander 
was  according  to  his  own  statement  a  "  public  teacher  of  Aristotelian 
philosophy  in  the  school  at  Heidelberg2."  He  was  a  man  of  almost 
universal  culture3,  and  was  so  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  classical 
literature,  that  the  extraordinary  aptness  of  his  quotations  and  his 
wealth  of  expression  give  exceptional  charm  to  his  writing  whenever 
he  is  free  from  the  shackles  of  mathematical  formulae  and  techni- 
calities. The  Epistola  Nuncupatoria  is  addressed  to  the  Prince 
Ludwig,  and  Xylander  neatly  introduces  it  by  the  line  "  Offerimus 
numeros,  numeri  sunt  principe  digni."  This  preface  is  very  quaint 
and  interesting.  He  tells  us  how  he  first  saw  the  name  of 
Diophantus  mentioned  in  Suidas,  and  then  found  that  mention 

1  "Sed  suas  Diophanteis  quaestionibus  ita  immiscuit,  ut  has  ab  illis  distinguere  non 
sit  in  promptu,  neque  vero  se  fidum  satis  interpretem  praebuit,  cum  passim  verba 
Diophanti  immutet,  hisque  pleraque  addat,  pleraque  pro  arbitrio  detrahat.  In  multis 
nihilominus  interpretationem  Bombellii,  Xilandriana  praestare,  et  ad  hanc  emendandam 
me  adjuvisse  ingenue  fateor."  Ad  lectorem. 

3  "Publicus  philosophiae  Aristoteleae  in  schola  Heidelbergensi  doctor." 
3  Even  Bachet,  who,  as  we  shall  see,  was  no  favourable  critic,  calls  him  "  Vir  omnibus 
disciplinis  excultus." 


THE   MSS.   OF  AND   WRITERS  ON   DIOPHANTUS        23 

had  been  made  of  his  work  by  Regiomontanus  as  being  extant 
in  an  Italian  library  and  having  been  seen  by  him.  But,  as  the 
book  had  not  been  edited,  he  tried  to  think  no  more  of  it  but, 
instead,  to  absorb  himself  in  the  study  of  such  arithmetical  books 
as  he  could  obtain,  and  in  investigations  of  his  own1.  Self-taught 
except  in  so  far  as  he  could  learn  from  published  works  such  as 
those  of  Christoff  Rudolff  (of  the  "Coss"),  Michael  Stifel,  Cardano, 
Nunez,  he  yet  progressed  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  add  to,  modify 
and  improve  what  he  found  in  those  works.  As  a  result  he  fell 
into  what  Heraclitus  called  oiija-iv,  lepav  VOGOV,  that  is,  into  the 
conceit  of  "  being  somebody "  in  the  field  of  Arithmetic  and 
"Logistic";  others  too,  themselves  learned  men,  thought  him  an 
arithmetician  of  exceptional  ability.  But  when  he  first  became 
acquainted  with  the  problems  of  Diophantus  (he  continues)  right 
reason  brought  such  a  reaction  that  he  might  well  doubt  whether  he 
ought  previously  to  have  regarded  himself  as  an  object  of  pity  or  of 
derision.  He  considers  it  therefore  worth  while  to  confess  publicly  his 
own  ignorance  at  the  same  time  that  he  tries  to  interest  others  in 
the  work  of  Diophantus,  which  had  so  opened  his  eyes.  Before  this 
critical  time  he  was  so  familiar  with  methods  of  dealing  with  surds 
that  he  had  actually  ventured  to  add  something  to  the  discoveries 
of  others  relating  to  them  ;  the  subject  of  surds  was  considered  to 
be  of  great  importance  in  arithmetical  questions,  and  its  difficulty 

1  I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting  the  whole  of  this  passage  :  "  Sed  cum  ederet  nemo  : 
cepi  desiderium  hoc  paulatim  in  animo  consopire,  et  eonim  quos  consequi  poteram 
Arithmeticorum  librorum  cognitione,  et  meditationibus  nostris  sepelire.  Veritatis  porro 
apud  me  est  autoritas,  ut  ei  coniunctum  etiam  cum  dedecore  meo  testimonium  lubentissime 
perhibeam.  Quod  Cossica  seu  Algebrica  (cum  his  enim  reliqua  comparata,  id  sunt  quod 
umbrae  Homerice  in  Necya  ad  animam  Tiresiae)  ea  ergo  quod  non  assequebar  modo, 
quanquam  mutis  duntaxat  usus  preceptoribus  caetera  at/roSidaKTos,  sed  et  augere,  uariare, 
adeoque  corrigere  in  loco  didicissem,  quae  summi  et  fidelissimi  in  docendo  uiri  Christifer 
Rodolphus  Silesius,  Micaelus  Stifelius,  Cardanus,  Nonius,  aliique  litteris  mandauerant : 
incidi  in  otyaiv,  Upav  vbaov,  ut  scite  appellauit  Heraclitus  sapientior  multis  aliis  philoso- 
phis,  hoc  est,  in  Arithmetica,  et  uera  Logistica,  putaui  me  esse  aliquid :  itaque  de  me 
passim  etiam  a  multis,  iisque  doctis  uiris  iudicatum  fuit,  me  non  de  grege  Arithmeticum 
esse.  Verum  ubi  primum  in  Diophantea  incidi :  ita  me  recta  ratio  circumegit,  ut  flendusne 
mihi  ipsi  antea,  an  uero  ridendus  fuissem,  haud  iniuria  dubitauerim.  Operae  precium  est 
hoc  loco  et  meam  inscitiam  inuulgare,  et  Diophantei  operis,  quod  mihi  nebulosam  istam 
caliginem  ab  oculis  detersit,  immo  eos  in  coenum  barbaricum  defossos  eleuauit  et  repur- 
gauit,  gustum  aliquem  exhibere.  Surdorum  ego  numerorum  tractationem  ita  tenebatn, 
ut  etiam  addere  aliorum  inuentis  aliquid  non  poenitendum  auderem,  atque  id  quidem  in 
rebus  arithmeticis  magnum  habetur,  et  difficultas  istarum  rerum  multos  a  rnathematibus 
deterret.  Quanto  autem  hoc  est  praeclarius,  in  iis  problematis,  quae  surdis  etiam 
numeris  uix  posse  uidentur  explicari,  rem  eo  deducere,  ut  quasi  solum  arithmeticum 
uertere  iussi  obsurdescant  illi  plane,  et  ne  mentio  quidem  eorum  in  tractatione  ingenio- 
sissimarum  quaestionum  admittatur. " 


24  INTRODUCTION 

was  even  such  as  to  deter  many  from  the  study  of  mathematics. 
"But  how  much  more  splendid,"  says  Xylander,  "in  the  case  of 
problems  which  seem  to  be  hardly  capable  of  solution  even  with 
the  help  of  surds,  to  bring  the  matter  to  the  point  that,  while  the 
surds,  when  bidden  (so  to  speak)  to  plough  the  arithmetic  soil, 
become  true  to  their  name  and  deaf  to  entreaty,  they  are  not  so 
much  as  mentioned  in  these  most  ingenious  solutions ! "  He  then 
describes  the  enormous  difficulties  which  beset  his  work  owing 
to  the  corruptions  in  his  text.  In  dealing,  however,  with  the 
mistakes  and  carelessness  of  copyists  he  was,  as  he  says,  no  novice; 
for  proof  of  which  he  appeals  to  his  editions  of  Plutarch,  Stephanus 
and  Strabo.  This  passage,  which  is  good  reading,  but  too  long 
to  reproduce  here,  I  give  in  full  in  the  note1.  Next  Xylander 
tells  us  how  he  came  to  get  possession  of  a  manuscript  of  Dio- 
phantus.  In  October  of  the  year  1571  he  made  a  journey  to 
Wittenberg ;  while  there  he  had  conversations  on  mathematical 
subjects  with  two  professors,  Sebastian  Theodoric  and  Wolfgang 
Schuler  by  name,  who  showed  him  a  few  pages  of  a  Greek 

1  "  Id  uero  mihi  accidit  durum  et  uix  superabile  incommodum,  quod  mirifice  deprauata 
omnia  inueni,  cum  neque  problematum  expositio  interdum  integra  esset,  ac  passim  numeri 
(in  quibus  sita  omnia  esse  in  hoc  argumento,  quis  ignorat?)  tarn  problematum  quam 
solutionum  siue  explicationum  corruptissimi.  Non  pudebit  me  ingenue  fateri,  qualem  me 
heic  gesserim.  Audacter,  et  summo  cum  feruore  potius  quam  alacritate  animi  opus  ipsum 
initio  sum  aggressus,  laborque  mihi  omnis  uoluptati  fuit,  tantus  est  meus  rerum  arithmeti- 
carum  amor,  quin  et  gratiam  magnam  me  apud  omnes  liberalium  scientiarum  amatores  ac 
patronos  initurum,  et  praeclare  de  rep.  litteraria  meriturum  intelligebam,  eamque  rem 
mihi  laudi  (quam  a  bonis  profectam  nemo  prudens  aspernatur)  gloriaeque  fortasse  etiam 
emolumento  fore  sperabam.  Progressus  aliquantulum,  in  salebras  incidi :  quae  tantum 
abest  ut  alacritatem  meam  retuderint,  ut  etiam  animos  mihi  addiderint,  neque  enim  mihi 
novum  aut  insolens  est  aduersus  librariorum  incuriam  certamen,  et  hac  in  re  militaui,  (ut 
Horatii  nostri  uerbis  utar)  non  sine  gloria,  quod  me  non  arroganter  dicere,  Dio, 
Plutarchus,  Strabo,  Stephanusque  nostri  testantur.  Sed  cum  mox  in  ipsum  pelagus 
monstris  scatens  me  cursus  abripuit :  non  despondi  equidem  animum,  neque  manus  dedi, 
sed  tamen  saepius  ad  oram  unde  soluissem  respexi,  quam  portum  in  quern  esset  euadendum 
cogitando  prospicerem,  depraehendique  non  minus  uere  quam  eleganter  ea  cecinisse 
Alcaeum,  quae  (si  possum)  Latine  in  hac  quasi  uotiua  mea  tabula  scribam. 

Qui  uela  uentis  uult  dare,  dum  licet, 

Cautus  futuri  praeuideat  modum 

Cursus.     mare  ingressus,  marine 

Nauiget  arbitrio  necesse  est. 

Sane  quod  de  Echeneide  pisce  fertur,  eum  nauim  cui  se  adplicet  remorari,  poene  credibile 
fecit  mihi  mea  cymba  tot  mendorum  remoris  retardata.  Expediui  tamen  me  ita,  ut  facile 
omnes  mediocri  de  his  rebus  iudicio  praediti,  intellecturi  sint  incredibilem  me  laborem  et 
aerumnas  difficilimas  superasse  :  pudore  etiam  stimulatum  oneris  quod  ultro  mihi  impos- 
uissem,  non  perferendi.  Paucula  quaedam  non  plane  explicata,  studio  et  certis  de  causis 
in  alium  locum  reiecimus.  Opus  quidem  ipsum  ita  absoluimus  ut  neque  eius  nos  pudere 
debeat,  et  Arithmeticae  Logisticesque  studiosi  nobis  se  plurimum  debere  sint  haud  dubie 
professuri." 


THE   MSS.    OF   AND   WRITERS   ON    DIOPHANTUS         25 

manuscript  of  Diophantus  and  informed  him  that  it  belonged  to 
Andreas  Dudicius  whom  Xylander  describes  as  "Andreas  Dudicius 
Sbardellatus,  hoc  tempore  Imperatoris  Romanorum  apud  Polonos 
orator."  On  his  departure  from  Wittenberg  Xylander  wrote  out 
and  took  with  him  the  solution  of  a  single  problem  of  Diophantus, 
to  amuse  himself  with  on  his  journey.  This  he  showed  at  Leipzig 
to  Simon  Simonius  Lucensis,  a  professor  at  that  place,  who  wrote  to 
Dudicius  on  his  behalf.  A  few  months  afterwards  Dudicius  sent 
the  MS.  to  Xylander  and  encouraged  him  to  persevere  in  his 
undertaking  to  translate  the  Arithmetica  into  Latin.  Accordingly 
Xylander  insists  that  the  glory  of  the  whole  achievement  belongs 
in  no  less  but  rather  in  a  greater  degree  to  Dudicius  than  to 
himself.  Finally  he  commends  the  work  to  the  favour  of  Prince 
Ludwig,  extolling  the  pursuit  of  arithmetical  and  algebraical 
science  and  dwelling  in  enthusiastic  anticipation  on  the  influence 
which  the  Prince's  patronage  would  have  in  helping  and  advancing 
the  study  of  Arithmetic1.  This  Epistola  Nuncupatoria  bears  the 
date  I4th  August,  I5743.  Xylander  died  on  the  loth  of  February 
in  the  year  following  that  of  the  publication,  1 576. 

Tannery  has  shown  that  the  MS.  used  by  Xylander  was 
Guelferbytanus  Gudianus  I.  Bachet  observes  that  he  has  not  been 
able  to  find  out  whether  Xylander  ever  published  the  Greek  text, 
though  parts  of  his  commentary  seem  to  imply  that  he  had,  or  at 
least  intended  to  do  so.  It  is  now  clear  that  he  intended  to  bring 
out  the  text,  but  did  not  carry  out  his  intention.  Tannery  observes 
that  the  MS.  Palatinus  gr.  391  seems  to  have  been  written  either  by 
Xylander  himself  or  for  him,  and  there  are  German  notes  in  the 
margin  showing  that  it  was  intended  to  print  from  it. 

Xylander's  achievement  has  been,  as  a  rule,  quite  inadequately 
appreciated.  Very  few  writers  on  Diophantus  seem  to  have  studied 
the  book  itself:  a  fact  which  may  be  partly  accounted  for  by  its 
rarity.  Even  Nesselmann,  whose  book  appeared  in  1842,  says  that 
he  has  never  been  able  to  find  a  copy.  Nesselmann  however  seems 
to  have  come  nearest  to  a  proper  appreciation  of  the  value  of  the 
work :  he  says  "  Xylander's  work  remains,  in  spite  of  the  various 


1  "  Hoc  non  modo  tibi,  Princeps  Illustrissime,  honorificum  erit,  atque  gloriosum ;  sed 
te  labores  nostros  approbante,  arithmeticae  studium  cum  alibi,  turn  in  tua  Academia  et 
Gymnasiis,  excitabitur,  confirmabitur,  prouehetur,  et  ad  perfectam  eiusscientiam  multi  tuis 
auspiciis,  nostro  labore  perducti,  magnam  hac  re  tuis  in  remp.  beneficiis  accessionem 
factam  esse  gratissima  commemoratione  praedicabunt." 

2  "  Heidelberga.  postrid.  Eidus  Sextiles  CID  ID  LXXIV." 


26  INTRODUCTION 

defects  which  are  unavoidable  in  a  first  edition  of  so  difficult  an 
author,  especially  when  based  on  only  one  MS.  and  that  full  of 
errors,  a  highly  meritorious  achievement,  and  does  not  deserve 
the  severe  strictures  which  it  has  sometimes  had  passed  upon  it. 
It  is  true  that  Xylander  has  in  many  places  not  understood  his 
author,  and  has  misrepresented  him  in  others ;  his  translation  is 
often  rough  and  un-Latin,  this  being  due  to  a  too  conscientious 
adherence  to  the  actual  wording  of  the  original ;  but  the  result 
was  none  the  less  brilliant  on  that  account.  The  mathematical 
public  was  put  in  possession  of  Diophantus'  work,  and  the 
appearance  of  the  translation  had  an  immediate  and  enormous 
influence  on  the  development  and  shaping  of  Algebra1."  As  a 
rule,  the  accounts  of  Xylander's  work  seem  to  have  been  based 
on  what  Bachet  says  about  it  and  about  his  obligations  to  it. 
When  I  came  to  read  Bachet  myself  and  saw  how  disparaging, 
as  a  rule,  his  remarks  upon  Xylander  were,  I  could  not  but  suspect 
that  they  were  unfair.  His  repeated  and  almost  violent  repudiation 
of  obligation  to  Xylander  suggested  to  me  the  very  thing  which  he 
disclaimed,  that  he  was  under  too  great  obligation  to  his  predecessor 
to  acknowledge  it  duly.  I  was  therefore  delighted  at  my  good 
fortune  in  finding  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge, 
a  copy  of  Xylander,  and  so  being  able  to  judge  for  myself  of 
the  relation  of  the  later  to  the  earlier  work.  The  result  was  to 
confirm  entirely  what  I  had  suspected  as  to  the  unfair  attitude 
taken  up  by  Bachet  towards  his  predecessor.  I  found  it  every- 
where ;  even  where  it  is  obvious  that  Xylander's  mistakes  or 
difficulties  are  due  only  to  the  hopeless  state  of  his  solitary  MS. 
Bachet  seems  to  make  no  allowance  for  the  fact.  The  truth  is  that 
Bachet's  work  could  not  have  been  as  good  as  it  was  but  for  the 
pioneer  work  of  Xylander;  and  it  is  the  great  blot  in  Bachet's 
otherwise  excellent  edition  that  he  did  not  see  fit  to  acknowledge 
the  fact. 

I  must  now  pass  to  Bachet's  work  itself.  It  was  the  first 
edition  published  which  contained  the  Greek  text,  and  appeared 
in  1621  bearing  the  title:  Diophanti  Alexandrini  Arithmeticorum 
libri  sex,  et  de  numeris  multangulis  liber  unus.  Nunc  primiim 
Graece  et  Latine  editi,  atque  absolutissimis  Commentariis  illustrati. 
Auctore  Claudia  Gaspare  Baclieto  Meziriaco  Sebusiano,  V.C.  Lutetiae 
Parisiorum,  Sumptibus  Hieronymi  Drovart"1,  via  Jacobaea,  sub  Scuto 

1  Nesselmann,  p.  279-80. 

2  For  "  sumptibus  Hieronymi  Drovart  etc.  "  some  copies  have  "  sumptibus  Sebastiani 


THE   MSS.   OF  AND   WRITERS   ON   DIOPHANTUS         27 

Solari.  MDCXXI.  Bachet's  Greek  text  is  based,  as  he  tells  us, 
upon  a  MS.  which  he  calls  "codex  Regius,"  now  in  the  Bibliotheque 
Nationale  at  Paris  (Parisinus  2379) ;  this  MS.  is  his  sole  authority, 
except  that  Jacobus  Sirmondus  had  part  of  a  Vatican  MS.  (Vat. 
gr.  304)  .transcribed  for  him.  He  professes  to  have  produced  a 
good  Greek  text,  having  spent  incalculable  labour  upon  its  emenda- 
tion, to  have  inserted  in  brackets  all  additions  which  he  made  to  it, 
and  to  have  given  notice  of  all  corrections,  except  those  of  an 
obvious  or  trifling  nature ;  a  few  passages  he  has  left  asterisked,  in 
cases  where  correction  could  not  be  safely  ventured  upon.  He 
is  careful  to  tell  us  what  previous  works  relating  to  the  subject  he 
had  been  able  to  consult.  First  he  mentions  Xylander  (he  spells 
the  name  as  X/lander  throughout),  who  had  translated  the  whole  of 
Diophantus,  and  commented  upon  him  throughout,  "except  that 
he  scarcely  touched  a  considerable  part  of  the  fifth  book,  the  whole 
of  the  sixth  and  the  treatise  on  multangular  numbers,  and  even 
the  rest  of  his  work  was  not  very  successful,  as  he  himself  admits 
that  he  did  not  thoroughly  understand  a  number  of  points."  Then 
he  speaks  of  Bombelli  (as  already  mentioned)  and  of  the  Zetetica  of 
Vieta  (in  which  the  author  treats  in  his  own  way  a  large  number 
of  Diophantus'  problems :  Bachet  thinks  that  he  so  treated  them 
because  he  despaired  of  restoring  the  book  completely).  Neither 
Bombelli  nor  Vieta  (says  Bachet)  made  any  attempt  to  demonstrate 
the  difficult  porisms  and  abstruse  theorems  in  numbers  which 
Diophantus  assumes  as  known  in  many  places,  or  sufficiently 
explained  the  causes  of  his  operations  and  artifices.  All  these 
omissions  on  the  part  of  his  predecessors  he  thinks  he  has  supplied 
in  his  notes  to  the  various  problems  and  in  the  three  books  of 
"Porisms"  which  he  prefixed  to  the  work1.  As  regards  his  Latin 
translation,  he  says  that  he  gives  us  Diophantus  in  Latin  from  the 
version  of  Xylander  most  carefully  corrected,  in  which  he  would 
have  us  know  that  he  has  done  two  things  in  particular,  first, 

Cramoisy,  via  Jacobaea,  sub  Ciconiis."  The  copy  (from  the  Library  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge)  which  I  used  in  preparing  my  first  edition  has  the  former  words ;  a  copy  in 
the  Library  of  the  Athenaeum  Club  has  the  latter. 

1  On  the  nature  of  some  of  Bachet's  proofs  Nicholas  Saunderson  (formerly  Lucasian 
Professor)  remarks  in  Elements  of  Algebra,  1740,  apropos  of  Dioph.  ill.  15  :  "  M.  Bachet 
indeed  in  the  i6th  and  i7th  props,  of  his  second  book  of  Porisms  has  given  us  demonstra- 
tions, such  as  they  are,  of  the  theorems  in  the  problem  :  but  in  the  first  place  he 
demonstrates  but  one  single  case  of  those  theorems,  and  in  the  next  place  the  demonstra- 
tions he  gives  are  only  synthetical,  and  so  abominably  perplexed  withal,  that  in  each 
demonstration  he  makes  use  of  all  the  letters  in  the  alphabet  except  I  and  O,  singly  to 
represent  the  quantities  he  has  there  occasion  for.  * 


28  INTRODUCTION 

corrected  what  was  wrong  and  filled  the  numerous  lacunae, 
secondly,  explained  more  clearly  what  Xylander  had  given  in 
obscure  or  ambiguous  language  ;  "  I  confess  however,"  he  says, 
"  that  this  made  so  much  change  necessary,  that  it  is  almost 
fairer  to  attribute  the  translation  to  me  than  to  Xilander.  But  if 
anyone  prefers  to  consider  it  as  his,  because  I  have  held  fast,  tooth 
and  nail,  to  his  words  when  they  do  not  misrepresent  Diophantus, 
I  have  no  objection1."  Such  sentences  as  these,  which  are  no 
rarity  in  Bachet's  book,  are  certainly  not  calculated  to  increase 
our  respect  for  the  author.  According  to  Montucla2,  "the  historian 
of  the  French  Academy  tells  us  "  that  Bachet  worked  at  this  edition 
during  the  course  of  a  quartan  fever,  and  that  he  himself  said  that, 
disheartened  as  he  was  by  the  difficulty  of  the  work,  he  would  never 
have  completed  it,  had  it  not  been  for  the  stubbornness  which  his 
malady  generated  in  him. 

As  the  first  edition  of  the  Greek  text  of  Diophantus,  this  work, 
in  spite  of  any  imperfections  we  may  find  in  it,  does  its  author  all 
honour. 

The  same  edition  was  reprinted  and  published  with  the  addition 
of  Fermat's  notes  in  1670:  Diophanti  Alexandrini  Arithmeticortim 
libri  sex,  et  de  numeris  multangiilis  liber  unus.  Cum  commentariis 
C.  G.  Bacheti  V.C.  et  obseruationibus  D.  P.  de  Fermat  Senator  is 
Tolosani.  Accessit  Doctrinae  Analyticae  inuentum  nouum,  collectum 
ex  variis  eiusdem  D.  de  Fermat  Epistolis.  Tolosae,  Excudebat 
Bemardus  Bosc,  e  Regione  Collegii  Societatis  Jesu.  MDCLXX. 
This  edition  was  not  published  by  Fermat  himself,  but  by  his 
son  after  his  death.  S.  Fermat  tells  us  in  the  preface  that  this 
publication  of  Fermat's  notes  to  Diophantus3  was  part  of  an 
attempt  to  collect  together  from  his  letters  and  elsewhere  his 
contributions  to  mathematics.  The  "Doctrinae  Analyticae  In- 
uentum nouum"  is  a  collection  made  by  Jacobus  de  Billy4 

1  Deinde  Latinum  damus  tibi  Diophantum  ex  Xilandri  versione  accuratissime  castigata, 
in  qua  duo  potissimum  nos  praestitisse  scias  velim,  nam  et  deprauata  correximus,  hiantesque 
passim  lacunas  repleuimus :  et  quae  subobscure,  vel  ambigue  fuerat  interpretatus  Xilander, 
dilucidius  exposuimus;  fateor  tamen,  inde  tantam  inductam  esse  mutationem,  vt  prope- 
modum  aequius  sit  versionem  istam  nobis  quam  Xilandro  tribuere.  Si  quis  autem  potius 
ad  eum  pertinere  contendat,  quod  eius  verba,  quatenus  Diophanto  fraudi  non  erant, 
mordicus  retinuimus,  per  me  licet.''  -  i.  323. 

3  Now  published  in  CEuvres  de  Fermat  by  P.  Tannery  and  C.  Henry,  Vol.  I.  (1891), 
pp.  289-342  (the  Latin  original),  and  Vol.  in.  (1896),  pp.  241-274  (French  translation). 

4  Now  published  in  CEuvres  de  Fermat,    in.   323-398   (French  translation).      De 
Billy  had  already  published  in  1660  a  book  under  the  title  Diophantus  geometra  sive 
opus  contextum  ex  arithmetica  et  geometria. 


THE   MSS.    OF  AND  WRITERS   ON   DIOPHANTUS        29 

from  various  letters  which  Fermat  sent  to  him  at  different  times. 
The  notes  upon  Diophantus'  problems,  which  his  son  hopes  will 
prove  of  value  very  much  more  than  commensurate  with  their 
bulk,  were  (he  says)  collected  from  the  margin  of  his  copy  of 
Diophantus.  From  their  brevity  they  were  obviously  intended 
for  the  benefit  of  experts1,  or  even  perhaps  solely  for  Fermat's 
own,  he  being  a  man  who  preferred  the  pleasure  which  he  had 
in  the  work  itself  to  any  reputation  which  it  might  bring 
him.  Fermat  never  cared  to  publish  his  investigations,  but  was 
always  perfectly  ready,  as  we  see  from  his  letters,  to  acquaint 
his  friends  and  contemporaries  with  his  results.  Of  the  notes 
themselves  this  is  not  the  place  to  speak  in  detail.  This  edition 
of  Diophantus  is  rendered  valuable  only  by  the  additions  in  it 
due  to  Fermat;  for  the  rest  it  is  a  mere  reprint  of  that  of  1621. 
So  far  as  the  Greek  text  is  concerned,  it  is  very  much  inferior 
to  the  first  edition.  There  is  a  far  greater  number  of  misprints, 
omissions  of  words,  confusions  of  numerals ;  and,  most  serious  of 
all,  the  brackets  which  Bachet  inserted  in  the  edition  of  1621  to 
mark  the  insertion  of  words  in  the  text  are  in  this  later  edition 
altogether  omitted.  These  imperfections  have  been  already  noticed 
by  Nesselmann2.  Thus  the  reprinted  edition  of  1670  is  untrust- 
worthy as  regards  the  text. 

In  1585  Simon  Stevin  published  a  French  version  of  the  first 
four  books  of  Diophantus3.  It  was  based  on  Xylander  and  was 
a  free  reproduction,  not  a  translation,  Stevin  himself  observing  that 
the  MS.  used  by  Xylander  was  so  full  of  mistakes  that  the  text  of 


1  Lectori  Seneuolo,  p.  iii :  "  Doctis  tantum  quibus  pauca  sufficiunt,  harum  obserua- 
tionum  auctor  scribebat,  vel  potius  ipse  sibi  scribens,  his  studiis  exerceri  malebat  quam 
gloriari;  adeo  autem  ille  ab  omni  ostentatione  alienus  erat,  vt  nee  lucubrationes  suas 
typis  mandari  curauerit,   et   suorum   quandoque  responsorum  autographa  nullo  seruato 
exemplari  petentibus  vitro  miserit ;  norunt  scilicet  plerique  celeberrimorum  huius  saeculi 
Geometrarum,  quam  libenter  ille  et  quanta  humanitate,  sua  iis  inuenta  patefecerit." 

2  "Was  dieser  Abdruck  an  ausserer  Eleganz  gewonnen  hat  (denn  die  Bachet'sche 
Ausgabe  ist  mit  ausserst  unangenehmen,  namentlich  Griechischen  Lettern  gedruckt),  das 
hat  sie  an  innerm  Werthe  in  Bezug  auf  den  Text  verloren.     Sie  ist  nicht  bloss  voller 
Druckfehler  in  einzelnen  Worten  und   Zeichen  (z.   B.  durchgehends   JT  statt  ~^,   900) 
sondern  auch  ganze  Zeilen  sind  ausgelassen  oder  doppelt  gedruckt  (z.  B.  ill.   12  eine 
Zeile  doppelt,  iv.  25  eine  doppelt  und  gleich  hinterher  eine  ausgelassen,  IV.   52  eine 
doppelt,  v.  ii  eine  ausgelassen,  desgleichen  v.  14,  15,  33,  VI.  8,  13  und  so  weiter),  die 
Zahlen  verstiimmelt,  was  aber  das  Aergste  ist,  die  Bachet'schen  kritischen  Zeichen  sind 
fast  uberall,  die  Klammer  durchgangig  weggefallen,  so  dass  diese  Ausgabe  als  Text  des 
Diophant  vollig  unbrauchbar  geworden  ist,"  p.  283. 

3  Included  in  L' Arithmelique  de  Simon  Stevin  de  Bruges. ..A  Leyde,  De  I'lmprimerie 
de  Christophle  Plantin,  cio  .  ID  .  LXXXV. 


3o  INTRODUCTION 

Diophantus  could  not  be  given  word  for  word1.  Albert  Girard 
added  the  fifth  and  sixth  books  to  the  four,  and  this  complete 
version  appeared  in  i6252. 

In  1810  was  published  an  excellent  translation  (with  additions) 
of  the  fragment  upon  Polygonal  Numbers  by  Poselger  :  Diophantus 
von  Alexandrien  iiber  die  Polygonal-Zahlen.  Uebersetzt  mit  Zusdtzen 
von  F.  Th.  Poselger.  Leipzig,  1810. 

In  1822  Otto  Schulz,  professor  in  Berlin,  published  a  very 
meritorious  German  translation  with  notes :  Diophantus  von 
Alexandria  arithmetische  Aufgaben  nebst  dessen  Schrift  iiber  die 
Polygon-Zahlen.  Aus  dent  Griechischen  ilbersetzt  und  mit  An- 
merkungen  begleitet  von  Otto  Schulz,  Professor  am  Berlinisch- 
Colnischen  Gymnasium  zum  grauen  Kloster.  Berlin,  1822.  In  der 
Schlesingerschen  Buck-  tind  Mtisikhandlung.  The  work  of  Poselger 
just  mentioned  was  with  the  consent  of  its  author  incorporated  in 
Schulz's  edition  along  with  his  own  translation  and  notes  upon 
the  larger  treatise,  the  Arithmetica.  According  to  Nesselmann 
Schulz  was  not  a  mathematician  by  profession ;  he  produced, 
however,  a  thoroughly  useful  edition,  with  notes  chiefly  upon 
the  matter  of  Diophantus  and  not  on  the  text  (with  the  exception 
of  a  very  few  emendations) :  notes  which,  almost  invariably  correct, 
help  much  to  understand  the  author.  Schulz's  translation  is  based 
upon  the  edition  of  Bachet's  text  published  in  1670. 

Another  German  translation  was  published  by  G.  Wertheim 
in  1 890 :  Die  A  rithmetik  und  die  Schrift  fiber  Polygonalzahlen  des 
Diophantus  von  Alexandria.  Ubersetzt  tmd  mit  Anmerkungen 
begleitet  von  G.  Wertheim  (Teubner).  Though  it  appeared  before 
the  issue  of  Tannery's  definitive  text,  it  is  an  excellent  translation, 
the  translator  being  thoroughly  equipped  for  his  task  ;  it  is  valuable 
also  as  containing  Fermat's  notes,  also  translated  into  German,  with 
a  large  number  of  other  notes  by  the  translator  elucidating  both 
Diophantus  and  Fermat,  and  generalising  a  number  of  the  problems 
which,  with  very  few  exceptions,  receive  only  particular  solutions 
from  Diophantus  himself.  Wertheim  has  also  included  46  epigram- 
problems  from  the  Greek  anthology  and  the  enunciation  of  the 
famous  Cattle-Problem  attributed  to  Archimedes. 

1  See  Bibliotheca  Mathematica  Vii3,  1906-7,  p.  59. 

2  U  Arithmetiqiu  de  Simon  Stevin  de  Brvges,  Reiteue,  corrigee  &  augmenlee  de phisieurs 
traictez    et   annotation   par   Albert    Girard   Samielois   Mathematicien.      A    Leide,   de 
I'lmprimerie  des  Elzeviers  cio .  10 .  cxxv.     Reproduced  in  the  edition  of  Les  (Euvres 
Mathematiques  de  Simon  Stevin  de  Bruges.    Par  Albert  Girard.    Leyde,  cio  .  10  .  cxxxiv. 


THE   MSS.   OF  AND  WRITERS   ON   DIOPHANTUS        31 

No  description  is  necessary  of  the  latest  edition,  by  Tannery, 
in  which  we  at  last  have  a  definitive  Greek  text  of  Diophantus 
with  the  ancient  commentaries,  etc.,  Diophanti  Alexandrini  opera 
omnia  cum  Graecis  commentaries.  Edidit  et  Latine  interpretatus 
est  Paulus  Tannery  (Teubner).  The  first  volume  (1893)  contains 
the  text  of  Diophantus,  the  second  (1895)  the  Pseudepigrapha, 
Testimonia  veterum,  Pachymeres'  paraphrase,  Planudes'  com- 
mentary, various  ancient  scholia,  etc.,  and  38  arithmetical  epigrams 
in  the  original  Greek  with  scholia.  Any  further  edition  will  neces- 
sarily be  based  on  Tannery,  who  has  added  all  that  is  required  in 
the  shape  of  introductions,  etc. 

Lastly  we  hear  of  other  works  on  Diophantus  which,  if  they 
were  ever  written,  are  lost  or  remain  unpublished.  First,  we  find 
it  asserted  by  Vossius  (as  some  have  understood  him)  that  the 
Englishman  John  Pell  wrote  an  unpublished  Commentary  upon 
Diophantus.  John  Pell  (1611-1685)  was  at  one  time  professor 
of  mathematics  at  Amsterdam  and  gave  lectures  there  on  Dio- 
phantus, but  what  Vossius  says  about  his  commentary  may 
well  be  only  a  recommendation  to  undertake  a  commentary, 
rather  than  a  historical  assertion  of  its  completion.  Secondly, 
Schulz  states  in  his  preface  that  he  had  lately  found  a  note  in 
Schmeisser's  Orthodidaktik  der  Mathematik  that  Hofrath  Kausler 
by  command  of  the  Russian  Academy  prepared  an  edition  of 
Diophantus1.  This  seems  however  to  be  a  misapprehension  on  the 
part  of  Schulz.  Kausler  is  probably  referring,  not  to  a  translation 
of  Diophantus,  but  to  his  memoir  of  1798  published  in  Nova  Acta 
Acad.  PetropoL  XI.  p.  125,  which  might  easily  be  described  as  an 
Ausarbeitung  of  Diophantus'  work. 

I  find  a  statement  in  the  New  American  Cyclopaedia  (New  York, 
D.  Appleton  and  Company),  Vol.  vi.,  that  "  a  complete  translation 
of  his  (Diophantus')  works  into  English  was  made  by  the  late 
Miss  Abigail  Lousada,  but  has  not  been  published." 

1  The  whole  passage  of  Schmeisser  is :  "Die  mechanische,  geistlose  Behandlung  der 
Algebra  ist  ins  besondere  von  Herrn  Hofrath  Kausler  stark  geriigt  worden.  In  der 
Vorrede  zu  seiner  Ausgabe  des  Uflakerschen  Exempelbuths  beginnt  er  so :  '  Seit  mehreren 
Jahren  arbeitete  ich  fur  die  Russisch-Kaiserliche  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  Diophants 
unsterbliches  Werk  iiber  die  Arithmetik  ans,  und  fand  darin  einen  solchen  Schatz  von 
den  feinsten,  scharfsinnigsten  algebraischen  Auflosungen,  dass  mir  die  mechanische, 
geistlose  Methode  der  neuen  Algebra  rait  jedem  Tage  mehr  ekelte  u.s.w.' "  (p.  33). 


CHAPTER    III 

NOTATION  AND  DEFINITIONS  OF  DIOPHANTUS 

As  it  is  my  intention,  for  the  sake  of  brevity  and  per- 
spicuity, to  make  use  of  the  modern  algebraical  notation  in  giving 
my  account  of  Diophantus'  problems  and  general  methods,  it  is 
necessary  to  describe  once  for  all  the  machinery  which  our  author 
uses  for  working  out  the  solutions  of  his  problems,  or  the  notation 
by  which  he  expresses  such  relations  as  would  be  represented  in 
our  time  by  algebraical  equations,  and,  in  particular,  to  illustrate 
the  extent  to  which  he  is  able  to  manipulate  unknown  quantities. 
Apart,  however,  from  the  necessity  of  such  a  description  for  the 
proper  and  adequate  comprehension  of  Diophantus,  the  general 
question  of  the  historical  development  of  algebraical  notation 
possesses  great  intrinsic  interest.  Into  the  general  history  of  this 
subject  I  cannot  enter  in  this  essay,  my  object  being  the  elucidation 
of  Diophantus  ;  I  shall  accordingly  in  general  confine  myself  to  an 
account  of  his  notation  solely,  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  interesting 
to  compare  it  with  the  corresponding  notation  of  his  editors  and 
(in  certain  cases)  that  of  other  writers,  as,  for  example,  certain  of 
the  early  Arabian  algebraists. - 

First,  as  to  the  representation  of  an  unknown  quantity.  The 
unknown  quantity,  which  Diophantus  defines  as  containing  TrXrjQos 
/jiovdBcov  dopio-rov,  i.e.  an  undefined  number  of  units  (def.  2),  is 
denoted  throughout  by  what  was  printed  in  the  editions  before 
Tannery's  as  the  Greek  letter  9  with  an  accent,  thus  <?',  or  in  the 
form  9°.  This  symbol  in  verbal  description  he  calls  o  dpi&fj,6<>,  "  the 
number,"  i.e.t  by  implication,  the  number  par  excellence  of  the  problem 
in  question.  In  the  cases  where  the  symbol  is  used  to  denote  in- 
flected forms,  e.g.,  the  accusative  singular  or  the  dative  plural,  the 
terminations  which  would  have  been  added  to  the  stem  of  the  full 
word  dpiOpos  were  printed  above  the  symbol  9  in  the  manner  of  an 


NOTATION  AND   DEFINITIONS  OF   DlOPHANTUS       33 

exponent,  thus  ?xv  (for  apidpov,  as  TVV  for  TOJ/),  s°5,  the  symbol  being 
in  addition  doubled  in  the  plural  cases,  thus  55°*," w0***  ??"">  5?°**,  f°r 
dpiO/jLOi  K.r.e.  When  the  symbol  is  used  in  practice,  the  coefficient 
is  expressed  by  putting  the  required  Greek  numeral  immediately 
after  it,  thus  s<?°'  ta  corresponds  to  I  ix,  9'  a  to  x  and  so  on. 

Tannery  discusses  the  question  whether  in  the  archetype  (a)  of 
the  MSS.  this  duplication  of  the  sign  for  the  plural  and  this 
addition  of  the  terminations  of  the  various  cases  really  occurred1. 
He  observes  that  any  one  accustomed  to  reading  Greek  MSS.  will 
admit  that  the  marks  of  cases  are  common  in  the  later  MSS.  but 
are  very  frequently  omitted  in  the  more  ancient.  Further,  the 
practice  of  duplicating  a  sign  to  express  the  plural  is  more  ancient 
than  that  of  adding  the  case-terminations.  Tannery  concludes  that 
the  case-terminations  (like  the  final  syllables  of  abbreviations  used 
for  other  words)  were  very  generally,  if  not  always,  wanting  in  the 
archetype  (a).  If  this  seems  inconsistent  with  the  regularity  with 
which  they  appear  in  our  MSS.,  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  A 
and  Bl  do  not  represent  the  archetype  (a)  but  the  readings  of  a,  the 
copyist  of  which  probably  took  it  upon  himself  to  substitute  the 
full  word  for  the  sign  or  to  add  the  case-terminations.  Tannery's 
main  argument  is  the  frequent  occurrence  of  instances  where  the 
wrong  case-ending  has  been  added,  e.g.,  the  nominative  for  the 
genitive ;  the  conclusion  is  also  confirmed  by  instances  in  which 
different  cases  of  the  word  dpi0/j,6<;,  e.g.  dpiffpov,  dptffpov,  and  even 
aptBpAv  written  in  full  are  put  by  mistake  for  xai  owing  to  the 
resemblance  between  the  common  abbreviation  for  icai  and  the 
sign  for  dpiOpo*;,  and  of  course  in  such  cases  the  abbreviation  would 
not  have  had  the  endings.  As  regards  the  duplication  of  the  sign 
for  the  plural,  Tannery  admits  that  this  was  the  practice  of  the 
Byzantines  ;  but  he  considers  that  the  evidence  is  against  sup- 
posing that  Diophantus  duplicated  the  sign  ;  he  does  not  do  so 
with  any  other  of  his  technical  abbreviations,  those  for  p.ovds, 
Svvapis,  etc.  Accordingly  in  his  text  of  Diophantus  Tannery  has 
omitted  the  case-endings  and  written  the  single  sign  for  dpi0/j,6<; 
whether  in  the  singular  or  in  the  plural  ;  in  his  second  volume, 
however,  containing  the  scholia,  etc.,  he  has  retained  the  duplicated 
sign. 

On  the  assumption  that  the  sign  was  the  Greek  final  sigma,  it 
was  natural  that  Nesselmann  should  explain  it  by  the  supposition 

1  Dioph.  II.  pp.  xxxiv-xxxix. 
H.  D.  3 


34  INTRODUCTION 

that  Diophantus,  in  search  of  a  convenient  symbol  for  his  unknown 
quantity,  would  select  the  only  letter  of  the  Greek  alphabet  which 
was  not  already  appropriated  as  a  numeral1.  But  he  made  the 
acute  observation2  that,  as  the  symbol  occurred  in  many  places  (of 
course  in  Bachet's  text)  for  dpi0/j,6<t  used  in  the  ordinary  un- 
technical  sense,  and  was  therefore,  as  it  appeared,  not  exclusively 
used  to  designate  the  unknown  quantity,  the  technical  apropos,  it 
must  after  all  be  more  of  the  nature  of  an  abbreviation  than  an 
algebraical  symbol  like  our  x.  It  is  true  that  this  uncertainty  in 
the  use  of  the  sign  in  the  MSS.  is  put  an  end  to  by  Tannery,  who 
uses  it  for  the  technical  dpiO/j>6f  alone  and  writes  the  untechnical 
dpiQjjLos  in  full  ;  but,  even  if  Diophantus'  practice  was  as  strict  as 
this,  I  do  not  think  this  argues  any  difference  in  the  nature  of  the 
abbreviation.  There  is  also  a  doubt  whether  the  final  sigma,  ?, 
was  developed  as  distinct  from  the  form  a-  so  early  as  the  date  of 
the  MSS.  of  Diophantus,  or  rather  so  early  as  the  first  copy  of  his 
work,  if  the  author  himself  really  gave  the  explanation  of  the  sign 
as  found  in  our  text  of  his  second  definition.  These  considerations 
suggested  to  me  that  the  sign  was  not  the  final  sigma  at  all,  but 
must  be  explained  in  some  other  way.  I  had  to  look  for  con- 
firmation of  this  to  the  precise  shape  of  the  sign  as  found  in  extant 
MSS.  The  only  MS.  which  I  had  the  opportunity  of  inspecting 
personally  was  the  MS.  of  the  first  ten  problems  of  Diophantus  in 
the  Bodleian ;  but  here  I  found  strong  confirmation  of  my  view  in 
the  fact  that  the  sign  appeared  as  '^,  quite  different  in  shape  from, 
and  much  larger  than,  the  final  sigma  at  the  end  of  words  in  the 
same  MS.  (There  is  in  the  Oxford  MS.  the  same  irregularity  as 
was  pointed  out  by  Nesselmann  in  the  use  of  the  sign  sometimes 
for  the  technical,  and  sometimes  for  the  untechnical,  aptfyio?3.) 
But  I  found  evidence  that  the  sign  appeared  elsewhere  in  some- 
what different  forms.  Thus  Rodet  in  the  Journal  Asiatique  of 
January,  1878,  quoted  certain  passages  from  Diophantus  for  the 
purpose  of  comparison  with  the  algebra  of  Muhammad  b.  Musa 
al-Khuwarazml.  Rodet  says  he  copied  these  passages  exactly 
from  Bachet's  MS. ;  but,  while  he  generally  gives  the  sign  as  the 
final  sigma,  he  has  in  one  case  iji]01  for  dpiffftoi.  In  this  last  case 

1  Nesselmann,  pp.  290-1.  2  ibid.  pp.  300-1. 

3  An  extreme  case  is  lra£a  TO  rov  devrtpov'^o  api8/j,ovtt>6$,  where  the  sign  (contrary  to 
what  would  be  expected)  means  the  untechnical  <i/H0/u6s,  and  the  technical  is  written  in 
full.  Also  in  the  definition  6  5e  nydef  rotiruv  T&V  Idiw/A&TUv  KTriffd/j.evos...apit)[j.bs  KaXerrai 
the  word  dpify^s  is  itself  denoted  by  the  symbol,  showing  that  the  word  and  the  symbol 
are  absolutely  convertible. 


NOTATION   AND  DEFINITIONS  OF   DIOPHANTUS       35 

Bachet  himself  reads  9?ot.  But  the  same  form  ijip  which  Rodet 
gives  is  actually  found  in  three  places  in  Bachet's  own  edition, 
(i)  In  his  note  to  IV.  3  he  gives  a  reading  from  his  own  MS.  which 
he  has  corrected  in  his  own  text  and  in  which  the  signs  ija  and 
LJLjr)  occur,  evidently  meaning  dpi0/j,o<;  a  and  dpiO^ol  rj,  though  the 
sign  should  have  been  that  for  dpid^oarov  (=  \\x).  (2)  In  the  text  of 
IV.  1 3  there  is  a  sentence  (marked  by  Bachet  as  interpolated)  which 
contains  the  expression  LjLjr,  where  the  context  again  shows  that 
i]q  is  for  dpiOfjuoL  (3)  At  the  beginning  of  V.  9  there  is  a  difficulty 
in  the  text,  and  Bachet  notes  that  his  MS.  has  prjre  6  8nr\a<ria)v 
avrov  LJ  where  a  Vatican  MS.  reads  dpid^ov  (Xylander  notes  that 
his  MS.  had  in  this  place  fjurjre  6  BnrXaalcov  avrov  dp  po  a  ...). 
It  is  thus  clear  that  the  MS.  (Paris.  2379)  which  Bachet  used 
sometimes  has  the  sign  for  dpiQ/jios  in  a  form  which  is  at  least 
sufficiently  like  i|  to  be  taken  for  it.  Tannery  states  that  the  form 
of  the  sign  found  in  the  Madrid  MS.  (A)  is  tj,  while  B1  has  it  in  a 
form  ($)  nearly  approaching  Bachet's  reproduction  of  it. 

It  appeared  also  that  the  use  of  the  sign,  or  something  like 
it,  was  not  confined  to  MSS.  of  Diophantus  ;  on  reference  to 
Gardthausen,  Griechische  Palaeographie,  I  found  under  the  head 
"  hieroglyphisch-conventionell "  an  abbreviation  9,  99  for  aptfytd?, 
-oL,  which  is  given  as  occurring  in  the  Bodleian  MS.  of  Euclid 
(D'Orville  301)  of  the  9th  century.  Similarly  Lehmann1  notes  as 
a  sign  for  dpi0/j,6<;  found  in  that  MS.  a  curved  line  similar  to  that 
which  was  used  as  an  abbreviation  for  icai.  He  adds  that  the 
ending  is  placed  above  it  and  the  sign  is  doubled  for  the  plural. 
Lehmann's  facsimile  is  like  the  form  given  by  Gardthausen,  but  has 
the  angle  a  little  more  rounded.  The  form  iji|ot  above  mentioned 
is  also  given  by  Lehmann,  with  the  remark  that  it  seems  to  be 
only  a  modification  of  the  other.  Again,  from  the  critical  notes  to 
Heiberg's  texts  of  the  Arenarius  of  Archimedes  it  is  clear  that  the 
sign  for  dpidpos  occurred  several  times  in  the  MSS.  in  a  form 
approximating  to  that  of  the  final  sigma,  and  that  there  was  the 
usual  confusion  caused  by  the  similarity  of  the  signs  for  dpidpbs 
and  teal2.  In  Hultsch's  edition  of  Heron,  similarly,  the  critical 
notes  to  the  Geodaesia  show  that  one  MS.  had  an  abbreviation  for 

1  Lehmann,  Die  tachygraphischen  Abkiirzungen  der  griechischen  Handschriften,  1880, 
p.  107  :  "  Von  Sigeln,  welchen  ich  auch  anderwarts  begegnet  bin,  sincl  zu  nennen  dpi6/j.6s, 
das  in  der  Oxforder  Euclidhandschrift  mit  einer  der  Note  xal  ahnlichen  Schlangenlinie 
bezeichnet  wird." 

2  Cf.  Heiberg,  Quaestiones  Archimedean,  pp.  172,  174,  187,  188,  191,  192;  Archimedis 
opera  omnia,  II.,  pp.  268  sqq. 

3—2 


36  INTRODUCTION 


oi  in  various  forms  with  the  case-endings  superposed  ;  some- 
times they  resembled  the  letter  £,  sometimes  p,  sometimes  O  and 
once  £J.  Lastly,  the  sign  for  dpiBfjios  resembling  the  final  sigma 
evidently  appeared  in  a  MS.  of  Theon  of  Smyrna2. 

All  these  facts  strongly  support  the  assumption  that  the  sign 
was  a  mere  tachygraphic  abbreviation  and  not  an  algebraical 
symbol  like  our  x,  though  discharging  much  the  same  function. 
The  next  question  is,  what  is  its  origin  ?  The  facts  (i)  that  the 
sign  has  the  breathing  prefixed  in  the  Bodleian  MS.,  which  writes 
'^-7  for  dptOfjios,  and  (2)  that  in  one  place  Xylander's  MS.  read  dp 
tor  the  full  word,  suggested  to  me  the  question  whether  it  could 
be  a  contraction  of  the  first  two  letters  of  dpidpos  ;  and,  on  con- 
sideration, this  seemed  to  me  quite  possible  when  I  found  a 
contraction  for  ap  given  by  Gardthausen,  namely  cf.  It  is  easy  to 
see  that  a  simplification  of  this  in  different  ways  would  readily 
produce  signs  like  the  different  forms  shown  above.  This  then 
was  the  hypothesis  which  I  put  forward  twenty-five  years  ago,  and 
which  I  still  hold  to  be  the  easiest  and  best  explanation.  Two 
alternatives  are  possible,  (i)  Diophantus  may  not  have  made  the 
contraction  himself.  In  that  case  I  suppose  the  sign  to  be  a  cur- 
sive contraction  made  by  scribes  ;  and  I  conceive  it  to  have  come 
about  through  the  intermediate  form  <p.  The  loss  of  the  downward 
stroke,  or  of  the  loop,  would  produce  a  close  approximation  to 
the  forms  which  we  know.  (2)  Diophantus  may  have  used  a  sign 
approximately,  if  not  exactly,  like  that  which  we  find  in  the  MSS. 
For  it  is  from  a  papyrus  of  154  A.D.,  in  writing  of  the  class  which 
Gardthausen  calls  the  "Majuskelcursive,"  that  the  contraction  c?f>  for 
the  two  letters  is  taken.  The  great  advantage  of  my  hypothesis  is 
that  it  makes  the  sign  for  aptfytov  exactly  parallel  to  those  for  the 
powers  of  the  unknown,  e.g.,  Jr  for  Svvafjus  and  KY  for  /cu/8o?,  and 

o 

to  that  for  the  unit  fjwvds  which  is  denoted  by  M,  with  the  sole 
difference  that  the  letters  coalesce  into  one  instead  of  being 
written  separately. 

Tannery's  views  on  the  subject  are,  I  think,  not  very  con- 
sistent, and  certainly  they  do  not  commend  themselves  to  me.  He 
seems  to  suggest  that  the  sign  is  the  ancient  letter  Koppa,  perhaps 
slightly  modified  ;  he  first  says  that  the  sign  in  Diophantus  is 
peculiar  to  him  and  that,  although  the  word  dpi6p,b<i  is  very  often 

1  Heron,  ed.  Hultsch,  pp.  146,  148,  149,  150. 

2  Theon  of  Smyrna,  ed.  Hiller,  p.  56,  critical  notes. 


NOTATION   AND   DEFINITIONS   OF  DIOPHANTUS       37 

represented  in  mathematical  MSS.  by  an  abbreviation,  it  has  much 
oftener  the  form  $  or  something  similar,  closely  resembling  the 
ancient  Koppa.  In  the  next  sentence  he  seems  to  say  that  "  on 
the  contrary  the  Diophantine  abbreviation  is  an  inverted  di- 
gamma  "  ;  yet  lower  down  he  says  that  the  copyist  of  a  (copied 
from  the  archetype  a)  got  the  form  i]  by  simplifying  the  more 
complicated  Koppa.  And,  just  before  the  last  remark,  he  has 
stated  that  in  the  archetype  a  the  form  must  have  been  5  or  very 
like  it,  as  is  shown  by  the  confusion  with  the  sign  for  ical.  (If  this 
is  so,  it  can  hardly  have  been  peculiar  to  Diophantus,  seeing  that 
the  same  confusion  occurs  fairly  often  in  the  MSS.  of  other 
authors,  as  above  shown.)  I  think  the  last  consideration  (the  con- 
fusion with  ical}  is  very  much  against  the  Koppa-hypothesis  ;  and, 
in  any  case,  it  seems  to  me  very  unlikely  that  a  sign  would  be 
used  by  Diophantus  for  the  unknown  which  was  already  appro- 
priated to  the  number  90.  And  I  confess  I  am  unable  to  see  in 
the  sign  any  resemblance  to  an  inverted  digamma. 

Hultsch1  regards  it  as  not  impossible  that  Diophantus  may 
have  adopted  one  of  the  signs  used  by  the  Egyptians  for  their 
unknown  quantity  hau,  which,  if  turned  round  from  left  to  right, 
would  give  V;  but  here  again  I  see  no  particular  resemblance. 
Prof.  D'Arcy  Thompson2  has  a  suggestion  that  the  sign  might  be 
the  first  letter  of  o-«p6<?,  a  heap.  But,  apart  from  the  fact  that  the 
final  sigma  (<?)  is  not  that  first  letter,  there  is  no  trace  whatever 
in  Diophantus  of  such  a  use  of  the  word  o-twpo?  ;  and,  when 
Pachymeres3  speaks  of  a  number  being  crwpeia  /j,ovdSa>v,  he  means 
no  more  than  the  7r\fj0os  fAovdSwv  which  he  is  explaining  :  his 
words  have  no  connexion  with  the  Egyptian  hau. 

Notwithstanding  that  the  sign  is  not  the  final  sigma,  I  shall 
not  hesitate  to  use  9  for  it  in  the  sequel,  for  convenience  of 
printing.  Tannery  prints  it  rather  differently  as  =>. 

We  pass  to  the  notation  which  Diophantus  used  to  express  the 
different  powers  of  the  unknown  quantity,  corresponding  to  x*,  x3, 
and  so  on.  He  calls  the  square  of  the  unknown  quantity  8vz>a/u<?, 
and  denotes  it  by  the  abbreviation  Jr.  The  word  Svvapts, 
literally  "  power,"  is  constantly  used  in  Greek  mathematics  for 

1  Art.  Diophantus  in  Pauly-Wissowa's  Keal-Encyclopadie  der  classischen  Altertums- 
wis sense  h  aften . 

2  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  Vol.  xxxvm.  (1896),  pp.  607-9. 

3  Dioph.  n.  p.  78,  4.    Cf.  lamblichus,  ed.  Pistelli,  p.  7,  7  ;  34,  3  ;  81,  14,  where  <rw/>efa 
is  similarly  used  to  elucidate  TrXTjflos. 


38  INTRODUCTION 

square*.  With  Diophantus,  however,  it  is  not  any  square,  but  only 
the  square  of  the  unknown  ;  where  he  speaks  of  any  particular 
square  number,  it  is  Terpdytovos  dpid/Mos.  The  higher  powers  of  the 
unknown  quantity  which  Diophantus  makes  use  of  he  calls  Kvftos, 
&vva,f*,o8vva/j,t<;,  Swa/jLotcvfios,  KvftoKvftos,  corresponding  respectively 
to  Xs,  x*,  Xs,  x6.  Beyond  the  sixth  power  he  does  not  go,  having 
no  occasion  for  higher  powers  in  the  solutions  of  his  problems.  For 
these  powers  he  uses  the  abbreviations  KY,  AYA,  AKY,  KYK  re- 
spectively. There  is  a  difference  between  Diophantus'  use  of  the  word  * 
8vva/j,i<;  and  of  the  complete  words  for  the  third  and  higher  powers, 
namely  that  the  latter  are  not  always  restricted  like  8iW/u<?  to  powers 
of  the  unknown,  but  may  denote  powers  of  ordinary  known  num- 
bers as  well.  This  is  no  doubt  owing  to  the  fact  that,  while  there 
are  two  words  Bvva/j,i<;  and  rerpdyaivo^  which  both  signify  "  square," 
there  is  only  one  word  for  a  third  power,  namely  /cu/3o?.  It  is 
important,  however,  to  observe  that  the  abbreviations  KY,  AYA, 
AKY,  KYK,  are,  like  Svvafw  and  AY,  only  used  to  denote  powers 
of  the  unknown.  The  coefficients  of  the  different  powers  of  the 
unknown,  like  that  of  the  unknown  itself,  are  expressed  by  the 
addition  of  the  Greek  letters  denoting  numerals,  e.g.,  AKV *r  cor- 
responds to  26x*.  Thus  in  Diophantus'  system  of  notation  the  signs 
AY  and  the  rest  represent  not  merely  the  exponent  of  a  power  like 
the  2  in  xz,  but  the  whole  expression  x*.  There  is  no  obvious 
connexion  between  the  symbol  AY  and  the  symbol  9  of  which  it  is 
the  square,  as  there  is  between  x*  and  x,  and  in  this  lies  the  great 
inconvenience  of  the  notation.  But  upon  this  notation  no  advance 
was  made  by  Xylander,  or  even  by  Bachet  and  Fermat.  They  wrote 
A7  (which  was  short  for  Numerus)  for  the  9  of  Diophantus,  Q  (Quad- 
ratus)  for  Jr,  C  (Cubus)  for  KY,  so  that  we  find,  for  example, 
I Q  +  5^=  24,  corresponding  to  x"-  +  $x  =  24.  Other  symbols  were 
however  used  even  before  the  publication  of  Xylander's  Diophantus, 
e.g.  in  Bombelli's  Algebra.  Bombelli  denotes  the  unknown  and  its 
powers  by  the  symbols  -i  1,  £,  and  so  on.  But  it  is  certain  that 
up  to  this  time  (1572)  the  common  symbols  had  been  R  (Radix 
or  Res),  Z  (Zensus,  i.e.  square),  C  (Cubus).  Apparently  the  first 
important  step  towards  x*,  x*,  etc.,  was  taken  by  Vieta  (1540 — 

1  In  Plato  we  have  SiW/uj  used  for  a  square  number  (Titnaeus,  31)  and  also 
(TTieaetetus ,  147  D)  for  a  square  root  of  a  number  which  is  not  a  complete  square,  i.e.  for 
a  surd  ;  but  the  commonest  use  is  in  geometry,  in  the  form  8vvA.fj.tL,  "  in  square,"  e.g.  "AB 
is  dw6/j.ei  double  of  £C"  means  "  AB2=  2.5C2." 


NOTATION   AND   DEFINITIONS   OF   DIOPHANTUS       39 

1603),  who  wrote  Aq,  Ac,  Aqq,  etc.  (abbreviated  for  A  quadratus 
and  so  on)  for  the  powers  of  A.  This  system,  besides  showing  the 
con  .exion  between  the  different  powers,  has  the  infinite  advantage 
that  by  means  of  it  we  can  use  in  one  and  the  same  solution  any 
number  of  unknown  quantities.  This  is  absolutely  impossible  with 
the  notation  used  by  Diophantus  and  the  earlier  algebraists. 
Diophantus  in  fact  never  uses  more  than  one  unknown  quantity  in 
the  solution  of  a  problem,  namely  the  dpi6/j.6<;  or  <?. 

Diophantus  has  no  symbol  for  the  operation  of  multiplication ; 
it  is  rendered  unnecessary  by  the  fact  that  his  coefficients  are  all 
definite  numbers  or  fractions,  and  the  results  are  simply  put  down 
without  any  preliminary  step  which  would  call  for  the  use  of  a 
symbol.  On  the  ground  that  Diophantus  uses  only  numerical 
expressions  for  coefficients  instead  of  general  symbols,  it  might 
occur  to  a  superficial  observer  that  there  must  be  a  great  want 
of  generality  in  his  methods,  and  that  his  problems,  being  solved 
with  reference  to  particular  numbers  only,  would  possess  the 
attraction  of  a  clever  puzzle  rather  than  any  more  general  interest. 
The  answer  to  this  is  that,  in  the  first  place,  it  was  absolutely 
impossible  that  Diophantus  should  have  used  any  other  than 
numerical  coefficients,  for  the  reason  that  the  available  symbols  of 
notation  were  already  employed,  the  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet 
always  doing  duty  as  numerals,  with  the  exception  of  the  final  9. 
In  the  second  place,  it  is  not  the  case  that  the  use  of  none  but 
numerical  coefficients  makes  his  solutions  any  the  less  general. 
This  will  be  clearly  seen  when  I  come  to  give  an  account  of  his 
problems  and  methods. 

Next  as  to  Diophantus'  expressions  for  the  operations  of 
addition  and  subtraction.  For  the  former  no  symbol  at  all  is 
used:  it  is  expressed  by  mere  juxtaposition,  thus  KYa^Y^y^€ 
corresponds  to  x*  +  \yc-  +  $x.  In  this  expression,  however,  there 
is  no  absolute  term,  and  the  addition  of  a  simple  numeral,  as 
for  instance  /8,  directly  after  e,  the  coefficient  of  ?,  would  cause 
confusion.  This  fact  makes  it  necessary  to  have  some  expression 
to  distinguish  the  absolute  term  from  the  variable  terms.  For  this 
purpose  Diophantus  uses  the  word  /u,ovaSe<?,  or  units,  and  denotes 

o 

them  after  his  usual  manner  by  the  abbreviation  M.  The  number 
of  units  is  expressed  as  a  coefficient.  Thus  corresponding  to 
the  expression  Xs  +  \y?  +  $x+2  we  should  find  in  Diophantus 

KYa  Jrt79eJ/£.     As  Bachet  uses  the  sign  +  for  addition,  he 


40  INTRODUCTION 

has  no  occasion  for  a  distinct  symbol  to  mark  an  absolute  term. 
He  accordingly  writes  iC+  i^Q+^N+2.  It  is  worth  observing, 
however,  that  the  Italians  do  use  a  symbol  in  this  case,  namely  N 
(Numero),  the  first  power  of  the  unknown  being  with  them  R 
(Radice).  Cossali1  makes  an  interesting  comparison  between  the 
terms  used  by  Diophantus  for  the  successive  powers  of  the  unknown 
and  those  employed  by  the  Italians  after  their  instructors,  the 
Arabians.  He  observes  that  Fra  Luca  (Paciuolo),  Tartaglia,  and 
Cardano  begin  their  scale  of  powers  from  the  power  o,  not  from  the 
power  i,  as  does  Diophantus,  and  he  compares  the  scales  thus : 


Scala  Diofantea.  Scala  Araba. 

i.  Numero.. .il  Noto. 

x  \.     Numero...  1'  Ignoto.  i.  Cosa,  Radice,  Lato. 

X*  i.     Podesta.  3.  Censo. 

x3  3.     Cubo.  4.  Cubo. 

x*  4.     Podesta-Podesta.  5.  Censo  di  Censo. 

xs  5.     Podesta-Cubo.  6.  Relate  i°. 

x6  6.     Cubo-Cubo.  7.  Censo  di  Cubo,  o  Cubo  di  Censo. 

xi  7 8.  Relate  2°. 

Xs  8 9.  Censo  di  Censo  di  Censo. 

x9  9 10.  Cubo  di  Cubo. 

and  so  on.*  So  far,  however,  as  this  is  meant  to  be  a  comparison 
between  Diophantus  and  the  early  Arabian  algebraists  themselves 
(as  the  title  "  Scala  Araba"  would  seem  to  imply),  there  appears  to 
be  no  reason  why  Cossali  should  not  have  placed  some  term  to 
express  Diophantus'  /ioi>«Se?  in  the  same  line  with  Numero  in  the 
Arabian  scale,  and  moved  the  numbers  i,  2,  3,  etc.  one  place 
upward^  in  the  first  scale,  or  downwards  in  the  second.  As 
Diophantus  does  not  go  beyond  the  sixth  power,  the  last  three 
places  in  the  first  scale  are  left  blank.  An  examination  of  these 
two  scales  will  show  also  that  the  evolution  of  the  successive 
powers  differs  in  the  two  systems.  The  Diophantine  terms  for 
them  are  based  on  the  addition  of  exponents,  the  Arabic  on 

1  Upon  Wallis'  comparison  of  the  Diophantine  with  the  Arabian  scale  Cossali 
remarks:  "ma  egli  non  ha  riflettuto  a  due  altre  differenze  tra  le  scale  medesime.  La 
prima  si  e,  che  laddove  Diofanto  denomina  con  singolarita  Numero  il  nuinero  ignoto, 
denominando  Monade  il  numero  dato  di  comparazione  :  gli  antichi  italiani  degli  arabi 
seguaci  denominano  questo  il  Numero ;  e  Radice,  o  Lato,  o  Cosa  il  numero  sconosciuto. 
La  seconda  e,  che  Diofanto  comincia  la  scala  dal  numero  ignoto ;  e  Fra  Luca,  Tartaglia, 
Cardano  la  incominciano  dal  numero  noto.  Ecco  le  due  scale  di  rincontro,  onde  meglio 
risaltino  all'  occhio  le  differenze  loro  ",  I.  p.  195. 


NOTATION   AND   DEFINITIONS   OF  DIOPHANTUS      41 

their  multiplication^.  Thus  the  "cube-cube"  means  in  Diophantus 
x?,  while  the  Italian  and  Arabian  system  uses  the  expression  "  cube 
of  cube  "  and  applies  it  to  x9.  The  first  system  may  (says  Cossali) 
be  described  as  the  method  of  representing  each  power  by  the 
product  of  the  two  lesser  powers  which  are  the  nearest  to  it,  the 
method  of  multiplication;  the  second  the  metliod  of  elevation,  i.e.  the 
method  which  forms  by  the  process  of  squaring  and  cubing  all 
powers  which  can  be  so  formed,  as  the  4th,  6th,  8th,  9th,  etc. 
The  intermediate  powers  which  cannot  be  so  formed  are  called 
in  Italian  Relati.  Thus  the  fifth  power  is  Relate  i°,  x1  is 
Relato  2°,  x10  is  Censo  di  Relato  i°,  x"  is  Relato  3°,  and  so  on. 
Another  name  for  the  Relati  in  use  among  European  algebraists  in 
the  1  6th  and  I7th  centuries  was  sursolida,  with  the  variants  super- 
solida  and  surdesolida. 

It  is  interesting  to  compare  with  these  systems  the  Egyptian 
method  described  by  Psellus2.  The  next  power  after  the  fourth 
(8vi>a/ioSiW/u9),  i.e.  x6,  the  Egyptians  called  "  the  first  undescribed  " 
((1X0709  here  apparently  meaning  that  of  which  no  account  can 
be  given),  because  it  is  neither  a  square  nor  a  cube  ;  alternatively 
they  called  it  "  the  fifth  number,"  corresponding  to  the  fifth  power 
of  x.  The  sixth  power  they  apparently  called  "  cube-cube  "  ;  but 
the  seventh  was  "  the  second  undescribed  "  (0X0709  Sevrepos),  as 
being  the  product  of  the  square  and  the  "  first  undescribed,"  or, 
alternatively,  the  "seventh  number."  The  eighth  power  was  the 
"quadruple-square"  (rerpaTrXfj  8ui>a/u9),  the  ninth  the  "extended 
cube  "  (/eu/8o9  e£eXt*T09).  Thus  the  "  first  undescribed  "  and  the 
"second  undescribed"  correspond  to  "Relato  i°"  and  "Relato  2°" 
respectively,  but  the  "quadruple-square"  exhibits  the  additive 
principle. 

For  subtraction  Diophantus  uses  a  symbol.  His  full  term  for 
negation  or  wanting  is  Xenjrt9,  corresponding  to  inrap%i<;  which 
denotes  the  opposite.  The  symbol  used  to  denote  it  in  the  MSS., 
and  corresponding  to  our  —  for  minus,  is  (Def.  9  KOI  7-^9  Xetye<»9 
eXXi7T€9  Kara)  vevov,  A)  "  an  inverted  ¥  with  the  top 


1  This  statement  of  Cossali's  needs  qualification  however.  There  is  at  least  one  Arabian 
algebraist,  al-Karkhi  (died  probably  about  1029),  the  author  of  the  Fakkri,  who  uses  the 
Diophantine  system  of  powers  of  the  unknown  depending  on  the  addition  of  exponents. 
Al-Karkhl,  namely,  expresses  all  powers  of  the  unknown  above  the  third  by  means  of 
mat,  his  term  for  the  square,  and  kab,  his  term  for  the  cube  of  the  unknown,  as  follows. 
The  fourth  power  is  with  him  mdl  mal,  the  fifth  mal  kab,  the  sixth  kab  ka'b,  the  seventh 
mdl  mal  kab,  the  eighth  mdl  kab  kab,  the  ninth  kab  kab  kab,  and  so  on.  Among  the 
Italians  too  there  was  an  exception,  Leonardo  of  Pisa,  who  proceeded  on  the  additive 
principle  (Bibliotheea  Mathematica,  vis,  1905-6,  p.  310).  2  Dioph.  H.  p.  37-38. 


42  INTRODUCTION 

shortened,  /ft."  As  Diophantus  uses  no  distinct  sign  for  +,  it 
is  clearly  necessary,  in  order  to  avoid  confusion,  that  all  the 
negative  terms  in  an  expression  should  be  placed  together 
after  all  the  positive  terms.  And  so  in  fact  he  does  place  them. 
Thus  corresponding  to  x3  —  $*?  +  &tr  —  i,  Diophantus  would  write 

KY a  9  T;  A^l1  e Ma.  With  respect  to  this  curious  sign,  given  in 
the  MSS.  as  T  and  described  as  an  inverted  truncated  M*",  I  believe 
that  I  was  the  first  to  suggest  that  it  could  not  be  what  it  is 
represented  as  being.  Even  when,  as  in  Bachet's  edition,  the 
sign  was  printed  as  ^  I  could  not  believe  that  Diophantus  used 
so  fantastic  a  sign  for  minus  as  an  inverted  truncated  ty.  In 
the  first  place,  an  inverted  ^  seems  too  far-fetched ;  to  one  who 
was  looking  for  a  symbol  to  express  minus  many  others  more 
natural  and  less  fantastic  than  jp>  must  have  suggested  themselves. 
Secondly,  given  that  Diophantus  used  an  inverted  M/",  why  should  he 
truncate  it  ?  Surely  that  must  have  been  unnecessary ;  we  could 
hardly  have  expected  it  unless,  without  it,  confusion  was  likely 
to  arise;  but  ./p.  could  not  well  have  been  confused  with  anything. 
This  very  truncation  itself  appears  to  throw  doubt  on  the  description 
of  the  symbol  as  we  find  it  in  the  MS.  I  concluded  that  the  con- 
ception of  this  symbol  as  an  inverted  truncated  M*  was  a  mistake, 
and  that  the  description  of  it  as  such  is  not  Diophantus'  description, 
but  an  explanation  by  a  scribe  of  a  symbol  which  he  did  not 
understand1.  I  believe  that  the  true  explanation  is  the  following. 
Diophantus  here  took  the  same  course  as  in  the  case  of  the  other 
symbols  which  we  have  discussed  (those  for  apiOftos,  Svvafjus,  etc.). 
As  in  those  cases  he  took  for  his  abbreviation  the  first  letter  of  the 
word  with  such  an  addition  as  would  make  confusion  with  numbers 
impossible  (namely  the  second  letter  of  the  word,  which  in  each  of 
the  cases  happens  to  come  later  in  the  alphabet  than  the  corre- 
sponding first  letter),  so,  in  seeking  an  abbreviation  for  A,et-\Ja<? 
and  cognate  inflected  forms  developed  from  \ITT,  he  began  by 
taking  the  initial  letter  of  the  word.  The  uncial2  form  is  A. 
Clearly  A  by  itself  would  not  serve  his  purpose,  since  it  denotes 
a  number.  Therefore  an  addition  is  necessary.  The  second  letter 
is  E,  but  AE  is  equally  a  number.  The  second  letter  of  the  stem 

1  I  am  not  even  sure  that  the  description  can  be  made  to  mean  all  that  it  is  intended 
to  mean.     AXiTr^s  scarcely  seems  to  be  sufficiently  precise.     Might  it  not  be  applied  to 
/]\  with  any  part  cut  off,  and  not  only  the  top  ? 

2  I  adhere  to  the  uncial  form  above  for  clearness'  sake.     If  Diophantus  used  the 
"  Majuskelcursive  "  form,  the  explanation  will  equally  apply,  the  difference  of  form  being 
for  our  purpose  negligible. 


NOTATION   AND    DEFINITIONS   OF   DIOPHANTUS      43 

\ITT  is  I,  but  Al  is  open  to  objection  when  so  written.  Hence 
Diophantus  placed  the  I  inside  the  A,  thus,  A.  Of  the  possibility 
of  this  I  entertain  no  doubt,  because  there  are  undoubted  cases 
of  combination,  even  in  uncial  writing,  of  two  letters  into  one  sign. 
I  would  refer  in  particular  to  X,  which  is  an  uncial  abbreviation  for 
TAAANTON.  Now  this  sign,  A,  is  an  inverted  and  truncated  W 
(written  in  the  uncial  form,  y) ;  and  we  can,  on  this  assumption, 
easily  account  for  the  explanation  of  the  sign  for  minus  which  is 
given  in  the  text. 

The  above  suggestion,  made  by  me  twenty-five  years  ago, 
seems  to  be  distinctly  supported  by  what  Tannery  says  of  the  form 
in  which  the  sign  appears  in  the  MSS.1  Thus  he  remarks  (i)  that 
the  sign  in  the  MSS.  is  often  made  to  lean  to  the  right  so  that  it 
resembles  the  letter  Lambda,  (2)  that  Planudes  certainly  wrote  fc  as 
if  he  meant  to  write  the  first  letter  of  Xen/ret,  and  (3)  that  the 
letter  A  appears  twice  in  A  where  it  seems  to  mean  XotTro?.  Yet 
in  his  edition  of  Diophantus  Tannery  did  not  adopt  my  explanation 
or  even  mention  it,  but  explained  the  sign  as  being  in  reality 
adapted  from  the  old  letter  Sampi  (~>>),  the  objection  to  which 
suggestion  is  the  same  as  that  to  which  the  identification  of  <?  with 
Koppa  is  open,  namely  that  ~^  represented  the  number  900,  as  ? 
represented  90.  Tannery  however  afterwards2  saw  reason  to 
abandon  his  suggestion  that  the  symbol  was  originally  an  archaic 
form  of  the  Greek  Sampi  rather  than  "un  monogramme  se 
rattachant  a  la  racine  de  Xen/rt?."  The  occasion  for  this  change 
of  view  was  furnished  by  the  appearance  of  the  same  sign  in  the 
critical  notes  to  Schone's  edition  of  the  Metrica  of  Heron3,  which 
led  Tannery  to  re-examine  the  evidence  of  the  MSS.  of  Diophantus 
as  to  the  sign  and  as  to  the  exact  word  or  words  which  it  re- 
presented in  different  places,  as  well  as  to  search  for  any  similar 
expressions  denoting  subtraction  which  might  occur  in  the  works 
of  other  Greek  mathematicians.  In  the  MSS.  of  Diophantus, 
when  the  sign  is  resolved  by  writing  a  full  word  instead  of  it, 
it  is  generally  resolved  into  Xen/ret,  the  dative  of  Xen/rt<? ;  in  such 
cases  the  only  grammatical  possibility  is  to  construct  it  with  the 
genitive  case  of  the  quantity  subtracted,  the  meaning  then  being 
"with  the  wanting,  or  deduction,  of  ...".  But  the  best  MS.  (A) 

1  Dioph.  n.  p.  xli. 

-  Bibliotheca  Mathematica  v3,  1904-5,  pp.  5-8. 

3  Heronis  Alexandrini  opera,  Vol.  in.,   1903,  pp,  156,  8,   10.     The  MS.  reading  is 
t'd',  the  meaning  of  which  is  74 -TV 


44  INTRODUCTION 


has  in  some  places  the  nominative  Xetyv  9,  while  in  others  it  has  the 
symbol  instead  of  parts  of  the  verb  \ei-7reiv,  namely  \nr(i)v  or 
XeiS/ra?  and  once  even  XITTOJO-I  ;  hence  we  may  conclude  that  in  the 
cases  where  A  and  B^  have  \etyei  followed  by  the  accusative  (which 
is  impossible  grammatically)  the  sign  was  wrongly  resolved,  and 
the  full  word  should  have  been  a  participle  or  other  part  of  the 
verb  \eliretv  governing  the  accusative.  The  question  therefore 
arises  whether  Diophantus  himself  used  the  dative  \efyet  at  all 
or  whether  it  was  introduced  into  the  MSS.  later.  Certain  it  is 
that  the  use  is  foreign  to  Classical  Greek  ;  but,  even  if  it  began 
with  Diophantus,  it  did  not  finally  hold  the  field  before  the  time  of 
Planudes.  No  evidence  for  it  can  be  found  in  Greek  mathe- 
maticians before  Diophantus.  Ptolemy  has  in  two  places  Xenjrai/ 
and  \ei7rovaav  respectively,  followed  by  the  accusative,  and  in 
one  case  TO  airo  rrjs  FA  \ei<l>9ev  VTTO  TOV  aVo  -n)9  Zf  (where  the 
meaning  is  ZP-  FA2).  Consequently  we  cannot  suppose  that  the 
sign  where  it  occurs  in  the  Metrica  of  Heron  represents  the  dative 
Xenjr«;  it  must  rather  stand  for  a  participle,  active  or  passive. 
Tannery  suggests  that  the  full  expression  in  that  passage  was 
fjiovdSwv  oB  \ei<f)0evTo$  re(r<TapaKaiS€Kdrov,  the  participle  being 
passive  and  the  construction  being  the  genitive  absolute  ;  but  I 
think  a  perhaps  better  alternative  would  be  povaSmv  08  \en/rao-<wz/ 
reo-a-apaKaiSeicaTov,  where  the  active  participle  would  govern 
the  accusative  case  of  the  term  subtracted.  From  all  this  we 
may  infer  that  the  sign  had  no  exclusive  reference  to  the  sub- 
stantive \enjrt9,  still  less  to  the  dative  case  of  that  substantive,  but 
was  a  conventional  abbreviation  associated  with  the  root  of  the 
verb  \ei7reiv.  In  these  circumstances  I  think  I  may  now  fairly 
claim  Tannery  as,  substantially,  a  convert  to  my  view  of  the 
nature  of  the  sfgn. 

For  division  it  often  happens  that  no  symbol  is  necessary, 
i.e.  in  the  cases  where  the  divisor  divides  the  dividend  without 
a  remainder.  In  other  cases  the  quotient  has  to  be  expressed 
as  a  fraction,  whether  the  divisor  is  a  specific  number  or  contains 
the  variable.  The  case  of  division  comes  then  under  that  of 
fractions. 

Fractions  are  represented  in  different  ways  according  as  they  are 
submultiples  (fractions  with  unity  as  numerator)  or  not.  In  the 
case  of  submultiples  the  Greeks  did  not  write  the  numerator,  but 
only  the  denominator,  distinguishing  the  submultiple  from  the 
cardinal  number  itself  by  affixing  a  certain  sign.  In  more  recent 


NOTATION  AND   DEFINITIONS  OF   DIOPHANTUS      45 

MSS.  a  double  accent  was  used  for  this  purpose:  thus  7"  =  ^. 
Diophantus  follows  this  plan  in  the  hypothesis  and  analysis  of  his 
problems,  though  in  the  solutions  he  seems  to  have  written  the 
numerator  a  and  assimilated  the  notation  to  that  used  for  other 
fractions.  The  sign,  however,  added  to  the  cardinal  number  to 
express  the  submultiple  takes  somewhat  different  forms  in  A  : 
sometimes  it  is  a  simple  accent,  sometimes  more  elaborate,  as  /" 
above  the  letter  and  to  the  right,  or  actually  forming  a  continuation 
of  the  numeral  sign,  e.g.  fr'  =  ^.  Tannery  adopts  as  the  genuine 
mark  in  Diophantus  the  affix  x  in  place  of  the  accent :  thus  7X  =  3. 
For  £  he  writes  L '  as  being  most  suitable  for  the  time  of  Diophantus, 
though  A  has  <~*/,  sometimes  without  the  dot. 

Of  the  other  class  of  fractions  (numerator  not  unity)  f  stands  by 
itself,  having  a  peculiar  sign  of  its  own  ;  curiously  enough  it  occurs 
only  four  times  in  Diophantus.  A  has  a  sign  for  it  which  was 
confused  with  that  for  dpidpos  in  one  place ;  Tannery  judges  from 
the  Greek  mathematical  papyrus  of  Achmlm1  that  its  original  form 
was  <y  ;  he  himself  writes  in  his  text  the  common  form  iff'.  In  the 
rare  cases  where  the  first  hand  in  the  oldest  MS.  (A)  has  fractions 
as  such  with  numerator  and  denominator  written  in  full,  the 
denominator  is  written  above  the  numerator.  Tannery  therefore 
adopts,  in  his  text,  this  way  of  writing  fractions,  separating  the 

numerator  and  denominator  by  a  horizontal  line:  thus  pica  =  —^. 

PACT? 

It  is  however  better  to  omit  the  horizontal  line  (cf.  p  in  Kenyon 
Papyri  II.  No.  cclxv.  40;  also  the  fractions  in  Schone's  edition 
of  Heron's  Metrica).  Once  we  find  in  the  same  MS.  (A)  in  the  first 
hand  the  form  ies  =  1f-.  In  this  latter  method  of  writing  fractions 
the  denominator  is  written  as  we  write  exponents ;  and  this  is  the 
method  adopted  by  Planudes  and  by  Bachet  in  his  edition. 
Another  alternative  is  to  write  the  numerator  first,  and  then  the 
denominator  after  it  in  the  same  line,  marking  the  denominator  with 
the  submultiple  sign  in  some  form  ;  thus  jB'  would  mean  £  ;  this  is 
the  most  convenient  method  for  purposes  of  printing.  Or  the  de- 
nominator may  be  written  as  an  abbreviation  for  the  ordinal  number, 
and  the  case-termination  may  be  added  higher  up ;  e.g.  v  K>fv  =  50 
twenty-thirds.  But  the  denominators  are  nearly  always  omitted 


1  Published  by  Baillet  in  Memoire s  publih  par  Its  Membres  de  la  Mission  archeologique 
franfaise  au  Caire,  T.  Ix,  Fascicule  i,  pp.  1-88.     Paris,  1892. 


46  INTRODUCTION 

altogether  in  the  first  hand  of  A  ;  in  the  first  two  Books  B^  and  the 
second  hand  of  A  give  the  denominator  in  the  place  in  which  we  write 
an  exponent,  following  the  method  of  Planudes  ;  in  the  last  four 
Books  both  MSS.  almost  invariably  omit  the  denominator.  In 
some  cases  the  omission  is  not  unnatural,  i.e.  where  the  denominator 
has  once  been  given,  and  it  is  almost  superfluous  to  repeat  it 
in  other  fractions  immediately  following  which  have  the  same 
denominator  ;  in  other  cases  it  was  probably  omitted  because  the 
superposed  denominator  was  taken  by  the  copyist  to  be  an  inter- 
linear scholium.  A  few  examples  of  fractions  from  Diophantus 
may  be  added  : 


(v.  9)  ; 

A  ff> 

' 


=  (IV.  16)  ;       pKa-XS      =  (IV.  39)  ; 

(V.2). 

152      V 

Diophantus  however  often  expresses  fractions  by  putting  eV 
or  popiov  between  the  numerator  and  denominator,  i.e.  he 

r 

says   one   number   divided   by  another.     Cf.  Mpiv  .  g^irb   poplov 
_  _  r 


_ 

*r  .  ,/8/3/iS  =  1507984/262144  (IV.  28),  where  of  course  M  = 

(tens  of  thousands);  (3  .  ,e%  ev  ^opiw  picfS  .  /aice=  25600/1221025 
(v.  22).  As  we  said,  the  most  orthodox  way  of  writing  a  sub- 
multiple  was  to  omit  the  numerator  (unity)  and  use  the  denominator 
with  a  distinguishing  sign  attached,  e.g.  rx  or  r'  =  £.  But  in  his 
solutions  Diophantus  often  uses  the  form  applicable  to  fractions 

W  i 

other  than  submultiples  ;    e.g.  he  writes     a     for  -  (IV.  28). 

Numbers  partly  integral  and  partly  fractional,  where  the 
fraction  is  a  submultiple  or  the  sum  of  submultiples,  are  written 
much  as  we  write  them,  the  fraction  simply  following  the  integer  ; 
e.g.  a  7X  =  i^  ;  in  the  Lemma  to  V.  8  we  have  ft  L  '  r'  =  2  \  %  or  2§, 
where  f  is  decomposed  into  submultiples  as  in  Heron.  Cf.  also 
(m.  ii)roZ.Vx=37oiTV. 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  numerical  notation,  it  may  be 
convenient  to  refer  to  the  method  of  writing  large  numbers. 

r 
Myriads  (tens  of  thousands)  are  expressed  by  M,  myriads  to  the 


NOTATION  AND   DEFINITIONS  OF   DIOPHANTUS      47 

second  power  by  MM     or,  in   words,   Bevrepa   fj.vpia<f.     The  de- 
nominator 1 87474560  in  V.  8  would  thus  be  written  /j,opiov 


a  teal  [ivpi(i8(i)v  TrpcaTfav  fij^n^  ical  M  ,£<£>£,  and  the  fraction 
131299224/1629586560  would  be  written  Bevrepa  pvpias  a 


M     0(TK?)    fioptov    Bevrepfav   pup  id  Sow  if 
M~r&£\ 


But  there  is  another  kind  of  fraction,  besides  the  purely 
numerical  one,  which  is  continually  occurring  in  the  Arithmetica, 
such  fractions  namely  as  involve  the  unknown  quantity  in  some 
form  or  other  in  their  denominators.  The  simplest  case  is  that  in 
which  the  denominator  is  merely  a  power  of  the  unknown,  9. 
Concerning  fractions  of  this  kind  Diophantus  says  (Def.  3)  :  "  As 
fractions  named  after  numbers  have  similar  names  to  those  of  the 
numbers  themselves  (thus  a  third  is  named  from  three,  a  fourth 
from  four),  so  the  fractions  homonymous  with  the  numbers  just 
defined  are  called  after  them  ;  thus  from  a/>ifyto<?  we  name 
the  fraction  dpidfioarov  \t£.  ijx  from  x\,  TO  Swapoarov  from 
is,  TO  KvftoffTov  from  >ti>/8o?,  TO  BwafioBwapoa-rov  from 
,  TO  Bwa/AOKV/Soa'Tov  from  SvvafjLoicvftos,  and  TO 
from  KV&OHV&OS.  And  every  such  fraction  shall 
have,  above  the  sign  for  the  homonymous  number,  a  line  to 
indicate  the  species."  Thus  we  find,  for  example,  IV.  3,  ?x  17  cor- 
responding to  8/x  and,  IV.  15,  ?x  Xe  for  35/4:.  Cf.  Jrxor  for  250^. 

Where  the  denominator  is  a  compound  expression  involving  the 
unknown  and  its  powers,  Diophantus  uses  the  expedient  which  he 
often  adopts  with  numerical  fractions  when  the  numerators  and 
denominators  are  large  numbers,  namely  the  insertion  of  ev  popiy 
or  /jiopiov  between  the  expressions  for  the  numerator  and  de- 
nominator. Thus  in  VI.  12  we  have 


=  (6ar2  + 
and  in  VI.  14 


For  to-o?,  equal,  connecting  the  two  sides  of  an  equation,  the 
sign  in  the  archetype  seems  to  have  been  iff  •  but  copyists  intro- 

1  Hultsch,  he.  tit. 


48  INTRODUCTION 

duced  a  sign  which  was  sometimes  confused  with  the  sign  i|  for 
dpidpos  ;  this  was  no  doubt  the  same  abbreviation  Lj  as  that  shown 
(with  terminations  of  cases  added  above)  in  the  list  given  at 
the  end  of  Codex  Parisinus  2360  (Archimedes)  of  contractions 
found  in  the  "  very  ancient  "  MS.  from  which  it  was  copied  and 
which  was  at  one  time  the  property  of  Georgius  Valla1. 

Diophantus  evidently  put  down  his  equations  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  writing,  i.e.  they  were  written  straight  on,  as  are  the 
steps  in  the  propositions  of  Euclid,  and  not  put  in  separate  lines  for 
each  step  in  the  process  of  simplification.  In  the  scholia  of 
Maximus  Planudes  however  we  find  conspectuses  of  the  problems 
with  steps  in  separate  lines  which,  except  for  the  slightly  more 
cumbrous  notation,  make  the  work  scarcely  more  difficult  to  follow 
than  it  is  in  our  notation2.  Though  in  the  MSS.  we  have  the 
abbreviation  t0"  to  denote  equality,  Bachet  makes  no  use  of  any 
symbol  for  the  purpose  in  his  Latin  translation.  He  uses 
throughout  the  full  Latin  word.  It  is  interesting  however  to  observe 
that  in  the  notes  to  his  earlier  translation  (1575)  Xylander  had 
already  used  a  symbol  to  denote  equality,  namely  ||,  two  short 
vertical  parallel  lines.  Thus  we  find,  for  example  (p.  76), 


which  we  should  express  by  x*1  +  12  =x*+  6x+  9. 

Now  that  we  have  described  in  detail  Diophantus'  method  of 
expressing  algebraical  quantities  and  relations,  it  is  clear  that  it  is 
essentially  different  in  its  character  from  the  modern  notation. 
While  in  modern  times  signs  and  symbols  have  been  developed 

1  Heiberg,  Quaestiones  Archimedeae,  p.  115. 

2  One  instance  will  suffice.     On  the  left  Planudes  has  abbreviations  for  the  words 
showing  the  nature  of  the  steps  or  the  operations  they  involve,  e.g.  &r0.  =  ftcflecns  (setting  - 
out),  rerp.  =  rer/scry  wpwy^s  (squaring),  wuvO.  —ff^vOecrts  (adding),  a<f>.  =  d.<j>alpfffis  (subtrac- 
tion), pep.  =  fj.epiffiJ.6s  (division),  OTT.  =  virap%  is  (resulting  fact). 

Dioph.  I.  28. 
Planudes.  "  Modern  equivalent. 


(K&. 
rerp. 


atvd.      AYp(J.°ff        I"      M0^? 


AYa 


[Given  numbers]  20,  208 
Put  for  the  numbers  .*+  10,  10  -  * 
Squaring,  we  have  *2+2a*+  100, 
#2+  100-20*. 
Adding,  2jr2+2OO  =  2o8. 
Subtracting,  2.*2=8. 
Dividing,  Jf2  =  4. 


Result:  [the  numbers  are]  12,  8. 


NOTATION  AND   DEFINITIONS   OF  DIOPHANTUS      49 

which  have  no  intrinsic  relationship  to  the  things  which  they 
represent,  but  depend  for  their  use  upon  convention,  the  case 
is  quite  different  in  Diophantus,  where  algebraic  notation  takes 
the  form  of  mere  abbreviation  of  words  which  are  considered  as 
pronounced  or  implied. 

In  order  to  show  in  what  place,  in  respect  of  systems  of 
algebraic  notation,  Diophantus  stands,  Nesselmann  observes  that 
we  can,  as  regards  the  form  of  exposition  of  algebraic  operations 
and  equations,  distinguish  three  historical  stages  of  development, 
well  marked  and  easily  discernible,  (i)  The  first  stage  Nessel- 
mann represents  by  the  name  Rhetorical  Algebra  or  "reckoning  by 
complete  words."  The  characteristic  of  this  stage  is  the  absolute 
want  of  all  symbols,  the  whole  of  the  calculation  being  carried  on 
by  means  of  complete  words,  and  forming  in  fact  continuous  prose. 
As  representatives  of  this  first  stage  Nesselmann  mentions  lambli- 
chus  (of  whose  algebraical  work  he  quotes  a  specimen  in  his  fifth 
chapter)  "and  all  Arabian  and  Persian  algebraists  who  are  at 
present  known."  In  their  works  we  find  no  vestige  of  algebraic 
symbols;  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  oldest  Italian  algebraists 
and  their  followers,  and  among  them  Regiomontanus.  (2)  The 
second  stage  Nesselmann  proposes  to  call  the  Syncopated  A  Igebra. 
This  stage  is  essentially  rJielorical,  and  therein  like  the  first  in 
its  treatment  of  questions ;  but  we  now  find  for  often-recurring 
operations  and  quantities  certain  abbreviational  symbols.  To 
this  stage  belong  Diophantus  and,  after  him,  all  the  later 
Europeans  until  about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century 
(with  the  exception  of  Vieta,  who  was  the  first  to  establish, 
under  the  name  of  Logistica  speciosa,  as  distinct  from  Logistica 
numerosa,  a  regular  system  of  reckoning  with  letters  denoting 
magnitudes  and  not  numbers  only).  (3)  To  the  third  stage 
Nesselmann  gives  the  name  Symbolic  Algebra,  which  uses  a  com- 
plete system  of  notation  by  signs  having  no  visible  connexion 
with  the  words  or  things  which  they  represent,  a  complete  language 
of  symbols,  which  supplants  entirely  the  r/ietorical  system,  it  being 
possible  to  work  out  a  solution  without  using  a  single  word  of  the 
ordinary  written  language,  with  the  exception  (for  clearness'  sake) 
of  a  connecting  word  or  two  here  and  there,  and  so  on1.  Neither 

1  It  may  be  convenient  to  note  here  the  beginnings  of  some  of  our  ordinary  algebraical 
symbols.  The  signs  +  and  -  first  appeared  in  print  in  Johann  Widman's  arithmetic 
(1489),  where  however  they  are  scarcely  used  as  regular  symbols  of  operation  ;  next  they 
are  found  in  the  Rechenbuch  of  Henricus  Grammateus  (Schreiber),  written  in  1518  but 
perhaps  not  published  till  15.21,  and  then  regularly  in  Stifel's  Arithmetica  Integra  (1544) 


5° 


INTRODUCTION 


is  it  the  Europeans  from  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century 
onwards  who  were  the  first  to  use  symbolic  forms  of  Algebra. 
In  this  they  were  anticipated  by  the  Indians. 

Nesselmann  illustrates  these  three  stages  by  three  examples, 
quoting  word  for  word  the  solution  of  a  quadratic  equation 
by  Muhammad  b.  Musa  as  an  example  of  the  first  stage,  and 
the  solution  of  a  problem  from  Diophantus  as  representing  the 
second. 

First  Stage,  Example  from  Muhammad  b.  Musa  (ed.  Rosen, 
p.  5).  "A  square  and  ten  of  its  roots  are  equal  to  nine  and  thirty 
dirhems,  that  is,  if  you  add  ten  roots  to  one  square,  the  sum  is  equal 
to  nine  and  thirty.  The  solution  is  as  follows.  Take  half  the  number 
of  roots,  that  is  in  this  case  five;  then  multiply  this  by  itself,  and 
the  result  is  five  and  twenty.  Add  this  to  the  nine  and  thirty, 
which  gives  sixty-four;  take  the  square  root,  or  eight,  and  subtract 
from  it  half  the  number  of  roots,  namely  five,  and  there  remain 
three:  this  is  the  root  of  the  square  which  was  required,  and  the 
square  itself  is  nine1." 

Here  we  observe  that  not  even  are  symbols  used  for  numbers, 
so  that  this  example  is  even  more  "rhetorical"  than  the  work  of 
lamblichus  who  does  use  the  Greek  symbols  for  his  numbers. 


as  well  as  in  his  edition  of  RudolfFs  Coss  (1553).  Vieta  (1540-1603)  has,  in  addition, 
=  for  ~.  Robert  Recorde  (1510-1558)  had  already  in  his  Algebra  (The  Whetstone  of 
Witte,  1557)  used  =(but  with  much  longer  lines)  to  denote  equality  ("  bicause  noe.2. 
thynges,  can  be  moare  equalle").  Harriot  (1560-1621)  denoted  multiplication  by  a  dot, 
and  also  by  mere  juxtaposition  of  letters;  Stifel  (1487-1567)  had  however  already 
expressed  the  product  of  two  magnitudes  by  the  juxtaposition  of  the  two  letters  represent- 
ing them.  Oughtred  (1574-1660)  used  the  sign  x  for  multiplication.  Harriot  also 
introduced  the  signs  >  and  <  for  greater  and  less  respectively,  -f-  for  division  is  found 
in  Rahn's  Algebra  (1659).  Descartes  introduced  in  his  Geometry  (1637)  our  method  of 
writing  powers,  as  a3,  a*  etc.  (except  a2,  for  which  he  wrote  aa) ;  but  this  notation  was 
practically  anticipated  by  Pierre  Herigone  (Cours  matktmatique,  1634),  who  wrote  ai,  a$, 
04,  etc.,  and  the  idea  is  even  to  be  found  in  the  Rechenbuch  of  Grammateus  above 
mentioned,  where  the  successive  powers  of  the  unknown  are  denoted  by  pri,  se,  ter,  etc. 
The  use  of  x  for  the  unknown  quantity  began  with  Descartes,  who  first  used  2,  then  y,  and 
then  x  for  this  purpose,  showing  that  he  intentionally  chose  his  unknowns  from  the  last 
letters  of  the  alphabet.  ^/  for  the  square  root  is  traceable  to  Rudolff,  with  whom  it  had 
only  two  strokes,  the  first  (down)  stroke  being  short,  and  the  other  relatively  long. 
1  Thus  Muhammad  b.  Musa  states  in  words  the  following  solution. 

^+10^  =  39, 
xz+  10^+25=64; 
therefore  x  +  5  =  8, 


NOTATION   AND   DEFINITIONS   OF  DIOPHANTUS      51 

Second  Stage.  As  an  example  of  Diophantus  I  give  a  trans- 
lation word  for  word  of  II.  8.  So  as  to  make  the  symbols  correspond 
exactly  I  use  5  (Square)  for  Jr  (Svvafus),  N  (Number)  for  9,  U 
(Units)  for  M  (^o^aSe?). 

"To  divide  the  proposed  square  into  two  squares.  Let  it  be 
proposed  then  to  divide  16  into  two  squares.  And  let  the  first  be 
supposed  to  be  \S\  therefore  the  second  will  be  16  U—  1 5.  Thus 
16  U  —  i  5  must  be  equal  to  a  square.  I  form  the  square  from  any 
number  of  N's  minus  as  many  (7's  as  there  are  in  the  side  of 
1 6  £/'s.  Suppose  this  to  be  2/V  —  ^U.  Thus  the  square  itself  will 
be  4S  i6U-  \6N.  These  are  equal  to  i6U-  I  S.  Add  to  each 
the  negative  term  (77  Xen/rt?,  the  deficiency)  and  take  likes  from 
likes.  Thus  56"  are  equal  to  i6N,  and  the  N  is  16  fifths.  One 
[square]  will  be  ^,  and  the  other  l-gg,  and  the  sum  of  the  two 
makes  up  4^°,  or  \6U,  and  each  of  the  two  is  a  square." 

Of  the  third  stage  any  exemplification  is  unnecessary. 

To  the  form  of  Diophantus'  notation  is  due  the  fact  that  he 
is  unable  to  introduce  into  his  solutions  more  than  one  unknown 
quantity.  This  limitation  has  made  his  procedure  often  very  dif- 
ferent from  our  modern  work.  In  the  first  place  we  can  begin 
with  any  number  of  unknown  quantities  denoted  by  different 
symbols,  and  eliminate  all  of  them  but  one  by  gradual  steps  in  the 
course  of  the  work ;  Diophantus  on  the  other  hand  has  to  perform 
all  his  eliminations  beforehand,  as  a  preliminary  to  the  actual 
work,  by  expressing  every  quantity  which  occurs  in  the  problem 
in  terms  of  only  one  unknown.  This  is  the  case  in  the  great 
majority  of  questions  of  the  first  Book,  which  involve  the  solu- 
tion of  determinate  simultaneous  equations  of  the  first  degree 
with  two,  three,  or  four  variables;  all  these  Diophantus  expresses 
in  terms  of  one  unknown,  and  then  proceeds  to  find  it  from  a 
simple  equation.  Secondly,  however,  this  limitation  affects  much  of 
Diophantus'  work  injuriously;  for,  when  he  handles  problems  which 
are  by  nature  indeterminate  and  would  lead  with  our  notation  to  an 
indeterminate  equation  containing  two  or  three  unknowns,  he  is 
compelled  by  limitation  of  notation  to  assume  for  one  or  other  of 
these  some  particular  number  arbitrarily  chosen,  the  effect  of  the 
assumption  being  to  make  the  problem  a  determinate  one.  How- 
ever, it  is  but  fair  to  say  that  Diophantus,  in  assigning  an  arbitrary 
value  to  a  quantity,  is  careful  to  tell  us  so,  saying,  "for  such  and 
such  a  quantity  we  put  any  number  whatever,  say  such  and  such  a 

4—2 


52  INTRODUCTION 

number."  Thus  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  there  is  (as  a  rule)  any 
loss  of  generality.  We  may  say,  then,  that  in  general  Diophantus  is 
obliged  to  express  all  his  unknowns  in  terms,  or  as  functions,  of 
one  variable.  He  compels  our  admiration  by  the  clever  devices 
by  which  he  contrives  so  to  express  them  in  terms  of  his  single 
unknown,  9,  as  to  satisfy  by  that  very  expression  of  them  all 
conditions  of  the  problem  except  one,  which  then  enables  us  to 
complete  the  solution  by  determining  the  value  of  9.  Another 
consequence  of  Diophantus'  want  of  other  symbols  besides  9  to 
express  more  variables  than  one  is  that,  when  (as  often  happens) 
it  is  necessary  in  the  course  of  a  problem  to  work  out  a  subsidiary 
problem  in  order  to  obtain  the  coefficients  etc.  in  the  functions  of  9 
which  express  the  numbers  to  be  found,  the  unknown  quantity 
which  it  is  the  object  of  the  new  subsidiary  problem  to  find  is  also 
in  its  turn  denoted  by  the  same  symbol  9 ;  hence  we  often  have 
in  the  same  problem  the  same  variable  9  used  with  two  different 
meanings.  This  is  an  obvious  inconvenience  and  might  lead  to 
confusion  in  the  mind  of  a  careless  reader.  Again  we  find  two 
cases,  II.  28  and  29,  where  for  the  proper  working-out  of  the 
problem  two  unknowns  are  imperatively  necessary.  We  should  of 
course  use  x  andjp;  but  Diophantus  calls  the  first  9  as  usual;  the 
second,  for  want  of  a  term,  he  agrees  to  call  "one  unit"  i.e.  I. 
Then,  later,  having  completed  the  part  of  the  solution  necessary  to 
find  9,  he  substitutes  its  value,  and  uses  9  over  again  to  denote 
what  he  had  originally  called  "  I " — the  second  variable — and  so 
finds  it.  This  is  the  most  curious  case  of  all,  and  the  way  in  which 
Diophantus,  after  having  worked  with  this  "  I  "  along  with  other 
numerals,  is  yet  able  to  put  his  finger  upon  the  particular  place 
where  it  has  passed  to,  so  as  to  substitute  9  for  it,  is  very  remark- 
able. This  could  only  be  possible  in  particular  cases  such  as  those 
which  I  have  mentioned;  but,  even  here;  it  seems  scarcely  possible 
now  to  work  out  the  problem  by  using  x  and  I  for  the  variables 
as  originally  taken  by  Diophantus  without  falling  into  confusion. 
Perhaps,  however,  in  working  out  the  problems  before  writing  them 
down  as  we  have  them  Diophantus  may  have  given  the  "  I "  which 
stood  for  a  variable  some  mark  by  which  he  could  recognise  it 
and  distinguish  it  from  other  numbers. 

Diophantus  will  have  in  his  solutions  no  numbers  whatever 
except  "rational"  numbers;  and  in  pursuance  of  this  restriction  he 
excludes  not  only  surds  and  imaginary  quantities,  but  also  negative 
quantities.  Of  a  negative  quantity  per  se,  i.e.  without  some  positive 


NOTATION  AND   DEFINITIONS   OF   DIOPHANTUS       53 

quantity  to  subtract  it  from,  Diophantus  had  apparently  no  con- 
ception. Such  equations  then  as  lead  to  surd,  imaginary,  or 
negative  roots  he  regards  as  useless  for  his  purpose:  the  solution 
is  in  these  cases  aSui/aro?,  impossible.  So  we  find  him  (v.  2) 
describing  the  equation  4  =  4^+20  as  aroTros,  absurd,  because  it 
would  give  x  =  —  ^.  Diophantus  makes  it  his  object  throughout 
to  obtain  solutions  in  rational  numbers,  and  we  find  him  frequently 
giving,  as  a  preliminary,  the  conditions  which  must  be  satisfied  in 
order  to  secure  a  result  rational  in  his  sense  of  the  word.  In  the 
great  majority  of  cases,  when  Diophantus  arrives  in  the  course  of 
a  solution  at  an  equation  which  would  give  an  irrational  result,  he 
retraces  his  steps  and  finds  out  how  his  equation  has  arisen,  and 
how  he  may,  by  altering  the  previous  work,  substitute  for  it 
another  which  shall  give  a  rational  result.  This  gives  rise,  in 
general,  to  a  subsidiary  problem  the  solution  of  which  ensures 
a  rational  result  for  the  problem  itself.  Though,  however,  Dio- 
phantus has  no  notation  for  a  surd,  and  does  not  admit  surd 
results,  it  is  scarcely  true  to  say  that  he  makes  no  use  of  quadratic 
equations  which  lead  to  such  results.  Thus,  for  example,  in  V.  30 
he  solves  such  an  equation  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  see  to  what 
integers  the  solution  would  approximate  most  nearly. 


CHAPTER   IV 

DIOPHANTUS'  METHODS   OF   SOLUTION 

BEFORE  I  give  an  account  in  detail  of  the  different  methods 
which  Diophantus  employs  for  the  solution  of  his  problems,  so  far 
as  they  can  be  classified,  it  is  worth  while  to  quote  some  remarks 
which  Hankel  has  made  in  his  account  of  Diophantus1.  Hankel, 
writing  with  his  usual  brilliancy,  says  in  the  place  referred  to,  "The 
reader  will  now  be  desirous  to  become  acquainted  with  the  classes 
of  indeterminate  problems  which  Diophantus  treats  of,  and  with 
his  methods  of  solution.  As  regards  the  first  point,  we  must  observe 
that  included  in  the  130  (or  so)  indeterminate  problems,  of  which 
Diophantus  treats  in  his  great  work,  there  are  over  50  different 
classes  of  problems,  strung  together  on  no  recognisable  principle 
of  grouping,  except  that  the  solution  of  the  earlier  problems  facili- 
tates that  of  the  later.  The  first  Book  is  confined  to  determinate 
algebraic  equations;  Books  II.  to  v.  contain  for  the  most  part 
indeterminate  problems,  in  which  expressions  involving  in  the  first 
or  second  degree  two  or  more  variables  are  to  be  made  squares  or 
cubes.  Lastly,  Book  VI.  is  concerned  with  right-angled  triangles 
regarded  purely  arithmetically,  in  which  some  linear  or  quadratic 
function  of  the  sides  is  to  be  made  a  square  or  a  cube.  That  is  all 
that  we  can  pronounce  about  this  varied  series  of  problems  without 
exhibiting  singly  each  of  the  fifty  classes.  Almost  more  different 
in  kind  than  the  problems  are  their  solutions,  and  we  are  completely 
unable  to  give  an  even  tolerably  exhaustive  review  of  the  different 
turns  which  his  procedure  takes.  Of  more  general  comprehensive 
methods  there  is  in  our  author  no  trace  discoverable :  every 
question  requires  a  quite  special  method,  which  often  will  not 
serve  even  for  the  most  closely  allied  problems.  It  is  on  that 

1  Zur  Geschichte  der  Mathematik  in  Alterthum  und  Mittelaller,  Leipzig,  1874, 
pp.  164-5. 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF   SOLUTION  55 

account  difficult  for  a  modern  mathematician  even  after  studying 
100  Diophantine  solutions  to  solve  the  icist  problem;  and  if  we 
have  made  the  attempt,  and  after  some  vain  endeavours  read 
Diophantus'  own  solution,  we  shall  be  astonished  to  see  how 
suddenly  he  leaves  the  broad  high-road,  dashes  into  a  side-path 
and  with  a  quick  turn  reaches  the  goal,  often  enough  a  goal  with 
reaching  which  we  should  not  be  content;  we  expected  to  have 
to  climb  a  toilsome  path,  but  to  be  rewarded  at  the  end  by  an 
extensive  view;  instead  of  which  our  guide  leads  by  narrow, 
strange,  but  smooth  ways  to  a  small  eminence;  he  has  finished! 
He  lacks  the  calm  and  concentrated  energy  for  a  deep  plunge 
into  a  single  important  problem ;  and  in  this  way  the  reader  also 
hurries  with  inward  unrest  from  problem  to  problem,  as  in  a 
game  of  riddles,  without  being  able  to  enjoy  the  individual  one. 
Diophantus  dazzles  more  than  he  delights.  He  is  in  a  wonderful 
measure  shrewd,  clever,  quick-sighted,  indefatigable,  but  does  not 
penetrate  thoroughly  or  deeply  into  the  root  of  the  matter.  As 
his  problems  seem  framed  in  obedience  to  no  obvious  scientific 
necessity,  but  often  only  for  the  sake  of  the  solution,  the  solution 
itself  also  lacks  completeness  and  deeper  signification.  He  is  a 
brilliant  performer  in  the  art  of  indeterminate  analysis  invented  by 
him,  but  the  science  has  nevertheless  been  indebted,  at  least  directly, 
to  this  brilliant  genius  for  few  methods,  because  he  was  deficient 
in  the  speculative  thought  which  sees  in  the  True  more  than  the 
Correct.  That  is  the  general  impression  which  I  have  derived  from 
a  thorough  and  repeated  study  of  Diophantus'  arithmetic." 

It  might  be  inferred  from  these  remarks  of  Hankel  that 
Diophantus'  object  was  less  to  teach  methods  than  to  obtain  a 
multitude  of  mere  results.  On  the  other  hand  Nesselmann 
observes1  that  Diophantus,  while  using  (as  he  must)  specific 
numbers  for  numbers  which  are  "  given  "  or  have  to  be  arbitrarily 
assumed,  always  makes  it  clear  how  by  varying  our  initial  as- 
sumptions we  can  obtain  any  number  of  particular  solutions  of 
the  problem,  showing  "that  his  whole  attention  is  directed  to 
the  explanation  of  the  method,  to  which  end  numerical  examples 
only  serve  as  means";  this  is  proved  by  his  frequently  stopping 
short,  when  the  method  has  been  made  sufficiently  clear,  and 
the  remainder  of  the  work  is  mere  straightforward  calculation. 
The  truth  seems  to  be  that  there  is  as  much  in  the  shape  of  general 

1  Algebra  der  Griechen,  pp.  308-9. 


56  INTRODUCTION 

methods  to  be  found  in  Diophantus  as  his  notation  and  the  nature 
of  the  subject  admitted  of.  On  this  point  I  can  quote  no  better 
authority  than  Euler,  who  says1 :  "  Diophantus  himself,  it  is  true, 
gives  only  the  most  special  solutions  of  all  the  questions  which  he 
treats,  and  he  is  generally  content  with  indicating  numbers  which 
furnish  one  single  solution.  But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  his 
method  was  restricted  to  these  very  special  solutions.  In  his 
time  the  use  of  letters  to  denote  undetermined  numbers  was  not 
yet  established,  and  consequently  the  more  general  solutions  which 
we  are  now  enabled  to  give  by  means  of  such  notation  could  not 
be  expected  from  him.  Nevertheless,  the  actual  methods  which  he 
uses  for  solving  any  of  his  problems  are  as  general  as  those  which 
are  in  use  today;  nay,  we  are  obliged  to  admit  that  there  is 
hardly  any  method  yet  invented  in  this  kind  of  analysis  of  which 
there  are  not  sufficiently  distinct  traces  to  be  discovered  in  Dio- 
phantus." 

In  his  8th  chapter,  entitled  "Diophantus' treatment  of  equations2," 
Nesselmann  gives  an  account  of  Diophantus'  solutions  of  (i)  Deter- 
minate, (2)  Indeterminate  equations,  classified  according  to  their 
kind.  In  chapter  9,  entitled  "Diophantus'  methods  of  solution3," 
he  classifies  these  "  methods  "  as  follows4:  (i)  "  The  adroit  assump- 
tion of  unknowns,"  (2)  "Method  of  reckoning  backwards  and 
auxiliary  questions,"  (3)  "Use  of  the  symbol  for  the  unknown  in 
different  significations,"  (4)  "Method  of  Limits,"  (5)  "Solution  by 
mere  reflection,"  (6)  "Solution  in  general  expressions,"  (7)  "Arbi- 
trary determinations  and  assumptions,"  (8)  "Use  of  the  right- 
angled  triangle." 

At  the  end  of  chapter  8  Nesselmann  observes  that  it  is  not 
his  solutions  of  equations  that  we  have  to  wonder  at,  but  the  art, 
amounting  to  virtuosity,  which  enabled  Diophantus  to  avoid  such 
equations  as  he  could  not  technically  solve.  We  look  (says  Nessel- 
mann) with  astonishment  at  his  operations,  when  he  reduces  the 
most  difficult  problems  by  some  surprising  turn  to  a  quite  simple 

1  Nffvi  Commentarii  Academiae  Petropolitanae,  1756-7,  Vol.  VI.  (1761),  p.  1 55  =  Com- 
mentationes  arithmtticae  collectae  (ed.  Fuss),  1849,  I.  p.  193. 

2  "  Diophant's  Behandlung  der  Gleichungen." 

3  "  Diophant's  Auflbsungsmethoden." 

4  (r)    "Die  geschickte  Annahme  der  Unbekannten,"  (i)   "  Methode  der  Zuriick- 
rechnung  und    Nebenaufgabe,"    (3)    "  Gebrauch   des  Symbols  fur  die    Unbekannte  in 
verschiedenen  Bedeutungen,"  (4)  "Methode  der  Grenzen,"  (5)  "  Auflosung  durch  blosse 
Reflexion,"  (6)  "Auflosung  in  allgemeinen  Ausdriicken,"   (7)  " Willkiihrliche  Bestim- 
mungen  und  Annahmen,"  (8)  "Gebrauch  des  rechtwinkligen  Dreiecks." 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  57 

equation.  Then,  when  in  the  pth  chapter  Nesselmann  passes  to  the 
"methods,"  he  prefaces  it  by  saying:  "To  give  a  complete  picture 
of  Diophantus'  methods  in  all  their  variety  would  mean  nothing  else 
than  copying  his  book  outright.  The  individual  characteristics  of 
almost  every  problem  give  him  occasion  to  try  upon  it  a  peculiar 
procedure  or  found  upon  it  an  artifice  which  cannot  be  applied  to 
any  other  problem....  Mean  while,  though  it  may  be  impossible  to 
exhibit  all  his  methods  in  any  short  space,  yet  I  will  try  to  describe 
some  operations  which  occur  more  often  or  are  particularly  re- 
markable for  their  elegance,  and  (where  possible)  to  bring  out 
the  underlying  scientific  principle  by  a  general  exposition  and  by 
a  suitable  grouping  of  similar  cases  under  common  aspects  or 
characters."  Now  the  possibility  of  giving  a  satisfactory  account  of 
the  methods  of  Diophantus  must  depend  largely  upon  the  meaning 
we  attach  to  the  word  "method."  Nesselmann's  arrangement  seems 
to  me  to  be  faulty  inasmuch  as  (i)  he  has  treated  Diophantus' 
solutions  of  equations,  which  certainly  proceeded  on  fixed  rules, 
and  therefore  by  "method"  separately  from  what  he  calls  "methods 
of  solution,"  thereby  making  it  appear  as  though  he  did  not 
look  upon  the  "treatment  of  equations"  as  "methods";  (2)  the 
classification  of  the  "Methods  of  solution"  seems  unsatisfactory. 
Some  of  the  latter  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  methods  of  solution  at 
all;  thus  the  third, "  Use  of  the  symbol  for  the  unknown  in  different 
significations,"  might  be  more  justly  described  as  a  "hindrance  to 
the  solution";  it  is  an  inconvenience  to  which  Diophantus  was 
subjected  owing  to  the  want  of  notation.  -Indeed,  on  the  as- 
sumption of  the  eight  "methods,"  as  Nesselmann  describes  them, 
it  is  really  not  surprising  that  no  complete  account  of  them 
could  be  given  without  copying  the  whole  book.  To  take  the 
first,  "the  adroit  assumption  of  unknowns."  Supposing  that  a 
number  of  essentially  different  problems  are  proposed,  the  differences 
make  a  different  choice  of  an  unknown  in  each  case  absolutely 
necessary.  That  being  so,  how  could  a  rule  be  given  for  all  cases? 
The  best  that  can  be  done  is  to  give  a  number  of  typical  instances. 
Precisely  the  same  remark  applies  to  "methods"  (2),  (5),  (6),  (7). 
The  case  of  (4),  "  Method  of  Limits,"  is  different ;  here  we  have 
a  "  method  "  in  the  true  sense  of  the  term,  Le.  in  the  sense  of  an 
instrument  for  solution.  And  accordingly  in  this  case  the  method 
can  be  exhibited,  as  I  hope  to  show  later  on;  (8)  also  deserves 
to  some  extent  the  name  of  a  "  method." 


58  INTRODUCTION 

In  one  particular  case,  Diophantus  formally  states  a  method  or 
rule ;  this  is  his  rule  for  solving  what  he  calls  a  "  double-equation," 
and  will  be  found  in  II.  1 1,  where  such  an  equation  appears  for  the 
first  time.  Apart  from  this,  we  do  not  find  in  Diophantus'  work 
statements  of  method  put  generally  as  book-work  to  be  applied  to 
examples.  Thus  we  do  not  find  the  separate  rules  and  limitations 
for  the  solution  of  different  kinds  of  equations  systematically 
arranged,  but  we  have  to  seek  them  out  laboriously  from  the 
whole  of  his  work,  gathering  scattered  indications  here  and  there, 
and  to  formulate  them  in  the  best  way  that  we  can. 

I  shall  now  attempt  to  give  a  short  account  of  those  methods 
running  through  Diophantus  which  admit  of  general  statement. 
For  the  reasons  which  I  have  stated,  my  arrangement  will  be 
different  from  that  of  Nesselmann  ;  I  shall  omit  some  of  the  heads 
in  his  classification  of  "methods  of  solution";  and,  in  accordance 
with  his  remark  that  these  "methods"  can  only  be  adequately 
described  by  a  transcription  of  the  entire  work,  I  shall  leave  them 
to  be  gathered  from  a  perusal  of  my  reproduction  of  Diophantus' 
book. 

I  shall  begin  my  account  with 


I.    DIOPHANTUS'  TREATMENT  OF  EQUATIONS. 

This  subject  falls  naturally  into  two  divisions:  (A)  Determinate 
equations  of  different  degrees,  (B)  Indeterminate  equations. 


(A)     Determinate  equations. 

Diophantus  was  able  without  difficulty  to  solve  determinate 
equations  of  the  first  and  second  degrees;  of  a  cubic  equation  we 
find  in  his  Arithmetica  only  one  example,  and  that  is  a  very 
special  case.  The  solution  of  simple  equations  we  may  pass  over; 
we  have  then  to  consider  Diophantus'  methods  of  solution  in  the 
case  of  (i)  Pure  equations,  (2)  Adfected,  or  mixed,  quadratics. 

(i)     Pure  determinate  equations. 

By  pure  equations  I  mean  those  equations  which  contain  only 
one  power  of  the  unknown,  whatever  the  degree.  The  solution  is 
effected  in  the  same  way  whatever  the  exponent  of  the  term  in  the 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  59 

unknown;  and  Diophantus  treats  pure  equations  of  any  degree 
as  if  they  were  simple  equations  of  the  first  degree. 

He  gives  a  general  rule  for  this  case  without  regard  to  the 
degree1:  "If  a  problem  leads  to  an  equation  in  which  any  terms 
are  equal  to  the  same  terms  but  have  different  coefficients,  we  must 
take  like  from  like  on  both  sides,  until  we  get  one  term  equal  to 
one  term.  But,  if  there  are  on  one  side  or  on  both  sides  any  negative 
terms,  the  deficient  terms  must  be  added  on  both  sides  until  all  the 
terms  on  both  sides  are  positive.  Then  we  must  take  like  from  like 
until  one  term  is  left  on  each  side."  After  these  operations  have 
been  performed,  the  equation  is  reduced  to  the  form  Axm  =  B  and 
is  considered  solved.  The  cases  which  occur  in  Diophantus  are 
cases  in  which  the  value  of  x  is  found  to  be  a  rational  number, 
integral  or  fractional.  Diophantus  only  recognises  one  value  of  x 
which  satisfies  this  equation;  thus,  if  m  is  even,  he  gives  only  the 
positive  value,  excluding  a  negative  value  as  "impossible."  In  the 
same  way,  when  an  equation  can  be  reduced  in  degree  by  dividing 
throughout  by  any  power  of  x,  the  possible  values,  x=o,  thus 
arising  are  not  taken  into  account.  Thus  an  equation  of  the  form 
x*  =  ax,  which  is  of  common  occurrence  in  the  earlier  part  of  the 
book,  is  taken  to  be  merely  equivalent  to  the  simple  equation  x=a. 

It  may  be  observed  that  the  greater  proportion  of  the  problems 
in  Book  I.  are  such  that  more  than  one  unknown  quantity  is  sought. 
Now,  when  there  are  two  unknowns  and  two  conditions,  both 
unknowns  can  easily  be  expressed  in  terms  of  one  symbol.  But, 
when  there  are  three  or  four  quantities  to  be  found,  this  reduction 
is  much  more  difficult,  and  Diophantus  shows  great  adroitness  in 
effecting  it:  the  ultimate  result  being  that  it  is  only  necessary 
to  solve  a  simple  equation  with  one  unknown  quantity. 

(2)    Mixed  quadratic  equations. 

After  the  remarks  in  Def.  1 1  upon  the  reduction  of  equations 
until  we  have  one  term  equal  to  another  term,  Diophantus 
adds2:  "But  we  will  show  you  afterwards  how,  in  the  case  also 
when  two  terms  are  left  equal  to  a  single  term,  such  an  equation 
can  be  solved."  That  is  to  say,  he  promises  to  explain  the 
solution  of  a  mixed  quadratic  equation.  In  the  Arithmetica, 
as  we  possess  the  book,  this  promise  is  not  fulfilled.  The  first 

1  Def.  ii. 

*  fcrrepo*'  &  eroi  Sfl&nev  /tot  TWJ  Suo  eiSwv  tffuv  evl  KaraXfi^vruv  TO  TOIOVTOV  Xi/erot. 


60  INTRODUCTION 

indications  we  have  on  the  subject  are  a  number  of  cases  in  which 
the  equation  is  given,  and  the  solution  written  down,  or  stated  to 
be  rational,  without  any  work  being  shown.  Thus 

(IV.  22)  x*  =  4JF  —  4,  therefore  x  =  2 ; 

(IV.  31)  325^  =  3^+18,  therefore  x  =  $fc  or  &; 

(vi.  6)  84*2  +  7.^  =  7,  whence x=\; 

(vi.  7)  84*2  -  7-*-=  7,  hence  .*•  =  £ ; 

(VI.  9)  630.^2  -  fix  =  6,  therefore  .ar  =  -^  ; 

and  (vi.  8)  630.^2  +  73^  =  6,  and  x  is  rational. 

These  examples,  though  proving  that  Diophantus  had  somehow 
arrived  at  the  result,  are  not  in  themselves  sufficient  to  show  that 
he  was  necessarily  acquainted  with  a  regular  method  for  the 
solution  of  quadratics ;  these  solutions  might  (though  their  variety 
makes  it  somewhat  unlikely)  have  been  obtained  by  mere  trial. 
That,  however,  Diophantus'  solutions  of  mixed  quadratics  were  not 
merely  empirical  is  shown  by  instances  in  V.  30.  In  this  problem 
he  shows  that  he  could  approximate  to  the  root  in  cases  where  it  is 
not  "  rational."  As  this  is  an  important  point,  I  give  the  substance 
of  the  passage  in  question:  "This  is  not  generally  possible  unless 
we  contrive  to  make  x.  >  |  (x°-  —  60)  and  <  \  (x^  —  60).  Let  then 
x*  —  60  be  >  5*,  but  x*  —  60 <  $>x.  Since  then  xz-6o>  $x,  let  60  be 
added  to  both  sides,  so  that  &  >  $x  +  60,  or  x*=$x  +  some  number 
>  60;  therefore  x  must  not  be  less  than  n."  In  like  manner 
Diophantus  concludes  that  "x*  =  Sx+  some  number  less  than  60 ; 
therefore  x  must  be  found  to  be  not  greater  than  1 2." 

Now,  solving  for  the  positive  roots  of  these  two  equations,  we 
have 

x  >  2  (5  +  V265)  and  x  <  4  +  ^76, 
or  x>  10*6394. ..  and  x<  127177.... 

It  is  clear  that  x  may  be  <  1 1  or  >  1 2,  and  therefore  Dio- 
phantus' limits  are  not  strictly  accurate.  As  however  it  was 
doubtless  his  object  to  find  integral  limits,  the  limits  u  and  12 
are  those  which  are  obviously  adapted  for  his  purpose,  and  are 
a  fortiori  safe. 

In  the  above  equations  the  other  roots  obtained  by  prefixing 
the  negative  sign  to  the  radical  are  negative  and  therefore  would 
be  of  no  use  to  Diophantus.  In  other  cases  of  the  kind  occurring 


DIOPHANTUS'    METHODS   OF   SOLUTION  61 

in  Book  V.  the  equations  have  both  roots  positive,  and  we  have  to 
consider  why  Diophantus  took  no  account  of  the  smaller  roots  in 
those  cases. 

We  will  take  first  the  equations  in  V.  10  where  the  inequalities 
to  be  satisfied  are 

17    ........................  (i). 

19    ........................  (2). 

Now,  if  a,  /8  be  the  roots  of  the  equation 

x-  —px  +  q  =  o  (p,  q  both  positive), 
and  if  a  >  fi,  then 

(a)  in  order  that  x"2-  —  px  +  q  may  be  >  o 

we  must  have  x>  a  or  <  /3, 
and    (b)  in  order  that  x*  —  px  +  q  may  be  <  o 

we  must  have  x  <  a  and  >  /9. 
(i)     The  roots  of  the  equation 

—  J2X+  17  =o 


36  +  V  1007  ,     6773...        ,4-26... 

are  —  -  --  -  ;  that  is,    '  '  J  —  and  -    —  ; 

17  17  17 

and,  in  order  that  ijx*  —  72^+  17  may  be.<  o,  we  must  have 


(2)     The  roots  of  the  equation 

19=0 


that  .    66-577...  and 


19  19  19 

and,  in  order  that  ic^tr2  —  J2X  +  19  may  be  >  o,  we  must  have 

x>  66^77^  Qr<  5-422^ 
19  19 

Diophantus  says  that  x  must  not  be  greater  than  f|  or  less  than 
ff  .  These  are  again  doubtless  intended  to  be  a  fortiori  limits  ; 
but  ff  should  have  been  f£,  and  the  more  correct  way  of  stating  the 
case  would  be  to  say  that,  if  x  is  not  greater  than  ff  and  not  less 
than  \\,  the  given  conditions  are  a  fortiori  satisfied. 

Now  consider  what  alternative  (if  any)  could  be  obtained,  on 
Diophantus'  principles,  if  we  used  the  lesser  positive  roots  of  the 


62  INTRODUCTION 

equations.     If,  like  Diophantus,  we  were  to  take  a  fortiori  limits, 
we  should  have  to  say 

^<T5gbut>^, 

which  is  of  course  an  impossibility.     Therefore  the  smaller  roots 
are  here  useless  from  his  point  of  view. 

This  is,  however,  not  so   in  the  case   of  another  pair  of  in- 
equalities, used  later  in  V.  30  for  finding  an  auxiliary  x,  namely 

X*  +  60  >  22X, 


The  roots  of  the  equation 

X*  —  22X  +  6O  =  O 

are  ii  +  V6i  ;  that  is,  i8'8i...  and  3'i8...; 
and  the  roots  of  the  equation  x*  -  2<\x  +  60  =  o 

are  12  +  \/84;  that  is,  2ri6...  and  2-83.... 
In  order  therefore  to  satisfy  the  above  inequalities  we  must  have 

x>  i8'8i  ...  or  <  3'i8..., 
and  x<  2i'i6  ...  but  >  2-83. 

Diophantus,  taking  a  fortiori  integral  limits  furnished  by  the 
greater  roots,  says  that  x  must  not  be  less  than  19  but  must  be 
less  than  21.  But  he  could  also  have  obtained  from  the  smaller 
roots  an  integral  value  of  x  satisfying  the  necessary  conditions, 
namely  the  value  x  =  3  ;  and  this  would  have  had  the  advantage 
of  giving  a  smaller  value  for  the  auxiliary  x  than  that  actually 
taken,  namely  2O1.  Accordingly  the  question  has  been  raised2 
whether  we  have  not  here,  perhaps,  a  valid  reason  for  believing 
that  Diophantus  only  knew  of  the  existence  of  roots  obtained  by 
using  the  positive  sign  with  the  radical,  and  was  unaware  of  the 
solution  obtained  by  using  the  negative  sign.  But  in  truth  we 
can  derive  no  certain  knowledge  on  this  point  from  Diophantus' 
treatment  of  the  particular  equations  in  question.  Thus,  e.g.,  if  he 
chose  to  use  the  first  of  the  two  equations 

17, 
19, 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  an  upper  limit  only,  and  the  second 

1  This   is  remarked  by  Loria    (Le    scienze    esatte    delP  antica   Grecia,   V.  p.  128). 
But  in  fact,   whether  we  take  20  or  3  as  the  value  of  the  auxiliary  unknown,  we  get 
the  same  value  for  the  original  .r  of  the  problem.     For  the  original  x  has  to  be  found 
from  x*-6o=(x-m)*  where  m  is  the  auxiliary.*;  and  we  obtain  x=  n£  whether  we 
put  .r2  -  60  =  (.*•-  2  o)2  or  x'2-6o  =  (x-3)2. 

2  Loria,  op.  cit.  p.  129. 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  63 

for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  lower  limit  only,  he  could  only  use 
the  values  obtained  by  using  the  positive  sign.  Similarly,  if,  with 

the  equations 

x2  +  6o>  22.x, 

x*  +  60  <  24*, 

he  chose  to  use  the  first  in  order  to  find  a  lower  limit  only,  and 
the  second  in  order  to  find  an  upper  limit  only,  it  was  not  open  to 
him  to  use  the  values  corresponding  to  the  negative  sign1. 

For  my  part,  I  find  it  difficult  or  impossible  to  believe  that 
Diophantus  was  unaware  of  the  existence  of  two  real  roots  in 
such  cases.  The  numerical  solution  of  quadratic  equations  by  the 
Greeks  immediately  followed,  if  it  did  not  precede,  their  geometrical 
solution.  We  find  the  geometrical  equivalent  of  the  solution  of 
a  quadratic  assumed  as  early  as  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  namely  by 
Hippocrates  of  Chios  in  his  Quadrature  of  limes*,  the  algebraic  form 
of  the  particular  equation  being  ^2  +  Vf  -ax  =  a'i.  The  complete 
geometrical  solution  was  given  by  Euclid  in  VI.  27-29:  and  the 
construction  of  VI.  28  corresponds  in  fact  to  the  negative  sign 
before  the  radical  in  the  case  of  the  particular  equation  there 
solved,  while  a  quite  obvious  and  slight  variation  of  the  con- 
struction would  give  the  solution  corresponding  to  the  positive  sign. 
In  VI.  29  the  solution  corresponds  to  the  positive  sign  before  the 
radical;  in  the  case  of  the  equation  there  dealt  with  the  other  sign 
would  not  give  a  "real"  solution3.  It  is  true  that  we  do  not  find 
the  negative  sign  taken  in  Heron  any  more  than  in  Diophantus, 
though  we  find  Heron4  stating  an  approximate  solution  of  the 
equation 

x  (  1  4  -  x)  =  6/2O/  144, 

without  showing  how  he  arrived  at  it;  x  is,  he  says,  approximately 
equal  to  8£.  It  is  clear  however  that  Heron  already  possessed 
a  scientific  method  of  solution.  Again,  the  author  of  the  so-called 
Geometry  of  Heron5  practically  states  the  solution  of  the  equation 

212 


r  A/  (  154  X  212  +  841)  —  20 

in  the  form  x=     v       -  —  —  -  -, 

ii 

1  Enestrom  in  Bibliotheca  Mathematica  IX3,  1908-9,  pp.  71-2. 

2  Simplicius,  Comment,  in  Aristot.  Phys.,  ed.  Diels,  p.  64,  t8;  Rudio,  Der  Bericht 
des  Simplicius  iiber  die  Quadraluren  des  Antiphon  und  des  Hippokrates,  1907,  p.  58,8-11. 

3  The  Thirteen  Books  of  Euclid's  Elements,  Cambridge,  1908,  Vol.  II.  pp.  257-267. 

4  Heron,  Metrica,  ed.  Schdne,  pp.  148-151.     The  text  has  8  as  the  approximate  solu- 
tion, but  the  correction  is  easy,  as  the  inference  immediately  drawn  is  that  \\-x=§\. 

6  Heron,  ed.  Hultsch,  p.  133,  10-23.    See  M.  Cantor,  Geschichte  der  Math.  I3,  p.  405. 


64  INTRODUCTION 

showing  pretty  clearly  the  rule  followed  after  the  equation  had 
been  written  in  the  form 

121^  +  638^  =  212  x  154. 

We  cannot  credit  Diophantus  with  less  than  a  similar  uniform 
method  ;  and,  if  he  did  not  trouble  to  give  two  roots  where  both 
were  real,  this  seems  quite  explicable  when  it  is  remembered  that  he 
did  not  write  a  text-book  of  algebra,  and  that  his  object  through- 
out is  to  obtain  a  single  solution  of  his  problems,  not  to  multiply 
solutions  or  to  show  how  many  can  be  found  in  each  case. 

In  solving  such  an  equation  as 

ax1  —  bx  +  c  =  o, 

it  is  our  modern  practice  to  divide  out  by  a  in  order  to  make  the 
first  term  a  square.  It  does  not  appear  that  Diophantus  divided 
out  by  a\  rather  he  multiplied  by  a  so  as  to  bring  the  equation 
into  the  form 

cPx?  —  abx  +  ac  =  o  ; 
then,  solving,  he  found 


and  wrote  the  solution  in  the  form 


a 

wherein  his  method  corresponds  to  that  of  the  Pseudo-Heron  above 
referred  to. 

From  the  rule  given  in  Def.  1  1  for  removing  by  means  of  addition 
any  negative  terms  on  either  side  of  an  equation  and  taking  equals 
from  equals  (operations  called  by  the  Arabians  aljabr  and  almukd- 
bala)  it  is  clear  that,  as  a  preliminary  to  solution,  Diophantus  so 
arranged  his  equation  that  all  the  terms  were  positive.  Thus, 
from  his  point  of  view,  there  are  three  cases  of  mixed  quadratic 
equations. 

Case  I.     Form  mx?+px=q;  the  root  is 


m 

according  to  Diophantus.  An  instance  is  afforded  by  vi.  6.  Dio- 
phantus namely  arrives  at  the  equation  6x*  +  yc  =  7,  which,  if  it  is 
to  be  of  any  service  to  his  solution,  should  give  a  rational  value 
of  x  ;  whereupon  he  says  "  the  square  of  half  the  coefficient1  of  x 

1  For   "  coefficient  "   Diophantus   simply   uses   ir\rj6os,   multitude   or  number  ;  thus 
"number  of  dpiO/ioi  "  =  coeff.  of  x.     The  absolute  term  is  described  as  the  "units." 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS  OF  SOLUTION  65 

together  with  the  product  of  the  absolute  term  and  the  coefficient 
of  x?  must  be  a  square  number ;  but  it  is  not,"  i.e.  \jp  +  mq,  or  in 
this  case  (|)2  +  42,  must  be  a  square  in  order  that  the  root  may  be 
rational,  which  in  this  case  it  is  not. 

Case  2.     Form  mx*  =px  +  q.     Diophantus  takes 


An  example  is  IV.  39,  where  2^2>6>+i8.  Diophantus  says: 
"To  solve  this  take  the  square  of  half  the  coefficient  of  x,  i.e.  9,  and 
the  product  of  the  absolute  term  and  the  coefficient  of  x*,  i.e.  36. 
Adding,  we  have  45,  the  square  root1  of  which  is  not2  <  7.  Add 
half  the  coefficient  of  x,  [and  divide  by  the  coefficient  of  x*\  ;  whence 
x  is  not  <  5."  Here  the  form  of  the  root  is  given  completely  ;  and 
the  whole  operation  of  finding  it  is  revealed.  Cf.  IV.  31,  where 
Diophantus  remarks  that  the  equation  5^r2=3^r+  18  "is  not  rational. 
But  5,  the  coefficient  of  x*,  is  a  square  plus  I,  and  it  is  necessary 
that  this  coefficient  multiplied  by  the  18  units  and  then  added  to 
the  square  of  half  the  coefficient  of  x,  namely  3,  that  is  to  say  2$, 
shall  make  a  square." 

Case  3.     Form  mx*  +  q  =px.     Diophantus'  root  is 


Cf.  in  V.  10  the  equation  already  mentioned,  1  7^r2  +  1  7 
Diophantus  says:  "  Multiply  half  the  coefficient  of  x  into  itself  and 
we  have  1296;  subtract  the  product  of  the  coefficient  of  x*  and  the 
absolute  term,  or  289.  The  remainder  is  1007,  the  square  root  of 
which  is  not3  >  31.  Add  half  the  coefficient  of  x,  and  the  result  is 
not  >  67.  Divide  by  the  coefficient  of  ;r2,  and  x  is  not  >  67/17." 
Here  again  we  have  the  complete  solution  given.  Cf.  VI.  22,  where, 
having  arrived  at  the  equation  172^=336^+24,  Diophantus 
remarks  that  "this  is  not  always  possible,  unless  half  the  coefficient 
of  x  multiplied  into  itself,  minus  the  product  of  the  coefficient  of  x* 
and  the  units,  makes  a  square." 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison  with  Diophantus'  solutions  of 
quadratic  equations  we  may  refer  to  a  few  of  his  solutions  of 

1  The  "  square  root"  is  with  Diophantus  TrXeupd,  or  "side." 

2  7,  though  not  accurate,  is  clearly  the  nearest  integral  limit   which  will  serve  the 
purpose. 

3  As  before,  the  nearest  integral  limit. 

H.  D.  5 


66  INTRODUCTION 

(3)     Simultaneous  equations  involving  quadratics. 
Under  this  heading  come  the  pairs  of  equations 


I  use  Greek  letters  to  distinguish  the  numbers  which  the 
problem  requires  us  to  find  from  the  one  unknown  which  Dio- 
phantus  uses  and  which  I  shall  call  x. 

In  the  first  two  of  the  above  problems,  he  chooses  his  x  thus. 
Let,  he  says, 


Then  it  follows,  by  addition  and  subtraction,  that 

£  =  a  +  x,     r)  =  a  —  x. 
Consequently,  in  I.  27, 

£7  =  (a  +  x)  (a  -x)  =  a>-x*  =  B, 
and  x  is  found  from  this  "pure"  quadratic  equation. 

If  we  eliminate  £  from  the  original  equations,  we  have 

if  -  2ai)  +  B  =  o, 
which  we  should  solve  by  completing  the  square  (a  —  T/)2,  whence 

(a-^^tf-B, 
which  is  Diophantus'  ultimate  equation  with  a  —  tj  for  x. 

Thus  Diophantus'  method  corresponds  here  again  to  the  ordi- 
nary method  of  solving  a  mixed  quadratic,  by  which  we  make  it 
into  a  pure  quadratic  with  a  different  x. 

In  I.  30  Diophantus  puts  £  +  i\  =  2;r,  and  the  solution  proceeds 
in  the  same  way  as  in  I.  27. 

In  I.  28  the  resulting  equation  in  x  is 

x?=  2  (a*  +*2)  =B. 


(4)     Cubic  equation. 

There  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  Diophantus  was  acquainted 

with  the  algebraical  solution  of  a  cubic  equation.    It  is  true  that  there 

is  one  cubic  equation  to  be  found  in  the  Arithmetica,  but  it  is  only 

a  very  particular  case.     In  VI.  17  the  problem  leads  to  the  equation 

x*  +  2x  +  3  =  xs  +  ix  -  3**  -  i, 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS  OF  SOLUTION  67 

and  Diophantus  says  simply  "whence  x  is  found  to  be  4."  All 
that  can  be  said  of  this  is  that,  if  we  write  the  equation  in  true 
Diophantine  fashion,  so  that  all  the  terms  are  positive, 

x3  +  x  =  4*2  +  4. 
This  equation  being  clearly  equivalent  to 


Diophantus  no  doubt  detected  the  presence  of  the  common  factor 
on  both  sides  of  the  equation.  The  result  of  dividing  by  it 
is  x=  4,  which  is  Diophantus'  solution.  Of  the  other  two  roots 
x=  ±  v'(—  i)  no  account  is  taken,  for  the  reason  stated  above. 

It  is  not  possible  to  judge  from  this  example  how  far  Dio- 
phantus was  acquainted  with  the  solution  of  equations  of  a  degree 
higher  than  the  second. 

I  pass  now  to  the  second  general  division  of  equations. 

(B)     Indeterminate  equations. 

As  I  have  already  stated,  Diophantus  does  not,  in  his 
Arithmetica  as  we  have  it,  treat  of  indeterminate  equations  of  the 
first  degree.  Those  examples  in  Book  I.  which  would  lead  to  such 
equations  are,  by  the  arbitrary  assumption  of  a  specific  value  for 
one  of  the  required  numbers,  converted  into  determinate  equations. 
Nor  is  it  likely  that  indeterminate  equations  of  the  first  degree 
were  treated  of  in  the  lost  Books.  For,  as  Nesselmann  observes, 
while  with  indeterminate  quadratic  equations  the  object  is  to  obtain 
a  rational  result,  the  whole  point  in  solving  indeterminate  simple 
equations  is  to  obtain  a  result  in  integral  numbers.  But  Diophantus 
does  not  exclude  fractional  solutions,  and  he  has  therefore  only  to 
see  that  his  results  are  positive,  which  is  of  course  easy.  Inde- 
terminate equations  of  the  first  degree  would  therefore,  from 
Diophantus'  point  of  view,  have  no  particular  significance.  We 
take  therefore,  as  our  first  division,  indeterminate  equations  of 
the  second  degree. 

(a)  Indeterminate  equations  of  tJte  second  degree. 
The  form  in  which  these  equations  occur  in  Diophantus  is 
invariably  this:  one  or  two  (but  never  more)  functions  of  the 
unknown  quantity  of  the  form  Ax*  +  Bx  +  C  or  simpler  forms 
are  to  be  made  rational  square  numbers  by  finding  a  suitable 
value  for  x.  Thus  the  most  general  case  is  that  of  solving  one  or 
two  equations  of  the  form  Ax*  +  Bx  +  C=y*. 

5—2 


68  INTRODUCTION 

(i)     Single  equation. 

The  single  equation  takes  special  forms  when  one  or  more  of 
the  coefficients  vanish  or  satisfy  certain  conditions.  It  will  be  well 
to  give  in  order  the  different  forms  as  they  can  be  identified  in 
Diophantus,  premising  that  for  "  =  j2"  Diophantus  simply  uses  the 
formula  ia~ov  rerpayoovo),  "  is  equal  to  a  square,"  or  iroiel  rerpdytavov, 
"  makes  a  square." 

I.  Equations  which  can  always  be  solved  rationally.  This  is 
the  case  when  A  or  C  or  both  vanish. 

Form  Bx=y*.  Diophantus  puts  for  j2  any  arbitrary  square 
number,  say  m*.  Then  x  =  m*\B. 

Ex.  III.  5:  2x=yz,  y  is  assumed  to  be  16,  and  ;r=  8. 

Form  Bx+  C=y*.  Diophantus  puts  for  y*  any  square  nP,  and 
x=(m*—C)IB.  He  admits  fractional  values  of  x,  only  taking 
care  that  they  are  "rational,"  i.e.  rational  and  positive. 

Ex.  III.  6:  6x+  i  =y*  =  121,  say,  and  x=  20. 

Form  Axz  +  Bx=y*.  Diophantus  substitutes  for  y  any  multiple 
of  x,  as  —  x;  whence  Ax  +  B  =  —^  x,  the  factor  x  disappearing  and 

the  root  x  =  o  being  neglected  as  usual.     Thus  x  —  — - — -^. 


Exx.  II.  21:     43?+  yc  =jj/2  =  ($xf,  say,  and  x  =  f  . 
II.  33  :   i6x*  +  *]x  =y*  =  ($x)*,  say,  and  x  =  $. 

2.  Equations  which  can  only  be  rationally  solved  if  certain 
conditions  are  fulfilled. 

The  cases  occurring  in  Diophantus  are  the  following. 

Form  Ax*  +  C=y*.  This  can  be  rationally  solved  according  to 
Diophantus 

(a)     When  A  is  positive  and  a  square,  say  «2. 
Thus  cPx*  +  C=yi.    In  this  case  f  is  put  =  (ax  ±  mf  ; 
therefore  a^x-  +  C  =  (ax  ±  mf, 


^- 
and  x=  +  —      —  , 

"    2ma 

(m  and  the  doubtful  sign  being  always  assumed  so  as  to  give  x 
a  positive  value). 

(/?)     When  C  is  positive  and  a  square  number,  say  c*. 
Thus  Axz  +  c*  =_/.     Here  Diophantus  puts  y  =  (mx  ±  c)  ; 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS  OF  SOLUTION  69 

therefore  Ax*  +  £*  =  (mx  ±  cj, 

2mc 

and  x  =  +  -;  --  ,  . 

~  A  —  m* 

(7)  When  one  solution,  is  known,  any  number  of  other 
solutions  can  be  found.  This  is  enunciated  in  the  Lemma  to  vi.  1  5 
thus,  though  only  for  the  case  in  which  C  is  negative:  "Given  two 
numbers,  if,  when  one  is  multiplied  by  some  square  and  the  other 
is  subtracted  from  the  product,  the  result  is  a  square,  then  another 
square  also  can  be  found,  greater  than  the  aforesaid  square  which 
has  the  same  property."  It  is  curious  that  Diophantus  does  not 
give  a  general  enunciation  of  this  proposition,  inasmuch  as  not 
only  is  it  applicable  to  the  cases  +  Ax*  ±  C=y3,  but  also  to  the 
general  form  Ax-  +  Bx  +  C=y\ 

Diophantus'  method  of  finding  other  greater  values  of  x  satisfy- 
ing the  equation  Ax*-  —  C=y*  when  one  such  value  is  known  is  as 
follows. 

Suppose  that  x0  is  the  value  already  known  and  that  q  is  the 
corresponding  value  of  y. 

Put  ;r  =  jF0  +  £  in  the  original  expression,  and  equate  it  to 
(q  —  k%)-,  where  k  is  some  integer. 

Since  A(x.  +  &-C=(q-k&t 

it  follows  (because  by  hypothesis  Ax£—  C  =  q*)  that 


2  (Ax0  +  kq) 
whence  g=      #_ 

2(A 
and  *«.+ 


In  the  second  Lemma  to  VI.  12  Diophantus  does  prove  that  the 
equation  Ax*  +  C=y*  has  an  infinite  number  of  solutions  when 
A  +C  is  a  square,  i>.  in  the  particular  case  where  the  value  x=  I 
satisfies  the  equation.  But  he  does  not  always  bear  this  in  mind; 
for  in  III.  10  the  equation  S2x*  +  I2=y2  is  regarded  as  impossible  of 
solution  although  52+12  =  64,  a  square,  and  a  rational  solution  is 
therefore  possible.  Again  in  III.  12  the  equation  266r2—  10  =y*  is 
regarded  as  impossible  though  x  =  i  satisfies  it. 

The  method  used  by  Diophantus  in  the  second  Lemma  to 
VI.  12  is  like  that  of  the  Lemma  to  VI.  15. 

Suppose  that  A  +  C  =  q11. 

Put  i  +  f  for  x  in  the  original  expression  Ax*  +  C,  and  equate  it 
to  (q  —  kgf,  where  k  is  some  integer. 


70  INTRODUCTION 

Thus  A(i  +  £?+C=(q-k%}\ 

and  it  follows  that  2£  (A  +  kq}  =  ?  (k-  -A), 

so  that  £ 


It  is  of  course  necessary  to  choose  k?  such  that  &  >  A. 

It  is  clear  that,  if  X  —  G  satisfies  the  equation,  C  is  a  square,  and 
therefore  this  case  (7)  includes  the  previous  case  (yS). 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  VI.  14  Diophantus  says  that  a  rational 
solution  of  the  equation 

Ax*  -  &  =  j/8 

is  impossible  unless  A  is  the  sum  of  two  squares. 

[In  fact,  if  x-=p\q  satisfies  the  equation,  and  Ax*-  c2  =  &, 
we  have  Ap*  =  c*q*  +  k-q-, 

Lastly,  we  have  to  consider 

Form  Ax*  +  Bx+C=y*. 

This  equation  can  be  reduced  by  means  of  a  change  of  variable 
to  the  preceding  form  wanting  the  second  term.     For,  if  we  put 

D 

x  =  z  --  -j  ,  the  transformation  gives 


Diophantus,  however,  treats  '  this  form  of  the  equation  quite 
separately  from  the  other  and  less  fully.  According  to  him  the 
rational  solution  is  only  possible  in  the  following  cases. 

(a)     When  A  is  positive  and  a  square,  or  the  equation  is 

tfxn-  +  Bx  +  C=y\ 
Diophantus  then  puts  y*  =  (ax  —  mf,  whence 

=  ™?-c          ^Exx        22     ^ 

2am  +  B 
(#)     When  C  is  positive  and  a  square,  or  the  equation  is 

Ax*  +  Bx  +  c*  =  y\ 
Diophantus  puts_y2  =  (c  —  mxf,  whence 

(Exx.IV.8,9etc.) 


DIOPHANTUS'  METHODS  OF  SOLUTION  71 

(7)  When  ^B*  -  AC  is  positive  and  a  square  number.  Dio- 
phantus  never  expressly  enunciates  the  possibility  of  this  case; 
but  it  occurs,  as  it  were  unawares,  in  IV.  31.  In  that  problem 


is  to  be  made  a  square.     To  solve  this  Diophantus  assumes 


which  leads  to  the  quadratic  $x+  18  —  $xa  =  o;  but  "the  equation 
is  not  rational."  Accordingly  the  assumption  4**  will  not  do; 
"and  we  must  find  a  square  [to  replace  4]  such  that  18  times 
(this  square  +  i)  +(f)2  may  be  a  square."  Diophantus  then  solves 
the  auxiliary  equation  i8(?«2  +  1)  +  £  =fy  finding  m=i8.  He 
then  assumes  3*+  18  -^a  =  (i8)2^2,  which  gives  $2$x*  —  3*-  18  =  0, 
"and  x=-^,  that  is  ^.'Jl 

1  With  this  solution  should  be  compared  the  much  simpler  solution  of  this  case  given 
by  Euler  (Algebra,  tr.  Hewlett,  1840,  Part  n.  Arts.  50-53),  depending  on  the  separation 
of  the  quadratic  expression  into  factors.  (Curiously  enough  Diophantus  does  not  separate 
quadratic  expressions  into  their  factors  except  in  one  case,  vi.  19,  where  however  his 
purpose  is  quite  different  :  he  has  made  the  sum  of  three  sides  of  a  right-angled  triangle 
4^  +  6^  +  2,  which  has  to  be  a  cube,  and,  in  order  to  simplify,  he  divides  throughout  by 
x+  i,  which  leaves  4^  +  2  to  be  made  a  cube.) 

Since  \EP-AC  is  a  square,  the  roots  of  the  quadratic  Ax*  +  Bx  +  C=o  are  real,  and 
the  expression  has  two  real  linear  factors.  Take  the  particular  case  now  in  question, 
where  Diophantus  actually  arrives  at  3*+  18-  x*  as  the  result  of  multiplying  6-x  and 
3+jr,  but  makes  no  use  of  the  factors. 

We  have  3*+  i8-xn-  =  (6-x)  (3+*). 

Assume  then  (6  -  x)  (3  +  x)  =^  (6  -  *)2, 

and  we  have  /J(6-* 


where/,  q  may  be  any  numbers  subject  to  the  condition  that  ip*>q*.     If  ^  =  9,  q*=  16, 
we  have  Diophantus'  solution  x  =  —  . 

In  general,  if  Ax?  +  £x+C=  (f+gx)  (A+Jtx), 

we  can  put  (f+gx)  (h  +  kx)  =  £  (f+gx)*, 

whence  ?2  (A  +  >br)  =/(/+£*), 

»££ 

This  case,  says  Euler,  leads  to  a  fourth  case  in  which  Ax3  +  Bx  +  C=y*  can  be  solved, 
though  neither  A  nor  C  is  a  square,  and  though  ^-^Cis  not  a  square  either.  The 
fourth  case  is  that  in  which  Ax*  +  Bx  +  C  is  the  sum  of  two  parts,  one  of  which  is  a  square 
and  the  other  is  the  product  of  two  factors  linear  in  x.  For  suppose 

Ax*  +  Bx  +C=Z*  +  XY, 
where  Z=dx  +  e,    X=/x+g,     Y=hx  +  k. 


72 


INTRODUCTION 


It  is  worth  observing  that  from  this  example  of  Diophantus  we 
can  deduce  the  reduction  of  this  general  case  to  the  form 

Ax*  +  C=y* 
wanting  the  middle  term. 

Assume,  with  Diophantus,  that  Ax*  +  Bx+  C=m2x2:  therefore 
by  solution  we  have 


A-m2 

and  x  is  rational  provided  that  IB*  —  AC+  Cm*  is  a  square.     This 
condition  can  be  fulfilled   if  \B*  -  AC  is  a  square,  by  the   pre- 

We  can  then  put  Z2  +  X  Y=  (  Z  +  ^  JfY, 

whence  F=2^Z  +  4/A', 

q        q> 


, 

that  is,  x  (p2f+  ipqd  -fA)  =  kq*  -  ipqe  -p2g. 

Ex.  i.     Equation  ix2-  i=y2. 
Put  •2X*-i 


*  A£ 

Therefore  x-  i  =  it-x+^(x  +  i), 

and  x  (f  +  ipq  -g*)=-(p*  +  q\ 

As  x2  is  alone  found  in  our  equation,  we  can  take  either  the  positive  or  negative  sign 
and  we  may  put 


Ex.  2.     Equation  ix2  +  'i=y2. 
Here  we  put 

Equating  this  to  -J2  +  -  (x+  i)|    , 

P     P* , 
we  have  i(x-  i)  =  4 <-  +  -„(*+  i), 

1     ?2V 
or  x  (/•>  -  iq2)  =-(iqt+4j>q  +/), 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  this  method  enables  us  to  solve  the  equation 

Ax'1-c2=y2 

whenever  it  can  be  solved  rationally,  i.e.  whenever  A  is  the  sum  of  two  squares  (d2  +  e2, 
say).     For  then 

Ax2  -£2  =  d^x2  +  (ex  -  c)  (ex  +  c). 

In  cases  not  covered  by  any  of  the  above  rules  our  only  plan  is  to  try  to  discover  one 
solution  empirically.  If  one  solution  is  thus  found,  we  can  find  any  number  of  others;  if 
we  cannot  discover  such  a  solution  by  trial  (even  after  reducing  the  equation  to  the 
simplest  form  A'x'2+  C=ya),  recourse  must  be  had  to  the  method  of  continued  fractions 
elaborated  by  Lagrange  (cf.  Oeuvres,  II.  pp.  377-535  and  pp.  655 — 726 ;  additions  to 
Euler's  Algebra). 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS  OF  SOLUTION  73 

ceding   case.     If  \B'i  —  AC  is   not    a  square,  we   have   to   solve 
(putting,  for  brevity,  D  for  \B*  —  AC)  the  equation 

D  +  Cm2  =y\ 
and  the  reduction  is  effected. 

(2)     Double-equation. 

By  the  name  "double-equation"  Diophantus  denotes  the  pro- 
blem of  finding  one  value  of  the  unknown  quantity  which  will  make 
two  different  functions  of  it  simultaneously  rational  square  numbers. 
The  Greek  term  for  the  "double-equation"  occurs  variously  as  SwrXoi'- 
croT?;?,  St7rX?7  tVor???  or  8frr\rj  to-axrt?.  We  have  then  to  solve  the 
equations 


mx2  +  a.x  +  a  =  u2} 

nx2  +  fix  +  &  =  w2} 

in  rational  numbers.  The  necessary  preliminary  condition  is  that 
each  of  the  two  expressions  can  severally  be  made  squares.  This 
is  always  possible  when  the  first  term  (in  x2)  is  wanting.  This  is 
the  simplest  case,  and  we  shall  accordingly  take  it  first. 

I.     Double-equation  of  the  first  degree. 

Diophantus  has  one  general  method  of  solving  the  equations 

ax  +  a  =  u2' 


taking   slightly  different  forms   according   to   the   nature   of  the 
coefficients. 

(a)     First  method  of  solution  of 

ax  +  a  =  u2 


This  method  depends  upon  the  identity 


If  the  difference  between  the  two  expressions  in  x  can  be  separated 
into  two  factors  p,  qt  the  expressions  themselves  are  equated 
to  {^(p+q)}2  respectively.  Diophantus  himself  (II.  u)  states  his 
rule  thus. 

•  "Observing  the  difference  [between  the  two  expressions],  seek 
two  numbers  such  that  their  product  is  equal  to  this  difference; 
then  equate  either  the  square  of  half  the  difference  of  the  two 
factors  to  the  lesser  of  the  expressions  or  the  square  of  half  the 
sum  to  the  greater." 


74  INTRODUCTION 

We  will  take  the  general  case  and  investigate  to  what  particular 
classes  of  cases  the  method  is  applicable,  from  Diophantus'  point 
of  view,  remembering  that  his  cases  are  such  that  the  final  quadratic 
equation  in  x  always  reduces  to  a  simple  equation. 

Take  the  equations 

Q.X  +  a  = 


Subtracting,  we  have 

(a  -  £)  x  +  (a  -  b)  =  if  -  w\ 

We  have  then  to  separate  (a  —  $)x  +  (a-b}  into  two  factors; 
let  these  be/,  {(a  -  /3)*  +  (a  -  b]}lp. 
We  write  accordingly 


. 

u  ±  w  =    - 

P 


u  +  w 
Thus         u2 


4 

therefore  {(a-@)x  +  a-6  +/2}2  =  4/2  (ax  +  a), 

or  (a  -  /3)2;tr2  +  2x  {(a  -  ff)  (a  -  b  +/2)  -  2p"  a}+(a-b  +/2)2  -  4«/2=o, 
that  is,     (a  -  /S)2*2  +  2x  {(a  -ft)  (a-  b}  -/2  (a  +  £)} 

+  (a-  by  -2^(a  +  b}  +^  =  o. 

Now,  in    order   that   this   equation    may  reduce   to   a   simple 
equation,  either 

(i)     The  coefficient  of  x"  must  vanish,  so  that 

«-A 

or       (2)     The  absolute  term  must  vanish,  that  is, 


or  /- 

so  that  ab  must  be  a  square  number. 

Therefore  either  a  and  b  are  both  squares,  in  which  case  we 
may  substitute  &  and  d*  for  them  respectively,  /  being  then  equal 
to  c  ±  d,  or  the  ratio  of  a  to  b  is  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square. 

With  respect  to  (i)  we  observe  that  on  one  condition  it  is  not 
necessary  that  a  —  /8  should  vanish,  z>.  provided  we  can,  before 
solving  the  equations,  make  the  coefficients  of  x  the  same  in  both 
expressions  by  multiplying  either  equation  or  both  equations  by 
some  square  number,  an  operation  which  does  not  affect  the 
problem,  since  a  square  multiplied  by  a  square  is  still  a  square. 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS  OF  SOLUTION  75 

In  other  words,  it  is  only  necessary  that  the  ratio  of  a  to  @  should 
be  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square1. 

Thus,  if  a/^  =  m2/n2  or  an?=@m*,  the  equations  can  be  solved 
by  multiplying  them  respectively  by  nz  and  m*;  we  can  in  fact 
solve  the  equations 


like  the  equations 

tax  +  a  =  u' 
a.x  +  b  =  w 

in  an  infinite  number  of  ways. 
Again,  the  equations  under  (2) 

ax  +  c2  =  u2 


can  be  solved  in  two  different  ways  according  as  we  write  them  in 
this  form  or  in  the  form 


obtained  by  multiplying  them  respectively  by  d*,  c1*,  in  order  that 
the  absolute  terms  may  be  equal. 

I  shall  now  give  those  of  the  possible  cases  which  we  find  solved 
in  Diophantus'  own  work.     These  are  equations 
(i)   of  the  form 

b  = 


1  Diophantus  actually  states  this  condition  in  the  solution  of  iv.  32  where,  on  arriving 
at  the  equations 


he  says  :  "  And  this  is  not  rational  because  the  coefficients  of  x  have  not  to  one  another 
the  ratio  which  a  square  number  has  to  a  square  number." 

Similarly  in  the  second  solution  of  III.  15  he  states  the  same  condition  along  with  an 
alternative  condition,  namely  that  a  has  to  b  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square,  which  is 
the  second  condition  arrived  at  under  (2)  above.  On  obtaining  the  equations 


Diophantus  observes  "But,  since  the  coefficients  in  one  expression  are  respectively  greater 
than  those  in  the  other,  neither  have  they  (in  either  case)  the  ratio  which  a  square  number 
has  to  a  square  number,  the  hypothesis  which  we  took  is  useless." 
Cf.  also  iv.  39  where  he  says  that  the  equations 


are  possible  of  solution  because  there  is  a  square  number  of  units  in  each  expression. 


76  INTRODUCTION 

a  case  which  includes  the  more  common  one  where  the  coefficients 
of  x  in  both  are  equal  \ 

(2)   of  the  form 

ax  +  c*  =  u2  } 


solved  in  two  different  ways  according  as  they  are  written  in  this 
form  or  in  the  alternative  form 


General  solution  of  Form  ( i )  or 

am2x  +  a  =  u2 
a.n2x  +  b  =  w2\' 

Multiply   by   n2,   m2  respectively,  and    we   have   to   solve  the 
equations 

am2n'2x+an2  =  tt'2\ 

The  difference  is  an2  — dm2;   suppose  this  separated  into  two 
factors  p,  q. 

Let  u'  ±  w'  =/, 

u'  4-  w  =  q ; 

therefore  u'2  =  ^(p  +  qj,  w'*  —  i  (P  —  #)2> 

and  a  m2n2x  +  an2  =  i  (/  +  q)2, 

or  a.m2n2x  +  bm2  —  \(p  —  q)*. 

Either  equation  gives  the  same  value  of  x,  and 


a.m2n2 
since  pq  =  an2  —  bm2. 

Any  factors  /,  q  may  be  chosen  provided  that  the  resulting 
value  of  x  is  positive. 

Ex.  from  Diophantus  : 

65  - 

65-24* 

therefore  ,       260  -  24^  =  u'2  } 

65  -  24^  =  w2  j  ' 

The  difference  =  195  =  15  .  13,  say; 
therefore     £(15  —  I3)2  =  65  —  24^;  that  is,  24^=64,  and 


=*2l. 
=^}' 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  77 

• 

General  solution  (first  method)  of  Form  (2),  or 
ax  +  &  =  u'z  \ 
/3x  +  d*  =  w'2)' 

In    order   to    solve   by   this    method,   we    multiply   by   d2,   c2 
respectively  and  write 


u  being  supposed  to  be  the  greater. 

The  difference  =  (ad*  -  fic^x.     Let  the  factors  of  this  be/*,  q. 
Therefore  u2  =  £  (  px  +  qf, 

w>  =  \(px-qf. 
Thus  x  is  found  from  the  equation 


This  equation  gives 

fx*  +  2x  (pq  -  2ad2)  +  q^-^d-  =  O, 
or,  since  pq  =  (ad2  —  fie2), 

p*x*  -  2x  (ad2  +  &<*)  +  f-4c2d2^  o. 

In  order  that  this  may  reduce  to  a  simple  equation,  as  Dio- 
phantus  requires,  the  absolute  term  must  vanish, 


and  q  —  2cd. 

Thus  our  method  in  this  case  furnishes  us  with  only  one  solution 
of  the  double-equation,  q  being  restricted  to  the  value  2cd,  and  the 
solution  is 

_  2  (ad2  +  &") 


Ex.  from  Diophantus.  This  method  is  only  used  in  one  par- 
ticular case  (IV.  39),  where  c*  =  d*  as  the  equations  originally  stand, 
the  equations  being 


6x  +  4  = 

The  difference  is  2x,  and  q  is  necessarily  taken  to  be  2\/4,  or  4; 
the  factors  are  therefore  ^x,  4. 

Therefore  %x  +  4  =  \  (%x  +  4)2, 

and  x=  112. 

General  solution  (second  method)  of  Form  (2)  or 

ax  +  c2  = 


78  INTRODUCTION 

The  difference  =  (a  -  /8)  x  +  (<?  -  d*). 

Let  the  factors  of  this  be  p,  {(a  -  /3)  ^  +  cz  - 

Then,  as  before  proved  (p.  74),  /  must  be  equal  to  (c  ±  d). 

Therefore  the  factors  are 


and  we  have  finally 


which  equation  gives  two  possible  values  for  x.  Thus  in  this  case 
we  can  find  by  our  method  two  values  of  x,  since  one  of  the  factors 
p  may  be  either  (c  +  d)  or  (c  -  d). 

Ex.  from  Diophantus.     To  solve  the  equations 

(ill.  15.) 

The  difference  is  here  5^+  5,  and  Diophantus  chooses  as  the 
factors  5,  x+  i.  This  case  therefore  corresponds  to  the  value 
c  +  d  of/.  The  solution  is  given  by 

(\x  +  3)2  =  \QX  +  9,  whence  x  =  28. 

The  other  value,  c  —  d,  of  /  is  in  this  case  excluded,  because  it 
would  lead  to  a  negative  value  of  x. 

The  possibility  of  deriving  any  number  of  solutions  of  a  double- 
equation  when  one  solution  is  known  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
noticed  by  Diophantus,  though  he  uses  the  principle  in  certain 
cases  of  the  single  equation  (see  above,  pp.  69,  70).  Fermat  was  the 
first,  apparently,  to  discover  that  this  might  always  be  done,  if  one 
value  a  of  x  were  known,  by  substituting  x  +  a  for  x  in  the  equa- 
tions. By  this  means  it  is  possible  to  find  a  positive  solution,  even 
if  a  is  negative,  by  successive  applications  of  the  principle. 

But,  nevertheless,  Diophantus  had  certain  peculiar  artifices  by 
which  he  could  arrive  at  a  second  value.  One  of  these  artifices 
(which  is  made  necessary  in  one  case  by  the  unsuitableness  of  the 
value  of  x  found  by  the  ordinary  method)  gives  a  different  way  of 
solving  a  double-equation  from  that  which  has  been  explained,  and 
is  used  only  in  one  special  case  (IV.  39). 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  79 

(£)     Second  method  of  solving  a  double-equation  of  the  first 
degree. 

Consider  only  the  special  case 


Take  these  expressions,  and  »2,  and  write  them  in  order  of 
magnitude,  denoting  them  for  convenience  by  A,  B,  C. 


A -B    f        ,  A-B 
Therefore  ~ — -^  =-j ,  and   _      _ 


Suppose  now  that      Jix  +  «2  =  (y  +  »)*  ; 
therefore  hx  =  y*  +  2ny, 


and 


or 


thus  it  is  only  necessary  to  make  this  expression  a  square. 
Assume  therefore  that 


and  any  number  of  values  for  y,  and  therefore  for  x,  can  be  found, 
by  varying/. 

Ex.  from  Diophantus  (the  only  one),  IV.  39. 

In  this  case  there  is  the  additional  condition  of  a  limit  to  the 
value  of  x.  The  double-equation 


6x  +  4  = 
has  to  be  solved  in  such  a  manner  that  x  <  2. 

Here  „    -~=  £,  and  B  is  taken1  to  be  (y  +  2f. 

Therefore  A  -  B  =  $  (f  +  47)  ; 

therefore  A 


which  must  be  made  a  square. 

1  Of  course  Diophantus  uses  the  same  variable  JT  where  I  have  for  clearness  used  y. 
Then,  to  express  what  I  have  called  m  later,  he  says:  "I  form  a  square  from  3  minus 
some  number  of  JT'S,  and  x  becomes  some  number  multiplied  by  6  and  then  added  to  12, 
divided  by  the  difference  by  which  the  square  of  the  number  exceeds  3." 


8o  INTRODUCTION 

If  we  multiply  by  f  ,  we  must  make 

3j2  +  1  2y  +  9  =  a  square, 
where  y  must  be  <  2. 
Diophantus  assumes 


6m  +  12 

whence  y  =  —       —  , 

*»'-  3 

and  the  value  of  m  is  then  taken  such  as  to  make  j>  <  2. 

It  is  in  a  note  on  this  problem  that  Bachet  shows  that  the 
double-equation 

ax  +  a  = 


can  be  rationally  solved  by  a  similar  method  provided  that  the 
coefficients  satisfy  either  of  two  conditions,  although  none  of  the 
coefficients  are  squares  and  neither  of  the  ratios  a  :  /3  and  a  :  b  is 
equal  to  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square.  Bachet's  conditions  are  : 

(1)  That,  when  the  difference  between  the  two  expressions 
is  multiplied  or  divided  by  a  suitably-chosen  number,  and   the 
expression  thus  obtained   is  subtracted   from  the  smaller  of  the 
original  expressions,  the  result  is  a  square  number,  or 

(2)  That,  when  the  difference  between  the  two  expressions 
is  multiplied  or  divided  by  a  suitably-chosen   number,  and  the 
smaller  of  the  two  original  expressions   is  subtracted   from  the 
expression  obtained  by  the   said    multiplication  or   division,  the 
result  is  a  number  bearing  to  the  multiplier  or  divisor  the  ratio 
of  a  square  to  a  square1. 

1  Bachet  of  course  does  not  solve  equations  in  general  expressions  (his  notation  does 
not  admit  of  this),  but  illustrates  his  conditions  by  equations  in  which  the  coefficients  are 
specific  numbers.  I  will  give  one  of  his  illustrations  of  each  condition,  and  then  set  the 
conditions  out  more  generally. 

Case  (i).     Equations 


difference  2.r  +   6 

The  suitably-chosen  number  (to  divide  by  in  this  case)  is  2  ; 

\  (difference)  =x  +  3, 

and  (lesser  expression)  -  |  (difference)  =  x  +  7  -  (x  +  3)  =  4,  that  is,  a  square. 

We  have  then  to  find  two  squares  such  that 

their  difference—  2  (difference  between  lesser  and  4). 
Assume  that  the  lesser  =  (y  +  2)2,  2  being  the  square  root  of  4. 
Therefore  (greater  square)  =  3  (lesser)  -  8 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  81 

2.     Double-equation  of  the  second  degree, 
or  the  general  form 


These  equations  are  much  less  thoroughly  treated  in  Diophan- 
tus  than  those  of  the  first  degree.     Only  such  special  instances 

To  make  3;c2  +  127  +  4  a  square  we  put 

3J2+I2J|/  +  4  =  (2-/^)2, 

where  p  must  lie  between  certain  limits  which  have  next  to  be  found.    The  equation  gives 


In  order  that  y  may  be  positive,  fp  must  be  >  3  ;  and  in  order  that  the  second  of  the 
original  expressions,  assumed  equal  to  (jy+2)2,  may  be  greater  than  7  (it  is  in  fact  x+j), 
we  must  have  0'+2)>2f  (an  a  fortiori  limit,  since  2§  >«/7),  or_y>|. 

Therefore  4/  +  12  >  f  (/2  -  3)  , 


Suppose  that  3/2=i6/  +  53|,  which  gives/  =  7f. 

Therefore  /  <  7$,  but  /2  >  3. 

Put  /  =  3  in  the  above  equation  ;  therefore 

3/+t2;/  +  4  =  (2-37)2, 

and  j/  =  4. 

Therefore  .r=0/  +  2)2-  7  =  29. 

Case  (2).     Equations  6#+25  =  «2| 

wH-j^f  ; 

difference  4^+22 

The  suitable-number  (again  to  divide  by)  in  this  case  is  2  ; 

\  (difference)  =  ix  +  1  1, 

and  £  (difference)  -  (lesser  expression)  =  8=2.4, 

where  2  is  the  divisor  used,  and  4  is  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square. 
Hence  two  squares  have  to  be  found  such  that 

(their  difference)  =  2  (sum  of  lesser  and  8). 
If  the  lesser  is  j2,  the  greater  is  3jj/2+  i6  =  (4  -pyf1,  say. 
Bachet  gives,  as  limits  for  /, 

/Mil    /*>3» 
and  puts  p  =  3.     This  gives  7  =  4,  so  that  jr=  6  \. 

Let  us  now  state  Bachet's  conditions  generally. 
Suppose  the  equations  to  be 


The  difference  is  (a  -  /3)  *  +  (a  -  b). 
This  has  to  be  multiplied  by  —  ^—  which  is  the  "suitable"  factor  in  this  case,  and,  if 
we  subtract  the  product  from  fix  +  b,  we  obtain 

ab-afi 


'-^<*-*>.   -   T^T- 


82  INTRODUCTION 

occur  as  can  be  easily  solved  by  the  methods  which  we   have 
described  for  equations  of  the  first  degree. 

The  following  types  are  found. 

(i)  p 


The  difference  is  (a  —  /3)  x  +  (a  —  b\  and,  following  the  usual 
course,  we  may,  e.g.,  resolve  this  into  the  factors 

(1)  The  first  of  Bachet's  conditions  is  that 

ab-aS 
a_B  =  a  square  =/2/?2,  say. 

(2)  The  second  condition  is  that 

aB-ab  _p      ft 


;  a  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square. 


It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  first  of  these  conditions  can  be  obtained  by  considering 
the  equation 


obtained  on  page  74  above. 

Diophantus  only  considers  the   cases  in  which  this  equation  reduces  to  a  simple 
equation  ;  but  the  solution  of  it  as  a  mixed  quadratic  gives  a  rational  value  of  x  provided 
that 

{  (a  -  j8)  (a  -  b)  -f  (a  +  B)  }  2  -  (a  -  0)2{  (a  -  £)2  -  2/>2  (a  +  b)  +/4  }  is  a  square, 
that  is,  if 

^{(a  +  ^-(a-^}+^{(a  +  l>)(a-^-(a2-^)(a-/>)}  is  a  square, 
which  reduces  to  a/3/2  +  (a-/3)  (ab-aB)~  a  square   ........................   (A). 

This  can  be  solved  (cf.  p.  68  above),  if 
ab-aB 


is  a  square.         (Bachet's  first  condition.) 


Again  take  Bachet's  second  condition 


aB  -  ab  r* 

p      =  a  square  =  -z  say, 

and  substitute  fir2/*2  for  a/3  -  a/>  in  the  equation  (A)  above. 
Therefore  a/3/2  -  (a  -  ft)  /3  -^  =  a  square, 

or  aj3/'2  --  (a  -  18)  /3  =  a  square. 

This  is  satisfied  by  p'=i;  therefore  (p.  69)  any  number  of  other  solutions  can 
be  found  . 

The  second  condition  can  also  be  obtained  directly  by  eliminating  x  from  the  equations 
ax  +  a  =  «2  1 


for  the  result  is  ^  w2  +  -*-y-  =  «2> 

which  can  be  rationally  solved  if 

aB  -  a/' 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  83 

<"- 

as  usual,  we  put 


or 


In  order  that  x  may  be  rational  a  condition  is  necessary;  thus 
x  is  rational  if 

=  1  *~8 

This  is  the  case  in  the  only  instance  of  the  type  where  a  is  not 
equal  to  b,  namely  (III.  13) 


the  difference  is  i6x+4,  and  the  resolution  of  this  into  the  factors 
4,  ^x  +  i  solves  the  problem. 

In  the  other  cases  of  the  type  a  =  b\    the  difference  is  then 
(a  —  ft}x,  which  is  resolved  into  the  factors 


' 


ifa  —  B  \2 

and  we  put  p2x2  +  ax  +  a  =  -          —  4  2px    , 

4\    2p          r  j 


4\    2p 

whence  — —x  = 

Exx.  from  Diophantus : 


xz- 
and  ^  + 


(2)     The  second  type  found  in  Diophantus1  is 
x2  +  ax  +  a  =  u- ) 

0x  +  a  =  zv*)' 
where  one  equation  has  no  term  in  x*,  and  p  =  i,  a  =  b. 

1  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  the  method  of  the  "double-equation  "  has  a  distinct 
advantage  in  this  type  of  cose.  The  alternative  is  to  solve  by  the  method  of  Euler  (who 
does  not  use  the  "  double-equation  "),  i.e.  to  put  the  linear  expression  equal  to/*  and  then, 
substituting  the  value  of  JT  (in  terms  of/)  in  the  quadratic  expression,  to  solve  the 

6—2 


84  INTRODUCTION 

The  difference  x*  +  (*—$)x  is  resolved  into  the  factors 


and  we  put  &x  +  a  =  |  (a  - 

which  gives  x. 


resulting  equation  in  /.     But  the  difficulties  would  generally  be  great.      Take  the  case  of 
vi.  6  where 

>  have  to  be  made  squares. 

If 


(•fp  —  |)2 

therefore  x'2+  i  =  —  —  -  --  h  i  has  to  be  made  a  square, 

or  /4  -  2/2  +  1  97  =  a  square. 

This  does  not  admit  of  solution  unless  we  could  somehow  discover  empirically  one 
value  of  /  which  would  satisfy  the  requirement,  and  this  would  be  very  difficult. 

Let  us  take  an  easier  case  for  solution  by  this  method, 


which  is  solved  by  Euler  (Algebra,  Part  II.  Art.  222),  and  let  us  compare  the  working  of 
the  two  methods  in  this  case. 

I.     Enter's  method.  Assuming  x+  i  ==/>2  and  substituting^2—  i  for  x  in  the  quadratic 
expression,  we  have 

/4  -  2/J2  +  2  =  a  square. 

This  can  only  be  solved  generally  if  we  can  discover  one  possible  value  of  /  by  trial  ; 
this  however  is  not  difficult  in  the  particular  case,  for/=  i  is  an  obvious  solution. 

To  find  others  we  put  i  +  q  instead  of  p  in  the  expression  to  be  made  a  square  ;  this 
gives 

i  +  4^2  +  4^3  +  ij4  =  a  square. 

This  can  be  solved  in  several  ways. 

1.  Suppose  i  +  4^2  +  4^8-i-^4=(i  +  ?*)2; 

thus  4$r"  +  4^=2^2,  whence  q—  --,  p  =  -  and  x=  ---. 

2.  Suppose  i+4?2  +  4?3  +  ^=(I-?2)2; 

thus  4^2  +  4^=  -2?2,  and  q=  -|,   /=--  and  *=--. 

3.  Suppose  i+4^2  +  4^3  +  ^4  =  (i±2^±^2)a; 
and  we  find,  in  either  case,  that  q=  -  i,  so  that/=  -1,^  =  0. 

4.  Suppose  i  +  4^2  +  4^3  +  y4  =  (  i  +  2^2)2  ; 

and  we  have    4^  +  ^4=4^4,    whence   <?  =  -,  p  =  ~   and  x=(-\  -i=^. 

3          3  \3/  9 

This  value  of  x  satisfies  the  conditions,  for 


The  above  five  suppositions  therefore  give  only  two  serviceable  solutions 

x=-*,     ,=  *?. 
4  9 

To  find  another  solution  we  take  one  of  the  values  of  q  already  found,  say  y=  —  ,  and 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  85 

Exx.  from  Diophantus : 

3*-  12  =  u*) 
*i  ah  (v-  *•) 

O*;r  —12  =  T& j 


(vi.  6.) 

-6144*+  1048576  =  «M  ,yl   22> 

jr  +  64  =  wir 


substitute  r  -  -  for  q.     This  gives  /  =  i  +  ? = r  +  - ,  and  we  substitute  this  value  for  /  in  the 
expression  /*  -  2/a  +  2. 

We  have  then  ^-^r--  i*  +  'it3+t*  to  be  made  a  square,  or 
16      2        2 

25  -  24r- 8^+32^+ i6^=a  square. 

i.     We  take  S+A*^  for  the  root,  so  that  the  absolute  term  and  the  term  in  r4 
may  disappear.     We  can  make  the  term  in  r  disappear  also  by  putting  iof=  -  24  or 

/=  -  —  .     We  then  have 

(a)    The  upper  sign  gives 

-  8  +  32r = 40  +/*+  8A. 

<*  r 

and  r=( 

thus  P=— ,  and   jr=/2_I=?r±. 

20  400 

(£)     The  lower  sign  gives 

-8  +  32r=  -40+/2-8A, 

and  r=(f 


thus  p=  -  —  ,  and  or=^i  as  before. 

'  20  400 

We  have  therefore       .r+i  =  (^  ,  and 


)   . 
/ 


2.     Another  solution  is  found  by  assuming  the  root  to  be  5  +/r+g^  and  determining 
/and  g  so  that  the  absolute  term  and  the  terms  in  r,  r3  may  vanish  ;  the  result  is 
,_     £2  £7»  2/g-3?=      1550 

/-      5  '  ^^      125'    '  ~  i6-^r2          861  ' 

/- 

1  1  .     Method  of  "  doubU-tqitation. 


The  difference  =jca-jr. 

(i)     If  we  take  as  factors  JT,  x-  i  and,  as  usual,  equate  the  square  of  half  their 
difference,  or  -  ,  to  x  +  i,  we  have 

"•=;• 


86  INTRODUCTION 

The  absolute  terms  in  the  last  case  are  made  equal  by  multiply- 
ing the  second  equation  by  (i28)2  or  16384. 

(3)  One  separate  case  must  be  mentioned  which  cannot  be 
solved,  from  Diophantus'  standpoint,  by  the  foregoing  method, 
but  which  sometimes  occurs  and  is  solved  by  a  special  artifice. 

The  form  of  double-equation  is 

our2  4-  ax  =  uz  \ (i), 

/3;r2  +  bx  =  w*  \ ( 2 ) . 

Diophantus  assumes          ?/2  =  m^x*, 
whence,  by  ( I ),  x  =  a/(mz  —  a), 


(2)     If  we  take  -x,  tx-t,  as  factors,  half  the  sum  of  which  is  -*-  i,  so  that  the 

4 
absolute  terms  may  disappear  in  the  resulting  equation,  we  have 

U^-libA 

16        2 


and  *-. 

9 

(3)     To  find  another  value  by  means  of  the  first,  namely  x=  -  -  ,  we  substitute  y  -  - 
for  x  in  the  original  expressions.     We  then  have  to  solve 
,•-3       2|  =  1<t 


Multiply  the  latter  by  —  so  as  to  make  the  absolute  terms  the  same,  and  we  must  have 

a,+s.** 

4'     16 

Subtract  from  the  first  expression,  and  the  difference  is  yt-^—y=y  (y-  —  1  5  then, 

equating   the   square   of  half  the  difference  of  the  factors  to  the  smaller  expression, 
we  have 


so  that  961=400^+100. 

Therefore 


(4)     If  we  start  from  the  known  value  —  and  put  j+—  for  j;  in  the  equations,  we 


obtain  Euler's  fourth  value  of  *,  namely  . 

7  2965284 

Thus  all  the  four  values  obtained  by  Euler  are  more  easily  obtained  by  the  method  of 
the  "double-equation." 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  87 

and,  by  substitution  in  (2),  we  derive  that 

ba 

must  be  a  square, 


m2  —  a. 

a2 ft  +  ba  (m2  -  a) 
or 

We  have  therefore  to  solve  the  equation 

abmz  +  a  (aft  —  a.b)  =y2, 

and  this  form  can  or  cannot  be  solved  by  the  methods  already 
given  according  to  the  nature  of  the  coefficients1.  Thus  it  can 
be  solved  if  (a^  —  a.b}ja  is  a  square  or  if  a\b  is  a  square. 

Exx.  from  Diophantus : 

*•••••  4*--,  (VL  I2.) 


(£)     Indeterminate  equations  of  a  degree  higher  than  the  second. 

(i)     Single  equations, 

These  are  properly  divided  by  Nesselmann  into  two  classes  ; 
the  first  comprises  those  problems  in  which  it  is  required  to  make 
a  function  of  x,  of  a  degree  higher  than  the  second,  a  square  ;  the 
second  comprises  those  in  which  a  rational  value  of  x  has  to  be 
found  which  will  make  any  function  of  x,  not  a  square,  but  a  higher 
power  of  some  number.  The  first  class  of  problems  requires  the 
solution  in  rational  numbers  of 

Axn  +  Bxn~l  +  .  .  .  +  Kx  +  L  =/>, 
the  second  the  solution  of 

Axn  +  Bxn~l  +  .  .  .  +  Kx  -f  L  =  y3, 

for  Diophantus  does  not  go  beyond  making  a  certain  function  of 
x  a  cube.  In  no  instance,  however,  of  the  first  class  does  the  index 
n  exceed  6,  while  in  the  second  class  n  does  not  (except  in  a 
special  case  or  two)  exceed  3. 

1  Diophantus  apparently  did  not  observe  that  the  above  form  of  double-equation  can 
be  reduced  to  one  of  the  first  degree  by  dividing  by  x2  and  substituting^  for  i/jr,  when  it 
becomes 


Adapting  Sachet's  second  condition,  we  see  that  the  equations  can  be  rationally  solved 
if  (/3a  -  ab)la  is  a  square,  which  is  of  course  the  same  as  one  of  the  conditions  under  which 
the  above  equation  abttfi  +  a  (aft  —  a&)  can  be  solved. 


88  INTRODUCTION 

First  Class.     Equation 

Axn  +  Bxn~l  +  .  .  .  +  Kx  +  L  =  y". 
The  forms  found  in  Diophantus  are  as  follows  : 
i  .  Equation  Ax*  +  Bx*  +  Cx  +  d2  =  y\ 

Here,  as  the  absolute  term  is  a  square,  we  might  put  for  y 
the  expression  mx  +  d,  and  determine  m  so  that  the  coefficient 
of  x  in  the  resulting  equation  vanishes.  In  that  case 

2md  =  C,  and  m  —  C\2d\ 

and  we  obtain,  in  Diophantus'  manner,  a  simple  equation  for  x, 
giving 

C*  -^B 

4tl*  A 

Or  we  might  put  for  y  the  expression  nPx*  +  nx  +  d,  and  deter- 
mine m,  n  so  that  the  coefficients  of  x,  x*  in  the  resulting  equation 
both  vanish,  in  which  case  we  should  again  have  a  simple  equa- 
tion for  x.  Diophantus,  in  the  only  example  of  this  form  of 
equation  which  occurs  (VI.  18),  makes  the  first  supposition.  The 
equation  is 


and  Diophantus  assumes  y  =  \x  +  i,  whence  x  =  *£. 

2.     Equation     Ax*  +  Bx*  +  Cx*  +  Dx  +  E=y\ 
In   order   that   this  equation  may  be  solved  by  Diophantus' 
method,  either  A  or  E  must  be  a  square.     If  A  is  a  square  and 

D 

equal  to  a2,  we  may  assume  y  =  ax*  H  --  x  +  n,  determining  n  so 
that  the  term  in  x*  vanishes.  If  E  is  a  square  (=  ez),  we  may  write 
y  =  mx*  H  —  x  +  e,  determining  m  so  that  the  term  in  x*  in  the 

resulting  equation  may  vanish.  We  shall  then,  in  either  case, 
obtain  a  simple  equation  in  x. 

The  examples  of  this  form  in  Diophantus  are  of  the  kind 

ayx4  +  Bx3  +  Cx*  +  Dx  +  e*  =f, 

where  we  can  assume  y=±ax*  +  kx±e,  determining  k  so  that  in 
the  resulting  equation  the  coefficient  of  x3  or  of  x  may  vanish  ; 
when  we  again  have  a  simple  equation. 

Ex.  from  Diophantus  (iv.  28)  : 


Diophantus  assumes  y=  yc*—  6x+  i,and  the  equation  reduces  to 
2jr3  —   6>2  =  o,  whence  *=. 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  89 

Diophantus  is  guided  in  his  choice  of  signs  in  the  expression 
±  ax'1  +  kx  ±  e  by  the  necessity  for  obtaining  a  "  rational  "  result. 

Far  more  difficult  to  solve  are  those  equations  in  which,  the 
left-hand  expression  being  bi-quadratic,  the  odd  powers  of  x  are 
wanting,  i.e.  the  equations  Ax*  +  Cx*1  +  E  =y*  and  Ax*  +  E=y*, 
even  when  A  or  E  is  a  square,  or  both  are  so.  These  cases 
Diophantus  treats  more  imperfectly. 

3.     Equation  Ax*  +  Cx*  +  E  =y*, 

Only  very  special  cases  of  this  form  occur.     The  type  is 

a*x*  -  c*x2  +  e2  =y\ 
which  is  written 

a*x*-(?  +  ?L=y2. 

Here  y  is  assumed  to  be  ax  or  ejx,  and  in  either  case  we  have 
a  rational  value  for  x. 

Exx.  from  Diophantus  : 


This  is  assumed  to  be  equal  to 


where  y*-  is  assumed  to  be  equal  to 

4.  Equation  Ax*  +  E  =y\ 

The  case  occurring  in  Diophantus  is  x*  +  97  =yz  (V.  29).  Dio- 
phantus tries  one  assumption,  y  =  xz  —  10,  and  finds  that  this  gives 
X*  =  -£Q,  which  leads  to  no  rational  result.  Instead,  however,  of 
investigating  in  what  cases  this  equation  can  be  solved,  he  simply 
drops  the  equation  x*  +  97  =j2  and  seeks,  by  altering  his  original 
assumptions,  to  obtain,  in  place  of  it,  another  equation  of  the  same 
type  which  can  be  solved  in  rational  numbers.  In  this  case,  by 
altering  his  assumptions,  he  is  able  to  replace  the  refractory  equa- 
tion by  a  new  one,  ^4  +  337=j2,  and  at  the  same  time  to  find  a 
suitable  substitution  for  j,  namely  y  =  x*—  25,  which  brings  out 
a  rational  result,  namely  x  =  ^-.  This  is  a  good  example  of  his 
characteristic  artifice  of  "  Back-reckoning1/'  as  Nesselmann  calls  it. 

5.  Equation  of  sixth  degree  in  the  special  form 

x6  —  Ax*  +  J3x  +  c2  =y-. 


"  Methode  der  Zuriickrechnung  und  Nebenaufgabe." 


90  INTRODUCTION 

It  is  only  necessary  to  put  j>  =  x3  +  c,  and  we  have 
-Ax*  +  B  =  2cx\ 


-,— 

A  +  2C* 

which  gives  a  rational  solution  if  B/(A  +  2c)  is  a  square. 

6.  If,  however,  this  last  condition  does  not  hold,  as  in  the  case 
occurring  iv.  18,  x6  —  i6xs  +  x  +  64  =j/2,  Diophantus  employs  his 
usual  artifice  of  "back-reckoning,"  which  enables  him  to  replace 
the  equation  by  another,  Xs  —  128^  +  ^  +  4096  =/2,  where  the 
condition  is  satisfied,  and,  by  assuming  y  =  xs  +  64,  x  is  found  to 
be^. 

Second  Class,     Equation  of  the  form 

Axn  +  Bxn~l  +  .  .  .  +  Kx  +  L  =  j3. 

Except  for  such  simple  cases  as  Ax2=y3,  Ax*  =  y3t  where  it  is  only 
necessary  to  assume  y  =  mx,  the  only  cases  occurring  in  Diophantus 
are  of  the  forms 


i.     Equation  Ax*  +  Bx  +  C=y*. 

There  are  only  two  examples  of  this  form.  First,  in  VI.  I  the 
expression  x*  —  ^x  +  4  is  to  be  made  a  cube,  being  already  a  square. 
Diophantus  naturally  assumes  x  —  2  =  a  cube  number,  say  8,  and 
x=  10. 

Secondly,  in  VI.  17  a  peculiar  case  occurs.  A  cube  is  to  be 
found  which  exceeds  a  square  by  2.  Diophantus  assumes  (x  —  i)3 
for  the  cube  and  (x+  i)2  for  the  square,  and  thus  obtains  the 
equation 

•**  ~  3^2  +  Zx  ~  i  =*2  +  2*  +  3) 
or  x3  +  x=4xz  +  4, 

previously  mentioned  (pp.  66-7),  which  is  satisfied  by  ^  =  4. 
The  question  arises  whether  it  was  accidentally  or  not  that  this 
cubic  took  so  simple  a  form.  Were  x-i,  x+i  assumed  with 
knowledge  and  intention?  Since  27  and  25  are,  as  Fermat 
observes1,  the  only  integral  numbers  which  satisfy  the  conditions, 
it  would  seem  that  Diophantus  so  chose  his  assumptions  as  to  lead 
back  to  a  known  result,  while  apparently  making  them  arbitrarily 
with  no  particular  reference  to  the  end  desired.  Had  this  not 

1  Note  on  vi.  17,  Oeuvi-es,  I.  pp.  333-4,  II.  p.  434.     The  fact  was  proved  by  Euler 
(Algebra,  Part  II.  Arts.  188,  193).      See  note  on  vi.  17  infra  for  the  proof. 


DIOPHANTUS'   METHODS   OF   SOLUTION  91 

been  so,  we  should  probably  have  found  him,  here  as  elsewhere 
in  the  work,  first  leading  us  on  a  false  tack  and  then  showing  us 
how  we  can  correct  our  assumptions.  The  fact  that  he  here 
makes  the  right  assumptions  to  begin  with  makes  us  suspect  that 
the  solution  is  not  based  on  a  general  principle  but  is  empirical 
merely. 

2.     Equation  Ax3  +  Ex*  +  Cx+D  =f. 

If  A  or  D  is  a  cube  number,  this  equation  is  easy  of  solution. 

jy 

For,  first,  if  A  =  a?,  we  have  only  to  write  y  =  ax  +  —  a  ,  and  we 
obtain  a  simple  equation  in  x. 

Secondly,  if  D  =  d3,  we  put  y  =  —  ^  x  +  d. 

If  the  equation  is  a3xs  +  JBx2  +  Cx+  ds=y3,  we  can  use  either 
assumption,  or  we  may  put  y  =  ax  +  d,  obtaining  a  simple  equation 
as  before. 

Apparently  Diophantus  used  the  last  assumption  only  ;  for 
in  IV.  27  he  rejects  as  impossible  the  equation 


because  y  =  2x  —  i  gives  a  negative  value  x=  —  ^,  whereas  either 
of  the  other  assumptions  gives  a  rational  value1. 

(  2  )     Double-equations. 

There  are  a  few  examples  in  which,  of  two  functions  of  x,  one 
is  to  be  made  a  square,  and  the  other  a  cube,  by  one  and  the  same 
rational  value  of  x.  The  cases  are  for  the  most  part  very  simple  ; 
e.g.  in  vi.  19  we  have  to  solve 


2X+  I  = 

thus  j/3  =  2z*,  and  z  =  2. 

A  rather  more  complicated  case  is  VI.  21,  where  we  have  the 
double-equation 

2X 


Diophantus  assumes  y  =  mx,  whence  x  =  2/(m2  —  2),  and  we  have 


2     V        /      2     \2          2 
2 


2m* 


(m*  -  2)3 

1  There  is  a  special  case  in  which  C  and  D  vanish,  Ay?+  Bx~—y*.     Here  y  is  put 
equal  to  mx,  and  x=BI(mz  -  A).     Cf.  IV.  6,  28  (i). 


92  INTRODUCTION 

To  make  2m*  a  cube,  we  need  only  make  2m  a  cube  or  put 
m  =  4.     This  gives  x=\. 
The  general  case 

Ax9  +  Bx"  +  Cx  = 


would,  of  course,  be  much  more  difficult;    for,  putting  y  =  mx,  we 
have 

x=cl(m?-b), 

and  we  have  to  solve 


or  Ccm*  +  c(Bc-  2bC)  m?  +  be  (bC  -£c)  +  Ac3  =  u3, 

of  which  equation   the  above  corresponding  equation  is   a   very 
particular  case. 

Summary  of  the  preceding  investigation, 

1.  Diophantus  solves  completely  equations  of  the  first  degree, 
but  takes  pains  to  secure  beforehand  that  the  solution  shall  be 
positive.     He  shows  remarkable  address  in  reducing  a  number  of 
simultaneous  equations  of  the  first  degree  to  a  single  equation  in 
one  variable. 

2.  For  determinate  equations  of  the  second  degree  he  has 
a  general  method  or  rule  of  solution.     He  takes,  however,  in  the 
Arithmetica^  no  account  of  more  than  one  root,  even  where  both 
roots  are  positive  rational  numbers.     But,  his  object  being  simply 
to   obtain  some  solution    in    rational    numbers,  we   need   not   be 
surprised  at  his  ignoring  one  of  two  roots,  even  though  he  knew 
of  its  existence. 

3.  No  equations  of  a  degree  higher  than  the  second  are  solved 
in  the  book  except  a  particular  case  of  a  cubic. 

4.  Indeterminate  equations  of  the  first  degree  are  not  treated 
of  in  the  work.     Of  indeterminate  equations  of  the  second  degree, 
as  Ax*  +  Bx  +  C=y*>  only  those  cases  are  fully  dealt  with  in  which 
A  or  C  vanishes,  while  the  methods  employed  only  enable  us  to 
solve  equations  of  the  more  general  forms 

Ax*  +  C=y>  and  Ax*  +  Bx+  C=f 

when  A,  or  C,  or  \B?  -AC  is  positive  and  a  square  number,  or  (in 
the  case  of  Ax*  ±  C=y2)  when  one  solution  is  already  known. 


DIOPHANTUS'  METHODS  OF  SOLUTION  93 

5.  For  double-equations  of  the  second  degree  Diophantus  has 
a  definite  method  when  the  coefficient  of  x*  in  both  expressions 
vanishes  ;  the  applicability  of  this  method  is,  however,  subject  to 
conditions,  and  it  has  to  be  supplemented  in  one  or  two  cases  by 
another  artifice.     Of  more  complicated  cases  we  find  only  a  few 
examples  under  conditions  favourable  for  solution  by  his  method. 

6.  Diophantus'  treatment  of  indeterminate  equations  of  degrees 
higher  than  the  second  depends  upon  the  particular  conditions  of 
the  problems,  and  his  methods  lack  generality. 

7.  More  wonderful  than  his  actual  treatment  9f  equations  are 
the  clever  artifices  by  which  he  contrives  to  avoid  such  equations 
as   he   cannot   theoretically   solve,  e.g.  by   his   device   of  "back- 
reckoning,"  instances  of  which  would  have  been  out  of  place  in 
this  chapter  and  can  only  be  studied  in  the  problems  themselves. 

I  shall  not  attempt  to  class  as  "methods"  certain  headings 
in  Nesselmann's  classification  of  the  problems,  such  as  (a)  "  Solution 
by  mere  reflection,"  (£)  "  Solution  in  general  expressions,"  of  which 
there  are  few  instances  definitely  so  described  by  Diophantus,  or 
(c)  "Arbitrary  determinations  and  assumptions."  The  most  that 
can  be  done  by  way  of  describing  these  "  methods  "  is  to  quote 
a  few  characteristic  instances.  This  is  what  Nesselmann  has 
done,  and  he  regrets  at  the  end  of  his  chapter  on  "  Methods  of 
Solution"  that  it  must  of  necessity  be  so  incomplete.  To  under- 
stand and  appreciate  the  various  artifices  of  Diophantus  it  is  in 
fact  necessary  to  read  the  problems  themselves  in  their  entirety. 

With  regard  to  the  "  Use  of  the  right-angled  triangle,"  all  that 
can  be  said  of  a  general  character  is  that  only  "  rational  "  right- 
angled  triangles  (those  namely  in  which  the  three  sides  can  all  be 
represented  by  rational  numbers)  are  used  in  Diophantus,  and 
accordingly  the  introduction  of  the  "  right-angled  triangle  "  is 
merely  a  convenient  way  of  indicating  the  problem  of  finding 
two  square  numbers,  the  sum  of  which  is  also  a  square  number. 
The  general  form  used  by  Diophantus  (except  in  one  case,  VI.  19, 
q.v.)  for  the  sides  of  a  right-angled  triangle  is  (at  +  i?),  (a'—P), 
2ab,  which  expressions  clearly  satisfy  the  condition 


The  expression  of  the  sides  of  a  right-angled  triangle  in  this  form 
Diophantus  calls  "forming  a  right-angled  triangle  from  the 
numbers  a  and  b"  His  right-angled  triangles  are  of  course 
formed  from  particular  numbers.  "  Forming  a  right-angled 


94  INTRODUCTION 

triangle  from  7,  2  "  means  taking  a  right-angled  triangle  with  sides 
(7s  +  2"),  (7s  ~  22),  2 . 7 .  2,  or  53,  45,  28. 


II.    METHOD  OF  LIMITS. 

As  Diophantus  often  has  to  find  a  series  of  numbers  in 
ascending  or  descending  order  of  magnitude,  and  as  he  does  not 
admit  negative  solutions,  it  is  often  necessary  for  him  to  reject 
a  solution  which  he  has  found  by  a  straightforward  method 
because  it  does  not  satisfy  the  necessary  condition ;  he  is  then 
very  frequently  obliged  to  find  solutions  which  lie  within  certain 
limits  in  place  of  those  rejected. 

1.  A   very  simple  case    is  the  following :    Required  to  find 
a  value  of  x  such  that  some  power  of  it,  xn,  shall  lie  between  two 
given  numbers.     Let  the  given  numbers  be  a,  b.     Then  Diophantus' 
method  is  to  multiply  both  a  and  b  by  2n,  3",  and  so  on,  successively, 
until  some  wth  power  is  seen  which  lies  between  the  two  products. 
Thus  suppose  that  cn  lies  between  apn  and  bpn ;  then  we  can  put 
x  =  c\p,  in   which   case   the   condition    is   satisfied,  for  (<://)n   lies 
between  a  and  b. 

Exx.  In  IV.  31  (2)  Diophantus  has  to  find  a  square  between 
i  \  and  2.  He  multiplies  both  by  a  square,  64 ;  this  gives  80  and 
128,  and  100  is  clearly  a  square  which  lies  between  them;  there- 
fore (±gf  or  f|  satisfies  the  prescribed  condition. 

Here,  of  course,  Diophantus  might  have  multiplied  by  any 
other  square,  as  16.  In  that  case  the  limits  would  have  become 
20  and  32 ,  between  these  lies  the  square  25,  which  gives  the  same 
square  ff  as  that  before  found. 

In  VI.  21  a  sixth  power  ("cube-cube")  is  sought  which  shall 
lie  between  8  and  16.  The  sixth  powers  of  the  first  four  natural 
numbers  are  I,  64,  729,  4096.  Multiply  8  and  16  by  26  or  64,  and 
we  have  as  limits  512  and  1024,  between  which  729  lies.  There- 
fore -7^j9-  is  a  sixth  power  satisfying  the  given  condition.  To 
multiply  by  729  in  this  case  would  not  give  us  a  solution. 

2.  Sometimes  a  value  of  x  has  to  be  found  which  will  give 
some  function  of  x  a  value  intermediate  between  the  values  of  two 
other  functions  of  x. 

Ex.  i.     In  IV.  25  it  is  necessary  to  find  a  value  of  x  such  that 
8/(;r2  +.*•)  shall  lie  between  x  and  x  +  i. 
The  first  condition  gives  8  >x3  +  x*. 


DIOPHANTUS'    METHODS   OF  SOLUTION  95 

Diophantus  accordingly  assumes  that 


which  is  greater  than  xs+x*. 

Thus  #  =  f  satisfies  one  condition.     It  is  also  seen  to  satisfy 

o 

the  second  condition,  or  —  -  <x+  I.     Diophantus.  however,  says 
x*  +  x 

nothing  about  the  second  condition  being  satisfied  ;  his  method  is, 
therefore,  here  imperfect. 

Ex.  2.     In  V.  30  a  value  of  x  has  to  be  found  which  shall  make 
*  >  |  (*2  -  60)  but  <l(;tr2-6o), 

that  is,  x*  —  60  > 

x*  -  60  <  &r 

Hence,  says  Diophantus,  x  is  not  less  than  1  1  and  not  greater 
than  12.  We  have  already  spoken  (p.  60  sqq.)  of  his  treatment 
of  such  cases. 

Next,  the  problem  in  question  requires  that  x*  —  6o  shall  be 
a  square.  Assume  then  that 

x*  —  60  =  (x  —  mf, 
and  we  have  x  —  (m*  +  6o)/2m. 

Since,  says  Diophantus,^  is  greater  than  11  and  less  than  12, 
it  follows  that 

m2  +  60  >  22m  but  <  247/2  ; 

and  m  must  therefore  lie  between  19  and  21  (cf.  p.  62  above). 
He  puts  m  =  20,  and  so  finds  x=n^. 

III.    METHOD  OF  APPROXIMATION  TO  LIMITS. 

We  come,  lastly,  to  a  very  distinctive  method  called  by 
Diophantus  TrapHrorrjs  or  Trapia-orijTos  dytoyrj.  The  object  of  this 
is  to  solve  such  problems  as  that  of  finding  two,  or  three,  square 
numbers  the  sum  of  which  is  a  given  number,  while  each  of  them 
approximates  as  closely  as  possible  to  one  and  the  same  number. 

This  method  can  be  best  exhibited  by  giving  Diophantus'  two 
instances,  in  the  first  of  which  two  such  squares,  and  in  the  second 
three,  are  required.  In  cases  like  this  the  principles  cannot  be 
so  well  indicated  with  general  symbols  as  with  concrete  numbers, 
which  have  the  advantage  that  their  properties  are  immediately 


96  INTRODUCTION 

obvious,  and  the  separate  expression   of  conditions    is   rendered 
unnecessary. 

Ex.  I.     Divide  13  into  two  squares  each  of  which  >6  (v.  9). 
Take  half  of  13,  or  6^,  and  find  what  small  fraction  ijx^  added 
to  it  will  make  it  a  square  :  thus 

6^  +  —  ,  or  26  H  —  -  ,  must  be  a  square. 
Diophantus  assumes 

26+  -3  «Y$  +  i)  i  or  26j2  +  i  =  ($y  -f  i)a, 

whence  y=  10  and  1/7*  =  ^,  or  i/^  =  ^;  and 

6^+^=  a  square,  (W- 

[The  assumption  of  (i^+i)4  is  not  arbitrary,  for  assume 
26?*+  i  —(Py-\-  i)s>  and_y  is  then  2//(26—  /");  since  ijy  should  be 
a  small  proper  fraction,  $  is  the  most  suitable  and  the  smallest 
possible  value  for/,  inasmuch  as  26  -f  <  2p  or/8  +  2p  +  i  >  27.] 

It  is  now  necessary,  says  Diophantus,  to  divide  13  into  two 
squares  the  sides  of  which  are  both  as  near  as  possible  to  f^. 

Now  the  sides  of  the  two  squares  into  which  13  is  naturally 
decomposed  are  3  and  2,  and 

3  is  >  ft  by  &, 
2  is  <  ft  by  ^ 

But,  if  3  —  -fa  ,  2  +  ^  were  taken  as  the  sides  of  two  squares,  the 
sum  of  the  squares  would  be 


which  is  >  13. 

Accordingly  Diophantus  puts  3  —  gx,  2  +  i  ix  for  the  sides  of 
the  required  squares,  where  therefore  x  is  not  exactly  ^  but 
near  it. 

Thus  (3  -  9*)'  +  (2  +  i  \xj  =  1  3, 

and  Diophantus  obtains  ^r=_^T. 

The  sides  of  the  required  squares  are  f£f,  f$f. 

[It  is  of  course  a  necessary  condition  that  the  original  number, 
here  13,  shall  be  a  number  capable  of  being  expressed  as  the  sum 
of  two  squares.] 


DIOPHANTUS'  METHODS  OF  SOLUTION  97 

Ex.  2.  Divide  10  into  three  squares  such  that  each  of  them 
is  >  3  (v.  n). 

[The  original  number,  here  10,  must  of  course  be  expressible 
as  the  sum  of  three  squares.] 

Take  one-third  of  10,  or  3^,  and  find  what  small  fraction  of  the 
form  i/x*  added  to  3^  will  make  a  square;  i*.  we  have  to  make 

30  +  —  ,  a  square,  or  30^+  i  a  square,  where  3/r  =  i/y. 

Diophantus  assumes 

307*+  i  =(57+  i)*, 
whence  .7  =  2  and  therefore  i/*»  =  &  ;  and  3^  +  ^ff  =  W»  a  square. 

[As  before,  if  we  assume  y*)P  =  (py+  i)J,^'  =  2//(3O—  /*);  and, 
since  ijy  must  be  a  small  proper  fraction,  30—  p*  should  be  <  2p, 
or  /*  +  2/-f  i  >3i.  Accordingly  Diophantus  chooses  5  for/  as 
being  the  smallest  possible  integral  value.] 

We  have  now,  says  Diophantus,  to  make  each  of  the  sides 
of  our  required  squares  as  near  as  may  be  to  ty. 

Now  10 


and  3,  f,  ±  are  the  sides  of  three  squares  the  sum  of  which  is  10. 
Bringing  (3,  f,  §)  and  -^  to  a  common  denominator,  we  have 


And 


If  now  we  took  3  —  f$,  f  +  §£,  f  +  f£  for  sides  of  squares,  the 
sum  of  the  squares  would  be  3  (*£f  or  ^^,  which  is  >  10. 

Accordingly  Diophantus   assumes  as  the  sides   of  the  three 
required  squares 

3-35*.  f  +  37*.  1  +  31*. 
where  x  must  therefore  be  not  exactly  ^  but  near  it 

Solving        (3  -  3^r)«  +  (f  +  37^  +  (|  +  31*)*  =  10, 
or  10-116*+  3555**=  10, 

we  find  x  =  j^  ; 

the  required  sides  are  therefore 


and  the  required  squares 

1745041   lesigys   1658944 
505681  »   505521  »   50B6X1  * 


98  INTRODUCTION 

Other  instances  of  the  application  of  the  method  will  be  found 
in  V.  10,  12,  13,  14,  where,  however,  the  squares  are  not  required  to 
be  nearly  equal,  but  each  of  them  is  subject  to  limits  which  may 
be  the  same  or  different ;  e.g.  sometimes  each  square  is  merely 
required  to  be  less  than  a  given  number  (10,  say),  sometimes  the 
squares  lie  respectively  between  different  pairs  of  numbers,  some- 
times they  are  respectively  greater  than  different  numbers,  while 
they  are  always  subject  to  the  condition  that  their  sum  is  a  given 
number. 

As  it  only  lies  within  the  scope  of  this  Introduction  to  explain 
what  we  actually  find  in  Diophantus,  I  cannot  do  more  than  give 
a  reference  to  such  investigations  as  those  of  Poselger  in  his 
"  Beitrage  zur  unbestimmten  Analysis"  published  in  the  Abhand- 
lungen  der  Koniglichen  Akademie  der  Wissenscliaften  zu  Berlin  aus 
dem  Jahre  1832,  Berlin,  1834.  One  section  of  this  paper  Poselger 
entitles  "  Annaherungs-methoden  nach  Diophantus,"  and  obtains 
in  it,  on  Diophantus'  principles,  a  method  of  approximation  to  the 
value  of  a  surd  which  will  furnish  the  same  results  as  the  method 
of  continued  fractions,  with  the  difference  that  the  "  Diophantine 
method  "  is  actually  quicker  than  the  method  of  continued  frac- 
tions, so  that  it  may  serve  to  expedite  the  latter. 


CHAPTER    V 

THE   PORISMS   AND   OTHER  ASSUMPTIONS   IN    DIOPHANTUS 

I  HAVE  already  mentioned  (in  Chapter  I.)  the  three  explicit  refer- 
ences made  by  Diophantus  to  "  The  Porisms  "  and  the  possibility 
that,  if  these  formed  a  separate  work,  it  may  have  been  from  that 
work  that  Diophantus  took  a  number  of  other  propositions  relating 
to  properties  of  numbers  which  he  enunciates  or  tacitly  takes  for 
granted  in  the  Arithmetica. 

I  begin  with  the  three  propositions  for  which  he  expressly 
refers  to  "  The  Porisms." 

Porism  i.  In  V.  3  he  says,  "We  have  it  in  the  Porisms  that, 
'  If  each  of  two  numbers  and  their  product  when  severally  added  to 
the  same  given  number  produce  squares,  the  squares  with  which 
they  are  so  connected  are  squares  of  two  consecutive  numbers1.'" 

That  is  to  say,  if  x  +  a  =  mz,  y  +  a  =  n*,  and  if  xy  +  a  is  also  a 
square,  then  m~n=i. 

The  theorem  is  not  correctly  enunciated,  for  it  would  appear 
that  m  ~  n  =  i  is  not  the  only  condition  under  which  the  three 
expressions  may  be  simultaneously  squares. 

For  suppose 

x  +  a  =  m*,    y  +  a  =  n\    xy  +  a  =/2. 

By  means  of  the  first  two  equations  we  have 
xy  +  a  =  m*ri*  —  a  (m2  +  n2  -  i)  +  a\ 

In  order  that 

nfif-  -  a  (m*  +  «2  —  i  )  +  a* 

may  be  a  square  certain  conditions  must  be  satisfied.     One  suffi- 
cient condition  is 


or  m  ~  n  =  ±  i  , 

which  is  Diophantus'  condition. 

1  Literally  "(the  numbers)  arise  from  two  consecutive  squares"  (yeybvaffiv  avb  8i5o 
r(av  Kara  TO  (%?}*)• 

7—2 


INTRODUCTION 
But  we  may  also  regard 


as  an  indeterminate  equation  in  m  of  which  we  know  one  solution, 
namely  m  =  n±  i  . 

Other  solutions  are  then  found  by  substituting  z  +  (n  ±  i)  for 
m,  whence  we  obtain  the  equation 

(nz-a)z*+2{n*(n±  i)-a(n±i)}z 

+  O2  -  a)(n  ±  i  )2  -  a  (nz  -  i  )  +  «2  =/2, 

or  (n-  -a)  z2  +  2  (n*  -a)(n±  i)z  +  {n(n  ±  i)-a}2=p\ 

which  is  easy  to  solve  in  Diophantus'  manner,  since  the  absolute 
term  is  a  square. 

But  in  the  problem  V.  3  three  numbers  are  required,  such  that 
each  of  them,  and  the  product  of  each  pair,  when  severally  added 
to  a  given  number,  produce  squares.  Thus  if  the  third  number  be 
z,  three  additional  conditions  have  to  be  satisfied,  namely 

z  4-  a  =  it2,     zx  +  a  =  v2,    zy  +  a  =  w*. 
The  two  last  conditions  are  satisfied,  if  m+i=n,  by  putting 

z  =  2  (x  +y)  —  i  =  4.m*  -f  40?  +  I  -  4a, 
when  xz  +  a  =  {m(2m  +  i)  -  2a}2 

and 


and  perhaps  this  means  of  satisfying  the  conditions  may  have 
affected  the  formulation  of  the  Porism1. 

The  problem  V.  4  immediately  following  assumes  the  truth  of 
the  same  Porism  with  —  a  substituted  for  -f  a. 

Porism  2.  In  V.  5  Diophantus  says,  "  Again  we  have  it  in  the 
Porisms  that,  '  Given  any  two  consecutive  squares,  we  can  find  in 
addition  a  third  number,  namely  the  number  greater  by  2  than  the 
double  of  the  sum  of  the  two  squares,  which  makes,  the  greatest  of 
three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair  of  them  added  to 
either  the  sum  of  that  pair  or  the  remaining  number  gives  a  square."' 

That  is,  the  three  numbers 


1  Euler  has  a  paper  describing  and  illustrating  a  general  method  of  finding  such 
"porisms"  the  effect  of  which  is  to  secure  that,  when  some  conditions  are  satisfied,  the 
rest  are  simultaneously  satisfied  ("De  problematibus  indeterminatis  quae  videntur  plus 
quam  determinata"  in  Novi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petropol.  1756-57,  Vol.  vi.  (1761), 
p.  85  sqq.  =  Commentationes  arithmeticae  collectae,  I.  pp.  245  —  259).  This  particular 
porism  of  Diophantus  appears  as  a  particular  case  in  §  13  of  the  paper. 


THE  PORISMS  AND  OTHER  ASSUMPTIONS  101 

have  the  property  that  the  product  of  any  two  plus  either  the  sum 
of  those  two  or  the  remaining  number  gives  a  square.  In  fact,  if 
X,  Y,  Z  denote  the  numbers  respectively, 

XY+X+  Y=(  m*  +   m+i)*,    XY+Z=(m*  +   m  +  2)*, 

\T 7     i      y    i      7 f  ^  jj/-  J-  "2ff*  -I-  2^*         V '7  -I-   y    —  /•?••/*  _L  24**  _l_  ^\* 

ZJf +  Z  +  ^  =  (2/«s  +     /«  +  2)2,     Z^+  K=(2*»s  +    »+!)«. 

Porism  3  occurs  in  v.  16.  Unfortunately  the  text  is  defective 
and  Tannery  has  had  to  supply  three  words1 ;  but  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  correct  statement  of  the  Porism  here  in  question  is 
"  The  difference  of  any  two  cubes  is  also  the  sum  of  two  cubes," 
i.e.  can  be  transformed  into  the  sum  of  two  cubes,  or  two  cubes  can 
be  found  the  sum  of  which  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  any 
two  given  cubes.  Diophantus  contents  himself  with  the  enuncia- 
tion of  the  proposition  and  does  not  show  how  to  prove  it  or  how 
he  effected  the  transformation  in  practice.  The  subject  of  the 
transformation  of  sums  and  differences  of  cubes  was  investigated 
by  Vieta,  Bachet  and  Fermat 

Vieta  (Zetetica,  IV.  18-20)  has  three  problems  on  the  subject 

(i)  Given  two  cubes,  to  find  in  rational  numbers  two  other 
cubes  such  that  their  sum  is  equal  to  the  difference  of  the  given 
cubes8. 

As  a  solution  of  a*  —  fc=x*+y*,  he  finds 
a(a?-2P) 


a*  +  P      '    y~ 

rotj  Uoplff fount  on  "  Tarrwr  Suo  Kvfiur  i)  irrepaxh  Kvfkai>  < 

3  The  solution  given  by  Vieta  is  obtainable  thus.    The  given  cubes  being  a3,  A3,  where 
a>  b,  we  assume  x  -  b,  a  -  kx  as  the  sides  of  the  required  cubes. 

Thus 
whence 

This  reduces  to  a  simple  equation  if  we  assume 

•  lP-a?Jk=o,  or  Jk  = 
in  which  case 


and  the  sides  of  the  cubes  are  therefore 


Vieta's  second  problem  is  similarly  solved  by  taking  a+x,  kx-b  as  the  sides  of  the 
required  cubes,  and  the  third  problem  by  taking  x  -  6,  kx  -  a  as  the  sides  of  the  required 
cubes  respectively. 


102  INTRODUCTION 

(2)  Given  two  cubes,  to  find  in  rational  numbers  two 
others  such  that  their  difference  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  given 
cubes. 

Solving  a3  +  &  =  x3  —}>3,  we  find  that 


(3)  Given  two  cubes,  to  find  in  rational  numbers  two  cubes 
such  that  their  difference  is  equal  to  the  difference  of  the  given 
cubes. 

For  the  equation  a3  -  d3  =  x3  —  j3,  Vieta  finds 

_  b(2a*-P)         _  a  (26s  -a9) 

;     at  +  b3     '    y=      tf  +  b3 
as  a  solution1. 

In  the  solution  of  (1}  x  is  clearly  negative  if  2&  >a3;  therefore, 
in  order  that  the  result  may  be  "  rational,"  a3  must  be  >  2^.  But 
for  a  "  rational  "  result  in  (3)  we  must,  on  the  contrary,  have  a3  <  2b3. 
Fermat  was  apparently  the  first  to  notice  that,  in  consequence,  the 
processes  in  (i)  and  (3)  exactly  supplement  each  other,  so  that  by 
employing  them  successively  we  can  effect  the  transformation 
required  in  (i)  even  when  a3  is  not  >  2b3. 

The  process  (2)  is  always  possible  ;  therefore,  by  a  suitable 
combination  of  the  three  processes,  the  transformation  of  a  sum 
of  two  cubes  into  a  difference  of  two  cubes,  or  of  a  difference  of 
two  cubes  into  a  sum  or  a  difference  of  two  other  cubes  is  always 

1  Vieta's  formulae  for  these  transformations  give  any  number  of  very  special  solutions 
(in  integers  and  fractions)of  the  indeterminate  equation  jcs+y3  +  z?  =  v3,  including  solutions 
in  which  one  of  the  first  three  cubes  is  negative.  These  special  solutions  are  based  on 
the  assumption  that  the  values  of  two  of  the  unknowns  are  given  to  begin  with.  Euler 
observed,  however,  that  the  method  does  not  give  all  the  possible  values  of  the  other  two 
even  in  that  case.  Given  the  cubes  33  and  43,  the  method  furnishes  the  solution 

33  +  43+(—  Y=(—  Y,    but   not   the   simpler  solution    33  +  43+53  =  63.      Euler   ac- 

cordingly attacked  the  problem  of  solving  the  equation  x?+y3  +  zs  =  v3  more  generally. 
He  began  with  assuming  only  one,  instead  of  two,  of  the  cubes  to  be  given,  and,  on  that 
assumption,  found  a  solution  much  more  general  than  that  of  Vieta.  Next  he  gave  a 
more  general  solution  still,  on  the  assumption  that  none  of  the  cubes  are  given  to  begin 
with.  Lastly  he  proceeded  to  the  problem  To  find  all  the  sets  of  three  integral  cubes  the 
sum  of  which  is  a  cube  and  showed  how  to  obtain  a  very  large  number  of  such  sets 
including  sets  in  which  one  of  the  cubes  is  negative  (Novi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petropol- 
1756—57,  Vol.  VI.  (1761),  p.  155  sq.  =  C  omni  enta  done  s  arithmeticae,  I.  pp.  193  —  207). 
The  problem  of  solving  xs+y3=z3  +  7p  in  integers  in  any  number  of  ways  had  occupied 
Frenicle,  who  gave  a  number  of  solutions  (Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  ill.  pp.  420,  535)  ;  but  the 
method  by  which  he  discovered  them  does  not  appear, 


THE  PORISMS  AND  OTHER   ASSUMPTIONS  103 

practicable1.  Fermat  showed  also  how,  by  a  repeated  use  of  the 
several  processes  as  required,  we  can  transform  a  sum  of  two  cubes 
into  a  sum  of  two  other  cubes,  the  latter  sum  into  the  sum  of  two 
others  and  so  on  ad  infinitum*. 

Besides   the   "  Porisms "   there   are    many   other    propositions 
assumed  or  implied  by  Diophantus  which  are  not  definitely  called 

1  Fermat  (note  on  IV.  2)  illustrates  by  the  following  case  : 

Given  two  cubes  125  and  64,  to  transform  their  difference  into  the  sum  of  two  other 
cubes. 

Here  a=s,  6=4,  and  so  26s > a3',  therefore  we  must  first  apply  the  third  process 
by  which  we  obtain 

'-"(*)' -(*)'• 

As  f  -7   J  >  2  /  -~-  J  ,  we  can,  by  the  first  process,  turn  the  difference  between  the 

cubes  (  -—-  )    and  (  ?-  )    into  the  sum  of  two  cubes. 
\<>3/  \63/ 

"  In  fact,"  says  Fermat,  "if  the  three  processes  are  used  in  turn  and  continued 
ad  infinitum,  we  shall  get  a  succession  ad  infinitum  of  two  cubes  satisfying  the  same 
condition  ;  for  from  the  two  cubes  last  found,  the  sum  of  which  is  equal  to  the  difference 
of  the  two  given  cubes,  we  can,  by  the  second  process,  find  two  more  cubes  the  difference 
of  which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  two  cubes  last  found,  that  is,  to  the  difference 
between  the  two  original  cubes;  from  the  new  difference  between  two  cubes  we  can 
obtain  a  new  sum  of  two  cubes,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum" 

As  a  last  illustration,  to  show  how  a  difference  between  cubes  can  be  transformed  into 
the  difference  between  two  other  cubes  even  where  the  condition  for  process  (3)  is  not 
satisfied,  Fermat  takes  the  case  of  8-  i,  i.e.  the  case  where 
a  =  2,  d=i  and  o?>ilP. 

First  use  process  (i)  and  we  have 

--=®'+© 

Then  use  process  (2),  and 


2  Suppose  it  required  to  solve  the  fourth  problem  of  transforming  the  sum  of  two  cubes 
into  the  sum  of  two  other  cubes. 

Let  it  be  required  so  to  transform  23+  i3  or  9. 

First  transform  the  sum  into  a  difference  of  two  cubes  by  process  (2).     This  gives 


The  latter  two  cubes  satisfy  the  condition  for  process  (3)  and,  applying  that  process, 
we  get 

/2oV_  /i7\»      /I88479V  _  f  365*oV 
\  II       \7  /       \90391  /       \9°391/ 

The  cubes  last  found  satisfy  the  condition  for  process  ( i),  and  accordingly  the  difference 
between  the  said  last  cubes,  and  therefore  the  sum  of  the  original  cubes,  is  at  last  trans- 
formed into  the  sum  of  two  other  cubes. 


io4  INTRODUCTION 

porisms,  though  some  of  them  are  of  the  same  character  as  the 
three  porisms  above  described. 

Of  these  we  may  distinguish  two  classes. 

I.  The  first  class  of  theorems  or  facts  assumed  without  ex- 
planation by  Diophantus  are  more  or  less  of  the  nature  of  identical 
formulae.  Some  are  quite  simple,  e.g.  the  facts  that  the  expressions 
[%(a+b}}z  —  ab  and  a*  (a  +  i)2  +  a2  +  (a  +  i)2  are  respectively 
squares,  that  the  expression  a  (a2  —  a)  +  a  +  (a*  -  a)  is  always  a 
cube,  and  the  like. 

Others  are  more  difficult  and  betoken  a  certain  facility  in  work- 
ing with  quasi-algebraical  expressions.  Examples  of  this  kind  are 
the  following  : 

(a)  If  X=a2x+2a,  Y=(a  +  i)*x  +  2(a  +  i  ),  or,  in  other  words, 
if  xX  +  i  =(ax+  i)2,  xY+  i=[(a+  i)x+  i}2,  then  XY  +  i  is  a 
square  [IV.  20].  As  a  matter  of  fact, 


(/3)     8  times  a  triangular  number  plus  \  gives  a  square  [IV.  38]. 
In  fact,  8  .  £(£±1)  +  j  =  (2x  +  i)2. 


(7)  If  X±a  =  m\  Y±a  =  (m  +  i)2,  and  Z=2(X+Y)-i, 
then  the  expressions  YZ  ±  a,  ZX  ±  a,  X  Y  ±  a  are  all  squares. 
(The  upper  signs  refer  to  the  assumption  in  V.  3,  the  lower  to  that 
in  V.  4.) 

In  fact,  YZ  ±  a  =  {(m  +  i)(2m  +  i)  +  2a}\ 

ZX  ±  a=  [m(2m  +  i)+  2a}2, 
XY±a={m(m+  i)  +  a}\ 


then  the  six  expressions 

FZ-(  F+Z),      ZX-(Z+X),      XY-(X+  F) 
YZ-X,  ZX-Y,  XY-Z 

are  all  squares  [v.  6]. 
In  fact, 
YZ  -  (  F+  Z)  =  (2m*  +  $m  +  3)2,     FZ  -  X  =  (2m*  +  $m  +  4)2,  etc. 

2.     The  second  class  is  much  more  important,  consisting  of  a 
number  of  propositions  in  the  Theory  of  Numbers  which  we  find 


THE   PORISMS  AND   OTHER  ASSUMPTIONS  105 

first  stated  or  assumed  in  the  Arithmetica.  It  was,  in  general,  in 
explanation  or  extension  of  these  that  Fermat's  most  famous  notes 
were  written.  How  far  Diophantus  possessed  scientific  proofs  of 
the  propositions  which  he  assumes,  as  distinct  from  a  merely 
empirical  knowledge  of  them,  must  remain  to  a  great  extent 
matter  of  speculation. 

(a)  Theorems  in  DiopJtantus  respecting  the  composition  of  num- 
bers as  the  sum  of  two  squares. 

(1)  Any  square  number  can  be  resolved  into  two  squares  in 
any  number  of  ways,  II.  8. 

(2)  Any  number   which   is  the  sum  of  two  squares  can  be 
resolved  into  two  other  squares  in  any  number  of  ways,  II.  9, 

N.B.  It  is  implied  throughout  that  the  squares  may  be  frac- 
tional as  well  as  integral. 

(3)  If  there  are  two  whole  numbers  each  of  which  is  the  sum  of 
tivo  squares,  their  product  can  be  resolved  into  the  sum  of  two  squares 
in  two  ways,  III.  19. 

The  object  of  III.  19  is  to  find  four  rational  right-angled  triangles 
having  the  same  hypotenuse.  The  method  is  this.  Form  two 
right-angled  triangles  from  (a,  b)  and  (c,  d)  respectively,  i.e.  let 
the  sides  of  the  triangles  be  respectively 


and  c-  +  d\  ?  -  d*,  2cd. 

Multiplying  all  the  sides  in  each  by  the  hypotenuse  of  the  other, 
we  have  two  triangles  with  the  same  hypotenuse,  namely 


(a*  +  &}((*  +  dz),  (a2  -  P)(<*  +  d*\  2ab  (t*  +  d*\ 
and  (*»  +  P)(e?  +  d-\  (a2  +  P)((*  -  d*),  2cd  (a*  +  #). 

Two  other  triangles  having  the  same  hypotenuse  are  obtained 
by  using  the  theorem  enunciated.     In  fact, 

(a2  +  b*)(c*  +  d*)  =  (ac  ±  bd^  +  (ad  +  be? 

and   the   triangles   are   formed    from    ac  ±  bd,   ad  +  be,   being   the 
triangles 

(a2  +  P)(c-  +  d*\  \abcd  +  (a2  -  b*)(c-  -  d*),  2(ac-\-  bd)(ad  -  bc\ 
(a*  +  &)((?  +  d"-\  ^abcd  -  (a2  -  &*)(<;*  -  d*\  2  (ac  -  bd)(ad  +  be). 


106  INTRODUCTION 

In  the  case  taken  by  Diophantus 


and  the  four  triangles  are  respectively 

(65,  52,  39),    (65,  60,  25),    (65,  63,  16),     (65,  56,  33). 

(If  certain  relations1  hold  between  a,  b,  c,  d,  this  method  fails. 
Diophantus  has  provided  against  them  by  taking  two  triangles  "  in 
the  smallest  numbers"  (VTTO  eXa%to-T&>i>  dpid/j,oov),  namely  3,4,  5  and 
5,  12,  13.) 

Upon  this  problem  III.  19  Fermat  has  a  long  and  important 
note  which  begins  as  follows2  : 

"  [i]  A  prime  number  of  the  form  4^+1  is  the  hypotenuse  of 
a  right-angled  triangle  in  one  way  only,  its  square  is  so  in  two 
ways,  its  cube  in  three,  its  biquadrate  in  four  ways,  and  so  on  ad 
infinitum. 

"[2]  The  same  prime  number  4«  +  I  and  its  square  are  the 
sum  of  two  squares  in  one  way  only,  its  cube  and  its  biquadrate 
in  two  ways,  its  fifth  and  sixth  powers  in  three  ways,  and  so  on  ad 
infinitum. 

"[3]  If  a  prime  number  which  is  the  sum  of  two  squares  be 
multiplied  into  another  prime  number  which  is  also  the  sum  of 
two  squares,  the  product  will  be  the  sum  of  two  squares  in  two 
ways  ;  if  the  first  prime  be  multiplied  into  the  square  of  the  second 

1  (i)  We  must  not  have  a\b  —  c\d  or  a\b  =  d\c,  for  in  either  case  one  of  the  perpendiculars 
of  one  of  the  resulting  triangles  vanishes,  making  that  triangle  illusory.  Nor  (2)  must 
c\d  be  equal  to  (a  +  b)l(a-b)  or  to  (a-l>)j(a  +  l>),  for  in  the  first  case  ac-bd=ad+bc, 
and  in  the  second  case  ac  +  bd=ad-bc,  so  that  one  of  the  sums  of  squares  equal  to 
(a?  +  l>2)  (c2  +  cf2)  is  the  sum  of  two  equal  squares,  and  consequently  the  triangle  formed 
from  the  sides  of  these  equal  squares  is  illusory,  one  of  its  perpendicular  sides  vanishing. 

3  G.  Vacca  (in  Bibliotheca  Mat  hematic  a,  H3.  1901,  pp.  358-9)  points  out  that  Fermat 
seems  to  have  been  anticipated,  in  the  matter  of  these  theorems,  by  Albert  Girard,  who 
has  the  following  note  on  Diophantus  v.  9  (Oeuvres  mathhnatiques  de  Simon  Stevin  par 
Albert  Girard,  1634,  p.  156,  col.  i): 

"  ALB.  GlR.  Determinaison  d'un  nombre  qui  se  peut  diviser  en  deux  quarrez  entiers. 

I.  Tout  nombre  quarre. 

II.  Tout  nombre  premier  qui  excede  un  nombre  quaternaire  de  1'unite. 

III.  Le  produict  de  ceux  qui  sont  tels. 

IV.  Et  le  double  d'un  chacun  d'iceux. 

Laquelle  determinaison  n'estant  faicte  n'y  de  PAutheur  n'y  des  interpretes,  servira  tant 
en  la  presente  et  suivante  comme  en  plusieurs  autres.  " 

Now  Girard  died  on  9  December,  1632  ;  and  the  Theorems  of  Fermat  above 
quoted  are  apparently  mentioned  by  him  for  the  first  time  in  his  letter  to  Mersenne  of 
25  December,  1640  (Oeuvres  de  Fermat^  II.  p.  213).  Was  the  passage  of  Girard  known 
to  Fermat  ? 


THE   PORISMS  AND  OTHER   ASSUMPTIONS  107 

prime,  the  product  will  be  the  sum  of  two  squares  in  three  ways ; 
if  the  first  prime  be  multiplied  into  the  cube  of  the  second,  the 
product  will  be  the  sum  of  two  squares  in  four  ways,  and  so  on 
ad  infinitum*." 

It  is  not  probable  that  Diophantus  was  aware  that  prime  num- 
bers of  the  form  4#  +  I  and  numbers  arising  from  the  multiplication 
of  such  numbers  are  the  only  classes  of  numbers  which  are  always 
the  sum  of  two  squares ;  this  was  first  proved  by  Euler2.  But  it 
is  remarkable  that  Diophantus  should  have  selected  the  first  two 
prime  numbers  of  the  form  4«+  I,  namely  5  and  13,  which  are 
both  sums  of  two  squares,  as  the  hypotenuses  of  his  first  two  right- 
angled  triangles  and  then  made  their  product,  65,  the  hypotenuse 
of  other  right-angled  triangles,  that  product  having  precisely  the 
property  of  being,  as  in  Fermat's  [3],  the  sum  of  two  squares  in 
two  ways.  Diophantus  may  therefore  have  had  an  inkling,  whether 
obtained  empirically  or  otherwise,  of  some  of  the  properties  enunci- 
ated by  Fermat. 

(4)  Still  more  remarkable  is  a  condition  of  possibility  of  solution 
prefixed  to  the  problem  V.  9.  The  object  of  this  problem  is  "  to 
divide  I  into  two  parts  such  that,  if  a  given  number  is  added  to 
either  part,  the  result  will  be  a  square."  Unfortunately,  the  text 
of  the  added  condition  is  uncertain.  There  is  no  doubt  about  the 
first  few  words,  "  The  given  number  must  not  be  odd"  />.  No  number 
of  tlie  form  4«  +  3  [or  4*1  —  i]  can  be  tJte  sum  of  two  squares. 

The  text,  however,  of  the  latter  half  of  the  condition  is  corrupt. 
The  true  condition  is  given  by  Fermat  thus :  "  The  given  number 
must  not  be  odd,  and  the  double  of  it  increased  by  one,  when  divided 
by  tJte  greatest  square  which  measures  it,  must  not  be  divisible  by  a 
prime  number  of  the  form  %n—  I."  (Note  upon  V.  9;  also  in  a 
letter  to  Roberval3.)  There  is  room  for  any  number  of  conjectures 
as  to  what  may  have  been  Diophantus'  words4. 

1  For  a  fuller  account  of  this  note  see  the  Supplement,  section  I. 

8  Novi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petrofol.  1751-3,  Vol.  IV.  (1758),  pp.  3-40,  and  1754-5, 
Vol.  v.  (1760),  pp.  3-58=  Commentationes  arithmcticae,  I.  pp.  155-173  and  pp.  110—233  '•> 
cf.  Legendre,  Zahlentheorie,  tr.  Maser,  I.  p.  108;  Weber  and  Wellstein's  EncyclopdtSe 
der  Ekmentar-Mathematik,  I2.  pp.  285  sqq. 

3  Ofttvres  de  Fermat,  II.  pp.  203-4,     See  the  Supplement,  section  I. 

4  Bachet's  text  has  5e?  5^  rbv  di86tJKvov  /n^re  re/xerffdr  flrcu,  fir/re  6  SwXcurfuH'  oirrou 
q'  n°  a.  neifova.  txi  P*(KK  5.  17  fifrpeiTai  irrb  rov  a0".  t°*. 

He  also  says  that  a  Vatican  MS.  reads  nijre  6  5ir\affiw  afoov  aptOnov  /xortWa  a. 
fjLti^ova  txV  M^pos  TfTaprov,  rj  fjLerpeirai  intb  rov  ffxarov  apiffpov. 

Neither  does  Xylander  help  us  much.     He  frankly  tells  us  that  he  cannot  understand 


io8  INTRODUCTION 

There  would  seem  to  be  no  doubt  that  in  Diophantus'  condition 
there  was  something  about  "  double  the  number  "  (i.e.  a  number  of 
the  form  \n\  also  about  "  greater  by  unity  "  and  "  a  prime  number." 
It  seems,  then,  not  unlikely  that,  if  Diophantus  did  not  succeed  in 
giving  the  complete  sufficient  and  necessary  condition  stated  by 
Fermat,  he  made  an  approximation  to  it  ;  and  he  certainly  knew 
that  no  number  of  the  form  4#  +  3  could  be  the  sum  of  two 
squares l. 

(b)     On  members  which  are  the  sum  of  three  squares. 

In  the  problem  v.  1 1  a  condition  is  stated  by  Diophantus  re- 
specting the  form  of  a  number  which,  added  to  three  parts  of  unity, 
makes  each  of  them  square.  If  a  be  this  number,  clearly  30+1 
must  be  divisible  into  three  squares. 

Respecting  the  number  a  Diophantus  says,  "  It  must  not  be  2 
or  any  multiple  of  8  increased  by  2." 

That  is,  a  number  of  the  form  2^n  +  7  cannot  be  the  sum  of  three 
squares.  Now  the  factor  3  of  24  is  irrelevant  here,  for  with  respect 
to  three  this  number  is  of  the  form  ^m  +  I,  and  this,  so  far  as  3  is 
concerned,  might  be  a  square  or  the  sum  of  two  or  three  squares. 
Hence  we  may  neglect  the  factor  3  in  24^. 

We  must  therefore  credit  Diophantus  with  the  knowledge  of 


the  passage.  "  Imitari  statueram  bonos  grammaticos  hoc  loco,  quorum  (ut  aiunt)  est 
multa  nescire.  Ego  vero  nescio  heic  non  multa,  sed  paene  omnia.  Quid  enim  (ut 
reliqua  taceam)  est  ju^re  6  diirXafflwv  O.VTOV  op  fju>  a  etc.,  quae  causae  huius  irpoffSiopifffj,ov, 
quae  processus?  immo  qui  processus,  quae  operatic,  quae  solutio?" 

Nesselmann  discusses  an  attempt  made  by  Schulz  to  correct  the  text,  and  himself 
suggests  Atiyre  TOV  SurXaaiova  avTov  &pi9/j.bv  fj.ovdSi  /j.ei£ova  ^xet")  &  perpetrat  vvo  TIVOS 
irp&Tov  dpi6fwv.  But  this  ignores  frfpos  rtraprov  and  is  not  satisfactory. 

Hankel,  however  (Gesch.  d.  Math.  p.  169),  says:  "  Ich  zweifele  nicht,  dass  die 
von  den  Msscr.  arg  entstellte  Determination  so  zu  lesen  ist :  Aei  5^  rbv  diS6/j.evov  n^re 
wepiffffbv  elva.i,  /tijre  ^bv  oiirXafftova.  O.VTOV  api8fj.bv  fiovASi  d  (Jifl^ova  /j.fTptiff6ai  vir6  TOV 
irp&Tov  dpiOfiov,  6s  &v  fi.ovA.dt.  d  ndfav  fyv  V-tpos  rtrapTov."  This  correction  seems  a 
decidedly  probable  one.  Here  the  words  ptpos  T^raprov  find  a  place ;  and,  secondly, 
the  repetition  of  fj.ov&di  d  fj.d$wv  might  well  confuse  a  copyist.  TOV  for  TOV  is  of  course 
natural  enough ;  Nesselmann  reads  rtvos  for  TOV. 

Tannery,  improving  on  Hankel,  reads  A«  5r;  TOV  $i56u.fvov  yu^re  wepurffov  elvai,  //.ijre 
trip  SurXturioj'  avrov  Kal  fj.ov6.8i  M'?  /xeiforo  fjierpeiffOai  viro  TOV  irp&TOv  dpiB/J.ov  <ov  6 
fiovddt,  fdq.  fj.eifav>  ?x?7  M^pos  T^Taprov  t,  "  the  given  number  must  not  be  odd,  and  twice 
it  plus  i  must  not  be  measured  by  any  prime  number  which,  when  increased  by  i,  is 
divisible  by  4." 

1  A  discussion  of  the  text  and  a  suggestion  as  to  the  considerations  which  may  have 
led  to  the  formulation  of  the  condition  will  be  found  in  Jacobi,  "  Ueber  die  Kenntnisse 
des  Diophantus  von  der  Zusammensetzung  der  Zahlen"  (Berliner  Monatsberichte,  1847; 
Gesammelte  Werke,  vil.,  1891,  pp.  332-344). 


THE  PORISMS  AND   OTHER  ASSUMPTIONS  109 

the  fact  that  no  nttmber  of  the  form  8«  +  7  can  be  the  sum  of 
three  squares*. 

This  condition  is  true,  but  does  not  include  all  the  numbers 
which  cannot  be  the  sum  of  three  squares,  for  it  is  not  true  that 
all  numbers  which  are  not  of  the  form  8#  +  7  are  made  up  of  three 
squares.  Even  Bachet  remarked  that  the  number  a  might  not  be 
of  the  form  32^  +  9,  or  a  number  of  the  form  96^  +  28  cannot  be 
the  sum  of  three  squares. 

Fermat  gives  the  conditions  to  which  a  must  be  subject  thus2. 

Write  down  two  geometrical  series  (common  ratio  of  each  4), 
the  first  and  second  series  beginning  respectively  with  i,  8, 

i       4       16       64       256     1024      4096 
8     32     128     512     2048     8192     32768; 

then  a  must  not  be  (i)  any  number  obtained  by  taking  twice  any 
term  of  the  upper  series  and  adding  all  the  preceding  terms,  or 
(2)  the  number  found  by  adding  to  the  numbers  so  obtained  any 
multiple  of  the  corresponding  term  of  the  second  series. 
Thus  a  must  not  be 


128/^+2.16  +  4+1          =128/^  +  37, 
512^+  2.64+  16  +  4+  i  =  512^+  149, 
and  so  on,  where  k  =  o  or  any  integer. 

That  is,  since  i  +  4  +  42  +  .  .  .  +  4n-1  =  £(4"  —  i  ),  a  cannot  be  either 


therefore  30  +  I  cannot  be  of  the  form  4"  (24^  +  7)  or  4n  (8£  +  7). 

Again,  there  are  other  problems,  e.g.  v.  10  and  V.  20,  in  which, 
though  conditions  are  necessary  for  the  possibility  of  solution,  none 
are  mentioned  ;  but  suitable  assumptions  are  tacitly  made,  without 
explanation.  It  does  not  follow,  from  the  omission  to  state  the 
conditions,  that  Diophantus  was  ignorant  of  even  the  minutest 
points  connected  with  them  ;  as,  however,  we  have  no  definite 
statements,  we  must  be  content  to  remain  in  doubt. 

1  Legendre  proved  (Zahlentheorie,  tr.  Maser,  I.  p.  386),  that  numbers  of  this  form  are 
the  only  odd  numbers  which  are  not  divisible  into  three  squares. 
3  Note  on  Diophantus  v.  1  1  . 


no  INTRODUCTION 

(c)     Composition  of  numbers  as  the  sum  of  four  squares. 

Every  number  is  either  a  square  or  the  sum  of  two,  three  or  four 
squares.  This  well-known  theorem,  enunciated  by  Fermat1,  and 
proved  by  Lagrange2  (who  followed  up  results  obtained  by  Euler) 
shows  at  once  that  any  number  can  be  divided  into  four  squares 
either  integral  or  fractional,  since  any  square  number  can  be  divided 
into  two  other  squares,  integral  or  fractional.  We  have  now  to  look 
for  indications  in  the  Arithmetica  as  to  how  far  Diophantus  was 
acquainted  with  the  properties  of  numbers  as  the  sum  of  four  squares. 
Unfortunately,  it  is  impossible  to  decide  this  question  with  anything 
like  certainty.  There  are  three  problems,  iv.  29,  30  and  V.  14,  in 
which  it  is  required  to  divide  a  number  into  four  squares,  and  from 
the  absence  of  mention  of  any  condition  to  which  the  number  must 
conform,  considering  that  in  both  cases  where  a  number  is  to 
be  divided  into  three  or  two  squares,  v.  1 1  and  V.  9,  he  does 
state  a  condition,  we  should  probably  be  right  in  inferring  that 
Diophantus  was  aware,  at  least  empirically,  that  any  number  could 
be  divided  into  four  squares.  That  he  was  able  to  prove  the 
theorem  scientifically  it  would  be  rash  to  assert.  But  we  may 
at  least  be  certain  that  Diophantus  came  as  near  to  the  proof  of 
it  as  did  Bachet,  who  takes  all  the  natural  numbers  up  to  120 
and  finds  by  trial  that  all  of  them  can  actually  be  expressed 
as  squares,  or  as  the  sum  of  two,  three  or  four  squares  in  whole 
numbers.  So  much  we  maybe  sure  that  Diophantus  could  do,  and 
hence  he  might  have  empirically  satisfied  himself  that  it  is  possible 
to  divide  any  number  into  four  squares,  integral  or  fractional,  even 
if  he  could  not  give  a  rigorous  mathematical  demonstration  of  the 
general  theorem. 

1  See  note  on  Diophantus  IV.  29 ;  cf.  also  section  I.  of  the  Supplement. 

z  "  Demonstration  d'un  theoreme  d'arithmetique  "  in  Nouveaux  Memoires  de  PAcad. 
royale  des  sciences  de  Berlin,  annee  1770,  Berlin  1772,  pp.  123-133=  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange, 
in.  pp.  187-201  ;  cf.  Wertheim's  account  of  the  proof  in  his  Diophantus,  pp.  324-330. 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE   PLACE   OF   DIOPHANTUS 

IN  algebra,  as  in  geometry,  the  Greeks  learnt  the  beginnings 
from  the  Egyptians.  Familiarity  on  the  part  of  the  Greeks  with 
Egyptian  methods  of  calculation  is  well  attested.  Thus  (i)  Psellus 
in  the  letter  published  by  Tannery1  speaks  of  "the  method 
of  arithmetical  calculations  used  by  the  Egyptians,  by  which 
problems  in  analysis  are  handled "  (77  /car'  Alyvrrrtovf  rtov 
aptdfjbwv  /j,edoBo<i,  81  779  oiKovofj^eirat  ra  Kara  rrjv  dva\VTiicr)v 
7rpo/3A,?7/4aTa) ;  the  details  which  he  goes  on  to  give  respecting 
the  technical  terms  for  different  kinds  of  numbers,  including  the 
powers  of  the  unknown  quantity,  in  use  among  the  Egyptians 
are  doubtless  taken  from  Anatolius.  (2)  The  scholiast  to  Plato's 
Charmides  165  E  may  be  drawing  on  the  same  source  when  he 
says  that  "  parts  of  \oyia-TtKij  (the  science  of  calculation)  are  the 
so-called  Greek  and  Egyptian  methods  in  multiplications  and 
divisions,  and  the  additions  and  subtractions  of  fractions.... The 
aim  of  it  all  is  the  service  of  common  life  and  utility  for  contracts, 
though  it  seems  to  deal  with  things  of  sense  as  if  they  were 
perfect  or  abstract."  (3)  Plato  himself,  in  the  Laws2,  says  that 
free-born  boys  should,  as  is  the  practice  in  Egypt,  learn,  side  by 
side  with  reading,  simple  mathematical  calculations  adapted  to  their 
age,  which  should  be  put  into  a  form  such  as  to  give  amusement 
and  pleasure  as  well  as  instruction  ;  e.g.  there  should  be  different 
distributions  of  such  things  as  apples,  garlands,  etc.,  different 
arrangements  of  numbers  of  boys  in  contests  of  boxing  or  wrestling, 
illustrations  by  bowls  of  different  metals,  gold,  copper,  silver,  etc., 
and  simple  problems  of  calculation  of  mixtures ;  all  of  which  are 
useful  in  military  and  civil  life  and  "  in  any  case  make  men  more 
useful  to  themselves  and  more  wide-awake." 

1  Dioph.  II.  pp.  37-42.  2  Laws,  VII.  819  A-c. 


ii2  INTRODUCTION 

The  Egyptian  calculations  here  in  point  (apart  from  their 
method  of  writing  and  calculating  in  fractions,  which  differed 
from  that  of  the  Greeks  in  that  the  Greeks  worked  with  ordinary 
fractions,  whereas  the  Egyptians  separated  fractions  into  sums 
of  submultiples,  with  the  exception  of  |  which  was  not  decomposed) 
are  the  ^^-calculations.  Hau,  meaning  a  heap,  is  the  term  used 
to  denote  the  unknown  quantity,  and  the  calculations  in  terms 
of  it  are  equivalent  to  the  solutions  of  simple  equations  with  one 
unknown  quantity1.  Examples  from  the  Papyrus  Rhind2  corre- 
spond to  the  following  equations: 

=  19, 


(jr+f*)-i  (*  +  !*)  =10- 

Before  leaving  the  Egyptians,  it  is  right  to  mention  their 
anticipation,  though  in  an  elementary  form,  of  a  favourite  method 
of  Diophantus,  that  of  the  "  false  supposition  "  or  "  regula  falsi  " 
as  it  is  sometimes  called.  An  arbitrary  assumption  is  made  as  to 
the  value  of  the  unknown,  and  the  value  is  afterwards  corrected 
by  a  comparison  of  the  result  of  substituting  the  wrong  value  in 
the  original  expression  with  the  actual  fact.  Two  instances 
mentioned  by  Cantor3  may  be  given.  The  first,  taken  from  the 
Papyrus  Rhind,  is  the  problem  of  dividing  100  loaves  among  five 
persons  in  numbers  forming  an  arithmetical  progression  and  such 
that  one-  seventh  of  the  sum  of  the  first  three  shares  is  equal  to 
the  sum  of  the  other  two.  If  a  +  qd,  a  +  ^d,  a+2d,  a  +  d,  a 
are  the  shares,  we  have 


or  d  =  $^a. 

Ahmes  merely  says,  without  explanation,  "  make  the  difference, 
as  it  is,  5^,"  and  then,  assuming  a=i,  writes  the  series  23,  17^, 
12,  6^,  i.  The  addition  of  these  gives  60,  and  100  is  if  times  60. 
Ahmes  says  simply  "multiply  if  times"  and  thus  gets  the  correct 
values  38^,  294,  20,  iof  £,  if.  The  second  instance  (taken  from 
the  Berlin  Papyrus  6619)  is  the  solution  of  the  equations 

x*+y*=ioo, 
x  \y  =  i  :  f  ,   or  y  =  £  x. 

1  For  a  complete  account  of  the  subject  the  reader  is  referred  to  Moritz  Cantor's 
Geschichte  der  Mathematik,  I3.  Chapter  II.,  especially  pp.  74-81. 

2  Eisenlohr,  Ein  mathematisches  Handbuch  der  alten  Agypter  {Papyrus  Rhind  des 
British  Museum)  ,  Leipzig,   1877. 

3  Geschichte  der  Math.  I3.  pp.  78-9  and  p.  95. 


THE   PLACE   OF  DIOPHANTUS  113 


x  is  first  assumed  to  be  I,  and  x*+jP  is  then  found  to  be  25/16. 
In  order  to  make  100,  25/16  has  to  be  multiplied  by  64  or  S2.  The 
true  value  of  x  is  therefore  8  times  I,  or  8. 

The  simple  equations  solved  in  the  Papyrus  Rhind  are  just  the 
kind  of  equations  of  which  we  find  numerous  examples  in  the 
arithmetical  epigrams  included  in  the  Greek  Anthology.  Most 
of  these  appear  under  the  name  of  Metrodorus,  a  grammarian, 
who  probably  lived  about  the  time  of  the  Emperors  Anastasius  I. 
(491-518  A.D.)  and  Justin  I.  (518-527  A.D.).  They  were  obviously 
only  collected  by  Metrodorus,  from  ancient  as  well  as  more  recent 
sources  ;  none  of  them  can  with  certainty  be  attributed  to  Metro- 
dorus himself.  Many  of  the  epigrams  (46  in  number)  lead  to 
simple  equations,  with  one  unknown,  of  the  type  of  the  hau- 
equations,  and  several  of  them  are  problems  of  dividing  a  number 
of  apples  or  nuts  among  a  certain  number  of  persons,  that  is 
to  say,  the  very  type  of  problem  alluded  to  by  Plato.  For 
example,  a  number  of  apples  has  to  be  determined  such  that,  if 
four  persons  out  of  six  receive  one-third,  one-eighth,  one-fourth 
and  one-fifth  respectively  of  the  total  number  of  apples,  while  the 
fifth  person  receives  ten  apples,  there  remains  one  apple  as  the 
share  of  the  sixth  person,  i.e. 


We  are  reminded  of  Plato's  allusion  to  problems  about  bowls 
(<f>id\at)  of  different  metals  by  two  problems  (Antliol.  Palat.  XIV. 
12  and  50)  in  which  the  weights  of  bowls  have  to  be  found.  We 
can  now  understand  the  allusions  of  Proclus1  and  the  scholiast 
on  Charmides  165  E  to  p,rj\lTac  and  (f>ia\iTai  dpt0(j,oi,  the  adjectives 
being  respectively  formed  from  p.fi\ovy  an  apple,  and  </>taXi;,  a 
bowl.  It  is  clear  from  Plato's  allusions  that  the  origin  of  such 
simple  algebraical  problems  dates  back,  at  least,  to  the  fifth 
century  B.C. 

I  have  not  thought  it  worth  while  to  reproduce  at  length  the 
problems  contained  in  the  Anthology2,  but  the  following  is  a 
classification  of  them,  (i)  Twenty-three  are  simple  equations 
containing  one  unknown  and  of  the  type  shown  above  ;  one  of 
these  is  the  epigram  on  the  age  of  Diophantus  and  incidents 
in  his  life  (XIV.  126).  (2)  Twelve  more  are  easy  simultaneous 

1  Proclus,  Comment,  on  Eucl.  /.,  ed.  Friedlein,  p.  40,  5. 

2  They  are  printed  in  Greek,  with  the  scholia,  in  Tannery's  edition  of  Diophantus 
(il.  pp.  43-72  and  x),  and  they  are  included  in   Wertheim's  German  translation  of 
Diophantus,  pp.  331-343. 

H.  D.  8 


ii4  INTRODUCTION 

equations  containing  two  unknowns,  and  of  the  same  sort  as 
Diophantus  I.  1-6  ;  or,  of  course,  they  can  be  reduced  to  a  simple 
equation  with  one  unknown  by  means  of  an  easy  elimination. 
One  other  (XIV.  51)  gives  simultaneous  equations  in  three  un- 
knowns 


and  one  (XIV.  49)  gives  four  equations  in  four  unknowns 


With  these  may  be  compared  Diophantus  I.  16-21.  (3)  Six  more 
are  problems  of  the  usual  type  about  the  filling  of  vessels  by  pipes  : 
e.g.  (XIV.  130)  one  pipe  fills  the  vessel  in  one  day,  a  second  in  two, 
and  a  third  in  three  ;  how  long  will  all  three  running  together 
take  to  fill  it?  Another  about  brickmakers  (XIV.  136)  is  of  the 
same  sort 

The  Anthology  contains  (4)  two  indeterminate  equations  of 
the  first  degree  which  can  be  solved  in  positive  integers  in  an 
infinite  number  of  ways  (xiv.  48  and  144);  the  first  is  a  distribution 
of  apples  satisfying  the  equation  x  —  ^y  =y,  where  y  is  not  less 
than  2,  and  the  original  number  of  apples  is  $x  ;  the  second  leads 
to  the  following  three  equations  between  four  unknown  quantities  : 


the  general  solution  of  which  is  x  =  4^,  y  =  £,  xl  =  $k,  y^  =  2k.  These 
very  equations,  made  however  determinate  by  assuming  that 
x+y  =  xl  +j/i  =  100,  are  solved  in  Diophantus  I.  12. 

We  mentioned  above  the  problem  in  the  Anthology  (XIV.  49) 
leading  to  the  following  four  simultaneous  linear  equations  with 
four  unknown  quantities, 

x  +  y  =  a, 


x  +  ti  =  c, 


The  general  solution  of  any  number  of  simultaneous  linear 
equations  of  this  type  with  the  same  number  of  unknown  quantities 
was  given  by  Thymaridas,  apparently  of  Paros,  and  an  early 
Pythagorean.  He  gave  a  rule,  e</>oSo<?,  or  method  of  attack  (as 


THE   PLACE  OF  DIOPHANTUS  115 

lamblichus1,  our  informant,  calls  it)  which  must  have  been  widely 
known,  inasmuch  as  it  was  called  by  the  name  of  the  e-n-avdrffia, 
"  flower"  or  "bloom,"  of  Thymaridas.  The  rule  is  stated  in  general 
terms,  but,  though  no  symbols  are  used,  the  content  is  pure 
algebra.  Thymaridas,  too,  distinguishes  between  what  he  calls 
dopia-Tov,  the  undefined  or  unknown  quantity,  and  the  atpio-pevov, 
the  definite  or  known,  therein  anticipating  the  very  phrase  of 
Diophantus,  TrXijOos  povdSow  dopta-rov,  "an  undefined  number  of 
units,"  by  which  he  describes  his  dpidfjios  or  x.  Thymaridas'  rule, 
though  obscurely  expressed,  states  in  effect  that,  if  there  are  n 
equations  between  n  unknown  quantities  ;r,  xlt  x^...xn_l  of  the 
following  form, 


x*+  ...  +  x 
then  the  solution  is  given  by 


«  —  2 

lamblichus  goes  on  to  show  that  other  types  of  equations  can 
be  reduced  to  this,  so  that  the  rule  does  not  leave  us  in  the  lurch 
(ov  Tra/aeX/cet)  in  those  cases  either.  Thus  we  can  reduce  to 
Thymaridas'  form  the  indeterminate  problem  represented  by  the 
following  three  linear  equations  between  four  unknown  quantities  : 


b(u  +  y\ 


From  the  first  equation  we  obtain 

x  +  y  +  z  +  u  =  (a  +  i)  (z  +  u), 

from  which  it  follows  that,  if  x,  y,  z,  u  are  all  to  be  integers, 
x+y  +  z  +  u  must  contain  a+i  as  a  factor.  Similarly  it  must 
contain  b  +  I  and  c  +  I  as  factors. 

Suppose  now  that  x+y+z+u  =  (a+  i)(£+  i)fc+  i).     There- 
fore, by  means  of  the  first  equation,  we  get 


(x+y}    i  +       =(«+  !)(*+!)(*+  I), 

1  lamblichus,    /«    Nicomachi   arithmeticam   introductionem   (ed.    Pistelli),    pp.   62, 
18-68,  26. 

8—2 


n6  INTRODUCTION 


or 

Similarly  x+  z  =  b  (c  +  i)(a+  i), 

x  +  u  =  c(a+  i)(b+  i), 

and  the  equations  are  in  the  form  to  which  Thymaridas'  rule  is 
applicable. 

Hence,  by  that  rule, 

_  a(b+  i)(V+i)  +...-(<?+  I)  (b  4- 


In  order  to  ensure  that  x  may  always  be  integral,  if  is  only 
necessary  to  assume 

x+y+z  +  u  =  2(a+  i)(b  +  i)(c+  i). 

The  factor  2  is  of  course  determined  by  the  number  of  un- 
knowns. If  there  are  n  unknowns,  the  factor  to  be  put  in  place 
of  2  is  n  —  2. 

lamblichus  has  the  particular  case  corresponding  to  a  =  2, 
b  =  3,  c  =  4.  He  goes  on  to  apply  the  method  to  the  equations 


^0"M), 

for  the  case  where  £//=  f ,  mjn  =  |,  pjq  =  f . 

Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  Diophantus  was  not  the 
inventor  of  Algebra.  Nor  was  he  the  first  to  solve  indeterminate 
problems  of  the  second  degree. 

Take,  first,  the  problem  of  dividing  a  square  number  into  two 
squares  (Diophantus  II.  8),  or  of  finding  a  right-angled  triangle 
with  sides  in  rational  numbers.  This  problem  was,  as  we  learn 
from  Proclus1,  attributed  to  Pythagoras,  who  was  credited  with 
the  discovery  of  a  general  formula  for  finding  such  triangles  which 
may  be  shown  thus  : 

-  i\2    _  /;?2H 


\      2 

where  n  is  an  odd  number.     Plato  again  is  credited,  according 
to  the  same  authority,  with  another  formula  of  the  same  sort, 


Comment,  on  Euclid,  Book  /.  pp.  428,  7  sqq. 


THE   PLACE  OF   DIOPHANTUS  117 

Both  these  formulae  are  readily  connected  with  the  geometrical 
proposition  in  Eucl.  II.  5,  the  algebraical  equivalent  of  which  may 
be  stated  as 


The  content  of  Euclid  Book  II.  is  beyond  doubt  Pythagorean,  and 
this  way  of  stating  the  proposition  quoted  could  not  have  escaped 
the  Pythagoreans.  If  we  put  I  for  b  and  the  square  of  any  odd 
number  for  a,  we  have  the  Pythagorean  formula  ;  and,  if  we  put 
a  =  211*,  b  =  2,  we  obtain  Plato's  formula.  Euclid  finds  a  more 
general  formula  in  Book  X.  (Lemma  following  X.  28).  Starting 
with  numbers  u  =  c  +  b  and  v  =  c  —  b,  so  that 

uv  =  cz-  P, 

Euclid  points  out  that,  in  order  that  uv  may  be  a  square,  u  and  v 
must  be  "  similar  plane  numbers  "  or  numbers  of  the  form  mnfP, 
mngr*.  Substituting  we  have 


But  the  problem  of  finding  right-angled  triangles  in  rational 
numbers  was  not  the  only  indeterminate  problem  of  the  second 
degree  solved  by  the  Pythagoreans.  They  solved  the  equation 

2x*-y*=±  i      . 

in  such  a  way  as  to  prove  that  there  are  an  infinite  number  of 
solutions  of  that  equation  in  integral  numbers.  The  Pythagoreans 
used  for  this  purpose  the  system  of  "side-"  and  "diagonal-" 
numbers1,  afterwards  fully  described  by  Theon  of  Smyrna  2.  We 
begin  with  unity  as  both  the  first  "side"  and  the  first  "  diagonal"; 

thus 

#1=  i,  d^=  i. 

We  then  form  (a2,  d2),  (a3,  d3),  etc.,  in  accordance  with  the  following 
law, 


and  so  on.     Theori  states,  with  reference  to  these  numbers,  the 
general  proposition  that 

dn2=2an*±  i, 
and  observes  that  (i)  the  signs  alternate  as  successive  d's  and  a's 

1  See  Proclus,  In  Platonis  rempublicam  commtntarii  (Teubner,  Leipzig),  Vol.  II. 
c.  27,  p.  27,  11-18. 

2  Theon  of  Smyrna,  ed.  Hiller,  pp.  43,  44. 


n8  INTRODUCTION 

are  taken,  d?  —  2a?  being  equal  to  —  i,  d?-2a?  equal  to+i, 
d?  -  2#32  equal  to  -  I  and  so  on,  (2)  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  all 
the  d's  will  be  double  of  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  all  the  a's.  For 
the  purpose  of  (2)  the  number  of  successive  terms  in  each  series, 
if  finite,  must  of  course  be  even.  The  algebraical  proof  is  easy. 


and  so  on,  while  df  —  2a?  =  —  I.  Proclus  tells  us  that  the  property 
was  proved  by  means  of  the  theorems  of  Eucl.  II.  9,  10,  which 
are  indeed  equivalent  to 

(2.X  +j)2  -  2  (X  +_X)2  =  2*2  -f. 

Diophantus  does  not  particularly  mention  the  indeterminate 
equation  2x*—  i  =j2,  still  less  does  he  mention  "side-"  and 
"diagonal-"  numbers.  But  from  the  Lemma  to  VI.  15  (quoted 
above,  p.  69)  it  is  clear  that  he  knew  how  to  find  any  number  of 
solutions  when  one  is  known.  Thus,  seeing  that  x=  i,  /=  i  is 
one  solution,  he  would  put 

2  (i  +  xf  —  i  =  a  square 

=  (px-  i)2  say, 
whence  #  =  (4  +  2/)/(/2  -  2). 

Take  the  value  p=2,  and  we  have  ^  =  4,  or  ;tr+i=5;  and 
2  .  52  —  i  =  49  =  72.  Putting  x  +  5  in  place  of  x,  we  find  a  still 
higher  value,  and  so  on. 

In  a  recent  paper  Heiberg  has  published  and  translated,  and 
Zeuthen  has  commented  on,  still  further  Greek  examples  of  in- 
determinate analysis1.  They  come  from  the  Constantinople  MS. 
(probably  of  I2th  c.)  from  which  Schone  edited  the  Metrica  of 
Heron.  The  first  two  of  the  thirteen  problems  had  been  published 
before  (though  in  a  less  complete  form)  2  ;  the  others  are  new. 

The  first  bids  us  find  two  rectangles  such  that  the  perimeter 
of  the  second  is  three  times  that  of  the  first,  and  the  area  of  the 
first  is  three  times  that  of  the  second  (the  first  of  the  two  con- 
ditions is,  by  some  accident,  omitted  in  the  text).  The  number  3 

1  Bibliotheca  Mathematica,  vm3,  1907-8,  pp.  118-134. 

2  Hultsch's  Heron,  Geeponicat   78,  79.     The  two  problems  are  discussed  by  Cantor, 
Agrimensoren,  p.  62,  and  Tannery,  Mem.  dc  la  soc.  des  sc.  de  Bordeaux,  IV2,  1882. 


THE   PLACE   OF   UIOPHANTUS  119 

is  of  course  only  an  illustration,  and  the  problem  is  equivalent  to 
the  solution  of  the  equations 


xy  =  n.uv      } 

the  solution  given  in  the  text  is  equivalent  to 
x  =  2n*-i,  y  =  2n*  ) 
u  =  n  (4>/s  —  2),  v  =  n) 

Zeuthen  suggests  that  this  solution  may  have  been  arrived  at 
thus.  As  the  problem  is  indeterminate,  it  would  be  natural  to 
make  trial  of  some  hypothesis,  e.g.  to  put  v  =  n.  It  would  follow 
from  the  first  equation  in  (i)  that  u  is  a  multiple  of  n,  say  nz.  We 
have  then 

x  +y  =1+2, 

xy  =  ns2, 

whence  xy  =  n3  (x  +y)  —  n3, 

or  (x  -  n3)  (y  -  «3)  =  n3  (n3  -  i  ). 

An  obvious  solution  of  this  is 

x  —  n3  =  n3  —  i,  y  —  1?  =  n3. 

The  second  problem  is  equivalent  to  the  solution  of  the 
equations 


I    ........................  (I); 

xy  =  n  .  uv) 

and  the  solution  given  in  the  text  is 

i    .....................  (2), 


In  this  case  trial  may  have  been  made  of  the  assumption 

v  =  nx,  y  =  «2#, 
when  the  first  equation  in  (i)  would  give 

(«-i);r  =  («2-i)/,, 
a  solution  of  which  is  x=  w2  —  i,  u  =  n  —  i. 

The  fifth  problem  is  of  interest  in  one  respect.  We  are  asked 
to  find  a  right-angled  triangle  (in  rational  numbers)  with  area 
of  5  feet.  We  are  told  to  multiply  5  by  some  square  containing  6 
as  a  factor,  e.g.  36.  This  makes  180,  and  this  is  the  area  of  the 
triangle  (9,  ^b,  til).  Dividing  each  side  by  6,  we  have  the  triangle 
required.  The  author,  then,  is  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  area 
of  a  right-angled  triangle  with  sides  in  whole  numbers  is  divisible 


120  INTRODUCTION 

by  6.  If  we  take  the  Euclidean  formula  for  a  right-angled  triangle, 
thus  making  the  sides 

m2  —  #2          m*  4-  #2 

a  .  mn.    a  .  -  —  ,     a  .  —      —  , 

2  2 

where  a  is  any  number,  and  m,  n  are  numbers  which  are  both  odd 
or  both  even,  the  area  is 

2  mn  (m  —  n}  (m  +  n) 

4 

and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  numerator  mn(m  —  n)(m  +  n)  is 
divisible  by  24,  as  was  proved  later  (for  another  purpose)  by 
Leonardo  of  Pisa1.  '  There  is  no  sign  that  Diophantus  was  aware 
of  the  proposition  ;  this  however  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  he 
does  not  trouble  as  to  whether  his  solutions  are  integral,  but  is 
satisfied  with  rational  results. 

The  last  four  problems  (numbered  10  to  13)  are  of  great 
interest.  They  are  different  particular  cases  of  one  problem,  that 
of  finding  a  rational  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  numerical 
sum  of  its  area  and  all  its  three  sides  is  a  given  number.  The 
author's  solution  depends  on  the  following  formulae,  where  a,  b 
are  the  perpendiculars,  and  c  the  hypotenuse,  of  a  right-angled 
triangle,  6"  its  area,  r  the  radius  of  its  inscribed  circle,  and 


S  =  rs  =  \ab>  r  +  s  =  a  +  b,  c  =  s  —  r. 

(The  proof  of  these  formulae  by  means  of  the  usual  figure,  that 
used  by  Heron  to  prove  his  formula  for  the  area  of  a  triangle 
in  terms  of  its  sides,  is  easy.) 

Solving  the  first  two  equations,  in  order  to  find  a  and  b,  we 
have 

a]      r  +  s  +  <J{(r  +  s)2  -  8rs] 


which  formula  is  actually  used  by  the  author  for  finding  a  and  b. 
The  method  employed  is  to  take  the  sum  of  the  area  and  the  three 
sides  5  +  2s,  separated  into  its  two  obvious  factors  s  (r  +  2),  to  put 
s(r+2)  =  A  (the  given  number),  and  then  to  separate  A  into 
suitable  factors  to  which  s  and  r+  2  may  be  equated.  They  must 
obviously  be  such  that  sr,  the  area,  is  divisible  by  6.  To  take  the 
first  example  where  A  is  equal  to  280  :  the  possible  factors  are 

1  Scritti,  ed.  B.  Boncompagni,  n.  (1862),  p.  264.     Cf.  Cantor,  Gesch.  d.  Math.  iilt 
p.  40. 


THE   PLACE   OF   DIOPHANTUS  121 

2x140,   4x70,    5x56,   7x40,    8x35,    10x28,    14x20.      The 
suitable  factors  in  this  case  are  r  +  2  =  8,  s  =  35,  because  r  is  then 
equal  to  6,  and  rs  is  a  multiple  of  6. 
The  author  then  says  that 

a  =  6  +  35-  v1(6+35)2-8.  6.35)^41-  i  ^2Q> 

2  2 


and  ^=35-6  =  29. 

The  triangle  is  therefore  (20,  21,  29)  in  this  case.  The 
triangles  found  in  the  other  cases,  by  the  same  method,  are 
(9,  40,  41),  (8,  15,  17)  and  (9,  12,  15). 

Unfortunately  there  is  no  guide  to  the  date  of  the  problems 
just  given.  The  form,  however,  cannot  be  that  in  which  the 
discoverer  or  discoverers  of  the  methods  indicated  originally 
explained  those  methods.  The  probability  is  that  the  original 
formulation  of  the  most  important  of  the  problems  belongs  to 
the  period  between  Euclid  and  Diophantus.  This  supposition  best 
agrees  with  the  fact  that  the  problems  include  nothing  taken  from 
the  great  collection  in  the  Arithmetica.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
strange  that  none  of  the  seven  problems  above  mentioned  is  found 
in  Diophantus.  The  five  of  them  which  relate  to  rational  right- 
angled  triangles  might  well  have  been  included  by  him  ;  thus  he 
finds  rational  triangles  such  that  the  area  plus  or  minus  one  of  the 
perpendiculars  is  a  given  number,  but  not  the  rational  triangle 
which  has  a  given  area ;  and  he  finds  rational  triangles  such  that 
the  area  plus  or  minus  the  sum  of  two  sides  is  a  given  number, 
but  not  the  rational  triangle  such  that  the  sum  of  the  area  and 
the  three  sides  is  a  given  number.  The  omitted  problems  might, 
it  is  true,  have  come  in  the  lost  Books ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
Book  VI.  is  the  place  where  we  should  have  expected  to  find 
them.  Nor  do  we  find  in  the  above  problems  any  trace  of 
Diophantus'  peculiar  methods. 

Lastly,  the  famous  Cattle-Problem  attributed  to  Archimedes1 
has  to  be  added  to  the  indeterminate  problems  propounded  before 
Diophantus'  time.  According  to  the  heading  prefixed  to  the 
epigram,  it  was  communicated  by  Archimedes  to  the  mathe- 
maticians at  Alexandria  in  a  letter  to  Eratosthenes.  The  scholiast 

1  Archimedes,  ed.  Heiberg,  Vol.  II.  p.  450  sqq. 


122  INTRODUCTION 

on  Charmides  165 E  also  refers  to  the  problem  "called  by  Archi- 
medes the  Cattle-Problem."  Krumbiegel,  who  discussed  the 
arguments  for  and  against  the  attribution  to  Archimedes,  con- 
cluded apparently  that,  while  the  epigram  can  hardly  have  been 
written  by  Archimedes  in  its  present  form,  it  is  possible,  nay 
probable,  that  the  problem  was  in  substance  originated  by 
Archimedes1.  Hultsch2  has  a  most  attractive  suggestion  as  to 
the  occasion  of  it.  It  is  known  that  Apollonius  in  his  WKVTOKIOV 
had  calculated  an  approximation  to  the  value  of  TT  closer  than 
that  of  Archimedes,  and  he  must  therefore,  have  worked  out  more 
difficult  multiplications  than  those  contained  in  the  Measurement 
of  a  circle.  •  Also  the  other  work  of  Apollonius  on  the  multipli- 
cation of  large  numbers,  which  is  partly  preserved  in  Pappus,  was 
inspired  by  the  Sand-reckoner  of  Archimedes ;  and,  though  we 
need  not  exactly  regard  the  treatise  of  Apollonius  as  polemical, 
yet  it  did  in  fact  constitute  a  criticism  of  the  earlier  book.  That 
Archimedes  should  then  reply  with  a  problem  involving  such  a 
manipulation  of  immense  numbers  as  would  be  difficult  even  for 
Apollonius  is  not  altogether  outside  the  bounds  of  possibility.  And 
there  is  an  unmistakable  vein  of  satire  in  the  opening  words  of 
the  epigram,  "  Compute  the  number  of  the  oxen  of  the  Sun,  giving 
thy  mind  thereto,  if  thou  hast  a  share  of  wisdom,"  in  the  tran- 
sition from  the  first  part  to  the  second,  where  it  is  said  that 
ability  to  solve  the  first  part  would  entitle  one  to  be  regarded 
as  "  not  unknowing  nor  unskilled  in  numbers,  but  still  not  yet 
to  be  counted  among  the  wise,"  and  again  in  the.  last  lines. 
Hultsch  concludes  that  in  any  case  the  problem  is  not  much 
later  than  the  time  of  Archimedes  and  dates  from  the  beginning 
of  the  second  century  B.C.  at  the  latest. 

I  have  reproduced  elsewhere3,  from  Amthor,  details  regarding 
the  solution  of  the  problem,  and  I  need  do  little  more  than  state 
here  its  algebraical  equivalent.  Eight  unknown  quantities  have 
to  be  found,  namely,  the  numbers  of  bulls  and  cows  respectively 
of  each  of  four  colours  (I  use  large  letters  for  the  bulls  and  small 
letters  for  the  cows).  The  first  part  of  the  problem  connects  the 
eight  unknowns  by  seven  simple  equations ;  the  second  part  adds 
two  more  conditions. 

1  Zeitschrift  fur  Math.  n.  Physik  (Hist.  lilt.  Abtheilung),  xxv.  (1880),  p.  121  sq. 
Amthor  added  (p.  1 53  sq. )  a  discussion  of  the  problem  itself. 

2  Art.  Archimedes  in  Pauly-Wissowa's  Real-Encyclopcidie,  n.  i,  pp.  534,  535. 

3  The  Works  of  Archimedes,  pp.  319-326. 


THE   PLACE   OF   DIOPHANTUS  123 

First  part  of  Problem. 

(I)       W=($  +  ^X+Y    ..................  (i), 

..................  (2), 

..................  (3). 

(II)        w  =  (i  +  i)(.T  +  *)  ........  ..........  (4), 

)  ..................  (5), 


+«0  ..................  (7)- 

Second  part. 

W+X  =  a.  square  ...........................  (8), 

F  +  /?  =  a  triangular  number  ............  (9). 

The  solution  of  the  first  part  gives 

W  =  10366482  n,  w  =  7206360  n, 
X  =  74605  1  4  n,  x  =  4893246  n, 
Y=  4149387  w,  y=  5439213  «, 
Z=  7358060  «,  -s:  =  35  1  5820  «, 

where  »  is  an  integer.     The  solution  given  by  the  scholiast1  corre- 
sponds to  n  =  80. 

The  complete  problem  would  not  be  unmanageable  but  for  the 
condition  (8).     If  for  this  were  substituted  the  requirement  that 
W  +  X  shall  be  merely  a  product  of  two  unequal  factors  ("  Wurm's 
problem  "),  the  solution  in  the  least  possible  numbers  is 
W=  1217263415886,     w  =  846  1  924  1  0280, 

x=  876035935422,  *=  574579625058, 

F=    487233469701,     7  =  638688708099, 
Z=    864005479380,     #  =  412838131860. 

But,  if  we  include  condition  (8)  and  first  of  all  find  a  solution 
satisfying  the  conditions  (i)  to  (8),  we  have  then,  in  order  to 
satisfy  condition  (9),  to  solve  the  equation 

q(q+\)J2  =  5  1285802909803  .  f 


If  we  multiply  by  8,  and  put 

2q  +  I  =  /,     2  .  4657  |  =  it, 
we  have  the  equation 

^-1  =  2.3.7.  1  1.  29.  353.  «2, 
or  f--  4729494  «2=  i. 

1  Archimedes,  ed.  Heiberg,  Vol.  II.  pp.  454,  455. 


i24  INTRODUCTION 

The  value  of  W  would  be  a  number  containing  206545 
digits. 

Such  are  the  very  few  and  scattered  particulars  which  we 
possess  of  problems  similar  to  those  of  Diophantus  solved  or 
propounded  before  his  time.  They  show  indeed  that  the  kind  of 
problem  was  not  invented  by  him,  but  on  the  other  hand  they 
show  little  or  no  trace  of  anything  like  his  characteristic  alge- 
braical methods.  In  the  circumstances,  and  in  default  of  discovery 
of  fresh  documents,  the  question  how  much  of  his  work  represents 
original  contributions  of  his  own  to  the  subject  must  remain  a 
matter  of  pure  speculation.  It  is  pretty  obvious  that  one  man 
could  not  have  been  the  author  of  all  the  problems  contained  in 
the  six  Books.  There  are  also  inequalities  in  the  work  ;  some 
problems  are  very  inferior  in  interest  to  the  remainder,  and  some 
solutions  may  be  assumed  to  be  reproduced  from  other  writers 
of  less  calibre,  since  they  reveal  none  of  the  mastery  of  the  subject 
which  Diophantus  possessed.  Again,  it  seems  probable  that  the 
problem  V.  30,  which  is  exceptionally  in  epigrammatic  form,  was 
taken  from  someone  else.  The  Arithmetica  was  no  doubt  a 
collection,  much  in  the  same  sense  as  Euclid's  Elements  were.  And 
this  may  be  one  reason  why  so  little  trace  remains  of  earlier 
labours  in  the  same  field.  It  is  well  known  that  Euclid's  Elements 
so  entirely  superseded  the  works  of  the  earlier  writers  of  Elements 
(Hippocrates  of  Chios,  Leon  and  Theudius)  and  of  the  great 
contributors  to  the  body  of  the  Elements,  Theaetetus  and  Eudoxus, 
that  those  works  have  disappeared  almost  entirely.  So  no  doubt 
would  Diophantus'  work  supersede,  and  have  the  effect  of  con- 
signing to  oblivion,  any  earlier  collections  of  problems  of  the 
same  kind.  But,  if  it  was  a  compilation,  we  cannot  doubt  that 
it  was  a  compilation  in  the  best  sense,  therein  resembling  Euclid's 
Elements;  it  was  a  compilation  by  one  who  was  a  master  of  the 
subject,  who  took  account  of  and  assimilated  all  the  best  that  had 
been  written  upon  it,  arranged  the  whole  of  the  available  material 
in  due  and  progressive  order,  but  also  added  much  of  his  own,  not 
only  in  the  form  of  new  problems  but  also  (and  even  more)  in  the 
mode  of  treatment,  the  development  of  more  general  methods,  and 
so  on. 

It  is  perhaps  desirable  to  add  a  few  words  on  the  previous 
history  of  the  theory  of  polygonal  numbers.  The  theory  certainly 
goes  back  to  Pythagoras  and  the  earliest  Pythagoreans.  The 
triangle  came  first,  being  obtained  by  first  taking  I,  then  adding 


THE   PLACE  OF  DIOPHANTUS  125 

2  to  it,  then  3  to  the  sum  ;  each  successive  number  would  be 
represented  by  the  proper  number  of  dots,  and,  when  each  number 
was  represented  by  that  number  of  dots  arranged  symmetrically 
under  the  row  representing  the  preceding  number,  the  triangular 
form  would  be  apparent  to  the  eye,  thus : 


etc. 


Next  came  the  Pythagorean  discovery  of  the  fact  that  a  similar 
successive  addition  of  odd  numbers  produced 
successive  square  numbers,  the  odd  numbers 
being  on  that  account  called  gnomons,  and  again 
the  process  was  shown  by  dots  arranged  to  re- 
present squares.  The  accompanying  figure  shows 
the  successive  squares  and  gnomons. 

Following  triangles  and  squares  came  the  figured  numbers 
in  which  the  "gnomons,"  or  the  numbers  added  to  make  one 
number  of  a  given  form  into  the  next  larger  of  the  same  form, 
were  numbers  in  arithmetical  progression  starting  from  I,  but  with 
common  difference  3,  4,  5,  etc.,  instead  of  I,  2.  Thus,  if  the 
common  difference  is  3,  so  that  the  successive  numbers  added  to 
i  are  4,  7,  10,  etc.,  the  number  is  a  pentagonal  number,  if  the 
common  difference  is  4  and  the  gnomons  5,  9,  1 3,  etc.,  the  number 
is  a  hexagonal  number,  and  so  on.  Hence  the  law  that  the 
common  difference  of  the  gnomons  in  the  case  of  a  «-gon  is 
11  —  2. 

Perhaps  these  facts  had  already  been  arrived  at  by  Philippus 
of  Opus  (4th  c.  B.C.),  who  is  said  to  have  written  a  work  on 
polygonal  numbers1.  Next  Speusippus,  nephew  and  successor  of 
Plato,  wrote  on  Pythagorean  Numbers,  and  a  fragment  of  his 
book  survives2,  in  which  linear  numbers,  polygonal  numbers, 
triangles  and  pyramids  are  spoken  of:  a  fact  which  leaves  no 
room  for  doubt  as  to  the  Pythagorean  origin  of  all  these  con- 
ceptions3. 

Hypsicles,  who  wrote  about  170  B.C.,  is  twice  mentioned  by 
Diophantus  as  the  author  of  a  "  definition  "  of  a  polygonal  number, 

1  Bioypd(poi,  Vitarum  scriptores  Graeci  minores,  ed.  Westermann,  1845,  p.  448. 

2  Theologumena  arithmcticae  (ed.  Ast),  1817,  pp.  61,  62 ;  the  passage  is  translated  with 
notes  by  Tannery,  Pour  Phistoire  de  la  science  hellene,  pp.  386-390. 

3  Cantor,  Geschichte  der  Mathematik,  I3 ,  p.  249. 


i26  INTRODUCTION 

which  is  even  quoted  verbatim1.  The  definition  does  not  mention 
any  polygonal  number  beyond  the  pentagonal ;  but  indeed  this 
was  unnecessary :  the  facts  about  the  triangle,  the  square  and  the 
pentagon  were  sufficient  to  enable  Hypsicles  to  pass  to  a  general 
conclusion.  The  definition  amounts  to  saying  that  the  nth  #-gon 
(i  counting  as  the  first)  is 

*»  (2  +(»-!)  (a -2)}. 

Theon  of  Smyrna2,  Nicomachus3  and  lamblichus4  all  devote 
some  space  to  polygonal  numbers.  The  first  two,  who  flourished 
about  100  A.D.,  were  earlier  than  Diophantus,  and  are  accordingly 
of  interest  here.  Besides  a  description  of  the  successive  polygonal 
numbers,  Theon  gives  the  theorem  that  two  successive  triangular 
numbers  added  together  give  a  square.  That  is, 
(n-i)n  n(n+  i)_ 

~       —  7£~. 

2  2 

The  fact  is  of  course  clear  if  we  divide  a  square 
into  two  triangles  as  in  the  figure. 

Nicomachus  gave  various  rules  for  transforming  triangles  into 
squares,  squares  into  pentagons,  etc. 

1.  If  we  put  two  consecutive  triangles  together  we  get  a  square 
(as  in  Theon's  theorem). 

2.  A  pentagon  is  obtained  from  a  square  by  adding  to  it  a 
triangle   the   side  of  which  is  i    less    than    that   of  the    square; 
similarly  a  hexagon  from  a  pentagon  by  adding  a  triangle  the  side 
of  which  is  i  less  than  that  of  the  pentagon  ;  and  so  on. 

In  fact, 

\n  {2  +  (n-i)(a-  2)}  +i (»-i)»  =  J«  [2  +  (n-i){(a  +  i)  -2}]. 
Next  Nicomachus  sets  out  the  first  triangles,  squares,  pentagons, 
hexagons  and  heptagons  in  a  diagram  thus  : 


Triangles 

...     i 

3 

6 

10 

15 

2  i 

28 

36 

45 

55 

Squares 

...     i 

4 

9 

16 

25 

36 

49 

64 

81 

100 

Pentagons 

i 

5 

12 

22 

35 

51 

70 

92 

117 

H5 

Hexagons 

...     i 

6 

15 

28 

45 

66 

91 

120 

153 

190 

Heptagons 

...     i 

7 

18 

34 

55 

81 

112 

148 

189 

235 

and  observes 

that 

1  Dioph.  i.  pp.  470-472- 

2  Expositio   rerum   mathematicanim   ad    legendum   Platonem   ut ilium,   ed.    Hiller, 
pp.  31-40. 

8  Introductio  arithmetica,  ed.  Hoche,  II.  8-12,  pp.  87-99. 

4  In  Nicomachi  arithmeticam  introd.,  ed.  Pistelli,  pp.  58-61,  68-72. 


THE   PLACE  OF   DIOPHANTUS  127 

3.  Each  polygon  is  equal  to  the  polygon  immediately  above 
it  in  the  diagram  plus  the  triangle  with  i  less  in  its  side,  i.e.  the 
triangle  in  the  preceding  column. 

4.  The   vertical    columns    are   arithmetical  progressions,   the 
common    difference   of   which   is    the   triangle   in   the   preceding 
column. 

But  Plutarch,  a  contemporary  of  Nicomachus,  mentioned 
another  method  of  transforming  triangles  into  squares:  Every 
triangular  number  taken  eight  times  and  then  increased  by  I  gives 
a  square*.  That  is, 


Diophantus  generalised  this  proposition  into  his  theorem  for 
transforming  any  polygonal  number  into  a  square. 
If  P  be  a  polygonal  number,  a  the  number  of  angles, 

8P  (a  -  2)  +  (a  -  4)2  =  a  square. 

He  deduces  rules  for  finding  a  polygonal  number  when  the 
side  and  the  number  of  angles  are  given,  and  for  finding  the  side 
when  the  number  and  the  number  of  its  angles  are  given.  These 
fine  results  and  the  fragment  of  the  difficult  problem  of  finding 
the  number  of  ways  in  which  any  given  number  can  be  a  polygonal 
number  no  doubt  represent  part  of  the  original  contributions  by 
Diophantus  to  the  theory  of  that  class  of  numbers. 

1  Plat,  quaest.  V.  2,  4,  1003  F. 


THE    ARITHMETICA 
BOOK    I 

PRELIMINARY 
Dedication. 

"  Knowing,  my  most  esteemed  friend  Dionysius,  that  you  are 
anxious  to  learn  how  to  investigate  problems  in  numbers,  I  have 
tried,  beginning  from  the  foundations  on  which  the  science  is 
built  up,  to  set  forth  to  you  the  nature  and  power  subsisting  in 
numbers. 

"  Perhaps  the  subject  will  appear  rather  difficult,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  not  yet  familiar  (beginners  are,  as  a  rule,  too  ready  to  despair 
of  success) ;  but  you,  with  the  impulse  of  your  enthusiasm  and 
the  benefit  of  my  teaching,  will  find  it  easy  to  master ;  for 
eagerness  to  learn,  when  seconded  by  instruction,  ensures  rapid 
progress." 

After  the  remark  that  "  all  numbers  are  made  up  of  some 
multitude  of  units,  so  that  it  is  manifest  that  their  formation  is 
subject  to  no  limit,"  Diophantus  proceeds  to  define  what  he  calls 
the  different  "species"  of  numbers,  and  to  describe  the  abbreviative 
signs  used  to  denote  them.  These  "  species "  are,  in  the  first 
place,  the  various  powers  of  the  unknown  quantity  from  the  second 
to  the  sixth  inclusive,  the  unknown  quantity  itself,  and  units. 

Definitions. 

A  square  (=x-)  is  StW/u?  ("  power  "),  and  its  sign  is  a  J  with  Y 

superposed,  thus  Jr. 
A  cube  (=x3)  is  icvfios,  and  its  sign  KY. 

A  square-square  (=#*)  is  8vvafj,oBvva^i<;1,  and  its  sign  is  JrJ. 
A  square-cube  (=x5)  is  8vva/j,6Kvj3o<;,  and  its  sign  JATr. 
A  cube-cube  (=  x6)  is  tcvftoicvfios,  and  its  sign  KYK. 

1  The  term  Swa/uodiVa/us  was  already  used  by  Heron  (Metrica,  ed.  Schone,  p.  48, 
n,    19)   for   the   fourth   power  of  a  side   of  a  triangle. 

H.  D.  Q 


1 30  THE   ARITHMETICA 

"  It  is,"  Diophantus  observes,  "  from  the  addition,  subtraction 
or  multiplication  of  these  numbers  or  from  the  ratios  which  they 
bear  to  one  another  or  to  their  own  sides  respectively  that  most 
arithmetical  problems  are  formed"  ;  and  "each  of  these  numbers... 
is  recognised  as  an  element  in  arithmetical  inquiry." 

"  But  the  number  which  has  none  of  these  characteristics,  but 
merely  has  in  it  an  indeterminate  multitude  of  units  (7rX?}$o<? 
fi.ovd8ci)v  dopia-Tov)  is  called  dpiOpos,  '  number  I  and  its  sign  is 
9  [=*]." 

"And  there  is  also  another  sign  denoting  that  which  is  in- 
variable in  determinate  numbers,  namely  the  unit,  the  sign  being 

M  with  o  superposed,  thus  M." 

Next  follow  the  definitions  of  the  reciprocals,  the  names  of 
which  are  derived  from  the  names  of  the  corresponding  species 
themselves. 

Thus 

from  dpid/jLos  [x~\      we  derive  the  term  dpidpoarov  [=  I/*] 

[=  i/^2] 
[=  I/*3] 

„      8vvafj,o8vvafj,i<;  \x*\    „  „  SwaftoSwa/jLoa-Tov  [=  I/*"4] 

„       Suva/jioicvfios  \X5~\       „  „  Suva/Motcvftoo-TOv  [=  I/^5] 

„       /eu/3o/ei»/3o<?  [x6]  „  „  KvftoKvftoaTov  [=  I/*"6], 

and  each  of  these  has  the  same  sign  as  the  corresponding  original 
species,  but  with  a  distinguishing  mark  which  Tannery  writes  in 
the  form  x  above  the  line  to  the  right. 
Thus  JJ'X  =  ljx\  just  as  7*  =  £. 

Sign  of  Subtraction  (minus}. 

"  A  minus  multiplied  by  a  minus  makes  a  plus^ ;  a  minus 
multiplied  by  a  plus  makes  a  minus  ;  and  the  sign  of  a  minus  is  a 
truncated  ^f  turned  upside  down,  thus  fa." 

Diophantus  proceeds :  "  It  is  well  that  one  who  is  beginning 
this  study  should  have  acquired  practice  in  the  addition,  subtraction 
and  multiplication  of  the  various  species.  He  should  know  how 
to  add  positive  and  negative  terms  with  different  coefficients  to 

1  The  literal  rendering  would  be  "A  wanting  multiplied  by  a  wanting  makes  a 
forthcoming."  The  word  corresponding  to  minus  is  Xetfis  ("wanting"):  when  it  is 
used  exactly  as  our  minus  is,  it  is  in  the  dative  Xetyei,  but  there  is  some  doubt  whether 
Diophantus  himself  used  this  form  (cf.  p.  44  above).  For  the  probable  explanation  of 
the  sign,  see  pp.  42-44.  The  word  for  "forthcoming"  is  Uirap!;is,  from  VTT&PXU,  to  exist. 
Negative  terms  are  XeiTrovra  eldrj,  and  positive  virdpxoi>ra. 


BOOK   I    '  131 

other  terms  \  themselves  either  positive  or  likewise  partly  positive 
and  partly  negative,  and  how  to  subtract  from  a  combination  of 
positive  and  negative  terms  other  terms  either  positive  or  likewise 
partly  positive  and  partly  negative. 

"  Next,  if  a  problem  leads  to  an  equation  in  which  certain 
terms  are  equal  to  terms  of  the  same  species  but  with  different 
coefficients,  it  will  be  necessary  to  subtract  like  from  like  on  both 
sides,  until  one  term  is  found  equal  to  one  term.  If  by  chance 
there  are  on  either  side  or  on  both  sides  any  negative  terms,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  add  the  negative  terms  on  both  sides,  until  the 
terms  on  both  sides  are  positive,  and  then  again  to  subtract  like 
from  like  until  one  term  only  is  left  on  each  side. 

"  This  should  be  the  object  aimed  at  in  framing  the  hypotheses 
of  propositions,  that  is  to  say,  to  reduce  the  equations,  if  possible, 
until  one  term  is  left  equal  to  one  term  ;  but  I  will  show  you  later 
how,  in  the  case  also  where  two  terms  are  left  equal  to  one  term,  such 
a  problem  is  solved" 

Diophantus  concludes  by  explaining  that,  in  arranging  the 
mass  of  material  at  his  disposal,  he  tried  to  distinguish,  so  far  as 
possible,  the  different  types  of  problems,  and,  especially  in  the 
elementary  portion  at  the  beginning,  to  make  the  more  simple  lead 
up  to  the  more  complex,  in  due  order,  such  an  arrangement  being 
calculated  to  make  the  beginner's  course  easier  and  to  fix  what 
he  learns  in  his  memory.  The  treatise,  he  adds,  has  been  divided 
into  thirteen  Books. 


PROBLEMS 

1.  To    divide   a   given    number    into    two    having    a    given 
difference. 

Given  number  100,  given  difference  40. 
Lesser  number  required  x.     Therefore 
2^  +  4.0=  loo, 
^=30. 
The  required  numbers  are  70,  30. 

2.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  having  a  given  ratio. 

Given  number  60,  given  ratio  3:1. 
Two  numbers  x,  ^x.     Therefore  ;r=  15. 
The  numbers  are  45,  15. 

1  eTSos,  "species,"  is  the  word  used  by  Diophantus  throughout. 

9—2 


i32  THE   ARITHMETTCA 

3.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  numbers  such  that  one 
is  a  given  ratio  of  the  other  plus  a  given  difference1. 

Given  number  80,  ratio  3:1,  difference  4. 
Lesser  number  x.      Therefore  the  larger  is   "$x  f  4,  and 
4*  -f  4  =  80,  so  that  x  =  19. 
The  numbers  are  61,  19. 

4.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  their 
difference  is  also  given. 

Given  ratio  5:1,  given  difference  20. 
Numbers  $x,  x.     Therefore  ^x=  20,  x=  5,  and 
the  numbers  are  25,  5. 

5.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  numbers  such  that  given 
fractions  (not  the   same)  of  each  number  when    added  together 
produce  a  given  number. 

Necessary  condition.  The  latter  given  number  must  be  such 
that  it  lies  between  the  numbers  arising  when  the  given  fractions 
respectively  are  taken  of  the  first  given  number. 

First  given  number  100,  given  fractions  \  and  ^,  given 

sum  of  fractions  30. 

Second  part  $x.     Therefore  first  part  =  3  (30  —x). 
Hence  90  +  2x  —  100,  and  x  =  5. 

The  required  parts  are  75,  25. 

6.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  numbers  such  that  a 
given  fraction  of  the  first  exceeds  a  given  fraction  of  the  other 
by  a  given  number. 

Necessary  condition.  The  latter  number  must  be  less  than  that 
which  arises  when  that  fraction  of  the  first  number  is  taken  which 
exceeds  the  other  fraction. 

Given  number   100,  given  fractions  £  and  £  respectively, 

given  excess  20. 

Second  part  6x.     Therefore  the  first  part  is  4  (;r  +  20). 
Hence  lox  +  80  =  100,  x  =  2,  and 
the  parts  are  88,  12. 

1  Literally  "to  divide  an  assigned  number  into  two  in  a  given  ratio  and  difference  (ev 
Xctycf)  Kal  inrepoxs  r-ij  5o0ei<rij)."  The  phrase  means  the  same,  though  it  is  not  so  clear,  as 
Euclid's  expression  (Data,  Def.  1 1  and  passim)  boOivrt  pelfav  17  ev  \kryif.  According  to 
Euclid's  definition  a  magnitude  is  greater  than  a  magnitude  "by  a  given  amount  (more) 
than  in  a  (certain)  ratio"  when  the  remainder  of  the  first  magnitude,  after  subtracting 
tlie  given  amount,  has  the  said  ratio  to  the  second  magnitude.  This  means  that,  if  x,  y 
are  the  magnitudes,  d  the  given  amount,  and  k  the  ratio,  x-d=ky  or 


BOOK    I  133 

7.  From  the  same  (required)  number  to  subtract  two  given 
numbers  so  as  to  make  the  remainders  have  to  one  another  a 
given  ratio. 

Given  numbers  100,  20,  given  ratio  3:1. 
Required  number  x.     Therefore  x  —  20  =  3  (x  —  100),  and 
x  =  140. 

8.  To  two  given  numbers  to  add  the  same  (required)  number  so 
as  to  make  the  resulting  numbers  have  to  one  another  a  given  ratio. 

Necessary  condition.      The  given   ratio  must  be  less  than   the 
ratio  which  the  greater  of  the  given  numbers  has  to  the  lesser. 
Given  numbers  100,  20,  given  ratio  3:1. 
Required  number  x.     Therefore  ~$x  +  60  =x  +  100,  and 

9.  From  two  given  numbers  to  subtract  the  same  (required) 
number  so  as  to  make  the  remainders  have  to  one  another  a  given 
ratio. 

Necessary  condition.     The  given  ratio  must  be  greater  than  the 
ratio  which  the  greater  of  the  given  numbers  has  to  the  lesser. 
Given  numbers  20,  100,  given  ratio  6  :  I. 
Required  number  x.     Therefore  120  —  6x  =  100  —  x,  and 

10.  Given  two  numbers,  to  add  to  the  lesser  and  to  subtract 
from  the  greater  the  same  (required)  number  so  as  to  make  the 
sum  in  the  first  case  have  to  the  difference  in  the  second  case 
a  given  ratio. 

Given  numbers  20,  100,  given  ratio  4:1. 
Required  numbers.    Therefore  (20  +  x}  =  4(100-.*'),  and 
;r=76. 

11.  Given  two  numbers,  to  add  the  first  to,  and  subtract  the 
second    from,  the   same   (required)   number,   so   as   to   make  the 
resulting  numbers  have  to  one  another  a  given  ratio. 

Given  numbers  20,  100,  given  ratio  3:1. 
Required  number  x.     Therefore  yc  —  30x3  =x+  20,  and 
x  =  160. 

12.  To  divide  a  given  number  twice  into  two  numbers  such 
that  the  first  of  the  first  pair  may  have  to  the  first  of  the  second 
pair  a  given  ratio,  and  also  the  second  of  the  second  pair  to  the 
second  of  the  first  pair  another  given  ratio. 


134  THE   ARITHMETIC  A 

Given  number  100,  ratio  of  greater  of  first  parts  to  lesser 
of  second  2:1,  and  ratio  of  greater  of  second  parts 
to  lesser  of  first  parts  3:1. 

x  lesser  of  second  parts. 

The  parts  then  are 

-<5r) 


and 

IOO—2X)  X  \ 

Therefore  300  -  $x=  100,  x=  40,  and 
the  parts  are  (80,  20),  (60,  40). 

1  3.  To  divide  a  given  number  thrice  into  two  numbers  such  that 
one  of  the  first  pair  has  to  one  of  the  second  pair  a.  given  ratio, 
the  second  of  the  second  pair  to  one  of  the  third  pair  another 
given  ratio,  and  the  second  of  the  third  pair  to  the  second  of  the 
first  pair  another  given  ratio. 

Given  number  100,  ratio  of  greater  of  first  parts  to  lesser 
of  second  3:1,  of  greater  of  second  to  lesser  of 
third  2:1,  and  of  greater  of  third  to  lesser  of 
first  4:  i. 

x  lesser  of  third  parts. 
Therefore  greater  of  second  parts  =  2x,  lesser  of  second 

=  loo-  2x,  greater  of  first  =  300  -  6>. 
Hence  lesser  of  first  =  6x—  200,  so  that  greater  of  third 

=  24*-  -  800. 
Therefore  2$x  —  800  =  100,  x  =  36,  and 

the  respective  divisions  are  (84,  16),  (72,  28),  (64,  36). 

14.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  has  to  their 
sum  a  given  ratio.     [One  is  arbitrarily  assumed.] 

Necessary  condition.  The  assumed  value  of  one  of  the  two 
must  be  greater  than  the  number  representing  the  ratio1. 

Ratio  $  :  i,  x  one  of  the  numbers,  12  the  other  (>  3). 
Therefore  1  2x  —  $x  +  36,  x  =  4,  and 
the  numbers  are  4,  12. 

15.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  each  after  receiving  from 
the  other  a   given  number  may  bear  to  the  remainder  a  given 
ratio. 

Let  the  first  receive  30  from  the  second,  the  ratio  being 
then  2:1,  and  the  second  50  from  the  first,  the  ratio 
being  then  3:1;  take  x  +  30  for  the  second. 

1  Literally  "the  number  homonymous  with  the  given  ratio." 


BOOK    I  135 

Therefore  the  first  =  2x  —  30,  and 

(x  +  80)  =  3  (2x  -  80). 
Thus  x  =  64,  and 

the  numbers  are  98,  94. 

16.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  sums  of  pairs  are 
given  numbers. 

Necessary  condition.     Half  the  sum  of  the  three  given  numbers 
must  be  greater  than  any  one  of  them  singly. 

Let  (i)  +  (2)  =  20,  (2)  +  (3)  =  30,  (3)  +  (i)  =  40. 

x  the  sum  of  the  three.     Therefore  the  numbers  are 

x  —  30,    x  —  40,     x  —  20. 
The  sum  x  =  *x  —  go,  and  x  =  45. 
The  numbers  are  15,  5,  25. 

17.  To  find  four  numbers  such  that  the  sums  of  all  sets  of  three 
are  given  numbers. 

Necessary  condition.     One-third  of  the  sum  of  the  four  must  be 
greater  than  any  one  singly. 

Sums  of  threes  22,  24,  27,  20  respectively. 

x  the  sum  of  all  four.     Therefore  the  numbers  are 

X—22,      *—  24,      X-27,      X—2O. 

Therefore  ^x  —  93  —x,  x  =  3 1,  and 
the  numbers  are  9,  7,  4,  n. 

1 8.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  sum  of  any  pair 
exceeds  the  third  by  a  given  number. 

Given  excesses  20,  30,  40. 

2.x  the  sum  of  all  three. 

We  have  (i)  +  (2)  =  (3)  +  20. 

Adding  (3)  to  each  side,  we  have :  twice  (3)  +  20=  2x,  and 

(3)  =  *- 10. 
Similarly   the   numbers   (i)   and   (2)   are  ^—15,  x  -  20 

respectively. 

Therefore  yc  —  45  =  2x,  ^=45,  and 
the  numbers  are  30,  25,  35. 
\OtJierwise  thus1.     As  before,  if  the  third  number  (3)  is  x, 

(l)  +  (2)=;r+20. 

Next,  if  we  add  the  equations 

(I) +  (2) -(3)  =  20) 
(2)  +  (3)-(l)=3OJ' 

1  Tannery  attributes  the  alternative  solution  of  I.  18  (as  of  I.  19)  to  an  old  scholiast. 


136  THE  ARITHMETICS 

we  have       (2)  =  |  (20  +  30)  =  25. 
Hence  (i)=.r-5. 

Lastly  .u)  +  (i)-(2)  =  40, 

or  2r-5-25  =  4o. 

Therefore  x=  35. 

The  numbers  are  30,  25,  35.] 

19*    To  find  four  numbers  such  that  the  sum  of  any  three 
exceeds  the  fourth  by  a  given  number. 

Necessary  condition.     Half  the  sum  of  the  four  given  differences 
must  be  greater  than  any  one  of  them. 
Given  differences  20,  30,  40,  50. 

2r  the  sum  of  the  required  numbers.  Therefore  the 
numbers  are 

-r—  15,  x  —  20,  x—  25,  x—  10. 
Therefore  4-r  —  70  =  2jr,  and  x  —  35. 

The  numbers  are  20,  15,  10,  25. 

\Otkeronse  tk*s\     If  the  fourth  number  (4)  is  x, 

(I)  +  (2)  +  (3)  =  X  +  20. 

Put  (2)  +  (3)  equal  to  half  the  sum  of  the  two  excesses  20 
and  30,  i.e.  25  [this  is  equivalent  to  adding  the  two 
equations 


It  follows  by  subtraction  that  (I)  =  JT-  5. 
Next  we  add  the  equations  beginning  with  (2)  and  (3) 
respectively,  and  we  obtain 

(3)  +  (4)  =  1  (30  -I-  40)  =  35, 
so  that  (3)  =  35~^ 

It  follows  that     (2)  =  jr-  ia  ' 
Lastly,  since  (4)  +  (i)  +  (2)-(3)  =  50, 

y-  I5-(35--r>=50,  and  ^  =  25. 
The  numbers  are  accordingly  20,  15,  10,  25.] 

2Oi  To  divide  a  given  number  into  three  numbers  such  that  the 
sum  of  each  extreme  and  the  mean  has  to  the  other  extreme  a 
given  ratio. 

Given  number  ioo;  and  let  (i)  +  (2)=  3  .(3)  and  (2)  +  (3) 
=  4-(0- 

19  (as  of  I.  1  8)  to  an  old  scholiast. 


BOOK   I  137 

x  the  third  number.    Thus  the  sum  of  the  first  and  second 

=  3^r,  and  the  sum  of  the  three  =^x=  100. 
Hence  x  =  25,  and  the  sum  of  the  first  two  =  75. 
Let  y  be  the  first1.     Therefore  sum  of  second  and  third 


The  required  parts  are  20,  55,  25. 

21.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  greatest  exceeds  the 
middle  number  by  a  given  fraction  of  the  least,  the  middle  exceeds 
the  least  by  a  given  fraction  of  the  greatest,  but  the  least  exceeds 
a  given  fraction  of  the  middle  number  by  a  given  number. 

Necessary  condition.  The  middle  number  must  exceed  the 
least  by  such  a  fraction  of  the  greatest  that,  if  its  denominator2  be 
multiplied  into  the  excess  of  the  middle  number  over  the  least,  the 
coefficient  of  x  in  the  product  is  greater  than  the  coefficient  of 
x  in  the  expression  for  the  middle  number  resulting  from  the 
assumptions  made3. 

Suppose  greatest  exceeds  middle  by  \  of  least,  middle 
exceeds  least  by  \  of  greatest,  and  least  exceeds 
\  of  middle  by  10.  [Diophantus  assumes  the  three 
given  fractions  or  submultiples  to  be  one  and  the 
same.] 
x  +  10  the  least.  Therefore  middle  =  3-r,  and  greatest 

=  6x  -  30. 

Hence,  lastly,  6x  -  30  —  yc  =  £  (x  +  10), 
or  x+  10  =  93-  —  90,  and  x=  12^. 

The  numbers  are  45,  yj\,  22^. 

1  As  already  remarked  (p.  52),  Diophantus  does  not  use  a  second  symbol  for  the 
second  unknown,  but  makes  d/M0/xos  do  duty  for  the  second  as  well  as  for  the  first. 

2  "Denominator,"   literally  the   "number  homonymous  with  the  fraction,"  i.e.  the 
denominator  on  the  assumption  that  the  fraction  is,  or  is  expressed  as,  a  submultiple. 

3  Wertheim  points  out  that  this  condition  has  reference,  not  to  the  general  solution  of 
the  problem,  but  to  the  general  applicability  of  the  particular  procedure  which  Diophantus 
adopts  in  his  solution.     Suppose  X,  Y,  Z  required  such  that  X-  Y=Z\m,  Y-Z=X\n, 
Z-a=Y\p.     Diophantus   assumes   Z=x  +  a,   whence    Y=px,    X=n(j>x-x-a).     The 
condition  states  that  np  —  n  >p.     If  we  solve  for  x  by  substituting  the  values  of  X,  Y,  Z 
in  the  first  equation,  we  in  fact  obtain 

m  {(np-n-#)x-na}=x  +  a, 
or  x  (mnp  -  mn  -  mp  -  i)  =  a  (tnn+  i). 

In  order  that  the  value  of  x  may  be  positive,  we  must  have  mnp>mn  +  mp  -f-  1, 
that  is, 

np>n+p  +  — 
or  (if  m,  «,  /  are  positive  integers)  np>n  +/. 


138  THE   ARITHMETICA 

[Another  solution1. 

Necessary  condition.  The  given  fraction  of  the  greatest  must 
be  such  that,  when  it  is  added  to  the  least,  the  coefficient  of  x  in 
the  sum  is  less  than  the  coefficient  of  x  in  the  expression  for  the 
middle  number  resulting  from  the  assumptions  made2. 

Let  the  least  number  be  x  +  10,  as  before,  and  the  given 

fraction  \  ;  the  middle  number  is  therefore  $x. 
Next,  greatest  =  middle  +  £  (least)  =  $%x  +  3$. 
Lastly,          3*  =  x  +  i  o  +  £  (fa  +  3i) 


Therefore  x  =  \2\,  and 

the  numbers  are,  as  before,  45,  37^,  22^.] 

22.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that,  if  each  give  to  the  next 
following  a  given  fraction  of  itself,  in  order,  the  results  after  each 
has  given  and  taken  may  be  equal. 

Let  first  give  ^  of  itself  to  second,  second  \  of  itself  to 

third,  third  £  of  itself  to  first. 
Assume  first  to  be  a  number  of  x's  divisible  by  3,  say 

$x,  and  second  to  be  a  number  of  units  divisible  by 

4,  say  4. 

Therefore  second  after  giving  and  taking  becomes  -*"+  3. 
Hence  the  first  also  after  giving  and  taking  must  become 

;tr+3;    it  must  therefore  have   taken  x  +  $—2x,  or 

3-;r;   ^-x  must  therefore  be  £  of  third,  or  third 

=  I$-5* 

Lastly,      15  -5*-  (3  -#)+!=*+  3, 
or  13—4^  =  ^  +  3,  and  x=2. 

The  numbers  are  6,  4,  5. 

23.  To  find  four  numbers  such  that,  if  each  give  to  the  next 
following  a  given  fraction  of  itself,  the  results  may  all  be  equal. 

Let  first  give  \  of  itself  to  second,  second  \   of  itself 

to  third,  third  £  of  itself  to  fourth,  and  fourth  £  of 

itself  to  first. 
Assume  first  to  be  a  number  of  ;r's  divisible  by  3,  say  yc, 

and  second  to  be  a  number  of  units  divisible  by  4, 

say  4. 

1  Tannery  attributes  this  alternative  solution,  like  the  others  of  the  same  kind,  to  an 
ancient  scholiast. 

2  Wertheim  observes  that  the  scholiast's  necessary  condition  comes  to  the  same  thing 
as  Diophantus'  own. 


BOOK    I 


139 


The  second  after  giving  and  taking  becomes  x  +  3. 
Therefore  first  after  giving  x  to  second   and    receiving 
£  of  fourth  =x+  3  ;  therefore  fourth 

=  6(^+3  —  2x}=  i8-6.tr. 
But  fourth  after  giving  $—x  to  first  and  receiving  \  of 

third  =-*-  +  3  ;  therefore  third  =301: -60. 
Lastly,  third  after  giving  6x—  i?  to  fourth  and  receiving 

I  from  second  =  .*•+  3. 
That  is,  24^— 47=;tr+3,  and  *  =  f$. 

The  numbers  are  therefore  J^,  4,  J^f,  J^; 
or,  after  multiplying  by  the  common  de- 
nominator, 150,  92,  120,  114. 

24.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that,  if  each  receives  a  given 
fraction  of  the  sum  of  the  other  two,  the  results  are  all  equal. 

Let    first    receive    £    of    (second  +  third),    second    \    of 

(third  +  first),  and  third  i  of  (first  +  second). 
Assume  first  =x,  and  for  convenience'  sake  (rov  irpo^Lpov 
eveicev)  take  for  sum  of  second  and  third  a  number  of 
units  divisible  by  3,  say  3. 
Then  sum  of  the  three  =  x-\-  3, 

and  first  -I-  1  (second  +  third)  =  x  +  I . 

Therefore  second  +  ^  (third  +  first)  =  x+  I  ; 
hence  3  times  second  +  sum  of  all  =  4^  +  4, 
and  therefore  second  =  x  +  %. 

Lastly,       third  +  {  (first  +  second)  =  x  +  I, 
or  4  times  third  +  sum  of  all  =  5^+5, 

and  third  =x  +  ^. 

Therefore          x  +  (x  +  £)  +  (x  +  £)  =  x  +  3, 
and  ^  =  T!- 

The  numbers,  after  multiplying  by  the  common 
denominator,  are  13,  17,  19. 

25.  To  find  four  numbers  such  that,  if  each  receives  a  given 
fraction  of  the  sum  of  the  remaining  three,  the  four  results  are 
equal. 

Let  first   receive  £   of  the   rest,   second   1   of  the   rest, 

third  i  of  rest,  and  fourth  £  of  rest. 
Assume  first  to  be  x  and  sum  of  rest  a  number  of  units 

divisible  by  3,  say  3. 
Then  sum  of  all  =x+  3. 

Now  first  +  £  (second  -f  third  4  fourth)  =  x  +  I . 


i4o  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Therefore  second  +  |  (third  +  fourth  +  first)  =^+  I, 

whence  3  times  second  +  sum  of  all  =  4.^  +  4, 

and  therefore  second  =  x  +  \. 

Similarly  third  =.*•  +  £, 

and  fourth  =  ;r+f. 

Adding,  we  have        4^r  +  f§  =  ^+3, 

and  x==$- 

The   numbers,  after  multiplying   by  a  common 
denominator,  are  47,  77,  92,  101. 

26.  Given  two  numbers,  to  find  a  third  number  which,  when 
multiplied  into  the  given  numbers  respectively,  makes  one  product 
a  square  and  the  other  the  side  of  that  square. 

Given  numbers  200,  5  ;  required  number  x. 

Therefore  2OOtr  =     ^r2,  and 


.27.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  sum  and  product  are 
given  numbers. 

Necessary  condition.     The  square  of  half  the  sum  must  exceed 
the  product  by  a  square  number,     ecm  Se  roOro  irXao-fiaTiicbv1. 
Given  sum  20,  given  product  96. 
2x  the  difference  of  the  required  numbers. 
Therefore  the  numbers  are  io+x,  10—  x. 
Hence  ioo-xz  =  g6. 
Therefore  x=2,  and 

the  required  numbers  are  12,  8. 

28.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  sum  and  the  sum  of 
their  squares  are  given  numbers. 

Necessary  condition.  Double  the  sum  of  their  squares  must 
exceed  the  square  of  their  sum  by  a  square,  ecrrt  Se  KOI  TOVTO 


1  There  has  been  controversy  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  difficult  phrase.  Xylander, 
Bachet,  Cossali,  Schulz,  Nesselmann,  all  discuss  it.  Xylander  translated  it  by  "effictum 
aliunde."  Bachet  of  course  rejects  this,  and,  while  leaving  the  word  untranslated, 
maintains  that  it  has  an  active  rather  than  a  passive  signification  ;  it  is,  he  says,  not 
something  "made  up"  (effictum)  but  something  "a  quo  aliud  quippiam  effingi  et 
plasmari  potest,"  "  from  which  something  else  can  be  made  up,"  and  this  he  interprets  as 
meaning  that  from  the  conditions  to  which  the  term  is  applied,  combined  with  the 
solutions  of  the  respective  problems  in  which  it  occurs,  the  rules  for  solving  mixed 
quadratics  can  be  evolved.  Of  the  two  views  I  think  Xylander's  is  nearer  the  mark. 
Tr\afffj.aTiK6v  should  apparently  mean  "of  the  nature  of  a  ir\dfffj.a,"  just  as  5pa/uariK<5j> 
means  something  connected  with  or  suitable  for  a  drama  ;  and  ir\d<r/j.a  means  something 


BOOK    I  141 

Given  sum  20,  given  sum  of  squares  208. 
Difference  2x. 

Therefore  the  numbers  are  lo+x,  IQ-X. 
Thus  200  +  2x*  =  208,  and  x  =  2. 

The  required  numbers  are  12,  8. 

29.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  sum  and  the  difference 
of  their  squares  are  given  numbers. 

Given  sum  20,  given  difference  of  squares  80. 
Difference  2x. 

The  numbers  are  therefore  lO  +  x,  10  —  x. 
Hence  (lo  +  xf-  (io-xf=  80, 

or  401:  =  80,  and  x  =  2. 
The  required  numbers  are  12,  8. 

30.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  difference  and  product 
are  given  numbers. 

Necessary  condition.     Four   times   the    product   together  with 
the  square  of  the  difference  must  give  a  square,     eo-ri  Se  real  rovro 


Given  difference  4,  given  product  96. 
2x  the  sum  of  the  required  numbers. 

Therefore    the    numbers    are    x+2,    x  —  2\    accordingly 
x*—  4  =  96,  and  x=  10. 

The  required  numbers  are  12,  8. 

31.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  the 
sum  of  their  squares  also  has  to  their  sum  a  given  ratio. 

Given  ratios  3  :  I  and  5  :  I  respectively. 
Lesser  number  x. 

Therefore  \ox-  =  5  .  4-r,  whence  x  =  2,  and 
the  numbers  are  2,  6. 

32.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  the 
sum  of  their  squares  also  has  to  their  difference  a  given  ratio. 

Given  ratios  3  :  I  and  10  :  I. 

Lesser  number  x,  which  is  then  found  from  the  equation 

ior2  =  10.  ix. 
Hence*  =2,  and 

the  numbers  are  2,  6. 

"formed"  or  "moulded."  Hence  the  expression  would  seem  to  mean  "this  is  of  the 
nature  of  a  formula,"  with  the  implication  that  the  formula  is  not  difficult  to  make  up 
or  discover.  Nesselmann,  like  Xylancler,  gives  it  much  this  meaning,  translating  it  "das 
lasst  sich  aber  bewerkstelligen."  Tannery  translates  irXaoytart/roi'  by  "formativum." 


i42  THE   ARITHMETICA 

33.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  the 
difference  of  their  squares  also  has  to  their  sum  a  given  ratio. 

Given  ratios  3  :  i  and  6 :  I. 
Lesser  number  x,  which  is  found  to  be  3. 
The  numbers  are  3,  9. 

34.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  the 
difference  of  their  squares  also  has  to  their  difference  a  given 
ratio. 

Given  ratios  3  :  I  and  12 :  I. 

Lesser  number  x,  which  is  found  to  be  3. 

The  numbers  are  3,  9. 

Similarly  by  the  same  method  can  be  found  two  numbers  in 
a  given  ratio  and  (i)  such  that  their  product  is  to  their  sum  in  a 
given  ratio,  or  (2)  such  that  their  product  is  to  their  difference  in  a 
given  ratio. 

35.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  the 
square  of  the  lesser  also  has  to  the  greater  a  given  ratio. 

Given  ratios  3  :  i  and  6 :  i  respectively. 
Lesser  numbers,  which  is  found  to  be  18. 
The  numbers  are  18,  54. 

36.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  the 
square  of  the  lesser  also  has  to  the  lesser  itself  a  given  ratio. 

Given  ratios  3  :  i  and  6  :  i . 
Lesser  number  x,  which  is  found  to  be  6. 
The  numbers  are  6,  18. 

37.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  the 
square  of  the  lesser  also  has  to  the  sum  of  both  a  given  ratio. 

Given  ratios  3  :  i  and  2:1. 
Lesser  number  x,  which  is  found  to  be  8. 
The  numbers  are  8,  24. 

38.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  the 
square  of  the  lesser  also  has  to  the  difference  between  them   a 
given  ratio. 

Given  ratios  3  :  i  and  6  :  i. 
Lesser  number  x,  which  is  found  to  be  1 2. 
The  numbers  are  12,  36. 


BOOK    II  143 

'Similarly  can  be  found  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and 

(1)  such  that  the  square  of  the   greater  also  has  to  the 

lesser  a  given  ratio,  or 

(2)  such  that  the  square  of  the  greater  also  has  to  the 

greater  itself  a  given  ratio,  or 

(3)  such  that  the  square  of  the  greater  also  has  to  the  sum 

or  difference  of  the  two  a  given  ratio. 

39.     Given  two  numbers,  to  find  a  third  such  that  the  sums  of 
the  several   pairs  multiplied  by  the  corresponding  third   number 
give  three  numbers  in  arithmetical  progression. 
Given  numbers  3,  5. 
Required  number  x. 

The  three  products  are  therefore  3^  +  15,  5^+15,  &r. 
Now  3-r  +  1  5  must  be  either  the  middle  or  the  least  of 
the    three,   and    $x+i$    either  the  greatest  or  the 
middle. 

(i)    5^+15  greatest,  3^+15  least. 

Therefore  *>x  +  1  5  +  3-*"  +  1  5  =  2  .  &tr,  and 


(2)  5^+15  greatest,  3.^+15  middle. 

Therefore  (5*+  15)  -(3^+  15)  =  3*+  IS  -&r,  and 

*-?• 

(3)  %x  greatest,  yc  +  1  5  least. 

Therefore  &r  +  3*  +  1  5  =  2  ($x  +  1  5),  and 


BOOK   II 

[The  first  five  problems  of  this  Book  are  mere  repetitions  of  problems  in 
Book  I.  They  probably  found  their  way  into  the  text  from  some  ancient 
commentary.  In  each  case  the  ratio  of  one  required  number  to  the  other 
is  assumed  to  be  2  :  i.  The  enunciations  only  are  here  given.] 

1.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  to  the  sum  of 
their  squares  in  a  given  ratio  [cf.  i.  31]. 

2.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  difference  is  to  the 
difference  of  their  squares  in  a  given  ratio  [cf.  I.  34]. 


144  THE   ARITHMETICA 

3.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  is  to  their  sum 
or  their  difference  in  a  given  ratio  [cf.  I.  34]. 

4.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  sum  of  their  squares  is  to 
their  difference  in  a  given  ratio  [cf.  I.  32]. 

5.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  difference  of  their  squares 
is  to  their  sum  in  a  given  ratio  [cf.  I.  33]. 

61.  To  find  two  numbers  having  a  given  difference  and  such 
that  the  difference  of  their  squares  exceeds  their  difference  by  a 
given  number. 

Necessary  condition.  The  square  of  their  difference  must  be 
less  than  the  sum  of  the  said  difference  and  the  given  excess 
of  the  difference  of  the  squares  over  the  difference  of  the 
numbers. 

Difference  of  numbers  2,  the  other  given  number  20. 
Lesser  number  x.     Therefore  x  +  2  is  the  greater,  and 

4^+4  =  22. 
Therefore  x  =  4^,  and 

the  numbers  are  4^,  6£. 

71.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  difference  of  their 
squares  is  greater  by  a  given  number  than  a  given  ratio  of 
their  difference-.  [Difference  assumed.] 

Necessary  condition.  The  given  ratio  being  3:1,  the  square  of 
the  difference  of  the  numbers  must  be  less  than  the  sum  of  three 
times  that  difference  and  the  given  number. 

Given  number  10,  difference  of  required  numbers  2. 
Lesser  number  x.     Therefore  the  greater  is  x+  2,  and 

4^  +  4  =  3.2+  10. 
Therefore  x  =  3,  and 

the  numbers  are  3,  5. 

8.     To  divide  a  given  square  number  into  two  squares3. 

1  The  problems  n.  6,  7  also  are  considered  by  Tannery  to  be  interpolated  from  some 
ancient  commentary. 

2  Here  we  have  the  identical  phrase  used  in  Euclid's  Data  (cf.  note  on  p.  132  above) : 
the  difference  of  the  squares  is  rfjs  vTrepoxw  avr&v  doOtvTi.  apid/nf  /j.flfai>  rj  ev  \6yif, 
literally  "greater  than  their  difference  by  a  given  number  (more)  than  in  a  (given)  ratio," 
by  which  is  meant  "greater  by  a  given  number  than  a  given  proportion  or  fraction 
of  their  difference." 

3  It   is   to  this   proposition  that   Fermat   appended   his  famous  note  in  which   he 
enunciates  what  is  known  as. the  "great  theorem"  of  Fermat.     The  text  of  the  note  is 
as  follows  : 

"On   the   other   hand   it   is   impossible  to  separate  a  cube  into  two  cubes,   or  a 


BOOK  II  145 

Given  square  number  16. 

x*  one  of  the  required  squares.  Therefore  \6-x*  must 
be  equal  to  a  square. 

Take  a  square  of  the  form1  (inx— 4)*,  m  being  any 
integer  and  4  the  number  which  is  the  square  root 
of  1 6,  e.g.  take  (2^  —  4)*,  and  equate  it  to  16  —  x*. 

Therefore     4x*—\6x+i6=\(:>—x\ 

or  5**  =  \6x,  and  x  =  ±g-. 

The  required  squares  are  therefore  y-,  ^. 

9.    To  divide  a  given  number  which  is  the  sum  of  two  squares 
into  two  other  squares2. 


biquadrate  into  two  biquadrates,  or  generally  any  power  except  a  square  into  two  pcnvers 
with  the  same  exponent.  I  have  discovered  a  truly  marvellous  proof  of  this,  which 
however  the  margin  is  not  large  enough  to  contain." 

Did  Fermat  really  possess  a  proof  of  the  general  proposition  that  xm+ym  =  zl*  cannot 
be  solved  in  rational  numbers  where  m  is  any  number  >2?  As  Wertheim  says,  one 
is  tempted  to  doubt  this,  seeing  that,  in  spite  of  the  labours  of  Euler,  Lejeune-Dirichlet, 
Kummer  and  others,  a  general  proof  has  not  even  yet  been  discovered.  Euler  proved 
the  theorem  for  m  =  $  and  /»  =  4,  Dirichlet  for  *w  =  5,  and  Kummer,  by  means  of  the 
higher  theory  of  numbers,  produced  a  proof  which  only  excludes  certain  particular 
values  of  m,  which  values  are  rare,  at  all  events  among  the  smaller  values  of  m  ;  thus 
there  is  no  value  of  m  below  100  for  which  Kummer's  proof  does  not  serve.  (I  take 
these  facts  from  Weber  and  Wellstein's  Encyclopddie  der  Elementar-Mathematik,  I2, 
p.  284,  where  a  proof  of  the  formula  for  m  =  +  is  given.) 

It  appears  that  the  Gottingen  Academy  of  Sciences  has  recently  awarded  a  prize 
to  Dr  A.  Wieferich,  of  Miinster,  for  a  proof  that  the  equation  xp+yp  =  gp  cannot  be 
solved  in  terms  of  positive  integers  not  multiples  of  p,  if  2P  -  2  is  not  divisible  by  p*. 
"  This  surprisingly  simple  result  represents  the  first  advance,  since  the  time  of  Kummer, 
in  the  proof  of  the  last  Fermat  theorem  "  (Bulletin  of  the  American  Mathematical  Society, 
February  1910). 

Fermat  says  ("Relation  des  nouvelles  decouvertes  en  la  science  des  nombres," 
August  1659,  Oeuvres,  II.  p.  433)  that  he  proved  that  no  cube  is  divisible  into  two  cutesby 
a  variety  of  his  method  of  infinite  diminution  (descente  infinie  or  indefinie)  different  from 
that  which  he  employed  for  other  negative  or  positive  theorems  ;  as  to  the  other  cases,  see 
Supplement,  sections  I.,  n. 

1  Diophantus'  words  are:   "I  form  the  square  from  any  number  of  dp<.0/j.oi  minus 
as  many  units  as  there  are  in  the  side  of  16."     It  is  implied  throughout  that  m  must 
be  so  chosen  that  the  result  may  be  rational  in  Diophantus'  sense,  i.e.  rational  and 
positive. 

2  Diophantus'  solution  is  substantially  the  same  as  Euler's  (Algebra,  tr.  Hewlett, 
Part  n.  Art.  219),  though  the  latter  is  expressed  more  generally. 

Required  to  find  x,  y  such  that 


If  x  £  /,  then  y  $  g. 

Put  therefore  -r=/+/te,     y=g-qz. 

H.  D. 


146  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Given  number  13  =  22  +  32. 

As  the  roots  of  these  squares  are  2,  3,  take  (x  +  2)*  as  the 

first  square  and  (mx—  3)2  as  the  second  (where  m  is 

an  integer),  say  (2.x  —  3)*. 

Therefore  (x*  +  4-*"  +  4)  +  (^x*  +  9-1 2x}  =  1 3, 
or  5-r2  +  13  -8x=  13. 

Therefore  x  =  f ,  and 

the  required  squares  are  ~t  £-. 

10.  To  find  two  square  numbers  having  a  given  difference. 

Given  difference  60. 

Side  of  one   number  x,  side  of  the   other  x  plus  any 

number  the  square  of  which  is  not  greater  than  60, 

say  3. 

Therefore  (*  +  3)2  -  ;r2  =  60  ; 

x=%\,  and 

the  required  squares  are  72^,  132^. 

1 1.  To  add  the  same  (required)  number  to  two  given  numbers 
so  as  to  make  each  of  them  a  square. 

(i)    Given  numbers  2,  3  ;  required  numbers. 

X  -4-  2  1 

Therefore  \  must  both  be  squares. 

This  is  called  a  double-equation  (StTrXoiVo-n;?). 
To  solve  it,  take  the  difference  between  the  two  expressions 
and  resolve  it  into  two  factors1 ;  in  this  case  let  us  say 

4,  i- 
Then  take  either 

(a)  the  square  of  half  the  difference  between  these  factors 

and  equate  it  to  the  lesser  expression, 
or  (b)  the  square  of  half  the  sum  and  equate  it  to  the 
greater. 


hence  iffz  +/V  -  igqz  +  </2s2  =  o, 

and  «=3az2# 


so  that  *=^lj:\f',    y= 


in  which  we  may  substitute  all  possible  numbers  for/,  q. 

1  Here,  as  always,  the  factors  chosen  must  be  suitable  factors,  i.e.  such  as  will  lead  to 
a  "rational "  result,  in  Diophantus'  sense. 


BOOK   II  t47 

In  this  case  (a)  the  square  of  half  the  difference  is  %££-. 
Therefore  x  +  2  =  -2^,  and  x  =  g,  the  squares  being  ^5-,  Jj/£. 

Taking  (b)  the  square  of  half  the  sum,  we  have  x+  3  =  -^, 

which  gives  the  same  result. 
(2)     To  avoid  a  double-equation1, 

first   find    a   number  which  when  added  to  2,  or  to  3, 

gives  a  square. 
Take  e.g.  the  number  x~  —  2,  which  when  added  to  2  gives 

a  square. 

Therefore,  since  this  same  number  added  to  3  gives  a 
square, 

x*  +  i  =  a  square  =  (x  —  4)",  say, 
the  number  of  units  in  the  expression  (in  this  case  4) 

being  so  taken  that  the  solution  may  give  x-  >  2. 
Therefore  jr  =  -1g5-,  and 

the  required  number  is  ^,  as  before. 

12.     To  subtract  the  same  (required)  number  from  two  given 
numbers  so  as  to  make  both  remainders  squares. 
Given  numbers  9,  21. 

Assuming  9  —  x*  as  the  required  number,  we  satisfy  one 
condition,  and  the  other  requires  that  12  +x*  shall  be 
a  square. 
Assume  as  the  side  of  this  square  x  minus  some  number 

the  square  of  which  >  12,  say  4. 
Therefore  (x  —  4)-=\2  +  xz, 

and  x=\. 

The  required  number  is  then  8f  . 

[Diophantus  does  not  reduce  to  lowest  terms,  but  says 
x  =  |  and  then  subtracts  |-|~from  9  or  ^^.] 

1  This  is  the  same  procedure  as  that  of  Euler,  who  does  not  use  double-equations. 
Euler  (Algebra,  tr.  Hewlett,  Part  II.  Art.  214)  solves  the  problem 


Suppose  x  +  4  = 

therefore  jr=/2~4,  and  x  +  7= 

Suppose  that  / 

therefore  /  =  (3  - 

Thus  X—  (Q-22 

or,  if  we  take  a  fraction  r[s  instead  of  q, 
x  =  (gs*  - 


148  THE  ARITHMETICA 

13.    From  the  same  (required)  number  to  subtract  two  given 
numbers  so  as  to  make  both  remainders  squares. 
Given  numbers  6,  7. 

(i)     Let  x  be  the  required  number. 
Therefore  x  ~     I  are  both  squares. 


The  difference  is  I,  which  is  the  product  of,  say,  2  and 
and,  by  the  rule  for  solving  a  double  equation, 


(2)    To  avoid  a  double-equation,  seek  a  number  which  exceeds 

a  square  by  6,  say  x*  +  6. 

Therefore  x*  —  I  must  also  be  a  square  =  (x  —  2)2,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  f  ,  and 

the  required  number  is  ^. 

14.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  parts  and  to  find  a 
square  which  when  added  to  each  of  the  two  parts  gives  a  square 
number. 

Given  number  20. 

Take  two  numbers1  such  that  the  sum  of  their  squares 
<  20,  say  2,  3. 

1  Diophantus  implies  here  that  the  two  numbers  chosen  must  be  such  that  the  sum  of 
their  squares  <2O.     Tannery  pointed  out  (Bibliotheca  Matkematua,   1887,  p.   103)  that 
this  is  not  so  and  that  the  condition  actually  necessary  to  ensure  a  real  solution  in 
Diophantus'  sense  is  something  different.     We  have  to  solve  the  equations 
x+y=a,   22-t-jc  =  «2,   22+_y  =  z>2. 

We  assume  u  =  z  +  m,   z>  =  2  +  «,  and,  eliminating  x,  y,  we  obtain 


i  (m  +  n) 

In  order  that  z  may  be  positive,  we  must  have  n&  +  »2  <  a  ;  but  z  need  not  be  positive 
in  order  to  satisfy  the  above  equations.  What  is  really  required  is  that  x,  y  shall  both  be 
positive. 

Now  from  the  above  we  derive 


Solving  for  x,  y,  we  have 


_  (m  -  n)  (a  +  2tnn) 


m  (a  +  mn  -  «2)         _  n  (a  +  mn  -  m2) 
m+n         '  m+n 

If,  of  the  two  assumed  numbers,  m>n,  the  condition  necessary  to  secure  that  x,  y  shall 
both  be  positive  is  a  +  mn  >  m*. 


BOOK   II  149 


Add  x  to  each  and  square. 
We  then  have 


and,  if  ,  [  are  respectively  subtracted,  the  remainders 

are  the  same  square. 
Let  then  x*  be  the  required  square,  and  we  have  only  to 

make  £  .     •  I  tne  required  parts  of  20. 

Thus  10*  +13  =  20, 

and  X  =  IQ. 

The  required  parts  are  then  (£?,  ^Y  and 
the  required  square  is  —  . 

15.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  parts  and  to  find  a 
square  which,  when  each  part  is  respectively  subtracted  from  it, 
gives  a  square. 

Given  number  20. 

Take  (x  -I-  m?  for  the  required  square  \  where  m*  is  not 

greater  than  20, 
e.g.  take  (x  +  2)*. 

This  leaves  a  square  if  either  AX  +  4  }  .       , 

>  is  subtracted. 
or         2;r  +  3J 

Let  these  then  be  the  parts  of  20. 

1  Here  again  the  implied  condition,  namely  that  m-  is  not  greater  than  10,  is  not 
necessary  ;  the  condition  necessary  for  a  real  solution  is  something  different. 

The  equations  to  be  solved  are  x+y=a,  z^  —  x  —  u^,   z*—y=iP. 

Diophantus  here  puts  (£  +  m)*  for  zz,  so  that,  if  x=im$  +  m?,  the  second  equation  is 
satisfied.  Now  (£  +  w)2  -y  must  also  be  a  square,  and  if  this  square  is  equal  to  (£  +  m  -  «)*, 
say,  we  must  have 


Therefore,  since  x+y=a, 

i  (m  +  n)  £  +  mz  +  *mn  -n*=a, 

a  —  m?  +  w2  —  imn 

whence  £=  --  ;  -  r  -  , 

2  (///  +  «) 

and  it  follows  that 

_  m  (a  -  mn  +  »8)         _  »  (a  -  mn  +  m2) 
m  +  tt         '    y~          m  +  n          ' 

If  m>n,  it  is  necessary,  in  order  that  x,  y  may  both  be  positive,  that  a  +  «2  >  mn, 
which  is  the  true  condition  for  a  real  solution. 


150  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Therefore  6x  +  7  =  20,  and  x  =  J^-. 

The  required  parts  are  therefore  f^-,  ^  j ,  and 

the  required  square  is   —~. 

1 6.  To  find  two  numbers  in  a  given  ratio  and  such  that  each 
when  added  to  an  assigned  square  gives  a  square. 

Given  square  9,  given  ratio  3:1. 

If  we   take   a  square  of  side   (mx  +  3)  and  subtract  9 

from  it,  the  remainder  may  be  taken  as  one  of  the 

numbers  required. 

Take,  e.g.,  (x  +  3)*  —  9,  or  x*  +  6x,  for  the  lesser  number. 
Therefore  3^2+  i8x  is  the  greater  number,  and  3-r2+ 18^+9 

must  be  made  a  square  =  (2.x  —  3)2,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  30,  and 

the  required  numbers  are  1080,  3240. 

17.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that,  if  each  give  to  the  next 
following  a  given  fraction  of  itself  and  a  given  number  besides, 
the   results    after  each   has   given    and    taken  may  be   equal1. 

First  gives  to  second  \  of  itself  +  6,  second  to  third  £  of 

itself  +  7,  third  to  first  j  of  itself  +  8. 
Let  first  and  second  be  5^  6x  respectively. 
When  second  has  taken  x  +  6  from  first  it  becomes  7^  +  6, 

and    when  it  has  given  x  +  J  to   third    it   becomes 

6x-\. 
But   first  when    it  has  given  x  +  6  to  second    becomes 

^x  —  6 ;  and  this  too  when  it  has  taken  \  of  third 

+  8  must  become  6x  —  i . 
Therefore  f  of  third  +  8  =  2x  +  5,  and 

third  =  i^x  —  21. 
Next,  third  after  receiving  £  of  second  +  7  and  giving  \  of 

itself +  8  must  become  6x—  I. 
Therefore  I  ye  —  19  =  6x  —  I,  and  x  =  ±£. 

The  required  numbers  are  ^-,  - — ,  — . 


1  Tannery  is  of  opinion  that  the  problems  II.  17  and  18  have  crept  into  the  text 
from  an  ancient  commentary  to  Book  I.  to  which  they  would  more  appropriately  belong. 
Cf.  I-  22,  23. 


BOOK   II  151 

1  8.     To  divide  a  given  number  into  three  parts  satisfying  the 
conditions  of  the  preceding  problem1. 
Given  number  80. 
Let  first  give  to  second  £  of  itself  +  6,  second  to  third 

£  of  itself  +  7,  and  third  to  first  f  of  itself  +  8. 
[What  follows  in  the  text  is  not  a  solution  of  the  problem 
but  an  alternative  solution  of  the  preceding.     The 
first  two  numbers  are  assumed  to  be  ^x  and  12,  and 

the  numbers  found  are  ^^,  -       —  -.1 
19      19      19  J 

19.  To  find  three  squares  such  that  the  difference  between  the 
greatest  and  the  middle  has  to  the  difference  between  the  middle 
and  the  least  a  given  ratio. 

Given  ratio  3:1. 

Assume  the  least  square  =  x3,  the  middle  =x*  +  2x  -\-  I. 
Therefore  the  greatest  =  x>  +  8x  +  4  =  square  =  (x  +  3>2,  say. 
Thus;tr=2£,  and 

the  squares  are  30^,  12^,  6£. 

20.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  either  added 
to  the  other  gives  a  square2. 

1  Though  the  solution  is  not  given  in  the  text,  it  is  easily  obtained  from  the  general 
solutjon  of  the  preceding  problem,  which  again,  at  least  with  our  notation,  is  easy. 

Let  us  assume,  with  Wertheim,  that  '-the  numbers  required  in  n.  17  are  5.*,  6y,  "jz. 
Then  by  the  conditions  of  the  problem 

4x-6  +  z+8  =  ;,y-7  +  x  +  6  =  6z-8+y  +  7, 
from  which  two  equations  we  can  find  x,  z  in  terms  of  y. 

In  fact  *=(20>-i8)/i9  and  z=(\-jy-  3)/i9, 

and  the  general  solution  is 


In  his  solution  Diophantus  assumes  x=y,  whence  y  —  —    . 

Now,  to  solve  II.  18,  we  have  only  to  equate  the  sum  of  the  three  expressions  to  80, 
and  so  findy. 

We  have  jgaj 

y(i>.  26  +  6.  19  +  7.  17)  -5.  18-7.  3  =  80.  19,  ?  =  -^'> 

and  the  required  numbers  are 

944Q      9786      9814 
363  '     363  '     363  ' 

2  Euler  (Algebra,  Part  n.  Art.  239)  solves  this  problem  more  generally  thus. 
Required  to  find  x,  y  such  that  x3  +y  and  jp  +  x  are  squares. 

If  we  begin  by  supposing  x2+y=J?,  so  that  y=f^-x^,  and  then  substitute  the  value 
of  y  in  terms  of  x  in  the  second  expression,  we  must  have 
p\  _  2/2jc2  +  x*  +  x  =  square. 

But,  as  this  is  difficult  to  solve,  let  us  suppose  instead  that 
•*2  +y=(P~  *)2  =?  ~  tfx  -•-  J:2, 


152  THE  ARITHMETICA 

Assume  for  the  numbers  x,  2x  +  I,  which  by  their  form 

satisfy  one  condition. 
The  other  condition  gives 

4^r2  +  $x+  I  =  square  =  (2x  —  2)2,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  -^¥,  and 

the  numbers  are  —  ,  —  . 

21.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  either  minus 
the  other  number  gives  a  square. 

x+i,  2x+i  are  assumed,  satisfying  one  condition. 
The  other  condition  gives 

4^2  +  yc  =  square  =  gx2,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  f  ,  and 

the  numbers  are  -,  —  . 

22.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  either  added 
to  the  sum  of  both  gives  a  square. 

Assume  x,  x  +  I  for  the  numbers.     Thus  one  condition  is 

satisfied. 
It  remains  that 

xz  +  4*+2  =  square  =  (x  —  2)2,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  ^,  and 

the  numbers  are  -,  -. 
[Diophantus  has  f,  Jg°-.] 

23.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  either  minus 
the  sum  of  both  gives  a  square. 

Assume  x,  x  +  i   for  the   numbers,  thus  satisfying  one 

condition. 

Then     x*  —  2x  —  i  =  square  =  (x  —  3)2,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  2%,  and 

the  numbers  are  2^,  3^. 

and  that  j/2  +  x  =  (q  -yf  =  q*  -  iqy  +y2. 

It  follows  that 


whence 

tfq  -  i  4/7  -  i 

Suppose,  for  example,  /=2,  ?=3,  and  we  have  *  =  —  ,    y=  —  ;  and  so  on.     We 

must  of  course  choose  /,  q  such  that  x,  y  are  both  positive.     Diophantus'  solution  is 
obtained  by  putting  p=  -  i,  ^=3. 


BOOK   II  153 

24.     To  find  two  numbers  such  that  either  added  to  the  square 
of  their  sum  gives  a  square. 

Since  x3  +  $x*,  x2  +  Sx*  are  both  squares,  let  the  numbers 

be  $xz,  8x*  and  their  sum  x. 
Therefore  I2ix*  =  x2,  whence  I  ix*  =  x,  and  x  =  Jp 

The  numbers  are  therefore       ,       . 


25.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  their  sum 
minus  either  number  gives  a  square. 

If  we  subtract  7  or  12  from  16,  we  get  a  square. 

Assume  then  \2x*t  jx*  for  the  numbers,  and  i6x-  for  the 

square  of  their  sum. 
Hence  i$x*  =  4*,  and  x  =  ^. 

The  numbers  are  ^2,  **2. 

26.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  added  to 
either  gives  a  square,  and  the  sides  of  the  two  squares   added 
together  produce  a  given  number. 

Let  the  given  number  be  6. 

Since  x  (4*  —  i )  +  x  is  a  square,  let  x,  4*  -  i  be  the  numbers. 

Therefore  4#2  +  3^—1  is  a  square,  and  the  side  of  this 
square  must  be  6  —  2x  [since  2x  is  the  side  of  the 
first  square  and  the  sum  of  the  sides  of  the  square 
is  6]. 

Since  4^  +  3*  —  i  =  (6  —  2x)*, 

we  have  x  =  fj,  and 

the  numbers  are  §[.  — . 
27     27 

27.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  minus  either 
gives  a  square,  and  the  sides  of  the  two  squares  so  arising  when 
added  together  produce  a  given  number. 

Let  the  given  number  be  5. 

Assume  4x+i,x  for  the  numbers,  so  that  one  condition 

is  satisfied. 

Also  4*2  -  3*  —  i  =  (5  —  2x)*. 

Therefore  *  =  ff ,  and 

the  numbers  are  *|,  *^. 


i54  THE   ARITHMETICA 

28.  To  find  two  square  numbers  such  that  their  product  added 
to  either  gives  a  square. 

Let  the  numbers1  bex*,y2. 

X&  -1/2     i     i/2) 

Therefore      *        2j-  are  both  squares. 

To  make  the  first  expression  a  square  we  make  x*  -f  i  a 

square,  putting 

x*  +  i  =  (x  -  2)2,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  f  ,  and  x*  =  ^. 
We  have  now  to  make  ^(y*  +  i)  a  square  [and  y  must  be 

different  from  x\ 

Put  9^  +  9  =  (3y-  4)2>  say, 

and  y  =  lt. 

Therefore  the  numbers  are  -%.  Q. 
io'  576 

29.  To  find  two  square  numbers  such  that  their  product  minus 
either  gives  a  square. 

Let  xz,y*  be  the  numbers. 

.£.2  ,,,2   _   »£\ 

Then     *      J  \  are  both  squares. 
x  y  —XT) 

A  solution  of  x*  —  I  =  (a  square)  is  x"1  =  ff  . 
We  have  now  to  solve 

f  f  ^  -  ft  =  a  square. 
Put  ^-i=(j-4)2,say. 

Therefore  y  =  *£,  and 

the  numbers  are  $9    ??. 
64     64 

30.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  +  their  sum 
gives  a  square. 

Now  mz  +  n?  ±  2mti  is  a  square. 

Put  2,  3,  say,  for  m,  n  respectively,  and  of  course 

22  +  32  ±  2  .  2  .  3  is  a  square. 
Assume  then  product  of  numbers  =  (22  +  32)^2  or  1  3^,  and 

sum  =  2  .  2  .  3^r2  or  1  2x*. 

The  product  being  13^,  let  x,  lye  be  the  numbers. 
Therefore  their  sum  14^=  i2x*,  and  ^  =  ^. 
The  numbers  are  therefore  L      . 


1  Diophantus  does  not  use  two  unknowns,  but  assumes  the  numbers  to  be  xz  and  I 
until  he  has  found  x.  Then  he  uses  the  same  unknown  (x)  to  find  what  he  had  first  taken 
to  be  unity,  as  explained  above,  p.  52.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  next  problem. 


BOOK   II  155 

31.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square  and 
their  product  ±  their  sum  gives  a  square. 

2 .  2m .m  =  a.  square,  and  (2m)*  +  m*  ±  2  .  2m .m  =  a.  square. 

If  m  =  2,  4*  +  22  ±  2 . 4 .  2  =  36  or  4, 

Let  then  the  product  of  the  numbers  be  (4*  +  2f)x*  or  2Ora, 

and  their  sum  2.4.2JT2  or  idr1,  and  take  2-r,  lor  for 

the  numbers. 

Then  \2x=  idr2,  and  *  =  f. 

The  numbers  are  -,  — . 

32.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  any  one  of 
them  added  to  the  next  following  gives  a  square. 

Let  the  first  be  x,  the  second  2x  -f  i,  and  the  third 
2(2*+!)+ i  or  4* +3,  so  that  two  conditions  are 
satisfied. 

The  last  condition  gives  (44:  +  3)*  +  x  =  square  =  (44:  —  4^, 
say. 

Therefore  x=^y  and 

the  numbers  are  ^,  g,  &. 

33.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  any  one  of 
them  minus  the  next  following  gives  a  square. 

Assume  x  +  i,  2x+  \,  $x+  i  for  the  numbers,  so  that  two 

conditions  are  satisfied. 
Lastly,     1 6r2  +  "jx  =  square  =  25*',  say, 
and  x  =  £. 

The  numbers  are  ^,  ^,  ^. 
999 

34.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  any  one 
added  to  the  sum  of  all  three  gives  a  square. 

\^(m  —  n^-\-mn  is  a  square.  Take  a  number  separable 
into  two  factors  (#/, «)  in  three  ways,  say  1 2,  which  is 
the  product  of  (i,  12),  (2,6)  and  (3, 4). 

The  values  then  of  \  (m  —  n)  are  5|,  2,  £. 

Take  ^\x,  2xt  ^x  for  the  numbers,  and  for  their  sum  \2x-. 

Therefore  &r  =  1 2x*,  and  x  =  \. 
The  numbers  are  — ,  *,  -. 

[Diophantus  says  |,  and  ^,  f ,  |.] 


156  THE  ARITHMETICA 

35.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  any  one 
minus  the  sum  of  all  three  gives  a  square. 

{£  (m  +  «)}2  —  mn  is  a  square,     Take,  as  before,  a  number 

divisible  into  factors  in  three  ways,  as  12. 
Let  then  6^,  4*,  ^\x  be  the  numbers,  and  their  sum  \2x*. 
Therefore  \4x=i2x*,  and;r  =  f. 

The  numbers  are  &,      ,       . 


BOOK    III 

1.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that,  if  the  square  of  any  one 
of  them  be  subtracted  from  the  sum  of  all  three,  the  remainder 
is  a  square1. 

Take  two  squares  ;r2,  ^x* ;  the  sum  is  5;r2. 

If  then  we  take  5;r2  as  the  sum  of  the  three  numbers,  and 

x,  2x  as  two  of  them,  we  satisfy  two  conditions. 
Next  divide  5,  which  is  the  sum  of  two  squares,  into  two 
other  squares  ^,  J^-  [ll.  9],  and  assume  \x  for  the 
third  number. 
Therefore  x  +  2x  -f  \x  =  5*2,  and  x  =  ^. 

The  numbers  are  ^,  ^,  ~^. 
[Diophantus  writes  -^  for  x  and  T%\,  ||g,  -^  for  the  numbers.] 

2.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  the  sum  of 
all  three  added  to  any  one  of  them  gives  a  square. 

Let  the  square  of  the  sum  of  all  three  be  x*,  and  the 

numbers  ^,  8x*,  i$x\ 
Hence  26;r2  =  x,  x  =  -£%,  and 

the  numbers  are  ~y.  7-i,  — ,. 

0/0      0/0      OyO 

3.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  the  sum  of 
all  three  minus  any  one  of  them  gives  a  square. 

Sum  of  all  three  4*",  its  square  i6.r2,  the  numbers  "jx*, 

I2XZ,  l$X\ 

Then  34Jtr2  =  4*,  x  =  &,  and 

the  numbers  are  J?-,  £,  £. 


1  The  fact  that  the  problems  III.  1-4  are  very  like  II.  34,  35  makes  Tannery  suspect 
that  they  have  found  their  way  into  the  text  from  some  ancient  commentary. 


BOOK   III  157 

4.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that,  if  the  square  of  their  sum 
be  subtracted  from  any  one  of  them,  the  remainder  is  a  square. 

Sum  x,  numbers  2xzt  $xz,  lot:2. 
Then  17  x*  =  x,  x  =  -fa,  and 

the  numbers  are  ^,  J-,  Jj|. 

5.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square  and 
the  sum  of  any  pair  exceeds  the  third  by  a  square. 

Let  the  sum  of  the  three  be  (x+  i)2;  let  first  +  second 
=  third  +  i,  so  that  third  =  ^  +  x  ;  let  second  •+  third 
=  first  +  x*,  so  that  first  =x  +  $. 
Therefore  second  =  ^x*  +  £. 

It  remains  that  first  +  third  =  second  +  a  square. 
Therefore  2.x  —  square  =  16,  say,  and  x  =  8. 

The  numbers  are  8|,  32^,  40. 
Ot/ierwise  thus\ 

First  find  three  squares  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square. 
Find   e.g.   what   square  number  +  4  +  9   gives   a   square, 

that  is,  36  ; 

4>  36,  9  are  therefore  squares  with  the  required  property. 
Next  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  sum  of  each  pair  = 
the  third  +  a  given  number  ;  in  this  case  suppose 
first  +  second  —  third  =  4, 
second  +  third  —  first  =  9, 
third  +  first  —  second  =  36. 
This  problem  has  already  been  solved  [I.  18]. 

The  numbers  are  respectively  20,  6£,  22^. 

1  We  should  naturally  suppose  that  this  alternative  solution,  like  others,  was  inter- 
polated. But  we  are  reluctant  to  think  so  because  the  solution  is  so  elegant  that  it 
can  hardly  be  attributed  to  a  scholiast.  If  the  solution  is  not  genuine,  we  have  here 
an  illustration  of  the  truth  that,  however  ingenious  they  are,  Diophantus'  solutions  are  not 
always  the  best  imaginable  (Loria,  Le  scienze  esatte  nelf  antica  Greda,  Libro  v.  pp.  138-9). 
In  this  case  the  more  elegant  solution  is  the  alternative  one.  Generalised,  it  is  as  follows. 
We  have  to  find  JT,  y,  z  so  that 

-x+y  +  z  =  a.  square\ 
x  —y  +  2  =  a  square  Y  , 
x+y-z  =  a.  square) 

and  also  x  +y  +  z  =  a  square. 

We  have  only  to  equate  the  first   three  expressions  to  squares  a2,  P,  c*  such  that 
square,  ^  say,   since  the  sum  of  the  first   three   expressions  is   itself 


The  solution  is  then 


i58  THE  ARITHMETICA 

6.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square  and 
the  sum  of  any  pair  is  a  square. 

Let  the  sum  of  all  three  be  x*  +  2x+  i,  sum  of  first  and 
second  x2,  and  therefore  the  third  2.x  +  I  ;  let  sum  of 
second  and  third  be  (x -  i)2. 

Therefore  the  first  =  ^x,  and  the  second  =;r2  —  <\x. 
But  first  +  third  =  square, 
that  is,      6x  +  i  =  square  =121,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  20,  and 

the  numbers  are  80,  320,  41. 

[An  alternative  solution,  obviously  interpolated,  is  practically 
identical   with    the  above  except  that  it  takes  the  square  36  as 
the   value   of  6x+i,  so  that  x  —  ^-,  and    the   numbers   are   ^Q- 
_?4o    385    456-, 
-    36  '   36  '   36  <J 

7.  To  find  three  numbers  in  A.P.  such  that  the  sum  of  any 
pair  gives  a  square. 

First  find  three  square  numbers  in  A.P.  and  such  that  half 
their  sum  is  greater  than  any  one  of  them.  Let 
;r2,  (x+  i)2  be  the  first  and  second  of  these  ;  therefore 
the  third  is  x*  +  ^x  +  2  =  (x  -  8)2,  say. 

Therefore  x  =  f $  or  f£ ; 

and  we  may  take  as  the  numbers  961,  1681,  2401. 

We  have  now  to  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  sums 
of  pairs  are  the  numbers  just  found. 

The  sum  of  the  three  =  a^a  =  25211,  and 

the  three  numbers  are  120^,  840^,  1560^. 

8.  Given  one  number,  to  find  three  others  such  that  the  sum 
of  any  pair  of  them  added  to  the  given  number  gives  a  square,  and 
also  the  sum  of  the  three  added   to  the  given  number  gives  a 
square. 

Given  number  3. 

Suppose  first  required  number  +  second  =x"*  +  4x+  i, 
second  +  third   =  x*  +  6x  +  6, 
sum  of  all  three  =  x*  +  Sx  +  1 3. 
Therefore  third  =^x  +  12,  second  =x*-+2x-6,  first  = 
Also          first  +  third  +  3  =  a  square, 
that  is,  6x  +  22  =  square  =  100,  suppose. 
Hence  x=  13,  and 

the  numbers  are  33,  189,  64. 


BOOK   III  159 

9.  Given  one  number,  to  find  three  others  such  that  the  sum 
of  any  pair  of  them  minus  the  given  number  gives  a  square,  and 
also  the  sum  of  the  three  minus  the  given  number  gives  a  square. 

Given  number  3. 

Suppose  first  of  required  numbers  +  second  =  x*  +  3, 

second  +  third     =x*+2x  +  4, 

sum  of  the  three  =  x*  +  ^x  +  7. 

Therefore  third  =  4^+4,  second  =  x*  —  zx,  first  =  2x  +  3. 
Lastly,  first  +  third  —  3  =  6;r  +  4  =  a  square  =  64,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  10,  and 

(23,  80,  44)  is  a  solution. 

10.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair 
of  them  added  to  a  given  number  gives  a  square. 

Let  the  given  number  be  12.      Take  a  square  (say  25) 

and  subtract   12.     Take  the  difference  (13)  for  the 

product  of  the  first  and  second  numbers,  and  let  these 

numbers  be  13*,  \\x  respectively. 
Again.  subtract  12  from  another  square,  say  16,  and  let  the 

difference  (4)  be  the  product  of  the  second  and  third 

numbers. 

Therefore  the  third  number  =  4*. 
The   third    condition   gives    52^*  4-  12  =  a  square;   now 

52  =  4.  13,  and  13  is  not  a  square;   but,  if  it  were  a 

square,  the  equation  could  easily  be  solved1. 
Thus  \ve  must  find  two  numbers  to  replace  13  and  4  such 

that  their  product  is  a  square,  while  either  +  12  is 

also  a  square. 
Now  the  product  is  a  square  if  both  are  squares  ;  hence  we 

must  find  two  squares  such  that  either  +  12  =  a  square. 
"  This  is  easy2  and,  as  we  said,  it  makes  the  equation  easy 

to  solve." 
The  squares  4,  \  satisfy  the  condition. 

1  The  equation  52^+  n  =  «2  can  in  reality  be  solved  as  it  stands,  by  virtue  of  the  fact 
that  it  has  one  obvious  solution,  namely  x  =  i  .     Another  solution  is  found  by  substituting 
jr+i  for  jr,  and  so  on.     Cf.  pp.  69,  70  above.     The  value  JT=  i  itself  gives  (13,  i,  4)  as 
a  solution  of  the  problem. 

2  The  method  is  indicated  in  II.  34.     We  have  to  find  two  pairs  of  squares  differing 
by  12.     (a)  If  we  put  12  =  6.1,  we  have 


and  1  6,  4  are  squares  differing  by  n,  or  4  is  a  square  which  when  added  to  n  gives  a 
square.  (£)  If  we  put  12  =  4.3,  we  fi°d  '-(4-3);  or  -  to  be  a  square  which  when 
added  to  12  gives  a  square. 


160  THE  ARITHMETICA 

Retracing  our  steps,  we  now  put  <\x,  ijx  and  x\^  for  the 
numbers,  and  we  have  to  solve  the  equation 

x*+i2  =  square  =  (x  +  3)",  say. 
Therefore  x  =  %,  and 

(2,  2,  1  j  is  a  solution1. 

ii.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair 
minus  a  given  number  gives  a  square. 
Given  number  10. 
Put  product  of  first  and  second  =  a  square  +  10  =4  -H  10, 

say,  and  let  first  =  14*,  second  =  \\x. 
Let  product  of  second  and  third  =  a  square  +  10=  19,  say  ; 

therefore  third  =  19*:. 
By  the  third  condition,  266x'2  —  10  must  be  a  square  ;  but 

266  is  not  a  square2. 
Therefore,  as  in  the  preceding  problem,  we  must  find  two 

squares  each  of  which  exceeds  a  square  by  10. 
The  squares  30^,  12\  satisfy  these  conditions3. 
Putting  now  30^^,  \\x,  \2-\x  for  the  numbers,  we  have, 

by  the   third   condition,   37OT95;r2  —  10  =  square  [for 

370^  Diophantus  writes  370  J^]; 
therefore  5929*2  -  160  =  square  =  (77*  -  2)2,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  }  |,  and 


the  numbers  are  ^,  22,  ». 

1  Euler  (Algebra,  Part  n.  Art.  232)  has  an  elegant  solution  of  this  problem  in  whole 
numbers.    Let  it  be  required  to  find  x,  y,  z  such  that  xy  +  a,  yz  +  a,  zx  +  a  are  all  squares. 
Suppose  xy  +  a=jP,  and  make  z  =  x+j>  +  $; 

therefore  xz  +  a  =  x*  +  xy  +  qy.  +  a  =  xz  +  qx  +  {P, 

and  yz  +  a=xy+y*  +  qy  +  a=jP  +  qy+lP', 

and  the  right  hand  expressions  are  both  squares  if  ^  =  ±2/,  so  that  z  =  x+y±ip. 

We  can  therefore  take  any  value  for  p   such   that  /2>«,  split  p^-a  into  factors, 
take  those  factors  respectively  for  the  values  of  x  and  y,  and  so  find  2. 

E.g.  suppose  a—  11  and  ^2  =  25,   so   that  xy=\$\  let  x=i,y=i^t  and  we  have 
2=14=^10=24  or  4,  and  (i,  13,  4),  (i,  13,  24)  are  solutions. 

2  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  equation  266^-  io  =  «2  can  be  solved  as  it  stands,  since  it 
has  one  obvious  solution,  namely  x=i.     (Cf.  pp.  69,  70  above  and  note  on  preceding 
problem,  p.  159.)     The  value  x=i  gives  (14,  i,  19)  as  a  solution  of  the  problem. 

3  Tannery  brackets  the  passage  in  the  text  in  which  these  squares  are  found,  on 
the  ground  that,  as  the  solution  was  not  given  in  the  corresponding  place  of  in.  10,  there 
was  no  necessity  to  give  it  here.     10  and  i  being  factors  of  10, 


thus  3<>i  is  a  square  which  exceeds  a  square  by  10.  Similarly  {-(5  +  2)  I  or  12^  is  such 
a  square.  The  latter  is  found  in  the  text  by  putting  mz-  10  =  square  =  (m  --  2)2,  whence 
*»  =  34i  and  a«2=n|. 


BOOK   III  161 

12.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
added  to  the  third  gives  a  square. 

Take  a  square  and  subtract  part  of  it  for  the  third  number  ; 
let  x-  +  6x-\-g  be  one  of  the  sums,  and  9  the  third 
number. 
Therefore  product  of  first  and  second  =x*+6x;   let  first 

=  x,  so  that  second  =  x  +  6. 
By  the  two  remaining  conditions 
IOF  + 


54] 

~;r  are  both  squares. 
6J 


Therefore  we  have  to  find  two  squares  differing  by  48  ; 

"  this  is  easy  and  can  be  done  in  an  infinite  number 

of  ways." 
The  squares  16,  64  satisfy  the  condition.  Equating  these 

squares    to   the   respective    expressions,   we    obtain 

x=  i,  and 

the  numbers  are  i,  7,  g.  • 

1  3.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
minus  the  third  gives  a  square. 

First  x,  second  x  +  4  ;   therefore  product  =  x*  +  ^x,  and  we 

assume  third  =  4^. 
Therefore,  by  the  other  conditions, 

AX*  +  1  5.*-   ) 

\  are  both  squares. 
4*2-*-4j 

The  difference  =  i6x  +  4  =  4  (4^  +  i),  and  we  put 


Therefore  x  =  f£,  and 

the  numbers  are  |,  *£,  ™ 

14.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
added  to  the  square  of  the  third  gives  a  square1. 

1  Wertheim  gives  a  more  general  solution,  as  follows.     If  we  take  as  the  required 
numbers  X—-  ax,    V=ajc  +  6-,   Z=-£2,   two  conditions   are  already  satisfied,  namely 

A'K+Z2  =  a  square,  and  YZ+  X*  =  a.  square. 

It  only  remains  to  satisfy  the  condition  ZX+  F2  =  a  square,  or 

a2*2  +  ^|  at?*  +  #  =  a  square. 

Put  atx3  +  ^a^?x  +  l>* 

10 

16^(^ 
and  JT  =  —  ;  —  • 

a  (33  - 
where  k  remains  undetermined. 

H.  D. 


162  THE  ARITHMETICA 

Firsts,  second  4^  +  4,  third  I.     Two  conditions  are  thus 

satisfied. 
The  third  condition  gives 

x  +  (4*  +  4)2  =  a  square  =  (4*  -  5)2>  say- 
Therefore  x=  79¥,  and 

the  numbers  (omitting  the  common  denominator) 
are  9,  328,  73. 

15.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
added  to  the  sum  of  those  two  gives  a  square1. 

[Lemma.]     The  product  of  the  squares  of  any  two  con- 
secutive  numbers   added   to   the   sum   of   the   said 
squares  gives  a  square2. 
Let  4,  9  be  two  of  the  required  numbers,  x  the  third. 

Therefore  iatr+   'I  are  both  squares. 

The  difference  =  $x  +  5  =  5  (x  +  i  ). 

Equating  the  square  of  half  the  sum  of  the  factors  to 
IOF+  9,  we  have 

(H*  +  6)}2  =  10*  +  9. 
Therefore  x=  28,  and  (4,  9,  28)  is  a  solution. 

1  The  problem  can  of  course  be  solved  more  elegantly,  with  our  notation,  thus.  (The 
same  remark  applies  to  the  next  problem,  in.  16.) 

If  x,  y,  z  are  the  required  numbers,  xy  +  x+y,  etc.  are  to  be  squares.  We  may 
therefore  write  the  conditions  in  the  form 

(y+i)  (z  +  i)  =  a  square  +  i, 
(z+i)(x+i)  =  a  square  +  i, 
(jr+i)(^+i)=a  square  +  1. 

Assuming  a2,  £2,  f2  for  the  respective  squares,  and  putting  £  =  x+i,  i)=y+i,  f=z+i, 
we  have  to  solve 


[This  is  practically  the  same  problem  as  that  in  the  Lemma  to  Dioph.  v.  8.] 
Multiplying  the  second  and  third  equations  and  dividing  by  the  first,  we  have 


with  similar  expressions  for  r),  f. 

x,  y,  z  are  these  expressions  minus  i  respectively,  a2,  £2,  c1  must  of  course  be  so 
chosen  that  the  resulting  values  of  £,  i),  f  may  be  rational.  Cf.  Euler,  Commentationes 
arithmeticae,  II.  p.  577. 

2  In  fact,  a2(a+i)2  +  a2  +  (a+i)2={a(o+i)  +  i}2. 


BOOK   III  163 

Otherwise  thus1. 

Assume  first  number  to  be  x,  second  3. 
Therefore  4^  +  3  =  square  =  25  say,  whence  x  =  5^,  and  5^, 
3  satisfy  one  condition. 

1  This  alternative  solution  would  appear  to  be  undoubtedly  genuine. 
Diophantus  has  solved  the  equations 


Fermat  shows  how  to  solve  the  corresponding  problem  with  four  numbers  instead  of 
three.  He  uses  for  this  purpose  Diophantus'  solution  of  V.  5,  namely  the  problem 
of  finding  x2,  y2,  z2,  such  that 


Diophantus  finds  I  —  ,    —  ,    —  J  as  a  solution  of  the  latter  problem.     Fermat  takes 

these  as  the  first  three  of  the  four  numbers  which  are  to  satisfy  the  condition  that  the 
product  of  any  two  plus  the  sum  of  those  two  gives  a  square,  and  assumes  x  for  the 
fourth.  Three  relations  out  of  six  are  already  satisfied,  and  the  other  three  require 

»»+*+»,    or     34*  +  25 

9  9  99 

64  64  ij.x       64 

—  x  +  x+  —  ,    or     ta-  +  — 
9  9  99 

'-a^+'-g,    or    ~5*  +  12? 
9  9  99 

to  be  made  squares  :  a  "triple-equation"  to  be  solved  by  Fermat's  method.  (See  the 
Supplement,  section  V.) 

Fermat  does  not  give  the  solution,  but  I  had  the  curiosity  to  work  it  out  in  order  to 
verify  to  what  enormous  numbers  the  method  of  the  triple-equation  leads,  even  in  such 
comparatively  simple  cases. 

We  may  of  course  neglect  the  denominator  9  and  solve  the  equations 


73*  +  64  =  z/2, 
205*+  1  96  =  ^2. 
The  method  gives 

x_  _  459818598496844787200 
631629004828419699201  ' 
the  denominator  being  equal  to  (25132230399)2. 

Verifying  the  correctness  of  the  solution,  we  find  that,  in  fact, 


25 

73  x,  l  _  /  i 

64         ' 

*°SX          /  12275841601X2 

196  V25i3"3°399/ 

Strictly  speaking,  as  the  value  found  for  x  is  negative,  we  ought  to  substitute  y  -  A 
for  it  (where  -  A  is  the  value  found)  in  the  three  equations  and  start  afresh.  The 
portentous  numbers  which  would  thus  arise  must  be  left  to  the  imagination. 


164  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Let  the  third  be  x,  while  5^,  3  are  the  first  two. 
Therefore      ^         ~    I  must  both  be  squares; 

but,  since  the  coefficients  in  one  expression  are  respectively 
greater  than  those  in  the  other,  but  neither  of  the  ratios 
of  corresponding  coefficients  is  that  of  a  square  to  a 
square,  our  suppositions  will  not  serve  the  purpose  \  we 
cannot  solve  by  our  method. 

Hence  (to  replace  5$,  3)  we  must  find  two  numbers  such 
that  their  product  +  their  sum  =  a  square,  and  the 
ratio  of  the  numbers  increased  by  I  respectively  is 
the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square. 

Let  these  be  y  and  47  +  3,  which  satisfy  the  latter  con- 
dition ;  and,  in  order  that  the  other  may  be  satisfied, 
we  must  have 

4/2  +  87  +  3  =  square  =  (zy  -  3)2,  say. 

Therefore  y  =  T3^. 

Assume  now  ^,  4\,  x  for  the  three  numbers. 

Therefore  Jf*4"4/}  are  both  squares, 


or,  if  we  multiply  by  25  and  100  respectively, 

130*  +  105  ) 

,30*+    J0}  are  both  squares. 

The  difference  is  75  =  3.25,  and   the   usual   method  of 
solution  gives  x  =  ^. 

The  numbers  are  £,  g,  £. 

1  6.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
minus  the  sum  of  those  two  gives  a  square. 

Put  x  for  the  first,  and  any  number  for  the  second;  we 
then    fall    into   the   same   difficulty   as   in    the   last 
problem. 
We  have  to  find  two  numbers  such  that 

(a)  their  product  minus  their  sum  =  a  square,  and 

(b)  when  each   is   diminished    by    I,  the   remainders 

have  the  ratio  of  squares. 
Now  47+  i,/+  i  satisfy  the  latter  condition. 
The  former  (a)  requires  that 

47s  —  I  =  square  =  (2y  —  2)2,  say, 
which  gives  y  —  £. 
Assume  then  J,     -,x  for  the  numbers. 


BOOK   III  165 

Therefore     ,        ft  [  are  both  squares, 

*x~  If  J 
or,  if  we  multiply  by  4,  16  respectively, 

lox-  14) 

I0jr_26}  *«  both  squares. 

The  difference  is  12  =  2.6,  and  the  usual  method  gives 
*=3- 

The  numbers  are  ^,  3^  =  -g-,  3  =  y- 

17.     To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  added  to 
both  or  to  either  gives  a  square. 

Assume  x,^x—\  for  the  numbers,  since 

x  (^x  —  i  )  +  x  =  4x2,  a  square. 

A*&  _L    2  y  _    T   \ 

Therefore  also        ,  ,  \  are  both  squares. 

4*2  +  4*-  -  i  j 

The  difference  is  x=/^x.  \,  and  we  find 

*-4h- 

The  numbers  are  —  ,  --. 

1  8.     To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  minus  either, 
or  minus  the  sum  of  both,  gives  a  square1. 

1  With  this  problem  should  be  compared  that  in  paragraph  42  of  Part  I.  of  the 
Invenlum  Novum  of  Jacobus  de  Billy  (Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  in.  pp.  351-2),  where  three 
conditions  correspond  to  those  of  the  above  problem,  and  there  is  a  fourth  in  addition. 
The  problem  is  to  find  £,  -q  (!>»;)  such  that 

t 

are  all  squares. 


Suppose   TJ  =  X,   £=i-x;    the  first  two  conditions  are  thus  satisfied.     The   other 
two  give 


Separating  the  difference  ix  into  the  factors  ix,  t,  we  put,  as  usual, 

(^y--~.. 

whence  .*=  |  ,  and  the  numbers  are  |  ,  |  . 

o  so 

To  find  another  value  of  x  by  means  of  the  value  thus  found,  we  put  ^  +  5  *n  place  of 
x  in  the  double-equation,  whence 


Multiplying  the  lower  expression  by  49,  we  can  solve  in  the  usual  way.     Our  expressions 


166  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Assume  x+  i,  4^  for  the  numbers,  since 
<\x(x  +  i)  —  \x  =  a  square. 

Therefore  also    4;r2  _       _     [  are  both  squares. 

The  difference  is  A[x  =  £tx .  i,  and  we  find 

*-!*. 
The  numbers  are  2^,  5. 

19.     To  find  four  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  their  sum 
plus  or  minus  any  one  singly  gives  a  square. 
Since,  in  any  right-angled  triangle, 

(sq.  on  hypotenuse)  +  (twice  product  of  perps.)  =  a  square, 
we   must   seek   four   right-angled   triangles   [in    rational 

numbers]  having  the  same  hypotenuse, 
or   we   must   find    a  square  which  is  divisible  into  two 

squares  in  four  different  ways ;  and  "we  saw  how  to 

divide   a   square    into    two    squares    in    an    infinite 

number  of  ways."     [ll.  8.] 
Take    right-angled    triangles   in    the    smallest   numbers, 

(3,  4,  5)  and  (5,  12,  13);  and   multiply  the  sides  of 

are  now^2  -  - y  +  ~  and  49^  -  ^-y  +  ^ ,  and  the  difference  between  them  is  ^8y2  -  noy. 

The   solution   next   mentioned   by   De   Billy   was   clearly  obtained  by  separating   this 
difference  into  factors  such  that,  when  the  square  of  half  their  difference  is  equated  to 

jP—-y+jr\  the  absolute  terms  cancel  out.     The  factors  are  ^—y,  —Jf--,  and  we  put 

' 


This  gives  y=  — 4  't5  "     ,  whence  x—  —  /  ,  and  the  numbers  are 

71362992  7'362992 

48647065  ^    22715927 

71362992'    71362992' 

A  solution  in  smaller  numbers  is  obtained  by  separating  ^8y2-  noy  into  factors  such 
that  the  terms  in  x2  in  the  resulting  equation  cancel  out.  The  factors  are  6y,  8y  —  •-- ,  and 
we  put 


whence    y=479'S9     and  x=  47959  I  3  =  5l865  . 
10416'  10416      8      10416' 

This  would  give  a  negative  value  for   i  —  x ;    but,  owing  to  the  symmetry  of  the 

original  double-equation  in  x,  since  x=- 1  satisfies  it,  so  does  x=10*]    ;  hence  the 

10416  51865' 

numbers  are  — |^-   and        *y  :  a  solution  also  mentioned  by  De  Billy. 
Cf.  note  on  iv.  23. 


BOOK    III  167 

the  first  by  the  hypotenuse  of  the  second  and  vice 
versa. 
This  gives  the  triangles  (39,  52,  65)  and  (25,  60,  65);  thus 

652  is  split  up  into  two  squares  in  two  ways. 
Again,  65  is  "naturally"  divided  into  two  squares  in  two 
ways,  namely  into  72  +  42  and  82  +  i2,  "which  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  65  is  the  product  of  13  and  5,  each  of 
which  numbers  is  the  sum  of  two  squares." 
Form  now  a  right-angled  triangle1  from  7,  4.     The  sides 

are  (;2  -  42,  2  .  7  .  4,  ;2  +  42)  or  (33,  56,  65). 
Similarly,  forming  a  right-angled  triangle  from  8,  I,  we 

obtain  (2  .  8  .  i,  82-  i2,  82  +  I2)  or  16,  63,  65. 
Thus  652  is  split  into  two  squares  in  four  ways. 
Assume  now  as  the  sum  of  the  numbers  6$x  and 
as  first  number  2  .  39  .  52;tr2  =  4056^, 
„  second  „        2.25.  6ox2  =  3000^, 
„  third       „         2.33.  56;tr2  =  3696^, 
„  fourth    „        2.  i6.63x*=20i6x*, 
the  coefficients  of  x*  being  four  times  the  areas  of  the 
four  right-angled  triangles  respectively. 
The  sum  12768^  =  65^,  and  x 
The  numbers  are 

12675000      15615600     J3 


^ 
163021824'  163021824'  163021824'  163021824* 

20.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  parts  and  to  find  a 
square  which,  when  either  of  the  parts  is  subtracted  from  it,  gives 
a  square2. 

Given  number  10,  required  square  xz  +  2x  +  i. 

Put  for  one  of  the  parts  2x  +  i,  and  for  the  other  ^x. 

The  conditions  are  therefore  satisfied  if 


i  =  10. 
Therefore  x=i 


the  parts  are  (4,  6)  and  the  square  6£. 

1  If  there  are  two  numbers/,  y,  to  "form  a  right-angled  triangle"  from  them  means 
to  take  the  numbers  /2  +  ^2,  />2  -  q1,  ipq.     These  are  the  sides  of  a  right-angled  triangle, 


2  This  problem  and  the  next  are  the  same  as  II.  15,  14  respectively.  It  may  therefore 
be  doubted  whether  the  solutions  here  given  are  genuine,  especially  as  interpolations 
from  ancient  commentaries  occur  most  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  Books, 


168  THE   ARITHMETICA 

21.     To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  parts  and  to  find  a 
square  which,  when  added  to  either  of  the  parts,  gives  a  square. 
Given  number  20,  required  square  x*  +  2x  +  i. 
If  to  the  square  there  be  added  either  2^+3  or  4*+  8, 

the  result  is  a  square. 
Take  2x  +  $,  <\x  +  8  as  the  parts  of  20,  and  6x+  1 1  =  20, 

whence  x  =  \\. 
Therefore  the  parts  are  (6,  14)  and  the  square  6|. 


BOOK    IV 

1.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  cubes  such  that  the  sum 
of  their  sides  is  a  given  number1. 

Given  number  370,  given  sum  of  sides  10. 
Sides  of  cubes  5  +x,  5  —  x,  satisfying  one  condition. 
Therefore  30^  +  2  50  =  370,  x  =  2, 

and  the  cubes  are  73,  33,  or  343,  27. 

2.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  difference  is  a  given 
number,  and  also  the  difference  of  their  cubes  is  a  given  number. 

Difference  6,  difference  of  cubes  504. 

Numbers  X+^X—T,. 

Therefore  i8;tr2  +  54  =  504,  xz  =  25,  and  x=$. 

The  sides  of  the  cubes  are  8,  2  and  the  cubes  512,  8. 

3.  To  multiply  one  and  the  same  number  into  a  square  and 
its  side  respectively  so  as  to  make  the  latter  product  a  cube  and 
the  former  product  the  side  of  the  cube. 

Let  the  square  be  xz.     Its  side  being  x,  let  the  number 

be  8/r. 
Hence  the  products  are  8x,  8,  and 

(8;tr)3  =  8. 

Therefore  2  =  %x,  x  =  \,  and  the  number  to  be  multiplied 
is  32. 
The  square  is  ^  and  its  side  -. 

1  It  will  be  observed  that  Diophantus  chooses,  as  his  given  numbers,  numbers  such 
as  will  make  the  resulting  "pure"  quadratic  equation  give  a  "  rational  "  value  for  x.  If 
the  given  numbers  are  ia,  ib,  respectively,  we  assume  b  +  x,  b-x  as  the  sides  of  the 
cubes,  and  we  have 


so  that  x*  =  (a-lF)l$b;  x  is  therefore  "irrational"  unless  (a-b3)l$b  is  a  square.     In 
Diophantus'  hypothesis  a  is  taken  as  185,  and  b  as  5,  and  the  condition  is  satisfied.     He 
shows  therefore  incidentally  that  he  knew  how  to  find   two  numbers   a,  b  such   that 
(a-lP)l?,b  is  a  square  (Loria,  Le  scienze  esatte  nelV  antica  Grecia,  Libro  v.  pp.  129-30). 
A  similar  remark  applies  to  the  next  problem,  iv.  i. 


BOOK   IV  169 

4.     To  add  the  same  number  to   a   square   and  its   side   re- 
spectively and  make  them  the  same1  \i.e.  make  the  first  product  a 
square  of  which  the  second  product  is  the  side]. 
Square  x*,  with  side  x. 
Let  the  number  added  to  x*  be  such  as  to  make  a  square 

say  3X*. 
Therefore  yc*  +  x  =  side  of  $x2  —  2x,  and  x  —  \. 


The  square  is  -,  its  side  -,  and  the  number  -. 

5.  To  add  the  same  number  to  a  square  and  its  side  and  make 
them  the  opposite2. 

Square  x*,  the   number   a   square   number   of  times  x* 

minus  x>  say  4^r2  —  x. 
Hence  $x2  —  x=  side  of  4^r2  =  2x,  and  x  =  f  . 

The  square  is  £   its  side  f  ,  and  the  number  §^. 
25  5  Z5 

6.  To  add  the  same  square  number  to  a  cube  and  a  square 
and  make  them  the  same. 

Let  the  cube  be  x3  and  the  square  any  square  number  of 

times  x*,  say  gxz. 
We  want  now  a  square  which  when  added  to  gx*  makes 

a  square.     Take  two  factors  of  9,  say  9  and  i,  sub- 

tract i  from  9,  take  half  the  difference  and  square. 

This  gives  16. 

Therefore  i6x*  is  the  square  to  be  added. 
Next,  x*  +  i6x*=  a  cube  =  Sx3,  say;  and  x  —  ^-. 

The  cube  is  therefore  ^-,  the   square  ^?4,  and 
343  49 

the  added  square  number  ^5-. 
49 

1  In  this  and  the  following  enunciations  I  have  kept  closely  to  the  Greek  partly 
for  the  purpose  of  showing  Diophantus'  mode  of  expression  and  partly  for  the  brevity 
gained  thereby. 

In  Prop.  4  to  "make  them  the  same"  means  what  I  have  put  in  brackets  ;  to  "make 
them  the  opposite"  in  Prop.  5  means  to  make  the  first  product  a  side  of  which  the  second 
product  is  the  square. 

2  Nesselmann  solves  the  problem  generally,  thus  (Notes  in  Zeitschrift  fur  Math.  u. 
Physik,  xxxvii.  (1892),  Hist.  lilt.  Abt.  p.  162). 

x2  +y  =  J(x  +>>)  ;  therefore  x*  +  ix^y  +_y2  =  x  +y,  oiy2-(i-  ix2)  y=x-x*. 
Solving  for  y,  we  obtain,  as  one  of  the  solutions, 


To  make  the  expression  under  the  radical  a  square  we  put  -+x  —  x^=(mx  —  I   , 

m  +  i  m*  +  m3  —  m  —  i 

whence  x=  —^  -  ,  _j/=  —  -  —  ^  -  TO  -  •     Diophantus  solution  corresponds  to  m  —  i. 


1 70  THE  ARITHMETICA 

7.  To  add  the  same  square  number  to  a  cube  and  a  square 
respectively  and  make  them  the  opposite. 

For  brevity  call  the  cube  (i),  the  second  square  (2)  and 

the  added  square  (3). 

Now,  since  (2) +  (3)  =  a  cube,  suppose  (2)  +  (3)  =  (i). 
Since    a^  +  bz±2ab   is   a   square,    suppose   (i)  =  (a*+&i), 
(3)  =  2ab, so  that  the  condition  that  (i)  +  (3)  =  square 
is  satisfied. 
But  (3)  is  a  square,  and,  in  order  that  2ab  may  be  a  square, 

we  put  a  =  x,  b  =  2x. 
Suppose    then   ( i )  =  x*  +  (zxf  =  $xz,   (3)  =  2  .  x .  2x  =  ^ ; 

therefore  (2)  =  ^,  by  subtraction. 
But  $x2  is  a  cube;  therefore  x  =  5, 

and    the   cube   (i)=i25,  the  square   (2)  =  25,  the 

square  (3)  =  100. 
Otherwise  thus. 

Let  .(2)+  (3)=  (i). 

Then,  since  (i )  +  (3)  =  a  square,  we  have  to  find  two  squares 

such  that  their  sum  +  one  of  them  =  a  square. 
Let  the  first  of  these  squares  be  x*,  the  second  4. 
Therefore  2**  +  4  =  square  =  (2x  —  2)2,  say  ;    thus  x  =  4, 

and  the  squares  are  16,  4. 
Assume  now  (2)  =  4**,  (3)=  \6xz. 
Therefore  2oxz  is  a  cube,  so  that  x=  20; 

the  cube  (i)  is  8000,  the  square  (2)  is  1600,  and  the 
added  square  (3)  is  6400. 

8.  To  add  the  same  number  to  a  cube  and  its  side  and  make 
them  the  same1. 

Added  number  x,  cube  Sx5,  say.     Therefore  second  sum 

=  $x,  and  this  must  be  the  side  of  Sx3  +  x. 
That  is,  8x3  +  x=  27 x*,  and  igxs  =  x,  or  igx2=  i. 

1  Nesselmann  (pp.  fit.  p.  163)  gives  a  more  general  solution. 
We  have  x3  +y=  (x  +y)3,  whence  i  = 
Solving  for  y,  we  find 


xndy= na  +  m2          '     If  the  Positive  sign  be  taken,  then,  in  order  that  y  may 

always  be  positive,  m\n  must  be  >3  +  >/i2;  Diophantus'  solution  corresponds  to  /«  =  ;, 


BOOK   IV  171 

But  19  is  not  a  square.  Hence  we  must  find,  to  replace 
it,  some  square  number.  Now  igx3  arises  from 
2JX3  —  8x*,  where  27  is  the  cube  of  3,  and  8  the  cube 
of  2.  And  the  3*  comes  from  the  assumed  side  2x, 
by  increasing  the  coefficient  by  unity. 

Thus  we  must  find  two  consecutive  numbers  such  that  their 
cubes  differ  by  a  square. 

Let  them  be  7,  7+  I. 

Therefore  y*  +  -$y  +  i  =  square  =  (  I  -  2yf,  say,  and  y  =  7. 

Going  back  to  the  beginning,  we  assume  added  number 
=  *,  side  of  cube  =  "jx. 

The  side  of  the  new  cube  is  then  8*,  and 
343**  +  *=  512^. 

Therefore  *2  =  y^,  and  x  =  -^. 

The    cube    is  J^L     its    side  J  ,   and    the    added 
number  ^-. 

9.     To  add  the  same  number  to  a  cube  and  its  side  and  make 
them  the  opposite1. 

Suppose  the  cube  is  S*3,  its  side  being  2*,  and  the  added 

number   is    27  x3  —  2.x.     (The   coefficients   8,  27   are 

chosen   as  cube  numbers.) 

Therefore  3S*3  —  2*  =  side  of  cube  27**  =  3*,  or  35**  =  5. 
This  gives  no  rational  value. 
But  35  =  27  +  8,  and  5  =  3+2. 
Therefore  we  have  to  find  two  cubes  such  that  their  sum 

has  to  the  sum  of  their  sides  the  ratio  of  a  square 

to  a  square*. 
Let  sum  of  sides  =  any  number,  2  say,  and  side  of  first 

cube  =  z,  so  that  the  side  of  the  other  cube  is  2  -  z. 

1  Nesselmann  (op.  cit.  p.  163)  solves  as  follows.     The  equation  being  x+y=(x3+y)3, 
putjy^z-j;3,  and  the  equation  becomes  x  +  z-x3  = 
Dividing  by  x  +  z,  we  have  -r2  -  xz  +  z2  =  i  . 

Solving  for  x,  we  obtain  x  =  -  {z  ±>/(4  ~  S02)}- 


To  make  4-322  a  square,  equate  it  to  f-z-2  }   ; 


+ 


x=  2     —  ^n    ,  and  y  -z  -  x3.     If  the  positive  sign  be  taken,  Diophantus'  solution 

corresponds  to  m  —  t,  »=  i. 

2  It  will  be  observed  that  here  and  in  the  next  problem  Diophantus  makes  no  use  of 
the  fact  that 

Cf.  note  on  iv.  1  1  below. 


1  72  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Therefore  8  —  1  2z  -f  6z°  must  be  twice  a  square. 

That  is,  4  —  6z  +  32*  =  square  =  (2  -  4,3-)  2,  say  ;  s  =  i§,  and 

the  sides  are  |j|,  |f  . 
Neglecting   the   denominator   and    the   factor   2    in   the 

numerators,  we  take  5,  8  for  the  sides. 
Starting  afresh,  we  put  for  the  cube  125^  and  for  the 

number  to  be  added   512^-5^-;  we  thus  get 
637^  —  $x  =  %x,  and  x  =  |  . 

The  cube  is  ^5,  its  side  5,  and  the  added  number?^. 
343  7  OTO 

10.     To  find  two  cubes  the  sum  of  which  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  their  sides. 

Let  the  sides  be  2x,  ^x. 

This  gives  35^=  $x\  but  this  equation  gives  an  irrational 

result. 
We  have  therefore,  as  in  the  last  problem,  to  find  two 

cubes  the  sum  of  which  has  to  the  sum  of  their  sides 

the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square1. 
These  are  found,  as  before,  to  be  53,  83. 
Assuming  then  $x,  8x  as  the  sides  of  the  required  cubes, 

we  obtain  the  equation  637^=  i^x,  and  x=\. 

The  cubes  are  g.  » 

1  Here,  as  in  the  last  problem,  Diophantus  could  have  solved  his  auxiliary  problem 
of  making  (xri+ys)l(x+y)  a  square  by  making  x^-xy+y2  a  square  in  the  same  way  as  in 
Lemma  I.  to  V.  7  he  makes  x^  +  xy+y*  a  square. 

The  original  problem,  however,  of  solving 


can  be  more  directly  and  generally  solved  thus.     Dividing  out  by  (x+y),  we  must  have 


This  can  be  solved  by  the  method  shown  in  the  note  to  the  preceding  problem. 
Alternatively,  we  may  (with  Wertheim)  put  x2  -  xy+y2=  (x  +  ^y)'2,  and  at  the  same 
time  \  =  ±(x  +  ky). 

Thus  we  have  to  solve  the  equations 


which  give  x=±     I~J&2-2>         J= 

i+k  +  &'        * 

where  k  remains  undetermined. 

Diophantus'  solution  is  obtained  by  taking  the  positive  sign  and  putting  k  =  -  or  by 

taking  the  negative  sign  and  putting  k=  -  -  . 


BOOK   IV  173 

II.     To  find  two  cubes  such  that  their  difference  is  equal  to 
the  difference  of  their  sides. 

Assume  2x,  ^x  as  the  sides. 
This  gives  193?  =  x,  and  x  is  irrational. 
We  have   therefore   to    find    two  cubes  such  that  their 
difference  has  to  the  difference  of  their   sides   the 
ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square1.     Let  them  be  (z+  i)8, 
z3,  so  that  the  difference  of  the  sides  may  be  a  square, 
namely  I. 

Therefore  $z*  +  3#+  i  =  square  =  (i  —  2#)2,  say,  and  z—'j. 
Starting  afresh,  assume    'jx,  %x  as  the  sides;   therefore 
i6$x*=x,  and  x  —  -^. 
The  sides  of  the  two  cubes  are  therefore  ^-,  —  . 

1  Nesselmann  (Die  Algebra  der  Griechen>  pp.  447-8)  comments  on  the  fact  that 
Diophantus  makes  no  use  here  of  the  formula  (x3-y3)l(x-y)=xa  +  x}'+y2,  although  he 
must  of  course  have  known  it  (it  is  indeed  included  in  Euclid's  much  more  general 
summation  of  a  geometrical  progression,  IX.  35).  To  solve  the  auxiliary  problem  in 
IV.  1  1  he  had  only  to  solve  the  equation 

x?  +  xy+y2  —  a.  square, 
which  equation  he  does  actually  solve  in  his  Lemma  I.  to  v.  7. 

The  whole  problem  can  be  more  simply  and  generally  solved  thus.     We  are  to  have 


Nesselmann's  method  of  solution  (cf.  note  on  iv.  9)  gives  x=-  {  - 

±mn  —  2/««  ±  (w2  —  3«2)  „.  ,  . 

and  hence  y=  -?  -  ?,   x=  --  ^  —  ^-  -  —  -.  Diophantus    solution  is  obtained  by 
2         2                      2         2 


putting  m=  i,  n  =  2  and  taking  the  lower  sign. 

Wertheim's  method  (see  note  on  preceding  problem)  gives  in  this  case 
i-^  ik-i 


where  k  is  undetermined. 

If  we  take  the  negative  sign  and  put  k  =  -  3,  we  obtain  Diophantus'  solution. 
Bachet  in  his  notes  to  IV.  10,  n  solves  the  problems  represented  by 


subject  to  the  condition  that  m  is  either  a  square  or  the  third  part  of  a  square.  His  method 
corresponds  to  that  of  Diophantus.  He  does  not  divide  out  by  x±y,  and  he  reduces  the 
problem  to  the  subsidiary  one  of  finding  £,  17  such  that  the  ratio  of  {3=fci^  to  £±17  is  the 
ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square.  His  assumptions  for  the  "  sides,"  £,  17,  are  of  the  same  kind 
as  those  made  by  Diophantus;  in  the  first  problem  he  assumes  x,  6  —  x  and  in  the  second 
x,  x+2.  In  fact,  it  being  given  that  (y?±y3)l(x±y)=a,  Bachet  assumes  x±j>=z  and 
thus  obtains 

33?  —  $xz  +  z*  =  a, 

which  equation  can  easily  be  solved  by  Diophantus'  method  if  a  is  a  square  or  triple  of  a 
square. 

Fermat  observes  that  the  Siopt<j>i6j  of  Bachet  is  incorrect  because  not  general.  It 
should  be  added  that  the  number  (m)  may  also  be  the  product  of  a  square  number  into  a 
prime  number  of  the  form  3«+  i,  as  7,  13,  19,  37  etc.  or  into  any  number  which  has  no 
factors  except  3  and  prime  numbers  of  the  form  3«+  i,  as  11,  91  etc.  "The  proof  and 
the  solution  are  to  be  obtained  by  my  method.  " 


174  THE   ARITHMETICA 

12.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  cube  of  the  greater 
+  the  less  =  the  cube  of  the  less  +  the  greater1. 

Assume  2x,  ^x  for  the  numbers. 

Therefore  27  x*  +  2x  =  %x3  +  $x,  or  igxa  =  x,  and  x  is 
irrational. 

But  19  is  the  difference  of  two  cubes,  and  I  the  difference 
of  their  sides.  Therefore,  as  in  the  last  problem, 
we  have  to  find  two  cubes  such  that  their  difference 
has  to  the  difference  of  their  sides  the  ratio  of  a 
square  to  a  square2. 

The  sides  of  these  cubes  are  found,  as  before,  to  be  7,  8. 

Starting  afresh,  we  assume  jx,  $x  for  the  numbers;  then 
343-r*  +  8^-  =  5  1  2x*  +  jx,  and  x  -  -fa. 
The  numbers  are  —  ,  —  . 

13.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  either,  or  their  sum,  or 
their  difference  added  to  unity  gives  a  square. 

Take  for  the  first  number  any  square  less  I  ;  let  it  be, 
say,  o-r2  +  6^.  But  the  second  +  I  =a  square;  and 
first  +  second  +  i  also  =  a  square.  Therefore  we  must 
find  a  square  such  that  the  sum  of  that  square  and 
ojr2  +  6x  =  a  square. 

Take  factors  of  the  difference  gx*  +  6x,  say  gx  +  6,  x\ 
the  square  of  half  the  difference  between  these  factors 


Therefore,  if  we  put  for  the  second  number  this  expres- 
sion minus  i,  or  \6x*  +  2^x  +  8,  three  conditions  are 
satisfied. 

The  remaining  condition  gives  difference  +  i  =  square, 
or  7^2  +  i8x  -f  9  =  square  =  (3  —  3^r)2,  say. 

Therefore  x=  18,  and  (3024,  5624)  is  a  solution. 

14.     To  find  three  square  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  their  differences. 

Sum  of  differences  =  (greatest)  —  (middle)  +  (middle)  — 
(least)  +(greatest)—least=  twice  difference  of  greatest 
and  least. 

This  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  all  three,  by  hypothesis. 
Let  the  least  square  be  i,  the  greatest  x*  +  2x+  i  ; 

1  This  problem  will  be  seen  to  be  identical  with  the  preceding  problem. 

2  See  note,  p.  173. 


BOOK  IV  175 

therefore  twice  difference  of  greatest  and  least  =  sum  of 

the  three  =  2x*  +  44:. 
But  least  +  greatest  =x-  +  2X+2,  so  that 

middle  =  x2  +  2x  —  2. 
Hence  Xs  +  2x  -  2  =  square  =  (x  -  4)*,  say,  and  x  =  f . 

The  squares  are  (&,  ^,  i"\  or  (196,  121,  25). 
\  25     25       / 

15.     To   find  three  numbers  such   that  the   sum  of  any  two 
multiplied  into  the  third  is  a  given  number. 

Let   (first  +  second)  x  third  =  35,    (second  +  third)  x  first 

=  27  and  (third  +  first)  x  second  =  32. 
Let  the  third  be  x. 
Therefore  (first  +  second)  =  3 $/x. 
Assume  first  =  lo/x,  second  =  25/4:;  then 
250  , 


These  equations  are  inconsistent ;  but  they  would  not  be  if 

25  —  10  were  equal  to  32  —  27  or  5. 
Therefore  we  have  to  divide  35  into  two  parts  (to  replace 

25  and  10)  such  that  their  difference  is  5.     The  parts 

are  15,  20.     [Cf.  I.  i.] 
We  take  therefore  1 5/ar  for  the  first  number,  2ofx  for  the 

second,  and  we  have 


Therefore  x=  5,  and  (3,  4,  5)  is  a  solution1. 

1  As  Loria  says  (Le  scienze  esatte  nelT  antica  Grecia,  Libro  V.  p.  131),  this  method  of 
the  "false  hypothesis,"  though  somewhat  indirect,  would  not  be  undeserving  of  a  place 
in  a  modem  textbook. 

Here  again,  as  in  IV.  r,  2,  Diophantus  tacitly  chooses,  for  his  given  numbers,  numbers 
which  will  make  the  resulting  ' '  pure  "  quadratic  equation  give  a  rational  value  for  jr. 

We  may  put  the  solution  more  generally  thus.     We  have  to  solve  the  equations 
(y  +  z)x=a,    (z  +  x)y=&,    (x+y)i=c. 

Diophantus  takes  z  for  his  principal  unknown  and,  writing  the  third  equation  in  the 
form  x+y=e/z,  he  assumes  jr  =  o/2,  y=$\z,  where  a,  /3  have  to  be  determined.  One 
equation  connecting  a,  /3  is  a  +  /3  =  <-.  Next,  substituting  the  values  of  JT,  y  in  the  first  two 
equations,  we  have 


1  76  THE  ARITHMETICA 

1  6.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square, 
while  the  sum  of  the  square  of  each  added  to  the  next  following 
number  gives  a  square. 

Let  the  middle  number  be  any  number  of  x's,  say  4^; 
we  have  therefore  to  find  what  square  +  ^x  gives 
a  square.  Split  ^x  into  two  factors,  say  2x,  2,  and 
take  the  square  of  half  their  difference,  (x  -  I  )2.  This 
is  the  square  required. 

Thus  the  first  number  is  x—  I. 

Again,  i6x*  +  third  number  =  a  square.  Therefore,  if  we 
subtract  \6x*  from  a  square,  we  shall  have  the  third 
number.  Take  as  the  side  of  this  square  the  side  of 
\6x*,  or  ^x,  plus  i. 

Therefore  third  number  =  (^x  +  i)2  —  \6x*  =  &x  +  I. 

Now  the  sum  of  the  three  numbers  =  a  square;  therefore 
\$x=  a  square  =  i6o,y2,  say1. 

The  numbers  are  then  13^*  —  i,  52jp2,  104^+  i. 

Lastly,  (third)2  +  first  =  a  square. 

Therefore  io8i6y*  +  22iy2  =  a.  square, 

or  io8i6^2+  221  =  a  square  =  (1047  +  i)2,  say. 

Therefore  j  =  f§g  =  .|f, 

' 


17.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square,  while 
the  square  on  any  one  minus  the  next  following  also  gives  a  square. 
The  solution  is  precisely  similar  to  the  last. 

whence  it  follows  that  a-  fi  =  a-b.     From  this  condition  and  a  +  /3  =  c,  we  obtain 
a  =  -(a-6  +  c),     p  =  -(-a  +  i>  +  c). 


o_      /  i(a-6  +  c)(a  +  6-f))  8_       /{( 

z     V     (      i(-a  +  b  +  c)      /'    y~  '  z~  V    * 
Now  x,  y,  z  must  all  be  rational,  and  this  is  the  case  if 


where  /,  q,  r  are  any  integers. 

This  gives  a=p(tj  +  r),     b  =  q(r+p),     c=r(p  +  q); 

a  fact  which  can  hardly  have  been  unknown  to  Diophantus,  since  his  values  a  =  ij,  b  =  $i, 
^=35  correspond  to  the  values/  =  3,  ^  =  4,  r=$  (Loria,  loc.  cit.). 

1  Diophantus  uses  the  same  unknown  s  for  y  as  for  x,  writing  actually  Kal  ylverai  6 
s  A 


BOOK  IV  I77 

The  middle  number  is  assumed  to  be  4^.  The  square 
which  exceeds  this  by  a  square  is  (ar+i)2,  and  we 
therefore  take  x+  i  for  the  first  number. 

For  the  third  number  we  take  i6x*  —  ($x  -  i)s  or  %x—  i. 

The  sum  of  the  numbers  being  a  square, 
1  3^-  =  a  square  =  i6o.j>>2,  say. 

The  numbers  are  then  i$yz+  i,  S2^2,  lo^/p2—  i. 

Lastly,  since     (third)2  —  first  =  a  square, 
1  08  i6y  —  22  iyz  =  a  square, 

or  io8i6j2  —  221  =  a  square  =  (104^  —  i)2,  say. 


1  8.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  cube  of  the  first  added 
to  the  second  gives  a  cube,  and  the  square  of  the  second  added  to 
the  first  gives  a  square. 

First  number  x.     Therefore  second   is   a   cube   number 

minus  Xs,  say  8  —  x3. 
Therefore   x6  —  \6x*  +  64  +  ;r  =  a    square  =  (x3  +  8)2,   say, 

whence  ^>2x3  =  x,  or  32^=1. 
This   gives   an    irrational    result;    x  would    however   be 

rational  if  32  were  a  square. 
But  32  comes  from  4  times  8.     We  must  therefore  sub- 

stitute for  8  in  our  assumptions  a  cube  which  when 

multiplied  by  4  gives  a  square.     If  y*  is  the  cube, 

4y  =  a  square  =  \6yz  say;  whence  y  =  4. 
Thus  we  must  assume  x,  64—  x3  for  the  numbers. 
Therefore  x6-  1  2&X3  +  4096+  x  =  a  square  =  (x3  +  64)",  say  ; 

whence  2^6x3  =  x,  and  x  =  -fa. 


The  numbers  are  4,  ~- 
16'    4090 

19.     To   find  three  numbers   indeterminately1  such  that   the 
product  of  any  two  increased  by   i    is  a  square. 

Take  for  the  product  of  first  and  second  some   square 

minus  i,  say  xz  +  2x\  this  satisfies  one  condition. 
Let  second  =  x,  so  that  first  =  x+  2. 
Now  product  of  second  and  third  +  i  =a  square;  let  the 

1  The  expression  is  fr  T$  dop/ffry,  which  is  defined  at  the  end  of  the  problem  to  mean 
in  terms  of  one  unknown  (and  units),  so  that  the  conditions  of  the  problem  are  satisfied 
whatever  value  is  given  to  the  unknown. 

H.  D.  I2 


178  THE   ARITHMETICA 

square  be  ($x  +  i)*,  so  that  product  of  second  and 
third  =  9^  +  6x  ; 

therefore  third  =  9^+6. 

Also  product  of  third  and  first  +  I  =  a  square;  therefore 
gxz  +  2\x  +  1  3  =  a  square. 

Now,  if  13  were  a  square,  and  the  coefficient  of  x  were 
twice  the  product  of  the  side  of  this  square  and  the 
side  of  the  coefficient  of  x2,  the  problem  would  be 
solved  indeterminately. 

But  13  comes  from  2.6+  I,  the  2  in  this  from  twice  I, 
and  the  6  from  twice  3.  Therefore  we  want  two 
coefficients  (to  replace  I,  3)  such  that  the  product 
of  their  doubles  +  i  =  a  square,  or  four  times  their 
product  +  i  =  a  square. 

Now  four  times  the  product  of  any  two  numbers  plus  the 
square  of  their  difference  gives  a  square.  Thus  the 
requirement  is  satisfied  by  taking  as  coefficients  any 
two  consecutive  numbers,  since  the  square  of  their 
difference  is  i.  [The  assumption  of  two  consecutive 
numbers  for  the  coefficients  simultaneously  satisfies 
the  second  of  the  two  requirements  indicated  in  the 
italicised  sentence  above.] 

Beginning  again,  we  take  (x  +  i)2—  i  for  the  product  of 
first  and  second  and  (2x  +  i)2—  i  for  the  product  of 
second  and  third. 
Let  the  second  be  x,  so  that  first  =  x+  2,  third  =  4^+4. 

[Then  product  of  first  and  third  +  i  =  4^  +  12^  +  9,  and 
the  third  condition  is  satisfied.] 

Thus  the  required  indeterminate  solution1  is 
(x  +  2,  x,  4X  +  4)- 

1  The  result  obtained  by  Diophantus  really  amounts  to  the  more  general  solution 

a?x+ia,   x,   (a+  i)2jr+2  (a+i). 

With  this  solution  should  be  compared  that  of  Euler  (Algebra,  Part  II.  Art.  231). 
I.     To  determine  x,  y,  z  so  that 

xy+i,  yz+i,  zx+i  are  all  squares. 
Suppose  zx  +  i  -  /*,    yz+i  =  <j*, 

so  that  *=.(/*-  i)/«,    y  =  (q*-i)lz. 

•  Therefore  xy  +  1  =  (^Zjl^JLl)  +  ,  =a  square, 

or  (?-i)(f-i)+z*  =  z  square 

=  (2  -  ry,  say  ;         [Euler  has  (z  +  r)2] 


_ 

whence  z  =  -  St.  -  UJC 

2/- 
where  any  numbers  may  be  substituted  for^,  q,  r. 


BOOK   IV  i79 

20.     To  find  four  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
increased  by  unity  is  a  square. 

For  the  product  of  first  and  second  take  a  square  minus  I, 

say  (x+  iy*-  i  =x*  +  2x. 
Let  first  =  x,  so  that  second  =x+2. 


For  example,  if  r=pq+  i,  we  shall  have 
=  J/+£)L         ,  2 


II.     But,  if  whole  numbers  are  required,  we  put  ;ry+  1  =/*,  and  assume  z=x+y+f. 
We  then  have  xz+  i  =*3  +  .ry+^jr  +  i  = 

and  ?z+i=xy+yi+2y+i= 

These  expressions  are  both  squares  if  q  =  ±  ip. 
Thus  a  solution  is  obtained  from  xy=p*-  i  combined  with  either 
z=x+y+ip,  or  z=x+y-ip. 

We  take  a  certain  value  for  /*,  split  /*  -  i  into  two  factors,  take  these  factors  for  the 
values  of  x,  y  respectively,  and  so  find  z. 

For  example,  let/=3,  so  that/2-  1  =  8;  if  we  make  x=t,  .7=4,  we  find  z=either  11 
or  o  ;  and  in  this  case  x=i,  y=\t  z=  it  is  the  solution. 

If  we  put  /*  =  (£+  1)2,  we  have  xy=?  +  if  ;  and  if  we  put  x=t+y,jf={,  we  have 

or  o. 


The  solution  is  then  (£+  2,  £,  4^  +  4),  as  in  Diophantus. 

Fermat  in  his  note  on  this  problem  shows  how  to  find  three  numbers  satisfying  not 
only  the  conditions  of  the  problem  but  three  more  also,  namely  that  each  of  the  numbers 
shall  itself  when  increased  by  i  give  a  square,  i.e.  to  solve  the  equations 


Solve,  he  says,  the  present  problem  of  Diophantus  in  such  a  way  that  the  terms 
independent  of  x  in  the  first  and  third  of  the  numbers  obtained  by  his  method  shall  be 
such  as  when  increased  by  i  give  a  square.  It  is  easy  to  find  a  value  for  a  such  that 

IM  +  1  and  i  (a  +  1)  +  1  are  both  squares.    Fermat  takes  the  value  ia  =  -j?  ,  which  satisfies 
the  conditions,  and  the  general  expressions  for  the  three  numbers  sought  are  therefore 
160         13  7225        85 

5-7r4*+3-6>  -•  3-*3- 

Each  of  these  has,  when  increased  by  i,  to  become  a  square,  that  is,  we  have  to  solve  the 
triple-equation 

rfjL^if 

5184     36 


Fermat  does  not  give  the  solution  ;  but  it  is  effected  as  follows. 

Multiplying  the  third  expression  by  36  and  the  first  by  ^  .  36  (in  order  that  the 
absolute  terms  in  the  two  may  be  equal),  we  have  to  solve 

12  —  2 


i8o  THE   ARITHMETICA 

For  the  product  of  first  and  third  take  (2x  +  i)2-  i,  or 
4^r2  +  4,  the  coefficient  of  x  being  the  number  next 
following  the  coefficient  (i)  taken  in  the  first  case, 
for  the  reason  shown  in  the  last  problem ; 

thus  third  number  =  4^  +  4. 

Similarly  take  (3*  +  i)2-  i,  or  9x*  +  6x,  for  the  product  of 
first  and  fourth;  therefore  fourth  =  9* +6. 

And  product  of  third  and  fourth  +  i 

=  (4;r+4)(9;r  +  6)  +  i  =36^  +  60^+25, 

which  is  a  square1. 


X+I=V2 
*+I2I=«'2 


(S)1- 


In  order  to  solve  by  the  method  of  the  triple-equation,  we  make  x+  i  a  square  by 
putting  x=y*  +  iy. 

Substitute  this  value  in  the  other  two  expressions,  and  for  convenience  multiply  each 
by  144;  this  gives 

(y)V  +  V)  +  ('3*)8  =  a  square! 
(8s)2  0*  +  «y)+(  I3*)2  =  a  squareJ 
The  difference  =  (y*  +  iy)  (s$  +  l-^\  (s5  -  *-^\ 

' 


The  square  of  half  the  difference  of  the  factors  equated  to  the  smaller  expression  gives 


whence  y=~;   and  we  find  that 


7239457225 
It  is  easily  verified  that 


so  that  the  value  of  x  satisfies  the  three  equations. 

The  numbers  satisfying  Fermat's  six  conditions  are  then 

1&L  x  +  13  _i  0060498  1  50193144576  7225        85  _  48191691 

5184        36      171348100'          7239457225'  5  *84J36~  4008004 

1  This  results  from  the  fact  that,  if  we  have  three  numbers  x,  y,  z  such  that 

xy+i=(mx+i)z  and    xz+  i  =  {(m  +  i)x+  i}2, 
then  yz+i  =  \»i(m+i)x+('2m+i)}^ 


BOOK    IV  T8i 

Lastly,  product  of  second  and  fourth  +  i  =  gx2  +  24*  +  13 ; 

therefore     gx*  +  24*  +  13  =  square  =  (3*  -  4)',  say ; 

which  gives  x  =  -J%. 
All  the  conditions  are  now  satisfied1, 

and  TV  TV  "•  *£  is  the  solution2' 

1  The  remaining  condition  was:  product  of  second  and  third  +  i=a  square.    That  this 
is  satisfied  also  follows  from  the  general  property  stated  in  the  last  note.     In  fact 

(x  +  v)  (4^  +  4)  +  i  =  4*2  +  iix  +  g, 
which  is  a  sqnare. 

2  With  this  solution  should  be  compared  Euler's  solution  (Algebra,  Part  n.  Art.  233) 
of  the  problem  of  finding  x,  y,  z,  v  such  that  the  six  expressions 

xy  +  a,    yz  +  a,     zx  +  a,     xv  +  a,    yv  +  a,     zv  +  a 

are  all  squares.     The  solution  follows  the  method  adopted  to  solve  the  corresponding 
problem  with  three  unknowns  x,  y,  z  only.     See  note  on  III.  10  above. 

If  we  begin  by  supposing  xy  +  a=^P,  and  take  z  =  x+y+ip,  the  second  and  third 
expressions  become  squares  (vide  note  on  III.   10,  p.   160). 

If  we  further  suppose   v  =  x+y-ip,  the  fourth  and  fifth  expressions  also  become 
squares  (vide  the  same  note). 

Consequently  we  have  only  to  secure  that  the  sixth  expression  zv  +  a  shall  be  a  square ; 
that  is, 

x2  +  2xy  +yz  -  4/2  +  a  =  a  square, 

or  (since  xy  +  a  =/2)  xz  -  ixy  +y*  -  30  =  a  square. 

Suppose  that  . (x -y)2 -^a=(x-y- q)* ; 

therefore  x- 


Consequently  /2 = xy  +  a  =y*  +  ^-^  y  +  a. 

If  we  put  p=y  +  r,  we  have 


and  y  =  - 

from  which  /,  x,  and  therefore  z,  v  also,  are  found  in  terms  of  q,  r,  where  y,  r  may  have 
any  values  provided  that  x,  y,  z,  v  are  all  positive. 

Euler  observed  that  this  method  is  not  suited  for  finding  integral  solutions,  and, 
pursuing  the  matter  further,  he  gave  the  following  very  elegant  solution  of  Diophantus' 
actual  problem  (the  case  where  a=i)  in  integers  ("Miscellanea  analytica"  in  Com- 
mentationes  arithmeticae,  n.  pp.  45-6)- 

Six  conditions  have  to  be  satisfied.  If  x,  y,  z,  v  are  the  required  numbers,  let  x  =  »i, 
y  =  n,  where  m,  n  are  any  integers  such  that  mn  +  i  =  P. 

Then  put  z  =  m  +  n  +  il,  and  three  conditions  are  already  satisfied,  for 
xy+i=mn+i=  I2,  by  hypothesis, 
xz  +  i  =  in  (m  +  n  +  il)  +  i  =  (/+  /w)2, 

The  three  conditions  remaining  to  be  satisfied  are 

xv  +  i  —  mv  +  i  =  a  square, 

yv  +  i  =  nv  +  i  =  a  square, 

zv  +  i  =  (m  +  n  +  2/)  v  +  i  =  a  square. 
Let  us  make  the  continued  product  of  these  expressions  a  square. 


182  THE   ARITHMETICA 

21.     To  find  three  numbers  in  proportion  and  such  that  the 
difference  of  any  two  is  a  square. 

Assume  x  for  the  least,  x  +  4  for  the  middle  (in  order 
that  the  difference  of  middle  and  least  may  be  a 
square),  x+  13  for  the  greatest  (in  order  that  differ- 
ence of  greatest  and  middle  may  be  a  square). 


This  product  will  be  found  to  be 

i  +  v  (tK  +  n  +  l)v+{(m  +  n  +  /)2-  1}  »2+#/«(w  +  «  +  2/)zr3. 

Let  us  equate  this  to  \i+(m  +  n  +  l)v--vii  ,in  order  that  the  terms  in  v,  z>2  as  well 
as  the  absolute  term  may  vanish  ;  therefore 


whence 


=/(/+«)(/+«), 

and  therefore  v  =  \l  (/+  m)  (/+«). 

It  is  true  that  we  have  only  made  the  product  of  the  three  expressions  mv+i,  nv+i, 
(m  +  n  +  il)v+  i  a  square  ;  but,  as  the  value  of  v  has  turned  out  to  be  an  integral  number, 
so  that  all  three  formulae  are  prime  to  one  another,  we  may  conclude  that  each  of  the 
expressions  is  a  square. 
The  solution  is  therefore 

x=m,    y=n,    z  =  m  +  n  +  i/,    z>  =  4/  (/+*»)(/+«), 
where  mn  +  i  =  I3. 

In  fact,  while  three  of  the  conditions  have  been  above  shown  to  be  satisfied,  we  find, 
as  regards  the  other  three,  that 

xv  +  i  =4/w  (l+m)  (l+n)+i  =  (*P+'ilm  -  i)2, 
yv+  i  =4/»  (l+m)  (/+«)  +  i  =(2/2  +  2/«  -  i)2, 

2Z>+  I  =4/(#Z  +  «  +  2/)  (/+#*)(/+«)+  I  =  (4/l+2//W  +  2/«-  i)2. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  /  may  be  either  positive  or  negative. 
Ex.     Let  *»  =  3,  »  =  8,  so  that  /=  ±5. 

If  /=  +  5,  the  solution  is  3,  8,  21,  2080  ;  if  /=  -  5,  the  solution  is  3,  8,  i,  120. 
Fermat  shows  how  to  solve  this  problem,  alternatively,  by  means  of  the  "triple-equation.  " 
Take  three  numbers  with  the  required  property,  e.g.  3,  r,  8.     Let  x  be  the  fourth,  and 
we  have  then  to  satisfy  the  conditions 


Put  x=jfl+ty,  so  as  to  make  the  second  expression  a  square,  and  then  substitute  the 
value  of  x  in  the  other  two.     We  have  then  the  double-equation 


The  difference  =  5  (y*  +  iy)  =  $y  (y  +  1  )  . 

We  put  then  (3^+  i)2= 

whence  y=  10,  and  x—yz+  iy=  120,  which  value  satisfies  the  triple-equation. 

The  four  numbers  are  then  3,  i,  8,  120,  which  solution  is  identical  with  one  of  those 
obtained  by  Euler  as  above. 


BOOK   IV  183 

If  now  13  were  a  square,  we  should  have  an  indeterminate 
solution  satisfying  three  of  the  conditions. 

We  must  therefore  replace  13  by  a  square  which  is  the 
sum  of  two  squares.  Any  rational  right-angled 
triangle  will  furnish  what  is  wanted,  say  3,  4,  5  ; 

we  therefore  put  for  the  numbers  x,  x  +  9,  ;r+  25. 

The  fourth  condition  gives 

4r  +     »f  and  x  =     . 


Thus  —  ,  ^,  -^-  is  a  solution. 

22.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  solid  content1  added 
to  any  one  of  them  gives  a  square. 

Assume  continued  product  x*+  2x,  first  number  I,  second 

number  ^x  +  9,  so  that  two  conditions  are  satisfied. 
The  third  number  is  then  (x*  +  2x)\(&x  +  9). 
This  cannot   be  divided    out  unless  x*\^x=2x\<)   or, 
alternately,  x*  :  2x  =  ^x  :  g  ;  but  it  could  be  done  if  4 
were  half  of  9. 
Now  ^x  comes  from  6x  —  2x,  and  the  6x  in  this  from 

twice  T)X\  the  9  comes  from  32. 

Therefore  we  have  to  find  a  number  m  to  replace  3  such 
that  2m  —  2  =  \nf\  thus  m*  =  tyn  -  4,  whence2  m  —  2. 
We  put  therefore  for  the  second  number  (x+  2?  —  (x*  +  2x\ 
or  2x  +  4  ;  the  third  number  is  then 

(x*  +  2x)l(2x  +  4)  or  \x. 
Lastly,  the  third  condition  requires 

x*  +  2x  +  \x  =  a  square  =  4^,  say. 
Therefore  *  =  f, 

and    i,  is  a  solution*. 


1  6  e|  at/run-  ffre/>e6i,  "  the  solid  (number  formed)  from  them  "  =  the  continued  product 
of  the  three  numbers. 

8  Observe  the  solution  of  a  mixed  quadratic. 

3  Fermat  gives  a  solution  which  avoids  the  necessity  for  the  auxiliary  problem. 

Let  the  solid  content  bejc3-**,  the  first  number  i,  and  ihe  second  number  tx\  two 
conditions  are  thus  satisfied. 

The  third  number  is  now  A3  -  xr  divided  by  rr  .  i,  or  £  x  -  i  ;  and  the  third  condition 
gives 

x3-^x-i=a.  square. 

Now  x  must  be  greater  than  i  ;  we  therefore  put 

x*-^x-i=(x-m)*, 
where  m  is  greater  than  2. 


i84  THE  ARITHMETIC  A 

23.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  solid  content  minus 
any  one  gives  a  square1. 

First  numbers,  solid  content  x*  +  x;  therefore  product  of 

second  and  third  —x-\- 1. 

Let  the  second  be  i,  so  that  the  third  is  x  +  i. 
The  two  remaining  conditions  require  that 

2        I  shall  both  be  squares.  [Double-equation.] 

The  difference  =  x  =  J  .  2x,  say ; 
thus  (x  + 1)2  =  x2  +  x  -  i ,  and  x  =  ty. 

The  numbers  are  (~,  i,  ^M. 

\  o  o  / 

24.  To  divide  a  given  number  into  two  parts  such  that  their 
product  is  a  cube  minus  its  side. 

Given  number  6.     First  part^r;  therefore  second  =  6  —  x, 

and  6x  —  x2  =  a  cube  minus  its  side. 
Form  a  cube  from  a  side  of  the  form  mx —  i,  say  2^—1, 

and  equate  6x  —  x*  to  this  cube  minus  its  side. 
Therefore  Sx3  —  1 2xz  -f  ^x=  6x  —  xz. 

1  A  remarkable  problem  of  this  kind  (in  respect  of  the  apparent  number  of  conditions 
satisfied)  is  given  by  De  Billy  in  the  Inventum  Novum,  Part  I.  paragraph  43  (Oeuvres 
de  Fermat,  III.  p.  352) :  To  find  three  numbers  £,  77,  f  (£,  f,  77  being  in  ascending  order 
of  magnitude)  such  that  the  following  nine  expressions  may  become  squares  : 

(0     f-fctf»         (4)     i» -£-£!?•         (7)     fr-fcjf, 

(2)  77-f7?f,         (5)     f-f-fijf,         (8)    ijf-fijf, 

(3)  f-frf,         (6)     ij-f-frfc         (9)     V'-M. 

Take  x,  i,  i  —  JT  as  the  values  of  £,  77,  f  respectively.     Then  six  conditions,  namely, 
(0.  (3)»  (4).  (6).  (?),  (8),  are  all  automatically  satisfied. 
By  conditions  (2)  and  (9)  alike, 

i  -x  +  x2  =  a.  square. 
And,  by  (5),  i  —  $x  +  j?  =  a.  square. 

Solving  this  double-equation  in  the  usual  way,  we  get  *=f  ,and  the  numbers  are 

o 

*       !      I 

8'     '  8 

Another  solution  can  be  obtained  by  putting  y  +  ^  in  place  of  x  in  the  two  expressions, 

8 

and  so  on.     Cf.  note  on  III.  18  above. 

It  would  appear  from  a  letter  from  Fermat  to  De  Billy  of  26  Aug.  1659  (Oeuvres,  n. 
pp.  436-8)  that  this  problem  and  the  above  single  solution  were  De  Billy's  own.  De  Billy 
had  supposed  that  this  was  the  only  solution,  but  Fermat  observed  that  there  were  any 
number,  as  the  above  double-equation  has  any  number  of  solutions.  Fermat  gave 

(!O4l6  4l440\ 

^    ,  i,        H    )  as  another  solution. 


BOOK   IV  185 

Now,  if  the  coefficient  of  x  were  the  same  on  both  sides, 
this  would  reduce  to  a  simple  equation,  and  x  would 
be  rational. 

In  order  that  this  may  be  the  case,  we  must  put  m  for  2 
in  our  assumption,  where  ^m  —  m=6  (the  6  being 
the  given  number  in  the  original  hypothesis).  Thus 
m  =  3. 

We  therefore  assume 


or 
and 


The  parts  are  *,  ^. 


25.     To  divide  a  given  number  into  three  parts  such  that  their 
continued  product  gives  a  cube  the  side  of  which  is  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  differences  of  the  parts. 
Given  number  4. 
Since  the   product  is  a  cube,  let  it  be  Sx3,  the  side  of 

which  is  2x. 
Now  (second  part)  -  (first)  +  (third)  -  (second)  +  (third) 

—  (first)  =  twice  difference  between  third  and  first. 
Therefore  difference  between  third  and  first  =  half  sum  of 

differences=;tr. 
Let  the  first  be  any  multiple  of  x,  say  2.x;  therefore  the 

third  =  $x. 
Hence  second  =  S-^/dt?  =  %x\  and,  if  tJie  second  had  lain 

between  the  first  and  third,  the  problem  would  have  been 

solved. 
Now  the  second  came  from  dividing  8  by  2  .  3,  and  the 

2  and  3  are  not  two  numbers  at  random  but  con- 

secutive numbers. 
Therefore  we  have  to  find  two  consecutive  numbers  such 

that,  when  8  is  divided  by  their  product,  the  quotient 

lies  between  the  numbers. 
Assume   m,  m+i;    therefore   8/(m*  +  m)  lies  between 

m  and  m  +  I. 

o 

Therefore  --  1-  i  >  m  +  I, 

m*  +  m 

so  that  m*  +  m  +  8  >  m3  +  2m3  +  m, 

or  8  >  m3  +  m*. 


186  THE   ARITHMETICA 

I  form  a  cube  such  that  it  has  m3,  m*  as  terms,  that  is,  the 
cube  (m  -f  ^)3,  which  is  greater  than  m3  +  m2,  and  I  put 


therefore  m  +  ^  =  2,  and  m  =  £  . 

Assume  now  for  first  number  %x\  the  third  is  §x,  and 
the  second  is  \x. 

Multiplying  throughout  by  15,  we  take  2$x,  27^-,  4Ox, 
and  the  product  of  these  numbers  is  a  cube  the 
side  of  which  is  the  sum  of  their  differences. 

The  sum  =  g2x  =  4,  by  hypothesis. 

Therefore  x  =  -^, 

and  (g,  g,  g)  are  the  parts  required. 

[N.B.     The   condition    8/(m*  +  m)  <  m  +  i    is  ignored    in 
the  work,  and  is  incidentally  satisfied.] 

26.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  added  to 
either  gives  a  cube. 

Let  the  first  number  be  of  the  form  m*x,  say  8x 

Second  x*  —  i.     Therefore  one  condition  is  satisfied,  since 

Sx3  —  Sx  +  8x  =  a  cube. 

Also  Sx'  —  Sx  +  x2-  i  =a  cube  =  (2*—  i)3,  say. 
Therefore  13^  =  14^,  and  x  =  \&. 
The  numbers  are  ^,  ^. 

27.  a  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  mimes  either 
gives  a  cube. 

Let  the  first  be  of  the  form  m*x,  say  8x,  and  the  second 

x2  +  i  (since  S^3  +  8x  -  Sx=  a  cube). 
Also  S^+Sx—x2—  i  must  be  a  cube,  "  which  is  impossible1." 

1  Diophantus  means  that,  if  we  are  to  get  rid  of  the  third  power  and  the  absolute 
term,  we  can  only  put  the  expression  equal  to  (i^r-i)3,  which  gives  a  negative  and 
therefore  "impossible"  value  for  x.  But  the  equation  is  not  really  impossible,  for  we  can 
get  rid  of  the  terms  in  x3  and  -c2  by  putting 


^-i='2x-—,  whence  x=-, 
\          I2/  !3/52 

or  we  can  make  the  term  in  x  and  the  absolute  term  disappear  by  putting 

Sjf  +  Sx-x*-  !  =  (***-  iV,   whence  *  =  ^>- 
\3  /  '96 

Diophantus  has  actually  shown  us  how  to  do  the  former  in  iv.  25  just  preceding. 


BOOK   IV  187 

Accordingly  we  assume  for  the  first  number  an  expression 
of  the  form  m*x  +  i,  say  Sx+  i,  and  for  the  second 
number  x*  (since  8*8  +  x*  —  x*  =  a 'cube). 

Also  S.*8  +x2  -  8*  -  i  =  a  cube  =  (2x-  i)3,  say. 

Therefore  x  =  -J^, 

arid  the  numbers  are  ^,  ^. 

28.     To  find  two  numbers   such   that   their   product    ±   their 
sum  gives  a  cube. 

Assume  the  first  cube  (product  +  sum)  to  be  64,  and  the 

second  (product  — sum)  to  be  8. 
Therefore   twice  sum  of  numbers  =  64  -  8  =  56,  and  the 

sum  =  28,  while  the  product  +  the  sum  =  64;  therefore 

the  product  =  36. 
Therefore  we  have  to  find  two  numbers  such  that  their 

sum  is  28  and  their  product  36.     If  14  +  *,  14 -x  are 

the  numbers1,  we  have  196  —  ^  =  36,  or  x2=  160;  and, 

if   1 60  were  a   square,  we   should   have  a  rational 

solution. 
Now    160   arises   from    142-36,   and    14  =  ^.28  =  ^.56 

=  i  (difference  of  two  cubes);    also  36  =  £  (sum  of 

the  cubes). 
Therefore  we  have  to  find  two  cubes  such  that 

(\  of  their  difference)2  -  ^  their  sum  =  a  square. 
Let  the  sides  of  the  cubes  be  (z  +  i),  (z  —  i); 
therefore  £  of  difference  =  i^3  +  £,  and  the  square  of  this 

is  2j^+  1^2 +  £; 
£  the  sum  of  the  cubes  is  ^  +  32-; 
therefore  2^2*  +  \\zz  +  £—z*  —  32  =  a  square, 
or  9-s4  +  6z*  +  i  —  40s  —  122  =  a  square  =(52*  +  i  —  62)*,  say; 
whence  32^  =  36^,  and  z  =  |. 
The  sides  of  the  cubes  are  therefore  ^-,  |,  and  the  cubes 


Put  now  product  of  numbers  +  their  sum  =  ^^,  and  pro- 
duct —  sum  =  g-J-j- 

Therefore  their  sum  =  %$$•,  and  their  product 
Now  let  the  first  number  =  x  +  half  sum  =  x  + 

and  the  second  =  half  sum  -  x  =  ±$&-  -  x; 

t'hprpfoj'p  j  50 7 98^4  j£*2  =^  JL4J>7_ 

and  262144^=250000. 

i  Cf.  i.  27. 


i88  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Therefore  x  =  \\ §, 

and  (W'  i) is  a  solution- 

Otherwise  thus. 

If  any  square  number  is  divided  into  two  parts  one  of 

which  is  its  side,  the  product  of  the  parts  added  to 

their  sum  gives  a  cube. 
[That  is,  x  (x*  -  x)  -f  x*  -  x  +  x  =  a  cube.] 
Let  the  square  be  xz,  and  be  divided  into  the  parts  x>  x*—x. 
Then,  by  the  second  condition  of  the  problem, 

x^  —  x*  —  x*  =  x3  —  2x*  =  a  cube  (less  than  x3)  =  (^x)3,  say. 
Therefore  Sx3  -  i6x2  =  x9,  so  that  x  =  ^ , 
and  f1-,  —  J  is  a  solution. 

29.     To  find  four  square  numbers  such  that  their  sum  added  to 
the  sum  of  their  sides  makes  a  given  number1. 
Given  number  12. 
Now  xs  +  x  +  \  =  a.  square. 

Therefore  the  sum  of  four  squares  +  the  sum  of  their  sides 

+  i  =the  sum  of  four  other  squares=  1 3,  by  hypothesis. 

Therefore  we  have  to  divide  13  into  four  squares;  then,  if 

we  subtract  £  from  each  of  their  sides,  we  shall  have 

the  sides  of  the  required  squares. 

1  On  this  problem  Bachet  observes  that  Diophantus  appears  to  assume,  here 
and  in  some  problems  of  Book  v.,  that  any  number  not  itself  a  square  is  the  sum  of 
two  or  three  or  four  squares.  He  adds  that  he  has  verified  this  statement  for  all 
numbers  up  to  325,  but  would  like  to  see  a  scientific  proof  of  the  theorem.  These 
remarks  of  Bachet's  are  the  occasion  for  another  of  Fermat's  famous  notes :  "  I  have 
been  the  first  to  discover  a  most  beautiful  theorem  of  the  greatest  generality,  namely  this : 
Every  number  is  either  a  triangular  number  or  the  sum  of  two  or  three  triangular 
numbers  ;  every  number  is  a  square  or  the  sum  of  two,  three,  or  four  squares;  every 
number  is  a  pentagonal  number  or  the  sum  of  two,  three,  four  or  five  pentagonal 
numbers;  and  so  on  ad  infinitum,  for  hexagons,  heptagons  and  any  polygons  whatever, 
the  enunciation  of  this  general  and  wonderful  theorem  being  varied  according  to  the 
number  of  the  angles.  The  proof  of  it,  which  depends  on  many  various  and  abstruse 
mysteries  of  numbers,  I  cannot  give  here ;  for  I  have  decided  to  devote  a  separate  and 
complete  work  to  this  matter  and  thereby  to  advance  arithmetic  in  this  region  of  inquiry 
to  an  extraordinary  extent  beyond  its  ancient  and  known  limits." 

Unfortunately  the  promised  separate  work  did  not  appear.  The  theorem  so  far  as  it 
relates  to  squares  was  first  proved  by  Lagrange  (Nottv.  Memoires  de  F Acad.  de  Berlin, 
annee  1770,  Berlin  1772,  pp.  123-133;  Oeuvres,  in.  pp.  189-201),  who  followed  up 
results  obtained  by  Euler.  Cf.  also  Legendre,  Zahlentheorie,  tr.  Maser,  I.  pp.  212  sqq. 
Lagrange's  proof  is  set  out  as  shortly  as  possible  in  Wertheim's  Diophantus,  pp.  324-330. 
The  theorem  of  Fermat  in  all  its  generality  was  proved  by  Cauchy  (Oeuvres,  ile  serie, 
Vol.  VI.  pp.  320-353) ;  cf.  Legendre,  Zahlentheorie,  tr.  Maser,  II.  pp.  332  sqq. 


BOOK   IV  189 

Now  i3  =  4  +  9  =  (f!  +  f!)  +  (W  +  M)> 

and  the  sides  of  the  required  squares  are  |£,  T7^,  {$,  |$, 

the  squares  themselves  being  — ,  &- .  &*    *Q 

B   100'    100'    100'    100' 

30.  To  find  four  squares  such  that  their  sum  minus  the  sum  of 
their  sides  is  a  given  number. 

Given  number  4. 

Now  x*  —  x  +  |  =  a  square. 

Therefore  (the  sum  of  four  squares)  —  (sum  of  their  sides) 

+  i  =the  sum  of  four  other  squares  =  5,  by  hypothesis. 
Divide  5  into  four  squares,  as  ^,  |f ,  ff ,  ff . 
The  sides  of  these  squares  plus  $  in  each  case  are  the  sides 

of  the  required  squares. 
Therefore  sides  of  required  squares  are  }£,  i£,  ^,  -££,  . 

and  the  squares  themselves  ^,  *?,  *£,  *?. 

100'    100'    100'    100 

31.  To  divide  unity  into  two  parts  such  that,  if  given  numbers 
are  added  to  them  respectively,  the  product  of  the  two  sums  gives 
a  square. 

Let  3,  5  be  the  numbers  to  be  added;  x,  I  —  #  the  parts  of  I. 
Therefore  (x  +  3) (6  —  x)  =  1 8  +  3 x  —  x*  =  a  square  =  4^,  say; 
thus  1 8  +  3*  =  5;r2,  which  does  not  give  a  rational  result. 
Now  5  comes  from  a  square  +  I ;  and,  in  order  that  the 
equation  may  have  a  rational  solution,  we  must  sub- 
stitute for  the  square  taken  (4)  a  square  such  that 

(the  square  +  i) .  18  +  (|)2  =  a  square. 
Put  (m2  +  1)18  +  2^  =  a  square, 

or  72 m2  +  8 1  =  a  square  =  (Sm  +  gf,  say, 

and  m=  18,  w2=324. 

Hence  we  must  put 

(x+$)(6-x}=  18  +  3^-^2  =  324^r2. 
Therefore1  325^-  3^-18  =  0, 

*  =  s7A  =  &> 

and  (— ,  -~\  is  a  solution. 
Otherwise  thus. 

The  numbers  to  be  added  being  3,  5,  assume  the  first  of 

the  two  parts  to  be  x—  3  ;  the  second  is  then  4  —  x. 
Therefore          x  (9  -  x}  =  a  square  =  4^,  say, 
and  *=\- 

But  I  cannot  take  3  from  f ,  and  x  must  be  >  3  and  <  4. 

1  Observe  the  solution  of  a  mixed  quadratic  equation. 


190  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Now  the  value  of  x  comes  from  9/(a  square  +  i),  and,  since 
x>  3,  this  square  +  I  should  be<3,  so  that  the  square 
must  be  less  than  2;  but,  since  x  <4,  the  square  4-  I 
must  be  >  f ,  so  that  the  square  must  be  >  |. 

Therefore  I  must  find  a  square  lying  between  £  and  2,  or 
between  f$  and  ^. 

W  or  ft  satisfies  the  condition. 

Put  now  x  (9  -  x)  =  $%x* ; 

therefore  x  =  ift, 

and  (",  *)  is  a  solution. 

32.     To  divide  a  given  number  into   three   parts   such    that 
the  product  of  the  first  and  second  ±  the  third  gives  a  square. 
Given  number  6. 
Suppose  third  part  =  x,  second  =  any  number  less  than  6, 

say  2;  therefore  first  part  =  ^  —  x. 

The  two  remaining  conditions  require  that  8  —  2x  ±  x  —  a 
square, 

or  't    [  are  both  squares.    [Double-equation.] 

This  does  not  give  a  rational  result  ("is  not  rational "),  since 
the  ratio  of  the  coefficients  ofx  is  not  a  ratio  of  a  square 
to  a  square. 

But  the  coefficients  of  x  are  2  -  I  and  2  +  I ;  therefore  we 
must  find  a  number  y  to  replace  2  such  that 
(y  +  i)j(y  -  i)  =  ratio  of  square  to  square  =  ±,  say. 

Therefore  y  +  i  =  4y  —  4,  and  y  =  f . 

Put  now  second  part  =f ;  therefore  first  = -^  —  x. 

Therefore  &$-  —  \x±x='&  square. 

That  is,  'X    I  are  both  squares, 

260—  24^) 

or  ,  \  are  both  squares. 

65  -  24*] 

The  difference  =  195  =  15  .  13; 

we  put  therefore  \  (i 5  —  1 3)*  =  65  —  24*,  and  x  =  f . 

Therefore  the  required  parts  are  f-,  -,  -V. 

i  Fermat  observes:    "The  following  is  an  easier  method  of  solution.     Divide  the 
number  6  into  two  in  any  manner,  e.g.  into  5  and  i.     Divide  their  product  less  i,  that  is 

4,  by  6,  the  given  number:  the  result  is  -.     Subtracting  this  first  from  5  and  then  from  i, 


BOOK  IV  191 

33.  To  find  two  numbers  such  that  the  first  with  a  fraction 
of  the  second  is  to  the  remainder  of  the  second  in  a  given  ratio, 
and  also  the  second  with  the  same  fraction  of  the  first  is  to  the 
remainder  of  the  first  in  a  given  ratio. 

Let  the  first  with  the  fraction  of  the  second  =  3  times  the 

remainder  of  the  second,  and  the  second  with  the 

same  fraction  of  the  first  =  5  times  the  remainder  of 

the  first. 
[The  fraction  may  be  either  an  aliquot  part  or  not,  TO 

avro   fj.epof   or   rd  avra   fiepij  as  Diophantus   says, 

following  the  ordinary  definition  of  those  terms  ("the 

same  part"  or  "the  same  parts")-,   cf.   Euclid  VII. 

Deff.  3,  4-] 
Let  the  second  =x+  i,  and  let  the  part  of  it  received  by 

the  first  =  i ; 

therefore  the  first  =  3^—1  (since  ^x  —  i  +  I  =  yc\ 
Since  the  second  plus  the  fraction  of  the  first  =  5  times 

the  remainder  of  the  first, 

the  second  +  the  first  =  6  times  the  remainder  of  the  first. 
And    first  +  second  =  4*  ;    therefore   remainder  of   first 

=  f;r,  and  hence  the  second  receives  from  the  first 

-$x—\  —  \x  or  \x—  i. 
We  have   therefore  to  secure  that   \x—\    is   the  same 

fraction  of  yc  —  i  that  I  is  of  x+  i. 
This  requires  that  (&x  —  i)(^+  i)  =  (3^r—  i).  I  ; 
therefore     \x*  +  %x -  i  =  3*  —  i,  and  x  =  f . 
Accordingly   the  numbers  are  f,  ^;  and  I  is  ^  of  the 

second. 


we  have  as  remainders  —  and  -,  which  are  the  first  two  parts  of  the  number  to  be 

divided;   the  third  is  therefore  -." 

3 

That  is,  if  £,  77,  f  be  the  required  parts  of  the  number  a,  Fermat  divides  a  into  two 
parts  x,  a  -  x  and  then  puts 


whence 

The  three  general  expressions  in  x  satisfy  the  conditions,  and  x  may  be  given  any 
value   <a. 


192  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Multiply  by  7  and  the  numbers  are  8,  12,  and  the  fraction 
is  ^;  but  8  is  not  divisible  by  12:  so  multiply  by  3, 
and  (24,  36)  is  a  solution. 

Lemma  to  the  next  problem. 

To  find  two  numbers  indeterminately  such  that  their  product 
together  with  their  sum  is  a  given  number. 

Given  number  8. 

Assume  the  first  number  to  be  x,  the  second  3. 

Therefore  $x+x+  3=  given  number  =  8;  *  =  f,  and  the 
numbers  are  f ,  3. 

Now  |  arises  from  (8  -  3)/(3  +  i),  where  3  is  the  assumed 
second  number. 

We  may  accordingly  put  for  the  second  number  (instead 
of  3)  any  (undetermined)  number  whatever1 ;  then, 
substituting  this  for  3  in  the  above  expression,  we 
have  the  corresponding  first  number. 

For  example,  we  may  take*-  I  for  the  second  number; 

the  first  is  then  9  -  x  divided  by  x,  or  -  —  I. 

34.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
together  with  the  sum  of  those  two  makes  a  given  number2. 

1  The  Greek  phrase  is  eav  dpa  rdfw/xo'  rbv  fi?v  sov  oiovS^irore  (otonS^Trore  j  in  Lemma 
to  iv.  36),  "If  we  make  the  second"  (literally  "put  the  second  at")  "any  s  whatever." 
But  the  s  is  not  here,  as  it  is  in  the  Lemma  to  IV.  36,  the  actual  x  of  the  problem,  for 
Diophantus  goes  on  to  say  "  E.g.  let  the  second  be  x-  i."     In  the  Lemma  to  iv.  34  the 
corresponding  expression  is   "any  quantity   whatever"    (offovSjiroTe   without   s).     The 
present  Lemma  amounts  to  saying  that,  if  xy  +  x  +y  =  a,  then  x  =  (a-y)l(y+i). 

2  This  determinate  set  of  equations  can  of  course  be  solved,  with  our  notation,  by 
a  simple  substitution. 

The  equations  yz  +y  +  z  =  a\ 


are  equivalent  to 

where 

The  solution  is  £ = x  +  i 

In  order  that  the  result  may  be  rational,  it  is  only  necessary  that  (a+  i)  (l>+  i)  (c  +  i) 
should  be  a  square  ;  it  is  not  necessary  that  each  of  the  expressions  a  +  t ,  b  +  i ,  c  +  i 
should  be  a  square,  as  Diophantus  says. 


BOOK   IV  I93 

Necessary  condition.     Each  number  must  be  i  less  than  some 
square  1. 

Let  (product  +  sum)  of  first  and  second    =    8. 
»          „          „          second  and  third  =  15. 
„          „          „          third  and  first       =  24. 
By  the  first  equation,  if  we  divide(8  -  second)by  (second  +  1  ), 

we  have  the  first  number. 
Let  the  second  number  be  x  —  i. 


Therefore  the  first  = 


Similarly  the  third  number  =  --  i. 
The  third  equation  remains,  which  gives 


The  numbers  are  33,  2    ®, 
or,  when  reduced  to  a  common  denominator,  @,  f*    34?. 

DO       DO       OO 

Lemma  to  the  following  problem. 

To  find  two  numbers  indeterminately  such  that  their  product 
minus  their  sum  is  a  given  number. 
Given  number  8. 

First  numbers,  second  3,  suppose;  therefore 
(product)  -  (sum)  =  ?>x  —  x—*$  =  2x—  3  =  8,  and  x—^\. 
The  first  number  is  therefore  5^,  the  second  3. 
But  5^  comes  from  (8  +  3)/(3  -  i),  and  we  may  put  for  3 

any  number  whatever. 
E.g.  put  the  second  number  =x+\;  the  first  is  then  ^+9 

divided  by  x,  or  i  +-. 

35.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
minus  the  sum  of  those  two  is  a  given  number2. 

Necessary  condition.     Each  of  the  given  numbers  must  be  i  less 
than  some  square2. 

Let  (product  —  sum)  of  first  and  second    =    8. 

M  „  .,         second  and  third  =  15. 

third  and  first        =  24. 


1  See  last  paragraph  of  preceding  note. 

2  The  notes  to  iv.  34  above  apply,  mutatis  mutandis,  to  this  problem  as  well. 

H.  D.  J3 


194  THE  ARITHMETICA 

By   the    first    equation,    if    we    divide   (8  +  second)   by 
(second  -  i),  we  have  the  first  number. 

Assuming  x  +  i  for  the  second  number,  we  have  i  +  - 

for  the  first. 
Similarly  i  H is  the  third  number,  and  two  conditions 

are  satisfied. 

The  third  gives  l~  -  i  =  24,  and  x  =  -1/. 
The  numbers  are  ^,  — ,  — , 

or, with  a  common  denominator,  ~s,  ^,  ^. 

Lemma  to  the  following  problem. 

To  find  two  numbers  indeterminately  such  that  their  product 
has  to  their  sum  a  given  ratio. 

Let   the   given  ratio  be   3:1,  the  first   number  x,  the 

second   5. 
Therefore    5^=3(5  +  -*'),  x  =  7\',  and  the  numbers  are 

7i  5- 
But  7^  arises  from   15  divided  by  2,  while  the  15  is  the 

second  number  multiplied  by  the  given  ratio,  and 

the  2  is  the  excess  of  the  second  number  over  the 

ratio. 
Putting  therefore  x  (instead  of  5)  for  the  second  number, 

we  have,  for  the  first  number,  3 x  divided  by  x  -  3. 
The  numbers  are  therefore  ^xl(x—  3),  x. 

36.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
bears  to  the  sum  of  those  two  a  given  ratio. 

Let  product  of  first  and  second  be  3  times  their  sum. 
„  „        second  and  third  be  4  times  their  sum. 

„  „        third  and  first  be  5  times  their  sum. 

Let  second  number  be.r;  the  first  is  therefore  ^xl(x  —  3), 
by  the  Lemma,  and  similarly  the  third  is  <\x\(x  —  4). 

T>X       A.X          (  \x         A.X  \ 
Lastly  -^ — .  -^  —  =  5  ( -^ —  +  -^  _  ) 

x-i .  *-4     'U-3     *-4/' 

or  1 2 AT2  =  35^r2 

Therefore  *  =  J^, 

and  the  numbers  are  & 


BOOK   IV  I95 

37.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
has  to  the  sum  of  the  three  a  given  ratio1. 

Let  product  of  first  and  second  =  3  times  sum  of  the  three, 
„         „      of  second  and  third  =4 
„         „          of  third  and  first  =  5  „ 

First  seek  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 

has  to  an  arbitrary  number  (say  5)  the  given  ratio. 
Then  product  of  first  and  second  =  15;  and,  if  x  be  the 

second,  the  first  is   i$jx. 
The  product  of  second  and   third  =  20;   therefore  third 


It  follows  that  20.  i5/;r'2  =  25. 

And,  if  the  ratio  of  20  .  1  5  to  25  were  that  of  a  square  to  a 

square,  the  problem  would  be  solved. 
Now  15  =  3.5,  and  20  is  4.  5,  the  3  and  4  being  fixed  by 

the  original    hypothesis,  but    5    being   an   arbitrary 

number. 
We  must  therefore  find  a  number  m  (to  replace  5)  such 

that  I2m2/$m  =  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square. 
Thus  1  2m2.  5«z  =6om3  =  a  square  =  poow2,  say  ;  and  m=  1  5. 
Let  then  the  sum  of  the  three  numbers  be  15. 
Product  of  first  and  second  is  therefore  45,  and  first  =  45/^r. 
Similarly  third  =  6olx. 
Therefore  45  .  6o/x2  =  75,  and  x  =  6. 

Therefore   the  numbers    are  7|,    6,  10,  and  the  sum  of 

these  =  2  3^. 
Now,  if  this  sum  ^vere  1  5  instead,  the  problem  would  be 

solved. 


1  Loria  (pp.  cit.  p.  130)  quotes  this  problem  as  an  instance  of  Diophantus'  ingenious 
choice  of  unknowns.     Here  the  equations  are,  with  our  notation, 


xy  =  <(*+)>  +  z), 

and   Diophantus  chooses  as   his   principal   unknown   the   sum   of  the   three  numbers, 
x+y  +  z  —  w,  say. 

We   may  then   write   x=cw\y,   z-aw\y,   so   that   zx  =  acwi\y1  =  bw,   and  _j/2=  —  w. 

Putting  W  =  -T  £2,  we  have 


from  which,  by  eliminating  x,  y,  z,  we  obtain  £  = 
Hence  x=(6f+fa  +  a6)la, 


13—2 


196  THE  ARITHMETIC  A 

Put  therefore  for  the  sum  of  the  three  numbers  1  5^2,  and 

for  the  numbers  themselves  J\x,  6x,  lox. 
Therefore  2^x  =  \$xz,  so  that  x  =  $s, 

and  35M,  *,  4?o  is  a  solution> 
30       3"      30 

38.     To   find   three  numbers  such  that  their  sum   multiplied 

into  the  first  gives  a  triangular  number,  their  sum  multiplied  into 

the  second  a  square,  and  their  sum  multiplied  into  the  third  a  cube. 

Let  the  sum  be  x-,  and  let  the  numbers  be  m/x2,  n/x*,p/x-, 

where  mt  n,p  are  a  triangular  number,  a  square  and 

a  cube  respectively  ; 

say  first  number  =  6/x*,  second  4/*r2,  third  S/x2. 
But  the  sum  is  x2;  therefore  i8/xz  =  x2,  or  i8=;r4. 
Therefore  we  must  replace  18  by  some  fourth  power. 
But  1  8  =  sum  of  a  triangular  number,  a  square  and  a  cube. 
Let  x*  be  the  required  fourth  power,  which  must  therefore  be 

the  sum  of  a  triangular  number,  a  square  and  a  cube. 
Let  the  square  be  x*  —  2x*  +  i  ; 

therefore  the  triangular  number  +  the  cube  =  2x*  —  i. 
Let  the  cube  be  8;   therefore  the  triangular  number  is 

2X2  —  9. 
But  8  times  a  triangular  number  +  i  =  a  square  ;  therefore 

\6x~-  71  =  a  square  =  (4^—  i)2,  say;  thus  x  =  g,  the 

triangular  number  is  153,  the  square  6400  and  the 

cube  8. 

Assume  then  as  the  numbers  I53/-*"2,  64<X)/r2,  S/x2. 
Therefore  6$6i/x*  =  x*,  or  ^  =  6561,  and  x=g. 


1  The  procedure  may  be  shown  more  generally  thus. 
Let  £,  -TI,  f  be  the  required  numbers;  suppose 


It  follows  that 

Suppose  now  that  /3=j-2-32  [Diophantus  and  Bachet  assume  &=  i]. 

Then  ^tlU^-^3. 

Eight  times  the  left  hand  side  plus  i  gives  a  square  (by  the  property  of  triangular 
numbers)  ;  that  is, 

(20  -»-  1)2=  i6sV  -  8z4  -  8-y3  +  i  ='a  square 

=  (40jr-/&)2,  say, 


BOOK   IV  I97 

39.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  difference  of  the 
greatest  and  the  middle  has  to  the  difference  of  the  middle  and  the 
least  a  given  ratio,  and  also  the  sum  of  any  two  is  a  square. 

Ratio  3  :  i.     Since  middle  number  +  least  =  square,  let  the 

square  be  4. 

Therefore  middle  >  2  ;  let  it  be  x  +  2,  so  that  least  =  2-x. 
Therefore  difference  of  greatest  and  middle  =  6x,  whence 
the  greatest  =  7  x  +  2. 

Therefore  ,  I  are  both  squares.     [Double-equation] 

Take  the  difference  2.x,  split  it  into  factors,  say  \x,  4,  and 
proceed  by  the  rule  ;  therefore  x=  112. 

But  I  cannot  take  1  12  from  2;  therefore  x  must  be  found 
to  be  <  2,  so  that  6x  +  4<  16. 

Thus  there  are  to  be  three  squares  8^+4,  6^  +  4  and  4 
(the  4  arising  from  2  .  2),  and  the  difference  of  the 
greatest  and  middle  is  ^  of  the  difference  of  the 
middle  and  least. 

We  have  therefore  to  find  three  squares  having  this  property 
and  such  that  the  least  =  4  and  the  middle  <  16. 

Let  side  of  middle  square  be  z  +  2  ;  therefore  excess  of 
middle  over  least  =  &  +  42,  whence  excess  of  greatest 
over  middle  =  \z^  +  \%z,  and  therefore  the  greatest 


This  must  be  a  square  ;  therefore,  multiplying  by  9,  we  have 
1  2z*  +  482  +  36  =  a  square, 


whence  .,  — 

OKZ 

But  a  ^  must  be  integral,  and  therefore  a  integral,  so  that  -(43^-^-1)  must  be 


integral ;  that  is,  —  must  be  integral. 

Bachet  assumes  that  it  is  necessary,  with  Diophantus,  to  take  k=i,  observing  that 
trial  will  show  that  the  problem  can  hardly  be  solved  otherwise.  On  this  Fermat  remarks 
that  Bachet's  trial  had  not  been  carried  far  enough.  We  may,  he  says,  put  for  -y3  any 
cube,  for  instance,  with  side  of  the  form  3«+i.  Suppose,  for  example,  we  take  73. 
Then  [2  being  i]  we  have  to  make 

2.**  -  344  a  triangle, 

and  therefore  16^-2751  a  square,  and  we  may  take,  if  we  please,  4^-3  as  the  side  of 
this  square  [so  that  k  is  in  this  case  3]. 

By  varying  the  cubes  we  may  use  an  unlimited  variety  of  odd  numbers,  besides  3, 
as  values  for  k  which  will  satisfy  the  required  condition. 

Loria  (op.  cit.  p.  138)  points  out  that  the  problem  could  have  been  more  simply 
solved  by  substituting  x  fcr  *2  and  2  for  22  in  the  above  assumptions.  The  ultimate 
expression  to  be  made  a  square  would  then  have  been  162* -8s2 -873+  r,  and  we  could 
have  equated  this  to  X2,  thus  finding  jr. 


198  THE   ARITHMETICA 


or  3£r2  +  1  2.z  +  9  =  a  square  =  (mz  —  3)2,  say. 

It  follows  that  z—  (6m  +  \2)\(in^  —  3),  which  must  be  <  2. 

Therefore     6m  +  12  <  2m2  —  6,  or  2mz  >  6m  +  18. 

"When  we  solve  such  an  equation1,  we  multiply  half  the 
coefficient  of  x  into  itself  —  this  gives  9  —  then  multiply 
the  coefficient  of  X*  into  the  units  —  2  .  18  =  36  —  add 
this  last  number  to  the  9,  making  45,  and  take  the 
side  [square  root]  of  45,  which  is  not  less  than  7; 
add  half  the  coefficient  of  x  —  making  a  number  not 
less  than  10  —  and  divide  the  result  by  the  coefficient 
of;tr2;  the  result  is  not  less  than  5." 

[32+  18.2  =  45,  and  1^45  +f  is  not  less  than  f  +|.] 

We  may  therefore  put  m  =  f  +  |,  or  5,  and  we  thus  have 


Therefore  z  =  \\,  and  the  side  of  the  middle  square  is 

^f  ,  the  square  itself  being  -^p. 
Turning  to  the  original  problem,  we  put  6;r+  4  =1f$L,  and 

x  =  J^R,  which  is  less  than  2. 

The  greatest  of  the  required  numbers  =  yx  +  2  = 
the  middle  =^+2=^, 

and  the  least  =  2  -  x  =  & 
726 

The  denominator  not  being  a  square,  we   can    make  it 
a  square  by  dividing  out  by  6;    the  result  is 
1834^ 


121     '       121    '     121  ' 

or  again,  to   avoid   the   £   in    the   numerators,  we  may 
multiply  numerators,  and  denominators,  by  4;   thus 

7.          '          isaso,ution'. 


1  I  have  quoted  Diophantus'  exact  words  here,  with  the  few  added  by  Tannery, 
"making  a  number  not  less  than  10...  coefficient  of  jc2,"  in  order  to  show  the  precise 
rule  by  which  Diophantus  solved  a  complete  quadratic. 

When  he  says  v/45  is  not  less  than  7,  Diophantus  is  not  seeking  exact  limits.  Since 
^/45  is  between  6  and  7  we  cannot  take  a  smaller  integral  value  than  7  in  order  to 
satisfy  the  conditions  of  the  problem  (cf.  p.  65  above). 

2  A  note  in  the  Invmtum  Novum  (Part  n,  paragraph  26)  remarks  upon  the  prolix  and 
involved  character  of  Diophantus'  solution  and  gives  a  shorter  alternative.     The  problem 
is  to  solve 

£-rt  =  w  (•>}-{),  (!>•>?>£  and  ^  =  3,  say) 


BOOK   IV  199 

40.     To  find   three  numbers  such  that  the  difference  of  the 
squares  of  the  greatest  and  the  middle  numbers  has  to  the  differ- 
ence of  the  middle  and  the  least  a  given  ratio,  and  also  the  sum  of 
each  pair  is  a  square. 
Ratio  3:1. 

Let  greatest  +  middle  number  =  the  square  \6x*\  therefore 
greatest^*8:  let  it  be  8^  +  2 ;  hence  middle=8^-  2. 
And,  since  greatest  +  middle  >  greatest  +  least, 

1 6^  >  (greatest  +  least)  >  8x* ; 

let  greatest  +  least  =  ojr2,  say ;  therefore  least  =x*  —  2. 
Now  difference  of  squares  of  greatest  and  middle  =  64**, 

and  difference  of  middle  and  least  =  jx?. 
But  64  is  not  equal  to  3.7  or  21. 
Now  64  comes   from    32.2;   therefore  we  must  find  a 

number  m  (in  place  of  2)  such  that  32m  =21. 
Therefore  m  =  f£. 
Assume  now  greatest  number  =  &x-  +  f£,  middle  =  8x*  —  §£, 

least  =  ;r2-f£. 
[And  difference  of  squares  of  greatest  and  middle 


The  only  condition  left  is:  middle  +  least  =  square;  that  is, 

a  square  =  (yc—  6Y,  say. 
Therefore  x-- 
and 


Take  an  arbitrary  square  number,  say  4,  for  the  sum  of  ij,  f;  suppose  2  +  .1  =  17,  2  -  -*  - 
sothatij-i-=wr;  therefore  £- 17  =  3(1;- f)= 6*.  whence  f= 2  +  7*. 
The  last  two  conditions  require  that 

4  +  ?*l   shall  be  squares. 
4  +  drf 

Replace  x  by -)?  +  -?.     This  will  make  4  +  6x  a  square.     It  remains  that 


-(•*?)•*+ 

71105  -K^'iM?"5)' 

and  y=— ,  so  that  x=\y*+~ 7=*^  • 

The  numbers  are  therefore  — — - ,    — —  i    -—  • 


THE   ARITHMETICA 


BOOK   V 

i.     To  find  three  numbers  in  geometrical  progression  such  that 
each  of  them  minus  a  given  number  gives  a  square. 
Given  number  12. 
Find  a  square  which  exceeds  12  by  a  square.     "This  is 

easy  [u.  10];  42!  is  such  a  number." 
Let  the  first  number  be  42^,  the  third  ,r2;  therefore  the 
middle  number  =  6\x. 

Therefore   ^  [  are  both  squares; 

6\x-  12  j 

their  difference  =  xz  —  6\x  =  x  (x  —  6£)  ;  half  the  difference 
of  the  factors  multiplied  into  itself  =J^;  therefore, 
putting  6\x-  12=^,  we  have  ^  =  ffi, 


2.     To  find  three  numbers  in  geometrical  progression  such  that 
each  of  them  when  added  to  a  given  number  gives  a  square. 
Given  number  20. 
Take  a  square  which  when  added  to  20  gives  a  square, 

say  1  6. 

Put  for  one  of  the  extremes  16,  and  for  the  other  x*,  so 
that  the  middle  term  =  ^x. 

„,,        r         •*"  +  20  ) 
Therefore  \  are  both  squares. 

4^+20  j 

Their  difference  is  x*  —  \x  =  x  (x  —  4),  and  the  usual  method 
gives  $x  +  20  =  4,  which  is  absurd,  because  the  4 
ought  to  be  some  number  greater  than  20. 

But  the  4  =  \  (16),  while  the  16  is  a  square  which  when 
added  to  20  makes  a  square;  therefore,  to  replace  16, 
we  must  find  some  square  greater  than  4  .  20  and 
such  that  when  increased  by  20  it  makes  a  square. 

Now  8  1  >  80;  therefore,  putting  (m  +  9)2  for  the  required 
square,  we  have 

(m  +  p)2  +  20  =  square  =  (;//  —  1  1  )2,  say  ; 

therefore  m  =  £,  and  the  square  =  (9^)"  =  90^. 


BOOK   V  201 

Assume  now  for  the  numbers  90^,  Q\X,  x-,  and  we  have 


The  difference  =x(x  —  <)$),  and  we  put 
Therefore  x  =  -±^,  and 


3.  Given  one  number,  to  find  three  others  such  that  any  one  of 
them,  or  the  product  of  any  two  of  them,  when  added  to  the  given 
number,  gives  a  square. 

Given  number  5. 

"  We  have  it  in  tlie  Porisms  that  if,  of  two  numbers,  each, 
as  well  as  their  product,  when  added  to  one  and  the 
same  given  number,  severally  make  squares,  the 
two  numbers  are  obtained  from  the  squares  of  con- 
secutive numbers1." 

Take  then  the  squares  (x+  3)'2,  (x+^f,  and,  subtracting 

the  given  number   5    from   each,  put  for  the   first 

number  ;r2-j-6;tr+4,  and  for  the  second 

and  let  the  third2  be  twice  their  sum  minus  i,  or 

4_r2  +  28  x  +  29. 

1  On  this  Porism,  see  pp.  99,  100  ante. 

2  The  Porism  states  that,  if  a  be  the  given  number,  the  numbers  j^-a, 
satisfy  the  conditions. 

In  fact,  their  product  +  a={x  (x  +  i)}2-  a  («3+  wr+i)  +  a*+a 


Diophantus  here  adds,  without  explanation,  that,  if  X,  Y  denote  the  above  two  numbers, 
we  should  assume  for  the  third  required  number  Z=  i  (X+  Y)-i.  We  want  thrte  numbers 
such  that  any  two  satisfy  the  same  conditions  as  X,  Y,  Diophantus  takes  for  the  third 
Z  =  i.(X+  Y)-  i  because,  as  is  easily  seen,  with  this  assumption  two  out  of  the  three 
additional  conditions  are  thereby  satisfied. 

For  Z=2(X+Y)-i=i(2Jcl+ix+i)-4a-i 


therefore  XZ+a=Jt?(*jc+i)*-a{('ix 

=  Jt2  (2.*  +  i)s  -  a  .  +x  (ix  -f  i)  +  4«2 


while 


The  only  condition  remaining  is  then 

Z+a=a  square, 

or  (2jr+i)s-3 

and  x  is  found. 

Cf.  pp.  ioo,  104  above. 


THE   ARITHMET1CA 
Therefore  43?  +  2%x+  34  =  a  square  =  (2x  —  6)2,  say. 


Hence  *  =  ^,  and  (**,  ^,  ^)  is  a  solution'. 

4.  Given  one  number,  to  find  three  others  such  that  any  one 
of  them,  or  the  product  of  any  two,  minus  the  given  number  gives 
a  square. 

Given  number  6. 

Take  two  consecutive  squares  x*,  x*  +  2x  +  i. 

Adding  6  to  each,  we  assume  for  the  first  number  x*  +  6, 

and  for  the  second  x2  +  2x  +  7. 
For  the  third2  we  take  twice  the  sum  of  the  first  and 

second  minus  i,  or  4^  +  4^+25. 
Therefore  third  minus  6  =  ^.x-  +  4.*+  19  =  square  =(2x—6)2, 

say. 
Therefore  *  =  £|, 

«"  (??•  %,  w)  is  a  solution- 

[The  same  Porism  is  assumed  as  in  the  preceding  problem 
but  with  a  minus  instead  of  a  plus.  Cf.  p.  99  above.] 

5.  To  find  three  squares  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
added  to  the  sum  of  those  two,  or  to  the  remaining  square,  gives 
a  square. 

"  We  have  it  in  the  Porisms"  that,  if  the  squares  on  any  two 
consecutive  numbers  be  taken,  and  a  third  number 
be  also  taken  which  exceeds  twice  the  sum  of  the 
squares  by  2,  we  have  three  numbers  such  that  the 
product  of  any  two  added  to  those  two  or  to  the 
remaining  number  gives  a  square3. 

1  Diophantus  having  solved  the  problem  of  finding  three  numbers  £,  17,  f  satisfying 
the  six  equations 


Fermat  observes  that  we  can  deduce  the  solution  of  the  problem 

To  find  four  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair  added  to  a  gii-en  number 
produces  a  square. 

Taking  three  numbers,  as  found  by  Diophantus,  satisfying  the  above  six  conditions, 
we  take  x+  i  as  the  fourth  number.  We  then  have  three  conditions  which  remain  to  be 
satisfied.  These  give  a  "  triple-equation  "  to  be  solved  by  Fermat's  method. 

2  Diophantus  makes  this  assumption  for  the  same  reason  as  in  the  last  problem,  v.  3. 
The  second  note  on  p.  201  covers  this  case  if  we  substitute  -  a  for  a  throughout. 

3  On  this  Porism,  see  pp.  100-1  ante. 


BOOK   V  203 

Assume  as  the  first  square  x*+2x+  i,  and  as  the  second 

;r2  +  4jr+4,  so  that  third  number  =  4^  +  12*+  12. 
Therefore  x*  +  3*  +  3  =  a  square  =  (x  -  $f,  say,  and  x  =  f . 
Therefore  (|,  £,  ^)  is  a  solution. 

6.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  each  minus  2  gives  a 
square,  and  the  product  of  any  two  minus  the  sum  of  those  two, 
or  minus  the  remaining  number,  gives  a  square. 

Add  2  to  each  of  three  numbers  found  as  in  the  Porism 

quoted  in  the  preceding  problem. 
Let    the    numbers    so    obtained    be 


All  the  conditions  are  now  satisfied1,  except  one,  which 
gives 

4^?  +  44:  +  6  —  2  =  a  square. 

Divide  by  4,  and  x-  +  x  +  I  =  a  square  =  (x  —  2f,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  \t 

anc*  (§ '  W'  ^s)  is  a  s°luti°n- 

Lemma  I  to  tlie  following  problem. 

To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product  added  to  the 
squares  of  both  gives  a  square. 

Suppose  first  number  x,  second  any  number  (;«),  say  I. 
Therefore  x .  I  +xz+  I  =x*  +  x+  I  =  a  square  =  (x  —  2)2,  say. 
Thus  x  =  \,  and 

($,  i)  is  a  solution,  or  (3,  5). 

Lemma  II  to  the  following  problem. 

To   find  three   right-angled   triangles   (t.e.    three   right-angled 
triangles  in  rational  numbers-}  which  have  equal  areas. 

We  must  first  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  product 
-f  the  sum  of  their  squares  =  a  square,  e.g.  3,  5,  as  in 
the  preceding  problem. 


1  The  numbers  are  jc2  + 1,  (x+i)*+2,  i  {x*  +  (x+  i)2+  1}  +  2;  and  if  X,  Y,  Zdenote 
these  numbers  respectively,  it  is  easily  verified  that 

XY-(X+  Y)  =  (x?+x+i)\        XY-Z=(x*+x?, 
XZ  -  (X+  Z)  =  (2*2  +  x  +  2)2,       XZ  -  Y  =  (2.x-2  +  x+  a)2, 
and  FZ-(F+Z)  =(2^2+3^  +  3)2,     YZ  -  X  =  (2*2  +  3^  +  4)2. 

2  All   Diophantus'   right-angled   triangles   must   be   understood   to  be   right-angled 
triangles  with  sides  expressible  in  rational  numbers.     In  future  I  shall  say  "right-angled 
triangle  "  simply,  for  brevity. 


204  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Now    form    right-angled    triangles    from    the    pairs    of 
numbers1 

(7,  3),   (7,  5),   (7>3  +  5) 

\t.e.  the  right-angled  triangles  (72  +  32,  72  -  32,  2  .  7  .  3),  etc.]. 
The  triangles  are  (40,  42,  58),  (24,  70,  74),  (15,  112,  113), 
the  area  of  each  being  840. 

1  Diophantus  here  tacitly  assumes  that,  if  ab  +  a?  +  &2  =  c2,  and  right-angled  triangles 
be  formed  from  (c,  a),  (t,  b)  and  (c,  a  +  b)  respectively,  their  areas  are  equal.  The 
areas  are  of  course  (c2  -  a2)  ca,  (c2  -  32)  cb  and  {  (a  +  6>)'2  -  cz}  (a  +  b)  c,  and  it  is  easy  to 
see  that  each  =  abc  (a  +  b). 

Nesselmann  suggests  that  Diophantus  discovered  the  property  as  follows.     Let  the 
triangles  formed  from  (n,  m),  (q,  m),  (r,  m)  have  their  areas  equal  ;  therefore 
n  (m2  -n*)  =  q  (m2  -  f)  =  r(r*-  m2). 

It  follows,  first,  since  nPn  -  nz  =  mzq  -  q3, 

that  m2  =  (  w3  -  ?3)/(«  -f)  =  «2  +  nq  +  q*. 

Again,  given  (q,  m,  n),  to  find  r. 

We  have  q  (m*  -  f]  =  r(r>-  m*), 

and  m2-g*=nz  +  ng,  from  above  ; 

therefore  ?(«3  +  «?)  =  r(r2-  «2-«?-?2), 

or  q(nz  +  nr)  +  g*(n  +  r)  =  r(r*-n*). 

Dividing  by  r  +  «,  we  have  qn  +  q*  =  r2  -  rn  ; 

therefore  (q  +  r)  n  =  r*  -  q2, 

and  r=q  +  n. 

Fermat  observes  that,  given  any  rational  right-angled  triangle,  say  z,  />,  d,  where  z 
is  the  hypotenuse,  it  is  possible  to  find  an  infinite  number  of  other  rational  right-angled 
triangles  having  the  same  area.  Form  a  right-angled  triangle  from  z2,  ibd\  this  gives 
the  triangle  z*  +  ^bzd'2,  s4-^2^2,  ypbd.  Divide  each  of  these  sides  by  iz(!fi-d°), 

b  being  >d  ;  and  we  have  a  triangle  with  the  same  area  (  ~bd\  as  the  original  triangle. 

Trying  this  method  with  Diophantus'  first  triangle  (40,  42,  58),  we  obtain  as  the  new 
triangle  1412881       1412880      1681 

1189    '        1189    '     1189' 

The  method  gives  (  —  ,  —  ,  —  —  j  as  a  right-angled  triangle  with  area  equal 
to  that  of  (3,  4,  5). 

Another  method  of  finding  other  rational  right-angled  triangles  having  the  same  area  as 
a  given  right-angled  triangle  is  explained  in  the  Inventum  Novum,  Part  l,  paragraph  38 
(CEuvres  de  Fermat,  in.  p.  348). 

Let  the  given  triangle  be  3,  4,  5,  so  that  it  is  required  to  find  a  new  rational  right- 
angled  triangle  with  area  6. 

Let  3,  or  +  4  be  the  perpendicular  sides  ;  therefore 

the  square  of  the  hypotenuse  =*2+8.*+25  =  a  square. 

Again,  the  area  is  -  x  +  6  ;  and,  as  this  is  to  be  6,  it  must  be  six  times  a  certain  square  ; 

that  is,  -x  +  6  divided  by  6"  must  be  a  square,  and  this  again  multiplied  by  36  must 

be  a  square  ;   therefore 

gx  -f  36  =  a  square. 
Accordingly  we  have  to  solve  the  double-equation 


9*  +  36=^1  ' 


BOOK   V  205 

7.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  square  of  any  one  ± 
the  sum  of  the  three  gives  a  square. 

Since,  in  a  right-angled  triangle, 

(hypotenuse)2  +  twice  product  of  perps.  =  a  square, 
we  make  the  three  required  numbers  hypotenuses  and  the 

sum  of  the  three  four  times  the  area. 

Therefore  we  must  find  three  right-angled  triangles  having 
the  same  area,  e.g.t  as  in  the  preceding  problem, 

(40,  42,  58),   (24,  70,  74),  (15,  ii2,  113). 
Reverting  to   the  substantive   problem,  we  put  for  the 
numbers  5&r,  744:,  \\^x\  their  sum  245*  =  four  times 
the  area  of  any  one  of  the  triangles  =  3360**. 
Therefore  x  =     , 


and  ( 


«f  ,  S*f  ®)  is  a  solution. 


Leinma  to  the  following  problem. 

Given  three  squares,  it  is  possible  to  find  three  numbers  such 
that  the  products  of  the  three  pairs  shall  be  respectively  equal  to 
those  squares. 


This  gives  ^=_  67,5600  1 

2405601 
2806804 

whence  *+4=.-^6S- 

The  triangle  is  thus  found  to  be 

2896804      7/76485 
7405601*     2405601' 

The  area  is  6  times  a  certain  square,  namely   /242°I  ,  the  root  of  which  is  —  —  . 

2405001  1551 


Dividing  each  of  the  above  sides  by          ,  we  obtain  a  triangle  with  area  6,  namely 


Another  solution  of  the  double-equation,  •r=  ~^^»  P^  jr+4=4^'  leads  to 
the  same  triangle  (— ,  — ,  -.  —  ]  as  that  obtained  by  Fermat's  rule  (see  above). 

The  method  of  the  Invenium  Nvvum  has  a  feature  in  common  with  the  procedure  in 
the  ancient  Greek  problem  reproduced  and  commented  on  by  Heiberg  and  Zeuthen 
(Bibliotheca  Mathtmatiea,  vm3,  1907/8,  p.  122),  where  it  is  required  to  find  a  rational 
right-angled  triangle,  having  given  the  area,  5  feet,  and  where  the  5  is  multiplied  by  a 
square  number  containing  6  as  a  factor  and  such  that  the  product  "  can  form  the  area  of 
a  right-angled  triangle."  36  is  taken  and  the  area  becomes  180,  which  is  the  area  of 
(9,  40,  41).  The  sides  of  the  latter  triangle  are  then  divided  by  6,  and  we  have  the 
required  triangle  (cf.  p.  119,  ante). 


2o6  THE    ARITHMETICA 

Squares  4,  9,  16. 

First  numbers,  so  that  the  others  are  4/ar,  9/^5  and  36/^=16. 

Therefore  -f  =f,  and  the  numbers  are  (i^,  2|,  6). 

We  observe  that  x  —  \,  where  6  is  the  product  of  2  and  3, 
and  4  is  the  side  of  16. 

Hence  the  following  rule.  Take  the  product  of  two  sides 
(2,  3),  divide  by  the  side  of  the  third  square  4  [the 
result  is  the  first  number] ;  divide  4,  9  respectively 
by  the  result,  and  we  have  the  second  and  third 
numbers. 

8.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  two  + 
the  sum  of  the  three  gives  a  square. 

As  in  Lemma  II  to  the  7th  problem,  we  find  three  right- 
angled  triangles  with  equal  areas  ;  the  squares  of 
their  hypotenuses  are  3364,  5476,  12769. 

Now  find,  as  in  the  last  Lemma,  three  numbers  such  that 
the  products  of  the  three  pairs  are  equal  to  these 
squares  respectively,  which  we  take  because  each 
+  4 .  (area)  or  3360  gives  a  square  ;  the  three  numbers 
then  are 

Affix,   z-iy-x   ^Ull^x  Tannery], 

4it1;tr  [&lial&;tr  Tannery]. 

It  remains  that  the  sum  of  the  three  =  3360^. 

Therefore  ^ffffflr^  [**$$$*•*  Tannery]  =  3360;^. 

TViprpfnrf*  r 3282 4 80 6      f  131299224     /->••     781543      Tannprwl 

i iicrciui c  ji  —  -ftfTSTj-Gg-fG   LT3T958~(>55tf   U1    W5W20     -idiiiieryj, 

£and  the  numbers  are  ly^ ,   i^gf^  •  ^ST]  • 

9.  To  divide  unity  into  two  parts  such  that,  if  the  same  given 
number  be  added  to  either  part,  the  result  will  be  a  square. 

Necessary  condition.  The  given  number  must  not  be  odd  and 
the  double  of  it  +  i  must  not  be  divisible  by  any  prime  number 
which,  when  increased  by  i,  is  divisible  by  4  \i.e.  any  prime  number 
of  the  form  4«  —  i  ] 1. 

Given  number  6.  Therefore  13  must  be  divided  into  two 
squares  each  of  which  >6.  If  then  we  divide  13  into 
two  squares  the  difference  of  which  <  i,  we  solve  the 
problem. 

1  For  a  discussion  of  the  text  of  this  condition  see  pp.  107-8,  ante. 


BOOK   V  207 

Take  half  of  1  3  or  6£,  and  we  have  to  add  to  6£  a  small 
fraction  which  will  make  it  a  square, 

or,  multiplying  by  4,  we  have  to  make  -  +  26  a  square, 

X 

i.e.  26x*  +  I  =  a  square  =  (5^+  i)2,  say,  whence  x=  10. 
That  is,  in  order  to  make  26  a  square,  we  must  add  y^,  or, 
to  make  6^  a  square,  we  must  add  ^^,  and 


Therefore  we  must  divide  1  3  into  two  squares  siich  that  their 
sides  may  be  as  nearly  as  possible  equal  to  f£.  [This 
is  the  Tra/Ko-oTT/To?  dycayij  described  above,  pp.  95-8.] 

Now  1  3  =  22  +  32.  Therefore  we  seek  two  numbers  such 
that  3  minus  the  first  =  f£,  so  that  the  first  =  ^  ,  and 
2  plus  the  second  =  f£,  so  that  the  second  =  $. 

We  write  accordingly  (ii^r  +  2)2,  (3  —  gxf  for  the  required 
squares  [substituting  x  for  ^]. 

The  sum  =2O2^2-  io^+  13  =  13. 

Therefore  x=  fa,  and  the  sides  are  fjft,  fflf  . 

Subtracting  6  from  the  squares  of  each,  we  have,  as  the 
parts  of  unity, 

4843  5358 

I020I  '  IO2OI  ' 

10.     To  divide  unity  into  two  parts  such  that,  if  we  add  different 
given  numbers  to  each,  the  results  will  be  squares. 

Let  the  numbers1  be  2,  6  and  let  them  and  the  unit  be 
represented  in  the  figure,  where  DA  =2,  AB=\, 
BE  =  6,  and  G  is  a  point  in  AB  so  chosen  that  DG, 
GE  are  both  squares. 

D  A  GB  E 


Now  DE  =  g.  Therefore  we  have  to  divide  9  into  two 
squares  such  that  one  of  them  lies  between  2  and  3. 

Let  the  latter  square  be  *•,  so  that  the  other  is  9-*', 
where  3  >^2>2. 

Take  two  squares,  one  >  2,  the  other  <3  [the  former 
being  the  smaller],  say  fff ,  ff£. 

1  Loria  (op.  cit.  p.  isow.),  as  well  as  Nesselmann,  observes  thai  Diophantus  omits  to 
state  the  necessary  condition,  namely  that  the  sum  of  the  two  given  numbers  plus  i  must 
be  the  sum  of  two  squares. 


ao8  THE    ARITHMETICA 

Therefore,  if  we  can  make  x*  lie  between  these,  we  shall 

solve  the  problem. 
We  must  have  x>  ||  and  <  -ff. 
Hence,  in  making  9—^  a  square,  we  must  find 

x>ft  and  <  if. 
Put  9  —  xz  =  (3  —  mxf,  say,  whence  x  =  6mf(m2  +  i  ). 

17        6m    ,     10 
Therefore  —  <  —     -  <  —  . 

12       W2+I        12 

The  first  inequality  gives  Jim  >  iymz+  17  ;  and 

362-  17.  17=  1007, 
the  square  root  of  which1  is  not  greater  than  31  ; 

therefore  m  $  3I+36  ,  i.e.  m^. 
17  ^17 

Similarly  from  the  inequality   igm*+  I9>?2m  we  find2 

' 


Let  m  =  3^.     Therefore  9  —  ;r2  =  (3  —  3|^)2,  and  ^= 
Therefore  *2  =  fiHf, 

and  the  segments  of  i  are 


ii.     To  divide  unity  into  three  parts  such  that,  if  we   add  the 
same  number  to  each  of  the  parts,  the  results  are  all  squares. 

Necessary  condition*.     The  given  number  must  not  be  2  or  any 
multiple  of  8  increased  by  2. 

Given  number  3.     Thus   10  is  to  be  divided  into  three 
squares  such  that  each  >  3. 

Take  £  of  10,  or  3^,  and  find  x  so  that  —  -2-f  3|  may  be  a 

square,  or  3cur2+  i  =a  square  =  ($x+  i)2,  say. 
Therefore  ^=2,^  =  4,    i  jx*  =  £,  and 

3V  +  3i  =  W  =  a  square. 
Therefore  we  have  to  divide  10  into  three  squares  each  of 

which  is   as  near  as  possible  to  -1^1-. 


Now  10  =  32+  i2  =  the  sum  of  the  three  squares  9,  ^f  ,  -f^. 
Comparing  the  sides  3,  |,  |  with  -y-, 

or  (multiplying  by  30)  90,  24,  18  with  55,  we  must 

make  each  side  approach  55. 

1  I.e.  the  integral  part  of  the  root  is  ~t>  31.    The  limits  taken  in  each  case  are  a  fortiori 
limits  as  explained  above,  pp.  61-3. 

2  See  p.  6  1,  ante. 

3  See  pp.  108-9,  ante- 


BOOK  V  209 

[Since  then  M  =  3  ~M  =  f +  M  =  f  +  f£l>  we  put  for  the 
sides  of  the  required  numbers 

3-35*.   3i*  +  £,   37*+f. 

The  sum  of  the  squares  =  3555^-  n6>+  10=  10 
Therefore  *=&&, 

and  this  solves  the  problem. 

12.  To  divide  unity  into  three  parts  such  that,  if  three  different 
given  numbers  be  added  to  the  parts  respectively,  the  results  are 
all  squares. 

Given  numbers  2,  3,  4.     Then  I  have  to  divide  10  into 

three  squares  such  that  the  first  >  2,  the  second  >  3, 

and  the  third  >  4. 
Let  us  add  £  of  unity  to  each,  and  we  have  to  find  three 

squares  such  that  their  sum  is  10,  while  the  first  lies 

between   2,  2j,  the  second  between  3,  3$,  and  the 

third  between  4,  4^. 
It   is   necessary,  first,  to   divide    10  (the  sum    of   two 

squares)  into  two  squares  one  of  which  lies  between 

2,  2^;  then,  if  we  subtract  2  from  the  latter  square, 

we  have  one  of  the  required  parts  of  unity. 
Next  divide  the  other  square  into  two  squares,  one  of 

which  lies  between  3,  3^; 
subtracting  3  from  the  latter  square,  we  have  the  second 

of  the  required  parts  of  unity. 
Similarly  we  can  find  the  third  part1. 

1  Diophantus  only  thus  briefly  indicates  the  course  of  the  solution.  Wertheim  solves 
the  problem  in  detail  after  Diophantus'  manner ;  and,  as  this  is  by  no  means  too  easy, 
I  think  it  well  to  reproduce  his  solution. 

I.  It  is  first  necessary  to  divide  10  into  two  squares  one  of  which  lies  between  i 
and  3.  We  use  the  wapffb-nrrot  dywyj. 

The  first  square  must  be  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  J ;  and  we  seek  a  small  fraction 

-g  which  when  added  to  t\  gives  a  square:  in  other  words,  we  must  make  4(24+:is) 

a  square.     This  expression  may  be  written  10  +  (  -  J  ,  and,  to  make  this  a  square,  we  put 

107*+ i  =(3^+1)*,  say, 

whence y  =  6,  ^=36,  ^=144,  so  that  *J+  ^=  —  =  (||j  ,  which  is  an  approximation 
to  the  first  of  the  two  squares  the  sum  of  which  is  10. 

The  second  of  these  squares  approximates  to  7^,  and  we  seek  a  small  fraction  -5  such 

that  7i+^  is  a  square,  or  30+ {  -  J  =30  +  (  -J  ,  say  =a  square. 

H.  D.  14 


210  THE   ARITHMETICA 

13.     To  divide  a  given  number  into  three  parts  such  that  the 
sum  of  any  two  of  the  parts  gives  a  square. 
Given  number  10. 

Put  30jr  +  i  =  ($y  +  i  )2,  say ; 

therefore  y  —  2,  y-  =  4,  x2~i6,  so  that  7^  +  -^  =  ' 2  *  =  /  —  \   =  (  —  )  . 

Now,  since  io=i2  +  32,  and  i2=i+  — ,    while   ^  =  3-^-, 
12  12  12     a     12' 

we  put  (i  +  7-*)2  +  (3  —  3^)a=  10,  [Cf.  v.  9] 

so  that  x=— , 


Therefore  the  two  squares  into  which  10  is  divided  are  -s-^*  and  — ^ — ,  and  the  first  of 

041  041 

these  lies  in  fact  between  2  and  2^. 

II.     We  have  next  to  divide  the  square  ~ —  into  two  squares,  one  of  which,  which 
we  will  call  x'2,  lies  between  3  and  4.     [The  method  of  V.  10  is  here  applicable.] 
Instead  of  3,  4  take  ^,  —,  as  the  limits. 

Therefore  ^~  <  x3  <  -\ , 

10  16 


4  4 

,  6561                                            /8i      ,   Y 
And  -g- —  *"  must  be  a  square  =1 kx  \  ,  say, 

which  gives  X=^(^kr 

k  has  now  to  be  chosen  such  that 

<'>  id^r!' 

from  which  it  follows  that  ^<2'8..., 

162/6          8 

and  (2)  — !«<-» 

29  (i+^2)      4 

whence  ^>2'3.... 

We  may  therefore  put  k  =  i-$. 

Therefore  x=^,    jfl=^^t 

841  707281 

6561 
and  g x- 

The  three  required  squares  into  which  10  is  divided  are  therefore 
1849       2624400      2893401 
841  '      707281  '      707281 

And  if  we  subtract  2  from  the  first,  3  from  the  second  and  4  from  the  third,  we  obtain 
as  the  required  parts  of  unity 

14044?       50*557       64277 
707281'     707281'     707281' 


BOOK  V  211 

Since  the  sum  of  each  pair  of  parts  is  a  square  less  than 
10,  while  the  sum  of  the  three  pairs  is  twice  the 
sum  of  the  three  parts  or  20, 

we  have  to  divide  20  into  three  squares  each  of  which 
is  <  io. 

But  20  is  the  sum  of  two  squares,  16  and  4; 

and,  if  we  put  4  for  one  of  the  required  squares,  we 
have  to  divide  16  into  two  squares,  each  of  which  is 
<  10,  or,  in  other  words,  into  two  squares,  one  of  which 
lies  between  6  and  10.  This  we  learnt  how  to  do1 
[V.  io]. 

We  have,  when  this  is  done,  three  squares  such  that 
each  is  <  io,  while  their  sum  is  20  ; 

and  by  subtracting  each  of  these  squares  from  io  we 
obtain  the  parts  of  io  required. 

14.     To  divide  a  given  number  into  four  parts  such  that  the 
sum  of  any  three  gives  a  square. 
Given  number  io. 

Three  times  the  sum  of  the  parts  =  the  sum  of  four  squares. 
Therefore  30  has  to  be  divided  into  four  squares,  each  of 

which  is  <  io. 
(i)     If  we  use  the  method  of  approximation 

we  have  to  make  each  square  approximate  to 

1  Wertheim  gives  a  solution  in  full,  thus. 

Let  the  squares  be  Jt2,  16-x2,  of  which  one,  jc2,  lies  between  6  and  io. 

Put  instead  of  6  and  io  the  limits  —  and  9,  so  that 


To  make  16  -  x2  a  square,  we  put 

i6-**=(4- 

86 
whence  •r=I+l 


These  conditions  give,  as  limits  for  k,  2-84...  and  vti...  . 
We  may  therefore  e.g.  put  k  =  i\. 

Then  *=*?,    ,•  =  £??,     i6-*«=?3«. 

29  841  841 

6400     7056 
The  required  three  squares  making  up  20  are  4,    -g-y-  ,   -g—p  . 

Subtracting  these  respectively  from  io,  we  have  the  required  parts  of  the  given  number 

-         2010          1354 

io,  namely  6,     -^,    -^p 

14—2 


212  THE   ARITHMETICA 

then,  when  the  squares  are  found,  we  subtract  each 

from  10,  and  so  find  the  required  parts. 
(2)     Or,  observing  that  30=  16  +  9  +  4+  i,we  take  4, 9  for 

two  of  the  squares,  and  then  divide  17  into  two  squares, 

each  of  which  <  10. 
If  then  we  divide  17  into  two  squares,  one  of  which  lies 

between  8|  and    10,  as  we  have  learnt  how  to  do1 

[cf.  V.   10],  the  squares  will  satisfy  the  conditions. 
We  shall  then  have  divided  30  into  four  squares,  each  of 

which  is  less  than  10,  two  of  them  being  4,  9  and  the 

other  two  the  parts  of  17  just  found. 
Subtracting  each  of  the  four  squares  from  10,  we  have  the 

required  parts  of  10,  two  of  which  are  I  and  6. 

15.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  cube  of  their  sum 
added  to  any  one  of  them  gives  a  cube. 

Let  the  sum  be  x  and  the  cubes  JX*,  26**,  63^. 
Therefore  96>3  =  ^-,  or  <)6x*=  I. 

But  96  is  not  a  square;  we  must  therefore  replace  it  by  a 
square  in  order  to  solve  the  problem. 

1  Wertheim  gives  a  solution  of  this  part  of  the  problem. 

I  /2\2 

As  usual,  we  make  8£  +  — -t ,  or  34  +  (  -  I  ,  a  square. 

Putting  -  =  - ,  we  must  make  34  +  (  -  )    a  square. 

Let  34J/2  +  i  =  a  square  =  (6>  -  i)2, 

and  we  obtain  }>  =  6,  y*  =  $6,  ^=144. 

Thus  8i+^  =  ill5  = 

144       i44 

and  —  is  an  approximation  to  the  side  of  each  of  the  required  squares. 

Next,  since  17=  i2  +  42,  and  ^  =  r  +  ^=4-  ^  , 
12  12     *     12 

we  put  i7  =  (i  +  23;r)2  +  (4-i3.r)2, 

and  we  obtain  x  =  -^- . 

349 


«-^-^ 

Subtracting  each  of  these  from  10,  we  have  the  third  and  fourth  of  the  required  parts 
of  10,  namely 

185754       I79M 
121801"     121801" 


BOOK  V  2I3 

Now  96  is  the  sum  of  three  numbers,  each  of  which  is  i  less 

than  a  cube; 
therefore  we  have  to  find  three  numbers  such  that  each 

of  them  is  a  cube  less  i,  and  the  sum  of  the  three 

is  a  square. 
Let  the  sides  of  the  cubes1  be  m  +  i,  2  -  m,  2,  whence  the 

numbers   are   m3  +  3  m2  +  $m,  7  -  1  2m  +  6m'  -  m3,   7  ; 

their  sum  =  gm2  -  gm  +  14  =  a  square  =  (3^  -  4)',  say  ; 
therefore  m  =  -^, 
and  the  numbers  are  4M|,  i&HJ   7. 

o»375J     3375  *   / 

Reverting  to  the  original  problem,  we  put  x  for  the  sum  of 
the  numbers,  and  for  the  numbers  respectively 


whence 

that  is  (if  we  divide  out  by  15  and  by  x), 

2916**=  225,  and  x=\\. 
The  numbers  are  therefore  found. 

1  6.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  cube  of  their  sum 
minus  any  one  of  them  gives  a  cube. 

Let  the  sum  be  x,  and  the  numbers  \x*,  ff  x3,  ff^3. 

Therefore  fm^>  =  ^, 

and,  if  ff|f  were  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square,  the 

problem  would  be  solved. 
But  f  f  ||  =  3  -  (the  sum  of  three  cubes). 
Therefore  we  must  find  three  cubes,  each  of  which  <  i, 

and  such  that  (3  -  their  sum)  =  a  square. 
If,  a  fortiori,  the  sum  of  the  three  cubes  is  made  <  i,  the 

square  will  be  >  2.     Let2  it  be  2\. 

1  If  a3,  £3,  c3  are  the  three  cubes,  so  that  aP  +  fi  +  c3  -  3  has  to  be  a  square,  Diophantus 
chooses  c3  arbitrarily  (8)  and  then  makes  such  assumptions  for  the  sides  of  a3,  ft3,  being 
linear  expressions  in  m,  that,  in  the  expression  to  be  turned  into  a  square,  the  coefficient 
of  m3  vanishes,  and  that  of  w2  is  a  square.  If  0  =  111,  the  condition  is  satisfied  by 
putting  l>  =  3#i-m,  where  k  is  any  number. 

3  Bachet,  finding  no  way  of  hitting  upon  2^  as  tne  particular  square  to  be  taken 
in  order  that  the  difference  between  it  and  3  may  be  separable  into  three  cubes,  and 
observing  that  he  could  not  solve  the  problem  if  he  took  another  arbitrary  square  between 
i  and  3,  e.g.  2^,  instead  of  sj,  concluded  that  Diophantus  must  have  hit  upon  2$, 
which  does  enable  the  problem  to  be  solved,  by  accident. 

Fermat  would  not  admit  this  and  considered  that  the  method  used  by  Diophantus  for 
finding  2^  as  the  square  to  be  taken  should  not  be  difficult  to  discover.  Fermat  accord- 
ingly suggested  a  method  as  follows. 

Let  JT-  i  be  the  side  of  the  required  square  lying  between  i  and  3.  Then  3  -  (x  -  i)2 
=  2  +  ix  -  jr2,  and  this  has  to  be  separated  into  three  cubes.  Fermat  assumes  for  the  sides 


THE   ARITHMETICA 
We  have  therefore  to  find  three  cubes  the  sum  of  which 

=i  or  m\ 

that  is,  we  have  to  divide  162  into  three  cubes. 

But  162=  125+64-  27  ; 

and  "we  have  it  in  the  Porisms"  that  the  difference  of 

two  cubes   can  be  transformed  into  the  sum  of  two 

cubes1. 
Having  thus  found  the  three  cubes2,  we  start  again,  and 

x=2\x*,  so  that^=|. 
The  three  numbers  are  thus  determined. 


of  two  of  the  required  cubes  two  linear  expressions  in  x  such  that,  when  the  sum  of  their 
cubes  is  subtracted  from  i  +  ix-  x2,  the  result  only  contains  terms  in  x*  and  x3  or  in  x 
and  units. 

The  first  alternative  is  secured  if  the  sides  of  the  first  and  second  cubes  are  i  —  x  and 
i  +  x  respectively  ;  for 


This  latter  expression  has  to  be  made  a  cube,  for  which  purpose  we  put 

j^_26^_    _W3*3 

~4*        27  ~^7~'Say> 

which  gives  a  value  for  x.     We  have  only  to  see  that  this  value  makes  -x  less  than  i, 
and  we  can  easily  choose  m  so  as  to  fulfil  this  condition. 

[E.g.  suppose  *«  =  5,  and  we  find  x=  -  ,  so  that 

i        13  i        20  72 

-x  =  -2 ,     i x  =  — ,     i+x=—, 

3        33  3        33  33 

and  the  side  of  the  third  cube  is  — - . 

We  then  have  three  cubes  which  make  up  the  excess  of  3  over  a  certain  square ;  but, 
while  the  first  of  these  cubes  is  <  i,  the  second  is  >  i  and  the  third  is  negative.  Hence 
we  must,  like  Diophantus,  proceed  to  transform  the  difference  between  the  two  latter 
cubes  into  the  sum  of  two  other  cubes. 

It  will,  however,  be  seen  by  trial  that  even  Fermat's  method  is  not  quite  general,  for 
it  will  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  give  the  particular  solution  obtained  by  Diophantus  in 
which  the  square  is  2^. 

1  On  the  transformation  of  the  difference  of  two  cubes  into  the  sum  of  two  cubes,  see 
pp.  101-3,  ante. 

2  Vieta's  rule  gives  43  -  33=  (^  Y  +  (^Y-     II  follows  that 

3_i62_/s\3      /ioi\3      /  20  \3 

o 

and,  since  Xs  =  — •,  the  required  numbers  are 


9.8 

210    27 


8       4998267   _8_      20338417 


BOOK  V  215 

17.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  each  of  them  minus  the 
cube  of  their  sum  gives  a  cube. 

Let  the  sum  be  x  and  the  numbers  2jt*,  9**,  2&r*. 

Therefore  y^x-  =  i  ; 

and  we  must  replace  39  by  a  square  which  is  the  sum 

of  three  cubes  +  3  ; 
therefore  we  must  find  three  cubes  such  that  their  sum 

+  3  is  a  square. 

Let  their  sides1  be  m,  3  —  m,  and  any  number,  say  I. 
Therefore  gm*  +  31  —  27^  =  a  square  =  (30*  -  7)*,  say,  so 

that  m  =  £  ,  and  the  sides  of  the  cubes  are  f,  f  ,  I. 
Starting  again,  we  put  x  for  the  sum,  and  for  the  numbers 


whence  1445^=125,  ^  =  ^,  and  x=.fr. 
The  required  numbers  are  thus  found. 

1  8.     To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square  and 
the  cube  of  their  sum  added  to  any  one  of  them  gives  a  square. 
Let  the  sum  be  Xs  and  the  numbers  3*-*,  &r8,  I  $x*. 
It  follows  that  26x*  =  i  ;  and,  if  26  were  a  fourth  power,  the 

problem  would  be  solved. 
To  replace  it  by  a  fourth  power,  we  have  to  find  three 

numbers  such  that  each  increased  by  I  gives  a  square, 

while  the  sum  of  the  three  gives  a  fourth  power. 
Let  these  numbers  be  /«*—  2tn*,  m*  +  2m,  m*—2m  [the  sum 

being  m*]  ;  these  are  indeterminate  numbers  satisfying 

the  conditions. 
Putting  any  number,  say  3,  for  m,  we  have  as  the  required 

auxiliary  numbers  63,  15,  3. 
Starting  again,  we  put  x*  for  the  sum  and  3**,  1  5**,  63**  for 

the  required  numbers, 
and  we  have  8  !;**  =  .«*,  so  that;r  =  £. 

The  numbers  are  thus  found  (—  ,  —  ,  —  J  • 

19.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square  and 
the  cube  of  their  sum  minus  any  one  of  them  gives  a  square 

[There  is  obviously  a  lacuna  in  the  text  after  this  enunciation  ; 
for  the  next  words  are  "  And  we  have  again  to  divide  2  as  before" 

1  Cf.  note  on  V.  15.  In  this  case,  if  one  of  the  cubes  is  chosen  arbitrarily  and  m* 
is  another,  we  have  only  to  put  (3**  -  m)  for  the  side  of  the  third  cube  in  order  that,  in  the 
expression  to  be  made  a  square,  the  term  in  m*  may  vanish,  and  the  term  in  m*  may  be  a 

square. 


216  THE  ARITHMETICA 

whereas  there  is  nothing  in  our  text  to  which  they  can  refer,  and 
the  lines  which  follow  are  clearly  no  part  of  the  solution  of  V.  19. 

Bachet  first  noticed  the  probability  that  three  problems  inter- 
vened between  v.  19  and  V.  20,  and  he  gave  solutions  of  them. 
But  he  seems  to  have  failed  to  observe  that  the  eight  lines  or  so  in 
the  text  between  the  enunciation  of  V.  19  and  the  enunciation  of 
V.  20  belonged  to  the  solution  of  the  last  of  the  three  missing 
problems.  The  first  of  the  missing  problems  is  connected  with 
V.  1 8  and  19,  making  a  natural  trio  with  them,  while  the  second  and 
third  similarly  make  with  V.  20  a  set  of  three.  The  enunciations 
were  doubtless  somewhat  as  follows. 

iga.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square 
and  any  one  of  them  minus  the  cube  of  their  sum  gives  a  square. 

19  b.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  given 
number  and  the  cube  of  their  sum  plus  any  one  of  them  gives  a 
square. 

19  c.  To  find  three  numbers  such  that  their  sum  is  a  given 
number  and  the  cube  of  their  sum  minus  any  one  of  them  gives  a 
square. 

The  words  then  in  the  text  after  the  enunciation  of  V.  19 

evidently  belong  to  this  last  problem.] 
The  given  sum  is  2,  the  cube  of  which  is  8. 
We  have  to  subtract  each  of  the  numbers  from  8  and 

thereby  make  a  square. 
Therefore  we  have  to  divide  22  into  three  squares,  each 

of  which  is  greater  than  6  ; 
after  which,  by  subtracting  each  of  the  squares  from  8,  we 

find  the  required  numbers. 

But  we  have  already  shown  [cf.  V.  n]  how  to  divide  22 
into  three  squares,  each  of  which  is  greater  than  6 — 
and  less  than  8,  Diophantus  should  have  added. 
[The  above  is  explained  by  the  fact  that,  by  addition, 
three  times  the  cube  of  the  sum  minus  the  sum  itself 
is  the  sum  of  three  squares,  and  three  times  the 
cube  of  the  sum  minus  the  sum  =  3.8  —  2  =  22.] l 

1  Wertheim  adds  a  solution  in  Diophantus'  manner.     We  have  to  find  what  small 

fraction  of  the  form  — :,  we  have  to  add  to  —  or  — ,  and  therefore  to  66,  in  order  to 
x2-  39 

make  a  square.     In  order  that  66  +  -j  may  be  a  square,  we  put 

66*J  +  i  =  square  =  ( i  +  8*)2,  say, 
which  gives  #= 8  and  ^=64. 


BOOK  V  217 

20.  To  divide  a  given  fraction  into  three  parts  such  that  any 
one  of  them  minus  the  cube  of  their  sum  gives  a  square, 

Given  fraction  |. 

Therefore  each  part  =  ^  -f  a  square. 

Therefore  the  sum  of  the  three  =  |  =  the  sum  of  three 

squares  +  ^. 
Hence  we  have  to  divide  £f  into  three  squares,  "which  is 

easy1." 

21.  To  find  three  squares  such  that  their  continued  product 
added  to  any  one  of  them  gives  a  square. 

Let  the  "  solid  content  "  =  x"-. 

We  want  now  three  squares,  each  of  which  increased  by  I 

gives  a  square. 
They  can  be  got  from  right-angled  triangles2  by  dividing 

the  square  of  one  of  the  sides  about  the  right  angle 

by  the  square  of  the  other. 
Let  the  squares  then  be 


The  continued  product  =  s'iVffio-**  =  ^  by  hypothesis. 
Therefore  J$$x*  =  I  ;  and,  if  jf$  were  a  square,  the  problem 
would  be  solved. 


We  have  therefore  to  increase  66  by  ^-  ,  and  therefore  7^  by  —  -  ,  in  order  to  make  a 

square.     And  in  fact  7$  +  7^  =  (^)~. 

Next,  since  22  =  3*4-  32  +  22,  and  65-48=17,  while  72-65  =  7,  we  put 
22  =  (3  -  7jr)2+  (3  -  7.r)s+  (2  +  1  7*)*. 

and  »„*!. 

387 

Therefore  the  sides  of  the  squares  are  —^  ,   —  £2  ,    -•£-  , 

1100401       1100401       1094116 

the  squares  themselves  -  ^—  ,         —^~t     -        f     » 

149769         149769         149769 


and  the  required  parts  of  2  are    &1%-,    !Z75«        ™* 
149769      149769      H9769 


1  As  Wertheim  observes,  J4  =  -?-  +  —  +  —  ,  and  the  required  fractions  into  which 

64      64      25      400 

i  .  250       89        6r 

-  is  divided  are  —%—  ,  —^—  ,  —?  —  . 
4  loco    i  600    1600 

2  If  a,  b  be  the  perpendiculars,  c  the  hypotenuse  in  a  right-angled  triangle, 

a2          <-> 
^+i=^=asquare. 

Diophantus  uses  the  triangles  (3,  4,  5),  (5,  12,  13),  (8,  15,  17). 


218  THE   ARITHMETICA 

As  it  is  not,  we  must  find  three  right-angled  triangles  such 

that,  if  b's  are  their  bases,  and  /'s  are  their  perpen- 

diculars, p\p<ipz  bJ)J)3  =  a  square  ; 
and,  if  we  assume  one  triangle  arbitrarily  (3,  4,   5),  we 

have  to  make  \2plpj)J)z  a  square,  or  3/A//2^2  a  square. 
"This  is  easy1,"  and  the  three   triangles  are  (3,  4,   5), 

(9,  40,  41),  (8,  15,  17)  or  similar  to  them. 

1  Diophantus  does  not  give  the  work  here,  but  only  the  result.  Bachet  obtains  it 
in  this  way.  Suppose  it  required  to  find  three  rational  right-angled  triangles  (h\,  p±,  ^i), 
(A2,/2i  ^2)  and  (/63,  /3,  £3)  such  that  /i/2/3/^i^3  is  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square. 
One  triangle  (A1  ,  pl  ,  b-^  being  chosen  arbitrarily,  form  two  others  by  putting 


and  we  have 


If  now  A,  =  5,^,  =  4,  £1  =  3,  the  triangles  (/&2,/2,  £2)  and  (/53,/3,  *s)  are  (4i,  9,  40) 
and  (34,  1  6,  30)  respectively.  Dividing  the  sides  of  the  latter  throughout  by  2  (which 
does  not  alter  the  ratio),  we  have  Diophantus'  second  and  third  triangles  (9,  40,  41)  and 
(8,  15,  17). 

Fermat,  in  his  note  on  the  problem,  gives  the  following  general  rule  for  finding  two 
right-angled  triangles  the  areas  of  which  are  in  the  ratio  m  :  n  (;«>«). 

Form  (  i)  the  greater  triangle  from  im  +  n,  m  -  «,  and  the  lesser  from  m  +  in,  m  -  n, 
or  (2)  the  greater  from  im  -n,    m  +  n,      the  lesser  from  in  -  m,    m  +  n, 
or  (3)  the  greater  from         6m,  im  -  n,      the  lesser  from  4/«  +  n,  ^m  -  in, 
or  (4)  the  greater  from  m  +  \n,  im  —  4«,    the  lesser  from         6n,    m  —  in. 
The  alternative  (2)  gives  Diophantus'  solution  if  we  put  m  =  $,  n=i  and  substitute 
m  —  in  for  in  —  m. 

Fermat  continues  as  follows  :  We  can  deduce  a  method  of  finding  three  right-angled 
triangles  the  areas  of  which  are  in  the  ratio  of  three  given  numbers,  provided  that  the 
sum  of  two  of  these  numbers  is  equal  to  four  times  the  third.     Suppose  e.g.  that  m,  n,  q 
are  three  numbers  such  that  m  +  q  =  ^n  (m>q).     Now  form  the  following  triangles  : 
(  i  )  from  »t  +  +n,  im  —  +n, 

(2)  from         6«,    m  —  in, 

(3)  from  4«  +  q,    4«  -  iq. 
[If  A\  ,  AZ  ,  AS  be  the  areas,  we  have,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 

A-^m  =  Azfn  =  A^\q  =  -  6m3  +  $6m2n+  i  ^mn2  -  384«3.] 

We  can  derive,  says  Fermat,  a  method  of  finding  three  right-angled  triangles  the  areas 
of  which  themselves  form  a  right-angled  triangle.  For  we  have  only  to  find  a  triangle 
such  that  the  sum  of  the  base  and  hypotenuse  is  four  times  the  perpendicular.  This  is 
easy,  and  the  triangle  will  be  similar  to  (17,  15,  8)  ;  the  three  triangles  will  then  be  formed 

(1)  from  17  +  4.8,  2  .  17-4.  8     or  49,  2, 

(2)  from          6.8,        17-2.8     or  48,  i, 

(3)  from  4.8+15,     4.8-2.  15  or  47,  2. 

[The  areas  of  the  three  right-angled  triangles  are  in  fact  234906,  i  (0544  and  207270, 
and  these  numbers  form  the  sides  of  a  right-angled  triangle.] 

Hence  also  we  can  derive  a  method  of  finding  three  right-angled  triangles  the  areas 
of  which  are  in  the  ratio  of  three  given  squares  such  that  the  sum  of  two  of  them  is  equal  to 


BOOK   V  219 

Starting  again,  we  put  for  the  squares 


Equating   the  product  of  these  to  x*,  we  find  x  to  be 
rational  \x  =  ifr  ,  and  the  squares  are  —  ,  —  ,    4  ]. 

22.     To  find  three  squares  such  that  their  continued  product 
minus  any  one  of  them  gives  a  square. 

Let   the   solid  content  be  x*,  and  let  the   numbers   be 
obtained  from  right-angled  triangles,  being 


Therefore  the  continued  product  (—^— 

.    25600    m 


1221025 
If  then  - were  a  fourth  power,  i.e.  if  ~—  - —  were 

a  square,  the  problem  would  be  solved. 

We  have  therefore  to  find  three  right-angled  triangles 
with  hypotenuses  /tly  7i2,  h3  respectively,  and  with 
A>  A>  A  as  one  °f  *he  perpendiculars  in  each  re- 
spectively, such  that 

h\hJi*P\ P*Ps  =  a  square. 

Assuming  one  of  the  triangles  to  be  (3,  4,  5),  so  that  e.g. 
Jt3p3  =  5  . 4  =  20,  we  must  have 

S^iA^aA  =  a  square. 

This  is  satisfied  if //iA  =  5 ^2 A- 

With  a  view  to  this  we  have  first  (cf.  the  last  proposition) 
to  find  two  right-angled  triangles  such  that,  if  x^,  y^ 
are  the  two  perpendiculars  in  one  and  x^  y^  the  two 
perpendiculars  in  the  other,  x-^y-^  =  ^x^y^.  From  such 
a  pair  of  triangles  we  can  form  two  more  right- 
angled  triangles  such  that  the  product  of  the 
hypotenuse  and  one  perpendicular  in  one  is  five  times 
the  product  of  the  hypotenuse  and  one  perpendicular  in 
the  other1. 


four  times  the  third,  and  we  can  also  in  the  same  way  find  three  right-angled  triangles  of 
the  same  area;  we  can  also  construct,  in  an  infinite  number  of  ways,  two  right-angled 
triangles  the  areas  of  which  are  in  a  given  ratio,  by  multiplying  one  of  the  terms  of  the 
ratio  or  the  two  terms  by  given  squares,  etc. 

1  Diophantus'   procedure   is   only  obscurely  indicated  in  the  Greek   text.     It   was 
explained  by  Schulz  in  his  edition  (cf.  Tannery  in  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  I.  p.  313,  note). 


THE   ARITHMETICA 

Since  the  triangles  found  satisfying  the  relation  ^1y1  = 

are  (5,  12,  13)  and  (3,  4,  5)  respectively1,  we  have  in 
fact  to  find  two  new  right-angled  triangles  from  them, 
namely  the  triangles  (^i,/i,^)and  (A2,  A.  ^a)»  sucn  tnat 

^  A  =  30  and  h*pz  =  6, 

the  numbers  30  and  6  being  the  areas  of  the  two 
triangles  mentioned. 

These  triangles  are  (6|,  f§,  [u^j)  and  (2^  j£  [T7_])  re- 
spectively. 

Starting  again,  we  take  for  the  numbers 


[-1/  divided  by  2\  gives  ff  ,  and  f§  divided  by  6|  gives  |f$.] 

The  product  =x^  : 

therefore,  taking  the  square  root,  we  have 

4.24.120 

5-25.169 
so  that  ^=||,  and  the  required  squares  are  found. 

23.     To  find  three  squares  such  that  each  minus  the  product  of 
the  three  gives  a  square. 

Having  given  a  rational  right-angled  triangle  (z,  x,  y),  Diophantus  knows  how  to  find  a 
rational  right-angled  triangle  (A,  f,  b)  such  that  /&/  =  -  xy.     We  have  in  fact  to  put 

*  =  !,,^2,  whence  *  =  *-^  =  l(*Z^W^Y. 

2  4\          S2          /         \       22      / 

Thus,  having  found  two  triangles  (5,  11,  13)  and  (3,  4,  5)  with  areas  in  the  ratio  of  5 
to  i  (see  next  paragraph  of  text  with  note  thereon),  Diophantus  takes 

^!  =  ^.i3=6i,/i=^^  =  ^;   and  similarly  hz=  *  .  5  =  2^,  /2=  -^  =  ~  . 

Cossali  (after  Bachet)  gives  a  formula  for  three  right-angled  triangles  such  that  the 
solid  content  of  the  three  hypotenuses  has  to  the  solid  content  of  three  perpendiculars 
(one  in  each  triangle)  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square  ;  his  triangles  are 

(.),\*,/[,-=ipotenusa], 


If  /=5,  ^  =  4,  /  =  3,  we  can  get  from  this  triangle  the  triangles  (13,  5,  12)  and 
(65,  63,  16),  and  our  equation  is  — '  — '—  x2  —  i. 

1  These  triangles  can  be  obtained  by  putting  ;«  =  5,  n=  i  in  Fermat's  fourth  formula 
(note  on  last  proposition).  By  that  formula  the  triangles  are  formed  from  (9,  6)  and 
(6,  3)  respectively ;  and,  dividing  out  by  3,  we  form  the  triangles  from  (3,  i)  and  (2,  i) 
respectively. 


BOOK   V  221 

Let  the  "solid  content"  be  x*,  and  let  the  squares  be 
formed  from  right-angled  triangles,  as  before. 

If  we  take  the  same  triangles  as  those  found  in  the  last 
problem  and  put  for  the  three  squares 


each  of  these  minus  the  continued  product  (**)  gives  a 

square. 
It  remains  that  their  product  =x*\ 

this  gives  *  =  £f  ,  and  the  problem  is  solved. 

24.     To  find  three  squares  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
increased  by  I  gives  a  square. 

Product  of  first  and  second  +  i  =  a  square,  and  the  third 
is   a   square  ;    therefore   "  solid   content  "  +  each  =  a 
square. 
The  problem  therefore  reduces  to  V.  21  above1. 

1  De  Billy  in  the  Inventum  Novum,  Part  II.  paragraph  28  (Oeuvres  de  Fermai,  III. 
pp.  373-4),  extends  this  problem,  showing  how  to  find  four  numbers,  three  of  which  (only) 
are  squares,  having  the  given  property,  i.e.  to  solve  the  equations 
.r22.r32  +  1  =  r2,     -rj2  .v4  +  i  =  «2, 


First  seek  three  square  numbers  satisfying  the  conditions  of  Diophantus'  problem 
v.  24,  say  (  -% ,  —  f  -7T-  ).  the  solution  of  V.  i  \  given  in  Sachet's  edition.  We  have  then 
to  find  a  fourth  number  (a-,  say)  such  that 

VW( 

are  all  squares. 


Substitute  —  y1  +  —  y  for  x,  so  as  to  make  the  first  expression  a  square.     We  have 
then  to  solve  the  double-equation 


729  '        729 
which  can  be  solved  by  the  ordinary  method. 

De  Billy  does  not  give  the  solution,  but  it  may  be  easily  supplied  thus 

The  difference  =  (  —  -f  ^  V  '_O  -  ^ }  (y*  +  V) 


222  THE  ARITHMETICA 

25.  To  find  three  squares  such  that  the  product  of  any  two 
minus  I  gives  a  square. 

This  reduces,  similarly,  to  V.  22  above. 

26.  To  find  three  squares  such  that,  if  we  subtract  the  product 
of  any  two  of  them  from  unity,  the  result  is  a  square. 

This  again  reduces  to  an  earlier  problem,  V.  23. 

27.  Given  a  number,  to  find  three  squares  such  that  the  sum  of 
any  two  added  to  the  given  number  makes  a  square. 

Given  number  15. 

Let  one  of  the  required  squares  be  9  ; 

I  have  then  to  find  two  other  squares  such  that  each 
-f  24  =  a  square,  and  their  sum  +  15  =  a  square. 

To  find  two  squares,  each  of  which  +  24  =  a  square,  take 
two  pairs  of  numbers  which  have  24  for  their  pro- 
duct1. 

Let  one  pair  of  factors  be  4/ar,  6x,  and  let  the  side  of  one 

square  be  half  their  difference  or  -  -  3^. 

X 

Let  the  other  pair  of  factors  be  $jx,  Sx,  and  let  the 
side  of  the  other  square  be  half  their  difference  or 


Therefore  each  of  the  squares  +  24  gives  a  square. 
It  remains  that  their  sum  +  15  =a  square; 

therefore      ( —  -  ^x J  +  (  -  —  ^x\  +  1 5  =  a  square, 

Equating  the  square  of  half  the  sum  of  the  factors  to  the  larger  expression,  we  have 

\ 3         27/         9  9 

whence  y= ^— ,  and  v2  + i y=  -  -. ~^ . 

'         11520         '        f         '* v2 


Therefore  A-  =  —  (ys+iy)=-      ,     ,-     ,    which    satisfies   the    equations.      In    fact 
9  T  74649600' 


4  345/  1  4o 

But  even  here,  as  the  value  of  Jt  which  we  have  found  is  negative,  we  ought,  strictly 
speaking,  to  deduce  a  further  value  by  substituting  y  —  ^  ,  ;  —  for  x  in  the  equations 

and  solving  again,  which  would  of  course  lead  to  very  large  numbers. 

1  The  text  adds  the  words  "  and  [let  us  take]  sides  about  the  right  angle  in  a  right- 
angled  triangle."  I  think  these  words  must  be  a  careless  interpolation  :  they  are  not 
wanted  and  give  no  sense;  nor  do  they  occur  in  the  corresponding  place  in  the  next 
problem. 


BOOK  V  223 

6i 
or  -±  +  2  ^x*  -  9  =  a  square  =  25*',  say. 

Therefore  •*"  =  f  ,  and  the  problem  is  solved  *. 

28.     Given  a  number,  to  find  three  squares  such  that  the  sum  of 
any  two  minus  the  given  number  makes  a  square. 
Given  number  13. 
Let  one  of  the  squares  be  25  ; 
I  have  then  to  find  two  other  squares  such  that  each 

+  12  =  a  square,  and  (sum  of  both)  —  13  =  a  square. 
Divide  12  into  factors  in  two  ways,  and  let  the  factors  be 

(2*.  4/*)  and  (4*,  3/;r). 
Take  as  the  sides  of  the  squares  half  the  differences  of  the 

factors,  i.e.  let  the  squares  be 


Each  of  these  +  12  gives  a  square. 

It  remains  that  the  sum  of  the  squares  —  13  =  a  square, 

or  -f  +  6|  -^  —  25  =  a  square  =  -|  ,  say. 
Therefore  x  =  2,  and  the  problem  is  solved  2. 

1  Diophantus  has  found  values  of  f  ,  17,  f  satisfying  the  equations 


Fermat  shows  how  to  find  four  numbers  (not  squares)  satisfying  the  corresponding 
conditions,  namely  that  the  sum  of  any  two  added  to  a  shall  give  a  square.  Suppose  0=15. 

Take  three  numbers  satisfying  the  conditions  of  Diophantus'  problem,  say  9,  —  ,  —  -  . 

Assume  *2  -  1  5  as  the  first  of  the  four  required  numbers  ;  and  let  the  second  be  6jr  +  9 
(because  9  is  one  of  the  square  numbers  taken  and  6  is  twice  its  side)  ;  for  the  same 

reason  let  the  third  number  be  -  x  H  --  and  the  fourth  —  or  +  —  -  . 
5          ioo  15         225 

Three  of  the  conditions  are  now  fulfilled  since  each  of  the  last  three  numbers  added  to 
the  first  (x2-  15)  plus  15  gives  a  square.  The  three  remaining  conditions  give  the  triple- 
equation 


136,  522     I5=I|6jr+/77y  =^ 

15  «5  15          \i5/ 

tf*;l.j-+&+.^.:a,4(&y«*.  • 

15        ioo     225  15          \6J 

2  Fermat  observes  that  four  numbers  (not  squares)  with  the  property  indicated  can 
be  found  by  the  same  procedure  as  that  shown  in  the  note  to  the  preceding  problem. 
If  a  is  the  given  number,  put  .r2  +  a  for  the  first  of  the  four  required  numbers. 


224  THE   ARITHMETICA 

29.  To  find  three  squares  such  that  the  sum  of  their  squares  is 
a  square. 

Let  the  squares  be  ;r2,  4,  9  respectively1. 

Therefore  x*  +  97  =  a  square  =  (x*  -  io)2,  say  ; 

whence  x*  =  ^. 

If  the  ratio  of  3  to  20  were  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a 

square,  the  problem  would  be  solved  ;  but  it  is  not. 
Therefore  /  have  to  find  two  squares  (/2,  qz,  say)  and  a 

number  (m,  say)  such  t/iat  m-  —p*  —  q4  Jias  to  2m  the 

ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square. 
Let  J?  =  z*,f  =  4.  and  m  =  z*  +  4. 
Therefore  w2  -/4  -  q4  -  O2  +  4)2  -  2*  -  1 6  =  8-z2. 
Hence  8z2/(22*  +  8),  or  4^2/(-s'2  +  4).  must  be  the  ratio  of  a 

square  to  a  square. 
Put  <sr2  +  4  =  (£+i)2,  say; 

therefore  z=  \\,  and  the  squares  are  p*=2\,  q*  =  4,  while 

m  =  6\; 

or,  if  we  take  4  times  each,/2  =  9,  q*=  16,  m  •=  2$. 
Starting  again,  we  put  for  the  squares  x*,  9,  16; 
then  the  sum  of  the  squares  =  ;r4  +  337  =  (-*•*  —  25)2,  and 

*=V- 

The  required  squares  are  — ,  g,  16. 

30.  [The  enunciation  of  this  problem  is  in  the  form  of  an 
epigram,  the  meaning  of  which  is  as  follows.] 

A  man  buys  a  certain  number  of  measures  (%oe<?)  of  wine,  some 
at  8  drachmas,  some  at  5  drachmas  each.  He  pays  for  them  a 
square  number  of  drachmas  ;  and  if  we  add  60  to  this  number,  the 
result  is  a  square,  the  side  of  which  is  equal  to  the  whole  number 
of  measures.  Find  how  many  he  bought  at  each  price. 

Let  x=  the  whole  number  of  measures  ;  therefore  x*  —  60 
was  the  price  paid,  which  is  a  square  —(x—mf,  say. 

If  now  £2,  fl,  m2  represent  three  numbers  satisfying  the  conditions  of  the  present 
problem  of  Diophantus,  put  for  the  second  of  the  required  numbers  ik*  +/£2,  for  the  third 
2/JT  +  /2,  and  for  the  fourth  2//w+/«2.  These  satisfy  three  conditions,  since  each  of  the 
last  three  numbers  added  to  the  first  (x2  +  a)  less  the  number  a  gives  a  square.  The 
remaining  three  conditions  give  a  triple-equation. 

i  "Why,"  says  Fermat,  "does  not  Diophantus  seek  two  fourth  powers  such  that 
their  sum  is  a  square  ?  This  problem  is  in  fact  impossible,  as  by  my  method  I  am  in 
a  position  to  prove  with  all  rigour."  It  is  probable  that  Diophantus  knew  the  fact 
without  being  able  to  prove  it  generally.  That  neither  the  sum  nor  the  difference  of 
two  fourth  powers  can  be  a  square  was  proved  by  Euler  (Commentatioms  arithmeticae,  j. 
pp.  24sqq.,  and  Algebra,  Part  II.  c.  xm.). 


BOOK   V  225 

Now  £  of  the  price  of  the  five-drachma  measures  +  £  of 
the  price  of  the  eight-drachma  measures  =x\ 

so  that  xz  —  60,  the  total  price,  has  to  be  divided  into 
two  parts  such  that  £  of  one  +  £  of  the  other  =  x. 

We  cannot  have  a  real  solution  of  this  unless 
x  >  i  (x"-  -  60)  and  <  \  (x*  -  60). 

Therefore  $x  <  x'2  —  60  <  &r. 

(1)  Since  xz>  5^  +  60, 
x'i=t>x+  a  number  greater  than  60, 
whence  x  is1  not  less  than  1  1. 

(2)  x'*<8x  +  6o 

or  -r2  =  &r  -t-  some  number  less  than  60, 

whence  x  is1  not  greater  than  12. 

Therefore  11  <x<  12. 

Now  (from  above)  x  —  (m2  +  6o)/2w; 

therefore  22  /»  <  m*  +  60  <  247/2. 

Thus  (i)       22m  =  m'2  +  (some  number  less  than  60), 

and  therefore  m  is2  not  less  than  19. 

(2)     24#«  =  w2  +  (some  number  greater  than  60), 

and  therefore  m  is2  less  than  21. 

Hence  we  put  w  =  20,  and 

x*-6o  =  (x-  2o)2, 

so  that*=  \\%,x*=  132^,  and  *a  -  60  =  72$. 
Thus  we  have  to  divide  72^  into  two  parts  such  that  £ 

of  one  partptus  |  of  the  other  =  1  1£. 
Let  the  first  part  be  5*. 
Therefore  £  (second  part)  =  1  1|  -  .#, 
or  second  part  =  92  —  82  ; 
therefore  5*  +  92  —  8^  =  72^, 


Therefore  the  number  of  five-drachma  %oe? 
„  eight-drachma  „ 

1  For  an  explanation  of  these  limits  see  p.  60,  ante. 

2  See  p.  62,  ante. 


226  THE   ARITHMETICA 


BOOK  VI 

1.  To  find  a  (rational)  right-angled  triangle  such  that   the 
hypotenuse  minus  each  of  the  sides  gives  a  cube1. 

Let  the  required  triangle  be  formed  from  x,  3. 

Therefore   hypotenuse  =  x-  +  9,   perpendicular  =  6x,   base 

=**-9. 

Thus  xz  +  9  —  (xz  —  9)=  1 8  should  be  a  cube,  but  it  is  not. 
Now  1 8  =  2  .  3* ;  therefore  we  must  replace  3  by  m,  where 

2  .  m-  is  a  cube  ;  and  m  =  2. 
We  form,  therefore,  a  right-angled   triangle  from  x,  2, 

namely  (x*  +  4,   ^x,   x*  —  4) ;    and    one  condition    is 

satisfied. 

The  other  gives  xn-  —  4^  +  4  =  a  cube  ; 
therefore  (x  —  2)2  is  a  cube,  or  x  —  2  is  a  cube  =  8,  say. 
Thus  x  =  10, 

and  the  triangle  is  (40,  96,  104). 

2.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  hypotenuse 
added  to  each  side  gives  a  cube. 

Form  a  triangle,  as  before,  from  two  numbers  ;  and,  as 
before,  one  of  them  must  be  such  that  twice  its 
square  is  a  cube,  i.e.  must  be  2. 

We  form  a  triangle  from  x>  2,  namely  .a-'2 +-4,  4^-,  4— ;r2; 
therefore  ^  +  4^  +  4  must  be  a  cube,  while  x*  must 
be  less  than  4,  or  x  <  2. 

Thus  x  +  2  =  a  cube  which  must  be  <  4  and  >  2  =  %j-,  say. 
Therefore  x=^-, 

and  the  triangle  is  (-*$  ,  $%  ,  &7\  , 
or,  if  we  multiply  by  the  common  denominator,  (135, 
352,  377) 

3.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  area  added  to 
a  given  number  makes  a  square. 

Let  5  be  the  given  number,  (3^,  4^,  $x}  the  required 
triangle. 

1  Diophantus'  expressions  are  6  tv  rfj  viroreivotiffrj,  "  the  (number)  in  (or  represent- 
ing) the  hypotenuse,"  6  fv  eKar^pg,  ruv  6p6uiv,  "the  (number)  in  (or  representing)  each 
of  the  perpendicular  sides,"  6  iv  T£  inpaSy,  "the  (number)  in  (or  representing)  the  area," 
etc.  It  will  be  convenient  to  say  "the  hypotenuse,"  etc.  simply.  It  will  be  observed 
that,  as  between  the  numbers  representing  sides  and  area,  all  idea  of  dimension  is  ignored. 


BOOK   VI  227 

Therefore         6xz  +  5  =  a  square  =  9*',  say, 

or  3-^=5. 

But  3  should  have  to  5  the  ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square. 

Therefore  we  must  find  a  right-angled  triangle  and  a 
number  such  that  the  difference  between  the  square 
of  the  number  and  the  area  of  the  triangle  has  to  5  the 
ratio  of  a  square  to  a  square,  i.e.  =  \  of  a  square. 

Form  a  right-angled  triangle  from  ( m,  — \  ; 

\       *»/ 

thus  the  area  is  mz . 

Let  the  number  be  ;«  +  ——,  so  that  we  must  have 

101 

4 .  5  H =  £  of  a  square ; 

therefore      4.25+  ^-~-  =  a  square, 

or  ioow2  +  505  =  a  square  =  (lorn  +  5)2,  say, 

and  m  =  ^. 

The  auxiliary  triangle  must  therefore  be  formed  from  ^, 

/T,  and  the  auxiliary  number  sought  is  ^. 
Put  now  for  the  original  triangle  (fix,  px,  bx\  where  (//,  /,  b} 

is  the  right-angled  triangle  formed  from  ^,  ^  ; 
this  gives          \pbx-  +  5  =  Ll%ffix*; 
and  we  have  the  solution. 
[The  perpendicular  sides  of  the  right-angled  triangle  are 


52 
whence 


and  the  triangle  is 


4.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  area  minus  a 
given  number  makes  a  square. 

Given  number  6,  triangle  ($x,  4*,  $x),  say. 
Therefore  6>2  —  6  =  square  =  4-r2,  say. 

Thus,  in  this  case,  we  must  find  a  right-angled  triangle 
and  a  number  such  that 

(area  of  triangle)  -  (number)2  =  £  of  a  square. 


Form  a  triangle  from  /«,  —  . 
m 


15—* 


228  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Its  area  is  m2 ,  and  let  the  number  be  m  —  £  .  —  . 

m*  m 

Therefore  6 =  £  (a  square), 

or  ^6mz  —  60  =  a  square  =  (6m  —  2)2,  say. 

Therefore  m  =  f ,  and  the  auxiliary  triangle  is  formed  from 

(f ,  |),  the  auxiliary  number  being  |~|. 
We  start  again,  substituting  for  3,  4,  5    in   the   original 

hypothesis   the  sides   of  the   auxiliary  triangle  just 

found,  and  putting  (ff)2.*"2  in  place  of  ^x-\  and  the 

solution  is  obvious. 

[The  auxiliary  triangle  is  (*$$-,  2,  tyffl),  whence 
±0^2  _  6  =  (f|)^2,  and  x  =  f , 

so  that  the  required  triangle  is  (-4S°^,  -V6-»  -Wf)-] 

5.  To   find   a  right-angled  triangle  such  that,   if  its  area  be 
subtracted  from  a  given  number,  the  remainder  is  a  square. 

Given  number  10,  triangle  (3^,  4*,  $x),  say. 
Thus  10  — 6^2  =  a  square;  and  we  have  to  find  a  right- 
angled  triangle  and  a  number  such  that 

(area  of  triangle)  +  (number)2  =  T^  of  a  square. 

Form  a  triangle  from  m,  —  ,  the  area  being  m* ; , 

m  m 

and  let  the  number  be  — h  5w. 
m 

Therefore  26m2  +  10  =  ^  bf  a  square, 

or  26cwz2  +  100  =  a  square, 

or  again      6$m'*  +  25  =  a  square  =  (Sm  +  5)2,  say, 

whence  m  =  80. 

The  rest  is  obvious. 

The  required  triangle  is  AOfff^,  T^,  ^iHHHHM 

6.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  area  added 
to  one  of  the  perpendiculars  makes  a  given  number. 

Given  number  7,  triangle  (3^,  4^,  5^). 

Therefore  6xz  +  yc  =  7. 

In  order  that  this  migJit  be  solved,  it  ivould  be  necessary  that 

(half  coefficient  of  xj-  +  product  of  coefficient  of  x*  and 

absolute  term  should  be  a  square  ; 
but  (i^)2  +  6.7  is  not  a  square. 
Hence  we  must  find,  to  replace  (3,  4,  5),  a  right-angled 

triangle  such  that 

(\  one  perpendicular)2  +  7  times  area  =  a  square. 
Let  one  perpendicular  be  w,  the  other  i. 


BOOK   VI  229 

Therefore  ftm  +  ±=  a  square,  or  ijm  +  i  =  a  square.) 

Also,"  since  the  triangle  is  rational,  m*  +  i  =  a  square.) 

The  difference  m*  -  i^m  =  m  (m  —  14)  ; 

and  putting,  as  usual,  72  =  147/2  +  i, 

we  have  m  =  ^-. 

The  auxiliary  triangle  is  therefore  (^,  1,2,?-)  or  (24,  7,  25). 

Starting  afresh,  we  take  as  the  triangle  (24^,  7.*-,  25*). 

Therefore  84^  +  ?x  =  7, 

and  ^  =  ^. 

We  have  then  ^6,  ^  >  j)  as  the  solution1. 

7.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  area  minus  one 
of  the  perpendiculars  is  a  given  number. 
Given  number  7. 
As  before,  we  have  to  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that 

(£  one  perpendicular)2  +  7  times  area=  a  square  ; 
this  triangle  is  (7,  24,  25). 

Let  then  the  triangle  of  the  problem  be  (7^,  24^-,  25^). 
Therefore  843?  -  jx  =  7, 

*=l, 

and  the  problem  is  solved2. 

1  Fermat  observes  that  this  problem  and  the  next  can  be  solved  by  another  method. 
"  Form  in  this  case,"  he  says,  "  a  triangle  from  the  given  number  and  r,  and  divide 
the  sides  by  the  sum  of  the  given  number  and  i ;  the  quotients  will  give  the  required 
triangle." 

In  fact,  if  we  take  as  the  sides  of  the  required  triangle 
(a2  +  i)  .*,  (a2  -  i )  x,  iax, 
where  a  is  the  given  number,  we  have 

(a2—  i)  ax2  +  iax=a, 

one  root  of  which  is  x=  --= — -  +  -5 =  — ; — , 

a— i      fl*  —  I      a+  i 

and  the  sides  of  the  required  triangle  are  therefore 

a2  +  i       a2  -  i         va 
a+i '     a+i  '    a+ r ' 
The  solution  is  really  the  same  as  that  of  Diophantus. 

2  Similarly  in  this  case  we  may,  with  Fermat,  form  the  triangle  from  the  given  number 
and  i,  and  divide  the  sides  by  the  difference  between  the  given  number  and  i,  and  we 
shall  have  the  required  triangle. 

In  VI.  6,  7,  Diophantus  has  found  triangles  f,  £,  r)  (f  being  the  hypotenuse),  such  that 

(i)     l- 

and  (2)     \to 

Fermat  enunciates  the  third  case 

(3)     *- 


230  THE   ARITHMETICA 

8.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  area  added  to 
the  sum  of  the  perpendiculars  makes  a  given  number. 
Given  number  6. 
Again  I  have  to  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that 

(^  sum  of  perpendiculars)2  -f  6  times  area  =  a  square. 
Let  m,  i  be  the  perpendicular  sides  of  this  triangle  ; 
therefore  £  (m  +  i  )2  +  3  m  =  {m*  +  ^\m  +  i  =  a  square, 
while  m*  +  i  must  also  be  a  square. 


T-I  r 

Therefore  2        >  are  both  squares. 

The  difference  is  2m  .  7,  and  we  put 


whence  m  =  |f  , 

and  the  auxiliary  triangle  is  (ff  ,  i,  ff),  or  (45>  2^>  53)- 

Assume  now  for  the  triangle  of  the  problem 

(45*,  28*,  53*). 
Therefore  630^  +  73*  =  6  ; 

*  is  rational  [==  T'H],  and  the  solution  follows. 

9.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  area  minus  the 
sum  of  the  perpendiculars  is  a  given  number. 

Given  number  6. 

As  before,  we  find  a  subsidiary  right-angled  triangle  such 
that  (^  sum  of  perpendiculars)-+  6  ti  tries  area  =  a  square. 
This  is  found  to  be  (28,  45,  53)  as  before. 
Taking  (28*,  45*,  53*)  for  the  required  triangle, 

630*-'-  73*  =  6; 
x  =  ws>  an<^  tne  problem  is  solved1. 

10.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  sum  of  its 
area,  the  hypotenuse,  and  one  of  the  perpendiculars   is  a  given 
number. 


observing  that  Diophantus  and  Bachet  appear  not  to  have  known  the  solution,  but  that 
it  can  be  solved  "by  our  method."  He  does  not  actually  give  the  solution  ;  but  we  may 
compare  his  solutions  of  similar  problems  in  the  Inventum  Novitm,  e.g.  those  given  in 
the  notes  to  VI.  1  1  and  vi.  15  below  and  in  the  Supplement.  The  essence  of  the  method 
is  that,  if  the  first  value  of  x  found  in  the  ordinary  course  is  such  as  to  give  a  negative 
value  for  one  of  the  sides,  we  can  derive  from  it  a  fresh  value  which  will  make  all  the 
sides  positive. 

1  Here  likewise,  Diophantus  having  solved  the  problem 


Fermat  enunciates,  as  to  be  solved  by  his  method,  the  corresponding  proble 


BOOK   VI  23T 

Given  number  4. 

If  we  assumed  as  the  triangle  (hx.px,  bx),  we  should  have 


and,  in  order  that  the  solution  may  be  rational,  we  must 
find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that 

\  (hyp.  +  one  perp.)2  +  4  times  area  =  a  square. 
Form  a  right-angled  triangle  from  i,  m  +  i. 
Then  |  (hyp.  -f.jone  perp.)2  =  J-  (m*  +  2m  +  2  +  m2  +  2nif 

=  ;;z4  +  4m3  +  6mz  +  4m+  i  , 
and  4  times  area  =  4  (m  +  i)  (m2  +  2m) 

=  4m3  +  1  2m2  +  8m. 
Therefore 

m*  +  8m3  +  i  8m2  +  1  2m  +  i  =  a  square  =  (6m  +  1  -  w2)2,  say, 
whence  ;//  =  |,  and  the  auxiliary  triangle  is  formed  from 
(i,  f)  or  (5,  9).      This  triangle  is  (56,  90,   106)  or 
(28,  45,  S3)- 

We  assume  therefore  28^,45^,  53^  for  the  original  triangle, 
and  we  have     630^  +  8  \x  =  4. 

Therefore  ^=i^,  and  the  problem  is  solved. 

II.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  area  minus 
the  sum  of  the  hypotenuse  and  one  of  the  perpendiculars  is  a  given 
number. 

Given  number  4. 

We  have  then  to  find  an  auxiliary  triangle  with  the  same 

property  as  in  the  last  problem  ; 
therefore  (28,  45,  53)  will  serve  the  purpose. 
We  put  for  the  triangle  of  the  problem  (28^,45^,  53*),  and 
we  have  63O,r2  —  8  \x  =  4  ; 

x=-^,  and  the  problem  is  solved1. 

1  Diophantus  has  in  vi.  10,  n  shown  us  how  to  find  a  rational  right-angled  triangle 
f>  £>  *?  (f  being  the  hypotenuse)  such  that 

(1)  Jfr+f+f=«. 

(2)  l&l-(t+t)  =  a. 

Fermat,  in  the  Inventum  Novum,  Part  III.  paragraph  33  (Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  in. 
p.  389),  propounds  and  solves  the  corresponding  problem 

(3)     *•+«-;&  =  «• 

In  the  particular  case  taken  by  Fermat  0  =  4.     He  proceeds  thus: 
First  find  a  rational  right-angled  triangle  in  which  (since  a  =  4) 


^(f +£)['- 4-^  = 


a  square. 


232  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Lemma  I  to  the  following  problem. 

To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  difference  of  the 
perpendiculars  is  a  square,  the  greater  alone  is  a  square,  and  further 
the  area  added  to  the  lesser  perpendicular  gives  a  square. 

Let  the  triangle  be  formed  from  two  numbers,  the  greater 

perpendicular  being  twice  their  product. 
Hence  I  must  find  two  numbers  such  that  (i)  twice  their 
product  is  a  square  and  (2)  twice  their  product  exceeds 
the  difference  of  their  squares  by  a  square. 
This  is  true  of  any  two  numbers  the  greater  of  which 

=  twice  the  lesser. 
Form  then  the  triangle  from  x,  2.x,  and  two  conditions  are 

satisfied. 

The  third  gives  6x*  +  $x*  =  a  square,  or  6x-  +  3  =  a  square. 
I  have  therefore  to  find  a  number  such  that  6  times  its 

square  +  3  =  a  square  ; 
one  such  number  is  i,  and  there  are  an  infinite  number  of 

others1. 
If  x  =•  i,  the  triangle  is  formed  from  i,  2. 

Suppose  it  formed  from  x+  i,  x;  the  sides  then  are 

f=  IX*  +  1  JC  +  I  ,       %=2X+1,       1}  —  2JC^+2Ji. 

Thus  +£)l. 


=  a  square 

=  (  .r2  -  2X  +  i  )2,  say. 

- 
3 

The  triangle  formed  from  -  ,    -  is  (  —  ,—,-)•    Thus  we  may  take  as  the  auxiliary 

33       \9       9      9/ 
triangle  (17,  15,  8). 

Take  now  ifx,  15.*,  8*  for  the  sides  of  the  triangle  originally  required  to  be  found. 
We  have  then 

f  +£--£)?  =  32*  -6cur-  =  4; 

whence  x=-,  and  the  required  triangle  is  (—  ,  —  ,  -  ). 
3  V  3       3      3/ 

[The  auxiliary  right-angled  triangle  was  of  course  necessary  to  be  found  in  order  to 
make  the  final  quadratic  give  a  rational  result.] 

Bachet  adds  after  vi.  u  a  solution  of  the  problem  represented  by 


to  which  Fermat  adds  the  enunciation  of  the  corresponding  problem 


1  Though  there  are  an  infinite  number  of  values  of  x  for  which  6.r2  +  3  becomes  a  square, 
the  resulting  triangles  are  all  similar.     For,  if  x  be  any  one  of  the  values,  the  triangle  is 


BOOK   VI  233 

Lemma  II  to  the  following  problem. 

Given  two  numbers  the  sum  of  which  is  a  square,  an  infinite 
number  of  squares  can  be  found  such  that,  when  the  square  is  multi- 
plied by  one  of  the  given  numbers  and  the  product  is  added  to 
the  other,  the  result  is  a  square. 
Given  numbers  3,  6. 

Let  x*  +  2x  +  i  be  the  required  square  which,  say,  when 
multiplied  by  3  and  then  increased  by  6,  gives  a  square. 
We  have  3_r2  +  6.r  +  9  =  a  square  ; 

and,  since  the  absolute  term  is  a  square,  an  infinite  number 

of  solutions  can  be  found. 
Suppose,  e.g.         yp  +  6x  +  9  =  (3  -  $x}\ 
and  x  =  4. 

The  side  of  the  required   square  is   5,  and  an  infinite 

number  of  other  solutions  can  be  found. 
12.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  area  added 
to  either  of  the  perpendiculars  gives  a  square. 
Let  the  triangle  be  ($x,  \2x,  13^). 
Therefore  ( I )  30^  +  1 2x  —  a  square  =  36^,  say, 
and  x  =  2. 

But  (2)  we  must  also  have 

3Q*2  +  5-r  =  a  square. 
This  is  however  not  a  square  ivhen  x  =  2. 
Therefore  I  must  find  a  square  ;«2^2,  to  replace  36**,  such 
that  I2/O2-  30),  the  value  of  x  obtained  from  the 
first  equation,  is  real  and  satisfies  the  condition 

30tr2  +  $x  =  a  square. 
This  gives,  by  substitution, 

(6om2  +  25  2o)/(*«*  —  6om  +  900)  =  a  square, 
or  6ow2  +  2520  =  a  square. 

This  could  be  solved  [by  the  preceding  Lemma  II]  if 

60+2520  were  equal  to  a  square. 
Now  60  arises  from   5  .  12,  i.e.  from  the  product  of  the 

perpendicular  sides  of  (5,  12,  13); 

2520  is  30.  12.  (12-5),  i.e.  the  continued  product  of  the 
area,  the  greater  perpendicular,  and  the  difference 
between  the  perpendiculars.  

formed  from  .*,  2*,  and  its  sides  are  therefore  a*2,  4-r2,  5-*2  ;  that  is,  the  triangles  are  all 
similar  to  (3,  4,  5).  Fermat  shows  in  his  note  on  the  following  problem,  vi.  12,  how  to 
find  any  number  of  triangles  satisfying  the  conditions  of  this  Lemma  and  not  similar  to 
(3.  4-  5)-  See  p.  235,  note. 


«34  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Hence  we  must  find  an  auxiliary  triangle  such  that 
(product  of  perps.)  +  (continued  product  of  area, 
greater  perp.  and  difference  of  perps.)  =  a  square. 

Or,  if  we  make  the  greater  perpendicular  a  square  and 
divide  out  by  it,  we  must  have 
(lesser  perp.)  +  (product  of  area  and  diff.  of  perps.) 

=  a  square. 

Then,  assuming  that  we  have  found  two  numbers,  (i)  the 
product  of  the  area  and  the  difference  of  the  perpen- 
diculars and  (2)  the  lesser  perpendicular,  satisfying 
these  conditions,  we  have  to  find  a  square  (m2)  such 
that  the  product  of  this  square  into  the  second  of 
the  numbers,  when  added  to  the  first  number,  gives 
a  square1. 

1  The  text  of  this  sentence  is  unsatisfactory.  Bachet  altered  the  reading  of  the  MSS. 
So  did  Tannery,  but  more  by  way  of  filling  out.  The  version  above  follows  Tannery's  text, 
which  is  as  follows  :  airdycrai  eh  ri>  Mo  &pt6/M>vs  tvpbvras  [for  Suras  of  MSS.  ]  <  rbv  re  vwb  > 
roO  ^9a5oC  Kot  T?)J  i>7repox»?s  rwv  6p0wv,  </ca2  rbv  tv  Ty  tXdffffovt  rwv  opffuv  >  ,  avOis  [for 
avrrjt  of  MSS.]  farfiv  QOV  riva,  5s  jro\Xair\a<na<T0ets  eirl  i-va  rbv  dod^vja,  <  Kai  TT  po<T\afiuv 
rbvtrtpov>,  troiel  rerpdywvov. 

The  argument  would  then  be  this.    If  (A,  />,  l>)  be  the  triangle  (£>/),  we  have  to  make 

bp  +  -  bp  (i>  -p)  b  a  square, 

or,  if  b  is  a  square,  /  +  -  bp(b-p)  must  be  a  square. 

The  ultimate  equation  to  be  solved  (corresponding  to  6o/«2+252O  =  a  square)  is 
bpmz  +  -bp(b  -p)  6  =  a.  square, 

or,  if  b  is  a  square,  pni1  +  -  bp  (b  -/)  =  a  square  ; 

and  then  fore,  according  to  Tannery's  text,  "the  problem  is  reduced  to  this:  Having  found 

two  numbers  -  bp  (b  -/)  and  /  [satisfying  the  conditions,   namely  that  their  sum  is  a 

square,  while  b  is  also  a  square],  to  find  after  that  a  square  such  that  the  product  of  it 
and  the  latter  number  added  to  the  former  number  gives  a  square." 

The  difficulty  is  that,  with  the  above  readings,  there  is  nothing  to  correspond  exactly  to 

the  phraseology  of  the  enunciation  of  Lemma  I,  which  speaks,  not  of  making  /  +  -  bp  (b-p) 
a  square  when  b  is  a  square,  but  of  making  b  —  p,  b  and/-f  -  bp  all  simultaneously  ^quares. 
But  \\ieparticular  solution  of  the  Lemma  is  really  equivalent  to  making  b  and/>  +  -  bp  (b  —  p) 
simultaneously  squares.  For  the  triangle  is  formed  from  a,  ia  ;  this  method  of  ma1  ing 
b  a  square  (  =  4<z2)  incidentally  makes  b  —  p  a  square  (  =  a2),  and  p  +  -  bp  becomes  3<z2  +  6«*, 


while  p  +  -  bp  (b  -p)  becomes  3a2  +  6rt6.     Since  the  solution  actually  used  is  a—i,  the 

effect  is  the  same  whichever  way  the  problem  is  stated.  And  in  any  case,  whether  the 
expression  to  be  made  a  square  is  3>al»ii  +  6a^  or  3a?m?  +  6a6,  the  problem  equally  reduces, 
to  that  of  making  yn"1  +  6  a  square. 


BOOK    VI  235 

How  to  solve  these  problems  is  shown  in  the  Lemmas. 
The  auxiliary  triangle  is  (3,  4,  5).     [Lemma  I.] 
Accordingly,  putting  for  the  original  triangle  (3*,  4*-,  $x\ 

we  have  6**+      I  b°th  squares. 

Let  .*•  =  —  — -  be  the  solution  of  the  first  equation  : 

Ittr  —  O 

then  x-  = 

m4—  \2m--\-  36 

The  second  equation  therefore  gives 


whence  i2m*  +  24  =  a  square, 

and  we  have  therefore  to  find  a  square  (m*)  such  that 

twelve  times  it  +  24  is  a  square;  this  is  possible,  since 

12  +  24  is  a  square  [Lemma  II]. 
A  solution  is  m*  =25, 
whence  x=  -fa, 

and     f~.      ',  —  )  is  the  required  triangle1. 
\i9'   19'   ip/ 

13.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  area  minus 
either  perpendicular  gives  a  square. 

We  have  to  find  an  auxiliary  triangle  exactly  as  in  the 
last  problem  ; 


Bachet's  reading  is  drdyertu  efj  ri>  5i/o  apiOftwr  dofftrrur  TOV  T(  tuftadov,  iced  rijt 
(\dffcrovot  TUV  irepl  rrjv  opff-^v,  avrols  fi/ret*  rerpdyuvbi'  TIVCL,  5j  TO\XairXa<ria<rtftti  IT'I 
fva.  run  SoOtvruv,  Kai  T/xxrXa^Swi'  rov  erepov,  Toifj  rfrpdyuvoif. 

1  Fermat  observes  that  Diophantus  gives  only  one  species  of  triangle  satisfying  the 
condition,  namely  triangles  similar  to  (3,  4,  5),  but  that  by  his  (Fermat's)  method  an  infinite 
number  of  triangles  of  different  species  can  be  found  to  satisfy  the  conditions,  the  first 
being  derived  from  Diophantus'  triangle,  the  second  from  the  new  triangle,  and  so  on. 

Suppose  that  the  triangle  (3,  4,  5)  has  been  found  satisfying  the  condition  that 


where  £,  77  are  the  perpendicular  sides  and  £>if. 

To  derive'a  second  such  triangle  from  the  first  (3,  4,  5),  assume  the  greater  of  the  two 
perpendicular  sides  to  be  4  and  the  lesser  $+•*• 

Then  $,  +  $(£_,,)  .  I  £n  =  36-  i2jr-8.r»  =  a  square. 

Also  f2  =  £2  +  ij2=25  +  dr  +  Jrs  =  a  square. 

We  have  therefore  simply  to  solve  the  double-equation 
36-i2jr-8*2  =  «2V 
25+   6.r+  *2=^)' 

which  is  a  matter  of  no  difficulty.     As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  usual  method  gives 
20667  .     /  20667          23729i6s\ 

'+3=^S9  -  and  the  mangle  is  (593-89-  <•  -SSr 


236  THE   ARITHMETICA 

this  triangle  is  (3,  4,  5),  and  accordingly  we  assume  for 
the  triangle  of  the  problem  (3^-,  4*-,  $x). 

One  condition  then  gives  6r2—  4^=  a  square  =  m^x2,  say 
(*'<6), 

and  ;i:  =  ^ -«• 

6  —  m2 

The  second  condition  gives  6x2  —  3^r=  a  square  ;  and,  by 
substitution, 

96  12 

— >  -  ^ — -  — -  =  a  square, 
m*  —  1 2  m*  +36     6  —  w2 

or  24+1 2;/z2  =  a  square. 

This  is  satisfied  by  ;;/  =  I, 

whence  ;r=f ,  and  the  required  triangle  is  (—  ,  —  ,  4  J  . 

Or,  if  we  do  not  wish  to  use  the  value  I  for  m, 
\etm  =  z+i,  and  (dividing  by  4)  we  have 

3w2  +  6  =  3-sr2  +  6z  +  9  =  a  square  ; 
^  must  be  found  to  be  not  greater  than  Jg3-  (in  order  that 

m*  may  be  less  than  6),  and  ///  will  not  be  greater  than 

%2-.     The  solution  is  then  rational1. 


14-     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  area  minus  the 
hypotenuse  or  minus  one  of  the  perpendiculars  gives  a  square. 
Let  the  triangle  be  (p:,  4*,  $x). 

Therefore  ,  2      5   \  are  both  squares. 

Making  the  latter  a  square  (=  m^\  we  have 
x=6^1tf    (^2<6). 


1  Diophantus  having  solved  the  problem  of  finding  a  right-angled  triangle  f,  TJ, 
(f  being  the  hypotenuse)  such  that 


ire  both  squares, 


Fermat  enunciates,  as  susceptible  of  solution  by  his  method,  but  otherwise  very  difficult, 
the  corresponding  problem  of  making 


both  squares. 


This  problem  was  solved  by  Euler  {Navi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petropol.  1749,  n.  (1751), 
pp.  49  sqq.  —  Commentationes  arithmeticae,  I.  pp.  62-72). 


BOOK  VI 

The  first  equation  then  gives 

54  15 

- 


or  1  5;«2  —  36  =  a  square. 

This  equation  we  cannot  solve  because  \  5  is  not  tfie  sum  of 

two  squares*.   Therefore  we  must  change  the  assumed 

triangle. 
Now  (with  reference  to  the  triangle  3,  4,  5)  I5w2  =  the 

continued  product  of  a  square  less  than  the  area,  the 

hypotenuse,  and  one  perpendicular  ; 
while  36  =  the  continued  product  of  the  area,  the  perpen- 

dicular, and  the  difference  between  the  hypotenuse 

and  the  perpendicular. 
Therefore  we  have  to  find  a  right-angled  triangle  (h,  p,  b, 

say)  and  a  square  (w2)  less  than  6  such  that 

m^hp  —  ^pb  .p(]i  —  p}  is  a  square. 
If  we  form  the  triangle  from  two  numbers  Xlt  X3  and 

suppose   that   p=2.X^X^    and    if    we    then   divide 

throughout  by  (Xl  —  X^f  which  is  equal  to  //  -/,  we 

must  find  a  square  ,5s  [=  m-l(X^  -  XJf\  such  that 

z*/ip  —  ^pb  .p  is  a  square. 
Ttie  problem  can  be  solved  if  X^,  X^  are  "similar  plane 

numbers*? 
Form  the  auxiliary  triangle  from  similar  plane  numbers 

accordingly,   say    4,    i.     [The   conditions    are    then 

satisfied3.] 
[The  equation  for  m  then  becomes 

8  .  ijm-  —  4  .  1  5  .  8  .  9  =  a  square, 
or  1  36;«2  —  4320  =  a  square.] 

Let4  m*  —  36.     [This  satisfies  the  equation,  and  36  <  area 

of  triangle.] 

1  See  p.  70  above. 

4  Diophantus  states  this  without  proof.     [A  "  plane  number  "  being  of  the  form  a  .  bt 

a  plane  number  similar  to  it  is  of  the  form  —  a.—  b  or  -^  ab.] 
The  fact  stated  may  be  verified  thus.     We  have 

*«  (  X?  +  Xf)  vXiXz-  Xi  X2  (X?  -  AV)  2X1  X2  =  a  square. 

The  condition  is  satisfied  if  z*=X\X<i,  for  the  expression  then  reduces  to  +X^  X£.X£. 
In  that  case  X\X<t  is  a  square,  or  X^jX^  is  a  square. 

3  Since  ^=4,  X3=  i,  we  have  A  =  i?,f=S,  b=  15,  32=^^=4,  and 

z*hp-^pb.p=±.  17.  8-4.  15.  8  =  2.  32=64,  a  square. 

4  The   reason   for  this   assumption    is    that,    by   hypothesis,  «*=w/2/(.V1  -  X»)y,   or 
4  =  w2/32,  and  mz  =  $6. 


238  THE   ARITHMETICA 

The  triangle  formed  from  4,  i  being  (8,  15,  17),  we  assume 

&tr,  \$x,  \jx  for  the  original  triangle. 
We  now  put          6ox-  -  &r  =  36^, 
and  x~\- 

The  required  triangle  is  therefore  (-.  c,  ?2| 

U    5    37 
Lemma  to  the  following  problem. 

Given  two  numbers,  if,  when  some  square  is  multiplied  into 
one  of  the  numbers  and  the  other  number  is  subtracted  from 
the  product,  the  result  is  a  square,  another  square  larger  than 
the  aforesaid  square  can  always  be  found  which  has  the  same 
property. 

Given    numbers    3,    1 1,   side   of  square    5,  say,   so   that 

3.25  —  11-  =  64,  a  square. 
Let  the  required  square  be  (x  +  5)2. 
Therefore 

3  (*+  5)2  -  1 1  =  3*2+  3<^+  64  =  a  square 

=  (8  -  2x}\  say, 
and  x=62. 

The  side  of  the  new  square  is  67,  and  the  square  itself 
4489. 

15.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  area  added 
to  either  the  hypotenuse  or  one  of  the  perpendiculars  gives  a 
square. 

In  order  to  guide  us  to  a  proper  assumption  for  the 
required  triangle,  we  have,  in  this  case,  to  seek  a 
triangle  (//,  /,  b,  say)  and  a  square  (mz)  such  that 
m*  >  \pb,  the  area,  and 

mthp  —  \pb.p(}i  —p)  is  a  square. 
Let  the  triangle  be  formed  from  4,   i,  the  square  (;«2) 

being  36,  as  before  ; 
but,   the   triangle   being  (8,    15,    17),   the   square   is    not 

greater  than  the  area. 
We  must  therefore,  as  in  the  preceding  Lemma,  replace 

36  by  a  greater  square. 

Now  hp  =  136,  and  \pb  .p  (h  —p}  =  60 .  8 . 9  =  4320, 
so  that  1 36m2  —  4320  =  a  square, 

which  is  satisfied  by  m*=  36  ;  and  we  have  to  find  a  larger 
square  (^2)  such  that 

—  4320  =  a  square. 


BOOK   VI  ±39 

Put  s  =  in  +  6,  and  we  have 

(m*  -f  1 2nt  +  36)  1 36  -  4320  =  a  square, 
or  1 36;«2  -f  1 6$2m  +  576  =  a  square  =  (km  —  24)*,  say. 
This  equation  has  any  number  of  solutions  ;  e.g.,  putting 
k  =  1 6,  we  have 

m  =  20,  z  =  26,  and  2s  =  676. 

We  therefore  put  (&r,  i£r,  \yx)  for  the  original  triangle, 
and  then  assume 

6ot-2  +  &r  =  676*-2, 
whence  ^  =  7^,  and  the  problem  is  solved1. 

1  In  vi.   14,  15  Diophantus  has  shown  how  to  find  a  rational  right-angled  triangle 
*7i  I  (where  f  is  the  hypotenuse)  such  that 


are  both  squares, 


are  both  squares. 


In  the  Inventum  Afovum,  Part  I.  paragraphs  26,  40  (Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  ill.  pp.  341 
-2,  349-50)  is  given  Fermat  's  solution  of  a  third  case  in  which 

are  both  squares. 

This  depends  on  the  Lemma  :  To  find  a  rational  right-angled  triangle  in  which 
f(f+^)-^i?  =  a  square. 

Form  a  right-angled  triangle  from  JT+  i,  r  ;  the  sides  are  then 

o^+2jr+a,     jr*+2jr,     2JT+2. 
We  must  therefore  have 

(.r2  +  wr  +  «)(.*«  +  3jr  +  I)-(JT+I)  (.i3  +2-r)  =  a  square, 
or  •**  +  4*3  +  6j.-a  +  6^-+  2  =  a  square 

=  (j^+2x+i)s,  say. 

Therefore  r=  --,  and  the  triangle  has  one  of  its  sides  x-  +  ijc  negative.     Instead 

therefore  of  forming  the  triangle  from  -,  I  or  from  i,  2,  we  form  it  from  jr-f-  1,  a  aad 
repeat  the  operation.     The  sides  are  then 

j^+a-x  +  s,    jt»+2jr-3,     4^  +  4, 
and  we  have 

(.**+  2.r+  5)  (jc2  +  4jr-  i)  -  (2JT+  2)  (jr2+  2J.  -  3)  =  a  square, 
i  =a  square 
=  (i  +  iar-4r*)*,  say, 


24o  THE   ARITHMETICA 

1 6.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  number 
representing  the  (portion  intercepted  within  the  triangle  of  the) 
bisector  of  an  acute  angle  is  rational1. 

A 


C 

Suppose  the  bisector  AD  =  $x,  and  one  segment  of  the 

base  (DB}  =  3^-  ;  therefore  the  perpendicular  =  4^-. 
Let  the  whole  base  CB  be  some  multiple  of  3,  say  3  ;  then 

0?  =  3-3x 
But,  since  AD  bisects  the  angle  CAB, 

AC:CD  =  AB-.BD; 
therefore  the  hypotenuse  A  C  =  f  (3  —  3^)  =  4  -  4*. 

whence  x  =  ~,  and  the  required  auxiliary  triangle  is  formed  from  ^»9  or  from  29,  11, 
the  sides  being  accordingly  985,  697,  696. 

(Fermat  observes  that  the  same  result  is  obtained  by  putting  y  —  for  x  in  the 
expression  x*  +  ^x3  +  ftx*  +  6x  +  2  ;  for  we  must  have 

uare=^+5^-yy,  say, 

whence  y  =  —,  so  that  #=^  —  =  —  ,  and  the  triangle  is  formed  from—,  i   or  from 

29,  12,  as  before.) 

We  now  return  to  the  original  problem  of  solving 


We  assume  for  the  required  triangle  (985^,  697^,  696*)  and  we  have  -  £rj  =  244556^, 

so  that 

985^-242556^) 

V  must  both  be  squares. 
697^-242556^) 

Assume  that  697^  -  242556^=  (697^)*, 

and  we  have  x  -  348^2=^97^2, 

whence  x  =  —  —  ,  and  the  required  triangle  is  (  ,  —  —,  —  —  ). 

1045'  \iQ45  io45'  io45  ; 

[The  985^-242556^  is  a  square  by  virtue  of  the  sides  985,  697,  696  satisfying  the 
conditions  of  the  Lemma;  for  985^-242556^  =  -^;  -  ^.  ,9^'  92-  ,  which  is  a  square 

if  985.  1045  --.697.696  is  a  square,  and  1045  ^697  +  -.696.] 

1  Why  did  not  Diophantus  propound  the  analogous  problem  "  To  find  a  right-angled 
triangle  such  that  the  sides  are  rational  and  the  bisector  of  the  right  angle  is  also  rational"? 
Evidently  because  he  knew  it  to  be  impossible,  as  is  clear  when  (a,  c  being  the  perpen- 

diculars) the  bisector  is  expressed  as      —  ^2.     (Loria,  op.  cit.  p.  148  «.) 


BOOK   VI  241 

Therefore  [by  Eucl.  I.  47] 


16= 

and  *  =  £. 

If  we  multiply  throughout  by  32,  the  perpendicular  =  28, 
the  base  =  96,  the  hypotenuse  =  100,  and  the  bisector 
=  35- 

17.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  area  added 
to  the  hypotenuse  gives  a  square,  while  the  perimeter  is  a  cube. 

Let  the   area   be  x  and  the    hypotenuse   some   square 

minus  x,  say  16—  x. 
The  product  of  the  perpendiculars  =  2x  ; 
therefore,  if  one  of  them  be   2,  the  other  is  x,  and  the 

perimeter  =  18,  which  is  not  a  cube. 

Therefore  we  must  find  some  square  which,  when  2  is 
added  to  it,  becomes  a  cube1. 

1  "Did  Diophantus  know  that  the  equation  w2+2  =  w3  only  admits  of  one  solution 
«=•»,  ^=3?  Probably  not"  (Loria,  op.  cit.  p.  155).  The  fact  was  noted  by  Fermat 
(on  the  present  proposition)  and  proved  by  Euler. 

Killer's  proof  (Algebra,  Part  II.  Arts.  188,  193)  is,  I  think,  not  too  long  to  be  given 
here.  Art.  188  shows  how  to  find  x,  y  such  that  cuP  +  cy*  may  be  a  cube.  Separate 
fl-r'  +  ry2  into  its  factors  x*Ja+y^](  -c),  x<Ja  -y»J(  -  f),  and  assume 


the  product  (a/1  +  cq^f  being  a  cube  and  equal  to  cuP  +  ey*. 

To  find  values  for  x  and  y,  we  write  out  the  expansions  of  the  cubes  in  full,  and 


-c)-  yff  Ja  +  cf  J(  -  c), 
whence  a-  =  a/3  -  yfty3, 


For  example,  suppose  it  is  required  to  make  x*+y*  a  cube.     Here  a=i  and  e= 
so  that  x-p^-^pq^, 

y  =  3?q-q*, 
.     If  now/=2  and  f=i,  we  find  x=*  and^=  n,  whence 


Now  (Art.  193)  let  it  be  required  to  find,  if  possible,  in  integral  numbers,  other  squares 
besides  25  which,  when  added  to  2,  give  cubes. 

Since  0^  +  2  has  to  be  made  a  cube,  and  2  is  double  of  a  square,  let  us  first  determine 
the  cases  in  which  xljriyL  becomes  a  cube.  Here  a=  i,  c  —  2,  so  that 

.r=/3_6>?2,   y=&q—*f; 

therefore,  since  y=  i  i,  we  must  have 

ifq-  if  or  q($p*-iq*)=  ±  I  5 
consequently  q  must  be  a  divisor  of  i. 

Let,  then,  q=i,  and  we  shall  have  3/2  -  2  =  ±  i. 

With  the  upper  sign  we  have  3/^  =  3  and,  taking  /)=  -  i,  we  find  x~  5  ;  with  the  lower 
sign  we  get  an  irrational  value  of/  which  is  of  no  use. 

H.   D.  l6 


242  THE   ARITHMETIC  A 

Let  the  side  of  the  square  be  m+i,  and  that  of  the  cube 

m—  i. 
Therefore      mz  -  yn1  +  yn  —  i  =  m2  +  2m  +  3, 

from  which  m  is  found1  to  be  4. 

Hence  the  side  of  the  square  =  5,  and  that  of  the  cube  =  3. 
Assuming  now  x  for  the  area  of  the  original   triangle, 

25  —  x  for  its  hypotenuse,  and  2,  x  for  the  perpen- 

diculars, we  find  that  the  perimeter  is  a  cube. 
But    (hypotenuse)2  =  sum  of  squares  of  perpendiculars  ; 

therefore       x*  —  50*-  +  62  5  =  x*  +  4  ; 
x  =  &g^,  and  the  problem  is  solved. 

1  8.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  area  added 
to  the  hypotenuse  gives  a  cube,  while  the  perimeter  is  a  square. 

Area  x,  hypotenuse  some  cube  minus  x,  perpendiculars.*-,  2. 
Therefore  we  have  to  find  a  cube  which,  when  2  is  added 

to  it,  becomes  a  square. 
Let  the  side  of  the  cube  be  m  —  i. 

Therefore  m*  —  yiP  +  yn  +  i  =  a  square  =  (  \\m  +  i  )2,  say. 
Thus  m  =  *£,  and  the  cube  =  (Jf)3  =  ±£js. 
Put  now  x  for  the  area,  x,  2  for  the  perpendiculars,  and 

-%\-  —  x  for  the  hypotenuse; 
and  x  is  found  from  the  equation  (-%%-  —  xf  =  x*  +  4. 

nd  the  trianle  is  2  1 


19.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  area  added  to 
one  of  the  perpendiculars  gives  a  square,  while  the  perimeter  is 
a  cube. 

Make  a  right-angled  triangle  from  some  indeterminate  odd 

number*,  say  2x+  i  ; 

then  the  altitude  =  2*+  i,  the  base  =  2x"-  +  2.x,  and  the 
hypotenuse  =  2x"-  +  2x+  i. 

It  follows  that  there  is  no  square  except  25  which  has  the  required  property. 

Fermat  says  ("Relation  des  nouvelles  decouvertes  en  la  science  des  nombres," 
Oeuvres,  II.  pp.  433-4)  that  it  was  by  a  special  application  of  his  method  of  descente, 
such  as  that  by  which  he  proved  that  a  cube  cannot  be  the  sum  of  two  cubes,  that  he  proved 

(1)  that  there  is  only  one  integral  square  which  when  increased  by  i  gives  a  cube,  and 

(2)  that  there  are  only  two  squares  in  integers  which,  when  added  to  4,  give  cubes.     The 
latter  squares  are  4,  121  (as  proved  by  Euler,  Algebra,  Part  n.  Art.  192). 

1  See  pp.  66,  67  above. 

2  This  is  the  method  of  formation  of  right-angled  triangles  attributed  to  Pythagoras. 
If  m  is  any  odd  number,  the  sides  of  the  right-angled  triangle  formed  therefrom  are  m, 
i(w2-i),  i(^2-ri),  for  w2+  U(W2-  ,)12=  J1(W2+  !)j.2.       Cf.    prociUS)    Comment. 
on  Rucl.  i.  (ed.  Friedlein),  p.  428,  7  sqq.,  etc.  etc. 


BOOK    VI  243 


Since  the  perimeter  =  a  cube, 


and,  if  we  divide  all  the  sides  by  x  +  r,  we  have  to  make 
2  a  cube. 


Again,  the  area  +  one  perpendicular  =  a  square 


Before  +  .  .  square  ; 


But  4-r  +  2  =  a  cube ; 

therefore   we    must    find    a  cube  which  is  double  of  a 

square ;  this  is  of  course  8. 
Therefore  4^+2  =  8,  and  x=\\. 

The  required  triangle  is  (- ,  3 ,  %\  . 

20.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  sum  of  its 
area  and  one  perpendicular  is  a  cube,  while  its  perimeter  is  a 
square. 

Proceeding  as  in  the  last  problem,  we  have  to  make 
$x  +  2  a  square) 
2x+  i  a  cube    j  " 
We  have  therefore  to  seek  a  square  which  is  double  of  a 

cube;  this  is  16,  which  is  double  of  8. 
Therefore  4-r+  2=  16,  and  x=$\. 

The  triangle  is  (-,  ^,  %)  . 
\9  '    9  '    9J 

21.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  perimeter  is 
a  square,  while  its  perimeter  added  to  its  area  gives  a  cube. 

Form  a  right-angled  triangle  from  xt  i. 

The  perpendiculars  are  then  2x,  x*  —  i,  and  the  hypotenuse 

Hence  2x-  +  2x  should  be  a  square, 

and  x3  +  2x--\-x  a  cube. 
It  is  easy  to  make  2x-  +  2x  a  square  ;  let  2**  +  2x 

therefore  x=2/(m2-2). 
By  the  second  condition, 

o  82 

— _ 1-  — _ +  — _ must  be  a  cube, 

20Z4       _  . 

16— 2 


244  THE   ARITHMETICA 

Therefore  2;«4  =  a  cube,  or  2m  —  a  cube  =  8,  say. 

Thus  ;;z  =  4,  •^=T24  =  7>  x*  =  -£$- 

But  one  of  the  perpendiculars  of  the  triangle  is  x--  I,  and 

we  cannot  subtract  i  from  ^. 
Therefore  we  must  find  another  value  for  x  greater  than  i  ; 

hence  2  <  m2<  4. 

And  we  have  therefore  to  find  a  cube  such  that  |  of  the 

square  of  it  is  greater  than  2,  but  less  than  4. 
If  z*  be  this  cube, 

2<\&<   4, 

or  8  <    ^  <  16. 

This  is  satisfied  by  ^  =  -^-,  or  s3  =  ^-. 
Therefore   *»=»££,   ^2  =  ||f,  and  *=fff,  the  square  of 

which  is  >  i. 
Thus  the  triangle  is  known 


22.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  perimeter  is 
a  cube,  while  the  perimeter  added  to  the  area  gives  a  square. 

(1)  We  must  first  see  how,  given  two  numbers,  a  triangle 

may  be  formed  such  that  its  perimeter  =  one  of 
the  numbers  and  its  area  =  the  other. 

Let  12,  7  be  the  numbers,  12  being  the  perimeter,  7  the 
area. 

Therefore  the  product  of  the  two  perpendiculars 

=  14  =  ^.  14*. 
If  then  -,  14-r  are  the  perpendiculars, 

hypotenuse  =  perimeter  —  sum  of  perps.  =  12  ---  \^x, 

% 

Therefore  [by  Eucl.  I.  47] 

~  +  I96.r2  +  172  -  ^  -  336^=  ^  +  196*°  ; 

that  is,  172  =  336^-+  —  , 

3C 

or  172^=336^  +  24. 

This  equation  gives  no  rational  solution,  because  862  —  24  .  336 

is  not  a  square. 
Now  172  =  (perimeter)2  +  4  times  area, 

24.  336=  8  times  area  multiplied  by  (perimeter)2. 

(2)  Let   now  the  area  =  m,  and  the   perimeter  =  any 

number  which  is  both  a  square  and  a  cube,  say  64. 


BOOK  VI  245 

Therefore  {£  (642  +  4w)}2  -  8 . 64" .  m  must  be  a  square, 

or         4^2  -  24576^  +4194304  =  a  square. 

Therefore  m2  —  6 144772  +  1048576  =  a  square] 

Also  m  +  64  =  a  square]  ' 

To  solve  this  double-equation,  multiply  the  second  by 
such  a  number  as  will  make  the  absolute  term  the 
same  as  the  absolute  term  in  the  first. 

Then,  if  we  take  the  difference  and  the  factors  as  usual, 
the  equations  are  solved. 

[After  the  second  equation  is  multiplied  by  16384,  the 
double-equation  becomes 

m* -6i44m  +  1048576  =  a  square) 
16384^  +  1048576  =  a  square}  ' 

The  difference  is  mz—  22528;;?. 

If  m,  m  —  22528  are  taken  as  the  factors,  we  find  m  =  7680, 
which  is  an  impossible  value  for  the  area  of  a  right- 
angled  triangle  of  perimeter  64. 

We  therefore  take  as  the  factors  1 1  m,  -fam  —  2048  ;  then, 
when  the  square  of  half  the  difference  is  equated  to 
the  smaller  of  the  two  expressions  to  be  made  squares, 
we  have 

(&±m  +  1024)*  =  16384;^  +  1048576, 
and  m  = 


Returning  now  to  the  original  problem,  we  put  -  ,  2mx 

for  the  perpendicular  sides  of  the  required  triangle, 
and  we  have 


64  -  -  - 

which  leads,  when  the  value  of  m  is  substituted,  to 
the  equation 

78848*°  -  8432^  +  225  =  o. 

The  solution  of  this  equation  is  rational,  namely 
_527±23=  25         _o_ 
9856        448        176* 

Diophantus  would  of  course  use  the  first  value,  which 
would  give  (-^f-,  ^,  *$$)  as  the  required  right- 
angled  triangle.  The  second  value  of  x  clearly  gives 
the  same  triangle.] 


246  THE   ARITHMETICA 

23.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  the  square  of  its 
hypotenuse  is  also  the  sum  of  a  different  square  and  the  side  of 
that  square,  while  the  quotient  obtained  by  dividing  the  square 
of  the  hypotenuse  by  one  of  the  perpendiculars  of  the  triangle  is 
the  sum  of  a  cube  and  the  side  of  the  cube. 

Let  one  of  the  perpendiculars  be  x,  the  other  x*. 

Therefore    (hypotenuse)2  =  the    sum   of  a  square  and  its 

X*  -4-  X^ 

side  ;  also =  x3  +  x  =  the  sum  of  a  cube  and  its 

x 

side. 

It  remains  that  x*  +**  must  be  a  square. 
Therefore  x2  +  I  =  a  square  =  (x—  2)2,  say. 
Therefore  x=  f ,  and  the  triangle  is  found  [f ,  ^,  {£]. 

24.  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  one  perpendicular 
is  a  cube,  the  other  is  the  difference  between  a  cube  and  its  side, 
and  the  hypotenuse  is  the  sum  of  a  cube  and  its  side. 

Let    the    hypotenuse    be   x*+x,    and    one    perpendicular 

Therefore  the  other  perpendicular  =  2xz  =  a  cube  =  Xs,  say. 
Thus  x=  2,  and  the  triangle  is  (6,  8,  10). 

It  is  on  Bachet's  note  to  vi.  2  2  that  Fermat  explains  his  method  of  solving 
triple-equations^  as  to  which  see  the  Supplement,  Section  v. 

[No.  20  of  the  problems  on  right-angled  triangles  which  Bachet 
appended  to  Book  vi.  ("  To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its  area 
is  equal  to  a  given  number  ")  is  the  occasion  of  Fermat's  remarkable  note 
upon  the  theorem  discovered  by  him  to  the  effect  that  The  area  of  a  right- 
angled  triangle  the  sides  of  which  are  rational  numbers  cannot  be  a  square 
number. 

This  note  will  be  given  in  full,  with  other  information  on  the  same 
subject,  in  the  Supplement] 


ON    POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 

All  numbers  from  3  upwards  in  order  are  polygonal,  containing 
as  many  angles  as  they  have  units,  e.g.  3,  4,  5,  etc. 

"  As  with  regard  to  squares  it  is  obvious  that  they  are  such 
because  they  arise  from  the  multiplication  of  a  number  into 
itself,  so  it  was  found  that  any  polygonal  multiplied  into  a 
certain  number  depending  on  the  number  of  its  angles,  with 
the  addition  to  the  product  of  a  certain  square  also  depending 
on  the  number  of  the  angles,  turned  out  to  be  a  square.  This 
I  shall  prove,  first  showing  how  any  assigned  polygonal 
number  may  be  found  from  a  given  side,  and  the  side  from 
a  given  polygonal  number.  I  shall  begin  by  proving  the  pre- 
liminary propositions  which  are  required  for  the  purpose." 

i.  If  there  are  three  numbers  with  a  common  difference,  then 
8  times  the  product  of  the  greatest  and  middle  +  the  square  of  the 
least  =  a  square,  the  side  of  which  is  the  sum  of  the  greatest  and 
twice  the  middle  number. 

Let  the  numbers  be  AB,  BC,  BD  in  the  figure,  and  we 
have  to  prove  SA£  .  £C  +  BD*  =  (AB  +  zBC}\ 

E  _  A          O         p  _  B 

By  hypothesis  A  C=  CD,  AB=  BC  +  CD,  BD=  BC-  CD. 
Now  8A  B.BC=4A  B.BC+(^BC*  +  4BC.CD}. 
Therefore  ZAB.BC+BD* 


.  [Eucl.  n.  8] 

and  we  have  to  see  how  AB*  +  ^AB  .  BC+  ^BC*  can 
be  made  a  square. 

[Diophantus  does  this  by  producing  BA   to  E,  so  that 
AE  =  BC,  and  then  proving  that 


It  is  indeed  obvious  that 


2.  If  there  are  any  numbers,  as  many  as  we  please,  in  A.P., 
the  difference  between  the  greatest  and  the  least  is  equal  to  the 
common  difference  multiplied  by  the  number  of  terms  less  one. 


248  ON    POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 

[That  is,  if  in  an  A.P.  the  first  term  is  a,  the  common 
difference  b  and  the  greatest  term  /,  n  being  the 
number  of  terms,  then 

l-a  =  (n-  i)&] 

Let  AB,  BC,  BD,  BE  have  a  common  difference. 


Now  A  C,  CD,  DE  are  all  equal. 

Therefore  EA  =  ACx  (number  of  terms  AC,  CD,  DE} 
=  A  C  x  (number  of  terms  in  series  —  I ). 

3.  If  there  are  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  in  A.P.,  then 
(greatest  +  least)  x  number  of  terms  =  double  the  sum  of  the 
terms. 

[That  is,  with  the  usual  notation,  2s  =  n  (/  +  #).] 
(i)     Let  the  numbers  be  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  the  number  of 
them  being  even. 


Let  GH  contain  as  many  units  as  there  are  numbers, 
and  let  GH,  being  even,  be  bisected  at  K.  Divide 
GK  into  units  at  L,  M. 

Since  F-D=C-A, 


But  F  +  A  =  (F+A).GL- 

therefore  C  +  D  =  (F+A)  .LM. 

Similarly  E  +  B  =  (F  +  A  )  .  MK. 

Therefore,  by  addition, 

A  +  B  +  C  +  D  +  E  +  F  =  (  F  +  A  )  .  GK. 
Therefore        2  (A  +£+  ...)=  2  (F  +  A).  GK 

=  (F+A).GH. 
(2)     Let  the  number  of  terms  be  odd,  the  terms  being 

A,  B,  C,  D,  E. 


F  H  L  K  G 

Let  there  be  as  many  units  in  FG  as  there  are  terms, 
so  that  there  is  an  odd  number  of  units. 

Let  FH  be  one  of  them  ;  bisect  HG  at  K,  and  divide  HK 
into  units,  at  L. 


ON    POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 

Since  E-C=C-A, 

E  +  A  =  2C=2C.LK. 
Similarly  B  +  D=2C.LH. 

Therefore        A  +E  +  B  +  D  =  2C.  HK 
=  C.  HG. 

Also  C=C.HF- 

therefore,  by  addition, 

A+J3+C+  D  +  E=C.FG; 
and,  since  2C=  A  +  E, 


249 


4.  If  there  are  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning  with 
i  and  increasing  by  a  common  difference,  then  the  sum  of  all 
x  8  times  the  common  difference  +  the  square  of  (common 
difference  —  2)  =  a  square,  the  side  of  which  diminished  by  2 
=  the  common  difference  multiplied  by  a  number  which  when 
increased  by  i  is  double  of  the  number  of  terms. 

[The  A. p.  being  i,  i  +  b,  ...  i  +(n  -  \)b,  and  s  the  sum, 
we  have  to  prove  that 

s .  &b  +  (b  -  2f  =  {b  (2n  -  i)  +  2J2, 
i.e.  8bs  =  4#V/2  -  4  (b  -  2)  nb, 

or  2s  =  bnz  —(b  —  2)n 

=  n  {2  +  (»—  i)b\. 

The  proof  being  cumbrous,  I  shall  add  the  generalised 
algebraic  equivalent  in  a  column  parallel  to  the 
text.] 

Let  AB,  CD,  EF  be  the  terms  in  I     i +&,  i  +  26,  i  +  36,.... 
A. P.  after  i. 


P      A 


K  N 


Let   GH  contain    as  many  units 
as  there  are  terms  including  r. 

Difference  between  EF  and  i 
=  (diff.  between  AB  and  i)  x  (GH-  i). 
[Prop.  2] 


250 


ON    POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 


Put    AK,   EL,    GM  each    equal 
to    unity. 

Therefore  LF=KB.MH. 
Make  KN=2,   and    we   have  to 
inquire  whether 

(sum  of  terms)  x  8KB  f  NB- 

=  {2  +  KB(GH+HM)}\ 
Now  sum  of  terms 

.GH       [Prop.  3] 


=  \  (KB  .  MH,  GH  +  2677), 
since  LF  =  KB  .MH  [above]. 

Bisecting  MH  at  O,  we  have 
(sum  of  terms) 

=  KB.GH.HO+GH. 
We    have     therefore     to    inquire 
whether 

(KB  .  GH.  HO  +  GH}  .  8KB  +  NB- 
is  a  square. 

Now     KB.  GH.  HO.  8KB 
.HO.  KB* 


Is  then 

4GH.  HM  .  KB*  +  8KB  .  GH  +  NB* 
a  square  ? 

Now     8GH.KB 
=  4GM.  KB  +  4  (GH+HM)  KB. 
Also  4GM.  KB  =  2NK  .  KB  ; 
and,  adding  NB*,  the  right-hand  side 
becomes  KB*  +  KN*.         [Eucl.  II.  7] 

Is  then     ^GH.HM.KB* 
+  4  (GH  +  HM}  KB  +  KB*  +  KN* 
a  square  ? 

Again,  KB*  +  ^GH  .  HM  .  KB* 
=  GM*.KB*  +  ^GH.  HM  .  KB* 
=  (GH+HM)*  .  KB*.  [Eucl.  n.  8] 
Is  then     (GH+HM}*  .  KB* 

+  4(Gtf+HM)  KB  +  KN* 
a  square? 

Make  the  number  NO'  equal  to 
(GH+HM).KB- 


Call  the  expression  on 
the  left-hand  side  X. 


X=bn.H 


=  («  +  «-  i}*b* 
+  4  {«  +  (« 


ON   POLYGONAL  NUMBERS 


thus    (GH 

will   be   proved    later1. 

Also    ANO'  =  2  .  NO1 .  NK,   since 


Therefore 
X  =  {(»  +  n  -  i )  b  +  2]2 


Is  then  NO*  +  NK*  +  2NO' .  NK 
a  square  ? 

Yes ;  it  is  the  square  on  KO. 

And 

aK  -  2  =  NO'  =  KB(GH  +  HM\ 
while  GH+HM+  i  =  (twice  number 
of  terms). 

Thus  the  proposition  is  proved. 

"  The  above  being  premised,  I  say  that, 

[5]  If  there  be  as  many  terms  as  we  please  in  A.P.  beginning 
from  i,  the  sum  of  the  terms  is  polygonal;  for  it  has  as  many 
angles  as  the  common  difference  increased  by  2  contains  units,  and 
its  side  is  the  number  of  the  terms  set  out  including  i." 

The  numbers  being  as  set  out  in  the  figure  of  Prop.  4,  we 
have,  by  that  proposition, 

(sum  of  terms)  .  %KB  +  NB*  =  Ka\ 

Taking  another  unit  AP,  we  have  KP '  =  2,  while  KN '=  2; 
therefore  PB,  BK,  BN  are  in  A.P.,  so  that 

ZPB.BK  +  NB*  =  (PB  +  2KB}* ;       [Prop,  i ] 

while  3  +  i  =  2 .  2,  or  3  is  one  less  than  the  double  of  2. 
Now,   since   the  sum   of  the   terms  of  the  progression 


1  Deferred  lemma. 

To  prove  that  (Gff+ffM)2.  K& 

=  {(GH+HM).  KB}*. 


Place  DE  (equal  to  a)  and  EF  (equal  to  £)  in  a 
straight  line. 

Describe  squares  Dff,  EL  on  DE,  EF  and  com- 
plete the  figure. 

Then  DE:EF=Dff:HF, 

and  HE:EK=HF:EL. 

Therefore  ffFis  a  mean  proportional  between  the  two  squares, 
that  is  DH.FK=HF\ 

or  a»./S»=(a/3)». 


252  ON   POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 

including  unity  satisfies  the  same  formula1  [literally 
"  does  the  same  problem  "]  as  PB  does, 

while  PB  is  any  number  and  is  also  always  a  polygonal, 
the  first  after  unity  (for  AP  is  a  unit  and  AB  is  the 
term  next  after  it),  and  has  2  for  its  side, 

it  follows  that  the  sum  of  all  the  terms  of  the  progression 
is  a  polygonal  with  the  same  number  of  angles  as  PB, 
the  number  of  its  angles  being  the  same  as  the 
number  of  units  in  the  number  which  is  greater  by  2, 
or  PK,  than  the  common  difference  KB,  and  that  its 
side  is  GH  which  is  equal  to  the  number  of  terms 
including  I. 

And  thus  is  demonstrated  what  is  stated  by  Hypsicles  in 
his  definition,  namely,  that, 

"If  there  are  as  many  numbers  as  we  please  beginning 
from  I  and  increasing  by  the  same  common  difference, 
then,  when  the  common  difference  is  I,  the  sum  of  all 
the  terms  is  a  triangular  number  ;  when  2,  a  square  ; 
when  3,  a  pentagonal  number  [and  so  on].  And  the 
number  of  the  angles  is  called  after  the  number 
exceeding  the  common  difference  by  2,  and  the  side 
after  the  number  of  terms  including  I." 

[In  other  words,  if  there  be  an  arithmetical  progression 

i ,  i  +  b,  i  +  2b,  . . .  i  +  (n  —  i )  b, 

the  sum  of  the  n  terms,  or  \n  {2  +  («  —  i)  b}t  is  the 
wth  polygonal  number  which  has  {b  +  2)  angles.] 

Hence,  since  we  have  triangles  when  the  common  dif- 
ference is  i,  the  sides  of  the  triangles  will  be  the 
greatest  term  in  each  case,  and  the  product  of  the 
greatest  term  and  the  greatest  term  increased  by  i 
is  double  the  triangle. 


-  l  Nesselmann  (pp.  475-6),  exhibits  this  result  thus. 
Take  the  A.P.  i,     i+£,     i  +  il>,...   i+(n-i)l>. 

If  s  is  the  sum,  8sl>  +  (/>  -  a)2=  [b  (in  -  i)  +  i}z. 

If  now  we  take  the  three  terms  b-  2,  b,  6  +  1,  also  in  A. P., 

U(b  +  l)  +  (b-lY={(l>  +  l)  +  lb}Z 
=  (3* +2)2. 

Now  6+1  is  the  sum  of  the  first  two  terms  of  the  first  series,  and  corresponds  there- 
fore to  s  when  n  =  2  ;  and  3  —  2  .  2  -  i ,  so  that  3  corresponds  to  in-  i. 

Hence  s  and  b  +  2  are  subject  to  the  same  law  ;  and  therefore,  as  b  + 1  is  a  polygonal 
number  with  b  + 1  angles,  s  is  also  a  polygonal  number  (the  wth)  with  b  + 1  angles. 


ON   POLYGONAL   NUMBERS  253 

And,  since  PB  is  a  polygonal  with  as  many  angles  as 

there  are  units  in  it, 
and  8P£  .  (PB  -  2)  +  (PB  -  4)*  =  a  square  (from  above, 

BK  being  equal  to  PB  -  2,  and  NB  to  PB  -  4), 
the  definition  of  polygonal  numbers  will  be  as  follows  : 
Every  polygonal  multiplied  by  8  times  (number  of  angles 

—  2)  +  square  of  (number  of  angles  —  4)  =  a  square1. 

The  Hypsiclean  definition  and  the  new  one  being  thus 
simultaneously  proved,  it  remains  to  show  how,  when 
the  side  is  given,  the  prescribed  polygonal  is  found. 

For,  having  given  the  side  GH  and  the  number  of  angles, 
we  know  KB. 

Therefore  (GH  +  HM}  KB,  which  is  equal  to  NO',  is  also 
given  ;  therefore  KO'(=NO'+NK  or  NO'+  2)  is  given. 

Therefore  KO'Z  is  given  ; 

and,  subtracting  from  it  the  given  square  on  NB,  we 
obtain  the  remaining  term  which  is  equal  to  the 
required  polygonal  multiplied  by  "&KB.  Thus  the 
required  polygonal  can  be  found. 

Similarly,  given  the  polygonal  number,  we  can  find  its 
side  GH.  Q.  E.D. 

Rules  for  practical  use. 

(i)     To  find  the  number  from  the  side. 

Take  the  side,  double  it,  subtract  i,  and  multiply  the 
remainder  by  (number  of  angles  —  2).  Add  2  to  the 
product  ;  and  from  the  square  of  the  sum  subtract 
the  square  of  (number  of  angles  -  4).  Dividing  the 
remainder  by  8  times  (number  of  angles  -  2),  we 
have  the  required  number. 

1  Hultsch   points  out   (art.    Diophantos  in   Pauly-Wissowa's  Real-Encyclopadie  der 
dassischen  Altertumswissenschafteri)  that  this  formula 

8P  (a  -  -i  )  +  (a  -  4)2  =  a  square 

shows  that  Diophantus  intended  it  to  be  applied  not  only  to  cases  where  a  is  greater  than 
4  but  also  where  0  =  4  or  less.  For  36,  as  Diophantus  must  have  known,  besides  being 
the  second  36-gon,  is  also  a  triangle,  a  square,  and  a  ij-gon,  inasmuch  as 

)2  =   289=  i?2, 
-4)2  =   576=242, 


And  indeed  it  is  evident  from  Def.  9  of  the  Arithmetica  that  (3-4)2=  '.  while  it  is 
equally  obvious  that  (4-4)2  =  0. 


254 


ON   POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 


[If  P  be  the  wth  «-gonal  number, 

P  .  8  (a  -  2)  +  (a  -  4)2  =  {2  +  (2«  -  I  )  («  -  2)j 


(2) 


To  find  the  side  from  the  number. 

Multiply  the  number  by  8  times  (number  of  angles  —  2)  ; 
add  to  the  product  the  square  of  (number  of  angles  -4). 
We  thus  get  a  square.  Subtract  2  from  the  side  of 
this  square  and  divide  the  remainder  by  (number  of 
angles  -  2).  Add  I  to  the  quotient,  and  half  the 
result  gives  the  side  required1. 


=  i  rilP 
L       2V 


a-2 


\  I 
J'\ 


Given  a  number,  to  find  in  how  many  ways  it  can  be  polygonal. 
Let  AB  be  the  given  number,  BC        [Algebraical  equivalent.] 


the  number  of  angles,  and  in  BC  take 


Number  AB  =  P. 
Number  of  angles  BC=a. 


Since  the  polygonal  AB  has  BC 
angles, 

(i)  S AB.BD  +  BE*= 
say. 

Cut  off  AH  equal  to  i  ; 
therefore  SAB.BD 


=  X\  say. 
But     SP(a-2) 


Make  DK  equal  to  4(AB+Btf\ 
and  for  $AH .  BD  put  2BD .  DE. 

1  Fermat  has  the  following  note.  "  A  very  beautiful  and  wonderful  proposition  which 
I  have  discovered  shall  be  set  down  here  without  proof.  If,  in  the  series  of  natural 
numbers  beginning  with  i ,  any  number  n  be  multiplied  into  the  next  following,  n  +  i , 
the  product  is  twice  the  nth  triangular  number;  if  n  be  multiplied  into  the  (n+i)(h 
triangular  number,  the  product  is  three  times  the  nth  tetrahedral  number ;  if  n  be 
multiplied  into  the  («+  \}th  tetrahedral  number,  the  product  is  four  times  the  nth  triangulo- 
triangular  number  {figured  number  of  $th  order} ;  and  so  on,  ad  infinitum.  I  do  not 
think  there  can  be,  in  the  theory  of  numbers,  any  theorem  more  beautiful  or  more 
general.  The  margin  is  too  small,  and  I  am  not  at  liberty,  to  give  the  proof."  (Cf. 
Letter  to  Roberval  of  4  November  1636,  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  pp.  84,  85.)  For  a  proof, 
see  Wertheim's  Diophantus,  pp.  318-20. 


ON    POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 


255 


Therefore 
(2)  FGZ=KD.DB+2BD.DE  +  BE\ 


=  KD.DB  +  BD*  +  DE\ 

[Eucl.  II.  7] 

=  KB.BD+DE*.  [Eucl.  n.  i] 
But,  since 


(3) 
(4) 


and  DC  =  half  4  or  2  ; 

therefore          CK  >  CD. 

Therefore,  if  DK  be  bisected  at 
L,  L  falls  between  C  and  K. 

And,  since  Z^£"  is  bisected  at  Z, 

KB  .BD  +  LD*  =  LB*, 
whence    KB  .  BD  =  LB*  -  LD\ 

Therefore,  by  (4)  above, 

(5)  F 
or      F 

(6)  or  LD*-DE*  =  LB*-FG\ 

Again,   since  ED  =  DC,  and 
is  produced  to  £, 


therefore  EL  .LC=  DL?  -  DC  2 

=  DL*-DE* 

(7)  =LB*-FG\ 

Put     FM=BL     (for     BL>FG, 
since      FG*  +  DLZ  =  BL*  +  ED\ 
while  £>£2  >  ^Z^2). 

Therefore  ^J/2  -FG*  =  EL.L  C. 

Now,  Z?^  being  bisected  at  Z  and 
being  equal  to  4  (^4  B  +  BH\ 


And         DC=2AH. 

Therefore 
or 

But 

therefore  AB  =  \EL, 

while  BH=±CL. 

Therefore  AB.BH= 
or 


LC, 


EL  .LC=i6AB.BH. 


+  2  («  -  2)  .  2  +  (rt  - 


DL=2(2P-l) 


-{2(2P-l)}2+22 
{2(2P-l))2-22 


CL=2(2P-\}-2] 


{2(2P-  l)+ 

FM=2(2P- 


EL  = 


256  ON    POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 


(8)     Therefore 

1 6AB .  BH  =  MF~  -  FG* 

Therefore  GM  is  even. 

Let  GM  be  bisected  at  N  . . 


\6P(P- 


\_={2(2P-2)-2(H-l}(a-2}Y 

+  2  {2  +(2n-  i)(«-2)} 


[Here  the  fragment  ends,  and  the  question  of  course  arises  whether 
Diophantus  ever  actually  solved  the  problem  of  finding  in  how  many 
different  ways  a  given  number  can  be  a  polygonal.  Tannery  went  so  far 
as  to  call  the  whole  of  the  fragment,  from  and  including  the  enunciation 
of  the  problem,  the  "vain  attempt  of  a  commentator"  to  solve  it1. 
Wertheim2  has  however  shown  grounds  for  thinking  that  Diophantus  did 
solve  the  problem  and  that  the  fragment  is  a  genuine  part  of  his  argument 
leading  to  that  result.  The  equation 

8P(a  -  2)  +  (a  -  4)2  =  {2  +  (zn  -  i)  (a  -  2)}2 
easily  reduces  (by  algebra)  to 

8P(a  -  2)  =  4«  (a  -  2)  {2  +  («  -  i)  (a  -  2)}, 
or  2P--  n  (2  +  (n-  i)  (a  -  2)}. 

Wertheim  has  shown  how  this  result  can  be  obtained  by  a  continuation 
of  the  work,  from  the  point  where  the  fragment  leaves  off,  in  the  same 
geometrical  form  which  is  used  up  to  that  point3,  and  how,  when  the 

1  Dioph.  i.  pp.  476-7,  notes. 

2  Zeitschrift  fiir  Math.  u.  Physik,  hist.  litt.  Abtheilung,  1897,  pp.  121-6. 

3  The  only  thing,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  tending  to  raise  doubt  as  to  the  correctness  of 
this  restoration  is  the  fact  that,  supposing  it  to  be  required  to  prove  geometrically,  from 
the  geometrical  equivalent  of 


that  iP=n  {2  +  («-  i)  (a-i}\, 

it  can  be  done  much  more  easily  than  it  is  in  Diophantus'  proposition  as  extended  by 

Wertheim. 

For  let  FG=2  +  (in-  \)(a-i).    Cut  off  FR  equal  to  2,  and  produce  RFtv  S  so  that 


2n(o-2) 


T 

We  have  now  8P  .  SX=FG2  -  SF2 


Bisect  SG  at  T,  and  divide  out  by  4  ; 
therefore  iP  '.  S£  =  ST2-ST.  SF 

=  Sr(ST-SF) 
=  ST.FT 


Now  ST=n  .SR,  and  FJ?  =  i,  while  RT=(n-  i).  SK  =  (n-  \)(a-i). 
It  follows  that  iP=n{i  +  (n-i)  (a  -2)}. 


ON   POLYGONAL  NUMBERS 


257 


formula  is  thus  obtained,  it  can  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  finding  the 
number  of  ways  in  which  P  can  be  a  polygonal  number.  The  portion  of 
the  geometrical  argument  which  has  to  be  supplied  is,  it  is  true,  somewhat 
long,  and  its  length  and  difficulty  may,  as  Wertheim  suggests,  account  for 
the  copyist  having  failed,  as  it  were,  to  see  his  way  through  it  and  having 
stopped  through  discouragement  when  he  had  lost  his  bearings. 

I  shall  now  reproduce  Wertheim's  suggested  restoration  of  the  rest  of 
the  problem.  The  figure  requires  some  extension,  and  I  accordingly  give 
a  new  one  after  Wertheim. 


A     H 


B- 


S  R  Q  N 

The  last  step  in  the  above  fragment  is 
(9)  2FG  .  GM  +  GM2  =  i6AB.BH. 


Bisect  GM  in  JV, 
so  that  GW=  NM. 

Therefore,  if  we  divide  by  4, 
(10)  FG.  GN+  GN*  =  4AB.  BH, 


Put  now  FR=2AB,  and  RS=GN, 
so  that  GS  =  RN,  and  we  have 

FS=FR-RS  =  2AB  -  RS, 


FN=  FR  +  RN=  2AB  +  Ri\, 
GN=RS=2AB-FS. 
Substituting  in  (n),  we  have 
(12)  (2AB+  RN}(2AB-FS)=$AB.BH, 


{2(2P-2)-2(n-i)(a-2)} 


GN=NM 


{2P+n(a-  2)} 

(2  (/>-!)-(«-,)  («  -a)} 


FS=2P 

-{2(P-i}-(n-i}(a-2)\ 

=  2  +(n-  t)(a-2) 
FA7=2P+n(a-2),  from  above 
GN=2(P-i)-(n-i}(a-2) 
RN=  AV  -  2AB  =  n  (a  -  2) 
\2P+n(a-2)} 


'7 


258 


ON    POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 


(13)  4AB?-2AB(FS-RN) 


Therefore 
(14)  2AB(FS-RN} 


2P{2-(a-2)} 

+  «  (0-2)  {(«-i)(a -2) +  2} 


2P(a-2} 


Now  RN=  FN-FR  =  FM-  NM  -  FR  =  FM-\  GM-  FR 
=  BL-\  GM-  2AB  =  BD  +  \DK-  1  GM 
=  BD  +  2AB  +  zBH-  \  GM  -  2AB 


and 


FS=FR-RS 


Therefore 


RN- 


2BH-  zAB 


and  RN-  FS  +  2  AH  =  BD. 

Again,  we  have 

RN=  BD  +  2BH-  \  GM=  BD  +  2BH- 
=  BD+  2BH-  \BD  -%DL  +  \FG 
=  \BD  +  2BH-\DL  +  \FG 
=  \BD  +  2BH-  (AB  +  BH)  +  %FG 
=  \BD  +  BH-  AB  +  ^FG 
=  \BD-AH+\FG 
=  |  (BD  +  FG-  2  AH}. 

But,  from  the  rule  just  preceding  this  proposition, 


therefore  BD  +  FG  =  2n  .  BD  +  2, 

or  BD  +  FG  -  2AH=  211  .  BD  ; 

therefore  RN  =  n  .  BD. 

Accordingly  the  equation  (15)  above  becomes 


(16) 

or 

(17) 


=  n.BD.FS, 


2P(a-2} 

=  n(a-2){(n-i)(a-2) 
2P=n{(n-  i)(a-2)  + 


Thus  the  double  of  any  polygonal  number  must  be  divisible  by  its 
side,  and  the  quotient  is  the  number  arrived  at  by  adding  2  to  the  product 
of  (side  -  i)  and  (number  of  angles  -  2). 

For  a  triangular  number  the  quotient  is  n  +  i,  and  is  therefore  greater 


ON   POLYGONAL   NUMBERS 


2S9 


than  the  side ;  and,  as  the  quotient  increases  by  n  -  i  for  every  increase 
of  i  in  the  number  of  angles  (a),  it  is  always  greater  than  the  side. 

We  can  therefore  use  the  above  formula  (17)  to  find  the  number  of 
ways  in  which  a  given  number  P  can  be  a  polygonal  number.  Separate  *P 
into  two  factors  in  all  possible  ways,  excluding  i  .  zP.  Take  the  smaller 
factor  as  the  side  («).  Then  take  the  other  factor,  subtract  2  from  it, 
and  divide  the  remainder  by  (n  -  i).  If  (n  -  i)  divides  it  without  a 
remainder,  the  particular  factors  taken  answer  the  purpose,  and  the  quotient 
increased  by  2  gives  the  number  of  angles  (a).  If  the  second  factor 
diminished  by  2  is  not  divisible  by  (n-i)  without  a  remainder,  the 
particular  division  into  factors  is  useless  for  the  purpose.  The  number  of 
ways  in  which  P  can  be  a  polygonal  is  the  number  of  pairs  of  factors 
which  answer  the  purpose.  There  is  always  one  pair  of  factors  which  will 
serve,  namely  2  and  P  itself. 

The  process  of  finding  pairs  of  factors  is  shortened  by  the  following 
considerations. 

2P=n\(n-  i)(a-  2) +  2}; 
therefore  zPjn  =  4  +  an  -  a  -  2n, 

2(P-n) 

and  a  =  2  +  —     — / : 

n(n-i) 

therefore  not  only  2  Pin  but  also  —    1  must  be  a  whole  number  and, 

n(n-i} 

as  a  is  not  less  than  3, 


2(P-n) 
n(n-i) 


>  or  —  i, 


and  consequently 


Thus  in  choosing  values  for  the  factor  n  we  need  not  go  beyond  that 
shown  in  the  right-hand  expression. 

Example  i.     In  what  ways  is  325  a  polygonal  number? 

Here  -  i  +  V(i  +  &P)  =  -  i  +  V(a6oi)  =  50.  Therefore  n  cannot  be 
greater  than  25.  Now  2  .  325  =  2  .  5  .  5  .  13,  and  the  only  possible  values 
for  n  are  therefore  2,  5,  10,  13,  25.  The  corresponding  values  for  a  are 
shown  in  the  following  table. 


« 

a 

2 
325 

5 
34 

10 

9 

13 
6 

25 
3 

Example  2.     P=  120. 


- 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

8 
6 

10 

12 

'5 

E 

120 

41 

- 

- 

- 

3 

17—2 


CONSPECTUS    OF    THE   ARITHMETICA 

Equations  of  the  first  degree  with  one  unknown. 

i.    8.  x  +  a  =  m  (x  +  b). 

i.     9.  a-x  =  m(b~x). 

i.  10.  x  +  b  =  m  (a  —  x). 

i.  ii.  x  +  b  =  m  (x  —  a). 

i.  39.  (a  +  x)  b  +  (b  +  x)  a  =  2  (a  +  b}  x,  \ 

or  (a  +  b)  x  +  (b  +  x)  a  =  2  (a  +  x}  b,  \      (a>  b}. 

or  (a  +  b}  x  +  (a  +  x)  b  =  z  (b  +  x)  a, ) 

Determinate  systems  of  equations  of  the  first  degree. 

i.     i.  x+y  =  a,  x-y  =  b. 

{i.     2.  x  +y  =  a,  x  =  my. 

i.     4.  x-y  =  a,  x  =  my. 

i.    3.  x+y  —  a,  x=my  +  b. 

{i         i         , 
i.     5-     x+y  =  a.  —  x  +  -y  =  0. 
m        n 
i.    6.     x+y  =  a,  —  x — y  =  b. 
li.  1 2.     x1  +  x.2  =  y-L  +y2  =  a,  xl  =  my^  yl  —  nx2,     (x1  >  x$,  y1  >jy2). 

i.  15.     x  +  a  =  m  (y  —  a),  y  +  b  =  n  (x  —  b). 
(i.  16.    y  +  z  =  a,  z  +  x  =  t>,  x+y  =  c. 

1 1.  18.  y  +  z-  x=  a, 

J  L  19.  y  +  z  +  7v  —  x  =  a,  z  +  w  +  x  —y  =  b,  w  +  x  +y  —  z  —  c, 
i  x  +y  +  z  —  w  —  d. 

i.  20.  x+y  +  z  —  a,  x  +  y  =  mz,  y  +  z  =  nx. 

i.  2 1.     x  =y  -\ —  z .   y  =  z  +  -  x,  z  =  a  +  -  y,     (x  >  y  >  z). 

***>*•'  aa        '  A^  \  ^  / 


/I  \  /    I  \  /I 

ii.  18*.  x  —  {  —  x  +  a]  +  (  -  z  +  f]  =  y  —  {  -y  +  b\  +  [  —  x  +  a 
\m          )      \p         )    '       \nj       )      \ 

'       "     '-y  +  t>), 


x  +y  -i  z  =  a. 
Determinate  systems  of  equations  reducible  to  the  first  degree 

i.  29.     x+y  —  a,  x2—y^  =  b. 

*  Probably  spurious. 


CONSPECTUS   OF  ARITHMET1CA  261 


i.  3 !  •    x  =  niy>  x*  +y*  —  n  (x  +  y)- 

1.32.  x  =  my,  x2+y2=  n  (x-y). 

i.  33.  x  =  my,  x*  -f  =  n(x  +y). 

I.  34.  x  =  my,  x*-y2  =  n  (x  -y). 

i.  34.  Cor.  i.     x  =  my,  xy  =  n(x+y). 
Cor.  2.     x  =  my,  xy=n(x  -y). 

(  i.  35.  x  =  my,  y*=nx. 

1  I.  36.  x  =  my,  j2  =  ny. 

1.37.  x=my,y*  =  n(x+y). 
i.  38.  x  =  my,  y*  =  n(x  -y). 

1.38.  Cor.     x  =  my,  x2=ny. 

„        x  =  my,  x*  =  nx. 
„       x-my,  x*  =  n(x+y). 
„       x  =  my,  xr  =  n(x  —y)- 
n.  6*.     x-y  =  a,  x?-y*  =  x—y +  t>. 
iv.  36.    yz  =  m  (y  +  z),  zx  =  n(z  +  x),  xy  =p  (x  +-j). 

Determinate  systems  reducible  to  equations  of  second  degree. 
1 1.     27.     x+y  =  a,  xy  =  b. 
1 1.     3  .     x  -y  =  a,  xy  =  b. 

i.  28.  x+y  =  < 
Jiv.  i.  xs+y3  = 
\  iv.  2.  x3  -y3  =  a,  x-y  =  b. 

iv.  15.     (y  +  z)x  =  a,  (z  +  x)y  =  b,  (x+y)z-c. 
(  iv.  34.    yz  +  (y  +  z)  =  a2  -  i ,  zx  +  (z  +  x)  —  b*  —  \ ,  xy  +  (x  +y)  =  c2  —  i . 

iv.  37.     yz  =  m(x+y  +  z),  zx  =  n(x+y  +  z),  xy=p(x+y+z). 
Lemma  to  v.  8.    yz  —  a2,  zx  =  IP,  xy  —  c*. 

Systems  of  equations  apparently  indeterminate  but  really  reduced,  by 
arbitrary  assumptions,  to  determinate  equations  of  the  first  degree, 
i.  14.     xy-m  (x  +y)     [value  of  y  arbitrarily  assumed]. 

I  n.  i*.  (cf.  I.  31.)  x2+y2  =  m(x+y) 

-  n.  2*.  (cf.  i.  34.)  x2-y2=m(x-y)       j-     [x  assumed  -  2y\. 
n.  4*-  (cf.  i.  32-)  x*+y*=m(x-y) 

*  n.  5*.  (cf.  i.  33.)  x9  -f  =  m  (x  +y) 

11.7*.       xt—yz-m(x-y)  +  a     [Diophantus  assumes  x  -y  =  2]. 

i    22.     x--x  +  -z=y--y  +  -x  =  z-^-z  +  -y   [value  of  y  assumed]. 
m        p  nj      m  p        /< 

=  z--z+-y  =  w--w  +  -z     [value  of  v  assumed]. 
p        n*  q         p        L 

*  Probably  spurious. 


262  CONSPECTUS    OF   ARITHMETICA 


1.24.     x+  - 


i.  25.     x  +  -  (y  +  z  +  w)  -y  +  -(z+w  +  x) 


[value  of  y  +  z  assumed]. 


=  z  +  -  (w  +  x  +y)  =  zv  +  -(x+y  +  z) 

[value  of  y  +  z  +  w  assumed]. 

11.17*.     (cf.  i.  22.)     x-(  —  x  +  a  )  +  (  -z  +  c  ] 
\m  )      \p          ) 


[ratio  of  x  to  y  assumed]. 

IV.   33.  l  l 


Diophantus  assumes  l-y  =  i    . 

Indeterminate  equations  of  the  first  degree. 

Lemma  to  iv.  34.     xy  +  (x  +y)  =  a^  [Solutions  iv  dopurru. 

„        „  iv.  35.     xy  -  (x  +y)  =  a\  y  practically  found  in 

„        „  iv.  36.     xy  =  m  (x  +y)  }  terms  of  x.] 

Indeterminate  analysis  of  the  second  degree. 
n.    8. 


II.     9. 

n.  10.  x~—  y2  =  a. 

n.  ii.  x  +  a  =  u*,  x  +  b  =  v*. 

n.  12.  a-x-u^,  b-x  =  v*. 

n.  13.  x-a  =  u2,  x-b  =  v*. 
11.14  =  111.21.     x+y  —  a,  x+  zz  —  u2,  y  +  z2=  v2, 
II.  15  =  111.  20.     x+y  =  a,  z2-x  =  u2,  z*-y  =  v*. 

n.  1  6.  x  =  my,  a2  +  x  =  u2,  a2+y  =  v*. 

11.19.  x2  -y2  =  m  (y2  -  z2). 

ii.  20.  x2  +  y  =  u2,  y*  +  x  =  Z'2. 

n.  21.  x2-y  =  u*,  y2-x  =  v2. 

n.  22.  x2  +  (x  +y)  =  «2,  y2  +  (x  +y)  =  v~. 

n.  23.  x*  —  (x+y)  =  u2,  y2  -  (x  +y)  =  if: 

ii.  24.  (x  +y)2  +  x  =  u2,  (x  +y)2  +y  =  v2. 

II.  25.  (x+y)2-x=u2,   (x+y)2-y  =  v>. 

II.  26.  xy  +  x  =  u2,  xy+y  =  v2,  u  +  v  =  a. 

ii.  27.  xy-x  =  u2,  xy-y  =  v*,  u  +  v  =  a. 

II.  28.  X2y2  +  x2  =  u2,  X2y2+y2  =  v>. 

n.  29.  x2y2  -x2  =  u2,  x2y2  -y2  =  tf. 

n.  30.  xy  +  (x  +y)  =  u2,  xy  -  (x  +y)  =  v*. 
*  Probably  spurious. 


CONSPECTUS   OF  ARITHMETICA  263 

II.  31.     xy  +  (x  +  y)  =  w2,  xy~  (x  +y)  =  v>,  x+y  =  wl. 

II.  32.  y2  +  z  =  «2,  z-  +  x  =  v*t  x^  +y  =  it?. 

"•  33-  /-z^"2,  z--x  =  v>,  x?-y  =  w*. 

ill.  34.  x*  +  (x  +  y  +  z)  =  u\  y  +  (x  +y  +  z)  =  tf,  z*  +  (x  +y  +  z)  =  w'. 

II.  35.  x2  -  (x  +y  +  z)  =  u\  y  -  (x  +  y  +  z)  =  tf,  z*  -(x+y  +  z)  =  w>. 

in.  i*  (x+y  +  z)-xt  =  u2,  (x+y  +  z)-y*  =  v*,  (x+y  +  z)  -z*  =  w*. 

I  in.  2*.  (x  +y  +  zf  +  x  =  a2,  (x  +y  +  zf  +y  =  i?,  (x  +y  +  z)2  +  z  =  -uf. 

in.  3*.  (x  +y  +  zf  -x  =  u\  (x  +y  +  zf  -y  =  v*,  (x  +  y  +  z)2  -  z  =  W*. 

in.  4*  x  -  (x  +  y  +  zf  =  a2,  y  -  (x  +y  +  zf  =  v*,  z-  (x  +y  +  z)1  =  w*. 

in.     5.  x+y  +  z=f*,  y  +  z  —  x-u2,  z  +  x—y  =  vt,  x+y-z^w*. 

in.     6.  x  +y  +  z  =  ?,  y  +  z  =  w2,  z  +  x  - 

in.    7.  x—y  =y-z,  y  +  z-  if,  z  +  x  = 

fin.    8.  x  +y  +  z  +  a  =  /3,  y  +  z+  «  =  »*, 

(in.    9.  x  +y  +  z  -a  =  P,  y+z  —  a  =  u3,  z  +  x-a  =  v*,  x+y-a=w'1. 

fin.  10.  yz  +  a  = 

tin.  ii.  yz  —  a  = 

fin.  12.  yz  +  x  =  u 

tin.  13.  yz-x  =  u*,  zx—y  =  tf,  xy-z-vf. 

in.  14.  yz  +  x2  -  u\  zx  +y*  =  z?t  xy  +  z3  -  to*. 

fm.  15.  yz  +  (  y  +  z)  =  u*,  zx  +  (z-t-x)  =  v*,  xy+(x+y)  =  w*. 

tin.  16.  yz-(y  +  z)  =  u*,  zx-(z  +  x)  =  vt,  xy-(x+y)=itri. 

fill.  17.  xy  +  (x  +  y)  =  if*, 

tin.  18.  xy  -  (x  +y)  =  w2, 


in.  1  9. 

(Xi  +  xz  +  x3  +  x4)*  ±x2=  , 

(x1  +  Xs  +  x3+  xty  ±  x3  =          , 

(^!  +  x2  +  x3  +  x4)*  ±x4  = 

4. 
5- 


nv. 
tiv. 

iv.  13.  Jf  +  i  =  f,  y  +  i  =  «*,  a;  H-j'  +  i  =  z/2,  ^  —  y  +  i  =  w*. 

iv.  i4.  ^+y+s2=(^-jF3)  +  (/-z2)  +  (^-22)   (^> 

nv.  16.  x+_y  +  z  =  /2>  a^  +^  =  a2,  j>*  +  z  =  i?t  &  +  x  =  ur. 

tiv.  17.  ^+^  +  0  =  ^,  xa-y  =  tsi,  y-z^tr8,  02-o;  =  «^. 


17. 

iv.  19.  ^0  +  i  =  w2,  z*  +  i  =  p2,  ^y  +  i  =  a/2. 

iv.  20.  #2*3  +  i  =  r2,  #3*1  +  i  =  s2,  xlx.2+i=ft, 

xtxt  +  i  -  u*,  xsx4  +  i=v*,  xsx4  +  i  =  Z02. 

iv.  21.  a:z=y,  j:-j  =  «2,  ^-z  =  z^,  y-z  =  ur     (x>y>z). 

{iv.  22.  ^yz  +  ^^M2,  xyz+y-z^,  xyz  +  z  =  w*. 

iv.  23.  «j«  -*  =  »*,  xyz-y  =  zt,  xyz-z  =  ur. 

*  Probably  spurious, 


264  CONSPECTUS   OF  ARITHMETICA 


IV.   29- 

iv.  3°-  x2  +y2  +  z2  +  w2  —  (x  +y  +  z  +  w)  =  a. 

iv.  31.  x+y=i,  (x  +  d)(y  +  b}  =  u2. 

iv.  32.  x  +y  +  z  =  a,  xy  +  z-u2,  xy-z  =  tf. 

iv.  39.  x  —  y  =  m  (y  -  z),  y  +  z  =  u2,  z  +  x^v2,  x+y  =  zv2. 

iv.  40.  x2  -y2  =  m  (y  -  z),  y  +  z  =  u2,  z  +  x=zr>,  x+y  =  uf 

v.     2.     xz  =y2,  x  +  a  =  u2,  y  +  a  =  v*,  z  +  a  =  zv2. 

yz  +  a  —  tf1,  zx  +  a  —  v2,  xy  +  a  =  w2. 
v.    4.     x  -  a  =  r"-,  y  -  a  =  s2,  z  -  a  -  f2. 

yz  —  a  =  u2,  zx  —  a  =  0s,  xy  —  a  =  itr. 


V.      6.       X  -  2  =  r2,  y  -  2  =  S2,    Z  -  2  =  f2, 

_yz  —  _y  -  z  —  u2,  zx  —  z  —  x=zP,  xy  —  x—y  = 
yz-x  =  u'2,  zx  —y  =  v'2,  xy-z  =  w'2. 
Lemma  i  to  v.  7.     xy  +  x2  +y*  -  u2. 

v.    7.     x2 ±(x+y  +  z)=  {  J  ,  / ±  (x  +y  +  z)  =  \ *\ , 


,„,  ,V 

v.    8.    yz±(x  +y  +  z)  =  l   ,2\ ,  zx ±  (x  +y  +  z)  = 


v.  9.  (cf.  II.  ii.)     x+y-it 

v.  1 1 .  x  +y  +  2=1,  x  +  a  =  u2,  y  +  a^v2,  z  +  a  =  w2. 

v.  10.  x+y=  i,  #  +  a  =  #2,  y  +  b  =  vi. 

v.  12.  #  +_y  +  z  =  i,  x  +  a  =  u2,  y  +  b-v1^  z  +  c=w2. 

v.  1 3.  x  +y  +  z  =  a,  y  +  z  =  u2,  z  +  x  =  v2,  x  +y  =  zv2. 

v.  14.  x+y  +  z  +  w  =  a, 

x+y  +  z  =  s2,y  +  z  +  w  =  t2,  z  +  w  +  x-u2, 

v.  21.  X2y2z2  +  x2  =  u2,  x2fz2+y2  =  v*t  x2y2z2 +  z2  =  w2. 

v.  22.  X2y2z2-x2  =  u2,  X2y2z2-y2^zr',  x2y2z2- z2  =  u?. 

v.  23.  x2- x2fz2  =  u\  y2 - x2y2z2  =  z?,  z2- X2y2z2  =  w2. 

v.  24.  y2z2  +  i  =  u\  z2x2  +i=v*,  x2}'2  +  i  =  or8, 

v.  25.  y2z2-i=u2,  z2x2-i=v>,  ^y- i=a<». 

v.  26.      i-y2z2  =  u2,   i-z2x2  =  vi,   i-x2y2  =  ur>. 

v.  27.  y2  +  z2  +  a  =  u 

v.  28.  y2  +  z2-a  =  u 

v.  30.     mx  +  ny=u2, 

Lemma  2  to  vi.  12.     ax2  +  fr  =  u'2     (where  a  +  ^  =  ^). 

Lemma  to  vi.  1 5,        ax2  -t>  =  u2    (where  ad2  -  b  =  r  is  known) 


CONSPECTUS   OF  ARITHMETICA  265 

[m.  15].     xy  +  x+y  =  u2,  x+i=(y+i). 
-  =  -~z 


[in.  16].     xy  -  (x  +y)  =  u\  x-i=~z(y-  i). 


1  «2/ 

[iv.  32].     *+i  =  -i(*-i). 

[v.  2 1].     x2  +  i  =  u2,  y2  +  i  =  v*,  z2  +  i  =  w2. 

Indeterminate  analysis  of  the  third  degree, 
iv.    3.     xzy  =  u,  xy  =  u3. 


(iv.    6.     *3 
I  iv.     7.     x3 


iv.  8.  x  +ys  =  u3,  x+y  =  u 
iv.  9.  x  +y3  =  u,  x+y  =  u3 
iv.  10.  x3+y3  —  x+y 


j  iv.  ii.     «•->•  =  * --y^  the  same  m 

UV.   12.      3?+y  =}r  +  X) 


Really  reducible  to  second 
degree. 


iv.  1 8. 

iv.  24.     x+y  =  a,  xy  =  tf  —  u. 

iv.  25.     x+y  +  z  =  a,  xyz  =  {(x-y)  +  (x-z)  +  (y-z)}3     (x>y>z). 
(iv.  26. 
tiv.  27. 

iv.  28. 


iv.  38.  (x+y  +  z)x=-%u(u+  i), 

v.  15.  (x  +y  +  z)3  +  x  =  u3,  (x+y  +  sf+y^v3,  (x  +y  4-  z)3  -f  z  = 

v.  16.  (x+y  +  z)3-x  =  u3,  (x+y  +  zy-y  =  i?,  (x  +y  +  z)3  -  z  = 

v.  17.  x-(x+y  +  z)3  =  u*,  y-(x+y  +  z)3  =  v>,  z-(x+y  +  z)3  = 

v.  18.  x+y  +  z  =  t2,  (x+y  +  z)3  +  x  =  u2,  (x+y  +  z)3+y  =  v>, 

(x  +y  +  z) 

v.  19.  x+y  +  z  =  t\  (x+y  +  z)3-x  =  u2,  (x  +  y  +  z)3  -y  =  v>, 


v.iga.  x+y  +  z  =  f2,  x-(x+y  +  z)3  =  u\  y  -  (x  +y  +  z)3  =  v*, 
v.igb.   x+y  +  z  =  a,  (x  +y  +  z)3  +  x  = 


(x  +y  +  z)3 

z  =  a,  (x  +y  +  z)3  -  x  =  u\ 


v.  20.     x  +  y  +  z  =  -  ,  x  -  (x  +  y  +  z)3  =  u2,  y  -  (x  +  y  +  z)3  =  tf, 


[iv.  8].     x-y=i, 
[iv.  9,  10].     x?+ 


266  CONSPECTUS   OF   ARITHMETICA 

[v.  15].     x3  +/  +  z3  -  3  =  u\ 
[v.  1 6].     3  -  (x3  +y  +  z3)  =  u2. 
[v.  1 7].     x3  +y  +  z3  +  3  =  u2. 

Indeterminate  analysis  of  the  fourth  degree. 
v.  29.     x4  +y*  +  z4  =  u2. 
[v.  1 8].     x2  +y2  +  z2  —  3  =  u4. 

Problems  of  constructing  right-angled  triangles  with  sides  in  rational 
numbers  and  satisfying  various  other  conditions. 

[N.B.  I  shall  use  x,  y  for  the  perpendicular  sides  and  z  for  the 
hypotenuse  in  all  cases,  so  that  the  condition  x2  +y2  =  z2  must  be  under- 
stood to  apply  in  every  case  in  addition  to  the  other  conditions  specified.] 

Lemma  to  v.  7.     xy  —  x1y1  =  xaya. 
fvi.     i.     z  —  x  =  u3,  z—y  =  v*. 
Ivi.    2.     z  +  x  =  tt3,  z+y  —  i^. 
j  vi.    3.     \xy  +  a  =  u2. 
JVI.    4.     %xy-a  =  u2. 
I VI.     5.     a-^xy  =  u2. 
fvi.    6.     %xy  +  x  =  a. 
tvi.     7.     \xy-x-a. 
fvi.    8.     \xy  +  (x  +y)  -  a. 
tvi.    9.     \xy-(x+y)  =  a. 
fvi.  10.     %xy  +  (x  +  z)  =  a. 
tvi.  ii.     \xy  -  (x  +  z)  =  a. 

Lemma  i  to  vi.  12.     x  =  u2,  x-y  =  v2,   *xy  +  y  =  w2. 

(VI.    12. 

tvi.  13. 
fvi.  14. 
tvi.  15. 

vi.  1 6.  £  +  i)  = 
fvi.  17.  \xy  +  z 
tvi.  1 8.  \xy-\-z 

(vi.  1 9.     \xy  +  x  =  u2,  x  +y  +  z  =  v*. 
(vi.  20.     ^xy  +  x  =  j^,  x+y  +  z  —  v2. 
(vi.  21.     x  +y  +  2  =  u2,  \xy  +  (x  +y  +  z)  -  v3, 
tvi.  22.     x+y  +  z  =  u3,  \xy  +  (x  +  y  +  z)  =  v2. 

vi.  23.     z2  =  u2  +  u,  z2/x  = 

vi.  24,  z  =  u3  +  u,  x-n3 
[vi.  6,  7].  (\x}2  +  ^mxy  = 
[vi.  8,  9]. 

[vi.  10,  n],     {|  (z  +  x)}2  +  \rnxy  =  u2. 
[vi.  12].    y  +  (x-y).%xy  =  u\  x  =  v2     (x>y). 
[vi.  14,  15].     u2zx  -  %xy .  x  (z  -  x)  =  ir     («2<or> 


SUPPLEMENT 

ADDITIONAL  NOTES,  THEOREMS  AND  PROBLEMS  BY  FERMAT, 
TO  WHICH  ARE  ADDED  SOME  SOLUTIONS  BY  EULER 

I  HAVE  generally  referred  to  the  notes  of  Ferrnat,  and  allied  propositions 
of  his,  on  the  particular  problems  of  Diophantus  which  were  the  occasion 
of  such  notes,  illustrations  or  extensions ;  but  there  are  some  cases  where 
the  notes  would  have  been  of  disproportionate  length  to  give  in  the  places 
where  they  occur.  Again,  some  further  explanations  and  additional 
theorems  and  problems  given  by  Fermat  are  not  in  the  notes  to  Diophantus 
but  elsewhere,  namely  in  his  correspondence  or  in  the  Doctrinae  Analyticae 
Inventum  Novum  of  Jacques  de  Billy  "  based  on  various  letters  sent  to 
him  from  time  to  time  by  Pierre  de  Fermat "  and  originally  included  at  the 
beginning  of  the  2nd  (1670)  edition  of  Bachet's  Diophantus  (the  Inrentum 
Novum  is  also  published,  in  a  free  French  translation  by  Tannery,  in 
Oeurres  de  Fermat,  Vol.  in.  pp.  323-398).  Some  of  these  theorems  and 
problems  are  not  so  closely  connected  with  particular  problems  in  Dio- 
phantus as  to  suggest  that  they  should  be  given  as  notes  in  one  place 
rather  than  another.  In  these  circumstances  it  seemed  best  to  collect  the 
additional  matter  at  the  end  of  the  book  by  way  of  Supplement. 

In  the  chapter  on  the  Porisms  and  other  assumptions  in  Diophantus 
(pp.  106-110  above)  I  quoted  some  famous  propositions  of  Fermat  on  the 
subject  of  numbers  which  are  the  sums  of  two,  three  or  four  square  numbers 
respectively.  The  first  section  of  this  Supplement  shall  be  devoted  to 
completing,  so  far  as  possible,  the  story  of  Fermat's  connexion  with  these 
theorems. 


SECTION   I. 

ON    NUMBERS    SEPARABLE    INTO    INTEGRAL   SQUARES. 

As  already  noted,  Fermat  enunciated,  on  Diophantus  iv.  29,  a  very 
general  theorem  of  which  one  part  states  that  Every  number  is  either  a 
square  or  the  sum  of  /wo,  three  or  four  squares.  We  shall  return  to  this 
later,  and  shall  begin  with  the  case  of  numbers  which  are  the  sum  of 
two  squares. 


268  SUPPLEMENT 

i.     On  numbers  which  are  the  sum  of  two  squares. 

I  may  repeat  the  beginning  of  the  note  on  in.  19  already  quoted  (p.  106). 

"  A  prime  number  of  the  form  4^+1  is  the  hypotenuse  of  a  right-angled 
triangle  in  one  way  only,  its  square  is  so  in  two  ways,  its  cube  in  three,  its 
biquadrate  in  four  ways,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum. 

"  The  same  prime  number  472+1  and  its  square  are  the  sum  of  two 
squares  in  one  way  only,  its  cube  and  its  biquadrate  in  two  ways,  its  fifth 
and  sixth  powers  in  three  ways,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum. 

"  If  a  prime  number  which  is  the  sum  of  two  squares  be  multiplied  into 
another  prime  number  which  is  also  the  sum  of  two  squares,  the  product 
will  be  the  sum  of  two  squares  in  two  ways ;  if  the  first  prime  be  multiplied 
into  the  square  of  the  second  prime,  the  product  will  be  the  sum  of  two 
squares  in  three  ways  ;  if  the  first  prime  be  multiplied  into  the  cube  of  the 
second,  the  product  will  be  the  sum  of  two  squares  in  four  ways,  and  so  on 
ad  infinitum." 

Before  proceeding  further  with  this  remarkable  note,  it  is  natural  to 
ask  how  Fermat  could  possibly  have  proved  the  general  proposition  that 
(a)  Every  prime  number  of  the  form  4^+1  is  the  sum  of  two  square 
numbers,  which  was  actually  proved  by  Euler1.  Fortunately  we  have 
in  this  case  a  clear  statement  by  Fermat  himself  of  the  line  which  his 
argument  took.  In  his  "  Relation  des  nouvelles  decouvertes  en  la  science 
des  nombres"  sent  by  Fermat  to  Carcavi  and  shortly  after  (14  August, 
1659)  communicated  by  the  latter  to  Huygens,  Fermat  begins  by  a  refer- 
ence to  his  method  of  proof  by  indefinite  diminution  (descente  infinie  or 
indefinie)  and  proceeds2  thus:  "I  was  a  long  time  before  I  was  able  to 
apply  my  method  to  affirmative  questions  because  the  way  and  manner 
of  getting  at  them  is  much  more  difficult  than  that  which  I  employ  with 
negative  theorems.  So  much  so  that,  when  I  had  to  prove  that  every 
prime  number  of  the  form  4^+1  is  made  up  of  two  squares,  I  found  myself 
in  a  pretty  fix.  But  at  last  a  certain  reflection  many  times  repeated  gave 
me  the  necessary  light,  and  affirmative  questions  yielded  to  my  method, 
with  the  aid  of  some  new  principles  by  which  sheer  necessity  compelled  me 
to  supplement  it.  This  development  of  my  argument  in  the  case  of  these 
affirmative  questions  takes  the  following  line  :  if  a  prime  number  of  the 
form  4«  +  i  selected  at  random  is  not  made  up  of  two  squares,  there  will 
exist  another  prime  number  of  the  same  sort  but  less  than  the  given 
number,  and  again  a  third  still  smaller  and  so  on,  descending  ad  infinitum, 
until  you  arrive  at  the  number  5  which  is  the  smallest  of  all  numbers  of 

1  Novi   Commentarii    Academiae   Petropolitanae   1752    and    1753,    Vol.    iv.    (1758), 
pp.    3-40,    1754   and    1755,    Vol.    v.   (1760),    pp.    $-cfi=Co»imentationes   arithmetics 
colledae,  1849,  I.  pp.  155-173  and  pp.  210-233. 

2  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  p.  432. 


THEOREMS  AND  PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  269 

the  kind  in  question  and  which  the  argument  would  require  not  to  be  made 
up  of  two  squares,  although,  in  fact,  it  is  so  made  up.  From  which  we 
are  obliged  to  infer,  by  reductio  ad  absurdum,  that  all  numbers  of  the  kind 
in  question  are  in  consequence  made  up  of  two  squares." 

The  rest  of  the  note  to  Diophantus  in.  19  is  as  follows. 

"  From  this  consideration  it  is  easy  to  deduce  a  solution  of  the  problem 

"  To  find  in  how  many  ways  a  given  number  can  be  the  hypotenuse  of 
a  right-angled  triangle. 

"Take  all  the  primes  of  the  form  4^  +  i,  e.g.  5,  13,  17,  which  measure 
the  given  number. 

"If  powers  of  these  primes  measure  the  given  number,  set  out  the 
exponents  of  the  powers ;  e.g.  let  the  given  number  be  measured  by  the 
cube  of  5,  the  square  of  13,  and  by  17  itself  but  no  other  power  of  17; 
and  set  out  the  exponents  in  order,  as  3,  2,  i. 

"  Take  now  the  product  of  the  first  of  these  and  twice  the  second,  and 
add  to  the  product  the  sum  of  the  first  and  second  :  this  gives  1 7.  Multiply 
this  by  twice  the  third  exponent  and  add  to  the  product  the  sum  of  17  and 
the  third  exponent :  this  gives  52,  which  is  the  number  of  the  different  right- 
angled  triangles  which  have  the  given  number  for  hypotenuse.  [If  a,  b,  c  be 
the  exponents,  the  number  of  the  triangles  is  ^abc  +  2  (be  +  ca  +  ab]  +  a  +  b  +  c.] 
We  proceed  similarly  whatever  the  number  of  divisors  and  exponents. 

"  Other  prime  factors  which  are  not  of  the  form  4«  +  i,  and  their 
powers,  do  not  increase  or  diminish  the  number  of  the  right-angled  triangles 
which  have  the  given  hypotenuse. 

"  PROBLEM  i.  To  find  a  number  which  is  a  hypotenuse  in  any  assigned 
number  of  ways. 

"Let  the  given  number  of  times  be  7.  We  double  7  :  this  gives  14. 
Add  i,  which  makes  15.  Then  seek  all  the  prime  numbers  which  measure 
it,  i.e.  3  and  5.  Next  subtract  i  from  each  and  bisect  the  remainders. 
This  gives  i  and  2.  [In  explanation  of  the  process  it  is  only  necessary  to 
observe  that,  for  example,  2  \\abc +  2  (bc  +  ca  +  ab)  +  a  +  b  +  c]  +  i  is  equal 
to  (2a  +  i)(2£  +  i)(2c+  i),  and  so  on.]  Now  choose  as  many  prime 
numbers  of  the  form  4^  +  i  as  there  are  numbers  in  the  result  just  arrived 
at,  i.e.  in  this  case  two.  Give  to  these  primes  the  exponents  i,  2  re- 
spectively and  multiply  the  results,  i.e.  take  one  of  the  primes  and  multiply 
it  into  the  square  of  the  other. 

"  It  is  clear  from  this  that  it  is  easy  to  find  the  smallest  number  which 
is  the  hypotenuse  of  a  right-angled  triangle  in  a  given  number  of  ways." 

[Fermat  illustrates  the  above  further  in  a  letter  of  25  December  1640 
to  Mersenne1. 

To  find  a  number  which  is  the  hypotenuse  of  367  different  right-angled 
triangles  and  no  more. 

1  Oenvres  de  Fermat,  II.  pp.  214  sq. 


270 


SUPPLEMENT 


Double  the  number  and  add  i  ;  this  gives  735.  Take  all  the  divisors 
which  are  prime  numbers :  these  are  3,  5,  7,  7.  Subtract  i  from  each  and 
then  divide  by  2  ;  this  gives  i,  2,  3,  3.  We  have  then  to  take  four  prime 
numbers  of  the  form  4/2  +  i  and  give  them  i,  2,  3,  3  respectively  as  ex- 
ponents. The  product  of  these  powers  is  the  number  required. 

To  find  the  least  such  number,  we  must  take  the  four  least  primes  of  the 
form  4»  +  i,  i.e.  5,  13,  17,  29,  and  we  must  give  the  smallest  of  them, 
in  order,  the  largest  exponent ;  i.e.  we  must  take  53,  i33,  if  and  29  in  this 
case,  and  the  product  of  these  four  numbers  is  the  least  number  which  is 
the  hypotenuse  of  367  right-angled  triangles  and  no  more. 

If  the  double  of  the  given  number  +  i  is  a  prime  number,  then  there  is 
only  one  possible  divisor.  Suppose  the  given  number  is  20;  the  double 
of  \\.plus  i  is  41.  Subtracting  unity  and  bisecting,  we  have  20,  so  that  the 
number  to  be  taken  is  some  prime  number  of  the  form  4«  +  i  to  the  power 
of  20.] 

"  PROBLEM  2.  To  find  a  number  which  shall  be  the  sum  of  two  squares 
in  any  assigned  number  of  ways. 

"  Let  the  given  number  be  10.  Its  double  is  20,  which,  when  separated 
into  its  prime  factors,  is  2.2.5.  Subtract  i  from  each,  leaving  i,  i,  4. 
Take  three  different  prime  numbers  of  the  form  4^+1,  say  5,  13,  17,  and 
multiply  the  biquadrate  of  one  (the  exponent  being  4)  by  the  product 
of  the  other  two.  The  result  is  the  required  number. 

"By  means  of  this  it  is  easy  to  rind  the  smallest  number  which  is  the 
sum  of  two  squares  in  a  given  number  of  ways. 

"  In  order  to  solve  the  converse  problem, 

"  To  find  in  how  many  ways  a  given  number  is  the  sum  of  two  squares, 
"let  the  given  number  be  325.  The  prime  factors  of  the  form  4«  +  i 
contained  in  this  number  are  5,  13,  the  latter  being  so  contained  once  only, 
the  former  to  the  second  power.  Set  out  the  exponents  2,  i.  Multiply 
them  and  add  to  the  product  the  sum  of  the  two :  this  gives  5.  Add  i, 
making  6,  and  take  the  half  of  this,  namely  3.  This  is  the  number  of  ways 
in  which  325  is  the  sum  of  two  squares. 

"If  there  were  three  exponents,  as  2,  2,  i,  we  should  proceed  thus. 
Take  the  product  of  the  first  two  and  add  it  to  their  sum  :  this  gives  8. 
Multiply  8  into  the  third  and  add  the  product  to  the  sum  of  8  and  the 
third:  this  gives  17.  Add  i,  making  18,  and  take  half  of  this  or  9.  This 
is  the  number  of  ways  in  which  the  number  taken  in  this  second  case  is 
the  sum  of  two  squares.  [If  a,  b,  c  be  the  three  exponents,  the  number 
of  ways  is  \  {abc  +  (be  +  ca  +  ab]  +  (a  +  b  +  c)  +  i }  provided  that  the  number 
represented  by  this  expression  is  an  integer.] 

"If  the  last  number  which  has  to  be  bisected  should  be  odd,  we 
must  subtract  i  and  take  half  the  remainder. 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS  BY  FERMAT  271 

"  But  suppose  we  are  next  given  the  following  problem  to  solve : 

"To  find  a  whole  number  which,  when  a  given  number  is  added  to  it, 
becomes  a  square,  and  which  is  the  hypotenuse  of  any  assigned  number  of 
right-angled  triangles. 

"  This  is  difficult.  Suppose  e.g.  that  a  number  has  to  be  found  which 
is  a  hypotenuse  in  two  ways  and  which,  when  2  is  added  to  it,  becomes 
a  square. 

"  The  required  number  will  be  2023,  and  there  are  an  infinite  number 
of  others  with  the  same  property,  as  3362  etc." 


2.     On  numbers  which  cannot  be  the  sum  of  two  squares. 

In  his  note  on  Diophantus  v.  9  Fermat  took  up  a  remark  of  Bachet's 
to  the  effect  that  he  believes  it  to  be  impossible  to  divide  21  into  two 
squares  because  "  it  is  neither  a  square  nor  by  its  nature  made  up  of  two 
squares."  Fermat's  note  was:  "The  number  21  cannot  be  divided  into 
two  squares  (even)  in  fractions.  That  I  can  easily  prove.  And  generally 
a  number  divisible  by  3  which  is  not  also  divisible  by  9  cannot  be  divided 
into  two  squares  either  integral  or  fractional" 

He  discusses  the  matter  more  generally  in  a  letter  of  August  1640 
to  Roberval1. 

"I  have  made  a  discovery  a  propos  of  the  i2th  [gth]  proposition  of 
the  fifth  Book  of  Diophantus  (that  on  which  I  have  supplied  what  Bachet 
confesses  that  he  did  not  know  and  at  the  same  time  restored  the  corrupted 
text,  a  story  too  long  to  develop  here).  I  need  only  enunciate  to  you  my 
theorem,  while  reminding  you  that  I  proved  some  time  ago  that 

"A  number  of  the  form  qn  —  i  is  neither  a  square  nor  the  sum  of  two 
squares,  either  in  integers  or  fractions." 

[This  proposition  was  sent  by  Mersenne  to  Descartes,  on  22  March 
1638,  as  having  been  proved  by  Fermat] 

"  For  the  time  I  rested  there,  although  there  are  many  numbers  of  the 
form  4«  +  i  which  are  not  squares  or  the  sums  of  squares  either,  e.g.  21, 
33»  77>  etc->  a  fact  which  made  Bachet  say  on  the  proposed  division  of  21 
into  two  squares  'It  is,  I  believe,  impossible  since  21  is  neither  a  square 
nor  by  its  nature  made  up  of  two  squares,'  where  the  word  rear  (I  think) 
clearly  shows  that  he  was  not  aware  of  the  proof  of  the  impossibility. 
This  1  have  at  last  discovered  and  comprehended  in  the  following  general 
proposition. 

"  If  a  gi^n  number  is  divided  by  the  greatest  square  which  measures  it, 
and  the  quotient  is  measured  by  a  prime  number  of  the  form  4*1-1,  the  given 
number  is  neither  a  square  nor  the  sum  of  two  squares  either  integral  or 
fractional. 

1  Oftevres  de  Fermat,  II.  pp.  203-4. 


272  SUPPLEMENT 

"  EXAMPLE.  Let  the  given  number  be  84.  The  greatest  square  which 
measures  it  is  4,  and  the  quotient  is  21  which  is  measured  by  3  or  by 
7,  both  3  and  7  being  of  the  form  4^-1.  I  say  that  84  is  neither  a  square 
nor  the  sum  of  two  squares  either  integral  or  fractional. 

"Let  the  given  number  be  77.  The  greatest  square  which  measures  it 
is  i,  and  the  quotient  is  77  which  is  here  the  same  as  the  given  number 
and  is  measured  by  u  or  by  7,  each  of  these  numbers  being  of  the  form 
4#— i.  I  say  that  77  is  neither  a  square  nor  the  sum  of  two  squares, 
either  in  integers  or  fractions. 

"  I  confess  to  you  frankly  that  I  have  found  nothing  in  the  theory  of 
numbers  which  has  pleased  me  so  much  as  the  proof  of  this  proposition, 
and  I  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  try  to  discover  it,  if  only  for  the  purpose 
of  showing  me  whether  I  think  more  of  my  discovery  than  it  deserves. 

"  Following  on  this  I  have  proved  the  following  proposition,  which 
is  of  assistance  in  the  finding  of  prime  numbers. 

11  If  a  number  is  the  sum  of  two  squares  prime  to  one  another,  I  say 
that  it  cannot  be  divided  by  any  prime  mtmber  of  the  form  ^n  —  i. 

"For  example,  add  i,  if  you  will,  to  an  even  square,  say  the  square 
10  ooo  ooo  ooo,  making  10000000001.  I  say  that  10000000001  cannot 
be  divided  by  any  prime  number  of  the  form  4//  —  i,  and  accordingly, 
when  you  would  try  whether  it  is  a  prime  number,  you  need  not  divide  by 
3,  7,  ii  etc." 

(The  theorem  that  Numbers  which  are  the  sum  of  two  squares  prime  to 
one  another  have  no  divisors  except  such  as  are  likewise  the  sum  of  two  squares 
was  proved  by  Euler1.) 

3.     Numbers  (i)  which  are  always,  (2)  which  can  never  be,  the  sum 
of  three  squares. 

(i)  The  number  which  is  double  of  any  prime  number  of  the  form 
8«-  i  is  the  sum  of  three  squares  (Letter  to  Kenelm  Digby  of  June  i658)2. 

E.g.  the  numbers  7,  23,  31,  47  etc.  are  primes  of  the  form  8n—  i ;  the 
doubles  are  14,  46,  62,  94  etc. ;  and  the  latter  numbers  are  the  sums  of 
three  squares. 

Fermat  adds  "  I  assert  that  this  proposition  is  true,  though  I  do  so  in 
the  manner  of  Conon,  an  Archimedes  not  having  yet  arisen  to  assert  it 
or  prove  it." 

Lagrange3  remarks  that  he  has  not  yet  been  able  to  prove  the  pro- 
position completely.  The  form  8«  —  i  reduces  to  one  or  other  of  the  three 

1  Novi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petropol.   1752  and   1753,  Vol.   IV.  (1758),  pp.  3-40  = 
Commentationes  arithmeticae,  I.  pp.  155-173. 

2  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  II.  pp.  402  sqq. 

3  "Recherches   d'Arithmetique"   in    Berlin   Mtmoires    1773  and   1 775  =  Oeuvres  de 
Lagrange,  III.  p.  795. 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  273 

forms  24n  -  i,  24/2  +  7,  24;*  +  15,  of  which  the  first  two  only  are  primes. 
Lagrange  had  previously  proved  that  every  prime  number  of  the  form 
24«  +  7  is  of  the  form  x2  +  6y>.  The  double  of  this  is  2x2  +  1 2/,  and 


that  is,  2x*  +  i2/2  is  the  sum  of  three  squares. 

The  theorem  was  thus  proved  for  prime  numbers  of  the  form  Bn  -  i, 
wherever  n  is  not  a  multiple  of  3,  but  not  for  prime  numbers  of  the  form 
2472  —  i. 

Legendre1,  however,  has  the  theorem  that  Every  number  which  is  the 
double  of  an  odd  number  is  the  sum  of  three  squares. 

(2)  No  number  of  the  form  24/2+  7  or  \m  (z^n  +  7)  can  be  the  sum 
of  three  squares. 

This  theorem  is  substantially  stated  in  Fermat's  note  on  Dioph.  v.  n. 
We  may,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  substitute  for  the  forms  which  he  gives  the 
forms  8/2  +  7  and  4'"  (8n  +  7)  respectively. 

Legendre2  proved  that  numbers  of  the  form  Sn  +  7  are  the  only  odd 
numbers  which  are  not  the  sum  of  three  squares. 

4.     Every  number  is  either  a  square  or  the  sum  of  two,  three  or 
four  squares. 

This  theorem  is  also  mentioned  in  the  "  Relation  des  nouvelles  de- 
couvertes  en  la  science  des  nombres  "  already  quoted,  as  a  case  to  which 
Fermat  ultimately  found  himself  able  to  apply  the  method  of  proof  by 
descente.  He  says3  that  there  are  some  other  problems  which  require  new 
principles  in  order  to  enable  the  method  of  descente  to  be  applied,  and  the 
discovery  of  such  new  principles  is  sometimes  so  difficult  that  they  cannot 
be  arrived  at  except  after  very  great  trouble. 

"  Such  is  the  following  question  which  Bachet  on  Diophantus  admits 
that  he  could  never  prove,  and  as  to  which  Descartes  in  one  of  his  letters 
makes  the  same  statement,  going  so  far  as  to  admit  that  he  regards  it  as 
so  difficult  that  he  does  not  see  any  means  of  solving  it. 

"Every  number  is  a  square  or  the  sum  of  two,  three  or  four  squares. 

"  I  have  at  last  brought  this  under  my  method,  and  I  prove  that,  if 
a  given  number  were  not  of  this  nature,  there  would  exist  a  number  smaller 
than  it  which  would  not  be  so  either,  and  again  a  third  number  smaller 
than  the  second,  etc.  ad  infinitum ;  whence  we  infer  that  all  numbers  are 
of  the  nature  indicated." 

In  another  place  (letter  to  Pascal  of  25  September,  i654)4,  after  quoting 
the  more  general  proposition,  including  the  above,  that  every  number  is 

1  Legendre,  Zahlentheorie,  tr.  Maser,  I.  p.  387. 

2  Ibid.  p.  386. 

3  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  p.  433. 

4  Ibid.  p.  313. 

H.  n.  18 


274  SUPPLEMENT 

made  up  (i)  of  one,  two,  or  three  triangles,  (2)  of  one,  two,  three  or  four 
squares,  (3)  of  one,  two,  three,  four  or  five  pentagons,  and  so  on  adinfinitum, 
Fermat  adds  that  "  to  arrive  at  this  it  is  necessary — 

1 i )  To  prove  that  every  prime  number  of  the  form  4^+1  is  the  sum 
of  two  squares,  e.g.  5,  13,  17,  29,  37,  etc. ; 

(2)  Given  a  prime  number  of  the  form  4^+1,  as  53,  to  find,  by  a 
general  rule,  the  two  squares  of  which  it  is  the  sum. 

(3)  Every  prime  number  of  the  form  3^+1  is  of  the  form  x2  +  3jr, 
e.g.  7,  13,  19,  31,  37,  etc. 

(4)  Every  prime  number  of  the  form  8n  +  i  or  8>n  +  3  ts  of  the  form 
x*+2y2,  e.g.  n,  17,  19,  41,  43.  etc- 

(5)  There  is  no  rational  right-angled  triangle  in  whole  numbers  the 
area  of  which  is  a  square. 

"This  will  lead  to  the  discovery  of  many  propositions  which  Bachet 
admits  to  have  been  unknown  to  him  and  which  are  wanting  in  Diophantus. 

"  I  am  persuaded  that,  when  you  have  become  acquainted  with  my 
method  of  proof  in  this  kind  of  proposition,  you  will  think  it  beautiful,  and 
it  will  enable  you  to  make  many  new  discoveries,  for  it  is  necessary,  as  you 
know,  that  multi pertranseant  ut  augeatur  scientia  [Bacon]." 

Propositions  (3)  and  (4)  will  be  mentioned  again,  and  a  full  account 
will  be  given  in  Section  in.  of  this  Supplement  of  Fermat's  method,  or 
methods,  of  proving  (5). 

The  main  theorem  now  in  question  that  every  integral  number  is  the 
sum  of  four  or  fewer  squares  was  attacked  by  Euler  in  the  paper1  (1754— 
1755)  in  which  he  finally  proved  the  proposition  (i)  above  about  primes 
of  the  form  4/2  +  i ;  but,  though  he  obtained  important  results,  he  did  not 
then  succeed  in  completing  the  proof.  Lagrange  followed  up  Euler's 
results  and  finally  established  the  proposition  in  i77o2.  Euler  returned 
to  the  subject  in  1772  ;  he  found  Lagrange's  proof  long  and  difficult,  and 
set  himself  to  simplify  it3. 

(The  rest  of  the  more  general  theorem  of  Fermat  quoted  above,  the 
portion  of  it,  that  is,  which  relates  to  numbers  as  the  sum  of  n  or  fewer 
n-gonal  numbers,  was  proved  by  Cauchy4.) 

1  Novi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petropol.  for   1754-5,  Vol.   V.   (1760),   pp.   3-58=  Cow- 
mentatioiies  arithmeticae  collcctae,   1849,   *•   PP-   2IO~233- 

2  Nouveanx  Memoires  de  V Acad.  Koy.  des  Sciences  de  Berlin,  annee  1770,  Berlin  1772, 
pp.   123-133=  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange,  in.  pp.    187-201:    cf.   Wertheim's  account  in  his 
Diophantus,  pp.  324-330. 

3  "  Novae  demonstrationes  circa  resolutionem  numerorum  in  quadrata,"  Acta  Erudit. 
Lips.  1773,  p.  193;  Acta  Petrop.  I.  II.  1775,  p.  48;   Comment,  arithm.  I.  pp.  538-548. 

4  Cauchy,  "Demonstration  du  theoreme  general  dc  Fermat  sur  les  nombres  polygones," 
Oeuvres,  iie  Serie,  Vol.  vi.  pp.  320-353.     See  also  Legendre,  Zahletitheorie,  tr.  Maser, 
n.  pp.  332-343- 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  275 

Under  this  heading  may  be  added  the  further  proposition  that 

"  Any  number  whatever  of  the  form  8«  -  i  can  only  be  represented  as  the 

sum  of  four  squares^  not  only  in  integers  (as  others  may  have  seen)  but  .in 

fractions  also,  as  I  promise  that  I  will  prove1." 

5.     On  numbers  of  the  forms  x?+2y*,  x*  +  3^,  y*  +  5^*  respectively. 
(i)     Every  prime  number  of  the  form  8»  +  i  or  Sn  +  3  is  of  the  form 

X*+2f. 

This  is  one  of  the  theorems  enunciated  in  the  letter  of  25  Sept.,  1654, 
to  Pascal2  and  also  in  the  letter  of  June,  1658,  to  Kenelm  Digby3. 

[In  a  paper  of  1754  Euler  says  that  he  does  not  yet  see  his  way  to 
prove  either  part  of  the  theorem4.  In  1759  he  says5  he  can  prove  the 
truth  of  the  theorem  for  a  prime  number  of  the  form  Sn  +  i,  but  not  for 
a  prime  of  the  form  Bn  +  3.  Later,  however,  he  proved  it  for  prime 
numbers  of  both  forms6.  Lagrange7  also  proved  it  for  primes  of  the  form 


(2)  Every  prime  number  of  the  form  $n  +  i   is  of  the  form  x?  +  3^. 
The  theorem  is  stated  in  the  same  two  letters  to  Pascal  and   Digby 

respectively. 

Lagrange  naturally  quotes  it  as  "All  prime  numbers  of  the  form  6«+  i 
are  of  the  form  x*  +  3^,"  for  of  course  yi  +  i  is  not  a  prime  number  unless 
n  is  even. 

The  proposition  was  proved  by  Euler8.  Lagrange  proved9  (a)  that  all 
prime  numbers  of  the  form  i2#  —  5  are  of  the  form  x*  +  3^,  (b)  that  all 
prime  numbers  of  the  form  \zn—  i  are  of  the  form  3^—  }?,  and  (c)  that 
all  prime  numbers  of  the  form  i2«+  i  are  of  both  the  forms  ^  +  3^  and 
**-3/. 

(3)  No  number  of  the  form  3^-1  can  be  of  the  form  c?  +  3^*. 

In  the  "Relation  des  nouvelles  de'couvertes  en  la  science  des  nombres10" 
Fermat  says  that  this  was  one  of  the  negative  propositions  which  he  proved 
by  his  method  of  descente, 

1  Letter  to  Mersenne  of  Sept.  or  Oct.  1636,  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  II.  p.  66. 

2  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  II.  p.  313. 

3  Ibid.  II.  p.  403. 

4  "  Specimen  de  usu  observationum  in  mathesi  pura  (De  numeris  formae  2aa  +  bb)"  in 
Novi   Commentarii  Acad.    Petrop.    1756-7,   Vol.   VI.    (1761),    pp.    185-2  30  ^Comment. 
arithm.  I.  pp.    174-192. 

5  Nmi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petrop.  1760-1,  Vol.  vill.  (1763).  PP-  "6-8=  Comment. 
arithm.  I.  p.  296. 

6  Commentationes  arithmetics,  II.  p.  607. 

7  "  Recherches  d'Arithmetique  "  in  Ofuvres  de  Lagrange,  III.  pp.  776,  784. 

8  "  Supplementum  quorundam  theorematum  arithmeticorum,  quae  in  nonnullis  de- 
monstrationibus  supponuntur  (De  numeris  formae  aa  +  $bb)"  in  Novi  Commetit.  Acad. 
P^trop.  1760-1,  Vol.  VIII.  (1763),  pp.  105-1  28  =  Comment.  arithm.  I.  pp.  287-296. 

9  Op.  fit.,  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange,  III.  pp.  784,  791. 

10  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  p.  431. 

18—  2 


276  SUPPLEMENT 

(4)  If  two  prime  numbers  ending  in  either  3  o  r  7  which  are  also  of  the 
form  4«  +  3  are  multiplied  together,  the  product  is  of  the  form  x2  +  $y2. 

This  theorem  also  is  enunciated  in  the  letter  of  June,  1658,  to  Kenelm 
Digby.  Fermat  instances  3,  7,  23,  43,  47,  67  etc.  as  numbers  of  the  kind 
indicated.  Take,  he  says,  two  of  these,  e.g.  7  and  23.  The  product  161 
will  be  the  sum  of  a  square  and  5  times  another  square,  namely  81  +  5.16. 

He  admits,  however,  that  he  has  not  yet  proved  the  theorem  generally  : 
"  I  assert  that  this  theorem  is  true  generally,  and  I  am  only  waiting  for 
a  proof  of  it.  Moreover  the  square  of  each  of  the  said  numbers  is  the  sum  of 
a  square  and  5  times  another  square  :  this,  too,  I  should  like  to  see  proved." 

Lagrange  proved  this  theorem  also1.  He  observes  that  the  numbers 
described  are  either  of  the  form  20/2  +  3  or  of  the  form  20/2+7,  and  he 
proves  that  all  prime  numbers  of  these  forms  are  necessarily  of  the  form 
2x?  ±  2xy  +  3_y2.  He  has  then  only  to  prove  that  the  product  of  two 
numbers  of  the  latter  form  is  of  the  form  x2  +  $y2. 

This  is  easy,  for 

=  (2xx  +  xy  +yx'  +  $yy')2  +  5  (xy'  -yx')2. 


6.     Numbers  of  the  forms  x2  -  2y2  and  2x2-y2. 

Fermat's  way  of  expressing  the  fact  that  a  number  is  of  one  of  these 
forms  is  to  say  that  it  is  the  sum  of,  or  the  difference  between,  the  two  smaller 
sides,  i.e.  the  perpendicular  sides,  of  a  right-angled  triangle.  Like  Diophantus, 
he  "  forms  "  a  rational  right-angled  triangle  from  two  numbers  x,  y,  taking 
as  the  three  sides  the  numbers  x2  +  y2,  x2  -y2,  2xy  respectively.  The  sum 
therefore  of  the  perpendicular  sides  is  x2  +  2xy  -y2  or  (x  +y)2  -  2y2,  and 
their  difference  is  either  x2  -  2xy  -y2  or  zxy  -  (x2  -y2),  that  is,  either 
(x-y)2-2y2  or  2y2-(x-y}2. 

The  main  theorem  on  the  subject  of  numbers  of  these  forms  is,  as 
a  matter  of  fact,  contained,  not  in  a  letter  of  Fermat's,  but  in  two  letters 
of  Frenicle  to  Fermat  dated  2nd  August  and  6th  Sept.,  1641,  respectively2. 
It  is,  however,  clear  (cf.  the  letter  in  which  Fermat  had  on  isth  June,  1641, 
propounded  to  Frenicle  a  problem  on  such  numbers)  that  the  theorem  was 
at  any  rate  common  property  between  the  two. 

Frenicle's  two  statements  of  the  theorem  are  as  follows  : 

"  Every  prime  number  of  the  form  8n  ±  i  is  the  sum  of  the  two  smaller 
sides  of  a  (right-angled)  triangle,  and  every  number  which  is  the  sum  of  the 
two  smaller  sides  of  a  (right-angled)  triangle  with  sides  prime  to  one  another 
is  of  the  form  8/2  ±  i." 

"Every  prime  number  of  the  form  8n  ±  i,  or  which  is  the  product 
of  such  prime  numbers  exclusively,  is  the  difference  between  the  two 
smaller  sides  of  an  infinite  number  of  primitive  right-angled  triangles." 

1  Op.  dt.,  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange,  II.  pp.  784,  788-9. 

2  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  \\.  pp.  231,  235. 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  277 

Lagrange 1  quotes  the  theorem  in  the  form 

All  prime  numbers  of  the  form  8n  ±  i  are  of  the  form  y2  -  2/2. 

Lagrange  himself  proves2  that  all  prime  numbers  of  the  form  Sn  -  i  are 
of  both  the  forms  x2  -  2y2  and  2x2  -y2,  and  observes3  that  this  theorem  is  more 
general  than  that  of  Fermat  so  far  as  prime  numbers  of  the  form  Sn  -  i  are 
concerned.  This,  however,  seems  scarcely  correct  if  the  further  explanations 
given  by  Frenicle  are  taken  into  account.  For  Frenicle  shows  clearly, 
in  the  second  of  the  two  letters  referred  to4,  that  he  was  fully  alive  to 
the  fact  that  numbers  which  are  of  the  form  x2  -  zy2  are  also  of  the  form 
2X2  -y2 ;  and  indeed  it  is  obvious  that  he  was  aware  that 
x2  -2y*=2  (x  +yf  -(x+  2y)2. 

Lagrange  proved  in  addition5  that 

Every  prime  number  of  the  form  8«  +  i  is  at  the  same  time  of  the  three 
forms  x2  +  2y2,  x2  -  2y2,  2X2  -y2. 

This  is,  I  think,  really  included  in  Frenicle's  statements  when  combined 
with  Fermat's  theorem  (i)  above  to  the  effect  that  every  prime  number 
of  the  form  Sn  +  i  is  of  the  form  x2  +  2y2. 

The  problem  propounded  by  Fermat  to  Frenicle  in  connexion  with  the 
numbers  now  under  consideration  was: — 

Given  a  number,  to  find  in  how  many  ways  it  can  be  the  sum  of  the  two 
smaller  sides  of  a  right-angled  triangle. 

Frenicle  replied  that  this  involved  also  the  problem  of  finding  a  number 
which  will  be  the  sum  of  the  two  smaller  sides  of  a  right-angled  triangle  in 
an  assigned  number  of  ways  and  no  more,  and  tried,  but  unsuccessfully6, 
to  bring  these  problems  under  a  rule  corresponding  to  that  by  which 
Fermat  found  the  number  of  ways  in  which  a  prime  number  of  the  form 
4/z+  i  can  be  the  hypotenuse  of  a  right-angled  triangle  (see  p.  269  above), 
but  with  a  prime  number  of  the  form  Sn  ±  i  substituted  for  the  prime 
number  of  the  form  4^+1.  I  cannot  find  that  Fermat  ever  communicated 
his  own  solution,  at  all  events  in  the  correspondence  which  we  possess. 

SECTION    II. 

EQUATION    X2  -  Ay2  -  I. 

History  of  the  equation  up  to  Fermat's  time. 

Fermat  was  not  the  first  to  propound,  or  even  to  discover  a  general 
method  of  solving,  the  problem  of  finding  any  number  of  integral  values  of 
x,  y  satisfying  the  above  equation,  wherein  A  is  any  integral  number  not 
a  square.  But  Fermat  rediscovered  the  problem  and  was  perhaps  the  first 

1  Op.  tit.,  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange,  III.  p.  775.  2  Ibid.  p.  784.  3  Ibid.  p.  788. 

4  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  pp.  -235-240. 

5  Op.  cit.,  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange,  III.  p.  790. 

6  See  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  pp.  231,  238  sqq. 


278  SUPPLEMENT 

to  assert  that  the  general  solution  is  always  possible  whatever  be  the 
(non-square)  value  of  A.  The  equation  has  a  history  of  over  2000  years, 
and  that  history,  even  in  outline,  requires,  as  it  has  now  obtained,  a  book 
to  itself.  This  note  will  therefore  be  confined,  practically,  to  recalling,  in 
the  briefest  possible  way,  the  recorded  stages  anterior  to  Fermat,  and  then 
to  setting  out  somewhat  fully  the  passages  in  Fermat's  writings  which  throw 
the  most  light  on  his  connexion  with  the  subject. 

The  Pythagoreans. 

We  have  seen  (p.  117  above)  that  the  Pythagoreans  had  already 
discovered  a  general  solution  of  a  particular  equation  of  this  type,  namely 

»*»-y=±i, 

by  which  all  the  successive  values  of  x,  y  satisfying  the  equation  were 
ascertained.  If  x  =/,  y  =  q  satisfies  the  equation  2X2  —  y~  =  +  i,  they  proved 
that  the  equation  zx2  -y*  =  +  i  is  satisfied  by 


the  equation  2X2  —y*  =  +  i  again  by 

and  so  on.  As  /=  r,  q=  i  satisfies  2x*-y*  -  +  i,  we  have  all  the  suc- 
cessive solutions  of  2x*—yi  =  ±  i  by  forming  (pl,  ^x),  (pz,  q^)  etc.  in  accord- 
ance with  the  law. 

Archimedes. 

The  solution  of  the  above  equation  by  the  Pythagoreans  was  evidently 
used  in  order  to  obtain  successive  approximations  to  ^2. 

Consequently,  when  we  find  Archimedes  giving,  without  explanation,  the 
fractions  fff  anc^  Vs5zr  as  being  approximately  equal  to  ^3,  the  hypothesis  of 
Zeuthen  and  Tannery  that  he  arrived  at  these  approximations  by  obtaining 
successive  solutions  of  equations  of  a  similar  form,  but  with  3  substituted 
for  2,  is  one  of  the  most  natural  that  have  been  suggested2.  The  equations 
are  in  this  case 

XT  —  3_)'2  =  -  2. 

Tannery  shows  how  the  law  for  forming  successive  solutions  of  such 
simple  cases  as  these  can  easily  be  found  when  we  have  found  by  trial 
(which  is  not  difficult)  the  three  simplest  solutions.  If  we  take  the  more 
general  equation 

1  H.  Konen,  Geschichte  der  Gleichung  ft  -  Z?«2=i,  Leipzig  (S.  Hirzel),  1901. 

2  Zeuthen,  "  Nogle  hypotheser  om  Arkhimedes  kvadratrodsberegning,"  Tidsskrift  for 
Mathematik,  vi.  Raekke,  3.  Aargang,  pp.  isosqq.;  P.  Tannery,  "Sur  la  mesure  du  cercle 
d'Archimede"  in  Memoires  de  la  soc.  des  sciences  phys.  et  nat.  de  Bordeaux,  iie  Ser.  iv., 
1882,  p.  303;  see  Giinther,   "Die  quadratischen  Irrationalitaten  der  Alien  und  deren 
Entwickelungsmethoden  "  in  Abhandlungen  zur  Gesch.  der  Mathematik,  Heft  iv.  1882, 
pp.  87-91;  Konen,  op.  cit.  p.  15. 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  279 

of  which  x  =p,  y  =  #isai  known  solution,  and  put 


it  is  sufficient  to  know  the  three  simplest  solutions  in  order  to  find  a,  ft,  y, 
8;  for,  substituting  the  values  of  (p,  q\  (plt  9l)  and  (p2,  ^2)  where  (/„,  ?2) 
are  formed  from  (plt  ^)  by  the  same  law  as  (A,  ^)  are  formed  from  (p,  q], 
we  have  four  simultaneous  equations  in  four  unknown  quantities.  Taking 
the  particular  equation 

*2-3/=i, 

we  easily  find  the  first  three  solutions,  namely  (p=i,g  =  o),  (A  =  2»  ft  =  0 
and  (/2  =  7,  ^2  =  4),  whence 

2=0,  I  -  y, 

"J  —  2a  +  f3,    4  =  2y  +  8, 
and  a  =  2,  /3  =  3,  y  =  i,  8  =  2,  so  that 


But  there  is  evidence  that  Archimedes  dealt  with  much  more  difficult 
equations  of  the  type,  for  (as  stated  above,  p.   123)  the  Cattle-Problem 
attributed  to  him  requires  us  to  solve  in  positive  integers  the  equation 
x2-  4729494^=1. 

There  is  this  difference  between  this  equation  and  the  simpler  ones 
above  that,  while  the  first  solutions  of  the  latter  can  be  found  by  trial, 
the  simplest  solution  of  this  equation  cannot,  so  that  some  general  method, 
e.g.  that  of  continued  fractions,  is  necessary  to  find  even  the  least  solution 
in  integers.  Whether  Archimedes  was  actually  able  to  solve  this  particular 
equation  is  a  question  on  which  there  is  difference  of  opinion  ;  Tannery 
thought  it  not  impossible,  but,  as  the  smallest  values  of  x,  y  satisfying  the 
equation  have  46  and  41  digits  respectively,  we  may,  with  Giinther,  feel 
doubt  on  the  subject1.  There  is,  however,  nothing  impossible  in  the 
supposition  that  Archimedes  was  in  possession  of  a  general  method  of 
solving  such  equations  where  the  numbers  involved  were  not  too  great  for 
manipulation  in  the  Greek  numeral  notation. 

Diophantus. 

Tannery2  was  of  opinion  that  Diophantus  dealt  with  the  equation 

x2  -  Ay1  -  i 

somewhere  in  the  lost  Books  of  the  Arithmetica.  Diophantus  does  indeed 
say  (Lemma  to  vi.  15)  that,  if  a,  b  are  any  numbers  and  ax^-b  is  a  square 
when  x  is  given  a  certain  value  p,  then  other  values  of  x  greater  than  p  can 
also  be  found  which  have  the  same  property  ;  and  Tannery  points  out  that 

1  Giinther,  op.  ctt.,  pp.  92-93  note.     Cf.  Konen,  op.  cit.,  p.  14. 

2  Tannery,   "  L'Arithmetique  des  Grecs  dans   Pappus"  in  Memoires  dt  la  see,  des 
sciences  phys.  et  nat.  de  Bordeatix,  ue  Ser.  III.,   x88o,  pp.  370  sq. 


28o  SUPPLEMENT 

we  can,  by  making  suppositions  of  the  same  kind  as  Diophantus  makes, 
deduce  a  more  general  solution  of  the  equation 


when  one  solution  (/,  q]  is  known. 
Put  p1  =  mx- 

and  suppose 

p?  -  Aq?  =  m*x*  -  2mpx  +  p2-  Ax2  -  2Aqx  -  Aq2  =  i  ; 

therefore  (since/2  -  Aq2  =  i) 

mp  +  Aq 
m2-A  ' 

and,  by  substitution  in  the  expressions  for/!,  ylt  we  have 

_  (m2  +  A)p  +  2Amq         __  zmp  +  (m2  +  A]  q 
A=  m*-A  '    ^~          nf-A 

and  in  fact/!2  -  Aq?=  i. 

If  an  integral  solution  is  wanted,  one  way  of  obtaining  it  is  to  substitute 
u/v  for  m  where  uz-Ai^-i,  i.e.  where  u,  v  is  another  solution  of  the 
original  equation,  and  we  then  have 

A  =  (^  +  Av*)p  +  2Auvq,     q-i  =  2puv  +  (u2  +  Av*)  q, 

But  this  is  all  that  we  can  get  out  of  Diophantus  as  we  have  him,  and 
it  will  be  observed  that  here  too  we  must  have  ascertained  two  solutions  of 
the  one  equation,  or  one  solution  of  it  and  a  solution  of  an  auxiliary  equation, 
before  we  can  apply  the  method1. 

1  It  may  be  observed  that,  in  the  particular  case  of  the  equation  jr2-3_y2=i,  the 
assumption  of  u,  v  satisfying  the  equation  will  not  enable  us  to  obtain  from  the  formula 

pl  =  (u2  +  Av*)p  +  lAuvq,     q\  —  ipuv  +  (u2  +  Av2)  q 
above  given  the  simpler  formula  otherwise  obtained  by  Tannery  (p.  279  above),  namely 


for,  if  (/i,  ^i)  is  to  be  a  different  solution  from  (/,  q),  we  cannot  make  «=i,  v  =  o,  but 
must  take  u  =  i,  v=i,  whence,  putting  A  =3,  we  obtain 


which  is  the  same  as/2>  ?2.  the  next  solution  to/i  = 

In  order  to  get  the  latter  we  have  to  take  u,  v  satisfying,  not  x2  -  $j/2=i,  but 

**-3^=-* 

The  values  «=  i,  v=  i  satisfy  x2  -  3_y2=  -  2,  and 


and  of  course  p\  =  +(2/  +  3?),  q\=  +(/  +  «?)  can  be  taken,  since  they  equally  satisfy 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   PERM  AT  281 

The  Indian  Solution. 

If  the  Greeks  did  not  accomplish  the  general  solution  of  our  equation, 
it  is  all  the  more  extraordinary  that  we  should  have  such  a,  general  solution 
in  practical  use  among  the  Indians  as  early  as  the  time  of  Brahmagupta 
(born  598  A.D.)  under  the  name  of  the  "cyclic  method."  Whether  this 
method  was  evolved  by  the  Indians  themselves,  or  was  due  to  Greek 
influence  and  inspiration,  is  disputed.  Hankel  held  the  former  view1; 
Tannery  held  the  latter  and  showed  how,  from  the  Greek  manner  of 
deducing  from  one  approximation  to  a  surd  a  nearer  approximation,  it  is 
possible,  by  simple  steps,  to  pass  to  the  Indian  method2.  The  question 
presumably  cannot  be  finally  decided  unless  by  the  discovery  of  fresh 
documents;  but,  so  far  as  the  other  cases  of  solution  of  indeterminate 
equations  by  the  Indians  help  to  suggest  a  presumption  on  the  subject, 
they  are,  I  think,  rather  in  favour  of  the  hypothesis  of  ultimate  Greek 
origin.  Thus  the  solution  of  the  equation  ax  —  by  =  c  given  by  Aryabhata 
(born  476  A.D.)  as  well  as  by  Brahmagupta  and  Bhaskara,  though  it 
anticipated  Bachet's  solution  which  is  really  equivalent  to  our  method  of 
solution  by  continued  fractions,  is  an  easy  development  from  Euclid's 
method  of  finding  the  greatest  common  measure  or  proving  by  that  process 
that  two  numbers  have  no  common  factor  (Eucl.  vn.  i,  2,  x.  2,  3)3,  and 
it  would  be  strange  if  the  Greeks  had  not  taken  this  step.  The  Indian 
solution  of  the  equation  xy  =  ax  +  by  +  c,  by  the  geometrical  form  in  which 
it  was  clothed,  suggests  Greek  origin4. 

The  "cyclic  method"  of  solving  the  equation 


is   found  in   Brahmagupta  and  Bhaskara5  (born   1114  A.D.)  and  is  well 
described  by  Hankel,  Cantor  and  Konen8. 

The  method  is  given  in  the  form  of  dogmatic  rules,  without  any  proof 
of  the  assumptions  made,  but  is  equivalent  to  a  preliminary  lemma  followed 
by  the  solution  proper. 

1  Hankel,  Zur  Geschichte  der  Math,  im  Alterthum  und  Mittelalter,  pp.  203-4. 

2  Tannery,  "Sur  la  mesure  du  cercle  d'Archimede"  in  Mem.  de  la  soc.  des  sciences 
phys.  et  nat.  de  Bordeaux,  il"  Ser.  iv.,  1882,  p.  325;  cf.   Konen,  pp.  27-28;  Zeuthen, 
"  L'Oeuvre  de  Paul  Tannery  comme  historien  des  mathematiques  "  in  Bibliotheca  Mathe- 
matica,  VI3,  1905-6,  pp.  271-273. 

3  G.  R.  Kaye,  "Notes  on  Indian  mathematics,  No.  2,  Aryabhata"  in  Journal  of  the 
Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  Vol.  iv.  No.  3,  1908,  pp.  135-138. 

4  Cf.  the  description  of  the  solution  in  Hankel,  p.  199;  Cantor,  Gesch.  d.  Math.  13, 
p.  631. 

5  The  mathematical  chapters  in  the  works  of  these  writers  containing  the  solution  in 
question  are  contained  in  H.  T.  Colebrooke's  Algebra  with  arithmetic  and  mensuration 

from  the  Sanskrit  of  Brahmegupta  and  Bhaskara,  London,  18(7. 

6,  Hankel,  pp.  200-203;  Cantor,  I3,  pp.  632-633;  Konen,  op.  cit.,  pp.  19-26. 


282  SUPPLEMENT 

Lemma. 

If  x  =p,  y  =  q  be  a  solution  of  the  equation 

Ay-  +  s  =  x2, 

and  x  =p',  y  =  q'&  solution  of  the  equation 
Ay2  +  s'  =  x2, 
then,  say  the  Indians,  x  =pp'  ±  Aqq  ,  y  =pq  ±p'q  is  a  solution  of  the  equation 

Ay*  +  ss'  =  x2. 
In  other  words,  if 

Aq2  +s  =/a< 

Aq'2  +  s'  =p'2 
then  A  (pq'  ±p'q}2  +  ss'  =  (//  ±  Aqq'}2. 

This  is  easily  verified1. 

In  particular,  taking  s  =  s',  we  find,  from  any  solution  x  =/,  y  =  q  of 
the  equation 


a  solution  x  -p2  +  Aq2,  y  =  2pq  of  the  equation 

Ay2  +  s2  =  x2. 
Again,  particular  use  of  the  lemma  can  be  made  when  ^  =  ±1  or  .y  =  +  2. 

(a)  If  ^  =  +  i,  and  x  =p,  y  =  q  is  a  solution  of 

Ay2  +  i  =  x2, 

then  x  =p2  +  Aq2,  y  =  2pq  is  another  solution  of  the  same  equation. 
If  j  =  —  i,  and  x  =/,  y  -  q  is  a  solution  of 

Ayz-i=x*, 
then  x  =pz  +  Aq^  y  =  zpq  is  a  solution  of 

Ay2  +  i  -  x2. 

(b]  If  J  -  ±  2,  and  x  =  p,  y  =  q  is  a  solution  of 


then  x=p'1  +  Ay2,  y=  zpq  is  a  solution  of 

Ay2  +  4  =  x2. 

In  this  case,  since  zpq  is  even,  the  whole  result  when  the  values  of 
x,  y  are  substituted  must  be  divisible  by  4,  and  we  have  x  =  %  (p2  +  A<f), 
y  -pq  as  a  solution  of  the  equation 

Ay2  +i=x2. 


For,  since  s=f  -  Aq^,  s'=/2  -  Aq"*, 
ss'=(p*-Aq*)(p'*-Aq>*) 
=  (pp'Y+(Aqq')*  -  A  (pq' 
=  {  (pp'Y  ±  lApp'qq'  +  (Aqq'?}  - 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS    BY   FERMAT  283 

Solution  proper  of  the  equation  x2-Ay*=  i. 

We  take  two  numbers  prime  to  one  another,  /,  q,  and  a  third  number  s 
with  no  square  factor,  such  that 


the  numbers  being  also  chosen  (in  order  to  abbreviate  the  solution)  such 
that  s  is  as  small  as  possible,  though  this  is  not  absolutely  necessary. 
(This  is  a  purely  empirical  matter;  we  have  only  to  take  a  rough  ap- 
proximation to  ^A  in  the  form  of  a  fraction//^.) 

[It  follows  that  s,  q  can  have  no  common  factor ;  for,  if  8  were  a 
common  factor  of  s,  g,  it  would  also  be  a  factor  of/2,  and/2,  q"1  would  have 
a  common  factor.  But  /,  q  are  prime  to  one  another.] 

Now  find  a  number  r  such  that 

ql  =  +  is  a  whole  number. 

[This  would  be  done  by  the  Indian  method  called  cuttaca  ("  pulveriser  "), 
corresponding  to  our  method  by  continued  fractions.] 

Of  the  possible  values  of  r  a.  value  is  taken  which  will  make  r2  -  A 
as  small  as  possible. 

Now,  say  the  Indians,  we  shall  have  : 

sl-±  —    —  is  an  integral  number, 

and  Aql*  +  sl  =  (2^ 

(Again  the  proofs  are  not  given;  they  are  however  supplied  by  Hankel1.) 


1  Since  ql  =  ^  +  q>    is  an   integral   number,   all  the   letters  in   q\s=p  +  qr  represent 

integers. 

Further,  s=p'i-Aqi; 

therefore,  eliminating  s,  we  have 


or  p(pq\-  i)= 

Since  /,  q  have  no  common  factor,  q  must  divide  pq\  —  i  ;  that  is, 

PQ\  ~  l 

—  -  =an  integer. 


We  have  next  to  prove  that  si  =  (r2-  A)fs  is  an  integer. 
Now  ^_A  =  (ti*-tf-<<9>  =  9i'*-Wi>  +  *t    since 


therefore  -       i         is  an  integer) 

and,  since  s,  q  have  no  common  factor,  it  follows  that 


Also 


284  SUPPLEMENT 

We  have  therefore  satisfied  a  new  equation  of  the  same  form  as  that 
originally  taken1. 

We  proceed  in  this  way,  obtaining  fresh  results  of  this  kind,  until  we 
arrive  at  one  in  which  s  =  ±  i  or  +  2  or  +4,  when,  by  means  of  the  lemma, 
we  obtain  a  solution  of 

Ay*  +  i  =  x2. 

Example.     To  solve  the  equation  6"jy2  +  i  =  x2. 

Since  82  is  the  nearest  square  to  67,  we  take  as  our  first  auxiliary  equation 
67.  i2-3  =  82,  so  that/  =  8,  q  =  i,  *  =  -  3. 

Thus  ql  =  ---  .     We  put  r=  7,  which  makes  q-^  an  integer  and  at  the 
o 

same  time  makes  s1  =  -  -  ---    =  6  as  small  as  possible. 

Thus  ?i  =  -5>  A  =  (/?i^I)/^  =  -4i, 

and  we  have  satisfied  the  new  equation 


Next  we  take  qz  =••  '         *  2  ,   and  we  put  r2  =  5,  giving  qz  =  1  1  ;   thus 

r  2  —  6? 

-2-  —  =  -  7,  and  /2  =  (p&  -  i)/^  =  90,  and 


Next  q3  =  --      —  -,  and  we  put  r3  -  9,  giving  qs  =  -  27  ;  therefore 

r?  —  67  —  90  .  27  —  i 

s3  =  —  —  —  '-  =  -2,  /,  =  —  —  =  -221,  and 

67.(27)2-2=(22l)2. 

As  we  have  now  brought  our  s  down  to  2,  we  can  use  the  lemma,  and 

67  (2  .   27  .  22l)2  +  4  =  (22I2  +  67  .   272)2, 

or  67(ii934)2  +  4  =  (97684)2; 

therefore,  dividing  by  4,  we  have 

67(5967)2-f-i=(48842)2. 

Of  this  Indian  method   Hankel  says,   "  It  is  above  all  praise  ;   it  is 
certainly  the  finest  thing  which  was  achieved  in  the  theory  of  numbers 

1  Hankel  conjectures  that  the  Indian  method  may  have  been  evolved  somewhat  in 
this  way. 

s=p'i  is  given,  and  if  we  put  Aq'^  +  s'=p'z,  then 


Now  suppose^',  q'  to  be  determined  as  whole  numbers  from  the  equation^'  -  p'q=  i, 
and  let  the  resulting  integral  value  of  pp'  —  Aqq'  be  r. 

Then  A+ss'  =  r2,  and  accordingly  r2  -  A  must  be  divisible  by  s,  or  s'=(A-r2)js  is 
a  whole  number. 

Eliminating  p'  from  the  two  equations  in  p'  ',  q',  we  obtain 


and,  as  stated  in  the  rule,  r  has  therefore  to  be  so  chosen  that  (/  +  qr}ls  is  an  integer. 


THEOREMS   AND    PROBLEMS   BY  FERMAT  285 

before  Lagrange  " ;  and,  although  this  may  seem  an  exaggeration  when  we 
think  of  the  extraordinary  achievements  of  a  Fermat,  it  is  true  that  the 
Indian  method  is,  remarkably  enough,  the  same  as  that  which  was  redis- 
covered and  expounded  by  Lagrange  in  his  memoir  of  1768'.  Nothing  is 
wanting  to  the  cyclic  method  except  the  proof  that  it  will  in  every  case 
lead  to  the  desired  result  whenever  A  is  a  number  which  is  not  a  square ; 
and  it  was  this  proof  which  Lagrange  first  supplied. 

Fermat. 

As  we  have  already  said,  Fermat  rediscovered  our  problem  and  was 
the  first  to  assert  that  the  equation 

3?-Af=l, 

where  A  is  any  integer  not  a  square,  always  has  an  unlimited  number 
of  solutions  in  integers. 

His  statement  was  made  in  a  letter  to  Frenicle  of  February,  i6572. 
Fermat  asks  Frenicle  for  a  general  rule  for  finding,  when  any  number  not  a 
square  is  given,  squares  which,  when  they  are  respectively  multiplied  by  tlie 
given  number  and  unity  is  added  to  the  product,  give  squares.  If,  says 
Fermat,  Frenicle  cannot  give  a  general  rule,  will  he  give  the  smallest  value 
of  y  which  will  satisfy  the  equations  6ij^  +  i  =  or2  and  109^+  i  =^?3 

At  the  same  time  Fermat  issued  a  challenge  to  the  same  effect  to 
mathematicians  in  general,  prefacing  it  by  some  remarks  which  are  worth 
quoting  in  full4. 

"  There  is  hardly  any  one  who  propounds  purely  arithmetical  questions, 
hardly  any  one  who  understands  them.  Is  this  due  to  the  fact  that  up  to 
now  arithmetic  has  been  treated  geometrically  rather  than  arithmetically? 
This  has  indeed  generally  been  the  case  both  in  ancient  and  modern 
works;  even  Diophantus  is  an  instance.  For,  although  he  has  freed 
himself  from  geometry  a  little  more  than  others  have  in  that  he  confines 
his  analysis  to  the  consideration  of  rational  numbers,  yet  even  there 
geometry  is  not  entirely  absent,  as  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  Zetetica 
of  Vieta,  where  the  method  of  Diophantus  is  extended  to  continuous 
magnitude  and  therefore  to  geometry. 

"  Now  arithmetic  has,  so  to  speak,  a  special  domain  of  its  own,  the 
theory  of  integral  numbers.  This  was  only  lightly  touched  upon  by  Euclid 
in  his  Elements,  and  was  not  sufficiently  studied  by  those  who  followed 
him  (unless,  perchance,  it  is  contained  in  those  Books  of  Diophantus  of 

1  "Sur  la  solution  des  problemes  indetermines  du  second  degre"  in  Mcmoires  de 
VAcad.   Royale  des  Sciences  et  Belles-Lettres  de  Berlin,  t.  xxm.   1769  (=Oeuvres  de 
Lagrange,  n.  pp.  377  sqq.).     The  comparison  between  Lagrange's  procedure  and  the 
Indian  is  given  by  Konen,  pp.  75-77. 

2  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  II.  pp.  333-4. 

3  Fermat  evidently  chose  these  cases  for  their  difficulty ;  the  smallest  values  satisfying 
the  first  equation  are  ^=226153980,  *=  1766319049,  and  the  smallest  values  satisfying 
the  second  are_y=  15140424455100,  JT=  158070671986249. 

4  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  II.  pp.  334-5- 


286  SUPPLEMENT 

which  the  ravages  of  time  have  robbed  us);  arithmeticians  have  therefore 
now  to  develop  it  or  restore  it. 

"To  arithmeticians  therefore,  by  way  of  lighting  up  the  road  to  be 
followed,  I  propose  the  following  theorem  to  be  proved  or  problem  to 
be  solved.  If  they  succeed  in  discovering  the  proof  or  solution,  they  will 
admit  that  questions  of  this  kind  are  not  inferior  to  the  more  celebrated 
questions  in  geometry  in  respect  of  beauty,  difficulty  or  method  of  proof. 

"  Given  any  number  whatever  which  is  not  a  square,  there  are  also  given 
an  infinite  number  of  squares  such  that,  if  the  square  is  multiplied  into  the 
given  number  and  unity  is  added  to  the  product,  the  result  is  a  square. 

"Example.  Let  3,  which  is  not  a  square,  be  the  given  number;  when 
it  is  multiplied  into  the  square  i,  and  i  is  added  to  the  product,  the  result 
is  4,  being  a  square. 

"The  same  3  multiplied  by  the  square  16  gives  a  product  which,  if 
increased  by  i,  becomes  49,  a  square. 

"And  an  infinite  number  of  squares  besides  i  and  16  can  be  found 
which  have  the  same  property. 

"  But  I  ask  for  a  general  rule  of  solution  when  any  number  not  a  square 
is  given. 

"  E.g.  let  it  be  required  to  find  a  square  such  that,  if  the  product  of  the 
square  and  the  number  149,  or  109,  or  433  etc.  be  increased  by  i,  the 
result  is  a  square." 

The  challenge  was  taken  up  in  England  by  William,  Viscount  Brouncker, 
first  President  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  Wallis1.  At  first,  owing  apparently 
to  some  misunderstanding,  they  thought  that  only  rational,  and  not  neces- 
sarily integral,  solutions  were  wanted,  and  found  of  course  no  difficulty  in 
solving  this  easy  problem.  Fermat  was,  naturally,  not  satisfied  with  this 
solution,  and  Brouncker,  attacking  the  problem  again,  finally  succeeded  in 
solving  it.  The  method  is  set  out  in  letters  of  Wallis2  of  zyth  December, 
1657,  and  3oth  January,  1658,  and  in  Chapter  xcvin.  of  Wallis'  Algebra; 
Euler  also  explains  it  fully  in  his  Algebra*,  wrongly  attributing  it  to  Pell4. 

1  An  excellent  summary  of  the  whole  story  is  given  in  Wertheim's  paper  "Pierre 
Fermat's  Streit  mit  John  Wallis"  in  Abhandlungen  zur  Gesch.   der  Math.   ix.   Heft 
(Cantor-Festschrift),   1899,  pp.  557-576.     See  also  Konen,  pp.  29-43. 

2  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  ill.  pp.  457-480,  490-503.     Wallis  gives  the  solution  of  each 
of  the  three  difficult  cases  last  mentioned. 

3  Euler,  Algebra,  Part  II.  chap.  vn. 

4  This  was  the  origin  of  the  erroneous  description  of  our  equation  as  the  "  Pellian  " 
equation.     Hankel  (p.  203)  supposed  that  the  equation  was  so  called  because  the  solution 
was  reproduced  by  Pell  in  an  English  translation  (1668)  by  Thomas  Brancker  of  Rahn's 
Algebra;  but  this  is  a  misapprehension,  as  the  so-called  "Pellian"  equation  is  not  so 
much   as   mentioned  in   Pell's  additions    (Wertheim  in  Bibliotheca  Mathematica,  1113, 
1902,  pp.  124-6;  Konen,  pp.  33-4  note).     The  attribution  of  the  solution  to  Pell  was  a 
pure  mistake  of  Euler's,  probably  due  to  a  cursory  reading  by  him  of  the  second  volume 
of  Wallis'  Opera  where  the  solution  of  the  equation  ax2+  i  =j2  is  given  as  well  as  informa- 
tion as  to  Pell's  work  in  indeterminate  analysis.     But  Pell  is  not  mentioned  in  connexion 
with  the  equation  at  all  (Enestrom  in  Bibliotheca  Mathematica,  II13,  1902,  p.  206). 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  287 

Fermat  appears  to  have  been  satisfied  with  the  actual  solution*,  but 
later  he  points  out  that,  although  Frenicle  and  Wallis  had  given  many 
particular  solutions,  they  had  not  supplied  a  general  proof2  (i.e.  presumably 
that  the  solution  is  always  possible  and  that  the  method  will  always  lead 
to  the  solution  sought  for).  He  says,  "  I  prove  it  by  the  method  of 
descente  applied  in  a  quite  special  manner.... The  general  demonstration 
will  be  found  by  means  of  the  descente  duly  and  appropriately  applied." 

Further  on,  Fermat  says  he  has  discovered  "general  rules  for  solving 
the  simple  and  double  equations  of  Diophantus." 

"  Suppose,  for  example,  that  we  have  to  make 
2X2  +7967  equal  to  a  square. 

"  /  have  a  general  rule  for  solving  this  equation,  if  it  is  possible,  or 
discovering  its  impossibility,  and  similarly  in  all  cases  and  for  all  values 
of  the  coefficient  of  x?  and  of  the  absolute  term. 

"  Suppose  we  have  to  solve  the  double-equation 
2X  +  3  —  square  j 
2X  +  5  =  square  J  ' 

"  Bachet  boasts,  in  his  commentary  on  Diophantus3,  of  having  dis- 
covered a  rule  for  solving  in  two  particular  cases ;  I  make  it  general  for 
all  kinds  of  cases  and  can  determine,  by  rule,  whether  it  is  possible  or  not4." 

Thus  Fermat  asserts  that  he  can  solve,  when  it  is  possible  to  solve 
it,  and  can  determine,  by  a  general  method,  whether  it  is  possible  or 
impossible  to  solve,  for  any  particular  values  of  the  constants,  the  more 
general  equation 

&-Ap=B. 

This  more  general  equation  was  of  course  solved  by  Lagrange.  How 
Fermat  solved  it  we  do  not  know.  It  is  true  that  he  has  sometimes  been 

1  Letter  of  June,  1658,  to  Kenelm  Digby,  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  p.  402. 

2  "  Relation  des  nouvelles  decouvertes  en  la  science  des  nombres,"  Oeuvres,  n.  p.  433. 

3  See  on  Diophantus  IV.  39,  and  above,  pp.  80-82. 

4  With  this  should  be  compared  Fermat's  note  on  Dioph.   iv.   39,  where  he  says, 
similarly : 

"  Suppose,  if  you  will,  that  the  double-equation  to  be  solved  is 
i  x  +  5  =  square  I 
6x  +  3  =  square  |  ' 

"  The  first  square  must  be  made  equal  to  16  and  the  second  to  36;  and  others  will  be 
found  ad  infinitum  satisfying  the  question.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  propound  a  general  rule 
for  the  solution  of  this  kind  of  question." 

No  doubt  the  double-equation  in  this  case,  as  in  the  others  referred  to  in  the  "Relation," 
would  be  transformed  into  the  single  equation 

t*-Au*=B 

by  eliminating  x.  I  think  this  shows  how  Fermat  was  led  to  investigate  our  equation : 
a  question  which  seems  to  have  puzzled  Konen  (p.  29),  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  actual 
equation  is  not  mentioned  in  the  notes  to  Diophantus.  The  comparison  of  the  two  places 
seems  to  make  the  matter  clear.  For  example,  the  two  equations  mentioned  above  in 
this  note  lead  to  the  equation  /2-3«2=  -12,  and  the  solution  t  =  6,  «  =  4  is  easily 
obtained. 


288  SUPPLEMENT 

credited  with  the  very  same  solution  of  the  equation  x2  —  Ay*  =  i  as  that 
given  by  Brouncker  and  Wallis ;  but  this  idea  seems  to  be  based  on  a 
misapprehension  of  a  sentence  in  Ozanam's  Algebra  (1702).  Ozanam 
gives  the  Brouncker-Wallis  solution  as  "  une  regie  generale  pour  resoudre 
cette  question,  qui  est  de  M.  de  Fermat " ;  and  possibly  the  ambiguity 
of  the  reference  of  "  qui "  may  have  misled  Lagrange  and  others  into 
supposing  that  the  "regie"  was  due  to  Fermat. 

For  the  history  of  the  equation  after  Fermat's  time  I  must  refer  to 
other  works  and  particularly  that  of  Konen1.  Euler,  Lagrange,  Gauss, 
Jacobi,  Dirichlet,  Kronecker  are  the  great  names  associated  with  it.  I 
will  only  add  a  few  particulars  with  regard  to  Euler2  as  coming  nearest 
to  Fermat. 

In  a  letter  to  Goldbach3  of  loth  August,  1730,  Euler  mentions  that  he 
requires  the  solution  of  the  equation  x2  —  Ay*  —  i  in  order  to  make 
as?  +  bx  +  c  a  complete  square.  He  goes  on  to  observe  that  the  problem 
of  solving  x?  —  Ay2  =  i  in  integers  was  discussed  between  Wallis  and 
Fermat  and  that  the  solution  (which  he  already  attributes  to  Pell)  was 
set  out  in  Wallis'  Opera.  There  is  an  indication  in  this  very  passage  that 
Euler  had  then  only  read  the  Brouncker-Wallis  correspondence  cursorily, 
for  he  speaks  of  the  equation  iogy2  +  i  =  x2  as  being  the  most  difficult 
case  solved  by  them,  whereas  the  most  difficult  examples  actually  solved 
were  433_y2  +  i  =  x2  and  3 1  ^y~  +  i  =  x2. 

A  paper  of  a  year  or  two  later4  contained  the  proof  that  the  evolution 
of  successive  solutions  of  ay?  +  bx  +  c  =y-  when  one  is  known  requires  that 
one  solution  of  at?  +  i  =  tf  must  also  be  known.  Similarly,  in  his  Algebra*, 
he  shows  that  the  solution  of  the  latter  equation  is  necessary  for  finding  all 
the  possible  solutions  of  the  equation  ax~  +  b  =y2,  the  importance  of  which 
remark  is  emphasised  by  Lagrange6. 

In  the  paper  quoted  in  the  last  paragraph  Euler  finds  any  number 
of  successive  solutions  of  ax2  +  bx  +  c  =_>'2,  and  the  law  for  forming  them, 
when  we  are  given  one  value  n  of  x  which  will  make  ax2  +  bx  +  c  a 
complete  square  and  one  value  p  of  £  which  will  make  a£2  +  i  a  complete 
square,  or,  in  other  words,  when  an2  +  bn  +  c  =  m2  and  a/2  +  i  =  q1.  He 
then  takes  the  particular  case  ax2  +  bx  +  d2  =y2  where  (since  x  =  o,  y-d 
satisfies  the  equation)  we  can  substitute  o  for  n  and  d  for  m  in  the 
expressions  representing  the  successive  solutions  of  ax2  +  bx  +  c=y2.  Then 
again,  putting  b  -  o  and  d=i,  he  is  in  a  position  to  write  down  any 

1  Konen,  op.  cit.;   cf.  Cantor's  Geschichte  der  Mathematik,   iv.  Abschnitt  xx.,  as 
regards  Euler  and  Lagrange. 

2  Cf.  Konen,  op.  cit.  pp.  47-58. 

3  Correspondence  mathematique  et  physique  de  quelques  celebres  geometres  du  xvi I !*?»/« 
siecle,  publiee  par  P.  H.  Fuss,  Petersbourg,  1843,  I.  p.  37. 

4  "  De  solutione  problematum  Diophanteorum  per  numeros  integros"  in  Commentarii 
Acad.  Petropol.  1732-3,  VI.  (1738),  pp.  175  sqq.  =  Coinnientationes  arithm.  I.  pp.  4-10. 

6  Algebra,  Part  II.  ch.  VI. 

6  Additions  to  Euler's  Algebra,  ch.  vm. 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  289 

number  of  successive  solutions  of  a£?  +  i  =  rf  when  one  solution  £  =/, 
t\-q  is  known.     The  successive  values  of  |  are 

and  the  corresponding  values  of  rj  are 

i,  4,  2f-i,  44* -34,  ... 

the  law  of  formation  being  in  each  case  that,  if  A,  B  be  consecutive  values 
in  either  series,  the  next  following  is  2qB  -  A. 

The  question  then  arises  how  to  find  the  first  values  /,  q  which  will 
satisfy  the  equation.  Euler  first  points  out  that, 'when  a  has  one  of  many 
particular  forms,  values  of/,  q  can  at  once  be  written  down  which  satisfy 
the  equation.  The  following  are  such  cases  with  the  obvious  values  of 
/  and  q. 


a  =  &  +  i  ;  p  =  ze,  q  = 

a  =  aV*  +  2CU?6-1  ;  p  =  e,      q  =  a<?6+1  ±  i 

(where  a  may  even  be  fractional  provided  o^6"1  is  an  integer), 
a  =  (aeb  +  fte^)'2  +  2a^~l  +  2  fie*-1  •  p  =  e,  4  =  a£b+l  +  fie* 
a  = 


But,  if  a  cannot  be  put  into  such  forms  as  the  above,  then  the  method 
explained  by  Wain's  must  be  used.  Euler  illustrates  by  finding  the  least 
values  /,  q  which  will  satisfy  the  equation  3i£2+  i  -rf,  and  then  adds  a 
table  of  the  least  solutions  of  the  equation  a^  +  i  =  rf  for  all  values  of 
a  (which  are  not  squares)  from  2  to  68. 

The  important  remark  follows  (§  18)  that  the  above  procedure  at  once 
gives  a  very  easy  way  of  finding  closer  and  closer  approximations  to  the 
value  of  any  surd  *]a.     For,  since  a/2  +  i  =  <f,  we  have  >Ja  -  J(f  -  i)//, 
and,  if  q  (and  therefore  p  also)  is  large,  qjp  is  a  close  approximation  to  ,Ja  ; 
the  error  is  not  greater  than  ij(2/2Ja).     Euler  illustrates  by  taking  ^6. 
The  first  solution  of  6^  +  i  =  rf  (after  £  =  o,  -q-  i)  is  /  =  2,  q  -  5.     Taking 
then  the  series  of  values  above  given  for  a£2  +  i  =  rf,  namely 
£  =  o,  /,  2pq,        Atpf  -p,  ...  A,  B,  2qB  -  A, 
il=i,  q,  2f-i,   44*  -&,...£,  F,    2qF-E, 

and  substituting  p  -  2,  q  =  5,  the  successive  corresponding  values  P,  Q 
of  |,  t]  respectively  become 

P=o,  2,  20,   198,   1960,   19402,   192060,   1901198,... 

<2=i,  5,  491-485,  4801,  47525.  47°449.  4656965.  ••• 

and  the  successive  values  QjP  are  closer  and  closer  approximations  to  J6. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  method  of  obtaining  successive  approximations 

H.  D.  19 


290  SUPPLEMENT 

to  Ja  from  successive  solutions  of  a£-  +  i  -  rf  is  the  same  as  that  which, 
according  to  the  hypothesis  of  Zeuthen  and  Tannery,  Archimedes  used  in 
order  to  find  his  approximations  to  ^3. 

The  converse  process  of  finding  successive  solutions  of  a$?  +  i  —  -rf  by 
developing  ,Ja  as  a  continued  fraction  did  not  apparently  occur  to  Euler 
till  later.  In  two  letters'  to  Goldbach  of  4th  Sept.  1753  and  23rd  Sept. 
1755  he  speaks  of  a  "certain"  method  and  of  improvements  which  he  had 
made  in  the  "  Pellian  "  method  but  gives  no  details.  His  next  paper  on 
the  same  subject2  returns  to  the  problem  of  finding  all  the  solutions  of 
ax1  +  bx  +  c  =  y*  or  ax'2  +  l>=y2  when  one  is  known,  and  in  the  course  of 
his  discussion  of  the  latter  he  arrives  at  "  the  following  remarkable  theorem 
which  contains  within  it  the  foundation  of  higher  solutions. 

"If  x  =  a,  y  =  l>  satisfies  cur*  +p  —y2, 

and  x  =  c,  y  =  d  satisfies  cur2  +  q  =/-, 

then  x  —  be  +  ad,  y  —  bd  +  aac  satisfies  ax'2  +  pq  =y2." 

That  is  to  say,  Euler  rediscovers  and  recognises  the  importance  of  the 
lemma  to  the  Indian  solution,  as  Lagrange  did  later. 

More  important  is  the  paper  of  about  three  years  later3  in  which  Euler 
obtained  the  solution  of  the  equation  x2  -  Ay-  =  i  by  the  process  of  con- 
verting ,JA  into  a  continued  fraction,  this  course  being  the  reverse  of  that 
which  was,  according  to  the  hypothesis  of  Tannery  and  Zeuthen,  followed 
by  Archimedes,  and  to  the  feasibility  of  which  Euler  had  called  attention 
in  1732-3.  He  begins  by  stating,  without  proof,  that,  if  q- -  Ip2  +  i,  then 
q\p  is  an  approximation  to  ^//,  and  qlp  is  "  such  a  fraction  as  expresses 
the  value  of  Jl  so  nearly  or  exceeds  it  so  little  that  a  closer  approximation 
cannot  be  made  except  by  bringing  in  greater  numbers."  Next  he  develops 
certain  particular  surds,  namely  N/(I3)>  V(^1)  an^  V(^7)>  a^ter  which  he 
states  the  process  generally  thus.  If  ^z  be  the  given  surd  and  v  the  root 
of  the  greatest  integral  square  which  is  less  than  z,  the  process  will  give 


the  successive  quotients  a,  b,  c,  d,  being  found  by  means  of  the  process 
shown  in  the  following  table : 

1  Correspondance  etc.,  ed.  Fuss,  pp.  614  sq.,  62959. 

2  "De  resolutione  formularum  quadraticarum  indeterminatarum  per  numeros  integros  " 
in  Novi  Conimentarii  Acad.  Petropol.  1762-3,  IX.  (1764),  pp.  3  i,<\<\.  =  Coinmentat.  arithm. 
I.  pp.  297-315. 

3  "De  usu  novi  algorithm!  in  problemate  Pelliano  solvendo"  in  Novi  Conimentarii 
Acad.  Petropol.  1765,  xi.  (1767),  pp.  28-66=  Continental,  arithm.  \.  pp.  316-336.     The 
paper  seems  to  have  been  read  as  early  as  15  Oct.  1759. 


THEOREMS   AND    PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT 


291 


Take 


II.     B=aa-A 


III.     C=B/>-. 


yc-C 


'.  =  M-D 


and 


z-Fp 


It  follows  that 
•v  +  A 


<* 


7 

v  +  D 
8 


8 

etc.  etc. 

(This  is  of  course  exactly  the  process  given  in  text-books  of  Algebra, 
e.g.  Todhunter's.) 

Euler  now  remarks  as  follows. 

1.  The  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D  ...  cannot  exceed  v ;  the  first,  A,  is  equal 
to  v;  since  a  ^  (v  +  A)/a,  aa  -  A  -  B  ^  z/,  and  so  on. 

2.  Unless  where  one  of  the  numbers  a,  ft,  y,  8...  is  equal  to  unity, 
none  of  the  corresponding  quotients  a,  b,  c,  d ...  can  exceed  v. 

3.  When  we  arrive  at  a  quotient  equal  to  2v,  the  next  quotients  will  be 
a,  l>,  c,  d . . .  in  the  same  order. 

4.  Similar  periods  occur  with  the  letters  a,  ft,  y,  8...  and  the  term 
of  this  series  corresponding  to  a  quotient  2V  is  always  i. 

The  successive  convergents  to  the  continued  fraction  are  then  investi- 
gated and  it  is  shown  that,  for  successive  convergents  q[p  beginning 
with  v/i, 

q-  -  zp*  =  -  a,  +  ft,  -y,  +8,  -  e  etc.  in  order. 

It  follows  that  the  problem  is  solved  whenever  one  of  the  terms  with  a 
positive  sign,  ft,  8,  £  etc.,  becomes  i. 

Since  unity  for  one  of  the  terms  a,  ft,  y,  8  corresponds  to  the  quotient 
2v,  and  each  fresh  period  begins  with  2V,  the  first  period  will  produce 
a  convergent  qjp  such  that  q*  —  zp-  =  ±  i ;  and  the  negative  sign  will  apply 
if  the  number  of  quotients  constituting  the  period  is  odd,  while  the  positive 
sign  will  apply  if  the  number  of  quotients  is  even.  In  the  latter  case  we 
have  a  solution  of  our  equation  at  once;  if,  however,  q--zp'*  =  -i,  we 
must  go  on  to  the  end  of  the  second  period  in  order  to  get  an  even  number 
of  quotients  and  so  satisfy  the  equation '  q'1  —  zp-  —  +  i.  Or,  says  Euler, 
instead  of  going  on  and  completing  the  second  period,  we  can  satisfy 
the  latter  equation  more  easily  thus. 

Suppose  q-  -  zp*  =  -  i,  and  assume 


Then 


q'-  -  zp'-  =  4^  +  4^  +  i  - 


19—2 


292  SUPPLEMENT 

[This  last  derivation  of  a  solution  of  y2  —  zx2  —  i  from  a  known  solution 
of  y2  -  zx2  =  -  i  is  of  course  the  same  as  the  Indian  method  of  doing  the 
same  thing,  for  they  assumed/'  =  zpq,  q'  =  q2  +  zp2,  and  q2  +  zp2  -  q2+  (q2  +  i).] 

We  thus  see  that  in  Euler's  method  there  is  everything  necessary  to  the 
complete  solution  of  our  equation  except  the  proof  that  it  must  always  lead 
to  the  desired  result.  Unless  it  is  proved  that  the  quotient  2V  will  actually 
occur  in  the  development  of  the  continued  fraction  in  every  case,  we  cannot 
be  sure  that  the  equation  has  any  solution  except  x  -  o,  y  -  i. 

I  cannot,  I  think,  do  better  than  conclude  by  a  quotation  from 
H.  J.  S.  Smith1,  the  first  part  of  which  is  well  known2.  "  Euler  observed 
that  [if  T2  -  DU-  =  i]  TIU  is  itself  necessarily  a  convergent  to  the  value 
of  JD,  so  that  to  obtain  the  numbers  T  and  U  it  suffices  to  develop  JD 
as  a  continued  fraction.  It  is  singular,  however,  that  it  never  seems  to 
have  occurred  to  him  that,  to  complete  the  theory  of  the  problem,  it  was 
necessary  to  demonstrate  that  the  equation  is  always  resoluble  and  that 
all  its  solutions  are  given  by  the  development  of  >JD.  His  memoir 
contains  all  the  elements  necessary  to  the  demonstration,  but  here,  as 
in  some  other  instances,  Euler  is  satisfied  with  an  induction  which  does 
not  amount  to  a  rigorous  proof.  The  first  admissible  proof  of  the  re- 
solubility  of  the  equation  was  given  by  Lagrange  in  the  Melanges  de  la 
Societe  de  Turin,  Vol.  iv.  p.  4i3.  He  there  shows  that  in  the  development 
of  ,JD  we  shall  obtain  an  infinite  number  of  solutions  of  some  equation  of 
the  form  T2-DU2  =  A  and  that,  by  multiplying  together  a  sufficient 
number  of  these  equations,  we  can  deduce  solutions  of  the  equation 
T2-DU2-i.  But  the  simpler  demonstration  of  its  solubility  which 
is  now  to  be  found  in  most  books  on  algebra,  and  which  depends  on 
the  completion  of  the  theory  (left  unfinished  by  Euler)  of  the  development 
of  a  quadratic  surd  as  a  continued  fraction,  was  first  given  by  Lagrange 
in  the  Hist,  de  F  Academic  de  Berlin  for  1767  and  1768,  Vol.  xxm.  p.  272, 
and  Vol.  xxiv.  p.  236"*,  and,  in  a  simpler  form,  in  the  Additions  to  Euler's 
Algebra6,  Art.  37." 

1  "Report  on  the  Theory  of  Numbers,  Part  ill.,"  British  Association  Reports  for  1861, 
London,  1862,  p.  $1$=  Collected  Works,  Vol.  i.,  Oxford,  1894,  p.  192. 

2  It  is  given  in  Cantor,  Gesch.  d.  Math.  iv.  1908,  p.  159,  and  referred  to  by  Konen, 
op.  tit.  p.  51. 

3  "Solution  d'un  probleme  d'Arithmetique,"  finished  at  Berlin  on  2oth  Sept.   1768 
and   published   in   Miscellanea  Taurinensia,   iv.    i'j66-i'j6<)=0euvres  de  Lagrange,  I. 
pp.  671-731. 

4  The  references  are:  "Sur  la  solution  des  problemes  indetermines  du  second  degre," 
read  24th  Nov.  1768  and  published  in  the  Memoires  de  VAcadeniie  Royale  des  Sciences 
et  Belles-lettres  de  Berlin,  Vol.  xxm.,   1769,   pp.    165-310  =#««>;•«  de  Lagrange,  II. 
PP-  377-535  >  "Nouvelle  methode  pour  resoudre  les  problemes  indetermines  en  nombres 
entiers,"  read  2ist  June,    1/70,  and  published  in  Memoires  de  rAcademie  Royale  des 
Sciences  et  Belles-lettres  de  Berlin,  Vol.  xxiv.,  1770,  pp.  i%i-i$()  =  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange, 
II.  pp.  655-726. 

5  The  Additions  of  Lagrange  were  first  printed  as  an  appendix  to  £lei>iens  d' '  Algcbre 
par  M.  L.  Euler  traduits  de  Vallemand,  Vol.   II.,  Lyons,  1774;  second  edition,  Paris, 

1798;  they  were  thence  incorporated  in  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange,  vn.  pp.   158  sqq. 


293 


SECTION    III. 

THEOREMS   AND    PROBLEMS   ON    RATIONAL   RIGHT-ANGLED   TRIANGLES. 

i.  On  No.  20  of  the  problems  about  right-angled  triangles  added 
by  Bachet  to  Book  vi.  ("To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  such  that  its 
area  is  equal  to  a  given  number")  Fermat  has  a  note  which  shall  be 
quoted  in  full,  not  only  for  the  sake  of  the  famous  theorem  enunciated 
in  it,  but  because,  exceptionally,  it  indicates  the  lines  on  which  his  proof 
of  the  theorem  proceeded. 

"The  area  of  a  right-angled  triangle  the  sides  of  which 
are  rational  numbers  cannot  be  a  square  number. 

"This  proposition,  which  is  my  own  discovery,  I  have  at  length 
succeeded  in  proving,  though  not  without  much  labour  and  hard  thinking. 
I  give  the  proof  here,  as  this  method  will  enable  extraordinary  develop- 
ments to  be  made  in  the  theory  of  numbers. 

"  If  the  area  of  a  right-angled  triangle  were  a  square,  there  would  exist 
two  biquadrates  the  difference  of  which  would  be  a  square  number.  Con- 
sequently there  would  exist  two  square  numbers  the  sum  and  difference  of 
which  would  both  be  squares.  Therefore  we  should  have  a  square  number 
which  would  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  a  square  and  the  double  of  another 
square,  while  the  squares  of  which  this  sum  is  made  up  would  themselves 
[i.e.  taken  once  each]  have  a  square  number  for  their  sum.  But  if  a  square 
is  made  up  of  a  square  and  the  double  of  another  square,  its  side,  as  I  can 
very  easily  prove,  is  also  similarly  made  up  of  a  square  and  the  double  of 
another  square.  From  this  we  conclude  that  the  said  side  is  the  sum  of  the 
sides  about  the  right  angle  in  a  right-angled  triangle,  and  that  the  simple 
square  contained  in  the  sum  is  the  base  and  the  double  of  the  other  square 
the  perpendicular. 

"This  right-angled  triangle  will  thus  be  formed  from  two  squares, 
the  sum  and  the  difference  of  which  will  be  squares.  But  both  these 
squares  can  be  shown  to  be  smaller  than  the  squares  originally  assumed 
to  be  such  that  both  their  sum  and  their  difference  are  squares.  Thus, 
if  there  exist  two  squares  such  that  their  sum  and  difference  are  both 
squares,  there  will  also  exist  two  other  integer  squares  which  have  the  same 
property  but  have  a  smaller  sum.  By  the  same  reasoning  we  find  a  sum 
still  smaller  than  that  last  found,  and  we  can  go  on  ad  infinitum  finding 
integer  square  numbers  smaller  and  smaller  which  have  the  same  property. 
This  is,  however,  impossible  because  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  series 
of  numbers  smaller  than  any  given  integer  we  please. — The  margin  is  too 
small  to  enable  me  to  give  the  proof  completely  and  with  all  detail. 

"  By  means  of  these  considerations  I  have  also  discovered  and  proved 
that  no  triangular  number  except  i  can  be  a  biquadrate." 


294  SUPPLEMENT 

As  Wertheim  says,  it  may  have  been  by  following  out  the  indications 
thus  given  by  Fermat  that  Euler  succeeded  in  proving  the  propositions 
that  x4  -y*  and  x4  +y*  cannot  be  squares,  as  well  as  a  number  of  other 
theorems  connected  therewith  (Commentationes  arithmeticae  collectae,  i. 
pp.  24  sqq.  ;  Algebra,  Part  n.  Chapter  xin.). 

Zeuthen1  suggests  a  method  of  filling  out  Fermat's  argument,  thus. 
The  sides  of  a  rational  right-angled  triangle  can  be  expressed  as 

x*+y2,  x2-y2,  2xy. 

As  a  common  factor  in  the  sides  would  appear  as  a  square  in  the 
number  representing  the  area,  we  can  neglect  such  a  factor,  and  assume 
that  x2-y"  and  therefore  also  x+y  and  x-y  are  odd  numbers  and  thnt 
x,  y  are  prime  to  one  another,  so  that  x,  y,  x  +y,  x  -y  are  all  prime  to 
one  another. 

We  have  now  to  test  the  assumption  that  the  area  of  the  triangle 

xy  (x  -y)  (x  +y) 
is  a  square.     If  so,  the  separate  factors  must  be  squares,  or 

x  =  u\  y  =  v2, 
u2  +  v2=p2,  u2-z?  =  g2. 

("  There  would  exist  two  biquadrates  the  difference  of  which  [#4  —  z/*]  would 
be  a  square,  and  consequently  there  would  exist  two  squares  the  sum  and  differ- 
ence of  which  [u2  +  vz,  u-  -  v~]  would  both  be  squares"  Fermat.) 

From  the  last  two  equations  we  obtain 


("  We  should  have  a  square  number  which  would  be  equal  to  the  sum 
of  a  square  and  the  double  of  another  square  [p1  =  21?  +  q^\"  Fermat.) 

Now  p  +  q  and  p  —  q  are  both  even  numbers  because,  on  the  above 
assumptions,  p*  and  q"  are  both  odd;  but  they  cannot  have  any  other 
common  factor  except  2,  since  u2  and  v2  are  prime  to  one  another.  It 
follows  therefore  from  the  last  equation  that 

(2m2  (n2 


where  ;/  is  an  even  number. 
We  obtain,  therefore, 


The  whole  numbers  m2  and  —  are  therefore  sides  of  a  new  right-angled 

triangle  with  the  square  area  ----  . 
4 

1  Zeuthen,  Geschichte  der  MatJiematik  im  XVI.  and  XVII.  Jahrhundert,  1903,  p.  163. 


THEOREMS   AND    PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  295 

("  If  a  square  is  made  up  of  a  square  and  the  double  of  another  square 
[/2  =  21?  +  g*],  its  side  is,  as  I  can  very  easily  prove,  also  made  up  of  a 

square  and  the  double  of  another  square     p  =  tri*+  2{-]     •     From  this  we 

conclude  that  the  said  side  is  the  sum  of  the  sides  about  the  right  angle 
in  a  right-angled  triangle,  the  square  [w2]  being  the  base  and  the  double  of 


the  other  square    2J     the  perpendicular,"  Fermat.) 

That  the  sides  of  the  new  triangle  are  less  than  those  of  the  original 
triangle  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  the  square  on  its  hypotenuse  «2  or 
x  is  a  factor  of  one  of  the  perpendicular  sides  of  the  original  triangle1. 

As  now  an  infinite  series  of  diminishing  positive  whole  numbers  is 
impossible,  the  original  assumption  from  which  we  started  is  also  impossible. 

It  will  be  observed,  as  Zeuthen  says,  that  the  proof  includes  also  the 
proof  of  the  fact  that  u4  -  v*  cannot  be  a  square  and  therefore  cannot  be 
a  fourth  power,  from  which  it  follows  that  the  equation  rf  =  z/4  +  w4  cannot 
be  solved  in  whole  numbers,  and  consequently  cannot  be  solved  in  rational 
numbers  either. 

The  history  of  this  theorem  would  not  be  complete  without  an  account 
of  a  "proof  originating  with  Fermat"  which  Wertheim  has  reproduced2. 
In  the  small  paper  of  Fermat's  entitled  "  Relation  des  nouvelles  decouvertes 
en  la  science  des  nombres3"  containing  a  statement  of  his  method 
of  "diminution  without  limit"  (descents  infinie  or  indefinie)  and  of  a 
number  of  theorems  which  he  proved  by  means  of  it,  there  is  a  remark 
that  he  had  sent  to  Carcavi  and  Frenicle  some  proofs  based  on  this 
method.  And,  sure  enough,  Frenicle  gives  a  proof  by  this  method  of 
the  theorem  now  in  question  in  his  "Traite  des  triangles  rectangles  en 
nombres4."  Wertheim  accordingly  concludes  that  we  have  here  a  proof 
of  Fermat's.  A  short  explanation  is  necessary  before  we  come  to  Frenicle's 
proof. 

We  obtain  a  right-angled  triangle  2,  x,  y  in  rational  numbers  (z2  =  x2  +/) 
if,  a,  b  being  any  integers  and  a>t>,  we  put 

z  =  a2  +  b\  x  =  a2  -  P,  y  =  2ab. 

If  a  is  prime  to  b  and  one  of  these  numbers  is  even,  the  other  odd,  then 
it  is  easily  shown  that  the  greatest  common  measure  of  x,y,  z  is  i. 

In  the  right-angled  triangle  a2  -  1?  and  zab  are  the  perpendicular  sides, 

1  Zeuthen's  inference  at  this  point  diverges  slightly  in  form  from  what  we  actually  find 
in  Fermat's  own  statement  of  his  argument.     Fermat  does  not  actually  say  that  the  new 
right-angled  triangle  is  a  triangle  in  smaller  numbers  than  the  original  triangle  and  with 
the  same  assumed  property,  but  that  its  formation  gives  us  two  new  square  numbers  the 
sum  and  difference  of  which  are  squares,  and  which  are  smaller  than  the  two  squares 
originally  assumed  to  have  this  property. 

2  Zeitschrift  filr  Math.  u.  Physik,  hist.  litt.  Abtheilung  XLIV.  1899,  pp.  4-6. 

3  Ontvres  de  Fermat,  Vol.  n.  pp.  431-6. 

4  Memoires  de  VAcademie  Royale  des  Sciences,  v.,  Paris,  1729,  pp.  83-166. 


296  SUPPLEMENT 

and  (a2  -  P)  ab  is  the  area,  a,  b  are  called  the  generating  numbers  (the 
numbers  from  which  the  triangle  is  formed)  and  if  a  is  prime  to  b,  and  one 
of  them  is  odd  and  the  other  even,  so  that  x,  y,  z  have  no  common  factor 
except  i,  the  triangle  is  called  &  primitive  triangle. 

If  (cP  —  b^ab  is  the  area  of  a  primitive  right-angled  triangle — and  it 
is  enough  to  prove  the  proposition  for  such — each  of  the  three  numbers 
o?  -  P,  a,  b  is  prime  to  the  other  two.  If,  then,  the  product  is  a  square 
number,  each  of  the  three  factors  must  be  square,  and  in  that  case  a2  -  b2 
will  be  the  difference  between  two  fourth  powers.  The  theorems 

(1)  the  area  of  a  right-angled  triangle  in  rational  numbers  cannot  be 
a  square  number,  and 

(2)  the  difference  of  two  fourth  powers  cannot  be  a  square, 
accordingly  state  essentially  the  same  fact. 

The  proof  which  Frenicle  gives  of  the  first  of  these  propositions  depends 
on  the  following  Lemmas. 

Lemma  I.  If  the  odd  perpendicular  of  a  primitive  right-angled  triangle 
is  a  square  number,  there  exists  a  second  primitive  right-angled 
triangle  with  smaller  sides  which  has  for  its  odd  perpendicular 
the  root  of  the  said  square  number. 

If  a2  - 1?  =  r3,  it  follows  that  a?  =  I?  +  <*,  so  that  a,  b,  c  are  the  sides 
of  a  right-angled  triangle.  The  odd  perpendicular  of  this  second  triangle 
is  c,  for  by  hypothesis  c3  is  odd;  consequently  the  even  perpendicular  is 
b,  while  a  is  the  hypotenuse.  The  triangle  is  "primitive"  because  a 
common  divisor  of  any  two  of  the  three  numbers  a,  b,  c  would  divide 
the  third,  while  by  hypothesis  a,  b  have  no  common  factor  except  i. 
Next,  the  second  triangle  has  smaller  sides  than  the  first,  since  c<c2, 
a<a2  +  t>2,  b<zab. 

By  this  lemma  we  can  from  the  triangle  9,  40,  41  derive  the  triangle 
3,  4,  5,  and  from  the  triangle  225,  25312,  25313  the  triangle  15,  112,  113. 
Lemma   II.     If  in  a  primitive  right-angled  triangle  the  hypotenuse  as 
well  as  the  even  perpendicular  were  square,  there  would  exist  a 
second  primitive  right-angled   triangle  with  smaller  sides  which 
would  have  for  hypotenuse  the  root  of  the  hypotenuse  of  the  first, 
for  odd  perpendicular  a  square  number,  and  for  even  perpendicular 
the  double  of  a  square  number. 

Let  the  sides  of  the  first  triangle  be  a?  +  bz,  a-  -  b-,  zab.  If  zab  were 
a  square,  ab  would  be  double  of  a  square ;  therefore,  since  a,  b  are  prime 
to  one  another,  one  of  these  two  numbers,  namely  the  odd  one,  would 
be  a  square,  and  the  other,  the  even  one,  would  be  double  of  a  square. 
Let  a  be  the  odd  one  of  the  two,  b  the  even.  If  now  the  hypotenuse 
a2  +  b-  were  a  square  number  c*,  we  should  have  a  second  right-angled 
triangle  a,  b,  c  which  would  necessarily  be  primitive  and  in  which  the  sides 
would  be  smaller  than  those  of  the  first  triangle;  for  c<c,  b<2ab  and 
a  <  a"  —  b~  since  a  +  b  >  a,  a  —  b^  i . 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  297 

By  means  of  the  above  two  lemmas  combined  we  can  now  prove  that 
the  area  of  a  primitive  right-angled  triangle  cannot  be  a  square  number. 

Let  the  sides  of  the  triangle  be  c?  +  lr,  a2  -  F,  zab.  If  now  the  area 
were  square,  the  product  of  the  perpendicular  sides  would  be  double  of 
a  square.  But  the  perpendicular  sides  are  prime  to  one  another.  There- 
fore the  odd  perpendicular  a-  -  P  would  be  a  square,  and  the  even 
perpendicular  zab  the  double  of  a  square.  But,  if  cr-lr  were  equal  to 
^,  we  could  (by  the  first  Lemma)  find  a  second  primitive  triangle  with 
smaller  sides  in  which  the  odd  perpendicular  would  be  t,  the  even  per- 
pendicular fi,  and  the  hypotenuse  a.  Again,  since  zab  would  be  double 
of  a  square,  ab  would  be  a  square,  and,  since  a  is  prime  to  b,  both  a  and 
b  would  be  squares.  The  second  triangle  would  accordingly  have  a  square 
number  both  for  its  hypotenuse  (a)  and  for  its  even  perpendicular  (b). 
That  is,  the  second  primitive  triangle  would  satisfy  the  conditions  of  the 
second  Lemma,  and  we  could  accordingly  derive  from  the  second  primitive 
triangle  a  third  primitive  triangle  with  still  smaller  sides  which  would, 
exactly  like  the  first  triangle,  have  a  square  number  for  its  odd  perpendicular, 
and  for  its  even  perpendicular  the  double  of  a  square  number. 

From  this  third  triangle  we  could  obtain  a  fourth,  and  by  means  of  the 
fourth  we  could  obtain  a  fifth  with  the  same  property  as  the  first,  and  so 
we  should  have  an  unending  series  of  primitive  right-angled  triangles,  each 
successive  triangle  having  smaller  sides  than  the  one  before,  and  all  being 
such  that  the  odd  perpendicular  would  be  a  square  number,  the  even 
perpendicular  the  double  of  a  square  number,  and  consequently  the  area 
a  square  number.  This,  however,  is  impossible  since  there  cannot  be  an 
unending  series  of  integral  numbers  less  than  any  given  integral  number. 

Frenicle  proves,  by  similar  considerations,  that  neither  can  the  area  of  a 
right-angled  triangle  in  rational  numbers  be  Hie  double  of  a  square  number. 

In  enunciating  Fermat's  problems  on  right-angled  triangles  I  shall  in 
future  for  brevity  and  uniformity  use  £  17,  £  to  denote  the  three  sides,  while 
£  will  always  represent  the  hypotenuse  and  &  t\  the  two  perpendicular  sides. 

2.      To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  (£,  £  17)  such  that 


t  +  V  = 

[Since  £"'  =  £*  +  if,  this  problem  is  equivalent  to  that  of  finding  .r,  y  such 
that 


which  is  Question  17  in  Chapter  xiv.  of  Euler's  Algebra,  Part  11.] 

first  method. 

Form  a  right-angled  triangle  from  the  numbers  x  +  i,  x;  the  sides  will 
then  be 


298  SUPPLEMENT 

We  have  then  the  double-equation 

2X*  +  2X+  I  =  U-  | 
2X2  +  4X  +  I  =  V2  j 

The  ordinary  method  of  Diophantus  gives  the  solution  x  =  -  ^-  >  trie 
triangle  will  therefore  be  formed  from  -f-  and  --1/-  or,  if  we  take  the 
numerators  only,  -5  and  -  12,  and  the  triangle  is  (169,  -  119,  120)  which 
is  equally  the  result  of  forming  a  triangle  from  +  5  and  +  12. 

But,  as  one  of  the  perpendiculars  is  negative,  we  must  find  another 
value  of  x  which  will  make  all  three  sides  positive. 

We  accordingly  form  a  triangle  from  x  +  $  and  12,  instead  of  from 
5  and  12,  and  repeat  the  operation.  This  gives  for  the  sides 

t,-  x2  +10^+169,    g  =  x-  +  IQX-  119,    77--  243;+  120, 
and  we  have  to  solve  the  double-equation 

x2  +  iox+  169  =  u\ 
x2  +  343;  +      \-vi. 
Making  the  absolute  term  the  same  in  each,  we  have  to  solve 

x2  +  lox  +  169  =  u2, 
1693?  +  57463;  +  169  =  v'2. 

The  difference  is  i68x-  +  57363:,  which  we  may  separate  into  the  factors 
143:,  i2x  +  -i-8T6-§.  (the  sum  of  the  terms  in  x  being  26x  or  2  .  133:). 

Equating  the  square  of  half  the  sum  of  these  factors  to  the  larger 
expression,  or  the  square  of  half  their  difference  to  the  smaller,  we  find 
in  the  usual  way 


The  triangle  is  therefore  formed  from  -|iy°f£-,  I2>  or  ^rom  2I5°9°5> 
246792,  and  the  triangle  itself  is 

4687298610289,    4565486027761,    1061652293520, 
the  hypotenuse  and  the  sum  of  the  other  two  sides  being  severally  squares. 

Second  method. 

This  is  the  same  as  the  first  method  up  to  the  forming  of  the  triangle 
from  x  +  5  and  12  and  the  arrival  at  the  double-equation 
3?2  +  iox+  169  =  u2, 
x2  +  343;  +      i  =  v2. 

Multiply  the  two  expressions  together,  and  we  must  have 
x*  +  44X3  +  5io3:2-f  57563;+  169  =  a  square 


this  gives,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  same  value  of  x,  namely 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  299 

and  the  triangle  is  the  same  as  before1. 

In  his  note  on  Diophantus  vi.  22  Fermat  says  that  he  confidently 
asserts  that  the  above  right-angled  triangle  is  the  smallest  right-angled 
triangle  in  rational  numbers  which  satisfies  the  conditions. 

[The  truth  of  this  latter  assertion  was  proved  by  Lagrange2.  Lagrange 
observes  that,  since  £  +  rj  =y-,  g°  +  rf  =  #*,  say,  we  have,  if  we  put  z  for  £  -  •>/, 

Z2  +/  =  2«*, 

or  2X*  -y*  =  z2, 

and,  if  x,  y  is  any  solution  of  the  latter  equation, 


1  For  comparison  we  may  give  Euler's  solution  (Algebra,  Part  n.,  Art.  240;  Commen- 
tationes  arithmeticae,  n.  p.  398). 
We  have  to  solve  the  equations 


First  make  x2+y2  a  square  by  putting  x=a?  -  IP,  y  =  iab,  so  that 


To  make  the  last  expression  a  fourth  power  put  a=p^-qi,  b  =  ipq,  so  that 

a>  +  £*=(/*  +  ?*)', 

and  accordingly  **  +  y*  =  (p*  +  q*f. 

We  have  now  only  to  make  x  +y  a  square. 

Now  x  =  a?-lP=p*-6pzq'i  +  q*,     y  =  iab=4p*q-4pq3; 

therefore  /4  +  \p*q  -  6>V2  -  4A/3  +  ?*  =  a  square. 

In  solving  this  we  have  to  note  that  /,  q  should  be  positive,  p  must  be  >q  (for  other- 
wise^ would  be  negative),  and  a>b  in  order  that  x  may  be  positive. 

Put 


and  we  obtain  $fq  -  6ffi2  =  -  $fq  +  6p  V,  whence  p\q  =  |  . 

But,  if  we  put/  =  3,  q  =  i,  we  find  x=  -  1  19,  a  negative  value. 

To  find  fresh  values,  we  can  substitute  for  /  the  expression  %y  +  r  and  solve  for  the 
ratio  q\r;  then,  by  taking  for  q  the  numerator  and  for  r  the  denominator  of  the  fraction 
so  found,  we  find  a  value  for  /  and  thence  for  x,  y.  This  is  Euler's  method  in  the 
Algebra.  But  we  avoid  the  necessity  for  clearing  of  fractions  if  (as  in  the  Comment. 
ariihm.)  we  leave  2  as  the  value  of  q  and  substitute  3  +  z»  for  3  as  the  value  of/. 

We  then  have  /4=       81  +  io8z/+54»2+ 


—  6/2^2=  —  216  —  i  44"'  —  24^2, 
-4/^3=_   96-32^, 

+  <?*=       16, 

whence         x+y=  i  -t-  148^+  iO2Z>2+2OZ'3  +  z/4  =  a  square=(i  +  74W-z^)2,  say; 
and  we  obtain 

1343  =  42^,  or  »»-«=,  and  /  =  3  +  z'=-^,  while  q  =  ^. 
Taking  integral  values,  we  put/=i469,  ^  =  84. 
Therefore          a=  1385  .  1553  =  2150905,     £=168.1469  =  246792, 
and  ^  =  4565486027761,    y=  1061652293520, 

which  is  the  same  as  Fermat's  solution. 

2  N.  Mhnoires  de  fAcad.  Royale  des  Sciences  et  Belles-lettres  de  Berlin,  annee  1777, 
Berlin,  1779=  Oeuvres  de  Lagrange,  IV.  pp.  377-398. 


300  SUPPLEMENT 

He  sets  himself  therefore  to  find  a  general  solution  of  the  equation 
2X4  —  _y4  =  z2  and  effects  it  by  a  method  which  is  a  variation  of  Fermat's 
descente,  one  of  the  most  fruitful  methods,  as  Lagrange  observes,  in  the 
whole  theory  of  numbers.  The  modified  method  consists  of  two  parts, 
(i)  a  proof  that,  assuming  that  there  exist  integral  values  of  x,  y  greater 
than  r  which  satisfy  the  condition  2X*  —  J>*  =  z2,  there  are  still  smaller 
integral  values  which  will  also  satisfy  it,  (2)  the  discovery  of  a  general 
method  of  deducing  the  latter  from  the  former.  This  being  done,  and 
it  being  known  that  x-  i,  y  =  i  are  the  minimum  values,  the  successive 
higher  values  are  found  by  reversing  the  process.  Lagrange  found  that 
the  four  lowest  values  for  x,  y  give  the  following  pairs  of  values  for  £,  77, 
namely 

(1)  £=I  ,      77  =  0, 

(2)  £=120  ,    77  =  -ii9, 

(3)  £-2276953  ,    77  =  -4733o4, 

(4)  £=1061652293520,    77  =  4565486027761, 

so  that  the  last  pair  (4)  are  in  truth,  as  Fermat  asserts,  the  smallest  possible 
values  in  positive  integers.] 

3.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  77  such  that 


[This  is  of  course  equivalent  to  solving 
x-y  =  /2| 
x*  +  /  =  it?  \ 
Form  a  triangle  from  the  numbers  x  +  i,  i  ;  the  sides  will  then  be 

£  =  x'*+2X  +  2,     £  =  X2  +  2X,     f)=2X+2. 

We  have  then  to  solve  the  double-equation 


Solved  in  the  ordinary  way,  this  gives  x  ••=  -  1|-  ;  consequently  the 
triangle  is  formed  from  -T5^,  i,  or  from  -5,  12. 

We  could  proceed,  as  in  the  last  problem,  to  deduce  a  new  value  for  x, 
but  we  observe  that  the  triangle  formed  from  5,  12,  i.e.  the  triangle  169, 
119,  1  20,  satisfies  the  conditions. 

4.      To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  77  such  that 


£  +  mr) 
where  m  is  any  number. 

Fermat  takes  the  case  where  m  =  2. 

Form  a  triangle  from  x,   i;   the  sides  are  then  £  =  x''1+  i,  f  =  #2-  i, 
7  =  2*. 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  301 

Therefore 

I  must  both  be  squares. 

The  difference  =  2—4.*,  and  by  the  usual  method  we  find  x  -  T\. 
But  £  =  x2-  i  is  negative  unless  x>  i.     We  therefore  begin  afresh  and 
form  a  triangle  from  x  +  5,  12. 
The  sides  of  this  triangle  are 

x*+iox+i6(),   x?+iox—  119,    24^+120. 
We  have  therefore  to  solve  the  double-equation 
x?+  iox+  169  =  &t2| 
x*+  $Sx+  121  =  z>2) 

Fermat  multiplies  the  two  expressions  together  and  puts 
x4  +  6&X3  +  &JOX2  +  noi2x  +  20449  =  a  square 

=  (143  +  -Yfar*  -  ffff|&f  ^f,  say  ; 

and  the  triangle  is  formed  from  103447257961,  17749110120. 

The    double-equation    could   also    have    been    solved    by   the    usual 
Diophantine  method,  as  in  the  next  problem  to  be*  given. 

5.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  rj  such  that 

£_.!*„£}• 

where  m  is  any  number. 
Suppose  that  m  -  2. 
Form  a  triangle  from  x  +  i,  i,  so  that  the  sides  are 

£  =  X?+  2X  +  2,     £  =  X2  +  2X,     1}  —  2X  +  2. 

Therefore  we  have  to  solve 

X2  +  2X  +  2  =  U*  ' 


Solving  in  the  usual  manner,  we  obtain  x  =  -  $i,  so  that  the  triangle  is 
formed  from  -^,  i,  or  from  -  5,  12,  and  is  therefore  (169,  119,  —  120). 

We  have  to  replace  the  value  of  x  by  a  value  which  will  avoid  the 
negative  sign.     Form  a  triangle,  then,  from  #  —  5,  12. 

The  sides  are     or2-  lox  +  169,  x2  -  10^-119,  24^-120. 
The  double-equation  now  becomes 

x2-  iox+  169  = 
x3  —  58.*+  121 
Multiply  the  second  equation  by  iff,  and  we  nave  to  solve 

Xs-  iox+  169  =  u*  ) 
T -If  •*-"  ~  ^nrr x  +  l^9  =  v   ) 


=  w2) 
=1?  } 


302  SUPPLEMENT 

The  difference  =  ^x*  -  -8^2-x  =  T\  x  (ftx  -  ±f^). 
Equating  the  square  of  half  the  difference  of  the  factors  to  the  smaller 
expression  (or  the  square  of  half  the  sum  to  the  larger),  we  have 

•-^ttm1. 

and  the  required  triangle  is  formed  from  4363225,  552552,  the  sides  being 

19343046113329,    18732418687921,    4821817400400. 
Or  again  in  this  case  we  can  multiply  the  expressions  or  —  10^+169 
and  x2  -  580;  +121  and  put  their  product 

x4  —  6&X3  +  S"jox2  —  1 10120;  +  20449  —  a  square 

/  T  A  t          5  5  0  6  A*  _i_  .v2\2     our 

=  (J43  -  -\-£^-x  +  x )  >  say> 

and  the  result  will  be  the  same  as  before, 


X  — 

6.      To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  77  J«^  /$«/ 

£=«2) 

ztf/jm-  m  is  any  given  number. 

Let  m  =  3.     Form  a  triangle  from  #  +  i,  i  ;  its  sides  will  be 

£±  X2  +  2X  +  2,     £  =  X~  +  2X,     Tf]  —  2X  +  2. 

We  have  therefore  to  solve  the  double-equation 


Solving  this  in  the  ordinary  manner,  we  shall  find  x  =  TV. 

Hence  the  triangle  is  formed  from  j!*,  i,  or  (in  whole  numbers)  from 
13,  12  ;  the  sides  are  therefore  313,  25,  312. 

Fermat  also  finds  the  solution  by  multiplying  the  two  expressions  and 
making  the  product  a  square; 

x4  +  lox3  +  22#2  +  i2x  —  a  square 

=  (x2  +  $x  —  |^)2,  say. 

This  gives  the  same  value  of  x  as  before,  x  =  ^;    and  the  triangle 
is  3i3,  25,  312. 

7.     Jb  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  ^,  17  such  that 


where  m  is  a  given  number. 
Fermat  takes  the  case  m  —  3. 

Remembering  that  in  the  corresponding  problem  with  a  plus  sign  we 
found  the  triangle  313,  25,  312  which  is  formed  from  13,  12,  we  form  the 
triangle  in  this  case  from  x  —  13,  12  ;  its  sides  are 

£=  #2—  26#  +  313,    £  =  #2-  26.*;  +  25,   17=24^-312. 
We  have  then  x'2  -  26x  +    25  =  u- 

x--  gSx  +  96  !=•»". 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS  BY  FERMAT  303 

Multiplying  the  first  expression  by  ^U,  we  have  to  solve  the  double- 
equation 


*2-  98*  +  961  = 
The  difference  =  Y/-*3  -  m^-x  =  ^x  (^-x  -  i-W-)- 
Proceeding  as  usual,  we  find  *  =  .*™f£j8l;    the  triangle  is  formed 

from  x-  13,  12,  or  (in  whole  numbers)  from  23542921,  3820440,  and  the 

sides  are 

568864891005841,     539673367418641,     179888634210480. 
The  same  result  is  obtained  by  multiplying  the  expressions  x~  -  26*  +  25 
and  x~  —  qSx  +  961  and  making  the  product  a  square;  we  put 
x4  -  124^  +  3534#2-  27436^+  24025  -a,  square 


and  the  result  is  x  =  l^ffi|»i,  as  before. 

8.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  •*}  such  that 


£  +  mt]  -  v2 
where  m  is  any  given  number. 

Suppose  m  -  2.     Form  a  triangle  from  x  +  i,  i  ;  the  sides  are 

£  =  X?  +  2X  +  2,     £  =  ^3  +  20-', 

We  have  then  to  solve  the  double-equation 

X2  +  2X  -  U- 


The  usual  method  gives  x=  \,  and  the  triangle  is  formed  from  f  ,  i,  or 
(in  whole  numbers)  from  5,  4,  being  the  triangle  (41,  9,  40). 

Since  £  +  r;  =  :x;2+4:r  +  4  =  a  square,  we  have  actually  solved  the  problem 
of  finding  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  f,  rj  such  that 

£  = 
£  +  ri  = 


9-      To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  17  such  that 

i=a 

£  —  #/?7  =  V  ) 

where  m  is  a  given  number. 

Suppose  m  -  2. 

Since  the  corresponding  problem  with  a  plus  sign  just  preceding  has 
the  solution  (41,  9,  40)  formed  from  the  numbers  5,  4,  we  form  a  triangle 
in  this  case  from  re -5,  4;  the  sides  are 

£  =  x'2  -  IQ.V  +  4 r,  £  =  re2  —  IQX  +  9,  i/  -  8*  -  40. 


3o4  SUPPLEMENT 

We  have  then  to  solve  the  double-equation 


9  = 

X2  —  26x  +  121  = 

De  Billy  (or  Fermat)  observes  that  this  double-equation  "seems  to  admit 
of  solution  in  several  ways,  but  it  will  be  found  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to 
find  a  practical  solution  except  by  the  new  method  "  (expounded  earlier  in 
the  In-ventum  Nbvum)  of  making  the  absolute  terms  equal  (instead  of  using 
the  equal  terms  in  x2,  which  method  gives,  in  fact,  the  value  x  -  o).  That 
is  to  say,  we  make  the  absolute  terms  in  the  two  expressions  equal  by 
multiplying  the  first  by  if1'  and  the  double-equation  becomes 

1  2  1  ~2        1  210  v    ,    T  _  T         ,  >: 

— p —  XT TJ —  X  +  I  2  I  =  U 

X2-  26X+  121  =  V' 

The  difference  =  ^x2 - ^x  =  »x(2£x- ^). 

Equating  the  square  of  half  the  difference  of  the  factors  to  v1,  or  the 
square  of  half  their  sum  to  u"2,  we  find  x  =  -•££-. 

Therefore  the  triangle  is  formed  from  4^3-,  4  or  (in  whole  numbers) 
from  493,  132,  and  the  sides  are  260473,  225625,  130152. 

Since  £-77  =  ^-  i&c  +  8i  =a  square,  the  above  actually  amounts  to  the 
solution  of  the  problem  of  finding  a  right- angled  triangle  £,  £,  T/  such  that  the 
three  conditions 


are  simultaneously  satisfied. 

De  Billy  (or  Fermat)  observes  however  that,  while  the  above  one  solution 
satisfies  the  conditions  of  both  problems,  it  is  not  so  with  all  solutions  of 
the  problem  involving  the  two  conditions  only;  but  v\\\y  primitive  triangles 
satisfying  the  conditions  of  that  problem  satisfy  the  additional  condition. 
Thus  the  triangle  (624,  576,  240)  is  such  that  one  of  the  perpendicular 
sides  is  a  square  and  the  difference  between  the  hypotenuse  and  twice  the 
other  perpendicular  is  also  a  square,  but  the  hypotenuse  minus  the  latter 
perpendicular  is  not  a  square. 

10.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  r/  such  that 


Assume  x,  i  -  x  for  the  sides  £,  17  about  the  right  angle  respectively. 
This  supposition  satisfies  the  second  condition. 

Again,  since  gr]  =  x-x2,  the  third  and  fourth  conditions  are  satisfied, 
for  tf  =  x\  w*=i 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  305 

It  remains  to  satisfy  the  conditions 

•n=i  -x  =  t*  ) 

t. 

and  4  -e  +T=  !  —  2*  + 2#2  =  a  square) 

The  difference  =  2X2  —  x  =  \x  (4^-2),  and  we  find,  in  the  usual  way, 
The  triangle  is  (^,  |-£,  ^). 

n.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  r/  such  that 

£  =  a  cube     j 
£  —  £f>7  =  a  square] 

Fermat   assumes  £=i,   f\  =  x,  so  that   the  first  condition   is  satisfied, 
i  being  a  cube. 

We  must  now  have  i-£x  =  u*) 

and  also  £"2  =  i2  +  tf  =  i  +  y?  =  v1] 

The  difference  =  x2  +  %x  =  ±x  (4^  +  2),  and  we  find  x  =  -  f  |f . 

In  order  to  derive  a  positive  value  for  #  we  substitute  y  — 1-|4  for  x  in 
the  equations,  which  gives 


Make  the  absolute  term  in  the  first  equation  equal  to  that  in  the  latter 
by  multiplying  by  —  ,  and  we  have  to  solve 


The  difference  =/  - 
We  find  accordingly 

and 

The  triangle  is  then 


12.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  ^,  77  jw//  that 


Form  a  triangle  from  the  numbers  x+  i,  x  ;  the  sides  are 

£=2*2+2.r+I,       £=2X+I,       r)= 

Thus  ^  +  ^  =  2X*  +  $x*  +  $x  +  i  must  be  a  square. 
Suppose  2  x3  +  5**  +  3*  +  i  =  (|*  +  i  )s, 


306  SUPPLEMENT 

Now  substitute  y  -  -•£-  for  x  in  the  expression  to  be  made  a  square,  and 
we  have 

2/  -  ^/  +  Hy  +  |f  |  =  a  square 


whence  7  =  *&&,  and  *  = 

The  triangle  is  accordingly  found. 

13.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  77  such  that 


Form  a  triangle  as  before  from  x+  i,  x,  and  in  this  case  we  shall  have 
2X*  +  3#2  +  3#  +  i  =  a  square 

=  (f*+i)2,  say, 
whence  x  =  —  f  . 

Substitute  ^  -  f  for  ^  in  the  expression  to  be  made  a  square  ;  thus 
2^  =  a  square 


whence  .7  =  Wf  .  and 

the  triangle  being  therefore 

ttttffl, 


14.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  ^  £,  t\  such  that 


Let  £  =  A;,  >j  =  i  ;  then  £2  =  a^  +  i  =  a  square] 

Also,  by  the  condition  of  the  problem,  iv2  +  f  #  +  i  =  a  square) 
The  usual  method  of  solution  gives  #  =  —  £!•• 

Substitute  therefore  j  -  1-|  for  x  in  the  two  expressions,  and  we  have 
the  double-  equation 


Or,  if  we  make  the  absolute  term  in  the  first  expression  the  same  as  in 
the  second  by  multiplying  by  jf||, 


The  difference  =  f  f  ^/  -  Ullj  =  Hy  (Wy  ~  f  Hf  ). 
and  we  find  j  =  ffiff  ,  so  that  x=y-  |f  =  ^AV- 

Therefore  the  two  perpendicular  sides  of  the  triangle,  in  whole  numbers, 
are  39655,  129648,  and  the  hypotenuse  is  135577. 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS   BY  FERMAT  307 

15.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  ij  such  that 

(£  +  -t]f  +  b&l  =  a  square. 

This  problem  is  mentioned  in  Fermat's  letters  to  St  Martin  of  3ist  May 
and  to  Mersenne  of  ist  September  i643x.  The  result  only  is  given  (in 
the  letter  to  Mersenne),  and  not  the  solution  ;  but  it  can  easily  be  worked 
out  on  the  lines  of  the  solution  of  the  preceding  problem. 

Let  £  =  x,  i)  =  i  ;  we  must  therefore  have 

L 

both  squares. 

Solving  in  the  usual  way  by  splitting  the  difference  f  x  into  the  factors 
zx  we  find  x  =  —  f$. 
Substitute  _y  —  f$  for  x  in  the  two  expressions,  and  we  have  to  solve 


Multiply  the  last  by  (f  f  )2  so  as  to  make  the  absolute  terms  the  same 
and  we  have  to  solve 


The  difference  =  {(f|)2- 


We  therefore  put        (y  -  ^^f  =/  -  fty  + 
whence  y  (%&  -  ft)  =  < 

and^-^^^,  so  that  *=^-ft  =  ^ 

The  required  triangle  is  therefore  (V&Vo8*  V/sWi   0  or>  in 
numbers,  (205769,  190281,  78320). 


1  6.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £, 

^  +  m  .  %£rj  =  a  square. 
Fermat  takes  the  case  where  m  =  2. 
Form  a  triangle  from  the  numbers  x,  i  ;  the  sides  are  then 

£=*»+!,       (=3?-  I,       1J=2X. 

Thus  we  must  have  (*«  +  i)2  +  2^:  (««-  i)  a  square,  that  is, 
x*  +  2^  +  2^*  -  2X  +  i  =  a  square 

=  (*•  +  *  +  |)2,  say, 
whence  x  —  ^. 

1  Ofuvrfs  de  Fermat,  II.  pp.  260,  263. 


3o8  SUPPLEMENT 

But  this  value  makes  x2  -  i  negative  ;  so  we  must  seek  another  by 
putting  y  +  \  for  x  in  the  expression  to  be  made  a  square. 
We  have  f  +  3/  +  Qy2  -  T\jv  +  \\  \  =  a  square 


This  gives  y  =  HI  HI,  and  x  =y  +  }  =  |||£££. 

Therefore  the  triangle  is  generated  (in  whole  numbers)  from  571663 
and  436440. 

De  Billy  adds  that  there  is  one  case  in  which  the  problem  is  impossible. 
Tannery  observes  in  a  note  that  this  remark  seems  to  refer  to  the  case  in 
which  m  =•  8. 

17.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  i]  such  that 

£-\&\  =  a  square. 
Form  a  triangle  from  x—i,  4  ;  the  sides  will  then  be 

£  =  *2-2*  +  i7,     £  =  x*-2x-is,     rl  =  8x-&. 

Thus  (xz  -2x-  \$f-(4x-  4)  (x2-  2^-15)  must  be  a  square,  that  is, 
x*  —  Sx3  —  1  4#2  +  ii2x  +  i65  =  a  square 

-  (x2-  4*  -is)2,  say. 

This  gives  x  =  —  *-/-,  and  accordingly,  to  find  another  value,  we  substitute 
y  -  Y  for  x  in  the  expression  to  be  made  a  square. 
We  must  therefore  have 

y  -  38/  +  i<y>-I/  -  »*8iy  +  &3^A  =  a  square 


This  gives  y  =  VAS  and  *  =  j  -  Y  =  VTIT- 

The  triangle  is  therefore  formed  from  -6^$p,  4,  or  (in  whole  numbers) 
from  6001,  2280. 

The  sides  are  therefore  41210401,  30813601,  27364560. 

1  8.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  r\  such  that  (if  £  >  ij) 
(£  -  r/f  -  2tf  =  a  square. 

This  problem  is  enunciated  in  Fermat's  note  on  vi.  22.  He  merely 
adds  that  the  triangle  (1525,  1517,  156)  formed  from  39,  2  satisfies  the 
conditions,  but  does  not  give  the  solution. 

The  solution  is  however  easy  to  obtain  by  his  usual  method,  thus. 

Form  a  triangle  from  x,  i,  so  that 

£  =  *"+!,       £  =  #2-I,       t]=2X. 

Then  (t-r)Y-2rf  =  (xz-2X-iY-%xi 

=  x*-  4X3  - 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  309 

This  has  to  be  a  square  ;  let  it  be  equal  to  (x2-  2x  -  $y,  say  ;  this  gives 
=  2ox  +  25, 


x  -  - 


The  triangle  formed  from  -f,  i,  or  from  -3,  2,  will  have  one  side 
negative.     To  avoid  this,   we  proceed  as  usual  to  form  a  triangle  from 
-.  2. 


Thus  £=y-6.r+i3,     t=y*- 

and  (£-i?)»-2if  =  (/-iqy+  17)'-  2(47-12)' 

=y  —  2qys  +  I02J2-  1487  +  i. 

In  order  that  this  may  be  a  square,  suppose  it  equal  to  (jr-  loy  -  i)2  or 
y*  -  2oy*  +  gSy  +  2oy  +  i. 

It  follows  that  1023?  —  1487  =  gSy2  +  2oy, 

and  y  =  42. 

The  triangle  required  is  formed  from  y~3,  2,  that  is,  from  39,  2, 
and  is  accordingly  1525,  1517,  156. 

Fermat  does  not  tell  us  in  the  note  on  vi.  22  what  use  he  made  of  this 
problem,  but  the  omission  is  made  good  in  a  letter  to  Carcavi1,  where  he 
says  that  it  was  propounded  to  him  by  Frenicle  (who  admitted  frankly  that 
he  had  not  been  able  to  solve  it),  and  that  it  served  to  solve  another 
problem  which  had  occupied  Frenicle.  The  latter  problem  is  the 
following. 

19.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  t]  such  that 

1 

£  -  •>/  j-  are  all  squares. 

*-lJ 

Fermat  does  not  actually  give  the  solution,  but  presumably  it  was 
somewhat  as  follows. 

Form  a  triangle  from  two  numbers  x,  y  ;  the  sides  are  then 


Now  £  -  T/  -  x?  +y  -  2xy  and  is  ipso  facto  a  square. 

The  other  conditions  give 

x3  +y*  =  a  square, 

and  or!-y!-2^>'  =  (^-j>')2-2/  =  asquare. 

These  conditions  are  satisfied  by  the  two  perpendicular  sides  of  the 
triangle  of  the  last  problem,  that  is,  by  x=  1517,  y=  156. 
i  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  p.  265. 


310  SUPPLEMENT 

The  triangle  required  is  therefore  formed  from  1517,  156  and  is 
(2325625,  2276953,  473304)- 

The  present  seems  to  be  the  appropriate  place  for  a  problem  contained 
in  a  letter  from  Fermat  to  Frenicle  the  date  of  which  was  probably 
15  June  1641'. 

20.  To  find  all  the  right-angled  triangles  in  integral  numbers  such  that 
the  perpendicular  sides  differ  by  i. 

If  a  right-angled  triangle  is  formed  from  x,  y,  the  difference  between 
the  two  perpendiculars  is  either  x*—yi—2xy  or  2xy-(x2-y*),  that  is 
to  say,  either  (x-yf—2yi  or  zyi-(x—yf.  As  this  difference  is  to  be  i, 
we  have  to  find  all  the  integral  solutions  of  the  equation 

2yt-(x-y)*  =  ±l. 

Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  history  of  Greek  mathematics  will  here 
recognise  an  old  friend.  The  equation  is  in  fact  the  indeterminate 
equation 

•*-**!  i, 

which  the  Pythagoreans  had  already  solved  by  evolving  the  series  of 
"side-"  and  "diagonal-"  numbers  described  by  Theon  of  Smyrna,  the 
property  of  which  they  proved  by  means  of  the  geometrical  theorems 
of  Eucl.  n.  9,  to. 

If  x,  y  are  two  numbers  such  that 

2X2  —  y^  —  +  i, 
then  the  numbers  x  +y,  2X  +y  will  satisfy  the  equation 

2*»-,f  =  -i; 

fresh  numbers  formed  from  x  +y,  2x  +y  by  the  same  law  will  satisfy  the 
equation 

2^-7,2  =  +I, 

and  so  on. 

Take  now  the  equation 

2)>2  -  (* -j)2  =  ±  I, 

where  x,  y  are  two  numbers  from  which  a  right-angled  triangle  has  been 
formed.  We  can  deduce  a  right-angled  triangle  formed  from  x',  y'  where 

2/2-(*'-/)2=+i; 

for  by  the  above  law  of  formation  we  have  only  to  take 

y=y  +  (x-y)  =  x, 
x'  -y'  =  2y+(x  -y)  =  x  +y, 
whence  also  x'  =  2X  +y. 

1  Oeuvres  de  Fermat ',  n.  pp.  321  sqq. 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS   BY   PERM  AT  311 

Fermat  gave  two  rules  for  the  formation  of  this  second  triangle.  The 
first  rule  is  in  the  letter  above  quoted. 

First  Rule.  If  h,  /,  b  be  any  right-angled  triangle  satisfying  the  con- 
dition (h  being  the  hypotenuse,  /  >  b  and  /  -  b  =  i),  then,  if  a  triangle  be 
taken  in  which 

the  least  side      =2h+p  +  26, 
the  middle  side  =2/i+j>+  26+  i, 
the  greatest  side  =  3^  +  2  (/  +  6), 
this  triangle  also  will  be  a  right-angled  triangle  satisfying  the  condition. 

To  verify  this  from  the  above  considerations  we  have  to  consider  two 
cases,  according  as  2xy  is  greater  or  less  than  x2  -y2. 

Take  the  case  in  which  2xy  >  x2  -y2  ;  then 

2/-(*-jf=+i, 
and  accordingly 

2/2  -(*'-/)*  =  -i, 
or  x'2  -y'2  >  2x'y'. 

The  least  side,  therefore,  of  the  second  triangle 

2x'y  =  2X  (2X  +y)  =  2  (x2  +/)  +  (axy)  +  2  (x2  -/)  ; 
the  middle  side 

x'2  -y'2  =  2x'y  +  i  ; 
and  the  hypotenuse 

X1*  +/2  =  (ax  +yf  +  x2  =  3  (*2  +/)  +  2  (x2  -/  +  axy). 
The  expressions  on  the  right  hand  are  those  given  by  Fermat's  rule. 
Second  Rule. 

This  rule  is  given  in  a  letter  of  31  May  1643  probably  addressed 
to  St  Martin1. 

Fermat  says  :  Given  any  triangle  having  the  desired  property,  then,  to 
find  another  such  triangle  from  it,  "subtract  from  double  the  sum  of 
all  three  sides  each  of  the  perpendiculars  separately  [this  gives  two  of  the 
sides  of  the  new  triangle],  and  add  to  the  same  sum  the  greatest  side  [this 
gives  the  third  side]." 

That  is  to  say,  the  sides  of  the  new  triangle  are  respectively 


2Xy)-  2Xy, 


1  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  II.  p.  259. 


3i2  SUPPLEMENT 

In  fact  the  three  expressions  reduce  as  follows  : 

2  (2X2  +  2xy)  —  (x2  —y2)  =  33?  +  ^xy  +y2  =  (2X  + y}2  —  x2, 

2(2X2+2Xy)-2Xy=2x(2X  +y), 

2  (2X*  +  2xy)  +  x2  +yz  =  (2x  +y)2  +  x2 ; 
and  the  result  agrees  with  the  formation  of  the  triangle  from  x',  y'  above. 

From  the  triangle  (3,  4,  5)  we  get  (20,  21,  29);  from  the  latter  the 
triangle  (119,  120,  169),  and  soon.  The  sixth  such  triangle  is  (23660, 
23661,  33461). 

21.  To  find  all  the  rational  right-angled  triangles  in  ivhole  numbers 
which  are  such  that  the  two  perpendiculars  differ  by  any  given  number. 

To  his  explanation  of  the  First  Rule  above,  applicable  to  the  case 
where  the  given  number  is  i,  Fermat  adds  in  his  curt  way  :  "same  method 
for  finding  a  triangle  such  that  the  difference  of  the  two  smaller  sides  is 
a  given  number.  I  omit  the  rules,  and  the  limitations,  for  finding  all  the 
possible  triangles  of  the  kind  required,  for  the  rule  is  easy,  when  the 
principles  are  once  admitted." 

He  adds,  however,  to  his  Second  Rule1  its  application  to  the  case 
where  the  given  number  is  7. 

There  are,  he  says,  two  fundamental  triangles  with  the  desired  property, 
namely  5,  12,  13  and  8,  15,  17.  [In  the  case  of  the  former  2xy  >  x2-y*, 
and  in  the  case  of  the  second  x2  -y2  >  2xy.] 

From  the  first  triangle  (5,  12,  13)  we  deduce,  by  the  Rule,  a  triangle 
with  the  sides  2  .  30-  12,  2  .  30  -5,  2  .  30  +  13  or  (48,  55,  73) ;  from  the 
second  a  triangle  with  the  sides  2.40-15,  2.40-8,  2.40+17,  or 
(65,  72,  97)- 

And  so  on,  ad  infinitum. 

Next  to  the  explanation  of  the  first  of  the  above  Rules  Fermat 
mentions,  in  the  same  letter,  the  problem 

22.  To  find  right-angled  triangles  in  integral  numbers  £,  £,  77  (£>»/) 

such  that 

v      \ 

are  both  squares. 

He  observes  that  alternate  triangles  of  the  series  in  which  the  two 
smaller  sides  differ  by  i  satisfy  the  conditions,  those  namely  in  which  the 
smallest  side  77  is  2xy  and  not  x2-y2;  for  x*+y2-2xy  is  a  square,  and 
£-»7,  being  equal  to  i,  is  also  a  square. 

1  Oeuvres  de  Ffrmat,  n.  p.  250. 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY  FERMAT  313 

Thus,  while  3,  4,  5  does  not  satisfy  the  conditions,  (20,  21,  29)  does, 
and,  while  the  next  (119,  120,  169)  does  not  satisfy  the  conditions,  the 
triangle  after  that,  namely  (696,  697,  985),  does. 

Frenicle  naturally  objected,  in  his  reply,  that  the  triangles  should  not 
be  limited  to  those  in  which  the  smaller  square  representing  the  difference 
between  the  perpendicular  sides  is  r,  and  proposed  the  problem  in  the  form 

To  find  all  the  triangles  (£,  £,  77)  such  that 

are  both  squares, 

and  one  square  does  not  measure  the  other. 

Fermat  seems  to  have,  in  the  first  instance,  formed  the  triangle 
from  two  numbers  x,  y  where 

x  =  r*+  i,    y=  2r-2, 

and  then  to  have  given  the  more  general  rule  of  forming  a  triangle  from 
x  =  rs  +  s2,    y=2(r-s)s, 

where  r,  s  are  prime  to  one  another  (Letter  from  Frenicle  of  6  Sept. 
1641)'. 

It  appears  from  a  letter  of  Fermat's  to  Mersenne  of  27th  January 
i6432  that  St  Martin  propounded  to  Fermat  the  problem,  apparently 
suggested  by  Frenicle3, 

Given  a  number,  to  find  how  many  times  it  is  the  difference  between  the 
[perpendicular  ?]  sides  of  a  triangle  which  has  a  square  number  for  the 
difference  between  its  least  side  and  each  of  the  two  others  respectively. 

The  number  given  was  1803601800,  and  Fermat  replies  that  there  are 
243  triangles,  and  no  more,  which  satisfy  the  conditions.  He  adds  "  The 
universal  method,  which  I  will  communicate  to  him  if  he  asks  for  it,  is 
beautiful  and  noteworthy,  although  I  doubt  not  that  Frenicle  has  already 
given  him  everything  on  the  subject  of  these  questions." 

23.     To  find  two  triangles,  £,  £,  rj  and  £',  £',  77'  (£  >  77,  %  >  77')  such  that 


Suppose  the  two  triangles  formed  from  (x,  y)  and  (x',  /)  respectively, 
the  sides  being 

£  =  *»+/,       t=2xy,       17  =  ««-/. 


1  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  p.  233. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  250. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  247. 


3M  SUPPLEMENT 

Then  we  must  have 

(*-J>)2=2/2-(*'- 

and  2f-(x-y}*  =  (x'-yJ 

which  equations  show  that  y  =y',  and  that 


are  three  squares  in  arithmetical  progression. 

Suppose  that  these  squares  are  i,  25,  49  respectively  ;  thus  y  =  5  ; 
x-y=i,  so  that  #=1  +  5;  x'-y^y,  so  that  #'  =  5  +  7. 

Fermat  accordingly  gives  the  rule  :  Find  three  squares  in  arithmetical 
progression  ;  then  form  the  first  triangle  from  (i)  the  sum  of  the  sides  of 
the  first  and  second  squares  and  (2)  the  side  of  the  second,  and  the 
second  triangle  from  (i)  the  sum  of  the  sides  of  the  second  and  third 
squares  and  (2)  the  side  of  the  second1. 

In  the  particular  case,  the  triangles  are  formed  from  (6,  5)  and  from 
(12,  5)  respectively;  the  triangles  are  therefore  (61,  60,  n)  and  (169,  120, 
119)  respectively. 

For  solving  the  problem  of  finding  three  square  numbers  in  arithmetical 
progression  Fermat  seems  first  to  have  given  a  rule  which  was  not  general, 
and  then  in  a  later  document  to  have  formed  the  sides  of  the  three  squares 
as  follows  : 

r^-zs2,     r*  +  zrs  +  25*,     r*  +  \rs  +  2S2. 

Frenicle  formed  them  thus2: 


the  latter  form  agreeing  with  Fermat's  if  p  =  r  +  s,  and  q  =  s. 

Fre'nicle  expresses  his  formula  neatly  by  saying  that  we  take  for  the 
side  of  the  middle  square  the  hypotenuse  of  any  primitive  triangle  formed 
from  p,  q,  i.e.  p^  +  q"*,  for  the  side  of  the  smallest  square  the  difference 
between  the  perpendicular  sides  of  the  same  triangle,  i.e.  p^-q^—zpq,  and 
for  the  side  of  the  largest  square  the  sum  of  the  perpendicular  sides  of  the 
same  triangle. 

Suppose  the  primitive  triangle  is  (28,  45,  53)  formed  from  (7,  2). 
Then  the  sides  of  the  three  squares  in  arithmetical  progression  are  17,  53 
and  73,  the  squares  themselves  being  289,  2809,  5329.  The  triangles 
derived  from  these  squares  and  having  the  above  property  are  formed  from 
(7°>  53)  and  from  (126,  53)  respectively,  and  are  therefore  (7709,  7420, 
2091)  and  (18685,  i3356»  13067)- 

1  Oeuvres  de  Fermat,  n.  p.  225. 

2  Ibid.,  II.  pp.  234-5. 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS   BY  FERMAT  315 

24.     To  find  two  right-angled  triangles  (£,  &  t\)  and  (£',  £',  17')  such  that 


Form  the  triangle  £,  £,  r;  from  the  numbers  x,  i  ;  then 

£=*2+i,     £  =  #2--i,     17  =2*. 
Thus  £'=  xz  +  i  ;  and,  since   £'  -  17'  =  £  -  17  =  #2  -  2*  -  i,  it  follows  that 

T\   =  2X  +  2. 

It  remains  to  secure  that  £'2  +  >/a  =  (a;2  +  i)2  +  (2X  +  2)2  shall  be  a  square, 
that  is, 

x*  +  6x*  +  8x  +  5  =  a  square 

=  (*2+3)2,say; 
therefore  x  =  ^. 

Hence  the  triangle  £,  ^,  17  is  formed  from  £,  i  or  from  1,2;  but  this 
solution  will  not  do,  as  it  gives  a  negative  value  for  £.  Accordingly 
we  must  find  a  fresh  value  for  x,  which  we  obtain  by  forming  the  triangle 
from  x  +  i,  2. 

The  sides  are  then 

(;=«•  +  2*  -i-  5,    £  =  *2  +  2*  -  3,    17  =  4^  +  4; 
thus  £'  =  .x:2+  2^  +  5,    T?/  =  ^'-(jc2-2^-7)  =  4^+  12. 

Therefore  (x*  +  2X  -t-  5)2  +  (4^  +  i2)2  must  be  a  square,  or 
#4  +  4X3  +  30^  +  i  i6x  +  169  =  a  square 

^Oa  +  yf*-*2)2'  say» 

from  which  we  obtain  #  =  --V$n  and  the  triangle  is  formed  from  -§££,  2, 
or  (in  whole  numbers)  from  -  979,  1092. 

"  We  can  use  these  numbers  as  if  both  were  real  and  form  the  triangle 
from  1092,  979.  We  thus  obtain  the  two  triangles 

2150905,     2138136,     234023, 

2165017,     2150905,     246792, 
which  satisfy  the  conditions  of  the  question." 

25.     To  find  two  right-angled  triangles  (£,  £,  17)  and  (C,  £,  V)  such  that 


Form  the  triangle  £,  &  t\  from  the  numbers  x  +  i,  i  ;  then 

£  =  #2  +  2#  +  2,     £  =  ^+2*,     17  =  2*  +  2. 
Thus  ?  =  x*+2x+  2,  and  77'  =  £  +  *7-£'=  2a;- 


316  SUPPLEMENT 

We  must  now  have  £'2  +  rj'2  -  (x2  +  2X  +  2)2  +  (2#)2  a  square  ;  that  is, 
x4  +  4X3  +  1 2Xt  +  Sx  +  4  -  a  square 

-  (x*  +  2X  +  4)2,  say  ; 
whence  x=  —  |. 

Accordingly  we  substitute  y  -  f  for  x,  and  we  must  have 

y4    _    2yS    +      IByZ  _    20  y    +      1   69     _   &     SqUar6 


This  gives  j  =  f  £,  and  *  =  f£  -  1  =  ^ 

The  triangle  £,  £,  y  is  therefore  formed  from  f£,  i,  or  from  29,  26,  and 
is  therefore  1517,  165,  1508  ;  the  triangle  £',  £',  77'  is  1525,  1517,  156. 

Or  again  we  may  proceed  thus  from  the  point  where  we  found  x  =  -  f  . 
The  triangle  £,  £,  >;  may  be  formed  from  -  J,  i  or  from  -  i,  2. 

We  therefore  form  a  triangle  from  x  —  i,  2  and  start  afresh. 

The  sides  are 

£  =  *2-2*+5,     £  =  x*-2x-3,     77  =  4^-4. 

Thus  £'  =  x"  -  2X  +  5,  and  ?/  =  £  +  77  -  ^'  =  $x  -  12. 

Hence  (x2  -  2X  +  s)2  +  (4^  -  i2)2  must  be  a  square  ;  that  is, 
x*  -  43?  +  30#2  -  n6x+  169  =  a  square 

=  (i3-ff*  +  :x;2)2>  sav- 

This  gives  ^^yf,  and  the  triangle  £,  ^,  77  is  therefore  formed  from 
y|^,  2,  or  from  29,  26,  as  before. 

The  remaining  problems  on  rational  right-angled  triangles  in  the 
Inventum  Novum  are  cases  given  in  Part  n.  of  that  collection  to  illustrate 
the  method  of  the  Triple-Equation  due  to  Fermat  and  explained  by  him  on 
Diophantus  vi.  22  as  well  as,  at  greater  length,  in  the  Inventum  Novum. 
An  account  of  the  method  will  be  found  in  a  later  section  of  this  Supple- 
ment ;  but  the  problems  applying  the  method  to  right-angled  triangles 
will  be  enunciated  here. 

26.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  77  such  that 


By  Problem  2  above  find  a  right-angled  triangle  h,  /,  b  (h  being  the 
hypotenuse)  in  which  h,  p  +  b  are  both  squares  ;  the  first  condition  is  thus 
satisfied. 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY  FERMAT  317 

To  find  £,  £,  77,  put  £  =  hx,  £=px,  ri  =  bx. 

The  three  remaining  conditions  thus  give  a  "triple-equation"  in  x. 
[The  numbers  would  of  course  be  enormous.] 

27.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle.  £,  £,  77  such  that 


where  m  is  any  given  number. 

Fermat  supposes  m  =  2. 

Assume  for  the  required  triangle   (3*,   4*,  5*);  we   have   then   the 
triple-equation 

144^+    3*  =  «M 

144**  +    4x=v*  U 


the  solution  of  which  gives  x  =  ^^TF>  and  the  triangle  is 

507  .676  _4A| 

¥8016*       ¥8lTTS">        i»SOl6' 

28.      To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  ^,  t\  such  that 


Suppose  w  =  2. 

Find  a  triangle  (Problem  3  above)  in  which  £,  £  -  17  are  both  squares, 
say  the  triangle  (119,  120,  169).     Put  119*,  1200:,  169*  for  the  sides  of 
the  required  triangle,  and  we  have  the  "  triple-equation  " 
166464;*?+ 

166464^+ 

1  66464^  +  338^  = 
29.      To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  ^,  t\  such  that 


•     (f  +  i?  +  £)a  +  «C  =  « 

where  m  is  any  given  number. 

*  The  enunciation  has  £  (£  -  ^T;)  instead  of  ^  -  ££17  ;  but  £  (£  -  Jfi;)  is  inconsistent  with 
the  solution  given,  and  I  have  therefore  altered  it  so  as  to  correspond  to  the  solution. 


318  SUPPLEMENT 

Take  a  right-angled  triangle  in  which  i,/  are  the  sides  about  the  right 
angle  and  are  such  that  i  -  \p  is  a  square  (Problem  1  1  above). 

Let  q  be  the  hypotenuse  of  the  triangle  so  taken,  so  that  q  -  V(/2  +  l  )> 
and  take  as  the  sides  of  the  required  triangle  x,  px,  qx  ;  we  thus  have 
the  triple-equation 


(i  +/  +  ?)***+/*  = 
(i  +/  +  qf  y?  +  mqx  = 

30.     To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  £,  £,  t]  such  that 


First  find  a  triangle  in  which  one  of  the  perpendiculars  is  a  square,  and 
the  sum  of  the  perpendiculars  is  also  a  square,  say  40,  9,  41. 

Take  403:,  yx,  41  x  as  the  sides  of  the  required  triangle;  and  we  there- 
fore have  the  triple-equation 

Sioox2  +  ^ox  —  uz 
8  1  oox2  +      X  = 


SECTION    IV. 

OTHER  PROBLEMS  BY  FERMAT. 

31.      To  find  two  numbers  £,  t\  such  that 

(1)  (-(?-*)} 

(2)  r)-(g*-  rf)  >  are  all  squares. 
(3),  (4)            t±r,H?-W 

Let  ^  +  i]  =  i  —  2x,  £  —  t)  —  2x,  so  that  $  =  £,  i\  =  ^  —  2x,  and 

e-rf=2X-4X*. 
Thus  (3),  (4)  are  both  satisfied. 
The  other  conditions  (i)  and  (2)  give 

4X2  -  2X  +       = 


The  difference  -  2X  =  $x  .  \  ;  and,  putting  (2X  +  ^)2  =  4^2  -  2X  +  \  ,  we 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS   BY  FERMAT  319 

The  required  numbers  are  therefore  J,  ^5T. 

Another  pair  of  numbers  satisfying  the  conditions  will  be  obtained  by 
substituting^  +T7F  for  x  in  the  expressions  to  be  made  squares,  and  so  on. 

32.      To  find  two  numbers  £,  17  such  that 


Let  the  numbers  be  £  +  x,  %  -x;  therefore  £-TJ,  as  well  as  ?-if,  is 
equal  to  2x,     The  sum  f  +  17  =  i. 

Therefore  i  ±2X  must  be  a  square,  or  we  have  the  double-equation 
IH-  zx 


Replace  x  by  |y  +  j  so  as  to  make  i  +  zx  a  square  ;  therefore 
i  -  2y  —y*  =  a  square 

=  (i-37)2,  say, 
whence  y  =  f  ,  and  #  =  ^y2  +  _y  =  £|. 

The  required  numbers  are  therefore  f£,  ^. 

33.      To  find  two  numbers  £,  17  j«r£  that 

(£+9)(£*+f)?=««Mfe 

Assume  £  =  #,  17  =  2  -  #  ;  therefore 

(£  +  ?)  (£2  +  V8)  =  2  (z*2  -4*  +  4)  =  a  cube 

=  (2  -**)•,  say. 

This  gives  #  =  -  f  ;  and  to  get  a  "  real  "  value  of  x  we  must  substitute 
y  —  \  for  x  in  the  expression  to  be  made  a  cube. 
Thus  4^-44^  +  125  =  a  cube 


and  j  =  ^£,  so  that  *=>>-!  = 

The  required  numbers  are  therefore  f|!inr, 
COR.     We  observe  : 

(1)  that  the  numerators  26793,  15799  satisfy  the  conditions  ; 

(2)  that  we  have  in  fact  solved  the  problem  To  divide  2  into  two  parts 
such  that  twice  the  sum  of  their  squares  is  a  cube  ; 

(3)  that  we  can  solve  in  the  same  manner  the  problem   To  find  two 
numbers  such  that  any  multiple  of  the  sum  of  their  squares  is  a  cube.     Thus 
suppose   that  the  multiple  is  5  ;   we  then  assume  x  and   5  -  x  for  the 
numbers  and  proceed  as  above; 


320  SUPPLEMENT 

(4)  that  we  can  also  deduce  the  solution  of  the  following  "  very  fine 
problem  "  : 

To  find  two  numbers  such  that  their  difference  is  equal  to  the  difference  of 
their  biquadrates  or  fourth  powers. 

In  other  words,  we  can  solve  the  indeterminate  equation 
*-**.£-  ^r 

For  we  have  only  to  take  the  two  numbers  found  above,  namely  26793 
and  15799,  and  divide  by  (as  a  common  denominator)  the  root  of  the  cube 
formed  by  multiplying  their  sum  by  the  sum  of  their  squares. 

This  common  denominator  is  34540,  and  the  two  required  numbers  are 


This  latter  problem  is  alluded  to  in  Fermat's  note  to  Diophantus  iv.  i  r 
in  these  terms  :  "  But  whether  it  is  possible  to  find  two  biquadrates  the 
difference  between  which  is  equal  to  the  difference  between  their  sides  is  a 
question  to  be  investigated  by  trying  the  device  furnished  by  our  method, 
which  will  doubtless  succeed.  For  let  two  biquadrates  be  sought  such 
that  the  difference  of  their  sides  is  i,  while  the  difference  between  the 
biquadrates  themselves  is  a  cube.  The  sides  will,  in  the  first  instance,  be 
-^  and  |f.  But,  as  one  is  negative,  let  the  operation  be  repeated,  in 
accordance  with  my  method,  and  let  the  first  side  be  x--j^\  the  second 
side  will  be  #  +  |f,  and  the  new  operation  will  give  real  numbers  satisfying 
the  condition  of  the  problem  V 

34.     To  find  two  numbers  £,  tj  such  that 

£4  +  S7?4  =  a  square, 

Fermat  (or  De  Billy)  observes  that  it  must  be  required  that  the  first 
biquadrate  (£4)  shall  not  be  unity,  for  in  that  case  the  problem  would  be 
too  easy,  since  1  +  3.1  =  4  and  i  +  3  .  16  =  49. 
Assume  £  =  x,  ti  =  x-i  ;  therefore 

4^  -12:^  +  18^  -  i  zx  +  3  =  a  square 

'=  (zxz  -  3*  +  f  )2,  say. 

This  gives  ^=\1-,  #-i  =  f;  and  a  solution  in  whole  numbers  is 
i  =  n,  T/  =  3.  In  fact  n4  +  3  .  34=  14641  +  243=  14884  or  i222. 

We  can  also  take  any  equimultiples  of  (n,  3),  as  (22,  6)  and  (33,  9)  ; 
and  the  latter  pairs  of  numbers  severally  satisfy  the  condition  of  the 
problem. 

1  It  gives  in  fact          ^  ,    *          as  a  solution  of  the  subsidiary  problem,  and  from  this 
we  can  obtain  the  same  solution  of  the  main  problem  as  that  given  above 
/26T93    i5799\ 
\3454°'  3454°/  ' 


THEOREMS  AND   PROBLEMS   BY  FERMAT  321 

SECTION  V. 

FERMAT'S  TRIPLE-EQUATIONS. 

Fermat's  own  description  of  his  method  of  "  triple-equations,"  which  is 
contained  in  his  note  on  vi.  22,  is  as  follows  : 

"Where  double-equations  do  not  suffice,  we  must  have  recourse  to 
triple-equations,  which  are  my  discovery  and  lead  to  the  solution  of  a 
multitude  of  elegant  problems. 

If,  for  example,  the  three  expressions 

.v  +  4,     2.r  +  4,     5*  +  4 

have  to  be  made  squares,  we  have  a  triple-equation  the  solution  of  which 
can  be  effected  by  means  of  a  double-equation.  If  for  x  we  substitute  a 
number  which  when  increased  by  4  gives  a  square,  e-g.jr  +  4y  [Fermat  says 
^  +  4-r],  the  expressions  to  be  made  squares  become 

f  +  w  +  4,      2jr  +  &y  +  4,     5^  +  2qy  +  4. 

The  first  is  already  a  square  ;  we  have  therefore  only  to  make 


2y*+    Sj  +  4» 
^y2  +  201-  +  4  J 


severally  squares. 

That  is  to  say,  the  problem  is  reduced  to  a  double-equation. 

This  double-equation  gives,  it  is  true,  only  one  solution  :  but  from 
this  solution  we  can  deduce  another,  from  the  second  a  third,  and  so  on. 
In  fact,  when  we  have  obtained  one  value  for  y  [say  _>•  =  «],  we  substitute 
for  y  in  the  equations  the  binomial  expression  consisting  of  y  plus  the  value 
found  [i.e.  y  +  a\.  In  this  way  we  can  find  any  number  of  successive 
solutions  each  derived  from  the  preceding  one.'? 

The  subject  is  developed  in  the  Doctrinae  Analyticae  Inventum  Novum 
of  De  Billy  already  mentioned  so  often. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  absolute  term  in  all  the  three  expressions 
to  be  made  squares  is  a  square.  It  need  not  be  the  same  square  in  the 
original  expressions  ;  if  the  absolute  terms  are  different  squares,  the  three 
expressions  can,  so  far  as  necessary,  be  multiplied  by  squares  which  will 
make  the  absolute  terms  the  same,  when  the  method  will  apply. 

We  may  put  the  solution  generally  thus.     Suppose  that 


have  to  be  made  squares  (a,  b,  c  or  some  of  them  may  be  negative  as  well 
as  positive). 

Put  ax  =f  +  2py, 

which  makes  the  first  expression  a  square  (or  of  course  we   could  put 
ax  =  a*y*  +  za£y). 

H.  D.  21 


322  SUPPLEMENT 

Substitute  (y2  +  2py)\a  for  x  in  the  second  and  third  expressions. 
Therefore  ~ 


must  both  be  squares  ;  or,  if  we  multiply  the  first  expression  by  r2  and  the 
second  by  q*  (so  as  to  make  the  absolute  terms  the  same),  we  have  to  solve 
the  double-equation 

' 


-a  q-  (f  +  2py}  +  fr*  -  v*. 

The  difference  =  -   —  —  .  j2  +  2p  .  -  -      —  .y. 

This  has  to  be  separated  into  two  factors  of  the  form  \y,  py  +  v,  where 
v  must  be  equal  to  2qr  (in  order  that,  when  ^  {(A  +  /*)j  +  v}  is  squared  and 
equated  to  the  first,  or  when  i{(A-//,)j-  v}2  is  equated  to  the  second,  of 
the  two  expressions,  the  absolute  terms  ^V2  may  cancel  each  other). 

A  different  separation  into  factors  is  possible  if  b[a  and  c\a  are  both 
squares  ;  but  otherwise,  as  Fermat  says,  the  method  gives  only  one 
solution  in  the  first  instance  ;  the  above  difference  must  necessarily  be 
split  into  the  factors 

p(b^-cf\  ,    qr 

—  *J-y   and   y-y  +  2ar. 
aqr  pj 

Half  the  sum  of  these  factors 

-"    q 


aqr  p 

f_-cfq^       r 
apqr  ) 

Squaring  this  and  equating  it  to  —  (y~  +  2py)  4-  /r2,  we  have 

fi     (aq-ri  +  brp--cp1q- 

\\y( 

t2-7  \  apqr 

therefore 


ap 


THEOREMS   AND   PROBLEMS   BY  FERMAT  323 

that  is, 

-  zcafq'i*  -  zabfft*) 

=  wpft*  (br*f  +  cff  -  aft*), 

or  _  +  cff  -  a?**) 

J 


whence  *!=•?-.  —  ^-M  is  found. 
\          a      J 


Exx.  from  the  Inventum  Novitm. 
2*  +  4  -j 
yc  +  4  -  to  be  made  squares. 


(i)  2*  +  4  -j 

-  to  be 


Here  a  =  2,  ^  =  6,  ;  r=  3,  /  =  q  =  r  =  2  ;  therefore 

4.2.32(6.  16  +  3.  16-  2.  16) 


and 


i62  (4  +  36  +  9  -  2  .  6  .  3  -  2  .  3  .  2  -  2  .  2  .  6) 

16.7 
23    ' 

I  /    .,  x       I    (112^       4-II2)          56,  1120 

-(  r  +  4,r)  =  -  -I—  —^=^-,(112-4.2^)  =  -  . 

2V-  2\232          23.  j      23^  529 


i-| 

4  j-  to  be 

J 


3*  +  4   -  to  be  made  squares. 

2X  +  Q 

Here  a=  i,  ^  =  3,  ^=  2,  p  =  i,  q—  2,  r=3;  therefore 


362  +  9.  81  +4 .  16—  12  .  36  —  16  .  36  —  6  .  36.  9 

-  4  •  36  =  144 

-  36 .  46  +  9  .  81  +  4  .  16 1  ~  863  ' 

and  *  =  /  +  2j  =  (i**)2  +  2  (|4|)  =  ff|4f£. 

The  disadvantage  of  the  method  is  that  it  leads  so  soon  to  such  very 
large  numbers. 

Other  examples  from  the  Inventum  Novum  are  the  following,  which, 
like  those  above  given,  can  be  readily  solved  ab  initio  without  using  the 
above  general  formula. 

(3)     To  solve 


i  +  50:  =  "or) 
ic  se 

-£}• 


Put  x  =y*  +  2>-,  and  substituting  in  the  second  and  third  expressions  we 
have  only  to  solve  the  double-equation 


324  SUPPLEMENT 

The  difference  =  3  (f  +  ay)  =  y  (y  +  2). 

Equate  the  square  of  half  the  difference  of  the  factors  to  the  smaller 
expression  ;  thus 

(y—  i  Y  =  zyr  +  4y  +  i , 

whence  y  =  -  6,  and  x  =y  +  zy  =  24. 

(4)     Equations  x  +  9  =  u*' 

3*  +  9  = 

5*  +  9  =  < 
In  this  case  we  put  x  -y1  +  6y,  and  we  have  to  solve 


5  (y*  +  6y)  +  9  =  w'2 )  ' 
The  difference  =  2  (y*  +  6y)  =  zy  (y  +  6) ;  we  then  have 


and  y  =  -  f±,  so  that  x  =y*  +  6y  =  -^Vr- 
(5)     Equations  i+   x-u2 


If  we  assume  x.=y*  +  2y,  we  find  y  —  T2T  and  x  =  T4^. 
There  are  two  other  problems  of  the  same  sort  which  are  curiously 
enunciated. 

(6)     "  To  find  three  cubes  such  that,  if  we  add  their  sum  to  numbers 
proportional  to  the  cubes  respectively,  we  may  have  three  squares." 

What  Fermat  really  does  is  to  take  three  cubes  (a3,  ft\  c'A)  such  that  their 
sum  is  a  square  (this  is  necessary  in  order  to  make  the  term  independent 
of  x  in  each  of  the  three  expressions  a  square)   and  then   to  assume 
aax,  Px,  c>x  for  the  numbers  proportional  to  the  cubes.     He  takes  as  the 
cubes  i,  8,  27,  the  sum  of  which  is  36.     Thus  we  have  the  triple-equation 
36+      x  =  u*  | 
36  +    Sx  =  z?   \-  . 

T>6  +  2'lX  =  Wi  } 

We   put  x  =y  +  1  2y  in  order  to  make  the  first  expression  a  square. 
Then,  solving  the  double-equation 

36+8  (y-  +  izy)  =  v2 


we  obtain  y  =  ^3*  and  x  =y-  +  i2y  =  -§§f|-. 

(7)  "To  find  three  different  square  numbers  such  that,  if  we  add 
to  them  respectively  three  numbers  in  harmonic  progression,  the  three 
resulting  numbers  will  be  squares." 

Fermat  first  assumes  three  square  numbers  i,  4,  16  and  then  takes 
2X,  3#,  6#  as  the  required  numbers  in  harmonic  progression.  (He  observes 


THEOREMS   AND    PROBLEMS   BY    FERMAT  325 

that,  of  the  three  numbers  in  harmonic  progression,  the  greatest  must  be 
greater  than  the  sum  of  the  other  two.)     We  thus  have  the  triple-equation 


I  +  2X  =  lil    1 

4  +  3*=^   \, 


or,  if  we  make  the  absolute  terms  the  same  square, 
16  +  32.*  =  u"~ 

l6+  I2X  =  V"* 

Making  the  last  expression  a  square  by  putting  £/  +  ^y  for  x,  we  solve 
as  usual  and  obtain  y  =  —  ^-  and  x  =  \  ( y*  +  By)  =  ^^ 

Fermat  observes  that  triple-equations  of  the  form 

x2  +  $x  =  it? 
that  is  to  say,  of  the  form 

f-y?  +  ax  =  u> 
fy?  +  bx  - 1? 
jZx*  4-  ex  -  v? 

can  be  similarly  solved,  because  they  can  be  reduced  to  the  above  linear 
form  by  putting  x=\\y  and  multiplying  up  by/. 
Examples. 
(i)     To  solve  the  triple-equation 

43?  +  6x  =  v1 
^x2  +  gx  —  ix? 
If  x  =  i/y,  this  is  equivalent  to 


Putting  y  =  l?z2  +  22  and  solving  as  usual,  we  find 

•  »-*TO7HP+8S=fftf»  and  x  =  % 

(2)     Equations  «*  +    x  = 


90:-  +  20; 
This  is  equivalent  to 

v  +  i 


«*  +    x  =  i?  } 
4^r  +  3^-  =  i?   |  • 
90:-  +  20;  =  a*2  J 


ay  4-  9  =  r</'2 
We  put  y  =  z-  +  2s  and,  solving  the  double-equation 


e  find  s  -  ^i,  .r  -  f  ^^,  so  that  *  -  |UHS- 


326  SUPPLEMENT 

(3)  "  To  find  three  square  numbers  such  that,  if  we  add  their  sum  to 
each  of  their  roots  respectively,  we  obtain  a  square." 

Choose,  says  Fermat,  three  squares  such  that  their  sum  is  a  square  and 
such  that  the  root  of  the  greatest  is  greater  than  the  sum,  of  the  roots  of  the 
other  two  (the  reason  for  this  last  condition  will  shortly  appear)  ;  e.g.  let 
the  squares  be  4,  36,  81,  the  sum  of  which  is  121. 

Let  4#2,  36^,  Si.*2  be  the  three  square  numbers  required;  therefore 


I2IX2  +  bx^V* 

=  it? 


The  solution,  arrived  at  as  above,  is  x  = 

Fermat  actually  used  his  triple-equations  for  the  purpose,  mainly,  of 
extending  problems  in  Diophantus  where  three  numbers  are  found 
satisfying  certain  conditions  so  as  to  find  four  numbers  satisfying  like 
conditions.  The  cases  which  occur  are  in  his  notes  to  the  problems 
in.  15,  iv.  19,  20,  v.  3,  27,  28;  they,  are  referred  to  in  my  notes  on 
those  problems. 

De  Billy  observes  (what  he  says  Fermat  admitted  he  had  not  noticed) 
that  the  method  fails  when,  the  absolute  terms  being  the  same  square,  the 
coefficient  of  x  in  one  of  the  linear  expressions  to  be  made  squares  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  coefficients  of  x  in  the  other  two.  Thus  suppose  that 

i  +  2x,  i  +  3*,   i  +  5jc 

have  to  be  made  squares.     To  make  the  first  expression  a  square  put 
x  =  2^  +  2j.     The  other  expressions  then  become 

i  +  6y  +  6y,   i  +'  iqy  +  ioy-. 
The  difference  is  4^  +  %y  =  zy  (2y  +  2),  and  the  usual  method  gives 

(27  +  i)2  =  io/2  +  ioy  +  i, 
or  6y2  +  6y  =  o, 

so  that  y  =  —  i  ,  and  consequently  x  =  2y*  +  2y  =  o. 

It  does  not  however  follow,  says  De  Billy,  that  a  set  of  expressions  so 
related  cannot  be  made  squares  by  one  value  of  x.  Thus  i  +  $x,  i  +  i6x 
and  i  +  2ix  are  all  squares  if  #  =  3,  the  squares  being  16,  49,  64.  He 
adds  (§  n)  that  "we  must  observe  with  Fermat"  that  the  triple-equation 

2 


not  only  cannot  be  solved  by  the  above  method,  but  cannot  be  solved  at 
all,  because  "  there  cannot  be  four  squares  in  arithmetical  progression"  which 
however  would  be  the  case  if  the  above  equations  had  a  solution  and  we 
took  i  for  the  first  of  the  four  squares. 


THEOREMS    AND    PROBLEMS   BY   FERMAT  327 

The  subject  of  triple-equations  has  been  taken  up  afresh  in  a  recent 
paper  by  P.  v.  Schaewen1.     The  following  are  the  main  points  made. 
(i)     The  equations  ax+JP  = 


=  it? 
can  be  reduced  to  the  form 

i  +  ax  =  u" 

i  +  b'x'  -  v' 

i  +  c'x'  =  w 

by  substituting  MX'  for  x,  where  m  is  the  least  common  multiple  of/'2,  ?2,  r2. 
(2)  The  method  of  Fermat  has  the  disadvantage  that,  with  one 
operation,  it  only  gives  one  value  for  x  and  not  by  any  means  always  the 
smallest  solution.  From  this  point  of  view  there  is  a  better  method,  namely 
that  of  finding  the  general  solution  of  the  first  two  equations,  substituting  the 
general  value  of  x  so  found  in  the  third  equation  and  solving  the  resulting 
equation  in  a  new  unknown.  Consider  the  equations 


i  +  ax  -  it1  \ 
i  +  bx  =  i?   > . 

i  +  ex  •=  -up  j 


Suppose  i  +  ax  =  /2,  some  square.     Therefore 
i+6x=i  +-(/3-i), 

and,  multiplying  by  a3,  we  have  to  make 

abp-  +  a2  —  ab  a  square. 

This  is  a  square  if/=i  ;  and  we  therefore  substitute  q  +  i  for/.     Thus 
abq-  +  zabq  +  a2  =  a  square 


say. 

Therefore  (ab  -  ^  q  =  2  (™  a  - 

zan  (m  —  nti) 
and  9  =  ~>->    ' 


whence  p=g+i-   — ^j^TT^i 

((2amn  —  abn2  —  tn?Y 


and 


-  4  ;//«  w  — 


Substituting  this  value  of  x  in  the  expression  I'+ex,  we  have  a  biquad- 
ratic expression  in  m  which  has  to  be  made  a  square,  namely 
M4  -  ^ctrfn  +  {4  (a  +  b)  c  -  2ab\  m*ri2  -  ^abcmi? 

1  Bibliotheca  Mathematica,  IX3,  1909,  pp.  289-300. 


328  SUPPLEMENT 

Example.     Find  x  such  that 

i  —  x,  i  +  4#,  i  +  "jx  are  all  squares. 

First  find  the  general  value  of  x  which  will  make  the  first   two   ex- 
pressions squares  ;  this  is 


or,  if  we  substitute  k  for  2n/m, 


We  have  now  to  make  i  +  TX  a  square  ;  that  is, 

k*  +  14/fc3  +  23/£2  —  i4/fc  +  i  -  a  square. 

The  first  solution  of  this  is  k  =  ±  i,  and  by  means  of  these  values  we  get 
the  further  values  k  =  f  and  k  -  \^  (cf.  Euler's  solution  of  the  problem  of 
making  x2  +  i  and  x  +  i  simultaneously  squares  quoted  in  my  note  on 
pp.  84,  85).  The  corresponding  values  of  a-  are  respectively 

3  120       .  120120 
~  ,  --  o  and  ---  —j  i-  . 

4  "2Q2  421- 

Fermat's  method  gives,  as  the  next  solution  after  f  ,  the  value 


(3)  v.  Schaewen  observes  that  the  problem  of  finding  x  such  that  three 
different  expressions  of  the  form  mx  +  n  are  all  squares  can  always  be  solved 
provided  that  we  know  one  solution  ;  in  this  case  the  absolute  terms  need 
not  be  squares.     I  doubt  however  if  he  is  right  in  supposing  that  the 
possibility  of  solution  in  this  case  was  not  known  to  Fermat  or  De  Billy. 
I  think  it  probable  that  Fermat  at  least  was  aware  of  the  fact  ;  for  this  case 
of  the  triple-equation  is  precisely  parallel  to  that  of  the  double-equation 

2x  +  5  =  t? 

6x  +  3  =  w- 

given  as  a  possible  case  by  Fermat  in  his  note  on  Sachet's  conditions  for 
the  possibility  of  solving  double-equations  (cf.  note  on  p.  287  above). 
Fermat  says  that  the  square  to  which  2x  +  $  should  be  made  equal  is  16 
and  that  to  which  6x  +  3  should  be  made  equal  is  36  (corresponding  to 
x  =  5^),  adding  that  an  infinite  number  of  other  solutions  can  be  found. 

(4)  Lastly,  v.  Schaewen  investigates  the  conditions  under  which  the 
equations 

i  +  ax  =  «2,   i  +  bx  =  v2,   i  +  (a  +  b}  x  =  w~, 

which  cannot  be  solved  by  Fermat's  method,  are  nevertheless  capable  of 
solution,  and  shows  how  to  solve  them  when  they  have  a  solution  other 
than  x  =  o. 


SOLUTIONS   BY    EULER.     PROBLEM    i  329 

SECTION  VI. 

SOME   SOLUTIONS    BY   EULER. 

PROBLEM  i.     To  solve  getierally  the  indeterminate  equation* 


Vieta  solved  this  equation  on  the  assumption  that  two  of  the  four 
numbers  are  taken  as  known. 

[I  noted  on  p.  102  Euler's  remark  that,  if  33  +  43  is  turned  into  the 
difference  between  two  cubes  by  the  direct  use  of  Vieta's  second  formula, 
the  formula  gives  33  +  43  =  (A^)3  -  (±£f-f  but  not  3s  +  43  -  63  -  5'.  I  ought 
however  to  have  observed-  that  the  latter  can  be  obtained  from  Vieta's  first 
formula  if  we  multiply  throughout  by  a3  +  ^.  The  formula  then  becomes 

a3  (a3  +  6*f  =  6*  (<?  +  P)3  +  c?  (a3-  zPf  +  P  (203-  £*)3. 
Putting  a=2,  6=1,  we  have  i83=93+  123+  153,  which  gives  (after  division 
by  33)  63  =  33  +  43  +  53.     The  next  solution,  obtained  by  putting  a  =  3,  b=  i, 
is  84*  =  283  +  533  +  753  ;    if  a  -  3,  b  -  2,  we  have  ios3  =  33*  +  yo3  +  Q23;  and 
so  on.     Similarly  Vieta's  second  formula  gives 

a3  (a3  +  2^)3  -  a3  (a3  -  ^)3  +  ^  (a3  -  ^)3  +  P  (20*  +  Pf, 
and  we  obtain  other  integral  solutions  ;  thus 

if  a  =  2,  b  =  i,  we  have  2o3  =    73  +  i43  +  1  7:!, 
if  a  =  3,  b=\,  we  have  &f  =  26'  +  $$3+  78*; 
and  so  on.] 

(i)  A  more  general  solution  can  be  obtained  by  treating  only  one  of 
the  three  numbers  x,  y,  z  as  known. 

To  solve  cf  +  x3  +y  =  v1, 

put  x  =pu  +  r,  y  =  qu  —  r; 

therefore 


say; 
and  we  obtain,  after  dividing  out  by  (/  +  q)  u*, 


1  N.  Comment.  Acad.  Petrof.  1756-57,  Vol.  vr.  (1761),  pp.  IJ5  sqq-  =  Commtnt. 
arithm.  I.  pp.  193-206.  Cf.  pp.  101-2  above. 

-  See  Nesselmanivs  "Anmerkungen  zu  Diophant"  in  the  Zcitsfhrift  fiir  Math.  u. 
Physik,  XXXVII.  (1892),  Hist.  litt.  Abt.  p.  123. 


330  SUPPLEMENT 


-  ?")  -  ^  (/  +  ?)'"' 


_  30  V4  (/  +  ?)  - 


where  c,  r  and  the  ratio  /  :  q  may  be  given  any  values  we  please. 

(2)     A  more  general  solution  still  is  obtained  if  we  regard  none  of  the 
first  three  cubes  as  known. 

Suppose  that,  in  the  equation 

x*  +  y*  4-  z*  =  v"; 

x  =  mt  +  pu,  y=nt  +  qu,  z  =  -  nt  +  ru. 
Therefore 

o?  +y3  +  23  = 


Put  now  Z 

and  we  have,  after  division  by  u", 

3/  {w/  +  «  (f  -r>)}  +  u  (f 


n*  (<?  +  r)}3, 


m6 

whence,  neglecting  a  common  factor  which  may  be  chosen  arbitrarily,  we 
have 

/  -  m6  (f  +  g3  +  r3)-  \m>p  +  j?  (q  +  r}f, 

u  =  yn*  {nfp  +  n2  (y  +  r}Y  -  3^'  {mp^  +  n  (f  -  r1)}, 
or,  if  we  divide  by  the  factor  q  +  r, 

t  =  ;«6  (q-  -qr  +  r*}-  yn*riip'i  —  ^tr^n^p  (q  +  r)  -  n*  (q  +  r)3, 
u  =  -  3men  (q  —  r)  +  6m5n2p  +  yri?n*  (q  +  /-), 
so  that  x,  y,  z  and  v  can  be  written  down. 
The  solution  is,  however,  still  not  general. 

(3)     General  solution. 

To  find  generally  all  the  sets  of  three  cubes  the  sum  of  which  is  a  cube. 

Suppose  As+&  +  C3  =  D\  or  A3  +  £3  =  Dl -  C'\ 
and  assume  A-p  +y,  B=p  -  q,  C=r~s,  D  =  r  +  s. 

Then  A:s  +  £3=  2pA  +  6pq\  &  -  Cs  =  2  j8  +  6r-s, 

so  that  '  +  ' 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEM   i  331 

This  equation  cannot  subsist  unless  f  +  $#*,  s2+  ^  have  a  common 
divisor.  Now  it  is  known  that  numbers  of  this  form  have  no  divisors 
except  such  as  are  of  the  same  form. 

To  find  them,  we  introduce  six  new  letters  to  take  the  place  of 
/,  </,  r,  s,  thus  :  let 

p  =  qx  +  $by,  s  =  yy  ~  dxt 


whence        f-  +  tf  =  (rf2  +  3£2)  (*»  +  3^),  s2  +  3^  =  (d-  + 
and  our  equation,  divided  by  x2  +  3^-,  becomes 

(ax  +  3ty)  («a  +  3^)  =  (yy-  dx)  (d*  +  y*)  ; 
so  that  *  -  -  3*  <«*  + 


y.        a       +3 

and  we  may  put         *=-  yib  (a-  +  yV)  +  yic  (d-  +  y*), 

y  -  na  (a*  +  3^)  +  nd  (d-  +  3^). 
Hence  the  values  of/,  (/,  r,  s  are  found  to  be 


g  =  «  (Zbc  -  ad]  (<i*  +  y*)  -  n  (<?  +  3^)2, 
r-n  (d*  +  3^)2  -  »  (36f  -  ad)  (a2  +  3^), 
s  =  3«  (or  +  ^)  (a2  +  3^), 
and  ^  =  n  (^ac  +  ybc  -ad+  3  A/)  (^2  +  3^)  -  n  (a2  + 


-ad+ 

D=  n  (d*  +  3^)2  +  n  (ytc  - 
These  values  satisfy  the  equation 

As  +  &  +  C*  =  Z^, 

and,  since  no  restriction  has  been  introduced,  the  solution  is  capable  of 
giving  all  the  sets  of  three  cubes  which  have  a  cube  for  their  sum. 

More  special  forms  for  A,  £,  C,  D  can  of  course  be  obtained  by  putting 
zero  for  one  of  the  letters  a,  b,  r,  d,  and  still  more  special  forms  by  co'm- 
bining  with  the  assumption  a  =  o  or  l>  =  o  the  assumption  d=±c,  or  com- 
bining with  the  assumption  c=  o  or  d  -  o  the  assumption  b  =  ±  a. 
Two  cases  are  worth  noting. 
First,  suppose  b=  o,  d  =  c,  and  we  have 
A  =  Svaf-na*,  B  =  i6nat*  +  na4,   C=  i6nc*  -  2>ia*c,  D  =  i 
If  further  we  write  2a  for  a  and  #/i6  for  «,  we  have 
A  =  na(S-a3),   8  =  na  (2<?  +  a3),   C=nc(<?-c?\  D  =  nc 
which  is  equivalent  to  Vieta's  solution  of  his  second  problem. 
Secondly,  suppose  d  =  o,  b  =  a,  and  we  have    - 

A  -i  Snat?  —  1  6//a4,  B  =  1  6»a4,   C  =  9«^  -  _24«otV,  D  *= 
or,  if  we  write  ia  for  a, 

A  =  gnac3  -  «a4,  j9  =  «a4,  C"  =  gnc*  —  yid*c>  D  =  gt 


332  SUPPLEMENT 

which,  if  n  -  a  =  c  —  i,  gives  the  simplest  solution  of  all 

4  =  8,  JB=i,  C  =  6,  Z>=9,  and  ia  +  6s  +  88  =  98. 

In  proceeding  to  other  solutions  we  have  to  remember  that,   while 

A,  £,  C,  D  must  be  integral,  they  should  all  be  prime  to  one  another;  for 

those  solutions  in  which  A,  Jt,  C,  D  have  a  common  factor  are  not  new 

solutions  in  addition  to  that  from  which  the  common  factor  is  eliminated. 

Thus,  while  giving  any  values,  positive  or  negative,  to  the  numbers 
a,  £,  c,  d  in  the  formulae 

x  =  yic  (d*  +  30  ~  yd  (a*  +  3^), 
y  =  nd(d-  +  $r)  +  na  (a-  +  3^'), 

we  have  to  choose  for  n  such  a  fraction  as  will  make  x,  y  prime  to  one 
another.     We  then  form 

p  =  ax  +  $by,  q=bx-ay>  r  -  dy  +  ex,  s  =  yy  -  dx  ; 
and,  after  again  eliminating  any  common  factor,  we  put 


and  we  shall  have  A^  +  ^+C3^  I?. 

(The  cases  in  which  one  of  the  three  cubes  A"',  J?\  C3  is  negative  will 
give  the  solutions  of  the  equation  Xs  +y*  =  zz  +  v\) 

While  any  values  of  a,  l>,  c,  d  may  be  taken,  it  is  necessary,  if  we  want 
a  solution  in  which  A,  B,  C,  D  will  be  small  numbers,  to  choose  «,  l>,  c,  d 
so  that  cr  +  3^2,  d*  +  3^  may  have  a  common  factor.  Euler  accordingly 
sets  out  a  table  of  all  numbers  of  the  form  mz  +  yr  less  than  1000  (giving 
m  values  from  i  to  31  and  //  values  from  i  to  18),  and  then  chooses  out 
cases  in  which  a2  +  3<52,  d2  +  y~  have  a  tolerably  large  common  factor. 

Now,  assuming  that  a2  +  3^2  =  mk, 


we  have  (supposing  further  that  ac+bd=f,  $bc  -  ad  '  =  g) 


In  these  formulae/,  g  may  be  either  positive  or  negative,  the  signs  of 
a,  l>,  c,  d  being  ambiguous  ;  and  we  may  put 

either  A±("  +  A0    1     or   /=±(^-^)  } 

'er^=±(3^-^)l.        g=±(&  +  ad}}- 

But,  if/  changes  sign  while  g  remains  unaltered,  we  get  numbers  of  the 
same  form,  only  in  different  order  ;  therefore  we  may  confine  ourselves  to 
the  positive  sign  in/ 


SOLUTIONS   BY  EULER.     PROBLEM  i 
Example  i.     Let 


333 


19,  so  that  a  =  4,  b=^, 
eP  +  3^  =  76.  so  that  </=  i  j  or  </=  7  1  or  //=  8 1 

Then  ///=  i,  «  =  4,  k=  19. 

The  following  values  for  f,  g  result,  viz. 

I.        /=2F,  II.      /=I9,  III.      /=I9, 

^=±11,  ^=±19,  ^=±19, 

IV.    /=5,  V.    /=i6,  VL    /=o, 

^=±37,  ^-±26,  ^=±38, 

while,  since  m  —  i,  »  =  4,  >£=  19, 


The  values  (VI)  /=  o,  ^=  ±  38  are  excluded  because,  if  /=  o,  A  =  -  B 
and  C=D. 


The  values  (I)  give 


that  is, 


=  315 


C=  241 


C*=230 


The  values  (II)  and  (III)  give,  after  division  by  19, 

A  =  11  ±4,     that  is,  i     /*  =  1501-^  =  5         A=^ 
^=13  +  4  B=   9        £  =  3         £=17 

(7=13  +  1  C=i2        C  =  4 


The  values  (IV)  give 
A=   411148,     that  is, 
£=    79+148 

^  =  319+    37 
Lastly,  the  values  (V)  give 
A  =  173  ±104,     that  is, 
2?  =  21 1  +  104 
(7=256+    26 

26 


D=2Q 

A=i&qoTA=    63     i     A  =  -ioj 
B=-6<)        #=-23         B=     227 

c=  252      c=  84   I  ^^326 

Z?=  282        Z>=     94     |    D=    356 


€=230 


^4  =  69  or  A  =  23 
,#=315  #=105 
^=282  C=  94 
Z>=*78  Z>=i26 


334  SUPPLEMENT 

Thus   from   the   one    assumption  for   a-  +  3^,    d-  +  ^c   we   have   the 
following  solutions : 

22-js+  23o3+  2773  =  3563     1  io73  +  3563=  2273  +  3263 

io73+ 230°  +  2773  =  3263     I  233+    94s  =    63*+    84* 

.,  o  ,  ,.,  ! 

23  +   94+105—126 

33+      43+      5S=      6s 
Example  2.     Assuming 

a2  +  3^2  =  28,  so  that  a  - 

d2  +  y2  =  %4,  so  that  d=$\    or  ^=6)    or  d=q\ 
we  have  k=  28,  m=- 1,  n  =  3,  and  the  following  solutions  will  be  obtained  : 

I3+  I23=     Q3+  I03 


PROBLEM  2.      To  find  three  numbers  x,  y,  z  such  that 

x  +y,  x  +  z,  y  +  z, 

x—y,  x-  s,  y-z, 
are  all  squares, 
First  solution  J. 

Assume  that  x  —y  =f,  x-z  =  <f,  y-z  =  r*  ; 

therefore  y-  x-pz,  z  =  x-$2,  and  <72=/2  +  r!. 
The  first  three  formulae  now  become 

x  +y  =  2X  —p^,  x  +  z  =  2X  —  q*,  y  +  z=  2X  —  p"*  —  q*. 

Suppose  that  2x  -p*-<f  =  t2,  so  that  2x  =  f1  +  p*  +  q*  ;  therefore  we 
have  to  make  /2  +  ^  and  /2  +/2  squares,  while  in  addition  q*  =#2  +  r-. 

Let  q  =  az+  l>\  p^a*-P,  r  =  tab  ; 

then  t-  +  (rt2  +  <^)2  -  /2  +  a4  +  b*  +  zdW  | 

and  t*  +  (rt2  -  ^)2  =  f2  +  a4  +  b*  -  2aW  } 

must  be  made  squares. 

Comparing  now  /a  +  a4  +  b*  with  r  +  d-  and  2«2//2  with  2cd,  let  us 
suppose  cd=c?P=pg*&ff,  c=fY,  d=tf&,  a*=fW,  P^g*}?  (or  a=/fi, 
b  =  gfc)  ;  then  the  assumption  /2  +  ^4  +  fr  =  cz  +  </2  will  assume  the  form 


Algebra,  Part  II.  Art.  235. 


SOLUTIONS  BY  EULER.  PROBLEM  2 


335 


Hence  the  problem  is  reduced  to  finding  the  differences  of  two  pairs  of 
fourth  powers,  namely /4-/£4  and  g*  -h*t  the  product  of  which  is  a  square. 

For  this  purpose  Euler  sets  out  a  table  of  values  of  m4  -  n*  corre- 
sponding to  different  values  of  m,  n,  with  a  view  of  selecting  pairs  of 
values  of  m*  -  «4  the  products  of  which  are  squares. 


m* 

t* 

ml  -  n> 

**+»* 

w4  -  «< 

4 

I 

3 

5 

3-  5 

9 

I 

8 

10 

16.  5 

9 

4      5 

13 

5-  i3 

16 

1     15 

17 

3-  5-  17 

16 

9      7 

25 

25-  7 

25 

i     24 

26 

16.  3.13 

25 

9 

16 

34 

16  .  2.17 

49 

i 

48 

5° 

25.  16.  2.  3 

49 

16 

33 

65 

3-   5-H-I3 

64 

i 

63 

65 

9-   5-  7-i3 

81 

49 

32 

130 

64-  5-»3 

121 

4 

117 

I25 

25-   9-  5-13 

121 

9 

112 

130 

16.  2.   5.7.  13 

121 

49 

72 

170 

144.  5.17 

144 

25 

II9 

169 

169.  7.17 

I69 

i 

168 

170 

16.  3.   5.  7-  17 

I69 

81 

88 

250 

25.  16.  5.  n 

225 

64 

161 

289 

289.  7.23 

One  solution  is  obtained  from/2  =  9,  t?  =  4,  g2  =  81,  h*  =•  49,  whence 

/«  =  (/4  -  £4)  (^  -  //4)  =  5  -  i3  •  64  •  5  •  i3  =  (52o)2=  270400. 
Therefore 

a  =fh=  21,  b—gk—\^^p  =  (f  —  b'i=  117,  $  =  a2  +  fi*  =  765,  r  =  2fl/£  =  756  : 
therefore       2.r  =  /2-h/2  +  </'  =  8693i4,  or  jc  =     434657] 
y  =  x-f?=    420968  V. 
s  =  x-f  =  -i5o56S\ 

The  last  number  z  may  be  taken  positively;  the  difference  then  becomes 
the  sum  and  the  sum  becomes  the  difference  ;  therefore 

x=  434657,  *+y=  855625  =  (925)2,  x-y=    13689  =  (i  1  7)2, 


y  =  420968,  x  +  z  =  585225  =  (765)2,  x  -  z  =  284089  =  (533)2, 
2=150568,  J  +  z=57  1536  =  (756)2>  y-  2  =  270400  =  (520)'-. 
We  might  also  have  taken/2  =  9,  #*  =  4,  ^2=  121,  -£2  =  4,  which  would 
equally  have  given  a  solution. 


336  SUPPLEMENT 

Second  solution^. 

This  later  solution  (1780)  of  Euler's  is  worth  giving  on  account  of  the 
variety  of  the  artifices  used. 

We  can  make  x  +y  and  x  -y  squares  by  putting  x  =/2  +  g*,  y  =  2/y. 
Similarly  x  +  z,  x-z  will  be  squares  if  x  =  r-  +  s2,  z  =  2rs. 

Therefore  four  conditions  will  be  satisfied  if  only  pl  +  f  =  r*  +  s'2. 
Now  [cf.  Diophantus  in.  19  and  pp.  105-6  above]  if  we  put 

x  =  (a2  +  P)  (c*  +  d*\ 

x  can  be  made  the  sum  of  two  squares  in  two  ways  ;  in  fact 
/  =  ac  +  bd,  r  =  ad  +  be, 
q  —  ad—  be,    s  —  ac  —  bd, 
and 

y  —  2pq  =  2  (a?cd  +  abd^  —  abc*  —  b*cd),  z  =  zrs  =  2  (cPcd  +  abc*  -  abd*  —  Ircd], 
so  that  y  +  z  =  ^cd  (a-  -  //),  y-z*  $ab  (d?  -  <*). 

These  latter  expressions  have  to  be  made  squares. 
First  make  their  product  y1  -  z2  a  square  ;  this  means  that 
ab(a*-l?)  .  cd(d*  -c*)  must  be  made  a  square. 

To  effect  this,  let  us  assume  that  cd(d'2  —  c-}  =  ri*ab  (a*  -  b*}  ;  we  may 
further,  since  the  question  depends  on  the  relations  between  the  pairs  of 
letters  a,  b  and  c,  d,  suppose  that  d^a. 

We  have  then  c  (a2  -  r2)  =  r?b  (a*  -  //'), 

whence  a2  =  —?-,  -  ,  which  fraction  has  accordingly  to  be  made  a  square. 
ri*b-c 

2  A3  _   .-3 

Suppose  that  a~b-cy  so  that  ^Y_  -  =1?  —  2bc  +  13,  and  we  have 

o  =  -(2«2+i)£-V+(«2+2)<V; 

b       n*+2 
therefore  -  =  ^^  - 

Put  b  =  ril  +  2  and  c  -  zri-  +  i  ;  therefore  a  =  \—n1-d. 

As  we  have  now  made  the  product  of  the  expressions  ab  (d~  -  c1)  and 
cd  (a1  -  &*)  a  square,  it  only  remains  to  make  either  of  them  singly  a  square, 
say  ab  (d*  -  <?}. 

But          ab  (d-  -  c*)  =  ab  (d  -  c)  (d  +  c)  =  3/z2  (tr  -  i  )  (n9-  +  2)% 

We  have  therefore  only  to  make  3  (#2-  i)  a  square,  which  is  easy,  since 
n3  -  i  has  factors  ;  for  we  have  only  to  put 

2-  2 


which  gives  3  («  -  i  )  -£g  («  +  i  ),  or  n  =  7-5^  . 

o  O6         J 

1  Mtmoires  de  F  Acadtmie  Imptriale  des  Sciences  de  St  Peter  sbourg,  1813-14,  vi.  (181  8), 
pp.  54  sqq.=  Commentationes  arithmeticae,  II.  pp.  392-5. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.      PROBLEM   2  337 

[Euler  had  previously   tried   the   supposition   a  =  b  +  c,  which  would 
require  3(#2+i)  to  be  made  a  square,  which  is  impossible.] 

All  the  conditions  are  now  satisfied,  and  we  have  to  find  a,  b,  c,  d  etc. 


n  terms 


As  the  whole  solution  depends  on  the  ratios  of  a,  b,  c,  d,  we  can 
multiply  throughout  by  the  common  denominator,  divide  by  3,  and  put 


whence  p  =  -  8/V  (/<  +  9^),     r=/» 


[Euler  took  a  to  be  «2  —  i  instead  of  i  —  n-  and  consequently  obtained 
positive  signs  for  the  values  of/  and  s  ;  he  also  has  f  =  —  (f4  -  9g*)~,  which 
appears  to  be  a  slip.] 

Assuming  therefore  any  values  for/  g  in  the  first  instance,  we  first  find 
values  for  a,  b,  c,  d,  then  values  for  pt  q,  r,  s,  and  lastly  values  for  x,  y,  z. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  we  get  negative 
values  or  not  ;  for  positive  values  can  be  substituted  without  danger. 

Euler  gives  four  examples. 

If/=  i,  g=  i,  we  find  that  x,  y  have  equal  values;  this  solution  there- 
fore does  not  serve  our  purpose. 

The  same  is  the  case  if/=  3,  g-  i. 

Suppose  then  that/=  2,  g-  i;  therefore  a  =  //=-  16,  b-  17,  c=  33;  and 
(taking  positive  signs)  we  have 

/  =  8oo,  ^  =  305,  r=8i7,  ^  =  256, 
and  #  =  733025,  ^  =  488000,  .2  =  418304, 


If/=  i,  g-  2,  we  have  a  =  d=  16,  b-  137,  c-  153,  and 

^  =  4640,  ^=20705,  r=  21217,  ^=256, 
leading  to  large  numbers  for  x,  yt  z. 

Euler  adds  that,  if  x,  y,  z  satisfy  the  conditions  of  the  problem,  another 
solution  is  furnished  by  X,  Y,  Z  where 


H.  D. 


338  SUPPLEMENT 

PROBLEM  3.     To  find  three  squares  such  that  the  difference  of  any  pair 
is  a  square,  or  to  find  x,  y,  z  such  that 

x2  —  JF2,  x2  —  z2,  y2  —  z2  are  all  squares. 

Any  solution  of  the  preceding  problem  will  satisfy  this,  hut  the  numbers 
would  be  large  and  we  can  get  smaller  solutions1. 

x2    y2 
Dividing  by  z~,  we  have  to  find  three  squares,  5-,  3  and  i,  such  that 


are  all  squares. 

The  last  two  conditions  are  satisfied  if  we  put 
x  l>2+i  ,  y  <?2+i 
~z  f^\  and  *  j^IJ 

and  we  have  only  to  make  p  ~  "p  =  /\L     4  ""  rt 4  a  S(luare. 

Now 


Therefore  (/VJ-  i)  (/-/2)  or  (/s^a-i)  fC  -  i")  has  to  be  made 
square. 

(i)     The  latter  expression  is  a  square  if 


And  /^  .  ^  =  ^2,  a  square  ;  therefore 


.         ~  orfg  (f*  +  g*)  .  hk  (A2  +  &}  must  be  a  square. 


,    g  =  a-b,    h  =  c+d,    k  =  c-d,    the    expression    becomes 
4  (<z4  -  b4}  (<?  -  d*),  which  must  be  a  square. 

From  the  Table  to  the  last  problem  we  may  take  the  values 

a2  =  9,  F  =  4,  r  =  8t,  d*  =  49, 
which  make  the  expression  a  square. 

Then/=  5,  g=  i,  /&=  16,  k=2,pq  =  ^-,  q\p  =  ^£  =  |f,  so  that  ^  =  ^, 
^  =  -1/-,  and  therefore  /  =  4- 


y 


-     —9  -     -  --  ,     -       ,  ---     — 
z     /2-i         9      2     ^-i      153 

1  Algebra,  Part  II.,  Arts.  236,  237. 


.     .         .. 
is  the  solution. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.      PROBLEM   3  339 

To  obtain  whole  numbers,  we  put  2=153  an<3  then  ^  =  -697  and 
7=185. 

Thus  *»  =  4858091   and  s»-y  =  45  1584  =  (6  72)', 

y=    342251  f-z 

z-=    23409]  .r!-z 

(2)   Without  using  the  Table,  we  may  make  (/V2-  J)  (  nj  ~  J  )  a  square 
in  another  way. 

Put  qlp  =  m  or  q  =  w/>,  and  (#z2/4  -  i)  (nf  -  i)  has  to  be  made  a  square. 

This  is  a  square  when  /  =  i  ;  substitute  therefore  i  +  s  for  p  and  we 
have 

(w2  -  i)  (m-  -  i  +  4n?s  +  6wV  +  4?nzs3  +  m2*4). 

Dividing  out  by  (w2-i)2  and,  for  brevity,  putting  a  for  »/2/(w2—  i), 
we  have 

i  +  4as  +  6as2  +  4«i3  +  as*, 

which  has  to  be  made  a  square. 

Equating  this  to  (i  +fs+gs*Y,  let  us  determine/,^  so  that  the  first 
three  terms  disappear  ; 

therefore  2/=  40,  or  /=  20, 

and  6a  =  zg  +f2  or  g  =  i  (6a  -T2)  =  30  -  2<z2. 

Lastly,  the  equation  gives  40  +  a.r=  ^fg  +  g^s,  so  that 


4a  ~  2fg  _     40-120*+  So3  4  -  1 20.  +  Sa"       _   4  (za-  i) 


4a3- 

Now  m  in  the  expression  for  a  may  have  any  value. 
Ex.  i.     Let  m  =  2,  so  that  a  =  | ; 
therefore  s  =  4  .  — —  =  ~~^T»   /  =  ~^7'    ^  =  ~2~3 


*  949  y  _  6005 
whence  z=^'  -z~w' 

Ex.2.  Let  w  =  |,  so  that  a  =  f; 

13-5        26°     ^         249  747 

therefore  s  =  4  •  —  -  —  —  ,  ^=  -  77  '    ^--^1' 

whence  */a,  j/z  are  determined. 

Euler  considers  also  the  particular  case  in  which  a  =  m*/(m*-i)  is  a 
square,  P  say. 

The  expression  i  +  4^-r  +  60V  +  4<*V  +  ^J4  is  then  equated  to 
(i-f  2^  +  Ar2)2, 

I-2b-2P  ,     .        1-2? 

and  we  obtain  s=    —  ^  -  and  /=     ^     . 

22—2 


34o 


SUPPLEMENT 


Ex.     a  is  a  square  if  m  =  |,  and  in  that  case  b  =  f.     Therefore  p=-  ^ 
q  -  nip  =  —  ^,  and  accordingly 


z      145 

PROBLEM  4.     To  find  three  square  numbers  such  that  the  sum  of  each 
pair  is  also  a  square^  i.e.  to  find  numbers  x,y,  z  such  that 

X?  +/,    X*  +  Z2,  /  +  Z2 

are  all  squares*. 

Dividing  by  z2,  we  have  to  make 

x*    y*     x2         y- 

*+;?'  ^  +  I'i*+I 

all  squares. 

The  second  and  third  are  made  squares  by  putting 


z         2p  z         zq 

and  it  only  remains  to  make 


This  can  hardly  be  solved  generally,  and  accordingly  we  resort  to 
particular  artifices. 

i.     Let  us  make  the  expression  divisible  by  (/  +  i)2,  which  is  easily 
done  by  supposing/  +  i  =^—  i,  or  g=p+  2,  so  that  </+  i  becomes/  +  3. 

Thus  (/  +  2)2  (p  -  1)2  +/2  (p  +  3)2,  or  2/4  +  S/3  +  6f  -  A£  +  4,  must  be  a 
square. 

Suppose  2/4  +  8/  +  6/2  -  ^p  +  4  =  (^/2  +^  +  2)2, 

and  let  us  choose/,  g  such  that  the  terms  in  p,  /2  vanish  ;  therefore/-  -  i  , 
and  4§-+i=6,  or  g=%. 

We  now  have  2p  +  8  =  g*p  +  2^- 

_  25   J.        5 

"'Tvf-y* 

so  that  /  =  -  24,  and  ^  =  -  2  2,  whence 

*=^1I=_S75    j  =  r~I=   483 

z         2/  48  '    z        2^  44  ' 

Making  0=16.3.  1  1,  the  least  common  multiple  of  48  and  44,  we  have 
the  solution 

x=  ii.  23.  25  =  6325,  y=i2.2i  .23  =  5796,  2  =  3.  ii  .  16  =  528, 
and 


/+z2=i22(4832+   442)=i22. 
1  Algebra,  Part  II.,  Art.  238. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.      PROBLEMS   3,  4  341 

2,  3.     Euler  obtains  fresh  solutions  by  assuming,  first,  that 

?-i  =  2(/+  i), 
and,  secondly,  that  q  -  i  =  £  (p  -  i). 

4.     Lastly,  he  makes  our  expression  divisible   by  both   (/  f  i)2  and 
(p-if  at  the  same  time. 
For  this  purpose  he  takes 


whence        ?  +  1 

Substituting  in  the  formula  ?  (f  -  if  +  f  (<?  -  if  the  value  of  q  in 
terms  of/,  /  and  then  dividing  by  (/2-  i)2,  we  have  the  expression 


and  we  have  to  make  (//  +  i)2  (/  +  /)2  +/>  (/2  -  i)2  a  square, 

or      /y  +  2t  (/2  +  i)/3  +  {2/2  +  (/2  +  i)2  +  (/2  -  i)2}/2  +  2/(/2  +  i)p  +  /* 

must  be  a  square. 

We  now  equate  this  to     {tjr  +  (t-  +  i)p  -  /}2, 
whence  we  have 

{2/2  +  (/2+  i)2  +  ((*-  i)2}/  +  2/(/2+  i)  =  {(/2  +  i)2-  2/2}/  -  at  (t-  +  i), 
which  gives  {4**  +  (t-  -  i)2}/  +  4/  (/2  +  i  )  -  o, 

and  P  =  -> 


therefore  //+  i  =  -  ,  /  +  /= 


and 

where  t  can  be  chosen  arbitrarily. 

Ex.     Let  /=  2  ;  then/  =  -f,  ^  =  -  -^  and 

x  =  f~*=    39       ^  =  g'"I=     "_7. 
z         2/  80  '      z         zq  44  * 

Putting   2  =  4.4.5.11,  the  least  common   multiple  of  80  and   44, 
we  have 

#  =  -3.  ii  .  13  =-  429» 
^  =  -4.  5.  9.  13  =  -2340, 
z  =  4.4.5.11=  880, 


342  SUPPLEMENT 

and  *2+/=32.  i32  (121  +  3600)  =  32  .  if.  6i2, 

^  +  z2  =  ii2  (1521  +6400)      =  n2.892, 

J2  +  Z2  =  202  (13689+  1936)     =202.I252. 

PROBLEM  5.     (Extension  of  Dioph.  iv.  20  to  five  numbers.) 
To  find  five  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  every  pair  increased  by  unity 
becomes  a  square^. 

Euler  had  already  shown  (see  pp.  181,  182  above)  that,  if  mn+  i  =  /2, 
then  the  following  four  numbers  which  we  will  call  a,  b,  c,  d  have  the 
property,  viz. 

a  =  m,  b  =  n,  c-m  +  n  +  2l,  d  =  $l(l  +  m)  (l+n). 

If  now  z  is  the  fifth  required  number,  the  four  expressions 

i  +  az,  i  +  bz,   i  +cz,   i  +  dz 
must  all  be  squares. 

If,  says  Euler,  we  had  to  satisfy  these  conditions  singly,  the  difficulties 
would  be  insuperable.  But  here  too  it  happens,  as  in  the  former  case, 
that,  if  we  make  the  product  of  the  four  expressions  a  square,  the 
expressions  are  all  severally  squares. 

Let  the  product  be         i  +pz  +  qz*  +  rz*  +  sz*, 
where  accordingly 

p  =  a  +  b  +  c  +  d,  £=  ab  +  ac  +  ad  +  be  +  bd  +  cd, 

r  —  abc  +  abd  +  acd  +  bed,  s  =  abed. 
Suppose  now  that 

i  +pz  +  ?z*  +  rzs  +  sz*  =  {i  +  \pz  +  (\g-  i/2)  z"}2  ; 
therefore,  since  the  absolute  term  and  the  terms  in  z,  z1  vanish,  we  have 


whence 


Now  it  will  be  found  (see  the  proof  lower  down)  that 

If.-V—  i(«+*)'i 

the  denominator  of  the  fraction  will  therefore  be  ^  (s  —  i)2;  that  is,  the  said 
denominator  fortunately  turns  out  to  be  a  square  ;  if  it  were  not  so,  the 
single  expressions  i  +  az,  i  +  bz,  i  +  cz,  \+dz  could  not  have  been  made 
squares. 

As  it  is  however,  substituting  for  \q  -  \p*  its  value  in  the  numerator 
and  denominator  of  the  fraction  for  z,  we  have 


1  Commentationes  arithnteticae,  n.  pp.  50-52. 


SOLUTIONS   BY  EULER.      PROBLEMS   4,   5  343 

and  all  the  conditions  will  be  fulfilled,  that  is,  all  the  expressions 
ab  +  i,     af+i,     ad+i,     h+i,     bd  +  i, 
cd+i,     az+i,     bz+i,     cz  +  i,     dz  +  i 

will  be  squares. 

Lemma.     To  prove  the  fact  (assumed  above)  that 

k-J^=-H*+i). 

For  brevity,  put  m  +  n  +  /=/,  /  (/  +  /«)  (/  +  «)  =  £,  so  that  k  =fl*  +  Imn  ; 
and,  since  a  =  m,  b  =  n,  c=f+  /,  d=^k,  we  have  a  +  b  +  c-  2/,  and  therefore 

/=2/+4£ 

Again,  since  q  =  (a  +  b  +  c)  d  +  (a  +  H)  c  +  at>, 

q  =  8/£  +  (m  +  nY+  2/  (m  +  n)  +  mn  ; 
and,  since  mn  +  i  =  /•,  the  latter  expression  becomes 

^  =  8/^+/2-i. 

Moreover,  s  -  abed  -  ^mnk  (f+  /)  ; 

therefore  i  +  q  +  s  =  %fk  +/2  +  $mtik  (/+  /), 

and  we  have  to  see  whether  the  right-hand  expression  is  equal  to  \p~* 
Now  i/'=/2+4//&  +  4/&2. 

Assume  then,  as  a  hypothesis,  that 
*fk  +f2 


or,  if  we  divide  throughout  by  4^, 

f  +  mn  (f+l)=k  —f/2  +  Imn,  from  above  ; 
that  is,  f+fmn  =ff\ 

which  is  of  course  true,  since  mn  +  t  =--  A 
Consequently  it  is  proved  that 

,  or         -)  =  -J+0 


Ex.   i.     Assume  «i  =  i,  n  =  3,  so  that  1=2;  therefore 

«=i,     ^  =  3,     f  =  8,     ^=120, 
whence  /  =  i32>     ?=  J47S»     ^=4224,     ^  =  2880, 

and  we  deduce  that 

_  4.  42  24  +  264^881  __   777480 
"  2  "  ' 


8288641 

The  conditions  are  satisfied,  for 

ab  +  i  =  22,  «<:+  i  =    32, 


344  SUPPLEMENT 

Ex.  2.     To  get  smaller  numbers  (since  we  must  put  up  with  fractions) 
let  us  put  m  =  ^,  n  =f,  so  that  /=f  ;  therefore 

«  =  .*,     £  =  f,     <r=6,     //=48, 

whence  /  =  S7»     ?  =  45IT»     ^=93II>     J  =  36o> 

_  4.934  +  114.361  _  44880 
3592  ~  128881' 

PROBLEM  6.     Euler  has  a  general  solution  of  the  problem  of  Dioph.  in. 
15,  viz. 

To  find  three  numbers  x,  y,  z  such  that 

xy  +  x  +y,     xz  +  x  -f  0,    yz  +y  +  z 
are  all  squares*. 

(i)     Put  x  +  i  =  A,  y  +  i  =  B,  z  +  i  =  C,  so  that  AB  -  i,  AC-\  and 
BC-  i  have  to  be  made  squares. 

Let  AB=p*+i,     AC=f+i,     BC  =  r*+i; 

therefore  ABC=  J{(p  +  i)  (f  +  i)(r*  +  i)}. 

To  make  this  expression  rational,  let  us  regard  /,  q  as  given  and  put 
(/2+  i)  (q*  +  i)  =  m*  +  n?,  so  that  m-pg±iy  n=p~+q\   therefore 
ABC=  J{(m*  +  «a)  (r*  +  i)}  =  J{(mr  +  nf  +  (nr  -  mf\. 
Put  the  latter  root  equal  to  mr  +  n  +  t  (nr  —  m)  ;  therefore 
nr-m-  zmrt  +  znt  +  nrf  —  mP 


(m*  +  «2)  (f2  +  i  )2 
Therefore      r2 


,---  —    -  TO>  ~r  —  ~  -  - 

\n  (t2  -  i  )  +  2tnt\*  n  (/2  -  i  )  +  2  »//  ' 

thus,  since  £C=t3+  i,  we  have 

«(/2-  i)  +  zw/ 
^*  t*+i         ' 

and,  since  w2  +  n-  =  (p*  +•  i)  (^2  +  i), 

(/2+i)(/2+i) 
' 


n(f* 
where  w  =/^  +  i,  «  =/  +  ^. 

This  solution  is  very  general,  inasmuch  as  we  may  choose  /,  q  as  we 
please,  thus  equating  AB  —  i,  AC-i  to  any  given  squares;  and,  as  / 
can  be  chosen  arbitrarily,  we  have  an  infinite  number  of  square  values  for 
SC-i. 

(2)  Euler  adds  two  methods  of  obtaining  solutions  in  integers,  the 
second  of  which  is  interesting. 

1  "  Considerationes  circa  analysin  Diophanteam,"  Commentationes  arithmeticae,  n.  p.  577. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.      PROBLEMS   5,  6  345 

Take  two  fractions-;  and  -so  related  that  ad-bc  =  +i;  and  form  a 
o          a 

third  fraction  ^^>  which   is   similarly  related  to  either  of  the  former 
fractions. 

Then  the  following  three  numbers  will  satisfy  the  conditions  : 


For,  since  ad-bc  =  ±i, 


(Cf.  Dioph.  in.  19.) 

Simple  solutions  are  seen  thus  : 


a 
3 

c 
d 

a+c 
J+d 

A             B                     C 

p 

i 

i 

i 

f 

f+* 

i 

f~  l 

f 

ft       f              ft       f 

r 

•  f" 

f+i 

2          if    -2/+I          2/z+2/+I 

i 

f 

/+« 

*- 

if  -i 

2^-i  j           o       a/        i/nl       o/'»yT» 

and  so  on. 

(3)  If  two  of  the  numbers  A,  B  are  given  such  that  AB-\  =/*,  we 
can  find  an  infinite  number  of  values  for  a  third,  C,  which  with  At  B 
will  satisfy  the  conditions. 

For,  since  AC—  i  and  BC  -  i  have  to  be  squares,  take  their  product 
ABC*  -  (A  +  B)  C+  i  and  equate  it  to  (mC+  i)2;  we  have  then 

A  +  B  +  2m  (A  +  mf  (B  +  m)* 


C=   AB-m"    ' 

Therefore  we  have  only  to  make  AB-m*  a  square;  that  is, 
jp  +  i  -  m*  -  a  square  =  ri*  say,  so  that  m2  +  n*  =/2  +  i. 

Take  now  two  fractions  a  and  a  such  that  02  +  a2  =  i,  and  let  m  =  aj>  +  o, 

//  =  op  -  a  ;  then 

«-< 
where  a,  a  are  determined  by  giving  any  values  whatever  to  /  g  in  the 

expressions 


346  SUPPLEMENT 

PROBLEM  7.  To  find  four  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair 
plus  the  sum  of  that  pair  gives  a  square;  or,  in  other  words,  to  find  four 
numbers  A,  B,  C,  D  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair  diminished  by  i  is  a 
square,  that  is,  such  that 

AB-i,     AC-  i,     AD-  i,     BC-i,     BD-i,     CD  -  i 
are  all  squares1.     (Cf.  Diophantus  iv.  20.) 

Let  us  regard  two  of  the  numbers  A,  B  as  given,  being  such  that 
AB  -  i  =f,  or  AB=p*  +  i. 

Let  a,  a  be  such  fractions  that  a2  +  a-=  i,  and  put 


Similarly  let  P  +  ft?  =  i,  and  put  for  the  fourth  number 
A+B  +  2(ty+ft) 

($p-b? 
Thus  five  conditions  are  satisfied,  namely,  that 

AB-i,  AC  -i,  BC-i,   AD  -i,  BD  -  i   are  all  squares. 
The  sixth  condition,  that  CD  -  i  shall  be  a  square,  gives 
(A  +  B)2+2(A  +  B}  {(a  +  b)p  +  a  +  ft}  +  4  (ap  +  a)  (bp  +  ft) 

-  (ap  -  a)2  (ftp  -  b)*  =  a  square, 

where  AB  has  at  the  same  time  to  be  equal  to/2  +  i. 
Regarding  a,  a,  b,  ft  and  /  as  given,  we  have 

p*+  i      A*+p*+  i 
A  +  B  =  A  +^         =  --  ^  -  ' 

A  A 

and  the  expression  to  be  made  a  square  becomes  the  following  expression 
in  powers  of  A, 


+  4A?  (ap  +  a)  (bp  +  ft)    +  2  A  (/2  +  i)  (a  +  ft) 


Equate  this  to  the  square  of 

A*  +  A  (a  +  b)p-  (f  +  i) 


and  we  have 

A*  {(a  +  £)2/2  +  2  (a  +  ti)  (a  +  ft)/>  +(a  +  ftY-4  (/>  +  i) 


whence  A  is  found. 

Euler  goes  on  to  some  particular  cases,  of  which  the  following  may 
be  given. 

1  Commentationes  arithmeticae,  n.  pp.  579—582. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.      PROBLEMS    7,  8  347 

Suppose  b  =  -  a  and  /3  =  -  a ;  we  then  have 
_    A  +  B  +  2  (at  +  a) 


-of 


and  the  expression  above  in  A  which  had  to  be  made  a  square  becomes 

^4+2^2(/2+l)  +  (/2+l)2 

-  4A2  (ap  +  a)2 

-  An- 
This  can  be  put  in  the  form 


by  virtue  of  the  relation  a2  +  a2  =  i. 

Our  expression  is  clearly  a  square  if  4  —  (ap  -  of  =  o,  or  ap-a  =  2, 
that  is,  /  =  (2  +  a)/a,  and 

(2  +  a)  a  2a+'i 

ap  +  a  =  -  -  —  +  a  =  -  , 
a  a 

and  in  that  case 

A+J3+2(2a+i)/a     a(A  +  £) 
-  =  - 

4  4a 


where  A  can  be  chosen  quite  arbitrarily. 

Putting  «=(/2-£2)/(/2  +  /)>  a  =  zfgKf*  +  g*),  we  obtain  the  following 
as  a  solution,  where  m,  n  can  be  any  integers  whatever. 


. 

Zmnfg  Smng 

Ex.     Suppose        /=  i,    g=2,     m  =  5,    n  =  6; 
therefore  ^  =  ||,     £  =  ft,     C=|||,     />-«§/ 

and  AB-i=r' 


PROBLEM  8.     To  find  four  nutnbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair 
added  to  a  given  number  n  gives  a  square1. 

(i)     A  particular  solution  is  found  in  this  way.     Let  A,  B,  C,  D  be 
the  required  numbers,  and,  since  AB  +  n  has  to  be  a  square,  put 

A  =  na2-P,     B=ncz-d*, 

so   that   AB=(nac-bdf-n(ad-bcf.     [Cf.    the   Indian  formula  above, 
p.  282.] 

1  Commentationes  arithmetical,  u.  pp.  581-3. 


348  SUPPLEMENT 

The  condition  that  AB  +  n  is  a  square  is  therefore  fulfilled,  provided 

that  ad-bc  =  ±\:   therefore  we  have  to   take  fractions  T,  -  such   that 

o     a 

ad-  bc=±  i ;  and,  when  this  is  done,  the  fractions  -. ,  and  T — 7  will  have 

o  +  a          b—d 

the  same  property  in  relation  to  either  of  the  former  fractions. 
We  accordingly  put 

C=n(a  +  cf  -(b  +  d)2,     D=n  (a-cf  -  (b-d)2. 

Thus  five  conditions  are  satisfied,  and  it  only  remains  to  make  CD  +  n 
a  square ;  that  is, 

—  2n  (ad  -  bcf  \  =  a  square. 

or,  since  (ad-  bcf  =  i, 

n2  (a2  -  c2}2  -  n  { 2  (ab  —  cd}2  +  i }  +  (b2  -  d2}2  =  a  square. 

(2)     We  obtain  a  general  solution  by  the  same  method  as  that  applied 
above  (p.  345)  in  the  problem  of  making  AB  —  i,  BC '—  i,  etc.  squares. 

Put  AB=p2-n;  then,  to  make  AC+n,  BC+n  both  squares,  take  the 
product  of  these  expressions  and  equate  it  to  (n  +  Cx)2;  therefore 
n2  +  n  (A  +  B}  C  +  ABC2  =  n2  +  2nCx  +  C2x2, 

whence  C=        2 — -j-=- -   ,  and  AC+  n  =  — ^ — .  *  , 

so  that  (x2  -  AB]\n  must  be  a  square. 

Let  then     y?  -  AB  =  x2  -p2  +  n  =  ny2,  or  x2  -  ny2  =p2  -  n. 
Similarly  let  us  put  v2  -  nz2  =/2  -  n,  so  as  to  get 

A  +  B-2V 

and  it  remains  to  make  CD  +  n  a  square, 

that  is,  (A  +  B}2  -  2  (*  +  v)  (A  +  B)  +  ny2z2  +  $xv 

must  be  a  square. 

But,  since  B  =       *     and  A  +  B-    — ^ ,  the  expression  becomes 

(after  multiplication  by  A2) 

A4  -  2  A*  (x  +  v)  +  2  A2  (p2  -  n}  -  2  A  (p2  -n)(x  +  v)  +  (p2  -  n)2 


SOLUTIONS   BY  EULER.      PROBLEMS   8,  9  349 

which  must  be  a  square  =  {A2  -  A  (x  +  v)  -  (pz  -  n)}2  say ;  therefore 

A2  {(x  +  vf  -  4  (f  -  n}  -  ny-z*  -  4x0}  +  ^A  (x  +  v)  (/2  -  «)  =  o, 
so  that 

A=- 


= 
nfz2  -  2n  (y2  +  z2)  +  (v  +  xf ' 

(3)     A  particular  solution  is  obtained  by  assuming  that  v  =  -x,  so  that 
y,  and 


while  AB=f-n  =  x*-  nf. 

For  then  we  have  to  make 

A4  +  A*{2(?z-n)  +  nyt-  4^}  +  (/>  _  «)«  a  square  ; 
that  is,  (A2  -f  +  rif  +  nA*f  (y*  -  4)  =  a  square. 

This  is  satisfied  if  we  put_y  =  2,  so  that  /2  =  .r2  -  3». 

Suppose  p  =  x-t,  and  we  have 


3«  -  t*  \ni?  -  /a  -inu-  +  t- 

-  and  p  =  —  —  ,  or  ;>  =  °  -  and  x  =  *  - 

2t  2t  2tU  2tu 

.     (nu2  -  12)  (onu*  -  12) 

and  hence  AB  =  ^-  --  ^E  -  ^ 

4/2w2 

We  may  therefore  put 


*  —  -  - 

2gtu  2/tU 


,n_ 


Bfetu  S/gtu 

It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  solution  C+  D  =  |  (A  +  B}. 

PROBLEM  9.  To  find  four  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair 
added  to  the  sum  of  all  gives  a  square1. 

First  find  four  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair 
increased  by  a  number  n  gives  a  square  (Problem  8). 

Take  as  the  numbers  sought  mA,  mB,  mC,  mD,  and,  since  m*(AB  +  //) 
is  a  square  or  nPAB  +  nfn  is  a  square,  we  have  only  to  make  m2u  equal  to 
the  sum  of  the  four  numbers  or  m(A  +  B  +  C  +  Z)),  whence 

A  +  B+C+D 

m  = . 

n 

1  Commentationes  artthweticae,  II.  pp.  583-5. 


350  SUPPLEMENT 

But,  since  in  the  other  problem  C  +  Z>-^(A  +  ^\  this  gives 


2H 

where  n  as  well  as/,  g,  t  and  u  can  be  chosen  as  we  please. 

Since  n   may  be  chosen  arbitrarily,  take  /2  =  #2  -  3;;,  as  in  the  last 
problem,  so  that  n-\(af-f)t  and  AB  =p*  -  n  =  ^  (^f  -  x?). 

Accordingly  we  may  put 

A  _f(2p  +  X)  R_g(2j-x). 

S3.    --       -    y  JJ    —  ~£  -  ) 

therefore         j+s.'W 


and  hence  c,'C^ 


and 


therefore      m  =  (A  +  X+C+  D}\n  = 


Now  two  of  the  numbers,  A,  £,  can  be  chosen  arbitrarily,  and 


•herefore 
sothat 


-Bj*  A+B 

anu  o  —  —  j  -  »     •*'  =  -  ~~ 


while 


If,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  fractions,  we  put  A  =  $afg,  B  =  $bfg,  we  have 


Ex.     Let/=  2,  g=  i ;  therefore 

A  =  8a,     ^-8^,     C=6b-a,     D  =  $a-2 

1 2  (a  +  b~)  1 2  (a  +  b) 

-  a)' 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.      PROBLEMS  9,  9  A,   10       351 
The  following  are  simple  cases  : 

(1)  a=    5,   t>=t,     whence^  =  40,    £  =    &,    C=  i,    Z>=23,    M=||. 

(2)  a  -ii,    b=2,     whence  ^-88,    B  =  16,     <7=  i,    Z>=5i,    «  =  |. 
If/=  S*^  !>  we  can  obtain  integral  solutions,  thus. 

A  =  2oa,     B  =  zob,     C  =  30^  +  2a,     D  =  8a  -  20^, 
..  _          3°  (a  +  6) 


-a)' 
Assuming  then  a  =  19,  £  =  7,  we  have 

,4  =  380,     ,5=140,     £=248,     Z>=i2,     ;«  =  £, 
so  that  the  required  numbers  are 

475.     175.     31°,     15, 
the  sum  of  which  is  975. 

We  can  also  solve  the  corresponding  problem  : 

9  A.  To  find  four  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any  pair  minus  the 
sum  of  all  gives  a  square. 

For  we  have  only  to  give  m  a  negative  value. 

PROBLEM  10.     To  find  three  numbers  x,  y,  z  such  that 

x+y  +  z        \ 

yz  +  zx  +  xy  L  are  all  squares1. 

xyz  j 

(This  may  be  expressed  as  the  problem  of  finding  />,  q,  r  such  that  the 
equation  ^-p^  +  q^-r-o  has  all  its  roots  rational  while/,  qt  r  are 
all  squares.) 

Take  nx,  ny,  nz  for  the  numbers  required,  so  that 
n(x+y  +  z)         \ 

n*(xy  +  xz  +yz)  \  must  all  be  squares. 
tfxyz  ) 

If  the  first  and  third  conditions  are  satisfied,  we  must  have,  by 
multiplication, 

xyz  (x  +  y  +  2)  =  a  square. 

Put  therefore          xyz  (x  +y  +  z)  =  v1  (x  +y  +  z}\ 
whence  xyz  =  tf  (x  +y  +  z\  and  z  = 


Since   xyz  =    '  ^  we  must  nave>  m  order  that  nxyz  may  be 

a  square, 

n  =  ni-xy  (x  +y)  (xy  -  #*). 

1  ffffi'i  Commentarii  Acad.  Petropol.  1760-61,  Vol.  VIII.  (1763),  P-  64sqq.  = 
lationes  arithineticae,  I.  pp.  239-244. 


352  SUPPLEMENT 

If  the  values  of  z,  n  thus  found  be  taken,  the  first  and  third  conditions 
are  satisfied,  and  the  three  numbers  will  be 

nx  -  t/iVy  (x  +y)  (xy  -  v*), 
ny  =  trfxy*  (x  +y)  (xy  —  v*), 
nz  =  nt&xy  (x  +y)2. 
The  second  condition  requires  that 

z/2  (x  +  yf 
xy  +  z(x  +y)  —  xy-\ ! p-  =  a  square. 

Suppose  for  this  purpose  that  xy-tf^u2  (this  introduces  a  restric- 
tion because  there  are  doubtless  plenty  of  solutions  where  xy  -  tf  is  not 
a  square);  therefore 

_  v2  +  uz       ^  _  z>2  (x  +y) 
*~      x     '  u2       ' 

and  xy  =  v*  +  a2,  x  +y  =  —  — ,  so  that  we  must  make 

X 


, 
v*  +  u2  +  — 5-^ a  square. 

22 


Put  x  =  tv,  so  that  y  = ,  and 

tv 


*  +  *  +  VL\L±£L±=  a  square, 


i)  +  «2}2 
/V 

or  /2wV  +  /V  +  v*  (f2  +  i)2  +  2«V  (t2  +  i)  +  u*  =  a  square, 

i.e.         if  (/2  +  i)2  +  wV2 (3/2  +  2)  +  «4 (/2  +  i)  =  a  square 

=  {v2  (/2  +  i)  +  .rw2}2,  say. 

Therefore        w8  (3^  +  2)  +  w2  (/2  +  i)  =  2^  (/*  +  i)  +  J2^2, 

^2  /2  +  :   _  ,y2 

and  — j  =  — -j-^ r 5 =  a  square. 

Further,  let  s  =  t—  r,  and  we  shall  have 
v2  2rt—r*  +  i 


Multiply  the  numerator  and  denominator  by  2r/  -  r2  +  i,  and  we  have 


The  problem  is  accordingly  reduced  to  making  the  denominator  of  this 
fraction  a  square.  If  we  suppose  this  done,  and  Q  to  lie  the  square  root, 
while  /  and  r  are  determined  as  the  result  of  equating  the  denominator  to 
Q2,  we  shall  have 

v      2rt-r*+  i          ,  v2  +  u2 

-=    __-,ai«l*=^;y  =  -sr-> 

whence  we  can  derive  the  numbers  required. 


SOLUTIONS   BY  EULER.     PROBLEM    10 


353 


Now  the  denominator  to  be  made  a  square  is  easily  made  such  if  the 
coefficient  of  t*,  or  the  absolute  term,  is  a  square;  and  the  absolute  term 
is  a  square  if  2  (r  -  i)  is  a  square. 

Case  I.  Suppose  r=i;  the  coefficient  of  /4  is  then  a  square  and  the 
absolute  term  vanishes. 

We  have        4/4  -  lo/3  +  4^  -  8/  =  Q*,  while  v/u  =  2tjQ. 
Suppose  Q  =  2t-  -  1/,  and  we  have 

4/2-8/  =  W,     and  /  =  -V»     -  =  —  —  =  —  ; 
«     4/-5       '73 

we  therefore  put  #  =  -36,     #=173,     t  =  -$£,  and  #:=/z;=  128;  further 

_  »*  +  »3  _  31225  _  25  .  1  249 
y~     tv  128  1^8      ' 


173*.  128  ' 
and,  since  xy-v*  =  u*,  the  required  numbers  will  be 

nx  =  i  z82.  25.  1  249-  47609-  1  733  ^ 

128.  252.  1  2492.  47609^  73* 

~"i28».178~~  ' 

362.  128.25.  1249.47609'-    , 

128.  I282 

In  order  to  get  rid  of  fractions,  put  m  =  J-f^,  and  we  have 

nx=  i282.  i732.  1249.  47609  =  490356736.  59463641, 
«_y  =  52.i732.  I2492.  47609  =  934533025  •  59463641, 
nz  =  36"  .  1249  .  476o92  =  61701264  .  59463641. 

The  product  of  the  three  numbers  is  obviously  a  square;  their  sum  is 
found  to  be  25  .  5946364I2;  and  the  sum  of  the  products  of  pairs 
=  1  732-  59463641"  •  18248924559376 
=  (i73  •  59463641  • 


Case  II.     Put  r  =  f  ;  then  V-  =  E2  ~5,  and 


whence  6/1  - 

Accordingly  Q  = 

Therefore         *  = 
u.  D. 


^  -  ^,  and  /  =  f$. 
if.  and  we  put  »  =  19,  «  =  14- 


354  SUPPLEMENT 

and  the  required  numbers  are 


That  is,  ##  =    705600.2315449=1633780814400, 

ny=    109172.2315449=    252782198228, 
nz  =  1500677  .  2315449  =  3474741058973. 

The  product  of  the  three  numbers  is  clearly  a  square;  their  sum  will  be 
found  to  be  23I54492;  and  the  sum  of  the  products  of  pairs 

=  i42-  23I54492  •  6631333489 
=  (14.  2315449.  8i433)2. 
These  numbers  are  much  smaller  than  those  first  obtained. 

If  fractional  numbers  are  admitted,  we  may  divide  those  found  in  the 
last  solution  by  23  15449%  and  the  solution  will  be 


PROBLEM  n.     To  find  four  numbers  x,  y,  2,  u  such  that 

xy+yz  +  ... 

>•  are  all  squares1. 
xyz  +  yzu  +  zux  +  uxy  I 

xyzu  J 

A  general  solution  being  apparently  impossible,  some  particular  as- 
sumption simplifying  the  problem  had  to  be  made.  Euler  therefore 
assumed  as  the  four  numbers 

Mob,     Mbc,     Mcd,     Mda, 

which  assumption,  although  five  letters  are  used,  involves  the  restriction 
that  the  product  of  the  first  and  third  numbers  is  equal  to  the  product  of 
the  second  and  fourth. 

We  must  therefore  have 

M(ab  +  bc  +  cd  +  da)  \ 

Af2  (ab*c  +  b?d  +  cd*a  +  da*b  +  2abcd)  I  dl          res 
M3  (a&fd  +  ab<*d*  +  tfbcd*  +  a*Pcd)    | 

J 


1  Novi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petrop.,  1772,  xvil.  (1773),  pp.  24  sqq.  =  Commentationes 
arithmeticae,  I.  pp.  450-5. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEMS  10,  n  355 

The  above  assumption  therefore  has  the  advantage  of  making  the 
product  of  the  four  numbers  automatically  a  square  and  also  of  making  the 
third  formula  take  the  form 

APaibcd  (ab  +  bc  +  cd  +  da). 

Since  the  first  formula  M  \ab  +  be  +  cd  +  da)  must  be  a  square,  it  follows 
that  abed  must  be  made  a  square. 

In  order  to  make  the  first  and  third  formulae  squares,  take 


or,  if  the  latter  expression  has  a  square  factor,  say/5,  put 
M=  (ab  +  bc  +  cd  +  da)\f. 

We  now  have  only  two  conditions  remaining  to  be  satisfied,  namely 
abcd=3i  square  ..............................  (i), 

aPc  +  bc*d+  cd*a  +  dd*b  +  2abcd=  a  square  ............  (2). 

The  expression  in  (2)  reduces  to 

(a*  +  ca)bd+ac(P  +  d*)  +  zabcd, 
or  bd(a^  +  c3)  +  (b  +  df  ac  =  a  square. 

We  have  therefore  only  to  find  numbers  a,  b,  c,  d  satisfying  these  two 
conditions.  It  is  further  to  be  noted  that  a,  c  are  connected  by  a  relation 
similar  to  that  between  b,  d,  and  the  whole  question  depends  on  the  ratios 
a  :  c  and  b  :  d.  We  may  therefore  assume  a,  c  prime  to  one  another  and 
likewise  b,  d  prime  to  one  another,  for,  if  either  pair  had  a  common  divisor, 
it  could  be  omitted  and  the  relation  would  still  be  satisfied. 

Consider  now  the  second  condition  as  being  the  more  difficult  Although 
two  ratios  a  :  c,  b  :  d  are  involved,  neither  can  be  arbitrarily  assumed.  -For 
suppose  e.g.  that  b  :  d=  2  :  i  ;  then  2«2  +  2t*  +  <)ae  would  have  to  be  made 
a  square  ;  this  however  is  seen  to  be  impossible,  for,  if  we  put  a=p  +  q, 
c=p  —  q>  we  obtain  the  expression  13^-  5^,  which  cannot  be  made  a 
square.  The  same  impossibility  results  if  we  put  b  :  d=$  :  i.  Therefore 
the  ratios  a  :  c  and  b  :  d  can  only  be  certain  particular  ratios. 

Obviously  the  first  class  of  ratios  adapted  for  our  purpose  are  square 
ratios.  Assume  then  that  b  :  d  =fr  :  q3,  and  put 


*)  +  <u(f  -f  fY  =   pqa  +      ,,  say; 

therefore  »a  (/*  +  ^)8  a  +  tfffc  =  zmnpqa  +  nfc, 

°_=          n?-n*f? 

c~  i?  (f  +  f)*  -  zmnpq* 

or,  if  m  =  ±  kpq, 


35.6  SUPPLEMENT 

Now,  if  values  could  be  found  for  k,  n,  /,  q  such  as  would  make  ac  or 

«  (&  -  n-)  {n  (p*  +  g*Y  ±  2kff\  a  square, 

we  should  have  a  solution  of  the  problem,  since,  bd  being  already  a  square, 
abed  would  then  be  a  square.  Euler  however  abandons  the  investigation 
of  this  general  problem  as  too  troublesome  and  as  certain,  in  any  case,  to 
lead  to  very  large  numbers;  and,  instead,  he  proceeds  to  seek  solutions 
by  trial  of  particular  assumptions. 

Particular  values  of  ajc  in  terms  of  p,  q  are  the  following,  which  are 
obtained  by  putting  >£  =  2,  n=i ;   k  =  3,  «  =  i ;   etc. 


in.  '       ,  5g    ....    iv.    a-      ^f- 


c    4(y+<rr±™r<r  c 

VI       f=  24/V 

^      (^2+«72)2± 

a 
c 


Taking  now  the  simplest  values  of  bjd-p^lq^,  let  us  write  down  the 
simplest  corresponding  values  for  a\c  : 

if  ^  =  T.      *  becomes  f,  -|,  |,  /F,  --1/-,  ^,  ^,  ^; 

if        _  4  ^    liprnmpc    4       12       a2       3  2        5          5  60       20. 

"         T»          Becomes  3,  TT,  -T-,  T5-,  T7,  yy,  —  -T-,  T¥, 


if         —  «  ^    hprniTIPC     108        45        28        64          fi4 

11  ^  —  T>        ~   uccujiies  -2-g->   FT'    TF>   T¥'    ^s¥' 

The  last  assumption  gives,  "praeter  exspectationem,"  two  cases  in  which 
ajc  becomes  a  square  ;  and  these  give  two  solutions  of  our  problem. 

1.  Putting  a  =  64,  b  =  9,  c  -  49,  ^=4,  we  have 

M=ab  +  bc  +  cd  +  da  =  $'](>  +  441  +  196  +  256 

=  1469* 
and  the  four  numbers  are 

1469.196,     1469.256,     1469.441,     1469.576. 

2.  Putting  a  =  64,  />  =  9,  ^=289,  d  -  4,  we  obtain 

J/=576+  2601  +  1156  +  256  =  4589, 
and  the  four  numbers  are 

4589.256,     4589.576,     4589.1156,     4589.2601. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEM    n  357 

Again,  the  form  of  the  expressions  abed,  bd  (c?  +  e*~)  +  ac  (b  +  df  to  be 
made  squares  shows  that  any  values  for  aje  obtained  by  the  above  process 
may  be  taken  as  values  for  bid.  Also  a  and  c  may  be  interchanged.  Euler 
accordingly  sets  down  as  values  of  b\d\.Q  be  tried  the  following: 

f  ,  f  ,  I,  ¥,  ¥,  f*.  ¥,  ¥,  ¥  etc. 

He  obtains  no  solution  from  the  assumption  bjd~^,  but  he  is  more 
successful  with  the  assumption  bjd=\. 

Putting  bld  =  ^t  we  have  to  make 

20  (a2  +  r2)  +  8io<r=a  square. 

This  is  satisfied  by  a\c=\;  let  therefore  aje  =  i  +  x,  and  we  have  to 
make  20  {(i  +  x)z  +  i}  +  8i  (i  +  x)  a  square;  that  is, 

121  +  I2ix  +  20x^-3.  square  =  (n  +  xyf,  say; 


121  -  22V  ,a       V2—  22V+IOI        ttt*  + 

therefore    x  =  —=  -  ±,  and  -  =<  -  ^-— 
* 


22mtl  + 


-  , 
c  y-2o  m*-2on- 

and,  by  putting  m  —  5,  n  —  i  we  obtain  a/r=  ^. 

This  solution  serves  our  purpose,  since  it  makes  abed  a  square. 
Putting  a  -  16,  £=5,  ^=5,  <^=4,  we  have 

80  +  25  +  20  +  64      189 

M=    ~7^-      •7r> 

and,  if  /^  =  3,  M=  2  1  ;  the  four  numbers  are  therefore 

21.  20,     21.25,     21.64,     21.80. 
This  is  a  solution  in  much  smaller  numbers  ;  and 

the  sum  of  the  numbers  =9.21-, 

the  sum  of  products  of  pairs  =  1  1  o2  .  2  12, 

the  sum  of  products  of  sets  of  three  =  i2o2.  2i4, 
and  the  product  of  all  four  =  i6oo2.  21*. 

When  one  solution  is  known,  others  can  be  found.     Take,  for  example, 
the  last  solution  in  which,  for  bfd-^,  we  found  that 
a     y*—  22y+  IQI 

C  ~          jP—20 

In  order  that  abed  may  be  a  square,  we  must  have 

5(ys-2o)(y-22j'+  101)=  a  square. 
This  is  satisfied  by  y  =  5.     Substitute  2  +  5  for  y,  and  we  have 

5  (z2  +  102  +  5)  (z2  -  1  20  +  1  6)  =  a  square, 
or  400  +  5000-4950"-  102^  +  52*  =  a  square. 


358  SUPPLEMENT 

Equate  this  expression  to  (20  +  ^/-z  —  ^-z*)2,  and  we  have 


\322          »/  32 


whence 


3»-  "55.  =3»-  '°5  =  33g£ 


. 

266321       242II       2201     2201 

therefore  j  =  2  +  5  =  ^/^-  ;   and   the   resulting  values  of  a,  c  are   large 
numbers  which  Euler  does  not  trouble  to  develop.     Asa  matter  of  fact, 

a  _      55696      _  4.  n82 
c  "109465205  "5.  4679*  ' 
It  follows  that 

f2M=  5  .  55696  +  5  .  109465205  +  4  .  109465205  +  4  .  55696 
=     278480+      547326025+      437860820+    222784 
=     985688109; 
and,  putting  /=  9,  we  have 

M=  12168989. 

The  four  numbers  are  therefore 
12168989  .  278480,     12168989  .  547326025, 

12168989  .  437860820,     12168989.  222784. 
PROBLEM  12.     To  find  three  numbers  x,  y,  z  such  that  the  expressions 

X*  +y>  +  z2,     x2f  +  x2z2  +y2z2 
are  both  squares^, 

In  order  to  satisfy  the  first  condition,  we  have  only  to  put 

x  =p2  +  q2  —  r2,    y  =  2pr,     z  =  2qr, 

for  then  x2  +/  +  z2  =  (/  +  q2  +  r2)2  =  P2,  say. 

The  second  condition  requires  that 


therefore,  since  y*  +  z2  -  ^r2  (/2  +  ^), 

<22  =  ^  (p*  +  y2)  (p*  +  f-  r2)2 
or  <2V4^  -  (/2  +  f)  (f  +  f-  r2)2 

In  order  to  get  rid  of  the  sixth  power  of  p  and  so  make  p*  the  highest 
power  of/,  suppose  that  r-p-nq  (which  introduces  no  restriction); 
therefore 

«22/4  (/  -  nq?  =  (p2  +  q2}  \znpq  +  (i  -  n2}  q2}2  +  4/V  (/  -  nqf, 
or       <22/4?2  (/  -  nqf  *  (/2  +  ?2)  {2«/  +  (i  -  n2)  q}2  +  4/2  (/  -  «?)2- 


1  Ada  Acad.  Scient.  Imp.  Petropol.,   1779,  Vol.  III.  (1782),  pp.  30  sqq.  =  Commenta- 
tiones  arithmetic  ae,  n.  pp.  457  sqq. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEMS  n,   12  359 

Let  the  latter  expression  be  denoted  by  fi2,  so  that  Q=  2q(p-nq)  R; 
and 

^  =  4(1+  »2)/4  -  4*  (i  +  fP)fq  +  (i  +  6rr*  +  ft1)/?? 


This  may  be  made  a  square  in  two  ways,  either  (i)  by  taking  advantage 
of  the  fact  that  the  last  term  is  a  square,  or  (2)  by  making  the  first  term, 
i.e.  making  i  +  «2,  a  square. 

(i)  Put  .ffs={(I-«2)r  +  2«/V  +  a;>y>  and  make  the  term  in  q* 
disappear  by  choosing  a  so  that  i  +  6«*  +  «4  =  4«2  +  20(1  -«*),  or 

I  +  2#2  +  «4 

a  =  —  -  -  -£—  ;    we  then  have 


whence  (i5~35«2  +  i3«4-«6)/  =  8»(i  -«*)  (3  - 

this  divides  throughout  by  3  -  a2,  and 


^     5  — 

Let/=-8«(i  -w2),   ^=5—  io«2  +  «4;  then  r=p-nq  =  n  (3  +  2«*-«4), 
while 


and  a:,  j,  s  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  «. 
Ex.   i.     Suppose  «  =  2;    then 

/  =  -48,     ^  =  -19,    r  =  -io,    ^  =  7035,     <2=38 
x  =  2565,  y  =  960,  s  =  380,  or  (dividing  throughout  by  5)  x  =  5130'=  192» 
2=  76  (in  which  case  £=106932,  P=>^^). 

Ex.  2.     Suppose  «  =  3;  then  p  =  -  192,  ^  =  -  4,  r  =  -  180,  or  (dividing 
by  -4) 

^  =  48,     ^=i,     '•=45,     ^=14120,     £=1270800; 

x  -  280,    _y  =  90  .  48,     z-  90. 
Dividing  the  values  of  x,y,  z  by  10,  we  have 

*  =28,    ^  =  432,     0  =  9,     and    Q=  12708,     /*=433- 
(2)     To  make  the  first  term  in  IP  a  square,  suppose  i  +  «2=  w2,  which 
is  the  case  whenever  n  =  (a2-  tr)/2al>. 
We  have  then 

IP  =  4m*p4  -  4«/»2/V  +  («*  +  4**a)/y  +  4«  (i  -  «8)//  ^  (  r  ~  "T  /• 
Euler  solves  this  in  three  ways. 


360  SUPPLEMENT 

First,  he  puts  R=2mp2  —  nmpq  +  (i-n2}q2;  and  from  this,  by  taking 
a  =  2,  b  =  i,  so  that  n  -  f ,  m  =  ±  f ,  he  obtains  the  particular  solution 

*  =  -392>    7=i386,     *  =  -ios6, 
or  x=     196,    7=    693,     z  =       528. 

Secondly,  he  puts  R  =  im f  +  2npq  +  (i  -  n2)  ?2,  and  deduces,  by  the  same 
particular  assumptions, 

*  =  936,    7=74,     2  =  3552, 
or  *  =  468,    7  =  37,     2=1776. 

Thirdly,  he  supposes 

„  w4  +  3»2 

K  =  2mp  —  mnpq  H —  a2. 

^m 

where  however  the  last  term  should  apparently  be  q~. 


Euler's  son,  J.  A  Euler,  gave,  in  a  Supplement  to  his  father's  paper, 
another  solution  as  follows. 
We  know  that 

(/  -  i)2  +  4/>2  =  (/  +  i)2  and  (gn-  -  i)2  +  4^  =  (f  +  i)2. 
Multiply  the  first  equation  by  4^2  and  the  second  by  (p-  +  i)-;  this  gives 


or  _I/+ 

Therefore  the  three  numbers 


satisfy  the  first  of  the  conditions. 

The  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  products  of  pairs  of  these  numbers  must 
now  be  a  square;  after  dividing  out  by  4^2,  this  gives 

(?2-  02(/4-  i)2  +  4/(?2-  i)2(/+  i)2+  i6/V  (/-  i)2  =  a  square. 

But  (/4-i)2  +  4/2(/2+i)2  =  (/2  +  i)4; 

therefore  (/2+  i)4(^2-  i)2+  i6/V2(/2-  i)2  must  be  a  square. 

For  brevity,  let  A2  =  (/2  +  i)4,  £*  =  io>2(/2-  i)2,  and 

A2  (f2  -  i)2  +  ^2,  or  AY  +  (B1  -  2  A*}  q*  +  A2, 
must  be  a  square. 

Put  A2qi+(JP 

A1   _ 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEMS    12,   13  361 

Now  both  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  this  fraction  are  squares 
if  v*  =  A-  -  £?,  for  the  numerator  becomes  B*  and  the  denominator 


which  is  the  square  of  A  +  ,J(A*  -  &}. 

But,  putting  for  A,  B  their  values  in  terms  of  p  as  above,  we  have 

<P-&=S 
therefore 


'— 

and  the  numbers  required  will  be 


8/ 


or,  if  we  multiply  by  (/2—  i)2, 

(6/  -/-!)(/  +  1), 
The  sum  of  the  squares  of  these  numbers  turns  out  to  be  (/*  +  1)6, 
which  is  not  only  a  square  but  a  sixth  power,  while  the  sum  of  the  squares 
of  the  products  of  pairs  is  found  to  be 


or 

Ex.     Put  p-  2,  and  we  have 


-16.4.9.  3372  =  8o882, 
the  solution  being  in  smaller  numbers  than  Euler's  own. 


PROBLEM  1  3.     To  find1  three  positive  integral  numbers  x,  y,  z  such  that 

x  +y  +  z  = 


To  make  ar'+y  +  z2  a  square,  put  x  =  a2  +  $*-ci)}>  =  2af,  z  =  2h,  and  we 
have  x2  +f  +  z*  =  (a2  +  P  +  r8)2. 

We  have  now  to  make  a2  +  ^  +  r8  a  square,  and  we  put  similarly 

a—f>ijrqi  —  rL^     b  =  2pr,     c—2qr\ 
we  have  then  x2  +y>  +  02  =  (f  +  <f  +  r2)4. 

Now  let  us  express  x,  y,  z  in  terms  of/,  ^,  r  ;  this  gives 
x  =p*  +  f  +  r4  +  2ff  +  2/V  - 


1   Commentationes  arithmeticae,  II.  pp.  399-400. 


362  SUPPLEMENT 

therefore 
x  +y  +  z  =p*  +  q*  +  ?A  +  2/V  +  2/V  - 

(1)  Arrange  this  according  to  powers  of/,  and 
x+y  +  z  =/4  +  2  (^  +  r)2/2  +  8/tyr2 

In  making  this  a  square,  we  have  to  see  that  />,  g,  r  are  all  positive,  and 
also  /•  +  ^  >  r'.  Also  o2  +  £2  must  be  >  <?. 

Equate  the  expression  to  {/2  +  (q  +  r)2}2,  and  we  have 

8/^r2  +  /  +  4?V-  6/r2 -  ^r3  +  r*  -  (?  +  r)4, 
whence  8/tyr2  =  1 2^2^  +  S^r3,  or  /  =  \q  +  r. 

Therefore         a  =  \3-^2  +  ^r,     b  =  $qr  +  2^,     c  =  zqr, 
where  both  the  letters  ^,  r  may  be  given  any  positive  values. 

Ex.  i.     Suppose  4=2,  r=  i ;  therefore 

/  =  4,     a  -19,     l>  =  8,     c  =  4; 
accordingly  the  numbers  are 

#  =  409,    .7=152,     2  =  64, 

and  ^+^  +  2  =  625  =  252,     xi+yi  +  zi=  194481  =  44i2=  2 14. 

Ex.  2.     Let  q  =  2,  r  =  2  ;  therefore 

/  =  '5,     «  =  25,     ^=20,     r=8, 
and  #=961,    _y  =  4oo,     2  =  320; 

therefore       #+jy  +  2=  1681  =4i2,     ^2+_y2  +  22=  1185921  =  334. 

(2)  Arrange  the  expression  for  x+y  +  z  according  to  powers  of  g ; 
this  gives 

x+y  +  z  =  #t  +  44?  r  +  2^  (p*  -  y"}  +  ^qr  (f-  +  zpr  -  r*)  +  (p-  +  ^)2. 

In  order  that  the  terms  in  q*  and  q*  and  the  absolute  term  may  vanish, 
equate  the  expression  to 

te2+2^-(/2  +  ^)}2, 

2pr  (p  +  r) 

whence  we  obtain  q  -  — — ^- — —^ . 

2r--p* 

Ex.     Suppose/  =  i,  r  =  i  ;  therefore 

q  =  4,     a=  16,     6=2,     c  =  S, 
or  (if  we  divide  by  2)          a  =  8,     b  -  i,     c  =  4  ; 
therefore  x  =  49,    y  =  64,     2  =  8; 

and  #+_>'  +  £=  ii2,     #2+yj  +  22=656i  =8i2  =  94. 

These  numbers  are  no  doubt  the  smallest  which  satisfy  the  conditions. 

The  case  of  three  numbers  is  thus  easier  than  that  of  two  (see  p.  299, 
note).  Euler  solves  the  same  problem  for  four  and  five  numbers,  and  shows 
how  the  method  may  be  extended  to  six  numbers,  and  so  on  indefinitely. 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEMS   13,    14  363 

PROBLEM  14.     To  find  three  numbers  x,  y,  z,  positive  and  prime  to  one 
another,  such  that  both  x+y  +  z  and  x?+y2  +  zli  are  fourth  powers1. 

As  in  the  above  problem,  put 

x  =  az  +  b*  —  c2,    y  =  2ac,     z  —  2bc, 
and  further  a=fl*  +  qri-r*,    b-  2pr,     c  =  zqr, 

and  make  the  expression  in  /,  q,  r  for  x  +  y  +  z  a  square  by  equating  it 
to  {f  +  (q  +  rff  as  before.  This  gives  /  =  \q  +  r;  but  we  have  now,  in 
addition,  to  make  /2  +  (q  +  rf  a  square. 


therefore  g*  (?  +  r)  =  zfgp  +f>  (q  +  r). 

Substitute  f  q  +  r  for/,  and  this  becomes 


whence 


The  problem  may  therefore  be  solved  in  this  way. 

Take  q  =/2  +  2fg-g*  and  r  =  g*  -  3fg-/*, 

so  that  /  =  ^(/2-£"2),  then  find  a,  t>,  c,  and  then  again  x,  y,  z,  in  terms 
of/.?. 

Ex.     Let  /=  1,^=3;  therefore 

#  =  -2,     r  =  -i,    p  =  -4, 
or  4=2,     r=i,    p  =  4. 

Thus  a—ig,     ^  =  8,     ^=4, 

and  ^  =  409,    ^=152,     2  =  64; 

so  that  x+y  +  z  =  62$  =  $*,     x2+y2  +  z*=  194481  •-  2  14. 

To  find  limits  for  the  values  off,  g,  change  the  signs  of  q,  r,  putting 
V=g*-2fg-f\     r=f^Zfg-g\    /  =  iQr2-/2)- 

In  order  that  q  may  be  positive, 

glf>  i  +V2>2.4i4..., 
and,  in  order  that  r  may  be  positive, 


Suppose  e.g.  that  /=  2,  g  =  5  ;  then 

y=i,     r=<),    p  =  Q, 

or  in  integers  f-2,     r=iB,    p  =  2i; 

hence  a  =121,     £=756,     ^=72, 

^=580993,    JF=  17424,     2=108864, 
=  707281  =  294,     ^+j2  +  22 

1  Comtnentationes  arithmeticae,  n.  p.  402. 


364  SUPPLEMENT 

PROBLEM  15.     (Problem  in  Fermat's  note  on  vi.  13.) 

To  find  a  right-angled  triangle  (in  rational  numbers)  such  that  either 
of  the  sides  about  the  right  angle  less  the  area  gives  a  square^. 

Let  the  perpendiculars  be  —  ,  -  ,  so  that  the  area  is  -^  ;  and 


2X        XV 

---  ^  or  2xz  —  xy 

2 


-  -  -^-     or  yz  -  xy 


y 
as  well  as     --  —•  or  4^  +y 


have  to  be  made  squares. 


Since  the  first  two  expressions  are  to  be  squares,  their  product  must  be 
so  also  ;  therefore 

2xyz*  —  tot?  yz  —  xy*z  +  x*y*  =  a  square 


and,  after  dividing  byyz,  we  have 

2p 

2x2  -  2oc  -  xy  =  -  —  xy  + 

*L       * 
Whence 

Thus  = 

p*xy  +  fxy  -  2pqxy  =  xy  (p  -  qf 
2<?x-fy  2<fx-J*y> 

x  (2qx  -pyf     x2  (2qx  -  pyf 
and  2xz  -xy=  -$2L  j> 


Therefore  the  two  expressions  are  squares  if  24* x2  —  p* xy  is  a  square. 

therefore  (2^  -  r*}  x  =  p*y,  or  x/y=f-/(2?z-r*). 

It  is  sufficient  for  our  solution  to  know  the  ratio  x/y,  since  a  common 
denominator  z  has  already  been  introduced. 
Therefore  we  may  put 

1  Novi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petrop.,  1749,  Vol.  II.  (1751),  pp.  49  sqq.  =»  Commentationes 
arithmeticae,  I.  pp.  62-72. 


SOLUTIONS  BY  EULER.     PROBLEM    15  365 

whence  ,-,  =  * 

and  ^ 


. 

It  only  remains  to  make  4*?  +y*  a  square  ;  that  is, 

4p'  +  424~442r2  +  ?A  must  be  a  square. 

A  general  solution  of  this  equation  giving  all  possible  values  of  /,  q,  r 
is  impossible.     We  must  therefore  be  satisfied  with  particular  solutions. 

Particular  solutions  (i)  and  (2). 
Put  4/  +  4?* 

therefore  4 


and  /!  =  +     (?2-^), 

that  is,  either 

(')    /^Vfe'-O,  or  (2)  •/  = 

(i)     Now  /  =  ^  V^2  "  **)  is  satisfied  by  q  =  £  +  <t\  r  =  2cd,  whence 


or  we  may  put 

/  =  (t*  +  <P)  (r  - 
and  we  thus  find  values  for 


Ex.  i.     Suppose  c=  2,  d-  i  ;  then 

/  =  5-3=I5>     ^  =  4-5  =  20»     r=  4.4=16, 

544.25      25.89     2225 
-     --    =-- 


and  the  triangle  is 

2          44      J       435  2 


=  = 

2   ~  89  '     2      25.89'  *  25.89 

Ex.  2.     If  r  =  3,  d=  i,  we  get  the  triangle 


366  SUPPLEMENT 

(2)     In  this  case  p  -  -  J(r*  -  qz\  and  we  have  to  put 

2Cd(<*-< 

\     g=  2cd,     whence  p  = 


or  p  =  2cd  (<?  -  dz),     q= 

while 


Here,  since  2<f  must  be  >  r2, 

&<?d*  >  (cz  +  d*f  and  2cd  j 
therefore  d*>(c-d  >J2)Z,  and 

either  d>c-d^2,  so  that  -> 


c      i  +  V2' 
or        d>d^2-c,  so  that  -< 


C        *J2  -  I 

If   therefore    d=i,   either    c<^2  +  i    or  0^2-1.      The    second 
alternative  is  satisfied  by  c>  i. 

Ex.     Let  c  -  2,  d=  i,  and  we  have 

^  =  4.3=12,     ^  =  4.5  =  20,     ^=5.5  =  25; 
therefore 


The  triangle  is  therefore 

2X  =  288.25  =  45_o  .  J  =  25-I75  =  4375  .  V(4^2+y)  =  25.337  =  8425 
z    4048    253'  z   4048   4048'     *•      4048   4048' 

Particular  solution  (3). 
Put  4/4  +  4^ 

therefore  ^  -  4?V  =  ±  8/V2,  and  /2  =  ± 


therefore        either  /  =  —  ^(zr3  -  8^),  or  p  =  — 

The  first  value  is  however  useless,  since  2q-  -  r2  >  o,  or 

We  have  therefore          /  =  —  J(Sa2  -  2^), 
,  ..  4f 

while 

Since  8^2  —  2^  must  be  a  square,  put 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEM    15  367 

therefore        4^  -  2r  =  ^  (zq  +  r\  or  ^d'2q  -  2^/V  =  2<?q  +  <?r, 
whence 


2r*)  =  Scd,   and   therefore   *  = 
Multiplying  by  zd'1  +  £,  we  have  in  integers 


while  x,  y,  z  have  the  values  above  stated. 
Ex.  i.     Put  c=  i,  d=  i  ;  therefore 

/  =  4»     ?  =  9>     r=6;      x=i6,    y=i26,     ^(4^  +/)=  130, 

j  .      126  .  25      207 

and  2=16  +  --  7-^=  —  ^-. 

36  2 

The  triangle  is  therefore 

64         22         *2  +       260 


0       207'     z  ~  207  '  z  ~~  207' 

This  is  the  triangle  in  the  smallest  numbers  satisfying  the  conditions,  as 
Euler  proves  later. 

Ex.  2.  Since  2^a>r2,  it  follows  that  '  c\d  >  2  -  ^2  ;  but  it  does  not 
matter  whether  2d'2  >  <?  or  not,  since  /,  y,  r  may  be  negative  as  well  as 
positive. 

Put  then  d=  2,  c=$;  therefore  2d'2  -  <?  =  -  i,  and  2d'2  +  <?  =  17. 
We  then  have        p  -  -  24,     ^  =  289,     r  -  -  34  ; 


The  triangle  is  therefore 

?f  =      23°4          J  =  28.41.  if       J(4X*+f)  =  4-5-53-3I3 
z       28118255'     z       28118255'  -z  '    28118255 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  all  the  above  examples  it  matters  not 
whether  c,  d  are  negative  ;  it  will  only  result  in  the  values  of  /  or  q  or  r 
becoming  negative,  but  the  values  of  x  and  y  will  not  be  thereby  changed. 
Only  z  will  vary,  since  z  may  be  either 

y(p-  ?)2          y  (P  +  v? 

x  +          ,         or  x  +  J  ^     —  . 

After  remarking  that  the  problem  of  making 

4/4  +  4^  -  4?2^  +  ^  or  4/4  +  (24*  -  r2)2  a  square 
may  be  solved  generally  by  equating  it  to 


Euler  passes  to  his  general  solution. 


368  SUPPLEMENT 

General  solution. 
If   —  ,    -   are   the   perpendicular   sides   of   the    triangle,    let   x  -  ab, 

y  =  a*-lr*i   the  triangle  is  then 

2ab      rf-P      a*  +  t? 


and  the  area  is 


Now  we  found  above,  at  the  beginning  of  the  investigation,  that 
_  =  2qix*  +  q^xy  -  2pqxy  =  ^  [  xy  (p  -  q? 
2qlx-fy  zfx-fy* 

or,  since  q  can  be  taken  positively  as  well  as  negatively, 


where  x  =  ab,  y  =  a*  —  IP. 

And  we  took  2?*x2  -pzxy  =  r* 

y(p±gf  (^ 

whence  z  =  x  +         I       =ab+^—    —  - 

We  have  therefore  only  to  satisfy  the  equation 


and,  since  xy  =  ab(di-by),  we  have  to  find  such  numbers  for  a,  b  that 
ab(<?-F)  may  be  of  the  form  2/2-^2  or  (2/*-gn-}h\ 

Suppose  now  that  such  numbers  a,  b  have  been  found  that 
ab(o?-b^  =  (2 

Then,  since  x  =  ab, 


and  a  natural  inference  is  suggested,  namely  that 
aba      „      abr        . 


Let  now  p  —  ab,  and  accordingly 

the  triangle  is  then 

2ab 


+  (a2  -  P)  (ab  ±  fKf  ' 


abg'W  +  (a2  -  P)  (ab  ±fhf  ' 


abgW  +  (a2  -  P)  (ab  ±fKf  ' 


SOLUTIONS  BY   EULER.     PROBLEM   15  369 

Also  from  any  particular  values  of  a,  b  any  number  of  triangles  can  be 
derived  satisfying  the  conditions. 

For,  if  p  —  ab,  and 

a&  (<*-&)  =  (*/*-?)», 

we  have  (a/3  -  g*)  h*  =  2<?-  r>, 

or 


Put  2(/a  +  ?)  =      (tf*  +  r)f  9*&fk-9  = 


therefore  q  =  *mngh  -£#£#)  jk  ^ 

-)gh  -  qmnfh 


21?  -n? 

or,  in  integers,  p-(2f^  —  m-)  ab, 

q  =  2mngh  -  (20*  +  m2)fh, 
r  =  (2#2  +  *«2)  gh  — 

while  z 


rr,         ,         -  —  . 

Thus  the  triangle  I  —  ,  -    —  ,  -          I  is  known. 
\  z  z  a     / 

Lastly,  to  find  suitable  values  for  a,  b,  Euler  writes  down  all  the 
numbers  from  i  to  200  which  are  of  the  form  2/2  -  w2,  including  all  the 
squares  arising  from  the  supposition  that  u  =  t,  and  all  the  doubles  of 
squares  corresponding  to  u  -  o.  Inspection  shows  that  the  table  contains 
(within  the  limits)  all  the  prime  numbers  of  the  form  8/«  +  i,  and  no  other 
primes,  the  doubles  of  the  primes,  the  products  of  the  primes  into  all 
squares  and  into  one  another,  and  the  doubles  of  those  products. 

Now,  since  the  product  a  .  b  (a  +  b}  (a  -  b}  is  to  be  of  the  form  z/2  -  ir1, 
and  the  factors  a,  b,  a  +  b,  a  —  b  are  either  prime  to  one  another  or  at  the 
most  have  2  as  a  common  divisor,  while  2  is  itself  contained  in  the  form 
2/2-«2,  the  several  factors  must  all  be  of  that  form,  in  which  case  the 
product  will  be  of  that  form. 

We  have  therefore  first  to  take  some  value  of  b  in  the  table  and  then  see 
whether  there  are  in  the  table  three  other  numbers  a—&,  a,  a  +  b  differing 
by  b.  Euler  gives  a  second  table  showing  values  of  a  corresponding  to 
values  i,  7,  8,  9,  16,  17  etc.  of  b. 

The  values  of  a  in  the  table  corresponding  to  b=i  are  8,  17,  63, 
72,  127. 

Ex.  i.     Take  b=  i,  a  =  8  ;  therefore 

ab  =  S,     <?-P  =  63,     a£(aa-£2)  =  8.9.7  =  4.9.  14, 

and   4.9.  14  =  A2  (z/2-^2),  so  that  h  =  6,   2/*-g*=i4,  and  accordingly 
/=3>  ^=2- 

H.  D.  24 


370  SUPPLEMENT 

We  have  therefore  in  this  case 

/  =  8(2«2-0*2),     ^  =  24/;m-i8(2«2  +  ;«2),     r=  12  (zn?  +  m*)  -  >j  2tnn  ; 
or,  dividing  by  2, 


Thus  there  are  any  number  of  values  of  z  from  which  triangles  may  be 
obtained  satisfying  the  conditions. 

The  simplest  value  is  found  by  putting  m=i,  n  =  o,  whence 


and  either  z  =  8  +  £  .  25  =  ££!, 

or  z  =  8  +  f.i69  =  lYJL- 

The  first  value  gives  the  triangle  in   smallest  numbers  above  found 

(P-  367), 

2ab_  _  _64_      a2-^2  _  252       cP  +  P  =  260 

z    ~  207'         z          207'         z          207' 
Substituting  1215  for  207,  we  have  the  sides  of  the  triangle  corre- 

sponding to  the  second  value  of  z. 

The  particular  triangles  are  also  directly  obtained  from  the  values  of 

a,  t>,  f,  g,  h  without  bringing  in  m,  n  ;    for 


thatis, 


Ex.  2.     Take  ^  =  41,  a—  112;  therefore 

0^=7.16.41,     a2-^2=  71  .  9.  17, 
and  ab(c?  -  P)  =  16  .  9  .  7  .  17  .  41  .  71  =  (2/2 

whence  h  -  12,  and  7  .  17  .  41  .  71  =  2/2  —g*. 

The  simplest  solution  is/  =41  7,  £•=  37. 


is  easily  found,  and  consequently  the  triangle 
zab       a*-P       a*  + 


[Euler  finds  values  for/  g  by  using  the  formulae 
(2a2-/82)(2y2-82)  =  (2ay±^8)2-2()8y 
and  x*  -  2f  =  2  (#  ±j>/)2  -  (a:  ±  2j>;)2. 


SOLUTIONS  BY  EULER.  PROBLEMS  15,  1  6    371 

He   does   not   actually  give  the  steps  leading  up   to   the   particular 
solution  7=41  7,  £-=37,  but  it  can  be  obtained  thus. 
Since  7  =  2.  22-  i  and  i7  =  2.32-i,  we  have 

7.  l7=(2.2.3+I.l)2-2(3.  I  +  2.I)2 

=  i32-2.52=2(i3-5)2-(i3-2.5)i=2.82-32. 
Again,  since  41  =  2  .  52-  32  and  71  =  2  .  62-  i2,  it  follows  that 
4I.  71^(2.5.  6-3.  i)2-2(3.  6-5.  i)2 

=  572-2.i3a=2(57-i3)a-(57-2.i3)2=2.442-3i8. 
Therefore,  by  multiplication, 


-  7972-  2  .  38o2  =  2  (797  -38o)2-  (797  -  2  •  tf°Y=  *  •  4i72-37J-] 

PROBLEMS  16.  "De  problematibus  indeterminatis,  quae  videntur  plus 
quam  determinata1." 

We  have  seen  that  by  means  of  certain  "  Porisms  "  stated  without 
proof  Diophantus  is  able  to  obtain  relations  between  three  numbers 
x,  y,  z  which  have  the  effect  that,  when  they  are  satisfied,  a  quite 
appreciable  number  of  symmetrical  expressions  in  x,  y,  z  are  auto- 
matically (as  it  were)  made  squares. 

It  is  clear  therefore,  says  Euler,  that,  if  a  general  method  of  finding 
"porisms"  of  this  kind  can  be  discovered,  the  whole  subject  of  Diophantine 
analysis  will  be  appreciably  advanced.  Accordingly  he  proceeds  to  discuss 
such  a  method. 

The  method  depends  on  a  Lemma  the  truth  of  which  is  evident. 

Lemma.  If  values  have  been  found  for  the  letters  z,  y,  x  etc.  which 
satisfy  the  equation  W-Q,  where  W  is  any  function  of  those  letters, 
and  P,  Q,  R  etc.  are  other  functions  of  the  letters  such  that  P+W, 
Q  +  W,  R±W  etc.  are  squares,  then,  if  the  values  of  z,y,x  etc.  are 
taken  which  satisfy  W=o,  the  resulting  values  of  P,  Q,  R  etc.  will 
also  be  made  squares. 

Cor.     P,  Q,  R  etc.  will  similarly  be  made  squares  if  P+  a  W,  Q  +  ft  W, 
yW&c.  or,  more  generally,  if 


etc. 
are  squares. 

Conversely,  If  such  values  for  z,  y,  x  etc.  have  been  assigned  as  will 
satisfy  W=  o,  all  formulae  such  as  P2  +  a  W,  Q?  +  p  W,  R*  +  yW  etc.  will 
at  the  same  time  be  made  squares. 

1  Novi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petropol.,  1756-57,  vi.  (1761),  pp.  85  sqq.  =  Commenta- 
tiones  arithmeticae,  I.  pp.  145-259. 


372  SUPPLEMENT 

And,  as  the  number  of  such  formulae  is  subject  to  no  limit,  it  is  clear 
that  an  unlimited  number  of  conditions  can  be  prescribed  which  are  all 
satisfied  provided  that  the  one  condition  W=  o  has  been  satisfied. 

The  same  Lemma  can  be  extended  to  the  case  of  cubes  or  any  higher 
powers ;  for,  if  W=  o  has  been  satisfied  by  certain  values,  all  expressions  of 
the  form  P3  +  a  W  will  thereby  be  made  cubes,  all  expressions  of  the  form 
P*  +  a  W  will  be  made  fourth  powers,  and  so  on. 

While  it  is  plain  that,  if  values  for  z,  y,  x  etc.  are  found  which  satisfy 
the  condition  W=  o,  all  the  expressions  P2  +  a  W,  Q2  +  ft  W,  R 2  +  y  W  etc. 
will  be  made  squares  by  the  same  values  of  x,  y,  z,  the  difficulty  will  be, 
when  a  number  of  expressions  P2  +  a  W,  Q2  +  ft  W  etc.  are  given  which  are 
capable  of  being  made  squares  in  this  way,  to  identify  and  separate  the 
expression  W  the  equating  of  which  to  zero  will  make  the  rest  of  the 
several  expressions  automatically  squares.  It  would  indeed  be  easy  so  to 
hide  away  the  composition  of  the  expressions  as  to  make  this  separation 
itself  a  most  arduous  problem.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  easy  and  in- 
teresting to  begin  with  W=  o,  and  then  investigate  the  simpler  formulae 
which  can  by  this  means  be  made  squares.  Before  proceeding  to  the 
particular  cases,  Euler  observes  further  that  it  is  convenient  to  take  for  W 
an  expression  in  which  z,  y,  x  etc.  enter  symmetrically  and  can  be  inter- 
changed ;  for  then,  if  P2  is  such  a  square  that  P2  +  a  W  is  a  square,  and 
z,  y,  x  etc.  are  interchanged  so  as  to  turn  P2  into  Q2,  R2  etc.,  Q2  +  a.W, 
R"1  +  a  W  etc.  will  also  be  squares.  Also,  since  solutions  in  rational 
numbers  are  required,  z,  y,  x  etc.  should  not  enter  in  any  higher  power 
than  the  second  into  the  expression  W.  Euler  begins  with  expressions 
containing  two  unknowns  2,  y  only. 

Problem  (i).  Given  W=y  +  z  -  a  =  o,  to  find  the  more  simple  formulae 
which  by  means  of  this  equation  can  be  made  squares. 

When  the  equation  y  +  z-a  =  o  is  satisfied,  it  is  clear  that  the  general 
formula  P2  +  M(-  a  +y  +  z)  will  become  a  square  whatever  quantities  are 
put  for  P  and  M.  Accordingly  Euler,  by  giving  /*,  M  various  values, 
obtains  without  difficulty  44  different  expressions  which  become  squares 
when  y  +  z  —  a  —  o. 

He  supposes  M-  2,  -  2,  2«,  -y,  -  z  -y,  y  +  z  +  a,  n  (y  +  z  +  a), 
(y  +  z  +  a)(y-z  +  a)(z-y  +  a),  and  3  and  n2 -  i  times  the  last  expression 
respectively,  and  with  each  of  these  assumptions  he  combines  one  or  more 
forms  for  P.  I  need  only  quote  a  few  expressions  which  are  thus  made 
squares,  e.g. 


(y -  i)2  +  2  (- a  +y  +  z}  =y2  +  22 
(2  -  i)2  +  2  (-  a  +y  +  2)  =  22  +  2y  + 


+  i  -  2aJ ' 


SOLUTIONS   BY  EULER.     PROBLEMS    16  373 

(y  -  z  +  i )2  -  2  (-  a  +  y  +  z)  =  (y  -  zf  -  40  +  i  +  2a\ 

y(-a+y  +  z)  =yz  +  znz  +  n"  —  2na, 


-(y  +  z)  (-  a+y  +  z)  =  ay  +  az 


(yz  -nY  +  n(y  +  z  +  a)  (-  a  +  y  +  z)  =yiz*  +  tiy2  +  nz*  +  «2  - 
(y*+  z2+a?)2+  (y+z  +  a)  (y-z  +  a)  (z-y+  a)  (-a+y  +  z) 

and  so  on.     Wherever  a  new  expression  can  be  got  by  interchanging  z 
and  y,  this  may  be  done. 

Taking  the  more  particular  case  of  W=y  +  0-1=0,  Euler  obtains  the 
following  expressions  which  are  thereby  made  squares, 

y  +  42,    f-y  +  z,    y  +  z,     y-yz, 
z*  +  ty,     z*-z  +y,     z  -yz, 

/Z2+/  +  Z2,       2/+2Z2-!, 

which  indeed  are  easily  seen  to  reduce  to  squares  if  we  put  y  +  z=i  or 
y=i-z. 

The  fact  that  j222  +y*  +  z2  is  a  square  if  y  =  i  —  z  or,  more  generally,  if 
y  =  ±i±z,  is  included  in  the  Porism  in  Dioph.  v.  5.     Similarly 


is  made  a  square  if  we  put  y  =  ±  a  ±  z. 

The  last  expression  but  one  in  the  first  of  the  above  lists,  namely 
y*zz  +  ny*  +  nz*  +  ri*-  na\  becomes  a  square  whatever  value  n  has.  If  a  =  t, 
it  becomes 

y>z*  +  ny*  +  nz*  +  n2  -  n 

or  (f+n)(z'i  +  n)-n. 

That  this  is  a  square  when  z  -y  ±  i  is  part  of  Diophantus'  assumption 
in  v.  4  (see  p.  104  above). 

Euler's  Problems  (2)  and  (3)  similarly  show  how  to  find  a  number  of 
formulae  which  are  all  made  squares  by  values  of  y,  z  satisfying  the 
equations  W-yz  -a(y  +  z)  +  t>  =  o  and  W=y*  +  z2—  2nyz  -a-o. 

He  then  passes  to  the  cases  where  there  are  three  unknowns. 

Problem  (4).  Given  W-  x+y  +  z-a  =  o,  to  find  the  more  noteivorthy 
formulae  which  can  be  made  squares  by  satisfying  this  equation. 

In  this  case  the  general  expression  P*  +  M(x  +y  +  z-a)  becomes  a 
square. 


374  SUPPLEMENT 

Put  M-  2n  and  P=  one  of  the  expressions  x  -  n,  y  —  n,  z-n,  or  one 
of  the  expressions  y  +  z  —  n,  z  +  x  —  n,  x  +y  —  n. 

These  assumptions  make  the  following  expressions  squares  : 
z2  +  2n  (x  +y)  +  n?-2na,  and  the  two  other  similar  expressions, 
(y  +  zf  +  2nx  +  ri*  -  2na,  „  „  „ 

If  M—  2nyz,  P=yz  —  ny  —  nz,  and  so  on, 

jV  +  2nxyz  +  «2y  +  «V  +  2n  (n  -  a)yz 
and  the  two  other  similar  expressions  are  squares. 

If  M=  -  (a  +  x  +y  +  z),  />  =j>  +  2  —  #  and  corresponding  expressions, 


02  —  4yz  -  4yx      are  all  squares. 
a?-4zx-4zy  ] 

In  particular,  if  n  =  2a,  a-  \,  the  following  six  expressions  are  made 
squares  by  putting  x  +y  +  z  =  ^  : 


y*  +  z  +  x, 

z*  +  x  +y,     (x  +y)2  +  z. 
If  a  =  2,  we  make  the  expressions 

i  —  xy  —  xz 
i-yz-yx 
i  —  zx  —  xy 
all  squares  by  putting  x  +y  +  z  =  2. 

Problem  (5)  finds  expressions  which  are  made  squares  if 

W=yz  +  zx  +  xy  —  a  (x  +y  +  z)  +  b  =  o 
is  satisfied. 

Problem  (6).  Given  W=  x2  +yz  +  z2  -  zyz  —  2zx  —  2xy  -a  =  o,  to  find 
the  more  simple  formulae  which  can  be  made  squares  by  means  of  solving  that 
equation. 

Here  the  general  formula  will  be 


If  J/=-i,  P=x+y  +  z, 

4yz  +  4zx  +  ^xy  +  a  =  a  square. 
If  M=  -  i,  P=  y  +  z-x,  etc., 


"I 

4zx  +  a  h  are  squares. 


\xy  +  a 
I(Af=-i,  P=y-z,  etc., 

a  +  2  (y  +  z)  x  - 

a  +  2  (z  +  x)y  —  y*    V  are  squares. 

a  +  2  (x  +y)  z  — 


-  x2  "i 

—  y*    V 

—  z2   J 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEMS    16  375 

In  the  particular  case  where  a  -  4*1,  so  that 

*  =  2yz  +  2zx  +  2xy  +  4*, 


zx  +  n 
-       xy  +  n      are  all  squares; 

yz  f  zx  +  xy  +  n  J 

or   our   formula   gives   the   means   of    solving   the   elegant   Diophantine 
problem  : 

Given  any  number  n,  to  find  three  numbers  such  that  the  product  of  any 
pair  added  to  n  gives  a  square,  and  also  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  pairs 
added  to  n  gives  a  square. 

By  solving  the  equation 

IV—  3?  +y*  +  z3  —  2yz  —  zzx  —  2xy  —  4«  =  o, 
we  obtain  z  =  x  +  y  ±  2  J(xy  +  n). 

We  assume,  therefore,  such  numbers  for  x,  y  as  will  make  xy  +  n  a 
square;  suppose  xy  +  n  =  u*,  and  we  then  have  two  values  for  z,  namely 
z  =  x  +y  ±  2u,  each  of  which  along  with  x,  y  will  satisfy  the  conditions. 

In  fact,  if  z  =  x  +  y  ±  2u,  while  u  -  »J(xy  +  n), 

±  J(xz  +  n)  =  %(x  +  z  -y)  =  x±u, 


± 
(Cf.  Euler's  solution  of  Dioph.  in.  10,  p.  160  above.) 

Problem  (7).     Given 

W-  y?  +y*  +  z*  -  2yz  —  2zx  -  2xy  —  2a(x+y  +  z)-6  =  o, 
to  find  the  more  noteworthy  expressions   which   can  be  made  squares  by 
satisfying  this  equation. 

The  general  expression  here  is 

P*  +  M{x*  +y*  +  z*-  2yz  -  zzx  -  2xy  -  20  (x  +y  +  2)  -  b}. 
If  M-  -  i,  P=  x+y  +  z  +  a,  we  have 

(a)     4yz  +  4zx  +  4*y  +  4a(x+y  +  z)  +  a*  +  6  =  3i  square. 
=-i,  P=x+y+z-a, 

^)     472  +  4zx  +4xy  +  al  +  6  =  a.  square. 
=-i,  P=y  +  z-x  +  a,  etc., 

4yz  +  40  (y  +  z)  +  a*  +  b  \ 
(c)     4zx  +  40  (z  +  x)  +  0s  +  b  [  are  all  squares. 
4xy  +  40  (x  +y)  +  a*  +  b 


376  SUPPLEMENT 

If  M=  —  i,  P=y  +  z  -  x  —  a,  etc., 

4yz  +  4ax  +  a?  +  b  \ 
(d)     ^zx  +  4ay  \-cP-\-b  L  are  all  squares. 

4xy  +  4<zz  +  d*  +  &  ) 

Cor.  i.  In  order  to  solve  the  problem  represented  by  (c),  equate  the 
expression  4xy  +  40  (x  +  y)  +  a?  +  b  to  a  square  #2,  whence 

4  (x  +  a)  (y  +  a)  =  u*  -  b  +  30?, 
or  (x  +  a)  (y  +  a)  =  %  (u* -b  +  3a2) ; 

x  and  y  are  then  determined  by  splitting  \(u*-b  +  3<z2)  into  two  factors 
and  equating  x  +  a,  y  +  a  to  these  factors  respectively.  Next,  solving, 
for  z,  the  equation 

x2  +jv2  +  z2  -  2yz  -  zzx  -  2xy  -  za  (x  +y  +  z)-t>  =  o, 
we  find,  since  4xy  +  40  (x  +y)  +  cP  +  b  =  u*,  that 

z  —  x  +y  +  a  +  u. 
Cor.  2.     If  b  =  —  a2,  then,  by  solving  the  equation 

x2  +y2  +  z2  =  2yz  +  2zx  +  2xy  +  2a  (x  +  y  -f  z)  —  a2, 

we  make  all  the  following  formulae  severally  squares, 

yz  +  a  (y  •+  z),     yz  +  ax, 

zx  +  a(z  +  x),     zx  +  ay, 

xy  +  a  (x  +y},     xy  +  az, 

yz  +  zx  +  xy, 

yz  +  zx  +  xy  +  a  (x  +y  +  z), 
by  assuming 

z  =  x+y  +  a+  2,J{xy  +  a  (x  +y)}  =  x  +y  +  a+  2u, 

where  (x  +  a)  (y  +  a)  is  put  equal  to  «2  +  a2. 

An  interesting  case  of  this  last  problem  is  that  in  which  a  =  i ;  and 
from  this  case  we  can  deduce  a  solution  of  a  new  problem  in  which  the 
corresponding  expressions  with  #2,  y2,  z2  in  place  of  x,  y,  z  are  all  squares. 
The  problem  is 

To  find  three  square  numbers  such  that  (i)  the  product  of  any  two  added 
to  the  sum  of  those  two,  (2)  the  product  of  any  two  added  to  the  third,  (3)  the 
sum  of  the  products  of  pairs,  (4)  the  sum  of  the  products  of  pairs  added  to 
the  sum  of  the  numbers  themselves,  all  give  squares. 

We  have  to  find  values  of  xz,  yz,  z"*  which  will  make  all  the  following 
expressions  squares, 

/Z2  +/  +  Z2,       /Z2  +  X2, 


SOLUTIONS   BY   EULER.     PROBLEMS    16,    17  377 

As  we  have  seen,  all  these  will  be  squares  if 

z*  =  x*  +f  +  i  +  2  y(*y  +  of  +  f). 

We  have  also  seen  (Problem  (i)  above)  that  x?f  +  x>+f  becomes  a 
square  if  only  y  =  x  +  i.     Put  then  y  =  x  +  i,  when  we  have 

22=2^2+  2X+  2±  2  ,J(x*+2  X3  +  ^X2  +  2X  +  i); 

that  is,  «»  =  4  (*»  +  *  +  i). 


It  only  remains  to  make  x2  +  x  +  i  a  square.     Equate  this  to  (-  x  +  f)\ 
and  we  have 


whence 

Therefore  the  roots  of  the  required  squares  are 


Or,  putting  t=(r  —  q)\zq,  the  values  become 


4qr  $qr  zqr 

Let  ^  =  i,  r  =  2,  and  we  have  a;  =  f  ,  y  -  1,  a  =  J  ;  or,  if  we  put  /  =  2  in 
the  values  expressed  in  terms  of  t,  the  values  are  x  =  f  ,  y  =  f  ,  z  =  Y- 

PROBLEM  17.  To  find  two  fourth  powers  A4,  £4  such  that  their  sum 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  two  other  fourth  powers^. 

In  other  words,  to  solve  the  equation  A*  +  £'=  €*  +  £>',  or  (what  is 
the  same  thing)  A*  -  £>*  =  C*  -  £\ 

It  is  proved,  says  Euler,  that  the  sum  of  two  fourth  powers  cannot  be 
a  fourth  power,  and  it  is  confidently  affirmed  that  the  sum  of  three  fourth 
powers  cannot  be  a  fourth  power.  But  the  equation  A*  +  £*  —  C*  =  2)*  is 
not  impossible. 

First  solution. 

Suppose         A  =p  +  <?,  D=p-q,  C-r  +  s,  B  =  r-  s; 
thus  the  equation  A  4  -  Z>4  =  C4  -  £* 

becomes  pq  (p-  +  q*)  =  rs(r*  +  s?). 

Put  p  =  ax,  q  =  by,  r  =  kx  and  s  =y,  and  we  obtain 
ab  (aV  +  bY) 


1  Navi  Commentarii  Acad.  Petropol.,  1772,  Vol.  XVII.  (1773),  pp.  64  &\<\.=.Commen- 
tationes  arithmeticae,  I.  pp.  473-6;  Mt  'moires  de  FAcad.  Imp.  de  St  Pitersbourg,  XI.  (1830), 
pp.  49  sq.=  Comment,  arithm.,  II.  pp.  450-6. 

24~5 


378  SUPPLEMENT 

therefore  ^=  —^  —  -r  ,  which  fraction  has  therefore  to  be  made  a  square. 
One  obvious  case  is  obtained  by  putting  k  =  ab,  for  then 


whence  _y  =  a,  #  =  i,  so  that  p  =  a,  q  =  ab,  r-ab,  s  =  a,  and  the  result  is 
only  the  obvious  case  where  #  =  s,  q  =  r. 

Following  up  this  case,  however,  let  us  put  k  =  ab(i  +  z). 
We  then  have 


x?~  ab  (P-i-  z)  Ir  -  i  -  z  ' 

therefore,  multiplying  numerator  and  denominator  by  P  -  i  -  z  and  ex- 
tracting the  square  root,  we  obtain 


To  make  the  expression  under  the  radical  a  square,  equate  it  to 


and  assume  /,  g  such  that  the  terms  in  z,  z2  vanish. 

In  order  that  the  term  in  z  may  vanish,  /=  |  (3/r-  i),  and,  in  order 
that  the  term  in  z2  may  disappear, 

3^2-  2)  =  2  (P-  i)  g+f>=  2  (^- 

t_*- 

whence 


__. 

The  equation  to  be  solved  is  then  reduced  to 


Now  b  can  be  chosen  arbitrarily;  and,  when  we  have  chosen  it  and 
thence  determined  z,  we  can  put 

x  —  b2  —  i  —  2,    y  — 
and  accordingly 


-\  +fz  +  gz*),     s  =  a(F-i  +fz  -f  gz"), 
where  we  may  also  divide  out  by  a. 

If  x,  y  have  a  common  factor,  we  may  suppose  this  eliminated  before 
J>,  q,  r,  s  are  determined. 


SOLUTIONS  BY  EULER.     PROBLEM    17  379 

Ex.  i.     Let  b  =  2  (for  b  cannot  be  i,  since  then  g  would  be  oo  ). 

TViorAfnrA  f—  ii      <T—        zs       -_«6OO 

Ineretore  /-->r>  ^-~TT»  2-T?27- 

As  a  does  not  enter  into  the  calculation,  we  may  write   i   for  it  : 
therefore 

6600     2187  ii   6600     25   /66oo\s 

=*  ---  =  -  -  =        —   ----  "- 

/ 


2929        2929  2      2929        24 

=  -  +  55407  -"QQ  =  3  •  2889494 

2929*  2929* 

But  the  ratio  x  :y  is  what  we  want,  and 

y  =  3  .  28894941  =  28894941  =  3210549  =  1070183 

.Y          2187.2929          2929.729        2929.81         27.2929' 

so  that  we  may  put 

x  =  79083,    .7=1070183. 


Therefore 

/  =  79083,  r=  27.  19058  =514566, 

^=2.1070183  =  2140366,     5=1070183. 

Consequently 

A=p  +  q=  2219449,      C=r  +  s=  1584749, 
^  =  r-5  =  -5556i7,     D  =  p-q  =  -2061283, 
and  A4  +  £*=C4  +  D*. 

Ex.  2.     Let  b  =  3  ;  therefore  /=  13,  g  =  f  ,  *  =  fr§  J 
^^     3-369     no7_27-4i. 

***<s+^"i6r"is9~  i69  ' 

200     8.144 
*=    -T6^  =  ~T69~' 

5      200\        -        200     2447  _  8.89736 

*  +  4'-^)=     +^'~^~      16? 

x     8.144-169     6.169 
Therefore  -  =  -8Tg^    '^3-9' 

and  we  may  put  -v  =  1014,    y  =  3739- 

Accordingly       /  =  i  o  1  4,       r=  ~£*  .  i  o  1  4  -  6642, 

^=11217,  ^  =  3739. 

and  therefore  ^  =  12231,  (7=10381, 

.5=2903,  Z>  =  -  10203, 
and  again  A4  +  £4  =  C< 


380  SUPPLEMENT 

Another  solution  in  smaller  numbers. 

In  the  second  of  the  papers  quoted  Euler  says  that,  while  investigating 
quite  different  matters,  he  accidentally  came  across  four  much  smaller 
numbers  satisfying  the  conditions,  namely, 

,4  =  542,  .5=103,   ^=359.  ^>  =  5I4, 
which  are  such  that  A*  +  E*  =  C*  +  D4. 

He  then  develops  two  methods  of  analysis  leading  to  this  particular 
solution;  but,  while  they  illustrate  the  extraordinary  ingenuity  which  he 
brought  to  bear  on  such  problems,  they  are  perhaps  of  less  general  interest 
than  the  above. 


INDEX. 

[The  references  are  to  pages.] 
I.    GREEK. 


"impossible,"  53 

01X0705  (  =  "  undescribed  "  apparently), 
Egyptian  name  for  certain  powers,  41 

dipto-ros,  indeterminate:  xX^tfos  /j.ovdSuv 
dopiffrov,  an  undetermined  number  of 
units  =  the  unknown,  dpi0/i6j,  i.e.  x,  32, 
115,  130  ;  iv  T(J>  dopiffTif,  indeterminately, 
or  in  terms  of  an  unknown,  177 

apifffjujriK^  distinguished  from  XoytorwnJ,  4 

dptOfibs,  number,  used  by  Dioph.  as  techni- 
cal term  for  unknown  quantity  (=x), 
32,  115,  130;  symbol  for,  32-37,  130 

dptOfMffTbr  (=!/.*)  and  sign  for,  47,  130 

S.TOTTOS,  "  absurd,"  53 

StirXij  Iff6n)t  or  SirXoib-inj  j,  double-equation, 


square,"  used  for  square  of  un- 
known (  =  xi):  distinguished  from  rrrpd- 
yuros,  37-38  ;  sign  for,  38,  129  ;  Terpav\ij 
Svva/jus,  "quadruple-square,"  Egyptian 
name  for  eighth  power,  41 
5vva./ju>8vvanis,  fourth  power  of  unknown 
(=jrt),  sign  for,  38,  129 

f,  submultiple  of  8\n>a/4odv- 
(=  i/*4)  and  sign,  47,  130 
i>/3os,    "square-cube"   (=x5),   sign 
for,  38,   129 
SwapoKvpoffTor,  submultiple  of  5wa/t6/ci>/3oj 

(=ilx5)  and  sign,  47,  130 
5wanoffT&v,  submultiple  of  SuVa^us  (  =  i/jr2) 
and  sign,  47,  130 

elSos,  "species,"  used  for  the  different  terms 
in  an  algebraic  equation,  7,  130,  131 

AXei^-tJ,  "deficiency":  *r  tXXei'feaf  riva, 
etSii,  "any  terms  in  deficiency,"  i.e. 
"any  negative  terms,"  7,  131 


,  "existent,"  used  for  positive 
terms,  7,  130 

ttrdvffijfJM  ("flower"  or  "bloom")  of 
Thymaridas,  114-116 

&roy,  equal,  abbreviation  for,  47-48 

Kv/36jrv/3o?,  "cube-cube,"  or  sixth  power 
of  unknown  (=x9)t  and  sign  for,  38, 
129 

KvfioKvf)o<rr6v   (=  i fx*)  and  sign,  47,  130 
iru/Joj,  cube,  and  symbol  for  cube  of  un- 
known, 38,  1 29  ;  <n'</3oi  e|«Xi/tT6f ,  Egyp- 
tian term  for  ninth  power  (x9),  41 
( =  !/-**)  and  sign,  47,  130 


Xefare  ir,  to  be  wanting:  parts  of  ve 

to  express  subtraction,  44  ;  Xehrorra  eldy, 
negative  terms,  130 

X«^«,  "wanting,"  term  for  subtraction 
or  negation,  130;  Xety«  (dat.)  =  minus, 
sign  common  to  this  and  parts  of  verb 
\fi-reif,  41-44 

X0y«rTuti),  the  science  of  calculation,  in; 
distinguished  from  dfH0/MjruoJ,  4 


*»-»  I44»- 

/i€/x)5,  "part,"  =an  aliquot  part  or  sub- 
multiple  ;  fi^prj,  "  parts,"  used  to  describe 
any  other  proper  fraction,  191 

/ttijXfTijj  dpidfjidf  (from  /x^Xor,  an  apple),  4, 

"3 

pord*,  "unit,"  abbreviation  for,  39,   130 
Mopto<m«rd,  supposed  work  by  Diophantus, 

3-4 
fwpiov,  or  iv  i^pitf,  expressing  division  or 

a  fraction,  46,  47 
/xt/ptAi  TPUTTJ,   dtvrtpa,  47-48 


382 


INDEX 


6/ju>w\i)9r}  (etSi}),  (powers  of  unknown) 
"with  the  same  coefficient,"  7 

*•,  value  of,  calculated  by  Archimedes 
and  Apollonius,  122 

trapiff(>Tris,  TrapiffbnjTos  dyuy/i,  approxima- 
tion to  limits,  95  sq.,  207,  208,  209  «., 

211 

ir\a<Tna.TiKt>v,     "formativum"     (Tannery), 

meaning  of,  140  ft. 
irXfvpd,  side,  =  square  root,  65  «. 
w\rj0os,  "number"   or  "multitude,"  used 

for  "coefficient,"  64  «. 
wp6raffis,  proposition,  9 

ffTfpe6s,  solid,  used  of  a  number  with 
three  factors,  183  «. 


ftovASuv,   "heap"  or  collection  of 
units,  37 
aapds,  "heap,"  37 


rpaTrX^      Svva/jus,      "quadruple-square," 
Egyptian  term  for  eighth  power,  41 


,  "existence,"  denoting  a  positive 
term  (contrasts  with  \«^ts),  41 
inrdpxovra  (et8ri),   "existent"   or  positive 
(terms),   i^on. 


<f>ta\lTrfi  apiff(i,6s  (from   0«iX??,  a  bowl),  4, 
"3 


of  Apollonius,  122 
,  determinate,   115 


II.     ENGLISH. 


Abu'l-Faraj,    i 

Abu'1-Wafa  al-Buzjanl,  6,  19 

Achmim  Papyrus,  45 

Addition,  expressed  in  Dioph.  by  juxta- 
position, 42;  Bombelli's  sign  for,  22; 
first  appearance  of  + ,  49  ». 

Ahmes,   112 

Alfraganus,  20 

Algebra:  three  stages  of  development, 
49-51 

Algebraical  notation :  Diophantus,  32-39, 
41-44;  Bombelli,  22,  38;  earlier  Italian 
algebraists,  38 ;  Xylander,  38, 48 ;  Bachet 
and  Fermat,  38 ;  Vieta,  38,  39,  50  n. ; 
beginnings  of  modern  signs,  49-50  n. 

Aljabr,  64 

al-Karkhi,  5,  41  «. 

al-Khuwarazmi,  Muhammad  b.  Musa, 
34.  5° 

Almukabala,  64 

Amthor,  122 

Anatolius,  2,   18 

Andreas  Dudicius  Sbardellatus,   17,  25 

Angelus  Vergetius,  16 

Anthology,  arithmetical  epigrams  in,  113- 
114;  on  Diophantus,  3;  indeterminate 
equations  in,  114 

Apollonius  of  Perga,  5,  6,   12,    18,   122 

Approximations:  Diophantus,  95-98;  Py- 
thagoreans, 117-118,  278;  Archimedes, 
278-279 


Arabian  scale  of  powers  of  unknown 
compared  with  that  of  Diophantus, 
40,  41 

Arabic  versions  and  commentaries,   19 

Archimedes,  n,  12,  35,  278,  279,  290; 
Codex  Paris,  of,  48 ;  Cattle-Problem, 
121-124,  2795  Arenarius,  35,  122 

Arenarius  of  Archimedes,  35,   122 

Arithmetica  of  Diophantus :  different  titles 
by  which  known,  4-5 ;  lost  Books,  5-12; 
division  into  Books,  5,  17-18;  notation 
in,  32-53 ;  conspectus  of  problems  in, 
260-266 

Arithmetical  progression,  summation  of, 
248-249 

Ars  rei  et  census,  20 

Aryabhata,  281 

Auria,  Joseph,  15,  18 

Bachet,  12,  16,  17,  21,  22«.,  25,  26-29,  35, 
38,  45,  48,  80-82,  87  n.,  101,  107 «., 
109,  no,  140 ».,  173  «.,  196-197  «., 

2I3«.,  22O  ».,  23O«.,232«..  234~235«., 

246,  271,  273,  287,  293 
"Back-reckoning,"  56,  89,  93 
Baillet,  45  «. 

Bessarion,  Cardinal,  17,  20 
Bhaskara,  281 
Bianchini,  10 
Billy,  Jacques  de,  28,  165  «.,  166  «.,  184  «., 

221  «.,  267,  304,  308,  320,  321,  326 


INDEX 


383 


Bodleian   MSS.    of  Dioph.,    15,    34,   35 ; 

MS.  of  Euclid,  35 
Bom  belli,    Rafael,    n,    27;    Algebra    of, 

21,  22;   symbols  used  by,  22,  38 
Brahmagupta,  281 
Brancker,  Thomas,  286  n. 
Brouncker,  William,  Viscount,  286,  288 

Camerarius,  Joachim,  21 

Cantor,  Moritz,  3  «.,  6,  6$n.,  112,  n8«., 

120  «.,  125  «.,  281 
Cardano,  21,  23,  40 
Cattle- Problem  of  Archimedes,  n,  12, 

121-124,  279 
Cauchy,  i88«.,  274 
Censo,  or  Zensus,  =  square,  40,  41 
Charmides,    scholiast   to,    in,   113,    121- 

122 

Chasles,  n 

Cleonides,  i6«. 

Coefficient,  expressed  by  w\TJ0ot,  multitude, 
39,  64  n. 

Colebrooke,  6,  281  «. 

Com,  =the  unknown,  22,  40 

"Coss,"  23 

Cossali,  i,  21  «.,  40,  41,  140  »., 
220  n. 

Cracow  MS.  of  Dioph.,  5  «.,  14,  18 

Cube :  Vieta's  formulae  for  transforming 
the  sum  of  two  cubes  into  a  difference 
of  two  cubes  and  vice  versd,  101-103; 
Fermat's  extensions,  ibid. ;  a  cube  cannot 
be  the  sum  of  two  cubes,  i44«. ;  Euler's 
solution  of  problem  of  finding  all  sets  of 
three  cubes  having  a  cube  for  their  sum, 
329-334;  sign  for  cube  of  unknown  or 
x3,  38,  129 

"  Cube-cube  "  (  =  sixth  power  of  unknown, 
or  .z6),  sign  for,  38,  129 

Cubic  equation,  simple  case  of,  66-67, 
242 

Cuttaca  ("pulveriser"),  Indian  method  of, 
283 

Definitions  of  Diophantus,  32,  38,  39, 
129-131 

"Denominator,"  137 

Descartes,  271,  273;  notation,  sow. 

Determinate  equations :  of  first  and  second 
degrees,  58  ;  pure,  58-59 ;  mixed  quad- 
ratics, 59-65;  simultaneous  equations 
leading  to  quadratics,  66 ;  a  particular 
cubic,  66-67 

"Diagonal-"  numbers,   117,   118,  310 


Dionysius,  2  «.,  9,   119 

Diophantus :  spelling  of  name,  i ;  date, 
1-2;  epigram  on,  3;  works,  3-13;  in 
Arabia,  5-6,  19;  "Pseudepigraphus," 
12,  31 ;  MSS.  of,  14-18;  commentators 
and  editors,  18-31  ;  notation  of,  32—53  ; 
methods  of  solution,  54-98 ;  porisms 
°f|  3>  8-10,  99-101  ;  other  assumptions, 
103  sqq.;  theorems  in  theory  of  numbers, 
105-110;  on  numbers  which  are  the 
sum  of  two  squares,  105-106;  numbers 
which  are  not  the  sum  of  two  squares, 
107-108;  numbers  not  sum  of  three 
squares,  108-109;  numbers  as  sums  of 
four  squares,  no;  Dioph.  not  inventor 
of  algebra,  in-n6;  nor  of  indeter- 
minate analysis,  115-124;  his  work 
a  collection  in  best  sense,  124;  his  ex- 
tensions of  theory  of  polygonal  numbers, 
127 

Division,    how    represented    by    Dioph., 

44-47 

Doppelmayer,  ion. 

Double-equations  (for  making  two  ex- 
pressions in  x  simultaneously  squares), 
ii,  73-87,  91-92;  two  expressions  of 
first  degree,  73-80,  80-82  n. ;  two  ex- 
pressions of  second  degree  or  one  of  first 
and  one  of  second,  81-87  ;  general  rule 
for  solving,  73,  146 ;  double  equations 
for  making  one  expression  a  square  and 
another  a  cube,  91-92 

Dudicius  Sbardellatus,  Andreas,  17,  45 

Egyptians:  hau,  sign  for,  37;  names  for 
successive  powers,  41 ;  beginnings  of  alge- 
bra, ^^-calculations,  111-112;  method 
of  writing  fractions,  1 1 2 

Eisenlohr,   1 1 2  n. 

Enestrom,  63  «.,  286  n. 

Epanthema  of  Thymaridas,   114-116 

Epigrams,  arithmetical,  in  Anthology,  113- 
114;  on  Diophantus,  3;  one  in  Dio- 
phantus (v.  30),  124 

Equality:  abbreviation  for,  47-48;  sign  in 
Xylander,  48 ;  the  sign  =  due  to  Recorde, 
50  ». 

Equations,  see  Determinate,  Indeterminate, 
Double,  Triple,  etc. 

Eratosthenes,  121 

Euclid,  8,  n,  12,  19,  63,  117,  124,  132  «., 
144  «.,  191 

Eudoxus,  114 

Euler,  56,  71-72  «.,  83-85  «.,  86  ».,  9O«., 


384 


INDEX 


ioo«.,  102  «.,  107,  no,  145  w.,  151  «., 
160  «.,  162  w.,  178  «.,  181-182  «., 
188  «.,  224  «.,  -236  «.,  241  ».,  242  «., 
268,  272,  274,  275,  286,  288-292, 
294,  297,  299  «.,  Supplement,  329-379 
passim  • 

Euler,  J.  A.,  360 

Eutocius,  5,  6 

Exponents,  modern  way  of  writing  due 
to  Descartes,  50  ». 

Fakh-ri,  5,  41  n. 

"False  supposition,"  use  of,  in  Egypt, 
112-113 

Fermat,  28,  29,  30,  38,  78,  90,  101, 
102,  103,  106,  107,  108,  109,  no, 
144-145  «.,  163  «.,  173  «.,  179-180  w., 
182  «.,  183  «.,  184  «.,  188  «.,  190- 
191  ».,  197  «.,  202  «.,  204  ».,  205  «., 
213-214  ».,  218  ».,  220  ft.,  223  «., 
^29  n.,  230  «.,  231  «.,  232  «.,  233  «., 
235  »•,  236  w.,  239  «.,  240  «.,  241  «., 
742  «.,  246,  254  n.,  Supplement,  267- 
328  passim,  364 ;  "  great  theorem  of 
Fermat,"  144-145  ».;  Fermat  on  num- 
bers which  are,  or  are  not,  the  sums  of 
two,  three,  or  four  squares  respectively, 
106—110,  267-275  ;  on  numbers  of  form 

•  x*—  iyi  or  ix2—  y2,  276-277,  of  form 
j^-f  3j/2,  275,  and  of  form  ^24-&y2,  276, 
277;  on  equation  x*-Ayz—  i,  285-287  ; 
x*-y*  =  z2  cannot  be  solved  in  integers, 
224,  293-297;  problems  on  right-angled 
triangles,  204-205  «.,  2i8-2i9«.,  220  w., 
229 n.,  230 «.,  23/-233M.,  235  w.,  236  «., 
239-240  «.,  297-318;  Fermat's  "triple- 
equations,"  321-328 

Fractions :  representation  of,  in  Diophantus, 
44-47;  sign  for  i,  45;  for  |,  45; 
sign  for  submultiple,  45-47 

Frenicle,  102  «.,  276,  277,  285,  287, 
295-297,  3°9,  3io,  313,  314 

Gardthausen,  35,  36 

Geminus,  4 

Georg  v.  Peurbach,  20 

Georgius  Pachymeres,  18,   19,  31,  37 

Girard,  Albert,  30,  106  ». 

Gnomons,  125 

Gollob,  14,  1 8 

Grammateus  (Schreiber),  Henricus,  49  n. , 

50  «. 

Greater  and  less,  signs  for,  50  n. 
Gunther,  6,  278«.,  279^. 


Hankel,  6,  54-55,  108  «.,  281,  283,  284, 

286  w. 

Harriot,  50  n. 
Hau  (  =  "heap"),  the  Egyptian  unknown 

quantity,  37,  112 
Heiberg,  35,  48  «.,  118,  205  n, 
Henry,  C.,   13*  28  «. 
Herigone,  50  n. 
Heron,    12,    13,    35,    36,  43,   44,  45,  63, 

129  n. 

Hippocrates  of  Chios,  63,  124 
Holzmann,  Wilhelm,  see  Xylander 
Hultsch,  2«.,  3,  4,  9,  10,  ir,   12,   ign,t 

35,36,  37,47»M  63«.,  ii8«.,  122,  253  «. 
Hydruntinus,  loannes,  16 
Hypatia,  5,  6,   14,  18 
Hypsicles,     2 ;    on    polygonal     numbers, 

125-126,  252,  253 

lamblichus,  2,  3,37  n.,  49,  50,  115-116,  126 

Ibn  abi  Usaibi'a,   19 

Ibn  al-Haitham,   19 

Identical  formulae  in  Diophantus,  104,  105 

Indeterminate  equations :  single,  of  second 
degree,  67-73  ;  of  higher  degrees,  87- 
91  ;  how  to  find  fresh  solutions  when  one 
is  known,  68-70 ;  double-equations  for 
making  two  expressions  simultaneously 
squares,  11,  (i)  two  expressions  of  first 
degree,  73-80,  80-82  «.,  (2)  two  of  second 
degree,  or  one  of  second  and  one  of  first, 
81-87  ;  double-equations  for  making  one 
expression  a  square  and  another  a  cube, 
91-92  ;  rule  for  solving  double-equations 
in  which  two  expressions  are  to  be  made 
squares,  73, 146 ;  indeterminate  equations 
in  Anthology,  114;  other  Greek  ex- 
amples, 118—121;  ix^  —  _y2=  A  i  solved 
by  Pythagoreans,  117-118,  278,  310 

"Indian  method,"  12-13,  21  «. 

Indian  solution  of  x*-Ayz=i,  281-285, 
290,  292 

Inventum  Novum  of  J.  de  Billy,  28, 
165  «.,  184  «.,  198  n.,  204  «.,  205  »., 
221  ».,  230  n.,  231  «.,  239  «.,  Supple- 
ment, 267-328  passim 

loannes  Hydruntinus,  16 

Ishaq  b.  Yunis,   19 

Italian  scale  of  powers,  40,  41 

Jacobi,  108  «.,  288 

Kab,  Arabic  term  for  cube  of  unknown, 
41  n. 


INDEX 


385 


al-Karkhl,  5,  41  ». 

Kausler,  31 

Kaye,  G.  R.,  281 

Kenyon,  45 

Konen,    278  ».,    279  n.,    281  ».,    285  n.t 

286  n.,  288,  292*. 
Kronecker,  288 
Krumbiegel,  122 
Kummer,  145  n. 

Lagrange,  72  «.,  no,  188  «.,  272,  273, 
274,  275,  276,  277,  285,  287,  288, 
290,  292,  299,  300 

Lato,   "  side,"  40  n. 

Legendre,  107 «.,  109 ».,  i88».,  273 

Lehmann,  35 

Lejeune-Dirichlet,  145  ».,  288 

Leon,   124 

Leonardo  of  Pisa,   n,  41  «.,   120 

Less  and  greater,  signs  for,  50  ». 

Limits :  method  of,  57,  94,  95 ;  approxi- 
mation to,  95-98 

Logistica  speciosa  and  Logistica  numerosa 
distinguished  by  Vieta,  49 

Loria,  62  ».,  157  «.,  168  ».,  175  n., 
i-j6n.,  195  ».,  197  ».,  207  «.,  240  «., 
241  n. 

Lousada,  Abigail,  31 

Luca  Paciuolo,  21,  40 

Madrid  MS.,  14,  15,  16 
Mdl,  Arabic  term  for  square,  41  ». 
Manuscripts  of  Diophantus,  14-18 
Maximus   Planudes,   13,    14,    19,  21,   31, 

43.  44.  45.  46>  48 
Measurement   of  a    circle    (Archimedes), 

122 

Mendoza,  17 
Melrica  of  Heron,  43,  44,  45,  63,  129  «.; 

MS.  of,  118 
Metrodorus,  5,  113 
Minus,     Diophantus'     sign     for,     41-44, 

130 ;    same    sign   in    Heron's   Metrica, 

43,    44 ;    Bombelli's  abbreviation,    22 ; 

modern     sign     for,      49  «.;      Vieta's 

sign  for  difference  between   (  =  for  ~), 

50*. 

Montchall,  Carl  v.,   18 
Montucla,  28 

Moriastica  of  Diophantus,  3-4 
Muhammad  b.  Musa  al-Khuwarazmi,  34, 

5° 

Multiplication,  signs  for,  50  «. 
Murr,  Ch.  Th,  v.,  ion. 


Negative  quantities  not  recognised  by 
Diophantus  as  real,  52-53 

Nesselmann,  6-10,  «i  ».,  25,  26 ».,  29, 
33.  34.  49-5L  55-58.  67,  87,  89,  93, 
108  «.,  140  «.,  173  ».,  204  «.,  207  ». , 
252  n,,  329  n. 

Nicomachus,  2,   126,  127 

Notation,  algebraic:  three  stages,  49-51; 
Diophantus'  notation,  32-49,  51-52 

Numbers  which  are  the  sum  of  two  squares, 
105-107,  268-271  ;  numbers  which  are 
not,  107-108,  271-272;  numbers  which 
are  the  sum  of  three  squares,  272-273  ; 
numbers  which  are  not,  108-109,  273 ; 
numbers  not  square  are  the  sum  of  two, 
three  or  four  squares,  no,  273,  274; 
corresponding  theorem  for  triangles, 
pentagons,  etc.,  188,  273 

Numtrus,  numero,  term  for  unknown  quan- 
tity, 38,  40 

Nunez,  23 

Oughtred,  50  n. 
Ozanam,  288 

Pachymeres,  Georgius,  18,  19,  31,  37 

Paciuolo,  Luca,  21,  40 

Pappus,  11,  13 

Papyrus  Rhind,  112;  Berlin  papyrus 
6619,  112 

Paris  MSS.  of  Diophantus,  15,  16,  18 

Pazzi,  A.  M.,  21 

Pell,  John,  31,  286  n.,  288 

"Pellian"  equation,  origin  of  this  er- 
roneous term,  286 

Peurbach,  G.  von,  20 

Philippus  of  Opus  on  polygonal  numbers, 
125 

Planudes,  Maximus,  13,  14,  19,  21,  31, 
43.  44.  45.  46,  48 

Plato,  4,  38*.,   in,  113,  116,  125 

Plus,  signs  for,  22,  49*.;  expressed  in 
Diophantus  by  juxtaposition,  39 

Plutarch,  127 

Polygonal  Numbers,  treatise  on,  3,  n-n, 
247-259;  sketch  of  history  of  subject, 
124-127 ;  began  with  Pythagoreans,  124- 
125;  figured  by  arrangement  of  dots, 
125;  Hypsicles  on,  125-126,  252,  253; 
Diophantus'  extensions,  127 

Porisms  of  Diophantus,  3,  8-10,  99-101, 
201,  202,  214 

Poselger,  30,  98 

Powers   of  unknown    quantity  and    signs 


386 


INDEX 


for,,  37-39*  139;  Italian  and  Arabian 
scale  (multiplicative)  contrasted  with  Dio- 
phantine  (additive),  40-41  ;  Egyptian 
scale,  41 

Proclus,  4«.,  113*  116,  ii7«.,  118,  242  w. 

Psellus,  2,  14,  18,  41,  m 

Ptolemy,  18,  44 

Pythagoreans :  3  ;  on  rational  right-angled 
triangles,  116,  242 «.;  on  polygonal 
numbers,  124-125;  on  indeterminate 
equation  ix2-y2=±i,  117-118,  278, 
310 

Quadratic  equations  in  Diophantus,  7-8, 
59-66 ;  in  Hippocrates  of  Chios,  63 ; 
in  Euclid,  63;  in  Heron,  63,  64 

Quadratic  inequalities  in  Diophantus, 
60-63 !  limits  to  roots,  60-63,  65,  95 

Qusta  b.  Luqa,  19 

Radice  (  =  x),  40 

Radix  (=x),  38 

Rahn,  50  ».,  286  n.  /          , 

Ramus,  i6n. 

Rationality,  Diophantus'  view  of,  52-53 

Recorde,  Robert,  50  «. 

Regiomontanus,  5,   17,  20,  23,  49 

"  Regula  falsi"  in  Egypt,   112-113 

Relato,  Italian  term  for  certain  powers 
of  unknown,  41 

Res,  alternative  for  radix,  in  sense  of 
unknown  quantity,  38 

Rhind  Papyrus,  112 

Right-angled  triangles  in  rational  numbers 
in  Diophantus,  93-94,  105-106  ;  method 
of  "forming,"  93-94;  other  methods  of 
forming  attributed  to  Pythagoras,  116- 
117,  and  to  Plato,  i 16-1 1 7 ;  Euclid's  for- 
mula for,  117,  120;  Pythagorean  formula 
once  used  by  Diophantus,  242  ;  Greek 
indeterminate  problems  on,  other  than 
those  of  Dioph.,  119-121  ;  Fermat's 
theorems  and  problems  on,  204-205  «., 
218-219  «.,  220  «.,  229  «.,  230  «.,  231- 
232  «.,  235  «.,  236  «.,  239-240  ».,  293- 
318,  364-371 
Rodet,  34,  35 
Rosen,  50 

Jtudioj  63  n. 

Rudolff,  Christoff,  23,  50 «. 

Salmasius,  Claudius,   17 
Sand-reckoner  of  Archimedes,  i»a 
Saunderson,  N.,  27  «. 


Schaewen,  P.  v.,  327,  328 

Schmeisser,  31 

Schone,  43,  45,  118 

Schreiber,  H.,  see  Grammateus 

Schuler,  Wolfgang,  24 

Schulz,  9,  n,  18,  30,  31,  108  «.,  140  «., 
219  n. 

Sebastian  Theodoric,  24 

Serenus,   12 

"  Side  "  =  square  root,  65  ». 

"  Side-  "  and  "  diagonal-"  numbers,  Py- 
thagorean solution  of  ix2-yi=±i  by 
means  of,  117-118,  278,  310 

Simon  Simonius  Lucensis,  25 

Simplicius,  63  n. 

Sirmondus,  J.,  27 

Smith,  H.  J.  S.,  292 

"  Species"  (ef5r?)  of  algebraical  quantities, 

7»  '3°,  131 

Speusippus  on  polygonal  numbers,  125 
"Square-cube"     (  =  x6),     sign     for,     38, 

129 
Square  root,  sign  V  f°r»   5<>«.;  =v\evpd 

(side),  65  «. 
"Square-square"    (=x*),    sign    for,     38, 

129 
Squares :  numbers  as  sum  of  two,  three, 

or  four,  no,  273,  274;  of  two,  105-107, 

268-271;  not  of  two,  107-108,  27F-272; 

of  three,  272-273 ;   not  of  three,   108, 

109,  273 

Stevin,  Simon,  29,  30  n. 
Stifel,  M..,  23,  49  M.,  50 «. 
Submultiples,    sign    for,    45—4? ;    decom- 
position   of    fractions    into,    46,     112; 

submultiples   of  unknown  and  powers, 

47 

Subtraction,  symbol  for,  41-44 
Suidas,  i,   1 8,  22 

Surdesolides,  sursolida  or  super solida,  41 
Surds,  23-24 
Suter,  H.,  19  «. 

Tannery,  P.,  i  «.,  3,  5,  6,  8,  10-12,  14-19, 
25,  28  n.,  31,  32-37,  43-44,  45,  io8w., 
in,  118  ».,  125  n.,  135  «.,  138  «., 
144  «.,  148  ».,  150  «.,  156  «.,  160  «., 
198  ».,  219  «.,  234  ».,  256,  278,  279, 
280,  281,  290,  308 

Tanto,  unknown  quantity,  in  Bombelli,  22 

Tartaglia,  21,  40 

Theaetetus,  124 

Theon  of  Alexandria,  2,  18 

Theon  of  Smyrna,  2,  36,  117,  126,  310 


INDEX 


387 


Theudius,  124 

Thompson,  D'Arcy  W.,  37 

Thymaridas,  Epanthema  of,  114-116 

"  Triple-equations "    of   Fermat,    163  «., 

179 ».,    182/1.,    102  n.,    223  ».,    224  «., 

246,  321-328 

"  Units  "  (/xo«'d5es)  =  absolute  term,  39-40; 
abbreviation  for,  39,  130 

Unknown  quantity  (  =  x),  called  in  Dio- 
phantus  dpi.9ij.6s,  "number":  definition 
of,  32,  115,  130;  symbol  for,  32-37, 
130;  signs  for  powers  of,  38,  129; 
signs  for  submultiples  of  unknown  and 
powers,  47,  130  ;  Italian- Arabian  and 
Diophantine  scales  of  powers,  40,  41  ; 
Egyptian  scale,  41;  x  .first  used  by 
Descartes,  50  «. ;  other  signs  for,  i,  used 
by  Bombelli,  22,  38,  N  (for  Numerus) 
by  Xylander,  Bachet,  Fermat  and  others, 
38,  R  (Radix  or  Res),  38,  Radice,  Lato, 
Cosa,  40  «. 

Vacca,  G.,  io6«. 

Valla,  Georgius,  48 

Vatican  MSS.  of  Diophantus,  5  «.,  15,  16, 

17 
Vergetius,  Angelus,  16 


Vieta,    27,    38-39,   49,    sow.,    101,    102, 

214  ».,  285,  329,  331 
Vossius,  31 

Wallis,  40«.,  286,  287,  288,  289 

Weber,  Heinrich,  3  n. 

Weber  and  Wellstein,  107  n.,  145  «. 

Wertheim,  30,  no  ».,  137  «.,  138  «., 
145  «.,  151  «.,  161  n.,  209  «.,  2ii  «., 
2I2W.,  216  n.,  217  ».,  254  «.,  256,  257, 
286  «.,  294,  295 

Westermann,  125  «. 

Widman,  49  w. 

Wieferich,  145  «. 

Woepcke,  5  «. 

"Wurm's  problem,"  123 

JT  for  unknown  quantity,  originated   with 

Descartes,  50  «. 
Xylander,   17,  22-26,  27,  28,  29,  35,  38, 

107-108  «.,  140 «.;  Xylander's  MS.  of 

Diophantus,  17,  25,  36 

Zensus  (=Ctnso),  term  for  square  of  un- 
known quantity,  38 
Zetetica  of  Vieta,  27,  101,  285 
Zeuthen,    118-121,    205  «.,    278,    281  «., 
290,  294-295 


CAMBRIDGE:  PRINTED  BY  JOHN  CLAY,  M.A.  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


7,138 

JAN  si 

0  4  1383 


SEP  2  6  1983 

SEP27RECD 
JUN    51985 


V 
„    4 


PSD  2343    9/77 


UCLA-Physics  Library 

QA  31  H351 1910 


L  006  583  1  52  1 


physics 
Librae* 

&tr 

3\ 

H35l
