Perpetuum Mobile; or, Search for Self-Motive Power (Henry Dircks, 1861)
=======================================================================
Henry Dircks — The definitive 19th-century history of the search for perpetual motion, 17th-19th centuries. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (perpetuummobile01dircgoog) — 1861 first edition.

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


^>/ 


c  )^ 


vN\  .'>:^' 


THREE  CENTURIES 


OF 


PERPETUAL  MOTION. 


By    henry    DIRCKS,    C.E. 


PEKPETUUM  MOBILE; 

OR, 

SEAKCH  FOE  SELF-MOTIVE  POWEE, 

DURING  THE  17th,  18th,  and  19th  CENTURIES. 


ILLUSTBATED  FBOM  VAEIOUS  AUTHENTIC  SOUBCES, 

IN  PAPEB8,  ESSAYS,  3LETTEBS,  PABAGBAPHS,  AND  NUMEJIOUS 

PATENT  SPECIFICATIONS. 


AN    INTEODUCTORY   ESSAY, 

By  HENRY    DIRCKS,    C.E, 


*A  HOSjT  INCREDIBLE  THING  IF  NOT   SEEN." 

Marquis  of  Worcester. 


'  THE  HUMAN  CNDER  STANDING  18  ACTIVE,  AND  CANNOT  HALT  OR 
REST;  BUT  BFEN,  THOJJGH  WITHOUT  EFFECT,  STILL  PRESSES 
FORWARD." 

Bacon. 


E.    &   F.   N.    SPON,    16,  BUCKLERSBURY. 


186  1. 
[7%«  right  of  Translation  is  reserved,'] 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BT  B.  HBABNDBN,   12,  KINO'S  BOAD,  BALLS  POND. 


PEEPETUUM   MOBILE, 


CONTENTS. 

PAGB 

Introductoet  Essay.— 1.  Early  history,  ajjd  to  the  Siiteenth 
century;  2.  Seventeenth  century  characterized;  3.  The 
Eighteenth  century;  4.  The  Nineteenth  century;  5.  "Per- 
petual Motion  "  defined ;  6.  Found  to  be  a  fkscinating  puT" 
suit ;  7.  Kind  of  machine  sought ;  8.  Is  a  paradox— mathe- 
maticians divided  in  opinion  ;  9.  The  inventive  faculty  ;  10, 
Undiscovered—constant  feilures  ;  11.  Folly  of  secrecy ;  12. 
At  best  but  a  toy  ;  13.  Influence  to  the  study  ;  14.  Moderu 
instances  and  correspondence ;  15.  Abortive  efforts ;  16. 
No  deciidon  offered ;  17.  Goneral  laws  not  without  excep- 
tions ;  18.  Mathematics  opposed  to  perpetual  motion  ;  19. 
Ordinary  argumei]its  against  it ;  20.  Incessant  failure ;  21. 
Erroneous  contrasts ; .  22.  Its  inutility  often  asserted ;  23. 
Loss  of  fortune  assumed ;  24.  Understanding  assailed ;  25. 
Opposition  should  be  feirly  directed  ;  26.  The  pursuit  likeued 
to  a  lock  without  a  key  ;  27.  Stimulus  to  continued  search  ; 
28.  Belief  and  disbelief;  29.  Error  in  the  application,  and 
not  in  the  sciences  of  mechanics  and  mathenjiatics  ;  30.  Mar- 
quis of  Worcester  ;  31.  Orfl^nreus ;  32.  Invention  of  the  first ; 
33.  Invention  of  the  second  ;  34.  The  subject  in  every  light 
paradoxical ;  35.  Botl^  the  supposed  discoveries  kept  secret ; 
36.  Scientific  disbelief ;  37.  Projectors  should  analyse  their 
schemes  ;  38.  Its  discovery  unpromising  and  unlikely  on  all 
known  laws  ;  39.  Apparatus  to  show  the  difficulty ;  39.  Con- 
clusion ......        xi — xlii 

Chapter  I. — Early  opinions  respecting  the  possibility  of,  and 

projects  for  obtaining,  perpetual  motion  .  .        1 — 33 

Bishop  Wilkins,  1  j  Scarce  works  on  perpetual  motion, 
2  ;  Seeming  fecility  and  real  difficulty  of  several  contriv- 

a2 


IV  CONTENTS. 

PAOB 

ances,  2—5  ;  Attempts  by  magnetiBm,  5—7  ;  and  by  wheel 
and  solid  weights,  8—12 ;  Its  power  analysed,  9  ;  Fhiid 
weights,  Archimedean  screw,  12—18  ;  Taisnienis  on  Con- 
tinual Motion,  18  ;  Wheel  and  magnet,  20  ;  Leupold  on 
Perpetual  Motion,  21  ;  on  Orfl^nreus*  wheel,  22  ;  on  a  null 
and  syphon,  22  ;  and  a  pump,  23  ;  "Manual  Arts,"  1661, 
23 :  Turrianus'  mill,  24 ;  Fludd's  works,  1618,  and  two 
inventions,  24 — 29  ;  Bettino's  works,  1645,  29—33. 

Chaptek  n. — Inventions  of  the  Marquis  of  Worcester  and 

Councillor  Orfl^reus  ....  34—59 

The  Marquis  of  Worcester  and  his  "  Century  of  Inventions," 
34  ;  Partington's  note  on  the  same,  35  ;  and  on  perpetual 
motion,  36 ;  Orfl^T^us,  his  character,  37  ;  his  celebrated 
wheel,  38 — 42  ;  and  Gravesande*s  letter  to  Sir  Isaac  New- 
ton, 39—42;  Desaguliers  against  perpetual  motion, 
42—48  ;  Notice  of  Orffjrreus  and  Dr.  Kenrick,  48,  49  ; 
Dr.  Hutton  on  Orfl^^eus  and  against  perpetual  motion, 
49—54  ;  Kenrick's  lecture  in  fitvour  of  perpetual  motion 
and  his  own  invention,  54—59. 

Chapter  HL — ^Patents  of  the  Seventeenth  and  Eighteenth  cen- 
turies, with  contemporary  scientific  notices  on  them  and  the 
subject  generally   ......      60—84 

1630,  Ramseye,  60  ;  1635,  Barton,  60  ;  1662,  Wayne,  61  ; 
l779,Muller,  61;  1782,Morley,  61 ;  1786,  Mead,  62;  1790, 
Schwiers,  65 ;  1790,  Haywood,  66  ;  1794,  Mead,  67  ;  1797, 
Varley,  68 ;  and  remarks  on  same,  and  Schwiers'  patent, 
70 — 82;  1801,  Thiville,  and  remarks  on  same,  and  per- 
petual motion,  82 — 84. 

Chapter  IV.— Early  papers  firom  the  Philosophical  Transactions, 
and  Sir  Bobert  Boyle  ;  also  the  Paris  Academy  of  Sciences, 
with  notices  of  communications  to  the  Academy,  1837—56 

85—105 

Dr.  Papin  on  a  French  invention  for  perpetual  motion, 
85 ;  his  Airther  remarks,  87  ;  and  final  answer,  88,  89 ; 
Rev.  J.  T.  Desaguliers,  LL.D.,  his  proposition  on  the 
balance,  89— 93  ;  and  on  a  mechanical  paradox,  93 — 97  ; 
Sir  R.  Boyle  on  a  self-moving  liquor,  98—101  ;  M.  de  la 
Hire,  his  celebrated  demonstration  of  the  impossibility  of 


CONTENTS.  V 

PAOB 

perpetual  motion,  102 ;  list  of  commmucationB  on  per^ 
petnal  motion  made  to  the  Paris  Academy  of  Sciences, 
103, 104 ;  M.  Parent's  demonstration  of  the  impossibility  of 
perpetual  motion,  105. 

Chapter  V.— Remarks  on  Perpetual  Motion,  derived  from  trear 

Uses  on  Natural  Philosophy        ....     106 — 147 

1747,  By  Martin,  106—108  ;  1748,  Maclaurin,  108—113 ; 
1748,  Rutherford,  114—119 ;  1783,  Hooper,  119, 120 ;  1794, 
Emerson,  120—122;  1800,  Nicholson,  122—137;  1807, 
Young,  137—139;  1815,  Gregory,  139—142;  1823,  Mil- 
Imgton,  142;  1828,  Partington,  143;  1828,  Dr.  Amott, 
144,  145 ;  Montucla's  "  Histoire  des  Mathematiques," 
145—147;  Cox*s  clock  (by  Nicholson),  123—127. 

Ohapteb  VL — Papers  from  early  scientific  and  other  journals 

148—191 
From  the  "Gentleman's  Magazine:"—!.  Discovery  of 
longitude,  148—153;  11.  Raising  water^  153—159;  m. 
Solski's  machine,  159 ;  IV.  A  self-moving  wheel,  163 ;  V. 
Magnetic  motion,  and  alleged  discovery  by  Hicken,  170 ; 
VL  Archimedean  water-raising  machine,  173 ;  Yll.  Ash* 
nlan's  alleged  discovery,  177  ;  VIH.  By  Galvanic  agency^ 
177 ;  IX.  Ancient  attempt  at  perpetual  motion,  177 ;  X. 
Kenrick  and  Miiller  apply  for  patents,  178 ;  XL  A  mag- 
netic scheme,  178;  XlX.  Spence's  magnetic  motion,  180; 
XIH.  Magnetic  wheel,  181 ;  Cox*s  time-piece,  182 ;  Dode* 
mant's  alleged  discovery,  183 ;  Poppe  on  perpetual  motion, 
183 ;  Gill's  exposure  of  an  impostor,  184—186 ;  Dr.  Young**^ 
illustrative  model  of  perpetual  motion,  187 ;  Gravesande 
on  perpetual  motion,  187—190 ;  Resolution  of  the  Aca- 
demy of  Sciences  agamst  memoirs  on  perpetual  motion,  190, 
191. 

Chapter  VEL— definitions  and  descriptions  of  perpetual  motion: 

from  encyclopaedias  and  dictionaries       .  .  .     192—812^ 

Article  from  Rees'  Cydopaedia,  192—197 ;  Encyclapadia 
Britannica,  197 ;  Chambers'  Cyclopaedia,  197 ;  Stone's 
Mathematical  Dictionary,  198 ;  Dictionary  of  Mechanical 
Science  (Fisher's),  200 ;  Francis'  Dictionary  of  Arts,  200 ; 
Ogilvie's  Imperial  Dictionary,  201 ;  Brande  and  Cauvin's 
^ctionary   of  Science,   &c.,    201—203;   Encyclopaedia 


Tl  CONTENTS^ 

PAGK 

Americana,  203,  204 ;  Diderot  and  D'Alembert's  French 
EncyclopaBdia,  1765,  204;  Encyclopedic  Methodique,  205; 
Zedler's  German  Universal  Lexicon,  1741,  206—209; 
AUegemeine  Encyclopadie,  von  M.  H.  E.  Meier,  1767, 
209—211 ;  Dr.  Binder's  Conversations  Lexicon,  211 ;  Hof- 
mann's  Lexicon,  1698,  211,  212. 

Chapter  VIII. — Early  popular  and  other  jomuals,  and  the  Percy 

Anecdotes  >i  .  .  .  .  .    213— 236 

Absurdity  erf  perpetual  motion  deraonsti^ated,  213 ;  The 
perpetual  motion  hunter,  214—220;  Dr.  T.  P.  Jones 
(America)  on  the  futility  of  attempting  perpetiml  motion, 
220  —225 ;  Stukeley,  Anecdote  of,  226  ;  Spence's  perpetual 
motion,  and  his  inventions,  226—229 ;  Pendulum  motion, 
229—231 ;  Alleged  discovery,  two  claimants,  231 ;  A  de- 
ception exposed,  231—233;  another,  233,234;  "Century 
of  Inventions, "  reviewed,  235,  236. 

Chapter  IX. — Recent  popular  scientific  and  other  journals    237—406' 

Section  I. — Possibility  of  perpetual  motion  asserted,  237; 
by  Pasley,  237 ;  to  promote  discovery,  239 ;  by  Welch, 
239—241;  by  Todd,  241—244;  Review,  244—250;  A 
query,  250 ;  to  construct  twenty  models,  251 ;  Arguments 
for  and  against,  252—254 ;  by  Twiss,  254 — 256  ;  Pearson's 
views,  256—259;  by  Mackintosh,  259.  Section  n.— Its 
possibility  denied,  259 ;  advice,  259,  260  ;  Objections  to  a 
pump,  260  ;  No  perpetual  motion,  260—264 ;  Invariable 
motion  wanted,  264 ;  On  particles  of  matter,  266 ;  Objec- 
tions to  perpetual  motion,  267  ;  Editor's  advice,  269  ;  A 
lectm-er's  observations,  269,  270 ;  Scripture  texts,  270 ;  Re- 
marks against  perpetual  motion,  and  editor's  note,  271 — 273 ; 
T(y  perpetual  motionists,  273 ;  "  Penny  Magazine  "  article, 
275—277  ;  Notes  from  Mudie's  Mathematics,  277,  278  ;  W. 
R.  Groves'  lecture,  279 ;  General  T.P.Thompson's  lecture, 
281.  Section  HI.- Plans,  283 ;  A  pump,  283 ;  Hydro- 
pneumatic  apparatus,  284 ;  De  Luc's  column,  285  ;  A  pump, 
286 ;  Archimedean  screw,  287 ;  A  pump,  288—291 ;  By 
magnetism,  291 ;  Several  schemes,  293 ;  Spence's  perpetual 
motion,  294 ;  A  clock,  295  :  A  hydro-pneumatic  plan,  296 — 
298  ;  Band  with  corks,  299,  300  ;  Propelling  vessels,  300— 
302 ;  A  pump,  302 ;    A  clock,  303 ;  Ancient  attempt,  a 


CONTEXTS.  Til 

PAOB 

pump,  303—305 ;  Orchard's  engine,  305 ;  Wheel  and  mag- 
nets, 307 ;  Water-blowmg  machine,  307  ;  Hydro-pneumatic 
machine,  310—314 ;  Sir  W.  Congreve's  schemes,  314 — 326  ; 
Pendulum  motion,  327 ;  Wheel  and  magnets,  329  ;  Cox*s 
time-piece,  330 — 338 ;  Magnetic  pendulum,  339  ;  Syphon, 
340 ;  New  motion,  342  ;  Railway  carriage,  343 ;  Sims'  water 
elevator,  346;  Worcester's  scheme,  347 ;  Wheels  and  pumps, 
349;  Wheel  and  weighted  levers,  350 ;  Pump,  351 ;  Mill, 
354 ;  Demonstration  against  water-wheels,  356—361 ;  An 
hydraulic  mover,  361;  Paradoxical  balance,  363;  Arising 
and  descending  equal  weight,  364;  Two  "certain"  plans, 
365;  Wheel,  ball,  and  magnet,  367;  Its  fellacy,  369;  An 
attempt,  369.  Section  IV. — Claimants,  370  ;  Alleged  dis- 
covery in  Stamford,  370;  Advertisement,  371 ;  by  Van 
Dyke,  371;  Franklin,  372;  A  clock,  373;  Wright,  373; 
Sellery,  Buckle,  Townsend,  374 ;  Stringfellow,  Hutt,  375  ; 
in  Gravesend,  375 ;  Hendrickson,  and  his  sad  fate  (America), 
376 ;  Chenhall's  clock.  Section  V.— Impostures,  378;  in 
Scotland,  378  ;  from  America,  380 ;  Adams,  381 ;  in  Finch- 
lane,  382 ;  Redhoeffer  (America),  383.  Anecdote  of  Stukely, 
383;  Article  on  impossibility,  384;  On  impracticability, 
385 — 390;  A  popular  view,  390 ;  Deuchar  on  loadstones, 
393 ;  Spence's  imposture,  394 — 395  ;  A  paradox,  396  ;  A 
pump,  397 ;  Hollow-spoked  wheel  and  weights,  398 ;  The 
pursuit  censured,  399  ;  Eoioto's  scheme,  400 ;  On  attempts, 
401 ;  Alleged  discovery  by  Wather ;  Plan  of  double  wheels 
(American),  402,  and  by  Willis,  404 ;  and  others,  404 ; 
Poppe  on  perpetual  motion,  plans,  and  an  imposture,  405. 
Censure,  406. 

Chapter  X. — Newspapers  and  miscellaneous  sources  of  informa- 
tion    ,  ,  ,  .  .     •  .  .     407—427 

The  Athenian  Qracle,  407 ;  Alleged  discovery  by  Bayne, 
408 ;  Spence's  invention,  408  ;  Dalling's  scheme,  409  ;  A 
wager,  410 ;  Mannardet's  wheel,  410  ;  Garhar's  scheme, 
410 ;  Geyser's  imposture,  411 ;  Irish  Advertisement,  411 ; 
Alleged  discovery,  412;  and  in  Newcastle,  412;  An  impos- 
ture, 413  ;  Presumed  discovery,  413 ;  by  Van  Dyke,  414  ; 
Richards'  engine,  414  ;  by  Vignemon,  415  ;  by  Stannard ; 
by  Hutt,  416  ;  in  Lille,*  417;  Pasley's  views,  417;  Eaton's 

•  Probably  the  machine  patented  by  Asaert,  of  Lille.    (See  page  451.) 


Vm  C0KTEKT9. 

PAGB 
gyplion,  418 ;   Legge's  power,  419 ;   Foster's  wheel  (Ame^ 
rica),  419;    Predaval*s  patent  motive  power   company, 
420—427. 

Chapteb  XI— Patents  of  the  I^eteenth  century,  for  improve- 
ments in  obtainiog  inotivQ  power:  English,  French,  and 
American  ......    428—500 

Remarks  on  patents,  428;  Patentees,  namely:— Plea- 
wmts,  429  ;  Winter,  430 ;  Copland  (three  patents),  431 ; 
Linton,  485;  Jordan,  437;  Congreve,  437;  Hainsselin,  438 ; 
Predaval,  442 ;  BraziU,  442  ;  Stuckey,  443  ;  W.  W.  Sleigh 
(four  patents),  446 ;  Eaton,  450 ;  Asaert,  451 ;  Fr^che, 
455;  Buchholz,  459  ;  Greaves,  459,  460  ;  Faulkner,  460 ; 
Luedeke,  460 ;  Wood,  461 ;  Fitt,  461 ;  Newton,  461 ; 
Olomey,  462 ;  Bellford,  463 ;  A.  W.  Sleigh,  463  ;  Aitken, 
463;  Shaw,  464;  Oulton,  464;  Thomas,  465;  Hale,  465, 
481 ;  Malavas,  466 ;  Huddart  (two  patents),  467 ;  Benton, 
468 ;  Weber,  468  ;  Gilardeau,  468  ;  Jones,  469 ;  Herault, 
469 ;  Lang,  470 ;  Dembinski,  470 ;  Layeuder,  471  ;  Lespi- 
nasse,  471 ;  Barrow,  472 ;  Lecocq,  472  ;  Predavalle  (four 
patents),  472 ;  Commandeur,  475  ;  Fontainemoreau,  478 
Gilmour,  478 ;  Middleship,  479 ;  Mennons,  481 ;  Hill,  481 
Richard,  482;  Black,  483;  Coates,  484;  Pickering,  485 
Wright  and  Mercer,  485  ;  Starbuck,  486 ;  Roussel,  486 
Rigby,  486  ;  Smith,  487  ;  Picciotto,  489  ;  Priuce  G.  Gen- 
nerich,  491 ;  Redrup,  493 ;  Edwards,  495.  Patentees' 
professions,  496.  List  of  French  patents,  497  ;  iMid  Ame- 
rican patents,  498.    Concluding  remarks,  499, 

Chapter  XH. — Summary  remarks  ,  .  .    501—504 

Scarce  works,  501 ;  List  of  eminent  mathematicians, 
their  births  and  deaths,  501 ;  Dr.  Kenrick,  notice  of,  502 ; 
Century  of  Inventions,  unnoticed  in  foreign  works,  502, 
503 ;  An  error  in  naming  the  Marquis  of  Worcester,  603 ; 
Orffyreus's  name ;  some  patents  probably  omitted,  503 ; 
Condufiion,  504. 

Appeitoix      ^  •  .  •  .  .  .    505—534 

A.  Prom  "Theatrum  Machinarum  Generale,"  by 
Jacob  Leupold.  Ldpsic,  1794.  Folio.  Referred  to  at 
page  21.— 505— 509 


PREFACE. 


Who  will  not  be  reminded,  on  perusing  the  title  of  this  book^ 
of  the  exclamation — "  Will  no  one  write  a  book  on  what  he 
"onderstands ! "  Great  will  be  the  disappointment  of  him 
who  seeks  here  to  find  an  account  of  any  veritable  Perpetual 
Motion ;  or,  to  be  enlighteiied  on  the  art  of  constructing  any 
such  machine.  Neither  will  he  even  meet  with  any  very 
powerful  arguments  for  or  against  its  possibility.  Either 
way,  whatever  may  be  his  views,  we  opine  he  will  discover 
many  deficiencies,  little  to  praise,  and,  as  in  all  other  human 
works,  much  to  censure. 

Can  such  a  book  be  a  desideratum?  Yes;  because  it 
supplies  a  niche  hitherto  vacant  in  the  history  of  Mechanical 
Science ;  it  opens  to  view  a  ciirious  phase  in  the  mental  con- 
stitution of  a  certain  class  of  inventors ;  it  brings  into  a  com- 
prehensive form  their  labours  and  the  opinions  of  their 
bpponents,  gathered  from  sburces  scattered  through  a  vast 
variety  of  "^Vorks— many  inaccessible  to  the  general  student ; 
and,  lastly,  it  fexhibits  an  amount  of  infatuia,tion  respecting 
patent  schenles  that  would  otherwise  have  remained  long 
unknown ;  or,  if  asserted  without  this  evidence,  could  scarcely 
have  been  credited.  If  this  publication  tends  to  the  attaining 
of  no  other  result  than  arresting  the  further  operations  of  this 
misguided,  though  ingenious,  class  of  men,  it  will  have  erected 
a  step  in  the  ladder  bf  ajiv|i;icement. 

The  writer  at  a  vefy^jWly  period  of  life  became  aware  of 


INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY. 


1.  In  the  classic  ages,  Invention  was  restricted  almost  exr 
clusively  to  Poetry  and  Painting,  hence  to  however  remote  a 
period  we  may  trace  the  history  of  manual  arts,  we  find  it 
harren  of  all  interest,  save  that  which  always  attaches  to  a 
comparatively  primitive  character.  Except  as  considered 
Metaphysically  and  Mathematically,  we  cannot  but  feel  sur- 
prised how  the  idea  of  a  self-motive  mechanical  power  should 
have  originated,  or  at  what  period  it  could  have  been  called 
into  existence.  As  emanating  from  the  fruitful  fancy  of  the 
poet  or  romancer,  it  may  readily  be  conceived,  but  with  what 
object  and  by  what  means  the  rude  mechanician  of  a  remote 
antiquity  woi^d  attempt  it,  is  not  readily  to  be  conjectured.  All 
modem  ideas  on  the  subject  would  reasonably  ally  it  with  im- 
provements early  connected  with  Horologe,  when  automata 
of  every  kind  engaged  the  attention  of  the  ingenious  mecha- 
nician ;  or,  to  a  period  when  water  and  other  natural  agents 
were  commonly  to  be  seen  operating  machines  employed  in 
mechanical  arts,  and  which,  as  they  were  early  brought  to  a 
state  of  considerable  perfection,  the  ne  plus  ultras  would  most 
likely,  for  a  long  time,  appear  to  have  been  attained ;  and 
what  then  would  be  more  natural,  in  the  oi^w^rd  progress  of 
improvement,  than  to  seek  for  the  obtaining  of  power  by  some 
direct  application  of  grayity  ?  The  problem  of  a  Perpetual 
Motion  once  pron^ulgated  would  prove  highly  attractive,  asf 
it  would  appear  in  ^  primitive  age  easy,  natural,  and  perfectly 
attainable.  Imagination  may  thus  supply  the  probable  pro- 
cess originating  this  pursuit,  one   equally   curious,    contra^- 


Xll  INTKODUCTORY  ESSAY. 

dictory,  and  seductive.  We  cannot  trace  the  history  of  its 
practical  operations  previous  to  the  sixteenth  century,  and 
at  that  era  only  to  a  very  limited  extent.*  When,  however,  we 
consider  the  mutations  and  dificulties  attending  early 
histories  generally,  we  have  little  to  be  surprised  at  in  the 
fact  of  this  meagre  information.  Whatever  may  have  been 
the  fate  of  this  class  of  lost  inventions,  certainly — so  far  as 
may  be  judged  from  modern  models — we  seem  to  have  no 
great  occasion  for  regret ;  except,  indeed,  such  as  would  un- 
questionably apply  to  the  curiosity  of  their  mediaeval  character. 

2.  In  the  seventeenth  century  we  find  schemes  for  appljring 
magnetism,  pneumatic  agency,  weights,  and  atmospheric 
changes.  To  this  period  belongs  the  celebrated  invention  of 
the  Marquis  of  Worcester,  exhibited  by  him  before  Charles  I. 
and  his  court.  During  the  same  century  were  established, 
in  London,  the  Royal  Society ;  and  in  Paris,  the  Royal 
Academy  of  Sciences.f  These  learned  bodies  showed  less 
fastidiousness  than  they  afterwards  observed,  in  the  class  of 
Memoirs  they  admitted,  consequently  we  find  both  were 
drawn  into  discussion,  by  their  members,  on  the  then  popular 
topic  of  the  time — "  Perpetual  Motion."  Patents  were  also 
being  granted  in  England  thus  early  for  reputed  perpetual 
motion  machines. 

3.  In  the  eighteenth  century  it  was  currently  reported  that 
the  discovery  was  at  length  made  ;  sometimes  propagated  by 
the  public  press,  at  others  by  the  scientific  journals  then 
coming  into  repute.     The  latter  admitted  papers  in  which 

♦  In  the  16th  century,  Edmimd  Jentill,  in  a  letter  to  Lord  Burghley, 
dated  October,  1594,  amongst  other  matters,  professed  to  have  dis- 
covered "  A  perpetuall  motion  of  sufficient  force  to  diyve  a  myll ;" 
afterwards,  in  another  statement,  adding  the  words,  "  in  any  standinge 
water,  or  quike  springe,  which  maie  alsoe  be  converted  to  sundrie  other 
uses  comodious  for  aJI  estates,  which  have  hetherto  byn  supposed  to  be 
unpractyzable."  See  "  Science  in  England,"  illustrated  in  letters  from 
the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  Charles  the  Second,  edited  by  J.  O. 
HaUiweU,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  8vo,  1841,  pp.  35-6. 

t  See  their  decision  against  admitting  and  discussing  papers  on  the 
subject,  pp.  190-1, 


INTRODUCTOBY    ESSAY.  XIU 

the  subject  was  treated  rather  favourably  than  otherwise  ;  and 
the  "  Annual  Register  '*  and  "  Gentleman's  Magazine"  made 
known  the  invention  of  Orffyreus,  which  had  acquired  re- 
markable notoriety  in  Germany  ;  attributable  perhaps  to  the 
large  premium  he  required,  and  the  patronage  of  a  Prince  of 
Hesse  Cassel.  To  crown  all,  during  the  South  Sea  Bubble 
mania,  the'  prospectus  was  'issued  of  a  company  "  For  a 
Wheel  for  Perpetual  Motion."* 

4.  But  it  is  to  the  present  century  we  must  look  for  abun- 
dant and  various  schemes.  The  ready  means  afforded  for 
making  such  plans  public,  through  the  medium  of  cheap 
popular  scientific  journals  and  magazines,  and  likewise  the 
facilities  afforded  for  patenting  inventions,  have  brought 
to  light  much  curious  matter. 

5.  Before  proceeding  further,  it  becomes  requisite  to  premise 
in  what  sense  the  term  Pebp:rtuum:  Mobile,  or  Perpetual 
Motion,  should  be  taken ;  that  is,  in  its  mechanical  applica- 
tion, which  is  the  only  one  we  have  to  consider.  The  term 
must  unquestionably  be  used  in  a  modified,  and  not  in  its 
absolute  literal  sense ;  being  thus  accepted  as  one  early,  yet 
wrongfully,  though  popularly  applied,  it  distinguishes  inven- 
tions intended  to  be  operated  through  the  medium  of  their 
own  peculiarly-constructed  internal  arrangements,  and  seems 
afterwards,  though  improperly,  to  have  been  extended  to  in-- 
genious  automata,  worked  by  external  agents,  as  magnetism, 
&c. ;  which  latter  we  reject  entirely.  It  is  manifest  that  the 
term  neither  does,  nor  ever  can,  strictly  apply  to  any  product 
of  human  intelligence.  In  this  limited  sense  it  means  any 
machine  which  (independent  of  wear)  would  not  run  out. 
A  ball  always  rolling,  a  fiuid  always  flowing,  a  wheel  always 
turning — each  operating  by  gravity  alone — would  exactly 
fulfil  the  required  condition.  But  not  so  machinery  moved 
by  any  external  commumcated  power,  as  the  tides,  wind, 
electricity,  temperature,  or  like  agencies.     We  may  even  go 

*  See  Anderson's  History  of  Commerce. 


XIV  INTRODUCTORY    ESSAY. 

the  length  to  assert  that,  in  this  strict  mechanical  sense,  even 
the  planetary  system  offers  no  exhibition  of  perpetual  motion 
in  the  several  planets  themselves,  although  each  is  in  per- 
petual movement.  The  distinction  lies  here  : — the  motions 
of  the  earth,  for  example,  are  referable  to  other  causes  than 
its  own  structural  arrangement,  internal  or  external.  By 
Perpetual  Motion,  then,  is  simply  to  be  understood — a  self- 
sustained  continuous  mechanical  motive  power ;  and  which 
we  shall  now  next  proceed  to  consider. 

6.  A  German  metaphysician  declared  his  preference  to 
truth  being  hid,  even  had  he  the  choice  of  its  being  other- 
wise, from  the  exquisite  gratification  which  the  search  after 
it  affords  the  true  philosopher.  The  long-hidden  truth 
respecting  Perpetual  Motion  has  exercised  the  mental  energies 
of  men  of  the  highest  intellect,  and  has  entangled  in  its 
toils  men  of  the  humblest  attainments.  Much  as  is  known 
respecting  what  has  been  done  in  this  investigation,  how 
much  remains  untold  !  In  action,  if  not  in  words,  those  who 
seek  for  this  perpetuum  mobile,  much  as  they  desire  to  find  it, 
take  no  small  pleasure  in  the  endless  contrivances  it  re- 
quires and  suggests.  The  inquiry  always  presents  itself  to 
the  mind  as  exceedingly  simple  and  easy ;  particularly  to  the 
iminitiated.  The  early  life-history  of  inventors  continually 
informs  us  of  the  youthful  genius  fascinated  with  the  pleas- 
ing prospect  of  cutting  the  Gordian  knot.  The  early  career 
of  Sir  Richard  Arkwright  was  marked  by  his  acquaintance 
with  the  clockmaker  Kay,  who  made  the  first  model  of  his 
memorable  cotton-spinning  machine,  through  his  applying  to 
him  to  construct  a  perpetual  motion  model.  And  it  is  really 
remarkable  tq  find  thj^t  inventors  are  not  wanting  who, 
although  not'  possessed  of  any  assured  proof  of  its  pos- 
sibility, nay,  in  direct  opposition  to  every  announcement  of 
its  impracticability,  and  as  if  in  contempt  of  every  censure 
heaped  on  the  pursuit,  are  still  to  be  found  rushing  into  this 
hazardous  arena.  It  has  been  condemned  as  a  chimera,  an 
is^nis  fatuus,  an  absurdity ;  and  yet  adventurers  are  nothing 


INTBODUCTOKY   ESSAY.  XT 

daunted.  Surely  this  opens  to  us  a  curious  phase  of  the 
human  mind,  that  sets  at  nought  the  dicta  of  mechanics 
and  mathematics,  and  the  admitted  laws  of  nature. 

7.  Any  machine  would  deserve  the  distinctive  character  of 
being  a  perpetual  motion,  that  acquired  its  rotation,  sup- 
posing it  to  be  a  wheel,  from  a  property  consequent  on  the 
arrangement  of  its  internal  parts,  always  compelling  one  side 
to  become  heavier  than  the  other;  such  motion  being  no 
other  than  the  ability  in  a  machine  to  generate'  and  maintain 
its  own  power  of  movement. 

8.  The  attempts  to  solve  this  problem  would  sefeni,  so  far, 
only  to  have  proved  it  to  be  thoroughly  paradoxical.     The 

•  inventions  I'esulting  from  it  during  the  last  three  centuries 
baffle  any  attempt  at  classification  developing  progressive 
improvement.  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  each  inventor 
had  acted  independent  of  his  predecessors ;  and,  therefore, 
frequently  re-inventing,  as  new,  some  exploded  fallacy. 
These  retrograde  operations,  and  strange  resuscitations,  have 
led  to  unmitigated  censure,  and  a  sweeping  charge  of  igno- 
rance, imbecility,  and  folly.  No  doubt  many  instances  exist 
especially  deserving  the  severest  treatment ;  but  unsparing 
censure  loses  half  its  causticity,  and  it  shows  a  weak  cause, 
or  weaker  advocacy,  to  condenm:  all  parties  alike  as  deficient 
both  in  learning  and  common  sense.  It  has  long  been,  and 
so  remains  to  this  day,  an  unsettled  question,  whether  Per- 
petual Motion  is,  or  is  not,  possible.  To  name  no  other,  it  is 
evident,  from  their  writings,  that  Bishojy  Wilkins,  Gravesande, 
Bernoulli,  Leupold,  Nicholson,  and  many  eminent  mathema- 
ticians, have  favoured  the  belief  in  the  possibility  of  Perpetual 
Motion,  although  admitting  difficulties  in  the  way  of  its  dis- 
covery.* Against  it,  we  find  de  la  Hire,  Parent,  Papin,  Desa- 
guliers,  and  the  great  majority  of  scientific  men  of  all  classes 


♦  A  recent  Gennan  writer  says : — "  The  discovery  of  such  a  motion 
is  difficult,  but  not  impossible j  as  Kastner,  Laagsdorf,  and  other  cele- 
brated mathematicians,  have  frequently  shown.    (See  pa^e  405.) 


XVI  IKTBODUCTOBT   ESSAY. 

and  countries.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  even  mathema- 
ticians are  not  agreed.  But  to  the  further  consideration  of 
this  point  we  shall  presently  return. 

9.  The  inventive  faculty  in  most  men  in  early  life,  and  in 
others  during  their  lives,  according  to  the  power  and  bent  of 
their  genius,  information,  and  position  in  life,  takes  an 
essentially  romantic  turn,  unless  curbed  by  experience  or 
necessity.  This  is  no  evil  omen  in  youth,  but  is  scarcely 
excusable  at  a  riper  age.  Invention  should  not  be  always 
soaring  among  clouds,  and  finding  delight  only  in  mysticism. 
A  fervid  imagination  forbids  the  seeing  of  impossibilities, 
even  when  opposed  by  stern  realities.  The  theoretical  or  the 
practical  engineer,  unhappily  led  away  by  this  substitution  of ' 
prolific  fancies  in  place  of  sound  judgment,  is  the  last  person 
to  be  convinced  by  the  most  obvious  obstacles  to  success,  in 
the  fidfilment  of  his  ■  views  and  statements.  To  him,  every 
opponent  is  the  victim  of  little-mindedness,  prejudice,  and 
envy*  To  himself,  all  his  opinions  stand  for  realizable 
objects.  We  cannot  avoid  having  some,  though  a  very 
chastened,  sympathy  with  such  enthusiastic  projectors,  who 
would  seem  to  pride  themselves  on  the  strongly-expressed 
notion  that  "  genius  to  madness  is  near  allied.*'  It  is,  un- 
questionably, in  such  cases,  a  constitutional  weakness,  ill 
fitting  its  possessor  for  that  calm,  cool,  reflective  character 
which  alone  commands  confidence  and  ensures  respect.  The 
class  of  men  who  form  the  largest  body  of  inventors  are  better 
practical  than  theoretical  mechanicians ;  to  them  the  refine- 
ments of  geometers  are  truly  a  fountain  sealed,  and  it  would 
perhaps  be  difficult  to  offer  propositions  and  definitions  level 
to  their  general  comprehension ;  but  the  attempt  is  worthy  of 
the  most  gifted  mind.  If  they  do  not  always  see  the  bearing 
and  consequence  of  one  being  equal  to  one,  a  pound  to  a 
pound,  the  like  to  the  like,  and  other  profound  expressions, 
of  this  at  least  they  may  rest  pretty  well  satisfied — that  the 
easier  the  problem  of  self-motive  power  appears  to  them, 
just  in  a  reverse  ratio  is  it  the  more  difficult ; — and  that  just 


INTBODUCTORY   ESSAY.  XVll 

in  proportion  as  they  see  two  or  any  greater  number  of 
eqiially  feasible  constructions,  they  may  with  certainty  take 
them  as  representing,  not  Perpetual  Motion,  but  the  squares 
of  distance  they  are  by  consequence  from  the  goal  of  their 
ambition. 

10.  The  history  of  the  search  for  Perpetual  Motion  does 
not  afford  a  single  instance  of  ascertained  success;  all 
that  wears  any  appearance  of  probability  remains  secret, 
and,  like  other  secrets,  cannot  be  defended  in  any  satis- 
factory way  against  the  opinions  of  the  sceptical,  who 
have  in  their  favour,  in  this  instance,  an  appeal  to 
learned  authorities  against  the  principle  of  all  such  machines, 
and  the  total  want  of  operativeness  in  all  known  prac- 
tical results.  Published  statements  afford  sorry  examples 
of  talents  and  ingenuity  strangely  misapplied.  Some,  but 
very  few,  are  slightly  redeemed  from  contempt  by  a  glimpse  of 
novelty.  Of  genius  all  are  deficient,  and  the  reproductions 
of  known  fallacies  shows  a  remarkable  ignorance  of  first 
principles  on  one  side,  and  of  the  most  ordinary  sources  of 
information  On  the  other.  One  of  the  grossest  fallacies  of 
the  mind  is  that  of  taking  for  granted  that  ideas  of  mecha- 
nical constructions,  apparently  the  result  of  accident,  must  of 
necessity  be  quite  original.  The  history  of  all  invention 
fairly  leads  to  the  conclusion  that,  were  all  that  is  known  to 
be  swept  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  the  whole  would  be  re- 
invented in  coming  ages.  The  most  doubtful  "  originality"  is 
that  which  any  inventor  attributes  to  his  ignorance  of  all 
previous  plans,  coupled  with  an  isolated  position  in  life.  It 
may  be  granted  that  the  desire  of  secrecy  often  renders  in- 
vestigation difficult,  and,  from  some  remarkable  feeling  of 
this  nature,  most  inventors  of  supposed  perpetual  motion 
machines,  believing  themselves  possessors  of  this  notable 
power,  make  it  a  matter  of  profound  secrecy. 

11.  It  is  difficult  to  surmise  whether  the  expectancy  of 
honour  or  hope  of  high  reward  has  most  contributed  to  pro- 
mote investigations  of  this  character,  and  led  to  the  folly  of 


XVlll  INTRODUCTORY    ESSAY. 

making  a  great  secret  of  the  presumed  discovery.  Each  in 
its  turn  has  indubitably  had  its  influence.  They  who  sought 
fame  have  been  most  miserably  disappointed ;  and  as  to 
wealth,  who  has  ever  seen  a  return  for  his  first  outlay  ?  At 
one  period,  the  large  premiums  of  from  £10  to  £20,000, 
offered  by  Government  for  means  to  discover  the  longitude  at 
sea,  stimulated  many ;  and  when  rescinded,  the  problem  lost 
nothing  of  its  interest  with  many  really  ingenious  individuals ; 
for  at  that  period  there  was  a  real  difficulty  for  the  inventive 
to  know  what  to  invent,  to  satisfy  their  desire  of  producing 
novel  mechanical  contrivances.  The  evils  of  secrecy  are 
Numerous.  The  inventor  is  left  to  believe  in  a  bubble  ;  the 
public  are  deluded,  and  impostors  reap  the  only  harvest,  by 
imposing  on  the  credulity  of  all  lovers  of  the  wonderful — of 
which  a  secret  will  generally  be  accepted  as  one ;  while  the  de- 
ceived are  mostly  prompted  by  the  hope  of  making  a  dis- 
covery. And  who  can  deny  the  pleasure  there  is  in  solving  a 
secret  ? 

12.  An  object  of  such  long-continued,  inveterate,  and  indus- 
trious inquiry  might  at  least  be  supposed  to  be  attainable, 
and  when  attained  to  be  of  superlative  value.  Reserving  the 
first  inquiry  for  further  observation,  we  will  only  presume  its 
J)ossibility  admitted,  and  direct  attention  to  the  only  probably 
feorrect  estimate  of  its  intrinsic  value.  It  has  been  attempted 
to  effect  Perpetual  Motion  by  water,  mercury,  sand,  levers, 
inclined  planes,  Archimedean  screws,  Barker's  mills,  water- 
wheels,  single  wheels,  drum  wheels,  multiplied  wheels,  and 
other  mechanical  means.  One  might  almost  desire  to  know 
what  has  not  been  put  on  its  trial  to  make  wheel-work  con- 
tinually turn  itself.  A  thousand  failures  do  not  prove  the 
thing  impossible,  because  a  thousand  persons  may  have  taken 
a  wrong  direction.  But  it  proves  this,  that  something,  how- 
ever trifling,  is  wanting ;  so  small,  it  may  be,  perhaps,  that 
no  one  has  hitherto  taken  the  trouble  to  look  for  it !  Suppose 
it  to  be  something  to  act  as  a  lubricator;  or  something  as  a 
detent,  at  a  particular  point.     Does  not  this  at  once  suggest 


INTBODXrCTOKY   ESSAY.  X13C 

the  weakness  and  feebleness  of  such  a  machine  for  any  utili- 
tarian purpose  ?  It  must  be  plain  that  it  would,  at  best,  be 
little  more  than  an  exquisitely  curious  toy. 

13.  Many  persons  may  have  been  dra^vn  into  this  amusing 
pursuit  imder  the  influence  of  vague  impressions  that  self- 
motive  ppwer  was  but  a  lost  invention.  The  more  abstruse 
the  inquiry,  the  more  some  minds  are  gratified  in  probing 
the  subtleties  which  mystery  abundantly  affords.  Hence 
Judicial  Astrology,  the  Philosopher's  Stone,  the  Quadrature 
of  the  Circle,  the  Multiplication  of  the  Cube,  the  Elixir  Vitae 
— ^a  panacea  for  all  diseases — have  each  been  sources  of  in- 
tense study.  The  metaphysical  Cowley  says,  in  "  The  Adept," 
that,  tbough  he — 

his  great  secret  miss, 

For  neither  it  in  art  or  nature  is, 

Yet  things  worth  while  his  toils  he  gains; 
And  does  his  charge  and  labour  pay 
With  good  unsought  experiments  by  the  way. 

The  Baconian  Philosophy  has  so  far  discoui-aged  as  to  have 
^spelled  nearly  all  these  chimeras.  Only  for  its  influence, 
dreams  of  philosophy  would  have  increased,  rather  than,  as 
they  have  done,  fallen  into  decay. 

14.  We  will  not,  however,  close  here,  but  endeavour  to  show, 
from  comparatively  recent  personal  experience,  the  working 
effects  of  taking  up  the  study  of  Perpetual  Motion  as  a  serious 
employment — some  men  experimenting  for  years,  others  for 
the  best  part  of  a  lifetime.  All  studies  of  a  mental  kind 
may  be,  and  continually  are  being,  carried  to  excess.  It  has 
been  so  in  Painting,  in  Statuary,  in  Music,  in  Literature,  and 
in  all  the  Learned  Professions.  The  "  pursuit  of  Knowledge 
under  difficulties"  has  driven  many  to  despair  ;  and  the  irri- 
tability, anxieties,  and  distresses  of  "  Genius  "  imder  every 
phase,  have  been  admirably  depicted  by  D'Israeli.  The 
"Martyrs  of  Science"  have  been  many — the  victims  to  the 
pursuit  of  Perpetual  Motion  not  a  few.  If  Hartmann  of 
Leipsic  hanged  himself  from  despair  at  his  vainly-spent  life 


XX  INTBODUCTOKY    ESSAY. 

in  prosecuting  this  hopeless  attempt,  could  not  an  equalty 
sad  tale  be  related  of  many  a  Poet  and  Artist  ?  But  to  pro- 
ceed, we  will  first  give  a  series  of  short  narratives  relating  to 
modem  instances  of  devotion  to  this  search  after  a  self- 
motive  power* ;  followed  by  extracts  from  several  years'  cor- 
respondence.— First,  of  personal  narratives : — 

I.  A  tall  old  Welshman,  a  custom-house  officer,  imagined 
he  had  found  out  Perpetual  Motion  by  some  peculiar  applica- 
tion of  sand  from  the  sea  shore.  He  went  to  London  with 
the  machine  he  had  invented,  and  applied  to  the  Board  of 
Longitude,  but  without  receiving  any  encouragement.  He 
used  to  say  that  it  was  while  listening  to  a  sermon  at  St. 
James's  Church,  Liverpool,  from  a  particular  text  (which  he 
never  named)  that  he  had  the  first  idea  of  the  machine  he 
had  invented. 

II.  A  watchmaker  showed  his  customers  the  model  of  a 
wheel  and  weights  in  his  shop,  belonging  to  a  German. 
It  had  employed  a  man  three  months  cleaning,  and  had 
been  left  on  his  hands  for  ten  years,  therefore  he  supposed 
the  Qerman  would  never  redeem  it,  although  he  had  travelled 
with  the  machine  all  over  Europe.  He  had  some  means  of 
making  it  work ;  but  walking  across  the  room,  or  a  passing 
cart  in  the  street,  would  suffice  to  jostle  and  stop  the  works. 
The  same  watchmaker  had  been  presented  by  some  other 
party  with  a  pamphlet  entitled  ** Perpetual  Motion:  ex- 
plained as  it  is  discovered  in  nature.  By  Peter  Brentano. 
Gloucester :  Printed  by  William  Verrinder,  24,  Southgate 
Street,  1830."  27  pages.  It  is  arranged  under  these 
heads : — 

Page  3.   "  Perpetual  Motion,  or,  self-possessing  power  to 
move  in  space  void  of  air  caused  by  a  method  of  forcing  the 


'*'  Since  these  narratives  were  arranged,  the  author  has  been  informed, 
on  unquestionable  authority,  that  Bamsden,  celebrated  for  his  dividing 
machine,  used  frequently  to  metttion  the  fact  of  the  late  Duke  of 
Gordon,  at  Aberdeen,  being  deeply  and  expensively  engaged  in  carrying 
out  experiments  for  obtaining  Perpetual  Motion. 


IKTBOBUCTOBr  £SSAT«.  XXI 

vatet  Tdiich  runs  out  of  a  tube,  back  into^  tfie  same  tube 
again,  the  power  for  forcing  back  the^  water  gained  by 
levers.'* 

This  is  followed  by*  two  engravings,  one  representing  an 
"Iron  Case." 

Page  11.  ^'Formation  of  a  Vacuum  £or  the  Moving 
Machine.'* 

Page  12.  "  lUustrations.** 

Page  14.  "  Creation  of  Time."  [Genesis^  chap;  1,  verses 
1,  2,  3,  4,  6.} 

Page  20.  '*  The  Formation  of  Time."  [Genesis,  verses 
6,  7,  9,  10, 13, 16, 17,  IB.] 

Page  24.  Job,  chapv  38,  verses  5,  8,  9, 10,  11, 14. 

III.  Mr.  S had  a  curious  Perpetual  Motion  contrivancev 

constructed  of  double  cones,  made  with  mathematical  pre- 
cisicm.  His  first  trial  of  it  was  before  his  wife,  and  shut  up- 
in  his  room,  where  all  it  wanted  wa»  his  continued  presence 
and  assistance ! 

rV.  Mr.  E— — ,  a  very  ingenious  workman,  devoted  all  his 
time  to  mechanical  pmrsuits  in  relation  to  Perpetual  Motion, 
reducing  himself  to  a  state  of  beggary  through  his  fondness 
for  his  favourite  pursuit.  He  was  always  in  high  spirits, 
peaking  confidently  of  his  success  being  near  and  certain ; 
yet,  to  the  last,  one  thing  was  wanting,  the  very  thing  first 
sought. 

V.  Mr.  P— —  followed  the  pursuit  of  Perpetual  Motion 
above  twelve  years,  until  at  last  his  mind  became  affected. 
Later  in  life  he  preferred  being  silent  on  the  subject.  He 
used  to  say  his  notions  of  it  were  very  simple,  so  much  so, 
that  wefe  he  only  a  practical  mechanic  he  should  not  doubt 
of  success,  but  that  to  place  his  plans  in  the  hands  of  work- 
men "Would  cmly  expose  his  inventions  to  his  disaidvantage. 
He  contrived  a  quantity  of  apparatus  principally  on  a  large 
scale,  with  different  kinds  of  wheels,  some  operated  by  water, 
and  aU  intended  to  be  kept  constantly  overbalancing. 

VI.  Mr.  E stateathat  Mr.  Charles,  of  Bala  (Wales),  in 


XXU  INTRODUCTORY    ESSAY. 

his  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,  under  the  article  "Mills,** 
relates  of  mills  in  Wales  which  worked  without  wind  or 
water,  or  the  aid  of  man,  after  being  once  set  in  motion. 

This,  Mr.  E says  truly,  is  very  like  Perpetual  Motion. 

Mr.  Charles,  he  proceeds,  further  states  that,  about  the  year 
1500,  William  Salisbury  (first  translator  of  the  Bible  into 
Welsh)  had  a  mill  of  this  description.  He  also  gives  an 
account  of  a  wheel  and  millstone  found  near  Corwen,  sup- 
posed to  have  belonged  to  such  a  mill.  The  wheel  was  all 
of  wood,  except  one  qtmrter ;  the  axle  was  the  thickness  of  a 
man's  thigh,  and  the  millstone  three  feet  diameter,  having  a 
piece  of  metal  attached  to  its  edge,  which  had  probably  been 
a  loadstone !     Mr.  E  says  he  has  tried  many  plans  for 

Perpetual  Motion,  all  of  which  have  failed ;  he  has  thought 
of  a  hundred  schemes  or  more,  but  still  he  thinks  he  knowsr 
of  one  plan  superior  to  all  hitherto  tried. 

VII.  In  Manchester,  a  man  forty  years  of  age,  who  had 
made  his  money  as  a  common  moulder  in  a  foundry,  ex- 
pended the  sum  of  three  hundred  pounds  in  models  of  wheels 
having  falling  arms,  arranged  with  the  intention  of  always 
preponderating  on  one  side,  made  for  him  by  a  watchmaker. 

Vm.    Mr.  B of  London,   philosophical  instrument 

maker,  entered  into  an  engagement  with  a  gentleman,  who 
bound  him  on  oath  to  keep  the  secret  of  his  plans  in  working 
out  his  scheme  for  Perpetual  Motion,  under  a  penalty  of  one 
thousand  pounds.  His  employer,  a  rich  gentleman,  expended 
above  two  thousand,  and  himself  one  thousand  pounds  in 

fruitless  efforts.     Mr.  B when  speaking  of  their  career, 

would  take  up  a  scrap  of  paper,  and  tearing  off  a  very  small 
portion,  exclaim — "  We  got  it — all  but  that/*  throwing  the 
paper  scrap  on  the  table. 

IX.  Mr.  R was  made  a  confidant  by  a  friend  of  his, 

who  so  firmly  believed  himself  possessed  of  a  veritable  self- 
moving  and  most  powerful  machine,  that  he  consulted  Mr. 

R on  a  means  of  stopping  it,  after  its  being  once  set  in 

motion ! 


INTRODUCTORY   ESSAY.  XXUl 

X.  A  mechanic,  a  model  maker,  had  a  neat  brass  model 
of  a  timepiece,  in  which  were  two  steel  balls  A  and  B ; — B  to 
fall  into  a  semicircular  gallery  C,  and  be  carried  to  the  end 
D  of  a  straight  trough  D  E  ;  while  A  in  its  turn  rolls  to  E, 
and  80  on  continuously ;  only  the  gallery  C  not  being  screwed 
in  its  place,  we  are  desired  to  take  the  will  for  the  deed,  imtil 
twenty  shillings  be  raised  to  complete  this  part  of  the  work ! 

XI.  Mr.  F professes  to  have  an  unfailing  Perpetual 

Motion,  obtained  by  making  the  vertical  pressure  of  a  column 
of  water  work  a  four-feet  wheel,  which  by  a  fall  of  eight  feet 
will  enable  him,  with  a  one-foot  crank,  to  raise  water  to  a  pump 
to  supply  the  cistern  above,  and,  after  allowing  for  friction, 
leave  a  surplus  of  above  one-third  of  the  power  employed. 
He  has,  he  says,  studied  Perpetual  Motion  for  twenty  years  ; 
and  has  several  plans,  but  this  he  estimates  to  be  worth  all 
the  rest.  His  brother,  who  has  followed  the  same  pursuit, 
has  a  room  set  round  with  machines,  none  of  which  ever 
went.  His  nearest  approach  to  success  was  in  a  method 
acting  by  the  percussion  of  balls,  one  after  another,  as  a 
wheel  revolved  ;  on  which,  and  other  plans,  he  has  expended 

upwards  of  £1500,     Mr.  F knows  a  gentleman  who  has 

been  thirty  years  engaged  on  this  subject,  and  is  pecuniarily 
assisted  by  a  person  of  good  means. 

XII.  In  a  conversation  with  Mr.  — — ,  he  stated  that  a 
friend  of  his,  although  he  was  a  Professor  of  Mathematics  in 
one  of  our  Colleges,  had  invented  a  mode  of  propelling  vessels, 
which  was  only  what  would  be  called  a  Perpetual  Motion ; 
yet  he  was  for  years  infatuated  with  his  plan,  before  he  could 
satisfy  himself  that  it  was  preposterous  to  expect  it  to  operate 
as  a  propulsive  power. 

XIII.  Mr. ,  a  dissenting  minister,  then  resident  in  the 

North  of  England,  in  conversations  with  his  nephew,  about 
the  year  1835,  mentioned  his  having  been  14  years  seeking 
to  discover  Perpetual  Motion,  in  which  he  at  last  succeeded, 
having  had  a  wheel  with  rolling  balls  in  motion  several  days; 
after  which  he  destroyed  it  to  avoid  discovery,  retaining  only 


XXIV  WTTEODUCTOBY  ESSAY, 

his  drawings.  He  liad  castings  made,  which  he  could  finish 
in  a  lathe  himseif,  with  all  other  requisite  work  for  his  in- 
dention. He  was  a  good  linguist  and  mathematician,  and 
■died  at  forty  years  of  age ;  his  relative  considered  that  he 
must  have  expended  at  least  ^1500  in  experiments.  His 
brother,  also  a  minister,  could  not  be  persuaded,  by  drawings, 
«f  the  possibility  of  this  continuous  movement,  but  still  he 
sent  an  account  of  his  brother's  invention  to  a  local  publica- 
tion, about  1835-6. 

And  secondly,  the  following  extracts  from  correspondence 
are  offered  in  further  corroboration  of  the  opinions  and  feel- 
ings of  inventors  once  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  this 
mechanical  dilemma  l-^ 

XIV.  Mr,  P writes  from  Slough,  6th  Nov.,  1847:— 

**  I  have  discovered  a  system  by  which  Power  to  any  extent 
may  be  procured  by  a  self-acting  piece  of  machinery.  My 
object  is  not  the  amount  of  money,  but  to  meet  with  a  party 
who  possesses  sufficient  knowledge  and  influence  to  procure 
and  protect  a  patent." 

XV.  Mr.  H — — ,  Islington,  28th  July,  1848,  says  :— 
**  Having  matured  the  plan  of  a  mechanical  improvement 
which  I  am  persuaded  will  be  highly  profitable  to  any  capi- 
talist who  will  join  with  me  in  taking  out  a  patent  and  ap- 
plying the  invention  to  practical  use,  I  beg  leave  to  certify 
the  same  to  you.  When  I  state  that  I  have  submitted  a 
drawing  and  description  to  the  scrutiny  of  Lord  G — —  and 
Mr.  V  .■  ,  and  that  they  have  both  borne  practical  testimony 
of  their  favourable  opinion  by  presenting  me  with  a  handsome 
contribution,  I  trust  you  will  not  allow  any  preconceived 
opinion  of  the  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion  to  operate  to 
my  prejudice,  when  I  announce  that  such  is  the  object  of  my 
invention.** 

XVI.  Mr.  H ,  of  Weymouth,  12th  Feb.,  1849,  com- 
municates about  *'  a  continuous  revolution  machine,  which 
overcomes  gravity,"  and  "has  friction  wheels  to  stop  it!" 


INTKODUCTOBY   ESSAY.  XXT 

XVII.  Mr.  H ,  Hinckley,  2l8t  Jan.,  1850,  writes  :— 

*'  Sir, — ^As  I  am  confident  of  the  machine  going,  but  am  in 
want  of  money,  which  stops  its  progress,  I  am  sure  from  £4 
to  £6  will  set  it  a-going."  He  had  previously  written  : — 
"  Sir, — ^We  have  always  imderstood  that  there  was  a  free 
patent  and  a  premium  for  any  one  that  discovered  the  Per- 
petual Motion." 

XVIII.  Mr.'  R ,  Liverpool,  26th  Nov.,  1850,  states  :— 

"  I  have  invented  a  machine  to  give  motion  to  any  kind  of 
machinery.  Its  power  is  not  derived  from  any  changeable  or 
expensive  element ;  in  short,  it  is  a  Perpetual  Motion,  It  may 
be  applied  to  any  stationary  machinery,  but  not  to  ships  and 
carriages.  1  have  not  made  a  practical  experiment  of  it,  but 
its  truth  is  clear  and  simple.*  What  I  expect  to  have  for  it 
will  be  £500  sterling." 

XIX.  Mr.  K ,  PentonvHle,  20th  Dec,  1850,  cor- 
responds about  two  inventions : — "  No.  1.  Maintaining  power 
by  machinery,  to  gain  any  power  that  may  be  required,  to 
any  extent;  and  No.  2.  A  maintaining  water  power  from  a 
well,  or  still  tank,  thereby  to  get  a  perpetual  water  power." 

XX.  Mr.  M ,  Liskeard,  10th  May,  1852,  writes  about 

his  "new  motive  power,"  of  which  he  states : — "  The  advan- 
tages are  its  cheapness  and  simplicity j  not  costing  more  than 
about  £1.  per  horse  power,  and  its  perpetuity  of  motion,  for 
it  will  start  itself,  and  will  go  for  ever  without  requiring  any 
attendance,  except  for  oiling,  repairs,  &c.  As  it  is  not 
patented,  of  course  I  would  not  describe  it  further  than  to 
say,  it  is  worked  by  an  entirely  new  principle  which  I  have 
discovered."  In  another  letter  he  says : — "  The  motive  force 
is  the  buoyant  power  of  water,  a  force  which  costs  nothing, 
and  is  easily  obtained." 

XXI.  Mr.  H ,  Kent,  23rd  Aug.,  1852,  writes  in  a  strain 

which   excites  our  interest  and  sympathy : — "  I  have  com- 

♦  It  turned  out  to  be  an  endless  band  or  chain  carrying  buckets  to 
fill  an  upper  dstem,  from  which  it  was  to  be  worked. 


XXVI  INTRODUCTOBY   ESSAY. 

pleted  (he  says)  a  most  valuable  invention  to  give  true  time 
at  sea  ;  it  supersedes  the  use  of  the  chronometer,  has  no 
spring,  and  never  requires  to  be  wound  up,  being  self-acting. 
It  acts  by  the  gravity  of  mercury,  and  as  gravity  is  not 
affected  by  temperature,  when  set  to  Greenwich  mean  time 
continues  to  show  that  time  in  every  climate  or  part  of  the 
world.  It  is  an  invention  of  the  most  simple  kind,  truly 
mathematical  in  its  mechanical  construction,  both  in  practice 
and  theory.  It  solves  the  problem  of  Negative  Attraction  ^ 
which  is  this : — ^A  raises  B,  acting  on  a  wheel  C ;  and  B 
raises  A  to  its  former  position,  continuing  the  motion  of  the 
toothed  wheel  C,  negativing  the  attraction  of  the  gravity  of 
A»  merely  by  the  change  in  the  position  of  B,  which  is 
mercury,  whose  gravity  shifts  in  the  tube  that  contains  it ; 
and  this  change  of  position,  from  left  to  right,  and  vice  versa, 
constitutes  a  self-acting  balance  compensating  lever,  and  that 
acts  on  an  equally  simple  and  compensating  escapement, 
which  is  effected  by  the  force  of  A  and  B,  ultimately ;  with 
these,  and  four  wheels,  the  machine  is  a  complete  chrono- 
meter, giving  quarter  second  time.  It  can  be  varied  in  size 
and  weight,  and  can  be  equally  applied  for  a  church  clock  or 
a  watch.  This  invention  has  cost  me  thirty  years'  study  and 
experience,  and  now  that  I  have  obtained  the  result  required 
mathematically,  I  am  aware  of  its  value  in  a  double  sense ; 
the  English  patent  alone  is  worth  £60,000  to  the  trade  of 
Horlogery  generally,  and  at  the  same  time  from  neglecting 
every  other  thing  to  attain  this  object,  I  am  in  want  of  means 
to  render  me  so  far  independent  of  the  trade  as  to  be  able  to 
demand  the  above  sum,  or  carry  out  my  principle  by  absorb- 
ing the  sale  of  self-acting  chronometer  watches  and  clocks." 

XXII.   Mr.  S writes  from  Creetown,  Scotland,  12th 

June,  1855 : — ^"  I  have  a  small  machine  I  think  might  come 
\o  be  of  some  use  to  the  public ;  it  is  a  small  engine,  the 
same  nearly  as  a  steam-engine,  which  could  work  itself, 
without  either  steam  or  anything  to  assist  it.  It  would 
require  no  assistance  after  it  commenced,  except  oiling.     I 


INTRODUCTORY   ESSAY.  XXVU 

think  I  might  have  something  for  it,  as  it  would  save  every 
cost  after  put  up.  It  would  require  no  winding  up  or  any- 
thing. I  heard  that  Government  had  a  reward  out  for  to  try 
and  find  out  something  that  could  work  itself.  I  think  it 
would  be  of  great  use ;  it  could  drive  mills  or  the  like  itself." 

XXIII.  An  Irish  correspondent  (Mr.  G — — )  writes  from 
the  county  of  Donegal,  dated  Moville,  25th  Sept.,  1855  : — 
•*  After  long  and  painful  study  of  mechanical  power,  I  have 
at  present  arrived  at  my  purpose  of  a  power  that  will  drive 
the  British  Fleet,  at  no  expense,  and  at  speed  never  before 
thought  ofi  I  have  been  directed  by  some  scientific  gentle- 
men to  bring  the  matter  before  you." 

On  the  5th  Oct.  he  again  wrote: — "  I  received  your  most 
instructive  letter,  and  I  trust  it  (the  invention)  will  not  turn 
out  like  the  mouse  and  the  mountain.  To  give  you  some 
idea  of  this  great  power,  it  is  of  very  simple  construction.  There 
is  but  one  wheel  in  the  work,  and  the  power  can  be  raised  to 
any  imaginable  height ;  this  power  turns  the  wheel,  and  the 
wheel  turns  the  crank,  and  it  will  be  found  that  no  such 
simple,  useful,  and  practicable  invention  has  ever  come  under 
your  notice.  It  is  equally  applicable  to  propel  by  either  sea 
or  land ;  either  the  largest  ship  or  the  simplest  mill  or  loom 
can  be  driven  by  it,  with  the  same  ease ;  and  the  power  can 
be  raised  in  proportion  to  the  necessity  for  it.  It  is  taken 
from  the  clock,  the  mill,  and  the  loom  combined  together.  I 
have  not  the  least  doubt  of  the  success  of  my  invention.  I 
have  given  it  many  trials,  and  prod\iced  very  satisfactory 
results,  but  unfortimately  I  am  not  in  a  position,  for  want  of 
capital,  to  carry  out  this  great  invention ;  it  may  fall  bac^ 
another  century,  if  something  does  not  arise  to  my  aid.  I 
have  spent  a  great  deal  of  money  on  this  matter.'* 

XXIV.  Mr.  P ,  a  gentleman  of  a  very  igenious  turn  of 

mind,  writing  from  Cheshire,  29th  Jan.,  1856,  says  : — "  I 
have  not  been  brought  up  a  mechanist  in  any  shape,  but  in- 
vention and  ingenuity  are  natural  to  all  our  family.  Like 
many  other  fools,  I  spent  about  nine  months  in  trying  to  dis- 


XXViii  INTBODUCTOBY   ESSA.T. 

cover  perpetual  motioii.  Now,  Sir  Walter  Scott  tells  us 
such  a  thing  can  never  be  done,  but  were  he  here  I  could 
convince  him  to  the  contrary,  for  I  discovered  it  in  my  first 
attempt,  which  was  by  attraction  onwards  on  a  level  plane, 
and  then  by  ever-counterbalancing  gravitation  backwards  down 
an  inclined  plane.  I  secondly  tried  it  on  by  leverage;  I 
worked  at  it  about  six  months,  levers,  wheels,  cranks,  and 
everything  else  innumerable,  and  the  further  I  went  the 
nearer  I  got  to  perpetual  stand-still.  In  my  third  attempt  I 
considered  that  in  Hydrostatics  the  same  thing  that  finds  its 
centre  of  gravitation  upwards,  in  Pneumatics  finds  its  centre 
of  gravity  downwards ;  for  instance,  drop  a  piece  of  wood,  it 
falls;  place  that  same  piece  under  water,  it  rises ;  so  here, 
by  a  very  simple  contrivance,  I  got  up  and  down  perpetual 
motion  to  full  perfection,  but  they  all  amount  to  nothing ; 
I  cast  them  aside  as  mere  playthings,  for  all  the  power  they 
can  ever  give  is  taken  up  in  moving  themselves." 

XXV.  Mr.  A ,  writing  from  Ireland,  dated  Bally- 

watter,  20th  Feb.,  1856,  speaks  of  a  "motive  power"  he 
has  discovered,  of  which  he  states : — "  It  will  prove  safe, 
speedy  and  economical,  though  of  astonishing  power ;  it  will 
be  uniform  and  steady  in  operation,  and  at  the  highest 
velocity  perfectly  within  the  control  of  one  man,  I  may  say 
boy.  When  properly  adjusted,  it  may  also  for  hours,  indeed 
for  days,  be  left  to  its  own  discretion ;  especially  if  by  mechan- 
ism oil  be  kept  to  its  very  few  bearings.  The  power  is  a 
combination  of  weight,  as  the  first  mover,  with  the  power  of 
the  lever,  to  which  is  added  velocity  as  the  result  of  both, 
and  which  varies  with  the  amoimt  of  both." 

XXVI.  Mr.  B ,  of  Bermondsey,  28th  July,  1857,  says: 

— ii  Sir, — ^I  have  (through  curious  circumstances)  discovered 
*  perpetual  motion.'  It  will  be  a  wonderful  engine,  as  it  can 
be  constructed  to  keep  in  motion  (without  the  least  assistance 
of  anybody)  everlastingly.  I  have  not  the  means  of  carrying 
it  on  by  myself,  therefore  I  want  somebody  with  money  to 
assist  me  in  doing  so." 


INTBODUCTO»y   ESSAY.  XXIX 

XXVII.  Another  Mr.  B ,  WheyhiU,  Andover,  Hants, 

15th  Oct.,  1857,  writes ;— "  Sir, — I  beg  permission  to  inform 
you  that  I  am  in  a  position  to  prove  positively  that  motive 
power  to  any  -amount  for  propelling  all  kinds  of  machinery 
may  be  maintained  without  any  cost  whatever,  save  the 
wearing  of  the  machinery  by  friction.  This  invaluable 
invention  supersedes  the  steam-engine,  but  I  cannot  proceed 
to  a  public  development  without  capital." 

XXVIII.  The  last  communication  that  will  be  here  noticed 
was  made  by  enclosing  a  printed  circular,  giving  notice  that 
— "Speedily  will  be  published,  dedicated  to  the  British 
people,  a  Treatise  on  the  discovery  and  application  of  a 
Continuous,  Increasing,  and  Self-generating  Motive  Power, 
whereby  the  agency  of  steam  is  superseded  in  mechanical 
enterprises.  By  John  Henry  Vries,  Esq.,  M.D."  In  this 
work  the  prospectus  states  : — "  The  Inventor  enters  into 
details  relative  to  the  Pneumatic  Engine,  of  whose  utility,  as 
applied  to  practical  purposes,  Dr.  V.  is  the  discoverer.* 
Oeneral  remarks  follow  (it  adds),  wherein  the  labours  of 
Watt,  Erichsen,  Sir  Humphrey  Davy,  and  others,  are  dwelt 
«pon,  &c.,  &c."  Only  a  limited  number  of  copies  are  pro- 
mised, at  the  price  of  50s.  each, 

15.  It  is  needless  to  extend  personal  narrative  or  correspon- 
dence as  indicative  of  the  general  diffusion  of  a  desire  to 
discover  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  a  perpetuum  mobile,* 
in  each  instance  adduced,  however,  will  be  found  charac- 
teristic traits  of  the  progress,  hopes,  disappointments,  and 
untiring  zeal  that  distinguishes  the  various  inventors  of  this 
4Drder.  Those  who  read  for  the  first  time  these  statements  of 
devotedness  to  what  seems  little  ^better  than  laborious  idle- 
aess ;  and  peruse  the  collected  examples  of  published  plans 
# 

•  Dr.  J.  R  Vries,  in  January,  1853,  had  granted  him  provisional 
protection  for  six  months,  for  "  tnprovements  in  obtaining  Motive 
tower,"  but  not  having  been  proceeded  with,  has  become  void-  He 
employed  electricity,  the  gases  from  water,  a  generator,  and  a  rotatory 
engine. 


XXX  INTRODUCTORY    ESSAY. 

for  Perpetual  Motion;  and  find  that  men  have  been  so 
enamoured  with  these  schemes  that  for  three  centuries  they 
have  not  only  continued  patenting  abortive  efforts  to  main- 
tain self-motive  power,  but  rather  increase  than  diminish  in 
avidity  to  perpetuate  their  errors,  will  admit  that  it  becomes 
matter  for  serious  inquiry,  Have  Mathematicians  and  Mecha- 
nicians exhausted  their  powers  of  demonstration  ?  Who  is 
amenable  for  the  evil  which  somewhere  or  other  undoubtedly 
does  exist  to  a  lamentable  extent ;  so  much  so,  indeed,  as  to 
be  a  reflection  on  the  intelligence  of  the  present  age  of 
boasted  enlightenment  ?  We  shall  proceed  to  examine  in 
order,  the  several  facts  connected  with  this  remarkable  subject, 
according  to  the  various  aspects  in  which  it  is  generally 
viewed. 

16.  Perpetual  Motion  either  is,  or  is  not,  attainable.  We 
do  not  pretend  to  decide  the  question,  but  merely  to  show 
that  much  may  be  said  on  both  sides.  They  who  engage  in 
experiments  to  discover  Perpetual  Motion,  as  well  as  they 
who  undertake  to  disprove  its  possibility,  equally  find  them- 
selves beset  with  difficulties.     It  proves  a  paradox  to  both. 

17.  It  is  accepted  by  most  scientific  men  that  Perpetual 
Motion  is  impossible,  because  no  body  can  at  the  same  time 
be  heavier  and  lighter  than  itself.  But  may  there  not,  after 
all,  be  exceptions  to  this  law,  as  in  some  other  laws,  stated 
in  equally  general  terms?  Thus,  although  water  is  said 
always  to  find  its  level,  and  heavy  bodies  to  fall  lowest, — yet> 
no  one  disbelieves  in  capillary  attraction,  or  that  the  heavy 
fluid,  carbonic  acid  gas,  rises  to  a  moimtain's  height. 

18.  The  eminent  French  mathematician  and  astronomer 
Philip  de  la  Hire,  bom  in  1640,  died  in  I7I8.  At  the  age 
of  about  38  years  he  offered  a  demonstration  on  the  impos. 
sibility  of  Perpetual  Motion,*  which  it^would  seem  has  never 
been  improved  on  for  182  years ;  and  although  the  fact  of  its 
existence  has  been  repeated  by  numerous  >vriters,  it  never 

*  See  page  102,  and  Appendix  D. 


INTEODUCTORT   ESSAY.  XXXI 

appears  to  have  occurred  to  any  to  reproduce  it ;  bis  name, 
but  not  bis  reasoning,  bas  been  reiterated  during  tbe  above 
period  as  sufficient  to  warn  all  projectors  from  any  furtber 
pursuit  of  their  favourite  schemes.  To  say  the  least,  such 
indifference  is  indefensible.  Authorities  are  not  wanting  who 
employ  bis  reasoning,  but  silence  on  this  fact  left  the  me- 
chanic to  suppose  that  something  even  still  more  conclusive 
against  him  lay  hid  in  the  closets  of  the  learned.  The  wonder 
with  many  was,  what  M.  de  la  Hire  could  have  said  so  de- 
cisive and  iiifallible.  We  now  have  his  reasons  before  us  ; 
and  we  learn  that  they  leave  Gravesande,  Bernoulli,  and 
many  eminent  Continental  mathematicians  in  doubt  whether 
Perpetual  Motion  is  impossible,  and  consequently  whether 
M.  de  la  Hire  may  not  have  offered  too  sweeping  a  denuncia- 
tion against  its  possibility.  The  demonstration,  intended  to 
apply  generally,  does  actually  but  take  into  consideration,  as 
data,  schemes  previously  known  to  be  fallacious ;  therefore, 
such  demonstration,  however  clearly  unfavourable  to  one 
class  of  schemes,  may  not  strictly  apply  to  an  entirely  dif- 
ferent order  of  inventions.  As  late  as  Nicholson  (1800),  we 
find  this  opinion  supported.  We  may  remark,  for  instance, 
that  every  demonstration  takes  for  granted  the  free,  unre- 
strained action  of  gravity.  But  suppose  a  certain  arrange- 
ment could  be  introduced  to  frustrate  this  free  action  of  a 
rolling  or  falling  body,  at  some  desired  point,  its  liberation  to 
be  followed  by  a  like  suspension,  and  so"  on;  such  a  modifi- 
cation would  be  beyond  th^  range  of  the  existing  mathe- 
matical reasoning,  which  had  never  contemplated  the  element 
now  supposed  practicable.  These  examples  may  be  paralleled 
by  supposing  theorems  and  problems  relating  to  the  action  of 
a  cbiled  spring,  which  would  satisfy  every  one  in  regard  to 
certain  facts,  but  demonstrate  nothing  as  to  results  attending 
the  added  regulating  effect  of  a  pendulum,  assuming  that  to 
represent  an  unknown  element,  the  something  wanted,  and 
alike  sought  in  either  case.  Surely  the  greater  the  danger 
and  folly  of  following  Perpetual  Motion,  from  believing  it 


XXltU  INTBODUCTOBY   ESSAY. 

attainable,  the  greater  is  the  necessity  for  reducing-  the  qnes* 
tion  to  its  true  conditions,  and  satisfactorily  settling  the 
inquiry.  An  inventor  desires  to  ascertain,  not  one,  but  all 
the  difficulties  that  he  may  expect  will  frustrate  lus  attaining 
his  object.  Knowing  the  real  difficulty  is  next  to  being  half- 
way to  the  attainment  of  his  search.  Here  it  is,  however, 
that  Mathematics  ceases  to  assist  him.  It  predicts  nothing  ; 
it  makes  no  discovery  in  mechanical  invention. 

19.  Taking  their  tone  from  the  strongly-expressed  objec- 
tions raised,  and  clearly  and  ably  defined  and  demonstrated 
by  Mathematicians,  by  Natural  Philosophers,  and  Scientific 
Bodies,  the  public  voice  has,  for  more  than  a  hundred  years, 
been  directed  against  Perpetual  Motion  as  a  dream,  a  delu- 
sion, a  chimera,  an  ignis  fatuus.  It  is  likened  to  Alchemy 
and  to  the  Squaring  of  the  Circle.  Censure  is  of  the  easiest 
possible  acquirement.  Few  are  aware  how  difficult  it  is  to 
steer  a  medium  course,  and  that,  while  there  is  no  wisdom 
shown  in  abuse,  it  actually  requires  some  skill,  some  informa- 
tion, and  not  a  little  practice,  to  praise  or  censure  discrimi- 
nately.  It  is  not  by  displaying  a  nervous  irritability  that 
shrinks  from  all  explanation,  other  than  reiterated  stale  plati- 
tudes, that  minds  above  mediocrity  are  to  be  satisfied  on 
scientific  matters-  Why  should  a  Perpetual  Motion  inven- 
tion be  pursued,  more  than  other,  timidly  and  secretly? 
More,  perhaps,  for  one  reason  than  any  other ;  because  per- 
sons who  profier  friendly  advice  go  so  far  out  of  their  way, 
to  cover  their  own  ignorance  of  the  matter,  by  offering 
false,  and  consequently  offensive  rather  than  convincing 
arguments. 

20.  Incessant  failure  does  not,  of  itself,  offer  sufficient 
argument  against  the  possibility  of  Perpetual  Motion.  The 
history  of  all  science  affords  abundant  evidence  of  this  fact. 
Such  opponents  affect  to  despise  Alchemy,  the  precursor  of 
Chemistry;  false  enough  in  itself,  and  yet  where  would 
Chemistry  have  been  at  this  day  had  Alchemy  been  unknown? 
Necessity  often,  but  more  frequently  accident,  led  to  the  dis- 


INTBODUCTOBT   ESSAY.  XXXUl 

covery  of  many  early  inyentions.     In  modem  times,  most 
discoveries  are  made  solely  by  a  train  of  scientific  reasoning. 

21.  Another  frequent  but  false  argument  is  the  oflTering  of 
disparaging  opinions  drawn  from  absurd  contrasts;  as  if 
failure  in  one  invention  or  pursuit  afforded  cogent  reasons 
against  the  possibility  of  some  other  diametrically  opposite 
invention  or  pursuit*  This  favourite  course  of  weak  oppo- 
nents, is  too  ridiculous  an  estimate  of  the  proper  method  of 
settling  such  disputed  points,  to  require  farther  comment. 

22.  Inutility  is  the  presumed  consequence  of  an  impossible 
experiment,  and  no  one  can  deny  the  fact.  But  on  what 
ground  is  the  experiment  itself  assumed  to  be  impossible? 
It  does  not  show  very  good  common  sense  to  argue  without 
a  sensible  reason.  What  was  the  use  of  rubbing  a  small 
piece  of  amber  ?— or  noticing  the  quivering  of  a  dead  frog's 
legs,  or  the  action  of  copper  and  silver  laid  on  the  tongue  ? 
In  a  word,  of  what  use  is  the  electric  telegraph  ? 

23.  But  the  most  invidious  distinction  and  the  weakest 
argument  adopted  by  well-meaning  persons  is,  that  the  pursuit 
leads  to  "  wasting  time  and  fortune.*'  We  have  no  wish  to 
uphold  improvidence,  but  let  us  ask,  what  pursuit  in  life  is 
ensured  against  this  species  of  loss  ?  That  it  is  not  peculiar 
to  making  geometrical  drawings  and  innocently  motionless 
wheels  we  feel  well  assured ;  nay,  we  doubt  whether  do- 
mestic life,  with  its  many  frivolous  amusements  and  accom- 
plishments, is  always  equally  thrifty  in  expenditure,  with 
these  well-abused  Inventors.  If  we  admit  our  opinions  to  be 
swayed  by  such  representations,  how  much  have  the  inventors 
of  Rotatory  Engines,  Screw  Propellers,  and  a  thousand  other 
schemes,  to  answer  for  on  the  score  of  vast  unproductive  ex- 
penditure ! 

24.  Lastly, — It  is  a  singular  want  of  liberality  to  impeach 
the  understtinding  of  any  one  who,  for  any  reason  whatever, 
attempts  the  discovery  of  Perpetual  Motion.  It  is  not  too 
much  to  say,  that  there  is  scarcely  any  ingenious  youthful 
engineer  or  machinist  who  has  not  more  or  less  given  hi» 


XXXIV  INTRODUCTOEY   ESSAY. 

mind  to  solving  the  problem.  Infatuation  is  not  confined  to 
the  pursuit  of  Perpetual  Motion ;  and  without  attempting  or 
intending  the  least  apology  for  spending  a  lifetime  or  fortune, 
as  a  worthy  employment  of  the  one  or  the  other,  on  a  matter 
of  such  apparently  second-rate  value,  yet,  what  is  unjust  in 
relation  to  arts  and  sciences  generally,  for  the  acts  of  a  few 
of  their  weaker  followers,  is  equally  unjust  in  the  present 
instance,  which  charges  on  thousands  the  foibles  of  a  few 
eccentric  individuals — a  class  of  enthusiasts  from  which,  un- 
happily, no  pursuit  and  no  walk  in  life  is  entirely  free. 

25.  Opposition  in  the  right  direction  might  effect  much  good. 
A  mathematician  of  an  inventive  turn  of  mind  would,  in  en- 
deavouring to  prove  the  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion,  be 
in  a  fair  way  to  discovery  (if  within  mortal  reach),  as  com- 
pared to  the  cleverest  mechanic,  seeing  nothing  before  him 
but  its  ready  achievement.  The  first  would  seek  difficulties 
and  ponder  them ;  the  other  would  see  a  machine  in  motion 
even  before  it  was  made ;  and  we  all  know  the  danger  of 
over  confidence.  Theoretically,  Perpetual  Motion  may  be  ac- 
tually neither  impossible  nor  absurd ;  not  so,  however,  the 
many  pretended  self-motive  machines  to  which  precipitation 
has  given  rise,  all  abundantly  absiird.  If  the  theory  be  sound, 
then  in  practice,  have  all  results  to  which  it  has  led  been 
most  unfortunate;  whether  considered  in  reference  to  in- 
ventors or  to  opponents. 

26.  We  have,  in  this  tantalizing  pursuit,  only  found  an  in- 
genious lock,  for  which  we  want  now  to  find  a  key.  The  key 
is  all  that  is  wanting.  Many  set  but  on  the  search  for  it, 
declaring  its  discovery  to  be  of  very  easy  attainment ;  ex- 
perience has  taught  some  humility,  but  posterity  follows 
in  their  footsteps.  Many  an  ardent  student  feels  assured  he 
has  all  but  found  it — such  a  mere  trifle  wanting.  A  few 
declare  they  know  exactly  where  it  is,  and  are.  providing  in- 
struments for  its  recovery.  Several  hasty  aspirants  have 
published  their  good  fortime,  to  avoid  piracy.  Two  foimd 
it,  but  alas!  it  has  followed  them   to  their    graves;    so 


rKTKODirCTORY   ESSAY.  XXXV 

that,  after  all  this  boastful  parade,  the  key  is  not  yet  forth- 
coming. 

27.  It  is  sufficient  stimulus  to  the  human  mind,  in  entering 
upon  any  great  undertaking,  to  beliere  in  its  possibility. 
What  has  been  done  by  one  may  be  done  by  another ;  so  all 
reasonably  argue.  Now  no  doubt,  what  has  tended  more  than 
anything  else  to  keep  alive  the  pursuit  of  Perpetual  Motion, 
is^  aB  idea  of  its  being  merely  a  lost  invention,  and,  therefore, 
ttndoubtedly  possible.  The  scientific  sage,  however,  views  all 
these  schemes  alike  as  fallacies  and  absurdities ;  he  can  only 
see  in  thent  Nature  opposed  to  herself,  which  is  quite  un- 
tenable. 

28.  Implicit  credulity.  Ho  less  thatl  unlimited  scepticism  it, 
has  been  well  observed,  evidences  mental  imbecility.  The  mul- 
titude adopt  the  popular  opinion ;  and  the  common  belief  of 
scientific  meii,  and  through  them  scientific  treatises,  being 
i^ainst  the  possibility  of  Perpetual  Motion,  it  is  self-evident 
which  is  the  popular  side.  And  there  is  little  in  the 
"Whole  arcana  of  scientific  knowledge  to  warrant  any  strikingly 
opposite  view.  Half  a  dbzeii  scientific  authorities  ranged 
against  some  hundreds  is  not  a  very  encouraging  spectacle. 
And  such  is  a  true  picture  of  the  case. 

5S9.  Even  Science  is  fallible ;  but  Mechanics  is  not  a  science 
open  to  the  discovery  of  new  laws,  as  in  Chemistry.  If  we 
seek  for  argument  in  favour  of  the  possibility  of  Perpetual 
Motion,  we  must  believe  it  attainable  on  known  laws,  by 
means  which  in  no  way  infringe  them,  and  which  themselves 
only  offer  additional  proof  of  their  stability.  Of  this  there 
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt.  And  Mathematicians,  too,  are 
correct,  as  f ai*  Jts  they  go,  and  where  they  stop. 

30.  The  only  appeal  that  can  be  made  in  apology  for  the 
pursuit  of  Perpetual  Motion,  is  derivable  from  the  results 
represented  to  have  been  obtained  by  the  Marquis  of 
Worcester  in  one  instance,  and  by  Orffyreus  in  another.  All 
the  circumstances  relating  to  their  singular  inventions  excite 
our  curiosity,  raise  our  scepticism,  and  induce  us  to  pause  ia 

b2 


3IXXVI  INTEODUCTOEY   ESSAY. 

our  decision.  Let  us  first  consider  the  inventors  personally  ;- 
and  secondly  their  inventions  and  the  circumstances  attend- 
ing their  exhibition.  The  two  men  were  of  very  different 
character  and  position  in  life.  The  first  noble  by  birth,  of 
ancient  lineage,  loyal  to  the  extent  of  sacrificing  his  property 
in  support  of  the  cause  of  Charles  I.,  and  evidencing  by  hi& 
prayers,  his  truly  religious  sentiments.  About  or  before  1648 
(as  the  King  died  1649),  he  exhibited  his  wheel,  or  perpetual 
motion,  in  the  Tower,  before  his  Majesty,  two  Extraordinary 
Ambassadors,  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  Duke  Hamilton,  most 
part  of  the  Court,  and  Sir  William  Belford,  Lord  Lieutenant 
of  the  Tower.  We  have  to  consider  the  upright  character  of 
the  Marquis,  his  having  invented  the  steam-engine,  his 
worthiness  in  all  respects,  and  the  circumstances  here  de- 
tailed, and  then  ask  ourselves  : — Little  as  Science  favours  any 
belief  in  such  an  invention,  can  we  see  any  reasonable 
grounds  for  error  in  this  great  experiment,  or  believe  that  a 
person  so  distinguished,  and  so  much  to  be  admired  in  all 
other  respects,  could  thus  boldly  and  recklessly  deceive  him- 
self, his  noble  company,  and  the  public :  taking  ten  years  or 
upwards  to  elaborate  and  record  a  gross  falsehood  }  It  seems 
incredible,  and  true  respect  for  the  Marquis's  memory  will 
go  far  to  maintain  doubts  respecting  the  infallibility  of  all  ma- 
thematical demonstrations  adverse  to  the  possibility  of  a  self- 
motive  power.     Secondly : — 

31.  Orfiyreus  was  of  humble  origin,  versatile  talents, 
fickle,  discontented,  unsettled,  irregular,  and  eccentric.  He 
was  ambitious,  boasting,  and  the  very  man  to  raise  up 
enemies.  Between  1712  and  1718  he  made  and  destroyed  in 
succession  four  wheels  or  machines.  He  had  learnt  the  art 
of  clock-making,  and  several  mechanical  arts,  and  is  supposed 
to  have  constructed  or  put  these  wheels  together  himself. 
He  had  a  princely  patron,  who  wished  to  obtain  practical 
results  from  the  invention  for  manufacturing  and  other  opera- 
tions. A  misunderstanding  ensues ;  and  from  that  time  to  his 
death,  in  1745 — at  least  twenty-eight  years — the  subject  lies 


INTBODUCTOBY    ESSAY.  XXXvii 

dormant,  and  the  invention  dies  with  him.  This  last  fact, 
coupled  with  the  wheel  having  raised  so  great  a  weight  as 
70  lbs.,  makes  a  doubtful  case  still  more  doubtful ;  and  par- 
ticularly when,  about  the  same  time,  Geiser  imposed  on  the 
German  public  with  a  mere  piece  of  clockwork,  as  a  true 
perpetual  motion. 

32.  Next,  as  to  the  inventions  of  these  two  remarkable 
characters : — 

The  Marquis  of  Worcester's  wheel  was  fourteen  feet  in 
diameter ;  it  was  rotated  by  the  action  of  forty  50  lb.  weights 
— 2,000  lbs. — an  enormous  weight,  requiring  some  very 
laborious  operations  of  the  carpenter,  to  erect  a  sufficiently 
strong  framework.  Its  completion  must  have  taken  some 
time,  and  led  to  frequent  visits  from  the  noble  inventor,  as 
well  as  experiments  to  test  its  correct  working,  before  offer- 
ing a  practical  demonstration  before  majesty. 

33.  Orffyreus's  fourth  or  last  wheel,  at  Hesse  Cassel,  was 
twelve  feet  in  diameter,  fourteen  inches  broad,  made  of  light 
oak  framing,  and  covered  with  oil-cloth.  It  would  revolve 
either  way,  and  this  alone  casts  a  shade  of  doubt  on  there 
being  any  deception  in  practice  with  it.  But,  strange  to  say, 
it  had  power  enough  to  raise  70  lbs.  to  a  considerable  height. 
Its  operations  were  seen  and  attested  by  so  many,  that  these 
broad  facts  rest  not  alone  on  the  inventor's  authority.  It 
was  so  ingeniously  made,  that  M.  Gravesande  wrote  to  Sir 
Isaac  Newton  on  the  subject;  and  his  letter  and  mathe- 
matical reasonings,  in  reference  to  the  matter,  appear  in  his 
works,  edited  by  Professor  Lalande,  1774. 

34.  The  subject  of  Perpetual  Motion  opposes  paradox  to 
paradox.  It  is[J^ viewed  both  as  being  most  simple  and 
most  difficult  to  find.  The  learned  justify  both  its  possibility 
and  impossibility.  Many  mechanics  believe  it  possible ;  but 
of  the  only  two  accepted  cases,  both 'prove  secrets.  Its  pur- 
suit always  commences  in  confidence,  only  to  end  in  doubt. 
It  is  as  near  being  discovered  now  as  it  was  three  hundred 
years  ago ;  it  was  then  tried,  and  is  now  beginning.     Inventors 


XXXVm  IV^&ODUCIO&Y   £S»AT, 

stand  at  cro^s-roads,  arguing  as  to  which  is  the  right 
path ;  although  there  are  only  two  roads,  all  are  allured  to 
take  the  wrong.  Of  two  men  supposed  to  have  got  into  the 
right  track,  some  think  both  were  impostors,  and  many  be- 
lieve that^  one  at  least  deserved  no  better  character.  Most 
inventors  reap  honour,  or  at  least  commiseration ;  here  they 
are  assailed  with  opprobrium.  Such  b  the  fate  of  this 
paradox  of  paradoxes. 

35.  It  is  a  singular  coincidence,  that  the^  only  two  accre- 
dited ix^ventions  acting  as  evidences  of  Ferpetu^  Mption,  one 
about  1649,  the  other  1712,  should  both  have  been  treasured  by 
their  inventors,  and  yet  be  lost  to  posterity.  Nothing  satis-' 
factory  can  be  advanced  to  justify  secrecy  under  such  circum-r 
stances.  If  due  to  accident,  it  may  have  been  unavoidable ;  if 
otherwise,  it  evinces  a  narrow  selfish  principle,  to  the  sus- 
picion of  which  no  man  should  lay  himself  open.  Our  belief 
in  either  is  necessarily  wavering.  We  view  each  with 
suspicion.  Our  confidence  is  shaken  by  known  facts,  and 
receives  i^p  confirmation  from  any  results  obtained  by  those 
who  thus  withhold  &om  us  that  evidence,  the  truth  of  which 
we  ourselves  might  easily  have  tested. 

3Q,  Pisbelief  in  the  possibility  of  Perpetual  Motion  per- 
vades all  scientific  classes  of  society,  from  whom  the  popular 
tone  is  taken.  Yet  among  scientific  men  it  is  often  disbelief 
with  a  mental  reservation.  The  most  incredulous  mathema- 
tician would  like  to  examine  a  so-called  perpetual  motion, 
while  he  would  scout  the  idea  of  listening  to  any  attempted 
proof  of  the  multiplication  of  two  equal  amounts  to  produce 
an  unequal  one.  It  is  in  the  very  nature  of  mathematical 
fmd  mechanical  science  to  afibrd  evidence  that  runs  entirely 
counter  to  the  idea  of  self-motive  machinery.  At  the  same 
time,  as  scientific  attainments  enlarge  the  understanding,  they 
could  have  no  effect  to  prejudice  the  mpst  learned  against 
receiving  ocidar  demonstration  of  any  fact  on  this  subject, 
however  opposed  to  preconceived  views. 

37*  There  are  only  a  limited  number  of  methods  which  at 


INIRODUCXO&Y  £SSAT. 


XXX IX 


the  utmost  can  be  expected,  by  the  most  sanguine,  to  offer  a 

transient  hope  of  success ;    as  wheels,  with  solid  or  fluid 

weights  arranged  somewhere  around  their  peripheries.     Such 

plans  are  capable  of  analysis ;  but,  if  complicated,  are  all  the 

more  likely  to  prove  abortiye  in  results.     It  is  not  to  be  ex* 

pected  that  the  discovery,  if  to  be  made  at  all,  will  ever  be 

the  result  of  haphazard  experiment.    Ignorance  has  already 

done  its  work,  and  no  one  should  now  bave  the  presumption 

to  attempt  it,  unprovided  with  a  large  fund  of  intelligence* 

and  no  small  ability  in  experimental  investigations  generally ; 

remembering — 

A  little  knowledge  is  a  dangerous  thing : 
Prink  deep,  or  taste  not  the  Pierian  spring : 

for,  as  sad  experience  truly  shows—* 

'    There  shallow  draughts  intoxicate  the  brain. 

38.  Appearances  are  every  way  so  much  opposed  to  offering 
any  plausible  hope  of  success,  that  all  the  wisest  can  say 
amoimts  to  no  more  than-— -It  may  be  found ;  or,  it  may  never 
be  found ;  and,  if  found,  the  discoverer  will  probably  establish 
the  fame  of  others  quite  as  much  as,  if  not  more  than,  his 
own.  The  insufficiency  of  the  only  supposed  means  of  solving 
the  problem — ^namely,  by  contriving  a  wheel  so  that  all  the 
weights  on  one  side  shall  be  con« 
stantly  farther  from  the  centre  than 
the  weights  of  the  opposite  side — 
has  been  attempted  to  be  shown  in 
a  palpable  manner  by  Desaguliers 
(see  pages  79  and  89) ;  but  the 
author  has  invented  a  model  appa« 
ratus  of  a  more  convincing  cha* 
racter,  being  an  actual  wheel,  as 
represented  in  the  annexed  diagram. 
We  have  here  a  wheel  A  B,  having  a 
number  of  spokes,  each  terminating, 

at  or  beyond  the  periphery,  with  a  weight.     It  is  represented 
with  all  the  weights  extended  farthest  on  the  right  hand  side. 


Xl  IKTBODUCTOBY   ESSAY, 

Now,  on  giving  it  a  reverse  revolution,  all  these  weights 
will  recede,  and  the  weights  on  the  left  hand  side  be  extended 
in  like  manner.  Yet  will  nothing  be  gained ;  in  every  posi- 
tion it  will  remain  neutral.  It  consists  of  spokes,  as  A  a  and 
B  b,  each  terminating  at  their  ends  A  and  B  in  compound 
levers,  or  lazy-tongs,  while  their  opposite  ends  a  and  b  pass 
through  a  hole  drilled  in  the  axle ;  and  so  for  each  spoke,  which 
must  have  a  weight  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  opposite  end. 
Spokes  thus  made,  when  vertical  on  the  top  side  of  the  wheel, 
are  extended,  while  the  opposite  bottom  spoke  is  depressed 
or  shortened ;  and  so  on  with  each.* 

39.  In  conclusion,  we  would  briefly  observe  that  we  think 
a  careful  perusal  of  all  that  has  been  gathered  respecting 
Perpetual  Motion  clearly  establishes  that  much  remains  to  be 
done  to  prove  th^  impossibility  of  practically  solving  this 
knotty  problem ;  and  that  a  full  demonstration  of  the  diffi- 
culties that  environ  it  is  worthy  of  being  attempted,  even  by 
the  most  exalted  mathematicians.  It  is  not  requisite  that 
they  should  descend  to  the  level  of  the  most  ordinary  minds, 
but  leave  it  for  others  to  reduce  their  elaborated  reasoning 
on  the  subject  to  some  generally  comprehensible  form.  We 
fear  the  proposal  partakes  too  much  of  the  difficulty  of 
proving  a  negative ;  but  still,  as  the  attempt  has  been  made 
by  celebrated  savans,  and  is  generally  considered  insufficient ; 
and  as  data  may  have  been  wanting,  which  we  conceive  £v 
collection  gf  the  chief  known  examples  will  supply;  we  re- 
commend the  consideration  of  this  matter  to  all  geometers. 
In  his  Lives  of  the  Poets,  Dr.  Johnson  characterises  the 
"  Dunciad"  as  a  work  "  of  which  the  design  is  to  ridicule  such 
studies  as  are  either  hopeless  or  useless,  as  either  pursue 
what  is  unattsiinablQj  or  what,  if  it  be  attained,  is  of  no  use." 

*  The  spokes  can  only  slide  up  or  down  while  verticaly  in  conse- 
quence of  a  ring  or  rim  around  them,  placed  to  act  as  a  shoulder  against 
the  axle,  so  long  as  the  spokes  are  inwards,  and  noi  in  a  vertical  posi-. 
tion  ;  otherwise  they  would  act  at  an  angle  of  45®.  The  shoulder  of 
each  spoke  is  small  enough  to  slip  freely  through  the  hole  in  which  it 
isHdes  in  the  axle,  when  the  same  becomes  vertical  durmg  rotation. 


Xli  INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY. 

It  is  difficult  to  surmise  to  what  extent  Pope  thus  benefitted 
literature ;  but  it  is  certain  that  all  the  minor  *^  Dunciads," 
in  lashing  Perpetual  Motion,  have  failed  to  rid  Natural 
Philosophy  of  many  misgivings  respecting  its  feasibility ;  and 
it  is  either  impossible,  and  the  Marquis  of  Worcester  was  him- 
self strangely  deceived ;  or  it  may  be  possible,  and  the  noble 
inventor  of  the  steam-engine  remain  Worthy  of  his  high 
character  as  a  truthful  narrator  of  facts  :  quite  incapable  of 
misrepresenting,  much  less  elaborately  falsifying  them.  In  a 
mathematical  point  of  view.  We  think  this  subject  is  far  from 
being  exhausted ;  and,  after  what  has  been  advanced,  may 
very  properly  be  considered  as  claiming  grave  consideration. 
And  that,  scientifically  examined,  it  is  a  mark  of  mere 
shallowness  and  querulousness  to  attempt  the  substitution  of 
ridicule  and  satire  for  the  more  difficult,  but  consistent  course 
of  sound,  close  reason  and  argument,  such  as  the  wonted 
sobriety  and  severity  of  scientific  criticism  accords  to  its 
investigations  generally* 


♦^*  The  printing  of  this  work  had  progressed  too  far  to  introduce,  iit 
its  proper  place,  the  demonstration  of  Professor  Airy  in  favour  of 
Perpetual  Motion  being  possible.  It  is  taken  from  a  copy  of  the  Cam- 
bridge Philosophical  Society's  Transactions,  in  the  British  MuseUm, 
and  forms  the  last  article  in  the  Addenda. 


PERPETUUM  MOBILE; 


OB, 


SEAECH  FOE  SELF-MOTIYE  POWEE. 


CHAPTER  I. 


EARLY    OPINIONS    RESPECTING    THE    POSSIBILITY    OP,    AND 
PROJECTS   FOR   OBTAINING,    PERPETUAL   MOTION. 

John  Wilkins,  an  ingenious  and  learned  Bishop  of  Chester, 
was  born  near  Daventry,  in  Northamptonshire,  in  1614,  and 
died  1672.  He  was  well  versed  in  mechanical  science,  and 
his  writings  display  an  extensive  acquaintance  with  a  variety 
of  ancient  authorities  on  every  matter  on  which  he  discourses. 
He  is  the  most  exact  writer  of  the  seventeenth  century  on 
the  subject  of  Perpetual  Motion,  examining  it  thoroughly, 
with  admirable  acuteness  as  well  as  candour.  His  celebrated 
work,  entitled  "  Mathematical  Magic,"  is  divided  into  two 
books,  the  second  quaintly  designated  "  Daedalus,"  after  that 
ancient  inventor.  Among  the  works  he  has  briefly  quoted 
in  marginal  notes,  we  may  mention  more  at  large — "  A  Trea- 
tise on  Continuall  Motions,  by  Joannes  Taisnierus,  a  public 
Professor  of  Rome,  Ferraria,  and  other  Vniuersities  in  Italic  " 
— no  date,  but  afterwards  printed  with  other  works,  1579, 

c 


2  PEBPETxruM  mobile; 

quarto.  Also  "  A  Dialogue  concerning  Perpetual  Motion, 
by  Thomas  Tymme,  Mynister,"  London,  1612,  quarto.  He 
does  not,  however,  allude  to  another  of  the  same  period, 
"De  Inventione  JEterni  Motoric,  b7  James  Zabaeella, 
Teacher  of  Logic  at  Padua,"  where  ho  died  1589 ;  his  book 
was  published  at  Francfort,  1618.  The  ninth,  thirteenth, 
fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  chapters  of  Bishop  Wilkins'  work, 
second  book,  here  follow : — 


CHAP.  IX. — Of  a  Perpetual  Motion — The  seeming  facility  and 
real  difficulty  of  any  such  contrivance— The  several  ways  whereby 
it  hath  been  attempted,  particularly  by  Chymistry. 

It  is  the  chief  inconvenience  of  all  the  automata  before- 
mentioned,*  that  they  need  a  frequent  repair  of  new  strength, 
the  causes  whence  their  motion  does  proceed  being  subject 
to  fail,  and  come  to  a  period ;  and  therefore  it  would  be  worth 
our  enquiry  to  examine  whether  or  no  there  may  be  made 
any  such  artificial  contrivance,  which  might  have  the  principle 
of  moving  from  itself,  so  that  the  present  motion  should  con- 
stantly be  the  cause  of  that  which  succeeds. 

This  is  that  great  secret  in  Art  which,  like  the  Philosopher's 
Stone  in  Nature,  hath  been  the  business  and  study  of  many 
more  refined  wits,  for  divers  ages  together  ;  and  it  may  well 
be  questioned  whether  either  of  them  as  yet  hath  ever  been 
found  out ;  though  if  this  have,  yet,  like  the  other,  it  is  not 
plainly  treated  of  by  any  author. 

Not  but  there  are  sundry  discourses  concerning  this  subject, 
but  they  are  rather  conjectures  than  experiments.  And  though 
many  inventions  in  this  kind  may  at  first  view  bear  a  great 
shew  of  probability,  yet  they  will  fail,  being  brought  to  trial, 
and  will  not  answer  in  practice  what  they  promised  in  specu- 
lation. Any  one  who  hath  been  versed  in  these  experiments 
must  needs  acknowledge  that  he  hath  been  often  deceived  in 
his  strongest  confidence;  when  the  imagination  hath  con- 
trived the  whole  frame  of  such  an  instrument,  and  conceives 
that  the  event  must  infallibly  answer  its  hopes,  yet  then  does 
it  strangely  deceive  in  the  proof,  and  discovers  to  us  some 
defect  which  we  did  not  before  take  notice  of. 

*  Various  milli,  chariots,  clocks,  &o.,  &c. 


OB,   8BABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTITE   POWEB.  3 

Hence  it  is,  that  you  shall  scarce  talk  with  any  one  who 
hath  never  so  little  smattering  in  these  arts,  but  he  will 
instantly  promise  such  a  motion,  as  being  but  an  easy 
atchievement,  till  further  trial  and  experience  hath  taught 
him  the  difficulty  of  it.  There  being  no  enquiry  that  does 
more  entice  with  the  prohability  and  deceive  with  the  subtilty. 

I  shall  briefly  recite  the  several  ways  whereby  this  hath 
been  attempted,  or  seems  most  likely  to  be  effected,  thereby 
to  contract  and  facilitate  the  enquiries  of  those  who  are 
addicted  to  these  kind  of  experiments ;  for  when  they  know 
the  defects  of  other  inventions,  they  may  the  more  easily 
avoid  the  same  or  the  like  in  their  own. 

The  ways  whereby  this  hath  been  attempted  may  be 
generally  reduced  to  these  three  kinds : — 

1.  By  Chymical  Extractions. 

2.  By  Magnetical  Virtues. 

3.  By  the  Natural  Affection  of  Gravity. 

1.  The  discovery  of  this  hath  been  attempted  by  Chymistry. 
Paracelsus  and  his  followers  have  bragged,  that  by  their 
separations  and  extractions,  they  can  make  a  little  world 
which  shall  have  the  same  perpetual  motions  with  this 
microcosm,  with  the  representation  of  all  meteors,  thunder, 
snow,  rain,  the  courses  of  the  sea  in  its  ebbs  and  flows,  and 
the  like.  But  these  miraculous  promises  would  require  as 
great  a  faith  to  believe  them,  as  a  power  to  perform  them  ; 
and  the'  they  often  talk  of  such  great  matters, — 

At  nusquam  totos  inter  qui  talia  curant, 
Apparet  ullus,  qui  re  miracula  tanta 
Comprobet — 

yet  we  can  never  see  them  confirmed  by  any  real  experiment ; 
and  then,  besides,  every  particular  author  in  that  art  hath 
such  a  distinct  language  of  his  own  (all  of  them  being  so 
full  of  allegories  and  affected  obscurities),  that  'tis  very  hard 
for  any  one  (imless  he  be  thoroughly  versed  amongst  them) 
to  find  out  what  they  mean,  much  more  to  try  it. 

One  of  these  ways  (as  I  find  it  set  down)  jBtten.Mathem. 
is  this: — Mix  five  ounces  of  ?  with  an  B6creat,prob.nB. 
equal  weight  of  %  ;  grind  them  together  with  ten  ounces 
of  sublimate;  dissolve  them  in  a  cellar  upon  some  marble 
for  the  space  of  four  days,  till  they  become  like  oil  olive ; 


4  PEBPBTUUM   mobile; 

distil  this  with  fire  of  chaff,  or  driving  fire,  and  it  will 
sublime  into  a  dry  substance ;  and  so,  by  repeating  of 
these  dissolvings  and  distillings,  there  will  be  at  length  pro- 
duced divers  small  attorns,  which,  being  put  into  a  glass  well 
luted,  and  kept  dry,  will  have  a  perpetual  motion. 

I  cannot  say  any  thing  from  experience  against  this ;  but 
methinks  it  does  not  seem  very  probable,  because  things  that 
are  forced  up  to  such  a  vigorousness  and  activity  as  these 
ingredients  seem  to  be  by  their  frequent  sublimings  and  disr 
tillings,  are  not  likely  to  be  of  any  duration.  The  more  any 
thing  is  stretched  beyond  its  usual  nature,  the  less  does  it 
last;  violence  and  perpetuity  being  no  companions.  And 
then,  besides,  suppose  it  true,  yet  such  a  motion  could  not 
well  be  applied  to  any  use,  which  will  needs  take  much  from 
the  delight  of  it. 

oeubratedinan  Amongst  the  chymical  experiments  to  this 
epigram  b]/ Hugo  purposc,  may  be  reckoned  up  that  famous 
Orotius,  11.  motion^  invented  by   Cornelius   Dreble,    and 

made  for  King  James  ;  wherein  was  represented  the  constant 
revolutions'  of  the  sun  and  moon,   and   that  without   the 

EpUtadEmet.  ^®^P  ^^^her  of  Springs  or  weights.  Marcellus 
turn  de  Lamp.  Vranckhein,  speaking  of  the  means  whereby  it 
^*****  was  performed,  he  calls  it  ScintiUula  animce 

mdgneiiccB  mundi,  seu  astralis  et  insensibtlis  sptritm ;  being 
that  grand  secret,  for  the  discovery  of  which,  those  dictators 
of  philosophy,  Democritus,  Pythagoras,  Plato,  did  travel 
unto  the  Gymnosophists  and  Indian  Priests.     The  author 

EpisLadJaeo-    himself,  in  his   discourse  upon  it,   does  not 

um  Begtm.  at  all  rcveal  the  way  how  it  was  performed. 
But  there  is  one  Thomas  Tymme,  who  was  a  familiar 
acquaintance  of  his,  and  did  often  pry  into  his  works 
(as  he  professes  himself),  who  affirms  it  to  be  done  thus : 
By  extracting  a  fiery  spirit  out  of  the  mineral  matter, 
joining  the  same  with  his  proper  air,  which  included  in  the 

Phiio»oph,Dia'  axletree  (of  the  first  moving  wheel),  being 
logue,  confer.  2,  hollow,  carrieth  the  other  wheels,  making  a 
**^  continual  rotation,   except    issue   or  vent  be 

given  in  this  hollow  axletree,  whereby  the  imprisoned  spirit 
may  get  forth. 

What  strange  things  may  be  done  by  such  extractions,  I 
know  not,  and  therefore  dare  not  condemn  this  relation  as 
impossible ;  but  methinks  it  sounds  rather  like  a  chymical 


OB,    SEAECH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  5 

dream,  than  a  philosophical  truth.  It  seems  this  imprisoned 
spirit  is  now  set  at  liberty,  or  else  is  grown  weary,  for  the 
instrument  (as  I  have  heard)  hath  stood  still  for  many  years. 
It  is  here  considerable  that  any  force  is  weakest  near  the 
center  of  a  wheel ;  and  therefore,  though  such  a  spirit  might 
of  itself  have  an  agitation,  yet  'tis  not  easily  conceivable 
how  it  should  have  strength  enough  to  carry  the  wheels  about 
with  it.  And  then,  the  absurdity  of  the  author's  citing  this, 
would  make  one  mistrust  his  mistake.  He  urges  it  as  a 
strong  argument  against  Copernicus ;  as  if,  because  Dreble 
did  thus  contrive  in  an  engine  the  revolution  of  the  heavens 
and  the  immoveableness  of  the  earth,  therefore  it  must  needs 
follow  that  'tis  the  heavens  which  are  moved,  and  not  the 
earth.  If  his  relation  were  no  truer  than  his  consequence,  it 
had  not  been  worth  the  citing. 

CHAP.  XIII. — Concerning  several  attempts  of  contriving  a  Perpetual 
Motion^  hy  Magnetical  Virtues* 

The  second  way  whereby  the  making  of  a  perpetual  motion 
hath  been  attempted,  is  by  Magnetical  Virtues,  which  are  not 
without  some  strong  probabilities  of  proving  effectual  to  this 
purpose ;  especially  when  we  consider  that  the  heavenly  revo- 
lutions (being  as  the  first  pattern  imitated  and  aimed  at  in 
these  attempts)  are  all  of  them  performed  by  the  help  of 
these  qualities.  This  great  orb  of  earth,  and  all  the  other 
planets,  being  but  as  so  many  magnetical  globes,  endowed 
with  such  various  and  continual  motions  as  may  be  most 
agreeable  to  the  purposes  for  which  they  were  intended. 
And,  therefore,  most  of  the  authors  who  treat  oubertdeMag. 
concerning  this  invention,  do  agree  that  the  net  cahcemPM- 
likeliest  way  to  effect  it,  is  by  these  kind  of    ^^^  Magnet,  1 4, 

,...  ^  ^  C20. 

qualities. 

It  was  the  opinion  of  Pet.  Peregrinus,  and  there  is  an 

example  pretended  for  it  in  Bettinus  (apiar.  9,  progym.  5, 
pro.  11)  that  a  magnetical  globe,  or  terella,       ^^^         ^. 

r  .  .1^1         1         J  'i.  1  ij      i        Athanas.   Ktr- 

bemg  nghtly  placed  upon   its   poles,    would  of     cherdeArteMag. 

itself  have  a  constant  rotation,  like  the  diurnal  net.  i.  1.  par.  2. 
motion  of  the  earth.  But  this  is  commonly  ^^^\^  ^^''^ 
exploded  as  being  against  all  experience. 

Others  think  it  possible  so  to  contrive  several  pieces  of 
steel  and  loadstone  that,  by  their  continual  attraction  and 


a.  Tract,  de 
miotu  eontinuo. 

b.DeBotaper- 
p€t4  tnotui,  par. 

e.  De  VarteL 
rerum,  2.  9,  a  48. 

De  Magneto  I. 


PEBFETUVM    MOBILE; 

expulsion  of  one  another,  they  may  cause  a 
perpetual  revolution  of  a  wheel.  Of  this  opinion 
were  »  Taisner,  ^  Pet.  Peregrinus,  and  «  Cardan, 
out  of  Antonius  de  Fantis.  But  D.  Gilbert, 
who  was  more  especially  versed  in  magnetical 
experiments,  concludes  it  to  be  a  vain  and 
groundless  fancyl 
But  amongst  all  these  kinds  of  inventions,  that  is  most 
likely,  wherein  a  loadstone  is  so  disposed  that  it  shall  draw 
unto  it  on  a  reclined  plane  a  bullet  of  steel,  which  steel,  as 
it  ascends  near  to  the  loadstone,  may  be  contrived  to  fall 
down  through  some  hole  in  the  plane,  and  so  to  return  unto 
the  place  from  whence  at  first  it  began  to  move ;  and,  being 
there,  the  loadstone  will  again  attract  it  upwards  till  coming 
to  this  hole,  it  will  fall  down  again ;  and  so  the  motion  shall 
be  perpetual,  as  may  be  more  easily  conceivable  by  this 
figure : — 


Suppose  the  loadstone  to  be  represented  at  A  B,  which, 
though  it  have  not  strength  enough  to  attract  the  bullet  C 
directly  from  the  groimd,  yet  may  do  it  by  the  help  of  the 
plane  E  F.  Now,  when  the  bullet  is  come  to  the  top  of  this 
plane,  its  own  gravity  (which  is  supposed  to  exceed  the 
strength  of  the  loadstone)  will  make  it  fall  into  that  hole  at  E  ; 
and  the  force  it  receives  in  this  fall  will  carry  it  with  such  a 
violence  unto  the  other  end  of  this  arch,  that  it  will  open  the 
passage  which  is  there  made  for  it,  and  by  its  return  will 
again  shut  it ;  so  that  the  bullet  (as  at  the  first)  is  in  the 
same  place  whence  it  was  attracted,  and,  consequently,  must 
move  perpetually. 


OB,    SEAECH   FOB   SELP-MOTIVE   POWEB.  7 

But  however  this  invention  may  seem  to  be  of  such  strong 
probability,  yet  thete  are  sundry  particulars  which  may  prove 
it  insufficient :  for — 

1.  This  bullet  of  steel  must  first  be  touched,  and  have  its 
several  poles,  or  else  there  can  be  little  or  no  attraction  of  it. 
Suppose  C  in  the  steel  to  be  answerable  unto  A  in  the  stone,  and 
to  B ;  in  the  attraction  C  D  must  always  be  directed  answer- 
able to  A  B,  and  so  the  motion  will  be  more  difficult ;  by 
reason  there  can  be  no  rotation  or  turning  round  of  the  bullet, 
but  it  must  slide  up  with  the  line  C  D,  answerable  to  the 
axis  A  B. 

2.  In  its  fall  from  E  to  G,  which  is  motus  elementarts^  and 
proceeds  from  its  gravity,  there  must  needs  be  a  rotation  of 
it ;  and  so  'tis  odds  but  it  happens  wrong  in  the  rise,  the 
poles  in  the  bullet  being  not  in  the  same  direction  to  those  in 
the  magnet ;  and  if  in  this  reflux  it  should  so  fall  out,  that  D 
should  be  directed  towards  B,  there  should  be  rather  a  flight 
than  an  attraction,  since  those  two  ends  do  repel,  and  not 
draw  one  another. 

3.  If  the  loadstone  A  B  have  so  much  strength,  that  it 
can  attract  the  bullet  in  F,  when  it  is  not  turned  round,  but 
does  only  slide  upon  the  plane,  whereas  its  own  gravity  would 
rowl  it  downwards ;  then  it  is  evident  the  sphere  of  its  activity 
and  strength  would  be  so  increased  when  it  approaches  much 
nearer,  that  it  would  not  need  the  assistance  of  the  plane,  but 
would  draw  it  immediately  to  itself  without  that  help ;  and 
so  the  bullet  would  not  fall  down  through  the  hole,  but 
ascend  to  the  stone,  and,  consequently,  cease  its  motion :  for, 
if  the  loadstone  be  of  force  enough  to  draw  the  bullet  on  the 
plane,  at  the  distance  F  B,  then  must  the  strength  of  it  be 
sufficient  to  attract  it  immediately  unto  itself,  when  it  is  so 
much  nearer  as  £  B.  And  if  the  gravity  of  the  bullet  be 
supposed  so  much  to  exceed  the  strength  of  the  magnet,  that 
it  cannot  draw  it  directly  when  it  is  so  near,  then  will  it  not 
be  able  to  attract  the  bullet  up  the  plane,  when  it  is  so  much 
further  oflf. 

So  that  none  of  all  these  magnetical  experiments,  which  have 
been  as  yet  discovered,  are  sufficient  for  the  effecting  of  a 
perpetual' motion,  though  these  kind  of  qualities  seem  most 
conducible  unto  it ;  and  perhaps,  hereafter,  it  may  be  con- 
trived from  them. 


8  PEBPETUXTM    MOBILE; 

CHAP.  XIV. — The  seeming  probability   of  effecting  a  Continual 
Motion  by  Solid  Weights  in  a  Hollow  Wheel  or  Sphere, 

The  third  way  whereby  the  making  of  a  perpetual  motion 
hath  been  attempted  is  by  the  Natural  Affection  of  Gravity ; 
when  the  heaviness  of  several  bodies  is  so  contrived,  that  the 
same  motion  which  they  give  in  their  descent,  may  be  able  to 
carry  them  up  again. 

But  (against  the  possibility  of  any  such  invention)  it  is 
L 17  De  ^^^  objected  by  Cardan : — ^All  sublunary  bodies 
Var.  R<yrum]  1. 9.  have  a  direct  motion  either  of  ascent  or  descent ; 
«•  4»-  which,  because  it  does  not  refer  to  some  term, 

therefore  cannot  be  perpetual,  but  must  needs  cease  when  it 
is  arrived  at  the  place  unto  which  it  naturally  tends. 

I  answer,  though  this  may  prove  that  there  is  no  natural 
motion  of  any  particular  heavy  body  which  is  perpetual,  yet 
it  doth  not  hinder,  but  that  it  is  possible  from  them  to  con- 
trive such  an  artificial  revolution  as  shall  constantly  be  the 
cause  of  itself. 

Those  bodies  which  may  be  serviceable  to  this  purpose 
are  distinguishable  into  two  kinds : — 

1.  Solid  and  consistent;  as  weights  of  metal,  or  the  like. 

2.  Fluid  or  sliding ;  as  water,  sand,  &c. 

Both  these  ways  have  been  attempted  by  many,  though 
with  very  little  or  no  success.     Other  men's  conjectures  in 

D.Fiud.  Tract  ^^^  ^^'^^  3'°^  ^^1  ®®®  ®®*  down  by  divers 
2.  pa/r.  7,  t.  2.  c  4  authors.  It  would  be  too  tedious  to  repeat 
*  '^'  them  over,  or  set  forth  their  draughts. 

I  shall  only  mention  two  new  ones,  which  (if  I  am  not 
over-partial)  seem  altogether  as  probable  as  any  of  these 
kinds  that  have  been  yet  invented  ;  and,  till  experience  had 
discovered  their  defect  and  insufficiency,  I  did  certainly  con- 
clude them  to  be  infallible. 

The  first  of  these  contrivances  was  by  solid  weights  being 

placed  in  some  hollow  wheel  or  sphere,  unto  which  they 

should  give  a  perpetual  revolution ;  for,  as  the  philosopher 

Arist  Phy8.a.8,    hath  largely  proved,  only  a  circular  motion  can 

«•  12.  properly  be  perpetual. 

But,  for  the  better  conceiving  of  this  invention,  it  is  requi- 
site that  we  rightly  understand  some  principles  in  Trochilicks, 
or  the  art  of  wheel  instruments ;  as,  chiefly,  the  relation 
Arist  Mechan.,  bctwixt  the  parts  of  a  wheel  and  those  of  a 
K6ra  addrcx^    ballauce ;  the  several  proportions  in  the  semi- 


OK,    SEABCH   POB   SELF-MOTIYE   POWER. 


9 


diameter  of  a  wheel  being  answerable  to  the  sides  in  a 
ballance,  where  the  weight  is  multiplied  according  to  its 
distance  from  the  center. 


Thus,  suppose  the  center  to  be  at  A,  and  the  diameter  of 
the  wheel,  D  C,  to  be  divided  into  equal  parts  (as  is  here 
expressed),  it  is  evident,  according  to  the  former  ground,  that 
one  pound  at  C  will  equiponderate  to  five  pound  at  B,  because 
there  is  such  a  proportion  betwixt  their  several  distances  from 
the  center.  And  it  is  not  material  whether  or  no  these  several 
weights  be  placed  horizontally ;  for  though  B  do  hang  lower 
than  C,  yet  this  does  ^ot  at  all  concern  the  heaviness ;  or 
though  the  plummet  C  were  placed  much  higher  than  it  is  at 
E,  or  lower  at  F,  yet  would  it  still  retain  the  same  weight 
which  it  had  at  C ;  because  these  plummets  (as  in  the  nature 
of  all  heavy  bodies),  do  tend  downwards  by  a  strait  line ; 
80  that  their  several  gravities  are  to  be  measured  by  that  part 
of  the  horizontal  semidiameter  which  is  directly  either  below 
or  above  them.  Thus,  when  the  plummet  C  shall  be  moved 
either  to  G  or  H,  it  will  lose  one-third  of  its  former  heavi- 
ness, and  be  equally  ponderous  as  if  it  were  placed  in  the 
ballance  at  number  3  ;  and  if  we  suppose  it  to  be  situated  at 


10 


PERPETUUM   mobile; 


I  or  K,  then  the  weight  of  it  will  lie  wholly  upon  the  center, 
and  not  at  all  conduce  to  the  motion  of  the  wheel  on  either 
side  ;  so  that  the  strait  lines  which  pass  through  the  divisions 
of  the  diameter  may  seiTe  to  measure  the  heaviness  of  any 
weight  in  its  several  situations. 

These  things  thoroughly  considered,  it  seems  very  possible 
and  easie  for  a  man  to  contrive  the  plummets  of  a  wheel,  that 
they  may  be  always  heavier  in  their  fall,  than  in  their  ascent ; 
and  so,  consequently,  that  they  should  give  a  perpetual  motion 
to  the  wheel  itself;  since  it  is  impossible  for  that  to  remain 
unmoved  as  long  as  one  side  in  it  is  heavier  than  the  other. 

For  the  performance  of  this,  the  weights  must  be  so 
ordered — 1.  That  in  their  descent  they  may  fall  from  the 
center,  and  in  their  ascent  may  rise  nearer  to  it.  2.  That 
the  fall  of  each  plummet  may  begin  the  motion  of  that  which 
should  succeed  it,  as  in  the  following  diagram : — 


Where  there  are  sixteen  plummets,  eight  in  the  inward  circle, 
and  as  many  in  the  outward.  (The  inequality  being  to  arise 
from  their  situation,  it  is  therefore  most  convenient  that  the 
number  of  them  be  even.)     The  eight  inward  plummets  are 


OK,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  11 

supposed  to  be  in  themselves  so  much  heavier  than  the  other, 
that  in  the  wheel  they  may  be  of  equal  weight  with  those 
above  them,  and  then  the  fail  of  these  will  be  of  sufficient 
force  to  bring  down  the  other.  For  example,  if  the  outward 
be  each  of  them  four  ounces,  then  the  inward  must  bs  five  ; 
because  the  outward  is  distant  from  the  center  nve  of  those 
parts  whereof  the  inward  is  but  four.  Each  pair  of  these 
weights  should  be  joined  together  by  a  little  string  or  chain, 
which  must  be  fastened  about  the  middle,  betwixt  the  bullet 
and  the  center  of  that  plummet  which  is  to  fall  first,  and  at 
the  top  of  the  other. 

When  these  bullets,  in  their  descent,  are  at  their  farthest 
distance  from  the  center  of  the  wheel,  then  shall  they  be 
stopped,  and  rest  on  the  pins  placed  to  that  purpose ;  and  so, 
in  their  rising,  there  must  be  other  pins  to  keep  them  in  a 
convenient  posture  and  distance  from  the  center,  lest,  approach- 
ing too  near  unto  it,  they  thereby  become  unfit  to  fall  when 
they  shall  come  to  the  top  of  the  descending  side. 

This  may  be  otherwise  contrived  with  some  different  cir- 
cumotances,  but  they  will  all  redound  to  the  same  effect.  By 
such  an  engine  it  seems  very  probable  that  a  man  may  pro- 
duce perpetual  motion ;  the  distance  of  the  plummets  from  the 
center  increasing  with  weight  on  one  side,  and  their  being  tied 
to  one  another,  causing  a  constant  succession  in  their  falling. 

But  now,  upon  experience,  I  have  found  this  to  be  falla- 
cious ;  and  the  reason  may  sufficiently  appear  by  a  calculation 
of  the  heaviness  cf  each  plummet,  according  to  its  several 
situation ;  which  may  easily  be  done  by  those  perpendiculars 
that  cut  the  diameter,  (as  was  before  erplained,  and  is  here 
expressed  in  five  of  the  plummets  on  the  descending  side). 
From  such  a  calculation  it  will  be  evident,  that  both  the  sides 
of  this  wheel  will  equiponderate  ;  and  so  consequently,  that 
the  supposed  inequality  whence  the  motion  should  proceed,  is 
but  imaginary  and  groundless.  Cn  the  descending  side,  the 
heaviness  of  each  plummet  may  be  measured  according  to  these 
numbers,  (supposing  the  diameter  of  the  wheel  to  be  divided 
into  twenty  parts,  and  each  of  those  subdivided  into  four) : — 

THB  OUTWA.ll©   FLUMMETS.  THE   INWARD  PLUMMETS. 

7.0"^ 

10.0  >   The  sum  24.  ^o^   The  sum  19. 

7.o) 


12  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

On  the  ascending  side,  the  weights  are  to  be  reckoned 
according  to  these  degrees : — 

THE  OUTWABD.  THE   INT^ABD. 

4.1, 


1.3. 
7.2 

9.0  r   The  sum  24. 

5.3  \ 

0.0'' 


6 


The  sum  19. 


The  sum  of  which  last  numbers  is  equal  with  the  former, 
and  therefore  both  the  sides  of  such  a  wheel  in  this  situation 
will  equiponderate. 

If  it  be  objected,  that  the  plummet  A  should  be  contrived 
to  pull  down  the  other  at  B,  and  then  the  descending  side 
will  be  heavier  than  the  other ;  for  answer  to  this,  it  is  con- 
siderable— 

1.  That  these  bullets  towards  the  top  of  the  wheel,  cannot 
descend  till  they  come  to  a  certain  kind  of  inclination. 

2.  That  any  lower  bullet  hanging  upon  the  other  above  it, 
to  pull  it  down,  must  be  conceived,  as  if  the  weight  of  it 
were  in  that  point  where  its  string  touches  the  upper ;  at 
which  point  this  bullet  will  be  of  less  heaviness  in  respect  of 
the  wheel,  than  if  it  did  rest  in  its  own  place  ;  so  that  both 
the  sides  of  it,  in  any  kind  of  situation,  may  equiponderate. 

CHAP.  XV. — Of  composing  a  Perpetual  Motion  hy  Fluid  Weights — 
Concerning  Archimedes  his  Water  Screw — The  great  probability 
of  accomplishing  this  enquiry  by  the  help  of  that,  with  the  fallible- 

\    ness  of  it  upon  experiment. 

That  which  I  shall  mention  as  th^  last  way,  for  the  trial  of 
this  experiment,  is  by  contriving  it  in  some  Water  Instrument ; 
which  may  seem  altogether  as  probable  and  easie  as  any  of 
the  rest ;  because  that  element,  by  reason  of  its  fluid  and 
subtle  nature  (whereby,  of  its  own  accord,  it  searches  out  the 
lower  and  more  narrow  passages),  may  be  most  pliable  to  the 
mind  of  the  artificer.  Now,  the  usual  means  for  the  ascent 
of  water  is  either  by  suckers  or  forces,  or  something  equiva- 
lent thereunto ;  neither  of  which  may  be  conveniently  applied 
unto  such  a  work  as  this,  because  there  is  required  unto  each 
of  them  so  much  or  more  strength,  as  may  be  answerable  to 
the  full  weight  of  the  water  that  is  to  be  drawn  up ;  and 
then,  besides,  they  move  for  the  most  part  by  fits  and  snatches, 
so  that  it  is  not  easily  conceivable,  how  they  should  conduce 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTITE    POWER.  13 

unto  such  a  motion,  which,  by  reason  of  its  perpetuity,  must 
be  regular  and  equal. 

But,  amongst  all  other  ways  to  this  purpose,  that  invention 
of  Archimedes  is  incomparably  the  best,  which  is  usually 
called  Cochlea^  or  the  "Water  Screw ;  being  framed  by  the 
helical  revolution  of  a  cavity  about  a  cylinder.  "We  have  not 
any  discourse  from  the  author  himself  concerning  it,  nor  is  it 
certain  whether  he  ever  writ  anything  to  this  purpose ;  but  if 
he  did,  yet,  as  the  injury  of  time  hath  deprived  us  of  many 
other  his  excellent  works,  so  likewise  of  this  amongst  the  rest. 

[Near  five  pages  are  occupied  in  describing  the  use  of 
this  screw,  and  the  form  and  manner  of  making  it ;  then 
follows : — ^] 

The  true  inclination  of  the  screw  being  found,  together 
with  the  certain  quantity  of  water  which  every  helix  does 
contain;  it  is  further  considerable,  that  the  water  by  this  instru- 
ment does  ascend  naturally  of  itself,  without  any  violence  or 
labour ;  and  that  the  heaviness  of  it  does  lie  chiefly  upon  the 
centers  or  axis  of  the  cylinder,  both  its  sides  being  of  equal 
weight  (saith  Ubaldus) ;  so  that,  it  should  seem,  ubaidus  de  co- 
though  we  suppose  each  revolution  to  have  an  «Wtfa,j.3,proj),4. 
equal  quantity  of  water,  yet  the  screw  will  remain  with  any 
part  upwards,  according  as  it  shall  be  set,  without  turning 
itself  either  way;  and,  therefore,  the  least  strength  being 
added  to  either  of  its  sides  should  make  it  descend,  according 
to  that  common  maxim  of  Archimedes — any  d^  jSquipond, 
addition  will  make  that  which  equiponderates  ^^ppo'-  8. 
with  another  to  tend  downwards. 

But  now,  because  the  weight  of  this  instrument  and  the 
water  in  it  does  lean  wholly  upon  the  axis,  hence  is  it  (saith 
Ubaldus}  that  the  grating  and  rubbing  of  these  axes  against 
the  sockets  wherein  they  are  placed,  will  cause  some  ineptitude 
and  resistency  to  that  rotation  of  the  cylinder ;  which  would 
otherwise  ensue  upon  the  addition  of  the  least  weight  to  any 
one  side  ;  but  (saith  the^  same  author)  any  power  that  is 
greater  than  this  resistency  which  does  arise  from  the  axis, 
will  serve  for  the  turning  of  it  round. 

These  things  considered  together,  it  will  hence  appear  how 
a  perpetual  motion  may  seem  easily  contrivable.  For,  if  there 
were  but  such  a  water-wheel  made  on  this  instrument,  upon 
which  the  stream  that  is  carried  up  may  fall  in  its  descent,  it 
would  turn  the  screw  round,  and  by  that  means  convey  as 


14 


PEKPETUUM    mobile; 


much  water  up  as  is  required  to  move  it  ;  so  that  the  motion 
must  needs  be  continual,  since  the  same  weight  which  in  its 
fall  does  turn  the  wheel  is,  by  the  turning  of  the  wheel, 
carried  up  again. 

Or,  if  the  water,  falling  upon  one  wheel,  would  not  be 
forcible  enough  for  this  effect,  why  then  there  might  be  two 
or  three,  or  more,  according  as  the  length  and  elevation  of  the 
instrument  will  admit ;  by  which  means  the  weight  of  it  may 
be  so  multiplied  in  the  fall  that  it  shall  be  equivalent  to  twice 
or  thrice  that  quantity  of  water  which  ascends;  as  may  be 
more  plainly  discerned  by  the  following  diagram : — 


Where  the  figure  L  M,  at  the  bottom,  does  represent  a  wooden 
cylinder  with  helical  cavities  cut  in  it,  which  at  A  B  is  sup- 


OB,    SEABCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIYE    POWEE.  15 

posed  to  be  covered  over  with  tin  plates,  and  three  water- 
wheels  upon  it,  H  I  K ;  the  lower  cistern,  which  contains  the 
water,  being  C  D.  Nov/,  this  cylinder  being  turned  round, 
aU  the  water  which  from  the  cistern  ascends  through  it,  will 
fall  into  the  vessel  at  E,  and  from  that  vessel  being  conveyed 
upon  the  water-wheel  H,  shall  consequently  give  a  circular 
motion  to  the  whole  screw.  Or,  if  this  alone  Thcrcia another 
should  be  too  weak  for  the  turning  of  it,  then  Hkcwntrivaneeto 
the  came  water  which  fails  from  the  wheel  H,  p^J^S^'apJ" 
being  received  into  the  other  vessel  F,  may  \pogym,iprop. 
from  thence  again  descend  on  the  wheel  I,  by  J^*  ^*  ^^^  *^«** 
which  means  the  force  of  it  will  be  doubled,  than  *tis  here  pro 
And  if  this  be  yet  unsufficient,  then  may  the  pond 
water  which  fails  on  the  second  wheel  I,  be  received  into  the 
other  vessel  G,  and  from  thence  again  descend  on  the  third 
wheol  at  K  ;  and  so  for  as  many  other  wheels  as  the  instru- 
ment is  capable  of.  So  that,  besides  the  greater  distance  of 
these  three  streams  from  the  center  or  axis  by  which  they  are 
made  so  much  heavier,  and  besides  that  the  fall  of  this  out- 
ward water  is  forcible  and  violent,  whereas  the  ascent  of  that 
within  is  natural, — besides  all  this,  there  is  thrice  as  much 
water  to  turn  the  screw  as  is  carried  up  by  it. 

But,  on  the  other  side,  if  all  the  water  falling  upon  one 
wheel  would  be  able  to  turn  it  round,  then  half  of  it  would 
serve  with  two  wheels,  and  the  rest  may  be  so  disposed  of  in 
the  fall  as  to  serve  unto  some  other  useful  delightful  ends. 

When  I  first  thought  of  this  invention,  I  could  scarce  for- 
bear, with  Archimedes,  to  cry  out  evprjKa,  evprjKa  ;  it  seeming 
80  infallible  a  way  for  the  effecting  of  a  perpetual  motion  that 
nothing  could  be  so  much  as  probably  objected  against  it ; 
but,  upon  trial  and  experience,  1  find  it  altogether  insufiicient 
for  any  such  purpose,  and  that  for  these  two  reasons : — 

1.  The  water  that  ascends  will  not  make  any  considerable 
stream  in  the  fall. 

2.  This  stream,  tho'  multiplied,  will  not  be  of  force  enough 
to  turn  about  the  screw. 

1.  The  water  ascends  gently,  and  by  intermissions  ;  but  it 
falls  continually,  and  with  force ;  each  of  the  three  vessels 
being  supposed  full  at  the  first,  that  so  the  weight  of  the 
water  in  them  might  add  the  greater  strength  and  swiftness 
to  the  streams  that  descend  from  them.  Now,  this  swiftness 
of  motion  will  cause  so  great  a  difference  betwixt  them  that 


16  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

one  of  these  little  streams  may  spend  more  water  in  the  fall 
than  a  stream  six  times  bigger  in  the  ascent,  tho'  we  should 
suppose  both  of  them  to  be  continuate;  how  much  more, 
then,  when  as  the  ascending  water  is  vented  by  fits  and  inter- 
missions, every  circumvolution  voiding  so  much  as  is  con- 
tained in  one  helix ;  and,  in  this  particular,  one  that  is  not 
versed  in  these  kind  of  experiments  may  be  easily  deceived. 

But,  secondly,  tho'  there  were  so  great  a  disproportion,  yet, 
notwithstanding,  the  force  of  these  outward  streams  might 
well  enough  serve  for  the  turning  of  the  screw,  if  it  were  so 
that  both  its  sides  would  equiponderate  the  water  being  in 
them  (as  Ubaldus  hath  afiurmed).  But  now,  upon  farther 
examination,  we  shall  find  this  assertion  of  his  to  be  utterly 
against  both  reason  and  experience.  And  herein  does  consist 
the  chief  mistake  of  this  contrivance ;  for  the  ascending  side 
of  the  screw  is  made,  by  the  water  contained  in  it,  so  much 
heavier  than  the  descending  side,  that  these  outward  streams, 
thus  applied,  will  not  be  of  force  enough  to  make  them  equi- 
ponderate, much  less  to  move  the  whole,  as  may  be  more 
easily  discern' d  by  this  fig. : — 


Where  A  B  represents  a  screw  covered  over,  C  D  E  one  helix 
or  revolution  of  it,  C  D  the  ascending  side,  E  D  the  descend- 
ing side,  the  point  D  the  middle ;  the  horizontal  line  C  F 
shewing  how  much  of  the  helix  is  filled  with  water,  viz.,  of 
the  ascending  side,  from  C  the  beginning  of  the  helix,  to  D 
the  middle  of  it ;  and  on  the  descending  side,  from  D  the 
middle,  to  the  point  G,  where  the  horizontal  does  cut  the 
helix.      Now,  it  is  evident  that  this  latter  part,  D  G,   is 


OB,   SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  17 

nothing  near  so  much,  and  consequently  not  so  heavy  as  the 
other,  D  C ;  and  thus  is  it  in  all  the  other  revolutions,  which, 
as  they  are  either  more  or  larger,  so  will  the  difficulty  of  this 
motion  be  increased.  Whence  it  will  appear  that  the  outward 
streams  which  descend  must  be  of  so  much  force  as  to 
coimtervail  all  that  weight  whereby  the  ascending  side  in 
every  one  of  these  revolutions  does  exceed  the  other.  And 
tho'  this  may  be  effected  by  making  the  water-wheels  larger, 
yet  then  the  motion  will  be  so  slow  that  the  screw  will  not 
be  able  to  supply  the  outward  streams. 

There  is  another  contrivance  to  this  purpose,  mentioned  by 
Kircher  de  Magnete,  1.  2,  p.  4,  depending  upon  the  heat  of 
the  sun  and  the  force  of  winds;  but  it  is  liable  to  such 
abundance  of  exceptions  that  it  is  scarce  worth  the  mention- 
ing, and  does  by  no  means  deserve  the  confidence  of  any 
ingenious  artist. 

Thus  have  I  briefly  explained  the  probabilities  and  defects 
of  those  subtle  contrivances  whereby  the  making  of  a  per- 
petual motion  hath  been  attempted.  I  would  be  loth  to 
discourage  the  enquiry  of  any  ingenious  artificer  by  denying 
the  possibility  of  effecting  it  with  any  of  these  mechanical 
helps ;  but  yet  (I  conceive)  if  those  principles  which  concern 
the  slowness  of  the  power  in  comparison  to  the  greatness  of 
the  weight  were  rightly  understood  and  thoroughly  considered, 
they  would  make  this  experiment  to  seem,  if  not  altogether 
impossible,  yet  much  more  difficult  than  otherwise,  perhaps, 
it  will  appear.  However,  the  enquiring  after  it  cannot  but 
deserve  our  endeavours,  as  being  one  of  the  most  noble 
amongst  all  these  mechanical  subtUties.  And,  as  it  is  in  the 
fable  of  him  who  dug  the  vineyard  for  a  hid  treasure,  tho'  he 
did  not  find  the  money,  yet  he  thereby  made  the  groimd  more 
fruitful,  so,  tho'  we  do  not  attain  to  the  effecting  of  this  par- 
ticular, yet  our  searching  after  it  may  discover  so  many  other 
excellent  subtilties  as  shaU  abundantly  recompence  the  labour 
of  our  enquiry. 

And  then,  besides,  it  may  be  another  encouragement  to 
consider  the  pleasure  of  such  speculations,  ,^^.^j.  ^  ^^-^ 
which  do  ravish  and  sublime  the  thoughts  <rti(m^, 
with  more  clear  angelical  contentments.  Archi-  ce^^'Xan.TzIi 
medes  was  generally  so  taken  up  in  the  delight  zes,  cml  2.  HisL 
of  these  mathematical  studies  of  this  familiar  ^-Vaier. Maxim- 
men  (as  Plutarch  stiles  them)  that  he  forgot     •^•^•'" 


18  PEEPETUTTM    MOBILE; 

both  his  meat  and  drink,  and  other  necessities  of  nature ; 
nay,  that  he  neglected  the  saving  of  his  life,  when  that 
rude  soldier,  in  the  pride  and  haste  of  victory,  would 
not  give  him  leisure  to  finish  his  demonstration.  What  a 
ravishment  was  that,  when,  having  found  out  the  way  to 
measure  Hiero's  crown,  he  leaped  out  of  the  bath,  and  (as  if 
he  were  suddenly  possessed)  ran  naked  up  and  down,  crying 
evprjKa,  evfrrfKa  /  It  is  storied  of  Thales  that,  in  his  joy  and 
gratitude  for  one  of  these  mathematical  inventions,  he  went 
presently  to  the  Temple,  and  there  offered  up  a  solemn  sacri- 
fice ;  and  Pythagoras,  upon  the  like  occasion,  is  related  to 
have  sacrificed  a  hundred  oxen;  the  justice  of  Providence 
having  so  contrived  it,  that  the  pleasure  which  there  is  in  the 
success  of  such  inventions  should  be  proportioned  to  the 
great  diflB.culty  and  labour  of  their  enquiry.* 


Of  Continual  Motion.  By  Joannes  Taisnieeus  ;  prior 
to  1579. — In  the  library  of  the  British  Museum  is  an  edition  of 
"  A  very  necessarie  &  profitable  booke  concerning  Nauigation, 
compiled  in  Latin  by  Joannes  Taisnierus,  a  public  professor 
in  Rome,  Ferraria,  and  other  universities  in  Italie  of  the 
Mathematicalles,  named  a  Treatise  of  Continuall  Motions; 
translated  into  English  by  Richard  Eden."  It  is  a  black 
letter  quarto  tract,  printed  by  Richard  Jugge,  without  date, 
consisting  of  eighty-two  pages.  The  first  part  is  "  Of  the 
vertue  of  the  Loadstone,"  and  the  second  part  is  "  Of  con- 
tinual motion  by  the  said  stone  Magnes."  It  was  reprinted 
1579.  In  his  introductory  remarks,  he  observes,  in  allusion 
to  continual  motion,  that  it  is — 

The  thing  which  to  this  day  in  manner  from  the  beginning 
of  the  world,  great  philosophers  with  perpetual  studie  and 
great  labour,  have  endeavoured  to  bring  to  effect,  and  desired 
end,  hath  neverthelesse  hitherto  remayned  eyther  unknown 
or  hydde,  not  without  great  damage  &  hynderance  of  most 
expert  mathematicians. 

•  Mathematical  Magick,  in  two  books,  by  Bishop  Wilkins.  8vo. 
1707.    Fifth  edition.    Book  ii.,  called  Dsdalus;  or,  Mechanical  Motions. 


OB,    SEABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  19 

Referring  now  to  the  second  part,  we  read : — 
From  the  begynnyng  of  the  worlde,  in  manner  all  naturall 
philosophers  &  mathematitians,  with  great  expences  and 
labour,  have  attempted  to  fynde  out  a  continuall  motion  or 
moovyng :  yet  imto  this  day  have  few  or  none  atteyned  to  the 
true  ende  of  their  desyre.  They  have  attempted  to  doo  this 
with  divers  instrumentes  &  wheeles,  &  with  quicksylver,  not 
knowyng  the  vertue  of  this  stone.  Neyther  can  continual 
motion  be  founde  by  anyc  other  meanes,  then  by  the  stone 
Magnes,  in  this  maner.  Make  a  holowe  case  of  sylver,  after 
the  fashion  of  a  concave  glasse,  outwardly  laboured  with 
curious  art  of  gravyng,  not  onely  for  ornament,  but  also  for 
lyghtnesse ;  the  lyghter  that  it  is,  so  much  the  more  eassyer 
shal  it  be  mooved,  neyther  must  it  be  so  pearced  through,  that 
such  as  are  ignorant  of  the  hyd  secrete,  may  easyly  perceyve  it. 

["  The  fourftie  of  the  stone  "  is  here  engraved.] 

It  must  have  on  the  inner  syde  certayne  litle  nayles  & 
denticles  or  smal  teeth  of  iron  of  one  equal  weyght,  to  be 
fastened  on  the  border  or  margent,  so  that  the  one  be  no  fur- 
ther distant  from  the  other,  then  is  the  thycknesse  of  a  beane 
or  chicke  pease.  The  sayd  wheele  also  must  be  in  all  partes 
of  equall  weyght,  then  fasten  the  exiltree  in  the  myddest, 
upon  the  whiche  the  wheele  may  tume,  the  exiltree  remayn- 
jug  utterly  immoveable.  To  the  whiche  exiltree  agayne  shal 
be  joyned  a  pynne  of  sylver,  fastened  to  the  same,  &  placed 
betweene.the  two  cases  in  the  hyghest  parte,  whereon  place 
the  stone  Magnes.  Beyng  thus  prepared  let  it  be  fyrste 
brought  to  a  rounde  fourme,  then  (as  is  sayd)  let  the  poles  be 
founde :  then  the  poles  imtouched,  the  two  contrarye  sydes 
Ijdng  betweene  the  poles,  must  be  fyled  &  pullyshed,  &  the 
stone  brought  in  maner  to  the  fourme  of  an  egge,  &  somewhat 
narower  in  those  two  sydes,  lest  the  lower  parte  thereof 
shoulde  occupie  the  inferior  place,  that  it  may  touche  the 
wallas  of  the  case  lyke  a  litle  wheele.  This  done,  place  the 
stone  upon  the  pynne,  as  a  stone  is  fastened  in  a  ryng,  with 
such  art,  that  the  north  pole  may  a  litle  enclyne  toward  the 
denticles,  to  the  ende  that  the  vertue  thereof  woorke  not 
directly  his  impression,  but  with  a  certayne  inclination  geve 
his  influence  upon  the  denticles  of  iron.  Every  denticle 
therefore  shall  come  to  the  north  pole,  &  when  by  force  of  the 
wheele  it  shall  somewhat  passe  that  pole,  it  shaU  come  to  the 


20  PEBPETUUM   mobile; 

south  part,  whiche  shall  dryve  it  backe  agayne ;  whom  then 
agayne  the  pole  artike  shall  drawe  as  appeareth.  And  that 
the  wheele  may  the  sooner  doo  his  office  within  the  cases,  in- 
close therein  a  litle  calculus  (that  is)  a  litle  rounde  stone  or 


pellet  of  copper  or  sylver,  of  suche  quantitie,  that  it  may  com- 
modiously  be  receyved  within  any  of  the  denticles :  then  when 
the  wheeles  shal  be  raysed  up,  the  pellet  or  rounde  weyght 
shal  fal  on  the  contrary  parte.  And  whereas  the  motion  of 
the  wheele  downwarde  to  the  lowest  part,  is  perpetuall,  & 
the  fall  of  the  pellet,  opposite  or  contrary,  ever  receyved 
within  any  two  of  the  denticles,  the  motion  shall  be  perpetuall, 
because  the  weyght  of  the  wheele  &  pellet  ever  enclyneth  to 
the  centre  of  the  earth,  &  lowest  place.  Therefore  when  it 
shal  permit  the  denticles  to  rest  about  the  stone,  then  shall  it 
well  serve  to  the  purpose.  The  myddle  places  within  the 
denticles  ought  so  artificially  to  be  made  belowe,  that  they 
may  aptly  receive  the  fallyng  pellet  or  plommet,  as  the  fygure 
above  declareth.  And  briefly  to  have  wrytten  thus  much  of 
continuall  motion  may  suffice. 

Description  of  the  Engraving — ^A,  the  stone  ;  B,  the  silver 
pinne ;  E,  calculus,  a  little  rounde  stone  or  small  weyght. 


OB,    8EABCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB.  21 

Pebpetuaii  Motion. — In  the  "Theatrum  Machinarum 
Generale,"  by  Jacob  Leupold,  published  at  Leipsic,  1724, 
folio,  appears  an  article,  of  which  the  following  is  a  free  and 
abridged  translation : — 

The  so-called  machine  to  produce  perpetual  motion  con- 
sists of  a  proper  adjustment  of  weights.  Such  a  machine  is 
one  that  without  external  power  would  have  a  continual 
movement  of  its  own,  as  long  as  its  materials  last.  The 
search  after  this  movement  has  become  so  general  in  the  pre- 
sent day  (prior  to  1724),  that  the  humblest  mechanics  enthu- 
siastically express  certainty  of  their  ability,  had  they  time 
and  money,  to  produce  something  of  the  kind  to  surprise  the 
world.  However,  is  there  any  subject  after  which  so  many 
thousands  have  longed,  spent  their  money,  industry,  and 
time,  as  this  same  perpetual  motion  ?  Dr.  Becher  has  eight 
dissimilar  inventions,  all  of  which  have  interested  the  scientific 
world,  one  of  the  number  being  perpetual  motion.  Although 
the  discovery  of  making  gold  would  be  the  most  honourable 
and  praiseworthy  thing  in  the  world,  yet  not  even  that  has  been 
80  sought  after  as  perpetual  motion  ;  because  the  one  requires 
a  high  knowledge  of  chemistry,  and  the  other  merely  requir- 
ing that  a  certain  weight  at  a  distance  from  the  axletree, 
should  fall  and  rise  without  losing  its  power  ;  and  it  is  here 
so  many  inventors  have  been  deceived,  from  wanting  proper 
mechanical  knowledge.  The  machines  most  hopeful  are 
those  given  in  Figures  10  and  11. 

[For  engravings  and  full  account,  see  Appendix  A.] 

The  action  of  the  foregoing  plans,  in  each,  tends  to  find 
the  centre  of  gravity,  and  therefore  after  many  trials  were  all 
found  to  cease  movement. 

It  still  remains  to  find  out  this  wonderful  and  undiscovered 
thing,  which  to  the  present  time  remains  impossible  both 
mathematically  and  mechanically,  so  far  as  we  yet  know. 
Great  weight  only  increases  friction,  but  there  was  a  wheel  or 
machine  that  did  not  weigh  above  forty  pounds,  and  was  nine 
feet  diameter,  which  promised  better  results,  yet  failed  like 
others,  and  so  dissipated  all  hope  of  succeeding. 

Notwithstanding  we  hold  that  perpetual  motion  is  not  an 
impossibility,  as  has  been  shown  to  all  the  world  by  Coun- 


22  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

cillor  Orflfyreus,  and  attested  by  the  princely  word  of  the 
Landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel,  a  prmce  himself  well  grounded 
in  the  science  of  mechanics,  and  who  so  minutely  scrutinised 
and  observed  this  wonderful  motion,  which  was  with  him  on 
trial  during  two  months ;  all  of  which  time  he  kept  the 
machine  in  a  sealed  chamber. 

To  all  the  seekers  after  perpetual  motion  the  following 
remarks  will  be  found  most  valuable : — 

1.  That  they  must  endeavour  to  construct  one  of  the  sim- 
plest of  machines ;  for  the  more  material  and  workmanship, 
the  less  chance  of  durability.  And  if  not  found  in  such 
simple  arrangement,  it  will  be  hid  for  ever. 

2.  That  it  must  be  tried  by  experiment  and  not  only  on 
paper,  for  the  friction  and  action  can  only  be  estimated  by 
trial. 

3.  That  unless  groimded  in  the  fundamental  principles  of 
mechanics,  no  one  should  attempt  the  project,  as  he  will  only 
lose  time  and  money.  ITie  thousands  who  fail  of  success  yet 
learn  something  of  mechanics,  and  that  one  pound  cannot 
move  more  than  one  pound,  but  always  arrives  at  an  equili- 
brium.* 

Peepetuax  Syphon  aitd  Mill. — Leupold,  in  his  "  Thea- 
trum  Machinanmi  Generale,"  on  Hydraulics,  describes : — 

The  water-wheel  of  a  mill  operated  by  a  syphon.  The 
inventor  has  here  endeavoured  to  gain  perpetual  motion  by 
constructing  a  syphon  which  at  A  has  more  water  than  at  B, 
consequently  more  weight ;  to  lessen  the  waste  of  water  at 
A,  he  makes  the  syphon  smaller  at  its  aperture ;  so  that  the 
weight  of  A  and  B  are  equalised.  Water,  however,  is 
weighed  not  by  its  quantity  but  its  height,  hence  this  plan  did 
not  succeed  in  this,  and  many  other  instances;  and  it  has  been 
tried  to  the  ruin  of  many.  Modifications  of  the  principle  on 
which  this  syphon  is  constructed  have  been  found,  on  experi- 
ment, equally  false.  In  the  work  of  Sinclari's  "De  Arte  magna 
et  nova  gravitatis  et  levitatis,"  the  subject  of  perpetual 
motion  by  means  of  mercury  is  very  skilfully  handled.  But 
all  these  plans  have  circumstances  attending  them  causing 

♦  Vol  1,  par.  58. 


OB,   8EABCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  23 

their  failiire. — Frtym  the  first  chapter  of  the  first  division  on 
Hydraulics. 

[See  Appendix  B,  for  full  account  and  engraving.] 

Pebpetual  Pump. — ^In  continuance  of  the  same  subject, 
but  employing  other  means,  Leupold  describes : — 

A  machine  with  a  water-snake  (Archimedean  screw) 
whereby  perpetual  motion  was  attempted. 

There  was  a  wheel  made  connected  with  a  screw,  and  the 
water  was  to  fall  from  the  screw  on  the  wheel.  Several  hands 
were  occupied  with  great  industry  and  earnestness  on  it  for 
some  years.  A  full  description  of  this  plan  is  to  be  found  in 
Bettinus  and  in  Peter  Schotte's  "Mechanica  Hydraulica- 
Pneimiatica ;"  but  Bettinus,  and  especially  Kircherus,  have 
written  to  prove  the  impossibility  of  the  method  here  proposed. 

[For  engraving  and  full  description  from  Leupold's  work, 
see  Appendix  C] 


Our  next  early  authority  on  the  subject  under  consideration 
is  derived  from  "  A  History  of  Manual  Arts,  1661,"  to  the 
following  effect: — 

[After  alluding  to  "  Archimedes  of  Syracuse,  the  greatest 
mathematician  and  the  rarest  engineer  that  was  in  his  time," 
who  invented  '^  a  sphear  and  an  artificial  heaven,  wherein  he 
did  represent  the  rotations  and  revolutions  of  the  planets," 
and  of  which  Claudian  gives  a  poetic  description — "  that  this 
machin  did  move  of  itself;  it  was  an  automaton,  a  self- 
moving  device ;"  and  further,  "  that  these  motions  were 
driven  and  acted  by  certain  spirits  pent  within;"  also  of 
another  device  of  "a  silver  heaven  sent  by  the  Emperour 
Ferdinand  for  a  present  to  Soliman  the  Grand  Signior," 
with  twelve  men,  and  a  book  "  that  shewed  the  use  of  it,  and 
how  to  order  and  keep  it  in  perpetual  motion," — ^an  accoimt 
is  next  given  of  Cornelius  van  Drebble,  a  Dutchman,  of 
Alcmar,  engineer  to  King  James,  in  England : — ] 


24  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

He  presented  the  king  with  a  rare  instrument  of  perpetual 
motion,  without  the  means  of  steel,  springs,  or  weights ;  it 
was  made  in  the  form  of  a  globe,  in  the  hollow  whereof  were 
wheels  of  brass  moving  about,  with  two  pointers  on  each  side 
thereof,  to  proportion  and  shew  forth  the  times  of  dayes, 
moneths,  and  years,  like  a  perpetual  almanack.  (Page  19.) 

At  page  22  is  an  account  of  Fanellus  Turrianus,  a  citizen 
of  Cremona,  who  "  did  recreate  the  Emperour  Charles  the 
Fift  (when  he  had  resigned  up  his  empire,  and  retired  to  a 
monastique  life  in  Spain)  with  ingenious  and  rare  devices ;" — 
among  others — 

He  framed  a  mill  of  iron  that  turned  itself,  of  such  subtile 
work  &  smalness,  that  a  monk  could  easily  hide  it  in  his 
sleeve ;  yet  would  it  daylie  grinde  so  much  wheat  as  would 
abimdantiy  serve  8  persons  for  their  day's  allowance.* 


The  next  two  articles  we  shall  quote  will  be  given  in  the 
original  Latin  version ;  the  first  from  a  folio  edition  of 
KoBBBT  Fludd's  works,  1618,  as  follows : — 

De  inatrumento  hand  spemendo,  quo  quidain^  Helvetius  motum  per' 
petuum  invenisse  pro  certo  credehat.  JSstque  speciei  prima  rota' 
rum  differentite, 

A.  rota  principalis.  B.  C.  pondera  unius  lateris.  D.  E.  F. 
pondera  alterius  lateris.  G.  baculus  portator.  H.  sustinens 
baculum.  I.  rotula  elevans.  K.  ejus  pecten.  L.  corona. 
M.  pecten  corona.  N.  interfracta.  O.  arbor.  P.  orbiculus. 
Q.  chorda.     R.  pondus  4  librarum. 

Rota  principalis  hoc  modo  fit,  scilicet,  ut  in  12.  partes 
sequales  dividatur  in  uno  ac  altero  latere,  &  affigantur  cuique 
lateri  clavi  6.  eadem  distantia  ab  invicem  dispositi,  sic  tamen, 
ut  quivis  clavus  stet  in  medio  duorum  alionmi  ex  altero  latere 
rotae,  et  non  unus  juxta  alium :  Appensis  jam  ponderibus  6. 
(quonmi  in  quovis  latere  sunt  3.  omnia  tamen  6.  in  ima  parte 
rotae  citra  centrum)  reperitur  haec  rota  onerata  pondere  15. 

*  Humane  Industry;  or,  a  History  of  most  Manual  Arts.  12mo. 
London,  1661.    Pp.  14  to  23. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVB    POWER.  2? 

libramm,  quia  pondus  C.  in  recta  linea  habet  lb.  quatuor. 
D.  E.  circa  7-  lb.  B.  F.  autem  4.  quae  simul  aggregatae  effi- 
ciunt  15.  lb.  quemadmodum  ex  regulis  prima  primi  cap.  et 
prima  ac  secunda  secundi  cap.  lib.  primi  patet. 

Movetur  jam  rota,  ita  ut  infimum  pondus  appropinquet 
clavo  baculi  portantis,  qid  positus  juxta  B.  &  F.  recipit  hoc 
pondus  per  uncum  suimi,  ubi  illi  adhaerenti  portatur  in  altum, 
&  rota  inferiiis  evacuata  perget ;  interim  appropinquat  clavus 
proximus,  qid  seqidtur  B.  &;  in  eodem  loco,  ubi  jam  est  B. 
recipit  pondus  sibi  apportatum  a  baculo:  Et  ita  semper 
oneratur  rota  in  superiori  &  exoneratur  in  inferiori  parte, 
quia  semper,  dum  duodecima  pars  rotse  volvitur,  baculimi 
ascendere,  et  dum  alia  duodecima  pars  vertitur,  iteriim 
eundem  descendere  necesse  est.  Elevatur  autem  baculus 
per  rotulimi  L.  quae  rotula  ter  vertendo  attingit  omnem 
altitudinem  baculi,  ipsum  ad  clavum  usque  desideratum 
elevans  :  Vertitur  autem  ejusmodi  rotula  per  pectinem 
suum  K.  a  corona  L.  quae  et  ipsa  per  suum  pectinem 
M.  a  rota  interfracta  N.  semel  volvitur,  a  quavis  duodecima 
parte  rotae  interfractae  O.  semper  dentes  habentae  in  duodecima 
sua  parte  superficiei,  et  hoc  sexies  habet  enim  alias  intermedias 
vacuas  ejusdem  speciei  ad  relinquendimi  baculum,  qid  sponte 
sua  cadere,  et  per  casimi  suum  rotulam  Q.  et  coronam  M. 
reverti  cogit ;  Ne  autem  cadat  cum  impetu,  suspensus  est  ad 
chordam  Q.  alteri  baculo  adhaerentem,  per  orbiculum  P.  qida 
tantum,  quantum  unus  baculus  cadit,  alter  ascendit. 

Rota  interfracta  affixa  est  arbori  aut  axi  rotae  principalis, 
et  ejus  vi  circumvolvitur.  Quod  autem  similia  instrumenta 
posita  simt  ex  alio  rotae  principalis  latere,  eo  fit,  quod  semper 
et  continuo  loboratur  onerando  et  exonerando  rotam,  qida 
quando  ex  imo  latere  pondus  aufertur,  in  alio  appenditur. 
Et  sic  semper  rota  habet  5,  pondera  pendentia,  et  unum 
semper  inascendente  baculo. 

Sed,  quamvis  haec  viri  Helvetici  theoria  sit  satis  ingeniosa 
aud  probabilis  quod  5.  pondera  inhaerentia  rotae  unum  pondus 
facile  trahere  et  elevare  deberent ;  Attamen,  quia  vis  non  est 
proportionata  ad  tempus,  nihil  hie  efficitur,  qida  ascendens 
pondus  pertransire  debet  per  pondera  5.  aut  per  spatium  tot 
partium,  quarum  unica  ipsum  movetur,  unicum  pondus  as- 
cendens tantum  perdurat,  quantum  caetera  quinque  ratione 
longi  transitus.     Ergo  seipsum  superare  nequit. 

Hanc  Ingeniatoris  Helvetici  inventionem  ej  usque  errorem 


28 


PERPETUUM    mobile; 


hoc  loco  descripsimus,  ut  hujus  scientiae  curiosi  majori  dili- 
gentia  proportionum  cognitionem  perscutentur,  easque  se- 
dul6  observent. 

De  alia  bona  inventione  ad  aquas  facile  elevandas^  quo  quidam  Italwt 
se  motum  perpetuum  invenisse  jactitare  attstu  est. 


^ 


fci^      37 


pM 


.   Pea* 20* 


A 

S 

i 

J-3 

m 

r 

INSTBUMENTI     DE8CBIPTI0. 
LITERABUM  EXPLICATIO. 

A.  haustnim  seu  pompa. 

B.  rotula  affixa  in  haustrifimdo,  super  quam  pistella,  sive 
rotunda  ex  corio  conflata  leviter  circumvolvuntur,  ut  facilius 
sursum  tendant ;  repleturque  uncis  ferreis. 

C.  C.  C.  pistella  seu  rotunda  ex  corio,  quorum  ope  aqua 
extollitur  in  pompa. 


OB,    SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  29 

D.  rotula  per  quam  dicta  rotunda  in  altum  elevantur, 

E.  pecten  movens  rotulam  D.  et  B. 

F.  est  rota  a  rota  inferior!  G.  circumducta,  cujus  dentibus 
pecten  E.  circulariter  agit. 

H.  pecten  movens  rotam  G. 

1N8TBUMENTI    HXTJUS    rSTTS. 

Numeratnr  hoc  instrmnentum  inter  rotas  primae  differentiae?, 
quod  vald^  est  necessarium  in  multis  usibus,  quia  minimo 
labore  magnam  aquae  quantitatem  sursum  propter  rotarum 
multitudinem  ferre  non  est  dubiiun. 

Longitudo  autem  haustri  A.  est  35.  pedum,  ejus  ver6  lati- 
tude pedis  1.  cimi  J  secundum  proportionem,  cujus  concavi- 
tates  rotundas  exacte  fieri  debent,  ut  non  perdant  aliquid 
aquae  ab  iis  attractae  in  suis  ascensionibus ;  Pompae  igitur 
concavitas  erit  bene  rotimda. 

Rota  magna  aquaria  habebit  pedes  24.  in  altitudine  :  Ilia 
ver6  G.  pedes  20. 

Italus  ille,  sua  contemplatione  deceptus  putabat  se  tantum 
aquae  per  pompam  elevaturum,  ut  rotam  aquariam  perpetud 
movere  cogeret,  qida  majorem  vim  requiri  dicebat  in  fine 
hujus  instrument!,  qiiam  in  principio,  sed,  quia  male  capiebat 
ponderum  proportiones,  igitur  in  sua  praxi  erat  deceptus.* 


The  second  Latin  authority  we  have  to  offer  is  Bettino,  as 
follows : — 

Motum  aqua  per  machinas  perpetuum  molitionihus  longe  facilUmia 
attentare. 

Motus  ille  graunium  circa  terrae  centrum  perpetuus  indica- 
tus  in  7  &  8  propositionibus,  etiam  si  fieri  posset,  esset  tamen 
inutilis  himianae,  ac  ciuilis  vitae  necessitatibus.  In  hac  decima 
propositione  motum  aquae  perpetuum  attentamus  per  ma- 
chinas ;  qui  motus  si  fieret,  maximo  esset  usui,  et  quaestusa 
compendia  ex  eo  in  vitam  humanam  redundarent.  Ut  igitur 
aliquid  circa  famosissiman  hanc  materiam  nos  etiam  ex  nostro 

•  Tractatua  Secundus  De  Naturae  Simla  sea  Technica  macrocosmi 
bistoria  in  partes  undecim  divisa.  Roberto  Fludd  alias  de  Fluctibus 
i^rmigero  et  in  Medicina  Doctore  Ozoniensi.  In  Nobili  Oppenheimio. 
Folio.     1618.     Pp.  456  and  462. 


30  PERPETITUM    mobile; 

sensu  prodamus,  aio  (quod  attinet  ad  theoricam  quandam 
constructionem  ex  ingenii  geometrici,  ac  scientifici  inventione, 
prodeunt^)  plures  machinas  aquaticas  constnii  posse,  aut  ab 
antiqids  ingeniosissime  constructas  facillimo  negotio  ita  possa 
accomodari,  ut,  fortasse,  nisi  quid  obstet  exparte  materise 
(a  quae  mathematica  inventio  abstrahit,  nee  culpam  subit 
physicaeimperfectionis)  machinae  illae  semper  eadem  aquae  quan- 
titate  in  orbem  ascendente,  ac  descendente,  perpetuo  quodam 
motu  agitentur. 

Exemplum  exbibiamus  in  mirissima  ilia  macbina  cocblese 
Archimedeae  per  lineas  spirales  aqua  baurientis,  et  (ut  in 
sequenti  propositione  demonstrabimus)  deuectione  pondus 
impositum  euebentis.  Moveatur  rota  A  B  C,  et  cocbleae  G  D 
pes  G  ^  subiecto  lacu  G  E  aquam  attollat  per  spiralem,  ac 
volutam  circa  cilindrum  G  D.  Cum  aqua  peruenerit  ad  D, 
atque  eflFundetur,  excipiatur  canali,  seu  tubo  D  F,  qid  tubus 
versus  rotam  ABC  deuexus  deferat  aquam,  atq ;  effundat  in 
rotam  cuius  aquae  decidentis  vis  supplebit  vices  potentiae 
moventis  rotam:  ac  dum  rota  ab  aqua  movetur  movetur  et 
cocblea,  et  cochlea  aquam  haurit,  atq ;  attollit,  aqua  sublata 
revertitur,  ac  refunditur  in  rotam,  e  rota  excipitur  in  lacum. 
Atq ;  hoc  aquae  circulo  machina  cochleae,  quae  impetum  acce- 
pit  a  motrice  potentia  an  non  iam  per  se  solo  aquae  circimiitu 
ciebitur,  motuq ;  rotabitur  perpetuo  dum  aqua  e  lacu  non 
defecerit  ? 

Pariarte,  atq ;  inveto  machina  Ctesibii,  cuius  fabricam,  et 
simulacru  habes  apud  Vitruidum,  et  aliae  aliquae  antiquorum, 
si  fiat  ut  aquae  quam  attolunt,  refundatur  in  rotam,  qua 
machinam  moveat,  an  non  poterunt  motus  perpetui  exempla 
praebere  ?  Sed  nos  exemplum  nostrum  exhibuimus  in 
cochlea  tum  ob  alia,  tum  praecipue  ob  duo,  quae  mox  appo- 
nam,  quibus  singulariter  in  hac  machina  facilior  fit  constructio, 
et  usus  ad  motimi  perpetuum,  quam  in  alia  ulla ;  praetereaq  ; 
reiici  videtur  oppositiones  praecipuae,  quae  obstare  possunt 
molientibus  inventa  pro  motu  aquae  per  machinas  perpetuo. 

Prim6  enim  si  fingas,  atq ;  opponas  requiri  maiorem  uim 
motricem  in  rota,  quam  sit  aquae  uis,  ac  quantitas  in  rotam 
decidentis,  ut  cochlea  pondus  aquae  possit  attollere,  etiam  si 
augeatur  vis  aquae  dimi  sublata  in  machinam  deinde  in  natae 
gravitatis  nisu,  ac  podere  maiori  praecipi  dantur  revoluta  in 
rotam  machinae  motricem.  Respondeo  prim6  singulare  esse 
in  cochlea  ut  minor  vis  ad  eius  motionem  proportione  requira- 


OB,   SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIYE   FOWEB.  31 

tur,  quam,  in  alia  uUa  machina,  duas  prsecipue  ob  causas. 
Minor  via  requi-  Prima  est  quia  euectio  ilia  per  spiralem  circa 
nfto-  ad  motum  cylindruixi,  vel  conum,  est  aliqua,  &  minus  vio- 
aUmrum  wtaehi-  lenta,  quam  sublatio  aquae  perpendiculanter 
iiMnim.  ascendentis,  vel  per  vim  ejectse,  ut  in  Ctesibiana 

machina,  et  in  aliis  quibusdam  fit.  Secunda  causa  facilitatis 
ad  motum  in  cochlea  est  a  modo  peculiari,  atq ;  admirando 
euectionis  ponderum  per  spiralem,  d\hn  cochlea  obliqua  cir- 
cumuoluitur ;  ea  enim  euectio  ita  fit,  ut  pondera  ipsa  suam 
euectionem  inuent.  Nam  fit  quidam  motus  mixtus  ex  conti- 
nent! quodam  decensu  simul,  atq ;  ascensu  gravium,  qvae 
gravia  dum  motu  proprio  descensum  affectant,  decummt 
sponte  per  spiralem,  atq;  ipsa  spiralis  ex  circumuolutione 
cochleae  pondera  decurrentia  sensim,  atq ;  oblique,  ac  quasi 
furtiu^  paullatim  attollit.  plura  inferius  in  sequenti  proposit. 
11  et  in  schol.  1  ad  eam  propositionem  dicemus  circa  miriss 
hune  motum  spiralem,  &c. 

Respondeo  2,  quod  ad  aquae  quantitatem,  ac  vim,  c6chlea 
habet  etiam  hoc  eximiu,  ac  pecidiare,  ut  in  ipsa  machina  (hoc 
est  circa  cylindnmi,  vel  eonimi)  possint  miiltiplicari  volutse, 
sine  tubi  spirales  ita,  ut  non  unica  tantum  sit  spiralis  (quod 
hactenus  in  usu  fuit  circa  cylindricas  cochleas)  sed  temse, 
quatemae,  ac  plures  spirales  circimipositae  maiorem  aquae 
copiam  pro  niunero  spiralium  hauriant,  et  attollant.  Qua  de 
re  inferius  in  schol.  2  proposit.  sequentis  undecimae.  Nimc 
tantum  ad  rem  indico  quemadmodum  aquae  copia  possit 
augeri,  ut  aquare,  ac  superare  possit  uim  potentiae  rotam  A  B 
C  moventis. 

Notandum  est  univers^  circa  hunc  aquae  circulumper  aptas 
machinas  ad  motu  perpetuum,  canales,  ac  tubos  machinarum, 
per  quos  aqua  influet  sic  aptandos,  et  cum  omni 
Nota  onem.  ^q^^qj^q  mimiendos,  ut  nihil  aquf  inter  fluelis, 
aut  defluentis  possit  furtim  effluere,  atq  ;  efiundi.  Nam 
exea  aquae  effusione  imminueretur  non  solum  quantitas,  sed 
et  uis  aquae  necessaria  ad  machinam  movendam,  et  ad  motimi 
perpetuandum. 

1^  tamen,  ut  in  nostra  figura,  aqua,  post  defluxum  in  rotam 
diffluat  in  lacum,  nihil  aquae  peribit,  &c.  etiam  si  aperte  deci- 
dant.  Eadem  enim  aquae  quantitas  semper  refunditur  in  lacimi. 

Vide  ad  motum  perpetuum  adhuc  maiora  adiumenta  pro- 
pos.  14  inferius  in  hoc  progym.  [Apiar.  IV.,  progym.  I., 
prop.  X."] 


82  PERPETUiTM  mobile; 

Horaria   dioptrica,  ^  catoptrica.     Machine  perpetuo   tnotu  diu, 
tioctuq;  soils  cursum  sequentes^  acper  horas  aimentientes, 

1.  Pertinent  ad  paradoxa  gnomonica  horologia  dioptrica, 
velut  scaphia,  in  qidbus  aqua  infusis  umbra  gnomonis  per 

Horaria  di       a^^am    refracta   horas    indicat,     Reuise   nos 
triea,  in  qui^    initio  Apiarii  nostri  astronomici,  ubi  modum 
hora  per  refrao-    apposuimus     metendi     organic^    quantitatem 
*^'*^  anguli  refractorii  per  scaphia.     Nihil  nos  hie 

de  iis  dioptricis  horariis,  quia  nihil  habent  in  nouitate  utili- 
tatis,  inuno  sol6m  addunt  plures  difficultates  fabricse,  ac  usui 
horariorum  in  scaphiis  usitatorum. 

2.  Sunt  et  horaria  catoptrica,  in  quibus  et  horarise  linese 
inuersse,  et  specillum  loco  verticis  gnomonici  reflectit  radium 

.  solis   ad  horas   indicandas.     De  quibus  vide 

triea^^in* ^iSn  opusculum  doctissimum  erudissimi P.  Athanasii 
horas  per  rejiexio-  Kircheri  e  nostra  Societate,  qui  imus  e  tribus 
***"**  fuit  c^soribus,  et  adprobatoribus  Romse  meo- 

rum  Apiariorum.  Novitas  in  iis  catoptricis  horariis  ingeniosa, 
et  in  eo  prsecipue  utilis  est  qu6d  horas  indicet  intracubicula,  et 
conclavia  in  umbra,  ne  oculorum  aciem  prsestringat  solis 
fulgor,  &c.  Nos  in  sequenti  capite  aliquem  usum  catoptri- 
cum  no  catoptricorum  horariorum  dabimus,  quern  apud  alios 
non  vidimus. 

3.  Machinas  horarias  aliqui  machinati  sGt,  in  quibus  vel 
rotulanmi  supra  aquam  libratarum  mobilis  index,  vel  globulus 
in  aqua  mobilis  diu,  noctuq ;  perpetua,  lentissimaq ;  rotatione 
motum  solis  sequuntur*  Hse  machinse  non  tam  ad  mathema- 
ticiun  quam  ad  physicum  philosophimi  pertinent,  et  extra 
nostrum  institutum  sunt,  qui  mathematica  inventa  geometricis 
demonstrationibus  confirmata  profitemur  ;  ob  admirandam 
tamen  novitatem  digna  sunt  ea  horaria,  quae  inter  nostra 
paradoxa  reponantur  accipe  verba,  et  iconem  unius  ^  prae- 

dictis  machmae,  ut  iacent  apud  P.  Sylvestrum 
Mira   horaria    Petra  sanctam  nostra  societatis,  in  expolitis- 

machtTia  cumotu       .  j  -i    i»      t_        •-.•      Tt,    a  '      n 

perpetuo.  s^^o  opere  de  symbous  heroicis  ub.  4  m  fine 

capitis  6.  Scio  magnetis  lapidis  effecta  pror- 
sus  admiranda  esse,  atq ;  ex  illius  virtute  prodire  semper 
aliquid  novi.  Sic  Leodu  nuper  in  Collegio  Anglorti  nostras 
Societatis  P.  Fraciscus  Linus  Magister  matheseos  excogitavit 
felicissime  orbem,  qui  intra  phialam  (velut  B  C  A)  in  circun- 
fusae  aquae  centro  (sicut  in  circunfuso  aere  tellus)  haeret 
secreto  suae  molis  libramento  (ut  ad  D).     Sed  conuersionem 


OB,    SEABCH   FOB   SELP-MOTIYE   POWEB.  33 

c»li  tamen  ab  ortu  in  occasum  arcana  vi,  et  veluti  quodam 
amore  consectatur,  spatioq ;  Yigintiquatuor  horamm  omnino 
circTunagitur. 

Piscicnlus  interest  indicia  I060  est  (ceu  in  G)  et  quasi  nandi 
peritus,  ac  libratus  pondere  sue  praetereuntes  horas  veluti 
admiras  designat  rostro,  easq ;  oculis  de  fixis  intuetur.  Mota 
phiala,  si  aquae  impetus  detur,  mox  iter  sua  sponte  orbis 
releget ;  penitusq ;  ratio  temporis  constabit,  postquam  tran- 
quillitas  redierit. 

Indicem  quoq ;  in  pbiala  constituas,  et  indicabit  perinde 
horas*  Sed  et  solem  finge  in  eodem  orbe,  venmi  solem  in 
ortu,  meridie,  occasu  sequetur,  atq ;  adeo  e  sede  sua  excussas 
requiret  illic6,  et  repetet  stationem  syderi  consentaneam. 
Tantum  plus  nimis  adproper  abit,  quia  nescit  amor  tardita- 
tem :  nilulominua  dum  aliquoties  transiliet,  resilietq ;  demum 
ob  inebit  locum,  ex  cuo  citra  errorem  solis  comes  denu6  ibit. 

Vitreus  orbis  A  C  B  sustinetur,  ut  vides,  lector,  ab  aqua 
peluis  C  E  F  B. 

Egent  tamen  etiam  bse  machinse,  quemadmodum  et  autho- 
mata  horaria  ex  ponderibus,  vel  ex  chalybe  contorto,  subinde 
aliqua  restauratione,  qida  deniq ;  nullum  k  mortalibus  inven- 
turn  est  inunortale,  ac  vera  perpetuimi.*  [Apiar.  IX.,  progym. 
v.,  prop.  XI.] 


♦  Apiaria  Universae  PhilopophisB  Mathematicaa  in  quibua  Para'Ioxa. 
By  Mario  Bettinu  Bononieusi  e  Soc.  Jesu.    Bonnoniae,  1615.     FoLo. 

E 


34  PEEPETUUM  mobile; 


CHAPTER  II. 

INVENTIONS    OF     THE    MABQUIS     OF    WOBCESTEB,     AND 
COUNCILLOR    OBFFIKEUS. 

Edwabd  Somebset,  sixth  Earl  and  second  Marquis  of 
Worcester,  bom  at  Ragland,  near  Monmouth,  author  of 
the  "  Century  of  Inventions,"  was  much  distinguished  in 
his  youth  by  King  Charles  I.,  during  several  visits  he  made 
to  Ragland  Castle,  and  who  subsequently  appointed  him 
Lord-Lieutenant  of  North  Wales,  addressing  him  as  Earl  of 
Glamorgan,  until  he  succeeded  to  his  heritable  honours. 
Walpole  has  been  justly  censured  for  describing  him  as  "  a 
fanatic  projector,"  and  his  "  Century  "  as  "  an  amazing  piece 
of  folly."  He  died  in  retirement  near  London,  1667,  in 
reduced  circimistances. 

The  following  is  the  fifty-sixth  article  transcribed  from 
the  manuscript  of  the  "  Century  of  Inventions,"  dated  1659, 
and  indexed  therein  as  "  An  advantageous  change  of 
centers :" — 

56.  To  proidde  and  make  that  all  y*  weights  of  y*  defcending 
syde  of  a  wheele  shal  be  perpetually  further  from  y*  center, 
then  thofe  of  y*  mounting  syde,  and  yett  equall  in  number 
and  heft  of  y*  one  syde  as  y*  other.  A  most  incredible  thing 
if  not  scene,  butt  tryed  before  y*  late  King  of  happy  and 
glorious  memorye  in  y*  Tower  by  my  directions,  two  Extra- 
ordnary  Embaffadors  accompanying  his  Ma*^®  and  y*  D.  of 
Richmond,  D.  Hamilton,  and  most  part  of  y*  Court  attending 
him.  The  wheele  was  14  foote  ouer,  and  40  weights  of  50 
p*^  apiece ;  S'  Wm.  Belford,  then  Lieu*  of  y*  Tower,  and  yet 
lining  can  justify  it  with  seuerall  others ;  They  all  saw  that 
noe  sooner  these  great  weights  passed  y*  Diameter  Line  of  y* 
vpper  syde  but  they  himg   a  foote  further  from  y®  center. 


OB,    SEABCH   FOB   SBLF-MOTIVB   POWER.  36 

nor  no  sooner  passed  the  Diameter  line  of  the  lower  syde, 
butt  they  hung  a  foote  nearer ;  bee  pleaded  to  judge  y  conse- 
quence** 

Note  on  above,  from  an  edition  of  the  "  Century  of  Inven- 
tions,'* edited  by  Charles  F.  Partington.     1825  : — 

The  celebrated  problem  of  a  self-impelling  power,  though 
denied  by  Huygens  and  De  la  Hire,  who  have  attempted 
to  demonstrate  its  fallacy,  has  yet  been  supported  by 
some  of  the  most  celebrated  among  the  ancient  as  well  as 
modem  philosophers.  Inniimerable  have  been  the  machines 
to  which  the  idea  of  the  perpetual  motion  has  given  birth, 
but  the  most  celebrated  among  the  modems  is  the  Orffpean 
Wheel.  This  machine,  according  to  the  description  given  of 
it  by  M.  QrsBvesande,  in  his  "  CEuvres  Philosophiques,"  con- 
sisted of  a  large  circular  wheel  or  drum,  twelve  feet  in  dia- 
meter, and  fourteen  inches  in  depth.  It  was  composed  of  a 
number  of  thin  deals,  the  spaces  between  which  were  covered 
with  wax  cloth,  in  order  to  conceal  the  inner  parts  of  it.  On 
giving  the  wheel,  which  rested  on  the  two  extremities  of  an 
iron  axis,  a  slight  impulse  in  either  direction,  its  motion  was 
gradually  accelerated ;  so  that,  after  two  or  three  revolu- 
tions, it  is  said  to  have  acquired  so  great  a  velocity  as  to  make 
twenty-five  or  more  turns  in  a  minute :  and  it  appears  to  have 
preserved  this  rapid  motion  for  the  space  of  two  months, 
during  which  time  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse,  in  whose  cham- 
ber it  was  placed  to  prevent  a  possibility  of  collusion,  kept 
his  own  seal  on  the  outer  door.  At  the  end  of  that  time  it 
was  stopped  to  prevent  the  wear  of  the  materials.  Graeve- 
sande,  who  had  been  an  eye-witness  to  the  performance  of 
this  machine,  examined  all  the  external  parts  of  it,  and  was 
convinced  that  there  could  not  be  any  commimication  between 
it  and  the  adjacent  rooms.  Orflfyreus,  however,  having 
been  informed  of  the  ill-timed  curiosity  of  the  professor,  and 
incensed  at  the  refusal  of  a  premium  of  twenty  thousand 
pounds,  which  he  had  made  a  sine  qua  non  for  disclosing 
the  mechanism  of  its  construction,  broke  the  whole  apparatus 
into  atoms,  and  his  life  was  soon  after  sacrificed  to  chagrin  at 
his  disappointment.  The  analogy  between  the  Marquis's 
description  and  the  Orffyrean  Wheel  is  sufficiently  evident ; 
and  the  experiment  having  been  made  in  the  Tower  more 

*  See  Harleian  MS.,  X4o.  2,428,  In  the  British  Museum. 


36  PEKPETUXTM   MOBILE; 

than  fifty  years  prior  to  the  attempt  of  the  German  mechanic^ 
it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  idea  was  derived  from  the 
noble  author's  work. 

Mr.  Partington,  in  his  "  Manual  of  Natural  Philosophy,'* 
writes  as  follows  on  Perpetual  Motion : — 

Having  taken  a  brief  review  of  the  simple  machines  which 
are  usually  considered  under  the  general  character  of  mechani- 
cal powers,  it  may  now  be  advisable  to  examine  how  far  a 
combination  of  these  powers  can  tend  towards  producing  a 
perpetual  motion.  There  are  few  subjects,  indeed,  that  have 
more  engaged  the  attention  of  the  mechanical  world  in  every 
age,  than  the  solution  of  this  apparently  difficult  problem  ; 
and  their  repeated  failure  has  been  no  bar  to  renewed  attempts. 

It  may,  indeed,  be  demonstrated  that  a  perpetual  motion 
is  impossible,  at  least  by  the  ordinary  laws  of  nature  ;  for  to 
be  possible,  it  is  necessary  that  the  effect  should  become 
alternately  the  cause,  and  the  cause  the  effect.  It  would  be 
necessary,  for  example,  that  a  weight  raised  to  a  certain 
height  by  another  weight,  should  in  its  turn  raise  the  second 
weight  to  the  height  from  which  it  descended.  Now  this 
we  know  to  be  impossible. 

Amongst  the  various  attempts  at  a  perpetual  motion,  that  of 
a  circular  wheel,  described  by  the  Marquis  of  Worcester  and 
Orfiyreus,  offered  at  first  view  the  greatest  chance  of  success. 

The  Marquis  of  Worcester's  account  of  a  perpetual 
motion  occurs  in  the  fifty-sixth  article  of  his  "  Century  of 
Inventions."* 

In  this  cylindrical  wheel,  or 
drum,  are  formed  channels,  con- 
taining balls  of  lead,  which  alter- 
nately approach  and  recede  from 
the  centre  ;  and  it  would  seem, 
upon  the  principle  of  the  lever, 
that  as  the  weights  are  always 
further  from  the  centre  on  one 
side  than  on  the  other,  a  continu- 
ous rotatory  motion  must  be  pro- 
duced. 

But,  notwithstanding  the  spe- 
cious appearance  of  this  reason- 

*  See  preceding  article. 


OE,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  3? 

ing,  experience  has  proved  that  the  machine  will  not  turn 
perpetually ;  and  it  will  he  seen,  on  inspection,  that,  though 
some  of  the  weights  are  more  distant  from  the  centre  than 
others,  yet  there  is  always  a  proportionably  smaller  number 
of  them  on  the  side  at  which  they  have  the  greatest  power, 
so  that  these  two  circumstances  precisely  counterbalance  each 
other.* 

The  Marquis's  wheel  will  be  found  often  referred  to  in 
notices  occurring  in  succeeding  pages ;  indeed,  the  invention 
and  its  ingenious  author  are  sufficiently  remarkable,  no  one 
having  been  able  to  reproduce  a  wheel  possessing  the  precise 
properties  he  mentions,  or  satisfactorily  contradict  the  state- 
ment he  has  made. 

The  only  other  invention  we  have  here  to  consider  is  the 
celebrated  one  constructed  by  Jean  Ernest  Elie-Bessler 
Orffyre  or  Orphyrreus,  who  is  usually  named  Orffyreus 
when  noticed  in  English  and  German f  works  on  mechanics.  He 
was  bom  in  1680,  near  Zittan,  in  the  department  of  Alsace, 
France,  and  early  studied  theology  and  medicine,  but  his 
erratic  genius  was  only  to  be  satisfied  by  engaging  himself 
in  the  pursuit  of  a  variety  of  the  mechanical  arts  and  paint- 
ing. He  asserts  that  it  was  during  his  search  for  whatever 
might  prove  curious  and  valuable  that  he  discovered  Perpetual 
Motion,  and  between  the  years  1712  and  1719,  made  two 
machines  on  his  system ;  one  he  desired  to  exhibit  publicly, 
but  broke  it  up  rather  than  submit  to  the  payment  of  the 
licence  or  tax  required  by  the  Government  of  Cassel;  the 
other  he  destroyed  after  its  having  been  imfavourably 
reported  on  by  M.'S  Grsevesande.  He  published,  in  Ger- 
man and  Latin,  a  book,  or  pamphlet,  entitled  "  Le  Mouve- 
ment  Perpetuel  Triomphant,"  quarto,  dated  Cassel,  1719.J 

*  A  Manual  of  Katural  and  Experimental  Philosophy.  By  Charles 
F.  Partington.     8vo. 

t  Leupold  styles  him  Herr  Rath  Orffvreus,  he  heing  one  of  the  Coun- 
cillors to  the  Prince  of  Hesse  Cassel.     [See  Appendix  A.] 

X  See  Dezohry  and  Bachelet's  Dictionnaire  Generale  de  Biographie, 
&c.    Paris,  1857.     Royal  Svo. 


88  PBRPETUUM   MOBII.E; 

Other  accounts  differ,  as  will  presently  appear,  respecting 
the  breaking  of  the  second  machine;  and,  on  insufficient 
authority,  Mr.  Partington  styles  him  a  "  German  mechanic/' 
Dr.  William  Kenrick,  among  his  miscellaneous  works,  wrote 
"An  Account  of  the  Automaton,  or  Perpetual  Motion  of 
Orflfyreus,  with  additional  remarks,"  in  editions  dated  1770 
and  1771.     Orfiyreus  died  November,  1745. 

We  shall  now  proceed  to  giye  notices  and  attempted 
refutations  of  his  and  supposed  like  inventions. 

The  "  Annual  Register  "  for  1763  gives  the  following  inte- 
resting correspondence  about  Orffyreus  and  his  wheel : — 

On  the  possibility^  and  use  towards  finding  the  longitude^  of  a  Perpetual 
Motion, 

Sib, — The  "Utrecht  Gazette"  some  time  since  informed 
us,  "  that  a  mechanic*  of  East-Friesland  hath  invented  a 
machine,  which,  being  once  put  in  motion,  keeps  perpetually 
going  till  such  time  as  the  materials  of  which  it  is  composed 
are  fallen  to  decay,  or  the  structure  of  the  machine  itself  is 
altered."  To  this  accoimt  some  blundering  news-writer,  I 
suppose,  has  added  the  following  reflection :  "  If  this  be 
true,  we  have  here  a  discovery  of  the  longitude  under  aU  the 
variations  of  climes,  seasons,  weather,  &c.,  an  invention 
which  the  great  Leibnitz  and  Bemouilli  thought  as  impos- 
sible as  the  squaring  of  the  circle,  or  the  discovery  of  an  uni- 
versal panacea."  Now,  Sir,  whether  the  information  con- 
tained in  the  above  article  be  true  or  false,  or  whether  such  a 
discovery  be  practicable  or  only  chimerical,  certain  it  is  we 
should  be  no  otherwise  benefited  by,  in  regard  to  the  longi- 
tude, than  as  it  might  be  productive  of  a  time-keeper,  that 
would  not  want  winding  up.  It  is,  however,  an  equable  as 
well  as  a  constant  motion,  that  is  wanted  to  determine  the 
longitude ;  so  that  every  such  machine  must  be  regulated  by 
a  pendulum,  and  would  then,  as  well  as  in  other  respects,  be 
subject  to  the  variations  of  climes  and  seasons.  Again,  the 
reflector  is  mistaken  in  saying  that  both  Leibnitz  and  Ber- 
nouilli  thought  this  discovery  impossible.  The  former, 
indeed,  constantly  affirms  its  impossibility;  and  yet  in  his 
disputes  with  Papin,  published  in  the  "  Acta  Lipsiensia,"  he 
declares,  that  if  the  force  of  a  body  in  motion  be  in  a  direct 


OB,    SEAECH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  39 

proportion  to  its  velocity  (as  it  is  now  universally  known  to 
be)  a  perpetual  motion  must  be  possible.  And  with  regard 
to  Bemonilli,  you  may  find  in  the  first  volume  of  his  works, 
page  41  Sf  seq.y  that  he  not  only  declares  it  to  be  possible,  but 
also  that  he  had  actually  conceived  a  method  whereby  it 
might  be  rendered  practicable.  De  la  Hire  and  other  eminent 
mathematicians  pretend,  indeed,  to  have  demonstrated  the 
impossibility  of  such  a  discovery.  But  it  is  certain  that 
others  have  not  thought  those  demonstrations  applicable  to 
all  possible  machines.  Among  these  may  be  mentioned  the 
late  Professor  'S  Gravesande  of  Leyden,  undoubtedly  one  of 
the  first  mathematicians,  and  as  well  versed  in  geometry  and 
mechanics  as  any  man  of  his  time.  Yet  this  gentleman 
wrote  a  treatise  professedly  to  prove  the  possibility  in  ques- 
tion ;  nay,  it  appears  that  he  went  so  far  as  to  think  it  had 
been  actually  discovered  in  the  machine  of  Orfyreus,  that 
made  such  a  noise  at  Hesse  Cassel  about  forty  years  ago ; 
and  which  he  examined  at  the  desire  of  the  landgrave,  with 
the  utmost  care  and  attention.  Indeed,  I  cannot  help  think- 
ing that  the  dispute  subsisting  between  the  philosophers  tjon- 
ceming  the  momenta  of  moving  bodies,  which  was  at  that 
time  at  its  highest  warmth,  prevented  that  machine  from 
being  so  much  attended  to  as  it  deserved.  In  this  opinion 
also  I  am  strongly  confirmed  by  a  letter,  written  by  that  pro- 
fessor to  Sir  Isaac  Newton  on  the  subject  of  that  machine  ; 
which  letter,  as  I  know  not  where  it  is  to  be  foimd  in  the 
English  language,  I  have  translated  from  the  French,*  for 
the  information  or  entertainment  of  your  readers : — 

A  Letter  from  Professor  'S  Oravesande  to  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  con- 
cerning Orfyreus' s  Wheel. 

Sib, — ^Doctor  Desaguliers  has  doubtless  shown  you  the 
letter  that  Baron  Fischer  wrote  to  him  some  time  ago,  about 
the  wheel  of  Orfyreus ;  which  the  inventor  affirms  to  be  a 
perpetual  motion.  The  landgrave,  who  is  a  lover  of  the 
sciences  and  fine  arts,  and  neglects  no  opportunity  to  encou- 
rage the  several  discoveries  and  improvements  that  are  pre- 
sented him,  was  desirous  of  having  this  machine  made  known 
to  the  world,  for  the  sake  of  public  utility.  To  this  end  he 
engaged  me  to  examine  it ;   wishing  that,  if  it  should  be 

*  Printed  in  the  **Mercure  Historique  et  Politique,"  September,  1721. 


40  PESPETtrUM   MOSILS; 

found  to  answer  the  pretensions  of  the  inventor,  it  might  b0 
made  known  to  persons  of  greater  abilities,  who  might  deduce 
from  it  those  services  which  are  naturally  to  be  expected  from 
so  singular  an  invention.  You  will  not  be  displeased,  I  pre- 
sume, with  a  circumstantial  account  of  this  examination ;  I 
transmit  you  therefore  a  detail  of  the  most  particular  circum- 
stances observable  on  an  exterior  view  of  a  machine,  con- 
cerning which  the  sentiments  of  most  people  are  greatly 
divided,  while  almost  all  the  mathematicians  are  against  it. 
The  majority  maintain  the  impossibility  of  a  perpetual 
motion,  and  hence  it  is  that  so  little  attention  hath  been  paid 
to  Orfyreus  and  his  invention. 

For  my  part,  however,  though  I  confess  my  abilities  infe- 
rior to  those  of  many  who  have  given  their  demonstrations  of 
this  impossibility  ;  yet  I  will  communicate  to  you  the  real 
sentiments  with  which  I  entered  on  the  examination  of  this 
machine.  It  is  now  more  than  seven  years  since  I  conceived 
I  discovered  the  paralogism  of  those  demonstrations,  in  thaty 
though  true  in  themselves,  they  were  not  applicable  to  all 
possible  machines ;  and  have  ever  since  remained  perfectly 
persuaded,  it  might  be  demonstrated  that  a  perpetual  motion 
involved  no  contradiction ;  it  appearing  to  me  that  Leibnitz 
was  wrong  in  laying  down  the  impossibility  of  the  perpetual 
motion  as  an  axiom.  Notwithstanding  this  persuasion,  how- 
ever, I  was  far  from  believing  Orfyreus  capable  of  making 
such  a  discovery,  looking  upon  it  as  an  invention  not  to  be 
made  (if  ever)  till  after  many  other  previous  discoveries. 
But  since  I  have  examined  the  machine,  it  is  impossible  for 
me  to  express  my  surprise. 

The  inventor  has  a  turn  for  mechanics,  but  is  far  from 
being  a  profoimd  mathematician,  and  yet  his  machine  hath 
something  in  it  prodigiously  astonishing,  even  tho'  it  should 
be  an  imposition.  The  following  is  a  description  of  the 
external  parts  of  the  machine,  the  inside  of  which  the 
inventor  will  not  permit  to  be  seen,  lest  any  one  should  rob 
him  of  his  secret.  It  is  an  hollow  wheel,  or  kind  of  drum, 
about  fourteen  inches  thick,  and  twelve  feet  diameter  ;  being 
very  light,  as  it  consists  of  several  cross  pieces  of  wood 
framed  together ;  the  whole  of  which  is  covered  over  with 
canvas,  to  prevent  the  inside  from  being  seen.  Through  the 
centre  of  this  wheel  or  drum  runs  an  axis  of  about  six  inches 
diameter,  terminated  at  both  ends  by  iron  axes  of  about  three- 


OB,    SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   FOWEB.  41 

quarters  of  an  inch  diameter  upon  wliich  the  machine  turns. 
I  have  examined  these  axes,  and  am  firmly  persuaded  that 
nothing  from  without  the  wheel  in  the  least  contributes  to 
its  motion.  When  I  turned  it  but  gently,  it  always  stood 
still  as  soon  as  I  took  away  my  hand ;  but  when  I  gave  it  any 
tolerable  degree  of  velocity,  I  was  always  obliged  to  stop  it 
again  by  force ;  for  when  I  let  it  go,  it  acquired  in  two  or 
three  turns  its  greatest  velocity,  after  which  it  revolved  for 
twenty-five  or  twenty-six  times  in  a  minute.  This  motion  it 
preserved  some  time  ago  for  two  months,  in  an  apartment  of 
the  castle :  the  door  and  windows  of  which  were  locked  and 
sealed,  so  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  fraud.  At  the 
expiration  of  that  term  indeed  his  serene  highness  ordered  the 
ap€Lrtment  to  be  opened,  and  the  machine  to  be  stopped,  lest, 
as  it  was  only  a  model,  the  parts  might  suffer  by  so  much 
agitation.  The  landgrave  being  himself  present  on  my  exa- 
mination of  this  macHne,  I  took  the  liberty  to  ask  him,  as  he 
had  seen  the  inside  of  it,  whether,  after  being  in  motion  for  a 
certain  time,  no  alteration  was  made  in  the  component  parts ; 
or  whether  none  of  those  parts  might  be  suspected  of  con- 
cealing some  fraud :  on  which  his  serene  highness  assured 
me  to  the  contrary,  and  that  the  machine  was  very  simple. 

You  see,  Sir,  I  have  not  had  any  absolute  demonstration, 
that  the  principle  of  motion  which  is  certainly  within  the 
wheel,  is  really  a  principle  of  perpetual  motion ;  but  at  the 
same  time  it  cannot  be  denied  me  that  I  have  received  very 
good  reasons  to  think  so,  which  is  a  strong  presumption  in 
favour  of  the  inventor.  The  landgrave  hath  made  Orfyrcus 
a  very  handsome  present,  to  be  let  into  the  secret  of  the 
machine,  under  an  engagement  nevertheless  not  to  discover, 
or  to  make  any  use  of  it,  before  the  inventor  may  procure  a 
sufficient  reward  for  making  his  discovery  public. 

I  am  very  sensible.  Sir,  that  it  is  in  England  only  the  arts  and 
sciences  are  so  generally  cultivated  as  to  afford  any  prospect 
of  the  inventor's  acquiring  a  reward  adequate  to  this  disco- 
very. He  requires  nothing  more  than  the  assurance  of 
having  it  paid  him  in  case  his  machine  is  found  to  be  really  a 
perpetual  motion ;  and  as  he  desires  nothing  more  than  this 
assurance  till  the  construction  of  the  machine  be  displayed 
and  fairly  examined,  it  cannot  be  expected  he  should  submit 
to  such  examination  before  such  assurance  be  given  him. 
Now,  Sir,  as  it  would  conduce  to  public  utility,  as  well  as  to 


42  PEBPETur^M  mobile; 

the  advancement  of  science,  to  discover  the  reality  or  tlie 
fraud  of  this  invention,  I  conceive  the  relation  of  the  above 
circumstances  could  not  fail  of  being  acceptable.      I  am,  &c. 

Nothing  can  be  more  in  favour  of  Orfyreus  than  this  testi- 
m.ony  of  Mr.  'S  Gravesande ;  so  that,  on  a  supposition  that  the 
Oazette-writer  of  Utrecht  hath  not  imposed  upon  us,  the 
East-Frieslander  hath  probably  done  no  more  than  Orfyreus 
did  before  him ;  the  world  having  been  so  long  deprived  of 
the  advantages  that  must  necessarily  attend  the  publication 
cf  such  a  discovery,  from  the  effects  of  a  mistaken  prejudice, 
equally  destructive  to  the  improvement  of  the  arts  and 
sciences,  as  to  the  happiness  of  mankind.* 

The  following  remarks  of  Dr.  Desaguliers  on  Perpetual 
Motion,  in  the  thirty-first  volume  of  the  "  Philosophical  Trans- 
actions," are  repeated  in  the  first  volume  of  his  "Course  of 
Experimental  Philosophy,"  and  are  thus  introduced: — 

14.  [70. — Pretenders  to  perpetual  motions,  and  those  who 
promise  greater  effects  by  machinery  than  is  conformable  to 
the  reciprocal  proportion  between  the  intensities  of  the  powers 
and  weights,  and  their  velocities.]  About  the  year  1720  and 
1721,  the  late  John  Rowley,  mathematical  instrument  maker, 
talk'd  so  much  of  the  wheel  which  he  had  seen  at  Hesse- 
Cassel  (which  he  believed  to  be  a  perpetual  motion,  as  well 
as  a  great  many  persons  in  that  country)  that  besides  the 
common  herd  of  Perpetual  Motion  men,  which  every  age 
affords,  some  very  ingenious  men  made  an  attempt  that  way, 
and  were  countenanc'd  in  it  by  some  great  mathematicians, 
who,  when  the  scheme  was  laid  before  them,  declared  they 
knew  no  reason  why  it  should  not  do.  But  as  I  always  de- 
clar'd  against  all  projects  tending  that  way,  I  was  desired  at 
that  time  to  publish  my  reasons  why  the  thing  seemed  impos- 
sible or  impracticable  ;  which  I  did  in  the  "  Philosophical 
Transactions"  (No.  369)  in  such  a  manner  as  might  dissuade 
people  at  first  from  any  such  attempts,  in  which  so  much 
time  and  money  have  been  lost.  I  have  here  printed  the 
whole  account  again.f 

*  The  Annual  Register,  for  the  year  1763,  vol.  6,  pp.  126-128. 

t  A  Course  of  Experimental  Philosophy.  By  J.  T.  Desaguh'er^-, 
LL  D.,  F.R.S.     2  vols.    4fto.     Second  Edition,  174f5.  .  Vol.  1,  p.  183. 


OB,    SBABCH    FOB   SELP-MOTIVE    POWEB.  43 

[The  annexed  paper, from  the  "  Philosophical  Transactions,'' 
is  the  one  above-named : — ] 

Remarks  on  some  Attempts  made  towards  a  Perpetual  Motion  ;  by 
the  Rsverend  Dr.  Desaguliers,  F,E.S. 

The  wheel  at  Hesse-Cassel,  made  by  Monsieur  Orfire.us, 
and  by  him  called  a  perpetual  motion,  has  of  late  been  so 
much  talk'd  of,  on  account  of  its  wonderful  phaenomena,  that 
a  great  many  people  have  believed  it  to  be  actually  a  self- 
moving  engine  ;  and  accordingly  have  attempted  to  imitate  it 
as  such.  Now,  as  a  great  deal  of  lime  and  money  is  spent  in 
those  endeavours,  I  was  willing  (for  the  sake  of  those  that 
try  experiments  with  that  view)  to  shew  that  the  principle 
which  most  of  them  go  upon  is  false,  and  can  by  no  means 
produce  a  perpetual  motion. 

They  take  it  for  granted,  that  if  a  weight  descending  in  a 
wheel,  at  a  determined  distance  from  the  centre,  does  in  its 
accent  approach  nearer  to  it ;  such  a  weight  in  its  descent 
will  always  preponderate,  and  cause  a  weight  equal  to  it  to 
rise,  provided  it  comes  nearer  the  centre  in  its  rise ;  and 
accordingly  as  itself  rises,  will  be  overbalanced  by  another 
weight  equal  to  it ;  and  therefore  they  endeavour  by  various 
contrivances  to  produce  that  effect,  as  if  the  consequence  of 
it  would  be  a  perpetual  motion. 

But  I  shall  shew  that  they  mistake  one  particular  case  of  a 
general  theorem,  or  rather  a  corollory  of  it,  for  the  theorem 
itself.    The  theorem  is  as  follows  : — 

Thbob.— If  one  weight  in  its  descent  does  by  means  of  any 
contrivance  cause  another  weight  to  ascend  with  a  less  mo- 
mentum or  quantity  of  motion  than  itself,  it  will  preponderate 
and  raise  the  other  weight. 

Cob.  1. — ^Therefore  if  the  weights  be  equal,  the  descend- 
ing weight  must  have  more  velocity  than  the  ascending 
weight,  because  the  momentum  is  made  up  of  the  weight 
multiplied  into  the  quantity  of  matter. 

Cob.  2. — ^Therefore  if  a  leaver  or  balance  have  equal 
weights  fastened  or  hanging  at  its  ends,  and  the  brachia  be 
ever  so  little  unequal,  that  weight  will  preponderate  which  is 
farthest  from  the  centre. 

Scholium. — ^This  second  corollary  causes  the  mistake ; 
because  those,  who  think  the  velocity  of  the  weight  is  the 
line  it  describes,  expect  that  that  weight  shall  be  overpoised. 


44  PERpmrcM  xoblle: 

-which  descrihes  the  shortest  Hne,  and  therefore  contrive  ma- 
chines to  cause  the  ascending  weight  to  describe  a  shorter 
line  than  the  descending  weight.  As  for  example,  in  the 
circle  A  D  B  a  ^Fig.  3^  Ae  weights  A  and  B  being  supposed 
eqnaU  thej  imagine,  that  if  \}>j  any  contriTance  whatever) 
whilst  the  weight  A  describes  the  arc  A  a,  the  weight  B  is 
carried  in  any  arc,  as  B  &,  so  as  to  come  nearer  the  centre  in 
its  rising,  than  if  it  went  up  the  arc  B  D ;  the  said  weight 
shall  be  oveipois'd,  and  consequently,  by  a  number  of  such 
weights,  a  perpetual  motion  wfll  be  produced. 

'Diis  is  attempted  by  several  contrivances*  which  all  depend 
upon  this  Mse  principle ;  but  I  shall  only  mention  one,  which 
is  represented  by  Fig.  4,  where  a  wheel  having  two  parallel 
circumferences,  has  the  space  between  them  divided  into 
cells,  which  being  curv'd,  will  (when  the  wheel  goes  round) 
cause  weights  placed  loose  in  the  said  cells,  to  descend  on 
the  side  A,  at  the  outer  circumference  of  the  wheel,  and  on 
the  side  D  to  ascend  in  the  line  B  6  6  &,  which  comes  nearer 
the  centre,  and  touches  the  inner  circumference  of  the  wheel. 
In  a  machine  of  this  kind,  the  weights  will  indeed  move  in 
such  a  manner,  if  the  wheel  be  tum'd  round,  but  will  never 
be  the  cause  of  the  wheel's  going  round.  Such  a  machine  is 
mentioned  by  the  Marquis  of  Worcester,  in  his  *'  Century  of 
Inventions,"  in  the  following  words.  No.  56  : — 

"  To  provide  and  make  that  all  the  weights  of  the  descending 
side  of  a  wheel,  shall  be  perpetually  farther  from  the  centre, 
than  those  of  the  mounting  side,  and  yet  equal  in  number 
and  heft  to  the  one  side  as  the  other.  A  most  incredible 
thing,  if  not  seen ;  but  tried  before  the  late  King  (of  blessed 
memory)  in  the  Tower  by  my  directions,  two  extraordinary 
ambassadors  accompanying  his  Majesty,  and  the  Duke  of 
Richmond,  and  Duke  of  Hamilton,  with  most  of  the  Court 
attending  him.  The  wheel  was  fourteen  foot  over,  and 
had  fourty  weights  of  fifty  pounds  a  piece.  Sir  William 
Balfore,  then  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  can  justify  it,  with 
several  others.  They  all  saw,  that  no  sooner  these  great 
weights  passed  the  diameter  line  of  the  lower  side,  but  they 
hung  a  foot  farther  from  the  centre ;  nor  no  sooner  passed 
the  diameter  line  of  the  upper  side,  but  they  himg  a  foot 
nearer.     Be  pleased  to  judge  of  the  consequence." 

Now  the  consequence  of  this,  and  such  like  machines,  is 
nothing  less  than  a  perpetual  motion ;  and  the  fallacy  is  this  : 


(Fig.  3.) 


(Pig-  *.) 


(Fig.  5.) 


'  PhiloiopWcal  Tratifactions."    No.  369.    Vol.31.    1720-1721. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  47 

The  velocity  of  any  weight  is  not  the  line,  which  it  describes 
in  general,  but  the  height  that  it  rises  up  to,  or  falls  from, 
with  respect  to  its  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  earth.  So 
that  when  the  weight  (Fig.  3)  describes  the  arc  A  a,  its 
velocity  is  the  line  A  C,  which  shews  the  perpendicular 
descent  (or  measures  how  much  it  is  come  nearer  to  the 
centre  of  the  earth),  and  likewise  the  line  B  C  denotes  the 
velocity  of  the  weight  B,  or  the  height  that  it  rises  to,  when 
it  ascends  in  any  of  the  arcs  B  b,  instead  of  the  arc  B  D : 
so  that  in  this  case  whether  the  weight  B,  in  its  ascent  be 
brought  nearer  the  centre  or  not,  it  loses  no  velocity,  which 
it  ought  to  do,  in  order  to  be  raised  up  by  the  weight  A. 
Nay,  the  weight  in  rising  nearer  the  centre  of  a  wheel,  may 
not  only  not  lose  of  its  velocity,  but  be  made  to  gain  velocity, 
in  proportion  to  the  velocity  of  its  counterpoising  weights, 
that  descend  in  the  circumference  of  the  opposite  side  of  the 
wheel;  for  if  we  consider  two  radii  of  the  wheel,  one  of 
which  is  horizontal,  and  the  other  (fastened  to  and  moving 
with  it)  inclined  under  the  horizon  in  an  angle  of  60  degr. 
(Fig.  5)  and  by  the  descent  of  the  end  B  of  the  radius  B  C, 
the  radius  CD  by  its  motion  causes  the  weight  at  D,  to  rise 
up  the  line  p  P,  which  is  in  a  plane  that  stops  the  said  weight 
from  rising  in  the  curve  D  A,  that  weight  will  gain  velocity, 
and  in  the  beginning  of  its  rise,  it  will  have  twice  the  velocity 
of  the  weight  at  B ;  and  consequently,  instead  of  being  rais'd, 
will  overpoise,  if  it  be  equal  to  the  last  mentioned  weight. 
And  this  velocity  will  be  so  much  the  greater,  in  proportion 
as  the  angle  A  C  D  is  greater,  or  as  the  plane  P  p  (along 
which  the  weight  D  must  rise)  is  nearer  to  the  centre. 
Indeed,  if  the  weight  at  B  (Fig.  3)  could  by  any  means  be 
lifted  up  to  p,  and  move  in  the  arc  /3  5,  the  end  would  be 
answer'd;  because  then  the  velocity  would  be  diminished, 
and  become  /3  C. 

Experiment  (Fig.  5). — Take  the  leaver  BCD,  whose 
brachia  are  equal  in  length,  bent  in  an  angle  of  120  degr.  at 
C,  and  moveable  about  that  point  as  its  centre :  In  this  case, 
a  weight  of  two  pounds  hanging  at  the  end  B  of  the  horizontal 
part  of  the  leaver,  will  keep  in  aequilibrio  a  weight  of  four 
pounds  hanging  at  the  end  D.  But  if  a  weight  of  one  pound 
be  laid  upon  the  end  D  of  the  leaver,  so  that  in  the  motion 
of  D  along  the  arc  p  A,  this  weight  is  made  to  rise  up  against 
the  plane  P/?  (which  divides  in  half  the  line  A  C  equal  to 


48  PEBFETUUM    MOBILE; 

C  B)  the  said  weight  will  keep  in  sequilibrio  two  pounds  at 
B,  as  having  twice  the  velocity  of  it,  when  the  leaver  begins 
to  move.  This  will  be  evident,  if  you  let  the  weight  4  hang 
at  D,  whilst  the  weight  1  lies  above  it :  for  if  then  you  move 
the  leaver,  the  weight  1  will  rise  four  times  as  fast  as  the 
weight  4.* 

Notice  of  the  Wheel  of  OrflPyreus,  in  the  "  Gentleman's 
Magazine,"  in  a  letter  on — 

Perpetual  Motion  said  to  be  discovered, 

Mb.  Ubbak, — Being  an  admirer  of  improvements  in  me- 
chanics, and  desirous  of  seeing  the  perpetual  motion  dis- 
covered, I  Was  much  pleased  on  readmg,  some  time  ago,  an 
accoimt  of  the  automaton  constructed  by  Orflfyreus,  in  two 
letters,  one  from  Professor  s'Gravesande  to  Sir  Isaac  Newton, 
the  other  from  Baron  Fischer  to  Dr.  Desaguliers,  with  the 
testimonial  of  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse^Cassel  (who  had  seen 
the  inside  of  it)  in  favoiir  of  its  construction.  To  which  are 
added  some  remarks  by  William  Kenrick,  the  writer  of  the 
pamphlet,  who  takes  that  opportimity  to  propose  a  subscrip- 
tion for  a  similar  machine,  which  he  says  he  has  contrived, 
and  denominated  a  Rotator. 

It  is  much  to  be  lamented  that  the  learned  did  not  examine 
more  strictly  into  the  merit  of  Orflfyreus*s  wheel ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  being  prepossessed  with  a  notion  of  the  impractica- 
bility of  the  perpetual  motion,  suffered  it  to  be  neglected, 
and  at  last  destroyed  by  the  hands  of  a  disappointed  mechanic, 
who,  with  unwearied  application  and  steady  perseverance,  had 
brought  it  to  perfection.  I  wish  we  may  not  again  let  slip  an 
opportunity  of  becoming  acquainted  with  an  invention,  which, 
when  made  public,  will  reflect  honour  on  the  inventor,  and 
be  of  the  utmost  utility  to  the  world.  Such,  I  woidd  hope,  is 
the  rotator  mentioned  by  W.  Kenrick ;  for,  unless  his  disco- 
very were  real,  I  cannot  think  that  he  would  have  taken  the 
liberty  to  express  himself  as  he  does  in  p.  26,  &c.  "  The 
inventor  flatters  himself  that,  if  the  contents  of  the  foregoing 
pages  are  seriously  attended  to,  and  it  be  farther  considered, 
that  not  a  penny  of  the  proposed  premium  is  required,  till  the 
subscribers  are  fully  satisfied  of  the  reality  and  utility  of  the 

•  The  PliiloBophtcal  Transactions,  vol.  31,  for  the  years  1720,  1721. 
4to.    No.  369,  Sep ,  Oct.,  Nov.,  Dec,  1721,  page  237. 


OK,    SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  49 

invention,  his  proposal  will  not  be  treated  with  so  mortifying 
a  neglect  as  that  of  Orffyreus."  Again  he  says,  "  If  it  does 
not  supply  the  place  of  a  first  mover,  at  the  expense  only  of 
the  construction  and  repair  of  a  simple  wheel,  subject  to  very 
little  friction,  and  that  in  all  such  engines  and  machines,  even 
from  the  slightest  piece  of  clockwork  to  the  waterworks  of 
Marli  or  London-bridge,  he  expects  nothing  for  his  discovery, 
but  to  stand  exposed  to  the  contempt  that  will  be  justly 
thrown  on  him,  for  having  so  miserably  mispent  his  time, 
and  frivolously  engaged  the  attention  of  the  public." 

Now,  I  think  that  W.  Kenrick's  proposals  are  very  fair ; 
and  should  be  glad  to  be  informed,  whether  any  attention 
has  been  paid  to  them,  and  whether  Sir  Isaac  Newton  took 
any  notice  of  the  letter  addressed  to  him  by  Professor  8*Gra- 
vesande.  I  shall  consider  it  as  a  favour  if  any  correspondent 
will  oblige  me  with  an  answer  to  these  particulars. 

A  Constant  Reader.* 

Dr.  Hutton,  in  his  notice  "  Of  the  Perpetual  Motion,"  inci- 
dentally condemns  the  wheel  of  Orfiyreus,  observing  : — 

The  perpetual  motion  has  been  the  quicksand  of  mechani- 
cians, as  the  quadrature  of  the  circle,  the  trisection  of  an 
angle,  &c.,  have  been  that  of  geometricians :  and  as  those 
who  pretend  to  have  discovered  the  solution  of  the  latter  pro- 
blems are  in  general  persons  scarcely  acquainted  with  the 
principles  of  geometry,  those  who  search  for,  or  imagine  they 
have  found,  the  perpetual  motion,  are  always  men  to  whom 
the  most  certain  and  invariable  truths  of  mechanics  are 
unknown. 

It  may  be  demonstrated,  indeed,  to  all  those  capable  of  rea- 
soning in  a  soimd  manner  on  those  sciences,  that  a  perpetual 
motion  is  impossible  :  for,  to  be  possible,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  eflfect  shoidd  become  alternately  the  cause,  and  the  cause 
the  effect.  It  woidd  be  necessary,  for  example,  that  a  weight 
raised  to  a  certain  height  by  another  weight,  should  in  its 
turn  raise  the  second  weight  to  the  height  from  which  it  de- 
scended. But,  according  to  the  laws  of  motion,  all  that  a 
descending  weight  coidd  do,  in  the  most  perfect  machine 
which  the  mind  can  conceive,  is  to  raise  another  in  the  same 
time  to  a  height  reciprocally  proportional  to  its  mass.      But 

•  The  Gentleman'g  Magazine.     Vol.  42.     1772.     P.  172. 

F 


50 


PEBPETUUM   MOBILE  ; 


it  is  impossible  to  construct  a  machine  in  wliich  there  shall 
be  neither  friction  nor  the  resistance  of  some  medium  to  be 
overcome ;  consequently  at  each  alternation  of  ascent  and 
descent,  some  quantity  of  motion,  however  small,  will  always 
be  lost :  each  time,  therefore,  the  weight  to  be  raised  will  ascend 
to  a  less  height ;  and  the  motion  will  gradually  slacken,  and 
at  length  cease  entirely. 

A  moving  principle  has  been  sought  for,  but  without  suc- 
cess, in  the  magnet,  in  the  gravity  of  the  atmosphere,  and  in 
the  elasticity  of  bodies.  If  a  magnet  be  disposed  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  facilitate  the  ascension  of  a  weight,  it  will  after- 
wards oppose  its  descent.  Springs,  after  being  unbent, 
require  to  be  bent  by  a  new  force  equal  to  that  which  they 
exercised ;  and  the  gravity  of  the  atmosphere,  after  forcing 
one  side  of  the  machine  to  the  lowest  point,  must  be  itself 
raised  again,  like  any  other  weight,  in  order  to  continue  its 
action. 

We  shall,  however,  give  an  account  of  various  attempts  to 
obtain  a  perpetual  motion,  because  they  may  serve  to  show 
how  much  some  persons  have  suffered  themselves  to  be  de- 
ceived on  this  subject. 

Fig.  62,  pi  12.) 


Fig.  52,  plate  12,  represents  a  large  wheel,  the  circum- 
ference of  which  is  furnished,  at  equal  distances,  with  levers, 
each  bearing  at  its  extremity  a  weight,  and  moveable  on  a 


OE,    SEARCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIYE    POWER. 


61 


iinge,  so  that  in  one  direction  they  can  rest  upon  the  circum- 
ference, while  on  the  opposite  side,  being  carried  away  by  the 
weight  at  the  extremity,  they  are  obliged  to  arrange  them- 
selves in  the  direction  of  the  radius  continued.  This  being 
supposed,  it  is  evident  that  when  the  wheel  turns  in  the  direc- 
tion a  b  Cy  the  weights  A  B  and  C  will  recede  from  the 
centre ;  consequently,  as  they  act  with  more  force,  they  will 
carry  the  wheel  towards  that  side ;  and  as  a  new  lever  will  be 
thrown  out,  in  proportion  as  the  wheel  revolves,  it  thence 
follows,  say  they,  that  the  wheel  vnll  continue  to  move  in  the 
same  direction.  But,  notwithstanding  the  specious  appear- 
ance of  this  reasoning,  experience  has  proved  that  the 
machine  will  not  go ;  and  it  may  indeed  be  demonstrated 
that  there  is  a  certain  position  in  which  the  centre  of  gravity 
of  all  these  weights  is  in  the  vertical  plane  passing  through 
the  point  of  suspension,  and  that  therefore  it  must  stop. 

The  case  is  the  same  with  the  following  machine,  which  it 
would  appear  ought  to  move  also  incessantly.  In  a  cylindric 
drum,  in  perfect  equilibrium  on  its  axis,  are  formed  channels 
as  seen  in  Fig.  53,  which  contain  balls  of  lead,  or  a  certain 

(.Fig,  53.) 


quantity  of  qidcksilver.  In  consequence  of  this  disposition, 
the  balls  or  quicksilver  must,  on  the  one  side,  ascend  by 
approaching  the  centre ;  and  on  the  other  must  roll  towards 


52 


PERPETXJXJM   mobile: 


the  circumference.      The  machine  then  ought  to  turn  inces- 
santly towards  that  side. 

A  third  machine  of  this  kind  is  represented  Fig.  54.  It 
consists  of  a  kind  of  wheel  formed  of  six  or  eight  arms,  pro- 
ceeding from  a  centre,  where  the  axis  of  motion  is  placed. 
Each  of  these  arms  is  furnished  with  a  receptacle  in  the  form 
of  a  pair  of  bellows,  but  those  on  the  opposite  arms  stand  in  con- 

(Fig.  54.) 


trary  directions,  as  seen  in  the  figure.  The  moveable  top  of 
each  receptacle  has  affixed  to  it  a  weight,  which  shuts  it  in  one 
situation  and  opens  it  in  the  other.  In  the  last  place,  the 
bellows  of  the  opposite  arms  have  a  communication  by  means 
of  a  canal,  and  one  of  them  is  filled  with  quicksilver. 

These  things  being  supposed,  it  is  visible,  that  the  bellows 
on  the  one  side  must  open,  and  those  on  the  other  must  shut ; 


OB,    SEABCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    FOWEB.  53 

consequently  the  mercury  will  pass  from  the  latter  into  the 

former,  while  the  contrary  will  be  the  cage  on  the  opposite 

side. 

It  might  be  difficult  to  point  out  the  deficiency  of  this 
reasoning ;  but  those  acquainted  with  the  true  principles 
of  mechanics  will  not  hesitate  to  bet  a  hundred  to  one  that 
the  machine,  when  constructed,  will  not  answer  the  intended 
purpose. 

The  description  of  a  pretended  perpetual  motion,  in  which 
bellows,  to  be  alternately  filled  with  and  emptied  of  quick- 
silver, were  employed,  may  be  seen  in  the  "  Journal  des 
Savans  "  for  1685.  It  was  refuted  by  Bemouilli  and  some 
others,  and  it  gave  rise  to  a  long  dispute.  The  best  method 
which  the  inventor  could  have  employed  to  defend  his  inven- 
tion would  have  been  to  construct  it,  and  shew  it  in  motion  ; 
but  this  was  never  done. 

We  shall  here  add  another  curious  anecdote  on  this  sub- 
ject. One  Orfyreus  annoimced,  at  Leipsic,  in  the  year  1717, 
a  perpetual  motion,  consisting  of  a  wheel  which  would  con- 
tinually revolve.  This  machine  was  constructed  for  the  Land- 
grave of  Hesse  Cassel,  who  caused  it  to  be  shut  up  in  a  place 
of  safety,  and  the  door  to  be  sealed  with  his  own  seal.  At 
the  end  of  forty  days,  the  door  was  opened,  and  the  machine 
was  found  in  motion.  This,  however,  affords  no  proof  in 
favour  of  a  perpetual  motion  ;  for  as  clocks  can  be  made  to 
go  a  year  without  being  wound  up,  Orfyreus' s  wheel  might 
easily  go  forty  days,  and  even  more. 

The  result  of  this  pretended  discovery  is  not  known.  We 
are  informed  that  an  Englishman  offered  80,000  crowns  for 
this  machine ;  but  Orfyreus  refused  to  sell  it  at  that  price  : 
in  this  he  certainly  acted  wrong,  as  there  is  reason  to  think 
he  obtained  by  his  invention,  neither  money,  nor  even  the 
honour  of  having  discovered  the  perpetual  motion. 

The  Academy  of  Painting  at  Paris  possessed  a  clock  which 
had  no  need  of  being  woimd  up,  and  which  might  be  con- 
sidered as  a  perpetual  motion,  though  it  was  not  so.  But 
this  requires  some  explanation.  The  ingenious  author  of 
this  clock  employed  the  variations  in  the  state  of  the  atmo- 
sphere for  winding  up  his  moving  weight.  Various  artifices 
might  be  devised  for  this  purpose;  but  this  is  no  more  a 
perpetual  motion  than  if  the  flux  and  reflux  of  the  sea  were 
employed  to  keep  the  machine  continually  going;  for  this 


54  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

principle  of  motion  is  exterior  to  the  machine,  and  forms  no 
part  of  it. 

But  enough  has  been  said  on  this  chimera  of  mechanics. 
We  sincerely  hope  that  none  of  our  readers  will  ever  lose 
themselves  in  the  ridiculous  and  unfortimate  labyrinth  of 
such  a  research. 

To  conclude,  it  is  false  that  any  reward  has  been  promised 
by  the  European  Powers  to  the  person  who  shall  discover  the 
perpetual  motion ;  and  the  case  is  the  same  in  regard  to  the 
quadrature  of  the  circle.  It  is  this  idea,  no  doubt,  that 
excites  so  many  to  attempt  the  solution  of  these  problems ; 
and  it  is  proper  they  should  be  imdeceived.* 

Dr.  William  Kenrick  published  "  A  Lecture  on  the  Perpe- 
tual Motion,"  in  1770  and  following  year  ;  it  is  a  quarto  pam- 
phlet of  ninety-two  pages,  now  very  rare,  a  copy  of  which, 
however,  is  in  the  valuable  library  connected  with  the  Patent 
Office.     We  shall  proceed  to  give  it  in  an  abridged  form. 

In  the  Apology,  occupying  six  pages,  he  says  : — 

The  mere  exhibition  of  a  self-moving  machine,  without  a 
display  of  its  mechanism,  or  the  principles  on  which  its 
motion  is  begun  and  continued,  could  produce  no  conviction. 
The  fate  of  Orflfyreus  and  his  machine  is  a  proof  of  this. 
Scarce  fifty  years  ago  that  whimsical  mechanician  exhibited  a 
perpetual  motion  at  Hesse  Cassel,  the  constancy  of  whose 
operation  was  experienced  for  many  weeks  imder  the  most 
exact  caution  of  the  Landgrave  of  that  Principality,  whose 
testimony  of  such  operation,  as  well  as  in  favour  of  its  con- 
struction (to  the  secret  of  which  he  was  admitted),  was  given 
in  the  most  explicit  and  determinate  form.  And  yet,  because 
Orffyreus  would  not  display  the  mechanism  without  the  pre- 
vious assurance  of  a  premium  of  200,000  florins  (near  twenty 
thousand  pounds),  or  because  he  would  not  or  could  not  dis- 
cover the  principles  on  which  it  acted,  his  pretensions  were 
neglected,  his  machine  was  destroyed  by  his  own  hands,  and 
his  life  made  a  sacrifice  to  the. chagrin  attending  his  disap- 
pointment.    Twenty  years  had  he  racked  his  brains  for  in- 

*  Recreations  in  Mathematics  and  Natural  Philosophy.  First  com- 
posed by  M.  Ozanam,  greatly  enlarged  by  M.  Montucla,  and  translated 
into  English  and  improved  by  Chs.  Hutton,  LL.D.  and  F.K.S.  In  4  vols* 
8vo.  1803.    [See  vol.  2,  p.  102  and  plate  12.] 


OK,    8EAKCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVB   POWEE.  65 

vention,  and  expended  a  patrimonial  competence  with,  parsi- 
mony in  prosecuting  his  design.  And,  when  success  inspired 
the  hope  of  reward,  he  found  his  ingenuity  suspected  of  im- 
posture, and  his  industry  rewarded  with  contempt. 

Whether  any  of  his  successors  in  the  same  pursuit  will 
meet  with  a  hetter  fate  is  at  length  to  be  determined.  One 
species  of  our  predecessor's  merit,  however,  I  (adds  Dr.  Ken- 
rick*)  presume  myself  at  least  entitled  to,  that  of  persever- 
ance ;  it  being  now  fifteen  years  since  I  first  engaged  in  this 
undertaking,  which  I  have  since  pursued  with  almost  imre- 
mitted  assiduity,  and  that  not  only  at  a  considerable  waste  of 
time  and  expence,  but  imder  the  constant  mortification  of 
hearing  it  equally  ridiculed,  by  those  who  do  know,  and  by 
those  who  do  not  know,  anything  of  the  matter. 

It  is,  indeed,  generally  supposed,  and  as  confidently 
affirmed,  that  the  mathematicians  have  published  demonstra- 
tions of  the  impossibility  of  a  perpetual  motion.  But  I  can 
safely  take  upon  me  to  affirm  that  no  such  demonstration  was 
ever  published  by  any.  Within  these  twelve  years  past,  the 
mathematicians  who  deny  the  possibility  of  a  perpetual  motion 
have  been  repeatedly  and  publicly  called  upon,  both  in  the 
foreign  and  English  prints,  to  produce  a  single  instance  of 
these  demonstrations.  They  have  not  done  it.  They  might 
have  produced,  indeed,  the  demonstrations  of  Huygens,  De  la 
Hire,  and  others,  to  prove,  as  Desaguliers  very  properly  ex- 
presses it,  the  fallacy  of  the  schemes  of  most  of  the  pretenders 
to  the  perpetual  motion.  They  proved  nothing  more  ;  and 
this  was  so  far  unnecessary,  in  that  the  fallacy  evidently 
appeared  in  the  discovery  of  the  principle  on  which  they  were 
founded. 

This  was  done  in  the  last  century  by  the  celebrated  Mar- 
quis of  Worcester,  in  the  presence  of  the  King  and  his  Court, 
at  the  Tower,  by  the  exhibition  of  a  wheel  so  contrived  that, 
in  revolving  on  its  axis,  it  carried  up  several  weights  nearer 
its  centre  on  one  side  than  they  descended  on  the  other.  The 
scheme  was  plausible,  and  to  appearance  practicable  ;  but, 
though  the  wheel  was  polite  enough  to  turn  about  while  his 

•  We  learn  from  Gorton's  Biographical  Dictionary  that  William 
Kenrick  was  born  at  Watford,  and  brought  up  to  the  business  of  a  rule- 
maker.  He  procured  a  doctor's  degree  at  Ley  den,  and  died  in  1779,  less 
lamented  than  he  might  have  been,  owing  to  his  generally  malignant 
and  vituperative  style  of  writing. 


56  PESFETUXTM    MOBILE; 

Majesty  was  present,  it  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  be  so 
complaisant  in  his  absence.*  The  mathematicians  avenged 
themselves  of  the  short  triumph  of  the  mistaken  Marquis, 
but  were  equally  mistaken  themselves  in  thinking  l^ey  had 
routed  the  problem,  or  that,  in  hunting  down  the  jackal,  they 
had  destroyed  the  lion.  The  perpetujed  motion  survived  ;  it 
had  still  its  advocates ;  Professor  'S  Gravesande  and  John 
Bemouille  maintained  its  practicability,  the  former  giving 
his  testimony  in  favour  of  Orffyreus's  machine,  after  a  long 
and  scrutinous  examination.  It  is  not  twelve  years  since  this 
testimony  was  republished  by  Dr.  Allaman,  the  present  Pro- 
fessor of  Natural  Philosophy  at  Leyden,  whose  own  opinion, 
given  at  the  same  time,  is  also  greatly  in  favour  of  the  disco- 
very. It  is  even  some  years  later  that  a  dissertation  still 
more  in  its  favour,  written,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  by  the  cele- 
brated De  Gprter,  of  Petersberg,  appeared  in  the  "  Philoso- 
phical Transactions  "  of  Haarlem.  My  end  is  not  to  amuse 
or  persuade,  but,  with  due  deference,  to  inform  and  convince. 
To  remove  every  cause  of  objection,  I  must  beg  leave  to 
expatiate  somewhat  at  large  on  the  theory  of  this  discovery. 
It  is  with  the  more  propriety  I  presume  on  this  method,  as 
the  discovery  to  which  1  pretend  has  not  been  (as  frequently 
happens)  the  effect  of  mechanical  accident,  but  the  premedi- 
tated result  of  mathematical  reasoning  and  physical  experi- 
ment. I  shall  proceed  to  elucidate  the  principal  arguments 
d,  priori,  that  prove  the  practicability  of  a  perpetual  motion 
to  be  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  known  and  established 
laws  of  nature. 

Having  proceeded  thus  far,  he  opens  his  lecture  at  page  7  with 
the  Introduction ;  and  first  "  On  the  nature  of  motion  in 
general,' '  which,  in  fourteen  pages,  being  more  metaphysical 
than  mechanical,  affords  no  extractable  matter  for  our  present 
object.  Part  1,  is  "  On  the  cause  and  effect  of  motion." 
This  elementary  part  is  needlessly  laboured  and  elaborated 
through  twenty-seven  pages.  In  the  course  of  his  remarks  he 
states : — 

The  discovery  of  a  perpetual  motion,  says  De  la  Hire, 

*  On  what  authority  he  presumes  to  make  this  statement  of  its  inope- 
rativeness does  not  appear,  and,  indeed,  seems  quiie  apocryphal. 


OB,    SEABCBL   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  57 

would  be  to  discover  a  body  at  once  heavier  and  lighter  than 
itself.  But  this  is  not  a  fair  state  of  the  question.  It  is  not 
necessary  that  all  the  parts  of  a  perpetually-moving  machine 
should  be  attached  to,  and  inseparable  from,  each  other ; 
which  they  must  be,  to  constitute  one  gravitating  body  of  a 
determinate  weight. 

He  proceeds  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  circulation  of 
the  blood,  pneumatic  pressure,  the  steel-yard,  real  and 
relative  weight,  and  spiral  action.  Again,  we  have  Hobbes, 
Locke,  and  Stewart,  in  the  same  sentence  with  such  language 
as — "  I  could  almost  as  readily  impute  ingenuity  to  vegetables 
and  dossils — to  the  sensitive  plant  and  the  loadstone — as 
mediation  to  muscles,  or  cogitabimdity  to  cockles,  peri- 
winkles, and  rock  oysters !"     In  conclusion,  he  says : — 

I  have  endeavoured  to  make  it  appear  that  motion  is  the 
mechanical  effect  of  the  physical  action  of  the  primary  ele- 
ments ;  that  the  direction  of  motion  only  comes  withm  the 
province  of  animal  intellect;  that  the  vital  system  is  sup- 
ported by  mere  mechanic  motion,  kept  up  by  the  elasticity  of 
the  solids  and  the  gravity  of  the  fluids  composing  the  animal 
body;  that  by  the  same  means  a  more  simple  inanimate 
system  or  machine  may  be  framed,  which  may  have  the  same 
property  of  continued  action  (or,  as  it  is  called,  self-motion). 
And  this  is  all  that  is,  or  can  be,  expected  of  a  perpetual 
motion ;  the  momentum  of  which  may  be  increased  to  any 
degree,  according  to  the  weight  of  the  bodies  employed  and 
the  work  required  to  be  done. 

•  The  second  part  of  this  lecture  commences  with  a  Proem 
of  thirteen  pages : — 

I  am  induced  (he  says)  to  trespass  farther,  by  extending  in 
like  manner  the  subsequent  divisions  of  it ;  making  the 
second  and  third  parts  of  my  printed  syllabus  the  topics  of 
the  present  reading,  and  reserving  the  last  part,  with  the 
concluding  experiment,  to  the  third  and  flnal  lecture. 

I  pretend  merely  to  the  investigation  of  the  general  prin- 
ciples of  mechanics,  and  even  to  illustrate  these  so  far  only 
as  I  conceive  they  relate  to  the  immediate  object  of  my  lec- 
ture, the  discovery  of  an  artificial  perpetual  motion  ;  leaving 


58  F£BF£TUUM    MOBLLE  ; 

the  application  of  such  principles,  in  the  solution  of  particular 
phenomena,  or  the  construction  of  particular  machines,  to 
such  as  make  the  different  arts  and  sciences  their  peculiar 
study.  ^ 

He  very  prudentiy  ends,  observing : — 

But  I  beg  pardon,  gentiemen,  for  the  length  of  this  digres- 
sive introduction,  and  shall  proceed  to  the  more  immediate 
subject  of  my  lecture. 

Section  1,  of  this  lecture,  is  ^'  On  the  composition  and  com- 
bination of  motion."  After  discussing,  in  his  own  peculiar 
style,  mechanical  principles  of  motion,  he  adds  : — 

It  would  require  a  volume,  and  that  not  a  small  oife,  to 
illustrate  these  subjects,  and  support  them  by  the  necessary 
demonstrations  and  experiments.  Should  Providence  give 
me  life  and  health,  therefore,  they  (his  auditors)  shall  hare  it. 
Indeed,  I  have  already  spent  some  years  in  preparing  such  a 
volume  for  the  press. 

He  is  very  prolix  on  gravity  and  motion,  then  commences 
Section  2,  "  On  the  communication  and  dissipation  of  motion." 
Five  pages  are  occupied  in  discussing  motion,  in  popular 
language,  in  the  course  of  which  he  remarks  : — 

.  And  as  to  the  imperfectiy  elastic  bodies,  their  power  of 
retaining  or  commimicating  motion  depends  entirely  on  their 
vis  inertia  and  weight ;  nor  can  they  on  any  occasion  what- 
ever communicate  a  greater  momentum  to  another  body  than 
they  themselves  possess.  It  is  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  a 
perpetual  motion  that  they  can  do  this.  And,  indeed,  here 
all  the  difficulty  lies,  viz.,  in  the  means  of  communicating  the 
momentum  or  moving  force  of  a  heavy  body  to  a  light  one. 
Now,  the  most  virulent  opponents  to  the  practicability  of 
perpetual  motion  have  never  pretended  to  demonstrate  the 
impracticability  of  this  communication.  The  qiwmodo,  or 
means  of  effecting  it,  being  the  point  in  dispute.  It  is  to 
this  discovery  that  I  pretend ;  and  to  show  that  my  preten- 
sions are  well  groimded,  have  taken  the  liberty  to  invite  you 
to  this  lecture. 

The  lectures  appear  to  have  been  illustrated  by  a  plate 
having  two  figures  of  a  simple  apparatus  used  to  demonstrate 


OB,    SEABCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB.  59 

the  action  of  a  spring  and  two  unequal  weights;  also  an 
inflexible  ruler  suspended  between  two  unequal  balls, — ^with 
both  he  experimented  before  his  auditors ;  but  the  engraving 
is  wanting  in  the  edition  now  used.  In  conclusion,  he 
observes : — 

You  see,  gentlemen,  I  am  purposely  provided  here  with  a 
very  simple  and  clumsy  app^-ratus.  The  perpetual  motion 
does  not  need  the  assistance  of  friction  wheels,  or  depend  on 
the  niggling  nicety  of  tooth  and  pinion.  If  the  practical  part 
of  my  discovery  be  not  superior  to  the  manual  dexterity  of  a 
village  carpenter  or  country  smith,  I  am  satisfied.  There 
will  be  no  great  discernment  required  to  comprehend  the 
design  they  are  to  put  in  execution.  You  will  permit  me, 
however,  at  present,  to  defer  what  I  have  farther  to  offer  on 
the  subject  to  another  opportunity.* 


♦  A  Lecture  on  the  Perpetual  Motion.  Part  the  first.  London,  1771. 
4to.  Pp.  49.  A  Lecture  on  the  Perpetual  Motion.  Part  the  second. 
London,  177 L  4to.  Pp.43.  An  "Address »»  follows  the  first  title 
page,  dated  24  Jan  ,  1771,  signed  W.  Kenrick  j  and  has  a  notice  at  the 
end  that  **  The  plates  will  be  delivered  with  the  third  and  last  part  of  the 
lecture."  This  "third  and  last  part,'*  if  published,  does  not  form  part 
of  the  copy  in  the  Patent  Office  library. 


60  PEHPETUUM  moblle; 


CHAPTER  in. 
Patexts  of  the   setesteexth  and  eighteenth   cex- 

TUBIES,    WITH    CONTEMPOBABY    SCIENTIFIC    NOTICES    ON 
THEM   AND    THE    SUBJECT    GENEBALLY. 

The  very  fact  of  patenting  inventions,  ostensibly  to  go  on 
gravitating  without  coining  to  a  stand-still,  so  long  as  their 
materials  endure,  offers  fair  presumptive  evidence  of  the 
unfaltering  faith  of  their  designers.  And  the  tone  of  early 
scientific  journals  is  by  no  means  decidedly  averse  to  offering 
encouragement  to  these  workers  in  the  dark.  We  cannot 
extend  these  remarks  to  recent  patentees  and  journalists ; — 
the  former  generally  deceive  both  themselves  and  others,  and 
the  latter  now  repudiate  such  productions. 

The  following  patents  belong  to  the  seventeenth  century: — 

1630. — David  Ramseye  [No.  60],  esquire,  and  one  of  the 
Groomes  of  the  Privie  Chamber.  Among  other  claims  to  a 
patent  for  ^^  his  great  paines,  industry,  and  chardge^^  in  finding 
out  the  same,  he  names — '^  To  make  any  sort  of  mills  to  goe 
on  standing  waters  by  continuall  mocion,  without  the  helpe  of 
winde,  waite,  or  horse."  But  no  description  is  given  or  was 
then  required. 

1635.— William  Babtok  [No.  79],  gentleman,  "  by  his 
own  invention,  labour  and  expense,  hath  gained  the  ^  skill  of 
making  of  engines,  which  being  put  in  order,  will  cause  and 
maintain  their  own  motions,  with  continuance  and  without  any 
borrowed  force  of  man,  horse,  wind,  river,  or  brooke,  whereby 
many  several  kinds  of  excellent  rare  works  may  be  performed 
to  the  great  good  and  benefit  of  the  commonwealth,  the  like 
cause  and  means  of  which  continuance  of  motion  hath  not  been 
heretofore  brought  to  perfection.^ " 


OB,    SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  61 

This  patent,  granted  ia  the  reign  of  Charles  L,  for  the  term 
of  14  years,  is  in  the  usual  form  to  secure  the  right  to  the 
patentee  and  the  payment  by  him  of  the  annual  rent  of  ^'  tenn 
pounds  "  into  the  Exchequer  "  att  the  Feast  of  the  Annuncia- 
cion  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Marie,  att  Saint  Michaell  the  Arch- 
angell,^'  beyond  which,  and  the  above  title,  nothing  is  known 
of  the  invention  itself. 


1662. — Ralph  Wayne  [No.  135])  gentleman,  "hath, 
through  his  great  charge,  labour,  and  industry,  attained  the 
knowledge  of  ^an  engine  which,  with  the  perpetual  motion  of 
it  selfe,  without  the  help  or  strength  of  any  person  or  creature, 
will  not  only  drain  great  levels  of  vast  quantities  of  water,  but 
also  mines  of  fifty  fathoms  deep  or  more.'  '^ 

This  patent,  granted  in  the  reign  of  Charles  XL,  like  the 
former  gives  only  the  title,  and  requires  the  yearly  payment  of 
ibur  pounds  per  annum,  for  14  years. 


Here  follow  patents  of  tlie  eighteenth  century : — 

1779. — John  Dietbick  Mulleb  [No.  1228],  of  St. 
Jame8%  Westminster,  gentleman.  "A  machine  or  engine 
constructed  on  self-moving  principles."  It  is  "a  double 
wheel,  consisting  of  two  frames,  fixed  on  and  at  right  angles  to 
an  axis,  moving  on  and  supported  by  two  pivots  or  gudgeons.'^ 
£ach  wheel  has  two  or  more  oval  apertures,  and  boxes  and 
weights  made  to  fit  and  slide  in  them,  and  are  to  operate  on 
"teeth  or  trundles,"  like  "a  man  acting  in  the  wheel  of  a 
crane,  and  thus  the  powers  which  are  generated  in  any  machine 
depend  upon  the  exact  formation  and  relative  position  of  these 
oval  holes,"  &c.  &c.  8cc. 


1782.— Hildebband  Mobley  [No.  1324],  of  Clement's 
Inn,  Middlesex,  gentleman.  "  New-invented  wheel,  engine, 
or  machine,  whereby  to  give  or  communicate  to  mills,  clocks, 
timepieces,  or  other  instruments  or  engines  requiring  the 
same  properties,  a  constant  and  perpetual  force  and  motion." 

"  My  said  invented  wheel,  engine,  or  machine,  whereby 


62  PEBPETunc   mobile; 

to  gire  or  commaniaUe  to  mills,  clocks,  timepieces,  or  other 
instmmeits  or  engines  requiring  the  same  properties,  a  con- 
stant and  perpetual  force  and  motion,  has  a  framework*  of 
wood,  iron,  or  other  metal  to  which  the  machinery  is  fixt  and 
supported.  It  consists  of  a  wheel  which  is  divid^  on  the  rim 
or  outward  edge  into  any  number  of  divisions  in  the  manner  of 
a  water  wheel,  so  that  each  division  be  sufficient  to  contain  a 
round  ball,  which  balls  are  made  of  wood,  or  hollow  balls  made 
of  tin,  copper,  iron,  or  other  metal,  or  of  glass.  These  balls, 
as  the  wheel  moves  round,  fall  off  on  an  inclined  plane  or 
spout,  from  whence  they  acquire  sufficient  velocity  or  force  to 
enter  through  a  passage  a  tall  square  tube  filled  either  with 
quicksilver,  water,  or  other  fluids,  which  is  there  supported  by 
the  pressure  of  the  outward  air.  As  soon  as  those  balls  enter 
the  aforesaid  tube  they  will  rise  upwards  therein,  being  lighter 
than  the  fluids,  and  through  a  certain  number  of  new  contrived 
valves  which  support  the  fluids  alternately  in  the  tube.  When 
the  balls  are  arrived  at  the  top  or  broad  head  of  the  aforesaid 
tube,  they  are  conducted  to  a  wheel  with  a  certain  number  of 
teeth,  on  which  are  placed  lifters  to  lift  the  balls  out  of  the  said 
fluids.  This  said  wheel  is  drove  by  another  wheel  with  the 
same  number  of  teeth  and  diameter,  to  which  is  joined  a 
pulley,  over  which  passes  a  cord,  chain,  catgut,  silken  thread, 
or  any  other  line  or  twist,  which,  being  joined  at  both  ends,  is 
passt  over  another  pulley  fixt  to  the  axle  of  the  great  wheel,  which 
great  wheel,  when  loaded  with  the  aforesaid  balls,  turns  round 
the  aforesaid  two  other  wheels,  by  which  means  the  balls  are 
lifted  out  of  and  from  the  fluids,  and  fall  on  an  inclined  plane 
or  spout,  which  lead  to  the  great  wheel.  At  the  lower  end  of 
this  inclined  plane  or  spout  is  fixt  a  small  wheel,  which  is  put 
into  motion  by  spokes  fixt  on  the  rim  or  outward  edge  of  the 
great  wheel,  which  turns  the  balls  separately  on  itself  to  con- 
tinue the  motion.^* 


1786.— Thomas  Mead  [No.  1543],  of  Sandwich,  Kent, 
carpenter.  ^^An  automaton  or  machine  upon  a  self-moving 
principle,  which  when  in  motion,  will  acquire  and  preserve 
velocity  and  force  sufiicient  to  work  every  kind  of  mill,  crane, 
pump,  and  all  other  engines  and  machines  in  general,  and  give 
motion  to  any  sort  of  carriage  or  vessel.^^     This  invention  con- 


OB,   8EABCH  FOB  SXLF-MOTIYE  FOWEB.  65 

sjsts  of  **  a  square  frame  of  wood  boarded  close  on  the  under 
side ;  square  posts  of  wood  fixed  into  the  bottom  frame  and  top 
frame,  boarded  top  and  bottom,  in  which  box  moves  a  circular 
board,  carrying  the  flies,  wheel  work,  &c."  And  a  complicated 
affair  it  is,  to  be  sure.  However,  the  patentee  says,  '*  When  this 
machinery  is  to  be  put  in  motion,  the  bottom  frame,  tube,  and 
box,  are  to  be  filled  with  water,  mercury,  or  some  other  fluid/* 
How  it  was  intended  to  work  is  doubtful ;  that  it  never  did  do 
daty  is  certain. 

1790.— CoNBADTJS  ScHwiEBS  [No.  1746],  of  Hoztony 
Middlesex,  Doctor  in  Divinity.  ^*A  machine  on  a  self- 
moving  principle,  or  perpetual  motion/* 

**  Now  know  ye,  that  in  obedience  of  the  said  letters  patent, 
and  the  proviso  therein  contained,  I,  the  said  Conradus 
Schwiers,  do  hereby  declare  my  said  new  invented  self*moving 
principle,  or  perpetual  motion,  is  made  and  performed  in 
manner  following,  that  is  to  say : — 

^  Two  stiles  or  uprights  marked  in  the  plan  (see  opposite  page) 
hereunto  annexed,  A,  A,  c&c,  and  fastened  together  by  the 
•  screws  1, 2, 3,  and  to  the  base  at  4, 4, 4, 4,  between  which  stiles 
or  uprights  run  the  wheel  C,  and  the  pinion  D,  and  the  two 
double  pinions  D,  D,  &c,  over  which  double  pinions  runs  the 
double  chain  E,  E,  &c.,  to  which  chain  are  fixed  the  bucketts 
F,  F,  &c.  The  chain  is  made  with  joints  on  each  side  and 
bans  running  across,  equal  in  number  to  the  cogs  of  the  wheel 
C.  Upon  the  same  axle  with  the  wheel  C,  on  the  farther  side 
of  the  inner  stile  A,  runs  the  wheel  G,  whose  diameter  is  full 
double  that  of  the  wheel  C ;  and  the  pivot  of  the  wheel  G  runs 
in  the  back  H  as  the  other  pivot  of  the  same  axle  runs  in  the 
front  stile  A.  The  wheel  G  is  divided  near  the  periphery  into 
receptacles  in  number  equal  to  the  buckets  on  the  chain,  which 
receptacles  are  supplied  with  metal  balls  I,  I,  &c.  from  the 
buckets  F,  F,  &c.  by  means  of  the  gutter  K,  which  balls  by 
their  weight  forcing  round  the  wheel  G,  and  thereby  lifting  up 
the  buckets  F,  F,  &c.  on  one  side  as  they  go  down  on  the 
other  side,  discharge  themselves  again  at  the  gutter  L,  where 
they  are  taken  up  by  the  buckets  F,  F,  &c.,  and  discharged 
again  at  the  gutter  K,  and  are  so  repeated  in  a  constant  sue- 
oeasion  as  often  as  any  receptacle  is  vacant  in  the  wheel  Gat 


66  FESPETUUM  mobile; 

the  gutter  K  for  their  reception,  and  by  thai  means  the  per- 
petual revolution  is  obtained,  the  upper  ball  being  at  the  same 
time  discharged  from  one  bucket  i^hea  the  lower  ball  is  taken 
up  by  another.'*  * 

1790.— John  Haywood  [No.  1750],  of  Long  Acre,  Mid- 
dlesex, draftsman  and  mechanic  ^^  A  machine  for  working 
mills  and  engines  without  the  aid  of  fire,  water,  or  wind, 
or  in  aid  of  all  or  any  of  those  or  any  other  powers.*^ 

^*  The  machine  acts  on  a  rotative  principle,  or,  in  other 
words,  has  a  revolving  circular  or  circulating  motion  round  an 
axis,  center,  or  centers.  It  may  be  made  or  constructed  of 
any  materials  or  matter  whatsoever,  so  it  be  of  sufficient 
strength  to  sustain  the  power  of  action  when  applied  to  any 
mill,  engine,  or  machine  to  which  action  or  motion  can  or  may 
be  communicated  by  a  wheel.  The  size  or  dimensions  of  this 
machine  are  by  no  means  confined,  but  may  be  varied  or  altered 
as  circumstances  may  require. 

^^  References  to  the  drawings  of  the  machine  hereunto 
annexed  : — Fig.  1  is  the  section  of  the  machine.  A,  A,  B^ 
a  cranked  or  double  center,  fixed  to  the  stand  or  frame  £>  by  • 
the  bolts  £.  C,  C,  the  wheel  which  turns  or  revolves  round 
that  part  of  the  cranked  center  mark  A«  F,  levers  which  turn 
or  revolve  round  the  cranked  centf r  B.  G,  G,  rollers  or 
weights  which  revolve  in  the  circular  guides  or  grooves  by 
means  of  the  leavers  F.  H,  H,  circular  grooves  or  guides 
which  are  affixed  to  the  inner  sides  of  the  wheeL  N.B. — The 
distance  from  A  to  B  is  the  radius  in  all  cases  to  determine  the 
space  between  the  center  of  the  guide  or  groove  H  and  the 
center  of  the  roller  or  weight  G.  The  distance  of  the  two 
concentric  circles  which  form  the  guides  or  grooves  H  must  be 
equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  roller  or  weight  G.  I,  I,  springs 
which  stop  the  rollers  or  weights  G  from  returning  when  at 
the  horizontal  diameter  of  the  wheel.  K,  weights,  which  may 
be  increased  or  diminished  at  pleasure.  L,  ledges  which  con- 
nect the  sides  of  the  wheel  together.  N.B. — By  fixing  cogs 
or  teeth  on  the  rim  of  the  wheel,  so  as  to  connect  it  with  any 

*  Copied  from  the  original  specification.  The  same  also  occnrs  in 
The  Repertory  of  Arts  and  Manufactures,  first  series,  vol.  7,  8vo.,  1797, 
Art.  XXIII.,  p.  165. 


OK,   SEJULCH   FOB  SELF-MOTITE   POWEK. 


67 


mill,  machrne,  or  engine  to  which  motion  can  be  given  by  a 
wheel,  the  power  of  this  machine  may  be  communicated." 
{Fig.  1.) 


1794.— Thomas  Mead  [No.  1979]^  of  Sculcoates,  York, 
engineer*  ^^  Certain  methods  of  exerting,  putting,  and  con- 
tinuing in  motion  pneumatic  chemical  or  pneumato-chemical 
apparatus.'*  This  is  an  arrangement  of  pipes,  cylinders,  stop- 
cocks, and  ^^  a  hollow  fire  grate,"  of  which  it  would  be  folly 


PEBPETTHTM  MOBILE; 


to  quote  the  description ;  indeed,  the  patentee  himself  com- 
placently states — ^^  it  was  not  for  any  particular  apparatus  for 
which  the  letters  patent  were  granted  !" 


1797. — RiCHABD  Vabley  [No.  2181],  of  Damside,  Lanca- 
shire, merchant.     ^  A  new  perpetual  moving  power.'* 

^^My  invention  consists  of  a  method  of  applying  the  weight 
of  the  atmosphere  upon  a  wheel  in  any  other  fluid,  and  by  that 
means  destroying  its  spring  or  reaction,  the  manner  of  doing 
which  I  describe  as  follows,  agreeable  to  the  drawing  (Fig.  6) 
annexed : — 

"  A  is  a  circular  vessel,  made  of  copper  or  any  other  sub- 
stance, capable  of  containing  water,  and  covered  with  a  top 
part  so  as  to  be  perfectly  air  tight.  B  is  a  wheel  placed  in  the 
inside  of  the  vessel,  with  its  axle  perpendicular,  the  uppermost 
part  of  which  comes  thro'  the  top  of  the  vessel,  and  is  made  to 
work  air-tight;  the  lower  end  runs  in  a  step  within  the  vessel, 
and  no  part  of  the  wheel  is  to  touch  the  vessel  but  its  axis. 
C  is  a  cylinder  placed  firmly  upon  the  wheel.  D  is  the  piston, 
suspended  by  a  chain  to  a  strong  spring  fixed  on  the  wheel* 
This  spring  is  to  be  made  of  such  strength  as  that  when  the 
whole  weight  of  the  atmosphere  is  upon  the  piston  the  air  will 
only  move  it  about  one  inch  down.  E  is  the  tube  leading  from 
the  axle,  which  is  hollow  from  the  top  to  the  level  of  the  wheel, 
so  as  to  admit  the  external  air  by  this  tube  to  the  piston  D, 
which  piston  is  a  circular  vessel,  made  air-tight,  and  exactly 
fits  the  cylinder.  There  is  a  joint  in  the  tube  E  at  F,  which 
is  made  air-tight  by  leathers,  so  that  when  the  piston  descends 
the  tube  may  give  way  to  it.  G  is  a  small  tube  leading  from 
the  bottom  of  the  cylinder  to  the  center  of  the  axle,  and  from 
thence  brought  out  at  the  end  of  it,  and  by  which  the  air  is  ex- 
tracted from  the  cylinder  by  means  of  an  air  pump,  and  a 
vacuum  formed  in  it.  On  the  top  part,  or  any  other  con- 
venient place  of  the  vessel,  are  fixed  two  cylinders  or  tubes,  of 
a  proportional  size  to  the  cylinders  on  the  wheel,  one  of  which 
is  a  condensing  cylinder,  by  means  of  a  screw  and  piston,  and 
by  which  the  water  in  the  vessel  may  be  compressed ;  the 
other  has  its  piston  suspended  at  the  bottom,  and  the  top  part 
of  the  fjjff^der  being  filled  with  air,  as  the  other  piston  is 


OB,   SEABCH   FOB  SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  69 

screwed  down  this  rises,  and  condenses  the  air  in  the  cylinder, 
the  spring  of  which  keeps  the  water  in  the  vessel  pressed  to  all 
parts  alike ;  and  when  the  air  is  extracted  from  the  cylinder 


C,  and  the  piston  D  is  forced  down  by  the  external  atmosphere 
into  the  cylinder,  this  pressure  is  continued,  and  the  condensed 
air  expands  in  proportion,  and  prevents  any  tendency  to  a 
vacuum  being  formed,  which  would  cause  a  cohesion  of  all  the 
parts.     By  this  means  the  external  air  is  suspended  upon  the 


70  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

wheel  by  the  chain,  the  same  as  a  weight,  aod  the  spring  of 
the  atmosphere  being  taken  from  the  cylinder,  there  is  nothing 
to  oppose  this  weight,  there  being  no  spring  in  water ;  and 
this  power  may  be  increased  in  proportion  to  the  size  and 
number  of  cylinders  on  the  wheel  and  its  diameter.^'* 

The  following  strictures  on  Mr.  Varley's  machine  for  pro- 
ducing perpetual  motion  occur  in  the  "Monthly  Magazine :" — 

On  the  23rd  May,  1797,  letters  patent  were  granted  to  Mr. 
Richard  Varley,  of  Damside,  Bolton-le-Moor,  county  of  Lan- 
caster, cotton  manufacturer,  for  a  machine  for  producing  per- 
petual motion. 

The  ignorant  and  prejudiced  part  of  mankind  have  in  all 
ages  attached  a  folly  to  the  pursuit  of  yarious  mysteries  of 
nature  and  science ;  such  as  the  ascertaining  the  longitude 
at  sea,  the  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle,  the  transmuta- 
tion of  metals,  the  quadrature  of  the  circle,  the  adhesion  of 
metallic  particles,  the  repulsion  of  atmospheric  particles,  the 
essential  differences  between  bodies  to  the  exclusion  of  their 
attributes,  and  perpetual  motion.  The  last  has  been  thought, 
in  the  general  meaning  of  the  term,  to  be  the  most  chimeri- 
cal, because  all  machines  are  composed  of  perishable  sub- 
stances. 

Mr.  Varley's  discovery  of  a  new  perpetual  power  appears, 
however,  to  promise  as  much  utility  as  steam,  wind,  water,  or 
any  other  force  requisite  for  working  mechanical  apparatus. 

We  present  our  readers  beneath  with  the  form  of  the 
opened  superfices  of  his  apparatus,  with  this  peculiar  advan- 
tage that  it  never  diminishes  its  force,  while  the  machine  upon 
which  it  acts  preserves  its  original  form  and  solidity. 

[Here  follows  a  description,  as  given  in  foregoing  specifi- 
cation.] 

Thus,  having  described  the  machine,  it  appears  that  the 
principle  of  the  discovery  of  the  new  power  is  effected  by 
"  converging  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere  on  a  wheel  in  any 
other  fluid,  and  by  that  means  destroying  the  repulsive 
quality,  or  re-action  of  the  air." 

*  Copied  from  the  original  patent.  A  copy  is  published  in  The 
Repertory  of  Arts  and  Manufactures,  8vo,  1799,  vol.  10,  first  series,  p.  9. 


OB,   SEA&CH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  71 

The  process  Mr.  Varley  pursues  in  effecting  his  purpose  is 
as  follows : — ^The  copper  vessel  is  filled  with  water  or  any 
other  fluid,  with  the  other  apparatus  in  it  as  hefore  described. 
It  is  then  closed  with  the  cover,  and  by  means  of  leather  on 
the  edges  is  made  perfectly  air-tight.  In  this  condition,  with 
the  help  of  an  air-pump,  a  vacuum  is  formed  in  the  larger 
cylinder,  over  which  cylinder  is  a  spring  that  is  acted  upon 
by  the  condensed  air  conveyed  into  the  piston  through  the 
tube  F,  and  that  produces  the  action  of  tiie  wheel,  because 
water  has  no  spring. 

It  is  found  that  upon  every  square  inch  of  the  earth's  sur- 
face there  exists  a  weight  of  nearly  sixteen  pounds  of  common 
air,  and  that  a  column  of  mercury,  whose  elevation  will  be 
thirty  inches,  and  its  base  one  cubic  inch,  will  weigh  fifteen 
pounds  avoirdupoise,  at  the  rate  of  eight  ounces  for  every 
cubic  inch  of  mercury.  Since  this  atmospheric  power  can  be 
condensed  by  various  means,  the  formation  therefore  of  the 
vacuum  in  the  cylinder,  and  the  pressure  of  the  condensed  air 
against  it,  of  course  produces  the  revolution  of  the  wheel, 
which  is  the  effect  sought  for. 

The  cylinders  can  be  increased  on  the  radii,  or  wheel-spokes, 
to  any  weight,  as  also  may  the  condensed  air.  Consequently,  if  a 
toothed  segment  or  cogged  wheel  of  any  description  is  fitted 
to  it,  it  will  receive  the  full  action  of  the  weight  of  the  atmo- 
sphere as  its  impulsive  power,  and  may  be  easily  applied  to 
any  machine  in  the  same  manner  as  if  it  were  acted  upon  by 
steam,  wind,  water,  horses,  weight,  spring,  or  any  description 
of  muscular  power  necessary  to  produce  motion.* 

The  following  is  an  editorial  Note  to  Correspondents  in 
«  Nicholson's  Journal  of  Philosophy,  &c."  4to.  1797.  Vol.1, 
p.  334:— 

I  should  be  glad  to  give  a  description  and  drawing  of 
Mr.  Varley's  machine  for  producing  perpetual  motion,  as 
requested  by  Mr.  Notlem,  of  Wisbech,  if  an  attentive  perusal 
of  the  specification  enrolled  in  Chancery  had  shewn  me  any- 
thing tending  to  improve  the  theory  or  practice  of  mechanics. 
The  description  in  the  periodical  work  he  mentions  is  not 
sufficiently  clear  to   shew  the  whole   of  what   the   writer 

•  The  Monthly  Magazine  for  1797.    Vol.  4  (July  No.),  p.  58. 


72  PEBPETITUM   mobile; 

meant  to  explain,  and  I  found  the  original  equally  imperfect. 
Mr.  Varley's  notion,  obscured  by  some  extraneous  and  unim- 
portant circumstances,  appears  to  be,  that  if  an  exhausted 
cylinder  be  fixed  to  one  part  of  the  periphery  of  a  wheel,  and 
a  piston  fitted  therein,  the  pressure  of.  the  atmosphere  on 
tliis  last,  supposed  also  to  be  attached  to  the  wheel  by  a  spring 
and  chain  (parallel  to  a  tangent),  will  tend  to  drive  it  into  the 
vacuum,  and,  if  prevented  by  the  shortness  of  the  chain,  will 
draw  the  wheel  round.  It  is  obvious  to  any  person  acquainted 
with  statics,  that  the  pressures  on  his  wheel  must  counter- 
balance each  other,  and  cannot  produce  motion. 

It  has  always  been  easy  to  shew  the  fallacy  of  schemes  for 
perpetual  motion  in  the  particular  instances ;  but  I  have  met 
with  no  clear  enunciation  of  this  project  so  general  as  to 
include  every  possible  scheme,  and  evince  its  own  absurdity. 
The  difficulty  of  performing  tiiis  seems  to  arise  from  a  want 
of  direct  and  concise  demonstrations  of  the  fundamental 
principles  of  the  lever,  and  the  equal  pressure  of  fluids  in  all 
directions. 

Mr.  Nicholson,  in  consequence  of  Mr.  Varley's  and  Dr. 
Schwiers'  patents,  wrote  as  follows : — 

On  the  Meehankal  Projects  for  affording  a  Perpetual  Motion. 

In  consequence  of  the  notice*  taken  of  Mr.  Varley's 
attempt  to  produce  a  perpetual  motion,  I  have  been  requested 
by  several  correspondents  to  state  how  far  the  mechanical 
scheme  for  which  Dr.  Conrad  Shiviersf  took  out  a  patent  in 
the  year  1790,  for  the  same  object,  may  be  worthy  of  atten- 
tion. I  have,  on  that  occasion,  mentioned  the  difficulties 
which  have  prevented  any  clear  general  demonstration  of  the 
absurdity  of  this  pursuit  from  being  produced,  though  it  has 
not  been  difficult  to  shew  the  fallacy  of  the  individual  plans. 
It  does  not,  indeed,  seem  easy  to  enunciate  the  scheme  itself. 
What,  in  universal  terms,  is  the  thing  proposed  to  be  done  ? 
Is  it  to  cause  a  body  to  act  in  such  a  manner  that  the  re- ac- 
tion shall  be  greater  than  the  action  itself,  and  by  that  means 
generate  force  by  the  accumulation  of  the  surplus  ?     Or,  can 

•  Nicholson's  Phil.  Jour.     4to.     Page  334. 
t  Read~-Dr.  Schwiers. 


OB,   SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIYE   FOWEB.  73 

tite  motion  communicated  be  greater  than  that  lost  by  the 
agent?      Since    these    positions   are  evidently  contrary  to 
the  physical  axioms  called  the  laws  of  nature,  and  frictions 
and  resistances  would  speedily  destroy  all  motions  of  simple 
uniformity,   it  may  be  presumed  that  S*  Gravesande,  who 
thought  that  all  the  demonstrations   of   the   absurdity  of 
schemes  for  perpetual  motion  contained  paralogism,  would 
haye  stated    the  proposition  under  different  terms.      But, 
without  entering  upon  this  apparently  unprofitable  disquisi- 
tion, it  may  be  useful,  as  well  as  entertaining,  to  make  a  few 
observations  on  the  mechanical  contrivances  which  depend  on 
a  mistaken  deduction  from  the  general  theorem  respecting 
the  balance,  among  which  that  of  Dr.  Shiviers''^  must  be 
classed. 

There  is  no  doubt'but  numerous  arrangements  have  been 
made,  and  still  are  laboured  at  by  various  individuals,  to  pro- 
duce a  machine  which  shall  possess  the  power  of  moving 
itself  perpetually,  notwithstanding  the  inevitable  loss  by  fric- 
tion and  resistance  of  the  air.  Little,  however,  of  these 
abortive  exertions  has  been  entered  upon  record.  The  plans 
of  Bishop  Wilkins,  the  Marquis  of  Worcester,  and  M.  Orfy- 
reus,  are  all  which  at  this  time  occur  to  my  recollection. 

There  is  no  doubt  but  the  celebrated  Wilkins  was  a  man 
of  learning  and  ability.  His  essay  towards  a  real  character 
and  a  philosophical  language  is  sufficient  to  render  his  name 
immortaL  Twenty  years  before  the  appearance  of  that  work, 
lie  published  his  '^  Mathematical  Magic,"  namely,  in  the  year 
16&,  containing  295  pages,  small  octavo,  which,  from  the 
nnmber  of  copies  still  in  being,  I  suppose  to  have  been  a 
very  popular  treatise.  It  is  in  this  work  that  I  find,  among 
other  contrivances  for  the  same  purpose,  a  wheel  carrying 
sixteen  loaded  arms,  similar  to  that  deHneated  in  Fig.  4,  plate 
16,  in  which,  however,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  I  have 
drawn  but  six.  Each  lever,  A  B  C  D  E  F,  is  moveable 
through  an  angle  of  45^,  by  a  joint  near  the  circumference  of 
the  wheel,  and  the  inner  end  or  tail  of  each  is  confined  by 
two  studs  or  pins,  so  that  it  must  either  lie  in  the  direction 
of  a  radius,  or  else  in  the  required  position  of  obliquity.  If 
the  wheel  be  now  supposed  to  move  in  the  direction  E  F,  it 
is  evident  that  the  levers  A  B  C  D,  by  hanging  in  the  oblique 

•  Read — Dr.  Schwiers. 


74 


PEBPETUTJM    mobile; 


position  against  the  antecedent  pins,  will  describe  a  less 
circle  in  their  ascent  than  when,  on  the  other  side,  they  come 
to  descend  in  the  positions  E  F.  Hence,  it  was  expected 
that  the  descending  weights,  having  the  advantage  of  a 
longer  lever,  would  always  predominate.  Dr.  Wilkins,  by 
referring  the  weights  to  an  horizontal  diameter,  has  shewn 
that  in  his  machine  they  will  not.  A  popular  notion  of  this 
result  may  also  be  gathered  from  the  figure,  where  there  are 
three  weights  on  the  ascending,  and  only  two  on  the  descend- 
ing side;  the  obliquity  of  position  giving  an  advantage  in 
point  of  number,  equal  to  what  the  other  side  may  possess  in 

(Fig.  4,  pi  15.) 


intensity.  Or,  if  this  contrivance  were  to  be  strictly  ex- 
amined, on  the  supposition  that  the  levers  and  weights  were 
indefinitely  numerous,  the  question  would  be  determined  by 
shewing  that  the  circular  arcs  A  K,  H  I,  are  in  equilibrio 
with  the  arcs  A  G,  G  L. 

The  simplest  method  of  examining  any  scheme  of  this 
kind  with  weights,  consists  in  enquiring  whether  the  perpen- 
dicular ascents  and  descents  would  be  performed  with  equal 
masses  in  equal  times.     If  so,  there  will  be  no  preponder- 


OB,   8EAECH   P0»   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  75 

ance,  and,  consequently,  no  motion.     This  is  clearly  the  case 
witii  the  contrivance  before  us. 

The  Marquis  of  Worcester,  who  will  ever  be  remembered 
as  the  inventor  of  the  steam  engine,  has  described  a  perpetual 
motion  in  the  fifty-sixth  No.*  of  his  "  Century  of  Inventions," 
published  in  the  year  1655,  and  since  reprinted  in  1767  by 
tiie  Foulis's  at  Glasgow.     His  words  were  as  follow  : — 

"  To  provide  and  make,  that  all  the  weights  of  the  de- 
scending side  of  a  wheel  shall  be  perpetually  further  from 
the  centre  than  those  of  the  mounting  side,  and  yet  equal  in 
number  and  heft  to  the  one  side  as  the  other.  A  most  incre- 
dible thing  if  not  seen,  but  tried  before  the  late  King  (of 
blessed  memory)  in  the  Tower  by  my  directions,  two  extraor- 
dinary ambassadors  accompanying  his  Majesty,  and  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  and  Duke  Hamilton,  with  most  of  the  Court, 
attending  him.  The  wheel  was  fourteen  feet  over,  and  forty 
weights  of  fifty  pounds  a-piece.  Sir  William  Balfour,  then 
Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  can  justify  it  with  several  others^ 
They  all  saw,  that  no  sooner  these  great  weights  passed  the 
diameter  line  of  the  lower  side,  but  they  hung  a  foot  further 
from  the  centre ;  nor  no  sooner  passed  the  diameter  line  of 
the  upper  side,  but  they  hung  a  foot  nearer.  Be  pleased  to 
judge  the  consequence." 

Desaguliers,  in  his  *'  Course  of  Experimental  Philosophy,'* 
vol.  1,  page  185,  has  quoted  this  passage,  and  given  a  sketch 
of  a  pretended  self-moving  wheel,  similar  to  Fig.  5,  plate  16, 
as  resembling  the  contrivance  mentioned  by  the  Marquis  of 
Worcester.  The  description  of  this  last  engineer  agrees,  how- 
ever, somewhat  better  with  the  contrivance  Fig.  4.  It  must, 
of  course,  be  a  mistake  in  terms,  when  he  says  the  weight 
receded  from  the  centre  at  the  lower  diameter,  and  approached 
towards  it  at  the  upper :  the  contrary  being  in  fact  necessary 
to  a£ford  any  hope  of  success ;  and  accordingly  in  the  quota- 
tion it  is  so  stated.  I  am,  therefore,  disposed  to  think  that 
Fig.  5  represents  the  wheel  of  Orfyreus  at  Hesse  Cassel,  much 
talked  of  about  the  year  1720,  and  which  probably  was  made 
to  revolve,  during  the  time  of  exhibition,  by  some  concealed 
apparatus.  It  consists  of  a  number  of  cells  or  partitions, 
distinguished  by  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  which  are  made 
between  the  interior  and  exterior  surfaces  of  two  concentric 

*  1663  is  the  date  of  the  first  printed  edition,  and  1359  date  of  the  MS. 


76  PEEPETUFM   mobile; 

cylinders.   The  partitions  being  placed  obliquely  with  respect, 
to  the  radius,  a  cylindrical  or  spherical  weight  placed  on  each, 

{Fig,  5,  pi,  15,) 


it  is  seen  from  the  figure,  that  these  weights  will  lie  against: 
the  inner  surface  of  the  large  cylinder  whenever  the  outer 
end  of  the  bottom  partition  of  any  cell  is  lowest ;  and,  on 
the  contrary,  when  that  extremity  is  highest,  the  weight  will 
rest  on  the  surface  of  the  interior  cylinder.  Let  the  wheel  be 
made  to  revolve  in  the  direction  ABC;  the  weights  in  C  D* 
E  F  G  H  I  being  close  to  the  external  circle,  and  the  weights 
K  L  M  A  B  close  to  the  inner,  for  the  reasons  last  mentioned. 
As  the  cell  B  descends,  its  weight  will  likewise  run  out,  at  the 
same  time  that  the  weight  in  the  cell  I  will  run  in,  in  conse- 
quence of  its  partition  being  elevated.  By  the  continuation 
of  this  process,  since  all  the  weights  on  the  descending  side 
pass  down  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  centre,  while  those 
of  the  ascending  side  rise  for  a  considerable  part  of  their 
ascent  at  a  less  distance  from  the  same  point,  it  is  concluded 
that  the  wheel  will  continue  to  maintain  its  motion.  On  this, 
however,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  perpendicular  ascent 
and  descent  are  alike,  both  in  measure  and  in  time  of  per- 
formance ;  and  that  the  familiar  examination,  even  to  those 
who  know  little  of  such  subjects,  is  sufficient  to  show  that 
the  preponderance  is  not  quite  so  palpable  as  at  first  it 
appears.  For  the  weights  G  and  F,  H  and  £,  I  and  D  are 
evidently  in  equilibrio,  because  at  the  same  horizontal  dis- 
tance from  the  centre ;  and  if  the  favourable  supposition  that 


OB,    SEARCH   FOB  SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  77 

the  weight  B  hath  already  ran  out  be  admitted,  it  will  then 
remain  a  question  whether  these  two  exterior  weights,  B  and 
C,  can  preponderate  over  the  four  inner  weights,  K  L  M  A. 
The  more  accurate  examination  of  this  particular  contrivance 
will  lead  to  thefollowing  theorem : — In  two  concentric  circles, 
if  tangents  be  drawn  at  the  extreme  points  of  a  diameter 
of  the  smaller,  and  continued  till  they  intersect  the  larger, 
the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  arc  of  the  greater  circle 
included  between  the^tangents,  and  of  the  half  periphery  of 
the  smaller  circle  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  diameter,  will 
be  the  common  centre  of  the  circles.  If,  therefore,  the  balls 
were  indefinitely  numerous  and  small,  the  supposed  effective 
parts  of  the  wheel  (Fig.  6)  would  be  in  equilibrio,  as  well  as 
the  parts  beneath  the  horizontal  tangent  of  the  inner  circle. 

Fig.  6  represents  the  contrivance  of  Dr.  Shiviers,*  which,  in 
a  periodical  publication,  in  other  particulars  respectable,  has 
been  said  to  continue  in  motion  for  weeks  and  even  months 
together.  There  is  not  the  smallest  probability  that  it  should 
continue  in  motion  for  half  a  minute,  or  nearly  as  long  as  a 
sifnple  wheel  would  retain  part  of  its  first  impulse.  The  external 
circle  denotes  a  wheel  carrying  a  number  of  buckets,  ABIL,  &c. 
C  represents  a  toothed  wheel,  on  the  same  axis,  which  drives 
a  pinion  D ;  and  this  last  drives  another  pinion  £  upon  the 
axis  of  a  lanthom,  or  wheel  intended  to  work  a  chain-pump 
with  the  same  number  of  buckets  as  in  the  larger  wheel  A 
B  I.  The  lanthom  G  is  made  of  such  a  size  as  to  receive 
the  buckets  abil  with  a  due  velocity.  K  represents  a  gutter, 
through  which  a  metallic  ball,  contained  in  the  bucket  m,  may 
run  and  lodge  itself  in  the  bucket  A  of  the  wheel.  Each  of 
the  buckets  of  the  wheel,  B  I  L  M,  which  are  below  the 
gutter,  is  supplied  with  a  metallic  ball,  and  so  likewise  are  the 
ascending  buckets,  a  b  il m,  of  the  chain-pump.  As  the 
pump  supplies  the  wheel,  it  is  again  supplied  at  M,  where  the 
balls  fall  into  its  ascending  buckets.  Now,  it  is  presumed 
that  the  balls  in  the  wheel,  I  suppose  on  account  of  their 
distance  from  the  centre  of  motion,  will  descend  with  more 
than  sufficient  force  to  raise  those  on  the  chain,  and,  conse- 
quently, that  the  motion  will  be  perpetual. 

The  deception  in  this  contrivance  has  much  less  seduction 
than  in  the  two  foregoing,  because  it  is  more  easily  referred 

•  Should  be  Dr.  Schwiers.    The  patent  bears  date  1790  [No.  1745]. 


78 


PEBPETUUM   mobile; 


to  the  simple  lever.      This,  like  the  others,  exhihits  no  pro- 
spect of  success,  when  tried  by  the  simple  consideration  of 

(Fig.  6,  pi.  15.) 


the  equality  of  the  ascent'  and  descent  in  the  whole  time  of 
the  rotation  of  a  single  ball.  It  may  also  be  shewn,  from 
the  principles  of  wheel-work,  which  are  familiar  to  artisans, 
that  whatever  is  gained  by  the  excess  of  the  diameter  of  the 
great  wheel  beyond  that  of  the  wheel  C,  is  again  lost  by  the 
excess  of  the  lanthom  A  beyond  the  pinion  E. 


OK,   SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.. 


79 


The  fundamental  proposition  of  the  simple  lever  or  balance, 
that  equal  bodies  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  fulcrum  will 
equiponderate,  but  that  at  unequal  distances  the  most  remote 
mU  descend,  has  in  these  and  numberless  other  instances  led 
mechanical  workmen  and  speculators  to  pursue  tbis  fruitless 
enquiry  with  labour  and  expense  often  ill-a£forded,  and  with  a 
degree  of  anxiety  and  infatuation  which  can  hardly  be  con- 
ceived by  those  who  have  never  suffered  the  pain  of  hope 
long  deferred.  For  this  reason  chiefly,  it  has  appeared  de- 
sirable and  useful  to  treat  the  subject  in  a  familiar  way,  without 
descending  to  those  expressions  of  contempt,  whicb  igno- 
rance, harmless  to  aU  but  itself,  is  surely  not  entitied  to.  If 
such  reasoners  were  well  convinced  that  the  power  of  a 
machine  is  to  be  estimated  by  the  excess  of  motion  referred 
to  the  perpendicular,  without  any  regard  to  the  apparent 
centre  of  the  machine,  and  that  in  machines  very  little  com- 
pounded it  is  possible  to  produce  effects  directly  contrary  to 
the  rule  which  is  true  of  the  simple  lever,  they  would  proba- 
bly renounce  many  flattering  projects,  grounded  only  on  the 
supposition  of  its  universality.  Desaguliers  contrived  an 
apparatus  in  which  two  equal  weights  may  be  placed  at  any 
distance  whatever  from  the  centre  of  motion,  and  still  con- 


Compound  Balance^ 


(Fig.  3,  pi  15.) 


tinue  in  equilibrio.     Fig.  3  represents  this  instrument.     A  D 
denotes  a  balance  with  equal  arms,  and  E  F  another  of  the 


80 


FEBFETTJinC   MOBILE; 


same  cdmensions.  These  move  on  the  centres  B  and  C,  and 
are  connected  by  the  inflexible  rods  A  E  and  D  F;  the 
motion  being  left  free  by  means  of  joints  at  the  comers. 
Across  the  rods  A  D,  E  F,  are  fixed  two  bars,  I  E,  L  M. 
Now,  it  is  unnecessary  to  shew  that  the  weight  G  will  de- 
scribe exactly  the  same  line  or  circular  arc,  when  the  leyers 
are  moyed  into  the  position  a  d/e^  or  any  other  position,  as  it 
would  have  described  in  case  it  had  been  suspended  at  A,  or 
E,  or  E ;  and  that  it  is  of  no  consequence  in  this  respect  at 
what  part  of  the  line  A  E  or  I  K  it  be  fixed.  The  same 
observations  are  true  of  the  weight  H  on  the  other  side. 
And  accordingly  it  is  found  that  these  equal  weights  may  be 
suspended  anywhere  on  the  lines  I  E  and  L  M  without  alter- 
ing their  equilibrium. 

By  this  contrivance  it  is  most  evidently  proved,  to  those 
who  are  totally  imacquainted  with  the  theory,  that  weights  do 
not  preponderate  in  compound  engines,  on  account  of  their 
distance  from  the  centre.  Several  other  contrivances  may  be 
made  to  the  same  efiect.  The  following  combination  of 
(Fig,  2,  pL  15.) 


OK,    SEAKCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  81 

wheel-work  presented  itself  to  me  as  one  which  would  most 
probably  be  mistaken  for  a  perpetual  motion.   (Fig.  2,  plate 
15.)  The  dye  circles  represent  the  same  number  of  wheels,  of 
equal  diameter  and  number  of  teeth,  acting  together.     The 
middle  wheel  A  is  fixed  between  two  upright  pillars,  so  that 
it  cannot  revolye.     The  other  four  wheels  are  pinned  in  a 
frame  H  I,  in  which  they  can  revolve,  and  through  which  the 
axis  of  A  likewise  passes.      From  the  extremity  of  the  axis 
of  D,  and  also  of  d^  proceed  the  horizontal  levers  H  K  and  I 
U  which  are  equal,  and  point  in  the  same  direction  parallel 
to  the  plane  of  the  wheels.      At  the  extremity  of  these  arms 
hang  the  equal  weights  P  and  p.     Let  it  now  be  imagined 
that  the  end  I  of  the  frame  is  depressed,  the  wheel  B  will 
turn  round  by  the  re-action  of  the  fixed  wheel  A  in  the  same 
direction  as  H  I,  and  it  will  make  one  revolution  in  the  same 
time  relative  to  the  frame,  or  two  with  regard  to  absolute 
space,  by  reason  of  its  being  carried  round.     The  action  of  B 
upon  D  will  produce  a  rotation  relative  to  the  frame  in  the 
opposite  direction  during  the  same  time.      Instead,  therefore, 
of  two  revolutions,  like  the  wheel  B,  this  wheel  D,  with  regard 
to  absolute  space,  will  not  revolve  at  all,  and  in  every  posi- 
tion of  the  apparatus  the  arm  I  L  will  continue  horizontal, 
and  point  the  same  way.      For  similar  reasons,  the  arm  H  K 
will  retain  its  position.      Consequently,  it  is   seen   that  the 
descending  weight  will  move  at  a  great  horizontal  distance 
from  the  centre  N,  while  the  ascending  weight  rises  very  near 
that  centre.      But  there  will  not  on  this  account  be  a  perpe- 
tual motion :  for  the  action  of  the  levers  H  K  and  I  L  upon 
the  frame  H  I,  by  means  of  the  toothed  wheels,  will  in  the 
detail  be  found  precisely  alike,  and  in  the  general  considera- 
tion of  the  motions  of  P  and  p,  the  opposite  motions  in  the 
circle  E  F  G  will  be  accurately  the  same. 

It  has  always  been  considered  as  essential  to  a  perpetual 
motion,  that  it  should  be  derived  from  some  energy  which  is 
not  supposed  to  vary  in  its  intensity.  Such  are  the  inertia, 
the  gravity  or  magnetism  of  bodies.  For  an  occasional  or 
periodical  variation  of  intensity  in  any  force  is  evidently  pro- 
ductive of  motion,  which  requires  only  to  be  accumulated  or 
applied,  and  the  apparatus  for  applying  it  cannot  be  con- 
sidered as  a  machine  for  perpetual  motion.  Neither,  in  strict- 
ness, can  any  machine  whose  motion  is  derived  from  the 
rotation  of  the  earth,  and  the  consequent  change  of  seasons 


62 


PEKPETUUM     mobile; 


and  rotation  of  events,  be  to  considered,  because  it  does  not 
generate,  but  only  communicates.  The  perpetual  flow  of 
rivers  ;  the  vicissitudes  of  the  tides ;  the  constant,  periodical 
and  variable  winds ;  the  expansions  and  contractions  of  air, 
mercury,  or  other  fluids,  by  daily  or  other  changes  of  tem- 
perature ;  the  diflferences  of  expansions  in  metals,  by  the 
same  change  ;  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  mercury  in  the  baro- 
meter ;  the  hygrometric  chang:e8  in  the  remains  of  organized 
beings,  and  every  other  mutation  which  continually  happens 
around  us,  may  be  applied  to  give  motion  to  mills,  clocks, 
and  other  engines,  which  may  be  contrived  to  endure  as  long 
as  the  apparatus  retains  its  figure.* 


1801. — Specification  of  the  Patent  granted  to  Joseph  Gaston  John 
Baptiste,  Count  de  Thiville  [2472],  of  Piccadilly,  in  the  County 
of  Middlesex t  for  "  Certain  new  methods  of  giving  an  independent 
moving  power  to  all  machines,  by  means  of  hydraulic  engines  ;  and 
also  of  constructing  and  employing  separately  several  of  their 
parts,  such  as  wheels,  pistons,  and  apparatus  for  reducing  friction, 
upon  new  principles,** — Dated  February  5,  1801. 

To  all  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come,  &c.  Now  know 
ye,  that  in  compliance  with  the  said  proviso,  I,  the  said 
Joseph  Gaston  John  Baptiste,  Count  de  Thiville,  do  hereby 
declare,  that  my  said  invention  consists  in  the  application  of 
certain  hydrostatical  principles  not  at  all  or  but  little  known 
till  now,  which  contrary  to  the  laws  of  statics  in  solid  bodies, 

give  to  incompressible  fluids 
the  property  of  rising  almost 
spontaneously  above  the 
place  from  which  they  have 
fallen.  Without  accounting 
for  the  causes,  I  will  con- 
fine myself  to  eflects  founded 
on  experiments,  and  give 
some  specimens  of  these  prin- 
ciples, and  of  the  conse- 
quences resulting  therefrom. 
Let  Fig.  1  be  an  empty  tube, 
(Fig,  1,  pL  14.)  ^^^  stopped  at  bottom  or  top 


♦  A  Journal  of  Natural  Philosophy,  Chemistn',  and  the  Arts.     By 
WUliam  Nicholson.    Vol.  1.    4to.     17S>7.     Page  875. 


OB,    SEABCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB. 


83 


air-tight.  If  it  be  immersed  into  water  and  suddenly  opened, 
the  fluid  will  rise  to  a,  fall  to  b,  rise  again  to  c,  and  so  on 
till  it  flx  itself  at  d,  which  is  the  level  of  the  fluid. 

[He  then  proceeds  to  describe  Fig.  2  as  "a  vertical  sec- 
tion of  a  chest  fastened  in  a  large  reservoir  or  pond."  Four 
other  figures  are  given  to  illustrate  this  plan  on  the  preceding 
principle  of  giving  motion  to  machinery.  That  he  had  not 
reduced  his  plans  to  practice,  appears  from  the  following : — ] 

At  what  height,  in  what  quEintity,  and  at  what  expence  of 
power  can  the  water  be  raised,  are  likewise  liable  to  great 
variations,  and  can  only  be  ascertained  by  experiments  on 
large  scales,  and  in  open  water. 

[Some  "  Observations  by  the  Patentee  **  are  added,  on 
*'  Friction  in  Fluids,"  on  "  Resistance  of  Fluids,"  and] 

Pebpetuax  Motion. — ^Without  prejudging  anything  upon 
the  principles  I  have  introduced  in  my  specification, — which 
principles  I  consider  as  a  theorem  from  which  every  one  may 
draw  the  corollaries, — I  will  confine  myself  within  the  limits 
I  have  prescribed,  and  propose  the  following  problem : — 


— 'H^ 

^-■M 

J=^^^=^^ 

f:^~-^:37ED\\\\\\\\lJ 

■==^=^^^^^^^=^^^^!SSSS 

5::-- ^        r^            NhSwS 

~. —  -.  ^-r-^ rr-'TT":'z~;^ 

{Fig.  13,  pL  14.) 

Let  A  (Fig.  13)  be  a  wheel  or  cylinder  turning  on  its 
gudgeon  b;  ece  is  an  assemblage  of  sheets  of  any  material 


84  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

or  stuff;  these  sheets  pass  between  thin  plates  or  wires 
fastened  in  a  fixed  box,  ii;  at  o  o  they  pass  freely  between 
small  cylinders  or  rollers,  turning  in  another  fixed  box,  V. 
Instead  of  being  so  separated,  they  may  be  pressed  close  to 
each  other  by  passing  between  two  rollers,  u  u.  Thus,  the 
apparatus  being  so  disposed,  and  the  level  of  the  water  being 
as  at  6?  ^,  I  say  the  phenomenon  of  spontaneous  ascent  of 
fluids  in  capillary  tubes  or  spaces,  ought  to  take  place  between 
the  sheets  at  i  i  ;  and  it  ought  not  to  do  so  at  o  o,  or  at  u  «, 
by  their  being  too  close  to  or  distant  from  each  other.  That 
being  established,  1  represent  by  Y  the  power  acquired  by 
the  ascent  of  the  fluid  at  i  i  ;  I  represent  by  Z  the  mechanical 
resistance  occasioned  by  the  rubbing  of  the  sheets  against 
the  cylinders  at  o  o,  or  by  their  pressure  at  u  u  Now,  I  ask 
how,  and  at  what  point,  the  laws  which  preside  over  the 
phenomena  of  nature  at  i  i,  and  those  which  regulate  the 
mechanical  effect  at  o  o  or  t/  ti,  coincide  so  as  to  determine  a 
constant  ratio  between  the  power  and  the  resistance;  and 
finally,  what  is  the  ratio  between  Y  and  Z. 

It  is  obvious  that  if  Z  is  greater  than  or  equal  to  Y,  the 
machine  will  remain  immovable.  If,  on  the  contrary,  Y  is 
greater  than  Z,  the  machine  once  put  in  motion  will  never 
stop.* 


♦  The  Repertory  of  Arts  and  Manufactures.    8vo.  1801.  Vol.  14,  p.  289. 


OB,    SEAKCH    FOK    SEXF-ITOTIVE    rOWER. 


85 


CHAPTER  IV. 

BABLT  PAPEBS  FBOM  THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  TRANSACTIONS, 
AND  SIB  BOBEBT  BOYLE ;  ALSO  THE  PABIS  ACADEMY  OF 
SCIENCES,    WITH    NOTICES    OF    COMMUNICATIONS    TO    THE 

ACADEMY,  1837-56. 

Nothing  later  than  1733  appears  to  have  heen  brought 
before  the  Royal  Society  on  Perpetual  Motion,  and  the  follow- 
ing papers  are  chiefly  remarkable  as  being  derived  from  its 
Transactions : — 

Observations  of  Dr*  Paphiy  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society,  on  a  French 
Paper  concerning  a  Perpetual  Motion. 

The  paper  printed  in  French,  and  containing  a  contrivance 
for  perpetual  motion,  being  set  down  in  such  a  manner  that 
can  hardly  be  understood  but  by  those  that  are  much  ac- 
quainted with  such  descriptions,  I  have  endeavour' d  to 
explain  it  as  follows  : — 

Let  D  E  F  be  a  pair  of  bellows  forty 
inches  long,  that  may  be  open'd  by  re- 
moving the  part  F  from  E ;  let  them  be 
exactly  shut  everywhere  but  at  the 
aperture  E ;  and  let  a  pipe  E  G,  twenty 
or  twenty-two  inches  long,  be  soldered 
to  the  sayd  aperture  E,  having  its  other 
end  in  a  vessel  G,  full  of  mercury,  and 
placed  near  the  middle  of  the  bellows. 

A  is  an  axis  for  the  bellows  to  turn 
upon. 

B,  a  counterpoise  fastened  to  the 
lower  end  of  the  bellows. 

C,  a  weight  with  a  clasp  to  keep  the 
bellows  upright. 

Now,  rf  we  suppose  the  bellows 
open'  d  only  to  i  or  J,  standing  upright,  and 
full  of  mercury,  it  is  plain  that  the  sayd 
mercury,  being  forty  inches  high,  must 
fall,  as  in  the  Torricellian  experiment, 
to  the  height  of  about  twenty-seven 
inches,  and,  consequently,  the  bellows 
must  open  towards  F,  and  leave  a 
vacuity  there.      This  vacuity  must  be        {Fiq.  184,  ph  5.) 


86 


PEKPETUUM    mobile; 


filled  with  the  mercury  ascending  from  G  through  the  pipe  G  E, 
the  sayd  pipe  being  but  twenty-two  inches  long;  by  this 
means  the  bellows  must  be  opened  more  and  more,  till  the 
mercury  continuing  to  ascend  makes  the  upper  part  of  the 
bellows  so  heavy  that  the  lower  part  must  get  loose  from  the 
clasp  C,  and  the  bellows  should  turn  quite  upside  down ;  but 


(Fig,  185,  pi.  5.) 

the  vessel  G  being  set  in  a  convenient  place,  keeps  them 
horizontal,  and  the  part  F  engageth  there  in  another 
clasp  C  ;  then  the  mercury,  by  its  weight,  nms  out  from  the 
bellows  into  the  vessel  G  through  the  pipe  E  G,  and  the  bel- 
lows must  shut  closer  and  closer  untill  the  part  E  F  comes  to 
be  so  light  that  the  counterpoise  B  is  able  to  make  the  part  F 
get  loose  from  the  clasp  C ;  then  the  bellows  come  to 
be  upright  again ;  the  mercury  left  in  them  falls  again  to 
the  height  of  twenty-seven  inches,  and,  consequently,  all  the 
other  effects  will  follow  as  we  have  already  seen,  and  the 
motion  will  continue  for  ever.  Thus  much  for  the  French 
author. 

Upon  this  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  bellows  can  never 
be  opened  by  the  internal  pressure,  imless  the  sayd  pressure 
be  stronger  then  the  extemall ;  now,  in  this  case,  the  weight 
of  the  atmosphere  doth  freely  press  up  the  outward  part  of 
the  bellows,  but  it  cannot  come  at  the  inward  part  but 
through  the  pipe  G  E,  which,  containing  twenty-two  perpendi- 
cular inches  of  mercury,  doth  counterpoise  so  much  of  the 
weight  of  the  atmosphere,  so  that  this  being  supposed  to  be 
twenty-seven  inches  of  mercury,  it  cannot  press  the  inward 
part  of  the  bellows  but  with  a  weight  equivalent  to  five  per- 
pendicular inches  of  mercury.      From  this  we  may  conclude, 


OR,    SEIKCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  87 

that  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  being  weakened  within 
the  bellows  more  then  it  can  be  helpt  by  the  mercury  con- 
tained in  the  same,  as  may  easily  be  computed,  the  sayd 
bellows  standing  upright  must  rather  shut  then  open. 
Thus,  without  losing  any  labour  and  charges  in  trying,  people 
may  be  sure  that  the  thing  can  never  do.* 

Some  further  Remarhs  on  the  Instrument  proposed  hy  an  Anomymous 
French  Author  for  effecting  a  Perpetual  Motion,  an  account  whereof 
isgioen  in  No*  177  of  these  Transactions.  By  Dr.  Fapin,  M.D. ,  R.S.  S. 

Having  seen  in  the  "  Journal  des  Savans "  of  May  13, 
and  in  the  "  Nouvelles  de  la  Republique  des  Lettres  "  of  the 
month  of  Jime,  that  the  author  of  the  perpetual  motion  is 
not  satisfied,  but  doth  endeavour  to  answer  the  objection  that 
I  propounded  against  his  contrivance  in  the  "  Philosophical 
Transactions "  of  the  month  of  December,  1685,  I  find  I 
must  explain  myself  more  at  large  than  I' did  in  that  paper  ; 
but  I  begg  his  pardon  if  I  say  nothing  concerning  the  new 
disposition  which  he  says  might  be  given  to  his  engine.  My 
want  of  time  makes  me  avoid  new  matters  of  dispute,  and  I 
think  it  enough  for  me,  if  I  do  but  shew  that  his  first  descrip- 
tion can  never  succeed. 

I  am  very  sorry  that  this  author  took  so  much  trouble  in 
trying  his  bellows  with  several  liquors,  as  oyl,  mercury,  water. 
I  thought  I  had  sayd  nothing  that  might  make  him  believe 
that  I  did  in  the  least  question  the  truth,  which  he  intended 
to  prove  against  me  by  those  experiments ;  and  without  any 
tryals  I  am  ftdly  enough  convinced,  that  the  mercury  in  his 
engine  must  follow  the  laws  of  the  sequilibrium  of  fluid 
bodies.  But  the  consequence  which  he  draws  from  that  prin- 
ciple seems  to  me  very  groimdless ;  for,  altho'  the  lowermost 
part  of  the  bellows  be  presst  by  the  weight  of  forty  inches  of 
mercury,  it  doth  not  follow  that  all  the  parts  which  are  situ- 
ated higher  must  bear  the  same  pressure.  To  the  quite  con- 
trary, it  is  plain  that  the  upper  part,  having  no  mercury  above 
it,  bears  none  at  all ;  the  parts  that  lye  in  the  middle  near  the 
axes  of  the  bellows  bear  but  twenty  inches,  and  so  all  the 

*  The  Philosophical  Transactions.  Vol.  15,  for  the  year  1685.  4to. 
Page  1240.  Also,  the  Phil.  Trans,  and  Collections  to  the  end  of  the 
year  1700,  abridged,  in  3  vols.  By  John  Lowthorp,  M.A.  and  F.11.S. 
Vol.  I,4to.,l70o,  p.  592. 


88  PEKPETUXJM  mobile; 

rest  must  bear  more  or  less  according  as  they  lye  higher  or 
lower.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  there  are  as  many  parts 
that  bear  less  then  twenty  inches  as  there  are  that  bear  more, 
and  the  increase  of  pressure  following  an  arithmetical  pro- 
gression, it  is  undenyable  that  all  these  pressures  added  toge- 
ther will  do  no  more  than  one  uniform  pressure  that  would  be 
equal  to  twenty  inches  everywhere. 

Having  thus  found  the  quantity  of  pressure  caused  by  the 
mercury  within  the  bellows,  we  must  remember  that  the  pres- 
sure of  the  atmosphere  within  the  same  bellows  is  equivalent 
but  to  five  inches,  as  I  observed  in  my  first  paper,  vid,  "  Philo- 
sophical Transaction,"  No.  177,  page  1241 :  so  that  we  find 
that  the  inward  pressure  is  equivalent  but  to  twenty-five 
inches  of  mercury  in  all.  Now,  the  pressure  of  the  atmo- 
sphere upon  the  outside  is  everywhere  equal  to  twenty-seven 
inches  ;  from  whence  it  appears  that  the  pressure  without  is 
stronger  than  the  pressure  within,  and  so  I  had  reason  to  say, 
that  the  bellows  standing  upright,  must  rather  shut  than  open. 

I  did  not  think  to  have  given  this  computation  so  at  large, 
but  I  have  been  necessitated  to  do  it  (as  I  said  in  the  begin- 
ning), since  my  first  paper  was  not  sufficient  to  make  me  be 
imderstood  by  the  author  of  the  perpetual  motion.  However,  I 
will  be  careful  to  save  the  time  of  the  reader  as  much  as  I 
can ;  and  although  I  might  observe  some  other  things  in  his 
description  that  will  increase  the  difficulty  of  opening  the 
bellows,  I  forbear  to  speak  of  them,  and  I  will  stick  only  to 
that  which  is  most  material,  and  make  his  perpetual  motion  to 
be  altogether  impossible. 

As  for  the  argument  the  author  drawes  from  comparing  his 
engine  to  an  ordinary  siphon,  I  do  beseech  him  to  consider 
what  a  difierence  there  is  between  a  siphon  that  lets  the 
water  rim  down  at  the  bottom,  and  his  engine,  that  should 
gather  up  the  heavy  liquor  into  the  highest  part  of  the  instru- 
ment, and  I  do  not  question  but  he  will  acknowledge  the 
weakness  of  this  argument.* 

An  answer  of  Dr.  Papin  to  the  Author  of  the  Perpetual  Motion. 

In  the  last  papers  I  published  in  "  Philosophical  Transac- 
tion "  No.  184,  against  this  perpetual  motion  described  in 

•  The  Philosophical  Transactions.  Vol.16,  for  the  years  1686  and 
1687.     No   182,  June,  16.S6,  p.  138. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELT'-MOTIVE    POWER.  89 

No.  177j  I  intreated  the  author  to  permit  me  to  say  nothing 
as  to  what  alterations  he  might  make  in  his  engine,  resolving 
to  leave  it  to  others  to  shew  him  that  upon  that  principle  aU 
he  can  do  signifies  nothing.  But  I  find  since,  in  the  "  Nou- 
Yelles  de  la  Kepublique  "  for  December  last,  that  he  still  per- 
sists to  urge  some  new  contrivances,  which  being  added,  he 
conceives  his  engine  must  succeed.  To  this  I  answer,  that  I 
undertook  only  to  shew  that  his  first  device  woidd  faile,  which 
yet  I  should  scarce  have  done  if  I  had  thought  a  dispute  of 
this  nature  could  have  lasted  so  long.  To  come,  therefore,  to 
the  point  where  he  saith  that  this  engine  may  well  succeed 
without  alteration,  because  he  hath  tryed  with  liquors  put  into 
bellows  immersed  in  water ;  I  again  say  that  I  grant  him 
the  truth  of  the  experiments,  but  deny  the  consequences  he 
would  draw  from  them.  I  have  already  given  the  reasons  of 
my  dissent,  which  this  gentleman  is  not  pleased  to  imder- 
stand.  But  to  end  all  controversies,  he  may  please  to  con- 
sult Mr.  Perrault,  De  la  Hire,  or  any  other  at  Paris  well  known 
to  be  skilled  in  hydraulicks,  and  I  doubt  not  but  he  will  find  them 
of  the  same  opinion  with  Mr.  Boyle,  Mr.  Hook,  and  other 
knowing  persons  here,  who  all  agree  that  our  author  is  in  this 
matter  under  a  mistake.* 

A  Proposition  on  the  Balance^  not  taken  notice  of  by  Mechanical 
Writers,  explained  and  confirmed  by  an  Experiment.  By  the  Rev. 
J.  TrDesaguliert,  LL,D.,  F.R.S. 

Theor.  6. — ^A  B  is  a  balance,  on  which  is  supposed  to 
hang  at  one  end,  B,  the  scale  E,  with  a  man  in  it,  who  is 
counterpoised  by  the  weight  W  hanging  at  A,  the  other  end 
of  the  balance.  I  say,  that  if  such  a  man,  with  a  cane  or 
any  rigid  straight  body,  pushes  upwards  against  the  beam 
anywhere  between  the  points  C  and  B  (provided  he  does  not 
push  directly  against  B),  he  will  thereby  make  himself 
heavier,  or  overpoise  the  weight  W,  though  the  stop  G  G 
hinders  the  scale  E  from  being  thrust  outwards  from  C 
towards  G  G.  I  say  likewise,  that  if  the  scale  and  man 
should  hang  from  D,  the  man,  by  pushing  upwards  against 
B,  or  anywhere  between  B  and  D  (provided  he  does  not 
push  directly  against  D),  will  make  himself  lighter,  or  be 

•"*  The   Philosophical    Transactions.       Vol.    16,    1686-7.      No.    186, 
January,  1687,  p.  267. 


90  PEBPETUUM    MOBILE  ; 

overpoised  by  the  weight  W,  which  before  did  only  counter- 
poise the  weight  of  his  body  and  the  scale. 

If  the  common  center  of  gravity  of  the  scale  E,  and  the 
man  supposed  to  stand  in  it,  be  at  k,  and  the  man,  by  thrust- 
ing against  any  part  of  the  beam,  cause  the  scale  to  move 
outwards  so  as  to  carry  the  said  common  center  of  gravity  to 
'A  X,  then,  instead  of  B  E,  hi  will  become  the  line  of  diec- 
tion  of  the  compound  weight,  whose  action  will  be  increased 
in  the  ratio  of  L  C  to  B  C.  This  is  what  has  been  explained 
by  several  writers  of  mechanics  ;  but  no  one,  that  I  know  of, 
has  considered  the  case  when  the  scale  is  kept  from  flying 
oat,  as  here  by  the  post  G  G,  which  keeps  it  in  its  place,  as 
if  the  strings  of  the  scale  were  become  inflexible.  Now,  to 
explain  this  case,  let  us  suppose  the  length  B  D  of  half  of 
the  brachium  B  C  to  be  equal  to  3  feet,  the  line  B  E  to  4 
feet,  the  line  E  D  of  5  feet  to  be  the  direction  in  which  the 
man  pushes,  D  F  and  F  E  to  be  respectively  equal  and 
parallel  to  B  E  and  B  D,  and  the  whole  or  absolute  force 
with  which  the  man  pushes  equal  to  (or  able  to  rise)  10  stone. 
Let  the  oblique  force  ED  (  =  10  stone)  be  resolved  into  the 
two  E  F  and  E  B  (or  its  equal  F  D)  whose  directions  are  at 
right  angles  to  each  other,  and  whose  respective  quantities 
(or  intensities)  are  as  6  and  8,  because  E  F  and  B  E  are  in 
that  proportion  to  each  other  and  to  E  D.  Now,  since  E  F 
is  parallel  to  B  D  C  A,  the  beam,  it  does  no  way  affect  the 
beam  to  move  it  upwards ;  and  therefore  there  is  only  the 
force  represented  by  F  D,  or  8  stone,  to  push  the  beam 
upwards  at  D.  For  the  same  reason,  and  because  action  and 
reaction  are  equal,  the  scale  will  be  pushed  down  at  E  with 
the  force  of  8  stone  also.  Now,  since  the  force  at  E  pulls 
the  beam  perpendicularly  downwards  from  the  point  B,  dis- 
tant from  C  the  whole  length  of  the  brachium  B  C,  its  action 
downwards  will  not  be  diminished,  but  may  be  expressed 
by  8  X  B  C ;  whereas  the  action  upwards  against  D  will  be 
half  lost,  by  reason  of  the  diminished   distance   from   the 

center,  and  is  only  to  be  expressed  by  8  x^Ji ;  and  when  the 
action  upwards  to  raise  the  beam  is  substracted  from  the 
action  downwards  to  depress  it,  there  will  still  remain  4  stone 

to  push  down  the  scale ;  because  8  x  B  C  —  8  x^^  =  4  B  C. 

2 

Consequently,  a  weight  of  4  stone  must  be  added  at  the  end 


OB,    SEABCH    FOB   SBLF-MOTIYE    POITEB.  93 

A  to  restore  the  sequilibrium.  Therefore  a  man,  &c.,  pushing 
upwards  under  the  beam  between  B  and  D,  becomes  heavier. 
Q.E.D. 

On  the  contrary,  if  the  scale  should  hang  at  F,  from  the 
point  D,  only  3  feet  from  the  center  of  motion  C,  and  a  post 
G  G  hinders  the  scale  from  being  pushed  inwards  towards  C, 
then,  if  a  man  in  this  scale  F  pushes  obliquely  against  B 
with  the  oblique  force  above  mentioned,  the  whole  force,  for 
the  reasons  before  given  (in  resolving  the  oblique  force  into 
two  others  acting  in  lines  perpendicular  to  each  other)  will 
be  reduced  to  8  stone,  which  pushes  the  beam  directly  upwards 
at  B,  while  the  same  force  of  8  stone  draws  it  directly  down 
at  D  towards  F.  But  as  C  D  is  only  equal  to  half  of  C  B, 
the  force  at  D,  compared  with  that  at  B,  loses  half  its  action, 
and  therefore  can  only  take  off  the  force  of  4  stone  from  the 
push  upwards  at  B ;  and  consequently  the  weight  W  at  A 
will  preponderate,  imless  an  additional  weight  of  4  stone  be 
hanged  at  B.  Therefore,  a  man,  &c.,  pushing  upwards  under 
the  beam  between  B  and  D,  becomes  lighter.* 

[The  paper  concludes  with  some  further  rules  and  experi- 
ments.] 

An  Experiment  explaining  a  Mechanical  Paradox^  that  two  bodies  of 
equal  weight  suspended  on  a  certain  sort  of  balance  do  not  lose 
their  aquUibrium  by  being  removed,  one  farther  from^  the  other 
nearer  to,  the  center.  By  the  Rev,  «/".  T,  Desaguliers^  LL,D,t 
F,R.S. 

Pbop.  7. — If  the  two  weights  P  W  hang  at  the  ends  of  the 
balance  A  B,  whose  center  of  motion  is  C,  those  weights  will 
act  against  each  other  (because  their  directions  are  contrary) 
with  forces  made  up  of  the  quantity  of  matter  in  each  multi- 
plied by  its  velocity ;  that  is,  by  the  velocity  which  the  motion 
of  the  balance  turning  about  C  will  give  to  the  body  suspended. 
Now,  the  velocity  of  a  heavy  body  is  its  perpendicular  ascent  or 
descent,  as  will  appear  by  moving  the  balance  into  the  position 
a  b,  which  shews  the  velocity  of  P  to  be  the  perpendicular 
line  e  a,  and  the  velocity  of  B  will  be  the  perpendicular  line 
b  ^S  for  if  the  weights  P  and  W  are  equal,  and  also  the  lines 
e  a  and  b  g,  their  momenta,  made  up  of  «  a  multiplied  into 

*  The  Philosophical  Transactions,  from  1719  to  1733,  thridged.  4to. 
London,  1734.    Vol.  6,  p.  306. 


94  PERPETTTUM    MOBILE; 

W,  and  h  g  multiplied  into  P,  will  be  equal,  as  will  appear  by 
their  destroying  one  another  in  making  an  equilibrium.  But 
if  the  body  W  was  removed  to  M,  and  suspended  at  the 
point  D,  then,  its  velocity  being  only  f  d,  it  would  be  over- 
balanced by  the  body  P,  because  /  d  multiplied  into  M 
would  produce  a  less  momentum  than  P  multiplied  into  b  g. 

As  the  arcs  A  o,  B  6,  and  D  d,  described  by  the  ends  of 
the  balance  or  points  of  suspension,  are  proportionable  to 
their  sines  e  a^  g  h^  and  d  f,  as  also  the  radii  or  distances 
C  A,  C  B,  and  C  D  ;  in  the  case  of  this  common  sort  of 
balance,  the  arcs  described  by  the  weights,  or  their  points  of 
suspension,  or  the  distances  from  the  center,  may  be  taken 
for  velocities  of  the  weights  hanging  at  A,  B,  or  D,  and 
therefore  the  acting  force  of  the  weights  will  be  reciprocally 
as  their  distances  from  the  center. 

Scholium. — The  distances  from  the  center  are  taken  here 
for  the  velocities  of  the  bodies,  only  because  they  are  propor- 
tionable to  the  lines  e  a,  b  g,  and  /  d,  which  are  the  true 
velocities ;  for  there  are  a  great  many  cases  wherein  the  velo- 
cities are  neither  proportionable  to  the  distances  from  the 
center  of  motion  of  a  machine,  nor  to  the  arcs  described  by 
the  weights  or  their  points  of  suspension.  Therefore,  it  is  not 
a  general  rule  that  weights  act  in  proportion  to  their  distances 
from  the  center  of  motion ;  but  a  corollary  of  the  general  rule 
that  weights  act  in  proportion  to  their  velocities,  which  is 
only  true  in  some  cases.  Therefore,  we  must  not  take  this 
case  as  a  principle,  which  most  workmen  do,  and  all  those 
people  who  make  attempts  to  find  the  perpetual  motion,  as  I 
have  more  amply  shewn  in  the  Phil.  Trans.,  No.  369. 

But  to  make  this  evident  even  in  the  balance,  we  need 
only  take  notice  of  the  following  experiment : — ^A  C  B  E  K  D 
is  a  balance  in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram  passing  through  a 
slit  in  the  upright  piece  N  O  standing  on  the  pedestal  M,  so 
as  to  be  moveable  upon  the  center  pins  C  and  K.  To  the 
upright  pieces  A  D  and  B  E  of  this  balance  are  fixed  at  right 
angles  the  horizontal  pieces  F  G  and  H  I.  That  the  equal 
weights  P  W  must  keep  each  other  in  sequilibrio,  is  evident ; 
but  it  does  not  at  first  appear  so  plainly,  that  if  W  be  re- 
moved to  V,  being  suspended  at  6,  yet  it  shall  still  keep  P  in 
sequilibrio,  though  the  experiment  shews  it.  Nay,  if  W  be 
successively  moved  to  any  of  the  points  1,  2,  3,  E,  4,  5,  or  6, 
the  sequilibrium  will  be  continued ;  or  if,  W  hanging  at  any 


OB,    SEABCH    FOB    8EI.F-M0T1VE    POWEB.  97 

of  those  points,  P  be  successively  moved  to  D,  or  any  of  the 
points  of  suspension  on  the  cross  piece  F  G,  P  will  at  any  of 
those  places  ^make  an  sequilibrium  with  W.  Now,  when  the 
weights  are  at  P  and  V,  if  the  least  weight  that  is  capable  to 
overcome  the  friction  at  the  points  of  suspension  C  and  K  be 
added  to  V,  as  w,  the  weight  V  will  overpower,  and  that  as 
much  at  V  as  if  it  was  at  W. 

From  what  we  have  said  above,  the  reason  of  this  experi- 
ment will  be  very  plain. 

As  the  lines  A  C  and  K  D,  C  B  and  K  E,  always  continue 
of  the  same  length  in  any  position  of  the  machine,  the  pieces 
A  D  and  B  E  will  always  continue  parallel  to  one  another, 
and  perpendicular  to  the  horizon.  However,  the  whole 
machine  turns  upon  the  points  C  and  K,  as  appears  by  bring- 
ing the  balance  to  any  other  position,  SiS  a  b  e  d;  and  there- 
fore, as  the  weights  applied  to  any  part  of  the  pieces  F  G  and 
H  I  can  only  bring  down  the  pieces  A  D  and  B  E  perpen- 
dicularly, in  the  same  manner  as  if  they  were  applied  to  the 
hooks  D  and  E,  or  to  X  and  Y,  the  centers  of  gravity  of  A  D 
and  B  E,  the  force  of  the  weights  (if  their  quantity  of  matter 
is  equal)  will  be  equal,  because  their  velocities  will  be  their 
perpendicular  ascent  or  descent,  which  will  atWays  be  as  the 
equal  lines  4  I  and  4  L,  whatever  part  of  the  pieces  F  G  and 
H  I  the  weights  are  applied  to.  But  if  to  the  weight  at  V  be 
added  the  little  weight  w,  those  two  weights  will  overpower, 
because  in  this  case  the  momentimi  is  made  up  of  the  simi  of 
V  and  u  multiplied  by  the  common  velocity  4  L. 

Hence  follows,  that  it  is  not  the  distance  C  6  multiplied 
into  the  weight  V  which  makes  its  momentum,  but  its  perpen- 
dicular velocity  L  4  multiplied  into  its  mass.     Q.E.D. 

This  is  still  further  evident  by  taking  out  the  pin  at  K ;  for 
then  the  weight  P  will  overbalance  the  other  weight  at  V, 
because  then  their  perpendicular  ascent  and  descent  will  not 
be  equal.* 


•  The  Philosophical  Transactions,  from  1719  to  1733,  abridged.  4to. 
London,  1734.  Vol.  6,  p.  310.  Another  paper  by  Dr  Desaguliers,  being 
"  Remarks  on  some  attempts  made  towards  a  Perpetual  Motion,"  from 
the  Phil.  Trans  ,  abridged,  4to.,  1734,  vol.  6,  p.  323,  will  be  found  trans- 
ferred to  Chapter  11. 

I 


yO  PERPETUUM   mobile; 

An  Historical  Account  of  a  strangely  Self-moving  Liquor.  Printed  first 
in  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  No.  176 ,  p.  1 188,  anno  lG85,i;o/.  15. 

An  ingenious  teacher  of  mathematicks,  having  occasion  to 
make  a  composition  for  a  new  fire-engine,  whereof  he  was  to 
shew  his  Majesty  a  trial,  mingled  divers  ingredients  in  an 
earthen  pot  over  kindled  coals ;  but  could  not  or  did  not  do  it 
so  warily,  but  that  the  matter  took  fire,  and  began  to  blaze 
furiously,  which  obliged  him  to  stifle  the  blaze  as  hastily 
as  he  could ;  and  having  removed  the  vessel  from  the 
fire,  and  suffered  it  to  grow  cold,  when  afterwards  he  came  to 
look  upon  it,  to  see  if  what  remained  might  be  of  any  use  to 
him,  he  was  surprised  to  find  it  variously  and  briskly  moved. 
Wherefore,  having  set  it  aside,  to  be  sure  that  it  might  be 
thoroughly  cold,  he,  after  some  hours,  visited  it  again,  and 
found  it  move  as  before  ;  and  having  cast  store  of  seeds  upon 
it,  to  see  if  the  liquor  would  move  them  also,  the  bituminous 
part  of  it  connected  them  into  a  kind  of  thick  scimi,that  covered 
most  of  the  superfices,  but  yet  left  some  intervals,  in  which 
the  liquor  appeared,  and  discovered  that  it  continued  its 
motions.  Two  days  after,  the  engineer  discoursing  with  me 
of  this  fire-work,  about  which  he  had  advised  with  me  before, 
told  me,  among  other  things,  of  this  odd  accident.  And 
when  I  asked  him  if  the  motion  continued  still,  and  had  been 
answered  affirmatively,  though  it  was  then  a  dark  night  and 
ill  weather,  my  diffidence  or  my  curiosity  made  me  engage 
him  to  send  for  the  pot  as  it  was,  partly  to  be  sure  of  the 
matter  of  fact,  and  partly  to  try  if  the  knowledge  I  had  of 
the  ingredients,  which  he  had  before  told  me,  would  afford 
any  hint  of  the  cause  of  so  odd  an  effect ;  a  like  to  which  in 
kind,  though  not  in  degree,  I  had  many  years  before  devised, 
and  successfully  practised,  the  way  of  producing. 

The  vessel  being  come,  though  the  hasty  transportation  of 
it  seemed  to  have  sufficiently  disturbed  it,  there  did  appear 
manifest  signs  of  such  a  motion  as  the  engineer  had  ascribed 
to  it ;  and,  therefore,  he  being  willing  to  leave  it  with  me,  I 
caused  it  to  be  set  aside  in  a  laboratory,  where  some  furnaces 
kept  the  air  constantly  warm,  and  did  there  and  elsewhere, 
at  different  times,  look  heedfuUy  upon  it,  now  and  then  dis- 
placing or  quite  taking  off"  some  of  the  thick  scum  that  too 
much  covered  the  surface  of  it,  and  by  this  means  I  had  the 
opportunity  to  take  ixotice  of  several  phaenomena,  whereof 
these  are  the  chief: — 


OB,    SEABCH    FOE    8EI/F-M0TJVE    POWER.  99 

1.  I  observed  that  the  motion  of  this  liquor  was  not 
only  brisk,  but  very  various,  so  that  having  loosened  some 
small  portions  of  the  scum,  one  of  them  would  be  carried 
towards  the  right  hand  for  instance,  and  another  towards  the 
left,  at  the  same  time.  2.  Where  the  liquor  first  came 
out  from  under  the  scimi,  it  seemed  to  move  the  most  briskly, 
flowing  almost  like  a  stream  whose  motion  upwards  had  been 
checked,  and,  as  it  were,  reverberated  by  that  incumbent 
obstacle.  3.  Several  motions  in  this  liquor  were  the  more 
easy  to  be  observed,  because,  though  it  were  dark,  yet  it  was 
not  uniform ;  consisting  in  part  of  oily  and  bituminous  ingre- 
dients, which,  though  they  seemed  to  have  but  one  common 
superficies  with  the  rest  of  the  liquor,  yet,  but  their  colours 
and  power  of  vigorously  reflecting  the  light,  they  were  easily 
enough  distinguishable  from  the  rest.  And  I  often  observed 
that  some  of  these  unctuous  portions  of  the  matter,  emerging 
to  the  surface  of  the  liquor,  though  perhaps  at  first  one  of 
them  would  not  appear  bigger  than  a  pin's  head,  yet,  in 
moving  forwards,  it  would  at  the  same  time  difiuse  itself 
circularly,  and  make,  as  it  were,  a  great  halo,  adorned  with 
the  colours  of  the  rainbow,  and  so  very  vivid  as  afforded  a 
very  pleasant,  and  at  first  surprising,  spectacle ;  these  phan- 
tasms often  nimbly  succeeding  one  another,  and  lasting  till 
they  lost  themselves  against  or  under  the  thick  scum.  4.  The 
motions  of  this  odd  liquor  were  not  only  various,  but  fre- 
quently vortical ;  to  be  satisfied  of  which,  I  sometimes  put 
short  bits  of  straw,  or  fragments  of  some  such  like  stuff", 
upon  the  discovered  part  of  the  surface  of  the  liquor,  by 
which  they  were  carried  towards  very  distant,  if  not  opposite, 
parts  of  the  vessel  at  the  same  time.  But  to  make  the  vorti- 
cal motion  more  evident,  I  several  times  detached  consider- 
ably large  pieces  of  the  thick  scum  from  the  rest  of  the  body, 
and  had  the  pleasure  to  see  them  move  both  with  a  progres- 
sive motion  in  crooked  lines,  and  with  a  motion  about  their 
own  middlemost  parts.  All  this  while,  the  liquor,  whose 
parts  were  thus  briskly  moved,  was  actually  cold,  as  to  sense. 
6.  To  observe  what,  the  presence,  or  absence,  of  the  free  air 
woidd  do  to  this  liquor,  I  caused  many  spoonfuls  of  it,  with 
some  of  the  scum,  to  be  put  into  a  cylindrical  glass,  which, 
though  large  itself,  had  a  neck  belonging  to  it,  that  was  but 
about  the  bigness  of  one's  thimib,  that  it  might  be  ,well 
stopped  with  a  cork.     But  having,  by  this  means,  kept  the 


100  PERPETUITM    mobile; 

free  air  from  having  a  frill  and  immediate  contact  with  the 
whole  surface  of  the  mixture,  as  it  had  when  that  mixture 
lay  in  the  wide-mouthed  vessel,  I  could  not  perceive  the 
liquor  to  move  to  and  fro,  no,  not  though  the  orifice  of  the 
neck  were  left  open :  whereas,  having,  at  the  same  time, 
poured  some  of  the  liquor  into  a  very  shallow  and  wide- 
mouthed  vessel,  called  in  the  shops  a  clear-caked  glass,  it 
moved  rather  more  than  less  nimhly  and  variously  than  in 
the  great  earthen  pot  (which  yet  was  of  the  same  shape), 
and  shewed  us  many  of  those  vivid  tnd  self-dilating  circles 
that  have  been  mentioned  in  the  third  number ;  and  these, 
by  the  fineness  of  their  colours  and  the  quickness  wherewith 
they  succeeded  one  another,  afforded  a  delightful  spectacle 
as  long  as  I  stayed  to  observe  the  liquor.  6.  Though  the 
motions  of  the  hitherto  mentioned  liquor  did  not  seem  to  be 
always  equally  brisk,  yet  they  appeared  to  continue  manifest 
and  various  in  some  diversities  of  weather,  as  to  cold  and 
heat,  and  when  I  looked  on  it  by  candle-light  as  well  as  by 
daylight ;  and  when,  being  not  well  enough  to  visit  it  myself, 
I  sent  one  purposely  to  look  upon  it,  about  ten  o'clock  at 
night,  he  brought  me  word  that  it  continued  to  move  as 
formerly,  and  so  it  has  done  for  ten  days ;  and  how  much 
longer  it  will  continue  to  do  so,  time  must  determine. 

Postscript. — Some  time  after  the  foregoing  account  had 
been  written,  when  I  came  to  look  upon  the  liquor  (which  in 
the  mean  time  had  been  several  times  viewed,  and  appeared 
to  retain  its  motions),  I  found,  to  my  trouble,  that  somebody's 
impertinent  curiosity  and  heedlessness  had  cracked  the  lower 
part  of  the  earthen  pot ;  at  which  overture,  the  liquor,  though 
not  the  scimi,  was  run  out ;  which  had  put  a  period  to  our 
observations,  but  that,  foreseeing  that  such  an  accident  might 
happen,  I  had  long  before  taken  out  some  spoonfuls  of  the 
liquor,  and  kept  it  close  stopped  in  a  vial.  By  this  means  I 
had  the  opportimity  to  observe  that,  when  I  poured  out  the 
liquor  into  a  wide-mouthed  vessel,  it  would  move  £is  before, 
though  this  were  done  some  weeks  after  it  had  been  put  up. 
And  I  remember  that  long  after,  having  one  day  received  the 
honour  of  a  visit  from  a  foreign  minister,  who  was  an  inquisi- 
tive person  and  a  man  of  letters,  we  chanced,  among  other 
things,  to  talk  of  the  liquor  ;  and  though  it  were  scarce  to 
be  hoped  that  it  could  still  retain  any  of  its  motive  virtue, 
yet,  to  gratify  his  curiosity,  and  that  of  some  ingenious  men 


OB,    SEABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  101 

there  present,  I  caused  the  vial  to  be  brought,  and  having 
unstopped  it,  I  poured  out  the  liquor  into  a  convenient-shaped 
vessel,  in  which,  after  we  had  suffered  it  to  rest  awhile,  they 
were  delightfully  surprised  to  see  it  move  (though  not,  in  my 
opinion,  quite  so  briskly  as  before),  yet  very  manifestly  and 
variously.  This  encouraged  me  to  think  it  possible  that  it 
might  retain  some  motion,  though  but  languid,  seven  or  eight 
weeks  after ;  and  therefore,  on  the  25th  of  July,  I  looked 
upon  it  again,  and  having  caused  it  to  be  poured  into  a  china 
cup,  it  manifested,  at  first,  a  brisk  and  various  motion  ;  but 
this,  after  awhile,  did  so  slacken  that  I  began  to  have  some 
suspicion  that  the  motion  it  was  put  into  by  effusion  and  the 
first  contact  of  the  air  might  have  given  it  the  greatest  part 
of  its  agitation.  But  this  being  but  suspicion,  I  put  the 
vessel  into  divers  postures  in  a  window,  the  better  to  discover 
the  true  cause  of  this  phaenomenon  ;  but  whilst  I  was  busy 
about  this,  which  ingrossed  my  attention,  a  mischance  over- 
turned the  cup,  and,  by  throwing  down  the  liquor,  pi^t  an 
end  to  my  speculation  :  yet  this  mischance  hindered  me  but 
from  observing  how  long  the  odd  agitation  of  our  liquor 
would  have  continued,  but  not  from  finding  that  it  lasted  a 
great  while ;  for  I  shewed  it  the  foreign  minister  about  or 
after  the  beginning  of  June,  that  is,  about  five  months  or 
more  after  the  liquor  was  first  observed  to  move.* 

The  following  is  extracted  from  a  letter  of  S.  Hartlib  to 
Mr.  Boyle : — 

I  had  lately  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Oldenburg,  amongst 
other  particulars,  in  these  words  : — "  In  our  passing  through 
Mentz  we  met  with  a  rare  artist  called  Beckor,  a  young  man, 
who  hath  found,  he  saith,  the  perpetual  motion,  the  possibility 
whereof  hath  been  hitherto  so  much  disputed  by  philosophers. 
He  hath  almost  finished  a  work,  wherein  he  doth  demonstrate 
his  invention,  which  we  have  seen,  and  the  design  and  way 
whereof  the  m*<jter  told  me  himself,  he  would  v/ithin  a  very 
few  weeks  put  in  print  here  at  Francfort ;  which  being  done, 
I  shall  send  you  a  copy  of  it. — July  18,  1658."  f 

•  The  Works  of  the  Hon.  Robt.  Boyle,  in  6  vols-  4to.,  1772.  Vol.  5, 
page  71. 

t  Ibid.   Vol.  6,  page  113. 


102  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

The  following  eminent  authority  is  often  adduced  in 
Encyclopaedias ;  but  his  paper  is  little,  if  at  all,  known, 
entitled — **  A  Demonstration  of  the  Impossibility  of  Perpetual 
Motion.  By  M.  de  la  Hire.  Written  on  the  occasion  of 
several  schemes  having  recently  appeared  :" — 

There  is  not  any  of  those  who  pretend  to  have  found  out 
perpetual  motion,  who  do  not  agree  that  two  weights  placed 
in  a  position  to  move,  following  their  natural  direction  in 
equal  time,  or  in  any  way  reciprocal  to  their  weight,  remain 
in  equilibrium.  Yet  there  is  no  perpetual  motion  scheme, 
where  one  cannot  draw  a  conclusion  quite  opposed  to  this 
principle  ;  for,  whatever  may  be  pretended,  perpetual  motion 
is  nothing  more  or  less  than  the  elevation  of  one  weight  to  a 
certain  height  by  the  descent  of  another  weight  at  the  same 
time  ;  and  reciprocally  the  restitution  of  the  first  to  the  place 
where  it  was  before  its  movement,  by  the  descent  of  the  one 
that  had  been  raised,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum ;  sometimes  by 
means  of  weights,  which,  being  raised,  in  their  fall  agitate 
other  weights ;  sometimes  by  means  of  liquid  bodies,  which, 
being  raised,  can  run,  and  move  other  parts  far  separated 
from  the  centre  of  motion ;  from  which  no  advantage  can  be 
derived,  and  which  is  entirely  contrary  to  the  preceding 
principle. 

Those  who  occupy  themselves  with  this  chimera,  find 
nothing  but  embarrassment,  for  generally  their  machines 
have  so  many  weights,  &c.,  to  move  them,  that  their  in- 
ventors forget  always  to  be  on  their  guard  against  the  many 
hinderances  that  arise, — the  height,  &c.,  of  the  powers  em- 
ployed, their  natural  direction,  Sec,  all  these  are  sometimes 
so  strangely  jumbled  together  that  it  requires  very  hard 
work  to  be  able  rightly  to  distinguish  them.  This  is  one 
great  reason  that  leads  such  persons  to  a  false  demonstration 
of  perpetual  motion  ;  and  when  they  propose  their  beautiful 
inventions  to  those  who  are  versed  in  science,  and  who 
cannot  immediately  make  them  see  or  understand  in  what 
way  their  reasoning  is  false,  they  then  publish  to  the  world 
that  the  very  cleverest  men  have  been  convinced  of  the  truth 
of  their  perpetual  motion.* 

•  Memoires  de  1* Academic  Royale  des  Sciences.  Paris,  1730,  4to. 
Vol.  10,  page  605.     [See  Appendix  D.] 


OR,    8EABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  103 

The  Paris  Academy  of  Sciences  received  numerous  com- 
munications on  Perpetual  Motion,  but  in  their  "Comptes 
Rendus  Hebdomadaries  des  Seances,"  in  conformity  with  a 
regulation  of  long  standing,  they  only  name  the  authors  and 
the  matter  of  ttieir  papers  when  upon  this  subject,  as— 

Vol.  4,  1837. — A  Letter  from  M.  Pascal,  on  perpetual 
motion. 

Vol.  6,  1838. — ^M.  Jennisson  addressed  a  presumed  solu- 
tion of  the  problem  of  perpetual  motion,  offered  by  M. 
Freyberg. 

Vol.  13,  1841. — M.  Fubiet  read  a  paper  on  perpetual 
motion,  its  object  being  to  prove,  by  the  most  popular 
manner,  its  impossibility. 

Vol.  14,  1841. — ^A  communication  received  from  M. 
Verger  on  perpetual  motion. 

Vol.  29,  1849. — M.  le  Ministre  de  I'lnstruction  Publique 
transmits  a  note  and  paper  addressed  to  him  by  M.  le  Prefet 
des  Hautes-Pyrenees,  in  which  the  author,  M.  Dulot, 
describes  a  piece  of  mechanism  by  means  of  which  he  believes 
he  obtains  perpetual  motion. 

Vol.  38,  1854. — M.  Jauffbet  announces  himself  as  a  can- 
didate for  the  prize  given  for  the  improvement  of  navigation ; 
he  offers  a  propeller  which  he  believes  realizes  perpetual 
motion. 

M.  Theod.  Sylvestre  considers  he  has  discovered  per- 
petual motion. 

M.  Badannel  begs  the  grant  of  a  commission  to  examine 
a  piece  of  mechanism  he  has  invented)  to  give  continued 
rotation  and  keep  itself  going. 

The  Academy,  according  to  a  regulation  of  ancient  stand- 
ing, cannot  grant  a  commission  to  examine  into  papers  rela- 
tive to  perpetual  motion. 

M.  EuG.  Romey  announces  his  invention  for  showing  the 
movements  of  the  earth,  acting  also  as  a  clock. 

Vol.  39,  1854. — M.  Parceint  presents  a  pajier  and  draw- 
ing of  a  propeller  having  a  universal  and  continuous  move- 
ment. 

The  Academy,  as  before,  decline  investigating  this  matter. 

Vol.  40,  1855. — ^M.  Aime  Lecoq  addresses  a  paper  on 
perpetual  motion  to  the  Ministre  du  Commerce,  &c.,  who 


104  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

sends  it  to  the  Academy,  and  they  refuse  to  grant  a  commis- 
sion for  the  examination  of  communications  relative  to  this 
subject,  which  they  consider  unattainable. 

M.  HuHN,  of  Prussia,  announces  having  invented  a  system 
of  aerial  navigation,  composed  of  a  series  of  fanners,  shaped 
like  a  bird's  body,  and  the  whole  attached  like  a  railway  train. 
They  are  propelled  by  perpetual  motion  machinery. 

As  before  stated,  the  Academy  refuse  accepting  this  and 
like  offers. 

Another  note  is  addressed  by  M.  Rieffeb  on  perpetual 
motion. 

Vol.  41, 1855. — M.  Castagne  addresses  a  letter  relative 
to  the  squaring  of  the  circle,  and  also  on  perpetual  motion. 

The  Academy,  as  before,  decline  his  offers,  and  state  they 
consider  all  commucications  on  these  two  subjects  null  and 
void. 

M.  MuYTON  writes  a  letter  relative  to  perpetual  motion. 

The  Academy,  as  before  stated,  decline  to  take  the  subject 
into  consideration. 

Vol.  42, 1856. — M.  Blanc het  announces  his  intention  of 
submitting  to  the  judgment  of  the  Academy  a  paper  in  which 
he  considers  he  has  resolved  the  question  of  perpetual  motion. 

The  Academy,  as  in  like  cases,  refuse  any  examination  by 
a  commission. 

Vol.  43, 1856. — The  Academy  have  received  two  notes  on 
perpetual  motion — one  by  M.  Petrement,  and  the  other  by 
M.  Grusset — which  they  refuse,  on  their  former-named 
regulations. 

Vol.  47,  1858. — A  paper  presented  by  M.  le  Ministre  de 
rinstruction  Publique,  enclosing  two  notes — one  descriptive 
of  an  astronomical  apparatus,  and  the  other  a  piece  of 
mechanism — showing  perpetual  motion.  Both  by  M.  Vitelli, 
a  Neapolitan. 

The  Academy  receive  the  first  of  these  notes,  but  the 
second  they  reject. 

M.  Marc  HAND  sends  a  note  on  perpetual  motion,  which  is 
refused,  on  the  ground  of  their  before-named  decision.* 


*  Comptes  Rendus  H6bdomadaries  des  Seances,  de  TAcad^mie   des 
Sciences.     Paris,  4to. 


OB,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  105 

In  an  abridgment  of  the  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Academy 
of  Sciences  at  Paris,  for  1700,  an  accoimt  is  given  of — 

A  false  report  of  the  Perpetual  Motion  being  discovered,  and  the 
impossibility  of  it  demonstrated. 

There  was  in  this  year  a  report  spread  that  the  perpetual 
motion  was  found.  It  was  seen  in  a  place  where  the  diffi- 
culty of  the  thing  was  not  well  known,  where  the  invention 
was  not  examined  as  it  would  have  been  in  an  academy, 
where  an  air  of  science  succeeds  sometimes,  and  the  air  of 
confidence  almost  always.  M.  Sauveur  explained  the  inven- 
tion to  the  academy,  who  were  very  much  surprised  at  it.  A 
little  while  after  the  noise  that  this  discovery  made,  the  per- 
petual motion  disappeared  with  its  author.  On  this  occasion, 
M.  Parent  proved  the  impossibility  of  it  by  this  single  reason, 
that  all  the  parts  of  a  machine  have  a  common  centre  of 
gravity ;  that  while  they  turn  roimd  an  axis  or  fixed  point, 
whichever  it  be,  this  common  centre  of  gravity  finds  itself 
necessarily  in  one  situation,  where  it  is  lower  than  in  any 
other,  and  that  presently  all  must  stop.  For,  since  there  is 
a  point  where  the  force,  which  many  bodies  have  to  descend, 
is  entirely  re-imited,  as  soon  as  this  point  cannot  descend  any 
more,  all  these  bodies  must  remain  fixed.  M.  Parent  deter- 
mined in  general  that  there  must  inevitably  be  this  point  of 
rest  for  all  the  machines  possible.* 


•  The  Philosophical  History  and  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Academy  of 
Paris  ;  or,  an  Abridgment  of  all  the  Papers  relating  to  Natural  Phi- 
losophy. Translated  and  abridged  by  J.  Martyn,  F.R.S.,  and  E.  Cham- 
bers, F.R.S.     5  vols  ,  8vo.     1742.     Vol.  1,  p.  203. 


106  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 


CHAPTER  V. 

EEMABKS    OHf    PEKPETXTAL    MOTION,    DEBITED    FBOM 
TBEATI8E8    ON   NATXTBAX    PHILOSOPHY. 

We  here  offer  the  opinions  of  Martin,  1747;  Maclaurin, 
1748;  Rutherford,  1748;  Hooper,  1783;  Emerson,  1794; 
Nicholson,  1800 ;  Young,  1807 ;  Ghregory,  1815 ;  Partmgton, 
1828 ;  Amott,  1828  ; — all  authors  easily  accessible,  and  some 
or  all  of  whom  should  be  consulted  before  expending  time  or 
money  on  schemes  which  it  is  abundantly  evident  are  con- 
stantly and  shamefully  terminating  in  disappointed  hopes. 

In  his  Lectures  on  Mechanics,  Martin  takes  occasion  to 
illustrate  the  impossibility  of  effecting  Perpetual  Motion, 
observing  that — 

A  lever  is  any  inflexible  line,  rod,  or  beam,  moveable  about 
or  upon  a  fix*d  point  (called  the  prop  or  fulcrum),  upon  one 
end  of  which  is  the  weight  to  be  raised ;  at  the  other  end  is 
the  power  applied  to  rai^^e  it,  as  the  hand,  &c.  Since  (as  we 
have  before  proved)  the  momentums  of  the  weight  and  power 
are  as  the  quantities  of  matter  in  each  multiplied  by  their 
respective  celerities,  and  the  celerities  are  as  the  distances 
from  the  centre  of  motion,  and  also  as  the  spaces  pass'd 
through  in  a  perpendicular  direction  in  the  same  time,  it  must 
follow  that  there  will  be  an  equilibrium  between  the  weight 
and  power  when  they  are  to  each  other  reciprocally  as  the 
distances  from  the  centre,  or  as  the  celerities  of  the  motions, 
or  as  the  perpendicular  ascent  or  descent  in  the  same  time ; 
and  this  universally  in  all  mechanical  powers  whatsoever, 
which  is  therefore  the  fundamental  principle  of  all  mechanics. 

(XXXVII.)     1.  The  nature  of  this  proposition  being  not 


OK,    SEARCH    FOR   SKLF-MOTIVE    POWER.  10? 

understood  by  smatterers  in  mechanics,  gave  occasion  to 
imagine  the  possibility  of  a  perpetual  motion  from  one  part 
of  it,  which  they  did  not  see  was  utterly  impossible  from 
another  part  of  it. 

2.  That  part  which  seem'd  to  promise  the  possibility  thereof 
was  this,  viz.,  that  the  momenta  of  equal  bodies  were  as  their 
distances  from  the  centre  of  motion.  Hence,  say  the  Per- 
petual Motion  men,  if  a  wheel  were  constructed  of  the  form 
of  that  in  the  figure  A  B  C  D, 
with  circular  cells  going  from  the 
inner  part  E  F  G  H  to  the  outer, 
containing  equal  balls  C  D  E  F ; 
then  upon  turning  the  wheel  they 
must  move  towards  the  centre  N 
on  one  part,  as  the  ball  E ;  and 
from  it  on  the  opposite  part,  as 
the  ball  C  ;  and  by  this  means  the 
ball  C  will  have  a  greater  momen- 
tum than  the  ball  F,  and  so  will 
determine  the  wheel  to  move  round ; 
and  since  this  must  be  the  case  of  all  the  balls  E  and  C  that 
come  into  the  situation  E  C,  the  wheel  must  necessarily  move 
continually,  because  it  will  bring  two  balls  into  that  situation. 

3.  'Tis  true,  where  there  are  but  two  balls  E  and  C,  the  ball 
C  would  by  this  contrivance  move  the  wheel  one  quarter  round, 
viz.,  while  it  descended  from  C  to  D,  and  by  this  means  would 
raise  the  ball  E  to  F,  and  there  they  will  abide  in  the  situa- 
tion D  F.  But,  say  the  men  of  this  persuasion,  two  other 
balls  succeeding  to  the  places  E  and  C  will  keep  the  wheel 
moving.  Yes,  so  they  would,  if  the  balls  at  D  and  E  could 
be  taken  away  the  moment  they  come  into  that  posit  on, — not 
else ;  for  the  balls  C  and  E,  in  order  to  move  the  wheel,  must 
move  the  balls  D  and  F,  which  have  equal  momenta  (as 
being  the  same  distance  each  from  the  centre  as  are  the  other 
two  respectively),  which  is  absurd  by  the  general  proposition. 

4.  The  absurdity  of  a  perpetual  motion  will  still  farther 
appear,  if  we  consider  that  the  momenta  of  bodies  are  always 
proportional  to  the  perpendicular  descent  or  ascent  to  or  from 
the  centre  of  the  earth.  Since,  therefore,  in  the  wheel  the 
bodies  are  all  equal  by  supposition,  and  the  perpendicul 
spaces  through  which  they  descend  and  ascend,  above  and 
below  the   horizontal   line  or  diameter  A  C,  are  equal,  it 


108  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

follows  that  an  equilibrium  must  ensue.  Thus,  so  far  is  this 
wheel  from  producing  a  perpetual  motion,  that  it  admits  of 
none  at  all.* 


Maclaurin,  to  the  same  purpose,  treating  of  the  Laws  of 
Motion,  and  their  general  Corollaries,  says : — 

1.  The  first  law  of  motion  is,  "  That  a  body  always  perse- 
veres in  its  state  of  rest,  or  of  uniform  motion  in  a  right  line, 
till  by  some  external  influence  it  be  made  to  change  its  state." 
That  a  body  of  itself  perseveres  in  its  state  of  rest,  is  matter 
of  most  common  and  general  observation,  and  is  what  suggests 
to  us  the  passive  nature  of  body;  but  that  it  likewise,  of 
itself,  perseveres  in  its  state  of  motion  as  well  as  of  rest,  is 
not  altogether  so  obvious,  and  was  not  imder stood  for  some 
time  by  philosophers  themselves,  when  they  demanded  the 
cause  of  the  continuation  of  motion.  It  is  easy,  however,  to 
see  that  this  last  is  as  general  and  constant  a  law  of  nature 
as  the  first.  Any  motions  we  produce  here  on  the  earth  soon 
languish,  and  at  length  vanish  ;  whence  it  is  a  vulgar  notion 
that,  in  general,  motion  diminishes  and  tends  always  toward 
rest.  But  this  is  owing  to  the  various  resistances  which 
bodies  here  meet  with  in  their  motion,  especially  from  fric- 
tion, or  their  rubbing  upon  other  bodies  in  their  progress,  by 
which  their  motion  is  chiefly  consumed.  For  when,  by  any 
contrivance,  this  friction  is  much  diminished,  we  always  find 
that  the  motion  continues  for  a  long  time.  Thus,  when  the 
friction  of  the  axis  is  lessened  by  friction  wheels  applied  to 
it  and  turning  round  with  it,  the  great  wheel  will  sometimes 
continue  to  revolve  for  half  an  hour  ;  and  when  a  brass  topp 
moves  on  a  very  small  pivot  on  a  glass  plane,  it  will  continue 
in  motion  very  smoothly  for  a  great  number  of  minutes.  A 
pendulum,  suspended  in  an  advantageous  manner,  will  vibrate 
for  a  great  while,  notwithstanding  the  resistance  of  the  air. 
Upon  the  whole,  it  appears  that  if  the  friction  and  other 
'  resistances  could  be  taken  quite  away,  the  motions  would  be 

•  Philosophia  Britannica;  or,  a  New  and  Comprehensive  System  of 
the  Newtonian  Philosophy.  By  B.  Martin.  2  vols.  1747.  8vo.  (Vol.  1. 
Third  Lecture  on  Mechanics.  Pp.  106-8.)  N.B.— Under  "Perpetual 
iMovemeut,*'  the  ahove  is  copied  literally  into  **  A  New  and  Complete 
Dictionan'  of  Arts  and  Sciences.  By  a  Society  of  Gentlemen."  4  vols. 
1754.     4to. 


OR,    SEABCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVB    POWER.  109 

perpetual.  But  what  sets  this  in  the  clearest  light  is,  that  a 
hody  placed  on  the  deck  or  in  the  cahin  of  a  ship  continues 
there  at  rest  while  the  motion  of  the  ship  remains  uniform 
and  steady ;  and  the  same  holds  of  a  hody  that  is  carried 
along  in  any  space  that  has  itself  an  uniform  motion  in  a 
right  line.  For  if  a  hody  in  motion  tended  to  rest,  that 
which  is  in  the  cabin  of  a  ship  ought  to  fall  back  towards  the 
stem ;  which  would  appear  as  surprising,  when  the  motion 
of  a  ship  is  uniform  and  steady,  as  if  the  body  should  of 
itself  move  towards  the  stem  when  the  ship  is  at  rest.  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  the  uniform  motion  of  the  earth  upon  its 
axis  has  no  effect  on  the  motion  of  bodies  at  the  surface ; 
that  the  motion  of  a  ship  carried  away  with  a  current  is 
insensible  to  those  in  the  ship,  unless  they  have  an  oppor- 
tunity to  discover  it  by  objects  which  they  know  to  be  fixed, 
as  the  shores  and  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  or  by  astronomical 
observations  ;  and  that  the  motions  of  the  planets  and  comets, 
in  the  free  celestial  spaces,  require  no  new  impulses  to  per- 
petuate them.* 

[He  then  proceeds  to  consider  the  other  laws  of  motion.] 

And  of  the  Mechanical  Powers,  he  says  : — 

30.  The  mechanical  powers,  according  to  their  different 
structure,  serve  for  different  purposes ;  and  it  is  the  business 
of  the  skilful  mechanic  to  chuse  them,  or  combine  them,  in  the 
manner  that  may  be  best  adapted  to  produce  the  effect  required, 
by  the  power  which  he  is  possessed  of,  and  at  the  least  expence. 
The  lever  can  be  employed  to  raise  weights  a  little  way  only, 
unless  the  engine  itself  be  moved,  as,  for  example,  to  raise 
stones  out  of  their  beds  in  quarries.  But  the  axis  and  wheel 
may  serve  for  raising  weights  from  the  greatest  depths.  The 
puUies  being  easily  portable  aboard  ships,  are  therefore  much 
employed  in  them.  The  wedge  is  excellent  for  separating 
the  parts  of  bodies,  and  the  screw  for  compressing  or  squeezing 
them  together;  and  its  great  friction  is  even  sometimes 
of  use  to  preserve  the  effect  already  produced  by  it.  The 
strength  of  the  engine,  and  of  its  parts,  must  be  proportioned 
to  the  effects  which  are  to  be  produced  by  it.      As  we    find 

that,  when  the  centre  of  motion  is  placed  between  the  power 

• 

•  An  Account  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  Philosophical  Discoveries,  in 
four  books  By  Colin  Maclauria,  A.M.  Third  editicn,  1775,  8vo. 
Page  118,  chap.  2,  book  2. 


110  PEiirETUUM  mobile; 

and  tlie  weight,  it  must  sustain  the  sum  of  their  efforts,  a 
small  balance  ought  not  to  be  employed  for  weighing  great 
weights,  for  these  disorder  its  structure,  and  render  it  unfit 
for  serving  that  purpose  with  accuracy;  neither  are  great 
engines  proper  for  producing  small  effects  :  the  detail  of  which 
things  must  be  left  to  the  skilful  and  experienced  mechanic. 

31.  But  besides  the  raising  of  weights  and  overcoming 
resistances,  in  mechanics  we  have  often  other  objects  in  view. 
To  make  a  regular  movement,  that  may  serve  to  measure  the 
time  as  exactly  as  possible,  is  one  of  the  most  valuable 
problems  in  this  science,  and  has  been  most  successfully 
effected  hitherto  by  adapting  pendulums  to  clocks,  tho' 
many  ingenious  contrivances  have  been  invented  to  correct 
the  irregularities  of  those  movements  that  go  by  springs. 
Some  have  endeavoured  to  find  a  perpetual  movement,  but 
without  success ;  and  there  is  groimd  to  think,  from  the 
principles  of  mechanics,  that  such  a  movement  is  impossible. 
In  many  cases,  when  bodies  act  upon  each  other,  there  is  a 
gain  of  absolute  motion;  but  this  gain  is  always  equal  in 
opposite  directions,  and  the  quantity  of  direct  motion  is  never 
increased.  To  make  a  perpetual  movement,  it  appears 
necessary  that  a  certain  system  of  bodies,  of  a  determined 
number  and  quantity,  should  move  in  a  certain  space  for  ever, 
and  in  a  certain  way  and  manner ;  and  for  this  there  must  be 
a  series  of  actions  returning  in  a  circle,  to  make  the  move- 
ment continual,  so  that  any  action  by  which  the  absolute 
quantity  of  force  is  ijicreased,  of  which  there  are  several 
sorts,  must  have  its  corresponding  counter-action,  by  which 
that  gain  of  force  is  destroyed,  and  the  quantity  of  force 
restored  to  its  first  state.  Thus,  by  these  actions,  there  will 
never  be  any  gain  of  direct  force,  to  overcome  the  friction  and 
the  resistance  of  the  medium.  But  every  motion  will  be 
abated,  by  these  resistances,  of  its  just  quantity ;  and  the 
motions  of  all  must  at  length  languish  and  cease. 

32.  To  illustrate  this,  it  is  allowed  that  by  the  resolution 
Q  of  force  there  is  a  gain  or  in- 
crease of  the  absolute  quantity  of 
force  ;  as  the  two  forces  A  B  and 
A  D  (Fig.  2)  taken  together, 
exceed  the  force  A  C  which  is 
resolved    into    them.      But   you 

(Fig.  2  .tab.  1.)  cannot  proceed  resolving  motion 


OR,    SEABCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    POWEK.  Ill 

til  infinitum,  by  any  machine  whatsoever  ;  but  those  you  have 
resolved  must  be  again  compounded,  in  order  to  make  a  con- 
tinual movement,  and  the  gain  obtained  by  the  resolution  will 
be  lost  again  by  the  composition.  In  like  manner,  if  you 
suppose  A  and  B  (Fig.  42)  to  be  perfectly  elastic,  and  that 
the  lesser  body  A  strikes  B  quiescent,  there  will  be  an 
increase  of  the  absolute  quantity  of 
ibrce,  because  A  will  be  reflected ; 
but  if  you  suppose  them  both  to 
turn  round  any  centre  C,  after  the 
stroke,  so  as  to  meet  again  in  a 
and  b,  this  increase  of  force  will  be 
lost,  and  their  motion  will  be  re- 
duced to  its  first  quantity.  Such  a 
gain,  therefore,  of  force  as  must  be 
afterwards  lost  in  the  action  of  the 
bodies  can  never  produce  a  per- 
petual movement.  There  are  various 
ways,  besides  these,  by  which  abso-  ^^^3'  *^»  ^"°*  ^'^ 

lute  force  may  be  gained ;  but  since  there  is  always  an  equal 
gain  in  opposite  directions,  and  no  increase  obtained  in  the 
same  direction,  in  the  circle  of  actions  necessary  to  make  a 
perpetual  movement,  this  gain  must  be  presently  lost,  and 
will  not  serve  for  the  necessary  expence  of  force  employed  in 
overcoming  friction  and  the  resistance  of  the  mediimi. 

33.  We  are  to  observe,  therefore,  that  tho*  it  could  be 
shewn  that  in  an  infinite  number  of  bodies,  or  in  an 
infinite  machine,  there  could  be  a  gain  of  force  for 
ever,  and  a  motion  continued  to  infinity,  it  does  not 
therefore  follow  that  a  perpetual  movement  can  be  made. 
That  which  was  proposed  by  Mr.  Leibnitz,  in  August,  1690, 
in  the  Leipsic  acts,  as  a  consequence  of  the  common  estima- 
tion of  the  forces  of  bodies  in  motion,  is  of  this  kind,  and,  for 
this  and  other  reasons,  ought  to  be  rejected.  It  is,  however, 
necessary  to  add  that,  though  on  many  accounts  it  appears 
preferable  to  measure  the  forces  as  well  as  motions  of  bodies 
by  their  velocities,  and  not  by  the  squares  of  their  velocities  ; 
yet,  in  order  to  produce  a  greater  velocit^^  in  a  body,  the 
power  or  cause  that  is  to  generate  it  must  be  greater  in  a 
higher  proportion  than  that  velocity,  because  the  action  of 
the  power  upon  the  body  depends  upon  their  relative  motion 
only ;  so  that  the  whole  action  of  the  power  is  not  employed 


112 


PERPETUUM    mobile; 


in  producing  motion  in  the  body,  but  a  considerable  part  of 
it  in  sustaining  the  power,  so  as  to  enable  it  to  act  upon  the 
body  and  keep  up  with  it.  Thus  the  whole  action  of  the  wind 
is  not  employed  in  accelerating  the  motion  of  the  ship,  but 
only  the  excess  of  its  velocity  above  that  of  the  sail  on  which 
it  acts,  both  being  reduced  to  the  same  direction.  When 
motion  is  produced  in  a  body  by  springs,  it  is  the  last  spring 
only  which  acts  upon  the  body  by  contact,  and  the  rest  serve 
only  to  sustain  it  in  its  action  ;  and  hence  a  greater  nimiber 
of  springs  is  requisite  to  produce  a  greater  velocity  in  a  given 
body  than  in  proportion  to  that  velocity.  A  double  power, 
like  that  of  gravity,  will  produce  a  double  motion  in  the 
same  time ;  and  a  double  motion  in  an  elastic  body 
may  produce  a  double  motion  in  another  of  the  same 
kind.  But  two  equal  successive  impulses,  acting  on  the 
same  body,  will  not  produce  a  motion  in  it  double  of 
what  would  be  generated  by  the  first  impulse,  because  the 
second  impulse  has  necessarily  a  less  effect  upon  the  body, 
which  is  already  in  motion,  than  the  first  impulse  which  acted 
upon  it  while  at  rest.  In  like  manner,  if  there  is  a  third  and 
fourth  impulse,  the  third  will  have  less  effect  than  the  second, 
and  the  fourth  less  than  the  third.  From  this  it  appears  what 
answer  we  are  to  make  to  a  specious  argument  that  is  adduced 

{Fig.  43,  tab.  3.) 
A 


^- 

:^\.„.„ 

».  A\     ,* 

V.--'                                D 

> 

E 

V "■■* 

to  show  the  possibility  of  a  perpetual  motion.     Let  the  height 
A  B  (Fig.  4i)  be  divided  into  four  equal  parts  A  B,  C  D, 


OK,    SEARCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER. 


113 


D  E,  E  B — suppose  the  body  A  to  acquire  by  the  descent 
A  C,  a  velocity  as  1,  and  this  motion  by  any  contrivance  to 
be  transmitted  to  an  equal  body  B  ;  then  let  the  body  A,  by 
an  equal  descent  C  D,  acquire  another  motion  as  1,  to  be 
transmitted  likewise  to  the  same  body  B,  which  in  this  manner 
is  supposed  to  acquire  a  motion  as  2,  that  is  sufficient  to  carry 
it  upwards  from  B  to  A  ;  and  because  there  yet  remain  the 
motions  which  A  acquires  by  the  descents  D  E  and  E  B,  that 
may  be  sufficient  to  keep  an  engine  in  motion,  while  B  and  A 
ascend  and  descend  by  turns,  it  is  hence  concluded  that  a 
sufficient  gain  of  force  may  be  obtained  in  this  manner,  so  as 
to  produce  a  perpetual  movement.  But  it  appears,  from 
what  has  been  shewn,  that  a  motion  as  2  cannot  be  produced 
in  B  by  the  two  successive  impulses  transmitted  from  A,  each 
of  which  is  as  1. 

Some  authors  have  proposed  projects  for  producing  a  per- 
petual movement,  with  a  design  to  refute  them ;  but,  by 
mistaking  the  proper  answer,  have  rather  confirmed  the 
unskilful  in  their  groundless  expectations.  An  instance  of 
this  we  have  in  Dr.  Wilkins's  "  Mathematical  Magick," 
book  2,  chap.  13.  A  loadstone  at  A  (Fig.  44)  is  supposed 
to  have  a  sufficient  force  to  bring  up  a  heavy  body  along  the 
plane   F   A,   from   F   to   B ;     -^ 

whence  the  body  is  supposed    ^kv  (^^9*  **i  ^"°«  3-) 

to  descend  by  its  gravity,  along 
the  curve  B  E  F,  continually. 
But  supposing  B  Z  E  to  be 
the  surface  upon  which,  if  a 
body  was  placed,  the  attrac- 
tion of  the  loadstone  and  the 
gravity  of  the  body  would 
balance  each  other,  this  sur- 
face shall  meet  B  E  F  at  some 

point  E  between  A  and  F,  and  the  body  must  stop  in  descend- 
ing along  A  E  F  at  the  point  E.* 

*  An  Account  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  Philosophical  Discoveries,  in 
four  hoolss.  By  Colin  Maclaurin,  M.A.  Published  from  the  author's 
MS.  papers,  by  Patrick  Murdoch,  M.A  and  F.R.S.  Third  edition,  8vo. 
1776.     Book  2,  chap.  3,  p.  187.     N.B.— First  edition,  4to.,  printed  1748. 

The  foregoing  article  may  be  found  copied  into  "A  New  and  Complete 
Dictionary  of  Arts  and  Sciences.  By  a  Society  of  Gentlemen."  4  vols. 
4to.    1764. 


114  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

Dr.  Rutherford,  in  allusion  to  Perpetual  Motion,  says : — 

98.  The  friction  of  the  parts  of  a  machine  against  each 
other  will  in  time  destroy  any  motion  that  has  been  communi- 
cated to  it. 

Amongst  the  other  mutual  actions  of  bodies  upon  each 
other,  we  reckon  friction.  No  machine  can  have  the  surface 
of  its  parts  made  exactly  smooth  by  polishing,  though  their 
roughness  may  be  made  too  small  for  our  eyes  to  discover  it. 
And  as  a  body  by  striking  directly  upon  another,  that  is  either 
at  rest  or  in  motion,  will  lose  velocity,  so,  as  the  parts  of  a 
machine  rub  against  each  other,  when  the  prominence  of  one 
part,  though  ever  so  small,  strikes  upon  the  prominence  of 
another  part,  the  motion  of  the  parts  will  by  this  means  be 
diminished,  and  by  frequent  strokes  of  the  same  sort  will  in 
time  be  entirely  destroyed. 

From  hence  it  follows  that  no  machine  can  be  so  contrived 
as  to  have  a  perpetual  motion,  or  always  to  preserve  the 
motion  once  impressed  upon  it ;  for  the  motion  commimicated 
will  by  the  friction  of  the  machine  be  constantly  decreasing, 
and  must  end  at  last. 

To  prevent  this,  in  all  the  contrivances  for  a  perpetual 
motion  the  usual  attempt  has  been  to  find  out  a  way  of  re- 
pairing the  motion  which  is  lost  by  friction ;  and  as  bodies 
move  themselves  by  the  force  of  gravity,  and  as  motion  is 
likewise  generated  by  the  spring  of  such  bodies  as  are 
elastic,  the  way  of  repairing  the  motion  as  it  decays  by  fric- 
tion must  be  by  the  application  of  one  or  other  of  these  two 
properties  of  matter.  The  motion  of  some  clocks  is  kept  up 
by  the  force  of  gravity ;  but  then  this  motion  is  not  a  per- 
petual one,  for  the  clock  stops  as  soon  as  the  weights  are 
down.  Other  clocks  are  kept  in  motion  by  elastic  springs ; 
but  this  motion  ceases  likewise,  when  the  spring,  by  having 
expanded  itself,  is  grown  too  weak  to  repair  it  any  longer. 
And  indeed,  neither  of  these  properties  can  be  so  applied  as 
to  make  a  perpetual  motion.  This  I  will  endeavour  to  shew, 
from  one  or  two  of  the  principal  contrivances  in  the  two 
following  propositions : — 

99.  The  force  of  gravity  cannot  produce  a  perpetual 
motion. 

The  general  reason  for  this  has  been  already  given ;  for, 
since  gravity  produces  motion  in  bodies  only  whilst  they  can 


OR,    8EA.BGH   FOR    SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


115 


descend,  the  motion  of  a  machine,  which  is  lost  by  the  fric- 
tion of  its  parts,  can  be  repaired  by  a  weight  no  longer  than 
till  the  weight  is  down,  or  is  come  to  the  ground,  and  is  pre- 
vented by  it  from  descending  any  longer. 

In  order  to  remove  this  difficulty,  machines  have  been  con- 
trived with  more  weights  than  one,  of  which  some  are  to  be 
constantly  ascending  whilst  the  others  are  descending.  Where 
we  may  observe  that  the  descending  weights  are  applyed  to 
two  purposes  ;  they  are  to  repair  the  motion  in  the  machine, 
and  likewise  to  raise  the  other  weights  which  were  down  as 
low  as  they  could  go ;  and  these  weights,  when  they  are 
raised,  are  to  descend  again,  and  in  their  turn  to  answer  the 
same  purpose.  For  this  end,  some  one  or  more  of  the 
mechanical  powers  is  made  use  of,  by  the  assistance  of  which 
the  descendmg  weights  may  be  made  to  move  always  with  a 
greater  velocity  than  the  ascending  ones ;  and  then,  if  the 
quantities  of  matter  in  the  weights  be  equal,  their  moments 
will  be  as  their  velocities,  and  consequently  the  descending 
weights  may  by  this  means  have  a  moment  given  them  so 
much  greater  than  the  ascending  ones  have  as  to  be  sufficient 
to  answer  the  two  purposes  already  mentioned. 

It  would  be  endless  to  examine  all  the  inventions  of  this 
sort.  The  principle  upon  which  they  depend  is  applyed  in 
the  neatest  manner  in  the  wheel  described  by  Desaguliers  ; 
and  by  examining  the  principle  in  this  one  instance,  we  shall 
see  the  fallacy  of  it,  and  how  little  hopes  of  success  there  is 
in  any  other  application  of  it.  The  wheel  (Fig.  1,  plate  4) 
has  two  rims  or  circumferences, 
"DeABajidrhi/.  The  space 
between  the  two  rims  is  divided 
into  cells  by  the  spokes  q  A, 

/  U  pjy^  A  «,  &c.,  which  are 
bent  in  such  a  manner  as  to 

^aiise  weights  placed  loose  in 

^ilie  cells  to  descend  on  the  side 

A  «  ^  B  from  A  to  B,  which  is 
the  lowest  point,  on  the  outer 
rim  of  the  wheel,  and  to  ascend 
again  from  B  on  the  other  side 
of  the  wheel  B  D,  in  the  line 
B  «  m  /?  r,  which  comes  nearer 
the  centre  C  and  touches  the  inner  rim.     Thus  the  weights 


{Fig.\,pl^.) 


116  PEEPETUUM     MOBILE  *, 

on  the  descending  side  of  the  wheel  being  farther  from  the 
centre  of  motion  than  those  on  the  ascending  side,  it  is 
imagined  that  the  moment  of  the  former  will  always  be 
greater  than  the  moment  of  the  latter.  The  weight  A,  in 
particular,  descends  to  B  in  the  arc  A  «  ^  B,  which  is  a 
quarter  of  a  circle ;  but  it  rises  from  B  to  D  in  the  curve 
B  w  «i  jt?  r,  which  is  less  than  a  quarter  of  a  circle.  And, 
since  the  velocity  is  as  the  space  described  in  a  given  time, 
the  velocity  and  consequently  the  moment  of  A  when  it 
descends  is  greater  than  its  moment  when  it  ascends.  This 
will  be  the  case  of  every  weight  in  its  turn ;  therefore,  the 
descending  weights  will  always  have  a  greater  moment  than 
the  ascending  ones. 

The  fallacy  is  this : — The  velocity  with  which  the  weight  A 
descends  to  B  is  estimated  by  the  line  A  s  tB,  whereas  the 
velocity  of  all  bodies  in  motion  is  to  be  estimated  in  the  line 
of  their  direction,  by  the  second  law  of  motion.  For  it  is 
only  in  the  line  of  direction  that  any  force  acts  so  as  to  com- 
municate motion  to  a  body ;  and  it  is  in  the  same  line  only 
that  the  body  in  motion  acts,  when  it  communicates  motion 
and  is  itself  considered  as  a  moving  force.  From  hence  it 
follows,  that  the  velocity  with  which  a  weight  descends,  if 
the  weight  is  considered  as  a  moving  force,  must  be  estimated 
in  the  line  of  its  direction,  that  is,  in  a  line  drawn  from  its 
centre  of  gravity  to  the  centre  of  the  earth ;  or,  the  velocity 
of  a  weight  is  proportional  to  the  approach  of  it  in  any  given 
time  to  Sie  earth's  centre.  In  like  manner,  the  velocity  with 
which  the  weight  ascends  is  to  be  estimated  in  the  line  of  its 
direction,  and  in  any  given  time  it  is  as  the  distance  to  which 
it  is  raised  from  the  earth's  centre  in  that  time.  From  hence 
it  appears  that,  though  the  weight  A  descends  to  B  in  the 
curve  A  8  tB,  yet  the  velocity  with  which  it  descends  being 
as  its  approach  to  the  earth's  centre,  is  as  A  G  =  C  B  ;  and 
though  the  same  weight  ascends  in  the  lesser  curve  B  n  m  p  r, 
yet  the  velocity  with  which  it  ascends  being  as  the  distance 
to  which  it  is  raised  from  the  earth's  centre  in  that  time,  is  as 
Er  =  CB  =  AG.  Therefore,  the  descending  and  ascend- 
ing velocities  are  equal,  and  consequently  the  moment  of  the 
descending  weights  will  be  no  greater  than  the  ascending 
ones. 

I  do  not  know  whether  this  will  be  made  more  intelligible 
by  distinguishing  between  the  weight's  velocity  whilst   it 


OR,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIYE    POWER.  117 

descends  and  the  velocity  with,  which  it  descends.  This  may 
appear  to  the  reader  too  nice  a  distinction ;  but  I  hope  he 
will  understand  my  meaning,  if  he  observes  that  whUst  A 
descends  it  does  not  move  directly  downwards  in  the  line  A  G, 
but  moves  partly  downwards  and  partly  in  a  horizontal  direc- 
tion, and  by  both  these  motions  together  is  carried  to  B. 
Since,  therefore,  whilst  it  descends  it  is  likewise  carryed  hori- 
zontally, I  think  it  is  evident  that  it  does  not  descend  with  its 
whole  velocity ;  therefore,  its  velocity  whilst  it  descends  is 
different  from  the  velocity  with  which  it  descends,  as  different 
as  the  whole  is  from  its  part.  Or  otherwise,  whilst  A  de- 
scends to  B  in  the  line  A  «  ^  B,  we  may  consider  its  motion 
as  resolved  into  the  two  sides  of  a  parallelogram,  A  G  and 
A  C  =  G  B ;  where  the  velocity  with  which  it  descends  is 
A  G,  and  the  other  part  of  its  velocity  A  C  or  G  B  carries  it 
horizontally.  In  like  manner  we  may  distinguish  between 
the  velocity  which  the  weight  has  whilst  it  ascends  and  the 
velocity  with  which  it  ascends ;  for  if,  as  before,  the  weight 
ascends  in  the  curve  B  n  mp  r,  we  may  consider  its  motion 
as  resolved  into  the  two  sides  of  a  parallelogram,  B  C  =  E  r 
and  B  E ;  where  the  velocity  with  which  it  ascends  is  E  r, 
and  the  other  part  of  its  velocity  B  E  carries  it  horizontally. 
Now,  the  descending  velocity  A  G  is  equal  to  the  ascending 
velocity  E  r;  and,  therefore,  the  moment  with  which  the 
weight  descends  will  be  equal  to  the  moment  with  which  it 
ascends.  The  horizontal  velocity  G  B  of  the  descending 
•  weight  is  greater,  indeed,  than  the  horizontal  velocity  B  E  of 
the  ascending  one.  But  I  suppose  it  is  unnecessary  to  prove 
that  this  cannot  possibly  contribute  anything  towards  turning 
the  wheel,  or  towards  making  the  moment  on  the  descending 
side  greater  than  the  moment  on  the  ascending  side ;  for  I 
imagine  the  reader  will  easily  see  that  a  motion  in  the  direc- 
tion G  B  E  or  A  C  r  will  not  contribute  in  the  least  towards 
making  the  point  A  descend,  or  towards  turning  the  line 
A  C  D  round  upon  the  centre  of  motion. 

100.  The  force  of  elasticity  cannot  produce  a  perpetual 
motion. 

Elastic  springs,  as  has  been  observed  already,  by  ex- 
panding themselves  grow  weak ;  and,  when  they  are  quite 
expanded,  become  entirely  unable  to  produce  any  motion  at 
all.  But  in  proposition  83  it  was  shown  that  if  an  elastic 
ball  A  strikes  upon  another  B,  which  is  greater  than  itself, 


118  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

the  moment  of  B  after  the  stroke  will  be  greater  than  that  of 
A  was  before  it.  In  like  manner,  if  B  was  to  strike  upon  C, 
another  elastic  body  greater  than  itself,  the  motion  might 
still  be  increased.  And  thus,  by  placing  more  elastic  bodies 
in  the  row,  of  which  each  should  be  greater  than  the  last 
before  it,  the  motion  might  be  increased  in  what  proportion 
we  pleased.  Now,  why  might  not  motion  produced  in  this 
manner  be  applied  to  repair  what  is  lost  in  a  machine  by  the 
friction  of  its  parts,  and  to  make  the  motion  of  the  machine  a 
perpetual  one?  I  intended  to  supply  the  reader  with  an 
answer  to  this  question  when  I  desired  him  to  remember  in 
the  instance  of  two  bodies,  in  proposition  83,  that  though 
there  is  motion  produced  if  we  consider  the  greater  body 
alone,  yet  if  both  bodies  are  taken  together  there  is  no  motion 
produced  in  the  same  direction ;  but  the  moment  in  the  same 
direction  is  exactly  the  saine  after  the  stroke  that  it  was 
before  it.  This  woidd  be  the  case  were  there  ever  so  many 
bodies.  But  a  machine  can  o^y  be  moved  by  moving  forces 
in  the  same  direction;  for  equal  moving  forces  in  contrary 
directions  would  destroy  esLph.  other  and  produce  no  effect  on 
the  machine,  and  the  effect-^produced  by  unequal  ones  in  con- 
trary directions  will  be  as  their  difference.  Since,  therefore, 
the  moving  force,  by  which  the  motion  of  the  machine  should 
be  repaired,  is  the  moment  of  these  elastic  bodies,  and  since 
their  moment  in  the  same  direction  is  the  same  after  the 
strolie  th|t  it  was  before ;  it  follows,  that  no  such  moment  is 
producedby  the  stroke  as  can  keep  the  motion  of  the  machine 
and  make  it  perpetual.  For  instance,  suppose  the  machine 
consists  of  four  wheels;  call  them  c,  d^  e,  andy.  Let  c  be 
the  first  mover,  and  let  /  be  the  last.  Now,  if  c  begins  to 
move  with  8  degrees  of  moment,  and  by  the  friction  2  degrees 
are  lost  when  the  motion  comes  to  the  wheel  /,  then  /  can 
return  only  6  degrees  of  motion  on  c,  the  first  mover.  And 
thus  the  motion,  as  it  decays  in  every  round,  will  at  last  be 
entirely  lost,  imless  some  method  could  be  found  for  repairing 
it.  Suppose,  therefore,  that  there  were  two  elastic  balls  A 
and  B,  and  that  A  is  to  B  as  2  to  4 ;  then,  by  proposition  83, 
if  A  strikes  B  with  a  moment  6,  B  will  gain  by  the  stroke  a 
moment  8.  ||fp,if  y,  the  fe^  wheel  which  has  only  the 
moment  6,  wa^  to  strike  updir5v  and  A  to  strike  upon  B,  and 
B  Xo  strike  upon  the  first  wheel  c,  then  this  first  mover  would 
iave  the  same  motion  8  communicated  to  it,  with  which  it 


OB,   SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  119 

began  to  move.  And  as  the  two  elastic  bodies  would  always 
repair  the  2  degrees  of  motion  that  are  lost  by  friction  in 
conveying  the  motion  from  c  to/,  why  might  not  this  con- 
trivance be  so  applyed  as  to  make  the  machine  a  perpetual 
motion?  I  answer,  because,  though  B  strikes  c  with  8 
degrees  of  motion,  yet  A  will  at  the  same  time  be  reflected 
with  2  degrees  against  /,  and  striking  /,  the  last  mover,  by 
reflection,  will  stop  the  machine  with  a  force  2,  whilst  B  is 
moving  it  with  a  force  8.  Therefore,  by  the  action  of  both 
bodies  together,  of  B  impelling  c  with  the  moment  8,  and 
of  A  reflected  back  upon  f  with  the  moment  2,  the  machine 
will  be  moved  only  with  the  difference,  or  8  —  2  =  6.  So  that 
if  c  began  to  move  at  first  with  the  moment  8,  and  this 
moment  by  being  carried  round  through  d  and  e  to /was  re- 
duced to  6,  the  two  elastic  balls  A  and  B  will  not  repair  the 
moment  lost ;  but  the  machine  will  have  only  6  degrees  of 
moment,  notwithstanding  the  seeming  increase  of  motion  by 
A's  striking  upon  B.* 


Dr.  Hooper  describes  "A  Clock  to  go  perpetually  by  the 
influence  of  the  Celestial  Bodies,"  and  very  properly  dis- 
criminates the  difference  between  such  action  and  a  self- 
motive  power.     He  says : — 

The  construction  of  the  movements  in  this  clock  is  the 
same  with  those  in  common  use ;  it  differs  from  those  only  in 
its  situation  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  wound  up. 

This  clock  is  to  be  placed  near  a  wall,  by  or  against  which 
the  tide  constantly  flows.  To  each  of  the  barrels  round 
which  the  string  that  carries  the  weight  is  wound,  there  must 
hang  a  bucket,  and  into  that,  when  the  tide  rises  to  a  certain 
height,  the  water  runs,  by  means  of  a  pipe  fixed  in  the  wall. 
The  bucket  then  overbalancing  the  weight,  descends,  and 
winds  up  the  clock ;  but  when  it  comes  to  a  certain  deptlii,  it 
is  taken  by  a  catch  fixed  in  the  wall,  which  by  turning  it 
over  discharges  the  water ;  the  weights  of  the  clock  ti^en 
descend  in  the  usual  manner,  and  the  buckets  are  drawn  up. 

Now,  as  this  clock  is  kept  in  motion  by  the  tide,  and  as 

♦  A  System  of  Natural  Philosophy.  By  T.  Rutherford,  D.D.,  F.R.S. 
9,  vols.  4to.,  1748.    Vol.  1,  pp.  88-92. 


120  PEBPETUTJM    mobile; 

the  tide  proceeds  from  the  influence  of  the  sun  and  moon,  it 
necessarily  follows  that  the  motion  of  the  clock  proceeds 
from  the  same  cause,  and  that  as  long  as  the  parts  of  the 
machine  remain,  motion  will  be  perpetual. 

This,  according  to  the  common  acceptation  of  the  term,  is 
certainly  a  perpetual  motion,  and  so  is  every  mill  that  is 
driven  by  a  constcnt  stream ;  but  that  is  not  the  sense  in 
which  the  term  was  used  by  the  advocates  for  a  perpetual 
motion  in  the  last  century.  They  meant  a  machine  which, 
being  once  put  in  motion,  should,  by  its  peculiar  construction, 
move  perpetually  without  any  fresh  force  impressed.  This 
they  attempted  by  various  means  :  as  the  attraction  of  a  load- 
stone, the  descent  of  heavy  bodies,  the  difference  of  the 
momentum  in  revolving  weights,  &c.,  all  of  which,  though 
ingenious  enough,  discover  a  want  of  due  attention  to  the 
principles  of  mechanics.  Besides,  if  a  perpetual  movement 
could  be  effected  by  either  of  those  means,  it  would  be  of 
very  little  or  no  use  :  for  the  unavoidable  wear  of  the  several 
parts  of  the  machine,  arising  from  the  incessant  friction, 
must  necessarily  destroy  that  equality  of  motion  which  alone 
could  render  its  perpetuity  of  any  consequence.* 


Emerson,  in  Prop.  CXVIII.,  treating  how  "  To  determine 
the  friction  and  other  irregularities  in  mechanical  engines," 

,;^ys:— • 

;  li;;  As  to  the  mechanic  powers.  The  single  leaver  makes 
np^i^sistance  by  friction.  But  if,  by  the  motion  of  the  leaver 
in  lifting,  the  fulcrum  or  support  be  changed  further  from  the 
weight,  the  power  will  be  decreased  thereby. 

7.  If  any  wheel  of  a  machine  running  upon  an  axis,  the 
friction  on  the  axis  is  as  the  weight  upon  it,  the  diameter  of 
the  axis,  and  the  angular  velocity.  This  sort  of  friction  is 
but  smsdl. 

8.  In  the  pulley,  if  p  q  he  two  weights,  and  q  the  greater, 

and  if  W=  r^,  then  W  is  the  weight  upon  the  axis,i^f  the 
single  pulley.  And  it  is  not  increased  by  the  acceleration  of 
the  weight  q,  but  remains  always  the  same. 

*  Rational  Recreations.  By  W,  Hooper,  M.D.  4  vols.  8vo.  1783. 
Vo'.  1,  p.  187;  recieaticn  65. 


OK,    SEAHCH    FOU    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  121 

The  friction  of  the  pulley  is  very  considerable  when  the 
sheaves  rub  against  the  blocks,  and  by  the  wearing  of  the 
holes  and  axles. 

The  friction  on  the  axis  of  the  pulley  is  as  the  weight  W, 
its  angular  velocity  the  diameter  of  the  axis  directly  and  the 
diameter  of  the  pulley  inversely.  A  power  of  lOOlbs.  with 
the  addition  of  501bs.  will  but  draw  up  SOOlbs.  with  a  tackle 
of  5. 

And  151bs.  over  a  single  pulley  will  draw  up  only  141bs. 

9.  In  the  screw  there  is  a  great  deal  of  friction.  Those 
with  sharp  threads  have  more  friction  than  those  with  square 
threads,  and  endless  screws  have  more  than  either.  Screws 
with  a  square  thread  raise  a  weight  with  more  ease  than 
those  with  a  sharp  thread. 

In  the  common  screw  the  friction  is  so  great,  that  it  will 
sustain  the  weight  in  a  position  given  when  the  power  is 
taken  off.  And,  therefore,  the  friction  is  at  least  equal  to 
the  power.  From  whence  it  will  follow,  that  in  the  screw 
the  power  must  be  to  the  weight  or  resistance,  at  least  as 
twice  the  perpendicular  height  of  a  thread  to  the  circumfer- 
ence described  by  gne  revolution  of  the  power,  if  it  be  able 
to  raise  the  weight,  or  only  sustain  it.  This  friction  of  the 
screw  is  of  great  use,  as  it  serves  to  keep  the  weight  in  any 
given  position. 

10.  In  the  wedge  the  friction  is  at  least  equal  to  the  power, 
as  it  retains  any  position  it  is  driven  into.  Therefore,  in  the 
wedge  the  power  must  be  to  the  weight  at  least  as  twice  the 
base  to  the  height,  to  overcome  any  resistance. 

11.  To  find  the  friction  of  any  engine,  begin  at  the  power, 
and  consider  the  velocity  and  the  weight  at  the  first  rubbing 
part,  and  estimate  its  quantity  of  friction  by  some  of  the 
foregoing  articles ;  then  proceed  to  the  next  rubbing  part,  and 
do  the  same  for  it;  and  so  on  through  the  whole. 

And  note,  something  more  is  to  be  allowed  for  increase  of 
friction  by  every  new  addition  to  the  power. 

Cor. — Hence  will  appear  the  difficulty,  or,  rather,  im- 
possibility of  a  perpetual  motion,  or  such  a  motion  as  is  to 
continue  the  same  for  ever,  or  at  least  as  long  as  the  mate- 
rials will  last,  that  compose  moving  machines. 

For  such  a  motion  as  this  ought  continually  to  return  undi- 
minished, notwithstanding  any  resistance  it  meets  with,  which 
is  impossible.     For,  although  any  body  once  put  into  motion, 


122  PEB?ETUUM  mobile; 

and  moving  freely  without  any  resistance,  or  any  external 
retarding  force  acting  upon  it,  would  for  ever  retain,  that 
motion,  yet,  in  fact,  we  are  certain  that  no  body  or  machine 
can  move  at  all  without  some  degree  of  friction  and 
resistance ;  and,  therefore,  it  must  follow  that,  from  the 
resistance  of  the  medium,  and  the  friction  of  the  parts  of  the 
machine  upon  one  another,  its  motion  will  gradually  decay, 
till,  at  last,  all  the  motion  is  destroyed,  and  the  machine  is  at 
rest.  Nor  can  this  be  otherwise,  except  some  new  active 
force,  equal  to  all  its  resistance,  adds  a  new  motion  to  it. 
But  that  cannot  be  from  the  body  or  machine  itself ;  for  then 
the  body  would  move  itself,  or  be  the  cause  of  its  own 
motion,  which  is  absurd,* 


Among  the  numerous  commimications  made  by  William 
Nicholson  to  the  journal  he  conducted,  and  which  bears  his 
name,  he  contributed  the  following  carefully-written  paper — 
"  Concerning  those  Perpetual  Motions  which  are  producible 
in  Machines  by  the  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Barometer  or  the 
Thermometrical  Variations  in  the  Dimensions  of  Bodies  :" — 

In  a  former  communication,  I  have  given  an  account  of 
some  of  the  delusive  projects  for  obtaining  a  perpetual 
motion  from  an  invariable  power.f  In  that  paper,  I  remarked 
that  the  flow  of  rivers,  the  vicissitudes  of  tides,  the  varia- 
tions of  winds,  the  thermometrical  expansions  of  solids  and 
fluids,  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  mercury  in  the  barometer,  the 
hygrometric  changes  in  organised  remains,  and  every  other 
of  those  mutations  which  never  fail  to  take  place  around  us, 
may  be  applied  as  flrst  movers  to  mills,  clocks,  and  other 
engines,  and  keep  them  going  till  worn  out.  Many  instances 
of  this  kind  of  perpetual  motion  are  seen  in  water-nulls  and 
other  common  engines,  which  are  necessarily  confined  to  cer- 
tain local  situations.  The  windmill,  though  less  confined 
with  respect  to  place,  is  the  subject  of  a  much  more  variable 
power ;  other  instruments,  still  less  confined  with  regard  to 
^situation  and  exposure,  have  been  made,  which  are  capable  of 

•  The  Principles  of  Mechanics.  By  W.  Emerson.  4to.  1794. 
Tourth  ed'tion,  p.  173. 

t  Philosophical  Journal,  voL  1,  p.  375. 


OB,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  123 

contmuing  their  motion  without  ceasing.  Such  was  the 
clock,  or  perpetual  motion,  in  Cox's  Museum,  which  was 
shewn  about  twenty  years  ago  in  London.  My  former  paper 
was  written  to  shew  the  value  of  the  perpetual  motion, 
strictly  so  called,  which  has  for  the  most  part  been  pursued 
by  men  of  little  information.  In  the  present  memoir,  I  shall 
endeavour  to  ascertain  that  of  this  second  kind  of  motion, 
which,  because  more  promising,  and  of  nearly  the  same  prac- 
tical value,  has  been  followed  at  some  expense  by  men  of 
higher  claims.  For  this  purpose,  I  shall  first  describe  a  few 
schemes,  and  then  investigate  the  quantity  of  power  they  are 
likely  to  afford. 

Fig.  1,  plate  6,  is  a  sketch  of  the  first  ipover  in  a  clock 
which  formed  part  of  Cox's  Museum,  which  was  sold  by 
public  lottery,  about  the  year  1776^  if  my  recollection  be 
accurate.  A  represents  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  a  baro- 
meter, the  glass  vessel  of  which  had  the  form  of  a  bottle  or 
chemical  mattrass.  The  diameter  of  the  upper  surface  of  the 
mercury  was,  I  think,  about  twelve  inches.  C  D  represents 
the  bason,  or  receptacle,  into  which  the  aperture  of  A  B  was 
k»lunged.  I  suppose,  of  course,  that  the  lower  surface  of 
toercury,  which  was  exposed  to  the  pressure  of  the  atmo- 
^here,  was  nearly  the  same  as  the  upper,  A  B,  as,  in  fact,  it 
appeared  to  be.  From  the  intervention  of  the  case,  and 
other  parts  of  the  apparatus,  I  could  only  conjecture  the 
manner  in  which  the  effect  was  produced ;  but  this  was  after- 
wards explained  to  me  by  Mr.  Rehe,*  who  contrived  and  made 
it.  The  bason  B  D  is  suspended  by  two  chains  K  L,  which 
pass  over  the  pullies  or  wheels  H  I,  and  are  attached  to  the 
frame  E  F,  which  last  is  fixed  to  the  barometer  A  B.  Let 
us  now  suppose  the  apparatus  to  be  at  liberty,  and  it  will  be 
clearly  seen,  that  if  the  two  masses  attached  to  the  opposite 
ends  of  the  chains  K  L  be  not  precisely  equal,  the  heaviest 
will  descend,  and  cause  the  lightest  to  rise.  The  masses 
must,  therefore,  be  brought  nearly  to  this  state  of  equality, 
by  the  adjustment  of  weight  added  to  one  or  both  of  them. 
In  this  state,  suppose  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  to  in- 
crease, and  the  consequence  will  be,  that  a  portion  of  the 
mercury,  being  forced  from  the  vessel  C  D  into  A  B,  will 

*  This  gentleman  is  at  present  one  of  the  Board  of  Inspection  of  Naval 
Worksat  the  Admiralty.    June,  1799. 


124  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

render  this  last  heavier,  and  cause  it  to  descend,  while  C  D 
at  the  same  time  rises.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  when,  by  a 
diminished  pressure  of  the  external  air,  the  mercury  subsides 
in  A  B,  the  vessel  C  D  will  preponderate,  and  A  B  will  rise. 
Now,  the  frame  E  F,  which  is  interposed  between  the  baro- 
meter and  the  pullies  I  K,  is  jointed  at  the  corners,  and  also 
at  the  places  where  it  is  attached  to  the  chain  and  the  baro- 
meter ;  and  the  inner  edges  of  the  upright  pieces  E  F  are 
formed  into  teeth,  like  those  of  a  saw,  the  slopes  of  which 
lie  in  opposite  directions,  as  is  shewn  in  the  figure.  The 
wheel  G,  which  is  placed  between  these  bars,  is  also  toothed 
in  the  same  manner ;  and  its  diameter  is  such,  that  when  the 
teeth  on  each  side,  as,  for  example,  E,  are  engaged,  those  on 
the  other  side,  F,  may  be  free ;  but  it  is  too  large  to  admit  of 
both  sides  beingjdisengaged  at  once.  The  wheel  G  is  pre- 
vented, by  a  click,  from  moving  in  the  direction  opposite  to 
that  which  may  be  produced  by  the  action  of  the  bars  E  and 
F.  Hence,  the  play  of  the  machine  is  evident.  When  the 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere  diminishes,  and  the  barometer 
rises  from  its  cistern,  the  side  E  of  the  frame  will  move  the 
wheel  G  through  a  greater  or  less  space,  according  to  the 
variation  ;  and  when,  on  the  contrary,  it  falls,  the  teeth  E 
will  be  drawn  out  of  their  bearing,  and  those  of  F  will  be 
thrown  into  the  wheel,  and  still  produce  a  motion  of  the  same 
kind ;  the  joints  of  the  frame  E  F  allowing  it  to  change  its 
figure  enough  for  this  purpose.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to 
remark  that  this  wheel  G,  being  connected  with  the  clock, 
serves  to  wind  it  up,  and  that  the  clock  is  constructed  to  go 
for  a  much  greater  number  of  days  than  the  barometer  has 
ever  been  known  to  remain  stationary. 

The  ingenious  mechanic  will  readily  form  a  notion  of  many 
other  methods  of  applying  the  variations  of  the  barometer  to 
similar  objects.  The  wheel-barometer  of  Robert  Hook,  as 
well  as  another  contrivance,  in  which  the  barometer  and  its 
cistern  are  placed  at  the  different  extremities  of  an  inclined 
lever,  may  likewise  be  used  for  this  purpose. 

Several  artists  have  exerted  their  industry  in  attempts  to 
apply  the  variations  produced  by  change  of  temperature  in 
bodies  as  a  first  mover.  If  a  thermometer  be  suspended  by 
its  centre  of  gravity  in  such  a  manner  that  the  tube  may  lie 
nearly  horizontal,  the  daily  variations  in  the  bulk  of  the  mercury 
will  cause  a  preponderance  on  the  one  side  or  the  other, 


mm 


(Fig.\,pL^.) 


OR,    SEARCH   FOB   SEXF-MOTIVE    POWER.  12? 

accordingly  as  the  temperature  is  higher  or  lower  than  it  was 
at  the  original  fixing  of  the  centre  of  suspension.  The  thermo* 
meter  may  contain  mercury  or  any  other  fluid,  or  it  may  con- 
sist of  air  confined  by  merciiry,  as  in  the  manometer.  In  this 
contrivance,  the  great  and  frequent  ranges  of  variation  afford 
much  promise  of  utility.  The  limits  of  convenient  or  prac- 
ticable power  from  change  of  equilibrium  in  a  fluid  thermo- 
meter will  hereafter  be  examined.  A  much  greater  force 
seems  to  offer  itself  in  the  power  by  which  the  expansion  is 
produced ;  but  the  difficulty  of  forming  a  piston  or  other 
apparatus  for  confining  fluids,  will  probably  constitute  an  in  • 
surmountable  impediment  to  this  method. 

The  solid  thermometer  does  not  present  the  same  difficulty. 
Fig.  2  represents  a  series  of  expansion-bars,  each  consisting  of 
a  plate  of  brass,  soldered  to  another  of  steel,  and  possessing 
the  property  of  bending  by  change  of  temperature,  according 
to  the  laws  already  explained  in  this  work.*  If  the  steel  face 
of  C  A  be  uppermost,  and  the  end  C  be  fixed  to  C  B,  the 
extremity  A  will  rise  from  B  when  the  temperature  is  ele- 
vated ;  and  if  the  succeeding  bars  be  similarly  fixed  above 
each  other,  as  in  the  figure,  the  whole  system  will  occupy  a 
greater  length,  or  elevation,  above  C  B,  when  heated,  than 
when  cold.  Another  more  convenient  method  of  disposing 
the  bars  is  shewn  in  Fig.  3.  In  this,  the  bars  are  fixed  toge- 
ther at  the  middle,  with  the  brass  faces  turned  towards  each 
other.  Each  bar  has  a  slight  curvature  (much  less  than  is 
here  shewn),  which  will  be  increased  by  heat,  and  by  that 
means  cause  the  distance  between  the  middle  of  two  extreme 
bars  to  be  greater  than  it  would  be  at  a  lower  temperature. 

These  causes  of  action  may  be  applied  to  machinery  by 
various  contrivances,  some  of  which  serve  to  increase  the 
length  of  range,  but  add  nothing  to  the  power.  This  last, 
no  doubt,  is  an  object  of  convenience,  according  to  the  effect 
intended  to  be  produced.  The  only  method  of  adding  to  the 
power  will  consist  in  increasing  the  number  of  the  bars.  Fig.  4 
represents  a  system  for  this  purpose,  which  is  the  simplest 
and  most  convenient  that  has  occurred  to  me.  A  C  repre- 
sents the  circumference  of  a  barrel,  resembling  those  in 
which  the  mainsprings  of  clocks  are  put,  the  length  and  dia- 
meter of  which    may  be  varied,  according    to  the  power 

*  Philosophical  Journal,  vol.  1.  pp.  62,  576. 


128  PERPETXJUM  mobile; 

intended  to  be  gained.  To  this  external  part  is  fixed  a  ratchet- 
wheeL,  to  receive  the  click  C,  which  confines  its  motion  to  one 
direction.  At  A  is  fixed  a  plate,  to  receive  the  action  of  the 
expansion-pieces.  B  D  is  an  internal  cylinder  of  the  same 
kind,  which  is  also  confined,  by  a  ratchet-wheel  and  click,  to 
move  only  in  the  same  direction  as  the  outer  part  A  C.  It  is 
not  necessary  to  describe  the  operative  arrangements  by 
which  these  two  cylinders  are  disposed  so  as  to  move  on  the 
same  axis,  and  the  ends  duly  applied,  so  as  to  form  one  box, 
while  the  interior  and  exterior  parts  are  allowed  to  move  inde- 
pendent of  each  other.  At  B  is  fixed  a  plate,  by  which  the 
action  of  the  expansion-pieces  is  communicated  to  the  inner 
cylinder.  A  series  of  bars,  similar  to  those  delineated  in 
Fig.  3,  are  disposed  in  the  space  between  the  two  cylinders, 
the  greatest  part  of  which  they  occupy,  leaving  only  such  an 
interval  between  A  and  B  as  may  be  sufiicient  to  allow  for 
the  motion  of  the  bars.  In  this  interval  is  placed  a  spring, 
tending  to  cause  A  and  B  to  recede  from  each  other  ;  and, 
lastly,  there  are  side-pins  proceeding  from  the  places  of  fric- 
tion of  every  pair  of  bars,  which  respectively  pass  through 
circular  grooves  in  the  caps,  and  prevent  the  motion  of  the 
bars  from  being  interrupted  or  impeded  by  their  touching 
either  the  inner  or  the  outer  cylinders.  E  represents  a  wheel, 
which  is  supposed  to  be  connected,  by  tooth-work  or  other- 
wise, with  the  face  of  the  external  cylinder,  and  may  be  con- 
sidered as  the  machinery  intended  to  be  moved.  Or  other- 
wise, if  the  clicks  C  and  D,  with  the  teeth  they  act  upon,  be 
reversed,  and  the  interior  cylinder  be  fixed  to  the  axis  itself, 
that  axis  may  be  used  as  the  first  mover. 

Suppose  this  apparatus  to  be  put  together  at  a  certain  tem- 
perature in  the  day-time,  and  that  in  the  night  the  tempera- 
ture becomes  colder,  in  this  case,  the  curvature  of  all  the 
bars  will  diminish,  and  the  distance  between  A  and  B  will  be 
increased  by  the  action  of  the  intermediate  spring ;  but  as 
the  plate  A  is  prevented  by  the  click  C  from  receding,  the 
plate  B  will  be  pushed  forward,  and  the  interior  cylinder  will 
gather  a  certain  number  of  its  teeth  upon  the  click  D.  The 
next  day,  when  the  temperature  again  rises?,  all  the  expansion- 
bars  will  bend,  and  the  space  between  A  and  B  will  be  dimi- 
nished ;  this,  however,  cannot  happen  by  the  motion  of  B, 
which  is  held  fast  by  the  click  D.  The  external  part  will, 
consequently,  be  now  carried  forward,  and  will  act  upon  the 


{Fig,  2.) 


{Fig.Z.) 


(Fig.  4.) 


{Fiq.  6.) 


BRASS 


ftHASS 


STEEL 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  131 

apparatus  E.  A  second  lowering  of  the  temperature,  by 
whatever  cause,  will  occasion  the  interior  part  again  to  ad- 
vance, and,  in  this  manner,  the  accumulations  of  force  may 
be  incessantly  reiterated. 

Experience  must  determine  how  far  the  properties  of  these 
compound  bars  may  be  changed  in  the  course  of  time.*  It 
seems  probable  that  the  mere  changes  communicated  by  the 
atmosphere  could  scarcely  produce  any  sensible  effect ;  and 
whether  this  effect  would  be  detrimental  to  the  general  result, 
may  also  be  questioned.  Considerations  of  this  nature  lead  to 
the  enquiry,  whether  our  object  may  not,  with  equal  facility, 
be  obtained  by  the  direct  push  or  pull  of  bars  of  metal,  as  in 
the  gridiron  pendulum,  or  that  of  EUicott.f 

If  a  succession  of  bars  of  brass  were  disposed  round  a 
cylindrical  face  of  less  expansible  metal,  so  as  to  form  an 
helical  line  from  the  one  end  to  the  other ;  or,  otherwise,  if 
we  suppose  a  brass  clock  chain,  with  a  right-lined  edge,  to 
be  wrapped  round  such  a  cylinder  ;  or,  again,  if,  instead  of 
the  cylinder,  we  suppose  the  chain  to  pass  over  a  succession 
of  rollers,  whether  disposed  in  a  cylindrical  system  or 
according  to  the  form  of  a  pulley,  the  result  will  be  the 
same ;  that  is  to  say,  the  chain  will  contract  and  expand 
about  the  ten-thousandth  part  of  its  length,  for  every  ten 
degrees  of  Fahrenheit's  thermometer.  In  the  way  of  rough 
estimate,  let  us,  therefore,  assume  a  cylinder  of  cast-iron,  one 
foot  in  diameter  and  one  foot  in  length,  having  a  groove 
turned  in  its  surface,  like  a  screw,  with  twelve  turns  in  the 
inch,  for  the  purpose  of  lodging  a  system  of  friction  rollers  to 
receive  the  brass  chain,  wrapped  round  it.  Such  a  chain,J 
consisting  of  144  turns,  would  measure  450  feet,§  and  would 
contract  nearly  0.54  inches  for  every  10  degrees,  or  one- 
twentieth  of  an  inch  for  each  degree  of  change  of  tem- 
perature ;  but  as  the  cylinder  itself  contracts,  the  whole  effect 
will  be  somewhat  less  than  half  that  quantity  ;  that  is  to  say, 
each  degree  of  the  thermometer  will  be  one-fortieth  of  an 
inch. 

The  philosophical  world  is  aware  that  hygrometers  have 

♦  Philosophical  Journal,  vol.  1,  p.  62. 

t  Ibid.,  pp.  59,  60. 

X  And  would  cost  about  £25. 

§  For  pyromelrical  data,  see  Philosophical  Journal,  vol.  1,  p.  58. 


132  PERPETxruM  mobile; 

been  made,  on  this  principle,  with  catgut,  hair,  whalebone, 
and  other  materials.  It  seems  probable  that  the  first  of  these 
would  exert  considerable  force  as  a  first-mover,  but  it  would 
scarcely  prove  durable  ;  and,  what  is  still  worse,  the  variations 
of  moisture  in  the  atmosphere  are  little  suited  to  operate  upon 
machinery  preserved  in  a  case  in  an  apartment. 

If  the  increase  of  the  space  moved  through  by  the  expan- 
sion of  metals,  upon  the  principle  of  EUicott's  pendulum, 
should  be  adopted  instead  of  the  compound  bars  in  Fig.  4, 
the  project  of  Fig.  6  may  be  followed.  A  bar  of  steel  A  K 
is  fixed  beside  a  bar  of  brass  B  I,  the  joinings  I  K  being 
inflexible ;  but  those  at  A  B,  in  the  lever  A  F,  being  jointed, 
the  difference  of  expansion  between  the  two  metals  will  be 
magnified  at  F,  in  the  proportion  of  A  F  to  A  B.  The  lines 
L  C  G  D  E  represent  a  second  combination  of  the  same  kind, 
in  which  the  point  G  will  have  a  similar  and  equal  motion  to 
that  of  F ;  but  the  bar  E  L  being  prolonged  to  F,  so  as  to 
bear  upon  the  lever  E  F,  the  whole  of  the  second  combina- 
tion will  be  pushed  forward  by  the  expansion  of  the  first,  on 
account  of  which,  the  motion  of  G  will,  in  fact,  be  double 
that  of  F  ;  by  the  addition  of  a  third  combination,  the  motion 
will  be  tripled,  &c.  A  sufficient  number  of  these,  properly 
placed  in  the  cavity  between  the  two  cylinders.  Fig.  4,  would 
afford  the  same  consequences ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
any  contrivance  of  this  last  kind  could  afford  the  same  power 
in  as  small  a  space  as  that  occupied  by  the  compound  bars. 

I  shall  now  proceed  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  quantities 
of  force  communicated  by  these  several  contrivances. 

The  apparatus  (Fig.  1,  plate  6),  or  barometrical  clock,  is 
driven  by  a  force  which  may  be  estimated  in  its  annual 
quantity  from  the  sum  of  the  deviations  of  the  barometer 
taken  from  a  meteorological  journal,  such  as  that  in  the 
Philosophical  Transactions;  together  with  the  quantity  of 
mercury  so  moved,  which  may  be  derived  from  the  dimen- 
sions of  the  surfaces  in  the  tube  and  basin.  From  these 
variations,  severally,  must  be  taken  the  quantity  of  what 
mechanics  call  lost  time,  or  the  ineffectual  movement  between 
the  direct  and  retrograde  actions  on  the  machinery.  The 
whole  power  will  be  measured  by  the  entire  column  of  varia- 
tion, supposed  to  descend  through  half  its  height ;  for  this 
will  be  the  case  when  a  perpendicular  tube  empties  itself  by 
the  descent  of  any  fluid  contained  in  it.     I  have  not  taken 


OB,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  133 

the  trouble  to  collect  these  elements ;  but  it  may  easily  be 
imagined  that  the  sum  of  all  the  variations  during  the  year 
would  amount  to  no  great  quantity.  I  understand,  from  the 
ingenious  constructor  of  this  apparatus,  that  the  accumulated 
power  was  not  sufficient  to  allow  the  clock  to  be  maintained 
by  a  force  equal  to  that  which  drives  a  common  watch, 
namely,  six  ounces,  with  the  daily  fall  of  twelve  inches. 

In  the  investigation  of  the  power  of  expansion,  in  Fig.  4, 
a  variety  of  curious  objects  of  physical  and  mathematical 
research  offer  themselves  to  our  consideration.  In  a  former 
part  of  this  journal,*  it  has  been  shewn  that  the  curvature 
assumed  by  a  straight  compound  bar,  having  each  of  its 
parts  uniformly  thick,  will  be  circular ;  whence  it  follows, 
from  the  nature  of  versed  sines  of  small  arcs,  that  the  dis- 
tance A  B,  Fig.  2,  will,  cceteris  paribus^  be  as  the  square  of 
C  A ;  and  it  should  seem  as  if  a  considerable  advantage 
might  be  derived  from  using  the  whole  length  of  the  bar,  as 
in  that  figure  (2),  instead  of  the  two  half-lengths  in  Fig.  3. 
But  it  must  be  considered  that  the  effect  of  hammer-hardening 
the  lower  part,  and  wire-drawing  the  upper,  of  the  compound 
bar  C  A,  is  twice  as  great  at  C,  Fig.  2,  as  it  is  at  C  in  Fig.  3, 
and  is  shewn  in  the  greater  spring  or  yielding  of  the  parts, 
and  that  the  action  at  A,  in  this  figure,  is  doubled  at  the 
opposite  extremity  of  the  bar ;  so  that,  upon  the  whole,  the 
action  at  A,  on  account  of  the  short  lever  A  C,  Fig.  3,  being 
twice  as  powerful  as  that  at  A  in  Fig.  2,  and  being  exerted 
through  the  space  A  B,  Fig.  3,  of  one-fourth  part  of  the 
space  A  B  in  Fig.  2,  will  be  half  the  action  at  the  end  of 
Fig.  2.  But  as  both  extremities  of  the  bar  are  made  to  act 
in  Fig.  3,  the  whole  of  its  action  will  be  precisely  equal  to 
that  in  Fig.  2.  The  combination.  Fig.  3,  appears,  therefore, 
to  be  preferable  on  account  of  its  convenient  figure  only. 

It  may  also  be  questioned  whether  these  bars  should  be 
made  extremely  thin  or  the  contrary.  If  they  be  very  thin, 
the  effect  of  the  reaction  being  equivalent  to  a  pull  or  push 
endways  upon  the  bar,  which  is  greater  than  the  reaction 
itself,  in  the  proportion  of  the  length  of  the  bar  to  its  half 
thickness,  it  may  easily  be  imagined  that  the  texture  and 
cohesion  will  be  most  strongly  affected ;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
if  the  bar  be  very  thick,  the  effect  from  change  of  tempera- 

♦  Vol.  1,  p.  62. 


134  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

ture  may  resolve  itself  entirely  into  an  action  upon  the  parts 
near  the  contiguous  surfaces,  without  producing  any  flexure 
at  all.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  there  is  a  thickness  which 
is  practically  better  than  any  other ;  but  what  this  thickness 
may  be,  remains  to  be  determined  by  trials.  As  the  quantity 
of  motion  is  inversely  as  the  thickness  (Philos.  Journal,  i., 
576),  and  the  force  directly  as  that  thickness,  it  must  follow 
that  the  quantity  of  mechanic  efiect  in  all  similar  bars, 
neither  extremely  thick  nor  extremely  thin,  will  be  the  same 
upon  equal  changes  of  temperature.  I  should  give  the  pre- 
ference to  thin  bars,  not  so  much  reduced  as  to  have  any 
perceptible  spring. 

If  the  Fig.  4  be  supposed  of  such  dimensions  as  that  the 
circular  arc  struck  through  the  middle  parts  of  all  the  bars 
might  be  three  feet  in  length,  and  the  bars  were  each  six 
inches  long  in  the  radial  direction,  with  a  thickness  nearly 
equal  to  that  of  the  second  experiment  related  at  the  last- 
quoted  article  of  our  journal,  the  space  moved  through  by 
each  bar,  upon  an  alteration  of  146  degrees,  would  be  about 
0.05  inch,  or  haK  a  tenth ;  but  300  of  these  bars  might  with 
ease  be  contained  in  the  circular  space  of  three  feet ;  and 
these  would  produce  a  motion  of  fifteen  inches  by  the  same 
change  of  temperature,  or  one-tenth  of  an  inch  for  every 
degree  of  Fahrenheit.  In  order  to  determine  the  force  with 
which  this  change  of  position  would  be  effected,  we  are  in 
want  of  some  experiments  on  the  expansions  of  metals.  It  is 
generally  supposed  that  a  rod  or  wire  will  contract  or  dilate 
by  change  of  temperature  in  the  same  manner,  whether  it  be 
at  perfect  liberty  to  move  horizontally,  or  be  made  to  support 
a  weight  hung  from  its  extremity,  or  placed  on  its  upper  end. 
This  is,  in  fact,  supposed  to  be  the  case  in  the  estimates  for 
constructing  gridiron  pendulums ;  and  if  it  were  strictly  true, 
the  power  of  this  wheel  would  be  constantly  equal  to  the 
reaction  against  which  it  should  be  exerted.  But  it  would  be 
to  little  purpose  to  institute  a  calculation  upon  data  assumed 
at  random.  I  shall  therefore  only  remark  that  the  power  of 
this  wheel  is  very  considerable,  and  may  be  increased  almost 
at  pleasure,  by  enlarging  the  dimensions  of  the  bars  in  the 
direction  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  cylinder. 

Whatever  question  there  may  be  with  regard  to  the  force 
and  durability  of  this  system  of  bars — neither  of  which  I  am 
disposed  to  doubt — ^there  can  be  scarcely  any  with  regard  to 


OK,    SEAKCH    FOB    SELF-MOTITS    POWEB.  135 

the  spiral  chain  round  the  cylinder.  The  direct  expansion 
and  contraction  of  metals  is  certainly  very  powerful,  and  was 
shewn  in  a  striking  manner  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Jones,  in  an 
experiment  related,  if  my  memory  be  correct,  in  George 
Adam's  Philosophical  Lectures.  He  hung  a  very  heavy 
weight  to  the  longer  end  of  a  lever,  the  shorter  arm  of  which 
pressed  upwards  against  the  longer  arm  of  another  lever,  and 
the  shorter  arm  of  this  last  was  supported  by  a  rod  of  metal. 
By  this  mechanical  arrangement,  it  will  be  understood, 
without  difficulty,  that  a  very  slight  motion  of  the  arm  which 
bore  upon  the  metal  might  be  attended  with  a  very  con- 
siderable motion  of  that  extremity  which  supported  the 
weight ;  and  the  dimensions  were  such,  that  this  was  in  fact 
the  case. 

The  flame  of  a  candle  applied  to  the  bar  of  metal  caused  it 
to  expand,  and  carried  up  the  load  without  difficulty. 

Hygrometric  contractions  and  dilations  are  known  to  be 
performed  with  immense  force  ;  but  want  of  durability  in  the 
materials,  and  the  difficulty  with  regard  to  exposure,  which 
has  been  already  mentioned,  seem  to  forbid  the  practical  use 
of  this  power  for  the  purpose  to  which  our  attention  is  now 
directed. 

The  contrivance.  Fig.  5,  may  be  considered  as  effectual ; 
but  the  objections  which  have  been  made  to  EUicott's 
pendulum  are  still  more  strongly  applicable  to  this,  namely, 
that  the  friction,  the  wear,  and  the  irregular  action  of  the 
joints,  must  he  hurtful  to  the  general  effect.* 

In  Nicholson*  s  Journal,  vol.  1,  for  1802,  page  27,  is  given 
the  "  Construction  of  an  hydraulic  apparatus,  which  by  means 
of  the  syphon  raises  water  above  its  level,  and  performs  its 
alterations  without  attendance.'*  It  is  the  invention  of 
"William  Close."  It  has  pipes  and  valves  which  require 
nice  adjustment,  it  is  stated,  "to  prevent  the  sudden  pressure 
of  the  atmosphere  from  forcing  the  air  out  of  the  empty  pipes 
with  such  rapidity  as  would  [and'  no  doubt  did]  destroy  the 
operation  of  the  syphon."  The  article  is  not  of  sufficient 
interest  to  extract  in  extenso. 

♦  A  Journal  of  {Natural  Philosophy,  Chemistry,  and  the  Arts.  By 
WiUiam  Nicholson.     Vol.  3,  pp.  126  and  172.     1800.    4to. 


136 


PEBPSTUUM   mobile; 


A  New  Project  for  Perpetual  Motion,    In  a  Letter  from  R.  B, 
to  Mr,  Nicholson, 

Sir, — I  was  mucli  gratified,  several  years  ago,  by  some 
essays  with  which  you  obliged  your  readers  upon  the  perpetual 
motion.  In  the  first  volume,  p.  375,  of  your  quarto  series,  I 
find  an  accoimt  of  several  schemes  (necessarily  abortive)  for 
producing  perpetual  motions  by  the  action  of  gravity ;  and 
in  your  third  volume  I  find  an  accoimt  of  various  methods  of 
keeping  up  the  motion  of  a  machine  by  means  of  the  changes 
which  take  place  in  the  barometer  and  thermometer.  I  have 
ventured  to  send  you  the  sketch  of  a  project  for  a  perpetual 
motion  of  the  latter  kind,  which  has  long  remained  among 
my  memorandums.  You  will  see  it  is  not  of  the  class  of 
perpetual  motions,  properly  speaking,  but  merely  the  applica- 
tion of  some  existing  intermittent  motions  in  nature  to  the 
purpose  of  maintaining  the  rotation  of  machinery. 

Fig.  1,  plate  12. — A  represents  the  marine  barometer  of 
Halley,  but  varied  by  the  addition  of  a  vessel  B  at  the  open 
(Fig.  1,  pi  12,  vol.  9.) 


end,  in  which  the  water,  or  other  fluid,  exposes  a  surface 
nearly  equal  to  that  in  the  closed  vessel  A.     These  two 


OB,    SEAKCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  13? 

vessels  are  connected  by  a  long  horizontal  tube  G.  It  is 
evident  that  any  change,  either  in  the  pressure  of  the  external 
air  or  the  elasticity  of  the  internal  air,  will  cause  the  fluid  to 
run  along  the  tube,  and  add  to  the  weight  of  A  or  of  B, 
according  to  circumstances.  The  heavier  vessel  will  prepon- 
derate, but  it  will  be  prevented  from  descending  too  far  by  a 
stop  or  bearing  to  which  it  will  arrive.  Any  change  in  the 
inclination  of  G  will  move  the  attached  lever  C  D  ;  by  means 
of  which,  one  of  the  two  horizontal  racks  will  be  made  to 
push  round  that  ratchet-wheel  into  which  its  teeth  fall,  at  the 
same  time  that  the  other  rack  will  be  drawn  backwards  upon 
its  wheel.  The  opposite  action  will  drive  forward  the  other 
wheel ;  and,  as  both  these  wheels  are  fixed  on  the  same  axis, 
the  system  will  be  driven  the  same  way  by  every  change  of 
densi^  or  weight  in  the  air  that  takes  place.* 

Dr.  Yoimg,  in  his  ninth  lecture  "  On  the  Motions  of  Con- 
nected Bodies,"  remarks : — 

To  seek  for  a  source  of  motion  in  the  construction  of  a 
machine  betrays  a  gross  ignorance  of  the  principles  on  which 
all  machines  operate.  The  only  interest  that  we  can  take  in 
the  projects  which  have  been  tried  for  procuring  a  per- 
petual motion  must  arise  from  the  opportunity  that  they  afford 
us  to  observe  the  weakness  of  human  reason,  to  see  a  man 
spending  whole  years  in  the  pursuit  of  an  object  which  a  week's 
application  to  sober  philosophy  might  have  convinced  him 
was  imattainable.  The  most  satisfactory  confutation  of  the 
notion  of  the  possibility  of  a  perpetual  motion  is  derived  from 
the  consideration  of  the  properties  of  the  centre  of  gravity. 
We  have  only  to  examine  whether  it  will  begin  to  descend  or 
to  ascend  when  the  machine  moves,  or  whether  it  will  remain 
at  rest.  If  it  be  so  placed  that  it  must  either  remain  at  rest 
or  ascend,  it  is  clear,  from  the  laws  of  equilibriimi,  that  no 
motion  from  gravitation  can  take  place  ;  if  it  may  descend,  it 
must  either  continue  to  descend  for  ever,  with  a  finite  velocity, 
which  is  impossible,  or  it  must  first  descend  and  then  ascend 
with  a  vibratory  motion,  and  then  the  case  will  be  reducible 
to  that  of  a  pendulum,  where  it  is  obvious  that  no  new  motion 
is  generated,  and  that  the  friction  and  resistance  of  the  air 

•  A  Journal  of  Natural  Philosophy,  Chemistry,  and  the  (Arts.  By 
Wm.  Nicholson.    Vol.  9,  p.  212.     18U4.    8vo. 


138 


PBRPETUUM    mobile; 


must  soon  destroy  the  original  motion.  One  of  the  most 
co.nmon  fallacies,  by  which  the  superficial  projectors  of 
machines  for  obtaining  a  perpetual  motion  have  been  deluded, 
has  arisen  from  imagining  that  any  number  of  weights  ascend- 
ing by  a  certain  path  on  one  side  of  the  centre  of  motion  and 
descending  on  the  other  at  a  greater  distance,  must  cause  a 
constant  preponderance  on  the  side  of  the  descent :  for  this 
purpose,  the  weights  have  either  been  fixed  on  hinges  which 
allow  them  to  fall  over  at  a  certain  point,  so  as  to  become 
more  distant  from  the  centre,  or  made  to  slide  or  roll  along 
grooves  or  planes  which  lead  them  to  a  more  remote  part  of 
the  wheel,  from  whence  they  return  as  they  ascend ;  but  it 
will  appear,  on  the  inspection  of  such  a  machine,  that  although 
some  of  the  weights  are  more  distant  from  the  centre  than 
others,  yet  there  is  always  a  proportionally  smaller  number  of 
them  on  that  side  on  which  they  have  the  greatest  power,  so 
that  these  circimistances  precisely  coimterbalance  each  other. 
(Fig.  78,  pi.  6,  page  91.) 

(Fig.  78,  pi  6.) 


Note  on  plate  6,  page  763,  vol.  1 : — 

Fig.  78. — ^A  wheel  supposed  to  be  capable  of  producing  a 


OB,    8EAB0II    FOR   SELF-MOTITE   POWER.  139 

perpetual  motion ;  the  descending  balls  acting  at  a  greater 
distance  from  the  centre,  but  being  fewer  in  number  than  the 
ascending.  In  the  model,  the  balls  may  be  kept  in  their 
places  by  a  plate  of  glass  covering  the  wheel.     (Page  92.)* 


The  following  occiirs  in  a  Scholium  at  page  82  of  Dr. 
Gregory's  "  Treatise  of  Mechanics  :" — 

Before  we  close  our  discussion  respecting  the  lever,  it  may 
not  be  amiss  just  to  remark,  that  in  every  attempt  to  deter- 
mine the  advantage  gained  by  this  machine  peculiar  attention 
must  be  paid,  not  only  to  the  directions  in  which  the  forces 
are  exerted,  but  to  the  points  on  the  lever  to  which  their 
action  is  to  be  referred.  Without  a  due  regard  to  these  par- 
ticulars, the  mechanist  will  often  be  involved  in  error,  even 
in  simple  cases  where  there  might  be  supposed  but  little 
probability  of  mistake.  In  fact,  even  the  simple  property  of 
the  straight  lever,  that  equal  weights  acting  at  equal  distances 
from  the  fulcrum  on  opposite  sides  will  be  in  equilibrio, 
while  at  unequal  distances  the  one  which  acts  most  remotely 
from  the  fulcrum  will  preponderate,  has  more  than  once  been 
a  source  of  error  in  unskilful  hands  ;  and  in  particular,  it  has 
lain  at  the  foundation  of  most  of  those  ill-fated  and  useless 
contrivances  which  have  been  struck  out  by  such  as  were  in 
pursuit  of  the  perpetual  motion.  In  these  contrivances  the 
object  of  the  projector  has  generally  been  to  apply  different 
weights  to  a  rotatory  machine  in  such  manner  that,  at 
successive  moments  of  time,  first  one  and  then  another  should 
be  brought  to  greater  distances  from  the  centre,  and  so,  by 
being  placed  at  the  extremity  of  a  longer  lever,  should  pro- 
duce a  constant  motion.  To  prevent,  therefore,  such  waste 
of  time  and  ingenuity,  we  shall  here  describe  an  apparatus 
invented  by  Dr.  Desaguliers  (see  Phil.  Trans.,  No.  419,  or 
New  Abridg.,  vol.  6,  p.  542),  in  which  two  equal  weights 
may  be  placed  at  any  imequal  distance  whatever  from  the 
centre  of  motion,  and  still  remain  in  equilibrio.  In  Fig.  3, 
pi.  5,  A  B  represents  a  balance  with  equal  arms,  and  E  F 
another  of  equal  dimensions :  they  turn  freely  upon  the 
centres  C  D,  and  their  extremities  are  connected  by  equal 

•  A  Course  of  Lectures  on  Natural  Philosophy.     By  Thomas  Young, 
M.D.    2vol8.4to.     1807. 


140 


PERPKTUUM    mobile; 


inflexible  bars  A  E,  B  F ;  the  whole  being  permitted  to  move 
freely  at  the  points  A  B  C  D,  so  as  to  assume  the  forms  of 
varying  parallelograms,  in  consequence  of  any  motion  upon 

{Fig.  3,  pi.  5.) 


the  points  C  and  D.  Across  the  bars  A  E,  B  F,  are  fixed 
others,  as  W  U,  P  Q,  from  any  points  of  which  equal  weights, 
P  W,  may  be  suspended.  Now,  on  whatsoever  part  of  the 
bar  P  Q  the  weight  P  is  fixed,  it  is  manifest  that  it  will,  on 
account  of  that  bar  being  firmly  connected  with  the  vertical 
rod  B  F,  act  as  though  it  were  placed  at  F ;  and,  in  like 
manner,  in  whatever  part  of  the  bar  W  U  the  weight  W  be 
suspended,  it  will  act  as  though  it  were  placed  at  E :  so  that, 
however  great  may  be  the  difference  of  the  distances  of  the 
bodies  P  and  W  from  C  D,  they  will  still,  if  equal  in  weight, 
balance  each  other  in  any  position  of  the  system.  Nor  is 
this  in  any  respect  incompatible  with  the  principle  of  the 
equal  products  of  weight  and  velocity,  which  we  have  men- 
tioned (130)  as  a  useful  indication  of  an  equilibrium;  for, 
suppose  this  compound  balance  to  be  brought  by  motion  on 
its  centres  into  the  position  a  b  c  d,  the  weights  being  then  at 
w  and  p,  those  weights  will  have  moved  through  the  arcs 
Ww,  Fp,  while  the  extremities  of  the  levers  will  have  passed 
through  the  equal  and  respectively  parallel  arcs  A  a,  E  6,  B  3, 


OK,    SEARCH   FOE   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  141 

¥/;  of  consequence,  the  velocities  of  the  two  weights  will 
have  been  equal,  as  they  ought  to  be,  in  conformity  with  that 
principle.  Thus,  then,  it .  appears,  from  this  simple  con- 
trivance, that  weights  do  not  preponderate  in  machines 
merely  on  accoimt  of  their  different  distances  from  the  centre 
of  motion;  and,  consequently,  a  mere  increase  of  distance 
does  not  universally  give  a  mechanical  advantage. 

[The  paragraph  130,  before  alluded  to,  occurs  at  page  71» 
as  follows  : — ] 

130.  Writers  on  the  subject  of  mechanics  have  often 
attempted  to  demonstrate  the  properties  of  the  several  simple 
machines  by  means  of  a  celebrated  theorem,  which  is  this  : 
When  two  heavy  bodies  counterpoise  each  other  by  means  of 
any  machine,  and  are  then  made  to  move  together,  the  pro- 
ducts of  each  mass  into  its  velocity,  or,  as  it  is  technically 
expressed,  the  quantities  of  motion  with  which  one  body 
descends  and  the  other  ascends  perpendicularly,  will  be 
equal.  Since  an  equilibrium  always  accompanies  this  equality 
of  motions,  it  bears  such  a  resemblance  to  the  case  wherein 
two  moving  bodies  stop  each  other  when  they  meet  together 
with  equal  quantities  of  motion,  that  many  have  thought  that 
the  cause  of  an  equilibrium  in  the  several  machines  might  be 
immediately  assigned  by  saying  that,  because  one  body  always 
loses  as  much  motion  as  it  communicates  to  another,  two 
heavy  bodies  coimteracting  each  other  must  continue  at  rest 
when  they  are  so  circumstanced  that  one  cannot  descend 
without  causing  the  other  to  ascend  at  the  same  time,  and 
with  velocities  inversely  proportional  to  their  masses ;  for 
then,  should  one  of  them  begin  to  descend,  it  must  instantly 
lose  its  whole  motion  by  communicating  it  to  the  other.  But 
this  argument,  however  plausible  it  may  seem,  is  (as  Dr. 
Hamilton  remarked)  by  no  means  satisfactory  ;  for  when  we 
say  that  one  body  commimicates  its  motion  to  another,  we 
must  necessarily  suppose  the  motion  to  exist  first  in  the  one 
and  then  in  the  other ;  but  in  the  present  case,  where  the 
two  bodies  are  so  connected  that  one  cannot  possibly  begin 
to  move  before  the  other,  the  descending  body  cannot  be  said 
to  communicate  its  motion  to  the  other,  and  thereby  make  it 
ascend  ;  but  whatever  we  should  suppose  causes  one  body  to 
descend,  must  also  be  the  immediate  cause  of  the  other's 
ascending,  since,  from  the  connection  of  the  bodies,  it  muit 


142  PERPExyuM  mobile; 

act  upon  them  both  together,  as  if  they  were  really  but  one. 
And  therefore,  without  contradicting  the  laws  of  motion,  we 
might  suppose  the  superior  weight  of  the  heavy  body,  which 
is  in  itself  more  than  able  to  sustain  the  lighter,  would  over- 
come the  lighter,  and  cause  it  to  ascend  with  the  same  quantity 
of  motion  with  which  the  heavier  descends  ;  especially  as 
both  their  motions,  taken  together,  may  be  less  than  what 
the  diiFerence  of  the  weights,  which  is  here  supposed  to  be 
the  moving  force,  would  be  able  to  produce  in  a  body  falling 
freely.  For  these  reasons,  and  various  others  which  might 
easily  be  assigned,  we  are  of  opinion  that  all  proofs  founded 
upon  this  theorem  as  a  basis  are  necessarily  imsatisfactory  : 
we  have,  nevertheless,  thought  it  right  to  notice  it ;  and,  as 
it  may  serve  as  a  good  index  of  an  equilibrium  in  many 
machines,  and  admits  in  some  instances  of  a  useful  applica- 
tion, we  may  again  refer  to  it  in  the  practical  part  of  this 
treatise.* 


In  treating  "  Of  Friction,"  Millington  says  : — 

From  a  number  of  experiments  that  have  been  made  to 
investigate  the  power  of  friction,  it  appears  to  increase  in  a 
less  ratio  than  that  of  the  weight  of  the  moving  body, 
although  this  conclusion  is  contrary  to  the  generally-received 
opinion,  and  has  a  limit ;  for  if  the  moving  siirface  be  too 
small  or  too  thin  to  support  its  own  weight,  it  will  not  bear 
evenly,  and  will  wear  into  a  groove  or  notch  which  may 
occasion  much  additional  friction. 

However  perfectly  a  piece  of  machinery  may  be  made,  still 
friction,  to  a  certain  degree,  must  ever  exist,  and  cannot  be 
prevented.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  power  that  is  given 
to  one  extreme  of  a  machine  can  never  be  conveyed  without 
abatement  to  the  other ;  and  hence  it  will  immediately  appear 
that  a  perpetual  motion  is  impossible,  because  this  presumes 
that  a  certain  power  is  to  be  communicated  to  a  machine,  and 
is  to  be  transferred  through  all  its  different  movements  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  machine,  when  it  must  be 
given  back  again  without  diminution,  in  order  that  it  may  be 
communicated  back  again  to  the  beginning  of  the  machine  to 

*    A   Trectise  of  Mechanics.     Bv   Olinihus   Gregory,   LL.D.,   &c. 
2  vols.  8vo.     Third  edition,  1815.     (Vol.  1,  pp.  71  and  82.) 


OB,    SEARCH    FOR    SHLF-MOTIYE    POWER.  143 

produce  a  repetition  of  the  same  impulse  it  had  produced  in 
the  first  instance,  otherwise  the  motion  of  the  machine  could 
not  be  maintained.  But  since  no  effect  can  be  produced  that 
is  greater  than  its  cause,  and  as  the  cause  must  be  diminished 
by  friction,  vis  inertitSy  &c.,  in  its  transfer  through  a  machine, 
so  it  cannot  be  renewed  with  a  power  equal  to  that  with 
which  it  began;  consequently,  a  perpetual  motion  must  be 
considered  as  an  unattainable  thing,  inasmuch  as  it  implies  a 
renewal  of  power  which  no  machine  can  give  to  itself.* 


In  his  "  Manual,"  Partington  describes,  as  follows,  a 
well-known  galvanic  apparatus  maintaining  long-continued 
motion : — 

Mr.  Singer  contrived  an  arrangement  (of  M.  De  Luc's 
electrical  colimm  or  dry  pile)  which  is  well  calculated  to 
form  a  perpetual  motion,  by  excluding,  to  a  very  considerable 
extent,  the  operation  of  extraneous  causes  of  interruption ; 
and  it  at  the  same  time  renders  the  disposition  of  the  appa- 
ratus rather  elegant.  A  series  of  from  1,200  to  1,600  groups 
are  arranged  in  two  columns  of  equal  length,  which  are 
separately  insulated  in  a  vertical  position  by  glass  pillars  con- 
structed on  his  principle  of  insulation ;  the  positive  end  of 
one  column  is  placed  lowest,  and  the  negative  end  of  the 
other ;  and  their  upper  extremities  being  connected  by  a  wire, 
they  may  be  considered  as  one  continuous  column.  A  small 
bell  is  situated  between  each  extremity  of  the  colimm  and  its 
insulating  support,  and  a  brass  ball  is  suspended  by  a  thin 
thread  of  raw  silk,  so  as  to  hang  midway  between  the  bells, 
and  at  a  very  little  distance  from  each  of  them.  For  this 
purpose,  the  bells  are  connected,  during  the  adjustment  of 
the  pendulum,  by  a  wire,  that  their  attraction  may  not  inter- 
fere with  it ;  and,  when  the  wire  is  removed,  the  motion  of 
the  pendulum  commences.  The  apparatus  is  placed  upon  a 
circular  mahogany  base,  in  which  a  groove  is  turned  to 
receive  the  lower  edge  of  a  glass  shade,  with  which  the 
whole  is  covered.f 

♦  An  Epitome  of  the  Elementary  Principles  of  Natural  and  Experi- 
mental Philosophy.     1  vol.    8vo.     1823.     Page  85. 

f  A  Manual  of  Natural  and  Experimental  Philosophy.     By  Charles  F. 
Partington.     8vo.     1828.     Vol.  2,  p.  206. 


144  PERPETUUM   mobile; 

Dr.  Amott,  in  his  "  Elements  of  Physics,"  section  2  of  the 
first  part,  on  "  Motions  and  Forces,"  says : — 

Further  illustrative  of  the  truths  that  action  and  reaction 
are  equal  and  contrary,  and  that  in  every  case  of  hard  bodies 
striking  each  other,  they  may  be  regarded  as  compressing  a 
very  small  strong  spring  between  them,  we  may  mention  that 
when  any  elastic  body,  as  a  billiard  ball,  strikes  another 
larger  than  itseK,  and  reboimds,  it  gives  to  that  other,  not 
only  all  the  motion  which  it  originally  possessed,  but  an 
additional  quantity,  equal  to  that  with  which  it  recoils,  owing 
to  the  equal  action  in  both  directions  of  the  repulsion  or 
spring  which  causes  the  recoil.  When  the  difference  of  size 
between  the  bodies  is  very  great,  the  returning  velocity  of  the 
smaller  is  nearly  as  great  as  its  advancing  motion  was,  and  it 
gives  a  momentum  to  the  body  struck,  nearly  double  of  what 
it  originally  itself  possessed.  This  phenomenon  constitutes 
the  paradoxical  case  of  an  effect  being  greater  than  its  cause, 
and  has  led  persons  imperfectly  acquainted  with  the  subject 
to  seek  from  the  principle  a  perpetuum  mobile,      (Page  109.) 

The  following  reflections  occur  at  page  141,  part  2, 
"  Mechanics :" — 

What  an  infinity  of  vain  schemes — some  of  them  displaying 
great  ingenuity — for  perpetual  motions,  and  new  mechaniced 
engines  of  power,  &c.,  would  have  been  checked  at  once,  had 
the  great  truth  been  generally  understood,  that  no  form  or 
combination  of  machinery  ever  did  or  ever  can  increase,  in 
the  slightest  degree,  the  quantity  of  power  applied.  Ignor- 
ance of  this  is  the  hinge  on  which  most  of  the  dreams  of 
mechanical  projectors  have  turned.  No  year  passes,  even 
now,  in  which  many  patents  are  not  taken  out  for  such 
supposed  discoveries;  and  the  deluded  individuals,  after 
selling  perhaps  even  their  household  goods  to  obtain  the 
means  of  securing  the  supposed  advantages,  often  sink  in 
despair,  when  their  attempts,  instead  of  bringing  riches  and 
happiness  to  their  families,  end  in  disappointment  and  utter 
ruin.  The  frequency  and  eagerness  and  obstinacy  with 
which  even  talented  individuals,  owing  to  their  imperfect 
knowledge  of  this  part  of  natural  philosophy,  have  engaged 
in  such  undertakings,  is  a  remarkable  phenomenon  in  human 
nature. 


OB,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  145 

In  section  1  of  the  third  part,  treating  on  "  Hydrostatics,'* 
he  says : — 

A  projector  thought  that  the  vessel  of  his  contrivance, 
represented  here,  was  to  solve  the  renowned  problem  of  the 
perpetual  motion.*  It  was  goblet-shaped, 
lessening  gradually  towards  the  bottom 
until  it  became  a  tube,  bent  upwards  at 
c,  and  pointing  with  an  open  extremity 
into  the  goblet  again.  He  reasoned  thus  : 
A  pint  of  water  in  the  goblet  a  must 
more  than  counterbalance  an  ounce  which 
the  tube  b  will  contain,  and  must  there- 
fore be  constantly  pushing  the  ounce  forward  into  the  vessel 
again  at  a,  and  keeping  up  a  stream  or  circulation,  which  will 
cease  only  when  the  water  dries  up.  He  was  confoimded 
when  a  trial  shewed  him  the  same  level  in  a  and  in  6.f 


In  Montucla's  admirable  "  Histoire  des  Mathematiques," 
completed  by  J.  de  la  Lande,  and  published  in  4  vols.,  4to., 
1802,  no  less  than  eight  pages  are  devoted  to  a  dissertation 
(here  briefly  translated)  as  follows : — 

On  perpetual  motion — a  chimera  old  and  celebrated  enough 
in  mechanics  for  us  to  treat  of  it  in  this  work.  It  is  under- 
stood to  be  a  movement  which  continually  preserves  and 
renews  itself  without  exterior  help.  Many  real  discoveries 
have  been  the  result  of  this  enquiry.  Montucla's  "  Mathe- 
matical Recreations"  and  the  "Journal  des  Savans,"  1678 
to  1746,  treat  on  this  subject.  Several  machines  have  been 
made,  intended  to  solve  this  knotty  problem,  and  made  much 
noise  in  the  scientific  world,  but  have  all  proved  failures ; 
and  it  is  now  more  an  insult  than  praise  to  say  any  one  is 

*  A  contrivance  on  precisely  the  same  principle  here  enunciated,  was 
proposed  by  the  Ahbe  de  la  Roque,  in  *'  Le  Journal  des  Sj^avans,  Paris, 
1686.  The  instrument  was  a  U  tuhe,  one  leg  longer  than  the  other  and 
bent  over,  so  that  any  liquid  might  drop  into  the  top  end  of  the  short  leg, 
which  he  proposed  to  be  made  of  wax,  and  the  long  one  of  iron.  Pre- 
suming the  liquid  to  be  more  condensed  in  the  metal  than  the  wax  tube,  it 
would  flow  from  the  end  into  the  wax  tube,  and  so  continue.  Page  29* 

t  Elements  of  Physics,  or  Natural  Philosophy.  By  Neil  Arnott,  M.D. 
Third  editioD,  1828.    Page  270. 

M 


146  PERPETTJTJM    MOBILE; 

searching  after  perpetual  motion.  Among  all  the  known 
properties  of  matter  and  motion,  there  does  not  appear  among 
them  one  single  principle  that  would  give  the  intended  effect. 
It  is  allowed  that  action  and  reaction  must  be  equal.  Fric- 
tion and  the  air  also  retard  motion.  Neither  can  any  machine 
receive  greater  motive  power  than  that  which  is  first  com- 
municated to  it.  And  perpetual  motion  cannot  take  place 
imless  the  power  communicated  be  much  greater  than  the 
generating  power,  and  imless  it  compensates  for  the  diminu- 
tion of  power  caused  by  friction,  which  is  impossible.  Thus 
the  question  is  reduced  to  finding  a  weight  heavier  than  itself, 
or  an  elastic  power  greater  than  itself.  Thus  it  is  requisite 
to  find  some  method  by  which  a  combination  of  mechanical 
power  will  gain  a  strength  equivalent  to  that  which  is  lost ; 
it  is  principally  this  last  poiijt  that  is  sought,  to  resolve  the 
problem.  It  is  certain  that  the  multiplication  of  powers 
serves  no  purpose,  as  whatever  is  gained  in  power  is  lost  in 
time,  so  that  the  quantity  of  motion  remains  the  same.  One 
small  power  can  never  be  mechanically  made  really  equal  to 
a  greater  one. 

Maupertius,  in  his  letters  on  different  scientific  subjects, 
remarks  that  atmospheric  changes,  &c.,  are  excluded,  and 
that  inertia,  &c.,  are  alone  made  subservient  to  obtaining 
perpetual  motion,  which  he  considers  unattainable.  Inertia 
and  elasticity  are  also  inapplicable. 

In  1700,  a  report  was  current  that  perpetual  motion  had 
been  found.  Sauveur  explained  it  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences, 
and  Parent  proved  its  impossibility. 

In  the  philosophical  works* of  *s  Gravesande,  published  at 
Amsterdam,  1774,  is  an  account  of  a  machine  constructed  by 
Orffyreus  in  1715.  It  was  called  the  Wheel  of  Cassel,  and 
is  described  in  a  letter  to  Newton.  Gravesande  is  persuaded 
that  it  can  be  shown  that  perpetual  motion  is  not  a  contra- 
diction ;  and  it  appears  to  him  that  Leibnitz  was  wrong  in 
regarding  as  an  axiom  the  impossibility  of  this  movement. 
It  caused  general  surprise  that  this  great  man  should  try  to 
prove  its  possibility,  and  expressing  a  hope  that  the  prejudices 
of  mathematicians  regarding  this  movement  would  not  pre- 
vent their  giving  serious  attention  to  the  subject.  Jean 
Bernoulli  also  believes  in  the  success  of  Orffyreus' s  discovery. 
(See  Opera,  tome  i.,  page  41.) 

Wolf,  in  I7I6,  in  his  "  Dictionary  of  Mathematics,*'  gives 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   8ELF-M0TIYE    POWER.  147 

the  arguments  of  Sturm,  Lorini,  St6vin,  and  Leibnitz,  against 
perpetual  motion.  He  considers  there  is  a  doubt  whether 
the  movement  in  Orffyreus^s  machine  was  not  the  effect  of 
some  invisible  fluid. 

The  examination  that  ^sGravesande  made  of  Orffyreus's 
wheel  so  aggravated  him  that  he  broke  the  machine  the  same 
day,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  "  Annal.  Physico-Med.  de  Breslaw," 
Leipzig,  1723,  page  427.  Also,  in  his  life,  ^sGravesande 
states  that  Orflfyreus  wrote  on  the  wall  that  it  was  the  imper- 
tinent curiosity  of  the  professor  which  caused  him  to  break  it. 
This  seems  to  indicate  that  he  feared  an  ulterior  examination ; 
but  *8  Gravesande  has  never  confessed  that  he  himself  was 
deceived.  At  the  same  period  appeared  D.  G.  Diez's  disser- 
tation against  perpetual  motion,  and  he  names  De  Lanis, 
Drebbel,  Becher,  and  Mitz,  all  as  chimeras. 

Peresc  and  Kepler  were  incredulous  on  this  subject,  the 
first  wrote  1691  and  the  latter  1607  (published  1718). 

Baron  de  Zach  has  made  some  very  curious  researches  in 
respect  to  different  inventions  for  perpetual  motion,  in 
"  Reichs-Anzeiger,"  1796.  In  conclusion,  there  is  a  lecture 
on  perpetual  motion,  by  Henrich.,  1770. 

In  1775,  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  in  Paris  passed 
the  resolution  not  to  examine  any  machines  announced  as 
intended  for  perpetual  motion,  and  gave  their  motives  for  so 
doing  in  the  History  of  the  Academy,  1775,  page  65. 

[See  Appendix  E.] 


148  PERPETUUM  mobile; 


CHAPTER  VI. 


PAPERS   FROM  EARLY  SCIENTIFIC  AND  OTHER  JOURNALS. 

The  "Gentleman's  Magazine'*  and  "Annual  Registers" 
afford  several  interesting  communications;  some  from  each 
were  necessarily  transferred  to  Chapter  II.  We  have  here, 
also,  the  "Monthly  Magazine"  of  1806-19;  "Annals  of 
Philosophy,"  1820  ;  and  "  Royal  Institution,"  1802. 

The  following  are  from  the  "  Gentleman's  Magazine :" — 

I. — ^Two  "  Schemes  for  the  Discovery  of  the  Longitude." 

Two  persons — one  at  Exeter,  the  other  at  Dublin — conceive 
they  have  made  some  discoveries  towards  finding  out  the 
important  secret  of  the  longitude. 

The  Irish  gentleman  declares  he  has  made  several  trials 
with  good  success,  after  a  plain,  easy,  intelligent  way,  by 
machines  of  his  own  invention,  which  have  given  him  an 
entire  confidence  of  the  truth  of  their  operation ;  but  not 
having  opportunity  to  try  the  experiment  at  sea  in  different 
kinds  of  weather,  wherein  he  has  not  the  least  doubt  of 
success,  he  invites  the  assistance  of  some  publick-spirited 
gentleman  to  fit  out  a  ship  two  or  three  months  for  that 
purpose ;  on  which  consideration  he  will  communicate  the 
secret,  and  assign  over  half  the  reward. 

The  Exonian  (who,  by  the  way,  signs  himself  "The 
Farmer,"  because  he  had  wrote  something  formerly  under 
that  name)  is  more  explicit,  and  gives  the  following  account 
of  his  scheme  : — 

Discovery  of  a  Perpetual  Motion^  whereby  the  Longitude   may  be 
mechanically  found. 

Before  I  proceed  to  this  simple,  yet  most  useful,  discovery, 
I  shall  premise  a  few  necessary  things,  viz. : — 

1.  That  the  difference  of  time  is  the  difference  of  longitude. 


OR,    SEABCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  149 

because  every  15  degrees  to  the  eastward  of  any  meridian  is 
an  hour  sooner,  and  every  15  degrees  to  the  westward  is  an 
hour  later,  in  time,  than  at  the  said  meridian ;  since  24  times 
15  degrees  compose  the  360  degrees  of  the  earth's  circum- 
ference. 

2.  Hence  it  must  follow,  that  if  any  vessel  revolve  round 
the  globe  westward,  a  day  will  be  gained  when  that  revolu- 
tion is  performed  ;  and  if  she  make  her  revolution  eastward, 
a  day  must  be  lost,  since  by  how  much  she  departs  from  her 
meridian  to  the  eastward,  by  just  so  much  she  loses ;  because 
every  15  degrees  that  way  is  one  hour  earlier  in  time ;  the 
360  degrees  in  this  eastern  circuit  must  be  24  hours  earlier, 
and  consequently  that  time  must  be  lost  by  a  well-regulated 
perpetual  motion,  and  the  contrary. 

3.  It  is  generally  allow' d,  that  the  perpetual  motion 
being  found,  this  would  discover  the  longitude ;  which  I  also 
grant,  but  with  this  provision,  that  it  is  so  nicely  regulated  as 
to  keep  time  exactly  with  or  without  an  equation-table ;  that 
is  to  say,  equal  time  to  correspond  with  the  sun. 

4.  Yet,  as  I  prefer  such  a  perpetual  motion  as  will  keep 
pace  with  apparent  time,  or,  in  other  words,  with  the  sun's 
shadow  on  a  dial,  or  a  true  meridian  line,  being  discovered 
stands  in  no  need  of  any  equation-table  at  all;  so  I  shall 
evidently  make  it  appear  that  such  a  motion  is  found,  in  a 
proper  sense  ^for  our  purpose.  So  that  what  has  hitherto 
been  thought  impossible  by  the  generality  of  mankind  shall 
no  longer  be  a  secret.     And, 

5.  It  must  be  granted,  when  duly  considered,  that  there 
are  many  movements  which,  in  the  sense  foregoing,  may  be 
called  perpetual ;  yet,  hitherto,  there  never  came  under  my 
observation  any  of  them  that  could  be  depended  on  in  the 
case  before  us,  except  that  one  which  I  shall  discover. 

6.  I  will  instance  in  two  particulars,  that  are  easily  framed, 
tho*  not  very  common. 

First,  There  are  some  spring  clocks  and  watches,  so  con- 
trived by  art  as  to  lose  no  time  in  winding,  by  having  a  spring 
fixed  to  stand  free  from  the  work,  except  at  such  times  as 
they  are  to  be  wound  up ;  but  then,  by  pulling  a  string 
fastened  to  it  for  that  end,  this  spring  presses  sufficiently  on  a 
tooth  in  the  main  wheel  to  keep  the  movement  going,  so  that 
no  time  is  lost  in  winding.  And  this,  I  say,  in  a  proper  sense 
to  the  purpose,  may  be  calFd  perpetual ;  yet  none  of  them 


160  PERPETUtTM   mobile; 

can  be  so  suiEciently  adjusted  as  to  keep  time  to  exactness, 
therefore  not  to  be  depended  on  in  this  case. 

Secondly,  Our  long  pendulum  clocks,  which  are  by  the 
same  contrivance  kept  going  while  wound,  may  be  said,  in 
the  same  sense,  to  be  perpetual  in  their  motion ;  yet  even 
these,  tho'  nearer  the  truth  than  the  other,  are  not  to  be 
depended  on  in  a  matter  of  so  great  moment.  Nor,  indeed, 
is  there  any  equation-table  extant  that  is  just,  even  Flamstead's 
correct  table  being  about  15  minutes  erroneous  at  one  time  of 
the  year,  tho'  it  is  right  in  October,  when  his  greatest 
difference  comes  to  16  min.  2  sec. 

Having  thus  premised,  my  next  business  shall  be  to 
demonstrate  a  perpetual  motion,  that  comes  so  near  the  truth 
as  not  to  vary  from  apparent  time  (tho*  that  is  very  unequal) 
3  min.  in  a  whole  year,  tho'  daily  proved  by  a  dial  well  set,  or 
by  a  just  meridian  line ;  which  I  take  to  be  the  greatest 
discovery  hitherto  so  publickly  made  manifest. 

But  in  order  thereto,  and  to  carry  instruction  with  me  to 
a  mean  capacity,  I  must  have  recourse  to  the  method  whereby 
so  wonder-working  a  machine  was  first  framed,  by  the  late 
most  ingenious  Joseph  Williamson,  watch-maker,  in  London, 
whose  name  there  is  famous,  and  his  works  greatly  admired. 

[He  then  explains  how  this  horologist,  from  "his  thirst 
after  the  knowledge  of  equation,"  spent  seven  years  in 
forming  correct  tables.] 

From  this  true  equation-table,  this  excellent  workman 
formed  an  elliptical  wheel,  that  revolved  once  a  year,  and  so 
fixed  it  to  the  day  of  the  month,  that  it  had  such  influence  on 
the  pendulum,  by  shortening  and  lengthening  it,  that  his 
clocks,  thus  framed,  would  keep  time  to  admiration  with  the 
sun,  and  therefore  he  called  them  his  sun-clocks.  This  is 
the  perpetual  motion  I  commend  to  the  world,  for  it  loses  no 
time  at  all  in  winding. 

[This  last  expression  shows  how  much  it  partook  of  a  real 
perpetual  motion.  He  goes  on  to  state  the  praise  bestowed 
on  the  invention  in  "  a  speech  made  to  the  Royal  Society  by 
Sir  Isaac  Newton."  After  this,  follow  observations  on  its 
uses,  the  mode  of  fixing  it  on  board  ship,  with  several  neces- 
sary precautions.] 

And  so  curious  is  the  invention,  that  the  spring  which 
keeps  the  work  going  while  the  clock  is  wound  up  is  also 
fixed  to  a  plate  that  always  by  its  force  slides  back  again  to 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  153 

close  the  holes  that  receive  the  key  for  that  end,  when  the 
tooth  of  the  main  wheel  has,  in  its  course,  slipt  from  it. 

I  subscribe, 

The  Farmer. 

P.S. — Nothing  hitherto  found  can  be  so  regularly  ad- 
justed to  the  time  as  a  long  pendulum  movement.  All 
springs  are  fallible,  and  short  pendulums  too.  But  those  of 
about  33  inches  long,  that  beat  true  seconds,  are  next  to 
infallibility,  being  kept  in  perpetual  motion,  as  I  here  mani- 
fest they  may  be.* 


II. — ^Raising  water: — ^Fig.  1,  Col.  Kranach's  machine  for 
constant  motion,  with  a  power  tgt  raise  water.  Fig.  2,  Mr. 
Gervas's  engine  for  raising  water. 


EXPLANATION. 

Fig.  1  represents  an  artificial  machine  for  constant  motion ; 
the  inventor  is  Col.  Kranach,  who,  in  a  book  printed  at  Ham- 
burgh, asserts  that  when  once  put  in  motion  for  any  of  the 
following  works,  it  will  continue  its  operation  both  night  and 
day  without  any  other  help  or  assistance  except  that  of  a  small 
quantity  of  standing  water :  that  by  it  large  and  heavy  weights 
may  be  drawn  up,  to  2,000  weight ;  that  in  24  hours  it  will 
fling  out  2,400  barrels  of  water,  and  is  therefore  highly 
necessary  for  the  draining  of  land  overflown  by  inundations ; 
that  it  wiU  be  of  great  use  in  mines  to  draw  up  the  water  and 
ore  24  fathoms  deep ;  that  it  may  be  employed  instead  of 
wind  or  water  mills,  for  all  manner  of  uses ;  and  that  this 
machine  may  be  put  either  in  a  quick  or  slow  motion. 

The  author  protests  that  he  had  laboured  for  thirty  years 
together  before  he  brought  this  machine  to  perfection,  and 
declares  his  readiness  to  oblige  any  gentleman  with  a  small 
or  large  model  thereof,  and  to  inspect  the  building  of  it  for 
use,  at  a  reasonable  gratification. 


Vol.  7, 1737,  p.  «7. 


154  PERPETXJTJM  mobile; 

Fig.  2. — This  is  a  representation  of  an  engine  for  raising 
water,  like  that  erected  by  Mr.  Gervas,  at  Sir  John  Chester's, 
near  Newport  Pagnel. 

A  and  B  are  two  copper  buckets  of  an  imequal  weight  and 
size,  suspended  by  chains,  which  alternately  wind  off  and  on 
the  multiplying  wheel  Y  Z ;  the  part  Y  being  smaller  in 
diameter,  and  Z  larger,  in  proportion  to  the  different  lift  for 
which  each  is  designed.  The  buckets  being  both  filled  with 
water  from  the  spring,  which  affords  a  fall  of  ten  feet,  the 
larger  bucket  A,  being  heavier  when  fuU,  though  the  lighter 
empty,  descends  the  ten  feet  from  C  to  D,  and  weighs  up 
the  lesser  bucket,  from  E  to  F,  perhaps  30  feet,  where  touch- 
ing a  trigger  it  discharges  its  water  into  a  cistern  W,  whence 
it  is  conveyed  for  service  by  the  pipe  T ;  at  the  same  time, 
the  water  by  the  like  means  is  discharged  (and  runs  away) 
from  the  larger  bucket,  which  then  being  lighter  is  drawn  up 
by  the  smaller  (but  at  that  time  becomes  the  heavier)  bucket, 
in  order  to  be  filled  again  at  the  spring.  This  work  is  con- 
tinued day  and  night,  without  any  other  force,  and  has  not 
been  out  of  order  since  it  was  set  up  in  1725.  The  buckets 
are  guided  by  two  iron  rods  on  each  side,  which  run  in 
grooves  of  the  buckets,  and  the  whole  motion  is  kept  steady 
by  a  jack  fly  L,  which  is  turned  by  a  spiral  wheel  at  one  end 
of  the  great  axis  M;  and  the  other  part  of  the  regulator, 
being  a  quadrant  with  a  moveable  weight  at  I,  is  by  a  proper 
number  of  teeth  on  a  conmiimicating  wheel  suffered  to  go 
only  in  a  fourth  of  a  circle,  from  G  to  K,  and  serves  as  a 
balance,  while  the  chains  of  the  buckets  are  winding  off  and 
on  the  wheels. 

This  engine  carries  up  one  bucket  containing  6  gallons  of 
water  in  5  minutes,  but  then  there  is  a  waste  of  water  ten 
gallons,  which  are  the  contents  of  the  larger  bucket ;  but 
Dr.  Desaguliers  observes,  that  it  is  not  the  hundredth  part  of 
what  is  spent  by  a  water  wheel  to  raise  an  equal  quantity  of 
water  to  the  same  height.  The  desirable  improvement  of 
this  engine  is  to  prevent  the  great  waste  of  water, — and  we 
are  informed  that  can  be  effected  in  some  degree  by  Thomas 
Yeoman,  of  Northampton. 

But  the  reason  of  exhibiting  this  engine,  together  with  that 
of  the  German  engine  (Fig.  1)  is  from  a  suggestion,  that  a 
round  weight  might  by  some  means  be  made  to  run  in  and 
out  of  a  scale  or  bucket,  and  so  raise  up  water  with  very  little 


(Fig.  2,  pi.  16.) 


(Fig.  1,  pi.  18  ) 


OK,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIYE    POWER.  159 

or  no  waste.  We  promise,  as  an  encouragement  to  the  attempt, 
five  pounds  for  the  person  who  first  compleats  such  a  work, 
or  produces  a  model  for  the  like  effect. 

This,  it  is  apprehended,  will  be  much  easier  performed  than 
the  great  operations  mentioned  by  Col.  Kranach.  However, 
that  person  who  can  come  at  such  a  secret  will  not  want  five 
pounds,  or  a  hundred  times  larger.* 

III. — ^In  the  Gentleman's  Magazine  is  described  a  "  Self- 
moving  Machine." 

A  full  account  of  the  same  machine,  with  an  engraving,  as 
here  given,  will  be  foimd  in  "  Le  Journal  des  Sgavans,  1678 
[re-printed  Paris,  1724],  4to,  page  79,  entitled  "  Le  mouve- 
ment  perpetuel  purement  artificiel  invente  et  execute  par  le 
P.  Stanislas  Solski,  Jesuite  Poonois."  The  Magazine 
article  proceeds : — 

Description. — Fig.  1,  a  self-moving  machine,  invented  by 
a  Polish  Jesuit.  It  consists  of  a  pump,  whose  body  ah  f  g 
is  a  palm  and  two  fingers*  breadth  in  diameter,  and  four  palms 
in  height;  the  head  d  e  f  g\&  a  palm  in  height ;  the  cylinder 
a  b  d  e  of  the  body  of  the  pump  is  two  palms  and  a  half  in 
height,  of  which  the  piston  c  c  fills  up  one  palm ;  the  other 
palm  and  a  half  must  hold  at  least  five  cans  of  water,  each 
containing  three  quarts.  * 

The  wooden  pipe  from  /  g  to  the  horizontal  pipe  n  nis 
about  thirty-two  palms  in  vertical  height. 

The  author  observes  that  if  the  diameter  of  the  mouth  of 
the  pipe  A  «  be  equal  to  that  of  the  cavity  of  the  pimip,  and 
the  diameter  of  the  iron  rod  h  k  be  of  such  size  as  that  the 
pipe  f  g  n  shall  contain  only  seventeen  cans  of  water,  the 
maclune  will  be  the  easier  worked,  as  the  water  being  forced 
thro'  a  passage  less  strait  meets  with  less  resistance. 

The  diameter  of  the  hole  /  g  must  be  equal  to  half  the 
diameter  d  e  oi  the  body  of  the  pump,  whence  it  will  be  four 
times  straiter  than  the  body  of  the  pump,  because  circles  are 
to  one  another  as  the  squares  of  their  diameters. 

The  machine  works  in  the  following  manner : — The  piston 

•  Vol.  17,  1747,  p.  459. 


160  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

c  c  being  at  the  bottom  of  the  pump,  the  suckers,  both  of 
the  pump  and  of  the  piston,  shut  by  their  own  weight,  whence 
by  the  descent  of  the  bucket  p,  the  wheel  m  w,  six  feet  in 
diameter,  is  turned,  by  which  means  the  chain  k  z,  by  passing 
round  the  axis  II  oi  the  wheel,  raises  the  iron  rod  k  A,  and 
the  piston  c  c,  at  which  instant  the  sucker  of  the  pump  opens, 
and  gives  passage  to  the  water,  which  is  forced  into  the  body 
of  the  pump  by  the  weight  of  the  external  air.  The  counter- 
poise V  descends,  and  so  turns  the  wheel  m  m,  round  which 
goes  the  cord  mm  o,  which,  descending  on  the  other  side, 
raises  the  bucket. 

In  proportion  as  the  counterpoise  v  descends,  and  the 
bucket  p  is  raised,  the  axis  of  the  great  wheel  is  freed  from 
the  twistings  of  the  cord,  and  so  the  piston  by  its  own  weight, 
and  that  of  the  iron  rod,  falls  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  body 
of  the  pump,  and  by  that  means  the  sucker  of  the  pump 
shuts,  and  the  five  cans  of  water  moimt  up  thro*  the  piston 
by  its  sucker,  which  opens  above.  The  same  operation  is 
readily  performed  again,  in  order  to  carry  that  water  into  the 
pipe  f  g  nni,  whence  it  is  discharged  thro'  the  horizontal 
pipe  fi  n  into  the  basin,  which  holds  at  least  thirty-two  pounds 
of  water.  This  water  falls  into  the  bucket  jo,  thro'  the  pipe 
q  r,  whose  clap  opens,  being  raised  by  two  cross  sticks,  which 
are  fastened  to  the  cord,  and  lift  up  the  bar  o  y. 

The  bucket  p  contains  four  cans  and  a  half  of  water ;  it  is 
two  palms  in  length,  ten  at  the  opening,  and  six  inches  in 
depth,  where  the  two  long  faces  \miting  form  an  angle  of  120 
degrees :  being  thus  filled,  it  descends  apace,  and  the  bar  n  o 
being  depressed,  the  clap  falls  and  closes  the  pipe  q  r,  and  as 
it  descends  30  feet,  and  as  the  great  wheel  is  10  feet  in 
diameter,  it  makes  an  entire  revolution,  and  thus  the  axis  /  / 
twisting  up  the  chain  k  z,  the  rod  k  b  raises  anew  the  piston  c, 
and  carries  again  at  least  four  cans  and  a  half  of  water  into 
the  basin  n  q,  thro'  the  horizontal  pipe  n  n. 

The  bucket,  when  descended  almost  to  the  surface  of  the 
water  of  the  well,  is  raised  again  by  the  cord  8  t,  which  is 
too  short  to  reach  the  water,  and  being  for  the  present  dis- 
charged of  its  weight,  the  piston  descends  to  the  bottom  of 
the  body  of  the  pump,  by  its  own  weight  and  that  of  the 
rod  h  k,  and  the  cross  sticks  o  of  the  cord  of  the  bucket 
coming  imder  the  bar  o  y,  raises  it  together  with  the  clap, 
that  the  water  of  the  basin  n  q  may  fall  again,  thro'  the  pipe 


OB,    SEARCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  163 

q  r,  into  the  bucket  p,  causing  it  to  descend  anew,  and  so 
maintain  a  perpetual  motion. 

There  are  several  other  small  pieces  in  this  machine,  the 
use  of  which  is  easily  comprehended.* 


IV. — ^A  new  plain  draught  of  a  Self-moving  Wheel,  tho* 
not  perpetual ;  with  a  description  of  its  parts,  and  manner  of 
operating;  submitted  to  the  inspection  and  amusement  of 
the  curious. 

Directions  to  make  a  Self  moving  Wheel, 

Let  there  be  a  well-turned  board,  of  at  least  two  feet 
diameter. 

At  Fig.  1,  six  pins  for  the  chequers  to  turn  upon. 

At  Fig.  2,  let  in  brass  grooves  into  the  board  for  the 
receiving  of  rollers,  which  must  be  fastened  to  the  bottom 
points  of  the  small  chequers. 

At  Fig.  3,  place  pullies. 

At  the  points  of  the  small  chequers  fasten  chains  that  pass 
lound  the  pullies,  and  are  made  fast  to  both  points  of  the 
next  large  chequer ;  the  chains  must  be  all  of  an  equal 
length. 

Make  very  substantial  brass  chequers,  with  good  joints  to 
^by  free  without  wriggling,  and  of  as  large  a  size  as  the 
dicumference  of  the  wheel  will  admit,  and  fix  weights  at  the 
points  of  the  said  chequers. 

Remarks  upon  the  manner  of  Operating, 

Observe,  that  one  pound,  placed  at  the  zenith  of  the  larg 
chequer,  is  correctly  equal  to  two  pounds  placed  at  the  nadir 
of  the  small  chequer ;  and  that  this  power  (if  occasion  be) 
may  easily  be  either  increased  or  diminished  at  pleasure,  by 
only  fastening  the  chains  farther  off  or  nigher  to  the  weights  : 
therefore,  it  is  self-evident  that  the  weights  above  the  horizon 
cannot  want  full  power  for  the  drawing  in  of  all  the  weights 
below  it ;  more  especially  those  particular  weights  that  arrive 
gradually  to  the  mounting  side  of  the  wheel,  as  is  shewn 
hereafter.  And  this  is  done  by  reason  of  the  chains  being 
all  in  a  diagonal  position,  therefore  the  weights  below  the 

•  Vol.21,  1751, p.  391. 


164  PERPETUUM    MOBILE  ; 

horizon  cannot  be  otherwise  drawn  in  by  such  slant  lines, 
than  into  a  gradual,  regular,  elliptical  form,  as  they  appear  in . 
the  plate.  But  to  prevent  the  said  weights  from  being  either 
too  much  or  too  little  drawn  in,  this  diagonal  position  of  the 
chains  may,  by  means  of  the  pullies,  be  made  to  slant  more 
or  less,  so  as  to  answer  to  the  right  elliptical  form  of  drawing 
in  the  weights  as  shall  be  requisite ;  and  thus,  by  this  elliptical 
form  of  the  weights,  the  power  of  gravity  must  needs  give  the 
wheel  some  considerable  share  of  movement,  so  as  to  cause  the 
weight  B,  &c.,  to  descend  below  the  horizon,  where  they  will 
run  out  to  the  same  length,  as  you  see  the  weight  A  does,  to 
the  very  great  and  constant  supply  of  power  to  the  descending 
side  of  the  wheel. 

As  to  the  moimting  side  of  the  wheel,  by  the  manner  of 
chaining  the  chequers  to  each  other,  they  become  partly  as 
it' were  all  of  one  piece,  so  that  the  weights  above  the  horizon 
can  no  way  press  down  their  chequers,  without  communicating 
their  drawing-in  power  to,  and  being  always  felt,  in  a  certain 
measure,  by  every  weight  of  the  wheel,  in  the  elliptical 
manner  above  mentioned,  with  respect  to  the  diagonal  position 
of  the  chains.  Moreover,  whatever  number  of  weights  shall 
descend  below  the  horizon  on  the  one  hand,  the  like  number 
of  weights  must  ascend  above  it  on  the  other,  where  they,  in 
conjimction,  will  press  down  their  chequers  with  ample  force, 
for  the  gradual  dxawing-in  of  those  extended  weights  which 
are  their  next  followers,  reducing  them  into  the  same  less 
extended  form  as  they  themselves  were  in  just  before  they 
were  carried  above  the  horizon.  After  the  same  gradual 
manner,  by  the  power  of  the  weights  above,  will  all  the 
extended  weights  be  thus  gradually  reduced,  drawn  in,  and 
carried  round,  when,  at  the  same  time,  the  elliptical  form  of 
the  wheel,  by  the  constant  supply  of  weights  running  out  at 
the  descending  side,  will  at  aU  times  be  kept  up,  like  as  at 
the  first  setting  off  of  the  wheel,  for  the  continuance  of  the 
movement. 

By  all  which  it  appears  that  there  are  two  different  and 
distinct  acting  powers  in  this  wheel,  both  which,  by  the 
freeness  of  the  joints  and  other  parts,  in  a  workman-like 
manner,  cannot  but  act  with  that  puissance  as  to  leave  no 
room  to  reflect  upon  friction  in  any  respect  whatever. 

Therefore,  if,  upon  due  inspection,  no  objection  shall  appear 
against  either  of  the  said  powers,  is  not  here  a  discovery  of  a 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTITE    POWER.  165 

new  power  in  a  short,  easy,  obvious  manner,  capable  of  any 
improvement  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  wheel,  so  as  to 
be  applicable  to  ten  thousand  different  uses,  both  great  and 
smaU? 

Suppose  we  compare  this  wheel  with  the  Marquis  of 
Worcester's  great  wheel  (see  vol.  18,*  pp.  9,  61,  107), 
some  time  since  shewn  in  the  Tower  of  London,  there  will 
appear  the  following  most  material  differences : — His  wheel 
was  contrived  with  loose,  running  weights,  forty  in  number, 
of  fifty  pounds  each ;  which,  at  the  nadir,  bore  the  same 
distance  from  the  centre  as  the  weights  at  the  descending  side, 
upon  which  accoimt,  no  such  contrivance  can  possibly  ever 
answer  the  design  to  keep  moving,  as  is  easily  demonstrable  ; 
whereas,  in  this  wheel,  the  weights  at  the  nadir  will  at  all 
times  be  considerably  nigher  the  center  than  the  weights  of 
the  descending  side,  the  consequence  of  which  wants  no 
explaining.  And  should  one  of  these  wheels  be  made  up  for 
any  large  use,  and,  by  mistakes  in  the  workman,  it  be  so 
made  as  not  to  answer  ftdly  to  the  purpose,  as  mentioned 
above,  still  the  same  would  be  of  exceeding  great  service  by 
being  applied  to  co-operate  with  the  powers  of  a  fire  engine, 
for  the  raising  of  double  the  quantity  of  water  they  now  raise, 
"which  is  the  same  thing  as  the  saving  of  half  the  quantity  of 
coals  that  are  now  consumed. t 

*^*  As  a  considerable  wager  is  depending  whether  a 
model,  upon  these  principles,  can  be  made  to  operate,  any 
artist,  who  imagines  that  he  can  make  such  a  one,  at  a 
moderate  price,  may  send  his  terms  in  writing  to  E.  Cave,  at 
St.  John's  Gate. 


The  Self -moving    Wheel  shewn   to    be   defective  by  a  Mechanical 
Demonstration. 

Mr.  Urban, —  *  *  *  What  I  have  here  sent  you  is  an 
attempt  to  prove  that  the  wheel  with  weights,  described  in 
your  last  magazine,  tho*  put  in  motion  by  the  hand,  will  not 
continue  and  preserve  that  motion  any  better  than  a  common 
plain  wheel  would.       *  *  *  * 

In  the  following  demonstration,  I  suppose,  and  take  for 

•  Where  a  copy  is  given  of  the  Marquis's  Century  of  Inventions,  with 
original  remarks  on  each. 

t  Vol.  21,  1751,  p.  448. 


166  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

granted,  that  Mr.  A.  B.,  by  his  self-moving,  tho*  not  perpetual, 
wheel,  as  he  terms  it,  means  such  a  wheel  as,  by  the  action 
of  gravity  alone,  would  continue  in  a  regular  imiform  motion 
round  its  axis,  till  some  of  the  parts  of  it  are  decayed  or  out 
of  order.  I  suppose,  too,  since  he  says  nothing  to  the  con- 
trary, the  weights  are  all  exactly  equal.  And  I  suppose  and 
allow  that  such  weights,  fitted  to  the  wheel  in  the  manner  he 
directs,  would,  by  the  action  of  gravity,  so  form  themselves  as 
to  be  constantly  farther  distant  from  the  center  of  motion  on 
the  descending  side  than  on  the  ascending.  It  must  be 
allowed,  too,  that  any  weight  so  fixed  (or,  to  speak  more  pro- 
perly, the  center  of  gravity  of  it)  would,  in  every  entire 
revolution  of  the  wheel,  describe  a  curve  line  returning  into 
itself  again,  and  that  all  the  other  weights  would  successively 
describe  the  same  curve — ^perhaps  not  of  a  regular  elliptical 
form,  as  Mr.  A.  B.  imagines,  but  quite  irregular  in  its  shape. 
However  this  be,  it  matters  not,  so  long  as  a  line  passing  per- 
pendicularly thro*  the  center  of  motion,  and  produced  both 
ways  till  it  touches  the  curve  in  two  points  (which  points  we 
shall  call  the  zenith  and  the  nadir,  and  suppose  to  be  marked 
with  the  letters  Z  and  N),  divides  it  into  two  unequal  parts, 
whereof  that  through  which  the  weights  descend  is  the 
largest  and  most  distant  from  the  center  of  motion,  as,  from 
what  has  been  already  granted,  must  be  the  case  here. 

These  things  being  premised,  let  us  now  examine  what 
power  gravity  will  supply  any  one  single  weight  with,  to 
continue  the  wheel  in  motion :  let  us  call  this  weight  W. 
Now,  'tis  plain  that  W,  in  its  passage  from  the  zenith  to  the 
nadir,  thro'  the  greatest  and  most  distant  part  of  the  curve, 
will  yet  descend  perpendicularly,  or  get  nearer  to  the  center 
of  the  earth  only  as  much  as  comes  to  the  length  of  the  line 
Z  N.  In  its  further  progress  from  the  nadir  to  the  zenith, 
from  whence  it  first  set  out,  tho'  it  be  thro'  a  less  and  nearer 
part  of  the  curve,  it  will,  notwithstanding  this,  ascend  perpen- 
dicularly, or  recede  from  the  earth's  center  the  length  of  the 
same  line  N  Z ;  and,  therefore,  since  the  weight  W  is  obliged, 
in  every  entire  revolution,  to  ascend  perpendicularly  thro'  as 
large  a  space  as  it  descends,  it  follows  that  the  reaction  of 
gravity  upon  it,  whilst  it  is  in  the  ascending  part  of  the 
curve,  will  be  exactly  equal  to  the  action  of  gravity  whilst  in 
the  contrary  part  of  it;  whence  'tis  plain  that,  upon  the 
whole,  this  particular  weight  W  will  not  be  supply' d,  by 


OB,    SEABCII   FOB   SELF-MOTITE    POWIfiB.  167 

gravity,  with  the  least  power  to  continue  the  wheel  in  motion, 
tho',  by  application  of  the  hand,  it  was  once  set  agoing.  The 
same  will  hold  true  of  every  other  weight  fixed  to  the  wheel ; 
and  therefore  all  the  weights,  be  the  number  what  it  will, 
will  have  no  power  at  all,  upon  the  whole,  to  continue  the 
wheel  in  motion ;  so  that  (if  we  abstract  from  what  difference 
may  be  caus'd  through  friction — ^resistance)  this  wheel  would 
continue  moving  no  longer  than  any  common  plain  wheel 
would  that  had  the  same  velocity  at  first  given  to  it  by  the 
hand.     Q.E.D. 

But  to  make  this  still  plainer,  instead  of  one,  let  us  con- 
sider two  opposite  weights  together,  and  examine  wherein 
the  material  difference  lies  between  the  action  of  two  equal 
weights  so  placed  in  this  machine,  and  of  two  others  fixed  to 
the  ends  of  any  common  lever,  whose  center  of  motion  is  at 
some  distance  from  its  middle  point.  Now,  with  respect  to 
the  lever,  let  the  two  equal  weights  fixed  to  it  be  called  W 
and  X.  Let  W  be  that  which  is  farthest  from  the  center  of 
motion,  and  let  the  lever  be  placed  in  a  horizontal  situation. 
The  reason  why  W  will  in  this  case  preponderate,  tho'  the 
weights  be  equal,  is  because  it  can  approach  the  center  of  the 
earth  faster  than  it  obliges  X  to  recede  from  it ;  for  W,  in 
passing  from  its  first  position  to  its  lowest  point— that  is,  till 
the  lever  becomes  vertical — ^will  have  got  nearer  to  the  center 
of  the  earth,  just  as  much  as  comes  to  its  o^vn  distance  from 
the  center  of  motion,  and  X,  in  the  meanwhile,  will  have 
ascended  thro*  a  space  equal  to  its  distance  from  the  same ; 
but  the  distance  of  X  from  the  fulcrum,  or  center  of  motion, 
was,  by  supposition,  less  than  that  of  W ;  and,  therefore, 
since  W  in  this  case  does  in  the  same  time  descend  further 
than  it  obliges  X  to  ascend,  it  necessarily  follows  that  it  can 
and  does  descend  faster,  which  is  the  reason  of  its  prepon- 
derating and  causing  the  lever  to  move. 

But  tibe  case  of  two  equal  and  opposite  weights  that  are  fixed 
to  Mr.  A.  B.'s  wheel  is  quite  different;  for,  let  the  two 
weights  be  here,  also,  called  W  and  X,  His  plain  that  in  the 
same  time  that  W  moves  from  Z  to  N,  X  must  move  from  N 
to  Z ;  in  which  time  also  X  will  have  ascended  just  as  much 
as  W  has  descended,  or  will  have  receded  from  the  center  of 
the  earth  just  as  much  as  W  has  approached  towards  it :  the 
recess  of  the  one  and  the  access  of  the  other  being  equal  to 
the  same  line  Z  N.     And  therefore,  tho'  the  absolute  velocities 


168  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

of  W  and  X  may  be,  and  are,  very  different  ( W  in  this  case 
describing  a  larger  part  of  the  curve,  whilst  X  describes  a 
less),  yet  wUl  their  perpendicular  velocities  be  the  same ;  and, 
consequently,  since  the  two  weights  are,  by  supposition, 
equal,  W  will  not  preponderate  or  cause  X  to  move.  The 
same  may  be  said  of  every  other  pair  of  weights  that  are 
opposite,  and  therefore  all  the  weights  on  the  descending 
side  will  not  preponderate  or  cause  the  wheel  to  move. 
Whence  'tis  plain  again  that  Mr.  A.  B.*s  wheel  with  weights 
is  no  better  (fisposed  to  be  put  or  continue  in  motion,  by  the 
action  of  gravity  upon  it,  than  any  common  plain  wheel  is. 
Q.E.D. 

Mb.  Ubban, — Now  I  am  writing  to  you  upon  this  subject, 
I  shall  beg  leave  to  add  a  short  general  demonstration,  to 
shew  that  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  any  wheel  whatsoever, 
by  means  of  weights  affixed,  to  be  so  contrived,  as,  by  the 
action  of  gravity  alone,  to  be  put  and  continued  in  motion 
round  its  axis,  even  so  much  as  for  one  single  revolution. 

*Tis  a  well-known  truth  in  mechanicks,  that  if  gravity, 
actmg  on  any  body,  can't  move  the  center  of  gravity  of  that 
body,  it  can't  move  the  body  at  all.  Now,  a  wheel  furnished 
with  weights,  in  any  manner  whatsoever,  may  be  considered 
as  one  complete  body,  the  center  of  gravity  of  which  can 
either  be  made  to  move,  by  the  action  of  gravity  upon  the 
body,  or  it  can  not.  If  the  line  of  direction  of  the  center  of 
gravity  of  this  complex  body  passes  directly  thro'  the  center 
of  motion,  in  this  case,  the  center  of  gravity,  and,  con- 
sequently, the  body  itself,  will  not  be  moved  at  all  by  the 
action  of  gravity  alone ;  but  if  the  aforesaid  line  of  direction 
passes  on  one  side  of  the  center  of  motion,  in  this  case,  as 
the  center  of  gravity  is  not  immediately  sustained,  it  may 
therefore  descend,  and  the  wheel  may  move  ;*  but  this 
center  of  gravity,  by  the  action  of  gravity  on  the  body,  will 
never  be  made  to  perform  a  whole  revolution  round  the 
center  of  motion;  it  will  only  vibrate  for  some  time  in  the 

•  I  say  that  in  this  case  it  may  descend,  but  not  that  it  always  will 
do  so;  for  tho',  in  the  wheel  of  the  Marquis  of  Worcester,  and  of  Mr. 
A.  B.,  the  line  of  direction  of  the  center  of  gravity  of  the  whole  machine 
passes  on  one  side  of  the  center  of  motion,  and  at  a  considerable  distance 
from  it,  yet  in  such  machines,  tho*  turned  by  the  hand,  the  center  of 
gravity  will  not  move  at  all,  but  is  as  much  fixed  as  if  it  coincided  with 
the  center  cf  motion. 


on,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  169 

manner  of  a  pendulum,  which  vibrating  motion,  by  unavoid- 
able friction  and  resistance,  will  be  soon  destroyed,  and  the 
body,  with  its  center  of  gravity,  remain  at  rest  without  having 
performed  so  much  as  one  single  entire  revolution.  Q.E.D. 
If  the  publishing  of  what  has  been  here  said  gives  such 
satisfaction  to  the  publick  as  may  prevent  any  future 
attempts  of  this  kind,  which  have  hitherto  always  proved 
fruitless,  and  frequently  very  expensive,  and  which,  I  am 
thoroughly  persuaded,  can  never  be  successful,  my  end  is 
answered ;  but  if  not,  I  shall  at  least  have  the  satisfaction 
myself  to  think  that  it  can  do  no  harm  in  the  world,  which  is 
more  than  can  be  truly  said  of  many  things  that  have  lately 
appeared  in  print. 

Twiford,  Nov.  20,  1751.  T.  P.* 


Mr.  Urban, — Reading  in  your  last  Magazine,  p.  501,  Mr. 
T.  P.*s  attempt  to  prove  the  wheel  with  weights,  described  in 
your  last  October  Magazine,  p.  449,  tho'  put  in  motion  by 
the  hand,  will  not  continue  moving  any  longer  than  a  common 
wheel  would ;  when,  at  the  same  time,  he  allows  that  weights 
so  fitted  to  a  wheel,  in  the  manner  directed,  would,  by  the 
action  of  gravity,  so  form  themselves  as  to  be  constantly 
further  distant  from  the  center  of  the  wheel  on  the  descending 
side  than  on  the  ascending;  he  also  allowing  that  weights 
so  ordered  would,  in  every  revolution  of  the  wheel,  describe 
a  curve  line,  returning  into  itself  again,  and  that  all  the 
weights  of  the  wheel  will  describe  the  same  curve,  and,  by 
consequence,  granting,  though  he  does  not  mention  it,  that 
the  weights  at  the  bottom  of  the  wheel,  as  well  as  all  those  at 
the  moimting  side,  will  be  always  nigher  the  center  than  the 
weights  at  the  descending :  these  things  being  supposed 
must  infallibly  render  the  wheel  constantly  lapsided,  which  is 
all  that  is,  or  need  be,  required  to  continue  its  motion. 
Whatever  may  be  in  old  objections,  against  old  contrivances, 
is  one  thing,  but  to  contrive  to  have  the  weights  at  the 
bottom  of  the  wheel,  as  well  as  the  weights  at  the  mounting 
side,  to  be  always  nigher  the  center  than  the  weights  of  the 
descending  side,  I  take  to  be  a  quite  new  discovery,  and  is 

•  Vol.21,  17J1,  p.  501. 


170  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

more  than  can  be  said  of  any  former  contrivance  whatever ; 
but  as  to  the  consequences  of  this  promising  contrivance,  I 
cannot  see  how  it  can  be  emy  further  known,  without  making 
of  the  experiment. 

I  am,  &c.. 
Queen  Street,  Westminster.  M.  B.* 


V. — Perpetual  Motion  proposed  to  be  effected  by  Magnetism. 
— Alleged  discovery  by  Hero  Hicken,  of  Friezland. 

Mb.  Ubban, — ^Ever  since  I  became  acquainted  with  the 
mechanical  powers  (which  is  now  near  seven  years  ago),  the 
greatest  part  of  my  leisure  time  has  been  employed  upon 
inventions  for  the  good  of  the  publick.  Each  branch  of  ex- 
perimental philosophy  has  in  turn  engaged  my  attention; 

and  I  might  also  add,  that  each  has  in  turn but  modesty 

forbids  me  to  proceed.  Yet  I  must  tell  you,  that  if  the 
attraction  of  the  loadstone  would  have  supported  a  weight  at 
the  distance  of  but  |  of  an  inch  (which  a  printed  book  affirms 
for  a  truth),  gravity  before  this  time  had  been  useless  in 
clockwork,  and  the  longitude  effectually  discovered.  I  was 
extremely  sorry,  as  you  may  very  well  suppose,  that  so  useful 
a  scheme  should  miscarry ;  and  so  much  the  more,  as  I  was 
within  less  than  an  inch  of  it.  But  disappointments,  Mr. 
Urban,  we  must  expect  to  meet  with,  as  my  attempts  upon 
perpetual  motion  have  often  experimentally  taught  me.  For 
that,  you  must  know,  in  spite  of  demonstration,  has  ever  been 
my  favorite  pursuit,  and  many  are  the  projects  that  I  have 
successively  been  big  with ;  some  lasted  a  week,  some  a  fort- 
night, but  a  month  most  commonly  put  an  end  to  them  all. 
But,  however,  I  have  at  last  succeeded.  My  present  scheme 
had  overcome  every  objection  that  either  my  own  head,  or 
my  neighbour's,  could  possibly  bring  against  it ;  and  I  was 
drawing  out  a  plan  of  it  to  transmit  to  you,  when  the  follow- 
ing article  appeared  in  the  "  Gazetteer :" — 

"  A  paragraph  from  Amsterdam,  in  the  last  *  Utrecht  Ga- 
zette,* says,  that  at  Doornum,  in  East  Friezland,  a  mechanic, 
named  Hero  Hicken,  has  invented  a  machine,  which,  being 

•  Vol.  21,  1751,  p.  610. 


OB,    SBABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  171 

once  set  in  motion,  teeps  going  perpetually,  till  such  time  as 
the  materials  of  which  it  is  composed  are  fallen  to  decay,  or 
the  structure  of  the  machine  itself  altered." 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  tell  you,  Mr.  Urban,  what  a 
terrible  damp  this  threw  upon  my  spirits ;  in  spight  of  all  my 
philosophy,  I  was  neither  able  to  eat,  drink,  or  sleep,  for  a 
considerable  time  after.  For  this  was  not  only  a  full  demon- 
stration that  my  scheme  was  practicable,  but  also  attended 
with  this  melancholy  circumstance,  that  England  would  lose 
the  honour  of  it. 

As  a  month  has  now  elapsed  since  I  met  with  the  above 
account,  without  any  further  confirmation  of  it,  my  uneasi- 
ness is  greatly  abated,  and  I  now  begin  to  flatter  myself,  that 
either  M.  Hicken's  project  has  failed,  or  that  the  whole 
account  is  only  one  of  those  periodical  paragraphs  that  appear 
once  in  about  thirty  years.  But,  as  my  situation  does  not 
permit  me  to  make  a  strict  enquiry  into  the  truth  of  these 
matters,  I  freely  resign  that  office  to  those  of  your  readers 
who  have  leisure  enough  to  examine  the  arcana  of  news- 
mongers, or  money  enough  to  take  a  tramp  to  Doomum. 

I  am,  &c., 

Andbew  DoswiL. 

EXPLANATION  OF  THE  MACHINE. 

A  B  C  D  represents  a  frame  of  brass  or  wood  for  the  ma- 
chine E  F  to  rim  in. 

E  and  F  are  two  brass  wheels,  similar  and  equal,  fixed 
upon  a  moveable  axis  G. 

1,  2,  3,  &c.,  are  a  nimiber  of  artificial  magnets,  placed 
within  the  teeth  of  the  wheel  all  round,  and  as  near  each 
other  as  is  possible,  provided  they  do  not  touch  ;  their  north 
poles  at  E,  and  their  south  poles  at  F. 

H  and  I  are  two  similar  and  equal  magnets  fixed  in  the 
brass  plate  A  C,  very  near  each  other,  but  not  touching. 

K  and  L  two  more  fixed  in  the  brass  plate  B  D. 

Now,  as  the  north  pole  of  one  magnet  repels  the  north 
pole  of  another  magnet,  and  attracts  the  south ;  and  inversely 
the  south  pole  of  one  magnet  repels  the  south  pole  of 
another,  and  attracts  the  north ;  so  the  south  pole,  I,  attracts 
all  the  north  ones  at  E ;  and  the  north  pole,  H,  repels  all 


172 


PERPETUUM    MOBILE  I 


the  north  ones  at  M.  In  like  manner,  K  attracts  at  N,  and 
L  repels  at  O,  and  by  this  means  the  whole  machine  E  F 
moves  perpetually  round. 


N.B. — As  the  success  of  the  machine  depends  a  good  deal 
on  the  nearness  of  the  poles,  the  twentieth  part  of  an  inch 
is  the  thickness  I  would  recommend  for  the  magnets ;  the 
proportion  of  every  other  part  is  as  the  artist  pleases.  The 
magnets  are  to  be  put,  not  flat,  but  edgeway  to  the  wheel ; 
and  to  prevent  anything  affecting  their  virtue  after  they  are 
touched,  a  brass  ring  to  slide  over  the  whole  will  be  most 
convenient.* 


*  Vol.  S.-J,  1763,  p.  439. 


OB,    SEARCH    FOR    8BLF-M0TITE    POWER.  173 

VI. — Under  the  title  of  "A  new-invented  Machine  for 
Raising  Water,"  appears  a  letter — 

To  the  Society  for  the  Encouragement  of  Arts,  Manufac- 
tures, and  Commerce,  the  following  proposal  is  with  great 
deference  submitted,  by  their  most  obedient  humble  sei-vant, 

Richard  Blackwell. 

Mr.  Urban, — Having  read  your  Magazine  for  July  last, 
wherein  you  have  obliged  the  public  with  a  print  of  that 
curious  engine*  for  raising  water  in  Kew  Gardens,  erected  by 
the  ingenious  Mr.  Sm^aton,  it  put  me  in  mind  of  what  I  have 
often  thought  of — ^viz.,  that  (upon  the  principle  of  Archi- 
Di^edes'  water-screw)  a  machine  might  be  contrived  to  raise 
water  perpetually,  by  means  of  an  over-shot  wheel  applied  to 
the  said  screw,  agreeable  to  the  annexed  drawing.  On  this 
principle  I  once  undertook  to  construct  a  model  of  such  a 
machine,  but  other  employments  not  permitting  me  to  finish 
it,  I  cannot  ascertain  the  success ;  yet  I  conceive  the  water 
which  may  be  raised  by  the  revolution  of  the  screw,  when 
applied  to  the  overshot  wheel,  will  be  more  than  sufficient  to 
keep  it  in  constant  motion ;  and  the  surplus  water  may  be 
applied  to  many  useful  purposes  in  life. 

The  great  utility  of  such  a  machine  is  very  obvious, 
especially  among  the  seats  of  our  nobility  and  gentry,  many 
of  whom  are  so  unhappily  situated  that  they  have  no  con- 
venience of  water  but  at  a  continual  expense  of  bringing  it 
from  some  distant  place ;  whereas,  could  they  raise  it  to  a 
sufficient  height,  they  might  constantly  be  supplied  without 
any  trouble.  Add  to  this  the  great  advantage  this  machine 
may  yield  in  pleasure  gardens,  and  the  infinite  service  the 
reservoir  of  water  would  be  in  cases  of  fire. 

If  by  experiment  it  should  ?ippear  that  the  water  raised  by 
the  screw  is  more  than  sufficient  to  supply  the  over-shot  wheel, 
the  whole  may  be  employed  to  add  more  power  to  that  wheel, 
which  may  then  be  applied  to  many  useful  purposes  where 
mill-work  is  applicable. 


•  An  Archimedes  screw,  erected  in  1761.  When  worked  by  two  horses, 
it  supplies  the  lake  and  basins  in  the  gardens  with  upwards  of  3,60U 
hogsheads  of  water  every  twelve  hours. 


174 


PEHPETUUM  alobile; 


The  whole  is  submitted  to  those  gentlemen  whose  know- 
ledge in  hydrostaticks  renders  them  proper  judges  of  such 
matters. 


A,  the  reservoir. 

B,  the  Archimedean  screw,  by  the  revolution  of  which  the 
reservoir  is  supplied  with  water. 

C,  the  over-shot  wheel,  by  the  force  of  which  the  screw  is 
kept  in  constant  rotation. 

D,  a  small  rivulet,  or  spring,  which  supplies  the  well  with 
water. 

E,  the  bolt  to  regulate  the  flux  of  the  water  into  the  over- 
shot wheel.* 


Mr.  Urban, — The  ingenious  gentleman  whose  plan  of  a 
machine  for  raising  water  by  a  perpetual  motion  you  inserted 
in  your  Magazine  (see  p.  448)  was,  I  am  afraid,  too  sanguine 
in  his  hopes  of  success.  Were  the  slowness  of  the  motion  in 
this  machine  in  proportion  to  the  force  with  which  it  is 
expected  to  operate  thoroughly  considered,  I  imagine  no 
practical  trial  need  be  made  to  convince  us  of  the  fallacy  of 
its  contrivance.     First,  then — 

The  water  which  is  thrown  up  by  the  screw  can  never  be  able 

•  Vol.  33,  1763,  p.  448. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  175 

to  turn  the  wheel,  both  because  of  the  smallness  of  its  quantity 
and  the  slowness  of  its  ascent  through  the  screw,  in  proportion 
to  its  descent  down  the  wheel  ;  for  even  supposing  the  screw 
to  turn  round  twice  (which  is  more  than  appears  from  the  plan 
before  us)  whilst  the  wheel  turns  once,  yet  no  more  water 
can  be  thrown  up  by  each  revolution  of  the  screw,  than  is 
contained  in  that  part  of  its  uppermost  helix,  which  lies  above 
an  horizontal  line  drawn  through  the  middle  of  the  screw. 
(See  the  annexed  diagram,  A  B.)  Now,  can  twice  this  quantity 
of  water  be  supposed  to  turn  this  wheel  round — especially 
when  the  stream  in  which  it  falls,  falls  by  fits,  and  is  inter- 
mitted till  the  return  of  the  mouth  of  the  upper  helix  of  the 
screw  to  the  surface  of  the  reservoir  ?  But  though  we  sup- 
pose even  this  to  be  possible,  if  the  screw  were  suspended  at 
its  center  of  motion,  yet  we  can  scarcely  allow  it  to  be  so, 
when  the  screw  is  far  from  being  thus  suspended,  and  conse- 
quently far  from  that  equilibrium  which  is  alone  consistent 
with  an  easy  and  regular  motion.  That  this  must  be  the  case 
in  this  machine  will,  I  hope,  be  sufficiently  demonstrated 
from  the  annexed  diagram. 


A  B  represents  a  screw  covered  over ;  C  D  E  one  helix  or 
revolution  of  it ;  CD  the  side  that  is  to  ascend ;  E  D  the 
descending  side ;  the  point  D  the  middle ;  the  horizontal 
line  C  F  showing  how  much  of  the  helix  is  filled  with 
water,  viz.,  of  the  ascending  side,  from  C,  the  beginning  of 
the  helix,  to  D,  the  middle  of  it ;  and,  on  the  descending 
side,  from  D,  the  middle,  to  the  point  G,  where  the  hori- 
zontal line  cuts  the  helix.  Now  it  is  evident  that  this  latter 
part  D  G  is  nothing  near  so  large,  nor,  consequently,  so 


176  PERPETxruM  mobile; 

heavy  as  the  other  (ascending)  part  D  C.  And  thus  it  must 
be  in  all  the  other  revolutions  which,  as  they  are  either  more 
in  number  or  larger  in  diameter,  so  much  must  the  difficulty 
increase :  from  whence  it  appears  that  the  outward  stream 
must  be  of  force  sufficient  to  overcome  the  difference  of 
weight  in  the  ascending  side  of  the  screw,  which  can  scarcely 
be  effected  by  any  contrivance  of  this  sort ;  for  though  the 
water-wheel  might  be  made  larger,  yet  the  velocity  of  the 
motion  which  it  could  communicate  to  the  screw  would  be 
inversely  diminished. 

Most  of  the  arguments  I  here  make  use  of  are  to  be  found 
in  a  book  of  Dr.  Wilkins',  wherein  he  also  mentions  a  con- 
trivance to  multiply  the  same  stream  so  as  to  apply  it  several 
times  to  the  same  screw  ;*  but  even  with  this  addition  it  is 
impossible. 

I  send  this  letter  with  no  other  view  than  to  prevent  any 
persons  making  an  experiment  which  must  be  attended  with 
a  disappointment  so  expensive ;  nor,  indeed,  could  any  one 
speak  with  another  view  against  an  artist  who  seems  so  in- 
genious and  so  modest.  Your  Magazine,  Mr.  Urban,  bring- 
ing forth  to  public  view  these  efforts  of  invention,  must  be 
an  incentive  to  enquiries  of  this  nature,  which  may  be  of  the 
greatest  service  to  society.  I  cannot,  therefore,  better  con- 
clude this  letter  than  with  the  words  of  the  author  I  above 
mentioned : — "  However,  the  enquiry  after  it  (the  perpetual 
motion)  cannot  but  deserve  our  endeavours,  as  being  one  of 
the  most  noble  amongst  all  these  mechanic  subtelties.  And, 
as  in  the  fable  of  him  who  dug  the  vineyard  for  a  hidden 
treasure,  though  he  did  not  find  the  money,  yet  he  thereby 
made  the  ground  more  fruitful ;  so,  though  we  do  not  attain 
to  the  effecting  this  particular,  yet  our  searching  after  it  may 
discover  so  many  excellent  inventions  as  shall  abundantly 
recompence  the  labour  of  the  enquiry." 

I  am,  Sir,  &c., 

J.  S.f 


•  See  Chapter  I. 
t  Vol.  33,  1763,  p.  554. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELf-MOTlVE    POWER.  177 

VII. — ^Alleged  discovery  by  William  Ashman. 

Horsley,  Gloucestershire,  Nov.  12,  1800. 
Mr.  Urban, — ^I  beg  you  to  announce  that  Mr.  William 
Ashman,  hatter,  of  this  place,  has  this  day  been  with  me  anl 
asserted  that  he  has  discovered  the  perpetual  motion,  t.e., 
that  he  has  invented,  and  actually  possesses,  a  self-moving 
machine,  which,  when  once  set  going,  will  continue  so  till 
worn  out.  He  also  says  it  is  applicable  to  the  greatest 
objects  and  most  useful  purposes.  1  have  thought  it  my 
duty  to  communicate  his  assertion  to  Sir  Joseph  Banks. 

T.  D.  FOSBROOKE.* 


VIII. — Perpetual  Motion  by  Galvanic  agency. 

The  perpetual  motion,  so  long  sought  for  in  vain,  is  now 
sought  through  the  medium  of  galvanism.  A  French  physi- 
cian has  in  his  cabinet  two  galvanic  piles,  16  inches  high, 
which  alternately  attract  a  pretty  heavy  beam.  The  con- 
tinual oscillation  of  the  beam  gives  motion  to  a  pendulum, 
which  has  never  stopped  for  the  last  three  years.  The 
physician  is  now  endeavouring  to  give  to  this  movement  an 
isochronism  which  may  render  it  more  useful. f 


IX. — ^An  ancient  attempt  at  Perpetual  Motion. 

Mr.  Urban, — In  the  curious  preface  of  the  learned  Dr. 
Dee,  prefixed  to  his  Euclid,  is  the  following  remarkable 
passage  in  the  article  "  Trochilike."  If  any  of  your  ingenious 
correspondents  can  furnish  an  explanation  of  so  odd  a  piece 
of  mechanism,  it  will  afford  much  satisfaction  to 

A  Constant  Reader. 

*'  By  wheels,  strange  works  and  incredible  are  done,  as 
will  hereafter  appear.  A  wonderful  example  of  further 
possibility  and  present  commodity  was  seen  in  my  time,  in 
a  certain  instrument,  which  by  the  inventor  and  artificer 
(before)  was  sold  for  twenty  talents  of  gold,  and  then  had  (by 

•  Vol.  70,  part  2,  1800,  p.  1128. 
t    The  "Abstract  of -Foreign   Occurrences,"   in  the  •*  Gentleman's 
Magazine,"  vol.  87,  part  2,  1817,  p.  170.     The  same  in  vol.  88,  part  1, 
p.  63. 


178  PERPETUITM    mobile; 

misfortune)  received  some  injury  and  hurt.  And  one  Janellus 
of  Cremona  did  mend  the  same,  and  presented  it  unto  the 
Emperor  Charles  the  Fift.  Hieronymus  Cardanus  can  be 
my  witnesse,  that  therein  was  one  wheel  which  moved,  and 
that  in  such  rate,  that,  in  7000  years,  only  his  own  period 
should  be  finished.  A  thing  almost  incredible  :  but  how 
farre  I  keep  me  within  my  bounds,  very  many  men  (yet  alive) 
can  tel." 

Quere,  Does  not  the  doctor  intimate  this  machine  to  be 
very  ancient  by  the  mode  of  fixing  the  price  ?  Talents  have 
not,  I  believe,  been  used  in  reckoning  by  any  moderns.  I 
desire  likewise  to  be  informed  whether  he  refers  to  the  verbal 
or  written  testimony  of  Cardan  ?  If  the  latter,  in  what  part 
of  his  works  is  an  account  of  the  same  wonderful  automaton 
to  be  found  ?* 


X. — ^Dr.  Kenrick  and  J.  D.  Muller  make  application  for 
Patents. 

Dr.  Kenrickf  and  Mr.  John  Dietrick  Muller  waited  on  the 
Attorney-General :  the  first  with  reference  from  the  Court  of 
Chancery  on  a  petition  for  a  patent  for  the  exclusive  benefit 
of  a  discovery  of  a  mechanical  principle,  of  self-motion,  for 
the  construction  of  machines  which  acquire  a  constant  supply 
of  power  from  the  action  of  gravity  on  themselves  only ;  the 
latter,  on  a  like  reference,  for  the  invention  of  a  machine  or 
engine  constructed  on  self-moving  principles.  The  Attorney- 
General,  on  hearing  the  merits,  was  pleased  to  make  his 
report  in  favour  of  both  parties.  J 


XI. — ^A  Magnetic  Scheme  suggested. 

Mr.  Ukban, — How  frequently  do  we  find  ourselves  in  the 
situation  of  the  author  in  the  farce  of  the  "  Critic,"  who 
having  been  discovered  in  a  plagiarism,  is  driven  to  his  shifts 

*  Vol.  47, 1777,  p.  441. 

f  Probably  the  invention  alluded  to,  but  not  described,  in  his  lecture 
(Chapter  III.)  ;  and  elsewhere  called  **  The  Rotator." 

J  The  **  Historical  Chronicle,"  in  the  "  Gentleman's  Magazine," 
Tol.  49,  1779,  p.  269, 


OE,    SEARCH    FOB    SELF-MOTITE    POWEB.  179 

for  an  excuse,  and  at  length  observes,  "  that  all  he  has  to  say- 
about  it  is,  that  Shakspeare  and  he  had  the  same  ideas,  but 
that  Shakspeare  used  them  first"  (or  words  to  that  effect). 
In  some  such  light  does  a  rude  idea  of  mine  stand  just  now. 
About  two  years  ago,  or  not  quite  so  long,  I  mentioned  to  a 
philosophical  friend,  who  had  frequently  turned  his  attention 
towards  the  construction  of  a  machine  that  would  afford  the 
long  sought  for  desideration  of  perpetual  motion,  my  opinion 
as  to  what  I  conceived  must  be  selected  as  the  first  principle 
of  any  such  action.  I  considered  that  whatever  the  power 
may  be  which  shall  keep  up  an  action  of  that  kind,  would  be 
found  only  in  nature;  and  that,  however  art  may  assist 
towards  the  attainment  of  the  end,  it  would,  nevertheless,  be 
found  to  be  but  secondary.  I  told  him  the  power  which  I 
conceived  was  the  one  required;  and  he  (on  my  writing  to 
ask  if  he  remembered  the  conversation)  replies,  that  he  per- 
fectly recollects  it ;  and  that  the  magnet  was  that  to  which  I 
alluded.  Now,  Mr.  Urban,  I  am  very  far  indeed  from 
wishing  to  claim  anything  like  discovery ;  but  I  can  only  say, 
that  the  gentleman  in  whose  behalf  the  interest  of  Parliament 
is  about  to  be  sought,  "  has  had  the  same  idea  (so  far  as  the 
magnet  is  concerned)  with  me,  but  has  used  it  first."  Mine 
being,  however,  but  a  theory,  as  I  never  have  attempted  to 
construct  the  machine  I  had  in  my  mind,  I  should  justly 
merit  both  scorn  and  ridicule,  could  I  have  for  a  moment  the 
effrontery  of  putting  my  hypothesis  in  competition  with  the 
tried  apparatus  of  the  gentleman  in  question.  Nevertheless, 
1  may  venture  to  give  them  on  paper,  as  they  may,  perhaps, 
assist  in  a  small  degree  towards  exciting  the  attention  of 
more  philosophical  men  than  myself.  I  am  well  aware  of  the 
mechanical  difiiculties  that  will  present  themselves,  but  still 
do  think  they  may  be  overcome.  The  power  of  the  magnet 
we  know  to  be  both  attractive  and  repellent ;  and  as  this 
power  exists  independent  of  human  agency,  I  have  always 
looked  upon  it  as  the  most  likely  to  supply  the  wants  we  are 
anxious  to  remove.  I  therefore  suppose  that  a  wheel,  simple 
in  its  construction  and  like  to  a  water-wheel,  might  be  made 
to  move  on  a  diamond  or  agate  pivot,  having  its  weather 
boards  (I  know  not  if  that  be  the  technical  term  for  the  parts 
which  dip  into  the  stream  or  not)  armed  with  iron;  the 
magnet  then  to  be  applied  nearly  vertical  and  wheel  put  in 
motion,  when  it  appeared  to  me  that  the  attractive  power 

o 


180  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

acting  on  the  extremities  of  the  wheel,  on  one  side  of  each  of 
the  boards  and  in  an  opposite  power  to  the  other,  would 
continue  to  propel  the  wheel  with  a  rotatory  motion :  the 
first  impetus  of  course  must  be  given  by  hand.  Rude  and 
untried  as  my  plan  is,  I  cannot  but  think  it  practicable,  and 
trust  that  you  will  oblige  me  by  giving  it  a  place  in  yo\ir 
publication,  as  through  such  a  channel  of  scientific  informa- 
tion it  may,  perhaps,  assist  some  to  form  new  ideas,  or  to 
induce  others  to  correct  the  erroneous  one  (if  it  be  such)  of 

Yours,  &c., 

Alphabeticus.* 


XII. — Spence's  Motion  by  Magnetism. 

John  Spence,   an  ingenious  individual,    residing  at  Lin- 
lithgow, in  Scotland,  has  applied  the  magnetic  power  to  the 
production  of  a  perpetual  motion.     This  person  was  in  early 
life  apprenticed  to  a  shoemaker,  but  the  natural  bent  of  his 
genius  ^or  mechanics  overcame  every  obstacle  ;  he  got  to  be 
keeper  of  a  steam-engine  in  a  spinning  factory  at  Glasgow, 
and  after  two  years'  study  in  this  school,  retired  to  his  native 
place  to  pursue  the  shoemaking  for  bread ;  and  wheels,  levers, 
&c.,  for  the  gratification  of  his  own  taste.     The  perpetual 
motion  was  an  object  worthy  of  such  a  devotee,  and  we  find 
that  he  has  invented  a  piece  of  mechanism  which  is  doubly 
curious,  from  its  own  powers,  and  from  the  extraordinary  diffi- 
culties in  whose  despite  it  has  been  accomplished.     It  is  not 
easy  to  convey  an  idea  of  it  without  plates.     A  wooden  beam, 
poised  by  the  centre,  has  a  piece  of  steel  attached  to  one  end 
of  it,  which  is  alternately  drawn  up  by  a  piece  of  magnet 
placed  above  it,  and  down  by  another  placed  below  it :  as  the 
end  of  the   beam  approaches  the  magnet,   either  above  or 
below,  the  machine  interjects  a  non-conducting  substance, 
which  suspends  the  attraction  of  the  magnet  approached,  and 
allows  the  other  to  exert  its  powers.     Thus  the  end  of  the 
beam   continually   ascends   and   descends   betwixt   the   two 
magnets,  without  ever  coming  into  contact  with  either ;  the 
attractive  power  of  each  being  suspended  precisely  at  the 
moment  of  nearest  approach.     And  as  the  magnetic  attrac- 
tion is  a  permanently  operating  power,  there  appears  to  be  no 

•  Vol.  88,  part  1,  1818,  p.  391. 


OB,    SEARCH   FOR   SEIiF-MOTIVB   POWER.  181 

limit  to  the  continuance  of  the  motion,  but  the  endurance  of 
the  materials  of  the  machine.  The  first  machine  made  by 
Mr.  Spence  is  very  rude,  and  fashioned  by  his  own  hands, 
but  he  intends  applying  the  principle  to  the  motion  of  a 
time-piece.  We  trust  this  ingenious  man  will  meet  the 
encouragement  he  deserves — if  not  as  the  reward  of  his 
talents  and  perseverance,  at  least  for  the  benefit  of  the  com- 
munity, for  it  is  from  such  sources  that  great  national 
improvements  are  often  derived.* 


XIII. — ^A  Wheel  moved  by  Magnetic  influence. 

The  piece  of  mechanism  consists  of  only  one  small  hori- 
zontal wheel,  not  exceeding  3-4ths  of  an  inch  in  diameter, 
through  the  centre  of  which,  on  the  plane  of  the  wheel,  passes 
a  small  magnetic  bar,  projecting  about  3-4ths  of  an  inch 
beyond  the  circumference  of  the  wheel  on  the  one  side,  and 
about  3-8ths  of  an  inch  on  the  other  side.  These  projections 
are  called  the  north  and  south  poles.  The  axis  of  the  wheel 
is  of  course  perpendicular.  Its  operative  power  is  magnetism ; 
its  motion  (probably  owing  to  the  friction  inseparable  from 
the  long-continued  action  of  the  axis  in  its  sockets)  is 
somewhat  irregular ;  but  on  the  whole  it  is  a  curiosity  highly 
deserving  attention.  Owing  to  a  sudden  shock,  its  motion 
was  stopped  entirely  the  other  day,  but  we  have  learned  that 
it  has  been  restored.  About  two  years  ago  it  was  stopped  by 
some  unknown  cause,  but  after  a  short  pause  recovered  its 
motion  of  itself,  without  any  additional  impulse,  and  con- 
tinued its  revolutions  without  intermission.  In  a  room  at 
Mr.  Swan's,  in  Coppergate,  which  was  excessively  warm,  and 
crowded  with  company,  its  action  ceased  altogether,  after  first 
becoming  irregular  and  sickly.  Query. — Might  not  this 
simple  fact  lead  to  some  important  issue  on  the  question  of 
the  variation  of  the  compass  ?  This  we  only  know,  that  the 
magnetic  influence  was  deadened  by  excessive  heat,  and 
resuscitated  by  more  moderate  atmosphere. — Yorkshire 
Gazette,] 

•  Vol.  88,  part  2, 1818,  p.  156. 
t  Vol.  91  (July  to  December,  1821),  part  2,  p.  628. 


182  PERPETUXJM    MOBILE  ; 

In  the  "  Annual  Register,"  for  1774,  is  a  "  Description  of 
the  curious  Time-piece  in  Mr.  Cox*s  Museum :" — 

Among  other  great  works  now  introduced  at  Mr.  Cox's 
Museum  is  an  immense  barometer,  of  so  extraordinary  a  con- 
struction that  by  it  the  long  sought  for,  and  in  all  likelihood 
the  only  perpetual  motion  that  ever  will  be  discovered  is 
obtained.  The  constant  revolution  of  the  wheels  moving  in 
vertical,  horizontal,  and  other  directions,  is  not  only  physi- 
cally produced,  but  the  indication  of  time  from  an  union  of 
the  philosophic  with  the  mechanic  principles  is  effected. 
Upon  the  dial,  besides  a  minute  and  an  hour  hand,  is  another 
hand  dividing  the  minute  into  60  equal  parts.  These  hands 
are  motionless  till  affixed  to  the  primary  motion,  so  that  the 
motion  of  the  time-piece  (as  Mr.  Cox  in  his  descriptive 
inventory  judiciously  expresses  it)  is  originated,  continued, 
and  perfected,  by  the  philosophic  principle  through  which  it 
is  (solely)  actuated. 

The  encouragement  Mr.  Cox  has,  for  many  years,  given  to 
men  of  genius,  and  the  perseverance  with  which  he  has 
pursued  the  great  line  of  utility,  have  not  only  given  birth  to 
productions  that  have  astonished  all  Europe,  as  well  as  the 
eastern  world,  but  have  at  last  produced  the  wonderful 
machine  above  described.  Several  of  the  most  eminent 
philosophers  and  mathematicians  in  this  kingdom,  who  have 
examined  it  attentively,  are  of  opinion  that  it  will  lead  to 
farther  improvements  both  in  philosophy  and  mechanics  ; 
and  we  hear  that  Mr.  Cox  intends  to  devote  a  part  of  every 
week  to  the  gratification  of  such  gentlemen  in  the  scientific 
world  as  wish  to  be  acquainted  either  with  the  construction 
or  the  mode  of  operation,  the  principles  of  action  or  the 
masterly  execution  of  so  capital  a  performance.  This  article 
is,  we  are  informed,  one  of  the  prizes,  and  the  work  of  many 
years,  during  which  time  numberless  ineffectual  and  expen- 
sive trials  were  made,  which  perhaps  would  have  damped  any 
ardour  but  Mr.  Cox's,  and  probably  prevented  the  world  from 
ever  being  benefited  by  so  valuable  a  discovery. 

"  I  have  seen  and  examined  (says  Mr.  James  Ferguson,  in 
a  letter  dated  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  Jan.  28)  the  above-de- 
scribed clock,  which  is  kept  constantly  going,  by  the  rising 
and  falling  of  the  quicksilver  in  a  most  extraordinary 
barometer ;  and  there  is  no  danger  of  its  ever  failing  to  go ; 


OK,    SEABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  183 

for  there  is  always  such  a  quantity  of  moving  power  accumu- 
lated as  would  keep  the  clock  going  for  a  year,  even  if  the 
barometer  should  be  taken  quite  away  from  it.  And,  indeed, 
on  examining  the  whole  contrivance  and  construction,  I 
must  with  truth  say  that  it  is  the  most  ingenious  piece  of 
mechanism  I  ever  saw  in  my  life." 

For  a  further  account  of  this  extraordinary  machine,  see 
Mr.  Cox's  descriptive  inventory  of  his  museum.* 


Alleged  discovery  in  France,  by  M.  Dodemant : — 

A  machine,  capable  of  being  set  in  motion,  and  pro- 
ducing a  powerful  effect,  without  either  the  intervention 
of  any  combustible,  the  action  of  any  current  of  water  or  of 
air,  or  the  exertion  of  animal  strength,  but  possessing  within 
itself  the  inexhaustible  principle  of  motion,  would  doubtless 
prove  of  great  utility  to  mankind.  Such  is  that  of  which 
M.  Dodemant,  professor  of  mathematics  at  Lyons,  announces 
himself  the  inventor.  At  his  request,  the  prefect  has  directed 
two  persons — M.  Carron,  chief  engineer  of  the  department, 
and  M.  MoUer,  professor  of  natural  philosophy — to  examine 
this  machine.f 


The  following,  referring  to  Geiser's  imposition  and  Zam- 
boni's  Column,  is  extracted  from  an  article  headed  "The 
most  important  inventions  and  discoveries  of  our  times," 
which  in  a  note  we  are  informed  is  "  from  the  German  of 
M.  Poppe,  of  Tubingen  :" — 

Many  able  mechanicians  have  been  endeavouring  to  discover 
a  perpetutmi  mobile ;  but  many,  who  thought  themselves  on 
the  point  of  succeeding,  found  their  hopes  deceived,  and  the 
phantom  they  had  pursued  eluded  their  grasp.  The  clock  of 
M.  Geiser,  an  admirable  piece  of  mechanism,  seemed  to  have 
solved  this  great  problem  in  an  ingenious  and  simple  manner; 
but  it  deceived  only  for  a  time,  not  only  the  author  of  this 
essay,  but  many  of  the  most  excellent  mathematicians  ;  for 
in  this  clock  springs  were  concealed  in  the  most  artful  manner, 
which  were  wound  up  at  certain  times,  to  aid  the  apparent 
power,  which  was  not  able  alone  to  keep  the  machine  in 

♦  The  Annual  Register,  vol.  17,  1774,  p.  248. 
t  The  Monthly  Magazine,  vol.  22,  part  2,  1806,  p.  67. 


184  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

motion.  Above  a  year  ago,  the  author  of  this  article  dis- 
covered this  trick,  with  several  other  lovers  of  the  arts,  who 
had  joined  with  him  to  examine  the  machine  ;  and  he  soon 
after  made  his  discovery  public. 

The  column  of  Zamboni,  and  the  clock  connected  with  it, 
by  that  artist,  at  Verona,  which  have  now  gone,  without 
interruption,  for  above  four  years,  as  well  as  that  of  Ramis, 
at  Munich  (called  the  electric  pendulum  clock),  are  therefore, 
perhaps,  the  hest perpetuum  mobile  that  we  yet  have.  By  this 
name  we  of  course  understand  a  machine  which  is  able  con- 
stantly to  renew  the  cause  of  its  motion  by  its  own  mechanism, 
and  whose  moving  principle  preserves  its  action  without 
interruption,  and  without  any  new  impulse,  till  it  is  stopped 
either  by  the  wear  of  the  machine  or  by  violence.  The 
invention  of  a  machine  possessed  of  this  property  is  indeed 
very  difficult,  but  not  impossible,  as  Kastner  Langsdorff  and 
other  mathematicians  have  demonstrated.* 


An  imposition  exposed   in  a  letter  from  Mr.  Thomas  Gill, 
Chairman  of  the  Committee  of  Mechanics  in  the  Society  for 
the  Encouragement  of  Arts,  &c.  &c.,  of  London,   to   Prof. 
Thomson,  on  a  pretended  Patent  Self-moving  Engine  : — 
No.  125,  Strand,  London,  Oct.  4,  1820. 

Sib, — My  attention  has  lately  been  directed  to  a  gross 
imposition  upon  the  public  in  a  pretended  self-moving  engine, 
which  is  now  exhibiting  in  this  metropolis,  and  which  I 
think  it  highly  proper  to  expose,  and  thereby,  as  far  as  lies 
in  my  power,  prevent  the  delusion  from  being  continued. 

It  is  announced  in  the  following  handbill : — 

"  The  newly-discovered  patent  self-existing  engine  for 
propelling  ships  at  sea,  carriages  on  the  road,  and  all  kinds 
of  machinery,  without  the  aid  of  horse,  steam,  water,  or 
other  power  now  in  use.  To  be  seen  at  work  every  day, 
Sundays  excepted,  from  ten  in  the  morning  till  six  at  night, 
at  32,  Burlington  Arcade,  Piccadilly,  Admittance,  Two 
Shillings. 

"  N.B. — Gentlemen  intending  to  have  their  machinery 
driven  by  the  above  power  are  desired  to  apply  as  above.  If 
by  letter,  post-paid, 

*  The  New  Moiv.hly  Magazine,  vol.  12,  part  2  (July  to  December, 
1819),  p.  162. 


OR,    SEABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTITE    POWER.  185 

1  found  the  machine  to  consist  of  a  light  brass  wheel,  about 
two  feet  in  diameter,  turning  upon  an  horizontal  axis,  which 
is  supported  at  each  end  in  square  blocks  upon  the  tops  of 
two  brass  columns,  which  are  affixed  to  a  mahogany  table 
mounted  upon  a  thick  pillar  of  the  same  wood,  with  feet  and 
rolling  castors,  so  that  it  may  be  moved  about,  and  thereby 
show  that  it  has  no  communication  through  the  floor  of  the 
room  it  is  exhibited  in.  The  thickness  of  the  table  is  about 
an  inch  and  a  half,  and  the  pillar  is  about  6  inches  in 
diameter.  Around  the  periphery  of  the  wheel  are  fixed  at 
equal  distances,  by  screws,  a  number  of  small  cylindrical 
rods  or  bars  of  metal,  which  are  placed  parallel  to  the  axis  of 
the  wheel ;  and  at  one  end  of  the  frame  surrounding  the 
wheel  (and  which  frame  is  besides  supported  on  two 
other  brass  columns)  is  a  brass  pillar,  which  has  an  arm 
or  bracket,  on  which  is  fixed,  near  the  periphery  of  the 
wheel,  a  ball,  which  the  inventor  pretends  is  formed  of  a 
new  combination  of  metals,  the  composition  of  which,  he 
says,  possesses  a  new  species  of  attraction,  which  is  not 
magnetism,  for  the  metal  bars  on  the  periphery  of  the 
wheel  so  as  to  draw  each  of  them  in  succession  continually 
towards  it ;  but  as  this  attraction  takes  place  equally  above 
and  below  the  ball,  he  says  that  he  cuts  it  off  below  by 
means  of  a  plate  of  a  different  composition  of  metals,  which 
is  placed  beneath  the  ball,  and  thus  he  pretends  that  the 
wheel  is  continually  turned  round  by  this  new  attempt  at 
reviving  the  long  since  exploded  doctrine  of  attraction  and 
repulsion,  and  with  considerable  force,  and  says  that  he  has 
in  the  country  a  machine  of  two  horses'  power.  On  being 
asked  if  he  had  any  pieces  of  the  compound  metals  with  him 
besides  those  on  the  machine,  he  said  he  had  not,  and  would 
not  suffer  any  person  to  possess  them,  lest  they  should  take 
them  to  pieces,  and  thereby  discover  their  composition.  On 
being  questioned  as  to  his  patfent,  he  said  that  in  fact  he  had 
none,  having  merely  entered  a  caveat  to  prevent  any  persons 
from  taking  out  a  patent  for  a  similar  machine  without  his 
being  informed  thereof.  So  much,  then,  for  his  pretended 
patent;  and  I  verily  believe  that  his  new-invented  power 
rests  on  no  better  a  foundation,  and  that,  in  fact,  his  wheel  is 
turned  by  spring  mounted  on  a  barrel,  as  usual  in  spring 
clocks  and  other  pieces  of  mechanism,  and  which  is  concealed 
either  in  the  substance  of  the  table  itself  or  in  the  thic 


186  PEEPETXJUM  mobile; 

pillar  which  supports  it,  the  barrel  having  a  ring  of  teeth 
around  it,  working  in  a  pinion  affixed  upon  the  lower  end  of 
an  upright  axis  concealed  in  one  of  the  brass  columns  that 
support  the  horizontal  axis  of  the  wheel,  and  having  at  its 
upper  end  another  pinion  which  works  into  a  small  toothed 
contrate  wheel  fixed  on  the  end  of  the  horizontal  axis,  but 
also  concealed  in  the  brass  block  on  the  top  of  the  column, 
and  in  another  pillar  which  is  screwed  upon  the  top  of  the* 
block,  and  is  quite  large  enough  to  contain  it,  and  thus  gives 
motion  to  the  wheel ;  and,  indeed,  the  artifice  is  but  very 
clumsily  concealed.  I  should  have  added  that  the  brass 
pillar  last  mentioned  supports  an  upright  axis  having  a  pinion 
at  its  lower  end,  which  is  driven  by  a  contrate  wheel  on  the 
horizontal  axis  of  the  wheel,  and  which  upright  axis  has  at 
the  top  of  it  a  fly  with  wings  to  regulate  the  motion  of  the 
machine,  as  in  other  spring  movements. 

This  barefaced  imposition  reminds  me  of  another  which 
was  practised  upon  the  public  several  years  since,  and  was 
detected,  and  very  properly  exposed,  by  my  friend  Mr.  J.  T. 
Hawkins,  which  put  an  end  to  the  trick :  this  consisted  of 
what  was  said  to  be  a  self-moving  pendulum,  and  beneath 
the  bottle  of  it  a  ball  was  placed,  out  of  which,  as  the 
exhibitor  pretended,  an  elastic  fluid  was  continually  proceed- 
ing, which  gave  an  impulse  to  the  ball  as  it  passed  over  it. 
Mr.  Hawkins,  however,  foimd  that  the  impulse  was,  in  fact, 
given  to  the  pendulum  at  its  upper  end ;  and  that  the  axis  on 
which  it  hung  communicated  with  another  pendulum  which 
was  kept  in  motion  by  a  weight  or  other  maintaining  power ; 
for  in  like  manner  the  real  cause  of  the  wheel's  motion  in 
this  new  imposition  is  concealed,  and  the  attention  of  the 
spectator  is  directed  to  another  pretended  first  mover,  and 
which  is  besides  attended  with  the  additional  advantage  of 
afibrding  him  matter  for  wonder,  which  constitutes  the  chief 
pleasure  of  the  multitude,  and  contributes  greatly  to  the 
profit  of  the  exhibition. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

Thomas  Gill.* 

•  Annals  of  Philosophy.  By  Thomas  Thomson,  M.D.  8vo.  Vol.  16, 
1820,  p.  373. 

Mr.  G.,  Editor  of  the  Technical  Repository,  referred  to  in  Chapter  VI II. 
of  the  present  work. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  187 

In  the  notice  given  of  "  Lectures  delivered  in  the  Theatre 
of  the  Royal  Institution,"  the  following  occurs,  in  mentioning 
"  Dr.  Young*  s  Lectures  on  Mechanics :" — 

The  doctrines  of  rotatory  power  and  preponderance  were 
considered  after  those  of  equilibrium  ;  the  apparatus  intended 
for  illustrating  the  effects  of  rotatory  power  was  not  com- 
pleted ;  but  an  experiment  was  made,  in  a  subsequent  lecture, 
in  confirmation  of  the  propositions  respecting  the  most 
advantageous  disposition  of  power  in  machines.  Six  equal 
weights  were  attached  to  as  many  threads,  and  each  pair  of 
threads  was  passed  in  opposite  directions  round  the  different 
portions  of  three  pullies.  The  first  pulley  was  so  formed 
that  its  larger  portion  was  to  its  smaller  as  3  to  2;  the  second 
was  in  the  ratio  of  6  to  2,  and  the  third  as  4  to  1 ; 
and  the  three  weights,  of  which  the  threads  were  coiled 
round  the  smaller  part  of  each  pulley,  being  suffered  to  rise 
at  the  same  instant,  the  middle  weight  rose  evidently  much 
faster  than  either  of  the  others.  Dr.  Young,  however, 
remarked  that  the  greatest  velocity  would  not  in  all  cases  be 
practically  desirable,  on  account  of  the  injury  that  the 
machinery  would  sustain  from  the  shock  in  stopping  it.  A 
model  of  a  wheel  with  moveable  weights,  for  producing 
perpetual  motion,  was  employed  for  showing  the  fallacy  of  all 
projects  of  this  kind,  and  it  was  observed  that  a  general 
demonstration  of  its  insufficiency  might  be  deduced  from  the 
properties  of  the  centre  of  gravity.* 


In  "  (Euvres  Philosophiques  "  of  M.  's  Gravesande,  we  find 
his  letter  to  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  already  given  (Chapter  II.), 
and  the  following — 

Remarks  touching  Perpetual  Motion, 

About  eight  months  ago,  by  order  of  His  Serene  High- 
ness the  Landgrave  of  Hesse,  I  was  called  upon  to  examine 
the  effects  of  a  machine  at  Cassel,  which  the  inventor 
(Orffyreus)  professed  to  be  a  perpetual  motion.  He  care- 
fully hid  its   interior,   requiring   a   certain   sum   when   the 

♦  Journals  of  the  Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  1,  8vo., 
1802,  p.  105. 


188  PERFETUUM    MOBILE*, 

machine  should  have  been  first  fully  examined  and  recognised 
by  mathematicians  to  be,  what  in  mechanics  is  called  a 
perpetual  motion.  I  was  so  forcibly  struck  by  what  I  saw 
and  what  1  heard  of  it,  as  to  be  unable  to  call  it  in  question. 
I  was  obliged  to  look  on  the  machine  as  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  inventions  in  mechanics  that  I  had  ever  known,  and 
had  only  to  consider  the  truth  of  the  effects  before  me. 
I  wrote  to  Mr.  Newton  all  I  had  observed  about  it,  which 
having  been  printed,  fault  has  been  found  with  what  I 
advance,  saying  : — "  that  I  do  not  believe  perpetual  motion  to 
be  a  contradiction ;" — "  that  the  demonstrations  given  on  its 
impossibility  do  not  appear  to  me  as  applicable  to  all 
machines  ;" — and,  lastly,  "  that  I  find  it  probable  that  the 
machine  at  Cassel  may  be  a  perpetual  motion."  All  the 
difficulty  turns  on  the  first  of  these  remarks ;  if  that  were 
proved,  the  remaining  ones  would  not  embarrass  me  much ; 
and  has,  no  doubt,  been  found  too  bold  to  venture  on  without 
proof.  In  this  I  quite  agree,  and  I  should  not  have 
committed  the  fault  had  my  letter  been  written  for  the  public. 
I  was  so  little  inclined  to  advance  a  proposition  without 
proof,  that  I  have  never  yet  declared  what  I  thought  on 
perpetual  motion,  foreseeing  the  judgment  that  all  mathema- 
ticians must  pass  on  any  one  who  should  turn  aside  from  the 
generally  received  opinions.  What  I  considered  I  owed  to 
truth,  after  having  seen  the  machine  at  Cassel,  induced  me  to 
give  Mr.  Newton  my  opinion  on  it,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
say  what  I  thought  of  the  proofs  of  the  impossibility  of 
perpetual  motion.  I  must  now  justify  myself  before  the 
public. 

We  must,  however,  first  establish  the  state  of  the  question. 
As  no  foreign  agent  must  be  employed,  it  will  be  seen  that  a 
clock,  in  whatever  way  woimd  up,  would  not  be  perpetual 
motion.  It  may  be  what  mathematicians  have  taught  under 
the  term  of  collision,  on  the  power  of  which  they  are  divided 
in  opinion.  All  agree  that  the  force  of  collision  is  pro- 
portionate to  the  mass.  We  must  admit  the  possibility 
of  perpetual  motion  in  all  machines  which  would  have  the 
principle  of  their  movement  in  the  collision  of  bodies.  The 
impossibility  of  perpetual  motion  has  not  been  shown  in  all 
possible  cases,  affected  by  collision.  And  the  laws  of  nature 
are  not  yet  well  enough  known  to  allow  our  drawing  a 
conclusion  that  perpetual  motion  is  contrary  to  these  laws. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  189 

As  it  is  possible  for  a  body  to  rise  quicker  than  it  descends, 
on  this  I  found  my  proof  of  the  possibility  of  perpetual 
motion. 

Conceive  a  body  falling  from  one  foot  high,  losing  all  its 
movement  by  the  shock  ;  suppose  it  to  fall  four  times  simi- 
larly, it  would  have  fallen  from  the  height  of  four  feet,  and  the 
four  shocks  would  be  equal  to  the  force  that  the  gravity  com- 
mimicated  to  the  body  during  the  four  moments  of  its  fall. 
But  it  is  known  that  the  body  could  mount  in  two  of  these 
moments  to  the  height  of  four  feet ;  consequently,  the  force  of 
two  of  these  four  shocks  suffices  to  make  it  rise,  and  the  two 
other  shocks  may  be  employed  to  move  a  machine :  so  the 
movement  wbuld  be  continued  perpetually  by  the  falls  reite- 
rated of  the  same  body,  which  at  each  revolution  would  gain 
the  force  of  two  shocks.  The  gain  of  the  force  would  be 
greater  at  each  revolution,  if  the  number  of  shocks  were 
increased  in  the  descent.  Thus,  there  is  in  nature  an 
augmentation  of  strength,  which  is  sufficient  to  support  the 
opinion  that  perpetual  motion  is  not  a  contradiction — ^nay, 
that  it  is  even  possible. 

This  possibility  will  appear  still  clearer,  if  attention  is  paid, 
to  the  property  of  springs,  that  they  reboimd  with  the  same 
force  that  boimd  them.  This  matter  was  disputed  between 
MM.  Leibnitz  and  Papin,  in  the  "  Actes  de  Leipsic," 
respecting  whether  the  force  of  a  body  was  proportionate 
to  its  speed ;  if  admitted,  Leibnitz  considered  perpetual 
motion  would  be  the  consequence ;  Papin  admitted  the 
validity  of  the  consequence,  but  doubted  the  proposition. 

The  only  means  of  replying  to  the  arguments  brought 
forward  on  the  possibility  of  perpetual  motion,  is  to  deny 
with  M.  Leibnitz  the  principle  on  which  they  are  founded. 

I  should  not  be  able  to  persuade  myself  that  it  is  a  con- 
tradiction to  construct  a  machine  which  would  have  in  itself 
the  principle  of  the  augmentation  of  power,  in  consequence 
of  the  laws  of  nature.  These  laws  are  so  little  known  to  us, 
and  there  is  little  appearance  that  they  will  ever  be 
discovered  sufficiently  for  us  to  arrive  at  such  a  conclusion. 
To  me  it  seems,  that  these  laws,  on  the  contrary,  ought 
to  make  us  look  upon  such  a  machine  as  very  possible, 
although  it  may  never  be  accomplished  by  human  art. 

The  question  of  the  possibility  or  impossibility  of  perpetual 
motion,  then,  seems  to  me  of  little  consequence ;  but  it  is 


190  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

desirable  that  the  strong  persuasion  that  mathematicians  have 
regarding  its  impossibility  should  not  prevent  their  paying 
serious  attention  to  such  a  machine  as  the  astonishing  wheel 
of  Cassel ;  a  wheel  having  the  principle  of  movement  in- 
ternal, and  which  is  moved  by  the  slightest  effort,  turning 
either  way  without  any  necessity  to  reverse  the  moving  power ; 
lastly,  after  making  some  millions  of  surprisingly  rapid 
turns,  continues  its  motion  until  stopped  by  a  strong  effort  of 
the  arm.  It'  appears  to  me  that  such  a  machine  merits  some 
praise,  even  should  it  not  satisfy  all  its  inventor's  representa- 
tions. If  it  is  perpetual  motion,  he  deserves  the  recompense 
he  asks ;  and  if  not,  the  public  may  here  discover  a  beautiful 
invention.* 

[For  full  details,  see  Appendix  F.] 


The  resolution  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  in 
Paris  not  to  entertain  communications  relating  to  Perpetual 
Motion,  was  passed  in  1775.     They  say  : — 

This  year  the  Academy  has  passed  the  resolution  not 
to  examine  any  solution  of  problems  on  the  following  sub- 
jects : — 

The  duplication  of  the  cube,  the  trisection  of  the  angle, 
the  quadrature  of  the  circle,  or  any  machine  announced 
as  showing  perpetual  motion. 

We  believe  ourselves  bound  to  account  for  the  motives 
which  have  led  to  this  determination. 

***** 

The  construction  of  a  perpetual  motion  is  absolutely 
impossible.  If  even  friction  and  resistance  from  the  middle 
did  not  eventually  destroy  the  effect  of  the  first  motive 
power,  that  power  cannot  produce  an  effect  equal  to 
its  cause ;  if,  then,  it  is  desired  that  the  effect  of  a  complete 
power  should  act  continually,  the  effect  must  be  infinitely 
small  in  a  given  time.  If  the  friction  and  resistance  be 
subtracted,  the  first  motion  given  to  a  body  will  always 
continue ;  but  it  will  not  act  in  regard  to  other  bodies, 
and  the  only  perpetual  motion  possible  in  this  hypothesis 

•  (Euvres  Philosophiques  et  Mathematiques  de Mr.  G.  J,  *s  Gravesande. 
AiViSlerdam,  1774.     2  vols.,  4to.     (Vol  1,  p.  305.) 


OR,    SEABCH    FOB   SBLF-MOTITE   POWEB.  191 

(which  could  not  exist  in  nature)  would  he  ahsolutely  useless 
in  carrying  out  the  ohject  proposed  by  the  constructors 
of  these  perpetual  motion  machines.  The  drawback  to  these 
Iresearches  is  their  being  exceedingly  expensive,  and  has 
ruined  more  than  one  family ;  often  mechanics,  who  could 
have  rendered  great  services  to  the  public,  have  wasted  their 
means,  time,  and  genius. 

Such  are  the  principal  motives  that  have  dictated  tie 
determination  of  the  Academy.  In  stating  that  they  will  not 
occupy  themselves  any  longer  with  these  subjects,  they  only 
declare  their  opinion  of  the  complete  uselessness  of  the  labour 
of  those  who  so  occupy  themselves.  It  has  often  been  said, 
that  in  seeking  to  solve  chimerical  problems,  many  useful 
truths  have  been  found;  an  opinion  which  originated  in 
a  time  when  the  proper  method  of  discovering  the  truth  was 
unknown,  which  in  the  present  day  is  well  known.  It  is  more 
than  probable  that  the  right  manner  of  discovering  these 
truths  is  to  search  for  them.  But  the  quadrature  of  the 
circle  is  the  only  rejected  problem  of  the  Academy  which 
could  give  rise  to  any  useful  research ;  and,  if  a  geometrician 
should  find  it  out,  the  determination  of  the  Academy  would 
only  enhance  his  merit,  as  it  would  show  the  opinion  that 
geometricians  have  of  the  difficulty,  not  to  say  insolubility,  of 
the  problem.* 


*  Histoire  de  l*Acad^mie  Koyale  des  Sciences,  1775.  Paris,  1778.  4to* 
Pp.  61-66. 


192  PERPETUUM  mobile; 


CHAPTER  VII. 

DEFINITIONS    AND    DE8CBIPTI0NS     OF    PERPETUAL   MOTION, 
FROM    ENCYCLOP-EDIAB   AND    DICTIONARIES. 

Great  similarity  in  style  and  matter  will  be  observed  in  each 
of  these  articles,  and  the  paucity  of  information  they  generally 
afford  is  evidence  how  little  has  hitherto  been  known  respecting 
what  had  been  done  and  written  on  the  subject.  All  speak  in 
the  most  vague  and  general  terms  of  the  amount  of  attention 
devoted  to  its  pursuit, — all  claim  to  demonstrate  its  impossi- 
bility, either  on  the  authority  of  M.  de  la  Hire,  or  on  one  or 
two  examples.  Well  has  M.  's  Gravesande  observed  on  the  in- 
sufficiency of  arguments  against  the  possibility  of  a  perpetual 
motion  to  meet  all  known,  much  less  all  possible,  cases.  A 
false  argument,  or  a  weak  one,  is  worse  than  useless,  for  the 
opinionated  are  only  thereby  confirmed  in  erroneous  theories. 

l.-^In  the  edition  of  Rees'  Cyclopaedia  for  1819,  we 
read : — 

Perpetual  Motion,  in  mechanics,  a  motion  which  is  sup- 
plied and  renewed  from  itself  without  any  external  cause  ;  or 
it  is  an  iminterrupted  communication  of  the  same  degree  of 
motion  from  one  part  of  matter  to  another,  in  a  circle  or 
other  curve  returning  into  itself,  so  that  the  same  momentum 
still  returns  imdiminished  upon  the  first  mover. 

This  celebrated  problem  of  a  perpetual  motion  consists  in 
the  inventing  of  a  machine  which  has  the  principle  of  its 
motion  within  itself.  M.  de  la  Hire  has  demonstrated  the 
impossibility  of  any  such  machine,  and  finds  that  it  amounts 
to  this,  viz.,  to  find  a  body  which  is  both  heavier  and  lighter 
at  the  same  time ;  or  to  find  a  body  which  is  heavier  than 
itself. 

To  find  a  perpetual  motion,  or  to  construct  aii  engine,  &c., 
which  shall  have  such  a  motion,  is  a  famous  problem  that  has 


OE,    SEARCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB.  193 

employed  the  mathematicians  of  two  thousand  years  ;  though 
none,  perhaps,  have  prosecuted  it  with  attention  and  earnest- 
ness equal  to  those  of  the  present  age. 

Infinite  are  the  schemes,  designs,  plans,  engines,  wheels, 
&c.,  to  which  this  longed-for  perpetual  motion  has  given 
birth :  it  were  as  endless  as  impertinent  to  give  a  detail  of 
them  all. 

In  effect,  there  seems  but  little  in  nature  to  countenance 
all  this  assiduity  and  expectation:  among  all  the  laws  of 
matter  and  motion,  we  know  of  none  yet  which  seems  to 
furnish  any  principle  or  foundation  for  such  an  effect. 

Action  and  re-action  are  allowed  to  be  ever  equal,  and 
a  body  which  gives  any  quantity  of  motion  to  another  always 
loses  just  so  much  of  its  own ;  but,  under  the  present  state 
of  things,  the  resistance  of  the  air,  the  friction  of  the  parts  of 
machines,  &c.,  do  necessarily  retard  every  motion. 

To  keep  the  motion  constant,  therefore,  either : 

First,  there  must  be  a  supply  from  some  foreign  cause, 
which  in  a  perpetual  motion  is  excluded  ; 

Or,  secondly,  all  resistance  from  the  friction  of  the  parts 
of  matter  must  be  removed,  which  necessarily  implies  a 
change  in  the  nature  of  things.* 

For,  by  the  second  law  of  nature,  the  changes  made  in  the 
motions  of  bodies  are  always  proportional  to  the  impressed 
moving  force,  and  are  produced  in  the  same  direction  with  it ; 
no  motion,  then,  can  be  communicated  to  any  engine,  greater 
than  that  of  the  first  force  impressed. 

But,  on  our  earth,  all  motion  is  performed  in  a  resisting 
medium,  and  must,  therefore,  of  necessity  be  retarded ;  con- 
sequently, a  considerable  quantity  of  its  motion  will  be  spent 
on  the  medium. 

Nor  is  there  any  engine  or  machine  in  which  all  friction 
can  be  avoided ;  there  being  in  nature  no  such  thing  as 
exact  smoothness  or  perfect  congruity, — the  manner  of  the 
cohesion  of  the  parts  of  bodies,  the  small  proportion  the 
solid  matter  bears  to  the  vacmties  between  them,  and  the 
nature  of  those  constituent  particles,  not  admitting  it.  This 
friction,  therefore,  will  also  in  time  sensibly  diminish  the 
impressed  or  communicated  force ;  so  that  a  perpetual  motion 

*  So  far,  this  is  a  mere  repetition  from  Diderot  and  D'Alembert's 
French  Encyclopaedia,  1765,  folio. 


194  PEBPETuiTM  mobile; 

can  never  follow,  unless  the  communicated  force  be  so  much 
greater  than  the  generating  force  as  to  recompense  the 
diminution  made  therein  by  all  these  causes:  but  nil  dat 
quod  non  hahet ;  and  the  generating  force  cannot  communi- 
cate a  greater  degree  of  motion  than  it  hath  itself. 

Or,  thirdly  and  lastly,  there  must  be  some  method  of 
gaining  a  force  equivalent  to  what  is  lost,  by  the  artful  dis- 
position and  combination  of  mechanic  powers ;  to  which  last 
point,  then,  all  endeavours  are  to  be  directed :  but  how,  or 
by  what  means,  such  force  should  be  gained,  is  still  a  mystery. 

The  multiplication  of  powers  or  forces,  it  is  certain,  avails 
nought ;  for  what  is  gained  in  power  is  still  lost  in  time,  so 
that  the  quantity  of  motion  still  remains  the  same.  This  is 
an  inviolable  law  of  nature,  by  which  nothing  is  left  to  art, 
but  the  choice  of  the  several  combinations  that  may  produce 
the  same  effect. 

Although  it  is  allowed  that,  by  the  resolutions  of  force, 
there  is  a  gain  or  increase  of  the  absolute  quantity  of  force, 
as  the  two  forces  in  the  sides  of  the  parallelogram  taken 
together  exceed  the  force  in  the  diagonal  which  is  resolved 
into  them,  yet  you  cannot  proceed  resolving  motion  in  infinitum 
by  any  machine  whatsoever;  but  those  you  have  resolved 
must  be  again  compounded,  in  order  to  make  a  continual 
movement,  and  the  gain  obtained  by  the  resolution  will  be 
lost  again  by  the  composition.  In  like  manner,  if  you  sup- 
pose two  bodies  to  be  perfectly  elastic,  and  that  the  lesser 
body  strikes  the  other  at  rest,  there  will  be  an  increase  of  the 
absolute  quantity  of  force,  because  the  striking  body  will  be 
reflected ;  but  if  you  suppose  them  both  to  turn  roimd  any 
centre,  after  the  stroke,  so  as  to  meet  again,  this  increase  of 
force  will  be  lost,  and  their  motion  will  be  reduced  to  its  first 
quantity.  Such  a  gain,  therefore,  of  force,  as  must  be  after- 
wards lost  in  the  actions  of  the  bodies,  can  never  produce  a 
perpetual  movement.  There  are  various  ways,  besides  these, 
by  which  absolute  force  may  be  gained ;  but  since  there  is 
always  an  equal  gain  in  opposite  directions,  and  no  increase 
obtained  in  the  same  direction,  in  the  circle  of  actions  neces- 
sary to  make  a  perpetual  movement  this  gain  must  be 
presently  lost,  and  not  serve  for  the  necessary  expense  of 
force  employed  in  overcoming  friction  and  the  resistance  of 
the  medium.  We  may  observe,  therefore,  that,  though  it 
could  be  shewn  that  in  an  infinite  nimiber  of  bodies,  or  in  an 


OR,    SEARCH   FOB   SEXF-MOTIYB   POWEB. 


195 


infinite  machine,  there  could  be  a  gain  of  force  for  ever,  and 
a  motion  continued  to  infinity,  it  does  not  follow  that  a  per- 
petual movement  can  be  made.  That  which  was  proposed 
by  M.  Leibnitz,  in  August,  1690,  in  the  "  Leipsic  Acts,"  as 
a  consequence  of  the  common  estimation  of  the  forces  of 
bodies  in  motion,  is  of  this  kind,  and,  for  this  and  other 
reasons,  ought  to  be  rejected. 

The  possibility  of  a  perpetual  motion  has  been  urged  from 
the  following  specious  argument : — ^Let  the  height  A  B  be 

(Fig.  11,  pi.  34.) 
^^^^  A 


^Ap , 

■<dJ -u- 



E 

^                                 1 

^S     K.V  7 

divided  into  four  equal  parts,  A  C,  C  D,  D  E,  E  B.  Suppose 
the  body  A  to  acquire,  by  the  descent  A  C,  a  velocity  as  1, 
and  this  motion,  by  any  contrivance,  to  be  transmitted  to  an 
equal  body  B ;  then  let  the  body  A,  by  an  equal  descent  C  D, 
acquire  another  degree  of  motion  as  1,  to  be  transmitted 
likewise  to  the  same  body  B,  which  in  this  manner  is  sup- 
posed to  acquire  a  motion  as  2,  that  is  sufficient  to  carry  it 
upwards  from  B  to  A ;  and  because  there  yet  remain  the 
motions  which  A  acquires  by  the  descents  D  E  and  E  B,  that 
may  be  sufficient  to  keep  an  engine  in  motion,  while  B  and  A 
ascend  and  descend  by  turns,  it  is  hence  concluded  that  a 
sufficient  gain  of  force  may  be  obtained  in  this  manner,  so  as 
to  produce  a  perpetual  movement.  But  it  should  be  con- 
sidered that  two  equal  successive  impulses,  acting  upon  the 
same  body,  will  not  produce  a  motion  in  it  double  of  that 
which  would  be  generated  by  the  first  impulse ;  because  the 


196  PERPETUTTM    MOBILE; 

second  impulse  has  necessarily  a  less  effect  upon  the  body 
which  is  already  in  motion  than  the  first  impulse  which  acted 
upon  it  while  at  rest.  In  like  manner,  if  there  is  a  third  and 
fourth  impulse,  the  third  will  have  less  effect  than  the  second, 
and  the  fourth  less  than  the  third.  Hence  it  appears  that  a 
motion  as  2,  in  the  preceding  case,  cannot  be  produced  in  B 
by  the  two  successive  impulses  transmitted  from  A,  each  of 
which  is  as  1. — Maclaurin's  View,  &c.,  book  ii.,  c.  3.  (See 
Orffyreus's  Wheel.)  * 


In  the  same  Cyclopaedia  appears  the  following  accoimt  of 
Orffyreus's  celebrated  Wheel : — 

Orfiyreus's  Wheel,  in  mechanics,  is  a  machine  so  called 
from  its  inventor,  which  he  imagined  to  be  a  perpetual 
motion.  This  machine,  according  to  the  accoimt  given  of  it 
by  M.  's  Gravesande,  in  his  "  (Euvres  Philosophiques,"  pub- 
lished by  Allamand,  Amst.,  1774,  consisted  of  a  large  circular 
wheel,  or  rather  drum,  twelve  feet  in  diameter  and  fourteen 
inches  in  depth,  and  very  light,  as  it  was  formed  of  an 
assemblage  of  deals,  the  intervals  between  which  were 
covered  with  waxed  cloth,  in  order  to  conceal  the  interior 
parts  of  it.  The  two  extremities  of  an  iron  axis,  on  which  it 
turned,  rested  on  two  supports.  On  giving  the  wheel  a 
slight  impulse  in  either  direction,  its  motion  was  gradually 
accelerated  ;  so  that  after  two  or  three  revolutions  it  acquired 
so  great  a  velocity  as  to  make  twenty-five  or  twenty-six  turns 
in  a  minute.  This  rapid  motion  it  actually  preserved  during 
the  space  of  two  months,  in  the  chamber  of  the  Landgrave 
of  Hesse,  the  door  of  which  was  kept  locked,  and  sealed  with 
the  Landgrave's  own  seal.  At  the  end  of  that  time  it 
was  stopped,  to  prevent  the  wear  of  the  materials.  The 
professor,  who  had  been  an  eye-witness  to  these  circum- 
stances, examined  all  the  external  parts  of  it,  and  was 
convinced  that  there  could  not  be  any  communication  between 
it  and  any  neighbouring  room.  Orffyreus,  however,  was  so 
incensed,  that  he  broke  the  machine  in  pieces,  and  wrote  on 
the  wall,  that  it  was  the  impertinent  curiosity  of  Professor 
's  Gravesande  which  made  him  take  this  step.     The  Prince 

•  The  Cyclopaedia;  or,  Universal  Dictionary  of  Arts,  Sciences,  and 
Literature.     By  Abraham  Rees,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  &c.    Vol.  25.     1819. 

The  first  part  of  this  article  has  incorporated  in  it  that  on  "  Motion, 
Perpetual,"  in  Hatton's  Math.  Diet,  4to.,  1795. 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  197 

of  Hesse,  who  had  seen  the  interior  parts  of  this  wheel,  being 
asked  by  's  Gravesande,  whether,  after  it  had  been  in  motion 
some  time,  there  had  been  any  change  observable  in  it, 
or  whether  it  contained  any  pieces  that  indicated  fraud 
or  deception,  answered  both  questions  in  the  negative,  and 
declared  that  the  machine  was  of  a  very  simple  construction.* 


2. — In  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,"  we  read,  imder 
the  head  "  Perpetual  Movement,"  that — 

Many  have  attempted  to  find  a  perpetual  movement,  but 
without  success ;  and  there  is  reason  to  think,  froni  the 
principles  of  mechanics,  that  such  a  movement  is  impossible ; 
for  though  in  many  cases  of  bodies  acting  upon  one  another, 
there  is  a  gain  of  absolute  motion,  yet  the  gain  is  always 
equal  in  opposite  directions,  so  that  the  quantity  of  direct 
motion  is  never  increased. 

To  make  a  perpetual  movement,  it  appears  necessary  that 
a  certain  system  of  bodies,  of  a  determined  number  and 
quantity,  should  move  in  a  certain  space  for  ever,  and  in 
a  certain  way  and  manner ;  and  for  this  there  must  be 
a  series  of  actions  returning  in  a  circle,  otherwise  the  move- 
ment will  not  be  perpetual ;  so  that  any  action  by  which  the 
absolute  quantity  of  force  is  increased,  of  which  there  are 
several  sorts,  must  have  its  corresponding  counter-action,  by 
which  the  gain  is  destroyed  and  the  quantity  of  force  restored 
to  its  first  state. 

Thus,  by  these  actions,  there  will  never  be  any  gain  of 
direct  forde  to  overcome  the  friction  and  resistance  of  the 
medium,  so  that  every  motion  being  diminished  by  these 
resistances,  they  must  at  length  languish  and  cease. f 


3. — ^In  Chambers's  "  Cyclopaedia,"  1738,  Perpetual  Motion, 
in  mechanics,  is  defined — 

A  motion  which  is  supplied  and  renewed  from  itself,  &c., 
&c.,  &c.     (See  Motion.) 

Infinite  are  the  schemes,  designs,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.     Nor  does 

•  Rees'  Cyclopaedia,  vol.  26,  1819. 
This  may  have  been  copied  from  Hutton's  Math.  Diet.,  4tc.,  1795. 
t    Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  18  vols.,  4tq.,  1797. 
The  above  is  copied  verbatim  into  the  English  EncyclopsBdia,  10  vols., 
4to.,  1802  ;  aru  "  Movement,  Perpetual.'* 


198  '  PEBPETTTTJM   MOBILE; 

any  of  them  deserve  particular  mention,  since  they  have 
all  equally  proved  abortive.  *  *  *  * 

In  effect,  there  seems  but  little  in  nature  to  countenance  all 
this  assiduity,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.     (See  Nature.) 

Action  and  re-action  are  allowed  to  be  ever  equal,  &c.,  &c. 
(See  Resistance.) 

Also  see  Matter  and  Friction;  Communication  and  Per- 
cussion; Medium. 

The  multiplication  of  powers  or  forces,  it  is  certain,  avaUs 
nought ;  for  what  is  gained  in  power  is  still  lost  in  time, 
so  that  the  quantity  of  motion  still  remains  the  same. 

All  mechanics  cannot  make  a  little  power  equal  or 
superior  to  a  larger;  and  wherever  a  less  power  is  found 
in  equilibrio  with  a  larger,  v.  gr,  25  poimds  with  100,  it 
is  a  kind  of  deception  of  the  sense :  the  equilibrium  is  not 
strictly  between  100  and  25,  but  between  lOO  pounds  and 
25  moving,  or  disposed  to  move,  four  times  as  fast  as  the  100. 

To  consider  the  weights,  100  and  25,  as  fixed  and  immove- 
able, the  25  may  seem,  somehow,  raised  beyond  themselves, 
which  is  one  of  the  sham-miracles  of  mechanics,  that  has 
deceived  millions,  but  which  is  easily  dissipated  by  con- 
sidering the  four  degrees  of  velocity  which  are  to  be  given 
to  the  25  poimds,  and  which  require  a  force  equal  to  the 
excess  of  100  above  25  poimds. 

A  power  of  10  pounds  moved  with  ten  times  the  velocity  of 
the  100  pounds,  would  have  equalled  them  in  the  like 
manner,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  all  the  possible  products 
equal  to  100.  But,  in  fine,  there  must  still  be  100  pounds 
of  power  on  each  side,  what  way  soever  they  be  taken, 
whether  in  the  matter  or  the  velocity. 

This  is  an  inviolable  law  of  nature,  by  which  nothing 
is  left  to  art,  but  the  choice  of  the  several  combinations  that 
may  produce  the  same  effect.     (See  Laws  of  Nature.)* 


4. — In  Stone's  "  Mathematical  Dictionary,"  we  read  of 
Perpetual  Motion,  that — 

By  this  term  ought  to  be  meant  an  uninterrupted  communi- 
cation  of  the    same    degree  of  motion  from  one    part  of 

•  Cyclopaedia ;  or,  an  Universal  Dictionary  of  Arts  and  Sciences.  By 
E.  Chambers,  F.R  S.  2  vols.,  folio,  1738.  Vol.  2;  art.  "Motion, 
Perpetual, ' '  and  *  *  Machine. ' ' 


0»,    SEAKCH    FOE    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  199 

matter  to  another,  in  a  circle  (or  such-like  curve  returning 
into  itself),  so  that  the  same  quantity  of  matter  shall  return 
perpetually  undiminished  upon  the  first  mover :  and  perhaps, 
if  men  had  rightly  imderstood  that  this  is  the  true  meaning 
of  a  perpetual  motion,  abundance  of  expence,  both  of  money 
and  reputation,  might  have  been  saved  by  the  vain  pretenders 
to  this  piece  of  impossible  mechanism. 

1.  When  a  wheel,  or  other  machine,  once  set  in  motion, 
will,  without  additional  actions  on  it,  continue  to  move  with 
the  same,  or  a  greater,  velocity  with  which  it  first  moved,  as 
long  as  the  matter  of  which  it  consists  remains  the  same ; 
such  a  motion,  by  mechanics,  is  called  perpetual. 

2.  But  since  bodies  have  not  in  themselves  power  to  move 
themselves,  and  therefore  have  not  power  to  increase  or 
diminish  a  motion  given  them;  if  they  are  not  acted  on 
by  other  bodies,  they  will  continue  so  to  move,  and  with  the 
same  velocity :  but  all  revolving  bodies  suffer  friction  with 
those  by  which  they  are  suspended;  and  the  velocities 
of  those  bodies  are  therefore  continually  lessened  by  the 
action  of  friction.  Therefore,  a  wheel,  or  other  machine,  set 
in  motion  without  additional  actions  on  it,  will  not  continue  to 
move  with  the  same  velocity,  tho'  the  matter  of  which 
it  consists  remains  the  same;  but,  on  the  contrary,  this 
velocity  will  be  continually  diminished. 

3.  Moreover,  since,  by  numberless  experiments,  the  most 
polished  or  burnish' d  bodies  sliding  over  one  another,  lose 
all  the  motion  which  hath  been  given  them,  and  in  a  short 
time  ;  therefore  every  wheel,  or  any  other  such  machine,  will, 
in  a  short  time,  lose  its  motion. 

4.  Hence  it  appears,  that  the  perpetual  motion  is  not  to  be 
expected  by  a  single  wheel. 

5.  And  if  any  contrivance  causes  one  part  of  a  wheel 
to  preponderate  another;  whatsoever  is  gained  by  the 
descent  of  that  preponderating  part  will  be  lost  in  its 
ascent;  and  then  the  wheel  thus  loaded,  as  soon  as  the 
friction  hath  destroyed  the  motion  given  it,  will  for  awhile 
vibrate  like  other  pedulous  bodies,  and  then  at  last  stand 
still.     Consequently,  no  perpetual  motion  by  wheel-work.* 


•   A  New  Mathematical  Dictionary.    By  E.  Stone,  F.R.S.     Second 
edition,  1  vol.,  8vo.,  1743. 


200  PERPETTTUM    MOBILE; 

5. — In  a  "  Dictionary  of  Mechanical  Science/*  we  are 
informed  that — 

Perpetual  Motion  is  that  which  possesses  in  itself  the 
principle  of  motion ;  and  consequentiy,  since  every  body  in 
nature,  when  in  motion,  once  begim,  would  be  perpetual,  but 
for  the  operation  of  some  external  causes — such  are  those  of 
friction,  resistance,  &c. ;  and  since  it  is  also  a  known  principle 
in  mechanics  that  no  absolute  power  can  be  gained  by  any 
combination  of  machinery,  except  there  being  at  the  same 
time  an  equal  gain  in  an  opposite  direction ;  but  that,  on  the 
contrary,  there  must  necessarily  be  some  lost  from  the  above 
causes,  it  follows  that  a  perpetual  motion  can  never  take  place 
from  any  purely  mechanical  combination ;  yet  this  is  a  problem 
which  has  engaged  the  attention  of  many  ingenious  men, 
from  the  earliest  period  to  the  present  time,  though  it  has  but 
seldom  been  attempted  by  men  of  science,  since  the  true  laws 
of  mechanics  have  been  so  well  established. 

An  idea  of  a  mechanical  contrivance  to  work  without  inter- 
mission, till  its  parts  are  destroyed  by  friction  [is  given  in  an 
engraving  of  a  water-wheel  working  a  pump  to  supply  itself]. 
It  was  supposed  that  the  water  which  had  fallen  upon  the 
wheel  into  the  reservoir  would  be  raised  by  means  of  the 
pump,  fall  through  the  horizontal  pipe,  and  so  produce  a 
continued  rotatory  motion.  Experience  has,  however,  proved 
its  inutility.  The  machine  cannot  furnish  power  enough 
to  perpetuate  its  motion.* 


6. — ^Another  popular  Scientific  Dictionary  states  that — 
Perpetual  Motion  is  that  which  possesses  within  itseK  the 
principle  of  motion,  and  that  of  sufficient  force  to  overcome 
the  friction  of  its  parts.  In  nature  there  are  numerous  per- 
petual motions,  such  as  the  revolution  of  the  heavenly  bodies, 
the  tides,  organic  and  inorganic  changes,  vital  functions,  &c. 
Artificial  or  mechanical  perpetual  motion  has  never  yet  been 
attained,  though  the  subject  has  occupied  the  attention  of  the 
ingenious  for  many  ages,  the  nearest  approach  to  it  being, 
perhaps,  the  dry  electrical  pile  of  De  Luc.f 

•  Dictionary  of  Mechanical  Science.  4to.,  pp.  1066.  Fisher  and  Co, 
The  Preface  and  Introduction  are  by  **  A.  J.  Wyke  House,  Middlesex, 
June,  1827." 

t  The  Dictionary  of  Arts,  Sciences,  and  Manufactures.  By  G.  Francis, 
F.L.S.     8vo.     1842. 


OK,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB.  201 

7. — Perpetual  Motion,  in  Ogilvie*8  excellent  **  Imperial 
Dictionary,"  is  defined  as — 

That  which  generates  a  power  of  continuing  itself  for  ever 
or  indefinitely,  by  means  of  mechanism  or  some  application 
of  the  force  of  gravity,  not  yet  discovered.  The  celebrated 
problem  of  a  perpetual  motion  consists  in  the  inventing  of  a 
machine  which  shall  have  the  principle  of  its  motion  within 
itself,  and  numberless  schemes  have  been  proposed  for  its 
solution ;  but  unless  friction  and  the  resistance  of  the  air, 
which  necessarily  retard,  and  finally  stop,  the  motions  of 
machines,  could  be  removed,  a  perpetual  motion  must  be 
impossible  from  any  pure  mechanical  combination.  The 
problem,  when  strictly  investigated,  amounts  to  this — namely, 
to  find  a  body  which  is  both  heavier  and  lighter  at  the  same 
time,  or  to  find  a  body  which  is  heavier  than  itself.  In 
speaking  of  the  perpetual  motion,  it  is  to  be  understood  that 
from  among  the  forces  by  which  motion  may  be  produced  we 
are  to  exclude  not  only  air  and  water,  but  other  agents — as 
heat,  atmospheric  changes,  &c.  The  only  admissible  agents 
are  the  inertia  of  matter  and  its  attractive  forces,  which  may 
all  be  considered  of  the  same  kind  as  gravitation.  The  planets 
in  their  orbits,  and  in  their  rotations  on  their  axes,  furnish 
instances  of  perpetual  motion.* 


8. — ^In  the  "Dictionary  of  Science  and  Literature,"  by 
Professor  Brande  and  Dr.  Cauvin,  appears  the  following  : — 

Perpetual  Motion,  in  mechanics,  a  machine  which,  when 
set  in  motion,  would  continue  to  move  for  ever,  or  at  least 
until  destroyed  by  the  friction  of  the  parts,  without  the  aid 
of  any  exterior  cause.  The  discovery  of  the  perpetual  motion 
has  always  been  a  celebrated  problem  in  mechanics,  on  which 
many  ingenious,  though  in  general  ill-instructed,  persons 
have  consumed  their  time  ;  but  all  the  labour  bestowed  on  it 
has  proved  abortive.  In  fact,  its  impossibility  has  been 
so  fully  demonstrated  from  the  known  laws  of  matter,  that  it 
is  rather  an  insult  than  a  praise  to  say  of  any  one  that 
he  has  occupied  himself  with  the  research.     Nevertheless, 

•  The  Imperial  Dictionary,  Endish,  Technological,  and  Scientific. 
Edited  by  John  Ogiivie,  LL.D.     Glasgow,  18^4.     Royal  8vo. 


202  FERPETUUM    MOBILE; 

the  pursuit  of  the  chimera  has  been  the  cause  of  many  useful 
inventions. 

In  speaking  of  the  perpetual  motion,  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  from  among  the  forces  by  which  motion  may  be  pro- 
duced we  are  to  exclude  not  only  air  and  water,  but  other 
natural  agents — as  heat,  atmospheric  changes,  &c.  The  only 
admissible  agents  are  the  inertia  of  matter  and  its  attractive 
forces,  which  may  all  be  considered  of  the  same  kind  as 
gravitation. 

It  is  an  admitted  principle  in  philosophy,  that  action  and 
re-action  are  equal ;  that  when  motion  is  communicated  from 
one  body  to  another,  the  first  loses  just  as  much  as  is  gained 
by  the  second.  But  every  moving  body  is  continually 
retarded  by  two  passive  forces,  the  resistance  of  the  air  and 
friction.  In  order,  therefore,  that  motion  may  be  continual 
without  diminution,  one  of  two  things  is  necessary, — either 
that  it  be  maintained  by  an  extra  force  (in  which  case  it 
would  cease  to  be  what  we  imderstand  by  a  perpetual 
motion)  ;  or  that  the  resistance  of  the  air  and  friction  be 
annihilated,  which  is  physically  impossible.  The  motion 
cannot  be  perpetuated  till  these  retarding  forces  are  com- 
pensated, and  they  can  only  be  compensated  by  an  exterior 
force ;  for  the  force  communicated  to  any  body  cannot  be 
greater  that  the  generating  force,  and  this  is  only  sufficient 
to  continue  the  same  quality  of  motion  when  there  is  no 
resistance.  To  find  the  fperpetual  motion  is,  therefore,  a 
proposition  equivalent  to  this, — ^to  find  a  force  (either  an 
attractive  force  like  that  of  gravitation  or  magnetism,  or  an 
elastic  force,  that  of  a  spring,  for  example)  greater  than  itself. 

But  it  may  be  argued  that  by  some  arrangement  or  combi- 
nation of  mechanical  powers  a  force  may  be  gained  equal  to 
that  which  is  lost  in  overcoming  friction  and  atmospheric 
resistance.  This  notion  at  first  mention  appears  plausible, 
and  is,  in'fact,*that  by  which  most  speculators  have  been  led 
astray.  It  is,  however,  entirely  erroneous ;  for  by  no  multi- 
plication of  forces  or  powers  by  mechanical  agents,  can  the 
quantity  of  motion  be  increased.  Whatever  is  gained  in 
power  is  lost  in  time  ;  the  quantity  of  motion  transmitted  by 
the  machine  remains  unaltered.* 

•  The  entire'of  the  foregoing,  ending  at  this  paragraph,  appears  also  in 
Appletou's  Dictirnary  of  Machines,  Mechanics,  Engine  Work,  and 
Engineering,     New  York,  1858.     2  vols.,  royal  Svo. 


OK,    SEABCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  203 

Although  thef*  perpetual  motion  has  been  demonstrated 
again  and  again  to  be  impossible  on  any  known  principle  of 
mechanics,  projectors  have  not  thereby  been  deterred  from 
the  pursuit.  Li  1775,  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris 
resolved  not  to  consider  or  admit  into  their  Memoirs  any 
future  proposal  for  the  discovery  of  the  perpetual  motion ; 
yet  such  appears  to  be  the  seductive  nature  of  the  subject 
that  innumerable  schemes,  designs,  and  projects  for  accom- 
plishing it  have  since  been,  and  even  to  the  present  time 
continue  to  be,  put  forward ;  and  there  are  very  recent 
instances  of  men  of  no  common  attainments  and  reputation, 
and  well  versed,  moreover,  in  the  principles  of  mechanical 
science,  who  have  been  deceived  by  the  ingenious  frauds  of 
charlatans  and  impostors  into  a  belief  of  its  actual  discovery. 
Montucla,  "  Hist,  des  Math.,"  tome  iii.,  p.  813 ;  "  Reper- 
tory of  Arts,"*  vols.  vii.  and  xiv. ;  "London  Journal  of 
Arts,"t  ^^ay,  1827 ;  Airy,  "  Trans,  of  the  Cambridge  Phil. 
Soc,"  vol.  iii.,  part  2  ;  J  Poppe,  "  Wimder  der  Mechanik," 
1832 ;  and  various  papers  in  the  earlier  volumes  of  the 
"  Memoires  de  TAcademie  des  Sciences,"  and  the  "  Philo- 
sophical Transactions.")  § 


9. — The  American  Encyclopaedia  defines  Perpetual  Motion 
as — 

A  motion  which  is  supplied  and  renewed  from  itself,  without 
the  intervention  of  external  causes.  The  problem  of  a 
perpetual  motion  consists  in  the  inventing  of  a  machine  which 
has  the  principle  of  its  motion  within  itself;  and  numberless 
schemes  have  been  proposed  for  its  solution.  The  difficulty 
is,  that  the  resistance  of  the  air,  the  friction  of  the  parts 
of  the  machine,  &c.,  necessarily  retard,  and  finally  stop,  the 
motions  of  machines,  and  therefore  seem  to  render  perpetual 

•  The  "  Repertory,"  vol.  7,  refers  to  the  Patent  of  Conradus  Shiviers, 
1790  (but  should  be  Schwiers — see  his  Patent,  Chapter  III.),  and  vol.  14 
to  Motion  from  the  Rising  and  Falling  of  the  Tide. 

t  The  article  in  the  "London  Journal,*'  very  flippantly  written,  affects 
to  criticise  the  Patent  of  Sir  William  Congreve,  1827.  (See  Chapter  XI.) 

t  Airy*8  paper  relates  to  the  Pendulum,  and  in  no  way  to  Perpetual 
Motion. 

§  A  Dictionary  of  Science,  Literature,  and  Art.  By  W.  T.  Brande, 
F.li.S.,  &c.,  and  Joseph  Cauvin,  M.D.,  &c.    London,  1852.    8vo. 


204:  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

motion  an  impossibility.  Attempts  have  recently  been  mad^ 
to  produce  a  perpetuum  mobile  by  means  of  galvanism:  a 
metallic  bar  being  placed  between  two  dry  galvanic  columns, 
is  alternately  attracted  by  each  column.* 


10. — The  following  is  a  translation  of  an  article  from  a 
French  Encyclopaedia  of  1765,  printed  in  Switzerland,  and 
has  been  embodied  in  most  of  our  modern  Encyclopaedias : — 

Perpetual  Motion  is  a  movement  which  is  maintained  and 
renewed  from  itself,  without  any  external  cause.  Or  it  is  an 
uninterrupted  communication  of  the  same  degree  of  motion 
which  passes  from  one  part  of  matter  to  another.  In  order 
to  find  perpetual  motion,  a  machine  must  be  constructed 
having  such  a  movement.  This  has  been  the  famous 
problem  which  has  exercised  the  minds  of  mathematicigms 
for  2,000  years. 

We  have  an  infinite  number  of  designs,  figures,  plans, 
machines,  and  wheels,  &c.,  which  are  the  fruits  of  the  efforts 
made  to  resolve  this  problem.  It  would  be  useless  here  to 
give  the  details  of  any  of  these  projects,  which  are  scarce 
worth  mentioning,  for  they  have  all  failed.  It  is  now  more 
an  insult  than  praise  to  say  of  any  one  that  they  are  searching 
for  perpetual  motion.  The  inutility  of  the  efforts  that  have 
been  made  to  find  it,  gives  a  very  imfavourable  idea  of  those 
who  occupy  themselves  in  this  research.  Indeed,  it  appears 
that  we  dare  scarcely  hope  to  find  it.  Amongst  the  properties 
of  matter  and  motion,  we  know  of  none  that  has  the  principle 
of  such  an  effect. 

It  is  agreed  that  the  action  and  re-action  must  be  equal,  that 
one  body  that  gives  motion  to  another  body  must  lose  as 
much  motion  as  it  communicates.  The  resistance  of  the  air 
and  friction  must  necessarily  retard  that  motion :  thus,  in 
order  that  motion  may  continue  always,  it  will  be  necessary 
that  it  should  be  supplied  from  an  exterior  cause, — this 
would  then  no  longer  be  what  is  required  as  perpetual 
motion  ;  or  that  all  resistance  should  be  annihilated, — which 
is  physically  impossible. f 

*  Encyclopaedia  Americana,  vol.  10.     Philadelphia,  1854. 
t  Encyclopedic,  ou  Dictionnaire  raisonn^  des  Sciences,  des  Arts,  et 
des  Metiers.     Par  Diderot  et  D'Alembert.     Neufchastel,  1765.    Folio. 


OR,    SEAKCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  205 

[The  article  concludes,  referring  to  "Matiere  et  Frotte- 
men.*'  And  under  the  word  *' Mouvement,"  perpetual 
motion  is  treated  as  "  Le  celebre  probl^me ;"  and  allusion  is 
made  to  M.  de  la  Hire's  estimate  of  its  impossibility,  as  it 
requires  to  find  a  body  at  the  same  time  light  and  heavy  ;  or, 
a  body  which  will  outweigh'  itself.] 


11. — In  the  "  Encyclopedic  Methodique"  will  be  foimd  two 
articles — one,  "  L'Examen  du  Mouvement  Perpetuel,"  which, 
with  the  diagrams,  is  extracted  from  Montucla's  "Mathe- 
matical Recreations ;"  the  second,  by  M.  Decremps,  of  which 
we  now  offer  an  abridged  translation,  is  as  follows  : — 

Perpetual  Motion,  as  proved,  is  but  a  step  of  the  ladder  of 
ambition  to  the  mechanic.  We  will  give,  by  way  of  recrea- 
tion or  amusement,  an  idea  of  a  perpetuated  movement,  pro- 
duced by  magnetic  attraction. 

Mr.  Wilson  shows  in  his  cabinet,  at  York,  a  compass 
arranged  on  a  pivot,  in  the  midst  of  a  circle  of  iron  hooks, 
constantly  turning  round  by  the  influence  of  the  magnetised 
iron  hooks,  each  attracting  the  needle  in  its  turn.  It  was 
considered  a  trick,  really  effected  by  concealed  clockwork. 

Mr.  Wilson  showed  another  experiment,  consisting  of  two 
cross  pieces  of  wood  on  a  pivot,  placed  vertically,  each  having 
at  its  extremity  inclined  cases,  or  ,^.     ^  v 

sheaths,  containing  balls  of  lead 
(see  Fig.  4,  plate  3).  He  says  it 
is  as  simple  as  ingenious  :  it  is 
attached  by  string.  The  balls  A 
and  B  are  in  equilibrium,  because 
they  are  at  an  equal  distance  from 
the  vertical  line  passing  through 
the  centre  E :  by  the  construction 
of  the  machine  the  baU  D,  being, 
on  the  contrary,  farther  from  the 
centre  than  the  ball  C,  ought  to 
overweigh  this  last  one,  and  over- 
come the  equilibrium,  descend  to  the  point  B,  and  cause  the 
machine  to  make  a  quarter  turn,  and  so  on  \mtil  worn  out. 


206  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

To  prove  the  falsity  of  the  experiment,  we  see  that  the 
Ball  D  (Fig.  6),  being  farther  from  the  centre  than  the  ball  C, 
tends  to  carry  it  round ;  but  the 
ball  B,  which  at  the  same  moment  ^^*ff'  ^O 

is  farther  from  the  centre  than  the 
ball  A,  tends  to  reverse  the  motion. 
These  opposite  efforts  must  then 
stop  the  machine.  Mr.  Wilson 
admitted  this  statement,  and  said 
the  arms  were  magnetised,  and 
the  stand  contained  a  hidden 
magnet,  and  was  so  artfully  con- 
trived as  to  be  capable  of  easily 
deceiving.* 


12. — ^The  following  is  from  Zedler's  "  Great  Universal 
Lexicon  of  all  Knowledge  and  Art,"  Leipsic  and  Halle, 
1741  :— 

Perpetual  Motion,  in  mechanics,  is  the  name  given  to  the 
extraordinary  movement  of  a  machine  possessing  within 
itself  its  own  power  of  motion,  and  so  it  would  deserve  to  be 
called  if  it  would  last  as  long  as  the  materials  used  in  its 
construction.  But,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  it  must  act 
independent  of  outward  power,  and  possess  within  itself  the 
power  of  movement.  Many  persons  have,  from  ancient  times 
to  the  present  day,  sought  to  obtain  this  object,  with  great 
trouble  and  at  much  expence.  Gaspar  Schottus  has  described 
many  rare  examples  in  his  "  Technica  Curiosa,"  lib.  x.,  P.  i., 
p.  732.  But  there  is  a  larger  collection  of  these  examples  by 
Francisco  Tertio  de  Lanis,  in  his  "  Magisterio  Naturae  et 
Artis,"  tom.  i.,  lib.  viii.,  c.  2  and  3 ;  also  L.  C.  Sturm,  in 
"  Mathesi,"  P.  ii.,  p.  366.  For,  although  the  search  seemed 
to  be  given  up,  and  the  pursuit  was  much  ridiculed  by 
Bonajustus  Lorini,  in  his  work,  lib.  v.,  c.  19,  who  considers 
it  an  enquiry  beneath  the  attention  of  any  learned  mathe- 
matician, and  that  the  finding  of  it  would  be  less  a  mental 

*  Dictionnaire  £ncyclop6dique  des  Amu  semens  des  Sciences  Math^- 
matiques  et  Physiques.  Part  —  of  the  £ncyclop4die  M^thodique.  Paris, 
1792.     4to. 


OE,    SEAECH   FOB   SELF-MOTIYE   POWEE.  207 

investigation  than  an  accidental  discovery,  besides  that  the 
loss  of  power  by  friction  alone  would  exclude  obtaining  an  exact 
calculation,  many  other  circumstances  concur  to  increase  the 
difficulty.  The  complicated  construction  of  most  machinery 
conceals  the  truth  as  regards  defects  ;  it  depends  on  a  mere 
matter  of  chance  to  discover  it.  Simon  Stevinus,  in  his  "  Ele- 
ment. Static,"  lib.  i.,  prop.  19,  p.  448,  gives  a  demonstration  of 
the  balance,  in  which  he  clearly  proves  that  this  movement  is 
quite  impossible.  After  him,  we  have  Leibnitz,  who  has 
examined  plans,  and  shows  that  machines  of  this  kind  must 
cease  movement ;  and  says,  whoever  wishes  to  follow  this 
pursuit  must  be  thoroughly  versed  in  mechanics,  so  as  to  be 
prepared  for,  and  provided  against,  every  obstruction  as  it 
occurs. 

In  1730,  Schliiter,  an  eminent  engineer,  received  an  offer 
of  30,000  roubles  from  the  King  if  he,  or  any  other,  would 
find  out  perpetual  motion ;  but,  in  consequence  of  his 
decease,  his  son  renewed  the  offer,  but  without  avail.  In 
1712,  Herr  Orffyreus,  celebrated  in  mathematics  and 
mechanics,  made  a  great  sensation,  having,  after  ten  years' 
study  and  industry,  perfected  a  perpetual  motion ;  the  first 
model  of  it  was  2§  Leipsic  yards  in  diameter  and  4  inches 
deep  ;  it  raised  some  pounds.  He  then  exhibited  it  at  Court, 
before  the  nobility  and  people  of  high  standing,  and  some 
celebrated  mathematicians  and  mechanics.  He  showed  it 
in  several  places,  and  was  much  censured  for  its  small- 
ness,  his  critics  declaring  that  a  larger  one  would  not 
go.  He,  therefore,  constructed  a  large  machine  in  1713, 
which  was  nearly  6  Leipsic  yards  high  and  6  inches  thick, 
revolving  at  the  rate  of  fifty  revolutions  per  minute,  and  raised 
a  weight  of  40  pounds.  This  he  exhibited  openly  before 
persons  of  all  classes.  He  next  went  to  Merseburg,  where 
he  constructed  a  third  machine,  6  Leipsic  yards  high  (and 
one  schuh  thick) .  No  outward  cause  of  motion  was  observable, 
although  examined  by  various  artizans  and  others  capable  of 
judging  ;  it  could  be  moved  by  the  finger,  and  had  a  strong 
inward  power  of  its  own.  Being  much  persecuted  by 
censures,  he  challenged  an  open  trial,  which  occurred 
October  31,  1715,  before  commissioners,  a  prince,  duke, 
several  members  of  the  nobility  and  learned  societies,  all  of 
whom  signed  a  certificate  to  the  effect  that  they  had  seen 
it  turn  both  right  and  left,   on  the  slightest  impulse,  soon 


208  PEBPETUUM    MOBILE  ; 

acquiring  a  regular,  rapid  movement.  It  was  published,  with 
two  others,  at  Leipsic,  1715,  entitled — "  Advice  to  Students 
on  the  Orffyrean  System ;  the  happy  discoverer  of  the  Per- 
petual Motion."  His  opponents  continued  nimierous  and 
violent,  one  laying  a  large  wager  that  no  such  power  existed. 

In  1716,  Christian  Wagner,  a  great  mathematician,  in 
Leipsic,  published — "  The  now  fully  discovered  Perpetual 
Motion,"  in  which  he  shows  that,  through  the  experiments  of 
Orfiyreus,  he  has  made  his  own  discoveries.  He  constructed 
a  copper  machine,  which  turned  right  and  left  with  amazing 
rapidity,  lifting  a  weight  of  70  poimds  ;  and  this  he  exhibited 
in  Leipsic. 

One  of  Orffyreus's  opponents,  J.  G.  Borlach,  of  Dresden, 
wrote,  in  1716,  "  Advice  against  Perpetual  Motion." 

Jacob  A.  Mahn,  who  was  first  a  confectioner  and  then  a 
clockmaker,  professed  to  have  been  anticipated  in  the  inven- 
tion by  Orffyreus,  being  himself  short  of  means,  and  published 
his  complaint  in  the  newspapers  of  1717.  This,  and  other 
like  representations,  have  not  damaged  Orffyreus' s  reputation 
of  being  the  happy  possessor  of  the  secret  of  this  wonderful 
discovery. 

We  next  hear  of  Orffjrreus  being  at  Cassel,  where  he  filled 
the  office  of  Coimcillor  of  Commerce.  He  there  constructed 
another  machine,  and  then  put  forth  the  following  advertise- 
ment:— "  Fresh  news  of  the  curious  and  well-confirmed 
perpetual  motion  trial  of  Herr  Orff3rreus,  which  he  now 
exhibits  in  a  newly-built  machine  at  Weissen-stein,  near 
Cassel.  From  November,  1717,  until  the  present  year,  1718, 
it  has  moved  perpetually  during  eight  weeks.  It  is  under 
the  lock  and  seal  of  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel.  All 
who  doubt  are  invited  to  inspect  it.  And,  moreover,  a  wager 
of  10,000  reichs-thaler  is  offered  for  any  one  to  accept."  The 
diameter  of  this  wheel  was  12  schuhe,  and  2i  schuhe  thick ;  the 
axle-tree  was  6  schuhe  long,  and  8  zoll  (inches)  thick.  It  was 
made  of  oak ;  it  turned  either  way,  commencing  by  a  slow 
movement,  which  went  on  increasing.  It  had  power  to  raise 
a  large  heavy  box,  full  of  stones ;  and  this  power  was 
so  evident  as  to  dissipate  all  doubts  of  its  genuineness.  The 
Landgrave  signed  a  certificate,  speaking  of  the  merits  of  the 
invention  in  unqualified  terms  of  commendation.  It  was 
expected  it  could  be  employed  for  various  practical  opera- 
tions,   as    mill-work  and    raising  water ;    particularly   by 


OK,   SEAECH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEK.  209 

Prince  Charles  (the  Landgrave),  who  was  well  versed  in  both 
mathematics  and  mechanics,  and  had  given  much  time  and 
attention  to  the  study  of  perpetual  motion.  Orfiyreus,  on  his 
part,  required  a  special  protection,  which  the  Landgrave 
refused ;  this  became  a  cause  of  dispute,  the  particulars  of 
which  appear  in  Bresslauer's  "  History  of  Nature  and  Medi- 
cine." 

Gartner,  of  Poland,  made  an  Archimedean  screw,  and  a 
machine  working  by  means  of  balls  or  weights,  a  full  account 
of  which  is  given  in  the  "  Sejour  de  Paris."  He  went 
to  Paris  and  produced  another  machine,  also  worked  by 
balls ;  but  of  these  inventions  we  have  only  his  own  account. 
On  his  return  to  Germany,  he  made  a  whet-stone  or  grind- 
stone, worked  by  a  perpetual  movement,  turning  right  or  left, 
quick  or  slow,  and  moveable  from  place  to  place.  The  King 
of  Poland  invited  him  to  his  Court,  and  enquired  whether 
the  power  could  be  applied  to  carry  on  great  works,  of  which 
Gartner  expressed  his  opinion  of  its  inapplicability  on  so 
large  a  scale.  Gartner*  has  published  numerous  learned 
papers  on  this  subject,  many  of  which  will  be  foimd  in  Bress- 
lauer's  work,  already  named.f 


13. — In  the  "AllgemeineEncyclop'adie,vonM.  H.E.Meier," 
of  1842,  is  an  article  by  Hankel,  on  Perpetual  Motion.  He 
classes  this  motion  as — 

First,  Physical ;  and,  secondly.  Mechanical.  To  the  first 
belong  the  barometer  and  the  magnet;  and  to  the  second 
(generally  understood),  a  machine  which  not  only  has  a  self- 
moving  power  of  its  own,  but  is  capable  of  renewing  and 
keeping  up  its  own  motion  without  any  outward  help ;  or, 
again,  one  part  of  a  machine  following  another  in  a  rotation 
or  a  circle,  so  that  the  part  carried  roimd  should  return  to  its 
first  position  without  having  lost  any  of  its  pristine  power. 
Kaspar  Schottus's  "Technica  Curiosa"  refers  to  several 
machines,  and  we  find  many  more  described  by  Franziskus 

•  In  Meier's  EncyclopaBdia,  of  18412,  is  a  statement  of  the  discovery 
of  GS.rtner'8  plan  being  a  deception. 

t  J.  H.  Zedler*s  Great  Universal  Lexicon.  Leipsic  and  Halle,  1741. 
Folio. 


210  PERPETUTJM    MOBILE  ; 

de  Lanis,  in  his  "  Magisterium  Naturae  et  Artis."  In  numbers 
of  the  "Journal  des  Savans"  for  1678,  1686,  1700,  1726, 
and  1745,  are  accounts  of  many  machines  which  are  said  to 
have  succeeded  in  attaining  and  retaining  perpetual  motion. 
But  Papinus  appears  to  have  written  most  favourably*  on  this 
subject  in  the  "  Phil.  Trans.,"  xv.  and  xvi.,  and  "  Acta  Erud.,'' 
1688  and  1689.  We  have  also,  on  this  matter,  Desaguliers, 
in  "Phil.  Trans.,"  xxxi. ;  C.  L.  Sturm,  in  "Math.,"  part  ii., 
p.  366;  Bonajustus  Lorini,  in  "  Festungsbauj"  lib.  v.,  c.  19; 
Simon  Stevinus,  in  "Element.  Static,"  lib.  i.,  prop.  19; 
Parent,  in  "  Mem.  de  TAcad.,"  Paris,  1700,  p.  159.  La  Hire, 
in  "  Mem.  de  TAcad.,"  x.,  p.  426,  expresses  himself  quite 
against  it ;  which  feeling  may  be  earlier  traced  in  the  corre- 
spondence of  Com.  Drebbel  von  Peiresc  to  his  friend 
Camden  ("  G.  Camdeni  Epistolse,"  Londini,  1691,  pp.  333, 
387),  and  also  in  Kepler  ("  Epistol.,'*  1718,  p.  393).  Chr. 
Wolff,  in  his  "  Math.  Lexic,"  Leipsic,  1716,  is  favourable 
to  the  possibility  of  a  perpetual  motion.  Diez  describes,  in 
1722,  a  machine  he  constructed  on  the  system  of  Orflfyreus's 
plan,  but  treats  of  the  incompleteness  of  that  and  all  others 
that  had  appeared.  The  Academy  of  Paris,  in  1775,  passed 
a  resolution  not  to  consider  any  plans  intended  for  perpetual 
motion;  at  the  same  time  appeared  a  paper  from  Camot 
("  Principes  fondamentaux  de  Tequilibre  et  du  mouvement," 
Par.,  1803,  sec.  281).  T.Young  ("Lee.  on  Nat.  Phil.," 
tom.  i.,  p.  91),  and  others,  although  they  have  written  against 
it — ^but  persons,  mostly  of  uncultivated  minds — stiU  hope  to 
find  out  this  movement. 

In  1712,  a  certain  Orffyreus,  named  Bessler,  of  Saxony, 
after  ten  years  hard  striving,  professed  to  have  foimd  per- 
petual motion,  being  then  in  Gera.  He  made  a  second  larger 
machine  at  Draschwitz,  in  1713.  A  third  still  larger  wheel 
was  made  in  Merseburg :  it  lifted  70  lbs.  from  the  court-yard 
up  to  the  roof  of  the  house  he  occupied.  A  fourth  and 
larger  wheel  was  erected  by  him  at  the  desire  of  Landgrave 
Karl  von  Hessen-Cassel,  at  his  castle  of  Weissen-stein,  where 
it  was  in  a  sealed  room,  and  found  in  eight  weeks  to  be  in 
the  same  good  movement.  He  was  strenuously  opposed  by 
the  mechanic  Gartner,  of  Dresden,  and  Barloch,  who  declared 
his  discovery  to  be  an  imposition.   Gartner  finished  a  machine, 

•  See  Chapter  IV,  for  Papin's  real  sentiments. 


OR,    SEAKCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  211 

or  wheel,  with  weights,  intended  to  perpetually  move  a  clock, 
artfully  constructed  and  beautifully  worked:  it  stood  on  a 
raised  stand  or  pedestal,  under  which,  after  some  months, 
was  discovered  a  hidden  clockwork,  by  which  the  wheel  was 
turned.  It  was  made  under  the  patronage  of  King  Augustus 
II.  of  Poland. 

None  of  the  foreign  inventors  have  as  yet  found  out  a 
machine  that  without  some  outward  help  will  continue  in 
motion.  These  machines  are  all  complicated,  instead  of 
adopting  the  most  simple  construction,  and  their  inventors 
seem  not  properly  to  understand  the  principles  of  the  lever. 
Descriptions  of  such  machines  will  be  found  in  a  dissertation 
of  Diez,  also  in  one  by  Neumann  (Lubfeck,  1767)-* 


14. — ^Dr.  Binder,  in  his  "  Conversations  Lexicon,"  published 
at  Regensburg,  1848,  says : — 

What  is  understood  by  perpetual  motion  is  a  self-moving 
machine,  unaided  by  any  outward  appliance.  Such  motion 
is  impossible,  acted  on  as  it  must  be  by  friction  and  other 
counteracting  causes.  The  necessary  loss  of  power  must  be 
apparent,  because  of  the  impulsive  power  being  derived  at 
the  expense  of  any  surplus  power  that  might  appear  to  be 
gained,  for  the  operation  cannot  be  greater  than  the  cause. 
It  has  been  a  study  and  paradox  for  many  ages.  There  are 
the  clocks  of  Cox,  La  Paute,  and  others;  the  celebrated 
Merseburge  machine,  Castelli's  wheel,  the  wonderful  weight- 
moving  machine  of  Conrad  Schwiers.f  There  was  also 
Geisser's  wheel,  but  of  which,  in  1832,  after  his  death, 
appeared  a  description  in  Poppe's  "  Wunder  der  Mechanik," 
showing  it  contained  concealed  clockwork. 


15. — ^The  following  short  article,  in  Latin,  is  derived  from 
Hoffmann's  Lexicon  of  1698 : — 

Perpetui  Motus  specimen,  exhibetur  ab  Athanasio  Kirchero, 
in  hydraulica  machina,  seu  clepsydra,  quae,  ubi  effluxit  inversa, 
iterum  fluit  ob versa,  ccelum  aquarum  aspergine  irrorans,  uti- 

•  M.  H.  E.  Meier's  Allgemeine  Encyklop^die.    'Leipsic,  1842.     Fol. 
f  See  his  Patent  in  Chapter  III.,  dale  1790. 

Q 


'212  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

docet  in  "  Descript.  Mussel  Kircheriani,"  Georg.  de  Sepibus, 
p.  3.  Idem  alio  quoque  instruinent6  utcunque  eum  adum- 
brat.  In  co  namque  motu  rarefactionis  &  condensationis,  ex 
metu  vacui  sublata  aut  depressa  aqua,  quae  in  exteriore  canali 
detinetur ;  cum  desuper  levigato  corpore  innatante,  per  an- 
nexam  chordam,  quae  circa  cylindrum  convoluta,  suberis 
levissimi  innatantis  super  aquam  ponders  in  exteriore  circulo 
per  axim  indice  instructam  vel  horas  vel  humidum  &  siccum 
demonstrat.  Sic  ex  quibusdam  puteis,  qui  ad  diversa  anni 
tempora  aqu^  plus  minusve  repletur,  fieri  potest  thermome- 
trum,  quod  continue  motu  quatuor  distinguat ;  quinimo  ad 
certa  distincta  spatia  sono  campanulse  graduum  aut  anni  mu- 
tatum  tempus  sonoro  strepitu  accidisse  commoveat ;  sicque 
in  sphaera  vitrea  caloris  &  frigoris  gradus  distinguantur, 
(Vide  Georg.  de  Sepibus  in  "  Musaeo  Kircheriano,"  p.  53, 
&  supra  Mobile  Perpetuum.)* 


There  is  a  large  amount  of  repetition  in  this  chapter,  and 
which  it  has  been  difficult  to  avoid  increasing.  Sufficient 
has  been  quoted  to  satisfy  an  impartial  reader  how  imsatis- 
factorily  these  great  channels  of  information  have  supplied 
matter  on  this  one  subject.  The  French  Encyclopaedias  are 
the  most  defective ;  but  the  German  "  Conversations  Lexicons" 
are  comprehensive,  and  afibrd  the  greatest  number  of  authori- 
ties ;  still,  of  these  we  have  been  obliged  to  omit  an  edition 
of  1836 ;  and  also  Dr.  Wolff,  1843 ;  I.  Meyer,  1860 ;  and 
(Brockhaus)  1853  and  1856 ;  in  consequence  of  their  striking 
resemblance  to  each  other. 


*  Lexicon  Universale.     By  Joh.  Jacobi  Hofmaunus.     Lugduni,  Bata- 
vorum,  1698.    Folio. 


OB,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB.  213 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

EARLY  POPULAR  AND  OTHER  JOURNALS,  AND  THE  PERCY 
ANECDOTES. 

We  shall  commence  ^vith  papers  from  the  "  London  Maga- 
zine," the  "  Imperial  Magazine,"  and  the  "  Pamphleteer." 

The  absurdity  of  a  Perpetual  Motion  is  demonstrated  as 
follows  in  the  "  London  Magazine,"  vol.  17,  1749  : — 

As  a  perpetual  motion,  according  to  the  opinion  of  some 
gentlemen,  seems  to  be  comprehended  within  the  sphere 
of  human  attainments,  I  humbly  present  these  lines  to  the 
publick,  to  caution  such  against  vain  and  fruitless  enquiries. 

*  *  -i^  •H'  *  'i^  % 

In  researches  after  this  unattainable  solution,  not  thinking 
it  requisite,  in  the  first  place,  to  study  the  natural  propensity 
of  matter,  which,  causing  its  tendency  to  a  state  of  inactivity, 
must  consequently  subject  it  to  rest,  as  soon  as  deprived  of 
its  given  velocity  by  repeated  retardations,  which  all  bodies 
moving  in  our  atmosphere,  or  in  any  other  medium,  are  per- 
petually subjected  to ;  for  even  the  least  particle,  upon 
collision  or  percussion,  let  its  direction  be  what  it  will — viz., 
direct,  oblique,  or  perpendicular — ^bears  a  part  in  the  obstruc- 
tion, which  is  more  or  less  in  proportion  to  such  resisting 
particles  or  powers,  difierent  degrees  of  magnitude,  density, 
elasticity,  non-elasticity,  &c.  Therefore,  when  the  sum  of 
the  velocity,  which  the  resisting  powers  have  received, 
amounts  to  the  momentum  given  their  actuating  body,  such 
having  thus  communicated  its  motion  to  circumambient 
particles  or  powers,  must  again  return  to  its  natural  state  of 
rest.     Perhaps  this  demonstration  may  appear  more  evident 


214  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

by  a  logistical  method  of  argument,  for  which  reason  it  may 
be  requisite  to  reduce  the  whole  into  a  syllogism. 

As,  according  to  the  laws  of  nature,  every  moving  body 
loses  its  motion,  and  returns  to  a  state  of  rest,  upon  meeting, 
in  a  rectilinear  direction,  with  a  resisting  power  equal  to  the 
momentum  wherewith  it  moves  : 

And  as  the  factum,  or  aggregate,  of  a  sufficient  multiplicity 
of  minutest  resisting  powers  (or  that  of  the  successive  and 
perpetually  resisting  force  of  the  particles  of  air,  which  all 
bodies  moving  in  our  atmosphere  are  subjected  unto)  amounts 
to  any  momentum  how  great  soever : 

Ergoy  all  moving  bodies  will  at  length  lose  their  motion 
and  return  to  their  natural  state  of  inactivity — viz.,  when  the 
sum  of  the  retardations  they  meet  with  becomes  equal  to  the 
momentum  of  the  motions  first  communicated. 


"The  Perpetual  Motion  Hunter"  is  the  title  of  an  article 
in  the  "  Imperial  Magazine,"  vol.  6,  1824  : — 

It  gives  me  much  pleasure  (says  the  writer)  to  observe 
that  you  notice  scientific  subjects :  you  are  very  right  in  so 
doing,  as  it  will  not  only  give  variety,  but  add  considerably 
to  the  value  of  your  very  useful  miscellany.  It  is  my  humble 
opinion  that  such  a  procedure  is  infinitely  better  than  filling 
it  with  the  splenetic  efiusions  of  angry  minds,  the  ebullitions 
of  disappointed  envy,  or,  what  is  worse,  dealing  out  large 
portions  of  scandal,  and  making  use  of  personalities  to  wound 
virtuous  sensibility;  as  is  the  constant  practice  in  some 
similar  publications. 

I  am  now.  Sir,  an  elderly  man,  and  am  sorry  to  inform  you 
that  I  have  lost  much  valuable  time,  and,  of  course,  money, 
too,  from  having  been  infected,  in  the  early  part  of  my  life, 
with  the  vanity  of  hunting  after  that  ignis  fatuus^  called  the 
"  perpetual  motion."  Common  report  informed  me  that  it 
would  immortalize  the  name  of  the  inventor ;  that  by  it  the 
longitude  would  be  discovered ;  and  that,  on  this  account, 
the  British  Parliament  had  ofiered  a  premium  of  ten  thousand 
pounds  for  the  discovery !  This  was  something  like  assailing 
a  man  at  all  points  at  once :  the  acquirement  of  such  pro- 
digious fame  flatters  his  vanity;    and  the   "ten  thousand 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTITE    POWER.  215 

pounds  '*  could  be  looked  upon  in  no  other  light  than  as  the 
reward  of  distinguished  genius ! 

Under  these  impressions  I  began  my  career,  and  pursued 
it  with  an  ardour  which,  in  any  other  case,  could  not  have 
failed  to  ensure  me  success.  I  read,  with  the  greatest 
avidity,  all  the  accounts  of  such  machines  1  could  anywhere 
meet  with.  For  a  short  time  I  was  amused  with  the  ball  of 
iron  and  the  magnet,  mentioned  in  Bishop  Wilkins'  "  Mathe- 
matical Magic."  I  afterwards  studied  the  properties  of 
Orfiyreus^s  wheel,  which,  as  Gravesande  informs  us,  con- 
tinued in  rapid  motion  for  two  months ;  at  the  end  of  which 
period  it  was  stopped,  he  says,  to  prevent  the  wear  of  the 
materials.  This  astonishing  wheel  was,  you  know,  destroyed 
by  the  inventor  soon  after  the  time  of  the  above-mentioned 
experiment.  I  endeavoured,  with  all  my  might,  to  recover 
the  long-lost  secret,  and  success  partly  crowned  my  efforts ; 
for,  after  a  great  deal  of  wearisome  labour,  I  constructed  a 
machine  which  I  then  believed  would  amply  compensate  the 
loss  which  the  crazy  philosopher  had  occasioned,  when,  in 
a  fit  of  frenzy,  he  dashed  it  to  pieces.  The  delight  which 
Newton  felt  on  discovering  the  law  of  universal  gravitation  did 
not  exceed  mine  when  I  found  that  my  machine  would  answer 
the  intended  purpose.  'Tis  true,  it  would  not  put  itself  in 
motion — but  what  then  ?  It  was  sufficient  for  the  purpose,  if 
it  would  move  perpetually  when  put  in  motion ;  and  at  that 
time,  like  many  others,  I  did  not  quite  understand  how  many 
requisites  were  necessary  in  order  that  a  machine  might 
become  a  "  perpetual  motion.'* 

You  can  scarcely  imagine  how  my  heart  palpitated  when  I 
sent  off  a  description  of  this,  my  first  invention,  to  the  Board 
of  Longitude  ;  it  was  a  machine  which  I  had  no  doubt  would 
determine  the  longitude,  both  at  sea  and  land,  with  the 
greatest  ease  and  accuracy.  During  the  first  week,  my 
nightly  slumbers  were  frequently  broken  by  the  violent  per- 
turbations of  my  mind ;  and  my  day-dreams  almost  continually 
represented  to  me  the  postman  knocking  at  my  door  with  the 
wished-for  letter  that  was  to  crown  all  my  hopes.  So  certain 
was  I  of  success,  that  I  actually  began  to  look  about  for  an 
estate  which  the  ten  thousand  pounds  were  to  purchase ;  for, 
in  my  mind's  eye,  I  had  it  already  in  my  grasp.  The  humble 
occupation  I  had  till  then  followed,  I  now  looked  upon  with 
disgust ;  and  I  saw  myself  at  once  elevated  to  opulence  and 


216  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

fame.     I  waited  with  patience — ^yes,  Mr.  Editor,  with  all  the 
patience  I  could  muster — ^but  no  letter  arrived.     However, 

**  Day  presses  on  the  heels  of  day, 
And  moons  increase  to  their  decay."  i 

After  a  few  weeks,  my  mind  recovered  its  wonted  serenity  ; 
and  in  about  three  months  more,  my  machine  was  as  free  from 
any  violent  perturbations  as  my  mind,  for,  at  the  end  of  that 
period,  it  had  completely  lost  all  power,  either  of  perpetuating 
or  continuing  its  motion.  This  circumstance  occasioned  me 
some  uneasiness;  and  I  was  not  much  amused  with  the 
taunting  remark  of  one  of  my  friends,  who,  on  viewing  it, 
exclaimed,  "Well!  it  is  a  perpetual  motion  still /^^  At  the 
end  of  nine  months,  I  received  a  letter  from  the  Secretary  of 
the  Board  of  Longitude,  informing  me  of  what  I  already 
knew — ^viz.,  that  my  machine  would  not  answer. 

It  is  now  carefully  stowed  in  my  brother  Jonathan's  garret, 
at  Brigg,'  in  Lincolnshire,  where  it  may  be  seen  by  all  who 
are  curious  in  such  matters. 

I  now  turned  my  mind  into  a  different  channel.  I  thought 
it  possible  that  the  object  of  my  search  might  be  accomplished 
by  means  of  some  of  the  fluids.  I  considered,  with  care,  the 
almost  continued  oscillation  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube  of  the 
barometer ;  but  I  could  deduce  from  this  motion  no  practical 
result.  I  afterwards  endeavoured  to  turn  the  tides  to  some 
account ;  but  I  failed  here  also.  At  length,  after  turning  my 
mind  in  a  variety  of  ways,  as  I  was  one  day  reading  an 
account  of  the  rise  of  water  in  capillary  tubes,  it  at  once 
occurred  to  me  that,  as  the  water  rises  in  such  a  tube  to  more 
than  an  inch  above  the  surface  of  the  water  in  the  vessel  in 
which  the  tube  is  immersed,  if  I  placed  the  tube  in  an  inclined 
position,  the  water  would  run  over  its  top  ;  and  as  it  would 
fall  into  the  same  vessel,  the  motion  thus  produced  would  be 
perpetual.  At  this  moment  my  mind  was  again  agitated :  I 
exclaimed,  like  Pythagoras,  "  I  have  found  it !  I  have  found 
it!"  I  now  supposed  myself  to  be  as  great  a  man  as  any 
Pythagoras  that  ever  lived*  I  did  not,  however,  run  out, 
like  him,  naked  into  the  street ;  but  I  remember  the  discovery 
was  made  in  the  winter  season,  when  I  was  warmly  and 
comfortably  clothed  :  had  it  been  in  the  summer,  I  cannot  tell 
what  might  have  happened. 

1  soon  procured  a  capillary  tube,  and  proceeded  very  care- 


OR,    SEARCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  21? 

fully  to  make  the  experiment ;  but  the  water  did  not  flow ! 
Well,  said  I,  this  is  curious ;  but  a  syphon  will  run :  that  the 
water  does  not  run  from  the  top  of  the  tube,  is  owing  to  the 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere  upon  it.  I  now  ordered  a  capillary 
syphon;  and  was  again  disappointed,  for  the  sluggish  water, 
as  if  envious  of  my  fame,  still  refused  to  move.* 

Having  recovered  a  little  from  the  stupor  into  which  I  had 
been  thrown  by  the  failure  of  another  of  my  schemes,  it 
occurred  to  me  that  if  I  employed  a  syphon  to  carry  water 
over  the  bank  of  a  river  that  communicated  with  the  sea,  the 
syphon  would  run  if  the  outer  leg  on  the  outside  of  the  bank 
was  longer  than  the  inner  leg ;  and  because  the  water  would 
find  its  way  into  the  ocean,  and  be  brought  back  by  the  process 
of  evaporation,  which  is  constantly  going  on,  the  motion  would 
be  perpetual.  I  could  not,  however,  employ  this  method  to 
discover  the  longitude,  either  at  sea  or  land,  and  of  course  I 
was  not  entitled,  from  this  invention,  to  the  ten  thousand 
pounds. 

Another  of  my  machines  consisted  of  two  wheels,  A  and  B : 
the  wheel  A  had  a  number  of  buckets  at  equal  distances 
roimd  its  outer  rim :  these  buckets  were  so  placed  that  they 
would  each  contain  a  ball  of  iron.  Seven  such  balls  were 
always  on  one  side  of  the  wheel  A,  urging  it  downwards ; 
and  one  was  in  the  inside  of  the  wheel  B.  When  the  wheel 
A  had  arrived  in  a  certain  position,  the  lowest  ball  fell  out  of 
its  bucket,  and  rolled  down  an  inclined  plane,  placed  for  that 
purpose,  into  the  interior  of  B ;  and  then  it  rolled  down 
another  inclined  plane  into  the  top  bucket  of  the  wheel  A  ; 
and  so  on.  This  machine  had  a  very  specious  appearance, 
and  was  mistaken  for  a  perpetual  motion  by  thousands  of 
well-informed  persons.  I  need  scarcely  add  that  the  persons 
I  mention  were  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  motion  and  the  theory 
of  mechanics.  A  similar  machine  was  lately  exhibited  for  a 
perpetual  motion,  and  a  great  deal  of  money  made  by  shewing 
it  to  the  good  people  of  New  York,  in  North  America.  My 
last  invention  of  this  kind  consisted  of  an  iron  wheel  and  four 
magnets,  similar  to  the  one  exhibited  some  time  back  in 


*  I  have  since  found  that  nearly  the  same  account  is  given  by  Dr.  Jurin, 
in  the  Appendix  to  Cotes'  Lectures  on  Hydrostatics.  I  can  assure  you, 
however,  that  the  experiments  were  actually  made  by  me  in  the  manner 
above  related* 


218  PEBPETUUM   MOBILE  ; 

Edinburgh,  and  other  places.  As  the  wheel  did  not  move 
uniformly,  and  as  the  power  of  the  magnets  soon  began  to 
diminish,  I  suspected  it  would  ultimately  fail,  and  abandoned 
it  altogether.  It  is  necessary  to  inform  you  that  my  modesty 
— or,  rather,  my  honesty — would  never  permit  me  to  exhibit 
any  of  my  inventions  for  money,  as  I  had  always  very  strong 
grounds  of  suspicion  that  they  would  not  answer,  and  my 
suspicions  were  always  verified  in  a  short  time.  It  was  only 
after  a  great  number  of  disappointments  that  I  began  seriously 
to  think  on  the  subject.  I  at  first  wondered  how  it  happened 
that  my  schemes  should  always  prove  abortive ;  but  I  soon 
discovered  that  I  was  entirely  ignorant  of  the  theory  of 
mechanics.  Not  long  after,  I  had  also  the  mortification  to 
perceive  that,  I  had  totally  mistaken  the  specific  nature  of  the 
machine  which  had  been  so  long  the  object  of  my  search ;  so 
that  it  would  have  been  next  to  a  miracle  if  I  had  found  it. 
I  now  began,  in  earnest,  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  natural  philosophy,  and  I  very  soon  found  that  I 
had  begun  at  the  wrong  end  of  my  business. 

My  misfortunes  had  created  in  me  serious  musings.  Yes, 
said  I,  in  all  ages  mankind  have  had  some  favorite  object  to 
pursue, — a  something  bordering  on  the  limits  of  impossibility. 
Astrology,  or  the  foretelling  of  future  events,  was  once  the 
grand  charm  that  led  men  astray.  People  are  fond  of  prying 
into  futm-ity :  all  men  are  naturally  delighted  with  what  is 
wonderful ;  and  what  pains  do  they  take  to  deceive  them- 
selves !  Astrology  ruled  with  despotic  sway  during  the  reign 
of  ignorance ;  but,  as  knowledge  advanced,  the  chimera 
retreated ;  and  the  few  votaries  it  has  now  left  are  ranked 
either  amongst  the  most  ignorant  or  the  most  knavish  of  all 
the  human  race. 

Alchemy  was  another  favorite  pursuit.  To  be  able  to 
transmute  the  baser  metals  into  gold  w;as  certainly  an  object 
of  the  greatest  consequence,  and  now  the  discovery  would  be 
particularly  desirable.  There  is  no  doubt  that  it  would  be 
liberally  patronized  by  the  Ministers  of  State  and  the  mem- 
bers of  the  British  Senate ;  because,  if  properly  managed,  it 
would  enable  them  to  pay  off  the  national  debt,  and  ease  the 
good  people  of  England  of  the  intolerable  burden  of  taxa- 
tion. In  case  of  such  an  event  taking  place,  what  joy  would 
be  diffused  throughout  the  whole  of  this  great  empire !  The 
people  would  be  wealthy,  and  the  Ministers  again  able  to 


OK,    SEARCH    FOR    SKLF-MOTIVE    POWER.  2l9 


create  places  and  to  give  pensions  ad  infinitum.  But  I  must 
return  to  my  subject.  The  search  after  the  perpetual  motion 
is  of  the  same  nature  as  those  of  astrology  and  alchemy :  it 
has  long  amused  the  ignorant  and  deceived  the  credulous  ; 
but  men  of  science,  properly  qualified  to  judge  of  its  merits, 
look  upon  it  as  a  nonentity,  and  laugh  at  its  proselytes  as 
deluded  creatures,  who  are  pursuing  a  phantom  of  their  own 
creation. 

I  have  not  much  hope  of  being  able  to  convince  those 
persons  who  are  in  search  of  this  shadow  of  a  shade,  that 
their  labours  will  be  fruitless.  I  will  proceed,  however,  to 
describe  the  machine  they  are  endeavouring  to  construe:. 
The  perpetual  motion  is  a  machine  which  possesses  within 
itself  the  principle  of  self-motion ;  and,  because  every  body 
in  nature,  when  in  motion,  would  continue  in  that  state,  it 
follows  that  every  motion,  once  begun,  would  be  perpetual, 
if  it  were  not  acted  upon  by  some  opposing  force,  such  as 
friction,  the  resistance  of  the  air,  &c.  In  order,  then,  to 
produce  a  perpetual  motion,  we  have  only  to  remove  all  the 
obstacles  which  oppose  that  motion,  and  it  is  obvious  that,  if 
we  could  do  this,  any  motion  whatever  would  be  a  perpetual 
motion.  But  how,  let  me  ask,  are  we  to  get  rid  of  these 
obstacles  ?  Can  the  friction  between  tw'o  touching  bodies  be 
entirely  annihilated  ? — or  has  any  substance  yet  been  found 
that  is  void  of  friction?  Can  we  totally  remove  all  the 
resistance  of  the  air,  which  is  a  force  continually  varying  ? 
And  does  not  the  air  at  all  times  retain  its  impeding  force  ? 
They  cannot  be  removed,  then,  so  long  as  the  present  laws 
of  nature  continue  to  exist ;  and  who  will  attempt  to  destroy 
them  ?  Besides,  it  is  a  well-known  principle  in  mechanics, 
"  that  no  power  can  be  gained  by  any  combination  of 
machinery,  except  there  be  at  the  same  time  an  equal  gain  in 
an  opposite  direction  ;"  and  must  there  not  be  some  absolute 
loss  arising  from  opposing  forces,  as  friction,  &c.  ?  How, 
then,  can  a  perpetual  motion  be  foimd  by  any  combination  of 
machinery?  Another  necessary  circumstance  is,  that  the 
motion  of  any  such  machine  be  uniform  ;  for,  if  it  accelerates, 
it  will  in  time  become  swift  enough  to  tear  itself  to  pieces  ; 
if  it  retards,  it  will  at  length  stop.  Now,  among  all  the 
numerous  forces  acting  on  machines, — forces,  too,  which  are 
continually  var}dng,  according  to  known  causes,  and  to  the 


220  PEEPETUXJM  mobile; 

influence  of  which  every  machine  is  constantly  liable, — ^who 
is  there  so  hardy  as  even  to  imagine  that  a  machine  can  be 
constructed,  the  motion  of  which  shall  be  constant,  and  uni- 
formly the  same  ?  There  is  one  perpetual  motion,  and  but 
one, — that  is,  I  know  of  but  one, — and  that  was  constructed 
by  Infinite  Wisdom.  The  Divine  Creator  of  the  universe 
has  balanced  this  earth  with  such  exquisite  art,  that  its 
diurnal  revolutions  are  performed  so  precisely  in  the  same 
time,  that  it  has  not  varied  the  hundredth  part  of  a  second 
since  the  time  of  Hipparchus,  which  is  noyr  more  than  two 
thousand  years. 

All  that  we  can  hope  is,  that  the  beams  of  science  will 
diffuse  truth  more  generally  through  the  world ;  for,  other- 
wise, dreamers  of  every  kind  will  continue  to  dream  to  the 
end  of  time. 


-The  following  article  appeared  in  an  American  scientific 
journal.  The  first  part  of  it  only  is  here  taken  from  a  reprint 
in  the  "  Technological  Repository,"  entitled — 

On  the  futility  of  the  attempts  to  construct  Perpetual  Motions,  By 
Dr,  Thomas  -P.  Jones,  JSditor  of  the  ^*  Journal  of  the  Franklin 
Institute" 

It  will  not  be  expected,  by  those  conversant  with  the 
inquiry,  that  anything  really  new  can  be  offered  on  a  subject 
which  has  been  so  frequently  and  so  ably  treated  as  the 
inquiry  into  the  possibility  of  constructing  a  machine  which 
has  within  itself  a  principle  of  continued  motion.  There  is 
something  extremely  fascinating  in  the  pursuit  of  this  object, 
as  is  evinced  not  only  by  the  attempts  of  a  host  of  tyros  in 
mechanics,  but  by  the  persevering  efforts  of  some  men  of 
genius  and  science,  who,  although  they  have  professed  faith 
in  the  admitted  laws  of  motion,  have  yet  proved  by  their 
works  that  their  faith  was  not  perfect.  Whilst  there  is 
nothing,  in  the  known  laws  which  govern  the  material  world, 
upon  which  to  found  the  idea  of  being  able  to  construct  a 
perpetual  motion,  the  time  might  not  be  misspent  which 
should  be  devoted  to  an  investigation  of  the  causes  which 
operate  upon  the  mind  in  exciting  and  keeping  alive  the  ex- 
pectation that  such  a  machine  will  somq  day  be  discovered ; 


OK,    SEARCH    r«R    SELF-MOTIYB  POWEK.  221 

but  if  we  possessed  the  ability  fully  to  prosecute  this  investi- 
gation, it  would  belong  more  to  a  work  devoted  to  moral, 
than  to  mechanical,  philosophy. 

Some  of  our  readers  may  be  ready  to  exclaim,  "  But  we 
have  understood  that  all  philosophers  denied  the  possibility 
of  any  such  thing."  We  believe  that  all  who  really  merit 
the  name  of  mechanical  philosophers  do  unite  in  such  a 
denial ;  but,  if  this  be  the  fact,  the  corps  is  but  a  small  one ; 
for  our  own  observations,  together  with  numerous  facts  upon 
record  which  might  be  called  as  evidence,  go  to  prove  most 
clearly  that  there  are  but  few  persons  who  admit  this  truth 
as  they  admit  an  axiom :  there  appears,  in  general,  to  exist 
some  mental  reservation;  some  apprehension  that,  if  they 
declare  the  thing  impossible,  it  may  nevertheless  happen  that 
some  lucky  wight  may  "hit  upon  it,"  and  thus  ruin  their  re- 
putation as  accurate  philosophers ! 

The  subject  of  mechanics  is  one  which,  of  necessity, 
occupies  a  large  portion  of  the  attention  of  mankind.  All  the 
moving  powers  which  we  can  command  are  called  to  our 
aid ;  but  into  the  actual  employment  and  adaptation  there 
enters  much  more  of  practice  than  of  principle.  A  great 
portion  of  our  mechanics  are  men  of  observation,  intelligence, 
and  experience ;  and  many  of  them  have  paid  praiseworthy 
attention  to  science.  But  their  very'  pursuits  and  occupa- 
tions, although  greatly  aided  by  the  scientific  knowledge  they 
have  acquired,  forbid  their  carrying  such  investigations  to  a 
great  extent.  And  we  ought  not,  therefore,  to  be  much 
astonished  if  some  of  them  are  occasionally  engaged  in  this 
fruitless  pursuit.  To  their  credit,  however,  this  is  now  a 
rare  occurrence,  as  the  observations  founded  upon  correct 
practice  must  necessarily  lead  to  the  same  general  results  as 
does  a  correct  theory.  The  constant  employment  or  notice 
of  the  various  machines  which  are  daily  seen  in  operation, 
induces  almost  every  man  to  conclude  that  he  knows  some- 
thing of  mechanics.  In  many  of  these  machines,  the  cause  of 
their  motion  is  very  obscure ;  whilst  the  motion  itself  is  not 
only  evident,  but  so  uniform  and  continuous,  as  may  well 
lead  the  ordinary  mind  astray,  and  cause  the  conclusion  that 
the  step  from  some  of  them  to  an  actual  perpetual  motion  is 
but  a  short  one. 

There  are  but  few  terms  in  our  language  which  are  less 
definite  than  the  term  "  science ;"  it  embraces  almost  every 


222  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

department  of  human  knowledge,  whether  natural,  moral,  or 
physical;  and  it  happens,  unfortunately,  that  when  philo- 
sophers and  men  of  science  are  mentioned,  the  world  are  not 
Very  discriminative ;  and  the  opinion  of  the  adept  in  natural 
history,  or  in  chemistry,  will  carry  an  undue  weight  in 
subjects  to  which  he  has  not  attended,  and  of  which, 
although  he  is  a  man,  he  is  nearly  or  completely  ignorant 
It  is  in  this  way  certainly,  and  in  this  only,  that  the  votaries  of 
science,  and  the  believers  in  a  mechanical  perpetual  motion, 
have  been  identified.  On  which  side  were  the  scientific 
men  of  Philadelphia  arranged,  when  Redheffer's  machine 
was  exhibited  at  Chesnut  Hill?  Those  who  recollect  the 
period  will  find  no  difficulty  in  answering  the  question. 
We  believe  that  nineteen-twentieths  of  those  that  were  so 
esteemed  were  avowed  believers.  We  know  one  gentle- 
man who  professed,  and  was  believed,  to  be  a  man  of 
great  mechanical  knowledge,  who  delayed  in  completing  a 
patent,  lest  Redheffer^s  machine  should  be  found  to  be 
genuine.  We  are  of  opinion  that  there  is  scarcely  any 
other  subject  so  familiarly  spoken  of,  and  so  little  understood, 
as  the  principles  of  mechanics;  and  no  one,  therefore,  in 
which  quackery  is  more  certain  of  success. 

Let  not  our  readers  expect  that,  because  we  have  thus 
freely  spoken  our  sentiments,  we  are  about  to  demonstrate 
that  a  mechanical  perpetual  motion  is  an  impossibility :  we 
should  indeed  be  willing  to  take  any  particular  machine, 
which  might  be  pointed  out  to  us  as  such,  and  undertake  to 
show  the  fallacy  of  its  claim ;  but  to  give  a  general  negative 
demonstration  is  a  task  which  we  cannot  undertake.  It 
belongs  to  those  who  advocate  its  possibility,  to  establish  a 
principle  upon  which  it  may  be  made  to  act ;  the  general 
practice,  however,  has  been  to  exhibit  a  complication  of 
levers,  weights,  or  other  powers,  which  serve  to  obscure  the 
action  of  the  individual  parts,  and  to  claim,  for  the  whole, 
effects  to  which  these  individual  parts,  taken  alone,  have 
no  power  to  contribute. 

It  has  been,  we  think,  truly  observed,  that  to  produce  a 
perpetual  motion  we  must  find  a  body  which  is  at  the  same 
time  both  heavier  and  lighter  than  itself,  and  in  which  the 
action  and  re-action  may  consequently  be  unequal.  This  is 
manifestly  a  physical  absurdity ;  and  although  many  attempts 
have  been  made  to  cheat  bodies  out  of  the  properties  with 


OR,    SEARCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  223 

which  nature  has  endued  them,  yet  no  one  has  had  the 
hardihood  to  deprive  them  of  their  essence  in  a  legitimate 
way. 

To  investigate  the  laws  which  obtain  in  the  motion  of 
bodies,  would  require  a  treatise  of  no  small  length:  this, 
therefore,  we  cannot  attempt ;  but,  nevertheless,  think  it 
necessary  to  offer  a  few  remarks  upon  some  of  them,  and 
particularly  upon  the  property  denominated  inertia,  and  upon 
momentum. 

The  very  words  which  we  employ  to  designate  a  particular 
thing  are  frequently  permitted  to  lead  us  into  error,  in  conse- 
quence of  our  not  restricting  our  terms  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  things  to  which  they  are  applied:  thus,  we 
frequently  use  the  expression,  "  the  power  of  inertia," 
which  may  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  from  this  property 
of  matter  some  power  may  be  derived;  although  the  very 
term  "  inertia "  is  intended  to  express  the  simple  fact  that 
matter  is  altogether  inactive  or  powerless.  Inertia  is  a  mere 
nullity ;  and,  therefore,  instead  of  conveying  the  idea  of  power, 
it  is  intended  to  express  the  entire  absence,  rather  than  the 
existence,  of  that  property.  If  this  be  true,  inertia  can  give 
us  no  aid  in  producing  a  perpetual  motion ;  for,  supposing, 
for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  gravitation,  friction,  and  a 
resisting  medium,  could  be  placed  out  of  the  question ;  as 
every  single  impulse  which  is  given  to  matter  tends  to  carry 
it  on  in  a  straight  line,  whatever  deflected  it  must  necessarily 
abstract  from,  and  eventually  stop,  its  motion.  All  our 
machines  must  have  either  a  vibratory  or  a  curvilinear 
motion,  or  they  woidd,  from  their  very  structure,  soon  elude 
our  grasp ;  any  impidse  which  we  give  to  them  cannot,  there- 
fore, be  continued,  in  consequence  of  the  inertia  of  the  matter 
of  which  they  are  composed.  But  we  must  also,  and  at  every 
moment,  encounter  friction  and  a  resisting  medium ;  and,  in 
consequence  of  these,  our  machine  must  eventually  lose  what- 
ever impulse  we  may  have  given  to  it ;  for,  although  matter 
is  indifferent  both  to  rest  and  motion,  it  is  not  so  to  impulse, 
or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  to  resistance ;  and  whether  we 
abstract  from  its  motion  by  grains  or  by  ounces,  it  must 
eventually  cease.  Upon  this  it  is  imnecessary  to  dwell, 
because  the  fact  must  be  admitted  on  all  hands  to  be  as 
stated.  But  if  inertia,  or  the  absence  of  power,  cannot  give 
power  to  a  machine,  may  we  not  obtain  something  from 


224  TERPETUUM     MOBIiE ; 

momentum  ?     Momentimi  is  the  quantity  of  motion,  and  is 
compounded  of  the  quantity  of  the  matter  moved,  and  the 
velocity  with  which  it  moves.      The  case  we  have  been  con- 
sidering imder  the  head  of  inertia  is  a  case  of  momentum ;  as 
we  have  supposed  a  certain  impulse  given  to  matter,  which 
matter  has,   in  consequence,  acquired   motion,   and   which 
motion,  from  inertia,   woidd   be   continued    were   there   no 
counteracting  causes.      If  we  give  a  double  velocity  to  our 
machine,  or  mass  of  matter — as  to  a  wheel,  for  example — 
we  give  a  double  momentum,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  a 
double  space  of  time,  cceteris  paribus^  to  exhaust  this  motion. 
We  have  not,  therefore,  advanced  a  single  step  towards  per- 
petuity.    It  consequently  is  not  in  this  way  that  aid  has  been 
sought  from  momentum,  but  one  which,  although  it  is  equally 
fallacious,  is  better  calculated  to  deceive.      We  have  already 
observed   that   the   momentum   of  a  body  is  increased  by 
increasing  its  velocity,  or  the  space  through  which  it  passes 
in  a  given  time,  although  its  quantity  of  matter  remains  the 
same.     Suppose   We  have  a  horizontal  lever,  or  bar,  with 
equal  weights  at  each  end  of  it,  A  and  B,  supported  by  a 
fulcnmi  between  them,  and  that  the  fulcrum  is  but  half  the 
distance  from  A  at  which  it  stands  from  B ;  when  allowed 
to  move,  B  will  therefore  preponderate,  and  will  move  with  a 
velocity  which  will  be  double  that  of  A — that  is,  it  will 
descend  two  inches  whilst  A  ascends  but  one :  its  momentum 
power,  or  quantity  of  motion,  will  therefore  be  double.      If, 
now,  we  could  cause  the  fulcrum  to  change  its  place — that  is, 
to  bring  it  as  near  to  B  as  it  was  to  A,  and  back  again 
alternately,  each  of  the  weights  would  preponderate  in  its 
turn,  and  a  perpetual  vibration  would  ensue.     How  an  effect 
of  this   kind  has  been  attempted,   will   be   seen   upon   an 
examination  of  some  of  the  plans  to  be  presented  in   the 
sequel. 

In  many  instances,  machines  have  been  made  so  complex 
as  to  render  an  analysis  of  them  somewhat  difficult,  even 
to  well-informed  observers.  This  complexity,  however, 
instead  of  promoting  the  desired  end,  only  renders  a  larger 
portion  of  foreign  aid  necessary  to  produce  and  continue  the 
motion. 

Numerous  impositions  have  been  practised  by  individuals 
who  have  pretended  that  they  had  made  self-moving  ma- 
chines.    When  deceptions  of  this  sort  have  been  practised. 


OE,    3EAECH   FOB   SBLF-MOTITE   POWER.  225 

tlie  charlatans  have,  of  course,  endeavoured  to  perpetuate  the 
conceahnent  of  their  mode  of  procedure.* 

[This  article,  which  is  of  a  very  verbose  character,  pro- 
ceeds to  denounce  Redheffer's  machine  as  a  deceptive  one, 
and  gives  an  account  of  "  the  wheel  of  Orfiyreus,"  similar  to 
that  already  given  in  the  present  collection.  We  now  give 
in  aii  abridged  form  the  remaining  portion  of  this  paper, 
entitled — ] 

Observations  on  the  attempt  to  construct  Machines  of  the  kind  usually 
intended  by  the  term  of  Perpetual  Motion;  with  notices  of  some  of 
the  particular  Machines  which  have  at  different  times  been  proposed 
for  the  attainment  of  this  object.    By  the  Editor  A 

Almost  the  only  machine  of  the  kind  which  has  obtained  any 
celebrity  is  the  wheel  of  Orfiyreus,  of  which  an  acco\mt  was 
published  by  the  celebrated  philosopher,  's  Gravesande,  in 
1774. 

[Diagrams  from  Wilkins,  Gravesande,  and  Nicholson,  being 
described,  the  Editor  proceeds : — ] 

The  simplest  rule  that  we  can  give,  by  which  to  perceive 
the  fallacy  of  every  plan  depending  upon  the  ascent  and 
descent  of  weights,  is,  that  whatever  may  be  the  weight  which 
descends  in  a  given  time,  it  must  raise  an  equal  portion  of 
matter  to  the  same  perpendicular  height,  in  the  same  time, 
or  the  machine  must  evidently  stop.  Now,  the  power  required 
to  raise  any  weight  to  a  given  height  is  the  same,  provided 
the  time  be  the  same,  whether  that  weight  be  raised  vertically 
or  obliquely.  If  the  weights,  the  balls,  or  the  mercury  are 
to  descend,  they  must  first  ascend  to  the  necessary  height ; 
an  equilibrium  must  therefore  soon  take  place,  shotdd  motion 
be  produced  by  any  extraneous  force.  Putting  friction  and  a 
resisting  medium  out  of  the  question,  these  machines  supply 
no  source  of  motion  even  to  themselves. { 

*  Gill's   Technological   and   Microscopic    Repository,  vol.   6,  1830, 
p.*  06,  which  appears  to  be  the  last  volume  published. 

f  Thomas  P.  Jones,  M.D. 

X  Journal  of  the  Franklin  Institute,  Philadelphia  (1828),  vol.  6,  p.  318. 


226  PEEPETUUM  mobile; 

The  two  following  articles  are  from  the  "Percy Anecdotes:" 

Pebpetual  Motion  Seeker. — Mr.  Stukeley  was  a  gentle- 
man of  fortune,  bred  to  the  law,  but  relinquished  the  pro- 
fession, and  retired  into  the  country,  filled  with  the  project  of 
discovering  the  perpetual  motion.  During  a  period  of  thirty 
years,  he  never  went  abroad  but  once,  which  was  when  he 
was  obliged  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  King  George 
the  First ;  this  was  also  the  only  time  he  changed  his  shirt 
and  clothes,  or  shaved  himself,  during  the  whole  time  of  his 
retirement. 

Mr.  Stukeley  was  at  once  the  dirtiest  and  cleanliest  of  men, 
washing  his  hands  twenty  times  a  day,  but  his  hands  only. 
His  family  consisted  of  two  female  servants,  one  of  whom 
lived  in  the  house  and  the  other  out  of  it.  He  never  had  his 
bed  made.  After  he  relinquished  the  project  of  perpetual 
motion,  he  devoted  himself  to  observing  the  works  and 
economy  of  ants,  and  stocked  the  town  so  plentifully  with 
that  insect,  that  the  fruits  in  the  gardens  were  devoured  by 
them.  ****** 

The  gentleman  who  accompanied  him  to  the  town-hall 
when  he  went  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  talked  with  him 
on  every  subject  he  could  recollect,  without  discovering  in 
him  the  least  tincture  of  madness.  He  rallied  himself  on 
the  perpetual  motion,  laughed  at  the  folly  of  confining  him- 
self in-doors,  and  said  he  believed  he  should,  some  time  or 
other,  come  abroad  again,  like  other  men.  He  was  always 
esteemed  a  person  of  good  understanding,  before  his  shutting 
himself  up.  At  the  time  of  his  death,  he  was  building  a 
house  the  walls  of  which  were  seven  feet  thick. — [Vol.  10. 
Article  "  Eccentricity,"  p.  3.] 


Spence's  Perpetual  Motion. — ^Among  those  who  have 
attempted  the  grand  problem  which  has  puzzled  philosophers 
in  all  ages — the  discovery  of  perpetual  motion — few  persons 
have  displayed  more  ingenuity  than  John  Spence,  an  untu- 
tored mechanic  of  Linlithgow.  When  only  three  or  four 
years  of  age,  Spence  was  excessively  fond  of  mechanical 
inventions,  and  never  could  get  the  idea  of  them  banished 
from  his  mind.  When  eleven  years  old,  he  invented  and  con- 
structed a  model  of  a  loom,  the  whole  working  apparatus  of 


OR,    SEAUCH    FOTl    SEliF-MOTITE    POWER.  227 

which  was  set  in  motion  by  a  winch,  or  handle,  at  one  side. 
It  was  contrived  on  the  same  principle  as  the  looms  subse- 
quently constructed  in  Glasgow  to  be  wrought  by  the  steam- 
engine,  but  had  less  machinery.  He  gave  the  model  to  a 
gentleman  of  Stirling,  and  never  heard  what  became  of  it. 
When  twelve  years  old,  he  was  put  to  the  trade  of  a  shoe- 
maker; after  only  eight  days'  instruction,  he  was  able  to 
make  shoes  on  his  own  acco\mt ;  not  that  he  was  master  of 
the  trade,  but  he  was  then  left  to  the  resources  of  his  own 
ingenuity,  and  acquired  the  art  without  farther  actual  super- 
intendence. But  the  natural  bent  of  his  genius  leaned 
towards  mechanics,  and  he  never  liked  the  employment. 
Wheels  and  levers  occupied  his  mind  from  his  earliest  recol- 
lection, and  he  was  happy  only  when  he  was  inventing,  or 
constructing  what  he  had  invented.  He  soon  left  his  native 
town,  and  went  to  Glasgow,  not  with  the  view  of  following 
out  the  trade  of  a  shoemaker,  but  in  the  hope  of  getting  into 
an  employment  which  would  place  him  near  some  of  the 
magnificent  machines  used  by  the  manufacturers  of  that  city. 
Uninstructed  as  an  artist,  however,  and  utterly  ignorant  of 
spinning  and  weaving,  it  was  difficult  for  him  to  find  a  situa- 
tion about  a  manufactory  which  he  was  fitted  to  fill.  At  last 
he  thought  himself  qualified  for  the  himible  situation  of  the 
keeper  of  an  engine ;  and,  accordingly,  engaged  himself  in 
that  capacity.  For  two  years  his  daily  occupation  was  to 
feed  the  furnace  and  to  oil  the  engine ;  and  he  felt  happy  in 
the  employment,  for  it  afforded  him  an  opportunity  of  looking 
upon  wheels  in  motion.  Tired,  at  last,  of  the  sameness  of 
the  scene,  he  returned  to  Linlithgow,  and  endeavoured  to 
follow  his  original  trade.  But  the  mechanical  powers  still 
haunted  his  imagination,  and  he  continued  to  invent  and 
construct,  till  he  sometimes  brought  upon  himself  the  admo- 
nitions of  his  friends  and  the  scoffs  of  his  enemies,  for 
devoting  so  much  time  to  his  visionary  inventions,  as  they 
called  them,  instead  of  attending  to  his  trade.  The  invention 
of  the  long-sought-for  perpetual  motion  appeared  to  him  a 
splendid  enterprise,  attractive  by  the  difficulty  which  attended 
it,  and  it  excited  his  ambition  by  the  very  obstacles  which  it 
presented.  He  directed  his  ingenuity  to  that  object,  and  at 
length  he  produced  a  piece  of  mechanism  of  extraordinary 
ingenuity. 

In  the  year  1814,  he  had  become  so  disgusted  with  the 

R 


228  PEEPETUUM  mobile; 

trade  of  a  shoemaker,  that  he  could  continue  it  no  longer. 
Often  would  he  throw  the  shoe  from  his  hand  in  indignation, 
when  his  mind  was  diving  deep  into  the  principles  of  me- 
chanics, and  accuse  fortune  for  dooming  him  to  such  despi- 
cable drudgery.  As  often  would  he  draw  down  the  sage 
advices  of  his  spouse,  who  regarded  him  as  the  dupe  of  a 
heated  imagination.  He  now  conceived  the  idea  of  becoming 
a  weaver.  He  had  then  in  view  to  erect  looms  to  be  worked 
by  a  water-wheel ;  and  thus  promised  himself  both  profit  and 
pleasure  from  his  change  of  profession.  Accordingly,  his 
first  object  was  to  learn  the  trade  of  a  weaver.  This  was 
soon  accomplished.  He  constructed  with  his  own  hands  the 
whole  apparatus  of  a  loom,  except  the  treddles  and  reed ;  got 
a  professional  weaver  to  put  in  the  first  web ;  and,  without  any 
other  instruction,  made  as  good  cloth  as  those  regularly  bred 
to  the  business.  This  scheme,  however,  was  never  prosecuted 
farther. 

His  last  effort  was  to  complete  his  discovery  of  a  perpetual 
motion.  The  invention  was  known  in  Linlithgow  a  consider- 
able time  before  it  was  known  to  the  public;  but  it  was 
despised  there,  in  the  usual  way,  for  a  prophet  is  not  without 
honour,  save  in  his  own  country.  The  voice  of  fame,  how- 
ever, at  length  taught  the  good  folks  that  a  genius  was 
among  them,  and  they  then  crowded  to  see  it,  with  as  much 
eagerness  as  they  formerly  displayed  indifference  about  it. 
A  considerable  number  of  strangers  also  visited  it,  and  all 
expressed  their  admiration  of  the  ingenuity,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  the  simplicity  of  the  contrivance. 

It  is  difficult  to  convey  an  idea  of  the  invention  by  descrip- 
tion. A  wooden  beam,  poised  by  the  centre,  has  a  piece  of 
steel  attached  to  one  end  of  it,  which  is  alternately  drawn  up 
by  a  piece  of  magnet  placed  above  it,  and  down  by  another 
placed  below  it ;  and  as  the  end  of  the  beam  approaches  the 
magnet,  either  above  or  below,  the  machine  interjects  a  non- 
conducting substance,  which  suspends  the  attraction  of  the 
magnet  approached,  and  allows  the  other  to  exert  its  powers. 
Thus  the  end  of  the  beam  continually  ascends  and  descends 
betwixt  the  two  magDets,  without  ever  coming  into  contact 
with  either,  the  attractive  power  of  each  being  suspended 
precisely  at  the  moment  of  nearest  approach.  As  the  mag- 
netic attraction  is  a  permanently  operating  power,  there 
appears  to  be  no  limit  to  continuance  of  the  motion,  but  the 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  229 

endurance  of  the  materials  of  tlie  machine.  So  much  may  be 
said  of  his  model,  which  is  rather  a  practical  development  of 
the  principle  than  an  application  of  it  to  any  purpose. 

Spence  afterwards  simplified  the  apparatus,  and  exhibited 
a  horizontal  wheel,  set  full  of  needles,  attracted  constantly 
round  by  the  magnetic  power;  and  which,  he  said,  would 
move  as  long  as  the  axle  of  the  wheel  would  last,  or  the 
magnetic  virtue  remain. 

Spence  made  several  other  ingenious  machines,  including  a 
self-moving  car,  which  was  exhibited  in  Edinburgh,  and  on 
which  he  used  frequently  to  make  excursions  along  the  road. 
This  ingenious  artist  has  very  little  of  the  enthusiastic  visionary 
in  his  composition,  but  possesses  a  full  reliance  on  his  own 
powers.  His  education  has  been  that  of  the  operative 
mechanics  of  Scotldnd  in  general — ^reading,  writing,  and 
arithmetic ;  but  he  has  an  intuitive  perception  of  every 
principle  connected  with  mechanics,  which  he  never  studied 
in  books ;  because  he  found,  on  attempting  to  do  so,  that  he 
derived  no  instruction  from  reading,  on  account  of  not  under- 
standing the  terms.  He  has  studied  mechanics,  however, 
extensively  in  another  way — ^viz.,  by  visiting  many  and  various . 
machines,  by  observing  them  in  motion,  and  by  thinking  on 
the  principles  developed  in  their  construction.  He  cannot, 
however,  he  says,  well  understand  a  scientific  description,  or 
easily  commimicate  his  own  ideas  by  description  to  others. 
When  he  has  invented  any  particular  piece  of  mechanism,  he 
constructs  a  model  of  it,  and  thus  at  once  satisfies  his  own 
mind  on  the  practicability  of  the  principles,  and  conveys  his 
ideas  to  other  minds — ^rather,  however,  for  his  own  gratifi- 
cation than  for  any  assistance  he  expects  to  obtain  from  it. 
[Article  "  Ingenuity.'* — See  also  Chapter  IX.,  page  145.] 


Under  the  title  of  "A  few  words  inducing  towards  the 
discovery  of  Perpetual  Motion,  perhaps  the  actual  discovery 
thereof,"  the  following  appears  in  the  "  Pamphleteer :" — 

London,  March,  1822. 
What  is  meant  by  the  term  "  Perpetual  Motion  ?  "     Is  it 
supposed  that  there  is  an  undiscovered  substance  in  the  world, 
that  will  of  itself  perpetually  move,  with  as  little  apparent 


230  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

cause  as  that  which  actuates  the  needle  in  becoming  motion- 
less in  one  particular  position  ?  Or,  is  it  to  be  found  in  the 
combined  re-action  of  mechanical  powers  ? 

The  first  idea  is  stamped  with  a  degree  of  probability,  by 
the  mystery  of  the  needle ;  yet  I  imagine  the  latter  is  relied 
on  with  the  greater  confidence  of  mankind,  and  is  the  pith  of 
the  following  few  words : — 

It  is  well  known  that  the  weight  of  a  pendulum  will  almost 
regain  the  level  from  which  it  descended,  losing  a  little 
space  at  every  vibration,  until  it  becomes  motionless ;  if  of 
itself  it  could  exceed  or  even  regain  the  level,  doubtless  it 
would  become  a  perpetual  motion. 

To  find  a  power  that  will  aid  the  motion  of  the  pendidum, 
and  in  conjunction  renew  its  strength,  is  what  is  wanted  to 
create  perpetual  motion. 

What  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  will  at  least  induce 
towards  the  discovery  of  this  power. 

The  principal  parts  of  the  machinery  about  to  be  shown 
are  in  number  three  : — 

A  vibrating  pendulum, 

A  revolving  pendulum,  and 

A  tubular  lever. 

A  vibrating  pendulum  in  motion  describes  a  segment  of  a 
circle,  and  returns  on  the  same  segment,  and  at  every  vibra- 
tion its  described  segment  decreases. 

A  revolving  pendulum  is  composed  of  two  or  more  pen- 
dulums, united  at  their  lighter  extremities,  there  revolving  on 
an  axis,  the  heavier  extremities  being  placed  at  equal  dis- 
tances in  the  outer  circle  :  this,  I  believe,  is  what  is  termed 
a  fly-wheel  when  affixed  to  hand-mills,  &c. 

The  tubular  lever  is  the  chief  instigator  of  the  whole,  and 
must  contain  a  weight  apportioned  to  the  weights  of  the  two 
pendulums. 

Fix  the  lever  on  a  cross  axis :  thus,  on  an  axis  within  a 
circle,  the  circle  on  an  axis  at  opposite  angles,  thereby  is  given 
to  each  extremity  of  the  lever  a  revolving  power  of  motion ; 
attach  one  extremity  of  the  lever  to  the  outer  circle  of  a 
revolving  pendulum,  the  other  extremity  confine  within  the 
bar  of  the  vibrating  pendulum ;  thus  combined,  the  efiect  to 
be  produced  when  put  in  motion  will  be  this — 

The  two  pendulums  will  guide  the  motion  of  the  lever, 
which  then  partakes  of  the  power  of  a  pendulum,  giving  fresh 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  231 

impulse  at  every  vibration  of  the  pendulum,  and  every  half 
revolution  of  the  revolving  pendulum  ;  for,  as  each  extremity 
of  the  lever  rises,  the  weight  within  falls  to  the  opposite 
extremity,  and  gives  fresh  impulse  to  the  whole  :  thus  (if 
my  idea  is  correct)  will  be  produced  motion  perpetual — that 
is  to  say,  perpetual  so  long  as  the  materials  of  which  it  is 
made  will  hold  together. 

1  have  given  this  short  description  merely  by  way  of 
example,  as  I  believe  there  are  several  ways  of  combining 
these  three  powers,  so  as  to  produce  perpetual  motion,  if  my 
idea  on  the  subject  is  correct. 

The  lever  may  contain  mercury  or  a  solid  orb  of  heavy 
substance ;  and  if  the  tube  be  exhausted  of  air  the  weight  will 
pass  more  freely,  and  certainly  increase  the  power  of  the 
lever.* 


The  two  following  claims  occur  among  the  many  instances 
of  alleged  discovery  : — 

That  great  phaenomenon,  a  perpetual  motion,  is  now  found 
out  by  Sir  Charles  le  Blon,  and  Henry  Huish,  Esq.,  captain  in 
the  Royal  navy.  The  mechanical  part  of  it  was  performed 
and  improved  by  Mr.  William  Paget,  watchmaker,  late  of 
Burford,  in  the  county  of  Oxford. — (The  "London  Magazine," 
1756.) 


Amongst  the  perpetual  claimants  of  this  (so  far  as  we 
know)  undiscovered  discovery,  another  has  arisen,  who 
asserts  that  he  has  invented  one  which  has  not  ceased  for 
several  years,  and  which,  unencumbered  by  weights  and 
springs,  and  such  "  foolery,"  will  maintain  itself  as  well  for 
a  century  as  a  day  :  its  power  and  velocity,  he  asserts,  are 
equal  to  anything. — (The  "  Imperial  Magazine,"  1823.) 


Mr.  Gill,  as  chairman  of  the  Mechanical  Section  of  the 
Society  of  Arts,  having,  in  Thomson's  "  Annals  of  Philosophy,*' 

♦  The  Pamphleteer,  vol.  21,  1822. 
No.  41,  Tract  8.— Considerations  of  the  Police  Report  of  1816,  &c. 
With  a  few  words  inducing  towards  the  discovery  of  Perpetual  Motion-^ 
perhaps  the  actual  discovery  thereof.     Page  207. 


232  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

1820,  exposed  an  imposture,  as  already  given,  now,  in  his 
own  Journal,  has  "Another  pretended  Perpetual  Motion 
exposed :" — 

The  puhlic  are  highly  indebted  to  the  spirited  conduct  of 
three  respectable  and  scientific  individuals,  in  suppressing  a 
gross  imposition  upon  the  too  easy  credulity  of  the  British 
public.  The  exhibition  was  in  Fleet-street,  and  the  admis- 
sion money  demanded  was  two  shillings  for  each  person.  It 
has  been  described  to  us  (for  we  had  not  faith  enough  in  the 
practicability  of  the  thing  to  wish  to  see  it)  as  consisting  of 
two  upright  axes ;  their  upper  and  lower  pivots  turning  in 
holes  made  through  pieces  of  brass  sufficiently  thick  to 
enclose  any  communicating  powers  from  machinery  placed 
either  above  or  below  the  pivots,  to  intimate  that  no  motion 
was  conveyed  to  the  axes  through  them.  Upon  one  of  the 
axes,  two  toothed  wheels  were  fixed  obliquely,  which  worked 
into  a  long  pinion  upon  the  other  axis  ;  and  upon  the  upper 
surface  of  one  of  the  toothed  wheels  three  inclined  planes 
were  fixed,  having  a  small  waggon  or  carriage  upon  each, 
with  weights  affixed  to  them ;  and  it  was  pretended,  by  the 
exhibitor,  that  these  carriages,  by  their  downward  tendencies, 
were  the  real  cause  of  the  motion.  This,  however,  was  all 
pretence,  and  intended  to  divert  the  attention  of  the  observers 
from  the  real  source  of  motion. 

We  have  already  stated  that  the  pivots  of  the  upright  axes 
passed  through  thick  pieces  of  brass.  And  it  was  evident 
that  one  or  other  of  these  pieces  included  two  toothed  wheels, 
the  one  upon  the  pivot  which  passed  through  it,  and  the 
other  upon  another  axis,  which  derived  its  motion  from  a 
concealed  spring  movement,  placed  either  above,  or,  more 
probably,  below  the  pivot,  in  the  support  of  the  machine  ; 
which  spring  was  wound  up  from  time  to  time,  as  its  power 
became  exhausted.  One  of  the  gentlemen  ofiered  to  give 
the  exhibitor  a  thousand  pounds,  provided  he  would  suffer 
him  to  enclose  the  machine  in  a  locked  chest,  and  that  it 
should  be  found  to  continue  in  motion  one  week  afterwards. 
This  he  declined  to  accept ;  but,  upon  their  assuring  him  of 
their  conviction  of  their  being  possessed  of  the  true  cause  of 
its  motion,  twice  did  he  refund  the  money  he  had  taken  from 
them !  They  did  not,  however,  stop  here  ;  for,  after  detect- 
ing the  imposition  themselves,  they  thought  it  their  duty  to 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTITE    POWER.  233 

prevent  the  public  from  being  farther  imposed  upon;  and 
therefore  they  prepared  a  placard,  and  paid  a  person  for 
carrying  it  up  and  down  Fleet-street,  to  caution  the  public 
against  being  duped  by  any  pretended  perpetual  motion. 
This  had  the  effect  of  dislodging  the  proprietor  from  his  first 
place  of  exhibition,  and  it  was  thought  to  have  suppressed 
the  delusion :  but  not  so  ;  he  soon  recovered  from  his  panic, 
and  in  his  new  placard  announced  that  the  real  perpetual 
motion  was  only  to  be  seen  there :  he  also  gave  out  that  it 
was  his  intention  soon  to  take  out  a  patent  for  it ;  and  several 
gentlemen  actually  called  upon  the  editor  to  inform  him 
thereof.  The  exhibitor  did  not  stop  even  there,  but  laid  a 
complaint  before  the  Lord  Mayor,  of  the  annoying  conduct 
of  the  gentlemen  who  had  detected  the  imposition ;  but  his 
Lordship,  much  to  his  credit  and  to  the  dismay  of  the  quack, 
informed  him  that  they  had  acted  very  properly ;  that  their 
conduct  was  highly  praiseworthy ;  and  that,  had  they  not 
done  it,  he  should  have  found  it  necessary  to  have  taken  the 
same  measure. 

We  hope  that  we  may  now  congratulate  the  public  upon 
being  freed  from  this  imposture,  which  had,  however,  founa 
many  believers  in  the  possibility  of  the  thing  ;  and  we  would 
seriously  advise  all  persons,  in  future,  to  inquire  into  the 
causes  which  actuate  these  pretended  self-movers,  and  not 
give  themselves  up  to  the  expectation  that  such  an  invention 
will  ever  be  discovered. 

The  Society  of  Arts  has  been  so  very  often  annoyed  by  the 
claims  of  persons  bringing  pretended  self-moving  machines, 
or  perpetual  motions,  before  it,  that  it  is  about  to  offer  a 
premium  for  the  best  demonstration  of  the  utter  impractica- 
bility of  such  a  thing  being  ever  accomplished. 

The  imposture  of  another  of  these  charlatans,  who  exhi- 
bited in  the  Burlington  Arcade,  was  last  year  detected,  and 
soon  stopped,  by  the  editor.* 

A  conespondent  writes  Mr.  Gill  "  On  a  pretended  Per- 
petual Motion,"  which  would  appear  to  be  the  same  he 
himself  described  in  1820  : — 

Bury  St.  Edmunds,  Suffolk,  Dec.  10,  1825 
Sir, — Some  few  years  since  a  person  exhibited  in  Bury  a 

•  The  Technical  Repository.     By  Thomas  Gill.     Vol.  1,  1822,  p.  235. 


2Z4  TEBPETUUM    MOBILE; 

perpetual  motion,  or  pretended  perpetual  motion,  of  which 
the  maintaining  power  was  magnetism.  The  inTention  con- 
dinted  of  two  horse -shoe  magnets,  fixed  in  a  horizontal  plane, 
with  their  poles  opposite  to  each  other,  and  a  few  inches 
aparC  Between  them  was  placed  a  small  needle  similar  to 
that  of  a  compass ;  but,  instead  of  the  cap  and  point  sus- 
pension, it  was  fixed  at  right  angles  to  a  light  perpendicular 
axis,  and  it  was  pretended  that  the  powers  of  attraction  and 
repulsion  of  the  two  magnets  kept  the  needle  in  a  perpetual 
and  very  rapid  rotatory  motion.  Between  the  two  poles  of 
each  magnet  was  fixed  a  small  block  of  a  black  substance, 
which,  the  exhibitor  asserted,  was  a  mixture  of  metals  pos- 
sessing the  power  of  intercepting  the  magnetic  influence ; 
but  beyond  this,  he  was,  or  pretended  to  be,  entirely  igno- 
rant of  the  principle  of  the  invention,  which  he  stated  was 
not  the  fruit  of  his  own  ingenuity,  but  of  some  person  whose 
name  I  forget,  and  who  bequeathed  it  to  him  on  his  death- 
bed. Accidentally  meeting  with  some  numbers  of  the 
"  Mechanics'  Magazine,"  a  few  days  since,  I  found  a  descrip- 
tion of  a  perpetual  motion  which,  I  have  no  doubt,  is  the 
very  same ;  but  there  is  no  attempt  at  explaining  the  prin- 
ciple upon  which  it  is  constructed.  As  you  have  already 
exposed  one  or  two  impositions  of  this  kind,  perhaps  you 
will  not  deem  the  one  I  have  attempted  to  describe  below 
your  notice.  If  it  were  a  perpetual  motion,  as  many 
imagine,  it  seems  deserving  of  consideration  for  its  great 
ingenuity ;  and  if  not,  a  detection  of  the  fraud  may  serve,  in 
some  measure,  to  prevent  similar  impositions.  *         * 

Your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E. 

Obseevations  by  the  Editob. — We  must  own  that  we 
cannot  possibly  conceive  what  benefit  can  be  derived  from 
the  continual  publication  of  pretended  perpetual  motions  ! 
They  merely  serve  to  gratify  that  perverted  appetite  for  the 
marvellous,  which,  unfortunately  for  true  science,  is  always 
too  much  prevalent.* 

[He  concludes  by  mentioning  the  rapid  movements  pro- 
duced by  electro-magnetism.] 


The  Technical  Repository.     By  Thomas  Gill.     Vol.  9,  1826,  p.  56, 


on.    SEABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  235 

In  the  **  Quarterly  Review  "  appeared  an  able  article  oa 
"  The  Century  of  Inventions  of  the  Marquis  of  Worcester, 
from  the  Original  MS.;  with  Historical  and  Explanatory 
Notes,  and  a  Biographical  Mennoir.  By  C.  F.  Partington,  &c. 
London,  1825." 

The  following  selections  are  made  from  the  review  of  this 
work,  as  being  pertinent  to  the  object  of  the  present  work. 
As  regards  the  **  Century,"  the  critic  remarks : — 

It  has  frequently  been  asserted — but  on  grounds  too  weak 
to  warrant  any  such  supposition — that  these  "Inventions"  of 
the  Marquess  were  mere  assumptions  set  down  at  random  ; 
and  that  he  never  had  by  experiment  performed  any  one  of 
them,  nor  intended  that  they  should,  either  by  himself  or 
others,  be  performed.  Hume,  who  does  not  even  know  the 
title  of  his  book,  boldly  pronounces  it  (the  **  Century'*)  **  a 
ridiculous  compound  of  lies,  chimeras,  and  impossibilities;** 
and  Walpole,  in  his  "  Royal  and  Noble  Authors,"  designates 
the  Marquess  as  a  '*  fantastic  projector  and  mechanic."  With 
his  too  frequent  disregard  of  truth,  he  asserts  what  is  in 
direct  contradiction  to  historical  fact ;  he  was  a  prejudiced 
writer,  and,  like  some  others  more  celebrated  for  their  literary 
attainments  than  for  scientific  knowledge,  affected  to  despise 
and  undervalue  what  he  did  not  understand. 

There  are  some  circumstances,  however,  it  must  be  con- 
fessed, which  lead  one  to  conclude  that  his  projects  were 
wholly  disregarded  at  the  time.  The  Royal  Society  had  then 
been  some  years  in  existence.  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Boyle, 
Wilkins,  Hook,  and  other  learned  and  ingenious  men,  were 
living,  and  eagerly  pursuing  philosophical  researches  ;  yet  no 
notice  appears  to  have  been  taken  by  any  of  them  of  the 
Marquess's  pretensions.  Could  it  be  that  the  mysterious  and 
empirical  terms  in  which  his  inventions  are  stated  caused  them 
to  be  disregarded  ?  True  it  is,  he  was  poor  ;  and  it  is  clear, 
from  the  Act  passed  in  his  favour,  that  his  object  was,  and 
indeed  it  is  so  expressed,  **  to  enable  his  heirs,  for  99  years, 
to  receive  the  sole  benefit,  profit,  and  advantage  resulting 
from  his  *  water-commanding  engine,'  " — but  his  poverty  was 
greatly,  if  not  altogether,  occasioned  by  his  father's  loyalty  to 
two  sovereigns. 


236  PERPETUUM    MOBILE  ; 

[The  reyiewer  then,  alluding  to  the  Marquis's  imprisonment 
in  Ireland  in  Charles  the  First's  time,  and  in  the  Tower  when 
Charles  the  Second  ascended  the  throne,  ably  upholds  his 
character  for  both  genius  and  piety.  After  a  dissertation  of 
some  length  on  the  steam  engine^  be  proceeds  to  say : — 

The  wonderful  wheel  described  in  No.  56 — whicb  is,  as 
the  Marquess  says,  "  a  most  incredible  thing  if  not  seen  ** — is 
an  attempt  at  what  has  been  tried  by  thousands,  and  which 
will  yet  be  tried  by  thousands  more.  The  failure  of  such  a 
number  will  not  deter  others  from  wasting  their  time  and  sub- 
stance to  no  purpose  in  the  discovery  of  a  perpetual  motion 
— a  property  the  power  of  which  is  vested  solely  in  the  Great 
Author  of  the  universe,  and  exists  only,  as  far  as  we  know,  in 
the  arrangement  of  the  planetary  system.  No  charge  of 
quackery,  however,  can  fairly  be  laid  against  the  Marquess  on 
this  score,  as  the  wisest  men  of  his  time,  and  both  before  and 
after  him,  have  split  upon  the  same  rock.  Now  at  last,  how- 
ever, the  squaring  of  the  circle,  the  finding  of  the  longitude, 
and  the  discovery  of  perpetual  motion  are  the  stumbling- 
blocks  mostly  of  feeble  minds,  set  in  action  by  that  dangerous 
thing,  "  a  little  learning." 

There  are  a  few,  but  not  many,  of  the  **  scantlings " 
which  may  justify  Lord  Orford's  ill-natured  remark ;  for 
instance,  No.  25,  which  runs  thus  : — '*  How  to  make  a  weight 
that  cannot  take  up  an  hundred  pounds,  and  yet  shall  take 
up  two  hundred  pounds,  and  at  the  self- same  distance  from 
the  centre  ;  and  so  on,  proportionably,  to  millions  of  pounds." 
This  is,  at  least,  in  its  present  state,  unintelligible.  It  is 
'"  paradoxical,"  and  so  completely  contrary  to  every  esta- 
blished principle  or  rule  in  science,  that  we  may  fairly  set  it 
down  among  the  marvellous,  contributing  to  bring  the  whole 
"  Century"  into  disrepute.  Mr.  Partington's  little  volume 
will,  however,  prevent  this.* 


*  The  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  32, 1825,  8vo.,  pp.  397-410. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POAVER.  237 


CHAPTER  IX. 


RECENT   POPULAR   SCIENTIFIC   AND    OTHER   JOURNALS. 

The  '*  Mechanics'  Magazine,"  which  commenced  in  1823, 
gave  great  facilities  to  artizans  and  others  to  communicate 
their  views;  and  the  following  abstracts  of  lectures,  papers, 
letters,  and  editorial  notices,  evidence  how  much  this  subject 
has  been  discussed  in  the  pages  of  that  journal.  For  con- 
venience, in  perusing  them,  they  are  given  both  in  the  order 
of  their  dates  and  arranged  under  the  following  heads  : — 
First,  all  relating  to  the  Possibility,  and,  secondly,  those 
asserting  the  Impossibility,  of  Perpetual  Motion;  then, 
thirdly.  Plans ;  fourthly.  Alleged  Discoveries ;  and,  fifthly. 
Impostures.  Two  papers  from  American  journals  are 
appended  to  these  in  their  proper  places,  a  review  of  Sir 
William  Congreve's  pamphlet,  and  a  notice  relating  to  Hen- 
drickson. 

Section  I. — Its  Possibility  Asserted, 

T.  H.  Pasley  (vol.  2)  writes,  June,  1824  :— 

I  feel  no  hesitation  in  standing  up  in  support  of  this  grand 
desideratum — this  almost  forsaken  friend  of  science, — whether 
the  thing  be  practicable  or  not. 

[Under  the  impression  that  this  problem  is  of  great  value 
to  science  in  general,  and  that  there  is  no  occasion  to  dis- 
hearten those  who  try  to  find  it  out,  he  says : — ] 

On  the  contrary,  "  Persevere  "  should  be  every  one's  advice  ; 
to  do  so,  or  discontinue,  every  one's  own  pleasure.  And  why 
should  the  impossibility  of  anything  be  pronounced  unless  it 
be  established  wherein  the  limits  of  possibility  consist } 


238  PESPBTUVM  mobile; 

[He  has  much  original  reasoning,  and  not  very  apropos, 
such  as — ] 

It  is  puerile  in  the  extreme  to  be  foretelling  defeat  when 
so  many  other  objects  may  be  gained  by  the  highly  laudable 
pursuit,  perhaps  of  greater  advantage  to  society  at  large 
than  the  discovery  in  question.  ***** 

In  a  word,  were  the  perpetual  motion  discovered  to-morrow, 
it  would  be  wise  of  all  the  governments  of  the  world  to  offer 
a  very  high  reward  for  some  species  of  discovery  that  would 
be  universally  sought  after,  although  it  might  never  be  found 
out.  *  *  *  *  [Adding:—]  The  effects  of 
industry  are — enlargement  of  the  mind,  accumulation  of  know- 
ledge, and  rendering  ourselves  ignorant  of  the  torments 
which  idleness  and  dulness  always  engender.  *  * 

In  the  next  place,  there  are  no  solid  grounds  for  the  assertion 
that  the  discovery  of  a  perpetual  motion  is  an  impossibility. 
In  the  present  state  of  human  knowledge  respecting  the 
powers  of  nature,  it  is  not  demonstrable  one  way  or  another. 
*  *  *  [And  again : — ']     The  study  of  what 

relates  to  the  perpetual  motion  has  this  great  advantage,  that 
it  directs  Ho  the  discovery  of  error  as  well  as  of  truth ; 
whereas,  what  are  they  which  are  called  truths  of  science  at 
present  but  vacillating  human  opinions,  or  erroneous  assump- 
tions of  what  we  call  natural  causes  ?  What  are  they  but 
such  as  consist  in  mere  assumption,  sanctioned  by  time,  and 
admitted  by  existing  authorities  in  science,  and  of  course 
generally  acquiesced  in,  without  previous  investigation  } 

[Speaking  of  the  "  stern  conditions  on  which  alone  the 
student  in  science  can  have  his  opinion  listened  to,*'  he 
says : — ] 

So  far,  then,  from  being  guided  in  our  decision  respecting 
what  is  possible  by  the  "  unerring  laws  of  nature,"  by 
"mathematical  demonstration,"  and  by  "experimental 
proofs,"  we  are  continually  misled  by  an  erroneous  faith  in 
the  nonentity,  attraction. 

[He  attempts  to  show  our  acquaintance  with  "  motion," 
and  the  *'  cause  "  wherein  "  continued  motion  consists  ;  " 
then  says  : — ] 

On  such  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  causes  of  phenomena, 


OK,    SHAROH   FOR    SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  239 

who  should  say  he  knows  what  can  or  what  cannot  be  dis- 
covered ? 

[He  seems  to  think  there  is  some  "  true  motion-making 
cause  "  which  may  be  employed  to  produce  perpetual  motion 
on  some  species  or  other  of  mechanism.] 


A  plan  designed  to  accelerate  the  discovery  of  Perpetual 
Motion  (vol.  4,  1825)  :— 

[The  writer  remarks — ^"  All  that  has  or  can  be  said  will  not 
amount  to  a  proof  of  its  impossibility."  He  then  examines 
how,  what  were  once  thought  impossibilities  have  of  late 
been  accomplished,  as  : — "] 

We  can  now,  however,  soar  above  the  clouds,  explore  the 
depths  of  the  ocean,  and  skim  over  its  surface.  *  * 

A^d  be  it  remembered  that  we  owe  these  and  many  other 
advantages  to  a  few  persevering  individuals  who  were,  in  all 
probability,  stigmatised  as  chimerical  visionaries  by  those 
who  seem  to  have  an  unconquerable  propensity  to  condemn 
everything  above  the  level  of  their  own  understanding. 

If  by  perpetual  motion  nothing  more  is  meant  than  the 
putting  in  motion  some  of  the  most  durable  substances  with 
which  we  are  acquainted,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  ensure  a 
continuance  of  motion  as  long  as  those  substances  will  resist 
the  effects  of  time  and  friction,  I  do  not  despair  of  seeing  it 
accomplished.  *  *  [He  thinks  there  is]  reasonable 
ground  to  hope  that  the  time  is  not  far  distant  when  even 
this  impossibility  must  yield  to  persevering  ingenuity.  In 
the  present  state  of  public  opinion  with  regard  to  its  practica- 
bility, it  would  be  looked  upon  as  an  empty  boast,  were  1  to 
assert  that  the  discovery  is  already  made.* 


J.  Welch  (vol.  6,  1825)  confesses  himself  a  believer  in  the 
existence,  or  rather  possibility  of  discovering,  perpetual 
motion : — 

Those  who  condemn  the  notion  altogether  seem  to  have 

•  The  person  who  can  raise  a  weight  of  6  oz  to  the  height  of  13§  inches, 
merely  by  the  descent  of  4  oz.  only  12  inches,  ought  to  be  allowed  to  assert 
that  the  discovery  is  made. 


240  PERPJBTUTJM  mobile; 

taken  but  a  very  confined  view  of  the  subject.  What  they 
say  about  mere  matter  is  right  enough ;  but  they  seem  to 
forget  that  there  are  other  active  agents  in  nature  which 
possess  wonderful  powers,  that  hare  nothing  to  do  with  either 
bulk,  weight,  or  form.  Such  are  electricity,  magnetic  attrac- 
tion, capillary  attraction,  and  the  irregular  pressure  of  the 
atmosphere.  The  powers  of  electricity  are  great,  and,  indeed, 
it  seems  to  be  the  prtmum  mobile  that  gives  life  and  motion  to 
the  animated  part  of  the  creation.  Dr.  Franklin  shows  us  how 
to  give  a  circular  coated  plate,  revolving  on  an  axle,  sufficient 
power  to  roast  a  chicken,  merely  by  once  changing  (charging  ?) 
it.  Could  not  a  plate  of  this  kind  be  made  to  turn  a  small 
electrical  apparatus,  so  situated  as  to  keep  the  charge  in  the 
plate  always  at  its  maximum  ?  The  whole  might  be  kept  dry 
by  having  it  enclosed  in  a  glass  case. 

It  has  often  been  attempted  to  give  motion  to  a  wheel  by  the 
power  of  a  loadstone,  but  hitherto  without  effect;  no  substance 
in  nature  being  found  to  have  the  power,  by  interposition,  of 
cutting  off  its  attractive  property.  Still  I  think  it  should  be 
further  investigated.  Is  a  small  piece  of  steel  in  the  form  of 
a  wedge  as  strongly  attracted  at  the  smaller  end  as  at  the 
thicker  ?  And  would  not  twenty  or  thirty  pieces  of  steel,  of  that 
form,  placed  round  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  the  point  of 
one  towards  the  head  of  the  other,  cause  a  magnet  placed  in 
the  centre,  to  revolve  in  the  direction  in  which  their  points 
lie  ?  I  think,  perhaps  not ;  but  still  such  experiments  should 
be  tried. 

In  capillary  attraction  we  have  a  power  that  at  once  raises 
fluids  above  their  level.  It  is  this  which  carries  the  oil  up 
the  wick  of  a  lamp  as  fast  as  the  flame  consumes  it.  Water 
and  other  fluids  rise  through  cotton  even  quicker  than  oil ; 
and  he  who  can  contrive  to  collect  them  as  they  arrive  at  the 
t(»p  will  discover  perpetual  motion.  Would  not  water  run 
constantly  through  a  syphon,  one  leg  of  which  was  made  of  a 
collection  of  capillary  tubes,  and  the  other  in  the  usual  way  ? 
or  would  the  water  above  and  below  the  tubes  neutralise  and 
destroy  their  power  ? 

I  now  come  to  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  a  thing 
easily  understood.  *  *  *  *  Make  a  cast-iron 
barometrical  tube,  with  a  top  sufficiently  large  to  contain 
2  cwt.  of  mercury  ;  invert  it  in  a  basin  large  enough  to  con- 
tain 2  or  3  cwt.  more,  and  let  a  piece  of  iron  of  10  or  12 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  241 

stones  weight  float  on  the  mercury  in  this  basin,  so  as  to  rise 
and  fall  along  with  it  at  every  change  of  the  weather.  We 
have  here  both  motion  and  power.  The  motion,  indeed,  will 
sometimes  stand  still,  but  then  it  can  easily  be  regulated,  and 
made  a  constant  quantity  in  the  machine  to  be  attached.  I 
have  no  doubt  but  clocks,  &c.,  may  be  made  to  derive  their 
chiming  principle  from  a  contrivance  of  this  nature. 

H.  Todd  (vol.  8,  1827)  says  :— 

*  *  *  Many  of  your  readers  seem  to  have  imbibed 
very  erroneous  opinions  on  this  grand  desideratum,  both  as 
regards  its  utility  and  its  practicability. 

First,  It  is  supposed  by  many  that,  when  it  can  be  found, 
very  many  useful  and  entirely  new  effects  will  be  produced. 
This  is  an  error ;  for,  if  it  should  be  discovered,  no  advan- 
tage of  this  kind  would  follow,  as  it  is  the  regularity  of 
motion,  not  the  perpetuity  of  it,  that  would  be  advantageous 
or  useful.  Mere  motion  in  perpetuity  would  be  of  no  avail,  or, 
at  least,  not  worth  the  expense  of  erecting  any  machine 
to  continue  it  in  another  form.  The  determination  of 
the  longitude,  which  many  so  fully  anticipate,  would  be 
as  far  distant  as  ever.  Perpetual  motion  can,  in  fact, 
be  obtained  by  a  common  watch,  by  winding  it  regularly  up 
(for  it  is  perpetual  if  it  never  stops  till  the  works  are  worn 
out);  but  the  chronometer  is  no  nearer  perfection  on  that 
account.  Some  also  seem  to  entertain  an  idea  that  a  reward 
from  the  English  Government  awaits  the  discoverer  of  the 
perpetual  motion.  This  is  only  imaginary,  as  no  such  reward 
ever  was  or  could  be  offered  for  what  would  benefit  no  one. 
True  it  is,  that  the  person  who  discovers  a  certain  way  of 
finding  the  longitude,  in  any  or  every  place  (chiefly  on  the 
sea),  will  be  entitled  to  a  reward  from  the  Commissioners  of 
Longitude,  let  that  method  be  what  it  may ;  and  as  perfect 
regularity  of  motion  would  make  a  perfect  chronometer  in 
itself,  such  perfect  regularity,  if  found,  would  be  the  means 
of  obtaining  the  longitude,  setting  aside  perpetuity,  as  of 
little  or  no  consequence  in  the  affair.  Hence,  the  makers  of 
chronometers  turn  their  attention  always  to  the  perfection  of 
the  regulation  part  of  the  machine ;  for  if  a  common  watch, 
to  be  wound  up  daily,  could  be  made  to  show  mean  time 
truly,  it  would  be  infinitely  superior  to  any  chronometer  or 


242  PERPETuuM  mobile; 

timepiece  wanting  regulation,  though  it  required  to  be  wound 
up  once  in  seven  years,  or  in  one  hundred  years,  or  went 
perpetually  without  being  wound  up  at  all. 

Next,  as  to  the  practicability  of  perpetual  motion,  though 
so  many  doubt  it,  I,  with  several  others,  not  only  assert  that 
it  is  practicable,  but  that  it  has  already  been  found  out,  or 
discovered,  and,  as  appears  to  me,  in  the  most  satisfactory 
manner  possible  :  I  do  not  mean  by  mechanical  powers 
alone,  but  with  their  assistance,  conjoined  with  the  powers  of 
nature.  We  need  not  examine  into  the  pretended  inventions, 
whether  patent  or  otherwise,  of  those  authors  who  assert  the 
discovery  by  mechanism  alone. 

[He  then  copies,  as  "the  complete  reason"  of  this,  from 
"  the  celebrated  B.  Martin,  in  his  '  Philosophical  Grammar,' 
p.  125."] 

The  incredulous  on  this  head,  though  zealous  in  the  cause, 
have  nevertheless  pursued  their  desires  this  way ;  and  the 
Patent  Office  at  Washington,  in  the  United  States  of  America, 
is  adorned  with  models  patented  as  perpetual  motions,  but 
standing  there  motionless  as  the  models  of  all  the  other 
patents  about  them. 

[After  describing  the  wheel  by  Dr.  Shiviers,*  he  says : — ] 

OF  this,  nothing  more  was  heard  of  (as  I  can  find)  from 
the  time  of  its  discovery  or  publication ;  but  this  does  by  no 
means  forbid  the  employment  of  mechanics  united  with  other 
means.  There  are  several  parts  of  nature  which  of  them- 
selves are  perpetual  motion,  and  require  only  mechanics  to 
regulate  them.  First,  there  is  the  lise  and  fall  of  the  tides  ; 
second,  the  waves  of  the  sea ;  third,  the  wind ;  fourth,  the 
variation  of  weight  of  the  atmosphere ;  fifth,  electrici«^y  ; 
sixth,  expansion  and  contraction,  by  heat  and  cold,  &c.,  &c.; 
nor  does  the  art  appear  so  much  in  applying  them  to  ma- 
chines, as  the  regulating  the  motions  when  so  applied.  Of 
the  practicability,  however,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  By  per- 
petual motion,  as  it  is  generally  understood,  I  mean  a  machine 
once  set  in  motion,  that  will  go  without  any  further  human 
assistance  till  the  works  are  worn  out  by  time  or  its  materials 

•  Read — Schwiers. 


OK,    SEARCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   P9WEB.  243 

decay.  Now,  this,  I  again  repeat,  has  already  been  accom- 
plished, and  that  by  a  Mr.  Coxe,  a  celebrated  mechanist,  and, 
I  believe,  maker  of  various  other  automata,  as  to  have  a 
museum  formed  of  them.  As  this  was  exhibited  to  the 
public,  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  for  several 
years,  it  must  have  been  generally  known  at  that  time. 
(I  think  this  was  the  most  celebrated  of  his-  works.)  The 
only  account  I  can  at  this  time  give  of  it  is  this : — ^it  was 
a  watch,  capped,  jewelled,  and  protected  from  friction  in 
every  part  as  much  as  possible ;  without  any  main-spring, 
the  inventor  so  applied  it  to  the  mercury  in  a  barometer 
attached  to  it,  that  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  mercury  gave 
motion  to  the  timepiece  or  watch ;  and  the  best  part  of  the 
invention  was,  that  if  the  barometer  were  taken  away,  the 
timepiece  would  go  a  year  without  it, — ^if  applied,  the  power 
would  continue  it ;  and  it  had  a  contained  self-regulator,  to 
let  off  or  adjust  dl  excess  of  power  caused  by  the  rise^  and 
fall  of  the  barometer. 

[He  begs  some  reader  to  forward  an  account  of  it,  and 
adds : — ] 

I  do  not  know  whether  Coxe's  Museum  was  exhibited 
before  or  after  Martin's  Museum,  which  I  believe  also 
consisted  of  automata. 

Thus  was  perpetual  motion  discovered, — ^for  such  it  was  in 
every  sense  of  the  word ;  and  that  it  is  feasible  in  other 
ways,  I  think  no  one  can  doubt.  The  chief  ingenuity  in 
Mr.  Coxe  was  in  applying  the  perpendicular  difference  of 
height  in  the  column,  caused  by  the  variations  of  the  atmo- 
sphere's weight,  with  a  self-regulator.  I  do  not  recollect 
whether  it  was  regulated  to  that  perfection  as  to  keep  to 
mean  time  :  its  being  perpetual  motion  did  not  of  necessity 
imply  this,  though,  perhaps,  it  came  as  near  it  as  any  other 
chronometer  on  the  steel-spring  construction. 

[He  says: — "The  engraving  showed,  chiefly,  the  front 
view."] 

The  waves  of  the  sea  could  certainly  be  applied  to  produce 
a  regulated  perpetual  motion ;  and  I  have  read  somewhere, 
though  my  memory  at  this  instant  does  not  assist  me  in 
particulars,  that  a  Frenchman  had  made  a  mill  or  some  ma- 
chine to  be  wrought  by  the  waves  only.     I  think  it  is  related 


244  PERPETUUM   mobile; 

in  some  of  their  Society  Transactions.  The  rise  and  fall  of 
the  tides  would  also  make  a  constancy  or  perpetuity  of  motion, 
wanting  a  self-regulator.  There  are  tide-mUls  on  the  Thames 
and  other  places.  And  I  now  hear  that  a  Frenchman  has 
invented  a  timepiece  set  in  motion  hy  the  wind,  which,  on 
the  principle  of  Coxe's  barometer-watch  above-mentioned, 
probably  has  sufficient  wind  in  any  one  week,  or  month,  to 
supply  it  for  a  year,  and  a  kind  of  self-adjusting  escape  to 
let  off  the  surplus  power ;  and  which  is  to  all  intents  and 
purposes  actual  perpetual  motion.  I  might  refer  to  many 
other  things,  more  curious  than  useful,  causing  differences  by 
themselves  ;  as  of  contraction  and  expansion  by  cold  and 
heat — accumulation  and  exhaustion,  as  by  rain  and  evapora- 
tion, as  to  a  variety  of  natural  causes ;  any  of  which,  if  the 
necessary  self-regulating  mechanism  were  applied,  would 
perform  a  similar  continuity  of  action,  and  which  would  as 
certainly  be  perpetual  motion,  though  of  no  use.  For  the 
winding  up  of  a  clock,  as  a  prime  mover,  can  be  regulated 
much  easier  than  any  other  machine  yet  known.  Metals  are 
found  to  expand  every  way,  but  wood  only  in  the  width  of 
the  fibre ;  hence,  a  wooden  pendulum  has  not  yet  been  found, 
I  believe,  to  expand  only  across  the  grain  (which  is  of  no 
consequence),  and  not  in  length. 

[He  concludes  with  advising  "  not  to  attempt  perpetual 

motion  alone;  next,  that  perpetual  motion,  of  itself,   is  of 

little  or  no  use  unless  it  can  be  duly  or  properly  regulated  ; 

and  that  a  regulation  of  any  of  the  present  known  powers 

will  be  of  more  service  than  perpetual  motion  itself,  when 

alone  found.''] 

•  ••••• 

I  remain,  your  constant  reader, 

H.  Todd. 


Review  of  Papers  on  Perpetual  Motion  (vol.  11, 
1829).     By  an  anonymous  correspondent : — 

[His  review  is  necessarily  abridged,  and  is  only  given  in 
consequence  of  its  author  professing  to  be  a  practical  me- 
chanic of  some  experience.] 

To  begin,  then,  I  boldly  affirm  that  to  be  possible  which  is 


OE,   SEARCH   FOE   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEE.  245 

now  universally  denied  to  be  so — ^namely,  perpetual  motion 
by  mechanism.  *  *  *  Having  made  this 

bold  assertion,  I  shall  proceed  to  make  some  remarks  on 
what  has  been  said  to  the  contrary. 

[He  commences  with  vol.  4,  and  notices  the  several  schemes 
therein.     Also  Emerson's  Proposition  118,  Corollary.] 

I  believe  it  was  Emerson's  idea,  and  I  conceive  it  to  be  a 
general  one,  that  if  a  body,  or  a  system  of  bodies,  could  be  made 
to  revolve  on  an  infinitely  small  axis,  or  a  point  of  suspension 
placed  in  its  centre  of  gravity,  without  any  friction  whatever, 
and  that  the  body  or  system  were  put  in  motion  in  an  unre- 
sisting medium,  that  motion  would  be  continued  by  its  vis 
inertia^  even  when  that  motion  proceeded  from  a  momentary 
impulse ;  but  as  the  effect  of  friction  and  the  resisting 
medium  is,  in  practical  mechanism,  an  insurmountable 
obstacle,  his  corollary  holds  good  thus  far,  and  no  farther. 

[After  noticing  the  Finch  Lane  imposition,  Philo-Montis, 
and  T.  Bell,  he  states :— ] 

I  have  looked  into  Dr.  Hutton's  "  Mathematical  Recrea- 
tions," referred  to  by  T.  B.  Dr.  Hutton  generally  observes  : 
— "  The  perpetual  motion  has  been  the  quicksands  of  mecha- 
nicians, as  the  quadrature  of  a  circle,  the  trisection  of  an 
angle,  &c.,  has  been  that  of  the  geometricians ;  and  as  those 
who  pretend  to  have  discovered  the  solution  of  the  latter 
problem  are  persons  scarcely  acquainted  with  geometry, 
those  who  search  for  the  perpetual  motion  are  always  men 
to  whom  the  most  certain  and  invariable  truths  in  mechanics 
are  unknown." 

[He  does  not  like  the  style  here  adopted,  saying : — "  It 
falls  heavy  on  smatterers — a  character  I  never  professed  to 
exceed."] 

Dr.  H.  goes  on  to  observe  (and  it  will  be  necessary  to 
dissect  his  arguments,  to  get  at  his  meaning) : — "  It  may  be 
demonstrated  to  all  capable  of  reasoning  in  a  sound  manner 
on  those  sciences,  that  a  perpetual  motion  is  impossible." 
How  ?  Why,  "  it  is  necessary  the  effect  should  become  the 
cause,  and  the  cause  the  effect."  Assertion  to  prove  asser- 
tion.    Perhaps  it  is  necessary — ^perhaps  not;  but  then  we 


^  246  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

have  an  example : — "  A  weight  raised  to  a  certain  height  by 
another  weight,  should,  in  its  turn,  raise  the  second  weight 
to  the  height  from  which  it  descended.'*  Be  it  so ;  still,  it 
does  not  follow  that  this  is  necessary  to  perpetual  motion. 
"According  to  the  laws  of  motion,  all  that  a  descending 
weight  can  do,  in  the  most  perfect  machine  the  mind  of  man 
can  conceive,  is  to  raise  another  weight  in  the  same  time  to 
a  height  proportioned  to  its  mass " — that  is,  by  the  most 
perfect  machine  the  mind  of  man  can  conceive ;  so  that  the 
argument  comes  to  this : — ^human  ingenuity  has  not  hitherto 
been  able  to  go  beyond  this  point,  which  is  necessary  to  pro- 
duce perpetual  motion.  But,  whether  it  is  necessary  or  no, 
the  Doctor  extends  it  to  this : — it  is  impossible  to  produce 
perpetual  motion  by  any  means  the  mind  of  man  can  con- 
ceive ;  so  that  the  Doctor,  it  seems,  has  made  a  discovery 
equal,  perhaps,  to  the  one  in  question — ^namely,  a  knowledge 
of  the  utmost  extent  of  the  energies  of  the  mind  of  man ! 
But  he  has  not  yet  drawn  his  conclusion,  as  he  goes  on  to 
explain  why  a  machine  cannot  continue  its  motion  when  acted 
on  by  equal  weights  on  each  side  the  centre  of  motion  (as  I 
assume  his  arguments  are  confined  to  that  view  of  the  ques- 
tion) ;  and  he  evidently  falls  into  the  common  error  before 
noticed,  of  applying  his  maxima  beyond  their  sphere  of  applica- 
bility, building  his  argument  on  the  corollary  of  Emerson's, 
already  alluded  to. 

♦  ♦  «  #  ♦  ♦ 

I  After  alluding  to  the  schemes  of  "  T.  B.,"  "  P.,"  and 
"  H.  Todd,"  he  goes  on  to  say : — '] 

I  have  mentioned  these  three  schemes  together,  introduc- 
tory to  an  inquiry  I  wish  to  make  respecting  a  principle 
which  I  conceive  they  embrace.  Their  projectors  seem  to 
have  assumed  that  if  two  equal  weights  be  placed  at  the  end 
of  a  lever  or  balance  of  unequal  arms,  and  be  made  to  move 
on  a  centre  or  axis,  the  descending  weight  always  moving  in 
the  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  radius  is  equal  to  the 
longest  arm,  then,  if  by  any  means  the  ascending  weight 
could  be  carried  up  through  the  perpendicular  diameter,  or 
near  to  it,  by  the  action  of  the  lever,  the  descending  weight 
would  always  preponderate  after  it  had  once  left  its  perpen- 
dicular direction,  and  the   equilibrium  which  would  take 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR    SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  24? 

place  at  the  perpendicular  be  destroyed  by  a  succession  of 
similar  levers  and  weights.  I  ask,  would  this  be  the  case  ? 
I  am  aware  of  arguments  that  may  be  used  to  show  that 
there  would  be  no  more  than  an  equilibrium  when  the  actions 
of  the  diflferent  levers  are  combined  at  equal  distances  from 
one  another,  and  the  weights  made  to  preserve  an  uniformity 
in  their  angular  velocity ;  but  if  those  arguments  are  no  other 
than  what  I  can  anticipate,  I  have  doubts  of  their  applica- 
bility. I  will  venture  to  ask  two  questions : — The  first  is  : 
What  is  the  difference,  or  is  there  any,  in  the  effective  force 
or  the  momentum  of  a  weight  falling  through  the  perpen- 
dicular diameter  of  a  circle,  and  of  the  same  or  an  equal 
weight  falling  through  the  semi-circumference  of  the  same 
circle,  at  the  end  of  a  lever  moving  freely  on  the  centre, 
without  any  counterpoise  ?  The  second  is :  What  am  I  to 
understand  by  the  expression,  "  The  cycloid  is  the  curve  of 
swiftest  descent ;  or  a  heavy  weight  will  fall  from  one  given 
point  to  another,  by  the  way  of  the  arc  of  a  cycloid,  in  a  less 
time  than  by  any  other  route  ?"  and  does  it  admit  that  these 
points  may  be  perpendicular  to  a  horizontal  line  ? 

Now  comes  our  champion,  Sir  Wm.  Congreve,  of  whose 
plan  I  shall  say  but  little ;  it  meets  my  ideas  in  almost  every 
point. 

[After  commenting  on  the  Baronet's  plan,  he  adds : — "] 

As  to  the  words  that,  in  mechanical  operations,  "  no  duty 
can  be  performed  without  a  correspondent  loss  of  efficiency," 
though  they  may  be  the  words  of  one  of  our  most  celebrated 
mathematicians,  I  cannot  help  being  so  uncourteous  as  to  say 
*  *  *  they  "  are  not  worth  a  tush."  No  one  can 
have  more  respect  for  men  who  excel  in  scientific  pursuits 
than  myself — they  are  to  me  as  demigods  ;  but  when  I  look 
up  to  them  for  instruction,  and  receive  it  in  unintelligible 
language,  I  cannot  help  lamenting  the  infatuation  that  should 
induce  them  to  throw  a  veil  over  scientific  subjects,  as  though 
they  were  (like  some  others)  thoughts  too  sacred  for  the  eye  or 
the  ear  of  the  multitude  ;  and,  by  this  means,  when  they  would 
wish  to  convey  information,  run  the  risk  of  proving  the  maxim 
in  a  literal  sense — ^perform  a  duty  with  a  corresponding  loss 
of  efficiency. 


248  PEKPETxruM  mobile; 

[He  proceeds  to  notice  other  schemes,  and  then  gives  the 
following : — ] 

Pkoposition. — ^In  what  way  may  a  body,  or  rather  a 
system  of  bodies,  be  impelled  or  made  to  move  on  an  hori- 
zontal plane  by  the  force  of  pressure  alone,  the  source  of 
pressure  being  within  the  system,  or  the  first  mover  being 
a  weight,  or  weights,  forming  a  part  thereof  ? 

I  do  not  presume  to  say  that  such  a  thing  is  possible, 
though  I  have  dreamt  such  a  conclusion  Jmay  be  drawn  from 
the  composition  and  resolution  of  forces.  I  should  like  to 
see  a  demonstration  of  the  contrary.  If  this  proposition  is  a 
possibility,  perpetual  motion  easily  follows. 

When  a  subject  is  involved  in  imcertainty,  the  greater  the 
number  of  opinions  that  are  taken  on  it  the  more  likely  is  the 
system  to  be  unravelled;  even  though  many  of  those  opinions 
may  be  in  the  greatest  part  erroneous,  still,  they  tend  to 
place  the  subject  considered  in  so  many  diflferent  points  of 
view  as  to  add  materially  to  the  facility  of  its  investigation. 

[On  Mr.  Nicholson's  remark  that  he  has  "  met  with  no 
clear  enunciation  of  this  project  so  general  as  to  include  every 
possible  scheme,'*  he  says : — "] 

Certainly  not ;  nor  will  any  one  else,  until  every  possible 
scheme  be  produced,  which  is  not  likely  to  be  very  soon  the 
case. 

[He  has  been  speaking  of  the  "  want  of  direct  and  concise 
demonstrations  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  lever, 
&c."  Then  comes  an  extract  "from  a  short  essay  in  a 
scarce  volume  of  tracts,  by  H.  Hamilton,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  and 
Professor  of  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Dublin.  He 
says :" — "] 

"  The  many  useful  instruments  that  have  been  so  ingeniously 
invented  and  so  successfully  executed,  and  the  great  perfec- 
tion to  which  the  mechanic  arts  are  now  arrived,  would 
incline  one  to  think  that  the  true  principles  on  which  the 
efficacy  and  operations  of  the  several  machines  depend 
must  long  since  have  been  accurately  explained ;  but  this  is 
by  no  means  a  necessary  inference,  for,  however  men  may 
differ  in  their  opinions  about  the  true  method  of  accounting 


OK,   SEAECH   FOR    SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  249 

for  the  effects  of  the  several  machines,  yet  the  practical 
principles  of  mechanics  are  so  perfectly  known  by  experience 
and  observation,  that  the  artist  is  thereby  enabled  to  contrive 
and  adjust  the  movements  of  his  engines  with  as  much 
certainty  and  success  as  he  could  do  were  he  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  the  laws  of  motion,  from  which  the  principles 
may  be  ultimately  derived.  However,  though  an  inquiry 
into  the  true  method  of  deducing  the  practical  principles  of 
mechanics  from  the  laws  of  motion  should  not  contribute 
much  to  promote  the  progress  of  the  mechanic  arts,  yet  it  is 
an  inquiry  in  itself  usefiil,  and  in  some  measure  necessary ; 
for,  since  late  authors  have  used  very  different  methods  of 
treating  this  subject,  it  may  be  supposed  that  no  one  method 
has  been  looked  on  as  satisfactory  and  imexceptionable.  The 
most  noted  theorem  in  mathematics  is  this:  'When  two 
heavy  bodies  counterpoise  each  other  by  means  of  any 
machine,  and  are  then  made  to  move  together,  the  quantities 
of  motion  with  which  one  descends  and  the  other  ascends 
perpendicularly  will  be  equal.'  An  equilibrium  always 
accompanying  this  equality  of  motion  bears  such  a  resem- 
blance to  the  case  where  two  moving  bodies  stop  each  other 
when  they  meet  together  with  equal  quantities  of  motion, 
that  many  writers  have  thought  that  the  cause  of  an  equi- 
librium in  the  several  machines  may  be  immediately  assigned 
by  saying  that  since  one  body  always  loses  as  much  motion  as 
it  commimicates  to  another,  two  heavy  bodies  counteracting 
each  other  must  continue  at  rest,  when  they  are  so  circum- 
stanced that  one  cannot  descend  without  causing  the  other  to 
ascend  at  the  same  time,  and  with  the  same  quantity  of 
motion ;  for  then,  should  one  of  them  begin  to  descend,  it 
must  instantly  lose  its  whole  motion  by  communicating  it  to 
the  other.  This  argument,  however  plausible  it  may  seem, 
I  think  is  by  no  means  satisfactory ;  for  when  we  say  that 
one  body  communicates  its  motion  to  another,  we  must 
necessarily  suppose  the  motion  to  exist  first  in  the  one  and 
then  in  the  other ;  the  descending  body  cannot  be  said  to 
communicate  its  motion  to  the  other,  and  thereby  make 
it  ascend;  but  whatever,  we  should  suppose,  causes  one 
body  to  descend,  must  be  also  the  immediate  cause  of  the 
other's  ascending,  since,  from  the  connexion  of  the  bodies,  it 
must  act  on  them  both  together,  as  if  they  were  really  but 
one.      And,   therefore,   without   contradicting   the   laws   of 


260  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

motion,  I  might  suppose  the  superior  weight  of  the  heavier 
body,  which  is  in  itself  more  than  able  to  sustain  the  lighter, 
would  overcome  the  lighter,  and  cause  it  to  ascend  with  the 
same  quantity  of  motion  with  which  the  heavier  descends, 
especially  as  both  their  motions  taken  together  may  be  less 
than  what  the  difference  of  the  weights,  which  is  here  sup- 
posed to  be  the  moving  force,  would  be  able  to  produce  in  a 
body  falling  freely.  However,  as  the  theorem  above  men- 
tioned is  a  very  elegant  one,  it  certainly  ought  to  be  taken 
notice  of  in  every  treatise  on  mechanics,  and  may  serve  as  a 
very  good  index  of  an  equilibrium  in  all  machines ;  but  I  do 
not  think  that  we  can  from  thence,  or  from  any  one  general 
principle,  explain  the  nature  and  effects  of  all  the  mechanic 
powers  in  a  satisfactory  manner,  because  some  of  these 
machines  differ  very  much  from  others  in  their  structures, 
and  the  true  reason  of  the  efficacy  of  each  of  them  is  best 
derived  from  its  particular  structure." 

As  these  remarks  perfectly  agree  with  my  own  ideas  on 
this  subject,  I  may  be  allowed  to  draw  this  conclusion,  that 
from  hence  it  follows  it  may  be  possible  to  construct  a 
machine  whose  effects  are  not  to  be  easily  or  satisfactorily 
explained  on  any  one  general  principle ;  and  that,  after  all, 
experience  must  take  place  of  theory. 

[Of  the  wind,  the  tides,  &c.,  he  remarks  : — "  as  I  before 
observed,  are  an  approximation,  but  not  a  solution,  of  the 
problem."] 


Tn  vol.  12  (1829-30)  appears  the  annexed  commimica- 
tion : — 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  letter  of  an  esteemed 
correspondent,  to  whom  our  readers  have  been  indebted  for 
many  valuable  contributions  to  our  pages  : — 

I  now  send  you  a  copy  of  a  memorandum  I  have  placed 
among  a  great  number  of  papers,  diagrams,  notes,  &c.,  on  the 
subject  of  perpetual  motion,  but  all  unintelligible  to  any  one 
but  myself.  "  Infatuation  all,"  you  will  say  ;  but  though  I 
might  not  be  able  to  deny  this  charge  in  toto^  yet  this  I  will 
say,  I  can  demonstrate  the  possibility  of  perpetual  motion  by 
the  action  of  material  bodies  on  one  another,  aided  by  the  con- 


OR,    SEABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  2e51 

stantly  existing  powers  of  nature,  made  available  to  that  pur- 
pose.    The  memorandum  is  as  follows  : — 

Query -^Wk^t  ought  to  be  the  reward  for  the  invention  of  a 
continual  self-acting  power  which  may  be  increased  at  pleasure 
and  without  limitation,  excepting  that  of  the  strength  of 
materials  acted  upon  by  their  own  weight  ?  That  this  is 
possible  and  practicable  I  am  now  convinced,  and  that  there  is 
no  law  of  nature  or  even  theorem  in  the  science  of  mechanics 
which  goes  to  controvert  the  assertion.  But  the  principles  on 
which  it  may  be  effected,  and  particularly  the  practical  means, 
have  hitherto  eluded  the  researches  of  the  ingenious  of  all  ages 
to  the  present  hour,  and  now  lie  concealed  in  the  breast  of  an 
individual  who  may  possibly,  from  neglect  and  want  of 
encouragement,  be  induced  to  relinquish  a  pursuit  thedevelope- 
ment  of  which  would  confer  an  incalculable  benefit  on  man- 
kind, and  the  loss  of  which  may  require  ages  yet  to  come  to 
recover. 

That  the  above  is  the  unequivocal  and  sincere  opinion  of  the 
writer  is  attested  by  his  own  hand  this  25th  of  February,  1829. 


In  vol.  13  (1830)  there  is  a  conditional  engagement  to 
construct  twenty  models  : — 

The  submitter  of  the  following  proposals  having,  for  some 
years,  been  prepossessed  with  an  idea  of  being  able  to  invent  a 
self-moving  machine,  or,  at  least,  one  moved  by  the  power  of 
gravity,  acting  obliquely  over  the  centre  or  axis  of  its  motion, 
and  having  now  the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  success,  but  not 
the  pecuniary  means  of  carrying  on  his  experiments,  which  he 
has  hitherto  done  with  his  own  hands  to  a  great  extent,  on 
scientific  principles,  according  with  original  practical  ideas 
(arising  from  experience)  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  exclu- 
sively his  own,  begs  leave  to  submit  to  encouragers  of 
ingenuity  the  following  proposal : — He  solicits  a  subscription 
of  £20,  for  which  he  would  engage  to  produce  20  experi- 
mental models  of  machines  illustrative  of  his  ideas,  differing 
in  form  and  appearance,  but  each  equally  curious.  In  case  of 
non-success  in  his  attempts,  the  models  to  be  presented  to  the 
London  Mechanics^  Institution,  or  disposed  of  as  a  majority  of 
the  subscribers  may  direct.  In  case  of  success,  ample  re- 
muneration   would  be  in  his    power,    and  the    subscription 


252  PERPETiriTM    MOBILE  ; 

returned,  or  a  model  of  the  successful  machine  furnished  to 
each  subscriber  of  £1. 

P.S. — The  proposer  has  several  ingenious  ideas  of  inventions 
of  a  highly  useful  nature,  which  would,  at  all  events,  be  greatly 
promoted  by  the  experimental  trials  for  which  this  subscription 
is  solicited;  and  for  a  claim  to  a  talent  for  ingenious  specula- 
tion, he  begs  leave  to  refer  to  the  Editor  of  the  "  Mechanics* 
Magazine,"  by  whom,  and  by  the  publisher  of  the  magazine, 
subscriptions  will  be  received. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS    RECEIVED. 

The  Editor  of  the  '*  Mechanics*  Magazine  "    ..      ..£1     1     0 

A  few  friends  of  the  Editor        1     1     0 

T.  B 0     5     0 

One  of  like  faith 026 

London,  July  9,  1830. 


Arguments  por  and  against  the  possibility  op 
Perpetual  Motion;  including  an  Apology  for  a  certain 
Perpetual  Motion  Seeker  (vol.  14,  1831)  :— 

/'Yes ;  we  shall  conquer !     All  those  dangers  past 
Will  serve  to  enrich  the  future  story." 

A  correspondent  says : — 

The  application  to  the  subject,  on  my  part,  has  been  accom- 
panied by  continual  experimental  elucidations  of  the  subjects 
considered,  and  comparisons  of  these  with  the  axioms, 
theorems,  and  demonstrations  of  one  of  the  best  authorities^  if  I 
may  be  allowed  so  to  call  my  favourite  author,  Emerson,  whose 
I  says  are  generally  correct. 

I  disagree  with  Mr.  B.,  and  do  trust  that  even  a  perpetual 
motion  seeker  might  deserve  encouragement,  if  it  be  found  that 
such  a  character  may  exist  in  a  person  who  is  not  so  ignorant 
of  first  principles  as  Mr.  B,  supposes  cdl  are  who  have  this 
bias;  especially  if  it  be  found  that  the  person's  researches  have 
been  connected  with  subjects  of  a  more  tangible  nature, 
relating  to  the  improvement  of  the  useful  arts,  and  particularly 
to  some  modern  inventions  of  high  importance  that  are  not 
perfectly  correct  in  their  construction. 

In  this  article,  Mr.  B,  advises  those  who  are  misspending 
their  time  in  this  pursuit,  to  consider  the  question  in  its  most 
simple  form,  divested  of  more  complicated  operations,  which 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELP-MOTITE    POWER. 


253 


simple  form  is  that  of  a  pulley  accurately  constructed  so  as  to 
reduce  the  resistance  to  motion  as  much  as  possible.  He  says, 
*'  it  will  be  found,  as  long  as  the  weights  are  equal,"  there 
will  be  no  motion  produced,  but  wherever  the  weights  are 
placed  they  will  remain  ;  and  to  produce  vertical  motion  in 
the  smallest  degree,  it  will  be  necessary  to  add  a  weight  to  one 
of  the  former  to  create  a  preponderancy.  This  weight  he  calls 
the  mechanical  loss,  and  an  insurmountable  bar  to  perpetual 
motion,  &c.  We  need  not  follow  Mr.  B,  to  his  conclusion,  as 
I  think  this  insurmountable  bar  can  be  easily  removed ;  and  I 
shall  be  able  to  show  that  this  equilibrium,  for^such  it  merely 
is,  can  be  destroyed]  without  adding  to  one  of  the  weights,  or 
absolutely  taking  from  the  other;  though  this  may  virtually  be 
considered  to  be  the  case,  inasmuch  as  we  c^n  at  least  produce 
an  effect  on  the  system  as  if  the  weight  were  reduced.  Mr.  B. 
Sftys,  under  this  arrangement,  "wherever  the  weights  are 
placed  they  will  remain,  unless  an  addition  is  made  to  one  of 
them."  We  will  therefore  suppose  the  following  diagram  to 
represent  the  arrangement  on  a  small  scale,  delicately  con- 
structed. 

A  B^  are  the  two  weights  connected 
to  each  other  by  the  string  passing 
over  the  pulley,  and  being  nicely 
equalized  in  their  weight,  here  would, 
of  course,  be  an  equilibrium  on  the 
principle  of  the  lever.  But  take  a  flat 
piece  of  wood,  such  as  a  ruler,  and 
place  it  obliquely  in  a  way  so  as  not  to 
interfere  with  the  pulley  m  in  the  direc- 
tion c?,  and  then  bring  the  weight  to 
impinge  upon  it  in  a  way  so  as  not  to 
move  the  weight  A  m,  C  c?,  the  least,  or 
alter  its  position.  What  will  be  the 
consequence  ?  Some  would  say,  why, 
the  weight  A  would  then  descend,  and 
cause  the  weight  B  to  ascend.  But 
I  should  rather  say,  the  re-action  of  the 
plane  when  acted  on  by  the  weight  B, 
having  destroyed  the  equilibrium  of  the 
forces,  motion  takes  place.  Now,  if 
we  attribute  this  motion  to  the  re-action 


2'54  PEEPETTJITM    MOBILE; 

of  the  plane  on  the  weight,  though  we  will  not  go  so  far 
as  to  say  motion  is  generated,  yet  if  we  say,  by  this  simple 
arrangement  the  equilibrium  is  destroyed  and  motion  takes 
place,  the  leaftt  we  can  admit  is,  that  motion  is  communicated 
to  the  system,  and  that  by  the  agency  of  part  of  the  machine 
itself,  the  apparatus  employed  being  considered  as  such:  Then, 
why  so  much  objection  to  the  term  self-moving  machine  in 
limited  sense  ?  But  I  will  not  dispute  about  words,  which  are 
but  the  imai^es  of  things,  and  images  may  be  strangely  distorted 
by  the  medium  through  which  they  are  received — of  which 
distorting  mediums,  there  is  none  equal  to  that  of  prejudice  in 
favour  of  abstract  notions— which  notions  perhaps,  if  rigidly 
examined,  would  be  found  to  have  no  foundation  in  facts  or  in 
common  sense. 

Another  demonstrator  of  the  impossibility  of  perpetual 
motion,  is  Mr.  Mackinnon  (see  "  Mech.  Mag.,"  vol.  1,  p.  363). 
As  no  doubt  the  different  attempts  to  produce,  or  communicate, 
continued  and  perpetual  motion,  at  least,  such  as  are  often 
brought  forward  by  persons  unacquainted  with  the  science  of 
mechanics,  are  generally  to  those  who  are  acquainted  with  that 
science,  if  not  absolutely  ridiculous,  yet  of  a  nature  to  excite  a 
smile  at  their  futility:  still  there  are  a  few  (perhaps  a  very 
few)  who  entertain  an  opinion  that  such  a  thing  is  not  imprac- 
ticable, and  who  have,  from  practical  experience  as  well  as 
study,  acquired  a  tolerable  insight  into  the  laws  of  nature  (so 
far  as  relate  to  this  subject);  who  in  their  turn  cannot  help 
smiling  at  the  weak  reasoning  of  some  other  would-be  philo- 
sophers, who  gravely  give  their  dictum  in  the  case.  In  this 
class  I  include  Mr.  Mackinnon,  who  very  gravely  goes  to 
work  to  prove,  &c.,  and  flatters  himself  he  shall,  if  rightly  un- 
derstood, help  to  prevent  much  future  waste  of  time  on  the 
subject.  He  then  goes  on  to  give  us  his  definition  of  inertia, 
by  which  he  informs  us  that  a  body  in  a  state  of  rest  will 
remain  so  until  it  is  moved  (wonderful !) — that  it  cannot  move 
itself — that  it  has  not  that  power — and  that  no  mechanical  con- 
trivance can  give  it  that  power.    (How  profound  !)     *        * 


Inquiry  into  the  possibility  of  Perpetual  Motion 
(vol.  14,  1831):— 

Proposition. — That  a  wheel  can  be  made  to  possess  more 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELP-MOTIVE   POWER  266 

force  in  its  first  revolution  than  is  in  the  spring  that  moved  it 
(provided  the  moving  power  is  not  too  much  or  too  little)  by 
only  making  it  heavy  enough  and  regulating  its  diameter ;  and 
that  this  increase  of  power  goes  on  ad  infinitum.  To  demon- 
strate  this  will  be  to  demonstrate  the  possibility  of  perpetual 
motion. 

First,  then,  "  The  moment  of  any  moving  body  may  be  con- 
sidered «6  a  sum  of  all  the  moments  of  the  parts  of  that  body," 
and  the  expansion  of  a  substance  increa«es  the  resistance  of  the 
air  to  Its  motion  by  exposing  more  surface.  Now,  a  wheel  of 
a  ton  weight  possesses  as  much  force,  when  put  in  motion,  as  a 
thousand  small  ones  made  of  its  contents  would  possess,  while 
it  is  less  resisted  by  the  air,  as  it  has  less  surface  exposed  to  it. 

Secondly,  The  impediment  of  friction  to  a  wheel's  motion 
increases  with  the  circumference  of  the  axis  (as  proved  by 
balancing  a  beam,  which,  if  balanced  on  a  sharp  edge,  the  least 
touch  will  move  it),  and  vice  versa.  Now,  if  a  wheel  of  a  ton 
weight  be  divided  into  a  thousand  small  ones,  the  axis  suflicient 
to  support  that  wheel  must  be  divided  as  well  into  a  thousand 
small  bars.  The  large  wheel,  moved  with  the  collected  force 
of  the  thousand  small  ones,  while  it  was  less  resisted  by  the 
friction  as  the  circumference  of  its  axis,  was  less  than  a  sum  of 
the  circumferences  of  the  thousand  small  ones.  Besides,  one- 
thousandth  part  of  the  large  axis  is  not  sufficient  to  support 
one-thousandth  part  of  the  wheel's  weight,  as  a  beam  of  four 
equal  sides  will  support  a  greater  weight  than  if  split  into 
boards  and  laid  flat.  So  a  small  wheel  must  have  a  greater 
axis  in  proportion  to  its  weight  than  a  large  one  ;  consequently 
it  possesses  more  friction  in  proportion  to  its  power.  And  as 
the  wheel  is  increased,  the  power  increases,  for  "  the  motion  of 
all  matter  is  as  its  quantity,"  without  a  proportional  increase 
of  resistance  from  the  air  or  friction. 

Thirdly,  It  is  granted  that  when  a  wheel  is  put  in  motion, 
that  motion  would  be  perpetual  only  for  the  resistance  of  the  air 
and  friction.  Well,  all  the  force  it  possesses  is  present  in  the 
first  revolution,  and  can  be  used  to  reproduce  the  moving  cause 
while  the  resistance  can  be  almost  avoided,  for  it  only  is 
produced  as  the  wheel  revolves. 

I  was  led  by  this  course  of  reasoning  to  make  the  following 
experiments.     1.  Three  wheels,  of  various  sizes,  were  put  in 


256  PEBPETUTJM  mobile; 

motion  by  a  force  equal  to  the  one-ei£rhth  of  their  respective 
weights ;  the  smallest  was  stopped  in  its  first  revolution  by  the 
same  weight  that  moved  it  ;  the  next  in  size  took  once  and  a 
half;  and  the  largest  wheel  took  twice  the  moving  power  to 
stop  it.  2.  A  wheel,  two  feet  in  diameter,  had  various 
weights  fixed  alternately  to  its  periphery,  and  the  weight  let 
fall  from  the  perpendicular,  the  greater  the  weight  on  the 
wheel,  the  nearer  was  it  brought  round  toward  the  point  from 
which  it  fell,  until  the  weight  was  increased  to  two  pounds; 
here  the  principal  began  to  diminish  until  the  diameter  of  the 
wheel  was  increased — when  increase  of  weight  increased  the 
moment  as  before.  So,  there  is  a  certain  diameter  as  well  as 
weight  to  be  considered, 

Robert  Twiss,  Jun. 
P.S. — Much  depends  on  the  organic  structure  in  lessening 
the  size  of  the  machine.  I  have  three  models  (one  moved  by  a 
spring,  and  the  rest  by  a  weight)  for  the  inspection  of  any 
person  disposed  to  put  this  plan  into  execution.  In  one  the 
power  of  the  lever  is  present  in  two  places,  and  in  another  a 
weight  acts  on  the  whole  during  its  entire  revolution,  and  is 
replaced  by  being  lifted  only  two  or  three  inches. 


A  POWERFUL  Perpetual  Motion.  By  W.  Pearson 
(vol.  20,  1834)  :— 

If  I  Tinderstand  perpetual  motion  aright,  it  means  that  a 
machine,  or  other  moving  body,  must  be  so  constructed  that 
it  shall  continually  work  itself  without  intermission. 

If  my  ideas  of  perpetual  motion  are  correct,  I  am  confident 
I  have  discovered  it ;  for  I  know  a  machine  which  will  not 
only  work  itself,  without  the  assistance  of  any  person,  but 
will  also  have  a  sufficient  power  to  spare,  to  work  any  kind 
of  machinery  required. 

However,  setting  the  question  of  perpetual  motion  entirely 
aside,  here  is  a  machine  which  can  be  applied  to  all  the  pur- 
poses steam  is  applied  to,  and  free  from  any  danger  whatever 
— which  is  ready  for  starting  at  any  moment,  and,  except  the 
act  of  setting  in  motion  and  stopping,  requires  no  farther 
attending  to. 

The  contrivance  is  so  simple  that  I  can  calculate  the  gain 
and  loss  of  every  part  of  it ;  and  am  positive  that  what  is 


OE,    SEARCH   FOE   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  257 

now  considered  a  very  small  engine,  if  constructed  on  my 
plan,  after  deducting  sufficient  power  to  keep  itself  in  motion, 
will  have  to  spare,  over  and  above,  about  100  stones  pressure, 
which  may  be  applied  to  any  required  work ;  and,  by  en- 
larging its  dimension,  it  may  be  made  of  any  given  power. 

It  will  answer  admirably  for  propelling  vessels  across  the 
seas,  as  they  are  now  done  by  steam;  and  as  no  fuel  is 
needed,  it  certainly  is  a  desideratum.  The  engine  is  much 
more  compact,  and  will  be  free  of  that  uncomfortable  heat 
which  is  so  much  felt  in  steamers. 

I  do  not  think  it  proper,  at  present,  to  explain  more  parti- 
cularly the  nature  of  this  machine,  for  I  believe  there  are 
people  in  the  world  who  would  not  scruple  to  take  advantage 
of  my  labour  and  study.  This  being  the  case,  I  have  not 
sent  a  drawing  and  description,  as  I  first  intended ;  but  if 
any  gentleman,  merchant,  mechanic,  &c.,  of  known  integrity, 
who  needs  such  an  engine,  or  wishes  to  know  if  it  be  possible 
to  make  one,  will  secure  me,  by  a  patent  or  any  other  suffi- 
cient means,  an  adequate  return  for  the  invention,  I  will 
prove  to  him  by  a  drawing  (if  he  knows  anything  about  a 
machine)  that  it  cannot  fail  to  answer  the  desired  end. 

It  is  not  in  my  power  to  try  it ;  and  yet  an  engine  of  this 
description  will  cost  much  less  than  a  steam-engine  of  the 
same  power,  without  any  running  expense  for  fuel,  &c., 
upon  it. 

Confident  I  am  not  mistaken,  I  will  not  shrink  behind  an 
anonymous  signature,  but  openly,  and  at  once,  acknowledge 
myself  as 

Yours,  &c., 

William  Peabson. 

Bishop  Auckland,  Jan.  6,  1834. 

P.S. — Many  hold  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  machine  to 
expend  the  same  power  it  works  with ;  but  let  me  inform 
them  that  I  have  brought  an  ally  into  the  field  which  does 
the  most  material  part  of  the  work,  and  yet  requires  no 
outlay  of  power  in  return. 


Self-acting  Machineby. — ^W.  Pearson  (vol.  23,  1835) 
again  writes : — 

The  possibility  of  making  a  perpetual  motion,  or  machinery 
to  generate  the  power  it  works  with,  is  affected  to  be  treated 


258  PEBFETWH  mobile; 

as  an  "  idle  chimera,"  equally  vain  and  opposed  to  the  well- 
established  laws  of  nature  and  mechanics  ;  but  in  spite  of 
this,  perpetual  motion  seekers  are  more  numerous  than  any 
superficial  observer  may  imagine.  Having  already  made  an 
avowal  of  my  confidence  of  the  practicability  of  making  self- 
acting  machinery,  I  have  had  occasion  to  hear  much  said  on 
the  subject.  Many  with  whom  1  have  conversed,  after 
quoting  what  this  or  that  learned  gentleman  has  said  on  the 
impossibility  of  the  thing,  have  taken  "heart  of  grace"  from 
hearing  me  still  profess  my  confidence  in  my  plans,  and  at 
length  acknowledge  that  they  themselves  turned  their  atten- 
tion to  it  at  one  time,  and  believed  they  could  lay  down  plans 
by  which  self-acting  machinery  could  be  made  to  do  such 
and  such  particular  work !  One  person,  after  *'  beating 
about  the  bush "  as  above,  alleged  that  he  could  *'  make  a 
wheel  which  would  be  able  to  turn  a  grunstane .'"  Thus  you 
see,  Sir,  perpetual  motion  seekers  abound  ;  and  though  they 
pretend  to  laugh  at  the  idea,  yet  are  they  secretly  labouring 
to  catch — ^what  is  it  Bishop  Wilkins  calls  it  ? — the  *'  chaste 
wanton." 

I  believe  most  of  the  engineers  of  the  present  day  have 
been  perpetual  motion  seekers  ;  but,  disappointed  by  repeated 
failures,  have  given  up  the  thing  as  a  false,  deluding  chimera, 
unworthy  of  their  study :  though  I  have  heard  it  said 
(whether  true  or  false  I  know  not,  neither  is  there  any 
offence  meant)  that  Mr.  Hancock,  of  steam-carriage  celebrity, 
remarked  once,  that  "  if  he  had  an  hundred  sons,  he  would 
like  them  all  to  study  perpetual  motion ;  for,  if  it  had  no 
other  beneficial  effect,  it  would  make  them  familiar  with  the 
various  modes  of  connecting  the  working  parts  of  machinery." 

[After  a  little  pleasantry  in  the  Way  of  proposing  some 
incredible  machinery,  he  proceeds  : — ] 

Sir  Isaac  Newton,  it  is  said,  hinted  something  about  a  fool 
when  he  failed  of  discovering  the  perpetual  motion.  How 
far  I  may  tally  with  the  learned  astronomer's  ideas  of  one, 
I  know  not ;  but  certainly  I  have  no  ambition  to  contend  for 
the  title.  Though  the  veteran  mathematician  did  not  express 
himself  in  the  self-sufficient  style  of  some  of  our  ci-devant 
perpetual  motion  seekers  after  they  had  failed, — **  Phoo !  it's 
all  fudge  ;  there  is  no  such  thing :  haven't  I  tried  it  all  tvaysf* 
— ^yet  I  must  say  it  was  rather  ungenerous  of  him  to  place  a 


OR,    SEABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  259 

disgraceful  bar  in  the  way  of  the  successful  student.  I  am 
not  unaware,  however,  that  many  people  consider  me  a  down- 
right ninny,  for  coming  forward  as  I  have  done,  in  a  plain, 
open,  decisive  manner ;  but  how  far  I  may  really  merit  the 
epithet,  remains  eventually  to  be  proved.  If,  after  setting  up 
my  name  as  a  target  for  the  arrows  of  criticism  to  be  pointed 
at,  it  is  clearly  demonstrated  that  I  am  in  error,  then,  indeed, 
I  cannot  but  acknowledge  the  term  will  be  very  justly  applied. 
However,  it  may  suffice  at  present  when  I  say,  "  I  do  not 
fear  the  result !" 


Mr.  Mackintosh,  in  a  lecture  delivered  in  October,  in  rela- 
tion to  the  laws  and  sources  of  motion  (vol.  26,  1836), 
says : — 

All  mechanical  motion  resulting  from  gravity  tends  from  a 
circumference  to  a  centre,  the  time  which  the  motion  con- 
tinues being  greater  or  less  as  the  velocity  or  distance  from 
the  centre  is  greater  or  less. 

If  chemical  motion  continually  tends  from  the  centre  to 
the  circimiference,  a  perpetual  chemical  motion  is  impossible, 
because,  whatever  may  be  the  dimensions  of  the  mass,  it 
must  have  a  centre,  at  which  point  chemical  action  would 
cease. 

If  mechanical  motion  continually  tends  to  a  centre,  a  per- 
petual mechanical  motion  is  impossible,  because,  whatever 
may  be  the  dimensions  of  a  circle,  it  must  have  a  centre,  at 
which  point  mechanical  motion  would  cease. 

But  a  perpetual  motion  may  and  does  exist,  and  is  a  neces- 
sary result  of  the  two  forces,  viz.,  of  chemical  motion  tending 
from  a  centre,  and  of  mechanical  motion  tending  to  a  centre; 
and  these  two  forces  may  and  will  continue  to  produce  motion 
for  ever. 


Section  II. — lu  Possibility/  Denied, 

A  correspondent  (vol.  1,  1823),  speaking  of  the  London 
Mechanics'  Institute,  about  to  be  established,  observes : — 

Amongst  the  various  other  important  benefits  to  be  derived 
from  the  proposed  institution,  will  be  that  of  demonstrating. 


260  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

in  intelligible  terms,  the  total  fallacy  and  inutility  of  certain 
pursuits  after  the  chimera  of  perpetual  motion,  in  search  of 
which  so  many  have  sunk  their  little  capital  and  many  of 
their  best  years  of  existence,  which  might  have  been  pre- 
vented by  an  acquaintance  with  the  first  elements  of  me- 
chanics. 

In  some  recent  cases  which  have  come  to  my  knowledge, 
the  visionary  mechanics  have  been  objects  of  pity,  from  the 
encouragement  given  to  them  by  persons  who  ought  to  have 
been  qualified  to  have  given  better  advice.  These  dark  and 
golden  dreams,  the  seeds  of  fruitless  patents,  will,  it  is  to  be 
hoped,  be  diminished  by  a  more  general  diffusion  of  mechani- 
cal knowledge. 

[He  concludes  his  letter  with : — ^] 

Perhaps  some  of  your  correspondents  will  favour  the  public, 
through  the  medium  of  your  Magazine,  with  a  short  history 
of  some  of  the  most  specious  attempts  to  produce  a  gener- 
ating power,  or  a  machine  capable  of  working  from  a  power 
raised  by  itself. 


"A  Constant  Reader"  (vol.  1,  1823)  states:— 

*  *  *  I  have  witnessed,  however,  a  nearer  approach 
to  a  method  of  obtaining  perpetual  motion  than  is  set  forth 
by  your  correspondent,  which,  if  I  comprehend  it  rightly, 
only  shows  one  pump  for  raising  the  water  over  the  wheel, 
but  which  is  not  sufficient  to  carry  the  wheel  roimd.  In  the 
case  I  witnessed,  there  were  two  pumps,  which  moved  suc- 
cessively after  each  other,  by  which  means  the  wheel,  if  it 
were  possible  to  overcome  the  friction,  would  be  kept  in  con- 
stant motion ;  whereas,  after  the  contents  of  a  single  pump 
are  discharged  on  the  wheel,  it  would  immediately  stop. 

But,  however  an  engine  of  this  description  may  be  made, 
it  is  utterly  impossible  to  overcome  the  friction  of  the  bear- 
ings, couplings,  levers,  &c. 


No  Perpetual  Motion  (vol.  1,  1823). — ^The  writer 
says : — 

I  would  advise  those  persons  who  yet  may  be  misspending 
their  valuable  time  on  this  vain  pursuit,  to  consider  the  ques- 


OK,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER. 


26i 


tion  in  its  most  simple  form,  divested  of  the  more  complex 
operations  of  raising  water  by  means  of  pumps,  as  these 
operations  always  involve  questions  of  difficulty  as  to  the 
proportion  of  power  expended  to  the  effect  produced ;  taking 
into  account  that  the  real  mechanical  effect  in  all  hydraulic 
machines  falls  much  below  the  power  expended.  Let  the 
question  be,  therefore,  considered  by  means  of  a  simple 
pulley,  mounted  on  friction  wheels,  so  as  to  reduce  the  re- 
sistance to  motion  as  much  as  possible :  let  us  also  suppose 
a  line  passing  over  this  pulley,  without  weight,  and  without 
rigidity  or  stiffness ;  at  each  end  of  this  fine  let  there  be 
attached  an  equal  weight.  As  the  subject  is  of  importance, 
it  will  be  right  to  consider  well  the  result  of  this  arrange- 
ment. It  will  be  found  that  so  long  as  the  weights  are  equal 
there  will  be  no  motion  produced,  but  that  wherever  the 
weights  are  placed  they  wiU  remain ;  and  to  produce  vertical 
motion,  even  in  the  smallest  degree,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
add  a  weight  to  one  of  the  former,  to  create  a  preponderancy: 
this  additional  weight  is  therefore  the  mechanical  loss,  and 
the  insurmountable  bar  to  perpetual  motion.  All  attempts 
to  get  rid  of  this  difficulty,  by  the  introduction  of  pumps, 
whether  the  common  lifting  pumps,  the  spiral  cylinder,  or 
any  other  rotatory  machinery,  will  only  serve  to  increase  the 
loss  of  power,  by  the  friction  inseparable  from  every  part  of 
a  machine. 

[He  says  that — ] 

If  one  hundred  gallons  of  water  be  made  to  operate  upon 
any  pump,  with  a  fall  of  ten  feet,  it  will  be  found  that  the 
quantity  raised  to  the  height  of  ten  feet  will  be  several 
gallons  short  of  one  himdred. 

[He  adds  : — ] 

A  very  considerable  portion  of  the  fruitless  attempts  to 
procure  a  generating  power,  that  have  come  to  my  knowledge 
in  the  course  of  the  last  twenty-five  years,  have  been  foimded 
upon  the  presumption  that  a  machine  could  be  made  to  raise 
more  water  than  was  required  for  its  own  operation.  A  due 
consideration  of  the  less  complicated  question  of  a  pulley 
with  two  equal  weights  sufficiently  proves  that  the  presump- 
tion could  never  be  realized. 


262  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

No  Pebpetuaii  Motion  (vol.  1,  1823) : — 

Your  correspondent  has  taken  up  a  very  wrong  position 
when  he  insinuates  that  a  perpetual  motion  cannot  be  made, 
because  matter  is  inert.  That  matter  is  inert,  no  one  will 
deny  ;  but  motion  is  as  natural  to  matter  as  inertness.  This 
was  long  ago  asserted  by  Des  Cartes :  impress  motion  upon 
any  mass,  and  it  will  keep  that  motion  for  ever,  if  not  affected 
by  any  other  agent;  witness  the  harmonious  motion  of  the 
celestial  spheres. 

The  want  of  a  perpetual  motion  arises  from  a  very  different 
cause  than  that  of  the  inertia  of  matter.  In  the  science  of 
statics  there  are  a  few  things  most  essentially  necessary  to  be 
considered,  and  these  are  strikingly  illustrated  by  the  simple 
lever. 


"l 

A 

L 

1 

K 

L   P 

w, 

Let  A  K  be  an  inflexible  bar  without  weight ;  place  it  on 
the  fulcrum  L :  place  equal  weights,  P  and  W,  at  each  end ; 
these  will  evidently  balance  each  other ;  put  them  in  motion 
in  a  vertical  plane,  and  the  descent  of  the  one  will  be  equal 
to  the  ascent  of  the  other ;  the  times  of  ascent  and  descent 
will  be  the  same;  in  short,  a  perfect  statical  equilibrium 
obtains — that  is,  the  times,  the  velocities,  the  momenta,  and 
the  space  passed  over  in  each  are  respectively  alike.  Now, 
let  the  weight  W,  of  six  ounces,  be  placed  at  H  ;  then,  by 
the  properties  of  the  lever,  WxHL  =  PxAL;  hence 

^^  "^  =  P,  that  is,  6x2-5=  15,  and  15  divided  by 
4-6  =  3-3,  the  weight  P ;  in  this  position  the  balance  is  still 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  263 

preserved.  The  times  of  ascent  and  descent  are  equal ;  the 
velocities  and  spaces  described  are  nnequal;  being  as  4*5  is 
to  2*5 ;  but  this  is  again  compensated  by  the  momenta ;  for, 
since  that  is  as  the  quantity  of  matter  multiplied  into  its 
velocity,  we  shall  have  for  the  momentum  of  P  3*3  X  4*5  =  15, 
and  for  W  it  will  be  6  X  2*5  =  15 ;  here,  again,  the  momenta 
are  brought  into  an  equilibrated  state,  and  of  course  motion 
will  cease.  The  same  truth  will  hold  good  in  any  other  posi- 
tion, and  in  any  other  machine,  however  complicated  may  be 
its  construction;  for  it  has  been  asserted  by  an  eminent 
astronomer  and  mechanical  philosopher,  that  upon  this  prin- 
ciple depends  the  whole  of  mechanics ;  and  it  holds  \miver- 
sally  true  that  when  the  bodies  are  suspended  on  any  machine, 
so  as  to  act  contrary  to  each  other,  if  the  machine  be  put 
into  motion,  and  the  perpendicular  ascent  of  one  body  multi- 
plied into  its  weight  be  equal  to  the  perpendicular  descent  of 
the  other  body  multiplied  into  its  weight,  those  bodies,  how 
unequal  soever,  will  balance  one  another  m  all  situations. 
In  hydraulic  machinery  the  same  law  holds  true,  and  it  is 
strikingly  exemplified  in  the  sjrphon.  Suppose  a  vessel 
whose  surface  contains  16  superficial  inches,  and  a  syphon 
whose  bore  contains  exactly  one  superficial  inch — ^that  is,  any 
transverse  section  of  the  tube — ^it  is  well  known  that,  if  the 
longer  leg  of  the  sjrphon  be  on  the  same  level  with  the  sur- 
face of  the  water  in  the  vessel,  the  water  will  not  run,  even 
though  means  be  used  to  effect  its  egress.  The  reason  is 
obvious :  let  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  be  15  pounds 
on  the  square  inch ;  since  fluids  press  alike  in  all  directions, 
the  15  poimds  of  upward  pressure  will  exactly  balance  the 
pressure  of  240  on  the  vessel;  for,  if  16  inches  of  water 
were  to  be  forced  through  the  syphon,  the  water  in  the  vessel 
would  only  fall  one  inch,  and  this  velocity  1  x  240  (the  pres- 
sure on  the  vessel)  =  240,  and  the  velocity  of  the  sjrphon 
16  X  15  (its  atmospheric  pressure)  =  240.  Let  the  end  of 
the  longer  leg  be  brought  below  the  level  of  the  surface  of 
the  water  in  the  vessel,  so  as  between  that  level  and  the 
point  of  discharge  may  contain  one  pound  of  water;  and 
since  this  one  poimd  of  water  acts  against  the  15  pounds  of 
atmospheric  pressure,  hence  14  pounds  only  remain,  which 
do  not  balance  the  pressure  upon  the  vessel ;  in  this  case  the 
water  will  flow;  but  no  mechanical  advantage  can  possibly 
be  derived  from  this  circumstance ;  for  although  the  velo- 


S64  PEKPETxruM  mobile; 

cities  are  as  16  to  1,  yet  the  quantities  are  equal,  the  times 
are  equal,  and  the  momenta  are  equal ;  for  the  momentum 
or  force  thus  generated  by  the  affluent  water  can  never  raise 
a  quantity  in  the  slightest  degree  greater  than  itself  to  the 
point  where  it  fell  from ;  and,  so  long  as  nature  acts  in  this 
form,  in  vain  shall  we  look  for  a  perpetual  motion. 

[He  then  quotes  from  Dr.  Gregory,  where  he  illustrates 
the  impossibility  of  perpetual  motion  by  the  balance  invented 
by  Dr.  Desaguliers.] 


Invariable  rather  than  Perpetual  Motion  to  be 
Sought  after  (vol.  2,  1824) : — 

Notwithstanding  the  many  ingenious  papers  which  have 
appeared  in  your  Magazine,  tending  to  elucidate  the  subject 
of  perpetual  motion,  with  the  laudable  view  of  restraining 
deluded  genius  from  the  pursuit  of  an  object  which  can  never 
be  attained,  it  seems  pretty  clear  (from  the  observations  of 
F.  J.)  that  they  have  all  proved  insufficient  to  effect  this  pur- 
pose. It  is  not  enough  for  one  enamoured  with  his  imagined 
discoveries,  and  more  or  less  hallucinated  by  a  long  and 
almost  incessant  contemplation  of  them,  to  be  shown  the 
unsuccessful  attempts  of  others ;  nor  is  it  sufficient  that  a 
skilful  mathematician  can  comprehend  the  demonstration  of 
its  impossibility;  but  I  hope  many  may  be  restrained,  by 
convincing  them  that  it  would  be  utterly  useless  if  discovered, 
and  that  the  pursuit  of  it  is  disreputable  in  the  eyes  of 
scientific  men. 

When,  however,  I  assert  that  perpetual  motion  can  never 
be  obtained,  I  wish  to  be  understood,  that  it  cannot  be  pro- 
duced by  any  means  strictly  mechanical,  or  hydrostatical : 
that  it  may  be  practicable  by  other  means,  must  be  sufficiently 
obvious  to  every  theorist.  For  example :  let  a  tube  be  made 
in  the  form  of  those  used  in  common  wheel  barometers, 
sufficiently  capacious  to  contain  several  hundred  pounds  of 
mercury ;  then  suspend  a  weight  on  the  surface  of  the  mer- 
cury, with  a  proportional  counterpoise,  so  placed,  that  every 
ascent,  as  well  as  descent,  shall  renovate  the  maintaining 
power  of  a  train  of  wheels,  terminated  by  a  delicately  small 
balance.     By  this  means  a  very  small  alteration  in  the  pres- 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  265 

sure  of  the  atmosphere  will  wind  up  the  weight  or  spring 
sufficiently  to  maintain  the  vibrations  of  a  balance  for  a 
period  of  two,  or  three,  or  more  weeks,  according  to  the 
weight  of  the  column  of  mercury  suspended  in  the  tube.  If 
it  be  objected,  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  the  atmosphere 
preserving  an  uniform  pressure  for  so  long  a  period,  a  ther- 
mometer constructed  pyrometrically  (i.e.,  with  bars  of  metal 
possessing  an  equal  expansibility)  may  be  substituted  ;*  and 
as  the  power  of  this  may,  like  the  last,  be  accumulated  to  any 
given  extent,  it  may  be  made  to  require  only  the  constant 
changes  of  season  to  impart  to  the  machine  sufficient  power 
•to  render  it  totally  independent  of  the  minor  and  inconstant 
variations  of  temperature,  from  which  it  would  nevertheless 
frequently  derive  a  renewal  of  power. 

But  to  produce  perpetual  motion  by  mechanical  means,  is 
a  proposition  which  in  itself  implies  a  contradiction :  mecha- 
nical motion  consists  in  an  approximation  to  mechanical 
equilibriimi,  and  it  is  therefore  a  contradiction  to  say  that  a 
body,  or  system  of  bodies,  can  constantly  approach  without 
ultimately  arriving  at  that  point  of  equilibrium  where  motion 
ceases. f  If,  again,  it  be  said  that  motion  may  be  produced 
without  approaching  the  point  of  equilibrium,  an  equally 
obvious  contradiction  is  involved ;  for  the  proposition  comes 
to  this,  that  we  may  produce,  by  the  expenditure  of  a  given 
quantity  of  power,  a  renovating  power  greater  than  that 
expended,  which  is  impossible.  It  may  not,  perhaps,  be  so 
distinctly  evident ;  but  it  is  no  less  capable  of  demonstration, 
that  projected  bodies  of  any  description,  deriving  their  force 
from  their  momentum,  are  subject  to  the  same  or  (in  their 
result)  similar  laws,  and  equally  inadequate  to  produce  per- 
petual motion. 

Let  me  exhort  those  of  your  readers,  who  will  not  be  con- 
vinced of  the  impracticability  of  their  schemes,  and  who,  after 
all^that  has  been  said,  still  imagine  that  they  can  accomplish 
that  which  has  baffled  the  learned  of  all  ages ;  who  esteem 
those  facts  which  science  has  established,  and  which  have 
been  demonstrated  to  our  understanding,  and  proved  to  our 

*  See  NicliO'Son  on  the  Solid  Thermometer,  p.  127. 
f  Mathematically,  perpetual  approximation  mny  easily  be  conceived. 
Not  so  here,  because  the  motion  of  a  specific  body  requires  a  specific  power 
to  maintain  it ;  and  when  the  power  becomes  less  than  that  q\iantity,  the 
motion  ceases. 


266  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

senses,  to  be  merely  as  "  customs,"  or  fashions,  which  they 
can  lay  aside  when  they  impede  their  operations:  these  I 
would  advise  to  relinquish  a  pursuit  which  is  profitable 
neither  to  society  nor  to  themselves,  and  direct  their  exer- 
tions to  the  investigation  of  subjects  in  which  their  success 
would  entitle  them  to  remuneration  for  the  trouble  and 
anxiety  inseparable  from  speculative  experiments.  Instead 
of  studying  perpetual  motion,  which  has  hitherto  produced 
nothing  but  perpetual  nonsense,  let  their  object  be  an  invari- 
able motion.  The  necessity  of  winding  up  such  machines  at 
certain  periods,  is  a  circumstance  altogether  unimportant  and 
frivolous,  while  it  remains  to  obviate  the  evils  arising  from  • 
external  motion ;  to  neutralize  the  effects  of  heat  and  cold, 
without  the  introduction  of  other  evils ;  to  prevent  the 
variable  and  injurious  influence  of  oil,  &c.,  &c. 


In  vol.  3,  1824,  a  correspondent,  who  signs  "  Esperance," 
gives  the  following  as  a  memorandum  made  by  him  "  while 
perusing  some  works  relating  to  the  controversy  of  finite 
particles :" — 

Dec,  1813. — The  theory  of  a  finite  quantity  of  matter 
being  composed  of  an  infinite  number  of  particles,  as  to  the 
truth  of  which  mathematicians  are  divided  in  opinion,  may 
perhaps  be  compared  to  that  of  perpetual  motion.  For 
mathematicians,  on  the  other  side,  say,  it  is  a  contradiction 
to  suppose  anything  of  finite  dimensions  can  be  composed  of 
infinities,  which  certainly  appears  correct  in  principle ;  yet, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  argued  that  no  certain  number  of 
parts  of  which  any  matter  consists  can  be  supposed,  without 
having  an  idea  of  a  greater  number,  even  ad  infinitum.  On 
the  same  ground,  although  no  certain  time  can  be  pointed 
out  which  forms  the  maximum  of  the  movements  of  ma- 
chinery, nor  can  any  length  of  time  be  conceived  wnthout  an 
idea  of  greater  extent,  to  which,  by  increasing  either  the 
moving  power  or  the  complication  of  the  inferior  parts,  the 
motion  may  be  carried :  yet  perpetual  motion,  as  a  mechanic 
principle,  is  visionary.  Query. — ^Will  this  at  aU  explain  the 
subject  which  has  been  so  long  controverted,  as  it  proves  the 
maintainers  of  both  sides  of  tiie  question  to  be  to  a  certain 
degree  right  ? 


OB,    SEARCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  267 

This  argument,  of  course,  alludes  to  engines  where  a  me- 
chanical power  is  the  moving  force,  and  not  a  chemical  power, 
as  the  electrical  pendulum. 


A  correspondent  (vol.  6,  1825)  directs  his  remarks  chiefly 
against  the  singular  opinions  of  Mr.  Pasley,  who  believes 
''  that  a  perp^tual-motion-making  cause  may  yet  be  discovered, 
and  that  following  such  an  i^nis  fatuus  may  lead  to  the  path 
of  wisdom,"  and  observes : — 

On  the  contrary,  this  vain  pursuit  has  been  known,  even  in 
the  present  age,  to  lead  to  poverty  and  ruin ;  and,  indeed, 
what  else  can  be  expected,  when  speculators  construct  ma- 
chines without  understanding  the  first  principles  of  mechanics  ? 
Such  was  the  case  with  myself  (perhaps  thirty-five  years 
since),  when,  believing  that  nature  abhorred  a  vacuum,  I 
constructed  a  syphon  with  a  small  bore  as  far  as  the  water 
was  to  ascend,  and  a  large  bore  in  the  shorter  descending 
leg  ;  fully  expecting  that  the  weight  of  the  larger  column  of 
water  would  draw  up  the  smaller  column  out  of  a  basin,  and 
permit  the  liquid  to  fall  into  the  vessel  from  whence  it  came, 
and  turn  a  wheel  in  its  descent.*  Another  of  my  raw  youthful 
speculations  consisted  in  a  water-wheel,  contrived  so  as  to 
pump  up  water  near  the  centre  of  it,  a  part  only  of  which  I 
supposed  would  be  amply  sufficient  to  keep  the  wheel  in 
motion,  by  the  great  power  it  would  possess  if  conveyed  into 
buckets  at  the  wheel's  circumference.  I  did  not  then  know 
the  imiversal  law  of  mechanics,  which  must  inevitably  de- 
molish all  similar  projects  in  machinery,  viz.,  that  whatever 
is  gained  in  power  is  lost  in  time. 

I  believe  the  idea,  that  a  perpetual-motion-making  cause 
may  yet  be  discovered,  arises  principally  from  ignorance  of 
the  laws  of  nature  which  relate  to  machinery,  but  partly  from 
a  notion  which  has  been  broached  by  certain  pantheistical 
philosophers,  that  a  propensity  to  motion  is  an  innate  and 
essential  property  of  the  particles  of  matter.  Yet,  in  oppo- 
sition to  this  doctrine,  the  natural  immobility  and  inertness  of 
matter  are  obvious  wherever  we  turn  our  eyes ;  and  the  pro- 

*  For  this  favourite  idea,  see  Appendix  B ;  and  Zonca's  work  on 
Macbinesi  1G07|  folio. 


I 


268  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

jectile  motion  in  the  planets,  &c.,  can  no  more  be  an  innate 
quality  than  it  is  in  a  cannon-ball.  The  whole  universe  is, 
indeed,  an  example  of  perpetual  motion,  as  respects  the 
larger  masses  of  matter,  yet  the  motion  in  all  cases  seems  to 
proceed  from  an  external  or  mental  cause. 

The  circulation  of  the  blood  in  animals  seems  to  be  caused 
by  a  series  of  galvanic  shocks  ;  but  a  constant  external  supply 
of  food,  air,  and  heat  is  indispensable,  and  shows  that  the 
motion  of  the  heart,  &c.,  is  not  an  innate  propensity.  A 
watermill  in  a  large  river  may  be  deemed  a  real  perpetual 
motion ;  but  the  weight  or  gravity  of  the  water,  which  con- 
stantly carries  it  towards  the  ocean,  proves  that  some  other 
agent  must  convey  it  up  again  towards  its  source. 

[On  Mr.  Pasley's  version  of  the  projectile  force,  he 
remarks : — "] 

What !  is  the  projectile  force  (as  exemplified  on  the  largest 
scale  in  the  planetary  system)  a  nullity  ?  On  the  contrary, 
that  is  precisely  the  kind  of  force  which  all  perpetual  motion 
seekers  should  cherish  above  all  others ;  for  it  is  acknow- 
ledged that  bodies  projected  into  space  move  on  ad  infinitum 
with  their  original  velocity,  unless  obstructed  by  the  air  or 
some  other  agent. 

Without  wishing  any  one  to  place  a  blind  reliance  on  great 
authorities,  I  think  no  person  ought  to  presume  to  promulgate 
any  anti-Newtonian  doctrines,  till  they  have  given  sound 
reasons  for  rejecting  the  established  system. 

[This  he  says  in  allusion  ,'to  such  common-sense  phi- 
losophers as  Sir  R.  Phillips  and  others.] 

I  fear  the  delusive  projects  for  perpetual  motion  have  been 
encouraged  in  no  small  degree  by  the  disingenuousness  of  the 
Marquis  of  Worcester,  who,  like  some  of  your  correspondents, 
scruples  not  to  insinuate  that  he  has  actually  succeeded  in 
this  hopeful  attempt. 

The  wheel  that  he  speaks  of  in  No.  56  of  his  "  Century  of" 
ingenious  speculations,  rather  than  "inventions,"  certainly 
would  not  move  of  itself,  though  it  is  possible  to  make  the 
weights  descend  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  centre  than 
their  ascending  distance. 

[He  complains  of  Nos.  78  and  98  as  fallacious ;  and — ] 

Nos.  99  and  100  are  complete  castles  in  the  air,  or  else 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    8ELF-M0TIVE    POWER.  269 

they  are  worth  a  thousand  of  perpetual  motions.  The  descent 
of  1  lb.  is  to  raise  100  lbs.  as  high  as  the  1  lb.  falls,  in  defiance 
of  the  mechanical  principle — that  what  we  gain  in  power  we 
lose  in  time,  &c. 


The  Editor  (vol.  10,  1828)  says :— • 

Philobrune,  who  expresses  his  determination  never  to 
believe  in  the  impossibility  of  perpetual  motion,  until  he  has 
"  spent  twenty  or  thirty  pounds  in  the  trial,"  and  who  wishes 
for  a  candid  examination  of  the  arguments  for  and  against  it, 
will  be  pleased  to  learn  that  we  propose  inserting,  shortly,  a 
series  of  clever  papers,  which  profess  to  have  that  object  in 
view,  by  a  correspondent  nearly  as  incredulous  as  himself. 
We,  however,  recoijimend  him  to  keep  his  money  in  his 
pocket  till  he  has  read  these  papers,  and  what  may  possibly 
be  oiSered  in  reply  to  them.  Strange  to  stay,  notwithstanding 
all  that  has  been  experimented  and  written  on  the  subject, 
the  "  Philobrunes "  are  still  a  very  numerous  class ;  and 
while  they  are  so,  no  apology  can  be  necessary  for  appropri- 
ating a  portion  of  our  pages  to  their  conversion. 


A  lecturer  (vol.  10,  1828)  writes  :— 

Perpetual  motion  is,  and  ever  must  be,  an  impossibility. 
For,  consider  motion  abstractedly  from  matter — a  certain 
quantity  of  motion  is  communicated  to  a  given  body,  and  the 
seeker  after  perpetual  motion  endeavours,  by  the  agency  of 
machinery,  to  make  it  return  to  the  same  place  again,  and  so 
continue  for  ever.  Now,  were  there  no  such  things  as  fric- 
tion and  resistance,  all  would  be  well ;  but  as  long  as  bodies 
continue  to  part  with  their  motion  to  surrounding  bodies,  so 
long  will  perpetual  motion  be  unattainable.  It  is  of  no  use 
to  invent  machinery  to  economize  the  motion  :  at  the  return 
of  each  circulation,  the  motion  must  and  will  be  less  than  it 
was  at  the  end  of  the  preceding  one,  and  so  it  will  continue 
till  the  machine  stops. 

Neither  is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  by  the  agency  of 
any  uniform  moving  power  (if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expres- 
sion), such  as  the  magnet,  the  earth's  attraction,  the  atmo- 
spheric pressure,  &c.,  we  can  attain  perpetual  motion.     For 


270  PEBPETUUM  mobixe; 

instance,  in  the  magnet,  all  cases  may  be  reduced  to  the  fol- 
lowing : — ^There  are  two  magnets,  A  and  B,  and  another  body, 
as  C,  to  be  attracted,  first  by  one  and  then  by  the  other,  as 
in  the  figure. 


6    r-- — I 


c 

First,  then,  A  is  to  have  sufficient  power  to  attract  C  away 
from  B ;  and  then  B  is  to  have  a  greater  power,  to  draw  C 
away  from  A.  Now,  if  the  power  of  B  be  greater  than  the 
power  of  A,  it  could  never  have  attracted  C  away  from  B  in 
the  first  instance ;  and  if  B  be  less  than  A,  B  can  never  draw 
it  back  in  the  second.  To  suppose,  then,  that  in  any  arrange- 
ments of  magnets,  first  one  should  have  the  greater  power 
and  then  the  other,  is  absurd ;  and  the  same  holds  good  of 
any  uniform  source  of  motion  whatever. 

In  writing  the  above,  I  have  gone  at  once  to  first  principles, 
considering  that  I  wrote  for  persons  who  understood  the 
subject;  for  in  investigating  questions  of  this  nature,  we 
must  not  stop  to  consider  the  best  passage  for  fluids,  the 
superiority  of  a  friction  roller,  or  the  advantages  of  a  lever, 
but  go  at  once  to  the  first  principles ;  the  same  as  in  algebra 
we  clear  an  equation  of  all  unnecessary  quantities.  *  * 
If  I  have  made  the  case  clear,  it  may  preserve  talents  from 
being  wasted  upon  that  which  is  not  attainable. 


ScBiPTUBE  Texts  (vol.  11,  1829). — ^What  the  following 
has  to  do  with  the  subject,  it  is  difficult  to  surmise :  but  its 
author  seems  in  good  earnest : — 

"  Notice  to  Perpetual  Motion  Seekers." — The  following 
is  a  literal  copy   of   a  communication  which  we   have  re- 


OR,    SEABCH   FOB   SELP-MOTIVE    POWEB.  271 

ceived  under  this  head.  We  publish  it  for  the  benefit  of 
all  concerned : — "  Perpetual  Motion  Seekers !  see  Coloss., 
ch.  ii.,  V.  8 — '  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you,  through  phi- 
losophy and  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  of  men,  after  the 
rudunents  of  the  world.'  Ye  are  making  the  words  of  God  of 
none  efiect  by  your  traditions,  in  publishing  these  things  to 
the  world.  How  can  such  toys  and  baubles  as  these  be  per- 
petual? See  Malachi,  ch.  iv.,  v.  1 — 'For  behold  the  day 
cometh  that  shall  bum  as  an  oven ;  and  all  the  proud,  yea, 
all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  as  stubble.'  Here  is  the  end 
of  them.  I  the  undersigned  have  to  inform  the  public,  the 
model  for  making  perpetual  motion  is  to  be  found  in  that  too 
much  neglected  book  of  models,  the  Bible.  I  called  upon 
the  Lord,  and  he  showed  it  to  me.  T  said,  '  Lord,  shall  I 
show  this  unto  them  ?'  This  was  the  answer  to  me : — See 
Isaiah,  ch.  xli.,  v.  29 — '  Behold,  they  are  all  vanity ;  their 
works  are  nothing.'  I  said,  '  Lord,  be  pleased  to  show  me 
some  more  about  it.'  '  Bring  forth  your  strong  reason^,  saith 
the  King  of  Jacob.' — Isaiah,  ch.  xli.,  v.  21.  This  was  the 
answer : — See  Isaiah,  ch.  xli.,  v.  14 — '  Fear  not,  thou  worm 
Jacob.  *  *  Behold,  I  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  thresh- 
ing instrument  having  teeth ;  thou  shalt  thresh  the  moun- 
tains, and  beat  them  small,  and  shall  make  the  hills  as  chaff.* 
See  also  Jeremiah,  ch.  viii.,  v.  9 — '  The  wise  men  are  ashamed ; 
they  are  dismayed  and  taken,'  &c.  See  also  Jeremiah,  ch.  ix., 
Y.  12 — '  Who  is  the  wise  man  that  may  imderstand  this  ?' 
If  there  is  not  a  wise  and  learned  man  who  can  show  this, 
there  is  a  deaf  and  unlearned  man  that  will,  by  the  blessing 
of  God,  set  it  forth  to  you.  I  am  that  deaf  and  unlearned 
man,  Geobge  Lovatt,  Stafford. 

"  P.S. — Mr.  Editor :  I  have  told  you  what  I  was  commanded 
to  do.  See  Ezekiel,  ch.  iii.,  v.  4  to  the  end.  Now,  see  thou 
forget  it  not ;  let  those  models  which  come  from  the  Word  of 
God  have  the  first  place. — Joshua,  ch.  xxiv.,  v.  15." 


A  correspondent,  and  the  Editor's  note  (vol.  13,  1830), 
appear  as  follows : — 

"  I  believe  there  are  principles,  could  they  be  brought  into 
action,  which  would  effect  the  desired  purpose,  and  the  diffi- 
cidty  is  mostly  in  the  practical  application." 

Sir, — The  above  is  the  conclusion  of  "Hezron's"  letter 


272  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

in  your  366tli  number,  who,  "  at  some  sacrifice  of  valuable 
space,"  has  described  a  perpetual  motion,  the  most  unlikely 
to  keep  moving  that  ever  was  thought  of. 

Now,  Sir,  if  "Hezron"  will  point  out  the  "principles" 
he  speaks  of,  I  will  engage  to  remove  every  "  difficulty"  that 
stands  in  the  way  of  their  "  practical  application." 

The  pursuit  of  the  perpetual  motion  has  been  supposed  by 
some  to  render  the  same  service  to  mechanics  which  the 
efforts  to  discover  the  philosopher's  stone  are  said  to  have 
rendered  to  chemistry.  Whether  or  not  the  latter  science 
has  been  improved  by  the  dreams  of  the  alchymists,  I  am  not 
prepared  to  say ;  but  I  think  I  may  assert,  without  fear  of 
contradiction,  that  the  science  of  mechanics  neither  has  been, 
nor  ever  will  be,  benefited  by  the  attempts  to  discover  a  per- 
petual motion.  What  probability  is  there  of  persons  im- 
proving a  science,  who  are  completely  ignorant  of  it?  And 
this  is  almost  universally  the  case  with  perpetual  motion 
seekers.  What  benefit  has  science  ever  derived  from  their 
exertions  ?     I  believe  none  at  all. 

To  believe  in  the  possibility  of  the  perpetual  motion  in- 
volves the  absurdity  of  believing  that  the  same  thing  may  be 
greater  or  less  than  itself.  I  cannot  help  lamenting  that 
ingenuity  should  be  thrown  away  in  endeavouring  to  discover 
what,  from  the  nature  of  things,  never  can  exist  in  this 
world;  when,  at  the  same  time,  that  ingenuity  might  be 
productive  of  public  good  and  the  private  advantage  of  its 
possessor,  if  properly  directed. 

[We  do  not  think  that  a  belief  in  the  possibility  of  per- 
petual motion  argues  such  complete  ignorance  as  "  S.  Y." 
supposes:  of  this,  at  least,  we  are  well  satisfied,  that 
"  Hezron"  possesses  both  information  and  ingenuity  enough 
to  prove  himself  a  troublesome  antagonist  to  any  one,  be  his 
scientific  attainments  what  they  may.  "S.  Y."  should  in 
candour  have  noticed  that  the  scheme  given  in  No.  366  was 
not  one  of  "  Hezron's "  own,  but  an  attempt  to  exemplify 
one  of  the  Marquis  of  Worcester's  Century  of  Inventions. 
Neither  do  we  agree  with  "  S.  Y."  that  the  subject  is  one 
from  the  prosecution  of  which  nothing  is  to  be  gained  to  the 
science  of  mechanics.  We  conceive  that  were  the  result  of 
the  experiments  for  which  "  Hezron "  solicits  subscriptions 
to  do  even  no  more  than  this — convince  the  many  hundreds 
(thousands,  we  may  say)  who  still  cherish  the  notion  that  a 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  273 

perpetual  motion  is  possible,  of  the  fallacy  of  the  thing,  it 
would  do  a  great  deal  of  good,  inasmuch  as  it  would  direct 
into  channels  of  practical  utility,  all  that  labour  and  ingenuity 
which  are  now  fruitlessly  spent  in  pursuit  of  the  (alleged) 
chimera. — ^Ed.  M.  M.] 


Discovering  Impossibilities  (vol.  17,  1832) : — 

M.  Mathulon,  a  manufacturer  of  stuiSs  at  Lyons,  once  an- 
nounced that  he  had  discovered  the  quadrature  of  the  circle 
and  the  perpetual  motion,  and  he  deposited  1000  crowns,  to 
be  awarded  to  any  person  who  should  prove  that  he  was  in 
error.  M.  Nicole  eiSectually  did  this,  and  the  thousand 
crowns  were  awarded  to  him,  and  were  presented  by  him  to 
the  General  Hospital  at  Lyons. 


A  few  Words  to  the  Perpetual   Motionists  (vol. 
17,  1832)  :— 

Gentlemen, — 

"When  leave  you  off  your  vagaries?" 

Five-and-twenty  years  ago,  I  entertained  the  notion  of  making 
a  machine,  not  only  to  work  itself,  but  to  put  in  motion  as 
many  traps  as  Bishop  Blaize  in  the  miniature  wool  machinery 
of  a  show,  that  used  to  go  about  the  fairs  in  the  north  of 
England,  when  I  was  a  lad.  As  soon  ^s  I  had  got  the  neces- 
sary tools,  I  made  a  wheel  of  brass,  with  weights,  friction- 
wheels,  &c.,  to  be  thrown  out  from  the  centre  on  the  one  side, 
and  brought  near  to  the  centre  on  the  opposite  side,  by 
means  of  guide-rings.  The  whole  was  made  of  well-lackered 
brass,  and  contained  in  a  frame-work  of  the  best  mahogany. 
So  confident  was  I  of  its  working,  that  I  hardly  thought  it 
possible  my  hobby  could  fail,  and  actually  prepared  myself 
with  a  table-cloth  to  stop  it  in  case  it  should  go  so  fast  as  to 
break  in  pieces  !  I  thus  gained  some  experience,  and  be- 
ginning to  inquire  of  men,  books,  and  machines,  I  soon  found 
that  the  great  enemy  to  all  perpetual  or  self-acting  machines 
is  friction  and  gravity. 

Emerson  says,  prop.  116,  cor.  1,  "  Hence  it  follows,  that  if 
any  weight  is  moved  by  help  of  a  machine,  what  is  gained  in 


274  PEBPETXJUM  mobile; 

power  is  lost  in  time."  Again,  cor.  2,  "  Hence  the  motion 
of  the  weight  is  not  at  all  increased  by  any  engine  or  mechani- 
cal instrument  (think  of  that,  gentlemen),  only  the  velocity  of 
the  weight  is  so  much  diminished  thereby,  that  the  quantity 
of  motion  of  the  weight  may  not  exceed  the  quantity  of  motion 
of  the  power  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  a  vain  fancy  of  any  one  to 
think  that  he  can  move  a  great  weight  with  a  little  power,  and  • 
with  the  same  velocity  as  with  a  greater  power !"  So  that, 
gentlemen,  if  your  machines  or  wheels  were  to  run  in  dia- 
monds, your  pumps  to  be  of  glass,  still  you  would  find  a  few 
drops  of  water  necessary  to  overcome  friction  ;  which  drops 
must,  of  course,  be  lost,  for  they  cannot  be  got  up  to  the  over- 
shot wheel  again  without  some  extra  power.  It  is  reported 
in  America  that  a  clock  has  been  invented,  going  without 
help  !  I  have  heard  of  clocks  going  seven  years  in  England  ; 
but,  as  Peter  Keir  said  of  Wolf  and  Edward's  new  steam- 
engine  in  Lambeth  (about,  I  think,  1810)  which  ground  19 
bushels  of  com  with  one  bushel  of  coals,  "  that's  a  thing  only 
to  be  believed  on  seeing  it."  But  even  suppose  you  could 
make  a  machine  to  go  or  work  of  itself,  it  could  have  no 
overplus  power  to  spare  for  any  other  purpose,  and  would 
therefore  be  of  no  practical  utility  whatever. 

I  will  allow  that  perpetual  motion-hunting  is  a  very  pleasant 
and  exciting  pursuit.  It  may  be  compared  to  being  in  a  sort 
of  waking  dream,  and  in  the  one  case  so  in  the  other  it  is 
very  vexatious  to  be  jilted. — I  am,  gentlemen,  your  weU- 
wisher, 

William  Heed. 

Peterhoif  Paper-mill,  near  St.  Petersburgh, 
January  19,  1832. 


Editorial  Notice  (vol.  19,  1833)  :— 

[A  correspondent,  writing  November,  1832,  having  spoken 
against  the  publication  of  fallacious  schemes,  the  Editor  gives 
as  a  reason  for  admitting  all  into  his  journal,  a  hope  to  do 
good  to  the  "  seekers  "  themselves.] 

They  are  still,  notwithstanding  the  wide  diffusion  of  scien- 
tific knowledge  in  modern  times,  a  very  numerous  race :  almost 
every  village  can  boast  of  some  lone  enthusiast  of  this  de- 


OR,    SEAKCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  275 

scription.  Now,  as  there  is  a  common  fallacy  which  pervades 
all  schemes  for  effecting  a  perpetual  motion,  the  chances  are, 
that  by  subjecting  any  one  of  the  number  to  the  test  of  a  public 
examination,  and  thereby  ensuring  its  refutation,  you  will 
demolish  hundreds  of  others,  and,  while  thus  exposing  the 
folly  of  one  visionary,  may  be  the  means  of  curing  many. 
We  know,  indeed,  that,  in  point  of  fact,  our  journal  has  in 
this  way  done  much  good. 


The  following  article  is  quoted  in  vol.  27,  1837 : — 

Two  classes  of  persons  are  inveigled  into  this  hopeless 
quest:  the  first  is  the  projector, — generally  a  man  who  can 
handle  tools,  and  who  is  gifted  with  some  small  power  of 
invention — a  faculty,  as  Mr.  Babbage  justly  observes,  by  no 
means  rare,  and  of  little  use  unless  coupled  with  some  know- 
ledge of  what  others  have  done  before  him.  Of  the  inven- 
tions already  made — of  the  experiments  which  have  been 
tried  and  have  failed — our  projector  is  usually  profoundly 
ignorant.  What  are  called  the  laws  of  mechanics — ^namely, 
general  truths  which  were  established  by  the  observations  of 
scientific  men  in  times  past,  and  which  are  now  admitted  by 
all  who  take  the  trouble  to  investigate  them — ^he  has  either 
never  heard  of,  or  chooses  to  set  at  nought  without  inquiry. 
The  other  class  is  that  which  finds  capital.  The  projector, 
having  perhaps  exhausted  his  own  funds,  takes  his  scheme 
to  some  person  who  has  a  little  money  to  spare,  and  dazzles 
him  with  the  prospects  of  sudden  and  splendid  wealth ;  little 
by  little,  he  is  drawn  into  expenses  which  neither  of  them, 
perhaps,  had  anticipated.  Failure  after  failure  ensues,  but 
still  all  is  to  be  right  at  last.  The  fear  of  ridicule — ^the 
necessity  for  retrieving,  the  one  his  capital,  the  other  his 
credit, — these  motives  carry  them  on  till  the  ruin  of  both 
puts  a  termination  to  their  folly. 

Unhappily,  however,  the  stage  is  quickly  occupied  by 
other  adventurers,  profiting  nothing  by  the  fate  of  their  pre- 
cursors ;  and  yet  one  would  think  that  a  very  slight  considera- 
tion of  the  subject  would  be  sufficient  to  shew  the  absurdity 
of  the  undertaking.  What  is  the  object  aimed  at?  Is  it  to 
make  a  machine  which,  being  once  set  in  motion,  shall  go  on 
without  stopping  until  it  is  worn  out?    Every  person  en- 


276  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

gaged  in  the  piirsuit  of  the  perpetual  motion  would  perhaps 
accept  this  as  a  true  statement  of  the  object  in  view.  Yet 
nothing  is  more  easy  than  to  make  such  a  machine.  There 
are  from  ten  to  twenty  of  them  at  work  at  this  moment  on 
the  Rhine,  opposite  Mayence.  These  are  water-mills  in 
boats,  which  are  moored  in  a  certain  part  of  the  river ;  andt 
as  the  Rhine  is  never  dry,  these  mills,  which  are  simple  in 
their  construction,  would  go  on  for  years — go  on,  indeed, 
imtil  they  were  worn  out.  But  if  this  instance  were  men- 
tioned, the  projector  would  perceive  that  the  statement  of 
his  object  was  imperfect.  It  must  run  thus : — a  machine 
which,  being  set  in  motion,  shall  go  on  till  worn  out,  without 
any  power  being  employed  to  keep  it  in  motion. 

Probably  few  persons  who  embark  in  such  a  project  sit 
down  beforehand  to  consider  thoroughly  what  it  is  they  are 
about  to  imdertake,  otherwise  it  could  hardly  require  much 
knowledge  of  mechanics  to  see  the  impossibility  of  construct- 
ing such  a  machine.  Take  as  many  shafts,  wheels,  pulleys, 
and  springs  as  you  please ;  if  you  throw  them  in  a  heap  in  the 
comer  of  your  room,  you  do  not  expect  them  to  move  ;  it  is 
only  when  put  together  that  the  wildest  enthusiast  expects 
them  to  be  endowed  with  the  power  of  self-movement ;  nor 
then,  unless  the  machine  is  set  going.  1  never  heard  of  a 
projector  who  expected  his  engine  to  set  ofT  the  moment  the 
last  nail  was  driven,  or  instantly  on  the  last  stroke  of  the 
file.  And  why  not?  A  machine  that  would  continue  to  go 
of  itself  would  begin  of  itself.  No  machine  can  be  made 
which  has  not  some  friction,  which,  however  slight,  would  in 
a  short  time  exhaust  any  power  that  could  have  been  em- 
ployed merely  for  the  purpose  of  setting  it  in  motion.  But 
a  machine  must  not  only  keep  moving  itself,  but  furnish 
power ;  or,  in  other  words,  it  must  not  only  keep  in  motion, 
but  it  must  have  power  to  expend  in  some  labour,  as  grinding 
com,  rolling  metals,  urging  forward  a  vessel  or  a  carriage ; 
80  that  by  an  arrangement  of  parts  which  of  themselves  have 
no  moving  power,  the  projector  expects  to  make  a  machine, 
self-moving,  and  with  the  power  of  performing  some  useful 
task! 

"Father,  I  have  invented  a  perpetual  motion!"  said  a 
littl6  fellow  of  eight  years  old.  "  It  is  thus :  I  would  make  a 
great  wheel,  and  fix  it  up  like  a  water-wheel ;  at  the  top  I 
would  hang  a  great  weight,  and  at  the  bottom  I  would  hang 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIYE    POWER.  277 

a  number  of  little  weights  :  then  the  great  weight  would  turn 
the  wheel  half  round  and  sink  to  the  bottom,  because  it  is 
so  heavy  ;  and  when  the  little  weights  reached  the  top  they 
would  sink  down,  because  they  are  so  many ;  and  thus  the 
wheel  would  turn  round  for  ever."  The  child's  fallacy  is  a 
type  of  all  the  blunders  which  are  made  on  this  subject. 
Follow  a  projector  in  his  description,  and  if  it  be  not  perfectly 
unintelligible,  which  it  often  is,  it  always  proves  that  he 
expects  to  find  certain  of  his  movements  alternately  strong 
and  weak — ^not  according  to  the  laws  of  nature,  but  according 
to  the  wants  of  his  mechanism. 

If  man  could  produce  a  machine  which  would  generate  the 
power  by  which  it  is  worked,  he  would  become  a  creator. 
All  .he  has  hitherto  done — all,  I  may  safely  predict,  he  ever 
will  do — is  to  mould  existing  power  so  as  to  make  it  perform 
his  bidding.  He  can  make  the  waterfall  in  the  brook  spin 
his  cotton,  4or  print  his  book  by  means  of  machinery ;  but  a 
mill  to  pump  water  enough  to  keep  itself  at  work  he  cannot 
make.  Absurd  as  it  may  seem,  the  experiment  has  been 
tried ;  but,  in  truth,  no  scheme  is  too  absurd  for  adoption  by 
the  seekers  after  perpetual  motion.  A  machine,  then,  is  a 
mere  conductor  of  power  into  a  useful  channel.  The  wind 
grinds  the  com — the  sails,  the  shafts,  and  the  stones  are  only 
the  means  by  which  the  power  of  the  wind  can  be  turned  to 
that  particular  purpose  ;  so  it  is  the  heat  thrown  out  by  the 
burning  coal  which  performs  all  the  multifarious  operations 
of  the  steam-engine,  the  machinery  being  only  the  connecting 
links  between  the  cause  and  the  efiect. — "  Penny  Magazine." 


DiSCOITRAGEMENTS     FOR     PERPETUAL     MoTIONISTS     (vol. 

41,    1844). — A  correspondent  gives  the  following  extracts 
from  Mudie's  "  Popular  Mathematics  :" — 

"  Of  the  vast  number  of  inventions  and  projects  which  are 
every  day  brought  before  the  public — not  as  mere  bubbles  or 
impostures,  but  with  perfect  honesty  and  zeal  on  the  part  of 
the  projectors — ^we  speak  with  most  charitable  liberality  when 
we  say  that  not  one  in  the  hundred  proves  to  be  of  any  use  9 
and  nine  out  of  every  ten  are  altogether  impracticable.  Th© 
reason  clearly  is,  that  neither  the  projectors  nor  those  b 


278  PEKPSTVUM  mobile; 

whom  they  are  encouraged  are  able  to  see  the  impossible 
elements  which  their  schemes  involve  ;  that  they  look  at  the 
possible  and  promising  ones  only :  and  thus  a  large  quantity 
of  well-meant  labour  and  ingenuity  is  constantly  wasted." 

In  reference  to  this  "lurking  impossible  quantity,"  Mr. 
Mudie  says  : — "  Perhaps  we  cannot  select  a  better  one  than 
that  of  the  'perpetual  motion' — ^that  is,  a  self-moving  machine, 
which  shall  not  involve  any  stoppage,  save  the  wearing  out  of 
the  materials  of  which  it  is  composed.  We  believe  that  the 
fonder  votaries  of  this  visionary  project  do  not  take  even  the 
wearing  out  of  the  materials  into  the  accoimt;  but  it  is 
necessary  to  do  this :  and  even  this  necessity,  when  analysed, 
involves  the  necessity  of  the  machine  stopping  before  the 
parts  are  worn  out." 

"  The  power  which  tends  to  stop  the  motion  of  all  machines 
upon  the  earth's  surface  is  a  power  which  acts  constantly  and 
imiformly,  never  pausing  an  instant,  nor  abating  %  jot ;  and 
therefore,  in  order  to  get  the  better  of  this  gravitation,  we 
must  have  a  counteracting  power  as  continually  new  as  itself; 
and  we  are  not  acquainted  with  any  such  power,  or  kind  of 
matter  in  which  such  a  power  could  reside.  It  is  not  difficult 
to  calculate  (upon  mathematical  principles)  that  if  we  could 
give  any  piece  of  matter  a  motion  round  the  earth  at  the  rate 
of  about  5  miles  in  a  second,  or  1,800  miles  in  an  hour,  and 
keep  up  the  motion  at  this  rate,  we  should  overcome  the 
gravitation  of  that  piece  of  matter.  This  is  what  may  be 
regarded  as  the  possible  case  of  perpetual  motion. 

"  In  the  case  of  a  fixed  machine — and  the  more  compli- 
cated the  machine  is,  it  is  the  less  likely  to  succeed — the 
impossible  element,  in  the  most  simple  view  we  can  take  of 
it,  is  this :  to  find  a  piece  of  matter  which,  of  itself,  shall  be 
alternately  greater  and  less  than  itself,  and  which  shall  also 
remain  equal  to  itself  all  the  time ;  and  if  this  is  not  an 
impossibility,  it  is  not  easy  to  see  where  impossibility  is  to  be 
found. 

*'  The  knowledge  of  impossible  or  absurd  quantities,  and 
the  method  of  readily  discovering  them,  are  often  of  great 
use  to  us — ^not  only  in  preventing  us  from  wasting  our  time 
in  attempting  to  do  that  which  cannot  in  the  nature  of  things 
be  done,  but  in  enabling  us  to  prove  or  demonstrate  truth  in 
cases  where  that  cannot  be  done  directly."  [Edition  1836, 
pages  23  to  27-] 


OK,    SEARQH    F#R    SELF^MOTIVE    POWEK.  279 

Pebpetuaii  Motion  (vol.  64,  1856) : — 

A  paper  containing  certain  important  inferences  from  the 
negation  of  perpetual  motion  was  recently  read  at  the  Royal 
Institution,  by  W,  R.  GroTe,  Esq.,  Q,C.,  F.R.S.,  &c.  In 
the  following  remarks  we  give  an  abstract  of  the  author's 
communication : — 

Scattered  among  the  writings  of  philosophers  will  be  foimd 
allusions  to  the  subject  of  perpetual  motion,  and  here  and 
there  are  arguments  like  the  following  : — Such  a  phenomenon 
cannot  take  place,  or  such  a  theory  must  be  fallacious,  because 
it  involves  the  idea  of  perpetual  motion.  Thus  Dr.  Roget 
advanced  as  an  argument  against  the  contact  theory  of 
electricity,  as  originally  propounded,  that  if  mere  contact  of 
dissimilar  metals,  without  any  chemical  or  molecular  change, 
could  produce  electricity,  then  as  electricity  could,  in  its 
turn,  be  made  to  produce  motion,  we  should  thus  get  per- 
petual motion. 

It  may  be  well  to  define,  as  far  as  such  a  definition  is 
possible,  what  is  commonly  meant  by  the  term  perpetual 
motion.  In  one  sense,  aU  motion,  or  rather  all  force,  is  per- 
petual. For  example,  if  a  clock  weight  be  wound*  up,  it 
represents  the  force  derived  from  the  muscles  of  the  arm 
which  turns  the  key ;  the  muscles  again  derive  force  indirectly 
from  the  chemical  action  of  the  food,  and  so  on.  As  the 
weight  descends,  it  conveys  motion  to  the  wheels  and  pen- 
dulum ;  the  former  giving  force  off  in  the  form  of  heat  from 
friction,  the  latter  commimicating  motion  to  the  air  in  contact 
with  it,  thence  to  the  air  of  the  room — ^proved  in  a  very 
simple  manner  by  the  ticking  heard,  which  is,  in  fact,  a  blow 
to  the  organ  of  hearing.  Although  ultimately  lost  to  our 
senses,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  force  is  ever  in 
fact  lost.  The  weight  thus  acting  reaches  the  ground  quietly, 
and  produces  no  effect  at  the  termination  of  its  course. 

If,  instead  of  being  allowed  to  communicate  its  force  to 
the  works  of  the  clock,  the  weight  be  allowed  to  descend 
suddenly,  as  by  cutting  the  string  by  which  it  is  suspended,  it 
strikes  the  floor  with  a  force  which  shakes  the  house ;  and 
thus  conveys,  almost  instantaneously,  the  amount  of  force 
which  would  be  gradually  dissipated,  though  not  ultimately 
consumed,  by  the  clock  in  a  week  or  nine  days. 

This  idea,  however,  of  the  perpetuity  of  force,  is  not  what 


280  PEBPETUiTM  mobile; 

is  commonly  understood  by  the  term  perpetual  motion: 
that  expression  is  used  to  convey  the  notion  of  a  motive 
machine,  the  initial  force  of  which  is  restored  by  the  motion 
produced  by  itself — a  clock,  so  to  speak,  which  winds  itself 
up  by  its  own  wheels  and  pendulum,  a  pump  which  keeps 
itself  going  by  the  weight  of  the  water  which  it  has  raised. 
Another  notion,  arising  from  a  confusion  between  static  and 
dynamic  forces,  was,  that  motion  might  be  obtained  without 
transferring  force,  as  by  a  permanent  magnet.  All  soimd 
philosophers  are  of  opinion  that  such  effects  are  impossible ; 
the  work  done  by  a  given  force,  even  assuming  there  were  no 
such  thing  as  friction,  aerial  resistance,  &c.,  could  never  be 
more  than  equal  to  the  initial  force ;  the  theoretical  limit  is 
equilibrium.  The  weight  raised  at  one  end  of  a  lever  can 
never,  without  the  fresh  application  of  extraneous  force, 
raise  the  opposite  weight  which  has  produced  its  own 
elevation.  A  force  can  only  produce  motion  when  the 
resistance  to  it  is  less  powerful  than  itself;  if  equal,  it  is 
equilibrium :  thus,  if  motion  be  produced,  resistance,  being 
less  than  the  initial  or  producing  force,  cannot  reproduce  this; 
for  then  the  weaker  would  conquer  the  stronger  force. 

The  object  of  this  evening's  communication  was  not,  how- 
ever, to  adduce  proofs  that  perpetual  motion,  in  the  sense 
above  defined,  is  impossible ;  but  assuming  that  as  a  recog- 
nised truth,  to  show  certain  consequences  which  had  resulted, 
and  others  which  were  likely  to  result,  from  the  negation  of 
perpetual  motion;  and  how  this  negation  may  be  made  a 
substantive  and  valuable  aid  to  scientific  investigation. 

After  Oersted  made  his  discovery  of  electro-magnetism, 
philosophers  of  the  highest  attainments  argued  that,  as  a 
current  of  electricity,  circulating  in  a  wire  round  a  bar  of 
iron,  produced  magnetism,  and  as  action  and  re-action  are 
equal,  and  in  contrary  directions,  a  magnet  placed  within 
a  spiral  of  wire  should  produce  in  the  wire  an  electrical 
current.  Had  it  occurred  to  their  minds  that  if  a  permanent 
magnet  could  so  produce  electricity,  and  thence  necessarily 
motion,  they  would  thus  get,  in  effect,  perpetual  motion,  they 
would  probably  have  anticipated  the  discovery  of  Faraday, 
and  found  that  all  that  was  required  was  to  move  the  magnet 
with  reference  to  the  wire,  and  thus  electricity  might  have 
been  expected  to  be  produced  by  a  magnet  without  involving 
the  supposed  absurdity. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  281 

[The  remainder  of  the  paper  relates  to  results  arising  from 
heat  and  freezing.] 


On  Perpetual  Motion  (vol.  68,  1858).  By  General  T. 
Perronet  Thompson,  M.P. : — 

Searches  after  what  is  known  by  the  name  of  a  perpetual 
motion  have  been  at  all  times  so  common  that  it  cannot  be 
without  use  to  endeavour  to  ascertain  and  set  down  the 
circumstances  imder  which  such  a  phenomenon  is  possible, 
or  the  contrary,  .with  the  reasons  why. 

The  innumerable  attempts  at  perpetual  motion  from  time 
to  time  made  known,  fail  generally  by  rimning  against  two 
canons  which  nature  has  set  up,  and  which  it  is  not  in  man 
to  bear  down :  that  action  and  re-action  are  equal,  and  that 
the  velocities  of  the  power  and  weight  are  inversely  as  those 
forces.  And  it  is  not  unamusing  to  see  how  curiously  these 
truths  may  be  disguised,  and  yet  with  what  certainty  they 
will  spring  out  on  the  hapless  projector,  at  the  moment  he 
thinks,  good  easy  man,  his  success  is  in  the  act  of  ripening. 

The  old  books  of  "  rare  inventions  "  deal  in  speculations 
of  this  disappointing  kind.  They  conceive  of  balls,  rolling 
down  an  inclined  plane  or  series  of  planes,  and,  by  some 
crafty  modification  of  art,  acquiring  velocity  enough  to  carry 
them  to  the  place  from  which  they  came.  Or,  they  pour 
water  on  an  overshot  wheel,  with  intent  that  this  shall  turn 
machinery  to  pump  the  water  up  again.  When  the  great 
mechanic  of  antiquity  declared  he  would  move  the  world  if 
anybody  would  show  him  where  to  fix  his  machine,  why 
shpuld  these  apparently  minor  performances  be  beyond  the 
reach  of  man?  Simply  because  the  one  offers  no  contra- 
diction to  the  canons  above  named,  and  the  others  do. 

To  one  who  has  never  reflected  on  such  subjects,  it  would 
look  like  a  comparatively  easy  thing  to  make  a  watch  which 
should  wind  itself  up. 

A  friend  of  early  days  went  to  considerable  expense  with  a 
machine  consisting  of  a  cylinder  which  turned  on  friction- 
wheels,  and  to  its  circumference  were  attached  certain  arcs 
or  arms  of  brass,  with  a  weight  or  ball  at  the  end,  and  these 


282  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

were  expected  to  turn  or  fall  into  a  position  approaching  the 
horizontal  on  one  side  of  the  cylinder,  and  lie  snug  upon  the 
other.  But  when  tried,  it  moved  for  a  short  time  when  set  in 
motion,  and  then  stopped ;  the  projector  expressing  his 
surprise  at  the  very  small  help  required  to  make  it  con- 
tinue in  motion.  It  was  suggested  to  him  to  put  quicksilver 
into  the  arcs  or  arms,  which  should  run  outwards  in  one  of 
their  positions  and  back  again  in  another ;  with  which  he 
was  much  elated,  but  nothing  came  of  it.  It  was  evident,  in 
all  these  cases,  that  when  the  machine  stopped  there  was  an 
exact  balance  in  all  its  parts,  and  no  surplus  of  force  any- 
where by  which  any  motion  could  be  continued. 

But  though  there  is  no  making  a  perpetual  motion  by  the 
simple  application  of  mechanical  force,  there  is  no  difficulty 
in  making  what  may  be  called  so  by  the  help  of  certain 
natural  powers,  if  we  can  get  them ;  and  this  by  the  token 
that  nature  is  full  of  perpetual  motions.  And  it  is  not  at  all 
imlikely  that  by  some  application  of  these,  something  very 
novel  and  important  may  be  forthcoming.  A  mill  on  a  per- 
petual stream  is  a  perpetual  motion,  because  the  stream  is. 
And  if  we  ask  why  the  stream  is  perpetual,  it  is  because  the 
sun  to-day,  yesterday,  and  as  long  as  the  world  shall  last,  is 
drawing  up  water  from  the  sea  by  evaporation,  which  in  the 
absence  of  the  sun  condenses  itself  into  the  shape  of  rain, 
some  of  which  falls  into  the  sea  again,  and  what  falls  on  the 
land  forms  rivers.  So  that  the  result  may  be  traced  to  two 
facts — that  the  sun  is  perpetual,  and  that  the  world  turns 
round  without  stopping. 

If  the  force  of  magnetism  had  been  capable  of  being  inter- 
cepted like  light,  it  would  have  been  possible  to  make  a 
perpetual  motion  by  the  attraction  of  a  magnet  on  steel 
points  in  the  circumference  of  a  wheel.  And  here  there 
would  have  been  one  of  nature's  perpetual  forces,  which  man 
cannot  copy.  There  are  ideas  abroad  that  something  of  this 
kind  is  to  come  of  electricity ;  though  how  we  are  to  have 
electricity  without  working  an  electrical  machine  does  not 
appear. 

On  the  whole,  however,  there  is  nothing  hopeless  in  the 
expectation  of  great  results  from  some  of  nature's  perpetual 
forces.  And  one  of  the  first  means  towards  such  an  end  is 
to  cultivate  an  acquaintance  with  the  impossible  which  is  to 
be  kept  clear  of. 


OK,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


283 


Section  III. — Plans  for  Effecting  Perpetual  Motion. 

1.  A  Perpetual  Pump. — ^A  correspondent  (vol.  1,  1823) 
sends  the  following  account  of  the  proposed  machine  : — 

I  know  only  of  one  at  present  which  in  theory  appeared 
to  the  inventor  "  just  the  thing ;"  of  course  he  must  have 
been  totally  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  friction. 


The  above  sketch  will  show  his  idea,  a  h  e  d  is  the  sec- 
tion of  the  reservoir,  &c.,  showing  the  wheel,  the  pump,  &c. 
A  B  is  an  overshot  water-wheel ;  C  D  the  working  beam ; 
E  the  pump ;  F  a  pipe  from  the  top  of  the  pump,  through 
which  the  water  was  to  fall  upon  the  wheel ;  C  O  an  arm, 
communicating,  by  means  of  a  crank  attached  to  an  hori- 
zontal shaft  through  the  centre  of  the  wheel,  motion  to  the 
lever  or  working  beam,  and  so  raising  water  from  the  reser- 
voir by  means  of  the  pump ;  H  I  the  water.  It  was  sup- 
posed that  the  water  which  had  fallen  upon  the  wheel  into 
the  reservoir  would  be  raised  by  means  of  the  pump,  fall 
through  the  horizontal  pipe,  and  so  produce  a  continued 
rotatory  motion. 


284 


PERPETTJTJM    MOBILE; 


2.  A  Hydbo-pneitmatic  Appabatus. — ^A  correspondent 
(yol.  1, 1823)  gives  an  account  of  a  plan  which,  though  failing 
from  the  friction — an  insurmountable  obstacle — is  presumed 
to  hare  some  claim  to  ingenuity. 


A  A  A  A  is  a  cistern  of  water,  filled  as  high  as  B  B. 
C  C  C  C  C  C  are  six  bladders,  communicating  by  the  tubes 
D  D  D  D  D  D  with  the  hollow  axle  E,  which  axle  is  con- 
nected with  the  bellows  F  by  the  pipe  G.  H  is  a  crank, 
connected  with  the  crank  I  by  the  rod  K.  L  is  a  saucer- 
wheel,  M  a  pinion,  N  its  shaft.  O  is  a  crank,  attached  to 
the  bellows  F  by  the  rod  P.  Q  Q  Q  Q  Q  Q  are  valves,  with 
a  projecting  lever.  R  and  S  are  two  projecting  knobs.  T  is 
a  hole  in  the  axle  E,  forming  a  communication  with  it  and 
the  lowermost  bladder.     The  axle  B  being  put  in  motion. 


OK,    SEARCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    POWEK.  285 

carried  round  the  bladders  and  tables,  and  by  the  cranks  H 
and  I,  and  the  connecting-rod  K,  caused  the  wheel  L  to  re- 
volve, which,  communicating  a  similar  but  accelerated  motion 
to  the  pinion  M,  shaft  N,  and  crank  O,  worked  or  blew  the 
bellows  F  by  the  rod  P  ;  the  air  entered  the  axle  E  by  the 
tube  G,  and  passing  through  the  hole  in  it  at  T,  entered  the 
lower  bladder  C  *  by  the  tube  D  *  ;  this  bladder  being  thus 
rendered  lighter  than  the  space  it  occupied,  ascended,  bring- 
ing the  bladder  behind  it  over  the  hole  in  the  axle  T  in  like 
manner,  and  which  thereby  gained  an  ascending  power,  pro- 
ducing a  similar  effect  on  the  one  behind  it.  When  one  of 
the  bladders  arrived  at  the  knob  S,  the  lever  of  the  valve  Q 
struck  against  it,  and  opened  the  valve ;  when  the  bladder 
arrived  at  U  and  began  to  descend,  its  pressure  on  the  water 
drove  out  the  air,  and  gave  it  a  descending  power  ;  the  knob 
R  then  closed  the  valve  Q,  and  prevented  the  entrance  of 
any  water  into  the  bladder  ;  by  this*  contrivance,  three  of  the 
bladders  were  full  and  empty,  according  as  they  passed  over 
the  hole  T  or  the  knob  S. 


3.  De  Luc*8  Column. — ^A  correspondent  (vol.  1,  1823) 
says : — 

Some  of  your  correspondents  treat  that  redoubtable  sub- 
ject, perpetual  motion,  as  a  chimera ;  and  others,  on  the 
contrary,  say  that  they  have  discovered  the  long-sought 
object,  and  prove  thereby  that  it  is  no  chimera.  A  corre- 
spondent (F.  J.)  in  No.  11  *  is  one  of  the  latter,  but  his 
scheme  is  only  in  perspective. 

[After  a  few  observations  on  other  communications  in  the 
Magazine,  he  proceeds : — "] 

There  is  now  existing  a  perpetual  motion,  made  by  Mr. 

•  Among  the  Notes  to  Correspondents,  p.  176,  the  Editor  says : — 
"  F.  J.  asserts  that,  so  far  from  *  the  idea  of  a  self-moving  machine  * 
being  a  mere  chimera  (as  our  correspondent  Mr.  Bevan  seems  to  think), 
'  had  he  capital  sufficient,  he  could  erect  a  machine  that  would  do  the 
work  ol  ten  thousand  horses  without  any  expense  but  the  wear  of  the 
machinery.'  ** 


286  FERFETVTJX    MOBILE  ; 

Wansborough,  of  Fulham,  in  June,  1818.  It  was  the  inven- 
tion of  Professor  De  Luc,  and  the  mobile  is  electricity.  A 
gold  ball,  suspended  by  a  silken  thread,  vibrates  against  two 
gold  pillars,  and  vibrates  perpetually.  Its  principle  I  do  not 
know,  but  the  Professor  explained  it  satisfactorily  to  his 
brethren  in  science.  This  is  but  a  pretty  plaything,  and  does 
not  come  within  the  laws  of  the  desired  problem,  but  it  still 
is  sufficient  to  overturn  the  foundation  of  Mr.  Mactaggart's 
sermon.* 

*  *  When  yoimg,  I  devoted  much  of  my  time  to  this 
subject,  and  devised  at  least  a  dozen  schemes,  rotatory,  pen- 
dulous, &c.,  and  actually  constructed  several  models ;  but 
far  from  being  shaken  by  such  repeated  failures,  though  I 
have  attained  a  tolerably  sober  age,  my  faith  is  still  firm,  and 
so  will  remain  imtil  I  have  proof  of  my  tenets  being  wrong. 
I  shall  esteem  it  a  great  favour  if  any  one  would  oblige  me 
with  this  proof,  as  it  might  serve  to  divert  my  thoughts  from 
a  future  attempt,  which  I  contemplate. 


4.  Another  Perpetual  Pump. — ^A  correspondent  (vol.  1, 
1823)  observes:— 

*  *  I  hope  soon,  however,  to  produce  something  that 
will  convince  even  the  scepticism  of  great  minds  that  a  self- 
acting  machine  is  not  impossible ;  but  that  I  may  not  lie 
under  the  charge  of  giving  my  ideas  only  in  perspective,  I 
will  say  this  much,  that  the  moving  power  I  contemplate  is 
to  be  produced  by  a  pump,  so  constructed  that  the  same 
power  that  will  raise  water  ten  feet  high  will  raise  it  to  any 
height  required,  even  though  it  were  ten  thousand  feet. 

[Farther  on,  the  Editor  remarks  on  the  above  : — ] 

It  seems  rather  obvious  that  "  F.  J.''  meant  to  say  "  the 
same  self-acting  principle,"  not  precisely  "  the  same  power." 


•  Mec.  Mag.,  vol.  1,  p.  253. 


OR,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


287 


6.    Archimedean    Screw    and  Mercury. — ^A    corre- 
spondent (vol.  1,  1823)  thus  describes  his  plan : — 


A  is  the  screw  turning  on  its  two  pivots  G  G ;  B  is  a 
cistern  to  be  filled  above  the  level  of  the  lower  aperture  of 
the  screw  with  mercury  (which  I  conceive  to  be  preferable  to 
water  on  many  accounts,  and  principally  because  it  does  not 
adhere  or  evaporate  like  water) ;  C  is  a  reservoir,  which, 
when  the  screw  is  turned  round,  receives  the  mercury  which 
falls  from  the  top ;  D  is  a  pipe,  which  by  the  force  of  gravity 
conveys  the  mercury  from  the  reservoir  C  on  to  (what,  for 
want  of  a  better  term,  may  be  called)  the  float-board  E, 
fixed  at  right  angles  to  the  centre  of  the  screw,  and  furnished 
at  its  circumference  with  ridges  or  floats  to  intercept  the 
mercury,  the  moment  and  weight  of  which  will  cause  the 
float-board  and  screw  to  revolve,  until,  by  the  proper  inclina- 
tion of  the  floats,  the  mercury  falls  into  the  receiver  F,  from 
whence  it  again  falls  by  its  spout  into  the  cistern  G,  where 
the  constant  revolution  of  the  screw  takes  it  up  again  as 
before. 


288  PEBPETrrM  mobhx; 

[After  noticing  the  friction,  kc.,  be  adds  : — '] 

To  oTercome  this  (the  power  of  the  fluid  in  the  screw  to 
turn  it  backwards),  I  thought  of  pbu;ing  a  metallic  ball,  or 
some  mercurj,  on  the  ledge  above  the  floats  (as  at  H  in  the 
drawing),  of  just  so  much  weight,  and  no  more,  as  would 
exactly  neutralize  this  backward  endeaTour ;  whether  or  no 
this  would  increase  the  difficulty  of  raising  the  mercury  in 
the  screw  I  cannot  say,  having  never  tried  the  experiment. 
*  *  *  We  ail  know  the  late  Mr.  Merlin's  machine, 
consisting  of  two  magnets  poised  upon  their  respective  centres, 
and  placed  within  the  sphere  of  each  other  s  influence,  by 
which  they  were  said  to  vibrate  in  perpetuum ;  but  the 
general  opinion  at  the  time  was,  that  some  concealed  me- 
chanism was  placed  underneath,  which,  indeed,  he  himself 
never  denied. 


6.  Plan  of  l  Self-mottng  Machine  (vol.  1,  1823): — 

[A  description  of  Rangely's  Patent  Roller  Pump  having  ap- 
peared in  the  first  volume,  the  writer  proposes  employing  this 
pump,  "  which  is  represented  as  working  with  no  more  friction 
than  what  is  occasioned  by  its  revolution  on  its  axis,  viz.,  the 
revolution  of  a  cylinder  on  its  axis  delivering  water  with  a 
continual  stream,  &c.,  2kc."] 

I  think  it  possible  to  produce  a  self-moving  power  by  such 
a  machine  as  that,  a  drawing  of  which  is  now  prefixed. 
From  its  very  simple  construction,  a  very  brief  description 
is  necessary.  A  represents  a  pump  immersed  in  a  reservoir 
B ;  the  pump  is  worked  by  the  rotatory  motion  of  the 
water-wheel  C,  which  is  four  feet  in  diameter.  On  the  shaft 
of  the  water-wheel  is  the  drum-wheel  D,  working  by  a  small 
cord  the  wheel  E,  on  the  axis  of  the  pump  discharging  the 
water  by  the  pipe  F  into  a  reservoir  G  over  the  water-wheel. 
In  this  reservoir  is  a  cock  to  regulate  the  quantity  of  water 
to  be  discharged  on  the  wheel.  The  wheel  on  the  shaft  of 
the  water-wheel  being  nine  inches  diameter,  and  the  wheel 
on  the  axis  of  the  pump  three  in  diameter,  the  latter  will 
consequently  make  three  revolutions  for  one  of  the  water- 
wheel.  As  the  pump  is  not  required  to  turn  with  great 
velocity,  the  speed  might  be  regulated  by  the  quantity  of 


—    ^ 


OB,   SEAKCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB.  291 

water  thrown  on  the  water-wheel,  the  latter  being  four  feet 
in  diameter,  and  the  wheel  on  its  shaft  nine  inches  ;  conse- 
quently the  radius  or  arm  of  the  wheel  has  near  4^  powers 
to  counteract  the  friction  of  the  axis  of  the  pump  and  water- 
wheel,  and  of  a  fine  cord  passed  over  the  wheels  D  and  E. 
If  necessary,  the  friction  of  the  machine  might  be  still  farther 
reduced  by  the  axes  of  the  pump  and  water-wheel  being  made 
to  run  in  gudgeons  with  friction  rollers. 

The  pipe  H  is  intended  to  convey  the  surplus  water  from 
the  reservoir  over  the  wheel  to  the  reservoir  below. 

The  pump  might  easily  be  turned  by  a  cog-wheel ;  but 
this  is  unnecessary,  as  the  cord  passing  over  the  drum-wheels 
will  do  equally  well,  and  is,  besides,  a  more  simple  method. 


7.  Plan  by  Magnetism  (vol.  4,  1825). — Its  inventor 
writes : — 

Let  those  laugh  now  who  never  laugh*d  hefore  ; 
Let  those  who  ever  laugh'd,  now  laugh  the  more. 

«  «  «  « 

You  will  agree  with  me  that  the  universe  is  a  display  of 
perpetual  motion,  and  that  such  a  thing  does,  beyond  all 
doubt,  exist.  The  co-operation  and  nice  combination  of  what 
or  how  many  various  causes  (each  perhaps  governed  by  dif- 
ferent laws,  and  opposite  in  their  effects)  which  produce  this 
perpetual  motion,  it  might  be  presumptuous  to  endeavour  to 
ascertain ;  suffice  it  to  know,  that  all  concur  in  a  most  won- 
derful manner  to  exhibit  what  man  is  striving  to  discover, 
and  hitherto  in  vain. 

I  coincide  in  opinion  with  those  who  consider  there  are 
insurmountable  difficulties  to  the  discovery  of  perpetual 
motion  by  any  machinery  wholly  subservient  to  the  laws  of 
gravity  and  the  mechanical  powers  ;  and  as  the  perpetual 
motion  of  the  universe  is  not  effected  under  the  laws  of 
gravity  only,  there  appears  but  little  probability  of  man's 
discovering  it  by  such  machinery. 

By  consulting  nature's  laws  generally,  success  is  more 
likely  to  follow ;  and,  indeed,  an  invisible  (but  well-known) 
agency  is  available  for  the  purpose.     I  have,  therefore,  re- 


292 


PEKPETUUM     mobile; 


sorted  to  an  auxiliary  that  operates  wholly  independent  of, 
and  in  opposition  to  gravity,  to  effect  perpetual  motion  ;  with 
what  success  you  will  see. 


Description. — The  above  drawing  represents  a  wheel  of 
one  foot  in  diameter,  revolving  on  its  centre  C.  Its  circum- 
ference R  K  K  is  a  thin  steel  hoop,  or  rim,  three  quarters  of 
an  inch  broad,  formed  in  the  indented  manner  delineated, 
and  connected  to  the  centre  by  two  bars  h  b  h  h.  (The 
thin  edge  of  the  rim  presents  itself  to  view.) 

M  M  M  are  three  magnets  fixed  totally  unconnected  with 
the  wheel.  Their  poles  are  placed  as  close  as  possible  to  its 
rim,  but  not  to  touch  it,  to  impede  its  going  round.  These 
three  magnets  are  so  disposed  as  alternately  to  exert  their 
full  attractive  powers,  at  right  angles,  on  the  flat  indented 
surface  of  the  steel  rim  of  the  wheel ;  and  as  it  moves  round, 
the  attraction  of  one  magnet  does  not  cease  its  operation 
until  another  magnet  exerts  its  full  power. 

The  weight  of  the  wheel  on  the  side  next  the  magnets 
being  thus  continually  lifted,  or  rendered  lighter,  by  the 
attraction  of  the  magnets,  causes  the  weight  of  the  opposite 
side  of  the  wheel  to  preponderate  on  its  centre,  and  the 
wheel  to  revolve,  and  to  continue  a  perpetual  rotatory 
motion,  at  least  as  long  as  the  magnets  retain  their  attracting 
power. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  293 

8.  Account  of  several  Schemes  (vol.  4,  1825).  By 
F.  Bell,  who  states  that — 

About  five  or  six  years  ago,  a  young  man,  a  Scotchman,  of 
considerable  ability,  stumbled  upon  this  attractive  plan  of 
producing  a  perpetual  motion.  Confident  of  the  truth  of  his 
principle,  and  giddy  with  the  dreams  of  riches  which  he  had 
been  told  would  await  the  happy  inventor  of  this  long-sought 
desideratum  in  mechanics,  he  gave  up  all  his  emoluments 
in  Scotland,  and  hastened  to  London,  for  the  purpose  of 
getting  his  machine  constructed  in  a  superior  manner.  The 
workman  he  employed  was  a  Mr.  Allen,  then  resident  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Fetter-lane.  The  principle  he  employed 
was  exactly  similar  to  that  of  your  correspondent,  but  more 
complex  in  its  application.  After  a  lapse  of  some  months, 
the  machine  was  finished ;  and,  with  beating  heart,  the 
magnet  was  applied  to  produce  efiects  which  should  astonish 
the  world ;  but,  alas !  how  shall  I  describe  it  ?  It  was  at 
that  moment  discovered  that  the  magnetic  influence  was 
exerted  equally  to  the  right  and  left ;  and  that,  instead  of  the 
pieces  of  soft  iron,  disposed  at  equal  distances  round  the 
circumference,  being  only  pulled  or  attracted  in  one  direction, 
they  were  equally  acted  upon  in  the  opposite,  and  conse- 
quently no  motion  ensued. 

It  is  about  three  years  since  that  another  person,  also  a 
native  of  North  Britain,  proposed  a  new  power  to  propel 
carriages  on  the  road  and  ships  at  sea,  and  exhibited  a  model 
of  his  engine  in  Burlington  Arcade,  Piccadilly.  It  consisted 
of  a  wheel  moved  (as  he  pretended)  by  this  self-same  prin- 
ciple of  magnetism.  The  magnet,  of  a  spherical  form,  was 
placed  on  a  plate  of  metal,  or,  rather,  mixture  of  metals  (as 
he  said),  which  had  the  rare  power  of  intercepting  the  mag- 
netic attraction,  and  consequently  preventing  the  re-action 
which  was  fatal  in  the  other  case.  I  believe  Mr.  Gill  took 
thfi  trouble  to  expose  this  pretender  in  his  "  Technical  Re- 
pository."* 

I  had  an  opportunity,  some  time  ago,  of  reading  a  letter 
from  a  person  who  had  witnessed  a  similar  invention,  made 
by  a  Mr.  John  Spence,  shoemaker,  at  Linlithgow,  also  in 
"  Scotland's  Isle.'*     It  consisted  of  a  needle  nicely  balanced 

•  See  Chapter  VI.,  p.  18*. 


294  PEBPETTTTTM   MOBILE; 

on  a  pivot,  which  was  kept  in  continual  motion  by  its  poles 
being  alternately  attracted  by  two  magnets,  properly  placed, 
and  whose  attraction  was  regularly  cut  off  through  the  inter- 
vention of  intercepting  substances,  which  Mr.  Spence  was 
represented  as  having  spent  twenty  or  thirty  years  in  finding 
out* 

It  was  also  stated  that  he  was  at  that  time  constructing  an 
apparatus  applicable  to  time-keepers,  which  he  was  going  to 
present  to  the  Royal  Society,  but,  not  having  since  heard  of 
him  or  his  intended  communication  to  that  learned  body,  I 
am  afraid  that  Death  has  stepped  in,  and  intercepted  him  in 
his  laudable  pursuits. 

«  «  «  «  « 


9.  Spence's  Pebpettjal  Motion  (vol.  4,  1826)  : — 

*  *  About  two  years  since,  a  person  named  Haigh 
(a  native,  I  believe,  of  Yorkshire)  called  on  me  with  what  he 
called  a  "  perpetual  motion."  I  inquired  why  he  did  not 
present  it  to  some  learned  body  in  London,  instead  of  travel- 
ling with  it  as  an  exhibition.  He  replied  that,  as  he  was  not 
himself  the  inventor,  he  was  afraid  he  should  not  be  attended 
to.  He  said  it  was  invented  by  the  late  Mr.  John  Spence,  of 
Linlithgow,  near  Edinburgh,  who,  being  on  his  journey  to 
London  to  present  it  to  the  Royal  Society,  was  taken  ill  in 
some  part  of  Yorkshire,  where,  after  a  lingering  illness,  he 
died ;  and  that  he  bequeathed  the  machine  to  him  in  grati- 
tude for  the  assistance  he  had  received  from  him  during  his 
illness.  •  The  construction  of  the  machine  was  as  pointed  out 
by  Mr.  Bell,  with  this  difference  : — the  needle  was  attached 
to  a  brass  balance,  about  the  size  and  weight  of  the  balance 
of  a  watch,  beyond  the  edge  of  which  it  projected.  He 
suffered  me,  after  having  witnessed  its  swift  rotatory  motion 
for  about  half  an  hour,  to  remove  the  balance,  &c.,  from  the 
frame  in  which  it  acted,  when  I  found  the  pivot  and  holes 
very  much  worn,  which  convinced  me  it  must  have  been  in 
action  a  considerable  time  (he  said  it  had,  nearly  six  years). 
On  replacing  it,  and  blowing  slightly  against  the  edge  of  the 
balance,  it  instantly  commenced  its  action  as  before,  i.e.,  with 
the  same  steady  velocity,  making  about  one  hundred  and 

•  See  pp.  182,  226. 


OR,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  295 

sixty  revolutions  in  a  minute,  which  I  again  witnessed  a  con- 
siderable time  ;  nor  did  Haigh  appear  the  least  impatient  to 
put  an  end  to  the  gratification  I  was  experiencing. 

The  following  extract  of  a  letter  from  Capt.  Bagnold,  R.M., 
Member  of  the  Society  of  Arts,  Haigh  left  with  me  : — 

"  Liverpool,  May  2,  1820. 

"  Having  inspected  Mr.  S.  Haigh's  exhibition  of  a  mag- 
netic perpetual  motion,  I  prevailed  upon  him  to  permit*  the 
approach  of  a  powerful  horae-shoe  magnet,  the  property  of 
Mr.  Eyewater,  of  this  town.  When  in  contact  with  the  glass 
on  one  side,  it  produced  no  very  striking  alteration  ;  when 
held  perpendicularly  over  the  case,  it  appeared  rather  to 
accelerate  the  revolution  of  the  needle ;  but  when  removed 
to  the  opposite  side,  its .  efiect  was  instantly  visible, — the 
needle  was  suddenly  checked,  and  seemed  to  recover  its 
motion  by  successive  impulses.  From  the  foregoing  circum- 
stances, I  am  clearly  of  opinion  Mr.  Haigh's  exhibition  is  a 
fair  specimen  of  perpetual  motion  by  magnetic  influence,  and 
the  experiment  has  totally  banished  from  my  mind  all  sus- 
picion of  deception ;  and  I  strongly  recommend  Mr.  Haigh 
by  no  means  to  repeat  the  experiment,  lest  injury  should 
accrue  to  so  ingenious  an  invention." 

Sir,  yours,  &c., 
JRiCHARD  Price,  Watchmaker  and  Silversmith. 

Wiveliscombe,  Somerset,  June  13,  1825. 


10.  Perpetual  Motion  on  Philosophical  Principles 
(vol.  4,  1825)  :— 

The  following  is  copied  from  a  foreign  work :  should  you 
consider  it  worthy  publication,  it  is  much  at  your  service. 

R.  W.  Dickinson. 

"  The  power  is  at  present  applied  to  the  machinery  of  a 
clock ;  this  clock,  unconnected  with  the  power,  is  calculated 
to  go  for  two  years  without  winding  up,  by  the  weight  of  a 
single  pound,  that  gives  motion  to  a  pendulum  of  twenty 
pounds,  which  moves  through  a  space  of  518*400  inches  in 
twenty-four  hours,  while  the  small  maintaining  weight  (a 
single  pound)  descends  only  1-lOth  of  an  inch.  The  internal 
work  of  the  clock  consists  of  three  wheels.  In  order  that 
the  superiority  of  this  movement  may  be  obvious  to  every 
understanding,  as  well  as  to  those  more  conversant  with  the 


296  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

more  difficult  parts  of  mechanics,  it  is  necessary  to  mention 
that  the  common  eight-day  clock  requires  a  weight  of  four- 
teen pounds,  where  this  only  requires  the  weight  of  one,  is 
wound  up  once  in  eight  days,  and  moves  a  pendulum  of  three 
pounds  and  a  half,  where  this  moves  one  of  twenty,  and  is 
wound  up  only  once  in  two  years.  In  twenty-four  hours, 
the  maintaining  weight  of  the  common  clock  descends  six 
inches,  in  this  it  descends  only  1-1 0th  of  an  inch.  The  least 
weight  which  we  at  present  recollect  to  have  heard  of  being 
used  by  the  first  artist  in  London  is  five  or  six  pounds,  where 
this  requires  only  one,  in  consequence  of  the  diminution  of 
friction.  So  far  it  has  been  thought  necessary  to  describe 
this  clock  in  comparison  with  the  common  one. 

"  We  now  come  to  that  part  to  which  extraordinary  merit 
is  to  be  ascribed — the  faculty  of  winding  itself  up  without 
the  intervention  of  human  power.  This  faculty  is  derived 
from  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere,  and  can  never  cease 
(under  the  conditions  after  mentioned)  while  the  machine 
lasts,  and  while  a  column  of  air  either  loses  or  gains  l-150th 
part  of  its  common  weight  five  times  in  the  space  of  two 
years,  the  time  which  the  clock  goes  without  requiring  any 
assistance  ;  or,  in  other  words,  as  long  as  the  change  of  the 
weight  of  the  air,  five  times  in  the  space  of  two  years,  shall 
be  such  as  to  cause  the  mercury  either  to  ascend  or  fall 
2-lOths  of  an  inch  in  the  barometer  above  or  below  its  mean 
height.  The  wearing  out  of  wheels,  or  of  any  kind  of  ma- 
chinery, by  friction,  never  can  be  avoided ;  accordingly,  it 
has  never  been  required  in  the  discovery  of  a  perpetual 
motion.  It  is  therefore  sufficient,  on  that  subject,  to  say  that 
the  present  machine,  upon  a  fair  comparison  of  its  friction 
with  that  of  the  common  clock,  would  probably  move  five 
centuries,  a  period  sufficient  for  any  purpose  that  can  be 
required." 


11.  A  Hydbo-pneumatic  Plan. — A  correspondent  (vol.  4, 
1825)  says  :— 

The  unsuccessful  (but  far  from  fruitless)  search  made  to  dis- 
cover the  *' philosopher's  stone,"  and  the  "elixir  vitae,"  were 
productive  of  most  important  and  beneficial  results  in  the  king- 
dom of  chemistry  ;  so,  by  a  parity  of  consequence,  I  am 
disposed  to  believe  that,  from  enquiry  after  the  "perpetual 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER. 


297 


motion"  (though  equally  unsuccessful),  a  similar  good  will 
result  to  the  mechanical  world.  *  *  I  beg  leave  to  offer 
the  prefixed  device.  The  point  at  which,  like  all  the  rest,  it 
fails,  I  confess  I  did  not  (as  I  do  now)  plainly  perceive  at  once, 
although  it  is  certainly  very  obvious.  The  original  idea  was 
this — to  enable  a  body  which  would  float  in  a  heavy  medium 
and  sink  in  a  lighter  one,  to  pass  successively  through  the  one 
to  the  other,  the  continuation  of  which  would  be  the  end  in 
view.  To  say  that  vdves  cannot  be  made  to  act  as  proposed 
will  not  be  to  show  the  rationale  (if  I  may  so  say)  upon  which 
the  idea  is  fallacious. 


The  figure  is  supposed  to  be  tubular,  and  made  of  glass, 
for  the  purpose  of  seeing  the  action  of  the  balls  inside,  which 
float  or  fall  as  they  travel  from  air  through  water  and  from 
water  through  air.     The  foot  is  supposed  to  be  placed  in 


298  PEHPETUUM  mobile; 

water,  but  it  would  answer  the  same  purpose  if  the  bottom 
were  closed. 

Description  of  the  Engbaying. — ^No.  1,  the  left  leg, 
filled  with  water  from  B  to  A.  2  and  3,  valves,  having  in 
their  centres  very  small  projecting  valves :  they  all  open 
upwards.  4,  the  right  leg,  containing  air  from  A  to  F. 
5  and  6,  valves,  having  very  small  ones  in  their  centres :  they 
all  opsn  downwards.  The  whole  apparatus  supposed  to  be 
air  and  water-tight.  The  round  figures  represent  hollow 
balls,  which  will  sink  one-fourth  of  their  bulk  in  water  (of 
course  will  fall  in  air) ;  the  weight,  therefore,  of  three  balls 
resting  upon  one  ball  in  water,  as  at  E,  will  just  bring  its 
top  even  with  the  water's  edge  ;  the  weight  of  four  balls  will 
sink  it  under  the  surface  until  the  ball  immediately  over  it  is 
one-fourth  its  bulk  in  water,  when  the  under  ball  will  escape 
round  the  corner  at  C,  and  begin  to  ascend. 

The  machine  is  supposed  (in  the  figure)  to  be  in  action, 
and  No.  8  (one  of  the  balls)  to  have  just  escaped  round  the 
comer  at  C,  and  to  be,  by  its  buoyancy,  rising  up  to  valve 
No.  3,  striking  first  the  small  projecting  valve  in  the  centre, 
which,  when  opened,  the  large  one  will  be  raised  by  the 
buoyancy  of  the  ball ;  because,  the  moment  the  small  valve 
in  the  centre  is  opened  (although  only  the  size  of  a  pin's 
head),  No.  2  valve  will  have  taken  upon  itself  to  sustain  the 
whole  column  of  water  from  A  to  B.  The  said  ball  (  No.  8) 
having  passed  through  the  valve  No.  3,  will,  by  appropriate 
weights  or  springs,  close  ;  the  ball  will  proceed  upwards  to 
the  next  valve  (No.  2),  ami  perform  the  same  operation  there. 
Having  arrived  at  A,  it  will  float  upon  the  surface  three- 
fourths  of  its  bulk  out  of  water.  Upon  another  ball  in  due 
course  arriving  under  it,  it  will  be  lifted  quite  out  of  the 
water,  and  fall  over  the  point  D,  pass  into  the  right  leg  (con- 
taining air),  and  fall  to  valve  No.  6,  strike  .and  open  the 
small  valve  in  its  centre,  then  open  the  large  one,  and  pass 
through;  this  valve  will  then,  by  appropriate  weights  or 
springs,  close,  the  ball  will  roll  on  through  the  bent  tube 
(which  is  made  in  that  form  to  gain  time  as  well  as  to  exhibit 
motion)  to  the  next  valve  (!>  o.  6),  where  it  will  perform  the 
same  operation,  and  then,  falling  upon  the  four  balls  at  E, 
force  the  bottom  one  round  the  corner  at  C.  This  ball  will 
proceed  as  did  No.  8,  and  the  rest  in  the  same  manner  suc- 
cessively. 


OR,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  299 

12.  F.  Bell's  Endless  Band  with  Cork  Floats  (vol.  4, 
1825). — ^After  commenting  on  perpetual  motion  schemes,  he 
says : — 

I  certainly  consider  the  idea  of  gaining  a  perpetual  motion 
by  the  passing  of  bodies  through  mediums  of  different 
densities  is  a  ver^j  ingenious  one,  as  it  is  the  same  in  effect  as 
if  the  specific  gravity  of  the  moving  bodies  was  a  variable 
quantity,  which  agrees  very  well  with  the  definition  of  De  la 
Hire — viz.,  to  find  a  body  heavier  and  lighter  than  itself. 
[He  then  gives  the  following  as  a  better  plan : — ] 
Let  an  endless  chain  or  rope  be  passed  over  a  pulley,  and 
through  a  hole  of  similar  diameter  made  in  the  bottom  of  a 
vessel  filled  with  water,  so  that  one  half  of  the  rope  will 
always  be  in  the  water,  and  the  other  half  in  air.  Now, 
let  this  chain  or  rope  be  divided  into  equal  links  or  divisions, 
and  constructed  in  the  following  manner: — Let  pieces  of  cork, 
or  any  other  light  substance,  be  attached  to  the  rope  exactly 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  whalebones  are  fastened  to  the 
stick  of  an  umbrella,  so  that  they  may  form  a  complete 
cylinder,  when  passing  through  the  hole  in  the  bottom  of  the 
vessel,  and  prevent  the  water  from  rushing  out;  but  the 
moment  one  of  these  links  gets  through  the  hole  (which  will 
be  immediately  filled  by  another)  these  pieces  of  cork  will 
radiate,  or  fly  out,  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel,  and  exert  a 
force  proportionate  to- their  lightness,  to  ascend  to  the  top  of 
the  vessel,  and  thus  give  motion  to  the  machine. 

*  *  *  *  « 

Although  it  is  my  opinion  that  the  "  Century  of  Inven- 
tions" has  been  the  means  of  forming  many  a  mechanical 
mind,  by  creating  a  spirit  of  enquiry  after  those  subjects,  yet 
I  also  believe  it  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  few  persons  who 
have  not  from  that  time  become  determined  perpetual- 
motionists ;  for,  if  we  can  place  any  reliance  upon  the 
invention  No.  56,  which  seems  so  well  attested,  the  Marquis 
was  undoubtedly  in  the  secret.  The  plan  which  most  people 
adopt,  who  would  accomplish  the  point  by  means  of  weights, 
is,  I  dare  say,  familiar*  to  most  of  your  readers — viz.,  by 
means  of  falling  levers,  a  description  of  which  may  be  seen 
in  the  "Mathematical  Recreations,"  translated  by  the  late 
Dr.  Hutton ;  but,  as  the  Doctor  observes,  "  it  may  be  easily 
shown  that  there  is  oile  position  of  the  wheel  in  which  the 


300  PERPETxriTM  mobile; 

system  is  in  equilibrium,  and  consequently  will  stop :"  the 
plan  may  therefore  be  given  up  as  untangible.  I  have  seen 
and  read  of  many  attempts  to  overcome  this  obstacle  by 
means  of  springs,  &c.,  but  they  have  been  attended  with  no 
better  success.  I  am,  however,  in  possession  of  a  method  of 
constructing  the  machine  so  that  "all  the  weights  on  the 
descending  side  of  the  wheel  shall  be  perpetually  further 
from  the  centre  than  those  of  the  mounting  side,"  by  which 
arrangements  there  seems  to  be  an  equilibrium  in  every 
position  of  the  wheel. 


13.  Another  Band  with  Cosk  Floats. — A  corre- 
spondent (vol.  4,  1825)  states  that  he  attempted  a  continued 
motion  precisely  on  the  foregoing  plan.    He  says : — 

The  experiment  I  made  was  with  a  number  of  corks,  strung 
at  intervals  for  the  purpose,  and  passed  through  an  aperture 
in  the  bottom  of  a  glass  vessel,  to  which  they  were  fitted. 
As  might  be  expected,  the  weight  of  the  column  of  water 
over  the  aperture  was  superior  to  the  buoyancy  of  the  corks^ 
and  upon  their  being  pressed  upwards  they  were  forced  back 
again  to  the  aperture.  This  to  me  was  sufficient,  for  the 
expansion  of  these  corks  in  the  manner  described  by  Mr. 
Bell  would,  it  appeared  to  me,  not  in  the  least  increase  their 
buoyancy,  unless  their  bulk  could  also  be  increased  at  the 
same  time. 


14.  Pebpetital  Motion  Discoveeed  ;  or,  a  Plan  by  which 
a  Vessel  may  be  made  to  continue  in  powerful  motion,  without 
any  assistance,  as  long  as  her  materials  endure  (vo^.  6, 1825). 
— The  inventor  states : — 

The  principle  on  which  I  depend  is  the  well-known  law  in 
hydrostatics,  that  the  pressure  of  water  is  the  same  at  the 
same  depth,  whatever  may  be  the  diameter  of  the  vessel  that 
contains  it. 

Let  a  boat  be  constructed,  having  a  bottom  as  flat  as  pos- 
sible. Let  two  parallel  boards  (each  of  equal  dimensions 
with  the  bottom  of  the  boat)  be  strongly  connected  together, 
having  an  interval  between  them  of  about  an  inch.  By  a 
contrivance  similar  to  that  which  unites  the  upper  with  the 


OE,    SEABCH    FOB    SELP-MOTITE    POWER.  301 

lower  board  of  a  common  bellows,  affix  these  boards,  thus 
connected,  to  the  bottom  of  the  boat,  in  such  a  manner  that 
they  may  be  readily  susceptible  of  an  alternate  ascending  and 
descending  motion,  in  a  space  of  about  two  or  three  feet  in 
height,  to  which  water  must  have  no  access.  In  the  centre 
of  these  boards,  or  of  this  moveable  frame,  ^x  a  strong  iron 
rod,  extending  upwards  through  the  boat,  and  attached  to 
the  machinery  for  working  the  paddles.  In  the  upper  part 
of  the  moveable  frame  make  a  small  aperture,  to  which 
firmly  secure  a  narrow  tube,  extending  upwards  through  a 
liole  in  the  bottom  of  the  boat.  At  the  bottom  of  this  tube 
let  there  be  a  sliding  valve,  which  by  a  very  simple  con- 
trivance can  be  closed  the  very  moment  that  the  frame 
reaches  its  greatest  distance  from  the  bottom  of  the  boat, 
and  as  speedily  re-opened  when  the  frame  comes  in  contact 
with  the  boat.  Through  this  narrow  tube  pour  water  into 
the  moveable  frame,  until  both  it  and  the  tube  are  full.  The 
space  between  the  frame  and  the  bottom  of  the  boat  must 
be  always  free  from  water.  The  vessel  now  is  ready  for 
action.  Let  us  suppose  that,  owing  to  the  upward  pressure 
of  the  sea,  the  frame  is  now  in  contact  with  the  bottom  of 
the  vessel ;  to  remove  it  to  its  greatest  distance  from  the 
vessel,  nothing  more  is  required  (according  to  the  above 
principle  in  hydrostatics)  than  an  altitude  of  water  within 
the  narrow  tube  a  little  greater  than  the  level  of  the  sea  ;  or, 
if  the  tube  be  not  sufficiently  long,  a  weight  pressing  on  the 
water  within  the  tube  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  column  of 
water  of  the  required  altitude,  will  be  equally  efficient,  and 
far  more  convenient.  If  the  valve  be  opened,  this  altitude 
of  water  will  be  applied,  and  the  frame  will  then  be  forced 
to  its  greatest  distance  from  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and 
will  then,  consequently,  have  closed  the  valve.  The  valve 
being  closed,  the  pressure  of  the  water  in  the  tube  is  no 
longer  continued  on  the  sheet  of  water  within  the  moveable 
frame,  so  that  the  sea  will  then,  with  a  power  nearly  equal 
to  the  weight  of  the  vessel,  force  the  frame  upwards  with 
the  iron  rod  affixed  to  it,  and  thereby  set  the  machinery  and 
paddles  in  vigorous  motion,  and  impel  the  vessel  either 
against  the  tide  or  in  any  other  direction  which  may  be 
required.  When  the  frame  comes  again  into  contact  with 
the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  the  valve  is  again  opened — the 
water  in  the  tube  again  presses  on  that  within  the  frame — 


302 


PEBPETTJUM    mobile; 


the  frame   again  descends  ;    and  thus   it  will  continue   ad 
infinitum,  without  any  assbtance  whatever. 

[He  proposes  placing  it  in  a  "  circular  channel.'] 

16.  Pekpetxtal  Pump  (vol.  5, 1826). — Its  inventor  says : — 

The  description  of  the  perpetual  pump  has  suggested  to 
me  whether  the  long-sought  ''perpetual  motion"  may  not 
be  found  by  a  simple  mechanical  alteration  of  that  macbine, 
and  substituting  a  cannon-ball  as  a  prtmum  mobile^  in  lieu  of 
the  water,  not  always  obtainable.  I  would  recommend  that 
in  the  bottom  of  the  trough  be  inserted,  at  each  end,  two 
dropping-boards,  of  a  triangular  form,  moving  on  an  axis  at 
one  comer,  one  of  which  falling  below  the  level  of  the 
trough  at  the  elevated  end,  the  other  shall  be  raised  by  the 
stop  affixed  to  the  standard-post,  which,  throwing  the  ball 
again  back  to  the  former  end,  shall  depress  that,  until  the 
same  process  is  repeated  in  perpetual  activity. 


^ 


I^Z 


u 


Desckiption. — Fig.  1.  A,  the  trough,  swinging  on  an  axis 
at  B.  C,  the  cannon-ball,  raised  by  one  of  the  dropping- 
boards,  D,  whilst  the  other  falls  through  the  opening  at  E, 
into  the  trough.  F,  the  support  or  stop,  raising  the  dropping- 
board  D.      The  centre  of  the  trough  ought  to  be  pierced. 


OB,    SEABCH   FOB   SSLF-MOTIYE   FOWEB.  303^ 

leaving  the  sides  as  a  support  to  the  ball,  which  ought  not  to 
be  wider  than  the  ball  may  travel  freely  through. 

Fig.  2.  DD,  the  dropping-boards,  which  pass  through 
the  centre,  so  as  to  leave  a  sufficiency  of  the  trough  as  a 
resting-place  for  the  ball  to  give  a  momentum,  and  depress 
the  trough,  previously  to  its  being  again  raised  by  the 
dropping-board. 


16.  Pebpetuax  Clock  (vol.  6,  1826). — ^A  correspondent 
says : — 

Allow  me  to  state  that  six  or  seven  years  ago  I  saw  part 
of  an  apparatus  which  I  was  informed  had  been  at  work  two 
years,  and  then  taken  to  pieces.  It  was  a  pendulum  clock, 
the  spring  of  which  was  wound  up  by  the  rising  and  falling 
of  the  mercury,  acted  on  in  two  tubes  by  the  atmosphere, 
every  variation  of  which,  whether  it  tended  to  rise  or  depress 
the  mercury,  still  acted  the  same  way  on  the  spring. — ^T.  N. 


17.  Ancient  Attempt  at  Pebpettjal  Motion  (vol.  6, 
1826)  :— 

The  imderwritten  is  translated  from  an  ancient  Latin  book 
*  *  *         (entitled  "  De  Simla  Naturae,"  Autore 

Roberto  Fludd),*  which  treats  of  every  science  known  at  the 
time  it  was  published,  and  largely  of  the  science  of  mechanics. 
What  follows  I  have  extracted  merely  to  show  that  the  dis- 
covery of  the  perpetual  motion  was  as  nearly  attained  then, 
perhaps,  as  it  is  now. — I  am,  &c.,  P. 

Of  another  useful  invention  for  raising  water  easily*  hy  the  which  a 
certain  Italian  ventured  to  boast  that  he  had  discovered  the  Per- 
petual  Motion, 

Descbiption  of  the  Instbxjment. — A  is  an  exhauster, 
or  pimip. 

B,  a  little  wheel  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  exhauster, 
about  which  pestils,  or  circular  flaps  of  prepared  leather, 
revolve  lightly,  so  that  they  rise  easily :  they  are  connected 
by  crooked  iron.f 

•  See  Chapter  I.,  p.  28. 
f  Bent  iron  wire,  I  imagine,  by  the  plate. 


304 


PERPETUUM    MOBILE  ; 


C  C  C,  pestils,  or  circular  leathers,  by  means  of  which  the 
water  is  raised  in  the  pump. 

D,  a  wheel,  by  which  the  said  circular  leathers  are  raised  up. 

E,  a  pinion,  moving  the  wheels  D  and  B. 

F  is  a  wheel,  continued  from  the  wheel  G,  whose  teeth  thfe 
pinion  E  propels  circularly. 

H,  a  pinion  moving  the  wheel  G. 


tVt_i  ^^ 


j^c>3 


3Z 


~l""j&Tl,jjtf|'-''^'f^' 


/" 


^J^ 

IkW 

?£|^ 

^k 

A 

lall 

% 

pm. 

»»> 

l-^ 

1 

^^^^^^' 

P^^^^^fo?^ 

Use  of  the  Instrument. — This  instnmient  is  classed 
with  those  of  the  first  sort,*  on  which  account  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  for  a  multitude   of  purposes,   because   it  bears 


*  In  refcreuce  to  previous  rules. 


OK,    SEABCH    FOK    SELF-MOTIYE   POWEH.  305 

upward  a  large  quantity  of  water  with  the  least  labour ;  for 
the  number  of  wheels  is  not  variable ;  but  the  length  of  the 
receiver  A  is  about  the  proportion  of  85  feet,  and  its  breadth 
one  foot  and  one-third.  The  concavities  of  it  should  be 
made  exactly  round,  that  they*  may  not  lose  any  water  by 
contracting  in  their  ascension ;  the  concavity  of  the  pump, 
therefore,  should  be  perfectly  round.  The  great  water-wheel 
should  be  24  feet  diameter,  and  the  wheel  G  20  feet. 

The  Italian,  deceived  by  his  own  thoughts,  conceived  that 
as  much  water  would  be  raised  by  this  pump  as  would  keep 
the  wheel  perpetually  in  motion ;  because  he  said  that  more 
force  was  required  at  the  extremity  of  this  macliine  than  at 
the  centre;!  but  because  he  calculated  the  proportions  of 
power  wrong,  he  was  deceived  (undeceived)  in  practice. 

This  last  remark  is  a  dose  for  many  perpetual  motion 
seekers. 


18.  Obchabd's  VACTTtJM  Engine  (vol.  6,  1826). — He 
considers  the  following  a  great  improvement  on  a  plan  he  had 
formerly  suggested.  It  is  meant  to  be  a  self-supplying 
engine  : — 

A  is  an  iron  reservoir  nearly  filled  with  mercury ;  B,  a  tube 
twenty-four  inches  long,  having  its  lower  end  inserted  in  that 
reservoir ;  and  C  and  D  two  cocks  for  the  convenience  of 
filling  the  tube  B.  From  this  tube  another  tube  M  proceeds 
at  right  angles,  to  the  vessel  G.  In  this  latter  tube  is  the 
cock  F,  to  admit  of,  or  shut  off,  a  communication  between 
the  tube  and  the  vessel  G.  This  communication  being  closed, 
the  tube  B  is  carefully  filled  with  mercury ;  after  which,  the 
cock  D  is  closed,  and  the  cap  E  screwed  on. 

The  vessel  G  is  to  be  filled  with  mercury  through  the  cock 
H,  the  pipe  I  being  open  to  allow  of  the  escape  of  air. 
"When  this  vessel  has  been  filled,  the  cock  H  should  be  closed, 
and  its  cap  screwed  on ;  and  the  pipe  I  be  also  closed  by  a 
valve,  which  is  to  be  pressed  tight  by  the  cap  on  the  head  of 
the  pipe.  I  is  a  vent-pipe,  open  at  the  top.  The  space  repre- 
sented by  the  double  lines  is  a  panel  of  thick  plate  glass, 

•  The  circular  leathers, 
t  The  pump  ? 


306 


PERPETUUM    mobile; 


having  two  horizontal  lines  described  on  its  surface,  whereby 
the  attendant  may  observe  the  quantity  of  mercury  within  the 
vessel. 


pglEg^^^ 


The  cock  F  being  closed,  a  quantity  of  mercury  must  be 
allowed  to  rim  out  of  the  vessel  G,  equal  to  the  space  1,  2,  3, 
4,  which  space  will  become  a  vacuum.  If,  therefore,  the 
cock  L  be  then  opened,  to  allow  of  the  discharge  of  a  certain 
quantity  of  mercury  on  the  wheel,  and  the  cocks  C  and  L 
also  opened,  the  mercury  will  continually  rise  from  the 
reservoir  A  into  the  vessel  G,  and  thence  be  discharged  on 


OB,    SEAECH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  307 

the  wheel,  whence  it  will  again  fall  into  the  vessel  A,  to  keep 
up  the  supply.  The  cock  F  must  be  so  adjusted  as  to  admit 
into  the  vessel  G  a  quantity  of  mercury  equal  to  that  which 
is  discharged  by  the  cock  L.  This  can  be  ascertained  and 
regulated  by  means  of  the  panel  of  glass  above  described. 

The  specific  gravity  of  mercury  being  7^  oimces,  it  is 
evident  that  but  a  small  quantity  of  it  is  required  to  turn  the 
wheel,  which  has  no  friction  but  that  of  the  axis  on  which  it 
turns. 


19.  A  Perpetual  Motion  at  Stutgartt  (vol.  6,  1826). 
— A  correspondent  writes : — 

I  beg  to  take  this  opportimity  of  stating  my  knowledge  of 
the  truth  of  perpetual  motion  having  been  accomplished  by 
magnets  placed  round  a  circular  box,  enclosing  a  steel- vaned 
wheel,  and  also  that  there  is  now  a  machine  incessantly  at 
work,  without  assistance,  in  the  famous  library  at  Stutgard, 
by  which  a  bar  (hung  by  a  pivot  through  the  middle)  in  an 
upright  position,  between  two  pillars,  with  a  ball  at  each  end, 
the  top  one  being  a  little  heavier  than  the  one  below,  con- 
tinues to  vibrate  by  the  top  ball  alternately  falling  upon  and 
rebounding  from  each  pillar.  How  this  is  performed  I  am 
ignorant,  as  the  person  who  saw  it  and  described  it  to  me 
did  not  examine  it  with  the  eye  of  a  machinist,  but  was 
merely  eye-witness  to  the  effects. 

[He  begs  the  favour  of  a  description  and  drawing.] 


20.  Water  Blowing  Machine  applied  to  the  Pro- 
duction OF  Perpetual  Motion  (vol.  7,  1827). — The 
inventor  writes  : — 

I  am  encouraged  to  send  you  the  following  attempt  at 
perpetual  motion,  because  I  think  it  is  upon  a  principle  that 
has  not  yet  been  examined  in  your  pages. 

In  Dr.  Brewster's  appendix  to  Ferguson's  Lectures,  the 
following  description  is  given  of  what  is  called  a  "  Water 
Blowing  Machine :" — "  Let  A  B  (see  Fig.)  be  a  cistern  of 
water,  with  the  bottom  of  which  is  connected  the  bended 
leaden  pipe  B  C  H.     The  lower  extremity,  H,  of  the  pipe  is 

X 


308 


PEHPETxriTM  mobile: 


inserted  into  the  top  of  a  cask  or  vessel^  D  E,  called  the 
condensing  vessel,  having  the  pedestal  P  fixed  to  its  bottom, 
which  is  perforated  with  two  openings,  M  N.  When  the 
water  which  comes  from  the  cistern  A  is  falling  through  the 
part,  C  H.  of  the  pipe,  it  is  supplied  by  the  openings  or  tubes, 
mn  opy  with  a  quantity  of  air  which  it  carries  along  with  it. 


This  mixture  of  air  and  water,  issuing  from  the  aperture  H, 
and  impinging  upon  the  surface  of  the  stone  pedestal  P,  is 
driven  back  and  dispersed  in  various  directions.  The  air 
being  thus  separated  from  the  water,  ascends  into  the  upper 
part  of  the  vessel,  and  rushes  through  the  opening,  F,  whence 
it  is  conveyed  to  the  fire,  while  the  water  falls  to  the  lower 
part  of  the  vessel,  and  rims  out  by  the  openings  M  N."  The 
author  then  goes  on  to  describe  the  construction  of  the  pipe 
B  C  H,  in  the  curve  of  which  some  nicety  is  required,  and 
to  explain  some  atmospherical  phenomena  upon  the  principle 
of  this  machine,  adding  that  "  Franciscus  Tertius  de  Lanis 
observes  that  he  has  seen  a  greater  wind  generated  by  a 
blowing  machine  of  this  kind  than  could  be  produced  by 
bellows  ten  or  twelve  feet  long." 


OE,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIYE   POWEK.  309 

Now,  if,  instead  of  the  pedestal  P,  a  wheel  were  placed  in 
the  condensing  vessel,  as  in  the  figure,  would  not  the  water, 
in  falling  upon  the  wheel,  be  sufficiently  dispersed  to  disen- 
gage the  air  at  the  same  time  that  it  drove  the  wheel,  and 
would  not  the  motion  of  the  wheel  be  retarded  by  the  density 
of  the  internal  air  ? 

I  do  not  apprehend  that  any  considerable  resistance  would 
be  offered  by  the  internal  air,  and  the  motion  of  the  wheel 
can  be  regulated  by  its  load,  so  as  to  offer  a  sufficient  resist- 
ance to  the  descending  stream  of  water ;  and  I  therefore 
assume  that  the  water,  in  its  descent,  would  produce,  by 
means  of  the  wheel,  a  power  capable  of  raising  a  part  of  the 
water  expended  back  again  to  the  cistern ;  and  this  is  the 
extent  of  the  power  of  most  of  those  machines  which  have 
been  mistaken  for  perpetual  motions  by  their  projectors.  But 
I  have  a  blast  of  wind  which  is  described  as  being  of  great 
force.  Can  this  blast  be  in  any  way  applied  to  raise  the 
surplus  water  ?  I  think  I  see  the  smile  which  the  proposal 
will  produce  in  those  who  deny  the  possibility  of  a  perpetual 
motion.  "  A  mere  puff  of  wind !"  is,  doubtless,  ejaculated 
from  all  sides.  But,  let  me  tell  these  gentlemen  that,  though 
I  may  not  know  any  method  by  which  such  blast  can  produce 
that  effect,  it  does  not  by  any  means  follow  that  the  impossi- 
bility of  the  thing  is  thence  to  be  presumed.  Far  from  it ; 
for  such  a  conclusion  rests  upon  the  supposition  that  the 
powers  and  application  of  a  blast  of  wind  are  fully  known, 
and  that  no  research  or  experience  can  add  to  our  knowledge 
on  that  subject — assumptions  which  appear  to  me  somewhat 
ridiculous.  Allow  me,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  to  suppose 
that  this  blast,  instead  of  wind,  had  been  a  blast  of  steam.  Time 
was,  when  wise  men  would  have  smiled,  and  said,  "  A  puff  of 
steam — ^a  mere  puff  of  steam !" — and  had  some  one,  more 
sanguine  than  the  rest,  attempted,  by  its  application,  to 
produce  a  motion,  he  would  have  applied  it  to  the  float- 
boards  of  a  wheel,  as  in  Branca' s  engine,  and  have  been  dis- 
appointed. It  is  notigiven  to  man  to  know  when  the  powers 
of  any  great  agent  have  been  fully  developed ;  and  those  who 
act  upon  such  presumptions  throw  the  greatest  obstacles  in 
the  way  of  enquiry.  But,  to  shew  the  anti-perpetualists  that 
within  their  own  time,  since  the  commencement  of  the 
"Mechanics'  Magazine,'*  an  addition  has  been  made  to  our 
knowledge  of  the  powers  of  a  blast  of  wind,  I  have  added  a 


310  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

tube,  G,  to  my  figure,  the  proposed  use  of  which  I  shall  now 
describe. 

In  a  part  of  the  "  Mechanics'  Magazine,"  published  some 
time  ago,  there  was  described  a  novel  mode  of  raising  water 
in  a  tube,*  by  directing  a  stream  of  air  over  its  mouth,  thereby 
destroying  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere. 

[He  asks  the  author  of  this  experiment  "  to  what  height 
he  has  raised  water  by  this  means."] 

I  do  not  suppose  it  will  rise  to  the  height  of  the  cistern  as 
I  have  figured  it ;  but  it  may  still  be  a  question  whether  it 
may  not  be  accomplished  by  a  series  of  short  tubes,  the 
bottom  of  the  one  being  placed  in  the  cistern  into  which  the 
next  below  discharges  its  water,  each  being  constructed  with 
a  blast  and  two  valves,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  single 
tube — namely,  the  valves  x  (under  water)  and  y,  worked  in 
such  a  manner,  by  the  arms  K  L,  that  the  one  may  shut 
when  the  other  opens.  Presuming  that  the  water  will  rise 
to  the  top  of  the  tube,  when  the  blast  is  in  action  {x  open 
and  y  shut),  the  water  in  the  part  of  the  tube  between  the 
blast  and  y  will  be  discharged  into  the  cistern  at  the  next 
motion  of  the  valves — ^namely,  when  x  is  shut  and  y  opened, 
the  blast,  at  the  same  time,  being  discontinued. 


21.  Editorial  Note,  and  Letter  on  Perpetual  Motion 
(vol.  7,  1827)  :— 

[The  subject  of  perpetual  motion  having  been  recently 
again  brought  imder  discussion  in  our  pages,  our  impartiality 
and  candour  have  been  appealed  to  for  the  insertion  of  the 
following  plan.  *  *  There  is  always  one  advantage  at- 
tending the  publication  of  even  the  most  absurd  schemes  of 
this  kind,  that  they  produce  refutations  which  serve  to  make 
the  true  principles  of  mechanics  better  and  better  understood 
among  ingenious  men,  and  to  induce  numbers  silently  to 
abandon  the  prosecution  of  plans  equally  absurd,  and  equally 
cherished  with  the  fondest  regard. — Ed.] 

«***♦* 

Amid  all  the  fruitless  attempts  which  have  appeared,  there 
*  Rather,  the  short  leg  of  a  sypbou,  by  blowing  with  a  pair  of  bellows. 


OS,    SEAKCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEK.  313 

was  still  one  avenue  to  the  object  of  pursuit  overlooked,  to 
wliicli  the  common  and  well-known  principles  of  hydrostatics 
seemed  to  direct  the  way :  this  was  the  principle  that  any 
body  specifically,  or  bulk  for  bulk,  lighter  than  common  air,  will 
rise  and  swim  in  it.  Consequently,  if  I  attach  a  certain  quantity 
of  vessels,  at  equal  distances,  round  the  circumference  or  rim 
of  a  wheel,  so  contrived  as  that  one  half  of  the  vessels 
shall  be  exhausted  on  one  side  of  the  wheel,  and  the  other 
half  filled  with  air  on  the  opposite  side,  in  this  case  the  ex- 
hausted vessels  will  attain  the  highest  part  of  the  wheel,  and 
the  full  ones  the  lowest.  But  to  render  the  matter  more 
explicit,  I  must  refer  to  the  prefixed  drawing. 

A  B  C  D  are  four  vessels,  connected  to  the  wheels  E  E 
(though  only  one  is  shewn,  to  prevent  confusion)  by  round 
pins,  a  a  a  a^  which  project  from  the  vessels  on  each  side, 
and  enter  into  corresponding  holes  in  the  wheels  E  E.  The 
wheels  E  E  are  caused  to  revolve  by  the  space  under  the 
vessel  B  being  a  vacuum,  and  therefore  lighter  than  the  same 
portion  of  air:  a  little  before  the  vessel  B  reaches  the 
highest  point  of  the  wheels,  it  begins  to  close,  and  opens  the 
opposite  vessel  D,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  vessel  C  opens 
A,  because  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  on  the  vessel  C  is 
equal  to  the  pressure  on  A.  Instead  of  common  packing  to 
make  the  vessels  air-tight,  mercury  is  substituted,  which  has 
infinitely  less  friction,  and  is  never  out  of  order :  it  is  repre- 
sented by  the  black  marks  in  the  drawing.  The  particles  of 
mercury  not  being  entirely  free  from  friction,  a  little  power  is 
requisite  to  open  and  shut  the  vessels  ;  this  is  effected  by  the 
rods  F  F,  connected  to  the  levers  G  G  G  G  by  chains.  The 
rods  F  F  give  motion  to  other  rods,  H  H,  by  the  rollers 
h  hh  b  acting  against  the  collars  on  the  rods  H  H.  Again, 
the  levers  G  G  G  G  are  successively  worked  by  sliding  over 
the  roller  P.  The  connecting-rods  H  H  are  so  adjusted  as 
not  to  draw  the  vessels  out  of  their  upright  position,  which 
would  let  the  mercury  escape ;  also,  the  lower  vessels  A  and 
D  are  made  rather  larger  in  diameter  than  B  C,  so  as  the 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere  may  counterpoise  the  weight  of 
the  vessels  A  C  and  B  D,  with  their  connecting-rods,  &c. 

I  doubt  not  in  the  least,  that  if  a  pneumatic  machine  like 
this  were  accurately  executed,  it  would  continue  in  perpetual 
motion ;  yet  I  still  think  the  power  might  be  greatly  increased 
by  placing  the  whole  engine  under  a  receiver  of  condensed 


314  PERPETTJTJM    MOBILE; 

air,  say  from  ten  to  twelve  atmospheres,  wHch  would  weigli, 
if  it  were  ten  atmospheres,  about  twelve  ounces  per  cubic  foot. 


22.  Scheme  of  Pekpetual  Motion  (vol.  7,  1827).  By- 
Sir  W.  Congreve,  Bart. — The  following  article  is  from  the 
"  Atlas  ;"— 

The  celebrated  Boyle  entertained  an  idea  that  perpetual 
motion  might  be  obtained  by  means  of  capillary  attraction ; 
and,  indeed,  there  seems  but  little  doubt  that  nature  has 
employed  this  force  in  many  instances  to  produce  this  effect. 

There  are  many  situations  in  which  there  is  every  reason 
to  believe  that  the  sources  of  springs  on  the  tops  and  sides 
of  mountains  depend  on  the  accumulation  of  water  created 
at  certain  elevations  by  the  operation  of  capillary  attraction, 
acting  in  large  masses  of  porous  material,  or  through  lami- 
nated substances.  These  masses  being  saturated,  in  process 
of  time  become  the  sources  of  springs  and  the  heads  of  rivers; 
and  thus,  by  an  endless  round  of  ascending  and  descending 
waters,  form,  on  the  great  scale  of  nature,  an  incessant  cause 
of  perpetual  motion,  in  the  purest  acceptance  of  the  term, 
and  precisely  on  the  principle  that  was  contemplated  by 
Boyle.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  any  imitation  of  this 
process  on  the  limited  scale  practicable  by  human  art  would 
not  be  of  sufficient  magnitude  to  be  effective.  Nature,  by 
the  immensity  of  her  operations,  is  able  to  allow  for  a  slow- 
ness of  process  which  would  baffle  the  attempts  of  man  in 
any  direct  and  simple  imitation  of  her  works.  Working, 
therefore,  upon  the  same  causes,  he  finds  himself  obliged  to 
take  a  more  complicated  mode  to  produce  the  same  effect.* 

To  amuse  the  hours  of  a  long  confinement  from  illness. 
Sir  William  Congreve  has  recently  contrived  a  scheme  of 
perpetual   motion,    founded    on   this   principle   of  capillary 

•  A  familiar  instance  of  a  continuous  round  of  interchanging  cause 
and  effect,  produced  by  this  capillary  process,  and  limited  only  by  the 
duration  of  the  materials,  is  furnished  by  a  common  candle.  The  flame 
melts  the  wax  or  tallow,  which,  ascending  the  fibres  of  the  wick,  keeps 
that  flame  alive  ;  so  that,  literally  speaking,  the  flame  is  the  active  cause 
of  its  own  existence, — a  sort  of  paradox,  precisely  similar  to  that  which 
our  perpetual  motion  seekers  have  so  long  been  vainly  endeavouring  to 
realize. — Ed.  **  Mec.  Mag." 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


317 


attraction,  which,  it  is  apprehended,  will  not  be  subject  to 
the  general  refutation  applicable  to  those  plans  in  which  the 
power  is  supposed  to  be  derived  from  gravity  only.  Sir 
William's  perpetual  motion  is  as  follows  : — 

^Fig.  1.) 


Let  A  B  C  be  three  horizontal  rollers  fixed  in  a  frame ; 
a  a  a^  &c.,  is  an  endless  band  of  sponge,  running  round  these 
rollers  ;  and  h  h  h^  &c.,  is  an  endless  chain  of  weights,  sur- 
rounding the  band  of  sponge,  and  attached  to  it,  so  that  they 
must  move  together ;  every  part  of  this  band  and  chain 
being  so  accurately  uniform  in  weight  that  the  perpendicular 
side  A  B  will,  in  all  positions  of  the  band  and  chain,  be  in 
equilibrium  with  the  hjrpothenuse  A  C,  on  the  principle  of 
the  inclined  plane.  Now,  if  the  frame  in  which  these  rollers 
are  fixed  be  placed  in  a  cistern  of  water,  having  its  lower 
part  immersed  therein,  so  that  the  water's  edge  cuts  the 
upper  part  of  the  rollers  B  C,  then,  if  the  weight  and  quan- 
tity of  the  endless  chain  be  duly  proportioned  to  the  thickness 
and  breadth  of  the  band  of  sponge,  the  band  and  chain  will, 
on  the  water  in  the  cistern  being  brought  to  the  proper  level, 
begin  to  move  round  the  rollers  in  the  direction  A  B,  by  the 
force  of  capillary  attraction,  and  will  continue  so  to  move. 
The  process  is  as  follows  : — 

On  the  side  A  B  of  the  triangle,  the  weights  6  5  6,  &c., 
hanging  perpendicularly  alongside  the  band  of  sponge,  the 


316  PEEPETxruM  mobile; 

band  is  not  compressed  by  them,  and  its  pores  being  left 
open,  the  water  at  the  point  x,  at  which  the  band  meets  its 
surface,  will  rise  to  a  certain  height,  y,  above  its  level,  and 
thereby  create  a  load,  which  load  will  not  exist  on  the 
ascending  side  C  A,  because  on  this  side  the  chain  of  weights 
compresses  the  band  at  the  water's  edge,  and  squeezes  out 
any  water  that  may  have  previously  accumulated  in  it ;  so 
that  the  band  rises  in  a  djy  state,  the  weight  of  the  chain 
having  been  so  proportioned  to  the  breadth  and  thickness  ot 
the  band  as  to  be  sufficient  to  produce  this  effect.  The  load, 
therefore,  on  the  descending  side  A  B,  not  being  opposed  by 
any  similar  load  on  the  ascending  side,  and  the  equilibrium 
of  the  other  parts  not  being  disturbed  by  the  alternate 
expansion  and  compression  of  the  sponge,  the  band  will  begin 
to  move  in  the  direction  A  B  ;  and  as  it  moves  downwards, 
the  accumulation  of  water  will  continue  to  rise,  and  thereby 
carry  on  a  constant  motion,  provided  the  load  at  ar  y  be  suffi- 
cient to  overcome  the  friction  on  the  rollers  ABC. 

Now,  to  ascertain  the  quantity  of  this  load  in  any  particular 
machine,  it  must  be  stated  that  it  is  found  by  experiment 
that  the  water  will  rise  in  a  fine  sponge  about  an  inch  above 
its  level ;  if,  therefore,  the  band  and  sponge  be  one  foot 
thick  and  six  feet  broad,  the  area  of  its  horizontal  section  in 
contact  with  the  water  would  be  864  square  inches,  and  the 
weight  of  the  accumulation  of  water  raised  by  the  capillary 
attraction  being  one  inch  rise  upon  864  square  inches,  would 
be  30  lbs.,  which,  it  is  conceived,  would  be  much  more  than 
equivalent  to  the  friction  of  the  rollers. 

The  deniers  of  this  proposition,  on  the  first  view  of  the 
subject,  will  say,  it  is  true  the  accumulation  of  the  weight  on 
the  descending  side  thus  occasioned  by  the  capillary  attrac- 
tion, would  produce  a  perpetual  motion,  if  there  were  not  as 
much  power  lost  on  the  ascending  side  by  the  change  of 
position  of  the  weights,  in  pressing  the  water  out  of  the 
sponge. 

The  point  now  to  be  established  is,  that  the  change  in  the 
position  of  the  weights  will  not  cause  any  loss  of  power. 
For  this  purpcce,  we  must  refer  to  the  following  diagram. 

With  reference  to  this  diagram,  suppose  a  a  a^  &c.,  an 
endless  strap,  and  h  hh^  &c.,  an  endless  chain  running  round 
the  rollers ;  A  B  C  not  having  any  sponge  between  them, 
but  kept  at  a  certain  distance  from  each  other  by  small  and 


OS,    8EAKCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


317 


inflexible  props,  p  p  p,  &c.,  then  the  sides  A  B  and  C  A 
would,  in  all  positions  of  this  system,  be  precisely  an  equi- 
librium, so  as  to  require  only  a  small  increment  of  weight  on 
either  side  to  produce  motion.  Now,  we  contend  that  this 
equilibrium  would  still  remain  unaffected,  if  small  springs 
were  mtroduced  m  lieu  of  the  inflexible  props  p  pp,  so  that 

(Fig.  2.) 


the  chain  h  b  h  might  approach  the  lower  strap  a  a  a,  by 
compressing  these  small  springs  with  its  weight  on  the 
ascending  side ;  for  although  the  centre  of  gravity  of  any 
portion  of  chain  would  move  in  a  different  line  in  the  latter 
case — ^foT  instance,  in  the  dotted  line — still  the  quantity  of 
the  actual  weight  of  every  inch  of  the  strap  and  chain  would 
remain  precisely  the  same  in  the  former  case,  where  they  are 
kept  at  the  same  distance  in  all  positions,  as  in  the  latter 
case,  where  they  approach  on  the  ascending  side ;  and  so, 
also,  these  equal  portions  of  weights,  notwithstanding  any 
change  of  distance  between  their  several  parts  which  may 
take  place  in  one  case  and  not  in  the  other,  would  in  both 
cases  rise  and  fall,  though  the  same  perpendicular  space,  and 
consequently  the  equilibrium,  would  be  equally  preserved  in 
both  cases,  though  in  the  first  case  they  may  rise  and  fall 
through  rather  more  than  in  the  second.    The  application  of 


318  PERPETTTUM    MOBILE; 

this  demonstration  to  the  machine  described  in  Fig.  1,  is 
obvious ;  for  the  compression  of  the  sponge  by  the  sinking  of 
the  weights  on  the  ascending  side,  in  pressing  out  the  water, 
produces  precisely  the  same  effect  as  to  the  position  and 
ascent  of  the  weights,  as  the  approach  of  the  chain  to  the 
lower  strap  on  the  ascending  side,  in  Fig.  2,  by  the  com- 
j)ression  of  the  springs ;  and  consequently,  if  the  equilibrium 
is  not  affected  in  one  case — that  is,  in  Fig.  2,  as  above  de- 
monstrated— it  will  not  be  affected  in  the  o^er  case.  Fig.  1 ; 
and,  therefore,  the  water  would  be  squeezed  out  by  the  pres- 
sure of  the  chain  without  any  loss  of  power.  The  quantity  of 
weight  necessary  for  squeezing  dry  any  given  quantity  of 
sponge  must  be  ascertained  and  duly  apportioned  by  expe- 
riment. It  is  obvious,  however,  that  whether  one  cubic  inch 
of  sponge  required  one,  two,  or  four  ounces  for  this  purpose, 
it  would  not  affect  the  equilibrium,  since,  whatever  were  the 
proportion  on  the  ascending  side,  precisely  the  same  would 
the  proportion  be  on  the  descending  side. 

This  principle  is  capable  of  application  in  various  ways, 
and  with  a  variety  of  materials.  It  may  be  produced  by  a 
single  roller  or  wheel.  Mercury  may  also  be  substituted  for 
water,  by  using  a  series  of  metallic  plates  instead  of  sponges ; 
and,  as  the  mercur)*  will  be  found  to  rise  to  a  much  greater 
height  between  these  plates,  than  water  will  do  in  a  sponge, 
it  will  be  found  that  the  power  to  be  obtained  by  the  latter 
materials  will  be  from  70  to  80  times  as  great  as  by  the  use 
of  water.  Thus*  a  machine,  of  the  same  dimensions  as  given 
above,  woidd  have  a  constant  power  of  2000  lbs.  acting 
upon  it. 

We  now  proceed  to  shew  how  the  principle  of  perpetual 
motion  proposed  by  Sir  Wm.  Congreve  may  be  applied  upon 
one  centre  instead  of  three. 

In  the  following  figure,  abed  represents  a  drum-wheel  or 
cylinder,  moving  on  a  horizontal  axis  surrouiixied  wi:h  a  band 
of  si\>agt^  1234567  8,  and  immer^d  in  water,  so  chat 
tho  surtace  of  the  water  touches  the  lower  eni  c:  the  cylinder. 
Now  then,  if ,  as  in  Fig.  2,  the  w-iter  or:  :he  desc^ndis^  side 
h  he  allowed  to  accumulate  in.  the  sponge  a:  x,  while,  on  the 
asvvnvUn^  side  D,  the  spoiii??  at  the  water's  e\i.^  shill.  by 
any  means  not  derinirini:  the  ev^uilibriuiLL.  S?  <o  cc=:i»r^ss^ 
that  it  shall  quit  the  water  in  a  dry  state,  the  iccusiiiilition 
of  wnter  aboTe  ius  level  ac  *,  by  the  cakpilliry  attrxcckcu  will 


OR,    SEAKCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER. 


319 


be  a  source  of  constant  rotatory  motion ;  and,  in  the  present 
case,  it  will  be  found  that  the  means  of  compressing  the 
sponge  may  be  best  obtained  by  buoyancy,  instead  of  weight. 
For  this  purpose,  therefore,  the  band  of  sponge  is  supposed 
to  be  divided  into  eight  or  more  equal  parts,  1  2  3  4,  &c., 
each  part  being  furnished  with  a  float  or  buoyant  vessel, 
/l,y2,  &c.,  rising  and  falling  upon  spindles,  s  s  s,  &c., 
fixed  in  the  periphery  of  the  drum  ;  these  floats  being  of  such 
dimensions  that,  when  immersed  in  water,  the  buoyancy  or 
pressure  upwards  of  each  shall  be  sufiicient  to  compress  that 
portion  of  the  sponge  connected  with  it,  so  as  to  squeeze  out 
any  water  it  may  have  absorbed.  These  floats  are  further 
arranged  by  means  of  levers  III,  &c.,  and  plates  p  p  p,  &c., 
so  that,  when  the  float/  No.  1  becomes  immersed  in  the 
water,  its  buoyant  pressure  upwards  acts  not  against  the 
portion  of  the  sponge  No.  1,  immediately  above  it,  but 
against  No.  2,  next  in  front  of  it ;  and  so,  in  like  manner, 
the  buoyancy  of  /  No.  2  float  acts  on  the  portion  of  the 
sponge  No.  3,  and  /  No.  3  float  upon  No.  4  sponge. 


Now,  from  this  arrangement  it  follows,  that  the  portion  of 
sponge  No.  4,  which  is  about  to  quit  the  water,  is  pressed 
upon  by  that  float,  which,  from  acting  vertically,  is  most 
efficient  in  squeezing  the  sponge  dry ;  while  that  portion  of 
the  sponge  No.  1,  on  the  point  of  entering  vhe  water,  ig  not 


320  FEBFETVTJX   MOBILE  ; 

compressed  at  all  from  its  corresponding  float  No.  8,  not 
having  yet  reached  the  edge  of  the  water.  By  these  means, 
therefore,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  sponge  always  rises  in  a 
dry  state  from  the  water  on  the  ascending  side,  while  it 
approaches  the  water  on  the  descending  side  in  an  imcom- 
pressed  state,  and  open  to  the  full  action  of  absorption  by  the 
capillary  attraction. 

The  great  advantage  of  effecting  this  by  the  buoyancy  of 
light  vessels  instead  of  a  burthen  of  weights,  as  in  Fig.  2,  is 
that,  by  a  due  arrangement  of  the  dimensions  and  buoyancy 
of  the  floats  immersed,  the  whole  machine  may  be  made  to 
float  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  so  as  to  take  off  all  friction 
whatever  from  the  centre  of  suspension.  Thus,  therefore, 
we  have  a  cylindrical  machine  revolving  on  a  single  centre 
without  friction,  and  having  a  collection  of  water  in  the 
sponge  on  the  descending  side,  while  the  sponge  on  the 
ascending  side  is  continually  dry ;  and  if  this  cylinder  be  six 
feet  wide,  and  the  sponge  that  surrounds  it  one  foot  thick, 
there  will  be  a  constant  moving  power  of  thirty  poimds  on 
the  descending  side,  without  any  friction  to  counteract  it. 

It  has  been  already  stated,  that  to  perpetuate  the  motion 
of  this  machine,  the  means  used  to  leave  the  sponge  open  on 
the  descending  side,  and  press  it  dry  on  the  ascending  side, 
must  be  such  as  will  not  derange  the  equilibrium  of  the 
machine  when  floating  in  water.  As,  therefore,  in  this  case 
the  effect  is  produced  by  the  ascent  of  the  buoyant  floats  b, 
to  demonstrate  the  perpetuity  of  the  motion,  we  must  show 
that  the  ascent  of  the  floats  /  No.  1  and  /  No.  3  will 
be  equal  in  all  corresponding  situations  on  each  side  of  the 
perpendicular  ;  for  the  only  circumstance  that  could  derange 
the  equilibrium  on  this  system,  would  be  that  /  No.  1  and 
/  No.  3  should  not  in  all  such  corresponding  situations 
approach  the  centre  of  motion  equally  ;  for  it  is  evident  that 
in  the  position  of  the  floats  described  in  the  above  figure, 
ifyNo.  1  float  did  not  approach  the  centre  as  much  as/ 
No.  3,  the  equilibrium  would  be  destroyed,  and  the  greater 
distance  of/  No.  1  from  the  centre  than  that  of  /No.  3 
would  create  a  resistance  to  the  moving  force  caused  by  the 
accumulation  of  the  water  at  x. 

It  will  be  fpund,  however,  that  the  floats  /  No.  1  and  / 
No.  3  do  retain  equal  distances  from  the  centre  in  all  corre- 
sponding situations,  for  the  resistance  to  their  approach  to 


OK,   SEJLBCH   FOE   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  321 

the  centre  by  buoyancy  is  the  elasticity  of  the  sponge  at  the 
extremity  of  the  respective  levers ;  and  as  this  elasticity  is  the 
same  in  all  situations,  while  this  centripetal  force  of  the  float 
yNo.  1  is  equal  to  that  of  the  float  J  No.  3,  at  equal 
distances  from  the  perpendicular,  the  floats/ No.  1  and/No.  3 
will,  in  all  corresponding  situations  on  either  side  of  the 
perpendicular,  be  at  equal  distances  from  the  centre.  It  is 
true,  that  the  force  by  which  these  floats  approach  the  centre 
of  motion  varies  according  to  the  obliquity  of  the  spindles  on 
which  they  work,  it  being  greatest  in  the  perpendicular 
position ;  but,  as  the  obliquity  of  these  spindles  is  the  same 
at  all  equal  distances  from  the  perpendicular,  and  as  the 
resistance  of  the  ascent  of  the  floats  is  equal  in  all  cases,  the 
centre  of  buoyancy  will  evidently  describe  a  similar  curve  on 
each  side  of  the  perpendicular ;  and  consequently  the  equi- 
librium will  be  preserved,  so  as  to  leave  a  constant  moving 
force  at  x,  equal  to  the  whole  accumulation  of  water  in  the 
sponge.  Nor  will  this  equilibrium  be  disturbed  by  any 
change  of  position  in  the  floats  not  immersed  in  the  water, 
since,  being  duly  connected  with  the  sponge  by  the  levers 
and  plates,  they  will  evidently  arrange  themselves  at  equal 
distances  from  the  centre,  in  all  corresponding  situations  on 
either  side. 

It  may  be  said  that  the  equilibrium  of  the  band  of  sponge 
may  be  destroyed  by  its  partial  compression ;  and  it  must  be 
admitted  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  part  compressed, 
according  to  the  construction  above  described,  does  approach 
the  centre  of  motion  nearer  than  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
part  not  compressed.  The  whole  weight  of  the  sponge  is, 
however,  so  inconsiderable,  that  this  difference  would  scarcely 
produce  any  sensible  effect ;  and  if  it  did,  a  very  slight  altera- 
tion in  the  construction,  by  which  the  sponge  should  be 
compressed  as  much  outwards  as  inwards,  would  retain  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  compressed  part  at  the  same  distance 
from  the  centre  of  motion  as  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  part 
not  compressed. 

Sib  W.  Congreve's  Pla-n  of  Perpetual  Motion 
(vol.  7,  1827).— The  following  is  taken  by  the  Editor  from  a 
small  pamphlet  on  the  subject,  by  the  ingenious  Baronet 
himself: — 

The  power  of  a  wheel  thus  set  in  motion  may  either  be 


222  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

applied  in  the  common  mode,  by  machinery  at  the  end  of  the 
axis,  or  the  wheel  itself,  as  in  the  following  figure,  may  be 

made  to  revolve  in  a  circular 
cistern  of  water,  of  any  con- 
venient diameter,  being  con- 
nected by  an  arm  from  the 
centre  of  the  wheel  to  an  up- 
right revolving  shaft  in  the 
centre  of  the  cistern,  so  as  to 
be  coimected  with  machinery. 

[He  proceeds  to  enlarge  on  the  merits  of  the  invention, 
gives  a  scheme  for  propelling  boats,  and  descants  on  capillary 
attraction  when  glass  plates  are  used,  and  proposes  the  use  of 
them  with  water,  and  of  copper  or  platina  plates  with  mercury, 
concluding : — ] 

My  principal  object  in  publishing  this  little  tract  is,  if 
possible,  to  call  the  attention  of  men  of  mathematical  attain- 
ments to  a  subject  which,  from  the  general  disbelief  of  the 
possibility  of  the  thing,  such  men  will  scarcely  condescend  to 
look  at.  Feeling,  however,  that  the  application  of  a  new 
principle  is  here  involved,  which  is  not  liable  to  the  general 
objections  urged  against  perpetual  motion,  I  have  bestowed 
the  most  patient  atteiTition  to  the  subject,  and  must  confess  I 
cannot  myself  discover  any  fallacy  in  the  proposition  here 
stated. 

William  Coxgreve. 

March  10, 1827. 

P.S. — Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  had  a  conversation 
with  one  of  our  most  celebrated  mathematicians  on  this 
subject.  He  contends  that  the  weights  ascending  on  the 
sloping  side  of  an  inclined  plane  can  exert  no  pressure  so  as 
to  produce  any  effect  on  that  plane,  without  a  corresponding 
loss  of  power  and  destruction  of  the  equilibrium.  He  seems  to 
forget  that  the  very  principle  of  this  equilibrium  is,  that  the 
inclined  plane  itself,  at  —  degrees  above  the  horizon,  sup- 
ports one  half  the  weight,  and  is,  of  course,  reacted  upon  to 
an  equal  extent  by  that  weight ;  so  that  if  the  weight  were 
100  lbs.,  50  lbs.  of  this  would  be  absolutely  disposable  to  the 
compression  of  any  substance  between  itself  and  the  plane, 


OE,    SEAKCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  323 

sucli  as  the  sponge  above-mentioned,  the  other  60  lbs.  being 
the  only  part  supported  by  the  counterpoise  on  the  perpen- 
dicular side. 

Now,  will  he  contend  that  if  a  carpet  or  sponge  were 
stretched  round  this  inclined  plane,  and  fixed  to  it  so  as  to 
be  allowed  to  absorb  water  on  both  sides  by  the  capillary 
attraction,  will  he,  I  say,  contend  that  there  would  not,  in 
this  case,  be  50  lbs.  disposable  on  the  side  A  C  for  squeezing 
the  water  out  of  this  sponge  or  carpet,  by  its  pressure  on  the 
slope,  without  affecting  the  equilibrium,  while  there  would 
be  no  weight  pressing  upon  it  to  operate  with  this  effect  on 
the  perpendicular  side  ? 


SiK  Wm.  Congkeve's  Perpetual  Motion  (vol.  7, 
1827)  :— 

[The  editor,  alluding  to  Sir  William's  "  Plan  of  Perpetual 
Motion  from  Capillary  Attraction,"  states  that  the  Baronet 
has  since  published  a  revised  and  enlarged  edition  of  that 
pamphlet  (Knight  and  Lacey,  pp.  24,  price  Is.),  in  which  he 
endeavours  to  refute  the  principal  objection  which  he  has 
heard  made  to  his  plan  by  a  celebrated  mathematician,  who 
opposed  to  Sir  William  Congreve's  proposition  ^  general 
maxim,  said  to  exist  in  all  mechanical  operations,  viz.,  "  that 
no  duty  (to  use  his  own  terms)  can  be  performed  without  a 
corresponding  loss  of  efficiency."  He  concluded  that  "  the 
weight  ascending  on  an  inclined  plane  can  produce  no  posi- 
tive effect,  such  as  the  compression  of  a  spring  or  sponge,  by 
which  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  weight  shall  describe  a 
curve  instead  of  a  straight  line,  without  an  equivalent  loss  of 
efficiency."  The  propounder  of  this  objection  defied  Sir 
William  to  produce  an  instance  to  the  contrary,  and  agreed 
to  leave  the  decision  of  the  main  question  to  this  issue.  Sir 
William  therefore  offers  the  following  as  a  proof  that  power 
may  be  gained  by  his  plan  without  any  corresponding  loss  in 
point  of  efficiency : — ] 

Let  A  C  be  an  inclined  plane.  Now,  suppose  a  small  car- 
riage W  on  four  wheels,  at  the  bottom  of  this  inclined  plane, 


324 


PEBPETTTCM    MOBIUB  ; 


be  connected  by  a  line  /  /  over  a  roller,  witb  a  counterpoise 
P  hanging  perpendicularly,  so  that  P  would  have  just  power 
enough  to  move  the  carriage  W  slowly  up  the  plane  AC; 


suppose,  also,  that  this  carriage  be  loaded  with  a  yielding 
substance,  such  as  sponge,  filling  the  space  an,  and  having 
a  layer  of  some  heavy  substance,  such  as  lead  x  «,  laid  upon 
the  top  of  it,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  gradually  compressing  the 
sponge ;  and,  lastly,  let  us  suppose  that,  things  being  thus 
arranged,  the  carriage  moves  slowly  up  the  plane  W  to  tc  by 
the  action  of  the  coimterpoise  ;  and  that  while  this  is  taking 
place,  the  leaden  weight  x  x  has  gradually  compressed  the 
sponge  in«  the  carriage  into  a  smaller  compass  z  z  ;  in  doing 
which,  it  is  evident  that  the  centre  of  gravity  will  describe  a 
curve  instead  of  a  straight  line.  Now  then,  I  will  ask 
whether,  under  these  circumstances,  this  change  of  position 
in  the  load  of  the  little  waggon  will  make  the  waggon  and 
its  contents  weigh  more  at  w  than  at  W,  so  as  to  render  the 
counterpoise  P,  in  this  last  situation,  less  efficient  in  drawing 
the  carriage  up  the  plane  ? 

To  say  there  would  be  any  increase  of  weight  thus  created 
in  the  carriage  W,  and  any  consequent  loss  of  efficiency  in 
the  counterpoise,  would  indeed  be  most  absurd ;  for,  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  evident  that  if  the  sponge  were  wet,  this  sink- 
ing of  the  lead  would  produce  a  decrease  of  weight  in  the 
waggon,  and,  consequently,  an  increase  of  power  in  the 
counterpoise  equivalent  to  the  weight  of  water  squeezed  out. 

My  friend,  therefore,  must  admit  that  I  have  fairly  met  his 
issue,  and  have  shown  that  the  sponge  may  actually  be  com- 
pressed by  the  sinking  of  the  lead  on  the  ascending  side 


OR,    SJEARCH    FOR   S»LF-MOTIVB   POWER.  325 

without  any  increase  of  weight  or  loss  of  power,  as  he  con- 
tends ;  and,  consequently,  that  the  load  constantly  accumu- 
lated by  the  capillary  attraction  on  the  descending  side,  must 
be  a  clear  gain  of  power  adequate  to  produce  a  perpetual 
motion,  whether  the  application  of  this  principle  be  by  a 
series  of  small  detached  parcels,  as  in  Fig.  3,  or  by  a  con- 
tinued band  of  sponge  and  endless  chain  of  weights,  as  in 
Fig.  1,  which  is,  in  effect,  the  same  thing. 

I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  my  friend's  general  objection 
does  not  hold  good  where  only  one  power,  such  as  gravity, 
is  employed ;  for  certainly,  in  that  case,  if  the  sponge 
were  alternately  to  act  as  weight  and  power,  the  loss  of 
any  weight  of  water  squeezed  out  on  the  ascending  side 
would  be  felt  on  the  descending  side  when  the  gravity  of 
the  sponge  was  called  upon  to  act  as  a  counterpoise.  But 
the  objection  will  not  apply  when  two  distinct  powers,  gravity 
and  capillary  attraction,  are  combined,  as  in  the  problem 
before  us ;  for  in  this  case,  at  the  moment  when  the  ineffi- 
ciency of  the  mere  gravity  of  the  sponge  is  felt,  its  capillary 
attraction  acts  spontaneously,  and  restores  the  load  of  water 
on  the  descending  side,  which  is  necessary  to  give  it  due 
efficiency,  as  coimterpoise,  to  sustain  the  motion. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  in  applying  his  general  maxim 
to  my  proposition,  he  extends  it  beyond  the  just  sphere  of 
its  applicability ;  and  it  is  thus  that  we  frequently  deceive 
ourselves  by  the  too  great  extension  of  general  and  meta- 
physical dogmas.  It  is  thus,  I  am  convinced,  that  the  dis- 
covery of  the  very  important  problem  now  before  us  has  been 
so  long  retarded,  by  the  general  persuasion  of  its  impracti- 
cability, which  has,  during  a  period  of  unexampled  progress 
in  mechanical  science,  absolutely  deterred  men  of  mathema- 
tical acquirements  from  bestowing  a  moment's  consideration 
upon  this  now  dishonoured  problem. 

[This  concludes  the  chief  extracts.  The  editor  goes  on  to 
say:—] 

Sir  William  gives  a  more  detailed  representation  on  the 
same  principle  as  the  figure  just  inserted,  for  which  the 
reader  is  referred  to  the  pamphlet  itself.  He  concludes  with 
expressing  his  perfect  conviction  that  he  has  proved  "  the 
existence  of  a  very  considerable  moving  force,  being  the 
150th  part  of  the  whole  weight  to  be  set  in  motion."     "  A 


3*26  PERPETuuM  mobile; 

power,  the  sufficiency  of  which  to  keep  water  in  motion  in  a 
variety  of  ways,  with  a  considerable  excess  to  spare,  will  not 
(he  saysy  be  doubted,  when  it  is  remembered  that  many  of 
the  largest  scale  beams,  with  a  ton  in  each  scale,  may  be 
moved  by  much  less  than  an  ounce  weight."  "  For  my  own 
part  ^he  says),  not  being  able  to  see  any  reason  why  the 
machine  should  not  act,  I  confess  that  my  faith  is  sufficiently 
strong  to  have  induced  me  to  take  out  a  patent,  and  I  am 
determined  to  use  my  best  exertions  to  give  mankind  the 
benefit  of  this  discovery,  should  it  turn  out,  as  I  sincerely 
believe  it  will,  a  source  of  perpetual  power  without  expense." 


Amebican  Review  of  an  Account  of  a  New  Scheme 
of  Perpetual  Motion,  invented  by  Sir  William  Congreve, 
Bart.  From  the  "  Franklin  Journal."  Philadelphia,  vol.  4, 
1827. — In  noticing  this  work,  the  reviewer  makes  the  follow- 
ing introductory  observations : — 

Sir  William  Congreve  is  a  member  of  the  British  Parlia- 
ment, and  claims  to  be  a  man  of  science,  and  an  engineer. 
He  is  the  inventor  of  the  rockets  which  bear  his  name.  He 
was  also  the  contriver  of  a  clock,  which  was  intended  to  look 
like  a  perpetual  motion.  It  kept  a  ball  in  motion,  which 
served  only  to  injure  the  going  of  the  clock.* 

[After  making  extracts,  which  the  foregoing  articles  antici- 
pate, together  with  remarks  thereon,  the  writer  concludes : — ] 

The  proposition  of  the  Baronet  includes  the  idea  of  a 
perpetual  motion,  as  this  term  is  restricted  by  those  who 
have  written  upon  the  subject.  This  has  been  defined  to  be 
— a  motion  which  is  supplied  and  renewed  from  itself, 
without  the  intervention  of  any  external  cause.  The  impos- 
sibility of  constructing  such  a  machine  has  been  repeatedly 
demonstrated ;  as  to  eff*ect  it  would  require  us  to  discover  a 
body  which,  in  one  position,  possesses  less  gravitating  force 
than  in  another ;  or,  in  other  words,  which  is  both  heavier 
and  lighter  than  itself. f 

*  A  clock  of  this  description  is  exhibited  at  the  Museum  in  the  Rotunda 
of  the  Arsenal,  Wrolwich. 

f  This  article  does  not  appear  in  the  *'  Mechanics'  Magazine.'* 


OB,   SEABCH   FOR   SELF-MOTITE   POWER. 


327 


23.  A   Pendulum   Motion. — ^A  correspondent  (vol.  7, 
1827)  describes  the  following  arrangement : — 


A  B  E  F  is  a  frame  connected  by  C  D — a  cross  bar, 
through  which  runs  g^  a  pendulum  hung  on  a  pivot  C.  This 
pendulum  has  two  arms,  one  a  measuring  five  feet,  and  the 
other  h  one  foot  in  length,  connected  so  together  to  form  a 
lever  with  a  long  and  short  arm,  whose  fulcrum  is  c.  This 
pendulum  has  a  weight  of  two  pounds  at  its  end.  K  K  are 
two  short  levers,  having  a  joint  in  them  to  allow  the  pendu- 
lum to  pass  them  one  way,  but  not  the  other,  without  moving 
them,  whose  fulcra  are  d  d,  by  which  they  are  connected  with 
A  B.  From  these  run  cords  /  /  over  mm  mm  pulleys,  which 
cords  are  connected  (for  the  purpose  of  drawing  them  up 
ink)  catches)  with  h  A,  springs  throwing  with  a  power  of 


328  PERPETUUS    MOBILE  ; 

three  pounds.  1 1  are  catches  for  the  springs  when  brought 
back  after  working  their  power,  moving  upwards.  N  is  the 
point  where  the  pendulum  g  will  escape  from  the  lever  K. 

There  are  various  springs,  stops,  &c.,  necessary  to  keep  the 
parts  in  their  proper  positions,  which  are  not  shown,  not  being 
essential  to  the  consideration  of  the  question.  Now,  assutning 
the  pendulum  to  be  brought  into  the  position  shown  in  the 
drawing,  and  the  spring  to  be  let  loose  against  it,  the  pendulum 
would  begin  to  move  with  a  power  equal  to  five  pounds,  which 
I  assume  would  be  sufiicient  to  throw  it  up  to  a  higher  situa- 
tion, on  the  opposite  side,  than  that  from  which  it  set  out ;  but 
in  its  progress  its  short  arm  comes  in  contact  with  K,  to  which 
is  attached  one  spring  A,  which  is  drawn  up  into  the  catch  by 
such  motion  of  the  pendulum.  This  resistance  is  equal  to 
three  pounds,  and  something  more ;  but,  because  the  arm  of 
the  lever  to  which  the  power  is  applied  is  five  times  longer 
than  the  short  arm  at  which  it  meets  with  the  resistance,  it 
requires  but  at  most  one  pound  to  overcome  it ;  by  which  one 
pound  of  the  five  pounds  being  lost,  there  will  remain  four 
pounds,  or  two  pounds  above  the  weight  at  the  end  of  the  pen- 
dulum, to  raise  it  to  as  high  a  situation  as  that  from  which  it 
set  out,  and  which  I  assume  will  be  sufiicient  for  such  purpose. 
Being  raised  to  such  a  situation,  it  will  release  the  spring  H  on 
the  opposite  side,  by  striking  up  the  catch  ;  and  will  perform  a 
similar  motion,  and  be  attended  with  similar  results,  as  the 
first. 


Another  correspondent  makes  the  following  remarks  on 
the  proposed  Pendulum  Motion : — 

The  resistance  opposed  by  the  catch  I  C  (on  the  right-hand 
side  of  the  plate)  to  any  impulse,  is  something  more  than  3  lbs., 
this  resistance  being  occasioned  by  the  force  of  the  spring, 
equal  to  3  lbs.,  the  weight  of  the  catch,  and  its  friction  on  its 
fulcrum. 

The  impulse  is  here  erroneously  imagined  to  be  4  lbs. : 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  not  quite  3  lbs.  Supposing  the  pendulum 
to  fall  from  the  situation  represented  in  the  figure,  it  would 
rise  to  an  equal  height  on  the  opposite  side  if  all  obstacles  were 
removed.     But  though  it  starts  with  a  momentum  equal  to 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


329 


2  lbs.,  yet  that  is  continually  diminishing  in  consequence  of 
friction  and  the  resistance  of  the  air.  The  end  h  coming  in 
contact  with  K,  something  more  than  1  lb.  is  lost,  and  the 
pendulum  continues  its  motion  until,  the  momentum  being 
destroyed,  it  is  stationary  for  a  moment  of  time,  and  then 
returns.  Let  the  point  where  it  is  stationary  be  called  n,  and 
let  the  pendulum  again  start  from  the  situation  in  the  figure, 
with  the  additional  momentum  of  3  lbs.  from  the  spring.     This 

3  lbs.  is  undiminished  until  the  pendulum  arrives  at  n;  it  is 
then  called  into  action,  and  gradually  diminishes  from  the  ob- 
vious causes  above  stated— friction  and  the  resistance  of  the 
air.  Hence  the  momentum  with  which  the  pendulum  strikes 
the  catch  is  something  less  than  3  lbs.,  to  overcome  a  resistance 
something  more  than  3  lbs. 


24.  PerpetitjLL  Motion  by  Magnetism  (vol.  9,  1828). 
—The  inventor  says  : — 

The  object  of  the  present  communication  is  to  lay  before 
your  readers  an  attempt  at  perpetual  motion  by  means  of  mag- 
netism, applied  somewhat  differently  to  any  that  has  yet  been 
published  in  your  Magazine. 


The  above  is  a  wheel  of  light  construction,  moving  on  fnc- 
tion  wheels  in  vacuo  ;  the  rim  is  furnished  with  dips  of  steel, 


330  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

— pieces  of  watch-spring  will  do.  N  N  are  two  magnets, 
which,  attracting  the  rim  of  the  wheel,  will  render  one  side 
lighter  and  the  other  heavier,  causing  it  to  revolve  ad  infinitum  : 
or,  to  render  it  more  powerful,  let  the  steel  rims  be  magnetized, 
and  fixed  on  the  wheel  with  their  north  poles  towards  its  centre. 
Let  two  more  magnets  be  added,  as  shown  by  the  dotted  lines : 
let  these  two,  S  S,  be  placed  with  their  south  poles  nearest  the 
rim  of  the  wheel ;  and  the  other  two,  N  N,  with  their  north 
poles  in  that  position.  Now,  as  similar  poles  repel  and  oppo- 
site poles  attract,  the  wheel  will  be  driven  round  by  attraction 
and  repulsion  acting  conjointly  on  four  points  of  its  circum- 
ference. B  B  are  blocks  of  wood,  to  keep  off  the  attraction 
of  the  magnets  from  that  part  of  the  wheel  which  has  passed 
them. 


25.  Cox's  Pbbpetual  Motion  (vol.  10,  1828) : — 

As  one  of  your  correspondents  mentions  my  having  in  my 
possession  an  engraving  and  description  of  the  perpetual 
motion  clock  which  occupied  a  prominent  place  in  Cox's 
Museimi,  some  fifty  or  sixty  years  ago,  I  beg  leave  to  enclose 
the  same. — I  am,  Sir,  yours,  &c.,  W.  P. 

Chatteris,  Cambridgeshire. 

Descbiption  of  the  Engbaving. — ^On  the  back  of  the 
engraving,  we  are  first  presented  with  what  appears  to  have 
been  an  extract  from  a  descriptive  inventory  of  Cox's  Museum, 
written  in  a  very  showman-like  style,  and  conveying  but  little 
real  information  with  respect  to  the  construction  of  the  piece  of 
mechanism  pretended  to  be  described.  It  is  in  the  following 
terms : — 

"  The  Perpetual  Motion  is  a  mechanical  and  philosophical 
time-piece,  which,  after  great  labour,  numberless  trials,  un- 
wearied attention,  and  immense  expense,  is  at  length  brought  to 
perfection.  From  this  piece,  by  an  union  of  the  mechanic  and 
philosophic  principles,  a  motion  is  obtained  that  will  continue 
for  ever  ;  and  although  the  metals  of  steel  and  brass,  of  which 
it  is  constructed,  must  in  time  decay  (a  fate  to  which  even  *the 
great  globe  itself,  yea,  all  that  it  inherit,'  are  exposed),  still 
the  primary  cause  of  its  motion  being  constant,  and  the  friction 
upon  every  part  extremely  insignificant,  it  will  continue  its 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


331 


action  for  a  longer  duration  than  any  mechanical  performance 
has  ever  before  done. 

*'  This  extraordinary  piece  is  something   above  the  height, 
and  about  the  dimensions,  of  a  common  eight-day  pendulum 


clock  ;  the  case  is  of  mahogany,  in  the  architectural  style,  with 
columns  and  pilasters,  cornices  and  mouldings,  of  brass,  finely 
wrought,  richly  gilt,  and  improved  with  the  most  elegantly 
adapted  ornaments.     It  is  glazed  on  every  side ;  whereby  its 


332  PERPETUFM  mobile; 

construction,  the  mode  of  its  performance,  and  the  masterly 
execution  of  the  workmanship,  may  be  discovered  by  the  in- 
telligent spectator.  The  time-piece  is  affixed  to  the  part  from 
whence  the  power  is  derived;  it  goes  upon  diamonds  ;  or,  to 
speak  more  technically,  is  jewelled  in  every  part  where  its 
friction  could  be  lessened;  nor  will  it  require  any  other  assist- 
ance than  the  common  regulation  necessary  for  any  other  time- 
keeper, to  make  ic  perform  with  the  utmost  exactness.  Besides 
the  hour  and  minute,  there  is  a  second  hand,  always  in  motion; 
and  to  prevent  the  least  idea  of  deception,  as  well  as  to  keep 
out  the  dust,  the  whole  is  enclosed  within  frames  of  glass. 

"N.B. — The  very  existence  of  motion  in  the  time-piece  is 
originated,  continued,  and  perfected,  from  the  philosophical 
principle  by  which  alone  it  acts." 

Following  this,  there  is  an  address  "  To  the  Public,"  from 
another  pen  (apparently),  which  seems  to  ha7e  been  intended  to 
throw  some  light  on  ^Mhe  philosophical  principle''  so  mys- 
teriously iipoken  of  by  Mr.  Cox  ;  but  leaves  it  in  as  much 
obscurity  as  before.  The  following  is  the  only  part  of  it  that 
need  be  quoted  : — 

"  The  constant  revolution  of  wheels,  moving  in  vertical, 
horizontal,  and  other  directions,  is  not  only  physically  produced, 
but  the  indication  of  time  from  an  union  of  the  philosophic  with 
the  mechanic  principles  is  effected.  Upon  the  dial,  besides  a 
minute  and  an  hour  hand,  is  another  hand,  dividing  the  minute 
into  sixty  equal  parts.  These  hands  are  motionless  till  affixed 
to  the  primary  motion  ;  so  that  the  motion  of  the  time-piece  (as 
Mr.  Cox  expresses  it)  is  originated,  continued,  and  perfected, 
by  the  philosophic  principle  through  which  it  is  solely  actuated." 

The  secret  is,  however,  at  last  divulged,  in  the  subjoined 
certificate  from  the  celebrated  philosopher,  James  Ferguson  :-^ 

'*  I  have  seen  and  examined  the  above-described  clock,  which 
is  kept  constantly  going  by  the  rising  and  falling  of  the  quick- 
silver in  a  most  extraordinary  barometer;  and  there  is  no 
danger  of  its  ever  failing  to  go;  for  there  is  always  such  a 
quantity  of  moving  power  accumulated,  as  would  keep  the 
clock  going  for  a  year,  even  if  the  barometer  should  be  taken 
quite  away  from  it.  And  indeed,  on  examining  the  whole 
contrivance  and  construction,  I  must  with  truth  say  that  it  is 
the  most  ingenious  piece  of  mechanism  I  ever  saw  in  my  life. — 
James  Ferguson,  Bolt- court,  Fleet-street,  Jan.  28,  1774." 


OR,    SEABCH   rOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  335 

Cox's  Perpetual  Motion  (vol.  11,  1829).— The  fol- 
lowing is  given  as  a  description  of  the  internal  mechanism 
of  the  perpetual  motion  clock ;  collected  "  from  a  very  large 
engraving,"  inscribed  '"to  the  King's  most  Excellent  Majesty,' 
by  Mr.  James  Cox ;  and  a  letter-press  description  written  by 
the  philosopher,  James  Ferguson,  published  some  years  since 
(but  without  a  date)  :" — 

This  clock  was  kept  in  constant  motion  by  the  rise  and 
fall  of  a  considerable  weight  of  quicksilver.  The  manner  in 
which  this  motion  was  made  subservient  to  the  purpose  of 
dividing  time  will,  I  hope,  be  rendered  intelligible  by  refer- 
ence to  the  accompanying  drawings. 

Fig.  1  is  a  front  view  of  the  machine.  A  a  and  B  h  are 
two  strong  pieces  of  metal,  curved  on  the  under  side,  like  the 
foot  of  a  rocking  cradle,  to  which  their  motion  on  the  sup- 
porting plate  C  C  is  similar;  they  are  therefore  distinguished 
by  the  name  of  cradles.  To  the  end  of  the  cradle  A  is  hung  a 
rod  D  G?,  and  to  the  opposite  end  of  the  other  cradle  h  is  hung 
the  other  rod  E  e.  By  the  lower  end  of  these  two  rods  (which 
are  of  equal  length),  at  d  and  *,  the  frame  F  F  F  F  hangs, 
with  the  gimbol/and  its  upright  bar  G.  To  the  middle  of  the 
lower  part  of  this  frame  is  hung  the  large  glass  ball  or  bulb  of 
a  barometer  H ;  the  tube  of  which,  I,  goes  down  into  the 
quicksilver  in  the  glass  cistern  K.  This  cistern  is  supported 
by  two  rods  L  L,  whose  ends  hang  from  the  contrary  ends  of 
the  cradles  A  a  and  B  5;  the  right-hand  rod  from  the  end  a  of 
the  cradle  A  a,  and  the  left-hand  rod  from  the  end  B  of  the 
cradle  B  5.  A  very  small  degree  of  attention  to  this  con- 
nexion will  show  that  if  the  bulb  H  be  pulled  down  it  must 
draw  up  the  cistern  K,  and  if  the  cistern  be  pulled  down  it 
will  draw  up  the  bulb;  for,  as  either  end  of  the  cradle  goes 
down,  the  other  end  must  rise.  The  cistern  being  open  at 
top,  the  atmosphere  exerts  a  varying  pressure  on  the  surface  of 
the  quicksilver;  and  when  heavy,  forces  the  greater  part  of  it 
up  the  tube  I  into  the  bulb  H:  this  makes  the  bulb  heavy  and 
the  cistern  light;  the  bulb,  therefore,  descends,  and  draws  up 
the  cistern.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  air  becomes  light,  its 
pressure  is  so  much  the  less  on  the  surface  of  the  quicksilver  in 
the  cistern;  and  being  then  unable  lo  support  the  lengthened 
column  of  quicksilver  in  the  bulb,  part  of  it  descends  into  the 


336 


PEBFETWM   mobile; 


cistern,  which,  becoming  thus  heavier  than  the  bulb,  descends 
and  draws  it  up.  And  thus,  when  the  air  is  heavy  the  bulb 
descends,  and  ascends  when  the  air  is  light,  through  more  than 
double  the  space  that  the  mercury  rises  and  falls  in  a  common 
barometer.     The  frame  F  F  F  F  and  its  upright  G  being  con- 

{Fig,  2.) 


nected  with  the  bulb,  rise  and  fall  with  it.  To  this  upright 
bar  G  is  attached  the  wind-up  frame  M, — which  is  shown  on  a 
larger  scale  in  Fig.  2.     In  this  frame  are  two  thin  metal  plates 


OB,  SEABCH    FOR   SBLF-MOTITB   POWEfi.  83? 

m  and  n,  toothed  like  the  blades  of  saws,  one  set  of  teeth  m 
pointing  downwards,  and  the  other  set  n  pointing  upwards. 
When  the  frame  falls,  the  teeth  of  the  saw  m,  by  means  of  a 
sliding  movement,  engage  the  teeth  of  the  wheel  N,  and  turn  it 
round  in  the  direction  shown  by  the  arrow ;  when  the  frame 
rises,  the  saw  m  is  disengaged  by  the  sliding  movement,  and 
the  saw  n  is  brought  into  connexion  with  the  wheel  N,  which 
it  turns  round  in  the  same  direction  as  before;  so  that  whether 
the  frame  ascends  or  descends^  it  is  eoniinually  turning  the 
wheel  N  in  the  same  direction.  This  frame  moves  between 
four  friction  wheels,  which  retain  it  in  an  upright  position.  O 
is  a  catch  which  falls  into  the  teeth  of  the  wheel,  to  keep  it 
from  being  turned  in  the  contrary  direction,  by  any  accident, 
during  the  short  intervals  of  time  between  one  of  the  saws 
leaving  the  wheel  and  the  other  taking  into  it.  On  the  back  of 
the  wheel  N  is  a  pulley^  with  sharp-pointed  pins  fixed  in  the 
bottom  of  its  groove,  for  laying  hold  of  the  endless  chain  1,  2. 
Above  this  is  just  such  another  pulley>  over  which  the  chain 
also  goes,  3,  4.  This  last  pulley  is  fixed  on  the  axis  to  the 
great  wheel  (R,  Fig.  1)  of  the  clock  movement,  by  which  the 
whole  of  the  clock-work  is  put  in  motion. 

Returning  to  Fig.  1 : — The  endless  chain  just  described 
passes  over  the  four  upper  pulleys  U  U  U  U,  which  are  fixed, 
and  under  the  two  lower  ones  S  and  S,  which  rise  and  fall 
with  the  heavy  weight  T  on  one  side,  and  the  lighter  counter- 
poise t  on  the  other  side,  which  hang  from  the  pulley  frames. 
The  weights  consisted  of  two  boxes  made  of  thin  brass  plate ; 
but  T  was  filled  with  lead,  while  t  w^as  quite  empty  The 
weight  T  acts  with  half  its  force  of  gravity  upon  the  part  6,  6, 
of  the  endless  chain,  and  with  the  other  half  upon  the  part  7,  8. 
By  pulling  the  former  part,  it  turns  round  the  great  wheel  R 
as  fast  as  the  motion  of  the  balance  of  the  clock  will  permit 
that  wheel  to  move.  It  will  be  seen  that  if  this  motion 
continued  for  a  short  time,  the  weight  T  would  go  dovyn  to  the 
bottom,  and  then  the  clock  would  stop.  But  the  train  of  the 
movement  is  such,  that  the  weight  would  keep  the  clock  going 
a  whole  year,  before  it  would  descend  quite  to  the  bottom  of 
the  machine.  By  the  above-mentioned  contrivance  of  the  wind- 
up  frame  M,  which,  as  it  moves  up  and  down,  turns  the  wheel 
N  round  (in  a  direction  contrary  to  that  in  which  the  pulley 
and  wheel  R  is  moving),  and  draws  up  the  chain  in  the  direc- 


PERPETUUM    mobile; 

tioQ  7i  8,  while  the  weight  T  is  pulling  down  the  part  5,  6,  the 
weight  is  prevented  from  ever  going  down  to  the  bottom,  and 
a  perpetual  motion  is  produced  in  the  clock,  by  the  alternating 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere  on  the  barometer  H  I  K.  The 
weight  of  quicksilver  employed  was  about  one  hundred  and  fifty 
pounds. 

The  only  inconvenience  that  Mr.  Cox  found  in  all  this 
machinery  was,  that  the  changes  of  the  air  affected  the  baro- 
meter so  much  as  to  draw  up  the  vreight  through  more  space 
than  the  clock  movement  would  allow  it  to  descend ;  which 
tended  to  overwind  the  clock  and  break  the  chain.  To 
remedy  this.  Mr.  Cox  made  the  wind-up  wheel  to  turn  loose  on 
the  arbor,  whenever  a  click  was  discharged  from  its  ratchet 
wheel.  And  although  the  action  of  the  wind-up  frame,  &c., 
would  continue,  they  would  have  no  effect  upon  the  chain 
pulley  and  arbor,  which  would  remrjn  at  rest  till  such  time  as 
the  weight  T  had  again  descended,  and  permitted  the  click  to 
regain  its  hold  of  the  ratchet  wheel.  I  may  observe,  that  the 
discharge  of  the  click,  in  the  first  place,  was  effected  by  the 
rising  of  the  weight  T  ;  for  when  the  top  x  of  the  pulley  frame 
S  reached  the  rod  X,  it  raised  it,  and,  by  means  of  the  levers, 
disengaged  the  click.  To  counterbalance  the  weight  of  the 
wind-up  frame  M,  one  end  of  a  short  chain  is  fixed  to  the  back 
of  it ;  and  after  the  chain  is  put  over  the  pulley  Y,  at  the  top  of 
the  machine,  a  weight  is  hung  on  the  end  of  the  chain.  It 
may  be  observed  that  as  the  weight  T  has  four  feet  to  descend 
from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  its  power  upon  the  time-piece  must 
be  as  much  lighter  when  at  top,  or  heavier  when  at  bottom,  as 
double  the  difference  of  the  weight  of  so  much  chain  ;  which 
would  cause  an  irregularity  in  the  e:oing  of  the  clock,  as  it  has 
a  balance  and  not  a  long  pendulum.  To  avoid  this  incon- 
venience, the  weight  T  was  made  to  wind  up  a  smaller  weight 
every  twelve  hours,  by  means  of  a  remontoir  ;  and  this  smaller 
weight  acting  upon  the  time-piece,  kept  it  in  motion.  As  it  is 
the  perpetual  motion  part  which  I  wished  to  explain,  I  have 
omitted  the  clock  movements,  which  are  of  the  common  descrip- 
tion— the  balance  spoken  of  consisting  of  a  lever,  supported 
by  an  axis  in  its  centre,  and  loaded  at  each  end  with  a  weight. 
— W.  B. 


OB,   SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTITB   POWER. 


339 


26.  Perpetual  Motion  by  Magnetism  (vol.  10, 1828). — 
Alluding  to  a  former  scheme  of  his  for  applying  magnetism, 
the  inventor  submits  the  following  : — 


Let  A  A,  in  the  prefixed  engraving,  represent  two  magnets 
revolving  on  axes.  Let  B  represent  a  larger  magnet,  hanging 
on  an  axis,  pendulum  fashion,  between  the  two  former.  As 
the  poles  of  the  two  smaller  magnets  lie  in  the  same  direction, 
the  eiSect  will  be  to  draw  the  larger  magnet  towards  that  on 
the  left  hand,  while  it  is  at  the  same  lime  repelled  by  that  on 
the  right ;  but  while  this  is  going  on,  the  upper  end  of  the 
large  magnet  raises,  by  means  of  a  guide  wire,  the  tumbler  D, 
which,  just  before  the  magnets  come  in  contact,  passes  the  per- 
pendicular, and  falls  over,  carrying  with  it  the  lever  connected 
with  the  two  wheels  C  C,  and  causing  them  to  perform  a  quarter 
revolution  ;  these  wheels  are  connected  by  lines  with  two  small 

z 


340 


PEBPKTUUII   MOBII.B; 


wheels  fixed  on  the  axles  of  the  two  ma^rnets  A  A.  While 
the  former  make  a  quarter  revelation,  the  latter  tnni  half 
round ;  consequently,  the  position  of  the  ma^ets  is  reversed, 
and  the  same  motions  are  then  performed  by  the  pendufilrii 
magnet  being  attracted  and  repel  Id  in  the  opposite  direction ; 
and  jnst  before  the  magnets  touch  each  other,  the  arrangemeol 
is  again  instantly  reveraed. 


27.  A  PEBPETiTALLT-Fi.ownro  Stphojt  (voL  10, 1828)  is 
described  by  reference  to  the  annexed  sectional  figoie : — 


OR,   SEABCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


341 


a  is  a  circular  glass  vessel,  1  foot  6  inches  diameter ;  h  by 
a  tube  fixed  thereunto :  c  c  are  funnels  containing  valves ; 
dy  a  float  of  hollow  copper,  or  any  light  substance ;  c,  an  open 
mouth ;  /,  an  open  vessel  filled  with  mercury  as  high  as  the 
dotted  line. 

It  is  well  known  that  several  experiments  were  made  by 
M.  Venturi,  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  &c.,  demonstrating  that  a 
vessel  shaped  thus — 


\( 


will  emit  water-  with  a  much  greater  rapidity  than  a  vessel 
shaped  thus — 


say,  with  more  than  a  third  as  much  more  speed.  I  propose, 
then,  to  have  the  mouth  of  the  vessel  a  of  the  former  shape, 
being  the  natural  form  of  flowing  water.  The  vessel  a,  and 
tube  hy  must  be  completely  filled  with  mercury,  by  means  of  the 
funnels  c  c,  which  will  also  contain  mercury.  In  order  to  set 
the  fluid  in  motion,  the  valve  in  the  large  vessel  c  is  to  be 
raised ;  the  mercury  (which  was  hitherto  held  up  by  a  greater 
weight  of  atmosphere)  will  instantly  run  out  of  the  mouth  ^, 
and  must  be  suffered  to  do  so  till  the  mercury  in  c  is  level 
with  the  dotted  line  :  by  this  time  the  mercury  in  a  will  have 
obtained  a  momentum  *  which  will  be  more  than  equivalent 

•  **  Water  not  only  gravitates  with  the  vessel  that  contains  it,  but  inde- 
pendently of  it;  and  thus,  if  the  containing  vessel  is  supposed  stationary, 
and  a  hole  is  bored  in  its  bottom,  the  contained  water  will  flow  out  and 
descend  through  tbe  air  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  lower  situation  than 
it  before  occupied ;  and  in  so  flowing  out,  those  particles  of  fluid  which 
were  over,  or  in  immediate  contact  with,  the  hole,  will  be  discharged  first,** 
&c. — "  Library  of  Useful  Knowledge." 


342 


PBRPETUUM   mobile; 


to  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere ;  consequently,  the  mercury 
will  run  out  of  the  large  vessel  a,  till  it  falls  as  low  as  the 
dotted  line ;  the  float  d,  resting  on  the  mercury,  of  course 
falls  with  it,  opens  the  valve,  and  admits  a  proportionable 
quantity  of  mercury  through  the  tube  5,  driven  by  the  pressure 
of  the  atmosphere  (the  height  from  the  mercury  in/,  to  the 
top  of  the  tube  b,  being  only  26  inches ;  which  is  2  inches 
less  than  what  the  atmosphere  will  at  all  times  raise  mercury 
in  a  vacuum). 

By  this  means  will  there  not  be  a  continual  circulation  of 
mercury  ? 


28.  New  Mechanical  Motion  (vol.  11, 1829). — A  corre- 
spondent says : — 

To  the  curious  who  delight  in  mechanical  intricacies,  to 
whom  ingenuity  of  contrivance  is  the  goal  for  which  they 
run,  nothing  seems  to  afford  and  require  such  endless  resources 
as  that  most  puzzling  thing — perpetual  motion.  The  unfor- 
tunate name  "  perpetual  motion,"  if  changed  for  "mechanical 
experiment,"  would  eventually,  perhaps,  remove  the  real 
cause  of  censuring  it,  by  the  different  idea  of  the  object 
aimed  at. 


I  now  beg  leave  to  offer  some  account  of  a  combination  of 
movements,   which,   from  its   originality,   and    seeming    to 


on,    8EABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  343 

possess  every  requisite  for  retaining  it  in  action,  may  possibly 
be  acceptable.  • 

This  diagram  shows  a  side  view.  On  the  stand  A  are 
raised  two  supports  B,  each  having  a  centre  hole  at  a,  to 
receive  the  axle  of  the  balanced  apparatus,  consisting  of  C, 
a  glass  tube  containing  a  portion  of  mercury  G ;  and  D,  a 
grooved  scaleboard,  in  which  a  ball,  E,  can  roll  backwards 
and  forwards.  F  F  are  two  jointed  levers,  which  are  to 
serve,  when  struck  by  the  ball,  to  reverse  the  position  of  the 
compound  balance :  the  whole  centred  at  a,  the  tube  at  h, 
and  the  grooved  board  at  c.  In  its  present  position,  the 
mercury  (it  is  supposed),  having  flowed  to  the  end  C,  will 
depress  D,  and  cause  the  ball  E  to  roll  to  D,  and  depress  the 
end  G  F  D ;  and  so  on  continually. 


29.  Self-moving  Railway  Cabbiage  (vol.  12,  1829). 
— ^A  correspondent  writes : — 

In  treating  of  perpetual  motion—-"  that  grand  secret  for 
the  tiiscovery  of  which  those  dictators  of  phSlosophy,  Demo- 
critus,  Pythagoras,  Plato,  did  travel  unto  the  Gymnosophists 
and  Indian  priests  " — ^it  would  add  considerable  interest  to 
give  some  account  of  its  early  history.  Regarding  the  falli- 
bility of  every  contrivance  hitherto  planned  or  experimented 
upon,  we  may  gather  sufficient  from  the  writings  of  Bishop 
Wilkins  alon6.  The  "  little  world "  of  Paracelsus  and  his 
followers — ^the  planetarium  invented  by  Cornelius  Dreble,  for 
Kin^.  James — the  "  magnetical  globe  or  Terella,"  suggested 
by  Pet.  Peregrinus,  with  the  vheel  that  he,  Taisner,  and 
Cardan  thought  might  be  kept  in  motion  by  "  pieces  of  steel 
and  loadstones" — are,  like  the  Bishop's  own  wheel  and 
plummets,  and  his  application  of  Archimedes*  screw,  inade- 
quate to  the  grand  end  for  which  they  were  designed. 

Without  enlarging  on  this  head,  we  shall  proceed  with  the 
description  of  a  machine  which,  were  it  possible  to  make  its 
parts  hold  together  unimpaired  by  rotation  or  the  ravages  of 
time,  and  to  give  it  a  path  encircling  the  earth,  would 
assuredly  continue  to  roll  along  in  one  imdeviating  course 
till  time  shall  be  no  more. 

A  series  of  inclined  planes  are  to  be  erected  in  such  a 
manner  that  a  cone  will  ascend  one  (its  sides  forming  an  acute 


344 


FEKFETUUM    MOBILE; 


angle),  and,  being  raised  to  the  summit,  descend  on  the 
next  (ha^'ing  •parallel  sides),  at  the  foot  of  which  it  must 
rise  on  a  third  and  fall  on  a  fourth,  and  so  continue  to  do 
alternately  throughout. 


The  diagram  is  the  section  of  a  carriage  A,  with  broad 
conical  wheels  a  a,  resting  on  the  inclined  plane  b.  The 
entrance  to  the  carriage  is  from  above,  and  there  are  ample 
accommodations  for  goods  and  passengers.  The  most  singular 
property  of  this  contrivance  is,  that  its  speed  increases  the 
more  it  is  laden ;  and  when  checked  on  any  part  of  the  road, 
it  will,  when  the  cause  of  stoppage  is  removed,  proceed  on 
its  journey  by  mere  power  of  gravity.  Its  path  may  be  a 
circular  road  formed  of  the  inclined  planes.  But  to  avoid  a 
circuitous  route,  a  double  road  ought  to  be  made.  The 
carriage  not  having  a  retrograde  motion  on  the  inclined 
planes,  a  road  to  set  out  upon,  and  another  to  return  by,  are 
indispensable. 

I  am  indebted  to  a  much-respected  friend  for. the  hint  of 
this  means  of  effecting  a  veritable  perpetual  motion. 


30.    An   Exercise   eor  Perpetual  Motion   Seekebs 
(vol.  13,  1830).— The  inventor  says  :— 

Let  us  suppose  an  apparatus  to  be  constructed   of  the 
description  represented  in  the  annexed  engraving:   a  is  a 


OR,    SEABCH   POn   SELP-MCMflVE   POWER. 


m 


wat6r  cistern,  whence  water  is  to  be  rjdsed  by  the  pump  b^ 
to  supply  the  cistern ;  c  d  is  a  small  pipe  with  a  stop-cock  at 
e,  which  lets  the  water  from  cistern  o  into  a  strong  water- 
tight bellows  /.  The  bellows  have  no  valve,  but  a  cock  g  to 
let  out  the  water  into  cistern  a;  A  is  a  weight,  and  i  a  rack 
on  the  top  of  the  bellows  which  works  in  the  cogs  on  the  axle 
of  the  large  cog-wheel  y,*  j  turns  the  little  cog-wheel  k,  that 
gives  motion  to  the  ^rm  /,  and  works  the  pump-handle  m  / 


n  is  an  upright  rod  on  the  end  of  the  lever  o,  which  rod  has 
a  turn  at  p  and  q  for  the  top  of  the  bellows  to  press  against 
in  ascending  and  descending.  The  water  being  let  into  the 
bellows  from  the  pipe  c?,  will  cause  the  top  of  the  bellows, 


FERPETinrM  mobile; 

with  the  weight  and  rack,  to  ascend  till  the  former  reacheff 
and  presses  /?,  which  will  move  the  lever  o  and  the  arm  or 
rod  r ;  by  which  means  the  stop-cock  e  of  the  pipe  will  be 
shut,  and  the  cock  g  opened,  and  the  water  let  in  from  the 
bellows  into  the  cistern  a.  The  top  of  the  bellows  will  now 
descend  till  it  comes  down  and  presses  the  turn  9,  which  will 
again  shut  the  cock  g  and  open  «,  on  which  the  water  will 
afjain  flow  from  the  pipe  into  the  bellows,  and  cause  the  top 
with  the  rack  to  ascend. 

Now  it  is  generally  known  that  the  power  of  an  hydrostatic 
bellows  is  thus  calculated : — 

As  the  area  of  the  orifice  or  section  of  the  pipe, 

To  the  area  of  the  bellows : 

The  weight  of  water  in  the  pipe  is. 

To  the  weight  the  bellows  will  sustain  on  the  top-board. 

We  will  suppose,  therefore,  the  pipe  d  to  be  10  feet  high^ 
with  a  bore  equal  to  1  square  inch,  which  wo'.dd  give  120 
cubic  inches,  and  about  4i  lbs.  of  water.  Let  us  suppose, 
also,  the  boards  of  the  bellows  to  be  20  inches  square,  which 
gives  400  square  inches.  When  the  water  is  let  from  the 
pipe  into  the  bellows,  there  will  be  a  pressure  of  4^  lbs.  on 
every  square  inch,  which  on  the  whole  will  amount  to  1700 
lbs.  Now  take  half  of  this  force  and  place  it  on  the  top  of 
the  bellows ;  there  will  then  be  a  working  power  of  8'60  lbs. 
up  and  down,  and  allowing  the  bellows  to  raise  one  foot,  it 
will  contain  about  20  gallons  of  water.  Now  the  question  is, 
-will  not  the  machinery,  with  a  moving  power  of  2  feet  and 
850  lbs.,  raise  20  gallons  of  water  10  feet,  which  would,  of 
course,  cause  the  motion  to  be  perpetual  ? — John  Sims» 

Pwllheli,  North  Wales,  Dec.  II,  1829. 


Remarks  on  foregoing  Scheme  (vol.  13,  1830). — ^A 
correspondent  says : — 

Had  Mr.  Sims  gained  the  power  exerted  by  the  descending 
weight  on  his  bellows,  he  would  have  been  fortunate  indeed ; 
but  it  unfortunately  happens  that  its  returning  power  (or  an 
equivalent)  was  expended  in  raising  it. 

With  respect  to  his  question,  whether  a  circulation  of 
water  wculd  be  kept  up  by  the  arrangement,  I  answer,  no  ; 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTITE   POWER.  347 

as  the  velocities  will  be  in  the  inverse  ratios  to  the  forces, 
and  the  descending  column  of  120  inches  must  expend  itself 
forty  times  to  raise  the  ascending  one  to  the  height  of  twelve 
inches,  as  proposed  : — 

10  ft.  or  120  in.  X  by  40  =  4800,  lifting  force  or  power. 
400  in.  X  12  :rt  4800,  opposing  force,  resistance,  or  weight. 

Here  is  an  equilibrium,  and  nothing  gained  to  overcome 
friction  or  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere  on  the  piston  of  the 
pump.  Were  it  possible  to  annihilate  both  friction  and  at- 
mospheric Weight,  even  then,  unless  the  power  exceed  the 
weight,  the  power  would  not  be  a  moving  one. 


31.  The  Marquis  op  Worcester's  Scheme  op  Per- 
petual Motion  (vol.  13,  1830). — ^A  correspondent,  alluding 
to  the  construction  of  the  Marquis  of  Worcester's  invention, 
No.  56,  says  :-^ 

The  pretensions  of  the  Marquis  in  his  description  of  this 
wonderful  piece  of  ingenuity  may  be  very  simply  eflfected; 
that  is,  they  may  fall  out  to  the  distance  of  1  foot  in  passing 
the  vertex  of  a  wheel  of  7  feet  radius,  or,  as  he  has  it,  14 
feet  over ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  they  would  fall  in  passing 
the  vertical  diameter  at  the  bottom,  or,  as  he  has  it,  on  the 
lower  side  move  a  foot  nearer.  I  shall  give  what  I  consider 
to  come  as  near  to  the  Marquis's  plan  as  the  words  of  his 
description  can  suggest  to  one  who  has  travelled  much 
farther  than  him  in  this  mazy  road.  I  have  no  doubt  but  the 
following  drawing  exhibits  the  principle  of  the  Marquis's 
wheel.  It  will  be  observed  that  he  particularly  mentions  the 
weights  shifting  their  position  in  passing  the  diameter  line 
of  the  upper  and  lower  sides,  meaning,  as  I  have  taken  it, 
the  vertical  diameter  (though  the  shifting  may  be  made  to  take 
place  in  any  part  of  the  circumference  on  the  opposite  sides) ; 
but  this  circumstance  most  probably  induced  him  to  overlook 
that,  though  the  horizontal  distance  was  greater  in  the  upper 
descending  quadrant  than  in  the  lower  ascending  one,  or 
opposite  end  of  the  respective  diameters,  still  the  reverse 
takes  place  in  the  remaining  half  of  the  wheel,  and  when 


348 


FERFETUUM    MOBII.E  ; 


each  weight  has  taken  its  new  position  at  the  shifting  point, 
equilibrium  is  preserved. 

I  beg  leave  to  add  that  it  is  not  by  such  crude  notions  as 
this,  or  any  other  I  have  seen  published  as  expositions  in 
support  of  the  prejudices  entertained  against  this  subject, 
that  the  question  can  be  decided ;  I  believe  there  are  prin- 
ciples,  could  they  be  brought  into  action,  which  would  effect 
the  desired  purpose,  and  the  difficulty  is  mostly  in  the  prac- 
tical application. 


Explanation  op  the  Engeaving. — ^The  diameter  of 
the  Marquis's  wheel  is  14  feet,  and  its  circumference  44,  very 
nearly,  which,  divided  into  40  portions  of  1  foot  each,  for  the 
weights  to  move  in,  leaves  4  feet,  or  48  inches,  for  the 
intervals  of  space  to  stay  the  weights,  and  allows  of  iron  pins 
of  about  1^  in.  in  diameter,  as  represented ;  the  rest  of  the 
figure  needs  little  explanation.  The  mode  of  attaching  the 
weights  may  vary ;  but  as  the  Marquis's  words  are,  "  they 
himg,"  I  have  represented  them  as  so  doing  in  the  grooves 
of  the  wheel  on  a  pulley,  running  on  the  two  rims  of  iron 
composing  the  circumference  thereof;  and  if  the  weights  are 
divided  in  two  parts,  one  half  being  on  each  side  the  wheel, 
the  lateral  pressure  thereon  will  be  prevented.  The  only 
motion  that  would  take  place  on  this  plan  would  be  a  vibra- 


OR,    SEABCH   FOB   8ELF-M0TITE   POWEB. 


349 


tion  to  the  extent  of  about  10  degrees  of  a  circle,  on  the 
wheel  being  slightly  agitated  either  by  design  or  accident, 
unless  a  moTing  force  were  applied  in  either  direction 
sufficient  to  cause  it  to  revolve  on  its  axis.  It  is  probable 
the  Marquis  designed  that  the  space  the  Weights  moved 
through  should  be  chords  of  the  arc,  or  a  direct  line,  and  not 
portions  of  the  circumference  ;  still  this  alters  not  the  case. 


32.  Pebpetttal  Wateb- wheels  and  Pumps  (tol.  14, 
1831). — ^A  correspondent  gives  a  description  of  a  plan 
which  he  says  he  believes  to  be  entirely  original,  and  not 
without  considerable  claims  to  plausibility,  thus  :-^ 


Let  a  h  c  d  represent  a  wooden  cistern,  or  trough,  half 
filled  with  water ;  E  F  G,  three  overshot  water-wheels,  sup- 
ported by  the  upright  piece;    H  K  is  another  cistern,  or 


350  PEBPETUUM    XOBII.E; 

trough,  filled  with  water  up  to  the  dotted  lines;  P  is  a 
syphon  to  convey  water  from  the  lower  to  the  upper  cistern 
K  ;  R  is  a  beam  supported  from  the  cistern ;  S  T  U  are 
moveable  cranks  attached  to  the  horizontal  shafts  through 
the  centre  of  the  water-wheels, — each  crank  has  a  connecting- 
rod  to  the  beam  R ;  V  W  are  two  curved  spouts  to  convey 
water  from  one  wheel  to  another.  It  may  be  well  here  to 
premise  that  each  water-wheel  has  a  pump  and  beam,  as  only 
one  is  seen  in  the  section. 

Now,  in  order  to  put  the  machine  in  motion,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  draw  a  portion  of  water  from  the  syphon  over 
the  wheel  E,  which  immediately  revolves,  consequently  the 
pump  L  M  draws  water  from  the  lower  to  the  upiper  cistern 
K.  Now,  the  water  passing  over  the  wheel  £,  is  collected 
bjr  means  of  the  curved  spout  V,  and  is  conveyed  upon  the 
Iniddle  wheel  F,  which  also  gives  motion  to  another  pump, 
and  draws  water  in  'like  manner.  Again,  the  water  passing 
Over  the  middle  wheel,  is  collected  as  before  by  another 
curved  spout  W ;  consequently,  the  lower  wheel  is  put  in 
action,  accompanied  with  another  pump.  Hence  it  is  obvious 
that  three  water-wheels  and  three  pumps  are  worked  by  one 
stream  of  water  from  the  syphon.  What  more  is  required  to 
perpetuate  its  motion  ? 

John  Linlet. 

Wicker  Sheffield,  May  28,  1830. 


33.  Wheel  and  Weights. — ^A  correspondent  (vol.  14, 
i831)  writes  :— 

The  description  of  the  design  for  a  perpetual  motion  in- 
vented by  the  Marquis  of  Worcester,  described  in  one  of  the 
recent  numbers  of  your  Magazine,  has  recalled  to  my  mind 
an  attempt  of  a  similar  kind  which  occurred  to  me  some  time 
ago,  and  which  I  have  had  by  me  ever  since.  It  may  cause 
some  amusement  amongst  your  readers,  and  may  call  forth 
the  exertion  of  some  ingenuity  to  discover  the  mistake  imder 
which  I  am  labouring  in  supposing  it  to  be  perpetual. 

Descbiption. — ^A  A  A  is  a  ring  of  thin  wood  ;  B  B  B, 
Several  spokes,  moveable  round  the  fixed  points  C  C  C,  and 
only  allowed  to  move  one  way  by  the  construction  of  the 
openings  D  D  D ;  £  E  E,  heavy  weights  fixed  to  the  ends  of 
the  spokes. 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTITK   POWER. 


351 


Froin  the  position  in  which  the  wheel  is  at  present,  it  is 
evident  that  the  weights  on  the  right-hand  side  (1  and  2) 
acting  at  a   greater   distance   from   the   centre   than  thosp 


(4  and  5)  on  the  other  side,  will  cause  that  side  to  descend 
until  the  spoke  1  reaches  the  position  3,  when  it  will  exert 
no  moving  influence,  but  by  which  time  the  weight  8  will 
have  fallen  into  the  position  1,  when  a  similar  effect  will 
take  place,  and  so  on  with  the  rest. 


34.  Self-acting  Pump. 

Observing  that  persons  no  less  distinguished  than  Bishop 
Wilkins,  the  Marquis  of  Worcester,  &c.,  have  amused  them- 


302  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

selves  with  such  things  as  perpetual  motion,  it  may  be  some 
apology  for  a  humble  individual  residing  as  I  do  in  a  very 
retired  part  of  the  country— ^scarcely  within  reach  of  much 
society — ^to  confess  that,  by  way  of  a  little  rational  amusement 
and  relief  to  the  mind,  I  have  at  times,  amid  a  variety  of  other 
investigations  and  inventions,  amused  myself,  amongst  the 
rest,  with  this  of  perpetual  motion.  The  result  I  will,  with 
your  permission,  lay  before  your  readers.  That  I  trespass  • 
upon  your  pages,  you  are  indebted  to  your  correspondent, 
Mr.  Linley,  whose  invention,  p.  104,  vol.  14, 1  thought  might 
partially  lead  to  an  anticipation  of  one  of  my  own,  a  model  of 
which  I  constructed  a  short  time  ago.  The  system  which 
first  came  to  my  mind,  as  likely  to  lead  to  the  accomplishment 
of  perpetual  motion,  was  that  of  the  syphon ;  experimenting 
with  which,  opened  discoveries  that  might  prove  useful  in 
hydrostatics.  Amongst  these  was  a  mode  of  equalizing  the 
horizontal  surface  of  the  water  in  two  separate  vessels  of 
different  altitudes.  The  following  sketch  will  afford  an  idea 
of  my  invention. 

Let  A  be  a  vessel,  having  two  orifices,  one  at  the  bottom  of 
it,  a,  and  the  other  open  at  the  top  for  waste  water,  b,  filled 
to  the  brim.  B,  a  reservoir,  so  far  filled  with  water  as  not  to 
come  in  contact  with  the  bottom  of  the  great  wheel  C,  whose 
axle  turns  in  the  wood  r,  attached  to  the  side  of  the  reservoir ; 
d,  a  crank  fixed  to  the  axle  of  the  great  water-wheel,  which 
turning  moves  up  and  down  the  rod  «,  attached  to  the  beam 
E,  which  works  the  pump  D,  having  its  cylinder  inserted  in 
the  reservoir  B  ;  /,  an  upright  attached  to  the  upper  vessel 
A,  to  form  a  support  for  the  beam  E ;  the  whole,  together 
with  the  cylinder  of  the  pump,  being  supported  and  tied 
together  by  the  wood- work  g  ff  ff* 

To  produce  the  motion,  draw  the  plug  from  the  orifice  at, 
from  which  the  water  gushing  out  with  considerable  force  will 
immediately  turn  the  water-wheel,  which  communicating 
motion,  by  the  crank  d  and  rod  «,  to  the  beam  E,  will  cause 
the  pump  D  to  be  worked,  the  water  from  the  spout  passing 
into  the  upper  vessel  A.  Now,  the  cylinder  of  the  pump,  if 
one  only  be  used,  must  be  of  suitable  dimensions,  or  the 
velocity  of  its  movement  so  increased  by  means  of  a  multi- 
plying-wheel  as  to  enable  it  to  discharge  water  into  the 
upper  vessel  A  faster  than  the  same  escapes  through  the  lower 
orifice  a ;  consequently,  the  vessel  A  will  soon  overflow  from 


OR,    8EABCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


383 


the  capacious  opening  at  b,  to  wliich  a  trough  is  attached, 
which  collecting  the  waste  water,  causes  it  to  descend  also 
upon  the  circumference  of  the  water-wheel ;  thus  contributing 
to  its  movement,  and  at  the  same  time  tending  to  preserve  an 
imiform  supply  of  water  in  the  reservoir  for  the  continued 
action  of  the  pump.  Hence  you  have  a  perpetual  motion,  so 
long  as  the  whole  keeps  in  repair  and  in  good  order,  which  is 
all  that  can  be  expected  of  any  perpetual  motion,  constructed 
as  it  must  be  of  perishable  materials. 


But  of  wtiat  Use  are  all  the  perpetual  motion  machines,  if 
they  can  perform  no  other  work  than  that  of  keeping  them- 
selves in  motion?  For  it  is  evident,  in  the  case  of  my 
machine,  that  if  I  wish  to  increase  the  power  of  the  wheel, 
fixed  as  it  is  in  size,  radius,  &c.,  I  must  increase  the  jet  of 
water,  and  consequently  the  pumps  must  be  made  of  corre- 
sponding dimensions,  or  exert  a  corresponding  increase  of 


354  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

force  or  velocity  to  replace  the  water ;  so  that  it  is  eTident, 
neither  Mr.  Linley*s  machine  nor  mine,  in  their  present  fixed 
state,  can  perform  more  than  the  simple  operation  of  pumping 
their  own  water. 

And  this  is  the  case  with  all  the  perpetual  motion  machines 
I  have  ever  observed — they  can  exert  no  useful  or  disposable 
power  beyond  that  of  keeping  up  an  equilibrium,  or  getting 
beyond  the  point  of  equilibrium.  *  * 

Yours,  &c., 

AUTIIOB  OF  THE  "  VoiCE  OF    ReASOX." 


35.  Peepktual  Wateb  Mill  (vol.  14,  1831).— The 
inventor  says :  — 

I  propose  to  endeavour  to  show  how  my  plan  of  perpetual 
motion  could  be  applied  to  practical  and  useful  purposes. 
With  a  view  to  this,  I  give  the  prefixed  sketch,  with  the  fol- 
lowing description  of  its  construction  and  use : — Let  A  repre- 
sent the  side-wall  or  gable-end  of  a  house,  from  40  to  60  feet 
in  elevation ;  B,  a  cistern,  filled  with  water,  having  an  orifice 
near  its  bottom,  and  another  open  at  the  top,  for  the  ready 
escape  of  waste  water,  as  before ;  C,  a  reservoir,  so  far  filled 
with  water  as  not  to  come  in  contact  with  the  bottom  of  the 
water-wheel  D,  which,  being  an  imdershot  wheel,  may,  of 
course,  be  of  such  radius  as  is  suitable  for  the  power  required 
to  raise  the  water.  Let  E  be  another  cistern,  filled  with 
water,  equal  to  and  provided  with  orifices  as  in  cistern  B, 
both  orifices  together  discharging  water  faster  than  it  escapes 
from  the  lower  orifice  of  the  cistern  B  ;  F,  two  (or  more,  as 
the  case  may  require)  pumps,  or  expressing-foimtains,  sup- 
ported against  the  wall  by  ties  d  d,  and  having  their  cylinders 
inserted  in  the  reservoir  C,  and  their  lower  suckers  fixed  at  a 
little  less  than  32  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the 
reservoir  C.  These  expressing-fountains  discharging  their 
water  into  the  cistern  E  a  trifle  faster  than  it  escapes  from 
its  lower  orifice,  at  an  elevation  of  at  least  33  or  34  feet  above 
the  surface  of  the  water  in  the  reservoir  C,  will  afford  space 
for  water-wheels,  supported  against  the  wall  by  the  upright 
K,  say  three  water-wheels,  G  H  I,  of  at  least  eight  feet  in 
diameter  each,  or  two  only  of  greater  diameter.  The  upper 
wheel  G  being  an  undershot  one,  if  not  of  greater  radius 


OB,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB. 


355 


than  four  feet,  which  it  might  be,  may  have  its  axle  fixed  at 
an  altitude  of  at  least  30  feet,  and  allowing  the  space  of  a 
foot  between  each  water-wheel  for  the  troughs  a  and  d,  which 
collect  and  convey  the  water  from  wheel  to  wheel,  will  give 
a  space  of  22  feet,  occupied  by  the  three  water-wheels, 
leaving  10  feet  for  the  descent  of  the  water  by  the  trough  c 
to  the  cistern  B  (which  may  be  four  or  five  feet  in  depth),  and 
thence  to  the  reservoir  C,  which  may  be  three  or  four  feet  in 
depth ;  also  the  cistern  E  may  be  four  or  five  feet  in  depth, 
and  all  of  other  corresponding  dimensions  ad  libitum.     To 


produce  the  motion,  remove  the  plugs  or  stoppers  from  the 
lower  orifices  of  the  cisterns  E  and  B ;  the  water  rushing 
from  the  latter  turns  the  great  water-wheel  D,  which  works 
the  expressing-fountains  into  the  upper  cistern  E ;  from  the 
orifices  of  which,  the  water  escaping  turns  the  undershot 
wheel  G  (which  may  be  of  larger  diameter,  if  required) ; 
whence  being  collected  by  the  spout  a,  it  shoots  over  and 
turns  the  wheel  H ;  being  collected  by  the  spout  b,  it  turns 
the  overshot  wheel  I ;  whence  being  collected  by  the  spout  c, 
it  is  conveyed  into  the  cistern  B,  from  thence  to  the  water- 

a2 


866  P£KPETxrux  xobii^; 

wheel  D,  and,  finally,  into  the  reservoir  C,  from  which  it  is 
I'aised  again  by  the  fountains  into  the  upper  cistern  £ ;  and 
so  on  as  long  as  you  please,  or  as  long  as  the  whole  keeps  in 
repair  and  in  good  order.  The  apparatus  may  with  fucOity 
be  stopped  for  convenience  at  any  time  without  fear  of  de- 
rangement, because  the  fountains  carrying  water  &ster  than 
it  escapes  from  the  lower  orifices,  the  cisterns  will  be  always 
full ;  and  it  may  be  again  set  in  motion  with  equal  fiacility. 
With  the  above  proviso,  it  cannot  stop  till  the  prevailing 
natural  causes  which  gave  it  motion — ^viz.,  the  pressure  of  the 
atmosphere  and  the  descent  of  water,  which  in  their  nature 
and  tendency  are  of  themselves  perpetual — shall  be  diverted 
Thus  you  may  have  the  power,  free  and  disposable,  of  three 
water-wheels  in  perpetual  motion,  to  be  applied  to  such  usefid 
purposes  of  machinery  within  the  building  as  its  inmates  may 
reqiure.  A  supply  of  water-mills  might  be  thus  provided  in 
any  situation— in  the  centre  of  the  metropolis  or  other  large 
towns — in  places  subject  to  a  deficiency  of  rivulets  suitable 
for  mills  on  the  common  system.  Neither  would  there  be 
any  necessity  for  resorting  to  rivers,  or  raising  immense 
buildings  upon  their  banks  ;  wherever  there  was  a  convenient 
house,  it  might  be  readily  appropriated  with  little  further 
expense  than  machinery. 

Yours,  &c., 
Jan.  10,  1831.  Ed.  ••  Vocis  Eationis." 


A  FEW  Reasonable  Considerations  addressed  to  the 
Author  of  the  "Voice  of  Reason"  (vol.  15,  1831).— Two 
correspondents  ojffer  the  following  rjsmarks  on  the  preceding 
plans,     'fixe  fitst  says  j-^ 

I  have  considered  with  attention  the  plan  for  a  perpetual 
motion,  invented  by  the  author  of  the  "  Voice  of  Season." 

In  the  plan  laid  down  by  your  correspondent,  it  requires 
one  entire  revolution  of  the  water-wheel  to  produce  a  single 
stroke  of  the  piston ;  and,  by  the  same  rule,  the  water  ex- 
j^^es8^d  by  one  operation  of  the   piston  must  furnish  th? 


OR,    SKAI^CH   FOR   SBLF-MOTIVE    POWER.  35? 

impulse  for  an  entire  revolution  of  the  wheel.  The  pistonic 
operations  might,  indeed,  be  midtiplied  by  the  introduction 
of  a  pinion  revolving  to  the  water-wheel'  in  the  proportion  of 
2  or  3  to  1 ;  but  just  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  revolu- 
tions made  by  the  pinion,  there  must  be  an  increased  expen- 
diture of  momentum  on  the  water-wheel, — it  being  an  inva- 
riable law  in  mechanics,  that  what  is  gained  in  time  is  lost  in 
power ;  therefore,  there  would  be  nothing,  in  reality,  either 
gained  or  lost  by  this  manoeuvre. 

We  will  suppose  the  barrel  of  the  pump  to  be  six  inches 
in  diameter,  and  that  every  stroke  of  the  piston  will  produce 
a  cylindrical  column  of  water  two  feet  in  length.  I  put  it  to 
the  good  sense  of  your  correspondent,  whether  it  be  possible 
to  employ  this  inconsiderable  force  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
cause  a  wheel  of  such  magnitude  to  revolve  with  all  its  ap- 
purtenances, and  a  weight  of  water  attached  to  it  sixteen 
times  heavier  than  the  impulse. 

If  it  be  answered  that  a  constant  stream  will  be  accom- 
plished by  the  small  aperture  at  the  bottom  of  the  cistern,  I 
reply,  this  does  not  meet  the  objection ;  for  a  constant  supply 
is  only  a  succession  of  parts  which  do  not  push  each  other ; 
and  whether  a  portion  of  the  water  be  sujffered  to  gush  out 
of  an  aperture  at  the  bottom,  or  the  whole  be  allowed  to  fall 
over  the  tumbling  bay  at  the  top  of  the  cistern,  no  real  ad- 
vantage will  be  obtained,  for  no  more  than  a  two-feet  column 
of  water  can  be  brought  into  action  till  the  wheel  has  com- 
pleted its  revolution. 

The  wheel  and  crank  being  a  lever  of  the  first  class,  in 
order  to  balance  a  weight  equal  to  32  (the  column  of  water  in 
the  pump)  by  a  pressure  equal  to  2  (the  water  drawn  by  a 
stroke  of  the  piston),  the  arms  of  the  lever  must  be  in  the 
proportion  of  16  to  1 ;  now,  to  accomplish  a  two-feet  plunge 
into  the  barrel  of  the  pump,  the  crank,  or  short  arm  of  the 
lever,  must  be  one  foot  from  the  fulcrum,  or  axis  of  the 
wheel, — consequently,  the  radius  of  the  wheel  must  be  16 
feet  (exactly  the  height  of  the  pump) ;  and  then  what  be- 
comes of  the  intermediate  machinery  of  the  three  water- 
wheels,  &c.  ? 

If  the  radius  of  the  wheel  be  increased,  it  must  be  raised 
higher ;  and  I  ask  again,  how  can  so  feeble  an  impulse  be 
employed  to  give  an  entire  revolution  to  such  a  ponderous 
body  resting  on  its  axle  ?  *  *  *  * 


358  P£BF£TUU3f   MOBILE; 

The  second  gives  the  following  demonstration  of  the  im- 
possibility of  a  Perpetual  Water-wheel : — 

**  From  thi»  example  you  may  see  how  desirous  people  are  to  reach  their 
object  in  their  own  way — what  need  there  often  is  of  enforcing  on  them 
truths  which  are  self-evident — and  how  difficult  it  may  be  to  reduce  the 
man  who  aims  at  effecting  something,  to  admit  the  primary  conditions 
uuder  which  alone  enterprise  is  possible." — Goethb« 

I  am  induced  to  make  an  attempt  to  demonstrate  the  utter 
impossibility,  under  any  circumstances,  of  making  a  water- 
wheel  that  will  supply  itself  instead  of  having  any  surplus 
power. 

The  accompanying  drawing  represents  part  of  an  overshot 
wheel  in  section,  the  buckets  only  part  filled,  by  which  the 
whole  of  the  water  expended  continues  to  act  through  a 
greater  portion  of  the  circumference  than  it  otherwise  would 
do.  The  area  of  the  vertical  section  of  the  complement  of 
water  to  each  bucket  is  made  40  inches;  and  taking  the 
breadth  of  the  wheel  at,  say  28|  inches,  gives  40  lbs.  as  the 
weight  of  water  in  each  bucket ;  therefore,  as  there  are  12 
buckets  containing  40  lbs.  each,  No.  13  30  lbs.,  and  No.  14 
only  20 lbs.,  altogether  making  a  total  of  630  lbs.  acting  on 
the  wheel  at  the  same  time  ; — to  show  clearly  all  the  effect 
that  can  be  expected  from  this,  I  have  divided  the  horizontal 
radius  into  a  scale  of  40  equal  parts  (there  being  40  lbs.  in 
each  bucket) ;  and  from  the  gravitating  centre  of  the  fluid 
contained  in  each  is  drawn  a  perpendicular  to  the  scale, 
where  the  effective  force,  or  weight  in  each  bucket,  may  be 
read  off  as  on  the  arm  of  a  common  steelyard.  The  weights 
will  be  found  as  follows,  viz.  :-*- 


No.      lbs. 

No. 

lbs. 

1         211 

8 

40 

2         26i 

9 

39i 

3        30|i 

10 

38 

4        33f 

11 

35| 

5        36| 

12 

82i 

6         88| 

13 

211  ♦ 

7         891 

14 

It  is  therefore  quite  evident 

that 

,  although 

we  have  530  lbs. 

acting  on  one  side  of  the  wheel,  a 

column  of 

water  weighing 

•  Two  thirds  vf  the  value  of  No.  13  and  only  half  that  of  No.  14  are 
here  taken,  as  the  contents  are  respectively  30  lbs.  and  20  lbs. 


OK,   SEARCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  361 

446  Ibff.  re-acting  at  the  same  distance  from  the<centre,  on  the 
opposite  side,  will  exactly  balance  the  whole  530  lbs.  con- 
tained in  the  buckets  ;  so  that  about  a  sixth  of  the  expendi- 
ture rests  on  the  axis  without  producing  any  useful  effect, 
and  the  wheel  so  loaded  must  remain  in  a  state  of  rest. 
Now,  in  spite  of  friction  and  the  vis  inertia  of  matter,  if  we 
suppose  the  wheel  at  work,  it  can  raise  only  446  lbs.  at  the 
expense  of  530  lbs. ;  but  even  if  it  could  raise  the  whole 
530  lbs.,  we  should  then  be  but  little  nearer  the  mark,  for  we 
must  remember  that  the  gravitating  centre  of  our  power  falls 
through  a  space  of  only  8  ft,  11  in,,  while  the  water  must  be 
raised  at  least  11  ft.  before  it  could  be  laid  on  and  delivered 
clear  of  the  wheel. 

As  a  further  means  of  coming  at  the  end  I  had  in  view  s^i 
the  commencement  of  this  letter,  I  will  conclude  with  a  simple 
rule  for  calculating  the  quantity  of  water  a  wheel  of  this  kind 
will  raise : — Multiply  the  number  of  pounds  expended  in  a 
minute  by  the  height  or  diameter  of  the  wheel  in  feet,  divide 
the  product  by  the  height  (also  in  feet)  of  the  reservoir  to  be 
filled,  and  two-thirds  of  the  quotient  will  be  the  answer 
required.  Example,  for  .  the  wheel  above  described,  making 
six  revolutions  per  minute  ;— 
42  buckets  on  wheel. 
6  revolutions  per  minute. 

252  buckets  filled  per  minute. 
40  the  weight  of  water  in  each  bucket. 


10080  lbs.  expended  per  minute. 
10  feet  height  of  wheel. 

11)  100800  momentum,  dividing^  by  1 1  feet  as  tbe  height  of  reservoir. 

3)  9163-636  dividing  by  3. 

3054*545  multiplying  by  2. 
2 


6109*09     answer  in  lbs. 
So  that  for  every  1008  gallons  expended  on  the  wheel,  we 
only  gain  sufficient  power  to  supply  611  nearly. 


36.  Scheme  of  an  Hydkatjlic  Moves,  on  the  principle 
of  Barker's  Mill  (vol.  15, 1831).-— The  mventor  offers  the  ac- 


PEEPXTUUx   moblle; 

companying  sketch,  with  description,  of  an  H  jdranlic  MoTer, 
for  communicating  power  to  machinery,  and  recently  inyented 
by  him: — 


A  is  a  hollow  cylinder  or  pipe,  forming  the  upright  shaft 
of  a  mill  on  Barker's  well-kno\Mi  and  effective  centrifugal 
principle. 

B  B,  the  lateral  pipes  from  ditto ;  a  a,  ^the  jets  of  water, 
whose  centrifugal  force  gives  the  motion. 

C,  beam  to  support  the  machinery,  built  at  each  end  into 
the  wall  D  D. 


OB,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  363 

E  E,  two  cog-wlieels  to  communicate  the  molion  to 

P,  the  rod  of  a  pump  (on  Shalder's  principle),  which 
derives  its  supply  from  the  well  into  which  the  water  from 
the  pipes  is  conducted,  which  it  raises  to 

H,  a  cistern  into  which  one  end  of  a  syphon,  I  I,  is  intro- 
duced, the  other  end  of  which  is  soldered  with  an  air-tight 
joint  into  the  top  of  pipe  A,  to  which  it  thus  supplies  the 
water  which  is  continually  running  from  the  pipes  B  B, 
producing  a  constant  motion  which  may  be  given  by  carrying 
the  horizontal  rod  F  through  the  wall  D,  to  machinery  for 
any  purpose.  And,  if  the  statement  in  the  pamphlet  on 
Hydrostatics,  by  the  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Useful 
Knowledge,  as  to  the  effect  of  Barker's  Centrifugal  Mill,  be 
correct,  the  power  gained  must  be  very  great. 

The  advantages  of  the  invention  are  obvious.  The  whole 
of  the  machinery  for  a  large  factory  may  be  contained  under- 
ground, which,  indeed,  will  be  the  most  desirable  situation 
for  it,  and  valuable  room  will  thus  be  saved ;  the  expense  of 
erection  will  not  be  great;  and  the  saving  in  cojds,  &c., 
necessary  for  a  steam-engine  of  the  like  powers,  will  be 
immense.  I  might,  perhaps,  have  secured  much  benefit  to 
myself  by  taking  out  a  patent  for  the  discovery,  but  I  have  no 
wish  to  profit  by  monopoly.  All  I  desire  is,  that  it  may  be 
recollected  that  the  machine  was  invented  by  one  who  is 

A  Journeyman  Mechanic. 


37.  The  Paradoxical  Hydrostatic  Balance  (vol.  15, 
1831). — ^After  describing  it  in  one  form,  this  correspondent 
applies  it  in  another,  observing : — 

This  hydrostatic  balance,  like  the  compound  balance  of 
Desaguliers,  may  be  introduced  to  illustrate  the  impossibility 
of  perpetual  motion  by  a  weight  removed  from  the  centre  of 
a  wheel. 

Take  the  hollow-rimmed  wheel  A  B ;  let  it  be  air-tight  and 
half  filled  with  water.  Let  C  be  the  axle ;  at  B  place  a 
hollow  ball  loaded  to  near  sinking.  Such  a  wheel,  however 
fine  its  axle  may  be,  or  however  ^vell  lubricated,  will  not 


364  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

make  a  single  revolution,  though  the  weight  B  occupies  that 
part  at  which  every  deluded  perpetual-motionist  is  desirous  it 


should  be  placed ;  concluding  that,  by  such  an  arrangement, 
the  production  of  another  Orffyrean  wheel  must  be  inevitable. 


38.  A  Pkoject  (vol.  18,  1832).  —  A  correspondent 
writes : — 

Will  you  allow  me  a  small  space,  to  announce  to  the 
mechanical  world  a  discovery  I  made  upwards  of  ten  years 
back,  and  which  I  now  regret  having  so  long  kept  to  myself; 
but  it  has  so  much  prejudice  to  contend  with,  that  I  had 
determined  not  to  attempt  to  bring  it  forward  until  I  could 
produce  ocidar  demonstration  of  the  fact.  However,  as 
constant  employment  in  a  totally  different  line  of  business 
will  in  all  probability  prevent  my  doing  so  for  many  years  to 
come,  1  have  resolved  upon  explaining  the  nature  of  it,  and 
soliciting  the  advice  of  your  readers  on  the  subject.  The 
discovery  consists  of  a  simple  method  of  raising  a  weight,  by 
the  descent  of  an  equal  weight,  to  a  height  equal  to  the 
descent,  which  I  believe  has  never  yet  been  accomplished. 
But  if  that  were  the  whole  merit  of  the  discovery,  it  would  be 
of  little  consequence  and  less  utility.  The  case  is,  however, 
otherwise,  there  being  a  considerable  disposable  power  over 
and  above  what  is  required  to  bring  up  the  weight.  I  am 
well  aware  that  nothing  short  of  ocular  demonstration  will 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  365 

convince  you  and  many  of  your  scientific  readers  of  the  pos- 
sibility of  my  statement  being  correct ;  but,  if  any  of  your 
numerous  correspondents  will  point  out  a  practicable  method, 
whereby  I  can  procure  a  moderate  remuneration  (bearing  in 
mind  that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  take  out  a  patent),  I  will 
engage  to  convince  the  most  sceptical  of  the  truth  of  what  I 
assert. 


39.  Two  "  CERTAIN  "  Plans  for  Producing  Perpetual 
Motion  (vol.  21,  1834). — A  correspondent,  under  this  title, 
writes : — 

Very  few  young  mechanicians  escape  being  seduced  into 
an  attempt  to  produce  a  perpetual  movement,  by  making 
gravitation  counteract  itself.  They  are  not  contented  with 
being  told  by  older  men,  that  a  cause  can  never  be  made  to 
exceed  its  own  power ;  yet  gravitation  is  expected  by  them 
to  lift  up  on  one  side  more  weight  than  sinks  on  the  other, 
with  some  per  centage  of  friction  into  the  bargain.  Nature, 
however,  is  too  true  to  itself  to  be  so  taken  in  by  all  or  any 
of  the  multitudes  of  various  ways  the  inventive  genius  of  man 
has  contrived,  and  still  keeps  contriving,  to  circumvent  her 
immutable  laws,  with  no  other  effect  than  to  render  the  case 
so  complicated  as  to  puzzle  the  judgment  of  the  inventors, 
which  ends  usually  in  their  firm  belief  that  they  have  out- 
witted nature  instead  of  themselves.  I  acknowledge  that  in 
my  youth  I  was  one  of  this  class,  and,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
young,  I  beg  to  present  you  with  two  certain  plans  for  pro- 
ducing perpetual  motion,  and  compelling  gravity  to  be* 
frolicsome,  and  do  more  work  than  she  ought. 

Let  A  (Fig.  1)  be  a  cistern  full  of  oil  or  water,  above  4  feet 
deep.  Let  B  be  a  wheel ;  freely  suspended  within  it,  on  its 
axle,  let  there  be  four  wide  glass  tubes,  40  inches  long,  c  e  c  c, 
having  large  bulbs,  holding,  say  a  pint,  blown  at  the  closed 
end.  Fill  these  tubes  with  mercury,  fix  on  an  Indian-rubber 
ball  or  bladder,  that  will  hold  a  pint,  to  each  of  them  at  the 
open  end,  and  let  them  be  attached  round  the  wheel,  as 
exhibited  in  the  figure.  As  the  pressure  of  40  inches  of 
mercury  will  exceed  the  atmospheric  pressure,  and  also  that 
of  the  four-feet  column  of  water,  when  the  Indian-rubber 
bottle  is  lowest,  and  the  tube  erect,  as  at  D,  the  mercury  will 


366 


PERPETUUM    MOBILE  ; 


fill  it,  leaving  a  vacuum  in  the  glass  bulb  above.  On  the 
opposite  side  the  mercury  will  fill  the  glass  bulb,  and  the 
Indian-rubber  bottle  will  be  pressed  flat,  as  will  also  be  the 
case  in  the  two  horizontal  tubes.  Now,  it  is  evident  that  the 
two  horizontal  tubes  exactly  balance  each  other ;  but  the  tube 
D,  with  its  bulb  swelled  out,  displaces  a  pint  of  water  more 
than  its  opposite  tube,  and  hence  will  attempt  to  rise  with 
the  force  of  about  one  pound  ;  and  each  tube,  when  it  arrives 
at  the  same  position,  must  produce  the  same  residt,  the  wheel 
must  have  a  continual  power,  equal  to  about  one  pound,  with 
a  radius  of  two  feet. — Q.E.D. 


{^ig.  1.) 


{Fiff.  2.) 


Let  Fig.  2  represent  a  light  drum  of  wood — one  hdf  of 
which  is  inserted  into  a  cleft  in  a  water- cistern  A,  which  fits 
it,  and  from  which  the  water  is  prevented  from  escaping  by  a 
strip  of  leather,  which  the  water  presses  against  the  drum, 
and  which  thus  operates  as  a  valve,  without  much  friction 
(especially  if  oil  be  substituted  for  water  in  the  cistern). 
Now,  as  this  drum  is  much  lighter  than  water,  it  must  ever 
attempt  to  swim,  and  thus,  in  perpetually  rising,  cause  the 
drum  to  revolve  forcibly  round  its  axle. — Q.E.D. 

I  tried  this  last  method  thirty  years  ago,  but  it  was  so 


OK,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTITE   POWEIU  36? 

obstinate  as  not  to  move  one  inch  at  my  bidding,  though 
it  obviously  is  proved,  to  demonstration,  that  it  ought  to  have 
gone  on  swimmingly.  I  have  just  heard  that  an  Italian 
gentleman  has  hit  upon  the  same  plan ;  so  it  seems  that  the 
mania  is  not  confined  to  England. 

[The  remarks  of  a  correspondent  respecting  the  foregoing, 
called  forth  the  following  observations  from  the  Editor  : — J 

We  think  our  correspondent,  S.  F.,  has  entirely  mis- 
conceived the  scope  of  the  playful  accoimt,  given  in  our  last 
number,  of  two  plans  of  perpetual  motion.  The  object  of  the 
writer  seems  to  have  been,  to  impress  on  the  minds  of  young 
mechanicians  the  folly  of  wasting  their  time  in  vain  endea- 
vours to  render  the  effects  of  causes  greater  than  the  causes 
themselves ;  or,  in  other  words,  to  gain  power  out  of  nothing 
— a  process  without  limit  or  value,  were  it  not  cut  short  by 
the  want  of  all  limit  to  its  folly  ;  and  this  he  could  not,  per- 
haps, have  done  in  any  way  so  well,  as  by  exhibiting  a  couple 
of  infallible  perpetual  movers  that  would  not  stir  at  all, 
though  they  bade  as  fair  for  it  as  any  of  their  kindred. 


40.  Essay  at  Pebpetual  Motion  (vol.  26,  1836). — 
F.  S.  Mackintosh  says : — 

I  herewith  forward  you  a  description  of  a  machine  which 
was  constructed  by  me  in  the  year  1823,  with  a  view  to 
produce  a  perpetual  motion.  With  this  machine,  and  the 
studies  necessarily  connected  with  it,  first  originated  the 
suspicion  that  the  planets  could  not  continue  in  motion 
imless  they  gradually  approached  the  centre  of  attraction. 

In  the  first  place,  let  us  describe  the  machine.  Fig.  1 :  A 
is  a  sectional  view  of  the  interior  of  the  wheel,  which  is 
formed  in  two  halves  upon  one  shaft ;  each  half  or  section  is 
furnished  with  a  projecting  ledge,  and  an  opening  is  left 
between  the  two  ledges  sufficiently  wide  to  admit  of  a  magnet 
being  introduced  between  them,  by  which  '^arrangement  the 
magnet  may  be  brought  as  near  to  the  ball  as  may  be  neces- 
sary (see  Fig.  2).  B  is  a  magnet,  whose  line  of  attraction 
acts  at  right  angles  with  the  line  of  gravity,  C  is  an  iron 
ball,  under  the  action  of  two  forces.  The  magnet  continually 
drawing  the  ball  up  the  inclined  plane  within  the  wheel,  and 
gravity  continually  drawing  it  to  the  bottom,  by  their  united 


368 


P£BF£TT7V]lf   MOBILE; 


action  it  was  supposed  the  wlieel  wotild  revolve  for  ever,  or 
till  it  waus  worn  out ;  upon  the  same  principle  that  a  wheel 
revolves  hy  the  animal  force  or  muscular  action  of  a  mouse  or 
squirrel,  which  carries  it  up  the  inclined  plane,  whilst  it  is 


iFig.  2.) 


{Fig.  1.) 


continually  drawn  to  the  bottom  by  the  action  of  gravity^ 
thereby  causing  the  wheel  to  revolve  by  the  weight  of  its 
body.  The  model  was  taken  from  the  earth's  motion  round 
the  sun;  and  the  following  process  of  reasoning  seemed  to 
justify  the  assumption  that  the  wheel  would  move  on  till  it 
was  worn  out : — 

"  The  earth  is  carried  round  the  sun  by  the  action  of  two 
forces,  one  of  which  is  momentum,  which  is  not,  in  reality,  a 
force  or  cause  of  motion,  but  an  effect  derived  from  an  original 


OR,  SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  S69 

impulse ;  and  that  impulse,  or  the  momentum  derived  from  it,  is 
not  destroyed,  because  there  is  no  resistance  to  the  moving 
body — that  is,  there  is  no  friction.  Well,  I  cannot  make  this 
machine  without  having  resistance  to  the  motion — that  is, 
friction ;  but  to  compensate  for  this,  I  have  two  real  forces, 
two  causes  of  motion,  each  of  them  capable  of  imparting 
momentum  to  a  body :  they  are  both  constant  forces  ;  and 
from  one  of  them,  the  magnet,  I  can  obtain  any  power  that 
may  be  required  within  certain  limits." 

This  reasoning  appeared  conclusive,  and  the  wheel  was 
made ;  but  when  the  magnet  was  applied,  instead  of  the  ball 
rolling  up  the  inclined  plane,  the  wheel  moved  backwards 
upon  its  centre.  It  occurred  to  me,  that  by  placing  a  small 
ratchet  upon  the  wheel,  as  shown  at  D,  this  backward  motion 
of  the  wheel  on  its  centre  might  be  prevented,  in  which  case 
the  ball  must  roll  up  the  inclined  plane,  and  that  a  perpetual 
motion  might  then  ensue;  but  this  ratchet  I  never  tried, 
having  about  that  time  begun  to  perceive  that  the  idea  of  a 
perpetual  mechanical  motion,  either  on  the  earth  or  in  the 
heavens,  involves  an  absurdity;  and  that,  therefore,  the 
motions  of  the  planets  must  necessarily  carry  them  continually 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  centre  of  attraction. 


Trial  of  the  foregoing  Plan  (vol.  26,  1836). — By 
R.  Munro,  who  says  : — 

The  result  of  Mr.  Mackintosh's  essay  at  perpetual  motion 
might  be  attributed  to  the  avoidable  friction  caused  by  the 
manner  in  which  the  iron  ball  is  placed  in  the  wheel. 
Curious  to  try  the  experiment,  I  proceeded,  and,  with  the  view 
of  diminishing  the  friction,  I  placed  two  wheels  on  the  axis 
of  the  ball,  but  the  result  was  precisely  that  described  by  Mr. 
Mackintosh.  I  next  applied  the  ratchet,  as  suggested,  but 
with  no  better  effect ;  the  ball  rolled  towards  the  magnet,  but 
did  not  give  the  required  motion  to  the  wheel.  It  is  not 
unlikely,  then,  that  the  present  ingenious  attempt  will  not  be 
realised. 


41.  An  Attempt  at  Perpetual  Motion  (vol.  44, 1846). 
-^An  "  Amateur  "  writes  : — 

The  account  of  an  attempt  to  realise  this  idea,  though  a 


370  PBBPETUTJM  mobile; 

failure,  may  not  be  wholly  uninteresting,  as  not  only  may  ex- 
perience be  gained  even  from  errors,  but  also  trouble  saved  to 
others  in  enabling  them  to  avoid  them.  Suppose,  then,  that 
the  buoyancy  in  water  of  a  flat  piece  of  wood,  when  its  sur- 
face lies  either  horizontal,  or  more  or  less  so,  is  greater  than 
that  of  a  similar  piece  when  perpendicular.  Connect  two  thin 
floats  of  wood  by  a  slip  of  wood  turning  on  a  centre ;  the 
floats  joined  to  the  connecting  strip  by  hinges,  so  that  the 
one  descends  on  one  side  edgeways,  but  the  other  in  its  rise 
doubling  up  inwards  against  the  connecting  strip,  draws  down 
the  other  below  its  own  level;  at  which  point  the  power 
appears  to  be  gained.  Now,  more  floats  added,  equal  on 
both  sides,  it  might  be  supposed  that  they  would  draw  one 
another  round  the  extreme  lowest  point,  and  thus  a  continual 
rotary  motion  be  produced ;  the  same  thing  becoming  alter- 
nately the  greater  and  less  power.  Such,  however,  on 
experiment,  proves  not  to  be  the  fact. 


Section  IV. — Claims  to  Discover^/. 

1.  Alleged  Discovery  op  Pekpettjal  IVtoTioN. — A 
correspondent  in  "Drakard's  Stamford  News"  makes  the 
following  communication : — "  Since  the  death  of  Sir  Isaac 
Newton,  it  has  been  the  study  of  thousands  of  little  and 
contracted  minds  to  discover  the  long-wished-for  perpetual 
motion ;  but,  doubtless  in  consequence  of  Sir  Isaac's  opinion, 
the  completion  of  the  thing  has  scarcely  ever  engaged  the 
mind  of  a  philosopher.  However,  when  he  has  been  immor- 
talized for  one  centuiy  (which  will  be  on  March  20th,  1827), 
your  present  correspondent,  a  friend  to  society,  will  offer  to 
the  public  (on  contribution  of  the  promised  sum*)  a  motion 
that  will  then  have  continued  eleven  years.  For  its  comple- 
tion he  has  spared  neither  time  nor  expense,  and,  above  all, 
has  omitted  that  which  the  vulgar  ever  found  to  decay.  It 
consists  of  that  which  is  not  foolish  or  nonsensical,  such  as 
springs,  balance,  and  weights,  but  of  materials  which  will 
continue  a  century  as  well  as  one  day.     No  weight  is  too 

•  A  viilpjar  error,  we  suspect.     We  know  of  no  sum  that  is  promised. 
— Ed.  *•  Mec.  Mag." 


OH,   SEARCH    FOB   SBLF-MOTIVE   POAVEB.  371 

oinmense  for  its  motion,  and  the  mechanic's  art  shall  be 
baffled  at  its  velocity."— ["  Mec.  Mag.,"  jrol.  1,  1823-4,  p. 
252.]  ' 


2.  A  Pebpetfal  Motion  Advebtised. — This  subject  has 
so  frequently  occupied  your  attention,  and  that  of  your  con- 
tributors, that  the  following  advertisement  in  the  "  Edinburgh 
Gourant,"  15th  December,  1707,  may  probably  be  thought 
worthy  of  a  comer  in  your  valuable  work :—"  These  are 
giving  advertisement  that  in  pursuance  of  some  overtures 
given  in  by  Mr.  Robert  Stewart,  Minister  of  the  Gospel,  in 
January  and  February  last,  in  the  '  Edinburgh  Courant,'  con- 
cerning the  perpetuum  mobile,  and  for  the  further  satisfeiction 
of  mankind,  and  clearing  their  scruples,  anent  the  same; 
there  was  a  curious  model  made  at  ,the  charge  of  John,  Earl 
pf  Breadalbane,  which  model  wiM  demonstrate  the  possibility, 
probability,  and  practicability  of  these  three  new  discoyeries, 
viz. :  Firstly,  a  balance,  by  which  an  equal  overcomes  an 
equal  at  the  same  time.  Secondly,  that  being  granted,  a 
Ijveight  always  going  down,  and  never  going  lower.  Thirdly, 
these  being  granted,  a  clear  idea  of  the  perpetuum  mobile. 
If  any  man  doubts  any  of  these  propositions,  the  model  is 
]t)rought  to  town,"  &c.,  &c.— [Vol.  9,.  1828,  p.  432.] 


•3.  Alleged  Discovery  of  Perpexual  Motion  bt 
Richard  Van  Dyke. — (From  the  "  Philadelphia  Gazette.") 
— ^We  were  much  gratified  yesterday  with  the  result  of  an 
examination  of  a  self-moving  machine,  which  may  be  seen  at 
Bowlsby's  Merchants'  Hotel,  i^  Slater  Street,  and  .which  the 
inventor  calls  a  perpetual  motion.  We  have  no  doubt  of  its 
Jjeinff  nearer  a  perpetual  self-moving  principle  than  any  in- 
vention fiiat  has  preceded  it,  and  as  near  as  any  we  shall 
ever  see.  The  great  merit,  aside  from  its  practical  uses,  is 
its  simplicity,  and  the  certainty  and  readiness  with  which  you 
-perceive  that  it  covers  no  trick  or  deception.  It  is  little  less 
than  an  illustration  of  one  of  the  most  obvious  laws  of 
nature.  The  agent  is  the  atmosphere,  bearing  directly,  by 
means  of  perpendicular  boxes  and  oblique  tubes,  upon  the 
4)uckets  .of  a  wheel,  which  is  propelled  with  greater  or  less 

*  b2 


372  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

velocity,  but  which  is  constantly  propelled,  and  will  continue 
to  run,  without  the  possibility  of  cessation,  while  the  mate- 
rials of  which  it  is  composed  last,  and  the  present  laws  of 
nature  continue.  The  inventor  is  Mr.  Richard  Van  Dyke,  of 
Orleans  county,  in  this  State,  who  gives  it  as  the  result  of 
^ve  or  six  years*  application  to  the  subject.  He  is  a  venerable 
man,  communicative  and  intelligent,  and  described  as  highly 
respectable  by  several  citizens  of  the  West,  on  whose  repre- 
sentations entire  reliance  may  be  placed.  He  affects  no  mys- 
tery, but  clearly  and  satisfactorily  explains  the  arcana  of  the 
machine."— [Vol.  12,  1829-30,  p.  55.] 


4.  Alleged  Discoveby  by  R.  W.  Franklin. — ^I  have 
read  a  great  deal  in  your  Magazine  about  perpetual  motion, 
and  have  studied  this  disheartening  question  many  years 
before  your  work  began.  In  No.  319,  I  see  there  is  an 
account  of  a  perpetual  motion  invented  by  one  Richard  Von 
Dyke,  of  America.  I  do  not  suppose  any  one  can  understand 
what  that  machine  is  from  such  an  account ;  but  no  doubt  it 
was  the  best  you  was  able  to  procure.  I  verily  believe  that  I 
invented  the  same  thing  a  few  months  ago,  but  was  pre- 
vented from  putting  it  to  the  test  of  experiment  by  great 
troubles  in  my  family.  If  a  few  of  your  correspondents 
will  favour  me  with  their  addresses,  I  will  appoint  a  time 
and  place  to  have  their  united  opinions  on  my  scheme. 
But  1  hope  no  one  will  apply  to  be  of  the  number  who  does 
not  know  something  about  pneumatics :  I  do  wish  that  person 
to  be  one  who  wrote  on  the  subject,  page  399,  No.  312. — I 
remain,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

R.  W.  Franklin. 

North  Place,  Wilsted  Street,  Somers  Town. 

P.S. — ^When  the  gentlemen  have  examined  my  drawings, 
I  wish  some  one  of  them  to  give  your  readers  an  accoimt 
of  it.— [Vol.  12,  1829-30,  p.  192.] 


The  following  is  from  the  same  claimant : — 
I  have  within  the  last  three  months  made  very  great  im- 
provements in  my  plan,  so  as  to  increase  its  power  fifty  times, 
that  is,  by  making  the  wheel  to  work  in  water  only,  instead 


OR,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  373 

of  water  and  air.  Success  is  certain.  Its  power  may  be  as 
easily  calculated  as  the  common  overshot  water-wheel,  and  a 
wheel  on  this  plan  may  be  made  of  fifty-horse  power.  Twenty 
years  ago  1  had  a  good  working  knowledge  of  the  five  me- 
chanical powers,  and  was  always  of  opinion  that  a  self-mover 
could  not  be  made  by  any  of  them.  I  determined  never  to 
look  for  it  anywhere  but  in  the  sciences  of  hydraulics  and 
pneimiatics.  I  had  a  short  correspondence  with  Lord  Stan- 
hope on  this  subject  in  the  year  181 6.  I  have  began  to  make 
my  machine,  and  can  defray  the  expense  myself ;  it  is  now 
half  finished  ;  but  I  shall  want  the  assistance  of  some  person 
of  property  and  ability  to  take  out  a  patent.  As  I  am  obliged 
to  proceed  slowly,  I  think  I  had  better  look  for  that  assist- 
ance at  once.  My  machine  will,  in  eight  cases  out  of  ten, 
abolish  the  steam-engine,  and  will  not  cost  twenty  shillings 
to  work  a  year. 

You  have  my  address,  and  will  probably  be  kind  enough 
to  take  charge  of  any  letters  which  may  be  addressed  to  me. 
— I  am,  &c.,  R.  W.  Franklin. 

August  29,  1830. 

P.S. — If  all  my  expectations  are  realised,  it  will  be  the 
most  important  invention  this  country  can  boast. — [Vol.  14, 
p.  13.] 


5.  Self-winding  Clock. — The  "  Connecticut  Register  " 
states  that  a  person  in  that  State  has  invented  a  clock  which 
winds  itself  up,  and  keeps  correct  time,  and  strikes  the  hour 
regularly,  and  will  continue  to  run  until  worn  out,  without 
the  application  of  any  power  external  to  itself. — [Vol.  12, 
p.  255.] 


6.  Wright's  Perpetual  Sphere. — It  is  related  in 
Hytton's  Dictionary  that  Edward  Wright,  the  mathematician, 
made  for  his  pupil,  Prince  Henry  (son  of  James  VI.),  a  large 
sphere,  and  "  there  was  in  it  a  work  for  a  motion  of  17,100 
years,  if  it  should  not  be  stopped,  or  the  materials  fail." 
"  This  sphere,"  it  is  added,  *'  though  thus  made  at  a  great 
expense  of  money  and  ingenious  industry,  was  afterwards,  in 
the  time  of  the  civil  wars,  cast  aside  amongst  dust  and  rub- 
bish, where  it  was  found,   in  the  year  1646,  by  Sir  Jonas- 


374  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

Moore,  who,  at  his  own  expense,  restored  it  to  its  first  state 
of  perfection,  among  his  other  mathematical  instruments  and 
curiosities.*'  Query,  Is  this  curiosity  still  extant? — [Vol.  15, 
p.  288.] 


7.  Sellekt's  Hydraulic  Self-acting  Engine.-^Mf, 
Charles  Doyne  Sellery  has  invented  a  new  engine,  which  he 
terms  the  "Hydraulic  Self-acting  Engine."  It  works  by  the 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  and  is  said  to  possess  a  power 
equal  to  six  times  that  of  the  steam-engine !  Another  re- 
markable character  of  this  powerful  engine  is,  that  it  neither 
requires  fire,  wind,  nor  water ;  and  when  once  set  going, 
works  without  any  assistance  whatever ! — Exeter  Flying  Post. 
— ["Mec.  Mag.,"  vol.  17,  p.  224.] 


8.  Buckle's  Perpetual  Motion. — ^A  correspondent  in 
North  Berwick  writes  as  follows  : — "  Mr.  William  Buckle,  a 
respectable  tradesman  of  this  place,  has,  after  many  years' 
close  study  and  observation  of  the  celestial  bodies,  discovered, 
the  perpetual  movement.  He  has  not  only  discovered 
wherein  longitude  consists,  but  longitude  itself  to  an  azimuth. 
He  has  prepared  tables  by  which  his  calculations  can  be 
carried  to  any  extent,  and  by  which  he  can,  at  any  time,  and 
under  the  most  unfavourable  circumstances,  ascertain  the. 
longitude  with  the  same  facility  and  correctness  as  latitude  \% 
at  present  by  the  nautical  instruments  now  in  use.  These 
latter  are  entirely  superseded  by  the  use  of  an  instrument 
ronstrucied  by  himself,  of  the  most  simple  description.  He 
has  every  confidence  in  being  able  to  explain  and  defend  the 
principles  and  correctness  of  his  discovery  to  any  one,  and  is, 
at  this  time,  endeavouring  to  bring  it  under  the  notice  of 
Government." — Scotsman. — [_''  Mec.  Mag.,"  vol.  19,  p.  368.] 


9.  Townsend's  Perpetual  Motion. — The  announce- 
ment in  our  last  number,  by  Mr.  Wm.  Pearson,  that  he  has 
discovered  a  veritable  perpetual  motion,  has  brought  us 
nnother  to  the  same  effect  from  a  gentleman  who,  like  Mr. 
Pearson,  disdains  to  "  shrink  behind  an  anonymous  signa^- 


OK,    SEAUCH    FOR   SELF-MOTITE   POWER.  375 

<ure,'*  and  glories  (or  hopes  to  glory)  in  the  name  of  Thomas 
Townsend,  of  Chancery  Lane,  London.  He  twits  Mr. 
Pearson  with  having  never  tried  whether  his  machine  would 
really  go  for  ever — (Is  not  this  asking  too  much  ?)— and  says 
that  he  has  actually  made  a  model  of  his  which  has  worked 
60  well  that  he  means  forthwith  to  make  one  on  a  larger 
scale.— [Vol.  20,  1834,  p.  304.] 


10.  Dr.  Stringfellow's  Perpetual  Motion. — By  the 
"  Georgia  (American)  Messenger,"  we  learn  that  a  Dr.  String- 
fellow,  of  Macon,  has  actually  discovered  the  long-sought 
and  never- before-found  perpetual  motion.  The  Editor  thus 
partially  describes  it : — *'  The  machine  is  very  simple,  the 
whole  consisting  of  a  very  few  pieces,  yet  comprising  the 
most  ingenious  and  the  most  perfect  principles  of  mechanism. 
It  is    comprised  within  a  square   frame   of  about  eighteen 

;  inches,  and  the  parts  consist  only  of  two  perpendicular 
spindles  and  two  horizontal  cog-wheels,  a  trundle-head,  three 

'  small  suspension  chains,  a  spiral  spring  and  weight,  and  a 
small  inclined  plane.'* — Weekly  Chronicle* — ["  Mec.  Mag.,*' 
vol.  27,  1837,  p.  160.] 


11.  Extraordinary  Mechanical  Invention. — A  gen- 
tleman at  Milton-next-Gravesend,  who  for  many  years  carried 
on  an  extensive  business  at  llamsgate,  after  eleven  years' 
study  has  succeeded  in  completing  some  machinery  which 
will,  when  brought  into  use,  he  imagines,  supersede  the  use 
of  steam  power.  It  may,  he  thinks,  be  applied  to  clocks  of 
any  description,  requires  no  winding  up  when  put  together, 
and  will  continue  going  so  long  as  the  materials  last. — (Cor- 
.  respondent  of  the  "  Times.*')  The  writer  of  this  announce- 
ment might,  quite  consistently,  have  added  at  the  end  of  it— 
'•  and  for  some  time  after.'* — *'  Mec.  Mag./*  vol.  3B,  1843, 
p.  48.] 


12.  Joseph  Hutt's  Perpetual  Motion  Machine. — ^A 
correspondent  of  the  ''  Midland  Counties  Herald  "  says  : — 
'*  A  framework  knitter  of  Hinckley,  named  Joseph  Hutt  has, 


376  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

after  twenty  years'  application  and  study,  completed  a 
machine  which  he  calls  a  '  self-moving  machine,'  or  *  per- 
petual motion.*  He  set  it  in  motion  the  26th  August  last, 
since  which  time  it  has  continued  to  work  with  the  greatest 
regularity.  The  motions  of  the  machine  are  hoth  quick  and 
powerful,  and  may  be  greatly  increased,  and  applied  to  any 
purpose.  It  does  not  require  the  aid  of  steam  or  any  other 
power  to  keep  it  in  motion,  having  one  continual  and  regidar 
movement  of  its  own.  Hutt,  who  is  a  poor  man,  is  anxious 
to  obtain  assistance  to  enable  him  to  test  still  further  the 
value  of  his  invention.** 

The  best  thing  which  the  friends  and  neighbours  of  this 
"  poor  man "  could  do  for  him  would  be,  to  make  him  a 
present  of  some  standard  work  on  mechanics — (say  Gregory 
or  Moseley) — from  which  he  would  learn  that  the  object  he 
is  aiming  at  is  a  positive  impossibility. — [Vol.  47, 1847, p.  463.] 


13.  Hendktckson's  Discovery  op  Perpettjai.  Motiobt, 
IN  America. — ^The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  "  Times  '* 
of  Thursday: — "Mr.  J.  G.  Hendrickson,  of  New  Jersey, 
announces  the  discovery  of  the  principle  of  perpetual  motion. 
The  success  is  obtained  by  the  employment  of  arms  and 
balls  attached  to  a  cylinder  so  as  to  keep  the  extra  weight 
always  on  one  side,  and,  therefore,  to  give  the  cylinder  a 
constant  inclination  to  turn  round.  The  machine  requires 
no  starting.  Take  away  the  blocks,  and  it  goes  off  like  a 
thing  of  life.  The  'Journal  of  Commerce'  says  of  it: — 
'  The  model  was  in  our  office  yesterday,  and  attached  to  some 
clockwork,  which  it  turned  without  once  stopping  to  breathe. 
We  see  no  reason,  why  it  should  not  go  until  worn  out ! 
After  a  careful  examination,  we  can  safely  say,  in  all  serious- 
ness, that  the  propelling  power  is  self-contained  and  self- 
adjusting,  and  gives  a  sufficient  active  force  to  carry  ordinary 
clockwork,  and  all  without  any  winding  up  or  replenishing.'" 
—[Vol.  61,  1854,  p.  326.] 


Perpetual    Motion — Pathetic    Story    of    its    In- 
ventor,  Hendrickson.* — About   fourteen  years   ago   we 

•  This  account,  from  an  American  paper,  is  here  introduced  to  com- 
plete the  foregoing  article. 


OB,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTITE   POWER.  377 

Sublished  the  first  description  of  a  machine  invented  by  Mr. 
ames  G.  Hendrickson,  of  Freehold,  N.  J.,  "  to  go  of  itself." 
A  model,  which  Mr.  H.  has  made,  after  patient  whittling  for 
forty  years,  was  brought  into  our  office,  and  we  found  that  it 
would  go  without  any  impulse  from  without,  and  would  not 
stop   unless  it  was  blocked.     The  power  was  self-contained 
and  self-adjusted,  and  gave  a  sufficient  force  to  carry  ordi- 
nary clockwork  without  any  winding  up  or  replenishing.     In 
short,  we  saw  no  reason  why  it  would  not  go  until  it  was 
worn  out. '  The  inventor  was  an  old  man,  who  had  spent 
his  whole  life  in  pursuit  of  the  object  he  had  now  attained. 
He  was  invited  to  be  present  at  various  fairs  and  exhibitions 
of  new  inventions,  and  wherever  he  went,  his  machine  formed 
one  of  the  chief  attractions.     The  professors  were  all  against 
him.      Accordingly,  Mr.   H.  was  seized  at  Keyport,  N.  J., 
for  practising  "jugglery,"  under  the  "Act  for  suppressing 
vice  and  immorality."     To  expose  the  supposed  trick,  an 
axe  was  brought,  and  the  cylinder  splintered  into  fragments. 
Alas!  for  the  philosopher,  there  was  no  concealed  spring, 
and  the  machine  had  "  gone  of  itself."     (He  made  a  new 
machine.)     His  model  once  more  completed,  was  constructed 
of  brass,  hollow  throughout.     (He  sent  a  working  model  to 
the  Patent  Office,  Washington.)     The  moment  the  blocks 
were  taken  out,  the  wheels  started  off"  "  like  a  thing  of  life;" 
and,  during  ten  months,  it  never  once  stopped.     The  inventor 
had  perfected  two  new  machines,  and  made  a  very  comfort- 
able livelihood  exhibiting  them,  prosecuting  his  efforts  mean- 
while to  secure  his  patent.     Age  crept  upon  him,  however, 
before  this  point  was  reached ;  and  last  Saturday  afternoon 
he  breathed  his  last  at  Freehold.     The  night  after  his  death 
his  shop  was  broken  open,  and  both  models  stolen.     Fortu- 
nately,  the   drawings   are   preserved,  and  there   is   a   little 
machine,  one  of  the  earliest  made,  now  running  in  Brooklyn, 
where  it  has  kept  up  its  ceaseless  ticking  for  nearly  twenty 
years. — New   York  Journal  of  (7om/?*crcc.-^[ Abridged  from 
the    ''  Scientific   American,"    New  York,    26th    November, 
1859,   the    Editor  of   which    states :— "  We   saw  the  self- 
same story  going  the   rounds  of  the   press  some   eighteen 
months  ago,  and  it  is  now  revived  with  the  sad  intelligence 
of  the  inventor's  death."] 

14.    Chenhall*s    Perpetual    Clock. — [The   following 


878  PEBPBTUXJM    mobile; 

letf er  is  from  a  gentleman  of  undoubted  honour,  and  who 
is  above  all  interest  in  the  ingenious  tradesman  of  whom  h« 
writes. — Eds.  M.  M.  : — ] 

I  believe  it  has  been  the  custom,  from  time  immemorial, 
among  nine-tenths  of  our  scientific  people,  to  view  the 
hitherto  occult  theory  of  perpetual  motion  as  a  chimera,  and 
to  regard  the  remaining  few,  who  will  still,  night  after  night, 
expend  thefir  midnight  oil  in  efibrts  to  bring  the  said  occult 
principle  to  light,  witfc  as  little  sympathy  as  those  who  once 
dreamed  away  the  better  part  of  their  existence  while  groping 
for  the  philosopher's  stone. 

In  a  small  out-of-the-way  street  of  Plymouth  (Drake-street) 
there  is  exhibited,  in  the  shop-window  of  a  watchmaker  named 
Chenhall,  a  clock  of  the  size  of  an  ordinary  eight- day  clock, 
with ,  a  novel  and  exceedingly  simple  movement,  and  which, 
simple  as  it  appears,  is  nevertheless  said  to  be  gifted  with  the 
property  of  going  as  long  as  the  durability  of  the  materials 
permits,  without  the  aid  of  weight  or  spring  ;  in  short;  with- 
out any  manual  assistance  whatever. 

,1  beg  to  state  that  I  have  no  personal  interest  in  the  a£fair 
whatsoever,  nor  am  I  even  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the 
unseen  agency  which  has  been  called  in  by  Mr.  Chenhall  to 
effect  hid  purpose,  and  which  the  latter  does  quite  right  in 
concealing  from  public  view;  but  this  I  know,  that  the 
hidden  part  occupies  but  a  very  small  space,  and  that  one 
glance  at  the  mechanii^m  which  is  visible,  seems  to  me  suffi- 
cient to  satisfy  the  most  sceptical  that  Mr.  Chenhall' s  asser- 
tions may  be  relied  on. — A  Subscbibee.  Plymouth,  May  1, 
1858.— [Vol.  68,  1858,  p.  447.] 


Section  5. — Impostures, 

PER^ETuii  MoTioK  iMPbs^iBLE. — An  impostor  exposed. 
— A  cprrespondfent,  who  sigris  *'  Mactaggart,''  makes,  among 
other,  ihe  following  reflections  oii  perpetual  motion  : — 

*  *  *  In  vain  did  the  ancient  Egyptians 

employ  tlieir  black  arts  to  find  it  out;  in  vain  did  the  mathe- 
tnaticiuns  of  the  school  of  Alexandria  club  their  thoughts 
together  respecting  it.  *  *  *  *      . 


OR,   SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTiVE   POWEK.  879 

Yet,  though  this  dark  secret  has  never  been  found  out, 
fior  ever  will,  it  has  been  of  mighty  use  to  the  advancement 
of  the  arts  ;  for  mankind,  in  searching  for  it,  have  found  many 
other  things  of  very  great  value.       *  *  * 

Mystery  has  ever  been  a  thing  of  great  value  to  mankind ; 
it  is  indeed  the  mother  of  curiosity.  *  * 

Since,  now-a-days,  to  all  informed  minds,  perpetual  motion 
seems  at  once  a  thing  of  entire  impossibility  to  find  out,  it 
must  surely  be  a  great  folly  in  any  artizan  or  man  of  genius 
to  waste  his  days  and  his  substance  in  order  to  make  the  dis- 
covery :  the  thing  is  Nature  herself,  on  one  of  her  grandest 
scales ;  it  is  the  utmost  presumption,  therefore,  in  man  to 
dare  to  mimic  her.  The  ocean,  as  it  ebbs  and  flows,  is  a  per- 
petual motion ;  death  and  life  on  the  earth  also  are  the  same 
thing  ;  and  obvious  to  all  are  the  ever- wheeling  orbs  in  the 
firmament  of  heaven. 

The  Almighty  has  wisely  ordered  that  nature  should  ever 
be  in  continual  motion,  never  stable ;  the  continual  move- 
ment is  therefore  an  invention  of  the  Deity,  for  his  rational 
creatures  to  contemplate  and  do  little  else  with,  as  the  causes 
by  which  it  is  actuated  are  concealed  from  our  feeble  coni- 
prehensions  in  impenetrable  darkness  :  we  may  say  they  are 
gravity,  attraction,  and  so  forth ;  but  what  these  are  we  know 
not ;  they  are  only  names  we  give  to  causes,  whose  properties 
are  unknown — the  workmen,  we  may  say,  who  do  stupendous 
things,  which  set  us  a  wondering,  but  to  whom  we  are  entire 
strangers.  ***** 

However,  let  us  farther  treat  of  man  trying  to  imitate  with 
his  arts  this  grand  moving  spectacle  of  his  Creator.  The 
nearest  approach  he  has  ever  made  towards  it  (though,  at  the 
same  time,  we  say  it  is  just  as  far  from  it  as  any)  is  the  simple 
pendulum;  and  were  it  possible  to  swing  it  free  of  friction, 
in  a  complete  vacuum,  it  is  likely  the  thing  would  be  accom- 
plished ;  but  as  this  is  not  possible,  a  continual  motion  cannot 
be  obtained. 

Many  have  fancied  that  the  elenients  of  nature  may  be  so 
brought  to  act  on  each  other,  that  a  movement  of  this  kind 
may  be  had ;  but  these  trials,  one  after  the  other,  have  all 
failed;  perhaps  efforts  "virith  magnetism  have  oftener  been 
tried  than  any,  as  it  has  both  the  virtue  of  attraction  and 
repulsion;  but  these  have  been  attended  with  no  greater 
isuccess  than  the  rest,  though  many  impostors  have  appeared 


380  FEBFETUUM   MOBILE; 

from  time  to  time,  who  have  reported  that  they  had,  with 
deep  study  and  much  difficulty,  found  out  the  important 
secret. 

One  of  those  quacks,  a  few  years  ago,  so  far  imposed  on 
the  good  people  of  Scotland,  who  inhabit  the  country  places 
and  small  villages,  with  an  article  which  he  had  made,  pur- 
porting to  be  this  famous  motion,  that  he  extracted  a  good 
deal  of  cash  out  of  their  pockets,  by  its  exhibition.  At 
length  he  had  the  hardihood  to  go  to  Edinburgh,  the  modem 
Athens,  with  it.  Instantly  his  puffing  handbills  brought 
hundreds  about  him,  all  anxiously  wishing  to  have  a  sight  of 
the  wonderful  machine.  Amongst  others  who  paid  to  get  in 
to  behold  it,  was  an  ingenious  young  artist,  who,  after 
looking  at  it  for  a  little  while,  like  the  rest,  requested  very 
politely  the  inventor's  leave  to  examine  it  in  his  hand.  It 
was  a  beautiful  thing,  certainly,  to  look  at.  An  inverted 
glass  bulb,  about  six  or  eight  inches  high,  and  about  five  in 
diameter  at  the  mouth,  was  placed  on  a  mahogany  bottom, 
about  the  one-fourth  part  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  round  the 
side  of  the  glass ;  in  the  interior  stood  six  pieces  of  metal, 
which  went  under  the  name  of  magnets ;  in  the  centre  of  the 
whole,  on  a  delicate  pedestal,  was  seen  something  rather 
thicker  than  a  needle,  moving  slowly  round :  and  this  was 
the  perpetual  motion. 

The  yoimg  mechanic  began  his  observations  upon  it  by 
examining  minutely  with  a  microscope  round  the  thin  edge 
of  the  mahogany  bottom,  and  was  not  long  before  he  found 
something  like  a  hole,  with  a  stop  very  neatly  put  in  it ;  this 
stop  he  soon  extracted,  and  holding  it  up  to  the  crowd,  said, 
''  This  is  the  place  by  which  the  key  is  inserted,  that  winds 
up  a  thin  coiled  spring,  by  which  the  motion  is  kept  appa- 
rently perpetual.''— [Vol.  1,  1823-4,  p.  253.] 


A  Pekpetual  Motion  Imfostitre,  fkom  America. — A 
person  "just  arrived  from  the  United  States -of  America,"  is 
going  the  round  of  our  provincial  towns,  exhibiting  what  he 
styles  "  one  of  the  grandest  pieces  of  mechanism  that  was 
ever  presented  to  the  world,"  being  nothing  less  than  the 
"  perpetual  motion  which  was  long  sought  for  by  the  great 
Sir  Isaac  Newton,  and  since  by  men  of  all  nations  of  the 


OB,    SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  381 

'  very  first  talents  in  the  arts  and  sciences.''  "  This  grand 
machine"  is  said  to  have  worked  ever  since  it  was  first 
invented — upwards  of  seven  years — and  will  continue  to 
work  without  any  assistance  whatever,  but  by  the  power  of 
its  own  gravity,  balance,  and  pivots,  as  long  as  the  world 
stands ;  or,  in  other  words  (if  the  materials  it  is  made  of 
would  last),  for  ever !"  We  are  further  assured  "  that  it 
has  been  exhibited  in  the  United  States,  and  all  the  principal 
towns  in  the  West  India  Islands ;  and  is  allowed,  by  men  of 
genius,  and  by  those  who  are  acquainted  with  mechanical 
powers,  to  be  one  of  the  most  wonderful  and  extraordinary 
pieces  of  machinery  that  was  ever  invented  in  the  world, 
reflecting  the  highest  credit  on  the  inventor,  for  his  patience 
and  perseverance  for  upwards  of  fifteen  years  study  on  this 
invention." 

The  "  inventor "  of  this  wonderful  wonder  having  lately 
honoured  the  city  of  Norwich  with  a  visit — for  "  a  short 
time"  only,  however,  while  he  "  waits  the  decision  "  of  the 
Royal  Society  of  London,  to  whom  he  has  applied  for  "  the 
premium  offered  by  Government"  (there  is  no  premium) — ^the 
mayor  thought  proper  to  direct  a  friend  in  London  to  inquire 
whether  Mr.  Perkins  knew  anything  of  this  American 
prodigy. 

Mr.  P.  told  the  inquirer  that  he  had  once  actually  travelled 
400  miles  in  America  to  see  a  piece  of  mechanism  which  he 
believed  to  be  similar,  but  that  having  foimd  it  to  be  all  a 
deception,  it  had  been  broken  to  pieces  by  the  populace. 

An  intelligent  correspondent  at  Norwich,  who  examined 
the  apparatus,  has  explained  to  us  pretty  clearly  in  what  the 
deception  consisted ;  but  without  an  engraving  (which  would 
be  thrown  away  on  such  a  piece  of  trickery),  his  deception 
would  not  be  intelligible  to  our  readers. 

It  may  suffice,  for  the  information  of  our  coimtry  friends, 
to  mention  that  the  concealed  cause  of  motion  is  thought  to 
lie  in  the  plinth,  and  that  it  seems  to  consist  of  "  machmery 
attached  to  the  lower  part  of  the  trundle,  worked  by  a  spring 
like  the  pocket- watch.  The  "  planes,  &c.,  upon  the  wheels 
are  mere  gew-gaws,  to  divert  the  attention  from  the  real 
cause."— [Vol.  2,  1824,  p.  361.] 

Adams'  Pebpetual  Motion  Impostttbe. — I  beg  to 
inform  you  of  a  Scotsman,   much  marked  with  the  small- 


382  PERrETuuM  mobile; 

pox,  and  whose  name,  according  to  his  handbills,  was  Adams, 
about  two  years  since  exhibited,  for  eight  or  nine  days,  his 
pretended  perpetual  motion  at  this  place,  and,  I  believe,  took 
the  natives  in  for  fifty  or  sixty  pounds.  Accident,  however, 
led  to  a  discovery  of  the  imposture.  A  gentleman,  viewing 
the  machine,  took  hold  of  the  wheel  or  trundle,  and  lifted  it 
up  a  little,  which,  I  suppose,  disengaged  the  wheels  that 
connected  the  hidden  machinery  in  the  plinth,  and  imme- 
diately he  heard  a  sound  similar  to  that  of  a  watch  tvhen  the 
spring  is  running  down;  the  Scotsman  was  in  great  anger, 
and  directly  put  the  wheel  into  its  proper  position,  and  the 
machine  again  went  round  as  before.  The  circumstance  was 
mentioned  to  an  intelligent  person,  who  determined  to  find 
out  and  expose  the  imposture,  and  took  with  him  a  friend  to 
view  the  machine ;  they  seated  themselves  one  on  each  side 
the  table  upon  which  the  machine  was  placed;  they  then 
took  hold  of  the  wheel  and  trundle,  lifted  them  up  a  little ; 
there  being  some  play  or  liberty  in  the  pivots,  directly  the 
hidden  spring  run  down.  They  continued  to  hold  the 
machine  in  spite  of  the  endeavours  of  the  Scotsman  to  pre- 
vent them.  Wheii  the  spring  had  run  down,  they  placed  the 
machine  again  on  the  table,  and  offered  the  Scotsman  fifty 
pounds  if  it  could  then  set  itself  going.  Alas !  notwithstand- 
ing his  fingering  and  pushing,  it  remained  motionless.  A 
constable  was  sent  for,  the  impostor  went  before  a  magistrate, 
and  there  signed  a  paper  confessing  his  perpetual  motion  to 
be  a  cheat.  He  was  suffered  to  go  at  large  upon  promising 
to  leave  the  town.— [Vol.  3,  1824-5,  p.  364.] 


The  Finch  Lane  Perpetual  Motion  Imposture. — ^I 
observed  some  time  back  in  your  excellent  work,  a  supposed 
refutation  of  what  was  stated  to  be  a  perpetual  motion,  by  a 
man  in  Finch  Lane.  This  man  stated  that  he  could  stop  the 
machine  (merely  a  ball  hanging  to  a  long  spring),  and  that  it 
would  set  itself  agoing  without  his  interference.  The  machine 
certainly  did  this,  and  at  first  puzzled  me  a  good  deal ;  and 
the  reason  of  my  writing  to  you.  now  about  it,  is  to  expose 
the  imposition  in  the  proper  manner.  I  may  here  remark 
that  the  man  has  shown  considerable  ingenuity  (as  I  believe 
the  idea  to  be  quite  new),  though  he  certainly  is  an  impostor. 
Below  the  ball  was  an  orifice,  and  through  this,  the  air  from 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  383 

without  the  room  was  conducted  immediately  upon  the  ball, 
which  it  set  in  motion,  and  continued  to  accelerate,  until  it 
had  received,  by  continually  passing  over  the  hole,  the  full 
effect  of  the  stream  of  air.  The  weather  being  warm,  and 
yet  observing  a  fire  in  the  room  on  both  my  visits,  was  what 
led  me  to  the  discovery ;  and  on  endeavouring  to  keep  open 
the  door  by  which  I  entered,  the  man  interfered ;  but  I  did 
so  long  enough  to  lessen  considerably  the  motion  of  the  ball, 
by  partly  destroying  the  current  of  air. — [Vol.  4,  1825, 
p.  302.]  

Redhceffer's  Perpktual  Motion  Impqsture.* — ^In 
the  year  1813,  a  belief  in  the  delusive  principle  of  perpetual 
motion  was  created  throughout  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
community  of  the  United  States,  by  a  deceptive  machine, 
constructed  by  one  Redhoeffer,  and  had  gained  sufficient 
character  to  induce  an  inquiry  into  its  reality  by  the  appoint- 
ment of  a  committee  of  the  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania.  The 
attention  of  Mr.  Lukens  was  turned  to  the  subject,  and 
although  the  actual  moving  cause  was  not  discovered,  yet  the 
deception  was  so  ingeniously  imitated  in  a  machine  of  similar 
appearance  made  by  him,  and  moved  by  a  spring,  so  well 
concealed,  that  the  deceiver  himself  was  deceived ;  and  Red- 
hoeffer was  induced  to  believe  that  Mr.  Lukens  had  been 
successful  in  obtaining  a  moving  power  in  some  way  in  which 
he  himself  had  failed,  when  he  had  produced  a  machine  so 
plausible  in  appearance  as  to  deceive  the  public. — Franklin 
Journal,— \J'  Mec.  Mag.,"  vol.  46,  1847,  p.  239.] 


Miscellaneous  Journals. 

Having  thus  concluded  the  classified  extracts  from  the 
**  Mechanics'  Magazine,"  we  now  proceed  with  quotations  from 
miscellaneous  journals  : — 

Perpetual  Motion. — In  an  article  on  "  Mental  Delu- 
sions," in  the  "  Penny  Magazine "  for  1841,  the  following, 
;among  other  cases,  occurs : — 

In  the  reign  of  Anne,  a  gentleman  named  Stukelyf  left  his 

^*  See  aUo  *'  Gill's  Tech.  Journal,*'  quoted  in  Chap.  VIII.,  p.  222. 
+  See  also  Chap.  VIII.,  p.  226. 


384  PEKPETUUM   mobile; 

practice  as  a  barrister,  and  retired  into  the  country  to  perfect 
his  discovery  of  the  perpetual  motion,  and  never  left  it  but 
once  for  thirty  years,  when  he  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to 
George  I.,  and  on  which  occasion,  for  the  only  time,  he 
shaved,  and  changed  his  shirt  and  clothes.  Before  he  died, 
he  had  abandoned  his  pursuit  of  the  perpetual  motion,  and 
would  laugh  at  his  own  folly  in  confining  himself  in-doors. — 
[New  Series,  folio,  p.  409.] 


On  the  Impossibility  op  Pebpetual  Motion,  we  take 
the  following  from  the  "  Magazine  of  Science :" — 

If  by  perpetual  motion  be  imderstood  a  power  which 
moves,  and  which  will  move  to  the  end  of  time,  wi^out 
regard  to  the  wear  and  perishable  nature  of  materials,  it  is  in 
vain  to  expect  such  can  be  made  by  human  means  and 
human  intelligence,  however  much  we  may  hope  for  future 
discoveries  in  science  to  aid  us.  In  the  works  of  God  alone 
must  we  look  for  such  perfection  and  continuity  of  motion. 
We  can  only  abide  by  those  laws  already  in  action,  and  must 
therefore  construct  our  machines  according  to  these  previously- 
arranged  impulses  ;  and  unfortunately  for  the  visionary 
schemer  of  the  perpetual  motion,  these  laws  are  too  stubborn 
for  him  to  modify,  much  less  destroy.  Even  supposing  he 
should  content  Imnself  with  an  apparatus  which  would  move 
only  while  its  materials  held  togetiiier,  the  resistance  of  the  air, 
the  friction  of  the  various  parts,  their  vis  inerticB,  and  the 
general  laws  of  gravitation,  are  impediments  never  to  be  over- 
come ;  and  although  all  have  failed,  yet  much  ingenuity  has 
been  exerted,  and  talent  called  into  exercise,  by  the  many 
attempts  which  have  been  made  to  surmoimt  them. 

Mechanics,  particularly  the  known  properties  of  the  lever, 
have  given  rise  to  innumerable  schemes.  One  was  called 
"The  Valley  Windmill.'*  This  consisted  of  a  wheel  with 
five  arms,  each  arm  made  of  two  pieces  connected  end  to  end 
by  a  joint.  When  made  to  turn  roimd,  the  jointed  ends  on 
one  side  fell  back,  or  rather  hung  down  from  the  end  of  the 
fixed  part  of  the  arm;  rising  to  the  greatest  elevation,  it  hung 
close  to  the  fixed  arm ;  passing  beyond  this,  it  fell  back 
towards  the  centre  ;  and  thus  by  its  position  making  a  shorter 
lever,  it  bore  with  less  weight ;  but  when  it  had  gone  a  little 


OK,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB. 

further,  altering  its  centre  of  gravity,  it  fell  down  suddenly, 
when  the  moveable  and  fixed  arm  became  one  long  lever, 
much  heavier  than  in  any  other  position,  and  this  extra  weight 
was  to  turn  the  whole.  The  machine  had  but  one  fault — ^it 
would  not  go.  "  The  "Wheel  of  Balls,"  described  by  the 
Marquis  of  Worcester,*  was  another  scheme.  This  was  a 
very  shallow  drum,  divided  into  a  number  of  compartments, 
into  each  of  which  a  leaden  ball  was  placed,  and  as  the  wheel 
turns  round  each  ball  rolls  alternately  to  and  from  the  centre 
of  the  wheel ;  and  it  would  seem,  from  the  principle  of  the 
lever,  that,  as  the  weights  are  always  further  from  the  centre 
on  one  side  than  on  the  other,  a  continuous  rotatory  motion 
must  be  produced ;  but  it  was  found  that  though  the  balls 
were  thus  placed,  yet  a  very  few  of  them  were  away  from  the 
centre,  while  there  were  many  near  to  it ;  thus,  those  on  one 
side  counteracted  those  on  the  other,  and,  as  in  the  other 
instance,  the  machine  would  not  go. 

Hydraulics,  pneumatics,  and  chemistry,  all  lent  their  aid, 
but  in  vain.  Water-wheels  were  to  throw  up  water  enough 
to  turn  themselves.  Pumps  were  to  move  by  self-created 
power.  Water-balances  were  alternately  to  rise  and  fall  by 
each  other's  weight.  Blasts  of  air  were  to  work  bellows,  and 
the  bellows  were  to  produce  blasts  of  air.  Hydrostatic 
parodoxes  became  numerous.  Barker's  mills  were  in  requi- 
sition. 

[The  article  next  proceeds  to  notice  the  results  of  electricity,, 
giving  an  account  of  "  De  Luc's  "Dry  Pile,  or  Electrical  Column 
and  Melloni's  Rotatory  Pile."]— [Edited by  G.  Francis,  F.L.S. 
Vol.  1,  1849,  p.  194.] 


On  the  Impracticability  of  Pboditcing  a  Pebpetuai- 
Motion. — Perpetual  motion  is  a  motion  which  is  supplied 
and  renewed  from  itself,  without  the  intervention  of  any 
external  cause :  to  find  a  perpetual  motion,  or  to  construct  a 
machine  which  shall  have  such  a  motion,  is  a  subject  which 
has  engaged  the  attention  of  mathematicians  for  more  than 
2000  years ;  though  none  perhaps  have  prosecuted  it  with  so 
much  zeal  and  hopes  of  ultimate  success  as  some  of  the 
speculative  philosophers  of  the  present  age. 

*  The  Marquis  describes  a  very  different  wheel. 


386  PERPETITITM    MOBILE; 

Infinite  are  the  schemes,  designs,  plans,  engines,  wheels, 
&c.,  to  which  this  longed-for  perpetual  motion  has  given 
birth;  and  it  would  not  only  be  endless  but  ridiculous  to 
attempt  to  give  a  detail  of  them  all,  especially  as  none  of  them 
deserve  particular  mention,  since  they  have  all  equally  proved 
abortive;  and  it  would  rather  partake  of  the  nature  of  an 
affront  .than  a  compliment,  to  distinguish  the  pretenders  of 
this  discovery,  ^.s  the  very  attempting  of  the  thing  conveys  a 
very  unfavourable  ide^a  of  the  mental  powers  of  the  operator. 

For  among  all  the  laws  of  n^^tter  and  motion,  we  know  of 
none  which  seen?LS  to  afford  a^y  principle  or  foundation  for 
such  an  effect.  Action  and  re-action  are  allowed  to  be  ever 
equal;  and  a  body  which  gives  any  quantity  of  motion  to 
another,  always  loses  just  so  much  of  its  own :  but,  under  the 
present  state  of  things,  the  resistance  of  the  air,  and  the  friction 
of  the  parts  of  machines,  ncessarily  retard  every  motion. 

To  keep  the  motion  going  on,  therefore,  there  must  either 
be  a  supply  from  some  foreign  cause,  which,  in  a  perpetual 
motion,  is  excluded : 

Or,  all  resistance  from  the  friction  of  the  parts  of  matter 
must  be  removed ;  which  necessarily  implies  a  change  in  the 
nature  of  things. 

For,  by  the  second  law  of  motion,  the  changes  made  in  the 
motions  of  bodies  are  always  proportional  to  the  impressed 
moving  force,  and  are  produced  in  the  same  direction  with  it;, 
no  motion,  then,  can  be  communicated  to  any  engine,  greater 
than  that  of  the  first  force  impressed. 

But,  on  our  earth,  all  motion  is  performed  in  a  resisting 
fluid,  namely,  the  atmosphere,  and  must  therefore,  of  neces- 
sity, be  retarded :  consequently,  a  considerable  quantity  of 
its  motion  will  be  spent  on  the  medium.  Nor  is  there  any 
engine  or  machine  wherein  all  friction  can  be  avoided ;  there 
being  in  nature  no  such  thing  as  exact  smoothness  or  perfect 
congruity ;  the  manner  of  the  cohesion  of  the  parts  of  bodies, 
the  small  proportion  which  the  solid  matter  bears  to  the 
vacuities  between  them,  and  the  ];iature  of  those  constituent 
particles,  not  admitting  it. 

Friction,  therefore,  will  also  in  time  sensibly  diminish  the 
ynpressed  or  communicated  force ;  so  that  a  perpetual  motion 
can  never  follow,  unless  the  communicated  force  be  so  muclj 
greater  than  the  generating  force  as  to  supply  the  diminution 
,occasioned  ,by  all  these  causes ;   but  the  generating  force 


OR,    SEABCH   POB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  387 

cannot  communicate  a  greater  degree  of  motion  than  it  had 
itself.  Therefore,  the  whole  affair  of  finding  a  perpetual 
motion  comes  to  this,  viz.,  to  make  a  weight  heavier  than 
itself,  or  an  elastic  force  greater  than  itself;  or,  there  must  be 
some  method  of  gaining  a  force  equivalent  to  what  is  lost,  by 
the  artful  disposition  and  combination  of  the  mechanical 
powers:  to  this  last  point,  then,  all  endeavours  are  to  be 
directed ;  but  how,  or  by  what  means,  such  a  force  can  be 
gained,  is  still  a  mystery  !* 

The  multiplication  of  powers  or  forces  avails  nothing ;  for 
what  is  gained  in  power  is  lost  in  time ;  so  that  the  quantity 
of  motion  still  remains  the  same. 

The  whole  science  of  mechanics  cannot  really  make  a  little 
power  equal  or  superior  to  a  larger;  and  wherever  a  less 
power  is  found  in  equilibrio  with  a  greater — as,  for  example^ 
twenty-five  pounds  with  one  hundred — it  is  a  kind  of  decep- 
tion of  the  sense ;  for  the  equilibrium  is  not  strictly  between 
one  himdred  pounds  and  twenty-five  pounds  moving  (or 
disposed  to  move)  four  times  as  fast  as  the  one  hundred 
pounds. 

A  power  of  ten  pounds  moving  with  ten  times  the  velocity 
of  one  hundred  poimds  would  have  equalled  the  one  hundred 
in  the  same  manner;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  all  the 
possible  products  equal  to  one  hundred :  but  there  must  still 
be  one  hundred  pounds  of  power  on  each  side,  whatever  way 
they  may  be  taken,  whether  in  matter  or  in  velocity. 

This  is  an  inviolable  law  of  nature ;  by  which  nothing  is 
left  to  art,  but  the  choice  of  the  several  combinations  that 
may  produce  the  same  effects. 

The  only  interest  that  we  can  take  in  the  projects  which 
have  been  tried  for  procuring  a  perpetual  motion,  must  arise 
from  the  opportunity  that  they  afford  of  observing  the  weakness 
of  human  reason. 

For  a  better  instance  of  this  can  scarcely  be  supplied  than 
to  see  a  man  spending  whole  years  in  the  pursuit  of  an  object, 
which  a  single  week's  application  to  sober  philosophy  would 
have  convinced  him  was  imattainable. 

But  for  the  satisfaction  of  those  who  may  not  be  convinced 


*  The  foregoing  is  an  epitome  of  what  has  appeared,  first  in  most  of 
the  German,  and  from  them  copied  into  English  Encyclopaedias. 

c2 


388  PESPETuxTM  mobile; 

of  the  impossibility  of  attaining  tliis  grand  object,  we  shall 
add  a  few  observations  on  the  subject  of  a  still  more  practical 
nature  than  the  above. 

The  most  satisfactory  confutation  of  the  notion  of  the  xwssi- 
bility  of  a  perpetual  motion  is  derived  from  the  consideration 
of  the  properties  of  the  centre  cf  gravity ;  it  is  only  necessary 
to  examine  whether  it  will  begin  to  descend  or  ascend  when 
the  machine  moves,  or  whether  it  will  remain  at  rest.  If  it 
be  so  placed  that  it  must  either  remain  at  rest  or  ascend,  it  is 
clear,  from  the  laws  of  equilibrium,  that  no  motion  derived 
from  gravitation  can  take  place :  if  it  may  descend,  it  must 
either  continue  to  descend  for  ever  with  a  finite  velocity, 
which  is  impossible,  or  it  must  first  descend  and  then  ascend 
with  a  vibratory  motion,  and  then  the  case  will  be  reducible 
to  that  of  a  pendulum,  where  it  is  obvious  that  no  new  motion 
is  generated,  and  that  the  friction  and  resistance  of  the  air 
must  soon  destroy  the  original  motion. 

One  of  the  most  common  fallacies  by  which  the  superficial 
projectors  of  machines  for  obtaining  a  perpetual  motion  have 
been  deluded,  has  arisen  from  imagining  that  any  number  of 
weights  ascending  by  a  certain  path  on  one  side  of  the  centre 
of  motion*,  and  descending  on  the  other  at  a  greater  distance, 
must  cause  a  constant  preponderance  on  the  side  of  the 
descent;  and  for  this  purpose  weights  have  been  made  to 
s^de  or  roll  along  grooves  or  planes,  which  lead  them  to  a 


*  On  this  important  point,  the  reader  will  do  well  to  consult  Bishop 
Wilkins,  on  the  relation  between  the  parts  of  a  wheel  and  those  of  a 
balance,  Chapter  T„  page  9  to  12  ;  likewise  Desaguliers's  account  of  a 
coinpoiind  balance,  on  which  two  bodies  of  equal  weight  may  be 
varicusly  Fu^pended  with  respect  to  the  centre,  without  losing  their 
equilibrium,  Chapter  IV.,  pages  93  to  97  ;  also  noticed  by  Nicholson 
at  page  79.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  Introductory  Essay,  the  author 
has  described  the  diagram  of  a  model  of  his  invention,  perhaps  still 
more  convincing,  as  it  forms  an  actual  wheel,  the  rotation  of  which 
occasions  all  the  weights  on  one  eide  to  protrude,  yet  without  over- 
balancing ;  and,  curious  enough,  on  reverrfng  the  rotation  the  advanced 
weights  all  recede,  and  those  nearest  the  centre  are  projected  further 
from  the  centre,  with  no  better  result.  'No  mechanic  who  has  made 
himself  acquainted  with  even  these  few  facts,  will  feel  justified  in 
maldng  models  for  plans  of  self-motive  machinery,  until  he  has  first 
eatisfi^  himself,  by  drawings  made  to  scale,  that  the  invention  will 
.-.bear  the  test  of  rigorous  examination. 


ox,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  389 

more  remote  part  of  the  wheel,  from  whence  they  return  as 
they  ascend,  as  represented  in  the  following  figure* : — 


Or  -^^ey  hare  heen  fixed  on  hinges,  which  aHow  them  to  fali 
oyer  at  a  certain  point,  so  as  to  hecome  more  distant  from  the 
centre ;  but  it  will  appear,  on  the  inspection  of  such  a  machine, 
tj^at  although  some  of  the  weights  are  more  distant  from  the 
centre  than  others,  yet  there  is  always  a  proportionally  smaller 
nijimber  of  them  on  that  side  on  which  they  have  the  greater 
power  ;  so  that  these  circumstances  precisely  counterbalance 
each  other. 

We  have  heard  it  proposed  to  attach  hollow  Arms  to  a 
wheel  by  joints  or  hinges  at  the  circumference,  and  to  fill 
these  arms  with  quicksilver  or  small  balls  instead  of  the  plan 
represented  by  the  above  figure ;  but  though  we  have  never 
heard  of  .it  JtifiviQg  bc^ein  tried)  yre  are  perfectly  convinced  that 

♦  In  the  model,  the  balls  may  be  ^ept  in  their  plaecf  ^jy  a  i>lfite  of 
glass  ooyering  the  wheel  ' 


390  PBEPETTJUM    MOBILE  ; 

it  would  end  as  all  other  attempts  have  done ;  that  is,  in  a 
total  failure. — ["  The  Artisan  ;  or,  Mechanic's  Instructor/* 
2  vols.,  8vo.     London,  1824-5.] 


A  Scotch  journal  gives  the  following  popular  view  of  the 
suhject : — 

It  is  not  many  years  since  the  discovery  of  the  perpetual 
motion  was  a  suhject  of  grave  discussion,  and  numerous 
individuals  of  high  ingenuity  wasted  their  time,  and  exhausted 
their  means,  in  futile  contrivances  destined  to  realize  a  notion 
which  nobody  had  shown  to  he  impossible.  A  more  general 
diffusion  of  sound  knowledge  has  of  late  thrown  popular 
discredit  on  pursuits  of  this  chimerical  nature,  and  replaced 
the  delusions  which  occupied  minds  of  an  inventive  turn,  by 
projects  of  a  more  rational  character.  Still,  however,  the 
subject  is  now  and  again  revived,  by  some  young  mechanical 
novices,  who  for  a  short  period  of  their  noviciate  imagine 
themselves  endowed  with  a  higher  degree  of  inventive  genius, 
than  ever  before  fell  to  the  lot  of  any  single  contriver.  A 
young  man  in  the  first  year  of  his  apprenticeship,  struck  with 
the  beauty  of  the  machinery  which  he  sees  around  him,  and 
as  yet  but  ill-acquainted  with  the  principles  of  its  construction, 
and  having  heard  a  deal  about  a  perpetual  motion,  begins  to 
plan,  and  lights  upon  a  project  which  he  feels  sure  could  not 
have  been  before  thought  of,  and  it  must  succeed.  Many  a' 
sleepless  hour  it  costs  him,  and  it  is  only  after  a  salutary 
exhibition  of  the  absurdity  of  his  scheme  to  astonish  the 
world  by  his  powers  of  invention,  that  he  is  cured  of  his 
self-idolatry. 

It  may  not  be  difficult  to  see  why  the  particular  contrivance 
failed  in  producing  the  expected  effect ;  but  it  is  not  there- 
fore manifest  that  all  contrivances  would  similarly  fail,  or 
that  the  problem  is  practically  impossible  ;  and,  supposing 
the  novice  after  his  failure  were  to  inquire  at  some  of  his  own 
experienced  acquaintances — some  one,  perhaps,  whom  he  has 
heard  ridiculing  the  notion  in  the  strongest  terms,  as  grossly 
absurd — would  he  receive  a  convincing  statement  of  the 
insurmountable  difficulty  ?  Put  the  question  broadly — why 
is  a  perpetual  motion,  in  the  sense  in  which  mechanics  under- 
stand it,  impossible  ?     It  is  not  enough  to  say  that  great  and 


OB,   SEARCH   FOK   SELF-MOTIYE   POWER.  391 

numerous  attempts  have  been  made  to  attain  it,  and  all  with- 
out success ;  for  the  question  just  occurs — ^why  did  they  fail? 
If  they  failed  for  want  of  ingenuity,  then  a  perpetual  motion 
is  possible ;  but  that  is  denied,— then  wherein  consists  the 
cause  of  failure  ? 

It  is  in  this  way  that  we  may  suppose  the  experienced 
derider  of  perpetual  motions  to  be  "pushed  home'*  by  his 
young  experimenting  friend,  and  he  will  require  some  know- 
ledge of  mechanical  principles  to  escape  without  humiliation. 
The  attempt  is  not  always  successful :  we  have  been  witness 
to  more  than  one  case,  in  which  the  strength  of  the  argument 
lay  on  the  wrong  side.  We  have  even  met  with  instances, 
where,  at  the  same  time  that  the  notion  of  a  perpetual  motion 
was  ridiculed  in  unqualified  terms,  exactly  the  same  absurdity 
was  admitted  indirectly,  as  one  of  the  most  easy  and  practical 
things  which  could  be  imagined.  As  a  palpable  case,  we  have 
heard  a  gentleman  of  veracity  state,  and  maintain  the  state- 
ment, that  he  had  observed  in  the  course  of  his  travels, 
which  were  not  very  extensive,  an  apparatus,  consisting  of 
an  overshot  wheel  and  pump,  for  clearing  a  quarry  of  bed- 
water  ;  and  that  the  wheel  was  driven  by  a  portion  of  the 
same  water  which  the  pump  lifted.  Now  this  is  the  very 
beau  ideal  of  a  perpetual  motion.  Here  was  a  pump  capable 
of  lifting  more  water  than  was  required  to  work  it ;  con- 
sequently, the  superfluous  water,  being  so  much  extra  power, 
might  have  been  applied  to  do  other  work,  as  lifting  stones 
and  the  like.  And  farther,  the  same  apparatus  might  be 
erected  over  a  tank  of  water,  and  it  would  work  on  so  long  as 
the  machinery  remained  in  good  repair,  and  the  power  which 
it  furnished  after  driving  itself  might  be  applied  to  any  useful 
purpose.  But  what  are  the  real  facts  of  the  case  ?  Sup- 
posing the  machinery  once  fairly  set  in  motion,  and  supposing 
that  its  motion  was  retarded  by  no  friction  or  other  resisting 
cause,  and  that  there  was  no  waste  of  water  by  leakage,  then 
would  it  continue  to  work  for  an  indefinite  time, — the  pump 
would  go  on,  lifting  the  water  to  the  height  from  which  it 
descended  upon  the  wheel,  but  not  the  miilioneth  part  of  an 
inch  higher. 

In  fact,  as  the  pump  obviously  can  give  no  power,  the 
whole  apparatus  might  be  viewed  as  a  single  water-wheel,  in 
which  the  ascending  side  received  at  the  bottom,  and  carried 
up  with  it  just  as  much  water  as  the  descending  side  received 


392  P£RF£TUUM    MOBILE; 

at  the  top  to  carry  do^m ;  and  in  sucb  an  arrangement,  it  is 
manifestly  of  no  consequence  whether  the  water  ever  leaves 
the  wheel  or  not ;  that  is,  whether  it  be  thrown  off  by  the 
descending  buckets  at  the  bottom,  and  taken  in  by  the 
ascending  buckets  at  the  same  point,  or  be  simply  carried 
round  with  the  revolutions  of  the  wheel  without  displacement 
from  the  buckets  into  which  it  was  first  poured;  And  if  this 
be  true,  it  is  not  very  difficult  to  see  that  the  wheel  would 
move  ad  infinitum,  just  as  well  without  the  water  at  all ! 
Now,  the  real  circumstances  are  these : — The  effective  power 
of  the  best-constructed  overshot  water-wheel  is  only  70  per 
cent,  of  the  power  which  drives  it;  that  is,  for  every  100 
gallons  of  water  expended  upon  driving  it,  it  would  lift  70 
gallons  to  the  same  height,*  and  no  more ;  antd  a  pumping 
apparatus  must  be  very  well  constructed  indeed,  to  give  an 
actual  result  equal  to  70  per  ceilt.  of  the  power  of  the  wheel. 
Here,  then,  is  a  loss  of  30  per  cent,  of  power  in  working  the 
apparatus,  and,  consequently,  all  the  water  lifted  by  the  pump 
would  just  be  half  sufficient  to  keep  up  the  motion,  without 
requiring  the  machinery  to  do  any  other  work.  So  much, 
then,  for  not  knowing  how  to  observe. 

The  case  which  we  have  here  noticed  is  probably  absurd 
to  every  mechanic  who  knows  anything  about  hydraulic 
machines;  but  the  same  absurdity  has  sometimes  been 
scarcely  less  glaringly  introduced  into  the  schemes  of  ignorant 
projectors.  Many  of  these  worthies,  in  the  plenitude  of 
their  presumption,  undertake  to  create  pbwer  by  complex 
fcombinations  of  mechanical  elements  which  they  obviously 
do  not  understand.  Within  perhaps  200  yards  of  ^here  we 
write,  still  stands,  for  aught  we  know  to  the  contrary,  a 
specimen  of  this  sort,  on  which  we  believe  riot  less  than 
£1,000,  were  spent,  and  which  was  not  patented  only  in  con- 
sequence of  the  death  of  the  projector;  The  money  belonged 
to  a  person  who,  fortunately,  can  sustain  the  loss  of  it  without 
serious  inconvetiience,  and  who  perhaps  deserved  to  pay  th^ 
penalty  of  his  ignorance;  the  merit  of  the  contrivance 
belonged  to  one  of  those  individuals  who  would  rather 
scheme  than  work,  and  who  had  just  that  amount  of  me- 
chanical knowledge  which  is  dangerous.  The  machine 
alluded  to  is  likewise  an  hydraulic  one,  and  its  pretended 
object  was  to  save  three-fourths  of  the  water  used,  by  pumping 
it  up  again  to  the  top  of  the  fall,  and  this  without  loss  cS 


OR,    SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTITE   FOWEB.  893 

effective  power  in  the  machine!  This  person,  and  his 
employer,  no  doubt  laughed  loudly  together  at  the  absurdity 
of  a  perpetual  motion. 

But  all  the  great  projectors  of  this  class  are  not  simply 
water  doctors.  We  have  known  them  take  to  contrivances 
for  "  lifting  great  weights  without  loss  of  speed,'*  and  find 
their  multiplicity  of  pulleys,  wheels,  and  pinions,  bent  and 
straight  levers,  all  resolvable  into  a  value  little  superior  to 
that  of  a  single  pulley.  This  is  fact ;  we  have  seen  such  a 
combination  of  mechanical  elements,  and  for  such  an  object, 
on  which  a  man — a  great  genius  in  his  own  and  his  employer'^ 
estimation — ^worked  for  upwards  of  two  years  with  bolted 
doors,  and  every  other  precaution  against  the  mighty  secret 
being  divulged  to  the  wondering  world. — ["The  Practical 
Mechanic  and  Engineer's  Magazine,"  vol.  1,  Glasgow,  18^1, 
pp.  8-12.] 

The  following  paper  gives  "  An  Account  of  Three  Large 
Loadstones,  one  of  which  presented  an  unusual  Line  of 
Attraction.  By  John  Deuchar,  M.W.S.,  and  Lectiu-er  on 
Chemistry  in  Edinburgh.  Read  before  the  Wernerian  Natural 
History  Society,  March  10,  1821." 

After  a  few  introductory  remarks,  he  says  : — "  The  largest 
of  the  loadstones,  independent  of  its  armature  and  connecting 
iron,  weighs  125i  pounds,  and  it  measures 

In  length    ..         ..  10}  inches 

In  breadth 8^      » 

In  height    ..         ..  ..  ..  ••     ^i      >, 

and  was  capable  in  all  of  bearing  a  weight  of  206  poimds." 
He  then  proceeds  to  a  description  of  the  two  others,  and 
observes : — 

Before  concluding  this  paper,  I  may  take  notice  of  an  im- 
position which  was,  about  three  years  ago,  attempted  to  be  kept 
up  upon  the  prosecutors  of  science  in  different  parts  of  the 
united  kingdom  by  a  needy  shoemaker,  of  the  name  of  Spence,* 
as  this  disgraceful  fraud  was  first  exposed  by  means  of  the 
largest  of  the  magnets  just  explained.     This  individual  pre- 

*  Sec  further  notices  of  him  in  pages  180  and  226* 


394 


PEBFETUUM   MOBII.S; 


tended  to  have  discovered  a  black  substance  which  did  not 
conduct  magnetic  energy  through  it,  and  he  wished  it  to 
appear  that  when  this  substance  was  made  to  come  between 
a  steel  beam  and  a  magnet,  the  power  of  attraction  was 
lessened,  if  not  altogether  stopped.  He  placed  machinery  in 
such  a  situation  as  not  to  be  observed;  and,  with  the  assistance 
of  a  few  falsehoods,  which  he  foimd  very  useful  in  raising 
the  curiosity  and  extorting  the  charity  of  credulous  visitors, 
he  tried  to  induce  a  belief  that  a  pendulum  was  then  moving 
a  clock,  and  had  continued  to  do  so  for  six  months,  without 
any  other  exciting  power  than  two  small  magnets.  This  is 
shewn  in  Fig.  9.  A  B  are  two  supposed  non-conductors  of 
(Fig.  9.) 


(The  pretended  Pendulum  Motion  by  Magnetism.) 

magnetism,  affixed  to  the  opposite  ends  of  a  beam  moving  on 
its  centre ;  C  D  are  the  two  magnets,  which  were  said  to 
attract  alternately  the  end  E  of  the  pendulum  E  F.  At  the 
commencement  of  the  motion  of  the  pendulum,  it  was  said 
that  one  of  the  pieces  of  the  black  substance,  say  A,  was 
moved  from  between  the  magnet  C  and  the  pendulum ;  this 
enabled  the  attraction  between  C  E  to  take  place,  and  cut  off 
the  attraction  between  D  E ;  and  this  is  the  state  in  which 
the  figure  on  the  plate  is  dra^vn.  But  as  E  approaches  nearer 


OK,   SEJLBCH   FOB   SEiF-MOTIVE   POWEE.  395* 

to  C,  SO  as  to  prevent  the  actual  contact  of  C  E,  then  Amoves 
up,  and  entirely  cuts  off  the  effect,  and  at  the  same  time  B 
leaves  the  power  of  D  in  full  action ;  therefore  E  moves  from 
C  towards  D,  and,  when  it  has  nearly  arrived  there,  B  again 
moves  up,  and  A  descends  :  and  thus,  it  was  maintained,  the 
continued  motion  of  the  pendulum  was  kept  up. 

Another  way  of  exhibiting  this  deception  is  shown  in  Fig. 
lO.  Here,  by  the  false  accoimt  given,  we  are  told  that  a 
very  fine  steel  beam,  about  an  inch  in  length,  has  been  made 

{Fig.  10.) 


(The  pretended  Perpetual  Magnetic  Motion.) 

to  revolve  with  great  rapidity  for  many  months,  and  that  two 
magnets,  partially  coated  with  the  extraordinary  black  sub- 
stance already  noticed,  and  placed  at  opposite  sides,  are 
the  sole  cause  of  the  motion.  This  motion,  it  is  almost 
unnecessary  to  add,  was  also  induced  by  secreted  machinery 
in  the  box  on  which  it  rested.  On  one  of  the  nights  of  lecture, 
when  I  was  upon  the  subject  of  magnetism,  this  scientific 
juggler  brought  his  perpetual  motion,  as  he  called  it,  to  the 
class-room.  As  at  this  time  I  had  the  largest  of  the  three 
magnets  (Fig.  11)  suspended  there,  for  the  purpose  of  ex- 
phuning  its  peculiarities  and  powers,  I  thought  it  would  be  a 
good  opportimity  to  try  the  truth  of  his  assertion  with  regard 
to  the  cause  of  the  motion.  I  therefore  placed  the  revolving 
needle  (Fig.  10)  on  a  table  under  the  large  magnet,  while 
the  usual  weight  which  it  carried  was  removed,  but  the 
needle  moved  as  rapidly  as  before.  Here,  then,  a  loadstone 
capable  of  lifting  205  poimds  did  not  affect  a  needle  said  to 
be  moved  by  two  very  small  artificial  horse-shoe  magnets. 
On  another  occasion  I  placed  a  piece  of  the  black  substance, 
which  was  called  a  non-conductor,  between  a  magnet  and  a 
magnetised  sewing-needle,  which  I  balanced  on  the  point  of 
my  finger,  and  I  found  it  to  be  attracted  and  repelled,   as 


396 


FE&rETuuM  mobile; 


the  different  poles  wete  presented,  in  the  same  Way  as  if  no 
such  hlack  suhstance  had  intervened, — ["  The  Glasgow  Me- 
chanics' Magazine,"  vol.  2,  1824-5,  p.  98* 
{Fig,  11.) 


(Dr.  Hope's  large  Magnet^  as  it  was  suspended  in  Mr.  Deuchar** 
class-room.) 


PEKPEiUAL  Motion  ;  a  Paradox. — ^Let  A  B  C  D,  Fig.  7< 
(%.7.) 

D 


bfe  a  wheel  moveable  on  its  axis,  passing  through  its  centra 
O ;  if  one  half  of  it,  A  B  C,  be  situated  in  a  vessel  tilled  with 


OB,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB. 


397" 


water,  and  the  other  half  ADC  lose  as  miich  of  its  weight 
as  the  weight  of  its  bulk  of  water,  will  it  occasion  A  D  C  to 
preponderate  and  produce  a  constant  motion;  or  does  the 
wheel  remain  in  equilibrium,  and  if  so,  what  is  the  occasion 
of  this  paradox  ?— [Vol.  2,  1824-5,  p.  42.] 


(Fig.  2.) 


Explanation    oi'    te/e    foregoing    Paradox. — Th^ 
pressure  of  the  water  in  every  direction  at  any  point  B,  Fig.  2, 

being  equal,  if  E  B  and  F  B  be 
the  directioiis  of  two  of  these' 
pressures  equally  inclined  to  the 
radius  produced,  O  B  G,  then 
their  resultant  is  G  B  O,  in  thef 
direction  of  the  centre;  which 
C8tn,  therefore,  have  no  tendency 
to  put  the  wheel  in  motion.  The? 
same  may  be  said  of  every  two 
similar  pressures,  hence  the 
Wheel  remains  in  equilibrium. — • 
[Vol.  2,  p.  42.] 


A  Perpetital  Motio^  P^ump.— ^A  co-respondent  of  the 
"  Glasgow  Mechanics*  Magazine  "  thus  describes  his  riews : — ' 

I  thought  I  had  discovered  the  perpetual  motion.  The 
method  which  appeared  to  itte  likely  to  answer  was  this : — « 
Place  s  Wheel  in  a  large  cistern,  so  that  it  may  turn  roimd 
without  touching  the  water  at  the  bottom,  and  that  the  water 
falling  upon  the  wheel  may  not  escape  from  the  cistern.  Attach 
this  wheel  to  the  end  of  a  beam,  or  balance,  by  a  crank ;  to 
the  other  end  of  this  balance  attach  a  pimip,  or  pumps,  to 
raise  a  sufficient  quantity  of  water  from  the  cistern  to  drive 
the  wheel ;  raisd  this  water  into  another  cistern  about  double 
the  height  of  the  wheel ;  below  this  cistern  place  another,  con- 
taining a  wheel  of  the  same  size,  and  in  the  same  situation  ai^ 
the  former.  The  water  in  the  highest  cistern  would  turn 
this  wheel,  and  the  water  in  the  middle  cistern  would  drive 
the  first- mentioned  wheel  (being  lower  than  the  other).  You 
will  observe,  the  intention  of  the  higher  wheel  is  to  drfv^ 


398 


PERFETUUM   MOBIXS; 


machinery,  as  the  power  of  the  lower  one  b  exhausted  (or, 
as  I  afterwards  understood,  overcome)  by  working  the 
pumps.— [Vol.  2,  p.  219.] 

A  Peepetual  Motion  by  Hollow-spoke©  Wheel  and 
Balls  ;  thus  described : — 

The  annexed  drawing  shows  how  I  have  at  length  taken 
this  enticing  jilt  (perpetual  motion),  though  after  a  long  and 
weary  chase — 

Through  pleasant  and  delightful  fields, 

Through  barren  tracts  and  lonely  wilds ; 

'  Mongst  quagmires,  mosses,  muirs,  and  marsbet. 

Where  deil  or  spunkie  never  scarce  is ! 

By  chance  I  happened  on  her  deu. 

And  took  her  when  she  didna  ken. 


W  W  W  W    (Fig.  3)    represents  a  wheel  with  twelve 
hollow  spokes,  in  each  of  which  there  is  a  rolling  weight  or 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  399 

ball.  C  C  C  C  is  a  chain  passing  over  two  pulleys  P  P. 
There  is  an  opening  round  the  wheel  from  the  nave  to  the 
circumference,  so  as  to  allow  the  chain  to  pass  freely  and  to 
meet  the  weights.  The  weights  are  met  by  the  chain  as  the 
wheel  revolves,  and  are  raised  from  the  circumference  till 
they  are  at  last  brought  close  to  the  nave,  where  they  remain 
till,  by  the  revolution  of  the  wheel,  they  are  allowed  to  roll 
out  to  the  circumference.  By  this  arrangement,  the  weights 
are,  on  one  side  of  the  wheel,  always  at  the  circumference, 
so  that  that  side  is  more  powerful  than  the  other,  which 
causes  the  wheel  continually  to  revolve.  F  F  F  F  is  the 
frame  of  the  machine ;  M  M  M  M  the  mortices  for  joining 
the  two  sides  of  the  frame  by  cross  rails.  The  arrows  point 
out  the  direction  in  which  the  wheel  turns.-r-l  am,  yours,  &c., 
Dixon  Vallance.  Liberton,  Lanarkshire,  Nov.  10,  1825. 
—[Vol.  4,  p.  227.] 


He  afterwards  writes  to  suggest  employing  angled  spokeff^ 
which  allow  the  rolling  weights  to  run  off  above  the  centre^ 
In  this  machine  the  angle  between  the  chain  and  the  spokes 
is  less  acute  than  in  the  other,  which  has  spokes  straight  out 
from  the  centre,  and  of  course  it  has  more  power ;  the  wheel 
with  12  hollow  spokes  having  an  opening  in  them  to  allow 
the  chain  to  pass  freely,  and  to  meet  the  weights,  with  the 
chain  passing  over  two  pulleys. 

[Our  friend,  Mr.  Vallance,  is  probably  not  aware  that 
machines  on  the  same  principle  with  the  above  have  been 
repeatedly  tried,  and  as  often  foimd  to  fail.  Indeed,  until  he 
can  remove  the  effects  of  friction,  he  will  not  get  this  amended 
machine  to  move  any  time.  It  is  not  to  be  disputed,  that  the 
friction  of  the  rollers  or  the  chain,  and  the  wheel  itself,  will 
completely  compensate  any  power  derived  from  the  weight 
which  the  descending  balls  may  have  over  the  ascending. — 
Eds.  "  The  Glasgow  Mechanic^'  Magazine,"  vol.  5,  1826, 
p.  166.] 


Perpetual   Motion  :     its    Pursuit    Censured.  —  In   the 
'^  Saturday  Magazine,"    for   1838,    appears    an   article    on. 


400  PERPETUUH    MOBII.K; 

*^  Recreations  in  Xatural  Philosophy : "  the  fifth  part  is  ^  On 
Perpetual  Motion,"  from  which  the  following  is  an  extract : — 

An  amusing,  but  at  the  same  time  a  melancholy  and  in- 
structive, history  might  be  formed  of  the  various  visionaiy 
schemes  which,  in  all  ages,  have  disposed  some  enthusiastic 
men  to  dissipate  their  time  and  fortune  in  seeking  to  obtain 
some  object  which  should  either  confer  boundless  riches  on 
its  possessor,  or  shield  him  from  all  t^e  ordinarv  accidents 
of  life. 

Our  distinguished  countryman.  Dr.  Thomas  Toung,  says 
ihat  '^  to  seek  for  a  source  of  motioj^  in  the  construction  of  a 
machine  betrays  a  gross  ignorance  of  the  principles  on  which 
all  machines  operate.  The  only  interest  ihat  we  can  take  in 
the  projects  which  have  been  tried  for  procuring  a  perpetual 
motion,  must  arise  from  the  opportunity  afforded  us  to  observe 
the  weakness  of  human  reason ;  to  see  a  man  spending  whole 
years  in  the  pursuit  of  an  object  which  a  week's  application 
to  sober  philosophy  might  have  convinced  him  was  unattain- 
able." 

It  will  be  amusing  to  adduce  a  few  examples  of  this  *^  gross 
ignorance,"  in  some  out  of  the  numerous  attempts  which 
have  been  made  to  obtain  perpetual  motion. 

[These  consist  of  three  plans  of  wheels  with  moving 
weights,  and  a  self-filling  goblet, — this  last  from  Dr.  Amott's 
work, — all  occurring  in  the  present  treatise.] 

A  few  years  ago,  a  person  fond  of  mechanical  pursuits 
i^ubmitted  to  the  writer  a  plan  for  a  machine  whose  object 
was  to  supersede  the  steam-engine.  Water  was  the  moving 
power,  and  the  principle  was  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  the 
hydrostatic  press.  He  said  his  invention,  being  new,  could 
not  be  affected  by  anything  that  had  been  written  on  the 
siubject.  He  contrived  many  arrangements  and  spent  much 
money,  without  the  smallest  prospect  of  a  propor;tionate 
Xeturn  from  it.— [Vol.  13,  p.  99.] 


On    a  Plan   op    Pebpetual    Motion   at  Ferraba, 
we  find  the  following  in  an  Italian  Journal : — 

Signer  Alfonzo  Roito,  of  Ferrara,  has  made  several  experi- 
.]|ients,  by  .which  l;ie  bejieves  to  have  discoyered  perpet.ual  mgr 


OB,   SEARCH    FOE   SELP-MOTlVE   POWER.  401 

tion.  His  invention  does  not  appear  to  deserve  to  be  put  on 
one  side  like  many  others,  for  the  Government  has  taken  it 
seriously  into  consideration.  The  Cardinal  Ilgolini,  legate  at 
Ferrara,  has  nominatpd  a  committee  of  competent  judges — 
philosophers,  engineers,  and  mechanics — for  the  purpose  of 
testing  its  merits.  The  committee  has  already  sat  twice,  and 
reports  and  drawings  have  been  sent  to  Rome,  to  the  Govern- 
ment, with  the  following  recommendation  by  the  committee ; — 

First.  After  having  carefully  examined  the  forces  which 
act  on  the  machine,  and  having  as  nearly  as  possible  tested 
their  power,  always  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  machine,  we 
find  that  the  forces  favourable  to  the  motion  are  superior  to 
those  which  are  against  it.  The  resistance  of  the  parts  which 
compose  the  machine  appear  to  us  to  possess  all  the  requisite 
strength ;  consequently,  our  opinion  is,  that  it  is  ver^  likely 
that  the  machine  may  be  put  m  motion  by  itself,  and  that  it 
will  not  easily  be  deranged. 

Secondly.  Your  committee  finds  that  the  construction  of 
the  machine  is  ingenious  and  simple ;  and  after  having  ex- 
amined the  machine  as  to  the  n^ode  in  which  its  movements 
are  brought  to  act  together,  your  committee  considers  it 
worthy  of  high  praise. 

Thirdly.  The  expenses  of  the  construction  will  not  exceed 
I36OO  Roman  crowns,  8,070  francs, — a  small  outlay  if  the  ad- 
vantages gained  shall  be  such  as  the  inventor  anticipates ; 
among  others,  of  setting  in  action  foi^  pair  of  stones  for 
grinding  wheat. — ["  The  Inventors*  Advocate,  and  Patentees* 
Recorder,"  4to.,  1839,  vol.  1,  p.  183.] 


The  Attempts  to  Produce  a  Perpetitaii  Motion. — 
In  a  leading  article  of  the  "Inventors'  Advocate,"  the 
Editor  says : — 

There  are  few  objects  on  which  so  much  time  and  money 
have  been  thrown  away  as  in  the  fruitless  aittempts  to  con- 
struct a  machine  that  will  move  for  ever.  Patent  after  patent 
lias  been  taken  out  with  a  view  to  secure  the  .exclusive  right 
'%o  inventions  in  which  it  was  falsely  imagined  the  desired 
object  had  been  attained.  A  description  of  all  the  inventions 
for  the  purpose  of  procuring  perpetual  motion  would,  indeed, 
present  a  curious  record  of  ignorance,  fallacious  reasoning, 
.aud  misdirected  ingenuity. 


402  PERPETI7UM  mobile; 

[After  some  general  remarks  he  adds : — ] 

It  lias  been  frequently  attempted  to  apply  the  power  of 
gravitation  for  this  purpose ;  but  as  that  power  acts  equally  on 
the  whole  mass  of  matter  in  the  earth,  its  force  cannot  be 
varied,  nor  its  direction  changed,  by  any  means  within  the 
limite  of  human  capability.— [Vol  9,  1840,  p.  264.] 


AiiLEGED  Discovery  by  Geobge  Watheb. — ^In  the 
"  Engineer,*'  February  8,  1856,  is  copy  of  a  police  report, 
in  which  is  an  account  of  the  difficulties  of  George  Wather, 
tailor,  about  70  years  of  age,  from  Bridport,  who  applied  for 
advice.  About  four  years  ago  (1852)  he  ventured  on  marry- 
ing a  third  time,  and  carried  on  business  in  a  small  way,  until 
he  by  accident  discovered  that  which  had  for  centuries  baffled 
the  greatest  philosophers,  namely,  the  "perpetual  motion." 
His  friends  said  that  doubtless  he  would  meet  with  distin- 
guished patrons  in  London.  Encouraged  by  their  representa- 
tions, he  and  his  wife  set  off  with  just  sufficient  to  bring  them 
to  town.  His  impression  was  that  he  should  be  possessed  of 
thousands  in  a  few  days,  but,  to  his  utter  astonishment,  neither 
the  authorities  at  Marlborough  House,  the  Lord  Chancellor, 
nor  Lord  Palmerston,  would  entertain  his  invaluable  discovery, 
nor,  in  fact,  could  he  find  any  one  who  would ;  thus  he  was 
left  destitute,  without  means  to  get  back  to  Bridport.  He 
was  relieved  from  the  poor-box,  and  obtained  a  pass  home, 
[Vol.  1,  1856,  p.  73.] 

An  American  Plan  op  Perpetual  Motion  : — 
Even  the  pursuit  after  perpetual  motion,  hopeless  as  it  is, 

{Fig.  1.) 


OR,    SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB. 


403 


may  not  be  considered  entirely  vain,  in  occasionally  leading 
to  useful  modifications  of  machinery.  As  an  instance  of  this, 
I  here  submit  to  you  a  plan  suggested  by  an  ingenious  friend 
of  mine,  several  years  ago,  as  in  the  diagrams  annexed.  Fig. 
1,  a  perpendicular,  and  Fig.  2  a  horizontal  view. 

A  A,  two  vertical  wheels,  placed  diagonally,  and  revolving  on 
the  axes  X  X.  The  levers  B  B  and  C  C  are  hinged  at  the 
peripheries  of  the  wheels.  By  rotation  the  arms  B  B  are 
projected  from  the  centre  of  motion,  while  the  arms  C  C  are 
drawn  in. 

{Fig.  2.) 


It  is  plain  that  a  series  of  arms  as  shown  in  Fig.  2,  will 
produce  an  eccentric  motion,  causing  the  weights  at  their  ends 
apparently  to  preponderate  on  the  side  B. — Belidob. — ["  The 
Journal  of  the  Franklin  Institute/'  Philadelphia,  1828. 
Vol.  6,  p.  414.] 

d2 


404  P£RF£TUUM    MOBILE; 

Willises  Perpetual  Motion. — ^A  Public  Exhibition.-^ 
The  following  is  abridged  from  the  "  Scientific  American :" — » 

One  of  the  immutable  laws  of  dynamics  is,  that  aU  bodies 
when  once  set  in  motion  will  continue  their  movements  until 
stopped  by  some  opposing  force.  The  only  known  opponents 
to  continued  motion  are  friction,  gravity,  and  resistance  of  the 
air. 

Many  attempts  have  been  made  during  the  last  three 
centuries  to  evade  the  dynamic  law  first  mentioned.  We 
could  fill  many  pages  with  descriptions  of  pretended  per- 
petual motion  machines,  some  of  them  very  curious,  if  it  were 
necessary ;  let  it  suffice  to  refer  to  Austin's  self-moving 
machine  (page  209,  vol.  2),  and  another  on  page  267,  as 
specimens  of  what  has  been  done. 

One  of  the  latest  attempts  at  perpetual  motion  is  that  of 
Mr.  E*  P.  Willis,  first  put  on  exhibition  at  New  Haven, 
Conn.,  and  lately  at  New  York  (1856).  It  is  heralded  to  the 
public  through  advertisements  and  placards,  as  "  the  greatest 
discovery  ever  yet  made." 

[An  engraving  is  given  of  the  machine,  as  seen  in  a  glass 
case,  and  the  Editor  having  seen  it  at  work,  adds : — ^] 

This  machine  is  very  beautifully  constructed*  The  shaft 
bearings  are  fine  steel  points,  and  have  but  little  friction. 
Possibly  it  is  one  of  those  contrivances  that  will  run  for  a  few 
hours  without  stopping,  owing  to  nice  adjustment  and  the 
trifling  amount  of  friction ;  we  are  inclined  to  think,  however, 
that  it  is  driven  by  electro-magnetism,  or  some  other  concealed 
power. 

The  ideal  water-wheel,  to  work  a  pump  and  lift  water 
enough  to  keep  the  wheel  always  moving,  is  planned  on  the 
same  principle. 

No  one  is  allowed  to  examine,  and  they  say  in  their  placards 
"  Why  it  is  not  a  bonajide  ' perpetual  motion'  is  left  for  the 
curious  on  the  subject  to  determine." — '[Vol*  11,  1856, 
p.  201.] 


Another  Ameiiica]^  Perpetual  Motion. — In  our 
remarks  (says  the  Editor)  relative  to  Willis'  "perpetual 
motion,"  we  referred  to  an  ideal  water*wheel  intended  to 
keep  itself  in  constant  motion. 


OR,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  405 

We  are  in  the  frequent  receipt  of  letters  containing  sketches 
■of  devices  arranged  on  similar  principles,  and  asking  our 
«idvice  relative  to  the  proper  steps  necessary  to  be  taken  in 
order  to  secure  such  valuable  discoveries.  We  have  received 
from  an  inventor  in  Virginia  a  sketch  of  one  of  the  before- 
named  water-wheels,  and  he  wants  to  hear  from  us  *'  as  soon 
as  possible.'' 

Another  correspondent  describes  a  plan  that  was  "sug- 
gested by  a  dream,"  but  "  it  stopped  "  after  every  push. — 
[Vol.  11,  1856,  p.  232.] 


In  Poppe's  "  Taschenbuch  fiir  Urhmacher,  &c.,"  1822,  re- 
lating to  Clock  and  Watch  work  generally,  is  an  "  Appendix, 
on  Perpetual  Motion,"  a  large  portion  of  which  referring  to 
the  imposition  practised  by  Geiser,  applications  of  Galvanic 
agency,  and  some  descriptions  previously  given  in  the  present 
work,  are,  therefore,  either  omitted  in  consequence^  or  much 
abridged. 

Meaning  by  perpetual  motion  a  machine  whose  motion  is 
constantly  renewed  by  the  means  of  its  own  mechanism,  and 
uninterruptedly  maintained  without  any  fresh  impulse,  the 
discovery  of  such  a  motion  is  difficult  but  not  impossible ;  as 
Kastner,  Langsdorf,  and  other  celebrated  mathematicians 
have  frequently  shown. 

For  several  himdred  years  some  of  the  best  mechanics  have 
given  themselves  endless  trouble  and  pains  to  discover  this 
motion  without  success.  Many  have  had  plans  they  thought 
would  solve  the  problem,  but  after  a  short  time  have  ceased 
-or  required  repair.  Balls  have  been  made  to  run  uninter- 
ruptedly in  channels  for  a  certain  time,  smalls  clocks  moved 
by  atmospheric  influence  have  been  brought  forward,  so  was 
Cox's  barometer,  also  Recorder's  cleverly-constructed  pocket- 
watch,  worked  by  a  hidden  weight,  and  numerous  other  con- 
trivances of  this  kind,  have  all  failed  to  deserve  their  claimed 
reputation. 

The  wonderful  and  cleverly- worked  pendulum  clock  of 
Oeiser,  of  Chaux  de  Fond,  which  was  recognised  and  admired 
by  many  of  the  best-informed  men  of  the  day,  proved  a 
deception  as  a  perpetual  movement.  When  thoroughly  ex- 
amined inwardly  and  outwardly,  some  time  after  his  death,  it 
was   found  that  the    centre  props  supporting  its  cylinders 


406  FEBFETUUM    MOBILE; 

contained  cleverly-constructed,  hidden  clock-work,  wound 
up  by  inserting  a  key  in  a  small  hole  under  the  second  hand: 
Of  all  the  contrivances  to  produce  perpetual  motion  yet 
brought  to  light — Zamboni's  pile,  and  Eamis's  electric  pen- 
dulum clocks  seem  most  deserving  of  the  name.* 


Perpetual  Motion:  an  Absurd  Pretension. — Lewis  C. 
Buck,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  the 
City  of  New  York,  &c*,  in  his  "  Researches  on  Commercial 
Potash,"  after  giving  the  specification  of  a  patent  for  a  most 
absurd  mode  of  manufacturing  potash,  and  which  by  the 
specious  pretensions  of  the  patentee,  imposed  on  many, 
takes  the  opportunity  to  observe  in  a  note,  as  follows : — 

It  need  not  excite  surprise  that  such  nonsense  should  gain 
currency  among  ignorant  manufacturers,  when  intelligent  and 
even  scientific  men  often  countenance  the  most  absurd  pre- 
tensions. I  once  saw  the  names  of  several  respectable  gentle- 
men, and,  among  the  rest,  that  of  a  professor  in  one  of  our 
colleges,  attached  to  a  certificate  in  favour  of  a  perpetual  motion, 
which  the  inventor  had  the  folly  to  exhibit. — ["  The  American 
Journal  of  Science  and  Arts,"  conducted  by  Benjamin  Silli- 
man,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  vol.  29,  1836,  p.  262. 


*  Dr.  J.  H.  M.  Poppe  Die  Wand,  Stand  und  Tasclienuliren  ;  dei 
niechanismus,  die  Erhaltung,  Keparatur,  und  StelJung  der^elbeii ;  Tas- 
chenbucli  fur  Urmacher^  Sic*     Franklurt  am  Main,  1822,  12nio.,  p.  176^* 


OK,    SEAKCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVK    POWER.  407 


CHAPTER  X, 

NEWSPAPERS    AND    MISCELLANEOUS    8QURCE3    OP    INFORMA- 
TION. 

As  may  be  supposed,  articles  from  the  public  press  refer 
generally  to  announcements  of  the  supposed  practical  solution 
of  the  problem ;  and  we  have  here  an  addition  to  the  British 
and  foreign  claimants  already  cited.  To  these  are  added 
the  views  of  Pasley,  from  his  eccentric  work  on  Natural 
Philosophy ;  four  unpublished  schemes ;  instances  of  impose 
ture;  and  the  particulars  of  a  Joint-stock  Perpetual  Motion 
Company. 

"We  shall  commence  this  chapter  with  an  apposite  quotation 
from  that  ancient  book  of  "  Notes  and  Queries " — r"  The 
Athenian  Oracle,"  which  inquires  and  replies  as  follows : — 

Quest.  5.  Why  may  there  not  be  invented  a  perpetua 
motion  ? 

Answ.  Archimedes,  that  indefatigable  inquirer  into  mathe* 
matical  speculation,  having  this  question  proposed  unto  him, 
viz.,  Whether  he  could  move  the  globe  of  this  world,  he  made 
this  answer.  That  if  the  proposer  could  find  another  basis  to 
fix  the  foot  of  his  engine  upon,  he  would  undertake  to 
remove  it.  In  like  manner,  we  say.  Find  us  bodies  or  matter 
that  are  qualified  for  a  perpetual  motion,  and  we'll  undertake 
the  affirmative  of  the  question.  But  if,  upon  a  particular 
search  of  every  individual  particle  of  the  creation,  we  find 
nothing  but  what  is  subject  to  change— not  by  flux  of  time, 
for  time  destroys  nothing,  but  by  motion  and  antipathies  in 
nature — ^then  it  follows  that  the  impossibility  of  perpetual 
duration  necessitates  the  impossibility  of  a  perpetual  motion,* 
^"The  Athenian  Mercury,"  No.  7,  April,  1691.] 

•  The  History  of  the  Athenian  Society,  for  the  resolving  of  a11  nice 
jtnd  curious  questions.     Printed  for  James  Dowley  (1690-3),  folio. 

Also,  The  Athenian  Oracle,  being  an  entire  collection  of  all  the  valu- 
able questions  and  answers  in  the  old  Atheniau  Mercuries.  3  vols.,  8vo., 
I70h     (See  vol.  l,p.  16.) 


408  PEBPSTUUM  mobile; 

Alleged  Discovery  op  Perpetual  Motion  by  Lewie 
Bayne,  and  Account  of  John  Spence's  Invention  ;  from 
an  Inverness  paper. 

Wehavemucli  pleasure  in  being  enabled  to  announce  to  the 
public  that  Mr.  Lewis  Bayne,  officer  of  excise,  in. this  place, 
two  years  ago  constructed  a  perpetually-moving  time-piecey 
which,  we  are  informed,  measures  time  with  the  greatest 
exactness.  This  machine  is  kept  in  motion  by  means  of 
magnetic  attraction;  but  in  the  construction  of  it  Mr.  Bayne 
makes  use  of  but  one  magnet.  It  is  only  about  six  months 
since  this  ingenious  time-piece  was  shewn  to  us  ;  but  there 
are  several  inhabitants  of  this  place  who  have  seen  it  going 
these  two  years  past.  The  inventor  has  often  been  requested 
to  announce  his  invention  to  the  public,  but  it  is  only  now 
that  he  has  consented  to  do  so.  He  is  about  to  construct 
one  on  a  small  scale,  to  stand  on  a  table  or  chimney-piece. 
The  principle  upon  which  this  machine  is  constructed  is 
very  simple,  and  the  expense  at  which  it  could  be  made,  we 
think,  would  be  considerably  less  than  that  of  an  ordinary 
clock.  It  is  but  fair  to  state  that,  in  the  pursuit  of  his 
mechanical  inventions,  Mr.  Bayne  found  it  both  expensive 
and  troublesome  to  procure  the  brass  wheel,  &c.,  of  which 
he  stood  in  need.  He  therefore,  a  considerable  time  ago, 
set  himself  to  make  a  machire  for  cutting  his  own  wheels, 
and  succeeded  in  this  also.  In  the  '  ^  Edinburgh  Magazine  " 
for  May,  1818,  we  have  an  account  of  the  invention  of  a 
perpetual  motion,  by  John  Spence,*  of  Linlithgow,  by  means 
of  two  magnets.  But  independently  of  Mr.  Bayne's  inven- 
tion being  first  in  point  of  time  (for  we  have  no  reason  to 
believe  that  the  invention  of  the  ingenious  mechanic  of 
Linlithgow  is  a  twelvemonth  old),  it  is  certainly  also  first  in 
point  of  importance. 

The  invention  of  John  Spence  consists  merely  of  a 
wooden  beam,  poised  by  the  centre,  which  ha6  a  piece  of 
steel  attached  to  one  end  of  it,  that  is  alternately  drawn  up 
by  a  magnet  placed  above  it,  and  down  by  another  placed 
below  it.  As  the  end  of  the  beam  approaches  the  magnet, 
hither  above  or  below,  the  machine  interjects  a  non-conduct- 
ing substance,  which  suspends  the  attraction  of  the  magnet 

*  See  also  pages  180  and  226. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  409 

approached,  and  allows  the  other  to  exert  its  powers.  Thus 
the  end  of  the  beam  continually  ascends  and  descends 
betwixt  the  two  magnets,  without  ever  coming  into  contact 
with  either ;  the  attractive  power  of  each  being  suspended 
precisely  at  the  moment  of  nearest  approach. — [j'The 
Kaleidoscope."     Liverpool,  Nov.,  1818.     Vol.  1,  p.  67-] 


John  Dallino's  Perpetual  Motion. — The  following 
letter  on  this  subject  has  been  addressed  to  the  Editor  of 
the  '*  Dumfries  and  Glasgow  Courier  :"— 

Sir, — Having  been  informed  that  the  Board  of  Longitude 
has  offered  a  great  reward  to  any  person  who  should  pro- 
duce a  machine  so  constructed  as  to  preserve  a  perpetual 
motion  without  the  aid  of  weight  or  spring,  and  bemg 
stimulated  by  the  hope  of  such  reward,  I  set  my  invention 
to  work,  and  have  now  discovered  one  which,  I  hope,  will 
meet  with  approbation.  It  will  revolve  without  the  aid  of 
wind,  water,  weight,  steam,  spring,  lever,  or  attraction.  It 
will  keep  uniform  motion  as  long  as  the  materials  of  which 
it  is  made  will  last,  which  may  be  of  wood,  or  any  metal.  It 
wiU  revolve  vertically,  horizontally,  or  at  any  angle  of 
inclination.  It  is  the  same  on  water  as  on  land.  The 
motion  of  a  ship  makes  no  variation  upon  it,  neither  is  it 
affected  by  heat  or  cold.  Its  principle  may  be  applied  to  a 
watch  or  clock,  and  made  to  drive  any  sort  of  machinery. 
It  is  not  dependent  upon  any  power  yet  known  to  the 
world,  and  its  principle  is  as  en(fl.ess  as  the  periphery  of  a 
circle.  The  above  are  a  few,  but  a  very  few,  of  the  qualities 
of  which  it  is  possessed,  and  of  the  uses  to  which  it  may  be 
applied ;  and  I  trust  its  own  intrinsic  worth,  when  known, 
will  be  sufficient  to  advocate  its  cause.  I  have  no  patron 
to  introduce  me  to  public  notice,  but  propose  humbly  to  lay 
my  claim  at  the  feet  of  his  Eoyal  Highness  the  Duke  of 
Clarence,  who  presides  at  the  Honourable  Board  of  Lon^- 
tude ;  and,  if  it  is  foimd  by  them  to  possess  the  requisite 
qualities  for  nautical  purposes,  superior  to  anything  of 
which  they  are  at  present  in  possession,  I  think  I  may  rely 
on  their  justice  and  liberality  for  a  suitable  recompense. 
When  my  secret  is  brought  to  light,  it  will  astonish  the 
most  learned  of  the  present  day.     It  will  elevate  the  honour 


410.  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

of  tliis  country,  and  will  incalculably  augment  its  wealth 
and  resources.  By  giving  the  above  a  place  in  your  patriotic 
paper,  you  wiU  oblige,  Sir,  your  obedient  humble  servant, 
John  Balling,  Joiner,  Castle  Douglas. — ["  The  Liverpool 
Mercury,"  October,  1813,  vol.  3,  p.  134.] 

Wager  in  beference  to  Redhceffeb's  Perpetttal 
Motion,  alleged  to  be  an  Imposture.* — The  following 
wager  appears  in  the  "Philadelphia  Gazette  :" — 

I  hereby  offer,  on  demand,  any  bet  or  bets  jfrom  6,000  to 
100,000  doUars,  to  the  end  of  proving,  in  a  few  days,  both 
by  mathematical  data  and  three  several  experiments,  to  the 
satisfaction  of  enlightened  judges,  chosen  by  my  very 
opponents  out  of  the  most  respectable  gentlemen  of  this 
city,  or  of  New  York,  that  Mr.  Redhoeffer's  discovery  is 
genuine,  and  that  it  is  incontestibly  such  a  perpetual 
self-moving  principle  as  the  one  alluded  to  by  Sir  Isaac 
Newton,  in  his  **Principia  Mathematica,'*  b.  1,  sec.  13, 
on  the  Laws  of  Motion. 

N.B.  This  is  to  be  valid  until  the  15th  inst.,  at  sun- 
setting. 

Charles  Gobert,  Civil  Engineer,  &c.  Philadelphia,  July 
12th,  1813.— ['*  The  Liverpool  Mercury,"  October,  1813, 
vol.  3,  p.  134.]' 

Mannardet's  Perpetual  Motion. — A  French  mechanic 
at  Neufchatel,  named  Mannardot,  is  said  to  have  discovered 
the  perpetuum  mobile.  It  consists  of  a  wheel,  on  the  peri- 
phery of  which  are  small  pipes  half  filled  with  quicksilver, 
wliich,  at  the  top,  have  a  centrifugal  direction,  and  by  a 
simple  contrivance  receive  below  an  opposite  impulse.  He 
shows  the  machine  publicly,  and  intends  to  submit  the 
solution  of  this  difficult  problem  to  a  further  examination 
at  Paris.  The  simplicity  of  the  construction  occasions  a 
favourable  opinion  of  the  thing. — [**  The  Liverpool  Mer- 
cury," October,  I8l5,  vol.  5,  p.  110.] 


Gartiar's  Perpetu^vl   Motion. — A.  M.  Raymond   Yin- 
ijent   Ignan   Garhar,    of  Frankfort,    it   is  pretended,  has 

*  See  statement  made  at  page  222. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  411 

invented  a  wheel,  the  movement  of  which  is  perpetual  and 
spontaneous.  The  Emperor  of  Austria  has  granted  him  an 
exclusive  privilege  for  fifteen  years,  if  within  a  year  he 
brings  his  invention  into  use. — ["The  Liverpool  Mercury," 
May,  1816,  voL  5,  p.  358.] 


Gteyser's  Perpetual  Motion.* — M.  M.  Geyser,  canton  of 
Berne,  Switzerland,  residing  at  La  Chaux-de-Fonds,  has 
exhibited  to  the  Grenevese  Society  for  the  Advancement  of 
Arts,  a  wheel  which  seems  to  turn  of  itself,  and  of  which 
the  most  skilful  artists  cannot  discover  the  moving  principle, 
which  the  artist  keeps  a  secret.  The  Society  admire  the 
execution  of  the  machine,  and  acknowledge  that  the  effect 
is  very  striking.  Probably  it  is  on  a  principle  already 
announced,  which  applies,  as  a  moving  power,  the  elasticity 
of  the  atmospheric  air  to  an  exhausted  cavity  which  is  made 
to  turn  out  of  the  centre  of  the  mass  by  uniform  pressure. 
— ["The  Liverpool  Mercury,"  October,  1816,  vol.  6,  p.  107.] 


Ax  Advertised  Perpetual  Motion. — The  following 
tjurious  advertisement  is  from  a  late  **  Dublin  Evening 
Post."  Whatever  ingenuity  may  be  in  the  mechanical  part 
of  the  invention,  we  are  particularly  struck  with  the 
modesty  of  the  projector,  in  contenting  himself  with  bo 
moderate  a  payment  in  advance : — 

Perpetual  Motion. — Take  notice,  that  I  will  exhibit, 
after  six  days'  notice,  for  the  sum  of  £300,000,  that  long- 
wished-for  perpetual  motion,  now  going  in  its  rapid  velo- 
city, without  the  aid  or  assistance  of  man  or  beast,  springs, 
weights,  or  balances,  steam,  wind,  or  water,  or  any  other 
visible  assistance,  and  will  continue  in  its  rapid  velocity  as 
long  as  a  body  of  any  substance  lasts. 

Let  the  reader  not  doubt  my  undertaking,  as  I  will 
undergo  any  penalty  requested  of  me  to  exhibit  an  art 
which  no  second  mortal  can  effect  by  study  or  ingenuiiy. 
Now,  all  gentlemen  who  study  the  merit  and  honour  of 

*  Declared  an  imposition,  see  page  183,  and  end  of  this  chapter. 


412  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

their  country,  let  them  appeal  to  me,  and  I  will,  for  the 
above  sum,  exhibit  an  art  that  will  be  a  honour  to  Ireland 
until  the  expiration  of  time. 

An  art  that  had  heretofore  defeated  the  great  Sir  Isaae 
Newton,  after  many  years'  study ;  likewise  the  known  world. 
This  art  I  have  effected  at  my  first  trial  of  it,  on  a  small 
scale,  with  a  few  minutes'  study  and  three  hours*  labour. 

An  art  that  no  second  mortal  can  effect,  I  now  challenge 
the  known  world ;  I  dare  their  study  or  ingenuity  to  execute 
what  I  have  done.  Should  this  undertaking  be  left  un- 
noticed, I  will  sell  its  merits  to  another  country. — ["  The 
Liverpool  Mercury,"  August,  1817,  vol.  7,  p.  62.] 


Alleged  Discoveby  of  Perpetual  Motion. — ^What  a 
proud  day  for  the.  **  Mercury"  to  have  to  announce  the 
discovery  of  the  perpetual  motion,  which  has  baffled  so  many 
wiseacres  and  ruined  so  many  speculative  mechanists. 
"What  a  credit  to  the  country,  too,  that  this  '*  consumma- 
tion, so  devoutly  to  be  wished  for,"  should  have  proceeded 
from  an  inhabitant  of  Toxteth  Park.  The  modesty  of  the 
projector  is  only  surpassed  by  his  genius,  or  he  would  never 
have  concealed  his  name  from  a  wondering  and  an  enquiring 
world.  The  following  bulletin,  on  this  great  occasion,  is 
given  verbatim  et  literatim  as  we  received  it  from  the 
author: — "Gentlemen  Please  to  Publish  in  Your  paper 
that  I  Can  produce  an  instrument  that  wiU  Give  true  time 
by  Real  Perpetual  Motion  it  is  no  use  for  Me  to  praise  My 
Works  for  the  Works  and  Move  Movements  wiU  prove  and 
praise  them  Selves  and  the  Latitude  Can  be  found  out  by 

the  same  instrument — ^it  is  found  out  by  J.  .n  A n  a 

Resident  in  in  Toxteth  Park  Near  St.  James."— ["  The 
Liverpool  Mercury,"  October,  1817,  vol.  7,  p.  120.] 


Perpetual  Motion  by  a  Mechanic  at  Newcastle. — ^An 
ingenious  mechanic,  of  Newcastle,  has  discovered  a  new 
and  simple  power,  which  he  conceives  involves  the  desidera- 
tum of  perpetual  motion,  and  which  he  purposes  laying 
before  tiie  proper  authorities  appointed  by  Government. — 
["The  Liverpool  Mercury,"  1821,  vol.  10,  p.  382.] 


OK,    SEJLKCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  413 

A  FiCTiTioTTs  Perpetual  Motion. — ^A  correspondent, 
addressing  the  "Liverpool  Mercury,"  says  : — 

The  model  now  exhibiting  in  Lord- street,  as  a  perpetual 
motion  working  by  the  "power  of  gravity,"  was,  during 
the  last  spring,  offered  io  the  inhabitants  of  the  metropolis, 
when,  being  detected  by  a  celebrated  American  engineer, 
who  had  seen  several  of  the  kind  in  Philadelphia,  some 
gentlemen  posted  a  large  placard  at  the  door  of  the  exhibi- 
tion, cautioning  the  public  against  imposition,  which  soon 
induced  the  proprietor  to  decamp  to  places  whose  inhabit- 
ants he  conceived  more  likely  to*  be  imposed  on  by  his 
"  powers  of  gravity." 

Several  of  these  articles  have  been  prepared  in  America, 
the  whole  of  which  act  by  means  of  a  concealed  spring, 
either  in  the  horizontal  wheel  itself,  in  the  pedestal  of  the 
model,  or  by  a  helical  one  in  either  of  the  pillars.  In  the 
two  latter  modes  of  arranging  it,  the  motion  is  communi- 
cated by  means  of  a  small  watch  wheel,  concealed  in  the 
clumsy  brass  bridge  through  which  the  lower  pivot  of  the 
upright  shaft  works,  with  its  point  resting  upon  a  plate  of 
glass. 

I  trust  this  communication  may  prevent  the  good  people 
of  Liverpool  from  being  duped  by  one  of  the  most  glaring 
absurdities  I  ever  witnessed.-r-["  The  Liverpool  Mercury," 
August,  1822,  vol.  12,  p.  46.] 


The  Editor  next  week  remarks  on  this  Perpetual  Motion : 
We  have  to  state  that  the  manager  of  the  wonderful  per- 
petual motion  decamped  immediately  after  the  appearance 
of  the  "  Mercury  "  in  which  his  trick  was  exposed. 


Presumed  Discovery  of  Perpetual  Motion. — ^A  corre- 
spondent, writing  from  Ormskirk,  April,  1828,  says: — 

An  ingenious  neighbour  of  mine  has  been  exercising  his 
wits  to  find  out  the  perpetual  motion.  He  does  not  pretend 
.  to  have  achieved  so  great  a  desideratum,  but  he  says  he 
has  found  out  a  motion  that  will  continue  in  action,  or  to 
move,  as  long  as  the  material  of  which  it  is  composed  wiU 


414  PERPETUUM  mobile;      , 

endure.  It  is  applicable  to  watches,  lathes,  engines — steam 
engines,  I  had  nearly  said ;  but  there  will  be  no  occasion 
for  steam  or  gas  either.  Not  being  a  mechanic  myself,  I 
find  it  a  very  diflB.cult  matter  to  state  the  man's  ideas,  and 
make  them  plain  to  the  reader.  He  says  he  has  mentioned 
the  thing  to  several  curious  men,  and  even  showed  it  in  its 
rude  state  to  many  neighbours.  They  all  agreed  that  it 
was  a  great  discovery,  and  that  it  ought  to  be  made  public ; 
but,  though  most  of  them  are  men  of  talent,  they  are  not 
in  the  habit  of  writing  for  newspapers.  It  was,  at  last, 
agreed  that  he  had  better  apply  to  your  humble  correspon- 
dent, who  would,  at  all  events,  do  something  by  describing 
his  excellent  invention,  and  thereby  bring  to  his  aid  all  the 
lovers  of  mechanism.  His  object  is  not  money :  he  wishes 
to  do  something  for  the  benefit  of  his  fellow-men.  He  is 
an  honest,  industrious  man,  but  he  wants  the  means  to  put 
his  machine  in  such  order,  perfection,  &c.,  that  it  may 
easily  be  understood  by  the  public.  He  says  that,  if  any 
society  or  individual  will  enable  him  to  put  his  discovery 
into  a  tangible  shape,  he  will  gladly  share  the  profits  with 
them,  or  throw  the  whole  concern  into  their  hands. — [**  The 
Liverpool  Mercury,"  April,  1828,  vol.  18,  p.  107.] 


Alleged  Discovery  of  Perpetual  Motion  by  M.  Van- 
dyke.— This  long-sought-for  discovery,  it  is  said,  has  been 
brought  to  light  by  Mr.  Vandyke,  of  Orleans  county.  The 
machine  is  so  constructed,  by  means  of  tubes,  as  to  produce 
a  current  of  air  that  propels  a  wheel,  and  keeps  it  in  con- 
tinual motion.  It  is  said  that  it  may  be  converted  to  many 
valuable  purposes. — American  Faper,  —  [**The  Liverpool 
Mercury,**  July,  1829,  vol.  19,  p.  222.] 


Richards'  Endless  Power  Engine. — An  engineer  of 
Bristol,  named  Richards,  living  in  that  city,  has,  after  fifteen 
years*  study  and  labour,  completed  a  machine,  which  he  calls 
his  "  Endless  Power  Machine,"  which  is  now  in  motion.  This 
engine,  it  is  said,  will  supersede  the  use  of  steam  in  all  its 
various  purposes.  The  inventor  declares  that  his  self-acting 
engine  of  250  horso  power  will  take  a  vessel  round  the  world 


OR,  SEABCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  415 

with  the  small  quantity  of  two  gallons  of  oil  applied  to  its 
movements  when  required. — Bath  Herald,— [''  The  Observer/' 
London,  Jidy,  1831.] 

M.  DE  Vignbrnon's  New  Mechanical  Power;  and 
English  claim  to  the  same. — -In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Editor 
of  the  "  Morning  Advertiser,"  inserted  Dec.  5,  1851,  the 
writer  says : — 

Will  you  have  the  goodness  to  do  the  reputation  of  England 
a  piece  of  justice,  which  the  "  Times"  (newspaper),  never  pos- 
sessed of  a  particle  of  public  spirit,  omits  to  do. 

Some  few  days  ago  that  paper  quoted  from  the  "  Courrier 
de  la  Garonne  '*  a  paragraph  stating  that  a  French  engineer  of 
Bordeaux,  named  De  Vignernon,  had  obtained  "  from  a  quan- 
tity of  water  at  rest,  and  confined  in  a  cenain  space,  a  per- 
petual power  that  will  supply  the  place  of  all  other  moving 
powers.** 

Now  this  was  vague  enough  to  the  general  reader,  but  the 
writer  of  this  letter  detected  at  once  the  identity  of  this  French 
discovery  with  one  he  himself  had  submitted  to  the  late  Sir 
Robert  Peel,  and  which  will  come  before  the  public  as  soon  as 
it  can  make  an  appearance  suitable  to  its  importance ;  where- 
fore, complying  with  the  conditions  laid  down  for  corres- 
pondents, but  concealing  his  name  from  the  public  (therefore 
evidently  aiming  at  nothing  more  than  he  professed,  viz.,  to 
reserve  a  claim  on  behalf  of  this  country),  he  solicited  the  in- 
sertion of  a  letter  confirming  the  statement  of  De  Vignernon 
(however  improbable  it  may  appear),  but  contending,  if  such 
a  thing  had  been  done  by  this  gentleman,  it  had  previously 
been  done  by  an  Englishman ;  and  predicting  the  time  not  far 
off,  when  the  beautiful  and  costly  steam  engines  would  be  re- 
duced to  the  value  of  old  metal. 

But,  as  if  to  make  good  the  charge  of  the  "  Edinburgh 
Review,"  that  though  the  "  Times"  would  go  in  any  direction 
and  to  any  lengths  with  the  masses,  it  never  lent  a  helping 
hand  to  any  individual,  however  situated,  my  missive,  self- 
denying  as  it  was,  could  not  find  entrance.  In  a  few  months 
it  may  be  important^  in  claiming  our  share  of  the  merit  of  the 
discovery,  to  have  this  letter  in  your  columns  to  refer  to. — ^I 
remain,  respectfully  yours,  J.  \V.  P. 

Walcot  Place  West,  Lambeth,  Dec.  3,  1851. 


416  PSKPETUUM  mobile; 

Stannabd's  Perpetual  Motion  Machine. — ^\Ve  have 
just  been  given  to  understand  that  an  artisan  in  very 
humble  circumstances,  residing  in  Ipswich,  has,  after  three 
years'  labour,  succeeded  in  constructing  a  model  ot  a  macliine, 
15  inches  by  13,  and  11 J  deep,  which  is  self-acting,  after  being 
put  in  motion  by  a  screw.  It  is  powerful  enough  to  turn  a 
grindstone  against  the  power  of  one  person  who  had  an  iron 
l»ar  on  the  stone.  It  has  kept  in  motion  upwards  of  36  hours, 
at  the  end  of  which  time  the  speed  was  not  diminished  ;  and 
the  constructor,  whose  name  is  Thomas  Stannard,  contends  that 
the  machine  will  keep  in  motion  as  long  as  the  materials  will 
last.  The  invention  was  offered  to  several  firms  in  Ipswich, 
who  declined  taking  it  up,  since  which  three  persons  belonging 
to  one  of  the  first  firms  of  engineers  in  London  have  visited 
Ipswich,  and  examined  the  machine,  and  have  been  induced  to 
pay  the  inventor  liberally,  aud  have  taken  the  machine  and  the 
inventor  to  London  to  prosecute  inquiry, — ["  Ipswich  Elxpress." 
(1853?)] 


Alleged  Discovery  op  a  Self-moving  Machine  bt 
Joseph  Hutt. — A  correspondent  in  the  "  Leicester  Mercury" 
writes^as  follows : — 

A  poor  framework-knitter,  named  Joseph  Hutt,  now  living 
near  the  Church,  Hinckley,  has,  after  twenty  years'  application 
and  study,  completed  a  machine,  which  he  calls  a  "  selt-moving 
machine,"  or  perpetual  motion  ;  and  he  is  very  confident  of  its 
being  fully  entitled  to  the  term  "perpetual;"  and,  also,  that 
its  power  may  be  increased  almost  to  any  extent.  From  his 
own  account  and  description  of  the  machine,  it  appears  that 
he  set  it  in  motion  on  the  26th  of  August  last,  since  which 
time  it  has  continued  to  work  exceedingly  well,  and  with  the 
greatest  ease  and  regularity ;  and  that  it  is  so  constructed  as  to 
bid  fair  to  become  one  of  the  most  useful  inventions  that  has 
hitherto  been  discovered.  Its  motions  are  both  quick  and 
powerful,  and  may  be  applied  to  anything  to  which  mechanics 
may  think  well  to  apply  it*.  It  does  not  require  the  aid 
of  steam  or  any  other  power  to  keep  it  in  motion,  having 
one  continued  and  regular  movement  of  its  own.  Its  bearing 
arm  wants  no  repose,  and  it  will  continue  as  long  as  the 
materials  it  is   made    of.      The   simplicity  of   the  machine 


OR,    SfiABCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  41? 

18  such  that  the  inventor  is  afraid  to  allow  any  person  to  see  it. 
He  is  desirous  of  bringing  it  out  in  a  more  finished  style,  but 
this  he  cannot  accomplish  under  £20,  which  sum  he  is  too  poor 
to  raise.— ["  The  Mining  Journal,"  vol.  17,  184:7,  p.  532.] 

In  relation  to  the  same,  we  read  in  the  **  Builder,"  June, 
1847,  that— 

This  vain  delusion,  if  not  still  in  foree,  is  at  least  as 
standing  a  fallacy  as  ever.  Joseph  Hutt,  a  framework- 
knitter,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  enlightened  town  of 
Hinckley,  professes  to  have  discovered  it,  and  only  wants 
£20,  as  usual,  to  set  it  agoing. 


Is  Perpetual  MoTtON  at  last  Discovered  ? — ^An  intelli- 
gent friend,  in  whom  we  have  confidence,  writes  to  us 
gravely  from  Lille,  to  state  that  a  mechanic  there,  after 
thirteen  years'  effort,  has  positively  obtained  the  means  of 
perpetual  motion.  Parties  have  formed  themselves  into  a 
company  to  bring  the  discovery  before  the  puJblic,  and  on 
Tuesday  (8th  August)  in  last  week,  a  meeting  of  these, 
including  some  engineers  connected  with  mines,  was  held 
to  witness  the  machine  in  operation,  and  the  only  objection 
made,  according  to  our  informant,  was,  that  it  was  not 
applicable  to  navigation;  but  this  the  inventor  denies, 
maintaining  its  applicability  to  all  purposes.  The  present 
machine  is  of  wood,  but  it  is  decided  to  make  one  of  iron. 
We  need  scarcely  say  that  we  are  not  believers  in  perpetual 
motion,  having  the  word  ** friction"  floating  in  our  mind, 
and  we  have  often  cautioned  correspondents  against  being 
led  into  so  dangerous  and  difOLcult  a  chase ;  but  in  this  case 
the  circumstances  are  put  before  us  by  so  careful  a  mind 
that  we  are  bound  to  wait  rather  than  to  scoff.  A  belief 
prevails  that  the  British  Q-ovemment  some  time  since  offered 
an  enormous  premium  for  the  discovery  of  this  power,  but 
we  are  disposed,  after  inquiry,  to  consider  this  belief  erro- 
neous.—[**  The  Builer,"  August,  1848,  vol.  6,  p.  406.] 


Perpetual  Motion.— In  detailing  the  steps  which  led  to 
the  formation  of  his  theory  of  motion,  Mr.  Pasley  (of 
Jersey)  says  in  his  Preface : — 

For  a  number  of  years   the   discovery  of  a  perpetual 


418 


PEBPETUUM    mobile; 


motion  occupied  my  thoughts,  and  at  every  mechanical 
device  I  could  imagine  my  leisure  hours  were  employed. 
The  pursuit  brought  me  acquainted  with  my  own  errors. 
Nothing  disheartened  by  numerous  failures,  I  gave  up  all 
idea  of  employing  mechanical  means,  but  looked  to  the 
planets  in  search  of  the  cause  of  these  bodies  performing 
perpetual  motion  ;  and  being  convinced  that  self-motion  of 
a  mass  of  inert  matter  is  an  absurdity,  it  appeared  to  me  a 
matter  of  certainty  that  planets  must  be  involved  in  a  medium 
on  the  pressure  of  which  their  motions  depend.        *         * 

It  is  almost  needless  to  mention,  I  felt  ambitious  to  be  the 
discoverer  of  the  cause  of  motion,  if  not  capable  of  effecting  a 
perpetual  motion ;  still,  by  experience  taught,  I  may  be  blind 
to  some  fundamental  mistake  which  I  am  incapable  of  dis- 
covering.*   

Eaton's  Perpetual  Syphon. — ^This  is  a  plan  proposed 


•  A  Theory  of  Natural  Philosophy,  on  mechanical  principles,  dirested 
of    all  immaterial  chemical  properties,   showing  for  the  first  time    the 


physical  cause  of  continuous  motion.    By  T.  H.  Pasley.    8vo. 
London,  1836. 


Whiiukef, 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER. 


419 


by  Mr.  Eaton,  in  1850,  and  consists  in  providing  two  water 
cisterns  A,  B ;  the  short  leg  of  a  syphon  0  enters  the  upper 
cistern,  and  terminates  in  three  escape  pipes,  capable  of  being 
rotated  by  the  pulley  a,  connected  by  a  band  with  the  ptilley 
6,  affixed  to  the  vertical  shaft  c,  rotated  by  the  inverted 
Barker's  mill  D,  constructed  on  the  short  leg  of  the  inverted 
syphon  E,  supplied  from  the  bottom  of  the  upper  water 
cistern.  By  this  means  it  was  expected  to  keep  up  a  con- 
tinual flow  down  the  pipes  C  and  up  E,  as  shown  by  the 
arrows. 


Legge's  Hydro-Pneumatio  Power. — ^Mr.  Legge  gives 
the  annexed  sketch  of  an  invention,  the  result  of  fourteen 
years'  study.  It  is  a  dome-shaped  vessel ;  its  upper  part 
A  filled  witii  air,  and  the  lower  half  with  water,  as  at  B. 


This  vessel  contains  two  apparatus  for  returning  the  water 
which  is  worked  through  C  D,  apparently  like  pump  barrels. 
The  air  is  to  be  at  from  250  to  500  pounds'  pressure  on  the 
square  inch.  When  once  started  it  wlQ  (it  is  stated)  go  on 
as  long  as  it  is  oUed.  The  inventor  estimates  a  one  thirty- 
second  share  at  one  thousand  pounds  value. 


Foster's  Wheel  of  Inclined  Planes. — ^Messrs.  Spon 
have  communicated,  by  a  large  drawing,  the  plan  of  Mr. 
Foster,  of  New  York,  for  producing  perpetual  motion  by  a 

e2 


*•. 


420  PSKFETT7UB1    MOBILE; 

series  of  inclined  planes  set  round  tlie  peripheiy  of  a  wheel, 
each  incline  having  a  roller  retained  on  its  surface  by  two 
side  rods,  each  pair  connected  at  one  end  to  the  rollers,  and 
at  their  other  ends  to  the  sides  of  the  wheel,  by  means  of 
pins,  allowing  them  free  rolling  motion.  It  was  expected 
that  on  turning  the  wheel  in  a  direction  to  carry  the  rolling 
weights  down  an  incline  on  the  central  horizontal  line,  and 
consequently  farthest  from  the  centre  of  rotation,  the  other 
inclined  planes  would  follow  in  succession,  and  deliver  their 
rolling  weights  in  like  manner.  But  innumerable  trials 
proved,  after  a  large  outlay  of  money,  that  gravitation  was 
not  to  be  overcome  by  any  such  means.  An  eminent 
engineer  considered  this  method  so  feasible,  that  he  devoted 
considerable  time  in  practically  testing  the  several  model 
apparatus  constructed  by  the  equally  or  more  sanguine 
inventor* 


t^RRi)JLTAL*s  Patent  Motive  Power  Com^ant. — The 
following  particulars  are  taken  from  th6  prospectus  of  the 
above  intended-to-be-formed  company,  for  it  most  likely 
never  went  so  far  as  to  apply  for  its  proposed  "capital 
£1,500,000,  in  3,000  shares  of  £60  each ;  deposit  £3  per 
share,"  notwithstanding  the  flattering  expectancy  held  out 
that  "  we  shall  have  £2,000,000  annual  profit.'* 

The  prospectus,  consisting  of  four  folio  pages,  is  curious 
enough  to  deserve  being  copied  entire,  but  the  following  ex- 
tracts must  here  suffice : —  • 

Importance  and  Advantages  of  the  MotiVe  Power.*— The 
following  considerations  are  sufficient  to  prove  to  the  share- 
holders that  a  large  benefit  may  be  realized. 

There  are,  in  the  united  Kingdom,  about  20,000  Steam 
JEngines,  of  a  mean  power  of  50  horses*  The 'advantages  of 
this  motive  power>  in  .comparison  with  the  steam  engine,  are 
so  plain  and  enormous,  that  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  will  be 
applied  at  least  to  all  the  existing  steam  engineSj  without  con- 
sidering the  newly-constructed  ones ;  and  supposing  only  £2 
for  each  horse  power  every  year,  for  the  licence,  or  for  the 
profit  of  construction,  we  shall  have  £2,000,000  of  annual 
profit. 

This  invention  will  open  a  new  epoch  of  prosperity  for  the 


{Fig.  No.  1.) 


Cover. 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   8ELF-M0IIYE    POWER.  '423 

English  constructors,  seeing  that  the  accuracy  with'  which  the 
.machine  requires  to  be  constructed  will  oblige  foreign  nations 
to  send  their  orders  to  England.  The  low  price  of  transport 
will  encourage  the  export  of  coal  to  foreign  countries,  with  the 
other  productions  of  tljie  kingdom,  and  will  produce  a  new 
source  of  riches  to  the  nation. 

This  invention  is  worthy  of  the  patronage  of  all  persons, 
and  all  departments  of  the  Government,  considering  its 
economy  and  security. 

Specification  of  the  Patent  *  (Sealed  1833.  No.  6510.) 
— The  invention  is  an  attempt  to  obtain  a  rotatory  motion  from 
a  hollow  drum  or  cylinder,  mounted  on  an  axle,  turning  in 
bearings  in  an  outer  air-and-water-tight  case;  the  space 
between  the  case  and  the  drum  being  divided  in  a  vertical 
direction  by  an  air-and-water-tight  partition,  into  two  com^ 
partments ;  one  is  filled  with  a  fluid,  and  a  vacuum  is  produced 
in  the  other  by  a  pump,  or  by  the  adhesion  of  the  surface  of 
the  half  air-tight  case  upon  the  half  drum,  when  it  is  expected 
that  the  tendency  of  the  part  of  the  drum  which  is  in  the 
liquid  chamber  will  rise  by  its  buoyancy,  and  the  inclination 
of  the  other  part,  or  that  in  the  vacuum,  will  fall  by  its  gra- 
vity, and  will  produce  a  rotatory  motion  as  long  as  the  vacuuni 
is  kept  up  in  one  chamber  and  the  liquid  is  in  the  other. 

The  surface  of  the  drum,  in  cast-iron,  should  be  perfectly 
smooth ;  and  the  plates  of  the  air-tight  case  upon  the  half 
drum  should  be  in  gun-metal,  perfectly  smooth ;  and  by  a 
friction  with  mercury  the  surface  will  be  covered  by  it,  and 
will  destroy  the  adhesion  of  the  metal  upon  the  surface  of 
the  drum. 

The  general  claim  is,  "  A  machine  acting  by  a  joint  power 
derived  from  the  buoyancy  of  a  body  in  fluids,  aiiid  the  weight 
of  a  body  in  vacuum." 

When  the  parts  are  put  together,  they  are  secured  by  screws, 
the  joints  being  made  air-tight. 

Fig.  No.  1,— *is  a  side  view  of  an  Engine  constructed  on 
the  principle  of  this  Invention,  with  the  outer  cover  being 
removed  to  expose  its  internal  construction. 

Experiment  made  without  expense,  by  every  person,  to 
ascertain  the  efficacy  of  this  Motive  Power. — Put  in  a  vertical 


♦  See  Chapter  XI.,  under  date  1833,  No.  6510, 


424  PXBPXTVUM    IfOBILX; 

direction  into  the  water,  the  half  drum  in  wood  (A  B  C,  Fig.  1) 
until  it  is  surrounded;  and  taking  it  easily  in  the  fingers,  it 
will  turn  round  according  to  the  pointed  line  A  E. 

Take  easily  in  the  fingers  the  other  half  drum  (Fig.  2),  and 
in  a  vertical  direction,  according  to  the  letters  F  G  H,  hold 
it  in  the  air,  and  it  will  fall  by  gravitation  according  to  the 
line  HI. 

The  force  with  which  the  No.  1  will  rise  is  equal  to  the 
difference  between  the  body  of  the  half  drum  and  the  body 
of  the  volume  of  water  displaced, — ^minus  the  friction  of  the 
axis  in  the  fingers,  and  the  friction  of  the  liquid  upon  the 
surface  of  the  half  drum. 

The  force  with  which  the  half  drum  (No.  2)  will  fall  is 
equal  to  the  difference  between  the  body  of  the  half  drum 
and  the  body  of  the  air  displaced, — minus  the  friction  of  the 
axis  in  the  fingers,  and  the  friction  of  the  air  upon  its  surface. 

All  this  is  practical ;  and  it  is  plain  that  it  will  turn  upon 
every  scale.  This  experiment  proves  that  the  force  with  which 
the  two  half  drums  move  is  more  than  the  friction  of  the  axis 
against  the  fingers,  and  the  friction  of  the  liquid  against  the 
surfaces  of  the  drum. 

By  the  practical  construction  of  steam  engines,  I  prove, 
in  the  following  numerical  report,  that  the  friction  to  prevent 
the  fluids  going  into  the  vacuum  chamber,  or  into  the  plates 
at  air-tight  upon  the  half  drum,  is  less  than  the  motive  power  ; 
and  that  there  remains  sufficient  to  produce  a  disposable 
force.  For  instance,  it  must  be  considered  that  upon  a  small 
scale  a  little  difference  in  the  construction  will  destroy  the 
motive  power,  but  that  will  not  be  the  case  upon  a  large 
scale,  because  a  great  power  will  easily  destroy  too  hard  a 
friction. 

Numerical  Illustration,  applied  to  a  Machine  in  which  the 
diameter  of  the  drum  is  6  feet,  and  the  length  2  feet. — 
Hydrostatic  Laws :  "  Fluids  press  in  proportion  to  the  height 
of  their  levels,  in  every  direction ;  but  the  greatest  pressure 
is  that  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the  vessel.  When  a 
body  is  entirely,  or  in  part  only,  immersed  in  a  fluid,  the 
horizontal  pressures  exercised  by  the  fluid  upon  its  surfaces 
are  mutually  destroyed.  The  result  of  all  the  vertical  pres- 
sures is  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  fluid  displaced,  and 
directed  in  opposition  to  the  gravitation,  applied  to  the  centre 
of  gravity,  of  that  portion  of  the  fluid  displaced ;  and  the 


OB,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  427 

body  loses  a  part  of  its  weight  equal  to  the  absolute  weight 
of  that  portion  of  fluid  displaced." — (See  the  above  indispu- 
table practical  principles  in  Hydrostatics  and  Mechanics,  by 
Poisson.) 

After  a  variety  of  calculations  and  statistics,  we  are  in- 
formed, in  the  concluding  observations  of  this  lengthy  pro- 
spectus, that — 

This  motive  power  is  applied  also  to  the  steam  engines 
existing ;  we  want  only  to  take  out  the  boiler  and  the  pistons. 
We  need  scarcely  say  that  we  can  obtain  any  number  of  horse 
power,  and  that,  by  its  simplicity,  this  motive  power  can  be 
applied  to  all  things  wanting  force. 

Every  person  laughs  at  what  is  called  "  perpetual  motion," 
but  a  very  small  number  know  what  that  expression  signifies. 
D'Alembert's  Encyclopaedia,  at  the  word  "  Perpetual,"  says, 
"  Perpetual  Motion  is  a  machine  working  by  itself,  without 
any  external  force,  and  only  by  gravitation  of  matter."  At 
the  first  sight,  it  is  plain  that  by  the  gravitation  we  shall  only 
obtain  a  movelnent  for  a  limited  time ;  after  which  the  equili- 
brium will  succeed :  but  it  must  be  considered,  that  in  the 
above  system  there  are  two  forces — one  is  gravitation,  the 
other  is  the  impetus  with  which  every  fluid  has  a  tendency  to 
raise  the  body  surroimded  by  it  in  a  direction  opposite  to  the 
gravitation.  This  tendency  is  continuous  in  every  fluid ;  con- 
sequently, in  this  machine  the  property  of  the  motive  power  is 
continuous  ;  but  not  the  machine,  which  requires  the  plates  to 
be  repaired  every  three  years.  If  anybody  was  to  ask  me 
to  show  them  a  machine  at  work,  I  should  answer — The  globe 
is  one ; — the  earth  turning  by  this  system,  half  only  being 
surrounded  by  water :  and  in  general,  all  planets  turning  upon 
their  axes  are  surrounded  in  part  by  fluids ;  the  moon  not 
turning  upon  its  axis,  because  it  is  deprived  of  fluids. 

The  engineers'  constructors  possess  and  know  the  construc- 
tion of  a  smooth  plate,  and  a  piston  in  a  cylinder ;  these  are 
all  the  pieces  necessary  for  the  working  of  the  machine.  The 
complement  to  go  more  or  less  quickly,  or  to  stop,  is  the  same 
as  that  employed  in  steam  engines,  according  to  the  circum- 
stances and  the  application. 


428  PXBPXTUVM  mobile; 


CHAPTER  XL 

PATENTS  OF  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTITRY,  FOB  IMPBOTH- 
MENTS  IN  OBTAINING  MOTIVE  POWER  :  ENGLISH, 
FRENCH,    AND    AMERICAN. 

Under  the  Patent  Laws  previous  to  October,  1852,  at  ^bich 
period  the  present  amended  law  came  into  operation,  the  cost 
of  a  patent  for  the  United  Kingdom  was  little  short  of  £300. 
The  new  law  provides  for  obtaining  patents  progressively 
both  in  respect  to  time  and  payment ;  that  is,  protection  for 
six  months,  on  depositing  a  provisional  brief  outline  specifica- 
tion, extensible,  at  the  option  of  the  patentee,  to  three,  four, 
and  seven  years,  making  a  total  of  fourteen  years,  as  hereto- 
fore, and  the  fees  at  each  stage  being  very  moderate.  The 
facilities  thus  offered  by  the  present  system  occasion  the 
patenting  of  a  large  amount  of  frivolous  and  crude  schemes, 
entered  on  without  investigation  as  to  former  claimants  or  the 
merits  of  the  supposed  novel  inventions.  This  accounts  for 
the  immense  number  of  subjects  patented  of  late  years,  which 
never  proceed  beyond  six  months'  protection. 

A  few  early  patents  were  granted  on  the  mere  title,  un- 
accompanied by  any  description,  as  noticed  in  Chapter  III. 
In  later  patents  it  was  only  required,  and  so  continued  to  be 
to  the  end  of  September,  1852,  to  file  a  specification  of  the 
invention  sought  to  be  protected,  before  the  six  months 
expire,  until  which  was  d«ne,  the  invention  was  only  known 
by  its  title  ;  and  if  not  filed,  as  required,  the  patent  in  conse- 
quence lapsed.  But  under  the  existing  law,  a  brief  or  pro- 
visional specification,  ascertaining  the  nature  of  the  inyention, 


OB,    SEARCH   FOB   SEXF-MOTIYX   FOWBB.  429 

mast  be  put  in  on  making  the  first  application,  otherwise  no 
protection  is  granted  ;  and  before  six  months  expire,  a  com- 
plete specification  has  to  be  lodged,  fully  detailing  the  inven- 
tion. Instances  of  all  these  cases  (except  void  patents)  will 
occur  in  the  folio winjr  Catalogue  Raisonne,  that  is — 1.  Patents 
granted  on  the  mere  titV.  2.  Others  not  specified,  and  there- 
fore void.  3.  Such  as  have  not  gone  beyond  provisional  or 
six  months'  protection.     And  4.  Those  fully  specified.* 

Patents  of  the  seveftteenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  have 
been  given  in  Chapter  III.,  to  which  one  patent  for  1801  was 
transferred  from  the  present  period,  to  be  there  associated 
with  critical  notices  from  contemporary  scientific  journals. 
The  patents  here  enumerated  may  be  said  to  have  fallen  dead 
bom,  having  excited  no  notice  or  attention  in  scientific 
circles.  All  interest  in  them  has  been  confined  (with  one 
exception)  to  the  inventors  themselves,  who,  though  they 
have  laboured  seriously  and  sedulously,  have  elicited  no  new 
fact.  The  display  their  efibrts  make  in  the  following  pages 
is  anything  but  flattering  to  their  knowledge,  ingenuity,  or 
practical  skill.  Nothing  can  be  more  disheartening  than 
such  a  scene  of  wreck  and  blighted  hopes ;  and  the  sad  pic- 
ture should  prove  a  salutary  warning  to  all  adventurers 
setting  out  on  this  shoreless  ocean  of  enterprise. 

1809.— William  Pleasants  [No.  3226],  of  Abbey  Street, 
Dublin,  Bachelor  of  Arts.  **  A  self-mover,  or  machine  which 
can  keep  itself  in  motion."  He  says: — "My invention  con- 
sists in  causing  water  to  ascend  through  inclined  pipes  in 
consequence  of  the  centrifugal  force  communicated  to  it  by 
the  whirling  of  the  vessel  (partly  filled  with  water)  whereinto 
these  pipes  are  inserted,  which  whirling  motion  is  occasioned 
by  the  same  fluid  in  its  descent  turning  a  wheel  on  the  axle 


*  It  may  he  useful  to  mention  here  that  printed  copies  of  all  specifica- 
tions can  he  ohtained  at  exceedingly  moderate  charges,  at  the  Great  Seal 
Patent  Office ;  all  that  is  required  heing  to  name  the  date  and  accompany- 
iivg  number^  each  of  which  is  given  throughout  this  and  the  Ibimer  list 


430  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

which  passes  up  through  and  is  fixed  to  that  vessel."  This  is 
the  old  story,  and  as  there  is  nothing  remarkable  in  the 
apparatus  it  need  not  be  farther  described. 


1814. — Henby  Julius  Winteb  [No.  3861],  of  Dover, 
Kent,  Confectioner.  **  A  method  of  giving  eflfect  to  various 
operative  processes." 

I  construct  a  set  of  water-wheels,  overshot,  breast  wheels, 
or  other  wheels,  of  such  construction  as  that  the  whole  or 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  charge  of  water  suitable  for  giving 
motion  shall  be  employed  in  so  doing.  And  I  place  the 
wheels  of  the  set  or  series  in  such  positions  with  respect  to 
each  other  as  that  one  of  the  wheels  shall  be  worked  by  water, 
conveyed  thereon  ;  and  that  the  second  wheel  of  the  series, 
shall  be  worked  by  the  very  same  water,  which  I  do  for  that 
purpose  immediately  convey  from  the  tail  of  the  first  wheel 
unto  the  head  or  upper  working  part  of  the  second  wheel ; 
and  moreover,  that  another,  or  the  third  wheel  of  the  series  (if 
consisting  of  more  than  two  wheels),  shall  be  worked  by  the 
very  same  water,  which  I  do  for  that  purpose  immediately 
convey  from  the  tail  of  the  second  wheel  unto  the  upper 
working  part  of  the  third  wheel ;  and  I  do  in  this  manner 
proceed  by  conveying  the  very  same  water  from  wheel  to 
wheel,  however  numerous  the  set  may  be.  And  I  cause  the 
water  to  be  received  into  a  cistern.  And  I  do  infer,  that  the 
force  of  rotation  by  the  said  means  produced  in  all  the  said 
wheels,  or  that  the  sum  total  of  the  rotatory  force  in  all  the 
said  wheels,  will  be  more  than  sufficient  to  raise  to  the  first 
level  the  whole  or  as  much  as  the  whole  of  the  water  so  em- 
ployed in  working  the  said  wheels  ;  and  that  I  do  accordingly, 
by  the  connexion  and  adaptation  of  a  pump  or  pumps,  or 
other  fit  hydraulic  engine,  with  or  unto  the  said  wheels,  raise 
again  the  said  water,  or  an  equal  quantity,  and  do  employ  the 
water  so  raised  in  communicating  and  maintaining  the  rotatory 
force  of  the  said  set  or  series  of  wheels,  as  before  shewn ; 
and  that  I  do,  by  other  communications  from  the  said  wheels, 
give  effect  to  such  various  operative  processes  as  require  ma.- 
chinery  to  be  moved  by  employing  the  excess  of  the  rotatory 
force  for  this  last  purpose,  which  shall  be  over  and  above 


OR,    SEARCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIYE   POWER. 


431 


what  would  be  adequate  to  raise  and  return  the  water  as  afore- 
said. And  lastly,  I  do  declare  that  the  power  or  force  so  to 
be  generated  will  not  cease  to  be  augmented  unless  employed, 
count  poised,  or  stopped,  by  some  force  extrinsic,  and  pro- 
ceeding from  some  other  source  or  cause  (except  the  wear  and 
decay  of  materials)  than  any  which  would  exist  in  the  set  or 
series  of  water-wheels  combined  together  and  worked  as 
aforesaid « 


1819.— Robert  Copland  [No.  4364],  of  Liverpool, 
Merchant.  "  A  new  or  improved  method  or  methods  of 
gaining  power  by  new  or  improved  combinations  of  apparatus, 
applicable  to  various  purposes." 

Figure  1  is  a  view  of  a  machine  by  which  I  purpose  to 
derive  a  disposable  force  or  power  from  the  action,  weight,  or 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere, 
through  the  medium  of  the 
column  of  water  or  other  heavy 
liquid  descending  on  one  side 
of  the  enclosed  vertical  wheel, 
and  from  thence  through  the 
centrifugal  wheel,  being  re- 
turned into  the  same  reser- 
voir, from  which  the  pressure 
of  the  atmosphere  raises  it  to 
be  again  delivered  on  the  top 
of  the  vertical  wheel  to  sup- 
ply the  discharge  on  the  de- 
scending side,  arising  from 
the  centrifugal  force  com- 
municated to  it  by  the  rotatory  velocity  of  the  centrifugal 
wheel,  and  the  pressure  of  the  descending  column  over- 
balancing the  re-action  or  resistance  of  the  atmosphere  at 
the  discharging  apertures  of  the  centrifugal  wheel.  Thus  a 
small  quantity  of  water  or  other  liquid  (according  to  the  size 
of  the  machine  required)  being  continually  returned  on  to 
the  top  of  the  vertical  wheel  by  the  pressure  or  action  of  the 
atmosphere,  and  acting  by  its  unbalanced  gravity  or  impetus 
in  its  descent,  will  produce  a  disposable  force  or  power  of  any 
required  magnitude^  by  increasing  the  size  or  number  of  the 


432  PSBFETUUM   MOBILE  ; 

roacbines,  provided  the  height  the  fluid  is  required  to  be  raised 
is  not  quite  so  high  as  the  column  which  the  atmosphere  when 
lightest  will  raise  of  that  fluid,  and  allowing  for  the  requisite 
velocity  on  to   the  vertical    wheel.     In    Figure    1,  A  is  the 
feeding  pipe  through  which  the  fluid  is  raised  by  the  pressure 
or  action  of  the  atmosphere  on  the  fluid  in  the  lowest  reser- 
voir, in  which  the  lower  end  of  the  pipe  is  immersed,   closed 
by  a  cock,  sliding  plate,  valve,  or  shutter,    to    allow    the 
machine  to  be  filled  at  the  commencement,  and  which  may  be 
under  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  also  to  keep   it  air-tight.     The 
other  end  is  inserted  air-tight  into  the  top  reservoir,  or  by  a 
curve,  as  shewn  by  the  dotted  line  a,  joined  to  pipe  C,  and 
delivering  upon  the  vertical  wheel,   without  any  top  reservoir. 
In  this  case,  if  water  is  used,  the  highest  pa-t  of  the  bend  or 
curve  inside  should  not  exceed  thirty  feet  above  the  level  of 
the  water  in  lowest  reservoir.      B  is  the  top  reservoir,  the 
lowest  internal   part  of  which   should  never  exceed  twenty- 
nine  or  thirty  feet  above  the  water  in  lowest  reservoir,  but  it 
will  admit  the  top  of  the  reservoir,   if  wished,    to  be  rather 
higher  than  when  the  curved  tube  a  only  is  used.       It  must 
be  quite  air-tight,  and  supported  as  convenient.     C  is  a  pipe, 
joined  air-tight  to  top  reservoir,  or  forming  part  of  A,  a,  C. 
C  is  a  moveable  flap  of  strong  leather,  or  other  substance, 
which  may  be  joined  to  the  lowest  part  of  C,  where  the  water 
is  delivered  so  high  on  the  wheel,  and  where  floats  with  binges 
are  used   on  the  wheel   to  prevent  its  going  down  on  the  as- 
cending side  ;  but  not  necessary  when  water  is  delivered  lower 
on  the  wheel.     D,  D,  D,  D,  is  the  fixed  and  immoveable 
waterway,  and  the   fixed  case  or  cover  (of  the  vertical  wheel), 
of  which  it  is  a  part,  joining  also  the  stufiing  boxes,    through 
v\^hich  the  axle  of  the  vertical   wheel  moves  air-tight,  thus 
entirely  enclosing  and  surrounding  every  part  of  the  wheel 
but  the  projections  of  the  axle,  and  allowing  the  float  boards 
and  wheel  just  to  turn  freely  in  it  without  touching   in   any 
part  except  the  axle  in  turning  in  the  packing  of  the  stafling 
boxes  ;  the  float  boards  are  fastened  on  to  the  rim  or  sole  of 
the  vertical  wheel  by  very  strong  hinges  or  moveable  joints 
just  within  the  fixed  waterway  D.     E   is   a   pipe  or   pipes 
joined  air-tight  to  the  fixed  cover  or  case  enclosing  the  vertical 
wheel  where  the  water  is  to  be  taken  off"  it,  having  their  lower 
^ends  inserted  air-tight  also  into  the  bottom  of  the  fixed  and 


OK,   SEABCH    FOR   SELr-MOTITB   POWER.  43S 

immoveable  top  of  the  centrifugal  wbeei  in  such  a  direction 
that  they  may  deliver  the  water  into  the  moveable  waterway 
of  the  centrifugal  wheel  as  near  as  possible  in  the  same 
direction  as  the  water  circulates  in  the  wheel.  F,  F,  is  the 
centrifugal  wheel,  of  any  diameter  convenient,  according  to  the 
jize  of  the  machine,  placed  horizontally  above  the  fluid  in  the 
}owest  reservoir,  so  as  to  move  on  its  axis  as  near  as  possible 
to  the  sutface  of  the  fluid  without  touching  it,  having  an 
immoveable  cover  or  top,  leaving  a  hollow  waterway  round  the 
rim,  into  which  the  fluid  is  discharged  from  E  in  the  direction 
of  the  wheels'  motion.  G,  G,  are  the  discharging  apertures 
of  the  centrifugal  wheel.  H,  H,  is  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in 
I,  I,  the  lowest  reservoir,  containing  a  sufficient  quantity  of 
water,  when  the  machine  is  put  to  work,  to  allow  the  bottom 
of  feeding  pipe  A  to  be  immersed  in  it  at  least  two  feet  below 
the  surface,  or  a  greater  depth  may  be  given  to  that  part  of 
the  reservoir  under  the  mouth  of  pipe  A,  forming  a  sort  of 
well  in  which  A  may  be  inserted  any  required  depth,  better  to 
exclude  any  particles  of  air  or  bubbles  mixed  with  the  water 
nearer  its  surface  from  ascending  in  pipe  A.  This  reservoir 
should  be  large  enough  to  contain  the  whole  of  the  water  used 
before  the  machine  is  filled.  K,  K,  are  the  ends  of  the  axle 
of  vertical  wheel  outside  of  the  stuffing  boxes  of  the  fixed 
case,  and  are  the  only  parts  of  the  vertical  wheel  seen,  and 
turning  air-tight  through  the  packing  or  stuffing  boxes,  or  in 
any  other  manner  the  external  air  is  entirely  excluded  from 
the  vertical  wheel  when  at  work  ;  e  is  an  air-tight  cock  to 
discharge  the  air  out  of  the  machine  when  filling.  L  is  an 
aperture  into  top  reservoir,  or  into  highest  part  of  pipe  A,  a, 
when  no  top  reservoir,  closed  air-tight  by  a  screw  cap ;  by 
this  the  whole  machine  is  filled  in  every  part  with  the  fluid 
used  before  it  can  be  set  to  work,  the  bottom  of  pipe  A  and 
apertures  G  (as  well  as  cock  to  bottom  of  pipe  E  when 
required)  being  previously  closed.  P  is  part  of  the  axle  on 
which  the  centrifugal  wheel  revolves.  Before  the  machine 
can  be  put  to  work,  everything  being  previously  arranged  as 
directed,  the  apertures  at  G  and  bottom  of  A  (and  at  E  if 
required  also),  must  be  closed  by  sliding  plates,  valves,  cocks^ 
or  other  methods,  as  most  convenient,  and  every  part  of  the 
machine  must  be  filled  with  the  water  or  fluid  used  by  thd 
aperture   L,   or  any  other  convenient  method  by  which  tht 


434  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

highest  parts  may  be  filled,  the  air  allowed  to  discharge  by 
opening  E  and  O,  the  latter  to  be  shut  as  soon  as  the  centri- 
fugal wheel  is  filled,  and  the  cock  at  E  closed  where  required, 
when  the  water  is  above  it  a  little,  e  continuing  open,  so  as  to 
allow  the  air  to  be  entirely  discharged  from  every  part,  which 
being  done,  and  the  machine  entirely  filled  with  water,  this 
cock  and  aperture  L  must  be  carefully  closed  ;  having  then 
fixed  upon  the  most  convenient  method  for  givin  gthe  re- 
quired assistance  to  set  the  machine  to  work,  by  giving  the 
centrifugal  wheel  motion,  and  assisting  it  till  arrived  at  the 
velocity  fixed,  it  must  be  put  in  motion,  and  the  apertures  Gr 
opened  ;  after  it  has  got  a  little  into  motion,  and  as  soon  as 
the  velocity  of  the  wheel  has  given  a  centrifugal  force  to  the 
water  sufficient  to  overbalance  the  slight  difference  in  the  height 
of  the  feeding  and  descending  columns,  the  pipe  A  must  be 
opened ;  a  discharge  from  the  apertures  G  will  now  take 
place,  which  is  supplied  from  top  reservoir  B  over  the  loaded 
side  of  vertical  wheel,  where,  by  its  gravity  and  impetus  acting 
on  the  float  boards,  it  causes  the  wheel  to  turn  till  it  descends, 
so  as  to  be  discharged  through  E,  on  to  the  rim  or  waterway 
W,  of  the  centrifugal  wheel,  which  it  strikes  with  the  velocity 
of  its  descent  in  nearly  the  direction  of  the  'wheel's  motion, 
and  is  discharged  through  aperture  G  into  the  water  contained 
at  commencement  in  lower  reservoir  I,  from  whence  this  dis- 
charge is  again  supplied  by  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere, 
returning  it  through  pipe  A  into  top  reservoir,  or  through  a, 
C,  and  the  part  intended  of  the  vertical  wheel.  As  the  velocity 
of  the  centrifugal  wheel  is  accelerated,  the  velocity  of  the  de- 
scending column  over  the  vertical  wheel  will  also  be  acceler- 
ated, and,  consequently,  the  vertical  wheels,  when  having 
arrived  at  their  respective  fixed  velocities,  the  assisting  force 
being  no  longer  necessary,  may  be  withdrawn,  and  the  c^'n- 
trifugal  wheel  may  now  receive  what  assistance  is  required  to 
support  its  velocity  from  the  vertical  wheel  through  the  con- 
necting shafts  and  wheelwork,  or  in  any  other  manner. 


1823.— Robert  Copland  [No.  4749],  of  Wilmington 
Square,  Middlesex,  Gentleman.  '*  Combinations  of  apparatus 
for  gaining  power,  part    of  which    are    improvements  ou  a 


OE,    SEARjCH    FOB    SELF-MQTIVE    PpWE^.  435\ 

patent  already  obtained  by  bim  for  a  new  or  improved  metb^d 
or  nietbods  of  gaining  power  by  new  or  improved  combina-r 
tions  of  apparatus  applicable  to  various  purposes/* 

He  says; — ** Figures  I  and  ?  represent  a  doubl^  macbine 
with  tbe  connecting  pipes  or  hollow  tubes,  in  the  parts  of 
which  most  convenient  for  opening  and  shutting  occasionally 
are  placed  cocks,  valves,  or  slides,  No.  I  to  8,  and  lower 
valves  11  and  12,  or  other  substitutes  for  these,  which  may 
be  shut  or  opened  when  required  by  any  of  tbe  wellrknown 
methods,  from  the  motion  of  the  beams,  or  by  tbe  hand,  or 
any  other  method.  C  1  and  C  2  are  hollow  iron  cylinders  of 
equal  contents,  connecting  together  at  bottom,  where  valve  11 
opens  or  closes  the  communication  ;  they  have  close  air-tight 
covers  or  tops,  with  stuffing  boxes  for  the  rods  to  pass 
through,  and  the  pipes  being  connected  by  air-tigbt  joints." 
We  then  hav*  '*  hollow  cylinders,  having  pistons  working  in 
them ;  pipes  inserted  through  these  bottoms  ;  an  ope^  trough 
or  waterway  joined  on  the  top  of  these  cylinders  ;  four  vessel? 
or  weights  moving  freely  in  the  four  cylinders,  suspended  by 
rods  passing  through  stuffing  bo^es  in  the  close  tops  ;**  and 
so  on  throughout  seven  printed  folio  pages.  "We  haye  here  <jt 
large  amount  of  complication  and  friction^ 


1836 Robert   CoPi^AyD   [No.   7216],  of  Wandsworth 

Boad,  Surrey,  Esquire,  "  Improvements  upon  patents 
already  obtained  by  me  for  Qombinations  of  apparatus  for 
gaining  power/'  The  engine  has  a  working  beam  and  cylinr 
ders,  like  the  preceding,  but  differently  wofkjB4i  without  any 
appearance  of  being  seif-movng. 


182J.— OeorgpLujtton  [No.  4632],  of  Gloucester  Street, 
Middlesex,  Mechanist.  **  A  new  niethod  of  impelling  ma- 
chinery without  the  aid  of  steam,  wind,  air,  or  fire." 

My  invention  consists  in  a  vertical  wheel  moving  by 
gravity  alone«  such  wheel  being  fixed  on  an  axis,  which  is 
made  to  turn  easily  in  gudgeons,  and  the  periphery  of  which 
wheel  is  provided  with  levers  so  construiCted  that  by  the  mere 
revolution   of   the    wheel   they   extend    themselves   to   their 

f2 


436 


PERPETUUM    mobile; 


greatest  length,  and  obtain  their  greatest  actin<y  power  succes- 
sively as  they  arrive  by  the  rotative  motion  of  the  wheel  at 
that  position  where  they  become  situated  at  the  upper  part  of 
the  lower  quadrant  of  the  descending  side  of  the  wheel,  and 
in  which  last-mentioned  position  they  charge  themselves  with 
a  weight  at  that  extremity  farthest  from  the  axis  ;  and  which 
It  vers  also  cease  to  act  as  levers  the  moment  they  have  passed 
the  lower  part  of  the  said  quadrant,  and  being  carried  up  in 
an  inactive  state  with  the  ascending  side  of  the  wheel,  discharge 
the  weight  when  the  said  weight  arrives  at  some  point  above 
the  level  of  the  axis ;  and  in  causing  the  said  wtight,  and 
others  so  discharged,  to  return,  hy  gravity  alone,  to  the  situa- 
tion whence  they  were  taken  by  the  levers  before-mentioned. 


I  will  here  observe  generally,  that  the  principle  of  ray 
invention  being  applicable  to  a  series  of  vertical  wheels  on  one 
axis,  as  well  as  to  a  single  vertical  wheel,  and  a  series  of 
Vertical  wheels  being  in  my  opinion  preferable  for  the  purpose 


OR,    SEAHCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  43? 

of  practically  applying  my  invention,  I  have  described  the 
principles  of  my  invention,  as  applying  to  such  a  series. 
Fig.  1  is  an  end  view  of  a  series  of  vertical  wheels,  one  onljr 
being:  seen,  while  the  levers  attached  to  the  whole  are  visible. 
In  Fig.  1,  the  lever  A  is  represented  in  the  act  of  falling  from 
the  periphery  of  the  wheel  into  a  right  line.  The  lever  is 
composed  of  a  series  of  flat  rods  connected  by  ruler  joints, 
which  said  ruler  joints  are  provided  vyith  a  stop  or  joggle  to 
prevent  their  collapsing  at  any  time  more  than  will  firing  any 
one  of  the  rods  which  compose  the  levers  at  a  light  angle  with 
the  rod  next  to  it.  This  lever  is  attached  to  the  periphery  of 
the  wheel  by  the  hinge  joint  5,  bejng  provided  with  the 
shoulder  c,  to  prevent  its  falling  into  any  other  than  a  right 
line  from  the  centre  of  the  circumference  of  the  wh/eeL  The 
levers  are  furnished  at  their  outer  extremity  with  a  bucket  or 
receiver,  the  bottom  of  which  is  sufficiently  broad  to  retain  the 
ball  G  ;  at  A  is  a  small  roller  to  facilitate  the  delivery  of  the 
ball.  The  ball  remains  in  the  bucket  till  the  lever  comes 
into  the  position  of  the  leyer  F,  when  Js  will  roll  out  of  the 
bucket  on  to  the  inclined  plane,  and  by  its  own  gravity  roll 
to  the  balls  at  the  other  end  of  the  inclined  plane,  ready  to  be 
again  taken  into  a  bucket.  The  stage  which  supports  the  i  nr 
clined  plane  should  not  have  any  connection  with  the  axis. 

[The  intended  operation  of  this  wheel  is  too  obyious  tp  r^r 
jquire  further  description.] 


1826. — Edward  Jordan  [No.  51i91],  of  Norwich,  En- 
gineer.  **  A  new  mode  of  obtaining  power,  applicable  jto 
imachin^ry  of  different  descriptions." 

This  is  a  sin^rularly  impracticable  invention,  yet  the  patentee 
daim«  that  it  •*'  consists  in  sinking  or  forcing  down  to  aqy 
.convenient  depth  under  water,  buoyant  vessels,  by  or  wjlh  a 
lever,  and  also  in  directing  and  conducting  them  when  so 
immersed,  so  that  they  are  alternately  placed  in  a  position 
to  act  upon  parts,  forming  in  effect  a  lengthened  portion  of  the 
Jcver  that  depressed  them,  thereby  obtaining  by  a  new  mode  a 
power  applicable  to  machinery.*'  Two  large  drawings  and 
seven  printed  folio  page§  complete  the  specification. 


1827.— Sir    William    Congreve    [No.   5461],    of   Cecil 


438 


PE&PETUUM    mobile: 


Street,  London,  Baronet.  "  A  new  motive  power.**  Enough 
has  already  been  stated  in  respect  to  the  inventions  herein 
protected.     (See  Chapter  IX.) 

1832. — Pierre  Nicolas  Hainsseltn  [No.  6290],  of 
Duke  Street.  St.  James's,  Middlesex,  Architect  and  Engineer. 
"  A  machine  or  motive  power  for  giving  motion  to  machinery 
of  different  descriptions,  to  be  called  '  Hainsselin's  Motive 
Power.'" 


I  do  declare  the  nature  of  my  said  invention  to  consist  in 
a  machine,  the  nature  of  which  depends  on  the  descent  of  an 
endless  series  of  reservoirs  filled  with  water,  which  water  is 
raised  to  a  suitable  elevation  for  the  purpose,  principally  by  the 
action  of  the  machine  itself. 


OB,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  439 

No.  1  represents  a  front  view  of  the  machine,  and  No.  2  a 
side  view;  similar  letters  of  reference  being  used  to  denote 
MJmiiar  parts.  A  is  a  large  drum  ;  B,  B,  an  endless  series  of 
reservoirs,  or  (as  they  would  be  called  on  a  water  wheel) 
buckets,  each  fastened  by  a  hinge  joint  to  the  other,  so  as  to 
form  an  endless  chain,  passiiig  over  the  drum  ;  C  is  a  cogged 
wheel,  working  into  the  pinion  D ;  and  E  is  an  eccentric, 
more  particularly  explained  hereafter ;  F  is  a  fly  wheel  ;  G, 
G,  is  a  balance  beam,  carrying  the  segment  of  a  circle  at  each 
end ;  H  is  what  I  call  an  escapement  for  T,  which  is  a  pen- 
dulum; and  I  2  is  the  weight  of  the  pendulum;  K,  K,  are 
two  pumps;  L  is  the  main  cylinder  of  the  machine;  M,  an 
air  pump;  N,  a  pipe,  through  which  the  water  which  works 
the  engine  is  raised  ;  O  is  a  reservoir  to  receive  the  water  from 
the  descending  buckets ;  and  P  is  a  reservoir  to  receive  the 
water  from  the  pipe  N ;  and  when  it  is  required  to  make  one  of 
the  said  machines,  the  following  details  must  be  observed  :— 
Suppose,  for  instance,  it  is  required  to  make  a  machine  on  my 
plan,  equal  in  power  to  a  steam  engine  of  which  the  expansive 
is  equal  to  a  resistance  of  1,000  lbs.  in  a  second.  It  will  be 
seen  that  air  and  water  are  the  two  principal  agents  in  me 
machine  ;  water,  it  is  known,  weighs  fiom  60  to  62  lbs.  thy 
cubic  foot,  and  it  requires  32  cubic  feet  of  air  to  balance  one 
cubic  foot  of  water  ;  and  I  have  found,  by  various  experiments, 
that  my  machine  employs  about  three-fourths  of  its  power  to 
produce  it  own  action.  From  these  premises  it  results  that  in 
order  to  have  a  machine  on  my  plan  equal  to  1,000  lbs.  per 
second,  there  must  be  4,000  lbs.  of  vfater  in  the  descending 
buckets,,  and  two  hundred  cubic  feet  of  air  condensed  in  the 
cylinder  L,  by  means  of  the  air  pump  M,  which  is  worked  by 
hand  by  the  lever  handle  a.  The  drawing  represents  sixty-four 
buckets  fastened  together  by  hinge  joints  in  such  manner  as  to 
form  an  endless  chain  of  buckets,  their  motion  being  so  contrived 
that  they  descend^fuU  at  one  side  of  the  drum,  and  rise  empty  at 
the  otherside,  the  drum  being  about  three  feet  six  inches  in 
diameter  ;  twenty-five  of  these  buckets  can  retain  water  in  the 
same  time;  and  in  order  that  the  united  weights  of  their  con- 
tents may  be  4,000  lbs.,  it  is  necessary  that  each  of  the  sixty^ 
four  buckets  shall  be  of  a  size  (whatever  be  their  form)  con- 
veniently to  hold  160  lbs.  of  water.  In  order  to  supply 
twenty-tive  descending  buckets  with   the  required  quantity  of 


440  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

water,  the  two  pumps  K,  K,  are  placed  a  little  above  the  lower 
reservoir  O  ;  the  rods  of  these  pumps  plumb  with  the  extremi- 
fies  of  the  balance  beam  G^  G^  by  which  they  are  worked  ; 
the  capacity  of  each  of  these  pumps  should  be  such  that  each 
stroke  of  the  piston  should  raise  a  column  of  water  to  the  upper 
reservoir  P^  sufficient  for  the  supply  of  one  bucket  (ihat  is  to 
bay,  160  lbs.) ;  these  pumps,  which  may  be  called  hydro-pneu- 
matic^ are  nearly  like  ordinary  lift  pumps,  the  only  ditference 
being  that  the  pump  chamber  is  divided  into  two  parts  b\  the  divi- 
sion/i  the  upper  part  being  furnished  with  the  piston  ol  a  force 
pump ;  the  same  rod  e  works  both   the   piston  d  ot  the   upper 
part  of  the  pump  chamber  c  and  the  valve  /of  the  lower  part 
of  the  chamber  g.     The  pump  rods  e^  e,  are  tixed  to  a  chain  A,  hi 
whfch  is  attached  to  the  segments  on  the  ends  of  the  balance 
beam  G,  G,  and  thereby  made  to  work  the  pump  rods,  while 
the  balance  weights  e,  t,  below  the  extremities  of  these  chains, 
keep  them  at  a  proper  degree  of  tension,  and  keep  the  beam  on 
a  just   balance.       The  strong  cast-iron  cylinder  L  must  be 
capable  of  resisting  the  force  of  the  condensed  air  which  it  is 
intended  to  contain,  say,  at  least  240  lbs.     The  interior  of  this 
cylinder  is  furnished  with  a  division/,  by  which  an  upper  and 
lower  chamber  dre  formed,  marked  k  and  L    The  lower  chamber 
k  is  intended  to  receive  the  water  which  the  pumps  K,  K,  feed 
it  with   by  means  of  the  pipes  m,  m,  at  every  stroke  of  their 
pistons,  and  in  this  cbamber  the  water  frees  itself  from  the  air 
which  may  have  been  pumped  in  with  it^  and  whicb  is  suffered 
from  time  to  time  to  escape  at  the  cock  n,  when  a  quantity  has 
collected    sufficient    in  any  way  to  retard  the   action  of  the 
machine.     It  is  from  this  lower  chamber  that  the  water  is 
supplied  to  the  upper  reservoir  P.     The  upper  chamber  /  of 
the  cylinder  L  is  destined  to  receive  the  air,  which   is  to  be 
forced  into  and  thus  condensed  in  it  by  means  of  the  small  air 
p^irap  Mfc'^Itjwill  be  seen  that  the  two  small  pipes  o^  o,  com- 
siunicate  witii  the   upper  chamber  I  of  the  cylinder  L.  and  the 
tipper  chamber  c,  c,  ot  the  two  pumps  K,  K;  these   pipes  are 
to  let  in  the  condensed  air  upon  the  tops  of  the  piston   c?,  c?,  td 
cause  the  downward  movement  of  their  alternate  action,     q^  q^ 
are  two  valves,  each  furnished  with  a  lever  <,  /,  which  levers 
are  connected  by  a  jointed  cross  bar  S,  as  shown  in  plan  in 
the  margin  of  the  drawing  No.  1.      As  the  two  arms  or  levers 
t\  tii  of  this  contrivance  project  beyond  the  vertical  line  of  the 


OB,    SEABCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    POWEB.  441 

pendulum  I,  they  are  acted  upon  alternately  by  the  vibration 
of  the  pendulum,  thus  alternately  opening  and  shutting  the 
valves  y,  q.  The  lower  reservoir  O  may  be  of  any  convenient 
capacity,  but  the  upper  reservoir  P  should,  at  least,  be  able  to 
contain  as  much  water  as  tvvi  nty-five  of  the  buckets  can  hold  ; 
and  theascendin  jr  pipe  N,  through  which  the  water  is  raised  from 
the  lower  chamber  k  of  the  cylinder  L  to  the  upper  reservoir  P, 
should  be  of  such  a  diameter  a;^  to  contain  exactly  the  quantity 
of  water  required  to  fill  three  of  the  buckets  in  the  space 
between  the  point  u  (which  should  always  be  in  a  line  with 
the  division/)  and  the  point  r.  The  cock  X  is  to  regulate  the 
descent  ol  the  wafer  from  the  reservoir  P  into  the  buckets, 
which  should  be  just  equal  to  what  is  pumped  up  by  each  pump 
at  each  stroke  of  the  piston,  y  is  an  air  cock  communicating 
with  the  upper  chamber  I  of  the  cylinder  L,  and  is  to  let  a 
portion  of  the  condensed  air  escape  when  its  too  great  density 
causes  the  engine  to  work  at  too  rapid  a  rate.  Z  is  a  cock  lor 
emptying  the  lower  chamber  of  the  cylinder  L  when  necessary 
for  repairs  or  otherwise,  and  a  similar  cuck  or  valve  should 
be  made  to  the. lower  reservoir  O,  in  case  at  any  time  it  should 
be  required  to  empty  it.  As  it  is  necessary  that  each  bucket 
as  it  empties  itself  should  be  replaced  by  a  full  one,  the  pinion 
D  should  be  so  regulated  with  reference  to  the  toothed  wheel 
c  (which  is  fixed  on  the  same  axis  as  the  drum  A),  that  at 
every  half  revolution  of  the  fly  wheel  F  (which  gears  m  with 
the  pinion  D,  and  is  on  the  same  axis  with  the  eccen  ric  E), 
one  of  the  buckets  shall  present  its  If  in  turn  under  the  cock 
X  to  be  filled.  The  pendulum  I  is  fixed  on  the  same  axis  as  the 
balance  beam  G,  G,  and  the  object  of  the  eccentric  fixed  on  the 
axis  of  the  fly  wheel  is  to  act  upon  that  part  of  the  pendulum 
which  I  call  the  escapement  at  r,  thus  propellingthe  pendulum  to 
one  side,  while  as  soon  as  the  eccentiic  turns  away  from  r, 
and  it  thus  escapes  from  the  action  of  the  eccentric  lor  a  tiiue, 
its  own  weight  brings  it  back  to  be  acted  upon  by  the  ecceniri  i 
again,  thus  keeping  up  the  vibration  of  the  pendulum.  The 
jointed  bars  at  H,  H,  H,  H,  which  I  have  called  the  escape- 
ment, form  a  part  of  the  rod  I.  This  rod  is  furni-hed  with 
the  weight  I  2,  which  may  be  raised  or  lowered  on  the  rod  I,  by 
turning  il  to  the  right  or  left  on  the  thread  of  t'le  screw  Q.  to  re- 
gulate the  motion  of  the  pendulum;  and  this  motion  may  be 
further  regulated  by  the  segment  bar  and  adjusting  screw,  which 


442  PBRPETUUM  mobile; 

expands  or  contracts  the  jointed  bars  H^  H^  H,  H,  of  the 
escapement,  at  pleasure,  and  thus  allows  an  increased  or  dimi- 
nished action  of  the  eccentric  on  the  part  r  or  the  escapement; 
R  is  a  lever  to  throw  the  pinion  D  in  and  out  of  gear  with  (his 
fly  Wheel  F,  in  order  to  stop  the  machine  or  put  it  in  action 
when  required  ;  and  it  may  be  well  here  to  describe  that  the 
h  effected  by  means  df  the  small  arm^  which,  when  in  gear, 
protrudes  through  a  hole  in  the  flange  of  the  pinion  ;  but  when 
the  pinion  is  drawn  aw^ay  from  this  arm,  the  fly  wheel  and  all 
upon  its  axis  stopsj  and  the  pinion  turns  harmlessly  with  the 
toothed  vVheel. 

This  verbose  description  is  followed  by  describing  how  the 
invention  is  to  be  Worked^  which  it  is  needless  to  inquire  into* 

[In  the  "Description  des  Machines  et  procedes  pour  lesquel* 
des  Brevets  d'Invention  out  et^  pris;"  Paris,  vol.  33,  p.  239, 
is  an  account  of  a  **  Machine  hydropneumatique,  dite  Machine 
iiainsselinej'*  Laporte,  October^  1836.] 


l833.-^fiARtHELEMY      RiCHARD      COMTE      DE      PrEDAVAL 

[No.  6510],  of  Leicester  Place^  London,  Engineer.  **An 
engine  for  producing  motive  power,  applicable  to  varioas  pur- 
poses." It  comprises  an  outer  circular  case,  supported  on  a 
stand,  having  a  corresponding  hollow  Water  and  air-tight 
cylinder  turning  on  an  axis,  working  in  a  stuffing  box  ;  this 
axis  is  fixed  to  a  drum,  and  passes  through  the  case  at 
each  side,  which  supports  it.  This  frame  contains  pistons 
or  friction  plates  occupying  the  space  between  the  inner  drum 
and  outer  Case  on  all  four  sides.  There  is  an  air  COck,  mercurial 
guage^  springs,  leather  packing,  metal  plates,  &c  ,  &tc.  Y  t  in 
spite  of  all  this  complication,  we  are  informed  the  engine  eaets 
"by  a  joint  poWer  derived  from  the  buoyancy  of  a  body  in 
fluids,  and  the  weight  of  a  body  in  vacuo." 

Note.— This  patent  was  made  the  subject  of  a  joint-stock 
company*     (See  conclusion  of  Chapter  X.) 


1839;-  Jacob  fiaAiiiLL  [No.  8312],  of  Deptford,  Kent, 
Governor  of  Trinity  Ground.  *'  Improvements  in  obtaining 
motive  power.*" 

My  invention  consi«»ts  in  a  certain  arrangement  or  com- 
binaiion  of  mechanism  whrrein  (he  atmospheric  air  is  employed 


OK,    SEARCH    FOB    StLF-MOTIVE    POWER. 


443 


as  the  impellingagent,  being  brought  to  bear  in  such  a  manner  as 
by  exerting  a  constant  urging  pressure,  to  produce  a  continuous 
rotary  motion,  and  applies  to  all  the  purposes  where  a  prime 
mover  is  required. 

Fig.  1  is  an  end  view  df  the  apparatus,  fl,  a,  are  the  bearings, 
top  and  bottom,  for  the  vertical 
shaft  b^  which  bearings  are  to 
be  so  constructed  as  to  produce 
the  least  possible  amount  of 
friction,  c  is  a  large  drum 
furnished  with  radial  plates  or 
fans,  some  of  the  plates  being 
so  arranged  as  to  slope  down 
towards  the  bottom  plate^  thus 
forming,  as  it  were,  a  series  of 
boxes  decreasing  in  their  trans- 
verse dimensions  as  they  ap- 
proach the  boss.  This  drum  is  to  be  put  in  motion  by  means 
of  a  current  of  air  directed  through  the  pipes  d  and  ^,  from  the 
two  pairs  of  double  bellows/ and  ff.  A  is  a  worm  fixed  on  the 
vertical  shaft  by  means  of  a  tightening  screw,  or  in  any  other 
convenient  way,  taking  into  the  worm  wbeelton  the  horizontal 
crank-?hafty,  supported  in  bearings  k,  k.  The  cranks  /,  I, 
work  the  bellows,  by  connecting  rods  m,  m;  n  is  a  spur  wheel 
taking  into  a  pinion  o,  on  the  axle  of  which  is  a  winch  handle 
p^  for  starting  the  apparatus. 

What  I  claim  as  my  peculiar  right  is,  the  impulsion  of  a 
current  of  air  against  the  fans  of  a  drum  (as  that  at  c)  through 
pipes,  as  at  d  and  e)  for  the  purposes  of  a  motive  power,  together 
with  a  certain  arrangement  of  mechanism,  by  means  of  which 
the  action  first  induced  shall  be  kept  up. 


1842.— William  Henry  Stuckey  [No.  9419],  of  St. 
Pi.'tersburg*  P^squire.  **  A  pneumatic  engine  for  producing 
motive  power." 

Fig.  1  is  a  front  view  of  my  said  pneumatic  engine,  partly 
iu  section.  A^  and  B^  two  horizontal  cylinders,  united  at 
tiioir  inner  extremities  a,  a,  which  rotate  on  gudgeons  that 
have  their  bearings  0,  G,  in  the  upright  standards  D,  D ;  A'' 
and  B'  two  pistons  which  work  to  and  fro  iu  these  cyiindera  \ 


444 


PEBFETUUM    MOBII.E  ; 


E'  aod  F?  two  hollow  amiB  or  tubes  which  radiate  from  the 
cylinder  A^  and  E^,  E*,  two  Bimilar  amiB  or  tnbes  which 
radiate  in  opposite  directions  from  the  cylinder  B^  each 
cylinder  having  an  open  comraonication  with  the  amiB  of 
tubes  attached  to  it.  F\  P,  P,  and  P,  four  other  cylinders, 
affixed  to  a  circular  ring  R,  R,  open  at  top  to  the  atmosphere 
and  open  at  bottom  to  the  railial  tubes  £^  E?,  P,  E^,  connected 
with  them  at  their  outer  extremities.  G^  G",  GP,  G*,  pistons 
working  in  the  cylinders  F,  P,  F,  and  F,  and  H^  H-,  H», 
and  H.*,  caps  screwed  ou  to  the  flanges  of  the  cylinders.  The 
different  parts  described  form  a  wheel,  which,  on  being  set  in 
motion,  rotates  on  the  gudgeons  in  the  bearings  C,  C.  Tha 
motion  is  produced  as  follows: — I  adjust  the  wheel  so  that  the 
tubes  E^  and  E^  shall  be  in  a  vertical  position ;  and  pour  into 
the  tube  E^,  through  the  cylinder  F^  withdrawing  the  pistun 
G^  as  much  mercury  or  other  suitable  fluid  body  (previously 
determined  by  calculation)  as  will  till  ti»e  tube  from  the  p  lint 
i)t  iiH  conuectiou  with  the  inner  cylinder  A^  up  to  the  U^ttom 
(a, a,)  ot  the  outer  cylinder  F\  The  mercury  thus  introduced 
liowB  into  the  cylinder  A^  at  the  back  of  the  piston  A^  and 

presses  that  piston  forward  to 
the  extremity  of  its  range,  the 
piston  G^  being  then  restored 
to  its  place  in  the  cylinder  F\ 
and  pressed  close  down  on  the 
mercury  in  the  tube  E^  I 
next  turn  the  wheel  till  the 
tubes  E^  and  E*  are  in  a  vertical 
position,  by  which  turning  the 
mercury  therein  is  forced  into 
the  tube  E^  flowing  down  which 
it  drives  the  piston  G'  of  the 
cylinder  F^  forward  to  the  ex- 
tremity of  its  range,  leaving 
a  vRcuilm  in  the  cylinder  A^  at  O,  equal  to  the  difference 
between  the  heights  from  which  the  mercury  descends  in  the 
tul)e8  K^  and  E^  I  then  fill  the  tube  E'^  and  cylinder  B^  with 
mercury,  to  the  same  extent  and  in  the  same  way  as  I  pre- 
viously filled  the  tube  E^  and  cylinder  A^  after  wuich  I  turn 
the  wheel  till  the  tubes  E^  and  L^  are  once  more  in  a  vertical 
}K)siti()n,  whereby  1  produce  a  vacuum  in  each  pair  of  tubes, 
and  their  intermediate  cylinder,  to  the  degree  of  the  difference 


OK,    SEABCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVB    POWER.  445 

before  explained.  To  the  four  tubes  there  are  attached  four 
cocks  K*,  K^,  K^,  K*,  which,  after  the  vacua  have  been  ob- 
tained, are  closed  ;  and  to  the  four  rods  of  the  pistons  of  the 
outer  cylinders  F\  F*,  F^  F*,  there  are  attached  four  hanging 
or  balance  weights  L^,  U,  JJ,  h\  in  such  manner  that  they 
shall  co-operate  with  the  atmospheric  pressure  on  the  said 
vacua  in  giving  rotation  to  the  wheel.  M^,  M'*,  M^  M*,  are 
jointed  levers,  by  which  these  weights  are  connected  at  one 
end  with  the  pistons  GS  G^  G^  G* ;  and  N^  N^  are  cords  or 
bands,  by  which  they  are  suspended  at  the  other  end  from 
standards  P,  P,  projecting  from  the  ring  R,  and  bearing 
pulleys,  over  which  the  cords  or  bands  pass,  each  cord  or  band 
serving  to  suspend  the  two  weights  which  are  opposite  to  each 
other,  for  which  purpose  it  is  passed  internally  across  the 
wheel  and  over  the  exterior  of  one  of  the  cylinders  A^  or  B\ 
The  cords  or  bands  are  attached  to  the  weights  at  the  lower 
ends  thereof,  and  pass  over  small  pulleys  close  to  the  points  of 
connexion,  so  that  the  cords  or  bands,  when  pulled,  may  act 
the  more  effectually  on  the  weights.  It  will  be  readily  un- 
derstood that  when  any  two  of  the  tubes  are  in  a  vertical 
position,  and  the  mercury  or  other  suitable  fluid  has  descended 
to  the  bottom  of  the  lower  tube,  its  pressure  on  the  piston  of 
the  outer  cylinder  G^  or  G^,  or  G^  or  G*,  will  cause  the  weight 
connected  with  that  piston  to  turn  inwards  towards  the  centre 
of  the  wheel,  by  which  movement  a  strain  is  exerted  on  the 
connecting  cord  or  band  N^  or  N^,  which  throws  up  the  oppo- 
site weight  at  top,  and  causes  it  to  force  down  the  piston  of 
the  top  cylinder,  or  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  the  upper 
tube,  whereby  any  excess  of  pressure  at  the  bottom  of  the 
lower  tube  is  transferred  to  the  top  piston,  where  it  acts  in  aid 
of  the  atmospheric  pressure  on  the  vacua  obtained  in  manner 
aforesaid.  The  four  cocks  K,  have  regulating  rods  connected 
to  them  in  the  way  common  in  steam  and  other  engines,  so 
that  as  each  tube  comes  into  a  vertical  position  the  cock 
attached  to  it  is  opened,  and  as  it  passes  from  that  position 
towards  the  horizontal,  is  shut,  so  that  the  mercury  always 
retains  its  proper  position  in  the  tubes  or  cylinders,  and  is 
acted  on  by  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  at  those  points 
only  where  such  pressure  can  be  of  service.  The  power  of 
this  wheel  will  be,  of  course,  in  proportion  to  the  vucua  pro- 
duced in  manner  aforesaid,  and  to  the  altitude  of  the  columns 
of  mercury  employed.     The  inner  cylinders  might  be  dispensea 


446 


PERPETUUM   mobile; 


with,  and  the  tubes  be  made  to  communicate  directly  with  each 
other,  but  I  prefer,  for  most  purposes,  the  arrangement  which 
I  have  before  described,  with  the  two  intermediate  cylinders 
AS  B* ;  where  the  inner  cylinders  are  dispensed  with,  I  make 
use  of  eccentrics  instead  of  the  joined  levers  before  described, 
to  enable  the  weights  to  turn  to  the  extent  of  about  half  a 
circle.  The  number  of  tubes  also  need  not  be  limited  to  four, 
but  increased  to  any  convenient  extent 


1845. — WiLLiAJtf  WiLLCocKs  Sleigh  [No.  10,711],  of 
Chiswick,  Middlesex,  Doctor  of  Medicine  and  Surgeon.  "A 
hydro-mechanic  apparatus  for  producing  motive  power." 

The  nature  of  my  invention  consists  in  the  application  of 
hydrostatic  pressure  in  a  chamber  by  means  of  apparatus, 
and  in  such  manner  as  to  reduce  the  effect  of  the  hydrostatic 
pressure  in  the  said  chamber,  in  whatever  direction  io  opposite 
to  that  in  which  it  is  intended  that  the  said  pressure  shall 
propel  the  said  chamber,  and  thereby  produce  motive  power, 
without  depending  upon  any  escape  of  water  from  the  said 
chamber  for  that  purpose. 

Fig.  1  represents  a  vertical    sectional  elevation    of   the 
Q  apparatus.      The    framework 

A  A  A  A.  B  B,  a  foundation 
plate  into  which  the  two  vertical 
pillars  or  guide  rods  C  C  C  C 
are  firmly  screwed  and  held 
in  position  at  their  upper  ex- 
tremities by  the  cross  bar  D. 
In  the  framework  A  A  A  A 
lies  the  horizontal  pipe  E,  from 
the  ends  of  which  rise  two 
vertical  pipes  F  and  G.  The 
pipe  F  has  a  stuffing  box  H  H, 
and  a  solid  cylindrical  piston 
I  I ;  a  supply  pipe  and  tap  J 
leads  from  a  small  funnel  K ;  and  lower  down,  projecting 
from  the  same  pipe,  is  a  discharge  cock  L.  At  the  upper 
end  of  the  pipe  G  is  a  stuffing  box  M  M,  through  which 
works  up  and  down  in  the  pipe  G  the  smaller  pipe  N  N, 
open  at  both  its  extremities  0  0.  On  the  upper  end  of  this 
pipe  N  N  is  fixed  and  supported,  by  means  of  two  vertical 


OB,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  447 

Tods  k  k,  the  chamber  a  a  a  a,  which  has  a  free  communica- 
tion with  the  water  in  the  pipe  N  N,  through  the  opening  O ; 
this  chamber  consists  of  two  hollow  cylinders  a  a  a  a,  united 
at  a  right  angle.  The  horizontal  cylinder  has  an  opening  or 
commimication  d  d  with  the  perpendicular  one,  and  is  fur- 
nished at  each  end  with  a  piston  h  h.  The  perpendicular 
cylinder  is  furnished  with  the  piston  Ji  A,  which  answers  as  a 
moveable  bottom  to  the  whole  chamber ;  these  three  pistons, 
h  h  and  h  A,  are  connected  together.  The  piston  h  h  has  an 
opening  and  stuffing  box  at  t  i,  for  the  pipe  N  N.  r  r, 
various  stuffing  boxes  for  the  pistons  h  h  and  A  A.  S,  a  rod 
for  communicating  the  power  gained  to  machinery.  T,  an 
air  cock  for  the  admission  of  air  during  the  filling  and 
emptying  of  the  pipes  and  chamber.  All  these  pistons  must 
move  water-tight  and  with  as  little  friction  as  possible. 

I  will  now  proceed  to  describe  the  modus  operandi  and 
the  effect  to  be  produced  thereby.  Water  must  be  introduced 
into  the  pipes  E  F  G,  through  the  small  funnel  K,  and  through 
the  supply  cock  J,  imtil  these  pipes,  together  with  the  pipe  N 
N  and  the  chamber  a  a  a  a^  are  all  completely  full,  the  air 
cock  T  being  open  during  the  flow  of  water.  When  all  are 
full,  the  supply  cock  J  and  the  air  cock  T  must  be  closed,  and 
the  piston  I  I  pushed  down  into  the  pipe  E ;  this  will  cause 
the  water  in  the  chamber  a  a  a  aio  press  upon  every  portion 
of  its  interior  surface  with  a  power  greater  than  that  given  to 
the  piston  1 1,  proportionate  to  the  difference  between  the  area 
of  the  piston  I  I  and  the  area  of  the  chamber.  Now,  the 
moveable  bottom  or  piston  h  h  being  supported  by  the  lateral 
pressure  on  the  pistons  b  b,  the  upper  part  or  roof  of  the 
chamber  a  a  a  ais  freed  from  a  great  part  of  the  counteracting 
effect  of  the  downward  pressure  on  the  moveable  bottom  h  /i, 
and,  therefore,  the  upward  pressure  necessarily  carries  the 
chamber  and  all  fixed  to  it  upwards  with  a  proportioned 
effective  power,  the  said  chamber  of  course  descending  on 
the  upstroke  of  the  piston  II.  A  power  being  thus  obtained 
in  the  chamber  a  a  a  a,  greater  than  that  given  to  the  piston 
I  I,  it  is  evident  that  if  the  rod  S  be  connected  by  any  ordinary 
means  to  a  crank  shaft  or  other  suitable  machinery,  and  the 
piston  rod  of  the  piston  1 1  be  moved  by  a  suitable  power,  an 
increased  production  of  motive  power  must  be  the  result, 
which  may  be  applied  by  any  of  the  ordinary  well-known 
means  to  machinery. 


448  PEBPETuuM  mobile; 

/ 

"  The  niacliine  imparts  a  power  of  upward  motion  to  the 
chamber  a  a  a  a,  greater  than  the  power  applied  to  the  prime 
mover  or  piston  I  I,  without  depending  upon  any  escape  of 
water  from  the  said  chamber  for  such  effect/' 


1853. — ^WiLLUM  WiLLCocKs  Sleigh  [No.  809],  of 
London,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  "  The  production  of  motive 
power,  which  he  entitles  '  The  counteracting  re-acting  motive 
power  engine.*  "     He  says  : — 

"The  nature  of  my  said  invention  consists  in  producing 
motive  power  by  means  of  water,  or  of  any  suitable  fluid  or 
liquid,  acting  by  a  forcing  pump,  or  other  well-known  means, 
in  certain  chanibers  fixed  to  an  axletree,  the  said  chambers 
being  so  constructed  that  that  portion  or  aspect  of  the 
pressure,  force,  or  power,  which  is  in  the  direction  opposite 
to  that  in  which  it  is  intended  motion  should  take  place,  is 
neutralized,  resisted,  or  counteracted  in  such  a  way,  and  by 
such  contrivance  or  apparatus,  that  the  said  re-action  shall  not 
counteract  that  portion  or  direction  of  the  said  pressure, 
force,  or  power  of  said  fluid  or  liquid  which  is  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  intended  motion.  The  said  motion  not  depending 
upon  nor  being  produced  by  the  exit  or  escape  of  any  of 
said  fluid  or  liquid  from  said  chambers." 

After  describing  his  complex  machinery,  he  says : — "  From 
all  which,  it  must  be  evident  that  when  the  chambers  are 
filled  with  water  by  the  pump,  and  force  applied  to  its 
handle,  the  said  pressure  or  force  must  produce  a  rotatory 
motion  of  said  chambers,  axletree,  apparatus  attached 
thereto,  and  any  machinery  connected  by  any  ordinary 
means  to  said  axletree."  But,  unfortunately  for  the  scientific 
world  and  the  public  at  large,  said  "  counteracting  re-action 
motive-power  machine  "  has  not  ypt  been  able  to  cpuiiteract 
the  common  inertia  of  matter. 


1856. — William  Willcocks  Sleigh  [No.  404],  for 
producing  motive  power,  which  I  entitle  "  The  hydrostatic 
motive-power  engine.** 

It  consists  "  in  producing  power  by  the  action  of  a  forcing- 
pump,  or  water  contained  in  certain  chambers  fixed  to  an 
axletree,  counteracting  by  mechanical  apparatus  that  portion 
of  the  force  or  pressure  which  is  in  the  direction  opposite  to 


OB,    8EA.BCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  449 

that  in  which  it  is  intended  motion  should  take  place,  said 
motion  and  counteraction  not  being  produced  by,  nor  de- 
pending upon,  the  exit  or  escape  of  any  of  said  water  from 
said  chambers."  Two  folio  printed  pages,  and  a  large 
drawing  of  five  figures,  complete  the  specification  of  this  most 
impracticable  machine. 


I860. — William  Willcocks  Sleigh,  of  49,  Middleton 
Square,  London,  M.D.  "  The  neutralific  motive-power 
engine.*' 

Without  any  preliminary  remark,  the  patentee  commences 
with  a  description  of  the  drawings  given  in  four  figures  on 
two  large  sheets.  The  first  contains  a  side  view,  with  the 
frame  for  supporting  the  axle,  and  an  immoveable  ring ;  the 
second  shows  the  axle  with  a  longitudinal  canal  in  its  centre, 
forming  a  communication  between  a  forcing-pump  and 
cylinders  or  chambers,  firmly  fixed  to  the  axle,  to  which 
guide-rods,  or  arms,  are  fixed ;  piston-rods  support  plungers 
in  the  cylinders;  a  forcing-pump  communicates  with  the 
canal  on  the  axle ;  a  flat  ring  is  fixed  to  and  supported  by 
the  frame  by  brackets,  to  which  four  toothed  pinions  are 
*fixed.  A  ring  has  teeth  in  its  convex  and  concave  surfaces, 
and  also  steps  on  each  side  of  a  former  row  of  teeth.  This 
ring  is  supported  by  and  acts  on  a  pinion.  A  lesser  ring, 
with  teeth  on  its  periphery,  is  firmly  fixed  to  the  guide-rods 
or  arms.  Horizontal  levers  are  attached  to  the  piston-roda. 
A  horizontal  arm  supports  a  cam.  Legs  act  on  the  steps  of 
a  wheel  (that  with  teeth  on  its  convex  and  concave  surfaces). 
A  "circular  wheel"  has  teeth  co-operating  with  the  teeth  of 
the  foregoing  wheel,  and  has  cams  on  each  side  to  act  on 
levers.  Other  levers  are  jointed  on  legs,  acted  on  by  the 
preceding  levers,  and  on  guide-rods  or  arms.  There  are 
horizontal  levers  to  adapt  the  piston-rods  to  the  bent  end  of 
the  guide-rods,  so  bent  to  enable  the  guide-rods  to  pass  clear 
in  front  of  the  before-named  flat  ring  and  the  pinions. 

The  forces  produced  by  water,  in  this  instance,  may  be 
produced  by  a  liquid  or  solid  substance,  capable  of  exciting 
two  forces  in  opposite  directions.  To  put  the  engine  in 
action,  the  cylinders  being  full  of  water,  force  is  to  be  ap- 
plied, strong  enough  to  sustain,  and  continue  so  to  do,  by 
repeated  strokes  of  the  pumps,  till  the  piston  of  the  chambers 


450  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

be  resisted  and  supported.  Then  motion  commences  !  The; 
cams  before-named  acting  on  levers,  produce  an  action  similar 
to  that  of  a  person  on  a  treadmill.  The  pistons  and  their 
rods  being  thus  supported  and  resisted,  the  force  acting  on 
the  surface  of  the  chambers  opposite  to  said  pistons,  rotate 
the  guide-rods,  the  axle,  and  the  chambers.  To  stop  the 
engine,  open  the  tap,  and  let  the  water  escape  from  the 
chambers ! 

The  claim  is  for-—"  the  principle  by  which  the  said  neutralific 
motive-power  engine  acts,  and  which  principle  consists  in 
counteracting  or  neutralizing  one  of  two  forces  acting  in 
opposite  cdrections,  produced  by  either  a  liquid,  fluid,  or 
solid,  the  force  so  counteracted  or  neutralized  being  in  the 
•direction  opposite  to  that  on  which  it  is  intended  motion 
«hould  take  place;  said  motion  not  depending  upon  nor 
being  produced  by  the  exit  or  escape  of  any  liquid  or  fluid 
from  said  chambers." 

We  have  been  thus  particular  in  describing  this  "  neutralific 
engine,**  because  it  is  impossible  to  accompany  it  with  an 
engraving,  the  printing  of  the  present  work  being  in  progress 
during  the  lodging  of  the  final  specification.  But  what 
engineer,  or  engineer's  apprentice,  can  require  any  further 
illustration  by  which  to  enable  bim  to  discover,  whether  a 
fluid  thus  bottled  up  in  a  chamber  can,  by  means  of  pumps, 
levers,  cams,  and  toothed  pinions,  be  made  to  move  ma- 
chinery at  all,  much  less  so  as  to  require  to  "  open  the  tap 
And  let  the  water  escape  **  to  stop  it  ? 


1846.— William  Eaton  [No.  11,462],  of  Newington, 
Surrey,  Engineer.  "Certain  improvements  in  obtaining 
motive  power,"  which  consist,  "  in  the  first  place,  in  a  novel 
Arrangement  of  machinery  or  known  mechanical  agents  by 
which  fluids,  being  subjected  to  pressure  or  force  from  an 
fiydraulic  press  or  other  power  applied  in  a  suitable  manner, 
are  caused  to  work  or  operate  perpetually,  or  so  long  as  the 
parts  of  the  said  mechanical  agents  are  in  a  working  condition, 
for  the  purpose  of  actuating  other  machinery,  as  a  substitute 
for  a  steam  engine,  water-wheel,  windmill,  or  other  first 
mover." 

The  fourteenth  year  for  which  this  patent  was  granted 
liaving  this  year  expired,  the  public  should  not  only  be  itt' 


oil,    SEABCH    FOB    SKLJb'-MOTIVE    POWEE.  451 

formed  '*  that  a  principle  .heretofore  not  used  in  any  engine  or 
machinery  is  brought  into  action,'"  and  that  the  acting 
'-  pressure,  weight,  or  force  *'  is  not "  required  to  pass  through 
space,"  but  also  that  this  elaborately  described  and  illustrated 
invention  is  now  public  property.  Let  the  use  hereafter  made 
of  it  be  the  test  of  its  merit. 


1848.— Joseph  Eugene  Asaert  [No.  12,293],  of  Lille, 
France,  Machinist.  "Improved  means  of  obtaining  motive 
power.'' 

I  combine  two  endless  chains  or  bands  in  such  manner 
that  one  is  caused  to  be  moved  by  a  series  of  descending 
weights,  and  thus  to  obtain  motive  power  to  axes,  from  which 
motion  is  communicated  to  the  second  endless  chain  or  band, 
which  is  so  arranged  as  to  convey  the  several  weights  back 
to  the  higher  position,  and  owing  to  there  being  at  all  times 
a  large  number  of  weight's  descending  and  acting  at  a  greater 
leverage  than  there  are  'weights  ascending,  and  which  act  at 
a  lesser  leverage,  there  will  result  a  considerable  motive  power 
for  giving  motion  to  other  machinery. 

Fig.  1,  a  side  elevation  of  the  machine,  a  o,  the  framing  ; 
b  b,  an  endless  chain  carried  by  the  two  chain  wheels  c  d.  On 
the  endless  chain  b  b  are  fixed  brackets  e  e  e^  which  receive 
the  weights  ///,  as  the  brackets  come  successively  over  the 
chain  wheel  c,  thus  causing  the  chain  to  descend  on  that  side 
of  the  wheel,  and  thus  is  motion  obtained  continuously  to 
the  wheels  c  d^  according  to  the  number  and  amount  of  weight 
used,  and  if  a  constant  succession  of  these  weights  be 
delivered  to  the'  carrying  brackets  e  c,  on  the  chain  b  b,  the 
power  obtained  would  be  the  value  of  the  several  weights  //", 
which  are  constantly  descending  with  the  chain  b  b,  but  from 
this  amount  of  pressure  will  have  to  be  deducted  the  loss  by 
reason  of  the  friction  of  the  various  parts,  and  also  the  requi- 
site force  for  causing  the  weights/jT  to  be  returned  into  a 
position  for  keeping  up  a  constant  suppl)  to  the  chain  b  b. 
ff  g,  di  second  endless  chain,  carried  by  the  chain  wheels  A  t, 
on  the  axes  h}  z^,  which  turn  in  suitable  bearings  at  h^  i^, 
and  it  is  by  means  of  this  chain  g  g  that  the  weights  //  re- 
turn to  the  upper  part  of  the  machine  so  as  to  keep  up  a 
supply  to  the  chain  b  b^  and  so  that  that  chain  in  descending 
will  have  all  the  descending  brackets  filled,  and  the  leverage 

g2 


452 


PERPETUUM    mobile; 


by  which  these  weights  will  be  raised  will  be  the  radius  of 
the  wheels  h  f,  which,  being  compared  with,  will  be  seen  to 
be  much  less  than  the  radius  of  the  wheels  c  i/,  and  there- 
fore the  leverage  with  which  the  weights  ff  act  when  de- 
scending, will  be  greater  than  that  of  the  ascending  weights. 
Motion  is  communicated  to  the   chain  y  y  in  the  following- 


manner  : — On  the  axis  c^  is  affixed  a  bevilled  toothed  wheel 
c*,  which  takes  into  and  drives  the  bevilled  toothed  wheel  k 


OB,    SEABCH    FOR.  SELF-MOTIYE   POWER.  453 

on  the  axis  k^,  which  turns  in  suitable  bearings  carried  by 
the  framing  of  the  machine.  .  At  the  lower  end  of  the  axis  k^ 
is  affixed  a  bevilled  toothed  wheel  k^,  which  takes  into  and 
drives  the  toothed  wheel  I  affixed  to  the  axis  i^  of  the  chain 
wheel  e.  r  r^  are  two  toothed  bars^  which  are  so  arranged  as 
to  work  alternately  in  connection  with  the  cog  wheels  on  the 
axes  h  i ;  that  is  to  say,  when  the  bar  r  is  descending,  and 
by  its  weight  gives  motion  to  the  axes  h  t,  and  thus  aid  in 
raising  the  ascending  weights  carried  up  by  the  chain  ^,  the 
the  bar  r^  being  raised  during  the  time  the  bar  r  is  descend- 
ing, for  which  purpose  the  bar  r^  is  moved  out  of  gear,  with 
its  cog  wheels  on  the  axes  hi,  then  the  bar  r  wilLbe  put  out 
of  gear  with  its  cog  wheels  on  the  axes  A  i,  and  the  bar  r^ 
will  be  brought  into  gear  with  its  cog  wheels  and  will  become 
the  descending  bar,  and  act  to  give  motion  to  the  axes  h  i, 
and  thus  aid  in  raising  the  ascending  weights,  and  thus  will 
they  alternately  be  the  means  of  aiding  in  giring  motion  to 
the  axes  hu  The  manner  in  which  the  bars  r  r^  are 
caused  to  rise  is  as  follows : — The  bars  are  connected  to- 
gether in  such  manner,  that  by  moving  one  out*  of  gear  with 
its  cog  wheels  on  the  axgs  h  e,  will  put  the  other  bar  into 
gear  withx  its  wheels  on  the  axes  h  i,  so  that  the  bars  r  r^ 
may  alternately  become  descending  bars,  whilst  the  other  is 
being  raised  into  a  position  to  become  an  acting  descending 
bar.  In  raising  the  bars  r  r^,  there  is  a  corresponding  train 
of  wheels  to  each  bar,  which  receive  their  motion  from  the 
axis  t,'  and  the  act  of  moving  either  bar  r  or  r^  out  of  action 
in  respect  to  its  cog  wheels  on  the  axes  A  •',  will  bring  that 
bar  into  a  position  to  be  acted  on  by  its  train  of  wheels  for 
raising  it.  s,  a  cog  wheel  on  the  axis  t^,  which  gives  motion 
to  the  cog  wheel  a^,  which  has  on  its  axis  the  cog  wheel  s^, 
which,  when  the  bar  is  brought  into  position,  raises  it ;  and 
a  like  arrangement  of  wheels  is  used  to  each  bar  r  r^.  At 
each  end  of  the  axis  f-  is  an  eccentric  t,  which  gives  motion 
to  the  lever  «,  and  to  the  two  bars  r  r\  so  that  the  one 
which  has  completed  its  descent  is  put  in  communication 
with  its  train  of  cog  wheels,  whilst  the  other  bar  r  or  r^, 
which  has  completed  its  ascent,  will  be  put  in  communication 
with  its  cog  wheels  on  the  axes  h  i,  in  ojder  again  to  descend, 
and  thus  will  there  be  a  bar  r  or  r^  to  descend,  and  thus  aid 
in  causing  the  ascending  weights  to  be  moved  upwards  to 
their  highest  position.     By  these  arrangements,  the  supply 


454  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

of  weight*?  ff  will  be  kept  up  in  direct  ratio  with  the  descent 
by  the  chain  h  b.  And  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  weights 
as  they  go  out  of  use  m  respect  to  the  chain  h  h  may  come 
into  a  correct  position  for  the  chain  g  g  io  take  them  up,  the 
following  arrangement  of  pares  is  employed :-^»  nnn  are 
four  chain  wheels  on  the  two  axes  w^  w^,  and  these  two  pair 
of  wheels  carry  the  two  endless  chains  «^  n^,  which  have 
horns  or  projections  «*  at  suitable  intervals,  so  that  wheil 
the  weights  are  left  successively  by  the  brackets  on  the  chain 
6,  they  will  be  received  between  these  horns  or  projections, 
and  moved  thereby  till  they  come  into  a  position  for  the 
carrying  brackets  on  the  endless  chain  g  y,  by  which  the 
weights  will  be  successively  raised  to  the  highest  position  in 
the  machine,  the  ascending  weights  moving  with  greater 
velocity  than  the  descending  weijjhts,  and  thus  is  the  con- 
stant supply  kept  up  to  the  chain  h  h.  Motion  is  communi- 
cated to  the  endless  chains  n^  n^  by  the  axis  o,*  which  turns 
in  suitable  bearings  carried  by  the*  framing  of  the  machine. 
OA  the  axis  o  is  affixed  the  bevilled  toothed  wheel  o^,  which 
is  driven  by  the  bevilled  toothed  wheel  dfi  on  the  axis  of  the 
chain  wheel  d;  and  bn  the  other  ^nd  of  the  axis  o  is  affixed 
the  bevilled  toothed  wheel  o*,  which  takes  into  and  drives 
the  toothed  wheel  n*  on  one  of  the  axes  n^,  so  that  the  two 
endless  chains  «^  will  be  moved  at  such  a  speed  as  to 
receive  and  carry  forward  the  successive  Weights  //  to  the 
chain  g  g  ;  and  in  order  that  the  weights /may  be  correctly 
taken  forward  from  the  chain  g,  there  are  two  endless  chains 
p  p  carried  by  four  chain  wheels  qq  on  axes,  two  of  which 
turn  freely  on  the  axis  h  of  the  endless  chain  gg,  the  other 
,  two  wheels  g  q  being  fixed  on  the  axes  y^,  and  there  are 
horiis  or  projections  which  receive  the  successive  weights, 
and  caUse  them  to  be  moved  into  a  correct  position  for  the 
tendles!5  chain  b.  there  being  springs  between  the  guides  near 
where  the  weights  pass  into  the  brackets  on  the  chain  h  A, 
such  sprinsrs  simply  acting  to  prevent  the  weights  passing 
Without  some  force,  by  which  they  are  insured  being  cor- 
rectly delivered  to  the  brackets  of  the  chain  b  by  the  move- 
ment caused  by  the  chains  jo/i,  all  which  will  readily  be 
understood  on  examining  the  drawings*  Tte  weights  are 
guided  ill  their  descent,  and  also  in  their  ascent,  by  means  of 
the  guides  x  x.  In  order  to  retard  and  stop  the  machine,  a 
Htiap  break  is  used,  with  other  apparatus. 


OB,    SEARCH    TOR   SELT-MOTIVE    POWER. 


455 


Having  thus  described  my  invention^  what  I  claim  is,  the 
mode  herein  explained  of  combining  mechanical  parts  into  a 
machine,  whereby  two  endless  chains  or  bands  are  caused  to 
be  put  in  motion  by  a  series  of  weights,  the  descending 
weights  being  at  all  times  more  numerous,  and  acting  with 
greater  leverage  than  the  ascending  weights,  whereby  an 
improved  means  of  obtaining  motive  power  is  produced. 


ISSO.^Aritaud  Nicolas  Freche  [No.  13,220],  of  Paris, 
Merchant.     '*  Improvements  in  obtaining  power." 

The  specification .  occupies  seven  folio  piinted  pages,  and, 
from  its  peculiar  language,  is  possibly  a  translation  made 
abroad^  The  plan  of  leverage  and  the  descriptiou  are  sq 
peculiar  that  they  are  jgiven  entirie : — 

This  invention  consists  in  the  creation  of  a  principle  of 
action  of  several  levers  producing  by  one  another  suph  ft 
progression  of  power  that  the 
inventor  thinks  it  susceptible 
of  being  applied  to  all  the  ncr 
cessities  which  are  supplied  by 
steam.  The  inventor  explains 
that  the  weight  placed  on  the 
lever  a  will  be  trebled  at  the 
point  which  unites  this  lever  to 
that  marked  c,  and  that  this 
last  will  increase  it  sixfold,  be- 
cause it  will  double  the  power  ,^ 
given  to  it  by  lever  a,  which  '  ' 
will  cause  on  the  first  of  the  multiplying  levers  e  a  weighing 
equal  to  six  times  the  weight  with  which  the  lever  a  is 
leaded.  This  first  multiplying  lever  having  for  point  of  sup- 
port an  axis  bearing  a  sector,  which  will  thus  be  diiected  by 
it,  and  the  radius  of  this  sector  only  being  the  fifth  part  of 
the  length  of  this  lever,  the  power  given  by  this  sector  tp  the 
first  niultiplying  lever  will  be  five  times  greater,  which  will 
make  it  represent  thirty  times  the  weight  which  will  Joad  the 
lever  a ;  but,  as  the  cam  that  this  sector  causes  to  work  to 
give  a  weighing  on  the  second  multiplying  leyer  t,  cannot  be 
conveniently  worked  unless  it  be  at  som^  distance  from  the 
centre  of  the  pinion  which  make  it  move,  the  thirty  powtr 
above  cited  will  be  reduced  to  twelve  and  a  half,  causing  the 


456  PEBPETUUM    MOBILE  ; 

weight  which  will  be  operated  on  the  second  multiplying 
lever.     Now,  proceeding  to  this  second  multiplying  lever, 
and  stating  that  by  the  reason  that  the  length  of  its  arm  will 
contain  three  times  the  radius  of  the  sector  which  it  will 
impel,  the  twelve  and  a  half  power  which  will  belong  to  this 
one  will  be  trebled  on  this  sector,  and  the  power  of  this  last 
will  be  equal  to  thirty-seven  and  a  half  times  the  weight 
which  will  load  lever  a ;  but  as  the  cam  which  this  sector 
will  impel  to  make  this  third  multiplying  lever  yield  (marked 
m)  its  power  as  the  preceding  one  will  take  place  at  some 
distance  from  the  centre  of  the  pinion  which  makes  it  work, 
these  thirty-seven  and  a  half  power  will  be  reduced  to  fifteen 
and  a  half,  making  the  weight  which  will  rest  on  the  third 
multipl5ring  lever.     And,  lastly,  as  the  length  of  this  third 
multiplying  lever  will  also  contain  three  times  the  radius  of 
the  sector  which  it  will  govern,  and  that  so  the  fifteen  and  a 
half  power  which  will  weigh  on  it  will  be  trebled  on  this 
sector,  the  power  that  the  latter  will  have  will  be  equal  to 
forty-six  and  a  half  times  the  weight  which  will  load  the 
lever  a,  power  which  will  yet  be  reduced  by  the  effect  of  the 
distance  from  the  point  where  the  cam  will  work,  reduction 
which   will   be,   however,   less    than    the   preceding    ones, 
because  the  pinion  directing  this  cam  being  larger  will  be 
more  powerful  than  the  other  two,  from  which  the  result  will 
be  that  the  forty-six  and  a  half  power  will  only  be  reduced  to 
twenty-three  and  a  quarter.     It  will  thus  be  seen  what  is  the 
progression  of  powers  which  will  be  given  at  the  beginning  of  the 
operation  by  the  simultaneous  action  of  all  these  levers.    That 
which  must  be  next  explained  is  the  means  that  the  inventor 
of  this  principle  has  imagined  to  overcome  the  obstacle  which 
has  always  given  to  believe  that  it  never  could  be  attained  to 
make  a  lever  raise  by  the  action  of  another.     It  is  true  that 
at  the  first  aspect  this  obstacle  seemed  to  defy  all  that  could 
be  tried  to  overcome  it,  since  nature  itself  seemed  to  oppose 
it  being  vanquished.     However,  the  perseverance  with  which 
the  inventor  sought  the  means  of  prevailing  has  made  him 
find  it,  and  this  is  in  what  these  means  consist : — Since,  has 
he  said,  the  power  which  a  lever  gives  to  an  eccentric  with  the 
appropriation  of  raising   another  lever,  cannot  give  fully  to 
this  eccentric  the  force  necessary  to  it,  so  that  it  may  operate 
this  raising,  as  this  power  is  more  than  absorbed  by  the  re- 
sistance when  the  pressure  of  the  eccentric  takes  place  at  a 


0»,    SEABCH   FOR    SELP-MOTIVB    POWER.  4d7 

point  too  distant  from  its  centre  of  motion^  this  obstacle  mig:ht, 
perhaps,  be  overcome  by  the  creation  of  a  system  which  would 
maintain  the  permanency  of  all  the  points  of  power.  Starting 
from  this  beam  of  light,  the  inventor  from  that  moment 
thought  of  using  several  levers,  whose  powers  should  be  dis- 
tributed at  equal  distances  on  the  extent  of  the  course  the 
eccentric  should  go  over,  being  quite  persuaded  that  by  this 
means  the  resistance  occasioned  by  the  raising  of  the  levers 
which  have  gone  over  their  course  will  hot  only  be  totally 
overcome,  but  that  the  power  produced  by  these  levers  (which 
will  overcome  the  resistance)  will  give  besides  an  incease  of 
power  which  will  be  capable  of  answering  all  necessities. 

Here  follow  the  descriptions  of  the  different  pieces  which 
will  compose  each  row : — a,  principal  lever,  which  will  be 
charged  with  a  relative  weight  according  to  the  power  to  be 
produced.  a\  a",  a"\  a"",  o**"\  point  at  which  it  is  placed, 
each  of  the  levers  a  of  the  five  rows  placed  next  that  whose 
figure  is  given  l^r  the  drawing,  when  the  lever  a  is  at  the 
place  shown ;  this  explains  that  all  the  levers  of  this  me- 
chanism should  be  disponed  by  gradation,  so  that  their  effect 
may  bring  on  the  driving  shaft  an  equal  and  constant  power, 
which  predominates  the  resistance  opposed  to  the  levers  arriv- 
ing at  the  end  of  their  course  by  the  levers  that  they  raise,  and 
thus  maintains  forcibly  the  continual  impulse  of  the  levers. 
The  explanation  just  given  for  the  levers  a  being  applicable 
to  those  who  depend  on  them,  since  it  is  the  levers  a  which 
make  them  act,  it  is  easily  understood  that  they  cannot  be 
placed  otherwise  than  by  gradations,  as  are  the  levers  a  ;  this 
is  the  reason  the  drawing  only  shows  the  gradation  of  the  said 
levers  a.  5,  band  which  imites  the  lever  a  to  that  of  above, 
to  give  it  the  power  produced  by  the  lever  a ;  e,  top  lever, 
whose  power  is  equal  to  six  times  the  heaviness  of  the  weight 
which  should  charge  lever  a;  d,  tail-piece,  giving  that  power 
to  the  first  multiplying  lever;  e,  first  multiplier;  /,  sector 
moved  by  this  lever ;  g,  pinion  which  engages  with  the  sector 
/  to  move  the  first  cam  ;  h,  first  cam ;  i ,  second  multiplying 
lever,  to  which  this  cam  will  give  the  effect  of  the  first ; ./, 
sector  moved  by  this  lever;  ^,  pinion  which  engages  "with 
this  sector  to  move  the  second  cam ;  Z,  second  cam  ;  m,  third 
multiplying  lever,  to  which  this  cam  will  gve  the  power 
which  the  second  multiplying  lever  will  have  given  it;  «, 
sector  moved  ,by  the  third  multiplying  lever ;  o,  intermediate 


458 


PEKPETUUM    mobile; 


wheel,  whose  use  is  to  move  the  third  cam  in  the  proper 
direction ;  p,  pinion  which  engages  with  this  wheel  to  move 
the  third  cam ;  q^  third  cam ;  r,  lever  to  which  this  cam  will 
give  the  power  which  the  preceding  levers  will  have  given. 
This  last  lever  will  have,  similar  to  all  the  others,  a  roller, 
which  will  aleviate  the  hardness  of  the  tail-piece  and  cams ; 
«,  crank,  which  will  give  to  the  driving  shaft  the  power 
which  will  be  transmitted  to  it  by  lever  r;  t,  wimble,  which 
will  have  two  uses, — first,  that  of  joining  the  crank  to  the 
driving  shaft ;  second,  that  of  acting  by  return  to  raise  lever 
a  ;  w,  wlieelwork,  which  will  facilitate  this  raising  by  regu- 
lating it  according  to  the  course  of  the  crank  8  ;  v,  fly-wheel, 
which  will  maintain  the  progression  of  the  pieces  producing 
the  power ;  x,  gears  directing  this  fly-wheel,  which,  like  the 
said  gears,  will  be  placed  in  the  empty  space  which  will 
separate  the  two  sides  of  this  mechanism ;  y,  driving  shaft, 
which  will  be  common  to  all  the  cranks,  and  from  whence 
will  be  taken,  whether  on  itself,  or  on  other  points  by  means 
of  transmission,  the  power  dlsposHble  ;  2,  point  of  support  of 
the  levers  and  gear  trees,  the  whole  bearing  on  two  frames, 
which  will  make  for  each  row  of  levers  a  separate  casing. 
Note,  a  hanging:  rod  beneath  the  weights,  which  will  load  the 
levers  a,  and  which  will  traverse  two  plates  sliding  between 
two  grooves,  will  stop  the  working  of  this  mechanism  at  will, 
by  means  of  a  screw  threaded  for  the  purpose,  which  will  by 
thtse  plates  strongly  press  the  hanging  rod  working,  which  ' 
will  be  carried  out  by  means  of  a  (screw  threaded  for  the 
purpose,  which  will,  by  these  plates,  strongly  press  the 
hanging  rod  working,  which  will  be  carried  out  by  means  of 
a  screw)  turning  handle,  helped  by  gears  if  necessarj',  and 
which  at  the  same  time  will  disengage  the  fly-wheel.  The 
upper  lever,  designated  by  the  letter  C,  will  also  be  loaded 
with  a  weight  if  thought  fit,  so  as  to  have  to  place  on  the  lever 
a  a  heavy  load.  In  order  that  the  cogs  of  the  gears  may 
constantly  adhere,  so  that  the  coming  and  going  that  the  levers 
xiperate  may  not  cause  any  loss  of  time,  springs  or  balance 
weights  will  be  used,  which,  being  fixed  to  the  axes  of  these 
gears,  will  oblige  their  cogs  to  remain  always  applied  to  each 
other.  The  inventor  thinks  that  this  addition  of  levers  would 
deliver  this  mechanissm  from  the  inconvenience  of  the  dead 
points  which  the  wimbles  cause  by  the  position  they  take  in 
their  revolutions.     He,  moreover,  thinks  that  by  these  levers 


OB,    SEAUCH    FOE    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  459 

more  power  still  would  be  gained ;  but  this  advantage  would 
be  at  the  expense  of  the  velocity.  As  to  the  first  motion  which 
the  cams  would  prevent  being  regular,  it  would  be  remedied 
by  arranging  the  arm  of  the  levers  joined  to  the  cranks,  so  as 
to  give  to  the  driving  shaft  an  invariable  motion,  whatever  be 
the  action  of  these  cams  on  the  lovers  which  impel  the  driving 
shaft. 


1851. — GusTAV  Adolph  Bdchholz  [No.  13,515],  of 
Norfolk  Street,  London,  Civil  Engineer.  ''  Improvements  in 
motive  power,  and  in  propulsion.'*  This  is  a  specification  in 
eleven  printed  folio  pages,  with  seventeen  sheets  of  drawings, 
containing  thirty-nine  figures.  The  third  part  of  his  inven- 
tion consists  "  in  a  machine  constructed  of  such  mechanical 
parts,  that,  constant  pressure  being  applied  at  two  or  more 
points,  and  so  that  the  lines  of  pressure  shall  give  rotary 
motion  to  one  or  more  axes,  the  pressure  shall  remain  sta- 
tionary in  position."  At  page  6  of  this  singular  document, 
he  says  : — "  I  will  now  proceed  to  describe  certain  modes  of 
applying  constant  force  of  pressure  to  the  eccentrics,  to  pro- 
duce the  desired  motion."  He  thus  begins: — "A  is  the 
framework  of  the  machine,  which  is  securely  bolted  and  fixed 
together.  B*,  a  '•bush,'  through  which  the  screw  C*  works 
for  compressing  the  spring  D*,  pressing  upon  the  rods  E*, 
E*,"  and  so  forth.  And  we  are  assured — "  this  machine 
will  be  found  to  work  more  advantageously  when  the  forces 
are  applied  to  the  eccentrics  in  a  direction  as  nearly  as  pos- 
sible at  right  angles  to  a  line  passing  through  the  centres  of 
the  two  systems  of  eccentrics."  Again, — "  Drawing  8  shews 
another  simple  machine,"  in  which  "pressure  upon  the 
^eccentrics  will  produce  a  continuous  rotary  motion  of  the 
«haft  A."  He  then  gives  his  views  on  obtaining  compound 
motion. 


1852.— Thomas  Gbeaves  [No.  283],  of  Manchester, 
Veterinary  Surgeon.  "Improvements  in  the  method  or 
means  of  obtaining  or  employing  motive  power."  "This 
machine  consists  of  a  beam  about  six  feet  long,  affixed  upon 
a  frame ;  at  one  end  of  the  beam  are  two  connecting  rods, 
one  attached  to  a  crank,  the  other  to  a  rod  over  a  hopper." 


460  PEiiPETUuM  mobile; 

A  flat  chain,  large  pulley,  buckets,  &c.,  follow ;  yet,  in  spite 
of  all,  "this  machine  will  dispense  entirely  and  altogether 
with  either  steam  power  or  manual  labour !"  Believe  it  who 
can. 


1855. — Thomas  Gkeaves  [No.  2205].  In  October,  1855^ 
he  commenced,  but  did  not  complete,  a  patent  for  improve- 
ments on  above.  I  now  propose  (he  says)  to  have  only  one 
shaft  to  run  through  the  beam,  and  also  through  two  large 
bevil  wheels,  the  beam  being  placed  between  thi-  said  wheels, 
one  end  forming  a  shaft  for  two  pinions  of  different  sizes 
rivetted  together,  which  gear  into  the  bevil  wheels,  each 
having  two  half  rims,  one  forming  an  inner  or  lesser  circle, 
having  teeth  of  the  same  pitch,  gearing  into  one  of  the 
pinions,  et  ctBtera^  and  et  cmtera  ! . 


1852.— Lot  Faulknek  [No.  410],  of  Cheadle,  Chester, 
Machinist.  "  Certain  improvements  in  the  method  of  obtaining 
motive  power." 

''  I  employ  a  beam  capable  of  vibrating  upon  a  fixed  centre ; 
to  one  end  I  attach  the  machinery  to  be  moved ;  to  the  other, 
two  levers  mounted  upon  studs,  and  so  connected  by  spur 
gearinij  that  they  shall  revolve  in  opposite  directions,  and 
always  counterbalance  each  other ;  and  upon  these  levers  I 
place  suitable  weights.*'  And  so  on.  In  conclusion,  "  As 
the  power  required  to  put  the  weighted  levers  In  motion  is 
so  small  in  comparison  with  the  force  exerted  at  the  other 
end  of  the  vibrating  beam,  it  will  be  evident  that  a  gp*eat 
increasing  motive  power  is  obtained."  This  being  only  a 
provisional  specificsetion,  so  far  makes  the  supposed  inven- 
tion public  and  free. 


1852.— Ebnst  Luedeke  [No.  706],  of  Bedford  Street, 
London.  "  Improvements  in  obtaining  and  applying  motive 
power."  "I  intend,  by  the  use  of  a  pendulum,  doable 
wheel,  and  springs,  to  produce  vibration,  kept  up  by  the 
concurrent  action  of  the  pendulum,"  &c.  Only  provisional, 
and  therefore  now  public  property. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  461 

1852.— Thomas  Wood  [No.  887],  of  the  Glue  Works, 
Hunslet,  Leeds,  Millwright.  ^  "  Improvements  in  the  mode  of 
obtaining  motive  power.*'  "  My  invention  consists  (he  says) 
in  obtaining  motive  power  by  means  of  a  wheel,  the  peri- 
phery of  which  presses  on  water,  or  any  other  fluid,  confined 
within  a  box  or  case,  or  larger  wheel,  to  which,  backward 
and  forward,  or  rotatory,  motion  is  communicated  by  me- 
chanical means.*'  He  adds : — "  In  combination  with  this 
wheel  and  water  chamber,  I  employ  weights,  which  are 
made  alternately  to  rise  and  fall,  and  by  means  of  levers  and 
suitable  gearing  to  act  upon  the  wheel.'*  A  good  drawing 
of  this  notable  machine  accompanies  the  specification. 


1852. — George  Fitt  [No.  921],  of  Parsonage  House, 
Chalk,  near  Gravesend.  "Obtaining  mechanical  motive 
power  and  speed."  This  is  a  singular  specification,  although 
only  provisional,  and  has  a  large  drawing  attached.  Its 
author  has  now  lost  all  title  to  the  invention.  He  says  : — 
"  From  the  mechanical  principle  of  the  inclined  plane,  and  a 
certain  law  of  the  lever,  I  have  produced,  by  an  arrangement 
of  machinery,  a  multiplied  mechanical  force  without  an 
ultimate  loss  of  speed."  He  adds : — "  The  method  of  work- 
ing the  machine  is,  by  causing  the  power  to  revert  to  the 
first  wedge  from  any  part  where  it  is  greater  and  the  velocity 
is  the  same  as  in  the  first  wedge,  by  the  bands  and  riggers, 
f. «.,  by  rods,  or  any  other  method,  by  the  hand  or  by  a 
spring,  or  anything  else  capable  of  giving  it  motion  and  force." 
Again  : — "  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  by  increasing  the  diameter 
of  the  wedges,  and  the  velocity  with  which  they  revolve,  and 
the  number  acting  on  each  other,  a  power  can  be  obtained 
more  than  sufficient  for  any  purpose  yet  known,  or  that  ever 
will  be  known,  where  power  is  required." 


1852.— A.  V.  Newton  [No.  1163],  of  Chancery  Lane, 
Lond6n,  Patent  Agent.  "  Improvements  in  obtaining  and 
applying  motive  power."  This  invention  consists  in  "  em- 
ploying the  pressure  of  a  weight  or  of  a  lever,  to  act  upon 
one  or  more  wheels,  rollers,  or  pulleys,  and  thereby  cause 
them,  by  their  rotation,  to  actuate  the  axle  or  shaft  intended 


462  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

to  communicate  motion  ,to  a  carriage  or  machine."  Eif^ht 
and  a  half  folio  pages  of  description  follow,  with  two  large 
sheets  of  drawings,  as  given  by  this  agent's  "  foreign  cor- 
respondent," who  states  that — "  The  principle  upon  which 
is  based  the  present  invention  is,  that  the  force  of  gravity 
properly  applied  will  produce  the  effect  of  a  horizontal  or 
tractive  force.  This  being  the  case,  it  will  be  understood 
that,  by  properly  applying  and  adapting  this  force  of  gravity, 
a  carriage,  even  when  loaded  with  a  heavy  weight,  may,  or 
to  a  certain  extent,  be  made  to  propel  itself.** 


1852.— Benjamin  Globney  [No.  1189],  of  Mardlyke 
Mills,  near  Dublin,  Manufacturer.  '*  Improvements  in  ob- 
taining and  applying  motive  power.*'  He  has  only  filed  a 
provisional  specification,  which,  if  it  has  no  other  merit,  has 
that  of  brevity.  He  says  : — *•  This  ii^vention  consists  in 
obtaining  motive  power  by  the  weight  of  a  njoving  waggon  or 
carriage,  which  is  made  to  traverse  backwards  and  forwards 
along  a  railway,  and  thereby  communicate  thereto  an  oscil- 
lating or  vibrating  motion,  or  a  rectilinear  motion,  the  said 
railway  being  either  mounted  on  a  centre  or  pivot  for  this 
purpose,  or  otherwise  constructed  and  aiTanged  so  that  the 
weight  of  the  loaded  waggon  or  carriage  may  be  made  to  act 
thereon.  The  power  and  motion  thus  obtained  may  be 
communicated  by  any  convenient  gearing  to  the  machinery 
intended  to  be  driven ;  but  the  peculiar  arrangement  of  such 
gearing  must  depend  upon  circumstances,  and  should,  in  a 
great  measure,  be  left  to  the  discrimination  of  a  competent 
engineer." 


1853.— AuGusTE  E.  L.  Bellford  [No.  118],  of  C&stle 
Street,  London.  Patent  Agent.  "An  improved  machine  for 
obtaining  motive  power."  It  is  *' composed  of  pumps  of 
small  diameter,  a  water  reservoir  into  which  air  is  pumped, 
causing  the  water  to  escape  by  a  tube,  thence  into  a  smaller 
cylinder,**  &c.,  &c.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  this  complication 
of  pumps,  pipes,  and  cisterns,  is  so  efficient,  "  that  once  in 
movement,  the  machine  will  feel  it,  and  will  not  require  any 
auxiliary  motive  powjer.**     As  the  plan  (communicated  by  a 


OR,    SEi^RCH    FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  463 

foreigner)    is  fully   described    by   drawinpjs,    although   the 
patent  is  not  completed,  it  is  open  to  public  use— if  wanted* 


1854. — ApDERLElf  WiLLCOCKS  SleicJ^  [No.  174],  Kuight 
of  the  Most  Noble  and  Ancient  Order  of  the  Tower  and 
Sword,  M.R.H.S.,  Captain  Royal  Services  of  Portugal  and 
Spain,  late  R.N*,  of  No.  1,  Weymouth  Street,  Portland  Place, 
London,  Middlesex,  for  his  invention  of  "  creating  a  continual 
self-acting,  self-sustaining,  new  motive  poller,  applicable  to 
every  purpose  requiring  speed,  motion,  atid  power,  together 
or  separately/' 

He  states  as  his  invention,*—"  Firstly,  T^ie  application,  by 
the  mechanical  agency  hereiiiafter  described,  of  the  principle 
of  the  imponderosity  or  identification  of  lesser  quantities  or 
bodies  of  fluids,  or  liquids  in  fluids,  or  liquids  of  their  own 
nature,  or  otherwise,  and  of  the  same  or  different  tempera- 
tures. Secondly,  Of  the  principle  of  the  ponderosity,  attraction, 
or  specific  gravity  and  momentum  of  fluids  or  liquids  in  the 
atmosphere,  or  in  any  less  dense  medium,  or  in  a  vacuum." 
And  sp  through  four  other  heads  of  like  jargon.  He  con- 
cludes :-^"  I  do  not  confine  my  discovery  and  invention,  the 
principles  being  natural  laws;  and  being  the  first  and  only 
person  to  shew  and  ascertain  and  pi;ove  (?)  how  those  natural 
laws  could  be  applied  to  power  and  speed  by  an  engine 
invented  by  me,  and  these  principles  thus  applied  being 
correct.*' 

In  the  printed  specification,  six  folio  pages  are  occupied 
with  description,  and  two  large  but  extraordinarily-executed 
drawings  given,  they  being  mere  rough  pen-and-ink  hand 
sketches,  executed  without  rule  or  compasses.  A  more 
stubbornly  solid  piece  of  mechanical  invention  it  is  next  to 
impossible  to  imagine ;  and  only  that,  according  to  his  own 
statements,  the  patentee  himself  appears  s6  satisfied  with  its 
versatile  mobility,  we  might  good-naturedly  enough  suppose 
his  sole  object  was  tb  solicit  information  on  the  merits  of  this 
oddly  conceived  and  constructed  monster  perpetual  motion 
engine. 


1854. — John  Aitken  [No.  557],  of  I  ongsight,  Manchester* 


464  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

Gentleman.  "  Improvements  in  obtaining  motive  power." 
His  short  provisional  specification,  all  he  published,  makes 
the  following  a  public  gift ! — ''  This  invention  consists  in  an 
arrangement  of  apparatus  for  obtaining  power  by  lifting  and 
lowering  weights,  and  this  is  done  by  means  of  two  pulleys 
between  which  are  guides  for  the  weights  used.  The  lowest 
of  the  two  pulleys  is  so  formed  as  to  push  the  weights  in 
succession  up  the  gui&e  to  the  upper  pulley,  over  which  it 
passes,  and  descends  by  the  guide  on  the  opposite  side.  The 
machine  is  set  in  motion  by  any  external  power,  and  then  the 
principles  of  inertia,  gravity,  and  momentum  are  brought 
into  action,  and  the  result  is,  the  weight  of  the  balls  falling, 
and  their  momentum  is  on  one  side  of  the  working  wheel, 
the  cog  wheel,  and  on  the  other  side  the  weight  of  the  ascend- 
ing balls  lessened  by  their  momentum;  the  momentum  in 
both  being  in  proportion  to  their  velocity,  and  the  difference 
between  the  two  is  the  working  power."  Possibly  he  has 
often  since  wished  that  facts  had  favoured  him  as  much  as  a 
fervid  fancy  in  inaking  such  a  declaration  of  his  supposed 
invention. 


1854.— James  W.  Shaw  [No.  1360],  of  Birmingham, 
Merchant.  A  communication  from  Don  Manuel  Maria  Jose 
Trinidad  Miciano  y  Contillo,  residing  at  Cadiz,  Spain  "  Im- 
provements in  apparatus  or  machinery  for  producing  motive 
power."  This  ingenious  Spaniard  saith  :^"  The  invention 
consists  in  a  certain  arrangement  and  combination  of  an  axle 
with  a  system  of  shifting  radial  arms  or  levers,  furnished 
with  weights,  and  maintaining  a  motive  power  by  the  force  of 
gravity  jdone,  without  any  other  agent  than  mechanism." 


1854.— Plato  Oulton  [No.  1744],  of  Dublin.  Gentle- 
man. "  Improvements  in  obtaining  motive  power."  '*  My 
invention  consists  in  the  construction  of  a  machine  or  appa- 
ratus in  which  a  stream  of  leaden  or  other  suitable  balls  are 
made  to  supply  the  place  of  water  in  actuating  two  or  more 
main  wheels,  and  in  which  provision  is  made  for  keeping  up 
a  constant  supply  or  stream  of  balls  to  these  wheels  by  means 
of  a  peculiar  arrangement  •  of  worm  shafts."  The  machine 
consists  of  **  two  main  wheels,  above  which  is  an  inclined 


OB,    SEABCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIVE    PO'WEB.  465 

plane,  by  way  of  head  race,  down  which  the  balls  roll  on  to 
the  wheels,  each  ball  entering  one  of  the  buckets  of  the 
wheels.  When  the  balls  have  carried  the  wheels  round,  they 
fall  on  to  and  roll  down  another  short  inclined  plane,  by  way 
of  tail  race,  and  are  carried  on  to  the  screws  or  worm  shafts." 
This  "  head  race"  and  "  tail  race  *'  must,  long  ere  this,  have 
turned  out  a  goose  chase.  The  whole  specification  reads  as 
if  rather  coming  from  the  good  old  times  of  the  last  century 
than  with  the  freshness  of  only  the  last  six  years.  Three 
and  a  half  folio  pages  of  print,  and  a  large  drawing,  com- 
plete this  sapient  specification. 


1854. — Fbedebick  Samson  Thomas  [No.  2129],  of  17, 
Cornhill,  London.  "  An  improved  mode  of  obtaining  motive 
power."  Provisional  protection  alone  having  been  obtained, 
expired  within  six  months,  and  the  following  statement  is 
now  given  to  the  public  for  whatever  it  is  worth : — "  My 
invention  (he  says)  consists  in  certain  mechanical  contriv- 
ances for  the  construction  of  a  wheel  having,  by  its  own 
mechanical  construction,  the  power  to  commence  and  sustain 
a  rotative  movement,  and  applicable  to  convey  such  move- 
ment to  other  machinery  requiring  motive  power.  The  con- 
struction of  the  wheel  consists  in  forming  therein  certain 
arms  or  chambers,  upon  or  within  which  I  place  weighty 
balls,  or  rollers,  or  fluids,  which  approach  the  periphery  of 
the  wheel  upon  the  descending  side,  and  the  centre  or  nave 
of  the  wheel  upon  the  ascending  side ;  and  by  the  greater 
leverage  on  the  descending  side,  I  provile  the  power  by 
which  the  wheel  obtains  and  sustains  its  own  lotative  move- 
ment." 

The  early  pages  of  the  present  volume  sufficiently  expose 
the  fallacy  of  this  olt-repeated  scheme. 


1854.— Geobge  Hale  [No.  2589],  of  Tavistock  Street, 
London,  Boot  and  Shoe  Maker.  "  Certain  improvements  in 
obtaining  and  applying  motive  power."  Although  only  pro- 
visionally specified,  and  therefore  lost  to  the  patentee,  the 
public  will  be  no  gainers,  the  invention  being  a  very  old  one. 
"  My  improvements  (?)  consist  in,  taking  advantage  of  the 


466  PEKPETUUM  mobile; 

power  of  gravity,  and  applying  the  same  by  means  of  a 
suitable  arrangement  of  mechanical  parts  to  drive  machinery 
of  various  kinds.  Power  is  obtained  (?)  by  causing  certain 
weights  applied  to  or  connected  with  rotating  arms  or  levers 
to  act  upon  and  drive  a  central  shaft  with  which  the  said 
arms  are  connected.  The  weighted  levers  are  jointed,  and 
so  arranged,  that  when  they  are  intended  to  act  by  their 
gravity  on  the  shaft  to  be  driven,  they  will  be  extended  out- 
wards to  their  greatest  extent,  so  that  their  weights  may  be 
made  to  act  with  the  greatest  leverage  and  effect  on  the 
central  shaft,  and  cause  the  same  to  rotate ;  and  when  the 
weighted  arms  or  levers  have  so  acted,  and  are  required  to 
be  brought  up  again  into  their  elevated  position,  the  weights 
are  brought  nearer  to  the  centre  of  the  shaft,  or  ol  the  circle 
of  rotation,  so  as  to  diminish  the  leverage  and  allow  the 
falling  weights,  whose  leverage  is  much  greater,  to  oviercome 
the  gravity  of  the  ascending  ones.  The  motive  power  thus 
obtained  may  be  applied  by  causing  the  molion  of  the  centre 
shafc  to  be  communicated  to  the  main  driving  shaft  of  any 
machine  or  apparatus  required  to  be  driven.**  Alas  !  who, 
reading  the  above,  would  suppose  he  was  perusing  a  docu- 
ment from  the  archives  of  the  Patent  Office  ? 


1856. — Jacques  Roux  Delguey  Malavas  [No.  238], 
of  Montbrison,  France,  Gentleman.  '"  Improved  machinery 
for  obtaining  and  applying  motive  power.'*  It  consists  of 
'•an  arrangement  of  apparatus  which  I  term  (he  says)  gravi- 
tation machinery."  Its  principle  "  is  founded  upon  the 
laws  of  gravity,  and  the  power  depends  upon  the  difference 
which  exists  with  the  same  weight,  according  to  whether  it 
is  brought  nearer  to  or  further  from  its  point  of  gravitation." 

"The  apparatus  consists  of  a  number  of  circular  plates 
accurately  fixed  on  a  long  horizontal  shaft  mounted  in  suit- 
able bearings.  Between  these  plates  are  placed  long  levers, 
their  centres  of  motion  at  one  end,  their  opposite  ends  rest- 
ing in  guides,  &c.'* 

He  concludes : — "  When  the  main  shaft  has  been  made  to 
rotate  once,  the  weight  of  the  levers,  by  bearing  on  the  discs, 
will  keep  it  continuously  in  motion."  A  large  drawing,  and 
four  and  a  half  folio  printed  pages,  complete  the  specifica- 
tion of  this  not  very  obvious  scheme. 


OB,    SEABCH   POK   SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  467 

1855.^— Geoboe  Augusttts  Huddabt  [No.  942],  of 
Brjmkir,  Caernarvon.  "  Improved  machinery  for  obtaining 
and  applying  motive  power."  A  water-wheel  with  buckets, 
and  a  chain  of  buckets ;  the  first  to  raise  the  water  to  ai^ 
elevated  cistern,  being  rotated  by  the  chain,  operated  by  the 
discharge  of  the  water  raised.  Why  disturb  such  novelties 
from  their  origiinal  dust?  But,  abov^  all,  why  ^.ttempt 
patenting  such  rubbish  ? 


1860. — Geobge  ATTGiTSTirs  Huddabt  and  Joseph  Dub^ 
HAM  Ebskine  Huddabt  [No.  263],  both  of  Brynkir, 
Caernarvon,  Gentlemen.  "  ImprovemeijJs  m  obtaimng  motive 
power." 

The  object  of  this  invention  is  to  obtain  motive  power  by 
loading  a  wheel  in  such  a  manner  that  the  specific  gravity  of 
the  load  on  one  side  shall  always  exceed  that  of  the  other, 
and  thereby  ensure  its  continuous  rotation  so  long  as  the  me-.- 
chanism  is  desired  to  operate.  The  load  proposed  to  be 
applied  to  the  wheel  may  consist,  for  example,  of  a  series  of 
cylinders  open  at  one  end,  and  fitted  each  vnth  a  weighted  piston, 
which  closes  them  air-tight.  The  cylinders  are  placed  jj.round 
the  wheel,  and  the  whole  of  the  apparatus  is  to  be  immersed 
in  water  or  other  liquid.  The  cylinders  are  to  be  filled 
with  air  or  other  aeriform  body,  and  the  weighted  pistons, 
as  they  come  round  to  the  position  for  pressing  upon  the 
air  or  gas  contained  in  their  respective  cylinders,  will  com- 
press that  fluid,  and  thus  the  buoyancy  of  the  cylinder  will 
be  proportionately  reduced.  When,  however,  the  weighted 
piston  becomes  pendent,  it  will  act  in  the  opposite  direction, 
and  expand  the  confined  air  or  gas,  and  thereby  increase  the 
buoyancy  of  its  cylinder  ;  thus  each  cylinder  will  be  constantly 
presenting  to  the  central  wheel  a  varying  specific  gravity. 
And  it  is  this  increase  or  decrea,se  in  the  specific  gravity  of 
the  parts  forming  the  load  which  is  made  available  for  driving 
the  wheel,  and  thereby  producing  motive  power.. 

Instead  of  employing  a  dead  weight  for  compressing  and 
expanding  the  confined  air,  a  cam  or  other  equivalent  mecha- 
nical means  may  be  adopted.  The  load  may  also,  if  preferred, 
be  carried  by  an  endless  chain  passing  over  a  pair  of  chaia 
wheels.. 

»2 


468  PEKPETTJUM  mobile; 

1855. — Robert  Beijton  [No.  2304],  of  Birmingham, 
Engineer,  Surveyor,  and  Land  Agent.  "Improvements  in 
obtaining  motive  power  by  leverage." 

This  invention  has  for  its  object  the  means  of  keeping  a 
barrel  or  wheel  in  continuous  motion  by  the  successive  appli- 
cation of  any  even  number  of  levers,  acting  entirely  inde- 
pendent of  each  other,  and  in  eccentric  instead  of  the  cus- 
tomary circular  orbits ;  for  which  purpose,  eccentric  planes 
are  employed,  and  each  lever,  on  successively  coming  in  con- 
tact with  such  eccentric  plane  or  planes,  is  for  the  time  being 
elongated,  and  rendered  a  long  lever  with  a  short  shank ;  and 
having  passed  through  or  over  such  plane  or  planes,  it  imme- 
diately becomes  neutralized  on  the  rising  side  of  the  barrel 
or  wheel  to  which  it  is  attached,  by  being  so  fixed  as  to  form 
one  side  of  a  cube  figure,  either  square  or  octagonal,  and  in 
that  position  it  is  carried  roimd  the  moving  barrel  or  wheel 
until  its  pivot  returns  to  the  point  from  whence  it  was  first 
placed  against  the  face  of  the  eccentric  plane. 

The  patentee  had  arrived  at  an  advanced  age  at  the  above 
date,  which,  coupled  with  his  experience  and  earnest  belief 
in  the  truthfulness  of  his  scheme,  might  well  plead  an  ample 
apology  for  the  wilder  non-perpetualities  of  mere  tyros  iu 
mechanical  science. 


1855. — ^Henbt  Weber  [No.  2373],  of  Zurich,  Switzer- 
land, Mechanician.  "  Certain  improvements  in  apparatus  for 
motive  power.'* 

"  My  apparatus  (he  says)  consists  of  a  half  cylinder  (which 
may  be  made  to  rotate  on  a  centre),  placed  in  an  inclined 
position,  and  supported  on  drums  or  friction  rollers,  on  which 
it  travels  in  circular  guides.  To  the  upper  part  of  the  half 
cylinder  is  attached  a  weight  in  such  a  manner  as  to  press  by 
means  of  a  lever  on  its  upper  edge.  The  weight  pressing  on 
the  half  cylinder  imparts  to  it  a  continued  revolving  motion 
in  the  guide  circles." 


18^. — Michel  Pierre  Gilardeatt  [No.  2607],  of  Paris, 
and  4,  South  Street,  Finsbury,  London.  "A  new  motive 
power."  "  The  invention  consists,  first,  in  using  a  certain 
quantity  of  liquid  equal  to  a  weight  of  at  least  three  atmo- 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVR    POWE|p.  469 

spheres,  to  compress  the  air  alternately  into  two  parallel 
pumps,  thereby  obtaining  a  power  equ^  to  the  weight  em-r 
ployed.  Secondly,  to  make  use  of  the  compressed  air  for 
propelling  a  horizontal  cylinder  in  which  a  vacuum  is  pro^ 
duced.  And,  lastly,  to  compel  the  weight  employed  for  com-? 
pressing  the  ^  to  p^ss  fron^  one  sidg  of  the  ^pps^atus  to  th^ 
other;' 


1856.*«-David  Jones  [No.  463],  of  Kagland,  Monmouth, 
Civil  Engineer.  "  Certain  improvements  in  obtaining  and 
applying  motive  power."  This  invention  consists  in  obtain^ 
ing  power  by  the  combined  action  of  air,  W9fter,  or  other 
fluids  on  each  other,  by  vacuum  or  pressure.  An  important 
feature  consists  in  so  constructing  and  operating  with  the 
apparatus  l^at  there  is  no  appreciable  friction  of  the  principal 
parts  thereof,  and  consequently  no  wear  of  the  material, 
thereby  effecting  economy ;  the  power  generated  and  main- 
tained in  the  apparatus  for  an  indeiuiite  peripd  is  also 
attended  with  no  expense. 

I  take  (he  adds)  an  open  vessel,  of  any  convenient  shape 
or  size,  into  which  I  place  water ;  also  a  cylindrical  vessel, 
the  air  discharged  therefrom,  is  to  be  filled  with  water,  and 
placed  upright  with  the  open  end  downwards,  immersed  in 
the  first  vessel ;  a  hollow  collapsible  sphere  has  afiixed  to  one 
end  a  flexible  tube,  formed  with  two  outlets  or  branches,  each 
fitted  with  a  cock,  one  opening  to  the  atmosphere,  the  other 
to  a  hollow  vessel. 

A  "  vibrating  lever"  is  described ;  and  after  a  printed  page 
of  description,  we  are  at  last  assured  that— r"  The  alternate 
opening  and  closing  of  the  cocks  of  the  apparatus  is  rendered 
«elf-acting  by  the  vibrating  movement  of  the  lever  or  other 
sidtable  means." 

Most  likely  the  "  other  suitable  means  "  was  found,  in  the 
end,  to  be  just  the  one  thing  wanting,  for  this  patent,  like 
many  of  its  class,  never  went  beyond  the  first  six  months* 
protection, 

1856. — pWixliam  Smith  [No.  1168],  Adelpbi*  London, 
A  communication  from  Alexandre  Herault,  of  Angers,  France. 
"  A  new  application  of  the  syphon  as  j^n  irrigator  and  a 
motive  power  machine." 


470  PEKPETUUM  moblle; 

The  inventinn  consists  in  the  peculiar  arrancfement  of  an 
apparatus  fitted  to  the  upper  part  of  a  syphon,  which  is  pro- 
vided with  receptacles,  which  permit  the  withdrawal  of  a 
certain  quantity  of  water  from  it  without  disturbing  it  or  its 
action,  and  employing  this  water  at  the  same  time  as  a  motive 
power,  by  the  means  and  through  the  instrumentality  of  the 
apparatus  itself,  and  also  by  its  fall  working  an  hydraulic 
power  of  any  description,  or  feeding  a  system  of  irrigation. 
Finally,  by  means  of  this  apparatus,  water  can  be  thrown  to 
a  heiarht  of  from  three  to  seven  or  eight  yards,  without  cessa- 
tion, by  makinsf  the  exit  vent  of  the  trough  in  a  proportion 
agreeing  to  the  quantity  or  volume  of  water  that  it  receives. 

Two  folio  pages  of  print  and  a  full  drawing  complete  the 
specification  of  this  topsy-turvy  sjrphon ;  but  as  the  invention 
did  not  proceed  to  the  Great  Seal,  all  right  in  it  has  lapsed  in 
consequence.  The  idea  is  by  no  means  new,  and  its  cause  of 
failure  is  due  to  an  imperative  law  of  hydrostatics. 


1856.— Duncan  Lang  [No.  1345],  of  Greenock,  Scot- 
land, Engineer.  *'  Improvements  in  obtaining  and  applying 
motive  power." 

Air  (he  says),  when  accumulated  in  any  vessel,  and  com- 
pressed or  urged  into  motion,  acts  as  a  very  powerful  motive 
agent. 

Having  described  an  engine,  but  one  that  is  capable  of 
great  modification,  he  concludes : — "  The  motion  is  perpetual 
in  its  action,  in  as  far  as  matter  or  material  is  susceptible  of 
the  time  (query,  "term")  being  applied  to  mechanical  inven- 
tion, and  capable  of  being  modifiisd  and  adjusted,  stopped 
and  resumed.  Its  advantages  are — its  enormous  power  and 
economical  use  ;  the  pressure  from  the  compressed  air  of  the 
common  atmosphere  dispensing  with  coal,  coke,  fire,  and  the 
tear  and  wear  of  their  action,  and  expense,  as  attendant  on 
the  engines  of  the  present  day  in  their  practical  working." 

That  word  "  practical"  is  a  decidedly  saving  clause  in  this 
instance.  But  who  would  not  rather  bear  with  the  wear  and 
tear  of  expensive  machinery  steam-propelled,  than  rest  satis- 
fied with  the  much-extolled  machinery  here  and  elsewhere 
described  as  that  of  which  "  the  motion  is  perpetual  ?" 


1856. — General  Henbi  Dembinski  [No.  1611],  of  Paris. 


OB,    SEARCH   FOR    SELF-MOTIVE   POWER.  471 

*'  An  apparatus  giving  a  self-acting  motive  power,  produced 
by  water,  elasticity,  compressed  water,  or  any  gas  wnatever.*' 

My  invention  (he  says)  consists  of  an  apparatus  to  produce 
a  continual  motion  reproductive  of  itself,  by  two  wheels  bemg 
connected  by  means  of  gearing  or  endless  chains  or  ropes, 
the  motion  being  produced  either  by  weight  or  elasticity,  the 
latter  obtained  by  air,  gas,  compressea  water,  or  any  com- 
pressible fluid. 

This  hopeless  scheme  is  accompanied  by  a  drawing  de- 
scribed in  a  full  folio  page  of  letter-press,  presenting  no 
extractable  point  of  interest.  It  never  had  more  than  six 
months'  patent  protection. 


1856.-i-RoBEBT  and  Edward  Lavender  [No.  2164],  of 
London.  "  Improvements  in  raising  water  and  other  fluids, 
and  in  obtaining  power  thereby.'*  Their  apparatus  consists 
of  two  upright  cylinders,  between  and  over  which  a  wheel 
or  pulley  is  moimted,  and  over  this  wheel  an  articulated 
piston  is  hung,  its  ends  passing  into  the  two  cylinders ;  one 
end  of  the  piston  descending  into  one  of  the  cylinders,  dis- 
places the  fluid  therein,  which  flows  up  to  suitable  troughs, 
?ind  the  other  end  of  the  piston  descends  into  the  other 
cylinder.  Hydraulic  bellows  are  recommended  for  giving 
motive  power !  "In  this  way  (we  are  assured)  any  amount 
of  motive  power  will  be  obtained,  and  the  only  cost  thereof 
will  be  that  of  keeping  the  machinery  in  repair."  Which 
"  cost,**  we  can  promise,  shall  be  as  nothing  per  annum,  for 
how  can  that  wear  out  that  remains  so  imperturbably  quiet } 


1856. — ^Antione  Jean  Baptiste  Lespinasse  [No.  2284], 
of  Toulouse,  France,  Engineer.  "  Improvements  in  the  means 
of  obtaining  motive  power."  All  we  can  learn  of  this  pre- 
cious scheme  is  derived  from  one  of  the  shortest  possible 
provisional  speciflcations,  thus  : — "  This  invention  relates  to 
an  improved  hydraulic  apparatus  for  obtaining  motive  power. 
This  apparatus  consists  of  a  reservoir  of  water,  or  other  fluid, 
fitted  with  a  syphon,  the  larger  limb  of  which  passes  down 
to  a  water  wheel,  and  is  so  constructed  as  to  be  capable  of 
directing  a  stream  of  water  on  to  either  side  of  the  wheel. 


472  ^EBPETTJUM   MOBIiE^ 

according  to  the  direction  of  rotation  requiredi  Th^  axis  of 
this  wheel  works  a  set  of  pumps  for  raising  the  water  which 
has  acted  upon  the  wheel,  and  returning  it  to  the  reservoir 
to  be  again  supplied  to  the  wheel  through  the  syphon.  The 
power  may  be  transmitted  from  the  axis  of  the  wat€(r-wheel 
to  a  driving  shaft  in  any  eonvenient  manner/' 


1856.-^ROBEflT  GfiOitGE  Babbow  [No.  2455],  Of  Poplar, 
liondon.  Engineer.  "  A  self-maintaining  motive  power  ob- 
tained from  water,  air,  or  any  other  fluid  or  liquid."  Hfe 
says : — "  The  method  of  obtaining  niotiVe  poWer*  self-sil^- 
taining,  is  as  follows  :  I  make  a  double-acting  force-pump  of 
one  half  the  diameter  of  the  cylinder,  and  attach  to  it  a 
receiver  with  an  hemispherical  top  (air- tight),  and  I  force 
water  or  air  into  this  receiver  with  the  pump  until  1  attain 
the  pressure  on  the  square  inch  required.  1  then  attach  or 
conneet  the  pUmp  to  the  engine,  and  it  will  maintain  the 
supply  in  the  receiver  for  any  definite  period  required,  so 
long  as  all  the  joints  are  tight  and  in  working  order.'*  A 
complete  specification  and  drawings  were  filed  by  the  in- 
ventor's executors,  but  the  character  of  the  invention,  as  a 
•*  self-sustaining  "  power,  is  by  no  means  clear. 


16b6. — ^AiMfi  LEcbcci  [Nd*  2873],  of  S^railce,  Contractot. 
**  Improvements  in  hydraulic  engines."  These  improve- 
ments consist  in  an  arrahgemfeiit  by  which  the  pressure  of 
thd  water  flowing  from  a  basin  or  reserVoir,  and  falling  down 
in  the  buckets  of  a  wheel  enclosed  on  both  sides,  causes  this 
wheel  to  turn  and  carry  the  water  up  through  a  syphon- 
like  canal  to  another  basin  or  reservoir,  from  whence  part  of 
the  water  may  flow  aild  impart  motion  to  another  wheel, 
which  latter,  as  well  as  th6  first  one,  may  serve  then  as  a 
prime  mover  for  any  machinery. 


1657.— SARfttOtOMKW  PbedatallU  [Nd.  958],  df 
Bloomsbury,  London,  Civil  Engineer.  "  A  new  motive  en- 
^inei*'  **  The  said  invention  (he  says)  consists  in  the  action, 
feltcrtlately  intercepted  and  restoredj  of  the  vertical  pressure 


OR,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   FOWEB.  473 

©f  liquids  on  a  base,  and  the  ascent  of  liquids  by  capillary 
attraction.  For  this  purpose,  twice  the  liquid,  for  instance, 
water,  wanted  to  rise  a  piston  in  a  cylinder  is  put  in  a  vessel, 
large  in  .size  and  small  in  depth,  communicating  with  the 
said  cylinder.  A  reservoir  above  the  vessel,  and  of  the  same 
size,  is  put  in  communication  with  the  cover  of  the  vessel  by 
a  pipe,  and  both  the  reservoir  and  pipe  are  filled  with  water. 
In  the  cover  of  the  vessel  there  are  fixed  some  capillary 
tubes  in  glass,  communicating  with  the  water  inside  the 
vessel,  and  such  in  number  as  to  contain  about  the  quantity 
of  water  required  to  raise  the  piston,  these  capillary  tubes 
passing  throughout  the  bottom  of  the  reservoir  into  the 
water ;  they  are  vertical  for  about  one  inch,  then  horizontal 
for  about  half  an  inch,  then  vertical  to  the  top.  This  par- 
ticular construction  of  the  capillary  tubes  is  indispensable  to 
the  purpose  for  which  they  are  intended.  A  valve  in  the 
cover  of  the  vessel  when  cut  off  the  communication  of  the 
pipe  with  the  water  in  the  vessel,  opens  the  communication 
between  the  water  in  the  vessel  and  the  capillary  tubes." 
He  also  vaguely  describes  another  similar  machine,  being 
only  a  provisional  specification. 


1858. — ^Babtolommeo  Pbedavalle  [No.  2563],  of 
Hart  Street,  Middlesex,  Civil  Engineer.  "  Improvements  in 
producing  or  obtaining  motive  power." 

"  My  invention  relates  to  the  combination  of  certain  me- 
chanical means  in  connection  with  a  peculiar  property  of 
fluids  observable  in  the  '  hydrostatic  paradox  *  for  the  pur- 
pose of  producing  or  obtaining  motive  power.  According  to 
this  invention,  motive  power  is  produced  by  the  vertical 
pressure  of  a  column  of  fluid  alternately  cut  off  and  restored. 
For  this  purpose,  a  column  of  fluid  is  caused  to  exert  vertical 
pressure  on  a  body  of  fluid  contained  in  a  vessel  of  larger 
base  than  the  diameter  of  the  column,  means  being  provided 
for  alternately  and  instantaneously  cutting  off  and  restoring 
such  pressure  for  neutralizing  the  pressure  on  the  side  oppo- 
site to  that  on  which  motion  is  to  be  primarily  produced,  and 
for  returning  the  vessel  after  having  been  acted  on  to  its 
original  position  to  receive  a  fresh  impulse.  I  include  in  the 
term  *  fluid,'  and  propose  to  use  as  the  fluid  agent,  water  or 
other  liquid,  mercury  or  other  substance  kept  naturally  or 


474  PEKPETUTJM  mobile; 

artificially  in  a  state  of  sufficient  fluidity,  vapours,  gaseous^ 
or  aeriform  fluids.  In  one  arrangement,  I  employ  a  vessel 
consisting  of  two  separate  parts  (kept  in  contact),  and  flx 
vertically  thereto  a  pipe  or  tube  which  communicates  with 
the  interior  of  the  vessel,  and  which  I  fill  with  fluid  so  as  to 
obtain  a  pressure  in  the  vessel  equal  to'  the  weight  of  a 
column  having  the  diameter  of  the  vessel's  interior  and  the. 
height  of  the  pipe.  The  bottom  of  the  vessel  is  connected 
by  a  shafts  ot  otherwise,  to  one  end  of  a  beam  or  lever,  to 
the  other  end  of  which,  and  at  an  equal  distance  from  the 
centre,  is  connected  another  apparatus  (or  pipe  and  vessel) 
in  eveiy  respect  similar  to  the  preceding.  To  each  pipe, 
iiear  its  junction  with  its  respective  vessel,  is  fitted  a  cock  or 
valve,  which  cocks  or  valves  may  be  acted  on  by  the  motion 
of  the  machine  itself,  and  are  so  arranged  as  to  open  and 
shut  alternately,  so  that  when  otie  is  open,  the  column  of 
fluid  will  instantly  act  on  the  vessel  in  connection  with  it, 
and  by  its  pressure  force  it  down,  and  with  it  the  end  of  the 
beam ;  i«rhile  the  other  vessel,  having  its  cock  or  valve  shut, 
has  no  other  pressure  than  its  own  absolute  weight,  and  is 
consequently  raised  by  the  leverage  of  the  balance, ». «.,  the 
depression  of  the  descending  vessel.  The  action  is  then 
reversed,  and  thus  a  reciprocating  motion  is  produced  by  the 
vertical  pressure  of  the  column  of  fltiid  alternately  cut  off 
and  restored.  Motion  thus  obtained  may  be  applied  directly 
or  transmitted  vertically,  horizontally,  or  obliquely,  or  con- 
verted into  rotary  or  other  motion  by  suitable  appliances. 
The  power  so  obtained  may  also  be  caused  to  compress 
liquids  or  steam,  or  other  aeriform  or  gaseous  fluid,  in  a 
separate  vessel,  in  order  to  drive  pistotls  or  communicate 
motion  to  an  Archimedean  screw,  wheels,  or  other  contriv- 
ances, and  may  be  adopted  in  substitution  of  steam,  water 
power,  or  other  agent,  for  working  any  known  arrangement 
of  enginci'* 


1869. — Bartolommeo  Phedava^li/e  [No.  2851],  of 
Bloomsbury  Street,  London,  Civil  Engineer.  "  According  to 
this  invention,  motive  power  is  produced  by  the  vertical 
pressure  of  a  column  of  fluid  alternately  changing  its  action 
on  the  beam  of  a  balance."  Only  provisional  protection  was 
obtained* 


OB,   SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWSB.  475 

1860. — ^Babtolommeo  Pbedatalle  [No«1458],  of  Blooms- 
bury,  London,  Civil  Engineer.  "  A  new  mode  of,  and  appa- 
ratus for  producing  and  obtaining,  motive  power." 

The  provisional  specification  (all  published)  states : — "  My 
invention  consists  in  a  constant  atmospheric  pressure  impart- 
ing its  downward  gravitation  on  a  vertical  column  of  liquid, 
commimicating  with  a  hoUow  piston  suspended  in  a  cylinder 
and  surrounded  by  a  vacuum.  At  one  extremity  of  an  india- 
rubber  tube  is  fixed  a  circular  frame  containing  a  valve  open- 
ing outside,  and  at  about  an  inch  from  this  a  plate  of  the 
same  diameter  as  the  valve  is  secured,  in  order  to  form  a  kind 
of  a  hollow  air-tight  piston  sack  or  bag." 

More  surely  need  not  be  quoted  to  convince  any  one  of  the 
impossibility  of  effecting  a  moving  power  by  such  an  ar- 
rangement. However,  one  more  quotation  will  suffice: — - 
"  When  the  vacuum  is  made  in  the  cylinder,  and  the  vertical 
pipe  filled  with  liquid,  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  through 
the  thin  or  small  pipe  will  impart  a  constant  impulsive  force 
to  the  valve  and  to  the  rod  touching  it,  in  proportion  to  the 
height  of  the  column  of  liquid  and  the  vacuum  produced ; 
and  the  apparatus  will  move  according  to  the  adopted  con- 
trivance, and  may  be  applied  as  the  piston  of  a  steam-engine." 


1857. — Chakles  Bablow  [No.  1108],  of  Chancery  Lane, 
London,  Patent  Agent.  A  communication  by  Joseph  Com- 
mandeur,  of  Lyons,  France,  Gentleman.  '*  A  mechanical 
apparatus  for  regenerating  the  impulsive  force  of  any  motive 
power."     He  says  :— 

The  effects  of  this  machine  are  due  to  the  force  created  by 
the  travelling  of  heavy  iron  balls  or  weights  in  and  around 
helical  spirals,  which  are  woimd  roimd  cylinders  of  different 
diameters.  These  cylinders  are  set  in  motion  by  the  impulse 
given  to  them  by  the  gravitation  of  the  heavy  weights  or  balls 
when  set  in  motion,  which  motion  is  of  an  oscillating  rotatory 
kind,  on  account  of  the  shafts  being  inclined. 

The  drawing  represents  a  vertical  section  across  the  axle 
of  the  upright  cylmders  A  and  B.  The  helical  spirals  are  of 
a  hollow  or  trough  form,  so  that  the  iron  balls  or  weights 
placed  at  the  upper  end  will  easily  and  instantly  run  down 
them.     The  spirals  of  the  cylinders  A  and  B  have  a  reverse 


476 


PEBFETXTUM    MOBIUS; 


action — ^the  former  acts  as  the  motive  power,  the  latter  as  a 
resistance ;  that  is  to  say,  its  only  purpose  is  to  carry  up 
again  the  halls  or  weights  running  out  from  the  lower  spirals 
of  the  cylinder  A  into  a  lower  horizontal  trough  C,  which 
conveys  them  into  a  lower  spire  of  th6  cylinder  B,  the  iron 
balls  nmning  up  the  said  cylinder  through  the  spiral  wind- 
ings until  they  reach  the  top  part,  where  they  fall  into  the 
horisontal  path  D,  which  conveys  them  back  to  the  upper 
spirals  of  the  cylinder  B  by  means  of  the  four  bevilled  wheels 
£  E  E  E,  two  of  which  are  keyed  to  the  horizontal  shaft  F, 


imd  the  two  others  on  short  vertical  shafts  A  and  D.  The 
number  of  spirals  beiiig  the  same  in  each  cylinder,  and  their 
rotative  motion  being  at  the  same  speed,  it  follows  that  at 
feach  revolution  of  the  cylinder  A  a  ball  will  run  out  of  the 
lower  spiral,  and  will  be  conveyed  back  to  the  cylinder  B 
through  the  straight  trough,  and  similarly  at  each  revolution 
of  the  cylinder  B  a  ball  will  run  out  of  its  upper  spiral  and 
be  conveyed  back  into  the  cylinder  A  through  the  gutter  or 
trough  D.  This  new  combination  will  constantly  regenerate 
and  maintain  the  first  impulsive  force  applied  to  the  appa- 
ratus. From  the  disposition  of  the  helical  spirals  and 
cylinders,  it  is  evident  that  the  surfaces  of  revolution  gene- 
rated by  the  axes  or  shafts  T  T,  of  the  cylinders  A  and  B, 
are  conical  surfaces,  the  generating  lines  of  which  are  the 
axes  1 1  of  the  cylinders,  which  revolve  around  their  summit. 


OB,   SEABCH   FOB   8EXF-MOTIYS   FOWBB.  477 

tvhich  moving  freely  in  suitable  bearings,  the  axles  or  shafts 
1 1  can  revolve  very  freely.  The  top  part  of  the  shafts  1 1  is 
also  of  a  spheroidal  shape,  as  seen  at  G  G,  and,  working  in 
brass  seats,  moves  freely  at  top  and  bottom  in  its  bearings^ 
so  that  the  motion  of  the  shafts  is  easy,  the  first  driving 
around  with  it  the  crank  H,  whilst  the  shaft  I  is  driven  by 
the  crank  H.  At  the  lower  part  of  the  cylinders,  discs  J  J 
are  keyed,  which  discs  are  provided  with  wedge  pieces  K  K, 
the  lower  corners  of  which  bear  on  the  chairs  L  L  for  the 
purpose  of  lessening  the  strain  at  the  end  of  the  cranks,  pro- 
ducing a  kind  of  re-aetion  which  acts  as  an  addition  to  the 
motive  force.  Above  the  cylinders  A  and  B,  circular  plates 
or  troughs  are  placed,  working  on  brass  bearings  around  the 
rounded  edges  of  the  shafts  1 1.  In  these  troughs,  heavy  iron 
balls  travel,  serviiifg  as  a  fly-wheel  to  the  rest  of  the  ma- 
chine, and  balancing  the  bails  in  the  spirals.  These  plates 
have  an  oscillating  mocion  on  the  rounded  edges  O  0,  and 
are  connected  to  the  upper  cross  arm  plates  P  P  by  rods 
Q  Q  Q  Q.  They  have  also  an  oscillatory  motion  given  to 
them  by  the  crank  knobs  E  E.  The  troughed  plates  M  M 
ought  to  have  an  inverted  inclination  to  that  of  the  helical 
spires  of  the  cylinder,  which  inclination  may  be  suitably 
regulated  by  the  screw  nuts  on  the  connecting  rods  Q  Q  Q  Q* 
as  shown  on  the  drawing.  The  under  sides  of  the  troughed 
plate  are  provided  with  a  circular  rib  SS,  projecting  down- 
wards, and  rounded  off  at  its  edge,  and  which  constantly 
bears  on  the  plates  T  T  as  they  revolve.  By  means  of  the 
adjustable  connecting  rods  QQQQ,  the  heavy  balls  NN 
are  started,  running  to  the  required  number  in  advance  of  the 
cylinders,  so  as  to  overcome  the  dead  points.  By  means  of 
the  apparatus  hereinbefore  described,  and  shown  by  the 
annexed  drawing,  impulsive  force  may  be  increased  by  in- 
creasing the  number  of  spirals  so  as  to  admit  of  the  use  of 
more  weights,  or  by  enlarging  the  pitch  of  the  helical  so  as 
to  admit  of  the  use  of  larger  balls ;  and  some  of  these  balls 
might  be  hollow,  so  as  to  increase  power  in  the  less  ratio« 
Instead  of  the  helical  cylinder  A,  a  bucket-wheel  might  be 
used,  into  which  the  balls  carried  up  by  the  spirals  of  the 
cylinder  B  would  enter  at  its  top  part.  The  contrary  prin- 
ciple might  be  applied,  videlicet,  the  helical  cylinder  A  might 
be  preserved  as  the  motive  agent,  and  the  wheel  to  carry  the 
balls.      Lastly,  both  helical  cylinders  might  be  applied  to 


478 


rEBFETUUM   MOBII^  ; 


convey  the  iron  balls  to  the  wheel,  which  latter  should  then 
be  the  motive  agent.  The  force  and  efficacy  of  the  apparatus 
will  increase  or  decrease  according  to  the  size  and  weight  of 
the  balls,  to  the  diameter  of  the  motive  helical  spiral,  and  to 
the  weight  of  the  bails  in  the  troughed  plate. 

I  claim  the  construction  of  a  machine  for  imparting  motive 
power  actuated  by  rotating  balls  in  helical  spirals,  or  any 
mere  equivalents  therefor. 


1857. — ^Peteb.  Asmand  i#b  Comte  de  Fontainemoeeatt 
[No.  1330],  of  London,  Agent.  "An  improved  hydraulic 
motor."     A  communication. 

The  apparatus  is  composed  of  a  number  of  hollow  elastic 

buckets  or  bellows,  partly  im- 
mersed in  water,  made  to  pass 
over  two  pulleys.  Each  bel- 
lows is  furnished  with  a  leaden 
weight  at  the  bottom,  which 
forces  the  air  contained  in  the 
bellows  on  one  side,  to  pass 
by  means  of  connecting  tubes 
into  those  buckets  or  bellows 
which  are  on  the  opposite  side. 
The  bellows  are  fitted  to  slotted 
links,  and  connected  together 
so  as  to  form  an  endless 
chain,  which  passes  over  the 
two  pulleys. 


1857.— William  Gilmoue  [No.  2125],  of  Dalbeth,  Scot- 
land.    "  Improvements  in  obtaining  motive  power." 

This  invention  (he  says)  relates  to  the  obtainment  of  a  con- 
tinuously-acting motive  power,  by  means  of  weights  operating 
upon  combinations  of  levers  or  parts  acting  on  the  lever 
principle.  It  may  be  carried  out  imder  various  practical 
forms,  but  under  one  of  its  simplest  modifications  the  appa- 
ratus mainly  consists  of  a  pair  of  long  parallel  horizontal 
levers  of  the  first  order,  each  set  upon  a  fulcrum  near  one 
end,  whilst  to  the  other  and  longer  end  there  is  hung  a  weight 
of  a  certain  predetermined  size.     The  descent  of  this  weight, 


OB,    SEARCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   POWEB.  479 

when  the  apparatus  is  in  motion,  obviously  elevates  the  oppo- 
site shorter  arm  of  the  lever,  and  this  end  is  connected  to  a 
short  crank  upon  a  small  horizontal  shaft,  which  shaft  has 
upon  its  opposite  end  a  longer  crank. 

The  pin  of  this  longer  crank  is  jointed  by  a  suitable  link 
to  the  longer  arm  of  another  lever  of  half  the  length  of 
the  main  lever.  This  lever  is  also  of  the  first  order,  and  its 
shorter  arm  is  linked  to  one  end  of  an  equal-armed  lever,  the 
opposite  end  of  which  lever  is  connected  by  a  rod  to  a  crank 
upon  a  long  horizontal  transverse  shaft.  This  long  shaft  has 
upon  it  three  other  cranks;  the  second  of  these  cranks  is 
linked  to  the  longer  arm  of  another  lever,  to  which  is  hung  a 
weighted  lever  one  half  that  of  the  weight  on  the  main  lever. 
The  other  shorter  end  of  this  lever  is  linked  to  one  end  of  an 
equal-armed  lever,  the  opposite  end  of  which  is  linked  to  a 
crank  on  a  secondary  horizontal  transverse  shaft.  This  shaft 
has  also  four  cranks  upon  it,  and  the  external  one  next  to 
that  last  referred  to  is  linked  to  the  weighted  end  of  the  main 
horizontal  lever. 

The  remaining  two  cranks  on  the  main  horizontal  four- 
cranked  shaft  operate  in  a  precisely  similar  manner  upon  an 
exactly  corresponding  series  of  parts  in  connection  with  the 
other  main  horizontal  lever ;  in  other  words,  the  arrangement 
comprehends  two  main  horizontal  weighted  levers,  working 
in  combination  through  the  intervention  of  precisely  similar 
parts,  the  entire  apparatus  comprising  four  acting  weights, 
the  two  on  the  main  levers  being  twice  the  weight  of  the 
other  two. 

The  result  of  this  combination  is,  that  as  the  two  main 
weighted  levers  descend,  they  alternately  elevate  the  other 
lighter  weights,  which  lighter  weights  in  turn  descending, 
operate  by  means  of  their  lever  connections  so  as  to  again 
raise  the  main  weighted  levers,  and  thus  cause  the  main 
horizontal  crank  shadN;  continuously  to  revolve. 


1857. — William  Middleship  [No.  3199],  of  South 
Grove,  Mile  End,  London,  of  H.  M.  Customs.  "  Improved 
machinery  or  apparatus  for  obtaining  motive  power." 

My  invention  of  improved  machinery  or  apparatus  for  ob- 
taining motive  power  consists  principsJly  of  a  wheel  of  ai^y 


48D  FKKPKTVTM    MOBII.E  ; 

saitable  diameter,  and  moanted  on  a  spindle  which  tarns  in 
bearings ;  the  rotation  of  this  wheel  is  to  be  effected  and 
kept  np  by  maintaining  a  weight  of  water  ahrays  on  one  side 
of  the  wheel,  or  if  the  wheel  shoold  be  immersed  in  water, 
the  same  object  may  be  effected  by  the  inflation  of  chambers 
with  air,  the  ascending  power  of  the  air  chambers  being 
sufficient  to  commnnicate  rotating  power  to  the  wheel,  as  the 
air  chambers  will  be  inflated  on  one  side  only  of  the  wheel. 
Whether  water  or  air  be  employed  as  the  motive  agent,  the 
chambers,  which  most  be  ammged  round  the  periphery  of 
the  wheel,  must  be  collap^ble,  so  as  to  admit  of  their  alter- 
nately receiTing  the  air  or  water,  and  allowing  the  same  to 
be  expelled  when  required.  1  prefer  to  make  the  chambers 
in  the  form  of  a  wedge,  but  other  forms  may  be  employed  if 
preferred. 

As  respects  working  the  wheel  by  water  power,  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  wheel  the  collapsible  chambers  are  filled 
with  water,  and  as  they  communicate  by  means  of  tubes 
with  similar  chambers  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  wheel,  it 
will  be  understood  that  when  the  wheel  begins  to  rotate,  in 
consequence  of  the  weight  of  water  on  one  side  of  it,  the 
collapsible  vessels  which  are  capable  of  compression  are 
brought  into  contact  with  a  pressing:  wheel  mounted  in 
bearings  below  the  water  wheel.  The  pressing  wheel  is 
moved  by  the  friction  of  contact  only,  and  the  collapsible 
chambers  being  pressed  between  the  two  wheels,  the  water 
is  forced  out  of  the  lower  ends  up  into  the  oj^oeite  chamber 
above,  thus  rendering  the  weight  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
wheel  the  same  as  before  the  movement  took  place ;  the 
emptied  chamber  is  prevented  ft-ora  filling  again  until  it 
arrives  at  the  top,  and  is  ready  to  pass  to  the  right  side  of 
the  axis.  The  motion  is  continued  by  each  chamber  being 
successively  brought  down  and  compressed,  and  the  water 
therefrom  forced  into  the  opposite  chamber  above  in  regular 
succession.  The  reflow  of  water  from  the  upper  into  the 
lower  chamber,  after  passing  the  point  of  compression,  is  to 
be  prevented  by  a  button  turned  by  a  pin,  or  any  other 
suitable  contrivance,  which  must  be  brought  into  operation 
just  as  the  chamber  is  emptied.  The  button  or  other  con* 
trivance  which  closes  the  collapsible  chambers  may  be 
removed  by  a  similar  pin  when  the  chamber  reaches  the 
wpper  part  of  ^he  wheel  to  be  refilled.     Assuming  that  thft 


OB,  SEARCH    FOB   SBLF-MOTIYB   POWSB.  481 

weight  of  ten  pounds  of  water  on  the  right  side  of  the  wheel 
would  be  sufficient  to  force  up  one  pound  to  the  required 
opposite  point,  any  additional  number  of  chambers  for  which 
there  might  be  space  left  would  give  an  increased  motive 
power. 

The  principle,  when  applied  to  air  working  a  wheel  under 
water,  is  to  be  effected  simply  by  reversing  the  position  of 
the  wheels  and  substituting  air  as  the  motive  power  for  com- 
pression downwards  to  the  chamber  at  the  bottom  of  the 
wheel,  so  that  by  its  buoyancy  it  may,  in  its  tendency  to 
ascend  to  the  surface  of  the  water,  pull  round  the  wheel. 


1858. — ^Marc  Antoine  Fban^ois  Mennons  [No.  566], 
of  Paris,  and  Finsbury,  London.  "Certain  improvements 
in  the  production  of  motive  power."  This  invention  consists 
in  constructing  machinery  for  utilising  gravity  and  centri- 
fugal force  for  obtaining  motive  power.  The  machinery  is 
composed — ^first,  of  a  peculiar  pendulum  or  swinging  lever, 
which,  after  receiving  an  oscillating  motion  by  the  hand 
acting  on  a  cord,  comes  in  contact  with  springs  which  cause 
the  pendulum  to  rebound  and  continue  oscillating.  This 
motion  is  further  assisted  by  means  of  the  gravity  of  water, 
or  other  liquid,  placed  in  tubes  or  receivers  at  the  bottom  of 
the  pendulum,  &c.  This  invention  had  only  six  months' 
protection. 

1858. — Geoboe  Hale  [No.  1374].  Levers  on  a  shaft — 
es  before.     (See  1854,  No.  2589.) 


1858. — Geobge  Singleton  Hill  [No.  1743],  of  Ryde, 
Isle  of  Wight,  Miller.  "  Improvements  in  hydro-pneumatic 
machinery."  The  invention,  completely  patented  by  this 
patentee,  "  is  based  on  the  principle  that  atmospheric  air  will 
sustain  a  column  of  water  varying  from  twenty-eight  to 
thirty-two  feet  in  height,  according  to  its  pressure  indicated 
by  the  barometer.'*  He  says  his  machinery  "  consists  of  a 
water-wheel  of  about  twenty-eight  feet  in  diameter,  a  cistern 
or  well  underneath  it,  and  a  tank  about  three  or  four  feet 
ideep  fixed  above  the  wheel ;  there  are  to  be  fitted  to  it  as 


482 


PEEPETUUM   mobile; 


many  pumps  as  required  for  pumping  the  water  into  the 
tank  above,  to  be  driven  by  the  water-wheel. "  A  large 
drawing  is  given,  in  describing  which  the  -patentee  compla- 
cently informs  us — "  The  suction  pipes  I  descend  into  the 
cistern  K,  formed  beneath  the  wheel,  where  the  water  em- 
ployed in  turning  the  wheel  collects,  and  is  elevated  by  the 
pumps  G  to  the  top  of  the  wheel  again."  This  is  remarkable 
under  any  circumstances,  but  more  so  as  thus  recorded  in 
the  Patent  Office  by  a  practical  man,  and  a  miUer  too. 


1858.— PiEKKE  RicHABD  [No.  1870],  of  Rue  St.  Jean, 
Paris,  Engineer*  "  Improvements  in  apparatus  for  obtaining 
motive  power." 

The  invention  consists  in  commimicating  a  rotary  motion 
to  a  fly-wheel  or  drum  by  means  of  a  set  of  falling  weights 

tied  together  by  means  of 
chains,  ropes,  or  straps.  This 
set  of  weights,  forming  an 
endless  chain,  runs  over  two 
pulleys,  or  rollers,  suitably 
disposed  up  and  down  near 
the  fly  wheel,  which  is  pro- 
vided with  a  set  of  cups 
suitably  shaped,  and  fixed 
aroimd  near  its  periphery, 
so  as  to  receive  the  weights 
as  they  are  delivered  up 
by  the  upper  pulley,  and 
to  carry  them  down  to  the 
lower  pulley,  whence  the  same  weights  re-ascend  in  a 
straight  .direction  to  the  upper  pulley.  The  weights 
of  the  endless  chain  running  or  falling  down  in  the 
curvilinear  direction  of  the  periphery  of  the  drum  are  more 
numerous  than  those  that  are  raised  up  in  a  straight  line, 
because  the  curvilinear  line  is  longer  than  the  straight  one, 
and  the  difference  of  heaviness  due  to  the  number  of  weights 
is  the  force  which,  by  its  action  at  the  end  of  the  levers  or 
Kadii  of  the  drum,  causes  that  drum  to  rotate. 

The  drawing  shows  an  endless  chain  composed  of  twenty- 
five  rounded  weights  or  balls,  fifteen  of  which  are  carried  bj 


OE,   SEA-RCH   FOR   SELF-MOTIVE    POWER. 


481 


the  cups  or  bowls  mentioned,  whilst  the  ten  other  weights 
are  ascending  freely  in  a  straight  line,  being  carried  upwards 
by  the  excess  of  weight  of  the  former.  L  L  L,  feet  of  IJiq 
frame  bearing  the  whole  apparatus ;  A  A,  fly  wheel  or  drum ; 
P  P,  pulleys  or  rollers,  over  which  runs  the  endless  chains 
composed  of  roimded  weights  B  B  B,  which  are  tied  together 
by  strings  or  straps  as  aforesaid.  The  shafts  of  the  pulleys 
P  P  run  on  bearings  fixed  upon  the  cross  pieces  N  N  of  th^ 
frame;  the  shaft  of  ihe  drum  runs  upon  bearings  fixed 
upon  the  cross  piece  M  of  the  said  frame ;  G  C  C,  cups  or 
bowls  fixed  around  the  drum  A  A.  The  machine  being  set 
in  motion,  will  keep  on  running  to  perform  any  work  which 
may  be  applied  to  it.  It  can  be  stopped  by  means  of  a 
brake  G,  acted  upon  by  a  lever  D  worked  by  hand.  When 
the  lever  is  brought  at  I),  the  brake  is  tight,  and  the  drum  A 
stops. 


1858.— James  Black  [No.  1933],  of  Edinburgh,  Machine 
Maker.  "  An  improved  mode  or  means  of  obtaining,  apply- 
ing, and  transmitting  motive  power.* 

A  face  plate  or  disc  is  fixed  on  an  axis,  and  has  formed  in 
it  a  number  of  wipers,  eccentrici?,  or  curved  pat^s,  whicl^ 
receive  (in  the  space  taken 
out)  a  pulley  or  roHer,  free 
to  revolve  on  its  own  axis, 
and  attached  to  an  adjust- 
able lever  in  equal  balance 
wilii  the  desired  lift  or 
pressure.  Gn  rotary  motion 
being  communicated  to  the 
plate  (bv  a  band  or  otherwise), 
the  puHey  or  roller  moves 
round  the  eccentrics  or  paths, 
imparting  a  rocking  motion 
to  the  lever  (similar  to  the 
action  of  a  beam),  wherefrom  motion  may  be  traasmitted  ^r 
applied,  as  desired,  or  converted  by  suitable  appliances  intp 
anv  description  of  motion. 

In  conifbction  herewith,  a  pump  may^  set  in  a  tank  of  water, 
and  a  tank  added  above ;  on  the  saine  shaft  with  the  face  plate 
is  a  water- whed  driven  by  the  water  from  above ;    when  it 

i2 


484  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

passed  the  centre,  the  water  falls  into  the  lower  tank  and  i» 
pumped  up  again ;  whatever  weight  of  water  is  in  each  stroke 
18  equalized  by  a  balance  weight  on  the  lever;  the  number  of 
eccentrics  and  size  of  water-wheel  may  be  increased  to  corre- 
spond with  the  quantity  of  water  required  to  secure  a  desired 
power. 

One  means  of  imparting  rotary  motion  from  my  arrange- 
ment is  by  attaching  at  the  end  of  the  lever  a  crank  and 
connecting  rod  of  same  radius  as  the  lift  of  the  lever,  carried 
over  the  centre  by  a  fly  wheel. 

The  invention  is  applicable  to  the  actuating  of  pumps, 
mincing  machines,  and  other  machinery,  instruments,  and 
apparatus,  and  to  parts  thereof;  to  propelling  on  land  and 
water,  and  to  various  motive  purposes. 

Fig.  1  is  an  elevation,  showing  an  arrangement  for  obtain- 
ing power  according  to  my  invention.  X  is  the  general 
framework  of  the  apparatus ;  A,  a  disc  or  plate,  mounted  on 
a  shaft  E,  and  formed  with  curved  paths  B  ;  the  same  shaft 
E  also  carries  a  water-wheel  W,  provided  with  vanes  or  blades 
to  w,  as  is  usual ;  C  is  a  roller,  working  in  the  paths  B,  and 
connected  to  a  lever  ID,  attached  to  rods  d  d  of  pumps  G  G. 
G^  is  a  balance  weight  at  the  further  end  of  the  lever,  which 
is  supported  in  the  bearing  /;  H  H  are  tanks  fixed  below 
the  water-wheel,  and  I  is  a  tank  set  above  it ;  t  %  are  supply 
pipes,  for  conveying  the  water  from  tanks  H  H  to  the  tank  1 ; 
yy,  escape  water  pipes.  The  water  falling  from  the  tank  I 
on  to  the  wheel  W,  drives  that  wheel  in  the  usual .  manner ; 
and  when  it  passes  the  centre,  the  water  falls  into  the  lower 
tanks  H,  from  which  it  is  pumped  up  again  into  the  upper 
tank  I  by  the  pumps  G,  actuated  by  the  levers  E,  driven  by 
the  rollers  C,  in  the  pathways  B  of  the  face  plate  A,  as  the 
latter  is  caused  to  revolve  by  the  revolution  of  the  water- 
wheel  W  on  the  same  shaft  with  it,  thus  producing  a  con- 
tinuous motive  power. 


1858.--J0HN  CoATES  [No.  1934],  of  Lower  Shadwell, 
London,  Engineer.  "  Improvements  in  apparatus  or  ma- 
chinery for  obtaining  and  applying  motive  power." 

A  complicated  machine  is  described,  of  which  he  says  : — 
"  The  cylinder,  the  tubular  portions,  and  the  trough  are  filled 
with  water,  and  the  working  of  the  piston  causes  the  alter- 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVK    POWER. 


485 


nate  admission  and  expulsion  of  the  water,  thereby  putting 
the  engine  into  motion.*'  He  adds  :  — "  The  water  that  supr 
plies  the  engine  cylinder  ascends  the  (hollow)  column  sup- 
portiQg  the  beam.**  The  patent  has  no  drawing ;  but  though 
completed,  the  construction  of  the  engine  ai^d  its  precise 
intended  mode  of  working  are  not  yery  obvious. 


1858. — Peter  Pickering  [No.  2142],  of  Danzig,  Prussia, 
Landed  Proprietor.  "  An  atmospheric  engine."  1,  2,  3, 4,  6, 
cylinders  18  feet  long  or 
high  and  3  feet  diameter, 
so  that  the  surface  of  each 
piston  has  1,296  square 
inches  acting  with  an  at*, 
mospheric  pressure  of  15  lbs. 
to  the  square  inch,  causes  a 
pressure  of  19,440  lbs.  to 
each  cylinder  (saying  nothing 
of  friction,  which  will  be 
accounted  for  later) ;  6,  7, 
8,  9,  10,  pistons  of  each  cylinder,  as  they  m\jst  be  placed 
when  the  engine  begins  to  work ;  6, 7>  8,  9,  causing  a  vacuum 
under  each  piston  (as  they  have  for  the  first  time  been  brought 
into  their  present  situation  by  main  force),  afterwards,  >yheu 
the  engine  is  permitted  to  start,  they  will  regulate  themselves ; 
No.  10  lies  fiat  on  the  bottom  of  the  cylinder ;  II,  12, 13,  14, 
15,  piston  rods  acting  on  shaft  No.  1(6 ;  17,  wheel  to  com- 
municate the  engine's  power  to  the  machinery  of  the  engine 
itself ;  18,  wheel  to  conjimunicate  the  engine's  power  to  the 
wheel  or  propelling  screw  of  a  sl^ip,  rqianufactory,  locomo- 
tive, &G. 


1858. — Robert  Wright  [No.  2530],  of  Manchester, 
Jeweller ;  and  T.  J.  Mercer,  of  Coventry,  Watch  Manufac- 
turer. "  A  new  or  improved  motive  power  engine."  "  Our 
invention  consists  of  an  engine  by  which  motive  power  is 
obtained  by  the  use  of  compressed  air,  which  said  engine 
^so    effects   the    compression  of  the  air,  by  the  expansive 


486  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

power  of  which  the  motive  power  is  obtained."  This  looks 
very  like  an  intended  perpetual  motion,  but  in  this  provisional 
specification  is  insuificiently  described. 


1858.— Moses  Starbuck  No.  [2708],  of  New  York, 
America.  "A  static  pressure  engine."  In  his  very  brief 
provisional  specification,  all  published,  he  says  : — "  My  inven- 
tion consists  in  the  application  of  a  static  pressure  to  produce 
a  continuous  movement,  which  movement  is  effected  in  con- 
sonance with  the  settled  laws  of  mechanical  philosophy,  by 
means  of  arrangements  of  devices  heretofore  undeveloped. 
By  means  of  these  devices,  I  am  enabled  to  convert  a  static 
pressure  into  a  continuous  movement,  from  which  the  static 
pressure  (minus  the  friction  of  the  engine)  can  be  continually 
given  off  for  the  purpose  of  moving  any  machinery  to  which 
the  engine  may  be  applied. 


1858. — Joseph  Mabie  Roussel  [No.  2853],  of  Paris, 
Mechanician.  '*  A  new  system  and  new  apparatus,  using  air 
as  a  motive  power.'*  A  drawing  accompanies  the  provisional 
specification ;  but  the  patent,  not  being  completed,  has,  Jike 
many  more,  lapsed  in  consequence.  Compressed  air  is  used, 
and  the  patentee  assures  us  that — "The  motor  once  set  in 
motion,  the  pumps  supply  air  in  a  quantity  sufficient  to  com* 
pensate  in  the  great  reservoir  that  already  used." 


1859.— Hugh  Rigby  [No.  754],  of  Salford,  Manchester, 
Engineer.  "  Improvements  in  machinery  or  apparatus  for 
obtaining  motive  power,  applicable  to  hoists,  and  all  other 
purposes  to  which  motive  power  can  be  applied." 

He  says : — "  I  employ  an  upper  reservoir  of  water  of  any 
suitable  capacity,  and,  by  means  of  a  regulating  valve,  allow 
the  water  to  fall  upon  the  buckets  of  a  water-wheel  or  tur* 
bine,  the  water  being  delivered  into  a  similar  reservoir  below. 
The  water-wheel  or  turbine  gives  motion  to  a  series  of  hy- 
draulic pumps,  for  the  purpose  of  forcing  the  water  into  one 
or  more  hydraulic  rams,  to  each  of  which  a  larger  pump- 
bucket  is  attached,  working  in  a  suitable  barrel,  the  bottoi« 


Oit,    SEARCH    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  487 

tof  which  is  placed  in  the  lower  reservoir.  As  the  water- 
wheel  or  turbine  turns  from  the  supply  of  water,  and  gives 
motion  to  the  series  of  pumps,  the  ram  or  rams  rise,  and 
raise  the  larger  bucket  or  buckets,  the  eflfect  of  which  is  to 
raise  the  surplus  water  from  the  lower  reservoir  to  the  upper, 
Which  latter  is  thus  continually  supplied ;  which,  acting  on 
the  wheel,  obtains  a  motive  power  in  propoition  to  the 
dimensions  of  the  parts."  Need  more  be  said  ?  We  have 
quoted  the  patentee's  own  statement  from  a  complete  specifi- 
cation of  three  printed  folio  pages,  accompanied  by  four  large 
sheets  of  illustrative  drawings !  Yet  Manchester  is  distin- 
guished for  its  engineers  and  machinists. 


1859. — James  Eandal  Smith  [No.  1057],  of  Glasgow. 
Gentleman.     "  Improvements  in  obtaining  motive  power,' ' 

Under  one  modification,  the  apparatus  or  machinery  consist? 
of  a  wheel  with  a  tubular  or  hollow  rim  capable  of  revolving 
in  a  vertical  plane  upon  a  horizontal  axis  or  centre  ot  motion. 
To  the  periphery  of  this  wheel  there  are  attached  at  equal  dis- 
tances asunder  and  all  round  it  a  series  of  open  cages  or 
chambers,  each  containing  a  flexible  diaphragm  of  a  tubular 
or  bag  form.  The  two  end*  of  each  chamber  or  flexible  bag- 
holder  are  solid  discs,  to  one  of  which  one  end  of  the  flexible 
bag  is  attached  so  as  to  be  fluid-tight,  and  a  water  thoroughfare 
or  tube  passes  from  this  end  disc  to  the  wheel  rim,  so  that  there 
is  a  free  passage  from  the  holldw  rim  into  the  interior  of  each 
flexible  bag.  The  opposite  end  disc  has  attached  to  it  a  spring 
of  any  convenient  kind,  and  between  this  spring  and  the  end 
of  the  flexible  bag  on  that  side  there  is  interposed  a  heavy  disc 
weight.  This  weight  fits  loosely  to  the  interior  of  the  bag 
chamber,  and  it  is  attached  to  the  free  end  of  the  flexible  bag 
so  as  to  be  fluid-tight.  The  tubular  or  chamber  space  in  ihe 
main  wheel  is  filled  with  water,  mercury,  oil,  or  other  liquid, 
and  it?  operation  is  this: — Supposing  there  are  eight  flexible 
bag  chambers,  and  that  the  position  of  the  wheel  is  such  that 
there  are  two  diametrically  opposed  chambers  in  an  accurate 
vertical  line  or  plane,  whilst  of  course  there  are  other  two  m 
an  accurate  horizontal  line,  the  remaining  four  chambers  holding 
relatively  of  course  positions  in  lines  ol  45  degrees  with  the 
horizon,  and  supposing  the  wheel  to  be  intended  to  revolve  to 


488  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

the  rijrht  or  in  the  same  direction  as  the  hands  of  timekeepers, 
then  one  of  the  flexible  bags  in  ihe  two  chambers  in  the  hori- 
zontal plane*  the  one  to  ihe  left^  or  the  ascending  one,  is  empty 
of  water,  the  disc  weiuihl  being;  on  the  top  of  it  so  as  entirely 
to  collapse  it^  the  opposite  bag  of  this  pair^  or  that  on  the 
descending  side^  is  full  of  water,  the  disc  weight  having  dis- 
tended it  by  falling  down  upon  the  spring  on  the  end  of  the 
chamber,  so  that  water  or  other  liquid  matter  in  the  wheel  has 
flowed  from  the  wheel  into  the  interior  of  the  bag.  The  next 
Img  beneath  the  full  one  on  the  descending  side,  or  following 
the  direction  of  the  revolution  of  the  wheel,  is  also  full  of 
liquid,  but  its  weight  is  of  course  acting  upon  the  wheel  wiih  a 
reduced  leverage  as  compared  with  the  one  above  it.  The 
bottom  hag  is  also  full  of  liquid,  but  of  course  inert  as  regard* 
its  operation  upon  the  revolving  action  of  the  wheel.  The  next 
bag  on  the  ascending  side  is  half  full  of  liquid,  the  weight  and 
spring  being  above  it.  The  next  to  this,  as  already  described^ 
is  empty^  as  also  is  the  following  one,  and  the  top  one  of  all, 
whilst  the  first  or  uppermost  one  on  the  descending  side  is  half 
full.  This  description  shows  that  there  is  a  preponderating 
weight  upon  the  descending  side  of  the  wheel,  causing  the  latter 
to  revolve^  and  this  preponderance  is  kept  up  throughout  the 
whole  revolution^  as  each  bag  comes  into  and  goes  out  of  action. 
According  to  another  arrangement^  motive  power  is  obtained 
by  a  peculiar  system  of  toothed  wheel  gearingt  The  principle 
involved  in  this  arrangement  may  be  carried  out  in  working 
practice  in  many  ways.  According  to  one  arrangement,  this 
combination  involves  twelve  wheels;  of  these,  eight  are  bevil 
wheels,  disposed  in  four  pairs,  the  individual  wheels  of  each 
pair  being  set  at  an  angle  or  inclination  one  with  the  other, 
feach  wheel  being  set  loose  upon  the  end  of  an  inclined  or 
angularly-disposed  lateral  stud^  the  whole  being  carried  upon 
a  pair  of  parallel  horizontal  shafts,  so  as  to  form  a  parallelogram 
in  plan.  When  the  set  of  weights  on  one  side  have  descended 
to  their  lowest  positions  in  virtue  of  the  half  revolution  of  two 
of  the  pairs  of  bevil  wheels,  their  action  upou  the  interposed 
wheel  on  that  side  has  also  caused  the  other  half  of  the  train  of 
four  bevil  wheels  to  turn  round  or  swing  over  upon  the  main 
centre,  as  before  referred  to,  and  thus  their  weights  are  brought 
at  once  to  their  highest  posiiions^  and  just  past  the  centre^  fof 
the  purpose  of  again  giving  motion  to  the  arrangement  for  thtf 


OR,   SEAttCH   FOE   SELF-MOTIVE   POWJBR.  i89 

succeeding  half  revolution,  and  in  this  way  the  revolution  is 
kept  up  continuously  as  each  set  of  two  pairs  of  bevil  wheels 
lurns  alternately  upon  the  main  centre.  The  essence  of  this 
portion  of  the  invention  being  the  obtainment  of  continuous 
revolution  from  weights  disposed  upon  inclined  wheels  or  discs, 
in  combination  with  the  reversing  action  of  these  wheels  for 
«gain  bringing  the  operating  weights  to  their  highest  positions 
of  work. 


1859. — ^MosES  Hatm  Picciotto  [No.  1413],  of  Finsbury 
Circus,  London,  Merchants  **  Improvements  in  apparatus 
for  producing  or  obtaining  motive  power." 

My  invention  consists  in  combining  apparatus  in  which 
motive  power  is  produced  by  the  gravity  or  pressure  of  a 
permanent  column  of  fluid  in  a  stationary  pipe,  the  base  of 
which  is  connected  to  a  fixed  cistern  or  chamber,  to  the  bot- 
tom whereof  are  attached  a  number  of  vertical  fleidble  tubes 
terminating  in  and  attached  to  a  moveable  plate,  piston,  or 
vessel,  capable  of  travelling  up  and  down  {in  guides  or  in 
«,  cylinder),  the  flexible  tubes  bending  and  unbending  as  the 
moveable  plate,  piston,  or  vessel  rises  and  descends.  This 
plate,  piston,  or  moveable  vessel  is  also  connected  to  one 
end  of  a  beam,  the  other  end  of  which  is  connected  to  a 
precisely  similar  apparatus,  also  consisting  of  a  Hke  set  of 
flexible  tubes,  attached  in  like  manner  to  a  fixed  chamber 
{communicating  with  the  column  of  fluid),  and  to  a  move- 
able plate,  piston,  or  vessel,  communication  being  opened 
between  the  main  pipe  and  the  flexible  tubes  at  one  end  of 
the  beam ;  the  gravity  or  pressure  of  the  column  of  fluid 
will  act  upon  and  force  down  the  plate,  piston,  or  moveable 
vessel  at  that  end,  unbending  the  tubes,  and  bringing  down 
the  corresponding  extremity  of  the  beam,  whilst  at  the  same 
time  communication  is  closed  between  the  main  pipe  and 
the  flexible  tubes  at  the  other  end  of  the  beam,  causing 
such  end  to  rise,  its  tubes  bending  accordingly,  to  facilitate, 
which  operation  a  small  quantity  of  the  fluid  contained, 
therein  may  be  let  off  to  be  pumped  back  into  the  main 
pipe.  The  action  is  then  reversed,  communication  being 
opened  on  the  up  side,  and  closed  on  the  down  side,  and  so 
on,  whereby  reciprocating  motion  is  produced  and  motive 
power  obtained.     The  power  may  be  increased  by  adapting 


490 


PEKPiixuuM  mobile; 


Bunilar  means  to  the  nnder  side  of  each,  of  the  plates,  pistons, 
or  moveable  vess^,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  cause  the  gra- 
rity  or  pressure  of  a  column  of  fluid  to  act  upward  on  the 
plate,  piston^  or  moveable  vessel  when  the  downward  pres- 
sure of  the  fluid  contained  in  the  flrst-mentioned  main  pipe 
is  removed,  by  closing  the  communication  thereof  with  the 
upper  set  of  tubes,  the  pressure  acting  upward  on  the  plate, 
J)iston,  or  vessel  at  one  end  of  the  beam,  while  acting  down- 
ward on  the  plate,  piston,  or  vessel  at  the  opposite  end,  and 
vice  versa.  The  flexible  tubes  may  be  so  contrived  as  to 
bend  into  an  arc,  spiral,  or  other  convenient  form;  The 
apparatus  may  be  adapted  to  act  horizontally  instead  of 
vertically.  The  term  fluids  when  employed  in  this  specifi- 
cation is  intended  to  comprise  water  and  other  liquids, 
gaseous  and  aeriform  fluids,  and  mercury  and  other  sub- 
stances in  a  fluid  state. 

I  now  proceed  more  particularly  to  explain  my  said  in- 
vention. 

Figure  1  is  an  elevation  o^  an  apparatus  constructed  ac- 
cording to  these  improvements.     A  is  a  pipe,  which  I  call 

the  main  pipe,  and  which 
contains  the  column  of  water 
or  other  fluid,  :&om  the 
pressure  or  gravity  whereof 
motive  power  is  to  be  ob- 
tained; This  pipe  A  is  fixed 
to  brickwork  or  in  a  general 
framework  X,  and  terminates 
at  the  lower  end  in  twqf 
branches  A^  A^  whereof  A^ 
leads  into  a  chamber  B^^ 
also  fixed  to  the  frame- 
Vork  X,  and  perforated  oh 
its  undel*  stirface  for  tke  reception  of  a  number  of  flexible 
tubes  Ci  C^  Ci,  attached  to  it  at  their  upper  ends,  and  con- 
hected  at  their  lower  ends  to  a  vessel  D^,  as  shown  in  the 
plan,  Figure  2  ;  such  Vessel  travelling  up  and  down  in  sta- 
tionary  guides  a ^  d\  ^  is  an  arm  or  link  by  which  the 
vessel  D^  is  attached  to  a  beam  E.  The  branch  pipe  A^  in 
like  manner  leads  into  \i  chamber  B^,  with  flexible  tubes 
C2  C2  C2,  tei-minating  in  a  vessel  D'^  working  in  guides 
d^  d-y  and  connected  by  an  arm  or  link  e^  to  the  beam  E; 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  491 

the  arrangements  of  tlie  parts  B^  C^  jy^  cP  ^  are  preeiisely 
similar  to  those  of  B^  C^  D^  d^  and  «^  respectively.     Kie^ 
tubes  of  the  set  C^  are  equal  in  number  to  those  of  the  set 
C^,  and  the  collective  area  or  surface  of  the  bores  of  the 
tubes  in  either  set  is  nearty  equal  to  the  surface  of  the  bore 
of  the  main  pipe  A.     Thus,   for   example,    suppose  the 
diameter  of  the  main  pipe  A  were  12  inches,  giving  108 
square  inches  of  surface^  then  the  same  amount  of  surface 
would  be  presented  in  either  set  of  tubes  collectively,  f^f^ 
are  valves  working  to  and  fro  in  valve  boxes  g^  g^^  and  ac- 
tuated from  the  fly  wheel  shafts,  or  other  part  of  the  ma- 
chinery, in  the  manner  hereinafter  described  for  opening 
and  closing  communication  between  the  main  pipe  A  and 
tile  flexible  tubes  on  each  side  of  the  beam ;  they  are  so  ar- 
ranged and  operated  that  when  the  end  h}  reaches  the  bot- 
tom of  its  stroke,  the  valve /^  closes,  and  cuts  off  commimi- 
cation  between  tibie  fluid  in  A  and  that  in  the  tubes  C*,  and 
when  that  end  h^  has  reached  the  top  of  its  stroke,  the 
valvey*  opens  and  permits  communication  between  the  fluid 
in  A  and  that  in  the  tubes  C^ ;  in  a  similar  manner  the 
valve /^  closes  whfen  the  end  h^  has  reached  the  bottom  of 
its  stroke,  and  opens  when  it  has  anived  at  the  top  of  its 
stroke.     The  valves  are  so  regulated  that  one  valve  must 
always  be  quite  closed  before  the  other  valve  begins  to  open. 
Instead  of  two  valves/^,  y^,  a  single  pivot  valve  or  a  ball 
or  circular  valve  may  be  used,  being  fitted  at  the  bottom  of 
the  pipe  A,  and  so  actuated  as  to  open  and  close  communi- 
cation on   each  side  alternately,  or  a  two-leaved  or  other 
convenient  valve  or  valves  may  be  employed  for  the  purpose. 
F  is  a  cut-off  valve  near  the  bottom  of  the  pipe  A,  opened 
by  means  of  a  lever  handle  to  start  the  engine,  and  left 
open  while  it  is  at  work.- 


1859. — Prince  Gustave  Gexnerich  [No.  2815J,  of 
Poland.  "  A  new  system  of  motive  power  applicable  for 
working  cranes  and  wheels.*' 

The  present  invention  is  a  motive  power  applied  to  d 
crane  for  raising  goods  instead  of  multiplied  hands  or  steam 
power.  The  principle  consists  of  a  heavy  weight  sliding  oh 
an  iron  rod  which  is  attached  to  tlic  axis  of  a  wheel,  and  by 
means  of  a  snap  fastened   to  the  rod  causes  the  wheel  to 


492- 


PERPETUUM    mobile; 


revolve.  By  means  of  the  heavy  slidmg  weight  the  cylindei* 
to  which  the  chain  is  attached  is  made  to  act  with  great 
power.  The  same  power  may  be  applied  in  any  case  where  a 
wheel  or  crank  is  required  to  be  turned,  as  by  the  heavy 
weight  sliding  to  and  fro  the  iron  rod  acts  as  balance  and 
creates  a  power,  and  by  moving  up  and  down  turns  a  wheel 
or  crank. 

Figure  1,  A,  a  heavy  weight  containing  four  wheels  inside 
as  is  indicated  2,  A,  running  on  two  rods,  3,  B,  C,  tJie  weight 
4,  D,  the  chain,  5,  E,  and  connected  with  a  communication 
rod ;  6,  F,  another  chain,  7,  CI,  and  8,  H,  which  are  attached 
9,  I,  and  10,  K,  which  is  just  the  position  which  drew  down 
the  driving  lever  for  the  wheel;  11,  L,  the  other  chain;  8, 


tt,  is  dropping  into  a  wheel,  12,  M,  driving  Weight,  13,  N» 
standing  upright,  bemg  the  time  of  change  to  draw  up  the 
sliding  or  the  gennero-motive  power  weight  for  another  re- 
volution of  the  wheel  12,  M,  is  inclosed  in  a  little  catch,  1 4, 
O ;  15,  P,  a  lever ;  also,  16,  Q,  is  the  start  for  the  motion  of 
the  gennero-motive  or  the  new  system  of  motive  power* 
The  Isver  15,  P,  drawn  down,  draws  up  by  means  of  a  chain 
18,  S,  a  weight  17,  R,  which  has  lost  all  its  power  and  gives 
to  Figure  13,  N,  the  full  power  to  draw  down  the  lever  12, 
M,  for  another  start  for  the  gennero-motive  weight,  and  so  it 
goes  constantly  with  the  two  levers  15,  P,  and  16,  Q,  the 
two  weights,  13,  N,  and  17  R,  beinjj  placed  opposite  each 
other  and  attached  with  a  chain  sliding  on  wheels  between 
them  19,  T,  while  drawing  do^vn  the  lever  12,  M,  Figure  17, 
R,  is  eased  by  the  lever  1 5 ,  P,  and  drawn  up  with  the  lever 


OR,    SEABCH    FOB   SELF-MOTIYE    POWER.  495 

and  weight  13,  N;  20,  U,  and  21,  V,  are  levers  for  the 
driving  lever  of  the  eccentric  wheel ;  22,  W,  adopted  for  the 
perfect  revolution  of  the  driving  wheel  without  fly-wheel  or 
balance ;  23,  X,  is  a  lever  which  is  pressed  down  only  by  the 
weight  13,  N,  and  doubles  the  power,  acting  together  with 
the  gennero-motive  weight,  only  for  the  revolution  of  the  12, 
M,  the  lever;  10,  K,  exercises  the  same  power,  only  in  a 
different  mannerj;  1,  A,  has  only  a  bar  of  iron  catching  in  the 
frame;  3,  B,  with  Figure  24,  Y,  the  frame  of  the  entire 
engine  is  starting  off;  3,  B,  C,  in  which  the  axle  runs;  25, 
Z,  Figure  26,  A,  A,  is  a  very  strong  frame,  in  which  a  very 
great  power  is  exercised,  in  which  the  axle  of  10,  K,  and  12, 
M,  runs  through ;  27,  B,  B.  a  frame  in  which  the  lever  for 
the  driving  wheel  is  attached.  For  the  conclusion  28,  C,  C, 
everywhere  where  a  hole  is  running  through  to  be  fastened 
with  screws  and  nuts. 

This  is  the  entire  description  of  the  gennero-motive  or  the 
new  system  of  motive  power  exercised  by  means  of  weights, 
levers,  and  chains,  to  be  used  to  any  extent  of  power ;  even 
the  engine  does  not  require  to  be  larger,  only  the  weights 
must  be  increased. 

[The  engraving  of  this  complicated  machine  in  its  reduced 
size  is  curtailed,  and  many  references  obliged  to  be  omitted  j, 
its  impossible  nature,  however,  is  evident.] 


1860. — Geobge  Redbup  [No.  272],  of  Loughborough, 
Leicester,  Brewer.  "  Improvements  in  the  means  of  and 
apparatus  for  obtaining  and  applying  motive  power  whereby 
perpetual  motion  may  be  obtained."  Here  is  no  conceal- 
ment of  the  real  object,  as  in  most  titles.  The  entire  pro- 
visional specification  is  as  follows  : — 

My  invention  consists  of  cylinders  with  pistons  working 
up  and  down,  or  to  and  fro  as  may  be  required,  which  are 
actuated  by  simple  or  compound  levers.  I  use  a  small 
cylinder  similar  to  that  employed  in  ordinary  steam  engines. 
Instead  of  using  steam  power,  I  attach  to  each  end  of  the 
cylinder  which  I  here  call  the  smaller  cylinder,  an  elbow  of 
east  iron  or  other  metal  with  the  top  i)art  large  enough  to 
screw  or  fix  on  a  large  cylinder  in  which  I  have  a  piston 
working  as  may  be  required.     On  the  top  of  each  of  the 


494  PERPETUUM  mobile; 

large  cylinders  and  on  the  side  nearest  the  small  cylinder^ 
I  fix  a  piece  of  iron  or  other  metal,  or  if  preferred  I  cast 
the  same  with  the  cylinder  for  the  purpose  of  fixing  in  the 
end  of  a  lever  near  to  this  which  I  call  the  fulcrum,  and 
upon  the  lever  I  attach  the  piston  of  the  large  cylinder  in  a 
similar  manner  to  that  which  is  applied  to  force  and  other 
phimps.  At  the  end  or  long  end  of  the  levers,  I  propose  to 
to  attach  either  in  a  fixed  or  moveable  position  a  weight 
which  will  impart  considerable  pressure  to  the  piston  of 
the  large  cylinders.  Inside  the  small  cylinder  ia  a  piston, 
with  the  piston  rod  working  through  a  stuffing  box,  which 
stuffing  box  is  fixed  on  the  elbow  at  one  end  of  the  cylinder, 
the  said  piston  rod  being  connected  with  machinery  as  in 
steam  engines  for  turning  a  crank,  the  piston  working  to 
and  fro  communicating  a  rotative  motion.  Underneath,  or 
in  any  required  position  relatively  to  each  of  the  levers 
which  act  on  the  piston  of  the  large  cylinders,  I  employ 
simple  or  compound  levers  with  the  short  end  placed  close 
to  the  end  or  weight  of  the  lever  attached  to  the  cylinder, 
so  that  a  small  weight  applied  at  the  long  end  of  the  under 
lever  will  raise  both  the  weight  and  lever  which  are  attached 
to  the  cylinder,  and  which  when  raised  takes  off  the  pressure 
ffoni  the  piston.  These  levers  are  acted  upon  by  certain 
parts  of  the  machinery  when  in  motion,  either  by  weights, 
springs,  a  wheel  or  wheels,  or  other  apparatus  having  cord 
or  other  suitable  material  attached ;  I  have  also  various 
other  modes  of  acting  upon  them  alternately,  and  they  are 
moved  when  the  piston  arrives  at  or  near  either  end  of  the 
small  cylinder,  or  when  required.  Inside  the  cylinders, 
that  is  to  say,  on  each  side  of  the  small  piston  and  between 
that  and  the  pistons^of  the  large  cylinders,  I  place  a  requisite 
quantity  of  water  or  other  fluid  to  be  acted  upon  on  each 
side  alternately  by  the  pressure  of  the  lever,  piston,  and 
weight  of  the  larger  cylinder  as  before  mentioned. 

In  farther  explaining  my  invention,  I  suppose  a  machine 
to  be  charged  with  a  proper  quantity  of  water,  oil,  or  other 
fluid,  the  piston  of  the  small  cylinder  being  nearest  the 
stuffing  box,  and  the  weight  or  pressure  being  removed  from 
the  large  cylinder  farthest  from  the  stufling  box,  by  means 
of  a  lever  or  levers  acting  upon  the  upper  lever,  thereby 
lifting  up  the  end  of  the  long  lever  the  height  required,  the 
pressure  then  being  applied  on  the  water  by  means  of  the 


OR,    SEAUCII    FOB    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  495 

tover,  piston,  and  weight,  as  before  mentioned,  on  the  large 
oylinder  near  the  stuffing  box ;  now  suppose  the  large  cylin- 
der to  be  six  times  larger  than  the  small  one,  while  the  piston 
descends  one  inch,  the  smaller  piston  would  be  forced  six 
inches,  causing  the  water  to  rise  higher  in  the  cylinder  with 
the  pressure  relieved.  When  the  piston  and  small  cylinder 
have  moved  their  proper  distance  from  the  stuffing  box,  the 
machinery  will  instantly  take  off  the  pressure  by  the  levers 
from  the  end  just  forced  down,  that  is  to  say,  the  piston 
of  the  cylinder  nearest  the  stuffing  box,  and  will  put  the 
whole  pressure  on  the  water  in  the  other  cylinder,  which 
would  force  the  small  piston  back  again  towards  the  stuffing 
box ;  the  machinery  before  mentioned  acting  upon  the  levers 
reverses  the  pressure  as  before,  so  that  a  continual  or  per- 
petual motion  is  kept  up.  One  particular  arrangement  of 
xaj  engine  is  constructed  with  a  small  cylinder  placed  hori- 
zontally, and  with  a  large  cylinder  placed  perpendicularly, 
but  I  do  not  confine  myself  to  the  foregoing  mode  of  work- 
ing, fixing,  or  arrangement,  as  the  same  may  be  varied  or 
modified  as  circumstances  may  require. 


I860.— Thomas  Edwards  [No.  930],  of  Great  Tindal 
Street  Works,  Birmingham,  Engineer.  "Improvements  in 
obtaining  motive  power." 

This  invention  relates  to  a  peculiar  system  or  mode  of  ob- 
taining motive  power,  and  consists  in  the  employment  for 
thcit  purpose  of  a  continuous  pressure  obtained  from  steam, 
air,  gases,  or  fluids  of  any  kind,  such  pressure  acting  upon  a 
revolving  piston  inside  a  cylinder.  This  piston  is  provided 
with  two  metallic  packing  strips  forming  a  line  of  contact 
with  the  opposite  sides  of  the  interior  of  the  cylinder,  one  of 
such  lines  of  contact  being  formed  on  the  abutment  side  of 
the  piston,  and  the  other  on  the  pressure  or  power- exerting 
^ide  of  the  piston.  The  axis  or  shaft  of  the  rotatory  piston 
is  placed  eccentrically  within  the  cylinder,  and  the  cylinder 
accommodates  itself  to  the  .changing  positions  of  the  piston 
in  its  revolving  or  circular  motion.  The  medium  or  agent 
employed  for  obtaining  the  requisite  pressure  is  admitted  by 
a  suitable  divided  passage  cast  in  the  shaft,  each  compart- 
ment communicating  by  an  opening  or  passage  with  either 
;5ide   of  the  revolving  piston,  so  that  the  engine    may  be 


496  PEBPETUUM  mobile; 

reversed  at  pleasure,  by  simply  directing  the  agent  used  through 
one  or  the  other  of  tlie  passages  by  any  convenient  valvular 
arrangement. 

The  essential  feature  of  novelty  in  this  engine  is  the  total 
absence  of  all  exhaust  when  in  motion,  the  motive  power 
being  produced  by  the  constant  pressure  of  the  medium  or 
agent  inside  one  half  of  the  cylinder  exerted  against  the  re- 
volving piston;  any  suitable  packing  may  be  used  on  the 
ends  of  the  piston  next  the  cylinder  covers. 

This  patent  did  not  proceed  beyond  provisional  protection  ; 
and,  though  not  expressly  so  stated,  yet  must  be  for  a  per- 
petual 'motion,  if  the  inventor  has  discovered  a  mode  of 
obtaining  "  continuous  pressure "  through  pneumatic  or 
hydraulic  agency  acting  on  "a  revolving  piston  inside  a 
cylinder,"  under  "  the  total  absence  of  all  exhaust  when  in 
motion." 


.  In  the  foregoing  statements  of  English  patents,  we  have 
(including  those  in  Chapter  III.) — that  is,  to  June,  1860 — 
seventy-four  patentees,  who  obtained  eighty-four  patents. 
It  is  curious  to  observe  their  several  stations  in  life.  We 
find  a  Prince,  a  Baronet,  two  Counts,  a  Knight  of  the  Tower 
and  Sword,  a  General,  a  Groom,  of  the  Privy  Chamber,  the 
Governor  of  Trinity  Ground,  a  Doctor  of  Divinity,  two 
Doctors  of  Medicine,  two  Surgeons,  a  Bachelor  of  Arts,  ten 
Gentlemen,  four  Merchants,  ten  Engineers,  three  Civil 
Engineers,  an  Architect,  a  Surveyor,  a  Contractor,  a  Manu- 
facturer, a  Brewer,  a  Millwright,  a  Miller,  five  Machinists,  a 
Carpenter,  a  Draftsman,  a  Jeweller,  a  Watchmaker,  a  Con- 
fectioner, a  Shoemaker,  a  Custom-house  Ofiicer,  with  nine 
persons  and  seven  foreigners  undescribed.  The  major  por- 
tion of  these  must  have  been  persons  above  mediocrity  in 
position  and  education,  so  that  the  pursuit  of  Perpetual 
Motion  has  been  far  from  being  limited  to  an  unintelligent 
class,  as  boldly  assumed  by  many  insufiiciently-informed 
writers.  Their  patents  cannot  have  cost  much,  if  any,  less 
than  £4,000 — a  large  amount  to  pay  for  the  empty  privilege 
of  possessing  letters  patent  to  so  much  moonshine ! 


or,  search  fob  self-motite  power.  49? 

French  Patents. 

The  following  particulars  of  Patents  for  Perpetual  Motion 
are  translated  from  "  Description  des  Machines  et  Precedes 
pour  les-quels  des  Brevets  d'Invention  ont  ete  pris.  Paris." 
Quarto.  They  are  arranged  under  the  head  of  "  Moteurs,'' 
and,  though  extracted  entire,  afford  but  Kttle  information : — 

1.  M.  J.  B.  Fauche  ;  for  a  machine  called  "  Motasipse," 
intended  to  realise  perpetual  motion. — August,  1845.  (Vol.  1, 
p.  127,  1850.) 

2.  M.  Guenee.  The  inventor  tries  to  utilise  the  move- 
ment of  a  case  of  mercury  placed  on  a  moveable  tressel,  by 
which  the  centre  of  gravity  is  displaced. — December,  1844. 
(Vol.  1,  p.  289.) 

3.  M.  Peydiebe.  He  has  constructed  a  system  of  rails 
forming  three  railways,  and  says  that  after  the  first  impulse 
given  to.  a  waggon  of  his  construction  for  this  railway,  its 
movement  would  be  perpetual,  or  at  least  greatly  augmented. 
—December,  1844.     (Vol.  1,  p.  305.) 

4.  M.  DuBAND.  He  raises  water  from  a  well,  which 
water  he  proposes  using  to  operate  the  pimxp  employed. 
(Vol.  4,  p.  193.) 

5.  M.  Gbellet  ;  for  a  perpetual  movement. — ^August, 
1845.     (Vol.  5,  p.  97.) 

6.  M.  Lewtoigne.  The  inventor  raises  water  by  means  of 
a  pump,  and  causes  the  same  water  to  work  the  pump. 
(Vol.  5,  p.  187.) 

7-  M.  Chalette-Thetabd  ;  for  mechanism  having  a 
perpetual  movement,  described  in  his  patent  and  certificate. 
—October  22,  1846.     (Vol.  5,  p.  190.) 

8.  M.  MoiNAu.  In  his  patent  and  certificate,  dated  Sep- 
tember, 1846,  the  inventor  describes  a  machine  in  which  a 
pump  raises  a  certain  quantity  of  water,  and  is  kept  in  move- 
ment by  the  same.     (Vol.  6,  p.  6.) 

9.  M.  Geobges.  The  inventor  claims  a  mode  of  turning 
a  windmill  by  means  of  bellows ;  and  considers  that  the  mill 
ought  to  cause  the  bellows  to  work. — April,  1846.  (Vol.  6, 
p.  208.) 

10.  M.  FouiLiiET  has  a  perpetual  movement.  (Vol.  8, 
p.  23.) 


498  PERPKTUUM  mobile; 

11.  M.  Legentil.  He  has  a  combination  by  which  he 
forms  a  break  wheel,  which  after  a  first  impulse  is  intended 
to  move  the  machine  he  has  invented,  leaving  a  disposable 
extra  power,     (Vol.  9,  p.  149.) 

12.  M.  RoLLET.  The  inventor  desires  to  make  and  main- 
tain a  power  by  his  arrangement  of  certain  levers  and 
weights.— May,  1847.     (Vol.  10,  p.  266.) 

13.  M.  Peydiebe  ;  for  a  perpetual  movement.-r-January, 
1851.     (Vol.  18,  p.  348.) 


Amebican  Patent? 

For  Perpetual  Motion  are  generally  considered  to  be  rather 
numerous,  but  no  adequate  opinion  can  be  formed  by  con- 
sulting mere  Patent  Lists,  which  give  only  the  Titles.  How- 
ever, as  Patent  Specifications  and  Models  previous  to  1837 
were  destroyed  in  the  fire  which  occurred  at  Washington,  the 
following  List  of  Patents,  previous  to  that  period,  may  be 
offered  as  referring,  most  likely,  to  intended  self-motive 
machines : — 

Peteb  Ovebt,  New  York.  Power  and  motion  by  weights. 
—Dec.  18,  1813. 

James  Widdifield,  Philadelphia.  Perpetual  water- 
wheel.— April  21,  1817. 

Chables  Redheffeb,  Philadelphia.  Gaining  power. — 
July  11,  1820. 

Cam  Bboyles,  Tellico.  Power  for  propelling  machinery 
by  weights.— Oct.  19,  1827. 

Joel  Estes,  Brownsville  Power  for  propelling  miHs  by 
rolling  and  balance  wheel. — August  16, 1831. 

William  Rhodes,  Trenion.  Power  for  propelling  mills 
by  lever.— April  27,  1832. 

L.  H.  Emmons  and  G.  Upham,  Masillon.  Power  for  pror 
pelling  mills  by  balance  lever. — May  1^,  1833. 

Obed  R.  Mabston,  Java,  U.  S.  Power  by  weight9* — 
Jan.  9,  1835. 


OB,    SEABCH   FOB   SELF-MOTIVE   FO'WEB.  .    49ft 

Luke  M.  Edwabds,  Trenton.  Power  for  propelling  ma^ 
chinery,  called  lever  and  dead  weights. — ^March  2,  1835, 

EI.TSHA  TuBNEB,  North  Pownel.  Power  by  weights. — 
Jiinel2,  1835. 

J.  J.  GiBAUD,  Baltimore.  Self-motive  power. — ^March  31, 
1836u 


On  this  peculiar  class  of  patents,  here  concluded,  we  have 
but  little  further  to  remark. 

Whether  the  matter  thus  brought  under  notice  amounts  to 
any  proof  of  scientific  progress  or  not ;  whether  it  claims  our 
congratulation  or  not,  who  can  doubt  ?  Much  assuredly  has 
been  attempted,  much  done,  yet  what  remains  is,  after  all,  but 
a  baseless  fabric.  The  grand  problem  itself  remains  as  great  a 
mystery  as  when  it  was  first  propounded.  It  has,  therefore, 
heen  cufitomary  to  associate  the  pursuit  with  Alchemy,  Judicial 
Astrology,  and  similar  chimeras.  But  as  a  mechanical  efifort, 
it  compares  and  ranks  rather  with  such  schemes  as  the  many 
ingenious  attempts  at  Flying,  Submarine  Navigation,  and 
£lectro-motive  Engines,  all  of  which  have,  in  turn,  led  to 
elaborate,  expensive,  and  futile  experiments.  If  common  sense 
be  appealed  to  in  the  matter,  it  readily  suggests  itself  to 
us  to  exclaim  with  Cowper : — 

"Defend  me,  therefore,  common  sense,  I  say, 
From  all  idle  enterprises,  light  or  vain; 
From  dropping  buckets  into  empty  wells. 
And  growing  old  in  drawing  nothing  up." 

But  scientific  inquiries  are  governed  by  no  such  standard; 
their  results  are  generally  in  advance  of  the  age,  and  in  every 
sense  uncommon.  Something  might  be  hoped  from  Mathe- 
matics ;  but  Mathematical  Science  is  the  follower  or  servant 
t)f  arts,  and  not  their  precursor  or  master ;  much  as  it  owes 
to  the  results  of  invention  in  affording  it  matter  for  its 
Valuable   demonstrations,    no   invention   whatever   owes   its 

k2 


boo    '  PEBPETUUM    MOBILE  ; 

CiHgin  to  mathematical  science — ^in  short,  it  can  only  operate 
on  fix^d  or  assumed  data ;  and  it  is  evident  that  that  which  is 
assumed  correct  in  itigures  may  fail  on  the  test  of  Facts. 
On  the  question,  Whether  Perpetual  Motion  is  possible  or 
impossible,  therefore,  on  all  the  evidence  we  have  been  able 
to  adduce,  the  only  verdict  we  can  conscientiously  give  is 
that  of  Non  provtm. 


OB,    SEARCH    FOR    HELF-MOTIYE    POWER.  ftOl 


CHAPTER   XII. 

SUMMARY    REMARKS. 

In  bringing  this  collection  of  curious  and  hitherto  scattered 
information  to  a  close,  a  few  remarks  are  necessary  that  could 
not  have  been  better  offered  than  in  the  present  simxmary. 

The  writer,  like  most  collectors  desirous  of  completing  a 
series,  has  been  disappointed  in  obtaining  reference  to  some 
few  works,  particularly — 

L  A  Dialogue  concerning  Perpetual  Motion ;  by  Thomas 
Timme,  or  Tjonme,  Minister.     London,  1612,  4to. 

2.  De  Inventione  JEtemi  Motoris;  by  James  Zabarella, 
Teacher  of  Logic  at  Padua,  where  he  died  1589.  Francfort, 
1618,  4to. 

3.  Essay  for  a  Machine  of  Perpetual  Motion ;  by  Robert 
Stewart.     Edinburgh,  1709,  4to.*     And— 

4.  An  Account  of  the  Automaton  or  Perpetual  Motion  of 
Orffjrreus ;  with  additional  remarks ;  by  William  Kenrick, 
LL.D.     London,  ITTO.f 

Many  works  which  appeared  likely  to  afford  information 
proved  very  deficient  on  reference  to  them.  Dingler's  Poly- 
technic Journal,  Stuttgart,  as  one  among  many  other  volumi- 
nous periodicals,  was  found  to  be  supplied  from  very  ordinary 
sources  on  the  subject  under  investigation. 

Of  the  great  mathematicians  and  philosophers  who  have 
noticed  the  matter,  the  following  particulars  will  interest  the 
general  reader.     Dr.  Dents  Papin,  an  ingenious  physician, 


♦  See  «  A  Perpetual  Motion  Advertised,"  Chap.  IX.,  page  371. 

t  In  Montucla's  works  reference  is  made  to  a  Lecture  on  Perpetual 
Motion,  by  Henrich;  London,  1770.  Most  likely  he  meant  "  Kenrick" 
(See  Chap.  V.,  p.  147.) 


502  PERPETUUM.  mobile; 

born  At  Blois,  ^as  elected  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society, 
1680.  Godfrey  Wm.  de  Leibnitz,  an  eminent  mathema- 
tician, was  bom  at  Leipsic,  1646,  arid  died  1716.  Philip 
DE  LA  HiBE,  a  celebrated  mathematician  and  astronomer, 
was  born  1640,  dnd  diidd  1 7 18,ut  the  adVaneed  age  of  seventy- 
eight  years.  Wm.  James  's  Gkavesande,  a  distinguished 
Dutch  philosopher,  was  bom  1688,  and  died  1742.  '  John 
T.  Desaguliehs,  a  great  experimental  philosopher,  was  bom 
At  Rochelle  in  1 683  ;  he  was  elected  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal 
Society  1714,  and  died  1744.  And  John  Bebnoulli,  a 
celebrated  mathematician  was  bom  at  Basil  in  1667,  and  died 
full  of  honours  in  i  748,  in  the  eighty-first  year  of  his  age.* 

Dr.  Kenrick's  strangely-composed  Lecture  on  Perpetual 
Motion  appears  in  an  abridged  form  at  page  54*  The  copy 
from  which  it  was  taken  was  either  imperfect,  or  the  entire 
lecture  was  never  published.  He  declares  himsfelf  to  be  the 
inventor  of  a  machine  for  perpetual  motion,  and  whiich, 
judging  from  a  letter  in  the  "  Gentleman's  Magazine"  (p.  4S), 
would  appear  to  have  been  pretty  well  known,  and  called  a 
**  Rotatdr.**  On  the  same  Mtlldrity  it  alsd  ajipears  that  a 
subscription  was  commenced  to  remunerate  thfe  inventof. 
Th^  lecture  was  printed  1771,  ttie  above  letter  written  1772^ 
and  Dr.  Kenrick  died  1779,  the  very  year  when  (as  we  find 
at  page  178)  he  applied  for  a  patent  simultaneously  with  J.  D; 
Muller.  The  latter  was  obtained  the  same  year,  but  no  steps 
whatever  seeni  to  have  been  taken  by  Dr.  Kenrick  beyond  hi^ 
appearing  before  the  Attorney-General.  This  may  be  attri- 
buted either  to  his  having  only  applied  in  the  way  of  opposing 
MuUer's  claim,  or  to  extreme  illness,  resulting  in  his  early 
decease. 

We  have  niat  met  with  the  slightest  allusion  to  the  Marquis 
of  Worcester «  invention  in  any  French  or  German  writer; 
So  many  editions  of  the  "  Century  of  Inventions "  have  been 
published  from   1663,  1746,  1767,  down  to  1825,  that  the 

*  For  his  demonstration  iri  favour  of  the  possibility  of  perpetvial 
mptioii,  see  ApjSdndix  H. 


OR,    SEARCH    FOR    SELF-MOTIVE    POWER.  603 

circumstance  is  not  a  little  remarkable.  We  feel  satisfied  It 
cannot  have  arisen  from  any  jealousy  in  according  to  him 
priority  of  invention,  the  invention  being  still  in  abeyance. 
And  certainly  French  Biographies  give  no  very  charitable  or 
agreeable  account  of  the  life  of  OrflPyreiis ;  while  German 
writers  of  his  period  soundly  abused  him  as  an  empiric  and 
charlatan;  and  his  alleged  invention  was  pronounced  nn** 
worthy  of  credit.  Such  writers,  from  their  silence,  mu^t 
have  been  entirely  unacquainted  with  the  "  Century  of  Invent 
tions  ;*'  but  we  do  not  feel  so  well  assured  that  it  was  equally 
unknown  to  Orfiyreus,  a  man  of  reading^  various  experieuce, 
and  meeting  men  of  ell  grades  th^rougb  tl^e  fa^^e  pf  his  ^eputeij; 
discovery. 

With  regard  to  the  Marquis  of  Wotcestejr,  we  may  her© 
mention  a  singular  misnomer  in  naming  him  as  Henry 
Somerset,  instead  of  Edward  Somerset,  the  former  being  hiii 
father,  himself  an  author.  In  the  excellent  and  generally 
accurate  Bibliothecas  by  Watt  and  by  Lowndes,  this  glaring 
mistake  occurs,  and  they  serve  to  propagate  the  error. 

The  proper  name  of  Orflfyreus  was  Bessler  ;  but  for  some 
whim,  not  explained,  he  adopted  a  stenographic  or  cypher 
designation,  produced  by  writing  the  letters  of  the  alphabet 
in  two  lines,  and  selecting  the  letter  abov^  or  below  (as  might 
happen)  each  letter  of  hia  family  i^ame.  A  further  short 
jjiotice  of  his  invention  will  be  found  in  the  Leipsijc  Acts^ 
1715.* 

The  number  .of  patents  that  ar^  recorded  will,  no  doubt, 
create  general  surprise ;  and  yet  9ome  may  have  escaped 
notice  o^ing  to  adopting  titles  as  Jittle  explanatory  a»  posT 
sible  of  the  patentees'  real  object.  This  .circumstance  occa- 
sions the  patei^ts  under  this  particular  head,  in  the  Patent 
Qffice  indexes,  to  appeiar  as  not  exceedbg  a  dozen ! — the 
remainder  appearing  as  '*  Motive  Powers,''  and  taking  rank 
{ijrit^  gtean^  pijgines,  &c.     In  such  cases,  the  only  course  is  t9 

*  See  Appendix  Q. 


504  PEBPETUUM    MOBILE. 

refer  to  the  specifications,  and  where  this  could  not  be  done, 
as  in  foreign  patents,  the  lists  are  necessarily  defective.  If 
invention  in  this  department  showed  any  vigour,  any  signs  of 
progressive  improvement,  this  fact  would  prove  a  serious 
drawback.  All  circumstances,  however,  considered,  it  may 
really  be  acknowledged,  by  many,  as  a  great  relief  from 
absolute  surfeit. 

The  effect  of  the  entire  collection  of  evidence  now  offered 
on  both  sides  the  question  must  naturally  be  to  induce  a 
belief  in  the  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion ;  and  that,  as 
it  cannot  be  relied  on  as  attainable  on  any  scientific  grounds, 
scientific  men  must  discredit  its  possibility ;  or,  if  they  waver 
at  all,  it  must  be  solely  on  a  moral  consideration  that  it  is  just 
within  the  bounds  of  possibility  there  may  be  something 
worthy  of  belief  in  the  word  and  evidence  adduced  in  favour 
of  the  inventors  and  their  inventions,  as  regards  the  Marquis 
of  Worcester  and  Orffyreus.  By  making  known  all  opinions 
and  all  plans  that  could  be  obtained,  farther  delusion  will 
assuredly  be  stayed,  and  instead  of  an  oscillatory  movement, 
the  inventor,  in  future,  will  be  necessitated  to  show  at  least 
some  progress  towards  a  genuine  motive  power.  If,  in  one 
sense,  the  collection  appears  to  some  as  offering  a  bane 
rather  than  what  is  desirable,  it  must  not  be  overlooked,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  the  antidote  is  tendered  along  with  the 
magic  chalice.  We  are  no  friends  to  mystery,  and  cannot 
understand  why  this,  any  more  than  any  other  subject  of 
scientific  inquiry,  should  not  be  brought  to  light,  anatomized, 
and  the  scalpel  applied  to  the  tracing  of  its  most  secret 
operations.  It  is  time  the  early  dreams  of  philosophy  were 
dispelled ;  and  this  is  not  to  be  effected  by  substituting  any 
modern  romance  of  engineering.  Let  no  one  henceforth  be 
overcome  with  the  "  delicious  delirium"  that,  by  any  occult 
process,  he  can  effect  motive  power  by  models  outraging  the 
**  natural  magic"  of  natural  philosophy. 


APPENDIX  A. 


Theatpum  Machiiuinim  Geoerale.    By  Jacob  Leupold.    L^pzig,  1794. 

Folio. 

§  58.  Wie  zwen  bekaadte  Machinen  wodurch  viele  das  Perpetuuiv 
Mobile  erfaaschen  wollen,  aqs  d^i^  Abstandt  der  Grewidite  zu  be- 
rechnen? 

Das  P^petuum  Mobile,  oder  eine  machine,  die  ohne  ausserliche 
Ejafit  unaufhorlich,  so  lange  die  Materialien  dauren,  und  nichts  zer- 
brieht,  sidi  selbst  beweget,  ist  dem  Nahmen,  nacfa  heut  zu  Tage  so 
bekandt,  dass  auch  die  geringsten  handwer^er,  ja  Schuster  und 
Schneider,  nicht  nur  dayon  zu  reden  wissen,  sondem  ouch  sich  ein- 
bilden,  das  sie  dar^eichen  mach^i  wc^ten,  w^in  sie  nur  unkosten  und 
zeit  hatten  ;  denn  ist  eine  sache  in  der  wdt,  womadi  viele  mit  grossen 
Yerlangen,  Zeit,  Fleiss  und  Unkosten  gestrebet,  so  ist  es  gewiss  das 
Per.  Mo.  D.  Becher  hat  8  StUck  angeftihret,  wonach  man  jederzeit 
eifrig  getrachtet,  als  da  sind :  1,  Der  Lapis  Philosophorum  ;  2,  liquar 
Alcahest ;  3,  Das  glassveich  zu  machen  ;  4,  Ein  ewiges  Licht ;  5,  Eine 
linie  Hyperbole  in  einra  Brenn-Spiegd  ;  6,  Die  Longitudo  zur  See  ; 
7,  Die  Quadratura  QrcuH.  Und  endiich ;  8,  das  Per.  Mo.  ;  Alleine 
weder  goldmachen,  so  doch  das  herrlichste  Ding  in  der  welt  ist,  und 
alles  vermog,  noch  anders,  ist  von  so  vielen  als  das  Per.  Mo.  gesucht 
worden  ;  ursach  :  weil  bey  jenem  raehr  kunnst  und  wissenschafft  in  der 
chymie  erfordert  wird,  hier  aber  es  dem  Anschein  nach  auf  etwas 
weniges  ankommt,  nemlich,  das  einer  nur  zuwege  brachte,  dass  das 
gewichter,  so  nieder  gehet,  weit  von  der  Achse  abstehe,  wenn  es  aber 
weider  in  die  hofae  steiget,  der  Achse  oder  Linie  der  Rohe  sich  nafaere, 
nnd  seine  kraffl;  verlohre.  Und  hlermit  haben  sidi  sehr  nel  kunstler 
betrogen,  die  da  gemeynet,  sie  batten  es  bey  alien  4  zipfiein,  und  haben 
dariiber  viel  zeit,  kosten,  ja  ofiters  ehre  und  Reputation,  verlohren.  Ja 
diese  Begierde  ist  noch  heut  zu  tage  bey  sehr  lieben  so  tieflf  dngewurt- 
zelt,  dass  sie  sich,  todt  schlagen  liessen,  als  das  sie  zugeben,  sie 
wurden  selbiges  nicht  finden ;  alleine  es  kommet  mdst  daher,  dass 
solche  Leute  kein  Fundament  in  der  Mechanic  haben  vomehmlich  aber 
den  Abstandt  nicht  zu  berechnen  wissen,  und  dahero  auf  ihre  blosse 


{Tab.  r.) 


mj.Df 


APPENDIX. 


607 


elnbildung  und  Gerathewohl  lossbauen.  ffitten  aber  solche  die  Ma- 
chine fleissig  zu  Pappier  gebracht,  und  berechnet,  wurden  sie  vieler 
tinkosten  seyn  uberhoben  worden,  oder  batten  sich  nicht  so  viele  jahre, 
ja  fiwt  ihre  Lebens-zeit  mit  einer  falschen  Hoffnung  sich  meicheln  und 
schleppen  diirffen.  Damit  aber  derj^leichen  Leut«  einige  Anweisnng 
haben,  (als)  sind  bier  zwey  bekandte  Machinen  ein  Profil  gezeichnet, 
davon  die  eine  Fig.  X.,  Tab.  Vn.,  mH  kugehi,  die  andere  aber  Fig.  XI., 
mit  fiillendem  Gewichte  an  einer  Aohse. 

Die  gemeldte  Machine  mit  knsreln,  so  Fisr.  IX.,  abgebildet,  bestehet 
a-us  einem  Had,  so  wie  ein  habler  schleiff-stein  ausstehet,  inwendig 
aber  ist  solche  durch  Bretter  in  12  Fache  eimgetheilet ;  wie  besser  aus 
der  Fignr,  als  weits  lauffliger  Beschreibung  zu  sehen.  In  jeden  Fachte 
Jieget  eine  ninde  metallene  Kngel ;  will  man  solche  berichnen,  so 
giebet  man  der  machine  eine  gewisse  Stellung  als  bier,  da  nnten  nnd 
oben  ein  Fach  mit  der  Linie  der  Rohe  schliesset,  nemlich  bey  a  nnd  b, 
der  gleichen  auch  bey  der  Horizontal-Linie,  so  durch  die  Achse  gehet ; 
Oder  es  geschiehet  auf  die  Arth,  wie  Fig.  X.,  darstelle.  Sind  die  Fache 
alle  richtig  aufs  Pappier  gebracht,  so  werden  die  kugeln  und  ders 
centra,  wie  solche  von  natur  liegen,  aueh  eingetragen,  und  eine  Perpen- 
dicular-Lmie  ah,  bo  bier  die  Linie  der  Ruhe  gezogen.  Hier  auff  wird 
vom  centra  ieder  Kugel  eine  horizonfale  Leine  nach  der  Linie  der 
Euhe  gezogen  (§  4,  3),  welches  hier  die  punctirten  linien  sind,  und 
nach  einem  beliebigen  maass  staab,  so  hier  M  ist,  gemessen,  und  alle 
die  Verhaltnisse  jeder  Leite.  zusammen  addiret,  als  :  die  Linie  e  auf  der 
herabsteigenden  Seite  hat  37  Theile,  die  Linie  d  45,  die  Linie  e  41,  und 
/26.  Thut  in  Summa :  149.  Femer,  die  linten  der  aufsteierenden 
Seite,  als :  cr  12,  n  22,  t  26,  h  24,  /  40,  und  m  25.  Thut  in  Summa 
auch  149  :  Wenn  mm  jedes  gewicht  oder  kuprel  1  Pftind  wieght,  und 
die  kugel  d  stehet  42,  frey  angenommene  Theile  von  der  Robe  so 
bildet  man  sich  ein,  dass  sie  auch  45  Pfiind  Vermogen  babe,  hingegen 
/  26  Pfimd,  well  diese  kugel  nur  26  Theile  abstehet.  und  so  fort  mit  den 
(denen)  andem,  also,  dass  die  krafit  aller  dieserkugelu  e  a  e  f,  149 
Pfund  krafit  babe ;  well  aber  die  kraffl;,  wpun  sie  lebendig  seyn,  and 
die  last  wurcklich  bewegen  soil,  mehr  vermogen  haben  muss,  als  die 
last,  so  mussen  die  gewichter  der  andem  leite  nicht  so  viel  gegenstand 
Jiaben,  hier  aber  findet  sich  ebenfsdls  149,  also  das  beide  Su  aquilibrii 
ftehen  (§  13)  und  keines  das  andere  bewegen  kann. 

Eben  dergleichen  findet  sich  auch  Fig.  X.  da  die  Linie  des  Abstands 
«  44,  6  47,  c  37,  und  rf  81,  in  Summa  146  theil  sich  befinden,  und  auf 
^er  andem  Leite  aller  8  kugeln  ist  die  Summa  ebenfalls  146  :  und  auf 
diese  weise  bleibet  es  bey  alien  Standen.  Es  haben  dennoch  viele  diese 
■art  verbessem  woUen,  und  die  garden  Linien  der  Fache  in  krumme 
OrckeULinien,  und  auf  mancherley  art  zugerichtet ;    allein    es   isjt 


608 


APPENDIX. 


einmahl  blieben  wie  das  andre,  und  nicht  ein  mobile  sonder  stabille 
worden. 

Und  gesetzt  auch,  es  brachte  es  einer  dahin,  dass  er  etwas  mehr 
krafit  erlangte,  so  wird  solche  dennoch  nicht  zulanglich  seyn  nur  die 
friction  zu  tilgen,  geschweige  denn  aus  er  es  dahin  bringen  soils,  dass 
die  Kugeln  zu  richter  zeit  Mieder  nach  dem  eentro  lauflfen  soUten. 
Weil  alle  corper,  die  in  einer  runden  Bewegung,  nach  der  peripherie, 
und  nicht  nach  dem  eentro  eilen.  Dahero  man  ein  voiles  Bier-glass  in 
elnem  Reiffen  sitzen,  und  solchen  iiber  kopff  und  durch  die  Beine 
schwingen  kann  ohne  dass  das  Glass  herab  fallet,  noch  der  liquor  aus 
dem  glass  lauffet.  Ich  habe  durch  ein  experiment  gewissen,  das  wenn 
man  ein  solches  rad  schnell  beweget,  alle  kugeln  an  der  peripherie 
liegen  bleiben,  und  kdne  nach  dem  eentro  kommt. 

Ein  ander  perpetuum  mobile  gesselt,  Fig.  XI.,  Tab.  Vll.,  var.  E» 
sey  abCT>  eine  Schweibe  an  einer  welle,  auf  solcher  sind  12  kugeln, 
Oder  Gewichte  von  anderer  Figur  befestiget,  doch  dass  solche  an  einem 
arm  c/,  imd  dieser  bey  g  an  einem  Stifft  oder  Aohse  beweglich.  Das 
kurtze  theil  /,  leget  sich  bey  dem  hemieder-gehen  an  einen  stifft  an» 
dass  er  allemahl  mit  dem  radio  parallel  stehfet,  bey  dem  Aufeteigen 
«.ber  hanget  er  erstllch  frey,  als  bey  n,  hemach  aber  ruhet  er  auf 
^einem  andem  stifit,  als  t,  bis  er  sich,  wenn  er  iiber  a  herub^  ist,  auf 
dem  andem  schwinget. 

Die  Berechnung  ist  mit  vorigen  gleich,  nemlich :  Es  werden  alle 
linien  des  Abstandes  vom  eentro  gravitatis  au  bis  zur  Linie  du  Rohe- 
geraeslsen,  und  jede  Seite  mmmiret,  da  denn  die  niedergehende  leite 
•nach  dem  maassstab  M  163,  die  auf  steigende  aber  176,  und  also  noch 
13  Thefle  uber  das  .^uilibrium  hat,  und  dahero  ninam^rmehr  lanfTeB 
^wird. 

Es  konnt^i  dengleichen  Arthen  angufiihret  werden,  es  ist  aber  alles 
▼ergebUche  Arbeit  und  unkosten,  und  darbey  weiter  nichts  zu  lemen, 
"und  bleibet  entzwischen  eine  ausgemachte  sache,  dass  es  zur  zeit  noch 
iiicht  mogUch  durch  mathematisehe  und  meehanische  fundamenta  (so 
viel  ims  jetzo  bekandt  ist)  die  immer-wahrende  bewegung  zu  erweissen. 
Ja  ich  habe  beym  experimentiren  gefunden,  dass  auch  ein  ziemliches 
iiber-gewieht,  bloss  wegen  ^qt  friction ^  das  sie  nicht  praestiren  wollew, 
da.doch  die  machine  oder  rade  mit  denen  Gewichten  nicht  uber  40 
Pfund  schwehr  war,  auch  die  zapffen  kaum  I  zoH  im  diametro,  der 
diameter,  des  rades  aber  bey  3  Ellen,  und  war  das  ubergewichte  bes- 
tandig  1  bis  2  pfund,  ehen  dieses  hat  verursachet,  dass  ich  von  roeine 
person  meist  alle  hoffiiiing  falhren  lassen. 

Inzwischen  halte  es  doch  nicht  vor  iiraraoglich,  absonderlich  weil  der 
Herr  Rath  0rffifreu8  solches  der  Welt  schon  etliche  Jahre  gezeiget^ 
auch  sein  Hocli-Furgte,  Durchl,  der  landgraf,  zu  Hessen-Cassel,  solclies 


APPENDIX. 


509 


mit  Hohen  Furstlichen  wahren  Worten  durch  offentliches  hobet 
attestat  bekraftigt  als  ein  Fiirst  der  selbst  grosse  Erfhalining  und 
Wissenschaft  in  mechanicis  besitzet,  und  liie  siructur  des  verpetuum 
mobilis  genau  nnd  wohl  ohserviret  auch  in  die  zwie  monat  probem 
in  einem  versiegelten  zimmer  damit  machen  lassen. 

Ubrigens  ist  alien,  so  das  perpetuum  mobile  noch  bestandig  suchen, 
zu  hinterbringen : 

1.  Das  sie  solches  mit  den  aller  simplesten  machtnen  thun;  denn 
mehr  die  machine  ubersetzet,  je  mehr  sie  zapfffen,  zahne  und  materia- 
lien  hat,  je  weniger  wird  der  mot  us  perpetuus  erhalten  werden,  und 
wenn  es  nicht  in  der  simplicitat  geschiehet,  wird  es  in  compositions 
wohl  ewig  aussen  bleiben. 

Ferner  (2)  dass  keiner  sich  an  die  Arbeit  nach  er  habe  deun 
seine  invention  auf  dem  pappier  wohl  examiniret,  friction^  Ruhe,  die 
centrifugutim,  oder  das  die  Corper  so  im  Circkel  beweget  werden,  nach 
der  peripherie  eilen,  den  Abstand  und  alles  wohl  aus-und  abgemessen, 
und  den  calculum  gezogen. 

3.  Wer  diese  Berechnung  nicht  kann,  auch  meehanische  ftindamente 
nicht  verstehet,  gar  darvon  bleibe,  und  es  andern  uberlasse ;  denner 
wird  nur  zeit  wird  Greld  dabeyn  verllehren,  ja  welches  das  schlimmsteist 
wenig  Ruhe  haben  Wie  ich  wiel  Exempel  aufuhren  konte. 

Ob  aber  gleich  unter  so  viel  hundert  ja  taunsend  Suchenden  kaum 
noch  einer  das  perpetuum  mobile  geftmden,  so  ist  dennoch  nicht  alle 
Miihe  umsonst,  well  viele  dadurch  zup  mechanic  angeftihret  worden, 
die  sonsten  nicht  daran  gedacht  batten,  oder  haben  erlemet  dass  es  der 
Mensch  in  der  mechanic  nicht  hoher  foringen  kann,  als  Grott.  geordnet, 
und  das  mit  1  pfimd  nicht  mehr  als  wieder  1  pfhnd,  ja  nicht  einmahl 
beweget,  sondem  nur  in  aquUibrio  kan  erhalten  werden ;  so  aber  mehr 
damit  geschehen  soil,  auch  mehr  Ramn  und  Zeit  darzn  se3m  muss. 
Dahero  sind  billig  diejenigen,  welche  noch  mehr  prtestreny  als  nach 
denen  fhndamenten  der  mechanic  wohleingerichtete  Kiinste  bereita 
timn,  unter  Dr.  Bechers  weise  Narrheit  zu  zahlen.     (Pages  25  to  27.) 

Das  2.  Capitel.  Von  dem  hebel,  was  selbiger  sey  ?  ingleichen  von 
dessen  Theilen  und  Eigenshafften. — [Chap.  11.  Von  der  Schnell^ 
ifaage,  table  VII.] 


APPENDIX  B. 


Eine  Miihle  durcb  einen  Siphonem  zu  treiben,  zeiget  die  IH  Figur,  lo 
aus  dem  zeifiimg  entlehnet.* 

§  10.  Der  inventor  hjat  biermit  zugleich  das  perpeiuum  mobile  erja- 
gen  wollen,  well  er  vermeynet,  der  heber  lauffe  darum,  well  er  auf  der 
seite  A  mebr  wasser  als  auf  der  seite  B,  und  also  auch  mebr  Scbwebre 
babe ;  darum  hat  er  den  Yortbeil  zu  erbalten,  und  die  Bobre  des  Alb- 
lauffs  kiirtzer  zu  macben,  solche  sebr  weit  angeleget,  damit  die  grosse 
Menge  Wasser  in  A  das  wenige  in  B  iiberwaltigea  and  nacb  sicb 
zieben  mochte.  Wer  aber  aus  der  Mechaniea  Elementari  gelemet, 
dass  das  wasser  nicbt  nk;b  seiner  menge,  sondem  nacb  seiner  Hobe 
und  Oefihung,  drucket,  wird  gar  bald  seben,  dass  es  Betrug,  wodurcb 
aber  viele  zu  kurtz  kommen ;  wie  icb  denn  seiber  zwey  gute  stiimper 
gekennet,  die  sicb  &j3t  damit  ruiniret  baben.  Desswegen  icb  auch 
dieses  angefiibret,  und  ungescheut  davor  wamen  wollen. 

Als  dieses  geschrieben,  so  finde  No.  102,  an.  1719,  der  Leipsiger 
Grelebrten  neuen  S^dtungen  aus  denen  Transaciionibus  PhilQs,  der 
Engl.  Sodetat,  dass  Herm  Zurim  ein  Freund  berichtet :  Wenn  man 
einem  Siphonem  nebme,  davon  das  ein  Cms  enge  das  andere  weit  sey 
so  werde  das  wasser  im  engen  bis  zur  Krlimmung,  im  Weiten  aber 
nicht  so  bech  in  die  hobe  steigen,  und  also  zwiscben  beyden  einen 
leeren  Eaum  in  dem  Siphone  lasset.  Wenn  man  nun  das  Wasser  aus 
dem  Weiten  beraus  laufifen  lasse,  werde  es  im  Engen  das  vacuum  zu 
verbiiten,  nacbfolgen,  und  also  ein  moftis  perpetuus  erfolgen,  well  das 
Weite  kiirtzer,  und  also  das  Wasser  wieder  ins  Gefisiss  lauffen  konne, 
Herr  Zurim  sagt,  er  babe  solches  in  der  probe  falsch  geftmden. 

Icb  baltc  da^,  dass  Zurims  Freund  das  Sinclari  Buch  de  Arte  magna 
et  nova  gravitatis  et  levitatis  gelesen,  also  papigna  420  ^t  440,  ^hf 
weitlaufitig  von  dergleichen  heber  gebandelt  wjlrd,  und  will  der  autor, 
dass  es  mit  dem  Mer curio  gescheben  soil.  Weil  aber  besondere  Um- 
stande  darbey  vorfallen,  will  solcbes  zu  einer  andem  zeit  und  art 
gedacht  werden. — [Erstes  Capitel  des  Ersten  Tbeiis  von  der  Hydraulic 
Cap.  1,  page  6,  paragraph  10.] 

*  An  account  of  the  sn.m'^.  with  a  folio  copper-plate  engraving, 
occurs  in  Novo  Teatro  di  Machine  et  Edificie  par  uarie  et  si  cure  oper^r 
^oni.    Vittorio  Zopca,  Architetto.    Fol.     1^07.     P.  U5. 


XTab.  2,  Fig.  3.) 


J  IlililiUlll  J'""  "• '  I  H  III  I  ilMII^UL' 


§  80. 


APPENDIX  C. 


Eine  Machine  mit  der  Wasser-Schnecke,  woditfch  man  dai 
Perpetuum  Mobile,  machen  wollen. 


Man  hat  ein  uberschlachtiges  Rad  gemacht,  welches  eine  Wasser- 
Schranbe,  heist  und  das  Wasser  aus  der  Schraube  das  Bad  treiben  soil ; 
es  ist  Yon  yielen  mit  grossen  Ernst  ijnd  Fleiss  gemacht  worden,  auchnur 
Tor  etlichen  Jahren  yon  einem  mechanico,  der  alle  WissenschafiEten  tii 
tummo  gradu  zu  besitzen  yorgab.    Am  aUerweitlaUfitigstai  handelt 

{Tab.  \1,  Fig.  1.) 


hieryon  P.  Mavius  Bettinus,  in  Apiario  IV. ^  propos.  10,  schoL  /.,  und 
Pater  Schotte  in  Mechanica  Hydraulico-Pneumatica,  absonderlicb 
hat  dieser  Bettinus  und  Kircherus  solches  prastiren  wollen ;   aber 


APPENDIX.  613 

Ktreherus  hat  nach  vielen  Exverimenten  die  Unmoglichkeit  befunden, 
ob  er  schon  drey  solche  Scrauben,  soil  Hrr.  Professor  Griinberger  ver- 
fertiget,  uber  einander  gesetzet,  alleine  so  balde  selbige  etliche  wohl 
umgelaufieii,  hat  es  der  obem  an  Wasser  gemangeit. 

§  81.  Ich  will  die  Figur  wegen  derjenigen  die  noch  diese  Stunde  ihre 
Gendancken,  es  in  Stand  zu  bringen,  darauf  gerichtet,  wie  solche 
Bettinus  in  Apiaria  /K,  Prog,  X,  p.  15,  und  Pater  Scotte  in  ob  an- 
gezogenen  Orth  Icon.  20,  p.  333,  gezeichnet  haben  hieher  setzen. 

A,  Fig.  1,  Tab.  XVn.,  ist  ein  Teich  oder  Kasten  mit  Wasser,  darin- 
nen  stehet  B  die  Wasser-Schraube  mit  dem  einen  Ende,  mit  dem  andem 
giesset  sich  das  Wasser  aus  in  Kasten  C,  welches  durch  eine  Bohre  E 
auf  ein  iiberschlachtiges  Bad  D  (so  weder  von  Bettino  noch  Schotten 
recht  gezeichnet)  Mlet,  welches  durch  das  an  seiner  Welle  steckende 
Kamm-Rad  F  vermittelst  des  Getreches  G  die  Scraube  B  treiben,  und 
also  einen  eorUinuielichen  motum  verursachen  solL  Es  yemcTnet 
zwar  Bettinus  und  andere  mit  ihm  :  das  Wasser  steige  leichter  in  der 
Scraube  als  in  andem  pumpen  oder  Machinen,  weil  das  Wasser  sich 
gleischsam  in  der  Scraube  ohne  sonderliche  pressung  fortwaltzete. 
Allein,  ob  es  schon  scheinet  dass  die  Scraube  leichter  zu  bewegen  als 
eine  Fumpe,  so  will  es  auch  hingegen  desto  mehr  zeit  haben. 

Wer  eine  rechte  probe  von  der  Wasser-Schraube  haben  will,  denm 
will  tine  Machine  hierzn  anweisen.— [Chap.  4,  par.  180-81,  page  43.] 


V 


APPENDIX  D. 


demonstration  de  rimpossibilite  du  Moiivement  Perpetuel,  eiivdyee 
comme  il  s'ensult  a  TAuteur  du  Journal,  par  M.  de  la  Hire,  a  Tocca-' 
sion  de  plusiers  de  ces  mouvements  qui  ont  paru  depuis  peu. 

H  n*y  a  personne  de  ceux  qui  pretendent  avoir  trouve  le 
mouvement  perpetud,  qui  ne  demeure  d'aecord  que  deux 
poids  etant  en  disposition  de  se  mouvdir  suivant  leur  direction  naturelle^ 
dans  des  temps  ou  par  des  chemins  qui  soient  en  raison  reciproque  de 
leur  pesantenr  demeureront  en  equilibre.  Cependant  il  n'y  a  point  de 
inouvenient  perpetuel  dont  on  ne  puisse  tirer  une  conclusion  fort  op- 
posee  a  ce  prindpe  ;  car  de  quelle  manidre  qu'on  le  puisse  prendre,  ce 
n'est  qu*une  elevation  d*un  poids  a  une  certaine  hauteur  par  la  descente 
d*nn  autre  poids  dans  un  meme  temps,  &  reciproquement  la  restitution 
du  premier  au  lieu  ou  il  etoit  avant  son  mouvement  par  la  descettte  de 
celui  qui  a  ete  eleve,  &  ainsi  a  Finfini,  soit  par  le  moyen  de  quelques 
autres  poids,  qui  etant  elevee,  agissent  dans  leur  chute  sur  d'autres  ou 
sur  des  corps  liquides,  soit  par  le  moyen  de  quelques  corps  liquides  qui 
^tant  elevee  peuvent  coul^  &  agir  sur  des  parties  fort  eloignees  du 
centre  du  mouvement,  dont  on  ne  pent  tirer  aucun  avantage,  ce  qui  est 
entierement  contraire  au  principe  precedent. 

Ceux  qui  s'occupent  a  cette  recherche  embarrassent  pour  Tordi- 
naire  leurs  machines  de  tant  de  poids  &  de  mouvements,  qu'ils  oufolient 
toujours  a  prendre  garde  a  quelqu'une  des  circonstances  du  temps,  de 
la  hauteur  &  des  forces  agissantes,  ou  de  leur  direction,  qui  y  sont 
quelquefois  si  fort  melees  toutes  ensemble,  qu'il  faudroit  un  trcs-grand 
travail  pour  les  bien  distinguer.  C'est  ce  qui  les  conduit  a  ime  fausse 
demonstration  du  mouvement  perpetuel ;  &  quand  ils  proposent  leurs 
belles  inventions  a  ceux  qui  sont  versee  dans  les  sciences,  &  qui  ne 
peuvent  pas  sur  le  champ  leur  faire  connoitre  en  quel  lieu  se  recontre 
la  faussete  de  leur  raisonnement,  ils  publient  partout  que  les  plus 
habiles  out  ete  convaincus  de  la  verite  de  leur  mouvement  perpetuel. — 
Memoires  de  P Academic  Royale  des  Sciences ;  Depuis  1666,  jusqu'a 
1699.    A  Paris,  1730,  4to.  [vol.  X.,  page  605]. 


Note. — The  first  ten  volumes  of  this  edition  comprise  an  ^itome  of 
Memoirs  dating  from  1666. 


APPENDIX  E. 


Montucla  Histoire  des  Mathematiques. 

Du  mouvement  perpctuel.  Le  mouvement  perpetuel  est  tine  chim^re 
assez  ancienne  et  assez  celebre  dans  la  mecanique,  pour  qtie  nous 
devious  en  parler  dans  cet  ouvrage.  On  entend  par  mouvement  per- 
pctuel un  mouvement  qui  se  conserv^e  et  se  renouvelle  continuellement 
de  lui  meme  sans  le  secours  d^aucune  cause  exterieiire,  ou  une  commu- 
nication non-interrompue  du  meme  degre  de  mouvement  qid  passe 
d'une  partie  de  matidre  a  I'autre,  soit  dans  un  cercle,  soit  dans  une 
autre  courbe  rentr'ante  en  elle-meme,  de  sorte  que  le  meme  mouvement 
revienne  au  premier  moteur  sans  avoir  ete  altere.  {Encyclopedie*  au 
mot  Perpetuel.)  Mais  on  a  fait  beaucoup  de  decouvertes  reelles  en 
courant  apres  tin  chim^re.  On  pent  voir  a  ce  sujet  les  Recreations 
Mathematiques,  edition  de  Montuda.  On  trouve  des  propositKJns  de 
mouvement  perpetuel  dans  le  Journal  des  Savam,  1678,  p.'165  ;  1686, 
p.  9,  29,  95,  104  ;  1700,  p.  245  ;  1726,  p.  590  ;  1745,  p.  29.  Nous  par- 
lerons  ci-apr^s  d'une  des  machines,  fruit  des  efforts  qu'on  a  faits  pour 
resoudre  ce  problerae,  a  cause  du  bruit  qu'elle  fit  parmi  les  savans  ; 
tnais  toutes  ont  avort^.  C*est  aussi  plutot  une  insulte  qu'un  eloge  de 
dire  de  quelqu^un  qu^il  cherche  le  mottvement  perpetuel  ;  Putilite 
des  efforts  que  Ton  a  faits  jusqu'ici  pour  la  trouver,  donnent  une  idee 
pen  iavorable  pe  ceux  qui  s*en  occupent. 

Parmi  toutes  les  propriet^s  de  la  maiti^re  et  du  mouvement,  nous 
n'en  connaisons  aucune  qui  paraisse  pouvoir  ^tre  le  principe  d'un  tef 
effet. 

On  convient  que  Paction  et  la  reaction  doivent  etre  egales,  et  qu'un 
corps  qui  donne  du  mouvement  a  une  autre  doit  perdre  ce  qu'il  en 
communique.  Or,  dans  Petat  present  des  choses,  la  resistance  de  Pair, 
les  frottemens,  doivent  necessairetnent  retarder  sans  cesse  le  mouve- 
ment. 

Ainsi,  pour  qU'un  mouvement  quelconque  put  stibsister  toujours,  il 
fiiudroit  ou  qu'il  fat  continuellement  entr^tenu  par  une  cause  exterietire; 
et  ce  ne  seroit  plus  alors  ce  qu'on  entend  par  le  mouvement  perpetuel 

l2 


516 


APPENDIX. 


ou  que  toute  resistance  fut  aneantie,  ce  qui  est  physiquement  impos- 
sible. Par  une  autre  loi  de  la  nature,  les  changemens  qui  arrivent  dans 
le  mouvement  des  corps  sont  toujours  proportionnels  a  la  force  matrice 
qui  leur  est  imprimee,  et  sont  dans  la  meme  direction  que  cette  force : 
ainsi  une  machine  ne  pent  recevoir  im  plus  grand  mouvement  que 
celui  qui  reside  dans  la  force  matrice  qui  lui  a  ete  imprimee.  Or,  but 
la  terre  que  nous  habitons,  tons  les  mouvements  se  font  dans  un  fluide 
resistant,  et  par  consequent  ils  doivent  necessairement  etre  retardes  ; 
done  le  milieu  doit  absorber  ime  partie  considerable  du  mouve- 
ment. 

Le  frottement  doit  diminuer  peu-a-peu  la  force  imprimee,  ou  com- 
muniquee  k  la  machine ;  de  sorte  que  le  mouvement  perpetuel  ne 
sauroit  avoir  lien,  a  moins  que  la  force  communiquee  ne  soit  beaucoup 
plus  grande  que  la  force  generatrice,  et  qu'elle  ne  compense — la  dimi- 
nution que  toutes  les  autres  y  produisent ;  mais  comme  rien  ne  donne 
ce  qu'il  n*a  pas,  la  force  generatrice  ne  pent  donner  a  la  machine  un 
degre  de  mouvement  plus  grand  que  oelui  qu*elle  a  elle-meme  ;  ainsi, 
toute  la  question  du  mouvement  perpetuel  en  ce  cas,  se  reduit  a  trouver 
un  poids  plus  pesant  que  lui-meme,  ou  une  force  elastique  plus  grande 
qu'elle-meme. 

On  pent  dire  aussi  qu'il  faudroit  trouver  une  mcthode  de  gagner  par 
la  disposition  et  la  combinaison  des  puissance  mecaniques,  une  force 
equivalente  a  celle  qui  est  perdue.  C'est  principalement  a  ce  dernier 
point  que  s'attachent  ceux  qui  veulent  resoudre  ce  probleme :  mais 
comment  et  par  quels  moyens,  pent  on  regagner  une  telle  force. 

H  est  certain  que  la  multiplication  des  forces  ou  des  puissances  ne 
sertent  de  rien  pour  cela  :  car,  ce  qu'on  gagne  en  puissance  est  perdu  en 
temps  ;  de  sorte  que  la  quantite  de  mouvement  demeure  toujours  la 
meme. 

Jamais  la  mecanique  ne  saurait  faire  qu*nne  puissance  plus  petite, 
poit  rcellement  egale  k  ime  plus  grande ;  par  example,  que  25  livres 
soient  equivalentes  a  100.  S'il  nous  paroit  qu'une  puissance  moindre 
soit  equivalante  a  une  plus  grande,  c'est  une  erreur  de  nos  sens. 
L'equilibre  n'est  pas  veritablement  entre  25  et  100  livres  mais  entre 
100  livres  qui  se  meuvent  ou  tendent  a  se  movoir  avec  une  certaine 
Vitesse,  et  25  livres  qui  tendent  a  se  mouvoir  avec  quatre  fois  plus  de 
Vitesse  que  les  100  livres. 

Quand  on  considere  les  poids  de  25  et  100  livres  comme  fixes  et  im- 
mobiles,  ou  pent  croire  d'abord  que  les  25  livres  seules  empcchent  un 
poids  beaucoup  plus  grand  de  s*elever.  Mais  on  se  detromp  bientot 
si  Ton  considere  Tun  et  Pautre  poids  en  mouvement ;  car  on  verra  que 
les  25  livres  ne  peuvent  elever  les  100  livres  qu'en  parcourant  dans  le 
meme  temps  un  espace  quatre  fois  plus  grand.    Ainsi,  les  quantites 


APPENDIX.  617 

yirtuelles  de  mouvement  de  ces  deux  poids  seront  les  memes,  et  par 
consequent  il  n'y  aura  plus  rien  de  surprenant  dans  leur  equilibre. 

line  puissance  de  10  livres  etant  done  mue,  ou  tendant  a  se  mouvoir 
avec  dix  fois  plus  de  vitesse  qu'une  puissance  de  100  livres,  pent  faire 
equilibre  a  cette  derniere  puissance  ;  et  ou  on  pent  dire  autant  de  tons 
les  produits  egaux  a  100  livres.  Enfin,  le  produit  de  part  et  d'autre 
doit  toujours  etre  de  100,  de  quelque  maniere  qu'on  s'y  prenne  ;  si  on 
diminue  la  masse,  il  faut  augmenter  la  vitesse  en  meme  raison. 

Cette  loi  inviolable  de  la  nature  ne  laisse  autre  chose  a  feire  a  Part 
que  de  choisir  entre  les  diflerentes  combinaisons  qui  peuvent  produire 
le  meme  effet. 

Maupertias,  dans  ses  lettres  sur  diffireas  sujets  de  philosophie,  fait 
les  reflexions  suivantes  sur  le  mouvement  perpetuel.  Ceux  qui  cher- 
6lient  ce  mouvement  excluent  des  forces  qui  doivent  le  produire  non- 
seulement  Tair  et  I'eau,  mais  encore  quelques  autres  agens  naturels 
qu'on  y  pourroit  employer.  Ainsi  ils  ne  regardent  pas  comme  mouve- 
ment perpetuel,  celui  qui  seroit  produit  par  les  vicissitudes  de  Patmo- 
sphere,  ou  par  celles  du  froid  et  du  chaud.  lis  se  bornent  a  deux  agens, 
la  force  d'inertie  et  la  pesanteur,  et  ils  reduisent  la  question  a  savoir  si 
Ton  peut  prolonger  la  vitesse  du  mouvement,  ou  par  le  premier  de  ces 
moyens,  c*est-a-dire,  en  transmettant  le  mouvement  par  des  chocs  d'un 
corps  a  un  autre,  ou  par  le  second,  en  feisant  remonter  des  corps,  par 
la  descente  d'autres  corps  qui,  ensuite  remonteront  eux-memes,  pendant 
que  les  autres  descendront.  Dans  se  second  cas  il  est  demontre  que  la 
sonmie  des  corps,  multiplies  chacun  par  la  hauteur  d'ou  il  peut  des- 
cendre  est  egale  a  la  somme  de  ces  memes  corps  multiplies  chacun  par 
la  hauteur  ou  il  pourra  monter.  H  faudroit  done  pour  parvenir  au 
mouvement  perpetuel  par  ce  moyen,  que  les  corps  qui  tombent  et  s*eld- 
vent  conservassent  absolument  tout  le  mouvement  que  la  pesanteur 
peut  leur  donner,  et  n'en  perdissent  rien  par  le  frottement  ou  par  la  re- 
sistance de  Pair,  ce  qui  est  impossible. 

Si  on  veut  employer  la  force  d'inertie,  on  remarquera  que  le  mouve- 
ment se  perd  dans  le  choc  des  corps  durs ;  et  que  si  les  corps  sont 
elastiques,  la  force  vive  a  la  verite  se  conserve ;  mais  outre  qu'il  n'y  a 
pas  de  corps  parfaitement  elastiques,  il  font  encore  faire  abstraction  ici 
des  frottemens  et  de  la  resistance  de  Pair ;  d'ou  Maupertius  conclut 
qu'on  ne  peut  espcrer  de  trouver  le  mouvement  perpetuel  par  la  force 
d'inertie,  non  plus  que  par  la  pesanteur,  et  qu'ainsi  ce  mouvement  ^st 
impossible. 

11  se  repandit  en  1700  un  bruit  que  le  mouvement  perpetuel  etoit 
trouve.  .  On  le  voyoit  dans  un  lieu  ou  la  difficulte  de  la  chose  n'etoit 
pas  bien  connue,  ou  Pinventioa  n'etoit  pas  discutee  comme  elle  Pete 
dans  une  academic,  ou  un  air  de  science  reussit  quelqucfois,  et  Pair  de 


518  APPENDIX. 

coiifiance  presque  toujours.  Sauveur  I'expliqua  a  PAcademie  qui  en 
fut  fort  surprise ;  et  peu  de  temps  apres  le  mouvement  perpctuel  dis^ 
parut  avec  son  auteur.  A  cette  occasion  Parent  prouva  rimpossibiiite 
p:ir  cette  seule  raison  que  toutes  les  parties  d'une  machine  ont  \m  centre 
de  gravite  commun  que  pendant  qu'elles  tournent  autour  d'un  axe 
ou  d*un  point  fixe;  quel  qu'il  soit,  ce  centre  de  gravite  commun 
se  trouve  necessairement  dans  une  situation,  ou  il  est  plus  bas 
qu'en  toute  autre,  et  qu'aussitot  tout  doit  s'arreter.  Car,  puisqu'il 
y  a  un  point  ou  la  force  que  plusieurs  corps  ont  pour  descendre 
ef5t  reunie  toute  entiere,  dka  que  ce  point  ne  pent  plus  descendre,  il  fiiut 
que  tons  ces  corps  demeijrent  immobiles.  Parent  determina  en  general 
qi4el  Revolt  etre  ce  point  de  repos  inevitable  pour  toutes  les  machines 
possibles.— [Ilist.  Acad.,  1700,  page  156.] 

On  trouve  dans  les  (EJuvres  PMlosop/nques  de  'sGravesande^  publiees 
a  Amsterdam  en  1774,  la  relation  d'une  machine  d'OrfFyreus  construite 
^n  1715,  et  qui  fit  du  bniit  en  Europe.  On  I'appela  aussi  la  roue  de 
Cassel ;  et  void  ce  qu'il  en  dit  daijs  une  lettre  a  Newton,  tfxipe  1,  p.  303. 
J*ai  cru  que  vous  ne  seriez  pas  fache  d'avoir  vine  T^^ltSxm.  xm.  peu 
detaillee  de  ce  qu'on  observe  dans  un  exan^en  extejietir  S'une  machine 
6ur  laquelle  les  sentimens  sont  si  partages,  et  qui  a  contre  elle  presque 
Jous  les  habiles  mathematiciens.  Un  trds-grai)d  ijonjbre  soutient  rim-- 
possibilite  du  mouvenjent  perpetuel,  d'ou  est  yeim  1^  peu  d'attention 
qu'on  a  fait  a  la  njachine  d'Orffyreus.  Je  sals  combien  je  suis  in-r 
ferieur  a  ceux  qui  ont  donne  leurs  demonstrations  sur  Timpossibilite  de 
ce  mouvement;  cependant  pour  vous  expliquer  les  sentimens  avec 
lesquels  j'ai  examine  cette  machine,  j'aurai  Thoijneur  de  vous  dire 
jtju'jl  y  a  environ  sept  ans  que  je  cms  decouvirir  le  paralogisme  de 
ces  demonstrations,  en  ce  qn'elles  ne  peuvent  epre  applicables  a  toutes 
Jes  machines  possibles;  et  depuis  je  suis  toujours  reste  tres-persuade 
qu'on  pent  denjontrer  que  le  mouvement  perpetuel  n'est  pas  contradic-r 
toire;  il  m'a  paru  que  I^eibnitz  avoit  tort  de  regarder  comme  un 
a^pome  I'impossibilite  de  ce  mouvement;  ce  qui  sert  neanmoins  de 
fondement  a  une  partie  de  sa  pliilosophie.  Malgre  cette  persuasion, 
j'ctois  fort  eloigne  de  croire  qu'  Orfiyreus  f(it  assez  habile  pour  de- 
couvrir  le  mouvement  perpetuel  Je  regardais  ce  mouvement  comme 
ne  devant  etre  decouvert  qu'apres  plusieurs  autres  inventions,  au  cas 
qull  le  fut  jamais,  Depuis  que  j'ai  examine  la  machine,  je  suis  dans 
un  etonnement  que  je  ne  saurois  exprimer.  L'auteur  a  du  genie  pour 
les  mecaniques,  mais  n'est  rien  moins  que  profond  mathematicien, 
cependant  cette  machine  a  C|[uelques  chose  de  surprenant,  quand  ce 
seroit  une  fourberie.  Voici  ce  <jui  regarde  de  la  machine  mcme,  dont 
l'auteur  ne  laisse  voir  (lue  I'exterieur,  de  peur  qu'on  lui  vole  son  secret. 
Cost   un  tiiiubour  d'enyiron   14  pouces  d'opaisseur  sur    12  x>icds  de 


APPENDIX.  619 

diamdtre;  il  est  tres-leger,  etant  Mt  de  quelques  planches  assemblees 
par  d'autres  pieces  de  bois,  de  manidre  qu'on  verroit  rinterieur  de  tous 
cotes  sans  une  toile  ciree  qui  couvre  tout  le  tambour.  Ce  tambour  est 
traverse  d'un  axe  d'enyiron  six  pounces  de  diametre,  termine  par  les 
extremites  par  des  axes  de  fer  de  trois  quart  de  pouce,  sur  lesquels  la 
machine  tourne.  J'ai  examine  ces  axes,  et  je  suis  tres-persuade  qu-il 
n'y  a  rien  en  dehors  qui  contribue  au  mouvement  de  la  machine.  J'ai 
toume  le  tambour  fort  lentement,  et  il  est  reste  en  repos,  aussitot  que 
j*ai  retira  la  main;  je  lui  ai  fait  faire  un  tour  ou  deux  de  cette  maniere  ; 
ensuite  je  Tai  fait  mouvoir  tant  soit  pen  plus  vite;  je  lui  ai  fait  faire 
un  tour  au  deux;  mais  alors  j'etois  oblige  de  la  retenir  continuellement; 
car  I'ayant  lache  il  a  pris  en  moins  de  deux  tours  sa  plus  grande  celerite, 
de  maniere  qu'il  a  fait  vingt  cinqa-vingt-six  tours  dans  une  minute- 
C'est  le  mouvement  qu'il  a  conserve  ci-devant  pendant  deux  mois,  dans 
une  chambre  cachetee,  dans  laquelle  il  etoit  impossible  qu'il  y  eut 
aucune  fraude.  Le  prince  fit  ouvrir  la  chambre,  et  arreter  la  machine 
apres  ce  temps-la;  car,  comme  ce  n'est  qu'un  essai,  elle  n'est  pas  assez 
forte  pour  que  les  materiaux  ne  s'usent  pas  par  une  longue  agitation. 

Le  Landgrave  a  ete  present  a  Pexamen  que  j'ai  fait  de  la  macliine. 
J'ai  pris  la  liberte  de  demander  au  prince  qui  a  vu  I'interieur  du  tam- 
bour, si  lorsque  la  machine  a  ete  agitee  pendant  im  certain  temps,  rien 
n'etoit  change  dans  I'interieur;  comme  aussi  s'il  n*y  avoit  pas  quelques 
pieces  dans  lesquels  on  pourroit  soupconner  de  la  fraude;  le  prince  m'a 
assure  que  non,  et  que  la  machine  est  fort  simple.*  Vous  voyez 
monsieur,  que  je  n'en  ai  pas  assez  vu  par  moi  meme  pour  assurer  que 
j'ai  une  demonstration,  que  dans  cette  machine  a  la  principe  du  mouve- 
ment, qui  est  certainment  dans  le  tambour,  soit  tel  qu'il  le  faut 
pour  rendre  le  mouvement  perpetuel;  mais  aussi  je  crois  qu'on  ne 
sauroit  me  nier  d'avoir  des  presomptions  fortes  en  faveur  de  I'inventeur. 
Le  Landgrave  a  donne  une  recompense  digne  de  sa  generosite  a  Orf- 
fyreus,  afin  de  voir  le  secret  de  la  macliine,  avec  promesse  de  ne  se 
point  servir  du  secret,  ni  de  la  decouvrir  avant  que  I'auteur  en  eut 
retire  encore  d'autres  recompenses  pour  rendre  son  invention  publique, 
je  sais  tres  bien  monsieur,  qu'il  n'y  a  que  I'Angleterre  ou  les  sciences 
fleurissent  assez  pour  faire  trouver  a  Pauteur  une  recompense  digne  de 
son  invention.  II  s'agit  simplement  de  la  lui  assurer,  en  cas  que  sa 
machine  soit  un  veritable  mouvement  perpetuel,  I'auteur  ne  demande  a 
toucher  I'argent  qu'apres  que  la  machine  aura  ete  examinee  en  dedans; 
on  ne  sauroit  raisonnablement  exiger  cet  examen  avant  la  recompense 


♦  Comment  le  charlatan  n'en  auroit-il  pas  impose  au  prince,  puisqu'il 
a  impose  au  physicien? 


620  APPENDIX. 

promise.  Comme  il  s'agit  d*une  chose  untile  au  public,  et  a  Tavance- 
ment  des  sciences,  de  decouvrir  Tinvention  ou  la  fraude,  j'ai  cru  que 
cette  relation  ne  vous  seroit  pas  desagreable. 

On  fut  fort  etonne  que  ce  celebre  physicien  trouvat  que  le  mouvement 
perpetuel  n'etoit  pas  demontre  impossible :  apres  divers  raisonnemens, 
pour  tacher  de  le  prouver,  il  finit  par  dire :  il  seroit  a  souhaiter  que  la 
Ibrte  persuasion  dans  la  cfuelle  sont  les  mathematiciens,  touchant  cette 
impossibilite,  ne  les  empechat  pas  de  faire  une  attention  serieuse  a  une 
machine  aussi  etonnante  que  celle  de  Cassel.  Une  roue  dont  le 
principe  du  mouvement  est  interieur,  qui  se  met  en  mouvement  par  le 
moindre  effort,  qu'on  pent  faire  tourner  du  cote  qu'on  juge  a  propos, 
sans  que  ce  qui  la  fait  tourner  d'un  cote  soit  arretu  par  ce  qui  Tauroit 
fait  tourner  de  Tautre,  si  elle  y  avoit  ete  poussee.  Enfin,  une  roue 
qui,  apres  avoir  fait  quelques  millions  de  tours  avec  une  rapiditc  sur- 
prenante,  continue  son  mouvement  de  mcme,  et  n*est  arretoe  qu'a  force 
de  bras.  Une  telle  machine  merite,  a  ce  qu'il  me  paroit,  quelque  eloge, 
quand  meme  elle  ne  satisferoit  pas  a  tout  ce  que  Tinventeur  en  promet. 
Si  c'est  le  mouvement  perpetuel,  Tauteur  merite  bien  la  recompense 
qu'il  demande :  si  ce  ne  Test  point,  le  public  pent  decouvrir  une  belle 
invention,  sans  que  ceux  qui  auroient  promis  la  recompense  fiissent 
engages  a  rien,  Pinventeur  n'ayant  jamais  exige  qu'ime  promesse 
(tome  I,  p.  315).  Voyez  aussi  la  vie  de  's  Gravesande,  par  Allamand, 
a  la  tete  de  cet  ouvrage,  ou  Ton  pretend  que  la  servante  deposa  qu'elle 
faisoit  tourner  la  machine  etant  placee  dans  une  chambre  voisine; 
qu'Offyreus  etoit  un  fou ;  que  Popinion  qu'on  avoit  de  la  machine  avoit 
bien  change ;  cependant  on  voit  que  Jean  Bernoulli  croyoit  au  mouve- 
ment perpetuel.    Opera,  tome  1,  page  41.     [See  Appendix  H.] 

L'annee  suivante  1716,  Wolf  pubUa  son  Dictionnaire  Mathematiques, 
et  au  mot  Perpetuel  il  rapporte  les  argumens  de  Sturm,  Lorini,  Stevin 
et  Leibnitz  pour  en  prouver  I'impossibilite,  il  dit  que  quoiqu'on  ne 
trouve  pas  jusqu'a  present  aucime  raison  forte  pour  ne  pas  aj  outer  foi 
•au  serment  d'Orfiyreus  que  la  roue  puisse  couserver  toujours  le  mouve- 
ment qu'on  lui  a  communique  sans  effort ;  il  n'est  pourtant  pas  prouve 
qu'il  n'y  ait  pas  une  matiere  fluide  invisible  qui  influe  sur  ce  mouve- 
ment. L'examen  qu'en  fit  's  Gravesande  mit  Orifyreus  dans  un  si 
grande  colere,  qu'il  brisa  sa  machine  le  jour  meme,  comme  on  le  voit 
dans  les  AnnaL  Physico-Med.  de  Breslaw,  imprimees  a  Leipzig  et  a 
Budissin,  en  1723,  in  4to,  p.  427,  et  dans  la  vie  de  's  Gravesande ;  il 
ecrivit  sur  la  muraille  que  c'ctoit  I'impertinente  curiosite  du  professeur 
qui  en  etoit  la  cause ;  cela  sembla  indiquer  qu'il  redoutoit  un  examen 
ulterieur.  Au  reste,  's  Gravesande  n'a  jamais  avoue  qu'il  eiit  etc  si 
grossierement  tronipe.  Dans  le  temps  la  roue  de  Cassel  fiiisoit  tant  de 
bruit,  il  pai*ut  une  dissertation  de  David  Gottlob  Diez,  Perpvtuum  mobUU 


APPENDIX. 


521 


mecaniei  impombilifas  mefhodo  mnf  hematic  a.  11  fait  voir  que  les 
TOOuvemens  perpetuels  du  jesnite  de  Lanis,  de  Cornelius  Drebble,  de 
Becher,  de  Jeremie  Mitz  de  Bale  sont  des  chim^res.  Dans  son  theo- 
rcme  XLI.  on  trouve  cette  assertion :  Perpefuum  mobile  Orffyreum  ex 
demriptione  ejus  propria  aestimatum  impossibile  est, 

Peiresc  et  Kepler  n'etoient  pas  aussi  credules  que  's  Gravesande ;  au 
sujet  du  mouvement  perpetuel  que  Drebble,  le  premier  ecrit  a  son  ami 
Camden  que  Ton  ne  croit  pas  legerement  dds  de9a  ((?.  Camdeni  Epis- 
tolae.  Londini,  1691,  pp.  333  et  387).  Kepler  ecrivoit  a  ce  meme  sujet 
en  1607  :  si  creare  possit  antmam  quae  insttumena  ejus  sine  ponder i- 
bus  aliosque  motus  elementares  moveat^  et  in  moiu  conservet  tunc  mihi 
erii  magnus  Apollo.     (Kepi,  epist.  1718:  p.  393.) 

M.  le  baron  de  Zache,  dans  des  ecrits  sur  le  mouvement  perpetuel, 
ReichsAnzeiger^  1796,  6  juin  et  17  novemb.)  a  fait  des  recherches 
curieuses  a  ce  sujet,  relativement  aux  diflferentes  inventions  donnees 
pour  mouvement  perpetuel.  Je  finirai  en  indiquant  un  dernier  ouvrage 
a  ce  sujet :  Lecture  on  the  Perpetual  Motion,  Henrich.    London;  1770. 

Malgre  les  raisonnemens  de  *s  Gravesande,  Ton  a  continue  de  regarder 
le  mouvement  perpetuel  comme  impossible.  L' Academic  des  Sciences 
de  Paris  prit  en  1775  la  resolution  de  ne  plus  examiner  aucune  machine 
annoncee  comme  un  mouvement  perpetuel,  et  PAcademie  crut  devoir 
rendre  compte  des  motifs  qui  I'avoient  determinee,  dans  PHistoire  de 
TAcademie  de  1775,  p.  65. 

La  construction  d*un  movement  perpetuel,  dit  Phistorien,  est  absolu- 
ment  impossible:  quand  meme  le  frottement,  la  resistance  du  milieu  ne 
dcdruiroient  point  a  la  longue  Peffet  de  la  force  matrice.  Cette  force 
ne  pent  produire  qu'un  effet  egal  si  la  cause;  si  done  on  veut  que  Peffet 
d*une  force  finie  dure  toujours,  il  faut  que  cet  effet  soit  infiniment  petit 
dans  un  temps  fini.  En  faisant  abstraction  du  firottement  et  de  la 
resistance,  un  corps  ^  qui  on  fais  imprime  une  mouvement  le  con- 
serveroit  toujours;  mais  c'est  en  n'agissant  point  sur  d'autres  corps,  et 
le  seul  mouvement  perpetuel  possible,  dans  cette  hypoth^se,  qui 
d*ailleurs,  ne  pent  avoir  lieu  dans  la  nature,  seroit  absolument  inutil  k 
Pobjet  que  se  proposent  les  constructeurs  des  mouvement  perpetuels: 
ce  genre  de  recherches  a  Pinconvenient  d'etre  couteux;  il  a  ruineplus 
d'une  &mille,  et  souvent  des  mechaniciens  qui  eussent  pu  rendre  de 
grands  services,  y  ont  consume  leur  fortune,  leur  temps  et  leur  genie. 

Tout  attachment  opiniatre  a  une  opinion  demontree  fkusse,  s'il  s'y 
joint  une  occupation  perpetuelle  du  meme  objet,  une  impatience 
violente  de  la  contradiction,  est  sans  doute  une  veritable  folic.  On  ne 
la  regarde  point  comme  telle,  si  Popinion  qui  forme  cette  folic  ne  choque 
pas  les  idees  communes,  si  elle  n'  influence  sur  la  conduite  de  la  vie,  si 
elle  troubles  pas  Pordre  de  la  societe. 


522  APPENDIX. 

Mais  au  moment  ou  ce-ci  s'imprime,  je  vols  que  le  6  Janvier,  on  a 
presente  a  Londres  mie  petition  xx)ur  un  uomme  Dupre  qui  a  decouvert 
le  mouvement  perpetuel,  et  que  la  petition  est  datee  du  5  jour  du  mouve- 
ment  perpetuel* 


*  Histoire  des  Mathematiquesy  par  J.  F.  Montucla.  Acheve  et 
public  par  Jerome  De  la  Lande.  Paris,  1802.  4  vols.  4to.  [Vol.  3, 
pp.  813-820.] 


APPENDIX  F. 


(Euvres  Philosophiques  de  's  Gravesande.-— Remarques  touchont  le 
Mouvement  Perpetud. 

H  y  a  environ  huit  mois  que  j'examinai  a  Cassel,  par  ordre  de  S.A.S. 
Monseigneur  le  Landgrave  de  Hesse,  les  effets  d'une  maxihine,  que  Tin- 
venteur  assure  etre  un  mouvement  perpetuel.  H  en  cache  avec  soin 
Pinterieur,  jusques  h  ce,  (dit-il,)  qu'on  lui  ait  assure  une  recompense, 
qu*il  ne  demande  de  toucher,  que  lorsque  son  invention  aura  ete  exa^- 
rain6e,  et  reconnue  par  les  mathematiciens  pour  etre  ce  qu'on  apelle  en 
mecanique  le  mouvement  perpetuel.  Je  fus  ftuppe  des  effets  de  la  ma- 
chine ;  et  ce  que  j 'en  vis,  joint  a  ce  que  j'en  appris,  d'une  mani^re  k, 
ne  pouvoir  etre  revoque  en  doute,  il  me  faut  regardigr  cet  machine  comme 
une  des  plus  belles  inventions  en  mecanique  dont  j'aie  connoisance,  a  ne 
considerer  que  les  effets  averts. 

Le  desir  de  faire  connoitre  cette  machine,  fonde  sur  la  persuasion  de 
Tutilite  qu'on  pourroit  en  retirer,  m^me  en  supposant  fkusse  la  preten- 
sion de  Pauteur,  me  fit  ecrire  k  Monsieur  Newton  ce  que  j'avois  ob- 
serve. Ma  Lettre  a  ete  imprimee  en  Francois,  et  aussi  en  Anglois,  k 
ce  que  j*ai  appris,  n'ayant  jamais  vu  cette  traduction. 

On  a  trouve  a  redire  que  j'avance  dans  cette  Lettre,  que  je  ne  croi* 
pas  le  mouv.  perp.  contradictoire. 

Que  les  demonstrations  qu*on  a  donnees  de  son  impossibillte  ne  me 
paroissent  pas  applicables  k  toutes  les  machines  qu'on  pourroit  imar 
giner. 

Et  enfin,  que  je  trouvois  probable  que  la  machine  de  Cassel  fut  un 
veritable  mo.  per. 

Tout  la  difficidte  roule  sur  la  premiere  de  ces  trois  propositions.  Si 
elle  etoit  prouvee,  les  deux  derni^res  n'auroient  pas  grand  difficulte. 
Aussi  a^t-on  trouve  cette  premiere  proposition  trop  bardie  pour  etre 
avancee  sans  preuve ;  ce  que  j'accorde  tr^s-volontiers :  je  n'aurois  pas 
fait  cette  fiiute,  si  ma  Lettre  avoit  ete  ^crite  pour  6tre  imprimee,  maisf 
€lle  etoit  adressee  a  Monsieur  Newton. 

J'etois  si  peu  dispose  a  avancer  .cptte  proposition  saas  pjreuve,  que  je 
ne  me  suis  jamais  declare  sur  ce  que  je  pensois  sur  le  mo.  per.,  prcr 
voyant  le  jugement  que  les  mathematiciens  devoient  faire  de  celui  qui^ 
^9ur  ce  sujet,  s^ecarteroit  du  sentiment  re9u. 


624 


APPENDIX. 


Ce  que  j'ai  cru  devoir  k  la  verity,  apr^s  avoir  vu  la  machine  de 
Cassel,  m*a  engag^  de  dire  k  Monsieur  Newton  ce  que  je  pensois  but 
cette  machine,  et  k  cette  occasion  ce  que  je  pensois  des  preuves  de 
Pimpossibilite  du  mo.  per.  Ma  Lettre  a  ete  imprimee ;  il  fiiut  me  jus- 
tifier  devant  le  public :  j'aurois  meme  du  le  feire  plutot. 

Avant  d'entrer  en  mati^re,  il  faut  etablir  Tetat  de  la  question.  On 
apelle  en  mechanique  mo.  per.,  une  machine  dont  le  principe  du  mouve- 
ment  ne  s'arreteroit  j'amais  si  les  materiaux  ne  s'usoient  pas. 

On  voit  par  cette  definition,  qu'une  horloge,  qui  se  monteroit  par  le 
vent ;  par  les  changemens  que  Phumidite  et  la  secheresse,  ou  le  froid 
et  le  chaud,  produisent  dans  certain  corps ;  ou  enfin  par  les  changemens 
dans  le  poids  de  PatmosphSre,  ne  seroit  pas  un  mo.  per.  n  ne  seroit 
pourtant  pas  difficile  de  construire  une  telle  horloge,  qui  ne  pourroit 
s'arr^ter  que  par  quelque  derangement  dans  ses  parties ;  mais  ce  se- 
rait  des  agents  etrangers  qui  feroient  mouvoir  la  machine. 

H  faut  examiner  k  present  si  la  possibilite  du  mo.  per.  n*est  pas  une 
suite  de  ce  que  les  mathematiciens  out  ensdgne  sur  le  choc.  II  semble 
qu'une  partie  de  ceux  qui  ont  voulu  prouver  Pimpossibilite  d'un  tel 
mouvement,  n'aient  pas  fait  attention  aux  effets  du  choc. 

Les  mathematiciens,  et  les  physiciens,  sont  partages  sur  la  force  dn 
choc.  Les  uns  croient,  et  c'est  le  sentiment  le  plus  ordinaire,  que  les 
forces  de  differents  chocs  d'un  m^me  corps  sont  entre  eUes ;  comme  les 
vitesses  de  ce  corps.  Les  autres,  au  contraire,  soutiennent  que  cea 
memes  forces  sont  entre  eUes  comme  les  quarres  des  vitesses.  Tons 
conviennent  que  la  force  du  choc  est  proportionelle  k  la  masse ;  c'est 
pourquoi  les  premiers  multiplient  la  mass  par  la  vitesse,  pour  avoir  la 
force  du  choc ;  les  autres  multiplient  la  mass  par  le  quarre  de  la  vitesse, 
pour  determiner  cette  mtoe  force. 

Je  n'examinerai  pas  id  lequel  de  ces  deux  principes  est  juste : 
1.  Qu'en  admettant  le  premier  il  fkut  admettre  la  premier  possi- 
bilite du  mo.  per.  dans  les  machines  qui  auront  pour  principe  de  leur 
mouvement  le  choc  des  corps.  2.  Qu'en  admettant  le  second  principe, 
Pimpossibilite  du  mo.  per.  n'a  pas  encore  et€  demontr^  dans  tons  les 
cas  possibles.  Et  3.  Enfin,  je  tacherai  de  &ire  voir  que  les  loix  de  la 
nature  ne  nous  sont  pas  assez  connues  pour  en  tirer  une  conclusion 
generale,  que  le  mo.  per.  est  contraire  k  ces  loix. 

I.  Preuves  de  la  possibilite  du  Mo.  Per.,  en  supposant  que  la  Force 
du  corps  en  mouvement  est  proportionelle  k  la  masse  multipliee  par  la 
Vitesse. 

Ceux  qui  admettent  ce  principe  conviennent  de  cette  proi>08ition ; 
que  la  force  d'un  corps  qui  tombe  librement,  s'augmente  en  raison  du 
terns  que  le  corps  dans  sa  chute  reste  expose  k  Paction  de  la  pesanteur: 
ce  qui  est  une  suite  du  principe ;  puisqu'il  est  constant  par  Pexperi- 


APPENDIX.  525 

cnce,  que  la  vitesse  d'un  corps  qui  tombe,  s'augmente  en  raison  du  terns 
de  la  chute. 

Par  la  mcme  raison,  un  corps  qui  monte  verticalement,  perd  de  sa 
force  en  raison  du  terns  qu'il  monte :  par  consequent,  si  de  deux  corps 
6gaux  Tun  monte  verticalement,  pendant  que  I'autre  tombe  librement, 
le  premier  perdra  autant  de  force  que  le  second  en  gagne,  quo!  qu'ils 
parcourent  des  espaces  inegaux. 

La  force  qu'il  &iut  pour  &ire  monter  un  corps  k  une  certaine  hauteur, 
est  celle  qu'il  fiiut  pour  surmonter  Paction  de  la  pesanteur,  pendant 
que  le  corps  monte ;  &  cette  force  est  proportionelle  au  terns  que  le 
corps  emploie  a  monter. 

Si  done  un  corps,  en  tombant  librement  d*une.  certaine  hauteur,  pent 
rester  expose  plus  long-temps  a  Taction  de  la  pesanteur,  qu'il  ne  Pest 
en  remontant  a  la  meme  hauteur,  la  force  qu'il  acquiert  en  tombant 
surpasse  celle  qui  le  feire  remonter.  Comme  il  est  tr^s  possible  qu'un 
corps  remonte  plus  vite  qu'il  n'est  descendu,  c'est  sur  quoi  je  fonde  ma 
preuve  de  la  possibilite  du  mo.  per. 

Concevons  un  corps  qui  en  toinbant  de  la  hauteur  d'un  pied  perde 
tout  son  mouvement  par  le  choc ;  posons  qu'il  tombe  quatre  fois  de 
suite  de  la  mdme  manidre :  il  sera  descendu  de  la  hauteur  de  quatre 
pieds,  &  les  quatre  chocs  seront  egaux  a  la  force,  que  la  gravite  com- 
munique au  corps  pendant  les  quatre  momens  de  sa  chute.  Mais  11 
est  connu  que  le  corps  pent  remonter  en  deux  de  ces  momens  k  la 
hauteur  de  quatre  pieds ;  et  par  consequent  la  force  de  deux  des  quatre 
chocs  suflOit  pour  le  faire  remonter,  &  les  deux  autres  chocs  pourront 
etre  employees  k  faire  mouvoir  une  machine,  dont  le  mouvement  sera 
continue  k  perpetuite  par  des  chutes  reiterees  du  meme  corps,  qui  a 
cheque  revolution  gagne  la  force  de  deux  chocs.  Le  gain  de  la  tbrce 
sera  plus  grand  a  chaque  revolution,  si  on  augmente  le  nombre  des 
chocs  dans  la  descente.  U  ne  s'agit  pas  ici  de  la  mani^re  d'appliquer 
.I'eflTort  des  deux  chocs  qu'il  faut  pour  faire  remonter  le  corps :  je  ne  dis 
pas  que  j'aie  trouve  le  mo.  per. ;  il  suffit  de  demontrer,  comme  je  viens 
de  le  faire,  qu'il  y  a  dans  la  nature  un  principe  d'augmentation  de 
force,  pour  soutenir  que  le  mo.  per.  n'est  pas  contradictoire,  &  meme 
qu'il  est  possible. 

Cette  possibilite  pariotra  plus  clairement,  si  on  feit  attention  k  cette 
propriete  des  ressorts,  qu'ils  se  debandent  avec  la  meme  force  qu'ils  ont 
ete  bandes,  sur  quelque  corps  qu'ils  agissent.  Soient  deux  corps  que 
je  nomme  A  &  B.  Je  suppose  que  A  pese  quatre  livres,  &  B  une 
livre.  B  en  descendant  de  la  hauteur  de  quatre  pieds  &it  monter  A 
a  la  hauteur  d'un  pied,  par  le  moyen  d'lm  levier  ou  de  quelque  autre 
niiicliine ;  ce  qui  n'est  pas  coutcste.  Je  nomme  un  la  vitesse  qu'un  corps 
acquiert  en  tombant  de  la  hauteur  d'un  pied  a  laquclle  il  vient  d'etre 


526  APPBNDIX, 

eleve :  il  aura  quatre  degres  de  force.  Supposons  encote  (Jue  A  par 
son  choc  bande  un  ressort,  et  qu'il  y  employ^  toute  la  force  de  son 
choc<  Si  ce  ressort  en  se  debandant  agit  siir  B ;  il  communi^uera  a  B 
quatre  degres  de  force :  c'est  a  dire,  puisque  la  masse  de  B  est  un^ 
quatre  degres  de  vitesse,  qui  feront  remonter  le  corps  B  a  une  hauteur 
de  seize  pieds,  quadruple  de  la  hauteur  dont  il  etoit  descendu  d'abord. 

On  trouve  dans  les  Actes  de  Leipsic  une  dispute  sur  cette  mati^re 
entre  MM.  Leibnitz  et  Papin.  Le  premier,  pour  combattre  le  principe, 
que  la  force  d'un  corps  est  proportionelle  a  sa  ritesse,  soutenoit  que  la 
jvossibiUte  du  mo.  per.  en  est  la  suite.  M.  Papin  ne  put  nier  la 
validitc  de  la  consequence,  et  se  contenta  de  repondre,  que  si*  on  lai 
faisoit  voir,  qu'il  n'est  pas  contradictoire  que  toute  la  force  d'un  grand 
corps  soit  communiquee  a  un  petit,  il  avoueroit,  ou  que  le  principe  qu*il 
defendoit  est  faux,  ou  que  le  mouvement  perpetuel  est  possible.  M. 
Leibnitz  a  cette  occasion  indiqua  plusieurs  moyens  de  commimiquer 
toute  la  force  d'lm  grand  corps  a  un  petit,  difierents  de  celui  du  ressort 
que  j'ai  emploie  dans  ma  demonstration. 

Le  ressort  des  corps  est  Un  principe  d'augmentation  de  force  a  Pinfini 
en  supposant  toujours,  avec  les  plus  grand  nombre  des  Mathematiciens, 
que  la  force  du  corps  est  proportionelle  au  produit  de  la  masse  par  la 
vitesse. 

Concevons  onze  bouies  de  quelques  mati^re  flexible  a  ressort,  dont 
les  masses  soient  en  progression  geometrique  d'un  a  dix  ;  que  ces  bouies 
soient  rangees  suivant  Tordre  de  leur  grandeur  ;  que  la  plus  petite,  que 
nous  supposons  seule  en  mouvement^  frappe  celle  qui  la  suit;  que  celle- 
ci,  mise  en  mouvement  par  ce  choc,  aiUe  frapper  la  suivante;  &  ainsi 
de  suite,  jusques  a  ce  que  plus  grande  soit  frappee.  Dans  ce  cas,  si 
tous  les  chocs  sont  directs,  &  si  le  ressort  des  bouies  est  parfalt,  cette 
demi^re  aura  394.  fois  plus  de  force  que  n'en  avoit  la  plus  petite  ; 
comme  on  le  trouve  par  les  regies  du  choc,  recues  par  tous  les  Mathe- 
maticiens,  qui  n'ont  point  de  diflerent  sur  la  vitesse  des  corps  apres  le 
choc*  Les  dix  premieres  bouies  retournent,  &  les  forces  de  toutes 
jointes  ensemble  surpassent  393.  fois  la  force  communiquee  a  la  petite 
boule  qui  avoit  ete  mise  en  mouvement.  Or,  comme  la  direction  du 
mouvement  n'empeche  pas  que  I'effbrt  des  ces  corps  ne  puisse  etre  mis 
a  profit,  il  s'ensuit  qu'un  seul  degre  de  force  communiquee  a  un  corps, 
en  produit  pr^s  de  huit  cens  dans  d'autres  corps* 

Soutiendra-t-on  que  ces  huit  cens  degres  de  force  lie  puissent  etre  em- 
ploies  a  en  rendre  un  seul  au  premier  corps,  &  outre  cela  a  fidre  mou- 
voir  quelque  Machine,  dont  on  voit  aisement  que  le  mouvement  pour- 
roit  etre  continue  a  perpetuite,  si  les  materiaux  ne  susoriaent  pas? 

On  m'obj cetera,  peut-etre,  qu'il  n'y  a  point  de  corps,  dont  le  ressort 
soit  parfuit ;  ce  qui  ne  rcnverse  pas  la  force  du  ruisonnement.  De  manqutf 


APPENDIX^ 


627 


de  perfection  dans  le  ressort,  il  suit  que  Taugmentation  de  \&  force  sera 
moindre,  que  celle  que  nous  avons  determinee ;  mais,  il  faudroit  n'y  ent 
du  tout  points  de  ressort,  pour  qu'il  n'y  cut  d'augmentation  de  force. 
L'elasticite  de  Tyroire,  qui  n'est  pas  la  plus  parfait  que  nous  ayons,  est 
su£Q[sante  pour  augmenter  la  force  plus  de  dix  cens  Ms,  dans  Texemple 
qu'on  vient  d'alleguer. 

Le  seul  moyen  de  repondre  aux  argumens  qu'on  vient  de  proposer 
pour  la  possibilite  du  mo.  per.,  est  de  nier,  avec  M.  Leibnitz,  le  principe 
BUT  lequel  ils  sont  fondes,  que  les  forces  des  corps  sont  en  raisons  des 
produits  de  leurs  masses  par  leurs  vitesses ;  mais,  c'est  ce  qu'im  trcs 
petit  nombre  de  Mathematiciens  ont  fait  jusqu'ici  Dans  le  tems 
que  j'ecrivis  ma  Lettre  a  M.  Newton,  je  croyois  avoir  des  preuves  du 
principe  sur  lequel  j'ai  ralsonne  jusqu'a  present;  &  en  admettant  le 
principe,  il  me  paroissoit  que  la  consequence  etoit  demontree.  Si  je 
me  suis  trompe  dans  principe,  je  suis  trombe  dans  Perreur  avec  le  plus 
grand  nombre  de  ceux  qui  trouve  que  j'avois  tort  dans  ce  que  j'ai 
ftvance  touchant  le  mo.  per. 

11.  Examen  des  Demonstrations  de  Pimpossibilite  du  Mouvement 
Perpetuel,  en  posant  pour  principe,  que  la  force  d'un  corps  est  propor- 
tionelle  au  quarre  de  sa  Vitesse. 

Une  suitfort  naturelle  de  ce  principe  est  que  la  force  qu'un  corps 
acquiert  en  tombant  est  exactement  celle  qu'il  faut  pour  le  faire  re^ 
monter  a  la  meme  hauteur,  sans  qu'on  doive  avoir  egard-au  tems. 

C'est  encore  une  suite  du  meme  principe,  que  la  force  n'est  pas  aug- 
mentee  dans  le  choc  des  corps  flexibles  a  ressort :  &  j'accorde  volon- 
tiers,  qu*^  cet  egard,  ceux  qui  admettent  le  principe  dont  il  s'agit,  ont 
demontre  I'impossibilite  du  mo.  per* 

Mais,  il  suit  aussi  du  meme  principe,  que  deux  corps,  qui  se  choquent 
directement,  peuvent  rester  en  repos  apres  le  choc,  quoique  leurs  forces 
soient  inegales ;  car  deux  corps  inegaux,  dont  les  vitesses  sont  en  rai- 
son  inverse  des  masses,  et  dont  par  consequent  les  forces  sont  inegale, 
venant  a  se  choquer  directement,  s'ils  n'ont  point  de  ressort,  restent  en 
repos  aprds  le  choc :  ce  que  personne  ne  conteste,  et  ce  qui  est  prouve 
directement  par  des  experiences  dans  lesquelles  il  n'est  pas  possible 
qu'il  y  ait  de  I'erreur. 

Concevons  deux  corps  dont  les  masses  soient  comme  1^10  &  les 
vitesses  comme  10  a  1 :  la  force  du  petit  sera  cent,  &  celle  du  grand 
sera  dix,  en  multipliant  les  masses  par  les  quarres  des  vitesses,  c'est  a 
dire,  que  la  force  du  petit  corps  surpasse  dix  fois  I'autre,  &  cependant 
la  force  du  grand  corps  est  suffisante  pour  fair  perdre  au  petit  corps 
tout  son  mouvement.  C'est  im  axiome  reyu  de  tons  les  Mathematiciens 
qu'il  faut  autant  d'effort  pour  donner  a  un  corps  en  repos  dix  degres  de 
Vitesse,  qu'il  en  fiiut  pour  I'arreter  lorsqu'il  est  mu  avec  ces  memes  dix. 


628 


APPENDIX. 


dcgres  de  Titesse.  Or,  on  a  yu  comment  dans  le  choc  direct  une  petite 
force  suffit  pour  fidre  perdre  a  im  corps  dix  degres  de  vitesse.  Par 
consequent,  pour  fiiire  voir  que  le  mo.  per.  est  contradictoire,  il  &,udroit 
faire  voir  qu*il  implique  contradiction,  qu'avec  un  certain  degre  de 
force,  que  je  nomme  /,  on  puisse  communiquer  a  un  corps  une  force  dix 
fois  plus  grande  que  F,  quoique  cette  meme  petite  force  /  suffise  pour 
fidre  perdre  son  mouvementii  un  corps  dont  la  force  seroit  F.  Or  c'est 
ce  qui  me  paroit  pas  avoir  ete  entrepris  jusques  a  present. 

Bien  des  Lecteurs  seront  etonnes  de  voir,  entre  lee  sentlmens  des 
Mathematiciens  sur  la  force  des  corps,  une  difierence  aussi  grande  que 
celle  dont  nous  avons  parle.  La  matiere  du  choc  des  corps  est  une  des 
moins  eclaircies  de  la  physique :  plusieurs  probl^mes  importants  sur 
cette  matidre  n'ont  pas  encore  ete  examines ;  &  le  manque  de  certaines 
experiences  a  emp^che  ceux,  qui  ont  trete  jusques  a  present  cette  ma- 
tiere, quelque  principe  qu*ils  ayent  admis,  de  fidre  attention  sL  tout  ce 
qui  devoit  etre  considere.  J'ae  public  un  Introduction  a  la  Fhilosophie 
de  M.  Newton.  Tout  ce  que  j'y  dis  du  choc  est  fonde  sur  ce  principe* 
que  la  force,  qu'avec  les  autres  Mathematiciens  je  nomme  quantite  du 
mouvement,  est  proportionelle  a  la  masse  multipliee  par  la  vitesse. 
En  encrivant  ma  Lettre  a  M.  Newton,  j'etois,  comme  je  Tai  dis  ci- 
dessus,  encore  dans  le  meme  sentiment.  Les  regies  que  les  Mathema- 
ticiens ont  donnees  pour  determiner  I'effet  du  choc  de  deux  corps  sont 
trop  bien  confirmees  par  I'experience  pour  etre  revoquees  en  doute;  il 
me  paroissoit  qu*elles  etoient  une  suite  du  principe  dont  je  viens  de 
parler;  &  je  soup9onnois  d'autant  moins  que  je  pourois  me  tromper 
sur  ced,  que  ce  qui  regarde  le  choc  des  corps,  du  moins  des  corps  non 
elastiques,  a  ete  deduit'  de  ce  meme  principe,  par  les  Mathematiciens 
qui  admettoient  Tautre;  ce  qui  me  faicoit  croire,  que  quoi  qu'i'ls  ad- 
missent  ce  dernier  dans  la  speculation,  ils  etoient  obliges  de  Paban- 
donner,  pour  expliquer  ce  qui  regarde  les  effets  du  choc. 

Depuis,  j*ai  fidt  des  experiences  qui  m'ont  feit  voir,  d'une  mani^re  a 
ne  laisser  pas  le  moindre  doute,  que  ce  dernier  principe,  que  la  force 
des  corps  est  proportionelle  au  quarre  de  la  vitesse  multiplie  par  la 
masse,  etait  veritable.  Ce  principe  m'a  menie  a  des  consequences  qui 
m*ont  paru  bien  paradoxes;  mais,  les  ayant  trouvees  conformes  a  Fex- 
perience,  je  me  suis  attache  a  en  rechercer  les  raisons,  pour  concilier 
ces  experiences  avec  celles  qui  ont  ete  faites  touchant  le  choc.  Le 
public  jugera  si  j'ai-  reussi,  par  un  Essai  sur  une  nouvelle  Theorie  du 
uhoc,  qui  paroitra  dans  peu  dans  le  12,  tome  du  Journal  Litteraire,  qui 
s^imprime  a  la  Haye.*    On  verra  aussi  que,  d'admettre  Tun  ou  Pautre 

*  Cet  Essai  est  celui  qui  a  ete  insere  ci-dessus  pag.  217,  &  a  cette 
'Occasion  il  resta  propos  de  remarquer,  que  ce  que  M.  's  Gravesaude 


APPENDIX.  529 

des  principes  dont  nous  ayons  parle,  ne  change  rien  dans  tout  ce  qu'on 
a  demontre  sur  la  projection  des  graves,  sur  les  fbrces  centrales,  leg 
centres  d'oscillation,  et  plusieurs  autt>es  mati^res  qui  regardent  le 
mouvement. 

HE.  Quoique  depuis  ma  Lettre  ecrite  a  M.  Newton,  j*aie  entidrement 
change  de  sentiment  tonchant  la  nature  de  la  force  dont  depend  le 
choc,  &  que  je  ne  croie  dIus  qu'on  puisse  demontrer  la  possibilite  de 
mo.  per.  par  les  raisons  qu*on  a  veues  ci-deyant,  &  qui  me  parolssent 
encore  des  suites  incontestables  d'un  prindpe  generalement  re9u,  je  ne 
saurois  me  persuader  neanmoins,  qn'il  soit  possible  de  demortrer  jamais, 
qu'il  soit  contradictoire  de  constmire  une  machine  qui  auroit  en  soi  un 
principe  d'augmentation  de  force  en  consequence  des  loix  de  la  nature. 
Ces  loix  nous  sont  trop  inconnues.  et  il  y  a  peu  d'apparence  qu*on  les 
decouTre.  Jamais  toutes  assez  bien,  pour  en  tirer  une  samblable  con^ 
elusion.  H  me  paroit,  au  contraire,  que  ce  que  nous  connoissons  de 
ces  loix  nous  doit  faire  etivisager  comme  trds  possible  une  Machine 
tell  au*il  nous  faut  pour  gagner  de  force  qui  contre-balance  ce  qui  se  perd 
par  le  frottlement.  La  nouriture  ne  sert  proprement  qu'entretenir 
en  etat  les  materiaux  qui  composent  la  Machine. 

Au  reste,  la  question  de  la  possibilite  ou  impossibilite  du  mo.  per.; 
me  paroit  de  fort  peu  de  cons^uence :  mais  il  seroit  k  souhaiter  que  la 
forte  persuasion  dans  laquelle  sont  les  Mathematidens,  touchant  cette 
impossibilite,  ne  les  empechat  pas  de  fSure  une  attention  serieuse  k  une 
machine  aussi  etonnante  qu'est  celle  de  Cassel.  Une  rou,  dont  le  prin- 
dpe du  mouvement  est  interieur ;  qui  se  met  en  mouvement  par  le 
moindre  effort ;  qu*on  pent  faire  toumer  du  cot^  juge  k  propos,  sans 
que  ce  qui  la  fiiit  toumer  d'un  cote  soit  arrete  par  ce  qui  I'auroit  Mt 
toumer  de  Pautre,  si  elle  y  avoit  et^  poussee ;  enfln,  une  roue,  qui,  apr^s 
avoir  fait  ce  que  nous  venous  de  decrire,  quand  meme  Part  humain 
ne  pourroit  jamais  y  parvenir. 

H  y  a  dans  la  nature  des  prindpes  actifs  pour  retablir  le  mouvement 
qui  se  perd  en  taut  de  rencontres :  on  decouvre  de  tels  principes  dans 
toutes  les  petites  parties  dont  les  corps  sont  composes  ;  &  on  en  voit 
des  effets  bien  considerables  dans  les  ressorts,  dans  les  fermentations,  et 
dans  une  infinite  d'autres  occasions.  N*y  auroit-il  pas  quelque  temerity 
d'assurer  qu'il  soit  contradictoire  de  mettre  k  profit  ces  prindples  ?    n 


vient  de  dire  du  sentiment  sur  la  force  qu*il  a  adopte  dans  son  Intro- 
duction k  la  Philosophic  de  Newton,  doit  s'entendre  de  la  premiere 
edition  de  cet  ouvrage,  qui  a  paru  en  1720.*  Dans  les  deux  autres 
editions  qui  Tout  suivie,  &  qui  ont  ete  public  en  1725,  &  1742,  il  a 
etabli  que  la  force  '^toit  proportionelle  au  quarre  de  la  Vitesse  d'un 
corps,  multiplie  par  sa  masse. 


530  APPENDIX, 

paroit  probable,  que  c'est  d'eux  que  dependent  les  mouvemens  dans  les 
animaux,  dont  les  corps  me  parroissent  autant  de  mo.  per. :  le  sang,  qui 
circule,  met  en  mouyement  les  muscles  qui  agitent  le  coeur :  le  coeur 
agite  fiiit  circuler  le  sang ;  et  dans  chaque  revolution,  il  quelques  mil- 
lions de  tours,  avec  une  rapidite  suprenante,  continue  son  mouvement 
de  meme,  &  n'est  arretee  qu'a  force  de  bras ;  une  telle  machine  merite, 
a  ce  qu'il  me  paroit,  quelque  eloge,  quand  meme  elle  ne  satisferoit  pas  k 
tout  ce  que  Pinventeur  en  promet.  Si  c'est  le  mo.  per.,  I'auteur  merite 
bien  la  recompense  qu'il  demande :  si  ce  ne  Test  point,  le  public  pent 
decouvrir  une  belle  invention,  sans  que  ceux  qui  auroient  promis  la  re- 
compense ftissent  engages  a  rien;  Pinventeur  n'ayant  jamais  exige 
qu'une  promesse  conditionelle.*    [Vol.  1,  pp.  305-312.] 


*  CEuvres  Philosophiques  et  Mathematiques  de  M.  G.  J.  's  Grave- 
sande,  rassemblees  &  pubUee  par  Jean  Nic.  Seb.  AUamond.  Amsterdam, 
1774.    2  vols.    4to. 


APPENDIX  G. 


*  Acta  Ervditorvm  anno  1715.    Lipslae,  1715.    4to. 

Nova  Literaria  Mathematica  de  Ferpetuomobile,  Longitndine  Maris, 
&  Quadratura  a  Circuli 

^  Licet  irrito  per  tot  secilla  conatil  Miithematicortim  ingenia  defatiga* 
verint  perpetunm  mobile,  longitudo  maris,  ft  circuli  quadratura,  noil 
tamen  defuere  anno  proxime  prseterito,  qui  prolematum  hactenus  des-» 
peratorum  solutionem  giganteo  ausu  denuo  aggressi  sunt.  Perpetuum 
mobile  construxit  Orfreus,  Misnicus,  vir  in  arte  Medica,  quam  profi- 
tetur,  &  in  Chymia  atque  Mechanica  versatissimus :  Longitudincm 
Maris  inreniendi  methodum  excogitarunt  Dittonua  atque  Whistonus 
Angli,  eruditionis  fiima  prsestantes;  Circuli  Quadraturam  publicavit 
Daniel  Waeyvvel  Batavus,  Orbi  erudito  hactenus  ignotus.  PrsBstanda 
prsestitit  GermanuS ;  ingenio  suo  non  prorsus  indigna  dedere  Angli ; 
infeHx  in  demonstrando  suit  Batavus. 

Perpetuum  mobile,  quod  Orffrem  nostei*  construxit,  idderttfit  homi- 
num  myriades,  &  rerum  Mathematicarum  atque  Mechanicarum  peritis^ 
simi  a^mirati  sunt.  Structura,  quam  inventor  inventi  pnemium 
expectans  studiose  cdat,  simplicissima  esse  coUigitur,  quia  non  nisi, 
unica  rota  cum  axe  suo  dcumeunte  constat.  Diameter  ejus  quinque 
ulnas  Lipsienses  non  excedit  crassities  6  digitos  non  superat.  Intervallo 
unius  minuti  horarii  quinquaginta  revolutiones  absolvuntur  &  rotA 
libere  pendula  nee  ulla  motore  extemo  sensibili  Impulsa  obstaculo 
remoto  motum  inchoat,  eumque  perenniter  &  sequabiliter  admodum 
continuans  pondus  60  immo  70  &  amplius  librarum  ad  aliquot  orgyarum 
altitudinem  attolere  vaJet.  Tarn  nobUe  inventum  hactenus  spectandum 
inventor  in  pago  quodam  3)re8c$ta}it},  non  procul  ab  oppido  Ciza  sito } 
ted  nunc  locum  mutare  cogitur.    [Pp.  46-7.] 


n2 


APPENDIX  H. 


The  following,  by  J.  Bernoulli,  is  from  the  Appendix  to  "  Oper» 
Omnia,"  1742:— 

Vixdum  Dissertationi  huic  colophonem  imposui,  cum  mihi  praecipita- 
tionis,  &  secretionis  particularum  naturam,  ultimis  pagellis  breviter 
explicatam,  sedulo  contemplanti,  ex  hujus  occasione,  fortuito  sese  ob- 
tulit  modus  construendi,  ope  cujusdam  liquoris  continuo  fluentis,  decan- 
tatum  illud  &  ab  omni  aevo  desideratum  Mobile  Perpetuum  pure  arti- 
ficiale;  quem  proinde  hie,  coronidis  loco,  ob  materise  afiinitatem^ 
Eruditis  examinandum  proponam.  Neminem  profecto  latet,  quam 
avide  jam  a  longo  tempore  a  Celeberrimis  quoque  Viris  Motus  iste 
Perpetuus  sit  qusesitus,  quam  ardenter  effiagitatus:  quid  enim  non 
excogitarunt  ?  quot  sumptus  non  impenderunt  ?  quantasque  non 
extruxerunt  machinas?  sed  omnia  in  cassum, 

ndyla  y4\cffs,  Kal  Ttavra  kSvis,  Koi  vdvla  rh  firidev, 

Yexat  etiamnum  &  torquet  continuo  multos  coeca  ^Perpetui  higus 
Mobilis  cupido,  eorumque  ingenia  adeo  incitat,  ut  auribus  animisque 
Hominum  Eruditorum  absurda  de  hac  re  etiam  proferri  yideamus: 
quae  tamen  hodie  plerique  Viri  docti  rejiciunt ;  uanimiter  asseverantes, 
Motum  Perpetuum,  nee  dari,  nee  inyeniri  posse :  qmb  opinio  eousque 
apud  hos  invaluit,  ut  satis  temere  pronuncient,  ne  audiendos  quidem 
esse,  qui  tale  quid  se  reperisse  gloriarentmr ;  quorum  tamen  rationes  (ut 
fatear)  ad  me  convincendum  non  sufficient ;  quin  potius  asserere  non 
erubescam  Motum  Perpetuum,  ,non  solum  inventu  possibilem,  sed 
prorsus  inventum  jam  esse,  ut  quivis  &tebitur,  qui  has  legerit  lineolas ; 
&  quid  multis  opus  est  ?  annon  ipsa  Natura  (qu83  nunquam  non  juxta 
leges  mechanicas  operari  dicitur)  possibile  esse  Mobile  Perpetuum 
indicat  ?  quid  (ut  hoc  solum  memorem)  perennis  fluminum  &  aquarom 
fluxus  aliud  est,  quam  Motus  Perpetuus  ?  anon  omnia  mechanice  pera- 
guntur  ?  ergo,  fateris,  quod  liraites  legum  mechanicarum  non  excedit, 
illud  impossible  non  est ;  quid  proinde  impedit,  quo  minus  praeeuntem 
Naturam  hac  in  re,  utut  non  tarn  perfecte  imitari  possimus  ?  ut  autem 
tandem  finiam,  possibilitasque  Motus  Perpetui  artificialis  salvetur, 
moduni,  quo  conciliari  possit,  tibi  ostendam,  de  quo  ne  in  sinistram 


APPENDIX. 


533 


partem  teniae  judicium  feras,  vel  pro  Titanico  conatu  interpreteris, 
hunc  ut  prius  acriter  perpendas,  vel,  si  lubet,  rei  veritatem  ipse  expe- 
riaris  rogo. 
Ante  omnia  prseponenda  sunt  sequentia. 


{Tah.  1,  Fig.  8.) 
E, 


I.  Si  sint  duo  liquores  diyersss  gravitatis,  quorum  gravitates  sint  in 
ratione  G  ad  L ;  erunt,  viceversa,  altitudines  cylindrorum  aequiponde- 
rantium,  &  super  sBquali  basi  existentium,  in  ratione  L  ad  G. 

II.  Ideoque  si  altitudo  A  C  (Fig.  8)  Uquoris  unius  in  vaculo  A  D 
contenti,  sit  ad  altitudinem  E  F  liquoris  alteriu*  in  tubo  utriuque  aperto 
existensis,  ut  L  ad  G ;  liquores  ita  positi  quiescent. 

in.  Froinde  si  A  C  ad  £  F  sit  in  majori  ratione  quam  L  ad  G ; 
liquor  in  tubo  ascendet ;  vel  si  tubus  sufficienter  longus  non  sit,  liquor 
per  orifidum  E  prolabetur. 

(Haec  ex  Hydrostaticis  probantur.) 

IV.  Fossunt  haberi  duo  diversae  gravitatis  liquores,  qui  conjuncti 
invicem  miscentur. 

y.  Fotest  haberi  filtrum,  colatorium,  vel  aliud  secretorium,  ope  cujus 
liquor  levior  graviori  inunistus  ab  eodem  iterum  potest  secerni. 

CoNSTRUCTio. — His  prsBSuppositis,  Mobile  Ferpetuum  sic  construo. 
Sumantur  in  quacunque  quantitate,  si  vis,  in  aBquali,  duo  diversa  grar 
vitatis  liquores  invicem  miscibiles  (qui  per  hyp.  4.  possunt  haberi) 
illorumque  ratio  gravitatis  prius  exploretur,  quae  sit  ut  G  ad  L  gra- 
vioris  ad  leviorem,  deinde  illis  permixtis  impleatur  vasculum  A  D 
usque  ad  A.  Hoc  fiwito  sumatur  tubus  utriuque  apertus  E  F,  ejus 
longitudinis,  ut  sit  AC:EF>'2L:G-|-L;  hujus  vero  tubi  oriti- 
cium  inferius  F  obstruatur,  vel  potius  obducatur,  filtro,  vel  alia  materia 
quadam,  secemente  liquorem  leviorem  a  graviori  (quae  per  hyp.  5. 


534 


APPENDIX. 


etiam  potest  haberi) ;  tandem  tubus  hoc  modo  paratus  liquori  immer- 
gatur  usque  ad  fundum  vasculi  C  D  ;  dico,  liquorem  continuo  per  tubi 
orificium  F  ascensurum,  &  per  orificium  E  in  subjectum  liquorem  pro- 
lapsurum. 

Dkmonstratio. — Quia  tubi  orificium  F  obductum  est  filtro  (per 
constr.)  quod  liquorem  leviorem  a  graviori  secernit;  sequitur,  ut,  si 
tubus  immergatur  ad  fundum  vasculi,  liquor  solummodo  levior,  qui 
graviori  est  immistus,  per  flltrum  in  tubum  ascendere  debeat,  &  quidem 
eousque  ultra  superficiem  ambientis  liquoris  (per  hyp.  2.)  ascenderet, 
ut  esset  AC:EF=2L:G  +  L:  quia  vero  (per  constr.)  A  C  :  E 
F  >•  2  L  :  G  +  L,  necesse  est  (per  hyp.  3.)  ut  liquor  levior,  per  orifi- 
cium E,  sese  exoneret  in  vasculum  subjectum,  ibique  denuo  cum  gra- 
viori conjugatur,  &  (per  hyp.  4.)  misceatur  de  novo ;  qui  dein  pene- 
trando  filtrum,  in  tubum  rursus  ascendat,  interumque  per  superius 
orificium  expellatur.  Sic  itaque  fiuxus  continuabitur  in  perpetuum. 
Q.E.D. 

CoBOLL. — Hinc  commode  reddi  potest  ratio,  cur  aqua,  ex  mari  pro- 
fundo  ad  summa  usque  cacumina  montium  jugiter  ascendenda,  ex  iis 
saltuatim  prorumpat  &  refluend  sub  forma  fluminum,  se  refundat  in 
Oceanum,  sicque  Natura  nobis  Perpetuum  sistat  Mobile.  Hoc  inquam, 
Hon  bene  explicant  illi,  qui  dicunt  eandem  ob  causam  aquam  ex  mari  in 
sublimius  ferri  per  terra  poros,  ob  quam  liquor  in  tubilis  perangustis 
ascendat  ultra  superficiem  liquoris  tubulos  ambientis :  nam,  si  ita  res 
explicanda  fbret,  nunquam  demonstrare  possent,  cur  eadem  aqua,  in 
altum  elevata,  e  terrse  gremio  prolabatur ;  videmus  enim,  in  angustis 
istis  tubulis,  licet  tantillum  supra  liquorem  ambientem  emineant,  nun- 
quam tamen  extra  eorum  ora  sese  evolvere,  &  in  liquorem  substratum 
decidere.  Commodius  itaque  sit  explicatur :  notum  est,  aquam,  in  qua 
multum  salis  est  dissolutum,  graviorem  esse  eadem  dulci ;  verum  aqua 
marina,  ut  patet  ex  sapore,  multas  particulas  salinas  in  se  continent ; 
proinde  erit  gravior  quam  aqua  fontana  vel  fluvialis  :  credibile  itaque 
est,  quod  cum  terra  vicem  gerat  filtri,  per  cujus  poros  aqua  solum 
dulcis  transire  potest,  relictis  salinis  particulis,  quae  gravitatem  aqu9 
augent ;  aqua  dulcis  per  terram  longe  altius  ascendere  debeat,  ob  im- 
mensam  Oceani  profunditatem,  ita  ut  ad  altissima  quoque  montium 
fastigia,  per  pressionem  aqusB  marinae,  protrudatur ;  ex  quibus  dein, 
cum  ultra  ascendere  nequeat,  rivulorum  instar  emanet,* 


*  Johannis  Bernoulli,  M.D.,  Matheseos  Professoris,  &c.  Opera 
Omnia,  quse  ab  Anno  1690  ad  Annum  1713  prodierunt.  Tjausannw  et 
Oenev«  1742.    4  vols.    4to.     [Vol.  1,  pp.  41-4.] 


ADDENDA. 


Belgian  Patents. 

Meeting  accidentally  with  a  work  entitled  "  Recueil  Special 
des  Brevets  d'Invention,"  published  at  Brussels  for  the  pro- 
motion of  art,  in  3  vols.,  royal  octavo,  1855  to  1857,  the  fol- 
lowing is  a  list  therefrom : — 

1.  G.  Wynen,  1854.  For  a  perpetual  motion.  A  vertical 
wheel  turning  on  a  horizontal  axle.  It  has  radial  holes  con- 
taining metal  balls,  moving  freely.     (Vol.  1,  p.  248.) 

2.  J.  R.  Delgtjet-Malava,  1854.  For  a  movement  by 
continual  gravitation.  The  machine  seems  to  be  composed 
of  an  axle  carrying  weighted  levers.     (Vol.  1,  p.  634.)* 

3.  D.  Pbeumpleb,  1855.  For  a  system  of  perpetual 
motion.  It  is  a  combination  of  tubes,  in  which  water  is  kept 
in  constant  movement.     (Vol.  2,  p.  50.) 

4.  H.  J.  Botebmann,  1856.  For  a  perpetual  motion  by 
a  vertical  wheel.  It  has  balls  moving  in  guides.  (Vol.  2, 
p.  414.) 

5.  L.  Melabd,  1856.  For  perpetual  motion.  It  is  a 
horizontal  axle,  crossed  perpendicularly  with  straight  move- 
able iron  bars,  which  meet  in  eccentric  curves  during  rota- 
tion.    (Vol.  2,  p.  556.) 


♦  See  Chapter  XL,  p.  446. 


536  ADDENDA. 

6.  F.  Greniek,  1857.  For  a  system  of  perpetual  motion. 
It  is  a  large  wheel,  furnished  with  spokes  and  weights,  and 
operates  by  maintaining  the  weight  to  one  side.  (Vol.  3, 
pp.  655  and  942.) 

7.  J.  E.  Humbert,  1857.  For  a  double  apparatus  of 
perpetual'  motion.  It  consists  of  wheels  and  levers,  which  it 
is  represented  work  on  a  very  simple  principle.     (Vol.  3, 

p.  707.) 

8.  A.  M.  TiMBRELL,  1857-  For  a  system  of  constant 
; motive  power.  A  combination  of  pulleys  to  produce  a  "  me- 
•  chanical  stimulant"   to  equalize  reaction  and  create  power. 

(Vol.  3,  p.  959.) 

9.  F.  LE  CoMPTE,  1857.  For  an  articulated  fly-wheel  or 
perpetual  motion.  A.combination  of  levers  to  create  a  force 
sufficient  to  reproduce  itself  and  cause  a  circular  movement. 
(Vol.  3,  p.  976.) 


Polytechnic  Institution,  Regent  Street. — ^Two  fic- 
titious perpetual  motions,  applied  as  Time-pieces,  may  here 
be  seen.  They  are  described  as  patented  by  M.  Moinau  de 
Montauban. 

In  their  glass  shades  they  stand  2  feet  high,  on  a  base  of 
18  inches.  The  clocks  have  flat  annular  dials,  each  sup- 
ported on  2  pillars ;  each  has  behind  the  dial  a  wheel  with 
4  spokes,  having  around  the  periphery  12  arms  terminating 
in  cupped  rings  to  receive  and  deliver  balls  of  about  three 
quarters  of  an  inch  in  diameter.  One  clock  delivers  these 
balls  to  the  top  side  of  the  wheel  by  an  Archimedean  spiral ; 
the  other  elevates  them  by  a  lever.  These  models  must  have 
cost  between  one  and  two  hundred  pounds ;  and  it  is  quite 
obvious  that  they  must  have  received  external  aid  through 
apertures  which  may  be  seen  in  the  back  of  *the  base  of  each. 
Other  portions  of  reputed  Perpetual  Motion  machinery  were 
exhibited  by  the  same  patentee,  called  the  "  Volant  Moteur 
Perpetuel,"  but  are  removed. 


ADDENDA.  537 

On  certain  conditions  under  which  a  Perpetual  Motion  is 
possible.  By  George  Biddell  Airy,  M.A.,  Member  of 
the  Astronomical  Society,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  and 
of  the  Cambridge  Phil.  Society,  &c.,  &c.  (Read  Dec.  14, 
1829.) 

It  is  well  known  that  Perpetual  Motion  is  not  possible  with 
any  laws  of  force  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  The  im- 
possibility depends  on  the  integrability  per  se  of  the  expres- 
sion X  d  X  4-  Y  d  f/  +  Z  d  z  :  and  as  in  all  the  forces  of 
which  we  have  an  accurate  knowledge  this  expression  is  a 
complete  differential,  it  follows  that  perpetual  motion  is 
incompatible  with  those  forces. 

But  it  is  here  supposed  that,  the  Iftw  of  the  force  being 
given,  the  magnitude  of  the  force  acting  at  any  instant 
depends  on  the  position,  at  that  instant,  of  the  body  on  which 
it  acts.  If,  however,  the  magnitude  of  the  force  should 
depend  not  on  the  position  of  the  body  at  the  instant  of  the 
force's  action,  but  on  its  position  at  some  time  preceding  that 
action,  the  theorem  that  we  have  stated  would  no  longer  be 
true.  It  might  happen  that,  every  time  that  the  body  re- 
turned to  the  same  position,  its  velocity  would  be  less  than 
at  the  preceding  time  :  in  this  case  the  body'^s  motion  would. 
ultimately  be  destroyed.  On  the  contrary,  it  might  happen 
that  the  body's  velocity  in  any  position,  would  be  more  rapid 
ever}'  time  than  at  the  time  previous.  In  this  case  the- 
velocity  would  go  on  perpetually  increasing  r  or,  the  velocity 
might  be  made  uniform  if  the  machine  were  retarded  by  some 
constantly  acting^  resistance  :  or,  in  other  words,  the  machine 
might  move  with  uniform  velocity,  and  nright  at  the  same  time 
do  work :  which  is  commonly  imderstood  to-  be  the  meaning^ 
of  the  term  perpetual  motion:  If  the  machine  had  no  work  to 
do,  the  increasing  friction,  &c.,  would  operate  a&  an  increasing 
work,  and  the  velocity  would  be  accelerated  tiU  the  accelera- 
tion caused  by  the  forces  was  equal  to  the  retardation  caused, 
by  the  friction ;  after  which  it  would  remain  unaltered. 

For  this  idea  I  am  indebted  to  the  admirable  account  of 


538  ADDENDA. 

the  organs  of  voice  given  by  Mr.  Willis.  The  phenomenon 
to  be  explained  was  this.  When  two  plates  are  inclined  at 
an  angle  greater  than  a  certain  angle,  it  is  found  that  the 
effect  of  a  current  of  air  passing  between  them  is  to  give  a 
tendency  to  open  wider.  When  they  are  inclined  at  any 
angle  smaller  than  that  certain  angle,  the  effect  of  the  current 
is  to  make  them  collapse.  If,  then,  the  plates  be  sup- 
posed to  vibrate  through  the  position  corresponding  to  that 
angle,  the  tendency  of  the  forces  at  all  times  is  to  bring  them 
to  that  position.  Each  plate  is  in  the  state  of  a  vibrating 
pendulum :  and  whatever  be  the  law  of  force  which  acts  on 
it,  it  is  certain  that  if  the  force  be  the  same  when  the  plate  is 
in  the  same  position,  this  force  will  have  no  tendency  to  in- 
crease the  velocity.  The  retardation  arising  from  friction, 
&c.,  will,  therefore,  soon  destroy  the  motion.  But  it  is  found, 
in  fact,  that  the  motion  is  not  destroyed.  What  then  is  the 
accelerating  force  which  keeps  up  the  motion  ?  Mr.  Willis 
explains  this  by  supposing  that  time  is  necessary  for  the  air 
to  assume  the  state  and  exert  the  force  corresponding  to  any 
position  of  the  plate :  which  is  nearly  the  same  as  saying 
that  the  force  depends  on  the  position  of  the  plate  at  some 
previous  time.  In  this  paper,  which  is  intended  to  investigate 
the  mathematical  consequences  of  an  assumed  law,  I  shall  not 
dbcuss  the  identity  of  these  suppositions :  I  shall  only  remark 
that  the  general  explanation  appears  to  be  correct,  and  that 
it  clears  up  several  points  which  always  appeared  to  be  in 
great  obscurity. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  case  of  a  vibrating  body  acted  on 
by  two  forces,  of  which  one  is  proportional  to  its  actual  dis- 
tance from  the  point  of  rest,  and  the  other  proportional  to  its 
distance  at  some  previous  time.  Putting  0  (/)  for  the  body's 
distance,  the  equation  is 

This  equation  I  am  unable  to  solve  rigorously :  but  on  the 
supposition  that  ^  is  small,  an  approximate  solution  may  be 


ADDENDA.  439 

obtained  from  the  formulae  in  the  Memoir  on  the  Disturb- 
ances of  Pendulums,  Sec.  {Cam,  Trans,  Vol.  III.,  p.  109.) 
Neglecting  at  first  the  small  term,  we  have 

whence 

0  (/)  =  a.  sin  {t   \/  e  +  h). 
Consequently, 

0  (^-—  c)  =  o.  sin  {t  \/7+  l  —  c  \/e)y 

and  therefore  f  in  the  formulae  alluded  to  is 

=  a^  sin   (t  V^  e  +  h  —  c  \/^ e). 

The  increase,  therefore,  of  the  arc  of  semi-vibration  is 

—    -L_y^  ag,  sin  {t^e  +  h  —  c  V^7)   cos  {t  "^1  -f-    I) 


og 


— •/ *  /   sin  (2  /  l/«  +  25  —  c\^e)  —  sincVc  \ 


To  find  the  increase  from  one  vibration  to  another,  we  must 

2S 

take  the  integral  between  two  values  of  t  difiering  by zr: 

and  thus  we  obtain  for  the  increase  u  ag  sin  c  \/e 

e 
I  shall  not  occupy  the  time  of  the  Society  by  a  discussion 
of  the  different  values  of  the  increase  corresponding  to 
different  values  oi  c:  I  shall  only  remark  that  if  c  -v/  e  be 
less  than  ^  the  arc  of  vibration  increases  continually.  Nor 
shall  I  consider  the  cases  in  which  c  is  supposed  to  be  a 
function  of  the  position  or  velocity  of  the  vibrating  body 
(which  possibly  might  better  represent  the  circumstances  that 
originally  suggested  this  investigation).  My  object  is  gained 
if  I  have  called  the  attention  of  the  Society  to  a  law  hitherto 
(I  believe)  unnoticed,  but  not  unfruitful  in  practical  applica- 
tions.— Observatory,  Dec.  13,  1829.— ^[Transactions  of  the 
Cambridge  Philosophical  Society.  Vol.  3,  1830.  4to.  Pp. 
369—372.] 


INDEX. 


AcaueMie  Rotale  des  Sciences,  Paris         .           .           .  102, 210 

Abridged  Paper's                .  105 

^ ■ Kesolution  against  receiving 

Perpetual  Motion  communications  .  *  147, 190, 210 

Acta  lipsiensia :  Leibnitz's  Dispute  With  Papin      «           «  38 

"   Leibnitz's  Proposition        .            .           .  195 

Eruditorum,  1688^9            .        .            .            .            .  210 

^Notice  of  Orffyreus,  Appendix  G            .  631 

Action  and  Reaction  .  .  .  .  «  202 
Airy,  Professof ;  Ms  Demonstration  in  fevour  of  Perpetual 

Motion         .......  537 

Aitken,  J.,  1834? :  Specification          ...            *  463 

American  Review  of  Sir  W.  Congreve's  Schemes     .           .  326 

American  Patents,  1813-36     .....  498—499 

Americana,  Encyclopaefdia,  Article  from        .           .           .  203 

Ancient  Attempt  at  Perpetual  Motion          .           .           *  177 

Annual  Register,  1763,  Account  of  Orffyreus*  Wheel           -  38 

Antonius  de  Fantis,  his  Work            .           .           .           «  6 

Archimedes'  Water  Screw      .           *           .           *           ,  12 

its  properties         .           .           *  13—16 

applied  for  Perpetual  Motion       «  14, 15, 16 

Aristotle's  Physics      .....*  8 

Amott,  Dr.,  on  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion    .           ,  144 — 145 

Artizan,  The,  Article  from     .            .            .            «            <  886—390 

Arts,  A  History  of  Manual,  1661       ....  23 

Asaert,  J.  E.,  1848 :  Specification      ....  451—455 

Ashman,  W.,  Alleged  Discovery  by               .           .           .  177 

Athenian  Mercury,  The,  1691,  Note  from      .           «           .  407 

Athenian  Oracle,  The,  Note  from  ....  407 
Atmospheric  Changes,  &c.,  Schemes  by-    (See  Schemes.) 

Balance,  Compound              *           «           .           .           .  79 

A  proposition  on,  by  Desaguliers             .           .  89 

'    '                .            .            .             .            .  385,389 


Balls,  The  Wheel  of 


642 


INDEX. 


Barlow,  C,  1857:  Specification 

Barometrical  Perpetual  Motion,  proposed 

Barrow,  R.  G.,  1856  :  Specification    . 

Barton,  W.,  1635  :  Specification 

Becher,  Dr.,  had  an  Invention  for  Perpetual  Motion 

Belgian  Patents,  Addenda 

Bellford,  A.  E.  L.,  1853:  Specification 

Benton,  R.,  1855:  Specification 

Bernoulli,  is  said  to  have  considered  Perpetual  Motion  im 

possible         ...... 

The  same,  denied 

Bernoulli,  J.,  his  celebrated  Demonstration  of  the  possibility 

of  Perpetual  Motion,  Appendix  H 
Bettinus,  his  Work 

-Leupold's  notice  of 


Apiaria  Universae  Philosophiae  Mathematicae,  1645 

Binder,  Dr.,  his  CJonversations  Lexicoa,  Article  from 

Black,  J.,  1858:  Specification 

Blon,  Charles  le.  Alleged  Discovery  by 

Borlach,  J.  G.,  of  Dresden,  Advice  against  Perpetual  Motion 

Boyle,  Sir  Robert,  on  a  Self-moving  Liquor  .  85, 

Brande  and  Cauvin's  Dictionary  of  Science,  &c..  Article  from 

Brazill,  J.,  1839:  Specification 

Breslaw,  his  Annal.  Physico-Med. 

Buchholz,  G.  A.,  1851:  Specification 

Buck,  M.D.,  L.  C,  considers  Perpetual  Motion  absurd 

Camden,  G.,  Letters  to,  from  C.  Drebble  v.  Peiresc 
Cardan,  his  De  Variet.  Rerum 

Subtil,  1.  17,  De  Var.  Rerum 

Cardanus,  Hieronemous 

Camot,  M.,  his  Memoir  on  Motion     . 

CastelU,  his  Wheel  for  Perpetual  Motion 

Cauvin,  Dr.    (See  Brande  and  Cauvin.) 

Century  of  Inventions,  Marquis  of  Worcester's         .  34 

Note  on,  by  Partington  .  .  35 

Quoted  by  Dr.  Desaguliers  .  44 

Noticed  in  Quarterly  Review  .     235 — 236 

Chambers'  Cyclopadia,  Article  from  .  .  .  197 

Charles  V.,  present  to,  by  Turianus  .  .  .        24,  178 

Chemical  Schemes.    (See  Schemes.) 
Chenhall's  Perpetual  Clock    .  .  .  .  .  377 


FAOB 

475 

136 

472 

60 

21 

535,  536 

462 

468 

38 
39 

532—534 

5,15 

23 

29—33 

211 

483 

231 

208,  210 

,  98—101 

201—203 

442 

147 

459 

406 

210 
6 
8 
178 
210 
211 


INDEX. 


543 


PAfiE 

Clock,  self-winding,  Academy  of  Painting    ...  53 

Barometrical    .            .            .            .            .            .  132 

(See  Cox.) 

Close,  William,  his  Syphon  to  raise  Water    .            .            .  135 

Coates,  J:,  1858:  Specification            ....  484 

Cochlea,  or  Water  Screw.  (See  Archimedes.)  13 
Commandeur,  J.,  of  Lyons.     (See  Charles  Barlow.) 

Company,  Predaval's  Patent  Motive  Power  .  .  420 
Comptes  Kendus  Hebdomadairies  des  Seances  de  TAcademie 

des  Sciences,  Paris  .  .  .  .  .103 — 104 

Congreve,  Sir  W.,  1827:  Specification            .            .            .  437 

Congreve,  Sir  William,  his  several  Schemes                          .  314 — 326 

American  review  of            ...            .  326 

Conical  Wheel  Railway  Carriage       ....  344 

Continual  Motion,  J.  Taisnierus  on    .            .            .            .  18 

Copland,  R.,  1819-32-36:  Specifications         .                         .  431—435 

Cotes*  Lectures  on  Hydrostatics  .  .  .  217 
Cox,  James,  his  Barometrical  Clock  described  by  Jiimes 

Ferguson      .            .            .            .            .            .            .  335 

Cox*8  Clock,  described  by  W.  Nicholson        .            .            .  123—127 

in  the  Annual  Register         .            .  182 — 183 

Mechanics' Magazine             .  330—338 

Djedalus,  an  Ancient  Inventor          .            .           ,            .  1 

Dee's,  Dr.,  Euclid,  an  Ancient  Perpetual  Motion      .            .  177 
Definitions  and  Descriptions  of  Perpetual  Motion,  from 

Encyclopaedias         .            .            .            .            .            .  192—212 

Dembinski,  Gen.  L.,  1856 :  Specification       .            .            .  470 

Desaguliers,  Dr.,  Letter  to  him  about  Orffyreus        .            .  39 

Remarks,  from  his  Works          ...  42 

his  Course  of  Experimental  Philosophy            .  42,  75 

F.R.S.,  Rev.  Dr.,  Remarks  from  Phil.  Trans.    .  43 

demonstrates  Perpetual  Motion  impossible        .  43—46 

his  Proposition  on  the  Balance              .            .  89—97 

Deuchar,  M.  W.  S.,  John,  Account  of  three  large  Loadstones  393—396 
Dictionary  of  Mechanical  Science,  Fisher  and  Co.,  Article 

from             .......  200 

Diez,  D.  G.,  his  Dissertation  against  Perpetual  Motion  147,  210,  21 1 
Discovery,  alleged,  by  Marquis  of  Worcester,  34  ;  Orflyreus 

39 ;    Dr.   Kenrick,   55  ;    Hicken,   171 ;    Ashman,   177  ; 

Dodemant,  183;    Wagner,  208;   Mahn,   208;  Blon  and 

lluish,  231 ;  Another  (no  name),  231 ;  Pearson,  256—258 


544 


UfOEX. 


FAO» 


Hathulon,  273  ;  in  Stamfind,  370;  AdyertiBed,  1707,371; 
by  Van  Dyke,  371,414;  Franklin,  372;  Wright,  373; 
Sellery,  374;  Buckle,  374;  Townsend,  374 ;  Dr.  String* 
fellow,  375  ;  Hutt,  375,  416  ;  Hendrickflpn,  376;  Chenhall, 
377;  Hoioto,  of  Ferrara,  400;  Watber,  402;  Bayne,  408  ; 
DaUing,  409 ;  Mannerdet,  410 ;  Garhar,  410  ;  in  Dublin, 
41 1 ;  in  Liyerpool,  412 ;  in  Newcastle,  412 ;  in  Ormskirk, 
413 ;  by  Vignemon,  415 ;  Stannard,  416 ;  at  lille 
Dreble,  or  Drebble,  Comelins,  his  Inyention  for  King  James, 
■  Notice  of        •  ,  ,  .  , 


Eablt  opinions  and  projects 

East  Friezland,  Alleged  Discoyery  by  a  Mechanic  of 

Eaton,  W.,  1846 :  Specification 

Eaton's  Perpetual  Syphon      .... 

Eden's,  Eichard,  translation  of  Taisnierus'  work 

Edi^ards,  Thomas,  1860 1  Specification 

Eighteenth  Century,  Patents  of,  with  notices 

Emerson,  W.,  on  Impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion 

Encyclopaedia  Britannioa,  Artide  from         , 

. Americana,  Article  from         , 

Encyclop^e  Methodique,  Article  from 
Engines  for  Perpetual  Motion.    (See  Schemes.) 
Exhibition  of  Willis's  Perpetual  Motion  (America) 
Expausion,  powers  o^  by  W.  Nicholson        ,  , 


417 

4,23—24 

23 

I 

38 

450 

418 

18 

495 

60 

130—122 

197 

203 

805—206 

404 
133 


Faulkneb^L.,  1852:  Specification                •            ,            ,  460 

Ferdinand,  the  Emperor,  his  present              .           ,           ,  23 
Fisher,  Baron,  his  letter  to  Desaguliers  about  Orfiyreus' 

Wheel          .,.,.,.  39 

Fitt,G.,  1852:  Specification               .            .            ,            ,  461 

Fludd,  Robert,  his  works,  1618          .           ,           ,           ,  24 — 29 

^his  description  translated        .           ,           ,           ,  303 

Fontainemoreau,  P.  A.,  1857 ;  Specification             .           .  478 

Force,  resolution  of      .           .           .           .           ,           ,  194 

Foster's  Wheel  of  Inclined  Planes  (American)        .           .  419 

Francis*  Dictionary  of  Arts,  Sciences,  &c.,  Article  from      ,  200 

Franklin  Institute,  Journal  of,  Dr.  J.  P.  Jones'  article  from  220 — 225 

Frdche,  A.  N.,  1850 :  Specification    ♦           .            .            .  455—459 

French  Patents  1845-40 497 


Galvanism,  Schemes  by.    (See  Schemes.) 


INDEX. 


54S 


PAG  a 
Oalvanic  Agency,  Perpetual  Motion  by         .  .  .  177 

Gartner,  of  Poland,  his  Inventions  and  Perpetual  Motion  ,  209,  210 
Gennerich,  Prince  G.,  1859 :  Specification    ,  .  .  491 

Gentleman's  Magazine,  Articles  from  .  .  .     148 — 181 

Geisser's  Imposition,  his  pretended  Perpetual  Motion  1 83,  2 1 1 ,  405 
Gervas's  constant  Water-raising  Engine        .  .  .  153 

-Gilardeau,  M.  P.,  1855 :  Specification  ...  468 

Gilbert's  work,  de  Magnet      .....  5 

Gill,  T.,  his  exposure  of  an  Imposition  .  .         184,  231—233 

Gill's  Technological  Repository,  Article  from  .  .    220—225 

Gilmour,  W.  1857:  Specification       ....  478 

Glasgow  Mechanics'  Magazine,  Articles  from  .  .    393 — 399 

Glomey,  B.,  1852 :  Specification        ....  462 

Gorter,  de,  of  Petersburg,  in  favour  of  Perpetual  Motion      .  56 

Gravesande,  his  CEuvres  Philosophiques       .  .  .        35,  187 

Asserts  possibility  of  Perpetual  Motion  .  39 

Letter  to  Sir  I.  BTewton  about  Orflfyreus'  Wheel        39—42 

Reports  on  Orflgrreus*  Wheel      ...  37 

"  Remarks  on  same  and  Perpetual  Motion        187 — 190,  196 

Gravity,  natural  affection  of   ....  .  8 

Greaves,  T.,  1852 :  Specification  ....  459—460 
Gr^ory,  Dr.  O.,  on  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion  .  .139—142 
Grove,  Q.C.,  &c.,  W.  R.,  on  Perpetual  Motion  .  .    279— 28Q 

Gjonnosophists  and  Indian  Priests    ....  4 


Hainsselin,  p.  N.,  1832 ;  Specification 
Hale,  G.,  1854 :  Specification 
Harleian  MS.  (Marquis  of  Worcester's  Centeiry  of  Inventions) 
Hartlib,  S.,  his  Letter  to  Mr.  Boyle 
Hawkins,  J.  T.,  his  Exposure  of  an  Imposition 
Haywood,  J.,  1790:  Specification 
Hendrickson's  Discovery,  and  pathetic  story  of  him 
Henrich,  his  Lecture  on  Perpetual  Motion     . 
Herault,  A.,  1856:  Specification 
Hesse  Cassel,  Landgrave  o^  his  character,  and  treatment  of 
Orfl^^eus      ...... 

Hicken,  Hero,  his  alleged  Discovery 

HiU,  G.  S.,  1858 :  Specification 

Hipparchus,  2000  years  ago 

Hire,  De  la,  denies  the  possibility  of  self-impelling  power 

is  said  to  have  pretended  a  Demonstration 

his  Demonstration  against  Perpetual  Motion 


438—442 

465,481 

34—35 

101 

186 

66 

376- S77 

147 

469 

35 
171 
481 
220 
35 
39 
102 


646  INDEX. 

PAGE 

Hire,  de  la,  Memoirs  de  1' Academie  des  Sciences       .           •  210 

History  (A)  of  Manual  Arts,  1661     ....  23 

Hofman,  Jacob,  Ids  Latin  Lexicon,  Article  from      .            .  211 — 212 

Hollow  Wheel  or  Sphere,  with  weights         ...  8 

Hooper,  Dr,  W.,  on  Impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion         .  119 — 1 20 

Hope,  Dr.,  his  large  Magnet              ....  396 

Huddart,  G  A,  1855-60:  Specification         .            .            .  467 

Huish,  H.  and  C.  Le  Blon,  alleged  Discovery  by      .           .  231 

Huygens  denies  a  self-impelling  power          •           .            •  35 

Humane  Industry,  or,  a  History  of  most  Manual  Arts,  1661  24 

Hunter,  The  Perpetual  Motion           ....  214—220 
Hutton,  Dr.,  notices  of  Perpetual  Motion  and  Orflyreus' 

Wheel           .......  49—54 

Mathematical  Recreations          .            .            ;  54 

Hydraulic,  &c.,  Schemes.    (See  Schemes.) 

Hydraulics,  Leupold's             .            .           .            .            ,  22 

Imperial  Magazine,  1824,  The  Perpetual  Motion  Hunter  .  214 — 220 
Impostors.  In  France,  105;  Geiser,  183,  211,  405,  411; 
in  London,  184—187  ;  Gartner,  of  Poland,  209,  210,  211; 
Redheffer  in  America,  222;  in  London,  231—233;  in 
Bury,  233  ;  Spence's,  180,  226—229,  294,  393—396,  408  ; 
in  Scotland,  378  ;  from  America,  380—381  ;  Adams',  381 ; 
Pinch  Lane,  382 ;  Redhoeffer,  383 ;  a  Wager  respectuig 
RedhoefFer,  410 ;  in  Liverpool,  413. 
Impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion.  Wheels  and  Weights 
tested,  9  ;  Wheels  and  Weights,  74 ;  Wheels  and  Rolling 
Weights,  36,  44,  76,  107,  115,  138;  Wheels,  Weights, 
Levers,  and  Bellows,  50—53  ;  Bucket  Wheel  and  Balls, 
78;  Syphon,  145;  Bellows  and  Mercury,  85;  Water 
Wheel,  356,  358—361 ;  Desaguliers'  Balance,  79,  140 ; 
Nicholson's  Balance,  80 ;  De  la  Hire's  Demonstration, 
102;  Parent's,  105  ;  Maclaurin's,  110 — 113  ;  Academy  of 
Sciences,  190 ;  Encyclopaedias,  &c.,  192—212  ;  A  demon- 
stration, 213 ;  by  Dr.  Jones,  220—225  ;  Asserted,  259, 
260  ;  No  Perpetual  Motion,  260  ;  Invariable  rather  than 
Perpetual  Motion,  264 ;  Finite  and  Infinite  quantities,266; 
Against  Pasley's  views,  267 ;  Editor's  remark,  269 ;  A 
Lecturer's  remarks,  269 ;  Scripture  texts,  270 ;  Critical 
remarks,  271— 272;  Alleged  discovery,  273 ;  A  few  words 
to  Perpetual  Motionists,  273—274 ;  Editorial  notice,  274 ; 
Article  from  the  Penny  Magazine,  275 — 277  ;  Discourage- 


647 


ment ;  Mudie*s  Mathematics,  277—278  ;  by  W.  R.  Grore, 
Q.C.,  &c.,  279,  280  ;  by  General  T.  P.  Thompson,  M.P., 
281,  282  ;  by  Mactaggart,  378—380 ;  Article  from  Maga- 
zine of  Science,  384 :  its  impracticability  (from  the  Ar- 
tizan),  385—390;  Article  from  the  Glasgow  Practical 
Mechanics'  Magazine,  390—393;  its  Pursuit  Censured, 
Saturday  Magazine,  399. 
Inventors'  Advocate,  Articles  from 


400—402 


James,  Drebble,  engineer  to  King     . 

Present  of  a  Perpetual  Motion  to 

Jones,  D.,  1856  :  Specification 
Dr.  Thomas  P.,  on  the  futility  of  attempting  Perpe- 
tual Motion  ..... 
Jordan,  E.,  1825  :  Specification         ... 
Journal  des  Savans,  various  numbers  and  years 

(See  Nicholson.) 

Jurin,  Dr.,  in  Appendix  to  Cotes'  Hydrostatics 

Kastner,  has  shown  Perpetual  Motion  to  be  possible 
Kenrick,  Dr.  William,  an  account  of  Orffyreus*  Perpetual 
Motion        ...... 

Remarks  on  Orflyreus'  Wheel 

a  Rotator,  for  Perpetual  Motion 

his  proposed  invention  reconunended 

Lecture  on  Perpetual  Motion 

his  character  and  death 

applies  for  a  patent 

Note  on  his  Lecture 

Kepler  and  Peresc,  incredulous  on  Perpetual  Motion 

their  correspondence 

Kircher's  de  Arte  Magnet 

Leupold's  notice  of 

Kranach's  constant  Water-raising  Machine  . 

La  Lande  Montucla  Histoire  des  Mathematiques 
Lang,  D.,  1856  :  Specification 

Langsdorf,  has  shown  Perpetual  Motion  to  be  possible 
Lanis,  F.  T.  de.,  his  Magisterio  Naturae  et  Artis 
Lavender,  R.  and  E ,  1856  :  Specification     . 
Lecocq,  A.,  1856 :  Specification 


23 

24 

469 

220—225 
437 
210 

217 

405 

38 

48 

48 

49 

54—59 

55 

178 

502 

147 

210 

6,  17 

23 

153 

145 
470 
405 
206, 210 
471 
472 


648 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Inge's  Hydro-pneumatic  Power      ,           .           .            .  419 
Jjeibnitz,  is  said  to  hare  considered  Perpetual  Motion  impos 

sible           ••.,.•.  38 

The  same  denied       .           .          .           .           .  38, 39 

disputes  with  Papin  .            ,            .            ,             .  38,  189 

his  proposition  in  the  "  Lelpsic  Acts  "          ,           .  195 

against  Perpetual  Motion      ,           .           ,           .  207 

Leipsic  Acts,  1690,  Leibnitz's  proposition     .            .            .  195 

Lespinasse,  A.  J.  B.,  1856 :  Specification      •           .           .  471 

Leupold's  Theatrum  Machinarum  Generale              .           .  21 — 23 

Opinion  that  Perpetual  Motion  is  not  impossible  •  21 

Account  of  OrflS^eus*  Wheel         .            .            ,  22 

. "  Bemaxks  to  seeders  after  Perpetual  Motion         .  22 

Description  of  a  Mill  operated  \>j  «.  Syphon          .  22 

Linton,  G.,  1821 :  Specification         •            ,            .            •  435—437 

Loadstone  and  Steel  Bullet                ....  6 

objections  to  this  invention            .           »           .  7 

r  on  the  virtue  of,  by  J.  Taisnierus  ,            .           .  18 

Loadstones,  Deuchar's  account  of  three  large           ,            .  393 

London  Magazine,  1749,  Article  from           .            .            .  213 

Longitude,  two  schemes  for  discovering        ,            .            .  148 

LorinijBonas.,  in"Festungsbau"                  .           .           .  210 

Luedeke,  E.,  1852 ;  Specification       ,           ,           ,           ,  460 

Machines  for  Perpetual  Motion.  (See  Schemes.) 

Machine  for  Raising  Water,  Archimedean     .           .           ,  173—176 

Macintosh's  Arguments  for  Perpetual  Motion           ,           .  259 

Maclaurin,  C,  on  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion            .  108—113 
Magazines.  (See  London,  Imperial,  Mechanics',  Gentleman's, 

Monthly,  Penny,  Practical  Mechanic  and  Engmeer's,  GlaS' 

gow  Mechanics',  Saturday.) 

Magnes,  the  Stone,  Taisnierus'  instrument               .           .  18,  19,  20 

Magnet,  Ball,  and  Reclined  Plane      •           .           ,           .  6 

Large,  Dr.  Hope's     .....  396 

Magnetic  Schemes.    (See  Schemes  ) 

Magnetical  Virtues,  applied  for  Perpetual  Motion    .           .  5—7 

Mahn,  J.  A.,  an  opponent  to  Orflfyreus         •            ,  208 

Malavas,  J.  R.  D,,  1855 ;  Specification         ...  466 

Manual  Arts,  a  History  of,  1661        .           .            ,            ,  23 

Marquis  of  Worcester.    (See  Worcester.) 

Martin,  B.,  on  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion      ,            .  106 

Mathematical  Magic,  by  Bishop  Willdns     .                      .  1—18 


INDEX. 

Mathematical  Demonstratioiis,  not  applicable  to  all  possible 
Machines     ...... 

Mathematicians,  list  of  several 

Maupertius,  his  Letters  observing  on  Perpetual  Motioa 

Mead,  T.,  1786 :  Specification 

— " 1794:  Specification 

Mechanics*  Magazme,  Articles  from 

Meier  Allegremeine  Encyclopadie,  Article  from 

Mennons,  M.  A.  F.,  1858 :  Specification 

Mental  Delusions,  Article  on  ... 

Mercer,  T.  J.,  1858 ;  Specification 

Mercure  Historique  et  Politique,  1721 

Middleship,  W.,  1857  ;  Specification  .  , 

Millington  on  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion      . 

Monthly  Magazine,  1797,  Article  fix)m 

Montuda,  M.    (See  Button's  Mathematical  Recreations) 

. ^  his  Histoire  des  Mathenjatiques 

Montucla's  Mathematical  Recreations 
Morley,  H.,  1782 ;  Specification 
Mouvement  Perpetuel  Triomphant,  by  Orf^us 
Mudie's  Popular  Mathematics,  Article  from 
Muller,  J.  D.,  1779 :  Specification 

. application  for  his  patent 

Musaeo  Eircheriano    »  .  .  .  , 

New  Mechanical  Motion         .  ,  ,  , 

Newspapers  and  miscellaneous  sources  of  information 
Newton,  A.  V.,  1852 :  Specification 

•: Sir  Isaac,  Letter  to,  by  's  Gravesande,  describing 

Orflfyreus' Wheel     .  ,  .  .  . 
The  same  noticed      .... 


Nicholson,  W.,  Direct  and  concise  demonstrations  against 
Perpetual  Motion  are  wanting        ,  .  , 

' Opinion  of  Varley  and  Schwiers'  Patents 

'  Model  to  disprove  Perpetual  Motion 

Journal  of  Nat.  Phil.,  Chemistry,  and  Arts 

on  various  Schemes  for  Perpetual  Motion 

Journal,  Article  from 

Ogilvib's  Imperial  Dictionary,  Article  from 

Opinions,  Early,  respecting  Perpetual  Motion 

Orflfyre,  or  Orphyrreus,  J.  E.  Elie-Bessler,  Notice  of  his  Life 

Orfl^ean  Wheel        .  •  .  .  . 


649 

PAGE 

89,72 

501,  502 

146 

ea 

67 

237 

209—211 

481 

383 

485 

39 

479 

142—143 

70,71 

54 

145 

145 

61 

37 

277,278 

61 

178 

213 

342 
407 
461 

39—42 
187 

72 

72 

80,81 

82 

122—135 

71—82 

201 

\ 

37 

3$ 


650 


IXDEX. 


Orffjrreus,  Orffjrre,  or  Orphyrreus,  his  Life 
Orfl^rreus,  Leupold's  account  of  his  Wheel 
Orflfyreus,  CJouncillor,  his  Invention 

—  Partington's  remarks  on 

his  Perpetual  Motion,  Dr,  W,  Kenrick's  account  of 

his  Wheel  described 

Analogy  between  his  and  M.  of  Worcester'sWlieel 

. •  Account  of,  from  Annual  Register,  1763 

Letter  from  Gravesande  to  Sir  I.  Newton  about 

Notice  of,  in  Gentleman's  Magazine 

■  Dr.  Hutton  condemns  his  Wheel 

■  his  Le  Mouvement  Perpetuel  Triomphant 

Remarks  on  his  Wheel,  by  Dr.  Desaguliers 


—  Wheel,  noticed  in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine 

—  Dr.  Hutton's  account 

—  Dr.  W.  Kenrick's  remarks 

—  noticed  by  Montucla 

—  his  Wheel 
and  operations 


Note  on 


Oulton,  P.,  1854 :  Specification 

Ozanam,  M.    (See  Hutton's  Mathematical  Recreations) 

Pamphleteer,  Tlie,  Article  from,  on  Perpetual  Motion 
Papin,  Dr.,  on  a  French  Perpetual  Motion    . 

his  Dispute  with  Leibnitz 

Paracelsus,  Chymical  Perpetual  Motion 
Paradox,  Perpetual  Motion,  a,  396  ;  Explanation     . 
Parent,  M.,  demonstrates  impossibility  of  Per.  Motion 
Paris  Academy  of  Sciences,  Memoirs  and  Notices    . 
Partington,  C  F,,  Note  on  Art.  56  in  Century  of  Inventions 

. Notice,  Quarterly  Review 

his  Manual  of  Natural  Philosophy 

— — gives  a  demonstration  of  Perpetual  Mo- 
tion being  impossible 

■  Diagram  to  illustrate  the  principle  of  the 


tkGH 

37 

22 

35 

35 

38 

35 

35 

38 

39 

34 

36 

37 

43 

48 

53 

54 

146 

196 

,  208,  210 

602,  503 

464 

54 

229—231 

85—89 

38, 189 

3 

397 

105,146,210 

85,  103 

35 

235, 236 

36 


20 


Marquis  of  Worcester  and  Orflfyreus'  Inventions 
on  De  Luc's  Electrical  Column 


Patent  Laws,  and  Patent  Fees  and  Expenses 
Patented  Perpetual  Motions.    (See  Schemes.) 
Patentees  of  Perpetual  Motion,  their  professions 
Patents  for  Perpetual  Motion,  Remarks  on 


36 

36 

143 

428,  429 

497 
499 


INDEX. 


651 


Patents:  I7tli  and  18th  Centuries,  with  Scientific  Notices 

19th  Century  .... 

17th  Century: 


PAOB 

60—84 
428—500 


Barton,  60;  Ramseye,  60;  Wayne,  61. 

18th  Century: 

Haywood,  66  ;    Mead,  62  ;    Mead,  67 
Miiller,  61;  Schwiers,  65;  Varley,  68. 
19th  Century : 


Morley,  61 1 


Aitken,  463 ;  Asaert,  451 ;  Barlow,  475 ;  Barrow,  472;  Bell- 
ford,  462;  Benton,  468;  Black,  483;  Brazill,  442;  Buchholz, 
459;Commandeur,475;  Coates,  484;  Congreve,  437;  Cop- 
land, 43 1 — 435 ;  Dembinski,  470 ;  Eaton,  450 ;  Edwards, 495 
Faulkner,  460 ;  Fitt,  46 1 ;  Fontainemoreau,  47  8 ;  Frdche,  4.55 
Gennerich,  49 1 ;  Gilardeau,  468 ;  Gilmour,  478;  Glorney,  462 
Greaves,  459;  Hainsselin,  438;  Hale,  465 — 481 ;  Herault, 
460;  Hill,  481 ;  Huddart,  467 ;  Jones,  469 ;  Jordan,  437 ;  Lang, 
470;  Lavender,  471 ;  Lecocq,  472 ;  Lespinasse,  471 ;  Linton, 
435;  Luedeke,  460;  Malavas,  466;  Mennons,  481 ;  Mercer, 
485;  Middleship,  479;  Newton,  461 ;  Oulton,  464; Picciotto, 
489;  Pickering,  485;  Pleasants,  429;  Prcdeval,  472—475 
Predavalle,  442;  Redrup,  493;  Richard,  482;  Rigby,  486; 
Roussell,  486  ;  Shaw,  464 ;  Sleigh,  A.  W.,  463 ;  Sleigh,  W, 
W.,  446—450;  Smith,  469,  48?;  Starbuck,  486  ;  Stuckey, 
443 ;  Thiville,  82 ;  Thomas,  465 ;  Weber  468 ;  Winter,  430 
Wood,  461  ;  Wright,  48.5. 
Paute,  La,  his  Clock  for  Perpetual  Motion 
Pearson,  W.,  Alleged  discovery  by    . 
Peiresc,  Com.  Drebbel  von,  his  Letters  to  Camden 
Pendulum,  Vibrating,  revolving,  and  tubular 
Penny  Magazine,  Article  from,  against  Perpetual  Motion 
Percy  Anecdotes,  Articles  from 
Peregrinus,  Pet.,  his  opinion 

Treatise  De  Rota  Perpetul  Motus 

Peresc  and  Kepler  incredulous  on  Perpetual  Motion 
Perpetual  Motion,  Seeming  facility  and  real  difficulty 

Chemical,  magnetical,  and  by  gravity 

Wilkins 

Chemical  receipt  for 

by  fluid  weights    . 

: —  Partington's  remarks  against 

Desaguliers*        „  „ 

by  the  Sun's  heat  and  wind :  Kircher 

— ■  deserving  our  endeavours :  Wilkini 


211 

256—259 

210 

230—231 

275—277 

226—227 

5 

6 

147 

2 

3 
3 

8 

36 

42,43 

17 

17 


552 


INDEX. 


Perpetual  Motion  is  among  noble  mechanical  subtleties 
Wilkins        ...... 

Taisnierus'  Magnetic  Instrument 

Leupold's  remarks  to  all  seekers  after 

Dr.    Desaguliers'   demonstration  of  it* 


impossibility 


-  Remarks  from  Treatises  on  Katural  Phi- 


losophy 


■  Sturm,  LorinijStevin^d  Leibnitz  againsS 
•  its  absurdity 

-  Its  possibility  refiited 

-  Popular  view  of  the  subject 

-  a  paradox,  396 ;  answered 

-  its  pursuit  censured 

-  difficult,  but  not  impossible 


85,  »7,  8», 


Philosophical  Transactions,  Early  Papers 

Picciotto,  M.  H.,  1859 :  Specification 

Pickering,  P.,  1858 :  Specification 

Plans  for  Perpetual  Motion.    (See  Schemes.) 

Pleasants,  W.,  1809 :  Specification     . 

Pneumatic,  Hydro-pneumatic,  &c.  Schemes.  (See  Schemes. 

Poppe's  Work  on  important  Inyentions  and  Discoveries 

Wunder  der  Mechanik 

' Taschenbuch  fiir  Urhmacher,  &c. 

Possibility  of  Perpetual  Motion,  by  Gravesande 

by  Bernoulli 

' by  Professor  Airy 

' ■■ Arguments  for 

' asserted,  by  Pasley,  237 — 

239 ;  Plan  to  accelerate  discovery,  239 ;  by  J.Welch,  239, 
240  ;  by  H.  Todd,  241—244 ;  A  Review,  244—250 ;  A 
Query,  251  j  Offer  to  construct  20  models,  251 — 252 ;  For 
and  against,  252—254;  Inquiry  into  possibility,  254 — 256; 
A  powerful  motion,  256 — 259;  by  Macintosh,  259. 
Practical  Mechanic  and  Engineer's  Magazine,  Articles  from 
Predaval,  B.  R.,  1833 :  Specification 

Perpetual  Motion  Company  ,  .  , 

Predavalle,  B.,  1857-8-9-60  :  Specification     . 
Projects  for  Perpetual  Motion.    (See  Schemed.) 

Quarterly  Review,  Article  from     .  .  *  . 

Railway  Carriage,  Self-moving        .  «  ^  . 


PAG]^ 

17 

19,20 

22 

44—48 

106 
147 
213 
388 

390— 39a 
397 
39^9 
405 

89,  93,  97 
48^ 
48^ 

429r 

183 
203,211 

405 
187—190 
532—^34 
573— 54a 

195 


390—393 

442 

420—427 

472—475 

235,  23& 
34» 


INDEX. 


553 


JPAGK 

Ramseye,  D.,  1630 :  Specification       ...  60 

Raising  Water  by  Screw,  12;  Two  machines  for      .            .  153 

Machine  for,  Archimedean      .  .  .173—176 

Reaction.     (See  Action.) 

Redheffer,  his  deceptive  model  of  a  Perpetual  Motion           .  222 

Redrup,  G.,  1860 :  Specification        ....  493 

Rees'  Cyclopaedia,  1819,  Article  from            .            .      •      .  192—197 

Article  on  Orflyreus'  Whed        .            .  196 

Reed*s  few  words  to  Perpetual  Motionists     .            .            •  275 

Repertory  of  Arts,  1801          .....  84 

Richard,  P.,  1858 :  Spedflcation        ....  482 

Richards'  Endless  Power  Engine       .            .            .            .  .        414 

Rigby,  H.,  1859 :  Specification           ....  486 

Roito,  Alfonzo,  his  alleged  Discovery             .            .            .  400 — 401 

Roque,  Abbe  de  la,  his  inverted  Syphon  Perpetual  Motion  .  14& 
Rotator,  The,  jwoposed  subscription  to  make  it        .           48  Kote,  178 

Roussel,  J.  M.,  1858  :  Specification                ...  486 

Rowley,  John,  had  seen  and  approved  of  Orffyreus'  Wheel   .  42f 

Royal  Academy  of  Paris,  Abridged  Papers                .            .  105- 
Royal  Academy  of  Sciences,  Paris,  resolution  to  reject  papers 

on  Perpetual  Motion  .  .  .  .147,190—191,210 

Royal  Institution  model  of  a  fiillacious  Perpetual  Motion 

Wheel 167 

Rule  to  ascestain  fallacy  of  Perpetual  Motion            .            .  225 

Rutherford,  Dr.  T.,  on  impossibility  of  Perpetual  Motion     .  1 14— 1 19- 


Saturday  Magazine,  Article  from    .... 
Sauveur,  M.,  explains  a  false  Perpetual  Motion  (Paris) 
Schemes  for  Perpetual  Motion,  General  and  Patented : — 

1.  Atmospheric  Changes,  &;c. 

Cox's  clock,  123—127,  182 ;  A  barometer,  136 ;  Solid 
thermometers,  127 — 131. 

2.  Chemical. 

Ancient  recipe,  3 ;  C.  Dreble*s,  4  j  Boyle's  experiment, 
98. 

3.  Galvanism. 

De  Luc's  column,  143,  285;  French  invention,  177; 
Zamboni's,  184. 

4.  Hydraulic,  &c. 

Archimedean  scTeW,  14;  Sj^hon  and  mill,  22;  Archi- 
medean pump,  23;  Perpetual  pump,  28  ;  Syphon,  135 ; 
Archimedean  screw  and   balls,   153;   Water  engine, 


399—400 
105— 14& 


554  INDEX. 

PAGE 

154 ;  Solski's  water  machine,  159 ;  Archimedean 
screw  and  wheel,  173—176;  A  pump,  283,  286;  A 
machine  or  pump,  288—91;  Endless  band  and  cork 
floats,  299 ;  Another,  300 ;  Propelling  vessels,  300  ;  A 
pump,  302;  Ancient  water-wheel  and  pump,  303—305; 
by  Sir  W.  Congreve,  314—326 ;  Syphon,  340;  Wheels 
and  pumps,  349 ;  Pump,  351 ;  MiU,  354 ;  Hydraulic 
mover,  361;  Paradoxical  balance,  363;  Two  ** certain" 
plans,  365 ;  An  attempt,  369 ;  Pump,  397  ;  Water  at 
rest,  415;  Eaton's  syphon,  418;  Centrifugal  action  with 
pipes,  429;  Wheel  and  pump,  430;  Inverted  syphon  and 
wheels,  431 ;  same  improved,  434, 435;  Buoyant  vessels, 
levers,  and  water,  437;  Capillary  attraction,  437 ;  End- 
less chain  of  buckets,  438;  Hydro-mechanic  apparatus, 
446;  Counteracting  re-acting  engine,  448  ;  Hydrostatic 
motive  power  engine,  448;  Neutralific  motive  power 
engine,  449;  Hydraulic  press  power  engine,  450;  Wheel, 
water,  and  weights,  461 ;  Pumps,  462;  Power  by  fluids 
or  liquids.  463;  YHieel  Mid  chain  of  buckets,  467;  An 
irrigating  syphon,  469;  Pumps  with  articulated  pistons, 
471 ;  Wheel  and  syphon,  471 ;  Pumps,  receiver,  and 
engine,  472;  Wheel  and  syphon-like  canal,  182;  Capil- 
lary attraction,  472,  473;  Hydraulic  pressure,  473,  474; 
Atmospheric  and  hydraulic  pressure,  475;  Wheel  and 
water  or  air  chambers,  480 ;  Self-acting  water-wheel, 
481;  Another,  483;  Another,  486;  An  hydraulic  engine, 
484;  Pressure  of  a  permanent  column  of  water,  489; 
Hydrostatic  engine,  493;  Another,  495. 

5.  Magnetic. 

Inclined  plane  and  steel  ball,  6;  Wheel  and  round 
stone,  20;  Wheel-work,  24 ;  Spence's  beam,  180, 
227,  293,  294 ;  A  wheel,  181  ;  Drum  wheel  and 
magnets,  171,  172;  A  scheme,  178;  Magnets,  291,  293, 
307;  A  wheel,  329;  Wheel,  367—^69;  Pendulum,  339  ; 
tried  369;  Pendulum,  394;  Steel  beam,  395. 

6.  Pneumatic,  Hydro-pneimMitic,  &c. 

Apparatus  with  bladders,  284;  A  hydro-pneumatic  plan, 
296 ;  Orchard's  Yacuiun  Engine,  305 ;  Blowing  machine, 
307  ;  A  pneumatic  machine,  310 — 14 ;  Water  raising 
bellows,  345 ;  Legge's  hydro-pneumatic  power,  419  ; 
Bellows  and  drum  wheel,  443;  Pneimiatic  engine  443;  A 
hydro-pneumatic  apparatus  and  lever,  469;  A  pneumatic 


555 


engine.  470 ;  Wheels,  endless  chains,  and  water  or  air, 
471 ;  Endless  chain  of  bellows,  478 ;  An  atmospheric 
engine,  485;  Another,  485;  Air  engine,  486;  Another, 
with  revolving  piston,  496. 
7.  Wheels  and  Machines. 
Wheel  levers  and  weights,  10  ;  Globe  and  wheel- 
work,  24 ;  A  mill,  24 ;  Marquis  of  Worcester's  wheel, 
34,  347;  Orfl^rreus'  wheel,  39,  187,  207—208,  210; 
Dr.  Kenrick's  rotator,  48;  Wheel  and  bellows,  52; 
Bellows  and  mercury,  85 — 89  ;  Wheel,  lazy-tong 
levers  and  weights,  163  ;  Ancient  wheel- work,  177, 
178 ;  Archimedean  screw  and  mercury,  287 .  A 
clock,  295 ;  Another,  303 ;  A  pendulum,  327 ;  Cox*s 
time-piece,  330 — 338 ;  Balance,  mercury,  and  bail,  342 ; 
Double  cones,  or  carriage,  343 ;  Wheel  and  weighted 
levers,  350 ;  A  project,  with  weights,  364  :  Self-winding 
clock,  373;  Extraordinary  invention,  375 ;  Clock,  377; 
Hollow-spoked  wheel,  398 ;  By  two  wheels  (American) 
402 ;  Willis'  machine,  404 ;  Another  (American),  404 ; 
Wheel  and  mercury,  410;  A  wheel,  410;  Wheel  and 
air  tubes,  414 ;  Self-acting  engine,  414  ;  To  turn  a  grind- 
stone, 416  ;  A  French  engine,  41 7 ;  Foster's  wheel  of  in- 
clined planes,  419 ;  A  cylinder  maclune,  423, 442 ;  Wheel, 
levers,  and  weights,  435;  Endless  chain  bands  and 
weights,  451 ;  O)mpound  levers,  and  wheel,  455 ;  Con- 
stant pressure  machine,  459 ;  A  beam  machine,  459, 460 ; 
A  vibrating  beam,  460 ;  Pendulum,  wheel,  and  springs, 
460 ;  Wedge  power,  461  ;  Lever  and  wheels.  461 ; 
Weighted  railway  carriage,  462 ;  Pulleys  and  weights, 
463,  464 ;  Axle,  levers,  and  weights,  464;  Wheels  and 
balls,  464 ;  Wheels  and  weights  or  fluids,  465 ; 
Shaft,  levers,  and  weights,  465,  481  ;  Shaft,  circular 
plates,  levers*  and  weights,  466 ;  Wheel,  with  cylin- 
ders and  weighted  pistons,  467;  Wheel,  eccentric 
planes  and  levers,  468;  Half  cylinder  and  weight, 
468  ;  Helical  spirals  and  balls,  475  ;  Combined 
levers  and  weights,  478  ;  Pendulum,  or  swinging 
lever,  481 ;  Wheel,  and  endless  chain  of  weights,  482 ;  A 
static  pressure  engine,  486 ;  Wheel,  water  chambers,  and 
flexible  bags,  487 ;  Wheels,  levers,  and  weights,  491. 
Schemes  for  Perpetual  Motion:  De  la  Hire's  demonstration 
of  thdrfiillacy,  Appendix  D       ...  .514 


^56 


INDEX. 


Schemes  for  Perpetual  Motion:  Bernoulli's  demonstration  in 

their  fiivour,  Appendix  H  ... 

Schemes:  Two  fictitious,  in  the  Polytechnic  Instittftion 
Schottes,  Peter  Mechanica  HydrauUca  Pneumatica 
Schottus,  G.  (or  K),  his  Technica  Curiosa  . 
Schluter,  an  eminent  Engineer,  OfTer  to 
Schwiers,  C,  1790:  Specification 

his  weight  moving  machine 

Scripture  texts,  as  a  notice  to  Perpetual  Motion  seekers 

Self-moying  wheel,  though  not  perpetual 

Sepihus,  Qecxrg.  de,  in  '^  Musseo  Eircheriano " 

Serenteeth  Century,  Patents  o^  with  notices 

Shaw,  J.  W.,  1854 :  Spedfioation 

Silliman's  American  Journal  of  Sdenoe  and  Arts 

Sindari's  De  Arte  magna  et  nova  grayitatis 

Sleigh,  W.  W.,  1845, 1853, 1856, 1860:  Specification 

A.  W.,  1854 :  Specification 

Smith,  W.,  1856 :  SpeciOcation 

J.  R.,  1859 :  Spedflcation 

Solid  weights  and  whed,  for  Perpetual  Motion 
Solski,  P.  Stanislas,  his  sdf-moying  machine 
Spences  Motion  by  Magnetism 

and  his  ingenuity 

declared  an  imposition 

Starbuck,  M.  (New  York),  1858 :  Specification 

Stevinus,  S.,  his  Element.  Static. 

Stone's  Mathematical  Dictionary,  Artide  firom 

Stuckey,  W.  H.,  1842 :  Specification 

Stukdey,  Anecdote  of 

Sturm,  L.  C,  his  Mathesi       .... 

Summary  Remarks  .... 

Taisner,  his  Tract,  de  Motu  Continue 
Taisnierus,  Joannes,  on  "  Continuall  Motions  " 
Technica  Curiosa,  by  G.  (or  K.)  Schottus     . 
Technological  Repository:  Gill's,  Dr.  Jones,  on  the  futility  of 
Perpetual  Motion  ..... 

Terella,  or  Globe,  rotating  (magnetical) 
Theatrum  Machinarum,  by  J.  Leupold 

Appendix  ABC.  .  t 

Thermometer,  The  solid,  described  by  Nicholson 
Thiville,  J.  G.  J.  B.,  Count  1801 :  Spedflcation 
•p 


PAOB 

532 

536 

23 

206,  209 

207 

65 

211 

270 

163—170 

212 

60 

464 

406 

22 

446-— 460 

463 

469 

487 

8 

159 

180 

226—229 

393—395 

486 

207, 210 

199 

443—446 

226, 383 

206, 210  . 

501, 504 

6 

1,  18—20 

206, 209 

220—225 
5 

21 
505—513 
127—181 

82 


INDEX. 


657 


Hiiyille,  J.  G.  J.  B.,  Count,  Bemarks  on  Perpetual  Motion 
Thomas,  F.  S.,  1854 :  Specification 
Thompson,  M.P.,  Gen.  T.-R,  on  Perpetual  Motion 
Trochilicks,  or  Art  of  Wheel  Instruments 

Article  in  Dr.  Dee's  Euclid 

Turrianus,  Eanellus,  his  perpetual  mill 
Tymme,  Thomas,  acquaintance  of  Dreble's 
his  Dialogue  concerning  Perpetual  Motion 

TJbaldus  de  Cochlea  .   ^        . 

Utrecht  Gazette,  alleged  invention  of  Perpetual  Motion 

Vandyke,  of  Orleans,  U.S.,  his  alleged  discovery    . 
Varley,  R.,  1797 :  Specification 
Vignemon's  new  mechanical  power 
Yranckheim,  M.,  speaks  of  C.  Dreble's  invention    ,. 

Waqner,  C,  his  publication  on  Perpetual  Motion  . 
Wager,  on  B^edhosfEer's  Perpetual  Motion  (America) 
Water-blowing  Machine  .... 
Water-screw,  Archimedes'  .... 
Water  raising,  Kranach's  machine,  and  Gervas'  engine 

Machine  for  (Archimedean)    . 

Water-wheel  scheme  (America)         . 
Wather,  G.,  alleged  discovery  by       . 
Wayne,  B.,  1662 :  Specification 
Weber,  H.,  1855 :  Specification 
Weights,  solid  or  fluid,  for  Perpetual  Motion 

fluid,  for  composing  Perpetual  Motion 

Wheel  or  sphere,  hollow,  with  weights 

and  balance,  relation  between 

andplmnmets  .... 

Marquis  of  Worcester's 

Orfiyreus',  described 

Self-moving,  though  not  perpetual 

Wheels,  &c.,  Machines.    (See  Schemes.) 

-  of  Marquis  of  Worcester  and  Orfl^^reus,  objected  to 


PAQB 

83 

465 

281, 282 

8 

177 

24 

4 

2 

13 
38 

414 

63 

415 

4 

208 

410 

307,  310 

12 

153 

173—176 

405 

402 

61 

468 

8 

12 

8 

9—12 

10 

34 

35,  39—42 

163—170 


as  being  fldse  in  principle 
-  for  Perpetual  Motion. 


(See  Schemes.) 


Wilkins,  John  (Bishop  ol  Chester)     . 

Mathematical  Magick,  Book  2 

noticed  by  Nicholson 


36,  42,  44 

1 

1—18 

73 


558 


INDEX. 


Windmill,  the  Valley  ..... 

Winter,  H.  J.,  1814 :  Specification     . 

Wolf,  his  Dictionary  of  Mathematics 

Wood,  T.,  1852 :  Specification 

Worcester,  Marqnis  of,  his  invention 

Worcester,  Marqms  of,  his  Century  of  Inyentions    . 

in  Grent.'s  Mag. 

Art.  56,  from 

Note  on,  hy  Partington 


his  Wheel,  notice  hy  Dr.  Kenrick 

•  its  supposed  construction 


-  Noticed  hy  Nicholson 

in  Quarterly  Review 


■  Note  on 


Words,  A  few,  inducing  towards  the  discovery  of  Perpetual 
Motion        ...... 

Works  on  Perpetual  Motion,  wanting 
Wright,  R.,  1868 :  Specification 


PAGE 

384 

480 

146, 210 

461 

84—^7 

34 

165 

34,  44,  75 

35 

55 

347 

75 

255—256 

502—503 

229 
501 

485 


Young,  Dr.  Thomas,  on  impossibiUty  of  Perpetual  Motion    137 — 139 

— Lectures,  model  of  a  false  Perpetual 

Motion  exhibited  at  .  .  .  .  .  187 


Zababella,  James,  his  De  Inventione  ^temi  Motoris        .  2 

Zach,  Baron  de,  his  curious  researches  on  Perpetual  Motion  147 

Zamboni's  Electric  Column  and  Clock          .            .           .  184 

Zedler's  Universal  Lexicon,  Article  fix)m      .            .            .  206 — 209 


LIST  OF  BOOKS, 

PUBLISHED  BY 

E.  &  F.  N.  SPON, 

16,    BUCKLERSBURY,    LONDON^ 


ANCIENT  ALPHABETS.— 

The  Book  of  Ornamental  Alphabets,  Ancient  and 
Mediaeval,  from  the  Eighth  Century,  with  Numerals, 
including  Gothic,  Church  Text  (large  and  small), 
German,  Italian,  Arabesque,  Initials  for  Illumination, 
&c.,  &c.,  for  the  use  of  Architectural  and  Engineer- 
ing Draughtsmen,  lUimiinators,  Masons,  Decorative 
Painters,  Lithographers,  Engravers,  Carvers,  &c.,  &c., 
drawn  and  engraved  by  F.  Delamotte,  royal  8vo, 
oblong,  cloth,  4s. 
"  We  can  very  heartily  commend  it  to  the  attention  of  those'for  whona 

it  has  been  especially  intended  by  its  ingenious  collector  and  designer, 

Mr.  F.  Delamotta"— **  Sun." 

BREWING.— 

Instructions  for  making  Ale  or  Beer  in  all  tempera- 
tures, especially  adapted  for  Tropical  Climates,  by 
John  Beadel,  on  a  sheet,  Is 

CHEMICAL  TABLES.— 

A  series  of  Tables  of  Qualitative  Analysis,  from  the 
simplest  to  the  most  complex  cases,  arranged  in  a 
series  of  Tables  by  F.  W.  Griffin,  Ph.D.,  Director  of 
the  Bristol  School  of  Chemistry,  oblong  4to,  half 
bound,  12s. ;  or  mounted  separately  on  thick  boards 
and  strongly  varnished,  12s. 
"A  Laboratory  will  henceforth  be  absolutely  incomplete  without 

these  invaluable  Tables."—"  Chemist." 


List  of  Books  Published  by 

EARTHWORK  TABLES.— 

A  general  sheet  Table  for  facilitating  the  Calcu- 
lation of  Earthworks  for  Railways,  Canals,  &c.,  by  F. 
Bashforth,  M.A.,  on  a  large  sheet,  6d. 

EARTHWORK  TABLES.—     . 

A  general  Table  for  facilitating  the  Calculation  of 
Earthworks  for  Railways,  Canals,  &c.,  with  a  Table 
of  proportionate  parts,  by  Francis  Bashforth,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  in  8vo,  cloth, 
with  mahogany  slide,  4s. 

"  This  little  volume  should  become  the  hand-book  of  every  person 
whose  duties  require  even  occasional  calculations  of  this  nature  ;  were 
it  only  that  it  is  more  extensively  applicable  than  any  other  in  existence, 
we  could  cordially  recommend  it  to  our  readers,  but  when  they  learn 
that  the  use  of  it  involves  only  half  the  labour  of  all  other  Tables  con- 
stituted for  the  same  purpose,  we  o£fer  the  strongest  of  all  recommenda- 
tions, that  founded  on  the  value  of  time." — "Mechanics'  Magazine." 

ELECTRICITY.— 

Scientific  Researches,  experimental  and  theoretical, 
in  Electricity,  Magnetism,  Galvanism,  Electro-Mag- 
netism, and  Electro-Chemistry,  illustrated  with  en- 
gravings, by  William  Sturgeon,  royal  4to.  cloth,  2 Is. 

EMBROIDERY.— 

The-Embioiderer's  Book  of  Design,  containing  Initials, 
Emblems,  Cyphers,  Monograms,  Ornamental  Borders, 
Ecclesiastical  Devices,  Mediaeval  and  Modem  Alpha- 
bets and  National  Emblems,  collected  and  engraved  by 
F.  Delamotte,  royal  8vo;  oblong,  in  illuminated  boards, 
2s.  6d. 

FRENCH  CATHEDRALS.— 

French  Cathedrals,  by  B.  Winkles,  from  drawings 
taken  on  the  spot  by  R.  Garland,  architect,  with  an 
historical  and  descriptive  account,  50  plates,  4to,  cloth, 
18s. 

ILLUMINATION.- 

A  Primer  of  the  Art  of  Illumination,  for  the  use  of 
beginners,  with  a  rudimentary  treatise  on  the  art, 
practical  directions  for  its  exercise,  and  examples 
taken  from  Illuminated  MSS.  in  gold  and  colours,  by 
F.  Delamotte,  small  4to,  cloth  gilt,  9s. 


E.  &  F.  N.  Spon,  16,  BucKLEKSBUKY,  London. 

IRON  BRIDGES.— 

A  Practical  treatise  on  cast  and  wrought  iron  Bridges 
and  Girders  as  applied  to  Railway  Structures  and  to 
Buildings  gena^Uy,  with  numerous  examples  drawn 
to  a  large  scale^^j^ected  from  the  Public  Works  of 
the  most  eminent  TBl^ffineers,  with  58  full-page  plates, 
by  William  HumberTaj^sociate  Institute  Civil  Engi- 
neers, and  Member  of  flke  Institution  of  Mechanical 
Engineers,  imperial  4to,  half  bound  in  morocco, 
£3  lOs. 

"  Mr.  number's  admirable  work  on  Iron  Bridges."—"  The  Times." 

JONATHAN  HULLS.— 

A  description  and  draught  of  a  new  invented  Machine 
for  carrying  Vessels  or  Ships  out  of  or  into  any  Har- 
bour, Port,  or  River,  against  Wind  and  Tide,  or  in 
a  calm,  by  Jonathan  Hidls,  1 737,  reprint  in  fa-sicmile, 
12mo,  half  morocco,  48. 

LABOURERS'  COTTAGES  — 

Country  Cottages,  a  series  of  designs  for  an  improved 
class  of  Dwellings  for  Agricultural  Labourers,  by  John 
Vincent,  in  imperial  4to,  cloth,  12s. 

"  This  is  the  book  for  the  Country  Gentleman."—"  Western  Times." 

LOCKS  and  SAFES.— 

A  Treatise  on  Fire  and  Thief-proof  Depositories  and 
Looks  and  Keys,  by  George  Price,  in  one  large  vol. 
(916  pp.)  with  numerous  wood  engravings,  8vo,  cloth 
gilt,  5a. 

LOCKS.— 

A  Treatise  on  Gunpowder-proof  Locks,  Gunpowder- 
proof  Lock  Chambers,  DrUl-proof  Safes,  Burglars' 
methods  of  opening  Iron  Safes,  and  the  various  me- 
thods adopted  to  prevent  them;  why  one  maker's  safes 
are  better  than  another's ;  the  Burnley  Test,  its  history 
and  results,  by  George  Price,  author  of  **  A  Treatise 
on  Fire  and  Thief-proof  Depositories  and  Locks  and 
Keys,"  demy  8vo,  cloth,  with  46  wood  engravings, 

28. 


List  of  Books  Published  by 

MECHANICAL  DRAWING.— 

An  elementary  treatise  on  Orthographic  Projection, 
being  a  new  method  of  teaching  the  Science  of  Me- 
chanical and  Engineering  Drawing,  intended  for  the 
instruction  of  Engineers,  Architects,  Bxdlders,  Smiths, 
Masons,  and  Bricklayers,  and  for  tiie  use  of  Schools, 
with  numerous  illustrations  on  wood  and  steel,  by 
William  Binns,  Associate  Institute  Civil  Engineers, 
Master  of  the  Mechanical  Drawing  Class  at  the  De- 
partment of  Science  and  Art,  and  at  the  School  of 
Mines,  late  Professor  of  Applied  Mechanics  at  the 
College  for  Civil  Engineers,  &c.,  8vo,  cloth,  9s. 

<'  Mr.  Binns  has  treated  his  subject  in  a  practical  and  masterly  man- 
ner, avoiding  theoretical  disquisitions  on  the  art,  and  giving  direct  and 
applicable  examples,  advancing  progressively  from  the  correct  ortho- 
graphic projection  of  the  most  simple  to  the  most  complex  forms,  thus 
clearing  away  the  mist  from  the  mind  of  the  student,  and  leading  him 
gradually  to  a  correct  and  thorough  appreciation  of  what  he  has  under- 
taken, and  to  that  which  it  is  his  desire  to  attain."—"  The  Artizan." 

MODERN  ALPHABETS.— 

Examplesof  ModemAlphabets,  plain  and  omatnental, 
including  German,  Old  English,  Saion,  Italic,  Per- 
spective, Greek,  Hebrew,  Court  Hand,  Engrossing, 
Tu8C9.n,  Riband,  Gothic,  Rustic,  and  Arabesque, 
with  several  original  designs,  and  an  analysis  of  the 
Roman  and  Old  English  Alphabets^  for  ihe  use  of 
Draughtsmen,  Masons,  Decorative  Painters,  Litho- 
graphers, Engravers,  Carvers,  Schools,  &c.,  collected 
and  engraved  by  F.  Delamotte,  royal  8vo,  oblong 
cloth,  48. 

**  To  artists  of  all  classes,  but  more  especially  to  architects  and  en- 
gravers, this  very  handsome  book  will  be  invaluable." — *^  Standard." 

MINING.— 

Records  of  Mining  and  Metallurgy,  or  facts  and  me- 
moranda for  the  use  of  the  Mine  Agent  and  Smelter, 
by  J.  Arthur  Phillips  and  John  Darlington,  in 
crown  8vO)  cloth,  illustrated  by  wood  engravings  by 
F.  Delamotte,  6s. 

*•  We  can  strongly  recommend  the  *  Records  of  Mining*  as  a  very 
useful  and  instructive  work." — "  Wolverhampton  Herald." 


E.  &  F.  N.  Spon,  16,  BucKLEBSBUBT,  London. 

MINING.— 

Lectures  deHvered  at  the  Bristol  Mining  School  in 
1857,  by  Messrs*  Fryar,  Mackworth,  Coomber,  Coss- 
ham,  Mackie,  Gregory,  Dyer,  Greenwell,  Tennant, 
and  Saunders,  12nio,  cloth  2s.  6d.,  sewed  Is.  6d. 

OBLIQUE  BRIDGES.— 

A  Practical  treatise  on  the  construction  of  oblique 
Bridges  with  spiral  and  with  equilibrated  courses, 
with  12  plates,  containing  100  figures,  by  Francis 
Bashforth,  M» A.,  Fellow  of  St»  John's  College,  Cam- 
bridge, 8v0',  cloth,  68. 

PERPETUAL  MOTION.— 

The  Perpetuum  Mobile,  or  Search  for  Self-motiye 
power  during  the  17th,  18th,  and  19th  centuries,  illus- 
trated from  various  autiientic  sources  in  papers,  essays, 
letters,  paragraphs,  and  numerous  patent  specifications, 
with  an  introductory  essay  by  Henry  Dircks,  C.E., 
with  numerous  engravings  of  machines,  crown  8vo, 
cloth,  lOs.  6d. 

RAILWAYS.— 

Railway  Practice,  a  collection  of  working  plans  and 
practical  details  of  construction  in  the  Public  Works 
of  the  most  celebrated  Engineers,  comprising  Roads, 
Tramroads  and  Railways,  Bridges,  Aqueducts, Viaducts, 
Wharfs,  Warehouses,  Roofs,  and  Sheds,  Canals,  Locks, 
Sluices,  and  the  various  works  on  Rivers,  Streams,  and 
Harbours,  Docks,  Piers,  and  Jetties,  Tunnels,  Cuttings, 
and  Embankments,  works  connected  with  the  Drainage 
of  Marshes,  Marine  Sands,  and  the  Irrigation  of  Land, 
Water-works,  Gas-works,  Water-wheels,  Mills,  Engines, 
&c.,  by  S.  C.  Brees,  C.E.,  text  in  4to,  with  279  plates 
in  folio,  together  2  vols.,  half  bound  morocco,  £3  10s. 

RAILWAY  MASONRY.— 

The  Guide  to  Railway  Masonry,  containing  a  complete 
treatise  on  the  oblique  arch,  by  Peter  Nicholson,  third 
edition,  revised  by  R.  Cowen,  C.E.,  with  42  plates, 
8vo,  cloth,  Os. 


List  of  Books  Published  by 

ROPEMAKING,— 

A  Treatise  on  Kopemaking  as  practised  in  public  and 
private  Rope-yards,  with  a  description  of  the  manu- 
facture, rules,  tables  of  weights,  &c.,  adapted  to  the 
Trade,  Shipping,  Mining,  Railways,  Builders,  &c.,  by 
R.  Chapman,  formerly  foreman  to  Messrs.  Huddart  and 
Co.,  Limebouse,  and  late  Master  Ropemaker  of  H.M. 
Dockyard,  Deptford,  l8mo,  cloth,  28. 

**  This,  though  but  a  brief  and  little  work  upon  ropemaking,  nmst  be 
considered  a  sound  and  practical  treatise  of  niore  than  ordinary  merit. 
Every  page  has  struck  us  that  it  is  the  work  of  a  most  competent  per- 
son, and  one  who  has  devoted  hi ai self  to  the  task  of  fully  developing 
the  entire  science  of  the  subject." — "  Gvil  Engineer  and  Architect's 
Journal." 

SCREW  CUTTING.— 

Screw  Cutting  Tables  for  the  use  of  Mechanical  En- 
gineers, shewing  the  proper  arrangement  of  Wheels 
for  cutting  the  threads  of  screws  of  any  required  pitch, 
with  a  table  for  making  the  Universal  Gas  Pipe 
Threads  and  Taps,  by  W.  A.  Martin,  Engineer,  royal 
8vo,  oblong,  cloth.  Is.,  sewed  6d. 

SCREW  PROPELLER.— 

The  Screw  Propeller,  what  it  is  and  what  it  ought  to 
be,  by  R.  Griffiths,  8vo,  sewed,  6d. 

STEAM  BOILERS.— 

The  Modem  Practice  of  Boiler  Engineering,  con- 
taining observations  on  the  construction  of  Steam 
Boilers,  and  remarks  upon  Furnaces  used  for  Smoke 
Prevention,  with  a  chapter  on  explosions,  by  Robert 
Armstrong,  C.  E.,  revised,  with  the  addition  of  notes 
and  an  introduction,  by  John  Bourne,  Esq.,  with  en- 
gravings, fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  2s. 

"  The  collected  experience  of  a  practical  Engineer,  who,  for  thirty 
years  of  his  life,  has  directed  his  attention  to  the  construction  of  Steam- 
Boilers  and  Furnaces,  is  a  valuable  addition  to  the  stock  of  Engineering 
knowledge,  and  it  will  be  generally  more  appreciated  because  it  is 
condensed  within  so  small  a  volume  as  the  one  before  us.** — "  Civil 
Engineer  and  Arcliittct's  Journal.'* 


E.  &  F.  N.  Spon,  16,  BocKLEBSBURY,  London. 

STEAM  ENGINE.— 

The  Steam  Engine  for  Practical  Men,  containing  a 
theoretical  investigation  of  the  several  rules  given  in 
the  work  and  several  useful  Tables,  by  James  Hann, 
A.I.C.E.,  and  Placido  and  Justo  Qener,  Civil  Engi- 
neers, 8vo,  cloth,  9s. 

"To  the  practical  and  scientific  Engineer,  and  to  the  Assistant 
Engineer,  who  aspires  to  pass  his  examination  for  chief  with  credit  to 
himself  and  the  Service,  we  can  cordially  recommend  the  work." — **  The 
Nautical  Standard." 

STEAM  NAVIGATION.— 

High-speed  [Steam  Navigation  and  Steamship.  Per- 
fection— Can  perfection  be  defined  in  the  form  of  a 
Steamship,  a  Propeller,  or  any  other  mechanical  con- 
trivance r  a  proposition  for  the  solution  of  the  Scientific 
World,  and  for  the  consideration  of  the  British  Admi- 
ralty, by  Robert  Armstrong,  of  Poplar,  8vo,  sewed,  Is. 

SURVEYING.— 

An  Introduction  to  the  present  practice  of  Surveying 
and  Levelling,  being  a  plain  explanation  of  the  subject 
and  of  the  Instruments  employed,  illustrated  with 
suitable  plans,  sections  and  di^ams,  also  with  engra- 
vings of  the  Field  Instruments,  by  S.  C.  Brees,  C.  E., 
8vo,  cloth,  3b.  6d. 

TURBINE.— 

A  Practical  treatise  on  the  construction  of  the  Tur- 
bine or  Horizontal  Water-wheel,  with  seven  plates 
specially  designed  for  the  use  of  operative  Mechanics, 
by  William    Cullen,  Millwright  and   Engineer,  4to, 


TURNING.— 

Turners'  and  Fitters'  Pocket  Book  for  calculating 
the  change  wheels  for  Screws  on  a  Tiirning  Lathe,  and 
for  a  Wheel-cutting  Machine,  by  J.  La  Nicca,  18m  o, 
sewed,  6d. 


London :  E.  and  F.  N.  Spok,  16,  Bucklersbury. 


r
