Tales of Old-Time Texas
J. Frank Dobie, 1928
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Dobie's 1928 folklore collection — preserves the Wild Woman of the Navidad, the great Texas wildman legend of the 1830s-1850s, in its classic literary form. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/tales-of-old-time-texas-by-j.-frank-dobie). This 1928 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

| { 1
4a) RIAN ae Mnteeeaitc Ag UO RACE LIAO)
ONMOAO\T 8!) Moassoey / At EOT) uate TemOten Oiaairy


dhaiioay Mogenyy Git
Puebla hal When an
PUR TE ROK DA [Oo Ake suit ‘Siosiadd AupstjaEL Jo) ApS
PAL MAAOAN Seas SAMMI OS nA iO) etn ietedy DWE) Art (aha
Hes! Rapti ata ssoume and oa rosuod PAE Te SaLy Ot] SEA
PUPS ED EG AGOD Mead MOOT TA SAMO Pee Sexo pf


Sahay) quoi) ateNn sn
ashe 4oleuy tou ane


Hamel ite ttt sine} sou ea Aidmts jou st ou auiD Utes


SAVE ASUOUIOD ARQOCY AN, (SAA MOS ot 10 ENED) Aumaauaed
PUR BUEOURE egy MO) Sotaogh po RUS seve] SII Uy),


POUATO PF Rabat
S pep ued
IMAGO Muay ay Sb) St) | erty OEMOE oun 09) JonuOg


\ inti On) Oy i Horgau uo Adop! feed PH HOT)


Wis a.vonevengayey Ml “aejuEM io [sexe


Yon eae y) OLE SME a At
He sau oun paw eyqedaads
ret ASOT INOS ayy! To sung teTy pu laf] euyy) JO ADNIS AR
AVEO SU OH CONINSUT Sexo, BSL eLOCT MELT of IAL, |


Bcadtemee assrenatrges vee toe 1 oeaprayeaneitpemetetaagy luna fierce ene Iga oe ra


i


HH


yi


BOOKS BY J. FRANK DOBIE


A VAQUERO OF THE BRUSH COUNTRY
CORONADO’S CHILDREN
ON THE OPEN RANGE
* TONGUES OF THE MONTE
TALES OF THE MUSTANG
THE FLAVOR OF TEXAS
APACHE GOLD AND YAQUI SILVER
JOHN C. DUVAL: FIRST TEXAS MAN OF LETTERS
THE LONGHORNS
GUIDE TO LIFE AND LITERATURE OF THE SOUTHWEST
A TEXAN IN ENGLAND
THE VOICE OF THE COYOTE
THE BEN LILLY LEGEND
THE MUSTANGS


TALES OF OLD-TIME TEXAS


Tales of Old-Time Texas


J. FRANK DOBIE


Tales of
Old-Time Texas


Illustrated by
BARBARA LATHAM


Little, Brown and Company


Boston Toronto


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. NO PART OF THIS BOOK IN EXCESS OF FIVE
HUNDRED WORDS MAY BE REPRODUCED IN ANY FORM WITHOUT
PERMISSION IN WRITING FROM THE PUBLISHER


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NO. 55-10755


Published simultancously in Canada
by Little, Brown & Company (Canada) Limited


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


DEDICATION


Indebted to many storytellers, I dedicate this book to certain ones
who have helped make it and have added to my life. Several of them
are dead. All grew up on the soil, and not one was ever incorporated
into the machine age, with its jargoning power to make people de-
pend on canned amusements. They cultivated the art of interesting
themselves and others. They were and are individuals in the best
sense of the word, never confounding dull conformity and greedy
exercise of the “profit motive” with individualism. Only three of
them ever added up any profits. Their gusto, their generosity of
spirit, and their prodigal delight in sharing stories and characters out
of experience freshens me as I set down their names:

Birt (W. H.) Kirrrety, who never fools himself; Rocky REAGAN
and Asa Jones, bedrock cowmen, horsemen and borderers; Evojio
Juarez, joy-giving vaquero of thorned ranges; Rattroap (R. R.)
SmirxH and W. M. Loncwortu, masters of repose—“The dreamer
lives forever but the toiler dies in a day”; Wes Burton, never run-
ning out of hope even when nothing else is left; Mrs. Bruce Rew,
of birds and wild flowers; Jim Batxarn, looking with serene irony
through pretenses and etching characters with what they said; H. B.
Parks, tenacious rememberer, silent sufferer, tonic laugher; Cavtain
Dan Smitu, whose love of living outquivered the palsy that gripped
him.


Introduction


Ne that I have gathered together these tales of my land and
people, they seem inadequate. Put down on paper, they lack
for me the zest, the reality, the flavor that I drank in as a listener
to the original tellers. Print for the eyes of strangers evaporates
the humanity with which a tale told in genial companionship is
saturated. Some wit has said that the translation of prose from
one language to another is a betrayal; of poetry, an assassination.
The translation of telling into printing always changes a tale; it
may improve it — in the way Shakespeare turned an Italian melo-
drama into Romeo and Juliet; but the process of transplanting
can easily wither earthy freshness. I have none of the scientific
folklorist’s reverence for the oral original of a tale — unless the
original is masterly; it generally needs bettering. My custom is
to try to tell a tale as the original teller should have told it. Any
tale belongs to whoever can best tell it. When I reflect on where
and how and when and with whom I heard rollicky old Bigfoot
Wallace’s yarn of his hickory-nut armor, and then read my
printed version, I remember an incident in the life of Sir Walter
Scott. He had ridden low and ridden high taking down ballads
from the lips of people in his “ain countrie.” After he printed
them in the Border Minstrelsy, he took a copy to an old woman
of the Highlands. “Thank ye, sir,” she said, “but they were made
for singing and nae for reading.” The best tales told by accom-


x Introduction


plished nonwriting tellers are made for telling and nae for print-
ing.

The one quality in most of these stories that satisfies me is
their failure to be “action-packed.” The tempo of the earth is
not the tempo of action. The tempo of the earth-dwellers to
whom I have been listening for many years is the tempo of
growing grass, of a solitary buzzard sailing over a valley, of the
wind from the south in April, of the lengthening of a tree’s
shadow on a summer afternoon, of the rise and fall of flames in
a fireplace on a winter night; it is the tempo of a staked horse
grazing out from camp in darkness, of a coyote greeting moon-
rise, of a bobwhite making dawn more serene, of a lizard in the
sun waiting for a fly, and of cows chewing their cuds after they
have drunk; it is the tempo of a ranchman sitting on the front
gallery and looking for hours and hours into space with latent
hope for a cloud. This is not to say that folks who belong to
the earth do not vivify action. They do, but somehow, in the
phrase of Reed Anthony, cowman, they always appear to haye
“ample time.” They may hum, but their humming is not the
humming of industry. They may be propertied, but their minds
are not on drilling the guts out of the earth, damming up rivers,
laying pipelines across continents, converting the elements into
bombs to annihilate nations. They may run, but they have a
genius for soaking in and oozing out.


One time a buzzard was circling around and around, as de-
liberate as thought or greed in chiseling the features of a hu-
man being, when a hawk came sweeping by.

“Brother Buzzard,” the hawk paused to say, “you'll never get
anything to eat lazing around up here this way. Come with me
and we'll catch something.”


Introduction xi


“Thank you, Brother Hawk,” the buzzard said, “but I await
the will of God.”

And the buzzard kept sailing and sailing, high and unhurried,
while the hawk rushed on his way. After a while he streaked
back.

“Sull waiting, I see,” he said.

“Sull waiting on the will of God,” the buzzard said.

The buzzard sailed on in majestic repose and the hawk
streaked on with rapine intent. A third time their paths crossed.

“Old Slowpoke,” the hawk taunted, “I’m going to show you
something. You see that sparrow away down yonder sitting on a
sharp stob of a dead post oak?”

“Yes, I see the sparrow on the sharp stob and I see a thou-
sandlegs inching along on the ground right under him,” the
buzzard said.

“Well, watch me get meat,” the hawk said.

“Good hunting, Brother Hawk,” the buzzard answered. He
just kept on sailing and awaiting the will of God.

The hawk stretched out for a dive at the sparrow. He folded
his wings and shot through the air like a guided missile. Just as
he approached his target the sparrow darted and the hawk, by
some error, hit full against the sharp stob. It went clear through
his side and into his heart. He fluttered on the stob a minute
and then fell lifeless to the ground beside the inching-along
thousandlegs.

Meanwhile the buzzard was still circling slow and even, but
his circles soon grew shorter in diameter and he spiraled down-
ward until he lit on the ground beside the dead hawk.

He had awaited the will of God.


That buzzard had the tempo of the tales in this book — tales


xil Introduction


that belong to a patch of roasting ears guarded from bears by an
old hound, to contemplators of tracks made by the unseen Wild
Woman of the Navidad, to Colonel Abercrombie sitting in the
shade of a chinaberry tree waiting for a mole to pop out of the
ground, and to many another representative of long-gone life.

It is better to have a just sense of values unsatisfied than to
have a cheap sense of values fulfilled, and so I have left Roy
Bean out of this book. There are more yarns about him per-
haps than about any other Texas character, but he was essenti-
ally a publicity-hunting impostor and vulgarian, and striving
to make a hero out of him only adds to the hardupness of
Texas for heroes possessing the elements of nobility. I could
have put Pecos Bill in also. His name was unknown until Tex
O'Reilly, a newspaperman, put him into the Century maga-
zine (October, 1923), claiming him as a folk character. Later,
when somebody else wrote a book about him, O’Reilly sued for
money on the grounds of plagiarism, claiming that he had in-
vented Pecos Bill. He had. Now all the school children at
Pecos, Texas, can tell Pecos Bill yarns — most of them as me-
chanically constructed as the totals out of an adding machine.
They represent the typical American tall tale, which is little
more than an adding machine product. J have told tall tales
here about northers, sandstorms, and the like, but I’m bored
with the Roy Bean—Pecos Biil sausage-links.

Classifying all traditional tales as “tall” shows the debasing
effect of jargon on the perceptive faculties. Properly, a tall tale
is one of sheer exaggeration. It is usually short of wit and de-
void of humanity. It is tolerable only when it brings out charac-
teristics of situation, place, person or some other subject. The
most ingenious tall tale ranks below any good anecdote of char-
acter, though the almanac-minded manufacturers of humor have
driven the character anecdote off the air and out of films in fa-


Introduction xili


vor of their product. Anecdotes about Abraham Lincoln are as
traditional as “Barbara Allen.” I considered putting a selection
of anecdotes about Sam Houston, Brit Bailey, Pamela Mann,
W 6 Wright and other Texians in this book, but they didn’t
seem to fit. (Texian, along with Texican, was used before Texan
became common. The name still carries a kind of out-of-the-old-
rock connotation.)

Jokes, laws, songs, stories, all forms of human expression ex-
cept those bedded deep in human nature and truth, become ob-
solete. Thirty-one years have passed since I brought out as con-
tributor and editor — with the help of Bertha McKee Dobie,
who still “o’erlooks each line” — Legends of Texas. It soon
went out of print. I took from it whatever legends about lost
mines and buried treasure were worth taking and wove them
into Coronado’s Children; then for a long time I kept on expect-
ing to revise and extend the remaining material. When I finally
came to write the present book, I found that what had once in-
terested me — more historically than narratively — now bored
me. For changed me as well as for changed times, the senti-
mentality of lover’s-leap stories has become inane; the saccharini-
ties of miracles and pious doves wither the intellect; the sacerdotal
humbuggery of the Lady in Blue and other borrowings from
the Middle Ages denies the fact that imagination and reason are
integrated. This generation is not, of course, less sentimental, less
credulous or more realistic than preceding generations. It is
merely the directions taken by sentimentality, credulity and un-
realism that change. Anybody who can believe that Formosa is
China can believe anything: that the stars are the forget-me-nots
of the angels or that screw worms can be “talked” out of cows
by quoting a verse from Isaiah. Unadulterated superstition is the
lowest and dullest form of folklore. Imaginative power, not
superstition, makes Hamlet’s ghost harrow up thy soul and trans-


xiv Introduction


lates Queen Mab of the fairies into a reality a thousand times
realer than any female of the human species pictured in a thou-
sand Sunday newspapers.


Well, I have gone in one canyon and come out another. The
way to spoil a story is to talk about it rather than tell it.


JED.


Contents


Introduction ix
Part One
| Corn Dodgers and San Jacinto Corn 3
2The Wild Woman of the Navidad : 14
gilhe Dream That Saved Wilbarger 34
GP ighoot Wallace and the Hickory Nuts 42
S Jim Bowie’s Knife 51
6 The Robinhooding of Sam Bass 78
Part Two
Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms 93
Frozen Inside a Buffalo Hide 110
The Cold-Nosed Hounds 115
(0 Honey in the Rock 22


Part Three
(Utne Texas Bluebonnet 139
(P The Headless Horseman of the Mustangs 147


xvi Contents


[Ba Ranch on the Nueces
/ HDesperate Rides
) he Planter Who Gambled Away His Bride


Part Four
( The Panther’s Scream
| 7 Bears Are Intelligent People
Gord Bill, Confederate Ally


Part Five
{ Acolonel Abercrombie’s Mole
DV Phe Green Powder Keg
“Zin a Drouth Crack
lithe Stranger of Sabine Pass
/-3Longworth’s Vicey-versey Map
WAGuarded by Rattlesnakes
The Apache Secret of the Guadalupes
Do. Henry’s Treasure Hunt


27 Where Did Sam McFarland Cross the Colorado?


“)’The Mezcla Man


Notes and Credits


Index


155
166


2971


301


313
329


Part One


Corn Dodgers and San Jacinto Corn


H° bread it was corn dodgers,” went a song of pioneer times.
After Stephen F. Austin had located many colonists in
Texas and acquired many thousands of acres of land, he wrote:
“Tam still very poor, living on coffee made out of parched corn,
cornbread, milk and butter.” At that, Austin had two articles
seldom found on the tables of settlers. Travelers among them
habitually remarked on the constancy of cornbread and the lack
of milk and vegetables. Fruit, except wild berries, plums and
grapes, was virtually unknown.


It used to amuse me when we rode up to a house at night and
called for a meal, to hear the woman sing out to a boy, “Run to the
field and bring two or three ears of corn. I want to make some bread
for the gentlemen’s supper.” So we had to wait until the corn was
gathered, ground, kneaded and baked. I suppose this is the true
method of living from hand to mouth.


The quotation is from Trip to the West and Texas, by A. A.
Parker, Esq., who crossed into Texas in December, 1834. Even
cornbread he sometimes found scarce, for beef could be “raised
with less trouble than corn.” At only three places during his
travels did he find wheat bread. Many of the householders, he
recorded, “are what our northern people would call indolent.”
Occasionally he rode up to a good farm or large plantation


4 Tales of Old-Time Texas


with fine herds of cattle and a comfortable dwelling, but the
typical homestead was a one-roomed log cabin wherein a fam-
ily slept and fared on “cornbread, meat and sweet potatoes.”
Parker stopped at “‘some places where they had twenty or thirty
cows but no butter, cheese or milk.” He did not find butter “at
half the places” where he called and “obtained cheese only once
in Texas.” He verified the old saying that Texas had “more
cows and less milk than any other country on earth.” Frederick
Law Olmsted, whose illuminating Journey through Texas came
twenty years later, found cornbread and salt pork the unre-
lieved fare morning, noon and night.

According to a grandma tale, verified in essentials by docu-
mentary evidence, the first corn crop raised by English-speaking
people in Texas depended on a pointed stick and a hound.
Grandma and her family came in an ox wagon, along with two
or three other families, ali bound for homesteads near the
mouth of the Colorado River, where the schooner Lively, com-
missioned by Stephen F. Austin, was to land farm tools and
supplies from New Orleans.

Grandma and her sister walked behind the wagon nearly all
the way, in company with a milk cow. In the heavily loaded
wagon was a sow. One morning the family awoke to find a litter
of six pigs with the sow. Then the sow died and the pigs were
left orphans. At night Grandma and her little sister took them
into their pallet and there the pigs slept warm. They drank
some of the cow’s milk. The weather was turning cold, but by
day the jolting in their box helped to keep them warm. Every
night they slept in the pallet.

About Christmas the family reached the mouth of the Colo-
rado River, but the Lively had not arrived. The men built a
cabin and, while they waited for the ship that was never to
come, they hunted. The people ate venison for bread and bear


Corn Dodgers and San Jacinto Corn 5


steak for meat. Sometimes they had honey out of trees. They
had a little corn, but they were keeping it to plant.

Now, the Colorado River bottom was covered with a heavy
growth of reed cane. One day the dogs ran a bear into this
canebrake and the boys set it afire. The cane popped and roared
like guns in a battle. When the fire was out, the land where
the canebrake had been was a clean field, covered with ashes and
as loose and mellow as plowed ground.

Then Grandma took a sharp stick and punched holes in the
ground, making rows, and her sister dropped a grain of corn in
each hole, covering it with her foot. In a few days the corn was
sprouting. Under the spring sunshine it grew an inch a day and
was truly beautiful. But the ground was also covered with shoots
of cane, coming up from roots not burned. The planters had
neither plow nor hoe, but every morning they took sticks and
went into the field and knocked down all the tender cane
shoots. They did this until the corn was big enough to shade
out the cane.

Then when the roasting ears began to make, bears and coons
began to eat up the crop. Grandma tied an old hound in the
middle of the patch. He’d bark and howl all night and scare
the varmints away. The family ate fresh corn, roasting the ears
in ashes. Even before it was hard they were making cornbread
of it. That summer they got farming implements from the
East, and thereafter the colonists usually had plenty of corn,
but they had not come from a wheat country, were not now in
a wheat country, and had no money to buy imported wheat
flour.

Captain Jesse Burnam, the first settler up the Colorado River,
and his family went for nine months without bread of any kind.
One day, he related long afterwards, “a man from lower down
the country came up and told me he had corn that he had


6 Tales of Old-Time Texas


planted with a stick. There were no hoes nor plows in the col-
ony. I gave him a horse for twenty bushels and went sixty miles
after it with two horses, and loaded eight bushels on them. I
walked and led them back home. I had prepared a mortar
before I left home to beat the corn in, and made a sieve of
deerskin stretched over a hoop with holes punched in it. I al-
ways had young men about me for protection, and they would
generally beat the corn. Then we would have to be very saving,
and were allowed only one piece of bread around.”


In 1827, Noah Smithwick, on his way from Kentucky to
take up free Texas land, stopped at Burnam’s place just as
“corn was in roasting ear and the people feasting. They boiled
it and fried it and roasted it, either by standing the husked
ears on end before the fire and turning them till browned all
around or burying them husk and all in hot ashes — the sweet-
est way green corn was ever cooked.”

No other man of the colonies set down in writing so many
details about ways of living as Noah Smithwick put into his
reminiscences. The corn, he wrote, was of “the large, soft,
white Mexican variety.” People would flatten an old piece of
tinware, often a leaky coffee pot that had been ripped open, on
an ax-hewn board and punch it full of holes. The punched-out
tin served to grate still-milky grains of corn from an ear rubbed
over it. Bread from the grating was “very rich and sweet, if a
bit heavy.”

There were no mills, and after the corn was hard it had to be
pounded into grits. “A sound tree was cut off three or four feet
above the ground, and the stump was hollowed out by alternate
burning and scraping until it would hold about a peck of shelled
corn. Then a long pole with stone or iron pestle attached to the
butt end was swung into the fork of an adjacent tree,” so that


8 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the pestle when lowered would pound down into the stump
mortar. This contrivance was called mortar and sweep. It took
less manpower to work the sweep than to hammer down di-
rectly on the corn in the mortar. The meal into which corn was
thus pounded was not fine. “Often without sifting or salt, it
was mixed with water and baked. The bread tasted delicious to
people who had gone breadless for months. When cold weather
came on the people cooked huge kettles of lye hominy.”

Old settlers used to tell how a boy who had been given a
flour biscuit put a coal of fire on its back to see if it would
crawl. He thought it was a little terrapin. According to gossipy
Noah Smithwick, an early settler named Martin Varner man-
aged to get together enough money or pelts to buy a barrel of
flour. Mrs. Varner made a batch of biscuits, which were “as
heavy as lead and hard as wood. When they were done she set
them on the table. The boy looked at them curiously, helped
himself to one, and made for the door with it. In a few min-
utes he came back for another.” The father stepped out to see
what he was doing with the rarities. The youngster had punched
a hole through the center of each biscuit, inserted 4 stick for an
axle, and had the wheels ready for a toy Mexican cart. “Cart-
wheel” was a jocular nickname for biscuit. Even where flour
biscuits could be afforded at all, they were a Sunday treat. In the
Hallett household at Hallettsville, they were called “Billy Sel-
dom,” while the unvarying cornbread was called “Johnny Con-
stant.”


One time a family living on a creek was giving a wedding
dinner — in the middle of the day — for their daughter and her
groom. They were putting the big pot in the little one and
were having not only flour biscuits but pound cake, golden with
egg yolks and butter.


Corn Dodgers and San Jacinto Corn 9


The cake was baked and sliced and on the table, when a set-
tler named Bullock who lived at the very head of the creek —
away up above the last fork, where the owls mated with chick-
ens — came along. He and his family had not been invited to
the “‘infare,” as they lived out of reach. He did not belong to
the company anyhow. His hair looked as if he used it for a nap-
kin and had not had the bear grease washed out of it for years.
His buckskin clothes were “cured” not only with tallow rubbed
in to turn water but with the blood of butchered animals and
all variety of dirt. Yet it would never do to let him go on with-
out dinner.

“Now, Mr. Bullock,” the hostess beamed, “I know how far it
is on up to your home and how bad the road is and all that,
but you have just got to eat something before going on. It’s
ready and you won’t have to wait until all this crowd gets set-
tled. Come right in.”

Mr. Bullock washed his hands and face in a washpan on the
back gallery, dried on the common towel, lumbered into the
big hall, and sat down in a broad rawhide-bottomed chair near a
great plate of sliced pound cake. Soon plates of fried chicken,
fried venison, beef roasted over coals, bowls of mustard greens
and potatoes, jars of mustang grape preserves and jelly from
wild dewberries, and other good things were within his reach.
There was plenty of butter and gravy too, next to the golden
brown cornbread.

Mr. Bullock began peeling drumsticks at about a bite and a
half each. He ate a piece of cornbread sopped in gravy and
then he tried a slice of pound cake spread with butter. He sam-
pled venison and approved of the beef, but a combination of
fried chicken, pound cake and butter was evidently what his
system called for. After he had consumed two or three pieces of
pound cake the hostess moved the cornbread nearer to him.


10 Tales of Old-Time Texas


The yellow corn from which it was made gave it a rich look,
but Mr. Bullock was too deep in pound cake, butter and
fried chicken to notice it.

Now the hostess was truly alarmed. Mr. Bullock had let his
belt out a notch. It was a wide belt encased in rattlesnake skin.
He appeared to be really settling down to business when he
took it off and hung it over the back of his chair. While he was
uncinching himself the hostess ran out the back door and into
the kitchen, a room separate from the main house, and returned
with a platter of biscuits — flour biscuits.

“Oh, Mr. Bullock,” her voice came with an anxiety that any-
body else would have noticed, “do have some biscuits. We don’t
have them very often, you know, but I have just finished a big
baking of them.”

“No thank you, ma’am,” Mr. Bullock, who had resumed op-
erations on the pound cake, responded. “You jes’ save them
there biscuits for the company. This here yaller bread is good
enough for me.”

Then he “blowed” some coffee in a saucer and swallowed it
with another slice of “‘yaller bread.”


The day after the battle of San Jacinto, April 21, 1836, while
General Sam Houston lay on a pallet under a great live oak
near the battlefield, Santa Anna was brought to him as a pris-
oner. Almonte, Chief of Staff under Santa Anna, joined in the
talk.

“You talk about reinforcements, sir,” Houston said to him,
raising himself up. “It matters not how many reinforcements
you have, you can never conquer freemen.” Then, taking from
his pocket an ear of dry corn which he had carried for four days,
only a part of it consumed, he held it up and said, “Sir, do you


Corn Dodgers and San Jacinto Corn Il


ever expect to conquer men fighting for freedom whose general
can march for four days with one ear of corn for his rations?”

The un-uniformed Texas soldiers were crowded around the
group, and at the exhibition of the corn and the sound of
Houston’s dramatic words, they gave a yell of approbation.

“Give us that ear of corn,” one of them said. “We'll plant it
and call it Houston corn.”

“Certainly I’ll give it to you, my brave fellows,” Houston
said smiling. “Take it along if you care anything about it and
divide it among yourselves. Give each man a kernel as far as it
will go, and take it home to your fields, where I hope you will
long cultivate the arts of peace as nobly as you have shown
yourselves masters of the art of war. You have achieved your in-
dependence. Now see if you can make as good farmers as you
have proved yourselves gallant soldiers. But do not call it Hous-
ton corn. Call it San Jacinto corn, for then it will remind you of
your own bravery.”

Accordingly the corn was distributed and later planted. Thus
biographers of Sam Houston began telling the story at least as
early as 1855. Marquis James in The Raven (1929) follows
precedent in adding, “Thousands of tasseled acres today boast
pedigrees that trace back to the San Jacinto ear.”

In 1935 I published this story in newspapers over Texas, ask-
ing any reader who might know of any San Jacinto corn grow-
ing in Texas to inform me. I received one reply —and one
only. Although it confirms the Sam Houston gesture, it hardly
confirms the claim that “thousands” of acres of corn can be
traced back to the San Jacinto ear. The letter came from W. A.
Craddock, now dead, then living at Spur, Texas. It follows.

“My father, John Robert Craddock, later appointed by Sam
Houston as captain of a company of Texas rangers, was present
as a guard when General Sam Houston showed Santa Anna


12 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the ear of corn and told him, ‘You cannot hope to conquer a
people whose general and men can march three days on a ration
of one ear of corn.’ My father got a few grains and took them
to his brother-in-law, Gabriel Jackson, who had a large planta-
tion on the Brazos River in Burleson County. It was too late to
plant the corn that season, for my father was not discharged
until May 30. Therefore, the corn was carefully kept until the
spring of 1837. It thrived, and for many years thereafter was
grown on Gabriel Jackson’s plantation.

“After serving in various Indian campaigns and as captain of
the rangers, my father married and in 1850 opened a farm on
Little River in Bell County. He secured some of this corn,
planted it, grew it, and called it Sam Houston corn. I suppose
he improved it by selection. When I first took notice of it,
about 1870, it was indeed a wonderful corn. He had two kinds,
both nearly snow-white. One had broad, flat grains, which he
called ‘gourd seed’; the other had long, slim grains, which he
called ‘shoe-peg.’ But he called both varieties Sam Houston
corn. I could write a book on its many kinds of goodness — as
roasting ears, as lye hominy in the big iron pot, as pone bread in
skillet, as ash cakes cooked in wet shuck under hot coals, as
corn dumplings cooked with turnip greens in ‘pot licker,’ and as
rockahominy, which was corn parched and ground and then
perhaps sweetened — about the same thing as Mexican pinole.
This was one of the most concentrated and easily carried foods
known to man.

“T never knew Father to put a lock or bar on his cribs, and
to all who needed bread the invitation stood out: ‘Come and
help yourself, for it is Sam Houston’s corn.’ He always loved
Houston and stood by him in opposing secession. He died in
1891. I do not know if anyone after his death preserved the
Sam Houston corn as a distinct variety.”


Corn Dodgers and San Jacinto Corn 13


If so, it’s not through an agricultural experiment station,
where everything is hybridized. But in a kind of sequel to the
Sam Houston corn story scientific horticulture has had a part.

A few days before his death, in 1906, Governor Jim (James
Stephen) Hogg, the great commoner among Texas governors,
said: “I want no monument of stone or marble, but plant at
my head a pecan tree and at my feet an old-fashioned walnut,
and when these trees shall bear, let the pecans and walnuts be
given out among the plain people of Texas, so that they may
plant them and make Texas a land of trees.”

Pecan and walnut were planted at the grave in the State
Cemetery at Austin and cared for. In time they bore. About
1934 the Department of Horticulture of Texas Agricultural and
Mechanical College began saving the nuts —such as could be
rescued from worms, squirrels, coons and boys — to plant and
grow into small trees for distribution. The walnuts have not
grown and many pecan plants after being uprooted and shipped
did not live. Now the pecan nuts are given out for planting.
On courthouse squares and school grounds, in churchyards,
parks and other public places in many counties over Texas, Jim
Hogg pecans are helping “make Texas a land of trees.”


The Wild Woman of the Navidad


It happened one day about noon, going towards my boat, I was
exceedingly surprised with the print of a man’s naked foot on the
shore, which was very plain to be seen in the sand. I stood like one
thunderstruck, or as if I had seen an apparition; I listened, I looked
round me, I could hear nothing, nor see anything; I went up to a
rising ground to look farther; I went up the shore and down the
shore, but it was all one; I could see no other impression but that one;
I went to it again to see if there were any more, and to observe if it
might not be my fancy; but there was no room for that, for there was
exactly the very print of a foot, toes, heel, and every part of a foot;
how it came thither, I knew not, nor could in the least imagine.


a reads Daniel Defoe’s description of the most famous
human track in the literature of the world. In any solitary
land a man will be surprised, interested, fearful or wildly glad
at the glimpse of another human being; at the sight of a mere
track of an unknown fellow creature he will be filled with won-
der and curiosity.

For years the Wild Woman of the Navidad was the talk
and the mystery of the Texas colonies. Sometimes the unknown
was called “the wild man.” Again, two and even three of the
track-leaving but never-seen beings ran together. Many theories
and speculations arose as to their origin. Stories spread about
Africans who had run away from the Bowie brothers while they


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 15


were buying slaves from the pirate Lafitte on Galveston Island
at a dollar a pound and driving them inland, about escapes
from blacks smuggled into the country by the outrageous Mon-
roe Edwards, about a certain man from a cargo of raw meat-
eaters landed on the Brazos who escaped with a stolen knife
and months later was trailed to the Navidad, and about other
runaways.

To settlers living against the deep woods and dense brush
along the Navidad River no explanation was conclusive. One of
them, Samuel C. A. Rogers, decided in his old age to write
down the story that nearly everybody he knew was interested in.
His record has here been amended as to punctuation and the
like, but not as to language or detail.

“A great many persons [he begins] has requested me to write
of the wild man, as he was called, but I have my reasons for
not doing so. First, I] am a poor scribe and do not like to write.
Secondly, there is so much mystery connected with the doings
of the wild man that my statements would be naturally disbe-
lieved. Yet what I am going to relate is as true as Sam Rogers
is my name... .

“In the spring of 1845 when going to my work one morning
I discovered the tracks of three persons who had been near the
house the night previous. The smallest track was of a bare foot
that could have worn a No. 4 shoe; the second track was larger,
one of the feet that made it being bare and the other shod; the
third track was made by feet that must have required No. 9 or
No. 10 shoes. The makers of these tracks had not done any-
thing wrong; indeed, all they did for a good while was cause
wonder and surprise.

“At this time my household consisted of my wife Lucinda,
our little son John, a hired man by the name of Hall, Franklin
Rogers, and myself. Lucinda wanted a new dress. Calico was


16 Tales of Old-Time Texas


then very scarce, and a lady who could dress in neat new calico
belonged to the A-1 upper ten circle. Lucinda had a spinning
wheel. The waters of the Sandies had a great many fish, Well,
we men promised Lucinda the calico for her dress if she would
spin thread for us to make a fishing seine with. She put in time
after her housework was done, and when we came home from
the field we would spin too, I carding the rolls of cotton and
Hall and Franklin operating the wheel. In time we got our
seine completed, and the way we hauled fish out of the creek
would astonish anybody who knows that stream today.

“Then one morning we found the seine cut and half gone. I
had just killed a four-year-old beef so as to sell his hide for a
dollar and send to Matagorda for lead sinkers to put on the
seine. Now the whole thing was a loss. The only clue we had
were the tracks of the wild people. Hall said he was going to
watch the next night, and if they came for the other half of
the seine he would catch at least one of them with the dogs.
Franklin Rogers said, ‘Damn them wild people; if we can’t
catch or kill them, they will break us up.’ I have been sorter
religious for a great many years and I did not curse. The wild
people did not come back, for a while at least.

“Meantime Lucinda had not been paid for her calico dress.
There was no calico about, but finally some came to Texana,
and I got the money to pay for it. Two of our milch cows
died and their hides brought a dollar apiece. We had thought
of buying coffee with the hides, as a trader at Texana was giving
two pounds for a hide — but we could not get coffee and calico
both. Then, as no more milch cows died, we had to kill six
steers to make out the eight dollars. Lucinda did not like the
dress after all, as it was curtain calico stamped with large flow-
ers.

“Well, for nearly two weeks we did not miss anything more,


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 17


and we had become reconciled to the loss of the seine. Then
one morning Hall rushed back a-raring and pitching and cursing
from the bottom field, where he had gone to plow. I was as-
tonished, for he was a member of the Presbyterian Church; I
had heard Methodists curse and had heard Baptists curse, but
had never heard a Presbyterian before. “The damned wild peo-
ple,’ he said, had taken one of his trace chains; the grass was
growing so fast it would soon have his crop; he couldn’t plow
without traces— and then the way he did curse! But we sub-
stituted a lariat for the chain, and Hall went on plowing and
made a good crop of cotton, corn, and potatoes.

“The potato patch was the cause of his doing more cursing,
for, after the potatoes got large enough to eat, the wild people
would slip into the field nearly every night and gravel them up.

“The unknown folks had been around us nearly a year. Then
we missed the tracks of the big one and the little one. [ must
say that I felt a little sorry that the one that made the small
tracks was gone without my ever finding out who it was or
what had induced the person to live such a life. I spent many
nights watching but could never get a glimpse of any of the
three wild ones. Most people supposed that the little tracks
were made by some female. What became of the two missing
wild ones was never known. Franklin Rogers and others thought
they had died from sickness, as there was a great deal of rain
that year and even among people protected from the weather
there was much sickness.

“But the tracks of the one remaining wild man continued to
appear. When corn was in roasting ear he would come nearly
every night to get a supply. Once I had an old Irishman cutting
hay in the cornfield. He usually rode to it and tied his horse
while he worked or slept. One morning Franklin Rogers and I
saw the old man riding towards us like the devil beating tan-


18 Tales of Old-Time Texas


bark. He was screaming, ‘Mr. Rogers, get your gun! The wild
man is in the field!’ We went and saw where a bear had broken
down some corn. Then the Irishman admitted that he had been
asleep, had awakened at a noise near him, and, seeing a black
creature standing, had taken it for the wild man. After that
he would not go to the field without a dog or without a book
and ‘one of the gloves of Saint Mary’ given to him by a priest
in Ireland. He could not read a line, but he was sure that the
book and glove would keep him from harm as long as he had
them with him.

“One morning about this time I missed a handsaw that I
had been using the evening before and had left out in the
yard. Two years later it was delivered to me by Russell Ward
after he and his brother Lafayette Ward had surprised the wild
man in the bottom. In fleeing, the wild man dropped a kind of
basket or trunk that was very curiously woven. This contained a
shirt of mine, a novel, a Bible, and many other articles taken
from the house. The shirt had been torn and then the rent
sewed up as skillfully as any woman could have sewed it.
Thread and needles both made by the wild man were among
the curiosities in the trunk.

“The wild man had been scared, but he did not leave the
country. He kept coming to our premises. One morning after
we had kept watch all night we saw tracks in the yard and
garden that plainly showed he had been right at us. Russell
Ward then proposed that all the neighbors collect and hunt out
the bottoms. Eight of us met at the junction of the Navidad
River and the Sandies and searched all day without seeing any-
thing. Afterwards we found two different trees in which the
wild man had made his home while the bottoms were covered
with water. One of them was a live oak that forked about
thirty feet above the ground. This fork formed a kind of flat


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 19


place on which he could lie down and sleep and also build a
small fire to cook whatever he had to eat. I climbed the tree
myself, which was not difficult to do, as it did not grow straight
but inclined considerably.”


At this point the narrative of Samuel Rogers breaks off
abruptly, without coming to an end. The whole story, however,
was written out by a contemporary of Rogers, Martin M.
Kenney. With a few minor interspersions and some changes in
language, it follows, without quotation marks.


In the late 1830’s settlers on the lower Navidad began seeing
the barefoot tracks of two human beings but never the persons
who made them. The size of the tracks indicated that one was
made by a boy and the other by a girl or woman of delicate
feet. The two sometimes invaded the sweet potato fields and
sometimes helped themselves to a few ears of corn, but seemed
to avoid any mischief and took only something to eat.

At first they were thought to be runaway slaves, but their
gentle nature did not fit desperate runaways. Moreover, the
size of the mysterious tracks demonstrated that they were not
made by Negroes, and the makers of the tracks avoided Negroes
as well as whites. After the runaway slave theory had been re-
jected, it was supposed that the unknown ones might be some
wandering remnant of Indians; this conjecture was favored by
the smallness of the feet. Yet the conduct of the wild beings
seemed foreign to Indian character. Indians would not have
been so secluded; they would have committed more mischief
—or less.

The most probable conjecture seemed, for a while at least,
to be that the unknowns were lost children who had become


20 Tales of Oid-Time Texas


separated from their friends during the hurried retreat of the
settlers from the invading army of Mexico in 1836 — the Run-
away Scrape, as it was called. The children, it was supposed,
had become so alarmed that, believing the whole world hostile,
they in innocent ignorance avoided all mankind. But there
were grave objections to this theory also. If the supposed lost
children had been old enough to maintain themselves in the
wilderness, they would not have lacked the discretion to
make themselves known when their friends returned. Alto-
gether, the riddle remained unsolved.

After some years the larger track was no more seen, but the
small, slim track kept on appearing. Then a party of hunters
noticed some bones protruding from a pile of sticks and leaves
in the woods and uncovered a naked human skeleton. The
hunters were not anthropologists; to them the skull belonged to
some member of the human race; they did not know whether
white, black or red, male or female. But people speculated and
concluded that the larger of the two strange recluses had prob-
ably been a man and that when he died his mate gave his
body, with sticks and leaves, the best burial she was capable
of giving.

About the only places the small track was seen for a long
time was in sweet potato fields, where the strange being fre-
quently came by night and, after grappling a few potatoes, went
away as stealthily as she came. From the impress of the fingers
left in the mold it was judged that the hands were small and
slim; and from the tracks, which were only a span long, it
seemed certain that the author of these little depredations was
a woman, and not of the black race, whose feet are large and
flat. The track-maker was now called “the Wild Woman,”
though some called her “It.”

Curious to know what manner of being she was, some young


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 21


men set a watch at a potato patch where there were signs of
her recent depredations. As she was harmless and possibly ig-
norant of speech, they planned to seize her with their hands,
and for this purpose they concealed themselves between the
high ridges of the potato vines and waited in silence. At a late
hour she came, and as near them as they had expected. The
night was dark, but they could see the shadowy form. It was
slim and apparently unclothed, but the color could not be
distinguished. They sprang out to seize her, but, though they
were active young men, she was more agile still, and bounded
away as silently and quickly as the flitting of a shadow, and
was instantly lost in the darkness.

For a long time she was not heard of. But at length fresh
signs of her appeared in a manner that heightened curiosity.
The settlers were obliged to keep vigilant and fierce dogs to
protect the houses and domestic animals against beasts of
prey. Trained to battle with bears, panthers, and other wild
animals, the dogs were a trusted security against the clandestine
approach of man as well as beast. The houses of the early
settlers were constructed on the general plan of two log pens
connected by a wide hall, open at both ends, all under one
roof, shade and ventilation being the chief requisites in the
southern climate. If a pen were large enough it could be parti-
tioned, each sub-pen, or room, opening into the hall. Saddles,
ropes and other horse-gear hung from pegs or antlers on the
sides of the hall; guns were stacked in the corners of the rooms
or rested in racks over the mantels and doors, ready for instant
service; the settlers, skilled in the use of weapons, were scarcely
less vigilant than their dogs. Thus guarded, they felt secure
from prowling beasts and confident that human marauders
would not be foolhardy enough to try to steal into their houses.
In the summer time the doors and windows stood open day


22 Tales of Old-Time Texas


and night, and all wayfarers coming in good faith were wel-
come.

To one such house, on a bright moonlight summer night,
when everything was still and the inmates were asleep, the
Wild Woman came and entered, stepping over dogs, it would
seem. What search or exploration she made was not known, but
she entered the dining room, in which there was an open cup-
board containing a plate of meat and a loaf of bread. She took
part of the meat, and, breaking the loaf in two, took one half
and left the other; and with this mute explanation of her mo-
tive, she departed as silently as she came. Not a dog whimpered,
and the people of the house were none the wiser until morn-
ing, when this excusable theft excited their curiosity and com-
passion. But they wondered at the dereliction of the dogs.

The unknown one did not return to that house for a long
time. But she soon entered another house of the same style,
guarded by particularly vigilant dogs. In this her search was
extended, as shown by the things she moved; but it was also
obvious that her motives were not venal. There were gold
watches hanging over the mantel, where she moved bottles and
powder flasks, and she must have seen them, as the moonlight
came bright through the windows. There was silverware in the
cupboard, but she took only some scraps of food, taking, as be-
fore, only half and leaving half; and she effected her departure
without disturbing man or dog. She afterward entered numerous
houses in the same manner; not a dog would notice her. The
Negroes became superstitious about her. They called her “that
thing that comes.”

One winter it was found that she was more or less regularly
taking corn from a crib. The amount she took was trifling, but
here seemed an opportunity to capture her and satisfy curiosity.
All that needed to be done was to watch, and when she entered


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 23


the crib to close the door. The watch was kept for several
nights without results, a man staying inside the crib near the
door, ready to close it. One night he had fallen into a doze
when the rustling of corn shucks awoke him. The “thing” had
come. He had only to push the door and call the people. But
horror seized him. The thought of being shut up alone in the
dark, even for a few moments, with the mysterious creature was
accompanied by a sudden dread that he could not control. In
his fright he cried out, and before he could move a limb the
creature was gone with a single bound through the door into
the enveloping night.

The compassion of the people arose with their curiosity. The
poor creature was welcome a hundred times to what she took
in her little forays, harmless to others but so dangerous to her-
self. Every means was used to communicate with her. Diligent
search was made in the canebrake and in great hollow trees,
some of which afforded almost a house. But all in vain; she
avoided black and white alike, and no signs of her dwelling
could be found in the dark forests where she roamed like some
wild animal. Sometimes no sign of her would be seen for
months or even years, and the people would cease to think of
her; then suddenly she would appear with some trick, if it might
be so called, more curious than any preceding.

On one of the plantations the woodworkers’ tools, essential
to the early settlers, were kept under an open shed where there
was a rough workbench. From this the owner missed his hand-
saw, drawing knife, and some other tools. At first he suspected
some petty thief. But several weeks afterward the tools were all
found returned to their places, the handsaw scoured and pol-
ished as bright as a looking glass. What could this mean? It
must have been the work of the Wild Woman. The polish put
on the saw was wonderful. No one knew before that this


24 Tales of Old-Time Texas


familiar metal was susceptible of such a gloss, nor did anyone
know the process by which it could be effected. Why did the
woman take these tools? Was she building a hut or fixing her
residence in some hollow tree? Was she making weapons, a
raft, a boat? For any imaginable purpose the assortment she
took was incongruous, deficient, or superfluous. Why did she
return the tools so soon? What could be the meaning of the
curious but useless pains she had taken with the saw blade?
Was there some symbolic meaning, or message? Thus specula-
tion ran.

A little later, a neighbor missed a log chain. His Negro
teamster asserted that “dat thing what comes have tuk it.”
But a chain twelve feet long weighing thirty pounds or more
—what use could the wild creature have for it? The owner said
that if he ever “whipped a nigger for being a fool,” he ought
to “skin” the teamster. Not long afterward, the Wild Woman
did come to his house and made the usual round among un-
conscious watchdogs and sleeping people to her usual prize, the
cupboard, where she found a pan of milk, two loaves of bread,
a plate of butter, and other food. She took half the plate of
butter, dividing it neatly, took one of the loaves, poured half
the milk out of the pan into a pitcher, and, taking the latter,
departed. Two or three weeks afterwards, upon awakening one
morning, the family found the pitcher standing on the bare
ground before the door and the log chain coiled around it. The
chain was scoured and polished as bright as the saw had been.
To bring this chain and coil it before the door would seem to
have been necessarily a somewhat noisy operation, but the dogs
had taken no notice.

The people ceased to wonder at the recusancy of the dogs; it
had become an established phenomenon. For seven years or
more this strange creature had haunted the country, and all


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 25


sorts of dogs and several generations of them had been tested.
They seemed mysteriously insensible to the presence of the
Wild Woman.

Her next exploit surpassed all and set curiosity on tiptoe. A
farmer had a hog fattening in a pen near his house. A bear at-
tempted one night to take it off, but the dogs seized the beast
and after a severe fight killed it. The combative spirit of the
dogs was so raised by this occurrence that they kept a lively
watch, especially on the hog pen; and expecting every night to
be treated to another bear fight, all were fiercely alive to the
slightest alarm. One night during this state of matters, the
Wild Woman brought a poor hog out of the woods and put it
in the pen, then took the fat one out, making off with it safely,
and not a dog barked or growled. The farmer said that
he would have killed every dog on his place if he had thought
they were at themselves when “that thing” swapped hogs with
him. There was but one explanation possible: she had_ be-
witched both hogs and dogs. There was no use in fattening
the new porker; the Negroes would not have eaten a mouthful
of it short of starvation. During several years “the thing” re-
peated this mysterious performance at numerous places. The
substituted hog often bore a neighbor's earmark.

Trailing the Wild Woman with dogs should be easy now,
for surely she could not carry so heavy a burden as a fat
hog any great distance. But the dogs always lost the trail as
soon as the people following were left out of sight. When the
hog-taking achievement had ceased to be a wonder, some hunt-
ers came accidentally upon one of her camps, and here was
material for fresh curiosity. There were piles of sugar cane,
which abounded in the neighboring fields. Much of it had
been cut into short lengths and chewed; hence it was evident
that she knew the use of a knife. There were some curious


26 Tales of Old-Time Texas


strings twisted of the outside bark of the cotton plant. There
were no signs of fire and no implements. A secret watch was
kept on the camp for some time, but the creature did not re-
turn. Sometime afterwards, fresh signs of her having been seen,
a general hunt was resolved upon. Dogs were procured that had
been trained to follow runaway Negroes. They came upon the
trail and pursued eagerly enough; but the trail led through
ponds of water abounding in the swamp and soon put the
dogs at fault.

A long time followed during which she was not heard of;
then her camp was found again at a considerable distance
from the former one; she had removed to another section of
the country. This new camp revived curiosity. At it were several
things of her own manufacture, baskets and a curious snare
made from the fibrous bark of the cotton plant, seemingly in-
tended to catch rabbits or other small animals. There were
several articles taken from houses, a spoon, some table knives,
and a cup. There was no clothing; her bed was moss and
leaves; and there had been no fire. But what excited most
curiosity was several books, and these had been kept dry. In one
of the books was a letter of old date, containing tender senti-
ments and addressed to Miss . One of the books was a Bible,
and in it were the names of the members of a well-known
family in the neighborhood.

What then? Could this strange being read? Was she some
too high-strung heart that had been so overstrained or em-
bittered in the buffets of the world as to renounce human
society and resolutely for many years keep herself secluded in
the shadows of the forest? Had some wild romantic sentiment
prompted her to seek the savage life of the woods with a com-
panion, and then, having lost him, had she vowed to live so
strange and rude a hermitage? And after so many years was


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 27


the aching heart seeking solace in the company of old books?
Or was she seeking for one book only, taking volumes at ran-
dom in the dark until the light of morning should reveal the
title — one book with a promise, a light, a solace for one human
soul contained by no other? Such were a few of the questions
and conjectures evoked by discovery of the books. The matter
got into the newspapers.

Sympathy and curiosity rose together. If the creature could
read, why not write her letters and place them where she would
be most likely to find them? Letters plainly written in simple
language were posted at her recent camp and other places en-
treating her to make herself known. Home and friends were
offered her.

This serious drama was not without a comic side-scene. An
eccentric old bachelor in the country by the name of Moses
Evans had been nicknamed “The Wild Man of the Woods.”
Since there was now a veritable Wild Woman of the woods, wits
invented a match. Several love letters, partly in verse, over the
signature of “Moses Evans, the Wild Man,” addressed to the
unknown Wild Woman, were, with purported replies, published
in Texas newspapers and copied over the United States. Mean-
while the serious letters posted on trees and out from the
camp of the poor recluse remained untouched, and nothing
occurred to indicate that she understood them.

By this time a general resolution had grown up that the
riddle must be solved. A systematic and cautious plan was
adopted. A number of hunters formed extended lines and drove
through the woods with leashed hounds, while others, well
mounted and provided with lassos, took stands. Several fruit-
less hunts were made, but late one evening the hunters became
satisfied that the woman was in a neck of woods running out
into a prairie about a quarter of a mile wide. The men with


28 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the lassos took positions along the edge of this prairie while
others drove through the skirts of woods with the hounds. It
was night before the men were well arranged, but a bright
moon shone. Men accustomed to hunting with hounds can
readily tell by the nature of their cries what kind of game
they are pursuing. Scarcely were the men at their posts when
the hounds raised a cry never heard before. They were following
the track of some strange creature. Presently the breaking of
little sticks and the hurried rustling of the brush near one of
the lasso men announced the approach of something. A minute
later it bounded with a light and flying step into the open
prairie in the bright light of the moon.

It was the Wild Woman. She ran directly across the prairie
in the direction of the main forest. The man nearest her when
she ran out rode a fleet horse, and it needed all his speed to
catch up with the object of pursuit. But the horse was so
afraid of the strange creature that he could not be urged within
reach of the lasso. Three times he came up but each time shied to
right or left too far for his rider to throw, while the flying
figure each time turned her course to the opposite hand and ran
with the speed of a frightened deer. They were now nearing
the black shadow of the great forest, which was projected far
on the plain. Spurring his horse with angry energy, the pursuer
came this time fairly within reach and threw his lasso; but at
the instant of throwing, his horse shied as before, and the rope
fell short. In an instant the pursued creature was in the shadow
of a vast forest and further pursuit was useless.

One piece of knowledge, at least, had been gained:
the rider had a good look at her as they ran together for several
hundred yards across the prairie. She had long hair that
must have reached to her feet while she stood but that flew
back as she ran. She wore no clothes, but her body was covered


30 Tales of Old-Time Texas


with short brown hair. The rider did not see her face, as she
was between him and the moon, so that whenever she turned
toward him her face was in the shadow. Once or twice he
thought he caught a glimpse of wild eyes as she cast a fright-
ened glance over her shoulder. She had something in her hand
when he first saw her, but she dropped it either from fright
or to facilitate her escape. After the chase this was sought for
and found. It proved to be a club about five feet long, polished
to a wonder.


A long time passed without anything further being seen of
her. She seemed to have disappeared. But during the severe
winter of 1850, when a great sleet fell and snow covered the
ground, a camp was found in the brush of a tree that had re-
cently blown down in the tangled thicket of a canebrake. At
this place there were large piles of sugar cane, much of it
chewed. There was a rude bed of moss and leaves, but no sign
of fire. There was the strangest set of snares, made like those
found before, of the bark of cotton stalks, but these were much
more complex. The tracks in the snow were numerous and a
span long. A watch was set, but the creature had taken alarm
and did not come back.

The winter passed, and, some fresh signs being seen, another
great muster was made; then, equipped with horses, hounds,
and ropes, the pursuers made a favorable start on the track. The
men took up stations in line and closed in from all sides, In
the last resort, as was expected, the creature climbed a tree and
was soon looking down with a frightened stare at the troops of
baying dogs and the up-gazing men. Instead of the hair-covered
female glimpsed by moonlight on the prairie, they saw, now,
only a runaway African man cowered in the tree. The wild
creature they were pursuing had, it seemed, by accident or


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 31


design crossed his trail. The dogs, taking the latter scent, had
been misled. Now the hunters could remember that the cry of
the dogs changed during the chase, and it was thought that by
going back in time the trail might be recovered.

But this Negro was somewhat of a curiosity himself, and
they stopped to investigate him. He was entirely naked, an un-
known condition for runaways. The hunters bade him come
down, but he made no sign of obeying. They asked him to
whom he belonged, but he made no answer. They threatened
him, but he did not seem to understand. To frighten him into
obedience they pointed guns at him, pretending that they would
shoot him, but he motioned with his hand for them to desist
and go away. They then climbed the tree and took him down
by force. He trembled, but said nothing.

While looking at him they observed his feet and hands.
Could it be, after all, that this was the wild being who had so
long evaded the sight of man? They led him through a muddy
place to see the track he made. It was measured and found to
agree with the measure often taken of the strange wild one.
The man was kept confined for some time, and the news of
his strange capture was published far and wide. But no owner
came forward nor could anything be learned concerning
him.

At length a wandering sailor came that way who had been at
a Portuguese mission on the coast of Africa; he knew the cap-
tive’s tribe and spoke enough words of his barbarous language
to learn his history. The African had as a boy been sold by his
parents for “knife and tobacco” to slave traders, who had him
with many others for a long time in a ship at sea. They came
at last into a river. Here they were landed and kept for some
days in a large house, where they had plenty of sugar and


sugar cane. He and another, a grown man of his ibe, baad


— —


32 Tales of Old-Time Texas


their escape and wandered for a long time in the woods, cross-
ing a great many rivers and prairies; he did not know how
many. Often they were nearly starved to death, but his com-
panion, skillful to throw the club, had as often taken some
animal with which they sustained life. At length they came into
the section of the country where he afterwards remained so
long. They saw the people passing about, and they saw that
some of them were Negroes, but were afraid of their clothes;
they feared that the Negroes were cannibals. His companion
died after several years, and ever since he had been alone.


received some explanation. It appears that there is a tribe on
the west coast of Africa, perhaps more than one, characterized


nary feat of exchanging the hogs was very simple, but if made
known it might get somebody into trouble.


Other mysterious tracks and “wild men’ passed into legend
over the Texas frontiers and kept on appearing in some places
long after frontiers had disappeared. The tradition was common


—_


The Wild Woman of the Navidad 33


throughout the South, and various romancers worked — and
overworked — it into fiction.

In the seventies a tiny footprint that Texas rangers con-
nected with the Pegleg robberies in the San Saba country gave
them the same concern that a mysterious sign accompanying a
series of murders might give a Chinese detective. Some years
later lonely campers in the Big Bend country would awake in
the morning to see tracks of moccasined feet leading to and
from the vicinity — apparently of a man and a woman. But, no
matter how good as trailers the campers were or how per-
sistently they followed the trail, always the tracks ceased to lead
on; after having been traceable for miles, they would vanish as
completely as if the makers of them had taken wing. “Big
Foot and Little Foot have been here,” a cowboy might say upon
stirring the ashes of his camp fire in the morning. But who
made the big and the little tracks could never be found out.
The treaders did no mischief. Finally these vanishers amid the
solitudes ceased to be, even in tracks.


The Dream That Saved Wilbarger


ye cold night soon after he came to Texas, Bigfoot Wallace
O was sitting in the warm cabin of a settler down the Colo-
rado River when a stranger wearing a strange-looking fur cap
entered, stood bent over the fire a few minutes, and then re-
moved his headgear. At sight of the raw-looking, hairless scalp
thus exposed, Bigfoot Wallace broke the social code against ask-
ing questions.
“My friend,” he ventured, “excuse me, but what is the mat-
ter with your head?”
“I have been scalped by the Indians,” the stranger replied.
He was Josiah Wilbarger. He customarily wore his hat, even
at the dinner table, from the pre-dawn hour of rising until bed-
time, when he put on a nightcap. The story of his scalping and
of the dream that saved his life has been told in homes of old-
time Texans and kept also in print for more than a hundred
years. It is one of the best-known historical legends of the land.


In 1830, Josiah Wilbarger, lately from Missouri, located on a
headright survey along the Colorado River about ten miles
above the crossing of the camino real—the royal road, as the
Spaniards called it—between San Antonio and Nacogdoches.
His nearest neighbor was thirty miles or so down the river.


The Dream That Saved Wilbarger 35


Two years later his friend Reuben Hornsby built, with slave
help, a double-log cabin up the river, nine miles below the
present city of Austin, and moved into it with his wife Sarah
and eight children. Although separated by several miles, the
families were close neighbors. The names Wilbarger Creek
and Hornsby’s Bend fix permanently the locations of these two
outposts of colonization.

Early in August, 1833, Wilbarger went up to Hornsby’s to
join a party of men scouting for headrights. The Hornsby
home had already become a kind of Jand’s-end headquarters.
After spending the night, Wilbarger, in company with four
men named Christian, Haynie, Standifer, and Strother, set out
to explore to the northwest. On Walnut Creek they sighted a
lone Indian, who ran and escaped into the cedar hills.

After the chase the party turned homeward. Near Pecan
Spring, as the place was later named, they halted to noon. Wil-
barger, Christian, and Strother unsaddled their horses and hob-
bled them to graze; the other two men staked theirs with the
saddles on, merely removing the bridles. While the men were
eating, they were without warning fired on by Indians, who had
skulked up in the brush and timber. Some of the Indians had
only bows and arrows. The white men got behind trees, which
were small, and returned the fire, but soon Strother received a
mortal wound and a ball broke Christian’s thigh. With an ar-
row through the calf of a leg and a flesh wound in a hip, Wil-
barger dragged Christian behind a tree. About this time an
arrow went into his other leg. Haynie and Standifer now made
for their saddled horses. As they mounted, Wilbarger started
running toward them, calling upon them to wait. They saw him
pitch headlong to the ground. Then they saw “fifty Indians”
rushing for his scalp. They got away and reached Hornsby’s
house in safety.


36 Tales of Old-Time Texas


There they told how they had seen the savages scalping their
dead comrades and heard them yelling the blood yells. For the
present, all the men agreed, the dead would have to care for
the dead. The Indians were in such force and had met with
such success that they might well be expected to attack the
Hornsby outpost. A rider was sent below to carry the tidings to
the Wilbarger home and to summon help.

At last the house was still and Sarah Hornsby fell
asleep. About midnight she jumped awake from a vision as
sharply defined as the peaks of clouds under sheet. lightning.
She shook her husband, speaking so loud that the men in the
other room of the house heard.

“Wilbarger is not dead,” she cried. “I saw him in a dream.
He sits under a large post oak tree, naked, covered with
blood from wounds, scalped. But he is not dead. I saw him
plainly.”

Reuben Hornsby soothed his wife. He tried to pacify her by
going over the details related by the two survivors. He laid the
dream to overwrought nerves. She quieted down and went back
to sleep.

But about three o’clock she sprang from bed, more excited
and intense this time than before. “I saw him again,” she cried.
Her husband could not pacify her now. She threw a dress on,
lit a candle, aroused all the men.

“As sure as there is a God,” she repeated, “Josiah Wilbarger
is alive. He is alive out there, all alone under a large post oak
tree. His only covering is the blood from his own wounds. He
is scalped, but he lives, suffering tortures, hoping and waiting
for help.”

“But —” started to explain once more one of the men who
had left Wilbarger.

“But me no buts,” Sarah Hornsby went on with rising voice.


The Dream That Saved Wilbarger 37


“I saw him as plainly as I now see you safe and sound in front
of me. If you are not cowards, go at once or he will die.”

“Tl say it again as I have already said it many times,” the es-
caped man now got his word in. “I saw Wilbarger shot down.
I saw at least fifty Indians around his body. They were even
then lifting his scalp. They never leave a victim breathing.”

“I don’t care what you saw,” Sarah Hornsby retorted. “Maybe
you were too busy running to see anything straight. Anyhow, I
have had the last look. I know that Wilbarger is alive. Go. Go
at once.”

There was no arguing, but Reuben Hornsby now pointed out
that if he and the other men left before the expected recruits


38 Tales of Old-Time Texas


arrived from below, she and the children would be in grave
danger.

“Never mind me,” this wife flared. “I and my children can
take to the dogwood thicket and lie hid. Go, I tell you, to poor
Wilbarger.”

She was a little, black-haired, black-eyed woman of pure
Scotch blood off a plantation of traditional refinement in Mis-
sissippi. She sang Highland ballads, read the Bible to her chil-
dren, and taught them to read the box of books she had hauled
in an ox wagon all the way to Texas. One time when all the
men were gone from her home in Hornsby’s Bend she dressed in
man’s clothes and showed herself armed with a rifle in order
to scare off lurking Indians. Another time while her husband
was away she sent two of her boys at milking time to bring in
the cows from the wild rye that stretched out from the house
like a field of wheat. From the window — for there was never
a relaxed minute at this habitation in the wilderness — she,
gun in hand, watched them. Then, powerless to give aid, she
saw a band of Indians raise up with a yell behind the boys, but
the boys got into the house unharmed. Another time she saw
savages kill two young men hoeing in the field; then after dark
she and her young sons buried them. In time she buried one of
her own sons and another youth who were fishing in the river
when Indians killed them.

Against such resoluteness Reuben Hornsby and the other
men could not now stand. Still, they refused to leave until day-
light, by which time the recruits from below were expected.
Sarah Hornsby made coffee, cooked breakfast. Daylight comes
early in August. With it came the expected reinforcements.
Then the searching party prepared to ride.

“Take these three sheets,” Sarah Hornsby called. “Two to
bury Christian and Strother in. One to wrap around Wilbarger.


The Dream That Saved Wilbarger 39


You will have to bring him home on a litter. He cannot ride a
horse.”

This part of her prophecy alone proved erroneous. The men
went to the campsite where the Indians had attacked the day
before. They shrouded the bodies of Christian and Strother,
from whom all clothing had been stripped. After much search,
late in the afternoon, they sighted a red-hued figure under a big
post oak tree. An advance rider, mistaking him for an Indian,
called out, “Here they are, boys!”

At this, the figure rose up, saying, “Don’t shoot. It is Wil-
barger.”

His body was caked with blood. The only particle of his
clothing that had been left by the Indians was a sock. This he
had torn from his foot, swollen from the leg wound, and
placed on his naked skull.

With the sheet wrapped around him he was placed in Horns-
by’s saddle, the light-weighted Hornsby riding behind and
holding the wounded man in his arms. Very slowly the horse-
men filed towards the cabin in the river bend, six miles away.

There they found all in readiness for the rescued man: a bed,
warm water to cleanse the wounds, poultices of wheat bread —
a bread too scarce to eat —and bear’s oil to dress the scalpless
head. “I knew you would bring him,” Sarah Hornsby said.


Wilbarger’s own story made Sarah Hornsby’s dreams seem
even more remarkable. The shot that knocked him to the
ground had gone into his neck from the rear and come out at his
chin. It only creased — temporarily paralyzed — him, he said.
He did not feel pain; he could not move a muscle; yet he was
conscious. He knew when a savage cut his scalp around with a
knife and jerked it off. He did not flinch — because there was no
pain to flinch from and he could not flinch. The only sensation


40 Tales of Old-Time Texas


he experienced was a sound as of distant thunder. He knew
when the Indians were stripping off his clothes. They had cut
the throats of the other two men; the sight of the bullet hole
under his chin perhaps made them think that act unnecessary
with him.

There was a lapse of time during which Wilbarger knew
nothing. The sun was halfway down the western sky when he
recovered consciousness and felt pain and knew that he was
alone and could move. Dried blood was all over him, and he
was still bleeding. He felt a thirst that was agony. He tried to
stand up and walk but could not. The directions of the compass
were perfectly clear to him. He knew where the camp water-
hole was. He dragged himself to it. He drank and lay down in
the water. He lay there until he was almost numb with cold.
Then he crawled out on dry ground, to be warmed by the
sloping rays of the August sun. At last he fell into a deep sleep.

When he awoke green blowflies were buzzing around his
head. It does not take the eggs they lay long to hatch into flesh-
eating worms. His wounds had ceased to bleed. He was again
consumed with thirst. When he had drunk again, sharp hunger
came upon him. His wonderful constitution was crying for
nourishment to rebuild what his body had lost. He crawled to
some bushes and ate a few snails that he found. He drank more
water. He felt the maggots in the naked flesh of his head.

About nightfall he determined to crawl to the Hornsby
house. But he had gone only about a quarter of a mile before,
utterly exhausted, he halted under a large post oak tree. There
in semiconsciousness he rested until extreme cold roused him.
The only sounds that came to his ears were the pulsing of the
crickets, the hoot of an owl, and the long, long wail of a wolf.
The dying moon came up.

Then, as he lay under the tree, he saw suddenly, distinctly,


The Dream That Saved Wilbarger 41


without warning, the figure of his sister Margaret Clifton. He
saw her; yet she, he well knew, was living in Missouri, near St.
Louis, more than seven hundred miles away. It was not until
many weeks had passed that he learned she had died the day be-
fore he was wounded and even at the hour of his vision was
spending her first night in the grave.

Standing near him, the sister said, her voice calm and restful,
“Brother Josiah, you are too weak to go any farther by yourself.
Remain here under this tree and friends will come to take care
of you before the setting of another sun.”

When she had spoken thus, she began to move away in the
direction of Hornsby’s house. Such was Wilbarger’s state of
mind, and so vivid was the visitant’s form and so clear were her
words that he did not question her reality. As the vision van-
ished, he raised himself and with an imploring gesture called
after her, “Margaret, my sister Margaret, stay with me until
they come! Margaret!”

But the air was empty of answering sound and of sisterly form
alike.

Josiah Wilbarger recovered, though the skin never grew en-
trely over his skull bone. He lived for eleven years, leading an
active life, until an accidental blow on the exposed skull has-
tened death. No one who knew him or Mrs. Hornsby ever
doubted the veracity of either in their accounts of the dream —
or spirit — visitations. Wilbarger told his story long before he
heard of his sister Margaret's death. He was very definite in say-
ing that the vision faded from sight while moving in the direc-
tion of the Hornsby home. As near as could be figured out, Mrs.
Hornsby’s first vision of the wounded man occurred shortly after
Wilbarger heard his sister’s voice and called out after her vanish-
ing form.


Bigfoot Wallace and the Hickory Nuts


Obie Wat.ace had big feet, certainly — and thereby hangs
more than one tale — but they were not out of proportion
to his frame. He stood six feet, two-inches in his stocking feet
and had the trunk of a Hercules. He could go for days, like an
Indian, without food; then he had a vast space to fill. Once
while he was driving the mail from San Antonio to El Paso,
Apaches left him afoot and-foodless three days’ walk from the
nearest Mexican jacal. When he came to it, he bolted twenty-
seven eggs, and then walked on to a square meal. Captain Dan
Smith used to tell how Bigfoot rode up on him out on the range
one evening just after they had killed a maverick yearling. Cap-
tain Dan Smith was cow hunting with two other men, and Big-
foot had a man with him. They had been scouting after Indians
and hadn’t eaten anything to speak of for two days. They hadn’t
shot because they did not want to make a noise.

They got down and built a fire. Bigfoot pulled out Old Butch;
as he called_his.knife, came over to where the other men were
skinning the yearling, hewed off a forequarter with a side of
ribs, and then began roasting the meat on a mesquite fork.
“The other fellows,’ Captain Dan Smith said, “didn’t eat
more than three or four pounds of beef apiece, but Bigfoot
gnawed away until midnight, besides putting away a good part
of a sack of bread we were carrying.”


Bigfoot Wallace and the Hickory Nuts 43


Anyhow, Bigfoot Wallace was an enormous man. You'll have
to understand that in order to appreciate this story. ae
1836. D Not long after that he himself came to Teme to “get even’

“with the Mexicans”; yet he was too easygoing and openhearted
to be vindictive. He was descended from the great Scottish chief
of his name, belonged to-a Virginia family.of education_and
stability, and 1 used good English. He had been in the fantastic
Mier Expedition and drawn a white bean — life — while every
tenth man among his-comrades drew a black bean of death. As
ranger captain,

He kept the Comanches from off the ranches
And fought them far o’er the Texas frontiers.


He could trail like a bloodhound and read sign like an Apache.

A bachelor, he lived alone for many years in his cabin west of

the Medina River, but he loved genial company and was as

convivial a soul as ever sat by the blazing ingle with Tam
o’Shanter or sang:


If the ocean was whisky and I was a duck,
I'd dive to the bottom and suck it all up.


He was as honest as daylight, even if he did stretch the blanket
when it was blanket-stretching time.

Bigfoot Wallace was a character wherever he went. People
were always after him for stories and wanting to know about
his “most remarkable experience with Indians.” When he knew
they were expecting something extra, he did his best to give it
to them. Captain Dan Smith said he had heard Bigfoot tell one
story many times, and I imagine it did not lose much in the
captain’s retelling.

Captain Dan Smith, when I came to know him and heard
him tell this Bigfoot story, was an old man, trembly all over.


44 Tales of Old-Time Texas


His hand shook even when, sitting, he rested it on his cane;
and his voice quavered, but his eyes were as bright as mesquite
coals with the ashes blown off and his laugh was a tonic. A long,
sharp-pointed beard seemed to sharpen his tall, spare frame.
When a story possessed him, agility came back to him and he
would flourish his cane with Hotspur fire. He drew the small
pension granted to Confederate veterans, and added to it by
selling a patent medicine. I never saw him offer it for sale, but
he always had with him a little oblong tan satchel labeled
Brown’s Hers Tasters. He would sit in the lobby of the
cowman-dominated Gunter Hotel in San Antonio, the tan
satchel on the floor beside his chair, while men stood around
delighting in his reminiscences and yarns. He read bocks as well
as newspapers and was conscious of the art of story-telling. He
was a story-teller belonging to campfire life on the open range
who had brought his stories to a city of the machine age.


When the moon was full — the “Comanche moon,” as people
called it— Indians were expected, and then Bigfoot Wallace
kept his horses shut up in a picket pen back of his cabin, except
one in the cabin leanto or else staked in a little natural clearing
amid brush two or three hundred yards away. He had some
mongrel dogs that could be depended upon to warn him when
Indians came within smelling distance. What with horses penned,
dogs watching, and himself sleeping lightly, plus the reputa-
tion he had among Indians, he never lost an animal — until
one November night not long after the Civil War ended.

In the early, foggy morning he looked out and saw that his
horses were gone. The dogs had not whined or barked once
during the night. Some people claimed that Indians could
mesmerize dogs. Bigfoot figured the Comanches had mesmer-


Bigfoot Wallace and the Hickory Nuts 45


ized his. Going around to the back side of the corral, he saw
where the thieves had cut the rawhide strips holding the up-
right pickets together and pulled the pickets out of the ground.
Moccasin tracks were as thick as pig tracks around a corncrib.
It was against Bigfoot’s religion to let Indians get away with his
horses.

He walked down to the clearing in the brush where he had
staked a gray mare named White Bean. She was still there. He
led her up to the corncrib, threw his hull on her, crawled up


into it, and took out on the trail. armed with Old _


Butch, Sweet Lips—as_he called his long-barreled,_muzzle-
loading rifle —a powder horn, some molded bullets and cloth,


patches to hold them snug in n the gun barrel. He_used to say,


Oe ees laa seem to like the kind of kisses SweetLips—
gives.”


The ground was moist, and as he followed the trail of the
stolen horses, moccasin tracks seemed to get thicker, even
though some of the Indians were undoubtedly riding. Bigfoot
said he began to wonder just what he was going to do when he
caught up with all those Comanches. Still, he kept on going,
trailing as fast as White Bean could gallop.

After a while, as he topped a hill, he saw smoke rising from
a flat maybe a mile and a half ahead. He knew then the Indians
had stopped, close to a lake, and were cooking their favorite
breakfast food, colt meat — one of his colts. The deed riled him
and made him as hot as a bush red all over with ripe chilipi-
quines. Yet, now that he was catching up with the Indians, he
wondered more than ever what he was going to do when he
struck them on that prairie. He kept on going.

Before long he came into a heavily wooded swag in which
_ grew many hickory trees. It was hickory-nut time. The nuts
were thick on the ground and thick on the low-hanging


46 Tales of Old-Time Texas


branches. There wasn’t much to them but the hard, thick shells,
but they gave Bigfoot an idea. One time when he was going out
to fight Indians he had hung two window shutters on himself
as protection against arrows. That's what he told. He didn’t
have any window shutters along today. He didn’t have one of
those shields made out of buffalo bull hide that Indians parried
against arrows and bullets. He didn’t have a Spanish coat of
mail. He decided to armor himself with hickory nuts.

He wore buckskin breeches and a buckskin shirt, and he al-
ways, in Carlyle’s phrase, wore his clothes “cynically loose.” Un-
til the day he died, he liked roomy clothes as well as a roomy
range. Gloves “choked” his hands; a collar choked his neck.
Now he got down, pulled some buckskin strings out of a pocket,
and began tying his clothes so they would hold the hickory nuts.
He tied the cuffs of his shirt about his strong wrists, and he
tied the bottoms of his breeches legs at the ankles above his
big feet. Then he began gathering the hickory nuts and stuffing
them in. He picked hickory nuts until he thought he’d go blind,
he said. He stuffed them into his shirt and breeches until he
was padded out bigger than Santa Claus. Finally there wasn’t a
cubic inch of space between his own skin and the buckskin not
fortified with hickory nuts, and they were so evenly distributed
that not a finger space of his body was unprotected. He took off
his hat and filled it half full of hickory nuts so the top of his
head would be protected.

Thus armored, he started to get on White Bean and ride for
the attack. But he could hardly walk, much less pull up into the
saddle. The mare went to snorting at him and cavorting
around as if a bear were trying to mount. At last, though, Big-
foot led her up to a fallen log and gingerly stepped from it into
the saddle. He got himself balanced, and with the hickory nuts
working against his tough hide rode on towards the Indians.


Bigfoot Wallace and the Hickory Nuts 47


Just before he got to the edge of the big prairie, he rolled
off the horse — for he could not dismount in the usual way. He
peeped through the brush fringe and saw smoke still rising and
Indians lolling around after their big bait of colt meat. In those
times the waters were all clear and the grass was stirrup-high.
Through this tall grass Bigfoot began crawling, Old Butch in
his belt and Sweet Lips by his side.

He crawled until he was within maybe a hundred yards of
the Indians. He took time to count them, and there were
forty-two, including three staying with the horses. Then slowly,
still keeping well hid in the grass, he squinted one eye and lined
up the sights on Sweet Lips. She spoke, and a Comanche buck
answered with his last yell. The shot was such a surprise that
the Indians did not even locate the smoke made by the black
powder, the only kind used in those days.

Bigfoot poured a charge of powder from his horn into the
barrel, put in a bullet, rammed down the wadding, and again
aimed. Sweet Lips sent a kiss as fatal as Cleopatra ever gave, and
another Indian was converted.

This time the Indians were wildly alert. They saw the gun-
smoke, and now, all on foot, they took out for it lickety-brindle,
hellety-split, a-yelling and a-drawing their bows. Bigfoot had
prepared another charge of powder and lead. As quick as you
could say “scat” he rammed it home. But this shot, if he had to
use it, would, he knew, be his last. He was saving it for hard
times.

Meantime, Sweet Lips in position, Bigfoot raised up in all
his majesty and all his stature and all his hickory nuts. He said
those Indians halted “like they had been paralyzed by Davy
Crockett’s grin.” (Davy Crockett could grin a knot on a log into
splinters.) Those Comanches didn’t seem to know whether they
were facing some sort of supernatural giant swelled out worse


48 Tales of Old-Time Texas


than a dead mule, or “just Old Big.” They knew whose horses
they had stolen. They knew he was “pizen” unadulterated to
Comanche depredators everywhere between the Pecos and the
San Antonio rivers. Now, they seemed to debate with each
other and within themselves for a minute or two. Then they
must have decided that it wasn’t a giant but the Patas Grandes
(Big Feet) they had so often had on their trail.

This time they came not only a-yelling but a-shooting. It was
a mighty lucky thing for him, Bigfoot said, that not a buck had
a gun. But they were the most unerring marksmen with bow and
arrow a man could imagine. Every time a bowstring twanged,
an arrow hit a hickory nut, split it, and then fell to the ground.
Bigfoot said the arrows got stacked up so high in front of him
that he stepped up on the pile and stood three inches taller.
Then the Indians made a right flank movement and bombarded
him from that side, then a left flank movement and poured in
the arrows from that direction. The hickory nuts were getting
shelled faster than a Missouri mule could bite the grains off
an ear of corn. Every once in a while an arrow aimed high
would hit his hat and split a hickory nut there.

Finally, all the Indians concentrated on a rear assault. By
gravy, he said, those arrows kept jamming the hickory nuts in
under his knee joints until he got so tickled he had to bust out
laughing. Then he whirled around, and just as he did the last
Indian shot the last arrow in the last quiver of the whole band.

Well, sir, when they saw that their ammunition was all gone
and that, though not an arrow had missed, the enormous target
was still unharmed, they acted as if a bolt of lightning had
struck the ground in front of them. For about a minute they
stood with their eyes rolling and their tongues hanging out.
Then all at once they stampeded like a herd of longhorn
steers jumping up off the bedground. They made a bee-line for


50 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the Rio Grande, seventy miles away. They didn’t even give the
horses a look.

“I stood there in my tracks,” Bigfoot said, “as still and solemn
as a cigar Indian, until the devils were clean out of sight. Then
I untied the strings around my wrists and ankles, and the hick-
ory nuts just rolled out. If there was a peck of them there were
two bushels, and you can kick me to death with grasshopper
legs if a single, solitary hickory nut in the whole passel hadn’t
been split open.

“I thought what a pity it was to lose all those hickory nuts
when they were so good at fattening hogs. I walked back to
White Bean hid there in the brush and got on her and rode up
to the battleground. Then I tied up the coltskin the Indians
had peeled off and filled it with hickory nuts until it looked like
a Mexican’s goatskin full of pulque. I loaded it on White Bean
and got home before dark with all my horses, except the et colt.

“I guess this was the most remarkable experience I ever had
with Indians.”


Jim Bowie’s Knife


HE Bowie knife is the weapon most in vogue,” wrote Francis

C. Sheridan of the British Foreign Office, July 12, 1840, in
an official report on the Republic of Texas. “During my stay on
the coast, many murders were committed in the Island of Gal-
veston and in the country, and I could never learn that one of-
fender was brought to justice.” Most of the Bowie knives in
use, the reporter added, “are manufactured in Sheffield and
Birmingham and brought over in British ships. I have seen one
from Sheffield with a blade 18 inches long ornamented in beau-
tiful tracery on the steel as ‘The Genuine Arkansas Tooth Pick.’
I have been offered another, also of British make, the vendor
hinting that I ought to pay him a dollar more than he de-
manded, as it had tasted blood.”

It was the Knife Age. The publisher of the first newspaper
(1839) at Grenada, Mississippi, named it The Bowie Knife.
After looking at the vast assemblage of ancient weapons in War-
wick Castle, Nathaniel Hawthorne, who was as far removed
temperamentally as he was geographically from the Land of
Knifing, wrote in his journal, October 30, 1857: “The short
Roman sword was probably more murderous than any other
weapon of the same species except the Bowie knife.”

In the Knife Age it was the rule to “use a knife and save
powder and lead.” It also saved time. At the battle of San


2 Tales of Old-Time Texas


acinto perhaps three fourths of the Texans carried Bowie
knives in addition to rifles. If they surprised Santa Anna’s
forces by attacking at the siesta hour, they surprised them more
by not halting to reload but plunging on with guns for clubs
and with knives more difficult to parry than swords.

When Bigfoot Wallace presented himself at a quadroon ball
in New Orleans and was told that he must disarm before
entering, he said, checking his accouterments, “I don’t care
much about the derringers, but take good care of Old Butch.
I have a sort of affection for him on account of the many scrapes
he has helped me out of and the amount of hair he has lifted.”
Bigfoot liked to divert people. Use of the knife by the thug
element, as exemplified by a steamboat gambler who boasted
that Bowie steel was his looking glass and pistol fire his favor-
ite tune, classified it for some people as thuggish. Just the same,
probably as many respectable men carried a knife as carried a
pistol. Violence and honor were necked together in the South.
Daredevil Jack Smith of Missouri, whose favorite oath was
“Jesus Christ and General Jackson” and whose rifle was chris-
tened “Hark from the Tombs,” belonged to the culture of high
violence as well as to that of low violence.

There were saddle knives, butcher knives, machetes, dirks,
Green River knives — favored by the Mountain Men and so
called because of a trademark—and other styles of the in-
strument to cut and stick, but the knife of all knives came to be
the Bowie. It was a particular kind of knife, but in common
parlance the name became generic, just as the name of the
rubberized raincoat devised by Charles Macintosh came to in-
clude all waterproof coats.

In woods and mountains and all along the frontiers the
Bowie knife was as essential as a steady eye. For work in close
quarters, some backwoodsmen regarded firearms as “fit only


Jim Bowie's Knife 53
for the weak.” Any dude could shoot a bear; it took a real man
to meet his hug with a knife. For dozens of purposes, the
Bowie was as handy as a shirt pocket. The name “Arkansas
toothpick” suggests one use. It was the main eating implement
not only in camps but in many a cabin. The blade, especially
of the longer knives, hacked limbs from trees and cut up the
carcasses of beef, deer and buffalo. It served to skin and dress
all kinds of game. It was the tool for mending saddles and
harness, and for cutting thongs from cowhides to be plaited
into reatas and whips. On occasion it was used to dig a grave on
the lone prairie for a fallen comrade. A Texan lassoed by a
Mexican horseman might cut the reata with his Bowie knife.
The horn handle was a pestle to crack parched coffee beans. At
San Jacinto it cracked heads.

The knife was a fact. James Bowie was a fact. Both were of a
character to seize human imagination, and human imagination
welded them together and forged them into an extraordinary
legend.


Born in Logan County, Kentucky, in 1796, of strong-bodied,
strong-minded upper-class stock, James Bowie was the eighth of
ten children. The family settled down in Louisiana about
1802, and here young Jim became noted for roping wild horses,
riding them and alligators, hunting bear and wild cattle, and for
other feats in the wilderness. He was with Long’s filibustering
expedition into Texas. About the same time he and his brothers
Rezin P. and John J. were buying captive Africans at a dollar a
pound from the pirate Lafitte on Galveston Island and smuggling
them into Louisiana to sell as slaves.


54 Tales of Old-Time Texas


If —a very iffy if — Jim Bowie excelled in knife throwing
and juggling as well as in knife wielding, he must have reached
his climax at this period of operations. Knife juggling was
mainly a tent-show stunt. J. O. Dyer, who sometimes made
slight distinction between romance and history, said that “Big
Jim” Bowie in convoying smuggled slaves armed himself with
three or four knives so that he could transfix any who tried to
break away. Jerking a knife out was quicker than reloading a
horse pistol at the muzzle. Both Jim and Rezin P., Dyer said,
could keep several knives moving in the air at the same time
without allowing one to touch the ground. “At twenty paces
either could send a knife clean through a small wooden tar-
get.”

After clearing sixty-five thousand dollars on slave smuggling,
the Bowies turned to speculating in land. James joined Rezin P.
in developing a fine plantation named Arcadia and joined
John J. in selling fraudulent titles to land in Arkansas. Land
operations kept him in New Orleans a great deal, and he be-
came as much at home with sophisticated city people as he was
with bellowing alligators, mustang horses and cattle, and knife-
wielding backwoodsmen of the wilderness. He was a magnifi-
cent specimen of masculinity, six feet tall, well proportioned,
agreeable in manner and speech. At maturity he spoke French
and Spanish in addition to English.

One of the turning points in his life was stabbing a man to
death with his specially made knife. That episode will be de-
tailed in the proper place. The next year, 1828, he rode through
Texas looking over the land business and on to San Antonio,
where he became interested in the legend of the Lost San Saba
Mine, which he considered a fact and which still lures men on.

In the years of life remaining to him he was constantly riding
— back into Louisiana, up into Mississippi, down into Mexico.


Jim Bowie’s Knife ‘
over wide parts of Texas. He married Ursula de Veramend
daughter of the vice-governor of Texas. He organized an ex-
pedition to look for the Lost San Saba Mine and had per-
haps the most desperate fight with Indians recorded in
Texas history. He tried to get rich quick on big deals in
Texas lands — and failed. He belonged to the war party before
Texas made revolution against Mexico and was a leader when
the revolution came. He was dying on a cot in a remote room
of the Alamo when at daybreak on March 6, 1836, five thousand
Mexicans under Santa Anna made the final attack against a
hundred and eighty-odd Texans, leaving not one as a messenger
of defeat. Nobody knows exactly how Bowie died, but it is
popularly believed that at sight of Mexican soldiers coming into
his room he rallied and littered the dirt floor with knifed
bodies before he was overwhelmed.


me


Bowie was a legend —a gaudy legend of gaudy violence —
before he died. The Alamo blotted out all but the heroic from
popular memory and imagination. The Knife Age in the Land
of Violence was at its crest, and the forgers of the Bowie knife
legend were as active as the dwarf smiths who forged for the
Norse gods. Bowie did not institute the knife as a fighting
weapon, but his use of it at the right hour came to epitomize
knife fighting in the South. Its fame spread as far as the brag-
ging of Texans has gone in a later time. When Theodore
Parker, Boston preacher and reformer, visited Carlyle, always
fiercely hungry for biographical detail, he told him tales about
Bowie’s prowess with the Bowie knife. “By Hercules!” —
Carlyle is supposed to have exclaimed — “The man was greater


) Tales of Old-Time Texas


aan Caesar or Cromwell—nay, nearly equal to Odin or
Thor! The Texans ought to build him an altar.”

The Bowie knife was the New World’s counterpart to the
battle-axe with which Beowulf slew Grendel in the den deep
under dark waters; to Siegfried’s great sword Gram; and to
King Arthur's bright Excalibur of mystic powers.


Who devised the Bowie knife? Who made it? What circum-
stances brought it into use? How did Bowie use it? The an-
swers are conflicting, some valid — even the most valid subject
to the gross fallibilities of memory —some sheer inventions.
All belong to the legend.

The two witnesses nearest to Bowie contradict each other on
the knife’s origin but agree on the event that gave it fame. In
1838, only two years after the fall of the Alamo, Rezin P. Bowie
wrote, from Iberville, Louisiana, a flaming letter to the editor
of The Planters’ Advocate to refute a “dastardly scribbler’s”
story about the Bowie brothers and the knife. “The first Bowie-
Knife,” he said, “was made by myself in the parish of Avoyelles,
in this state, as a hunting knife, for which purpose, exclusively,
it was used for many years” before James drove it “‘as a weapon
of defense into an individual with whom he was at variance.”
The phrase, “made by myself,” was an abbreviated way of
saying that Rezin P. Bowie had his blacksmith make the knife.

In 1858, De Bow’s Review published a remarkably frank
sketch by John J. Bowie on the Bowies of Louisiana. According
to John J., his brother James, while living mostly in the woods,
had a blacksmith named Lovel Snowden make him the “hunt-
ing knife” that he used years later in the so-called Sandbar


Jim Bowie’s Knife 57


Duel to kill an opponent. He had “a neat scabbard” made for
the knife, “affirming that he would wear it as long as he lived,
which he did.”

The weight of testimony is on the side of Rezin P. Bowie’s
account. The circumstances that led to the making of the knife
seem to have been as follows. In Louisiana, as in Texas, many
unbranded, ownerless cattle — later called mavericks — of the
Spanish longhorn breed ran wild. Sporting planters hunted
them in two ways. One way was to shoot them from horseback,
as sportsmen on the plains shot buffaloes; the other was to
ride against them and stab or lance them with a long hunting
knife. Sometimes they were lassoed and then stabbed. The
chase with knife was more daring, dangerous and exciting than
shooting; therefore, the Bowie men preferred it.

One day while Rezin P. was thrusting his knife into a fleet
heifer she lunged her head in a way to drive the blade up
through his hand, cutting three fingers severely. After having
his hand dressed, he called the plantation blacksmith, Jesse
Cliffe, and told him to make a knife that would not slip
in a man’s grasp. Using pencil in his left hand, he roughly
traced on paper a blade with a strong guard between it and
the handle. Then he gave the smith a large file of the best
quality of steel. With fire and hammer, Jesse Cliffe wrought
the weapon. It proved so serviceable in hunting and Rezin P.
came to prize it so highly that for a long time he kept it, when
not wearing it, locked in his desk. Meantime he had Jesse
Cliffe make replicas of the blade to give friends, who called
them Bowie knives.

The size of the original knife will always be in question.
Rezin P. Bowie wrote that “the length [of the blade] was nine
and one quarter inches, its width one and a half inches, single
edge, and not curved.” Other specifiers go on up to eighteen,


58 Tales of Old-Time Texas


even twenty-four, inches. The knife probably had a buckhorn
handle. Proportion, balance and temper of steel went into its
superiority. A curved point became a feature of the Bowie knife.
“The improvement of its fabrication and the state of perfection
which it has since acquired from cutlers, was not brought about
through my agency,” Rezin P. Bowie added. If Jim Bowie ever
defined what he considered the final and proper Bowie knife, his
definition has not survived. Handmade Bowie knives were never
standardized like the .44 Winchester rifle manufactured by one
firm.


For years Bowie made Alexandria, in Rapides Parish on Red
River, business headquarters. One of the times while he was
pressed for money, he learned that Norris Wright, sheriff of
the parish and director in the bank from which he borrowed,
had thwarted a loan of money to him. There was already bad
blood between the two over political differences. Many prom-
inent citizens (comparatively few of the not-prominent citizens
of the Old South voted) were in constant ferment over politics.
One day when Wright and Bowie met on the street, Wright
fired a pistol at him, but the bullet was checked by a silver
dollar in Bowie’s vest pocket. Bowie’s pistol snapped and he
would have killed Wright with his hands if men had not with-
held him. The two parted expecting to meet another day.

That day was September 19, 1827. The place was a sandbar,
a kind of peninsula noted as a dueling place, on the west bank of
Mississippi River across from Natchez. Bowie was one of four
seconds, plus a surgeon, on the side of a principal in a duel. There
were six men, likewise including a surgeon, on the other side.


Jim Bowie's Knife 59


Bowie had told his brother Rezin of the trouble with Norris
Wright and of his pistol’s snapping, whereupon Rezin had given
him the knife made by Jesse Cliffe, saying, “Here, Jim, take old
Bowie. She never misses fire.”

The Sandbar Duel turned into a general fight in which two
men were killed and two badly wounded. Bowie had emptied
his pistol and was down, shot in four places and cut in five.
Norris Wright had emptied two dueling pistols. Without taking
time to reload, he rushed against Bowie with a cane sword.
Bowie, a ball in one hip, rose to standing position and stabbed
the knife into his enemy, “twisting it to cut his heart strings.”

The fame of the Bowie knife was made. For years, claims


60 Tales of Old-Time Texas


for this and that originator of it multiplied. It took James
Bowie, lying at Natchez, two or three months to recover from
his wounds. He was an ingenious whittler, and according to a
story of diverse forms, he during this time whittled from soft
pine an improved model for a knife and sent it to a Spanish
cutler in New Orleans known as Pedro who had learned his
trade in Toledo, where the finest swords in all Spain were
forged, and told him he needed a blade “fit to fight for a man’s
life with.” Pedro wrought the masterpiece of his career.

Or maybe Bowie turned over the model to two brothers
named Blackman, skilled smiths in Natchez, directing them to
spare no expense in time or skill to make the master of all
knives. Again, it is claimed that, after recovering, Bowie made
a trip to Philadelphia, taking his pine pattern with him, and
had a cutler there make the ideal knife. More likely, as another
account goes, a hardware merchant of Natchez sent a model of
Bowie’s knife to Philadelphia for replicas, which he sold in
large numbers.

A persistent story has it that a half-breed Negro smith named
Manuel, who worked for Rezin P. Bowie and specialized in the
wrought-iron balcony railings that adorn old houses of New
Orleans, came upon a piece of steel one day while he was at
his forge and made a knife as graceful as any clipper ship that
ever sailed. The point was long and sharp and could be jabbed
upwards with as deadly effect as when plunged in and down.

Twenty-five years after Bowie died in the Alamo, the Natchez
Free Trader published an article about a “weapon artist” of
the town named Captain Reese Fitzpatrick, who was then
making knives and swords for Quality Street gentlemen. Cap-
tain Fitzpatrick asserted that his knives were designed on a
model given him by Jim Bowie while both lived in Louisiana.
The original blade, he said, weighed only one pound, was


Jim Bowie’s Knife 61


elastic enough to quiver at the touch, and bore an edge as
keen as the lightning’s flash. Comparing it with the so-called
“Bowie knives” manufactured in Sheffield and Birmingham
and sold by the thousands in America, Captain Reese Fitz-
patrick said that the blade he wrought for Bowie had “the
spring and rebound of a Damascus blade,” whereas the English-
manufactured knives were made hard, to take a fine polish,
but lacked elasticity and would gap like pot metal.

When in doubt go to the encyclopedia. This is what the
Encyclopedia Americana (1928) sets forth: “Colonel James
Bowie is said to have had his sword broken down to within
about twenty inches of the hilt in a fight with some Mexicans,
but he found that he did such good execution with his broken
blade that he equipped all his followers with a similar weapon”
—the Bowie knife.


But let us not be too rash in drawing conclusions. Arkansas
has yet to be heard from, and Arkansas has a better right to
speak on the subject than any encyclopedia. In honor of the
“Arkansas toothpick,” Arkansas is yet sometimes referred to as
“the toothpick state.” The very spring that Bowie died in the
Alamo, Arkansas became a state, and members of the first legis-
lature in Little Rock used, after adjournment in the cool of the
evening, to take their knives and pistols and repair to a grove
hard by, there to practice throwing and shooting at the trees.

Some members of the legislature were in fine practice. The
Speaker of the House was John Wilson, sometimes known as
“Horse Ears,” from the fact that when he was excited, whether
by love, humor, or anger, his ears worked up and down like


62 Tales of Old-Time Texas


those of an aroused horse. One of his political enemies in the
house was Major J. J. Anthony. When a bill relating to bounties
on wolf scalps came up, Anthony arose and in the course of his
remarks made a cutting allusion to Speaker Wilson.

With ears working and quivering “in a horrific manner,”
Wilson leaped from his chair, at the same time drawing a Bowie
knife, and started towards his antagonist. Alfred W. Arrington,
author of a lurid item entitled The Lives and Adventures of
the Desperadoes of the Southwest, describes the blade of this
particular Arkansas toothpick as being engraved on one side
with a coiled rattlesnake about to strike and on the other with
a bear hugging a man who gouges at its heart with a Bowie
knife.

Anthony was waiting for Horse Ears with his own knife
drawn. A legislator thrust a chair between them. Each seized a
rung in his left hand and went to slashing with his right. An-
thony cut one of Wilson’s hands severely and in the scuffle lost
his knife. Wilson came on and literally disemboweled his en-
emy. He fell on the floor beside the dead man. However, he
quickly recovered, was cleared of the charge of murder, and at
a meeting of the legislature a few years later drew his Bowie on
another member.

An Arkansas judge, William F. Pope, maintains in his Early
Days in Arkansas that Rezin P. Bowie once came to Washing-
ton, Arkansas, and engaged an expert smith named Black to
make a hunting knife after a pattern whittled from the top of a
cigar box. “He told the smith that he wanted a knife that would
disjoint the bones of a bear or deer without gapping or turning
the edge of the blade. Black wrought the implement afterwards
known as the Bowie knife. The hilt was elaborately ornamented
with silver designs. Black’s charge for the work was ten dollars,
but Bowie was so pleased with it that he gave the maker twenty.


Jim Bowie’s Knife 63


“T do not hesitate to make the statement,” concludes Judge
Pope, “that no genuine Bowie knives have ever been made out-
side the state of Arkansas. . . . Many imitations have been at-
tempted, but they are not Bowie knives.”

Despite Judge Pope’s cocksureness, he seems to have had the
wrong Bowie in mind. The classic Arkansas story comes from
Dan W. Jones, governor of Arkansas from 1897 to 1901. Accord-
ing to Governor Jones, the James Black who made the only
“genuine” Bowie knife also designed it. Black was born in New
Jersey, May 1, 1800, and, after having served as apprentice to a
manufacturer of silver plate in Philadelphia, came south in
1818, settling at Washington, Hempstead County, Arkansas.

Here he found employment with a blacksmith named Shaw.
Shaw was an important man and he had ambitions for
his daughters. Consequently, when Anne fell in love with the
young smith, only a hired hand, Shaw objected. The young peo-
ple married nevertheless, and James Black set up a smithy of
his own.

He specialized in making knives, and very soon they had won
a reputation. “It was his rule,” to quote the Governor Jones
narrative, “‘after shaping and tempering a knife, and before pol-
ishing it, to cut very hard wood with it, generally an old hickory
axe-handle which had been used for a long time and had be-
come quite tough and hard. This he would do for half an hour,
and then if the knife would not easily shave the hair from his
arm, he would throw it away... .

“About 1831 James Bowie came to Washington and gave
Black an order for a knife, furnishing a pattern and desiring it
to be made within the next sixty or ninety days, at the end of
which time he would call for it. Black made the knife according
to Bowie’s pattern. He knew Bowie well and had a high regard
for him as a man of good taste as well as of unflinching courage.


4 Tales of Old-Time Texas


He had never made a knife that suited his own taste in point of
shape, and he concluded that this would be a good opportunity
to make one. Consequently, after completing the knife ordered
by Bowie, he made another. When Bowie returned, he
showed both knives to him, giving him his choice at the same
price. Bowie promptly selected Black’s pattern.

“Shortly after this Bowie became involved in a difficulty with
three desperadoes, who assaulted him with knives. He killed
them all with the knife Black had made. After this whenever
anyone ordered a knife from Black, he ordered it made ‘like
Bowie’s,’ which was shortened into ‘Bowie knife.’ Thus this
famous weapon acquired its name.”

The blade was so superbly tempered and Bowie was so su-
perbly dextrous in using it that one day, in order to give a store-
keeper change for some article, he laid a silver dollar on a plank
and with a single blow of his knife cut it in exact halves. Oc-
casionally a dollar was quartered or halved to make two-bit or
four-bit pieces, but knives were not the usual cleavers.

“Other men,” to resume the Arkansas governor’s narrative,
“made knives in those days, and they are still being made, but
no one has ever made ‘the Bowie knife’ except James Black. Its
chiefest value was in its temper. Black undoubtedly possessed
the Damascus secret. It came to him mysteriously and it died
with him in the same way. . . . He often told me that no one
had taught him the secret and that it was impossible for him to
tell how he acquired it. Large offers were made him for the se-
cret, but he refused them all. He was stealthily watched, in or-
der that his process might be discovered, but his reputation for
courage was such that no one approached him too closely after
having been warned to desist.”

The death of the secret is a part of the story. About 1838
Black’s wife died. Not long thereafter Black himself was con-


Jim Bowie’s Knife 65
fined to his bed by a fever. While he was down, his father-in-
law, who had all along been jealous of Black’s growing reputa-
tion, came unto him and beat him over the head with a stick.
Probably he would have killed him had not Black’s dog seized
Shaw by the throat. As it was, inflammation set up in Black’s eyes
and he was threatened with blindness. As soon as he had
strength enough to travel, he set out for expert treatment. A
quack doctor in Cincinnati made him stone blind. He returned
to Arkansas to find his little property gone and himself an ob-
ject of charity. Doctor Jones, father of the future Governor
Jones, gave him a home. When Doctor Jones died, the blind
man went to live with the son.

“Time and again,” recalls Governor Jones, “when I was a
boy, he said to me that notwithstanding his great misfortune,
God had blessed him in a rare manner by giving him a good
home and that he would repay it all by disclosing to me his
secret of tempering steel when I should arrive at an age to
utilize it.

“On the first day of May, 1870, his seventieth birthday, he
said to me that he was getting old; that I was now-thirty years
old, with a wife and growing family, and sufficiently ac-
quainted with the affairs of the world to utilize properly the
secret so often promised; and that, if I would get pen, ink, and
paper, he would communicate it to me and I could write it
down.

“T brought the writing material and told him I was ready.
He said, ‘In the first place —’ and then stopped suddenly and
commenced rubbing his brow with the fingers of his right hand.
He continued this for some minutes, and then said, ‘Go away
and come back again in an hour.’

“I went out of the room, but remained where I could see him,
and not for one moment did he take his fingers from his brow


66 Tales of Old-Time Texas


or change his position. At the expiration of the hour I went into
the room and spoke to him. Without changing his position or
movement, he said, ‘Go out again and come back in another
hour.’ I went out and watched for another hour. He remained
seated immobile except for the constant rubbing of his brow.

“Upon my speaking to him at the expiration of the second
hour, he again said, ‘Go out once more and come back in an-
other hour.’ Again I went out and watched. The old man sat
there, his frame sunken, immobile, his only movement the
constant rubbing of his brow with the fingers of his right
hand.

“When I came in and spoke to him at the expiration of the
third hour, he burst into a flood of tears and said:

““My God, my God, it has all gone from me! All these years
I have accepted the kindness of these good people in the belief
that I could repay it with this legacy, and now when I at-
tempt to do it, 1 cannot. Daniel, there were ten or twelve
processes through which I put the knives, but I cannot remem-
ber one of them. When I told you to get pen, ink, and paper,
they were all fresh in my mind, but they are all gone now. My
God, my God, I have put it off too long!’

“T looked at him in awe and wonder. The skin from his fore-
head had been completely rubbed away by his fingers. His
sightless eyes were filled with tears, and his whole face was the
very picture of grief and despair. . . .

“For a little more than two years he lived on, but he was
ever after an imbecile. He lies buried in the old graveyard at
Washington, and with him lies buried the wonderful secret of
the genuine Bowie knife steel.”

Noted wherever he went, especially after the Sandbar fight,
and generous by nature in a society accustomed to exchanging
gifts, Bowie might have had various knives made to give away,


Jim Bowie's Knife 67
if for no other reason. Touching the hem of a garment worn by
a great man gives some individuals the honest conviction that
they have cast it upon him.

In 1829 John Sowell, gunsmith and blacksmith by trade,
moved to Texas from Tennessee and opened a shop in Gon-
zales. According to his grandson, A. J. Sowell — who in chron-
icling pioneer life was as honest as daylight but not infallible
as to memory — James Bowie, “the noted Indian fighter and
gold hunter, often came through Gonzales on his way east after
a prospecting tour.” One time he stopped at Sowell’s blacksmith
shop and asked him to make a knife according to a model that
he had whittled out of soft wood. He said that in a body-to-body
tussle with an Indian his hand had slipped down on the blade
of his butcher knife, and now he wanted a guard between it
and the handle. He was well pleased with Sowell’s handiwork.
Sowell then asked permission to name it.

“Certainly, certainly,” Bowie responded. “Give it a name.”

“JT will name it in honor of you,” the blacksmith said — ‘“‘the
Bowie knife.”

Sowell “made a great many” knives on the same model after
this. “A Texan did not think he was fully armed unless he had
one of them.”

Noah Smithwick added wit and perspective to honesty, and
his Evolution of a State is the meatiest and readablest of all
Texian autobiographies, At the battle of Concepcién he saw
Bowie command by virtue of natural leadership. He had known
him since 1828, the year Bowie rode through the settlements
on his first trip to San Antonio. Smithwick, skilled by an
apprenticeship in “the gun and blacksmith trades,” had at that
time a shop in San Felipe de Austin. Bowie brought his “‘blood-
christened weapon” to him to have a duplicate made. He did
not want to “degrade” the original by ordinary use. He had had


68 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the blade, “about ten inches long and two broad at the widest
part,” polished and set into an ivory handle mounted with
silver, and he carried it in a silver-mounted scabbard. “When
it became known,” says Smithwick, “that I was making a gen-
uine Bowie knife, there was a great demand for them; so I cut
a pattern and started a factory, my knives bringing all the way
from $5 to $20, according to finish.”


How many men Bowie killed with the blade that saved his
life on the Mississippi sandbar will never be known. So far as
documentary evidence goes, that was the only deadly deed with
a knife he ever did. Rezin P. Bowie flatly affirmed that his
brother used the knife to kill only the one time and never
fought a duel “with any person soever.” All men of honor in
the South recognized, of course, the distinction between a duel
and a difficulty, also between a killing and a murder.

John J. Bowie, who was pronouncedly franker on family
history than his brother Rezin, said that when “aroused by
some insult” James was “terrible in an anger that frequently
terminated in a tragical scene,” and that his knife became
famous “owing to some very tragical occurrences.” Put in an-
other way by an acquaintance, “It was generally said that
Bowie had been in several violent transactions, but not on his
own account.”

About 1895 a young man of the Bowie tribe told Judge
William F. Pope of Arkansas, already quoted on the origin of
the Bowie knife, that his great-uncle James once fought a knife
duel with a “Mexican,” the combatants sitting face to face
within striking distance of each other, astride a log to which


Jim Bowie’s Knife 69
their leather breeches had been “securely nailed.” A duel under
these conditions could end only with the ending of one of the
knife wielders.

Walter Worthington Bowie, historian of the Bowie family, re-
lates that James and a neighboring Spanish planter in Louisiana,
having become “involved in a difficulty, decided to fight it out
with knife and dagger.” The left hands of the two men were
lashed together. The Spaniard, of course, held the dagger.
“As he drew his arm back to strike, Bowie thrust forward and
drove his awful knife through his antagonist’s body.” Then he
wiped his knife on the Spaniard’s shirt and, cutting the cords
that bound their left hands together, freed himself of the
corpse.

This Spaniard story takes with every teller a different turn,
blending with other stories, as a popular ballad often incor-
porates parts of other ballads. One time, a wild story went,
one of the Bowies challenged an offensive Spaniard in Cuba,
tauntingly requesting that each stand up to the other with feet
shackled. The Spaniard was game, but no opponent to a Bowie
with a Bowie knife ever survived. In another version, Bowie ~
and the Spaniard took positions fifty yards apart, back to back,
rifles held perpendicular. At the command “Wheel,” the
Spaniard, a military precisionist, made the about-face in three
movements. Bowie whirled about in one movement and put a
bullet through his opponent’s brain before the latter could even
aim.

These stories may all branch from one related by the actor
Edwin Forrest, who met Bowie at New Orleans during the
1820’s and admired him and certain members of his coterie
immensely —a race-horse man, a gambler-duelist and a half-
horse, half-alligator steamboat captain. Ten years younger than
Bowie, Forrest was himself a magnificent animal; he excelled in


70 Tales of Old-Time Texas


stage-bellowing. Bowie entertained him on his plantation and
gave him, along with its history, “his favorite knife,” the handle
“corrugated with braids of steel, that ic might not slip when the
hand got bloody.” Forrest used it in playing Metamora, a
melodrama he made very popular of an overpowered but un-
yielding Indian chief who at the end holds up to his white
conquerors—and to the audience —“this knife which has
drunk the foul blood of your nation.”

As Forrest transmitted the story, joining Bowie’s plantation
was one owned by a quarrelsome Spaniard who had killed
several men and who threatened to kill Bowie. Bowie chal-
lenged him. He accepted and named knives for weapons, each
man to choose his own. He stipulated that “an oak bench six
feet long, two feet high and one foot wide should be firmly
planted in the earth and then the combatants, stark naked,
securely strapped to the bench, face to face, their knees touch-
ing.” “The Spaniard stabbed at me,” Bowie is quoted as saying.
“T took his blade right through my left arm, and, at the same
time, by an upward stroke reaching to his spine, ripped him
open from abdomen to chin. He gave a hoarse grunt, the whole
of his insides gushed out, and he tumbled into my lap, dead.”

In response to another challenger, another multi-versioned
story goes, Bowie stipulated that the fight take place at night
in a locked room, the combatants naked, except for socks— to
soften the sound of footsteps. At midnight he and his oppo-
nent, each accompanied by a second, went to a deserted house,
stripped, and entered with Bowie knives, one going to the left,
the other to the right of the entrance. The seconds listening
outside the locked door could not for a long while hear any
movement. Then they heard a scuffle, the click of steel and a
dying moan. When they opened the door and held up a lighted


lantern, there lay Bowie in a pool of blood. He was con-


Jim Bowie's Knife 71


siderably cut up but got all right. The other man didn’t.

Another time, Bowie fought his opponent across a log, each
with one arm tied to his own back. Bowie’s knife won.

Bowie was no less gallant than gory. One day, so a yarn goes,
he met in Natchez-under-the-Hill the youthful son of an es-
teemed friend named Lattimore. The young man had just sold
a large amount of cotton, and now “Bloody” Sturdivant, a
notorious gambler and hard case, was cheating him right and
left in a faro game.

“Young man,” Bowie interposed, “you don’t know me but
your father does. Let me play your hand for a while.”

The young man got up, Bowie sat down and before long
exposed the cheater. He won back all the money young Latti-
more had lost and gave it to him with the advice never to
gamble again. “Bloody” Sturdivant, ignorant of who the res-
cuer was, challenged him to a duel, proposing that they lash
their left hands together and fight with knives. Bowie accepted,
at the first stroke disabled the right arm of his antagonist, and
then let him go.

The hand-lashed-to-hand duel was not confined to fiction. In
Texas it was called the “Helena duel,” from the fact that a
village by the name of Helena in Karnes County fostered it.
Sometimes it was known as a “Mexican fight.” The gauchos of
the pampas varied the procedure by tying their left knees to-
gether, kneeling on the right and using their ponchos, held in
the left hand, as shields against knife thrusts.

A person might suppose that Bowie lay awake nights planning
fantastic arrangements for knife duels; somehow he — or his
literary creators — missed the grave duel. The gunmen of the
saddle generally looked upon knifing as beneath their status,
but Clay Allison of the Washita, a six-shooter ace, once — and
only once — made an exception. According to the tale, he and a


72 Tales of Old-Time Texas


neighboring ranchman agreed to settle a dispute with Bowie
knives down in a six-by-three grave dug eight feet deep. Here,
according to agreement, they stripped to the waist and sat flat
on the ground, backs against the end walls, and then at a given
signal stood up and began cutting. It was understood that the
survivor would bury the other where and as he lay. Clay
Allison of the Washita shoveled in the dirt.


ier
=


In various “transactions” ascribed to him, Bowie did not
make use of the knife; all he had to do was show it, or him-
self. ““High-toned and chivalrous,” as fiery John J. Linn char-
acterized him — expressing the estimate of many patriotic par-
tisans — Bowie took up for the weak, the wronged, the pure and
innocent, wherever he encountered them on his incessant
travels.

One day in 1832 he stopped at the Payton House in San
Felipe de Austin while arrangements were going on for the
signing of a marriage contract there. A marriage in Mexico
could be legalized only by the offices of a priest, but as priests
were not usually available in the colonies, the alcalde (justice)
was empowered to make a civil contract that would hold until
a priest came along — unless by that time one of the contracting
parties skipped out. A girl had come in from Cole’s settlement
to “contract with” a man who claimed to be a parson and who
was dressed in parson-black. Bowie, unseen by the parson-
appearing man, recognized him as a horse thief who had run
away from his wife and children in Arkansas. He intercepted
the alcalde, informed him about the rascal, persuaded him to
put on a black robe and pretend to be a Spanish priest who


Jim Bowie’s Knife 73
could not speak English and must use Bowie as interpreter
during an examination preliminary to the marriage. When
informed of the arrival of a priest, the pretended parson ex-
pressed himself as delighted with the prospect of being legally
married. The examination, somewhat in the form of a con-
fessional, was held in a room separated by thin planks from
one in which the girl and other women were gathered. The
disguised alcalde said something in Spanish and then Bowie
boomed out questions about the candidate’s wife and children
and even called for details on horse-thieving. The man left
town in a short while wearing tar and feathers; the girl from
Cole’s settlement was saved from ruin.

One time while Henry Clay, according to a story attributed
to him, was riding in a stagecoach with doors tightly closed
against cold, rainy weather, a man got in smoking a cigar. A
frail-looking young woman, the only female passenger, pres-
ently whispered something to a frail-looking man who ap-
peared to be her husband; he, in turn, timidly requested the
man with the cigar to quit smoking.

“T’ve paid for my seat and have a right to smoke,” the fellow
said.

At this, a big man who had been sitting silent, wrapped in a
great cloak, threw it open, passed his hand under his collar at
the back of his neck, and pulled a long knife from its sheath.

“Stranger,” he said, “my name is James Bowie. If you don’t
throw that cigar out the window in a quarter of a minute your
vitals will be tasting this knife.”

The cigar went out and James Bowie put his knife back into
its sheath. He usually carried the sheath on his belt, but some
knife men slung it from the neck, in front or to the back.

One time while Bowie was riding horseback on a road along-
side a cotton plantation in Concordia Parish, Louisiana, he saw


74, Tales of Old-Time Texas


the owner lashing a slave out in the field. Acting on impulse,
he dismounted, ran up to the planter, jerked the whip out of
his hand, and laid it upon him. This led to a duel in which
Bowie only wounded the brute. He sent a doctor to him, bought
the slave and gave him his freedom.

As with other deeds — and some not-deeds — Bowie’s rescue
of a preacher from a gang of ruffians became a multi-formea
folk tale. Sumner Bacon was a fact. During the Texas revolu-
tion he served as courier for General Houston, who would say
to him, “Now, Brother Bacon, short prayers and long rides.”
He distributed Bibles and preached as a Presbyterian minister
among the colonists while it was against the law for Protestants
to hold services. It was not, however, the law or the church
that interfered with him. Bowie came along while rowdies
were threatening to break up a camp meeting.

“Go ahead,” Bowie said to Bacon, speaking loud so that
others could hear. “While you pray I will watch, and I will kill
the first man who dares disturb the proceedings.”

No man dared.

A story told more than once from the pulpit has Bowie
riding along with a Methodist preacher, neither known to the
other, until they arrived at a settlement, where services were
promptly announced. The audience gathered in a log room
was made up entirely of men. The preacher lined out a familiar
hymn that all joined in singing, but when he announced his
text, one bully went to braying like a jackass, another hooted
like an owl, a third barked like a dog, and a fourth crowed
like a rooster. The preacher stood hesitant.

Then he saw the man he had ridden with stand up and
bellow out: “Men, this preacher has come here to preach to
you, and I never saw people who needed preaching worse. He
is going to preach. The next man that interrupts will have


Jim Bowie’s Knife 75
Jim Bowie to fight.” The preacher had no further interruption.
It is no detraction from Bowie’s manhood to say that his
knife and his reputation for using it stood with him wherever
he stood up, like In Hoc Signo Vinces as a sign in the sky.
One must conclude that during the last decade of his two-
score years Bowie carried several knives, not one of which is
known to exist. The specimens labeled “Bowie knives” in the
Alamo museum and in the Witte Museum at San Antonio are
sickly-looking. John S. Moore, a descendant of Rezin P. Bowie,
wrote that the original knife was in his possession until lost by
a cousin about 1885. Edwin Forrest was sure that he had a
specimen baptized in blood by Bowie’s own hand. Cephas K.
Hamm, who hunted for the lost Spanish mine on the San Saba
with Bowie and killed Indians with him and was a comrade
without an ax to grind, used to recollect that after having worn
his precious knife for years, Bowie finally left it on the ground,
near the Goliad road, where he had butchered a deer. He rode
several miles before he missed it, and then rode back only to
find it gone. He supposed a coyote had found it and packed it
off into the grass somewhere “on account of the blood on it.”
No matter what is fact and no matter what is fiction, during
Bowie’s lifetime and for a little while longer his knife came,
in a phrase from Henry Adams, to represent “what society
liked to see enacted on its theater of life.”


Bowie was fortunate not only in an Alamo death but in the
timing of it. He did not live to see his symbol outmoded. In
1836, the year the Alamo fell, Samuel Colt took out the first
American patent for a revolving pistol—the six-shooter. A


76 Tales of Old-Time Texas


company at Paterson, New Jersey, began manufacturing “the
great equalizer.” Sixty years before, Jefferson had proclaimed
that all men are born equal; on the frontiers it was soon to be
said that “Colonel Colt made all men equal.” The army and
navy would have nothing to do with his “revolving pistol,” but
somehow — no known records tell how —some of the new-
styled weapons reached the Republic of Texas and here be-
came highly popular while they were still unknown else-
where. The first model to win fame was called “the Texas.”
After a few Texas rangers on horseback overwhelmed a horde
of Comanches, a model was named “the Walker” — for one of
their captains, Samuel H. Walker.

Many Texans who were not rangers bought six-shooters as
soon as they were available. One buyer was R. M. Williamson,
better known as “Three-Legged Willie”; his right leg was
drawn back at the knee and he wore a wooden leg from the
knee down. He had edited a newspaper and fought at San
Jacinto; he could speak six languages and was a lawyer. After
the government of the new Republic got organized, he was
elected judge of an immense district including Shelby County
against the Louisiana line, where no court had ever been held
and where various citizens were engaged in a feud called “the
Regulator and Moderator War”: nobody was moderate and no-
body would be regulated.

Some of the citizens lived so far back in the piney woods that
they had not yet heard about the birth of Christ, much less of
a pistol that would shoot six times without having to be re-
loaded. They had heard, however, that court was going to be
held. A number of men met and adopted a resolution against
holding court, delegating a kind of lawyer to present it to the
judge.

On the appointed day the log room designated as courthouse


Jim Bowie’s Knife 77
was well filled with men, some for order and some not. Plenty
of Bowie knives were visible. Judge Three-Legged Willie
walked in, wearing a long, black alpaca coat. As he sat down in
a rawhide-bottomed chair behind a plain pine table, the kind of
lawyer came forward, saying that he wanted to present a res-
olution drawn up by a number of citizens. The judge took the
proffered paper, glanced at it, laid it on the table and asked,
“What law or authority can you cite for such a proposal as
this?”

The kind of lawyer carefully, not at all threateningly, drew
his Bowie knife from its scabbard at his waist and placed it on
the paper, saying, “Your honor, this is the law in this country.”

At this, Judge Three-Legged Willie reached under the long
tail of his black alpaca coat and drew out the first six-shooter
that some knife men in front of him had ever seen. He laid it
across the Bowie knife on the table and said, “This is the
Constitution that overrides the law. Sheriff, call the court to
order.”

He had announced the verdict of evolution in the case of
Colt versus Bowie.


The Robinhooding of Sam Bass


il Jury, 1978, it will be a hundred years since Sam Bass, at the
age of twenty-seven, met his fate at Round Rock, where he
and his gang were preparing to rob a bank. He remains the
best-known of all Texas bad men, and the best-liked. While he
was dying he said to inquisitors of the law, “It’s agin my
profession to blow on my pals. If a man knows anything he
ought to die with it in him.” So far as the records go, he never
killed anybody until the end.

A deputy sheriff named Caige Grimes walked up to Sam
Bass in a store at Round Rock and asked him for his pistol.

“Tl let you have both of them,” Sam Bass said.

Before the deputy could draw he was dead. He left three
little children. They and their descendants have never regarded
Sam Bass as a knight of goodness and generosity. The people
in stagecoaches and trains that he robbed did not knight him
either. It has never been the victims who made sympathetic
songs about outlaws. Stories about Sam Bass by people of ad-
verse feelings seem not to persist. What people like to believe
does.

As the ballad goes, “A kinder-hearted fellow you seldom ever
see.” What follows here is mostly anecdotes by people who liked
Sam Bass. They, more than biographies, have kept Sam’s name


The Robinhooding of Sam Bass 79


green; they and that ballad — swifter and vivider in detail than
any ballad about any other frontier notable.

Sam Bass had been in Texas only six years when rangers
killed him. He had been an outlaw on the dodge only ten
months. He had spent most of the time around Denton, spe-
cializing in horse racing. He never was much of a cowboy.


Sam used to coin the money, he spent it just as free;
He always drank good whisky wherever he might be.


In the spring of 1877 he rode down to San Antonio and threw
in with Joel Collins. They bought a small herd of cattle on
credit, drove them up the trail, and somewhere north of
Dodge City sold out for cash. They soon spent all the money
in riotous living and then got their names on the map by
robbing, in Nebraska, a Union Pacific express train carrying
California gold. Each of six robbers took $10,000 in freshly
minted twenty-dollar gold pieces. They split up and

Sam made it back to Texas, all right side up with care,
Rode into the town of Denton with all his friends to share.

In the months following, his reputation for lighthearted
generosity began to grow into legend. Now he had something
to be generous with — something that did not belong to him.
He and his followers made a few poor-paying train holdups
in north Texas. He tipped the porters and brakemen— so
people said. The rangers were after him; the people were for
him. He had not been robbing people — unless they happened
to be on board a train he stopped. He had been robbing
corporations. Going into a town to buy supplies became in-
creasingly risky. He was on the dodge, covering lots of country;
he had to take, and when he took he put those twenty-dollar
gold pieces into circulation.

Sometimes Sam was sorely pressed for grain for his horses


80 Tales of Old-Time Texas


and food for his men. One morning a farmer named Hoffman
missed some shelled corn out of his crib. It had been carried
off in a sack with a little hole in it. Hoffman trailed the grains
until he saw he was approaching a camp known to be occupied
by the Bass gang. He turned back home. A few days later Bass
saw him, and, handing him a twenty-dollar gold piece, ex-
plained, “I had to have some corn in a hurry the other
night.”

One morning a woman on a farm on Elm Creek was alone
in the house when Bass and his men rode up.

“Do you have anything cooked?” Sam asked.

“No.”

“Well, we are terribly hungry. We haven’t eaten anything for
some time. Would you cook us a snack?”

“Nobody ever left this place hungry yet,” the woman said.

She flew in and cooked a big bait of biscuits, eggs, bacon,
and coffee, to which were added butter and molasses. After
eating heartily, Sam Bass, hat off, asked, “How much do we
owe you?”

“Nothing.”

“Many thanks. Let’s ride, boys.” But as Sam passed out, he
placed two twenty-dollar gold pieces in the farm woman’s hand.

In 1927, the proprietor of an ancient-looking plank hotel at
Van Horn was an old-time Texan named Jackson from Denton
County. He was a great admirer of Sam Bass, and one winter
night while he and I and Asa Jones sat by the wood stove that
warmed the hotel lobby he regaled us with stories of the daring
good outlaw. Sam, he said, was sandy-haired, kept a sandy
mustache well-trained, and habitually wore a grin that showed
sandy-hued teeth. He was good nature itself.

One time Jackson, then just a kid, and his small brother were
carrying a bucket of water apiece from the well to their house


The Robinhooding of Sam Bass 81


when they were overtaken by Sam Bass and his crowd. “Give us
a drink, kids,” Sam said. The boys had a gourd, and they
proudly ladled out water. Bass noticed that Jackson’s brother
was crippled with rheumatism, and as he started to ride
away he pitched the cripple four silver dollars. He was headed
toward a neck of woods.

He had hardly got out of sight when a posse of law-bringers
led by Riley Wetsel came fogging up. “Clear out, kids,” Riley
yelled. “There’s going to be a battle.” Of course the kids did
not clear out. A battle was what they wanted above all else.
They climbed up on a stake-and-rider fence to watch half the
law-bringers go on one side of the neck of woods and half on
the other, both parties shooting into the woods. One of the
crossfire bullets hit Riley in the leg. He thought Sam Bass had
killed him, but by that time Sam was far away.

Sam Bass was a fool about good horses. One time rangers
raided a little pasture where the fine horses belonging to the
outlaw gang were kept. For several days the rangers paraded
those horses around, keeping them in a livery stable at night.
The stable was across the road from where the Jacksons lived.

“I woke up one morning hearing voices,” Jackson said. “I
thought I recognized Kid McCoy’s. He was one of the Bass men
and rode the best-looking horse in the outfit. I ran to the win-
dow and peeped out. The livery stable doors were wide open
and there Sam Bass, Kid McCoy, and other men were, pulling
saddles off some little, sorry ponies and saddling up their own
horses. It did not take them long to change. Then they came
out of the stable yard hellety-split, yelling like Comanches
and emptying their six-shooters into the air. Shirt tails were
dodging behind every door in town. My father was a very quiet
religious man — never even said doggone. ‘My, those boys are
making a great disturbance,’ he said.”


82 Tales of Old-Time Texas


If Sam Bass wasn’t a killer, it wasn’t because he could
not shoot. While galloping by a live oak tree near Belton, they
say, he six-shootered his initials into it. A vendor of mounted
horns from old-time Texas steers named Bertillion used to
sell at fancy prices pairs of longhorns purported to be from
steers that Sam Bass had shot down in night stampedes.

“One day,” Shelton Story of Denton County used to re-
member, “a neighbor who had butchered a fat cow said he’d
give me a dollar to carry a hind quarter to a certain spot in the
Denton Creek bottom, deliver it to men camped there, and
ask no questions. The meat was wrapped in an old slicker and
I tied it behind my saddle. That saddle was the first new saddle
I ever owned. The skirts were fancy stamped; it had long
strings of tanned elk hide, and its creaking sounded sweeter to
me than waltz music.


The Robinhooding of Sam Bass 83


“Along in the middle of the afternoon I found the camp.
Four men were there, all wearing six-shooters. I said I’d come
to bring some meat. One asked me if Pete Lenoir had sent it.
I said he had. ‘Well, get down, kid, and stay a while,’ this man
said. I didn’t want to stay but got down to untie the old slicker.

“After I had delivered the beef, the man said, “That’s sure a
fine saddle you’re riding.’

“IT agreed with him and was prouder than ever. Then he
said, ‘Kid, how about trading your saddle for mine?’

“I looked over at the old hull he pointed to. I looked at the
six-shooters he and the other men were loaded down with
and the saddle guns laying around in easy reach. I didn’t have
any say coming, and I didn’t say anything.

“After the saddles were changed, this man asked, ‘Do you
know who I am?’

“No,

“Well, ’'m Sam Bass.’

“I left with a heavy heart. I wasn’t scared so much as I was
just down at having lost my fine new saddle. If it had been
left up to me, I’d not have put the old hull on my horse. I’da
left bareback. Sam Bass put his old saddle on my horse and
girted it up himself. The leather on it was fair and it had good
saddle pockets, but it was coming apart. I felt I had been taken
advantage of by the meanest, low-downest man in Texas.

“T rode on home. When I got down, I yanked that saddle off
and threw it on the ground like I was trying to split the tree.
When I did, I heard metal chink. I looked in a saddle pocket
to see what it was. It was three twenty-dollar gold pieces; in
the other pocket were three other pieces. Well, I bought a rig
sure enough with all that money — new saddle, silver-plated
bit and spurs, Navajo blanket, fancy boots, leggins, everything.”

In the spring of 1878 a youth named Chunk Porter was clerk-


84. Tales of Old-Time Texas


ing in a dry-goods store owned by a Mr. Cates in the little
town of Kaufman. Early one morning, as he told hundreds of
times in later years and as his descendants and others still tell,
he had just opened the store and was sweeping the plank side-
walk in front of it when three strangers rode up on good horses.
Two got down and walked into the store; the other remained
mounted, looking up and down the roads. Chunk was alone at
the store that day, his employer being sick in bed at home.

One of the strangers, pleasant-featured and pleasant-voiced,
said he wanted to buy a suit of clothes. Chunk was able to fit
him with the best grade of wool in stock. The purchaser handed
over two twenty-dollar gold pieces and said he would put the
new suit on now. Chunk went to the safe, which he had not
yet opened, for change. After he had worked the combination,
opened the door and pulled out a tray full of money, he be-
came aware of the man in the new suit standing at his side.

“Son,” the man said, “that is a good deal of money.”

Chunk explained that the town had no bank, that their cash
had to be sent by stage or taken in person to Terrell for bank-
ing, and that the illness of his employer had prevented his
attending to that matter. The stranger advised him not to let
everybody who came along see how much money the safe held,
and then rode away. After Sam Bass was killed in Round Rock
the clothes he wore were identified as having come from the
Cates dry-goods store in Kaufman.


Railroads, express companies, and the governor of Texas all
offered rewards for the capture of Sam Bass, and these offers
induced some citizens to join sheriff posses, out to get the
money. They were all fiascoes. While the Sam Bass gang was
dodging about the breaks on the Clear Fork of the Brazos in
Stephens County, the sheriff set about organizing a posse. A


The Robinhooding of Sam Bass 85


settler named Hide, who was proving up a section of land,
decided he’d join the posse and rode to the Caddo store to
enlist another brave or two to go with him.

As he was dismounting with his artillery, a man carrying a
sack of provisions from the store asked him where he was going.

“Tm going to hunt down Sam Bass,” the settler replied.

“Then you don’t need to go any farther. You’ve found him,”
the stranger said. “What are you going to do with him?”

“Nothing, I guess,” Hide answered. There didn’t seem to be
anything else to say.

“How many children you got?” Sam Bass asked.

Hide told him. He had a big litter.

Sam went back into the store and brought out a dozen apples,
a lot of candy, and a package of Arbuckle’s coffee. “Take the
candy and apples home to your children,” he said. “When you
get there make yourself a big pot of coffee and never tell a soul
you have seen Sam Bass.”

Hide waited thirty years to tell this story, he said.

One night soon after a train robbery by the Bass gang in the
vicinity of Dallas, a deputy sheriff named Boyd from Denton
County and several citizens ambitious for reward money were
in a saloon at Pilot Point. None of the posse knew Sam Bass by
sight, but they were full of plans for capturing him. Presently
a stranger in the usual garb of range men walked in, glanced
over the crowd, moved to the bar, and invited everybody up for
a drink. Everybody accepted. After the stranger downed his
whiskey he took a seat at a long table at the rear end of the
room, his back to the wall and to one side of an open window.
He asked for coffee and bread. Several of the men sat down
at the table also, ordering coffee, Boyd opposite him.

The talk naturally drifted to the recent train robbery. Not
in the least reticent, the stranger revealed a marked familiarity


86 Tales of Old-Time Texas


with circumstances attending it. Boyd was growing suspicious,
but the stranger remained drawlingly calm. When the coffee
came, he stirred his slowly and then asked Boyd to pass the
plate of bread. Boyd was by now flustered. He seemed to feel
that some action was expected of him as a peace officer. He
paid no attention to the request. Rising, the stranger pulled
his six-shooter, fired a bullet into the plate, scattering its con-
tents over Boyd’s lap. Then he stepped through the window.
By the time the deputy and his posse got outside, Sam Bass
had disappeared into the night. The country had another joke
at the expense of Sam Bass hunters.

Most people who met Sam — and some who didn’t — told
of their encounters with pride. In one town that Sam had
entered to buy ammunition he saw a sheriff and dodged into a
dressmaker’s shop. She had a mountain of ruffles on the floor;
in those days party dresses were trimmed with yards and yards of
ruffles. The dressmaker, recognizing Sam Bass, told him to
get under the ruffles. He did. The sheriff came in and saw
nothing that interested him. When she was a grandmother, the
dressmaker used to end her story by saying, “Lots of folks
loved Sam.”

A peddler and auctioneer named Samuels didn’t, but even he
harbored no hard feelings. One time he and his teamsters,
driving three wagonloads of merchandise to be auctioned off in
Denton, had made camp when Sam Bass’s company rode up.
Bass introduced himself by name and asked if the merchant
had any whisky.

“We only have five gallons,” Samuels told him.

“Well,” Sam said, “we don’t want to swim in it. All we want
is a little to drink. Five gallons will satisfy us.”

The Bass men made camp, put out a guard, helped them-
selves to food as well as whisky, played poker a while, slept,


The Robinhooding of Sam Bass 87


and next morning breakfasted with their hosts. At parting Sam
Bass was more than gracious in expressing appreciation for
hospitality. “You'll probably see some rangers this morning,”
he said. “When you do, tell ’em which way I went.”


A few weeks before Sam’s betrayal and death, a well-armed
rider dismounted in front of Dr. Isaac Mayfield’s little office
in the village of Deanville, away east of the Bass gang’s usual
range. Young Doctor Mayfield was fresh out of medical school
and eager for practice. His horse, saddled and bearing saddle-
bags loaded with a country doctor’s full equipment, stood at
the hitching post. The stranger said the doctor would have to
make a considerable ride to get to a sick man. What kind of
sickness, the doctor wanted to know.

“You'll see when you get there.”

The stranger led over what passed for a road for about ten
miles west and south to Yegua Creek, and then along a dim
trail into the Yegua Thicket, still noted for the dense growth
of yaupon and other shrubs and trees. Then they came to a
camp that had apparently been occupied for several days. Eight
men were visible. Their leader did not give his name. He told
the doctor that one of the men had a wounded leg. He lay on a
pallet of blanket-covered moss.

The doctor uncovered him and saw that he had been shot
through the fleshy part of the thigh and that gangrene was
setting in. He called for a pot of boiling water. It was soon
brought. He washed the bullet hole at entrance and exit and
applied an antiseptic. Then he told the leader that he must
probe in order to remove pus and needed some clean cloth.
The leader went to his pack and brought several plain silk
handkerchiefs, new and clean. The doctor had no narcotics to
give the wounded man; anaesthetics were then unknown.


88 Tales of Old-Time Texas —<—


“This is going to hurt,” he said. “You all will have to hold him.”

The men were standing around, back out of the way. The
leader said, “Boys, those new silk handkerchiefs are going to be
pulled through that bullet hole, hurt or no hurt. Now let a man
get to each leg and arm and one to his head and hold him
steady. No matter how much he hollers, hold him till the
doctor says quit.”

Five men stretched out the wounded man while the doctor
ran the silk handkerchiefs through the bullet hole. The sun
was low when he finished. He said that he would stay through
the night if there were anything more he could do but there
wasn’t. He would return if called. Now he had better ride in
order to get through the Yegua bottom before dark. The leader
asked how much he owed.

“I guess ten dollars will cover the bill,” the doctor said.

The leader handed him a twenty-dollar gold piece, adding,
“Doctor, I would be obliged if you'll not mention this day’s
work, where you have been, or what you have seen.”

The doctor replied, “My patients and practice are private,
and I make it a point to keep my mouth shut on personal
matters.”

He rode away, and as there was no further word he presumed
that the wounded man got well. He had concluded that the
leader was Sam Bass; descriptions in the papers following the
killing at Round Rock confirmed the opinion. He believed in
law and order and was against robbers, but had a sympathy for
hunted Sam Bass.

Almost immediately after news raced over the country that
Sam Bass had been betrayed to the rangers by one of his own
men named Jim Murphy, and killed, the ballad of Sam Bass
came into existence. Nobody knows who composed it. In years
that followed, millions of longhorns were soothed on their bed-


The Robinhooding of Sam Bass 89


grounds and steadied on their long, slow trailing by the strains
of the song. One line in particular expressed the sympathies
of the singers:


Oh, what a scorching Jim will get
When Gabriel blows his horn! . . .


Relic pirates went to chipping away the headstone that a
sister put up at Sam’s grave in the Round Rock graveyard.
Meanwhile, according to a minor legend, Sam Bass, like Billy
the Kid, Jesse James, Bill Longley and many another outlaw,
was not in his proper grave at all. There is no boundary to
human credulity. Shelton Story, who as a boy found six twenty-
dollar gold pieces in the pockets of Sam Bass’s discarded saddle,
so developed his power of memory that he got to recollecting
this end to his hero!

“Not many days after the Round Rock trouble, I took the
T. and P. train at Eagle Ford to go to Fort Worth. The minute
I stepped inside the coach I noticed a man hunkered over in a
seat by himself like he was sick. I took a close look and rec-
ognized Sam Bass. He was sick all right. In fact, he was dying
from his wounds. I didn’t say nothing. He didn’t say nothing
neither — not there on the train. When we got to Fort Worth
I put him in a hack and drove him to a house out towards
Grapevine — a house where we both knew he’d be safe. Blood
poison had set in. He lived only two days. We buried him
decently, and nobody will ever rob that grave. The man buried
at Round Rock was just one of the gang. While he was dying
he pretended to be Sam Bass in order to protect his leader.”

No tales are more persistent than those about treasure Sam
Bass is supposed to have hidden. If he did not bury his loot,
what did he do with all of it? The records, I believe, don’t
show that he ever went to Llano County. Just the same, a big


90 Tales of Old-Time Texas


jag of Sam Bass gold wrapped in a canvas mailsack branded
US was buried out there, they say.

Many years ago, a ranchman hired three Mexicans to cut
cedar pickets on one side of Packsaddle Mountain. He camped
them and left. It rained, and it was two or three days before he
came back. Camp was deserted. He could not understand why
the Mexicans would leave without getting their wages. He be-
gan looking around. The rain made sign easy to read. He found
where six pickets — exactly six—had been cut and leaned up
against a cliff. Two of them, as he read the sign, had pushed
their way through a very thin wall into a small cave. Just inside
the cave he found a piece of an old mail sack, the US brand
still visible on it, prints of coins showing on it too. The
Mexicans had-taken the gold and lit a shuck.

There are plenty of other caves, especially in the Round Rock
country, where Sam Bass’s loot has not yet been found. There
are still plenty of people who have a personal feeling for the
character when they sing,

Sam first came out to Texas, a cowboy for to be,
A kinder-hearted feller you seldom ever see.

A millionaire can buy propaganda agents, a king can knight,
a president can decorate, a pope can decree sainthood; but
nobody but just folks can robinhood an outlaw. In order to get
robinhooded, the outlaw must, like Jesse James in the song, be
“4 friend to the poor”; he must be daring and gay; he must be
merciful of life.


Part Two


Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms


ne Texas claim is that it does not have a climate — just

weather. The weather was here before Columbus sailed,
and it has had a far more powerful effect on the lives of the
inhabitants than all the Spanish expeditions, flag flyings and
gubernatorial administrations recorded in history books. Also,
it has done more than any other one factor to make braggarts
out of Texans. You can tell a Texan who is out of the old
rock from the other kind by how and what he brags on. He
does not brag on how many million miles of barbed wire
stretch across Texas, how many million barrels of brains
operate in the oil business, or anything like that. He brags
on the weather, and for his purposes the worst is the best. He
brags in reverse.

He wishes for rain but is fortified in spirit and inspired in
imagination by drouths. He sings about a home on the range
where “the skies are not cloudy all day,” spends —if he is a
country man —a large part of his life looking for clouds, and
brags of living in a country where six months are dry and six
months without rain. He quotes a jingle about “the silvery
Rio Grande,” and blows about having the dustiest rivers in the
world. He goes somewhere else in the summer and regales the
company with General Sherman’s remark that if he owned Texas
and Hell, he’d rent out Texas and live in the other place — and


94 Tales of Old-Time Texas


with the Texan retort, “That’s right. Every man stand up for his
own country.” If this gets a laugh he will recite “Paradise in
Texas”:


The devil was given permission one day

To make him a land for his own special sway.
He put thorns on all the bushes and trees

And mixed up the sand with millions of fleas.
He scattered tarantulas along all the roads,

Put spines on the cactus and horns on the toads.
He lengthened the horn of the Texas steer
And added a foot to the jack rabbit’s ear.

He put three devils in every bronco steed

And poisoned the feet of the centipede.

The rattlesnake bites you, the scorpion stings,
The mosquito torments you buzzing his wings.
The heat in the summer is a hundred and ten,
Too hot for the devil and too hot for men.
And all who remained in that climate soon bore
Cuts, bites, stings, scratches and blisters galore.


The authentic Texan is proud that government scientists
still can’t predict the weather accurately. The only people who
know are coyotes, but their haunting cries are unreliable, and
they are vanishing anyway. The official prognosticators never
say “norther”; they predict cool fronts and cold fronts. But
the norther, which “comes sudden and soon, in the dead of
night or the blaze of noon,” was the pride of the earliest
English-speaking settlers on the Texas coast, and now it is the
pride of all Texans from the Gulf of Mexico to the Staked
Plains, where the only protection standing between a cow camp
and the North Pole is a barbed-wire fence. Sweet are the uses
of adversity.

Two picturesque aspects of northers stand out: their sudden-


Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms 95


ness, and the extreme cold they bring to an atmosphere ex-
tremely hot, thereby fulfilling Romeo’s definition of love —
“cold fire.”

The Texas northers, especially the blue ones, don’t blow as
they used to. That is what the old-timers say. The weather
bureau didn’t keep records when the northers were at their
best. They used to blow the world inside out and freeze the
lining. They were cold enough to freeze the horns off a brass
billy goat.

Towards the end of December of 1839, or maybe it was
early in January of 1840, Josiah Bean was fishing in the Brazos
River in Brazoria County. The day was hot enough for August.
He was in his shirt sleeves and had a long pole so that he could
sit or lie in the shade and hold his line out in the channel.
About three o’clock he was disturbed from his rest by a nibble.
He stood up, put a fresh worm on his hook, dropped it out in
the water just beyond a dead tree, stuck the end of the pole in
the muddy bank, and was about to resume his comfortable
position, when he happened to glance to the north.

“Holy smoke!” he yelled out to himself. “Look at that blue
norther a-coming!”

It wasn’t more than half a mile to his cabin, but if he got
to a coat and shelter before he froze, he knew it would be
exercise that saved him. He made a grab for the pole, and
just as he yanked it out of the mud he felt a tug on the line that
indicated a good catfish. He gave the pole a mighty jerk, straight
back. At the same time he heard the norther roar into the trees.
He saw the catfish fly into the air, maybe thirty feet high,
still over the water, and in the same moment, drop free of the
hook.

“Well, of all the luck,” he moaned to himself.

It was luck sure enough. He had become so excited over the


96 Tales of Old-Time Texas


fish that he had not noticed how exceedingly far the temper-
ature had fallen in such an exceedingly short time. Automat-
ically he wiped his hand across his brow to clear the sweat from
it and felt ice. Then he noticed the catfish flopping about where
it had fallen —not into but on the river. He skated out and
caught it barehanded. He nearly froze to death before he got
home, but he brought in the fish.

In early days a man plowing with a pair of oxen on the
prairie discovered that one of them had become overheated. He
thought he had as well save its hide, but he had not more
than skinned it when a regular old-time blue norther hit. It
froze the other ox to death standing up. The only way the man
saved himself was by wrapping up in the freshly skinned ox-
hide.

One fall a squatter on the Canadian River, in the Panhandle,
bought a thermometer. Thermometers were rare things then.
The squatter wanted to give his and the weather both a fair
test. It was a big thermometer, as long as the pendulum of a
grandfather’s clock. He drove a twenty-penny nail in the corner
post of the yard fence he had just built and hung the thermom-
eter on it, facing north. A few weeks later he happened to be
looking out the window at this corner post when a norther
struck. He said he couldn’t believe his eyes. He saw the post
push down into the earth as if driven by a pile driver. But
there wasn’t any pile driver. The mercury tube was so strong
at the bottom of the thermometer, the nail in the post was so
strong at the top, and the drop in temperature was so sudden,
that the mercury simply took the post down with it. It drove
that post into the clay foundation right at two feet, the squatter
said.

An old Baptist preacher named Fuller used to tell that the
first winter he spent in Texas, a cold spell froze Caddo Lake


Northers, Drouths and Sandsiorms 97


solid. Then the cold let up and within a few hours a steady
rain put maybe two inches of water on top of the ice. Toward
sundown a fresh norther hit with a bang, and Brother Fuller
said he never saw so many geese in his life as came in. The
whole sky was strung across with comet-tails of geese and
thousands and thousands settled down on the lake, in the shallow
water over the ice. He knew that water would be frozen mighty
quick, he said, but darkness cut off further observation.

Next morning, as soon as it was light, Brother Fuller looked.
There the geese were, countless thousands of them, stuck fast
by their feet, flapping and squawking, trying in vain to get
loose. One patch of about twenty acres of lake looked to be
solid with wild geese. He spread the news. The weather had
cleared off, though it was still bitter cold, and before noon
people were coming in wagons from all directions to load up.
At that, hardly a dent was made in the numbers. On the second
day the ice loosened up enough for most of the geese to fly
away.


One of the most noted characters of deep Texas — the Texas
of piny weods and sorghum molasses — was Mr. Fishback of
the Sulphurs. Fishback Lake in Titus County preserves his
name, as does many a story of his race horses and coon dogs.
On a certain delightfully mild, sun-blessed winter morning of
a year that I have not been able to determine, though it was
away back yonder, Mr. Fishback of the Sulphurs set out on the
fastest of his race mares to ride from Clarksville to his cabin
on Fishback Lake, twenty miles south.

He had traveled about half the distance when he happened
to look back and see a gen-u-wine blue norther swooping down.
It wasn’t blue; it was black. In a second or two he felt the light
breath that always runs ahead of the mighty blizzard. This was


98 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Zs


before the days of slickers, but Mr. Fishback of the Sulphurs
had a good long-tailed overcoat tied behind his saddle. Without
stopping, he jerked the saddle strings loose and put on the coat
but left it unbuttoned. His mare needed no urging. She was
the fastest thing known in Texas before Sam Bass’s “Denton
mare” arrived long afterwards. But no race animal can run at
top speed for ten miles. Mr. Fishback held his racer down,
intending to save her best running for the final lap.

Before long, he looked back again and saw the norther twist-
ing the mare’s outstretched tail. He heard the roar of the great
wind. He felt a fleck of sleet on his face. He slacked the reins
a fraction, and the mare spurted ahead like a cry of joy. For six
miles, Mr. Fishback of the Sulphurs used to swear, they kept
exactly even with the howling, sleet-laden norther. That is, the
front end of the norther was enveloping the mare’s hind
quarters, shoving her along at the same time. Meanwhile the
mare’s foreparts and his face kept ahead of the norther.


Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms 99


He had a stable for this fine mare. He rushed in, closed the
door, got down and looked at the noble creature that had made
such a race. Her forequarters were in a lather, but the muscles
of her hind legs and all the rear parts of her body were frozen
stiff. Within thirty minutes she was in the fever of pneumonia,
and before daylight next morning was dead.

But not all the wind that blows in Texas is out of the north.
One time a stranger who had been riding on the plains for
three days asked a native he met, “Does the wind blow this way
all the time?” “No,” replied the native, “sometimes it blows
the other way.” Then he asked if those Kansas cyclones ever hit
the Panhandle. “No,” the native answered, “if one ever reaches
the country, this here west wind tears the vitals out of it.”

A traveler who came to Texas in the 1840’s described the
climate as “tropical between northers.” Sandstorms may blow
either during the tropical seasons or with the northers. “De
rain he vas all vind, and de vind he vas all sand,” a German
farmer of the Dust Bowl said. The wind out of a cloud will
blind the earth with sand, and then the cloud will catch up with
the sandstorm and rain mud. “Never mind the weather, just so
the wind don’t blow,” is an old saying out where the sandstorms
are worst. West Texas chambers of commerce don’t like having
their dust advertised; ordinary citizens bolster their pluck
with jokes on the subject.

They boast of the “west Texas wind gauge” —a log chain
fastened to a post. If the wind lifts the chain and blows it
straight out, it’s a hard wind.


They tell of a newcomer who noticed a man hunkered down
comfortably beside some house blocks without any house.
“You live here?” the newcomer asked.


“Yep.”


100 Tales of Old-Time Texas


“What happened to the house?”

“Blew away.”

“Anybody hurt?”

“Can't say yet. Wife and four kids blew away too.”

“Great Scott, man! It seems to me you’d be out looking for
them.”

“Now quiet yourself, stranger. If you had been in this
country as long as I have, you wouldn’t get so het up. The
wind’s already shifted around, and I figger I might jest as well
wait fer it to blow the old woman and the kids back. If I took
after ’em, I’d be liable to miss ’em. No, you don’t understand
about this here wind. Why, not long ago Jim Harper lost his
hat in it. Jest five days later danged if the wind didn’t change
and lodge that hat right in Jim’s own woodpile.”

The newcomer was interested. “Say,” he said after a minute’s
reflection, “how far do you suppose that hat traveled before it
started back?”

“Well, it traveled jest as far coming back as it did going out.
Mister, I guess you can figger distances as well as I can.”

The newcomer was figuring when, glancing to the north, he
saw a woman flying toward him with her skirts spread out and
four urchins hanging on.

“Well, by gravy, old woman,” the householder ejaculated as
she lit, “you got back a little sooner than I was expecting.” He
unfolded his legs and got up.

The newcomer rode on. About noon he came to the town of
Tahoka, close to Tahoka Lake. While he was eating dinner in a
café he fell in with two old-timers named Jack Potter and
Prairie Dog Dave. They saw he was eager to learn the country,
and went to telling about the hardest winds they had ever
experienced. In their time they had both drunk a good deal of
alkali water.


Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms 101


“Speaking of shooting ducks,” Jack Potter said, “minds me
of the great blow of ’79, when my outfit was camped on Tahoka
Lake out here. Well, sir, the wind must have drove all the
ducks out of the Panhandle into that water. They kept coming
and lighting and coming and lighting until you couldn’t see
a drop of water in the lake. The cook had an old double-
barreled shotgun in the wagon. I told him I was tired of eating
other people’s calves and we had as well have duck for a change.
So I loaded both barrels of the gun and went down for a shot.
The sand was so thick in the air that it made a kind of screen
and the ducks couldn’t see me. I jest aimed out over the water
and turned both barrels loose. Then the queerest thing hap-
pened you ever see. The whole passel of ducks rose into the air.
It looked to me like there were millions of them. And not a
single one, dead or alive, was left on the lake.”

“Cow-sucking jack rabbits!” Prairie Dog Dave put in here.
“You don’t mean to say that with the whole lake covered solid
you missed killing a single duck! It don’t stand to reason.”

“I was coming to that,” Jack Potter went on. “I was astonished
myself at first. 1 watched them ducks rise maybe two hundred
yards in the air, swooping off to one side of the lake. Then the
flock begun to separate like, and dead ducks started raining
down. It beat raining frogs or catfish all hollow. I started picking
up the ducks. Then I saw I couldn’t get nowhere by myself. I
went back to the wagon and got the cook and four cowboys who
were off herd. We must have picked up ducks for over an hour.
We started to count ’em, but that was too slow. We had an
empty water barrel and we measured ’em in that. We had
twenty-nine barrels full exactly. I fed that outfit on ducks until
they swore they were sprouting pin feathers.

“You see, the ducks were wedged against each other so solid
on the lake that when I fired and scared them the live ones


102 Tales of Old-Time Texas


took the dead ones up in the air with them. The sand kind of
glued them together. Then when they begun to spread out, the
dead ones naturally dropped — twenty-nine barrels of ’em.”

“1 remember that wind mighty well,” Prairie Dog Dave
agreed, “and I’m not surprised at its driving all the ducks be-
tween here and the North Pole into Tahoka Lake. That year I
was trying to farm a little down towards Midland. 1 swore
afterwards that if ever I tried farming again I’d boil all my
seed in pine tar before planting them. Still, I raised a pretty
good crop. I had a good corncrib and it chock full of corn—
corn in the shuck. On the west side was a little window kept open
for ventilation; the east wall had a knothole about the diameter
of a good-sized corncob. The roof was raised about three
inches above the top of the wall. | never did believe in shutting
up corn too tight any more than I believe in shutting up
people.

“You recollect that wind came up along late in the evening
and blowed fierce all night. The next morning — about the
time you were going out to shoot the ducks, I guess — I went
down to the crib to look around. Over on the east side |
noticed a line of fresh corncobs stringing out as far as I could
see.

“T looked inside the crib. Well, sir, it was five feet deep with
shelled corn and not a shuck or a cob in sight. You see, that
wind blowing in through the window on the west side would
twirl the ears of corn around and snatch off the shucks. Being
light, the shucks flew away through the opening between the
walls and the roof. I never did see any sign of them. After the
ears were shucked the wind went to blowing them endwise into
that knot-hole. It was better than a cornsheller. The cob couldn’t
get through until all the grains were shelled off. I trailed that
line of cobs eleven miles east of the knothole in my crib. It


Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms 103


was wonderful how straight the line was. I don’t know how
much farther the cobs would have been carried if they hadn’t
struck a line of telegraph poles. For a ways these telegraph
poles were jobbed full of corncobs. Maybe woodpeckers had
drilled the holes the cobs stuck into. I don’t know.”

All this time the newcomer had not said a word. “Gentle-

- men,” he now remarked, “from the wind I myself have ex-
perienced in west Texas I can well believe you, and thank you
for all the information you have been giving me,Jwant to
thank you also for not telling about how postholes are some-
times left standing up out of ground that’s gone with the wind.
Also for saying nothing about the poor devil who drilled for
oil, got a dry well, and then after a big storm found it sticking
up a mile high in the air, and to cover expenses cut it into
three-foot sections and sold them for postholes. Also, I want to
thank you for not telling me about the cowboy who staked his
horse to a twig one night and the next morning found him
hanging from a cottonwood tree sixty feet high. You two have
avoided such matters of common knowledge and given me fresh
facts. So long.”

After the stranger left, Jack Potter and Prairie Dog Dave
went to speculating on how many pounds of sand a dogie
yearling can carry in its craw without starving to death.

The stranger went on to FE] Paso, and got into a Shriner con-
vention. It was March and the wind-driven sand was so dense
that a driver couldn’t see past the radiator of his own car. When
the president of the Chamber of Commerce got up to make the
welcoming speech, he apologized for the weather, said the old-
est inhabitant of the city had never experienced such a sand-
storm, and poured out a lot more hokum about “this point on
God’s fair footstool.” He concluded by introducing Captain
Jim Gillett, who had come to El Paso when it was just a camp-


104 Tales of Old-Time Texas


yard and who would now give the audience the real thing.
Captain Gillett’s Six Years with the Texas Rangers had just been
published — the best ranger narrative there is.

He began, “I came to El Paso in 1879. They were having
sandstorms then and they have been having sandstorms ever
since, but here lately it seems like the wind has sorter lost its
strength. I remember one time we were riding in with a pack
mule off an Indian scout. The wind had been blowing for three
days and nights and sand had covered up all the grass and most
of the mesquite bushes. . . . Yes, the country had some grass
then; it hadn’t all been grazed off. . . . That pack mule was
the only one of us that could follow the trail. She went ahead.

“As we rode along through the sandhills between Fort Han-
cock and El Paso, I noticed the mule shy, and then the lead
ranger stopped. He was right over the crown of a man’s hat
sticking out of the sand. It looked like a new hat, and when the
ranger got down to dig it out, the rest of us stopped to watch.

“Well, sir, when he uncovered the brim and went to lift the
hat up, he discovered a man’s head inside it. We got down and
worked carefully with our fingers to scratch the sand out of the
man’s ears and eyes and mouth and nostrils. He gave a little
cough and said, ‘Get a shovel. There’s a good horse under me.’ ”


Down in the Nueces country one year, Dave Woodward was
selling — or trying to sell—land to Minnesota farmers. An
agent up there was shipping them down. One night he and his
prospective purchasers arrived in the little town of Cotulla in
the midst of a sleety norther. Dave spent an hour trying to con-
vince the strangers that sleet was almost unprecedented in that
part of Texas. A mild climate was what his prospects were
after.


Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms 105


Early next morning when the party started out to view the
land, Dave was still harping on such unprecedented weather.
Presently he sighted a brush-popper jogging down the road.

“There comes a man who has lived in these parts all his
life,” Dave said. “I’m going to stop him, and one of you ask him
if he’s ever seen such weather as this.”

Dave stopped the man, and one of the land buyers asked the
question.

“Can’t say that I ever did see it sleet like this before,” the
brush-popper answered; “but I'll tell you what’s a fact. I’ve
seen it rain.”

It was in the same part of Texas that a certain rancher who
was better at raising children than calves went out one Septem-
ber night soon after dark and began throwing handfuls of peb-
bles on the roof. His wife ran out and asked him what in the
world he meant.

“Why,” he said, “it’s lightning in the west and might rain.
This drouth has got to end sometime. That’s certain. I
thought it would be a good idear to kinder break the kids into
hearing something fall on the roof. Then if it ever acturally
rains, they won’t stampede.”

Out close to the New Mexico line a man filed on a section of
state land, built a shack to live in and somehow stayed there un-
til he got a deed. All this time he hauled water by wagon in
barrels from a creek eleven miles away. Right after he got his
deed he sold out to a stranger. He threw in the water barrels
with the land; and the day he loaded up family, washpot, quilts,
frying pans and other belongings, he left a barrel full of water
beside the front door.

The new owner was leaning against the doorframe watching
the homesteader drive away when he saw him halt not fifty
yards off, give the lines to his wife, get down, come back with a


106 Tales of Old-Time Texas


bucket in his hand, dip it full of water from the barrel, and
throw it on the roof. After he had thrown a second bucket of
water on the roof and was dipping up a third, the purchaser
asked, “What you wasting water that away fer?”

“Well, I'll tell you,” the water thrower replied. “Three year
ago this past summer when I built this house I put extra good
shingles on it. I always have had a curiosity to know if the roof
would leak, and, by grabs, I decided not to leave the country
without finding out.”

One time, during a terrible drouth, a mover heading east
stopped his team at the water trough in front of the courthouse
at Belton to water. The team consisted of a brindle-legged blue
mule with long whiskers and a dun ox with a drooped horn.

While they drank and a speckled hound that followed the
wagon lapped and a woman on the wagon seat took a fresh dip
of snuff out of a brown Levi Garret bottle with a hackberry
toothbrush, a man moved over to the wagon from the shady
side of a store facing the courthouse square and remarked,
“Sorter odd-mated team you got there.”

“Maybe so,” the driver said, looking by habit around the
circle of sky to see if he could detect a cloud: “You see, it’s this
away. It had quit raining in that Aberlene country before |
filed on a section of land, out there. I had a pair of mules,
but one of them died. Then I traded off a quarter-section, for
this ox, so I could pull out; but the damned fool I traded with
couldn’t read — and I got the whole section off on him.”

Another squatter had his house on a seep-draw close to a
cottonwood tree. It was dry, of course, and he had been cutting
sotol for his milk cows. There was no grass in the country. All
the tanks in the big pastures were dry. There wasn’t wind
enough to turn the windmills; water had to be-pumped from
deep wells with gasoline engines.


Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms 107


One night the squatter was lying on a pallet on the gallery
worrying about the drouth and wondering if it was ever going
to really rain again. While absorbed in his worry, he felt a
fresh wind stir. Then he heard, he thought, the sweet sound
of rain. He listened to it a long time — the sweetest music that
ever comes to a man in the drouth country. After a while he
got up to step out into the blessed rain and feel it upon his head
and body.

There wasn’t any rain! He realized that what he had heard
was the cottonwood leaves talking in the breeze. Many times,
like many other people, he had been comforted by that leaf talk,
but now his disappointment turned into anger against the tree.
It seemed to have been mocking him. He grabbed an ax and
cut the tree down. Before long he was saying he wished he had
the tree back, not only for shade but for the sound it makes like
rain.

Jack Helms did not live within fifty miles of a cottonwood
or any other kind of wood except the roots of switch mesquite.
His ranch was in a country where it takes fifty acres to run a
barren cow. The Spanish daggers grow there big enough to
shade a jack rabbit, but nothing larger.

One summer, though, it rained several times, and cattle were
a good price. It certainly looked as if Jack Helms’s ship was
coming in. He bought himself a new pair of boots and his wife
and children a phonograph, and had no trouble getting his
note extended at the bank.

After the papers were signed the banker asked, “What are
you going to do, Mr. Helms, when you sell this fall and have
all your money?”

“T tell you what I’m a-going to do,” Mr. Helms replied. “I’m
a-going to get a new waggin, and I’m a-going to drive it up in
front of my house, and I’m jest a-going to leave it there until it


108 Tales of Old-Time Texas


rots. Everybody in this country knows the only real shade a
man ever finds to take a nap in is under a waggin. Half the
time mine is in use. When I sell my yearlings ’m a-going to
buy a new waggin that won't have a derned thing to do but
supply shade for my nap every day.”


Along with drouths there have always been prayers for rain,
politicians especially advocating both rain and prayer; and,
along with drouth stories, other stories about prayers to break
the drouths grew up.

In 1888 people in the East were collecting money to buy
food for drouth-sufferers out West. The drouth was as bad
in Jack County as it was anywhere, and a camp meeting on
Keechi Creek dedicated one service to prayers for rain. It was
election year, and, of course, all the politicians in the country
were on hand to impress the great Weather-Maker. Among them
was the district judge, a pillar in the church, who was running
for re-election. The ramrod of the “Rain Dance” — as the Hopi
Indians call their ceremonials to make it rain — was Grandpa
Brummet, a strong partisan of the judge’s. He invited the
judge to lead in prayer, kneeling at his side.

After praying for “copious showers” to moisten the earth and
cause it to produce crops for the farmer and grass for the
rancher, the judge turned to the subject of internal revenue.

“And, O God,” he continued, “in the meantime soften the
hearts of the people in the East and cause them to send us
drouth-sufferers barrels of meal, barrels of flour, barrels of
bacon, barrels of coffee, barrels of sugar, barrels of lard, barrels
of molasses, barrels of rice, barrels of Irish potatoes and sweet
potatoes too, barrels of onions, barrels of beans, barrels of
pepper, bar —”


Northers, Drouths and Sandstorms 109


Here Grandpa Brummet nudged the Judge in the ribs and
said in a very loud whisper, “Oh, hell, judge, that is too much
pepper.”

During another drouth in another part of the country, sev-
eral farmers and ranchmen who happened to be together began
discussing a meeting to pray for rain. Two or three thought it
would be a good idea to consult an aged preacher who had
lived through many drouths. They were delegated to consult
him. He listened to them sympathetically, and then said, “As
long as this wind keeps steady out of the west, it won’t do any
good to pray.”


Frozen Inside a Buffalo Hide


+ was late in January, after repeated northers had frozen the
I ground; yet this particular day was mild and fair — too warm
and still for the season. The inactivity of the prairie dogs in-
dicated that they had little trust in the mildness and fairness.
John Rotman and two other hunters out on the plains to bring
in a load of buffalo meat did not trust the weather, either. The
night before and on after sunrise they had heard the long, deep
howls of lobo wolves on every side of their camp.

As the hunters rode away from their big wagon and the thin
blue smoke of burning buffalo chips, they had no fear of not
getting back ahead of the blizzard. Their only concern was
locating a bunch of buffaloes. Their plan was to kill a number,
as close together as possible, and then, after gutting them, to
bring up the wagon and butcher out the carcasses, taking only
the choicest meat and the tallow. There were no signs of Indi-
ans. At this time of year the Comanches and Kiowas generally
kept within reach of their camps in Palo Duro Canyon and
other sheltered places.

Circling so as not to get too far from camp, the hunters re-
marked that buffaloes seemed as scarce as Indians. It was mid-
afternoon before they sighted an animal. Then they saw the tail-
end of a vast herd walking steadily south, several miles away.
After galloping behind the animals a distance, Rotman told


Frozen Inside a Buffalo Hide III


his companions that he would ride ahead to one side and try to
push some of the buffaloes into a rolling, uneven country where
the other two men would have a better chance to shoot.

“Dark is going to come early tonight,” one of the other men
remarked, and all glanced north, where an atmosphere rather
than a cloud, a grayness more than a blackness, thickened the
horizon. The sun had a yellow glaze over it. Hardly had the
men separated before there was a stir in the sea of grass. Again,
all was still, and the angle between the one lone rider galloping
southwestward and the two going southeastward broadened.
And then with incredible swiftness, even though its forerunners
had given warning, the blizzard struck. Before he knew it, Rot-
man could no longer see the buffaloes. He untied his old Con-
federate overcoat from behind his saddle and buttoned it on.
Camp was north of east. His horse, as well as he, knew that;
but only with the greatest difficulty could he make him quarter
into the wind. The air was filled now with driving sleet and
snow. There was no longer any sun, just a dimness soon to turn
into blackness.

A man could not stay out in a night like this and live, unless
he kept moving. Rotman decided that the only thing to do was
to turn his back square to the storm and keep moving until he
got to a break or until daylight came. And where on those
illimitable plains was any break? Rotman got down to warm
himself with walking. His feet were already blocks of wood.
He had no saddle scabbard, but, like other men of that day,
carried his long rifle across the front of his saddle in a sling.
When he got down, he took the rifle with him, in gloved hand.

With back to the storm and eyes protected by a wide-
brimmed hat of rawhide that had been waterproofed with
smoked tallow, Rotman could still see perhaps two horse-lengths
ahead. Suddenly he found himself almost against a giant buffalo


112 Tales of Old-Time Texas


bull, facing him, standing still. Because of the very heavy hair
on head and shoulders, buffaloes, unlike cattle, stand facing a
storm. Before the animal could move, Rotman sent a ball into
his heart.

Now he had something that has kept many a man from freez-
ing to death on the plains. He had the warmest robe afforded by
nature. In that temperature it would have been impossible to
skin a cold animal, but he slit the buffalo’s belly and warmed
his hands in the vitals. He was an expert skinner and soon had
the hide laid out on the ground, hair side up. His horse stood
humped to one side. He staked him to the buffalo bull’s
horns. He and that horse seemed to be the only living creatures
in an Arctic blizzard over a blind world of blotted-out
plains.

He lay down on the hide and, rolling over and over, wrapped
himself in it. Who can describe the sensation of warmth driving
out cold that makes a man’s back ache, numbs his feet and
hands and stings his nose and ears raw? Rotman gradually grew
warm. He thought of his horse with a pang. He wondered
about his two comrades. He drifted into a drowsiness comfort-
ing like raw eggs in hot sweetened milk spiked with whisky to a
cold man just come to fireplace warmth, like the feel on a
frosty morning to a boy’s bare feet standing where a cow has
lain warming the earth all night.

When John Rotman awoke he felt, rather than saw, that it
was daylight. He had been aroused by sounds he could not at
first identify. He started to raise up but could not budge. Then
he heard gnawing mixed with wolf snarls. Attempting to un-
wind himself from the buffalo hide, he comprehended that it
was frozen as stiff as boards. No mummy swathed in the tombs
of Egypt could be more effectively bound from head to foot.
He had enclosed his head well, leaving only a small opening


Frozen Inside a Buffalo Hide 113


for air. He attempted to yell, but his muffled voice must have
sounded very dimly to the wolves. Soon their gnawing and
snarling were louder than ever. He guessed they were chewing
on the fresh buffalo hide. In the hasty skinning some slabs of
meat had been left on it.

It might be debated whether lobos would attack a man in
motion, but a hungry pack coming to human flesh wrapped
around by buffalo hide would hardly hesitate. Rotman made
all sorts of efforts to scare the beasts away. They kept on gnaw-
ing and clawing. No doubt they had already eaten the buffalo
carcass. Cold will make wolves, just as it will make man and
other animals, savagely hungry. Finally, losing some of his
own skin in the effort — for even the hairy side of the buffalo
hide now had iron-hard wrinkles — Rotman worked his right
hand up to the air opening in front of his forehead. His hand
was utterly futile at increasing the size of the opening. His
knife was at his belt, but he could not get to it.

Now the wolves were tugging their bundle this way and that.
After a while Rotman’s cramped hand felt itself full of hairs.
Involuntarily it clenched shut. There was a jerk, and Rotman
deduced that he had a strong hold on the tail of a lobo. The
lobo, in twisting around, fighting for a place among other lobos,
had somehow put its tail into the opening. The jerk made Rot-
man and the lobo both stronger. Instantly Rotman felt himself
moving and soon he was moving fast, his hand holding
tight.

Primitive people make fire by friction. Friction that will
ignite wood will thaw ice. Within a short time Rotman was
conscious of a loosening of his bindings. Presently he was
jerked out of the unrolling buffalo skin. He turned the tail
loose. The lobo never looked back. Taking a survey of the
world around him, Rotman saw that it was covered with white,


114 Tales of Old-Time Texas


that snow had ceased to fall, that the wind was laid, and that
he had been dragged down a slope into one of those depres-
sions common to the plains country.

As he walked up the drag-trail, he saw his horse, standing
still. Too still, he thought. The horse, in fact, was stone dead,
frozen upright in his tracks. No doubt the lobos would have de-
voured the horse had they not been diverted by the-buffalo hide
episode. Picking up his rifle, Rotman started toward camp.
About noon he was sighted by his two partners. They had made
it to camp the night before and left at daylight to hunt him.


There are stories of various men being bound up in a frozen
buffalo hide, but this is the one I like best. It seems much more
reasonable and credible to me than some of the others.


The Cold-Nosed Hounds


M* Jot Batrarp can talk without whittling. I’ve heard him.
But he won’t settle down to bringing characters of the past
to life and telling stories without a piece of red cedar in one
hand and a pocketknife in the other. He keeps one whetstone
at home and another in the back office of the bank at Beeville,
where he has as much time as on his own front gallery. At both
places he specializes in whittling miniature cowboy boots. He’s
wiry and satiric, composed and kindly, soaked in folk wisdom
and sayings, and sophisticated to the degree that all first-rate
intellects are sophisticated. He can believe one thing with his
mind and the opposite with his imagination. He remembers
what his grandmother Hallett, who belonged to the Republic
of Texas, remembered and whatever else he has heard and
lived interesting to him, during his eighty-odd years.

He never was “‘a fool about a dog,” but has had plenty of ex-
periences with them and with dog men, ranging from his father
to modern coyote hunters in automobiles.

His father, Pal Ballard — Pal being short for Palestine — had
sixty long-eared hounds to run deer out of the Devil’s Pocket on
the Navidad River, out of Tiger’s Bend and other bottom
thickets. When the first settlers came to that part of Texas, deer
ran like antelopes on Goldenrod Prairie, between the Navidad


116 Tales of Old-Time Texas


and Lavaca rivers, but after they had been hunted a while they
took to the thickets. Pal Ballard was sheriff of Lavaca County
and the finest piece of furniture in his house was a gun case. He
had a hunting horn that he could make sound for miles. He
kept only twenty hounds around his home at Hallettsville, and
these he fed mostly on cornbread. The other forty hounds he
left in good hands over the country. He had many friends, and
sometimes on an organized deer hunt he would place twenty-
five or thirty of them at different stands.


Jim Ballard considers Jeff Porter’s pair of cold-nosed hounds
as probably the most remarkable dogs that ever ran in southern
Texas. Jeff Porter imported them to his ranch on the San
Antonio River years ago. A cold-nosed dog is a dog that can
follow a cold trail. These two that Jeff Porter brought in and
trained got so that hardly any trail was too old and cold for
them to follow. They would snuff the cobwebs out of some
coon’s trail, warm it up with their breath and follow it. Jeff
Porter was mighty proud of them, understood their voices as if
they were talking to him in Mexican or English, and had ab-
solute confidence in their abilities.

Late one fall he invited his friend Jim Borroum to. come over
for a coon hunt. The dew had fallen, and maybe it was ten
o'clock that night when the two ranchers stopped and made a
fire. Bowie and Bonham — those were the names of the two
cold-nosed hounds — didn’t seem very anxious to hunt. They
had not scented a thing so far. Now, for a brief time they tar-
ried with the men. Directly Bowie sat on his haunches and let
out one of those long, long lonesome howls that seem to go up
to the remotest nebulae of the Milky Way and back through
the ages to the night when sorrow became a companion of


The Cold-Nosed Hounds 117


man. Bowie howled and Bonham howled after him, and their
howls awakened memories in Jeff Porter and Jim Borroum that
actually brought tears. If you have never heard that longest and
lonesomest of all |-o-n-g, |-o-n-e-s-o-m-e hound-howls, you
cannot conceive its effects. This night the howls of Jeff Porter’s
cold-nosed hounds made the leaves on a knockaway tree close
to them flutter and fall; actually they nearly covered Bowie
up.

Then the dogs set out to hunt. After they took off, Jeff Por-
ter boiled a can of coffee. He and Jim Borroum smoked, lis-
tened to geese honking southward, talked about the way wild
turkeys hold a strutting party, and felt better.

Then a sound that comes to a hunter like the break of dawn
of the Promised Day galloped over the air.

“Listen,” Jeff Porter said, raising his hand. “That’s Bowie,
and he’s struck a trail sure as shooting. . . . He’s working it.
. . . Listen, now he’s on the royal highway and headed fer the
throne. Amazing grace! Jest listen!”

It did sound as if Bowie were going home. And then, away
over to the right, the other hound opened up.

“That’s Bonham, and he’s hit another trail,” Jeff Porter an-
nounced. “It’s cold, but wait and he'll warm it up. . . . Lis-
ten. . . . Listen. Now that coon ain’t got no more chance of
hiding himself than the North Star has on a clear night.”

For an hour or so the hunters listened to the bayings of the
hounds coming over the almost frosty air. “By ganny, the trails
are going to cross,” Jeff Porter said. “By ganny, they have
crossed. Now Bonham’s on the right of Bowie.”

The men put some more dry mesquite limbs on the fire and
waited, always listening. “Derned if the trails ain’t coming back
together,” Jeff Porter said. “Yes, sir, they’re nearly side by side
now and still going. Let’s ride.”


118 Tales of Old-Time Texas


They rode, not too fast to prevent their continuing to enjoy
the hound music. After a long gallop Jeff Porter pulled up. “By
ganny,” he said, “they’re barking “Treed.’ ”

“Sounds that way,” Jim Borroum agreed.

“Yes, sir, treed, and two coons from two different directions
climbing into the same tree at the same time. That is peculiar.”

A full moon was overhead and the Morning Star was about
to dim when the hunters came up to the dogs, now only inter-
mittently barking. They were under a dead live-oak tree, dead so
long that its bark had fallen away, leaving the trunk and a few
stubby limbs bleached and bare. It stood apart, in clear ground,
not far from a motte of timber.

“Now listen, Jeff,” Jim Borroum said, “you don’t mean to
tell me that those fine dogs you been talking about are barking
up that old dead tree. Why, who in the nation ever heard of a
coon going up a dead tree?”

“Yes, a coon wants cover and I’ve never seen one take to any-
thing but a tree with leaves and moss on it,” Jeff Porter ad-
mitted. “But when Bowie and Bonham tell me something,
I know it’s true, and all your laws about coons can just be
blowed.”

About this time Bowie reached his forepaws up on the trunk
of the dead oak and gave a few scratches. Then Bonham did the
same thing.

“Coons in that tree, shore,” Jeff Porter yelled.

“Jest as well talk about razorback hogs smelling honeysuckle
when they could be picking up acorns,” Jim Borroum answered.
“Look. You can see for yourself all the coons there are in this
tree.”

By now Porter was off his horse. “Help me pull off my
boots,” he said. “I’m going to skin up and show you some-
thing.”


The Cold-Nosed Hounds 119


He climbed to a fork. ““Here’s the hollow they went into,” he
yelled.

He lit a match and held it in the opening. “Pitch me up
some old dry moss,” he called. After he got it and made a good
light, he reported. “Hollow ain’t deep at all. I can reach to the
bottom of it. Look out, the coons are coming down.”

He hauled out the bleached skeletons of two grown coons and
dropped them at the feet of his friend. After he had descended
and put his boots back on, he said, “I’ll still admit that coons
won't take up a dead tree, but this tree was not dead and them
coons weren’t dead neither when they clumb it. I told you
Bowie and Bonham were the best cold-nosed hounds that ever
worked a cold trail.”


They were smart dogs in other ways. When one got too full
of fleas he would take a wad of Spanish moss in his mouth,
jump into the San Antonio River and swim against the current,
gradually sinking lower and lower into the water until nothing
but the tip of his nose and the moss remained above it. The
fleas would retreat from the water and when most of them had
taken refuge in the moss, the dog would let it go.


Bowie and Bonham probably had just a little the edge on
Lindy, as trailers; but that dog’s reasoning powers some-
times seemed beyond this world. Lindy was a Walker hound,
straight from Mr. Walker’s kennels in Tennessee. Jim Lauder-
milk brought him to Beeville back in the days before govern-
ment trappers caught out most of the coyotes, ruined hunting,
increased jack rabbits and rats and did nobody any good except
themselves. Laudermilk used to take Lindy out alone and chase
down many a coyote. He wouldn’t let Lindy work with other


120 Tales of Old-Time Texas


dogs. He said that in the first place Lindy would not work
with them, he’d simply work ahead of them, in the second
place, his superiority would make the owners of the other dogs
feel bad.

About the time Lindy reached the zenith of his fame, a cer-
tain coyote in Bee County reached his. His reputation spread
far beyond his range, though that was pretty wide. He was
known as the “Graveyard Wolf,” from his habit of always pass-
ing, before the chase was over, near the old graveyard east of
Beeville. His home seemed to be along Medio Creek, but no
matter where dogs started him up, he would work around to
the graveyard before the night was over. All the dogs in the
country had chased the Graveyard Wolf, and always he got
away. Packs were brought in from other places; the Graveyard
Wolf made fools of them all.

Finally, Jim Laudermilk agreed to let Lindy run this coyote,
provided no other dog was turned loose in the field. No hound
had to have a keen sense of smell to pick up the trail of the
Graveyard Wolf; he was so sure of himself that he never both-
ered to conceal his tracks.

Out close to the Medio, Lindy struck his plain trail. Jim
Laudermilk had permitted several hound men to come along to
watch Lindy work. After they heard Lindy open up, they went
back close to the graveyard to await developments. It wasn’t an
hour before they heard Lindy coming. Then he did a remark-
able thing. When he got up close to the ground from which the
wolf habitually made his getaway, he stopped, howled a lone
howl or two, and started back the way he had come.

Jim Laudermilk at first seemed sort of embarrassed. Then he
caught on to the hound’s sagacity. “Just be patient,” he said.
“Just give Lindy time.”

The other hunters, tired of what appeared to them nothing


The Cold-Nosed Hounds 121


but nonsense on the part of both dog and man, were going in
when Laudermilk explained.

Lindy had realized that he was not cunning enough to catch
up with the Graveyard Wolf. Now he was backtracking to catch
him as a pup coming up. And—he actually caught the pup,
though it took him thirty-six hours to do it.


Honey in the Rock


“See yonder!” said Tom Owen, stretching out his long arm.
“There's a bee.”

We looked in the direction he pointed, but that was the extent of
our observation.

“Tt was a fine bee,” continued Tom Owen, “black body, yellow
legs, and went into that tree,” pointing to a distant oak. “In a clear
day I can see a bee over a mile, easy.”


nus T. B. Thorpe, in The Hive of the Bee-Hunter, pub-

lished in 1854, proceeds to delineate a type common on the
frontiers. On his way to the Alamo, David Crockett fell in with
an unnamed bee hunter bound for the same destiny — and the
Bee Hunter of the Alamo has his place in history.

Andrew Sowell, living at Seguin on the Guadalupe River, was
so noted as a bee hunter that settlers said if you put him in a
barrel and rolled it through the woods he would locate a bee
tree by an occasional glimpse through the bunghole. In one day
he located twenty-seven bee trees and chopped an x, the dis-
coverer’s sign of pre-emption, on each. Men with eyesight less
keen than his used to chop down trees he had marked and rob
the honey. He turned the tables on them by marking big trees
without a hollow, and then later finding those trees cut down.

Once while he was running a bear he saw bees going into the


Honey in the Rock 123


hollow of a bent-over limb he was dodging. He killed the bear,
dressed it, and then brought the carcass back to the tree and
took out the honey. Another time, while he was on his stomach
drinking from the Guadalupe, he noticed shadows of bees in
the water. He looked up and saw bees going in and out of a
knothole in an overhanging cypress.

Bees do not usually enter a hollow tree through a hole big
enough to admit a bear, or even a possum. They seek a hollow |
protected from weather and varmints. The opening into it is
often no bigger than a two-bit piece. One woodsman told me that
for three years he watched bees working in a big tree in his
own yard before he discovered their hole. Still, a good eye
searching the trunk and limbs of a tree can usually detect the
hole by movement of the bees and by discoloration of the wood
or bark around it.

If the professional couldn’t see a bee “over a mile off,” he
knew how to course one to its tree. After a bee has gathered a
load of honey, she flies directly in a straight line—a “bee line”
—to her colony’s comb, in order to deposit the honey. The bee
hunter would select a clear space and put out a dab of honey in
a saucer or pan; the bait would soon attract any bees in the
neighborhood. As soon as one had a load of honey, she would
line for home. The direction of the tree, but not the distance,
could thus be determined. Moving his bait some distance, to
one side or the other, the hunter would course other bees. The
intersection of the two bee lines would mark the deposit of
honey. Of course, it might take numerous trials to locate a
tree two or three miles away in a forest. The hunter, instead of
coursing by triangulation, might walk forward with his saucer,
often stopping, until he came to the tree. But bees from more
than one swarm were likely to come to the bait, especially if he
moved it; so sometimes he would sprinkle a few baited bees


124 Tales of Old-Time Texas


with sulphur, so as to recognize these when they came back for
more honey and thus avoid being deflected by bees from other
colonies.

During the days of the Texas Republic, the ford across On-
ion Creek on the road between Austin and San Antonio was
known as “Sasser Crossing” — from the fact that a bee hunter
had placed his saucer of bait on a stump at that place. In those
times a “bee gum” was still a hollow tree — gum tree, or some
other kind — and not a manufactured hive.

The professional bee hunter traded off his honey as he did
pelts and game taken on the side. Almost every settler robbed
bee trees now and then. Bands of frontiersmen, strong enough
to resist an Indian attack, would sometimes go out in the fall to
haul in wagon loads of honey, along with game meat. One such
band in Iowa in 1839 found sixteen hollow white oaks in one
vicinity from which they strained eight barrels of honey and
tried out a great quantity of beeswax. Captain Flack, who wrote
two books about wildlife in Texas and the South, gave “Bee
Hunting” a place amid chapters on the hunting of buffaloes,
wild turkeys, and other game.

The bee hunter flourished at a time when a traveler in Texas
often sat down to a meal “composed of dried venison sopped
in honey.” Out on long scouts, Texas rangers supplemented
their diet of game meat with honey kept in rawhide or deer-
skin sacks. Occasionally, Comanche Indians in friendly mood
would bring deerskins of honey on pack horses to trade to set-
tlers at Fredericksburg. “We kept our honey in a deerskin,”
wrote Captain Jesse Burnam, “for we had no jars, jugs, nor
cans. I would take the skin off a deer whole, except having to
cut around the neck and legs, and tie the holes up tight. Then
I would hang it up by the forelegs, and we had quite a nice can,
which we always kept pretty well filled.”


Honey in the Rock 125


Bread or no bread, the excellence of anything was summed
up in the current phrase, “As good as venison and honey.” No-
body ever appreciated this particular goodness more than Gid-
eon Lincecum, unflagging in his passion for liberty and knowl-
edge of nature, his genius flavored with a tang as sharp as the
juice of the mustang grape. Of his wanderings through the
Texas wilderness in 1835, he wrote: “I lived plentifully all the
while. Three or four times I found honey. Once I tried fish. I
did not relish them — had no bread nor salt. But every time I
found honey I would have a feast of the first order. I could kill
venison any time, and to broil the back-straps of a deer on the
coals, dip the point of the done meat into the honey, and then
seize it in your teeth and saw it off with your knife, is the best
and most pleasant way to eat it. I have often thought that there
could be no other preparation of food for man that is so suit-
able, so natural, so agreeable, and so exactly suited to his con-
stitutional requirements.”

In a land where money was so scarce that “many men of
property do not handle five dollars a year,” as one of his leading
settlers wrote Stephen F. Austin, people depended on honey
for sweetening just as they depended on corn for bread and
bear grease for lard. Soon after arriving in Texas, January, 1836,
David Crockett wrote a letter to his children back in Tennessee
describing the league of land on which he expected to settle.
It had, he said, “bees and honey a plenty.”


The ways of the American bee hunter, along with much
pleasant bee lore from many lands, have been put into two es-
says by John Burroughs, but tales of honey mines — sometimes
lost, and always as rich in sweets as lost mines are in gold —
seem to belong peculiarly to the limestone-cave country of the


126 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Edwards Plateau in Texas, where Bee Cave, Bee Creek, and
Bee Hollow are repeated place names.

H. B. Parks, for years director of the State Apicultural Labo-
ratory near San Antonio, sucks in knowledge and lore as
eagerly as a bee sucks honey. Most of the tales that follow are
his.

The best place to hear them used to be some bee yard in the
chaparral, after the day’s work was over and the extracting crew
were lounging in camp. Then some fellow would tell how a land
surveyor, while running a line out of the Frio Canyon back in
the eighties, saw something like a funnel of smoke hanging over
a cliff, discovered that the smoke was bees going in and out of
a cave, and entered the cave to behold vast chambers filled
with honey in pure white comb. Another would tell how a well
driller somewhere on the Edwards Plateau struck a layer of
honey and wax and bored thirty feet through it before hitting
rock.

One of the famous lodes has long been Bee Mountain, on
the Bosque River. A man named Hornbeak, who was born in
1852, in a log cabin only three miles from the “mountain,” said
that during his childhood Indians came after every wet spring
to get honey from the caves and crevices in the bluff. The open-
ings were about seventy feet up; the Indians would splice poles
into ladders and then one of light weight would mount and
send down the honey by means of a rawhide rope and a grass
bucket. When Hornbeak was ten years old, a band of the In-
dians, after having secured all the honey they wanted, killed sev-
eral settlers. That was their last trip into that section of the
country. . . . The Hornbeaks moved away. Distance and time
naturally made the honey increase in Hornbeak’s recollections.
When H. B. Parks heard Hornbeak expand on the subject, he


resolved to investigate. He counted some three hundred colo-


Honey in the Rock 127


nies of bees attached to the overhanging rocks. None, however,
appeared to be prosperous.

Being beyond investigation is a great conducer to anything's
enlargement. There is a tradition that in early days a cave in a
bluff fronting the San Antonio River, within what is now a
crowded part of the city, was unbelievably rich in honey. Ameri-
cans who came not long after the Texas Revolution tried to get
to this honey, but were unsuccessful. The earth over the cave was
covered with trees and brush. Finally a man bought the land
and cleared it off for building. Then something remarkable
happened.

The removal of the brush allowed the sun to beat down with
full summer force on the white chalk of the cave. The heat
naturally melted both honey and comb, and a stream of the
molten mixture began running down into the river. There the
honey dissolved into the water, and was carried away; but the
wax solidified. There was so much of it and it flowed down so
rapidly that, before anybody discovered what was happening, it
dammed the water back and forced the river to cut a new chan-
nel. Then somebody took possession of the dam, cut it out,
and sold the wax to a candlemaker in Mexico. The river went
back into its old channel, but the great honey mine was ruined
forever.

That wasn’t the only place where honey literally flowed. “As
a sixteen-year-old boy back in 1882,” a Texan wrote me, “I was
sitting on a baggage truck at the railroad station in Weather-
ford one day while a section foreman entertained several of us
with his reminiscences. He was helping build the Texas and
Pacific Railroad west, he said, when construction reached the
Brazos River. They built the bridge and then began working up
a gorge, laying the track as they went. While blasting out the
rocks in this gorge, they uncovered a bee cave that looked to


128 Tales of Old-Time Texas


have been used a thousand years. It was summer time, and the
great mutilated mass of exposed honey began melting and run-
ning down to the river. It flowed like lava between the rails and
over them. Before the work train coming up from the river
could get over the rails, they had to be sanded.

About the time of the Civil War and for years afterwards, as
tradition has come down, a person standing on one of the hills
near Round Rock and looking toward the southwest could, dur-
ing certain times in the spring and fall, see something like a
column of smoke standing out against the sky. It appeared to
issue from wooded hills along the Colorado River. The column
varied with the wind. It seems not to have been investigated un-
til Gustaf Wilhelm Belfrage, who from his hut in Bosque County
sent specimens. of insects to the chief museums of the world,
came into the vicinity of Round Rock on a collecting expedi-
tion. Gigantic in frame, gargantuan in thirst for corn whisky, as
isolated in his scientific pursuits as Robinson Crusoe on his is-
land, Belfrage was always inquiring.

When people told him about the strange smokelike column,
he ‘explained that blackbirds, gnats, bats, bees, all sometimes
move in such numbers that at a distance they look like streams
of smoke. There was certainly nothing supernatural about the
sight, he said. At his urging, a beekeeper set out to investigate.

After coursing and hunting all day, for the smoke effect was
not constant, this man found millions of bees coming and go-
ing from a sinkhole on the crest of a limestone ridge. He re-
ported that the orifice was small and that the bees had worn the
edges of it slick all around. He thought, however, that with
help he could get through the hole and explore the honey cham-
ber below.

The next day he and several other men returned. Provided
with a veil, smoker, and lantern, he tied a rope under his arms


Honey in the Rock 129


and was let down. But he had not descended far before the in-
finitude of bees going in and coming out began to smother
him. He jerked the rope and was pulled out.

After this experience, Round Rock became bee-cave mad.
Expeditions scoured the ground for a long distance all around
the sinkhole on the ridge. Some of the searchers found an open-
ing in a ravine that might connect with the honey chamber.
Here they built a fire of cedar brush. In time they saw a wreath
of smoke coming with bees out of the main opening. For two
days the fire was kept burning, and bees continued to pour out
with the smoke. Unable to re-enter, they hung in huge clusters
from trees and rocks about the ledge.


130 Tales of Old-Time Texas


On the morning of the third day came a change. Bees no
longer issued forth. The smoke no longer smelled like burning
cedar, but like burning sugar. Its color changed from gray to
bluish. Then the sinkhole turned into a belching furnace. The
wax and honey had ignited. For four days and nights the fire
raged. The heat calcined the whole hill. The edges of the open-
ing fell in until it was many yards across. Today the place,
which is still pointed out, resembles a long-deserted lime
kiln.


But not all honey deposits have been destroyed. An old-time
hunter said that one time while he and another man were go-
ing up the Blanco River they noticed a vast number of bees
flying in and out of a hole high up the canyon wall. He man-
aged to climb up to this opening, but there the bees covered
him by the thousands. He wore clothes and gloves made of
buckskin and so his hands and body were protected. He man-
aged to avoid the bees long enough to glimpse a solid wall of
white honey — not dark like that found in trees — back in the
cave.

He returned to his fellow hunter. They arranged their cloth-
ing so that they would be better protected, and prepared cedar
torches with which to smoke the bees. Considering the number
of bees and the size of the cave, the smoke was remarkably ef-
fective. They were approaching the beautiful wall of honey
when they heard a warning note, one that no man who has ever
heard it disregards. They halted and looked cautiously ahead.
The floor of the cave was a wriggling, twisting mass of rattle-
snakes. The honey prospectors got out.

There was another rattlesnake-guarded cave in the same
county. A Yankee who came to San Marcos in 1885, after hear-
ing about the deposits of honey and wax, went to Austin and


Honey in the Rock 131


formed a company. He sent back East for a patented smoke
gun. With it, and with lanterns, ropes, and other paraphernalia,
the company reached the opening of the cave.

It proved too small to enter. They sent to San Marcos for
sledge hammers and crowbars and then assaulted the rock. The
vibrations immediately set astir all the rattlesnakes denned up
in the bluff. They began to craw] out from every crevice. There
were so many and they came from such unexpected places in
such a stealthy way that the honey miners retreated, never to
return.

The story lived on, and about ten years after World War I
ended, a chemical division from Fort Sam Houston, at San An-
tonio, made an expedition to this cave to try out the effect of
poison gas on rattlesnakes. After having gassed the cave for
twelve hours and allowed time for the air to purify, the gas
warriors entered. They found one stupefied rattlesnake and no
honey at all.


A beautiful Negro spiritual has as its burden, “You'll find
honey in the rock.” The imagery goes back to Biblical hopes and
promises sweeter than honey and the honeycomb. Some con-
noisseurs consider no other honey so tasty or so beautiful in hue
as that made from huajillo. Huajillo is an acacia bush growing
on ranch land south and west of San Antonio. Its profuse flow-
ers, creamy-soft to the eyes, are wonderfully fragrant. Its leaves
afford the best of browses. Beekeepers from the north truck
thousands of hives to the huajillo for an early spring gathering
of honey, and then take them back to clover fields.

Back in the days while General John R. Baylor was making
the Uvalde country an unsafe place for cow thieves, at the same
time keeping a lookout for the lost Spanish mine in the Nue-


132 Tales of Old-Time Texas


ces Canyon, bears were plentiful. One day an old bear hunter
told him that if he would go to a certain bluff during spring-
time while the huajillo was in bloom, he could hear bee wings
roaring like a canyon flood, or like the sound made by a thou-
sand sandhill cranes startled from the prairie. The cave that
these roaring millions of bees carried huajillo honey into was,
the old bear hunter said, exceedingly inaccessible; but he be-
lieved the honey could be reached somehow.

General Baylor wasn’t much interested in anything as tame as
honey. In 1894, a land surveyor to whom he had passed the
bear hunter’s account heard, while looking for a bench mark of
a Spanish grant, the roar of bee wings and then saw the cloud
of bees going into and out of the cave. He could not get to the
entrance without ropes and a helper, but discovered a second
entrance.

He was so eager that he set his own coat on fire to make a
protective smoke while he explored with a torch. What he saw
was worth a store full of coats, so he reported. Room after
room was almost filled with long white curtains of the purest
brush-blossom honey, some of them fifty feet high from top to
bottom. Although not a bee-man, he estimated that there were
at least two thousand barrels of comb honey.

That night in camp, while he was telling plans for getting the
honey and selling it, the surveyor became so ill that one of
his chain carriers went to Uvalde for a doctor. The doctor
saw that the surveyor was beyond help and told him so. Before
breathing his last he made, with the aid of the doctor, a chart
showing the location of the honey mine. At one time this
map was offered for sale in San Antonio for five hundred dol-
lars.

Whether Jim Jones ever saw the map is hardly material. He
did sce the bees; he heard the roaring of their wings in huajillo-


Honey in the Rock 133


blossom time, and he located the entrance they streamed
through. He was used to rough country; he had an ingenious
mind. He took in a partner who had some money and knew
how to extract honey. They bought a pair of blacksmith bellows
and rigged it up with two hundred feet of hose to blow sulphur
fumes into the cave. They mounted this contraption on one
mesquite “lizard,” a sled made out of a forked limb, and a
honey extractor on another. Next, they bought a string of pack
burros and were ready about the time the spring crop of honey
had been gathered. The day before they were to start, they
robbed six hives of domesticated bees, leaving the empty comb
in the frames and imprisoning the bees.

Then Jim Jones led the caravan forth, followed by three bur-
ros, each with two beehives on his back, one on either side.
Behind these burros came a dozen others loaded with empty five-
gallon cans. Behind the can carriers another burro pulled the
smoke-making machine; behind that came the extractor. Then
came a pair of burros loaded with provisions. Jim Jones’s part-
ner was at the rear of the column; three hired Mexicans hissed
and punched the burros along.

They made camp near the base of the cliff into which the
bee cave opened. After firing up the smoke machine next morn-
ing, Jim Jones got himself and one end of the hose hoisted by
ropes to the orifice of the cave. All day the bellows pumped
sulphur fumes into the cave. By sundown it appeared that all
the bees had been killed. At sunrise the six colonies of domes-
ticated bees were released. In no time they began filling their
hives with undefended honey from the cave. The way they
worked was a sin to Mussett. Bees will steal from each other if
they can. There were no bees left in the cave to fight off the
newcomers. They did not quit carrying honey till dusk.

Jim Jones and his partner now opened the hives and extracted


134 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the honey, leaving the comb in the frames so that the bees
could fill them again the next day. Three hundred pounds of
extracted honey — pure huajillo honey — was the net amount of
one day’s work. By means of scaffolding and ladders men might
have gotten directly to the wild honey, but it was a fixed policy
with Jim Jones not to work his back when his brain might ac-
complish the results. He sent for more hives of bees.

The bees worked so hard taking free honey that a colony
would not last over two weeks. Jim Jones and his partner had a
stream of burros packing honey to Uvalde and bringing empty
cans and fresh bees out. Their plan worked so well that they
decided to leave the old comb in the cave for wild bees to fill
again with honey the next spring. That winter, however, the
bottom dropped out of the honey market, and Jim Jones drifted
on west.

He followed the Southern Pacific Railroad to the Pecos River
before he saw anything of interest. Bees often deposit honey in
the protecting timbers of railroad bridges. A bucket set on the
ground directly under a comb may catch a good deal of honey
jarred loose by passing freight trains on a hot summer day. Jim
Jones set buckets under the Pecos bridge, the highest and one
of the longest in the West, and caught lots of honey.

He discovered some richly stored combs about a hundred feet
beneath the sleepers — too remote from the rails and sleepers for
the honey to be jarred out, but still over a hundred feet from
the ground. He rigged up a rope ladder for letting himself down
from the top of the bridge to this honey. He owned a perpetu-
ally hungry hound that had learned to be as fond of honey as a
bear. He tied his rope to the top of the bridge at a time when
he would not be disturbed by a passing train, and, leaving the
hungry hound whining at the rope knot, let himself down to
the honey. The weather was exceedingly hot and at the least


Honey in the Rock 135


displacement the honey flowed. It went to dripping, but instead
of dripping down, it dripped up. This can be understood only
by remembering that the rope went up from the honey instead
of down.

As fast as the honey dripped up the rope to the knot, the
hound lapped it. In his eagerness for more, he chewed the rope
in two. Jim Jones dropped more than a hundred feet to the
rocky floor of the Pecos Canyon. Like the Chinaman that Roy
Bean once held an inquest over at this place, Jim Jones lay
dead. A Greek poem some three thousand years old tells how
the dog of a honey hunter caused the death of his master in
almost exactly the same way.


1 as ee
F , alice tel jttre! WL beta Gio ses 108
dnc 1) Gasp i ish ' aie
eit en aE ze basil = a


0


af oT ine aged ie
eel wile

ale Ve walt y _
ai bbl case ah
nay att F dg
Dad ak “a sily i 2


eae vines >


Part Three


The Texas Bluebonnet


cause the flower has a white tip, Mexicans call it conejo —
B “cottontail rabbit.” Some old-timers called it “wolf-flower,”
the belief being that the plant was predatory, like a wolf, taking
nourishment from the soil. This erroneous belief gave the plant
its generic name, Lupinus (lupine, or wolf). The Texas blue-
bonnet sometimes thrives where other plants are sparse and
weak; but, instead of impoverishing the soil, it, through the
curious nodules on its roots called “nitrogen fixers,” actually
nourishes it.

Another name, common early in the present century, is “buf-
falo clover”— not that buffaloes ate it. Although not poisonous
like the loco weed — which also belongs to the pea family and
which ruins any horse or cow that eats it — the bluebonnet seems
to be palatable to only goats and sheep among domestic animals.
They have killed it out in many places.

Like seeds of other native plants, including grasses, those of
the bluebonnet may lie dormant for a long time. They come up
in the fall; through the winter the little plants grow only
slightly; then in the spring, if it rains, they burgeon. If the
ground has no moisture in the fall, not many seeds sprout; they
reserve themselves. If the following fall is seasonable, they will,
in a bluebonnet area, come up “as thick as blossoms in para-


140 Tales of Old-Time Texas


dise.” S. S. Bundy, an observant rancher in the hill country,
told me that when, about the time of World War I, he began
raising goats and sheep on his ranch — which had been stocked
mostly with cattle —bluebonnets were plentiful. Before long
they became scarce, and then disappeared entirely. For eight or
ten years he had not seen a flower on the ranch — until he
fenced off about sixty acres for a deer park. The spring after he
fenced sheep and goats out of this plot, several blucbonnet
plants bloomed there, and then propagated themselves. Some
seeds had probably come up each year, the plants always eaten
down before they could bloom. But over all those years a few
seeds had kept themselves in reserve.

The name bluebonnet goes back to the days when women folk
wore sunbonnets. Each single flower on a spike of many flowers
resembles that style of headdress. In rgor the bluebonnet was by
legislative action adopted as the state flower of Texas. The cotton
bloom was a close contender, and John Garner, later known as
Cactus Jack, a member of the legislature at that time, urged the
claim of the prickly pear.

A few years later Julian Onderdonk, of San Antonio, took the
breath of the sensitive with his painting of a bluebonnet field.
“Nature follows art.” Texans have become increasingly con-
scious of the beauty, the fragrance, and, when seen in mass,
the power of their bluebonnets. Seizing upon the flower’s pop-
ularity, every dauber in the country tries his hand at painting
it, and bluebonnet chromos are as plentiful as cowboy figures
on pulp magazine covers. Yet no amount of commercialism, no
fad running into insipidity, no betrayal in the name of art, can
detract from the essential loveliness of the flower springing on
the hills and in the valleys of Texas, yielding


A passion of blossom, a splendor of spread.


The Texas Bluebonnet 141


No other flower — for me at least — brings such upsurging of
the spirit and at the same time such restfulness.

Like the artists, poets without number have tried their hands
on the bluebonnet. Margaret Bell Houston’s “Song from the
Traffic” alone makes my heart go “gallivanting.”


(Manhattan — Manhattan —1 walk your streets today
But I see the Texas prairies bloom a thousand miles away!)

Primroses burn their yellow fires

Where grass and roadway meet.

Feathered and tasseled like a queen,

Is every old mesquite.
(It’s raining in the barren park, but on the prairie-side
The road is shining in the sun for him who cares to ride!)

The plum tree’s arms are burdened white,

And where the shrubs are few

Bluebonnets fold the windy ways —

Is any blue so blue?
(Clouds of them, crowds of them, shining through the grey,
Bluebonnets blossoming a thousand miles away!)

How could I live my life so far

From where March plains are green,

But that my gallivanung heart

Knows all the road between?
(Manhattan — Manhattan — when you jostled me today,
You jostled one a-galloping a thousand miles away!


Of the lupines there are scores of varieties over the Americas,
some large, some small, but none so winsome in its intense, yet
soft, color as the bluebonnet, and no other so “takes the
winds of March with beauty.” It alone, too, has the bluebonnet
fragrance, the evanescences of petal and leaf mingling into an
aroma that is at once delicate and as tonic as a heifer’s breath.
What else in the world can be like passing a field of bluebonnets
in a spring night and sensing them only by smell!


142 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Despite sentimentality, one legend about the bluebonnet is
worthy of survival. A great drouth was on the country. There
had been a spring of dust, a summer of parching heat, a fall
with no color in the leaves and grass turned to dust, and then a
winter of cold and starvation for man and beast. Now spring
was coming again and still the drouth persisted. Many and many
a buffalo would not shed his hair this spring; bones dotting the
raw prairie told why. The people had only roots left for food.
They had drifted, like the deer and the buffaloes, to the south-
ern coast-line, where the weather is usually mild; but even here
they found nothing but famine. The jack rabbits seemed to
have disappeared, and the coyotes were gaunt.

It was clear to the people that the Chief of All Spirits had
turned away his face. Day and night medicine men chanted
their incantations, danced to the beat of tom-toms, and strewed
dust upon their bended heads. Warriors with knives of flint and
bone cut their own flesh and sent up wild cries of supplication.
Women and children cowered in silence, as noiseless in their
movements as shadows. A great fear was upon all the people.
They had, they knew, done some deed that must be forgiven
before rain would bring back life.

At last the Chief of All Spirits heard them. He spoke his
message through the medicine men. The tribe must make a
burnt offering of their most valued possession, and the ashes of
this offering must be scattered to the four cardinal points of
the earth, to the north and the east, the south and the west.
Until such a sacrifice was made, drought and famine would
continue.

Darkness was upon the world when the people heard this
message. On the outer rim of the assemblage was a little girl.
She had said not a word. She said not a word now as the
crowd dissolved, but within herself she knew that she possessed


The Texas Bluebonnet 143


and held tightly clasped to her body the “most valued posses-
sion” among her people.

It was a doll. Fashioned of bleached buckskin, it simulated
the figure of a warrior. Eyes, nose, mouth, and ears were
painted on it with the juice of berries. Its leggings were beaded
with bits of polished bone and brilliantly colored seeds. It wore
a belt of wildcat teeth, strung on twisted hair from a buffalo
tail. Its war-bonnet was made from the blue feathers of the
crested bird that cries “Jay, jay, jay.” No mother could have
loved the child of her own flesh more fiercely than this little
Indian girl loved her blue-bonneted doll warrior. No price
within her knowledge would have tempted her to part with it.
Heavy indeed was her heart now as she realized that this most
precious thing of hers must be also the “most valued possession”
among her people.

The council fires went out. The families were gone to their
tepees, and the gleam of coals that came through the cracks
faded into darkness. The little girl lay near the flap of her
home tepee. She lay there wondering if other people were
awake, and she hugged closer her precious doll. Once when she
started to get up, she heard the footfall of a dog and felt the
sniff of his nose. She hugged the doll closer. The last lone wail
of a coyote beyond the edge of the encampment died away.
The cries of geese winging their way northward made the silence
more silent.

The listening doe lays back her ears not more noiselessly
than now this child of the camp turned her head and saw that a
stick of wood in the tepee fire kept its light under the ashes.
It was almost within arm’s reach. By their breathing she knew
that her father and mother and her brothers and sisters were
asleep.

Then, moving as softly, yet swiftly, as the killdeer runs on


144 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the sandy edge of a lake, she arose, took the chunk of fire and
passed out of the tepee. She stopped behind some bushes to
listen. All she heard was the twit of a redbird, disturbed but
for a moment. The stars shone, but there was no moon.

Then she prayed to the Chief of All Spirits that her offering
might be acceptable, and she asked for a sign of acceptance. As
she arose in resolution, the tears dried from her eyes. She
gathered twigs and kindled a little fire. Then she thrust the
prize of her life headfirst into the flame. The smell of scorching
feathers and buckskin was strong, but there was no wind and
she trusted the smell would not wake any person. She stood,
her eyes fixed on the burning sacrifice, until not a fragment of
the doll was left. Then she scooped up the ashes, and, in the
manner she had seen her father and other men offer the peace
pipe, she scattered the ashes to the north and the east, the
south and the west. She heaped some dirt on the big coal, the
only fire left, and then she lay down where she had scattered
the ashes.

She had brought her blanket with her. She had no thought
of sleep, but she wanted to be near all that was left of her
doll. She did fall asleep, but not for long. Awaking, she reached
her hands out on the ground to feel.

Against her palms she felt something as fine and soft as the
softest feathers in the bonnet of the warrior doll. Yet what she
felt was not feathers — or fine ashes. And in her nostrils was a
new fragrance. Then she found that the delicious-feeling and
delicious-smelling thing was rooted to the earth. She would not
tear it loose.

She saw the Guide Star far up the heavens in the east and
the Morning Star following it. A little later she saw one of the
medicine men step into the open, his hands lifted. It would
soon be day.


The Texas Bluebonnet 145


Lightly she ran into her own tepee. “Oh, Mother, come!”
she whispered. Without words, the mother arose. As hand in
hand they stepped out, they met the dawn. The little one led
her mother to the opening beyond the bushes where she had
scattered the ashes. She was afraid to look, yet a-tremble to see.

There where the ashes had been scattered was, as it were, a
little lake, in the early light almost a blue-black; then as the
dawn rushed on, a blue as intense as indigo; then a blue as soft
yet shining as ever flashed from the spring-fresh feathers of the
bold bird crying “Jay, jay, jay” in the trees. These blue flowers
were so rich and thick that they almost hid the ash-green leaves
of the plants.

The little girl told her mother about the sacrifice. The mother
told the father. The father told the men of the council. And all


146 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the people came to behold the miracle. There could be no
doubt that it was a sign.

That very day soft, warm rain soaked the ground. Trees and
bushes began to put out. The prairies greened and grew gay
with flowers. Birds sang and built their nests. Game animals
came back and fattened. While the men hunted, the women
planted corn and pumpkins, and everything that was planted
grew in a magical way.

Up until this time the little girl had no real name. Now she
was named One-Who-Dearly-Loves-Her-People. Every day,
often for many hours, she watched the blue flowers that had
come in exchange for the wonderful doll of the blue war-
bonnet. She saw the flowers develop into podded seeds and the
green of the stalks turn brown. In time she saw the dried seed
pods twist and, with a little crack, open and shoot their seeds
out.

The next spring the lake of blue was far wider. Winds, rain,
water and birds carried the seeds to places far beyond where the
pods could pop them. Year by year the range of the bluebonnet
extended, its blueness mixing with the red and pink of wild
phloxes and the orange and rose of Indian paintbrushes. In
time nature planted the seeds over hills and valleys, beyond
rivers and across canyons, away and away from the tepee of
One-Who-Dearly-Loves-Her-People. So today, at the time of
year when the mockingbird sings in the moonlight and the
mesquite, sure that winter is gone, has put out its lacy leaves, then
along laned roads and on pasture slopes the bluebonnet makes
the Texas landscape lovely.


The Headless Horseman of the Mustangs


ASS the middle of the last century, not long after the Mex-
ican War ended, a rider without any head was reported to
be ranging in the great mustang country along the Nueces
River in southwest Texas. Several borderers who saw him said
that he carried his head, under a Mexican sombrero, tied to the
horn of his saddle. Some added a “band of gold bullion” to the
sombrero. About his shoulders fluttered a brush-torn serape
over a buckskin jacket, and his legs were encased in rawhide
leggings, such as were then made and worn by most vaqueros,
the light-colored flesh side turned out. His horse was a heavy
black mustang stallion as wild as anything that ever raced over
prairie or plunged through chaparral thicket.

There was no particular time or place at which mustang and
rider were to be seen. In the bright sunshine of morning some
hunter might glimpse them climbing the rough breaks far up
the Nueces Canyon, and then in the dusk of evening a lone
rancher on the Leona forty miles away might see the bleached
buckskin and rawhide of the strange rider on the black stallion
tearing across prickly pear flats. Neither horse nor horseman
seemed ever to tire, and it was observed that the rider never
bent or turned in the saddle but sat as rigid as if he were made
of wood and had been spiked to the animal’s back.

The creature carrying the awful thing was shunned by all


148 Tales of Old-Time Texas


other mustangs. Sometimes he could be located by a stampede
of wild horses away from his presence. He never stayed long in
one locality, as horses usually range, but roved far and wide.
Indeed, he seemed a thing possessed. At sight of a man he
would tear away at a speed that even the unconquerable Pacing
White Stallion — fleetest of all mustangs that grazed on the
mesquite grasses of Texas — could not have exceeded.

Indians, ever superstitious and ever horse-hunting, saw the
mustang with the headless rider on his back and tried to keep
clear of his range. Mexican vaqueros and pastores (sheep or
goat herders) were just as scared. A glimpse that some of the
troops stationed at Fort Inge on the Leona River got of the
rider resulted in a much-expanded tale. According to tradition,
the adventurer and romancer Mayne Reid, who had certainly
been with the American army at Mexico City, was for a time
right after the Mexican War stationed at Fort Inge. He was an
eager listener to camp tales about mustangers, buffalo hunters,
scalp hunters, and other frontier types. In The Headless Horse-
man, A Strange Tale of Texas (London, 1886), a romance
immensely popular for a generation, he added to the legend that
he heard growing up.

“No one,” he wrote, “denied that the thing had been seen.
The only question was how to account for a spectacle so pecul-
iar as to give the lie to all known laws of creation. At least
half a dozen theories were started. . . . Some called it an ‘In-
dian dodge’; others, a ‘lay figure.’ Still others said that it was a
real rider so disguised as to have his head under the serape that
enshrouded his shoulders, with perhaps a pair of eye-holes
through which he could see to guide his horse. Not a few
swore that the headless horseman was Lucifer himself.”

Perhaps the “Jay figure” Mayne Reid had in mind is ex-
plained by the following. Patrick Burke, who was born in 1834


The Headless Horseman of the Mustangs 149


on the Texas coast about an hour after his mother landed with
other settlers from Ireland, became a noted rancher east of the
Nueces River. He said that in early days mustangers he ranged
with would, if they could, catch a strong stallion and tie a
scarecrow, a kind of imitation man, on him and then let him
loose. He would tear away, and after a while make for his own
manada —band of mares — trailing it like a bloodhound. As
soon as any mustangs saw the scarecrow, they would stampede.
Their frightened running would set other mustangs running.
Sometimes thousands would be running over the prairies at the
same time, all going in the same direction, band after band
joining together. Their hoofs pounding on the earth sounded
like the terrific roar of a cyclone. After the mustangs had run
themselves down, the mustangers could guide them into pens
with long wings that had been built to hold them.

One theory not mentioned by Mayne Reid was that the
phantom horseman of his tale was the patrén—the ghostly
guard — of the lost mine of the long-abandoned Candelaria Mis-
sion on the Nueces, to protect it against profane prospectors.

No one ever got very close to the black mustang, but a few
frontiersmen who took long shots at the headless rider declared
that their bullets passed through him as easily as through a
paper target. They were less superstitious than Indians, Mexicans,
or soldiers, but even some of them developed a feeling of awe.
Finally, a half-dozen or so united to capture the mustang and put
an end to the mystery.

They ambushed him at Bull Head watering on the Nueces
and shot him down. On his back they found a dried-up Mexi-
can carcass perforated with bullets. It was lashed to horse and
saddle so tightly that the rope had to be cut to unfasten it,
and a skull with a frayed sombrero bound around it was tied
to the horn of the saddle.


150 Tales of Old-Time Texas


But the mystery was only half solved. How had a vaquero’s
body come to be fastened on a mustang and his head lashed
to the saddle? In time Bigfoot Wallace and Creed Taylor an-
swered the questions, but a full explanation carries us back
years before the mystery began.


On the night of December 4, 1835, a little while before the
besieging Texans heard that deathless cry, “Who will go with
Old Ben Milam into San Antonio?” a deserter from the Mexi-
can stronghold slipped into their ranks. He was a lieutenant
named Vidal. He brought valuable information, and he con-
vinced the Texans of his friendship. One who noted the Mexi-
can’s lithe body, deft movements, and alert eye was Creed
Taylor.

After the battle of San Jacinto had temporarily settled the
fight between Mexico and Texas, and the fighters had turned
to occupations of peace, Vidal took up horse stealing. It was a
risky business, for at that time a man could get away with a
neighbor’s life better than with his horses. At first Vidal’s
reputation as a patriot cloaked his operations. By the time his
real character became known, he was commander in chief of
a chain of horse thieves operating on both sides of the Rio
Grande and sneaking stolen stock clear into Louisiana and
Mississippi. They were cunning enough to throw suspicion for
their own operations on the ever horse-raiding Comanches.

In the summer of 1850 Vidal and three picked confederates
gathered up a considerable bunch of horses on the San Antonio
River and headed southwest towards Mexico. The raid was well
timed, for most of the sparse settlers were away to the north
chasing a band of Comanches who had swooped down on the
Guadalupe settlements a few days before.


The Headless Horseman of the Mustangs 151


But not all were away. Contrary to custom, Creed Taylor
was not after the Indians — and some of his horses were among
those stolen. Creed Taylor was a Texian among Texians. He
had killed Mexicans with Bowie and Milam, fought the Indians
as a ranger under Jack Hays, and scouted for old Rough-and-
Ready in the Mexican War. He was yet to be a principal in
the lethal Taylor-Sutton feud. He was not the kind of man to
let any thief gallop off with his horses.

A Mexican rancher named Flores who chanced also to be at
home had likewise lost horses. Both he and Taylor suspected
Vidal as they struck out on the trail of the thieves. The farther
they trailed, the surer they were that they were following Vidal.
They found cattle carrying arrows that had been shot into them.
“Vidal's trick to make greenhorns smell Indians,” Taylor said,
and went on.

At the Frio the trailers met Bigfoot Wallace — always ready
to “up” any “copperbelly” who needed upping. With joy he
joined in the hunt.

At the Nueces, the trail of the horses veered up the river.
Two days later, close to dusk, about twelve miles from Fort
Inge on the Leona, the trailers, unseen, sighted the stolen
caballada and the camp of the thieves. The Mexicans, who
had been pushing ahead hard, now seemed to consider them-
selves secure from pursuers. The smoke from their campfire was
rising thick and high, only one man was on herd; no sentinel
was out scouting for sign. The Texans lay low and waited.

Night came on. There was no moon but the stars were bright.
When the Evening Star was well up, Creed Taylor crept for-
ward to reconnoiter. He avoided passing too near the stolen
horses and kept the wind on them. He was more afraid of
their giving the alarm than he was of the man on herd, who
occasionally moved around at a sleepy walk. The camp was on


152 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the edge of a mesquite and prickly pear thicket. Crawling up to
it, Creed Taylor made out three sleeping forms. One of them,
he was sure, was Vidal’s. Then he stole back to his waiting
confederates. Their work must be done before the man on herd
awakened his relief.

Each of the three Texans had a six-shooter and a rifle. They
made their plans. Flores was to give Creed Taylor and Bigfoot
Wallace ample time to crawl to the sleeping Mexicans. In
ambush, he was to wait until the horse thief on herd passed
near him, and then to shoot. The sound of his shot would be
the signal for the other two men.

They had reached the camp, each had picked his man, and,
cocked six-shooters in hand, they were awaiting the signal shot
when it rang out, followed by the yell of a struck man. In an in-
stant the sleeping Mexicans were on their feet. Two revolvers
flashed, and two horse thieves went back to sleep — forever. The
third broke for the thicket, but two bullets stopped him. As
it turned out, Flores’s man was only wounded and got away in
the brush, but he did not take any stolen horses with him.

At daylight the bodies of the dead men were inspected. There
was no question as to the identity of Vidal’s. He was a little
man. Bigfoot Wallace, always daring and eccentric, now made
one of his original proposals. In the recaptured caballada was a
black mustang stallion that had been herd-broken but that had
never felt a cinch under his belly. Bigfoot proposed that he be
roped, saddled, and mounted with Vidal’s body. Perhaps Big-
foot jested. He thought it a good joke, once, when in a brush
with Indians he picked out the biggest one for his own, saying
he “needed a pair of leggings,” and, after killing him, actually
pulled the leggings off and wore them. Perhaps Bigfoot wanted
to give warning to other horse thieves. At any rate, his proposal
was considered good.


154 Tales of Old-Time Texas


The black mustang was roped, tied up, blindfolded with a
red bandana, and saddled. Then the Texans cut off Vidal’s
head and, with chin-strap and thongs, fastened the horse thief’s
sombrero firmly to it. Next, making deft use of buckskin, they
laced the sombreroed head to the horn of the saddle. It was a
Mexican saddle, rawhide-rigged, with a wide, flat horn. They
dressed Vidal’s headless body in full regalia — leggings, spurs,
serape — and with more care than an arriero in the Sierra Madre
takes in packing a mule with silver bars, fixed it in the saddle.
They tied the dead man’s feet in the stirrups and double-fast-
ened the stirrups to each other under the mustang’s belly so
that they could not fly up.

During all these operations the black mustang was shivering
and snorting, for nothing terrifies a wild horse more than the
smell of foreign blood. Finally the blind was removed from the
stallion’s eyes and, without bridle or halter, he was set loose.
In after years Bigfoot used to declare that he had seen many
pitching horses, but that he had never seen any other animal
act like that black stallion with a dead Mexican on his back.
After he had pitched in every direction, snorted, squealed,
pawed the air, reared up and fallen backwards, rolled and then
stood quivering, the thing was still on his back. For maybe
five minutes he stood with feet spread out, sides heaving, nos-
trils dilating, his whole body quivering. Then, with a wild and
terrified squeal, he broke away into a run that, as we have seen,
scared up a legend not yet dead.

Creed Taylor, Bigfoot Wallace and Flores drove the captured
horses back to the ranches on the San Antonio River. They
agreed to keep still for a while.


A Ranch on the Nueces


MM’ an old ranch house by its very looks calls up human
destinies. Such is the Ray Ranch on the Nueces River
down in the brush country of southwest Texas. It was estab-
lished so long ago and the story has passed through so many
people on the way down that it must be considered subject to
the fallacies of memory. I heard it on a ranch gallery one night
while the only sounds besides the voice of Rocky Reagan
were the south wind in the trees, the hoot of an owl now and
then down in the river bottom, and the occasional howl of a
coyote out in the brush,

After the Civil War was over, Elijah Ray still had lands and a
big store in Alabama, though no money. He preached on the
side and ran the store in partnership with a man named Hess.
Hess had a bull-like build and a red face that marked him among
other men. He was capable and energetic, but about the time
business began to pick up, Elijah Ray discovered signs of dis-
honesty in him. When two Yankees showed up with cash, he de-
cided to sell out his interest in the store, along with a farm. The
family lived on a better one. Hess sold his interest also.

Elijah Ray had made a prospecting trip into Texas in the
late ’40s and had never ceased to talk about the land there.
This talk and fresh reports of the great cattle drives out of
Texas and the free grass on which herds were raised filled the


156 Tales of Old-Time Texas


two Ray sons, Wallace and Jim, with ambition to go to Texas.
They wanted a ranch of their own.

In 1868 Jim Ray was eighteen years old and Wallace was
twenty. One day their father said: “Since you boys are bound
to go to Texas, I want you to go prepared. I once thought I
would go, but now it’s getting late. Your mother and I have
talked matters over. We have enough to live on and to take
care of your sisters until they marry. We are going to give each
of you five thousand dollars for a stake.”

Banks at this time were very scarce and communications
with Texas were scarcer. Elijah Ray remembered how in that
sparsely populated land most business was transacted for cash.
Indeed, for a few years after Wallace and Jim reached it, cattle
buyers carried bags of gold and silver with them to “cow
works,” left the money lying in camp until a herd had been
“shaped up,” and then counted out the gold and silver on a
blanket to the sellers. It was decided that the two brothers had
better take their money in cash. Bank notes were at a discount
and in the South, where paper money had sunk to nothing,
were not wanted.

The father had a fine money belt made for each of the boys.
When filled with five thousand dollars in gold pieces it was
plenty heavy. It was worn under shirt and trousers, but any
observant eye could have detected it. Each of the boys bought
himself 2 six-shooter, a long rifie, and clothes of the best grade.
Their mother saw that each had a Bible in his bag. They
figured they could do better in Texas on saddles and other
horse equipment.

The preparations went on for a good while. Outside of the
family only Hess knew that they were taking five thousand
dollars apiece in money belts. Having a hand in the business
transactions, he had somehow found out. He knew also that


A Ranch on the Nueces 157


they were going to the mesquite grass country on the Nueces
River west of most settlements, where Elijah Ray had been in
a seasonable year — when there was no sign of drought. Five or
six weeks before they left, Hess of the bull build and red face
disappeared. Wallace and Jim went down the Mississippi on a
steamboat to New Orleans, and there caught a boat to Indianola
on the Texas coast—a one-time important port, long since
annihilated by a Gulf hurricane. They found Indianola boom-
ing with trade, freight wagons leaving every day for San Antonio
and other inland places. The stores offered everything a fron-
tiersman could want. The Ray brothers spent several days look-
ing around, getting the lay of the land and completing their
outfits.

They bought two extra good Spanish horses, well broken and
in good flesh: a coyote dun—a dun with a stripe down his
back — for Jim; and a grullo — slate-colored like a sandhill crane
—for Wallace. Each had a cowboy saddle, leather leggings,
boots, spurs, Saltillo blanket with a hole slit in the middle of
it so that it could be worn to turn water —slickers not yet
having arrived. It was late summer and these blankets, carried
rolled up behind the saddle, would serve as pallets. Instead of
burdening themselves with a pack horse, they rolled up extra
clothing in the blankets. They each carried cartridges and some
food, principally crackers, coffee, sugar, and bacon, with a small
coffeepot and tin cups, in a morral — the fiber bag of Mexican
make that swung from nearly every saddle horn in the country.
They traded off the long, heavy Alabama rifles for light saddle
guns carried in scabbards.

One night in a wagon yard at Indianola, Jim Ray overheard
talk that led him to believe Hess had been at this place and
had gone on west. This was surprising but neither Jim nor
Wallace attached significance to the news.


158 Tales of Old-Time Texas


The two set out with a wagon train bound for Beeville.
Traveling was slow, but the coastal prairies afforded plenty to
see. The earth was a carpet of grass, in many places belly-high
to a horse. It was dotted with deer, cattle, and wild horses;
prairie chickens and bobwhites flew out of it constantly along
the road. September, the month of rains, had come and the
grass was green and all the streams were running with clear
water. Until the route crossed an arm of post oak country, the
only brush and timber were along creeks.

At Beeville, the Rays bought a few extra provisions and cut
loose from the freighters to prospect alone. They could kill
meat any time they wanted it and expected to live largely upon
it. They went west by north. They knew there were few ranches
west of the Nueces. They expected to locate perfection — water
and grass —somewhere out in that vast vacancy. Ten thou-
sand dollars would buy two thousand heifers. Even if they did
not buy that many to raise calves, but kept some money for
improvements, more horses, and expenses, they could set up a
good-sized ranch. They expected to file on a section of land
each for headquarters, and build a house. The problem would
be to control their stock on a range that belonged to nobody
and so to everybody.

They crossed the Nueces at Puente Piedra, where a ferry was
installed years later, and camped under live oak trees. They saw
cattle, some not branded, but no people. They caught a few
glimpses of mustang cattle, which ran separately from the semi-
domesticated stock. Some were black, some yellowish, most of
them line-backed, the thick, sharp-pointed horns on the bulls
indicating the fighting strain of Spanish cattle from which they
were descended. They were literally wilder than the deer and
as unclaimed. Along the creeks and river wild turkeys were as
common as jack rabbits out on the prairies. Now and then a


A Ranch on the Nueces 159


band of startled mustang horses, always alert, ran against the
sky line.

The second day, the Rays rode upcountry from the Puente
Piedra without seeing a sign of a ranch. A big rain that had
fallen during the night blotted out all tracks. A little before
sundown, while they were nearing a heavy line of timber that
indicated a creek, eighteen riders dashed towards them at a
dead run, shooting and yelling. It would have been foolhardy
to try to stand them off, and the brothers headed for a brushy
draw to their left. Travel in heavy ground had jaded their
horses; now, as they made the best time they could, they
turned in their saddles and fired their six-shooters at the raiders.
Neither, so far as they could tell, made a hit. Jim caught a
glimpse of the red face of a hatless man with a red bandana
tied around his head. He had a different look from the other
riders, who were unmistakable Indians.

A short distance from the brush, Wallace went down under a
dead horse. Jim stopped to try to get him loose and saw that
he was dying. He seemed to have been shot through the lungs.
He was plainly past being saved. Jim remounted and, with
bullets hitting around him, made it to the brush. There his
horse stumbled in a soggy gopher hole and as Jim cleared his
back he decided that the best policy would be to run in the
direction opposite to that the recovered horse was headed. He
jumped into a hard-bottomed gully and ran down it to thick
covering, where he stopped. All he had now was his six-shooter,
and it had only one unfired cartridge. He realized how useless
at the moment all his gold was.

He could hear the Indians above him and in other directions
and knew they had caught his horse. Then dark came. Flying
clouds, played on by lightning, banked to the west. After all
was quiet, Jim half-crawled back to where his brother had fallen.


160 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Occasionally he could hear a voice from the creek timber,
where the Indians had evidently camped. Wallace’s body was
not mutilated, but some of his clothes had been removed —
and his money belt was gone. Comanches were not out after
money belts.

Daylight found Jim in tall grass partly protected by brush
whence he could view the camp. The Indians were bringing in
hobbled horses. He saw his coyote dun among them, and he
saw plainly what he had waited to see. The red-faced man with
a bandana tied around his forehead, blockier in build than the
other men, was unmistakably Hess. Until the end of his life
Jim Ray speculated on how Hess had got in with the Indians,
but figured it must have been through one of those chains of
horse thieves, some making use of Indians, that operated from
the Rio Grande clear across Texas into the old Southern States.

The Indians instead of riding up the creek now prepared to
cross it. It was up big swimming, indicating that heavy rains
had fallen to the west. The south bank was a bluff; the north
bank sloping. During the excitement of crossing the creek, Jim,
hiding behind trees and brush, got closer. Circumstances seemed
to be favoring the use of his one cartridge. Two or three of the
riders managed to leap their horses into the stream, but the
others had to blindfold theirs and back them off the bank. Some
men swam free, some holding the tails of their horses.

When the last man reached the sloping bank on the other
side, Jim steadied his six-shooter with both hands and aimed
at Hess. The bullet, apparently, did not even graze him. It was
part of Jim’s plan to show himself. He stood up and yelled,
and one of the bullets that replied flecked his left thigh, barely
bringing blood. The whole pack, leaving their horses on the far
side, plunged back to hunt down the man they had missed. The


162 Tales of Old-Time Texas


stream carried them downward, and they had considerable dif-
ficulty clambering up the high bank.

Meanwhile, according to his plan, Jim ran upstream under
cover, jumped in, swam across, and, still under cover, ran
down to the horses. He had no difficulty catching his dun,
which carried not only his saddle but the scabbarded rifle. It
was loaded. He gave the other horses a scare and started down
the creek, keeping close to cover. He realized, however, that
within a short time the Indians would be back on their horses
trailing him. After he had galloped maybe two miles he dis-
covered that he was at a slough roughly paralleling the Nueces
River. The Nueces makes a big bend in this region, and he
was much nearer it than he had supposed. The slough was wide
but deep only in the middle. He rode up it in knee-deep water
for several hundred yards, leaving no tracks. Then he swam
across it and followed a shallow arm of water into flat country.
He stopped in a motte of trees and granjeno brush, satisfied
that he and his trail were both well concealed. He stayed there
all day without seeing a horseman. Once only he heard a yell
away off across the slough.

He found that all his ammunition had been removed from
the morral, but a few water-soaked soda crackers were still in it.
They tasted good. During the day he had located an island
of grass near the motte, and at night he and the coyote dun
camped on it, the horse faring superbly. By now, all ideas of
prospecting farther for a ranch had left him. He was restless to
get back to what was left of Wallace, near the creek crossing.
At daylight he rode. The world seemed so empty that when
he came upon the tracks of his enemies they made a kind of
human association. The creek had run down enough that it was
no longer swimming.

He carried his brother’s body to the head of a gully, wrapped


A Ranch on the Nueces


“wigs


his own shirt around the head, and spent almost the whole day
digging dirt with his pocketknife to cover the body. Then he
carried drift-logs from the creek to hold the dirt down.

When he was through, he noticed three buzzards in a dead
tree down the creek a short distance from where the Indians
had swum it. The tree might be their regular roost, but curiosity
took him to it. At its base was a mound of drift, in which a patch
of red caught his eye. After he had yanked out a few sticks,
the patch expanded into a bandana. It was still around Hess’s
head. The current, probably aided by a drifting log, had carried
Hess under into the tangle of drift. The only care Jim gave
Hess’s body was to remove Wallace’s money belt from it.


164 Tales of Old-Time Texas


He had meant to kill meat that evening, but now the light
was too dim for shooting. He got under a tree, It rained again,
just enough to keep him wet through the night. He was really
getting hungry now — and the coyote dun was feasting on mes-
quite grass. Clear, warm sunshine next morning seemed a spe-
cial benediction from on high. As the sun came up, Jim heard
gobbling. When he stepped out cautiously, he saw two big old
gobblers making passes at each other while other gobblers cir-
cled around them. The sheen on their feathers was wonderful.
He aimed his rifle, pulled the trigger and had meat. The fact
that he did not have a dry match did not keep him from en-
joying and assimilating while he swallowed several pounds of
prime turkey.

His only course now was to get to fire and food. He rode to
the river. It was on an immense rise. He knew that if he
went down it far enough he would reach people. An idea came
to him. Had he had more experience he would have rejected
any idea that parted him from his horse, but he was still, in a
way, a young greenhorn. He unsaddled, hobbled the horse, hid
saddle and money belts, lashed some drift-logs together with
his rope, tied his rifle to one of the logs, and with a pole to
steer with, shoved off into the current. It carried the raft rapidly,
but every once in a while eddies or treetops along the sides of
the river slowed down the voyage.

After Jim had been on the river maybe two hours, the raft
made a lunge against the inside bank of a sharp curve. Some
of the crooked logs had already worked loose in the roping. As
they hit the bank they twisted apart and, almost instantly, with
his rifle gone on down the river, Jim was left holding to a root
growing out of the bluff. He pulled himself up until he got his
elbows on the ground and then swung free.

After his breathing became normal, he walked out for a view.


A Ranch on the Nueces 165


He thought he had never seen a more beautiful sweep of coun-
try than the land in and beyond that bend of the Nueces. While
he watched some deer graze, they lifted their tails and bounded
away and then he saw what had disturbed them —a man on
horseback. He carried himself like a white man. Jim yelled and
waved his hat. The man approached to within about two hun-
dred yards and then, ready to shoot, waved for Jim to come to
him.

He proved to be the owner of a ranch five or six miles away.
He was looking for a horse that he suspected of having taken
up with the mustangs. He would have impressed anybody as a
man to be trusted. He carried Jim home with him, and there
Jim ate and slept for two days. Lending him a horse and saddle,
the rancher rode with him to recover his outfit and the ten
thousand dollars in two money belts.


Jim Ray had no need to prospect farther. He had found the
ideal location for a ranch. The rancher informed him that it
was state land, subject to sale or homesteading. He bought
horses, a wagon, lumber, provisions, tools and other necessities,
hired Mexican help and built a house on the bluff. He bought
landscript, then for sale cheap, and had several sections sur-
veyed out from the riverbank. He had been gone from home
nearly two years by the time he got stock branded and well
located on the range.

Then he went back to Alabama to marry a girl supposed to
be waiting for him. He had not written. She had not waited.
He knew that a dun horse with a line down his back and two
or three faithful Mexicans were waiting for him back on the
Nueces. He returned to them and in time the Ray ranch,
fenced in by barbed wire, became well known.


Desperate Rides


onc before Curtius the Roman jumped his horse into a deep
L chasm to appease the gods and save Rome — by sacrificing
Rome’s most precious possession, a brave citizen — tales of fear-
ful leaps by desperate men were no doubt popular. They also be-
long to the Horse Age of America. According to an account
that used to be repeated in talk and in print many times, in
1775 Major Samuel McCullough, hemmed in by four hundred
Indian warriors near Fort Henry on the Ohio River, jumped his
horse off a hundred-and-fifty-foot bluff overlooking Wheeler
Creek. They say that his horse cleared the ground for seventy-
five feet, hit a hump of loose rocks and dirt in the slightly in-
clined bank, slid, cleared the remaining seventy-five feet, struck
deep water still upright, and swam with rider uninjured to
safety.


Fifteen feet is a high dive for horse and rider. One day in
1832, Ad Lawrence and three other Texas frontiersmen rode
out on the prairies west of the Trinity River to capture mus-
tangs. Their method was to slip up on a bunch of wild horses
and each man rope the best animal he could get in throwing
distance of. The best mustangs usually got away, but many a


Desperate Rides 167


good saddle horse in the settlements had been captured on the
prairie.

On this particular day Ad Lawrence and his fellow mus-
tangers rode picked mounts; Ad’s was a black mare named
Bess, a little ahead of anything else in the country for speed
and bottom. About ten miles out they sighted a large bunch of
horses afar off in grass up to their sides. The wind was in the
mustangers’ favor; the lay of the ground and the very tall grass
enabled them to approach rather near without being discovered,
so they thought. They estimated the number of horses to be a
hundred, among them several fancy paints. As they rode closer,
they were surprised that none of the horses took alarm and
that they shifted about so little.

When a man looks intently for one thing he is often blind
to other things. The mustangers were looking for loose horses.
Suddenly a hundred painted Indians bbunded out of the high
grass, leaped onto their horses, and, coiling up their lariats on
the run, came yelling for hair.

The surprised mustangers broke for the Trinity River, and
for three miles held their distance. Then the Indian ponies
began to show their mettle. “You’ve no idea,” Ad Lawrence
lived to tell, “how much an Indian can get out of a mustang
pony. Instead of weighing their ponies down, those Indians
after us seemed to push them along, and a body could have
heard their yells clean to Red River.”

Then the Indians split, half veering to the left and half to
the right. They knew every deer trail and drainway in the coun-
try. The Texans learned something new in local geography
when a deep and impassable ravine, unmarked by tree growth
and hidden except from a near view, appeared in front of them.
There was nothing to do but ride around the head of it —
almost into one wing of the racing savages.


168 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Ad Lawrence was in the lead. When he rounded the head of
the gully, the Indians were so close that one whizzing arrow
stuck in his buckskin jacket and another in his mare’s neck. She
did not run any slower.

“As soon as I got headed for the river again,” Ad later told,
“T looked around to see what had become of the others. One
look showed me. They were all down. About half the Indians
had stopped to finish them, and the balance were coming for
me like red-hot lightning. I felt so dizzy for a minute that I
dropped my rifle. Then I straightened up and told Bess I was
still with her. I figured we could make it if we didn’t run into
another gulch. The Trinity timber looked about three miles
off.”

The mare had been running so hard that now she was pant-
ing for air. Ad jerked the arrow from her neck and worked out
of his heavy buckskin coat, which was flopping about with the
arrow in it, and threw it away. He ran a mile without gaining
or losing on one Indian who had outdistanced all the others.
Black Bess just had to have a little time to blow, though she
would never quit until she was dead. Ad drew her to a stop,
jumped down. loosened the cinch. The lead Indian was not
more than a hundred yards away.

He was game all right. He didn’t stop until he got within
ten feet of the white man. Then he pulled his horse to its
haunches, dropped his bow to the ground, and came on with a
long knife. Ad was waiting for him with a Bowie knife in his
right hand, the bridle reins in his left, for he was afraid the
Indian might scare Bess into running off.

There was no time for a long fight. “The Indian seemed too
sure,” Ad said. “He ran just right for me to ram my knife into
him and twist it around. He hardly made a movement after he
fell. As I pulled off my heavy boots to lighten the load, I heard


Desperate Rides 169


an awful howl. I tightened the girth, and we were flying for the
timber. When we struck it the going slowed down.

“T knew that for miles up and down the river the banks
were bluff, from fifteen to twenty feet high. Where I struck
they were about fifteen. If Bess wouldn’t take the jump, I was
going without her. She stopped, snorted once, heard the yell
close behind, and leaped straight out into air. She hit on her
feet plump into deep water and we both went under. She came
right up and went to swimming. I should have loosened the
girth before we jumped in; maybe I did, automatically. I don’t
know. After she got about two-thirds across she gave a groan
and sunk. I hated to leave her as bad as if she had been
human.”

While the Indians, unwilling to take the leap he had made,
lined the bank behind him, Ad Lawrence reached the opposite
one and crawled up a mustang grapevine to safety. It was too
far across the river for arrows to make an effective hit. He had
added another chapter to the riding tradition of mustang days.


About 1858 two men with their families, one named Booth
and the other Gedrie, were neighboring on the Trinity River in
east Texas. Each had a patch of corn fenced in with brush and
pickets. One day some cattle belonging to Booth broke into
Gedrie’s corn and ate most of it up. In those days cattle were
fenced out, not in. Gedrie saw the intruders and killed three.
Booth protested, and Gedrie did with him as he had done with
the cows.

Now, the dead settler had a boy, John, twelve years old. John
shook his fist in the face of his father’s slayer and said: “Gedrie,
when I am big I will kill you for killing my pap.”

Then the widow Booth moved three hundred miles west to


170 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the Nueces River — “the deadline of sheriffs,” as it used to be
called. The Civil War came on and John enlisted. When the
Confederates stopped fighting, he was nineteen years old and
had been a man for four years.

He returned to the Nueces and made open boasts that he
was now “big enough” to kill Gedrie. He made the boasts so
that they would reach Gedrie and keep him uneasy with the
vigilance of the hunted. When fall brought cool weather, he
quietly arranged a string of horses so as to have one every
thirty or forty miles between the Nueces and the Trinity. It
was his private pony express. He had friends.

One evening he rode up to the house of a neighboring ranch-
man. After supper he asked the rancher the date of the month,
the day of the week, and even the hour by the clock. In out-
of-the-way places such questions were not unusual.

“Would you swear in court that I was at your ranch on the
date and at the hour you have given me?” asked Booth.

“Of course I would,” replied the rancher.

“Then write the time of my visit down in the Bible.”

The great family Bible was brought out, and on one of
those pages provided for vital statistics the facts were slowly
written, the witnesses signing their names. It was the twentieth
of October, seven o’clock (sun time), 1865.

John Booth said good night, mounted his horse, and was lost
in the darkness.

According to evidence later brought out, when Gedrie on the
morning of October 22 started to ride away from his cabin
in the Trinity valley, his wife came running out with a shotgun
in her hand.

“Here,” she called, “you are getting too careless. You know
that John Booth is going to try to kill you sooner or later.”

“Oh,” carelessly replied Gedrie, “I’ve had so many messages


Desperate Rides 171


from him that I’m getting to believe he’s nothing but bluff.
Besides,” he added, slapping his hip, “this here old hogleg knows
how to talk back.”

Nevertheless, he took the shotgun and rode off. Twenty-four
hours later a riderless horse hung his head against the gate
opening into the Gedrie pens. As in the old Scottish ballad,


Hame cam’ the saddle, all bluidy to see,
O hame cam’ his guid horse, but never cam’ he


It was about an hour by sun on the morning of October
twenty-fifth when John Booth walked his horse up to the ranch
where his last visit had been recorded in the family Bible.
Right under the record was added, at his request, the hour of
his return.


172 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Some weeks passed, and then one day rangers appeared at the
Booth ranch with a warrant of arrest for John. He peaceably
submitted. In the session of district court that followed he was
charged with having killed Gedrie. A jury was impaneled to try
him; witnesses were summoned. The state proved that John
Booth had threatened to kill Gedrie; it proved that Gedrie had
been killed. The defense proved that John Booth had been on
the Nueces three hundred miles away two days before Gedrie
met his death, and that he had again been seen on the Nueces
less than three days later.

The alibi was incontrovertible. The jury, to a man, said that
no human being could have ridden three hundred miles, killed
a man, and then have ridden back three hundred miles in the
four days and five nights that Booth had not accounted for.
Booth was freed, and many times afterward he told, not with-
out pride, of the wonderful ride and the vengeance he had
done. The law is that after a man has been tried in the courts
and declared innocent he cannot be tried again for the same of-
fense.

It may be added as a postscript that the feud was ended
years afterward when Gedrie’s two sons shot John Booth’s son,
Robert, from a horse. But Robert proved true to his blood when
he raised himself up from the ground on which he was dying
and killed both his opponents.

Childless and penniless, John Booth died long ago in the Home
for Confederate Soldiers at Austin. The ride he made and not
the killings have kept his story alive.


The Planter Who Gambled Away His Bride


upwic Baron von Roeder of Prussia and his wife had nine
16 sons, all over six feet tall—and all restless under military
tyranny. In 1832 Sigismund, the wild one of the breed, fought
a duel at the University of Breslau with the Prince of Prussia and
killed him.

The fact that the duel was fair prevented the king from put-
ting Sigismund to death but not from sentencing him to life
imprisonment. After he had been in prison about a year, his fa-
ther went to the king for audience.

“What do you want?” the king glared.

“You know what I want,” the baron replied.

“No,” the king bellowed, “I will not.”

“Is there no condition at all?” the baron asked.

“Yes, one condition only. I will release your son if you and
all your family will leave Germany forever.”

“How much time will you give us to leave?”

“One year.”

The baron began at once to sell off his lands and other prop-
erties, keeping a few of his best hogs, chickens, horses, and cat-
tle to take to the new home. Mexico was at this time offering
hospitality to foreigners, and the baron set his compass for
Texas, then a part of Mexico. Several other Prussian families
joined the von Roeders in preparation for emigrating. They


174 Tales of Old-Time Texas


chartered an English ship, and as the end of the year ap-
proached, loaded it with livestock, household gear, carts, bug-
gies, tools, farm implements, clothing, food for a long voyage,
plows and whisky stills. The day before they were to sail, a
prison guard escorted Sigismund von Roeder to the ship.

It was headed for the mouth of the Brazos River, but a Gulf
hurricane drove it to Galveston Island. There the first child of
the colony was born. The Baroness von Roeder was troubled
with insomnia, and she had her piano landed so that she could
play it at night and keep others from sleeping. People danced to
its music. In his capital at San Felipe de Austin on the Brazos,
Stephen F. Austin heard of these Germans stranded on Galves-
ton Island. He sent an agent offering them lands out of his wide
grant. They investigated, saw the fertile soil and the great abun-
dance of game, and brought their ship and its holdings to the
mouth of the Brazos for unloading. They settled around Indus-
try.

Frontier conditions were not conducive to making Sigismund
von Roeder tamer. He learned to substitute Bowie knife for
sword, but still wore his rapier. He rode and hunted with young
men who slept with their guns and relied on them to enforce
their democratic ideas. Some were hard gamblers, more were
hard drinkers.

One morning about a dozen of the Sigismund von Roeder
crowd assembled for a celebration at the plantation home of
Benjamin Buckingham on the Brazos. It was not a mansion but
was more ample than most of the log houses. The owner had
just returned from Kentucky with a bride. She was beautiful
and she was rare in that world of young men. They were making
festival to honor her, but after the hard corn whisky began to
flow free and she saw that an especial amount of it was flowing
into her husband, she withdrew from the crowd. Soon the cele-


The Planter Who Gambled Away His Bride 175


brants turned to cards. Benjamin Buckingham was foremost in
turning a social game into one for stakes.

The stakes began low. As they rose, all players but Bucking-
ham and von Roeder dropped out. Von Roeder was doing most
of the winning. He proposed a limit to the bets, but Bucking-
ham, growing more reckless with each deal, called for the sky.
After he had lost all his money, he began betting his mules,
horses, oxen, then his slaves. Every time he lost a unit of these
chattels, he made out a bill of sale. His opponent stacked the
bills of sale under a red brick made from valley earth.

At noon the onlookers ate beef and wild turkey, corn pones
and greens, cooked by a slavewoman in the log kitchen out in
the yard to the rear of the main house. The only pause made
by the gamblers was for another drink. Paper slips representing
buggy, wagon, plows, harness, race horses, saddles and other per-
sonal property piled up under the red brick. Buckingham’s
friends begged him to stop.

“I will not stop,” he shouted in frenzy. “Luck will change
directly. You will see.”

SUL quit when Buckingham says quit,” von Roeder said. As
winner, according to the code, he was honor-bound to keep on
playing, giving the loser a chance to win back until the loser
cried a halt.

The shadows outside were long when Buckingham began to
put up the deeds to his lands. Against the tract on which the
house stood, von Roeder staked everything under the red brick.
He won.

There was a pause and a bitter oath from Buckingham. In
the fading light a white-haired Negro brought in candles, set
them on the table, went out, brought in a blazing pine knot and
lit them. Every eye was on von Roeder, but nobody was saying
a word.


176 Tales of Old-Time Texas


As the old slave withdrew, the bride entered and placed her
hand on her husband’s arm.

“Come, Benjamin,” she said. “It is time to quit. You are
tired out.”

“And that ain’t all,” said one brazen young man.

“You mean I am broke?” Buckingham yelled.

While his bride waited in a silence intensified by every man
present, he strode to a cabinet. He took a paper out of a
drawer, walked back to the table, and laid it down between the
candles.

“That,” he said, “will cover everything under your brick.”

Von Roeder spread the paper out. It was Buckingham’s mar-
riage license.


The Planter Who Gambled Away His Bride 177


“Only with the lady’s consent,” he said.

Maybe there was bitterness in her smile, but it was a smile
of assent.

Once more the cards were shuffled, dealt, played. It was a
quick game. As von Roeder reached for this last document to
add to the papers under the red brick, Buckingham reached for
one of the pistols he wore and fired. He missed. As he raised
the second pistol in his brace, von Roeder’s sword pierced his
heart.

It happened that an alcalde lived near. All agreed that noth-
ing would be touched, which is still the legal practice in Mex-
ico, until his arrival. That was within a short time.

The alcalde ruled that the killing was in self-defense. As the
body of the dead man was borne out on a plank, the alcalde’s
voice rang in question:

“Do you, Barbara Buckingham, take this man, Sigismund von
Roeder?”

In those days marriages in Texas were often made by con-
tract. Von Roeder sold the plantation he had won and took the
woman he had won and moved west. Descendants of the two
are numerous in southwest Texas today.


Part Four


The Panther’s Scream


eS years ago and more, a settler on the Trinity River
cut down a bee tree. Its crash to the ground broke the
silence of the forest. Immediately a high scream from a pan-
ther in the distance responded, and out of mockery the man
screamed back. The panther replied, nearer now. The man quit
mocking to listen, but a panther’s movements, even on the for-
est’s leafy floor, make no sound. The man had no idea that the
panther was so near until he saw it spring upon the stump of
the felled tree.

He raised his axe to strike, but the leaping panther was al-
ready upon him. It bit him through a shoulder and clawed into
his body and legs. He jerked his Bowie knife from its sheath
and stabbed until the attacker retreated. He himself received no
deep cuts, but his clothes were in shreds and he did not linger
to rob the bees. The next day he came back for the honey and
found the panther dead not far away. He announced his resolu-
tion never to mock another panther unless he had a gun along.

When I was a boy, I heard stories of ghosts and phantom
riders, but no tale of the spirit world ever shivered my timbers
like accounts of the panther’s scream and its readiness to leap
upon a man carrying meat, upon a woman entering a shed room
into which the big cat had stolen to devour a fresh deer ham,
or upon a child in the dark to eat it up. Nobody then called
the panther a “mountain lion,” as it is now called.


182 Tales of Old-Time Texas


The favorite story was of a neighboring ranchman who lo-
cated a turkey roost in the Nueces River bottom and rode out
one evening to kill the turkeys. It happened that he had only
two loads for his shotgun. He tied his horse at a barbed-wire
fence, through which there was no convenient gap, and walked
on about half a mile and hid himself near the roost. About
dusk he saw and heard the wild turkeys fly up into a clump of
live-oak trees. They took their time and it was dark before they
were all settled. He waited for the moon to come up so that he
could skylight the big birds blended into the foliage. He ma-
neuvered around until he had several lined up and then fired
both barrels. Six turkeys fell to the ground.

He was carrying them back to his horse, making slow prog-
ress on account of the weight, when the scream of a panther
right behind him in the brush curdled his blood —a scream al-
ways described as more terrifying than the scream of a woman
in fright or pain. The man knew what the panther was after; he
dropped a turkey. He had gone but a short distance farther be-
fore he heard the awful scream again. He dropped another tur-
key. The next time the squall came from brush to one side of
him. Finally he had only onc turkey left to drop. If the panther
leaped out of the shadows, the man’s gun, even as a club,
would be of little avail. And now the scream came nearer, more
terrifying. He dropped his last turkey. Just as he got to his
horse, which was plunging against the rope, the man heard the
panther again. But, thank God, he was mounted, “tearing a
hole in the brush.”

After hearing this story — and it seemed never to be told ex-
cept at night — I used to lie awake in bed for hours wondering
what would have happened to the man had he killed only four
or five turkeys to dole out to the panther instead of six, or if
he had had a whole mile to walk instead of just about half a


The Panther’s Scream 183


mile. But above any concern for human destiny the panther’s
scream dominated my childish imagination. Years later when I
read Blake’s verses —


Tiger, tiger, burning bright

In the forests of the night, . . .
In what distant deeps or skies
Burnt the fire of thine eyes?


—I wished that some poet of the panther world would inten-
sify the panther’s scream as Blake in “England’s green and
pleasant land” had intensified the tiger’s eyes. To this day I
never look at a panther mounted in a museum without think-
ing what a lack it is that the scream —the very essence of the
creature — cannot be mounted also.


184 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Perhaps it would be, if the processes of petrifaction could be
extended. Telling of the wonderful Petrified Forest of Arizona,
Jim Bridger used to say, “Yes, them putrified trees stand up
natural like any other trees. They are simply monstrous. You
can ride all day and not get acrost the forest. And all up in the
limbs there’s putrified birds, some of ’em blue and some of
’em red and all other kinds of colors. And them putrified birds
is act’ally singing putrified songs.”

At the time I heard and reheard the story of the man’s drop-
ping his turkeys to placate a screaming panther, I did not know
that it was “just an old yarn” —a folk tale. I still don’t know
but what it started with an actual experience that was appro-
priated as their own by tellers, in the way that a ballad is car-
ried far away in time and space from its originator. It has been
told for generations in many localities, pieces of venison or
other game sometimes substituted for the dropped turkeys.
Many of the narrators have no doubt believed their own narra-
tions, and I can’t help believing some of them myself.


“Late one evening in 1888,” a pioneer of Hall County re-
lated — after years of recollecting emotion in tranquillity — “I
took my gun and walked down into the Salt Creek breaks to kill
a turkey. It was after dark when I shot four nice fellows out of
their roost and started home. They were about all I could carry.
Pretty soon something was following me, and when it let out a
scream I knew it was a panther. It kept getting a little closer.
I dropped one of my turkeys and walked a little faster. Before
long it was following me again and let out another scream that
seemed closer by than the first one. I dropped another turkey
and walked still faster. I think there were several panthers. It
was intensely dark and they kept following and screaming un-
til I gave them the last turkey. By that time I was out of the


The Panther’s Scream 185


breaks on open ground and almost home. My brother and I
went to hunting them and that winter killed nine panthers.”


Jim Buckner lived in one of the lovely little valleys among
the wooded hills of Hamilton County. One day, as he used to
tell his grandchildren, he drove his wagon to a neighbor's to
help butcher a beef. It was dark before he started home with
half the carcass. The weather was cool and the horses stepped
along briskly, eager for feed and freedom. About nine o’clock,
while still two miles from home, Jim Buckner happened to look
back. There, coming along behind him in the starlit road, was
an animal that at first he took to be a dog but that, getting
closer, was plainly a panther. It was, he judged, following the
fresh meat, and in a minute he saw from its actions that unless
he did something it would jump up into the wagon. He took
his butcher knife and cut off a hunk of beef and threw it back.
He saw the panther stop to eat it. Then he cracked his black-
snake and the horses broke into a lope.

A wagon behind galloping horses makes nearly as much noise
to its occupant as a passing freight train. Jim Buckner didn’t
hear anything else, but when he looked back, he saw the pan-
ther in a springing run right behind him. He cut off another
hunk of meat, a big one, and threw it out. The panther stopped.
It must have been an awful swift eater, for it soon caught up —
to be detained by a third chunk of beef. The meat held out,
and when the wagon drew up at the Buckner house the panther
was not in sight.


If a panther’s scream could chill the blood, the deathly si-
lent approach of one in the dark until it got close enough to
touch would freeze the marrow. Jeff Ake’s people were with Old


186 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Hickory in Tennessee but moved to Arkansas before he was
born. He came on to Texas and drove cattle up the Chisholm
Trail and all the other trails and then went out into the Apache
country. He could charm the heart out of a whippoorwill with
his fiddle, and his grandchildren thought he was the greatest
story-teller on earth. This was their favorite.

“I was up on the Flower de Lucy that time, staying at a
ranch shanty alone. The Indians was pretty bad, and nobody
knowed when they might jump us. One evening late when I
come in from riding all day, | saw that Charley Merritt and
Bob Burch had left me the backstrap out of a deer and some
bear steaks. They kept bach, down the country a ways, and had
been on a little hunt. The meat was hung up high. You had to
hang up everything to eat in them days; coyotes would steal
the spurs out from under your head to chew on the leathers.

“Well, when I unsaddled that evening I throwed my saddle
down on the floor next to the door. There wasn’t no yard fence
to this place. Then I et about three pounds of fried venison
and hit the hay. Like always, I had my six-shooter under the
piller. In no time I was snoring hee-haw, like that.

“I don’t know how long afterwards it was, but I woke up in
the pitch-dark feeling like something was wrong. It wasn’t near
time to get up, but I was wide awake. Then something touched
me down the leg, like a hand jest feeling, soft — that way. ‘In-
dians,’ I thinks, and lays as still as a log. D’reckly there was the
same soft touch higher up my leg. 1 was inching my hands up
to my chest so that if the Indian grabbed for my throat I could
grab his. It seemed he didn’t know my geography any better
than I knew his. Next the touch was on my stomach, and it
sorter pressed down like he was a-leaning over to get a look into
my face.

“Well, by gravy,’ I thinks to myself, ‘I ain’t going to the


The Panther’s Scream 187


Happy Hunting Grounds by myself.’ Then I makes one big
grab for his throat and collars him. I whips him over on the
bed alongside me, twisting out of the covers and trying to get
them wropped around him. He’s half under me and I throws
my legs so’s to hold his down. About then I discover the In-
dian has turned into a panther.

“He’s clawing like a mowing machine, but them bed quilts is
a shield of mercy. What I’m afeared of is his teeth. I man-
age to clamp his muzzle shut with one hand and get a good
holt on a foreleg with the other. I am shoving him up and
back and purty soon have him over by the saddle. I kinder
wrop my legs around his hips so he ain’t got no room to
claw in and tie his muzzle up with the horn string. Then I
get a buckskin thong out of a saddle pocket and half-hitch
his forelegs together. He is still scratching me with his hind
paws, but it’s easy now to tie them up with saddle strings. I
light the lantern and drag saddle, panther and all into a shed
room and chain him up, and then go back to sleep.

“The next morning the owner of the Flower de Lucy come
along and when I told him about the panther he wanted to see
it. I told him he’d better go easy, but he was the kind of man
who had to have his way, and shore enough he got a little too
close and that panther took a mouthful out of his thigh. He
started to kill him, but I told him this was my panther and he
had to let him be. ‘I'll give you fifty dollars to let me drill day-
light into his insides,’ he says. ‘All right,’ I says, and he handed
over the fifty. He pulled his six-shooter and shot the panther
dead. I don’t know what I would have done with him if he
hadn’t. He wasn’t no pet size.”


What really made a panther hungry was the smell of a baby.
Some people claimed a panther could locate a baby by scenting


188 Tales of Old-Time Texas


milk from its mother’s breast. They claimed that whereas a
panther would skulk away from the sound of a man’s voice, it
would be attracted closer by the voice of a girl or woman. One
woman said that when she was a little girl her father would
take her riding through the woods behind him on a horse. He
had his gun loaded and ready and would keep her singing so as
to entice panthers into view for a shot.

In 1875 Sam Shaffer and his bride “Queenie” came from
Mississippi and settled on the Leon River. When she was an
old woman, she delighted her grandchildren with stories of
early days. The ones they called for over and over were about
her experiences with panthers, and this is the way she told
them.

“When our first baby was five months old, Sam said we had
to go to Fort Worth, about ninety miles away, for supplies.
He had made sideboards for our ox wagon, and we planned to
bring back some furniture as well as cloth and food. Nothing
much happened on the way, and it was the best time I’d ever
had, seeing the people and stores and all. I never dreamed Sam
had so much money. He bought me everything I admired —a
trunk, a spinning wheel, a sewing machine and many a yard of
pretty cloth. Then we started home.

“We were on the last lap of the journey and it was beginning
to get dark. Sam happened to look back and saw what he took
to be a man with a white shirt on a-galloping towards us. The
baby had the colic and started to cry. As the galloping thing
got closer, Sam said, ‘That’s no man. It’s the biggest panther I
ever saw.’ The panther had heard the baby and smelled us, and
musta been awful hungry, for he loped right close up to the
wagon. Sam stood up and cracked his whip and let out a holler
that would curdle your blood, and the panther stopped and
trotted off a ways and sat on his haunches. Then he got out of


The Panther’s Scream 189


sight a little off to one side and let out a scream that froze my
blood. D’reckly he was back in the road.

“Well, this went on till we could hardly stand the strain, and
the baby kept crying, and it got darker and darker. Finally,
Sam said, ‘Queenie, you’d better put the baby in the trunk.’ I
knowed then that he expected the hungry panther to leap up on
the wagon, and I reckon he thought we’d better smother the
baby to death than see it torn apart by the panther. I did like
he said, and stuffed my Sunday hat under a corner of the trunk
lid so as to let in a little air, and sat there near dead from
fright. Sam kept up his whip-cracking and yelling till our cabin
came in sight. Never before or after did it look so good to
me.

“A cousin of mine, a big strapping backwoodsman, had
come to Texas and soon afterwards married the oldest Willerts
girl, Sary. She was the best friend I had. They took up a sec-
tion of land close to ours, and I could cut across the woods and
not have to walk over three miles to their house. Sam often
told me I mustn’t do this, but I loved to take baby on pretty,
sunshiny days and walk over to Sary’s. One day Sary was pre-
serving, and I stayed late helping her, and before I got well
started home the sun was down nearly to the treetops. I was
hurrying along when something made me look back, and why I
didn’t just drop dead, I don’t know. A big yellow panther was
walking right after me. I started to run, and the panther ran too.
When I slowed down, he would slow down, but still gain on
me. It was getting darker and darker, and I was getting scareder
and scareder. I seemed numb all over, but somehow I kept on
running. The panther gained on me and I knew any minute
he’d grab baby away.

“T snatched off baby’s cap and dropped it, and the panther
stopped to smell it. I gained a little. Then one by one I


190 Tales of Old-Time Texas


snatched off more clothes, mine and baby’s both, whatever was
handiest, and dropped them as I ran. Well, I made the cabin
door and fell inside and managed to push the door shut. Thank
Heavens, Sam wasn’t there, and I come to enough to dress our-
selves and start supper before he got in. He didn’t need to ever
warn me again to take my saddle pony and go around by the
open pasture when I wanted to visit Sary.”

Another woman of the frontier was ironing clothes one after-
noon, having washed that morning. She had the ironing board
in the kitchen, the door of which was open and, of course,
screenless. After nursing her two-months-old baby, she laid it
down on a pallet near the door, to her back. Presently, the
smoothing iron in her hand, she looked around at the baby. A
panther, as noiseless as an owl in flight, had grabbed it. She hit
the panther’s head with the iron, knocked it flat, and then
pounded it until it was dead. Not long after that she killed two
Indians attacking her house and the neighbors presented her
with two fine six-shooters.


A camp meeting, always held in the summer, with babies on
pallets around the edges of a brush arbor in the dim lantern
light of the evening services, might have attracted all the pan-
thers in the country if so much noise hadn’t been going on.
Noise or no noise, at a camp meeting on Wild Cat Slough one
summer, a “painter” climbed up a tree and hid out on a branch
unbeknownst to anybody until the people all knelt down to
pray. Then it snatched up a baby and ran off with it. Nobody
ever caught it or found a sign of the baby.

One hot summer while Ben Coates and his wife and a two-
year-old baby were sleeping in front of the open door to their
one-room cabin, she was awakened by feeling her baby move
“as if it were falling off the bed.” It was gone before she could


The Panther’s Scream 191


rescue it, but in the dim light she saw something run out into
the yard. She and her husband heard the baby screaming as it
was carried deeper into the woods. The whole neighborhood
was alarmed. Dogs took the trail and the next morning had
the panther bayed in a narrow hole running up under a great
rock. A man could not enter without crawling; dogs could enter
only one at a time, and any dog that reached the panther was
sure to get killed. The men decided to besiege the hole day
and night until starvation or thirst drove the panther out. They
stood guard in relays. More than two hundred people gathered,
some from fifty miles away. On the fourth day, the animal
jumped out and was shot. Fragments of a baby’s dress were
found in the cave.


What happened between one person and a panther, if it was
harrowing enough, was bound to be experienced by another per-
son in another part of the panther-haunted country, which cov-
ered the South. The Ozarks probably mothered more panther
stories than any other region. Some of the best are in Wayman
Hogue’s Back Yonder.

“Right after Jim was born,” he relates, “my father left home
one morning to be gone till the next day. Jim was only five days
old and my mother was still in bed. Lelia was six and was do-
ing whatever had to be done. Nora was two. I didn’t yet exist.
My father took the gun with him, but left Tige, a very large
and strong dog.

“Along after midnight Tige began barking and growling as
if somebody or something were approaching. In no time the
sounds he made told my mother the thing was close. Then
there was fighting. My mother thought it was a wolf, and she
had confidence in Tige’s ability to defend the premises. Before


192 Tales of Old-Time Texas


long the intruder seemed to have left, for Tige quieted down,
but soon he was again in desperate struggle with something. My
mother grew alarmed and had Lelia latch the door and prop it.

“After fighting for a while, the thing seemed to have re-
treated once more, but Tige was not quiet for long. Now the
struggle was more desperate than ever. Just as it quieted, my
mother heard something light on top of the house. It could get
there, she knew, only by climbing a tree and leaping off.
Wolves can’t climb.

“She lay listening to the thing as it walked over the roof,
seemingly in search of an opening. Suddenly, pieces of the clay
chimney began falling into the fireplace. It had a little fire.
The creature was actually coming down the chimney. My
mother leaped out of bed, grabbed a case knife, ripped open a
straw mattress, and began piling the straw into the fireplace.
The straw caught fire and the blaze shot up the chimney. The
thing gave a fearful squall, and she heard it spring from the
roof to the ground. They smelt scorched hair. When my father
returned, he said ir was a panther after the baby. He located
Tige away back under the house, hardly able to move.”


Grandma Adams used to tell the Texas version of this story.
About dark one winter day, she heard a scream “like a woman
in distress makes.” She had little more than barred window and
door before she heard the panther walking on the roof. To pre-
vent its coming down the chimney she kept the fireplace burn-
ing. She ran out of wood and burned up two chairs, a quilt, an
old dress, and some other things. The panther kept padding
around on the shakes all night, now and then letting out a long
wail. Just before daylight it left.

One winter day the White family on Bear Creek in Sabine
County killed a hog, cut it up, put the meat in a wooden tub


The Panther’s Scream 193


and set it in a corner of the cabin, to be salted down and
smoked on the morrow. Then the man went off with his dogs
to join a neighbor on a hunt. That night while Mrs. White was
chunking up the fire in the fireplace, the children covered up in
bed and a quilt wrapped around herself to shut out the cold
norther blowing through the chinks in the log walls, she heard
a panther scream. She knew it had smelled the fresh meat. It
prowled under the puncheon floor and then leaped up on the
roof, every once in a while letting out a scream. Then it went
to clawing on the logs and finally got a paw through a crack
near the tub of-meat and took out a piece. At this, Mrs, White
threw her quilt over the tub, seized an axe standing just inside
the door and waited. In a little while the panther put its paw
back through the crack for another piece of meat. She had the
axe raised and now she came down with it, cutting the paw
clean off. That panther did not bother around the cabin any
more that night.


It is the habit of the panther to gnaw into the vitals of its
prey and, after eating what it wants, to cover the carcass with
leaves, grass, twigs — any dry covering at hand. It will come
back for a meal when hungry. It is not a carrion eater, but likes
to kill its own meat and likes it fresh.

Mrs. Ada Payne’s grandfather died in 1898 at the age of
ninety. She was only twelve, but she’ll never forget his tale of
two panthers he met as a sixteen-year-old boy. He was clearing
land for a field, chopping down trees. At noon after he had
eaten his lunch he lay down for a nap in a pile of leaves along-
side a big fallen tree. He had been asleep a little while when
he was awakened by warm breath on his face and a queer smell.

Instinct told him not to move or make a sound. He cau-


194 Tales of Old-Time Texas


tiously half opened his eyes and saw two full grown panthers
standing over him. After sniffing at him a few times, the larger
of the two partly pulled him over with a paw and let him roll
back into his original position. Then they washed their faces,
in the manner of house cats, and sniffed him over again. All
this time he had not moved a muscle.

Now the panthers turned their backs to him and with their
hind paws began raking leaves and twigs over him. They cov-
ered him up completely from head to foot. He could barely see
through the leaves over his face. They stood and sniffed around
awhile, seeming to inspect their job, he said. Finally they left.

He gave them plenty of time to get away before he raised
up cautiously for a look all around. He was sure they would re-
turn and he took out for home to get his rifle. His idea was to
hide in a tree nearby and shoot them when they came back. In
order to make them less cautious, he brought back an old shirt
and a pair of trousers similar to what he wore, fitted them on
sticks arranged in the form of a man, and covered up this
dummy with the same leaves that had covered him. Then he
hid.

Before sundown the panthers returned and were pawing the
leaves away when he shot. He killed the big panther, but only
wounded the other, which got away.

I guess it was better to be covered up alive by a panther than
to be covered up dead. Otherwise, the man covered up couldn’t
make a story out of what happened.


There are stories of friendly panthers, too, but they belong
mainly to the Spanish-Americans. W. H. Hudson’s richly storied
chapter on “The Puma,” in The Naturalist in La Plata, discov-
ered them to me, and I put the most remarkable one I have
heard in Tongues of the Monte.


Bears Are Intelligent People


pe black bear favors pork beyond all other meats. For this
reason the ideal hog of the South used to be the razorback.
It could “outfight a bear and outrun a nigger.”

In the Big Thicket country of east Texas, where, despite high
lines, deep oil wells and wide clearings, a few bears still sniff
for razorback “nests,” an old colored camp cook named Kinley
McCullock is remembered for his bear steaks and bear stories.

He never ate bear meat himself — but once. Then “it didn’t
taste lak no meat a-tall.” The flesh of an animal that walks and
thinks like a man couldn’t be expected to taste like regular
meat, could it?

“Tt war a long time ago,” old Kinley used to tell. “Mister
Cockrum he wus my boss man. Hav war still a-sucking, I
member. We named him William McKinley Havana, but ev-
ery body called him Hav, lak they still does. Bud wus old
ernough ter tote in wood fer the fireplace. One mawning airly I
wus out a-milking when I heared some old mockingbirds jist
a-cussing and a-stewing. I knowed right away an uppity squirrel
wus aggervating ’em. I thinks a little fried squirrel would pack-
age up mighty neat inside me fer breakfast. So I calls to Bud
to bring the gun. He brung it and comes along with me.

“But Mister Squirrel musta got word I wus coming. Any-
how, he warn’t thar and the mockingbirds quit saying whar he


196 Tales of Old-Time Texas


wus. I goes on, down the aige of Mister Cockrum’s cawnfiel’,
looking up inter the trees along the fence. I got squirrel meat
on my min’. The roas’en years is shore fine that summer, and
we been a-playing ‘Green Cawn’ for dinner every day without
any banjo.

“Well, here me and Bud wus way down the fence peering up
inter the trees to the righthand side and a-listening fer Mister
Squirrel ter scratch the bark, when I heard somebody over in
the tall cawn. I knowed ’twarn’t Mister Cockrum out in the
wet dew, and I knowed he wouldn’t be sending enybody over
ter this fiel’ anyhow. I kin hear whoever ’tis breaking the roas’en
years off, and sounds ter me lak he’s mighty careless tromping
over the stalks. I says ter Bud, ‘Cawn thief shore brung erlong
plenty o’ brass.’

“We steps back inter some bloodweeds growing aginst the
fence and waits, jist ez quiet ez a hoptoad waiting fer a fly. The
cawn is still a-popping. Then d’reckly I catches sigh uv the
thief. He’s wearing black, but I don’t have no idees ’bout our
preacher. He’s got a cawn patch uv his own. Now this gentle-
man is coming right down ’tween two rows, kinder spraddling
in his walk. His arms is full uv roas’en years, and then the first
good light uv mawning hits him and I sees it’s a b’ar. Jist as I
seed this, he stops and stacks all the cawn in one arm, lak it
wus stovewood. Then he reaches down with the other hand and
picks up a big yaller punkin fum a vine. He takes hit under his
arm. Now he’s all loaded up and ready to make tracks. I thought
at first he wus going to walk right over us, but he sorter takes
out to one side, and Bud and me jist stands. I’se telling my
eyes not to click too loud. That thief he steps over the picket
fence lak it wus the golden stairs. Befo’ the Good Lawd, I never
seen no plain woods b’ar toting off cawn and punkins lak that.

“After he shuffled inter the thicket, I says ter Bud, We'll


Bears Are Intelligent People 197


kinder track him. . . . So we snuck along behind, he being so
keerless he never looks back oncet. Purty soon he come to a
big holler stump ’bout six foot eround and high ez my shoulder.
I seen he wus a-going ter stop and so got behin’ a big gum
tree with huckleberry bushes growing all eround it. Shore nuf,
he stands still by the stump, listening and looking about in ev-
ery direction, ’specially down the way he’s come fum. He seems
ter suspicion somebody’s spying on his doin’s. He’s ez smart ez
any cawncrib thief that ever tuk off his shoes. D’reckly he
pears to be satisfied.

“Then he pitches that load er roas’en years over the aige of
the holler stump inside. Then he th’ows the punkin down so
it’s boun’ ter bust. He looks over inside the holler a good while,
lak he’s watching sumpin’. Fin’ly he leaves, going inter thick
timber.


198 Tales of Old-Time Texas


“When he’s good and gone, Bud and me snuck up ter the
holler stump and scramble round ter get a good look inside.
What yer reckon we see? Jist an ole narrow-face hawg with a
crop in one year and a swallerfork in the other! That’s Mister
Cockrum’s mark. There’s mighty little meat on the hawg, but
he’s goin’ to have meat on him if Mister B’ar keeps providing
fer him and he keeps on wrapping hisself roun’ cawn and
punkin lak he’s doing now. His jaws is champing ez happy ez
a banjo talking to ‘Little Brown Jug.’

“B’ars don’t fancy lean pork, you know. No, sah, they’s choosy.
This one’s going ter have pork that'll make cracklin’s. I guess
he stole that shoat fum Mister Cockrum’s pen in the dark and
maybe couldn’t pick very choosy. We go over and tell Mister
Cockrum, and he jist laugh lak he thinks I’m tryin’ to ’splain
away some shoat in my pen. No, sah, he don’t wanter come
and see what kind uv a hawgpen a b’ar uses. But after a while
he consent, and when he see that hawg in his own mark and
the cawncobs and punkin stems and b’ar sign and all, he
scratch his haid. Then he taken the hawg out and turn him
loose to rustle fer hisself till the fall mast will fix him up fer
bacon. But I made a mistake when I didn’t go back next mawn-
ing to see how Mister B’ar look when he come with another
load uv cawn and find his hawg ain’t nowhar.”


y


As my philosophic old friend on the border, Don Alberto
Guajardo, used to say, “Bears are very intelligent people.” There
was the bear that burned his hand on a pot of meat boiling on
a cabin fireplace; he took down a bottle of liniment from the
mantelpiece and doctored himself, There was the bear that
walked into a country schoolhouse at recess, removed the lids
from all the lunch buckets, and ate nothing but the pie and


Bears Are Intelligent People 199


other desserts. One night a woman sleeping with her baby in a
cabin that had only a quilt for a door saw a bear pull it back
and walk in. She needn’t have been afraid. All the bear did
was step over to the fireplace, where a fire was still making
light, and sniff at a pot of beans on the hearth. He must have
liked the smell. The beans were warm but not hot. The woman
watched him paw off the lid and gobble down all the beans and
bacon. Then he walked to the door, wiped his face on the quilt,
and left without even saying thank you.

David Crockett had a pet bear that would sit over on the
other side of the fireplace from him and smoke a pipe just like
Crockett until bedtime. He finally got so civilized that he took
whooping cough and died from it. Crockett never did forgive
the preacher for refusing to give that bear a Christian funeral.

An elevation in Grayson County, south of Red River, known
as Bear Mound, marks the place where a long time ago Billie
Clemens shot a black bear standing up and showing a white
spot on his breast. The bear had his arms stretched out, facing
the man. The bullet went into the white spot, and the bear
threw up his arms and moaned, “Oh, Lawdy, oh, Lawdy.”

If a wound was not fatal, a bear might gather up grass and
stuff it into the bullet hole to stop the bleeding. At least, that
is what some hunters told.


Jim Ingram was born in the piney woods on Sulphur River,
not far from where Mr. Fishback used to live. He was raised
on bear-lard biscuits and bear bacon, and was twelve years old,
they say, before he tasted his first hog-ham gravy. When he
grew bald, he greased his scalp with bear oil to bring back the
hair. He never would admit that rattlesnake oil is as good for
rheumatism as bear oil. He hunted mostly in a great tangle of


200 Tales of Old-Time Texas


brush, vines, fallen trees and soaring timber known as Hurri-
cane Rake. He always hunted alone and he had no use for a
dog, because a dog couldn’t get through the kind of places he
crawled into. He would ride to the edge of Hurricane Rake, tie
his horse, take his gun, a strong rope to string the bear carcass
up with, and a gunny sack to put the fat into, and strike out
looking for sign.

When Jim Ingram discovered the enormous cypress stump,
fully twelve feet high, that came to be called “Ingram’s Snag,”
he was in a tangle of sweet gum and other growth almost
against it. A scratching he heard told him the stump was hol-
low. He looked up and saw a big bear emerging from it. Two
cubs, apparently intent on following her, stuck their heads up,
but the old bear turned and gave each a slap that sent them
back down. Then while Jim Ingram was trying to find an open-
ing for his gun and a shot, the old she made off upwind, disap-
pearing in the jungle.

Ingram felt sure that she had gone on a hunt for food. His
best chance for bear grease, he decided, was to wait for her re-
turn. While he waited and waited, he got to thinking how
much fun his five small children, not to mention the older ones,
would have with those two cubs as pets. He knew as well as
anybody that the timidest kind of bear would fight like a cir-
cular saw for her cubs, but as he waited some more, he de-
cided that the mother of these cubs had gone off on a long
hunt and that he could capture them and get away before she
returned. His plan was to rope one of the snags along the rim
of the hollow stump, pull up to it, let himself down inside by
the same rope, put the cubs in his gunny sack, climb out and
get gone.

He leaned his gun against the cypress, roped a snag, and a
few minutes later was down inside a hollow ample enough to


Bears Are Intelligent People 201


camp in. Leaving the rope dangling, he located the cubs by
their whining and snarling away back in the darkness of a hol-
low root. While he paused to figure how he might get hold of
them without making a trip up for a stick to twist them out
with, he heard an echoing scratching noise against the hollow
wood. He looked up.

There old Susie was, all four feet bunched on the rim, bal-
anced like a hen on a limb, peering earnestly down into the
shadowed hollow. She did not appear to find fault with the
musky smell of bear and damp decayed wood that emanated
from her home.

“No,” Jim Ingram later reported, “there wa’n’t nary a twitch
to her nose. I was jest hunkered there, my mouth opened about
as wide as the gunny sack I had ready for the cubs. I guess my
eyes were bugged out like a pair of purple grapes on a mustang
vine. I don’t remember ever staring so hard in my life at any-
thing else as at that bear. I didn’t have no right to be supprised,
but I was. The bear was supprised too, but she was still mad-
der. She was the maddest bear I ever see, and I’ve saw many a
mad bear. There she squatted and there I squatted, and I
couldn’t have moved a finger. Then she started down.”

Bears don’t climb down trees headfirst, like squirrels. Old
Susie had to reverse ends to start down. The posture placed her
head outside the hollow so that she could not possibly see what
was going on beneath her descending rump. Not at all slowly,
the rump began wabbling downward, claws feeling for holds.

And now the spell that held Jim fixed was broken. “God-
a’mighty!” he yelled. “Git out o’ here!”

The yell rumbled and echoed in the deep hollow. The bear
was more than startled. She obeyed directions with great alac-
rity, hauling her body out. Then, balancing all four feet on the
rim, she again peered down.


202 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Jim was on his feet now, one hand grasping the rope. He
gave it a flap against the bear’s nose. She put out a hand, swept
the loop from the splinter that Jim had roped, and let it fall at
his feet.

Again she reversed ends and began her rearward descent.
Again Jim gave his war whoop. He’d been saving his energy
most of his life, and now he threw it all into his voice. The
bear scrambled out again, and then started down again. Jim was
plumb prodigal with his vocal productions. Six times in all the
bear retreated before the sounds that Jim sent up. The seventh
time she started down she kept coming. Jim hadn’t begun to
lose his voice; the bear was merely getting used to it. Jim had
his knife out, but there was a mighty poor prospect of digging
it into a vital spot.

“There wa’n’t but one thing fer me to do,” Jim afterwards
told, “and I done it. When she backed in good reach, I grabbed
her by the tail with one hand and give her a good knife-spurring
with the other. At the same time, I yelled like nobody ain’t
never yelled before nor since.

“She started back up again, and this time I was with her.
Yes, sir, she set out like Sam Bass’s race mare. I had to drop
my knife so’s to hold on with both hands. She took me up on
that tail like a coon pulls crawfish out 0’ the mud with his’n.
When I got to the rim, I made a dive that landed me on my
feet. At the same time, that she bear made a dive into the hol-
low that must of landed her on her head. No, sir, she wa’n’t
going to make no more rear movements into that holler tree.

“But it didn’t hurt her none. While I was a-getting my gun,
I heard her talking mama-talk to them cubs. I didn’t stop to
cipher out exactly what she was saying. I jest pulled my freight
fer Jericho. I'd done decided I could go a spell longer without
bear grease in the cornbread.”


Bears Are Intelligent People 203


“A gentleman of respectability and veracity” told Elias R.
Wrightman, who surveyed lands for the English-speaking colo-
nists in Texas, that he once saw a vaquero run his horse full
speed after a bear, cast a loop around the bear’s neck, jerk him
down and begin dragging him. Thereupon the bear turned over
on his back, seized the rope and began crawling up it toward
the horseman, who was still making pretty good time. The bear
took in the slack sailorwise until he was close enough to reach
over and get a handful of horseflesh. At this pass, the vaquero
unwound the rope from his saddle horn, threw it to the bear to
keep, and dashed away.

But that’s not the way a man distinguished — in the story-
teller world at least — for something better than “veracity” told
it to me.


A long time ago a certain bear that had been offended by a
vaquero caught him and ate him up. He liked the meat so well
that he took to lying in wait for men. Frequently he was shot
at, but no bullet ever seemed to harm him. He bore a charmed
life. He had a white spot on his breast that looked like a star,
and they called him Star Breast. He haunted a thicket where
two roads, or trails, crossed and where travelers sometimes
camped, for at this place was the only spring of water in the
country and near it was good grass. Finally, the place became
so well known on account of the number of people whom Star
Breast had made away with here that it was avoided by all trav-
elers.

Now there was one vaquero in the country who was very
brave and very desirous of winning fame. His name was Pablo
Romero. One day while Pablo Romero and another vaquero
were hunting horses on the prairie in the region of the cross-
trails, they saw the tracks of Star Breast. Those tracks were so


204 Tales of Old-Time Texas


enormous that no one could mistake them for the tracks of an-
other bear.

“Listen,” said Pablo Romero, “I’m going to kill Star Breast.
I know that it is useless to try to shoot him, and we have no
guns anyhow. But I shall rope him and choke him to death the
way we rope Indians and choke them. I am riding the best rop-
ing horse that a reata was ever thrown from. He has the
strength of ten bulls in him. My rawhide reata is new. It would
hold an elephant.”

Pablo Romero’s compafiero did not take to the idea at all. He
pleaded with his companion not to think of such a foolhardy
undertaking. “Don’t you know,” he said, “that if Star Breast is
proof against bullets he will be proof against rawhide? He’s in
that thicket now listening to us and preparing to come after us.
Instead of riding on towards him, we must turn and go the
other way.”

“No,” replied Pablo Romero, “in this country lead is not
superior to rawhide. A good roper, a good roping horse, and a
good rope can conquer anything that breathes.”

Pablo Romero would not be turned. His compafiero finally
consented to stay and watch the roping from a distance. They
rode on towards the thicket, and, sure enough as they were ap-
proaching it, they saw Star Breast emerge. He stood on his hind
legs, waved his great hairy arms, rumbled a great roar, and then
came on. The horses ridden by the vaqueros were beside them-
selves with fright, but Pablo Romero, by untying his reata from
the horn of the saddle and playing out a loop, persuaded his
horse to keep going. A good roping horse can hardly be
stopped when he realizes that the rope is being prepared for ac-
tion. The other vaquero galloped to a little rise.

He saw Pablo Romero fasten one end of the reata to his sad-
dle. He saw him with swinging loop dash towards Star Breast,


Bears Are Intelligent People 205


who had halted, standing up on his hind legs. The loop fell
over Star Breast’s head, while man and rider dashed on. When
the end of the rope was reached, the horse was jerked back and
the bear was jerked down. The loop had caught him under one
arm and around the neck. Instantly, almost, the horse whirled
so that he could get a better pull, and at the same time the
bear recovered his upright position.

And now came a desperate maneuver between a gigantic,
fierce, powerful and cunning bear at one end of the rope and
an expert horse ridden by an expert rider at the other end.
Several times the bear was jerked down. Had the loop not been
under his arm, the pull about his neck might have choked him.
The bear soon learned that by grasping the rope with his hands
he could break the force of the jerks. Once he caught the tough
rawhide in his teeth to break a jerk. A tooth was jerked out and
he howled with rage. He did not catch the reata with his teeth
again. He began to go forward up the rope towards the horse.
As the length of the rope between the animals grew shorter,
the horse had a shorter distance in which to run and therefore
could not jerk so hard. He could not jerk the rope out of the
bear’s hands. He was panting hard.

Pablo Romero was a brave vaquero. He would not quit his
horse. He had no gun of any kind to shoot. The rope was
knotted so tightly about his saddle horn that he could not
loosen it. Apparently he had no knife with which to cut it.
Had his compafiero been very brave, perhaps he might have
roped the bear also and have pulled him away from his friend.
He was not that brave. Anyhow, this roping contest was against
his judgment.

At last, panting and frothing, Star Breast got up to horse
and man. Now the vaquero who was watching saw a strange
thing. He saw Star Breast reach up and drag Pablo Romero


206 Tales of Old-Time Texas


from the saddle. He saw him take the rope off his own neck,
coil it up, and tie it to the saddle horn. Then he saw him
mount the horse and, with the limp form of Pablo Romero
across the saddle in front of him, ride off into the brush. That
was the last ever seen either of Pablo Romero or of Pablo
Romero’s horse.


One time in Montana an old Texas trail hand who had
stayed there after helping deliver a herd from Live Oak
County gave me a kind of side light on this story. He had been
down in California a while, working for Miller and Lux. In
1892, he said, another Miller and Lux man by the name of
Jim Reeves roped a big black bear up a tree growing in the
San Simeon Valley. The bear jumped before the rope really
tightened on him. Jim Reeves spurred, and then for a hundred
yards or so it was a race. Jim’s horse had to go around a low
rocky point and, having a bit of free time here, the bear jumped
on top of a rock. Jim reined up and for a minute sat in the saddle
admiring the bear, which made a fine sight above him. Then,
without a word of warning, the bear sprang upon the horse.
Jim at the same time sprang off. For a while that horse went on
as spectacular a spree of pitching as ever made a rodeo crowd
hold its breath. He sun-fished, worm-fenced, turned around in
the air, banked east, knotted his backbone west. He came down
with all four feet bunched like a deer’s when it is cutting a
rattlesnake to shreds, and he came down spraddled on stiff legs.
He bawled and he bellered, and there was no rein to check the
reach of his head. All the time that bear just hunkered on his
back, and then the horse headed for the tall tules.

Jim Reeves saw he was taking the direction to his line camp,
about two and a half miles away. His wife was there alone, and
Jim set out walking. Jim found her almost scared out of her


Bears Are Intelligent People 207


mind. She had heard a horse running, had rushed out of the
cabin, seen a riderless horse dragging something. She supposed
it was Jim. But it was the bear, dislodged from the horse’s
back, probably by the limb of a tree that the horse ran under.
All this time the rope had still been around the bear, one end
of it tied to the saddle horn. The bear had made his last ride.
Jim found the horse not far away; he never was worth anything
after that.

Three months later Jim’s wife gave birth to a boy that had
cheeks and nose shaped like those of a bear.


Old Bill, Confederate Ally


HEY tell me that Jeb Rider’s log cabin still stands, about a
nl of a mile up the slope from the spring on Elm Creek.
Nobody has struck oil in this part of east Texas yet, and so
things out of the past live on there. People still talk about the
Civil War, and call up the names of Jeb Rider and certain other
Confederates reduced long ago to earth in the little graveyard
where wild trumpet vines cover the fence with red flowers all
through the summer months and into fall. Old Bill disap-
peared long before they did, but Jeb Rider’s story of Old Bill
keeps on blooming with the trumpet vines. This is the way he
told it.


When me and my wife married, it was her idear having the
house so fur up the slope from where we got water outa the
spring on Ellum Creek. She was skeered of floods and strong on
a hill breeze. Also, she didn’t like bottom land mosquitoes. I was
nacherly agin having to tote water so fur, but ’fore long I some-
times wished it were further. I could walk down the trail and
set on the cypress log there at the spring and kinder get peaceful.
She was always badgering me to clear more land and plant more
Sweet pertaters and hoe the corn cleaner and keep stovewood


Old Bill, Confederate Ally 209


chopped up, and put my God-given time in on a lot of other
things. I’d always been used to squirreling around with the dogs
or jest being quiet and letting whatever was going on kinder
soak into me. Stewing about went against my nature.

The best dog I ever had was Old Bill. He was out of a bitch
Pa brung from Tinnissee; that is, figgering in several ginerations
between. I never can remember whether it was July 13 or July
14 he died, the year before the War started. Anyhow, one
cloudy day about a month after he died 1 was going down the
trail to the spring uncommon low in the mouth and was about
halfway, kinder unconsciouslike; I heard sump’n behind me.
Maybe it was a rustle in the leaves. I didn’t pay no ’rention
till I heard a low rattle. Then I looked, and I'll be dogged if
it wasn’t the biggest diamon’back rattlesnake I ever see, right
in the trail, not more’n six steps back.

When I stopped and looked, he stopped too and raised his
head up ina curious way and looked at me without shaking his
tail a-tall. Ir’s that tail-shaking that makes a rattlesnake so fear-
some, puts the j’ints in a human’s backbone to shaking too.
Well, I didn’t have a thing along to hit with, not even a water
bucket, and when I glanced round fer a stick there wa'n'’t
none in reach. I started on down the trail agin to a dead
dogwood I could break off. Then I looked back and that dia-
mon’back was coming on too, keeping a respec’ful distance and
looking like he didn’t mean no harm.

When I got to the dead dogwood and broke off a stick and
drew it back to lam the snake, he looked more harmless than
ever. I can’t explain it. There he was keeping a respec ful dis-
tance, and all at once he sorter seemed to me like a dog that
wants to foller you and be friends but’s afraid to come too
clost. Well, I stood there a-holding the stick, and he had his
head up a little watching me, and his eyes jest seemed to say


210 Tales of Old-Time Texas


he understood. They looked a lot charitabler than some human
eyes I’ve peered into.

Then I done clear contrary to nature. I throwed the stick
away and started agin on down to the spring. Ever once in a
while I’d turn my head and look back. The rattlesnake was
still follering, humble and respec’ful. When I set down on the
cypress log, he coiled up and kept looking right straight at me.
D’reckly I begun to kinder talk to him. I was still youngish
and a blamed fool about feeling sorry for myself. And that old
snake would nod his head around and look like he felt sorry
too.

No telling how long we mighta kept up the conversation if
about half a dozen mockingbirds hadn’t got to diving at the
snake and jabbering and disturbing his peace and mine too.
Still, I felt a lot better. When I started up to the cabin, he
started too, jest follering like a dog. About halfway up he
dropped out, and I didn’t see nothing more of him till the next
day. I was going down to the spring agin to bring up some
water fer Abbie to wash with. Right about the halfway place,
he fell in behind me like he’d done the first time, and now his
follering seemed jest as nacherl as a dog scratching fleas.

“See here,” I says to him after we got settled at the spring,
‘Tm going to call you Bill. Bill, he was the best coon and
possum dog I ever had, and he always understood me. When I
wanted to squirrel around, he never had no idears about hoeing
weeds out of the yard or putting poles in the fence to keep the
hawgs outer the field or anything like that. Yes, sir, you're Bill
to me from now on.”

And Bill jest nodded his head and looked grateful out of
his eyes and shore would’ve talked if he could of. It was real
soothing to be with him, and when Abbie went to squalling
fer me to hurry up and bring on the water he acturly winked.


Old Bill, Confederate Ally 211


Well, after that we was together lots at the spring. Whenever

went to the store I’d hear talk about the Aberlitionists up
North working to take the “niggers” away from us Southern
olks and make ’em our equals, and more talk about the Black
Republicans. When I got back I’d tell Bill about em — some-
imes afore I told Abbie — and, by hokey, he’d coil up and look
ierce enough to bite a crowbar.

Then the War did come. I volunteered fer Captain Aber-
crombie’s company and traded off some corn and a mule fer a
x0od, gentle horse and bought Abbie a new axe and got all ready
to go. The evening afore I was to set out, I went down to the
spring to kinder ca’m myself and tell Bill good-by.

It looked like he understood all about the Yankees. I told
him to look after things around the spring as best he could
and I’d be back someday. The next morning after Abbie got
my things all packed and I'd told her good-by and started fer
the county seat, I rode to the spring to water my horse.

Well, jest as I was coming out under that leaning ellum over
the trail between the house and the spring, I felt sump’n drop
acrost my shoulders. It woulda scared me if it hadn’t been so
nacherl.

“So you want to go to war too, do you, Bill?” I says. He nods.

“} don’t know how the fellers in camps would take to you,”
I says. “They’re all Texians, you know,” I says, “and got about
as much use fer a rattlesnake as a wildcat has for a lost puppy.”
You see, I hadn’t told a soul about Old Bill — not even Abbie.
I jest didn’t think anybody would understand. But if Bill was
so set on going with me, | decided right then I'd try to convert
the heathen.

“If you'll promise,” I says to him, “not to bother nobody
and stay put where I puts you, [ll take you. I'll explain to the
fellers and maybe they’ll git the idear.”


212 Tales of Old-Time Texas


He nods and we rode on.

Some of the fellers seemed to think at first that I was a plain
idiot, but they left Bill alone and he left them alone. I shore
didn’t have no trouble with anybody trying to steal my blankets,
and the way Jim Bowie — that’s what I named my horse —
and Old Bill got to be frenly with each other was a caution.
Sometimes Jim Bowie would kinder nose Bill along the back,
and many a time when Jim Bowie was a-grazing I’ve seen Bill
crawl out in front of him and scare off devilhorses so Jim
Bowie wouldn’t accerdently chew one up. You know how a
devilhorse, once it’s inside the stomick of an animal, can kill it.
I fixed up a bag for Old Bill to ride comfortable in, and when
we moved, hung it on the horn of the saddle.

Fer months we jest practised marching and squads-righting
and squads-lefting and so on. I’d leave Old Bill on the edge of
the parade grounds, and I got to noticing how interested he
seemed in our movements. When we paraded, he’d get ex-
citeder than the colonel’s horse. The band music was what set
him up. “Dixie” was his favorite tune, and he got so he could
sorter rattle it. It shore was comical to see him histing his
tail fer the high notes.

Finally our training was over. We crossed the Mississippi and
joined Gin’ral Albert Sidney Johnston’s forces. Then when
Shiloh opened up, on that Sunday morning in April, we was in
it. We fought and we fit all day long, sometimes going for-
wards and sometimes backwards, sometimes in the brush and
sometimes acrost clearings. We didn’t know till next day that
our gin’ral had been killed. If he’da lived and if we'da had a
few more like Old Bill, things would have turned out mighty
different.

My regiment was camped on Owl Creek, due north of Shiloh
Chapel, and jest before we went into battle that morning I took


214 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Old Bill over to a commissary waggin and told him to
there and told the driver to kinder keep him. Late ev
found us coming back into a long neck of woods that
colonel told us we'd have to clear of Yankees. They’d we
in between us and Owl Creek. We found ’em all right,
they was the deadest Yankees Tever see. At first we was b
ing along on the ground, keeping behind trees and expec
fire. Then when we kept finding more and more dead uns,
figgered some other outfit had beat us to em. We got to bre
ing easy, and then somebody noticed that none of the «
all-fired strange, and
trees wasn’t none of ’em creased neither.

I decided to examine a little closer, and I pulled up


his shoetop on the outs
where the ankle vein runs, I noticed a pair of little holes ab


suddent, I knowed Old Bill’d been there. I told the bo
They went to looking at the dead Yankee legs and could


We kep’ going through the neck of woods and counting de
Yankees till we got to Owl Creek, a little belo:
ricollection is that the count run to 417, but it may have bec
a few less. Course, too, some few might’ve been counted twice


I guess the official Teport would show, if ir didn’t git burne
up at Richmond.


Ww camps.


Old Bill, Confederate Ally 215


found a big wood rat. He brung it in alive and put it in
front of Old Bill. As a rule, Old Bill never et nothing hardly,
but the way he nailed that rat and then swallered him whole
was an edicashin in appertite. We all shore was proud of him.
After that the boys quit figgering on frying him up fer beef-
steak. They took to calling him Diamon’ Bill and looked on
him as a mascot. Some of ’em said he was the most valuable
soldier in the Confederate Army. Why, the Colonel used to git
me to send him out on scout duty. No telling how many
Yankees he cleaned out of thickets it was dangerous fer a man
to enter. He knowed the difference between Confederate gray
and Union blue jest as well as Ab Blocker’s cow dog knowed
the difference between a branded critter and a mav’rick.

Well, ’tain’t no use fer me to tell about all the battles we
fought in. At Appermattox I was still alive and so was Diamon’
Bill. Jim Bowie wa’n’t, though, and we rode home on a borrered
mule. One day ’way long in the summer I put Bill down at the
spring on Ellum Creek, and afore my saddle blanket was dry I
was breaking land, putting up the old fences, hoeing weeds out
of the patch Abbie had planted, and doing all sorts of work.
The dogs was all dead and there wan't no time fer nothing
else. Lots of days I didn’t even think about Old Bill.

Then one day in the spring of ’66, while I was going in a
hurry down to the spring, I heard something that made my
mind whirl back. I wheeled around and saw a big diamon’back
running towards me. Afore I could grab fer a stick, I see it was
Old Bill. I called out to him, “Bill!” He nodded his head the
way I'd seen him do a thousand times. But he made a new
kind of motion that says he wants me to foller him. He turns
off the trail and I follers.

About a hundred yards off he sidled up to another rattler,
and looked back at me. “Mrs. Bill?” I says. He nodded, and the


216 Tales of Old-Time Texas


two went on. D’reckly we come to a clearing *bout the size of
our courthouse maybe. Old Bill stopped, raised up like a
nacherl-borned commander, and give the durnedest rattle a man
ever heard. Then he moved on ahead about ten paces and rared
up agin. By that time, squads and troops and companies and
battalions of young rattlesnakes was coming out of the brush
on all sides. I’m afeared to say how many they was — hundreds,
maybe thousands. They come out in regular formations, squads-
righting and squads-lefting and fronting-into-line like old sol-
diers. Bill lined ’em up fer dress parade about the middle of the
field. Then he sounded one rattle fer a signal and, keeping a per-
fect front, they begun advancing towards me, all rattles a-going
and every dodgummed one of ’em a-playing “Dixie.”

Old Bill knowed what he’d done in the War. The trouble
was he was the only rattlesnake in it. He didn’t seem to realize
the War was over. Here he’d come home and raised this army,
and now he was offering it to me. I ricollect how the Confed-
erate boys uster always be quoting Gin’ral Bedford Forrest. He
said, you know, that the gin’ral wins who gits there fustest with
the mostest. Well, it was jest too late to be fustest. I tried to
explain to Diamon’ Bill. And that was the last in a military way
I ever seen of him.


Part Five


Colonel Abercrombie’s Mole


N” you can talk about cotton acreage in Washington, and
Perry McFaddin’s muskrat ranch on the Neches, and mole-
skin coats in New York. I'll tell you something about cotton
and moles right here on the Trinity River.”

Uncle Wayne Mitchell had taken the floor. So far as anyone
else in the company could recall, not a word had been breathed
about muskrats or moles or cotton. Uncle Wayne was so deaf
he couldn’t hear it thunder, but he read the Houston Post,
and in his monologues often began with an item in the news.
Sometimes he seemed bound to tell a story. Now he took the
bridle off.


Cotton was awful high that year. There hadn’t been much
made during the War; not any to speak of was planted in ’6s5,
and in ’66 the crop failed complete. But the next year the
Trinity bottoms were white, and cotton sold at a boom price.
As well as I recollect, it was around two-bits a pound. Rashe
McNary — his real name was Horatio but everybody called him
Rashe — must have ginned out fifty bales, and Colonel Aber-
crombie made close to three hundred. After the picking was
finished, they shipped their cotton to Galveston on river boats.


220 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Then, carrying their women folks with them, they went down
to sell it.

Well, they got a top price, and when they deposited the
drafts at the bank, they took out a shot-bag full of gold. It was
the first real money either had seen in six or seven years; so
you can imagine how good they felt. They told their women
folks to buy as many dresses and hats and bustles and carpets
and other such trappings as they wanted. Then they set out to
act thankful.

There were plenty of places for them to step into, and so,
taking a sniff here and a snort there, they kinder grazed out
from the main herd. Ever’ once in a while, Rashe would suggest
they’d better back-trail, but Colonel Abercrombie would say,
“A leetle more for thy stumick’s sake,” or “The freshest grass
is fartherest away from the waterhole,” or some other sech
Bible proverb, and they’d keep on moseying. Along about
sundown they found themselves away out on the edge of
town.

“Colonel,” says Rashe, “it looks like we’ve strayed clear off
the main trail, and I guess we'd better halt and get our bear-
ings.” ;

The Colonel straightened himself up and looked around, and
sure enough he was in a part of town he’d never seen. They
were just across from a shack with a low door and a patched
roof, and they could see a sign over the door. Colonel Aber-
crombie walked over to read it. It said: FORTUNE TELLING DONE
HERE.

“Rashe,” says the Colonel, “I'll back you out of having our
fortunes read.”

“T don’t take much stock in these here fortunetellers,” Rashe
replied, “and I figger they are evil anyway. I mind how the
Scripture says that he who useth divination is an abomination


Colonel Abercrombie’s Mole i 221


unto the Lord. And look what King Saul got from consulting a
fortuneteller.”

But Colonel Abercrombie had his curiosity up. “There never
was a charitabler or a purer man than Joseph,” he said, “and
remember how he consulted fortunetellers.”

It didn’t take much arguing to make Rashe give in. They
knocked, and a peculiar-looking, dark-complected woman with a
red scarf over her head and wickedlike earrings come to the
door. She was a Gypsy, I guess.

“Young lady,” the Colonel began with a bow. She wasn’t
very young, but the Colonel was quite a hand for saying nice
things to the ladies. He always calculated he’d never seen an
ugly woman or tasted bad liquor, though he admitted some was
better than others. “Young lady,” he went on, “this is my
friend Major Horatio McNary and I’m Colonel Abercrombie.
We're from Madison County on the Trinity River, and being
as we are in Galveston on a visit, we thought we’d like to have
our fortunes told.”

“Leastwise,” Rashe puts in, “the Colonel wants his told. I
don’t know about it myself yit. I'll see how he comes out.”

Well, the Gypsy woman told them to come in and set down.
It was darkish inside, but she lit a kerosene lamp on a table
covered with red-checkered oilcloth.

Colonel Abercrombie wanted to know how to start the thing
off. The Gypsy woman shook her earrings so the light glinted on
’em, and then says, “Cross my pa’m with coin and I'll summon
the sperrits.”

She stuck out her hand to Rashe first. Rashe wasn’t much of
a spendthrift; so I expect possibly he gave her four or five
picayunes.

She told him his name — like she hadn’t got it from Colonel
Abercrombie’s introduction — and said he had fought through


222 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the War and had served in Walker’s Division and was now a
prosperous planter. That was all true, and Rashe said anybody
in Madison County could have told him that without him
being out any money. That was about all Rashe got from the
fortuneteller.

Then she put her pa’m out to the Colonel, and he crossed it
with a two-and-a-half gold piece.

“You are Colonel James B. Abercrombie,” she begun. “En-
during the War you were a member of General Longstreet’s
staff, and you had lots of slaves on your plantation before Mr.
Lincoln freed them.”

“Anybody could have told the Colonel that without him
being out two and a half,” Rashe interrupted, but the Gypsy
woman went on.

“Enduring the War you and some other Trinity Bottom
planters loaded four hundred bales of cotton on ox waggins and
had ’em freighted to Brownsville for exporting through Mex-
ico.”

The Colonel straightened up a little straighter. “That’s right,
Rashe, and not everybody could have told me that. Let’s see if
she knows anything else about that cotton.”

“Some of the cotton got lost in the prickly pear and bresh
this side of the Rio Grande,” the Gypsy woman went on,
sorter singsonging like she was in a trance. “I see blood and
bandits, and mixed with the red I see bits of white sticking to
mesquite thorns all along the road. I see oxen with their tongues
out a-laying down, and there’s no water.”

By now Rashe was as quiet as a little brown wren on her nest.

“But,” the fortuneteller continued, “‘a good part of the cotton
got across into Mexico all right and was taken over by an
agent in Matamoros to be shipped to England, where the spin-
ners are. It was loaded on a gunrunner.”


Colonel Abercrombie’s Mole 223


“That’s right, that’s right,” the Colonel broke in. “Listen,
Rashe. Go ahead, young lady.”

“The gunrunner escaped the dastard enemy, but, Colonel
Abercrombie, you have never heared a word concerning that
cotton from that day till this.”

“T never have, and I never expect to,” the Colonel roared.

“Well, the cotton reached the spinners in the green fields of
England,” the Gypsy woman resumed.

“T don’t doubt it,” Rashe exploded.

She kept as ca’m as a Mexican burro eating shucks. “And
now, Colonel Abercrombie,” she went on, “you say you never
expect to hear from that cotton again. Yet it reached an honest
buyer, and he has been trying all this time to find out who
shipped it. He will learn very soon, Remember the stars have
been jostled in their courses.”

Here the fortuneteller paused. Colonel Abercrombie said
he sure hoped he’d hear something yit, but Rache jest kinder
snorted.

The fortuneteller went on, “Well, I see the other gentleman
don’t have any confidence in the sperrits, Colonel, but you
seem more reasonable. Do you believe in what the sperrits have
revealed unto you?”

The Colonel said he believed he did.

“IT am glad to hear that,” the fortuneteller answered. “Yit
you will go away and forget what I have told you, or be
ashamed and say nothing about it. Nevertheless, on next Saint
Patrick’s Day, you will receive a letter. In it will be a draft
for four thousand five hundred dollars, and it will be from the
party in England who bought your cotton. Then you will know
that what the sperrits have revealed is true.”

Well, sir, the Colonel was sure tickled. “I’m a-going to git
that money as sure as we are setting here,” he said. “It don’t


224 Tales of Old-Time Texas


stand to reason that this woman could know all that’s already
happened without knowing what is going to happen. As sure as
shooting, I’m a-going to git that money.”

Rashe told him to come on and get away before he went
clean out of his head. As they started to leave, the Colonel
reached down in his pocket, pulled out a five-dollar gold
piece, and gave it to the Gypsy woman. It was her turn to
be pleased.

“Colonel,” she said, “you have been kind to me and the sper-
rits are going to be kind to you. If you will ask your friend to
step out, the sperrits will reveal to you the whereabouts of forty
burro-loads of Spanish gold that for centuries have laid hid from
the eyes of man.”

Here the Colonel asked the Gypsy woman to let Rashe stay.
“J don’t mind,” he said. “He don’t believe in sech things, and
so won’t interfere by digging for the gold. Go ahead and tell
me where it is.”

The woman sat back and shut her eyes, and stayed that way
for a couple of minutes without saying a word. It was getting
darker and darker and the light from the kerosene lamp glinted
brighter’n ever on her gold earrings.

D’reckly she started. “Going on two hundred years ago now,”
she says, “an expedition of Spanish soldiers went up from Mex-
ico City into the Ozark Mountains of Arkansas to hunt gold.
They found it — found plenty of it — and mined until they had
forty burro-loads of pure gold extracted and melted down. They
mistreated the Indians, though, and as a result had to leave.
Before setting out, they covered up their shafts, leaving only a
line of trees with the tops cut off and a map on a rock to mark
the location. It hasn’t been located till this good day, though
everybody knows about the Lost Louisiana Mine, as they
call it.


Colonel Abercrombie’s Mole 225


“But all this don’t interest us, and the sperrits appear indif-
ferent to everything connected therewith but the forty burro-
loads of gold. The Spaniards started back to Mexico with it, the
Indians after them getting thicker and fiercer all the time. They
crossed Red River into Texas and took a route right down the
Trinity.

“Well, when they reached the land destined someday to be
the Abercrombie plantation, the big fight come off and more’n
half the Spaniards bit the dust.”

Colonel Abercrombie said yes, he’d heard rumors all his life
about Spanish gold being buried on his plantation. The Gypsy
woman went on.

“The Spaniards surviving this defeat decided their lives were
worth more than the gold. After dark they went on the prairie
where it was sandy, dug a hole, and planted their whole cargo.
They hadn’t more’n covered it up and got strung out towards
Mexico again before there was another attack. This time not a
Spaniard was left.”

Rashe forgot himself and put in: “How’ll we know where to
dig?” he asked.

“T beg your pardon, sir,” the Colonel said to Rashe, and then
he turned to the fortuneteller. “Jest where is the owner of the
Abercrombie plantation going to find that gold?”

“Please be patient,” the fortuneteller answered. “Your faith
in the sperrits has not been fully proved yet. As I hev said, after
you go away and ca’m down, you will be ashamed of this con-
sultation and won’t be willing to talk about it. But on Saint
Patrick’s Day, the seventeenth of March, when you get that
draft for forty-five hundred dollars for the cotton that the gun-
runner took to England, your faith will be revived and then you
will be able to take advantage of the knowledge imparted by
the sperrits.”


226 Tales of Old-Time Texas


The Gypsy woman shet her eyes and leaned her head back a
long time. Finally she said, “You hev a dark shade tree in front
of your house, do you not, Colonel Abercrombie?”

“Yes,” answered Rashe, “he’s got a big umbrella Chiny tree
right in front of his house.”

The fortuneteller went on, ignoring Rashe. “You love to set
under that tree. It’s sandy all about there. Well, one day while
you are setting there looking down at the ground, you will see
the grass and sand moving and a little ridge come up. That
will be a mole making his way right at the roots of the
grass.”

“Yes, it’s right sandy there, and I’ve seen signs of lots of moles
on his place,” Rashe put in.

The fortuneteller didn’t pay him any mind and went on.
“You watch that mole. After you watch the dirt move awhile,
he will pop out of the ground. Keep your eye on him and fol-
low him. Now mind what I say. After he pops out, follow him
clost, for where he digs back in will be the place for you to dig
and unearth the forty burro-loads of Spanish gold.

“Now good-by, and keep in mind what the sperrits hev re-
vealed unto you.”

Well, Rashe and the Colonel left the Gypsy woman’s house.
As soon as they got outside, she closed the door and they never
saw her again.

“Tr’s funny,” Rashe remarked, “that a woman who knows
where that’ much gold is lives in a house like this.”

“She deals in things of the sperrit, Rashe. She is not inter-
ested in gold.” The Colonel spoke with conviction.

“T notice she seemed glad to get the gold pieces you gave
her,” Rashe sneered.

On the way back to the hotel the Colonel made Rashe prom-
ise not to say anything to the women folks about the fortune-


Colonel Abercrombie’s Mole 227


teller business. “We'll wait till Saint Patrick’s Day and see
how matters turn out,” he said.

Well, time dogtrotted along, and finally Saint Patrick’s Day
arrived. Madisonville got mail three times a week, and it hap-
pened that the seventeenth of March fell on a mail day. Hours
before the mail hack was due, the Colonel was setting on the
board sidewalk in front of the post office twirling his spurs.
Rashe was as clost to him as his own shadder. At last the post-
master got the mail sorted and begun handing it out. There was
a letter for Colonel Abercrombie. It was from England. He
opened it and saw a draft for forty-five hundred dollars.

The Colonel and Rashe got on their horses and lit out. As
soon as they reached the house, the Colonel grabbed two of the
rawhide-bottomed chairs that always set on the front gallery
and carried them out under the chinyberry tree. The leaves
hadn’t sprouted yet. It was pretty breezy out there and, I im-
agine, a little bit early for moles. But they sat till dusk, watch-
ing, jest watching. Then Rashe went home. By the time he got
back next morning, the Colonel was fairly glued to the raw-
hide, as vigilant as a hound dog under a treed coon. The watch-
ing seemed to have a kind of fascination for him, and before
long, Rashe’s wife, so they say, got to nagging the daylights out
of him for staying away so much and letting everything on their
place go to the bowwows.

So the Colonel sat under the tree, Rashe steady by him, all
through the rest of March. In April the setting got more pleas-
ant. When the chinyberry and the Cape jessamines put out flow-
ers, you could see the Colonel inhaling deep and enjoying his
job. May came, and the setters went to shifting their chairs
around so as to keep in the shade. All this time they were hav-
ing mint juleps as reg’lar as the sun climbs up and goes down.

By now blamed near everybody out from the Trinity River


228 Tales of Old-Time Texas


in Madison County knew how the Gypsy woman had foretold a
draft for Colonel Abercrombie’s cotton on St. Patrick’s Day and
how it had come. This don’t mean they were expecting the pre-
diction on the Spanish gold to be fulfilled, but the interest in
moles that sprung up was a caution to the heathen. There was
more talk about moles than about mules or hound dogs. Every-
body had seen their tunnels but nobody hardly had ever actu-
ally seen a mole itself. Colonel Abercrombie sent off to New
Orleans for a set of the Encyclopedia Britannica so’s to read up
on the animal. I don’t think he found anything in it more helpful
on its habits than what Rashe gave him in a quotation from
Shakespeare. Neighbors would ride over and set by the hour
helping Rashe and the Colonel watch. They’d argue over
whether mint ought to be crushed or not crushed in the juleps,
and they’d get scientific over how much sugar is healthiest in
a toddy. The darkies were all mole-watching too, though they
made a stand at keeping out of sight.

The crops went to weeds, and still the Colonel sat under the
chinyberry tree every day and Sunday too, keeping his vigil. It
was the biggest-spreading chinyberry in the whole country, and
this spring it seemed to be taking its second growth. | lived
about twelve miles away, and now and then I'd ride over and
set in the afternoon shade. Colonel Abercrombie would be
smoking his pipe and stroking an old black cat he kept for
luck. He always kept settled down comfortable, but that didn’t
keep him from cutting his eyes this way and that for the
mole.

It was heathenish the way he banked on that black cat, and
I told him so. Once in a while an old roustabout they called
Uncle Alf would bring out a fresh pitcher of cold cistern water
and a demijohn. The Abercrombies made a special good wine
out of mustang grapes, and sometimes the Colonel ordered it.


230 Tales of Old-Time Texas


When the weather was sultry he’d fan himself with his hat.
He wasn’t missing any vittles, but it looked to me like he was
going short on his naps. He told me he put Uncle Alf to watch-
ing one day while he took a siesta and woke up to find him
snoring loud enough to scare off all the moles in Madison
County. Then he moved his cot from the hallway to a good
place under the chinyberry and napped there. I guess he
was figuring on the mole making enough noise to wake him
up.

I argued that moles don’t come out in the heat of the day but
work mostly at night. He said he wasn’t taking any chances. Jest
the same, about this time he took to napping longer after din-
ner, and he bought five or six new lanterns and hung them up
around so any night movement among moles could be detected.
When it come to having the wicks trimmed and coal oil put in
the lanterns, he was as vigilant as the five wise virgins in the
Bible.

Summer went by and cotton-picking time came, and no mole
yet. Rashe had kinder give up hope and his wife was keeping
him purty reg’lar out in the fields weighing cotton and so on.
Late one day about the end of September he rode over to the
Abercrombie place, tied his horse to one of them whitewashed
hitching posts out in front of the yard, and stepped to where
the Colonel was watching. Fall was setting in dampish, and
that’s the kind of weather moles like best to operate in. It ap-
peared to be pertickerly dampish around the Abercrom-
bie place, for I remember how a honeysuckle covering an old
log fence back of the smokehouse kept on blooming.

“It’s been nearly a year,” Rashe says, “since the fortuneteller
woman told us about the mole, and no mole yet. I believe
there’s been fewer moles this year than ever I saw. . . . I no-
tice you ain’t got but one lantern hanging up any more.”


Colonel Abercrombie’s Mole 231


It was clost to sundown, and the Colonel called to old Alf to
bring some fresh water and mint. The demijohn was on a little
table between him and Rashe.

While old Alf was fiddling around with the lantern, Colonel
Abercrombie went on talking. “Yes,” he said, “it’s been a dis-
appointing year for moles. I hate to do it, but tomorrow I’m
going to release the guard. I’ve got to go down to Galveston
to see about my cotton, and I think I’ll stop by and consult that
fortuneteller again. Maybe some way we didn’t get her direc-
tions straight. You see —”

But just at this instant Rashe jumped up like a shot.

“Good God, Colonel,” he busted out, keeping his voice down
in his throat and pointing his finger to a spot on the ground
about halfway between the house and the chinyberry tree,
“there’s that mole!”

Colonel Abercrombie threw his black cat down, jumped up
twice as excited as Rashe, and nearly run over him getting to
where he could see better.

Well, sir, as sure as shooting, you could see a ridge where the
mole had come from under the house. He was a-digging his
little tunnel along among the roots of the grass—jest scattered
crowfoot and grassburs — and he was heading straight for the
chinyberry tree. But the racket and the moving around must
have scared the little critter. He stopped as still as death and
wouldn’t budge a hair.

“Jest be quiet,” Rashe whispered. “He’ll start up again in a
minute.”

They waited a minute, then five minutes, then ten.

“Tm afraid that mole has suffered a stroke of paraly-
sis,” Rashe says, and he wasn’t joking. “It looks like he has
made his last move. Truly, as the Scriptures say, the ways of
the mole are dark.”


232 Tales of Old-Time Texas


But about then the sand started cracking again and the grass
a-jigging. The mole was still headed for the chinyberry. He
moved in jerks kinder, about half an inch at a time. In a little
while he stopped again.

By now the women folks at the house and all the help
around the place had caught on that the mole was in sight.
They were crowding around and tiptoeing up while Rashe and
the Colonel, sort of shooing them back, never took their eyes
off the mole.

About a step ahead of where he was stopped, a carriage track
had cut an inch or so into the turf. Well, d’reckly the mole
started tunneling again, and he’s making real good time now.
Then he come to the carriage track, and there he busted out on
top of the ground. By now dusk was turning to dark.

“Goober peas and General Jackson!” Rashe sorter groaned,
smothering his voice down. “He’s out, and if everybody don’t
keep quiet he’ll get confused and won’t go back into the ground
at the right place for the forty burro-loads.”

“Hush, hush,” the Colonel moaned. “Purty soon it'll be dark
and then we can’t see where he goes down.”

A minute later the Colonel sorter whispered, “Somebody
bring a lantern! No, don’t bring no lantern. The light will
blind him!” He went to bending over, sorter skylighting the
mole.

Well, I don’t guess anybody ever saw anything like it. Rashe
and the Colonel were so excited they were dodging their heads
this way and that, and the women folks and the darkies were
tip-toeing and going around, and meantime the little mole
was a-darting hither and yon, now halting and now appearing
to be ready to go back in. I always have believed in telepathy,
and I always will believe that little mole felt the anxiety every-
body around was feeling in trying to figure out where he was


Colonel Abercrombie’s Mole 233


going to dig in again. I don’t know why the Colonel didn’t order
the people to clear out.

Once the mole came within an ace of burrowing out of sight,
but something undecided him and he took off again. After he
had run in every direction there was, and had got four or five
steps away from the carriage track where he busted out on top
of the ground, something prevented his intentions from ever
being revealed. That old black cat the Colonel had kept by his
chair and in his lap all spring and summer gave a leap.

Before you could say “Jack Robinson,” the cat landed on the
little mole, killed it, and gobbled it down. It looked like a kind
of jedgment on the Colonel’s superstition. I’d remonstrated
with him time and again about believing in black cats. He was
as bad that way as his old black mammy. Well, after this, there
naturally warn’t no way in the world to find out where the mole
was aiming to dig in. I don’t reckon anybody, now, ever will
find the right place to dig for them forty burro-loads of Spanish
gold.


The Green Powder Keg


I tHE days “before bob-wire played hell with Texas,” old
man Bostick’s cattle ranged over the prairies all the way from
San Felipe de Austin on the Brazos River to Eagle Lake against
the Colorado. If he wasn’t the Bostick who captured Santa Anna
and led him to Sam Houston lying wounded under a live oak tree
on San Jacinto battlefield, he was no less a man.

He was a Texian out of the old rock, easy-sitting and hard-
riding; short in explanation and long in silences; sure of him-
self in both plan and execution, and just as sure that everybody
under him, mostly Negroes, would do the right thing the
wrong way. His features were weathered into rawhide; his
heart seemed drier than his skin. The pipe he smoked night
and day had cased his lungs. He was so tight-mouthed that no-
body ever knew what he was thinking.

One day his son Kelly said, “Pa, I’ve come to get some ad-
vice.”

Without waiting to hear on what matter, Bostick retorted,
“Son, get your own. You won’t have to go anywheres for it.
You'll always find it a lot handier than somebody else’s.”

In the manner of old-time range men, he wore a vest summer
and winter. No day ever got hot enough to make him shed it.
In the inside pocket he carried a little notebook containing all
his earthly accounts that needed recording and also a folded


The Green Powder Keg 235


almanac, replaced annually, that was his sole literary require-
ment. Sometimes he wore a white shirt, but never a necktie.
He always drank his coffee an hour before daylight. By day-
light, whether he was to ride or not, his horse was saddled and
tied to a certain post. He generally rode.

Old Bostick was as close in other ways as he was with his lips.
There was no call on him, or on anybody else in the country at
that time, for more than a pennyworth of charity. If some peo-
ple wanted to burden themselves with church buildings and
schools, let them. He felt no need of anything beyond what he
already had; all he wanted was more of the same thing, but he
made no extra moves to acquire it. His house spread out amply
on either side of a great hall, with galleries around half of it


236 Tales of Old-Time Texas


and a stairway through the hall leading to a half story of attics
and the bedroom in which his two daughters slept. Every room
in the house had a fireplace. The only company old man Bostick
ever seemed to care about was the fire.

Anybody who came to this house found a table bountifully
supplied with cornbread, butter, buttermilk, fried steak, baked
shortribs (in wintertime), blackeyed peas, bacon and greens
— when it was greens time — sweet potatoes and Irish potatoes,
honey from his own hives, pepper sauce from native Mexican
peppers, jars of preserved wild plums and grapes— all in such
plenty that half a dozen hounds throve on the daily leavings.
There was always a great plenty of not only food and dogs but of
Negroes, mules, horses, saddles, wagons, harness, woodpiles,
smokehouses, corncribs, rawhide-bottomed chairs and jugs of
whisky. Bostick could chamber whisky by the tincupful without
being fazed beyond a brightening of his steel-gray eyes.

His two daughters, whose mother had died when they were
small and who had been brought up pretty much by a Negro
woman, often wanted more money for dresses. Occasionally Bos-
tick humored them. More often he soothed them down with
saying, “It’s better to be able to buy than to buy,” “It’s not what
you want makes you rich,” or something like that. He was fond
of these girls in his way, and they of him.

The number of cattle he rendered for taxes was not under-
stood by anybody as being the number that wore the B O S
brand. Every year he sold a big string of steers. Twice a year
he worked the range close, branding all his own calves and none
of his neighbors’. Once in a while he sold off a herd of “shells”
— old cows and bulls. He was never known to receive a bank
statement. He always took coin for pay when he sold cattle; he
always paid in coin for anything he bought. He generally got
anything he bought cheaper than other people got it. He loaded


The Green Powder Keg 237


his own cartridges with black powder, bought by the keg,
and he habitually saved the kegs. They were made of water-
proof metal and were painted green. He did not use a great
deal of powder, for he never shot for sport — only for meat, and
he did not often miss.

What was he doing with his money? Nobody ever asked Old
Bostick that question. That was his business. His neighbors, as
well as he, knew how to tend to their own business and leave
other people’s alone.

While this was still the code and while the grass he grazed
was still unfenced, Old Bostick lay dying. A cold wet norther
beat against tne windowpanes, and he seemed satisfied to stay
inside. It would not have been like him to pour out at the end
what he had kept bottled up on the long road. As he lay on
his bed, so placed that he could look into the fireplace coals,
eyes asking him the question that lips dared not phrase got
back no more answer from his lips or expression than the ashes
gave.

After he was buried, still nobody knew what Old Bostick
had done with his money. That he had spent it in secret was
inconceivable. No will could be found. The two daughters,
grown and blooming now, and the son Kelly turned the house
inside and out, looked for loose flagstones in the hearth, searched
the barns and other outhouses, dug and poked in the yard and
lot, but not a sign of hoarded money could they find. They went
to Houston, San Antonio, Columbus, Austin and other places
where there were banks, inquiring after deposits. Apparently
their father had not made any. But the more they figured on how
many years he had sold how many cattle and how little he had
bought, comparatively speaking, to fill out the homemade and
homegrown goods consumed on the ranch, the more convinced
they became that there must be a store of money somewhere.


238 Tales of Old-Time Texas


In time they quit looking for it, but speculation about it and
anecdotes about the man supposed to have accumulated it per-
sisted in household conversation and campfire talk over the
country. The girls married and left the old place. Kelly stayed
on, letting everything run down. He was not good at managing
either whisky or cattle. Finally he got so tired of the cooking,
the dirt, and himself that he proposed selling the homestead
and dividing the proceeds. His sisters agreed, and the sale was
made. The time came for clearing out the old house and leaving
it —and its promise of the Bostick treasure — forever.


On the morning of the appointed day, Old Bostick’s children,
with the help of two strong-backed Negro men, began pulling
forth from the house the accumulations and off-castings of two
generations. It was understood as a matter of course that each
would take what she or he wanted of the furniture and other
goods; the Negroes could have what they wanted of the re-
mainder, and what nobody wanted would be burned. Old Bos-
tick’s saving habits on personal items like worn-out boots and
on such things as pieces of iron, which belonged in the scrap
heap by the blacksmith shop but which lay in boxes and corners
and on shelves, had added enormously to the bulk of material
to be lugged out.

Finally every part of the house had been cleared but the
big dark closet under the stairs, across from the room in which
Bostick always slept. In this closet he used to hang his hunting
horns, treasure a pair of pistols used in Austin’s Colony, hide
new axe handles to keep them from running off, save especially
long horns from longhorn steers he had raised. It was a hoard
of objects ranging from junk to museum pieces — depending on
who did the classifying.

The clearing out of the closet brought to light many things


The Green Powder Keg 239


the Bostick children had forgotten: a big box of Frank Les-
lie’s Illustrated Newspaper and other magazines their mother
had saved, a grandfather’s clock that their father had talked of
having repaired but never did get to, a sack — or what had once
been a sack — of wool, mostly converted into the nests of mice,
a buffalo robe that had been used as a rug, a moth-eaten Saltillo
blanket worn as a slicker on the Chisholm Trail before slickers
were invented, and so on. After the Negroes had pronounced
everything out, Kelly decided to have one last look. He had to
stoop slightly to go through the door. He struck a match, for
the back part of the closet was in thick darkness. The stirred-
up dust made him sneeze, and the sneeze blew out the match.
He lit a second one, stooping over to protect the flame with his
hands.

Thus bent and facing the bottom of the stairs, which sloped
the roof of the closet from a height of nothing to twelve feet,
he noted some kind of object under the second step. He had to
half-crawl to get to it. As he neared it and put his hand on it,
he recognized it as one of the old-time metal powder kegs,
painted green, a stopper of lead alloy screwed into a bunghole
at one end.

Kelly felt, then saw, that the bunghole was closed. He gave
the keg a yank; it did not budge. The thing seemed to be nailed
down. Bracing himself and pulling steadily at the rim on the
keg, he tipped it over. Then it was easy to roll. Rolling it, Kelly
heard a clinking.

When he called his sisters, he was alone with the keg in his
father’s old room, now entirely empty. He shut the door after
his sisters came in. He uprighted the keg and unscrewed the
metal plate. Gold filled the keg to the rim. They emptied it
right there — nothing but gold pieces of twenty dollars, ten,
five, and two and a half. They stacked all the twenties in one


240 Tales of Old-Time Texas


pile, all the tens in another, and so on. While the girls were
finishing this sorting, Kelly went out and brought in three blan-
kets.

Then the three sat on the floor, each with a blanket in front,
while Kelly undertook the distribution. “One for you, one for
you, and one for me,” he began, pitching the twenty-dollar
pieces, one at a time, on the blankets. Finally all the coins were
distributed. The counting came later. Each had approximately
twenty thousand dollars.

One girl tried to get her husband to invest her third. He
flatly refused to touch a cent of it, swearing that when he got so
he couldn’t support his wife she could live on her own money,
but that until then she’d have to put up with what he made.
For years the bank at Bellville kept a deposit of twenty thou-
sand dollars in her name. The husband of the other girl had no
such scruples. He and Kelly bought a ranch over on the Big
Bernard. They depended on a whisky bottle to manage it, and
the property evaporated faster than uncorked champagne.

All, in the end, that Old Bostick’s secret and gold came to
was a tale that is told.


In a Drouth Crack


HILE Texas was still a part of Mexico —though sepa-
Wired by export and import laws — the McNeal brothers
freighted a load of general merchandise from the lower Brazos
River to Presidio del Rio Grande (in the region of present
day Eagle Pass). They sold out at a good profit, receiving pay
in silver coins, which they put into stout bags. As there was an
export duty on silver from Mexico, they hid the bags from the
customs officials. After they had passed, however, the officials
became suspicious and sent a detachment of soldiers after them.
The McNeals were on a “mesquite prairie” seamed with dry-
weather crevices — drouth cracks — when they saw the soldiers
coming far off. Hidden from view, they dropped the bags of
silver into one of the cracks, took a good look at the landscape
and moved on.

The soldiers soon overtook them, searched them, found
nothing and turned back for the Rio Grande. The McNeals
waited until “all was pacific,” as the Mexicans say, and then
returned to the drouth crack. “But the cleft was so deep and the
ground was so hard they could not dig the money out without
picks and spades. These they could not obtain without a trip
to the colonies hundreds of miles away. Before they got in,
the rains came on, closing the cracks and obliterating their
landmarks. If anybody wants to search for buried treasure,


242 Tales of Old-Time Texas


there is his chance —if the stuff hasn’t gone through to the
other side of the world.” This is one of Noah Smithwick’s stories.


Only two or three times in a century does a drouth dry up
the central part of Texas as did that of 1886. . . . Now it was
late August. There had been no spring. The cedar elms along
Onion Creek were already dropping their leaves. Some oaks
were dead. Even the narrow, nonevaporating leaves on mes-
quites, beginning to take the prairies, had sered. The only
winds were whirlwinds — always the sign of more dry weather.
The grass roots had died; the bull nettles in the fields were
runty and withered. Drouth cracks seamed the black land ev-
erywhere.

Fanning his face with his hat, Tobe Pickett sat on the front
gallery of his low house, which sprawled out on both sides of
an open hall, among live oak trees on Onion Creek, near the
Spanish Trail crossing, about eight miles from Austin. He had
a way of grumbling to himself, interspersing his phrases with
“my-my’s” and long sighs, often with a kind of rhyme. He
usually ended his soliloquies with a whistling sound that pro-
longed itself the length of time it took to expire all the air
from his thick chest. Now he was going on to himself about
the weather.

“My, my, ain’t it hot!” he’d say. “Oh, ho, dead doe, how,
hmmm! I wonder if it ain’t ever going to rain. Rain, rain,
gone to Spain. Hu, hu, hu’ —and then that long, dying
whistle.

The only person present to notice his ejaculations and groans
and mutterings was his wife, Aunt Mat. She was so used to
them that she paid no attention to them now. Wiping the sweat
from her face with her apron, she stepped from an ironing


In a Drouth Crack 243


board in the hall to the wooden bucket hanging from a rafter
of the gallery and dipped out a gourd of water. As she drank,
her eyes swept the horizon.

“Seems like them dust-devils get thicker every day,” she re-
marked.

“It’s too dry for the dry weather locusts to sizzle,” Tobe went
on. “My, my, my, looks like it jes’ can’t rain. Drier’n it ever
was before, worser’n it was in sixty-four.”

“You don’t know how bad it was in sixty-four,” Aunt Mat re-
joined mildly. “You was stealing peaches in Georgia — between
battles with Sherman’s Yankees. That Meskin oughta be show-
ing up "bout now.”

“Well,” Tobe retorted, “haven’t you and everybody else left
here during the War told me over and over how the cattle died
too poor fer the buzzards to eat? And how the prickly pear
took the dry rot and shriveled to nothing? And how half the
dogies that didn’t starve to death fell down into the drouth
cracks? Don’t tell me. Dry, dry, dry, and nota cloud to try . . os
—and Tobe was off again on one of his monologues.


The sun was still maybe two hours high. The Mexican hired
man came up to the gallery, his feet, in rawhide sandals, touch-
ing the ground at each step in a manner of infinite repose.

“Maybe so I go haul the water now?” he queried. “She is
more cool.”

“Cool!” Tobe exploded.

The Mexican said, “Si, Sefor,” and took a restful stand in
the shade.

“Ho, hi, hum, whirlwinds till kingdom come,” Tobe went
on, looking out over the baked land, apparently oblivious of ev-
erything else.

“Well, don’t jes’ set and go on forever,’ Aunt Mat exclaimed.


260 Tales of Old-Time Texas


tions about the treasure, but no answer of theirs has ever made
the earth respond.


One of the men who searched was Billy Longworth. He knew
all there was to tell about the treasure — and maybe more. I’ve
merely told his story. I don’t know a thing more to tell.


In a Drouth Crack


nite Texas was still a part of Mexico —though sepa-
W rated by export and import laws — the McNeal brothers
freighted a load of general merchandise from the lower Brazos
River to Presidio del Rio Grande (in the region of present
day Eagle Pass). They sold out at a good profit, receiving pay
in silver coins, which they put into stout bags. As there was an
export duty on silver from Mexico, they hid the bags from the
customs officials. After they had passed, however, the officials
became suspicious and sent a detachment of soldiers after them.
The McNeals were on a “mesquite prairie” seamed with dry-
weather crevices — drouth cracks — when they saw the soldiers
coming far off. Hidden from view, they dropped the bags of
silver into one of the cracks, took a good look at the landscape
and moved on.

The soldiers soon overtook them, searched them, found
nothing and turned back for the Rio Grande. The McNeals
waited until “all was pacific,” as the Mexicans say, and then
returned to the drouth crack. “But the cleft was so deep and the
ground was so hard they could not dig the money out without
picks and spades. These they could not obtain without a trip
to the colonies hundreds of miles away. Before they got in,
the rains came on, closing the cracks and obliterating their
landmarks. If anybody wants to search for buried treasure,


242 Tales of Old-Time Texas


there is his chance —if the stuff hasn't gone through to the
other side of the world.” This is one of Noah Smithwick’s stories.


Only two or three times in a century does a drouth dry up
the central part of Texas as did that of 1886. . . . Now it was
late August. There had been no spring. The cedar elms along
Onion Creek were already dropping their leaves. Some oaks
were dead. Even the narrow, nonevaporating leaves on mes-
quites, beginning to take the prairies, had sered. The only
winds were whirlwinds — always the sign of more dry weather.
The grass roots had died; the bull nettles in the fields were
runty and withered. Drouth cracks seamed the black land ev-
erywhere.

Fanning his face with his hat, Tobe Pickett sat on the front
gallery of his low house, which sprawled out on both sides of
an open hall, among live oak trees on Onion Creek, near the
Spanish Trail crossing, about eight miles from Austin. He had
a way of grumbling to himself, interspersing his phrases with
“my-my’s” and long sighs, often with a kind of rhyme. He
usually ended his soliloquies with a whistling sound that pro-
longed itself the length of time it took to expire all the air
from his thick chest. Now he was going on to himself about
the weather.

“My, my, ain’t it hot!” he’d say. “Oh, ho, dead doe, how,
hmmm! I wonder if it ain’t ever going to rain. Rain, rain,
gone to Spain. Hu, hu, hu’—and then that long, dying
whistle.

The only person present to notice his ejaculations and groans
and mutterings was his wife, Aunt Mat. She was so used to
them that she paid no attention to them now. Wiping the sweat
from her face with her apron, she stepped from an ironing


In a Drouth Crack 243


board in the hall to the wooden bucket hanging from a rafter
of the gallery and dipped out a gourd of water. As she drank,
her eyes swept the horizon.

“Seems like them dust-devils get thicker every day,” she re-
marked.

“Tt’s too dry for the dry weather locusts to sizzle,” Tobe went
on. “My, my, my, looks like it jes’ can’t rain. Drier’n it ever
was before, worser’n it was in sixty-four.”

“You don’t know how bad it was in sixty-four,” Aunt Mat re-
joined mildly. “You was stealing peaches in Georgia — between
battles with Sherman’s Yankees. That Meskin oughta be show-
ing up ’bout now.”

“Well,” Tobe retorted, “haven’t you and everybody else left
here during the War told me over and over how the cattle died
too poor fer the buzzards to eat? And how the prickly pear
took the dry rot and shriveled to nothing? And how half the
dogies that didn’t starve to death fell down into the drouth
cracks? Don’t tell me. Dry, dry, dry, and notacloudto try .. .”
—and Tobe was off again on one of his monologues.


The sun was still maybe two hours high. The Mexican hired
man came up to the gallery, his feet, in rawhide sandals, touch-
ing the ground at each step in a manner of infinite repose.

“Maybe so I go haul the water now?” he queried. “She is
more cool.”

“Cool!” Tobe exploded.

The Mexican said, “Si, Sefior,” and took a restful stand in
the shade.

“Ho, hi, hum, whirlwinds till kingdom come,” Tobe went
on, looking out over the baked land, apparently oblivious of ev-
erything else.

“Well, don’t jes’ set and go on forever,” Aunt Mat exclaimed.


244 Tales of Old-Time Texas


“Tell Pablo to get moving and haul the water. When our well
went dry, I predicted the last waterhole in Onion Creek would
dry up too. If you and Pablo don’t fence in that rock waterhole,
we won't have any water fit to drink.”

“My, my, call it dry! Yes, go on, Pablo, and hitch up that
Gotch mule to the sled and haul the water.”

As the Mexican made a motion to get going, Tobe added,
“And mind out for them drouth cracks. Giles’s horse stepped
in one yesterday and nearly broke his leg, and his wife said
the off wheels of their buggy got into one and they had to drag
away down it before it got shallow enough to pull out of. You
watch now. Drier than a lime-burner’s hat and hotter’n a hot-
box in hell. Pablo, maybe a cup of coffee would sorter cool
me off.”

“Si, Sefior.” Pablo went to the kitchen, where he could be
heard lifting the stovelid off and raking up coals. After a while
he brought out a cup of hot, black coffee. After watching Tobe
saucer it, he left to haul the barrel of water.

He did watch out for the cracks. That night he told his wife
Maria he had seen a jack rabbit try to jump a crack and fall into
it. He sometimes exaggerated when he talked to Maria, particu-
larly if other people were around to hear what he said. But
very seriously he now added: “When you go to the back side
of the field, Maria, to cut prickly pear for the pigs, watch out
that you don’t fall into a crack like the jack rabbit. Those
cracks — they are a barbarity!”


Late the next day while going across the field to cut prickly
pear for the hogs, Maria saw a crack that really was, she be-
lieved, too wide for a jack rabbit to jump. Bending over, she
slowly moved along it trying to locate an imprisoned rabbit or
something else in its depths. A few feet down, darkness ob-


In a Drouth Crack 245


scured the opening, but presently she saw something that
rushed into her memory an old tale known to everybody in the
country.

Her eyes made out an iron chest, wedged between the walls
of the crack. She could even trace a kind of cable that passed
over the lid and through the handle on one uptilted end. That
is what she always claimed. Could it be the chest of gold that
the Spaniards left so long ago when they were held up on On-
ion Creek? Many strangers had come to the country looking for
that chest. According to some, it was on one side of the creek
and according to others, on the other side. As the story went,
the Spaniards, when attacked, had thrown it into “a hole.” But
they hadn’t had time to dig a hole. There was no known cave
in the vicinity. Some old settlers argued that the hole was a
drouth crack, which, of course, had closed with the first good
rain, leaving no sign. There were supposed to be signs on rocks
and trees in the vicinity.

Thinking of all she had heard, Maria stood beside the great
crack and looked around to make sure that no one had seen her.
It was time for Pablo to be coming from Onion Creek with
his sled of water. She hurried to the gap, beyond a line of
brush, to meet him. A neighbor was with him, however, and her
news was for Pablo alone. She went on and cut the prickly
pear.

It was after dark before she got an opportunity to talk.

“T tell you, Pablo,” she imparted, “that chest has more than
gold. Gold, yes, but what riches besides! It is too big. It holds,
most certainly, a little saint and a silver cup for the holy wine,
and a cross with red jewels in it. Look, it’s big like that,” and
she measured with outstretched arms.

But it was Pablo’s opinion that the chest contained nothing
but gold. Had not a cousin to his compadre’s uncle got the story


246 Tales of Old-Time Texas


from a priest, who had heard it in a monastery at a town far
down in Mexico where another priest had confessed one of the
dying bandits who had helped rob the pack train? The Span-
iards were on their way to St. Louis with the gold and were
right at the Arroyo de los Garrapatas (Ticks) — the old name
for Onion Creek — when the robbers attacked them. This his-
toria, coming down so directly, told of gold only, in a chest of
iron “placed in a hole.”

After their children were asleep, Pablo looked out and saw
that the big house was dark. “The patrén and Dojia Mattie are
asleep,” he said.

Then he lit the kerosene lantern and he and Marfa set out
across the field to feast their eyes on the chest in the great
drouth crack. They had not gone fifty steps, however, before
they heard the strong voice of Aunt Mat asking what was up.

“One animal, he catchee the chick,” Pablo responded.

“The animal has gone and if you don’t look out one rattle-
snake will bite one Meskin,” Aunt Mat’s voice came back. “It’s
too hot for the rattlesnakes in the day, and they are crawling
everywhere these nights,” Aunt Mat warned. “Get back, I tell


”


you.
The Mexicans put out the lantern. After a while, Pablo


wanted to venture forth again without the lantern, but no, Ma-
ria was too afraid of snakes— and only she could lead the way
to the chest. “I will show it to you tomorrow,” she said.

Pablo speculated how not only poles and ropes, but a team
and a derrick might be necessary to get the chest up. He was
afraid to let anybody else in on the secret. Yet how was he to
haul the great chest out in daylight in an open field without
being discovered? Well, he would see the chest in the morning
and then settle on a plan.

But the next morning early Aunt Mat put him and her hus-


248 Tales of Old-Time Texas


band to building the fence around the one clear waterhole left
in their stretch of Onion Creek. The cattle and horses would
have to go on down the creek to the next waterhole. After din-
ner, instead of taking the siesta that even the lizards in this aw-
ful drouth took, Pablo got Maria to go with him across the
field, as if to show her something about the prickly pear thicket.
The heat was enough to sizzle the brains of a roadrunner.

The chest, Maria said, was at a place not visible from the
house. But now she could not find it.

“Yesterday when you thought you saw it you were but sun-
struck,” Pablo accused.

“No, my head was as clear as the water out of Manchaca
Spring,” Maria returned. “My eyes were clear. The light down
in the hole was clear. I saw the iron chest as clear as the Three
Marys come up every evening.” And she pointed to where
Orion, with his belt of three stars, comes up every summer
night.

“You are a fool,” Pablo said.

Perhaps the heat was in his head. Quarreling, they went back
to their cabin, built in the shade of a great live oak tree. There
Marfa bound around her head some fresh willow leaves she had
brought up from Onion Creek. Pablo, perversely, placed only
mesquite leaves in his hat to cool his head.

After he had had his siesta, Marfa said, “This evening I mark
the place, I alone.”

When Pablo came in at dark, he asked, “You mark it?”

“Most certainly. I found it exactly, going to bring prickly
pear for the pigs. Again I saw the lid and the strong cable going
under the handle in one end. On the way back I saw it again
and I placed three prickly pear leaves so that one hangs over the
hole, just above the box.”

“Perhaps the prickly pear will fall in,” Pablo said.


In a Drouth Crack 249


“Perhaps the saint in the chest will lift it up on top of the
ground,” Marfa retorted.

She was hard to argue with. They went on talking for a long
time. Was the crack deep on down under where the chest was
lodged? It was so deep that the bottom was in darkness. Then
if the crack widened another inch, the heavy box might loosen
and fall even to infierno. This heat and scorching of the world
was all coming from that infierno.

“Tomorrow in the morning we go without fail,” Pablo said.
“The fence around the waterhole is finished and I will have
time.”

“Mafana for a surety,” Maria said.

As they talked, they suddenly sensed a breath of freshness in
the air. It had the smell that comes only out of clouds. Listen!
The “carts of the giants,” racing out of the east, were rumbling
over their heads. Look! Lightning! Its tongues showed clouds
of inky blackness covering the sky. From the big house came a
great cry of joy. In fifteen minutes the sky was pouring down
barrels, hogsheads, tanks of water; then the downpour turned
into an all-night soaker. The next day Aunt Mat told neighbors
how Tobe had rushed out into the yard, bareheaded and in his
underclothes, and let the rain pour over him, how he had held
his mouth open for the water to pound into until he choked,
and how he had stretched out his hands and yelled: “The
drouth’s broke, the frogs croak, green grass, garden sass, slick
cows and not a louse!”

Onion Creek boomed down like a regular river and carried
away the fence Tobe and Pablo had put up around the rock
waterhole. The next day and the next more rain fell. Not a
crack was left in the land, the black dirt swelling and sealing
up the contractions, leaving only hogwallows. They were little
lakes. The sky was still full of water, and all creatures beneath


250 Tales of Old-Time Texas


it seemed to know that tomorrow green would be showing ev-
erywhere. The old mules were kicking up their heels and the
cows were trying to play with their calves. Everybody in the
country from the Carolina wren under the bluff on Onion Creek
to the Governor of Texas on Capitol Hill was lighthearted.

Everybody but Pablo and Marfa. At daylight after the big
night rain, they had floundered together across the field. Deep
mud gave the ground uniformity except in the hogwallows,
where it was deeper. They couldn’t find even one prickly pear
leaf to mark the spot where the crack had opened over the chest
of gold. Maria knew where the place was, and yet she didn’t
know exactly.

“Sakes alive, Pablo,” Aunt Mat said when he brought in an
armload of stovewood, “you look like you had lost your best
friend.”

A month later she set out with Tobe on a long-delayed visit
to their daughter living on the Brazos River. They had not been
gone three hours before Pablo was digging a hole at the spot
selected by Maria.


“How deep you say it was?” he kept asking.

“More deep than you are tall,” she would invariably reply.
“Better make the hole wide.”

Pablo dug one hole fairly deep, though not so deep as he was
tall. Then he began shoveling up spadefuls of dirt at other
places round abouc. He worked maybe two hours.

“We wait for signs,” he explained to Maria.

“What signs?”

“Maybe the prickly pear will grow from where it is buried.”

“Not if it is buried deep.”

“Then a light will show at night. A light always plays in
the dark over a place where gold is buried.”


In a Drouth Crack 251


Pablo began to take walks at night out to a place where he
could overlook the slope across which the great drouth crack
had opened and revealed its hoard. He was happy again, like
the other animals of the fruiting earth.

“The gold is not destined for us,” he said to Marta.

“Thus it seems,” she agreed.


When Aunt Mat and Tobe came back, Pablo told the story —
Martfa’s story. Aunt Mat told other people.

“Jes’ Meskin imagination,” was Tobe’s only comment when
the matter was mentioned in his hearing.

“They’re still looking for fox fire to show the right place,”
Aunt Mat would laugh.

Before long unknown diggers began making holes at one
place and another in the Tobe Pickett field. That was back in
the nineteenth century. Men, more of them Americans than
Mexicans, are still digging holes and telling Maria’s story.
And now, whenever it gets dry enough on the old Pickett farm
—long since passed into other hands —for the black land to
crack, individuals not noted for industry may be seen peering
into the seams.


The Stranger of Sabine Pass


ge 1830, an Irishman by the name of Neil McGaffey and
his young wife settled on Sabine Pass in what is now Jeffer-
son County, Texas. As a protection against the Gulf storms that
periodically sweep in over that country, they built their cabin
on Shell Ridge —a kind of inland bar, five or six miles long
and hardly, on the average, a hundred yards wide. The house,
the only habitation for a long distance up and down the lonely
coast, was about two miles from where the western end of Shell
Ridge overlooks the waters of the Gulf of Mexico.

The famous Taylor White ranch lay twenty or twenty-five
miles to the east. The Broussards had another ranch away off.
Already, at this early date, these ranchers were trailing cattle
to the New Orleans market. McGaffey began to build up a
herd. As the saying went, it cost less to raise a calf than a
chicken. Before long, McGaffey had a few hundred head of cat-
tle, along with a faithful old slave named Wash — short for
Washington — to help care for them. McGaffey and his wife also
had two children, with a good chance for more. Sometimes they
went for months without seeing a stranger; when one did ap-
pear he was welcomed heartily.

One night, not long after supper, a man called out of the
darkness. “My name is Carton,” he said, “and I'd like to get
food and a bed.”


The Stranger of Sabine Pass 253


“Get down and come in,” McGaffey responded.

“Tm already down. I’m afoot,” the stranger responded, ad-
vancing to the door.

Being on foot away out from any town or settlement in Texas
at that time was a singular condition. But, according to the code,
no questions were asked. After an early breakfast next morning,
the man who called himself Carton offered to pay for his keep,
but of course, nothing would be accepted. He left, without éx-
planation.

That night he came again, was again welcomed, fed, and
bedded. Early in the morning he again left. The third night
he came once more. The daybreak disappearances and the
nightly appearances of the stranger on foot had made him by
now an object of suspicion more than of curiosity. The fact that
the McGaffeys kept a small amount of money hidden in the
house added to their uneasiness.

After the stranger had been given food on this third night,
McGaffey point-blank demanded to know his business.

“You have a right to ask,” the stranger admitted. “My ac-
tions would arouse anybody’s suspicions. Yet I have business
here. I see that the only way I can carry it out is to make you a
pardner.”

He paused. Without saying a word, McGaffey listened, gazing
at him in the candlelight.

“T have been a pirate,” the stranger resumed abruptly.
“Three of us owned the ship. We cut loose from Lafitte just
before he took up headquarters on Galveston Island. We made
good profits — one enormous haul out of a ship loaded with Mex-
ican silver and gold. But the time was up on such doings and
we knew it. We were sailing for New Orleans to split with our
men and disband when a hurricane caught us. It swept our
masts off clean and didn’t leave a shred of sail. We were half


254 Tales of Old-Time Texas


full of water besides, and the hand-pump had broke down.

“For days and then for weeks we drifted and bailed water.
The winds were not steady, and the tides didn’t seem to be
either. We drifted in one direction and then another. There
were thirty-eight of us altogether. When the rations of drinking
water got so low there was hardly enough for each man to keep
a killdeer alive, half the sailors ganged up and mutinied. Several
were killed. That did not give us water. We had a store of wine,
and a half-dozen men who broke into it and drank too much
went mad and jumped overboard into the sea. Still we drifted
on. Some of us had more endurance than others. That’s always
the way. I saw good men die. We threw their bodies over-
board. Then another storm hit us, not so strong as the first one.
We caught rainwater and drank. The wind blew us straight in,
until our ship grounded at the west end of what you call Shell
Ridge.

“Five of us were left alive. One was my pardner. The third
owner had died. We came ashore in a small boat and dug a hole
in the sand and got water fresh enough to drink. We still had
guns, and up a bayou we saw a wild black cow and killed her.
After we got a little strength, it was no trouble to keep in
meat. It took us six days to get strong enough to work and
decide on action.

“We dug a big hole on the side of Shell Ridge, next to the
Gulf. Then we brought in a big box from the foundered ship
and lowered it into the hole. Next we began putting the gold
and silver into the box. We brought the stuff in buckets and
just poured it in, bucket after bucket. Of course, we kept
enough out to take care of us until we could get somewheres and
make arrangements for coming back. After we covered up the
hole, we drove brass spikes into two big drift logs half-covered
by sand not far from the location.


256 Tales of Old-Time Texas


“The only place to go was New Orleans, and the only way to
get there was afoot.”

Here the stranger stopped as if to consider something. Mc-
Gaffey did not say a word, only listened.

“T’ve told you everything just as it was, so far,” the stranger
finally went on. “T’ll keep the same tack. All five of us, with
dried meat enough to last several days, set out for New Orleans.
Only two of us got there—the other surviving pardner and
myself. The other three never got anywhere, I’m dead certain.
We had plenty to buy a sloop with. We bought it and fitted it
out and still had money. We didn’t mind spending. Then one
night an Eyetalian stabbed my pardner down on the levee. He
cut me up too, but I paid him his dues. It took me a good while
to get well. I had to sell the sloop for expenses. From then on, I
had to fight one head wind after another, and me one of the
richest men in America. I was barred off from my wealth, like
a prisoner from freedom.

“This is not the first time I have been back here, but it was
four years from the time we left until I returned — alone, just as
I am now. Nobody had settled here, then, but the markers had
been washed away or covered up by sand. The wreck of our old
boat was gone — not a sign of any kind left. And I can’t locate
the exact spot now any more than I could the first time I came
back. You are the only soul that, drunk or sober, I have ever
told the facts to. Help me find it and take half.”

“T will help you and we will find it,’ McGaffey an-
swered.

They searched for weeks, digging into the sand. Occasionally
they had their hopes temporarily raised by striking a piece of
driftwood deep underground. Finally, along in the fall, Mc-
Gaffey had to quit to drive some beeves to New Orleans. The
ex-pirate, much discouraged, went with him. There he got pas-


The Stranger of Sabine Pass 257


sage on a ship for New York. He left an address through which
he could be reached should McGaffey find the treasure.

After returning to Shell Ridge, McGaffey went down to the
beach one morning with oxen and wagon to haul up a load of
driftwood for the fireplace. A recent storm had brought in an
unusual amount of it. While he was prying one end of a log out
of the sand he uncovered a slab of lumber. He always saved any
pieces of lumber that drifted in, and had a considerable pile of
it at the house. As he worked to get this piece out he discovered
that it was the lid to a big box.

Suddenly the idea occurred to him that the box might be the
one buried by the pirates. As he pried the lid off, the description
of “bucket after bucket” of the stuff being poured into the box
rushed to his memory. And there the stuff was. He ran his hand
into the vast heap of coins and slugs of gold. He threw the wood
off his wagon so that the oxen could walk home faster through
the sand.

“T’ve found it! I’ve found it!” he cried to his wife. “We'll sell
out and go back to Ireland and build a castle and live like the
king of Ulster.”

Then quickly McGaffey took saw and hammer and nails and
from the boards of cypress he had been saving made three
boxes. He took them in the wagon to where he had uncovered
the treasure. There he filled them full. Still there was an im-
mense amount of gold and silver in the big box. He buried the
three smaller boxes, scattering them some distance apart, not
far from where he had made the find. He rushed back to the
house, made two more boxes, filled and buried them. It was
long after dark before he quit work.

McGaffey’s idea, as he explained to his wife, was to scatter
the treasure so that if anybody else found a part of it he would
think he had found it all. His plan was to gather up all his


258 Tales of Old-Time Texas


cattle immediately, drive them to New Orleans, sell them, bring
the money back, dig up what was buried, haul his riches and
his family to Galveston, and there ship for Ireland. Sending
word to the man in New York who had led him to the wealth
was not in his plans.

Before he left with the cattle he told his wife several times
that he wanted to take her to the location of the five buried
boxes and point them out to her, But each time she refused.

“T don’t want to know,” she said. “If that strange man comes
back and suspicions that you have found the treasure and tries
to make me tell where it is, I can’t tell if I don’t know. I don’t
want to know.”

So she was left alone — and in ignorance — with the children.
The faithful old Negro slave went with his master. McGaffey
had three hired men to help drive the cattle. In New Orleans
he paid them off. Then, after he had sold all the cattle and
received payment in coin, he and Wash turned back for Sabine
Pass, on horseback. They had a pack horse.

About a day’s ride apart, over the road from New Orleans to
Texas, were what were called “stands” — each stand consisting
of a house where men could get meals and moss mattresses to
sleep on, feed for their horses, and a pen for holding their cattle
overnight.

Late one evening as McGaffey and Wash were nearing the
stand near what is now Franklin, Louisiana, he said to his ser-
vant, “Let’s ride up. I feel very queer.”

They struck a gallop. The man who owned the stand was
away, but his wife came out. She had to help Wash get Mc-
Gaffey down from his saddle and carry him onto the gallery,
where she made a pallet for him. She got some camphor and
went to bathing his face.


The Stranger of Sabine Pass 259


“Please don’t let the camphor get in my eyes,” he said in a
weak voice. These were his last words. A few minutes later he
was dead.

After a while the owner of the stand came in. He knew Mc-
Gaffey and Wash both from stops they had made on other trips.
There was nothing to do but bury the dead man. Wash rode on
home with the money. If he met any robbers he was to tell
them that his master was returning by boat to Galveston. Three
men who evidently knew that McGaffey had driven cattle to
New Orleans did hold the Negro up, but his story was so plau-
sible that they didn’t even examine his pack.


There was no castle in Ireland for Mrs. McGaffey now. Carry-
ing her baby in her lap, while old Wash carried the older child
on his saddle in front of him, she rode horseback to her hus-
band’s grave. After she had arranged for a tombstone to be put
up, she returned to Shell Ridge. She reinvested some of her
money in cattle. They were at best worth only a few dollars
each in those times.

She did not know where the great treasure was any more than
the stranger on foot calling in the night had known. She con-
tinued to live on Shell Ridge until she died. Her children grew
up and married newcomers in the county. The tradition of the
treasure she passed down is still told and believed by her de-
scendants.

During the course of years, hundreds of men have taken high-
priced “mineral rods,” “plumb bobs,” gold “calometers,” min-
ers’ compasses, mine detectors, and other instruments out to
Shell Ridge and prospected up and down and under it. But the
sandy earth still holds what it has. Traveling mediums and
fortunetellers in Beaumont have for decades answered ques-


260 Tales of Old-Time Texas


tions about the treasure, but no answer of theirs has ever made
the earth respond.


One of the men who searched was Billy Longworth. He knew
all there was to tell about the treasure — and maybe more. I’ve
merely told his story. I don’t know a thing more to tell.


Longworth’s Vicey-Versey Map


eo the papers,” Longworth said.

He pointed to a stack of manuscripts maybe five inches
thick.

“T started collecting leads in 1893,” he said. “There’s over
three hundred accounts of buried treasures and plenty lost
mines besides. If I just had a little more backing, my Radio
Sleuth would make us rich.”

We were long-time friends. He had given me a story for
Coronado’s Children, wherein I had published his San Antonio
address and an account of the Radio Sleuth. He claimed to have
received over a thousand letters from treasure hunters. Now we
were in his room, an island of privacy to the rear of the board-
inghouse run by his wife.

My eyes followed Longworth’s to a complicated contraption
of batteries, wires, microphones, and other parts. Then I began
to look over the manuscripts. I could hear Longworth breathing
and rolling a brown paper cigarette.

“T see this bullion stored at Olmos Pass has a map to it,” I
said.

“Yes.” Longworth breathed out his words slow with the
smoke. “It’s a vicey-versey map,” he added.

I looked up to question. Longworth was already stringing out.


262 Tales of Old-Time Texas


I had no inclination to interrupt. This is the way he told the
story.


There was a Spanish mission on the San Saba all right, but
the fort across the river from it wasn’t nearly so much to protect
the priests as it was to protect the miners. Then in 1756, as the
histories tell us, over a thousand Comanches attacked the mis-
sion. Where were the soldiers? The histories only say that the
Comanches killed and burned without opposition. A lot of the
miners had already fled. The soldiers were getting the bullion
packed on mules for the retreat.

There were two pack outfits of thirty-seven mules each. The
standard load of silver bars for a mule weighed three hundred
pounds. I keep up with the price of silver purty well when I’m
in town, and according to the quotations in today’s San Antonio
Express, that silver would be worth $157,549.46. Here’s the
sheet I figgered it on this morning. It’s worth more than double
what it was when I started out to locate it —all in my favor.
That’s not a very big treasure compared with some of the
others. Still it’s not to be sneezed at, and it’s dead certain there.
Not a flaw in the title.

Well, the caravan set out from San Saba hoping to get within
the safety zone of the San Antonio garrison, more’n a hundred
and fifty miles away. It was a doomed march from the begin-
ning, but the Spaniards kept shooting the Comanches back until
they reached Olmos Pass. That’s up in what is now Bandera
County. Here along in the afternoon the caravan discovered
itself surrounded, bottled up. Hundreds of the Comanches had
hurried around through Bandera Pass and blockaded the
Olmos Pass trail from the south. Hundreds more closed in from
behind. The hills all around were alive with them.


Longworth’s Vicey-Versey Map 263


There was and still is a fine spring in Olmos Pass. The
Spaniards forted up the best they could. They knew they
couldn’t carry their freight any farther. It was too bulky to dig
a hole for. Them limestone hills are full of caves and fissures.
They found an opening already made by nature, stored the bars
inside, covered the entrance with rocks, and then made certain
markings around to indicate the spot. The stuff was natu-
rally hid out of sight of the main camp. A trusty few did the
work.

The Comanches, yelling and helling around, kept them
awake all night. Then next morning the massacre begun. Over
one thousand warriors. That’s of record. The sixty-odd Span-
iards had about as much show as a bunch of jack rabbits hemmed
up in a corner of wire netting by men three rows deep armed
with automatic shotguns.

Comanches in them days didn’t scalp so much as they did
after they got to fighting Americans. And they were not fighting
for the treasure at all. I doubt if they ever even looked for it.
They knew where to get all the silver they wanted up in the San
Saba country. Years later when Jim Bowie went up there to
work the old mine and had that three-day fight with the Indians,
he discovered some of them shooting silver bullets from their
old muzzle-loaders. Silver was a lot plentifuler with them Co-
manches than lead was.

Well, after the warriors had made a clean sweep and left the
country, one Spaniard who had just been shot in the groin and
stunned came to life. He was an oldish man. He got him some
water in a gourd and started crawling southeast, towards San
Antonio, still forty or fifty miles away. The third day he saw a
camp of Lipan Indians. He knew they were friendly and went
to them. The daughter of the chief was specially kind to him
and nursed him the best she could. Then blood poison set in.


264, Tales of Old-Time Texas


The old herb women and the medicine men couldn’t do any-
thing with that.

He knowed his light was about to go out. So he called for
a dressed deerskin and some of the red ocher the Indians always
kept to paint theirselves with. Then he drawed a map of the
Olmos Pass storage and gave the details I have been giving as
well as some others. He told the Lipan girl to give the map and
its history to a certain priest at the San Jose Mission in San
Antonio and to say Gregorio Valdez died praying. Then he
died.

I don’t know why the map was never properly delivered. I
don’t know if the Lipans ever looked for the silver storage or
not. I guess not. Anyhow they didn’t find it. Time went on
and the Lipans were still in the country when Seco Robinson
went away out there in that Bandera country ahead of anybody
else and settled. He had a way of getting along with Indians,
and sometimes he’d buy stuff in San Antonio and trade it to
them for pelts and deerskins full of honey to sell.

He traded a new Bowie knife for that Spaniard’s buckskin
map and got its history as handed down among the Lipans.
There’s one thing about an Indian: he could not read or write,
but he could remember. It was the same with Seco Robinson
and his descendants.

About this time the Lipans got killed off and run out of the
country into Old Mexico. Seco located a section of land around
Olmos Pass and built him a cabin right at the spring. I can
show you yet some of the shakes he cut out of cypress with
his axe to roof it.

Seco begun looking for the storage of the San Saba silver.
He had the map, he knowed the country, and he could trail any-
thing from a bee to a buffalo. But the map and the land features
wouldn’t fit. That pass has got all sorts of crooks and nooks and


266 Tales of Old-Time Texas


corners and little canyons running up from it. Seco was a lot
forwarder to hunt deer than bar silver anyhow, I guess. After
peering round some, he lost interest. Still he kept the map.

He had a terrible big family. It looked like the older he got
the more children he kept begetting. He wore out three wives
before he died. One of his last wife’s children was kind of
afflicted, healthy enough in the body but sick in the head. She
was a lunertic, I guess. Her name was Agatha, and about the
time they settled down in Olmos Pass she was twelve years old.

Some member of the family used to keep an eye on her most
of the time, but, crazy as she was, she knew that rattlesnakes are
dangerous and she knew how to keep her directions. They got
so they jest let her mosey around by herself. She’d be gone all
day sometimes, but she was like a pet pig. No matter where she
laid out, she’d come home about sundown. She might have the
shed skin of a coachwhip snake looped around her neck, or a
bunch of mountain pinks stuck in her hair, or bring in an old
armadillo shell heaped full of buckeyes. She’d try to count them,
they say, but never could get up to twenty. She was always
bringing in things. She was as harmless as a cottontail rabbit.
Once she brung in one of them monstrous Spanish stirrups.
She said she’d found it covered up in leaf mould at the base of
a cedar tree. It was jest another piece of evidence showing the
Spaniards had passed that way.

One night at the supper table one of Seco’s boys who'd been
off working surprised his ma by handing her fifteen silver dol-
lars and telling her he wanted her to go to San Antonio and buy
herself some fixings.

That loco girl when she seen the silver grabbed it across the
table and said, “Oh, brother, where’d you get this?”

He told her it was money he had earned.

Then she says, “I know where there’s lots of heavy stuff like


Longworth’s Vicey-Versey Map 267


that... . Why,” she goes on, “it’s ricked up like wood in
pieces that long.” Then she measures with her hands about the
length of a old-timey silver bar.

“I tried to bring a piece home once,” she says, “but it was too
heavy and I dropped it down in a crack.”

Then all the family was at her to tell where she’d found the
silver.

“Back there in the cedars,” she says. “It’s in a hole the go-
phers use, just big enough for me to crawl into.” That country
is jest covered with cedars, you know.

The family kept prodding her for details. Then they seen
she was getting excited like she did sometimes, and they didn’t
question her any more that night. When she got excited that
way, she was as crazy as a bedbug.

The next morning she seemed fairly ca’m, and her brother
took her out to show him the rick of silver bars. She started off
running. Then d’reckly she stopped and went to imitating a
roadrunner bird, going crut-crut-crut thataway. The long and
short of it is that she never could be made to fasten her mind on
locating the storage of San Saba silver. She died years ago and is
buried under an ellum tree about a hundred yards out from the
spring.

Now, not a sane court in the world would take the evidence
of an idiot girl. But here’s a piece of evidence any court would
take. After Seco Robinson was gone and his family scattered
to the winds, a charcoal burner from the hill country come into
San Antonio one day and after selling his charcoal and buying
some groceries went up to the office of a doctor named Catter-
mole. The doctor pronounced his trouble an old rupture.

“How much will the operation and the hospital fee be?” the
charcoal burner wanted to know.

The doctor told him. Then the charcoal burner told him he


268 Tales of Old-Time Texas


didn’t have a thing to pay with except a bar of metal he thought
might be silver down in his wagon. The doctor dropped every-
thing and went down to examine the bar. He made a fine
operation, and when the man was cured got him to lead him to
the spot where he’d found the bar.

That spot was beside a trail leading down into the Olmos
Pass. In my mind it was the bar the idiot girl found too heavy
and dropped. I undertook to trace that bar down and found
where Old Dan Sullivan’s bank give Cattermole close to five
hundred dollars credit for it. Yes, sir, I found the entry — and
the bank didn’t lose anything on that deal. Doctor Cattermole
got well paid for his operation all right. He bought up three or
four sections of land around Olmos Pass and built what he
called a country home. He looked for the storage cave for years.

One other thing. About the time the courtry begun to fence
up with bob wire, people up in the hills turned to cutting cedar
posts and selling them. Lots of families still make a living that
way. Three or four of Seco Robinson’s sons became regular
cedar-cutters. One day three Mexicans showed up and asked
the Robinson boys if they’d ever noticed anything of an iron
spike driven into a Spanish oak round there. They hadn’t. The
Mexicans camped and spent several days looking round. One
said something about this having been the range of the Lipan
Indians. Then he let out his people had knowed the Lipans
in Mexico. In fact, he said he had Lipan blood in his own
veins.

The Mexicans went away and more’n a year later while one
of Seco’s boys was hunting wild turkeys and squatting under a
Spanish oak trying to call up an old gobbler with a caller made
out of a quill, he felt something sticking him against the shin.
He kinder moved and put his hand down, at the same time
watching for the gobbler. He felt the spike.


Longworth’s Vicey-Versey Map 269


It was at a tree he had seen a hundred times and cut posts
all around. The limb with the spike in it had rotted off. He
could see the stub it had fallen from, but he couldn’t tell which
way the spike was pointing when the limb was in place.

Well, that’s the way things go. The boy brung the spike in,
but it didn’t do him any good. The Mexicans were gone to no-
body knows where, and the Spanish oak didn’t seem to fit the
map.

When I got hold of that map, back about the time the de-
pression hit and bargains was plentiful, the first thing I done
was to hunt up the owner of the Olmos Pass land and arrive at
a clear understanding. We’re under a fifty-fifty contract, but
he’s quit staking me to anything. I made my camp at the spring
and went to inspecting the land, strip by strip, as thoroughly as
my wife clears a winderpane of fly specks. Still I couldn’t make
the map fit.

Then I took to follering the method of the old Spanish pros-
pectors. They slept by day and watched by night for a rainbow-
colored light to play up over the ground. That’s jest the blos-
soming on the surface of mineral gases formed below. Nothing
supernatural about it at all. It’s nature’s signpost to silver and
gold. But that was a terrible dry year and the cedars there are
so thick you can’t cuss a cat in em.

Of course, I’d examined first thing all the crevices and gopher
holes, but it stands to reason that all the old openings filled up
long ago with sediment washed down from above. It was jest
an accident anyhow that after the Spaniards closed the entrance
to their cave a gopher opened it up a little for the idiot girl
to crawl into.

I made trip after trip into that country. On the last one I
suddenly got the key to the map. It was thisaway: I decided on
the policy of sorter playing like I was the idiot girl and going


270 Tales of Old-Time Texas


out jest so far from the spring each day. I’d mosey along and
maybe spend two hours watching an armadillo dig up roots.
I’ve had one smell the toe of my shoe. I’d spend an hour dog-
ging a ground squirrel and then prod a beargrass stalk down
his hole. I’d watch a horned frog flattened out motionless on
the ground waiting for a fly to come by. Then if the fly got
away and flew off, I’d foller it. Sometimes I’d get down on a
grassy opening and press the grass down and then watch it raise
back up or maybe I’d lay down on the grass, as still as an old
rusty lizard asleep, and under my hat watch a buzzard show up
and wheel and wheel over me. They say a buzzard waits the
will of God. I’d notice which direction the buzzard took off and
then scout out that way. I was waiting on the will of God too.

You can’t expect anything out of Old Man Chance in cutting
down cedar posts or raising cotton, but in this game of finding
a lost mine or a lost storage, you can. I was jest kinder turning
myself over to Old Man Chance.

Now I don’t believe in mediums or fortunetellers or clair-
voyants or anything like that. I don’t believe in Spanish dip
needles, wiggle-sticks, doodlebugs, magnetic finders and such
frauds. I do believe in that Radio Sleuth I have perfected. It
is based on scientific principles, like the torsion balance test
used in oil fields. But my Radio Sleuth has to get pretty close
to metal before the broken wave current is detectable. Here is
where a good map or some sort of reliable waybill comes in.

Well, as I was saying, I tried to wander around and imitate
the habits of Seco Robinson’s idiot girl. ’'d been out all day,
and the next morning I had to come back to San Antonio to
tend to gover’ment business. I was laying there on the pallet,
my eyes kinder half shet, thinking how little a needle is in a
big haystack, when I seemed to hear a voice as ca’m and clear
as a fieldlark’s morning call.


Longworth’s Vicey-Versey Map 271

I can’t describe how low and cautious it was also. I say I
seemed to hear it. Mind, I’m not superstitious, though there
are some things in this world I don’t know. I opened my eyes
and raised up. The stars made a good light, and right there by
my pallet I saw — or maybe I had better say I seemed to see —
that afflicted girl. I didn’t even feel funny, the whole thing
was so natural.

She says to me in that same low, cautious, clear voice, “I
can’t lead you, but if you'll read the directions vicey versey
on the map, you'll find the bullion.”

That’s all she said, and then she wasn’t there.

She’d said enough. I didn’t even have the map with me, not
depending on it any longer. As I’ve said, I had to come back
home the next day. As soon as I got home, I pulled the map out
and begun studying it. Then it was as plain as day to me that if
a body was to go east where the map says to go west and vicey
versey, things would fit a lot better. It’s a vicey-versey map all
right, and why that interpretation didn’t come to me before,
I don’t know. The Spanish were reg’lar coyotes at throwing
their followers off the scent, and of course this map made by a
Spaniard was meant to be interpreted by a Spanish priest.

That drawing you see on the paper is just a copy. I don’t show
the original to many people.


Longworth got up, went over to an old-fashioned leather
trunk, unlocked it, raised the lid, and lifted up a folded buck-
skin. The ocher markings on it had faded out entirely in places,
but some were plain. I noticed one marking that looked like a
tree: The plainest marks on the buckskin were a cross,
and, under it, the blurred name: Greg r o V dez 756.

Before Longworth left on what was to be his last trip to


272 Tales of Old-Time Texas

Olmos Pass, I bet twenty-five dollars on Old Man Chance. Long-
worth didn’t have time enough left to make the vicey-versey
map work. He had already experienced all the golden streets
and pearly gates there are in the folklore of eternity.


Guarded by Rattlesnakes


nit the day of his death there was not a gray streak in
U Longworth’s Indian-black hair or a blot on his golden hope.
He was tall and lank, deliberate and earnest. He wore a long
black mustache that drooped like the ends of a pair of horns on
an antiquated Texas steer. His eyes and soft voice seemed to
have absorbed all the dreams of the mds alla — the farther on —
that had lured him for a lifetime.

I first met him in San Antonio, where so many stories and
storybook characters are always waiting. He had been working
off and on for years, with financial backing from a San Antonio
lawyer, to clean out “an old tunnel” in the San Saba River
country for the two thousand bars of silver stored there from
the Lost San Saba Mine.

This is one of the many stories Longworth gave me not long
before he died — effortlessly, as befitted his life. It came to him
from an old one-armed sheepherder named Pedro Hernandez
in the Uvalde country. Pedro was a good shot, and while he was
out with his flock he used to carry a brass-bellied .44 Winches-
ter, using the stub of his arm to support the barrel when he
aimed.

One evening while he was on a knoll watching his sheep
graze down a wide draw, he noticed the leaders of the herd
suddenly wheel and start up it. He knew they had scented


274 Tales of Old-Time Texas


danger. Not far below the place where they had turned, a
second draw emptied into the main one. Pedro’s good eyes
made out a coyote slunk down close to a low cliff at the junction
of the draws. He fired.

When the smoke cleared away — for he used old-time black
powder — he could not make out any coyote, dead or alive. He
was sure he had hit the animal; the bottom land was so open
that not even a jack rabbit could hide there. Puzzled as to how
the coyote had disappeared, he walked to investigate. In the
rocky cliff at which he had seen the coyote, but out of view from
the knoll from which he had shot, he discovered the low, nar-
row mouth of a cave, into which coyote tracks pointed. Noise-
lessly he peered within but saw only darkness. He knew that if
he remained silent, the coyote would, if not dead, soon come
out. He took a stand where he could watch the opening and
waited. Before long, the coyote’s head appeared. Pedro downed
him in his tracks this time. Then he scalped him, for there was
a bounty on coyotes. It was summer and the pelt was worthless.

Many times Pedro had passed up and down these draws, but
he had never before noticed the cave, the small entrance con-
cealed by a jut of rock and a bush. He had matches, and now,
having gathered some dried sotol leaves for flares, he went in-
side to look around. The farther back he went, the higher and
wider he found the room. Finally, lighting matches and burning
sotol leaves, he made out a pile of something on the level floor
in the middle of the cave. As he got close to it, it looked like a
pile of dirt. It was so far back that by now the circle of light
marking the mouth of the cave looked no bigger than a tin
plate.

Right at the piled-up object, he could not make out what it
was. He kicked it, and the kick broke open a kind of fiber
sacking. Gold coins poured out on the dusty floor. The dust


Guarded by Rattlesnakes 275


was as dry as a lime-burner’s hat. There were several sacks. The
fiber matting, or sacking, had long ago lost all life. Pedro tried
to pick one of the sacks up, but where he caught hold of it, it
pulled apart and the gold jingled to the ground.

As anybody would do, Pedro now began to fill his pockets
with coins. He was moving mostly in the dark, for dry sotol
leaves quickly burn up. He pulled off his shirt and tied knots in
the sleeves at the wrists in order to use them as bags, but the
shirt sleeves had so many holes in them that he was not making
much headway in bagging the gold when all at once he heard
the buzzing of rattlesnakes. The buzzing sounded all around
him. He dropped the shirt, and the buzzing stopped. He lit
matches and looked around, but not a snake was in sight. He
picked up the shirt and made two steps toward the opening
of the cave. The buzzing set up again. He retreated to the pile
of gold — so that he could stand on top of it and be clear of the
snakes. He again dropped the shirt, and the buzzing again
hushed.

Leaving the shirt where he had dropped it, Pedro again
started for the opening. The rattlesnake whirring became
louder and more angry in warning than ever. That sound can
run needles into the spine of a man looking at a rattler in
broad daylight, a safe distance off. In darkness, near at hand,
it is paralyzing. But Pedro was not too paralyzed to jump back
to the pile of gold. Instinctively he cast the coins from his
pockets — every coin he had picked up.

The den, the cave, became as silent as the darkness was deep.
Pedro lit a match and burned his last flare of sotol leaves. Not
a snake, not even a snake’s trail, lay on the dusty floor. When
Pedro headed for the mouth of the cave this time, he heard
nothing. In the sunlight at the entrance, once he was outside,
he stopped and looked back. There, a few feet away in the


276 Tales of Old-Time Texas


sandy floor-covering at the mouth of the cave, he could see his
own tracks and the tracks of the coyote—but no snake
tracks.

Rattlesnakes do not den up in summertime, though during
the day they keep in coolish places. At that time of year they
do not come together in great numbers as they do to hiber-
nate. Pedro knew this well. He knew he had seen a fortune
in gold. He wondered if he had imagined the rattling. He
had not, after all, seen a snake or smelled the strong rattle-
snake smell. Rattlesnakes when aroused give off an odor as
strong as that of excited javelinas casting musk from the back
gland.

No sheepherder is avaricious, but Pedro was in need of some
money. He stepped around the point of the draw, looked up it,
and saw that his dog was watching the sheep. Then he gathered
a big handful of dry sotol leaves and did what not one Mexican
sheepherder out of a thousand would have done. He went back
into the cave. When he got to the sacks and began gathering
his pockets full of the gold coins, he forgot all about rattle-
snakes. Soon he had all he could carry and started briskly
towards the light.

At the first step a sound of rattling went up that seemed to
fill the cave. He stopped dead still, dropping what money he
held clutched in his one hand. The rattling continued. He lit
a match, and there in front of him the biggest rattler he had
ever seen was reared up waist-high, ready to strike. It is hardly
necessary to say that he backed up to the sacks and emptied the
last coin out of his pockets. The rattling died down. He was too
weak for a while to attempt walking. Finally he got his breath,
and the blood began to circulate in his body again. When he
lighted a sheaf of sotol leaves and held it high so as to illumine
wide spaces, he could not see a snake. He said he did not know


Guarded by Rattlesnakes 277


whether he walked or crawled or ran out of the cave. Once
out, he had to lie down and rest before he could make it to
where he heard the bells on his sheep.

Pedro Hernandez told Longworth that he believed the snakes
were evil spirits guarding the money. If they had been real
snakes, he said, they would have left trails in the powdered
earth on the floor of the cave and would have smelled.

“Did you ever go back in the cave again?” Longworth asked
him.

“No, Sefior, and not for all the gold in the world would I go
back.”

“Will you make the sign of the cross, Pedro, and swear that
you are telling me the truth about the sacks of gold?”


278 Tales of Old-Time Texas


And Pedro made the sign of the Holy Cross and solemnly
said, “I tell only truth.”

He told Longworth he would guide him to the mouth of the
cave — that far and no farther. One day Longworth set out from
Uvalde for the ranch on which Pedro lived, but his car burned
out two bearings and he had to give up the trip. Sometime
after this, during prohibition days, a friend of his went to the
ranch to get Pedro’s guidance, but the rancher ran him off. The
rancher didn’t explain, but Longworth found out he had a still
located on the draw not far from the rattlesnake-guarded cave.
No doubt the cave is still there.


The Apache Secret of the Guadalupes


at that new day for two worlds on which Spaniards
plunged into the Americas after gold and silver, white men
have believed that Indians know where the precious metals are
but won’t tell. No Indian has ever profited by revealing pre-
cious metals to the takers of his land. Yet all secrets leak, and
belief in many a lost mine is fortified by a tradition of some
Indian’s parting with his secret.

Journeying west to survey the new international boundary
that resulted from the conquest of Mexico by the United States,
John R. Bartlett recorded in his diary: “The bold head of the
Guadalupe Mountain has been before us eight or ten days. We
were more than a hundred miles off when it was discovered.
Even then its features stood out boldly against the blue sky.”

Any bold stretch of earth — the Bad Lands of the Dakotas,
the mighty chasm of the Colorado River between Arizona and
Utah, Death Valley in California, the Guadalupe Mountains of
Texas and New Mexico — is significant not only for what it
reveals but for what it hides. Tradition of Apache knowledge
of gold in the Guadalupes goes back to the century of Coro-
nado’s Expedition.

No other character has been so vividly connected with the
tradition as Ben Sublett. Derided as a “crazy prospector,” he


280 Tales of Old-Time Texas


would disappear into the vastness of the Guadalupes at a time
when other men would not penetrate them except in bands to
fight the Apaches. How he lived or where he went, nobodv
knew. He had a “hunch.” According to legend, he had also a
friend among the hostiles who told him a tribal secret. One day
in the eighties he drove his rickety rig up to the Mollie Wil-
liams Saloon in Odessa, east of the Pecos, got out, strode inside,
and in a triumphant voice called for drinks all around. The
barkeeper, remembering past credits, hesitated; the loiterers,
some of whom had paid Sublett’s bills, remained loitering. But
when the prospector threw a buckskin pouch stuffed with gold
nuggets on the bar, all hands came to life.

“Boys,” he cried, “Old Ben Sublett has been poor, but he
ain’t poor no longer. Drink!”

They drank. Old Ben Sublett drank too. “Boys,” he gloated,
“J hev found the richest gold mine in the world. I can build a
palace of Californy marble and buy up the state of Texas for a
back yard for my children to play in. Drink till the likker runs
out yer ears.”

Ben Sublett brought back other nuggets — they say. He never
built even a shack or bought so much as a quarter-section of
greasewood alkali. The golden secret kept him happy. Men
trailed him, waylaid him, tried to worm into him; he never
revealed a direction or a landmark. “If anybody wants my
mine,” he said, “let him go out into the Guadalupes and hunt
fer it like I did.” At the end, after demanding that his body be
buried naked, he died swearing that he’d go to hell with the
secret locked inside it.

I shall not repeat the stories of Ben Sublett and other seekers
of Guadalupe gold told in Coronado’s Children. When | wrote
that book I was not acquainted with John C. Cremony’s Life
Among the Apaches, published in 1868. His translation of gold


The Apache Secret of the Guadalupes 281


into silver is not unusual among traditional tales of eluding
riches. “If you can’t get a redbird, jaybird’ll do.”


One Apache well known to Cremony bore a name meaning
Quick Killer. He seems to have been a Bluebeard among
women and an axe-man among warriors. He hunted, slept, ate,
killed, lived alone. For “some unaccountable reason” he became
attached to Cremony and related to him many of his experi-
ences. He had very long black hair, which he kept plaited,
and the plait hanging down his back was ornamented with
thirteen silver conchos, graduating in size from a saucer down to
a circle about twice the diameter of a silver dollar. He was
extremely vain of these ornaments on his luxuriant hair.
Cremony supposed that they had been taken from the saddles
of Mexican victims.

One day, touching the conchos, he asked, “Did you have a
hard time taking these?”

“You mistake, Tata,” Quick Killer replied. “These are not
off Mexicans. I found silver and beat it out myself into the
conchos.”

“Where did you find it?” Cremony asked.

“In the Guadalupe Mountains. I was with other warriors
going to the Llano Estacado to hunt buffaloes. While we were
climbing the mountain to look out upon the plains and make
sure they were clear of Comanches, I caught hold of a bush on
a canyon wall to pull by. It gave way, and I saw a bright lump
where its roots had been. I picked it up. It was heavy like the
plata on saddles of rich Mexicans. I found more lumps and
later beat them out into shape. This was many years ago. I have
never been back to the place.”

When John C. Cremony heard this story, he was a major in


282 Tales of Old-Time Texas


the United States Army and was stationed at Fort Sumner, New
Mexico. The year was 1863. Three or four months later he
received orders to make a scouting expedition to the south.
With Quick Killer as guide and with thirty-three other men, he
headed for the Guadalupe Mountains. At evening camp the day
they reached the Guadalupes, Quick Killer told his friend that
they were near the silver and that he would guide him to it
tomorrow. The next morning the whole detachment rode to a
canyon. There it was halted and left in charge of a sergeant,
while Major Cremony and Quick Killer rode on, the Apache
leading. After they had gone about a mile and a quarter, Quick
Killer gave the signal to halt. They tied their horses to a tree
and, taking a short-handled pick, walked on.

In Cremony’s stuff-shirted prose, “We ascended about three
hundred feet until we reached a bold and unmistakable min-
eral ledge, thickly shrouded with underbrush and stunted trees.
Quick Killer stopped a moment, examined the place well, and
proceeded directly to where he wanted to dig. He unearthed,
only a few inches down, several magnificent specimens of virgin
silver. I was satisfied, and, possessing myself of a goodly lump,
we retraced our steps to the command, none of whom were
made cognizant of these occurrences.”

When Cremony wrote his narrative in 1866, the Guadalupe
Mountains were still held by Apaches, but he considered that
the “wood, water and grass” abounding in the region of the
silver would someday facilitate mining. He seems to have been
one of those greedless individuals to whom knowledge means
more than possession.


The way to get evidence on ghosts is to tell about seeing one
—and ghosts don’t die. Not long after Coronado’s Children,


284 Tales of Old-Time Texas


with its chapter on Ben Sublett’s lost mine of Guadalupe gold,
was published, a chiropractor in San Antonio furnished me this
yarn, which has also been applied to the Lost Nigger Mine of
the Big Bend.

In the year 1926 an old Mexican, stove-up all over and as
deaf as a post, came into the chiropractor’s office. He gave his
name as Policarpo Gonzales — called Poly for short. He spoke
fair English, but seemed as out of place there as a sandhill
crane in a chicken coop.

All he wanted, he said, was to be able to hear music. He
began taking treatments, and after one about three weeks later
asked permission to rest a while in the office before going home.
While he was resting someone turned on the radio.

Crying out, “I hear music! I hear music!” Policarpo began
to dance. His steps and rhythm were so unusual that the chiro-
practor asked him where he had learned this dance. “From the
Apaches,” he answered. His face was gleaming, and when he
said good-by he was swinging his hands and humming with the
music.

The next day he returned, very grave, and said: “Doctor,
you have done much for me. I hear now the delightful music.
Last night on the plaza I could hear the accordion and
the guitar. But I have no money to give you. It is true that
I did not promise money, but I owe. I must pay somehow.
Listen. . . .

“When I was eleven years old my mother gave me to Colonel
Boone. That was while he was stationed at Fort Stockton to
fight the Apaches. Sometimes I went to school with the children
of the officers. Often I rode with the men on scouts. One summer
night, while only fourteen of us were camped away to the south
towards the Chisos Mountains, more than fifty Apaches at-
tacked. They were all yelling. We fought. I know not how many


The Apache Secret of the Guadalupes 285


were killed on either side. In the end I found myself wounded
in the leg and captured.

“Yet I was not afraid. My mother had told me that Indian
blood is in my veins. In my heart I am puro Indio. The Apaches
often captured Mexican children and trained them to be good
tribesmen. They were kind enough to me. I learned to shoot
the bow and arrow with the other boys. I learned their lan-
guage and to dance.

“Also, I learned where the Apache gold in the Guadalupes
is. The Guadalupes were our stronghold. Sometimes I would
go into the cave with men and help them break off chunks of
the ore. Certain Apaches friendly with the Mexicans who came
from New Mexico to catch mustangs or from Chihuahua to
haul salt from the salt lake south of the Guadalupes would
trade this ore for guns and ammunition. There was no other
use for the gold. More than one stranger stealing into the
Guadalupes to hunt it was caught and killed. The Apaches did
not want the gold. All they wanted was to be left alone in their
own land.

“All the time the white men kept coming nearer. At last
nearly all the warriors had been killed. Some had gone to join
Geronimo’s band to the west. Then one day the chief called
together all who were left and told us that we could hold the
land no longer. He told us to fill up the entrance to the cave so
as to hide the gold.

“Tt was within reach of a spring. We rolled and carried rocks
for two days; we covered up all sign of the cave. Then the
chief called me to one side. He said I was to go back to white
people. He and the other Apaches were going to Arizona to
surrender, or maybe into the Sierra Madre. He told me if ever
I found one white man to trust I might show him the gold.
Soon after that we parted. I was eighteen years old.”


286 Tales of Old-Time Texas


After this talk, Policarpo walked the floor several minutes,
muttering what the chiropractor took to be Apache words.
Then he continued: “In all these forty-nine years I have been
in many places, known many men. You are the first I have
found it in my heart to tell. I owe you for something better than
gold. If you will take me, I will show you where the gold is.
Like the Apache, I myself want little.”

Within twenty-four hours the chiropractor had supplies and
Policarpo in his car and was driving for the Guadalupes. They
left the car at a ranch that furnished horses. Then, with a
blanket apiece and a few provisions, they rode to the spring
which Policarpo said had been the Indian camping ground.
They came to it in the late evening and after Policarpo dis-
mounted and got the stiffness out of his knees, he made a speech
in Apache, seemingly, to his departed people and his own de-
parted years. “If I could call them back,” he said in English,
“I would be young again.”

There were plenty of deer in the country and that night,
after eating venison, Policarpo told stories of his youth — stories
so definite and circumstantial in detail that there could be no
doubt of his having lived with the Apaches, but stories not
pertaining to the gold. In the morning he said he wanted to go
alone.

While the chiropractor waited, a doe looked at him and then
drank from the spring, a javelina came into view, gave the
danger signal and wheeled back into the underbrush, an eagle
screamed overhead.

When the sun was maybe three hours high, Policarpo called.
After the man he trusted reached him, he led the way down a
rough slope. Then he stopped and sat on a rock.

His voice was pleasant and happy and his face was bright as
he said, “We Indians never forget. I remember everything as


The Apache Secret of the Guadalupes 287


well as if it had been yesterday.” He was silent a little while.
Then he got on his knees, locked his hands together, and put
them, knuckles down, on the ground at the point of his knees.

“Forty-five feet down, pure gold,” he said.

He loosened a big rock and showed how the Apaches had
rolled boulders to fill up the mine entrance. “When we Indians
hide anything,” he said, “no white man can find it.”

Back at the spring Policarpo showed where his lodge and the
chief’s lodge and other shelters had been. The only thing to do
now was to return to San Antonio and prepare for excavation
and mining. Men, tools, pack outfit, and other expensive ne-
cessities would be required.

Within a few weeks old Policarpo, who had done all that
could be expected of him, died. A year later the chiropractor
returned to the Guadalupes and camped at the spring for a
month. He easily found the spot over “pure gold, forty-five
feet down.” He marked it well — and then came away. “There’s
an old saying,” he explains, “that it takes a mine to work a
mine. I’m waiting for that first mine.”


The Indian who as a favor tells a secret of hidden gold is
not obligated to prove anything. I’m not either. In 1941 I
helped Mr. J. D. Talley celebrate his eighty-eighth birthday, in
Austin, Texas. He was a refined old gentleman of marked neat-
ness and did not look or talk as a cowboy who had ridden the
open range and trailed longhorn herds to the wild cow-towns
of Kansas is supposed to look and talk. That evening he told
this tale.

When his people moved to Hays County — the county of the
beautiful San Marcos River — in 1870, they became neighbors
to an odd character named Reece Butler who had been on the


288 Tales of Old-Time Texas


frontier a long time. He had a few cattle, farmed a little, hunted
whenever he wanted to, was a blacksmith, carpenter, and for
niture-maker and could do anything. He made a wagon out: ey P
bois d’are wood he got up on Red River. He made fiddle keys
out of the wood of Mexican persimmon. He made charcoal for
the forge in his blacksmith shop out of mesquite wood. He
claimed that mesquite charcoal produces a hotter fire than cedar
charcoal, which is more commonly used. He made crucibles
from clay found on the Colorado River near Austin.

Reece Butler had fought the Indians, but he had also been
friendly to some of them, and one time an Indian whose life
he had saved guided him to a deposit of silver and gold ore
somewhere in the Llano River country — where the Lost San
Saba Mine is sometimes placed by hunters who can’t find it on
the San Saba. About once a year Reece Butler would yoke six
oxen to his homemade bois d’arc wagon and pull out alone. A
month or so later he would come back with a heavy load of
black-looking ore. What he did with it was no secret, but the
place where he got it was. One time a man tried to follow him;
the man did not come back.

He would unload the ore at his blacksmith shop, pound it
into small pieces no bigger than acorns, place them in one of
his clay crucibles and then use his bellows and mesquite char-
coal to melt the metal. The extract from a wagon load of ore
would amount to a hunk about as big as Reece Butler’s two
burly fists. It was mostly silver, but anybody could see streaks
of gold in it. This hunk of gold-tinged silver he would take to
Austin and sell to a jeweler named Bahn.

In the course of nature Reece Butler died, and with him died
all knowledge of the ore deposit shown by one Indian to one
white man.


O. Henry’s Treasure Hunt


UTOBIOGRAPHICAL facts never inhibit the art of a true story-
A teller any more than any kind of facts hobble hope in a
genuine treasure-hunter. In “Buried Treasure,” O. Henry
wrote:

“T had been every kind of a fool except one. I had expended
my patrimony, pretended my matrimony, played poker, lawn
tennis, and bucket-shops — parted soon with my money in many
ways. But there remained one role of the wearer of cap and
bells that I had not played. That was the Seeker after Buried
Treasure.”

“Bexar Script No. 2692” — which first appeared in O. Henry’s
Rolling Stone, published at Austin, Texas, and read mostly by
Austin people — brings in “the well-known tradition of a buried
treasure on Shoal Creek west of the city,” and “three young
men” who dug there “last Thursday night with great diligence.”

One of these young men was William Sydney Porter, later to
be known as O. Henry. They dug in 1894. Two years later,
the treasurer of Travis County, of which Austin is the seat,
killed himself over this treasure. He had advanced over forty-
five hundred dollars of county money to a pair of crooks who
claimed to be spending it to get a “correct chart” to the treas-
ure. The day that his books were to be audited, the treasurer
relieved his bondsmen by taking his own life. Every once in a


290 Tales of Old-Time Texas


while somebody still digs on Shoal Creek, following a tradi-
tion that, long before Sydney Porter came to Texas, two Mex-
ican generals entertained in the home of Governor Pease gave
him, as a token of appreciation, a waybill to the treasure.

That was not the waybill, however, that O. Henry dug by.
I will tell the story as I set it down years ago at the dictation
of a veteran newspaperman named Vic Daniels. He knew
O. Henry well in Austin and shared his literary aspirations.
His brother Dixie Daniels was for a time O. Henry’s partner
on the Rolling Stone.

The velocity of the Rolling Stone was hardly perceptible to
the naked eye and O. Henry was yearning for a wider outlet
when he learned that the Hatchet, a humorous weekly pub-
lished in Washington and regarded by some as a peer to Life
or Judge, could be bought for twenty-five hundred dollars.
Major George W. Littlefield, the chief banker in Austin, talked
hospitably about the venture and expressed an anxiety that
“Texas get more notice in a literary way,” but he would not
put up any money.

Then the appearance of a character far removed from the
financial world made O. Henry believe — for an hour — that he
was about to have money to throw at the birds. When he came
to Texas from North Carolina, he lived long enough on a sheep
ranch down towards the Rio Grande to learn ““cowpen Mex-
ican.” Later, while he was working in the Texas State Land
Office at Austin, he returned to the region to inspect state-owned
lands. One night a rancher leasing state land told him a treas-
ure story that had been told him by a pastor (shepherd) named
Enrique.

The next day O. Henry ate frijoles with Enrique in camp
and made him glad by listening. According to the Mexican’s
story, while Santa Anna’s armies were trying to put down the


O. Henry’s Treasure Hunt 291


revolting Texans in 1836, the paymaster and the general of one
division colluded to steal the pay money that had, after much
delay, arrived for officers and men. The plan of the thieves was
to hide it and leave it until an opportunity arrived for getting
it out of the country. They considered it wise to store the money
where white men seldom went.

With seven privates to aid him in transporting and burying
the gold, the paymaster turned away from the San Antonio and
Nacogdoches road, on which the army was camped, for the
“mountains” up the Colorado River. On the way two of the
privates hatched a scheme for securing the wealth to themselves.
In the night they slit the throats of the paymaster and the five
other privates, saving a canteen of their blood. They were in
the vicinity of what is now Austin, at the edge of the Colorado
hills. They buried the money on a creek running into the Colo-
rado River, not far above the junction. Then they poured the
blood over the buried treasure as a “warden.” Next, according to
the nature of greed —and to a plot that was traditional when
Chaucer made “The Pardoner’s Tale” into the finest treasure
story ever written — one of the two murderers killed the other.
He made a chart to keep. Meanwhile, the guilty general had
gone on with Santa Anna’s army to San Jacinto, where he was
killed. The surviving murderer was now the lone master of a
fortune.

But he could not possibly get out of the country with it alone.
He could not rejoin the army. What saved him was the defeat
of the Mexicans and their disorderly retreat. The avenging Tex-
ans drove out of the country many Mexicans who had not taken
a military stand. The thief-murderer got across the Rio Grande,
but was afraid to come back for his fortune. His wants had
never been educated, anyhow, and, according to an old Spanish
proverb, “(He who wants little has all.”


292 Tales of Old-Time Texas


As years went on, he began to talk of the buried fortune.
Most who heard him did not believe; nobody who believed had
ambition enough to risk the long trip and the terrible Tejanos.
“He who wants little has all.” As a boy the ancient pastor now
pouring his story into O. Henry’s ears heard it from the man
who had himself poured human blood over the money in the
ground. The pastor believed the story. O. Henry believed it
also.

But the pastor did not have the chart. To get it he would
have to go far into Mexico and secure it from the son of the man
who made it, now dead. He offered to get it and deliver it for
one hundred dollars. O. Henry advanced twenty dollars on the
deal —all he could muster at the time —and promised the
other eighty dollars upon delivery of the chart. Then O. Henry
returned to Austin and became absorbed in his new literary
plaything, the Rolling Stone. He had almost forgotten about
the pastor and the chart, and he and Vic Daniels were figuring
in every direction how to raise money to take over the Washing-
ton Hatchet when a letter — written by an evangelista, a scribe
for illiterates — arrived from the pastor.

The pastor said that he had made the journey back to his old
home, located the chart, and now was very sick, too sick to
travel. If the patrén would send him forty-five dollars more, he
would dispatch the chart by his son, who would not only de-
liver it but interpret it. O. Henry scraped up forty-five dollars
and sent it. Vic Daniels scoffed, saying that he would never see
Mexican or chart. “Yes, I will,” O. Henry declared. “You don’t
know how faithful and reliable an old Mexican like that pastor
she
Three months or so passed, and then one day the son of the
pastor arrived in Austin on a poor, sore-backed, red roan pony
and found his way to O. Henry. He delivered the chart and re-


O. Henry’s Treasure Hunt 293


ceived the remaining thirty-five dollars due on it. It called for a
live oak tree on a creek west of what is now Capitol Hill. Shoal
Creek runs down just west of the main city of Austin into the
Colorado River. The trunk of the live oak could be located by
two eagle wings cut into it. Here the interpreter of the chart
said that the wings should be flying up the creek. Forty-five
varas from the tree, north, up the creek, lay the gold, four and
one-half feet underground, near the bank.

There were supposed to be sixteen thousand doubloons in
the chest. O. Henry and Vic Daniels figured that at $16.66 each,
the total value would be close to $260,000. Such a great sum
sounded unreasonable, but when they figured the number of
men in Santa Anna’s army, the pay of the soldiers at the rate of
$1.50 a month, the pay of the officers, and the fact that the pay
had been accumulating over a period of six months, the money
in the pay chest should have totaled just about a quarter of a
million dollars. O. Henry secured the opinion of a professor of
geology in the University of Texas, who estimated that since
1836 there had been a deposit of about fourteen inches of soil
along the bank of Shoal Creek. That would mean that the chest
was down five feet, eight inches.

With such details in hand, the two Daniels boys and O. Henry
made a reconnaissance. They found a live oak tree with what
appeared to be a pair of eagle wings carved on it. The bark of
the tree had been scaled off and the wings cut into the bole.
The marks were so barked over that unless one had been look-
ing for them they would never have been detected, and it took
imagination to translate them into eagle wings. With a bor-
rowed surveyor’s chain, they measured off forty-five varas to a
likely-looking spot for digging.

On the evening after these preliminaries were finished O.
Henry hired a livery rig with the understanding that if it were


294 Tales of Old-Time Texas


not returned that night the liveryman might look for it at
Manchaca on the road to San Antonio. The treasure hunters
were keeping their activities and plans secret. If they dug up
the money, they were going to take it to San Antonio and put it
in a bank. The livery rig was loaded with spades, grubbing
hoes, and a lantern.

About dark, having hidden their buggy in the brush, the
treasure hunters began digging. After going a foot or so through
soil that had apparently never been disturbed, they came to a
pocket of soft earth, about four feet long and three feet wide.
Earth once loosened and put back in a hole always retains a
certain loose texture —so regular diggers claim. The hunters
were getting down to about the four-foot ‘level and were in-
tensely absorbed, their lantern adjusted so that its rays would
not spread beyond the hole, when the most unearthly yell
imaginable arose from the undergrowth along the creek, seem-
ingly not forty yards away. It sounded like the whoop of a drunk
man turned into a fiend, the scream of a panther and the scalp
yell of a Comanche, all combined.

The hunters froze in their tracks. A minute later the yell
was repeated from another direction. Then from another. Vic
Daniels blew out the lantern and reached for an old Navy six-
shooter he had brought along. But the others would not allow
him to shoot. After a silence of several minutes, the lantern was
relit and the diggers were at work again. But only for a short
time was there peace. The unearthly yells, here, there, all
around, were resumed. The fortune seekers drove back to town.

The next morning the Austin Statesman had a headline story
on the escape of a maniac from the Insane Asylum into the
brush along Shoal Creek, where he let out yells awful beyond
description until his pursuers “bayed” him by surrounding him


and giving back yell for yell.


296 Tales of Old-Time Texas


With lingering but dampened hope, O. Henry went back to
the hole soon after daylight. Nobody disturbed him while he
dug until the soft ground played out and he struck limestone
that had evidently never been penetrated. He quit, satisfied
that the $260,000 had never been buried. Not long after this
episode he ran away from Austin to South America to escape
trial for embezzling bank funds. He returned and was sent to a
prison that gave him the opportunity to associate with his own
imagination and write. His treasure hunt furnished material
for two or three treasure stories that followed.


Where Did Sam McFarland
Cross the Colorado?


A tHE beginning of this century Samuel Louis McFarland
was selling Singer sewing machines in the hill country of
Texas drained by the San Saba, Llano, and Colorado rivers. In
youth he had taught a country school in his native Kentucky.
He had preached, tried sheep-raising, and, like Audubon and
Grant, kept a store. After he got among a remote population
in Texas he practiced obstetrics before he turned to sewing ma-
chines. He had a faculty for making money and likewise for
losing it, but he always lit on his feet. The great knack of
hoping never decayed within him.

After McFarland settled in Burnet, amid hills of legendary
lost silver lodes, he took to carrying a pick in his buggy. As he
drove over the country with his sewing machines, he wasn’t
exactly prospecting, but went prepared to prospect should any-
thing likely show up.

On a hot, dry day in the summer of 1902, while returning
home, he halted at the Colorado River ford to let his horses
drink and cool off. The water was only a few inches deep at
the ford and it was clear. He dipped up a cup of it, and while
he was standing there by the buggy drinking, he noticed, a


298 Tales of Old-Time Texas


little to one side, a dark streak, or seam, in the rocky bottom of
the river. He was curious.

He pulled off his shoes and socks, rolled up his trousers,
got his pick from under a sack of corn that he always carried in
the back of the buggy, and while his horses gratefully let the
water drip from their lips, dug into the formation. He dug out
between twenty and thirty pounds of chunks, put them in his
buggy for a test, and then with cheerful feelings drove his
cheered horses on into Burnet.

A man who had been “a kind of mining engineer” out West
was living there at this time, and the next morning Sam Mc-
Farland showed him a chunk of ore about the size of a man’s
fist.

“What kind of ore is this, anyway?” he asked.

The kind of mining engineer seemed very much excited.
“Why, this is horn silver,” he exclaimed. “Where did you get
it?”


Where Did Sam McFarland Cross the Colorado? 299
“Out of the Colorado,” Sam McFarland replied.


The mining engineer misunderstood him and in a disap-
pointed tone said, “Yes, they have lots of it out in that state.”

“No,” Sam McFarland said, “I don’t mean Colorado state. I
mean the Colorado River here in Texas.”

The engineer was more excited than ever. “T’ll go in partners
with you,” he said, “and we'll start taking out the ore. That ore
will make us as rich as cow yards — if there’s enough of it.”

“From the looks of the vein,” Sam McFarland said, “there’s
plenty of it.”

“Just where’d you say you saw it?” the engineer asked.

He had a reputation for being slick. “I didn’t say,” was the
only answer he got.

The discoverer of the silver had another partner in mind.
His daughter Gertrude was marrying Hugh Furman, whom he
liked very much. He showed Hugh a chunk of the ore, told
him how and where he had found it, and wanted to go after
it at once. But Hugh was busy on another project. He was a
kind of mafiana man, anyhow, his father-in-law thought. Mean-
while, Sam McFarland was expanding, looking as usual for new
pastures. Word came that he had been awarded a contract for
grading a stretch of roadbed for a railroad building into the Rio
Grande Valley.

He left the hills and rivers where Jim Bowie looked for silver
and where, almost from the day that Bowie died in the Alamo
and carried all his secrets to another world, generations of men
have been looking for the “Lost Bowie Mine.” For several years
Sam McFarland’s enterprises flourished and he made money.
Then one winter day as he was boarding a train he slipped on
the icy steps and severely injured his back. Financial reverses
followed the injury. In 1925, at the age of seventy-one, he
went to live with his daughter Gertrude and her family in


300 Tales of Old-Time Texas


Maryland. He had plenty of time now for memories, and a
seam of ore in the bed of the Colorado River down in Texas
became a very bright one.

One day he told his story to his grandson Harold Furman,
who was still in school. The gleam of the silver under water
took his eye also. In the spring of 1927, youth and grand-
father went to Texas and to the crossing of the old Burnet-San
Saba wagon road on the Colorado River. The river was on a
rise, and they could see nothing. Things seemed changed any-
how. While waiting for the river to run down and for summer
drouth to lower the flow to the minimum, the two drove on
south visiting relatives. Finally, in August they headed back
north out of Corpus Christi for the Colorado crossing. They had
driven only a few miles when a car smashed into them, breaking
old Sam McFarland’s leg. He had to go back to Maryland on a
stretcher. He died the next January without having recovered.

In 1930 the grandson came again, alone this time. “The
water was very deep.” He found nothing. All he knows is the
story that his grandfather told him, his father’s distinct rec-
ollection of holding a chunk of heavy ore in his hand, and his
mother’s recollection of seeing more chunks in their Burnet
home. He gave me the story after a series of dams on the
Colorado River had formed lakes that submerge all the old
fords for many miles.


The Mezcla Man


| es Juarez of the Rancho de Los Olmos and I were rid-
ing in the big pasture of open hills on the south side of the
Nueces River. He knew all that country as intimately as any of
the thousands of deer and javelinas knew the trails through
their own thickets. Its traditions had come down to him through
generations of vaquero people. He was quiet and had laughing
eyes, and no better vaquero ever roped an outlaw Brahma steer
in the chaparral.

Fine September rains had fallen that year. Calves, tails
stretched out, were running around their grazing mothers. Bulls
had mats of mud on their heads from butting gully banks. Our
horses seemed to feel as fresh and free as the white-tailed deer
showing us their flags as they bounded into the mesquites.
Elojio and I felt fresh and free too. When we came up on a
high ridge where we looked across the San Casimero — 20,000
acres in one pasture —to the Casa Blanca hills, towards San
Diego, we instinctively stopped and got down on the green-
turfed ground. Elojio rolled a shuck cigarette, I filled my pipe,
and the horses went to chopping off mouthfuls of mesquite
grass.

“Know you,” Elojio said, “that all this land down the Nueces
and far to the south used to be in sheep?”


302 Tales of Old-Time Texas


“T have heard so,” I answered.

“There was the brasada,” he went on, “but between the
thickets was all prairie, where mustangs ran and the flocks of
sheep moved slow and white, like clouds from the Gulf of
Mexico with morning sunshine on them. It was the time of rich,
rich bacendados and poor pastores” — the owners of haciendas
and peonized sheepherders.

And then, for we were in no more of a hurry than the
floating Gulf clouds, Elojio told this story.


There were no banks in the country then, and so when the
rich rancheros sold their wool and sheep, they brought the
money home. It was gold, with some silver. They had secret
holes in the rock walls of their houses for hiding away the
money. Often they buried it in the floor. The floors were of
dirt cemented with bull blood to make it hard. They had secret
places for gold under the fireplace rocks. Sometimes they put it
in holes outside the houses, maybe close to the corrals. There
were many places to hide the gold.

There were robbers, too, who came down from the north, and
bandits who raided up from the other side of the Rio Grande.
And always there were the Indians, the Comanches and the
Lipans, but they were not after gold; they took horses and
children and girls.

Now, one ranchero had more sheep and more wool and more
pastores and vacieros than any other. Each vaciero superin-
tended several shepherds and kept them supplied with food, for
they could never leave their flocks. This old rich ranchero
had more gold also than any other man, and he was very cun-
ning. He lived in the high hills of the Casa Blanca country
west of San Diego. His house was a kind of fort, with


The Mezcla Man 303


walls higher than the flat roof and loopholes in the walls to
shoot through. He kept a guard up there on the roof day and
night.

One time after he had sold thousands of sheep and had con-
ducted a caravan of carts loaded with wool to San Antonio, he
brought home more gold than he had ever had before. But now
instead of hiding it in his house, he carried it in secret to the
highest hill on his ranch. It was not far from the house. People
still call it Cerro del Rico — Hill of the Rich One. On the upper
slopes of this hill and on top of it black chaparral and catsclaw
and other thorned brush grew so dense a javelina could hardly
squeeze through it. The top of the hill was flat; perhaps it
still is, and here in the middle of the thicket was a small natural
clearing. The trail up to this clearing was very dim and thorny,
for hardly anybody but the wildcats ever traveled it.

The cunning old rico knew it though. He went up alone with
his gold. It must have been right‘after a rain, for he found
mud. There in the middle of the clearing he made a great big
man out of mezcla, which is a mixture of mud and straw or
little sticks, the same as adobe. Big sticks supported the legs
and neck and arms of the mezcla man. He was as big as a
giant, and he was natural like a picture. His head was thrown
back, and his mouth was wide open. He stood with his arms
stretched to the east and to the west, and across his chest was
this writing:

DIG OUT TO THE EAST AND THE WEST
THE WAY MY HANDS ARE POINTING
AND YOU WILL FIND
THE GOLD
Oh, but this #ezcla man was strange-looking, and his stomach
was so big that anybody who looked at him would have to
laugh. Perhaps Sancho Panza looked like him.


304 Tales of Old-Time Texas


After the cunning old rico had finished making the mezcla
man there in the middle of the thicket on top of the hill where
nobody ever went, and had written on his breast that waybill
to the gold, he kept his secret. He raised more sheep and the
shearers sheared more wool for him and he got more gold and
hid it. All he paid out was coppers. He was like two millstones
grinding out gold from the people under him and around him.
They say that when he snored at night his snores said, “Mas
oro, mas oro.”

Then one night while he was snoring for “more gold, more
gold,” the bandits came as quietly as the owl flies and choked
the guards before they could shoot or cry out and went into the


The Mezcla Man 305


snoring room. They grasped the cunning old rico while he was
still on his back.

“Your gold,” the chief of the bandits said.

“There is none,” the rico replied.

“You had better say,” the bandido said.

“There is none,” the rico repeated. That is all he would
say.

“Hang him,” the chief of the bandidos ordered.

The others tied his hands behind him and took a hair rope,
so that it would not cut his skin too much, and noosed him
by the neck. Then they drew the other end of the rope over a
beam and pulled him up until his feet were kicking nothing but
air. When he went to breathing like a lassoed wild horse chok-
ing down, they lowered him.

“What is the name of the dance you were doing for us?” one
of the bandits laughed.

The rico said nothing.

“Now say where the gold is,” the leader ordered.

“There is none.”

“One more chance you have,” the leader said.

“There is none.”

“All right,” the leader cried, “hang him up again.”

Again he danced and again he strangled, but the dance was
weaker and the sound of the little air passing through the tight
noose was shriller. The bandits let him down again.

“For the last time,” the bandit chief said, “I ask where is
the gold.”

The rico was purple in the face and coughing, but he wheezed
out, “There is none.”

“May you go with God!” one bandit called as he tightened
his hand on the rope to pull.

“And all you to the infierno,” the rico gasped back.


306 Tales of Old-Time Texas


“That’s where you will snore now for more gold,” another
bandit taunted.

After the rico’s legs had made their last jerk, the taunter
observed, “He loved his gold better than his life.”

“Tt was his pride that he loved,” the bandit chief said —
“even better than the Holy Virgin.”

Then all went to searching. They looked in his bed and
under his bed and all the other beds, paying no attention to
the crying women and children. They got bars and dug into
the floors and pried up rocks of the fireplaces. They found the
store of candles and had the rooms all lit up while they tapped
and hammered on the walls searching for secret little holes
fitted with money boxes. They pried up the lid of the big
leather chest. They looked everywhere there was to look inside
the house and found not one piece of gold, but they knew
plenty of it was somewhere.

When daylight came they went to digging holes at certain
places under mesquite trees and around the big corral. They
were many and well armed, and they impressed all the peones
to dig for them. They were as cunning as the old rico himself,
and some rode around looking for signs. One found the
trail going up through the brush on that hill and followed
it and came to the mezcla man. He could not read the
writing on the mezcla man’s breast, but he knew it meant
something. He came back yelling, “Now it is found, now it is
found.”

All the bandits went up the hill. The leader read out aloud
the words on the mezcla man’s breast: “Dig out to the east
and the west the way my hands are pointing, and you will
find the gold.” What joy they had! Quickly they dug under the
hands of the mezcla man, but the packed earth had never been
softened by digging. The directions did not say how far out


The Mezcla Man 307


to dig, and now the bandits ran east and west the way the
hands pointed, looking for likely places to dig. Perhaps it is
here, perhaps it is there, perhaps it is over yonder. They dug
and dug. They were in a hurry, not only from eagerness for
the gold but from knowledge that before long honest people
would find out about the murder of the rico, a very important
man, and begin trailing them down.

With all the travel up and down the hill, from digging to
water and food and from water and food to digging, the trail
became as plain as the road to Laredo. On the afternoon of the
second day the bandits heard horses galloping. They left the
country.

When the ranchmen who were after the bandits came to the
thicket and saw the strange mmezcla man and read that writing
on his breast, they forgot all about murder and justice. They
thought only of finding the gold. Nobody was after them, and so
they could dig as deep and as far out as they wanted to. They
would sight along the mezcla man’s shoulders and along his arms
and out his forefinger and out his middle finger and out his little
finger, trying, trying to locate the right place on the ground to
dig for the gold. They even sighted out to a hill five miles
away and dug a hole there. They cut paths through the brush
east and west. But after they had dug and dug and found noth-
ing, they became disgusted and quit.

Then the pastores began grazing their sheep up to the Cerro
del Rico. Each had a shepherd dog with his flock. The way
to train a dog to guard sheep is to take him away from his
mother before he opens his eyes and let him suck a ewe. When
he grows up, he thinks he is a sheep and will not let a coyote or
anything else bother his kinspeople. These pastores would leave
their dogs to care for the sheep and go up the hill and dig
all day long. They dug new holes and they dug the old holes


308 Tales of Old-Time Texas


deeper. But they did not find anything, and after a while they
became disgusted and quit coming.

Only one old pastor did not quit. He was more wise and
had more knowledge than any of the other pastores. He knew
what it meant when the coyotes howled on top of the hills
after sunup instead of in the valleys before daybreak. He knew
what it meant when the bullbats were thick in the evening air.
He knew what it meant when rattlesnakes crawled around in
the middle of a hot summer's day instead of remaining asleep
in the shade of bushes. He said that when a paisano (road-
runner) stopped suddenly while running down a trail, stood on
one leg, and bowed his head, he was praying — praying for rain,
perhaps. He could make better medicines than anybody else
out of the leaves of the gray cenizo plant, the bark of the
huisache tree, and the roots of the leather weed. He could read
in the stars, and also, it was said, he could read an almanac.
He was very astute, very wise.

So he kept on coming to that high hill and digging. Every
morning he would put his gourd of water down at the mezcla
man’s feet, take his grubbing hoe and spade, and then for hours
dig, dig, dig. He made some of the old holes deeper and he
put down new holes. Meanwhile his shepherd dog kept the
sheep out on the prairie.

One hot day after he had been working very hard and was
very thirsty and tired, he came in from his digging to drink

* from the gourd. He took the stopper made of shucks from its
mouth and, while his head was raised up to receive the water,
his eyes fell again on the writing upon the mezcla man’s breast.
He had read it many times, but he read it again out loud: “Dig
out to the east and the west the way my hands are pointing
and you will find the gold.”

After he had done drinking, the pastor regarded the writing


The Mezcla Man 309


for a long time. He read it again, over and over. At last
he said, speaking to the man of mud and sticks in front of
him:

“Why, the robbers came here and found you and read what
you say and dug out to the east and the west, and they did not
find any gold. Then all the rich and important rancheros in the
country came. They had confidence in your word, and they dug
out to the east and west, and they did not find gold. Then after
they quit, the pastores still believed you, and they dug more
holes and made the old holes deeper. But they did not find any
gold. And I! Well, here I have been listening to you and
digging my arms off for over a year, and J have never found so
much as a copper ceztavo.

“Why, you are just an old billy goat of a liar!” Then he
slapped him on his big mouth.

The pastor was very indignant. “Shameless one,” he said, “it is
not with your mouth that you deceive. Right now your lying
to honest people will end.”

He seized his spade and hacked off the head of that mezcla
man with his wide-open mouth. Then he chopped off the right
arm, which pointed to the east, and then the left arm, which
pointed to the west. And then, wow! he came with all his
might down through the words on the mezcla man’s breast and
into his enormous stomach.

And when he did, the gold coins and some silver coins too
just poured out on the ground. They were so heavy that the
pastor could not carry them all. You see, the cunning old
ranchero had built the man to hold plenty, and then he had
fed him through his open mouth until he was full.


“Elojio,” I asked when he thus ended his story, “what did
the pastor do with so much money?”


310 Tales of Old-Time Texas


“Oh, he gave his master some of it, and he kept the rest,
and he never had to herd sheep any more. He went back on the
other side of the river into his own country, and there he
lived muy contento all the rest of his life.”

And very contented I now rode on with Elojio.


Notes and Credits


Notes and Credits


I see no valid reason for repeating in notes information given in
the main text. The Bowie knife narrative demands proof, and so it is
annotated ad taedium. I wish, above all, to give credit to the story-
tellers who have told unto me.


Part One


CORN DODGERS AND SAN JACINTO CORN

Of homesteading on the Tombigbee River in Mississippi, in 1818,
Gideon Lincecum wrote: “Soon all the families had houses, and all
hands went to work, cutting down and clearing the maiden forest to
make fields to plant corn in. I cut down six acres of the canebrake
that jammed itself almost down to the place where J built my house.
I burnt off the cane on the 5th of May, and planted it with a sharp
stick on the 6th. Twice while it was growing I cut and beat down the
young cane that sprouted up from the old cane stumps. That was all
the work the crop got. The bear and raccoons ate and destroyed a
good deal of it, and yet I gathered 150 bushels of good corn.” —
Autobiography of Gideon Lincecum, Publications of the Mississippi
Historical Society, Vol. VIII, 1904, 471-472.

The story of the biscuit cartwheels was a common story, in vary-
ing forms. “During the time I was without bread, a man stayed all
night with us who had just come to the country. He had some crack-
ers and gave the children some. My son took his out in the yard, made
a little wagon and used the crackers for wheels.” “Reminiscences of


314 Notes and Credits


Capt. Jesse Burnham,” Texas Historical Association Quarterly, V
(1901), 13-14.

A. W. Eddins contributed “The First Corn Crop in Texas” to
Legends of Texas, edited by me for the Texas Folklore Society, 1924,
236-237. Somebody whose name I have forgotten gave me the inci-
dent of the little girls and pigs, which I have added to the narrative
of a typical family of settlers.

The San Jacinto corn episode is in The Life of Sam Houston,
The Only Authentic Memoir of Him Ever Published, 1855, and in
subsequent biographies by Crane (1884), Bruce (1891), Marquis
James (1929). W. A. Craddock, whom I quote on corn raised from
the grains given out by Sam Houston, was a solid, genuine man, with
strong historical interests, even if mightily opinionated.


THE WILD WOMAN OF THE NAVIDAD

“The Reminiscences of Mrs. Dilue Harris,” Texas Historical As-
sociation Quarterly, IV, 97-108, include details about the African
who ran away from an owner on the Brazos and made his way to
the Navidad.

The “Reminiscences” of Samuel C. A. Rogers are in manuscript
form in Archives of the University of Texas Library.

Martin M. Kenney’s manuscript was first published by his daugh-
ter, Mrs. Margaret Kenney Kress, of the University of Texas, in
Legends of Texas.

Victor M. Rose, Some Historical Facts in Regard to the Settlement
of Victoria, Texas, Laredo, Texas, 1883, 71-72, gives a cursory sketch
of the “wild woman” and assigns the date of her appearance from
1840 to 1850.

Under the title of “The Wild Man of the Woods,” a number of
fabricated letters, over the name of Mose Evans, “contributed by
Swante Palm,” are in A Texas Scrap-Book, compiled by D. W. C.
Baker, New York, 1875, 361-366. In a letter to Sam Houston from
his wife, dated May 8, 1848, Mrs. Houston notes: ‘“‘Your friend Mose
Evans ‘the wild man of Texas’ has become a baptist and a very pious
man.” (Marquis James, The Raven, Indianapolis, 1929, 368.) For
full treatment of the character, see “Mose Evans: the Wild Man of


Notes and Credits 315


the Woods,” by Donald Day, Publications No. XVII (Backwoods
to Border) of the Texas Folklore Society, Austin, 1943, 89-104.

After being captured, according to Victor M. Rose, as cited above,
the Negro was named Jimbo and sold by his captors to P. T. Bick-
ford, of Refugio County. “Jimbo would run away when work as-
signed him was not to his taste, and spent the greater part of his time
in the woods, a refugee from justice. He could give no account of
himself whatever, and the general supposition is that he was one of
a cargo of slaves brought from Africa to Texas by the notorious
Monroe Edwards and was lost in the woods while too young to
remember the history of his captivity. May we suggest that he might
have been one of the lot of Africans that escaped from the Bowie
brothers? . . . He was a fetich worshipper and with a jackknife
carved his gods from a shingle. Freed by the Civil War, he finally
gravitated to the ranch of Mr. Tijerina, a Mexican gentleman residing
on the San Antonio River, where he died in the year 1881.”

“Wild man” and “wild woman” stories got into fiction, as witness
the “wild man” clapped into Captain Marryat’s Narrative of the
Travels and Adventures of Monsieur Violet in California, Sonora and
Western Texas (1843); “The Wild Girl of the Nebraska” and “The
Texan Huntress” that Charles W. Webber brought into his Tales
of the Southern Border (1868) and Wild Scenes and Wild Hunters
(1852) respectively; R. M. Ballantyne’s The Wild Man of the West
(1863); and the satiric “Wild Man of the Woods” by Frederick
Gerstecker, in Western Lands and Western Waters (1864). “It is
certainly a peculiar circumstance that the rumor of ‘wild men’. . .
should exist in Western Forests,” says Gerstecker, “in spite of the
fact that seldom, or never, such a thing comes to light. Frequently,
after being quiet for months, the rumor breaks out afresh, and one
hunter or the other declares he has found the trail of the wild man
and traced him to his home in some cave or hollow tree on the moun-
tains.” Under the heading of “Wild Man of the Woods” the Gal-
veston Daily News, November 2, 1878, reported that a wild man had
been caught, probably in Kentucky, and taken to Louisville to be
exhibited. Long before this the Galveston Weekly Journal, May 26,
1851, reprinted from the Memphis Enquirer the report of a long-
haired giant, with a footprint thirteen inches in length, loose in the
Arkansas woods. Many other such reports could be cited.


316 Notes and Credits


See “Big and Little Foot,” by Mrs. S. J. Wright, Legends of Texas,
242.


THE DREAM THAT SAVED WILBARGER

The chief and the most reliable account of the Wilbarger scalp-
ing, and of the dreams, or visitations, that followed, is in Indian Dep-
redations of Texas, by J. W. Wilbarger, Austin, 1889, 7-13. “We
have stated the facts,” says J. W. Wilbarger, “as received from the
lips of Josiah Wilbarger, who was the brother of the author of this
book, and confirmed by Wm. Hornsby, who still lives, and others
who are now dead.”

John Henry Brown, who knew Wilbarger well, contributed an
account of the incidents to the Texas Almanac, 1861, which was re-
printed in Baker’s Texas Scrap-Book. In his Indian Wars and Pioneers
of Texas (n. d.) Brown extended the account. A version derived
from a descendant of the Hornsby family is in Pioneer Women of
Texas, by Annie Doom Pickrell, Austin, 1929, 58-68. A vivid but
inaccurate version is in A. J. Sowell’s Life of Bigfoot Wallace, printed
as a pamphlet in 1889 and reprinted, also as a pamphlet, by Frontier
Times, Bandera, Texas, 1927; see pp. 13-14 of reprint for the Wil-
barger story.

Many descendants of the Hornsby family living in Travis County
and elsewhere in Texas have versions of the story. Following Wil-
barger in the main, I have incorporated what other details seem valid.


BIGFOOT WALLACE AND THE HICKORY NUTS
The most delightful book on Bigfoot Wallace, who kindled
imagination more than any other Texas ranger, is The Adventures of
Bigfoot Wallace, by John C. Duval, 1870, several times republished.
Herein Bigfoot lives with gusto and tells his yarns with superb
naturalness.


JIM BOWIE’S KNIFE
The primary sources on Bowie's carly life are two sketches by his
brothers. That by John J. is more extensive and detailed. It was con-


Notes and Credits 317


tributed by “Dr. Kilpatrick, of Trinity, Louisiana,” who evidently
rhetorized it somewhat, to De Bow’s Review, New Orleans, October,
1852, 378-383. Rezin P. Bowie's letter, dated from Iberville, Louisiana,
August 24, 1838, reprinted from the Planters’ Advocate, appeared in
Niles’ National Register, Washington, D. C., Vol. V (September,
1838-March, 1839), 70. Both are fully quoted, with negligent and un-
clear references, in Bowie Knife, by Raymond W. Thorp, University
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, 1948. This work, though lack-
ing in orderly arrangement of materials, assembles much scattered
and recondite material bearing on the Bowie knife.

The Bowies and Their Kindred: A Genealogical and Biographical
History, by Walter Worthington Bowie, Washington, D.C., 1899,
has considerable about the Bowie knife.

In 1931 I contributed an essay entitled “Bowie and the Bowie
Knife” to the Southwest Review, XVI, 351-368. Ina slightly changed
form and with a new title, “The Knife That Was Law,” it was syndi-
cated by the New York Herald Tribune Magazine. Edward Gay
Rohrbough read the newspaper version and came to the University
of Texas to write a thesis on Bowie under my direction. His unpub-
lished James Bowie and the Bowie Knife in Fact and Fancy, Univer-
sity of Texas, 1938, is replete with knife lore.

The statement “At twenty paces . . .” concerning Rezin P. and
Jim Bowie’s prowess comes from J. O. Dyer, “A Truer Story of the
Bowie Knife,” Galveston News, March 21, 1920.

A score or so of accounts of the so-called Sandbar Duel have been
published. One in the Fontaine Papers, copied from the Concordia
Intelligencer of March, 1860, seems to be reliable. The fight was in
Concordia Parish of Louisiana. “A History of Rapides Parish, Louisi-
ana,” by G. P. Whittington, Louisiana Historical Quarterly, Vol. 16
(1933), 628-634, is good on details. So is “The Sandbar Fight,” a
section of “A History of Concordia Parish,” by Robert Dabney
Calhoun, Louisiana Historical Quarterly, Vol. 15 (1932), 638-643.
This contains a statement made in 1880 by Dr. Maddox, one of the
participants, and a letter from Col. Robert A. Crain, another partici-
pant, dated Oct. 3, 1827, soon after the fight. Both of these accounts
specify Bowie’s big knife. “Bowie and His Big Knife,” by Meigs O.
Frost, Adventure magazine, June 15, 1935, 110-116, explains par-
ticularly well the hostility between Bowie and Norris Wright.


318 Notes and Credits


On circumstances leading to making of the knife see John S. Moore
to W. W. Fontaine, in Fontaine Papers, Archives, University of
Texas Library; also in Galveston News, Sept. 8, 1875; Theresa M.
Hunter, reporting the testimony of another Bowie, “Grandson’s
Own Story of the Bowie Knife,” Dallas News, Jan. 12, 1930, and in
an article in the Austin American, Aug. 14, 1927; Homer S. Thrall,
A Pictorial History of Texas, 1879, 502-503.

Some accounts of varying smiths supposed to have wrought the
knife are in the following: an article by J. Marvin Hunter, “Who
Invented the Bowie Knife?” in Frontier Times, Bandera, Texas, Vol.
19 (November, 1941), 39-41, wherein the New York Star of May,
1836, the Red River Herald of Nachitoches, La., and other sources
are cited; an undated clipping from the Washington Post; Annie M.
Bowie, in the Galveston News, March 31, 1890; William M. New-
som, Whitetailed Deer, New York, 1926, 249-254; an article in the
Natchez Free Trader, May 17, 1861, as reprinted in the New Orleans
Picayune, April 26, 1925; American Notes and Queries, | (June 2,
1888), 49-50, with credit to the San Francisco Chronicle, and VIII
(Dec. 12, 1891) with credit to the Cincinnati Exquirer.

The Dan W. Jones manuscript with the Arkansas classic concern-
ing James Black lay unpublished for years before it was printed in
the Arkansas Gazette, Nov. 20, 1919, since which time it has been
reprinted in various places, among others in Herndon’s Centennial
History of Arkansas, I, 982-986. Raymond W. Thorp in his Bowie
Knife, as cited, bolsters the narrative.

Allsopp, Fred W., Folklore of Romantic Arkansas, New York,
1931, II, 72, gives the story of the knife’s cutting a silver dollar.

For information on Sowell the blacksmith see Sowell, A. J.,
Rangers and Pioneers of Texas, San Antonio, 1884, 126-127; also 107,
118, 124.

For Smithwick’s story of the duplicate he made see Smithwick,
Noah, The Evolution of a State, or Recollections of Old Texas Days,
Austin, 1900, 135-138, 114.

For the wild story of the Spaniard in Cuba see letters by P. Q. in
the Baltimore Commercial Transcript, June 9 and June 11, 1838, as
reprinted in Raymond W. Thorp’s Bowie Knife, 93-99—my source.
The lies in the letters, which other newspapers copied, infuriated


Notes and Credits 319


Rezin P. Bowie, whose reply to them has been cited. The story of
shooting the Spaniard, from the Jacksboro, Texas, Echo, May 25,
1877, is credited to Wilkie’s Spirit of the Times.

Perhaps the original Spaniard story is in Alger, William R., Life of
Edwin Forrest, Philadelphia, 1877, I, 118-123, 247-248. An article in
the San Antonio Express, July 8, 1888, p. 6, credits a confirmatory
account to Charles Durang, whose History of the Philadelphia Stage
ran serially in the Philadelphia Sunday Dispatch in 1868. I have
looked through a microfilm of the series without locating the Bowie
story. With credit to the San Francisco Chronicle, the story is in
American Notes and Queries, I (June 2, 1888), 49-50.

The naked fight in the dark room is in a scrapbook of newspaper
clippings given me by Mrs. Georgia Stenger of New York in 1928.
An unidentified clipping attributes the yarn to the Pittsburgh Dis-
patch of 1887. The story of a duel with knives in a dark room has
been affixed to numerous characters, as exemplified in G. W. Feather-
stonhaugh’s Excursion through the Slave States, London, 1844, Il,
55-58, and in The Lives and Adventures of the Desperadoes of the
Southwest, by Alfred W. Arrington (who wrote under the name of
Charles Summerfield), New York, 1849, 67-72.

Same unidentified clipping mentioned in the preceding paragraph
gives the story of the across-the-log duel.

Bowie’s rescue of young Lattimore is told in a lengthy article, by
“an aged correspondent,” published by the Record-Union of Sacra-
mento, California, and reprinted in the Galveston Daily News, March
6, 1880. A variation of the story, in which Bowie hands over to a
bride the fortune her groom has lost to a Mississippi River steamboat
gambler, is told in Wilkie’s The Spirit of the Times, XX (July 13,
1850), 243, with a credit line to the New York Sunday Times. The
same story appeared in the Democratic Telegraph and Texas Regis-
ter, Houston, June 20, 1850, reprinted from Noah’s Sunday Times.
The story is repeated in Major Ben C. Truman’s The Field of Honor,
1884, 290-296.

For the story of the contract-marriage rescue, see Linn, John J.,
Reminiscences of Fifty Years in Texas, New York, 1883, 302-304.

For the Henry Clay story, see The Texas Monument, La Grange,
Texas, March 22, 1854, with credit to Quarterly Review (n.p. or


320 Notes and Credits


date); Alger, Life of Forrest, 1877, as cited; John Henry Brown on
Bowie, in his The Encyclopedia of the New West, Marshall, Texas,
1881, 433-438; American Notes and Queries, III (July 27, 1889), 155-

Freeing the slave is described by “an aged correspondent” in the
Sacramento Record-Union, as reprinted in the Galveston Daily
News, March 6, 1880; also in John Henry Brown’s sketch on Bowie
cited above.

Chief authority for the Sumner Bacon story is John S. Ford,
Memoirs, manuscript in Archives of the University of Texas Library,
II, 332. The story is in part confirmed by William S. Red, The Texas
Colonists and Religion, 1821-1836, Austin, 1924, 137, 847.

The story of the Methodist preacher comes from “an aged corre-
spondent” in the Sacramento Record-Union, as reprinted in the
Galveston News, March 6, 1880; James Hatch, also “aged,” of San
Antonio, to J. Frank Dobie, May 4, 1928; typewritten pamphlet by
Hatch, in my files; American Notes and Queries, 1, (June 2, 1888),
49-50, with credit to the San Francisco Chronicle; Morrell, Z. N.,
Flowers and Fruits in the Wilderness, Dallas, 1886, 84-85.

John S. Moore’s claim to the original knife is in Fontaine Papers,
as cited.

The story of the knife’s being left by the butchered deer is in John
S. Ford, Memoirs, manuscript in Archives, University of Texas
Library.

For self-important claimants to possession of Bowie’s knife, see
American Notes: and Queries, 11 (March 23, 1889), 25, and VIII
(Dec. 12, 1891); Longhorn Magazine, University of Texas, Austin,
Feb. 1922.

I heard the popular story of the knife, the judge, and the six-
shooter told, I forget by whom, before I read any of the skimpy
forms of it in print. If one man does not tell a story—as a story—the
way it should be told, the next man is under artistic obligations to
improve it. One version is in John Henry Brown’s Indian Wars and
Pioneers of Texas, Austin, Texas, n. d., 407-408, quoting a speech on
Williamson made in the Texas Senate in 1891. Duncan W. Robinson,
Robert McAlpin Williamson, Austin, 1948, 160-162, quotes vari-
ations.


Notes and Credits 321


THE ROBINHOODING OF SAM BASS

The facts about Sam Bass are established by Wayne Gard in his
biography Sam Bass, Boston, 1936. The best thing written about him,
which takes into account popular attitudes as well as facts, is a long
article entitled “Sam Bass, Texas’ Beloved Bandit,” by Walter Pres-
cott Webb, in the Dallas News, Jan. 2, 1927. Webb also contributed
“The Legend of Sam Bass” to Legends of Texas, 226-230.

Among numerous people who supplied me with anecdotes about
Sam Bass, some are now dead. I am especially indebted to Mrs. Alice
M. Elliott, Irving, Texas, and to the following other individuals, all
of Texas: L. D. Bertillion, Mineola; Wes Burton, Austin; Dr. John
C. Graves, Kilgore; Hoffman, Denton; —— Jackson, Van
Horn; L. Marchand, San Antonio; E. T. Simmang, Giddings; Betsy
Walton, Fort Worth.

One anecdote was derived from a manuscript of reminiscences by
W. C. Cochran in the Archives of the University of Texas Library.

I doubt that Sam Bass “always tipped the brakemen and porters”
of trains he took a hand in robbing, but Mrs. Henry Harrison Beck
says so in On the Texas Frontier, St. Louis, Mo., 1937, 191-192. I
doubt a lot of things.

Bass’s six-shootering initials into a live oak is an example of what
Frost Woodhull called “folklore shooting.” See his essay on that
subject in Publications No, 9 of the Texas Folklore Society, 1931.


Part Two


NORTHERS, DROUTHS AND SANDSTORMS
Sources: the population of Texas.


FROZEN INSIDE A BUFFALO HIDE
The body of this folk yarn is in Twenty-Seven Years on the Texas
Frontier, by Captain William Banta and J. W. Caldwell, Jr. (first
published in 1893), Council Hill, Oklahoma, 1933, 36-37. Versions
of the story are in A Texas Ranger, by N. A. Jennings, New York,
1899, 21-23; Wild Sports in the Far West, by Frederick Gerstecker,


322 Notes and Credits


New York, 1860, 306-307; The Old Santa Fe Trail, by Colonel Henry
Inman, Topeka, Kansas, 1916, 205-206; “Some Reminiscences of an
Old Lawyer,” by Judge W. R. Chambers, Lebanon (Tennessee)
Democrat, Aug. 20, 1931.

In Allen, J. Taylor, Early Pioneer Days in Texas, Dallas, 1918,
415-416, a barrel instead of a buffalo hide imprisons the victim. A
rollicky variation of the yarn, in which a buffalo tail gets through
the barrel bunghole, is in “Cowboy Lore in Colorado,” by Honora
DeBusk Smith, Southwestern Lore (Publications No. 1X of Texas
Folklore Society), Austin, 1931, 34-37-


‘THE COLD-NOSED HOUNDS
This is one of Jim Ballard’s stories. He lives at Beeville, Texas, and
is an artist at storytelling. “The Cold-Nosed Hounds” was published
in the Atlantic Monthly, January, 1944, and then included in The
Pocket Atlantic, edited by Edward Weeks, Pocket Books, Inc., New
York, 1946.


HONEY IN THE ROCK

H. B. Parks, my chief creditor for these tales about wild honey,
gave me a manuscript for publication by the Texas Folklore Society
but, after some editing, he and I decided to give it to the Southwest
Review, in which it appeared, summer issue, 1930.

The account of Andrew Sowell, bee hunter, is taken from A. J.
Sowell’s Rangers and Pioneers of Texas, San Antonio, 1884, 121-122.

For Gustaf Wilhelm Belfrage, see a sketch of him by Samuel W.
Geiser in the Southwest Review, Vol. XIV (1929). Belfrage is quoted
on Round Rock by E. T. Cresson in an introduction to “Hymenop-
tera Texana,” Transactions of the American Entomological Society,
Vol. IV (November 1872).


Part Three


THE TEXAS BLUEBONNET
“An Indian Legend of the Bluebonnet,” by Mrs. Bruce Reid, in
Legends of Texas, 1924, was the first appearance in print, so far as I


Notes and Credits 323


know, of this myth. It has been retold many times and is now well
known over the state. The sacrifice motif is as ancient as the hills. It
is hard to keep sentimental banality out of the tale, but the public
does not mind it.


THE HEADLESS HORSEMAN OF THE MUSTANGS
Patrick Burke’s account of tying a scarecrow on a mustang stallion
and then turning him loose to stampede other mustangs is in A His-
tory of Bee County, by Mrs. I. C. Madray, Beeville, Texas, 1939, 5.
The Bigfoot Wallace-Creed Taylor narrative is from Warren
Hunter’s “The Headless Horseman,” in Frontier Times, Bandera,
Texas, I (1924), 12-14.


A RANCH ON THE NUECES
In The Longhorns, The Mustangs and elsewhere I have retold in-
cidents told me by Rocky Reagan, rancher of Live Oak County.
Years ago, while he had the Ray Ranch leased and was living on it,
he told me this story.


DESPERATE RIDES

“Ad Lawrence's Leap” is from D. W. C. Baker’s Texas Scrap-
Book, 1875, 342-344. One night about twenty-three years ago while
we sat in quietness, all traffic in bed, on the porch of a café-store at
the corner of Twenty-third Street and Guadalupe, in front of the
University of Texas, Railroad (R. R.) Smith of Jourdanton, Texas,
down in the brush country — my country — told me the story of
John Booth’s ride. He was a lawyer and believed in free intellectual
enterprise, he was a man of infinite repose, rich in lore of characters
and happenings of old times. He had cultivated the art of storytelling
and was a wonderful talker. Often I remember him and salute his
ghost. I wrote a narrative-essay entitled “The Saga of the Saddle”
for the Southwest Review (January, 1928), in which I put John
Booth’s ride and two other stories Railroad Smith told me. In 1936
they were included in my book, The Flavor of Texas, now long out
of print.


324, Notes and Credits


THE PLANTER WHO GAMBLED AWAY HIS BRIDE
This tribal tradition was told me in the summer of 1951 by Sig-
mund Engleking, a civilized character, at his home out from Comfort,
Texas.


Part Four


THE PANTHER’S SCREAM.

The story of the woodsman who mocked a panther is from James
K. Greer’s A Texas Ranger and Frontiersman, Dallas, Texas, 1912,
57°
The Hall County pioneer who placated a panther with wild
turkey carcasses is in Inez Baker’s Yesterday in Hall County, Mem-
phis, Texas, 1940, 146-147. One of my students at the University of
Texas gave me the Jim Buckner story; it is paralleled by one in
John Mortimer Murphy, Sporting Adventures in the Far West,
London, 1879, 91-92.

Jeff Ake’s yarn is abridged from They Die But Once, by James
O'Neil, New York, 1935, 215-217.

The panther tales handed down by “Queenie,” Sam Shaffer’s wife,
were furnished me by one of her descendants, Mrs. Faye Davidson,
a student of mine in the University of Texas, 1940.

The panther-smoothing iron episode is from History of Pioneer
Days in Texas and Oklaboma, by John A. Hart and others, n.p., n.d.,
57-58.

Wayman Hogue’s tale is condensed from his Back Yonder, New
York, 1932, 171-181. The Texas version of the same story, by Grand-
ma Adams, is from Bess Kennedy’s The Lady and the Lions, New
York, 1942, 23-24.

The frontier woman who cut off the panther’s paw was the grand-
mother of Mrs. J. E. Boyd, of Texarkana, Texas, who told me the
story. Mrs. Ada Payne, who gave me her grandfather's story of being
covered up by panthers, lives at Thalia, Texas.


Notes and Credits 325


BEARS ARE INTELLIGENT PEOPLE

The old-time Negro cook’s story of a bear that fattened his pork
was told me by the late Worth Ray, of Dallas and Austin. Frank
Bryan of Dallas gave me the Jim Ingram story.

Elias R. Wrightman’s asseveration is in Mary S. Helm’s Scraps of
Early Texas History, 1884, 187. The elaborated parallel yarn of
Pablo Romero was told me years ago by Bob Snow, of the Texas
Game, Fish and Oyster Commission. I published it in On the Open
Range, Dallas, 1931, from which it has been lifted, with my own
permission. I can’t recollect the name of the old trail driver in Mon-
tana who told me the Jim Reeves story, but he told it.


OLD BILL, CONFEDERATE ALLY

This story was told me by the late Charles W. Ramsdell, Pro-
fessor of History in the University of Texas —an authority on the
Confederacy. I wrote it down for the Junior Historian, published
by the Texas State Historical Association, and then it was published
in the Atlantic Monthly, October, 1943.


Part Five


COLONEL ABERCROMBIE’S MOLE

Bill (W. H.) Kittrell of Dallas, prince of storytellers, gave me this
tale in 1932 — wrote it out after I had heard him tell it. I tinkered
with it a little, and upon a request from the editor of Holland’s
Magazine sent it to him. He sent a check for fifty dollars, which I
turned over to Bill Kittrell, telling him that the next time I used
the story I would keep the riches. To me it is the best buried-treasure
story I have ever heard. Partly from force of habit, I have tinkered
with language and details since the story was published in Holland’s,
February, 1933.


THE GREEN POWDER KEG
My friend Houston Wade, who made a living by working in the
post office at Houston and spent his life gathering the lore and


326 Notes and Credits


history of old-time Texas, gave me this story. His published works,
Notes and Fragments of the Mier Expedition, An Early History of
Fayette County, etc., are as far away from his daily-bread work as
the Essays of Elia are from the ledgers that Charles Lamb kept.


IN A DROUGHT CRACK
This tale is made over from a version contributed by Mrs. Lida M.
Lee of Austin to the Austin, Texas, American, Oct. 25, 1925.
Noah Smithwick, The Evolution of a State or Recollections of
Old Texas Days, Austin, Texas, 1900, pp. 52-53, has the quotation
in my second paragraph describing the cleft.


THE STRANGER OF SABINE PASS; LONGWORTH’S VICEY-VERSEY MAP;
GUARDED BY RATTLESNAKES

One might make a whole book from the tales about lost mines and
buried treasures told by W. M. Longworth, to whom I owe these
three. The tales written out in longhand that he gave me not long
before he died, in January, 1937, amount to 808 typewritten pages —
towards 250,000 words, enough to fill two books larger than this
one. The genius that possessed him made him more interesting than
any story he ever told — and I have failed to reveal him.


THE APACHE SECRET OF THE GUADALUPES
The chiropractor who told me the latter part of this pieced-
together tale has switched to another lost mine and no longer lives
in San Antonio.


O. HENRY’S TREASURE HUNT
V. V. Daniels told me this story in Corpus Christi, where he was
on the editorial staff of the Evening Times, September 14, 1925. The
Dallas News, August 9, 1931, published a piece by him entitled
“Q, Henry on a Treasure Hunt.” The details in it are pronouncedly
different from those he gave me.


Notes and Credits 327


WHERE DID SAM MCFARLAND CROSS THE COLORADO?
Sam McFarland’s grandson, S. H. Furman of Glen Burnie, Mary-
land, gave me this tale in 1949.


THE MEZCLA MAN

Right after my vaquero friend told me this cuento, on Los Olmos
Ranch, owned by my Uncle Jim Dobie, in La Salle County, I wrote
it down. That was going on thirty years ago. I included it in On the
Open Range, 1931. Thanks to an improved memory, I have about
doubled the length of the story by putting in certain details that
Elojio Juarez and I both forgot to put in at the time of our tellings.
Carl Hertzog of El Paso printed the remade tale into a delightful-
appearing pamphlet that Bertha McKee Dobie and I sent out as a
Christmas remembrance for 1954.

One time along in the 1930's, while Carl Sandburg was in Austin,
I told him the story. He said, “Someday I’ll put this mud man into
a pome and call it B-E-L-L-Y G-O-L-D.”


Anke) ie ‘

sa —
te Teer, ¢ Se oe
ue 2 wal a


etal? (rustey


Sh APS

; eee w) boas Dns pon, :

we he’ Sy an at rot | : ‘ =

sony Voge ZI '

alee Hebyys fr] E0 os r ee x
asec» i= ger is > tut

Tiss ae #a ho eee a ere

Me ettatie geez) Sf Bon 9 cL os glercia he


®
=


> =
we)


~ Reet nbits8-oat Whlew P
‘hk ie) Eriety es
phth § scare ees SP aly Mey. ar ig
vate aught Sige PE. egy Sli
(Gari) TSO Be Mee fisienesinn
y
aa
+
. 3


Index


ABERCROMBIE, COLONEL JAMEs B., 2113
and the mole, 219-233

Abolitionists, 211

Adams, Grandma, panther tale by, 192

Adams, Henry, 75

African slaves, 31, 53, 54

Ake, Jeff, 185-186

Alamo, the, 55, 75

Alexandria, Texas, 58

Alf, Uncle, 228, 230, 231

Allison, Clay, 71-72

Almonte, » 10

Anthony, Major J. J., 62

Apaches, 42, 43, 186, 279, 281-282, 284-
285

Arizona, Petrified Forest of, 184

Arkansas, Bowie legends from, 54, 61-
66

“Arkansas toothpick,” 51, 53

Armadillo, 270

Arrington, Alfred W., The Lives and
Adventures of the Desperadoes of
the Southwest, 62

Ash cakes, 12

Aunt Mat (Dofa Mattie),
244, 246-249

Austin, Texas, 172, 289, 290, 291, 292

Austin, Stephen F., 3, 4, 174


242, 243-


Backstrap (deer), 186
Bacon, Sumner, 74

Ballard, Jim, 115

Ballard, Pal (Palestine), 115
Bandera County, Texas, 262
Bartlett, John R., 279


Bass, Sam, anecdotes, 78-90

Baylor, General John R., 131, 132

Bean, Josiah, norther experience, 95-96

Bean, Roy, 135

Beans, bear’s fondness for, 199

Bear grease, 199, 200

Bear meat, 4-5, 186, 195, 199

Bear Mound, 199

Bear-lard biscuits, 199

Bears, stories of, 195-207

Bee County, Texas, 120

Bee hunters, 122-125

Bee Mountain, 126

Bees, habits and lore of, 122-134

Beeville, 115, 158

Belfrage, Gustaf Wilhelm, 128-129

Bell County, Texas, 12

Bertillion, , 82

Bess, 167

Big Thicket country, 195

Billy Seldom, 8

Billy the Kid, 89

Birmingham, England, Bowie knife,
51, 61

Biscuits, rarity of, 8, 10

Black, James, Bowie knife, 63-66

Black mustangs, 147-149, 152-154

Black Republicans, 211

Blackman brothers, blacksmiths, 60

Blake, William, 183

Blanco River, bees at, 130

Bloody Sturdivant, gambler, 71

Bluebonnets, 139-141; legend, 142-146

Bois d’arc wagon, 288

Bonham, cold-nosed dog, 116-117


330


Boone, Colonel Daniel, 284

Booth, John, feud with Gedrie, 169-
172

Borroum, Jim, coon hunt, 116-119

Bosque County, Texas, 126, 128

Bostick, Kelly, 234, 237-240

Bostick, Old, green powder keg, 234-
237

Bowie, cold-nosed dog, 116-117

Bowie, Jim (James), life and death,
53-55; legends, 59-68, 72-75, 263

Bowie, Jim (Jeb Rider’s horse), 212

Bowie, John J., 53, 54, 56, 68

Bowie, Rezin P., 53, 54, 56-59, 62, 68,


69

Bowie, Walter Worthington, 69

Bowie knife, prevalence and uses of,
51-53, 168, 181, 264; legends, 56-69;
Clay Allison’s use of, 71-72

Bowie Knife, The (Grenada, Missis-
sippi), 51

Boyd, ——, deputy sheriff, 85-86

Brazoria County, Texas, 95

Brazos River, 95, 127, 174

Bridger, Jim, 184

Brown’s Herb Tablets, 44

Buckingham, Barbara, 174, 176-177

Buckingham, Benjamin, gambler, 174-


177
Buckner, John, panther story by, 185
Buffalo clover (Texas bluebonnet),


139

Buffalo hide, 112-114

Buffaloes, hunt for, 110-111

Bullbats, 308

Bullock, —, early settler, 9-10

Bundy, S. S., bluebonnet observations
by, 139-140

Burch, Bob, 186

Buried treasures, Sam Bass gold, 89-
go; the Spanish gold, 224-225; in
drouth cracks, 241-242, 245; Sabine
Pass, 254, 256, 257; San Saba silver,
261-272; rattlesnake-guarded cave,
274-277; in Guadalupes, 280-287; at
Shoal Creek, 290-296; mezcla man,
302, 303-309

Burke, Patrick, explanation of head-
less horseman, 148-149

Burleson County, Texas, 12


Index


Burnam, Captain Jesse, early settler,
5, 6, 124

Burnet, Texas, 297, 300

Burroughs, John, bee lore essays, 125

Butler, Reece, secret ore deposit, 287-
288

Buzzards, 163, 243, 270


Catico, scarcity of, 15-16

Camp meetings, 74, 108, 190

Candelaria Mission, 149

Carlyle, Thomas, 46, 55-56

Carton, ——, stranger of Sabine Pass,
252-257

Cartwheel biscuits, 8

Casa Blanca country, 301-303

Cattermole, Doctor, search for silver,
267-268

Cenizo plant, 308

Cerro del Rico, 303

Chaucer, “The Pardoner’s Tale,” 291

Chief of All Spirits, 142, 144

Chinyberry tree, 228

Chisholm Trail, 186

Christian, , in Wilbarger party, 35

Clay, Henry, Bowie legend, 73

Clear Fork of the Brazos, 84

Clemens, Billie, 199

Cliffe, Jesse, blacksmith, 57

Clifton, Margaret, vision of, 41

Cockrum, ——, 195, 196, 198

Coffee, 3

Cold-nosed dogs, 115-119

Collins, Joel, 79

Colorado River, homesteads at mouth,
4; horn silver ore, 298, 299, 300

Colt, Samuel, six-shooter, 75-76

Comanche moon, 44

Comanches, 76, 110, 124, 161, 302;
Bigfoot Wallace experience with,
43, 44, 47, 48; massacres at San Saba
and Olmos, 262, 263

Concepcion, Battle of, 67

Concordia Parish, Louisiana, 73-74

Confederate Army, Old Bill in, 211-
215

Coon hunt, 116-119

Corn, 102-103, 196 planting and
processing of, 3, 4, 5-8, 12; Sam
Houston’s ear, 11


Index


Corn dodgers, 3

Corn dumplings, 12

Cornbread, consistency of, 3-4, 6, 8

Coronado’s Children, James Frank
Dobie, 280, 282-283

Coronado’s Expedition, 279

Cotton, 219-220; Colonel Abercrom-
bie’s lost shipment, 222-223

Cotulla, Texas, 104

Court, holding of, 76-77

Coyotes, 94, 120, 157, 162, 164, 186,
274, 308; hunt for, 119-121

Craddock, John Robert, 11-12

Cremony, John C., Life Among the
Apaches, 280-282

Crockett, David, 122, 125, famous grin,
47; pet bear, 199

Cubs, bear, 200-201

Curtius the Roman, 166


Daniets, Dixie, 290

Daniels, Vic, 290, 292, 293, 294

De Bow’s Review, 56

Deer hunting, 115, 116

Deerskin, used as sieve, 6; for honey
sacks, 265; map on, 264

Defoe, Daniel, 14

Denton, Texas, Sam Bass around, 79,
86

Denton County, 82-83, 85

Devil’s Pocket, deer hunting, 115

Diamond Bill, 215-216

Dobie, James Frank, Tongues of the
Monte, 194; Coronado’s Children,
280, 282-283

Dogs, dereliction of, 22, 24, 25, 32,
44; cold-nosed, 115-118, 119

Doll warrior, sacrifice of, 143-146

Dream, Sarah Hornsby’s, 36

Dressmaker, hiding of Sam Bass, 86

Drouth cracks, hidden treasures in,
241-242, 245

Drouths, 142, 242-247; stories, 105-108

Ducks and the sandstorm, 101-102

Duels, 68-72

Dyer, J. O., 54


Eacte Forp, Texas, 89
Eagle wings, 293


331


Edwards Plateau, Texas, limestone
cave country, 126

El Paso, Texas, 103-104

Elm Creek, Sam Bass at, 80, 208

Encyclopedia Americana, on Bowie
knife, 61

Enrique, a shepherd, 290-291

Evans, Moses, 27

Express (San Antonio, Texas), 262


FisHBACK OF THE SULPHURS, and the
norther, 97-99

Fitzpatrick, Captain Reese, 60-61

Flack, Captain, 124

Flores, ——, hunt for Vidal, 151-154

Flour biscuits, 8

Flower de Lucy, 186

Forrest, General Bedford, 216

Forrest, Edwin, Bowie legends, 69-70,


75

Fort Henry, 166

Fort Inge, 148

Fort Worth, Texas, 89

Fortunetellers, 220-221

Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper,
238-239

Free Trader (Natchez, Mississippi),
60

Frijoles, 290

Frio Canyon, 126

Furman, Harold, 300

Furman, Hugh, 299


Gatveston, IsLaND OF, 51, 53, 174,

Galveston, Texas, 221-226

Garner, John, 140

Gedrie, , feud with Booth, 169-
172

Gillett, Jim, Six Years with the Texan
Rangers, 103-104

Gold. See Buried Treasures

Goldenrod Prairie, ris

Goliad Massacre, 43

Gonzales, Texas, 67

Gonzales, Policarpo, 284-287

Grave duel, 71

Graveyard Wolf, hunt for the, 120-
121

Grayson County, Texas, 199

Grenada, Mississippi, 51


332


Grimes, Caige, deputy sheriff, 78
Grullo, 157

Guadalupe Mountain, 279
Guadalupes, 279-286

Guajardo, Don Alberto, 198-199
Gunter Hotel, San Antonio, 44


Hacendados, 302

Hall County, Texas, 184-185

Hallett, grandmother, 115

Hallett household, 8

Hallettsville, 116

Hamilton County, Texas, 185

Hamm, Cephas K., 75

“Hark from the Tombs” (Daredevil
Jack Smith’s rifle), 52

Hatchet, humorous weekly, 290, 292

Havana, William McKinley, 195

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, quoted on
Bowie knife, 51

Haynie, , in Wilbarger party, 35

Hays, Jack, 151

Hays County, Texas, 287

Headless horseman, 147, 148, 149

Helena duel, 71

Helms, Jack, 107

Henry, O. See Porter, William Syd-
ne

Hernandez, Pedro, 273-279

Hess, —, Elijah Ray’s partner, 155-
163

Hickory nuts, 45-50

Hidden treasures. See Buried treasures

Hide, —, story of Sam Bass, 85 |

Hill of the Rich One, 303

Hoffman, ——, 80

Hogg, Governor James Stephens, 13

Hog-ham gravy, 199

Hogs, 25; and bears, 195-198

Hogue, Wayman, Back Yonder, 191

Honey, 124-125; from huajillo, 131,
132

Honey mines, 126-134

Horn silver, 298, 299, 300

Hornbeak, , bee lore, 126

Hornsby, Reuben, 35

Hornsby, Sarah, vision to, 36-37, 41

Horse Ears, 61

Horse thievery, 150-152

Hounds, cold-nosed, 115-119


Index


Houses of early settlers, 21

Houston, Margaret Bell, “Song from
the Traffic,” 41

Houston, Sam, 74; corn story, 10-13

Huajillo, honey from, 131, 132

Hudson, W. H., The Naturalist in La
Plata, 194

Huisache tree, 308

Hurricane Rake, 199-200


“INDIAN DODGE,” 148

Indianola, Texas, 157

Indians, scalping of Wilbarger, 35-
41; Bigfoot Wallace experiences, 42,
43; mesmerizing of dogs, 44; Jim
Bowie's fight with, 55; Hopi and
Rain Dance, 108; in a mustang chase,
166-169; encounter with Spaniards,
224-225. See also Apaches, Co-
manches, Kiowas, Lipans

Industry, Texas, 174

Ingram, Jim, bear story, 199-202


Jackson, ——, 80-81

Jackson, Gabriel, 12

James, Jesse, 89, 90

James, Marquis, The Raven, 11

Javelinas, 286, 301

Jefferson, Thomas, quoted, 76

Jefferson County, Texas, 252

Johnny Constant, 8

Johnston, General Albert Sidney, 212

Jones, Asa, 80

Jones, Dan W., Bowie legend by, 63-
66

Jones, Jim, honey mines, 132-135

Juarez, Elojio, mezcla man story, 301-
310


Karnes County, Texas, 71

Kaufman, Texas, 84

Keechi County, Texas, 108

Kenney, Martin M., wild woman story
by, 19-28

Kiowas, 110

Knife Age, 51-53, 55

Knife juggling, 54


Laritte, JEAN, pirate, 15, 53, 253
Land business, fraudulent titles, 54


Index


Lattimore, ——, 71

Laudermilk, Jim, coyote hunts, 119-
121

Lavaca River, 115

Lawrence, Ad, in Indian chase, 166

Lay figure, 148

Leather weed, 308

Lenoir, Pete, 83

Lincecum, Gideon, 125

Lindy, 119-121

Linn, John L., 72

Lipans, 263, 264, 268, 302

Littlefield, Major George W., 290

Live Oak County, Texas, 206-207

Lively, lost schooner, 4

Llano County, Texas, 89-90

Lobos, 110, 113-114

Logan County, Kentucky,
birthplace, 53

Longhorns, 49, 57, 82, 88, 238, 287, 323

Longworth, Billy, account of San
Saba silver, 260-272; rattlesnake
story, 273-279

Lost Bowie Mine, 299

Lost Louisiana Mine, 224

Lost San Saba Mine, 54, 55, 75

Louisiana, Bowie family from, 53, 56,
59, 60

Lupines, 139, 141

Lye hominy, 12


Bowie


McCoy Kip, 81

McCullock, Kinley, bear stories by,
195-198

McCullough, Major Samuel, 166

McFarland, Gertrude, 299

McFarland, Samuel Louis, 297-300

McGaffey, Neil, 252-260

McNary, Rashe (Horatio), 219-226

McNeal brothers, 241

Madison County, Texas, 221

Manuel, Negro blacksmith, 60

Maria, wife of Pablo, 244-248

Mavericks, hunting of, 57

Mayfield, Doctor Isaac, 87-88

Medicine men, 142, 144

Merritt, Charley, 186

Mesquite, 157, 241, 288

Mexican fight, 71


333


Mexicans, Goliad Massacre, 43; at Ala-
mo, 55; search for silver, 268

Mezcla man, 302-309

Mier Expedition, 43

Milam, Old Ben, 150, 151

Miller and Lux, 206

Mocking bird, 195, 210

Moles at Abercrombie’, 228-233

Moore, John S., 75

Morral, 157

Murphy, Jim, betrayal of Jim Bass, 88

Mustang cattle, 158

Mustang grapes, 228

Mustang horses, 147, 148, 149, 158, 166-
169


NatcHez-UNDER-THE-HILL, 71

Navidad River, 115

Negroes, 19, 30-32, 234, 236, 239

Northers, 94-96

Nueces River, 147, 149, 155, 158, 162,
164, 165, 169, 172


Oxp Bit, Confederate snake, 208-216

Old Butch, 45, 47, 52

Olmos Pass, San Saba silver at, 261-
272

Olmsted, Frederick Law,
through Texas, 4

Onderdonk, Julian, 140

One-Who-Dearly-Loves-Her-People,
146

Onion Creek, 124, 2

Owl Creek, 212, 214

Oxhide, 96

Ozarks, 224; panther stories from, 191


Journey


2, 245, 249


Panto, Mexican hired man, 244-250

Pacing White Stallion, 147, 148

Packsaddle Mountain, 90

Paisano, 308

Palo Duro Canyon, Indian camp, 110

Panthers, screams of, 181-183; stories,
185-194

“Paradise in Texas,” poem, 94

Parker, A. A., Esq., Trip to the West
and Texas, 3-4

Parker, Theodore, 55

Parks, H. B., bee lore stories, 126-127


334 Index
Pastores, 148, 290, 291, 292, 302, 307- Reeves, Jim, experience with bear,
308 206-207


Patas Grandes, 49

Paterson, New Jersey, six-shooters
from, 76

Payne, Mrs. Ada, panther story, 193-
194

Pease, Governor, of Texas, 290

Pecans, Jim Hogg, 13

Pedro, Spanish cutler in New Orleans,


Petrified Forest of Arizona, 184

Pickett, Tobe, 242-244, 249-251

Pie, bear’s fondness for, 198

Pinole, 12

Pistol, revolving, 75-76

Planters’ Advocate, The
Louisiana), 56

Pone bread, 12

Pope, William F., 68; Early Days in
Arkansas, 62-63

Porter, Chunk, 83-84

Porter, Jeff, coon hunt, 116-119

Porter, William Sydney (O. Henry),
290-296; “Buried Treasure,” 289;
Rolling Stone, 289, 290, 292

Post (Houston, Texas), 219

Potter, Jack, story of the ducks, 100

Pound cake, 8-9

Prairie Dog Dave, 100, 102-103

Presbyterian minister, 74

Prickly pear, 1qo, 244, 245, 248

Prussia, emigrants to Texas from, 173

Puente Piedro, Texas, 158-159


(Iberville,


Queenie, Sam Shaffer’s bride, 188-189
Quick Killer, 281, 282


Rapio SLEUTH, 261, 270

Rattlesnake oil, 199

Rattlesnakes, in honey caves, 130-131;
story of Old Bill, 209-216; guarding
gold in cave, 275-278

Ray, Elijah, store owner, 155-156

Ray, Jim, 156-164

Ray, Wallace, 156-163

Razorback, 195

Reagan, Rocky, 155

Reata, 204-205


Reid, Mayne, The Headless Horse-
man, A Strange Tale of Texas, 148,
149

Revolving pistol, 75-76

Rider, Jeb, story of rattlesnake, 208-
216

Robinson, Agatha, 266, 269-271

Robinson, Seco, search for silver, 264-
266

Rockahominy, 12

Rogers, Franklin, 15, 16

Rogers, Lucinda, 15, 16

Rogers, Samuel C. A., wild man story,
14-1

Romero, Pablo, fatal encounter with
bear, 203-206

Rotman, John, in buffalo hide, 110-
113

Rough-and-Ready, 151

Round Rock, 78, 90; Sam Bass killed
at, 84, 88-90; bee caves around, 128-
130


Sapine Pass, 252

Salt, mining, 285

Salt pork, 4

Saltillo blanket, +57, 239

San Antonio, Texas, 54; Witte Mu-
seum, 75; San Jose Mission, 264;
Fort Sam Houston, 131

San Antonio River, 127

San Felipe de Austin, 67, 72, 174

San Jacinto, Battle of, 10, 51-52, 76

San Jacinto corn, 11

San Jose Mission, 264

San Marcos, Texas, 130, 131

San Saba, lost Spanish mine on, 54,
555 75, 262

San Simeon Valley, 206

Sandbar Duel, 56-57, 58-59

Sandstorms in Texas, 99-104

Santa Anna, 10, 55, 290-291, 293

Sasser Crossing, 124

Scalping of Josiah Wilbarger, 34-35,
39-40

Settlers, early, 3-5; houses of, 21-22

Shaffer, Sam, panther tale, 188-189

Shaw, > 63, 65


Index


Sheep, 301-307

Sheffield, England, knives from, 51, 61

Shelby County, Texas, 76

Shell Ridge, 252, 254

Shells, old cows and bulls, 236

Sheridan, Francis C., of British For-
eign Office, 51

Shiloh Chapel, Battle of, 212

Shoal Creek, 289, 290, 293

Silver, buried in drouth crack, 241-
242; San Saba, 262-272; in Guada-
lupes, 281, 282; Reece Butler secret
deposit, 288

Silver ore, 298, 299, 300

Six-shooter, 75-76, 82-83

Slaves, 31, 53, 54, 222

Smith, Captain Dan, stories of Bigfoot
Wallace, 42-50

Smith, Daredevil Jack, of Missouri, 52

Smithwick, Noah, reminiscences, 6-8,
242; Evolution of a State, 67-68

Snake, 210

Snowden, Lovel, 56

Sorghum molasses, 97

Sotol leaves for flares, 274, 275, 276

Sowell, A. J., Bowie knife legend by,
67

Sowell, Andrew, bee hunter, 122-123

Sowell, John, Bowie legend, 67

Spaniards, lost cargo of gold, 224-225;
chest of gold, 245, 246, Comanche
massacres, 262, 263

Spanish daggers, 107

Squirrels, 195-196

Standifer, ——, in Wilbarger party, 35

Star Breast, bear story, 203-206

Statesman (Austin, Texas), 294

Stephens County, Texas, 84

Story, Shelton, Bass ancedotes by, 82-
83, 89

Strother, ——, in Wilbarger party, 35

Sturdivant, Bloody, 71

Sublett, Ben, prospector, 279-280

Susie, bear, 201

Sweet Lips, 45, 47

Sweet potatoes, 4, 236

Switch mesquite, 107


Tanoka, Texas, 100
Talley, J. D., 287


335
Taylor, Creed, hunt for Vidal, 150-


154

Taylor-Sutton feud, 151

Texan, characteristics of a, 93

Texas, weather braggarts in, 93-99;
sandstorms, 103-104; bluebonnet, 139

“Texas,” six-shooter model, 76

Texas Agricultural and Mechanical
College, 13

Thermometer, effect of norther on,


96

Thorpe, T. B., The Hive of the Bee-
Hunter, 122

Three-Legged Willie, 76, 77

Tige, dog, 191-192

Tiger's Bend, 115

Titus County, Texas, 97

Tongues of the Monte, James Frank
Dobie, 194

Toothpick State, 61

Travis County, Texas, 289

Trinity River, 167, 169-172; cotton
planters on, 219-220

Turkeys. See Wild turkeys


Union Paciric EXPRESS TRAIN, robbed
by Bass, 79

Uvalde, Texas, 132

Uvalde country, 273


Vacieros, 302

Valdez, Gregorio, 264

Van Horn, , 80

Varner, Martin, settler, 8

Venison in honey, 124, 125
Veramendi, Ursula de, 55
Vicey-Versey Map, 261, 264, 271-272
Vidal, ——, horse thief, 150-154
Visions seen by Sarah Hornsby, 36
Von Roeder, Ludwig Baron, 173
Von Roeder, Sigismund, 173-177


“Watker,” six-shooter model, 76
Walker, Captain Samuel H., 76
Walker kennels in Tennessee, 119
Wallace, Bigfoot, 52; Dan Smith
legend, 34-50; hunt for Vidal, 151-


154
Walsh, slave to McGaffey, 252, 258


A


336


Ward, Lafayette, 18
Ward, Russell, 18
Warwick Castle, weapons in, 51
Washington, Arkansas, Bowie knife
legend, 62-63, 66

. Wayne, Uncle, 219
Wetsel, Riley, 81
White Bean, Bigfoot's mare, 45, 46, 50
White family, panther tale, 192-193
Wilbarger, Josiah, scalping of, 34-35,

40

Wild Cat Slough, 190
Wild geese, effect of norther on, 97
Wild turkeys, 117, 182, 184-185
Willerts, Sary, panther story, 189-190


)
v yo
a


Index


Williams, Mollie, Saloon in Odessa,
280

Williamson, R. M., 76, 77

Wilson, John, 61

Witte Museum at San Antonio, 75

Wolf-flower (Texas bluebonnet), 139

Wolves, 110, 113-114

Woodward, Dave, 104

Wright, Norris, duel with Bowie, 58-


59
Wrightman, Elias R., bear story, 203
Yankees cleaned out by Old Bill, 214-


21


Yegua Creek, 87


