THE PHILOSOPHY OF ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY: In a Course of Twelve Lectures.
By John Bovee Dods. Stereotype edition. New York: Fowlers and Wells, 1852 (entered 1850).
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/60221590R.nlm.nih.gov).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY:


IN A COURSE OF


TWELVE LECTURES.


BY JOHN BOVEE DODS.


STEREOTYPE EDITION.

NEW YORK


PUBLISHED BY FOWLERS AND WELLS,

NOS. 129 AND 131 NASSAU STREET.

; 352.


r


£>&4% P e


Entered, according to act of Congress, in the year 1850, by

C . P • DODS,

in the Clerk s Ollico of the District Court for the Southern District of New York -


StEBEOTlTED BY *ANER AND PALMER,

901 William st., corner of Frankfort, N. Y.


DE DICAT 10 N.


TO B. B. WILLIAMS, M. D.

Dear Sir — Deeply sensible of your nobility, and
your sterling integrity and honor as a man, and sensi-
ble that the science of Electrical Psychology is
dear to your heart — that you have honored it, and done
much to establish it among mankind — and having so
often and deeply felt your friendship, I claim the favor,
as an expression of my confidence in your goodness, to
dedicate to you this little work. You will perceive,
that I have intentionally written it in rather a fanciful
style, so as to make it pleasing to readers in general ;
and surely you, as a critic, will overlook this,-as I have
also endeavored to please the scholar, by throwing out
before him a fair specimen of original thought. As
euch, it is most respectfully inscribed to you, by your

sincere friend,

THE AUTHOR.


CONTENTS.


PAUE*

DEDICATION 3

INTRODUCTION, 9-13

LECTURE I.

ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY — ITS DEFINITION, AND
IMPORTANCE IN CURING DISEASES, 15-32

Invitation by members of United States Senate to lecture on the
Science of Electrical Psychology — Man should use his reason
— His space is small, yet his power extends to other worlds —
The greatness and majesty of Nature — Her mysterious opera-
tions — Man a progressive being — Author's reference to his
Mesmeric Lectures — Has for twenty years argued electricity
to be the connecting link between mind and matter — Letter
from Hon. Richard D. Davis, with editorial remarks on the
mysterious nature of the experiments — Hiram Bostwick, Esq.,
cured of palsy — Two girls cured of deafness — Lady restored
to speech and sight — Editorial advice to physicians to learn
this Science — Resolutions of Dr. Dods' class of forty-five per-
sons in favor of this Science — A lady cured who had not
walked for eighteen years — Distinction between Mesmerism
and Electrical Psychology.

LECTURE II.

BEAUTY OF INDEPENDENT THOUGHT AND FEAR-
LESS EXPRESSION, 33-48

Electrical Psychology has claims .to philosophy — Its strangeness
awakens the deepest feelings of contempt among skeptics —
Those who scoff and sneer have received their ideas by in-
heritance, without labor, as they did their estate — Such,
though learned, are the greatest enemies of science — The
march of intellect — Improvements of the day — The chariot
of science commenced its career at the morning of creation,
with but few on board, and will continue to roll on without
end — Its passengers here are mortals ; in eternity, immortals —
The variety and richness of the intellectual and moral field-
Use of the school and college — Divines should not fear science
— It cannot destroy the Bible — Creation successive — Its vast-
ness — All sciences have been opposed, and their discoverers
persecuted — ' Harvey — Galileo — Newton — Fulton — Gall —
Spurzheim — Combe — The Fowlers, of New York — Men
should seek for true fame, and not. a momentary popularity —
True fame defined — A specimen of it in the example of
Christ.


Q CONTENTS.

LECTURE III.

PACKS.

CONNECTING LINK BETWEEN MIND AND MATTER
AND CIRCULATION OF THE BLOOD, . . . . • .49-04

Let not opposition surprise — The characters from whom it comes
are pointed out — Immutability of truth — It cannot be affected
by the belief or unbelief of men — Electrical theory of the uni-
verse—Electricity eternal — The agent employed by the Creator
to move globes and carry on the operations of nature — It is a
universal agent, and the cause of light, heat, vegetation, twi-
light, evaporation, storms, earthquakes, and hurricanes — Man
an epitome of the universe — All substances in him — Mind has
both voluntary and involuntary powers — Brain is the fountain
of the nervous system — Mind the cause of all motion, and can
touch nothing but electricity — From mind to dead matter is
seven links — Mind holds its royal throne in the brain, and ex-
ecutes its commands through electricity, its prime minister —
Circulation of the blood — Its philosophy is new — Heart, with
its ventricles and auricles — Why nerves attend the arteries
and not the veins — How the brain is supplied with electricity
— Why arterial blood is cherry-red, and venous blood purple.

LECTURE IV.

PHILOSOPHY OF DISEASE AND NERVOUS FORCE, 65-8)

Circulation of the blood concluded — Circulating system is two
systems — Arterial blood is positive, venous blood is negative —
The notion refuted that the heart circulates the blood and ex-
erts a force of 100,000 pounds — The heart is moved by the
involuntary force of the cerebellum — The blood is moved by
the positive and negative forces of electricity taken in at the
lungs by inspiration — Philosophy of disease — One cause only
for all diseases — Diseases do not originate in the blood, but in
the electricity of the nerves — They begin in the finest invisible
substance in the body and end in the grossest — All convulsions
in nature begin and end thus — Blood not rendered impure by
foreign substances carried into it, but by being thrown out
of balance in its circulation — Diseases caused by mental or
physical impressions — Disease settles upon the weakest organ
or part of the body — Nervous fluid thrown out of balance is
disease, and when equalized is health— Half of the nervous
fluid is under the voluntary control of the mind — The other
half is not

LECTURE V.
CURE OF DISEASE AND BEING ACCLIMATED, . . 82- 9 &
Philosophy of disease— Mental and physical impressions— R a
tionale of its cure— Man riding— Head aches— Meets a robber
—Headache cured— The healing principle is in us, not in med
icine — Equalize circulation by nervous force— Emetics do not


CONTENTS. 7

PAGES.

possess the vomiting principle — Vomiting is produced by nerv-
ous force — Examples and proof — Diseases cured by mental
impressions, even though caused by physical impression —
Medicines produce physical results — Example of a peach-tree
— Physicians should state to the patients what medicines they
administer — How to preserve health — Bathings — No disease
cured by an opposite — Philosophy of becoming acclimated —
Mineral and vegetable kingdoms — Man a vegetable of second
growth — All vegetables and animals adapted to their climates
— Foreign substances should not be eaten — Change of our
flesh and bones — Clothing adapted to climate — God has not
erred in disposing the vegetable substances over the globe —
Truth immutable.

LECTURE VI.
EXISTENCE OF DEITY PROVED FROM MOTION, . 99-118

Reason fearless of consequences — The power of electricity — Its
awful manifestations — Nothing compared with Deity — Spirit
supposed to be immaterial, but is not — Supposed to be the re-
sult of mechanism, but is not — Dr. Priestly — Atheists — The
resurrection — Spirit is a substance — Electricity is universal —
Mind is the opposite of dead matter — Body and nature com-
pared — Each organ has but one function — The chain of ele-
mentary substances considered, from the heaviest up to the
lightest — Only one substance has motion, this is mind — The
unseen is the reality, the visible is not — The tree is an out-
shoot from the invisible life of the seed — All powers are in the
unseen substances — Earthquakes — Man and nature alike — In-
voluntary powers of mind — Involuntary powers of God — His
voluntary powers create — His involuntary govern through
established laws — God's voluntary powers cannot be thwarted,
his involuntary can — First human pair — Difference between
being born and created — The acorn and the oak, which was
first — Geology — Creation and government of the globe — Pre-
mature deaths argued — Two brains — Voluntary and involun-
tary powers — The office of each proved by preparing (bod
and eating it.

LECTURE VII.
SUBJECT OF CREATION CONSIDERED 119-147

All motion originates in mind — Thought is not mind — Creation
is a vast subject — Man's right to reason on any subject — Worlds
made out of electricity — Nothing cannot be made into some-
thing — Apostle Paul — Bible sense of create — Something must
be eternal — God, space, and duration considered — Philosophi-
cal necessity — Electricity is the body of God — Each animated
body is an outshoot from mind — God's mind is not omnipresent,
his body is — Mind is form — The serpent — The lobster— All
feeling in mind — Amputations — Flow mind moves the body —


g CONTENTS.


PAOM.


, i i , \i,„i.< of creation— Sradually from

£o/i e" ' -c. icitv, out of which the globe was made to gov-
? u q U-One hundred cords fastened on one hundred elements
• n e i ec tricity— Positive and negative forces— Ultimates and
primates— Gold and phosphate of lime— Sun is electricity-
Philosophy of twilight— The globe not yet finished— Newton-
Comets— Elliptical orbits— Volcanoes— Philosophy oi variation
of the compass— The globe yet in its embryo— When finished
— What future generations will say of us.

LECTURE VIII.

DOCTRINE OF IMPRESSIONS 136-151

Creation and Electrical Psychology— All substances in man— It
requires electricity, out of which lie was made, to govern him —
Philosophy of digestion — Chyle, serum, blood, flesh, tendons,
bones— Positive and negative forces — Blood the universal sol-
vent of the body as water is of the globe— The brain — Stomach
— One hundred elements — Law of equilibrium — Nature like
man is thrown out of balance and becomes sick — Hurricane and
tornado — Rheumatisms and broken bones preceding a storm —
Thunder storms — Cause of hail — Earthquakes — Earth may
have a bowel complaint — Volcanoes — Eruptions — Nature is
cured by her own impressions, and so is man — Sleeping in un-
healthy climates — Keep positive to surrounding impressions —
Citizens of Charleston, S.C. — Country fever — Dr. Mason Good
— Fear — Cholera — Salem witchcraft — Pleading guilty — Dan-
ger of executing persons on their own confessions — Judges
and jurors.

LECTURE IX.

CONNECTION BETWEEN THE VOLUNTARY AND IN-
VOLUNTARY NERVES, 152-168

Electricity the connecting link between mind and inert matter —
Goose pimples on the arm — Insulated stool — Nerves are mag-
netic — Electrometer — Why mind removes warts, king's-evil, or
tumors — Dr. Warren, of Boston — Electro-nervous fluid heals —
Why it heals — The voluntary and involuntary powers — Throne
of the mind — Each person has two distinct brains through which
the mind acts — Connection between the voluntary and involun-
tary nerves — How one may affect the other — Death occasioned
by the want of sleep — Death is the sleep of the involuntary
powers — Suspended animation in alligators, toads, serpents,
raccoons, etc. — Suspended animation in some human beings
for several days — Its philosophy or cause — Danger of prema-
ture interments — A man in New Jersey, his ease stated The

circulating and nervous systems compared — The mind's throne

in the medulla oblongata — Philosophy of natural sleep Con

elusion— Poetry on Hope. '


CONTENTS.

PAOO.

healthy climates — Keep positive to surrounding impressions —
Citizeus of Charleston, S. C. — Country fever — Dr. Mason Good
— Fear — Cholera — Salem witchcraft — Pleading guilty — Dan-
ger of executing persons on their own confessions — Judges
and jurors.

LECTURE IX.

CONNECTION BETWEEN THE VOLUNTARY AND IN
VOLUNTARY NERVES 164-180

Electricity the connecting link between mind and inert matter —
Goose pimples on the arm — Insulated stool — Nerves are mag-
netic — Electrometer — Why mind removes warts, king's evil,
or tumors — Dr. Warren, of Boston — Electro-nervous fluid heals
— Why it heals — The voluntary and involuntary powers —
Throne of the mind — Each person has two distinct brains
through which the mind acts — Connection between the volun-
tary and involuntary nerves — How one may affect the other —
Death occasioned by the want of sleep — Death is the sleep of
the involuntary powers — Suspended animation in alligators,
toads, serpents, raccoons, etc. — Suspended animation in some
human beings for several days — Its philosophy or cause — Dan-
ger of premature interments — A mau in New Jersey, his case
stated — The circulating and nervous systems compared — The
mind's throne in the medulla oblongata — Philosophy of natural
sleep — Concl usion.

LECTURE X.

ELECTRO-CURAPATHY IS THE BEST MEDICAL SYS-
TEM IN BEING, AS IT INVOLVES THE EXCEL-
LENCES OF ALL OTHER SYSTEMS 181-198

Electrical Psychology is in its infancy — The power it is destined
to exert over disease in coming ages — It is the most sublime
system of philosophy in existence — Excels astronomy and geol-
• °gy» which are great — Its importance not realized — It uses
safe remedies — Discards poisons — It takes its medicines from
the fields of nature where the patient lives — Animals do the
same — The different medical systems noticed — They should all
be combined iu one system of Curapathy — Hydropathy con-
sidered— Aeriapathy considered — Electricity, galvanism, and
magnetism are useful — Called Electropathy — Terrapathy con-
sidered, or earth cures — Earths should be applied to the system
in various forms, particularly in inflammations — Man needs but
little medicine — Attention to food as to quantity and quality is
about all he needs — Why Terrapathy cures is argued — Difficult
to solve — Can physicians tell why any medicine cures ? — In-
stinct of the rattlesnake to cure himself when bitten — A negro,
on being bitten, ate the same plant and was cured — Most of
the valuable medicines were discovered by old country women,
old hunters, and Indians, and not bv doctors — With much op-
1*


1Q CONTENTS.

PAGM

position they were forced to adopt them— Their opposition to
Peruvian bark, the virtues of which were discovered by monks
The c i er ay opposed it — A state of health and disease consid-
ered Negative and positive forces considered — Positive elec-
tricity belongs to the air, negative to the earth — There are pos-
itive and negative diseases — How cured — Herbs are the eldest
born children of mother earth— They always hang upon her
breast— Clay poultices— The body buried in soils— Instances
where Ten-apathy has cured — The Master and the blind man
— The clay and spittle — Absorbent power of earths — Sting of
a bee cured — Grease spots, how removed from silks or wool-
ens — The scent of a skunk removed from clothes by earth —
The cause of this considered, and the supremacy of Electro-
Psychological Curapathy shown over all medical systems in
being.

LECTURE XI.

THE SECRET REVEALED, SO THAT ALL MAY KNOW
HOW TO EXPERIMENT WITHOUT AN INSTRUCT-
OR 199-232

As this science involves all medical systems, and embraces other
agents besides, so it should be understood by all — Doctors
should understand it — It often saves life when medicines fail —
It can be thoroughly learned and practically understood in ten
hours — Dr. Dods will teach it if preferred — He is located in
New York — Will attend to imparting instruction and lecturing
abroad, if invited — Ignoraut persons have gone abroad pretend-
ing to teach it for ten dollars, for two dollars, and some for
twenty-five cents — Some have changed its name to that of
Electro-Biology — To prevent imposition the secret is revealed
— How can those teach its philosophy and its application to
disease who are ignorant of the human system ? — More is here
taught than by any lecturers — God has stamped simplicity on
his works — Each organ of the body performs but one function
— There is but one nerve through which ideas are transmitted
to the mind — Ideas are successive, not simultaneous — We can
not attend to two public speakers at once — The mind has a
spiritual brain and spiritual organs — The nerve through which
impressions are communicated to the mind is located in the
organ of Individuality — All .the organs are double — This nerve
has infinite branches to all the voluntary parts of the body to
communicate motion — A pebble thrown into Lake Superior-
Its illustration — Philosophy of sympathy — Personal identity—
The brain is the earthly house — To control a person, a commu-
nication must first be established, either by or without contact
— The philosophy of communication in general — Positive and
negative forces of male and female electricity — Every one has
his electric circle — One in twenty-five is naturally in the psy
chological slate — The various modes of taking communication
— But one way after all — Directions given — The gripo The


CONTENTS.


11


PACHA

Ulnar, or Cubital Nerve — The Median Nerve — Both are com-
pound nerves — The Median Nerve is the best for communica-
tion — Its branches connect with the five senses — Various direc-
tions given how to experiment — Effects produced upon the
subject — The coin described, and how to use it — The number
of sittings — Other substances may be used — The science di-
vided into five plans — Mesmerism is No. 1 — The gripe No. 2 —
The coin No. 3 — The experiments No. 4 — And its application
to curing the diseases of those not in the state is No. 5 — Each
of these plans explained — Directions how to mesmerize fully-
given — How to awake him by an impression — Can not experi-
ment without a communication — All philosophy requires cause,
medium, and effect — God could not affect the globe, nor its in-
habitants, if he were isolated — Why the experiments are con-
ducive to health — Philosophy of a surgical operation without
pain while the patient is awake and rational — Connection be-
tween the mind and nerves of sensation — Case of Henry Clay
in an exciting speech in Congress — He felt not the insertion of
a pin into his flesh — Dr. Channing's remarks on no pain being
felt by the martyrs — None is felt from a wound in the heat of
battle — Inference.

LECTURE XII.
GENETOLOGY, OR HUMAN BEAUTY PHILOSOPHICAL-
LY CONSIDERED, 233-252

Human beauty founded on the doctrine of impressions — Our spe-
cies gradually improved — Born into existence with such forms
as we desire — Beauty loved, desired, and praised by all — The
mother by mental impressions variously affects the foetus — Has
produced abortion — Was frightened at a cub and produced an
idiot who acted like a bear — A lady frightened by a parrot —
Her child born a mediocre — A son born with compressed tem-
ples, caused by the mother seeing a lamb's head crushed — A
child born with one arm and leg — Effects produced by long-
ings — Color of wine transferred to the foetus — Strawberry,
blackberry, etc., transferred — Objections of medical writers
are groundless — It is no new truth — Old as human records —
Laban deceived Jacob — Rachael and Leah — Jacob's cattle
speckled — He used speckled rods — Its philosophy — Aqua regia
dissolves gold — Galvanizing metals — Making a bank plate-
Identity of letters, marks, and engravings preserved on metals
Application of this to the subject — Menses are the raw ma-
terial to form the child — How it is formed — How to produce it
in her own image — How to make it resemble her husband, or
any one else — Influence of her love or hatred on the foetus —
Effects of jealousy — Every object she sees has a tendency to
produce a favorable or unfavorable result on the child — Mind
has spiritual organism— Philosophy of effects produced upon
the foetus — The mother's responsibility — Importance of gov-


12 CONTENTS.

PACKS.

erning her passions, feelings, and emotions — Importance of
Phrenology— How the highest specimens of human beauty
may be produced— A talented lady considered— Pictures,
countenances, forms, landscapes— Under what impressions to
conceive— Her room, its furniture— Her mind, how employed
in contemplating the beautiful in nature and art — Her food,
and how to proceed till the time of delivery — All great men
produced by talented mothers — Talent depends more on the
mother than father — But few are now qualified to produce
beauty — Improvement gradual till the work shall be universally
consummated — Those in the psychological state considered, and
the husband's influence on such — Importance of educating
woman in all the sciences, and in political economy and his-
tory, equal to man — The responsibility of her station in rearing
her child — The inconsistency of committing her child to the
care of ignorant or base servants — The pulpit — Its moral power
—It neglects this great subject and must be aroused to nobler
action — The gospel of Christ — The millennium — Agricultural
associations are improving both vegetables and animals — Re-
wards offered for the most beautiful specimens — But nothing
done to improve and beautify the human form — We will begin
it — Future generations will consummate it — Poetry on hope.


INTRODUCTION.


The author received the following invitation from the under-
signed honorable gentlemen, members of the United States Senate,
to lecture in Washington city, District of Columbia :

" Washington, Feb. 12th, 1850.
"To Dr. Dods :

" Dear Sir — Having received highly favorable accounts of the
addresses delivered by you, in different sections of the Union, on
' Electrical Psychology,' a department of science said to treat of
the philosophy of disease, and the reciprocal action of mind and
matter upon each other, we would be gratified if you would deliver
a lecture on the subject in this city, at the earliest time consistent
with your convenience. With a view to the accommodation of
members of Congress and the community generally, the Hall of
Representatives, if it can be procured, would be a suitable place
for the delivery of your discourse.

" Yours, truly,
"Geo. W. Jones, Tho. J.,Rtjsk,

" John P. Hale, Sam Houston,

" H. Clay, H. S. Foote.

Dan. Webster."

To the above the following answer was returned :

"To the Hon. Tho. J. Rusk, Sam Houston, H. S. Foote, Geo. W.
Jones, John P. Hale, Henry Clay, and Daniel Webster, all of
the United States Senate :

" Gentlemen :

" In reply to yours of Feb. 12th, I would respectfully say, that
I feel myself highly honored to receive an invitation from you, to
lecture upon the philosophy of Electrical Psychology in the United
States Capitol. With this invitation I comply, and it affords me
much pleasure to do so. Owing, however, to circumstances and
previous engagements, my earliest and only time during my pres-
ent visit in Washington, will be on Saturday evening, Feb. 16th.
I will therefore appoint' that time as most suitable to my conveni-
ence, and commence my lecture at half-past seven o'clock.
" With sentiments of high consideration, I am

" Yours, truly,

" J. B Dons."


14 INTRODtCTION.

The science of Electrical Psychology I have taught to more than
a thousand individuals, and in all cases I have umiormly charged
gentlemen ten dollars for tuition, and ladies five. I have also made
it a uniform practice to lay them indiscriminately under written
obligations, pledging most solemnly their sacred honor, as ladies
and gentlemen, that they would never teach it to any persons but
of good moral character, nor, in any instance, for a less price than
above stated, and that they would lay all those whom they taught
under the same wi-itten obligations and pledges. But it so hap-
pens, that unprincipled individuals, regardless of their pledges of
sacred honor, have, in numerous instances, violated them, and
taught, or at least pretended to teach, this science to others for any
price they could obtain. There are, however, many honorable ex-
ceptions to this course of conduct among my students, and I am
proud to bear this testimony to their faithfulness.

The substance of the first nine of these Lectures was deliv-
ered, by request, in Washington city, last February, and immedi-
ately published. The sale of the work has exceeded my expecta-
tions, and, in this Fourth Edition, I have fully revealed the secret,
so that the reader, by the faithful perusal of my Lectures XI. and
XII., will be as well qualified to experiment as those unprincipled
pretenders, above noticed, who go about as teachers. They have
even made their pupils believe, that nothing was necessary for
them to know only the nerve or gripe to get a communication and
to speak in a positive manner and full tone of voice to the sub-
ject! But you will perceive, on reading this work, that they have
not taught you the A, B, C of this science. Its philosophy has
cost me seven years of intense study, and it can not be revealed
in a moment, not taught but by a workman. Honor and justice,
under all these circumstances, require me to publish the mode of
experimenting, so that those who shall teach it hereafter, will be
compelled to study and prepare themselves for the work, as quali-
fied instructors, because something more than the secret, which
Lecture XI. reveals, will now be required.

J. B. DODS.
New York, September 26th, 1850.


ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


LECTURE I.


Ladies and Gentlemen :

I have received an invitation from several eminent
members of the United States Senate, to deliver a
Lecture on the Science of Electrical Psychology — the
philosophy of disease — the connecting link between
mind and matter — their reciprocal action upon each
other, and the grand operations of nature that this
science may involve. In compliance with this invita-
tion, I now stand before you for this purpose, and will
endeavor faithfully to discharge my duty. In order to
do my subject justice, I shall be under the necessity of
making a very liberal draft on your time and patience.
Sensible that I stand here by the invitation of those
distinguished orators, statesmen, and generals, whose
eloquence, in defence of Liberty, has been felt by
thrones — whose wisdom has given laws that are re-
spected by all nations on earth, and make millions of


16 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

freemen happy — and whose heroism has breasted the
battle storm in defence of human rights — it may well
be expected that I should, in some measure at least,
feel the embarrassment that tne occasion itself must
naturally inspire.

As the Creator of the universe has endowed man
with reason, and assigned him a noble and intelligent
rank in the scale of intellectual and moral being — and
as he has commanded him to use this faculty — so I
may with justice remark, that he who cannot reason is
a fool ; he who dare not reason,, is a coward ; he who
will not reason, is a bigot ; but he who can and dare
reason, is a man.

The realms of nature lie open in boundless prospect
above, beneath, and around us. 'As inhabitants of
this globe, we occupy but a small spot — the centre, as
it were, of the immense universe that swarms with a
countless variety of animated beings, and contains end-
less sources of mental and moral delights. Order,
harmony, and beauty are so perfectly woven together
and blended throughout nature, as to form the mag-
nificent robe she wears, and with which she not only
charms and even dazzles the eyes of the beholder, but
conceals the overwhelming power and majesty of her
person. As she moves, the most grand and awful
impressions mark her footsteps on the globe's surface
or centre — in air or ocean. She smiles in the gentle-
ness of the calm, and frowns in the fury of the storm.


LECTURE I. 17

But "whether silence reigns, earthquakes rumble, or
thunders roll, she keeps her mighty course unaffected
by the revolutions of ages.

At the same time that there is confessedly something
most grand in the operations of nature, and even while
the most gifted minds are reveling with delight amidst
her magnificence, and feasting upon her splendors,
there is still something humiliating in the thought, that
incomprehensibility continues to hold its dark and sul-
len empire over the causes of many of her most sub-
lime manifestations. For a period of twice three
thousand years, she has concealed beneath the shadow
of her hand, not only the cause of worlds rolling in
their ceaseless course through the illimitable fields of
space, but also the rise and fall of vegetation, and the
phenomena of life and death.

Man is intellectually a progressive being. Though
confined to a narrow circumference of space, and
chained to this earth, which is but a small part of the
unbounded universe, yet as his mind wears the stamp
of original greatness, he is nevertheless capable of ex-
pending his researches far beyond the boundaries of
this globe. His mind is capable of a ceaseless devel-
opment of its powers. From the faint glimmerings of
infantile reason, he passes on to that intellectual
strength and grandeur when he can take a survey of
the planets, the dimensions of the sun, trace the comet
in its erratic course, analyze the works of God, and


\
18 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

comprehend the vast and complicated operations of his
own mind. How sublime is the contemplation, that" he
can invade the territory of other worlds, bring them
within field-view of the ken of his telescope, and see
them play their aerial gambols under the superintend-
ence of attraction and repulsion.

But before I proceed any further, it becomes neces-
sary that I clearly state the subject of my present
course of Lectures, so that we may enter upon it under-
standingly, and, if possible, with a clear conception of
its nature and importance to the human race. The
subject, upon which I am entering, is that to which I
have given the name of Electrical Psychology, as the
one which is, in my estimation, the most appropriate.
Psychology is a compound of two Greek words, viz.,
psuche, which means soul, and logos, which means
word, discourse, or wisdom. Hence by Psychology
we are to understand the Science of the Soul.
And as all impressions are made upon the soul through
the medium of electricity, as the only agent by which
it holds communication with the external world, so you
readily perceive not only the propriety but the entire
aptitude of the name Electrical Psychology.

Twenty years ago, I discovered electricity to be the
connecting link between mind and inert matter, and on
this discovery the philosophy of the present science is
based. Ever since 1830, I have contended, that elec-
tricity is not only the connecting link between mind


LECTURE I. 19

and inert matter, but is the grand agent employed by
the Creator to move and govern the universe. These
views, in opposition to the doctrine of inherent attrac-
tion in matter, I advocated in Taunton, Massachusetts,
in two Lectures I delivered before the Lyceum in 1832.
The substance of these is embodied in six Lectures I
delivered at the Marlboro Chapel, in Boston, Janu-
ary 1843, by request of members of both branches of
the Massachusetts Legislature then in session in that
city ; and they have been most extensively published in
this country, and republished in England. In that
work they are applied to the philosophy of Mesmerism.
I make these remarks so that ladies and gentlemen
present on this occasion may know, that my views of
the electrical theory of the universe, and the. con-
necting link between mind and inert matter, are not
the breathings of a momentary impulse, but of long
and matured deliberation.

Electrical Psychology takes a most extensive range,
and embraces a field rich in variety of thought. It is
so startling to human credulity, that its truth cannot
be believed, only by passing it through the ordeal of
the severest scrutiny by oft-repeated experiments. As
to the character and force of these experiments, I can-
not better express them than in the following editorial
notice from the " Saratoga Republican."

The editor of the Saratoga Republican having re-
ceived a letter from the Hon. Richard D. Davis, for-


20 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOL3G1.

merly a member of Congress, in relation to this science,
•writes as follows :

" Dr. Dods, who professes to have discovered a new
science, to which he applies the name of Electrical
Psychology, is at present giving a series of remarka-
ble experiments, in our village, by way of illustrating
its truth and undoubted reality. By it he professes to
be able to perform the most startling and cunning ex-
periments, upon persons fully awake, and in the most
perfect possession of all their faculties. Controlling
their motions — standing up, they find it impossible to
sit down ; if in a sitting posture, they are unable to
rise till the operator allows them to do so. He claims
to have the power to take away the powers of hearing,
speech, sight, and the memory, etc., whenever he
pleases, and to return again these faculties instantly ;
that he can change the personal identity of certain
individuals, making them imagine for the time being
that they are persons of color, that they belong to the
opposite sex, or that they are some renowned general,
orator, statesman, or what-not. He professes to be
able to change the appearance and taste of water in
rapid succession to that of lemonade, honey, vinegar,
molasses, wormwood, coffee, milk, brandy ; the latter
producing all the intoxicating effects of alcohol. He
brings before his subjects the threatening thunder-
cloud. They see the lightnings flash and hear the
thunders roll ; the storm bursts over their heads, and


LECTURE I. 21

they flee to a place of shelter, under a table, bench,
or any thing that offers protection. All this while the
individuals experimented upon are perfectly awake and
in possession of their reasoning faculties.

" We are well aware, that the first impression upon
the mind of the reader will be, that all this is absurd,
ridiculous, and utterly- impossible. This would be the
natural conclusion of every one who had never wit-
nessed any of these surprising phenomena; but the
reality of all this is maintained by some of the most
respectable and talented men in the country. We
have permission to refer to several individuals of the
highest standing and character, who are believers in
this science, and have been pupils of Dr. Dods. We
have before us a letter written by Hon. Richard D.
Davis, from which we make the following extract.
Mr. Davis stays :

" The science which Dr. Dods teaches, is to my mind
alike novel, instructive, and useful — full of speculation
fit for the loftiest intellect, and replete with rich in-
structions for every condition of human life. So far
as I am able to judge, I can safely say, that no person
of ordinary capacity and intelligence can take the usual
course of lessons from the doctor, who will not at its end
sincerely acknowledge himself more than tenfold repaid
for its cost of time, trouble, and expense ; and the more
the ability and information of the individual may be,
the more ready will be the acknowledgment. I am un-


22 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

willing to express more than half the gratification ana
instruction which I have received, and if my recom-
mendation can prevail with any one to become his pu-
pil, it is most cheerfully and earnestly given."

What I have now read in your hearing, will give you
some idea of the nature of the experiments, and also
what claims Electrical Psychology has, in the opinion
of distinguished men, in relation to its pretensions to
science and usefulness. But there is no question, that
ladies and gentlemen, after admitting that these exper-
iments are truly wonderful, and to them incomprehens-
ible, will yet ask, of what use are they to the human
race? The great usefulness and transcendent import-
ance of this science to the human race consist in its
curative powers over those diseases that medicine can-
not remove. As facts come home to men's bosoms,
and rebuke the skeptic in a voice of thunder, so I can-
not give a better answer to the question, nor render you
a better service, than to read a few extracts from the
city papers of Auburn, New York, where I last lectur-
ed and experimented. It is as follows :

" Hiram Bostwick, Esq., so long and so well known
in this city [Auburn] and county, during more than two
} T ears before he saw Dr. Dods, did not take a natural
step. For a year and a half last past, could only
slowly drag his feet along, as though they were attached
to wooden legs, and, at that, did not attempt to drag
himself about the streets. Besides an attack last


LECTURE I. 23

spring (which was the fifth stroke of palsy he had re-
ceived), he could not even distinguish light from dark-
ness, with his right eye. In a word, he was dead to
happiness and usefulness. He met Dr, Dods, and in
less than a week he was taking walks of a mile in
length. With his right eye he distinguishes persons,
and is constantly improving, while he is daily prome-
nading our streets with the perfect control and use of
every muscle, and is quite as happy as any man we
meet."

I will read again from another Auhurn paper. It is
as follows :

" Do the dumb speak and the deaf hear 1 In Au-
burn, in October, 1849, they do. This forenoon, two
girls went to the City Hall, neither of whom could hear
a conversation in an ordinary tone. They were ope-
rated upon some five or six minutes each, upon the
principles of Electrical Psychology as taught by Dr.
Dods, and when they left, one of them could distinctly
hear an ordinary conversation, and the other could as
distinctly hear a whisper."

" Yesterday noon, a lady from Massachusetts called
upon Dr. Dods, at the Western Exchange. Her eye-
lids were so drawn down over her eyes that she could
not see, and she could not talk. In twenty minutes
she could both see and converse. If any one discredits
this statement, let him ask Gen. Wood, the gentle-
manly proprietor of the Exchange. When this blind


24 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and dumb lady came, her female attendant stated to
Gen. Wood, that her friend had not opened her eyes
for three years, and for the hist year had not uttered
a syllable. The afflicted lady made the same state-
ment, after the doctor had restored her wonted powers
of speech. During the three years, she was for one of
them confined in a dark room, to avoid the supposed
injurious effects of light. She could not raise the up-
per lids of the eyes.

" Such was her situation when she called upon Dr.
Dods at the Exchange yesterday ; and in half an hour
she left again, drinking in with delight the prospect
about her, and from which for years she had been en-
tirely shut out, and while at the same time she poured
forth her joy in words which it may be well imagined
were those of the purest ecstasy. Her friends tried
to prevail upon her, when she reached the carriage at
the door, to shield her eyes, lest the sudden change
from darkness to glare should have a deleterious in-
fluence upon those sensitive and delicate organs ; but
a gaze about the city was too rich a treat to be
lost, and she availed herself of the opportunity to
enjoy it.

" As- this lady had been so long and so severely
afflicted, had availed herself of the knowledge and skill
afforded by the medical profession, and was at the time
traveling in search of health, I thought the case wor-
thy of mention.


LECTURE I. 25

" Do not understand me to be one who, even if in
his power, would do any thing to depreciate the high
estimation in which the medical profession is so justly
held. Not at all. I regard it as one of the noblest
of all pursuits, and believe that its practitioners, as a
class, are not excelled, if equaled, by any other in
kindness, self-denial, and humanity. But I will say,
that every physician ought to understand Dr. Dods'
system of Electrical Psychology. There is no room to
doubt that it will not only give him a knowledge of laws
and phenomena of the human economy he does not now
know or comprehend, but will enable him to afford re-
lief and restoration in cases where before it was out of
his power.

" Granting this to be so — and the appeal here is to
facts which cannot lie — what is the duty of the honest
physician? Is it to sneer at a system or science
which, with a respectable face, makes even these pre-
tensions 1 — which professes to unfold laws and powers
of mind and body which they do not understand, and
backed up by actual, tangible results, which utterly
dumbfound the whole of them 1 Is sneering his duty,
when his hands hold the scales in which are deposited
life and death 1 Is it not rather his duty to investi-
gate the matter — to probe it to the bottom — to know
all that can be known about it 1

" The community will answer these questions, be-
cause they are deeply interested in the answer. In
2


26 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

this city, cures will be performed within one year, by
the pupils of Dr. Dods, in cases where the present
medical system has been exhausted in vain. This will
test the question. And by this test, every physician
who sneers at Electrical Psychology will be compelled
to abide. From it he cannot, and will not escape.
I will refer now to only one beauty of the electro -
psychological treatment of pain and disease. Its
pharmacy is always perfect — it is of God."

From the extracts Avhich I have now read in your
hearing, from the Auburn papers, you will at once
perceive the power and glory that hover around this
science, and the importance which is claimed in its
behalf as one of the greatest blessings ever vouchsafed
to the human race. So that you may see the high
estimation in which this science is held by the citizens
of Auburn, generally, where these cures were per-
formed, I will trouble my audience but once more, and
ask their indulgence while I read the resolutions* they
unanimously passed in behalf of Electrical Psychology
as a great and important science, which resolutions
were published in the Auburn papers. I will also
read the prefaced remarks of the editor. They are as
follows :

" Electrical Psychology. — Dr. Dods closed his
Lectures, in Auburn, on Saturday evening. It will be
seen by our columns this afternoon, that the gentlemen
composing his Class, availed themselves of the occa-


LECTURE I. 27

sion to express their views of Electrical Psychology,
and of the manner in which the Doctor sustained his
relations as their Instructor in his system. It is
enough to say that the Class numbered gentlemen of
undoubted intelligence."

" Proceedings adopted by the Auburn Psychological
Class.

" At a meeting of the Class of forty-five persons,
who had taken private lessons of Dr. J. B. Dods in
the science of Electrical Psychology, held at the City
Hall, in the city of Auburn, on the 27th day of Octo-
ber, 1849, John P. Hulbert was called to the chair,
and Dr. S. N. Smith appointed secretary.

" On motion, a committee of three was appointed
by the chairman to draft and report to the meeting
resolutions expressive of the views and feelings of Dr.
Dods' pupils, in the city of Auburn, in respect to the
lessons and lectures given them by him."

" On motion, the chairman and secretary were
added to the committee.

" The committee reported the following resolutions,
which were unanimously adopted by the meeting.

" Resolved, That the science of Electrical Psy-
chology, as taught to this class, by Dr. J. B. Dods,
in a series of private instructions and lectures, we be-
lieve to be founded in immutable truth, and that it


28 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

will accomplish for the human race an inappreciable
amount of good.

" Resolved, That we believe Electrical Psycho-
logy has been, and will be eminently useful in allevi-
ating the pains of the suffering, and in the cure of dis-
eases ; that it is as comprehensive as it is beautiful
and beneficent ; and that it is not only eminently cal-
culated to enlarge and elevate the mind, but to impress
upon it more exalted ideas of the infinite wisdom and
goodness of the Deity.

" Resolved, That we tender to Dr. Dods our thanks
for the courteous and gentlemanly manner in which he
has discharged his duties to us as his pupils. That
he has, in all respects, redeemed every pledge or as-
surance that he gave us when we became his pupils,
and that in parting from him we give him our warmest
wishes for his prosperity and happiness.

" On motion, resolved, That the proceedings of this
meeting be signed by the chairman and secretary, and
delivered to Dr. Dods, and that they be published in
the newspapers of the city.

" John P. Hulbert, Chairman.

" S. N. Smith, Secretary."

The subject of these Lectures is now fairly open
before us. I have explained what I mean by the term
Electrical Psychology, and why I saw fit to give
the science this name. The wonderful and startling


LECTURE I. 29

phenomena that hover around it, like so many invisi-
ble angels, and which are made manifest in the experi-
ments produced, I have also candidly stated. They
consist in the fact, that one human being can, through
a certain nervous influence, obtain and exercise a
power over another, so as to perfectly control his vol-
untary motions and muscular force ; and also produce
various impressions on his mind, however extravagant,
ludicrous, or wild — and that too while he is in a per-
fectly wakeful state. I have stated, that it is one of
the most powerful remedial agents to alleviate the
pains of the suffering, and to cure those diseases that
set the power of medicine, and the skill of the ablest
practitioner, at defiance. And from the published
newspaper articles, letters, and resolutions of most
highly reputable, and even distinguished men, which I
have just read in your hearing, you can form an opin-
ion of the effects produced, of the cures performed, of
the high estimation in which this science is held by
those who have acquainted themselves with its secret
powers, and of their high estimate of its incalculable
importance to the human race, and the future amount
of good it is ultimately destined to achieve.

I have only read to you the testimony of the citizens
of Auburn, but could produce the testimony of thou-
sands more, from the various portions of the United
States where I have lectured — of the importance of
this science in the cure of diseases ; and those, too, of


30 ELECTKICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

a more startling character than any I have named. I
can produce the testimony of hundreds, that this sci-
ence has, in fifty minutes, restored to Lucy Ann Allen,
of Lynchburg, Virginia, the use of her limbs ; who
had not walked a step in eighteen years, nor had she
even been able to raise herself up from her pillow so as
to sit in her bed for more than fourteen years. Such
is the nature and intrinsic grandeur of this Science ;
such are the experiments and facts connected with it ;
such are its results that stamp it with the' high im-
press of its sterling importance to mankind ; and
such are its lofty end and aim ; and as such it must
stand when the pillars of strength and beauty that
support our Capitol shall fall and be crumbled to
dust.

Some have the impression, that Electrical Psychology
is, after all, but Mesmerism. In answer to such I will
say, that there is a very marked difference between the
two sciences, and this difference is easily pointed out.
Mesmerism is the doctrine of sympathy ; Elec-
trical Psychology is the doctrine of impressions.
In Mesmerism there is a sympathy so perfect between
the magnetizer and subject, that what he sees, the sub-
ject sees — what he hears, the subject hears — what he
feels, the subject feels — what he tastes, the subject
tastes — and what he smells, the subject also smells ;
and lastly, what the magnetizer wills, is likewise the
will of his subject. But the person in the electro-


LECTURE I. 31

psychological state has no such sympathies with his
operator. His sight, hearing, feeling, taste, and
smell are entirely independent of the operator, and he
continually exerts his will against him, and resists him
with all his muscular force. The person who is
aroused from the mesmeric slumber, has no remem-
brance of what transpired in it ; while the person in
the electro-psychological state, is a witness of his own
actions, and knows all that transpired. The person in
the mesmeric state can hear no voice but that of his
magnetizer, or the voices of those with whom he is put
in communication. But the person in the electro-
psychological state, can hear and converse with all as
usual.

If these distinctions are not sufficiently marked to
settle the points of difference, then I will mention two
more. I have found persons entirely and naturally in
the electro-psychological state, who never could be
mesmerized at all, nor in the least affected, under re-
peated trials. The other point is, that no person is
naturally in the mesmeric state, but thousands are
naturally in the electro-psychological state, and live
and die in it. Mesmerism and Somnambulism are
identical ; they are one and the same state. And as
no person is naturally in the somnambulic state, so no
one is naturally in the mesmeric state. Though the
experiments of both these states- are performed by the
same nervous fluid, yet this does not render the two


32 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

sciences identical, any more than that they are ren-
dered identical with fits, or insanity, which are catlsed
by the same nervous force. These observations being
sufficient for my purpose, are respectfully submitted to
you for your candid consideration.


LECTURE II.


LECTURE II.

Ladies and Gentlemen :

As the subject of Electrical Psychology is now fairly
introduced, its phenomena stated, and its importance
to the human race clearly pointed out, we are now pre-
pared to enter the diversified fields of nature ; to
glance at the operations of mental and material exist-
ences ; and to proceed understanding^ to the consid-
eration of its claims to philosophy, as the foundation
on which it rests, and the power by which its existence
must be sustained. But as I am fully sensible that
such strange facts as I have stated are most trying to
human credulity — sensible that they are calculated to
awaken the deepest feelings of contempt in the bosoms
of the skeptical, and to draw forth the sneers of man-
kind — so I must be indulged to speak, in the first
place, of the march of science, the beauty of the inde-
pendent expression of our thoughts, and to notice the
fate of the opponents of science in all ages of the
world.

Entering, as I do, upon a theme entirely new, I am
by no means insensible of the embarrassments that
2*


34 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

surround me. Were I called to address you upon any
other subject than that of Electrical Psychology,
I should stand before you with other feelings than
those that now pervade my breast. It is by no means
an enviable task to step aside from the long beaten
path of science into the unexplored and trackless re-
gions of solitude and silence. By sc doing, and daring
to think for myself, I am well aware that I assume no
very enviable position as it regards popularity. Inde-
pendent thought and fearless expression have ever
drawn forth the scoffs and sneers of that portion of our
race who have adopted, without investigation, the sci-
entific opinions of others. I refer to those only who
have received their ideas from others by inheritance, as
they did their real estate. For the one they never
labored, and for the other they never thought.

Such persons, though professing to be learned, and
perchance even claiming to be the guardians of science,
are nevertheless its greatest enemies ; and by exerting
their influence in favor of old opinions, however absurd,
and against any innovations, however true, useful, or
grand, are checking the mighty march of mind. They
are clogs of more than leaden weight hanging upon the
chariot wheels of science that are rolling through our
world. It commenced its career at the breaking morn
of creation, with but few passengers on board, and has
continued its course with increasing speed and growing
glory down to the present moment. It now travels


LECTURE II. 35

with the brilliancy and rapidity of the lightning's blaze,
and even compels the very lightnings to speak in a
familiar voice to man ! Yes ; they even write, not
only their forky gambols on the bosom of the dark
cloud, but they write on paper, and transmit human
thought as swift as thought can move.

The chariot of science is destined to continue its
majestic course, in duration coeval with our globe !
Still more ! it is destined to outlive the dark and sullen
catastrophe of worlds ! The chariot of science, with
ever increasing power, magnificence, and glory, is des-
tined to pass the boundaries of the mouldering tomb —
to snatch immortality from the iron grasp of death, and
roll on in living grandeur through the eternal world,
gathering new accessions of intellectual beauty and
unending delight. Its passengers here are mortal men.
There they will be angel, archangel, cherubim, sera-
phim, and the glorified millions of our race ! The
mind of man wears the impression of divinity, the
stamp of original greatness ; and is destined to ripen
in mental vigor as the wasteless ages of eternity roll.
Hence the very principles of our nature as an impres-
sion from the hand of God, forbid us to stand still.
Their command is onward.

If no human being had dared to hazard the express
sion of an original thought, then nothing in the realms
of science would have been disclosed by speech, nor
penned in books. A dreary, barren waste, wrapped


36 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

in solitude and night, would have reigned for .mrnan
contemplation. But instead of this frightful picture
of desolation, we see those fruitful fields of mental and
moral beauty, so rich in the scenery of thought, and in
endless variety, present themselves to our view. A
secret rapture of thrilling delight fills the heart as we
glance over this lovely scene, on which human research
has thrown a splendor surpassing that of the noontide
blaze.

Had not some master spirits dared to freely speak
and write their thoughts, then those pretended friends
of science, who now oppose every thing that may ap-
pear to them both new and strange, would have been
destitute of that knowledge they obtained from books ;
and not daring to think for themselves, they would have
remained in mental night. It is by daring to step aside
from the beaten track of books, and bringing forth from
the dark arcana of nature into the light of day some
new truth, that we add our mite to the common stock
of knowledge already accumulated. He who denies us
this grand right of our nature is a scientific bigot, and
has yet to learn, that even the school and college were
only established to discipline the mind for action.
There the student, through books and instructors, is
only made to see how other men have dared to think,
and speak, and write, and thus his mind, being made
to feel its innate freedom, power, and greatness, be-
comes inspired with a self-determination to do the


LECTURE II. 37

same. This makes the man, and answers the lofty
end of human existence. On the other hand, he who
goes through life, leaning entirely upon books and the
opinions of others, without thinking for himself, ren
ders his present existence a blank, inasmuch as he lays
his head in the dust, without its having bequeathed one
original thought to the world, for the benefit of after
generations.

The truths that God has established inherent in na-
ture, are not only infinitely diversified, but are at the
same time immutable and eternal. No possible addi-
tion can be made to their number, nor is it in the poAver
of man to create or annihilate a single truth in the em-
pire of nature. They exist independent of his be-
lief or unbelief ; and all he can do is to search them
out, and bring them forth from darkness into the light
of day. And he who has the magnanimity to do this,
so far from being opposed and persecuted, should be
sustained and encouraged as the benefactor of his race.

The Creator of the universe is the Author and Pro-
prietor of the great volumes of nature and revelation.
Hence divines, at least those who are men of letters,
should not start at any new scientific revelations, and
exclaim, " If this be true we must give up our Bibles !"
As men of science, they have nothing to fear from new
discoveries in the shoreless ocean of truth. The vol-
umes of nature and revelation both claim the same
perfect Author, who had every thing open and naked


38


ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


to his omniscient inspection, and exercised infinite wis-
dom in producing and establishing the order and har-
mony of the universe.

Though this globe, and perhaps the whole of our
planetary system, was finished six thousand years ago,
yet we have no reason to suppose that this was the first
effort of his creating energy. We are floating in an
immensity of space that knows no bounds, like the
mote in the sunbeam. This is peopled with rolling
worlds, in number beyond an angel's computation.
And the residue, which has not yet become the abodes
of light, life, order, and beauty, is filled up with mat-
ter still in its uncreated state. Hence the work of
creation has been going on from eternity, and will con-
tinue to progress, so long as the throne of the self-ex-
istent Jehovah endures, without ever arriving at an end
in the sublime career of creation ! New brother crea-
tions are every moment rolling from his omnific hand,
and that creating fiat will never, never cease.

These ideas of the wonder-working Jehovah, from
whose all-forming hand worlds and systems of worlds
are continually rolling, and have been, for millions on
millions of ages, force upon us those amazing concep-
tions of the oppressive grandeur of his works under
which the mind labors and struggles in its contempla-
tions, but is borne down, and lost and bewildered in
the immensity of the theme. Order, variety, and
beauty, in endless succession meet us on every hand.


LECTURE II.


39


All this has been accomplished by the Infinite Mind,
through electrical action, and bespeaks the vastness
and sublimity of the subject. It is the science of the
living mind, its silent, mysterious workings, and ener-
getic powers. It is a science that involves the majes-
tic movement of rolling worlds, the falling leaf, and
claims the Great Law of the universe as its own.
The vastness, as well as the transcendent importance
of the subject, clearly evince that it is worthy to be
embraced by every independent, noble, and generous
mind. You will pardon me, Ladies and Gentlemen,
for having, by a momentary digression from the pres-
ent chain of my subject, anticipated a few ideas in
relation to the creation and its vastness. These more
properly belong to a future Lecture, when I shall come
to show what connection this science has with the uni-
verse — w ith rolling worlds — yes, with a falling leaf.
The fall of a single leaf is a catastrophe as dreadful to
the thousands of inhabitants of its surface as the de-
struction of this globe would be to us. And the blot-
ting out of our globe from the catalogue of worlds,
would no more be missed amid the immensity of crea-
tion than the fall of a leaf compared to the sublime
magnificence of the countless forests on this globe.
From this digression I return to my subject.

That • Electrical Psychology should meet with oppo-
sition from men of a peculiar constitution of mind, and
a certain degree of scientific attainments, is nothing


40 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

5trange. Nor is it at all miraculous, that a few who
ire deemed men of talents, should oppose, and even
leride it as a humbug. But as genius is supremely
higher than talents, so I boldly and safely make the
declaration that no man of genius has ever opposed
Electrical Psychology ; nor in any age of the world
has genius ever been enlisted in opposing the dawning
light of any of the sciences that have arisen on earth
from the morning of creation to the present day. But
as before remarked, that this science should meet with
opposition from that class of scientific men, who al-
ways stand watching the direction in which the breeze
of popularity may chance to blow with the strongest
force, and who are anxious, through these means, to
bring themselves into notice, and thus gain a mo-
mentary fame from the passing crowd, is nothing
strange. It only proves the fact that Electrical
Psychology is, in the infancy of its being, destined
to share the fate of all great and useful sciences, that
now stand unshaken in the republic of letters. All,
in their infancy, received from such men a like opposi-
tion, and upon their founders they freely breathed out
their derision, scorn, and sneers.

Harve) discovered the circulation of the blood,
and disclosed it to the world. He was opposed and
derided, and much of that talent, learning, -and cun-
ning we have referred to, was enlisted against him.
They sought to paralyze the towering wing of his


LECTURE II. 41

genius ; to blast his reputation ; to witrier the fairest
flowers of his domestic love, hope, and joy ; and to
hurl his brilliant discovery from the light of day to the
darkness of night. But Harvey's name stands immor-
tal on the records of true fame, and the blood still
continues to frolic in crimson streams through its liv-
ing channels, while his learned opposers are forgotten.
Galileo discovered the rotation of this globe on its axis.
So great was the opposition of the learned powers com-
bined against him, that they arraigned him and his
theory at the august and awful bar of humbug. There
they fairly tried him and his discovery under the splen-
did and majestic witnesses of derision, sneer, and
scorn ; and the court very gravely decided, that his
discovery was a heresy, and that he must openly ac-
knowledge it to be so to the world. To this sentence
he submitted — acknowledged his theory to be a heresy,
but remarked, that he nevertheless believed it true.
Galileo lives in the bright page of history. That sen-
tence did not arrest the globe in its mighty course. It
still continues to roll on its axis as he discovered and
proclaimed, while the learned opposers of his theory,
who courted popular favor at the expense of honor, are
sunk into merited oblivion.

Newton's genius, when he was but a boy, intui-
tively drove him to study gravitation by piling up
small heaps of sand, and to notice more strictly this
power in the falling apple. It drove him to study


12 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

adhesion by watching the union of the particled water
at the side of some favorite stream ; and to perfect
this science he is next at the centre of the globe.
From gathering pebbles in boyish sport on the ocean's
shore, he is next among the stars, and at length pro-
claims to the world his system of .philosophy and
astronomy. He was derided and mocked as a silly-
headed fool, and his whole magnificent system was
spurned with sneering contempt and pronounced a
humbug by the old school of philosophers and astrono-
mers. But substances continue to respect the law of
gravitation^ and rolling worlds to obey the law of
attraction and repulsion. Newton lives in the
brightest blaze of fame ; for his name is written in
starry coronals on the deep bosom of night, and from
thence is reflected to the centre of the globe ; while
the opposers of his magnificent discovery are sunk to
the shades of unremembcred nothingness. The clouds
and mists of their own evanescent fame have become
their winding sheet.

Fulton was derided, and even men of science pointed
at him the finger of indignant scorn, because he de-
clared that steam— a light and bland vapor, which
could be blown away by human breath — could move an
engine of tremendous power, and propel vessels of
thousands of tons burthen against wind and waves and
tides. They declared it to be the greatest of humbugs,
and the most silly idea that ever entered a silly brain ■


w


LECTURE II. 43

or else the trick of a knave to make men invest capi-
tal in order to effect their ruin. His friends, even
though not over-sanguine of success, yet defended him
as a man of honor. But Fulton " stood firm amidst
the varying tides of party like the rock far from land,
that lifts its majestic head above the waves, and re-
mains unshaken by the storms that agitate the ocean."
So stern was the opposition, that some of the commit-
ted skeptics, who sailed from New York to Albany in
the steamboat that first tried the experiment, declared,
that it was impossible they had been conveyed a dis-
tance of one hundred and fifty miles by steam power '
and that it must, after all, have been some power aside
from steam, by which they had been enabled to reach
Albany ! The impression of Fulton's genius is
seen on all the machinery moved in our happy country
by this subtle power. It is seen in railroad and
steamboat communications, that bring the distant por-
tions of the United States in conjunction. It is seen
in the majestic steamships of England, that bring
her and the transatlantic world into neigborhood with
us, by a power that triumphs over all the stormy ele-
ments of nature. Fulton, as a man of genius, is
remembered as one of the great men of the universe,
while his opposers are silent and forgotten.

Thus far, I have spoken of the physical and me-
chanical sciences only, involving the chemical proper-
ties of material substances, and the general operations


44 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

of nature. I now come to those chat relate to the im-
provement of the mind. I come still nearer home.
The science of Phrenology, so beautiful, elevating,
and useful in its nature, and having so strong a bearing
upon the character and destiny of man, as an intellec-
tual, social, and moral being, and even involving the
dearest interest of our race — has been, and by some
still is, most shamefully abused. Gall, its discov-
erer, was persecuted ; and Spurziieim, Combe, and
Fowler have received unmerited abuse. The two
Fowlers, of New York, have for years withstood the
storm of opposition. Thus far, they have most suc-
cessfully met and repulsed the assaults of men — won
the victory — gathered new accessions of strength, and
still hold the field. They are business men, who never
slumber at the post of duty. They have made new
discoveries and improvements ; gathered an immense
variety of cabinet specimens of skulls and busts, from
the idiot up to the most brilliant intellect — from the
cold-blooded murderer up to the melting soul of a be-
nevolent and philanthropic Howard. They have made
a righteous development of true character in the phre-
nological examinations of thousands of human heads ;
have directed the anxious parent how to train up the
child of his affections ; have pointed out to the sighing
lover how to choose a congenial spirit of companionship
for life ; and have poured the light of mental and moral
improvement in silvery streams on the granh ~— -


LECTURE II. 45

of mind. Yet such a science as this has been called
a humbug ! and such men as these have been assailed.
Their bones are worthy to repose with the great men
of the universe, and their names shall live on the
bright scroll of fame down to the last vibrating pendu-
lum of time — shall live when the opposers of phreno-
logical science shall have sunk from human remem-
brance.

Such has been the fate of all sciences in the infancy
of their existence. The moment they were born into
life, the battle-axe was raised against them, and each
in succession has fought its way up to manhood. The
victory in favor of truth has always been sure, and
millions of sycophants in the contest have perished.

How lamentable is the consideration, that there are
those in this day of light, who, regardless of the warn-
ing voice of past generations, coming up from ten thou-
sand graves, still shut their ears and close their eyes —
and even sacrifice principle, to keep popular with those
on whom they depend for a momentary fame. But
they are not the men whose names will stand imperish-
able in the annals of history, to be handed down to
future generations. They are destined to perish from
human remembrance, and not a trace of them be left
on earth.

I would not be understood as dissuading you from
the pursuit of true fame. I do not despise its noble
glory ; but am fully sensible, that of all characters ever


46 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

formed and sustained by human beings, that of true
fame stands unrivaled and supreme on the page of his-
tory.

Though man is mortal, and his present existence
ephemeral, yet during the short span of three-scoro
years and ten, to what a transcendent height in the cul-
tivation of his powers is he capable of soaring ! True,
his station is humble, yet he who, with an unstained
hand, has honorably grasped the meed of righteous
fame, has clothed himself with power, has wreathed his
brow with undying laurels, and invested himself with
the true majesty of his nature. Fame has been alter-
nately assigned to the hero, the statesman, the philoso-
pher, astronomer, theologian. But fame is not confined
to any rank or pursuit in life. It can only exist in the
breathings of righteousness. The philosopher and as-
tronomer, though chained down to earth by the law of
gravitation, and tabernacled with the worm, may feel
within a stirring greatness that allies them to higher
intelligences in future worlds, and that bids them bear
their brow aloft. They may station themselves on a
mental elevation above the world, and lift their tower-
ing heads to the stars. From this pinnacle of glory,
they may range in loftiest thought the universe of God,
and even struggle to grasp the unbounded empire over
which Jehovah reigns, with all its moving worlds, and
yet, if this be all, true fame does not lie here. It is
not the birthright of the philosopher or astronomer, un-


LECTURE II. 47

less they are in possession of something more than in-
tellectual power.

True fame is not the birthright of the hero. The
blaze of glory that has for ages encircled his head, and
with its brilliancy so long dazzled the world, is begin-
ning to grow dim. The laurels that decorate his sullen
brow have been gathered at the cannon's mouth, from
a soil enriched with human gore, and watered by the
tears of bereavement. That fancied pinnacle of glory
on which he proudly stands, has been gained by con-
quest and slaughter. His way to it lay over thousands
of his fellow-creatures, whose warm hearts had ceased
to throb ; and the music that followed his march, was
the widow's moan and the orphan's wail. True fame
does not lie here. It sounds not in the cannon's roar,
the clashing steel, the rattling drum, nor in the fright
ful crash of resounding arms ! It is not heard in mar-
tial thunder. It is not seen in villages on fire, nor in
Moscow's conflagration — that ocean of flame ! True
fame breathes not in the deep-heaving sigh of despair-
ing love, nor draws its immortality from dying groans
on fields of war. It has a higher origin — a nobler
"birtli — a more elevated aim. True fame consists in

the LOFTY ASPIRATIONS AFTER INTELLECTUAL AND

moral truth ; and when these are found and cherish-
ed, that so deep will be the convictions of duty, sus-
tained by sterling honor, that no popularity — no bribes
of wealth and splendor— no fear of frowns, nor even


48 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

the hazard of life exposed to wasting tortures shall
deter that man from expressing and maintaining such
truth. He who does this, possesses true and righteous
fame.

Should the scoffers of rising science challenge me to
produce such an example of true fame ever being set
on earth, I would point them to one perfect specimen
on the sacred page. I would point them to the Son of
Man, in the majesty of whose virtues, honor, and firm-
ness in proclaiming truth, language is impoverished, all
human description fails, and the living light of elo-
quence is darkened forever


LECTURE III. 49


LECTURE III.

Ladies and Gentlemen:

Perhaps I have dwelt sufficiently long upon the pre-
liminaries of my subject. I have done so to bring dis-
tinctly before you its natu», and clearly state its incal-
culable importance to the human family. I have done
so to remind you of the opposition, sneers, and scorns
that the noblest sciences have encountered in the infan-
cy of their being, and in all ages of the world. I have
reminded you that this has been done, not by men of
genius, whose names are registered on the scroll of
true fume, and have come down to future generations,
but it has been done by that particular class of the
learned who have so large a share of the love of appro-
bation as to study public opinion, and follow it, right
or wrong, and thus beg a momentary fame from the
passing crowd, which is destined to expire in darkness,
and vanish from human remembrance, before the break-
ing light of truth. I have dwelt thus long upon these
points, so that opposition to this science may not sur-
prise you, nor the real character of the opponent be
mistaken.

S


50 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Having removed every obstacle that might embarrass
my course, and having plenty of sea-room, I am now
ready to embark in defence of one of the greatest of
causes. I stand before you to lecture upon the won-
derful and mysterious science of Electrical Psychology.
I stand here to exhibit by tangible experiments those
wonderful phenomena that cluster around it, and philo-
sophically to defend its paramount claims to immutable
truth. The successful discharge of this incumbent
duty, forces upon us the necessity of ranging the uni-
verse, and summoning the vast works of earth and
heaven to the for of reason, in order to investigate their
effects, and trace them back to their correspondent
causes. You are the empanneled jury to try this cause,
and I rejoice that I have the honor to argue so interest-
ing a point before the congregated talent and wis-
dom of my country. However skeptical men may be
in relation to any thing new, yet so far as stern reality
is in its nature concerned, we have this pleasing con-
sideration, that the unbelief of men cannot frown truth
into falsehood, nor can the belief of men smile false-
hood into truth. Hence the belief or unbelief of mor-
tals cannot in the least affect those truths that God has
established inherent in nature, and with which his un-
bounded universe swarms.

I stand here to defend the electrical theory of the
universe against the assaults of men, to notice the im-
mense variety of material existences, to glance at the


LECTURE III. 51

animated forms of living beauty, to scrutinize Me chem-
ical properties of created substances, and to pour, if
possible, the light of truth on rolling worlds. Let us
even venture to step back beyond the threshold of crea-
tion—venture to lift the dark curtains of primeval
night, and muse upon that original, eternal material,
that slumbered in the deep bosom of chaos, and out of
which all the tangible substances we see and admire
were made. That eternal substance is electricity, and
contains all the original properties of all things in be-
ing. Hence all worlds and their splendid appendages
were made out of electricity, and by that powerful, all-
pervading agent, under Deity, they are kept in motion
from age to age. Electricity actuates the whole frame
of nature, and produces all the phenomena that trans-
pire throughout the realms of unbounded space. It is
the most powerful and subtile agent employed by the
Creator in the government of the universe, and in car-
rying on the multifarious operations of nature. Mak-
ing a slight variation in the language of the poet, I may
with propriety say —

" It warms in the sun, reneshes in the breeze,
Glows in the stars, raid blossoms in the trees;
Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
Spreads undivided, operates unspent;
Breathes in our souls, informs our mortal part
As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart ;
As full, as perfect, in vile man that mourns,
As the rapt seraph, that adores and burns ;


52 * ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

It cliims all high and low, all great and small ;
It fills, it bounds, connects, and equals all."

It is immaterial to what department of this globe
and its surrounding elements we turn our attention,
electricity is there. Wherever we witness convulsions
in nature, the workings of this mighty, unseen power
are there. It writes its path in lightning on the sul-
len brow of the dark cloud, and breathes out rolling
thunder. Though cold and invisible in its equalized
and slumbering state, yet it is the cause, of light and
heat, which it creates by the inconceivable rapidity of
its motion and friction on other particles of matter.
It is the cause of evaporation from basined oceans and
silvery lakes — from majestic rivers and rolling streams,
and from the common humidity of the earth. It forms
aerial conductors in the heavens, through which this
moisture in vapory oceans is borne to the highest por-
tions of our globe, and stored up in magazines of rain,
and snow, and hail ! It is electricity that, by its cold-
ness, condenses the storm, and opens these various
magazines in mild beauty or awful terror on the world.
It is electricity that, by the production of heat, rare-
fies the air, gives wings to the wind, and directs their
course. It is this unseen agent, that causes the gen-
tle zephyrs of heaven to fan the human brow with a
touch of delight — that moves the stirring gale — that
arms the sweeping hurricane with power — that gives
to the roaring tornado all its dreadful eloquence of


LECTURE III. 53

vengeance and terror, and clothes the mid- Hay sun hi
light. Tt gives us the soft, pleasing touches of the
evening twilight, and the crimson blushes of the rising
morn. *It is electricity that, by its effects of light and
heat, produces the blossoms of spring, the fruits of
summer, the laden bounties of autumn, and moves on
the vast mass of vegetation in all the varieties and
blended beauties of creation. It bids winter close the
varied scene. It is electricity that, by its most awful
impressions, causes the earthquake to awake from its
Tartarean den, to speak its rumbling thunder, convulse
the globe, and mark out its path of ruin.

If we turn to man, and investigate the secret stir-
rings of his nature, we shall find, that he is but an
epitome of the universe. The chemical properties of
all the various substances in existence, and in the
most exact proportions, are congregated and concen-
trated in him, and form and constitute the very ele-
ments of his being. In the composition of his body
are involved all the mineral and vegetable substances
of the globe, even from the grossest matter, step by
step, up to the most rarefied and fine. And, lastly,
to finish this masterpiece of creation, the brain is in-
vested with a living spirit. This incomprehensible
spirit, like an enthroned deity, presides over, and gov-
erns through electricity, as its agent, all the voluntary
motions of this organized, corporeal universe; while
its living presence, and its involuntary, self-moving


54 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

powers cause all the involuntary functions of life to
proceed in their destined course. Hence human be-
ings and all animated existences are subject to the
same grand electrical law that pervades the universe,
and moves all worlds under the superintendence of the
involuntary powers of the infinite Spirit.

On this principle, it will be plainly perceived, that
as man is subjected to the same common law that per-
vades the universe, so electricity is the connecting
link between mind and matter. As it is co-eternal
with spirit or mind, so it is the only substance in be-
ing that mind can directly touch, or through which
it can manifest its powers. It is the servant of the
mind to obey its will and execute its commands. It
is through electricity, that the mind conveys its vari-
ous impressions and emotions to others, and through
this same medium receives all its impressions from the
external world. It is by electricity that the mind
contracts the muscles, raises the arm, and performs
all the voluntary motions of this organized body. This
I will now proceed to prove.

It will be readily perceived by every one acquainted
with electrical science, that if I can find an individual
standing in a negative relationship to myself, or by
any process render him so, then I, being the positive
power, can, by producing electrical impressions from
my own mind upon his, control his muscles with the
most perfect ease. This is evident, because the posi-


LECTURE III. 55

tive and negative forces electrically and magnetically
blend, are equal in power, and paralyze each other ;
or, on the contrary, produce motion. This great and
interesting truth I will prove to a demonstration, by
experiments upon ladies and gentlemen in this audi-
ence, while they are entirely awake, and in perfect
possession of all their reasoning faculties. Before 1
proceed to produce these astonishing and even startling
results, I will, in the first place, prove that electri-
city is the connecting link between mind and inert
matter, and is the agent that the mind employs to
contract and relax the muscles, and to produce all the
voluntary and involuntary motions of the body.

To bring this before you in the most plain and intel-
ligible manner, I would first remark that the brain is
the fountain of the nervous system, from whence it
sends out its millions of branches to every part of the
body. Indeed, the brain is but a congeries of nerves,
and is the immediate residence of the living spirit.
This spirit or mind is the cause of all motion, whether
that motion be voluntary, or involuntary. It wills the
arm to rise, and immediately the arm obeys the man-
date ; while the very presence of this mind in the
brain, even though wrapped in the insensibility of
sleep, produces all the involuntary motions of the 1
vitals, and executes the functions of life.

To establish the fact that electricity is, indeed, the
connecting link between the mind and the body, I


56 ELECTRICaI, psychology.

would in the first place distinctly remark, that mind
cannot come in direct contact with gross matter. My
mind can no more directly touch my hand, than it can
the mountain rock. My mind cannot touch the bones
of my arm, nor the sinews, the muscles, the blood-ves-
sels, nor the blood that rolls in them. In proof of this
position, let one hemisphere of the brain receive what
is called a stroke of the palsy. Let the paralysis be
complete, and one half of the system will be rendered
motionless. In this case, the mind may Avill with all
its energies — may exert all its mental powers — yet the
arm will not rise, nor the foot stir. Yet the bones,
sinews, muscles, and blood-vess*els are all there, and
the blood as usual continues to flow. Here then we
have proof the most irresistible, that mind can touch
none of these; for what the mind can touch it can
move, as easily as what the hand can physically touch
it can move. Our proof is so far philosophically con-
clusive.

I would now remark, that it is equally certain my
mind can touch some matter in my body, otherwise I
could never raise my arm at all. The question, then,
arises, What is that mysterious substance which the
# mind can touch, as its prime agent, by which it pro-
duces muscular motion 1 In the light our subject now
stands, the answer is most simple. It is that very
substance which was disturbed in this paralysis, and
that is the nervous fluid, which is animal electricity,


LECTURE III. 57

and forms the connecting link between mind and mat-
ter. Mind is the only substance in the universe that
possesses inherent motion and living power as its two
primeval efficients. These two seem to be insepa-
rable, because there can be no manifestation of power
except through motion. Hence mind is the first grand
moving cause. It is the first link in the magnificent
chain of existing substances. This mind wills. This
mental energy, as the creative force, is the second link,
and stirs the nervous force, which is electricity. This
is the third link. This electricity causes the nerve to
vibrate. This is the fourth link. The vibration of
the nerve contracts the fibre of the muscle. This is
the fifth link. The contraction of the muscle raises
the bone or the arm. This is the sixth link. And
the arm raises dead matter. This is the seventh link.
So it is through a chain of seven links that mind comes
in contact with dead matter ; that is, if we allow the
creative force — the will — to be one link. This will,
however, is not a substance, but a mere energy, or re-
sult of mind. To be plain, it is mind that touches
electricity — electricity touches nerve — nerve touches
muscle — muscle touches bone — and bone raises dead
matter. It is, therefore, through this concatenation or
chain, link by link, that the mind gives motion to and
controls living or dead matter, and not by direct con-
tact with all substances. Hence the proof is clear and
positive, that the mind can come in contact with, and
8*


58 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

by its volition control, the electricity of the body, and
collect this subtile agent with fearful power upon any
part of the system.

It is evident that the mind holds its residence in the
brain, and that it is not diffused over the whole system.
Were it so, then our hands and feet would think, and
in case they were amputated, we should lose part of
our minds. If, then, the mind, invested with royal-
ty, is enthroned in the brain — and if the mind com-
mand the foot to move, or the hand to rise, then it
must send forth from its presence an agent, as its
prime minister, to execute this command. This
prime minister is electricity, which passes from the
brain through the nerves, as so many telegraphic wires,
to give motion to the extremities. On this principle,
how easy it is to understand the philosophy of a paral-
ysis. The nerve, as the grand conductor of the motive
power, is obstructed by some spasmodic collapse, and
the prime minister cannot pass the barrier that ob-
structs its path. In this case, the mind, as the en-
throned monarch, may will the arm to rise, but the
arm remains motionless. But remove that barrier, the
agent passes, and the arm must rise. Hence it is
easily seen, that all motion and power originate in
mind.

I have now brought before you the connecting link
between mind and matter, and through this have shown
you the philosophy of the contraction of the human


LECTURE 111. 59

muscles through mental energy. This has ever been,
and still is, considered an inscrutable mystery in Phys-
iology. Whether it is now revealed or not, is submit-
ted to your decision. To my mind, the argument in its
defence is irresistible.

Having clearly and philosophically established the
truth, that electricity, in the form of nervous fluid, is
indeed the connecting link between mind and inert
matter, the question now presents itself— If the mind
continually throws off electricity from the brain by its
mental operations, and by muscular motion, then how
is the supply kept up in the brain — through what
source is it introduced into the system, and how con-
veyed to the brain? I answer, through the respira-
tory organs electricity is taken into the blood at the
lungs, and from the blood it is thrown to nerves and
conducted to the brain, and is there secreted and pre-
pared for the use of the mind. It will be impossible
for me to argue this point fully unless I explain at the
same instant the philosophy of the circulation of the
blood. As I differ also with physiologists on this
point, and as I do not believe that the heart circulates
the blood at all, either on the hydraulic, or any other
principle, so I will turn your attention to this subject.

The philosophy of the circulation of the blood is one
of the grandest themes that can be presented for hu-
man contemplation. While discussing this matter, it
will be clearly mad i to appear how electricity is gath-


60 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLCGY.

ered from the surrounding elements, carried into the
system and stored up in the brain to feed the mind
with impressions. I desire it to be distinctly under-
stood, that when I speak of the electricity, galvanism,
and magnetism of the human system, or of the nerv-
ous fluid, I mean one and the same thing. But before
I proceed to notice the philosophy of the circulation of
the blood, and the secretion of the nervous fluid, I will
first make a few observations in relation to the nerves
and blood-vessels, so that I may be distinctly under-
stood.

I have already stated, that the brain is the fountain
of the nervous system, and that both its hemispheres
are made up of a congeries of nerves. They both pass
to the cerebellum ; and the spinal marrow, continued
to the bottom of the trunk, is but the brain continued.
In the spinal marrow, which is the grand conductor
from the' brain, is lodged the whole strength of the
system. From this spinal marrow, branch out thirty-
two pairs of nerves, embracing the nerves of motion
and those of sensation. From these branch out others,
and others again from these ; and so on till they are
spread out over the human system in network so infi-
nitely fine that we cannot put down the point of a nee-
dle without feeling it — and we cannot feel, unless we
touch a nerve. We see, therefore, how inconceivably
fine the nervous system is. In all these millions of
nerves there is no blood. They contain the electric


LECTURE III. (ft

fluid only, while the blood is confined to the veins and
arteries. I am well aware that the blood-vessels pass
round among the convolutions of the brain, and through
them the blood freely flows to give that mighty organ
action ; but in the nerves themselves there is no blood.
They are the residence of the living mind, and its
prime agent, the electric fluid.

Though I have frequently, in my public lectures,
touched upon the philosophy of the circulation of the «.
blood, and hence those, remarks were reported and
published in my " Lectures on the Philosophy of Ani-
mal Magnetism, in 1843," in connection with my
views of the connecting link between mind and matter,
yet I have never taken up the subject in an exact, full,
and connected detail of argument. This I will now
proceed to do in connection with the secretion of the
nervous fluid.

I would, then, in the first instance remark, that the
air we breathe, as to its component parts, is computed
to consist of twenty-one parts oxygen, and seventy-
nine parts nitrogen. Electricity, as a universal
agent, pervades the entire atmosphere. We cannot
turn the electric machine in any dry spot on earth
without collecting it. Oxygen is that element which
sustains flame and animal life. Neither can exist a
moment without it, while nitrogen, on the contrary,
just as suddenly extinguishes both. The atmosphere,
in this compound state, is taken into the lungs. The


62 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

oxygen and electricity, having a strong affinity for
moisture, instantly rush to the blood, while the nitro-
gen is disengaged and expired. The blood, being oxy-
genized and electrified, instantly assumes a bright
cherry-red appearance, and by this energizing process
has become purified and prepared for circulation. The
lungs, and the blood thoy contain, are both rendered
electrically positive ; and we know that in electrical
science two positives resist each other a"nd fly apart.
Hence the lungs resist the blood and force it into the
left ventricle of the heart. The valve closes and the
blood passes into the arteries. Hence arterial blood is
of a bright cherry-red hue. It is by the positive force
of electric action, propelled through every possible
ramification of the arterial system till all its thousands
of minute capillary vessels are charged. Along these
arteries and all their thousands of capillary branches
are laid nerves of involuntary motion, but no nerves
whatever attend the veins. Why is this so? Why is
it, that nerves, like so many telegraphic wires, are laid
along the whole arterial system in all its minute rami-
fications, but that none are laid along the venous sys-
tem 1 ? I press this question— Why do nerves attend
the arteries, while none attend the veins 1 I answer,
that nerves are laid along the arteries to receive the
electric charge from the positive blood that rolls in
them, which charge the blood received from the air in-
spired by the lungs. But as the venous blood is nega-


LECTURE III. 63

tive, it has no electricity to throw off, and hence needs
no attendant nerves to receive a charge — because that
very electric charge, which the blood receives from
each inspiration at the lungs, is thrown off into the
nerves by friction, as it rolls through its destined chan-
nels in crimson streams. At the extremities of the
arterial system — at the very terminus of its thousands
of capillaries, the last item of the electric charge takes
its departure from the positive blood, escapes into the
attendant nerves, through them is instantly conducted
to the brain, and is there basined up for the use of the
mind.

The arterial blood, having thrown off its electricity
as above described, assumes a dark — a purplish hue.
It enters the capillaries of the veins, which are as nu-
merous as those of the arteries. The blood is now
negative, and as the lungs, by new inspirations, are
kept in a positive state, so the venous blood returns
through the right ventricle of the heart to the lungs,
on the same principle that the negative and positive
forces rush together. There it is again electrified and
oxygenized, changed to a bright cherry-red color, is
again rendered positive, and is thus purified and pre-
pared once more for arterial circulation. We now
clearly perceive that it is electrically the blood circu-
lates, and electrically it recedes from, and returns to,
the lungs through the two ventricles of the heart.
The heart does not circulate the blood at all, as phys-


64 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

iologists contend. The heart is the supreme regu-
lator of this sublime and constantly ebbing and flow-
ing ocean of crimson life, with all its majestic rivers
and frolicking streams, and determines with exactness
how rapidly the whole shall flow.


LEC1URE IV. 65


LECTURE IV.

Ladies and Gentlemen :

I have in my test Lecture touched upon the philoso-
phy of the circulation of the blood, Jhe nervous sys-
tem, and the secretion of electricity upon the brain,
which I call the nervous fluid. As this part of my
subject must, on account of its importance, possess
peculiar interest to us all, I desire to dwell upon it a
few moments longer.

From the arguments already offered, it will be clearly
perceived by every philosophic mind, that the circula-
ting system is in reality two distinct systems. The
first is the arterial system, that carries the posi-
tive blood, which is, as before stated, of a bright
cherry-red color, and is ever flowing from the heart to
the extremities. The second is the venous system,
that carries the negative blood, which is of a purple
color and is ever flowing from the extremities to the
heart. To these two circulating systems, the heart,
with its two auricles, two ventricles, and valves, is
exactly adapted, so as to keep the positive and nega-
tive blood apart, and to regulate the motion of both


ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


And it will be perceived that the nervous system most'
perfectly corresponds with what I have said of the
circulating system. I mean that nerves of involuntary
motion are laid along the arteries to receive the charge
of electricity from the positive blood that flows in them.
These views of the circulation of the blood are strength-
ened by the fact, that the blood contains a certain por-
tion of iron ; and we well know that iron becomes a
magnet only by induction, and loses its magnetic power
the moment the electric current passes from it. Hence
the blood, through the agency of the iron it contains,
can easily assume a positive state at the instant it re-
ceives the electric charge from the air at the lungs.
It can then pass into the arteries, and by friction throw
off its electricity into the nerves, and again assume a
negative state as it enters the veins.

I now consider the electric or magnetic circula-
lation of the blood philosophically and irresistibly
proved. Hence the position which many assume, that
the heart circulates the blood on the hydraulic or
vacuum principle, is utterly unfounded in truth. And
that the heart, in accomplishing this, exerts a force, as
they contend, of more than one hundred thousand
pounds, is too preposterous to be believed. I grant
that the heart is the strongest muscle in the human
system ; but who can for one moment believe that its
motive power is equal to fifty tons 1 The heart, as I
have alreaiy observed, does not circulate the blood at


LECTURE IV. 67

all ; nor on the contrary does the blood cause the heart
to throb. The heart and lungs both receive their mo-
tions from the cerebellum, which is the fountain and
origin of organic life and involuntary motion. Hence
the involuntary nerves from the cerebellum throb the
heart and heave the lungs, and the electricity contained
in the air they inspire, circulates the blood and sup-
plies the brain with nervous fluid, as I have already
explained.

Perhaps, however, the inquiry may here arise, What
proof is there that the involuntary nerves from the
cerebellum throb the heart and heave the lungs, and
that the blood is not made to circulate from the same
cause 1

This double interrogatory is easily answered. In-
sert, for instance, a surgical knife between the joints of
the vertebrae, and cut off the spinal marrow below the
lungs and heart — all the parts below this incision will
be so completely paralyzed, and voluntary motion and
sensation so entirely destroyed, that we have no power
to move the limbs by any volition we may exert ; nor
have we any power to feel, even though the paralyzed
limbs should be broken to pieces by a hammer, or
burned with fire. Yet in these immovable and un-
feeling parts the blood continues to circulate as usual
through the veins and arteries. This is proof positive
that the blood is not made to flow by any power what-
ever invested in the cerebellum, but, as before proved,


68 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

by the positive and negative forces of tliat electricity
contained in the air inspired by the lungs. But let
the spinal marrow be severed above the lungs and
heart, and both Avill be instantly paralyzed and cease
their motions ; yet the last inspiration taken in by the
lungs will cause the blood to circulate till it floods the
right ventricle of the heart with venous blood, and
empties the left ventricle of its arterial blood. This is
proof the most irresistible, that the heart and lungs

ARE MOVED BY AN INVOLUNTARY NERVOUS FORCE
ORIGINATING IN THE CEREBELLUM, while the blood IS

circulated by the positive and negative forces of that
electricity which is taken in with the air at the lungs.
The lungs merely act as a double force-pump to bring
in the surrounding atmosphere, extract from it a
proper supply of the vital principle to feed the bright
and burning flame of life, and to reject and expire the
dregs unfit for that end. This is perhaps as much as
it is necessary to«ay in relation to the circulation of
the blood, and the constant secretion of the nervous
fluid from the arterial blood to the brain. I now turn
to the philosophy of disease, and will be brief as pos-
sible.

It is generally supposed by medical men, that there
are innumerable causes for the various diseases in ex-
istence, and that even one disease may have many
causes in nature to produce it. But I contend, that
there is but one grand cause for all diseases, and this


LECTURE IV. 69

is the disturbing of the vital force of the body. There
is in every human being a certain amount of electricity.
This is, as I have said, the most subtile and fine mate-
rial iD the body ; is the power, as has been shown, that
moves the blood ; and is the agent by which the mind,
through the nerves, contracts the muscles and produces
motion. And as all the convulsions and operations in
nature and in man invariably begin in the invisible and
finest substances in being, and end in the most gross,
so electricity, in the human system, is the cause of all
the effects there produced, whether salutary or other- -
wise. When this electricity is equalized throughout
the nervous system, the blood will also be equalized in
its circulation, and the natural result is health. But
when it is thrown out of balance, the blood will, in like
manner, be also disturbed, and the natural result is
disease ; and the disease will be severe or mild in
the same ratio as the vital force is more or less dis-
turbed.

I am well aware that medical men are much inclined
to examine the patient's pulse, and watch the move-
ments of the blood. They seem to think that nearly
all diseases originate in the blood, and hence, under this
impression, hundreds of specifics, or nostrums, have
arisen to purify the blood, as though it contained some
foreign properties that rendered it impure, and that
these, by some medical treatment, must be extracted or
removed from the system. But all this is fallacious,


70 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

as the blood contains no foreign properties to render it
impure. The blood becomes impure only through a
disturbed circulation. It can be pui'ificd by no other
substances in being, except what are contained in the
air at the lungs. These arc oxygen and electricity.
The whole blood in the body must, every few moments,
be passed through the lungs to be purified and preserved
from putrefaction. If the circulation, in any part of
the ' body, be obstructed, or thrown out of balance, so
that the blood cannot pay its timely visit to the lungs,
it must become extravasated and impure. If, in any
part of the body, there is a complete obstruction, so
that the blood is entirely retained, then inflammation,
ulceration, and corruption must ensue.

I now turn directly to the subject, and call your un-
divided attention to the philosophy of disease. The
operations of the mind, and the nervous system of
man, have been too much overlooked by medical men,
who have paid great attention to the blood, and to the
more gross and solid parts of the body. But it is evi-
dent that disease begins in the electricity of the nerves,
and not in the blood. Electricity is the starting point.
From thence it is communicated to the blood, from the
blood to the flesh, and from the flesh to the bones,
which are the last effected. It begins in the finest, and
ends in the grossest particles of the system. The un-
seen are the starting powers.

I have already remarked that the brain is the foun-


LECTURE IV. 71

tain of the nervous' system, and sends forth its millions
of branches to every possible part and extremity of the
body. This nervous system is filled with electricity,
which is the agent or servant of the royal mind, who,
as monarch, holds his throne in the brain. From
thence the mind, by its volitions, controls one half of
the electricity of the system. It controls' all that is
contained in the voluntary nerves, but has no such
control over the other half, which is confined to the in-
voluntary nerves.

Though there is but one grand cause of disease,
which is the electricity of the system thrown out of
balance, yet there are, nevertheless, two modes by
which this may be done. It may be done by mental
impressions. And so it may be done by physical im-
pressions from external nature. I will first notice how
diseases are produced by mental impressions.

Millions of our race have been swept from the light
of life to the darkness of death by various diseases
caused by mental impressions. Misfortune and dis-
tress have fallen upon many a father, a mother, and
many a child. They have shut up in their bosoms all
these mental woes, and brooded over their misfortunes
in secret, concealed grief. Melancholy took possession
of the heart, the vital force was disturbed, the system
was thrown out of balance, disease was engendered,
and they went to their graves.

I am now addressing this audience. The action of


72 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

my mind has called the electricity of the system from
the extremities to the brain. The blood has -followed
it. My feet being robbed of their due proportion of
the vital force, are, in the same ratio, cold, and hence,
this is, so far, disease. And unless I ceased speaking,
and suffered a reaction to take place, it would bring me
to my grav^e.

A man accumulates a fortune of two hundred thou-
sand dollars. He loses one half of it, and is hurled
in distress. He broods over his misfortune. The
mind is in trouble ; it shrinks back on itself. The
electricity of the system, this servant of the mind,
leaves the extremities and approaches the brain, the
throne of the master. The blood follows on ; the ex-
citement becomes great, and he believes he shall die in
an almshouse. He is a monomaniac. Suppose he
now loses the other half of his fortune, and his mind
will become involved in still greater distress. This
mental action calls an increased quantity of electricity,
that is, of nervous fluid, to the brain, and an equal
amount of blood follows on. He is now entirely de-
ranged, and his feet are incessantly cold, because the
brain has robbed them of their due proportion of the vital
force. Now do you not perceive, that if these forces
are dispersed from the brain, and the circulation equal-
ized, that his reason will be restored ? There is not
too much of blood and electricity in the system, but
there may be toe much in any one department of the


LECTURE IV. 73

system. I will now suppose him once more in posses-
sion of his reason. Now bring him intelligence that
his darling child is crushed to atoms. The mind sud-
denly shrinks back on itself ; the electric, or nervous
fluid, instantly darts to the brain, like a faithful serv-
ant to see what distresses the master. The blood as
suddenly follows the servant. The storm rages, and a
fit ensues. Let the news be still more startling, and
the congregated forces will, in the same ratio, be in-
creased upon the brain, and he drops a corpse ! So we
perceive that, in all these instances, there is but one
cause of disease. The only diiference we have wit-
nessed in the effects produced, was a gradually increas-
ed action, occasioned by an increased power of the
same cause, even from the slightest excitement, grad-
ually up to that fearful point where it produced instant
death. An instance analagous to this, transpired here
among you, in the case of the distinguished statesman,
John Quincy Adams. Perhaps too much anxiety and
thought for the welfare of his country, at his advanced
age, called the forces to the brain, and the brilliant
lamp of reason and life was extinguished ! He has en-
tered on other scenes' !

I have thus far confined my remarks to effects pro-
duced upon the brain by the electro-nervous fluid and
blood, which were called there by the various emotions,
passions, and sensations of the mind. But that these
forces should invade the territory of the brain, and
4


74 ELECTRICAL FSYCHOL3GV.

produce such results, depends, however, upon the con-
dition of the brain as to its comparative physical
strength with the other parts of the system. In this
view of the subject, had the same misfortunes as to
loss of property above stated been visited upon this
same individual when his brain was firm, a different
disease would have been the result. Suppose that his
brain, as to its physical structure, had been strong and
firm, but that his lungs had been weak. Now let the
same misfortunes befall him. His mind again shrinks
back on itself; the electro-nervous force, as before,
starts for the ' brain, but is not allowed to enter this
palace of the distressed monarch, and it stops at the
lungs, the weakest and nearest post. The blood next
follows on in pursuit of the servant, and takes up its
abode with him. Inflammation sets in, and, if the
trouble of the monarch continues, tubercles form, ulcer-
ation takes place, and death ensues. It was consump-
tion.

But suppose the lungs had been strong, and that the
stomach had been, by some trivial circumstance, ren-
dered the weakest part. The electro-nervous fluid and
blood would, in this case, have gone there, and taken
possession of that post. Inflammation, canker, with
morbid secretions would have ensued, and even ulcers
might have been formed. The digestive organs would
have been weakened, and dyspepsia, with all its horror
of horrors, would have been the result. If the liver


LECTURE IV. 75

had been the weaker spot, the same forces, under the
same mental impressions, would have congregated there,
and produced the liver complaint. If the stomach and
liver had both been strong, and the spine weak, it would
have been a spinal complaint. If all these had been
physically firm, and the kidneys weak, the same forces
would have produced a disease of the kidneys. And
if all in the regions of the brain and trunk had been
firm, and a mere blow had been inflicted upon the hip,
knee, or any part of the lower limbs, the electro-nerv-
ous force and the attendant blood would have gone
there, and produced the white swelling, or any other
species of inflammation and distress. So we perceive,
that the same cause, under mental impressions, may
produce any of these diseases. As to the character
of the disease, it merely takes its name from the organ
or place in the body where it' may locate itself. Hence
diseases differ one from another only as the various dis-
eased organs, their motions, secretions, and functions
may differ — or as the various located parts of the body
invaded by disease may differ from each other. But
the producing cause of all these diseases is one and the
same. It is the electro-nervous fluid of the body.
Having said all that I at present deem necessary in
relation to the distui'bing of the nervous force by men-
tal impre-ssions, I will now turn your attention to
the disturbing of the nervous force fyr physical im-
pressions.


76 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

As the mind in distress— in secret melancholy and
grief— has disturbed the nervous force, which has en-
gendered disease by calling the blood and other fluids
of the body to its presence, and thus sent millions to
their graves — as it has produced all the diseases we
have mentioned and even hundreds more — so the same
diseases and hundreds more are also produced by the
nervous force when it is disturbed by physical impres-
sions from external nature.

I am well aware that mental and physical impres-
sions may be termed causes of disease ; but it will be
remembered, that medical men contend that there are
remote and proximate causes of disease. I am on the
latter, and contend that there are not thousands of
'proximate causes, but only one grand proximate
cause of disease, and this is the disturbing of the
nervous fluid, or throwing the electricity of the system
out of balance ; and that diseases begin in the electric
force of the nerves, and not in the blood. They begin
in the invisible and finest substance of the body, and
end in the gross. Hence the same cause that produces
monomania, produces entire derangement, fits, head-
ache, and even the common excitement of the brain in
a public speaker. The same cause produces' consump-
tion, dyspepsia, liver complaint, spinal affections, pleu-
risy, cholera, dysentery, inflammations, fevers, etc.
This subtile, disease-causing principle, is the elec-
tro-nervous fluid When equalized throughout the


LECTURE IV. 77

system, it is the cause of health, for it controls the
blood and other fluids, and when thrown out of balance,
it is the cause of disease. Hence the minister of health
and sickness — of life and death — is within us, and is
one and the same principle. As electricity is the effi-
cient cause of all convulsions, calms, and storms in na-
ture, and of all the pleasing or awful phenomena that
transpire in earth, air, or ocean, or in the vegetable or
mineral kingdom, so, as man is but an epitome of the
universe, it is electricity in the form of nervous fluid
that produces all the convulsions, calms, and storms in
his own system.

We have seen the various secret stirrings of electri-
city in the human nerves under mental impressions, in
producing insanity, fits, consumptions, etc. We wit-
ness the same mournful results when that subtile power
is moved by physical impressions. A wet foot, for
instance, may throw the* electro-nervous fluid out of
balance, and this subtile force may suddenly check the
lacteal or other secretions, and also produce insanity,
or fits, or by locating itself upon the lungs, it may pro-
duce consumption. The fact is, that the electro-nerv-
ous fluid, when disturbed at the extremities, or on the
surface of the body, always retires inward, and locates
itself upon the weakest organ, or upon some weak por-
tion of the vitals — the blood follows, and disease is the
result. As I have fully explained this when noticing
mental impressions, so there is no occasion of my par


78 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ticularizing. I will merely say, that a sudden exposure
to a damp air, sitting upon a cold rock, lying upon the
ground and suddenly falling asleep, or sitting with the
back to a current of air while in a perspiration — all, or
any of these, may at times disturb the electro-nervous
force, and arouse this disease-causing power from its
slumberings. This may throw the blood out of balance,
and by locating themselves upon the weakest organ or
weakest part of the system, engender disease. Or the
nervous force may be disturbed by eating or drinking
too much or too little of wholesome substances, or by
eating and drinking unwholesome or poisonous sub-
stances, and all these correspondent diseases produced.
It is now clearly seen how mental and physical im-
pressions disturb the electricity of the system, which
locates itself upon the weakest organ, calls the blood
to its aid, and brings disease, pain, and death. So we
perceive, that the same nervous fluid Avhich, when
equalized, produces health, is, when thrown out of bal-
ance, the cause of disease. The whole electricity of
the nerves is, of course, one hundred per cent. Fifty
per cent, is under the voluntary control of the mind,
and belongs to the voluntary nerves, and the other fifty
per cent, is under the control of the involuntary powers
of the mind, and belongs to the involuntary nerves.
Now if the whole fifty per cent, of either of these
forces, which when equalized is health, should be sud-
denly collected upm any one organ, it would be the


LECTURE IV. 79

destruction of that organ. If the mind, on hearing
bad news, or by some sudden distress, should call the
whole fifty per cent, of electricity under its control to
the brain, apoplexy and death must ensue. This would
be done by a mental impression on the voluntary nerv-
ous force, causing the mind to shrink back on itself and
become passive. But the same melancholy result could
be produced by eating, drinking, or some other physical
impression on the involuntary force over which the
mind has no such control. Hence it will be understood,
that all diseases, originating under mental impressions,
are produced by the fifty per cent, of voluntary nerv
ous force. But those diseases, originating under physi-
cal impressions, are produced by the fifty per cent, of
involuntary nervous force, and over which the mind has
no control.

If either of these electro-nervous forces,. to a certain
amount, should be called to a muscle, it would be pain.
If called to a still greater extent, it would be inflam-
mation ; and if the whole fifty per cent, were called
there, it would be mortification, and the ultimate and
absolute destruction of the muscle. The same result
would follow in case either of these forces were called
to any organ in the system. It would be the destruc-
tion of that organ.

There are three kinds of pain : First, a pain pro-
duced by negative electricity, which attracts the blood
to the spot, and is ever attended with inflammation.


80 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Second, a pain produced by positive electricity, which
repels the blood, and, though equally severe, is never
attended with inflammation. Third, a pain produced
by the confused mixture of the two forces, and consists
in a burning, itching, or prickly sensation, and is often
very distressing.

I have now given you a few hints on the philosophy
of disease, which are of course novel to you all ; but
they are, nevertheless, as interesting and important to
the welfare of our race, as they are novel and strange.
Medical men have ever noticed the great effect that the
mind has upon the body, both as it regards a disastrous
or salutary result. Hence they keep up the brightest
hopes of their patients as to recovery, and carefully
guard every one against uttering to them a word of dis-
couragement. These effects they have seen, but not
understanding the connecting link between mind and
matter, the true philosophy of* disease has been by them
entirely overlooked, and in relation to this science they
may after all cry " humbug." But this will avail them
nothing, for truth, after all, will stand unshaken, and
be appreciated by after generations, when opposition
shall have been interred, with no hope of its resurrec-
tion. In view of our subject, so far as it regards men-
tal impressions, we see the supreme importance of
maintaining a reconciled state of mind. Equanimity
of mind is the parent of health, peace, and happiness,
and the noblest test of the true Christian. When we


LECTURE IV. 81

see thousands always restless, complaining of cold and
heat, and wet and dry — complaining of their own con-
dition, and finding fault with others, and dissatisfied
with the events of Providence — we need not marvel
that so many complain of indisposition, and disease.
This state of mind produces them. So beware.


$2 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


LECTURE V

Ladies and I.^ylemen:

When we reflect how extensive a field Jhe philoso-
phy of disease naturally occupies, and how vast a
range we must take in order to inspect minutely its
several parts, it will then be seen that my remarks,
in my last Lecture, have been brief in comparison with
the vastness of the subject. I flatter myself, however,
that my views are understood^ and that the importance
of the doctrine of mental and physical impressions, in
relation to disease, is clearly seen, and fully appre-
ciated by you all. I believe it to be founded in im-
mutable truth, and that it will survive the crush of
empires and the revolution of ages.

Having brought forward the philosophy of dis-
ease in my last Lecture, I now turn to the ration-
ale of its cure in this.

In discussing the doctrine of mental impressions, I
have clearly and irresistibly proved that the mind by
shrinking back on itself in fear, melancholy, and grief,
in the day of adversity, misfortune, and distress, can
disturb the electro-nervous fluid, and allow it to con-


LECTURE V. 83

centrate itself upon any organ of the body and engen-
der disease. If, then, the mind can disturb the equili-
brium of the nervo-electric force and call it to some
organ so as to produce disease, then the mind can also
disperse it, equalize the circulation, and restore health.
This it can do by a mental impression, admitting the
impression to be sufficiently great. For example : A
man in possession of five thousand dollars is riding-
homeward on horseback in the evening. He is within
a mile of his house. He is weary and his head aches
so severely that he is obliged to walk his horse. He
is so indisposed and faint that he can but just keep his
saddle. From a lonely dismal spot at the road side,
a robber springs and seizes his horse's bridle — pre-
sents a pistol, and exclaims, " Your money, or your
life !" The rider, with a loaded whip, and at the im-
pulse of the moment, suddenly strikes the robber's
arm. This causes the pistol to discharge, and adds to
the confusion of the moment. The rider, scarcely
knowing what he is about, puts spurs to his horse.
He darts off at the top of his speed. Before he is
aware, he is at his own door. He dismounts and finds
himself safe. The .vital force is driven to the extrem-
ities, and his hands and feet are warm. Where is his
headache now 1 It is gone. The supreme impression
of his mind drove the electro-nervous fluid from his
brain — the blood followed it — a reaction took place,
and he was well. Is there any thing strange in this ?


84 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

No! Then there is nothing strange in this science,
for it is the curing of diseases by the doctrine of im-
pressions.

I desire it to be distinctly understood how this power
operates. Remember mind touches the electro-nervous
fluid, moves it — and this fluid moves the blood. Elec-
trical Psychology is the doctrine of impressions, and
the same disease that mind, or even physical impres-
sions can cause, the mind can remove, if the patient
be in the psj'chological state. Because mental impres-
sions to any extent we please can be produced upon
him. It is therefore immaterial from what source a
disease may arise, or what kind of a disease it may be,
the mind can, by its impressions, cause the nervous
fluid to cure it, or at least to produce upon it a salu-
tary influence. If exposure to heat or cold, dampness
or dryness, or to any of the changing elements, should
call the nervous fluid to the lungs, and disturb the cir-
culation of the blood, so as to produce inflammation,
the mind could disperse and equalize it, and thus effect
a cure as readily as though this inflammation of the
lungs had been brought on by melancholy and grief,
or by any other mental distress. Or if these exposures
had caused any other disease or pain in the system,
the mind could have had the same power to remove it,
as though it had been caused by mental distress. Or
if by eating, drinking, or by sedentary habits, dyspep-
sia had been produced, the mind could have had the


LECTVRE V. 85

same power to produce a salutary result, or even to
cure it as though it had been caused by mental dis-
tress. I do not mean that a cure can be effected by
the electro-nervous force, through mental impressions,
if there be any organic destruction of the parts dis-
eased. The consumption, for instance, could not be
cured if the lungs were ulcerated ; sight could not be
restored if the optic nerve were destroyed ; nor could
deafness be removed if the auditory nerve were de-
stroyed. In these cases, even, medical remedies, it
must be granted, would be of no avail, because there
is no foundation on which to build. In all I have
said, or may say in regard to cures, I have reference
only to curable cases. I mean, that the fifty per cent,
of electro-nervous force, under the control of the mind,
could effect a cure where there is no organic destruc-
tion, and where there is, at the same time, a suffi-
ciency of vital force left to build upon, so as to be able
to produce a sanative result. Nor do I mean to be
understood that this science alone can at all times
cure. It may require medicines to co-operate with it.
As diseases are produced through mental and physical
impressions, so through mental and physical impres-
sions they must be cured.

Medicine produces a physical impression on the sys-
tem, but never heals a disease. If a disease were
ever healed through medicines, it was healed by the
same sanative power as though it had been done by a


86 ELECTRICAL, PSYCHOLOGY.

mental impression in accordance with the teachings of
Electrical Psychology. This is evident ; because the
sanative power is in the individual, and not in the
medicine. Medicines and mental impressions only call
that sanative principle to the right spot in the system
so as to enable it to do its work. The following ex-
ample will explain my meaning on this particular
point :

You enter a garden and see a peach-tree with its
fruit not fully grown, but so heavily laden, that one of
its limbs is partially split from the trunk. The gar-
dener is aware that if it be neglected till the fruit
grows to maturity, the limb will be entirely parted
from the tree and die. He carefully raises the limb
till the split closes, and puts under it a prop to keep it
to its place. He winds canvas around the wounded
part, and over this he puts tar. Now there is cer-
tainly no healing principle in the prop — there is none
in the canvas — nor is there any in the tar. The prop
merely sustains the weight of the limb, and keeps the
split together ; the canvas is wound around it to pre-
vent the tar from entering the split ; and the tar was
applied to protect the whole from the air, rains, and
external elements ; while the tree is left to the inhe-
rent operations of its own sanative principles. The
sanative principle being in the tree, it must heal itself.
So the healing principle is in man, as much so as it is
in the tree. The healing principle in the tree is the


LECTURE V. 87

invisible electro -vegetative fluid. This moves and
equalizes the sap, and the sap affects the wood. It is
the electricity of the tree that does the work ; and this
electricity is under the control of its vegetable life.
So the healing principle in man is the invisible electro-
nervous fluid. This moves and equalizes the blood,
and the blood affects the flesh. It is the electricity of
the system, under the control of the mind.

The position is incontrovertible, that the healing
principle is in man. Admitting it to be electricity, or
what I call the electro-nervous fluid of the system, it
is then easily seen that there is no healing principle in
medicine, and it is also understood what effect medicine
must have upon the system in order to produce a salu-
tary influence. It must equalize the electricity, as
before remarked, and call it to the proper spot, so as
to enable it to do its healing work. Hence, if the
mind can so operate upon the fifty per cent, of the
electro-nervous force under its control, as to equalize
it, then it follows, as a matter of course, that the same
healing result will be obtained as is effected by medi-
cine. In either case there is no difference in the heal-
ing power. In both instances it is the same. The
only difference is, that in the one case the healing
power was made to act by the mind, which produced
its mental impression, and in the other case by the
medicine, which produced its physical impression.

It may now be asked, If medicine has no healing


88 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

property in it, then how can an emetic remove impuri-
ties from the stomach by vomiting the patient 1 In
reply I would state, that it has never done so. In
this I desire to be distinctly understood. I mean that
an emetic is not the vomiting principle. The vomiting
principle is in the man. It is the electricity of the
system. The electro-nervous fluid of the brain is the
vomiting principle. Let us understand the philosophy
of this. Emetics, whether mineral or vegetable, pos-
sess those peculiar chemical properties that cause im-
mense secretions. This effect is the whole secret of
their power. An emetic, taken into the stomach, pro-
duces secretions most freely from the glands of the
stomach, from the mucous membrane of the lungs,
from the glands of the trachoe, and from the glands of
the mouth and tongue. It robs them of their moisture
which is continually accumulating upon the stomach.
The parts being robbed of their moisture by this arti-
ficial action, the electricity from the nerves follows it,
because electricity has a strong affinity for moisture.
When a sufficiency of the electric force is drawn from
the brain, and the blood haviug in the same ratio fol-
lowed it, the countenance be-'omes pale — an expansion
and collapse of the stomach takes place, and vomiting
is the result. This is its philosophy. In proof of the
fact, electricity cannot be gathered in damp weather.
The moisture, for which it has a strong affinity,
holds it.


LECTURE V.


89


After all I have said of medicine and its operations,
it may yet be supposed that it possesses some healing
principle, and that the emetic does vomit the patient.
Why then will it not vomit a dead man'? The answer
is, because the vital force is gone, and the emetic is
powerless. But why will it not vomit the man w T hen
he is worn out with disease and near his end? 1
answer, because the vital force in the man, on which
vomiting depends, is wasted ; and as it does not exist
in'the medicine, so the emetic, in its chemical action
having no material to work upon, or to call to its aid,
is powerless.

If this is not satisfactory to your minds in the settle-
ment of the question whether the vomiting principle is
in the medicine or in the patient, I will pursue the
subject still farther. Suppose while eating strawber-
ries and cream, you tell a sensitive lady that she has
taken into the stomach a worm, or even a fly— she
stops eating, and in a minute shejromits freely. How
is this, when she has swallowed, in fact, neither worm
nor fly 1 I answer, that the vomiting principle is in
the brain. She believed that she had taken into the
stomach what was stated; she kept her attention
steadily and most intently upon il^and the mind
threw the electro-nervous force from the brain to the
stomach, until there was a sufficient quantity to pro-
duce an expansion and collapse of the stomach, and cause
vomiting. Now the vomiting in this case and in the


90 ELECTRICAL, PSYCHOLOGY.

case of the emetic was occasioned by one and the same
thing, and that is the electro-nervous fluid. The only-
difference in the two cases is, that the emetic called it
from the brain by a physical impression, and the mind
forced it from the brain by a mental impression.

If the vomiting principle is not in us, why then does
it turn the stomach to see an animal eating any thing
very filthy, like the dog returning to his vomit ? If
this principle is not in us, how can it produce nausea ?
How can the motion of a vessel, and sometimes even
the motion of a carriage, produce vomiting, unless it
exists in the nervous force of the brain 1 Why will a
fall, or blow upon the head, produce it.

The same is true in relation to cathartics, which
excite the secretions of the glands, but of other glands
than those affected by an emetic. A cathartic excites
the secretions of the mucous glands of the alimentary
canal. This draws the electric action from the brain,
but mostly from the nerves on the surface of the body
there, and produces its results. I have been thus par-
ticular upon the action and operation of emetics, as
this one hint is sufficient to lead any reflecting mind to
a correct impression of the relation in which medicines
stand to the human system. They are the mere props
and supports of some weak part, to aid nature in re-
storing herself to health and vigor. A cathartic, taken
into the stomach of a very sensitive individual, will
produce the result of an emetic ; and an emetic, too


LECTURE V. 91

long in effecting its end in the first stomach, will, after
passing the duodenum, produce the result of a cathartic
in the second stomach.

I have now said all that is necessary in relation to
the curing of diseases by the electro-nervous force,
and have clearly shown how this force can be made to
act by mind, or by medicine. I will now give advice
in relation to avoiding disease and preserving health,
which it will be well for every one to observe who is
desirous of securing this inestimable blessing. As life
is dear to all, I shall be pardoned when I say that
medical gentlemen are mad who administer medicine in
silence to the patient without candidly informing him
what the medicine is, and what effect or effects he in-
tends it to produce. If the patient were thus instruct-
ed by a physician in whom he had full confidence, then
he would be in constant expectation of the anticipated
effect ; and the mind, by its mental impressions, acting
in concert with the physical impressions of the medi-
cine, would produce a salutary and happy result. I
grant that this information cannot be given to infants,
nor to deranged persons ; but it should be done in all
possible cases.

In order to preserve health, the body should be kept
clean, and the mind pure and calm. There are ex-
tremes in every thing, and these should be carefully
avoided. The body should be carefully washed all
over, or bathed, except the head, in water moderately


92 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

cool. No soap should be used in either case, and the
process should not occupy more than three or four
minutes. It should be briskly rubbed with a coarse
towel, and mostly downward, so as not to disturb the
minute scales that cover the pores. In cold weather,
colder water should be used than in moderate weather.
Indeed, the water should be about the temperature of
the elements. But in freezing weather the body should
be merely immersed, and almost immediately extri-
cated, and the washing process should not occupy more
than a moment of time. In cold weather, twice per
week is sufficient ; and in warm weather, every alter-
nate day is abundant, in ordinary cases. Too frequent
washings and bathings, and of too long continuance, to
persons in ordinary health, is deleterious, as it destroys
too much of the natural oil of the skin, which the
Creator has supplied to give it a soft and silky texture.
The system of hydropathy has great force, if rightly
managed. In cases of heat, or inflammation, warm
water should be applied, and the reaction would be
coolness ; and in cases of cold feet, they should be
washed on going to bed each night in cold water, till
they remain continually warm. The coldest water
will extract the frost from a frozen hand, whereas if it
were immersed in the warmest water that could be
borne, it would perhaps destroy it, so as to render even
amputation necessary. But if the hand be burned or
scalded, immersing it in the warmest water that can be


LECTURE V. 93

borne, or holding it to the fire, will produce a salutary-
result, even though the remedy be a harsh one. On
this principle, you see the inconsistency of cold water
applications, and even of ice to the head in brain
fevers, or where there is a severe inflammation of the
brain, occasioned by a fall, a blow, or any concussion.

I now turn the attention of ladies and gentlemen to
eating, drinking, and wearing apparel, and will en-
deavor, in few words as possible, to show" the bearing
of these upon the human constitution.

Our bodies are made up of the elements, and, as I
have already observed, are an epitome of the universe.
In order to insure perfect health, we should subsist en-
tirely upon the provisions, whether vegetable or animal,
that are produced in that part of the earth where we
were born and reared, or in that part of the earth where
we intend to spend our days. And, moreover, our
Avearing apparel should also be the product of the same
section where we live. Cotton should never be worn
where the snow covers the earth, or in that part of the
earth's latitude where it cannot be raised. Hemp, flax,
cotton, wool, and silk may be worn with perfect safety
in those latitudes of the earth's surface where they can
be cultivated. The Creator's works are perfect. He
has established complete harmony between the vegeta-
bles, and the soil where they grow, and the climate that
fostered their existence and warmed them into life.
He, therefore, who eats the food belonging to his own


94 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

latitude, who drinks the water that gushes from his
own springs, and wears the clothing produced in his
own climate, establishes a perfect harmony and apti-
tude between his own body and the surrounding ele-
ments. I mean that he does this in case he uses these
blessings temperately, as not abusing them.

The truth of this will appear perfectly clear, if we
have a correct understanding of inuring ourselves to
another climate, entirely different from the one to which
we have been" accustomed. I will therefore call your
attention to the philosophy of becoming accli-
mated.

The mineral kingdom lays a foundation for the vege-
table, and the vegetable for the animal kingdom. It is
therefore perfectly clear that no animals could have
had an existence till there were vegetables, because an
animal is but a vegetable of the second growth. Each
latitude of the globe has vegetables peculiar to itself,
and these make up all the varieties that exist on earth.
But the same species of vegetables differ from each
other in different latitudes, as far as the climates and
elements or soils may differ from each other. An
apple, pear, or peach, grown in forty degrees north
latitude, differs considerably from the same fruit raised
in thirty degrees north latitude. This is certain, be-
imuse it is the result of surrounding elements that gave
it -being. The same may be said of corn, wheat, and
rye in different latitudes. And as animals are but


LEC1URE V. 95

vegetables of the second growth, hence the same ani-
mals vary in accordance with their latitudes. The
beef, mutton, and pork, raised in thirty and forty de-
grees north latitude, are therefore unlike, each being
adapted to its own climate and the vegetables that sus-
tained them.

I have already stated, that our bodies are made of
the Avater, the vegetables, and animals upon which we
subsist, and are adapted to the climate and surrounding
elements where we were born and reared. Our bodies
are continually wasting away, and by food and drink
are continually repaired. We lose the fleshy particles
of our bodies about once a year, and the bones in about
seven years. Hence in seven years we have possessed
seven bodies of flesh and blood, and one frame of bones.
We have not now, in all probability, a particle of flesh
and bones we had seven years ago. The water we
have drank, and the flesh and vegetables we have eaten,
having made up the component parts of our bodies,
cause us to hanker and long for the same substances of
which our bodies are composed. Like substance in us
calls for like substance without, to supply the waste
of the system. This is habitude.

Now suppose we suddenly change our climate from
forty to thirty degrees north latitude. The air, water,
fruits, vegetables, and flesh all differ. The old parti-
cles composing our bodies, and brought from forty de-
grees north latitude, fly off as usual. This produces


96 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

hunger and thirst, and we supply our wants by the
water and food of thirty degrees north latitude, and
continue for weeks to do so. This creates a conflict
between the old substances of our bodies and the new
flesh and blood continually forming, throws the electro-
nervous force out of balance, and engenders disease.
If we live and struggle on, for about seven years, we
become acclimated, because our old flesh and bones,
formed by the substances of one latitude, have disap-
peared, and our entire systems are made up of the
substances of another latitude. Hence we see the
danger of changing our positions on the globe to any
great extent, which may, however, in some instances,
prove beneficial to the constitution. Such is the phi-
losophy of being acclimated.

In view of what I have now brought forward, it will
be clearly perceived, by ladies and gentlemen, that we
'should confine ourselves to the water, fruits, grains,
and animal food, and even to the medicines produced
in that climate where we live, and reject those of dis-
tant latitudes and foreign climates. To drink tea and
coffee, and eat oranges, lemons, citrons, .pineapples,
and the productions of all parts of the globe, is like
changing, in some measure, our climate for another, or
for several others, and thus keeping up a continual
conflict between the elementary particles that are con-
stantly entering the composition of our bouies. There
is an incessant war waged between the climate where


LECTURE V. 97

we live, and the productions of another region, and
those of our own. To all this, add the clothing of
other distant climes to be Avorn by us, and who can
marvel that almost every man, woman, and child is
complaining of some indisposition, or else groaning
under disease and pain 1 Abandon luxuries of foreign
growth ; avoid dissipation ; keep your bodies clean ;
your minds calm and contented ; eat the productions of
your OA\-n climate ; drink the clear crystal Avater of your
OAvn spring ; wear the flax, hemp, cotton, or avooI that is
raised in your own latitude ; take all the rest of sleep
that your nature and temperament require ; have your
hours of study, labor, exercise, and serious contempla-
tion all regulated ; and be temperate in all things.
FoUoav these directions, and no doctor Avill enter your
house. If you must have tea, use sage, pennyroyal,
and hemlock. These are Avholesome, and habit will
transform them into luxuries far transcending the
nerve-destroying plant of China.

It is impossible that the Creator could have erred in
adapting all the fruits, grains, and other vegetable sub-
stances to each latitude of the earth, so that man and
other creatures can subsist there in health, peace, and
happiness. And man no more requires the products
of other climes to increase these blessings, than the
animals around him, who find not only their food
and drink, but even their medicines produced by the
6oil on which they tread, without resorting to foreign


98 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY. .

importations. At the novelty of these ideas you may
smile, but they are based upon immutable truth, and
established, constituted, and sustained by Him who
founded the pillars of strength and beauty that sup-
port the fabric of nature, and must stand till they
shall fall.


LECTURE VI.


LECTURE VI.

Ladies and Gentlemen :

The nature and importance of Electrical Psycholo-
gy I have clearly and philosophically argued, in a free,
unchained, and fearless expression of my thoughts.
For this, even if I have erred, I am entitled to your
approbation, rather than your condemnation. For
what is man, when he makes himself a cowering,
cringing slave to the opinions of others, and tamely
bows to win the momentary smiles of popular applause
from the passing crowd 1 What I have said in relation
to this science, has been the sincere breathings of my
own convictions. I have, therefore, reasoned fearless
of consequences ; and if I have in so doing met your
approbation, I rejoice at it ; if I have met your disap-
probation, I regret it — yet you will pardon me when I
say that I cannot alter my course and accommodate
myself to the opinions of others, however elevated may
be their stations. Fully sensible of the duty I owe to
my fellow-men, and to the Supreme Ruler of the uni-
verse, and when I discharge this to the best of my ability,
I little care what men may think or even say of me.


100 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

If, however, what I have argued of the human system
— the electro-nervous force — the connecting link be-
tween mind and matter — the circulation of the blood —
the philosophy of disease — the rationale of its cure —
the laws of health, and the philosophy of being accli-
mated — if these excite your surprise, ladies and gen-
tlemen may then prepare themselves for still greater
surprise in the arguments now to be offered on spirit,
and the creation and government of the universe.
Being myself perfectly unshackled and free, I shall
exert myself in that freedom while pursuing this de-
partment of my subject.

In my introductory remarks in my third Lecture, I
took a general survey of the powers and operations of
electricity throughout the empire of nature. We saw
its secret workings, and its alternately sublime or
awful manifestations. But all these operations and
convulsions, however magnificently grand, will appear
but as the drop of the bucket to the fountain, when
compared with the Unseen Power that stirs the uni-
verse. Electricity, so swift in its movement as to rival
the lightning glance of thought, and so inconceivably
awful in its rending force as to convulse the globe to its
centre, is yet as nothing, and less than nothing, com-
pared with that Eternal One who arms it with power —
who gives it all its expansive force, and who makes it
the messenger of his attributes to both nature and man.
With his finger he has wr'tten the truth of this science


LECTURE VI. 101

on every object throughout the realms of nature. It
is written in the beams of the mid-day sun — in the
descending rains and gentle dews. It is written in the
flowery field and shady grove. It is written in stars
on the scroll of night. It is written in lightning on
the bosom of the dark cloud. It is written deep in
sympathy on the soul, and controls the most powerful
affections and stormy passions of the human heart.

In this Lecture I will turn your attention to spirit,
or mind — by which I mean one and the same thing —
and will endeavor to prove the existence of an Infinite
Spirit. ,

Though the powers of mind and its complicated
operations can be seen, felt, and in a good degree com-
prehended, yet, after all, we know but little of mind as
it regards its properties, or substance. Some suppose
it to be absolutely and positively immaterial, because
it is purely spirit. Others believe mind to be the re-
sult of organism, and contend that it cannot exist with-
out a brain, which is. the grand organ that secretes
thought, even as the liver secretes its bile, or the stom-
ach its gastric juice ! The former of these supposi-
tions is the one generally adopted by the Christian
community who believe spirit to be an immateriality.
The latter supposition is embraced by those Christians
who wholly rely upon the resurrection of the body for
the future existence of the spirit. They are called
Materialists, because they make out the spirit to be no


102 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY. •

substance at all, but merely the result of organized
matter. Of this faith was the celebrated Dr. Priestly.
This latter position is also adopted by the Atheists,
who contend that spirit cannot exist independent of an
organized brain ; and as they reject the Christian hope
of the resurrection, so they contend that mind is extin-
guished in the night of the grave, and sleeps in non-
entity, to wake no more. Hence the idea of a God,
as an intelligent Spirit, they regard as a freak of fancy
— a mere chimera of the human brain. Both of these
positions as it regards spirit I reject, and will give my
reasons for doing so.

I reject the immateriality of the spirit, because
that which is positively and absolutely immaterial
cannot of course possess either length, breadth, thick-
ness, nor occupy any space. Indeed, it cannot, in this
case, possess any form ; and that which possesses no
form, cannot, in the nature of things, occupy any space.
And to talk of a thing having an existence, which, at
the same time, has no form, nor occupies space, is the
most consummate nonsense. Hence an immateriality
is a nonentity — a blank nothing. On the other hand,
if mind is merely the result of organism, and if it can-
not exist independent of an organized brain, then who
made the first brain 1 Did it not require an intelligent
spirit to organize its several parts, and adapt the eye
to light, the ear to sound, and make these organs the
inlets of sensation to the inhabitant in that brain 1


LECTURE


103


Surely the brain did not make itself, for this would
only be saying, that the brain acted before it existed !

Having given my reasons for rejecting both these
ideas of mind, I am now ready to introduce the ques-
tion, What is mind 1 I answer, it is a substance — an
element — as really so as -air or water, but differs mate-
rially from all inert substances in being. I regard
mind as living and embodied form — as that incompre-
hensible element whose nature it is to possess life and
motion, as much so as it is the nature of other sub-
stances to possess inertia. Hence, mind is, in these
two respects — namely, life and motion — directly the
opposite of dead matter.

In the first place I will start with the assertion that
. there must be in the universe an Infinite Mind. It is
impossible, in the very nature and constitution of
things, that an absolute perfection of substances can
be philosophically maintained without this admission.
For the truth of this position I rely upon motion. - By
motion, then, I am to prove the existence of an Eter-
nal Mind.

In the first place permit me to remark, that inher-
ent motion is not an attribute common to all sub-
stances in nature. This globe, as a body, is moved
by the positive and negative forces of electrical action.
And all the operations of nature in the earth and ele-
ments are carried on by the same power. Whether it
be crystalizations, or petrifactions, the growth of vege-


104 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

tation, or its decomposition — motions and changes in
air and water — or the crumbling particles of the moun-
tain rock — all the motions, visible and invisible, that
transpire in the mineral and vegetable kingdoms, and
in all their multifarious operations, are produced by
electricity, which is the universal agent appointed to
keep up the order and harmony of the universe. And
yet it is certain that electricity does not possess in-
herent motion as its attribute. Motion belongs to one
substance only, and that is mind.

There is certainly as much order in the universe as
there is in the human body. Let us, then, look truth
calmly in the face. Each organ of the body performs
but one function. The eye sees — the ear hears — the
olfactories smell — the glands taste — the heart throbs'
to regulate the blood — the hands handle — the feet
walk, and the liver secretes its bile. The eye never
hears, and the ear never sees. So there is but one
substance in nature whose attribute is inherent mo-
tion, and that is mind. Not one single part of the
human body possesses independent motion. Electri-
city is there also the grand agent to move the limbs
and vitals, and the living mind is the only* moving
power.

The point upon which I am now entering is one of
most deep and thrilling interest. It is no less than to
prove the existence of an Eternal Mind from motion
and the absolute perfection of the chain of elementary


LECTURE VI. 105

substances. But while accomplishing this, I must call
to my aid the relative subtilties of different portions of
matter with which we are surrounded. Let us, for a
moment, turn our attention to a few of the most obvi-
ous substances in nature, and then glance at her abso-
lute perfection as a whole. Let us carefully notice
the gradation these substances occupy toward each
other in their relation to motion, and then the intrin-
sic beauty of the subject will appear. I will begin at
the heaviest matter that may first suggest itself to my
mind, and leisurely pass on, rising higher and still
higher, through its various grades, up to that which is
more and more rarefied, subtile, and light, till we ar-
rive at that which must necessarily possess inherent
motion, and therefore living power.

The heaviest of gross substances in existence is the
most difficult to move, and hence must be at the great-
est possible distance from motion. Though there are
several solid substances heavier than lead, yet I choose
to begin at this, as the idea I wish to convey is all that
is worthy of your consideration in the present argu-
ment. Lead, then, on account of the density of its
particles, is difficult to move. Were it the heaviest
substance in nature, it would take its position farther
distant from motion than any other substance. Rock
being more easily moved than lead, takes its relative
position nearer to motion. In like manner earth is
more easily moved than rock. Water is more easily
5*


106 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

moved than earth. Air is more easily moved than
water. The gaseous fluids are more easily moved than
air, and electricity is more easily moved than the gase-
ous fluids.

It. will now be perceived, by ladies and gentlemen,
that as we mount the rounds of the ladder in the mag-
nificent scale of material* substances, there is a gradual
approximation toward motion. Each substance as we
rise, being more rarefied and light than the one below
it, is of course nearer to motion than its grosser neigh-
bor. And it will be perceived by every philosophic
mind, that we cannot continually approximate motion
without at last reaching motion, or that substance to
which motion belongs.

We have now mounted from lead up to electricity ;
and though as we rose we found each successive sub-
stance more easily moved than the one below it, still
we have not as yet found a single material that pos-
sesses inherent motion as its attribute. Lead, rock,
earth, and water are moved by impulse. Air is moved
by rarefication, and electricity is moved by the positive
and negative forces. True we have mounted up, as be-
fore remarked, to electricity, but even this cannot move,
unless it is thrown out of balance in relation to quan-
tity as to its positive and negative forces. In such
cases it flies, equalizes itself, and again sinks to rest.
I am fully sensible that electricity is a fluid most incon-
ceivably subtile, rarefied, and fine. It is computed to


LECTURE VI. 107

take four million particles of our air to make a speck
as large as the smallest visible grain of sand, and yet
electricity is more than seven hundred thousand times
finer than air ! It is almost unparticled matter, and is
not only invisible, but, so far as we can judge, it is im-
ponderable. It cannot be seen — it cannot be weighed!
A thousand empty Leyden jars, capable of containing
a gallon each, may be placed upon the nicest scale, and
most accurately weighed. Then let these be filled with
electricity, and, so far as human sagacity can deter-
mine, they will weigh no more. Hence to our percep-
tion, a thousand gallons weigh nothing.

As electricity, in regard to motion, stands upon the
poise, being completely balanced by the positive and
negative, forces, that equalize each other, so it is easily
perceived, that if we mount one step higher, we must
come to that substance whose nature it is to move, and
the result of that motion is thought and power. It is
mind. Hence it will be distinctly perceived, in view
of the argument now offered, that we cannot, as phi-
losophers, stop short of motion in the highest and most
sublime substance in being. This conclusion, as the
result of the argument, is absolutely and positively
irresistible, and challenges refutation.

When we mount up in our contemplations through
the various grades of matter, and see it continually
brightening as we progress onward in our delightful
career of rapture, till we arrive at that sublimated


108 ELECTRICAL PSYCK LOGY.

substance which can neither be seen nor weighed —
which moves with a velocity of twelve million miles
per minute, and can travel around this globe in the
eighth part of a second, we are struck with astonish-
ment and awe ! But as this is not the last link in the
immeasurable chain, we arc forced to proceed onward
till we arrive at the finest, most sublime, and brilliant
substance in being — a substance that possesses the
attributes of inherent or self-motion and living power,
and from which all other motion and power throughout
the immeasurable universe are derived. This is the
Infinite Mind, and possesses embodied form. He is
a living being. This Infinite Mind comes in contact
with electricity, gives to it motion, arms it with power,
and, through this mighty unseen agent, moves the uni-
verse, and carries on all the multifarious operations of
nature, whether minute or grand. Hence there is not
a motion that transpires amidst the immensity of his
works, from rolling globes down to the falling leaf, but
what originates in the Eternal Mind, and by Him is
performed, through electricity as his agent. Mind is,
therefore, the absolute perfection of all substances in
being; and as it possesses self-motion as its grand
attribute, so it is, in this respect, exactly the reverse
of all other substances, which are, of themselves, mo-
tionless. Mind, or spirit, is above all, and absolutely
disposes of and controls all. Hence mind and its agent,


LECTURE VI. 109

electricity, arc both imponderable — are both invisible,
and coeternal.

As the Eternal One wraps clouds and darkness
round about him, and holds back the face of his throne,
so many do not believe in his existence, because he is
unseen, while all the visible objects of creation are to
them so many realities. But the very position here
assumed is an erroneous one. The very reverse of
this is true. What is seen is not the reality, but is
only the manifestation of the unseen, which is the real-
ity. Let us carefully look at this point. There is an
apple-tree ; it is plainly seen ; but is that tree the re-
ality 1 No ; but it is the result of an invisible cause,
and that unseen cause is the reality. But what was it?
1 reply, that it was not even the seed, but the life of
that seed was the reality ; and that unseen life pos-
sessed the embodied form of that tree. All its shapes
and colors were there. By coming in contact with the
soil and moisture, in a proper temperature of climate,
it was enabled to throw out its own invisible and living
form. Firs*t, then, the life ; next the seed in which it
dwells ; next the trunk of the tree appears. Then its
limbs and branches— its buds, leaves, blossoms, and
fruit again end in living beauty. It began in life, and
in seed or life it ended. It performed an electric circle.
The tree, then, is nothing more than a visible outshoot
—an ultimate of an invisible substance, which is the
reality.


110


ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


All the powers and operations of nature are lodged
in the unseen and finest portions of matter — they pass
on through every grade, and end in the gross and heav-
iest parts. The unseen power that stirs the earth-
quake and convulses the globe # the reality. It
passes through every grade of matter, and ends in rend-
ing the solid rocks and hurling cities in the vortex of
ruin. The power that moves this globe in its orbit at
the rate of sixty-eight thousand miles per hour, is an
invisible agent, moved by omnipotent Power— for all
operations and effects begin in the finest substance in
being, which is the unseen cause, and therefore the
reality. Hence it is the same in nature as in the hu-
man system, as I have already shown in my arguments
on the philosophy of disease. The disease begins in
the finest substance of the body— in the electricity of
the nerves— passes on to the blood and flesh, and ends
in the bones. There is, indeed, but one common mode
of operation in nature and in man.

Ladies and Gentlemen— I desire now to turn your
attention to one important point in relation to mind,
which has been entirely overlooked by philosophers. I
mean its involuntary powers. To speak of the invol-
untary powers of mind will certainly produce a singu-
lar impression on your hearts ; and the strangeness
of the idea may, perhaps, fill you with surprise. But
strange as it may appear, it is nevertheless true that
mind possesses the two grand attributes of voluntary


LECTURE VI. Ill

and involuntary power. These two constitute the
mind as a living being of embodied form. If mind
make use of electricity as its agent, then it must pos-
sess the voluntary and involuntary powers to meet the
positive and negative forces in electricity. If this
be not so, then the Infinite Mind cannot be the Cre-
ator and Governor of the universe ; because it is by
his voluntary power that he creates a universe, but it
is by his involuntary power that he sustains and gov-
erns it. Each of these powers, from a philosophical
necessity, and from the very nature of his being, per-
form their own peculiar functions, and in perfect har-
mony preside over their own respective departments.
It is the peculiar province of the voluntary pDwer of
the Infinite Mind to plan, arrange, dispose, and create
worlds and their inhabitants, and it is the peculiar
province of his involuntary power to govern and con-
trol these worlds and their inhabitants through the
fixed laws of nature. Let us reason this point, and its
consistency will appear.

In the first place — if the voluntary power of the Cre-
ator governed the universe, then no possible contingen-
cies could happen — and nothing once commenced could
ever perish prematurely. For instance : if God deter-
mined to create a human pair, and by his voluntary
power commenced the work, they could not perish
when his work was but partially accomplished. They
are destined to come to maturity, invested with the


112 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

true lineaments of form — and destined to gaze upon
each other as perfect specimens of living beauty. If
not, then God in his voluntary and absolute determin-
ations can be thwarted and disappointed.

The first male and female, at least, of each species,
were produced, and the whole living chain of animated
existence was placed upon this globe by the voluntary
powers of God, without any previous parents from
whom they received their being. They were not born,
but created, for there is philosophically and strictly a
very wide difference between being created and born.
The former we call miracle, the latter, an order of
nature. To produce a human pair without a previous
father and mother, is not in the order or power of na-
ture, for she never changes her mode of operation in
•the production of her animated existences.

The same is true in relation to the vegetable king-
dom. The whole species of vegetable life was pro-
duced by the voluntary powers of God. In the order
of nature there never was an acorn but what grew on
an oak ; and there never was an oak but what came
from an acorn. Geology proves that there has been a
period when there wefe no vegetables or animals on
this globe. Which then was first — the acorn or the
oak ? If you reply that the acorn was first, then there
was an acorn that did not grow on an oak. If you say
that the oak was first, then there was an oak that did
not come from an acorn. Whence then is the starting


LECTURE VI. 113

point of creation, if there is no God 1 for nature cannot
start herself, as this would only be saying that she
acted before she existed. Whether the Creator, in
the first' place, produced by his voluntary powers the
seeds or the plants, is of no consequence to my present
purpose. It is enough to say, that they were brought
into existence without, any parent stock, and -in per-
forming this work there could be no uncertainty, nor
could any thing perish prematurely, because it was
under the voluntary powers of the Infinite Mind.

But after this globe was created, and the first link
of every species of vegetable and animal life was moved
into existence by the voluntary powers of the Creator,
it then naturally and of philosophical necessity passed
from the control of the voluntary powers to the control
of the involuntary powers of the Infinite Mind, and by
them to be governed through the established laws of
nature. Here then casualties may naturally arise, but
no where else under the government of the Supreme.

This view of mind removes the many difficulties and
perplexities we encounter, when we contemplate the
unchangeable character of the Creator in the govern-
ment of the world. Millions of our race are continu-
ally perishing by premature birth ! The eye was most
skillfully organized and adapted to see light, but saw it
not. The ear was formed — all its vocal chambers
were arranged, and the whole adapted to the reverber-
ations of sound, but it never heard. It had hands,


114 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

but they never handled — feet, but they never walked —
lungs, but they never breathed — and a mouth, but it
never spoke, nor tasted food.

Again — how many millions of our race die under ten
years of age ! And though they were constituted, and
ripening for the enjoyment of the social and domestic
affections, and the multiplication of their race, yet they
were prematurely cut off, and left no progeny on earth.
Now if these events are under the government of the
voluntary powers of the Creator, would he not, I ask,
be arrested in the execution of his voluntary will, and
would not his designs fail of being accomplished ? The
conclusion "is absolutely irresistible, for how can we
judge of designs only as we see the adaptation of
means to ends 1 If an eye and ear are formed, and
adapted to light and sound, does not this prove the
will and design of God, that the one shall see, and the
other shall hear 1 It does. If then the infant pre-
maturely dies and never sees an object, nor hears a
sound, are not those two brgans formed in vain, and
are not the design and will of the Creator both frus-
trated 1 If the girl that died at ten years of age, and
never bore nor nursed children — if it is admitted that
she did not answer the full measure and end of her ex-
istence, in common with her sex, is not then the will
of God rendered abortive, and do not his designs in
this case fail 1 It must be so, if the government of


LECTURE VI.


115


the world is under the voluntary powers of the Infinite

Mind.

That this part of my subject may be understood,
and its consistency clearly seen, I will endeavor to pre-
sent it before you in a very plain and simple form. I
will take for illustration the human mind in connection
with this body. We have two distinct brains — the
cerebrum, with its two hemispheres and six lobes, com-
mencing at the frontal part of the skull, and occupying
the greater portion of the cavity ; and the cerebellum,
which occupies the back portion of the skull. The
spinal marrow, extending through the vertebrae to the
bottom of the trunk, is but the continuation of these
two brains. From the spinal marrow branch out, as I
have before stated, thirty-two pairs of nerves, em-
bracing both the nerves of motion and those of sensa-
tion. From these again branch out others, and in
thousands of ramifications carry out the full power of
both brains into every part of the system.

The cerebrum is the great fountain of the voluntary
nerves, through which the voluntary powers of the
mind ever act. The cerebellum is the fountain of the
involuntary nerves, through which the involuntary
powers of the mind ever act. Though the voluntary
and involuntary nerves from these two brains seem to
blend in the spinal marrow, yet they preserve their
distinct character, even to their final termination in
• the system, and execute the functions appertaining to


116 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY:

their own office in producing voluntary and involuntary
motion. Such is the residence of the living mind,
which seems to hold its throne in the medulla ob-
longata, at 'the fountain-head of the voluntary and in-
voluntary nerves. From thence my mind, by its voli-
tions, controls all the voluntary motions of* my body,
through the cerebrum. At will I move my hands in
any possible direction I please to handle substances,
and at will I move my feet to walk.

But over the throbbings of my heart, the ultimate
heaving of my lungs, the circulation of my blood, and
the digestion of food by the stomach, I have no volun-
tary control. Awake, asleep, at home, abroad, the
heart continues its motions, and the functions of life
are executed, whether I will it or not. These then
receive their motions from the involuntary powers of
my mind, acting through the cerebellum. That these
are all moved by mind is certain — because, take the
mind or spirit from the body, and all motions, whether
voluntary or involuntary, instantly cease.

I will now make an application of this to the Infi-
nite Mind, in creating and governing the universe. If,
for instance, you make machinery of various kinds,
these are your own creations, for they are made by
the voluntary powers of your mind. If you cultivate
the earth, and raise grain and the various vegetables,
to sustain your existence, these again are your own
creations, for they are produced by your voluntary •


LECTURE VI. 117

powers. You prepare them, by various processes, for
your use — you cook and place them on the table. You
eat them, and thus far they are under your voluntary
action. But the moment they are eaten, your crea-
tions are finished, and the whole, naturally and of
philosophical necessity, passes beyond your direct voli-
tion, and is subjected to the involuntary powers of
your mind. These now take charge of this new crea-
tion, and govern it in all its involuntary motions and
revolutions, according to the fixed laws of the organ-
ized system.

In like manner the voluntary powers of Deity are
unchangeably employed in planning, arranging, and
creating new worlds, and systems of worlds, and peo-
pling them with inhabitants. When the whole of any
such system is finished, and all its laws established for
the rolling of worlds, and for the operations of the
mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms, the whole
naturally passes, according to the principles of philo-
sophical necessity, from the action and control of his
voluntary, miraculous power, and submits itself to be
governed through the fixed laws of the universe, by the
involuntary powers of the same Infinite Mind. As
the bare presence of the human mind in the brain
causes the heart to throb and the functions of life to
proceed, even when that mind is wrapped in sleep so
profound, that not a thought is stirring in its voluntary
department, so the bare presence and majesty of the


118 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Infinite Mind, even if he should not exercise a thought,
would cause all worlds to roll through immensity, and
cause all the operations of nature in the mineral, vege-
table, and animal kingdoms to proceed on in their
ceaseless changes ; for these are under the control of
the involuntary powers of the Deity, acting through
the laws of the universe.


LECTURE VII. H9


LECTURE VII.

i
Ladies and Gentlemen :

In my last Lecture the momentous question was
presented for our consideration — Where is the starting
point of all motion and power, whether voluntary or
involuntary, in both nature and man 1 The transcend-
ent importance of this question clothes it with the elo-
quence of its own splendor. I have humbly endea-
vored to answer it by showing that all motion and
power originate in mind. And surely the idea that
mind possesses the attribute of innate motion and liv-
ing power, is both majestic and sublime. I have
shown that mind has two grand forces. I mean its
voluntary and involuntary powers, by which the world
was created and is governed. I have proved the exist-
ence of the Infinite Mind from motion and the absolute
perfection of material existences. I have shown that
mind must be some substance, and not the result of
organism, nor an absolute immateriality, which is but
a nonentity.

I am well aware that thought, reason, and under-
standing are considered to be mind, and that these are


120 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

immaterial. But they are not mind, as I have clearly
proved in my Lectures on the Philosophy of Mesmer-
ism. Thought and reason are but the results of mind.
What is it that thinks and reasons ? It is the mind.
Then mind is something distinct from these mental
operations, which are only its effects. When the vol-
untary powers of the mind are stilled in sleep, reason
and thought are gone. Hence if these are mind, then
the mind is annihilated in sleep. But if we admit
mind to be a substance, a living and spiritually organ-
ized being, then all is plain. Sleep stops its motion,
and thought is gone. Remove that pressure, and re-
lease the mind, and instantly it resumes its inherent
motion, and the result of that motion is thought and
power. On this point I add no more, but refer you to
my Lectures on Mesmerism to learn my views more
fully.

I now turn your attention to the subject of creation.
Entering upon this, I feel the incompetency of my fee-
ble powers to do it justice. Like a drop to an ocean,
or an atom to a universe, any possible representation
of the intrinsic grandeur of this subject must fall so
far short of its reality, as to render any attempt at an
adequate description the unpardonable presumption of
impotent folly. Yet, as we are endowed with reason,
and as the inspiration of the Almighty hath given us
understanding, so we are bound, by the very laws of
our being, to extend our researches to the utmost


LECTURE VII. 121

verge of our mental capacity. He who would curb the
human intellect and say this or that is a subject with
which we have no right to meddle, and into which we
have no right to inquire, is not only recreant to duty
as an intellectual and moral being, but betrays his own
ignorance, and proves himself a scientific bigot. Give
the mind full scope and sea-room — let it feel the deep
stirrings of its own powers, and soar, if it can, into
the light of eternity, and survey the very throne of
God, and him who sitteth thereon ; and, if possible,
let it scan the secret energies of his creating fiat, and
even examine the raw material out of which worlds
were manufactured.

It -is the most commonly received opinion in the
Christian world, that God made all things out of no-
thing. It is true the inspired book does not say, or
even hint this. It simply says — " In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth ;" but it does
not add the words — out of nothing. It is absolutely
and philosophically impossible, in the very nature and
constitution of things, that something can be made out
of nothing. It implies, at the same time, a contradic-
tion in terms. We cannot form even a notion in our
imaginations how much of nothing it would take to
make the least imaginable something. I am speaking
of nothing in the strictest sense of the word. But
using the word nothing in its common acceptation, we
can easily perceive how all things could have been


122 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

made out of nothing. When all visible objects arc
removed from a room, we say there is nothing in it —
it is empty. Yet -we know that it is filled with air,
because we continue to breathe. But if the air, by a
force-pump, were removed from an air-tight room, we
might, with much more propriety, say there is nothing
in it ; yet electricity would be there. If solid sub-
stances were therefore made out of air, in an empty
room, we could say that they were made out of nothing,
for the room, according to the usual mode of expression,
had nothing in it. But admitting the air to have been
extracted" from the room, and nothing but electricity
left, and if solid substances were produced from this
ethereal and invisible fluid, we could with much 'more
apparent consistency say, that they were made out. of
nothing. In this sense, I grant that all things were
made out of nothing. Paul says — " The things that
are seen were not made of things that do appear."
Here he plainly states, that the substances seen were
made of invisible substances, or such as did not ap-
pear — for by things he only means substances.

If, however, it be said, to create must mean to bring
into existence something from nothing, I have only to
say, that this is not so ; for it says, " God created man
out of the dust of the earth." Here he created him
out of something — it was out of dust, and yet it was
creation. The Hebrew word rendered create, more
strictly means to gather together by concretion, or to


LECTURE VII. 123

form by consolidation — but never can it mean to bring
something into existence from absolutely and positively
nothing. I therefore contend that all tilings were
made out of electricity, which is not only an invisible
and imponderable substance, but is primeval and eter-
nal matter. It contains the invisible and impondera-
ble properties of all things in being. That this i3
electricity is certain, because there is no other sub-
stance with which the Infinite Mind could have come
in direct contact, so as to have produced by his creat-
ing power the solid and visible substances that compose
the globe. It is, as I have already proved, in my third
and fourth Lectures, philosophically impossible for mind
to come in direct contact with any substance in nature
except electricity. Hence electricity contains the ele-
mentary principles of all things in being, and contains
them in their original, invisible, and imponderable
state.

There must be something eternal. God, duration,
and space exist of philosophical necessity, and that
space was eternally filled with primeval matter. When
I say that they exist of necessity, I mean that the con-
trary of space and duration cannot possibly be con-
ceived. If infinite space were filled with an infinite
globe, it would be space filled. If that globe were
struck out of existence, it would be space empty. Fill-
ed or empty, it would still be space. As space exists
of necessity,^ is absolutely and positively eternal, and


124 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

hence could never have been created nor changed. The
same is true in relation to duration. Duration must
have rolled on, even if there had been no revolutions
of suns and worlds to mark its periods. The contrary
cannot possibly be conceived. Hence duration and
space both exist of philosophical necessity, and are ab-
solutely eternal. Endless duration is the age of Jeho-
vah, and space is the empire in which he dwells and
reigns. This space was eternally filled with mind and
invisible matter in its original state. They both exist
of philosophical necessity.

Hence matter is eternal, because if there ever had
been a period when there was nothing in existence as it
regards matter, then nothing would now have been, for
nothing cannot create itself into something. The same
is true in relation to mind. If there ever had been a
period when there was no mind in existence, then no
mind could now have been, for mind could not have
created itself, as this would be admitting mind to have
acted before it .existed. Hence mind and primeval
matter are both coexistent and coeternal. Indeed, the
one could not exist without the other, because that
electricity, which is original and eternal matter, is the
body of God. All other bodies are therefore emana-
tions from his body, and all other spirits are emana-
tions from his spirit. Hence all things are of God.
He has poured himself throughout all his works. He
has poured spirit from spirit's awful fountain, and kin-


LECTURE VII. 125

lied into existence a world of rationais, >jl :rus prin-
ciple it will oe seen, that the Eternal Mind is not ab-
solutely omnipresent, while his electrical body is, be-
cause it pervades immensity of space. Mind must be
enthroned, and not diffused over the whole body. And
as the mind of Jehovah actuates his body, so he pro-
duces impressions throughout the boundlessness of
space, and makes himself instantly felt throughout the
immensity of his works, even as the human mind, which
is located in the brain, still makes its presence felt
throughout the body, even to every possible extremity,
and produces the impressions of its existence on others.

Mind or spirit is of itself embodied and living form.
It is spiritual organism in absolute perfection, and from
mind itself all form and beauty emanate. The body
of man is but an outshoot or manifestation of his mind.
If I may be indulged the expression, it is the ultimate
of his mind. Hence every creature in existence has a
body which is the shape of its mind, admitting that the
physical laws of the system were not interrupted in
producing the natural form of the body from mind.
The serpent is all length — is all concentration, and no
wonder that he can charm the bird and other creatures
around him. What a singular mind the lobster must
have, for he has a singular body !

We touch the finger to any substance, and in the fin-
ger we appear to feel it. But this is not so, because
all feeling is in the mind. If we amputate the arm or


126 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

leg, yet the fingers and toes as usual can be felt. For
instance, we move a finger or wield the arm. How is
this done'? I answer this question by saying, that the
mind has its spiritual fingers, arms, limbs, and all its
lineaments of form corresponding to those of the body.
The mind holds its throne in the brain, and possessing
in itself the power of feeling and motion, it merely stirs
its spiritual fingers, or wields its spiritual arm, and
through the electric action of the nerves, which are
laid, like so many telegraphic wires, between the two,
the natural finger and the natural arm are compelled to
make an exactly correspondent motion. This solves
the mystery why the man who has his arm amputated,
even up to the shoulder, yet feels his arm and his fin-
gers as long as he lives, and often feels in them an itch-
ing sensation, or even pain, and that, too, at the same
distance from his body which the fingers and arm occu-
pied before amputation took place. All operations,
convulsions, and motions begin in the unseen substance
of the body, and end in its gross and solid parts.
These are last moved, and last affected. This is not
only so in muscular motion, but throughout nature.

Having the great principles of mind and matter be-
fore us, I will now proceed to notice the creation of
worlds. I have already remarked, that all the chemi-
cal properties of all substances in existence, belonging
to our globe and its surrounding elements, were made
out of electricity. Hence electricity contains all the


LECTURE VII. J27

elementary principles of all things in being. The an-
cients supposed there to be but four elements — namely,
earth, air, fire, and water. It so happens, however,
that heat is no element at all, any more than cold. It
is merely an effect of substances in motion, produced
by their friction. Though the ancients supposed there
to be but four elements, yet as the science of chemistry
advances onward toward perfection, more elements are
detected. I believe that about forty have been already
discovered, yet we have no reason to believe that even
these are all. I will suppose, however, that there are
one hundred elements belonging to this globe. Then
there are one hundred elements in electricity, out of
which this globe was created. We will step back in
our imaginations to that period when this globe, as
such, had no existence. For the sake of perspicuity,
we will suppose one hundred cords to be fastened on
those one hundred elements in electricity. Please to
bear this fact in mind.

Now, as the Eternal Mind can come in direct con-
tact with electricity only, so he exerted his voluntary
powers that constitute his creative energy, and con-
densed those one hundred elements that constitute
electricity, down to a more gross and dense state, each
element sliding down its own cord in its progress toward
creation. Though mind can directly touch nothing but
electricity, yet electricity, as the universal agent under
Deity, can touch all substances in being. The Creator


128 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

again acts, through another volume of electricity a v ;c:;
those one hundred partially condensed elements, and
moves them down a grade farther onward toward their
ultimate, or created state. And thus the work pro-
gresses ; wave successively following wave down its
own cord, till they all become air. Hence air contains
the one hundred elements ; and all the chemical prop-
erties of all things in being are involved in it. And
so the work of creation progresses, under the never-
ceasing action of the Infinite Mind, from whom all mo-
tion and power emanate, till those one hundred elements
are made into water. Hence water contains all the
chemical properties of all things in being. Matter,
from its invisible electric state, has now become visible
in the crystal, volatile, and colorless state called water.
The whole one hundred elements are here in solution ;
and from water, which is the universal solvent of na-
ture, earth, and all mineral and crystalized substances
were made. Boyle has proved, that by transmutation,
as he terms it, nature turns water into earth; and
Bishop Watson, in his "Chemical Essays," admits
the same, and says, " it has never been disproved by
any writer." Boyle should not have said that nature,
by transmutation, does this ; but that the Creator,
by his own power of inherent motion, turns water into
earth. I resume this interesting subject.

The one hundred elements, having reached the lower
extremity of the one hundred cords, have now attained


LECTURE VII. 129

their ultimate created condition and form, and the fin-
ished globe, in all its youth, beauty, and variety, ap-
pears. At the top of those cords are the one hundred
elements in their original electrical state, resting in
their own invisibility ; and as we descend Ave see the
continual change each successive wave passed through,
as the whole one hundred substances were, under the
action of the Creator, gradually approaching their cre-
ated state, till at length they emerged from invisibility
and chaotic night into the light of day, and rendered
the variegated beauties of their created forms visible
to the eye of the beholder.

The globe being finished, it required electricity, the
original substance out of which it Avas made, to be
brought upon it by the Creator, so that his infinite
mind, through this agent, might come in contact with
it, in order to move and govern it, not only in its revo-
lutions by the attractive and repulsive forces, but in
producing all the changes and operations in its mineral,
vegetable, and animal kingdoms. As this great work
is submitted to the involuntary powers of the Infinite
Mind, and as mind cannot come in direct contact with
gross matter, so the beauty and simplicity of the sub-
ject appear in the grandeur of the idea, that electricity,
being uncreated and eternal matter, is the only sub-
stance that mind can touch, and hence is the great
physical agent the Creator employs in the government
of all worlds. The unchanging laws of the universe
B*


130 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

are but the unchanging thoughts of God. Ladies and
gentlemen, I desire you to bear in mind that it re-
quires electricity, the very substance out of which the
globe "was made, to govern it by its positive and nega-
tive forces under the energy of Infinite Power.

As this subject is somewhat intricate, permit me to
be very explicit in making myself understood. When
I say that it requires electricity to govern the globe, I
mean as follows : Electricity, being the uncreated sub-
stance, is the positive force, and the globe, being the
created substance, is the negative force. In the next
place it will be clearly perceived, that all the sub-
stances existing in the globe as so many ultimates,
exist in electricity as so many primates. For in-
stance : If there is gold in the globe, then there is gold
in electricity, out of which it was made. If there is
phosphate of lime in the globe, out of which the shells
of the ocean and bones are formed, then there is phos-
phate of lime in electricity, out of which it was made.
The gold in electricity is in a gaseous and invisible
state, and is the positive force, and the gold in the
globe is in a solid and visible state, and is the nega-
tive force. As the positive and negative forces always
come together, so the gold in electricity entirely con-
trols and mineralizes the gold in the globe, but lets its
ninety-nine kindred elements alone. Each one keeps
its own cord of communication from top to bottom —
from primate to ultimate — from positive to negative.


LECTURE VII. 131

The same is true, not only of the gold, and of the
phosphate of lime, but also of the ninety-eight remain-
ing elements. The whole one hundred elements in
electricity, as the positive forces, are brought to act
upon the one hundred corresponding elements of the
globe, as the negative forces, and thus not only move
it on its axis, and in its revolutions around the sun,
but produce all the changes and operations in these
elementary substances of which the globe is composed.
These ideas of the creation and government of the
world are in reality sublime. And when we reflect
that the Infinite Mind comes in contact with electri-
city, and, through that eternal, invisible agent, governs
all worlds by his involuntary powers, sublimity rises
into infinite magnificence, and overwhelms the soul
with awe !

The sun being pure electricity is, of course, a cold,
invisible body. He is placed, as is supposed, in the
centre of a retinue of worlds composing our planetary
system, and that to these worlds he gives light, heat,
and vegetation. But to my mind it is evident that
there can be no light above our atmosphere which sur-
rounds the globe to the height of about fifty miles. As
electricity travels from the sun to the globe in never-
ceasing streams, so when it strikes the top of our at-
mosphere it becomes faintly visible, and not before.
This is proved by the morning and evening twilight,
when the sun is so far below the eastern hills as to


132 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

strike the very top of our atmosphere, apparent y on
a level with our fields, and affords a feeble light on
account of the thinness of our air at that height. But
as it rises higher, its rays shoot deeper, and the air
growing denser as they approach the earth where we
stand, till they touch it, the friction on the particles
of air is of course greater, and the light and heat are
rendered more intense by this density of atmosphere,
and by their final reflection and reaction from the
globe. Hence could we rise to the top of our atmo-
sphere, the sun would disappear, and we should there
be shrouded in total darkness. Electricity is cold and
invisible, and as it travels from the sun to the globe at
the rate of twelve million miles per minute, so it sets
the particles of the air on fire by the rapidity of its
motion and friction. Such is the philosophy of the
morning and evening twilight, which never has been,
and cannot be explained on any other principle than
the electrical invisibility of our sun, and the absence
of all light above our atmosphere. And electricity,
thrown from the sun to the globe, is the mode em-
ployed by the Creator to bring it to its full growth and
perfection, as a meet habitation for man.

As electricity is, in its one hundred elements, con-
tinually pouring from the sun upon the globe, why does
it not continue to increase it in bulk 1 I reply that it
does, and hence its entire creation, as to its size, vege-
tables, and animals, is not yet perfected, but will be ir.


lecture vrr. 133

future ages. Its distance from the sun, and its exact
relation to surrounding worlds, will then forbid its in-
crease in bulk. The human body, when completely
developed by food and drink, ceases its growth, even
though the same sustenance, both in quality and quan-
tity, is continued. This I will more fully explain, and
hence the cause of the variation of the compass, which
in philosophy yet remains inscrutable, will be made to
appear.

Comets are declared by Newton and others to be
melted globes, and he computed the heat of one to be
several thousand times hotter than that of red-hot iron,
and that it would take a comet the size of this globe,
fifty thousand years to cool to its centre. Comets move
in very elliptical orbits, and are deemed, on this account,
to be very eccentric bodies. The cause of this is, that
while they are chained by the attractive and repulsive
forces to keep a circle, yet as they are propelled in a
straight line, sky-rocket-like, by their own internal
gaseous flames that stream in their course, so their
orbits are elliptical. As they cool, their own internal
force is lessened, and their orbits become more circular,
because there is less trespassing on the attractive and
repulsive forces, which, if left to their own operation,
independent of foreign influences, would move all worlds
in perfect circles. Immensity of space is not square,
for then worlds would move in a square, but it is round,
if I may be indulged in the expression in regard to that


134 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

boundless field, " whose centre is everywhere, and its
circumference nowhere." Electricity, uninfluenced,
always moves in circles.

The globe yet moves in an elliptical orbit, because
its bowels are melted lava, and perhaps not more than
one hundred miles in depth of its crust are as yet cool-
ed. And the two hundred volcanoes now in existence,
are so many spiracles to the subterranean furnace, and
continually throw oft" the gaseous substances generated
in its bosom, and cause it to transgress in some meas-
ure the attractive and repulsive forces that move it.
As it cools, it continually approximates, in its orbit,
nearer to a circle. This will cause the variation of the
compass to continue, till its own internal forces cease
to affect its motion, and allow the law of attraction and
repulsion to move it in a perfect circle around the sun.
And when it shall perform an exact circle in its annual
revolution, it will be perfectly finished as to its size,
and yet the quantity of electricity thrown upon it from
the sun, will be the same as it now is, and ever has
been. But this redundancy will be thrown off at its
north and south poles, and in such increased quantities
as to warm and enlighten those extremities of the globe,
and bring them into the fruitfulness and bloom of the
garden of Eden. Then the variation of the compass
will cease, inasmuch as the cause will be removed that
produces it. The cause of its variation is the elliptical
orbit in which our globe moves, and its continual and


LECTURE VII. 185

unceasing approach to a circle. And when that circle
shall be obtained, the globe will be finished, and the
variation of the compass will disappear.

The globe is yet in its infancy — yes, in the embryo
of its being — and it will require many thousand years
to finish it. And this must be done, because under
the voluntary powers of the Creator, nothing can per-
ish prematurely. Many species of vegetables and ani-
mals now in existence, will become extinct, and disap-
pear from the page of the naturalist, and others of a
more improved and superior character will be awakened
into being. They will be perfectly adapted to the fu-
ture and ultimate perfection that this globe, under the
energies of the Infinite Mind, is destined to attain. Its
creation will then be perfected. The soil upon which
we now stand, will then be some deep stratum in its
crust, containing our present vegetables and animals in
a state of petrifaction. These will be pronounced, by
coming generations, the strange nondescript remains of
past centuries, and afford to the future geologist and
naturalist abundant materials for their loftiest specu-
lations. This subject, in connection with the bound-
lessness of the universe, and the successive creation of
worlds, I should like to pursue to a greater extent, but
lest I weary your patience, I now turn your attention
to the creation of the vegetable and animal species.

As globes were successively produced, so vegetables
and animals were not created at once, but successively


136 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

through a long scries of intervening ages. Does not
the Creator act through the established laws of gene-
ration in producing the human species'? He does.
While I freely admit that God originally produced
man by what we call miracle, yet by miracle I only
mean, that the first human beings were produced with-
out any parent stock from whom they received their
existence through ordinary generation, as we witness
in the p'resent day. And they were evidently pro-
duced full-grown, otherwise they could not have sus-
tained their existence by procuring their own food,
because the infant is helpless. But the miracle by
which existence was thus conferred was not contrary
to the laws of nature, but was effected by the volun-
tary powers of Deity exerted through the laws of
nature. It was thus he established both the vegetable
and animal kingdoms, not simultaneously, but success-
ively and progressively through various ages, from the
lowest vegetable life up to man, who is the glory of
this lower world.

While I contend that the Creator produced the
whole vegetable and animal creation at first, without
any parent stock or the ordinary mode of generation,
yet I would not be understood to say that there were
no germs of life existing as a primordial cause adequate
to the effect produced. But while I contend that there
were, for instance, no acorns, nor other seeds in being,
yet it is evident that the germ necessary to produce an


LECTURE VII. V67

acorn or an oak eternally existed in God. Hence the
Spirit of all life, whether vegetable or animal, even
from the highest reasoning powers, through every link
of the animal chain down to the lowest creature, and
through every link of the vegetable chain, eternally
existed in God, and is absolutely immortal. The
whole of this immense variety combined in Deity con-
stitutes the fullness and perfection of the Eternal
Mind. Hence the lowest animal or vegetable life is
but a part of the lowest life in God's spirit, which is
the correspondent germ from whence it emanated.
And the matter that forms the visible substance of
all animal and vegetable bodies eternally existed
in electricity, which is the original, invisible, and im-
mortal condition of inert matter, and constitutes the
body of God. Hence God and electricity are both
immortal and eternal. From electricity, which is the
invisible body of God, have emanated all the visible
substances that constitute globes, and from the full-
ness of his spirit have emanated all life, form, and
motion. And as all organism exists in spirit, so each
animal and vegetable have developed a physical body
corresponding in form to the germ of life they received
from the inexhaustible fountain of the Infinite Mind.

If God does not create through the laws of nature, but
by miracle, in the arbitrary sense it is generally under-
stood by Christians, he would in this case have finished
the globe before he produced the vegetable and animal


138 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

kingdoms, and then moved them both into existence at
the same time. But he can not, from the very nature
of his perfections, suspend the production of life while
forming a globe of dead matter, because he pours forth
simultaneously and unchangeably all his perfections
which are transmitted through correspondent laws for
the production of life, so far as a globe may be finish-
ed. And as this globe was progressively forming
through successive ages, and one elementary depart-
ment finished before another, so the successive creation
of plants and animals, as geology proves, is easily and
rationally accounted for.

God could not create a fish until there was water
adapted to its existence. And the moment the water
was perfected, it stood in a philosophical aptitude to
the marine laws of the universe, and through these
emanated from the Creator that portion only of his
spirit which stood in aptitude to the aqueous depart-
ment, and this spirit became the living germ or life of
that fish, and produced its body through the positive
and negative forces of electric action. Hence the body
of this fish was but the developed and visible shape of
its mind. But as the water was progressively created,
and for many ages covered the earth before dry land
appeared, therefore, while in its turbid and unfinished
state, many of the inferior species, from the lowest
life up to shell-fish, and from thence up through every
grade, exits ted before the most highly organized and


LECTURE VII. 139

perfect fish was created. And each of these grades,
in like manner, through the laws of nature received
. their life from the infinite fountain of spirit, which be-
came the germ of their being. The various shapes of
their organic structures were but visible manifestations
of the various shapes of their minds, and the most
perfectly organized fish in the ocean involves in his
body the organism of all below him, and his intelligence
is equal in amount to the intelligence in all.

It is evident that vegetables, in some form, must
have preceded animals, for an animal is but a vegeta-
ble of the second growth. May there not be a marine
vegetation of as great variety and abundance in the
caverned vales of the ocean as there is on earth 1 Of
this, however, we are certain, that terrestrial plants
and trees could not have been created till the dry land
appeared, because the Deity does not create by any
arbitrary mode of procedure, but through the immuta-
ble laws of nature. As soon as the dry land stood in
a philosophical aptitude to the laws of the universe,
and as the Spirit of the Creator gives out, like the sun,
its unchangeable and never-ceasing emanations, so it
communicated a portion of itself as the germinating
principle of life, and vegetation appeared, commencing
at the humblest and most imperfect formation of plants,
and rising higher and still higher in the beauty of or-
ganic perfection, till the noblest fruit-trees and most
powerful sons of the forest stood erect, and the finest


140 ELECTRICAL, PSYCHOLOGY.

organized plants and most beautiful flowers graced
creation , and vobe<i the new-born earth in smiles.

As each of these vegetable tribes rose in succession,
one above another with increasing splendor, so each
superior tribe involved in its own perfection the per-
fection and organism of all below it. For instance,
the first species of plants on the yet marshy earth was
ordinary ; the second, more perfect, retained its own,
and involved all contained in the first ; the third, still
advancing, retained its own perfection, and involved all
contained in the one below it ; the fourth makes its
appearance one grade higher, and involves all the or-
ganic perfections of the three below it. And should
we be able, in this vast range, to find the thousandth
different species, that thousandth one would retain its
own, and involve all the complicated beauties of or-
ganic structure and life contained in the 999 below it ;
because, as the form of the earth, in its progressive
creation, became more and more perfect and dense,
each rising vegetable species, standing in a full and
exact aptitude to all the laws of nature then in action,
so far as the globe was finished, would avail itself of
all the life from the Creator which thus far acted
through, and filled these laws.

It was the same, as we have already noticed, with
all animal life in the ocean. Each higher involved in
itself the perfections of all below it. It was the
same with all animated beings in earth and air. The


LECTURE VII. 1-il

amphibious animal is, of course, the connecting link
between the aqueous and terrestrial race. From the
humblest land animal up to man, the same grand law
obtains. Each higher involves in its constitution the
perfections of all below it, even up to man. When
the earth was finished, man was produced. And all
the laws' of nature in relation to this globe being in
action, so in man's organism was involved the organ-
ism of the whole animal and vegetable creation, and in
his spirit was involved the spirit of all life and intelli-
gence in universal nature below him. And, standing
in a complete relationship to the finished globe and all
its perfect laws, he, of course, drank in a portion of
all the perfections contained in the Infinite Spirit, and
hence he was strictly in the image of God. Man is,
therefore, in every sense, a perfect and grand epitome
of the universe. As he is in the image of his God, he
stands at the fountain-head of creation, and drinks in
all the powers of 'universal nature, and is sustained by
being fed with a due portion of both spiritual and
physical sustenance. His mind is fed and developed
with impressions as his body is with food.

God is a spirit, and in his spirit are involved all
life, all form, and the germinating principle of all ani-
mal and vegetable spirit. And in his body, which is
electricity, are involved the invisible and ethereal sub-
stances of all inert matter, out of which all globes and
the bodies of all creatures were produced. In God is,


142 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

therefore, involved the invisible and primal essence of
all matter and spirit existing in all globes and their
inhabitants.

But, after all, what is spirit? It is that sub-
stance which possesses self-motion, intelligence, sen-
sation, and power. Spirit is a union of two grand
forces. The first is voluntary ; the second is involun-
tary. The first is the grand magazine in which are
stored up all the voluntary powers of Infinite Intelli-
gence. All the schemes, plans, and arrangements that
appertain to all worlds and their countless inhabitants
are there. The second contains all the involuntary
powers of the Infinite Mind by which all worlds and
their inhabitants, after having been created, are con-
trolled through the fixed laws of nature. The first
plans, arranges, and creates through the laws of its
own omniscient being, which become the laws of the
universe ; and the second controls, moves, and gov-
erns all worlds and their inhabitants through the fixed
laws of nature. The first is the positive force ; the
second is the negative force. The first is male ; the
second is female. Hence of the male and female we
may say, that the one begins in the voluntary, and the
other in the involuntary power of the Infinite Spirit.
They both run through every department of the uni-
verse, and thread universal nature.

There arc likewise two electricities, called the posi-
tive and negative. The positive' is male, the negative


LECTURE VII. 143

is female. The male electricity belongs to the heav-
ens ; the female electricity belongs to the earth. The
male and female also extend through every possible
link of the immense vegetable chain, as well as through
every link of the animal chain, and retain their sepa-
rate existence and equal powers in the positive and
negative electricities, which are the primeval, eternal,
and invisible efficients of all visible matter.

Nature, as a whole, is one entire and absolute per-
fection, and stands in this beautiful relationship to the
Creator, from whom she emanated. All the objects
of creation, upon which we gaze with so much admira-
tion — all the diversified glories of the landscape — the
mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms, taken in one
grand whole — are an exact and visible impression of
the eternal perfections of his own character and in-
visible being, even as the stamp impresses the wax
and leaves its perfect image. Nature is the visible
daguerreotype shadow of his own invisible being. She
is the offspring of God. The poet breathes out,

" Man, bear thy brow aloft ! view every grace
In God's great offspring, beauteous Nature's face."

Creation is therefore no arbitrary act in God, but, like
the ever-streaming rays of light from the sun, it is the
natural result, the visible emanation and outshoot of
his own invisible existence, and was progressively cre-
ated through the laws of the universe, and as soon as
that part of the gloKe in which life was to be produced


144 ELECTRICAL, PSYCHOLOGY.

stood in a finished relationship to those laws. Hence
the laws of nature are but the result of the unchanging
thoughts of God. One part of the globe was finished
before another, and the creation of life, both vegetable
and animal, was in like manner progressive, from the
lowest grade and most imperfect organism, step by step,
up to man, who is the perfection of all, and is in the
image of God.

In this view of our subject it will be perceived that
spirit is a substance eternal in its nature, and not the
result of an organized brain, and that man has not re-
ceived his existence by climbing gradually from the
lowest link of the vegetable or animal chain up to his
present perfection and grandeur. He was never in his
creation a vegetable, or even a lower animal ; was never
a mushroom or a plant, a tadpole or a horse, as some
writers contend. His existence was never ingermed and
involved in any one or all of the six grand links of the
living chain below him, which naturalists divide into the
vegetable, the pisces, the saurian, the aves, the mar-
supial, and mammalia kingdoms, making man the
seventh link. Throwing aside the useless technicalities
of foreign language, these seven links of the living chain
embraced in the seven grand- kingdoms of nature can
be expressed in plain English. Their rising order is as
follows : First — The vegetable kingdom. Secostd —
The fish kingdom. Third — The reptile kingdom, em-
bracing lizards, turtles, crocodiles, etc. Fourth — The


LECTURE VII. 145

bird kingdom. Fifth — The pouch kingdom, embrac-
ing all who protect their young by carrying them in
pouches. Sixth — The breast kingdom, or those that
suckle their young ; and Seventh — Man.

It will also be perceived, in view of my position, that
gross, inert matter cannot be transmuted into mind —
cannot possibly secrete mind — nor can it, in any sense
whatever, become spirit through any refining process,
as is contended for by some. In this case it must have
•preceded God, and hence on this principle God is not
eternal. In the face of this theory, there must have
been a period when there was nothing but inert matter
in being, and if all motion originates in mind, how then
was dead matter set in motion so as to produce spirit or
mind through a successive series of elementary trans-
mutations 1

The same is in like manner equally true of each and
every link of the animal chain below man. The monkey
was never a bird nor a fish, and the horse was never a
snake nor an oyster. The horse-kind, for instance,
however much they may have been improved by amalga-
mation, have ever retained their circle, and have never
broken from their link in the chain, and emerged into any
other link above them. The same remarks are equally
applicable to the vegetable chain. The rose-bush can
never become an oak, nor the oak a peach-tree. The
family involved in each link, however much they may
be improved by amalgamation or culture, can never


146 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

break their circle, nor emerge into another link above
them. The individual life of every link of the whole
animal and vegetable chain is an emanation from the
Infinite Mind, and each acting through its correspondent
law, and through that elementary department of the
globe to which this law is unerringly adapted, has man-
ifested its own invisible form in the visible body it pro-
duced. What the life of the seed is to the production
and shape of the plant, the mind of each creature is to
the production and shape of its body. Hence the brain
does not produce mind, as the atheist contends, but
mind was the original germ that produced and developed
the brain. All vegetable life, as well as animal, is^
therefore a species of mind. They are both emanations
from the Creator, are both immortal, and will retain
their separate existence and identity without end.

Substances, in their infinite variety, pay a visit to
time, assume visible forms, so as to manifest their in-
trinsic beauties for a moment to the eye of the beholder,
and then step back into eternity, and reassume their
native invisibility in their own immortality. As man
is now constituted, were there but one object presented
for his contemplation, the mind would soon become
wearied and disgusted with sameness. But the infinite
variety and beauty of the animal and vegetable creation
here presented by the Deity, open to the mind sources
of inexpressible and never-ceasing delight. It seems
irrational, therefore, to conclude that the whole chain


LECTURE VII. 147

of being, which is perfect on earth, will be struck out
of existence (except man, who is the highest link), and
leave a cheerless blank in the realms of glory. For
one, I expect to meet the whole animated chain, and to
witness immortal groves, unwithering plants, and never-
fading flowers in that world where death, and pain, and
change shall be no more.


148 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


LECTURE VIII.

Ladies and Gentlemen :

The query may perhaps now arise in your minds,
What bearing has the subject of the creation of this
globe, and the original materials out of which it was
.made, advanced in the last Lecture, upon the science
of Electrical Psychology 1 The answer to this query
will be fully made to appear in the arguments I have to
offer on the present occasion. I have already stated in
my third Lecture, that man is an epitome of the uni-
verse, and that the chemical properties of all the vari-
ous substances in existence are congregated in him, and
form and constitute the very elements of his being. I
have stated, that in the composition of this body are
involved all the mineral and vegetable substances of
this globe, even from the grossest and heaviest matter
up to the most rarefied and light. And lastly, to finish
this masterpiece of creation, I stated that the brain
was invested with a living spirit, that, like an enthroned
deity, presides over, and governs, through electricity
as its agent, all the voluntary motions of this little, or-
ganized, corporeal universe ; while its living presence,


LECTURE VIII. 140

and involuntary self-moving powers, cause all the invol-
untary functions of life to proceed in their destined
course. Hence human beings, and all animated exist-
ences, are subject to the same common electrical law
that pervades the universe, and moves all worlds under
the superintendence of the involuntary powers of the
Infinite Spirit.

That all substances are incorporated in the body of
man is irresistibly true, otherwise he could not inure
himself to all, even to the most deadly poisons, and ren-
der them, in a good degree, harmless in his system.
He may so accustom himself to the use of tobacco,
rum, or even opium, that he can take into the stomach
a quantity sufficient to produce the death of several
individuals, while he himself will experience from it
but a slight effect. He may even commence the use
of arsenic in small quantities, gradually increasing the
dose, till he gets incorporated into his system a suffi-
cient quantity to kill, for instance, five men. As in
this case it forms a part of his body, so it causes a
longing for it in proportion to the quantity in the sys-
tem. Should he now take a portion sufficient to kill
five men, it would only produce a balance of power
with that already in his system. It would meet the
demand. This is habitude. But should he take one
portion more, sufficient to kill any other man, he would
die. Now it would be impossible for a man to inure
himself to any such substances, unless there were some


150 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

small particle in the composition of his body on which
to build. Hence it is philosophically true, that man is
an epitome of the universe, and that all the elements,
in exact proportions, are most skillfully combined in
his system, by the hand of the Creator ; and these pro-
portions should never be disturbed and thrown out of
balance by dissipation.

Having these facts distinctly before us, I would now
state, that if there are one hundred elements in the
globe which was made out of the same number in elec-
tricity, then there are one hundred in the composition
of man's body, for he is but an epitome of the universe.
As his body was created out of the dust of the earth,
and is but a vegetable of the second growth, so it is the
same as though it had been originally made out of elec-
tricity. And as the globe, after its creation, required
electricity, the original substance from whence, under
Deity, it sprung, to move, control, and govern it, so,
after man was organized, and his brain invested with a
living spirit, it required electricity, the primeval sub-
stance out of which he was made, to be inhaled with
the air into his lungs, and carried to every part of his
system, and by which, under the impulse of mind, it
must be moved, controlled, and governed by the posi-
tive and negative forces that move all worlds. You
now perceive what connection Electrical Psychology has
with the creation of our globe. It is a science that in-


LECTURE VIII.


151


volvcs the electrical theory of the universe, and all the
multifarious operations of nature.

We know not, as yet, how many elements there may
be in existence. I desire it, however, to be distinctly
borne in mind, that if there are one hundred in elec-
tricity, which is primal and eternal matter, then there
are one hundred in the globe, one hundred in the vege-
tables that the globe produces, and one hundred in the
human body, which is sustained by, and, therefore,
made up of vegetables. The stomach is the great
workshop of the system, to manufacture new materials
to supply the demand occasioned by its constant wastes.
The food and water taken into the stomach contain the
one hundred elements to meet the supply of the one
hundred that are contained in the composition of the
body. Electricity, containing also one hundred, is in-
spired by the lungs, communicated to the blood, from
the blood to the nerves, and conducted to the brain,
and there laid up for the use of the mind, as I have
explained in my third Lecture. This electricity is
sent by the involuntary powers of the mind from the
cerebellum through the pneumagastric and other invol-
untary nerves to the stomach, to produce digestion.
The one hundred elements in electricity meet the one
hundred corresponding elements in the food, and con-
vert the whole mass into one homogeneous chyle. This
is done by the positive and negative forces, without the
least confusion or interference of one element with its


152 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY .

kindred elements. The nutritious parts of this chyle
are taken up by the absorbents, and, in the form of se-
rum, are thrown into the circulating system, and trans-
muted into blood. The bloo'd is the universal solvent
of the system, containing, in solution, all the chemical
properties that are to constitute the body, even from
its finest particles down to the solid bones — the same
as water is the universal solvent of nature, out of
which all the constituent principles of this globe are
formed, through electrical action.

The finest particles of the blood are taken up, and,
by the positive and negative forces of electricity, are
transmuted into flesh, tendons, bones, and all the sub-
stances that constitute the animal economy, and by the
same forces the old particles of the body are thrown
off, to mingle again with those of the globe. When I
say that all this is effected by the one hundred electri-
cal elements, each acting upon its own element in the
food, without interfering with any of its ninety-nine
kindred elements, I desire to be distinctly understood.
In order to express clearly so intricate an idea, I will
take one of these elements, and carry it through in all
its principal bearings.

Phosphate of lime is the substance that forms our
bones. It may not be a simple element, but in ordei
to convey my ideas on this point, I will consider it so.
As our bones are continually wasting away, so this
waste must be supplied ; and as they are often frac-


LECTURE VIII. 153

tured, so they require new partioies to reunite them
by ossification. Hence there must be phosphate of
lime in our food as well as in electricity. This is cer-
tain, because that hard, bony-like substance collected
on the teeth in the act of mastication, is from the phos-
phate of lime in oar food and water. Having these
facts before us, I now turn to the point under consid-
eration, and ask your undivided attention.

The food is taken into the stomach. The phosphate
of lime in electricity being the positive force, moves
from the brain — from the cerebellum — through the in-
voluntary nerves to the stomach. It takes hold of the
phosphate of lime in the food, which is the negative
force, and leaves the other ninety-nine elements of the
food unmolested. This is perfectly philosophical, for
the positive and negative invariably rush together. It
converts this phosphate of lime into chyle, and takes it
up through the absorbents, and transmutes it into se-
rum and blood. This phosphate of lime from the food
now forms a constituent part of the blood. In the next
place, the phosphate of lime in electricity takes hold of
the phosphate of lime in the blood, and moves it on
through all its destined avenues till it reaches the liver,
which, while it secretes the bile, seems to act as the
bolter of the system, to separate these one hundred ele-
ments to be distributed to their destined, correspondent
parts of the body. The phosphate of lime in electricity
extracts the like substance from the blood at the liver,


154 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

conveys it to the various bones of the body, transmutes
it into an osseous substance, and lays it down, particlo
after particle, and thus forms anew the solid frame-
work of the system, while the dregs are passed off
through the urinary secretions. But before it lays
down the new, it removes the old particle by its re-
pulsive force, and compels it to fly off by insensible per-
spiration. Fully sensible that I am now understood in
reference to the operation of this one element, I am
satisfied that you understand me also in relation to the
operations of the other ninety-and-nine, in carrying on
the work of digestion to keep up the repairs of the
body.

These ideas, though somewhat intricate, are never-
theless interesting and sublime, as they unfold the
relation in which man stands to the globe, to surround-
ing worlds and his Creator, as an epitome of the uni-
verse. If their novelty produce surprise in any breast,
yet this is no reason that they should awaken resent-
ment, or kindle indignation against the speaker. .We
are finite beings, can know but little, and we should
ever be ready and willing to freely express our
thoughts reciprocally to each other, independent of the
opposition of men. By this mutual interchange of sen-
timent and feeling we should increase in knowledge,
and grow wiser a'hd better. Indeed, we need not go,
in our contemplations, out of ourselves to learn the
great principles and operations of both mind and mat-


LECTURE VIII. 155

ter, of God and his works. As it regards human
research, the words of the poet are unchangeably true,
and must stand unshaken when thrones and kingdoms
fall. He immortalized his verse when he breathed out,

" The proper study of mankind is man."

I now turn to another department of my subject,
equally interesting. I mean the Doctrine of Im-
pressions, by which both nature and man are thrown
out of balance, made sick and cured. In this also we
shall see the relation between man and nature.

The philosophy of disease I have briefly, but faith-
fully argued in my fourth Lecture, and shown how
it may be produced by both mental and physical im-
pressions. Hence there is no occasion that I should
weary your attention by ranging that field of pestilence
and death. I shall confine my observations principally
to nature, and even in these I shall be brief. The
law of equilibrium is the grand central law of the
universe. It holds over nature the reins of govern-
ment, and allows her, in her operations and changes,
to stray, but not too far, from the central track. She
may rise above, or fall below this law, but to its man-
date she must ever bow, and at stated periods resume
her medium course.

Electricity, being a universal agent, produces all the
phenomena and changes that transpire in our globe
and its surrounding elements. By heat, which is an


156 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

electrical effect, the air is rarefied and water is evapo-
rated. When the rarefication of the air is carried to
an extreme, then that portion of the earth and its in-
habitants suffer. Nature is diseased, and the denser
portion of the atmosphere is, at length, aroused from
its slumberings and armed with force. The sweeping
hurricane rushes, or the dreadful tornado roars in its
awful movement to fill up, and rescue that rarefied and
diseased portion of the air, and continues its force till
an equilibrium is attained in her aerial realms. At
this point all action ceases, and nature is well. She
was cured by her own impressions.

In like manner evaporation may continue till the
air is filled, in its upper regions, with vapors. As
electricity has a strong affinity for moisture, it leaves
the drier portions of the atmosphere near the earth,
and ascends to the moist and vapory regions above.
By this process electricity is thrown out of balance.
The man who has had a broken bone, even years ago,
or who is subject to rheumatism, will feel an inconve-
nience in that spot, or in his system, as harbingers of
the approaching storm. The cause of this is, that he
does not inspire as much electricity as usual with the
air into the lungs, and feels the inconvenience. And
the storm will surely burst, if there are no upper cur-
rents of air to disperse the vapor. The electricity
being thrown out of balance condenses the vapors into
thick clouds by its coldness, and thus darkens the


LECTDRE VIII. 1,")7

heavens. The lightnings flash, the thunders roll, the
rains descend, and the war of elements will continue
till that subtile fluid is equally dispersed throughout
the atmosphere. Nature having gained her equili-
brium, in her electrical realms, is at rest. By these
awful impressions of her voice she is cured. Here it
is distinctly perceived that electricity is a cold body,
because it condenses the storm, and when its quantity
is sufficiently great it produces hail, even in the warm-
est weather in our southern climates. In these few
ideas we see also the philosophy of storms.

Even the globe may be sick. She may have a bowel
complaint. By the confined air and continually gen-
erating gases in the lava contained in her bowels she
is thrown out of balance. The earthquake awakes
from slumber, and springs from its dreadful couch.
It starts to discharge its force at the nearest volcano.
In its fearful march it sounds its rumbling thunders
and convulses the globe. Flames start up through
fissures of the opening earth, and from the bottom of
the ocean burning islands arise ! Volcanoes bellow
and disembogue. Their lava overwhelms devoted cit-
ies, and their shock hurls others in crumbling ruins !
A reaction takes place, an equilibrium is produced in #
her subterranean realms, and she is well. By these
awful impressions of her own power she is cured.

I might extend my observations to every visible de-
partment of nature, and notice her more minute opera-


158 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

tions, but these few remarks, in reference to her most
stupendous and obvious convulsions, are sufficient to
give you my ideas how she becomes diseased by being
thrown out of her equilibrium, and how she is cured
by the inherent force of her own impressions. As
man, then, is an epitome of the universe, the full force
of my arguments on the philosophy of disease and the
rationale of its cure, advanced in my fourth and
fifth Lectures, will be clearly seen, and the rela-
tion in which man stands to the universe will be more
distinctly understood.

As I am now on the doctrine of impressions, I take
the liberty to say, that we should endeavor, at all times,
to keep ourselves positive to the surrounding impres-
sions of nature. We take disease much more easily to
fall asleep in an unhealthy spot than to keep awake.
While traveling in stages through some low, damp, and
unhealthy places in the southern states, and where the
mail stage runs both night and day, the traveler unused
to that climate should be careful to take short naps
during the day, so as not to fall asleep in the night
stage. It renders him passive and negative to the sur-
rounding impressions of nature, when she receives no
salutary influence from the beams of the sun. These
impressions become the positive force, and the electri-
city of the air inspired" by the lungs enters the system,
disturbs the nervous force and the circulation, throws
the whole out of balance, and disease ensues.


LECTURE VIII. 159

A citizen of Charleston, South Carolina, may ride
out, in warm weather, three or four miles into the
country, and, returning the same day, will experience
no inconvenience from the change. But should he re-
main over night and sleep there, he would, in all prob-
ability, have an attack of what is there called " the
country fever ■," and in a few hours he might be a
corpse, as it is considered to be even more fatal than
the yellow fever. On the contrary, a person from the
country visiting Charleston and returning the same day,
receives no harm. But should he remain over night,
and sleep there, the same mournful results might ensue.
My views on the philosophy of becoming acclimated,
in my sixth Lecture, will throw some light on this
point. And when we reflect that a person, while awake,
is active and positive to surrounding impressions, we
can easily perceive that he resists them, and conse-
quently avoids disease.

In view of the above, it will be readily perceived
why one person, even in the wakeful state, will take
disease much more easily than another. Those who
are firm in mind as a rock, are immovably calm, and
have no fear of disease, even when some startling mala-
dy visits their neighborhood. These will not take it,
even if they visit the bedside of the sick. This de-
termined action of their minds throws a constant and
powerful current of the electro-nervous force from their
brains and systems, keeps them positive to surrounding


160 ELECTRICAL J SYCHOLOGY.

impressions, md enables them to resist their force.
But those who are in constant fear of some disease,
who arc always complaining of their feelings, pains,
and aches, keep themselves constantly unwell by thus
concentrating their thoughts upon their own systems,
and watching each movement. When fever or cholera
visits their neighborhood, these are the very persons
who are in danger of an attack. Even fleeing to an-
other section will not save them, unless this circum-
stance should be the means of changing their thoughts
and removing their fears. The difficulty is, that fear,
as Dr. Mason Good remarks, depresses the vital energy
of the muscles, and slackens the motions of life. It
causes the mind to shrink back on itself, and to render
the system negative to the surrounding impressions of
the elements, and thus engenders disease. More than
one half the cases of cholera that have occurred during
the past year, owe their existence to the fears and ex-
citements of such persons, who, if they had not heard
that it was in their midst, would not have been afflicted
with it.

The cholera is a sudden collapse of the whole cuti-
cle, occasioned by the electricity of the nerves at the
surface suddenly retiring to the stomach and bowels,
^he pores of the skin being closed, the blood and other
fluids follow the electricity, and retire internally. The
venous circulation is obstructed and weakened, and the
fluids seem to rush to the stomach and bowels, and im-


LECTURE VIII. Ifi1

mensc secreticns ensue. Intense fever and inflamma-
tion in the entire alimentary canal aggravate the other
difficulties, and the storm bursts in fearful terror. The
external and internal parts of the system being thrown
out of balance in their electrical action, and the arterial
and venous circulation having lost their equilibrium, the
most dreadful cramps and convulsions ensue. All that
is necessary to eifect a cure is, to procure a reaction
from the centre to the surface, and thus restore the
usual equili?jrium between the arterial and venous cir-
culation, by equalizing the electricity of the system.

What I have now argued in relation to keeping the
mind positive to surrounding impressions, will account
for the well-known fact, that an individual sitting with
his back to a current of air, while in a state of perspi-
ration, will take cold much sooner than if he faced it.
The causo is obvious. The front part of the brain
contains tl c positive electro-nervous forces, under the
control of tfte voluntary powers of the mind, and the
b#ck part contains the negative electro-nervous forces,
under the control of the involuntary powers of the
mind. As the positive forces, under an absolute voli-
tion of mind, rcoist all external impression, so the fact
is readily seen why they have more power than the neg-
ative forces to resist disease, or any encroachments that
may be made upon the system.

I would now remark, that the science of Electrical
Psychology, being the doctrine of impressions, throw*


162 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

an immense flood of light on the human mind, and its
susceptibility to the most strange and unreasonable im-
pressions in the power of man to conceive. There are
some minds so constituted, that it is absolutely impos-
sible for them to resist the impressions that others may
make upon them. This science unfolds what was con-
sidered an inscrutable mystery in relation to the con-
duct of several individuals who perished in the excite-
ment of the Salem witchcraft. Persons of well-known
character — yes, of a stainless moral reputation — were
executed on their own confession ! They were charged
with being bewitched, and with having bewitched
others. They plead guilty to the charge, firmly be-
lieved it to be true, and, on their own confession, were
sentenced to die, and were cut off from the land of the
living. They were in the psychological state. In my
public experiments, I have taken persons who are
naturally in the psychological state, and have produced
such impressions upon them. I have made them con-
fess that they were bewitched, and that they had rode
on broomsticks through the air to bewitch others, and
deserved to die.

Hundreds of instances have occurred in our world,
where persons have been charged with murder, have
confessed themselves guilty of the deed, and, on that
confession, have been solemnly sentenced to die. And
yet, before the day of execution arrived, the supposed
murdered man was found alive in some distant section,


LECTURE VIII. 163

and hurried- home just in time to save an innocent fel-
low-creature from an ignominious death. Turn to the
criminal calendar, and you will find some most striking
instances of this character, and that, too, in our own
country, and even in New England, the boasted land
of light and morals. All such persons were naturally
in the psychological state, and really believed what
they confessed. How many may have, through such
means, innocently lost their lives, the opening scenes
of eternity alone can disclose. Judges and jurors have
yet to learn that no man should be hung on his own
confession. If he must die, let it be in the face of the
most indubitable evidence, and, even then, let him be
recommended to mercy, for often murder, as well as
suicide, is committed under some strange hallucination
of mind.


1G4 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.


LECTURE IX.

Ladies and Gentlemen :

Much has been advanced in relation to mind and
matter, their various operations, powers, and manifes-
tations, and the countless mental and physical impres-
sions of which they are susceptible. I have also said
not a little of the electro-nervous force, as the agent of
the mind, and how the functions of every part of the
system are executed under its energy. I have proved
it to be the connecting link between mind and inert
matter, and the agent by which the Creator moves all
worlds through the boundless fields of space. I have
shown the connection existing between man and nature,
and the relationship he sustains to her as an epitome
of the universe. As I have made electricity the grand
agent that, under mind, moves on all the multifarious
operations appertaining to the human system, it may be
asked, what proof is there to establish this truth, inde-
pendent of what has already been offered ? If the ar-
guments already advanced to prove that mind touches
and moves electricity as its prime agent, are not suffi-


LECTURE IX. 165

cient and entirely satisfactory, I will then refer you to
a visible and tangible experiment, the result of which
you can witness, and thus test the truth of my position.
Let any gentleman of eloquence, feeling, and pathos
strip up his sleeve, and lay his bare arm on a table
where it shall be perfectly at rest ; let him then repeat
some impressive poetry, or any prose sentences of stir-
ring eloquence, paying no attention to his arm till his
feelings are moved, and at that instant he will see his
arm covered with what are called goose-pimples. If
he cease speaking, they will gradually disappear, as his
mind sinks into calmness. Indeed, he can see them
rise and fall with his feelings and emotions. These are
occasioned by the redundant electricity which is thrown
to the surface by the strong emotions and positive im-
pulses of the excited mind. These pimples rise up at
the root of each hair, and as hair is a non-conductor,
and resists electricity, so the internal pressure of the
electro-nervous force, propelled to the surface by the
mind, causes these minute eminences to arise. Elec-
tricity is, in its nature, a cold substance. Hence,
when the weather is cold, the air, being dense, contains
an excess of electricity and oxygen. These, being in-
spired by the lungs in greater quantities than usual,
brace the system, and render these pimples in the same
ratio more prominent and visible than in warm weather.
This circumstance confirms the proof that it is elec-
tricity moved by mind, that causes these to rise when


16G ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

the feelings are excited by an eloquence that causes
even cold chills to pass over the body.

The proof now produced I consider to be absolutely
and positively irresistible, and abundant to satisfy any
philosophic mind, that electricity is the connecting link
between mind and inert matter, and is, therefore, the
agent through which the mind manifests its motions and
powers. But should this not be sufficient to send a
bold and firm conviction to the mind of the greatest
skeptic, then I will endeavor to carry the proof still
farther, and firmly nail the matter beyond his power to
remove it. I will show him . how abundant the proof
is by which this position is sustained. Let the skeptic
place himself on an insulated stool, with his arm en-
tirely bare, and charge his body from a powerful elec-
tric machine. The hairs and pimples will rise up even
as they do under an intense action of the mind. When
the body is electrically charged on an insulated stool,
even the hairs of the head rise up erect, and the same
result follows when the mind is greatly excited by fear
or moved by strong and stormy emotions.

If these evidences are not sufficient to strike the
skeptic speechless in his opposition, then let him take
a needle, and, after satisfying himself that it has no
magnetic power to attract the smallest atom, let him
insert it in the nerve of an animal, and it will become
sufficiently magnetic to take up fine iron filings. In-
deed, ladies and gentlemen, I have no doubt that the


LECTURE IX. 167

naked arm, under sufficiently strong and stirring emo-
tions of mind to raise those pimples, would, while in
that condition, produce an effect upon the electrometer.

We now perceive why the "mind, when involved in
trouble and distress, has so powerfully affected the
body, not only in bringing upon it various diseases, but
often sudden, or even instant death. And we more-
over see why the mind, when calm, serene, and happy,
when buoyant with hope, and animated with confidence,
faith, and joy, has produced such powerful and salutary
results in removing pains and diseases. We see why,
under the energy of such a favorable state of mind,
warts, and even king's-evil, cancers, and various tu-
mors have been made to disappear.

Dr. John C. Warren, of Boston, Massachusetts,
states, in his work on tumors, that a lady called upon
him to ask his advice in relation to an experiment she
thought of trying on a tumor with which she was
afflicted. It was to rub it with the hand of a dead
person ; and, as she had a good opportunity, she asked
Dr. Warren whether she had not better improve it.
He, states, that he at first thought of dissuading her
from it, but sensible of the power of the imagination,
he advised her to try the experiment. She did so, and
in a few weeks the tumor disappeared !

Dr. Warren calls it the imagination ; but it is the
effect of a mental impression, as I have just stated,
producing the result by the action of electricity through


168 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

the voluntary nerves. The philosophy of this is sim-
ple, and in a few Avords I will notice it.

The old particles of our flesh are thrown off through
the electro-nervous force' of the involuntary nerves, and
by the same force the new particles from the blood are
laid down in their stead. Hence the wastes and re-
pairs of the system are about balanced. We change,
as I have stated, the fleshy particles of our bodies
about once per year, and the bones in seven years.
While, therefore, the involuntary nerves are keeping
up this balance of power between the wastes and re-
pairs of the flesh, so the same tumor that is thrown off
once per year with the other particles of the body, is
gradually replaced each year by the same involuntary
electro-nervous force from the new particles of the
blood. Over this the mind has no direct control, be-
cause it acts through the voluntary nerves. Hence
when the mind is under the influence of confidence,
faith, hope, and joy, organic activity is heightened,
and by keeping the mind upon the tumor while in this
happy state, and believing it will disappear, creates a
surplus of action at that spot through the voluntary
nerves, and this surplus action throws off this surplus
protuberance to* return no more. Such is the philoso-
phy of what is called imagination.

The point being understood how the electro-nervous
fluid removes a tumor, the query may now arise in
your minds, Why does it heal a wound or cure a dis-


LECTURE IX. 160

ease? In answer to this question I would first re-
.mark, that I am well aware that the healing proper-
ties are in the individual, or in the electricity of the
system, and not in the medicine. And the question,
Why does the electro-nervous fluid heal, has been in-
directly considered in my last Lecture, when explain-
ing the process of digestion. Because if all things
were made out of electricity, then it is certain that
electricity contains all the elementary principles, and
therefore all the healing properties of all things in
being. All the balms, oils, and minerals in existence
are contained in electricity, and in their most skillfully
combined proportions. This electricity is inspired
with the air into the lungs, and passed through the
blood into the nerves of the brain, and becomes the
electro-nervous fluid. It is the positive, moving pow-
er, in all its one hundred elements, and meets the same
one hundred kindred elements that compose the body,
and are the negative power. And the positive and
negative forces coming together, and the one hundred
elements in electricity meeting the one hundred of the
same kind in the body, each tending to its own, pro-
duce the healing result, on the same principle that
they produce digestion, repair the system, and equal-
ize circulation. For a full explanation of this point
you will please call to mind my remarks on the diges-
tive process in my last Lecture, and the whole will be
easily comprehended.


170 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

I now leave this point and call your attention to the
brain, which is the palace and throne of the mind,
where it dwells and reigns. I shall briefly notice its
operations in its earthly house, point out the connec-
tion betAyeen the voluntary and involuntary nerves
through which the mind acts, and conclude by noticing
the philosophy of sleep.

I have stated in a former Lecture, that each indi-
vidual has two distinct brains— namely, the cerebrum,
which occupies the frontal part of the cranium, filling
the principal part of its cavity, and the cerebellum,
which occupies the back portion of the cranium. The
voluntary nerves belong to the cerebrum, through
which the voluntary powers of the mind act, and the
involuntary nerves belong to the cerebellum, through
which the involuntary powers of the mind act. And
though in their intricate convolutions through every
part of the cranium, they seem to interweave and
blend in ten thousand ways, and both dive into the
spine, and there combine to form the spinal marrow,
yet by some secret charm they preserve their entirely
distinct character as to their voluntary and involun-
tary powers, and thus carry out the separate forces of
both brains into every part of the entire system.

Our voluntary powers by which we reason, and by
which we move our limbs and bodies, being the posi-
tive force during our wakeful moments, soon tire, and
require the refreshment of sleep to restore them. But


LECTURE IX. 171

our involuntary powers, by which the heart and lungs
are moved, and the functions of life performed, com-
mence their career of action at birth, and often con-
tinue it, without any apparent weariness, for seventy,
eighty, or even a hundred years. They, however,
tire at last, and also require sleep. But when they
sleep, it is death. Natural sleep, which involyes the
sleep of the voluntary powers only in a state of entire
insensibility, is so far on the road to death. It is the
half-way house to the land of silence. By natural
sleep our exhausted voluntary powers are restored, we
wake up refreshed, our weariness has disappeared, and
we are prepared for renewed action. There is at the
same time another important end gained by our insen-
sibility in sleep. The involuntary powers, being left
free from the exciting action of the voluntary powers,
were allowed to gradually slacken their movements,
and regain their true and healthful equilibrium.

In order that this part of my subject may be dis-
tinctly understood, I must point out the connection
between the voluntary and involuntary powers, and the
manner in which they may reciprocally affect each
other. Our pulsations are more frequent in the eve-
ning than in the morning. This is owing to the men-
tal and physical action of our voluntary powers during
our wakeful moments. They, being the positive force,
trespass upon the involuntary powers, which are the
negative force, and hence one grand object of sleep is


172 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY..

to allow the heart to come down to its due natural
slowness of pulsation. The voluntary powers, being
the positive force, can of course trespass upon the in-
voluntary, till they become tired out and sink to rest
in the sleep of death. This I will endeavor to make
plain by the following circumstances.

In the barbarous ages of the world, criminals have
been, in some instances, doomed to die through depri-
vation of sleep. Guards, who took charge of them by
turns, both night and day, were ordered to keep them
incessantly awake. This they did do by touching
them with some instrument of torture, and sometimes
with fire, whenever exhausted nature would yield to
repose. In such instances the pulsations of the heart
are gradually increased above their usual throb, be-
coming more and more frequent, till between the third
and fourth day, when they rise to about one hundred
and twenty per minute, which is a fever heat. And
so on, gradually increasing, till the seventh or eighth
day, when the pulse is only perceived by a tremulous
motion, inconsistent with the continuance of life, and
the sufferer expires. You now perceive that the vol-
untary powers, by being kept awake, trespass upon the
involuntary powers till they too are tired, and fall
asleep ; but that sleep is death.

I have already remarked, that when our voluntary
powers are exhausted they fall asleep at night, and in
the morning we wake up restored. This brought us


LECTURE IX.


173


half way on our journey to the door of death, and ■vrell
may sleep, in all ages, have "been considered its em-
blem. But when the involuntary powers are entirely
exhausted by pain, by fevers, or by sickness in gen-
eral, they also require rest, and therefore fall asleep.
This is death. Now, if there were no positive organic
destruction, and could the laws of chemistry that de-
compose our bodies be suspended, and could the entire
system, blood and all, be kept precisely in the same
condition as it was when we expired, we should wake
up after a few days in perfect health. This is no
revery.of fancy, no chimera of the speaker's brain, but
absolutely and positively true, and in perfect accord-
ance with the principles of philosophy. As this sub-
ject is new, I will take it into consideration, as it must
be not only interesting, but vastly important to us all.
In the first place, we know that the serpent and
toad species, the alligator tribe, and nearly all insects,
fall into torpidity in winter, and in the spring they are
aroused from this state in perfect health, and with
regenerated vigor. Not only their voluntary, but also
their involuntary powers were asleep. The breathing
lungs and throbbing heart were motionless, and the
circulating blood was stilled. The raccoon and , seve-
ral other species of animals burrow, and fall into a
torpid state as winter, approaches, and remain till
spring without any sustenance whatever, and then
make their appearance without any loss of flesh. I*


174 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

alL these creatures the foramen ovale, an opening be-
tween the auricles of the heart, never closes, and hence
they can live without breathing.

It may, however, be said, that this is by no means
applicable to human beings, for they cannot live with-
out breathing. How then do we live without breath-
ing, or even without the throbbing of the heart, or the
circulation of the blood, till we were born into exist-
ance ? I answer by saying, that the foramen ovale was
not closed, but generally closes soon after our birth takes
place. We know that the new-born infant requires but
little air, and can live where we should be smothered
and perish. Again, there is occasionally an individual
in whom this never closes. It is true, that these in-
stances are exceedingly rare, and such persons are
liable, when disease or pain exhausts the involuntary
powers, to sink into a torpid state, which has been
mistaken for death. The lungs and heart suspended
their motions, the blood ceased to circulate, and the
limbs grew stiff and cold. Thousands in this condition
have been prematurely buried, came to life, struggled,
turned over in their coffins, and perished. On being
disinterred they have been found with the face down-
ward. Some, placed in tombs, have revived, been
accidentally heard, and fortunately rescued. And
though they expired with a distressing disease, yet they
awoke to life in health.

An instance of this kind occurred in New Jersey,


LECTURE IX. 175

where an individual was apparently in a state of death.
He was cold and motionless. The lungs heaved not ;
the heart in its pulsations was stilled ; the blood was
stagnated in its channels, and had ceased to flow. His
funeral was two or three times appointed, the friends
and neighbors assembled, and through the entreaties
of the physician it was postponed to another time. He
at length awoke from this state to life, and awoke in
health. Some call this singular condition, where circu-
lation is suspended, a trance ; but it is the sleep of the
involuntary powers in those individuals only where the
foramen ovale is not closed. In all other persons it
would be death.

In view of these facts we should be warned not to
inter our friends too soon after we suppose they are
dead. And as death is only the sleep of the involun-
tary powers, so dying cannot be a painful process, but
one that must afford the greatest pleasure and delight
of which we can conceive. It must certainly afford as
much real enjoyment to die as to lie down upon our
beds and sink into natural sleep. All sufferings arise
from the nature of the disease that tires out the invol-
untary powers, and not from the gasping struggles of
the dying. The fatigues, toils, and sufferings of the
day, that prepare our voluntary powers for a night's
repose, are not to be taxed upon the process of our
dropping into' natural sleep. This is of itself pleas-
urable, and so is also the process of dropping into the


•176 • ELECTRICAL, PSYCHOLOGY.

sleep of death. In this respect it is not " the king of
terrors," but the welcome angel of soothing smiles and
crowning joys.

You now perceive that though the voluntary and in-
voluntary powers of the mind are entirely distinct, and
seem to act independently of each other through two
distinct sets of nerves, yet there must be some secret
link between the two that unites them in one bond of
everlasting and indissoluble union. That this point
may be settled as accurately as possible, I must call
your attention to the voluntary and involuntary nerves,
to determine the connection between them, and also to
ascertain the throne of the mind, or in what particular
part of the brain it may be located.

Though I have faithfully explained the philosophy
of the circulation of the blood in my third Lecture, yet
I am compelled to glance at the position in which the
arterial and venous circulation stand in relation to each
other, and notice the connection between them, and
then see if this will not throw some light on the volun-
tary and involuntary nervous forces of the brain.

The circulating system is in reality two distinct
systems. The arterial carries the cherry-red blood,
which is positive, and ever flows from the lungs and
heart to the extremities, and the venous carries the
dark blood, which is negative, and ever flows from the
extremities to the heart and lungs. The arterial sys-
tem, commencing at the lungs and heart, divides into


LECTUil£ IX.


111


various brandies, and these again into others, and so
on, till they spread out in thousands <>f small blood-
vessels called capillaries, too minute for the dissecting
knife to trace, or the naked eye to see. Indeed, they
run out and seem to end, if I may so speak, in millions
of nothings. At their terminations, and in just as
many millions of nothings, the venous system begins.
Though there is no visible connection, that the dis-
sector can trace between the two, yet we know that
such a connection must exist, otherwise the blood could
never pass from the capillaries of the arteries into those
of the veins.

As the nervous system must correspond with the
circulating system, so these remarks will prepare your
minds for a correct understanding of my views in re-
lation to the voluntary and involuntary nerves and
the throne of the mind. The involuntary nerves have
their origin in the cerebellum, which is the organ of
involuntary motion, wind round in intricate mazes, and
form its convolutions. They pass into the spine, and
form the spinal marrow, a part of which is but the
cerebellum continued, and from thence they branch out
to the heart, lungs, and to all the involuntary parts of
the system, so that motion may be communicated to
them by the involuntary powers of the mind. They
return through another department of the spinal mar-
row to the brain, and terminate in the medulla oblon-
gata in thousands of nothings, by which I only mean
h 8*


178 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

invisible fibres. In just as many thousands of nothings,
the voluntary nerves begin — wind round in like in-
tricate mazes, and form the convolutions of the cere-
brum, which is the great organ of voluntary motion.
They pass into the spine and form the spinal marrow,
which is but the continuation of the two brains, and
from thence they branch out to all the voluntary parts
of the system, so that motion may be communicated
to them at pleasure by the voluntary powers of the
mind.

It is evident that the same secret and invisible con-
nection exists between the voluntary and involuntary
nerves of the two brains that exists between the arte-
ries and veins of the two circulating systems which
carry the positive and negative blood. If this connec-
tion between the voluntary and involuntary nerves of
the two brains does not exist, then the voluntary pow-
ers could not, by their wakefulness, produce the least
possible effect upon the involuntary powers, so as to
tire them out and produce death, nor could they even
cause the least disease. And on the other hand, the
involuntary could not produce the least possible effect
Upon the voluntary powers.

The mind is certainly not diffused throughout both
brains, because a part of the brain may be destroyed,
and the mind still retain all its powers and faculties.
If it were thus diffused, being an active principle, it
would keep every organ of the brain uniformly excited.


LECTURE IX. 179

Hence it appears most reasonable, that the mind holds
its throne between the termination of the involun-
tary nerves of the cerebellum and the commencement
of tl^| voluntary nerves of the cerebrum. This will
appear rational, if we reflect that any sudden, irregu-
lar motion of the heart for instance, or of any other
involuntary organ, will instantly convey the warning to
the mind, and bid it beware. But this sensation could
not be communicated to the mind unless it held its
throne between the voluntary and involuntary nerves.
This, though difficult to determine, seems to be in the
Medulla oblongata. There the royal monarch sits
enthroned. From the external world, through one
common nerve, he receives all his impressions, and
from thence he transmits them by electric telegraph to
the various departments of his palace — or, to speak
more phrenologically, to the different organs of the
brain, and thus manifests the true impression of his
character to the world.

In the light our subject now stands, the philosophy
of natural sleep can be stated in very few words
Heat expands, and cold shrinks the nerves of the
brain. • As the mind is that sublimated substance we
call spirit, and is a living being of embodied form, and
being the reverse of dead matter, it is its nature to
move, and the result of that motion is thought and
power. By the shrinking of the nerves of the cere-


X80 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

brum its motions are stillea, and thought is gone.
This is sleep.

I am done, and though errors may be detected, I
care not. I have spoken freely, and meant to ^) so.
And though skeptics may sneer, yet I see and feel the
full weight, importance, and majesty of my subject. I
have every thing to hope for in its favor, as a powerful
agent to remove disease, and pain, and to succor the
distressed.


LECTURE X. 181


LECTURE X.

Ladies and Gentlemen :

The science of Electrical Psychology is yet m the
infancy of its existence, and as so many astonishing
cures have been already effected under its energy while
yet in the very dawn of its being, so we can at pres-
ent form but a faint conception of that supreme em-
pire over disease which it is ultimately destined in
some future age to attain, or of that magnificence and
power with which coming generations will see it in-
vested. The time will come when it shall stand forth
in the full vigor and beauty of its manhood, clothed in
its meridian splendor, and shedding the pure light and
heat of its own healing power over the millions of our
race. In the great field of sciences already known to
the philosopher, that of Electrical Psychology stands
pre-eminent. In making this declaration I do not de-
tract one iota from their value or greatness, but on the
contrary yield to them all their grandeur. They are
worthy of the Creator who established them when he
founded the empire of nature, and worthy of the mas-
ter spirits who revealed them to the world. They are


182 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

great, and the various ranks of greatness they occupy
in the scale of sciences were assigned them by that
unerring Being who arranged the order and harmony
of the universe, and not by erring man. Then cen-
sure me not for the declaration I make as it regards
their relative importance.

I am not insensible of the fact that astronomy is a
science of that peculiar and lofty character that knocks
at the door of the heart, calls aloud for the most bold
and daring thought, and bids it soar into the regions
of unbounded space to survey, measure, weigh, and
balance suns and worlds. The bare sublimity of the
conception that man, who is but " an atom of an atom-
world," can enter those vast dominions of the Creator
and take cognizance of the grandeur of their expan-
siveness, the wisdom of their arrangements, the beauty
of their variety, and the order and harmony of their
motions, bespeaks the high origin of his nature and
destiny as an intellectual and moral being. But
astronomy, however vast may be its fields of brilliant
suns and blooming worlds, and however strong may be
its claims upon the human intellect for the exercise of
its highest powers and most deep-stirring energies is,
after all, but a physical science, and therefore inferior
to the science of mind.

If, from this lofty and daring flight among countless
suns and worlds, we descend and dive into the depths
of the globe on which we tread, and should we be able


LECTURE X. 183

to explore its dark subterranean dens and deepest cav-
erns, even down to its centre — or should we only range
its known geological de'partments and survey the vari-
ous strata of its crust, and scrutinize the marine, veg-
etable, and animal remains they contain as so many
deposits and mementoes marking the footsteps of na-
ture in former ages, we shall also find a call for the
deepest thought to scan the mysteries of geological .sci-
ence, and to search out and explain the operations and
convulsions of nature in these subterranean regions.
These contemplations on the heavens above, or on the
structure of the earth beneath, are certainly sublime,
and challenge tne noblest powers of the human soul.
But high as the science of astronomy may call the
mind to soar, or deep as the science of geology may
urge it to descend, yet these, after all, are only physical
in their character, end, and aim.

But, on the other hand, the science of Electrical Psy-
chology being the science of the living mind, its silent
energetic workings and mysterious powers are as far
above these and all others of a like character as mind
i3 supreme over senseless matter. And as the object
of this science is to produce such mental and moral
impressions upon the sick and afflicted as shall restore
them to health and happiness, and as this can posi-
tively be accomplished upon all who are in the electro-
psychological state, so the vast importance and utility
of this science are but faintly realized by the public at


184 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

large — are but dimly seen. Even when these mental
impressions can not be made upon an individual so as
even to paralyze a muscle, still" I can, in the great ma-
jority of cases, either cure or greatly benefit the suf-
ferer by physical impressions upon his body, provided
that he will faithfully follow my directions.

The remedies this science prescribes are always safe
because its pharmacy is of God, and rests on the bo-
som of nature. Even in those cases where they can
do no good they will do no harm*. It discards those
powerful, poisonous, and dangerous medicines of the
old-school practice which, in their experiments, have
proved so fatal to the lives of millions of our race. It
selects those only from the fields of nature which
grow in that part of the earth's latitude where we live,
and such must be adapted to our constitution and con-
dition by the wisdom of the Creator, who has provided
both food and medicine to all animals and creatures in
that part of the globe where he awakened them into
existence. If we watch the actions of the animal cre-
ation we shall learn that there is, and indeed must be,
as much simplicity in our medicine as there is in our
food. Allopathy, Thompsonianism, Homeopathy, Hy-
dropathy, Electropathy, and I will add, Aeripathy and
Terrapathy, should never be made to exist as so many
separate medical schools, but the excellences of them
all, so far as they are applicable to the relief of human
sufferings in any corresponding latitude on earth,


LECTURE X. 185

should be combined into one grand system to cure,
and call it Curapathy.

Water is nature's universal solvent, and when prop
erly applied, in its various degrees of heat and cold, to
the different parts of the system, either externally or
internally as the case may require, it is a most power-
ful agent to restore the equilibrium of the circulating
forces and remove disease. But water alone is not
sufficient in every case. The air in its- application
and various temperatures should not be overlooked,
nor the quality and temperature of that which is in-
haled into the lunge. We can live longer without food
or water than we can without air. In very warm
weather, when the air is greatly rarefied by heat, let
the invalid, and even the well person, descend into a
dry cellar, entirely under ground, undress, and there
not only breathe the pure, cool, and earth-impregnated
air for half an hour or more each day, but let the
body at the same time be exposed to its action. This
will brace the feeble system of the invalid, gradually
raising it up to soundness, and impart vigor and en-
ergy to the healthy. Call this Aeripathy. But this
is not sufficient to remove every case of disease. Elec-
tricity, galvanism, and magnetism, in all their forms,
should not be forgotten. Electricity is the agent of
mind and the invisible power of matter. These three
should be passed through different parts of the human
system to ease pain, and remove nervous obstructions


186 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and nervous diseases by thus equalizing the nervous
force. This is Electropathy, and requires not only a
familiar acquaintance with electrical science, but also
great skill in its correct application to the diseased.

But this alone is not sufficient. Wc must not be
unmindful of our mother earth, nor wholly forget to
lean upon her bosom. Our bodies take into their com-
position, not only due portions of electricity, air, and
water, these three grand divisions of nature, but they
also claim a large portion of earth, out of which they
are said to have been formed*. We are, indeed, an
epitome of the universe, and stand in an exact apti-
tude and relationship to nature. This being so, per-
mit me to remark, that diseased persons, during the
summer season or warm months, should seek some
farmer's secluded plough-field or garden, expose their
naked bodies, except the covered head, for several
minutes to the rays of the sun. When well heated
and rubbed, cover them up in the fresh earth for half
an hour or more, then wash and rub briskly with a
towel, dry well in the sun, and dress. At other -times,
and as often as convenient, let the invalid follow the
ploughman, and as he turns up the fresh earth let him
breathe the air while charged with the invisible life-
giving substances that rise from the ground.

As the above advantages can only be enjoyed by
those in the country, what shall be done for those in
cities 1 In order to be more explicit on this interest-


LECTURE X.


187


ing point, when you build you a house make provisions
for a room that can admit the sun through its win-
dows. It might be connected with your bathing
establishment, and in the same room. Have at least
three articles permanently constructed like the tub in
which you lie down to bathe the body. Let one be
filled with a pure, rich, fertile earth — another with a
light, sandy soil, and a third with clay. Here let the
invalid each day bury his body in one of the first two,
and remain at least half an hour, after first having
exposed it to the* action of -the sun. Then let him
wash, rub well with a towel, and dry thoroughly in
the sun before dressing. But in case of seyere chron-
ic diseases, apply pure water to the clay till it be-
comes a mortar in which the body will sink, and let
the patient bathe his body in this. If the disease is
attended with inflammation, let the mortar be warm
as can be conveniently borne, and then wash the body
in water of the same temperature. If there is no in-
flammation, let the water be cold as its usual summer
temperature, and wash the body in water of the same,
rub briskly with a towel, and always dry thoroughly
in the sun, if possible, before dressing. By this mode
of treatment an empire over many diseases will be ob-
tained, when all other modes have failed. This I will
name Terrapathy. Simple internal medicines, of
an animal or vegetable nature, may at times be taken
into the stomach, but nothing of a poisonous charac-


188 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ter. I therefore repeat, that Electrical Psychology
is the doctrine of mental and physical impressions
to cure the sick. This can often be done without
any medicine at all, by simply a mental impression,
which this science involves. But when I use phys-
ical impressions, I can not restrict my action to the
narrow sectarian " medical schools" set up by men,
but avail myself of a free and untrammeled range
in the extensive fields of nature. Hence I sum
up the whole matter by re-affirming, that Allopathy,
Thompsonianism, Homeopathy, Hydropathy, Electro-
pathy, to which I add Aeripathy and Terrapathy,
should never be established as so many separate med-
ical schools. In the splendid science of Electrical
Psychology I embrace the excellences of them all so
far as they are applicable to the relief of human suffer-
ings, and combine them in one grand system to cure,
and call it Curapathy.

I presume the question will arise in some minds, why
should Terrapathy, or the various applications of differ-
ent kinds of earth to the body, have "a tendency to cure?
This question is somewhat difficult of solution, but no
more so than to solve why water, air, or any medicine
has a tendency to produce a sanative result upon the
human system. If, however, you will recall my argu
ments on the philosophy of digestion in my eighth lec-
ture, and what I said on the philosophy of cure in my
• ninth, you will have my answer to the question, Why


LECTURE X.


189


should Terr apathy have a tendency to cure ? No phy-
sician pretends to explain why his medicines produce
certain effects upon the system. He merely knows the
fact, and ac*ts accordingly. These facts, as to the
medicinal virtues of certain substances, have in many
cases, at least, been learned from the animal creation
or been discovered by accident. When one rattlesnake
bites another, the wounded one will invariably eat a
certain plant and live. A negro, laboring in the Dismal
Swamp, in North Carolina, observing this, ate the same
on being bitten by a rattlesnake, and was cured. Others
laboring there have practiced it with the same success.
Indeed, nearly every useful vegetable medicine now in
possession of doctors, has been discovered by some old
woman in the country, or by old hunters and Indians,
and, after much learned opposition and medical sneer-
ing, it has been at length received as their adopted child,
and one after another has been, after passing through
a like ordeal, introduced into the medical family, and
claimed as their lawful paternity. Even Peruvian bark
was discovered by the Jesuits to be an excellent specific
for ague and fever. For this they were persecuted by
the medical profession, who sneered at the remedy,
laughed .its discoverers to scorn, and moved the clergy
to fulminate their thunders against them and their
medicine. But they have long ago adopted this perse -
cuted child into the medical family and school. Now,
they can not treat an intermittent fever without this


190 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

darling. You know that quinine, which is manufac-
tured from Peruvian bark, is in our day "all the rage"
in treating ague and fever. But setting aside the man-
ner in which the medical properties of substances were
first discovered, let us come directly to the subject
under consideration.

What evidence, we may now ask, is there that Terra-
pathy possesses any power to cure ? It will be remem-
bered that I have contended throughout these Lectures
that electricity is the power that controls matter, even
from the smallest particle up to the most ponderous
globes, and that mind is a self-moving substance that
controls electricity, and that hence all power and motion
consubstantially dwell in, and emanate from mind. I
have contended that the sanative principle is in the
man, and is involved in the electro-nervous fluid, which
is the positive force breathed in from the atmosphere,
and the food taken into the stomach is the negative
force abstracted from the earth, and answering to it.
These two forces in man, being the positive and nega-
tive, meet together and embrace each other. All the
elements of the positive electro-nervous force of the
brain blend with all the corresponding elements of the
negative electro-vegetative force of the food in the
stomach, and digestion, which is but the transmutation
of food into the elements of the system, proceeds.
The body, being the medium between these two forces,
is gradually and incessantly changing, by the old par-


LECTURE X. 191

tides being dismissed from its service and new ones
enlisted to supply the waste of this unceasing war.
But the electricity inspired with the air into the lungs,
in being secreted by the brain, undergoes a change from
what it was in the atmosphere equal in degree and cor-
responding to that of earth transmuted into vegetables.
This is evidently so, because in order to enable it to
act upon the negative electric force of the food in the
stomach, it must stand in the same positive relationship
to this that the positive electricity of the atmosphere
does to the negative electricity of the globe in order to
transmute its earthy particles into vegetable substances.
Should the electricity of the atmosphere, when taken
into the lungs, remain in its unchanged state, it could
never carry on a perfect digestionf so as to transmute
food into flesh and bones, because a perfect aptitude
between this electricity, the food, and the living body
does not exist. This can only h€ done by electricity,
after having been secreted and changed by the brain
into an electro-nervous fluid. But, on the other hand,
this electro-nervous fluid can not possibly transmute
earthy particles into vegetables, because a perfect
aptitude between these three changing properties
does not exist. This can only be done by the elec-
tricities of the atmosphere and globe acting in conjunc-
tion.

.Having these general facts distinctly before us, we
shall now be able to discover and appreciate the fact,


192 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

that Terrapathy possesses also, and that too in an
eminent degree, its distinct powers to cure. To a
candid consideration of this point I now invite your
particular attention.

In my Fourth Lecture I have argued the philosophy
of health and disease, and trust that the ideas there
advanced *are retained by you all. When the mind is
serene, and its mental and moral attributes are so bal-
anced as to act in perfect unison ; when all the inter-
nal circulating forces of the body are equalized so as
to move on in one harmonious and beautiful round in
their destined channels ; and when the body externally
stands in the same well-balanced and beautiful relation to
the air, water, vegetables, and earth, then health must
be the natural resist of this state of things, on the
principle of the common law of equilibrium, in which
all other laws are involved. But when any or all of
these are thrown out <af balance, disease ensues. How,
then, are these difficulties to be overcome, the circu-
lating forces equalized, the mind restored to its wonted
serenity, and health and happiness regained 1 In re-
ply to these important and interesting queries, I would
in the first place observe, that it is admitted by all
who are acquainted with the principles of electrical
science, that the atmosphere is charged with positive
electricity, and the earth with negative electricity.
Each of these electricities possess, of course, the at-
tractive and repulsive forces.


LECTURE X.


193


Now, as all diseases are either of a positive or nega-
tive character, so they must be cured by the positive.
or negative electricities, or by the application of sub-
stances that contain thern. We should first attempt
a cure by the science of Electrical Psychology alone.
Whether this, of itself, would prove successful or not,
could be tested in a few moments, by an immediate
trial of mental impi'essions upon the patient. If these
■were successful, the mind would resume the balance
of its powers. .Its peace and contentment would be
restored, and by its mental energies the nervous, and
other circulating forces of the body would be equalized,
and health and happiness ensue. But if the disease
can not be psychologically cured by direct mental im-
pressions, then we are compelled to resort to physical
remedies, and make what I call physical impressions
upon the body, and through these to reach the mind,
because the mind and body intermutually and recipro
cally affect each other.

Suppose, then, the disease to be a positive one, oc •
casioned by the positive electricity of the system being
thrown out of balance. In all diseases of this charac-
ter, even though they may be attended with severe
pain, yet there is never any inflammation. To these
make cold applications, or the positive electric forces.
Opposites should seldom be used, for they can not act
as permanent alteratives. Or suppose the disease to
be a negative one, occasioned by the negative electric-


194 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ity of the system being thrown out of balance. All
diseases of this character will be attended, not only
with pain, but inflammation. To these we should ap-
ply the negative forces, which belong in a peculiar
sense to the earth.

Here permit me to exhibit this interesting subject in
a more definite and orderly arrangement, so as to be
readily understood. Now, do you not perceive that,
according to the peculiar nature of the disease, we.
should apply electricity, galvanism, op magnetism, or
else air in its various temperatures, from the coldest
to the warmest that can be borne 1 Do you not per-
ceive that when the disease requires it, that water, in
its various temperatures, should be applied, either ex-
ternally or internally'? And do you not perceive that
herbs, in their various decocted combinations, or other-
wise, should also, when the disease requires it, be taken
internally or applied externally, and of such tempera-
tures as to produce a salutary result 1 We have now
descended from electricity, the finest known inert sub-
stance in being, through all the grand elementary de-
partments of nature, down to the vegetable kingdom.
Now, shall we stop here, or proceed down to Earth,
the Mother of us all, and draw relief from her gener-
ous bosom? Shall we stop at herbs, earth's eldest-
born children, who forever hang upon her breast, or
shall we approach the maternal germinating and gen-
erating power and source from whence they draw their


LECTURE X. 195

vital being ? As the earth is electrically negative, and
peculiarly so, how supreme must her powers be over all
diseases attended with inflammation ! Earthy sub-
stances, in various clayey or other combinations, and in
the form of poultices, either cold or warm, as the case
may require, can be applied to the diseased part, and
with the same convenience that we do any other sub-
stance. Or, when necessary, let the whole body be
buried in soils of various kinds, in their natural vege-
tating temperature. Or should the disease require it,
let the body be immersed in various mortars made of
one or several kinds of clay, or other earthy compounds.
The only thing requisite is a good knowledge of their
chemical properties, and good judgment and skill how,
and when, and in what manner to apply them to any
given disease.

Consistent and even irresistible as all this may ap-
pear, yet the question comes up — Can any facts be
produced as evidence of the sanative results of Teno-
pathy? Certainly; there are thousands of instances
of its power. But as it has never occurred to any
mind to bring it into practice as a system, so the in-
stances of its power are merely incidental. I have made
it my study occasionally for five years, and yet I am
now only ready to introduce it into the service of my
grand system of Electro-Psychological Curapathy, and
commence its practice. But to the point.

I might refer, with more force than many are aware,


196 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

to the spittle and clay prepared by the Master, and
put on the eyes of a blind man, whom he then ordered
to go and wash in the Pool of Siloam, and on doing of
which he received his sight. Most of Christians sup-
pose that all this was useless, and that he employed
some other agent to restore his sight besides the means
he manifestly employed. But it is in vain for any one
to contend that Christ practiced a fraud, by putting
clay upon his eyes to produce no possible effect, and
then secretly and deceptively restored his sight by some
other power. It was done by the very means that he
thus openly employed, and by which he pretended it
was done,, and without a shade of deception through
fear of men. It was accomplished by the combined
forces of Terrapathy, Hydropathy, and the faith and
confidence inspired in the blind man's mind by a strong
psychological impression.

But without any reference whatever to the Master, I
will, in as few words as possible, show that the various
earths possess a most -powerful electro-absorbent force
to draw out inflammation from the human system,
and with which no other known substances in existence
can compare. The smallest effect we witness on earth
is often pregnant with the greatest power, and portends
the most salutary or awful results. A straw shows the
direction of the current, however deep its waters, or
secret its irresistible movement.

Take then, for example, the sting of the bee, or the


LECTURE X. 197

bite of any poisonous insect, where the pain, swelling,
and inflammation would be great. The moment the
circumstance occurs take almost any kind of earth at
hand capable of producing vegetation, moisten it with
spittle or blood-warm water, apply it to the wound, and
in a few moments the poison will be extracted, and
every painful result arrested. But a blue or white clay
soil, moistened with warm water or spittle, is prefera-
ble, if it can be obtained without delay.

As to the drawing and absorbent powers of clay and
other earths, I might bring a few simple facts. For
instance, let oil or grease be spilled upon the floor, and
remain till the board be saturated. No soap and water
can remove it — no washings can make it disappear ; yet
clay, rightly prepared, will extract it. Or suppose
there are oil or grease spots upon a silk dress. Rub
pulverized magnesia on the opposite or wrong side of
the dress, then press a hot iron to the grease spot on the
right side, and the whole will instantly disappear, and
leave the silk as bright and fair as ever. The same
result may be obtained by using pulverized French
chalk on any beautiful woolen dresses or shawls. Now
it is utterly impossible that these effects could be pro-
duced unless these substances possessed a supreme
electro-absorbent power. Or let clothing be saturated
with any substance producing the strongest possible and
the most pungent and enduring scent, even that of the
skunk, and when no washing, no airing can remove it,


198 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

let it be buried in any soil capable of producing a free
vegetation, and in three or four days the whole will
entirely disappear.

The question arises — What is the cause of this? I
answer by saying, that the human stomach can not,
neither can that of any other animal, digest any crea-
ture swallowed alive, so long as it possesses animal life.
It must die before the stomach can digest and appro-
priate it to the elements that compose the body, and
until then the creature must sustain its existence by
drawing its sustenance from the vital force of the body.
So the earth can not digest, that is, decompose, any
substance while that substance has either animal or
vegetable life. These both draw strength and substance
from her. But the moment they are dead she can di-
gest and appropriate them to her own use, and thus in-
vigorate and fructify herself. Hence it is seen why
Terrapathy can cure. It is because all substances in
the human system that are adverse to animal life and
health, the earth can appropriate to herself, and so she
can all essences of the most pungent smell. She digests
the whole, and manufactures and re-absorbs them again
into the elements that compose her maternal body.
She removes every substance from the human system
adverse to the laws of animal life, and leaves perfect
health. Hence the supremacy of Electro-Psychological
Curapathy over all medical systems in being is clearly
manifest, and I add no more.


LECTURE XI 199


LECTURE XL

PRIVATE INSTRUCTIONS TO THE CLASS.
the secret revealed.

Gentlemen :

In my last Lecture I have argued the supremacy of
Curapathy over all medical systems in existence, for in
it are combined the excellences of them all ; and, in
addition to these, it contains modes of treatment that
no medical science as yet involves. In this peculiar
position of my subject it will be perceived by all those
who have paid any attention to the science of Electrical
Psychology, that it is of most paramount importance
to the human race, as a curative agent, and should,
therefore, be understood by all, so far, at least, as to
apply it successfully to the removal of disease and
pain. It should be practically understood by all med-
ical men. This will cost them only the trifling sum of
ten dollars, and in the course of their practice it would
be worth thousands to them, and at the • same time
afford them the supreme pleasure of having saved many
a life, where medicine must have failed. To obtain a
good knowledge of this science will require about five


200 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

lessons of two hours each ; and as I am now per-
manently settled in New York city, I am ready to im-
part these instructions to all persons of good moral
character who may call. If persons at a distance will
form a class sufficiently large to warrant the expense,
and address me a letter at New York, I will visit them
one week, and not only give private instructions to the
class, but will deliver, in the mean time, five public
evening lectures besides, and perform most interesting
experiments, of which the class may have the profit of
the admission fee. This would generally pay their tui-
tion, and in many instances exceed it.

I make this proposal, because hundreds of ignorant
individuals have undertaken to lecture upon, and even
to teach this science, who have never received any in-
struction from me, either verbal or written. These
persons pretend to teach it, and that, too, for any price
they can obtain, from five dollars down to twenty-five
cents ! They had better receive " a penny for their
thoughts" so as to adapt the price of tuition to the
amount of information they impart. All the regular
students to whom I have taught the science of Elec-
trical Psychology have been laid under written obliga-
tions, and have seriously pledged their sacred honor
never to teach it under ten dollars. Those, therefore,
who are qualified teachers and honorable men do still
continue to adhere to the obligations they signed, and
charge the original fee. Those who vary from it have


LECTURE XI. 201

either forfeited their obligations, 01 else never learned
the science as they ought ; and hence the public will
know who and what they arc.

It is due to myself to state, that some have changed
the name of this science to that of " Electro Biol •
ogy," and have claimed authorship as to its discovery,
and have even stated that Electro Biology has no con-
nection whatever with Electrical Psychology, but is an
entirely distinct science. This I am compelled to give
a most decided and unqualified denial. I have visited
some of the principal places where the Biologists have
, lectured, and have gathered all the facts in relation to
their proceedings and the character of their experi-,
mcnts. I am acquainted with its whole history, and
the circumstances under which it received its name,
and why Electrical Psychology was first called "Elec-
tro Biology." Should I, in a future day, be compelled
in self-defense to take this subject in hand, I shall
make all the necessary disclosures, which the interest
and advancement of this science may require, or just-
ice and duty demand. Fo*' the present they must rest
in my bosom till circumstances shall call them forth.
I would now only say, that the science of Electrical
Psychology is identical with that of Electro Biology,
and that the latter has no existence only what it
draws from the former, unless it be the mere half
of its name.

I have already stated, that there are certain indi-


202 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

viduals who have gone through the country lecturing,
and pretending to teach this science for one or two dol-
lars, and even for twenty-five cents; when they could
get no more,. who are utterly ignorant of the human
system — ignorant of those diseases that assail it, and
ignorant of the common principles involved in any of the
sciences. Such may be able to. inform you how to close
a man's eyes — how to paralyze or move his limbs, and
how to make a psychological impression on his mind.
But how can they teach any one its philosophical ap-
plication to disease, or to any useful medical purpose 1
Every man of common sense must perceive that this is
.impossible without the knowledge of science in general.
Such incompetent individuals have done Electrical
Psychology a serious injury, and in several places have
brought it into disrepute.

Under all these circumstances, I feel it my duty to
put an end to the worse than useless labors of such
individuals, by fully explaining the secret mode of
operation — how an individual may be controlled by
mental and physical impressions. I would not be un-
derstood that this can be wholly done by language. It
requires a visible and personal application of what the
theory involves — a practical illustration as to perform-
ing experiments, and how to apply it successfully to
disease. I will, however, do it faithfully, so far as
language can accomplish it, and far beyond what any
lecturer now in the field attempts to explain to his class


LECTURE XI.


203


of pupils. The most have failed to give satisfaction
to those whom they have undertaken to instruct, and
in many cases serious difficulties have occurred in rela-
tion to the sum paid for instruction. I have therefore
come to the conclusion not to suffer odium in future to
be brought upon this science, if in my power to prevent
it. I proceed, therefore, to give the instructions to all,
so that they may know how to experiment upon their
fellow-men, as well as those generally who go about as
lecturers and teachers of this science. In the accom-
plishment of this I shall be brief as possible. What
requires ten hours of instruction can not, by any means,
be communicated fully in two lectures of half an hour
each. Yet I will embody all, and even more than is
generally given to any class of pupils by those claiming
to be teachers.

I would, in the first place, remark, that the Creator
has stamped simplicity, as far as possible, upon each
separate part of the human system. As I remarked in
ij^y sixth Lecture, each organ of the body performs but
one function. The eye sees, the ear hears, the olfac-
tories smell, the glands taste, the heart throbs to regu-
late the blood, the hands handle, the feet walk, the
liver secretes its bile, and the stomach digests its food.
The eye never hears, and the ear never sees. So there
evidently is but one nerve or set of nerves through
which impressions from the external world are com-
municated to the mind. This is certain, because the


204 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

mind can receive but one idea at a time. It is imma-
terial how rapidly soever ideas may be transmitted to
the mind, they are nevertheless successive, and two
ideas can not possibly be conceived, at the same in-
stant, by the mind. One must succeed the other. But
as there are millions of nerves in the human brain, and
if it were alike the office of each to communicate ideas
to the mind, then as many millions of ideas as there
are nerves might be transmitted to the mind at the
same instant. But we are conscious that they are suc-
cessively and not simultaneously conceived. We can
not attend to two public speakers at once, so as to un-
derstand their ideas, if both were before us, and each
addressing us upon a different subject. With the same
earnestness that we give heed to the one, we must neg-
lect the other. Indeed, there can be no doubt in rela-
tion to the fact of ideas being successively communi-
cated to the mind, if we reflect that even one public
speaker by too rapid a delivery often confuses the

hearer.

«

The mind, as a living being of embodied form, has
its spiritual brain and spiritual organs answering to
the correspondent phrenological organs of the physical
brain through Avhich it manifests itself. The latter
are, indeed, a production from the former, as much so
as the plant and its form are a production from the life
of the seed. The nerve, or family of nerves, through
which impression-? are communicated to the mind, and


LECTURE XI. 205

by the mind to the Dody, to move its various parts, is
located in the organ of Individuality. All the organs
of the brain, and, indeed, of the whole system, are
double, and so are the senses likewise. The brain has
its two hemispheres, its two eyes, two ears, two glands
of taste, and two olfactories of smell. We have two
hands, two feet, and the heart has its two auricles and
two ventricles. The organ of Individuality is also
double. It is located in the centre of the lower part
of the forehead, sends off branches to the optic, audi-
tory, and olfactory nerves — extends through both hem-
ispheres of the brain, passes down the spinal marrow,
and in its course sends off branches to the arms and
lower limbs, and, indeed, to all the voluntary parts of
the body. Hence all voluntary motion originating in
mind is communicated to the organ of Individuality,
and from thence is transmitted through correspondent
nerves to that part of the body where the mind directs
motion to be made. Hence the organ of Individuality
is the one that constitutes our individualism, or personal
identity, and by which we identify all individual objects
in the external world. - And though this organ, like all
the other phrenological organs of the brain, is made up
of a congeries of nerves, yet I am satisfied that it has
but one single identical nerve that is moved by a men-
tal impression, and that one moves by sympathy the
whole family of nerves dwelling in that organ; and
thus motion is communicated to every voluntary de-


206 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

partment of the body -where the mind, as the motive
power, directs.

For illustration of the above, suppose a pebble were
thrown into the centre of Lake Superior. It would
displace its waters, and produce a circle. That circle
would produce a second, and that second would produce
a third circle, and so on, each continuing to lessen in
its action until it apparently died away. But though
imperceptible to the naked eye, yet the successive ac-
tion would be continued even to the distant shores, and "
move every drop of water from the centre to the cir-
cumference. And not only so, but that pebble would
displace, by sympathy, every particle of water in the
basined lake, even to its greatest depth. This is evi-
dent, because if a rock, half the size of that mighty
lake, were thrown into its centre, the universal disturb-
ance of every particle of water would be evident and
perceptible. On the same principle, a pebble — yes, a
single grain of sand — would produce the same result,
only on a smaller scale. So the centre nerve (if I may
so speak) of the organ of Individuality is moved by a
mental impression, and tins movement communicates
motion by sympathetic impulse to each and every volun-
tary part of the body where the mind directs. Is not
this the true philosophy of what we call sympathy ex-
isting between the different parts of the human body .
and the various attributes of the soul, and between one
individual and another? And is not this the true


LECTURE XI. 207

philosophy of perse nal identity, on the mystery of
which so much has been written ? Did not the mind
of man possess a spiritual organ of Individuality cor-
responding to the physical one of the brain, how then
could either personal identity or sympathy be recog-
nized, or even exist 1 This one spiritual organ consti-
tutes the unity of all the attributes of the mind, spirit,
soul, or whatever you please to call that part of man
which is to exist immortal in a future world. The
phrenological organs of the human brain are but a
daguerreotype manifestation — a result of the corre-
spondent spiritual organs of the living mind. They
constitute the physical apartments of the earthly house,
which is fitted up as a temporary residence for the in-
visible inhabitant within, during its continuance here.

Having clearly placed before you those interesting
points that involve the ever sweet and pleasing doctrine
of sympathy, I will now proceed to instruct you how an
individual can be electrically and psychologically con-
trolled. This is a subject involving vast utility as a
curative power to the sick and distressed, and is there-
fore full of deep and stirring interest to every feeling
heart. To control is to cure. In order to affect an
individual, and to successfully control his mind and
muscles, it is, in the first place, necessary that he
should stand in a negative relation to the operator
as to the doctrine of impressions. Some persons are
naturally in this condition, were born in it, live in it,


208 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and will die in it. Others are not in this state, and
hence means must be used to bring them, there before
they can be controlled. In order to determine whether
an individual stands in this negative relation to your-
self, as the operator, you must first proceed to tako
the communication, as we term it. This is inva-
riably and philosophically done through the medium of
two points. I care not whether it be effected by visible
contact or otherwise, it is still done through the me-
dium of two points, or the negative and positive electric
forces, and through the same nerve, or family of nerves,
that constitutes, phrenologically, our individualism or
personal identity.

Before I proceed to notice the most easy, sure, and
direct mode by which an electro-psychological commu-
nication may be established, I will, in the first place,
speak of the philosophy of communication in general.
It is evident that the positive and negative forces of
the two electricities pervade all nature. These I call
in my seventh Lecture the male and female electrici-
ties. These two forces not only permeate, more or
less, all substances in nature, but they also unceasingly
emanate from them in electric circles. Hence, as man
is a part of the universe, he constantly takes into his
system large portions of electricity with the air he in-
spires, with the water he drinks, and with the food he
eats. And by mental and muscular action, and the
common operations of animal life, he unceasingly


LECTURE XI. 209

throws it off through the nervous force. On passing
from his system into the surrounding elements, it forms
around him his electric or magnetic circle. How large
this circle may be is as yet to us unknown. Hence,
when two individuals come within a certain distance of
each other, their circles meet, and touch each other at
two points. And if one of these individuals is in the
electro-psychological state, the communication will be
taken through the positive and negative forces. And
though this communication was taken without personal
contact, yet it was done through the nerve that consti-
tutes our individualism or personal identity. A com-
munication in this manner can be established with those
persons only who are very sensitive. As only about
one in twenty-five is naturally in this state, so I can
step before an audience of a thousand persons, state to
them what I intend to do, so that all shall understand
me ; then request them all to close their eyes firmly,
and say, You can not open your eyes ! and forty out
-of the thousand will be unable to do so. All this can
be performed in five minutes after entering the hall.

It is, however, certain, that no effect can be produced
till you establish a thorough communication between
yourself and the subject through the nervous force of
the organ of Individuality that constitutes his personal
identity. And as the centre or moving nerve of this
organ has sympathy with all the voluntary nerves of
the system, and as they reciprocally affect each other,


210 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

so you can establish a psychological communication by
touching any part of the system "where voluntary nerves
are located, and particularly of those individuals who
are very sensitive and impressible. But the most nat-
ural mode to get a good communication, and the one
least liable to be detected by the audience, is to take
the individual by the hand, and in the same manner as
though you were going to shake hands. Press your
thumb with moderate force upon the ulnar nerve,
which spreads its branches to the ring and little finger
of the hand. The pressure should be nearly an inch
above the knuckle, and in range of the ring finger.
Lay the ball of the thumb flat and partially crosswise,
so as to cover the minute branches of this nerve of
motion and sensation. The pressure, though firm,
should not be so great as to produce pain or the least
uneasiness to the subject. When you first take him
by the hand, request him to place his eyes upon yours,
and to keep them fixed, so that he may sec every emo-
tion of your mind expressed in the countenance. Con-
tinue this position and also the pressure upon this cu-
bital nerve for half a minute or more. Then request
him to close his eyes, and with your fingers gently
brush downward several times over the eyelids, as
though fastening them firmly together. Throughout the
whole process feel within yourself a fixed determina-
tion to close them, so as to express that determination
fully in your countenance and manner. Having done


LECTURE XI. 211

this, place your hand on the top of his head and press
your thumb firmly on the organ of Individuality, bear-
ing partially downward, and with the other thumb still
pressing the ulnar nerve, tell him — you can not
open your eyes ! Remember, that your manner, your
expression of countenance, your motions, and your lan-
guage must all be of the most positive character. If
he succeed in opening his eyes, try it once or twice
more, because impressions, whether physical or mental,
continue to deepen by repetition. In case, however,
that you can not close his eyes, nor see any effect pro-
duced upon them, you should cease making any further
efforts, because you have now fairly tested that his
mind and body both stand in a positive relation to
yours as it regards the doctrine of impressions.

There is yet another mode of communication that I
have discovered, which is far preferable to the one just
noticed, is supreme over all others, and will remain so
till Omnipotence shall see fit to change the nervous
system of man. This is the Median Nerve, which
is the second of the brachial plexus. It is a compound
nerve having the power of both motion and sensation. It
is located in the centre of the upper part of the palm of
the hand near where it joins the wrist. In order to take
the communication through this medium, you must take
the subject by the hand with the palm upward, and
place the ball of your thumb in the centre of his hand
near the root of his thumb, and give a moderate but


212 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

firm pressure. The astonishing nature of the impres-
sion can only be equaled by the result produced. It
is a nerve of voluntary motion as well as sensation,
and therefore belongs to, and has its origin in, the cer-
ebrum. True, like the other nerves, it can be traced
directly no farther than the spinal cord, yet there is no
difficulty in determining its origin to be in the cere-
brum, because that is the organ of all voluntary mo-
tion, even as the cerebellum is the organ of all invol-
untary motion. This mode of communication trans-
cends all others, and will answer in all possible cases,
even upon persons the most difficult to control, as well
as upon those who are the most sensitive and impress-
ible. I care not how you obtain the communication
with an individual — whether it be without contact, or
by touching any pai-t of the body, yet the communi-
cation must ultimately be established through the Me-
dian Nerve as the centre telegraphic force from the
organ of Individuality, through which organ all ideas
and all impressions are transmitted from the external
world to the mind, "and through that same organ are
transmitted by the volitions of the mind to the different
parts of the body. Even if the communication is
taken by pressure on the ulnar nerve, yet it is neverthe-
less communicated by sympathy to the Median Nerve,
and through which alone the communication becomes
perfect. There is no question, in my mind, that the
optic, the auditory, and the olfactory nerves, as well


LECTURE XI. 213

as those of taste, are but branches of the same com-
mon nerve by which impressions or ideas are transmit-
ted to the mind through the organ of Individuality.
Those whom I have instructed, will please to remember
this. I desire you, and all, in order to experiment
with power, to keep up a perfect uniformity in taking
the communication through the Median Nerve, and
through this to transmit the electric current to the
brain and electrify the body.

I am aware that the exact location of this nerve is
somewhat difficult to find, unless you are personally in-
structed. If you succeed in closing the subject's eyes
by the above mode, you may then request him to put
his hands on his head, or in any other position you
choose, and tell him, You can not stir them ! In case
you succeed, request him to be seated, and tell him,
You can not rise ! If you are successful in this, re-
quest him to put his hands in motion, and tell him,
You can not stop them ! If you succeed, request him
to walk the floor, and tell him, You can not cease
walking ! And so you may continue to perform ex-
periments involving muscular motion and paralysis of
any kind that may occur to your mind, till you can
completely control him, in arresting or moving all the
voluntary parts of his system. "When this is accom-
plished, we say, for the sake of convenience, he is in
the electrical state.

You may, perhaps, not be able to affect him any fur-


214 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ther ; and as you can not know how tins matter stands
■without the trial, so you will next proceed to produce
mental impressions by operating uptm his mind only.
If he is entirely in the state, you can make him see that
a cane is a living snake or eel ; that a hat is a halibut
or flounder ; a handkerchief is a bird, child, or rabbit ;
or that the moon or a star falls on a person in the
audience, and sets him on fire, and you can make him
hasten to extinguish it. You can make him see a river,
and on it a steamboat crowded with human beings.
You can make him see the boiler burst, and the boat
blow up, with his" father or mother, brother or sister,
or wife or child on board. You can lay out the lifeless
corpse before him in state, cause him to kneel at its
side, and to freely shed over it the tears of affection
and bereavement. You can suddenly show him a boy
or girl, and he sees in them the lost father or mother
standing before him, and' gives the warm embrace.
You can change his own personal identity, and make
him believe that he is a child two or three years old,
and inspire him with the artless feelings of that age j
or that he is an aged man, or even a woman, or a negro,
or some renowned statesman or hero. You can change
the taste of water to that of vyiegar, wormwood, honey,
or of any liquors you please. In like manner you can
operate on his hearing and smelling, as well as on his
sight, feeling, and taste. When you can produce such
mental hallucinations as these on all his senses, or


LECTURE XI. 215

thousands of others that may suggest themselves to
your mind, we say, for the sake of convenience, that
he is in the psychological state.

I have thus far confined my remarks to that class of
individuals who are naturally in the electro-psycho-
logical state, and shown you clearly how a communica-
tion in its various modes may be taken, so as to suc-
cessfully control them both physically and mentally.
The average number of persons in the United States
who are naturally in the psychological state is about
one in twenty-five. These can be cured of any func-
tional diseases with which they may be assailed, by
simply performing upon them the experiments I have
just named, or any others of a like character. And
not only so, but upon such any surgical operation may
be performed without the slightest degree of pain, and
that, too, while they are wide awake, and in perfect
possession of all their reasoning faculties. But while
only one in twenty-five is entirely in this state, and nat-
urally so, yet there is, perhaps, one in twelve who is
partially in the state, and on whom experiments can be
performed to a greater or less extent. All these, in
connection with those on whom you can produce no
effect whatever, are to be subjected to a process to
bring them into the electro-psychological state, and we
see, too, how vastly important it is that this, if possi-
ble, should be done. This, indeed, would be the no-
blest triumph ever achieved by man. It would be a


216 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

triumph over disease and pain, and prepare the human
race to wear out with age.

In order to bring about this result, I know, at pres-
ent, of no better process than the following: Take
pure zinc and silver, with a copper wire, as a conductor,
passed through the zinc, so as to come in contact with
the silver. For convenience, take a piece of zinc the
size of a cent, but somewhat thicker, and imbed a five-
cent piece in its centro, and pass a small copper wire,
as a rivet, through both. Place this coin in the palm
of the hand, with the silver side up, and request him
to bring it within about a foot of his eyes. Let him
take a position, either sitting or standing, winch he can
retain twenty minutes or more, without any motion of
his feet, hands, lips, head, or any part of his body.
He must remain motionless as a statue, except the nat-
ural winking of the eye. His mind should be perfectly
resigned and kept entirely passive to surrounding im-
pressions. The eyes should be placed upon the coin
as though they were riveted there, and during the whole
twenty or twenty-five minutes they should, on no con-
sideration,, be raised to look at any person or object
whatever, and the spectators should be still as the
grave. If the eyes have a tendency to close, he should
not strive to keep them open, but let them close. Fol-
low nature. In a public audience, when lecturing, you
should seat, if possible, a class of thirty persons.
When the time has expired, collect your coin so as to


LECTURE XI. 217

relieve the class from their wearisome position, and
then try each individual, always taking the communi-
cation in the manner I have described, and proceed to
experiment upon them the same as you do upon those
who are naturally in the state. If one sitting do not
bring them entirely into the psychological state, then
let it be repeated on the next evening, and so continue
on till the work is consummated. All, with few ex-
ceptions, can be, by perseverance, brought into this
state. Some are naturally in it — some are brought
into it by one sitting — some by two — some 'by three — ■
and some may require a hundred sittings of half an
hour each before they can be brought to the participa-
tion of this inestimable blessing. No two individuals
are alike impressible in any thing whatever, whether it
be mental effort, moral power and moral suasion, or
physical endurance. Hence we should not be sur-
prised, that they all differ from each other as to nervous
impressibility in this science, and that, too', in the same
ratio as they may differ in their phrenological develop-
ments and cerebral excitability. It is enough for us to
know on this point that no two individuals are in any
respect exactly alike.

Having described the electro-magnetic coin which I
conceive to be the best, under all circumstances, to
produce the result, and having directed you how to use
it, I would now apprise you, that this state may be in-
duced by other substances as agents 'in nature. It


218 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

may be induced by fixing the eyes upon a piece of zinc
alone, and observing the directions already given. It
may be induced by a piece of silver, or a piece of cop-
per, iron, lead, or any other metal. It may be induced
by a piece of wood, or any other substance in nature.
Or it may be done by a mere mental abstraction, with
no substance, only the surrounding elements. But
when no substance is used, the process to the state is
slow and tedious. Then, again, there is every possible
grade of power from the feeblest substance placed in
the hand up to the galvanic battery, which is more
powerful than the coin I have adopted as a matter of
convenience and utility. The galvanic battery I should
prefer, if it could be carried in the pocket, or be ac-
cessible to all. If thirty persons should join hands,
and the two individuals at the extremes of the line
each take a handle of a galvanic battery, and let the
current be so graduated as to be but faintly felt, a,nd a
greater number would be affected than by any other
agent that could be employed. In this case, as in all
others, it is to be understood, that the same stillness of
muscles, the same fixed position of the eye upon some
object or spot, and the same passivity of mind are to
be strictly observed.

The query may now arise in the minds of some of
the class — Why should all substances in existence have
a greater or less tendency to produce this state 1 I
answer, that electricity is the great and universal


LECTURE XI. 219

agent ordained by the Creator to form, to transmute,
or to decompose all substances that swarm in the em-
pire of nature. Hence all substances in existence
throAV off a never-ceasing electro-atmospheric emana-
tion in a greater or less degree, otherwise they could
never change. And these emanations by their impres-
sions" more or less affect all human beings according to
the relative position in which they may be placed to
receive and feel the force of such impressions. There-
fore sleep and wakefulness, health and sickness, pain
and ease, and all the various sensations and changes to
which the human system' is subject, are experienced.
Hence when we fix our attention upon one substance,
and become mentally and physically passive to surround-
ing impressions, we render ourselves, by this volition,
relatively negative, as far as in our power, to the pos-
itive force of the substance with which we are engaged,
and drowsiness, or some other cerebral change or phe-
nomenon ensues, because by passivity the electro-nerv-
ous fluid is supplied through the lungs and stomach for
the brain more freely than it is thrown off. But when
we resume the activity of our mental and physical
energies, we, by this volition and action, become rela-
tively positive to the surrounding impressions of all
substances in nature, and wakefulness, with all its at-
tendant delights, is the result, because by mental and
muscular action we throw off from the brain the electro-


G*


220 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

nervous fluid more rapidly than it is supplied through
the lungs and stomach.

In order, therefore, to render the subject as simple
as possible, and to establish and perpetuate a uniform-
ity of procedure in the use of a substance to be placed
in the hand, I desire you to insist upon the electro-
magnetic coin as being alone sufficient, under the direc-
tions given, to induce the state. And I desire you to
insist that the pressure on the Median Nerve is alone
sufficient to establish a communication between the
operator and the subject to perform all the experiments,
both electrical and psychological, that this science may
involve. Indeed, all substances, so far as their electro-
emanating power extends, produce the same effect in
degree as the coin I recommend. Hence, strictly and
philosophically speaking, the electro-magnetic coin, as
the true mode of inducing th« stfffce, is all in all. And as
all possible modes of obtaining communication, whether
by contact or otherwise, must meet in the organ of In-
dividuality, through which all impressions arc trans-
mitted to the mind, and from the mind, through that
same organ,*to all the voluntary parts of the body, so
there is strictly and philosophically speaking but one
mode of taking communication, and hence the Median
Nerve is all in all. If, however, you could remember
the exposition I have given you on this intricate and
interesting subject, you would then find no difficulty in
defending yourself against tin assaults of skeptical


LECTURE XI. 221

men. But as it is, I must leave you with the two sim-
ple forms I recommend — the Electro-magnetic Coin
and the Median Nerve.

As the general points of the subject are now dis-
tinctly before you, I would next state, that we divide
this science, for the sake of perspicuity, into five
plans. The first three regard the mediums through
which persons are brought into the electro-psycholog-
ical state. The^rs^ is through Mesmerism. Hence
you will call Mesmerism plan number one. The sec-
ond is the pressure on the nerve by which we detect
those who are naturally in the electro-psychological
state. This you will call plan number two. The
third is the coin by which others are to be brought into
this state. The coin you will therefore call plan num-
ber three. The fourth, involves all the experiments,
whether electrical or psychological, as a sanative
agent, by which those who are already in this state are
to be relieved of pain, cured of disease, or prepared
for any surgical operation without suffering. This you
will call plan number four. And the fifth, in order
to cure the diseases of those who are not in the state,
involves the application of physical impressions upon
their bodies, and the administering of remedies, whether
externally or internally applied. This you will call
plan number five. On each of these five plans I
now proceed to impart all the necessary information,
and in as clear and concise a manner as possible.


222 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

In regard to Mesmerism, -which is plan number one,
I would say, that if you desire to mesmerize a person,
■who has never been put into the state, nor in the least
affected, I know of no better mode than to seat him in
an easy < posture, and request him to be calm and re-
signed. Take him by both hands, or else by one hand
and place your other gently on his forehead. But with
■whatever part of his body you may choose to come in
contact, be sure to always touch two points, answering ^
to the positive and negative forces. Having taken him
by both hands, fix your eyes firmly upon his, and, if
possible, let him contentedly and steadily look you in
the face. Remain in this position till his eyes close.
Then place both your hands on his head, gently pass
them to his shoulders, down the arms, and off at the ends
of his fingers. Throw your hands outward as you re-
turn them to his head, and continue these passes till
he can hear no voice but yours. He is then entirely in
the mesmeric state.

The reason why I desire you to throw your hands
outward on returning them to his head when making
the passes is, to avoid waking him by passing them up-
ward in front and near to his body. It is a well-known
fact, that by the downward passes of an electro-magnet,
attached to a galvanic battery, the steel magnet becomes
instantly charged so as to lift a pound of iron. But
by the upward passes it becomes instantly demagnet-
ized so that it will lift nothing. By the downward


LECTURE XI. 223

passes I mean from the bow or centre of the magnet to
the extremities, and by upward passes I mean the
reverse, regardless of the position in which the magnet
may be held. The same applies to the human being
when his mind is left uninfluenced. But if you apprise
the subject when in the magnetic state, that the upward
passes will not awake him, then by the force of his own
mind he can retain his condition, in defiance of all the
passes you may make. The mind, when in the mes-
meric state, has the power of appropriating electri-
city or magnetism to itself, or of rejecting it, at
pleasure.

In case, however, that the person whom you seat to
be mesmerized is not affected, and feels no inclination
whatever to close his eyes after fifteen or twenty min-
utes' trial, you will still proceed, as directed, to make
the passes, and continue them also for fifteen or twenty
minutes. Then take him, again by the hands, as at
first, and continue this position about the same length
of time, then resume the passes, as before directed,
and continue these two modes of operation alternately
till about an hour is consumed at a sitting. Before
you leave him, reverse the passes for the space of a
minute or so, as though waking him up, even though
you see no visible effect produced. On the next day,
give him another sitting of an hour ; and so on, day
after day, till you get him into the mesmeric state.
Remember, that all the influence you produce uoon him


224 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

at one sitting, however minute or imperceptible it may-
be, be fully retains to all subsequent daily sittings.

When a person is in the mesmeric state, whether
put there by yourself or by some other one, take the
communication by number two and awake him by the
upward passes ; or else do it by an impression, as fol-
lows : Tell him, " I will count three , and at the same
instant I say three I will slap my hands together, and
you will be wide awake and in your perfect' senses.
Are you ready'?" If he answer in the affirmative,
you will proceed to count — " One, two, THREE !"
The word three should be spoken suddenly, and in a
very loud voice, and at the same instant the palms of
the hands should be smitten together. This will in-
stantly awake him. Those who are thus aroused from
mesmeric slumber to wakefulness are, with few excep-
tions, in the electro-psychological state, and you can
immediately proceed to experiment upon them. Here,
then, is an individual who was brought into this state
through number one, and he stands in a negative re-
lation to you as it regards the doctrine of impressions,
and his body is principally charged with negative elec-
tricity, which is from the earth, and which alone is sus-
ceptible of being successfully controlled.

Having given you all the necessary directions how to
mesmerize, and how to bring a person into the electro-
psychological state through number one, and shown
the relation in which he stands to you as the operator,


LECTURE XI. 225

I now proceed to instruct you in relation to number
two. This can be done in a very few words, as it has
been already pretty fully noticed. In the first place,
you may go into a public audience, or among your social
friends, and take one individual after another by the
hand, press the Median Nerve, as I have directed, and
if you succeed in controlling some one, both physically
and mentally, then such individual is recognized as in
the electro-psychological state through number two.
Though this person has never been mesmerized, nor
operated upon, yet he is found to be naturally in the
same state, through number two, as is the individual
who was brought into it through number one. Seat
them side by side, and they both feel the same nervous
sympathy toward each other, are both charged with the
same negative electricity, and both stand in a negative
relation to you as it regards the doctrine of impressions.
Take number three, which is the electro-magnetic,
coin, and place it in the hand of an individual whom
you can not affect, as you did either of the persons men-
tioned, and subject him to the process of looking at it
as I have directed. When the time of the sitting has
expired, take the usual communication, number two,
and in case you can control him, both physically and
mentally, he is recognized as brought into the electro-
psychological state through number three. t Here,
then, are three individuals in the same state of nerv-
ous impressibility, charged with the same negative
10*


226 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

electricity, stand in the same negative relation to you,
as it regards the doctrine of impressions, and by the
same impression they can all be controlled, collectively
or separately. They are all in the electro-psychologi-
cal state, but were brought there through three differ-
ent plans. But by whatever means individuals may be
brought into this state, yet bear in mind, that through
number two, either with or without contact, you take
the communication, which is the secret, invisible, and
subtile link of controlling power, and without which no
effect whatever can be produced. Every principle of
philosophy is based upon cause, medium, and effect.
Even the Creator himself, were he completely isolated
from this globe, could produce no possible effect upon
it, nor upon the inhabitants of its surface, because there
would be, in such case, no medium of communication
by which he could come in contact with it, or in the
least affect its animal and vegetable kingdoms. Touch
what nerve you please, or obtain the communication,
with or without contact, as you may — I eare not how,
yet it must be transmitted to the brain through the
Median Nerve to the organ of Individuality, and from
thence to the mind. Even if you press the ulnar nerve,
yet it must be by sympathy communicated from this to
the Median Nerve, which is much larger, runs paral-
lel along the arm with it to the spinal cord, and from
thence they both unquestionably pass to the organ of
Individuality in the cerebrum* They are both com-


LECTURE XI. 227

pound nerves, by -which we mean, that they are both
susceptible of voluntary motion and sensation, being
connected with the mind as its agents to transmit the
electro-nervous fluid to and from it, and through which
it holds a correspondence with the externaf world.
Through this it receives by impressions its messages,
and through this by impressions it returns its answers.
To take the communication, therefore, by acting directly
upon the Median Nerve is far preferable to any other
mode, and particularly so upon persons who are not
very sensitive or impressible. The more remote we
take our communication from this nerve, the longer we
must labor to get control, and perhaps 'often fail, and
the more feeble will be our action and impression in
producing any interesting, brilliant, and startling ex-
periments. The next best mode to get a communica-
tion is, as I have uniformly taught, through the ulnar
nerve, and is the best mode to conceal the secret from

Others.

I have now briefly noticed the first three plans,
through which individuals may be brought into the psy-
chological state, and the subtile medium of communica-
tion through which they may be controlled by mental
impressions. In regard to plan number four I would
remark, that as it involves all the experiments, both
electrical and psychological, and as I have already suffi-
ciently noticed these in 'giving directions how to perform
them, so this part of my subjects been anticipated,


228 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and is fully before you. Permit me, however, to re-
mark, that it may be well for you to know why these
experiments are conducive to health, and how it is pos-
sible to perform an operation without pain, when the
patient is wide awake and in his perfect senses. These
two* points I will now philosophically explain.

Why the experiments, when properly conducted, are
conducive to health, is because the mind, by coming in
contact with the electricity of the nerves, moves it with
a force equal to the impression which the operator
makes on the patient, and sends it to that part of the
system to which the patient's attention is directed.
Under its energy the limbs are paralyzed, so that the
subject, by all his exertions, is unable to walk, nor
when walking is he able to stop, and when seated it is
not in his power to rise. His arms, in an instant, are
parabyzecl, so that he can not move them, or they are set in
motion, and he has no power to stop them. . By a men-
tal impression he is made to see his clothes on fire,
or the house falling, and his limbs crushed to pieces.
Or he is made to see a lion, a tiger, or a huge serpent
close in pursuit to devour him. Or, at pleasure, he may
be wrought up to the most supreme ecstasy of joy and
delight, or be made to feel, in the extreme, any other
emotion or passion of the soul. These various impres-
sions throw the electricity of the nerves to every part
of the system with such power <as to burst through all
functional obstructions, equalize the nervous force, and


LECTURE \l. 229

also the circulation of the blood, and thus remove dis-
ease and still pain. It is a well-known fact in medical
jurisprudence, that such supreme and sudden excite-
ments have often cured rheumatism, and made even the
lame walk.

On plan number five, which involves the cure of
persons who are not in this state, I can say but little.
It embraces physical action upon their bodies, accord-
ing to the nature of the disease, and impressions upon
their minds so far as it is possible to produce them. It
involves external applications or internal remedies, as
the case may require. In a word, it involves the excel-
lences of all medical systems in being, and sums them
all up in the supreme beauties of one bright and glo-
rious system, and that system is Electro-Curapathy.
I now turn to the consideration of the last point I prom-
ised to notice.

The true philosophical cause, why a tooth can be ex-
tracted, or a surgical operation performed, without pain,
is, that all feeling or sensation is in the mind, which
holds its residence in the brain, and which, as a living
being of immortal form, has its spiritual hands, feet,
and organs corresponding to those of the body. In-
deed, the body, in all its complicated organism, is but
a visible daguerreotype picture of the invisible spirit
in the brain, and from which it has drawn all its linea
ments of form. Strictly speaking, the body itself has
no feeling. If you touch, for instance, the point of a


230 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

needle to the forefinger, it irritates some minute branch
of a nerve of sensation. This irritation disturbs the
electricity of the nerve that serves as a telegraph wire
along which the disturbed electricity passes, and a
shock is produced upon the identical correspondent spot
of the forefinger of the spirit, disturbs the harmony of
its own beautiful movements in its spiritual sphere, and
this impression produces pain.

If, then, the communication between the mind and
the electricity of the nerve to which you touched the
needle could be cut off — if the telegraph wire should be
so impaired, that the electricity could not pass to the
mind to shock it, then no pain could be felt. This is
always the case in palsy, when the nerves of sensation
are paralyzed. Amputation could then be performed
without pain. Now, excitement will cause the same
insensibility to suffering and pain, if the impression be
sufficiently great to produce it. This is evident, be-
cause as there is, in the human system, but a certain
amount of feeling, therefore in the same ratio that you
excite one part to sensibility the other parts are so far
robbed. The following anecdote related to me of Henry
Clay will illustrate this. It is as follows :

A gentleman on the floor in Congress, in his speech,
made a severe personal attack on Henry Clay. Mr. Clay
was, at the time, very much indisposed, and considered
unable to speak. He whispered to the gentleman who sat
next to him, and said, I must answer him, but beg of you


LECTURE XI. 231

not to let me speak over half an hour. He commenced,
and was soon on wing— soaring, and uniting the lan-
guage of earth and heaven in his defense, till every
period seemed to shake the universe. He was aroused
— was excited— his brain stirred proudly. His half
hour expired, and the gentleman pulled his coat, but
Clay paid no attention to the signal. He kicked his
limbs, but it made no impression. He run a pin sev-
eral times half its length into the calf of his leg. Clay
heeded it not, spoke two hours, sunk exhausted into his
seat, and upbraided the sentinel for not stopping him !
He had felt nothing. Excitement called the electricity
of his system to his brain, and he threw it off by men-
tal effort. In the same degree that sensation was called
to his brain the limbs were robbed.

Dr. Channing, in his sermon on the burning of the
steamboat Lexington, when so many lives were lost,
most eloquently explains this very point. He says :

" We are created with a susceptibility of pain, and
severe pain. This is a part of our nature, as truly as
our susceptibility of enjoyment. God has implanted it,
and has thus opened in the very centre of our being a
fountain of suffering. We carry it within us, and can
no more escape it than. we can our power of thought.
We are apt to throw our pains on outward things as
their causes. It is the fire, the sea, the sword, or hu-
man enmity, which gives us pain. But there is no
pain in the fire or the sword, which passes thence into


232 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

our souls. The pain begins- and ends in the soul itself.
Outward things are only the occasions. Even the body
has no pain in it, which it infuses into the mind. Of
itself it is incapable of suffering. This hand may be
cracked, crushed in the rack of the inquisitor, and that
burnt in a slow fire ; but in these cases it is not the
fibres, the blood-vessels, the bones of the hand which
endure pain. These are- merely connected, by the will
of the Creator, with the springs of pain in the soul.
Here, here is the only origin and seat of suffering. If
God so willed, the gashing of the flesh with a knife,
the piercing of the heart with a dagger, might be the
occasion of exquisite delight. We know that, in the
heat of battle, a wound is not felt, and that men, dying
for their faith by instruments of torture, have expired
with triumph on their lips. In these cases, the spring
of suffering in the mind is not touched by the lacera-
tions of the body, in consequence of the absorbing
action of other principles of the soul. All suffering is
to be traced to the susceptibility, the capacity of pain,
which belongs to our nature, and which the Creator has
implanted ineradicably within us."

I close by remarking, that as the science of Electri-
cal Psychology is the doctrine of supreme impressions,
so you will readily perceive why a surgical operation can
be performed without pain.


LECTUKE XII. 233


LECTURE XII.

[The following Lecture upon the science of Genetology, which
was then called Natalology, was delivered, by request, to the La-
dies of Troy, N. Y., in the Morris Place Hall, in February, 1844.
And; as it belongs to the subject of Electrical Psychology and the
great doctrine of impressions that this science involves, it is here
inserted in its appropriate place. The Author has generally de-
livered it as the last lecture of the course, to his private classes,
when giving them instructions in Electrical Psychology.]

Ladies :

The purpose for -which we are now assembled is to
take into consideration the science of Genetology or
Human Beauty, as founded upon the doctrine of 'im-
pressions. I contend that the human species can be
gradually improved through the harmonious operation
of mental impressions, exercised by the mother, and that
the time will come when they will be born into existence
with just such lineaments of form as we may choose.
This is no idle dream — no infatuation of a disturbed
brain, but sober reality. Human Beauty has been, in
all ages, admired, praised, loved, and desired by the
millions of our race. Its charms have been sung by
the poet in thoughts that burn ; have taxed the finest
conceptions of the artist and the sculptor, and have


234 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

been made to breathe upon the canvas, and to speak
in the marble. The charms of Beauty have been
dwelt upon, and painted by the eloquent orator, and
have moved the hearts of all human kind. All know
and feel the power of Beauty, and ardently covet the
gem.

The subject now to be considered is, whether,
through the power of the mental impressions of the
mother, her unborn child, during the period from con-
ception to birth, can be moulded into beauty, and born
into existence with those admirable lineaments of form
that so much delight the beholder. To the candid
consideration of this interesting subject I now invite
attention.

That the mother can greatly affect her unborn child
is unquestionably true. No one will deny, that by
some sudden impulse of mind — such as extreme fear
or joy, she has often produced abortion, or else greatly
injured her offspring. I know of one well-authenti-
cated case, where the mother was extremely terrified
at a young cub when she was about three months en-
ciente. It was her twelfth child, and was born an
idiot, while her other eleven children were intelligent
and active. 1^ was a boy. He lived to fourteen
years of age, and had many actions peculiar to the
bear. There are instances, too numerous to mention^
where human beings have not only acted like, but even
resembled, some species of the brute or bird race.


LECTURE XII. 235

And as the uniform testimony of mothers is, that they
were frightened during pregnancy by the creature to
which the offspring was likened, so no other satisfactory
cause ever has been assigned for the effect produced.

A wealthy lady, in Boston, was frightened by a par-
rot. Her daughter, now ten or twelve years of age, is
a mediocre, and her voice and manner of speaking re-
semble those of this bird. A lady of my acquaint-
ance, on seeing the head of her cosset lamb suddenly
crushed, brought forth a son, about six months after
this occurrence, whose temples were much pressed in,
and the forehead protruded as did that of the injured
lamb, yet his intellect was not in the least impaired.
A singular circumstance occurred a few years ago in
Bunkum County, N. C. A girl was there exhibited,
who was born with only one leg and one arm. A lady
who was about two months advanced in her time, had
a strong desire to see this girl. Her curiosity being
great, she examined the deformed object with long and
unwearied attention. Her friends had to force her,
as it were, from the exhibition. She went home, but
the image of the unfortunate girl was but too deeply
impressed upon her mind to be forgotten. She con-
versed about it by day, and it was the subject of her
dreams by night. She at length got an impression
that her child would be born like the object that
haunted her brain. Her time of delivery came, and


236 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

her fears were realized. She brought forth a daugh-
ter 'with only one leg and one arm !

How often it has occurred, where a lady has had a
Strong desire, or longing for wine, that she has com-
municated the color of the liquor by impression to her
child. In like manner, through strong mental impres-
sions, she has stamped upon the unborn child a straw-
berry, blackberry, grape, or any fruit for which she
had an ardent longing, and made it perfect both as it
regards its color and shape. Endless instances of this
character can be produced, and also the uniform testi-
mony of the mother that she had a longing desire for
what appears upon the child. Against this, the argu-
ments and objections of some medical writers and their
adherents are of no weight, as they are evidently en-
tirely ignorant of the electrical philosophy of this sub-
ject. The mental impression, or longing of the moth-
er must, however, far exceed her usual impressions in
order to produce this result upon her offspring.

I am not arguing any new truth, nor the discovery of
any new principle of action, but what has been known from
the earliest of human records. The Bible history admits
the principle everi in its application to the brute race.
Laban deceived Jacob by giving to him Leah for a wife
instead of Rachel, for whom he had served him seven
years, by tending his flocks. He then proposed, that he
should serve him seven years more for Rachel. To
pacify Jacob, Laban offered him what he supposed to be


LECTURE XII. 237

a poor chance for wages. He told him, that all the
speckled cattle should be his. But Jacob resorted to
a plan by which* he sufficiently punished the selfish
spirit of Laban. He put speckled rods at the bottom
of the "watering troughs. He kept the male and female
cattle apart. There is no question, that he allowed the
males to have free access to water, but kept the fe-
males away till they were very thirsty, even bellowing
and bleating for water. In this condition he allowed
them to mingle only at the troughs. And as water is
colorless, nothing but the speckled rods could be seen
by the thirsty and drinking females, and under this
strong impression they conceived. But this is not all.
Jacob understood his subject sufficiently well to go over
the same ground again the next day, and keep up the
female herd till the same great thirst returned. This
would bring to their minds what seemed to them a
speckled fluid, and to those already conceived the im-
pression would continue to deepen. True, Laban re-
peatedly changed the wages even up to ten times ; but
this was of no avail, because Jacob as often changed
the scene of action by preparing the ^causes that must
philosophically produce their corresponding results in
the animal economy. Hence I again assert that I am
not arguing any new principle of action. I claim no
such discovery, but merely claim the discovery of its
philosophy, and of having reduced it to a system capa-
ble of improving and ennobling our race.


238 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

Such are its facts, and I now turn to its philosophy.
Gold can be dissolved in aqua regia. A five-dollar
gold piece thrown into this liquid dissolves and soon
disappears, only as the whole liquid assumes the color
of the gold. Let this liquid be properly prepared, and
dip the ends of the two wires of a galvanic battery into
it. In this liquid you may then immerse any metallic
article you please. Take, for instance, a silver watch-
case with your own name engraved upon it, and many
curiously wrought characters and devices ; immerse
this in the liquid, and the positive and negative forces
of galvanic action passing from the battery through
these two wires into the solution will seize the incon-
ceivably fine particles of gold and lay them upon the
watch-case as solid as though they had been melted
there. You may continue this process until every par-
ticle of the half-eagle shall be placed upon the watch-
case, and yd; the perfect identity of your name, and
all the marks and characters engraved upon it, will be
retained. This is called galvanizing metals. A second
copper bank-plate can be made from the original by
galvanism, so that every letter and mark shall be exact,
and the plate be a perfect fac-siimle of the original.
Hence we perceive that through the positive and nega-
tive forces of galvanism, which is but one form of elec-
tricity, a perfect identity is preserved.

We will now apply this great principle to the argu-
ment under consideration. The monthly evacuations


LECTURE XII. 289

of the female are a universal solvent in which are in-
volved exact proportions of all the constituent elements
of her body. This redundancy is given her by the
Creator for the propagation of her race. As soon as
she conceives, the "\yomb closes up, and. this same re-
dundant compound of her being is secreted in the
•womb, as the fluid in which the foetus is 'immersed and
swims, and is the raw material out of which its body
is to be manufactured. And while I am upon this
point, permit me to remark, that as soon as the child
is born this same redundant substance is carried through
the lacteal secretions and manufactured into nourish-
ment which the infant draws from its mother's bosom.
Hence the menses are the prepared substance to pro-
duce the child's body in the womb, and to sustain it at
the breast.

Through the galvanic action of the positive and neg-
ative forces of her involuntary nerves the foetus is
formed. These forces seize the elementary particles
of this solution, and convey them to the conception,
which is the nebulo-centre or nucleus to which they all
tend, similar to the particles of gold in solution to the
watch-case. Hence if a woman were to conceive while
wrapped in total darkness, and never see the man by
whom she conceived, nor get the most distant impres-
sion of his image, and could she, at the moment of
conception, be consigned to a sleep of profound insen-
sibility till the time of her delivery came, she would


240 ELECTKICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

unquestionably bring forth an offspring exactly in her
own image. It would be as perfect a fac-simile of her
own organism, form, and features as the second bank-
plate was of the first from which by galvanic action it
was produced. But while the galvanic powers of her
involuntary nerves, through the positive forces, are form-
ing the new being in her own image, the voluntary
nerves, through which the voluntary powers of her
mind act, are also producing their effects by moulding
the new being in the image of the person on whom her
mind is most powerfully placed. Hence if her self-
esteem is great, and she fancies herself superior to her
husband, and has great self-love, and but little regard
for him, she will often consult her mirror, and her child
will most resemble herself notwithstanding the im-
pression of her husband's countenance and the features
of all others around her. •

But if she, on the contrary, cherishes a warm and
generous affection to her husband, and if he be far dis-
tant from home and exposed to dangers on land or
ocean, her mind goes with him and lingers in imagina-
tion upon his image. The child is born, but it is in
the likeness of its father. If her love and esteem to-
ward herself and husband are about equally divided
and balanced, the child will be a blended picture of the
two. The opposite passions of hatred and dislike will
produce the same result as it regards form of features
and personal appearance. Or if the mother should


LECTURE XII. 241

entertain a very high regard for her minister, doctor, 1
or any friend, and circumstances should occur to bring
him frequently to her mind, her child would resemble
him. Suppose her husband should be jealous of any of
these, or of some boarder in the family whom she even
hated, and charge her with conjugal infidelity, she would
be inclined, under such circumstances, to keep her mind
upon him in detestation, fear that her child might re-
semble him, and when born all her fears would be real-
ized. Such circumstances have separated many a hus-
band and wife, and broken up many a family when the
wife was virtuous, and her honor unsullied and pure as
the snowflake ere it falls.

In this view of the subject it will be seen that every
countenance upon which the enciente mother gazes, and
every object, whether animate or inanimate, presented
to her view, has a tendency to produce an impression,
either favorable or unfavorable, upon the foetus. And
as all form, motion, and power belong to, and exist in,
mind, and can be communicated through electric action
from the mother's mind to the foetus, so when beautiful
forms and pleasing sights are presented to her with suf-
ficient power, she transmits them by a mental impres-
sion to the embryo being as a part of its future beauty.
So, on the other hand, when horrid forms and fearful
sights are presented to her mind with sufficient power,
and as her mind now contains these deformities, she
11


242 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

transmits them also by mental impression to her child,
and perchance effects its ruin.

If we contemplate all form, motion, and power as
existing in mind, and if the mind has, indeed, its spir-
itual arms, hands, and fingers, and limbs, feet, and
toes, and of which the natural ones are only correspond-
ent manifestations, may not, then, the withdrawing of
the spiritual arm from action in the mother's mind be
the cause of preventing the natural one in the foetus
from being developed and produced ? She deeply con-
templates a girl without an arm, and hence sends no
motion from her spiritual arm, and therefore produces
no electric action through the corresponding nerves to
organize the natural arm of the foetus, and hence her
child is born without an arm. The voluntary impres-
sion of her mind may be sufficiently great to overpower
all involuntary action in that part. This would ac-
count for the crush of the lamb's head, before stated,
and for all mishaps being transmitted by a deep im-
pression from the mother's mind to the corresponding
part of the foetus. It would account for the color of
Jacob's cattle, because all colors exist only in the rays
of light which are but a result of electric action. It
would account philosophically for the fact how the col-
or of wine and the colors and shapes of berries are in
like manner stamped upon the unborn being. It would
account for the fact how even the mother's disposition
may be phrenologically and hereditarily communicated


LECTURE XI. 243

to her offspring. By exercising too much her acquisi-
tiveness or secretiveness — or by exciting too deeply her
combativeness, destructiveness, or revengeful feelings,
she may communicate these hereditarily to her child,
and thus sow, in the embryo, the seeds of the future
robber, liar, or even murderer. The lady, while en-
ceinte, walks upon enchanted ground. She can not
stir without touching some string that may vibrate
either harmony or discord in her offspring's soul long
after her head shall have been laid in the dust. Phre-
nology must take one step farther back. She must
commence her instructions at the commencement of
our embryo being. She must there take her stand" at
the fountain- head of existence, and thunder her lessons
of eloquence as she moves down the stream of human
life to the silent grave, nor cease her AYarning voice till
the finger of death shall touch her lip.

The subject, Ladies, of Human Beauty is now fairly
open before us, and its vast importance seems to
awaken in your minds, as we proceed, an increasing
interest. I am now ready to have the grand question
introduced — How are our children to be born into
existence with just such lineaments of form, or Human
Beauty, as we may desire 1

To answer this question under standingly, I will take
into consideration the general directions to be pur-
sued, and the means to be used in order to produce
the noblest specimen of Human Beauty. I desire, at


244 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

the very onset, to introduce the subject to you in its
highest perfection, so far as I am able. To this end
I must select a lady of brilliant talents, and 'who is
highly educated and accomplished as an ornament of
her sex, but whose features and form are but of ordi-
nary mould. I merely desire one who is capable of
producing the strongest possible mental impression.
Let this lady select, before she conceives, a portrait,
bust, miniature, or picture of some beautiful, talented,
and distinguished individual, or the living person, she
would desire her child to be like both in appearance
and character. Let it be a picture that she greatly
admires for its fine proportions and beauty of person.
Let her keep her mind upon it until she entirely fa-
miliarizes herself with its features and form. Let her
now conceive with this deep impression on her mind ;
and after this, let her still continue to gaze upon, and
daily contemplate, the admirable grace of its form, and
the charming expression of its countenance. Let her
place it where it can be readily seen. Let her imbibe
for this image a sentimental passion, indelibly im-
press it upon the heart, and interweave and blend it,
as it were, with her being. Let her contemplate it by
day with such intense interest and devotion as to
transplant, if possible, its image to her midnight
dreams. And let her constantly long and desire, and
ardently hope and expect, that her child shall be like


LECTURE XII. 245

this in form and soul. These are to be her constant
feelings and impressions till the day of delivery.

In addition to this, let the most admirable order,
arrangement, and comfort pervade her house, and par-
ticularly her own apartment. Let its furniture be
beautiful. Let it be adorned with pictures of the
most pleasing and delightful landscapes embracing all
the beauties and varieties of nature, and such life-like
scenery as shall awaken and rouse the noblest powers
of her ideality, sublimity, and imagination. Let her
frequently go out to gaze upon, and contemplate nature
as she is, whether on the earth beneath, or in the
starry fields that mantle the bosom of night. By
these means she will keep her mind in balance, and
bring it into harmony with all that is grand and beau-
tiful in the works of the Creator. And not only so,
but let her soul be kept serene. Let her passions not
be excited. Let her anger, jealousy, and vengeance
remain in slumber, and no language be used to ruffle
her tranquillity. I am speaking of a highly educated,
accomplished, and talented woman. And, lastly, let
her food be wholesome, plain, and prepared to her
wishes, and adapted to her appetite. Let these direc-
tions be faithfully observed during her entire period
of gestation, and her child will be moulded in the
image of the picture, or living person she contemplated,
and be born into existence a noble specimen of Human
Beauty ; and under proper phrenological culture it can


246 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

be borne on in the path of improvement, and finally
elevated to the highest physical beauty, and intellectual
and moral perfection of our nature.

I have now considered what I call a perfect case,
the noblest specimen of man. And in order to pro-
duce this happy result, we perceive that the mother
must be highly educated, enlightened, and refined. It .
depends more upon her than the father. If the father
should possess the talents of an angel, and the mother
be deficient in intellect, her offspring, particularly the
sons, would never rise above mediocrity. In such
case the best intellect is in favor of the daughters.
But reverse it, and let the father be deficient, and the
mother highly talented, and she will produce intelli-
gent children of both sexes, but this intelligence will
be far more strongly developed in the sons than in the
daughters. An instance can not be found where an
imbecile mother ever produced a man of sterling tal-
ents, even though the father, as such, were most emi
nently distinguished. All talented and great men
have had great mothers who, even if they were unedu-
cated, still possessed the elements of original great
ness.

Owing, therefore, to this great diversity of intellec
tual, moral, and physical beauty and deformity in
females, it can not be expected, that the grand period
will soon arrive when all these difficulties will be sur-
mounted, and when our race shall attain that physical,


LECTURE XII. 247

mental, and moral beauty which our subject involves,
foreshadows, and insures. Comparatively but few fe-
males are as yet qualified to successfully introduce
their offspring into existence in Human Beauty, yet
the most deformed and ignorant female can be in-
structed and directed how to improve her progeny.
Her children again can be still farther improved and
elevated, and so on to succeeding generations till the
end, we contemplate, shall be obtained, and the highest
hopes, and the brightest mid-day dream of the philan-
thropist, as to the perfection of humanity, shall be
consummated.

My argument, thus far, relates to those of the fe-
male race who are not yet in the electro-psychological
state, but who are still capable of gradually perfecting
their progeny in proportion to the strength and power
of their impressions, and thus moving them onward to
the fair fields of Human Beauty. But in all these
cases it can be effected by the wife only, independent
of her husband. But there are many who are nat-
urally in the psychological state, and millions more
who, by a slight exertion, can be brought into it.
Upon all such a mental and moral impression can be
made to any extent we choose. In all these instances
it would be in the power of the husband to select the
portrait or picture in the likeness and beauty of which
he would desire his child to be moulded. And by pro-
ducing the impression psychologically upon the mind


248 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

of his companion once or twice per day, the end would
be obtained, and in all such cases the finest specimens
of Human Beauty could now be produced. How im-
portant, then, that the science of Electrical Psychology
should be thoroughly learned and understood by all, so
that, through their assistance, as many as possible
may be, by perseverance, brought into the state, and
that the great work of producing these sublime im-
pressions may now be understandingly commenced,
and some rare specimens of Human Beauty, under the
energy of this science, be presented to the world.

We see then, Ladies, the supreme importance of
woman being highly educated and accomplished. Col-
leges should be dedicated to her, and all the great and
useful sciences, that strengthen, expand, and elevate
the mind, should be laid at her feet. Her mind should
be early imbued Ayith political science, and taught the
value of liberty, and the deep-toned love of country.
She should be taught the history of fallen empires,
kingdoms, and republics, and be made acquainted with
the hardships, toils, and sufferings of our revolutionary
heroes. She should be taught the lofty dignity, honor,
and heroism of George Washington, the cradled son
of Columbia. She should be educated in every sense
equal to the man. It has been generally supposed, in
by-gone days, that if woman could barely read and
Write, it was abundant, as she had nothing to do but
attend to her domestic concerns, and to take care of


lecture xir. 249

children. But the arrest of her progress in science
has but proved to be an arrest of the intellectual,
moral, and social advancement of the world. Her sta-
tion, so far from being insignificant, is indeed a most
responsible one. She holds in her silken grasp the
destiny of empires, and the weal and woe of our race.
She has not only a moulding power over her unborn
offspring, but during the first ten years of its exist-
ence, as it is almost exclusively confined to her soci-
ety, so from her "it still continues to draw, in a great
measure, its cast of character. Hence she should be
educated and qualified to breathe to her child the
purest thoughts and noblest principles, and to inspire
its tender bosom with the deep-toned love of country.
She should be qualified to impress upon it a high sense
of honor and true greatness, and the most patriotic
and exalted sentiments. And, in order to do this suc-
cessfully, she should be well acquainted with phreno-
logical science and human nature, so as to make her
impressions understandingly and forcibly upon the
proper organs of the brain. These organs would then
be more and more harmoniously developed, and the child
would continue to improve in beauty of person, and in
intellectual and moral greatness, as he advanced to

maturity.

In the light our subject now stands, how lamentable,
and how awful is the consideration, that our children
should be committed to the care of ignorant, degraded,


250 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

and too often of wicked and unprincipled servants, to
be almost exclusively reared by them! There the
seeds of ignorance, if not of vice, are early sown.
How elevated and responsible is the mother's station !
How fatal to the character and welfare of her offspring
are ignorance and vice ! How dreadful, how alarming
and fearful, to see her resign her fond charge, and-
commit its destiny, for weal or woe, to such unskilled
hands ! She had better resign her child to the silent
grave, where, even though her lids are filled with
tears, she can yet smile, that its pains are o'er, that
its beating pulse is still, its spirit unstained, and its
burning brow is cold ! Yes, Ladies, the contempla-
tion of this subject is so painful, that I choose to leave
you to draw your own conclusions rather than to ex-
press my thoughts.

True, the pulpit insists on her social and religious
rights, because this is popular. But by neglecting to
plead in behalf of her civil, her political, and in-
tellectual bights it has forgotten her elevated sta-
tion and high destiny, fallen from heaven to earth, and,
by its fall, crushed the dearest hopes of the philan-
thropist for the speedy, intellectual, and moral advance-
ment of our race. It will not, and dare not speak in
a bold, firm, and untrembling voice in defense of those
rising sciences and improvements of the age, however
useful, against which the current of popular opinion
strongly sets. It has ceased to breathe the pure,


LECTURE XII. 251

healthful, and invigorating breezes of Paradise, that
inspire an independent and godlike heroism. Woman
is thus, in a voice of pretended mercy, oppressed, and
it dare not even rebuke oppression and crime, when
clothed in gold and sustained by popular impulse.

The pulpit is the great engine of moral power and
moral reform. But by neglecting the science of Hu-
man Beauty, and the general and extensive education
of woman, its energies are in a great degree para-
lyzed. But it is destined, by the decree of the Ruling
Heavens, to be aroused from its dreadful slumberings
upon the monster Popularity, whose breath is con-
suming it, and to thunder its energizing and regenera-
ting powers for the accomplishment of this great end
which involves the moral elevation and the intellectual
grandeur of man. The science of Genetology, em-
bracing the doctrine of psychological impressions, in
connection with the gospel- of Jesus Christ, is destined
to renovate the world and usher in the millennial
morn. Extensive combinations are formed, and the
most untiring exertions are constantly made to improve,
not only the animal, but even the vegetable race.
Fruits and grains, in a few years, have been brought
to great perfection, by man simply co-operating with
nature so as to enable her to make the most favorable im-
pressions to produce what is beautiful in her vegetable
department. So also in the animal kingdom. Horses,
sheep, and oxen, and even the race of swine, are annu-


252 ELECTRICAL PSYCHOLOGY.

ally improving in form and beauty, and premiums are
offered for the finest specimens, both as to symmetry
and size. But not a single thought is bestowed as to
improving and beautifying the godlike lineaments of
the human form. To improve these through the edu-
cating of -woman, and enlightening her how to make a
psychological impression upon her embryo-child, is but
to improve the morals of our race. The theme is a
great one, and it will require future generations to
move it on, and to develop and present it perfect to
the world. It will be the scroll of Human Beauty
unrolled. This is indeed a sublime hope.

" Eternal hope ! when yonder spheres sublime
Peal'd their first notes to sound the march of time,
Thy joyous birth began ; but not to fade
When all the sister planets have decayed.
When wrapt in fire, the realms of ether glow,
And heaven's last thunder shakes the earth below,
Thou, undismayed, shalt o'er the ruin smile,
And light thy torch at nature's funeral pile."


♦*•«» » f ***
