SPIRIT MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED AND EXPLAINED. Judge Edmonds Refuted;
or, Plain Propositions of the Spirit Hypothesis.
By John Bovee Dods. New York: De Witt & Davenport, 1854.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/spiritmanifestat00dod).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SPIRIT

MANIFESTATIONS

EXAMINED  AND  EXPLAINED.

JUDGE EDMONDS REFUTED;


AN  EXPOSITION  OF  THE

littolttttlarjj  $0fotr«  raft  $iwiintis

OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.

BY JOHN BOVEE;DODS,

AUTHOR  OF  «  PHILOSOPHY  OP  ELECTBICAL  PSYCHOLOGY," "  IMMORTALITY  TRIUMPHANT,"
ETC.,  ETC.


NEW  YORK  :
DE WITT & DAVENPORT, PUBLISHERS,

160  &  162  NASSAU  STREET.


y


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1854,  by

DE  WITT  &  DAVENPORT,

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court,  for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York.


W.  H.  Tinson,  Stereotypy.

24  Beeknvan  street,  N.  Y.


Holman,  Gray  &  Co.,  Printers.
New- York.


TO

HON. WILLIAM LUSK CRANDAL,

A

PHILOSOPHIC WRITER
ON  THS

EDUCATION OF MAN,

AND  THE

PEIEND OF CHILDHOOD


ffcis  ®0rk


16 RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED

BY

HIS SINCERE AND DEVOTED FRIEND,

THE  AUTHOR.


INTRODUCTION.


The  substance  of  the  following  Lectures,  on
the  rationale  of  the  so-called  spirit-manifesta-
tions, was  delivered  at  the  City  Hall  in
Auburn,  N.  Y.,  in  April,  1851.  In  June,
1852, 1  wrote  them  out  with  an  intention,  after
delivering  them  a  few  times,  to  hand  them
over  for  publication.  But  this  has  been
neglected,  and  I  have  continued  to  deliver
them  occasionally  for  eighteen  months  past,
when  and  where  invited  by  my  friends  to
do  so.

I  make  the  above  explanation,  because  it
will  be  perceived  by  the  reader,  that  in  one
of  my  Lectures  I  make  a  statement,  that  I
knew  of  no  one  who  had  taken  the  middle


VI  INTRODUCTION.

ground  between  believers  and  skeptics  in  the
spirit-manifestations,  and  who  was  a  rational
believer — that  is,  a  believer  on  natural  princi-
ples. And  as  I  use  considerable  language  of
this  character,  it  might  be  considered  incorrect,
when  Mr.  Rogers  has  published  a  work  that
occupies  the  middle  ground  between  believers
and  skeptics.  But  as  my  Lectures  were  written
and  delivered  before  his  book  appeared,  so
this  matter  will  be  understood  by  all.  I  have
no  faith  whatever  in  the  odic  force  of  Reich-
enbach,  which  Mr.  Rogers  seems  to  have
adopted  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  the  spirit-
manifestations.  For  this  the  reader  will  find
my  reasons  stated  in  the  Appendix  to  these
Lectures.

I  will  now  say,  that  I  had  abandoned  the
idea  of  publishing  my  views  in  connection  with
the  spirit-manifestations,  and  had  coi  eluded
to  prepare  a  work  devoted  exclusively  to  the
exposition  of  the  instincts  of  man  as  connected
with  the  involuntary  potvers  of  his  mind,  which,
as  a  branch  of  mental  philosophy,  has  been
entirely  overlooked.  But  as  Judge  Edmonds,
of  this city,  has  just  published a  work  in


INTRODUCTION.  Vll

defense  of  the  spirit-manifestations,  and  given
the  subject  the  weight  and  sanction  of  his
judicial  name,  and  even  resigned  his  seat  in
consequence,  as  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court,
and  as  the  doctrine  is  gradually  assuming  a
more  imposing  attitude  before  the  public,  so  I
feel  in  duty  bound  to  listen  to  the  solicitations
of  my  friends,  and  publish  this  humble  effort
of  mine  in  the  hope  that  it  may  do  good.
And  though  sensible  that  errors  may  be  de-
tected and  pointed  out,  yet  I  am  fully  satisfied
that  the  thought — the  leading  idea  involved
in  the  work — is  in  accordance  with  nature  and
truth,  and  this  is  all  that  I  feel  myself  bound
to  defend against  any  attack  that  may  be

made.

J.  B.  DODS.


CONTENTS.

Pagb

DEDICATION 3

INTRODUCTION 5

LECTURE I.

PUBLIC  OPINION  OF  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS  AND
MEDIUMS  STATED AND CONSIDERED 13-26

The  author  urged  to  explain  the  spirit-manifestations — They
are  not  produced  by  the  agency  of  departed  spirits,  are  not
a  humbug,  but  the  effect  of  a  natural  cause — Three  classes
of  minds — the  credulous,  the  skeptical,  and  those  who
calmly  investigate — Origin  of  rappings  in  the  family  of  Mr.
Fox,  March,  1848 — Intelligence  discovered ;  the  a-b-c  pro-
cess, rapping  and  writing  mediums ;  they  are  sincerely  hon-
est— The  mysterious  nature  of  the  subject — The  public
divided  into  believers  and  skeptics  ;  both  are  in  error ;  the
manifestations  may  be  true  if  not  caused  by  spirits — The
character  of  its  mediums  and  advocates  :  their  respectability,
their  number ;  rapidity  with  which  the  doctrine  is  spread-
ing— Periodicals  in  its  defense — It  portends  a  new  revelation.

LECTURE II.

INVOLUNTARY  RAPPING:  HOW  PRODUCED,  AND  THE

FORCE OF HABIT ARGUED 27-40

Two  points  to  be  considered,  viz.  :  Motion  and  intelligence
connected  with  it — Nervous  impressibility  through  passivity,
and  the  result — The  state  of  the  two  brains ;  the  involuntary
nerves  electrically  charged  more  than  the  voluntary  is  the
cause  of  electro-magnetic  sounds  being  given  off — Case  of
the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  and  Miss  Slaughter,  of  Virginia —
Case  of  a  lady  reported  in  Professor  Silliman's  Journal  who
gave  off  electric  sounds — Mediums  produce  sounds  in  a  sim-
ilar manner — Sound  is  propagated  and  conducted — The  force
of  habit ;  the  stuttering  boy ;  the  performer  on  the  piano ;  he
plays  by  instinct.

LECTURE III.

INVOLUNTARY  MOTION  IN  GENERAL  CONSIDERED. 41-63
Involuntary  motion  among  the  Greeks,  Romans,  Druids,  and
6avage  tribes — The  Pythian  priestess  and  spinning  dervishes
— Dr.  Babbington's  account — The  cat-mewing  nuns ;  the
biting  nuns — Barclay's  account  of  Quaker  tremblings  and
shakings  ;  a  Quaker  lady  in  Salem,  Mass. — Seeress  of  Pre-
vorst— Dr.  Stone  on  the  progress  of  fanaticism — The  devil-


X  CONTENTS.

Pagb
chase,  marble-playing,  and  stick-riding — The  jerks  among
converts — The  spirit-rapping  mania  is  from  the  same  origin
as  all  other  involuntary  motions.

LECTURE IV.

THE  INSTINCTS  OF  MAN  AND  THE  INVOLUNTARY
POWERS  OF  HIS  MIND  CONSIDERED,  AND  THE
INTELLIGENCE  CONNECTED  WITH  SPIRIT-MANI-
FESTATIONS  EXPLAINED 54-71

Every  part  of  the  human  system  is  double ;  the  brain  is
double,  and  the  mind  that  pervades  is  double  ;  the  cerebrum,
or  front  brain,  considered;  the  cerebellum,  or  back  brain,
considered — The  office  of  each  as  the  organ  of  the  mind  ;  the
front  brain  contains  the  voluntary  powers  of  the  mind,  such
as  thought  and  reason — The  back  brain  contains  the  invol-
untary powers  of  the  mind,  such  as  instinct  and  intuition
— The  senses  involuntary — Instinct  itself  considered  in
brutes  and  in  men — Pope  on  instinct ;  creatures  have  both
reason  and  instinct ;  man  has  both — Presentiments — All  the
intelligence  in  spirit-manifestations  is  from  the  involuntary
power  of  instinct — The  medium  has  no  will  in  writing —
Clay — Webster ;  their  communications— Writing  in  Hebrew,
Greek,  German,  French,  and  Indian  languages.

LECTURE  V.

THE  INSTINCTS  OF  MAN;  HIS  INVOLUNTARY  POW-
ERS OF  MIND  AND  THE  INTELLIGENCE  CONNECTED
WITH  THE  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS  CONTINUED.  72-96
Mesmerism,  psychology,  and  catalepsy  rouse  instinct  into
action ;  in  one  of  these  states  mediums  must  be — Seeress  of
Prevorst — What  constitutes  a  good  medium ;  false  mediums
— Psychological  impressions  and  experiment  stated — Fits —
The  whole  subject  of  the  spirit-manifestations  brought  to
the  test — Proof  that  it  is  psychology  or  mesmerism  under
the  energy  of  which  the  whole  is  done — Objections  stated
and  met  in  every  form — Contradictions  pointed  out — How
tables  are  tipped,  moved,  and  raised — Mediums  appeal  to

,  Scripture — The  angel  announcing  the  birth  of  Christ  to
shepherds  ;  the  splendor  of  the  scene — The  transfiguration —
The  angel  in  Gethsemane — The  crucifixion  and  resurrection.

LECTURE  VI.

THE  INSTINCTS  OF MAN— HIS  INVOLUNTARY  POW-
ERS OF  MIND,  AND  THE  INTELLIGENCE  CONNECTED
WITH  THE  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS,  CONCLUDED  97-113
Man  is  capable  of  double  consciousness ;  if  not,  where  do
spirits  get  the  power  to  communicato— Positive  proof  that


CONTENTS.  XI

Pagb
man  has  instinct  and  intuition  in  the  back  brain — Mesmer-
ism proves  it — The  involuntary  power  never  reasons,  but
knows ;  through  this,  God  has  inspired  men — From  the
instincts  of  the  lower  animals  man  has  obtained  his  first  idea
of  the  arts  and  improvements — History  testifies  it,  and  poets
sing  it — By  instinct  the  medium  writes;  by  it  the  somnam-
bulist walks  safely  where  he  could  not  by  reason  when  awake
— Mesmerism  and  psychology  useful  in  their  place;  not
needed  to  make  a  new  revelation  of  moral  truth — Mr.  Davis
and  the  Bible — Swedeaborg  and  the  Bible.

LECTURE VII.

THE  BIBLE  CAN  NOT  BE  SUPERSEDED  BY  A  NEW
REVELATION  OF  MORAL  TRUTH— THE  MAGNAN-
IMITY OF CHRIST 114-129

Improvements  may  be  made  in  the  arts  and  sciences,  but
not  in  moral  truth— The  moral  precepts  of  Christ — Mr.
Davis'  description  of  other  planets  and  their  inhabitants  is
no  revelation  of  moral  truth — The  globe  contains  more  of
natural  science  than  man  can  learn;  the  Bible  more  of  moral
truth  than  man  has  yet  practiced — Christ's  revelation  tran-
scends all  others — Christ  came  from  heaven  and  knew  man's
moral  wants — His  power;  his  greatness  ;  his  intelligence  ;  his
moral  grandeur — His  reign  and  its  consummation — He  is  the
First  and  the  Last.

LECTURE  VIII.

NOTICE  OF  JUDGE  EDMONDS'  BOOK,  AND  HIS  ARGU-
MENT  CONSIDERED 127-144

Judge  Edmonds,  Dr.  Dexter,  Governor  Tallmadge,  authors
of  the  work  called  "  Spiritualism,"  pages  505 — The  candor  of
the  writers — Swedenborg's  communications  considered  ;  also
Bacon's — The  character  ascribed  to  Christ — Communications
from  Clay,  Webster,  and  Calhoun — Dr.  Adin  Ballou— The
beauty  of  Charity — Andrew  Jackson  Davis'  book — Spirit-
intercourse  the  Judge  thinks  will  uproot  infidelity,  and  unite
all  denominations  in  one  harmony — Mrs.  Fish  ;  the  first  me-
dium, her  candor — Effects  of  the  gospel  in  1800  years — All
magnanimous  objects  move  slowly — The  volumes  of  nature
and  revelation  contrasted  ;  the  human  race  are  the  students
of  nature ;  their  progress  slow ;  the  same  in  revelation —
All  men  differ  in  nature,  and  why  not  in  revelation  ? — All
are  progressing  and  approximating  a  common  goal  of  senti-
ment— To  accomplish  this  union  may  require  thousands  of
years — The  agent  will  not  be  spiritual  intercourse  by  which
it  will  be  effected,  but  the  power  of  the  press — The  spirit-
manifestations  the  Judge  makes  older  than  the  Christian  era,
and  what  have  they  done  compared  with  the  gospel  ?  Nothing.


XU  CONTENTS.

Pagb

LECTURE  IX.

CONSIDERATION OF JUDGE EDMONDS' ARGUMENT

CONTINUED 145-172

Physical  manifestations  considered  ;  the  bell  is  taken  from
M.'s  hand  and  rung  ;  comb  taken  from  the  hair;  shawl  from
the  shoulders,  and  feet  tripped  up  by  the  spirits — Table
moved  and  bass-viol  and  violins  placed  in  the  Judge's  hand
and  hung  about  his  neck  and  played  upon,  and  the  Judge
struck  with  the  fiddle-bow — Ladies  tied  together  with  a
handkerchief — Spirits  requesting  lights  to  be  put  out —
Legerdemain ;  tricks  with  cards ;  bell-ringing  examined —
Were  the  rooms  well  lighted? — The  Judge  is  a  writing-me-
dium and  sees  visions — He  is  in  the  electro-psychological
state,  and  sees  and  hears  all  these  things — Clairvoyants
told  the  secrets  of  his  bosom — The  chair  jerked  from  under
the  Judge — All  these  things  should  be  performed  before  an
audience  of  four  or  five  hundred  persons  to  be  proved  true.

LECTURE  X.

THE EXISTENCE OF REICHENBACH'S ODIC-FORCE
EXAMINED - 173-215

Electricity  substituted  for  odic-force — Spirits  may  communi-
cate with  mortals — Revelation  finished — Swedenborg  consist-
ent— Davis  against  the  Bible — Professor  Grimes — Judge
Edmonds'  queries  with  spirits  as  to  understanding  how  they
communicate  with  men — It  is  by  the  odic-force  of  Von  Reich-
enbach — Sympathy  of  magnetizer  and  subject  as  to  feeling,
tasting,  smelling,  hearing,  and  seeing  —  Experiments  at
Clinton  Hall — It  is  all  by  sympathy — Magnetizer  is  unnec-
essary— Let  the  subject  go  into  the  state  by  a  mental  abstrac-
tion with  that  substance  in  his  hand  he  desires  to  investigate
and  write  it  all  down  while  in  the  state — He  should  be  igno-
rant of  human  opinions — Swedenborg  went  into  the  state
right — Somnambulists  also,  and  so  do  mediums — The  various
modes  by  which  to  get  into  communication  with  the  subject.
Of  this  Reichenbach  is  ignorant — If  the  odic-force  be  real,
why  have  not  all  clairvoyants  seen  it  ? — Since  Reichenbach's
book  has  been  read,  all  clairvoyants  have  seen  it,  and  lastly
Judge  Edmonds  has  seen  it.

APPENDIX.

The  appendix  concluding  with  a  letter  to  Professor  Bush
should  be  carefully  read,  as  it  contains  valuable  matter  re-
cording many  wonderful  cases  of  intelligence,  prophesy,  and
without  the  aid  of  spirit-communications 216-252


SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS.


LECTURE I


Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :

For  three  years  past  I  have  been  urged  by  various
literary  gentlemen  among  my  friends  and  acquaintance
to  investigate  the  mysterious  and  interesting  subject
of  the  spirit-rappings  and  the  spirit-writings,  and  the
various  startling  manifestations  hovering  around  it,
and  to  communicate  the  result  of  my  investigations  to
the  world.  They  desired  to  have  the  cause  ascertain-
ed and  the  subject  understood,  at  least  in  its  general
features.

I  have  not  the  vanity  to  believe  that  this  call  ha8
been  made  upon  me  on  account  of  any  superior  abilities
I  possess,  but  because  my  friends  knew  that  I  had,  for
the  last  twenty  years,  made  the  human  mind  and  body,
and  the  connecting  link  between  the  two,  and  the  phil-
osophy of  their  various  mental  and  physical  impressions
and  operations,  my  particular  study. On  this  account,


14  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

no  doubt,  they  have  urged  me  to  investigate  the  subject
of  the  spirit-manifestations  that  has  so  long  agitated
the  public  mind.

This  duty  I  have  endeavored  faithfully  to  perform,
by  giving  this  subject  a  candid  investigation,  and  have
succeeded  in  tracing  its  mysterious  manifestations  to  a
philosophical  and  rational  cause  entirely  satisfactory,
at  least  to  my  own  mind.  And,  ladies  and  gentlemen,
it  is  indeed  a  source  of  gratification  and  pleasure  to
me,  that  I  enjoy  the  opportunity  of  presenting  myself
before  you  this  evening,  for  the  purpose  of  a  free  and
candid  consideration  of  a  subject  so  full  of  mystery  to
the  public  mind,  that  clouds  and  darkness  may  be  said
to  rest  upon  it.  As  regards  the  result  of  my  investiga-
tions, I  must  candidly  confess  that  the  spirits  of  our
departed  friends  in  a  future  world  have  nothing  to  do
with  this  matter.  And  with  equal  candor  I  must  con-
fess, that  it  is  not  a  humbug,  sustained  by  collusion,
deception,  or  trick,  but  that  it  is  the  effect  of  a  rational
cause.  It  exists  in  the  realms  of  reason,  and  is  there-
fore susceptible  of  a  philosophical  investigation  and
solution  without  appealing  to  the  spirit-world,  or  dis-
turbing the  repose  of  its  raptured  inhabitants.  They
have  finished  their  earthly  career,  and  are  susceptible
of  nothing  but  the  impressions  and  feelings  that  apper-
tain to  a  future  world,  while  we  are  swift  on  our  jour-
ney to  meet  them  in  that  country  where  the  sun  never
sets.


LECTURE I.  15

The  human,  race  are  fleeing  like  shadows  over  the
plain.  They  seem  to  move  onward,  but,  as  it  were,
in  a  vortex  of  ceaseless  change,  where  all  are  swallowed
up  at  last,  and  vanish  from  human  sight,  soon  to  be
obliterated  from  human  remembrance.  And  thus  it
has  been  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  down  to  the
present  moment.  Each  generation  has,  in  its  turn,
discovered  some  new  truth,  or  made  some  useful  im-
provement, and  bequeathed  it  to  the  generations  that
should  come  after  them,  who,  in  their  turn,  have  added
it  to  the  common  stock  of  human  knowledge.  True,
the  advance  of  improvement  in  past  ages  has  been  slow,
because  the  freedom  of  speech  and  the  liberty  of  the
press  were  denied.  But  since  the  foundation  pillars
of  the  temple  of  American  Liberty  were  reared,  the
mind  left  free,  and  the  press  unchained,  improvement
in  its  onward  march  has  been  rapidly  gathering  force.
In  telegraphic  dispatch  it  now  rivals  the  lightning's
wing,  and  often  some  great  discovery  in  science  or  art,
by  its  brilliancy,  startles  the  public  mind  suddenly  as
a  flash  of  lightning  on  the  dark  midnight  heavens.
When  the  phenomena  of  any  new  discovery  appear
dark  and  inscrutable  to  our  present  mode  of  philoso-
phizing on  subjects  already  made  known,  some  are  apt
to  cry  out  "  Humbug !  collusion  !  deception  !"  and
some,  on  the  other  extreme,  to  ascribe  it  to  some  su-
pernatural agency.

The  human  mind  is  prone  to  indulge  in  various  fan-


16  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

tasies  and  wide  extremes.  And  in  an  age  like  thi3,
where  wonders  strike  and  adventures  thicken,  we  must
expect  not  only  solid  matter  and  sterling  truth,  but
enthusiasm,  reveries,  and  dreams.  The  human  race
ever  have  been  divided  into  three  general  classes,  and
ever  will  continue  to  be,  till  the  fabric  of  science,  in
the  splendor  of  its  own  beauty,  shall  be  perfected.
The  first  class  embraces  those  who  endeavor  to  look
at  things  calmly  as  they  are ;  who  listen  attentively  to
the  teachings  of  nature  and  revelation,  and  build
upon  the  solid  foundations  of  truth,  reason,  philosophy.
The  second  class  embraces  those  who  are  supersti-
tiously  fond  of  the  marvelous,  who  have  but  little  fel-
lowship with  sound  philosophy,  and  are  inclined  to
believe  any  thing  and  every  thing,  however  visionary,
unphilosophical,  and  absurd.  And  the  third  class
embraces  those  who  believe  nothing  beyond  what  they
were  taught  by  their  parents,  friends,  and  instructors
in  early  life,  or  what  it  may  become  popular  and
fashionable  to  believe.  These  last-named  classes  em-
brace the  two  opposite  extremes  of  our  race,  the  cred-
ulous and  the  skeptical,  and  are,  of  course,  equally
inconsistent  and  weak.  The  learned  Dugald  Stewart
says,  "  Unlimited  skepticism  is  equally  the  child  of
imbecility  as  implicit  credulity."

Neither  of  the  two,  however  learned  they  may  be,
ever  pretend  at  first  to  reason  when  something  new,
startling,  and  mysterious  first  strikes  the  public  mind.


LECTURE I.  17

They  both  act  as  though  they  were  alike  strangers  to
philosophy.  Those,  composing  the  one  class,  run  as  if
driven  by  instinct  into  the  regions  of  mystery,  where
supernatural  powers  reign  supreme  in  mystic  forms,
and  ascribe  every  new  phenomenon  that  transpires  to
their  mysterious  agency.  And  those  of  the  other  class
take  their  position  on  the  opposite  extreme,  and  cry
out — "  Humbug !  collusion  !"  They  merely  ape  the
conduct  of  those  whom  they  deem  their  superiors,
and  respond  to  the  breathings  of  the  popular  voice.
All  their  reasoning  is  but  a  repetition  of  their  school-
book  knowledge.  They  labor  to  shine  in  the  borrowed
plumage  of  others'  thoughts,  and  thus  pass  a  useless
existence  on  earth,  as  they  bequeath  not  a  single  origi-
nal idea  to  the  world.  Those  of  the  first  class  are  the
solid  producers  of  original  thought,  who  give  to  the
world  the  revelations  of  science.  Between  these  three
general  classes  there  is  every  possible  light  and  shade,
gradually  softening  down  and  sliding  one  into  the  other,
and  forming  the  strangely  mingled  picture  of  human
impressions  and  of  human  life.

It  is  not  therefore  to  be  wondered  at,  that  certain
mysterious  noises  or  rappings,  said  to  have  commenced
in  March,  1848,  in  the  family  of  John  D.  Fox,  should
have  been  ascribed  to  superhuman  agency  or  spirits,
produced  through  certain  individuals  called  rapping
mediums,  nor  that  the  spasmodic  movement  of  the
hand  producing  irregularly  formed  letters,  should  have


18  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

been  ascribed  to  the  same  supernatural  agency  per-
formed through  certain  individuals  called  writing  me-
diums. Hence  we  perceive,  that  there  are  rapping
mediums  who  call  for  the  alphabet,  and  in  a  very
tedious  manner  dole  out  their  intelligence  by  rapping
for  letters  to  spell  out  words ;  and  there  are  writing
mediums  who  suddenly,  and  in  a  very  irregular  manner,
transmit  words  to  paper,  while  others  do  it  very  slowly.
It  is,  however,  firmly  believed  that,  through  these  me-
diums, intelligence  is  communicated  from  the  spirit-
world  by  departed  friends  to  their  kindred  on  earth.
Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  others,  on  the  con-
trary, should  pronounce  the  whole  a  humbug,  sustained
by  deception  and  trick.

I  am  well  aware  that  those  who  are  in  reality  skep-
tical, have  never  paused  to  reflect  whether  the  mani-
festations made  through  mediums  might  not,  after  all,
be  true,  and  in  accordance  with  the  soundest  principles
of  philosophy,  even  if  departed  spirits  had  nothing  to
do  with  this  matter.  They  have  never  paused  to
reflect  that  mediums  might,  after  all,  be  in  reality  sin-
cere and  honest,  and  yet  not  understand  how  these
communications  are  made  by  them.  Ladies  and  gen-
tlemen, I  am  perfectly  satisfied  that  they  are  honest.
And  now  suppose  that  we,  skeptics  and  all,  for  a  mo-
ment admit  them  to  be  so.  This  being  admitted,  do
you  not  clearly  perceive  that  if  you  call  them  impos-
tors, and  charge  them  with  performing  all  these  things


LECTURE I.  19

by  trick,  deception,  or  collusion,  that  your  charge  has
no  other  tendency  than  to  make  them  more  firm  in  the
belief  that  it  is  all  done  by  the  agency  of  spirits'?
They  know  and  feel  that  they  are  honest;  you  have
given  them  no  rational  cause  for  the  effect  produced  ;
you  even  deny  that  there  is  a  rational  cause,  and  hence
they  remain  confirmed.  You  give  them  to  under-
stand that  there  can  be  no  natural  cause  assigned  for
the  phenomena,  that  they  lie  far  beyond  the  realms  of
philosophy.  You  give  them  to  understand  that  if  they
are  indeed  honest,  and  do  not  perform  these  things  by
trick,  then  they  must  be  ascribed  to  supernatural
agents  or  spirits,  and  this  you  are  yourself,  in  such  a
case,  ready  to  believe.

Now  as  the  medium  knows  that  he  is  honest,  do  you
not  perceive  that  you  confirm  him  more  and  still  more
in  the  belief  of  its  being  spirits  in  the  same  ratio  that
you  oppose  him  by  questioning  his  sincerity  and  honor  ?
Indeed,  I  am  not  acquainted  with  any  person  who  is  a
decided  unbeliever  in  these  manifestations,  but  what  at-
tributes them  to  trick  and  deception  in  the  mediums
through  whom  they  are  made.  He  looks  upon  the  whole
as  an  arrant  humbug.  Nor  do  I  know  an  individual
who  is  a  decided  believer  in  these  manifestations,  but
what  attributes  them  to  a  supernatural  agency  exerted
by  departed  spirits  in  a  future  state  of  being  through
mortal  mediums,  by  which  they  hold  converse  with  their
friends  on  earth. I  know  of  no  one  who  has  assumed


20  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

the  middle  ground  between  the  two,  and  contended  for
a  philosophical  cause,  and  who  is  a  rational  believer.
I  grant  that  there  are  thousands  of  individuals  who
have  not  made  up  their  minds  on  either  issue,  or  who
remain  perfectly  indifferent,  as  regards  either  its  truth
or  its  falsehood.  But  those  who  have  made  up  their
minds  form  the  two  classes  I  have  noticed,  of  believers
and  skeptics.

The  subject,  then,  it  appears,  stands  arraigned  at  the
bar  of  public  opinion  in  the  following  conjoint  form.
Are  these  manifestations  the  work  of  immortal  spirits
in  a  future  life,  or  are  they  a  scheme  of  trickery  car-
ried on  by  wicked  and  designing  men  in  this  ?  Now
I  contend  that  this  conjoint  question  does  not  involve
the  true  issue  of  the  case.  Even  should  it  be  perfectly
ascertained  that  it  is  not  a  scheme  of  trickery,  but  that
the  medium  is  honest,  yet  this,  I  contend,  would  not
prove  it  to  be  the  work  of  immortal  spirits.  The
medium  might  be  honest,  and  yet  the  whole  be  account-
ed for  on  natural  and  philosophical  principles.  The
mysterious  nature  of  the  various  manifestations,  through
rapping  and  writing,  has  led  every  individual  to  believe
them  to  be  the  work  of  spirits  the  moment  he  became
satisfied  that  the  medium  was  honest,  and  that  there
was  absolutely  no  trick  by  which  it  was  accomplished.
The  whole  subject  has  been  considered  so  mysterious
and  wonderful,  as  to  lie  entirely  beyond  the  grasp  of
the  human  intellect,  where  no  philosophy  could  approach


LECTURE I.  21

it — no  power  successfully  arraign  it  at  the  bar  of  human
reason.  This  being  the  true  state  of  the  case,  there
has  been  no  alternative  presented  to  the  public  mind
but  to  admit  that  these  manifestations  were  indeed  from
departed  spirits  in  a  future  world,  or  else  that  they
were  a  humbug  imposed  upon  the  community  by  trick
and  deception.  And  as  there  are  hundreds  of  medi-
ums whose  reputations  are,  in  the  estimation  of  their
friends  and  the  public,  above  suspicion,  so  the  doctrine
of  the  spirit-manifestations  is  rapidly  gaining  ground.

The  great  mass  of  the  Christian  community  have,
as  yet,  remained  indiiferent  to  these  things,  contenting
themselves  with  the  belief  that  as  the  whole  is  the  work
of  trick,  deception,  or  collusion,  it  must  and  will  come
to  naught.  And  it  is  moreover  believed  that  it  is  con-
fined to  the  low  and  ignorant  classes  of  society,  and  is
therefore  unworthy  of  serious  consideration,  as  it  can  do
little  or  no  harm.  But  let  us  not  deceive  ourselves  with
such  fallacious  hopes — such  groundless  expectations.
True,  there  are  many  of  its  believers  and  advocates
among  the  ignorant  and  lower  classes  of  society ;  but
this  is  no  objection  to  its  truth,  because  it  was  the  same
with  regard  to  the  disciples  and  followers  of  our  Savior
in  the  day  of  his  personal  ministry  on  earth.

But  that  the  believers  in  the  spirit-communications
through  rapping  and  writing  mediums  are  wholly  of
this  class  is  far — very  far  from  being  true.  Indeed,
the  case  is  entirely  different  from  such  a  supposition  as


22  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

this.  It  embraces  among  its  advocates  many  of  the
best  intellects  in  our  country,  and  those,  too,  who  have
drank  deep  at  the  fountains  of  science.  It  embraces
not  only  some  of  the  finest  talents  of  the  land,  but
those  also  whose  moral  and  religious  reputation  is  un-
suspected, and  spotless  beyond  reproach.  It  embraces
among  its  advocates  judges  upon  the  bench,  and  some
of  the  ablest  lawyers  at  the  bar.  It  embraces  among
its  advocates  some  of  the  best  intellects  in  our  State
Legislatures  and  in  the  halls  of  the  United  States  Con-
gress. It  embraces  among  its  advocates  some  of  the
most  skillful  and  eminent  medical  men.  It  embraces
among  its  advocates,  not  only  thousands  of  professing
Christians  of  all  sects  on  earth,  but  many  ministers  of
the  gospel,  and  of  every  denomination  under  heaven.
It  is  embraced  by  men  who  stand  in  the  council-cham-
ber, at  the  bar,  and  the  altar.  Such  are  its  advocates  ;
and  what,  I  ask,  is  the  character  of  its  mediums  ?

Its  mediums,  through  whom  these  communications
are  made,  purporting  to  be  from  the  spirit-world,  are
by  no  means  entirely  among  the  ignorant  and  obscure,
but  pervade  all  ranks  of  society.  There  are  rapping
and  writing  mediums  among  the  judges  of  our  courts —
among  those  who  hold  high  stations  in  the  community
— among  Church  members  male  and  female,  and  even
among  ministers  of  the  gospel !  Through  these  medi-
ums, communications,  purporting  to  be  from  spirits  in
heaven,  are  either  alphabetically  rapped  or  else  writ-


LECTURE I.  23

ten  out,  tables  and  stands  are  tipped,  stones  thrown,
window-glass  broken,  and  furniture  flung  about !  Still
more  :  the  spirit-hand  of  some  departed  child,  it  is  be-
lieved, is  laid  upon  its  father's  or  mother's  forehead,
and  plays  with  their  hair-locks  by  the  softest  and  gen-
tlest touch,  and  that  even  angels,  with  their  starry  wings
of  azure,  green,  and  gold,  fan  the  feverish  brow !  It
is  even  believed  that  some  invisible  and  immortal  hand
has  written  a  communication  in  the  Hebrew  language,
and  left  it  in  the  room  of  an  individual  while  he  was
wrapped  in  profound  slumber  !

These  and  other  wonders,  too  tedious  to  enumerate,
are  stated  to  have  been  performed,  and  yet  the  public
mind,  and  even  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  are  silent,
or  carelessly  slumbering  on  while  the  advocates  of  this
new  and  startling  theory  are  gathering  tremendous  and
fearful  force  by  continual  accessions.  Periodicals  are
already  established,  edited  with  no  mean  ability,  and
some  purport  to  receive,  not  only  their  subject-matter,
but  the  very  words  in  which  it  is  expressed,  from  im-
mortal spirits  in  a  future  state  of  existence !  Yes,
periodicals  are  published,  meetings  and  conventions  are
held,  and  even  clergymen  are  already  in  the  field  who
profess  to  preach  as  they  are  instructed  by  the  spirit-
rapping  and  spirit-writing  mediums  ;  and  yet  clergymen
are  securely  slumbering  on  while  these  fearful  elements
are  in  motion  throughout  the  land.

Mediums  are  constantly  springing  up  in  every  part


24  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

of  the  United  States.  The  transatlantic  world  has
caught  the  mania.  They  are  springing  up  in  various
parts  of  Europe,  and  particularly  in  Germany.  Each
one  hears  them  in  their  own  tongue  wherein  they  were
born — for  it  appears  that  the  spirits  know  no  other  lan-
guage than  that  of  the  several  mediums  through  whom
they  communicate.  There  are  already  several  thou-
sand mediums  in  the  United  States  alone,  and  these,
with  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  its  believers
and  advocates,  are  already  in  the  field,  and  their  num-
bers are  constantly  increasing  with  the  most  astonishing
and  even  alarming  rapidity.  Private  exhibitions  are
incessantly  given  in  social  evening  parties  and  circles  in
every  city,  and  in  almost  every  village  throughout  the
length  and  breadth  of  the  land ;  and  in  many  places
public  exhibitions  are  given.  New  York  city  alone
numbers  thirty-thousand  believers  in  the  spirit-mani-
festations.

And  what,  I  ask,  is  the  grand  object  to  which  these
movements  are  tending,  and  in  what  will  they  result  1
They  certainly  portend  a  future  revelation,  because  they
are  calculated,  if  true,  to  supersede  the  teachings  of
the  prophets  and  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  apostles,  by
a  new,  and,  as  some  believe,  by  a  higher  and  far  more
superior  revelation  than  that  contained  in  the  Scriptures
of  truth.  And  yet  the  lovers  of  the  Bible  and  the  min-
isters of  Christ  are  slumbering  on  in  security  while  the
spirit-rappings  and  spirit- writings,  as  a  new  mode  of


LECTURE  It,  25

communication  from  heaven  to  earth,  are  gaining  new
and  continual  accessions  of  adherents,  and  gathering
force  and  power.

Having  made  these  introductory  remarks,  which  the
occasion  seems  to  require,  and  fairly  opened  the  way  to
the  enchanted  field,  I  am  now  about  to  enter  upon  that
part  of  the  subject  which  is  of  most  deep  and  thrilling
interest  to  us  all,  because  it  is  of  vital  importance  to
the  repose  and  welfare  of  the  community,  and  to  the
advancement  and  triumph  of  Christian  principles.  It
is  no  less  than  the  philosophy  or  rationale  of  what  is
called  the  spirit-rappings  and  spirit- writings  performed
through  certain  persons  called  mediums.  It  is  a  sub-
ject so  dark  and  mysterious  in  its  nature,  and  so  far  re-
moved from  the  common  occurrence  of  events,  as  to  se-
verely tax  and  even  challenge  human  credulity.  And
as  this  subject,  with  all  its  wonderful  phenomena,  is  by
its  advocates  associated  with  the  movements  and  powers
of  the  immortal  spirits  of  our  departed  friends,  and
who  believe  that  it  wholly  pertains  to  the  scenes  of  eter-
nity, so  it  is  an  object  of  great  moment  to  individual
peace  and  public  repose,  that  it  should  be  removed  from
its  present  dark  and  secret  abode  into  the  light  of  day.
As  it  is  a  matter  of  science,  and  belongs  to  this  life,  it
should  be  divested  of  its  mystery,  and  at  least  so  far
explained  as  to  force  it  from  its  assumed  immortality  in
the  society  of  departed  spirits,  to  its  proper  rank  in  the
society  of  its  kindred  spirits  in  the  flesh,  and  like  other

2


26  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

earthly  things  be  subjected  to  the  powers  of  philosophy
and  reason.  In  accomplishing  this  task,  I  shall  ven-
ture to  call  to  my  aid  the  phenomena  associated  with
mesmerism,  electro-psychology,  and  catalepsy,  even
though  it  is  contended  that  all  these  have  been  met,
the  arguments  of  those  who  brought  them  forward
have  been  fully  considered  and  refuted,  and  hence
that  this  mode  of  accounting  for  the  spirit-manifesta-
tions has  been  found  entirely  wanting.  This  may  be
so,  but  I  have  not  had  the  pleasure  of  reading  any
arguments  satisfactory  to  my  mind  of  such  a  result,
There  are,  however,  various  other  points  in  the  course
of  my  Lectures  to  be  considered  in  connection  with  these,
such  as  the  force  of  habit,  and  even  the  instincts  of
man  as  associated  with  the  involuntary  powers  of  hi3
mind.  I  close  this  evening  by  observing,  that  in  my
next  Lecture  some  of  the  above  interesting  subjects  will
be  introduced  and  fully  considered.


LECTURE II.  27


LECTUEE II.

«

Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :

In  my  introductory  lecture  I  simply  stated  the  posi-
tion that  the  doctrine  of  the  spirit- manifestations  sus-
tains in  relation  to  the  public  mind,  as  regards  both  its
credulity  and  skepticism.  I  argued  the  sincerity  and
honesty  of  its  mediums,  and  the  respectability  and
number  of  its  advocates.  I  labored  to  bring  before
you  distinctly  the  talents  and  ability  embarked  in  its
defense,  and  the  rapidity  and  force  with  which  it  was
spreading  in  the  United  States  ;  that  it  had  even
crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  commenced  its  career  in  the
Eastern  world.  This  evening  I  will  turn  your  atten-
tion to  a  more  interesting  department  of  my  subject.
We  will  now  enter  on  an  exposition  of  its  wonderful
phenomena.

It  will  be  perceived  at  a  glance  that  there  are  but
two  grand  points  to  be  considered.  The  First  is,
Involuntary  Motion — such  as  rapping,  writing,
and  moving  of  furniture.  And  the  Second  is,  the
Intelligence  connected  with  these  manifestations.
In  this  lecture  I  shall  confine  myself  to  Involunta-
ry Motion,  in  its  various  features.

The  whole  subject  of  the  spirit-rappings  and  spirit-


28  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

•writings,  as  exhibited  through  mediums,  can  be  ration-
ally accounted  for  by  a  certain  condition  of  the  nervous
systems  of  such  individuals.  Indeed,  it  is  a  condition
to  which  persons  are  more  or  less  liable  to  be  brought,
accordipg  to  the  degree  of  their  nervous  impressibility.
It  can  be  brought  about  by  persevering  passivity,  and
perfected  by  habit.  Hence,  as  a  general  thing,  medi-
ums at  first  can  never  produce  any  manifestations  only
by  forming  a  circle  and  sitting  passively,  or  by  assum-
ing an  entirely  passive  condition  of  their  voluntary
powers  when  alone.  Indeed,  these  manifestations  are
produced  by  allowing  the  involuntary  powers  of  the
mind  in  the  back  brain  to  take  the  place  and  execute
the  office  of  the  voluntary  powers  of  the  mind  in  the
front  brain,  and  through  the  nervous  and  muscular
force  to  give  motion  to  the  medium's  foot,  or  any  part
of  the  body — or  to  move  his  hand  to  write,  and  over
which  he  has,  at  that  instant,  no  more  voluntary  con-
trol than  any  other  person  in  the  room.  It  is  also,
at  the  instant  of  his  passivity,  entirely  cataleptic  and
destitute  of  feeling.  But  the  moment  he  exercises  his
volition,  to  examine  the  state  of  his  arm,  that  instant
the  feeling  and  his  power  to  move  it  return,  because
the  voluntary  and  involuntary  electro-nervous  forces
between  the  two  brains  are  equalized.  We  see,  then,
that  these  manifestations  are  occasioned  by  too  great  a
redundancy  of  electricity  congregated  upon  the  invol-
untary nerves,  through  passivity  of  mind,  and  thus


LECTURE II.  29

imparting  to  them  extraordinary  nervous  force.  And
this  force  will  be,  more  or  less,  in  the  same  ratio  that
they  are  thrown  out  of  balance  with  the  voluntary
nerves.  In  this  condition,  an  electro-magnetic  dis-
charge from  the  fingers  or  toes  of  the  medium  may
often  produce  an  audible  snap,  or  even  sound,  by  com-
ing in  contact  with  surrounding  substances  favorable
to  the  propagation  of  sound,  and  be  heard  at  consid-
erable distances.  And,  moreover,  the  sound  will  ap-
pear to  originate  in  the  very  spot  where  it  is  heard.
Or  this  electro-magnetic  force,  by  endeavoring  to
equalize  itself  throughout  the  nervous  system  of  the
medium,  may  occasion  a  snapping  in  the  head,  as  I
have  witnessed  in  one  case,  or  a  striking  together  of
the  joints,  that  can  be  heard  in  an  adjoining  room,
and  even  appear  to  be  in  the  room.  And  while  these
phenomena  are  transpiring,  that  part  of  the  body  in
which  they  occur  will  be  entirely  destitute  of  feeling
at  the  very  instant  that  each  sound  or  rap  is  given.
The  entire  passivity  of  the  voluntary  powers  of  the
mind  and  of  the  voluntary  nerves  is  the  cause  of  un-
duly charging  the  involuntary  powers  with  too  great
an  electro-nervous  force,  and  the  result  is  those  singu-
lar manifestations  that  are  so  confidenly  attributed  to
the  agency  of  spirits.  After  being  thus  charged,  the
voluntary  powers  have,  doubtless,  some  agency  in  pro-
ducing the  sounds  by  a  concentrated  expectation,  thus
aiding  the  involuntary  powers to  produce  an  equilib-


30  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

rium,  for  there  is  a  sympathetic  connection  between
the  two  forces.

Hence  persons  who  are  in  a  perfectly  cataleptic
state,  and  which  is,  at  the  same  time,  attended  with  a
brilliant  clairvoyance,  are  sometimes  capable  of  pro-
ducing electro-magnetic  sounds  from  their  own  invol-
untary nervous  force,  so  as  to  be  heard  at  a  consider-
able distance.  And  being  so  near  a  state  approaching
the  dead,  and  so  sympathetically  affected  en  rapport
with  the  dying,  that  they  often  receive  an  impression,
not  only  of  the  time  the  person  dies,  but  also  that  the
departed  spirit,  on  its  journey  to  future  scenes,  ap-
pears to,  and  addresses  them.  Such  was  the  case  with
the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  and  also  With  Miss  Slaughter,
of  Virginia,  aged  only  sixteen.  Of  the  Seeress  of
Prevorst  the  writer  says  :  "  As  I  had  been  told  by
her  parents,  a  year  before  her  father's  death,  that  at
the  period  of  her  early  magnetic  state  she  was  able  to
make  herself  heard  by  her  friends  as  they  lay  in  bed
at  night  in  the  same  village,  but  in  other  houses  by  a
knocking — as  is  said  of  the  dead,  I  asked  her,  in  her
sleep,  whether  she  was  able  to  do  so  now,  and  at  what
distance  ?  She  answered,  that  she  would  sometimes
do  it — that  to  the  spirit  space  was  nothing.  Some
time  after  this,  as  we  were  going  to  bed — my  children
and  servants  being  already  asleep — we  heard  a  knock-
ing, as  if  in  the  air  over  our  heads.  There  were  six
knocks,  at  intervals  of  half  a  minute. It  was  a  hoi-


LECTURE II.  31

low,  yet  clear  sound  ;  soft,  but  distinct.  On  the  fol-
lowing evening,  when  she  was  asleep — when  we  had
mentioned  the  knocking  to  nobody  whatever — she
asked  me  whether  she  should  soon  knock  to  us  again  1
which,  as  she  said  it  was  hurtful  to  her,  I  declined."

The  wonderful  case  of  Miss  Slaughter,  and  the  ac-
curacy with  which  she  stated  the  death  of  two  of  her
friends,  is  reported  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Medical
Library,  published  in  Philadelphia  in  1843.  Hers
was  a  disease  called  catalepsy,  attended  with  most
wonderful  powers  of  clairvoyance,  which  she  entirely
lost  on  her  recovery.  But  there  is  not  one  person  in
fifty  million  who  is  in  a  state  of  perfect  catalepsy  and
at  the  same  time  of  brilliant  clairvoyance.

A  case  was  reported  in  Silliman's  Journal  of  a
lady  who,  on  looking  at  the  Northern  Lights  became,
by  her  entranced  passivity,  so  charged  that,  for  three-
months,  she  emitted  electric  sparks  from  her  fingers
and  toes  whenever  she  came  in  contact  with  other  sub-
stances. Sometimes  it  could  be  seen,  heard,  and  felt,
both  by  herself  and  others.  At  other  times  it  could
be  only  heard,  but  not  seen  nor  felt.  When  felt,  it
was  annoying,  because  she  was  not,  at  that  instant,
sufficiently  charged  to  render  the  parts  of  her  body
from  whence  it  escaped  insensible,  and  knowing  the
origin  to  be  a  natural  cause,  she  was  not,  therefore,  a
spirit-rapper  ! The  account  is  as  follows  :

"  On  the  evening  of  January  28th,  during  a  some-


32  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

•what  extraordinary  display  of  the  Northern  Lights,  a
respectable  lady  became  so  highly  charged  with  elec-
tricity as  to  give  out  vivid  electrical  sparks  from  the
end  of  each  finger  to  the  face  of  each  of  the  company
present.  This  did  not  cease  with  the  heavenly  phe-
nomenon, but  continued  several  months,  during  which
time  she  was  constantly  charged  and  giving  off  elec-
trical sparks  to  every  conductor  she  approached.  This
was  extremely  vexatious,  as  she  could  not  touch  the
stove,  or  any  metallic  utensil,  without  first  giving  off
an  electrical  spark,  with  the  consequent  twinge.  The
state  most  favorable  to  this  phenomenon  was  an  at-
mosphere of  about  eighty  degrees,  moderate  exercise,
and  social  enjoyment.  It  disappeared  in  an  atmos-
phere approaching  zero,  and  under  the  debilitating  ef-
fects of  fear.  When  seated  by  the  stove,  reading,
»with  her  feet  upon  the  fender,  she  gave  sparks  at  the
rate  of  three  or  four  a  minute  ;  and  under  the  most
favorable  circumstances,  a  spark,  that  could  be  seen,
heard,  or  felt,  passed  every  second.  She  could
charge  others  in  the  same  way  when  insulated,  who
could  then  give  sparks  to  others.  To  make  it  satis-
factory that  her  dress  did  not  produce  it,  it  was
changed  to  cotton  and  woolen  without  altering  the
phenomenon.  The  lady  is  about  thirty,  of  sedentary
pursuits  and  delicate  state  of  health,  having  for  two
years  previously  suffered  from  acute  rheumatism  and
neuralgic  affections,  with  peculiar  symptoms."


LECTURE II.  33

Here  is  a  fair  case.  She  gave  off  electro-magnetic
sounds  from  her  involuntary  nervous  force  that  could
be  heard  at  a  considerable  distance.  Still  her  volun-
tary powers,  such  as  "moderate  exercise  and  social
enjo}Tment,"  had  sjTnpathetically  something  to  do  with
it.  Fear  entirely  prevented  it.  The  elements,  as  to
degrees  of  heat  and  cold,  also  had  an  impression  favor-
able or  unfavorable  upon  her  as  to  the  result.  And  is
it  not  the  same  with  mediums  1  She  certainly  did  all
this  without  any  aid  from  spiritual  agents  aside  from
her  own  spirit.  Hence  the  raps  and  sounds  from  all
true  mediums  are  produced  on  the  same  general  elec-
tro-magnetic principle,  by  their  involuntary  powers  in
the  back  brain,  sent  off  from  thence  and  discharged  at
the  fingers,  toes,  joints,  or  some  other  part  of  the
body.  And  coming  in  contact  with  the  table,  floor,  or
any  substance  capable  of  propagating  and  conducting
sound,  the  noise  will  be  much  louder  than  the  original,
and  appear,  according  as  it  is  conducted,  in  some  other
part  or  parts  of  the  room.  A  music-box  held  in  the
hand  can  scarcely  be  heard.  But  place  it  upon  a  table
or  upon  the  naked  board  of  a  closed  piano,  and  the
sound  thus  multiplied  can  be  heard  even  in  an  adjoin-
ing room;  and  unless  the  listener  knows  where  the
box  is  placed,  he  can  not  tell  from  whence  the  sounds
of  the  music  proceed,  nor  will  any  two*  locate  it  alike.
The  cases  of  good  mediums  differ  only  from  that  of  the
lady  noticed  in  Professor  Silliman's  Journal  on the


34  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

ground  of  their  involuntary  nerves  being  so  much  more
highly  charged  as  to  render  the  parts  so  far  cataleptic
as  to  destroy  all  sensibility  at  the  instant  of  each  sound
being  given  off  from  the  involuntary  powers  in  the  back
brain,  with  which  are  connected  the  instincts  of  our
nature.  These  instincts  will  be  more  fully  considered
hereafter.

I  deeply  regret  that  the  involuntary  powers  of  the
human  mind  have  been,  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  entirely
overlooked.  True,  it  has  ever  been  known  and  ad-
mitted that  we  have  both  voluntary  and  involuntary
nerves,  and  it  has  also  been  uniformly  admitted  that
the  voluntary  powers  of  the  mind  act  through  the  vol-
untary nerves  to  produce  motion.  But  no  writer,  at
least  to  my  knowledge,  has  ever  contended  that  mind
has  also  its  involuntary  powers  acting  through  the  in-
voluntary nerves  to  move  the  heart  and  carry  on  all
the  functions  of  life  till  I  brought  it  forward.  Medi-
cal men  have  merely  asserted  that  the  motion  of  the
heart  and  all  the  involuntary  functions  were  a  mere
result  of  organic  life  independent  of  mind.  I  am  the
first,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  who,  in  mental
philosophy,  has  ever  contended  that  involuntary  power
belongs  to  the  mind  of  man — yes,  to  the  mind  of  the
Eternal.  I  say  this,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  not  as  a
matter  of  arrogance,  but  as  a  matter  of  justice,  and
against  the  pretensions  of  those  who,  in  their  published
books,  and  without  giving  credit,  have  used  my  ideas


LECTURE II.  85

as  though  they  were  original  with  them,  to  build  up
theories  at  my  expense.

For  the  information  of  the  younger  part  of  my  au-
dience, I  would  say,  that  by  the  voluntary  powers  of
the  mind,  we  mean  those  by  which  we  will  and  act.
We  move  the  head,  the  eyes,  the  tongue,  and  lips  by
the  voluntary  powers  of  the  mind,  and  by  the  same
power  we  move  a  finger,  or  the  hands  and  arms  to
handle,  and  the  feet  and  limbs  to  walk.  At  will  we
bend  the  body  and  ply  every  joint  of  the  entire  system.
This,  all  are  aware,  is  effected  by  the  voluntary  pow-
ers of  the  mind  residing  in  the  front  brain,  acting
through  the  voluntary  nerves.  But  over  the  motions
of  the  heart,  lungs,  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  the
digestion  of  the  food  by  the  stomach,  and  all  those
movements  on  which  the  functions  of  life  depend — over
these  we  have  no  voluntary  control.  Awake  or  asleep,
the  heart  continues  to  beat  whether  we  will  or  not,  and
all  the  phenomena  of  life  proceed  as  usual  in  their  des-
tined course.  All  these  movements  are  produced  by
the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind  residing  in  the
back  brain,  acting  through  the  involuntary  nerves,
and  are  not  the  result,  as  has  been  uniformly  supposed,
of  mere  organic  life  entirely  distinct  from  mind.  That
these  two  forces  both  belong  to  mind  is  certain,
because  take  the  spirit  from  the  body,  and  all  motion,
both  voluntary  and  involuntary,  instantly  ceases.  Hence
all  the  energies  of  reason,  thought,  understanding,  con-


6b ,  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

sciousness,  and  will,  belong  exclusively  to  the  voluntary
powers  of  the  mind.  And  all  the  movements  on  which
the  functions  of  life  depend,  and  all  the  instinctive
energies  or  intuitions  of  our  being,  belong  to  the  invol-
untary powers  of  the  mind.  Hence  man  has  his  in-
stincts superior  to  all  creatures  in  existence,  and  mind,
like  every  other  faculty  in  man,  is  double.

We  perceive,  then,  that  the  voluntary  power  of  the
mind  can  move  or  suspend  motion,  can  act  or  cease
acting,  can  reason,  think,  understand,  and  will,  or  sus-
pend all  these,  as  in  sleep.  But  the  involuntary  power
of  the  mind  continues  its  ceaseless  self-motion  through
every  period  of  existence,  when  we  are  asleep  as  well
.as  when  awake.  It  has  no  power  to  stop,  because  mo-
tion is  an  inherent  attribute  of  its  nature.  Seeing,
hearing,  feeling,  taste,  and  smell  belong  to  the  invol-
untary powers  of  the  mind,  where  all  impressions
through  the  senses  are  first  received,  and  from  thence
are  instantly  transmitted  to  the  voluntary  powers  of
the  mind,  where  they  are  compared  and  formed  into
ideas  by  the  power  of  what  we  term  reason  and  asso-
ciation. Though  the  voluntary  and  involuntary  powers
of  the  mind  are  entirely  distinct  attributes,  belonging
to  two  distinct  brains,  yet  there  is,  at  the  same  time,
an  indissoluble  connection  existing  between  the  two,
and  also  a  strong  sympathy  to  concur  together  in  one
common  state  and  mode  of  action,  through  indulgence
and  habit.


LECTURE II.  37

A  boy,  for  instance,  who  has  the  perfect  .control  of
his  voice  in  conversation,  may  take  pains  to  imitate  his
stuttering  playmate,  to  whom  he  is  strongly  attached,
and  with  whom  he  is  in  daily  intercourse,  till  he  be-
comes a  confirmed  stutterer.  By  indulging  in  this  act,
the  voluntary  powers  gradually  grew  weaker  in  their
natural  force  for  want  of  correct  action,  and  the  invol-
untary powers,  by  constant  force  of  habit  gathered
strength,  until  through  indulgence,  sympatic,  and
habit  they  so  far  got  the  upper  hand  that  he  lost,  in  a
good  degree,  the  voluntary  control  of  his  own  voice.
When  he  exercises  all  his  voluntary  power  to  speak
smoothly,  the  involuntary  power  interferes  through
habit,  indulgence,  and  sympathy,  and  stuttering  is  the
result.  But  this  is  in  conversation  only,  while  in  sing-
ing he  never  practiced  stuttering.  The  greatest  stut-
terers that  ever  existed  were  never  known  to  stutter
while  singing  a  song  or  hymn,  even  when  the  reading
of  it  might  be  almost  an  impossibility  for  them  to  per-
form. There  is  one  point  here  of  great  importance  to
my  argument.  It  is  this,  the  voluntary  and  involun-
tary stuttering  of  this  boy  were  alike.  His  real  stut-
tering, which  he  could  not  control,  was  almost  exactly
like  that  which  he  first  made  in  sport  to  mimic  his
companion,  or  because  he  considered  it  pretty.  The
involuntary  power  moved  in  the  same  track  that  the
voluntary  power  had  marked  out  and  practiced ;  for,  as
before  observed,  they  obtain,  through  habit  and  sym-


38  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

pathy,  a  strong  tendency  to  concur  together  in  one
common  state  of  action.

This  is  not  only  so  in  relation  to  the  voice  in  speak-
ing, but  also  to  the  hands,  feet,  or  body,  as  regards
motion.  Take,  for  instance,  a  finished  performer  upon
the  piano-forte.  When  he  first  commenced  playing  this
instrument,  it  was  wholly  a  matter  of  thought  and  vol-
untary motion.  He  had  to  pause  and  think  upon  what
keys  to  place  his  fingers,  and  then  moved  them  wholly
by  thought.  The  whole  was  at  first  slowly  executed,
and  entirely  by  his  voluntary  powers.  Bat  by  degrees
his  involuntary  powers,  through  indulgence  and  sympa-
thy, had  a  gradual  tendency,  more  and  still  more,  to
concur  with  the  voluntary  powers  in  the  same  mode  of
action,  until  a  perfect  habitude  between  the  two  was
established.  He  is  now  the  finished  performer.  He
plays  a  distinct  part  of  the  music  with  each  hand,  and
he  sings  a  third.  He  can  sweep  his  fingers  over  the
keys  with  the  most  astonishing  rapidity,  and  at  the
same  time  be  looking  his  friend  in  the  face,  and  hold-
ing an  interesting  conversation  with  him.  He  does
not  think  where  he  moves  his  fingers ;  indeed,  he  can
not  do  so,  for  his  thoughts  are  with  his  friend,  and
hence  his  fingers,  are  greatly  under  the  sympathetic
movement  of  the  involuntary  powers.  I  am  aware  it
will  be  said,  that  he  does  all  this  by  habit,  or,  as  it  is
generally  expressed,  he  moves  his  fingers  mechanic-
ally. This  is  granted ;  but  what,  I  ask,  is  habit  only


LECTURE II.  39

an  impression  successfully  made  and  repeated,  till  it  is
established  upon  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind
through  the  medium  of  the  senses  1  It  is  nothing  else.
.  It  is  a  second  nature.  It  is  the  same  with  the  violin
or  harp.  Though  there  is  some  volition  concerned,
yet  the  greater  part  is  performed  by  the  involuntary
powers  of  the  mind  instinctively  concurring  in  the
same  mode  of  action  with  the  voluntary  powers.  He
plays  by  his  instinctive  energies,  for  with  these  habit
is  strongly  associated,  and  through  these  impressions
are  transmitted  to  the  voluntary  powers  of  the  mind.
In  like  manner  is  the  medium's  hand  moved  by  his  in-
voluntary powers  to  form  those  letters  only  that  were
practically  learned  by  his  voluntary  powers  at  school.
And  there  is  as  much  intelligence  manifested  in  the
harmony  of  sounds  as  there  is  in  the  harmony  of  sen-
tences.

In  order  to  make  every  thing  plain  as  we  proceed,  I
have  thus  far  confined  my  remarks  to  habitude ;  and
in  the  examples  furnished,  we  perceive  the  great  effect
that  long- continued  practice  has  to  stamp  a  habit  upon
the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind  and  nerves  to  act
in  perfect  harmony  with  the  voluntary  powers.  I  have
noticed  the  voice  in  stuttering,  and  the  motion  of  the
fingers  in  producing  instrumental  music.  But  owing
to  the  differently  constituted  minds  and  nerves  of  dif-
ferent individuals,  one  person  can  establish  a  habi-
tude much  sooner  than  another,  whether  it  be  of  the


40  SPIRIT-MANIFESXATIONS EXAMINED.

voice  in  mimicry,  or  song,  or  of  the  motion  of  the  fin-
gers on  the  keys  of  the  piano.  All  these  may  be
termed  habits,  and  habits  are  perfected  and  established
by  repeated  impressions  called  practice.  There  are
persons,  however,  of  a  peculiar  mental  and  nervous
temperament,  who  are  liable  to  have  their  involuntary
powers  of  mind  moved  by  one  single  impression,  so
that  they  are  utterly  unable  to  control  their  motions.
These  are  in  the  electro-psychological  state,  and  in
proof  of  this  sudden  involuntary  motion,  I  am  able  to
produce  thousands  of  instances,  and  from  all  ages  of
the  world.  This  will  be  attended  to  in  my  next  Lec-
ture, will  be  fully  argued,  and,  I  trust,  will  be  made
interesting,  and  not  only  interesting,  but  satisfactory
to  both  ladies  and  gentlemen.


LECTURE III.


41


LECTUKE III.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :

In  my  last  Lecture  I  promised  to  produce  evidence
tills  evening,  from  past  ages  and  various  nations,  that
involuntary  motion  was  often  produced  in  a  very  sud-
den manner,  and  at  times  by  even  a  single  impression.
But  where  shall  I  begin  my  task  %  The  religious  his-
tory of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  of  Britain  under  the
priesthood  of  the  Druids,  of  India,  and  in  general  of
all  savage  tribes,  is  full  of  instances  in  proof  of  my  po-
sition as  to  involuntary  motion.  The  convulsions  of  the
Pythian  priestess,  the  contortions  of  the  Sybil,  the  vast
variety  of  convulsive  and  cateleptic  phenomena  among
the  devotees  in  India,  and  also  among  the  spinning  der-
vishes of  the  Mohammedans,  may  be  adduced  as  illus-
trations !  Dr.  Babbington  says  :  u  The  imaginations
of  women  are  always  more  excitable  than  those  of  men,
and  are  therefore  susceptible  of  every  folly  when  they
lead  a  life  of  strict  seclusion,  and  their  thoughts  are
constantly  turned  inward  upon  themselves.  Hence,  in
orphan  asylums,  hospitals,  and  convents,  the  nervous
disorder  of  one  female  so  easily  and  quickly  becomes  the


42  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

disorder  of  all.  A  nun  in  a  very  large  convent  in
France,  by  some  strange  impulse,  began  to  mew  like  a
cat.  Shortly  after,  other^nuns  also  mewed  together
every  day  at  a  certain  time  for  several  hours  in  succes-
sion, annoying  the  whole  neighborhood  with  a  cat- con-
cert. This  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  prevent  till  they
were  relieved  by  a  superior  impression."  He  further
says  :  "  But  of  all  the  epidemics  of  females  which  I  my-
self have  seen  in  Germany,  or  of  which  the  history  is
known  to  me,  the  most  remarkable  is  the  celebrated  con-
vent epidemic  of  the  fifteenth  century,  which  Cardan  de-
scribes," (and  which  peculiarly  proves  what  I  would  here
enforce,  as  it  regards  the  doctrine  of  impressions  being
often  sudden).  "  A  certain  nun  in  Germany  fell  to  biting
all  her  companions.  In  the  course  of  a  short  time  all  the
nuns  of  this  convent  began  biting  each  other.  The  news
of  this  infatuation  among  the  nuns  soon  spread,  and
passed  from  convent  to  convent  through  a  great  part  of
Germany,  principally  Saxony  and  Brandenburg.  It  af-
terward visited  the  nunneries  in  Holland,  and  at  last
the  nuns  had  the  biting  mania  even  as  far  as  Rome."

A  striking  illustration  of  the  effects  of  the  principle
of  involuntary  motion,  and  even  of  involuntary  imita-
tion upon  persons  brought  together  in  a  close  assembly,
even  where  nothing  is  spoken,  occurs  in  Barclay's
"  Apology  for  the  Quakers."  After  speaking  of  the
divine  influence  as  coming  down  upon  them,  and  "  pro-
ducing a  trembling  and  a  motion  of  the  body  upon  most


LECTURE III.  43

if  not  all,"  he  proceeds  to  say :  "  and  from  this  the
name  Quakers,  or  Tremblers,  was  first  reproachfully
cast  upon  us,  which  if  it  be  not  one  of  our  own  choos-
ing, yet  we  are  not  ashamed  of  it,  but  have  rather  rea-
son to  rejoice  in  this  respect,  even  that  we  are  sensible
of  this  power  that  hath  sometimes  laid  hold  on  our  ad-
versaries, and  made  them  yield  to  us,  and  join  with  us,
and  confess  to  the  truth  before  they  knew  what  our  doc-
trine was,  so  that  sometimes  many  at  one  meeting  have
been  thus  convinced,  and  power  would  sometimes  also
reach  to,  and  wonderfully  work  even  in  little  children,
to  the  astonishment  and  admiration  of  many."  Here,
then,  we  perceive,  that  Quakers  sitting  down  passive,
and  calmly  waiting  for  some  mysterious  power  to  move
them  to  rise  and  speak,  have  been  seized  with  trem-
bling and  shaking  caused  by  the  involuntary  powers,  and
over  which  they  had  no  possible  control  any  more  than
the  writing  medium  has  over  his  hand.  It  also  seized
their  enemies,  and  even  little  children ;  and  from  this
circumstance  of  trembling  and  involuntary  moving,  the
name  Quakers,  first  cast  upon  them  as  a  term  of  re-
proach, took  its  origin.  Those  of  their  enemies,  and
also  of  little  children,  who  were  impressible,  by  simply
sitting  passive,  were  involuntarily  moved  by  surround-
ing impressions  and  examples,  as  seen  in  the  case  of  the
nuns.  And  are  the  spirit-rappings  and  spirit-writings
any  more  mysterious  than  these  1  Certainly  not,  for
here  the  whole  body  was  not  only  shaken,  but  even  raised


44  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

to  its  feet,  by  the  involuntary  powers,  and  the  tongue
compelled  to  speak,  and  often,  too,  "with  eloquence,  their
spontaneous  impressions  which,  after  being  uttered,  they
oft  remembered  not,  nor  even  that  they  had  risen  to
speak.  I  knew  a  Quaker  lady  in  Salem,  Mass.,  who
from  long  habits  of  passivity,  waiting  for  the  moving
of  the  Spirit,  could  strike  every  joint  of  her  body  to-
gether so  as  to  be  heard  in  an  adjoining  room.  Nor
was  it  in  her  power  to  prevent  it.  Her  manner  of  de-
votion had  become  itself  a  disease.  The  habit  was
stamped  upon  her  involuntary  powers,  and  they  ruled.
She  was  unceasingly  rapping  during  her  waking  mo-
ments, and  was  still  only  when  she  was  asleep.  She
was  the  greatest  rapping  medium  I  ever  knew.

The  case  of  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst  is  an  exception
to  all  rappers  of  the  present  day,  and  should  not  be  ad-
duced by  them  as  an  instance  to  prove  their  power  to
do  the  same.  She  professed  to  do  it  by  her  own  power,
and  not  that  spirits  performed  it  through  her  as  a  me-
dium. And  if  mediums  of  the  present  day  quote  her
as  proof  of  their  own  power,  then  spirit-rapping,  ac-
cording to  their  own  confession,  is  at  an  end.  He?  case,
if  what  is  related  be  true,  was  one  of  an  entire  cata-
leptic state  of  the  whole  nervous  force,  combined,  at
the  same  time,  with  a  most  brilliant  mesmeric  and  sym-
pathetic clairvoyance,  and  of  which  there  is  not  probably
one  case  in  fifty  million.  I  will  not  say  that  it  was  im-
possible for  her  to  make  herself  heard  through  the  elec-


LECTURE III.  45

tro-magnetic  discharges  from  her  nervous  force  even  in
other  dwellings  in  the  village,  yet  it  requires,  I  must
confess,  a  very  liberal  stretch  of  credulity  to  believe
that  this  power  of  sound  extends  so  far.  But  as  per-
sons have  made  themselves  heard,  through  this  agent,
at  a  short  distance  at  least,  as  in  the  case  of  the  lady
reported  in  Professor  Silliman's  Journal,  so  others,  I
grant,  may  make  themselves  heard  at  a  still  greater
distance,  according  as  their  involuntary  nervous  force
in  the  back  brain  may  become  more  highly  charged
and  thrown  out  of  balance  with  the  voluntary  nervous
force  in  the  front  brain.  In  producing  an  equilibrium
between  the  two  forces,  the  sound  will  be  more  or  less
distinct,  and  be  heard  at  a  greater  or  less  distance  in
the  same  ratio  that  the  two  forces  are  thrown  out  of
balance  with  each  other,  and  with  the  forces  of  other
persons,  and  with  those  of  surrounding  elements.  And
as  all  the  powers  of  attraction  and  repulsion  belong  to
electricity,  as  the  agent  of  the  mind,  so  physical  sub-
stances may  be  attracted  to,  or  repelled  from,  certain
individuals  in  some  rare  instances,  after  having  been
charged  by  their  hands,  and  when  the  existing  relation
of  things  is  entirely  favorable  to  such  a  result.  And
as  it  is  the  result  of  a  strong  electrical  condition  of  the
involuntary  powers,  so  the  individual  has  no  direct  vol-
untary control  in  the  matter.  In  the  case  of  the  lady
reported  in  Silliman's  Journal,  we  know  the  sounds,
though  slight,  were  still  electrical. Hence,  if  in  an


46  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

other  individual  they  are  produced  ever  so  distinct  and
loud,  it  still  proves  that  they  are  produced  by  the  same
electrical  cause  more  powerfully  increased,  and  not  by
spirits.

But,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  -there  is  no  need  of  my
referring  back  to  the  Grecians  and  Romans,  nor  to  the
priesthood  of  the  Druids,  nor  to  heathen  India  and
savage  tribes,  nor  even  to  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  for
thousands  of  instances  as  proof  of  my  position.  There
is  no  need  that  I  should  refer  to  the  convulsions  of  the
Pythian  priestess — the  contortions  of  the  Sybil — the
vast  variety  of  convulsive  and  cataleptic  phenomena
among  the  devotees  in  India,  and  the  spinning  der-
vishes among  the  Mohammedans  to  sustain  my  position
of  the  countless  wonders  produced  by  the  involuntary
powers  of  the  mind  under  a  sudden  or  oft-repeated
impression.  I  need  not  even  go  back  to  the  involun-
tary cat-mewing  and  biting-mania  among  the  nuns  of
the  fifteenth  century,  nor  to  the  involuntary  tremblings
that  gave  rise  to  the  name  of  Quakers,  nor  to  the  shud-
derings  and  dancings  of  the  Shakers  under  the  labors
and  impressions  of  Ann  Lee. I  come  nearer  home.

Dr.  Stone,  in  his  work  on  the  "  Progress  of  Fanati-
cism," states  that  there  was  (now  forty-five  years  ago)
an  extensive  religious  excitement  in  Kentucky.  From
this  work,  jn  connection  with  wha,t  I  have  gathered  from
the  words  of  an  eye-witness,  I  make  the  following  con-
densed statement. The  excitement  was  produced  by


LECTURE III.  47

a  man  partially  deranged,  who  had  been  a  great  hunter,
and  who  believed  himself  inspired.  All  his  proceed-
ings were  characterized  by  the  greatest  fanaticism,  and
partook  of  the  character  of  the  man  as  a  hunter.  In
order  to  resist  the  devil  and  make  him  flee  from  you,
it  was  necessary,  he  contended,  to  give  him  chase,  to
tree  and  shoot  him  as  we  would  a  wolf  among  the
sheep  who  came  but  to  devour.  As  the  meeting  was
held  in  a  grove,  one  individual  suddenly  started  in  pur-
suit, as  he  supposed,  of  the  devil,  and  others  of  a  pe-
culiar nervous  temperament,  having  no  power  to  resist,
involuntarily  joined  in  the  pursuit,  and  this  was  called
"  the  running  exercise  /*'  One  climbed  up  into  a  tree
after  the  devil,  and  others  involuntarily  caught  the
mania.  This  was  called  "  the  climbing  exercise  /"
One  individual  was  moved  to  bark ;  and  soon  others,
even  though  they  used  every  method  to  prevent  it,  fell
to  involuntary  barking  like  dogs,  while  others  gathered
around  the  tree  praying  for  success.  This  was  called
u  treeing  the  devil  /"  It  was  literally  a  devil  chase  !
And  such  a  time  of  running,  climbing,  dog-barking,
and  devil-chasing  was  perhaps  never  known  before,
nor  since.  I  doubt  whether  it  can  be  surpassed  in  any
of  its  mysteries  even  by  the  rapping,  writing,  and
table-tipping  business  of  the  present  day  !

On  another  occasion,  insisting' upon  the  words  of
our  Savior  being  literally  understood — "  Except  ye  be
converted  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  can  not  enter


48  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

into  the  kingdom  of  heaven" — one  individual  went  to
playing  marbles  in  the  broad  aisle  of  the  church ;  others
involuntarily  joined  him.  An  old  man  undertook  to
expostulate,  saying  that  it  was  carrying  matters,  as  he
thought,  rather  too  far  !  On  hearing  this,  an  old  lady,
who  was  down  upon  her  knees  among  the  marble-play-
ers, sprung  to  her  feet,  grasped  her  umbrella,  and,
taking  a  side-saddle  seat  on  it,  rode  down  the  aisle  in
full  childlike  glee.  On  seeing  this,  the  old  gentleman
could  resist  no  longer — seized  his  cane,  threw  himself
astride  of  it,  like  any  boy,  and  rode  down  the  aisle  af-
ter her,  exclaiming  in  a  sing-song  voice — "  Oh,  my  dear
brethren  and  sisters,  I  feel  the  full  childlike  spirit  car-
rying me  to  heaven  on  a  wooden  hoss  !"  Several  oth-
ers now  caught  the  mania,  having  no  power  to  resist
it.  Others,  less  serious,  broke  out  in  convulsive
laughter,  shouted  and  hurraed,  and  the  meeting
broke  up  in  one  scene  of  confusion.  It  was  not  in
the  power  of  these  persons  to  resist  it.  The  involun-
tary powers,  by  one  single  impression,  took  the  entire
and  irresistible  control.

I  will  introduce  one  more  instance  as  proof  of  invol-
untary impressions  being  often  sudden  and  irresistible.
In  Stone's  "  History  of  Fanaticism,"  p.  312,  he  refers
to  it,  calling  it  the  jerking  exercise,  and  states  that  it
had  its  origin  in  Kentucky.  This  may  be  so  ;  but  my
information  in  relation  to  it  is  confined  to  North  Car-
olina, which  I  gathered  during  my  travels  in  that  State


LECTURE III.  49

in  1832.  The  substance  of  it  is  as  follows  :  A  man
setting  himself  up  as  a  preacher  who  had  received  a
commission  direct  from  Heaven,  and  as  clergymen  were
not  willing  to  admit  him  into  their  pulpits,  he  traveled
about,  preaching  in  groves  in  various  sections  of  the
State.  He  was  a  man  of  a  very  nervous  tempera-
ment, and  when  he  became  excited  in  speaking,  his
gestures  were  violent,  yet  impressive.  Still  they  were
made  by  his  voluntary  powers.  He  possessed,  also,  a
good  faculty  for  expressing  the  various  passions  and
emotions  of  the  soul  in  his  countenance,  according  to
the  sentiment  he  was  uttering.  These  gestures  of  his
hands  and  motions  of  his  face,  and  even  feet,  would
involuntarily  continue  for  some  time  after  he  took  his
seat,  while  the  concluding  hymn  was  being  sung,  and
frequently  commence  before  he  rose  to  speak,  and,  in-
deed, at  any  time  when  he  was  excited.  But  as  he,
in  all  these  cases,  exerted  his  voluntary  powers  to
keep  his  hands,  face,  and  feet  still,  so  the  conflict  be-
tween the  voluntary  and  involuntary  powers  produced,
not  gestures,  but  most  violent,  sudden,  and  irregular
jerkings  and  twitchings.  And  instead  of  expressing
the  passions  of  the  soul  in  his  countenance,  he  made
up  the  most  horrible  faces  that  can  be  well  conceived.
As  he  could  not  account  for  these  things  in  himself,
and  as  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  prevent  them,  so  he
attributed  the  whole  to  the  power  of  the  spirit !

Now  it  so  happened,  that  every  one  of  his  converts
3


50  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

was  at  first  seized  with  these  most  singular  spasmodic
motions  of  the  limbs  and  contortions  of  the  counte-
nance. Hence  these  involuntary  motions  were  called
"  the  jerks  "  and  whenever  any  one  was  converted,  it
was  expressed  by  saying  that  such  a  one  had  got  the
jerks  !  The  news  of  these  most  singular  manifesta-
tions spread  over  the  whole  region  round  about.  Per-
sons came  from  a  distance  of  twenty,  and  even  thirty
miles,  to  hear  him  and  see  the  wonders.  And  it  so
happened,  at  length,  that  as  many  of  those  who  came
laughing  and  mocking  were  seized  with  the  jerks  as  of
those  who  were  in  reality  converted.  This  was  pro-
nounced by  the  eccentric  speaker  as  the  curse  of  God
upon  those  who  scoffed.  But  the  mania  spread,  excit-
ing the  mirth  and  ridicule  of  some,  and  the  astonish-
ment and  awe  of  others,  till  the  excitement  became
general.  And  such  a  time  of  jerking,  twitching,  and
making  up  wry  faces  at  each  other,  as  existed  in  that
section,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine,  or  even  describe.
Here,  then,  is  a  striking  proof  of  the  fact,  that  the
involuntary  powers  of  some  can  be  made  to  act  sud-
denly— even  by  one  solitary  impression  made  upon  the
mind.

It  is  often  asked,  from  what  cause  could  these
strange  rappings,  and  at  a  certain  time,  and  in  differ-
ent sections,  have  arisen,  if  not  from  spirits,  and
through  what  influence  could  they  have  spread  with
such  rapidity  over  the  Union  1 I  answer,  that  they


LECTURE III.  51

arose  from  the  same  cause  that  the  jerks  did — namely,
from  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind.  And  in
like  manner,  as  the  jerks,  they  spread  over  the  coun-
try through  the  sympathy  of  excitement.  Hence
these  rapping  and  writing  mediums,  and  these  table-
tipping  and  furniture-moving  mediums  have  honestly,
and  just  as  certainly  got  the  jerks  as  those  of  whom
we  have  been  speaking  in  Kentucky  and  North  Car-
olina. They  move  the  hand  to  write  with  a  violent
motion — with  a  kind  of  spasm,  so  that  the  pencil  of-
ten flies  from  it  and  leaves  the  hand  convulsed  as
though  it  were  in  a  fit.  This  proves  that  the  motion
is  produced  by  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind
and  nerves,  for  it  is  these  that  cause  a  fit.

From  what,  I  ask,  arose  the  tremblings  of  the
Quakers,  and  the  shudderings  and  dancings  of  the
Shakers  1  I  answer,  that  they  arose  from  the  invol-
untary powers  of  the  mind.  By  sitting  perfectly  pas-
sive, in  the  firm  conviction  that  some  mysterious
power  would  come  upon  them  and  move  them  to  rise
upon  their  feet,  and  utter  language,  or  to  move  in  the
dance,  was  the  cause  of  producing  the  expected  result,
because  the  involuntary  powers  have  a  strong  tendency
to  concur  in  the  same  state  of  action  with  the  volun-
tary powers.  The  spirit-manifestations,  so  called,
arise  from  the  same  cause  as  the  Quaker-tremblings
and  the  Shaker-dancings.  They  arise  from  the  mys-
terious movements  and  operations  of  the  involuntary


52  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

powers  of  the  human  mind,  acting  through  the  invol-
untary nerves.  They  arise  from  the  same  cause  that
produced  the  cat-mewing  and  dog-biting  mania  among
the  nuns — the  running,  barking,  jerking,  climbing,  and
devil- treeing  mania  of  Kentucky,  and  the  umbrella
and  stick-riding  power  through  the  broad  aisle  of  the
church.  I  therefore  repeat  it,  that  the  mediums  are
sincerely  honest,  and  have  honestly  got  the  jerks,  and
can  no  more  control  their  hands,  joints,  feet,  and  toes
from  writing,  rapping,  tipping  tables,  and  moving
about  furniture,  than  the  nuns  could  prevent  their
cat-concerts  and.  bitings.  Their  only  wrong  consists
in  indulging  and  strengthening  the  habit  by  practice,
and  then  applying  the  results  to  the  agency  of  spirits,
by  which  many  are  rendered  insane,  some  commit  sui-
cide, whole  families  are  distressed,  and  their  dearest
hopes  blighted,  as  they  see  their  domestic  sun,  that
rose  so  fair,  go  down  in  blood.  If  this  be  the  work
of  spirits,  it  seems  strange  that,  like  the  midnight
prowling  hyena,  they  feed  upon  the  living,  the  dying,
and  the  dead.

They  began  by  simply  rapping.  Soon  they  found
out  what  the  rappings  meant,  through  the  a-b-c  busi-
ness. It  increased  gradually  to  abbreviating  words.
But  as  the  whole  a-b-c  rapping  concern  with  its  ab-
breviations was  too  slow,  it  advanced  to  the  medium-
writing  mania,  and  to  tipping  and  moving  furniture
about  as  a  manifestation  of  spirit-power. From  this


LECTUHE III.  53

it  advanced  to  the  spirit-mesmerizing  power,  and  to
the  spirit-talking  power  through  the  medium's  organs
— compelling  the  medium  to  imitate  the  voice  and  mo-
tions that  were  the  spirit's  while  in  its  earthly  tab-
ernacle ;  and  it  has  advanced  to  the  striking  and
ear-pinching  power,  and  to  the  dragging-out-of-door
power  !  Where  it  will  end,  God  only  knows — I  do
not.  But  I  hope  it  will  not  advance  to  the  nun-biting
power — to  the  umbrella  and  stick-riding  business,  nor
end  in  a  devil-hunt !  The  subject  being  founded  in
our  nature,  must  be  brought  to  science,  and  subjected
to  a  rational  investigation.

My  evidence  in  proof  of  involuntary  motion  in  all
its  varieties  and  forms  is  now  produced,  and  will  cer-
tainly cover  any  involuntary  motion  or  action  that
ever  transpired  among  mediums,  whether  it  be  invol-
untary writing — involuntary  mesmerizing — involuntary
speaking — involuntary  table-tipping  and  furniture-
moving — involuntary  striking  and  rapping,  or  involun-
tary dancing,  running,  or  climbing.  But  it  will  now
be  said,  that  though  the  lecturer  has  accounted  for  in-
voluntary motion,  yet  so  far  as  the  manifestations  are
concerned,  there  is  intelligence  connected  with  these
motions  for  which  he  has  not  accounted.  "This  I  ad-
mit, and  to-morrow  evening  I  will  commence  the  con-
sideration of  this  intelligence.  Its  great  and  stirring
agencies  will  be  brought  forward — laid  open — argued,
and  the  spirit-manifestations  annihilated.


54:  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.


LEOTUEE IV.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :

In  the  three  Lectures  to  which  you  have  listened,  I
have  taken  a  general  survey  of  the  spirit-manifestations,
and  shown  that  all  real  mediums  are  honest,  and  are  im-
pelled to  act  as  they  do,  without  being  able  to  resist  it.
I  have,  in  this  respect,  given  them  an  ingenuous  and
candid  defense,  so  far  as  their  sincerity  and  honor  are
involved.  I  am  aware  that  the  writing  medium  can
avoid  taking  a  pen  in  hand,  and  sitting  down  passively
to  await  the  result  of  involuntary  writing.  I  am
aware  that  mediums  can  avoid  sitting  down  to  await
involuntary  rapping,  or  table-tipping,  and  furniture-
moving.  And  by  so  doing,  I  grant  that  the  spirit-
manifestations  would  soon  disappear  from  our  world.
But  what  I  mean  is  this.  If  the  real  medium  sits
down  to  obtain  any  manifestations,  and  in  case  they
are  obtained,  it  is  by  his  involuntary  powers,  without
his  being  able  to  resist  it.  In  proof  of  this,  I  have
produced  evidence  from  the  earliest  ages  down  to  the
present  day.  I  have  produced  examples  of  every  vari-
ety of  involuntary  motion,  and  even  more  wonderful
and  startling  in  proof  of  my  position  than  any  thing


LECTURE IV.  55

connected  with  the  spirit-manifestations,  and  yet  the
"whole  was  accomplished  by  the  involuntary  powers  of
the  mind.

I  grant  that  there  are  false  mediums,  who  perform
all  they  do  hy  trick,  and  do  it  knowingly.  But  this  is
not  the  case  with  real  mediums — they  are  honest  and
sincere.  Hence,  I  repeat  that  the  involuntary  powers
of  the  mind,  and  the  instincts  of  our  nature  connected
with  them,  have  been  in  all  ages  of  the  world  entirely
overlooked.  I  have  called  to  my  aid  the  arm  of  philo-
sophy, and  clearly  shown  how  sounds  may  be  produced
by  electro-magnetic  discharges,  caused  by  the  energy
of  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind,  and  without  the
aid  of  spirits.  In  proof  of  this,  I  also  refered  to,  and
cited  a  well-known  case  reported  in,  Silliman's  Jour-
nal, of  such  electric  discharges  and  sounds  proceeding
from  a  lady,  resembling  those  made  by  mediums ;  and
as  we  are  bound  by  reason  and  common  sense  to  adopt
the  Natural  for  the  solution  of  any  phenomenon  be-
fore we  appeal  to  the  Supernatural,  so  all  the  raps
and  sounds  made  by  mediums  are  produced  electri-
cally, on  the  same  general  principle,  from  some  parts  of
their  own  bodies,  and  without  the  aid  of  spirits.  Hav-
ing finished  my  First  Position,  and  argued  involun-
tary motion  in  all  its  forms,  I  am  now  ready  to  proceed
to  the  most  interesting  part  of  my  subject.

My  Second  Position  is  to  account  for  the  intelli-
gence connected  with  these  manifestations.


56  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

In  my  second  and  third  Lectures,  I  have  several
times  referred  to  the  front  and  back  brains,  and  to
the  voluntas  and  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind  re-
siding in  them,  and  acting  through  their  appropriate
nerves.  Before  I  proceed  to  show  how  intelligence  is
connected  with  the  spirit-manifestations,  permit  me
first  to  notice,  more  particularly,  the  human  brain  and
mind,  so  as  to  be  clearly  and  distinctly  understood  by
the  younger  part  of  my  audience.

Every  part  of  the  human  system,  we  may  say,  is
double.  We  have  two  hands,  two  feet,  two  glands  of
taste,  two  eyes,  and  two  ears.  The  heart  is  double,
"having  its  two  auricles  and  two  ventricles,  and  so  is
even  the  circulating  system  double,  the  arterial  and
venous.  The  human  brain  is  likewise  double,  and  so
is  the  mind,  that  pervades  and  actuates  it,  also  double.
The  positive  and  negative  forces  respond  to,  and  bal-
ance each  other,  and  pervade  all  nature.  When  I  say
that  the  brain  is  doable,  I  mean  that  we  have  in  reality
two  distinct  brains,  each  performing  its  own  distinct
office,  so  long  as  they  are  kept  in  proper  harmony  with
each  other.  The  one  is  called  the  cerebrum,  which  lies
in  the  front  part  of  the  skull,  occupying  the  greater
portion  of  its  cavity ;  and  the  other  is  called  the  cere-
bellum, and  occupies  the  back  portion  of  the  cavity  of
the  skull.  So  that  I  may  be  understood  by  all,  I  will
call  the  cerebrum  the  front  brain,  and  the  cerebellum
the  back  brain*


LECTURE IV.  57

The  front  brain  is  perfect  by  itself,  having  its  two
hemispheres,  and  also  its  lobes.  It  is  double,  and  is
the  organ  of  all  voluntary  motion,  by  which  alone  we
move  the  head,  the  hands,  the  feet,  or  the  whole  body.
This  front  brain  is  the  residence,  the  earthly  house  of
that  part  of  the  mind  that  exercises  volition,  thought,
understanding,  and  reason.  If  one  half  of  this  brain
be  paralyzed,  it  renders  half  of  the  system  useless,  so
that  we  are  unable  to  move  it.

The  back  brain  is  also  perfect  by  itself,  having  its
own  distinct  lobes,  is  likewise  double,  and  is  the  organ
of  involuntary  motion  and  organic  life.  It  throbs  the
heart,  moves  the  blood,  gives  power  to  the  stomach  to
digest  its  food,  and  imparts  energy  to  the  glands  to
produce  their  secretions.  It  is  the  residence,  the
earthly  house  of  that  part  of  the  mind  that  exercises
involuntary  power  in  accordance  with  the  harmony  of
the  universe.  If  I  may  be  indulged  the  expression,  it
moves,  it  rolls  on  with  external  nature,  drinks  in,  and
feels  her  impressions,  and  scans  them  by  the  power  of
its  own  intuitions.  This  part  of  the  mind  contains  all
the  instincts  of  our  nature.  Hence  it  does  not  will,
understand,  and  reason,  as  the  voluntary  department
of  the  mind  in  the  front  brain  reasons.  It  intuitively
knows,  or,  if  I  may  so  speak,  it  involuntarily  reasons.
Under  certain  circumstances  and  conditions,  like  the
mesmeric  or  psychological  state,  it  takes  the  throne,
compels  reason  to  bow  to  its  mandate,  and  with  the

3*


58  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

brightness  of  its  blaze  throws  all  the  voluntary  powers
of  the  soul,  residing  in  the  front  brain,  into  comparative
darkness,  and  pours  out  the  eloquence  of  truth  like  a
river  of  life,  clear  as  costal,  from  its  throne.  When
the  back  brain  is  thus  roused  into  action,  the  front
brain  knows  nothing  of  its  secret  doings,  its  intuitive
powers,  and  instinctive  energies.  Each  brain  may
manifest  its  intelligence  and  impressions  separate  and
independent,  as  it  were,  of  the  other,  yet  there  is,  at
the  same  time,  an  undisturbed  harmony,  a  sympathetic
connection  existing  between  the  two.  The  first  mani-
fests itself  by  the  involuntary  power  of  thought  and
reason.  The  second  manifests  itself  by  the  involuntary
power  of  intuition  and  instinct,  and  while  doing  so,
the  first  has  no  remembrance,  no  knowledge  of  its  acts.
This  is  a  state  well-known  to  medical  men  and  physi-
ological writers,  who  call  it  double  consciousness.
Please  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  brain  is  double,  as  a
meet  tabernacle  adapted  to  the  living  spirit  or  mind  as
its  inhabitant,  which  is  also  double.  Seeing,  hearing,
feeling,  taste,  and  smell  are  involuntary.  If  our  eyes
are  open,  we  can  not  avoid  seeing ;  if  there  is  a  sound
near  us,  we  can  not  avoid  hearing ;  and  if  there  is  an
odor,  we  can  not  avoid  smelling.  As  our  senses  are
involuntary,  so  they  belong  to  the  involuntary  power.
Hence  all  impressions,  received  through  the  senses,  are
first  conveyed  to  the  involuntary  department  of  the
mind  in  the  back  brain  as  the  grand  magazine — the


LECTURE IV.  59

kitchen — where  they  are  prepared,  and  then  passed  on
to  the  fields  of  volition,  thought,  and  reason  in  the
front  brain,  to  be  digested  and  manufactured  into  ideas
by  the  power  of  association.

Before  proceeding  any  farther,  Aye  will  turn  our  at-
tention, for  a  moment,  to  instinct  itself.  And  what,  I
ask,  are  we  to  understand  by  instinct  ?  Answer  :  It
is  a  certain  power  or  disposition  of  mind  by  which,  in-
dependent of  all  instruction  or  experience,  animals  are
unerringly  directed  to  do  spontaneously  whatever  is
necessary  for  the  preservation  of  the  individual  or  the
continuance  of  the  kind.  It  is  an  inborn  desire  or
aversion,  not  determined  by  reason  or  deliberation.
It  is  the  power  that  determines  the  will  of  brutes.  It
is  an  intuition.  And  as  it  is  an  intuition  of  certain
things  that  exist  in  the  external  world,  so  instinct  can
not  reason,  or  even  will,  in  regard  to  such  things,  be-'
cause  it  knows. It  has  the  power  to  impress  and

MOVE  THE  VOLUNTARY  PART  OF  THE  MIND  TO  WILL

and  act.  Instinct  is  not  against  reason,  but  acts  in
concert  with  it.  Instinct  receives  impressions  from
the  external  world,  as  the  raw  material,  to  supply  rea-
son with  ideas.

The  infant  of  an  hour's  existence  shows,  by  the  ac-
tion of  its  head  and  mouth,  not  only  its  mysterious
impression  that  food  exists,  but  also  the  motion  and
manner  by  which  it  is  to  come  in  contact  with  it.
And  when  brought  in  contact  with  the  breast,  it  re-


60  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

moves  the  air  by  suction,  and  having  thus  produced  a
vacuum  in  its  mouth,  the  fluid  naturally  rushes  in
and  nourishes  this  new-born  being.  This  is  all  done
in  accordance  with  the  soundest  principles  of  hydrau-
lic philosophy,  and  which  it  required  a  master-mind  to
explain.

The  duck,  as  soon  as  hatched  into  existence,  intu-
itively knows  there  is  water,  and  feeling  at  the  same
time  an  inborn  desire  to  swim,  directs  his  course  un-
erringly to  the  stream.  The  young  bird,  the  moment
it  bursts  its  shell,  and  before  its  eyes  are  opened  to
the  light,  raises  its  head  and  opens  its  beak  the  first
time  the  mother  approaches  the  nest  with  food.  It
does  this  by  intuition,  and  without  any  process  of  rea-
soning whatever.

The  bee  selects  a  storehouse  in  some  hollow  tree,
impervious  to  rains,  inaccessible  to  storms.  He  di-
rects his  course  unerringly  to  flowery  fields — extracts
his  honey,  and  builds  the  cells  of  his  comb  all  exactly
six  square.  This  he  never  learned  to  do,  but  he
knows  it  intuitively,  or  by  what  we  call  instinct,  which
belongs  to  his  involuntary  powers,  and  by  these  all  his
voluntary  movements  are  directed.  His  instinct  and
reason,  and  his  voluntary  and  involuntary  powers,  all
act  and  move  in  perfect  harmony.  Instinct  often
seems  to  foreknow.  It  has  been  noted,  that  if  swal-
lows make  their  holes  in  the  banks  of  the  river  higher
than  in  former  years,  we  may  be  sure  of  an  unusual


LECTURE IV.  61

flood.  A  barn,  destined  to  be  struck  by  lightning  and
burned  up  during  the  summer,  Las  been  noted  to  have
been  deserted  by  swallows,  even  though  they  had  oc-
cupied it  every  previous  summer  to  build  their  nests
and  rear  their  young.  This  is  intuition,  belongs  to
the  involuntary  power  of  the  creature,  and  seems  al-
most like  inspiration.

Once  more.  Take,  for  instance,  a  toad  from  the
North  and  convey  him  to  the  far  South,  where  he  has
never  been,  and  put  him  in  battle  with  -a  large  poison-
ous spider  of  that  section,  and  of  a  species  he  has
never  before  seen.  Place  a  quantity  of  plantain,  say
three  rods  distant,  on  one  side  of  the  battle-ground,
and  the  same  quantity  four  rods  distant  on  the  other
side.  The  toad,  on  receiving  a  wround,  will  cease
fighting,  and,  after  a  momentary  hesitation,  will  go  di-
rectly to  the  nearest  plantain,  eat  the  leaf,  and  return
to  the  conflict.  Now,  while  he  is  engaged  in  battle,
bring  the  plantain  on  the  opposite  side  a  few  feet
nearer  to  him  than  the  other.  On  being  again  wound-
ed, he  instantly  starts,  without  any  hesitation,  for  the
same  leaf  before  visited — but  soon  stops,  turns  about,
and  goes  to  the  nearest  spot  for  his  remedy.  Now,  in
this  case,  we  clearly  perceive  the  operations  of  both  in-
stinct and  reason. Pope  with  great  propriety  asks —

"  Who  taught  the  nations  of  the  field  and  wood
To  shun  their  poison  and  to  choose  their  food  ?
Prescient  the  tides  or  tempests  to  withstand,


62  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

Build  on  the  wave,  or  arch  beneath  the  sand  ?
In  the  nice  bee,  what  sense  so  subtly  true,
From  poisonous  herbs  extracts  the  healing  dew  ?"

All  creatures  have  the  -will-power  and  the  reasoning
faculties  in  a  certain  degree,  and  these  both  belong  to
their  voluntary  powers  of  mind,  while  their  instincts
belong  to  their  involuntary  powers  of  mind.  In  the
same  ratio  that  their  reasoning  faculties  are  low  in
the  scale  of  being,  their  instinctive  faculties  appear
greater,  because  instinct,  in  all  such  cases,  becomes
the  guide,  and  hence  the  ruling  power.  But  in  the
same  ratio  that  the  reasoning  faculties  are  high  in  the
scale  of  being,  the  instinctive  powers  appear  to  be
less,  because  reason,  in  this  case,  becomes  the  guide,
and  hence  the  ruling  power.  But  still  the  number  of
instinctive  and  reasoning  faculties  in  each  creature  are
equal.  By  this  I  mean,  that  if  the  oyster,  for  in-
stance, has  two  instinctive  faculties,  then  he  has  two
of  reason.  If  the  next  higher  link  has  three  of  in-
stinct, it  has  three  of  reason — if  the  next  has  four  of
instinct  it  has  four  of  reason — and  if  the  next  link  has
five  faculties  of  instinct,  it  has  five  of  reason,  and  so  on
till  we  rise  up  to  man,  whose  instinctive  and  reasoning
faculties  are  also  equal  in  number,  but  exceedingly
more  numerous  than  in  any  other  creature  below  him.
Indeed,  we  may  safely  say  that  they  are  equal  in  num-
ber to  the  instinctive  and  intellectual  faculties  of  all
creatures  in  the  chain  of  life  below  him  combined.


LECTURE IV.  63

Hence  when  reason,  which  may  err,  is  so  low  in  the
scale  of  being  that  it  can  not  be  a  safe  guide,  then  the
creature,  in  his  voluntary  movements,  is  naturally  im-
pelled to  follow  his  instinct,  which  is  intuitive  and  un-
erring. The  poet  again  says  :

"  Say,  where  full  instinct  is  the  unerring  guide,
What  pope  or  council  can  they  need  beside  ?
Reason  however  able,  cool  at  best,
Cares  but  for  service,  or  but  serves  when  prest ;
Stays  till  we  call,  and  then  not  often  near,
But  honest  instinct  comes  a  vclunteer ;
Sure  never  to  o'ershoot,  but  just  to  hit,
While  still  too  wide  or  short  is  human  wit;
Sure  by  quick  nature  happiness  to  gain,
Which  heavier  reason  labors  at  in  vain.
This  too  serves  always,  reason  never  long,
One  must  go  right,  the  other  may  go  wrong.
See  then  the  acting  and  comparing  powers,
One  in  their  nature,  which  are  two  in  ours  !
And  reason  raise  o'er  instinct  as  you  can,
In  this  'tis  God  directs — in  that  'tis  man."

In  this  language,  Pope  gives  the  supremacy  as  to
honor,  unerring  truth  and  righteousness  to  instinct,
because  it  is  the  faculty  in  which  God  directs — while
reason  may  go  wrong,  because  it  is  the  faculty  in
which  man  directs.  In  these  respects  Pope  is  cor-
rect. But  the  idea,  that  the  creatures  have  nothing
but  instinct,  and  no  reason,  is  far,  very  far  from
truth.  In  this  respect  he  follows  the  universal  opin-
ion of  his  day. The  truth  is,  that  the  instinctive  and


64  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

reasoning  faculties,  in  any  one  creature,  are  equal  in
number,  for  mind  is  double,  and  the  faculties  must
correspond  one  to  the  other,  so  as  to  exactly  balance
the  positive  and  negative  forces,  for  without  these  the
creature  could  not  act.  The  fact,  that  all  creatures,
however  low  in  the  scale  of  being,  do  at  times  exer-
cise reason  as  well  as  instinct,  has  greatly  puzzled  nat-
uralists who  have  assigned  them  but  one  set  of  facul-
ties, and  then  marveled  how  instinct  could  have  taught
them  to  devise  and  execute  a  work  which,  if  it  had  been
done  by  a  human  being,  would  have  been  attributed  to
reason.  But  as  all  creatures  possess  a  will,  and  also
the  voluntary  and  involuntary  powers,  so  they  must  pos-
sess the  faculty  of  reason,  as  well  as  that  of  instinct.

I  regard  man  as  a  microcosm  of  the  universe.  A
portion  of  the  elementary  particles  of  all  substances
are  concentered  in  his  body  and  represented  in  his
being.  And  in  his  complicate  organism  is  involved  the
organism  of  all  creatures  below  him,  and  his  intelli-
gence is  equal  in  amount  to  the  intelligence  in  all.
And  as  reason  is  the  controlling  power  by  which  his
actions  are  principally  governed,  so  he  is,  on  this
account,  considered  as  almost  entirely,  if  not  quite,
destitute  of  instinct.  But  this  conclusion  is  an  errone-
ous one.  It  is  just  as  erroneous  as  to  suppose,  on  the
other  hand)  that  the  creatures  below  him  are  destitute
of  reason,  because  they  are  principally  governed  by
instinct. As  man  stands  at  the  head  of  creation,  so


LECTURE IV.  65

he  has  a  greater  number  of  reasoning  faculties  than
any  other  creature  in  existence.  Indeed,  if  we  select
one  individual  of  each  species  of  the  animal  chain  be-
low him,  we  shall  find  that  his  intelligence  is  equal  in
amount  to  the  combined  intelligence  in  all,  and  asserts
his  superiority  over  them.  And  man's  instinctive  and
reasoning  faculties  are  also  equal,  both  as  it  regards
their  number  and  power.  And,  moreover,  so  far  as  his
reasoning  faculties  are  superior  to  the  combined  reason
of  the  various  grades  below  him,  so  far,  also,  are  his
instinctive  faculties  superior  to  theirs.

If  man  is  destitute  of  instinct,  how  then,  I  ask,  can
he  ever  be  impressed  with  a  presentiment,  which  is  a
previous  involuntary  idea  1  There  must  be  something
in  his  internal  nature  that  corresponds  with  what  is  to
happen  in  the  external  world,  and  a  connection  between
the  two  to  convey  the  impression  to  his  instinctive
faculties.  If  man  is  destitute  of  instinct,  how  then
can  he,  in  the  mesmeric  state,  or  in  somnambulism,  or
in  catalepsy,  or  in  any  abnormal  condition,  intuitively
perceive  things  that  are  beyond  the  grasp  of  his  intel-
lectual faculties — things  that  his  reason  never  con-
ceived 1  All  this  is  impossible,  unless  we  admit  that
he  possesses  the  instinctive  powers  which  are  implanted
in  his  mysterious  nature  for  a  noble  end,  and  are  prin-
cipally intended  and  reserved  for  a  higher  and  more
glorified  state  of  action  in  that  world  where  death,  and
pain,  and  change  shall  be  no  more. What  is  mesmer-


66  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

ism  only  the  more  fully  arousing  of  the  human  instincts
from  slumber  into  action?  They  take  the  throne,
compel  reason  to  cease  her  action,  and  through  the  elo-
quence of  the  tongue  they  pour  out  full  gushing  truth
from  the  involuntary  fountain  of  the  soul.

It  will  now  be  said,  that  on  this  principle  instinct  is
unerring ;  and  as  instinct  says  that  it  is  spirits,  so  it
must  be  true.  I  reply,  that  instinct  is  unerring  in
both  man  and  brute,  when  left  to  its  own  natural  im-
pulses, independent  of  foreign  impressions.  It  can  be
made  to  err  by  reason,  by  education,  or  habit.  If  we
leave  all  substances  in  nature  as  they  grow  in  the  field
and  wood,  and  permit  each  creature  in  its  wild  state,
where  God  has  placed  it,  to  follow  the  impulses  of  its
nature,  and  its  instinct  will  unerringly  lead  it  to  avoid  the
poisonous  and  to  eat  the  wholesome  substances.  These
are  as  the  Creator  has  mingled  them  ;  and  as  he  directs
his  creatures  by  instinct,  so  they  have  nothing  to  fear.
But  man  may  extract  arsenic,  and  combine  this  or  any
other  deadly  poisons  with  breadstuffs  or  fruits,  and  kill
the  creatures  that  feed  upon  them.  Here  reason  causes
instinct  to  err.  But  this  is  not  of  God's,  but  of  man's
mingling.  Or  creatures  may  be  taken  from  their  wild
state,  domesticated,  and,  by  education  or  habit,  may
become  fond  of  mixtures  prepared  and  given  them  by
man.  Hence  they  will  be  more  likely  to  sicken,  and  even
have  their  lives  shortened,  than  in  their  wild,  natural
state. Here  education  and  habit  induce  instinct  to  err.


LECTURE IV.  67

^ut  much  more  is  instinct  in  man  liable  to  err  under
the  influence,  education,  habit,  and  all  the  "wily  seduc-
tions of  reason,  than  in  the  lower  animals.  Reason,
education,  and  habit,  directed  and  influenced  by  wrong
impressions,  have  greatly  stifled,  if  not  extinguished,
the  workings  of  instinct  in  the  human  soul.  To  bring
it  back  again  to  its  natural  power,  all  men  should  sit
down  each  day,  a  few  moments,  entirely  passive,  and
thus  cultivate  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  their
intuitive  energies,  till  they  hear  the  silvery  tones  of  the
still  small  voice  of  conscience  within,  and  not  of  de-
parted spirits  without — till  they  hear  from  the  pro-
found depths  of  their  own  intuitions,  that  hold  their
residence  in  the  involuntary  powers  of  their  own  minds,
and  not  in  the  spheres.  This  instinct  is  conscience,
that  god  in  man.  When  uninfluenced  by  foreign  im-
pressions, it  is  truth.  It  is  the  living  oracle  through
which  God  has  spoken  to  his  servants  in  dreams,  in
visions,  in  silent  and  passive  meditation.  It  is  the
living  oracle  through  which  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,
and  Daniel  consulted  the  Eternal,  and  through  which,
as  his  inspired  servants,  they  heard  his  voice  speaking
in  the  cool  stillness  of  the  day  in  silent  and  passive
meditation.  Through  this  medium,  and  not  through
reason,  they  were  inspired  to  speak  the  mind  of  God
above.  It  is  the  living  oracle  which  we  should  consult
when  night  mantles  the  plain.  We  should  consult  it
in  the  face  of  divine  revelation  already  given  to  the


68  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

world,  and  not  to  obtain  another.  Our  involuntary
power  of  mind .  is  the  grand  magazine  in  which  are
stored  up  all  the  intuitions  of  our  instinctive  energies.
All  the  germs  of  truth  that  the  never-ending  ages  of
eternity  will  unfold,  and  stamp  upon  our  ever-expand-
ing intellectual  and  reasoning  faculties,  are  there.  A
finite  portion  of  all  substances  in  being  is  in  man,  so
that  he  bears  about  with  him,  wherever  he  moves,  the
impression  of  infinity  and  eternity.

Having  made  these  general  remarks  in  relation  to
instinct,  and  brought  into  the  field  a  sufficient  amount
of  matter,  I  will  now  take  into  consideration  the  case
of  a  true  medium  as  an  example,  and  will  therefore
suppose  an  excellent  one.  And  here,  ladies  and  gen-
tlemen, I  must  contend,  and  I  do  it  without  hesitation,
and  with  the  most  perfect  confidence,  that  the  true
medium  is  made  to  write,  to  tip  tables,  and  to  move
and  fling  about  furniture,  and  to  produce  rappings,
through  the  involuntary  power  of  his  own  mind,  and
that  no  other  spirit  has  any  agency  in  this  matter.
The  medium,  for  instance,  sits  down  and  resigns  all
power  over  the  voluntary  nerves,  under  the  impression
that  some  immortal  spirit  will  move  the  hand  to  write,
and  thus  make  some  communication  through  him.  He
assumes  a  state  of  entire  passivity,  and,  so  far  as  the
motion  of  his  hand  is  concerned,  he  remains  perfectly
indifferent.  He  does  not  will  nor  exercise  even  the
slightest  mental  effort  to  move  his  hand. But  soon  the


LECTURE IV.  69

hand  does  move,  either  more  slowly  or  with  far  more
than  ordinary  rapidity,  and  a  sentence  is  produced.
But  in  the  production  of  this  sentence  the  medium,
really  and  honestly,  had  no  more  conscious  volition  than
any  other  person  present.

How  then,  it  may  be  asked,  did  he  form  letters  with-
out thinking  ?  I  answer,  that  it  was  intuitively  pro-
duced by  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind,  through
the  nervous  force  of  the  arm,  and  by  a  nervous  sym-
pathy they  would  produce  such  letters  only,  as  by  long-
established  habit  he  had  uniformly  written  by  the  vol-
untary powers  of  his  mind.  I  have  clearly  shown,  in
the  case  of  the  stuttering  boy,  and  the  fingers  of  the
musician  upon  the  keys  of  the  piano,  that  the  voluntary
and  involuntary  powers  have  a  strong  tendency  to  con-
cur together  in  one  common  state  of  action.  Hence  it
would  be  impossible  for  the  medium,  on  the  principle
I  am  arguing,  to  write  Hebrew  or  Greek  letters,  who
had  never  practiced  forming  them.  If  it  be  said,  this
has  been  done  in  one  instance  at  least,  and  a  fac-simile
of  it  has  been  published,  I  reply  that  it  is  a  sheer  hoax,
and  has  no  foundation  in  truth.

If  it  be  asked,  why  are  not  the  letters  in  the  medi-
um's own  handwriting  1  I  answer,  that  they  are,  if  he
writes  with  the  same  speed,  be  that  slow  or  fast,  that  he
usually  does  in  his  business  matters.  Permit  me,  in  my
turn,  to  ask — If  the  spirit  of  Webster  or  Clay  moves
the  medium's  hand,  why  is  it  not  in  the  handwriting


70  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

of  these  statesmen  1  I  have  seen  two  communications
purporting  to  be  from  the  hand  of  Clay,  and  one  from
the  hand  of  Webster,  since  their  death,  but  they  bear
no  possible  resemblance  to  their  earthly  chirography.
And  do  Webster  and  Clay  go  backward  in  eternity  ?
Their  communications  show,  that  they  have  lost  their
eloquence  and  good  sense  by  which  they  moved  men's
souls  on  earth.  Clay  has  lost  his  knowledge  of  En-
glish grammar  and  composition,  and  become  only  about
half-witted  !  And  Webster,  Franklin,  and  Washing-
ton are  not  much  better  off !  Why  are  these  things  so  1
I  answer,  because  the  spirits  of  these  mighty,  honored
dead  have  made  no  communications  to  the  living — and
hence  these  writings  bear  the  impress  of  the  medium's
own  measure  of  capacity  and  scholarship.  If  the  me-
dium is  unlearned  and  half-witted,  his  communication
is  so  likewise,  and  hence  he  fathers  his  silly  nonsense
upon  Henry  Clay.  Why,  I  ask,  does  the  medium  not
write  in  Greek,  when  he  consults  the  spirit  of  Homer
or  Socrates  1 — or  in  Hebrew,  when  he  consults  the  spirit
of  Moses,  or  of  any  of  the  prophets?  How  happen
they  all  to  be  familiar  with  the  English  language,  and
to  move  the  medium's  hand  to  form  our  letters  only  ?
If  y ou  reply,  that  through  a  German  medium  they  write
the  German  language,  through  a  Frenchman  they
write  French,  and  through  an  Indian  they  write  the
Indian  tongue,  I  have  only  to  say,  that  this  is  not
uniformly  the  case. It  is  pretended,  that  through


LECTURE IV.  71

English  mediums communications  have  been  written
in  various  languages,  some  of  which are  obsolete  or
dead,  and  most  difficult  to  write  both  as  regards  the
composition  and  the  letters. Was  this  a  freak  of  fancy
in  the  spirit? It  looks  very  much  like  an  effort  artifi-
cially made. True,  I  have  no  confidence  that  this  has
ever  been  done  by  fair  means,  as  other  experiments  have.
But  if  spirits  have  any  hand  in  the  matter,  this  would
be  the  most  natural  and  convincing  mode. If  Homer,
the  prince  of  £ong,  uniformly  breathed  his  living  verse  in
classic  Greek,  and  Virgil  poured  out  his  unrivaled  elo-
quence in  Latin  through  all  mediums,  and  if  Moses  and
the  prophets  communicated  in  Hebrew,  and  the  Indian's
spirit  in  his  native  tongue,  the  world  would  soon  be
converted  to  a  belief  in  spirit-manifestations. Do  not
say,  that  this  would  be  inconvenient,  for  we  have  trans-
lators by  the  thousand. But  an  occasional  specimen,
given  in  some  dead  language,  "  like  angel's  visits,  few
and  far  between,"  looks  suspicious,  and  savors  too  much
of  a  freak  of  fancy,  to  be  believed  by  any  candid  mind.


72  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.


LECTUKE  V.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :

The  involuntary  motions  of  every  part  of  the  human
system  I  have  fully  and  decidedly  sustained,  and  this
will  cover  any  possible  argument  that  can  be  presented,
as  regards  the  involuntary  movement  of  the  hand  in
writing.  But  the  great  point  upon  which  they  dwell
is,  that  intelligence  is  displayed  when  the  medium
neither  wills  nor  even  thinks.  In  urging  this  point,
they  have  entirely  overlooked  the  intuitions  or  in-
stincts of  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind,  of  which
it  gives  the  most  wonderful  and  astonishing  manifes-
tations while  in  the  mesmeric  or  electro-psychological
state.  In  this  state,  the  mind  in  the  back  brain  is
aroused  and  brought  into  a  more  perfect  communica-
tion with  the  doings  and  operations  of  nature,  in-
stinctively sees  things  as  they  are  (if  left  uninfluenced
by  other  minds),  and  through  habit  and  sympathy  it
performs  in  some  measure  the  office  of  the  front  brain.
It  presses  at  times  the  voluntary  part  of  the  mind,  if
I  may  so  speak,  into  its  service,  compelling  it  to  act  in
concert  with  its  own  intuitions.  These  instincts,  how-
ever, while  acting,  are  impressed  by  surrounding  cir-


LECTURE V.  73

cumstances,  by  previously  established  convictions,  and
by  the  sympathy  of  other  minds.

But  if  it  be  said,  that  human  instinct  can  not  mani-
fest such  astonishing  intelligence,  transcending  even
the  powers  of  reason,  and  that  it  must  require  the  in-
tervention of  spirits  to  account  for  its  manifestation,
how,  then,  I  ask,  can  instinct  in  the  lower  creatures
manifest  the  most  surprising  intelligence,  according  to
their  grade,  without  the  aid  of  spirits  ?  How  do  crea-
tures, without  the  aid  of  instruction,  intuitively  know
the  medical  properties  of  plants  1  Do  the  departed
spirits  of  their  own  species  teach  them  this  1  How  do
the  birds  of  heaven  so  perfectly  build  their  nests  1
How  does  the  spider  so  curiously  weave  his  web?
or  the  bee  so  skillfully  build  the  cells  of  her  comb  all
exactly  six  square  ?  How  does  the  swallow  foreknow
an  approaching  inundation,  and  make  the  holes  in  the
river's  bank  higher  than  in  former  years  1

"Prescient  the  tides  or  tempests  to  withstand,
Build  on  the  wave,  or  arch  beneath  the  sand  ?"

How  are  we  to  account  for  these,  and  the  countless
other  wonders  that  have  struck  with  surprise  the  most
gifted  minds  of  all  ages  1  How  can  instinct  in  these
creatures  manifest  such  astonishing  intelligence  with-
out the  aid  of  reason  or  instruction  1  And  is  this  in-
telligence any  evidence  that  the  departed  kindred
spirits  of  their  own  species  act  through  them  as  me-
diums and  produce  it  1 If  so,  how  then  did  the  first

4


74  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

creatures  manifest  their  instinctive  intelligence  before
any  of  their  race  died,  and  when  as  yet  there  were  no
kindred  spirits  of  their  kind  to  influence  them?  But
as  it  is  admitted,  that  all  creatures,  from  the  lowest  in
the  chain  of  being  up  to  man,  manifest  their  ever
varied  intelligence  by  instinct,  and  without  the  aid  of
departed  spirits  of  their  own  species  to  produce  it,
then  why  is  not  man,  the  highest  link  of  the  living
chain,  able  to  do  the  same,  and  to  manifest  an  instinc-
tive intelligence  beyond  the  grasp  of  his  reason,  and
without  the  aid  of  the  departed  spirits  of  his  race  to
produce  it?  If  he  is  not,  how  then  could  Adam  and
his  descendants  for  the  first  eight  hundred  years  re-
ceive most  wonderful  impressions,  and  manifest  a  simi-
lar intelligence  independent  of  their  reason  before  any
of  their  race  died,  or  before  there  were  any  departed
spirits  to  act  through  them  as  mediums  ?  It  appears
at  least  that  they  got  along  without  any  guardian  spirits
to  watch  over,  protect,  and  influence  them.  In  all
states  of  brilliant  catalepsy,  somnambulism,  mesmeric
clairvoyance,  and  electro-psychology  we  see  abundance
of  this  kind  of  intelligence  displayed.  And  in  one  of
these  states  the  medium-writer  must  be.  There  is  one
medium  who  went  about  lecturing  in  a  spirit-mes-
merized state,  as  it  was  termed,  and  when  done,  he
knew  not  what  he  had  uttered.  How  was  this  accom-
plished 1  He  said  it  was  done  by  the  spirit  that  mes-
merized him  speaking through his organs ! But I


LECTURE V.  <5

answer,  it  was  done  in  the  same  manner  that  the
medium  writes  by  the  spirit.  And  he  obtains  his  in-
telligence, all  his  knowledge,  from  the  same  source
that  all  mesmeric  and  psychological  subjects  do,  and
this  is,  not  from  spirits,  but  from  the  instincts  of  the
involuntary  powers  of  the  mind  in  the  back  brain.
This  will  be  more  fully  noticed  hereafter.

But  before  arguing  this  point,  I  will  speak  of  the
condition  of  a  good  medium,  and  of  mediums  in  gen-
eral. The  Seeress  of  Prevorst  was  no  spirit-rapping
medium,  nor  did  she  pretend  to  be.  Her  case,  take  it
all  in  all,  is  one  in  about  fifty  million.  The  condition
of  a  good  medium  can  be  attained  through  entire  pas-
sivity or  resignation  of  all  the  voluntary  powers  of
mind  and  body ;  but  by  those  persons  only  who  are
naturally  in  the  electro-psychological  state,  or  who  do
involuntarily,  or  by  a  mental  abstraction,  pass  instantly
into,  and  out  of,  the  mesmeric  state,  or  who  may  fall
into  a  cataleptic  condition.  These  are  the  only  per-
sons who  can  become  mediums  of  the  highest  order  by
a  little  practice.  Hence  mediums  are  more  or  less
perfect  in  proportion  to  the  excellency  of  their  invol-
untary nervous  development,  and  its  susceptibility  to
a  psychological  or  mesmeric  impression.  Some  per-
sons are  naturally  in  the  electro-psychological  state,
were  born  in  it,  live  in  it,  and  will  die  in  it.  All  such
become  mediums  of  the  finest  class,  and  by  practice
become  perfect ;  for  practice,  after  all,  has  much  to  do


76  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

with  this  matter,  as  it  tends  to  establish  a  habitude  of
action  upon  the  nervous  system,  as  it  does  upon  every
thing  else  in  mortal  life  to  which  it  may  be  applied,
and  confirms  the  old  proverb,  that  habit  becomes  a
second  nature.  The  voluntary  and  involuntary  powers
have  a  strong  tendency  to  concur  together  in  one  com-
mon mode  of  action  through  indulgence,  sympathy,  and
habit.  This  I  have  clearly  shown  in  the  case  of  the
stuttering  boy,  the  fingers  of  the  performer  on  the  keys
of  the  piano,  and  those  who  got  the  jerks  in  the  field
of  excitement.

There  are  other  persons,  however,  who  are  only  par-
tially in  the  electro-psychological  state,  who  can  be-
come only  partial  mediums,  according  to  the  degree
and  perfection  of  their  nervous  impressibility.  And
there  may  be  some  on  whom  no  visible  psychological
impression  can  be  made,  and  yet  by  long  practice,  un-
wearied patience,  and  perseverance,  they  may  become
writing  mediums,  and  such  as  move  tables  and  other
furniture  by  contact.  All  other  professed  mediums,
who  are  not  in  the  peculiar  psychological  condition
and  nervous  impressibility  I  have  mentioned,  are  im-
postors and  arrant  pretenders  in  every  sense  of  the
word.  They  intentionally,  and  by  their  voluntary
powers,  write,  move  furniture,  tip  tables,  and  produce
the  raps  by  deception  and  trick,  and  of  these  there  are
not  a  few.

As  even  the  honest  medium  is  deceived  by  his  own


LECTURE V.  77

impressions,  so  I  would  in  the  next  place  remark,  in
relation  to  the  doctrine  of  impressions,  that  there  is
one  in  about  twenty-five  or  thirty  who  is  capable  of
becoming  a  good  medium,  because  there  is  about  that
number  who  are  naturally  in  the  electro-psychological
state.  Upon  the  minds  and  bodies  of  such  individuals
any  impression  whatever  can  be  made.

For  the  information  of  such  as  may  not  be  ac-
quainted with  the  fact,  I  would  say,  that  all  the  senses,
their  sight,  hearing,  feeling,  taste,  and  smell,  are  sus-
ceptible of  the  most  astonishing  hallucinations,  and
far  superior  to  any  of  the  spirit-manifestations.  They
can  be  made  not  only  to  hear  raps,  but  to  see  a  choir
of  angels,  and  hear  them  sing,  while  they  strike  their
harps  of  gold  in  living  melody.  To  their  vision  a
handkerchief  can  be  changed  into  a  beautiful  child —
then  to  a  bird  of  paradise — then  into  a  lizard  or  any
thing  else.  They  can  be  impressed  to  see  the  clear
starry  heavens  through  the  ceiling  and  roof  of  this
hall  !  The  next  instant,  they  can  be  impressed  to  see
convolving  clouds  rolling  the  heavens  in  night — they
see  the  lightnings  flashing — hear  the  thunders  rolling,
and  feel  the  rain  and  hail  descending !  They  can  be
made  to  feel  the  opposite  extremes  of  sultry  heat  and
piercing  cold.  They  may  taste  pure  water,  and,  by
an  impression  on  the  mind,  it  can  be  instantly  changed
to  the  taste  of  vinegar — of  wormwood,  of  honey  —
salts — brandy — lemonade — cider  or  coffee  ! The  scent


78  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

of  the  sweetest  rose  can  be  changed  to  that  of  the
most  nauseous  drug  that  ever  came  in  contact  with  the
sense  of  smell,  or  to  the  pleasant  odor  of  the  straw-
berry, the  orange,  or  to  the  horrible  one  of  the  skunk !
They  can  be  made  to  see  a  table,  or  stand,  or  even  a
sofa,  not  only  tip  and  move  about  the  floor,  but  rise  to
the  ceiling  and  sail  around  overhead,  and  then  gently
descend  to  the  spot  where  it  stood.  They  can  be  im-
pressed even  to  believe  that  they  are  some  other  in-
dividual, either  male  or  female,  or  some  renowned
statesman,  general,  king,  or  even  queen,  or  a  beggar,
or  a  person  of  color,  or  an  ox,  or  a  horse !  Not  only
can  the  above  impressions  be  made  in  rapid  and  instant
succession  on  the  mind,  but  their  arms,  limbs,  and
bodies  can  be  instantly  paratyzed,  so  that  they  can  not
stir  from  any  position  in  which  they  may  be  placed.
And  in  this  rigid  condition  of  their  arms,  they  can  be
made  to  gently  tip  a  table  without  knowing  that  they
bore  down  upon  it  in  the  slightest  manner  whatever.
Or  their  limbs  can  be  set  in  motion,  so  that  they  can
not  stop  them.  They  can  be  made  to  dance,  to  rap
the  foot  upon  the  floor,  or  to  snap  the  joints  and  toes
where  this  rare  faculty  exists,  or  to  produce  an  electro-
magnetic snap  without  being  sensible  of  a  single  mo-
tion, because  all  feeling  can  be  removed  from  any  part
of  the  body,  and  again  be  instantly  returned.  Or  they
can  be  made  to  see  and  know  that  they  are  making
such  motions  and  noises,  and  yet  all  knowledge  of  the


LECTURE V.  79

fact  can  be  instantly  obliterated  from  their  remem-
brance. All  these  things,  and  thousands  more,  can  be
performed  upon  persons  in  the  electro-psychological
state,  and  that,  too,  while  they  are  wide  awake  and  in
full  possession  of  their  reasoning  faculties.  Some  can
be  made  even  to  read  the  thoughts  and  impressions  of
other  minds,  and  by  a  brilliant  clairvoyance  to  describe
individuals,  circumstances,  and  scenes  at  any  distance.
AH  this  can  be  done  in  accordance  with  the  soundest
principles  of  physiology,  and  the  philosophy  of  im-
pressions. The  spirit-manifestations  of  the  present
day  are  all  performed  on  the  same  principle,  with  but
little  variation,  that  I  have  here  laid  down  and  briefly
stated. This  I  shall  soon  decidedly  notice.

Once  more.  You  ask,  for  instance,  a  psychological
subject  to  move  his  hands,  and  he  does  so  by  his  vol-
untary power.  You  suddenly  exclaim —  You  can  not
stop  them  !  and,  sure  enough,  he  can  not.  By  this  im-
pression you  merely  cause  him  to  paralyze  the  volun-
tary power  of  his  mind,  so  that  it  can  not  act  through
the  voluntary  nerves  to  stop  the  arm,  while  the  invol-
untary power  of  his  mind  is  left  free  to  continue  this
motion  by  sympathy  through  the  involuntary  nerves.
It  seems  that  all  impressions,  received  from  the  exter-
nal world  through  the  senses,  must  first  pass  through
the  regions  of  involuntary  powers  before  they  can
reach  the  voluntary  powers  of  the  mind.  And  by  an
impression  you  stop  them in  the  involuntary  depart-


80  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

ment,  and  thus  prevent  the  voluntary  powers  from
acting.

It  may  perhaps  be  asked,  what  evidence  is  there
that  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind  can  move
either  the  hands  or  the  feet  without  even  will  or
thought  ?  I  reply  that  there  is  abundant  proof  in  the
many  instances  already  furnished.  I  will,  however,
bring  one  more.  In  a  fit,  for  example,  when  the  vol-
untary powers  of  the  mind  through  the  nervous  force
are  paralyzed  and  utterly  senseless — when  even  the
will  can  not  act  so  as  to  produce  the  least  motion  in
the  body  through  the  nerves,  why  is  it  that  the  hands,
limbs,  and  indeed  the  whole  body,  are  convulsively
moved,  and  often  with  a  force  equal  to  the  strength  of
two,  or  even  three  men  %  What  is  it  that  causes
these  motions  1  Surely  not  the  voluntary  powers,  for
they  are  senseless  ;  and  there  is  no  will  to  act.  Nor
can  it  be  the  body,  for  that  has  no  power  to  struggle
without  the  spirit.  "What,  then,  is  the  philosophy  of
a  struggle q.  The  cause  is  this,  and  has  been  over-
looked by  physiologists — The  fit  not  only  paralyzed  the
voluntary  powers  of  the  mind  and  body,  but,  at  the
same  time,  it  trespassed  so  far  upon  the  involuntary
department  as  to  suspend,  for  a  moment,  the  heaving
of  the  lungs  and  the  throbbing  of  the  heart.  The
convulsion  that  ensued  was  occasioned  by  the  involun-
tary powers  of  the  mind  instinctively  exerting  their
energies  to  force  the  heart  and  lungs,  on  which  life


LECTURE V.  81

immediately  depends,  to  start  into  motion  and  resume
their  functions.  In  this  case  we  see  that  the  involun-
tary powers  of  the  mind  can  move  the  hands  and  feet
without  the  will,  and  by  their  energy  force  the  lungs
and  heart  to  move.  So  the  question  is  not  only  an-
swered, but  unequivocally  settled.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :  I  now  say,  that  all  the  so-
called  spirit-manifestations  are  produced  by  the  invol-
untary powers  of  the  human  mind  through  the  nervous
force  of  those  persons  only  who  are  either  in  the  elec-
tro-psychological state,  or  in  the  mesm,eric  state,  or
in  an  entire  or  partially  cataleptic  state — these  three.
All  my  arguments  center  here,  and  hinge  on  the  invol-
untary powers  of  the  mind.  These  three  conditions,
it  is  to  be  understood,  involve  not  only  somnambulism
and  trance,  but  every  abnormal  condition  to  which
human  beings  may  be  subject.

In  describing  the  various  impressions  and  experi-
ments in  electrical  psychology,  I  spoke  of  the  rapping
of  the  foot  upon  the  floor,  and  the  subject  not  knowing
it.  I  do  not  mean  to  use  this  as  a  mode  by  which  to
account  for,  or  explain,  the  raps  of  true  mediums.
They  perform  them  electro-magnetically  from  their  in-
voluntary nervous  force,  while  the  false  medium  only
makes  them  intentionally  with  the  feet,  the  joints,  or
hands.

Let  us  now  fairly  try  the  question  by  meeting  the
mediums  and  the  believers  in  the  spirit-manifestations

4*


82  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

on  their  own  ground.  It  is  stated,  with  a  great  deal
of  confidence,  that  intelligence  is  connected  with  these
rappings  and  table-tippings,  and  that  the  most  myste-
rious facts  and  circumstances,  far  distant,  and  that
transpired  years  ago,  unknown  to  the  medium  and  to
all  present,  have  been  communicated.  This  is  grant-
ed ;  but  I  reply,  that  facts  and  circumstances  equally
mysterious  have  been  communicated  by  mesmeric  clair-
voyance— by  electro-psychological  impressions,  and  by
catalepsy.  And  you  will  please  to  bear  constantly  in
mind,  that  the  natural  cause  is  to  be  received  and
adopted  in  preference  to  the  supernatural.  But  to
proceed.  It  is  often  requested  that  some  skeptic  pres-
ent at  the  meeting  of  a  circle  shall  state  mentally
how  many  times  he  desires  the  table  to  tip.  He  con-
sents, and  says  mentally  four  times — I  will  now  sup-
pose no  failures  to  occur — and,  sure  enough,  the  table
tips  four  times  !  He  again  merely  thinks >  and  pro-
poses thirteen  ;  and  it  tips  thirteen  times  !  All  are
awe-struck  at  the  mysterious  nature  of  that  invisible
spirit  that  reads  the  thoughts  !  But  do  you  not  un-
derstand, that  mesmeric  clairvoyants  have  done  this  in
thousands  and  thousands  of  instances,  and  so  often  re-
peated, that  the  experiment  has  become  stale  1  But
do  you  object,  and  contend  that  the  medium  is  not  in
the  mesmeric  state  ?  How  do  you  know  this  1  What
immortal  spirit  has  revealed  it  to  you,  and  not  to  us  1
You  will  please,  however,  to  bear  in  mind  that  a  per-


LECTURE V.  83

son  often  passes  into  the  mesmeric  state  instantly,  and
just  as  suddenly  passes  out  of  it,  without  being  con-
scious in  himself  of  any  transition  from  one  state  to  the
other.  But  do  you  say,  that  no  one  magnetized  the
medium — that  his  eyes  are  open,  and  that  he  has  no
appearance  of  being  in  the  mesmeric  state  1  But  this
is  no  objection  whatever,  for  who  does  not  know  the
fact  of  self-mesmerism  ;  that  the  subject  can  throw
himself  into  and  out  of  the  state  at  will  ?  Or  who
does  not  know  the  fact,  that  the  subject  is  often  invol-
untarily thrown  into  and  out  of  the  state  by  surround-
ing impressions  and  circumstances,  and  without  even
knowing  it  1  But  do  you  say,  that  the  medium  is  not
in  communication  with  any  person  in  the  room,  and
yet  that  names  are  rapped  out  through  the  a-b-c  pro-
cess— that  deaths  and  circumstances  are  made  known
of  which  the  medium  never  heard,  of  which  every  per-
son at  the  circle  is  entirely  ignorant,  and  that  with
none  of  these  the  medium  is  in  communication  1  But
what  does  this  objection  amount  to  in  favor  of  spirit-
ual intercourse  ?  Nothing  !  for  who  does  not  know,
that  a  person  who  involuntarily  falls  into  the  mes-
meric state,  is  in  communication  with  surrounding  na-
ture, and  with  all  persons  of  a  certain  nervous  tem-
perament in  sympathy  with  his  own,  even  though
thousands  of  miles  distant,  and,  for  aught  we  know,
throughout  the  globe — and  -receives  impressions  from
their  brains,  and  details  circumstances  of  deaths  and


84  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

events  that  transpired  years  ago  1  Who  does  not
know,  that  mesmeric  clairvoyance  and  its  sympathetic
impressions  involve  all  this  ?  Who  does  not  know,
that  somnambulism  is  but  involuntary  self-mesmerism  ?
And  who  does  not  know,  that  the  somnambulist  is  in
communication  with  nature — with  surrounding  circum-
stances, and  can  feel  and  read  by  impress  the  thoughts
of  those  whose  nervous  sympathies  are  congenial  with
his  own  1  All  this  I  have  tested  in  hundreds  of  cases
for  the  last  fifteen  years.  And  he  who  cites  or  pub-
lishes such  instances  as  these,  as  proof  of  spirit-man-
ifestations, betrays  his  utter  ignorance  of  well-attested
mesmeric  phenomena.

But  could  it  be  clearly  shown  that  the  medium  is  not
in  the  mesmeric  state,  this  would  not  in  the  least  remove
the  difficulty.  He  must  then  be  in  the  electro-psycho-
logical state,  and  this  can  not  positively  be  distin-
guished from  his  natural  state  under  the  present  im-
pressions of  the  medium's  mind.  And  who  does  not
know  that  electro-psychology  is  the  doctrine  of  impres-
sions, and  that  around  it  cluster  all  the  phenomena,
and  even  more  than  mesmerism  can  boast?  A  good
psychological  subject  can  grasp  the  most  wonderful
and  apparently  hidden  events  and  buried  transactions,
call  them  up  from  their  graves,  and  clothe  them  to  his
fancy  in  their  resurrection  splendor,  just  as  they  ap-
peared when  they  transpired.  Like  a  good  mesmeric
clairvoyant,  so  a  brilliant  psychological  subject  can


LECTURE V.  85

range  the  universe — read  the  bare  bosom — read  human
thoughts,  and  scan  the  arcana  of  the  soul.  If  you  say-
that  mesmeric  and  psychological  subjects  often  fail  in
correctness ;  I  reply,  so  do  your  mediums  fail  in  cor-
rectness, as  to  the  spirit-communications,  and  fail  full
as  often.  They  both  stand  upon  the  same  ground,
bow  at  the  same  shrine  of  enchantment,  consult  the
same  oracle,  and  are  the  same  thing.  But  "when  the
medium's  experiments  fail,  he  has  a  spirit  scape-goat
on  which  to  lay  his  sins,  for  he  attributes  the  failure
to  ignorant,  lying,  or  mischievous  spirits !  But  when
the  unfortunate  clairvoyant  fails,  we  merely  say,  he  is
a  poor  subject.  Hence,  as  there  are  good  and  poor
clairvoyants,  so  there  are  good  and  poor  mediums.
This  each  medium  should  candidly  confess,  and  not
charge  his  own  ignorance,  stupidity,  or  failures  upon
the  spirits.

If  you  say,  that  the  medium  is  not  in  the  electro-
psychological  state,  because  there  is  no  person  to
speak  to,  and  impress  him — and  that  no  person  can
impress  him,  for  many  have  tried  it,  and  failed  ;  I
reply,  that  this  objection  is  utterly  futile.  It  is  by  no
means  necessary  that  another  person  should  speak  to,
and  control  him.  Any  absorbing  thought  or  supreme
impression,  or  any  thing  to  which  he  may  discipline  his
mind,  or  that  may  happen  to  enter  his  brain,  can  con-
trol him,  whether  it  may  be  his  full  conviction  of  the
power  of  some  invisible  spirit — an  angel,  a  fly,  or  a


86  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

worm  !  In  whatever  he  may  be  induced  to  place  con-
fidence, and  believes  or  expects  that  he  shall  receive
from  it  an  impression  upon  his  mind  or  body,  and  sits
passively  in  expectation  of  such  a  result,  this  becomes
to  him  the  controlling  power.  And  while  this  impres-
sion remains  the  supreme  one,  so  long  no  other  impres-
sion from  any  human  being  on  earth  can  remove  it  so
as  to  control  him.  Hence  you  perceive  that  this  is  no
proof  whatever,  that  he  is  not  in  the  electro-psycholog-
ical state  merely  because  no  person  can  control  him.
And  yet  there  are  individuals  whom  I  have  often
psychologically  controlled,  who  have  since  become
mediums.  Each  will  tell  me,  as  we  may  chance  to
meet,  "  Well,  you  say  it  is  not  spirits,  but  psychology  ;
now  operate  upon  me,  if  you  can.  I  should  like  to  see
you  psychologize  me  !"  And  so  says  the  mesmeric
clairvoyant  who  has  become  a  medium,  and  who  had
been  mesmerized  a  hundred  times :  "  Well,  I  should
like  to  see  you  mesmerize  me  now  !  My  father's  spirit
is  my  mesmerizer,  and  he  speaks  from  my  mouth,  com-
municates to  others,  and  through  mc  makes  other  me-
diums." All  this  shows  their  utter  ignorance  of  the
doctrine  of  impressions  ;  and  while  in  this  condition
no  argument  can  reach  their  understanding,  and  no
man  can  psychologize  or  mesmerize  them.

It  is  asked,  how  is  the  table  tipped  or  moved,  if  not
by  spirits  1  Answer  :  It  is  done  in  one  of  two  ways,
if  done  honestly. The  first  is  by  the  medium's  own


LECTURE V.  87

physical  force,  exerted  through  the  involuntary  nerves
from  the  back  brain,  and  without  the  medium's  knowl-
edge. By  placing  her  hands  tightly  upon  the  table,
and  keeping  the  voluntary  powers  of  her  mind  entirely
passive,  as  regards  the  motion  of  her  hands,  keeping
her  mind  calmly  and  steadily  fixed  upon  the  expected
result,  then  the  involuntary  powers  of  her  mind  residing
in  the  back  brain  send  out  their  electro-magnetic  force,
gradually  and  imperceptibly  stiffen  and  convulse  the
arms,  and  bear  them  down  with  a  force  sufficient  to
tip  or  move  it.  This  is  done  without  her  knowledge,
because  her  hands  and  arms,  being  at  that  instant
cataleptic,  have  no  more  feeling  than  in  a  fit.  But  on
being  asked  if  she  is  not  tipping  it,  the  moment  she
turns  her  attention  to  examine  the  state  of  her  hands,
her  voluntary  powers,  quick  as  lightning,  quick  as
thought,  equalize  the  forces  between  the  two  brains,
the  rigidity  is  gone  and  the  feeling  returns,  and  she
answers,  No !  I  am  not  tipping  it.  This  is  the  most
common  mode  of  tipping  and  moving  tables  when  one
or  two  mediums  are  seated  alone.

The  second  way  in  which  it  is  done,  is  by  electro-
magnetically  charging  the  table  from  a  living  battery
of  many  human  hands,  and  then  attracting  or  repelling
it  without  contact,  or  raising  it  as  high  as  their  heads
by  a  concentration  of  their  minds  upon  the  object,  and
the  slightest  touch  from  the  entire  circle.  This  is  by
far  the  most  mysterious,  yet  the  noblest  and  most  in-


88  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

teresting  mode,  and  can  not  but  strike  the  mind  with
astonishment  and  delight.  Though  far  more  difficult
than  the  rising  of  a  balloon,  because  the  table  is  more
solid,  yet  it  is  equally  simple.  The  millions  of  pores
in  the  table  are  filled  with  electro-magnetism  from
human  brains,  which  is  inconceivably  lighter  than  the
gas  that  inflates  the  balloon.  And  as  it  possesses  also
the  power  of  attraction  and  repulsion  in  itself,  the
table  will  follow  the  human  hands  and  brains  from
whence  it  was  charged,  and  with  the  slightest  united
effort  from  the  fingers  of  the  surrounding  circle,  it  can
be  raised  as  high  as  their  heads,  but  no  higher.  And
what,  I  ask,  is  better  calculated  to  produce  a  united
effort  of  minds  and  bodies  to  act  in  unison  than  to  say,
"Will  the  spirits  raise  the  table?  will  they  tip  it?
will  they  move  it  from  the  medium  1  will  they  move  it
toward  the  medium  Vy

Objections  against  this  exposition  will  weigh  nothing
against  its  truthfulness  sustained  by  experiment.  Take,
for  instance,  a  man  weighing  150  pounds,  and  lay  him
upon  his  back  on  a  counter  or  long  table.  Let  two
men  of  great  vital  force  stand,  one  either  side  of  him.
Let  each  place  the  forefingers  under  the  shoulder-blade
and  loins  on  each  side,  and  keep  a  steady  lift  of  50
pounds  in  all  on  the  body.  Let  all  three  take  in  a
long  inspiration  at  the  same  instant,  and  for  a  moment
hold  the  breath,  and  then  all  expire  together.  Let
them  continue  for  a  short  time  thus  to  draw  in  and


LECTURE V.  89

expel  their  breath  at  the  same  instant,  and  the  man
will,  at  length,  rise  above  the  table,  as  high  as  their
heads,  without  increasing  the  original  effort  of  50  pounds'
lift.  Here  we  perceive  that  an  unusual  inflation  of
air  into  the  lungs,  and  forcing  the  electricity  contained
in  that  air  into  the  blood  and  nerves  till  the  whole  sys-
tem of  the  prostrate  man,  on  whom  they  were  acting,
was  charged,  overcame  the  gravity  of  100  pounds.  In
fact  he  rose  on  the  same  principle  that  a  balloon  rises.
It  requires  no  disembodied  spirits  to  do  this.  But  no
man  ever  rose  to  the  ceiling,  as  some  have  stated,
without  being  in  contact  with  human  hands.

It  may  now  be  said  that  this  experiment  is  upon
man,  and  not  upon  dead  matter,  and  hence  affords  no
proof  that  a  table  can  be  raised,  or  moved,  or  tipped,
by  being  charged  with  electric  force  from  men.  In
reply,  I  would  first  remark  that  this  objection  amounts
to  nothing  in  the  face  of  experiment  and  fact.  Let  us
notice  dead  matter.  Take,  for  instance,  a  silk  um-
brella, closed  and  perfectly  dry ;  rub  it  briskly  for  a
minute  or  so  downward  with  the  hands — stand  its
handle  upon  the  floor — balance  it  between  the  palms
of  the  two  hands,  touching  it  near  the  top  of  the  silk,
and  then  remove  the  hands  evenly  and  gently  for  two
or  three  inches  away  from  it  on  each  side.  You  may
then  move  the  hands  backward  and  forward,  and
the  umbrella  will  follow  them  two  or  three  inches  out
of  its  perpendicular,  and  again  follow  them  back  to  its


90  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

upright  position.  All  this  can  be  done,  without  contact.
This  settles  the  question,  by  proving  that  the  mind,
through  electrical  agency  sent  from  the  brain  through
the  arms  and  hands,  can  charge  dead  matter,  and  influ-
ence it.  If  this  be  not  so,  how  then  could  the  Deity
electrically  and  magnetically  charge  this  globe,  and
move  it  by  the  same  attracting  and  repelling  forces  1
He  could  not.  If  man  can  not  electrically  charge  and
influence  a  table,  how  then  can  departed  spirits  whom
you  consult  do  it  ?  for  it  is  contended  that  they  do  it
through  an  electrical  agent.

Though  I  am  perfectly  aware  that  there  are  mediums
and  other  persons  who  have  become  so  electrically
charged  through  passivity  as  to  be  capable  of  giving
off  electro-magnetic  discharges  sufficient  to  be  heard  at
considerable  distances,  and  in  certain  rare  cases  to
move  light  substances  alone,  with  little  or  no  contact ;
and  though  I  conceive  it  possible  for  about  one  in  fifty
million,  like  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  to  produce  electro-
magnetic sounds  in  other  dwellings  while  in  the  mes-
meric state,  and  for  which  she  claimed  no  assistance
from  departed  spirits — though  I  admit  all  this,  yet  I
now  seriously  and  decidedly  challenge  any  medium  in
the  United  States  to  raise  the  lightest  stand  from  the
floor  to  the  ceiling  without  contact,  or  to  sit  down  alone
and  place  his  hands  upon  the  end  of  a  table,  that  has
its  four  legs  at  the  corners,  and  make  it  tip  from  him.
I  believe  that  persons  have  seen  apparently  a  table  rise


LECTURE V.  91

from  the  floor  to  the  ceiling,  but  they  were  in  the  electro-
psychological  state,  and  I  have  produced  that  impression
upon  hundreds,  yet  the  table  never  stirred  from  the
spot  where  it  stood !

Again,  there  are  mediums  who  profess  to  be  magnet-
ized by  some  spirit,  and  then  firmly  believe  that  the
spirit  makes  use  of  their  organs,  and  through  them
converses  with  any  at  the  circle  to  whom  the  spirit  may
direct  the  medium's  hand.  And  the  medium  will  often
successfully  imitate  the  voice  and  manner  that  were  the
spirit's  while  in  the  earthly  body.  But  who  does  not
know  that  persons  can  mesmerize  themselves  by  a
mental  abstraction  or  involuntary  fall  into  the  mesmeric
state  by  any  impression?  And  who  does  not  know  that
you  can  make  a  person  in  the  mesmeric  or  psychological
state  believe  that  they  are  some  other  individual,  and
will  then  endeavor  to  speak  and  act  like  that  individual,
whether  he  be  yet  lingering  on  earth  or  departed  to
another  world  1  All  such  stale  questions  are  continually
asked  by  the  believers  in  the  spirit-manifestations
wherever  I  go,  as  though  they  were  unanswerably  great,
when,  in  fact,  they  do  not  scarcely  involve  the  a  b  c  of
mesmeric  and  psychological  phenomena.

It  is  earnestly  contended  that  the  medium  does  not
rap,  tip  tables,  nor  move  furniture,  but  that  it  is  done
by  invisible  spirits.  Now,  this  is  not  only  an  incon-
sistency, but  a  blank  contradiction  to  what  they  uni-
formly admit  about  all  the  other  spirit-manifestations.


92  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

Let  us  notice  a  few  instances  as  examples  of  what  we
mean  :  Does  not  the  spirit  use  the  medium's  organs  to
speak  with  1  Yes,  they  all  say  so.  Does  not  the  spirit
use  the  medium's  hand  and  pen  to  write  with  ?  Yes,
they  all  grant  this  to  be  true.  I  then  ask,  Does  not  the
spirit  electro-magnetically  use  the  medium's  fingers,
toes,  joints,  or  whole  body  to  rap,  and  to  move  and  tip
tables  with  1  Certainly  ;  for  this  must  follow  suit,  and
be  consistent  with  all  the  other  manifestations.  There
must  be  no  contradiction,  but  entire  harmony  in  the
whole  matter.  But  as  it  is  positively  denied  that  the
medium  makes  the  raps  or  tips  the  tables,  in  what
sense  then  is  he  a  medium  ?  Can  this  question  be  an-
swered ?  No  !  His  hand  certainly  does  the  writing,
and  his  lungs,  voice,  and  organs  of  articulation  certainly
do  the  talking.  Then  do  not  his  hands  and  feet,  electro-
magnetically  or  otherwise,  do  the  rapping  and  table-
tipping  business  also?  This  being  admitted,  where,
then,  are  your  spirit-manifestations  1  But  if  you  say,
that  the  medium  does  not  do  this,  but  that-  spirits  do
it,  in  what  sense  then  is  he  a  medium  in  rapping,  tip-
ping, and  moving  tfurnituru,  more  than  any  other  person
in  the  room  ?  And  how  are  these  glaring  contradictions
to  be  reconciled  in  spirit-harmony,  that  the  mediums
do  the  writing  and  talking  business,  and  the  spirits  do
the  rapping,  tipping,  and  flin gin g- about-fur niture-
business?  The  moment  the  medium  admits  that  the
raps  are  made  through  any  part  of  his  body,  as  they


LECTURE V.


93


certainly  are,  then  we  must  bid  adieu  to  the  idea  that
spirits  have  any  concern  in  the  matter.  For  how  can
he  know  it  to  be  spirits,  if  the  sounds  come  from  his
hands  and  feet  1  How  could  he  prove  it  to  be  spirits,
if  his  own  hands  tipped  the  table,  or  moved  the  furni-
ture, by  first  charging  it  with  his  hands  ?  Is  it,  I  ask,
in  the  power  of  mediums  to  induce  spirits  to  move  a
table  without  first  charging  it  electro-magnetically  by
contact  with  their  hands  1  No,  it  is  not.  Let  mediums
step  into  a  room,  and  not  touch  the  table  at  all,  and
then  cause  it  to  be  tipped,  raised,  or  moved,  and  their
work  is  done.  For  one,  I  am  a  convert,  and  will  un-
flinchingly face  a  sneering  and  scoffing  world.  But  if
the  table  is  tipped  or  moved  through  the  influence  of
the  medium's  own  hands,  how  then  can  he  prove  it  to
be  done  by  spirits  ?  In  this  case  it  requires  but  little
sagacity  to  perceive  that  there  are  no  spirit-manifesta-
tions. But  in  case  they  are  not  made  through  him,  in
what  sense,  then,  is  he  a  medium  ?  Of  this  dilemma
they  may  take  either  horn,  and  also  reconcile  these
strongly  apparent  contradictions.  We  perceive,  then,
that  the  spirit-manifestations  will  not  bear  the  test  of
scrutiny — they  crumble  at  the  touch  of  reality.

But  it  is  said,  that  they  are  not  only  proved  true  by
experiment  and  fact,  but  that  the  Scriptures  fully
sanction  the  idea,  that  spirits  have  in  all  ages  ap-
peared to,  and  held  converse  with,  men.  But  why,
and  for  what  end  did  they  appear  1 The  answer  is,


94  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

they  appeared  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  revelation
of  the  mind  and  will  of  the  Creator  of  the  universe  for
the  benefit  of  all  mankind,  and  not  for  individual  pur-
poses and  selfish  or  silly  ends.  Nor  is  there  a  single
instance  where  they  manifested  themselves  through
mediums,  and  employed  raps  to  make  themselves  or
their  message  known  by  an  a-b-c  process.  In  Scrip-
ture times,  instead  of  manifesting  their  presence  by
tipping  tables,  flinging  about  and  destroying  furniture,
or  by  throwing  stones  and  breaking  window-glass,  they
uniformly  made  their  appearance  to  men  in  dignified
and  visible  splendor !  And  instead  of  calling  for  the
alphabet  and  rapping  out  their  messages,  they  deliv-
ered them  in  an  audible  manner,  and  with  the  living
voice.  And  have  spirits  lost  their  power,  become
deaf  and  dumb,  and  are  they  compelled  to  resort  to
various  signs  of  rappings  and  table-tippings  to  make
themselves  understood  1  No !  this  can  not  be.  Heaven
stoops,  but  not  to  meanness.  And,  moreover,  the
revelation  of  God  is  finished  by  the  living  Son,  the
most  exalted  and  dignified  personage  from  the  Supreme
Court  above.

To  finish  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  they  mani-
fested a  spirit-grandeur  and  power  beyond  that  of
electro-toe-rapping  and  table-tipping !  a  grandeur  and
power  worthy  the  Eternal,  and  that  a  seraph's  elo-
quence never,  never  can  describe !  The  darkened  sky
at  the  midnight  hour  broke,  and  gave  the  light  of  day !


LECTURE V.  95

the  light  of  eternity !  An  angel  from  heaven  ap-
peared, robed  in  his  immortal  costume — delivered  his
message  to  shepherds  on  the  plains  of  Judea  announc-
ing the  birth  of  Christ !  To  stamp  with  interest,  and
enhance  the  splendor  of  the  scene,  a  multitude  of  the
heavenly  host  appear,  and  are  seen  moving  along  the
front  of  night !  Not  only  are  they  seen,  but  heard  in
that  song  of  songs,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  on
earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men."  Hark  !  They
are  gone,  but  employed  no  mediums  to  rap  !

Mount  Tabor  is  rendered  immortal  by  the  transfig-
uration of  Christ.  Moses  and  Elias  appeared  in
glory ;  and  the  Master,  too,  was  changed  !  His  face
did  shine  as  the  sun,  and  his  raiment  became  shining,
exceeding  white,  as  snow,  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can
white  them.  They  appeared  not  only  visible  to  the
eye,  but  spake  audibly  to  the  ear,  delivered  their  mes-
sage, and  closed  the  scene  without  employing  mediums
to  rap ! Yes,  the  apostles  present  saw  and  heard.

The  crucifixion  hour  was  at  hand.  Christ  in  agony
sweat  drops  of  blood  !  An  angel  from  heaven  appears
in  the  garden  and  strengthens  him.  From  that  mo-
ment the  name  of  Gethsemane  is  immortal !  He  is
ready  for  the  approaching  scene  of  his  sufferings.  He
bangs  on  the  cross,  and  around  it  the  great  heart  of
nature  throbs  wildly !  Earthquakes  thunder,  rocks
end,  and  the  sun  is  in  night !  He  dies  amid  the  con-
vulsions of  nature,  and  dismisses  his  spirit ! He  is


96  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

laid  in  the  silent  tomb !  The  vengeance  of  a  world  is
roused,  and  Roman  soldiers  are  standing  around  his
sepulcher  as  if  determined  to  hold  the  Master  in
death.  But  on  the  third-day  morning  the  angel  of
God  descends  from  heaven !  An  earthquake  awakes
and  sounds  its  thunders,  announcing  his  approach  !
The  scene  how  grand  !  He  rolls  back  the  stone  from
the  door  of  the  sepulcher !  He  sits  upon  it.  His
countenance  is  like  lightning,  and  his  raiment  white  as
snow  !  For  fear  of  him  the  keepers  shake  and  become
as  dead  men !  And  the  angel  said  to  the  women,  Fear
not  ye,  for  I  know  that  ye  seek  Jesus  that  was  cruci-
fied. All  was  not  only  visible  to  his  friends  and  ene-
mies, but  they  also  heard  his  voice.  The  Roman
guard  was  smitten  down,  and  the  whole  majestic  scene
was  opened  without  forming  a  circle,  and  sublimely
closed  without  employing  mediums  to  rap.


LECTURE VI.


97


LECTURE VI.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :

I  am  sensible  that  many  of  the  ministers  of  the  gos-
pel feel  and  deeply  realize  the  dangers  that  are  thick-
ened around  their  dearest  religious  interests,  but  do  not
know  what  to  do  to  avert  the  gathering  storm.  Some
of  them  having  witnessed  the  manifestations  through
mediums  belonging  perhaps  to  their  own  church,  and
whose  honor  and  sincerity  they  could  not  question,
have  remained  silent  in  their  own  astonishment  at  the
mystery  that  hangs  over  the  subject.  And  though
they  were  by  no  means  satisfied  of  its  truth,  yet  cir-
cumstances of  a  personal  and  local  nature  prevented
their  making  any  opposition  whatever.

Others,  having  witnessed  experiments  through  medi-
ums who  were  strangers,  or  those  in  whom  they  had
no  confidence,  have  raised  their  voices  against  it,  not
only  in  private  conversation,  but  in  their  pulpits  have
pronounced  it  an  arrant  humbug,  and  utterly  unworthy
the  consideration  of  the  Christian  or  any  sober-minded
man.  And  other  clergymen  have  considered  it  be-
neath their  notice — have  refused  to  witness  a  single
experiment — and  believing  it  to  be  sustained,  and  en-
tirely so,  by trickery  and fraud,  have treated the

5


98  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

whole  matter  with  silent  contempt,  and  advised  others
to  do  the  same.  I  regret  to  say,  that  these  various
modes  of  procedure  have  done  any  thing  but  to  arrest
its  progress.  They  have,  on  the  contrary,  had  an  in-
direct tendency  to  urge  it  on,  and  by  such  opposition
to  give  it  permanency  and  support.

The  thing  itself  is  not  a  falsehood,  but  exists  con-
centered in  our  nature,  and  founded  on  immutable
truth.  When  the  whole  subject  is  philosophically
considered  and  scientifically  understood,  it  is  then  per-
ceived that  the  departed  spirits  of  another  world  have
no  agency  in  this  matter,  and  hence  have  never  been
called  from  their  dread  abode  to  produce  raps  through
the  flesh  and  bones  of  mediums,  nor  to  spasmodically
move  the  writing  medium's  hand  to  furnish  communi-
cations for  the  living.  The  mediums,  notwithstanding
this,  are  honest  and  sincere  through  whom  these  com-
munications are  made.  I  would  not  be  understood  to
say  that  they  are  all  honest.  It  would  be  strange,  in-
deed, were  this  the  case.  Every  bank  has  its  coun-
terfeit bills,  and  a  counterfeit  presupposes  a  true.
Among  the  twelve  disciples  of  the  Master  there  was  a
Judas,  and  in  Christian  churches  of  all  denominations
there  ever  have  been,  and  still  are,  hypocrites.  And
it  would  be  strange,  indeed,  if  there  were  no  false  me-
diums among  the  spirit-rappers  and  spirit-writers.  It
would  be  an  exception,  never  before  witnessed  on  earth
among  any  societies  or  combinations  of  men. I  desire


LECTURE VI.  99

it,  therefore,  to  be  distinctly  understood,  that  there  are
false  as  well  as  true  mediums  in  their  circles.  And
what  renders  the  subject  a  matter  of  more  grave  and
serious  interest  is  the  circumstance,  that  its  mediums
and  its  advocates,  as  a  body,  are  sincere.  Indeed,
they  appear  anxious  to  have  the  subject  thoroughly  in-
vestigated, so  that  they  may  know  to  what  cause  to
ascribe  it,  if  it  be  not  to  the  agency  of  spirits.  They
have  no  wish,  I  presume,  to  impose  upon  and
deceive  their  fellow-men  any  more  than  they  have
to  impose  upon  and  deceive  themselves.  All  are
alike  anxious,  and  it  only  needs  the  light  of  truth,
reason,  and  philosophy  to  be  freely  shed  upon  this
subject  around  which  hangs  so  much  mystery  and
darkness.  On  this  account  I  have  spoken  thus  far
plainly  and  freely,  and  endeavored  to  meet  your  ex-
pectations.

It  is  a  matter  of  regret,  that  notwithstanding  the
long  and  patient  investigations  of  various  committees
publicly  appointed  for  this  purpose,  as  well  as  the
private  investigations  of  hundreds  of  individuals,
through  successive  years,  that  they  have  resulted  in
nothing  satisfactory  to  a  rational  solution  of  the  sub-
ject. They  have  left  it  where  they  found  it,  resting
in  its  own  incomprehensibility,  and  pronounced  it  in-
scrutable to  the  human  mind.  The  reason  of  their
arriving  at  such  a  result  as  this,  is  because  these  in-
vestigating committees  and  individuals  have  generally


100  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

directed  their  efforts  to  detect  imposture  and  trick,
with  a  certainty  of  success,  and  when  satisfied  there
was  none,  they  have  at  once  concluded  that  it  must  be
attributed  to  the  agency  of  departed  spirits  in  another
world.  But  however  satisfactory  results  proved  to
themselves,  yet  they  have  uniformly  failed  to  report
any  discovery  they  had  made  satisfactory  to  the  public
mind,  that  invisible  intelligences  had  any  agency  in
producing  these  most  singular  manifestations.  This
state  of  things,  and  the  mystery  and  darkness  that
hover  around,  and  brood  with  more  than  raven  wing
over  this  subject,  concealing  it  from  human  scrutiny,
have  had  a  tendency,  for  several  years  past,  to  excite
the  community,  and  this  excitement,  so  far  from  abat-
ing, is  gradually  increasing  and  extending  itself  over
;  the  United  States  and  Europe  with  most  tremendous
force.

Much  stress  is  laid  upon  the  fact,  that  as  the  medi-
um's hand  moves  without  his  will  and  writes  intelli-
gently, so  it  is  moved  by  a  spirit !  Involuntary  motion
I  have  dwelt  upon  extensively,  and  shown  that  the  in-
tuitions or  instincts  of  man  belong  to  the  involuntary
powers  of  his  mind.  All  mesmeric  clairvoyance,  and
all  that  this  clairvoyance  has  ever  indited,  revealed,  or
written,  is  but  an  effort  and  result  of  the  involuntary
powers  of  the  mind.  If,  however,  you  say  that  man
has  no  such  involuntary  power  of  instinct  or  intuition
to  discover,  then  where  do  departed  spirits  get  the


LECTURE VI.  101

faculty  to  know  when  and  what  you  think — to  know
when  you  call  for  them — and  to  respond  to  you  when-
ever you  desire  them  to  communicate  ?  Where,  I  ask,
do  they  get  the  faculty  to  scrutinize  all  the  secret
thoughts  and  buried  transactions  of  the  human  heart,
and  rap  them  out  and  reveal  them  through  mediums  1
Surely  this  faculty  must  have  existed  inborn,  and  they
must  have  possessed  it  ingermed  in  their  being  while
here  on  earth,  or  they  could  never  have  attained  it  in  a
future  state  of  existence  except  by  a  new  creation.  If
spirits  possess  such  powers  of  intuition  or  instinct,  only
more  fully  developed  by  passing  through  death  into  the
spirit-world,  then  mortals  possess  the  same,  and  when  in
the  mesmeric  or  psychological  state,  or  in  clairvoyant
catalepsy — a  condition  so  nigh  approaching  that  of  the
dead — they  give  evident  manifestations  both  of  its  ex-
istence and  power,  for  in  any  of  these  abnormal  con-
ditions they  perceive,  understand,  and  explain  things
of  which  their  reason,  while  in  their  natural  state,
knows  nothing.

But,  it  is  asked,  what  evidence  is  there  that  man
has  such  intuition  or  instinct  belonging  to  the  involun-
tary power  of  the  mind  in  the  back  brain  1  I  reply,
that  the  evidence  in  proof  of  this  position  has  been  al-
ready given  in  my  former  Lectures.  But  that  this  new
and  interesting  point  in  the  philosophy  of  mind  may
be  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  all  cavil,  I  will  call  to
my  aid  some  of  the  following  well-known  class  of  phe-


102  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

nomena.  Ask  a  mesmerized  person  if  he  will  go  to
bed  in  the  mesmeric  state  and  wake  up  at  precisely
five  o'clock  in  the  morning,  or  at  any  other  hour  you
may  be  pleased  to  name,  and  if  he  firmly  promises  to
do  so,  he  will  awake  at  the  appointed  hour,  however
profound  may  be  his  natural  sleep.  What  is  it,  I
ask,  that  takes  note  of  time  while  the  inhabitant  in
the  front  brain  sleeps,  and  all  its  voluntary  powers  of
calculation,  reason,  thought,  and  understanding  are
gone  1  What  is  it  that  keeps  a  reckoning  of  time,  and
wakes  him  up  at  the  right  moment  1  It  is  a  power
that  lies  beyond  the  realms  of  consciousness — it  is  in-
tuition, or  instinct.  Or,  if  you  please,  after  making
him  promise  while  mesmerized  that  he  will  wake  up  at
five  o'clock  in  the  morning,  then  take  him  out  of  the
mesmeric  state  and  let  him  retire  at  pleasure.  He
now  knows  nothing  of  his  promise  so  far  as  the  volun-
tary powers  of  his  reasoning  faculties  are  concerned.
But  in  the  morning  at  five  o'clock  he  awakes.  I  again
ask,  what  awoke  him  at  the  specified  hour  ?  Surely
it  could  not  have  been  the  voluntary  power  of  his
mind  in  the  front  brain  that  awoke  him  by  the  exer-
cise of  its  thought  or  reason,  because  this  knew  noth-
ing about  the  appointed  hour,  nor  any  of  the  circum-
stances connected  with  the  promise.  And  even  if  it
had,  still  it  could  not  have  told  the  minute  without  a
timepiece.  I  again  ask,  what  was  it  that  knew  unerr-
ingly when  the  hour  came,  without  the  assistance  of  a


LECTURE VI,  103

timepiece,  and  at  that  instant  aroused  the  voluntary
power  of  the  mind  from  slumber  and  insensibility  to
wakefulness  and  thought  1  I  reply,  it  was  the  in-
stincts, the  intuition  of  the  involuntary  powers  of  his
mind,  that  held  their  throne  beyond  the  dominions  of
consciousness.

Once  more.  Ask  a  lady  in  the  mesmeric  state
whether  she  will  come  to  your  house  the  next  morning
at  precisely  ten  o'clock,  hand  you  a  glass  of  water,
and,  while  you  are  drinking  it,  whether  she  will  kneel
down  on  the  left  knee,  and  kiss  your  child  in  its  moth-
er's arms  1  She  firmly  promises  to  do  so.  Now  wake
her  up,  and  though  her  reason  and  understanding  have
not  the  least  knowledge  or  remembrance  of  this  mat-
ter, yet  on  the  morrow,  when  the  hour  is  approaching,
a  presentiment  will  take  possession  of  her  mind  where
she  must  go,  and  what  she  must  do,  and  for  which  she
can  assign  no  possible  reason.  And  so  great  will  be
the  impression  as  to  compel  her  to  proceed  to  your
house  at  the  appointed  hour,  and  do  every  thing  just
as  it  was  promised.  This  proof  is  sufficient  to  settle
the  question  in  all  its  points. Now  convince  me  that

THE  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS  ARE  TRUE,  AND  MY  PHI-
LOSOPHY IS  STILL  CORRECT.  In  SUCH  A  CASE  IT  WOULD
ONLY  BE  NECESSARY  FOR  ME  TO  MOVE  MY  POSITION  ONE
STEP  FARTHER  BACK,  AND  SAY  THAT  DEPARTED  SPIRITS
INFLUENCED  THE  INVOLUNTARY  POWERS  OF  THE  MIND
IN  THE  BACK  BRAIN,  AND  MOVED  INTO  ACTION  THE  IN-


104  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

STINCTIVE ENERGIES OF OUR BEING. It  Will be  per-

ceived,  that  in  the  exposition  now  given,  double  con-
sciousness and  presentiments  are  explained  on  perfectly
rational  and  philosophical  principles.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :  I  have  already  remarked
that  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  mind  never  reason,
nor  exercise  any  will,  but  they  know,  because  they
contain  all  the  instinctive  energies  of  our  being.  All
intuitive  knowledge  of  truth  is  there  in  embryo,  and
there  conscience  holds  her  throne.  Through  the  do-
minions of  the  involuntary  powers  all  impressions  are
compelled  to  pass  on  their  journey  to  the  fields  of  vo-
lition and  reason,  to  be  there  manufactured  into  ideas,
and  they  can  enter  there  by  no  other  road.  These  im-
pressions are  received  from  the  external  world  through
sight,  hearing,  feeling,  taste,  and  smell,  which  all  be-
long, as-  before  shown,  to  the  involuntary  powers  of  the
mind  residing  in  the  back  brain.  On  these  involuntary
powers  presentiments  are  often  impressed,  and  through
these  the  Creator  has  held,  in  the  early  ages  of  the
world,  mysterious  converse  with  holy  men,  and  through
these  he  has  poured  the  streams  of  prophetic  truth
and  divine  inspiration  from  the  fountain  of  his  being,
and  through  these  he  has  reached  the  reason,  thought,
understanding,  and  vnll  of  his  creatures.  Hence  the
involuntary  powers  of  man  are  the  very  basis  of  his
intellectual  existence,  and  the  mysterious  fountain
from  whence  all  his  reason  "and  intelligence  proceed.


LECTURE VI.  105

In  proof  of  this,  let  the  involuntary  powers  only  par-
tially suspend  their  operations,  as,  for  instance,  in  the
case  of  fainting,  and  all  the  voluntary  powers  of  rea-
son, thought,  and  intelligence  are  instantly  suspended.
This  proves  that  they  are  dependent  on  the  harmoni-
ous movement  of  the  involuntary  powers  for  their  very
existence — and  proves  that  the  immortal  mind  pos-
sesses these  two  attributes  of  voluntary  and  involun-
tary power.

From  whence,  I  ask,  originated  all  our  knowledge  of
the  arts  and  various  improvements  in  human  society  ?
From  whence,  for  instance,  did  man  in  the  early  ages
of  our  race  first  obtain  the  idea  of  building  a  house —
of  weaving  and  manufacturing  fabrics,  or  even  of  the
medical  properties  of  plants  1  The  consideration  is  a
humiliating  one,  I  confess,  but  it  is  none  the  less  true,
that  he  received  the  first  idea  from  the  instincts  of  the
lower  creatures.  And  these  instincts,  I  have  clearly
shown,  belong  to  the  involuntary  powers  of  the  whole
living  chain.  In  proof  of  this,  we  know  that  the  med-
ical properties  of  many  plants  were  discovered  by
watching  the  instinct  of  creatures.  History  proves
that  they  gave  us  the  idea.  Building  was  suggested
to  man.  by  the  bee,  the  beaver,  the  bird,  and  other
creatures — weaving  by  the  spider,  the  worm,  and  even
the  idea  of  the  forms  of  government  was  taken  from
the  ant  or  the  bee.  Virgil,  in  his  "  Bucolicks,"  exten-
sively sings  this  truth — and  Pope,  the  English  bard,
5*


106  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

only  breathes  the  language  of  nature,  of  man's  early
history  and  of  experience,  when  he  says  :

«'*  See  man  from  nature  rising  slow  to  art !
To  copy  instinct,  then,  was  nature's  part.
Thus,  then,  to  man  the  voice  of  nature  spake  :
'  Go,  from  the  creatures  thy  instructions  take.
Learn  from  the  birds  what  food  the  thickets  yield,
Learn  from  the  beasts  the  physic  of  the  field ;
Thy  arts  of  building  from  the  bee  receive,
Learn  of  the  mole  to  plow — the  worm  to  weave,
Learn  of  the  little  nautilus  to  sail,
Spread  the  thin  oar,  and  catch  the  rising  gale ;
Here  subterranean  works  and  cities  see !
There  towns  aerial  on  the  waving  tree  !
Learn  each  small  people's  genius,  policies,
The  ant's  republic,  and  the  realm  of  bees,
How  those  in  common  all  their  wealth  bestow,
And  anarchy  without  confusion  know ;
And  these  forever,  though  a  monarch  reign,
Their  separate  cells  and  properties  maintain.
Mark  what  unvaried  laws  attend  each  state !
Laws  wise  as  nature  and  as  fixed  as  fate !
Yet  go,  and  thus  o'er  all  the  creatures  sway,
Thus  let  the  wiser  make  the  rest  obey,
And  for  those  arts  mere  instinct  could  afford,
Be  crowned  as  monarchs,  or  as  gods  adored.' "

The  above  quotation  is  quite  sufficient  for  my  pur-
pose. These  instinctive  energies  belonging  to  our  in-
voluntary powers  of  mind  can  move  the  hand  of  the
medium  to  write,  and  to  rationally  and  instinctively


LECTURE VI.  107

express  the  impressions  of  the  involuntary  powers,  be-
fore they  reach  the  fields  of  volition  and  reason.  In-
deed, they  are  not  allowed  to  enter  the  dominions  of
the  involuntary  powers.  They  are,  if  I  may  so  speak,
arrested  upon  their  journey,  and  detained  in  the  in-
voluntary dominions,  and  from  thence  are  instinctively
sent  off  through  the  involuntary  nerves  of  the  arm,  and
formed  into  words  and  sentences,  and  in  such  letters
only  as  the  medium  by  his  voluntary  powers  learned
at  school.  Remember  that  the  finished  performer  upon
the  piano  plays  two  parts  of  the  tune  perfectly  with
his  fingers  while  he  is  holding  a  familiar  conversation
with  his  friend,  without  perhaps  a  voluntary  thought
what  music  his  fingers  are  playing.  And  you  will  bear
in  mind,  as  before  remarked,  that  there  is  as  much  ar-
rangement and  scientific  intelligence  displayed  in  the
harmony  of  sounds  as  in  the  harmony  of  sentences.
All  somnambulists  write,  and,  if  I  may  so  speak,  reason
and  move  by  the  involuntary  powers  of  mind  and  nerves.
And  can  you  tell  me  how  a  timid  female  can  step  and
move  intelligently  on  the  ridge-pole  of  a  barn-frame,
or  on  a  narrow  joist,  thirty  feet  high,  over  a  swift
stream,  where  a  misstep  would  prove  fatal  1  How  is
this  done  without  the  aid  of  spirits,  or  of  thought  and
reason  from  the  voluntary  power  of  her  mind  in  the
front  brain  %  Wake  up  her  thought  and  reason  while
in  the  act,  and  she  would  fall.  Or  in  the  wakeful
state,  and  by  the  aid  of  all  her  voluntary  powers  of


108  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

reason,  she  could  not  accomplish  it.  And  is  there  not
as  much  intelligence  displayed  in  the  movement  of  her
feet,  and  without  the  aid  of  her  voluntary  reason,  as
there  is  in  the  movement  of  the  writing  medium's
hand?  There  is.  I  say  all  somnambulists  write,  and,
if  I  may  so  speak,  reason  and  move  by  the  involuntary
power  of  mind  and  nerves.  And  so  do  all  mesmeric
clairvoyants,  and  those  in  a  state  of  catalepsy.  And
yet  they  marvel  and  wonder  that  the  hand  writes  when
they  do  not  will  it !  I  hope  they  will  not  wonder  and
perish !

Ladies  and  Gentlemen :  I  will  only  say  that  electro-
psychology  and  mesmerism,  as  matters  of  science,  should
be  kept  in  their  own  appropriate  domain,  to  detect  and
describe  disease,  and  apply  the  healing  remedy;  but
let  them  not  presume,  through  these  agents,  by  sup-
posed spirit-manifestations,  clairvoyance,  or  any  other
mode,  to  make  a  revelation  superior  to  the  prophets,
and  Jesus  Christ  and  his  apostles.  And  deeply  do  I
regret  that  Mr.  Davis  has  mesmerically  attempted  this,
by  speaking  disparagingly  of  those  inspired  men  who
have  for  more  than  four  thousand  years  kindled  up  the
fires  cf  moral  truth  for  the  peace  and  happiness  of  man-
kind and  the  light  of  future  generations.  He  has  not
done  justice  to  the  Bible,  the  prophets,  nor  to  Jesus
Christ  and  his  inspired  servants.  The  Holy  Bible  he
calls  "  excellent  soft  bark,"  and  Daniel's  visions
"  beastly,"  and  ranks  the  Scriptures  on  a  par  with  all


LECTURE VI.  109

heathen  Bibles.  His  evident  intention  was  that  his
book,  called  "  Nature's  Divine  Revelations"  should,  as
a  rule  of  life,  supersede  the  use  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,
and  that  he  himself,  as  a  moral  reformer,  should  surpass
the  Son  of  Man.  Read  his  156th  Lecture,  and  his  mes-
meric intention,  as  to  the  fate  of  the  Bible  and  the  in-
structions of  Christ,  is  clearly  seen.  And  deeply  do  I
regret  that  this  }Toung  man,  in  the  very  morning  of  his
being,  and  whom  I  so  highly  esteem,  has  been  so  misled
in  his  mesmeric  and  psychological  career  by  the  impres-
sions or  those  with  whom  he  was  surrounded,  and
for  which  he  is  not  to  be  blamed.  Hence,  and  above  all,
let  them  not  attribute  the  wonders  that  hang  around
the  psychological  and  mesmeric  states  to  the  communi-
cations of  departed  spirits  who  are  about  making  a  new
and  superior  revelation  to  men.

As  this  is  an  age  of  great  improvement  in  art  and
science,  and  as  some  entirely  new  and  startling  discov-
eries are  continually  being  made  as  regards  the  opera-
tions of  both  mind  and  matter,  so  it  will  be  readily  per-
ceived, even  by  the  most  careless  observer,  that  there  is
a  desire  felt,  an  expectation  entertained  and  even  cher-
ished by  many  minds,  that  improvements,  at  least,  will
be  made  in  divine  revelation  also,  sufficient  to  convert
the  Atheist,  and  they  loudly  boast,  that  the  spirit-man-
ifestations have  already  accomplished  this  in  many  in-
stances. In  reply  to  this,  I  have  only  to  say,  "  that  if
they  believe  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will


110  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

they  be  persuaded  though  one  arose  from  the  dead."
And  some  are  so  deluded  and  vain  as  to  entertain  an
opinion,  that  the  use  of  the  Scriptures  will  be  entirely-
superseded  by  a  higher  and  far  nobler  revelation,  and
one  more  perfectly  adapted  to  the  gradually  expanding
light  and  science  of  the  day,  than  the  old-fashioned  one
contained  in  the  Bible,  and  which  was  "  given  through
prophets,  and  the  apostles  of  Christ,  in  the  dark  and
uncultivated  ages  of  the  world  !"  Many  have  a  deep-
seated  impression,  that  we  as  much  require  a  gradual
improvement  to  be  made  in  divine  revelation,  even
though  given  to  the  world  by  the  living  Son  of  the  High-
est, as  we  do  in  the  arts  and  sciences,  and  that  the  one
must  necessarily  keep  pace  with  the  other.  Still  more  :
there  are  those  who  believe,  that  as  there  has  been  no
improvement  or  amendment  on  the  Bible  for  the  last
eighteen  hundred  years,  so  we  require  an  entirely  new
revelation  adapted  to  the  greater  light  and  science  of
the  day,  that  shall  as  completely  supersede  the  use  of
the  Bible,  or  throw  it  as  far  into  the  shade,  as  traveling
by  steam  supersedes,  or  throws  into  the  shade  the  old-
fashioned  mode  of  traveling  by  stage-coach !  Perhaps
some  are  expecting  a  revelation  from  heaven  by  tele-
graphic dispatch  from  Benjamin  Franklin  through  rap-
ping and  writing  mediums !

It  appears  that  my  friend,  Mr.  Davis,  for  whom  I  en-
tertain a  high  opinion,  has  placed  Franklin  at  the  head
of  matters  in  eternity,  as  the  inventor  or  first  discoverer


LECTURE VI.  Ill

of  this  new  mode  of  communication  from  heaven  to
earth.  And  the  only  reason  why  all  are  not  mediums,
is  because  the  wires  of  the  spiritual  telegraph  are,  as
yet,  established  through  only  a  few  mediums  as  a  mere
experiment.  But  as  the  prophetic  edict  has  been  given
out,  through  the  medium-oracle,  that  soon  we  shall
all  hold  familiar  converse  with  the  spirits  of  our  de-
parted friends,  so  we  shall  all  become  mediums  by  the
spiritual  telegraph  being  universally  established.  It  is
perhaps  a  providential  circumstance,  that  Professor
Morse  is  yet  in  this  world,  otherwise,  the  whole  honor
of  the  immortal  electric  telegraph  from  heaven  to  earth
would  have  been  attributed  to  his  invention,  instead  of
Benjamin  Franklin's.  This  would  have  been  too  much
honor  in  connection  with  his  earthly  discovery  for  any
one  man  to  bear  !  Only  think — a  telegraph  for  two
worlds !

We  know  there  was  a  day  when  our  grandmothers
used  the  spinning-wheel  and  hand-loom,  and  when  print-
ing and  the  various  mechanic  arts  were  slowly  executed
by  hand.  But  because  these  have  been  principally  su-
perseded by  water  and  steam  power,  yet  this  is  no  rea-
son that  the  good  old-fashioned  book,  called  the  Bible,
should  be  superseded  by  a  new  revelation  given  through
the  psychological  and  mesmeric  dreams  of  deluded  or
designing  men.  Because  a  telegraphic  dispatch  on  light-
ning's wing  immeasurably  outstrips  the  swiftest  stage-
coach express  of  former  days,  or  is  even  destined  to  su-


112  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

persede  its  use,  yet  this  is  no  reason  that  the  mesmeric
flights  of  men  to  other  planets,  or  to  future  worlds,  and
all  the  chimerical  revelations  they  can  make,  should
supersede  the  Bible,  which  is  admitted  by  the  Christian
world  to  contain  the  revelation  of  the  mind  and  will  of
the  Creator  of  the  Universe.  This  even  Emanuel
Swedenborg  never  assumed  to  do.  He  did  not  presume
to  furnish  a  new  revelation  of  truth  to  supersede  the
Bible.  His  veneration  was  too  great  for  the  Holy  Book,
to  make  such  an  attempt.  He  only  undertook  to  show
the  internal  and  spiritual  signification  of  the  Bible,  or
how  it  should  be  explained  and  understood  by  mankind.
I  am  not  of  his  religious  sentiment.  Indeed,  I  have
not  read  his  works,  except  two  pamphlets,  and  a  brief
sketch  of  his  life.  I  must,  however,  confess,  that  he  was
a  very  extraordinary  man,  and,  I  think,  superior  to  any
in  moral  and  intellectual  grandeur  since  the  days  of
Christ  and  his  apostles.  His  voluntary  powers  of  rea-
son and  understanding  in  the  front  brain  were  great.
But  far  greater  were  his  involuntary  powers  of  instinct-
ive energy  in  the  back  brain.  So  great  were  his  illu-
minated instincts,  and  so  perfectly  in  communication
with  God  and  nature,  that  they  ruled,  and  moved  his
reason  and  all  his  voluntary  powers  to  act.  And  when
uncorrupted  instinct,  drawing  its  impressions  purely
from  God  and  nature,  compels  reason  to  act3  man  must
be  sinless  and  holy,  for  he  can  not,  under  such  impres-
sions, go  wrong. I  conclude  this  Lecture  by  saying,  that


LECTURE VI.  113

I  should  like  to  be  informed  whether  Emanuel  Swe-
denborg,  after  his  illumination,  was  ever  known  to
commit  sin.  This  is  an  important  point  to  be  known  as
a  matter  of  science  in  relation  to  the  views  I  have  offered
on  instinct.  To  me,  it  is  a  point  of  deep  and  thrilling
interest.  My  public  Lectures  here  close,  and  my  ex-
positions as  regards  the  philosophy  of  the  so-called
spirit-manifestations  are  finished.


114  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.


LECTURE VII.

Ladies  and  Gentlemen  :

I  am  now  about  to  bring  my  Lectures  on  the  subject
of  the  spirit-manifestations  to  a  close.  Indeed,  my
arguments,  so  far  as  regards  the  philosophy  of  these
mental  phenomena  in  connection  with  the  instincts  of
our  nature,  were  concluded  in  my  last  Lecture.  As  I
stand  before  you  this  evening,  for  the  last  time,  I  am
sensible  that  I  can  render  you  no  better  service  than
to  show  you  the  utter  impossibility  of  superseding  the
Bible  by  another  revelation  of  moral  truth,  and  will
also  bring  before  you  distinctly  the  magnanimity  of
Christ.

If  it  be  asked  why  the  Bible  should  not  be  superseded
by  a  better  revelation,  I  answer,  because  it  is  impossible
in  the  very  nature  of  things  to  surpass  it.  If  it  be
asked,  Why  should  not  improvements,  at  least,  be  made
upon  the  original,  as  well  as  in  the  arts  and  sciences  ?
I  answer,  because  a  moral  truth  once  given  by  the  un-
erring Creator,  through  his  Son,  to  man,  as  a  moral
and  religious  being,  can  never  be  improved.  As  moral
truth  is  but  an  emanation  from  the  moral  attributes  and


LECTURE VII.  115

perfections  of  God's  own  nature,  so  it  is  stamped  with
immutability  and  immortality,  can  never  change,  and
hence  is  not  susceptible  of  the  least  improvement  by
men  or  by  angels,  in  time  or  in  eternity.  As  the  living
Son  has  fully  revealed  the  character  of  the  living
Father  in  its  highest  and  most  sublime  sense,  as  a
being  of  perfect  justice,  goodness,  love,  and  truth,  and
as  he  has  set  the  whole  before  us  in  his  spotless  exam-
ple as  a  rule  of  life  for  us  and  all  subsequent  generations
of  men  to  follow,  how  can  it  be  improved  1  We  are,
for  instance,  commanded  to  love,  forgive,  and  bless  our
enemies,  to  be  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another,  tender-
hearted and  forgiving,  industrious,  peaceable,  and
sober-minded,  to  do  unto  others  as  we  would  they  should
do  unto  us,  and  to  be  followers  of  God  as  dear  children.
In  a  word,  to  visit  the  widow  and  the  fatherless  in  their
affliction,  and  to  keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the
world,  to  love  one  another,  and  to  do  good  unto  all  men
as  we  have  opportunity.  And  how,  I  ask,  can  this  be
improved  1  It  is  impossible  ;  because  moral  truth  can
never  be  improved.  It  is  the  moral  food  and  life  of
the  soul  adapted  to  its  moral  nature,  as  much  so  as  the
delicious  fruits,  grains,  and  other  vegetable  productions
of  the  globe  are  the  natural  food  adapted  to  the  natural
life  of  the  body.  And  these  can  not  be  changed  till
the  globe  and  man's  nature  are  changed.  Nor  can
moral  truth  be  changed  till  God's  and  man's  natures
are  changed ! If  we  have  a  true  revelation  of  God's


116  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

moral  perfections  and  character,  then  we  have  also  a
true  revelation  of  moral  truth,  in  the  practice  of  which
we  become  Godlike,  by  imitating  him.  Hence  another
revelation  of  moral  truth  is  impossible,  unless  it  be  an
entirely  new  revelation  of  God's  character,  which  pre-
supposes the  one  we  now  have  to  be  utterly  false.  But
this  can  not  be,  because  it  is  adapted  to  our  moral
nature,  our  best  feelings,  our  highest  and  holiest  aspi-
rations, and  our  dearest  interest  and  happiness  in  time
and  in  eternity.

I  am  aware,  it  may  be  said,  that  Andrew  Jackson
Davis,  in  the  mesmeric  state,  has  visited  the  different
and  distant  worlds  belonging  to  our  planetary  system,
has  accurately  and  minutely  described  the  various  vege-
table tribes,  and  even  the  animated  inhabitants  in  their
vast  dominions,  and  that  the  writers  of  the  Old  and
New  Testaments  have  never  done  this,  nor  has  it  ever
been  revealed  even  by  the  Master  himself.  Suppose
we  admit  all  this  to  be  true,  what  would  it  amount  to
in  the  end?  Nothing,  except  a  mere  matter  of  geo-
graphical and  natural  science  as  regards  other  worlds.
In  such  a  revelation  there  is  not  a  single  moral  truth
to  perfect  human  virtue.  And  as  it  regards  science,
this  globe  contains  more  chemical  properties  than  man
can  analyze,  and  a  greater  variety  of  vegetable  and
animal  existences  than  he  can  understandingly  dissect
and  investigate  in  one  short  life  of  three-score  years
and  ten,  or  even  if  the  period  of  his  existence  were


LECTURE VII.  117

protracted  to  a  thousand  years  twice  told.  Of  what
use,  then,  would  it  be  to  us  to  leave  this  globe  and
invade  the  territory  of  other  worlds,  when  there  is
enough  for  us  to  study  and  admire  at  honiel  And
let  the  world  first  come  up  to  the  standard  copy
of  moral  excellence  and  perfection,  revealed  and  set
before  them  by  the  Saviour,  before  they  search  for
another.  Let  them  first  come  up  to  his  requirement,  to
be  perfect,  even  as  their  Father  who  is  in  heaven  is  per-
fect, in  his  present  revealed  character,  before  they
seek  for  the  revelation  of  a  higher  and  more  perfect
character  in  God.  I  think  it  will  puzzle  them  exceed-
ingly to  go  beyond  the  Master.  He  has  grasped,  in
his  capacious  thought,  infinite  space  and  unending  du-
ration, and  filled  them  with  the  infinite  attributes  and
perfections  of  an  infinite  God  and  Father !  And  how
they  can  go  beyond  this  is  more  than  my  feeble  thought
can  reach,  or  intellect  conceive.

We  have  this  globe  thrown  out  before  us  as  a  speci-
men of  infinite  power  for  us  to  study  and  investigate,
and  are,  at  the  same  time,  permitted  merely  to  perceive
that  there  are  other  worlds  in  the  dominions  of  the
Creator,  and  as  spectators  we  are  permitted  to  gaze  on
their  beauty,  order,  and  harmony,  and  from  analogy
to  reason  that  they  are  inhabited  by  moral  intelligences
and  other  beings  similar  to  our  own.  And  this  is
enough  for  us  to  know  in  our  present  state  of  existence,
without  paying  them,  in  person,  a  formal  visit. But


118  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

all  such  excursions,  or  clairvoyant  revelations,  could
not  make  known  a  single  moral  truth  as  a  rule  of  action
for  men  to  pursue.  All  the  moral  truths  adapted  to
beings  constituted  as  we  are,  have  been  revealed  by
prophets,  Jesus  Christ,  and  his  apostles.  They  involve
all  the  moral  duties  we  owe  to  our  God,  ourselves,  and  all
our  fellow-men,  in  every  possible  condition  of  mortal
life,  even  down  to  the  silent  grave.  And  this  is  enough
for  human  joy.

But  so  far  from  admitting,  I  deny,  in  toto,  that  mes-
meric clairvoyance  can  survey,  explore,  unravel,  and
reveal  other  worlds  or  systems  of  worlds  that  roll  in
immensity,  except  the  globe  we  inhabit,  and  but  very
little  of  this.  But  even  if  it  could  be  done,  it  would
be  no  accession  to  moral  truth,  but  only  to  physical  or
natural  science.

The  living  Son  has  revealed  the  moral,  absolute  per-
fections of  the  living  Father  for  our  imitation.  And
in  that  paternal  character  are  concentered  and  set
before  us  all  the  moral  duties  and  obligations  that  con-
stitute, in  their  performance,  human  happiness  on  earth,
and  involve  all  the  light  of  moral  splendor  to  which
human  beings  can  ever  attain  through  the  wasteless  ages
of  eternity.  And  can  any  improvement,  I  ask,  be
made  on  such  moral  truths  as  these  ?  Every  consistent
and  rational  being  will  answer  this  question  in  the  nega-
tive. Then  no  improvement  can  be  made  on  the  truths
of  the  Bible,  as  a  rule  of  moral  life,  nor  can  they  ever


LECTURE VII.  119

be  superseded  by  the  mesmeric  revelations,  dreams,  and
vagaries  of  men.  What,  then,  is  the  use  of  these  spirit-
manifestations,  but  to  drive  men  to  insanity,  to  suicide,
to  disturb  the  repose  of  society,  to  break  the  charm  of
peace  in  many  a  happy  family,  to  bereave  husbands  of
their  companions,  to  make  wives  widows,  children
orphans,  and  drown  their  eyes  in  tears,  as  they  see
their  morning  sun  of  domestic  light  and  joy  extinguished
at  mid-day,  and  their  bright  sky  of  mind  robed  in
night !

But  as  regards  understanding  the  peculiar  doctrines
of  Christ  and  his  inspired  companions — such  as  the
atonement,  or  in  what  sense  he  died  for  us  as  a  sacri-
fice to  take  away  the  sin  of  the  world — his  being  the
resurrection  and  the  life  of  the  world — his  immortal
reign — and  in  what  sense  that  he,  as  Judge  of  quick
and  dead,  is  to  reward  and  punish  all  mankind  accord-
ing to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body — and  even  in  what
sense  he  is  the  Son  of  God  distinct  from  any  of  the
human  race — I  say,  as  regards  understanding  these
and  other  doctrines,  I  am  satisfied  that  new  reveal-
ments,  through  clairvoyance  or  some  other  source,  are
to  be  made  to  the  world.  I  do  not  mean  new  revela-
tions of  any  doctrinal  truths  as  additions  to  what  are
already  in  the  Bible,  but  a  revealment  of  the  true
meaning  intrinsically  involved  in  those  doctrines  al-
ready recorded  in  the  Scriptures,  and  concerning  which
the  whole  Christian  world  are  divided  and  split  up


120  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

into  sects.  All  these  doctrines  must  be  made  to  har-
monize with  nature — with  reason — with  the  soundest
principles  of  mental  philosophy.  And  even  the  power
invested  in  the  apostles  to  work  miracles  of  mercy  will
be  again  invested  in  men  to  do  the  same,  and  not  only
so,  but  be  understood  and  explained.  But,  as  regards
the  moral  truths,  the  precepts  revealed  by  the  Mas
ter  and  his  inspired  servants,  there  can  be  no  mis-
understanding even  by  the  wayfaring  man,  though
a  fool.  As  to  their  meaning,  all  denominations  are
agreed,  and  there  can  be  no  misunderstanding  as  to
man's  duty,  interest,  and  highest  happiness,  as  a  ra-
tional and  moral  being  in  this,  or  any  other  world
where  Jehovah  reigns.  These  truths  can  not  be
superseded  nor  even  improved.

Christ  was  sent  from  heaven.  He  came  from  the
bosom  of  the  Father — he  knew  the  mysteries,  beati-
tudes, and  powers  of  that  world  to  come.  He  had
seen,  and  therefore  testified  and  bore  witness  to  the
truth  he  disclosed.  Was  not  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Son
of  God  and  the  true  light  of  the  world,  better  qualified
to  reveal  the  duty,  interest,  and  destiny  of  man  than
mesmeric  clairvoyants'?  Was  he  not  better  qualified
for  this  work  than  the  psychological  mediums  of  the
present .  day,  or  the  departed  spirits  they  invoke  1
Was  he  not  better  qualified  for  this  work  than  John
Calvin,  John  Wesley,  Washington,  Franklin,  Bona-
parte, Henry  Clay,  Daniel  Webster,  or  any  others


LECTURE VII.  121

who  are  called  upon  to  rap  or  move  the  medium's
hand  to  write  ?  Were  not  the  personal  presence  and
the  living  voice  of  Christ  on  earth  a  more  appropriate
and  dignified  mode  bj  which  to  make  a  revelation  to
men,  than  the  electro-magnetic  raps  of  invisible  de-
parted spirits  by  an  a-b-c  process  through  the  joints,
fingers,  and  toes  of  mediums  1  What  are  all  these
mediums,  or  even  the  great  names  mentioned,  com-
pared with  the  Master,  as  to  their  moral  or  even  intel-
lectual grandeur?  'And  what  is  their  example,  com-
pared with  his,  as  a  model  for  all  generations  of  men
to  emulate  and  follow  1  They  have  called  upon  Paul,
Peter,  John,  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles  to  rap.  But
why  do  they  not  call  upon  Jesus  Christ,  the  Master
of  them  all,  to  rap  1  This  would  be  so  obviously  dis-
gusting and  impious,  if  not  blasphemous,  that  they
dare  not,  as  yet,  venture  this  outrage  on  Christian
feeling.

The  revelation  made  by  the  Father  through  the  Son
is  enough  for  human  duty,  interest,  and  happiness  in
life,  and  human  hope  and  consolation  in  the  hour  of
death.  And  who  would  be  ashamed  of  him,  and  con-
sider him  so  deficient  in  intellectual  and  moral  attain-
ments and  power,  as  to  presume  to  surpass  him  in
making  a  better  and  more  elevated  revelation  1  Who
would  forsake  the  Master,  renounce  the  moral  sublim-
ity of  his  doctrine,  and  follow  another  leader'?  Did
you  ever  candidly  and  seriously  reflect  upon  his  bare

6


122  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

magnanimity?  Who,  I  ask,  can  dispute  the  moral
power  and  intrinsic  greatness  of  Jesus  Christ?  "  We
see  the  elevated  rank  he  sustains  and  the  stupendous
authority  with  which  he  is  invested !  As  he  was  en-
dued by  the  Creator  with  intellectual  and  moral
powers  far  beyond  those  of  the  highest  intelligences,  so
he  was  surely  no  contemptible — no  degraded  object.
He  was  a  greater  than  the  prophets — a  greater  than
Solomon — made  better  than  the  angels,  and  higher
than  the  heavens  !  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  that,
too,  in  the  loftiest  mold  of  perfection,  and  in  a  sense
that  you  and  I  are  not.

Bearing  a  special  commission  from  the  Eternal  One,
and  covered  with  the  holiest  mantle  of  inspiration,  he
came  to  earth  as  the  Minister  of  Heaven  to  mediate
between  the  two.  He  reached  his  hand  up  to  the  sky,
and  opened  the  cloud  that  vailed  the  truth  and  pur-
poses of  Jehovah,  brought  them  down  and  displayed
them  to  men.  He  reared  the  solid  bulwarks  of  a
pure  religion  in  the  very  midst  of  the  strongest  empire
of  moral  corruption  and  darkness !  He  planted  the
standard  of  his  cross  at  the  very  gates  of  hell,  and
caused  its  banner,  stained  with  his  own  blood,  to  wave
in  permanent  triumph  over  the  nations,  and  over  the
crumbling  ruins  of  ancient  systems  of  heathen  philos-
ophy and  Jewish  tradition.  He  abolished  outward
and  ceremonial  worship  under  types  and  shadows.
He  laid  the  corner  stone,  and  reared  the  walls  of  a


LECTURE VII.  123

spiritual  temple  for  the  worship  of  redeemed  and  glo-
rified millions.  He  inscribed  its  altar  to  the  one  only
living  and  true  God !  He  placed  within  it  the  conse-
crated lamp  of  truth,  lighted  by  the  rays  that  stream
from  the  sun  of  infinite  mercy,  and  with  its  splendor
revealed  the  duties  of  earth  and  the  blessedness  of
heaven.

Clothed  with  greatness  as  with  a  garment,  he  moved
familiarly  among  men,  demolishing  the  pompous  errors
of  earth-born  philosophy,  as  the  foot  of  the  giant  crushes
the  sandy  structures  of  the  mole-hill.  He  stripped  the
glittering  drapery  from  the  hideous  form  of  fashionable  4
vice,  and  disclosed  the  heaven-born  dignity  of  lowly
virtue.  He  exhibited  in  the  face  of  men's  false  views
of  honor  the  moral  cowardice  of  revenge,  the  bravery
of  meekness,  the  nobleness  of  humility,  and  the  base-
ness of  pride.  He  hung  upon  the  cross  to  furnish
blood  in  which  to  write  for  mankind  the  solemn  lesson
that  even  life  itself  is  to  be  sacrificed  for  immortal
truth,  for  conscience,  for  God,  even  as  he  sacrificed  it
for  sin.  He  descended  into  the  silent  tomb,  and  rose
again  as  a  pledge  for  the  immortal  resurrection  of  all
humankind.  He  wears  the  crown  of  mediatorial  power,
and  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  Majesty  on  high.  He
has  reigned  through  all  ages,  from  that  period  down  to
the  present  moment,  by  the  sway  of  his  spiritual  influ-
ences. And  he  must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies
under  his  feet,  till  the  last  enemy,  death,  is  destroyed  and


124  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

swallowed  up  in  victory.  All  this  not  only  presupposes,
but  positively  teaches,  that  there  was  no  future  revelation
to  be  made  after  that  of  Jesus  Christ  was  sealed  up  and
finished.  Hence  the  bright  and  immortal  reign  of  his
revealed  truth  is  not  to  be  superseded  by  any  other,
but  continue  with  irresistible  power  to  the  final  con-
summation.

Such  is  a  faint  picture  of  our  exalted  views  of  the
dignity  and  reign  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  most  wonderful
being  that  ever  appeared  on  this  globe,  the  vicegerent
of  the  Almighty,  and  the  Son  of  his  love.
#  The  evidences  of  the  divinity  of  his  mission  are
placed  on  a  foundation  too  deep  to  be  undermined.  Of
such  a  being  as  the  great  revealer  of  life  and  immor-
tality, the  moral  light  of  the  world,  and  the  bright
example  of  the  loftiest  purity  for  us  to  imitate,  we
have  no  reason  to  be  ashamed.  The  best  and  noblest
minds  that  ever  graced  the  earth  have  received  Jesus
Christ  as  the  Son  of  God.  Locke,  whose  eagle
eye  penetrated  the  deepest  recesses  of  investigation,
and  traced  the  intricate  windings  of  the  human  in-
tellect— Locke  was  not  too  philosophical  to  be  a
Christian.

Milton,  whose  genius  walked  in  awful  splendor
through  the  courts  of  heaven,  and  glared  in  horrible
magnificence  amidst  the  gloomy  caverns  and  torches  of
hell — Milton,  whose  name  is  covered  with  a  poet-luster
that  the  rust  of  ages  shall  fail  to  obscure,  was  not  too


LECTURE VII.  125

elevated  in  his  conceptions  to  fall  in  reverence  before
the  scepter  of  Christ.

Newton,  whose  gigantic  intellect  could  scale  the
loftiest  battlements  of  nature,  ransack  her  towers  of
light  in  the  sky,  and  stand  in  dignified  composure,  look-
ing abroad  on  the  universe  from  piles  of  thought — piles
at  whose  fearful  height  ordinary  minds  grow  dizzy  in
gazing — Newton,  from  the  proudest  summit  of  science
and  of  fame,  with  all  his  mighty  powers,  bowed  in  hu-
mility at  the  foot  of  the  cross."

I  speak  not  of  these  as  if  Christianity  needed  the
support  of  great  names,  but  I  do  it  to  show  the  little-
ness of  little  minds  compared  with  the  above,  who
would  fain  acquire  a  momentary  notoriety,  by  speaking
lightly  of  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  apostles,
and  assume  to  demolish  and  supersede  it  by  the  chi-
merical dreams,  reveries,  and  visions  of  mesmeric  reve-
lations, and  ps}rchological  rapping  and  writing  mediums.
Like  the  man  who,  failing  to  gain  public  notoriety  and
solid  fame  by  intrinsic  worth,  fired  the  temple  of  Diana,
at  Ephesus  (one  of  the  seven  wonders  of  the  world),
to  render  his  name  immortal,  and  thus  damn  himself
to  everlasting,  so  there  are  some  who  would  fain  secure
a  like  notoriety,  rather  than  fail  of  being  noticed,  by
demolishing  the  fabric  of  Christianity  in  case  they
could  not  supersede  it  by  a  revelation  of  their  own.

All  such  puny  efforts,  though  vain,  are  still  injurious
and  annoying  in  their  tendency,  but  are  destined  to


126  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

perish  from  human  remembrance  and  leave  the  temple
of  Christianity  unmoved,  unshaken  !  It  is  built  upon
the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus
Christ  himself  the  chief  corner-stone.  And  as  it  is
destined  to  outlast  the  powers  of  earth  and  outlive  the
pulsations  of  ages,  so  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail
against  it.  Christ  is  not  only  the  chief  corner-stone,
but  equally  sure  will  he  be  found  the  head  of  the
corner  when  the  work  shall  be  finished,  and  the  spir-
itual temple  consummated  in  future  scenes.  In  this
respect  he  will  prove  himself  to  be  the  Alpha  and  the
Omega — the  Beginning  and  the  End — the  First  and
the  Last.

I  would  therefore,  in  conclusion,  most  sincerely  and
earnestly  advise  all  rapping  and  writing  mediums  to
abandon  their  present  silly  and  foolish  enterprise  be-
fore they  are  irrecoverably  lost  and  confirmed  in  the
jerk !  And  permit  me  seriously  and  kindly  to  advise
not  only  all  rapping  and  writing  mediums,  but  all
mesmeric  and  psychological  subjects,  to  cease  from
their  labors  of  love — to  cease  enlightening  and  bless-
ing the  world  with  their  superior  revelations,  that
throw  those  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  apostles  so  far  in
the  shade.


LECTURE VIII.  127


LECTURE VIII.

The  seven  Lectures  contained  in  the  preceding
pages  were  publicly  delivered  in  various  sections ;  what
follows  was  not.  I  merely  divide  the  subject-matter
into  Lectures  to  preserve  a  uniformity  in  the  book.  I
append  them  as  an  act  of.  justice  to  Judge  Edmonds,
of  this  city,  and  his  associates,  who  have  published  a
work  of  505  pages  in  defense  of  the  truthfulness  of
spirit-manifestations.  I  must  confess  that  the  work
is  written  with  a  great  deal  of  candor  and  sincerity,
and  is  decidedly  the  best  that  I  have  as  yet  perused
upon  this  subject.  The  Introduction,  the  conjoint
work  of  John  W.  Edmonds  and  George  T.  Dexter,
contains  100  pages,  and  the  Appendix,  by  Nathaniel
P.  Tallmadge,  late  U.  S.  Senator,  and  Governor  of
Wisconsin,  contains  111  pages.  The  communications
in  the  body  of  the  work,  occupying  294  pages,  pur-
porting to  be  made  by  the  spirits  of  Bacon  and
Swedenborg,  through  the  Doctor,  who  is  a  writing
medium,  are,  with  few  exceptions,  excellent,  and  can
not  be  read  but  with  pleasure,  satisfaction,  and  profit
by any candid and seriously- disposed mind. Yet


128  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

those  of  Swedenborg  certainly  fall  short,  as  to  beauty
and  force  of  expression,  of  the  earthly  productions  of
that  wonderful  and  immortal  mind  !  productions  that
have  stamped  the  impress  of  his  existence  upon  ages,
and  forbid  his  name  to  die.  -4-He  has  forgotten,  it  would
seem,  how  to  spell  his  own  name — the  name  of  "  one
Sweedenborg,  who  wrote  so  many  foolish  things  on
earth,  which  he  is  willing  to  rectify  in  spirit/'  But  is
not  the  contrary  of  this  nearer  the  truth  1  and  do  not
the  productions  of  clairvoyants  and  mediums  show  that
they  live  only  by  feeding  upon  the  crumbs  that  fall  from
Swedenborg's  generous  and  liberal  table,  mixed  up,  it  is
true,  -with  crudities  of  their  own  1  Yet  I  say,  that
those  attributed  to  him  in  this  work  are,  with  few  ex-
ceptions, excellent,  and  may  be  read  with  profit.  The
same  may  be  said  of  the  visions,  as  to  their  moral
force,  seen  by  the  Judge.  Indeed,  there  runs  through
them  a  vein  of  moral  beauty  that  can  not  but  exert  a
salutary  influence  on  the  mind  of  the  reader.  "What
is  said  (page  376)  on  the  character  of  Christ  and  his
true  mission  on  earth,  is  not  only  interesting,  but  dig-
nified and  grave.  It  purports  to  be  an  emanation
from  the  spirit  of  Bacon  ;  and  if  that  immortal  mind
had  originated  it  while  tabernacled  in  the  flesh,  it
would  have  been  an  effort  worthy  of  his  head,  and  cer-
tainly of  his  heart.  True,  I  do  not  approve  of  the  en-
tire sentiment  it  breathes,  but  am  only  speaking  of  it,
in  its  general  features,  as  a  mental  and  moral  effort,


LECTURE VIII.  129

well  worthy  of  the  spirit  who,  it  is  believed,  communi-
cated it.

I  am,  moreover,  pleased  with  the  communications
attributed  to  Clay,  Webster,  and  Calhoun,  and  feel  no
disposition  to  disguise  the  fact,  that  they  bear  a  re-
spectable impress  of  the  exalted  intellects  of  those  dis-
tinguished and  lamented  statesmen.  They  stand  in  a
beautiful  and  dignified  contrast  with  those  meager
communications  that  I  have  requested  to  be  obtained
from  them  through  other  mediums,  and  to  which  I  re-
ferred in  my  Fourth  Lecture.  With  those  three
statesmen  I  had  the  honor  of  a  personal  acquaintance,
and  thus  far  I  have  labored  in  vain  to  find  a  medium
who  could  induce  the  spirit  of  Henry  Clay  to  commu-
nicate to  me  the  contents  of  the  last  letter  he  ad-
dressed to  me,  and  which  is  now  in  my  possession,  and
yet  I  have  found  a  mesmeric  clairvoyant  who  has  done
it.  This  goes  to  prove  what  I  have  argued  in  my
Fifth  Lecture,  that  there  are  good  and  poor  mediums,
as  there  are  good  and  poor  clairvoyant  subjects.

I  am  pleased  on  the  whole  with  Judge  Edmonds  and
the  Doctor's  conjoint  production,  and  with  the  candid
manner  in  which  they  have  given  their  sanction  to  the
great  moral  truths  contained  in  the  inspired  Book,  and
the  testimony  they  have  borne  to  the  magnanimity  of
Christ  as  the  Son  of  God.  Dr.  Adin  Ballou,  wTith
whom  I  am  personally  acquainted,  has  done  the  same,
and  I  have  great  confidence  in  the  moral  principles

6*


130  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

and  rectitude  of  that  excellent  man.  And  I  have
equal  confidence  in  the  talents,  the  moral  bearing,  and
honesty  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Brittan,  the  ingenious  and
able  editor  of  the  "  Spiritual  Telegraph."  The
courteous  and  dignified  manner  in  which  he  conducts
his  paper,  and  his  candor  and  forbearance  toward
those  who  scurrilously  assail  him,  justly  entitle  him  to
public  respect.  And  notwithstanding  the  abuse  and
sneers  of  some  time-serving  editors  and  their  petty
assaults,  and  notwithstanding  the  error  in  which  I  con-
sider him  involved,  yet  a  long  acquaintance  with  him
assures  me  that  he  is  worthy  of  the  entire  and  unre-
served confidence  of  the  public,  and  that  confidence,  I
am  satisfied,  he  will  never  betray.

I  make  these  remarks  as  a  duty  I  owe  to  my  tal-
ented fellow-men,  whom  I  consider  in  error,  but  hon-
estly so,  and  whom  it  therefore  ill-becomes  me,  and,  I
think,  any  other  man  to  denounce  merely  because  they
can  not  see  with  his  eyes  nor  understand  with  his  in-
tellect. The  justice  of  these  remarks  will  be  seen  and
felt,  when  we  reflect  that  no  two  minds  are  constituted
alike — that  we  can  not  believe  or  disbelieve  any  doc-
trine or  sentiment  at  choice — that  it  depends  wholly
upon  evidence,  and  that  the  very  evidence  which  is
abundant  to  satisfy  one  mind,  may  have  but  little  or
no  weight  upon  another.  Such  is  man,  and  his  nature
is  thus  constituted  by  the  hand  of  God  for  the  purpose
of  calling  into  action  universally  the breathings  of


LECTURE VIII.  131

a  charity  which  is  the  bond  of  perfeetness,  and  without
which  we  are  nothing."  Let  others  do  as  they  please,
but  as  for  myself,  I  will  net  denounce  even  the  honest
Atheist.  This  is  not  the  outburst  of  a  momentary  im-
pulse, but  the  settled  convictions  and  feelings  of  my
heart,  as  all  know  who  have  ever  perused  my  u  Im-
mortality Triumphant,"  a  work  in  which  I  make  a
direct  attack  on  the  principles  of  Atheists  and  Deists.
In  the  seven  preceding  Lectures  I  have  fully  sus-
tained the  sincerity  and  honesty  of  all  true  mediums,
and  the  advocates  of  the  spirit- manifestations,  and
even  of  those  among  them  who  may  expect  a  new  reve-
lation, superior  to  that  contained  in  the  Bible.  Andrew
Jackson  Davis  is  an  advocate  of  the  spirit-manifes-
tations, and  has  published  a  work  on  its  philosophy ;
and  he  is  at  the  same  time  a  superior  mesmeric  clair-
voyant. And  though  he  has  indited  and  published  a
work,  called  u  Nature's  Divine  Revelations,"  in  which
he  has  by  no  means  done  justice  to  the  Bible,  yet  I  am
satisfied  that  he  is  a  young  man  of  spotless  moral  repu-
tation, and  acts  according  to  the  impressions  and  honest
convictions  of  his  own  understanding.  There  are  also
many  principles  advocated  in  his  book  that  I  admire,
and  that  are  destined  ultimately  to  prove  useful  to  man-
kind. It  is  only  that  portion  of  his  work  which  is
directly  calculated  to  unsettle  the  faith  and  confidence
of  men  in  the  Scriptures,  as  containing  a  revelation
from  God,  against  whkh  I  seriously  object. This  will


132  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

be  found  refuted  in  my  book  above  referred  to,  com-
mencing at  page  92,  even  though  his  work  is  not  there
named  nor  directly  attacked.

But  it  gives  me  pleasure  to  state  that  all  sentiments
of  this  character  are  not  only  excluded  from  the  work
of  Judge  Edmonds  and  his  two  associate  friends,  but
the  claims  of  the  Bible,  as  containing  a  revelation  from
God,  are  sustained,  and  the  character  and  mission  of
our  Saviour  respected.  This  will  be  the  means  of  in-
troducing his  book  extensively  to  the  notice  and  perusal
of  the  Christian  community.  His  only  object  seems
to  be  to  bring  all  mankind  to  a  common  unity  of  senti-
ment, sympathy,  and  harmony,  as  regards  the  doctrinal
as  well  as  moral  teachings  of  Christ.  He  believes
that  this  desirable  end,  which  will  issue  in  the  removal
of  skepticism,  and  in  imparting  all  the  needed  conso-
lation to  mourners  over  the  loss  of  near  and  dear
friends,  will  be  effected  through  the  doctrine  of  spirit-
manifestations.

Though  the  foregoing  Lectures  were  written  more
than  eighteen  months  ago,  and,  of  course,  without  any
reference  to  Judge  Edmonds'  book,  which  at  that  time
had  no  existence,  yet  I  consider  them  a  fair  refutation
of  the  general  views  he  has  advanced,  so  far  as  any
proof  of  the  truth  of  the  spirit-manifestations'  is  con-
cerned. There  are,  however,  some  wonderful  experi-
ments recorded,  which  he  has  witnessed,  and  that  I
have  sought  for  in  vain. That  he  is  sincere  in  his  con-


LECTURE VIII.  133

victions  I  have  not  a  doubt.  It  may  be  that  I  have
been  unfortunate  in  consulting  what  I  call  poor  mediums.
This  is  not  my  fault.  I  have  called  twice  upon  Mrs.
Brown,  formerly  Mrs.  Fish,  of  this  city,  who,  I  believe,
was  the  first  through  whom  these  manifestations  were
made,  or  who  first  discovered  that  intelligence  was  con-
nected with  the*  rappings.  Her  engagements  at  that
time  were  such  that  she  could  not  accommodate  me,
and  since  that  period  I  have  been  absent  from  the  city.
I  was  certainly  much  pleased  with  her  candor  and  sin-
cerity, and  in  this  matter  I  believe  her  to  be  incapable
of  deception  or  trick.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  I
should  notice  a  few  of  the  most  important  of  the  Judge's
statements,  or  those  at  least  that  made  the  most  im-
pression on  my  mind  when  reading  his  book.  This
not  only  candor,  but  courtesy  to  him,  as  a  gentleman
of  honor,  demands  at  my  hands.  But  before  noticing
those  manifestations  in  his  work  that  I  deem  import-
ant, there  is  one  point,  by  no  means  of  trivial  moment,
that  deserves  a  faithful  notice,  and  on  which  I  submit  a
few  remarks  for  his  candid  consideration.  These  will
be  sufficient  for  my  present  Lecture.

He  speaks  of  the  great  division  of  sentiment  in  the
Christian  world  as  regards  their  peculiar  doctrines  of
faith,  and  calculates  the  comparatively  small  number
who  attend  religious  worship  by  the  number  of  churches
erected  for  their  accommodation,  and  that  this  small
advance  of  Christian  principles,  under  ministerial  en-


134  SPIRIT- MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

ergy  from  the  pulpit,  is  the  result  of  eighteen  hundred
years  experiment  and  trial.  He  therefore  comes  to
the  conclusion,  that  the  Gospel  of  Christ  has  not  an-
swered its  end,  nor  removed  infidelity  from  the  minds
of  many  in  Christian  lands.  And,  as  before  remarked,
he  believes  that  the  spirit-manifestations  are  the  des-
tined means  now  being  employed  by  the  Creator  to
heal  these  divisions — to  establish  Christian  union  and
harmony  on  one  common  platform,  and  to  advance
more  rapidly  the  spread  of  the  doctrines  of  Christ  and
his  companions. (See  pages  8,  9,  66,  67.)

In  reply  to  this,  I  would  say,  that  all  magnanimous
objects — all  great  and  grand  blessings  under  the  gov-
ernment of  the  Creator,  in  which  the  best  and  highest
interest  of  the  whole  human  race,  as  regards  their  ad-
vancement, are  involved,  are,  from  their  very  nature,
slow  in  their  operations.  This  holds  good  both  in
physical  and  moral  science.  Man  is  a  progressive
being,  and  can  not  learn  every  thing  in  a  day.

It  will  be  well  in  this  case  to  notice,  for  elucidation,
the  volume  of  Nature  in  contrast  with  the  volume  of
the  Revelation,  as  both  claim  the  same  Author.  Let
us  first  notice  the  volume  of  Nature.  In  this  great
Book  all  the  physical  truths  in  their  endless  variety
were  written  down  from  the  beginning.  Its  mighty
pages  only  unfold  as  the  human  race  progress  in  the
study  of  its  lessons.  Though  some  minds  are  far  in
advance  of  others,  yet  to  each  student  the  next  page


LECTURE VIII.  135

must  remain  a  mystery  till  his  lesson  on  the  preceding
page  is  understood,  and  by  its  subject-matter  his  mind
is  disciplined  and  expanded  to  receive  further  light.
Then  the  next  leaf  turns,  and  a  new  field  of  thought
opens  to  his  mental  gaze,  and  new  wonders  thicken
around  him  for  solution.  It  is  a  study  of  never-ceas-
ing delight !  If  we  look  abroad  on  the  world  and  con-
template these  students  of  nature,  we  find  that  even
the  learned,  who  are  a  few  pages  in  advance  of  those
called  ignorant,  differ  among  themselves  as  to  their
ideas  of  science,  and  advocate  conflicting  systems  of
philosophy.  And  not  only  so,  but  even  those  of  the
same  Newtonian  school  differ  among  themselves  as  to
certain  points,  while  on  the  grand  principles  of  this
system  of  philosophy  they  agree.  The  humblest
mind,  however,  understands  the  first  page  or  two  of
Nature's  Book,  so  far  at  least  as  concerns  the  great
and  essential  point,  which  is  to  sustain  his  existence
by  cultivating  the  soil.  But  the  students  of  nature  all
differ,  and  even  wrangle,  and  yet  this  is  the  experiment
and  result  of  at  least  six  thousand  years  !  But  be-
cause they  are  only,  as  it  were,  in  the  dawn  of  inquiry
and  improvement,  and  have  not  as  yet  arrived  at  a
unity  of  thought  and  opinion  on  the  great  doctrine  of
science  and  philosophy,  is  this  any  evidence  that  the
Book  of  Nature  has  not  answered  its  end  1  For  one,
I  think  not.  I  might  here  add,  that  the  same  argu-
ment holds  good  as  to  forms  of  human  governments  in


136  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

which  all  mankind  have  been  experimenting  ever  since
society  had  an  existence.  Perfection  of  government,
as  to  man's  independence,  liberty,  and  happiness,  will
come  in  some  distant  future,  because  its  principles  are
ingermed  in  his  being,  and  will  be  developed  by  study
and  experiment.  But  the  advance  to  it  is  necessarily
slow  from  the  very  constitution  of  his  yet  undeveloped
nature.

My  argument  will  now  be  understood  in  regard  to
the  volume  of  Revelation.  It  contains  all  the  truths
necessary  for  man's  moral  development,  happiness,
and  consolation  in  time,  and  his  dearest  interest  and
endless  progression  in  eternity  !  It  brings  life  and
immortality  to  light,  through  a  resurrection  from  the
dead  into  future  scenes  !  Its  moral  preceptive  truths,
as  the  essential  elements  that  constitute  the  moral
food  of  the  soul,  are  plain,  and  in  these  all  Christian
denominations  are  agreed,  as  nearly  so,  as  all  mankind
are  agreed  in  the  fruits  and  grains  that  constitute  the
physical  food  of  the  body  drawn  from  the  volume  of
Nature.  In  what  are  called  its  doctrinal  points  they
disagree,  but  still  are  improving  and  advancing.  This
is  evident  from  the  circumstance,  that  all  doctrines  are
gradually  softening  down,  as  their  adherents  are  grow-
ing more  and  more  liberal.  Calvinism  still  retains  its
name,,  but  has  undergone  a  most  astonishing  change
since  the  days  of  the  thundering  Reformer  of  Geneva
who  established  it. All  doctrines  are  approaching  a


LECTURE VIII.  137

common  gaol — a  center  where  they  will  one  day  meet,
embrace,  and  mingle  into  one  harmony  and  beauty.
The  name  will  be  the  last  thing  changed,  and  then
Christianity  with  all  its  brilliant  virtues  and  glories,
as  a  common  center,  will  throw  out  its  healing  beams
of  light  and  life  on  the  darkness  of  surrounding  na-
tions, even  as  the  central  sun  of  heaven  dispenses  his
light  and  genial  warmth  on  the  darkness  of  surround-
ing worlds.

To  accomplish  this,  and  enable  our  race  to  attain
this  eminence  of  moral  perfection  appertaining  to  their
nature  here  on  earth,  may  require  not  only  eighteen
hundred  years  more,  but  eighteen  hundred  thousand !
But  to  unfold  and  comprehend  all  that  is  contained  in
the  conjoint  volume  of  Nature  and  Revelation,  and
emulate  its  perfection,  will  require  the  ceaseless  ages
of  eternity.  Our  Saviour  clearly  teaches  that  the
steady  and  permanent  power  of  his  gospel  in  reform-
ing, developing,  and  perfecting  the  human  race  as  a
whole,  through  all  future  time,  though  sure,  would  be
slow  and  almost  imperceptible  in  its  advance.  He
compares  it  to  a  little  leaven  hidden  in  three  measures
of  meal,  and  to  the  growth  of  vegetation,  as  in  the
parable  of  the  mustard  seed.  Both  these  processes,
though  sure,  are  still  so  slow  as  to  be  imperceptible  to
the  steady  and  constant  gaze  of  the  keenest  eye.  The
change  of  vegetation  can  only  be  determined  by  a
second  look,  after  a  long  intervening  period,  and  then


138  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

comparing  the  two,  as  regards  its  appearance,  and  so
on,  till  this  smallest  of  seeds  becomes  a  tree.  It  is
compared  to  a  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without
hands,  it  became  a  great  mountain,  and  filled  the  whole
earth.

Hence,  to  enable  the  human  race  to  reach  the  sum-
mit of  moral  perfection  that  they  are  destined  to  attain
on  earth,  under  the  never-ceasing  energy  of  the  gospel
of  Christ,  will  require  ages  on  ages  to  roll.  In  order
to  effect  this  great  end,  I  freely  admit  that  it  will  re-
quire the  use  of  adequate  means  in  addition  to  the
moral  force  of  the  pulpit.  But  that  these  means  are,
as  Judge  Edmonds  believes,  the  spirit-manifestations,
I  have  yet  to  learn.  No !  they  came  in  entirely  too
late !  They  were  preceded  by  a  visible  and  more
tangible  agent  of  power — yes,  by  a  rapping  and  moving
power  far  beyond  that  of  rapping  and  moving  tables.
It  is  a  power  beneath  whose  raps  thrones  must  crumble
into  fragments,  despots  fall,  manacles  break,  and
tyranny  die !  It  is  the  PRESS !  Yes,  the  moral
power  of  the  press  is  already  the  great  co-working
companion  with  the  gospel  of  Christ !  Before  this
instrument,  as  to  its  idea,  was  invented  by  the  im-
mortal Faustus,  what  was  the  condition  of  the  world,
so  far  as  its  Christian  character  was  concerned  1  Let
the  ignorance,  cruelty,  bloodshed,  and  gloom  of  the
dark  ages  send  back  the  answer.  Where  then,  I  ask,
was  the  Bible  1 It  was  not  seen  by  the  millions  of  our


LECTURE VIII.  139

race  !  Its  written  manuscripts,  here  and  there  a  copy,
were  with  the  Pope,  the  Bishop,  the  Priest,  shut  out
from  the  light  of  day  in  some  cloister's  dark  recess,
or  vault.  It  was  the  strong  arm  of  the  press  that  tore
away  the  bolts  and  bars  of  its  prison,  demolished  its
doors,  snatched  it  from  its  secret  and  silent  tomb,  and
flung  it  to  the  hearth  of  the  cottager,  to  the  poor
widow  in  her  solitude,  to  the  lonely  orphan,  to  the
prisoner  in  his  dungeon,  flung  it  to  the  world,  as  the
world's  richest  treasure !  The  press !  that  mighty
engine  of  power  and  light  tyrants  feared,  fastened  upon
it  a  tyrant's  chain,  and  denied  or  restrained  its  liberty.
But  in  Young  America  and  Old  England  it  has  broken
loose.  It  is  unchained,  and  before  its  awful  power
tyrants  this  moment  tremble  and  their  thrones  shake.
It  flings  out  its  sheets  by  millions,  and  showers  them
over  the  globe.  The  water,  the  steam — yes,  the  light-
nings of  heaven — the  electric  power  that  moves  the
globe,  have  lent  it  their  aid !  I  had  almost  said  that
the  Creator  had  lent  it  his  own  omnipresence  in  the
telegraphic  dispatch !  It  has  its  millions  of  eyes,  and
beholds  all  things  that  are  done  under  heaven,  and  its
millions  of  tongues,  to  speak  alike  to  the  cottager  and
king,  and  it  speaks  without  fear !  It  is  in  motion,  and
beneath  its  tread  the  globe  shakes  to  its  center,  the
moral  elements  are  set  in  motion,  and  tyrants  may  as
well  presume  to  arrest  the  globe  in  its  mighty  course
around  the  sun,  as  attempt  to  arrest  the  advancing


140  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

power  of  the  press.  It  proclaims  alike  to  the  world
the  statesman's  magnanimity  and  greatness,  the  orator's
eloquence,  the  scholar's  fame,  the  poet's  inspiration,
the  philanthropist's  deeds  in  the  prisoner's  cell,  the
hero's  victories  in  fields  of  war,  the  oppressor's  wrongs,
the  Christian's  triumph,  and  the  villain's  defeat.  Its
transcendent  importance,  as  an  agent  of  moral  power,
should  not  be  undervalued  nor  forgotten.  It  looks
abroad  with  equal  eye  on  thrones  and  hamlets,  on  the
rich  and  poor,  summons  all  alike  to  its  tremendous
bar,  holds  them  in  its  grasp  for  trial,  condemns  or
acquits,  and  proclaims  its  verdict  to  the  world.

In  the  light  that  this  subject  is  now  presented,  it  will
be  perceived  that  Christianity,  as  to  its  present  position,
and  what  it  has  already  accomplished,  should  be  con-
sidered as  dating  from  the  commencement  of  the  press,
400  years  ago,  even  though  we  must  date  back  1800  years
to  reach  its  origin  and  Author.  It  will  also  be  borne
in  mind  that  the  Jews,  as  a  nation,  rejected  his  gospel,
and  still  continue  to  do  so,  which  he  himself  foretold,
and  that  the  present  Christian  world  have  been  gathered
from  heathen  nations,  and  brought  from  barbarism  and
heathen  night  to  their  present  civilization,  refinement,
moral  light,  and  intellectual  advancement.  I  would
therefore  kindly  remind  the  Judge  that  should  he  con
sent  to  give  the  case  a  re-hearing,  it  would  be  well
for  him  to  take  into  careful  consideration  the  above
items  of  evidence  before  he  charges  the  jury  or  pro


LECTURE VIII.  141

nounces  sentence  as  to  the  obvious  result  produced  by
the  doctrines  of  our  Saviour  in  eighteen  hundred  years.

Judge  Edmonds  not  only  expresses  his  surprise  at
the  slow  advance  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  in  so  long  a
lapse  of  years,  but  expresses  his  astonishment  at  the
far  more  rapid  spread  of  the  spirit-manifestations,
which  in  about  five  years  number  tens  of  thousands  of
mediums  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of  believers,  and
that  in  converting  the  Atheist  they  have  produced  "  an
effect  which  the  36,000  pulpits  in  the  land,  with  their
countless  sermons,  have  failed  to  produce."  In  this
case  they  are  every  way  superior  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.
Their  superiority  or  inferiority  I  will  not  here  under-
take to  argue.  This  I  have  faithfully  endeavored  to
do  in  my  Sixth  and  Seventh  Lectures,  which  the  reader
may  consult.  But  so  far  as  regards  the  comparative
spread  of  the  two  systems,  I  will  say  a  word  before  I
close,  because  some  suppose  that  the  rapid  spread  of
these  manifestations  is  an  unmistakable  evidence  of
their  truth.

The  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  was  commenced
by  his  apostles  after  his  resurrection,  and  this,  in  con-
nection with  their  wonderful  works,  made  more  converts
in  the  first  five  years  than  the  spirit-manifestations  have
in  the  same  period.  And  yet  they  did  it  by  traveling
on  foot  and  without  the  aid  of  the  press,  and  without
the  convenience  of  steamboat  and  railroad  conveyance
or  telegraphic  dispatch,  all  of  which  have  been  employed


142  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

in  advancing  the  doctrine  of  spirit-manifestations.  The
thousands  of  periodicals  that  have  opposed,  and  even
ridiculed  and  denounced,  have  aided  in  disseminating
them,  and  advancing  the  cause.  Judge  Edmonds  there-
fore errs  when  he  supposes  that  in  the  five  years  of
their  existence  they  have  outstripped  Christianity  in
their  advancement.  True,  it  is  only  ahout  five  years
since  they  commenced  communicating  intelligence
through  the  rapping  and  table-tipping  operation.  But
was  not  intelligence  communicated  from  the  same  source,
whatever  it  may  be,  from  the  earliest  ages  of  the  world  1
The  Judge  certainly  dates  them  back  long  before  the
commencement  of  the  Christian  era.

He  says,  page  45,  "  These  phenomena  have  always
astonished,  but  have  never  been  accounted  for.  Egyp-
tian, Chaldean,  Grecian,  and  Roman  history  are  prolific
with  statistics  to  sustain  this  position.  Read  Herod-
otus, Plato,  Xenophon,  Pliny,  Livy,  or  any  other  Greek
or  Roman  author  from  which  we  glean  whatever  infor-
mation we  possess  concerning  antiquity,  and  upon  al-
most every  page  we  find  the  writer  discoursing  upon
mysteries,  the  work  of  an  unseen  agency  which  he  could
not  comprehend.  Homer  and  Virgil  sang  about  them  ;
Socrates  and  the  philosophers  speculated  upon  them ;
Demosthenes  and  Cicero  harangued  about  them  in  ora-
tions, and  all  were  impressed  with  the  same  feelings  of
their  incomprehensibility."  But,  I  would  ask,  was  there
not  in  those  early  ages  an  intelligence  manifested,  even


LECTURE VIII.  143

as  now,  only  in  a  different  manner  ?  Let  the  Judge  an-
swer in  his  note  on  the  same  page. He  says :

u  Cicero  declares  his  age  indebted  to  such  an  unseen
agency  for  many  valuable  discoveries  in  physic,  for
warnings,  for  predictions,  and  extraordinary  deliveran-
ces ;  and  he  says,  '  I  know  of  no  one  nation,  polite
or  barbarous,  which  does  not  hold  that  some  persons
have  the  gift  of  foretelling  future  events.'  In  Plato's
c  Apology  for  Socrates'  he  is  made  to  say, £  Because  I  am
moved  by  a  certain  divine  and  spiritual  influence  which
also  Melitus,  through  mockery,  has  set  out  in  the  in-
dictment. This  began  with  me  from  childhood,  being
a  kind  of  voice  which,  when  present,  always  diverts  me
from  what  I  am  about  to  do,  but  never  urges  me  on.
Bat  this  duty,  as  I  said,  has  been  enjoined  me  by  the
Deity,  by  oracles,  by  dreams,  and  by  every  mode  by
which  any  other  divine  decree  has  ever  enjoined  any
thing  for  man  to  do.'  "

Here  then  we  perceive,  that  Judge  Edmonds  has  da-
ted the  spirit-manifestations,  and  an  intelligence  con-
nected with  them,  back  not  only  eighteen  hundred  years
to  the  dawn  of  Christianity,  but  he  has  gone  far  beyond
that  period.  He  has  not  only  dated  them  back  to  the
day  of  Herodotus,  the  reputed  father  of  Grecian  history,
but  even  back  to  the  days  of  the  Egyptian  Pharaohs,
a  period  of  twice  eighteen  hundred  years  !  It  is  grant-
ed that  the  intelligence  was,  in  some  respects,  mani-
fested in  a  different  manner  from  what  it  is  in  the  pres-


144  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

ent  day.  It  was  then  manifested  through  dreams,  vis-
ions^ and  impressions,  and  given  through  heathen  ora-
cles when  consulted.  And  during  this  long  period,  what
has  it  effected  1  Has  it  equaled  the  grand  results  pro-
duced by  the  moving  force  and  moral  power  of  the  gos-
pel of  Christ  %  It  will  not  do  to  deny  the  fact,  that  it
has  in  all  ages  had  its  able  and  eloquent  apostles  and
defenders.  This  the  Judge  admits.  Homer,  the  father
and  prince  of  song,  has  breathed  it  to  Greeks — Virgil,
the  Mantuan  bard,  sung  it  to  Romans  !  Demosthenes
thundered  it  in  Athens,  and  Cicero  in  Rome.  Socra-
tes taught  it.  Herodotus,  Plato,  Xenophon,  and  Livy
wrote  about  it.  The  people  believed  it,  and  consulted
this  mysterious  intelligence.  The  great  philoso-
phers of  Grecian  and  Roman  lore  were  its  apostles.
And,  I  ask  again,  what  has  it  effected  in  thirty-six  hun-
dred years  compared  with  the  gospel  of  Christ  in  half
that  period  1  Nothing  !  It  has  only  changed  from  in-
structing men  and  foretelling  events  through  oracles,  to
performing  the  same  thing  through  rapping  and  writing-
mediums.  Though  heathens  consulted  this  intelligence,
believed  it,  and  followed  its  instructions,  yet  it  never
raised  them  from  heathen  night  to  civilization — the  gos-
pel of  Christ  did,  and  gave  them  the  light  of  life.


LECTURE IX.  145


LECTURE IX.

I  now  proceed  to  notice  a  few  manifestations  of  a
peculiar  class  and  character  that  I  have  never  had  the
satisfaction  to  witness.  True,  they  have  been  related
to  me  by  individuals  who  professed  to  have  seen  them,
and  I  have,  in  many  instances,  when  time  permitted,
given  an  explanation  to  the  narrator.  But  as  the  gen-
tlemen, authors  of  the  work  I  am  considering,  occupy
high  stations  in  the  community,  and  as  their  statements
will  be  read  by  thousands,  so  I  deem  a  direct  notice  of
these  points  necessary.

I  have  already  stated,  in  my  last  lecture,  that  the
work  entitled  "  SPIRITUALISM"  is  a  triune  produc-
tion of  John  W.  Edmonds,  George  T.  Dexter,  M.D.,
and  Nathaniel  P.  Tallmadge,  late  U.  S.  Senator,  and
Governor  of  Wisconsin.  Judge  Edmonds  and  the  Doc-
tor, who  are  both  medium-writers,  are  the  authors  of
the  whole  work,  except  the  Appendix.  Of  the  general
merits  of  the  production  I  have  already  spoken,  and
also  of  the  talents  and  standing  of  its  distinguished
authors,  with  none  of  whom  I  have  the  pleasure  of  a

personal  acquaintance. I  wish  it  to  be  borne  in  mind

7


146  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

by  the  reader  that  Judge  Edmonds  and  the  Doctor,  be-
ing rftdium-writers,  are  both  happily  impressible.  The
Doctor's  productions  are  evidence  of  this  as  regards
himself,  and  the  six  interesting  "  visions"  presented
to  the  Judge,  orally  described  by  him  as  the  scenes  in
each  passed  before  his  view,  and  by  an  amanuensis
committed  to  paper,  are  evidence  of  the  same  as  regards
himself.  I  will  once  more  state  that  there  is  nothing
in  any  of  the  manifestations,  throughout  the  entire  work,
but  what  is,  in  substance,  accounted  for  in  the  first
Seven  Lectures  of  this  book.  But  as  I  have  said
nothing  there  as  regards  the  ringing  of  bells,  or  playing
on  instruments  of  music  by  some  unseen  agent,  it  may
be  said  by  some  of  my  readers  that  I  have  omitted  an
important  point.  On  this  account  I  proceed  to  notice
those  phenomena  only  which  are  of  a  physical  charac-
ter. As  regards  those  where  intelligence  only  is  in-
volved, I  would  remark  that  this  intelligence  is  so  eas-
ily accounted  for,  and  on  it  I  have  been  so  explicit,  that
I  deem  any  further  notice  of  that  branch  of  the  subject
unnecessary,  until  what  I  have  written  shall  have  been
disproved.  And,  moreover,  I  shall  confine  myself  to
the  statements  of  Judge  Edmonds  alone.  I  do  this,  not
only  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  but  because  the  au-
thorship of  the  work  is,  by  the  public  generally,  asso-
ciated with  his  name,  calling  it  "  Judge  Edmonds'
book ;"  and,  lastly,  because  I  can  find  all  the  variety
of  physical  manifestations  in  his  portion  of  the  produc-


LECTURE IX.  147

tion  that  may  be  found  in  that  of  his  distinguished  as-
sociates. I  shall,  therefore,  take  the  liberty  to  make
a  liberal  quotation,  and  then  submit  such  remarks  as  I
may  deem  appropriate.

The  Judge  says  (pages  22,  23,  24)  :  "  The  bell  was
taken  out  of  M.'s  hand  and  rung,  and  then  put  back
again.  This  occurred  several  times  in  the  course  of
the  evening."  "  Mrs.  R.'s  comb  was  taken  out  of  her
hair,  and  her  hair  suffered  to  fall  on  her  shoulders.''
"  The  clothes  of  G.  and  K.  and  M.  were  pinned
together  in  several  places,  and  K.  and  M.  were  tied
together  by  the  arms  with  a  pocket  handkerchief."
"  On  the  28th  of  March,  1851,  I  was  one  of  a  party
of  ten  who  were  directed  through  the  rappings  to  stand
up  in  a  circle  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  every  one
present  was  touched  by  this  unseen  power.  Some  were
pulled  down  upon  the  sofa ;  one  was  pulled  nearly  to
the  floor ;  one  had  her  feet  shoved  from  under  her  so
that  she  nearly  fell ;  a  shawl  was  snatched  from  a  la-
dy's shoulders  and  thrown  on  the  floor ;  I  was  repeat-
edly touched  in  different  parts  of  my  person ;  chairs
were  pulled  about,  and  a  small  table  slid  along  of  it-
self several  feet  on  the  carpet."

Page  26  the  Judge  says :  "  For  three  hours  I  there
witnessed  physical  manifestations  which  demonstrated
to  me,  beyond  all  doubt,  that  they  were  not  produced
by  mortal  hands,  and  were  governed  by  an  intelligence
out  of  and  beyond  those  present. It  is  in  vain  for  any


148  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

one  to  say  we  were  deceived.  I  knew  that  I  was  not,
and  so  did  every  one  of  that  large  party.  *  *  *
A  bass  viol  was  put  into  my  hand  and  rested  on  my
foot,  and  then  was  played  upon.  A  violin  was  placed
in  my  other  hand,  and  likewise  played  upon.  Another
violin  was  hung  around  my  neck  by  one  of  its  strings,
and  I  was  struck  frequently  with  a  fiddle-bow.  My
person  was  repeatedly  touched,  and  a  chair  pulled  out
from  under  me."

Pages  73,  74  the  Judge  says :  "  In  the  mean  time
another  feature  attracted  my  attention,  and  that  was
physical  manifestations,  as  they  are  termed.  Thus,  I
have  known  a  pine  table  with  four  legs  lifted  bodily  up
from  the  floor,  in  the  center  of  a  circle  of  six  or  eight
persons,  turned  upside  down  and  laid  upon  its  top  at
our  feet,  then  lifted  up  over  our  heads,  and  put  leaning
against  the  back  of  the  sofa  on  which  we  sat.  I  have
known  that  same  table  to  be  tilted  up  on  two  legs,  its
top  at  an  angle  with  the  floor  of  forty-five  degrees,
when  it  neither  fell  over  of  itself,  nor  could  any  person
present  put  it  back  on  its  four  legs.  I  have  seen  a
mahogany  table,  having  only  a  center  leg,  and  with  a
lamp  burning  upon  it,  lifted  from  the  floor  at  least  a
foot,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  those  present,  and  shaken
backward  and  forward  as  one  would  shake  a  goblet  in
his  hand,  and  the  lamp  retain  its  place,  though  its  glass
pendents  rang  again.  I  have  seen  the  same  table  tip-
ped up,  with  the  lamp  upon  it,  so  that  the  lamp  must


LECTURE IX.  149

have  fallen  off  unless  retained  there  by  something  else
than  its  own  gravity ;  yet  it  fell  not,  moved  not.  I  have
known  a  dinner-bell  taken  from  a  high  shelf  in  a  closet,
rung  over  the  heads  of  four  or  five  persons  in  that  clos-
et, then  rung  around  the  room  over  the  heads  of  twelve
or  fifteen  persons  in  the  back  parlor,  and  then  borne
through  the  folding  doors  to  the  farther  end  of  the  front
parlor,  and  there  dropped  on  the  floor.  I  have  fre-
quently known  persons  pulled  about  with  a  force  which
it  was  impossible  for  them  to  resist,  and  once  when  all
my  strength  was  added  in  vain  to  that  of  the  one  thus
affected.  I  have  known  a  mahogany  chair  thrown  on
its  side  and  moved  swiftly  back  and  forth  on  the  floor,
no  one  touching  it,  through  a  room  where  there  were  at
least  a  dozen  people  sitting,  yet  no  one  was  touched,
and  it  was  repeatedly  stopped  within  a  few  inches  of
me,  when  it  was  coming  with  a  violence  which,  if  not
arrested,  must  have  broken  my  legs."

These  are  all  the  quotations  I  deem  necessary  for
my  present  purpose.  I  will  commence  by  giving  a
faithful  notice  to  one  important  circumstance.  On  the
24th  and  25th  pages  the  Judge  states  an  occurrence
that  varies  somewhat  from  any  thing  that  I  have  heard
of,  or  read  in  the  spirit-manifestations.  He  states  the
circumstance  of  some  hieroglyphic  characters  being
written  on  a  small  piece  of  cartridge-paper  under  the
table,  when  there  was  no  pen  or  ink  in  the  room.  I
have  read  of  frequent  instances  where  writing  has  been


150  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

performed  under  the  table,  as  in  the  case  of  John  C.
Calhoun  writing  "  I'm  with  you  still"  but  in  all  cases
pen,  ink,  and  paper  (or  pencil)  were  required  for  the
use  of  the  spirit.  Sometimes,  I  grant,  that  the  writing
was  done  on  the  table,  but  in  total  darkness,  and  in  one
instance  at  least  the  writing  materials  were  locked  up
in  a  trunk,  and  the  key  put  where  it  was  stated  the
medium  could  not  conveniently  get  it  without  its  being
known,  and  yet  in  the  morning  there  was  writing  on  the
paper.  This  experiment  I  frankly  confess  would  con-
vince me,  provided  I  were  allowed  to  watch  the  trunk.
Indeed,  the  family  should  not  have  retired  and  slept,
till  so  important  an  experiment  were  faithfully  tested.
I  can  easily  conceive  how  the  medium,  retiring  to  rest
under  the  full  impression  that  spirits  would  write  on
that  paper,  could  rise  from  her  bed  in  somnambulism,
believe  herself  to  be  that  spirit,  get  the  key  unobserved,
perform  the  task  in  that  state,  return  to  her  bed,  and
rise  in  the  morning  without  the  least  remembrance  of
the  deed.  If  it  was  not  done  in  this  manner  by  some
human  being,  then  I  must  candidly  confess  that  I  have
no  philosophy  to  reach  the  case.  I  must  bow  to  the
mandate  of  my  Maker,  and  my  desire  is  to  do  so,
when  I  find  the  truth  and  know  his  will.

But  so  far  as  the  truth  of  any  departed  spirit  wri-
ting with  pen  and  ink,  or  pencil,  under  a  table  is
concerned,  or  in  darkness,  after  requesting  the  lights
to  be  extinguished,  I  must  candidly  confess  that  the


LECTURE IX.  151

whole  matter,  to  say  the  least,  looks  suspicious.  If
spirits  can  play  bass  viols,  violins  and  guitars — ring
bells  and  lift  a  table  with  a  man  upon  it  weighing  two
hundred  pounds — if  they  can  jerk  chairs  from  under
persons  and  even  trip  up  their  heels — if  they  can  snatch
a  comb  from  a  lady's  hair  or  a  shawl  from  her  shoul-
ders and  throw  it  on  the  floor — if  they  can  pin  the
clothes  of  three  ladies  together,  and  at  the  same  time
firmly  tie  together  the  arms  'of  two  of  them  with  a
pocket-handkerchief — then  why  can  they  not  write  with
the  pen  or  pencil  on  top  of  the  table,  and  in  sight  of
the  company  1  Why  can  not'  the  circle  meet  and  have
this  experiment  performed  in  open  daylight  on  the  top
of  the  table  and  in  the  presence  of  a  public  audience,
or  in  the  evening  when  the  light  is  brilliant  ?  The  pen
and  pencil  are  substances  that  can  be  seen,  and  if  we
saw  these  moved  by  an  invisible  hand,  or  even  if  the
hand  were  visible,  like  that  at  Belshazzar's  feast,  on
the  wall,  and  transmitting  intelligent  sentences  to  pa-
per, or  even  unknown  characters,  the  victory  would  be
won.  In  this  case  I  am  with  the  believers  in  the  spirit-
manifestations  ;  I  am  theirs  forever,  and  will  labor  and
die  in  their  cause !  If  they  knew  my  sincerity,  and
how  anxious  I  am  to  know  the  truth,  they  would  feel  a
sympathy  and  interest  in  my  favor,  and  a  charity  as
deep,  at  least,  as  I  have  exercised  toward  them,  in  vin-
dicating their  honesty  and  candor  in  these  pages  before
the  world. But  there  are  so  many  modes  by  which  a


152  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

medium  in  an  abnormal  condition  could  prepare  a  piece
of  writing  even  at  home,  and  succeed  in  conveying  it
under  the  table  with  other  sheets  or  pieces  of  paper
placed  there  for  the  spirit — all  this,  I  say,,  could  be
so  easily  accomplished,  and  yet  the  medium  be  entirely
honest,  remembering  nothing  of  the  matter,  that  the
experiment  can  not  be  safely  relied  upon  as  proof  that
it  was  done  by  a  spirit.

Permit  me,  moreover,  to  remark,  that  all  I  have
stated  above,  could  have  been  performed  even  by  trick,
by  any  shrewd  individual,  and  without  the  possibility
of  detection.  And  this  trick,  performed  by  a  man
skilled  in  the  art  of  legerdemain,  would  have  been  con-
sidered an  inferior  one  by  a  New  York  audience.  But
it  is  not  in  the  power  of  Herr  Alexander,  nor  of  the
wizard  Anderson,  to  cause  a  pen  or  pencil  to  erect  itself
to  the  writing  angle,  and  transmit  letters  to  paper  on  a
table  in  the  presence  and  plain  sight  of  a  promiscuous
audience  of  four  or  five  hundred  persons,  when
there  was  no  one  in  contact  with  that  table.  This  it
is  not  in  the  power  of  any  mortal  to  perform  without
the  aid  of  complex  machinery,  which  could  be  easily
detected,  and  hence  every  intelligent  individual  would
be  compelled  to  refer  it  to  an  invisible  superhuman
agent.  And  though  many  in  that  audience,  on  account
of  their  ignorance,  would  not  believe  that  it  was  done
by  such  an  agent,  yet  this  could  not  in  the  least  affect
its  verity,  provided  they  all  saw  it  done  and  barely  as-


LECTURE IX.  153

sented  to  the  fact,  that  it  positively  took  place  before
their  eyes.  Many,  I  grant,  do  not  understand  the  prin-
ciples of  what  we  term  natural  philosophy,  and  hence
do  not  know  its  rational  boundaries,  nor  where,  so  far
as  pertains  to  the  power  of  man,  it  must  stop  as  re-
gards the  application  of  its  causes  and  effects.  But  the
evidence  of  the  audience  being  in  harmony,  it  is  for  the
intelligent  and  philosophic  portion  of  that  audience  to
decide  what  was  the  nature  of  the  agent  acting,  or
whether  it  was  in  the  power  of  man,  philosophically  or
otherwise,  to  cause  a  pen  or  pencil  thus  to  write.

I  have  named  a  promiscuous  audience  of  four  or  five
hundred  persons,  because  there  is  no  rational  probabil-
ity, as  the  universal  test  of  experiment  proves,  that  the
whole  of  these  could  be  naturally  in  the  electro-
psychological  state  ;  or  even  in  the  mesmeric  state,  or
in  some  other  abnormal  condition.  But  such  an  ex-
periment as  this  in  the  presence  of  ten,  twenty,  or
even  five  hundred  good,  impressible,  selected  mediums
would  be  no  evidence  whatever,  that  the  pen  or  pencil
moved  and  wrote  on  paper.  It  would  be  no  evidence,
that  there  was  a  pen,  pencil,  or  paper  on  the  table,  or
even  a  table  before  them  !  Entertaining  the  bare  idea,
that  they  were  under  the  superior  impression  of  spirits,
and  were  expecting  such  a  result,  they  could  be  made
to  see  the  table,  the  pen,  pencil  and  paper  before  them,
and  the  whole  scene  produced,  when  it  was  nothing
more  than  the  waking  up  of  the  original  electro- embod-


154  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

iment  of  these  substances  in  their  brains  that  had  been
impressed  there  ever  since  they  first  saw  a  pen,  pencil,
paper,  and  table.  It  is  not  external  matter  we  see,
because  we  have  never  seen  any  thing  outside  of  our
eyes.  It  is  merely  the  image  of  external  objects  re-
flected by  the  rays  of  light  on  the  retina  of  the  eye,
and  thence  transmitted  through  the  optic  nerve  to  the
throne  of  the  spirit,  that  we  see.  It  is  there  impressed
forever,  to  be  called  up  by  the  permutation  of  circum-
stances to  the  inspection  and  scrutiny  of  the  spirit's
eye.  Hence  to  make  a  person  in  the  psychological
state,  or  a  medium,  see  a  thing,  it  is  not  necessary
to  present  the  material  object,  but  merely  to  call  up
its  original  impression  already  existing  in  the  brain.
Hence  the  pen  or  pencil,  and  its  motion  on  paper,
might  be  distinctly  seen  when  the  material  object  is
not  presented  to  the  medium.

But  no  human  being  could  produce  such  an  impres-
sion as  above  stated  upon  those  mediums  so  long  as
they  retain  the  belief  that  they  are  impressed  by  spir-
its as  mediums,  because  the  superior  impression  must
in  all  cases  bear  rule.  But  could  I  have  taken  those
five  hundred  persons  before  they  believed  themselves
mediums  (they  being  in  the  electro-psychological  state),
I  could  have  made  them  see  the  whole  writing  scene
with  pens  and  pencils,  self-moved,  passing  before
them  !  And  not  only  so,  but  I  could  have  left  the  im-
pression so  distinct,  real,  and  life-like  on  their  minds,


LECTURE IX.  155

that  they  would  have  gone  into  a  court  of  justice  and
made  solemn  oath  to  the  whole  as  a  reality.  And  no
empanneled  jury,  nor  judge  upon  the  bench,  would
have  supposed  their  real  condition  to  be  different  from
that  of  any  other  person,  because  it  is  a  state  in  which
they  naturally  exist  by  the  very  constitution  and  de-
velopment of  their  brains.

But  as  regards  this  writing  under  tables,  in  trunks,
or  on  tables  when  lights  are  extinguished  and  darkness
conceals  the  operation,  I  again  remark,  that  it  looks,
to  say  the  least,  suspicious,  when  spirits  are  so  power-
ful and  ready  to  perform  any  thing  else.  And  though
this  writing  under  tables  and  in  other  concealed  places
is  considered  by  many  as  evidence  of  intentional  fraud
in  the  mediums,  yet  I  must  say  to  such  that  this  by  no
means  follows  ;  that  it  may  be  done  by  some  shrewd
individual,  and  in  what  manner  I  have  already  stated.
I  will  also  state  how  it  can  be  done,  and  in  all  sincer-
ity and  candor,  by  a  real  medium.  It  is  a  well-known
circumstance,  that  the  medium,  while  under  the  sup-
posed influence  of  the  spirit,  often  believes  herself  to
be  that  spirit.  We  have  evidence  of  this  in  all  cases
where  the  medium  supposes  the  spirit  takes  entire  pos-
session of  her  body,  using  her  organs,  and  speaking
from  her  lips.  Hence  in.  this  condition,  and  many
more  analogous  to  it,  the  medium  may  prepare  the
writing  at  home,  or  at  the  house  where  the  circle
meets,  as  the  production  of  the  communicating  spirit,


156  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

believe  it,  and  when  seated  in  the  circle,  it  may  be
rapped  out  through  that  medium  by  the  a-b-c  process,
that  paper  and  pencil  are  wanted  on  a  drawer  under
the  table.  The  medium  believing  herself  to  be  that
spirit,  and  that  she  is  there  even  writing  an  article
that  is  already  written  !  and  the  result  follows  in  find-
ing the  paper  written  by  the  medium  !  And  moreover,
as  it  was  produced  by  her  involuntary  powers  of  in-
stinct, so  her  reason  and  understanding  knew  nothing
of  the  transaction  !

It  will  not  do  to  evade  the  force  of  this  by  arguing
its  impossibility,  or  by  saying  that  the  medium  could
not  carry  on  this  long  chain  of  circumstances  without
[mowing  it.  In  reply  I  have  only  to  say,  that  I  have
performed  it  upon  good  psychological  subjects,  and  I
am  ready  to  do  so  again,  and  will  even  consent  to  per-
form it  before  a  public  audience  whenever  called  upon
by  Judge  Edmonds  and  his  friends  to  do  so.  In  this
case  it  is  to  be  understood  that  I  confine  the  experi-
ment to  the  subject's  performing  the  whole  without  his
knowing  that  he  had  any  thing  to  do  with  any  part  of
the  entire  transaction,  but  on  the  contrary,  his  full
conviction,  that  the  writing  was  done  under  the  table
by  a  spirit !  And  throughout  the  whole,  he  shall  be
wide  awake  and  in  full  possession  of  his  reasoning  fac-
ulties !  Mediums  are  only  psychological  or  mesmeric
subjects,  but  under  the  influence,  as  they  believe,  of  a
higher  order  of  impressions,  and  therefore  can  not  be  in-


LECTURE IX.  15T

fluenced  to  any  extent  by  human  impressions,  as  many
could  before  they  became  mediums.  This  position  I
have  taken  and  argued  in  my  Fifth  Lecture,  and
this  position  I  feel  myself  fully  competent  to  sustain.
All  who  have  heard  me  lecture  On  my  favorite  science
of  Electrical  Psychology,  and  seen  me  experiment,
know  that  I  can  do  this.  And  I  feel  mortified  that  a
science  of  which  I  claim  authorship  should  be  diverted
from  its  own  natural  field  of  wonders  and  usefulness,
and  applied  to  spirit-manifestations.

But  it  may  be  said,  that  the  secrecy  and  adroitness
with  which  the  mediums  could  even  honestly  carry  on
such  a  work  as  this,  is  not  only  incomprehensible,  but
absolutely  impossible.  In  reply  to  this,  I  ask,  would
any  person  be  at  all  surprised  if  Herr  Alexander  and
the  wizard  Anderson  should  enter  a  room,  and  perform
all  these  things  by  sleight-of-hand,  after  having  well  pre-
pared themselves  for  the  task  ?  I  think  not.  But  suppose
there  were  six  or  even  ten  such  persons  in  a  room  with  as
many  more  spectators,  what  could  they  not  accomplish
as  regards  such  wonders  1  If  it  be  said  that  the  me-
diums know  nothing  of  legerdemain,  I  admit  that  they
do  not  practically.  But  all  these  things  are  open  and
naked  to  the  impression  of  their  involuntary  powers.
They  instinctively  perceive  them,  and  even  feel  the
sympathetic  impression  of  one  another's  thoughts  and
the  thoughts  of  those  in  the  room,  so  that  they  can  in-
tuitively see  how  the  source  of  the  so-called  spirit-man-


158  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

ifestations  can  be  concealed  from  the  sight  and  scrutiny
of  others.  And  as  they  are  under  the  full  impression
that  the  movement  of  the  spirits  is  invisible  and  must
remain  so,  they  are  therefore  impressed  to  proceed  and
act  accordingly.  This  the  whole  history  of  their  pro-
ceedings for  the  last  four  years  fully  corroborates.  All
experiments  that  can  be  performed  openly  and  yet  re-
tain their  mystery,  are  done  openly.  But  those  that
can  not,  are  done  under  the  table.  It  is  no  uncommon
thing  for  the  spirits  to  request  the  lights  to  be  extin-
guished, and  then  the  circle  may  be  sure  of  the  most
astonishing  manifestations.  Even  then  angels  with
their  wings  have  fanned  the  brows  of  the  circle.  It  is
no  uncommon  circumstance  for  the  spirits  to  request,
through  rapping  or  writing,  some  skeptic  or  skeptics
to  leave  the  room  who  were  too  inquisitive,  as  they
could  not  proceed  to  give  manifestations  unless  they
did  so.  This  proves  its  strong  alliance  to  mesmerism,
for  the  mesmerk;  subject  can  not  proceed  when  he  is
embarrassed  and  disconcerted  by  the  scrutiny  of  skep-
tics, till  they  leave  the  room.

If  it  be  said,  that  the  mediums  receive  no  impression
to  learn  any  thing  like  the  cunning  of  legerdemain  or
sleight-of-hand,  I  reply  that  in  one  of  the  published
books,  the  name  of  which  I  can.  not  now  recall,  the
writer  states  the  case  of  a  little  girl  who  was  an  excel-
lent medium,  and  saw  a  person  perform  an  interesting
trick  with  cards  and  difficult  to  understand. The  little


LECTURE IX.  159

medium  went  alone  into  a  room  a  few  moments,  inquired
of  her  guardian  spirit,  came  back  and  performed  the
trick.  She  said  the  spirit  taught  her  how  to  do  it,  and
had  taught  her  several  other  tricks.  She  moreover
added,  that  the  spirit  informed  her  that  they  often
played  whist  in  the  spheres  !  This  is  certainly  a  fair
specimen,  and  goes  to  prove  that  there  may  be  the  im-
pression of  cunning  to  the  full  extent  of  any  skillful
magician.  This  I  fully  believe,  and  it  is  difficult  to
set  bounds  to  the  grasp  of  human  intuition  or  instinct,
when  roused  into  action  and  thus  brought  into  commu-
nication with  mind  and  matter.  This  is  fully  exem-
plified in  the  case  of  Mr.  Davis,  and,  indeed,  of  all
good,  impressible,  and  favorably-developed  brains.

I  now  proceed  to  notice  the  ringing  of  bells,  and  also
the  playing  on  bass-viols  and  violins,  as  stated  by  the
Judge.  These  have  been  usually  performed  under  the
table,  and  of  which  there  are  instances  given  in  the
Appendix  of  the  book  I  am  noticing.  And  though  I
have  heard  it  stated  by  individuals  in  private  conversa-
tion, that  they  had  seen  such  things  done  openly,  yet
this  record  of  the  Judge  is  the  first  fair  and  reliable
account  that  I  have  read.  He  says  :  "  The  bell  was
taken  out  of  M.'s  hand  and  rung,  and  then  put  back
again.  This  occurred  several  times  during  the  even
ing."  He  again  says  :  "  I  have  known  a  dinner-bell
taken  from  a  high  shelf  in  a  closet,  rung  over  the  heads
of  four  or  five  persons  in  that  closet,  then  rung  around


160  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

the  room  over  the  heads  of  twelve  or  fifteen  persons  in
the  back  parlor,  and  then  borne  through  the  folding-
doors  to  the  farther  end  of  the  front  parlor,  and  there
dropped  on  the  floor."

Now  I  must  candidly  confess,  that  this  is  a  point  of
great  moment — I  may  even  say  of  paramount  import-
ance— and  requires  close  scrutiny  and  a  candid  consid-
eration. The  Judge  has  frequently  stated,  in  describing
other  manifestations,  that  there  were  burning  lamps  in
the  room  at  the  time.  In  the  account  of  the  ringing
of  the  bells,  there  is  nothing  said  of  the  quantity  of  light
there  was  at  the  time  of  that  occurrence  in  the  room
or  rooms.  I  would  therefore  respectfully  inquire  when
the  bell  was  taken  from  M.'s  hand  and  rung  and  put
back  again,  was  there  a  sufficiency  of  light  in  the  room?
If  not,  then  the  investigation  is  at  an  end,  and  the  mys-
tery solved  as  much  so  as  if  it  had  been  done  under  a
table.  But  to  proceed  :  Was  the  light  sufficient  for  the
Judge  to  see  clearly  all  the  persons  in  the  room,  and
also  the  bell  in  M.'s  hand?  How  came  she  to  have
that  bell  in  her  hand  ?  Was  it  in  expectation,  or  un-
der an  impression,  that  the  spirits  would  take  it  from
her  hand  and  ring  it  ?  As  "  this  occurred  several  times
in  the  course  of  the  evening,"  did  she  constantly  hold
that  bell  in  her  hand,  or  take  it  up  only  when  it  was  to
be  rung  by  the  spirit  f  If  so,  what  induced  her  to  take
it  up  at  those  specified  times  ?  Was  it  rapped  or  writ-
ten out  that  she  must  take  the  bell  in  her  hand,  or  had


LECTURE IX.  161

she  merely  an  impression,  that  she  must  do  so  1  Was
she  standing  or  sitting?  was  the  whole  company  seated
or  not,  and  "huddled  around  the  medium,  or  more  dis-
tant 1  Was  no  one  near  her  when  the  bell  was  rung  1
Did  the  judge  distinctly  see  the  bell  taken  from  her
hand,  suspended,  as  it  were,  in  air,  and  there  rung  and
passed  back  again  through  the  air  to  M.  without  the
aid  of  a  mortal  hand?  These  interrogatories,  it  will
be  perceived,  are  not  only  pertinent,  but  important  in
this  case,  as  much  depends  upon  her  position,  good
light,  and  the  relative  positions  of  those  in  the  room.

If  M.  were  seated  in  the  circle  around  the  table,  and
the  bell  in  her  hand  and  near  her  person,  it  is  easy  to
perceive  how  her  other  hand,  which  she  believed  to  be
that  of  the  departed  spirit,  and  with  which  she  felt  her-
self identified  by  impression,  could  take  the  bell  from
her  and  ring  it  under  the  table,  or  at  her  side,  and  return
it  back  again  to  her  hand,  as  it  was.  This  could  be  done
unobserved  by  the  circle,  and  with  a  burning  lamp  on  the
table,  whenever  the  spirit-impression,  as  she  sincerely
believed,  came  upon  her  to  act.  This  experiment  I  can
perform  upon  a  psychological  subject,  so  that  he  will  have
no  remembrance  of  his  own  personal  agency  in  the  mat-
ter, but  believe  it  was  done  by  a  spirit.  If  she  were
standing  or  seated  in  a  distant  part  of  the  room  from  the
company,  or  with  other  mediums  of  kindred,  sympathetic
impressions  around  her,  the  experiment  could  have  been
more  easily  produced  unobserved  by  the  Judge.


.162  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

I  proceed  to  notice  his  second  case  of  bell-ringing.
The  bell  was  taken  from  a  high  shelf  in  a  closet,  and
there  rung  over  the  heads  of  four  or  five  persons  in  the
closet.  Was  there  light  in  that  closet  ?  Did  the  Judge
see  the  bell  taken  down  from  that  shelf,  suspended  in
the  air,  and  rung  over  the  heads  of  those  persons  with-
out the  aid  of  a  mortal  hand  ?  Was  he  in  that  closet  ?
Were  the  front  and  back  parlors  well  lighted?  Did
he  see  that  dinner-bell  come  out  of  the  closet  still  sus-
pended in  the  air,  and  rung  over  the  heads  of  twelve  or
fifteen  persons  in  the  back  parlor  ?  And  did  he  see  it,
still  suspended  in  the  air,  pass  through  the  folding-
doors  into  the  front  parlor,  and  there  dropped  on  the
floor  ?  And  all  this  time  did  no  mortal  hand  touch  it  ?
After  being  rung  in  the  closet  over  the  heads  of  the
persons  in  it,  did  it  come  out  itself,  leaving  those  per-
sons behind,  or  did  they  bring  it  out,  or  come  out  with
it?  Were  the  persons  in  the  back  parlor  seated,  or
standing  and  moving  about  while  the  bell  was  ringing
over  their  heads?  Did  no  one  accompany  it  as  it
passed  through  the  folding-dcors  into  the  front  parlor
where  it  was  dropped  on  the  floor  ?  Was  there  any
person  or  persons  in  the  front  parlor  where  the  bell  lost
its  suspension  and  fell  ?  Did  the  Judge  see  it  fall,  and
no  human  hand  near  it  ?  These  questions  I  deem  im-
portant, and  as  the  Judge  says  that  "  he  appears  upon
the  witness's  stand  to  testify  to  things  that  he  knows,"
he  will  pardon  me  for  propounding  the  above  questions


LECTURE IX.  163

as  regards  their  legal  bearing,  for  I  am  not  much  ac-
quainted with  judicial  proceedings.

Though  I  am  satisfied  how  tables  and  other  wooden
substances,  and  even  human  beings  and  various  articles
may  be  charged,  moved,  and  raised,  and  which  I  feel
myself  able  to  explain  and  defend  on  natural  principles,
and  all  of  which  can  be  done  by  any  circle,  and  without
a  medium  in  it,  yet  I  candidly  confess,  that  I  have  no
philosophy  nor  experiment  by  which  I  can  solve  the
raising  of  a  piece  of  metal  of  any  kind,  when  entirely
detached  from  other  substances.  Here  all  my  experi-
ments have  proved  vain,  and  I  am  equally  satisfied  that
the  arm  of  human  philosophy,  as  now  understood,  can
not  possibly  grasp  it.  No  human  hands,  no  electro-
nervous  fluid  from  human  brains  can  charge  metal  so
as  to  overcome  its  gravity  and  suspend  it  in  air,  nor
even  to  make  it  move  or  tip.  And  let  me  see  this  ex-
periment performed  without  the  intervention  of  human
hands  or  physical  aid,  and  I  am  a  firm  believer,  that
spirits  are  here,  and  that  I  can  commune  with  the
sainted  spirits  of  my  departed  father  and  mother.  To
use  the  eloquent  breathing  of  Dr.  Nott :  "  Were  the
dead  mindful  of  the  devotion  that  the  living  pay  them,
I  would  bedew  the  graves  of  my  sainted  parents  with
my  tears,  and  disturb  ihe  repose  of  their  ashes  with  my
nightly  orisons."

The  questions  that  I  have  asked  in  relation  to  the
suspension  and  ringing  of  these  bells  show  the  position


164  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

in  which  I  would  desire  matters  to  be  arranged  in  order
to  produce  the  experiment  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  on
the  mind.  Bell-metal  is  so  dense  and  its  pores  so
minute,  and  so  much  weight  in  a  small  compass,  that
its  gravity  can  not  be  overcome  by  charging  it  with
nervo-vital  force  from  a  thousand  brains  !  But  if  the
above  questions  were  all  answered  to  my  entire  satis-
faction, yet  there  is  another  position  that  the  well-
known  principles  of  electro-psychology  compel  me  to
state.  Is  not  Judge  Edmonds  naturally  in  this  impres-
sible or  psychologic  state  1  If  he  is  not,  then  his  tes-
timony is  good.  Though  this  can  not  at  present  be  de-
termined by  the  experiment  of  even  a  skillful  operator,
yet  there  are  circumstances  connected  with  his  state-
ments entirely  favorable  to  the  conclusion,  that  he  is  in
this  state.  He  is  a  writing-medium,  and  can  be  im-
pressed to  see  visions,  and  so  can  all  mesmeric  and  psy-
chological persons.  The  reader  will  please  turn  to
page  26  of  Judge  Edmonds'  book,  or  notice  my  quota-
tion from  it  in  this  Lecture.  From  several  circum-
stances there  stated,  such  as  placing  a  bass-viol  in  one
of  his  hands,  resting  it  on  his  foot,  a  violin  in  his  other
hand,  and  a  second  violin  hung  around  his  neck  by  one
of  its  strings,  and  all  three  played  upon,  it  is  evident,
that  he  was  the  main  object  of  attention  and  interest
whom  the  spirits,  or,  as  I  think,  the  mediums  desired
to  convince  and  gain  over  to  their  cause.  Hence,  the
minds  of  all  the  mediums  and  believers  being  concen-


LECTURE IX.  165

trated  upon  him,  and  he  firmly  believing  it  to  be  spir-
its, produced  all  the  impression  necessary  to  prepare
"him  not  only  to  see,  but  also  to  hear  every  thing  to
which  his  senses  were  directed.  To  say  the  least,  the
whole  was  so  completely  calculated  to  throw  him  off  his
vigilant  guard,  that  he  could  not  tell  whether  the  me-
diums or  spirits  adorned  him  with  instruments  of  mu-
sic, nor  which  of  the  two  touched  the  strings,  when  the
mediums  were  so  officiously  huddled  around  him.  In
this  condition,  let  the  bell  have  been  rung  by  any  one
at  pleasure,  and  though  constantly  held  in  the  hand,
yet  he  could  have  seen  it  moving  over  the  heads  of  the
company,  and  heard  it  ringing,  and  at  length  heard  it
drop  on  the  floor  in  the  front  parlor.  Or  he  could  have
been  made  to  see  and  hear  all  this  when  there  was  not
a  bell  in  the  room  !  The  same  will  apply  with  equal
force  to  the  bass-viol,  violins,  and  the  music.  He  could
in  this  state  be  made  to  see  the  whole  moving  before
him  as  distinctly  as  he  saw  the  moving  scenes  in  his
visions,  and  the  one  would  have  been  just  as  much  evi-
dence of  an  existing  reality  as  the  other.  I  again
pledge  myself  to  the  public,  that  I  am  able  to  perform
all  this  upon  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  psychological
subjects,  and  with  or  without  bells,  bass-viols,  or  vio-
lins, as  they  may  desire.  And  not  only  so,  but  I  can
in  an  instant  render  the  subject  totally  blind,  or  so  im-
press his  vision,  that  he  can  see  no  person  but  himself
and  me  in  an  audience  of  a  thousand,  or  permit  him  to


166  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

see  as  few  or  many  as  I  may  choose  to  show  him.
Hence,  if  the  Judge  is  in  the  electro-psychological  state,
as  the  whole  chain  of  circumstances  go  to  prove,  then
he  could  not  in  this  case  be  a  witness  in  his  own  cause.

I  am  aware  that  he  appeals  to  the  corroborating  tes-
timony of  others  present,  but  it  remains  to  be  proved
that  they,  in  their  natural  state,  are  of  that  class  of
persons  who,  like  the  community  at  large,  can  not  be
impressed.  The  mediums  are  certainly  in  the  mesmeric
or  psychological  state,  and  for  any  individual  to  attempt
to  show  the  contrary,  is  but  a  vain  and  useless  effort.
And  as  we  know  that  all  the  wonders  recorded  of  bells
ringing,  bass-viols  and  violins  playing,  pinning  to-
gether the  dresses  of  ladies  and  tying  together  their
arms,  jerking  combs  from  their  heads,  striking  the  Judge
with  a  fiddle-bow,  and  jerking  a  chair  from  under  his
honor,  and  making  them  believe  it  is  all  done  by  spirits  ;
I  say,  as  we  know,  that  all  these,  wonders  can  be  per-
formed upon  persons  in  the  electro-psychological  state,
so  we  have  no  evidence  of  spirit-manifestations  in  such
occurrences  as  these.  The  natural  is  to  be  adopted
when  it  accounts  for  a  phenomenon,  and  only  when  this
fails  have  we  any  right  to  appeal  to  the  supernatural
for  its  solution.  We  perceive,  that  there  is  consider-
able jerking  in  this  matter,  and  I  would  kindly  admon-
ish them  to  take  heed  before  they  are  irrecoverably
lost  and  confirmed  in  the  jerks. [See  Third  Lecture.]

I  am  aware  that  the  Judge  says  (page  26) :  "  It  is  in


LECTURE IX.  167

vain  for  any  one  to  say  we  were  deceived.  I  knew  that
I  was  not,  and  so  did  every  one  of  that  large  party."
I  no  more  doubt  the  sincerity,  candor,  and  honesty  of
Judge  Edmonds,  than  I  do  my  own  existence ;  but  I
will  try  the  question  whether  or  not  he  has  been  de-
ceived, at  least  in  one  instance,  and  to  which  he  attaches
great  importance.

He  says  (page  18) :  "  Another  feature  was,  that  now,
for  the  first  time  in  this  connection,  I  saw  a  clairvoyant,
and  .our  interview,  which  lasted  nearly  three  hours,  was
conducted  partly  through  him  and  partly  through  the
rappings.  And  now,  too,  for  the  first  time,  I  wit-
nessed some  of  the  more  elevated  teachings  of  this
matter,  so  much  of  which  I  have  since  received."  This
interview  took  place,  as  appears  from  the  date  of  his
notes,  February  IT,  1851.  At  this  date  it  appears,
that  the  Judge  was  not  yet  a  firm  believer  in  the  spirit-
manifestations,  and  even  knew  nothing  of  mesmerism.
His  previous  interview  was  with  a  lady,  who  it  appears
possessed  the  faculty,  in  her  natural  state,  "  of  telling
the  character  and  mood  of  mind  of  any  person  upon
whom  she  might  fix  her  attention,  which  she  did  by
holding  in  her  hand  or  binding  on  her  forehead  some
writing  in  which  that  person's  thoughts  were  expressed,"
and  one  whom  she  had  never  seen.  The  Judge  tested
this  by  experiment,  and  found  it  to  be  true.  This,  he
says,  presented  to  him  a  new  feature.  This  shows  that
he  was  entirely  unacquainted  with  mesmeric  and  psy-


168  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

chological  phenomena.  I  now  come  to  the  instance  I
have  in  view,  and  to  which  I  invite  the  attention  of  the
Judge.

February  23,  and  pages  20,  21,  being  only  six  days
after  he  first  saw  a  clairvoyant,  he  says  :  "  About  this
time,  as  I  was  one  day  in  my  library,  the  thought  sud-
denly intruded  itself  upon  my  mind,  that  I  must  go  to
a  person  who  was  named  and  magnetize  him,  and  I
would  receive  a  communication  from  a  spirit  in  a  high-
er condition  than  any  who  had  yet  communed  with  me.
Now  as  I  had  no  acquaintance  with  that  person,  never
having  seen  him  but  once,  and  then  hardly  exchanged
ten  words  with  him,  and  as  I  did  not  know  how  to  mag-
netize him,  never  having  seen  the  operation  but  once,  I
disregarded  the  impression.  In  a  day  or  two  it  came
again  and  with  great  distinctness^  and  both  times  when
I  was  not  thinking  of  the  subject,  but  my  mind  was
intently  engaged  on  something  else.  After  it  had  come
the  second  time,  I  sought  a  rapping  medium,  and  in-
quired about  it.  I  was  told  that  it  was  not,  as  I  had
supposed,  my  own  imagining,  but  a  direction  it  would
be  well  for  me  to  heed.  I  accordingly  sought  an  inter-
view with  the  person  named,  who  was  a  clairvoyant,  a
rapping  medium,  and  a  medium  for  physical  manifest-
ations. At  the  appointed  time  I  met  him  with  a  party
of  six  or  eight  others,  none  of  whom  I  had  ever  seen
before.  And,  much  to  my  surprise,  I  received  a  com-
munication pointed  directly  to  two  trains  of  thought  in


LECTURE IX.  169

vay  mind,  one  that  had  been  there  for  some  twenty-five
years,  and  another  that  had  been  there  some  two  or
three  months,  but  neither  of  which  I  had  ever  uttered,
or  even  hinted  at  to  mortal  man  or  woman.  For  some
time  they  were  spoken  to  as  distinctly  as  if  I  had  pro-
claimed them  with  a  loud  voice.  I  was  startled,  for
here  was  to  me  evidence  from  which  I  could  not  escape,
that  my  most  secret  thoughts  were  known  to  the  intel-
ligence that  was  dealing  with  me.  There  was  no
avoiding  the  conclusion.  Reason  upon  it  as  I  would,
imagine  what  solution  I  might,  there  was  the  fact
plainly  before  me,  and  I  knew  it."

On  the  above  quotation  I  offer  a  few  remarks.
Here  is  a  plain  case  of  mesmeric  action,  and  what  any
good  mesmeric  subject  can  do,  and  that  is  to  read  the
thoughts  and  impressions  of  other  minds,  and  even  by
sympathy  to  feel  and  express  all  their  pains  of  body
as  well  as  distress  of  mind.  Every  one  who  has  the
least  acquaintance  with  clairvoyant  impressions  knows
this  fact  as  one  of  the  most  common  features  of  the
mesmeric  state.  And  yet  Judge  Edmonds  has  so  lit-
tle acquaintance  with  mesmerism,  that  he  attributes
this  act  of  the  clairvoyant  in  revealing  his  secrets,
to  the  intelligence  of  some  immortal  spirit  that  was
dealing  with  him  and  knew  his  most  secret  thoughts  !
In  this  case  at  least  he  is  certainly  deceived,  and  yet
he  places  great  reliance  upon  it  as  proof  of  spiritual
intercourse  ! He  refers  to  it  at  page  75  : "  My  most


170  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

secret  thoughts,  those  which  I  have  never  uttered  to
mortal  man  or  woman,  have  been  freely  spoken  to,  as
if  I  had  uttered  them."  He  again  speaks  of  them  as
thoughts  called  up  from  the  solitude  of  his  study,
where  they  had  been  buried  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.
His  principal  prop  as  regards  intelligence  to  prove
spirit-manifestations  fails  him,  and  shows  that  he  is
here  deceived.

In  this  long  quotation  it  will  be  also  perceived,  that
the  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  Judge,  that  he  must
go  and  see  a  certain  clairvoyant  and  magnetize  him,
and  the  results  that  followed  in  accordance  with  this
impression,  all  go  to  prove  that  he  is  in  the  electro-
psychological  state,  and  hence  a  writing-medium,  and
whose  mind  can  be  impressed  with  interesting  and
beautiful  visions.

How  natural  it  is,  then,  that  while  the  Judge  was
yet  warm  with  the  deep-stirring  impressions  on  his
mind  of  what  the  clairvoyant  had  revealed  in  regard
to  his  most  secret  thoughts,  and  believing  it  to  be  done
by  spirits,  that  he  should  be  prepared  to  hear  the  ring-
ing of  the  bell  by  an  invisible  intelligence,  and  which
took  place  at  the  very  next  interview.  And  however
incredulous  he  was  when  he  first  commenced  his  inves-
tigations, and  however  scrutinizing  and  exact  to  detect
what  he  then  deemed  imposture,  yet  it  is  easy  to  con-
ceive how  a  man,  even  of  Judge  Edmonds'  capacity
and  talent,  and  who  had  not,  till  the  time  above  stated,


LECTURE IX.  171

even  seen  a  clairvoyant,  should  be  thrown  off  his  vig-
ilant guard  by  his  secret  thoughts  being  disclosed,  and
be  prepared  to  believe  any  thing  and  every  thing  that
might  be  performed  by  mediums.  Human  nature  is
so  constituted,  that  the  greater  the  skepticism,  oppo-
sition, and  vigilance  of  a  talented  man,  the  greater
will  be  his  credulity  and  passivity  when  the  reaction
fairly  comes.  Hence  I  am  not  surprised  that  he  should
sit  entirely  passive,  and  have  bass-viols  and  violins
hung  about  him  by  mediums,  be  beat  with  a  fiddle-
bow,  and  have  his  chair  jerked  from  under  him,  and
yet  so  far  from  resisting,  take  the  whole  in  good  part !
Whereas  if  this  had  been  done  by  any  individual  when
the  Judge  was  upon  the  bench  and  trying  a  cause,  he
would  not  only  have  had  him  indicted  and  punished  for
contempt  of  Court,  but  also  tried  and  fined  and  im-
prisoned for  assault  and  battery.

But  the  Judge  being  perfectly  convinced  that  he
was  dealing  with  immortal  spirits  who  had  placed  these
instruments  in  his  hands  and  about  his  neck,  was  not
in  a  condition,  at  that  instant,  to  scrutinize  this  mat-
ter, and  the  mediums  might  have  touched  the  strings,
or  struck  the  Judge  with  the  bow,  with  perfect  ease
and  unobserved  by  him,  while  he  was  in  such  an  over-
whelming state  of  excitement  and  awe  as  a  scene  like
this  must  have  naturally  produced  on  his  mind.  Such
matters  are  personal  concerns  that  each  must  witness
for  himself,  or  else  receive  the  united  testimony  of  a


172  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

promiscuous  audience  of  four  or  five  hundred  persons
as  to  the  certainty  of  their  having  in  reality  occurred.
Let  me  see  this  performed  without  a  mortal  hand  on
instruments  of  music  held  by  myself  or  any  other  per-
son, and  all  others  kept  at  a  distance,  and  I  am  pre-
pared to  enter  on  a  new  scene  of  action  and  continue
to  pursue  it  faithfully  to  my  dying  day.  I  am  then
ready  to  move  my  philosophy  one  step  higher,  and
show  that  the  spirits  of  our  departed  friends — those
dear  and  former  loved  ones  of  earth — do  indeed  im-
press the  involuntary  powers  of  our  minds  with  heav-
enly impulses,  and  hold  communion  with  us  through
the  mysterious  instincts  of  our  nature  in  those  beauti-
ful mystic  fields  that  lie  beyond  the  realms  of  human
reason  and  consciousness — those  fields  where  wonders
reign — where  dreams  inspire — where  presentiments  are
born  and  beauty  unfolds.


LECTURE X.  173


LECTUEE X.

I  should  have  closed  my  examination  of  Judge  Ed-
monds' book  on  "  Spiritualism"  in  my  last  Lecture,
were  it  not  for  the  circumstance  that  he  has  adopted
the  views  of  Von  Reichenbach  of  the  existence  of  an
Odic-force  in  nature.  I  have  said  all  that  is  necessary
in  the  preceding  nine  Lectures  as  regards  the  doctrine
of  spiritual  intercourse,  and  which  will  cover  every  im-
portant point  contained  in  his  book,  or  in  the  entire
subject  of  the  spirit-manifestations,  so  far  as  it  has,  as
yet,  been  developed  and  published  to  the  world.  But  as
it  may  be  said  that  I  have  entirely  overlooked  the  Odic-
force  that  pervades  all  nature,  and  exists  in  our  bodies,
and  through  the  energy  of  which  spirits  are  enabled  to
impress  human  beings,  and  communicate  with  them,  so
I  have  not  fully  met  the  subject  in  all  its  important
bearings.  This  objection,  however,  would  be  of  but
trivial  moment,  because  I  admit  that  electricity,  in  some
of  its  forms,  is  the  connecting  link  between  mind  and
matter,  and 'through  which  spirits  have  rendered  them-
selves visible  in  past  ages,  and  held  converse  with  mor-
tals, and  for  which  the  Odic-force  would  only  stand  as


174  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

a  substitute.  I  would,  therefore,  be  distinctly  under-
stood that  I  admit  the  possibility  of  spirits  now  commu-
nicating with  us,  but  as  the  revelation  of  divine  truth,
for  man's  duty,  interest,  and  happiness  is  complete,  so
there  is  nothing  more  can  be  revealed  as  an  addition  to
the  stock  already  on  hand.  All  future  revelation,
therefore,  must  regard  the  making  known  to  mankind
how  the  doctrinal  truths  recorded  in  the  Scriptures  are
to  be  understood.  And  this  I  am  satisfied  will  be  done,
as  man's  nature  becomes  more  and  more  developed  so
as  to  require  it ;  and  just  as  much  light  will  be  let  in
upon  the  empire  of  mind  as  it  is  able  to  bear.

On  this  subject  Emanuel  Swedenborg  was  consistent,
who  undertook  to  explain  how  the  Scriptures  should  Jbe
understood  by  man.  And  though  I  am  not  of  his  faith,
yet  I  must  confess  that  his  powers  were  as  immense  as
his  gifts  were  wonderful.  I  entertained  strong  expec-
tations that  Mr.  Davis  would  follow  on,  and  advance
the  work,  but  was  disappointed  when  his  "  Nature's
Divine  Revelations"  appeared.  And  I  am  moreover
satisfied,  that  some  new  revelation^  as  regards  the  true
understanding  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Savior,  will  be
revealed  to  the  world.

Having  made  these  introductory  remarks,  I  now  pro-
ceed to  the  consideration  of  Reichenbach's  claims  to
having  discovered  a  new  power  in  nature  which  he  calls
Od,  or  Odic-force.  I  might  here  incidentally  remark,
that  if  such  a  power  does  exist,  he  has  been  preceded


LECTURE X.  175

in  his  discovery  by  Professor  Grimes,  of  Lansingburgh,
N.  Y.,  who  is  certainly  entitled  to  the  claim  of  priority.
He  published  a  work,  I  think,  in  1844,  in  which  he
contends  that  there  exists  in  nature  a  substance  more
sublimated  and  subtile  than  electricity,  and  which  he
calls  Etherium,  and  that  this  is  the  cause  that  induces
the  mesmeric  state.  It  is  a  production  I  would  advise
the  admirers  of  Reichenbach  to  read.  It  certainly  con-
tains many  valuable  thoughts.

But  to  proceed.  I  am  compelled  to  deny  the  exist-
ence of  such  a  power  in  nature  for  which  Reichenbach
contends,  not  only  in  the  absence  of  all  proof  to  sustain
his  assertion,  but  also  because  I  can  discover  no  pos-
sible use  for  its  existence.  The  following  account  was
communicated  through  Judge  Edmonds  as  a  speaking-
medium  :

Pages  39,  40,  the  Judge  says :  "  One  of  the  first
questions  was  this :  What  is  this  which  I  am  witness-
ing 1  Is  it  a  departure  from  nature's  laws,  or  in  con-
formity with  them  1  Is  it  a  miracle,  or  is  it  the  opera-
tion of  some  hitherto  unkncwn  but  pre-existing  cause
now  for  the  first  time  manifesting  itself?

"  The  answer  I  got  was  :  It  is  the  result  of  human
progress — it  is  in  execution,  not  a  suspension,  of  na-
ture's laws — it  is  not  now  for  the  first  time  manifest-
ing itself,  but  in  all  ages  of  the  world  has  at  times  been
displayed.

"  I  reasoned,  then,  if  it  is  a  law  of  nature,  it  must  be


176  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

universal  in  its  application,  and  it  may  be  discovered
and  understood  by  man ;  and  I  asked  that  I  might  un-
derstand it.  I  was  told,  however,  that  my  knowledge
of  nature  was  too  imperfect  to  enable  me  to  understand
it  as  yet.  I  asked  what  I  might  read  to  assist  me  to
the  requisite  knowledge,  and  I  was  referred  by  one
present  to  Von  Reichenbach's  c  Dynamics  of  'Magnet-
ism,5 and  there  I  found  that  he  had  discovered  a  hith-
erto unknown  power  in  nature.  He  named  it  Od,  or
Odic-force,  and  described  it  as  an  exceeding  subtile
fluid  existing  with  magnetism  and  electricity,  found  in
fire  and  heat,  and  produced  in  the  human  body  by  the
chemical  action  of  respiration  and  digestion  and  decom-
position, and  issuing  from  the  body  in  the  shape  of  a
pale  flame,  with  sparks  and  smoke,  and  material  in  its
nature,  though  so  sublimated  as  to  be  visible  only  to
persons  of  a  peculiar  vision.  In  my  experiments  I  have
myself  once  or  twice  seen  it,  but  have  met  with  those
who  could  see  it  as  readily  as  those  through  whom  that
German  philosopher  conducted  his  examinations.

"  I  was  given  to  understand,  that  this  power  was
used  in  these  manifestations,  but  how,  and  in  what  man-
ner, I  have  not  learned.  I  was  also  made  to  know
that  electricity  and  magnetism  had  something  to  do
with  them."

The  above  quotation  is  sufficient  to  show  that  Judge
Edmonds  has  adopted  the  views  of  Reichenbach,  and
as  he  has  once  or  twice  seen  the  invisible  flame  of  this


LECTURE X.  177

Odic-force,  it  also  confirms  positively  what  I  have  be-
fore stated,  that  he  is  in  the  psychological  or  mesmeric
state,  for  to  all  other  persons  this  supposed  substance
is  absolutely  invisible.  It  certainly  can  not  be  seen  by
natural  vision.  In  this  state  of  the  case  it  becomes
necessary  that  we  fairly  examine  and  test  the  evi-
dence which  this  German  philosopher  has  furnished  to
prove  the  truth  of  its  existence,  and  on  which  he  bases
his  whole  theory  which  has  produced  so  much  excite-
ment in  the  scientific  world.  And  I  hesitate  not  to  af-
firm, that  every  enlightened  mind,  every  man  of  inde-
pendent, unbiased  thought,  will  be  astonished  at  the
credulity  of  many  literary  men  in  receiving  a  theory
sustained  by  such  foggy  evidence,  and  for  no  other  rea-
son only  because  it  was  originated  by  a  philosopher  in
a  foreign  land,  of  high-sounding  titles  and  a  great  name.
Whereas  if  this  same  work  had  been  written  and  pub-
lished by  some  talented  but  humble  mesmeric  lecturer
in  this  country,  it  would  have  received  little  or  no  at-
tention from  the  learned  and  the  great.

Though  there  is  too  much  repetition,  and  the  work
needs  compression  throughout,  yet  I  admire  the  plain
classic  chasteness  of  its  style.  I  admit  the  force,  en-
ergy, and  power  of  Reichenbach's  mind.  He  has  left
the  impress  of  its  greatness  on  almost  every  page  of
his  book.  His  patience  and  perseverance  in  the  steady
pursuit  of  his  object  are  worthy  of  all  praise.  These
alone  evince  the  solid  materials  of  no  ordinary  mind,

8*


178  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

and  combined  with  other  circumstances  speak  his  great-
ness. Were  the  premises  he  has  assumed  true,  his
conclusions,  which  are  carefully  and  logically  drawn,
would  be  also  true,  and  his  work  would  stand  as  a  mas-
ter effort  of  a  giant  mind.  But  his  premises  being
unfortunately  false,  his  conclusions  are  therefore  false,
and  his  work  stands  before  us,  in  the  middle  of  the
nineteenth  century,  as  a  stupendous  monument  of  hu-
man folly  !  Before  I  proceed  to  notice  his  pretensions
to  a  new  discovery,  I  will  first  speak  of  Mesmerism  in
general.

It  is  an  established  and  well-known  fact,  that  a  per-
son in  the  mesmeric  state  is  so  sympathetically  en  rap-
port with  the  magnetizer,  that  if  pain  be  inflicted  with
a  pin  upon  any  part  of  his  body,  the  subject  will  in-
stantly feel  it,  and  describe  the  spot  on  his  own  person.
You  may  touch  it,  for  instance,  upon  the  magnetizer's
fore-finger,  and  the  subject  will  complain  that  some
one  is  pricking  his  fore-finger.  Or  touch  the  pin  upon
the  magnetizer's  ear,  and  the  subject  will  instantly  rub
his  own  ear,  and  say  some  person  is  pricking  it.  Or
pull  a  lock  of  the  magnetizer's  hair,  and  the  subject
will  complain  that  some  one  is  pulling  his  hair.  In  all
these  cases  it  is  necessary  that  the  magnetizer  should
keep  his  mind  concentrated  upon  the  subject,  willing
him  to  feel  the  corresponding  sensation.  But  in  case
his  mind  is  not  upon  the  subject  at  all,  and  should  he
unexpectedly  feel  the  prick  of  a  pin,  the  subject  would


LECTURE X.  7 179

not  heed  it.  This  proves  that  the  sensation  is  con-
veyed from  his  own  mind,  by  an  act  of  his  will,  to  the
subject,  for  it  is,  after  all,  the  mind  only  that  feels,  and
not  the  body.  In  further  support  of  this  position,  let
the  magnetizer,  for  instance,  feel  no  pain  at  all  from
the  touch  of  a  pin,  but  only  will  the  subject  to  feel,  and
the  same  sensation  will  be  fully  realized.

It  is  the  same  with  the  other  senses.  Let  the  mag-
netizer take  a  pinch  of  snuff,  and  the  subject  will  sneeze
and  say  that  some  one  has  given  him  snuff.  Or  let  the
magnetizer  take  tobacco  in  his  mouth,  and  the  subject
will  feel  sick.  Let  him  taste  sugar,  vinegar,  salt,  coffee,
or  brandy,  and  the  subject  will  describe  the  taste  of
each,  and  suppose  these  substances  to  be  in  his  own
mouth.  But  in  all  these  cases  it  is  necessary  that  the
magnetizer  should  concentrate  his  mind  upon  the  sub-
ject and  will  him  to  taste  these  articles.  But  if  he  is
capable  of  exercising  a  strong  imagination  without  the
actual  taste  of  these  substances,  and  then  ivill  the  sub-
ject to  taste  what  he  himself  imagines,  he  can  produce
upon  him  the  same  successful  results.  The  same  re-
marks apply  with  equal  force  to  hearing.  Let  the
magnetizer  only  imagine  that  he  hears  thunder,  or  the
constant  roar  of  cannon  in  the  battle-field,  and  the  sub-
ject will  hear  the  same,  and  start  from  his  seat  in  alarm  !
It  only  requires  a  concentration  of  mind  upon  the  sub-
ject with  an  attendant  anxiety  that  he  shall  hear,  and
the  work  is  done.


180  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

The  same  remarks  will  apply  to  seeing.  Let  the
magnetizer,  for  instance,  see  a  snake,  or  any  other
creature,  and  will  his  subject  to  see  the  same,  and  he
will  do  so,  and  describe  it  to  the  life,  as  to  color,  size,
and  position.  Or  let  the  magnetizer  only  picture  their
forms  in  his  mind,  and  the  same  result  will  follow.  I
lectured  at  Clinton  Hall,  New  York,  in  March,  1846,
on  the  philosophy  of  Mesmerism,  and  performed  exper-
iments to  sustain  my  positions.  My  mesmeric  subject
was  the  celebrated  Mr.  Tarbox,  one  of  the  best  clair-
voyants in  the  United  States.  And  there,  for  six  eve-
nings in  succession,  I  produced  every  variety  of  exper-
iments on  the  different  senses.  But  as  sight  is  the  one
with  which  I  am  at  present  more  directly  concerned,  I
will  confine  my  remarks  to  this  exclusively.  More  than
fifty  experiments  the  same  evening  were  performed  upon
this  young  man  in  succession,  merely  by  mental  impres-
sions, in  the  animal,  bird,  reptile,  and  insect  kingdoms,
from  the  mammoth  down  to  the  flea,  and  without  a  sin-
gle failure !  The  experiments  were  conducted  in  the
following  manner.  The  subject  was  seated  upon  the
stage  carefully  blindfolded  by  two  handkerchiefs.  I
was  requested  to  stand  upon  the  floor  in  front  of  the
audience.  The  name  of  the  animal,  bird,  reptile,  or
insect  was  then  written  by  any  skeptic  in  the  audience,
and  the  paper  handed  me  in  silence.  I  was  requested
to  use  invariably  the  same  interrogatory — What  do
you  see  ? In  every  instance  the  experiment  proved


LECTURE X.  181

successful.  I  was  then  requested  not  to  speak  at  all,
but  merely  to  will  in  silence.  And  though  this  mode
?ook  a  little  longer  than  to  call  his  attention  directly
to  the  object  by  speaking,  yet  the  experiments  proved
equally  successful.  All  this  can  be  testified  to  by  thou-
sands in  this  city  who  witnessed  these  startling  exper-
iments. Or  if  any  wish  for  individual  testimony,  I
can  refer  them  to  Dr.  Parmley,  0.  S.  Fowler,  Dr.  King,
and  Reverend  Mr.  Fishbough,  all  of  this  city.

In  experimenting  on  all  the  senses,  as  above  stated,
and  insuring  success,  it  only  requires  in  the  operator
the  power  of  concentrating  his  mind  upon  the  mesmer-
ized subject,  and  bearing  along  with  it  in  his  imagina-
tion the  full  electro-imaged  impression  of  the  desired
experiment,  willing  the  result,  and  it  is  done.  The
only  possible  use  of  inflicting  pain  on  any  part  of  the
operator's  person,  or  of  his  tasting  or  smelling  any
substance,  or  of  seeing  the  animal  or  object  literally
before  him  is,  so  that  his  mind  may  be  more  vividly
and  sensibly  impressed  to  act  on  the  subject  when  his
powers  of  imagination  and  concentration  are  too  small.
But  in  all  cases  where  the  anxiety  and  interest  of  the
operator's  mind  are  intense  and  great  as  to  the  result
of  his  experiment  upon  the  subject,  he  may  be  sure  of
success.  If  he  becomes  angry,  and  even  successfully
conceals  it,  and  happens  at  that  instant  to  turn  his  at-
tention to  his  subject,  he  may  be  sure  that  the  subject
will  become  angry,  strip  off  his  coat,  and  prepare  to


182  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

fight  when  he  knows  no  cause  for  it,  nor  whom  to  at-
tack. And  so  it  is  with  all  the  passions,  emotions,
and  desires  existing  in  the  operator's  soul.  Even  in
the  examination  of  diseases,  the  subject  feels  by  sym-
pathy all  the  pains,  aches,  weakness,  and  distress  of
the  patient.

What  I  have  said  above  is  still  further  demonstrated
by  what  is  called  clairvoyant  excursions.  In  these  the
subject  is  impressed,  and  wholly  conducted  by  the
mind  of  the  person  put  in  communication  with  him.
By  him  he  is  apparently  transported  to  some  distant
location  in  a  foreign  land,  or  to  a  dwelling  on  some  sol-
itary island  in  the  watery  waste.  Through  the  impres-
sions of  his  conductor's  mind  he  describes  the  exterior
of  the  domicil.  Through  the  same  medium  he  enters
in,  and  surveys  and  describes  the  doors,  windows,  fur-
niture, pictures,  and  ornaments  of  the  room,  or  of  all
the  rooms,  and  the  persons  who  reside  there  and  oc-
cupy them.  And  I  care  not  how  good  may  be  the  sub-
ject, yet  the  success  of  the  experiment  depends  on  the
power  of  the  imagination  and  concentration  of  the
conductor's  mind.  Through  him  he  sees  the  picture —
or,  more  strictly,  reads  the  impress  of  it  in  the  con-
ductor's soul.

Though  the  subject's  attention  can  be  directed  to,
and  impressed  by  man  to  examine  a  room  or  a  piece
of  dead  matter,  yet  he  can  not  by  man  be  put  in  com-
munication with  matter. Even  though  he  can,  through


LECTURE X.  183

a  piece  of  matter,  get  communication  with  the  person
who  has  handled  it,  still,  as  all  matter  stands  in  a
negative  relation  to  the  subject,  so  he  is  naturally  in
communication  with  it  the  moment  he  is  mesmerized.
Hence,  when  intending  to  examine  matter  in  any  one
department  of  nature,  he  should  not,  on  any  considera-
tion, be  mesmerized  by  man.  He  should  put  himself
into  the  state  by  a  mental  abstraction,  and  when  no
one  knows  it.  This  can  easily  be  done  by  holding  in  his
hand,  or  coming  in  contact  with,  the  substance  he  de-
sires to  investigate,  and  fastening  his  attention  upon  it
in  mental  abstraction,  forgetting  every  thing  else  but
the  object  before  him  till  he  passes  into  the  state.
Habit  will  soon  render  this  familiar  and  agreeable.  If,
for  instance,  he  feels  impressed  to  examine  a  magnet,  let
him  hold  a  magnet  in  his  hand  on  which  to  fix  his  eyes  ;
or,  if  he  wishes  to  examine  any  of  the  metals,  let  him
hold  that  one  in  his  hand  to  gaze  upon  which  he  de-
sires to  investigate.  If  he  feels  impressed  to  examine
water,  let  him  put  his  hands  in  water,  till  by  a  mental
abstraction  he  puts  himself  into  the  state.  If  he  de-
sires to  investigate  the  flowers,  fruits,  or  the  various
vegetable  tribes,  let  him  hold  that  species  in  his  hand,
which  is  the  intended  object  of  his  investigation,  and
look  upon  it  till  he  passes  into  the  state.  If  he  wishes
to  investigate  the  geological  formations  of  the  globe,
let  him  take  those  minerals  in  his  hand  that  compose
their  strata. If  he  desires  to  investigate  any  of  the


184  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

birds  or  animals,^  let  him  come  in  contact  with  one
of  that  species  which  is  the  object  of  his  inquiry
and  solicitude.  If  lie  wishes  to  examine  man  or
woman,  let  him  lay  his  hands  upon  them  and  pass
as  usual  into  the  state  by  a  mental  abstraction,  and
not  allow  them  to  mesmerize  him.  If  he  wishes  to
look  upon  and  examine  nature,  as  a  whole,  let  him
fasten  his  mind  upon  her  greatness,  and  hold  nothing
in  his  hand  till  he  passes  into  the  state.  I  have  be-
come satisfied,  of  late  years,  that  mesmerizers  will  ruin
the  energy,  the  power,  and  the  glory  invested  in  the
mesmeric  domain,  by  their  own  selfish  prepossessions
and  foolish  or  silly  impressions  on  the  mind  of  the  sub-
ject. Let  them  cease  their  labors,  and  set  his  impris-
oned faculties  free,  and  we  shall  soon  receive  a  very
different  message  from  the  higher  department  of  the
mesmeric  state.  I  am  pleased  to  see  that  this  course
of  mental  abstraction  is  almost  universally  adopted
and  pursued  by  mediums,  which  the  very  nature  of  the
case  obliges  them  to  do,  and  hence  their  communica-
tions on  mind  and  matter,  as  regards  science,  will  soon
outstrip  those  of  all  the  man-mesmerized  subjects.
And  this,  I  think,  is  the  great  and  good  end  the  Crea-
tor has  in  view,  and  that  he  will  overrule  the  so-called
spirit-manifestations  to  bring  the  mesmeric  power  to
bear  upon  its  own  legitimate,  important,  and  obvious
end.

The  subject  should  go  into  the  examination  of  nature


LECTURE X.  185

alone  entirely  ignorant,  if  possible,  of  human  opinions
concerning  the  point  he  desires  to  investigate.  And  as
he  is,  while  in  the  mesmeric  state,  still  connected  with
the  globe  and  breathing  its  surrounding  elements,  so
he  is  in  communication  with  nature  through  the  electri-
cal ocean  in  which  he  is  submerged,  and  can  turn  at
pleasure  to  any  of  her  departments,  and  hold  free  and
familiar  converse  with  her  mysteries.  And  as  all  sub-
stances in  nature  are  constantly  sending  off  their  elec-
tro-atmospheric emanations,  and  the  subject  being  left
free,  unimpressed,  and  uninfluenced  by  human  minds,
he  can  then,  and  only  then,  draw  his  instructions  di-
rectly from  the  impressions  of  her  own  bosom.  He
can  then  hold  intuitive  converse  with  her  immense
magazine  of  substances,  and  instinctively  pour  out  riv-
ers of  thought  in  full,  gushing  eloquence,  when,  so  far
as  his  voluntary  powers  of  reason  and  understanding
are  concerned,  he  is  entirely  ignorant  and  unlettered  in
the  schools  of  men.  To  receive  his  ideas  from  the  im-
pressions of  the  minds  of  those  with  whom  he  is  in
communication  is  very  different  indeed  from  receiving
them  directly  from  the  impressions  of  nature  herself.
If  the  clairvoyant  desires  to  know  what  is  in  man,  let
man  impress  him  ;  but  if  he  desires  to  know  what  is  in
nature,  let  nature  impress  him.  And  while  consulting
her  oracle,  no  human  being  should  be  near  him — no
human  mind  should  invade  the  sanctuary  of  his  soul  to
know  what  he  is  doing,  and  while  in  the  state,  he  should


186  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

write  down,  with  his  own  hand,  all  that  has  been  dis-
closed. And,  let  me  repeat,  that  he  should  go  into  the
examination  alone  entirely  ignorant  of  human  opinions
concerning  the  point  he  desires  to  investigate  ;  for  even
these  may  impress  his  mind  and  lead  him  astray,  be-
cause it  is  the  superior  impression  that  governs  his
mind,  and  blinds  him,  and  renders  him  invulnerable  to
all  other  impressions,  however  truthful.  Hence  it  will
be  perceived  that  Swedenborg  is  the  only  individual
of  modern  times  who  has  gone  into  the  superior  or  illu-
minated state  in  a  proper  manner,  and  met  nature  in
her  own  solitary  greatness,  and  has  thrown  out  a  world
(I  had  almost  said  an  eternity)  of  thought !  If  he  has
erred,  that  error  could  have  been  received  only  through
the  impression  of  preconceived  opinions  as  regards  both
nature  and  revelation.  All  somnambulists  go  into  the
state  as  I  have  described,  not  by  mesmerizers,  but  by
an  impression  from  some  object  or  circumstance  in  na-
ture, and  they  immediately  rise  from  their  pillows,  and
attend  to,  and  investigate  that  object,  and  let  all  others
alone.  Somnambulism  is  natural  self-mesmerism.  The
two  states  are  identical,  and  these  few  hints  as  regards
magnetizers  and  mesmerism  will  not,  I  hope,  be  disre-
garded by  Reichenbach  and  his  learned  admirers  in
England  and  America,  should  they  in  future  attempt,
through  clairvoyants,  to  investigate  and  unravel  the
arcana  of  nature.

There  is  one  point  more  connected  with  the  mesmeric


LECTURE X.  187

state,  on  -which  I  deem  it  necessary  to  bestow  a  few
remarks,  before  I  proceed  to  test  the  merits  of  Reichen-
bach's  claim  to  having  discovered  a  new  power  in  na-
ture termed  Odic-force.  I  refer  to  the  mode  of  taking
communication  -with  the  subject  in  the  mesmeric  state.
It  is  evident  that  the  mesmeric  subject,  when  placed
in  the  state,  can  not  at  first  see,  hear,  or  feel  any  other
persons  besides  his  mesmerizer,  unless  they  are  put  in
communication  with  him.  But  as  to  the  mode  of  taking
a  communication  so  as  to  become  en  rapport  with  the
subject,  there  are  many  erroneous  ideas  entertained,
and  this  is  the  grand  difficulty  under  which  our  cele-
brated author  labors.  It  was  at  first  supposed  that
none  could  obtain  communication  with  the  subject  ex-
cept by  the  direct  act  of  the  mesmerizer,  and  only  then
by  allowing  them  one  by  one  to  join  hands  with  the
subject,  and  making  a  few  passes  from  arm  to  arm,  or
else  by  touching  some  other  part  of  his  body.  But  it
was  next  discovered  that  any  person  could  place  him-
self in  communication  with  the  subject  by  simply  taking
hold  of  his  hand,  and  without  any  aid  from  the  magnet-
izer.  It  was  soon  found  out  that  the  magnetizer  could
place  the  subject  in  communication  with  any  individual,
or  with  a  whole  audience,  without  any  contact  whatever,
by  simply  requesting  the  subject  to  turn  his  attention
to  them.  It  was  next  discovered  that  any  individual,
by  placing  his  mind  intently  upon  the  subject,  with
great  anxiety  and  desire,  could  at  length  gain  his  atten-


188  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

tion,  and  thus  put  himself  in  communication  with  him
as  perfectly  as  if  it  had  been  done  by  contact  and  with
the  aid  of  the  magnetizer.  Hence,  when  lecturing  be-
fore large  audiences,  I  have  been  frequently  interrupted
in  my  experiments  by  one  or  two  magnetizers  obtaining
a  communication  through  this  secret  mode  with  my
subject,  and  diverting  his  attention  from  the  impressions
I  desired  to  produce  on  his  mind.  In  all  such  cases  he
could  point  out  the  individuals  who  were  influencing
him,  and  state  what  I  must  do  to  prevent  it,  so  that  I
could  proceed  with  my  experiments.  And  it  is  evident
to  my  mind,  that  Von  Reichenbach  supposes  it  to  be
impossible  to  gain  a  communication  with  the  subject,
or  the  subjects  one  with  the  other,  only  by  actual  con-
tact. This  is  clearly  manifest  from  the  whole  chain
of  his  reasoning  upon  the  subject.  Indeed,  he  takes
this  for  granted,  as  an  established  fact,  and  proceeds
to  his  argument  as  though  it  had  never  been  questioned,
but  as  a  point  upon  which  all  are  agreed.  This  proves,
that  however  great  may  be  his  powers  of  intellect,  and
however  grand  and  elevated  may  be  his  conceptions  of
nature  and  her  operations,  and  however  deep  and  pro-
found he  may  be  in  understanding  the  various  sciences
as  now  taught  in  the  schools  and  institutions  of  his
country,  yet  he  is  still  unlettered  in  the  science  of  mes-
meric phenomena,  and  stands  in  the  background  upon
the  old  platform  where  Mesmer,  his  own  countryman,
left  it,  except  that  he  has  renounced  the  magnetic  tub


LECTURE X.  189

used  by  Mesmer.  I  am  aware  that  Reichenbach.  per-
formed his  experiments  mostly  upon  subjects  in  the  som-
nambulic or  cataleptic  state,  to  test  the  existence  of  his
supposed  Odic-force.  But  this  does  not  in  the  least  alter
the  case.  I  have  already  stated  that  the  somnambulic
and  mesmeric  states  are  identically  the  same,  for  the
same  class  of  experiments  can  be  performed  upon  the  sub-
jects of  both.  The  only  difference  is,  that,  the  mesmeric
state  is  induced  by  the  aid  of  an  operator,  while  the  som-
nambulic state  is  not.  Indeed,  I  may  say  that  a  mesmer-
izer  is  entirely  unnecessary  even  to  bring  a  person  into
the  state  who  has  never  been  mesmerized  at  all.  This
can  be  effected  just  as  well  by  his  own  act,  independent
of  all  foreign  influence.  All  that  is  necessary  is,  that
the  individual  should  seat  himself,  entirely  passive,  in  a
room  where  he  will  not  be  disturbed,  and  fix  his  atten-
tion for  an  hour  upon  some  object  he  may  hold  in  his
hand,  and  not  turn  his  eyes  from  it,  but  keep  a  steady
and  constant  gaze.  This  should  be  continued  daily  till
the  state  is  induced.  Upon  natural  somnambulists  al-
most any  impression  can  be  made  even  in  their  waking
state,  and  so  it  can  upon  cataleptic  persons.  But  this
impression  will  be  much  greater  upon  some  than  upon
others,  according  to  their  sensitiveness,  or  the  degree
of  their  nervous  impressibility.  A  communication  can
be  taken  with  all  persons  of  this  character  asleep  or
awake,  and  in  the  same  manner  and  variety  of  ways
that  it  can  with  persons  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and  the


190  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

clairvoyance  in  the  good  subjects  of.  each  is  alike  bril-
liant. The  same  may  be  said  of  good  subjects  in  the
electro-psychologic  state.  With  all  these  classes  of
persons  a  communication  can  be  taken  simply  by  a
mental  impression,  and  independent  of  any  personal
contact  whatever.

I  would  now  say,  that  Reichenbach  builds  up  his
whole  theory  of  the  existence  of  an  Odic-force  on  the
testimony  of  somnambulists  (who  are  but  mesmeric
subjects),  and  upon  persons  in  a  cataleptic  state,  and
upon  persons  who  are  in  an  electro-psychologic  state.
This  latter  class  are  principally  those  upon  whom  he
tests  his  experiments  with  a  magnet  and  other  sub-
stances, so  far  as  regards  the  sense  of  feeling.  And
the  former  class  are  principally  those  upon  whom  he
tests  his  experiments  with  a  magnet  and  other  sub-
stances, as  regards  their  sense  of  seeing.  Of  these  he
introduces  upon  the  stand  six  witnesses,  who  declare
that  they  see  the  flames  of  this-  invisible  Odic-force.
We  will  now  proceed  to  a  fair  and  candid  examination
of  the  case,  and  see  what  his  testimony  amounts  to  on
the  mind  of  the  public,  who  are  our  empanneled  jury
to  try  this  cause.

I  will  first  notice  his  testimony  as  regards  the  sense
of  feeling.  Page  17,  he  says  :  "  If  a  strong  magnet,
capable  of  supporting  about  ten  pounds,  be  drawn  down-
ward over  the  bodies  of  fifteen  or  twenty  persons,  with-
out actually  touching them,  some among them  will


LECTUBE X.  191

always  be  found  to  be  excited  in  a  peculiar  manner.
Sometimes  three  or  four  are  met  with  in  such  a  num-
ber as  the  above  mentioned."  This  I  admit  to  be
correct ;  and  this  is  about  the  number  we  usually  im-
press to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  when  experimenting
in  electro-psychology.  These  are  psychological  sub-
jects, and  I  can  impress  them  in  like  manner  and  to
the  full  extent  as  above,  by  simply  passing  down  my
fore-finger  without  contact,  instead  of  a  strong  magnet,
and  have  done  so  at  a  distance  of  thirty  feet,  and  hun-
dreds of  times.  And  not  only  so,  but  I  have  done  it
with  a  wooden  cane,  distant  from  the  subject  to  the
farther  extent  of  a  large  hall,  and  before  a  thousand
persons.  And  I  pledge  myself,  that  I  can  do  it  with
any  substance  Mr.  Reichenbach  or  his  friends  may
choose  to  place  in  my  hands,  at  a  distance  of  five  hun-
dred feet ;  and  in  all  these  instances  the  subject  shall
feel  it  with  the  same  force  as  though  I  passed  it  within
an  inch  of  his  body !  It  is  not  the  magnet,  nor  any
other  substance  that  produces  these  effects,  but  it  is
the  mind  of  the  experimenter  simply  producing  an  im-
pression upon  the  sensitive  mind  of  the  subject,  because
mind  in  all  such  cases  transcends  matter  in  its  power
to  sympathetically  communicate  with,  and  impress  and
control  mind.

Page  18.  In  describing  the  different  effects  of  the
magnet  upon  different  persons,  the  author  says — "  It
is  rather  disagreeable than  pleasant,  and combined


192  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

with  a  slight  sensation  of  either  cold  or  warmth,  re-
sembling a  cool  or  gently  warm  breath  of  air,  which
the  patients  imagine  to  blow  softly  upon  them.  Some-
times they  feel  sensations  of  drawing,  pricking,  or
creeping ;  some  complain  of  headache.  Not  only
women,  but  men  in  the  very  prime  of  life,  are  found
distinctly  susceptible  of  this  influence  ;  in  children  it
is  sometimes  very  active."  All  this  I  admit  to  be
true,  and  would  reply,  that  I  can  produce  these  same
effects,  with  all  their  varying  sensations  upon  different
individuals,  by  simply  passing  down  my  hand,  or  a
piece  of  wood,  iron,  gold,  silver,  copper,  or  zinc.  I
have  done  so  in  many  instances,  so  that  some  have
fainted  away.  In  Syracuse,  before  an  audience  of  a
thousand  persons,  I  threw  a  lady  several  times  into  a
fit,  by  simply  passing  down  my  hand  before  her  as  an
experiment,  and  in  an  instant  I  could  at  pleasure  bring
her  out  of  her  lit.  I  performed  the  same  experiment
upon  a  young  man  in  Auburn,  before  an  audience  of
eight  hundred  persons.  His  fits,  to  which  he  was  sub-
ject, were  awful,  and,  though  he  was  perfectly  insen-
sible and  convulsed  before  that  audience,  yet,  at  an
instant,  when  the  request  was  made,  I  brought  him
out,  and  through  these  means  cured  him.  And  I  hold
myself  responsible  for  the  truth  of  what  I  utter.  It
is  only  the  impression  that  is  produced  on  the  minds
of  the  sensitive,  and  hence  no  two  feel  alike.  Where-
as, if  it  were  the  result  of  a  powerful  magnet,  there


LECTURE X.  193

could  not  be  experienced  from  it  such  opposite  effects
as  heat  and  cold.  The  same  substance,  however  sub-
tile, must  act  in  some  measure  uniform  as  to  its  phys-
ical effects  upon  human  bodies.  As  fire  produces  a
sense  of  heat,  and  ice  of  coldness,  upon  all,  so  the
magnet  can  not  produce  directly  opposite  physical  sen-
sations upon  different  human  beings.  It  will  not  do  to
evade  the  force  of  this  argument  by  saying,  that  it  is
the  exceeding  subtilty  of  the  Odic-force  that  does  this.
Electricity  and  galvanism  are  inconceivably  subtile,
yet  their  physical  sensations  upon  different  human
bodies  are  the  same  when  the  shock  is  given  ;  and  so
it  is  with  all  known  substances  in  nature.  If  the  Od-
force,  as  it  is  called,  varies  from  all  others,  then  it  is
surely  odd  enough,  and  hence  it  is  rightly  named.

Reichenbach  then  states  (page  19),  that  the  magnet
in  its  downward  pass  produces  its  various  effects  upon
healthy  individuals,  upon  those  of  sedentary  habits,
and  upon  persons  laboring  under  every  species  and
grade  of  disease  down  to  catalepsy,  and  "  lastly  upon
those  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  and  the  true  somnam-
bulist without  exception.'5  Now  I  would  respect-
fully  say,  that  all  what  he  here  so  minutely  details  is
the  natural  result  of  impressions  made  on  the  minds
of  persons  in  the  electro-psychological  state,  as  every
one  knows  who  has  the  least  acquaintance  with  this
science,  and  of  which,  it  would  seem,  that  the  distin-
guished author  has  never  heard.
9


194  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

That  any  substance  whatever  will  produce  these  and
other  results,  such  as  heat  and  cold,  tremblings,  shak-
ings, prickings,  spasms,  and  faintings,  provided  the
expectation,  anxiety,  will,  or  determination  of  the
operator's  mind  is  sufficiently  great  or  active,  is
not  only  certain,  but  Reichenbach  inadvertently  ad-
mits it.

After  stating  the  powerful  effects  of  a  magnet  capable
of  suspending  ninety  pounds,  and  which  Miss  Nowotny
grasped  with  a  convulsive  force,  so  that  she  was  un-
able to  loose  her  hands,  he  says  (pages  51,  52) — li  But
the  singularity  seemed  to  reach  the  height  of  incom-
prehensibility when  it  proved  that  not  merely  the
magnet,  but  even  a  simple  glass  of  magnetized  water,
possessed  the  power  of  drawing  along  the  hand  of  Miss
Nowotny.  It  is  true  that  this  occurred  in  a  much
weaker  degree,  but  her  hand  was  unmistakably  at-
tracted, both  in  the  catalepsy  and  at  every  other  time,
by  a  magnetized  glass  of  water,  in  such  a  manner  that
a  tendency  to  follow  this  in  every  direction  made  it-
self evident."  Here  Reichenbach  is  perfectly  dumb-
founded !  He  magnetized  a  glass  of  water,  and  she,
taking  the  impression  from  this  circumstance  that  the
water  would  also  attract  her,  could  not  resist  the  act
of  following  it.  Here  he  admits  what  I  have  argued  ;
and  I  will  add,  that  I  can  attract  the  subject  to  any
part  of  the  room  I  may  choose,  or  repel  him  from  me
by  a  mere  act  of  my  will  to  go  to  any  individual  in  the


LECTURE X.  195

room,  and  again  attract  him  to  me,  and  without  the  aid
of  a  glass  of  magnetized  water.

But,  to  his  astonishment,  he  has  at  last  found  some-
thing that  will  attract  besides  a  steel  magnet !  His
mind  conceives  a  new  force,  and  its  singularity  is  so
great  as  to  "  reach  the  height  of  incomprehensibility."
He  conceives  the  idea,  from  the  magic  force  of  this  glass
of  water,  that  it  must  be  some  other  power  besides  elec-
tricity or  magnetism,  because  water  has  no  magnetic
power  to  attract  any  substance !  He  moreover  con-
ceives the  idea  that  this  power  may  be  universal.  Our
German  philosopher  is  now  ready  to  begin  a  wild-goose-
chase  excursion  to  inspect  all  substances  on  the  globe !
What  astonishing  results,  what  great  discoveries  are
made  known  "  by  a  simple  glass  of  magnetized  water !"
He  is  now  ready  to  begin  his  excursion.

He  says  (page  52)  :  "  Contemplating  this,  and  con-
vinced that  so  strange  a  phenomenon  could  not  exist
isolated  in  nature,  I  was  desirous  of  trying  whether  the
same  effect  as  that  of  the  water  might  not  be  brought
about  by  means  of  some  other  body ;  if  this  proved  to
be  so,  I  hoped  to  see  cases  occur  with  various  modifica-
tions from  which  some  laws  might  be  deduced.  With
this  view,  all  sorts  of  minerals,  preparations,  and  drugs
and  other  things  were  rubbed  with  the  magnet,  and  the
patient  was  tried  with  them  in  the  same  way  as  with
the  magnetized  water ;  and  it  actually  happened  that
all  reacted  at  once  upon  her  more  or  less  in  the  same


196  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

Way  as  the  magnetized  water ;  they  attracted  the  pa-
tient's hand  more  strongly  or  weakly,  but  in  variously
modified  ways.  Some  produced  spasms  throughout  the
whole  body,  others  only  in  the  arms,  others  only  in  the
hand,  others  scarcely  caused  any  effect,  although  all
had  been  equally  strongly  magnetized.  It  was  evident,
therefore,  that  some  difference  lay  in  the  matter  itself,
and  required  to  be  taken  into  account  here."

Here  a  new  world  of  wonders  opens  to  the  mind  of
the  author.  He  has  now  found  out  that  this  attraction
exists,  not  only  in  magnetized  water,  but  also  in  drugs
and  other  substances  without  number,  for  by  magnet-
izing them  with  a  steel  magnet,  they  also  attract  the
patient's  hand !  But  he  was  destined  to  look  upon
still  greater  wonders  that  beset  his  path,  as  the  next
paragraph  shows. He  says  :

"  To  investigate  this,  I  now  tried  to  bring  the  same
substances  into  contact  with  the  patient  in  their  natu-
ral condition,  without  having  been  previously  mag-
netized. To  my  great  surprise,  they  also  acted  now
upon  the  patient  with  a  force  which  very  often  yielded
but  little  to  that  which  they  had  exhibited  in  the  mag-
netized condition.  But  the  action  was  not  always
accompanied  by  a  solicitation  to  follow  the  object ;  on
the  contrary,  that  other  effect  which  had  made  the  pa-
tient grasp  the  magnet  convulsively  in  her  hand  pre-
sented itself  in  various  gradations  of  force.  The  method
of  experiment  which  I  followed  here  consisted  in  this.


LECTURE X.  197

I  first  placed  the  various  bodies  in  the  patient's  hand
while  in  the  cataleptic  state,  and  observed  the  effects,
and  then  repeated  the  same  when  she  was  in  a  state  of
perfect  consciousness,  out  of  the  catalepsy."

He  has  now  advanced  so  far  in  his  investigations
that  he  has  found  out,  that  not  only  the  magnet  and
other  magnetized  substances  attract,  and  decidedly
affect  the  patient,  but  that  the  same  substances  unmag-
netizecl,  and  in  their  natural  condition,  attract  about  as
well !  He  next  proceeds  to  give  the  result  of  his  exper-
iments, and  places  about  forty  substances  in  a  column
that  will  not  affect  the  patient,  and  about  forty  that
will.  Now  permit  me  here  to  say,  that  I  will  take
the  whole  list  of  forty  substances  that  he  says  will  pro-
duce no  effect  upon  the  patient,  and  I  will  produce  all
the  results  that  he  can  with  his  magnet  of  ninety-pound
power  !  And,  further,  I  will  take  his  forty  substances,
and  not  only  his  magnetized  water,  all  of  which  he  says
will  attract,  but  I  will  take  his  most  powerful  steel
magnet,  and  by  an  impression  from  my  mind  upon  the
subject,  I  will  render  them  all  harmless  and  powerless
in  his  hands,  so  that  he  may  grasp  and  handle  them  at
pleasure  without  feeling  any  possible  effect  from  their
supposed  Odic-force.  I  have  produced  these  experi-
ments upon  hundreds  with  wood,  gold,  silver,  copper,
brass,  and  iron,  which  are  substances  set  down  in  his
category  that  will  not  affect  the  subject.  A  piece  of
copper,  silver,  or  wood,  the  size  of  a  penny,  I  have  ren-


198  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

dered  so  hot,  by  merely  an  impression  on  his  mind,  as
to  apparently  burn  the  hand,  and  force  the  subject  to
throw  it  suddenly  down.  I  have  replaced  the  same
piece,  and  rendered  it  so  cold  and  ice-like  that  he  could
not  possibly  hold  it.  The  whole  was  done  in  his  wake-
ful state.  And  I  have  no  more  doubt  than  I  have  of
my  existence,  that  all  of  Von  Reichenbach's  experi-
ments, with  one  or  two  exceptions,  were  the  result  of
his  own  impressions  on  his  subjects.  I  have  only  to
say  I  can  perform  the  whole,  and  even  reverse  his  ex-
periments by  mental  impressions.  And  he  should  also
bear  in  mind,  that  the  longer  he  experiments  with  a
subject,  the  more  perfectly  she  becomes  associated  with
his  feelings,  habits  of  thought,  and  sympathies,  by  a
more  direct  and  deep-seated  communication.

Having  noticed  all  the  necessary  evidence  he  has
produced  of  the  existence  of  his  Odic-force,  so  far  as
the  sense  of  feeling  is  concerned  in  the  persons  upon
whom  he  experimented,  I  now  proceed  to  the  examina-
tion of  the  evidence  he  produces  of  the  existence  of  his
Odic-force  by  the  faculty  of  clairvoyant  seeing.  For
this  purpose  he  introduces  six  witnesses  on  the  stand,
and  he  sincerely  and  honestly  considers  the  matter  set-
tled beyond  all  possible  doubt,  and  that  there  is  no
room  left  even  for  rational  controversy,  at  least  so  far
as  regards  the  absolute  existence  of  this  invisible  power.

Pages  22,  23,  he  says  :  "  Through  the  kindness  of
a  surgeon  practicing  in  Vienna,  I  was  introduced,  in


LECTURE X.  199

March,  1844,  to  one  of  his  patients,  the  daughter  of
the  tax-collector,  Nowotny,  a  young  woman  of  25  years
of  age,  who  had  suffered  for  eight  years  from  increasing
pains  in  the  head,  and  from  these  had  fallen  into  cata-
leptic attacks,  with,  alternate  tonic  and  clonic  spasms.
In  her,  all  the  exalted  intensity  of  the  senses  had  ap-
peared, so  that  she  could  not  bear  sun  or  candle-light,
saw  her  chamber  as  in  a  twilight  in  the  darkness  of  the
night,  and  clearly  distinguished  the  color  of  all  the  fur-
niture and  clothes  in  it.  On  this  patient  the  magnet
acted  with  extraordinary  violence  in  several  ways,  and
she  manifested  the  sensitive  peculiarity  in  every  respect
in  such  a  high  degree,  that  she  equaled  the  true  som-
nambulist (which  she  herself,  however,  was  not)  in
every  particular  relating  to  the  acuteness  of  sensuous
irritability.

"At  the  sight  of  all  this,  and  in  recalling  to  mind
that  the  northern  light  appeared  to  be  nothing  else
than  an  electrical  phenomenon  produced  through  the
terrestrial  magnetism,  the  intimate  nature  of  which  is
still  inexplicable  in  so  far  that  no  direct  emanation  of
light  from  the  magnet  is  known  in  physics,  I  came  to
the  idea  of  making  a  trial  whether  a  power  of  vision  so  ex-
alted as  that  of  Miss  Nowotny  might  not  perhaps  per-
ceive some  phenomena  of  light  on  the  magnet  in  perfect
darkness.  The  possibility  did  not  appear  to  me  so  very
distant,  and  if  it  did  actually  present  itself,  the  key  to  the
explanation  of  the  aurora  borealis  seemed  in  my  hands.


200  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

"  I  allowed  the  father  of  the  girl  to  make  the  first
preparatory  experiment  in  my  absence.  In  order  to
profit  by  the  greatest  darkness  and  the  maximum  dila-
tion of  the  pupil,  from  the  eye  having  long  been  accus-
tomed to  the  total  absence  of  light,  I  directed  him  to
hold  before  the  patient,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  the
largest  existing  magnet,  a  nine-fold  horse-shoe  capable
of  supporting  about  ninety  pounds  of  iron,  with  the  ar-
mature removed.  This  was  done,  and  on  the  following
day  I  was  informed  that  the  girl  had  really  perceived
a  distinct,  continuous  luminosity,  as  long  as  the  mag-
net was  kept  open,  but  disappeared  every  time  the  ar-
mature was  placed  on  it.

"  To  convince  myself  more  completely,  and  study  the
matter  more  closely,  I  made  preparations  to  undertake
the  experiment  with  modifications  myself.  I  devoted
the  following  night  to  this,  and  selected  for  it  the  period
when  the  patient  had  just  awakened  from  a  cataleptic
fit,  and  consequently  was  most  excitable.  The  win-
dows were  covered  with  a  superabundance  of  curtains,
and  the  lighted  candles  removed  from  the  room  long
before  the  termination  of  the  spasms.

u  The  magnet  was  placed  upon  the  table  about  ten
yards  from  the  patient,  with  both  poles  directed  toward
the  ceiling  and  then  freed  from  its  armature.  No  one
present  could  see  in  the  least,  but  the  girl  beheld  two
luminous  appearances,  one  at  the  extremity  of  each
pole  of  the  magnet. When  this  was  closed  by  the  ap-


LECTURE X.  201

plication  of  the  armature,  they  disappeared,  and  she
saw  nothing  more ;  when  it  was  opened  again,  the  lights
reappeared.  They  seemed  to  be  somewhat  stronger  at
the  moment  of  lifting  up  the  armature,  then  to  acquire
a  permanent  condition  which  was  weaker.  The  fiery
appearance  was  about  equal  in  size  at  each  pole,  and
without  perceptible  tendency  to  mutual  connection.
Close  upon  the  steel  from  which  it  streamed,  it  appeared
to  form  a  fiery  vapor,  and  this  was  surrounded  by  a  kind
of  glory  of  rays.  But  the  rays  were  not  at  rest ;  they
became  shorter  and  longer  without  intermission,  and
exhibited  a  kind  of  darting  rays  and  active  scintillation,
which  the  observer  assured  us  was  uncommonly  beau-
tiful."

The  author  made  other  experiments  with  this  lady,
and  with  the  same  success  ;  but  as  she  gradually  re-
covered her  health,  the  experiments  proved  less  inter-
esting, till  the  light  from  the  magnet  almost  disap-
peared. This  will  call  to  the  reader's  mind  the  case  I
stated  of  Miss  Slaughter,  of  Virginia,  in  a  former  Lec-
ture. She  was  in  a  state  of  entire  catalepsy,  attended
with  most  brilliant  sympathetic  clairvoyance.  She  was
enabled  to  take  impressions  from  other  minds,  and  even
from  two  of  her  dying  friends  so  as  to  state  the  mo-
ment of  their  death.  This  power  of  receiving  impres-
sions she  entirely  lost  on  her  recovery,  as  did  Miss
Nowotny.  I  moreover  stated,  that  her  case  was  one
in  about  fifty  million. From  the  account  given  of  Miss


202  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

Nowotny's  case,  it  was  unquestionably  one  of  a  like
character.

I  make  this  long  extract  from  Reichenhach's  work,  so
that  the  reader  may  fairly  see  and  distinctly  understand
the  real  condition  of  things  previous  to,  and  during
his  first  experiment.  Reichenbach  had  conceived  the
idea,  that,  as  the  northern  light  appeared  to  be  noth-
ing else  but  an  electrical  phenomenon  produced  through
the  terrestrial  magnetism,"  that  therefore  it  might  be
seen  streaming  from  the  north  and  south  poles  of  a
strong  magnet,  as  from  the  north  and  south  poles  of
the  globe.  He  gives  her  father  instructions  how  to  pro-
ceed in  the  first  experiment,  and  takes  his  departure.
But  he  leaves  Miss  Nowotny  in  full  communication  with
himself,  in  communication  with  her  father,  and  in  com-
munication with  the  magnet  which  he  had  allowed  her
to  handle  or  touch  before  he  left,  and  which  he  himself
had  handled.  Hence  they  are  all  in  communication.
And  it  is  very  natural  to  suppose  that  he  talked  the
matter  all  over  with  the  parties  before  he  left,  as  to
what  he  expected  to  discover  by  the  experiment.  But
even  admitting  it  possible  that  Reichenbach  never  once
hinted  to  them  what  result  he  expected  from  the  exper-
iment, yet  he  left  his  unexpressed  impressions  with  all
his  anxiety  on  the  mind  of  Miss  Nowotny.  She  would
feel  and  read  the  whole.  Indeed,  if  he  had  only  sent  the
magnet  to  her  by  another  person,  yet  as  Reichenbach
had  handled  it,  she  could  have  obtained  through  the


LECTURE X.  203

magnet  alone  a  communication  with  him,  and  read  his
mind  and  feelings  in  all  their  naked  force.  Hence  it
is  not  only  evident,  but  positively  certain,  that  she  saw
those  flames  issuing  from  the  poles  of  the  magnet
through  an  impression  from  Reichenbach's  mind,  and
not  in  reality.  Of  this  there  can  be  no  possible  doubt,
because  he  proceeds  to  the  experiment  to  ascertain  the
existence  of  his  Odic-force  streaming  from  the  poles  of
the  magnet,  so  as  to  enable  him  to  account  for  the  phe-
nomenon of  the  northern  light.  After  witnessing  the
force  with  which  Miss  Nowotny  grasped  the  magnet,
he  plainly  says  :

"  At  the  sight  of  all  this,  and  recalling  to  mind  that
the  northern  light  appeared  to  be  nothing  else  but  an
electrical  phenomenon  produced  through  the  terrestrial
magnetism,  the  intimate  nature  of  which  is  still  inex-
plicable, in  so  far  that  no  direct  emanation  of  light
from  the  magnet  is  known  in  physics,  I  came  to  the

IDEA  OF  MAKING  A  TRIAL  WHETHER  A  POWER  OF  VIS-
ION SO  EXALTED  AS  THAT  OF  MlSS  NoWOTNY  MIGHT
NOT  PERHAPS  PERCEIVE  SOME  PHENOMENA  OF  LIGHT
ON  THE  MAGNET  IN  PERFECT  DARKNESS.  THE  POSSI-
BILITY DID  NOT  APPEAR  TO  ME  SO  VERY  DISTANT,  AND
IF  IT  DID  ACTUALLY  PRESENT  ITSELF,  THE  KEY  TO
THE  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  AURORA  BOREALIS  SEEMED
IN  MY  HANDS."

With  this  idea  fixed  in  his  mind,  to  discover  the
cause,  and  explain  the  phenomena  of  the  aurora  bore-


204  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

alis,  he  proceeded  to  the  experiments ;  and  what  is  the
result  ?  The  result  is,  that  she  sees  the  northern
light,  and  I  may  say  the  southern  also,  streaming  from
the  two  poles  of  the  [magnet  corresponding  with  the
poles  of  the  globe !  The  above  experiment  and  its
successful  result  I  admit  to  be  true,  as  the  distinguished
author  has  candidly  stated.  When  the  armature  wa3
removed  she  saw  the  flames  of  the  Odic-force  issue
from  the  poles  of  the  magnet !  and  when  the  armature
was  replaced  the  flames  vanished.  How  perfectly  nat-
ural that  this  was  the  result  of  an  impression  from  the
operator's  mind  !  He  knew  that  when  the  armature
was  removed  the  magnetism  escaped,  and  in  time  the
magnet  would  lose  its  power.  He  knew  that  the  ar-
mature shut  it  off,  and  prevented,  in  a  good  measure,
its  escape,  and  she  took  the  same  impression.  And
instead  of  an  Odic-force  being  seen  to  escape  from  the
poles  of  the  magnet,  would  it  not  be  a  more  philosoph-
ical conclusion,  in  case  any  thing  could  in  reality  be
seen,  that  it  was  the  magnetism  itself,  which  we  know
continually  escapes  from  the  poles  when  the  armature  is
removed  ?  And  what  is  magnetism  but  galvanism
imprisoned  in  steel  1  And  what  are  either,  but  a  cer-
tain disposition  of  electricity  ?  And  what  is  electricity
but  the  original  and  primal  power  of  matter,  and  be-
yond which  there  is  no  other  power  except  the  power
of  mind'?

His  next  witness  is  Angelica  Sturmann,  nineteen


LECTURE X.  205

years  of  age,  suffering  from  tubercular  affection  of  the
lungs,  and  long  subject  to  somnambulism  in  its  slighter
stages,  with  attacks  of  tetanus  and  cataleptic  fits.
The  author  says  (page  26) — "  The  influence  of  the
magnet  displayed  itself  so  powerfully  in  her,  after  a
few  experiments,  that  she  far  surpassed  Miss  Nowotny
in  sensitiveness.  She  also  saw  a  flame  flash  over  the
magnet,  the  moment  the  armature  was  removed,  of  a
white  color  mingled  with  red  and  blue.  *  *  *  At  the
same  time  I  had  attained  my  principal  aim ;  a  confir-
mation of  Miss  Nowotny's  statements  respecting  the
luminosity  over  the  magnet  was  obtained.  It  had  now
been  seen  by  a  second  person  suffering  from  quite  a
different  disease,  without  any  communication  from  the
first."  Here  again  our  author  errs.  Her  disease  was
the  same  as  Miss  Nowotny's,  with  the  exception  of  the
complaint  on  her  lungs.  They  both  had  cataleptic
fits,  and  tetanus  (lock-jaw)  is  frequently  a  result  of  the
spasms.  He  also  errs  in  saying,  that  these  two  young
women  had  no  communication  with  each  other.  Reich-
enbach,  it  appears,  never  once  dreamed  that  he  car-
ried about  with  him  that  communication  from  one  to
the  other  wherever  he  went.  But  in  case  he  did  not
keep  the  subjects  en  rapport  with  each  other,  yet  the
same  impression  of  his  own  bosom,  with  but  little  va-
riation, was  presented  to  each  of  his  witnesses,  and  in
it  they  saw  and  read  the  beauty,  splendor,  and  power
of  his  Odic-force  !


206  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

The  author  says  that  the  third  witness  was  a  "  lad
about  eighteen  years  old,  suffering  from  intermittent
spasms,  produced  by  fright  and  ill-usage.  When  I
approached  him  with  the  magnet,  he  at  once  spoke  of
fire  and  flames  appearing  before  him,  which  returned
every  time  I  removed  the  armature."  But  the  author
states,  that  the  boy  was  too  ignorant  to  carry  on  with
him  any  profitable  experiment,  and  therefore  leaves  him.

Page  27.  His  fourth  witness  was  Miss  Maria  Maix,
twenty-five  years  old,  who  also  saw  this  light,  but  of
course  through  the  mind  of  her  operator.  His  fifth
witness  (same  page)  was  Miss  Barbara  Reichel,  a  true
somnambulist,  subject  also  to  talking  in  her  sleep  and
wandering  in  her  dreams.  She  saw  the  flames  issue
more  powerfully  than  any  of  the  witnesses  who  had
preceded  her.  She  even  saw  them  slightly  with  the
armature  on  the  magnet,  and  very  powerfully  and  beau-
tifully with  it  off.  The  whole  surface  of  the  magnet
also  appeared  in  a  glow  !  His  description  of  this  lady's
case,  and  the  experiments  he  performed  with  her  at  his
own  residence,  is  certainly  very  interesting.

Page  33.  Here  he  introduces  his  sixth  and  last
witness  in  the  present  case.  Miss  Maria  Atzmanns-
dorfer  (twenty-six  years  of  age)  is  the  name.  She  has
an  affection  in  the  head,  with  spasms  and  sleep-walking,
and  is  sensitive  in  a  high  degree.  The  author  says :
"  She  saw  the  magnetic  poles  flame  in  a  most  lively
manner. She  described  the  luminous  appearance  as


LECTURE X.  207

still  larger  than  Miss  Reichel,  from  the  nine-layered
horse-shoe,  more  than  twice  the  height,  and  gave  an
exactly  similar  account  of  the  light,  the  colors,  and
mobility  of  the  flame.  Like  her,  she  saw  the  whole
magnet  luminous,  and  its  entire  surface  clothed  with  a
delicate  light. She  makes  the  sixth  witness."

He  now  sums  up  the  testimony,  page  84,  and  remarks :
"  With  the  exception  of  an  acquaintance  between
Miss  Maix  and  Miss  Reichel,  none  of  the  witnesses
had  any  communication  with  each  other,  or  did  even
know  one  another,  but  lived  leagues  apart,  and  in  my
innumerable  experiments  never  contradicted  one  an-
other, much  less  themselves."  Here  we  perceive  that
the  learned  author  is  entirely  unacquainted  with  the
nature  of  clairvoyant  communication  between  different
individuals,  even  though  hundreds  of  miles  apart.  And
even  admitting  that  they  had  no  such  communication
with  each  other,  yet  he  is  entirely  unacquainted  with
the  nature  of  mental  impressions  that  were  communi-
cated from  his  own  mind  to  each  of  his  witnesses,  and
hence,  like  Bellerophon,  he  carries  his  own  indictment
and  condemns  himself.  He  bears  the  communication
in  his  own  bosom,  and  condemns  his  own  testimony  in
the  witnesses  he  has  brought  forward.  On  this  I  offer
no  more,  as  I  have  fully  noticed  elsewhere  the  different
modes  of  obtaining  communication.

We  have  now  before  us,  in  substance,  the  whole  evi-
dence in  the  case. And  upon  the  foundation  of  th;


208  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

clairvoyant  testimony  he  builds  the  whole  splendid  su-
perstructure of  his  theory.  It  rests  wholly  on  the
existence  of  his  Odic-force.  Strike  away  this  founda-
tion and  the  whole  superstructure  falls.  This  point
now  claims  our  candid  consideration.

There  is  one  important  point  in  the  history  of  the
evidence  that  claims  attention.  It  is  this  :  As  he  ad-
vances with  his  experiments  from  one  witness  to  another,
the  Odic-force  gradually  increases  to  their  minds  in  the
power,  beauty,  and  splendor  of  its  appearance,  until
the  subject  can  see,  not  only  the  whole  magnet  in  a
glow,  and  the  flame  issuing  a  little  even  with  the  arma-
ture on,  but  with  the  armature  removed  ;  the  last  wit-
ness saw  the  flames  blaze  up  from  the  poles  of  the
magnet  more  than  twice  as  high  as  the  first  witness !
Now,  on  the  principle  that  all  this  was  produced  on  the
minds  of  the  witnesses  by  an  impression  from  his  own
mind,  how  perfectly  natural  it  is  to  understand  and
explain  the  whole !  Before  he  tried  his  first  experiment,
though  his  confidence  was  strong  that  such  light  might
be  seen,  yet  he  had  some  lingering  idea  that  the  exper-
iment might  possibly  fail.  Still,  as  the  northern  and
southern  lights  of  the  globe  were  impressed  on  his
mind,  and  associated  with  the  idea  in  his  imagination
that  they  might  flame  from  the  corresponding  poles  of
the  magnet,  and  be  seen  by  the  extraordinary  power
of  vision  that  he  was  consulting,  clearly  show  the  im-
pression this  would  make  on  the  mind  of  Miss  Nowotny.


LECTURE X.  209

After  the  first  successful  experiment  he  is  elated,  and
nis  confidence  is  strengthened.  Under  this  excitement
the  second  experiment  is  performed,  and  perceived  by
his  subject  with  increased  beauty,  and  his  mind  is  con-
firmed. In  this  condition  he  confidently  marches  up  to
the  third  witness  with  magnet  in  hand,  removes  the
armature,  and  the  lad  complains  of  fire  and  flames,  but
is  too  ignorant  to  explain  himself.  As  he  passes  on  in
his  wonderful  career  of  rapture,  with  worlds  of  science
opening  before  him,  he  becomes  more  and  more  con-
firmed and  positive ;  doubt  recedes,  and  his  growing
enthusiasm  is  caught  by  his  subjects,  and  they  accord-
ingly portray  the  growing  glory  and  increasing  splendor
of  the  Odic-force !  But  pause,  reader,  and  remember
that  the  whole  of  what  these  witnesses  saw  was  not  the
Odic-force,  but  the  reflected  splendor  of  what  only  ex-
isted in  Von  Reichenbach's  own  brilliant  imagination.
They  saw  by  an  impression  the  fanciful  conceptions  of
his  own  mind,  and  most  sincerely  believed  the  whole
vision  to  be  real !

If  this  Odic-force  does,  indeed,  exist  inherent  in
matter,  and  can  be  seen  issuing  in  flames  of  glory  from
the  poles  of  the  magnet,  why,  then,  have  not  the  thou-
sands of  clairvoyants,  somnambulists,  and  cataleptic
persons  seen  it  1  Magnets  without  number  have  been
handled  and  examined  by  them  in  light  and  in  dark-
ness, but  no  one  has  seen  a  single  ray  of  this  brilliant
light  emanating  from  them  till  our  author  made  his


210  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

witnesses  see  it !  I  have  experimented  upon  them  with
magnets,  and  even  made  them  pass  into  the  mesmeric
state  by  holding  a  magnet  in  their  hand,  with  their
eyes  fixed  upon  its  poles,  but  they  saw  no  light.  I  have
uniformly  carried  a  magnet  and  a  complete  galvanic
apparatus  with  me  for  years,  when  lecturing  upon  the
philosophy  of  mesmerism — I  have  experimented  with
these  before  thousands,  in  about  all  parts  of  the  United
States,  and  also  upon  the  mesmeric  and  psychological
subjects,  and  yet  no  one  among  them  has  ever  seen  this
Odic-force  till  our  author  made  his  patients  see  it.  I
ask  again,  why  is  this  so,  if  it  exists  inherent  in  mat-
ter, and  flames  from  the  magnet  with  such  brilliancy
before  the  clairvoyant  eye  ?  If  an  ignorant  boy  saw  it
in  an  instant  when  Reichenbach  approached  him  and
removed  the  armature,  why  then  have  not  other  clair-
voyants seen  it,  when  I  have,  hundreds  of  times,  ap-
proached them  with  a  strong  magnet  in  hand  1  The
only  rational  answer  that  can  be  given  to  these  queries
is,  because  neither  myself  nor  others  ever  conceived
the  idea  of  Odic  flames  issuing  from  the  poles  of  a  mag-
net, and  hence  no  such  mental  impression  was  ever
communicated  to  these  subjects.  Von  Reichenbach
first  conceived  the  idea,  and  hence  his  six  witnesses
all  saw  it !  The  experimenters  in  this  country  and  in
England  have  read  his  book,  caught  the  idea,  and  many
have  believed  and  cherished  it.  And  now  all  their
clairvoyant  subjects  see  it. Somnambulists  see  it,  psy-


LECTURE X.  211

cliological  subjects  see  it,  and  at  length  Judge  Edmonds
sees  it.

The  following  quotation,  page  121,  furnishes  evidence
how  far  a  great  and  enlightened  mind  may  be  led  into
error  when  once  it  diverges  from  the  great  highway  of
reality  into  those  paths  where  no  inductive  philosophy
can  accompany  it.  He  says  :  "  I  allowed  Miss  Reichel
to  become  used  to  the  feeling  of  my  hand,  and  then
went  out  into  the  sunshine.  After  ten  minutes  had
elapsed,  during  which  I  had  exposed  myself  on  all  sides
to  the  sun's  rays,  I  went  back  and  gave  her  my  hand.
She  was  much  astonished  at  the  rapid  alteration  in  the
great  increase  of  force  which  she  experienced  in  it,  the
cause  of  which  was  unknown  to  her.  The  sunshine
had  evidently  impregnated  me  in  exactly  the  same  way
as  the  magnet  had  charged  the  body  of  a  man,  and  in
other  experiments  my  own  person. "  *•%.'*  "After
I  had  given  up  the  experiments  with  the  sun's  rays  on
Miss  Maix,  the  girls  of  her  neighborhood  amused  them-
selves with  them.  When  I  revisited  her,  they  told  me
that  the  patient  had  found  an  iron  key,  which  they  had
laid  in  the  sunshine,  after  a  short  interval  magnetic,
and  as  strongly  as  a  magnetic  rod  which  they  possessed.
It  did  not  attract  iron,  but  Miss  Maix  declared  that  it
acted  upon  her  exactly  like  a  magnet."

On  page  127  he  says  :  "  When  I  arranged  a  metallic
plate,  half  a  yard  square  in  extent,  so  that  I  could  at
pleasure  bring  it  into  the  moonshine  and  shade,  con-


212  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED

nected  a  long  wire  with  it,  and  carried  this  through  the
keyhole  down  the  darkened  stairs  into  the  hands  of
Miss  Reichel,  who  remained  there,  she  saw,  in  every
instance,  as  often  as  I  let  the  moon's  rays  fall  upon  it,
a  slender  flame,  scarcely  as  thick  as  one's  finger,  per-
fectly straight,  to  a  height  often  inches,  and  disappear
after  a  short  space,  as  often  as  I  removed  the  plate  from
the  moonlight.  From  the  foregoing,  it  follows  that
moonlight  is  not  all  moonshine."

In  reply,  I  have  only  to  say,  that  his  theory  will  all  end
at  last  in  moonshine.  Here  Miss  Reichel  sees  the  same
Odic-force  from  moonshine  that  she  saw  from  the  mag-
net !  and  he  further  states,  that  the  sensation  of  the
moon's  rays  produced  upon  her  a  gentle  warmth,  the
same  as  any  substance  that  had  been  exposed  to  the
sun's  rays,  and  by  this  course  of  procedure  he  finds  his
Odic-force  in  every  thing  throughout  nature  !  But  who
is  so  blind  that  he  can  not  perceive  in  all  these  experi-
ments the  mere  impression  of  his  own  mind  transmitted
by  sympathy  to  the  mind  of  a  sensitive  and  impressible
clairvoyant  1

It  will  be  perceived  by  every  candid  and  unbiased
reader,  that  he  has  not  produced  a  single  scrap  of  evi-
dence to  prove  the  existence  of  his  Odic-force.  His
supposed  testimony  is  weighed  in  the  balance  and  found
wanting,  and  it  is  utterly  futile  for  any  man  to  attempt
to  sustain  Reichenbach's  position  by  such  testimony  as
he  has  introduced  into  court. And  until  he  can  pro-


LECTURE X.  213

duce  something  in  the  shape  of  tangible  evidence  to
prove  the  existence  of  his  Odic-force,  then  the  argument,
as  regards  his  theory  built  upon  it,  must  stop.  And
though  there  is  the  display  of  talent,  yes,  the  energy  of
a  powerful  mind,  which  carries  along  with  it  the  evi-
dence of  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  nature  and  her
operations,  yet  as  his  premises  are  false,  so  far  as  re-
gards his  Odic-force,  his  conclusions  are  therefore  false,
and  his  whole  system  tumbles  into  ruin  for  want  of  a
foundation  upon  which  to  stand.

I  first  read  his  work  about  eight  months  ago,  and
since  then  I  have  tested  his  positions  fairly.  And  if
the  arguments  I  have  offered  are  not  sufficient  to  settle
this  point,  I  will  now  add  that  I  have  tested  his  experi-
ments upon  two  excellent  mesmeric  clairvoyants,  one
somnambulist,  and  five  persons  in  the  electro-psycho-
logical state.  I  have  made  them  see  the  flames  issuing
from  the  poles  of  a  magnet,  of  only  one-pound  power,
as  high  as  the  ceiling  of  a  room.  I  have  then  changed
the  scene  and  made  them  see  two  waterspouts  stream-
ing from  its  poles  to  the  ceiling  !  I  have  then  turned
those  two  waterspouts  into  two  serpents,  each  ten  feet
long,  touching  their  heads  to  the  ceiling !  Changing
again  the  scene,  I  have  caused  them  to  see,  by  an  im-
pression on  their  minds,  two  beautiful  rose  bushes  grow
out  of  the  poles  of  the  magnet,  and  covered  with  the
sweetest  roses  in  full  and  life-like  bloom,  and  a  rain-
bow arching  from  bush  to  bush. I  have  made  them


214  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

see  the  Odic-flames,  in  equal  splendor,  flash  up  from  a
cane  in  all  the  beauties  of  the  rainbow  1  I  have  con-
vulsed their  hands,  arms,  and  whole  bodies,  by  their
simply  taking  hold  of  a  cane  or  a  pocket-handkerchief,
and  have  rendered,  in  an  instant,  the  magnet  powerless
in  their  hands.  And  all  these  experiments  not  only
my  friends,  but  tens  of  thousands  who  have  heard  me
lecture,  and  seen  me  experiment  on  both  psychological
and  mesmeric  subjects,  know  that  I  am  able  to  perform
by  an  impression  on  their  minds.  I  can  show  them
the  moon,  when  it  is  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  globe,
through  the  ceiling  and  roof  of  the  hall,  make  it  appear
like  an  Odic-force  globe  of  light,  bring  it  down  into  the
hall,  set  the  audience  on  fire,  and  make  the  subject
hasten  to  extinguish  it !  This  I  can  do  upon  a  psy-
chological subject  by  the  impression  of  a  word,  and
upon  a  good  mesmeric  subject  by  a  mental  impression,
without  speaking  a  word,  and  yet  the  whole  would  be
but  moonshine,  and  less  than  moonshine,  for  no  moon
would  be  there  !

I  have  now  given  the  subject  of  the  spirit-manifesta-
tions all  that  consideration  which  its  growing  import-
ance demands.  And  as  some  of  its  advocates  are
inclined  to  adopt  the  Odic-force  of  Von  Reichenbach
as  one  of  the  physical  agents  employed  by  spirits  to
produce  them,  and  as  Judge  Edmonds  has  already
seen  it,  and  thus  lent  it  the  sanction  and  popularity  of
his  own  standing  and  name,  so  I  have  hastily  given


LECTURE X.  215

this  also  a  brief  but  candid  notice.  And  I  might  here
remark  how  much  more  elevated,  noble,  and  sublime  it
would  be  for  the  believers  in  the  spirit-manifestations
to  claim  the  lightnings  of  heaven — the  electro-magnetic
power  by  which  the  Creator  moves  this  globe  and  all
worlds  in  immensity ;  by  which  He  carries  on  the  mul-
tifarious operations  of  animal  and  vegetable  phenom-
ena, and  by  which  He  stirs  the  universe,  as  the  agent
by  which  spirits  also  operate  on  and  move  dead  matter.
I  am  aware  that  I  have  taken  a  middle  position,  ex-
posed to  a  cross-fire  from  both  armies.  The  skeptics,
as  regards  the  spirit-manifestations,  on  the  one  hand,
will  condemn  me  for  advocating  and  defending  the  sin-
cerity and  honesty  of  its  mediums  and  believers,  and
these,  on  the  other  hand,  will  condemn  me  for  not  be-
lieving more.  But  I  have  endeavored  to  do  my  duty
faithfully,  and  to  render  honor  and  justice  to  whom
honor  and  justice  were  due,  and  I  cheerfully  submit  the
whole  to  the  tribunal  and  scrutiny  of  public  opinion.
And  may  God  bless  all  my  fellow-men.


Note. — Dr.  Abercrombie  gives  the  following  account  of  a  dream  of  the  Eev.  J.
Wilkinson,  dissenting  minister  at  Weymouth,  England,  about  his  mother,  and
what  she  at  the  same  hour  witnessed.  It  is  given  in  the  Eev.  gentleman's  own
words:

1  One  night,  soon  after  I  was  in  bed,  I  fell  asleep,  and  dreamed  I  was  going  to
London.  I  thought  it  would  not  be  much  out  of  my  way  to  go  through  Glouces-
tershire, and  call  upon  my  friends  there.  Accordingly  I  set  out,  but  remembered
nothing  that  happened  on  the  way,  till  I  came  to  my  father's  house,  when  I  went
to  the  front  door,  and  tried  to  open  it,  but  found  it  fast  I  then  went  to  the  back
door,  which  I  opened,  and  went  in  ;  but  fir  ding  all  the  family  were  in  bed,  I  went


216  SPIRIT-MANIFESTATIONS EXAMINED.

across  the  rooms  only,  went  np  stairs,  and  entered  the  chamber  where  my  father
and  mother  were  in  bed.  As  I  went  to  that  side  of  the  bed  in  which  my  father
lay,  I  found  him  asleep,  or  thought  he  was  so;  then  I  went  to  the* other  side,  and
just  turned  the  foot  of  the  bed.  I  found  my  mother  awake,  to  whom  I  said  these
words :  '  Mother,  I  am  going  a  long  journey,  and  I  am  come  to  bid  you  good-bye.'
Upon  which  she  answered  me  in  a  fright, '  0  dear  son,  thou  art  dead !'  With  this
I  awoke,  and  took  no  notice  of  it,  more  than  a  common  dream,  only  it  appeared
to  me  very  perfect,  as  some  dreams  will.  But  in  a  few  days  after,  as  soon  as  a
letter  could  reach  me,  I  received  one  by  post  from  my  father,  upon  the  receipt  of
which  I  was  a  little  surprised,  and  concluded  something  extraordinary  must  have
happened,  as  it  was  but  a  little  before  I  had  a  letter  from  my  friends,  and  all  were
well.  Upon  opening  it,  I  was  more  surprised  still,  for  my  father  addressed  me  as
though  I  was  dead,  desiring  me,  if  alive,  to  write  immediately  ;  but  if  the  letter
should  find  me  living,  they  concluded  I  should  not  live  long,  and  gave  this  as  the
reason  of  their  fears :  That  on  such  a  night,  naming  it,  after  they  were  in  bed,  my
father  asleep,  and  my  mother  awake,  she  heard  some  one  try  to  open  the  front
door;  but  finding  it  fast,  he  went  to  the  back  door,  which  he  opened,  came  in,
and  came  directly  through  the  rooms  up  stairs,  and  she  perfectly  hnew  it  to  be
my  step.  I  came  to  her  bedside,  and  spoke  to  her  these  words :  ■  Mother,  I  am
going  a  long  journey,  and  am  come  to  bid  you  good-bye.'  Upon  which  she  an-
swered me  in  a  fright, '  0  dear  son,  thou  art  dead  !'  which  were  the  very  words
and  circumstances  of  my  dream;  but  she  heard  nothing  more,  and  saw  nothing;
neither  did  I  in  my  dream,  as  it  was  quite  dark.  Upon  this  she  awoke  my  father,
and  told  him  what  had  passed ;  but  he  endeavored  to  appease  her,  by  persuading
her  it  was  only  a  dream ;  she  insisted  it  was  no  dream,  for  that  she  was  as  per-
fectly awake  as  ever  she  was,  and  had  not  the  least  inclination  to  sleep  since  she
had  been  in  bed.  From  these  circumstances  I  am  apt  to  think  it  was  the  very
same  instant  when  my  dream  happened,  though  the  distance  between  us  was  a
hundred  miles ;  but  of  this  I  can  not  speak  positively.  This  occurred  while  I
was  at  the  academy  at  Ottery,  Devon,  in  the  year  1754,  and  at  this  distance  of  time
it  is  still  fresh  upon  my  mind.  I  have  since  had  frequent  opportunities  of  talking
over  the  affair  with  my  mother,  and  the  whole  was  as  fresh  upon  her  mind  as  it
was  upon  mine.  I  have  often  thought  that  her  sensations  as  to  this  matter  wero
stronger  than  mine.  What  some  may  think  strange,  I  can  not  remember  that
any  thing  remarkable  happened  hereupon.  This  is  only  a  plain,  simple  narrative
of  a  matter  of  fact."

Here  is  a  case  as  wonderful  as  can  be  produced  in  the  whole  history  of  the
spirit-manifestations,  and  yet  it  was  only  a  dream,  the  intelligence  of  which  was
responded  to  by  a  mother  in  the  waking  state  100  miles  distant.


APPENDIX.


217


APPENDIX.


It  is  said  that  there  is  something  so  strange  and  in-
comprehensible in  the  spirit-manifestations,  that  it  is
impossible  to  account  for  them  without  referring  the
whole  to  the  agency  of  departed  spirits.  Future  events
are  foretold — past  secret  transactions  are  disclosed — •
the  thoughts  of  the  heart  are  read  and  revealed,  and
an  intelligence  displayed  beyond  that  which  belongs  to
the  known  operations  and  powers  of  the  human  mind,
and,  therefore,  it  must  be  spirits.  To  show  the  incon-
sistency of  such  a  conclusion,  I  append  the  following
selections,  containing  records  of  events  of  the  most  sur-
prising character  and  well  authenticated,  and  which
certainly  equal,  if  not  surpass,  any  thing  connected
with  the  spirit-manifestations,  and  yet  they  belong  to
certain  mysterious  operations  of  the  human  mind,  and
not  to  the  influence  of  departed  spirits.

Extract  from  Mr.  Wesley^s  Works ,  vol.  x.,  p.  163.

"  A  little  before  the  conclusion  of  the  late  war  in
Flanders,  one  who  came  from  thence  gave  us  a  very

10


218  »  APPENDIX.

strange  relation.  I  knew  not  what  judgment  to  form
of  this,  but  waited  till  John  Haime  should  come  over,
of  whose  veracity  I  could  no  more  doubt  than  of  his
understanding.  The  account  he  gave  was  this  :  c  Jon-
athan Pyrah  was  a  member  of  our  society  in  Flanders.
I  knew  him  some  years,  and  knew  him  to  be  a  man  of
unblameable  character.  One  day  he  was  summoned  to
appear  before  the  board  of  general  officers.  One  of
them  said,  "  What  is  this  which  we  hear  of  you?  We
hear  you  are  turned  prophet,  and  that  you  foretell  the
downfall  of  the  bloody  house  of  Bourbon,  and  the
haughty  house  of  Austria.  "We  should  be  glad  if  you
were  a  real  prophet,  and  if  your  prophecies  came  true.
But  what  sign  do  you  give  to  convince  us  you  are  so,
and  that  your  predictions  will  come  to  pass?"  He
readily  answered,  "  Gentlemen,  I  give  you  a  sign.
To-morrow,  at  twelve  o'clock,  you  shall  have  such  a
storm  of  thunder  and  lightning  as  you  never  had  before
since  you  came  into  Flanders.  I  give  you  a  second
sign  :  As  little  as  any  of  you  expect  any  such  thing,  as
little  appearance  of  it  as  there  is  now,  you  shall  have
a  general  engagement  with  the  French  within  three
days.  I  give  you  a  third  sign  :  I  shall  be  ordered  to
advance  in  the  first  line.  If  I  am  a  false  prophet,  I
shall  be  shot  dead  at  the  first  discharge.  But  if  I  am
a  true  prophet,  I  shall  only  receive  a  musket-ballon
the  calf  of  my  left  leg."  At  twelve,  the  next  day,  there
Was  such  thunder  and  lightning  as  they  never  had  be-


APPENDIX.  219

fore  in  Flanders.  On  the  third  day,  contrary  to  all
expectation,  was  the  general  battle  of  Fontenoy.  He
was  ordered  to  advance  in  the  first  line,  and  at  the
very  first  discharge  he  received  a  musket-ball  in  the
calf  of  his  left  leg.'  »

Swedenborg's  Clairvoyance  Independent  of
Mesmerism.

Kant  gives  a  relation  concerning  Madame  Von  Marse-
ville,  and  continues  thus  :

"  But  the  following  occurrence  appears  to  me  to  have
the  greatest  weight  of  proof,  and  to  set  the  assertion
respecting  Swedenborg's  extraordinary  gift  out  of  all
possibility  of  doubt.  In  the  year  1759,  when  M.  de
Swedenborg,  toward  the  end  of  February,  on  Saturday,
at  4  o'clock,  p.  m.,  arrived  at  Gottenburg  from  Eng-
land, Mr.  William  Costel  invited  him  to  his  house,
together  with  a  party  of  fifteen  persons.  About  6
o'clock,  M.  de  Swedenborg  went  out,  and  after  a  short
interval,  returned  to  the  company  quite  pale  and
alarmed.  He  said  that  a  dangerous  fire  had  just  bro-
ken out  in  Stockholm,  at  the  Sudermalm  (Gottenburg
is  about  three  hundred  miles  from  Stockholm),  and  that
it  was  spreading  very  fast.  He  was  restless,  and  went
out  often ;  he  said  that  the  house  of  one  of  his  friends,
whom  he  named,  was  already  in  ashes,  and  that  his
own  was  in  danger.  At  8  o'clock,  after  he  had  been
out  again,  he  joyfully  exclaimed, '  Thank  God !  the


220  APPENDIX.

fire  is  extinguished  the  third  door  from  my  house.'
This  news  occasioned  great  commotion  through,  the
whole  city,  and  particularly  among  the  company  in
which  he  was.  It  was  announced  to  the  Governor  the
same  evening.  On  the  Sunday  morning,  Swedenborg
was  sent  for  by  the  Governor,  who  questioned  him  con-
cerning the  disaster.  Swedenborg  described  the  fire
precisely,  how  it  had  begun,  in  what  manner  it  had
ceased,  and  how  long  it  had  continued.  On  the  same
day,  the  news  was  spread  through  the  city,  and  as  the
Governor  had  thought  it  worthy  of  attention,  the  con-
sternation was  considerably  increased ;  because  many
were  in  trouble  on  account  of  their  friends  and  property,
which  might  have  been  involved  in  the  disaster.

u  On  the  Monday  evening  a  messenger  arrived  at
Gottenburg,  who  was  dispatched  during  the  time  of  the
fire.  In  the  letters  brought  by  him,  the  fire  was  de-
scribed precisely  in  the  manner  stated  by  Swedenborg.
On  the  Tuesday  morning,  the  royal  courier  arrived  at
the  Governor's  with  the  melancholy  intelligence  of  the
fire,  of  the  loss  which  it  had  occasioned,  and  of  the
houses  it  had  damaged  and  ruined,  not  in  the  least  dif-
fering from  that  which  Swedenborg  had  given  immedi-
ately after  it  had  ceased,  for  the  fire  was  extinguished
at  eight  o'clock.

"  What  can  be  brought  forward  against  the  authen-
ticity of  this  occurrence  ?  My  friend,  who  wrote  this  to
me,  has  not  only  examined  the  circumstances  of  this


APPENDIX.  221

extraordinary  case  at  Stockholm,  but  also  about  two
months  ago,  at  Gottenburg,  where  he  is  acquainted
with  the  most  respectable  houses,  and  where  he  could
obtain  the  most  authentic  and  complete  information ;
as  the  greatest  part  of  the  inhabitants  who  are  still
alive  were  witnesses  to  the  memorable  occurrence.
u  I  am,  with  profound  reverence,  etc.,

"  Emanuel  Kant.

"  Kcenigsburg,  Aug. 10,  1768."

Zsckokke's  Divination.*

"  There  was,  however,  no  want  of  agreeable  society
in  my  new  retirement — either  that  of  some  select  fam-
ilies and  individuals  in  the  city,  or  old  friends  and
acquaintances  of  the  Union,  who  never  forgot  me  when
they  passed,  or  in  visits  from  travelers,  allured  by  the
love  of  wandering  into  Switzerland,  or  blown  hither  by
the  wind  of  destiny.  I  never  failed  to  receive  such
visitors  with  all  due  honor,- having  learned  from  expe-
rience how  gladly  in  traveling  we  make  use  of  such
opportunities  to  fill  up  vacant  moments,  in  order  to
acquire  information,  to  enrich  the  harvest  of  remem-
brance. I,  therefore,  submitted  to  my  fate  with  resig-
nation. If  this  kind  of  virtue  became  burdensome  at
times,  it  was  rewarded  at  others  by  making  the  ac-


*  He  is  well  known  as  an  author,  statesman,  philosopher,  and
reformer.


222  APPENDIX.

quaintance  of  remarkable  persons,  or  by  tne  opportu-
nities it  yielded  for  the  exercise  of  a  singular  kind  of
prophetic  gift  which  I  called  my  '  inward  sight,'  but
which  has  ever  been  enigmatical  to  me.  I  am  almost
afraid  to  speak  of  this,  not  because  I  am  afraid  to  be
thought  superstitious,  but  that  I  may  thereby  strength-
en such  feelings  in  others.  And  yet  it  may  be  an  addi-
tion to  our  stock  of  soul- experiences,  and,  therefore,  I
will  confess !

"  It  is  well  known  that  the  judgment  we  not  seldom
form  at  the  first  glance  of  persons  hitherto  unknown,
is  more  correct  than  that  which  is  the  result  of  longer
acquaintance.  The  first  impression  that  through  some
instinct  of  the  soul  attracts  or  repels  us  with  strangers,
is  afterward  weakened  or  destroyed  by  custom,  or  by
different  appearances.  We  speak  in  such  cases  of
sympathies  or  antipathies,  and  perceive  these  effects
frequently  among  children,  to  whom  experience  in  hu-
man character  is  wholly  wanting.  Others  are  incred-
ulous on  this  point,  and  have  recourse  rather  to  the  art
of  physiognomy. Now  for  my  own  case.

"  It  has  happened  to  me,  sometimes,  on  my  first
meeting  with  strangers,  as  I  listened  silently  to  their
discourse,  that  their  former  life,  with  many  trifling  cir-
cumstances therewith  connected,  or  frequently  some
particular  scene  in  that  life,  has  passed  quite  involun-
tarily, and,  as  it  were,  dream-like,  yet  perfectly  dis-
tinct, before  me. During  this  time  I  usually  feel  so


APPENDIX.  223

entirely  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  the  stranger
life,  that,  at  last,  I  no  longer  see  clearly  the  face  of
the  unknown  wherein  I  undesignedly  read,  nor  dis-
tinctly hear,  the  voices  of  the  speakers,  which  before
served,  in  some  measure,  as  a  commentary  to  the  text
of  their  features.  For  a  long  time  I  held  such  visions
as  delusions  of  the  fancy,  and  the  more  so  as  they
showed  me  even  the  dress  and  motions  of  the  actors,
rooms,  furniture,  and  other  accessories.  By  way  of
jest,  I  once,  in  a  family  circle  at  Kirchberg,  related  the
secret  history  of  a  seamstress  who  had  just  left  the
room  and  the  house.  I  had  never  seen  her  before  in
my  life  ;  people  were  astonished  and  laughed,  but  were
not  to  be  persuaded  that  I  did  not  previously  know  the
relations  of  which  I  spoke,  for  what  I  had  uttered  was
the  literal  truth  ;  I,  on  my  part,  was  no  less  aston-
ished that  my  dream-pictures  were  confirmed  by  the
reality.  I  became  more  attentive  to  the  subject,  and
when  propriety  admitted  it,  I  would  relate  to  those
whose  life  thus  passed  before  me  the  subject  of  my
vision,  that  I  might  thereby  obtain  confirmation  or  ref-
utation of  it.  It  was  invariably  ratified,  not  without
consternation  on  their  part.* I  myself  had  less  con-

*  u  «  What  demon  inspires  yon  ?  Must  I  again  believe  in  pos-
session ?'  exclaimed  the  spirituel  Joliann  von  Riga,  when,  in  the
first  hour  of  our  acquaintance,  I  related  his  past  life  to  him,  with
the  avowed  object  of  learning  whether  or  no  I  deceived  myself.
We  speculated  long  on  the  enigma,  but  even  his  penetration  could
not  solve  it."


224  APPENDIX.

fidence  than  any  one  in  this  mental  jugglery. So  of-
ten as  I  revealed  my  visionary  gifts  to  any  new  person,
I  regularly  expected  to  hear  the  answer :  '  It  was  not
so.' I  felt  a  secret  shudder  when  my  auditors  replied
that  it  was  true,  or  when  their  astonishment  betrayed
my  accuracy  before they  spoke. Instead  of  many,
I  will  mention  one  example,  which  pre-eminently  as-
tounded me. One  fair  day,  in  the  city  of  Waldshut,
I  entered an inn (the  Vine), in  company  with  two
young  student-foresters  :  we  were  tired  with  rambling
through  the  woods. We  supped  with  a  numerous  so-
ciety at  the  table  d'hote,  where  the  guests  were  making
very  merry  with  the  peculiarities  and  eccentricities  of
the  Swiss,  with  Mesmer's  magnetism,  Lavater's  phys-
iognomy, etc.,  etc. One  of  my  companions,  whose  na-
tional pride  was  wounded  by  their  mockery,  begged
me  to  make  some  reply,  particularly  to  a  handsome
young man  who sat opposite us,  and  who  had al
lowed  himself  extraordinary  license. This  man's  for-
mer life  was  at  that  moment  presented  to  my  mind. I
turned  to  him  and  asked  whether  he  would  answer  me
candidly  if  I  related to  him  some  of  the  most  secret
passages  of  his  life,  I  knowing  as  little  of  him  person-
ally as  he  did  of  me. That  would  be  going  a  little
further,  I  thought,  than  Lavater  did  with  his  physiog-
nomy. He  promised,  if  I  were  correct  in  my  informa-
tion, to  admit  it  frankly. I  then  related  what  my  vis-
ion had  shown  me  and  the  whole  company  were  made


APPENDIX.  225

acquainted  with  the  private  history  of  the  young  mer-
chant ;  his  school  years,  his  youthful  errors,  and  last-
ly, with  a  fault  committed  in  reference  to  the  strong
box  of  his  principal.  I  described  to  him  the  uninhab-
ited room  with  whitened  walls,  where,  to  the  right  of
the  brown  door,  on  a  table,  stood  a  black  money-box,
etc.,  etc.  A  dead  silence  prevailed  during  the  whole
narration,  which  I  alone  occasionally  interrupted  by  in-
quiring whether  I  spoke  the  truth.  The  startled  young
man  confirmed  every  particular,  and  even,  what  I  had
scarcely  expected,  the  last  mentioned.  Touched  by
his  candor,  I  shook  hands  with  him  over  the  table,  and
said  no  more.  He  asked  my  name,  which  I  gave  him,
and  we  remained  together  talking  till  past  midnight.
He  is  probably  still  living  !

"  I  can  well  explain  to  myself  how  a  person  of  lively
imagination  may  form,  as  in  a  romance,  a  correct  pic-
ture of  the  actions  and  passions  of  another  person,  of
a  certain  character,  under  certain  circumstances.  But
whence  came  those  trifling  accessories,  which  nowise
conceited  me,  and  in  relation  to  people  for  the  most
part  indifferent  to  me,  with  whom  I  neither  had,  nor
desired  to  have,  any  connection  ?  Or,  was  the  whole
matter  a  constantly  recurring  accident  ?  Or,  had  my
auditor,  perhaps,  when  I  related  the  particulars  of  his
former  life,  very  different  views  to  give  of  the  whole,
although  in  his  first  surprise,  and  misled  by  some  re-
semblances, he  had  mistaken  them  for  the  same  ?
10*


226  APPENDIX.

And  yet,  impelled  by  this  very  doubt,  I  had  several
times  given  myself  trouble  to  speak  of  the  most  insig-
nificant things  which  my  waking  dream  had  revealed  to
me.  I  shall  not  say  another  word  on  this  singular  gift
of  vision,  of  which  I  can  not  say  it  was  ever  of  the
slightest  service  ;  it  manifested  itself  rarely,  quite  in-
dependently of  my  will,  and  several  times  in  refer-
ence to  persons  whom  I  cared  little  to  look  through.
Neither  am  I  the  only  person  in  possession  of  this
power.  On  an  excursion  I  once  made  with  two  of  my
sons,  I  met  with  an  old  Tyrolese  who  carried  oranges
and  lemons  about  the  country,  in  a  house  of  public  en-
tertainment, in  Lower  Hanenstein,  one  of  the  passes  of
the  Jura.  He  fixed  his  eyes  on  me  for  some  time,  then
mingled  in  the  conversation,  and  said  that  he  knew  me,
although  he  knew  me  not,  and  went  to  relate  what  I  had
done  and  striven  to  do  in  former  times,  to  the  conster-
nation of  the  country  people  present,  and  the  great  ad-
miration of  my  children,  who  were  diverted  to  find  an-
other person  gifted  like  their  father.  How  the  old  lemon
merchant  came  by  his  knowledge  he  could  explain  nei-
ther to  me  nor  to  himself ;  he  seemed,  nevertheless,  to
value  himself  somewhat  upon  his  mysterious  wisdom."
- — Autobiography  of  Zschokke,  pp.  169-172.

The  following  well-authenticated  account  is  from
La  Harpe's  Posthumous  Memoirs,  Paris,  1806,  vol.
i.,  p.  62  :


APPENDIX.  227

"  It  appears  but  as  yesterday ;  yet,  nevertheless,  it
was  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1788.  We  were
dining  with  one  of  our  brethren  at  the  Academy — a
man  of  considerable  wealth  and  genius.  The  compa-
ny was  numerous  and  diversified — courtiers,  lawyers,
academicians,  etc.  ;  and,  according  to  custom,  there
had  been  a  magnificent  dinner.  At  dessert,  the  wines
of  Malvoisin  and  Constantia  added  to  the  gayety  of  the
guests  that  sort  of  liberty  which  is  sometimes  forgetful
of  bon  ton — we  had  arrived  in  the  world  just  at  that
time  when  any  thing  was  permitted  that  would  raise  a
laugh.  Chamfort  had  read  to  us  some- of  his  impious
and  libertine  tales,  and  even  the  great  ladies  had  lis-
tened without  having  recourse  to  their  fans.  From
this  arose  a  deluge  of  jests  against  religion.  One
quoted  a  tirade  from  the  Pucelle  ;  another  recalled  the
philosophic  lines  of  Diderot —

'  Et  des  boyaux  du  dernier  pr^tre,
Serrez  le  cou  du  dernier  roi,'

for  the  sake  of  applauding  them.  A  third  rose,  and,
holding  his  glass  in  his  hand,  exclaimed,  i  Yes,  gen-
tlemen, I  AM  AS SURE  THAT  THERE  IS  NO  GoD,  AS I

am  sure  that  Homer  is  a  fool  ;'  and,  in  truth,  he
was  as  sure  of  the  one  as  of  the  other.  The  conver-
sation became  more  serious  ;  much  admiration  was  ex-
pressed on  the  revolution,  which  Voltaire  had  effected,
and  it  was  agreed  that  it  was  his  first  claim  to  the  rep-
utation he  enjoyed  :  he  had  given  the  prevailing  tone  to


228  APPENDIX.

his  age,  and  had  been  read  in  the  ante-chamber  as  well
as  in  the  drawing-room.  One  of  the  guests  told  us,  while
bursting  with  laughter,  that  his  hairdresser,  while  pow-
dering his  hair,  had  said  to  him — '  Do  you  observe,  sir,

THAT  ALTHOUGH  I  AM  BUT  A  POOR,  MISERABLE  BARBER,
1 HAVE NO  MORE RELIGION THAN  ANY  OTHER.' We

concluded  that  the  revolution  must  soon  be  consummat-
ed— that  it  was  indispensable  that  superstition  and  fa-
naticism should  give  place  to  philosoplry,  and  we  be-
gan to  calculate  the  probability  of  the  period  when  this
should  be,  and  which  of  the  present  company  should  live
to  see  the  reign  of  reason.  The  oldest  complained
that  they  could  scarcely  flatter  themselves  with  the
hope  ;  the  younger  rejoiced  that  they  might  entertain
this  very  probable  expectation  ;  and  they  congratu-
lated the  Academy  especially  for  having  prepared  this
great  work,  and  for  having  been  the  great  rallying-
point,  the  center,  and  the  prime  mover  of  the  liberty
of  thought.

"  One  only  of  the  guests  had  not  taken  part  in  all
the  joyousness  of  this  conversation,  and  had  even  gen-
tly and  cheerfully  checked  our  splendid  enthusiasm.
This  was  Cazotte,  an  amiable  and  original  man,  but
unhappily  infatuated  with  the  reveries  of  the  illumin-
ati.  He  spoke,  and  with  the  most  serious  tone.
'  Gentlemen,'  said  he,  c  be  satisfied  ;  you  will  all  see
this  great  and  sublime  revolution,  which  you  so  much
desire. You  know  that  I  am  a  little  inclined  to  proph^


APPENDIX.  229

esy:  I  repeat,  you  will  see  it.'  He  was  answered  by
the  common  rejoinder  :  '  One  need  not  be  a  con-
juror to  see  that.'  \  Be  it  so  ;  but  perhaps  one
must  be  a  little  more  than  a  conjuror  for  what  re-
mains for  me  to  tell  you.  Do  3-0  u  know  what  will  be
the  consequence  of  this  revolution — what  will  be  the
consequence  to  ail  of  you,  and  what  will  be  the  immedi-
ate result — the  well-established  effect — the  thoroughly-
recognized  consequence  to  all  of  you  who  are  here  pres-
ent V  cAh!'  said  Condorcet,  with  his  insolent  and
half-suppressed  smile,  '  let  us  hear — a  philosopher  is
not  sorry  to  encounter  a  prophet.'  i  You,  Monsieur
de  Condorcet,  you  will  yield  up  your  last  breath  on  the
floor  of  a  dungeon  ;  you  will  die  from  poison,  which
you  will  have  taken  in  order  to  escape  from  execution
— from  poison  which  the  happiness  of  that  time  will
oblige  you  to  carry  about  your  person.'

"  At  first  astonishment  was  most  marked  ;  but  it
was  soon  recollected  that  the  good  Cazotte  is  liable  to
dreaming,  though  apparently  wide  awake,  and  a  hearty
laugh  is  the  consequence.  '  Monsieur  Cazotte,  the  re-
lation which  you  give  us  is  not  so  agreeable  as  your
Diable  Amoureux' — (a  novel  of  Cazotte's).

"  '  But  what  diable  has  put  into  your  head  this  pris-
on, and  this  poison,  and  these  executioners  1  What
can  all  these  have  in  common  with  philosophy  and  the
reign  of  reason  V  c  This  is  exactly  what  I  say  to  you  ;
it  is  in  the  name  of  philosophy — of  humanity — of  lib-


230  APPENDIX.

erty  ;  it  is  under  the  reign  of  reason  that  it  will  hap-
pen to  you  thus,  to  end  your  career  ;  and  it  will  in-
deed be  the  reign  of  reason  ;  for  then  she  will  have
her  temples,  and,  indeed,  at  that  time,  there  will  be  no
other  temples  in  France  than  the  temples  of  reason.'
i  By  my  truth,'  said  Chamfort,  with  a  sarcastic  smile,
'you  will  not  be  one  of  the  priests  of  those  temples.'
c  I  do  not  hope  it ;  but  you,  Monsieur  de  Chamfort,
who  will  be  one,  and  most  worthy  to  be  so,  you  will
open  your  veins  with  twenty-two  cuts  of  a  razor,  and
yet  you  will  not  die  till  some  months  afterward.'
They  looked  at  each  other,  and  laughed  again.  i  You,
Monsieur  Vicq  d'Azir,  you  will  not  open  your  own
veins,  but  you  will  cause  yourself  to  be  bled,  six  times
in  one  day,  during  a  paroxysm  of  the  gout,  in  order  to
make  more  sure  of  your  end,  and  you'  will  die  in  the
night.  You,  Monsieur  de  Nicolai,  you  will  die  upon
the  scaffold  ;  you,  M.  Bailly,  on  the  scaffold  ;  you,
Monsieur  de  Malesherbes,  on  the  scaffold.'  I  Ah !
God  be  thanked,'  exclaimed  Roucher,  '  it  seems  that
Monsieur  has  no  eye  but  for  the  Academy  ; .  of  it
he  has  just  made  a  terrible  execution,  and  I,  thank

Heaven ' '  You  !  you  also  will  die  upon  the

scaffold.'  '  Oh,  what  an  admirable  guesser,'  was  ut-
tered on  all  sides  ;  4  he  has  sworn  to  exterminate  us
all.'  •  No,  it  is  not  I  who  have  sworn  it.'  '  But  shall
we  then  be  conquered  by  the  Turks  or  the  Tartars  1
Yet  again  .....' '  Not  at  all ;  I  have  already  told


APPENDIX.  231

you,  you  will  then  be  governed  only  by  philosophy —
only  by  reason.  They  who  will  thus  treat  you  will
be  all  philosophers — will  always  have  upon  their  lips
the  self-same  phrases  which  3rou  have  been  putting  forth
for  the  last  hour — will  repeat  all  your  maxims — -and
will  quote,  as  you  have  done,  the  verses  of  Diderot,
and  from  La  Pucelle.'  They  then  whispered  among
themselves.  '  You  see  that  he  is  gone  mad  ;'  for  he
preserved  all  this  time  the  most  serious  and  solemn
manner.  '  Do  you  not  see  that  he  is  joking  ?  and  you
know  that,  in  the  character  of  his  jokes,  there  is  al-
ways much  of  the  marvelous.'  '  Yes,'  replied  Cham-
fort,  '  but  his  marvelousness  is  not  cheerful ;  it  savors
too  much  of  the  gibbet — and  when  will  all  this  hap-
pen V  '  Six  years  will  not  pass  over  before  all  that  I
have  said  to  you  shall  be  accomplished.'

"  c  Here  are  some  astonishing  miracles'  (and  this
time  it  was  I  myself  who  spoke),  (  but  you  have  not
included  me  in  your  list.'  '  But  you  will  be  there,  as
an  equally  extraordinary  miracle  ;  you  will  then  be  a
Christian.'

"  Vehement  exclamations  on  all  sides.  i  Ah,'  re-
plied Chamfort,  c  I  am  comforted ;  if  we  shall  perish
only  when  La  Harpe  shall  be  a  Christian,  we  are  im-
mortal.'

"  *  As  for  that,'  then  observed  Madame  la  Duchesse
de  Grammont,  '  we  women,  we  are  happy  to  be  count-
ed for  nothing  in  these  revolutions  :  when  I  say  for


232  APPENDIX.

nothing,  it  is  not  that  we  do  not  always  mix  ourselves
up  with  them  a  little,  but  it  is  a  received  maxim,  that
they  take  no  notice  of  us,  and  of  our  sex.'  '  Your
sex,  ladies,  will  not  protect  you  this  time  ;  and  you
had  far  better  meddle  with  nothing,  for  you  will  be
treated  entirely  as  men,  without  any  difference  what-
ever.' s  Bat  what,  then,  are  you  really  telling  us  of.
Monsieur  Cazotte  1  You  are  preaching  to  us  the  end
of  the  world.'  '  I  know  nothing  on  this  subject :  but
what  I  do  know  is,  that  you,  Madame  la  Duchesse,  will
be  conducted  to  the  scaffold,  you  and  many  other  ladies
with  you,  in  the  cart  of  the  executioner,  and  with  your
hands  tied  behind  your  backs.'  'Ah  !  I  hope  that,  in
that  case,  I  shall  have  a  carriage  hung  in  black.'  'No,
madame  ;  higher  ladies  than  yourself  will  go  like  you
in  the  common  car,  with  their  hands  tied  behind  them.'
4  Higher  ladies  !  what !  the  princesses  of  the  blood  V
'  Still  more  exalted  personages.'  Here  a  sensible  emo-
tion pervaded  the  whole  company,  and  the  countenance
of  the  host  was  dark  and  lowering  :  they  began  to
feel  that  the  joke  was  become  too  serious.  Madame
de  Grammont,  in  order  to  dissipate  the  cloud,  took  no
notice  of  the  reply,  and  contented  herself  with  saying,
in  a  careless  tone  :  *  You  see  that  he  will  not
leave  me  even  a  coNFEssoR.'  '  No,  madame,  you
will  not  have  one,  neither  you,  nor  any  one  besides.
The  last  victim  to  whom  this  favor  will  be  afforded,
will  be ' He  stopped  for  a  moment. c  Well !


APPENDIX,  233

T7110  then  will  be  the  happy  mortal  to  whom  this  pre-
rogative will  be  given  V  '  'Tis  the  only  one  which  he
will  have  then  retained — and  that  will  be  the  King  of
France !'

"  The  master  of  the  house  rose  hastily,  and  every
one  with  him.  He  walked  up  to  M.  Cazotte,  and  ad-
dressed him  with  a  tone  of  deep  emotion  :  '  My  dear
Monsieur  Cazotte,  this  mournful  joke  has  lasted  long
enough.  You  carry  it  too  far — even  so  far  as  to  der-
ogate from  the  society  in  which  you  are,  and  from  your
own  character.'  Cazotte  answered  not  a  word,  and
was  preparing  to  leave,  when  Madame  de  Grammont,
who  always  sought  to  dissipate  serious  thought,  and  to
restore  the  lost  gayety  of  the  part}r,  approached  him,
saying,  '  Monsieur  the  prophet,  who  has  foretold  us  of
our  good  fortune,  you  have  told  us  nothing  of  your
own.'  He  remained  silent  for  some  time,  with  down-
cast eyes.  '  Madame,  have  you  ever  read  the  siege  of
Jerusalem,  in  Josephus  V  '  Yes  !  who  has  not  read
that !  But  answer  as  if  I  had  never  read  it.'  '  Well
then,  madame,  during  the  siege,  a  man  for  seven  days
in  succession  went  round  the  ramparts  of  the  city,  in
sight  of  the  besiegers  and  besieged,  crying  unceasingly,
with  an  ominous  and  thundering  voice,  Wo  to  Jeru-
salem !  and  the  seventh  time  he  cried,  Wo  to  Je-
rusalem, wo  to  myself  ! — and  at  that  moment  an
enormous  stone,  projected  from  one  of  the  machines  of
the  besieging  army,  struck  him,  and  destroyed  him.'


234  APPENDIX.

"  And,  after  this  reply,  M.  Cazotte  made  his  bow
and  retired."

That  the  above  prediction  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter,
history  fully  corroborates.  Perhaps  the  reader  may
wish  to  know  the  fate  of  this  excellent  man,  as  he  pre-
dicted that  he  should  perish  with  those  whose  fate  he
pronounced. His  end  is  thus  stated  :

"  'I  have  also  seen  the  son  of  M.  Cazotte,  who  as-
sured me  that  his  father  was  gifted,  in  a  most  remark-
able manner,  with  a  faculty  of  pre-vision,  of  which  he
had  numberless  proofs  ;  one  of  the  most  remarkable
of  which  was,  that  on  returning  home  on  the  day  on
which  his  daughter  had  succeeded  in  delivering  him
from  the  hands  of  the  wretches  who  were  conducting
him  to  the  scaffold,  instead  of  partaking  the  joy  of  his
surrounding  family,  he  declared  that  in  three  days  he
should  be  again  arrested,  and  that  he  should  then  un-
dergo his  fate  ;  and  in  truth  he  perished  on  the  25th
of  September.  1792,  at  the  age  of  72.' "

A  few  Passages  from  the  Life  of  Joan  of  Arc.

"  On  the  12th  of  February,  1428,  on  which  the  dis-
astrous battle  of  Rouvray-Saint-Denis  was  fought,  Joan
said  to  M.  Robert  de  Baudricourt,  Governor  of  Vau-
couleurs,  that  the  king  had  suffered  great  losses  before
Orleans,  and  would  experience  further  losses  unless
she  were  sent  to  him.  The  exactitude  of  this  an-
nouncement determined  Baudricourt  to  send  her.


APPENDIX.  235

"  The  next  day,  on  her  departure,  many  persons
asked  Joan  how  she  could  possibly  undertake  this  jour-
ney, since  the  whole  country  was  overrun  with  soldiers :
she  answered,  that  she  should  find  the  way  clear.  No
accident  happened  to  her,  nor  to  those  who  accompa-
nied her,  and  even  very  few  difficulties  during  the
whole  journey,  which  lasted  eleven  days,  through  an
enemy's  country,  at  the  close  of  winter,  over  a  distance
of  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues,  and  intersected  by
several  deep  rivers.

"  On  the  27th  of  February,  when  she  was  about  to
be  presented  to  the  king,  a  man  on  horseback  who  saw
her  passing,  employed  some  blasphemous  expressions.
Joan  heard  him,  and,  turning  her  head,  said,  '  Ha !  dost
thou  blaspheme  the  name  of  God,  and  yet  so  near  to
death.'?'  In  about  an  hour  afterward  this  man  fell
into  the  water  and  was  drowned.

M  The  following  month,  Joan  informed  the  doctors
who  were  commissioned  to  examine  her  at  Poictiers :

"  1.  That  the  English  would  be  beaten ;  that  they
would  raise  the  siege  of  Orleans ;  and  that  this  city
would  be  delivered  from  the  said  English.

"  2.  That  the  king  would  be  consecrated  at  Rheims.

"  3.  That  the  city  of  Paris  would  be  restored  to  its
loyalty.

"  4.  That  the  Duke  of  Orleans  would  return  from
England.

"  The  king,  in  council,  having  determined  to  send


236  APPENDIX.

Joan  to  Orleans,  they  commissioned  her  to  conduct  a
convoy  of  provisions,  of  which  the  place  stood  in  the
greatest  need.  It  was  observed  to  her  that  it  would
be  a  difficult  enterprise,  considering  its  fortifications
and  the  English  besiegers,  who  were  strong  and  pow-
erful. '  By  the  help  of  my  God,'  answered  she,  '  we
will  put  them  into  Orleans  easily,  and  without  any  at-
tempt to  prevent  us  on  the  part  of  the  English.'

"  The  generals  of  Charles  VII.  not  daring  to  take
the  route  which  Joan  had  pointed  out  to  them,  the
convoy  was  obliged  to  halt  at  some  leagues  from  Or-
leans, from  the  want  of  water  and  from  adverse  winds.
Every  body  was  confounded  and  in  grief,  but  Joan  an-
nounced that  the  wind  would  soon  change,  and  that  the
provisions  would  be  easily  thrown  into  the  town  in  spite
of  the  English,  all  of  which  was  completely  verified.

"  The  English  retained  one  of  the  heralds  whom
Joan  had  sent  to  summon  them  to  surrender — they
even  wished  to  burn  him  alive,  and  they  wrote  to  the
University  of  Paris  to  consult  upon  the  subject.  Joan
assured  them  that  they  would  do  him  no  harm.

"  When  Joan  appeared  on  the  redoubt,  called  the
Boulevard  de  la  Belle-Croix,  to  summon  them  to  raise
the  siege,  these  loaded  her  with  abuse,  especially  one
of  the  officers,  to  whom  Joan  replied,  '  that  he  spoke
falsely,  and  in  spite  of  them  all,  they  would  soon  de-
part, but  that  he  would  never  see  it,  and  that  many  of
his  people  would  be  killed.' In  fact,  when  the  fort  of


APPENDIX.  237

Tournelles  was  taken,  this  officer  wished  to  make  his
escape  by  the  bridge  which  separated  the  fort  from  the
suburbs ;  but  an  arch  gave  way  beneath  his  feet,  and
he  with  all  his  men  were  drowned.

u  Having  introduced  the  convoy  of  provisions  and
ammunition  into  Orleans,  Joan  foretold  to  the  inhab-
itants that  in  five  days  not  an  Englishman  would  re-
main before  their  walls.

"  On  the  6th  of  May,  Joan  informed  her  confessor
that  on  the  next  day  she  should  be  wounded  above  the
bosom,  while  before  the  fort  at  the  end  of  the  bridge.
And  in  fact  she  received  a  lance  between  the  neck  and
the  shoulder,  which  passed  out  nearly  half  a  foot  be-
hind the  neck.

"  On  the  morning  of  the  7th,  her  host  having  invited
her  to  partake  of  some  fish  which  had  been  brought  him,
she  desired  him  to  keep  it  till  night,  because  she  would
then  bring  him  a  stranger  who  would  do  his  part  in
eating  it.  She  added  that  after  having  taken  the
Tournelles,  she  would  re-pass  the  bridge — a  promise
which  seemed  impossible  to  any  body,  but  which,  nev-
ertheless, was  fulfilled,  like  all  the  other  impossibilities.

"  The  irresolution  of  the  king  was  the  greatest  pun-
ishment to  Joan.  '  I  shall  only  continue  for  a  year
and  a  very  little  more,'  said  she.  c  I  must  try  to  em-
ploy that  year  well.'

"  The  Duchesse  d'Alencon  was  greatly  alarmed  on
seeing  her  husband  at  the  head  of  the  army,  which  was


238  APPENDIX.

about  to  enforce  the  coronation  of  the  king  at  Rheims.
Joan  told  her  to  fear  nothing — that  she  would  bring
him  back  safe  and  sound,  and  in  a  better  condition
than  he  was  at  that  moment.

"  At  the  attack  of  Jargean,  the  Due  d'Alencon  was
attentively  reconnoitring  the  outworks  of  the  town,
when  Joan  told  him  to  remove  from  the  spot  on  which
he  was  standing,  or  that  he  would  be  killed  by  some
warlike  missile.  The  duke  removed,  and  almost  imme-
diately afterward  a  gentleman  of  Anjou,  by  the  name
of  M.  de  Lade,  was  struck  in  the  very  place  which  the
duke  had  just  left.

"  The  English  generals,  Talbot,  Searles,  and  Fal-
staff,  having  arrived  with  four  thousand  men  to  the
relief  of  the  castle  of  Beaugenie,  in  order  to  raise  the
siege  of  that  place,  Joan  predicted  that  the  English
would  not  defend  themselves — would  be  conquered,  and
that  this  triumph  would  be  almost  bloodless  on  the  part
of  the  royal  army,  and  that  there  would  be  very  few —
not  quite  to  say  no  one — killed  of  the  French  combat-
ants. In  truth,  they  lost  but  one  man,  and  almost  all
the  English  were  killed  or  taken.

"  Joan  had  told  the  king  not  to  fear  any  want  of
troops  for  the  expedition  to  Rheims,  for  that  there
would  be  plenty  of  persons,  and  many  would  follow
him.  In,  truth,  the  army  increased  visibly  from  day
to  day,  and  numbered  twelve  thousand  men  by  the  end
of  June,  1429.


APPENDIX.  239

u  When  the  army  had  arrived  before  Troyes,  that
city  shut  its  gates,  and  refused  to  yield.  After  five
days'  waiting,  and  useless  efforts  of  capitulation,  the
majority  of  the  council  advised  to  retire  to  Gien ;  but
Joan  declared  that  in  less  than  three  days  she  would
introduce  the  king  into  the  city  by  favor  or  by  force.
The  chancellor  said  that  they  would  even  wait  six  days
if  they  could  be  sure  of  the  truth  of  her  promises.
4  Doubt  nothing,*  said. she.  '  You  will  be  master  of  the
city  to-morrow.9  Immediately  preparations  were  made
for  the  projected  assault,  which  so  alarmed  the  inhab-
itants and  their  garrison  that  they  capitulated  next  day.

M  Charles  feared  that  the  city  of  Rheims  would  op-
pose a  long  resistance  to  his  arms,  and  that  it  would
be  difficult  to  make  himself  master  of  it,  because  he
was  deficient  in  artillery.  6  Have  no  doubt,'  said  Joan,
'  for  the  citizens  of  the  town  of  Rheims  will  anticipate
you.  Before  you  are  close  to  the  city,  the  inhabitants
will  surrender.'  On  the  16th  of  July  the  principal
inhabitants  of  the  city  laid  its  keys  at  the  feet  of  the
king.

"  During  her  captivity,  Joan  made  the  following
predictions  on  the  1st  of  March,  1430,  in  the  presence
of  nfty-nine  witnesses,  whose  names  are  given  faith-
fully by  M.  le  Brim  de  Charmettes  :  '  Before  seven
years  are  past,  the  English  will  abandon  a  larger  prize
than  they  have  done  before  Orleans,  and  will  lose  every
thing  in  France.


240  APPENDIX.

"  c  They  will  experience  the  severest  loss  they  have
ever  felt  in  France,  and  this  will  be  by  a  great  victory
which  God  will  bestow  upon  the  French.'

"  Paris  was  actually  re-taken  by  the  French  under
the  command  of  the  Marshal  de  Richemont  and  the
Count  de  Dunois,  on  the  14th  of  April,  1436."

La  Physique  Occulte,  ou  Traite  de  la  Baguette  Divi-
natoire^  par  M.  L.  L.  de  Vallemont,  M.  D.,  etc.

"  On  the  5th  of  July,  1692,  a  dealer  in  wine,  and
his  wife,  residing  in  Lyons,  were  murdered  in  a  cellar,
for  the  sake  of  robbing  them  of  a  sum  of  money  kept
in  a  shop  hard  by,  which  was  at  the  same  time  their
chamber.  All  this  was  executed  with  such  prompti-
tude and  secrecy  that  no  one  had  witnessed  the  crime,
and  the  assassins  escaped.

u  A  neighbor,  struck  with  horror  at  the  enormity  of
the  crime,  having  remembered  that  he  knew  a  man
named  Jacques  Aymar,  a  wealthy  peasant,  who  could
follow  the  track  of  thieves  and  murderers,  induced  him
to  come  to  L^ons^  and  introduced  him  to  the  king's  at-
torney-general. This  peasant  assured  the  functionary
that  if  they  would  lead  him  to  the  place  where  the  mur-
der was  committed,  in  order  that  he  might  receive  from
it  a  certain  influence,  he  would  assuredly  trace  the
steps  of  the  guilty  parties,  and  would  point  them  out,
wherever  they  were.  He  added,  that  for  his  purpose
he  should  make  use  of  a  rod  of  wood,  such  as  he  was


APPENDIX.  241

in  the  habit  of  using  to  find  springs  of  water,  metals,
and  hidden  treasure.  The  man  was  conducted  to  the
cellar  where  the  murders  were  committed.  There  he
was  seized  with  emotion  ;  his  pulse  rose  as  if  he  were
suffering  from  a  violent  fever,  and  the  forked  rod  which
he  held  in  his  hands  turned  rapidly  over  the  two  places
where  the  murdered  bodies  had  lain.

"  Having  received  the  impression,  Aymar,  guided  by
his  rod,  passed  through  the  streets  through  which  the
assassins  had  fled.  He  entered  the  courtyard  of  the
archbishop's  palace.  Arriving  at  the  gate  of  the
Rhone,  which  was  shut,  it  being  night,  he  could  then
proceed  no  farther.  The  next  day  he  went  out  of  the
town  by  the  bridge  of  the  Rhone,  and,  always  guided
by  the  rod,  he  went  to  the  right  along  the  bank  of  the
river.  Three  persons,  who  accompanied  him,  were
witnessess  that  sometimes  he  recognized  the  tracks  of
three  accomplices,  and  that  sometimes  he  found  only
two.  In  this  uncertainty  he  was  led  by  the  rod  to  the
house  of  a  gardener,  where  he  was  enlightened  as  to
the  number  of  the  criminals.  For,  on  his  arrival,  he
maintained  that  they  had  touched  a  table,  and  that  of
three  bottles  which  were  in  the  room,  they  had  touched
one,  over  which  the  rod  visibly  rotated.  In  short,  two
boys  of  nine  and  ten  years  of  age,  who,  fearing  their
lather's  anger,  had  at  first  denied  the  fact,  at  last  ac-
knowledged that  three  men,  whom  they  described,  had
entered  the  house,  and  had  drunk  the  wine  which  was
11


242  APPENDIX.

contained  in  the  bottle  indicated  by  the  peasant.  As
they  were  assured  by  the  declaration  of  the  children,
they  did  not  hesitate  to  go  forward  with  Aymar  half  a
league  lower  than  the  bridge  on  the  bank  of  the  Rhone.
All  along  the  bank  for  this  distance  the  footsteps  of
the  criminals  were  traced.  Then  they  must  have  en-
tered a  boat.  Aymar  followed  in  another  on  their
track  as  clearly  by  water  as  by  land ;  and  his  boat  was
made  to  go  through  an  arch  of  the  bridge  of  Vienne,
which  is  never  used,  upon  which  it  was  concluded  that
these  wretches  had  no  boatman,  since  they  wandered
out  of  their  way.

u  On  the  voyage,  Aymar  went  ashore  at  all  the
places  where  the  fugitives  had  landed,  went  straight  to
their  coverts,  and  recognized,  to  the  great  surprise  of
the  hosts  and  spectators,  the  beds  on  which  they  had
slept,  the  tables  on  which  they  had  eaten,  and  the  pots
and  glasses  they  had  touched.

"  He  arrived  at  the  camp  of  Sablon,  where  he  was
considerably  agitated.  He  believed  that  in  the  crowd
of  soldiers  he  should  find  the  murderers.  Lest  the
soldiers  should  ill-treat  him,  he  feared  to  operate  with
his  rod.  He  returned  to  Lyons,  whence  they  made
hira  go  back  to  the  camp  of  Sablon  by  water,  having
him  furnished  with  letters  of  recommendation.  The
criminals  were  no  longer  to  be  found  there.  He  followed
them  to  the  fair  of  Beaucaire,  in  Languedoc,  and  al-


APPENDIX.  243

ways  remarked,  in  his  course,  the  beds,  the  tables,  the
seats  where  they  had  been.

"  At  Beaucaire  the  rod  conducted  him  to  the  gate
of  a  prison,  where  he  was  positive  one  of  the  wretches
would  be  found.  Fourteen  of  the  prisoners  were  pa-
raded before  him,  and  the  rod  turned  on  a  man  with  a
humped  back,  who  had  been  sent  to  prison  about  one
hour  before  for  a  petty  larceny.  The  peasant  did  not
hesitate  to  declare  his  conviction  that  the  hump-backed
man  was  one  of  the  assassins  ;  but  he  continued  to
search  for  the  others,  and  found  that  they  had  gone
toward  Nismes.  No  more  was  done  at  that  time.
They  transferred  the  hump-backed  man  to  Lyons.
On  the  journey  he  asseverated  his  innocence ;  but  find-
ing that  all  the  hosts,  at  whose  inns  he  had  lodged,
recognized  him,  he  avowed  that  he  had  been  the  ser-
vant of  two  men  of  Provence,  who  had  engaged  him  to
join  them  in  this  foul  deed  :  that  these  men  had  com-
mitted the  murder,  and  had  taken  the  money,  giving
him  but  six  crowns  and  a  half  from  their  booty  of  one
hundred  and  thirty  crowns.  He  corroborated  the  ac-
curacy of  the  indications  of  the  peasant  as  to  the  gar-
dener's house,  the  camp  of  the  Sablon,  the  fair  at
Beaucaire,  and  the  other  places  through  which  the
three  had  passed,  extending  over  forty-five  French
leagues.  All  these  things,  of  course,  excited  immense
interest.  At  Lyons,  many  repetitions  of  the  observa-
tions respecting  the  turning  of  the  rod  in  the  cellar


244  APPENDIX.

were  made  in  presence  of  many  persons. Monsieur
PAbbe  Bignon  gives  his  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the
statement  of  facts,  in  a  letter  inserted  by  Vallemont  in
his  work. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  statements
require  very  strong  corroboration,  and  here  they  appa-
rently obtain  it. Vallemont,  quoting  the  authority  of
the  Royal  Society  of  London,  in  the  second  part  of  the
history,  seventeenth  section,  one  hundred  and  twenty-
fifth  page,  says,  that  in  all  countries  where  men  are
governed  by  laws,  the  testimony  in  a  matter  of  life  and
death,  of  only  two  or  three  witnesses  is  required  :  but
is  it,  then,  treating  an  affair  of  physics  equitably,  when
the  concurrence  of  sixty  or  a  hundred  persons  is  insuf-
ficient 1 It  is  difficult  to  define  the  just  boundaries  of
credulity;  but  in  all  these  recitals  of  histories  of  events
there  is this  general  consent,  that  in  those  who  can
make  use  of  the  rod,  there  is  always  an  agitation,  a  fe-
ver, or  some  sensation  which  indicates  a  nervous  com-
motion ;  and  the  best  evidence  of  the  closest  investiga-
tion goes  to  the  point,  that  most  frequently  the  rod  is
of  hazel  wood. How  far  these  stories  tend  to  the  con-
clusion that  organic  tests  appear  to  require  the  re-agen-
cies of  organic  force  is,  at  present,  a  matter  of  specu-
lation ;  but  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  effort  to  attract
serious  attention  to  this  class  of  facts  is  not  uninterest-
ing or  unimportant."

It  is  a  duty  I  owe  to  myself  and  readers,  to  state


APPENDIX.  245

that  the  views  I  have  advanced  in  the  first  Seven  Lec-
tures of  this  book,  on  the  involuntary  'powers  and
instincts  of  the  hitman  mind*  are  entirely  original  with
me,  and  have  been  entertained  for  several  years  previous
to  the  appearance  of  my  "  Twelve  Lectures  on  the  Phi-
losophy of  Electrical  Psychology,"  published  in  1850,
in  which  I  first  advanced  them  openly.  In  proof  of  this,
I  publish  the  following  letter,  which  is  the  original,  draft
of  one  I  addressed  in  1846  to  Professor  Bush  of  this  city,
whom  I  regard  as  one  of  the  first  linguists  and  scholars
of  the  age.  I  unfortunately  permitted  an  individual  to
take  a  copy  of  this  letter  in  1848,  and  hence  some  of
the  ideas  contained  in  it  appear  in  a  work  of  which  said
individual  claims  to  be  the  author.  In  self-defense  I
therefore  append  the  letter  as  proof  that  my  views  of
the  involuntary  powers  and  instincts  of  the  human
mind  contained  in  this  work  date  back  to  1846,  which
was  two  years  before  I  ever  saw  said  individual.

TO  GEORGE  BUSH,

PROFESSOR  OF  HEBREW  IN" NEW  YORK  UNIVERSITY.

"  Boston,  June  1,  1846.

u  My  dear  Sir — At  our  last  interview  I  promised
to  let  you  occasionally  hear  from  me.  As  a  convenient
opportunity  now  offers,  I  hasten  to  improve  it.  Since
conversing  with  you  in  New  York  city,  and  hearing
you  lecture  there,  I  have  had  many  pleasing  as  well  as
serious  contemplations  on  human  life,  human  nature,
the  mental  capacity  of  man,  and  his  susceptibility  of  a


246  APPENDIX.

ceaseless  development  in  intellectual  and  moral  gran-
deur. I  am  well  aware  that  a  finite  mind,  how  high
soever  it  may  soar,  can,  after  all,  know  but  little  com-
pared with  the  Infinite  Mind.  You  will  pardon  my
making  a  comparison  where,  strictly  speaking,  no  com-
parison can  exist.  I  merely  use  the  word  to  express
my  idea  of  the  greatness  and  yet  the  littleness  of  man.

"  It  is  evident,  however,  that,  from  the  faint  glim-
merings of  infantile  reason,  man  passes  on  to  that  in-
tellectual strength  and  greatness  when  he  can  take  a
survey  of  the  planets,  the  dimensions  of  the  sun,  trace
the  comet  in  its  erratic  course,  analyze  the  works  of
God,  and  comprehend  the  vast  and  complicated  opera-
tions of  the  human  mind.  Delivered  from  the  bondage
of  corruption,  he  can  approximate  to  more  than  angelic
purity,  and  in  this  moral  career  of  rapture  and  delight
he  can  soar  and  soar  forever !  Thus  his  faculties  are
destined  to  expand  and  assume  a  more  holy  and  glori-
ous type  without  end !

"  Such  being  the  wonderful  impression  of  man's  na-
ture, it  is  evident  that  that  measure  of  scientific  infor-
mation which  is  now  exactly  adapted  to  his  mental
capacity  and  condition  in  this  mortal  life,  could  not  be
suited  to  his  capacity  and  condition  a  thousand  years
to  come  (were  he  to  live  so  long  on  earth),  any  more
than  the  alphabet,  which  was  once  adapted  to  the  infant
mind  of  Newton,  could  have  been  suited  to  his  mental
capacity  and  condition  as  a  sage  philosopher.  As  the
mind  expands  in  intellectual  grandeur,  ideas  equally
expansive  and  grand  must  be  presented  to  it,  as  its
natural  food,  to  sustain  its  mental  vigor  and  accelerate
its  intellectual  growth. True,  man's  existence  here  ig


APPENDIX.  247

momentary,  yet  the  above  argument  retains  its  force,
for  it  is  just  as  applicable  to  future  successive  genera-
tions, to  whom  be  leaves  bis  improvements,  as  it  would
be  to  himself,  even  were  he  to  live  a  thousand  years
twice  told  on  earth.

"  This  being  the  case  in  relation  to  his  mental  con-
stitution and  nature,  is  it  not,  my  dear  sir,  safe  as  well
as  natural  to  adopt  the  same  mode  of  reasoning  in  rela-
tion to  his  moral  and  religious  nature  ?  Has  not  this,
too,  received  from  the  hand  of  God  the  stamp  of  that
original  greatness  which  is  destined  to  manifest  itself
by  a  ceaseless  development  of  moral  attainments  and
powers  1  If  so,  will  not  new  and  successive  revelations
in  relation  to  the  doctrines  and  teachings  of  Jesus  be
necessary,  as  the  moral  food  of  the  soul,  adapted  to  its
religious  and  ever-increasing  growth  and  vigor  1  There
was  unquestionably  a  revelation  made  to  our  first  pa-
rents adapted  to  the  infancy  of  our  race.  There  was
another  made  to  Noah,  and  still  another  to  Moses,
adapted  to  the  moral  science  (if  I  may  so  speak)  of
that  age.  Still  greater  and  ever-increasing  light  was
successively  vouchsafed  to  prophets,  adapted  to  the
moral  capacity  of  the  world,  till  the  coming  of  the
Just  One.  Till  then,  every  revelation  made  religion
consist  in  externals.  The  internal  and  spiritual  was
begun  by  our  Savior,  who  laid  the  foundation

OF  TRUTH  SO  BROAD  AND  DEEP,  THAT  ALL  FUTURE
GENERATIONS,  HOWEVER  MUCH  INSPIRED,  MIGHT  BUILD

upon  it,  and  he  let  in  upon  our  world  just  as  much
light  as  it  was  able  to  bear.  The  Apostles  enforced
his  doctrine,  built  upon  the  foundation,  and  advanced
the  work. Emanuel  Swedenhorg  pLid  his  duty,  for-


248  APPENDIX.

warded  the  superstructure,  threw  an  increasing  degree
of  spiritual  light  and  truth  on  the  world,  made  many
dark  places  plain,  and  advanced  and  ennobled  spiritual
worship  in  the  soul.

"  But  after  all,  is  this  the  greatest  height  of  moral
instruction  to  which  the  human  mind  can  soar?  Has
he  plucked  the  immortal  laurel  from  the  loftiest  cliff?
Has  he  finished  the  building  of  God,  and  laid  the  top-
stone  of  its  glory,  so  that  there  is  nothing  for  God's
chosen  servants  of  future  generations  to  do  ?  I  think
not,  and  human  magnetism  warrants  the  conclusion
that  Swedenborg  is  but  one  link  in  the  bright  and  end-
less chain  of  divine,  revelations.  By  long  experience
in  this  divine  magnetic  science,  I  am  entirely  satisfied
that  new  revelations  are  to  be  opened  on  the  world.
No  two  in  the  magnetic  state  are  alike,  and  in  propor-
tion to  their  moral  and  religious  greatness  and  grandeur
is  their  power  to  see  and  reveal  what  is  merciful,  great,
and  sublime  in  both  physical  and  moral  diseases,  and
their  treatment,  and  also  in  what  appertains  to  the  fu-
ture and  immortal  condition  of  man  in  eternity,  as  well
as  his  duty  and  interest  in  time.

66  Man  is  certainly  a  mysterious  and  wonderful  be-
ing, and  his  powers  and  capabilities  are  as  yet  but
partially  understood.  That  my  meaning  may  not  be
misapprehended,  permit  me,  dear  sir,  to  remark  that
we  are  well  aware  that  those  creatures  that  are  most
devoid  of  reason,  have  been  blessed  by  their  Creator
with  the  greatest  share  of  instinct,  to  supply  their
wants  and  answer  the  end  of  their  existence.  The  in-
stinctive powers  of  the  bee  are  wonderful  and  various,
but  no  more  incomprehensible  than  the  propensity  of


APPENDIX.  249

the  duck,  when  hatched  into  being,  to  go  to  the  water.
But  as  sagacity  increases,  the  instinctive  powers  appear
weakened,  or  in  slumber,  till  we  rise  in  regular  grada-
tion up  to  man,  the  highest  link  of  the  living  chain,
who  being  blessed  with  reason,  seems  devoid  of  instinct.
Still  the  instinctive  powers  do  exist  in  man,  and  un-
questionably in  a  much  higher  and  more  perfect  degree
than  in  any  other  creature  in  being.  By  instinct,  we
of  course  understand  an  internal  propensity  which  sug-
gests the  existence  of  some  external  object  as  its  grat-
ification, and  between  that  propensity  and  the  object
there  must  be  an  exact  aptitude  and  correspondence.
Hence  the  instinctive  propensities  must  be  numerous,
in  exact  ratio  to  the  number  of  external  objects  sug-
gested by  them.  Man  has,  therefore,  on  this  principle,
instinctive  powers  as  much  more  superior,  both  in  num-
ber and  degree,  to  any  other  creatures  in  existence,  as
his  rank  and  destiny  in  the  scale  of  intellectual  be-
ing are  higher  than  theirs.  Fie  possesses,  therefore,
instinctive  powers  to  discover  his  relation  to  things
earthly  and  heavenly — to  things  pertaining  to  his  entire
destiny  both  in  time  and  in  eternity.

"  But  in  his  present  existence  he  is  so  constituted,
that  while  he  is  in  his  natural  state  of  wakefulness  he
can  not  exercise  these  instinctive  powers.  If  he  could,
then  all  diseases,  accidents,  and  dangers  would  not
only  be  foreseen,  but  avoided  by  him,  and  hence  the
present  state,  where  he  is  disciplined  by  sufferings  and
self-denials  for  a  nobler  and  more  elevated  state  of  be-
ing, would  be  entirely  lost ;  and  hence  this  disciplinary
school,  founded  by  the  Creator  when  he  founded  the
pillars  of  the  universe,  and  where  have  been  taught
11*


250  APPENDIX.

the  most  sublime,  grand,  and  useful  lessons  of  earth,
would  be  struck  out  of  existence  !  But  when  he  is
thrown  into  the  spiritual  state,  then  the  doors  are  burst
open,  the  chains  are  broken  asunder,  and  the  impris-
oned faculties  of  his  instinctive  nature  are  in  a  meas-
ure set  free,  and  allowed  to  range  both  earth  and
heaven,  and  manifest  their  mysterious  powers  to  men
in  the  full  exhibition  of  the  most  brilliant  phenomena
that  seem  to  overwhelm  the  mind  with  amazement
and  awe.

"  This  being,  in  my  apprehension,  the  true  position
of  the  case,  you  will  perceive  I  hold  that  the  magnetic
state  is  nothing  more  than  arousing  the  instinctive
powers  of  man  from  their  natural  slumberings,  in  the
secret  chambers  of  the  soul,  into  wakefulness  and
sensibility,  so  as  to  act  in  concert  with  the  intellectual
powers  of  the  mind.  The  brain  is  a  congeries  of  or-
gans through  which  the  mind  acts,  and  manifests  all
its  wonderful  attributes,  and  holds  communion  with
external  nature.  If  a  certain  number  of  distinct  or-
gans of  the  brain  are  paralyzed  and  others  excited,  the
result  is  a  view  of  the  immortal  world.  If,  now,  some
of  the  excited  ones  are  paralyzed,  and  some  of  the  par-
alyzed ones  are  excited,  the  result  is  a  power  of  fore-
seeing future  events.  And  so  on  through  all  the  vari-
ety of  powers  and  phenomena  which  the  human  mind
is  capable  of  manifesting  by  an  indefinite  number  of
permutations  of  its  organs  and  attributes.  Hence  in-
spiration is  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  philosophy
of  mind  ;  and  one  may  be  inspired  '  to  work  miracles,
another  to  prophesy,  another  to  discern  spirits,  and
another  to  speak  with  different  tongues.'


APPENDIX.  251

"  It  is  unquestionably  true,  that  the  inspired  men  of
both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  embracing  prophets
and  apostles,  were  not  continually  inspired.  When  in-
formation was  asked  of  them  in  relation  to  any  matter,
they  required  time  to  give  the  answer.  But  if  they
had  been  continually  in  the  inspired  state,  this  would
have  been  unnecessary,  as  they  could  have  given  the
desired  information  at  any  instant.  When  Nebuchad-
nezzar commanded  all  the  wise  men  of  Babylon  to  be
slain,  because  they  could  not  relate  to  him  what  he  had
dreamed,  then  Daniel  went  in  and  desired  of  the  king
that  he  would  give  him  time,  and  that  he  would  show
him  the  dream,  and  also  its  interpretation.  Here  time
was  desired,  which  proves  that  Daniel  was  not  then
inspired  to  tell  him  the  dream.  By  prayer  and  supplica-
tion he  is  brought  to  a  state  where  the  whole  is  revealed
to  him  in  a  night  vision.  Hence  all  the  powers  of  in-
spiration and  prophecy  exist  in  the  human  mind ;  and
by  communing  with  God,  by  fasting,  supplication,  and
prayer,  the  mind  is  brought  into  a  condition  to  arouse
the  instinctive  principles  of  our  nature  into  action,  and
from  these  all  the  wonders  which  have  been  vouchsafed
to  inspired  men,  and  that  the  world  has  ever  beheld,
have  emanated.

"  Sensible  that  you  are  a  gentleman  of  profound  and
original  thought,  and  whose  mind  has  been  disciplined
and  enriched  by  education,  I  have  ventured  to  throw
out  to  you  the  above  ideas,  which  I  have  never  before
expressed  in  any  manner  whatever,  either  in  public  or
private.  We  live  in  an  age  of  wonders,  and  as  human
magnetism  is  being  reduced  to  a  science,  I  feel  a  hes-
itancy in  expressing  my  ideas  upon  this  subject  till  I


252  APPENDIX.

shall  at  least  see  what  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  the
New  York  clairvoyant,  who  is -now  considered  the  best
in  the  world,  has  to  say.  As  he  is  a  young  man  of
high  moral  and  religious  attainments,  and  is  at  the
same  time  unlettered,  we  shall  certainly  have  a  fair
opportunity  to  ascertain  whether  he  is,  or  is  not,  while
in  the  magnetic  state,  inspired,  in  the  scriptural  sense
of  the  word.

"  In  the  mean  time,  may  I  hope  for  the  pleasure  of
hearing  from  you  soon,  and  also  of  learning  how  far  you
differ  from  my  views  of  the  Magnetic  State.

"  I  am,  with  due  deference  and  respect,  most  sin-
cerely, "  Yours,

"  J.  B.  Dods."


I  would  say  to  my  readers,  that  there  are  sev-
eral words  and  sentences  in  the  above  letter  that  I
would  like  to  correct,  but  I  give  the  letter  as  it  stands
in  the  original  draft.  My  views  at  that  time,  now
about  eight  years  ago,  are  clearly  seen.


W


33.
