The Civil Law in its Natural Order, Vol. II (Jean Domat; William Strahan, trans.; Luther S. Cushing, ed., 1850)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of Cushing's 1850 edition, vol. II (https://archive.org/details/civillawinitsna02domagoog_202507).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CIVIL LAW


IN ITS NATURAL ORDER.


Br JEAN DOMAT.


SranslatedS from the Prencd,
By WILLIAM STRAHAN, LL. D.,


ADVOCATE IN DOCTORS’ COMMONS.


oe eee


EDITED,
FROM THE SECOND LONDON EDITION,


By LUTHER S. CUSHING.
IN TWO VOLUMES.


VOLUME II.
CONTAINING PART II. OF SUCCESSIONS.


BOSTON:
CHARLES C. LITTLE AND JAMES BROWN.
1850.


? “YY
 amens = SS
8


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1850, by
CHarres C. Lirrte anp Jamzs Brown,
in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts.


CAMBRIDGE:
METCALF AND COMPANY,


PRINTERS TO THE UNIVERSITY.


CONTENTS


OF


THE SECOND VOLUME.


THE CIVIL LAW.


PART II.
OF SUCCESSIONS.


THE PREFACE.


Pacu
WHEREIN ARE CONTAINED DIVERS REMARKS, AND MANY PRINCI-


PLES OF GREAT IMPORTANCE IN THE MATTERS TREATED OF
IN THIS SECOND PART . ° . e e ° e e 3


BOOK I.


OF SUCCESSIONS IN GENERAL.


TITLE I.
OF HEIRS AND EXECUTORS IN GENERAL.

Sect. I. Of the Quality of Heir or Executor, and of the Inheritance . . 30

Ii. Who may be Heir or Executor, and who are the Persons nee
of that Quality . . . 38

Ii]. Who are the Persons that are cuwartiy of Being Heirs or - Execu-
tors a ee i o« «@ 6s
IV. Of those who can ave: no Heirs or Executors : 87

V.


Of the Rights which are annexed to the ere of Heire ana Ex-
ecutors . - Z ; : . 89


lv F CONTENTS.


Sgcr. VI. Of the several Sorts of Engagements of Heirs or Executors . 4
VII. Of the Engagements which may be imposed on an Heir or Execu-

tor, and by what Kind of Dispositions ‘ 98
VII. Of the Engagements which arise from the Quality of Heir or
Executor, although the Person to whom he succeeds does not


impose any : 101

IX. In what Manner the Heirs or Executor 2 are bound for the Passive
Debts, ‘and for all the other Charges of the Inheritance. 105

X. Of the Engagements of the Heir or Executor, on Account of Crimes
and Offences committed by the Person to whom he succeeds. i111
XI. Of Funeral Charges eg é 13
XII. Of the Engagements of Coheirs to one another ; ; 125

XIII. Of those who are in the Place of Heirs or are although they
are not really so ; ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ; 129

TITLE TI.


OF HEIRS OR EXECUTORS WITH THE BENEFIT OF AN INVENTORY.


Sect. I. Of the Right to deliberate d - 136
II. How one becomes Heir or Executor with the Benefit of an Teens:


tory ® ® s e e e
Ill. Of the Effect of the Benefit of an Inventory : « - 140


TITLE III.


IN WHAT MANNER A SUCCESSION IS ACQUIRED, AND HOW IT I8 RENOUNCED.


Sect. I. Of the Acts which engage one in the Quality of Heir or Executor 144


II. Of the Acts which have some Relation to the Quality of Heir or
Executor, but which do not engage one init . 149

Ill. Of the Effects and jenn of the posi aia of the Tnherit-
ance ° . . . 153

IV. Of renouncing ‘the Inheritance % W. Sain Se ce: | ee. SS


TITLE IV.


OF PARTITIONS AMONG COBEIRS.


Sect. I. Of the Nature of Partition, and in what Manner itismade. . 158)
Il. Of Things which enter or do not enter into the Partition ; and of the
Expenses laid out by the Heirs or Executors, which they may

recover. 164 |

Il. Of Warranties between Contin, and of the othet Consequences of

the Partition . ° 170 |


CONTENTS. V


BOOK II.


OF LEGAL SUCCESSIONS, OR SUCCESSION TO INTESTATES.


TITLE I.
IN WHAT MANNER CHILDREN AND OTHER DESCENDANTS SUCORED.
Secr. I. Who are the Children and Descendants : : . (177
Il. The Order of the Succession of Children and Diseceilants : 181
Il. Of the Lines and Degrees of Proximity  . ; ‘ . 195
TITLE II.


IN WHAT MANNER FATHERS, MOTHERS, AND OTHER ASCENDANTS, SUCCEED.


Sect. I. Who are those that are called Ascendants, and in what Manner they
succeed ‘ 206

Il. Of the Rights which 1 some “‘hependinta may have, exclusive of the
others, in the Goods of the Children . . é ‘ ; Q11
Ill. Of the Right of Reversion. . . #.« =. =. = « « 920


TITLE III.
IN WHAT MANNER BROTHERS, SISTERS, AND OTHER COLLATERALS, SUCCEED.
Sect. I. Who are the Collaterals . ; Z ; : - 233
Il. The Order of the Succession of Collaterals ‘ 237
Til. Of the Succession of the Husband to the Wife, and of the Wife to
the Husband. : ; ; : ‘ 244
TITLE IV.
OF THE COLLATION OF GOODS.
Secr. I. Of the Nature of the Collation of Goods . : 346
Ii. Of the Persons who are bound to collate, and to whom the Collation
ought to be made ‘ 249
Mm. Of ae which are en to Collation, and of those which are
not ; ‘ ; - 250
BOOK III.


OF TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSIONS.


TITLE IL
OF TESTAMENTS.
Sect. I. Of the Nature of Testaments, and their Kinds . . . . 360


vi CONTENTS.


Sgcr. I. Who may make a Testament, and who is capable of rl Heir or


Executor, or a Legatee : Pf)
III. Of the Forms and Formalities meceaiaey in ‘Testaments : - £
IV. Of the Codicillary Clause . ‘ co


V. Of the several Causes which may annul a Testament in whole or

in part, although it be made in due Form, and of the Deroga-
tory Clauses. 318

VI. Of the Rules of cataract Obecurities, Ambiguities, and ee
Defects of Expression in Testaments . 4

Vil. Of the Rules for interpreting the other Sorts of Difficulties besides
those of the Expressions . ‘ 3h

VII. Of the Conditions, Charges, Destinations, Motives, Descriptions: and
Terms of Time, which Testators may add to their acces 32
IX. Of the Right of Accretion. & % ; ~ .
X. Of the Right of Transmission - ee er er ae |
XI. Of the Execution of Testaments ‘ a a a


TITLE II.


OF AN UNDUTIFUL TESTAMENT, AND OF DISHERISON.


Srcr. I. Of the Persons who may complain of a Testament, or other Unduti-


ful Disposition . ‘ ‘ j . 43
If. Of the Causes which render a Disherison just . 448
III. Of other Causes which make the Complaint against a » Testament
being Undutiful, to cease. 451
IV. Of the Effects of the ee agus a Testament, as being Un-
dutiful .  . 459
TITLE III.


OF THE LEGITIME, OR LEGAL PORTION DUE TO CHILDREN OR PARENTS.


Sor. I. Of the Nature of the eee or Legal Portion, and to whom it is


due ; _ 461
-L. What is the Quota or Quantity of the Tagine: or Teeal Por
tion . 461


II. Out of what Goods the Legitime i is taken, and how it ie regulated 4


TITLE IV.


OF THE DISPOSITIONS OF THOSE WHO HAVE MARRIED A SECOND TIME.


Sect. I. Of the several Sorts of Goods which Persons contracting a Second
Marriage may be possessed of : 4

II. The Rights which Children have to the Goods which iheit Father

or Mother who marries a Second Time had eae from the
Party who died first . .  . » «4


CONTENTS. Vii


Szcr. I. Of the Dispositions which Persons who a married twice may
make of their own Proper Goods . : ; . 481


BOOK IV.


OF LEGACIES, AND OTHER DISPOSITIONS MADE IN VIEW OF DEATH.


TITLE I.


OF CODICILS, AND OF DONATIONS IN PROSPECT OF DEATH.


Sect. I. Of the Nature and Use of Codicils, and of their Form : - 485
Il. Of the Causes which annul Codicils : : - «  « 489
IL Of Donations made in Prospect of Death . - 6 « « 493 -
TITLE II.
OF LEGACIES.

Sect. I. Of the Nature of Legacies, and of Particular Fiduciary pare 501
Il. Who may give Legacies, and who ae receive them . . 504
Ili. What Things may be devised . ‘ - .  « 608
IV. Of Accessories to Things bequeathed . : 522

V. Of Legacies of a Usufruct, or a oe or Alimony, and other
Things of the like Nature . : : : 528
VI. Of Legacies to Pious Uses : 535

VIL. Of Legacies of one of several Things, at the Choice of the Bxocttor,
or of the Legatee.. : 538
Vil. Of the Fruits and Interest of Legacies : : : 546
IX. How the Legatee acquires his Right to the Lapacy . . 653
X. Of the Delivery and Warranty of the Thing bequeathed . . 563

XI. How Legacies may be Null, revoked, diminished, or transferred to
other Persons . . - « 870

TITLE ITIL
OF THE FALCIDIAN PORTION.

Secr. I. Of the Use of the Falcidian Portion, and wherein it consista . 586
II. Of the Dispositions that are subject to the Falcidian Portion. . 593
TIT. Of those to whom the Falcidian Portion may be due or not . 603

IV. Of the Causes which make the Falcidian Portion to cease, or which


diminish it : : : 2 606


THE CIVIL LAW.


PART II.


OF SUCCESSIONS.


THE PREFACE.


WHEREIN ARE CONTAINED DIVERS REMARKS, AND MANY
PRINCIPLES OF GREAT IMPORTANCE IN THE MATTERS
TREATED OF IN THIS SECOND PART.


L The Reasons for distinguishing Successions from Engagements.

2408. We have distinguished the matters belonging to succes-
sions from those that relate to engagements, which have been ex-
amined in the first part. For although successions contain some
kinds of engagements, such as those of the heir or executor to the
creditors and legatees of the person to whom he succeeds, and
those of coheirs and coexecutors to one another; yet it was not
proper to consider successions under this view of the engagements
which they may happen to contain, because these kinds of engage-
ments are nowise essential, but only accessory, to successions:
and it may sometimes happen that a succession contains no man-
ner of engagement, as in the case where there is one only heir or
executor who succeeds to an inheritance free from all manner of
debt, legacies, and other burdens; whereas in the matters con-
tained in the first part, such as covenants, tutorships, guardian-
ships, the administration of the affairs of communities, and all the
others, the engagement is essential to their nature: and all these
matters are of themselves, and in their own nature, 80 many ties
and engagements which God has made use of for supporting and


4 THE CIVIL Law. [Part 1.


maintaining the society of mankind in all places; as it is the n-
ture of successions to preserve and continue it to all ages*
that it was necessary to distinguish successions from all thox
other matters, as being of a different order, which requires a sep-
arate rank.


Il. The Necessity of Successions, and in what Manner they hate
been regulated by the Laws.


2409. The Nature of Successions, and their Use. -— Successions
are the ways by which the goods, the rights, and the charges of
those who die, pass to other persons who succeed in their places,
and represent them. It appears evidently enough, that succes
sions are natural in the order of the society of mankind, and that
it was necessary to transmit the use of the goods of the generation
which passes to that which succeeds. But it does not appear s0
clearly in what manner this change ought to be regulated, and
what is the natural order of it; that is, whether this order is natv-
rally such, that the goods of those who die ought to pass entirely
to their children, or, in default of children, to their other near rels-
tions; or whether the dying persons may dispose of their goods,
in whole or in part, in favor of other persons who are strangers to
them; or even whether there might not be some other way of
transmitting the goods of one generation to another succes
sively.

2410. Three Ways of transmitting the Use of the Goods of om
Generation to another. — If we suppose that, in the beginning of
the society of mankind, the first who entered into that state did
take into consideration the ways of transmitting the use of the
goods of one generation to another; there were three principal
ways which they could not fail to have in their view, among
others which might probably occur to their thoughts in such a
deliberation.

2411. The first way is, by considering all the goods as if they
ought to be in common to all men, no man having a right to any
thing but what he should consume for his own use. And upon
this supposition, in whatever manner this total community of
goods among all men should be regulated, there would neither
be heirs nor successions, in the same manner as it is in regular
communities, where all the goods of the community belong to |


® See the fourteenth chapter of the Treatise of Lass, no. 2.


PREP.| SUCCESSIONS. §


the body, and none of the particular members have a right of
property in any part of them.

2412. Successions, Legal and Testamentary.— The two other
ways suppose that all the goods do not belong in common to all
men, but that every one may have something that is properly hie
own, exclusive of others. One of these ways is that of legal suc-
cessions, which are so called because they transmit all the goods
of those who die without having disposed of them to the persons
whom the laws call to the succession by virtue of their proximity
of blood, according to their order of descendants, ascendants, and
collaterals. The other is that of testamentary successions, which
transmit the goods of those who die to the persons whom the
deceased have called to the succession by a testament.

2413. Of these three ways, the first, which would render all things
common to all men, would be so full of inconveniences, that we
see plainly that it is impossible. For the love of justice and
equity not being common to all men, nor the only principle of the
conduct of each particular person, the universal community of all
goods would be a system altogether impracticable among so great
a number of partners, so full of self-love, and so much wedded to
their own particular interests. And it would be equally unjust,
a8 it is impossible that all things should be always in common to
the good and to the bad, to those who labor and to those who sit
idle and do nothing, that those persons who know how to make a
right use and a just distribution of the goods should be on the
same level with those who have neither the fidelity necessary to
preserve the goods to the society, nor the prudence that is requisite
for the right disposal of them, and who would do nothing but
consume and waste them. So that the state of a universal com-
munity, which might have been equitable and useful among men
perfectly just, living in a state of innocence, and free from passions,
cannot but be unjust, chimerical, and full of inconveniences among
men such as we are now-a-days. And we ought not to draw
any consequence, from the societies which we see among the
particular persons who live in regular communities, to a univer-
sal society of a whole nation, of a whole people, or even only of
a town or other corporation. For that which preserves those
regular communities is, that they are not made up of many
families, who are to be maintained according to their condition,
and according to the number of persons in each family; but con-
ast only of single persons, who are subject to their superiors, hav-

1 2


6 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL


ing no share in the administration of the goods and affairs of the
society, and who are allowed no other use either of the said
goods, or even of their own liberty, but what is prescribed by the
rules of the religious order which they profess. This is what
cannot be put in practice in a body that is composed of many
families.


IIL Of the Two Sorts of Successions, which are called Legal aad
Testamentary.


2414. It is not, therefore, without reason, that no government,
where there has been any thing like order, has ever put in practice
the universal community of all things among all men; but they
have observed the two other ways of succession, to wit, the egal,
which is likewise called the succession of intestates, because it
takes place when any one dies without making a testament, and
the testamentary succession. And the use of these two ways of
succession has been differently intermixed. For seeing both the
one and the other have their foundation in the order of society, they
have been both received in all places. And since they recipro-
cally derogate one from another, they have been reconciled divers
ways, as shall be explained hereafter.


IV. The Order of Legal Successions.


2415. Three Kinds of Heirs, Descendants, Ascendants, and Col-
laterals. — There are three orders of legal successions, according
to three orders or degrees of persons whom the laws call to suc-
ceed. The first is the order of children, and other descendants;
the second is that of fathers and mothers, and other ascendants ;
and the third is of brothers and sisters, and other near relations,
who are called collaterals; because that whereas the descendants
and ascendants are in one and the same line, which unites them
successively one to the other, the brothers and all the other more |
remote relations are among themselves at the side one of another,
every one in his own line under the ascendants which are com-
mon to them. :

2416. First Order, Succession of Children to Parents. — The
first of these three orders, which calls the children to the succes-
sion of their parents, is altogether natural, as being a consequence
of the order which God has established, by giving life to men by
the birth which they derive from their parents. For since life is a
gift which renders the use of temporal goods necessary, and since —


PREF.| SUCCESBIONS. 7


God gives them as a second benefit, which is a consequence of
the former; it is natural that, the goods being an accessory to
life, those which belong to the parents should pass to their chil-
dren, as a benefit which ought to accompany that of life. And this
rale, which is part of the divine law, as well as of human laws,
is so just and so natural, that it is engraven on the minds of all
mankind.

2417. Second Order, Succession of Parents to Children. — The
second order, which calls the ascendants to the succession of the
descendants, is not natural, as the first is, which makes the de-
scendants to succeed to the ascendants. For as it is conformable
to the order of nature that the children should survive their
parents, so it is contrary to the said order that the parents should
outlive their children. But when that case does happen, it would
be against natural equity that the parents should be deprived of
the sorrowful comfort of succeeding to their children, and that
they should suffer at the same time both the loss of their persons,
and likewise that of their goods.» And the same reason which
unites to the benefit of life that of the temporal goods, and which
makes the children to receive both the one and the other from
their parents, demands likewise that, when the ascendants survive
the descendants who die without children, they should not be de-
prived of their goods; since, the children and the other descend-
ants holding their life of their parents, the goods of the children
are destined by nature for supplying the necessities of the life of
those to whom they owe their own. So that, in one sense, the
succession of ascendants to descendants is agreeable to the law of
nature, as well as that of descendants to ascendants: and both
the one and the other are a consequence of the strict union that is
between these persons, and of the mutual duties which God has
established between them. For one of the principal effects of that
union and of those duties is the reciprocal use which nature gives
to the children of the goods of their parents, and to the parents of
the goods of their children, making them as it were common to
both. This is the reason why the laws of the Romans, even be-
fore they knew any thing of the Christian religion, considered the
goods of parents as the property of their children, and the goods


* See chap. 3 of the Treatise of Laws, no. 3. Gen. xv. 4;— Rom. viii. 17; ~ Prov. xiii.
22;— J. 7, D. de bon. dam.

* L.7,§1, D. si tab. test. nul. ext. unde lib.; —I. 6, D. de jure dot. ; —1. 15, D. de inoff.
leat,


8 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT u.


of the children as belonging to their parents in the same manner;
and looked upon their mutual successions to one another to be
not so much an inheritance which brought them any new right,
as a continuation of that right which seemed to make them mas-
ters of the goods of one another.

2418. Remark on the Succession of Ascendants.— It is to be
remarked, touching this natural equity, which calls the ascendants
to the succession of the descendants, and which was observed in
the Roman law, that, upon another principle of equity, the cus-
toms of France have established another rule, which is, that goods
acquired by descent from our ancestors do not ascend; that is to
say, that the father, and the other ascendants on the father’s side,
do not succeed to the goods of their descendants which they have
inherited on the mother’s side, and which are called, goods of
maternal inheritance ; and likewise, that mothers, and the other
ascendants on the mother’s side, do not succeed to the goods of
their descendants which came to them by the father’s side, and
which are termed goods of paternal inheritance. This rule is a
consequence of another rule of the same customs, which directs
the goods of paternal inheritance to be appropriated to the nearest
heirs of blood on the father’s side; and the goods of maternal in-
heritance to be appropriated in the same manner to the nearest
heirs of blood on the mother’s side. And this rule, which is com-
monly expressed by these words, paterna paternts, materna mater-
nis, hath its justice founded on the same natural law which appro-
priates the goods to the nearest relations. For this appropriation
of the goods to the heirs of blood does naturally respect those
who are of the family from whence the goods come. And this
justifies the rule, which deprives the ascendants of the property of
the goods of inheritance belonging to a descendant, which came
to him from another stock, to the end that the goods come from
one family may not pass to another, as it would happen if the
paternal goods should ascend to the matemal ascendants, or the
maternal goods to the paternal ascendants, who would transmit
them to their heirs, and by that means take them away from the
family from whence they came. But these customs leave to the
ascendants the movables and acquisitions of their descendants,
and the goods of inheritance which descended from their stock, |
together with the usufruct of the goods of inheritance come from _


© Z.11, D. de lib. a post.;—l. 1, § 12, D. de success. ed.


PREF.| SUCCESSIONS. 9


the other stock. Which has this double effect, that it preserves
the goods of inheritance in the same families from which they
came, and likewise provides what seems to be equitable in favor
of the ascendants. ;

2419. The Third Order, Succession of Collaterals. — The third
order of legal successions, which is that of collaterals, is founded
on the same natural equity which calls the descendants and as-
cendants to successions. For the goods which ought to pass from
the deceased to his descendants, or in default of them to his as-
cendants, go naturally to those who represent the said ascendants,
and who derive from them their origin, in common with the de-
ceased. Thus, we may say in general of these three sorts of suc-
cessions, of descendants, ascendants, and collaterals, that all the
persons who are united by birth in one of these three orders are
considered as one family, to which God has appropriated the
goods of all the particular persons whereof it consists, in order to
make them to pass from one to the other successively, according
to the degree of their nearness of kin. And, in fine, this succes-
sion by proximity is so natural, that it has been confirmed by the
divine law.4

2420. To this we may subjoin, as another principle of the equity
of succession by proximity of blood, which is a consequence of
the former, that, although there were no other law for successions
besides the will of those who dispose of their goods, it would be
Just and natural that every one should call his nearest relations to
succeed to his estate, unless he should have particular reasons that
might oblige him to dispose of it otherwise. For the union which
is formed by birth between ascendants, descendants, and collater-
als, being the first tie which God instituted among men, to unite
them together in society, and to engage them to the duties of mu-
tual love; every one, in the choice of an heir, ought to have regard
to those persons to whom God, by this first tie, has united him
more strictly than to others, and not to deprive them of his goods
without a just cause. Thus, we may say that the legal succes-
sions have this in their favor, that they are not only conformable
to the order and institution of nature, which calls to the succes-
sion the nearest relations, by the right of blood, and by appropri-
ating the goods to the families; but they are likewise most
consistent with the love and affection which those who dispose
of their goods ought to have for their relations, unless they have


4 Nuwab. xxvii. 8, 9, 10, 11.


10 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRrT il.


rendered themselves unworthy of the succession, or that some
other reasonable motives may have induced the testators to dis-
pose of their estates another way. It is upon this equity that the
customs of France are founded, which appropriate estates unto
families in such a manner, that they do not permit persons to dis-
pose of all their goods to the prejudice of the collateral relations,
even the most remote, as shall be observed hereafter.


V. The Origin of Testamentary Successtons.

2421. Use of Testaments. — Testamentary successions have like-
wise their foundation in the order of society ; and we may observe
in the said order different causes which may justify the liberty of
disposing of our goods by testament. Thus, it may happen that
a man has no relations at all, or that those which he has have
rendered themselves unworthy of succeeding him; and in this
case, the equity of a testament is clear and evident. In like man-
ner, one who has perhaps a small, inconsiderable estate, and which
he owes to the liberality and bounty of some benefactor, who hap-
pens to be at that time in great want and necessity, might justly
leave either all his goods, or a part of them, to his benefactor;
and that to the prejudice of his collateral relations, who perhaps
are related to him only at a great distance, and have a plentiful
estate of their own. It is just, likewise, that those persons whose
presumptive heirs are strangers, that is, aliens, or foreigners, inca-
pable of succeeding, may dispose of their estates to others. Thus,
bastards, not being born in lawful wedlock, have no relations who
can succeed to them; and if they die intestate, without leaving
any children lawfully begotten of their own body, they can have
no heir at law, not even their mother. So that it is just that they
should have liberty to dispose of their goods by testament. Thus,
in fine, it is just and equitable in general, that all persons who are
capable of disposing of their goods should have liberty to acquit
themselves of the duties of gratitude, and of other engagements
which may oblige them to give, if not all their goods, at least a
part of them, to other persons than their heirs at law, or next of
kin. And this liberty of disposing by testament is more especial-
ly favorable in those goods which the testator may have acquired
by his own labor and industry. Thus, Jacob disposed of the spoil
which he had taken from the Amorites by the force of his arms, in
favor of Joseph, preferably to his brothers.*


® Gen. xliviii. 22.


PREP.| SUCCESSIONS. 11


2422. From all these considerations we may infer, that, as
legal successions are natural in the order of society, so likewise
dispositions in view of death, whether it be of all one’s goods or
of a part of them, have their justice and equity in the said order:
and we see also that testaments are authorized by the law of
God.»


VL The Use of Testaments reconciled with the Legal Successions.

2423. The Origin of the different Dispositions of the Roman
Law, and of the Oustoms, with Respect to Testaments. — It is be-
cause of this natural equity, which is in the succession of near
relations, and of the natural equity which appears likewise in tes-
taments, that we see both the use of legal successions, and also
that of testaments, received in all places. But if it is just and
nataral that successions should pass to the nearest relations whom
the law calls to succeed, how can it be likewise just and natural
that they may be deprived thereof by a testament? And the laws
which call the nearest relations to succeed, shall they have their
effect only when there are no dispositions which deprive them of the
succession? Or, seeing these laws are a part of the law of nature,
will it not be just that they should have their effect without re-
gard to the will of those who have goods to leave after their
death, and that at least they may not have power to deprive their
near relations, unless it be of a part of their inheritance?

2424. All those who have made laws to regulate the matter of
successions have without doubt examined this question ; for they
have been sensible of the natural equity which calls the nearest
relations to succeed, and they have likewise been persuaded that it
is just to allow those who have goods to make dispositions of
them which may be executed after their death. Thus, they hav-


ing all of them seen the contrariety which seems to arise from the


use of these two principles, they could not fail to consider, under
all these views, what might be the most proper means of recon-
ciling them together.

2125. They have not therefore been ignorant, that, in order to
make a right use of these two laws, it was necessary to look upon
that which calls the heirs of blood, as a first general rule, which
gives them all the goods of the succession, when there is no just


b Galot. mi. 15; — Heb. fi 16, &e.; — Gen. xlviii: 5; — 2 Kings xx. 1; — Isaiah
xzxxvabn 1.
® See Trentiee of Laxs, chap. 11, n0. 7 and no. 31.


12 THE CIVIL LAW. [PamT u.


cause to deprive them of them. From whence it follows, that
when they granted the liberty to persons to dispose either of all
their goods, or of a part of them, they supposed that he who
chooses other heirs than those of his blood, or who gives a share of
his goods to other persons, ought to have some particular motives
which induce him to dispose of his succession otherwise than the
law would dispose of it. For it was not their intentian to coun-
tenance unreasonable dispositions, which should have only for
their motive some passion, or humor, and to grant an inconsider
ate liberty of making all sorts of dispositions, just or unjust; since
the good order of society doth not permit, even in matters which
have their effect in the lifetime of the parties, dispositions which
may be any way inconsistent with decency and good manners,
and doth not allow prodigals to have the management of their
own estates. Thus, the liberty which the laws grant to persons to
dispose of their estates by a testament implies, without doubt, ac-
cording to the intendment of the law, this condition, that the dis-
positions which they shall make in go serious an act as is that
of making a testament shall be according to reason. But al-
though the intention of the laws which permit testaments ought
not to be explained in any other sense, since we cannot say that
they approve indifferently of all manner of dispositions; yet there
would have been too many inconveniences in adding to the law
which permits testaments the condition that the dispositions
should be reasonable. For this reservation would call in question
all manner of testaments, even those that should be the most con-
formable to prudence and equity; since there would be a liberty
given from hence to examine them, and that, by considering them
under a different view than what the testator had, it would be an
easy matter to call them in question. Since, therefore, it was not
convenient to add to the law such a condition, and since it was
neither just nor possible to prescribe to every man in particular
the manner in which he ought to dispose of his goods, it was ne-
cessary that the law which permits testaments should leave it to
every One in particular to dispose of his goods as he himself should
judge most reasonable, whether by granting to each testator an
indefinite liberty to dispose of all his goods, or by restraining this
liberty to a part of them ; but still leaving it to his own judgment
and prudence how he will bequeathe that which the law allows
him to dispose of.


2426. From all these general principles, which all mankind must


PRer.| SUCCESSIONS. 13


agree in, we may reasonably draw this consequence, that, since it
is agreeable to the law of nature that succession should go to the
next of kin, and that it is likewise equitable that those who have
goods may dispose of them by will, the spirit and intention of
the laws which have permitted the making of testaments has
been, that the liberty of bequeathing should be regulated in every
one according to pradence, which may determine the use of this
liberty to more or less, according to the condition of his estate,
his family, and his different obligations to other persons besides
his children, if he has any, or his other near relations ; for it is by
these circumstances, and others of the like kind, the various com-
binations of which are infinite, that every one ought to regulate
his dispositions, and proportion them to his substance, and to the
different obligations he lies under. Thus, those who have but a
small estate, and a great many children, are less at liberty to dis-
pose of their goods by will, than those who are rich, and have no
children. In like manner, those persons who have poor relations
are under a greater tie and obligation towards them, than those
are whose relations are wealthy and in a good condition. Thus,
in general, the circumstances in which every one happens to be
point out to him the use of this prudence, which ought to be his
rule and guide.

2427. If we consult, therefore, only natural equity, which ought
to be the spirit of all laws, we shall be apt to conclude that the
principle which justifies this liberty of bequeathing by will is
nothing else but the equity that is in the use of this prudence.
Thos, it would seem that we may reasonably suppose that those
who made the laws concerning successions did agree in this prin-
ciple, and were divided only in the consequences which they
drew from it, and made as it were two parties; from whence have
sprung the two different sorts of laws which are extant concerning
this matter,

2428. The one is that of the Roman law, the authors whereof
thought it proper to leave to every one an entire liberty to dispose
of his goods as he pleases;> and they did not think the incon-
Veniences arising from the bad use which some might make of
this liberty to be a sufficient cause why it should not be left com-
mon to all persons; to the end that the condition of those who
are reasonable might not be restrained within the bounds which


b Inst. de lege Faleidia.
VOL. It 2


14 THE CIVIL LAW. | [PaRT IL


perhaps it might be convenient to prescribe to the conduct of
others.

2429. The other kind of law concerning successions is that of
the customs in France, the authors of which did not judge it con-
venient to leave particular persons at liberty to have no manner of
regard for natural equity, which calls the nearest relations to the
succession, under pretext of some few extraordinary occasions,
which might justify the use of such a liberty. And they were
desirous to prevent the inconvenience of the bad use which might
be made of this liberty by those who in making their testaments
govern themselves by no other rule beside that of their passions,
and under these several views, not being able to make different
rales for the different sorts of persons, and not thinking it reason-
able to suppose that the greatest part of mankind would regulate
their dispositions by a prudent and wise conduct, they set bounds
to this liberty of bequeathing for all sorts of persons without dis-
tinction. We shall see in the following article some differences
which it is necessary to observe between the spirit of the Roman
law and the spirit of our customs in France.


VIL. Difference between the Spirit of the Roman Law, and that of
the Oustoms in France.


2430. It would seem that the manner in which the Romans did
first put in practice this law, which gives a general and indefinite
liberty to all persons to dispose of their estates as they please,
which they derived from the Grecian commonwealths, was a con-
sequence of that spirit of dominion, of which we see so many
other marks in their whole conduct, from the foundation of their
state, whether it be in relation to other nations whom they con-
quered, or even with respect to their own families, in which they
had assumed to themselves an absolute power of life and death,
not only over their slaves,* but likewise over their children.” Pur-
suant to this spirit of dominion, they took to themselves the
liberty to dispose of all their goods at pleasure, and to deprive, not
only their relations of their successions, but even their children,
without any cause. It is true, that this might have been a means
to keep children in their duty to their parents; but the bad use
that was made of this liberty, many disinheriting their children


® Z.1,§1, D. de his qui sui vel al. jur. sunt.
> 1. 12, in fine, D. de lib. et post.;—I. ult. C. de patr. potest.


PREF.| SUCCESSIONS. 15


without any just cause, gave occasion to the receiving of the com-
plaints of children against those testaments which they called un-
dutiful, as being contrary to the duties of paternal love and affec-
tion. And even these complaints were not received but with this
precaution, that in order to give them some color or pretext, and
that they might have the effect of annulling those testaments, they
should be considered as being made by persons who are not alto-
gether in their right senses, and who were deprived of the use of
their reason at the time when they made them. They settled
likewise a legitime, or certain portion of the parent’s goods, for the
children, to whom they appropriated a fourth part of the goods
they would have had if their parents had died intestate ;4 and
they allowed likewise fathers and mothers, and other ascendants,
to exhibit complaints against the testaments of their children, as
being contrary to the duty and respect which children owe to their
parents. And at last the Emperor Justinian thought he did a
great deal in favor of the children, when he augmented their legi-
time, by giving them, instead of a fourth part, a third of the goods,
when there were four children, or a lesser number, and raising it
even to a moiety, in case there should happen to be five or more
children‘ But as for the collaterals, there was still left an entire
liberty to the testator to deprive them of the whole succession, ex-
cept in one only case, and that in favor only of brothers and sisters,
who were allowed to complain of the testaments of their brothers
and sisters, when the heir instituted by them was an infamous or
ignominious person. And even this liberty was not extended to
those who were brothers and sisters only by the mother’s sides
Thus, we see that the Roman law considered each testator as a
lawgiver in his own family, leaving to him an absolute power of
disposing of his goods according to his pleasure, under these reser-
vations alone, which have been just now mentioned.

2431. The Spirit of the Customs of France, in Relation to Suc-
cessions, — This disposition of the Roman law, which leaves per- |
sons at full liberty to dispose of all their goods by testament,
except the legitimes, which are reserved by law to certain persons,
is observed in the provinces of France, which are governed by the
Written law, that is, by the Roman law; and the law which re-
stains the liberty of dispositions in testaments, in favor even of


* L. 2, D. de inoff. test. @ ZL. 8, § 8, D. de inoff. test.;—1. 6, C. eod.
* Id. 14 15, D. de inoff. test. £ Novell. 18, ¢. 1.
& L. 27, C. de inoff. test.


20 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr t.


succeed to them, and the law has called the next of kin; whereas
the said order of society might subsist without the use of testa-
mentary successions, by the bare use of the succession of the
heirs of blood, and the customs do not own any other heirs besides
those of the blood, as has been already observed.

2440. The third difference consists in this, that there are many
inconveniences which attend the liberty of choosing heirs. For
many persons, being prejudiced by their passions, make an unjust
choice; and it is they themselves who are to blame for these kinds
of inconveniences; whereas in legal successions the inconvenien-
ces are but few; and those which do happen cannot be imputed
to any person whatsoever; they being only the effects of the divine
providence, and the natural consequences of a just rule, such as
we see do attend very often even the laws which are the moet holy
and sacred.

2441. From all these reflections we may draw this consequence,
that, the legal successions being more natural, more necessary, and
attended with fewer inconveniences than the successions by tes-
tament, the use of which has been introduced only as an excep-
tion to the rule which gives the right of succession to the nearest
of kin, the condition of the heirs of blood seems to be more
favorable than that of the heirs named by testament; and that in
any doubtful case, where it may be allowable to consider the favor
of one or the other of these two kinds of heirs, it may seem rea- —
sonable to decide in favor of the heir of blood. Thus, in the |
question before mentioned concerning the two testaments, the
former of which, being made according to form, gives the right of
succession to a stranger; the second, which, being signed only by |
five witnesses, would have been declared null had it been made —
in favor of a stranger, subsists and disannuls the first testament,
because the latter calls to the succession the heir at law.> This
decision is so much the more remarkable, that it is part of the
Roman law itself, which has, above all others, favored the testa-
mentary successions, and which otherwise is so very nice and |
scrupulous in matters of form. So that we may conclude from
hence, even according to the sentiment of those who have most
favored testaments, that the condition of the testamentary heir
is less favorable than that of the heir of blood.

» 7. 2, D. de injust. rupt. irr. f. test.; — 1.21, § 8, C. de testam. See the fifth article of
the fourth section of Testaments.


PREE.| SUCCESSIONS, 21


IX. The Reason why we have made all these Remarks.


2442. We have thought it necessary to make all these remarks
on the two kinds of succession, before we enter on the detail of
the rules of this matter; and this we have done chiefly for two
reasons. One is, that we might give as it were in a plan these
general ideas of the nature of successions, which is a subject of a —
very large extent. The other is, that we might fix and lay down
in this plan the grounds and principles on which depend many
rules which shall be particularly explained hereafter. And because
some other kinds of succession are used in France, which are
either altogether unknown in the Roman law, or which have by
the customs of France some rules peculiar to them, we have
thought fit to add the following remarks concerning them.


X. Of Institutions of Heirs by Contract.


2443, Besides the two sorts of successions, legal and testa-
mentary, of which we have spoken hitherto, there is in France a
third kind of succession of a quite different nature, which is that
of heirs instituted by contract or covenant, that is to say, of heirs
instituted by a contract which ascertains to them the right of
succession; the use whereof is very frequent in contracts of mar-
nage, in favor of the persons who marry, whether it be that they
are instituted heirs by their fathers and mothers, or other ascend-
ants, or by collateral relations, or even by strangers; and some
customs allow of these dispositions, not only in contracts of mar-
nage, but likewise in other contracts, as in a general partnership
of all the goods of the partners.

2444. These ways of naming heirs or executors are called insti-
tutions by contract, which are lawful, and even favorably received
in France, because they render marriages more easy and more fre-
quent, the persons who enter into that state having the advantage
of being assured of these institutions in their favor, which for
this reason are irrevocable; whereas in the Roman law all institu-
tons of heirs by contract were declared unlawful, as being con-
trary to the liberty which every one has to dispose of his estate
by his last will and testament.*

2445. Remarks on some Principles which relate to Institutions by
“Contract. Seeing these institutions by contract are no part of


* L. 15, C. de pactis.


22 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL


the Roman law, but djrectly contrary to it, they do not come
within the design of this book, and therefore we shall not treat of
them expressly. But the reader shall find here all the essential
principles, and the rules which are necessary for these sorts of in-
stitutions, that is, all the rules which are of natural equity, and
upon which one may reason. For we must observe, that all the
rules which can have any relation to institutions by contract may
be reduced to these kinds. The first kind consists of the peculiar
rules which each custom hath established for those sorts of insti-
tutions; and all these rules are nothing else but arbitrary statutes,
different according to the different customs, and which are easy to
be seen in each custom. The second comprehends the rules of
successions, whether legal or testamentary, which are of natural
equity, and which may be applied to these institutions by con-
tract; and these sorts of rules shall be explained in this second
part, every one in its proper place. The third kind is made up
of the rules of covenants, as, for example, those which concern the
interpretation of them, and the others which may likewise be
applied to contracts of succession; and these have been already
explained in the first part. So that this book shall contain all the
rules of natural justice and equity, and all the principles on which
the decisions in the matter of successions by contract may de-
pend; and it will be sufficient for us to take notice here of one
essential principle, of great use in this matter, and by which we
ought to examine the use of all the particular rules which may
have any relation to successions of this kind.

2446. This principle consists in this, that institutions by con-
tract being of a mixed nature, and consisting partly of testaments
and partly of covenants, and by consequence their rules being of

“the same mixture, and consisting of the nature of covenants as
well as of testaments, we ought in each difficulty to distinguish
which of these two sorts of rules is proper to be applied to it;

. and to consider whether it is by the rules of covenants, or by the
rules of testaments, that the difficulty is to be resolved, according
as the one or the other are most applicable to it; for there happen
daily in this matter questions of both these natures. And that
we may the better comprehend the truth of this principle and its
use, it will not be improper to make application of it in some ex-
amples of general difficulties which are easy to be resolved, but
which may help us to judge of others.

2447. For a first example, we may suppose that it is made a


PREF. | SUCCESSIONS. 23


question, whether one who is instituted heir by his contract of
marriage is at liberty, after the death of the person who has made
him his heir, to renounce the succession, or whether he is under
an obligation to accept it. If this question were to be decided by
the rules of covenants, it might seem that, as they form mutual
obligations, and that he who has by contract instituted one to be
his heir cannot revoke it, so in the same manner he who is insti-
tuted heir should be obliged on his part to accept the succession.
But as it is essential to the quality of an heir or executor that he
should accept the same, not by force, but freely and voluntarily,
and that it would be unjust that he who could assure to himself
a necessary heir should have the liberty of ruining him, by bur-
dening the succession with debts, legacies, and other charges
above the value of the goods, it is plain that this question ought
to be decided by the rules of successions, which give to heirs the
liberty of accepting or renouncing them, as they find convenient.

2448. If we suppose, for a second instance, that it were called
in doubt whether he who has instituted his heir by a contract of
marriage may recall that institution at his pleasure; if this ques-
tion were to be determined by the rules of successions, it would
appear just that he might alter this institution, and name another
heir. But because this liberty would be directly contrary to the
intent of these kinds of institutions, which is to ascertain the suc-
cession to the person who is named heir by his contract of marriage,
and to give him that assurance by a covenant that is irrevocable;
it is by the rules of covenants that this question ought to be de-
cided; and according to those rules, which make firm and irrevo-
cable whatever has been stipulated by a covenant, it is essential
to such an institution that it cannot be recalled.

2449. If, for a third example, we put the case, that it were
doubted whether he who has made one his heir by contract, not
being at liberty to revoke this institution, may nevertheless alien-
ate his goods, and dispose of them at pleasure in his lifetime, in
the same manner as if he had made no such institution. If this
question were to be decided by the rules of covenants, there would
be very good reason to doubt whether the alienations ought to be
permitted without any bounds, so as to render the institution of
the heir fruitless and of no effect, the person who has instituted
him heir having alienated all his goods, or contracted debts that
would exhaust them. But as this institution differs from those
which are made by testament only in this, that it is irrevocable, to


24 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr IL


the end that the heir by contract may be sure of succeeding to the
goods which shall remain after the death of the person who has
made him heir; this question ought to be decided by the rules of
testaments, which give to the heir only the goods which the testa-
tor leaves behind him at his death, but do not deprive him of the
liberty to alienate or mortgage them during his life. So that this
heir by contract could have no ground of complaint, unless it were
on account of donations, or other fraudulent alienations, made
with design to elude the institution.

2450. It is easy to judge, by these three examples, in what man-
ner we ought to discern, in the questions which may happen te
arise concerning institutions by contract, whether the difficulties
depend on the rules which belong to the matter of covenants, or
on those which are proper to testaments, or whether both these
sorts of rules may be applied to them, in the cases which happen
not to be regulated by the customs.


XI. Succession of those who die without leaving behind them any
Relations, or any Testament.


2451. The ways of succeeding of which we have spoken hith-
erto, have for their foundation either the proximity of blood be-
tween the heir and the person to whom he succeeds, or the will of
him who makes an heir or executor. But there is another sort of
succession, which has neither the one nor the other of these foun-
dations, and which, on the contrary, takes place only when he who
leaves goods behind him after his death has no relations, and has
made no will. For in that case, it is necessary that the goods
which he has left behind him should find a master; and this is
what the laws have taken care of.

2452. Succession of the Husband to the Wife, and of the Wife to
the Husband. — Succession of the Exchequer for Want of Heirs. —
By the Roman law the husband and wife succeed one to the other,
when any of them who dies first has no descendants, ascendants,
or collateral relations, and dies without making any will* And
if one who is not married, and who has likewise no heir of blood,
dies without disposing of his goods by will, they belong to the ex-
chequer, which in this case holds the place of heir.

2453. This succession of the husband to the wife, and of the
wife to the husband, is regulated after this manner, according to


® L.un. C. unde vir. of uxor. b 7.1, C de bon. vacant.


PREF. | SUCCESAIONS. 26


some customs in France. Others, on the contrary, have expressly
ordered that the exchequer should exclude the husband and the
wife; and some, by a singular hardship, prefer the exchequer, or
the lord of the fee, who has the rights of the exchequer, not only
to the husband and wife, but even to the nearest relations, unless
they be of the stock from which the goods did proceed. But in
the other customs of France, which have established nothing
touching this matter, and in the provinces which are governed by
the written law, it seems just to follow the rule of the Roman
law: and we see likewise that it is received into use by several
examples. For seeing the Roman law is the common law of
France, in every thing which is not abolished, or contrary to usage,
it ought with much more reason to be received as law, when that
which it ordains is agreeable to the law of nature and equity:
and it may be said of the succession of the husband to the wife,
and of the wife to the husband, that it is of this order of laws,
when other heirs are wanting. And we ought not to look upon
this manner of succession as being any way derogatory to the
rights of the exchequer; for besides that this case falls out so very
seldom, that the consequence of it ought to be counted for nothing,
the right of the exchequer in successions ought not to take place,
except where there is nobody whom any law calls to the inheri-
tance. And it cannot be said that the husband and the wife are
not called to succeed one to the other by any law, seeing they are
called thereto by this common law, and that this law which calls
them to the succession one of another is founded on the law of
nature, and on the divine law, which hath formed so strict a
union between the husband and the wife, and which of two distinct
persons hath made them one, that they might be the source of the
birth of men, and of their relations to one another, the nearest de-
gree of which makes a much slenderer tie and union than that
of marriage. Thus, seeing marriage is the source of the relations
which give the right to succeed, it is altogether natural to give to
the husband and wife the right of excluding the exchequer.

2454. As for the succession of the exchequer, which succeeds
when there are no other heirs, it is founded on this, that the goods
which happen to have no master pass naturally to the use of the
public, and accrue to the prince who is the head of the state, and
to whose use goods of this kind, and other casualties, are appro-
priated by the public, for the maintenance and support of the
piincely dignity. Thus, in France the successions of those who

3


VOL. II.


26 THE CIVIL Law. [PART Ii.


die without heirs, or without having disposed of their estates by
will, are acquired to the king. In like manner the king has the
right of succeeding to bastards, who leave no heirs of their own
body, to aliens, and to goods confiscated, of which we shall speak
in the three following articles. But these matters not coming
within the design of this book, we shall only observe here, in gen-
eral, the relation which they have to the matter of successions,
and that without touching upon the grants, either of all these
rights, or a part of them, which have been made by kings to the
lords of manors within their respective lands.


XIL Succession of Bastards.


2455. We must reckon in the number of successions which ac-
crue to the prince, that of bastards who die without leaving chil-
dren lawfully begotten of their own bodies, and without disposing
of their estates by will. For by our usage no man succeeds to a
bastard dying intestate but his children, if he has any lawfully be-
gotten ; and they likewise succeed to nobody, except it be by tes-
tament. This right of succession to bastards is grounded upon
this, that the succession of one who dies intestate is conveyed by
the relation of blood that is between the heir and the person to
whom he succeeds, and that we do not own any other relation be-
sides that which one has by being born in lawful wedlock. Thus,
as to the succession of bastards, our law is different from the dis-
position of the Roman law, as to which it is not necessary that
we should enlarge any farther here.°


XIII. Succession of Foreigners, who are called Aliens.


2456. There is yet another kind of succession which belongs to
the king. It is that of strangers, who are called aliens, that is,
those who are born in a country that is not subject to the king, or
to which our kings have not granted the right of naturalization, as
they have done to some neighbouring nations. By virtue of this
right to the successions of aliens, the king acquires the estate of a
foreigner who has not been naturalized in France by letters of
naturalization; which is founded not only on the Roman law,*


© V.§ 4, Inst. de success. cogn. ; —§ ult. Inst. de senatusc. Tertull. ;— § 8, Inst. de senat.
Orphst. ; —1. 29, § 1, D. de tnoff test. ; 2. 2 et 4, D. unde cogn.; — Nov. 89, c. 12; —v. ¢.
15, eod. See the eighth article of the second section of Heirs and Erecutors in general, and
the remark on that article. See Gen. xxi. 10; xxv. 6; — Deut. xxiii. 2;— Gal. iv. 30.

® V. 1. 6, § 2, D. de hered. inst.; —1. 1, C. eod.; — Ulp. tit. 17, § 1; tit. 22, § 2.


PRF.| SUCCESSIONS. 9


the other stock. Which has this double effect, that it preserves
the goods of inheritance in the same families from which they
came, and likewise provides what seems to be equitable in favor
of the ascendanta. ,;

2419. The Third Order, Succession of Collaterals. — The third
order of legal successions, which is that of collaterals, is founded
on the same natural equity which calls the descendants and as-
cendants to successions. For the goods which ought to pass from
the deceased to his descendants, or in default of them to his as-
cendants, go naturally to those who represent the said ascendants,
and who derive from them their origin, in common with the de-
ceased. Thus, we may say in general of these three sorts of suc-
cessions, of descendants, ascendants, and collaterals, that all the
persons who ate united by birth in one of these three orders are
considered as one family, to which God has appropriated the
goods of all the particular pereons whereof it consists, in order to
make them to pass from one to the other successively, according
to the degree of their nearness of kin. And, in fine, this succes-
sion by proximity is so natural, that it has been confirmed by the
divine law.

2420. To this we may subjoin, as another principle of the equity
of succession by proximity of blood, which is a consequence of
the former, that, although there were no other law for successions
besides the will of those who dispose of their goods, it would be
just and natural that every one should call his nearest relations to
succeed to his estate, unless he should have particular reasons that
might oblige him to dispose of it otherwise. For the union which
is formed by birth between ascendants, descendants, and collater-
als, being the first tie which God instituted among men, to unite
them together in society, and to engage them to the duties of mu-
tual love; every one, in the choice of an heir, ought to have regard
to those persons to whom God, by this first tie, has united him
more strictly than to others, and not to deprive them of his goods
without a just cause. Thus, we may say that the legal succes-
sions have this in their favor, that they are not only conformable
to the order and institution of nature, which calls to the succes-
sion the nearest relations, by the right of blood, and by appropri-
ating the goods to the families; but they are likewise most
consistent with the love and affection which those who dispose
of their goods ought to have for their relations, unless they have


d Numb. xxvii. 8, 9, 10, 11.


28 THE OIVIL Law. [Part 1


without children. This is differently regulated in different cu
toms, according to the conditions which were agreed on in relation
to this right when it was first established ; in the same manner as
we see the conditions of fiefs differently regulated in the original
grants thereof. The persons who possess these sorts of lands and
tenements are called persons of a servile condition, and the lands
which are held on this condition return to the lord, whenever the
case happens, as being a kind of succession which falls to him by
the death of the possessor, and which might be called a reversion
by covenant*


XVI. The Use of these last Remarks on the different Kinds of
Successions.


2459. Of all these sorts of successions aforementioned, which
transmit estates to the king, or to the lord of the manor, there is
not one which comes regularly within the design of this book, as
has been already observed. For they are matters which either be-
long to the public law, or to the customs. But although these
kinds of successions come not properly within the design of this
book, yet it was necessary to make these general remarks concern-
ing them, in order, not only to give an idea of all that may be
comprehended under the word succession,* and to distinguish what
relates to the successions which we are to treat of in this second
part from all that may have any relation to them, but more
especially to inform the reader, that even in those kinds of succes-
sions which are either part of the public law, or peculiar to the
customs, the rules of succession which shall be explained in this
second part may be applied to them in the cases where there is
any resemblance ; such as the rules which concern in general the
quality of the heir, the rights and burdens of heirs, their engage-
ments, and other rules which it will be easy to discover if they can
be of any use in those other kinds of successions, although no men-
tion be made thereof in the places where they shall be explained.


* See the end of the preamble of the fourth section of Heirs and Executors in general.

* We have not comprehended under the word succession the peculism, or small patri-
mony, which some professed monks may leave behind them at their death. For seeing
they themselves had no right of property therein, it is not by succession that that little
patrimony which they leave behind them passes to the pereons who are to have it


BOOK I.


OF SUCCESSIONS IN GENERAL.


2460. Matters treated of in this Book. — It is not necessary to
explain here what are all the particular matters treated of in this
‘first book. This appears sufficiently from the table, and from the
plan of the several matters which has been laid down in the Trea-
lise of Laws.* And it sufficeth to remark in general, that, as there
are some matters common to both kinds of successions, the legal
and testamentary, it is of these common matters that we are to
treat in this first book, before we pass to the matters which are
peculiar to each kind of succession.


TITLE Tf.


OF HEIRS AND EXECUTORS IN GENERAL.


2461. Tue name and quality of heir agree equally to the heir at
law or next of kin, that is, the person whom the law calls to the
succession, and to the heir instituted by testament, in the same
manner as the words succession and inheritance are common to the
two kinds of succession, that by testament and that of intestates.
And although there be this difference between the provinces of
France which are governed by their customs, and those which are
governed by the written law, that in the customs they give the
name of heir, as has been observed in the preface to this second
part, only to the heirs of blood, who are the heirs at law, and give


* See the fourteenth chapter, no. 14, 15, 16, of the Theatise of Lawe.
* See the preface, no. 7. -


30 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK |.


the name only of universal legatees to those who are instituted
heirs by a testament ; whereas, in the provinces which are governed
by the written law, they give the name of heir to him who is inst-
tuted by testament, as well as to him who is heir of blood: this
difference consisting only in the name, they are all of them equally
considered as heirs, and we may apply to the universal legatees
in the customs, as well as to all the other sorts of heirs, the rules
which shall be explained in this title, and likewise the rules con-
tained in the other titles, in so far as the said rules may be appli
cable to them. 4s to the detail of this first title of Heirs and Ex
ecutors in general, the table of the sections which compose it shows
plainly enough what are the matters to be treated of in it.


SECTION I.


OF THE QUALITY OF HEIR OR EXECUTOR, AND OF THE
INHERITANCE.


2462. Aut the articles of this section agree both to the heirs by
testament and to the heirs at law.


ARTICLE L


2463. Definition of Heir. — The heir or executor is he who 1s
universal successor to all the goods and all the rights of the de-
ceased, and who is bound to acquit all the charges and burdens of
the said goods.*


II.


2464. Two Sorts of Heirs. -— There are two sorts of heirs: those
who are instituted, that is to say, who are named by a testament,
who are called testamentary heirs; and those to whom the law
gives the inheritance on account of their proximity in blood, who
are called, for that reason, heirs at law. And they are called like-


® ZL. 9, § 12, D. de heered. inst.;—1. 37, D. de acquir. vel om. hared. ;—1. 2, C. de her.
act. As to these words, of ail the goods and all the rights of the deceased, see the fifth
article. And concerning the charges, see the seventh article.

We have put down in the definition what is said in the second of these texts, that the
heir succeeds to all the goods and to all the rights, although there may happen to be leg-
atees who have a share of the goods; for the heir is the universal successor, and the
legacies are a part of the charges which he is to acquit.


PREF.| SUCCESSIONS. 13


agree in, we may reasonably draw this consequence, that, since it
is agreeable to the law of nature that succession should go to the
next of kin, and that it is likewise equitable that those who have
goods may dispose of them by will, the spirit and intention of
the laws which have permitted the making of testaments has
been, that the liberty of bequeathing should be regulated in every
one according to pradence, which may determine the use of this
liberty to more or less, according to the condition of his estate,
his family, and his different obligations to other persons besides
his children, if he has any, or his other near relations; for it is by
these circumstances, and others of the like kind, the various com-
binations of which are infinite, that every one ought to regulate
his dispositions, and proportion them to his substance, and to the
different obligations he lies under. Thus, those who have but a
small estate, and a great many children, are less at liberty to dis-
pose of their goods by will, than those who are rich, and have no
children. In like manner, those persons who have poor relations
are under a greater tie and obligation towards them, than those
are whose relations are wealthy and in a good condition. Thus,
in general, the circumstances in which every one happens to be
point out to him the use of this prudence, which ought to be his
rule and guide.

2427. If we consult, therefore, only natural equity, which ought
to be the spirit of all laws, we shall be apt to conclude that the
principle which justifies this liberty of bequeathing by will is
nothing else but the equity that is in the use of this prudence.
Thus, it would seem that we may reasonably suppose that those
who made the laws concerning successions did agree in this prin-
ciple, and were divided only in the consequences which they
drew from it, and made as it were two parties; from whence have
sprung the two different sorts of laws which are extant concerning
this matter.

2428. The one is that of the Roman law, the authors whereof
thought it proper to leave to every one an entire liberty to dispose
of his goods as he pleases; and they did not think the incon-
veniences arising from the bad use which some might make of
this liberty to be a sufficient cause why it should not be left com-
mon to all persons; to the end that the condition of those who
are reasonable might not be restrained within the bounds which


> Inet. de lege Faleidia.
VOL. It. 2


32. THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IT. BOOK L


VL

2468. An Inheritance may be without any Goods.— Seeing an
inheritance consists in goods and rights, subject to debts and to
other charges, and that it may so fall out either that the debts and
charges exceed the goods, or that the goods, if there remain any
after all the charges are cleared, are diminished, or even quite de-
stroyed ; this word inheritance is only a term of law, that is to
say, which does not denote any sort of goods in particular, but
which signifies in general the right which the heir has, and which
is applicable as well to a succession that is overburdened with
debts and other charges, as to a plentiful succession, where there
is a residue of goods after all the charges are acquitted. Thus,
the heir may chance to have only the bare name, without any
profit, and sometimes even with loss.é


VIL


2469. Three Sorts of Charges in a Succession. — The charges of
the succession are of three sorts. The first is of those which are due
independently of the will of the deceased; such as the debts which
he owes, the restitution of goods which are substituted, if he had
any such in his possession. The second sort consists of those
which he himself may have directed, such as legacies. And the
third sort is made up of those which may happen after his death,
such as the funeral charges.”


VIIL


2470. The Heir or Executor is in the Place of the Deceased. —
The heir or executor succeeding to the estate, and to the burdens
of it, he puts himself in the place of the deceased, and his con-
dition is the same as if he had covenanted with him, that, on con-
dition he would leave him his goods after his death, he should be
obliged to pay his debts and to acquit the other charges, and as if
he had expressly bound himself to those persons to whom he may
be under engagements, by virtue of this quality of heir or exec-
utor. Thus, the condition of the heir or executor is, in one
sense, the same with that of the deceased, in that he has all the
same goods, and the same rights, and that he is obliged to bear


6 L. 119, D. de verb. signif. ;—1. 178, § 1, eod.
h These different sorts of charges shall be explained each in its proper place. See the
sixth and following sections.


TIT. I. SEC. 1.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 33~


the charges of them, in so far as the said goods and rights may
pass to him, as has been explained in the fifth article.!


19.¢


2471. Three Characters of the Engagement of the Heir. — This
engagement, which obliges the heir or executor to all the charges
and to all the consequences of the inheritance, has three essential
characters, which it is necessary to remark and to distinguish.
It is irrevocable, it is universal, it is indivisible: and these three
qualities have the effects which shall be explained in the following
rules!


X.


272. This Engagement is Irrevocable.—The engagement of
the heir is irrevocable, and he who, being of age, once takes upon
himself the quality of heir shall be always heir, and can never,
upon any pretence whatsoever, divest himself of that character, or
free himself from the engagements which attend it; not even al-
though the goods should be less than the charges, nor under pre-
text of the loss and diminution of the effective goods, nor of the
charges that were, perhaps, unknown to him. For he ought to
have foreseen these events; and he may be charged with having
found in the succession goods which he has concealed,” unless he
had taken the precaution to accept the inheritance under the ben-
eit of an inventory, of which we shall speak more fully under the
second title. |


XL


2473. Et is Universal.— The engagement of the heir is univer-
sal, and extends itself to all the debts owing by the deceased, and


'L.3,§ ult. D. quid. ex caus. in poss. eatur ; — § 5, inf Inst. de obl. que quasi ex contr.
na. ;—1. 59, D. de reg. jur.; —1. 120, eod. The engagement of the heir cannot be looked
Upon as a kind of contract, as it is called in these texts, without supposing that he has
engaged himself to some person. Which may be applied to an engagement towards the

by a retroactive effect, or towards his memory, and to an engagement towards
the creditors and legatees. See, concerning the engagement towards the deceased, the
fourteenth article.

We call that a retroactive effect, which makes a thing that has happened after another
to be considered in snoh a manner as to give it the same effect as if the last thing had
happened at the same time with the first.

I This is consequence of the preceding articles, and of those which follow.

™ L. 7,410, inf. D. de minor. ;—l. 8, D. de acquir. vel omit. hared. ;—1. 4, C. de repud.
hered. See the seventeenth article. We have added in the article these words, who
being of age, that we might not comprehend minors within this rule; as to which, see the
fenth and following articles of the second section of Rescissions.


‘9A THE CIVIL LAW. [PART If. BOOK |.


to all the kinds of obligations to which the deceased was a party,
and which might affect his estate. As if he was under any en-
gagement on account of things which he had sold, bought, ex-
changed, hired, or let to hire, or other covenants; if he was en-
gaged in any tutorship, or other administration; if he was surety
for other persons; if he had succeeded to some inheritance. And
in general, the heir or executor, who has taken upon him that
character, has obliged himself indefinitely to all the charges which
the deceased owed, and likewise to those which the deceased may
have imposed upon him by a testament, or other disposition. For
by succeeding to all the goods of the inheritance, he subjects him-
self to all the charges without distinction.”


XII.


2474. It is Indivisible. — The engagement of the heir is indivis-
ible, for he cannot confine his acceptance of the succession either
to any certain kind of goods, or to a certain portion of goods of
the same kind, so as to diminish the charges in proportion. And
even although it were a testamentary heir, instituted for two dif-
ferent portions of the inheritance, one of which should be left him |
on conditions which he should agree to, and the other portion left |
on conditions which he should not approve of, yet he could not
renounce the one and accept the other. And much less can the
heir, having once accepted the inheritance, divide the charges
thereof, in order to free himself either from some of them, or from |
a part of each of them, under pretext that there are not goods sui-
ficient to acquit all the charges, or even that the whole goods and
the whole rights of the succession are entirely perished.°


XIII.


2475. The Inheritance is divided among the Coheirs.— Although
the quality of heir be indivisible in the sense explained in the fore-


= IL. 62, D. de reg. jur.; —1. 2, C. de hered. act. See the sixteenth article.

© Tl. 1 et 2, D. de acq. vel omitt. hared. ; —1. 20, C. de jur. delib.; —l. 10, D. de acg. vd
omitt. hered. The rule explained in this article is not contrary to that rule of the cus-
toms, by which the succession of one who leaves behind him goods paternal and goods
maternal ought to be divided; and the relations of the father’s side, who succeed to the
paternal goods, are not bound for the debts and charges which ought to be acquitted ont
of the maternal goods; as, on the contrary, the heirs of the mother’s side who succeed to
the maternal goods are not answerable for the debts and charges which respect only the
paternal goods. For these two kinds of goods are considered as two different successions
which go to different heirs.


TIT. I. SBC. 1] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 35


going article, yet the goods and charges of the inheritance, which
one sole heir cannot divide in order to free himself of a part of
them, may nevertheless be divided among the heirs, when there
are more than one, according to the portions which may belong to
each of them, whether the same be regulated by the law, as if they
are heirs to an intestate, who are called jointly to the succession,
or by a testament, if they are testamentary heirs. And they may
likewise in their partitions divide among themselves the goods and
the charges in what manner they please, as shall be explained
hereafter in the proper place.?


XIV.


2476. The Succession not as yet entered to represent the De-
ceased. — Since it often falls out that the inheritance remains for
some time without a master, either because he who ought to suc-
ceed is absent, or that he deliberates whether he shall accept or
renounce the inheritance, and that, during these intervals, it may
happen that some right may accrue to the succession, or that it
may be engaged in new charges, or other affairs, the said inherit-
ance is therefore considered as holding the place of master, and
as representing the deceased to whom the goods did belong.?


XV.


77. The Heir is reputed such from the Moment of the Death of
the Person to whom he succeeds. — After the inheritance which had
lain some time without a master is accepted by the heir, his ac-
ceptance of, or entry to, the inheritance has this retroactive effect,
that it makes him to be considered in the same manner as if he
had entered to the succession in the moment that it fell to him by
the death of the person to whom he succeeds. And whatever
space of time there may have been between the said death and
the act by which he takes upon himself the quality of heir, it will
be the same thing as if he had declared his acceptance at the time
of the death: and as he will have all the goods which may have
augmented the succession, so he will be also bound for all the
charges that have fallen out since the death of the person to whom
he succeeds.*


P See the ninth section of this title, and the first section of Partitions.

VL. 116, § 3, D. de legat. 1;—1. 31, inf. D. de heered. instit.

" L. 54, D. de acq. vel omitt. hared. ; —1.193, D da reg. jur.;—1.138, D.eod. See the

ird section of the sixth article. We have not explained in this article what is meant
by the word retroactive, having already explained it in the remark on the eighth article.


36 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART IT. BOOK |


XVI.

2478. Several Successions of one Heir to another pass all of them
to the last Heir. —It follows from the preceding rules, that, the
heir being universal successor to all the goods, and bound irrevo-
cably and without distinction for all the charges, if the person to
whom he succeeds had likewise succeeded to others, the goods
and chattels which remain of the successions which the deceased
had inherited pass to his heir. And whatever number of heirs
there may have been successively one to the other, whether by
testament or without testament, he who succeeds to the last of
the said heirs succeeds to all the others, and will be liable for
all the charges of those successions,® although in the last succes
sions there should be no goods belonging to any of the former;
for the charges of each succession are transmitted from one heir
to the other: thus the last heir takes them all upon himself.


XVIL


2479. The Heir who divests himself of the Inheritance is never-
theless bound for all the Charges. — It follows, also, from the same
rules, that he who has once entered to an inheritance, or done any
act which may be construed as taking upon him the quality of
heir, according to the rules which shall be explained in the first
section of the third title, shall remain always heir; and although
he should afterwards divest himself of the inheritance, whether it
be by making it over to another by a deed of gift or by sale, or by
leaving it to the person who next to him had the right to succeed,
or by abandoning it, or disposing of it otherwise in any manner
whatsoever, he will, nevertheless, be always accounted as heir,
and be liable for all the charges. For the engagement by which
he took upon himself the quality of heir is irrevocable. But he
may be warranted against all the burdens of the succession by
the person to whom he shall have sold, given, or yielded up his
right.


XVIII.


2480. He who receives a Sum of Money to abstain from the Suc-
cession is reputed Heir.— We may place in the same rank with


* L. 7,42, D.de acq. vel omitt. hered.; —1.3, D. de hoered. petit. ; — 1.194, D. de reg. jur.;
— 1. ult. C. de harred. instit. ; —1. 65, D. de verb. signif.

t Z. 2, C. de legat.; —I. 7, in f. D. de minor. See the following article, and the eighth,
ninth, and tenth articles of the first section of the third title.


TIT. I. SEC. L] HEIBS AND BKECUTORS. 37


the heir who, having once accepted the succession, does afterwards
dispose of it, him who renounces it for a certain price, that it may
go to the person who next to him has the right to succeed. For
although he may seem not to be heir, having renounced the suc-
cession, yet he really and truly sells his right of inheritance, which
no one can do but as being heir. In the same manner as every
one who sells any other thing declares himself to be master of it,
and by divesting himself of it he exercises a right of proprietor.
Thus, the heir who for a certain price renounces the succession
remains still heir with respect to the creditors and legatees, al-
though he loses the rights appertaining to that quality with respect
to him to whom he has made them over."


XIX.


2481. The Succession of Intestates does not take place, if there
ts a Testament which subsists. — When the question is to know to
whom the succession of a person deceased doth appertain, we must
always first inquire whether he has disposed of it by will. For
whether the testator have children or not, he may make disposi-
tions which change the order of the succession of intestates, and
which ought to be executed. So that, in order to know who has
the right to the goods, we must always begin with the testa-
ments.”


XX.


2482. If the Portions of the Heirs are not regulated, they will be
equal. — If there are-several testamentary heirs, whose portions of
the inheritance are not regulated by the testament, or several heirs
to one dying intestate, and the law has not determined the shares
which every one ought to have, they shall be equal. For it being
necessary to divide the inheritance, and there being no reason for
an inequality in the partition, the heirs ought all of them to have
as much the one as the other’


" L.2, D. st quis om. caus. test.; —1. 1, C. si omissa sit caus. testam. See the ninth arti-
cle of the first section of the third title.

* L. 39, D. de acquir. vel om. her. ;—1. 70, ed. The rule explained in this article has
bothing in it contrary to what has been said in the preface, no. 8, touching the question,
Which of the two sorts of succession is most favorable, whether that of the heirs by testa-
ment, or that of the heirs of blood ; for here we speak only of cases where the testament
ought to have its effect.

Y L.9,§ 19, D. de heered. instit. We have said in this article, with respect to the heirs
of one dying intestate, that their portions shall be equal if the law does not regulate them.

VOL. If. 4


38 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART M1. BOOKL


SECTION II.


WHO MAY BE HEIR OR EXECUTOR, AND WHO ARE THE PERSONS
INCAPABLE OF THAT QUALITY.


2483. In order to know who may be heir or executor, it is neces
sary to know who are the persons incapable of this quality; for
these being excepted, all others are capable of it. There are two
sorts of persons who cannot be heirs or executors, those who are
incapable of this quality, and those who have rendered themselves
unworthy of it. We shall explain in this section the causes which
render persons incapable of succeeding, and in the following sec
tion those which render persons unworthy of it. The incapacities
of succeeding may respect both the successions of intestates, and
the testamentary successions: and it will be easy to perceive in
each article the effect of the incapacity with regard to these two
sorts of succession.

2484. It is to be observed, touching the causes which render per-
sons incapable of succeeding, that, besides those which shall be
explained in this section, there is one which is received in some
customs of France, which exclude the daughter, who is married by
her father, and even without giving her any portion, not only from
the succession of her father, but from all other successions of in-
testates, both in the direct and collateral line, when there are male
children, or issue of male children. And by a universal usage,
this exclusion hath been extended to daughters who, being married
and endowed by their father, renounce all successions that may
fall to them by the death of any one dying intestate, in favor of
the male issue, which begets an incapacity, or rather an exclu-
sion by agreement from the said successions, founded on the re-
gard that is shown to the male issue, in order to preserve the
estates in the families; the daughters who are married finding in
the family of their husbands the same advantages which they
leave to their brothers and their descendants when they go out of


For it may happen among coheirs to one dying intestate, fhat their portions are not
equal because of the right of representation. Thus, for example, if there are several
children of a son deceased, who divide with their uncle the succession of their grand-
father, they will have no more among them all than the moicty which their father would
have had, and the other moiety will go to their uncle. And it happens often in the cus-
-toms of France, that there are different heirs to different goods.


TIT. I. SEC. I1.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 39


their own family. And this usage is justified by the example of
the divine law, which excluded the daughters from the inheritance
of their fathers, as long as there was any of the male issue alive.*
We may consider likewise as another reason for this usage of the
exclusion of daughters, who by their marriages renounce their right
to all legal successions in favor of the males, and of their descend-
ants, the uncertainty of events, which makes it to be thought rea-
sonable that the father, in giving to his daughter a marriage portion,
may lawfully impose on her this condition, that the portion which
he gives her in hand and at present shall be to her in lieu of the
uncertain hopes of all intestate successions that might here-
after fall to her. But this exclusion doth not extend to testamen-
tary dispositions; and this renunciation of a married daughter
does not render her incapable of dispositions made in prospect of
death for her benefit, whether it be by other persons, or even by
her father.

2485. Seeing this exclusion of daughters by a renunciation in
their contract of marriage is not a part of the Roman law, but is
directly contrary to it, it is not a matter that comes properly
within the design of this book; but we have thought fit to make
this remark upon it. And we may add, that the reader shall have
here all the rules that are essential to the matter of this renuncia-
tion; for they depend on the rules of covenants, and on those of
successions, which are here explained: and we shall likewise insert
bere the rules which concern institutions by contract, pursuant to
the remark which has been made on this subject in the preface,
no. 10.

2486. Lastly, it may be remarked on this subject of the in-
capacity of succeeding, that, besides that of the daughters who
have renounced their right to all intestate successions, there is an-
other sort of incapacity introduced by the ordinances and some
other customs of France, with respect to testamentary successions,
from which they exclude certain persons. Thus, the ordinances of
France annul all deeds of gift, or testamentary dispositions, made
by donors or testators, in favor of their tutors, curators, and other
administrators during their administration, or to other persons for
their behoof ;° which some customs extend to other persons, from
whom the donors or testators may receive such impressions as may


* Numb. xxvii. b F,. ult. D. de suis; —1. 8, C. de collat.
* Ordinances of 1539, art. 131, and of 1549, art. 2.


40 TRE CIVIL LAW. [ParT 1. BOOK 1


diminish the liberty of disposing. Thus, upon the like consider
ations, or upon other views, some customs exclude the husband
and the wife from receiving any benefit by dispositions made in
favor one of another: which some customs restrain to the dispo
sitions made by the wife in favor of her husband, not prohibiting
those of the husband in favor of the wife. But there is this dif-
ference between these incapacities or exclusions regulated by the
ordinances and by the customs, and the incapacities treated of in
this section, that these are founded on qualities which respect the
state of the persons, and render them incapable by reason of some
personal defect, whereas the others are founded on motives which
have no relation either to the state of the persons or to any defect;
but which respect only some advantage for the good of families.


Art. IL.


2487. All Persons may be Heirs or Executors, if there is no Im-
pediment. — All persons may be heirs, whether it be to intestates,
if the law calls them to the succession, or that they be named by
a testament; provided there be no cause which exclades them
from the right of succeeding.*


IL
2488. Two Sorts of Incapacity, with Respect to the Two Sorts of
Succession. ——- There are some persons who are incapable only of
succeeding to intestates, and who are capable of testamentary suc
cessions, such as bastards. And there are some who are incapable
of both kinds of succession, such as foreigners, who are called
aliens, and others; of which we shall speak hereafter.


IIL
2489. Two Sorts of Incapacity, with Respect to their Causes. —


The causes of incapacity of succeeding are of two sorts. There |


are some causes which are natural, such as the cause of the inca-
pacity of stillborn children ; and there are others regulated by the
laws, such as that of the incapacity of professed monks.


¢ By the Roman law the husband and wife were allowed to give to one another by do-
nations made in prospect of death, but not by donations that should take effect in their
lifetime. V.l.1, D. de donat. int. vir. a ux. ;—l. $2, eod.;—d.1.1,4§24@8. See the
preamble to the title of Donations.

* Capacity arises from thence, that there is no incapacity.

> See the eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh articles.

© See the following article, and article 10.


TIT. I. SHC. 11,] HEINS AND EXECUTORS. 41


IV.

2490. Of Stiliborn Children, and of those born without Human
Shape. — Stillborn children, although they were alive in their
mother’s womb at the time that any succession fell, whether it be
of one dying intestate, or of one who had made a testament that
might belong to them, do not succeed; and consequently they do
not transmit that succession to the persons who would succeed to
them, if they had died only after their birth. For they could never
be reckoned in the number of persons capable of acquiring goods;
since it may be said, that they never had any existence in this
world, and by consequence could never have right to any thing
in it4 And the same incapacity excludes, with much greater
reason, that which is born of a woman without human shape,
although it may have had life; for it is a monster, or a mass of
flesh, which cannot be ranked in the number of persons.°


V.


2491. Children who die as soon as they ave born succeed. —
Children who are born alive, although they die immediately after
their birth, are capable of the successions which fell in the interval
between their conception and their birth. Thus, a child who was
born alive after the death of his father, and who died in the
moment after his birth, would succeed to him. And if there was
a testament which had called another person to the succession, it
would be annulled by the said birth‘


RemMaRKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2492. Whether a Chiid born before tts Time, but born alive, can
inhertt.— From the rule explained in this article, and the laws
here cited, there naturally arises a question, which, being of fre-
quent use, deserves our consideration ; that is, whether among the
children capable of succeeding we ought to reckon those who,
being born before their time, cannot live, and are born for no other
end but to die. This question is never moved on account of the


4 7.199, D. de verb. signif. ;—1. 2, C. de post. hared. inst. See the following article.

* L.14, D. de stat. hom. ; —v. l. 135, D. de verb. signif. See the fourth article of the
first section of Persons, and these last words of the third law, C. de post. hared. inst., cited
on the following article, si vivus ad orbem totus processit,ad nullum declinans monstrum vel

bicri


ws.
§ Z.2, C. de post. hosred. instit.;—t. 12, § 1, D. de lib. et post. hasred. inst. ;—J. 8, C. de
post. dered. inst.
4°


43 . HB CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK.L


interest of the children themselves, but because of the concem
which other persons have in it. Thus, for example, if a widow,
being with child, is delivered after the death of her husband of a
child of four or five months old, which dies as soon as it is bom,
the question will be between this widow, who will demand that
which the law gives her of her child’s paternal goods, alleging,
that her child succeeded to its father ; and the heirs of the father,
who will pretend that the child, not having been able to live, was
not capable of succeeding ; in which question it will be necessary
to determine whether the child did succeed to its father, or not.
And it would be the same thing with respect to the maternal
goods of the child, if, the child having survived its mother, who
died in childbed, the father should demand, in opposition to the
heirs of the mother, that which he ought to have of the maternal
goods of the said child.

2493. In this question, the heirs of the father, or those of the
mother, would say in one word, that seeing this child could not
live, it could not succeed ; that being incapable of using or stand-
ing in need of any temporal goods, it is incapable of acquiring
any, and consequently of having any share in a succession. And
the father and mother would say, on the contrary, that if the child
is born alive, it is a sufficient reason why it should be counted in
the number of children; that the birth of any person places him in
the world in the rank of men, who are really and truly children of
those from whom they derive their birth; that the birth of this
child, and the care and pains taken about it, both before and at
its birth, have been as chargeable to the parents as the birth of
any other child; so that its death is to them a real loss of a child,
more grievous in one sense than the death of their other children,
and which requires the same consolation which they would have
at the death of any of their other children, by succeeding to them,
which cannot be unless the child be allowed to have a right of
succeeding, that it may leave to its father, or to its mother, that
portion which the law has allotted to the parents of the goods of
their children. That the law gives the right of succession to all
the children without distinction, and excludes none from that
number, except those who, being born without human shape, can-
not be placed in the rank of persons.* That although the said
children can make but little use of the goods, yet their condition


* L. 14, D. de stat. hom. See the preceding article.


TI. I. SBC. 12] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 43


in this respect does not differ from the condition of those children
who, being born in due time, are nevertheless incapable of living,
and who die as soon as they are born, whether it be that their
death is occasioned by the hard labor of their mother, or by some
infirmity, or for the want of a just conformation of their members,
or by some other cause, which, although it makes it impossible for
them to live, and renders the goods in a manner useless to them,
yet it does not for all that make them incapable of successions;
that although the little occasion which children born before their
time may have for the use of the goods expires in a few days, or
even in a few hours, yet it may be said, and not without ground,
that they stand in need of them both before their birth, and even
after they are born, if they live any time, and that it is out of the
goods which belong to them that what they stand in need of
ought to be taken; that it is in consideration of all children
without distinction before their birth, that the law allots to widows
who are with child, and even to those who have estates of their
own, & provision out of the estate of their deceased husbands, dur-
ing their being with child, for the preservation of the child;> and
that curators are assigned to the children who are yet unborn, in
order to take care of the goods which wait for them,° because they
are heirs before they are born, and that, with respect to the acquir-
ing of goods which may belong to them, the law considers them
as if they were already born ;* that the successions of the father
or mother of the said children ought not to remain in suspense
after their birth ; and that seeing they did already belong to them
before they came into the world, upon this condition only that
they should be born alive, and that during the time they remain
in this life these successions can belong to no other person but to
them, it seems just that, adding to these considerations the great
favor which attends the cause of fathers or mothers who survive
their children, we should look upon these successions as being ac-
quired to the children, both on account of the right which the
children had to them even before they were born, and likewise in
consideration of the natural motive which induced our lawgivers
to give to the father or mother the consolation not to lose at the
same time their children, and also their effects;* and likewise


© See the eighth article of the seeond section, Je what Manner Children succeed.

< Bee the seventh article of the said second section, Jn what Manner Children succeed.
* 117, 26, D. de stat. hom.;—1. 7, D. de suis et legit.;—1. 1, D. de vent. in poss mit.
* L.6, D. de jur. dot.


45 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRr 21. BOOK L


for this reason, that the succession of the father or mother of
this child cannot, during its life, go to any other person but
to the child, and that it likewise cannot be one moment without
belonging to somebody or other. That the laws quoted on this
article require nothing more for making children capable of sue-
ceeding, but only that they may have one moment of life at
their birth. That the first of the said laws opposes to the siill-
born child which does not succeed the child that dies immediately
after its birth, and declares it capable of succeeding, whereas the
stillborn child is incapable thereof. 'That the second law requires
only that the child should have a human shape, and be born alive,
integrum antmal cum sptrite. That, as for the third law, it appears
that Justinian has there decided a question that was between two
parties of lawyers, the one pretending that the child which had
given any sign of life at its birth, although it did not cry after the
usual manner of children, might succeed; and the other being of
opinion that crying was necessary in order to prove that the child
had life; which, in all appearance, was founded on the uncertainty
of all the other signs of life. Thus, it would seem that the ques-
tion between those lawyers was not whether a child born before
its time, although born alive, was capable of succeeding, but only
whether we could judge of the child’s being born alive by any
other tokens than that of its crying; which seems, in a manner,
to prove that both parties agreed that a child, although born before
its time, might succeed if it had lived. And likewise, in this dis-
pute, Justinian does not decide that children eome to their full
time, and born alive, should succeed, and that those born before
their time should not succeed, although they should be alive at
their birth, which he ought to have decreed if that had been the
question ; but he only decides in general, and indefinitely, that
children who are born alive may succeed, althongh they die imme-
diately after their birth. That it is true that this law is expressed
in these terms, st vivus perfecte natus est ; but whether the word
perfecte relates to the preceding word vivus, or to the word satas,
which follows, and whether the expression signifies either perfectly
born or perfectly alive, it cannot be gathered from either of these
two meanings, that the words of the law are to be understood only
of a child born at its full time; since a child born before its time
may be born in such a manner as that there can be no room for
doubting of the child’s being perfectly alive, or of its being perfectly
born, that is to say, of its being separated from the bowels of its


TIT, 1. OBC. 11.] HEIRS AND EXEOUTORS. 45


mother, either by a natural and ordinary birth, or by opening the
mother’s body after her death. And the words which follow seem
to explain the law in this manner, since they make the only ques-
tion to be to know whether the child is perfectly born, and whether
it is a child, and not a monster, hoc tantummodo requirendo, si vivus
ad orbem totus processtt, ad nullum declinans monstrum vel prodigium.
That if we should give to this law the effect to exclude all children
who, by reason of their being born before their time, cannot live,
we should be obliged likewige to exclude from successions children
born in the eighth month, who, according to the general opinion,
cannot live. That even the laws which speak of children not
come to their full time consider in them this defect only when
the question is concerning the state of the children, and to know
if they are lawfully begotten or no; whether it be that they are
born too soon after the marriage, or too late after the husband’s
death. It is true that this question regards also the right of suc-
cession, for children who are not legitimate cannot inherit; but
there is not any one of ‘those laws which considers in the childrea
the capacity or incapacity of living, in order to exclude those from
inheriting who, by reason of their being born before their time.
are incapable of living. It is in reference to this question concern-
ing the state of these children that it is said in one law, that a
child born in the seventh month after the marriage is the lawful
child of the husband ;‘ that it is said in another law, that a child
born after the tenth month from the death of the husband does
not succeed to him, the law judging that he has another father;
and it is there added, that a child born in the, hundredth fourscore
and second day is born at its full time; and that if a woman
slave, being made free, happens afterwards to be brought to bed
on the hundredth fourscore and second day after her freedom, her
child shall have been conceived frees Thus, all that is contained
in those laws, which has any relation to the capacity or incapacity
of these children to inherit, concerns only their state and their
quality of legitimacy, without taking it into consideration whether
they may or may not live. There is another text, which, although
itis not in the body of the law, is, nevertheless, of some authority,
because it is in the works of the lawyer Paulus, one of the first
authors of the Roman laws, in which it is said that a child of
seven months is counted in the number of children, and is of ad-


€ T.19, D. de stat. hom. & L.8,§ pen. et ult. D. de suis et legit. heeved.


46 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK L


vantage to its mother. From whence it follows, that a child bom
before that time is of no benefit to her. But this is only in re-
lation to the ancient Roman law, which gave the mother right to
succeed to her children only when she had three of them. So
that this rule, any more than the others already mentioned, had no
relation to the capacity or incapacity of these children for succes-
sions, and it served only to exclude the children born before the
seventh month from being of the number of children necessary to
entitle the mother to this right of inheritance; which was founded
on this reason, that the law which required that the mother should
have three children to entitle her to this right had in view the ad-
vantage which accrued to the commonwealth by the multipli-
cation of children, and considered that thoee who could not live
were of no advantage in that respect. That, in fine, if children
which are born before their time are incapable of inheriting, there
will arise a great many inconveniences from the difficulty of judg-
ing of the time of the conception of a child, in order to know
whether it is born at its full time or not; and likewise from the
uncertainty that may be even in the rule itself, concerning the
time necessary for a child’s being born at the full term, as we shall
observe in the proper place.!

2494. As to this question, which is of so great importance, be-
cause of its consequences in the cases where it falls out, it would
seem that from all the foregoing remarks we might conclude that,
if it were to be decided by the laws which have been quoted, every
child that lives one moment after its birth is capable of inherit-
ing, whether it is born at its full time or before. And we see,
likewise, that it has been adjudged that children born in the fifth
or sixth month, which, according to the rule, is before the due
time, having lived for some moments, have inherited. And al-
though there may be other examples, where it has been decided, on
the contrary, that children born within the same time have not
succeeded, yet this may have happened in cases where there was
no certain proof that the child was alive. And we see in the
author of the greatest renown among those who have collected
the decrees of the parliaments in France, that he reports one!
which confirms this conjecture. It was in the case of a child of


b Paul. sent. 4, tit. 9.

! See the fifth article of the first section, Jn what Manner Children succeed, and the re-
mark which is there made.

1 Lonet, letter E, no. 5.


TIT. I. SEC. I1.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 47


four or five months, taken out of the womb of its mother after her
death, and which, as the father pretended, was alive; the heirs of
the mother alleging, to the contrary, that the said child had given
no manner of sign of life; so that the dispute between the parties
was only about the fact, to know whether the child had lived or not.
Upon which it was adjudged that the child was stillborn; which
seems to imply that, if it had been certain that the child was born
alive, it would have succeeded. For seeing this child was born be-
fore its time, if it had been adjudged for that reason, that, although
it had been born alive, it could not have succeeded, it would not
have been pronounced that it was stillborn; because the fact con-
cerning its life or its death would have been indifferent and use-
less as to what concerned the succession. And also another au-
thor,” reporting a decree of parliament, by which it was adjudged
that a child of five or six months, being born alive, had inherited,
says that it was decided that the seven months which the laws re-
quire for the term of a lawful birth ought not to be understood, as
has been already observed, except in reference to the quyestion
about the state of the child, to know whether it is legitimate or
not, cum agilur de statu, et fit questio status ; and have no relation
to the question about knowing whether the child has succeeded,
in order to transmit the succession, non cum agitur de transmissione
hereditatis ; these are the words of that author. Thus, it would
seem by these decrees that they did not take it for a rule, that the
child which is born before its time, not being capable of living, is
incapable of succeeding; and that they have, on the contrary,
taken it for a rule, that the child which is born alive, although it
be before the time necessary for ita being capable to live, does,
nevertheless, succeed ; provided that the proofs of life be perfect,
and that they do not take for proofs of the life of a child some ap-
pearances of motions of the members, which may happen even to
those which are born dead, and which are commonly the only
signs of life that appear in children which are born so long before
their time, as it happened in the case of the first of these two de-
crees, as the author has there observed, in reporting the reasons in-
sisted upon by both the parties. It was, without doubt, the uncer-
tainty of such like marks of life in these children that induced the
lawyers before mentioned to require, for a proof of the life of the
child, that it was heard to cry.


™ Bouguier, letter C, no. 4.


48 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART EI. BOOKL


VL

2495. A Child born after the Mother’s Death.— We must reckon
in the number of children capable of inheriting the child that is
taken out of its mother’s womb after her death, although it had
lived only a few moments. For although the child was not bon
when the mother’s succession was open, yet the operation by
which it is brought into the world stands in place of its birth:
and it is enough that the child hath survived its mother*® And
we may even say that it succeeded to its mother before its birth.


VIL


2496. Persons who are Mad, Deaf and Dumb, and Prodigai:,
may inkertt.— Those who are born deaf and dumb, or with othe
infirmities which render persons incapable of the management of
their estates, are nevertheless capable of inheriting, as well as the
other children. And even those who are mad acquire the succes
sions which fall to them, as well as prodigals who are interdicted
But all these sorts of persons have curators assigned them, who
take care of their estates, as tutors do of those belonging to mi
nors. And although these qualities render them incapable of
binding themselves, and the quality of heir may contain some
engagements, yet their tutors and guardians contract for them.
But always upon this condition, that, if the successions are bu-
densome to them, they may renounce them, and be relieved from
the said engagements.*


& L. 12, D. de ber. et post. heered. inst.; —1. 6, D. de tnoff. test. ;—v. l. 182, ef 2. 141, D.

de verb. signif. What is added in the article, that a child may be sail to have auccecded
to its mother before its birth, is founded on this, that the laws consider the children whic
are in their mother’s womb as if they were really born, when it concerns matters that are
for their advantage, or successions which may belong to them. See the laws cited un-
der the letter d, in the remark on the foregoing article.
2» V. tit. D. de bon. poss. furioso in f. muto, surdo, cco compet. ; —§ 4, in f: Inet. de heared.
gual. et diff.; —1. 1, § 2, D. de haered. instit.; —1.5, D. de acquir. vel omitt. heared. ; — d.
L. 5, 6.1, D. de acquir. vel omit. hered. All these sorts of persons are capable of having
goods of their own, and it is only because of this capacity that they have tutors and curs-
tors assigned them. And as to the engagements which attend the quality of heir, they
enter no farther into them than to thé value of the goods of the succession. For whens
succession falls to them, there is an inventory made of all the goods, in order to charge
the tutor or guardian therewith. Thus, the creditors have the same security in this case
as they have against those heirs who are of age, and who take upon them the quality of
heir only with the benefit of an inventory; which shall be the subject-matter of the
ensuing title. See the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth articles of the fifth section of
Persons.


TIT. I. SBC. 11.} HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 49


VIII.
2497. Bastards do not succeed to Intestates. — Bastards are inca-
pable of succeeding to intestates, unless it be to their own chil-
dren, if they have any lawfully begotten; and they do not so
much as sucoeed to their own mothers. For they do not reckon
in families any persons in the number of relations who are capa-
ble of inheriting, except such as are placed in that rank by their
being born in lawful wedlock. And as bastards cannot succeed
to any who die intestate, so likewise nobody can succeed to them
when they die intestate, except their own lawful children, not
even their mothers.! But they are capable of receiving by a deed
of gift or a testament, and they have power to dispose of their
own estates by will.


REMARES ON THE PrReEcEDING ARTICLE.


2498. It is said towards the close of the article, that bastards
are capable of acquiring by deed of gift or by testament, and that
they may dispose of their own goods; concerning which it is ne-
cessary to observe, that, as to the dispositions which they may
make of their goods, their condition is the same with that of other
persons, and they have the same liberty therein. But as for the
bounties which may be given to them, the Roman law, the cus-
toms of France, and usage have set some bounds thereto.

2499. As for the Roman law, the emperors had prohibited fa-
thers who had wives or lawful children to give to their bastards, or
to their mother, more than a four-and-twentieth part of their es-
tates®* Which the Emperor Justinian, by the 89th Novel, chap.
12, extended to a twelfth part, leaving fathers who had no lawful


' § 4, Inst. de success. cogn. Although this text relates only to the successions on the
father's side, and by the Roman law bastards were capable of succeeding to their re-
lations on the mother’s side, (v. I. 2, D. unde cogn.; —§ 4, Instit. de success. cogn.,) yet nev-
etheless we have thonght fit to put down the rule here in general, and conformable to
the usage in France, which excludes them from all successions to intestates. For al-
tough some singular customs in France call bastards to the succession of their mothers, in
conjunction with the childrea lawfully begotten, yet those particular usages are no reason
vhy the contrary rule should not be looked upon as being the usage of France, and as
being more agreeable to decency and good manners. See the preface to this second part,
Wo. 12, and the seventeenth, twenty-second, and thirtieth articles of this section, and the
fifth article of the first section In what Manner Children and Descendants suceeed.

By the 18th Novel of Justinian, chap. 5, the children by a concubine had a sixth part of
their father’s succession if he died without lawful issue; and their mother had in this
tixth part the same share or portion which every one of her children had according to
their number.

" L.2, C. de natur. bib.

VOL. II. 5


50 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOKL


issue or ascendants at liberty to give their whole estate to thez
natural children: and in case there were only ascendants, he r
served only for them their legitime.

2500. As to the customs of France, many of them allow pares=
to give to their bastard children, but differently. Some of ther
extend this liberty even to the license of instituting them heirs ts
their contract of marriage, or of making them gifts, with th
effect, that the said dispositions shall stand good, except in so {x
as they may be prejudicial to the legitime or filial portion of th
children; which is most notoriously contrary both to equity ard
common decency. There are other customs which permit tr
fathers and mothers of bastard children to give them what i:
necessary for their alimony and maintenance; which seems t
imply a prohibition of giving them any thing more. And thes
bounds, which are settled indifferently for all sorts of bastards, an
which, with respect to them all in general, are founded upon ho:
esty and good manners, are still more just with regard to bastard:
born in incest, adultery, or some other criminal copulation, seeing
that, by a law of Justinian’s, these could not so much as claim al-
mony from their parents,” although it be agreeable both to natun!
equity, to the canon law, and to our usage, that such should &
maintained by their parents.°

2501. It is sufficient to take notice here of these principles /
honesty and decency, and of the distinction which ought to le
made between the different sorts of bastards, without enterin<
into the detail of the questions which might be raised touchinz
the bounds or latitude of dispositions in their favor. For the de
tail of this matter is not regulated after the same manner by the
Roman law, as it is by the custom and usage of France. So that
this matter not having rules that are fixed, uniform, and common
over all, it were to be wished that such were established: and this
is not a matter that comes properly within the design of this book


IX.


2002. Strangers or Aliens do not succeed. — Strangers, who are
called aliens, are incapable of all manner of successions, whether
they come by testament, or by the death of persons dying intes-
tate.!


b VY. Nov. 89, c. ult.
© C. 5, in f. de eo qui duxit in matr. quam poll. per adult.
1 ZL. 1, Cod. de her. instit. ;—1. 6, § 2, D. cod. See what has been said touching stras-


TIT. I. SEC. 11.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 51


X.
2003. Professed Monks do not succeed. — Professed monks do
not succeed: and they are equally excluded by their vows both
from succeeding to intestates, and by testament.™


XL


2004. Persons condemned to Death, or to Punishments which im-
port Civil Death, cannot succeed. — Persons condemned to death,
or to some other punishment which implies civil death, are capa-
ble of no succession, whether they be called to it by testament or
by the death of an intestate. And this incapacity makes the
goods which ought to have come to them to pass to the other per-
sons whom the law calls to the suctession in their default”


XII.


2505. Corporations and Communities may succeed by Testament.
— Corporations and communities, such as towns, universities, col-
leges, hospitals, chapters, convents, and other societies, whether
ecclesiastical or secular, which are established and approved by
law, hold the place of persons, and being capable of possessing
lands and goods, are likewise capable of testamentary successions.
And those who have power to dispose of their estates may insti-


gers or aliens in the preface to this second part, no. 13. See the eleventh article of the
second section of Persons, the eighteenth, twenty-third, and thirty-first articles of this sec-
tion, the second article of the thirteenth section of this title, and the third article of the
fourth section of the same title, together with the remark there made on it.

Strangers are not only incapable of succeeding, but are also incapable of making a tes-

tament. See the twelfth article of the second section of Testuments.
_™ By the fifth Novel of Justinian, chap. 5, the goods belonging to those who entered
a @ convent did accrue to the convent into which they entered themselves ; and they
could not afterwards dispose of them, and their children could retain no more of their
sud parents’ goods than their legitime. In France the goods of one who enters into a
rligious order are not only not acquired to the convent into which he enters himself, but
he cannot even dispose of them in favor of any convent or monastery whatsoever. But
ke may dispose of his goods before his profession, in favor of his relations or other per-
‘ons, but not after he is once professed. See the nineteenth article of the ordinance of
Orleans, and the twenty-eighth article of that of Blois. See, touching professed monks,
the thirteenth article of the second section of Persons, and the nineteenth, twenty-fourth,
and thirty-second articles of this section.

* L. 18, D. de bon. poss. See the twentieth, twenty-fifth, thirty-third, and following arti-
des of this section, the fifth article of the fourth section, the first article of the thirteenth
tection, and the fourteenth article of the second section of Testaments. In France, by the ©
ordinance of 1670, art. 29, of Defaults, the punishments which import civil death are sen-
ibe a or condemnation to the galleys for ever, or to perpetual banishment out of

om.


52 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK |.


tute the said communities, their heirs or executors, provided the
law has not ordered any thing to the contrary.°


XII.


2006. Children who were not born before the Succession fell my
succeed. —- We must not reckon among the number of persons i0-
capable of succeeding, children who are not yet born when the
succession falls, provided they were then conceived. For postht-
mous children, who are born only after the death of their father,
do nevertheless succeed to them. And one may name for his
heir or executor the posthumous child of another person. So tha!
these children are equally capable of all successions which may
fall to them, whether they come by testament, or by the death o/
an intestate.?


XIV.

2507. The different Incapacities have their different Effects. — All
the causes of incapacity which have been explained have theif
different effects, according to their nature, and according to the
time in which the persons happen to be under the incapacity.
Which depends on the rules which follow.


XV.


2508. Difference between the Incapacities with Respect to tht
Two Kinds of Succession. — As to what relates to the nature of
the several sorts of incapacities, to wit, that of bastards, foreigt-
ers, professed monks, and of persons condemned to some punish:
ment which implies civil death; the incapacity of bastards is dis-
tinguished from the others in this, that bastards are incapable only
of legal successions, or succession to intestates, and are capable
either of succeeding by a testament, or receiving some benefit
thereby, according to the distinctions which have been remarked
on the eighth article; but the other incapacities exclude the per


° L.1, C. de sacrosanct. eccl.; —1. 8, C. de hred. instit. We must understand by the
privilege mentioned in this text, the permission to form a society. For there can be 00
lawfal society without the permission of the prince. See the fifteenth article of the sec-
ond section of Persons. There are some communities which are incapable of successions,


such as those of the mendicant friars. See, concerning dispositions made in favor of reli-


gious houses, the remark on the tenth article.
P § 4, in f. Inst. de hered. qual. et diff. ; — Inst. de bon. poss.
4 See the following article.


:


TIT. I. BEC. The] HEIKS AND EXECUTORS. 53


sons who are under them equally from both the kinds of succes-
sion, and from all dispositions made in prospect of death.


XVI


2009. Some Incapacities may cease, others last always.— We
must further observe concerning the nature of these four sorts of
incapacities, that there are some of them which last always, and
others which may cease,* as will appear by the rules which follow.


XVIL


2010. The Incapacity of Bastards ceases by the Marriage of their
Father and Mother.— The incapacity of a bastard, whose father
and mother might have been lawfully married together at the time
of the child’s conception, ceases in case the parents, being after-
wards joined together in matrimony, own it for a lawful child, and
the same is legitimated by the subsequent marriage.'


XVIIL


2511. Naturalization makes the Incapacity of Foreigners to cease.
— The incapacity of foreigners may cease by naturalization. For
the effect of naturalization is to give them the same rights and
Privileges with those who are natural-born subjects of the prince
who grants them that favor”


XIX.


2512, The Incapacity of Monks ceases by the Nullity of their
Yows.—- The incapacity of professed monks may cease if their
vows happen to be null, and that, having protested against the
tame in due time, they procured them to be declared null by a
court of justice, which they may do if they made profession be-
lore they attained the age prescribed by law, or within their year
of probation, or if they have any other just cause to show But


' See the eighth article, and the remark upon it.

' See the following articles down to the twenty-sixth.

' L.5, C.de nater. lib; —1.10, eod.; —I. 11, eod. ;—v. Nov. 12, c.4;— Nov. 74, ¢. 1;
~ Nov. 89, ¢.8. See, touching the incapacity of bastards, the twenty-second and thirti-
eth articles. We shall say nothing here of the manner of legitimating bastards by letters
it of the prince, that being a matter which does not come within the design of this


* Cives allectio facit. Z. 7, C.deincol. Although this text does not relate directly to
letters of naturalization, yet these words may be applied to the effect of the said letters.
See the twenty-third and thirty-first articles.

* The vows would be null if they were not preceded by one year of probation, and if

5 e


54 . THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK I.


if their profession cannot be annulled, their incapacity will last
always.


XX.


2013. That of a Condemned Person ceases by a Remission, and in
other Cases. —-'The incapacity incurred by the civil death of the
person condemned may cease, if he gets his sentence of condem-
nation to be reversed. And if he died before the accusation, or
even before sentence of condemnation, he would have been under
no incapacity.’


XXL


2014. Incapacities which cease both for the Time past and the
Time to come, or only for the Time to come.— Among the inca-
pacities which may cease, it is necessary to distinguish between
_ those which cease in such a manner as that the person whom they
rendered incapable ceases to be such only for the time to come,
without having any change made in his condition as to the time
past ; and those which cease so as that the person is considered as
if he had never been incapable, and is restored so fully to. his
rights that he becomes capable even of the successions which fell
to him within the time that his incapacity seemed to subsist.
And this difference between these several sorts of incapacities is a
natural effect of their causes, which consists in this, that the
causes of some of them may be annulled in such a manner as if
they never had existed: such as the entering into a religious order,
which causes the incapacity of a professed monk, and the sen-
tence of condemnation, which occasions the incapacity of the con-
demned person. For if the profession of a religious be declared
null, and the sentence of a condemned person be repealed, both the
one and the other return to their first condition, in the same manner
as if the one had never made any profession, nor the other been
condemned. But the causes of the incapacity of a bastard, and of
that of a foreigner, cannot be abolished in the same manner. For
the blemish that is in the birth of a bastard cannot be repaired in
such a manner as to make his birth to be the same as if it had
been lawful: neither can the defect of the original extraction of a


he who makes profession was not sixteen years of age complete. See the Council of
Trent, session 25, chap. 15, and the ordinance of Blois, article 28. See, touching the in-
capacity of professed monks, the twenty-fourth and thirty-second articles.

Y See hereafter the twenty-fifth and thirty-third articles, and the others that follow-


TIT. 1. BEC. 11.) HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 55


foreigner be supplied in such a manner as that his extraction
should be the same as if he were a natural-born subject of the
country in which he is naturalized. Thus, when a bastard is le-
gitimated by the subsequent marriage of his father with his mother,
and a foreigner naturalized by the letters patent of the prince,
these changes do not abolish the blemish that is in the birth of the
bastard, nor the defect that is in the extraction of the foreigner,
but they make only the incapacity which was the effect of those
causes to cease. And for this reason they cannot become capable
of succeeding but for the time to come. We shall see in the fol-
lowing articles the use of this distinction in each sort of inca-
pacity.*


XXII.


2315. The Incapacity of Bastards can only cease for the Time to
come.— When a bastard is legitimated by the marriage of his
father with his mother, seeing his legitimation does not reinstate
him in a capacity which was natural to him, as has been said
in the foregoing article, it does not make him capable of succeed-
ing but for the time to come, and has not the effect to acquire to
him the successions which fell in the time that his incapacity sub-
sisted." Thus, for instance, if we suppose that one who has a
bastard, and no other children, renounces a succession fallen to
him, and that afterwards this bastard comes to be legitimated by
a subsequent marriage between his father and mother, the succes-
sion, which by the renunciation of the father would have gone to
this bastard, if he had been legitimated at any time, and had been
willing to accept of it upon the father’s refusal, will not accrue to
him by his legitimation, which happened only afterwards; but
this succession will remain to the heir who, being the nearest of
kin, and capable of inheriting, was willing to take it. And it
would be the same thing, in the case of a succession falling to a
foreigner, who should happen to have a bastard not as yet legiti-
mated, but who is a natural-born subject of the country, or natu-
raized. For if this foreigner, who was incapable of the succession,
should afterwards intermarry with the mother of the said bastard,
and thereby legitimate him, this legitimation would not have the
effect to give him right to this succession of which he was inca-


* See the articles which follow.
* This is a conseqnence of the defect in the birth of the bastard.


56 TRE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK I.


pable, not being legitimated at the time when the succession fell,
and of which his father, as being a foreigner, was likewise inca-
pable. But this succession would remain to him who had in-
herited it in default of them.


XXITIL


2516. As likewise that of a Foreigner.— It is the same thing »
to the incapacity of a foreigner. For when he is naturalized, he
is only made capable of the succession which may fall to him for
the future. But all those which fell before his naturalization, and
might have come to him if he had been eapable of inheriting,
remain the property of those who, by reason df his incapacity,
were called to the succession. For this incapacity, as well as that
of a bastard, was natural to the state and condition of his extrac
tion. So thatthe capacity of inheriting, which the benefit of
naturalization gives him, can have its effect only for the time to
come,’ as has been said in the twenty-first article.


XXIV.


2017. The Incapacity of a Professed Monk may cease both for
the Time past, and for the Time to come.— The incapacity of a
professed monk is in this respect different from that of a bastard,
and of a foreigner. For as the monk could not have been rendered
incapable, but by the vows which are called solemn, and which
have no nullity in them ; the nullities which are in his vows being
discovered, the judgment which vacates and annuls his profession
removes the cause of his incapacity, and puts him again in the
same condition he was in before he took upon him the vows.
Thus, he recovers his former right, and his incapacity ceases with
its cause, both for the time past and for the time to come. Which


distinguishes his condition from that of a bastard, and of a for-
eigner.°


XXV.


2018. As likewise that of a Condemned Person. — The incapacity
of one condemned to some punishment which carries along with
it civil death, having no other cause but the sentence of condem-


b This is a consequence of the state of a foreigner. See the thirty-first article, and the
remark that is there made on it.


© This is a consequence of the nullity of the vows. See the two preceding articles,
touching the difference between this incapacity and that of a bastard, and of a foreigner.


TIT. 1. SEC. 11.] H&IRS AND BXECUTORS. &7


nation, if this cause happens to cease, the person who was con-
demned is restored to his former state, as the professed monk is,
who has got his vows to be declared null, And this condemned
person recovers all his rights, in the same manner as if he had
never been under sentence of condemnation.‘


AXVL


2519. Divers Times to be considered with Regard to the Effect of
Incapacities.— All the rules which we have just now explained
respect the nature and differences of the several sorts of incapaci-
ties, which it was necessary to distinguish, that we might the bet-
ter know how to make a right use of the rule explained in the
fourteenth article. And we must likewise for the same reason dis-
tinguish the times in which the incapacity ought to be considered,
whether it be in successions by testament, or to intestates® And
this depends on the rales which follow.


XXVIL


2020. Three Times to be considered for the Incapacity of Testa-
mentary Successions.—- As for testamentary successions, the capa-
city or incapacity of the testamentary: heir or executor may be
considered at three different times; to wit, at the time of making
the testament, at the time of the death of the testator, and at the
time of his entering to the succession, that is to say, when the heir
or executor declares his willingness to accept of that quality.‘
We shall see hereafter the use of the distinctions of these several
times.


XXVIIL


2021. One Time only to be considered in the Succession of Intes-
lates. — In successions to intestates, the capacity or incapacity of
the heir is to be considered only at the time of the death of the
person to whom he succeeds. For it is this death that lays the


* See the thirty-third and the other following articles.

* See the following articles.

' L. 49,41, D. de hered. instit.; — 1. 6, § 2, cod.; —d. 1. 49, § 2, eod. We have not set
down in the article what is contained in these texts, that the incapacity which happens in
one of these three times excindes the heir. For it is necessary to mitigate a little this
rule of the Roman law by the temperaments which result from the following rules, and
the remarks which shall be there made upon them, and particularly from what shall be
suid on the thirty-first article. See, on the same subject, the preamble to the tenth sec-
Gon of Testaments.


58 THE CIVIL Law. [PAR II. BOOK I.


succession open: and by our rule, that the dead man gives seizin
to the living, his next heir of blood who ts capable of succeeding to
hem, the right of the heir of blood vests in him at the moment of
the said death, and in such a manner that, if he comes to die im-
mediately thereafter, without knowing any thing of the death of
that other person, or that he had the right of succeeding to hin,
yet nevertheless he transmits his right to his heirs. From whence
it follows, that if the heir to whom an inheritance fell by the death
of one dying intestate, whilst he was capable of inheriting the
same, becomes afterwards incapable before be has exercised or
even known his right, as if he enters into some religious order, or
is condemned to death, or to some other punishment which is at-
tended with civil death, this incapacity happening after the succes-
sion fell to him will not have the effect of transmitting the goods
of this succession to the other heirs, who next to him had the right
of succeeding; but it will only have the effect which is explained
in the following article.


X XIX.


2022. Effect of the Incapacity happening after the Succession of an
Intestate is open.— If the heir to an intestate, who was capable of
inheriting at the time of the death which lays the succession open,
becomes afterwards incapable of succeeding by his entering into a
religious order, or by virtue of a sentence of condemnation, before
he has taken any step to assert his right, or even before he knew
of it, the goods of the said inheritance having been vested in him
as well as his other goods, they will pass to those who shall have
his rights, whether they be creditors or others.'! Thus, the goods
of a professed monk will go to his heirs; and those of the con-
demned person will fall to the king, or to the lord of the manor
who shall have the right to his escheat.


& This is a consequence of the rule, the dead man gives seizin to the living. We have
conceived this rule in a manner agreeable to the usage of France, and pursuant to the
maxim, that the dead man gives seizin to the living, his next heir that is capable of succeed-
tng to him, although in the Roman law this rule was not common to all heirs of intes-
tates, as shall be explained in the preamble to the tenth section of Testaments.

b See, upon this and the next article, the thirty-first article, and the remarks made there
upon it. In this and the following article we have made mention only of the incapacity
of a professed monk and of that of a person condemned to death, and not of that of a for-
eigner, because of the difficulties which are taken notice of in the remarks on the follow-
ing article.

i This is also a consequence of the rule, the dead man gives seizin to the living.


TIT. 1. SBC. 11.] HEIRS AND SXECUTORS. 59
Remarks ON THE Two PrReEcEepING ARTICLES.


2023. We must observe on this and the foregoing article, that
the incapacity of succeeding to intestates, which happens after the
death which lays the said successions open, and before the entry
to the inheritance, can relate only to the foreigner, the professed
monk, and the condemned person. For as to the bastard, since
he cannot cease to be legitimate after he has been once legiti-
mated, no incapacity of this kind can afterwards happen to him.
And as for the others, it is necessary to distinguish their conditions
in what concerns the effect of the said incapacity which happens
to them after the succession is open, and consider therein a differ-
ence between the incapacities of a professed monk, and of a con-
demned person, and that of a person who falls under the condition
of a foreigner. This difference consists in this, that the incapacity
happening to a professed monk, and to a condemned person,
divests them of the successions which they had acquired before
their incapacity, in the same manner as of all their other goods,
and makes them to pass to those who have their right; whereas
the incapacity which he falls under who becomes a foreigner does
not divest him of the goods which he had acquired before the said
incapacity. Thus, for example, if we suppose that a stranger
who is a subject of a country to which our kings had granted the
ght of naturalization, having succeeded to one who died intes-
tate, and having taken possession of his inheritance, should hap-
pen afterwards to lose the privilege of naturalization, by a general
revocation of the privilege of naturalization which was given to
the inhabitants of that country, and which would reduce all the
inhabitants thereof to the condition of foreigners, that change
would not deprive him of the succession which he had already
acquired; and he would retain the goods of that succession, as
well as his other goods. Thus, on the contrary, the incapacity
happening to a professed monk, and to a condemned person,
makes the inheritances which they had acquired, as well as their
other goods, to go to those who have their right, as is said in the ar-
ticle. We make here this remark, touching the difference between
the effect of the incapacity under which he falls who becomes a
stranger, and the effect of the incapacity happening to a professed
monk and to a condemned person, that we may account why, in
this and the foregoing article, we have mentioned only the case of
the professed monk. and of the condemned person, and not that


60 ‘THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 13. BOOK |


of the stranger, because of a difficulty that is peculiar to the
stranger, and which results from this difference between his con-
dition and that of the others.

2024, The said difficulty consists in this, that on one part it is
certain that, by our rule explained in the twenty-eighth article,
the succession of one dying intestate is acquired to the heir at the
moment of the death of the person to whom he suceeeds, without
any act on his part; from whence it follows, that, although after
his death the said heir should become incapable, his right either
remains with himself, or passes to those who succeed to him, or
who have his right, as it happens in the case of a professed monk,
and of a condemned person: and thus it would seem that the
heir who is become a stranger, in the case that has been just now
observed, ought to reap the benefit of the succession which had
fallen to him, and to retain an estate which was his own, seeing
he is not become incapable of holding possession of what he had,
as a religious and a condemned person are, and that even it would
seem that if, before the said incapacity, and without having done
any act to declare his acceptance of the succession, he had
assigned, given, or otherwise transferred his right to a person that
was capable, the said disposition would not be annulled by his
incapacity happening afterwards. But, on the other hand, con-
sidering the thing under another view, it might be questioned
whether the incapacity happening to him before his entry to the
succession might not hinder him from reaping the benefit of it;
for it might be urged against him, that, not having entered to the
succession before his incapacity, he would be within the mean-
ing and intendment of the law which renders the stranger incapa-
ble of succeeding. Because the motive and inducement for mak-
ing that law was to prevent the wealth of the kingdom from
passing into the hands of strangers, which would happen in his
person if, after he is become a stranger, he should be allowed to
have the goods of that succession. And that therefore this law,
which is a part of the public law, ought, with respect to him, to
set aside the effect of the law which declares the heir to be seized
of the inheritance at the moment of the death of the person to
whom he succeeds, which is only a rule of the private law, that is
to say, which regards only the interest of particular persons. To
which it might be added, that it is the usage in France, even with
respect to natural-born Frenchmen, who have been for a long time
settled in a foreign country, although they have not been there


TIT. 1. SRC. 11.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 61


naturalized, that, if they return into France to reap a succession
that is fallen to them, they are obliged to settle again in France,
and not to alienate the goods of the succession which they claim.
From whence this consequence might be drawn, that if, in cases of
this nature, such precaution is taken with respect to a natural-born
Frenchman, for fear he should remove into a foreign country the
effects belonging to that succession, and the price which he might
raise from the sale of the immovables, there would be as much,
or rather more, reason to exclude from a succession one who is
actually a foreigner at the time when he would enter upon it,
unless it should be thought sufficient to forbid him to alienate it,
or unless he should obtain letters of rehabilitation to reinstate him
in his former capacity; for in that case he would without doubt
succeed.

2525. This difficulty leads us to another, which would happen
if he who was become a stranger had died in that state, and in
the interval between the time that the succession fell which vested
in him, he being capable of it, and his entry to the succession
which his death had prevented. The difficulty which would arise
in this second case would be between those who should exercise
the king’s right to the succession of aliens, and claim the succes-
sion of this person who, having become a foreigner, died in that
state, and those who would dispute with them the said inheritance,
claiming it as their right to succeed thereto in default of the said
foreigner, in case the incapacity which he had incurred ought to
bea bar to him. In this dispute it would be the interest of the
king that the succession should belong to the heir who was be-
come a stranger, that it might be a part of the stranger's estate,
and so increase the escheat that falls to the king. And in order
to support this pretension, it might be alleged that the motive of
the law which excludes strangers from successions would cease
in this case, seeing the goods would remain in the kingdom, and
would go to the king. So that there would be no pretence for
derogating from the rule, the dead man gives seizin to the living,
as there is in the case where this heir becoming a stranger, and
temaiming alive, should pretend to inherit the succession. That
thos this stranger being dead seized of the said inheritance, it
Would fall to the king, in the same manner as the other goods
Which he should leave behind him. That it would not be the
consideration of favoring the right of the crown to the escheat of
aliens, that would be the foundation of a judgment given in this

VOL. I. 6


62 THE CIVIL LAW, [PART II. BOOK L


manner, but that this decision would be a natural effect of the roles
oflaw. For seeing the professed monk and condemned person, who
are capable at the time when the succession falls which they have
a right to, are not excluded from it by the incapacity which hap-
pens before their entry to the inheritance; and that that incaps-
city has not the effect of transmitting the said succession to the
other heirs who have a right to succeed in default of them, but
that, on the contrary, it remains in their estate, and passes to
those who have their right; it ought to be the same thing in the
succession fallen to this heir, who becomes afterwards a stran-
ger, and it ought to accrue to him so as to remain his during his
life, in the same manner as all the other goods which he might
have acquired by any other way, and which he would not loz
on account of this change, and after his death this succession
ought, as his other goods, to pass to those who should have his
right.

2526. We do not mention here these different cases barely out
of curiosity, but in order to show by the difficulties which occur
in them, and by the principles which have been just now ex-
plained, and from which it would seem that the decisions thereof
ought to be taken, what have been the reasons which have induced
us to think, that, although by the Roman law the capacity of suc-
ceeding be necessary at the time of entering to the inheritance,
even in the successions of intestates;* yet that the rule of this
article ought to be conceived in terms conformable to the rule ob-
served in France, that the dead man gives seizin to the living,
which makes the capacity necessary for these successions only at
the time of the death which lays the succession open, as appears
in the cases of the professed monk and condemned person. So
that it was not proper to put it down in the article as a rule in use
with us, that in successions to intestates the capacity of the heir
is necessary at two times; to wit, at the time of the death which
lays the succession open, and at the time of the entry to the
succession ; and although it should be adjudged in the case of the
incapacity of the person who became a stranger before he entered
to the inheritance, that he could not succeed to it, yet it could


® By the Roman law, the heir to an intestate, who died before his entry to the inherit-
ance, did not transmit his right to his heirs; so that he did not acquire the inheritance
but by his entry to it. From whence it follows, that the incapacity which did afterwards
happen excluded him from the inheritance. See the preamble to the tenth section of Jes
taments.


|


TIT. I. SEC. 31] HEIRS AND EXROCUTORS. 68


not be inferred from thence that the said judgment was founded
on the rule of the Roman law, which requires the capacity at the
time of the entry to the inheritance, seeing, notwithstanding that
rule, those who have the rights of the professed monk and of the
condemned person reap the successions which fell to them before
their incapacity, although they did not so much as know of their
right, and were become incapable before their entry to the inherit-
ance. And therefore, seeing the said rule proves to be false in two
cases of three which it may comprehend, as to what relates to in-
capacities, it cannot be placed in the number of rules, and cannot
be assigned as a reason for excluding the person who became a
stranger before his entry to the inheritance. But if it should be
in fact decided that he ought to be excluded, it would certainly be
for other reasons, such as those which have been remarked.

2027. All that has been said hitherto in this remark on the time
at which we are to consider the capacity or incapacity of the heir,
relates only to successions of intestates, of which only mention is
made in the article. And as for the three times in which the rule
of the Roman law requires a capacity for testamentary successions,°
it is necessary to see the end of the remark on the thirty-first ar-
ticle, and the preamble of the tenth section of Testaments, where
we have treated of transmission, which implies a necessity of
knowing at what time the right of the heir accrues to him, in
order to know whether he transmits it to his heirs or not. Thus,
it is necessary to join together all that is said in those two places,
where we have endeavoured to explain the different principles of
the Roman law, and of the usage in France with regard to this
matter, and to add thereto the principles of the law of nature and
of equity, which we have judged might be of service to set this
matter in a clearer light.


XXX.

2528. Effect of the Incapacity of Bastards. — Seeing the inca-
pacity of bastards respects only the successions of intestates, they
are either capable or incapable of them, according to the state they
are in at the time of the death which lays the succession open.
Thus, the bastard who is not legitimated by the marriage of his
father with his mother before this death would not succeed, al-
thoagh he should happen to be legitimated before the succession


b See the twenty-seventh article.


64 . HE CIVIL Law. [PART 11. BOOK I.


were entered to; for, his incapacity at the time when the succes-
sion fell having excluded him from inheriting, it would pass im-
mediately to the person who had the right to succeed in his de-
fault: But he would be capable of reaping the benefit of the
successions of intestates which should fall to him after his legiti-
mation by the said marriage.


XXXII.


2529. Effect of that of Foreigners.— The incapacity of a stran-
ger respects equally the successions of intestates and successions
by testament. Thus, he who, being a foreigner at the time of
the death of the person to whom he had a right to succeed, if he
had not been under that incapacity, is not naturalized till after
the said death, would not carry away the succession, whether the
same was left by will or came by the death of an intestate, from
the heir who succeeded to it because of the incapacity he was
under.4


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING AND T'WENTY-SEVENTH ARTICLES.


2530. We must not here pass over in silence some reflections on
the difficulties which arise from the rule explained in this article,
and from that which is laid down in the twenty-seventh article,
whether they relate to successions of intestates or to successions by
will. If we suppose, for a first difficulty, with respect to the suc-
cessions of intestates, that a son of a natural-born subject of
France, having taken up his abode out of the kingdom, and being
become a stranger by his engagements in a country that is subject
to another prince, returns to France with a design to get letters of
rehabilitation, that is to say, to reinstate him in his first condition,
and that he could not obtain the said letters till some days after


© This is a consequence of the nature of that incapacity. We presuppose in this article
the capacity of bastards to succeed by testament, but it is necessary to remark on this
subject what has been said on the eighth article.

4 This is a consequence of the incapacity, and of the testamentary succession’s being
laid open by the death of the testator, as the succession of an intestate is laid open by the
death of thé person whose inheritance is the matter in dispute. For it is from the mo-
ment of that death that every heir ought to have his right. Insomuch that even the
child which was not born at the time of the death of the person to whom it has a right to
succeed, and the heir who does not enter to the estate for a long time after it is fallen to
him, are considered as if they had succeeded at the moment of that death, according to
the rule explainef in the fifteenth article of the first section. Thus, the heir who is inca-
padle at the time of the said death is excluded from the inheritance by him to whom it
ought to pass.


TIT. f. SEC. 11] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 65


the death of his father, would he be excluded from his father’s suc-
cession by a collateral heir, or even by his own brothers, in case he
had any? And would it not be just in this case that, being re-
stored to his first estate by the effect of the said letters, in the same
manner as the professed monk who gets his vows to be annulled
reénters into his former state, he should succeed as if he had
always continued a natural subject of France, such as he was by
his birth? And even although he had been born a foreigner, the
son of a foreigner who had been naturalized without him, would it
not be sufficient that he should be naturalized after the death of
his father to enable him to take his succession, which nobody had
as yet entered to, seeing the incapacity of strangers is no part of
the law of nature, and that it would be contrary to it in this case,
where it would be necessary to prefer to this son the exchequer, or
collateral relations, if there should be any who should lay claim to
the succession? And would it not, on the contrary, be more
agreeable to humanity and equity to apply in this case, for the
benefit of the son, the spirit of the laws, which dispenses with
their rigor when equity demands something else than what is en-
acted by the letter of the law, and especially in cases such as this,
where the spirit of the law subsists together with the temperament
of equity? For the motive of the law which excludes a foreigner
from successions is to hinder the wealth of the kingdom from being
carried into foreign countries, which would not happen in the per-
son of this son who is naturalized, although it be only after the
death of his father. It is for the like reason of equity, that, although
those who die strangers can have no heirs, as shall be shown in
the third article of the fourth section, yet the children of strangers
who die in France succeed to their fathers if the said children are
born in France, or have been naturalized there. And not only are
children excepted from this rule, but it would seem that usage ex-
cepts from it likewise the collateral heirs of strangers, if the said
heirs be natural-born subjects of France, or have been naturalized
there; for the motive of the law ceases with respect to them.
And there are some customs in France which call to the succes-
sion of aliens their heirs whatsoever, who are capable of succeed-
ing to them.

2581. We might propose other questions, by supposing, for ex-
ample, that instead of a son. it were a brother, who was natural-
ized only after the death of his brother, whose succession he claims
jointly with the other brothers, or in opposition to a cousin who

6 @


66 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK 1


would exclude him from it; which might happen several ways, ac
cording as he puts in his claim whilst all things are yet entre, no
body having entered to the succession, or only after another her
has been for some time in possession of the goods, and has evea
disposed of them. But it is not our business to enter here into the
detail of questions of this nature ; and we have only touched upoo
this because of the difficulties which frequently arise in the us
and application of the principles, in that they seem to demand de-
cisions which may, at first sight, appear to be contrary to the said
principles. For if the rule is absolute, and without exception, that
every heir who is incapable at the time of the death of the person
to whom he has right to succeed ought to be excluded from the
succession, then the son who, as has been already mentioned, hap
pens to be a foreigner at the moment of his father’s death, he not
having had the opportunity of being naturalized till some days
after, will be excluded from having any share in his father’s estate,
either by his brothers, or, if he has no brothers, by his collateral re-
lations ; which appears to be so contrary to equity, that it seems
but reasonable in this case that the matter should be decided
against this rule. Since it is therefore the design of this book to
explain in as clear a manner as is possible the principles and rules
on which depend the decisions of the difficulties which arise in the
matters treated of here, and since it seems reasonable that the case
of this son should be an exception to the rule, we did not think fit
to pass over in silence a remark of this consequence, and the re-
flection which was proper to be made on such a difficulty. We
see that it consists in this, that the rule which excludes a foreigner
from inheriting, and which is only an arbitrary rule of the positive
law, being literally applied to this son who should happen to be 8
foreigner at the moment of his father’s death, would be repugnant
to a principle of natural equity, which calls the son to the succes-
sion of his father. So that, in a difficulty of this nature, it seems
but reasonable to say that the spirit of the laws demands, in favor
of this son, that, in order to preserve to him his right, we should
give to the act of his naturalization the effect of reinstating him i
the right of succession which he had by nature, and which was a3
it were suspended in his person by that arbitrary rule, the effect
whereof is superseded by the act of naturalization. Thus, in this
case, by giving the succession to the son, we do nothing else but


observe the first principles of the interpretation of laws, which i


require that we should reconcile them by the universal spirit of


a


TIT. I. SEC. 51} HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 67


equity, which reigns in them all, and on which depends the good
use both of the natural and arbitrary laws, according to the rules
which have been explained in the title of the Rules of Law.

2532, The same consideration which hath induced us to make
this remark on the case of the son obliges us, likewise, to consider
the same case under circumstances where the difficulty would be
much greater; as if he should not come to demand his father’s
inheritance till many years after his brothers, or even his collateral
relations, had been in possession of it; would it be just in this
case to reéstablish the son that is naturalized in his primitive and
natural right? To trouble the quiet of the families of those who
had succeeded to the estate by reason of his incapacity? To
turn topsy-turvy the state of their affairs? To revoke the aliena-
tions which they have made? Or would it be just to give to this
son a share of his father’s estate, and upon what foot ought this
share to be adjusted ?

2533. We see by these kinds of difficulties, and others which
may be supposed in the cases of children and brothers demanding
ashare in successions after their naturalization, how much it is to
be wished that all such difficulties were adjusted by some certain
rules, according to the divers circumstances of the time that is
passed since the inheritance fell, the changes which may have hap-
pened, and others of the like nature. As to which it would not
be improper to examine which of the ways to be taken for adjust-
ing such difficulties would be most useful; whether to render
altogether inflexible the rule which excludes the heir when he hap-
pens to be a foreigner at the time that the succession falls, and to
limit the effect of all acts of naturalization to successions which
shall afterwards fall; or to give to the said acts of naturalization
the effect of removing the incapacity, as well for the time past as
for the time to come, and to make the condition of a foreigner,
in this particular, equal to that of a professed monk, and of a con-
demned person, who are restored to their rights when the profes-
sion of the one and the condemnation of the other are annulled,
a3 shall be shown in the two following articles; or to leave the
application of the rule, and the effect of the naturalization, to the
discretion of the judges, that they may determine therein as they
shall see cause according to the circumstances; or to limit a cer-
tain time, such as a year, or any other term, shorter or longer,
beyond which the naturalization should have no effect for the time
past, allowing a longer term for successions in the direct line than


68 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT Ii. BOOK I.


for those in the collateral. Of all these ways the first would con-
tain something of hardship in relation to the son, for the reasons
which we have already mentioned: the second would be attended
with two mischievous consequences, by putting families into
great confusion and disorder, which is not to be apprehended in the
case of professed monks and condemned persons, seeing their con-
dition is always known, and can never be so long in suspense as
the condition of a foreigner who is absent and unknown: the third
way would have the inconvenience of making the law altogether
uncertain, which, as well as other sciences, ought to have certain
and fixed principles: and the last of these ways would seem to
be the most equitable, and attended with the fewest inconveniences.
But these difficulties are of such a nature, that to enter intoa
particular discussion of them would be to exceed the bounds of
the design of this book, and perhaps we have already enlarged too
much upon them.

2534. As for the testamentary successions, we shall confine
ourselves to one reflection upon the rule of the Roman law, which
requires that the person who is instituted heir should be capable,
not only at the time of the death of the testator, and at the time of —
his entering to the inheritance, but likewise at the time of making
the testament, in order to make the institution valid in its origin,
wi consittertt institutio ; these are the words of the text cited on the
twenty-seventh article. And this rule has a relation to two other
rules in the Roman law, one whereof is general, which declares
that whatever is null or defective in its beginning can never become
valid by length of time® The other rule, which is a consequence
of the former, and is called the Cutontan rule, ordains that the dis-
positions of a testator which would have been null, if the testator
had died at the time when he made his will, shall always remain
such at whatever time the testator shall happen to die’ From
whence it follows, that as the institution of one to be heir who is
a foreigner at the time of making the testament would be null, if
the testator should die immediately after having made his will,
because this heir would be found incapable at that time of acquir-
ing the inheritance, his incapacity at the time of making the
testament would nevertheless exclude him from the succession,
although he should happen to be naturalized at the time of the
testator’s death. We shall not here enter on the discussion of the


© ZL. 99, D. de veg. jur. € V,2.1, D. de reg. Caton.


TIT. I. SEC. 11.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 69


use of this Catonian rule, of which we shall speak more fully in
another place.©. We shall only observe here, in relation to the
rule of the Roman law, which requires that the testamentary heir
should be capable at the time of making the testament, that, if we
were to examine the justice of this rule, either by the principles of
natural equity and of our usage, which is directly opposite to the
niceties of the Roman law, or even by some principles of the
Roman law itself, we might have reason perhaps to say, that as
those who invented the Catonian rule have owned it to be false
in certain cases, so that rule which requires that the heir should
be capable at the time of making the testament may likewise be
the same.

2030. If we consider the principles of natural equity, and those
of the Roman law which are the most conformable thereto, we
shall find by these two sorts of principles, that testaments have
not their effect but by the death of the testator; and that as until
that time they are always revocable, so it is only at that moment
that they have their validity. And consequently it is only at that
moment that testaments have their effect, and that the disposi-
tions of the testator begin to have the force of laws which the
law gives them. From whence it follows, that the heir who is
instituted by a testament begins only to have his right by the
said death. “Which proceeds from this principle, which we may
call natural, and which is agreeable, likewise, to the spirit of the
Roman law, that every testament implies in it the condition that
the testator shall persevere in the same mind until the time of his
death, Thus, it is a real truth, without any fiction or nicety, that
the will of the testator hath not, even according to his own inten-
fon, any other force than that which his testament shall receive
from his perseverance in his dispositions until the time of his
death; in the same manner as if he had said expressly in his tes-
lament, that his meaning was that his dispositions should have
their effect, in case he should die in the same intention, without
making any alteration in them. For although this condition
Were expressed in this manner, yet it would not make the testa-
ment to depend any more upon it than it does when the condi-
tion is only tacitly implied. And it is alike true with respect to
ull testaments, that they will be of no validity unless the testators


5 See the eleventh section of Legacies, the fifth article.
* L.A, D, de reg. Caton. .


70 THE CIVIL LAW-~ [part II. BOOK I.


die without revoking them, which they may do. From whence it
follows, that it is always the death of the testator which, by ful-
filling the condition of his perseverance in the same will until the
last moment of his life, gives at that very moment to the testa-
ment its force and validity. Which has the same effect as if the
testator had reiterated his testament at the time of his death, or
had only then made it; in which case his heir, who was formerly
an alien, and happens to be naturalized at that time, would suc
ceed without any difficulty. We see, likewise, that it is certain,
by an express rule in the Roman law, that if a foreigner was insti
tuted heir on condition that he should be naturalized at the time
of the death of the testator, this disposition would have its effect
if the case should happen;! notwithstanding that the heir was
incapable at the time when the testament was made, and for no
other reason but that the condition would be expressed by the tes-
tator, and because the Catonian rule does not take place in condi-
tional institutions} as shall be explained in the place where we
shall treat more fully of it, as has been already mentioned. Thus,
since this condition when it is expressed had this effect, might
not we suppose that the testator who has not expressly mentioned
it has tacitly meant it, seeing he was desirous that his will should
be executed in whatever manner it could? And where would be
the inconvenience in considering the institution of an heir who
should be an alien at the time of making the testament, as imply-
ing the condition that he should cease to be such at the time of
the death of the testator? For might not this heir say, that his
institution was not null, and ought not to continue so, but in case
he were not naturalized at the time of the testator’s death? And
that in the mean while it remained in suspense, either to have its
effect, or not to have it, according to the state in which he should
happen to be at the time of the said death, which ought to give
to the dispositions of the testator the character of a last will;
since it is this essential character which is considered in all dispo-
sitions made in prospect of death, and which, by giving them their
validity, gives them the effect which they are to have. To which
we may add, that there are several cases in the Roman law in
which this general rule, that whatever is null in ts beginning
remains always so, is false, as well as the Catonian rule. Thus,
for example, deeds of gift between husband and wife were null by


! VY. 1.26, D. de heared. inst. 1 ZL. penult. D. de reg. Caton.


TIT. I. BEC. II] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 71


the Roman law, but if the donation was not revoked before the
death of the donor, the said death ratified it in favor of the sur-
vivor2 Thus, for another example, if a Roman senator had mar-
ried a woman who had been made free from slavery, the marriage
was null; but if the said senator happened to lose his dignity, the
marriage began to have its effect. Thus, for a third example,
which is a case in point to the present subject, taken out of the
same body of the Roman law, if a testator had left a legacy in
trust in favor of a slave, whose master had been condemned to
some punishment which rendered him incapable thereof, as by the
usage in France a perpetual banishment out of the kingdom
would do, this legacy in trust, which was to accrue to the master
through the slave, bad its effect, if the master who was condemned
was restored to his former condition, although his incapacity at
the time when the testament was made ought to have rendered it
null. And if it should be said, that in this example the prince’s
favor had restored him who was incapable to his former capacity,
in the same manner as if he never had been condemned; yet it is
sufficient for the consequence which we pretend to draw from it,
that although the disposition of the testator was not conditional,
and that if he had died at the time he made his testament, the
legacy in trust would have been null, yet it ceased to be so by the
said change. Thus, the said rules ceased to take effect in this
case, and proved to be false with respect to it. And, in fine, it may
be said, that this rule which requires that the heir should be capa-
ble at the time of making the testament has been in all appear-
ance a consequence of that ancient form of testaments which for
a long time was the only one used at Rome, and which they called
per es et ibram,’ where the testator made an imaginary sale of his
succession to his heir, who was present in person, and was the
purchaser for a certain price in money which he put into a scale.
Thus, it was necessary that the purchaser should be a citizen of
Rome, and capable of purchasing a right to the succession; and
as this was a mere superfluous nicety which was at last abolished,
0 this rule which requires the capacity of the heir at the time of
making the testament, being a remainder of that nice formality in
the ancient Roman testaments, might likewise very well be abol-
ished, and that with the greater equity, because it seems that the


™ £1, D. de donat. int. vir. ef ux. ° 27, D. de rit. nupt.
" LE. 82, § 1, a sequent. D. de donat. int. vir. et uz. P L. 7, D. de legat. 8.
1 § 1, Inst. de testam. ; —v. Ulp. tit. 20; —d. t. Ulp. § 2.


72 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT IL BOOK L


rule which makes void the institution of an heir, and the legacies,
which would have been null if the testator had died at the time
when he made his will, was a fiscal law, made with a view to ex-
tend the effect of this incapacity in favor of the exchequer, which
reaped the benefit thereof, and which is directly contrary to the
spirit of our laws.

2036. If we suppose, then, that a foreigner who is naturalized,
having no children of his own, but having several brothers who
are likewise naturalized, except one who remains still a foreigner,
should in his testament institute all his brothers his heirs, and that
the brother who was not naturalized at the time of making the
testament is naturalized before the death of the testator, could the
brothers who were naturalized before the testament was made ex-
clude from the succession the brother who was naturalized only
afterwards, and allege dgainst him that his incapacity at the time
of making the testament rendered his institution null, although he
was capable of succeeding at the time when his father died, and
that thus, the testament subsisting with respect to the brothers who
were naturalized before it was made, the other brother’s portion
ought to belong to them by the right which is called the right of
accretion, and which shall be explained in its proper place?* It
must certainly be that the said brothers should be thoroughly
versed in the Roman laws, before it could ever enter into their
minds to call in doubt their brother’s right to his share in the said
inheritance. And it seems to be certain that without this knowl-
edge it would not only never enter into the mind of any person to
raise such a dispute, but, on the contrary, whoever would act nat-
urally, and follow the bare dictates of reason, would cry out
against a rule which should have this effect to exclude the said
brother. - And it would be the same thing, if, instead of brothers,
we should suppose them to be other collateral relations, who, hav-
ing all of them an equal right to succeed as heirs if there were no
testament, are called to the succession by a testament. Thus, it
may be said that this rule has in it more of the character of the
niceties of the Roman law than of equity, and that for this reason
it seems that our usage would reject it. And although it be true
that this rule, the application whereof appears odious in the cases
where the persons called to the succession by a testament are the
heirs of blood, yet it would not be so hard in the case where the


¥ See the ninth section of Zestaments.


TIT. I. SEC. 11.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 7


testamentary heir is another person than the heir of blood, or
might be less entitled to favor according to the circumstances, yet
seeing the rule is pure and simple, and general for all sorts of tes-
tamentary heirs, without any distinction, whether they be relations
or strangers, it would be necessary to have an express rule which
might set bounds to it. From whence it seems that we may rea-
sonably conclude, that it would be just, and is much to be wished
for, either that this rule were entirely abolished, or that the use of
it were regulated by some law which might prevent the incon-
veniences thereof.

2537. All that has been hitherto said concerning the institution
of an heir respects likewise legacies, and the other dispositions
made in prospect of death ; which, as well as the institution of the
heir, were null according to the rules of the Roman law which
have been mentioned. So that a legacy, for instance, for a sum
of money to a friend of the testator’s, or to some poor person,
would be null, according to these rules, if the legatee who was
capable of it at the time of the testator’s death had not been
also capable at the time when the will was made. We have
thought ‘ourselves to be under a necessity of making all these
reflections, not only because of the consequence of all these
difficulties, but likewise that we might give a reason why in the
twenty-seventh article we have only mentioned that, in testamen-
tary successions, it is necessary to consider, with respect to the
capacity or incapacity of the testamentary heir, the time of making
the testament, the time of the death of the testator, and the time
of the heir’s entering to the inheritance, without laying it down as a
rule, that the capacity is necessary in all the said three times. And
we may gather from all these remarks, and from those which have
been made on the twenty-ninth article, and likewise from what re-
sults from the observations which have been made on the right of
transmission, in the preamble of the tenth section of Testaments,
that, as to what concerns testamentary successions, it seems to be
agreeable to the spirit of our usage, which is directly opposite to
the niceties of the Roman law, not to consider the incapacity of
the testamentary heir but at the time of the death of the testator,
as in the successions of intestates, and to apply even to that rule
the temperaments which may appear to be necessary from the
reflections which have been made in all these remarks, and which
it is needless to repeat here.

VOL. I. 7


74 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK L


XXXIL

2538. Effect of the Incapacity of a Professed Monk. — The inca-
pacity of a professed monk, as well as that of foreigners, respects
the two kinds of successions, both testamentary and that of intes-
tates. And he who happens to be in that state at the time of the
death of the person to whom he has right to succeed, whether it
be as heir of blood, or by virtue of a testament, has no share in
the inheritance. Thus, he does not transmit it to his heirs, but it
passes to those who have the right to succeed in his default. But
if the professed monk gets his vows to be declared null; seeing in
that case he is restored to the same condition as if he had never
made any profession, so he becomes capable, not only of the suc-
cessions which may fall to him afterwards, but likewise of those
which fell after his making profession ;" provided that he brought
his action in due time to have his vows annulled, and that he
made those persons parties to the suit who claim an interest in
the succession which is in dispute.


XXXIIL


2539. Effect of the Incapacity of Condemned Persons. — The in-
capacity of persons condemned to death, or to other punishments
which import civil death, excludes them, in the same manner as
the incapacity of professed monks, from both the kinds of succes-
sion.? And the successions which might have come to them had
they not been incapable pass to those persons who have the right of
succession in their default, in the same manner as if the condemned
persons had died before the succession fell. Thus, the son of a
condemned person succeeds to his grandfather, to whom the father
cannot succeed.! But if their incapacity comes to cease, they will
be restored to their former condition, and will be equally capable
of all successions, and even of those which fell before their inca-
pacity was abolished?


XXXIV.


2040. This Incapacity takes Place only from the Time of Condem-
nation. — Seeing the person that is condemned is rendered inca-


® This is a consequence of the nullity of the vows.

© See, in the remark on the eleventh article, what are the condemnations which have
this effect.

P LZ. 18, D. de bonor. possess.

q L. 7, D. de his qui sui vel al. jur. s.;—1. 4, § 2, D. de bon. libert.

* See on this whole article the rules which follow.


TIT. 1. SEC. 11.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 75


pable only by the sentence of condemnation, which puts him in the
state of incapacity which is produced by the civil death; the suc-
cessions, whether they be of intestates or by testament, which may
have fallen to him before his condemnation, and even after his ac-
cusation, belong to him in the same manner as his other goods,
until he is stripped of them by his condemnation ;° for till then it
is uncertain whether he may not die before he receive sentence,
whether he may not be acquitted, or whether he may not procure
his pardon from the prince. Thus, his condition does not imply
any incapacity until his condemnation.


XXXV.


2541. If the Condemnation subsists, tt makes the Incapacity to
subsist Likewise. — If, after a sentence of condemnation which
might be reversed, the case should happen of a succession which
should go to the person condemned, if he were capable thereof, his
right would remain in suspense until the event should either ratify
or annul the condemnation ; and if it subsists, it will make the in-
capacity to subsist likewise. As, on the contrary, the succession
would belong to him if the effect of the condemnation should hap-
pen to cease, as it may by any one of the causes explained in the
following article.


XXXVI


2542, This Incapacity ceases in several Cases. — The effect of the
condemnation may cease either by the prince’s pardon," or by a
decree of a superior court which annuls the sentence of condem-
nation,? or by the bare appeal itself, if the condemned person dies
before the said appeal has been decided” And in all these cases


* Si quis post accusationem in custodia fuerit defunctus, testamentum ejus valebit.
L. 9, D, qui test. fac. poss. ;—1. 1, § 3, D. de legat. 3; —1. 8, D. de publ. judic. The cape
city of making a testament, and of succeeding, is the same. So that this text proves the
one by the other. See the fourteenth article of the second section of Testaments.

‘ See the text quoted on the thirty-third article.

" L.1, C. de sent. pass. ef rest.

* The sentence of condemnation may be annulled by a decree of a superior court, which
acquits the party, or which mitigates the punishment, and decrees another punishment
which does not imply civil death.

Y Provocationis remedio eondemnationis extinguitur pronunciatio. L. 1, § ult. D. ad.
senat. Terpil. Si quis cum capitali poona, vel deportatione damnatus esset, appellatione
interposita, et in suspenso constituta, sati diem functus est, crimen morte finitum est. L.
wit. C. si reus vel accus. mort. fuer.; —1. 2, C. si pend. app. m. int. Si quis in capitali cri-

mine damnatus appellaverit, et modio tempore pendente appellatione fecerit testamentum,


76 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


the incapacity ceases for all the time that is past. Thus, the suc-
eessions which may have fallen to the said condemned person
will belong to him, or to those who shall have his right.


Remargs ON ArticLes XXXIII. ro XXXVL


2543. We must observe, on this and the three preceding articles,
a difference there is between the rules of the Roman law and those
of the French law, as to what relates to the matter of condemna-
tions. By the Roman law no sentence of condemnation could
pass against the party accused, unless he were heard in his own
defence, but his estate was irrevocably confiscated if he did not
appear within a certain time, and the giving judgment on the ac-
cusation was deferred till he should give an appearance. By the
rules observed in France, which are the ordinances, there are two
sorts of condemnations; that which is pronounced when the party
accused is present in judgment, and that which is given in his ab-
sence, by which he is condemned to the punishments which the
law inflicts for the crime, which is called a condemnation on ac-
count of contumacy, because of the disobedience which the party
accused shows to the decree pronounced against him. Both these
sorts of condemnations have this belonging to them in common,
that both the one and the other import the civil death of the per-
son condemned, and, by consequence, his incapacity. But where-
as the condemnation which is passed against the party who is
present in judgment is executed on his person by corporal punish-
ments, and on his estate with regard to the forfeitures, fines, and
the civil interest of the adverse party, so that his incapacity is
reckoned from the day of his condemnation ; the incapacity which
arises from a condemnation on account of contumacy depends on
what happens afterwards, and on the rule established by the or-
dinances, which directs that the condemnation on account of con-
tumacy shall have its effect on the estate of the condemned per-
son, as to the acquisition of forfeitures, fines, and the civil interest
of those who have an interest only after the condemned person
has suffered five years to elapse from the time of his condemnation
without giving an appearance in judgment, in order to make his


et ita decesserit, valet ejus testamentum. JD. 13, § 2, D. qui test. fac. poss.;—i. 6, § 6, D.
de injust. rupt. This last text proves the capacity by the effect of the appeal.

See, at the end of the following remark, another way of annulling a sentence of con-
demnation, which is received in France, when the condemned person dies during his de-
lay to purge his contumacy.


TIT. I. SEC. I1.] HEIRS AND EXECUPORS. 77


defence and undergo his trial. This is what results from the or
dinance of Moulins, article 28; by which article the king reserves
to himself the power of receiving the accused party to make his
defence, even after the five years, according to the circumstances
of the causes, the persons, and the times, and other considerations ;
these are the words of the said ordinance. And the same thing is
ordained by the twenty-eighth article of the title of Defaults and
Contumacies in the ordinance of 1670, which makes the five years
to ran only from the day of the execution of the sentence, that is
to say, from that execution thereof which is by effigy, and not
from the day of the condemnation. And by the twenty-ninth ar-
ticle of the same ordinance of 1670, the condemned person who
dies after having suffered five years to elapse without presenting
himself in court, or yielding himself up prisoner in order to take
his trial, is reputed to be civilly dead from the day of the execution
of the sentence for contumacy. According to these ordinances, if
the condemned person happens to die within the five years, his
condemnation will be without effect, seeing it is to have its effect
only by reason of the contumacy of the condemned person, who
has stood in contempt for five years without giving an appearance.
From whence it would seem to follow, that he dies without in-
capacity, and that the successions which may have fallen to him
after his condemnation go to his heirs, or to those who have his
rights. And it is in this sense that the said ordinances are gen-
erally construed, although in some places it is otherwise adjudged.
So that we may add to the three causes which make the inca-
pacity to cease, as has been explained in the article, and which are
common both to the Roman law and to the usage in France, this
fourth cause, which is peculiar to the usage in France, and that is
the death of the person who is condemned for contumacy, when
he dies within the five years.

2544. We must likewise remark on this article, that we are not
to understand what relates to the appeal from the sentence of con-
demnation, of all sorts of condemnations without distinction. For
we must except the condemnations for crimes which are prosecut-
ed after the death of the persons accused, such as the crime of
high treason, and others, which it would be needless to mention
here.®


* V.L ult. D. ad. 1. Jul. majestatis ; — 2. 6, 7, 8, C. eodem ; — 1. 5, Cod. sf reus vel accusat.
mort. fuerit.
7*


7 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK |


XXXVIL

2545. One cannot give or bequeath to one that is Incapable by the
Intervention of other Persons. — All the sorts of incapacities have
this effect, which is common to them all, that not only one cannot
bequeath any thing to a person who is incapable, naming him ex-
pressly in his will; but likewise all those dispositions which are
called tacit gifts, or bequests in trust, where one leaves to some
person whose name is made use of in order to convey by his
means to one that is incapable by law, either the whole inherit-
ance or some legacy, are annulled both with respect to the person
that is incapable, and also with respect to him who lends his name
for the carrying on this fraud.*


SECTION III.


WHO ARE THE PERSONS THAT ARE UNWORTHY OF BEING HEIRS OER
EXECUTORS.


2546. Tuene is this difference between the causes which render
persons incapable of succeeding, and those which render them
unworthy thereof, that the causes which render the heir or execu-
tor incapable of the succession have no particular relation to the
duties which he owed towards the deceased, to whom he was to
succeed ; and that even of the four sorts of incapacity which have
been explained in the foregoing section, there are three the causes
whereof have nothing in them that is a transgression of any man-
ner of duty whatsoever. But the causes which render the heir
unworthy of the succession regard some particular duty, in which
he may have failed towards the deceased whose succession he
lays claim to, whether it was against his person while he was
alive, or after his death against his memory; or even some other
sort of duty, as in the case of the eleventh article. Thus, it is
always on the account of some crime, or of some kind of offence,
that an heir is declared unworthy of a succession.

2047. We must observe here, in relation to the persons who


® L. 3,44, D. de jur. fiec.;—l. 1, eod.; —1. 18, D. de his qua ut ind. It appears from
these texts, that by the Roman law what was given by a tacit bequest in trust was forfeited
to the exchequer, when the fraud was well proved. But by our usage, the dispositions
of this kind are only annulled, and the heir or executor retains what was given in fraud
of the law, or of the custom. See the eleventh article of the following section.


TIT. 1. BEC. II] HEIRS AND EXEOUTORS. 79


have rendered themselves unworthy of the succession, a difference
between the usage in France and the Roman law, which consists
in this, that by the Roman law the inheritance which the heir
was deprived of because of his unworthiness escheated to the
exchequer,* which was observed, likewise, in the case of heirs to
intestates, although they derived their right to the succéssion from
the law, and not from the will of the deceased.» But according to
the usage in France, when the heir is found to be unworthy of the
succession, it passes to the person who has the right to succeed
next after him, whether it be in the case of a testamentary succes-
sion, or of a succession to an intestate. For the punishment of
the heir that is unworthy ought only to fall upon himself, and not
upon the person to whom the inheritance ought to belong by
reason of his exclusion. Thus, there appears to be in our usage
more humanity and more equity than in the Roman law.

2548. Seeing the causes which render persons unworthy of
being heirs may regard either both the kinds of succession, the
testamentary as well as that of intestates, or only the testamentary
alone, it will be easy to distinguish in each cause, either by the
words of the article or by the remarks made upon it, to which of
the two kinds of succession it relates.


Arr. I.


2349. The Heir that ts unworthy is excluded from the Inherit
ance. —- Those who, being capable of succeeding, do render them-
selves unworthy thereof, are excluded from all successions, whether
they come by the death of an intestate or by the will of a testator,
and the goods of the succession pass to those who, in default of
them, have the next right to the inheritance, as shall be explained
by the rules which follow.


II.


2500. Causes which render the Heir wnworthy.— The causes
which may render the heir unworthy of the succession are indefi-


* V.1.1, D. de jure fisci ; — toto titulo D. et C.de his qua ut indign.

» ZL. 9, C. de his quib. ut indign.

* Toto titulo D. e& Cod. de his quae ut indign. See the following articles, and the text
whieh is cited in the preamble.

* We have added these last words, that the goods go to those who have the next im-
mediate right to the inheritance, because, as has been remarked in the preamble of this
section, the inheritances belonging to heirs who render themselves unworthy of them do
not by our usage fall to the exchequer, as they did by the Roman law, but pass to the


80 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL BOOK L


nite, and the discerning of what may or may not be sufficient to
produce this effect depends on the quality of the facts and the
circumstances® Thus, we are not to limit these causes to such
as shall be explained in the following articles, where we have only
mention of those which are expressly named in the laws. But if
there should happen any other case where good manners and
equity should require that an heir should be declared unworthy, it
would be just to deprive him of the inheritance. Thus, for exam-
ple, if one who has had an unlawful commerce with a woman of
a bad life and conversation should institute her his heir or execn-
trix, such an institution ought to be annulled.4


IL


2551. If he attempts to kill the Person to whom he should succeed.
— If he who is to succeed as heir, either by testament or to an
intestate, attempts any thing against the life of the person to
whom he should succeed, he shall be deprived of the succession,
although the attempt had not its effect, provided it be sufficiently
proved.*


IV.


2002. If he has any Hand in his Death, although tt be only by
Neglect. — Although the heir did not make any attempt upon the
life of the person whose estate was to come to him, yet if his
death can be imputed either to the negligence or any other fault
of this heir, as if he knew that others had a design to murder or
poison him, and he did not discover it; or if, seeing him in danger
of his life, he neglected to give him the aid and succour which he
might have done, he shall be deprived of his inheritance in the
same manner as if he had been the author of his death.‘


other heirs who, in default of the heir that is unworthy, have the next immediate right to
succeed.

© See the following article.

4 Mulier in quam turpis suspicio cadere potest, nec ex testamento militis aliquid ca-
pere potest, ut divas Hadrianus reecripsit. Z. 41, § 1, D. de testam. mil. ;—1. 14, D. de his
que ut indign.

Although the rule which results from this text be limited to the dispositions of soldiers,
yet the morality upon which it is grounded ought to render it common to all other per-
sons. For there is no person whatsoever who is not bound, as well as a soldier, to abstain
from every thing that is contrary to decency and good manners.

© This case renders the heir unworthy, with much greater reason than those which are
explained in the following articles.

Indignum esse D. Pius illum decrevit, ut et Marcellus refert, qui manifestissime com-


TIT. L SEC. TEL] HEIRS ND BXRCUTORS. 81


V.

2003. If he attempts any Thing against his Honor. -— The heir at
law, or executor, who makes an attempt upon the honor of the
person to whom he is to succeed, whether it be by becoming his
accuser in a court of justice, or by joining in an accusation that
is brought against him, is no less unworthy of succeeding to him
than if he had attempted against his lifes


VI.


2554. If there happens between them a Mortal Hatred. — If there
had happened between the testator and the person whom he had
named his executor a mortal hatred and enmity, to such a degree
as that there might reasonably be presumed from thence a change
in the will of the testator, this would be a sufficient cause to ex-
clude the executor from the succession, unless there was a recon-
ciliation before the death of the testator. But a slight quarrel or
difference would not have this effect.»

Betas ON THE PrecepINeG ARTICLE.

2550. Although the laws cited make mention only of a legatee,
and not of a testamentary heir, yet the rule seems to be much
more just and equitable with respect to the testamentary heir, see-
ing in his case, as the kindness is greater on one side, so likewise
is the ingratitude on the other; and he who is not worthy of a
small favor is much less worthy of a greater.

2506. This rule is founded on a natural effect of enmity. For
as every testator chooses his testamentary heir only in consideration
of some merit which he discovers in him, and that nothing is
more opposite to the merit which recommends any person to the
esteem of another than that which may produce hatred instead of


Probatas est id egiese, ut per negligentiam et culpam suam mulier a qua heres institatas
eat, moreretur. L. 3, D. de his quer ut indig.
_ Although this text speaks only of the testamentary succession, yet the rule is equally
jut in both the kinds of succession.

© L. penult. 4 penult. D. de adim. vel transf. legat. We might place in the same rank
the heir who attempts upon the honor of the wife of the person to whom he is to succeed.

Although the text cited on the article mentions only a legatee, yet its decision
sems nevertheless to be applicable, and with much greater reason, to execators and heirs
rp See the remark on the following article. See the texts cited on the two follow-

articles.

"1.9, D. de his que ut indign. aufer.;—l. 8, inf, D. de adim. vel transf leg.;—1. 4,
ed. ;—v.§ 11, Instit. de excus. tut.

* L.9, D. pro sucio.


82 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL BOOK 1L


friendship; the enmity, therefore, which falls out between the tes
tamentary heir and the testator must necessarily produce this
effect of changing the will of the testator who had named for his
heir a person whom he now looks upon as his greatest enemy, and
consequently of annulling a disposition which it is very probable
the testator would not be willing to have executed. This is a con
sequence which naturally arises from the words of the first of the
laws quoted on this article. And although it be true that enmities
containing a mutual hatred between two persons are always ur-
lawful, even on the part of those who have not been the first ag-
gressors, and that every man ought always to preserve the spirit of
the second law towards all others; yet this truth does not de
stroy the equity of the law which annuls the wills of testators
made in favor of persons against whom they afterwards conceive 3
mortal hatred, even although the said persons should be noways
to blame on their part. For it is always certain that, if this enmity
lasts to the death of the testator, it has two effects which annul
the institution of an heir or executor who has since become an
enemy. One is on the part of the testator, by the proof which it
furnishes of his mind being changed with respect to the said heir;
and the other is on the part of the heir, whom it renders unworthy
of the succession ; so that, as this heir by testament has no othet
title besides the good will of the testator, and the favorable opinion
which he had conceived of him, he has no longer either any title
or right to the succession. Thus, although the hatred should be
much more unjust on the part of the testator than on that of the
testamentary heir, yet the effect which it has by law of annulling
the institution is not, upon that account, any thing the less just.
For as to him who is instituted heir, he is justly deprived of the
succession of which he is unworthy; and as to the testator, the
injustice of his hatred against the person whom he had instituted
his heir does not consist in the annulling of the institution, but
only in this, that he is wanting in his duty, in not loving him with
that brotherly love which he owes to all mankind in general.
And since this duty of brotherly love does not oblige him to name
for his heir a person who not only has no manner of right to his
inheritance, but is even unworthy of it, and that, on the contrary,
the said duty leaves him at full liberty to leave his estate either to
his heir at law, or to any other person whom he pleases to choose ;


> See the fourth and sixth chapters of the Zreatise of Lawe.


TIT. 1. SEC. II1.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 83


it is therefore without any injustice that the law annuls the insti-
tation when there falls out afterwards a mortal hatred between
the heir that is instituted and the testator.

2507. We have restrained this rule to the testamentary heir;
for besides that the laws quoted on this article have relation only to
the dispositions of testaments, the condition of those who succeed
as heirs to intestates ought to be distinguished from that of tes-
tamentary heirs, as to what regards the effect of the enmity that
happens between the heir and the testator; because that whereas
the testamentary heir owes the succession barely to the will of the
testator, the heir of blood who succeeds to an intestate derives his
right from the provision of the law. So that we may say, that an
enmity which does not go to that height which has been men-
tioned in the foregoing articles would not be sufficient to exclude
the heir at law from the inheritance of his kinsman, who, by choos-
ing to die intestate, would by that sufficiently declare his mind
that he was not willing his estate should go to any others but to
those who should be entitled to it by law. And much less ought
enmity to exclude the heir at law in the provinces of France,
which are governed by their customs, where it is not allowed to
deprive the heirs of blood of that part of the estate which is appro-
pnated to them by the said customs; because if enmity were to
have that effect, it might happen that a testator who should chance
to have some quarrel with his heir at law might turn it into hatred,
and so heighten it to such a degree as might furnish him with a
pretext for making a will to his prejudice, and for eluding the law.


VIL


2008. If he calls the State of the Testator in Question. — If the
heir who is instituted by testament has done any great injury to
the testator, or used him so basely as to render himself unworthy
of the benefit he receives by his will, he shall be deprived of it;
and with much more reason will he be deprived of this benefit if
he was the author of, or any way concerned in publishing, a de-
famatory libel reflecting on the testator’s honor, or if he had com-
Menced a lawsuit against him in relation to his state and con-
dition. As if, the testator pretending to be a gentleman, he had
contributed to make him lose that quality ; or if he had attempted
to get him declared a bastard!


' 1.9, §§ 1 et 2, D. de his quae ut indign. auf. Defamatory libels are placed in the num-


84 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


VIIL

‘2559. If he does not prosecute the Authors of his Death.— The
heir, whether he succeed by testament or as heir at law, who neg-
lects to bring to condign punishment the murderers of him to
whom he has a right to succeed, renders himself, by that neglect,
unworthy of the succession. Unless he should deserve to be er-
cused upon account of the tenderness of his years, as if the said
heir was a minor, or for some other reasonable cause, according to


the circumstances 2


IX.


2560. If he treats concerning the Succession during the Testator’s
Life, and without his Knowledge.— If any one, before the death of
the person whose estate is to come to him, either by testament or
by right of blood, should in prospect thereof dispose of any of the
effects belonging to the said estate, without the consent of the said
person, he would thereby render himself unworthy of succeeding
to him


X.


2561. If he hinders him from making a Testament.— If he who
is named heir in a testament had hindered the testator from mak-
ing a second will, whether it were by force or by any other un-


ber of capital crimes. V./. un. C. de fam. libel. And they deserve this punishment more
than any injury or any insult whatsoever.

We must likewise make the same remark here, that although the text cited on this ar
ticle speaks only of a legatee, yet it may be applied with much greater reason to the tes-
tamentary heir.

If, in the case of two persons contending for the same inheritance, one of them should
contest the state of the other in order to exclude him from it, having some reason to be-
lieve him to be cither a bastard or an alien, and meapable of succeeding, and the per
son whose state was called in question was adjudged to be lawfully begottan, or a natu-
ral-born subject, and afterwards he comes to die having for his heir at law the person
who had called his state in question, the said heir would not upon this account be judged
unworthy of succeeding to him. For his controverting the other's state under these cir-
cumstances ought not to be imputed to any design ia him to do harm; since it tended
only to discover the truth of a matter of fact, which was uncertain, and on which depend-
ed the right of the contending parties. But as for defamatory libels, atrocious injurics,
and bad treatment, seeing they are crimes punishable by law, and such as destroy men’s
reputation, which is mach dearer to them than life itself, it seems just that the heir at
law who has been guilty of any of the said crimes should be declared unworthy of the
inheritance.

1 7.17, D. de his que ut indign.;—1. 1, C. eod.

m I. 6, C. eod.

® [1,29 ef 30, D. de donat.;—i. 2, in f. D. de his qua ut indign.


TIT. E. SEC. 111.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 85


lawful means, he would be unworthy of succeeding to him. It
would be the same thing if he to whom the inheritance belongs
by right of blood should make use of the same indirect means to
hinder the person whose succession would fall to him by law, in
case there were no testament, from making one. And he who
should use violence, or any other unlawful way, to extort a testa-
ment in his own favor, or in favor of other persons in trust for
him, would with much greater reason be debarred from reaping
any benefit by the said testament. And in all these cases, the
authors of such unlawful ways, together with their accomplices,
will be liable to be punished, according to the quality of the facts
and the circumstances.°


XL


2062. Tf he has lent his Name for a tacit Bequest in Trust.—~
We may place in the rank of persons unworthy of successions
those who lend their names to testators, that they may be named
heirs in order to convey the effects to persons whom the law has
excluded. And these sorts of dispositions, which are called tacit
fiduciary bequests, remain without effect, if the fraud appears.
And he who is named heir, as well as the person to whom he was
to restore the goods of the succession, shall be deprived of them;
the one as being incapable, and the other as being guilty of a
cheat, which the laws liken to a robbery or a theft” |


XIL


2563. The Heir who is unworthy restores the Fruits and the
lnterest. — The heir that is unworthy, and who has already en-
joyed some part of the inheritance, ought to restore all the fruits
thereof, and the other revenues which he has received during the
Whole time of his possession, as likewise the interest of the money
which he has received, whether it be from persons indebted to the
succession, or from the sale of some of the movables, or upon
other accounts. For he is of the number of unjust possessors,
even before any action is brought against him.

* 1.1, D. si quis alig. test. prokib. vel oveg.; —1. 2, eod.;—1. 2, C. cod. ;—11, C. ead.
See the fourth article of the second section of Legacies. See the twenty-fifth and follow-
ing articles of the fifth section of Testaments.

? L. 10, D. de his quee ut ind. auf.;—J. 46, D. de haved. petit. Seo the last article of
the foregoing section.

‘1 Heredes, quos necem testatoris inultam omisisse constiterit, fractus integros cogun-
tr reddere. Neque enim bons fidei possessores ante controversiam illatam videntur

VOL. Il. 8.


86 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK L


XII.

2564. Difference between the Causes which render Heirs un
worthy. — Among all these causes which we have just now
explained, and which may render an heir unworthy of the inhenit-
ance, we must distinguish between those which may cease to
have their effect, and those whereof the effect can never cease.
Which depends on the state in which matters are at the time of


the death of the person whose succession is in question, and on
the rules which follow.


XIV.


2065. Of those which render the Hetr unworthy at the Time of the
Death of the Testator.— If the cause which may render the heir
unworthy subsists at the time of the death which lays the succes-
sion open, and the heir cannot justify himself against the charge,
he shall be irrevocably excluded as unworthy. For being found
to be such at the moment that the inheritance falls to him, he can-
not acquire it, and the estate goes to the person whom the law
calls to the succession."


XV.


2566. Of those which have ceased at the Time of the Death. —
If the cause which might have rendered the heir unworthy did
cease, as if it was a mortal hatred, or other cause, which a recon-
ciliation with the deceased, or a justification of the heir, had abol-
ished, the obstacle ceasing, he might succeed.‘


fuisse, qui debitum officium pietatis scientes omiserunt. Ex hereditate autem rerum
distractarum, vel a debitoribus accepts pecuniss post motam litem bonorum, usttras infe-
rant. Quod in fructibus quoque locum habere quos in prediis heereditariis inventos, aut
exinde perceptos vendiderint, procul dubio est. Z.1, C. de his quid. ut ind.

Although this text speaks only of the heir who has not revenged the death of the de-
ceased, yet this rule agrees to all the cases of the other causes which may render the heir
unworthy.

Seeing the unworthy heir is called in this text an unfair possessor, even before any
action is brought against him, ante controversiam illatam, why should he be accountable for
the interest of the money which he shall have received, either from the debtors to the suc-
cession, or from the sale of any of the movable goods, only from the time that the suit is
commenced, as it is said in this text? Unless it were that the text is to be understood of
money that is in being, or that is still owing by those who have bought any thing of the
said heir.

F See the following articles. ‘

* This is the effect of the cause which renders him unworthy.

t See the sixth article.


TIT. I. SEC. 1V.| HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 87


XVI.

2067. Distinction of the Causes with Respect to the Two Sorts of
Successions. — Among the causes which render the heir unworthy,
we must distinguish between those which regard equally the suc-
cessions of intestates and testamentary successions, and those
which can have respect only to testamentary successions. For this
distinction is necessary to be observed, in order to prevent our
giving to the causes which render the heir unworthy another
effect than that which they ought to have according to law and
equity." And it will be easy to judge, by the reading of every
article, to which of the two successions each of the said causes
ought to be applied.


SECTION IV.
OF THOSE WHO CAN HAVE NO HEIRS OR EXECUTORS.


2068. Havine explained who are the persons who cannot be
heirs or executors, order requires that we should, in the next place,
show who are the persons who cannot have heirs or executors.
And this is different in testamentary successions from what it is
in the succession of intestates. For, as shall be explained in this
section, there are some persons who are capable of having heirs at
law, and cannot have testamentary heirs.* There are others, on
the contrary, who cannot have heirs at law, and who are capable
of having heirs by testament.’ And there are some who can
neither have heirs at law nor heirs by a testament.

2069. We might reckon in the number of persons who cannot
have heirs those who possess only those kinds of estates which we
see in some customs, and which are said to be of a servile condi-
ton or of mortmain, of which we have already spoken in the
preface, no. 15. For as to estates of this nature, it is the lord of
the manor who succeeds when there are no children; and he ex-
cludes all others, whether they be heirs at law or heirs by testa-
nent, as has been remarked in the above-mentioned place.


" This article is a consequence of the former.

* See the first article of this section, and the remark that is there made upon it.
* See the second article.

* See the third article.


88 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOK L


Arr. L

2570. Persons incapable of making a Testament cannot have an
Executor or Testamentary Hetr.— All persons who are incapable
of making a testament, whether it be for want of age or for other
causes, which shall be explained in their proper place,* cannot by
consequence have executors or heirs by testament. But their
inheritance goes necessarily to the person whom the law calls to
succeed.®


IL.


2571. Bastards can have no other Heirs, if they die intestate, bul
their Children.— Bastards who have estates may dispose of them
by will, and their children may succeed to them as their heirs at
law, if they have any that are lawfully begotten. But if they die
without children, and intestate, as they have no legal parentage
with any person, so they can have no heir at law.°


Ti,


2572. Foreigners can neither have Executors, nor Heirs at Law.
-~ Foreigners who die without being naturalized can have no
heir, neither heir at law nor testamentary heir.!


IV.


2573. Professed Monks have either Testamentary Heirs, or Heirs
at Law.— Professed monks have for their heirs, either the persons
whom they may institute by a testament, if they think fit to make
any before their profession, or those to whom their inheritance


* See the second section of the first title of the third book.

b We may reckon, in one sense, among the persons who cannot have testamentary
heirs, those whose estates are situated in the provinces of France which are governed by
their customs. For there they know no other heirs besides thove of blood ; and they give
the name only of universal legatees to those who, not being called te the succession by
law, are instituted heirs by a testament.

© L. 4, D. unde cogn. See the eighth article of the second section, and the remark that
is there made on it. The successions of bastards belong to the king, by virtue of that
right whieh is called right of bastardy, or to the lord of the manor.

4 See the ninth article of the second section, and the articles which are there quoted.
We must except from this rule strangers who have children or relations born in France,
or naturalized ; for they may succeed to them, as has been remarked in the thirty-first
article of the second section. And we must likewise except the strangers who come
within the case of the ordinances of 1463, 1588, and 1569, which allow foreign merchants,
who frequent the fairs of Lyons, to make their wills, and their heirs at law to succeed
them when they die intestate. The successions of foreigners belong to the king, by vir-
tue of that right which is called right to the estates of aliens.


TIT. 1. SEC. V.| HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 88


belongs by law, if they have not disposed of it by will. And the
estate which belonged to them at the time of their profession goes
to their heirs. For their vows put them into the state of a civil
death, which, rendering them incapable of possessing any goods,
has the same effect as a natural death in laying their
open.*


V.


2574. Condemned Persons have no Heirs. Persons condemned
to death, or to other punishments which imply civil death, and
dying in that condition, can have no heirs. For their condemna-
tion has stripped them of all their goods, which go either to the
king, or to the lord of the manor who has right to the escheat.‘
But if their condemnation is annulled by any one of the ways ex-
plained in the thirty-sixth article of the second section, their goods
will descend to their heirs.


VL


2575. Persons who have no Reiations have no Hews at Law.
— Those who either have no relations at all, or only such as are
aliens not naturalized, have no heirs if they die intestate‘ But
they may dispose of their effects by will, if they are under no inca-
pacity of making one.


SECTION V.


OF THE RIGHTS WHICH ARE ANNEXED TO THE QUALITY OF HEIRS
AND EXECUTORS.


2576. Tas whole section, which relates to the rights of heirs
and executors in general, and the three following sections, which
treat of the charges of heirs and executors likewise in general, are
as it were a plan, in which it was necessary to distinguish the said


* See the tenth article of the second section, and the remark that is there made on it.
' This is a necessary consequence of the state of these condesaned persons. See the
deventh article of the second section, and the other srticles there quoted.

' L.1, C.debon. vacant. The estates of these who leave behiad them no heirs, nether
betementary heirs nor beirs of blood, belong to the king, by virtue of that right which
entitles him to the succeasions of all those who leave no heirs behind them. Seo the
cnn tit sovond part, mo. 12, and the firet article of the thirteenth section of this


8 *


90 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK L


rights and the said charges, and to give this first view of them,
that their order may be the better understood, before we enter
upon explaining the particulars. For this detail, containing a
great number of rules, which are to be treated of in different places,
and which make different matters, it is necessary to give the idea
of the said matters all in one place, and there to lay down the
principles and general rules which are to enter into this plan, and
which ought to precede the detail of all the said matters, each of
which will have its proper detail in ita proper place; as shall be
explained in the remark subjoined at the end of the eighth section.

2577. The same reason which has induced us to make this
plan obliges us likewise to acquaint the reader, that he must not
take those things for repetitions, which are to be met with either
in the foregoing sections, or in the remaining part of this trea-
tise, which may seem to have any resemblance with what shall
be explained in these four sections. For either there will be
found some difference between the things themselves, or, if the
same thing be repeated in different places, it will appear to have
been necessary in both places, either for method’s sake, or for some
other consideration.


Art. I.


2078. Right to accept the Succession, and to take Possession of
the Goods. — Seeing the heir or executor is universal successor,
the first right which this quality gives him is to accept the suc-
cession, to take possession of the goods, to claim such of them as
shall happen to be in the hands of other persons, to call in the
debts, and to dispose of every thing belonging to the succession
as owner and master.


IL


2579. The Entering to the Inheritance hath tts Effect from the
Day of the Death.— This right of the heir or executor hath this


® ZL. 37, D. de reg. jur. See the first article of the first section. We must not con-
found the right to accept the succession which is spoken of in this article with the right
or title which makes one heir or executor. The right of accepting the inheritance de-
pends on the will of the heir or execator, but not the title which makes him heir or exec-
utor; to wit, the testament in testamentary successions, and the proximity of blood in
the succession of intestates.

See, concerning the accepting of the inheritance, and the difference between the right
to the quality of heir or executor, and the right of accepting that quality, what is said
thereof in the preamble to the third title of this first book, and in the places quoted at the
end of the said preamble.


TI?. I. SEC. V.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. Of


effect, that although he does not know that the succession is fallen
to him until a long time after, or that knowing it he delays to ac-
cept it, yet from the moment that he begins to intermeddle with
it he acquires all the rights belonging to the succession, in the
same manner as if he had entered to it at the time of the death of
the person to whom he succeeds. And whatever may have aug-
mented the succession during that interval will belong to him.


1008


2580. The Heir may renounce the Inheritance. — Seeing succes-
sions may be sometimes more chargeable than profitable, the
heir, whether he be testamentary heir or heir at law, who does
not think it convenient to accept of that quality, has a right to re-
nounce it;° but this he must do whilst things are still entire; that
is, before he has done any act which implies his acceptance of the
succession. For, as has been said in another place, he who has
once been heir or executor can never cease to be such.’


IV.


2581. The Heir may deliberate whether he shall accept of the
Succession or not. — If the heir is in doubt whether the succession
be advantageous or not, he may take a time to deliberate whether
he shall accept or renounce it ;* as shall be explained in the first
section of the second title.


V.


2082. The Heir may accept the Succession with the Benefit of an
Inventory. — In the same case with that of the foregoing article,
the heir may, without deliberating, if he does not think fit to take
that method, declare himself heir with the benefit of an inventory,
that is, by getting an inventory of all the goods, to be made in
due form. Which will have this effect, that he will be answerable
for the debts no farther than to the value of the goods, and be
only accountable for them ; and if he himself has any demand on
the inheritance, the same will be preserved entire to him! It is


"1.138, D. de reg. jur. See the first article of the eighth section.

* L.18, D. de aoguir. vel omit. hoered. ;—1.16, C. de jure deliber. See the fourth sec-
ton of the third title of this first book.

See the tenth article of the first section of this title.

* L.1,§1, D. de jure deliber.; — 1. 5, eod.

 L. wt. § 2, C. de jure delib.; —d. 1. § 9, in f. Seo the second title.


9 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT mL BOOK L


this benefit of an inventory which shall be the subject-matter of
the second title.


VL
2583. He may demand that the Legacies and Bequests in Trust
be reduced, when there is Ground for it.— Although the goods of
the succession exceed the debts that are owing by the deceased,
yet if the heir, whether he be heir by testament or heir of blood,
be charged by a testament, or codicil, with legacies, bequests in
trust, substitutions, or other dispositions which diminish the por-
tion of the goods of the inheritance that is appropriated by law to
the heir or executor, he has a right to demand that these sorte of
dispositions be moderated; as shall be explained in the proper
place.s
VIL
2584. The Heir may sell the Inheritance, make tt over by Deed
of Gift, or dispose of t otherwise.— Although the heir who has
once taken upon him this quality cannot afterwards divest himeelf
of it in such a manner as not to be any more subject to the charges
of the succession which he had accepted, yet he has nevertheless
the right to sell it, to make it over by deed of gift, or to dispose of
it by any other title, for the behoof of another person who enter
to his rights, and who obliges himself to acquit the charges® But
although this heir has stripped himself of the goods of the succes-
sion, yet he remains still bound for all the debts, and has only his
‘recourse against the person who, having got the succession, ought
to warrant him against them:


VUL

2585. Right of Transmitting the Inheritance to his Hetr.— We
may place in the number of the rights belonging to the heir that
of transmitting, after his death, the inheritance which had fallen to
him to the persons who shall succeed to him, although he had not
declared his acceptance of the succession, nor done any act as heir.
This is the right which is called right of transmission, and which
shall be explained in its proper place.


& L.1,D.adleg. Fale. See the third title of the fourth book, and the fourth title of the
fifth book.

b Toto titulo D. et C. de hereditat. vel act. vend.

1 7. 2, C. de legat. | See the tenth section of Testaments.


TIT. L. SEC. V.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 98


IX.

2086. There are some Rights which do not go to the Heirs. —
We must not reckon among the rights belonging to the heir all
those which the person had to whom he succeeds. For there are
many rights which are restrained to the persons themselves, and
do not go to their heirs.™


x.


2587. The Right of the Heirs of Blood to the Goods appropriated
to them by Law.— It is necessary to remark among the rights be-
longing to heirs the peculiar right which children, and other de-
scendants and ascendants, have to a legitime, or certain portion of
the goods, which cannot be taken away from them, and of which
we shall treat in its proper place" And also the right which the
collateral relations have, in the provinces of France governed by
their customs, to the goods which are appropriated to them, and
which cannot be disposed of to their prejudice.°


XI.


2088. Right of Partition among Coheirs.— When there are sev-
eral heirs, each of them has a right to oblige the others to come to
a partition of the effects and charges of the inheritance.


XIL


2089. Right of Accretion among Cohetrs.—In the same case,
where there are many heirs, they have among them reciprocally
that right which is called right of accretion, which hath this effect,
that in default of any one of them his right passes to the others,
pursuant to the rules of this matter, which shall be explained in
their proper place.1


XTIL


2590. Right of Collation of Goods. — Among several coheirs to
an ascendant, whether they succeed by right of blood or be called
by testament, every one has a right to oblige his coheirs, who may
have received any goods from this ascendant to whom they suc-


™ Sce the fifth article of the first section.

® Sce the third title of the third book.

® See the preface to this second part, no. 7.
P See the fourth title of this first book.

? See the ninth section of Testaments.


94 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 31. |


ceed, to bring them in; that is to say, to put them into th
of the estate, that they may be likewise comprised in the pa
This is called the right of collation of goods, which makes
ter by itself, the rules whereof shall be explained in its
title.


XIV.


2591. Right of Reversion.— When ascendants succeed |
descendants, and chance to have coheirs, as it happens in th
which shall be explained in their proper places,’ if the said
dants had made any donations to their descendants to who
succeed, that which they had given them does not enter i
partition, but returns to them by that right which is called :
reversion, which shall be explained in its place.


SECTION VI.
OF THE SEVERAL SORTS OF ENGAGEMENTS OF HEIRS OR EXE(


Arr. L


2092. Engagement to the Succession by the bare Effect of .
ance.— The heir, whether it be the heir at law or heir |
tament, who has accepted of this quality, or who has done :
which makes him heir, as shall be explained in the first sec
the third title, enters into a general engagement, which oblig
to all the consequences of this quality of heir, and to all the «
of the inheritance, by the bare effect of his acceptance. 1
act which makes him heir is, as it were, a contract betwee
and the persons to whom this quality may oblige him, by
he takes the goods on condition to acquit the charges.*


IL
2593. Several Sorts of Engagements of Heirs. — The e


ments of heirs are of several sorts, in the same manner
charges of the inheritance. And in order to understand ari;


T See the fourth title of the second book.

® See the first section of the second title of the second book.

t See the third section of the same second title of the second book.

* L. 4, D. qub. ex caus. in poss. eat. ; —1. 8, in f. cod. ; —1. 5, § 2, D. de oblig. ¢
§ 5, Znst. de oblig. que quas. ex contr. nase. See the first article of the eighth secti


TIT. I. BEC. Vi.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 95


nature of each engagement, and the order of them all, it will be
necessary to make the following distinctions.®


HL.


2594. The First General Engagement for all the Charges of the
Inheritance. — The first engagement of an heir or executor is that
genefal and indefinite obligation which he contracts with all those
who may have any demand on the inheritance, although he be
ignorant who those persons are and what their demands are; and
that even although the goods of the succession be not sufficient to
satisfy them all, unless he has taken the precaution whjch has
been mentioned in the fifth article of the fifth section.


IV.


2595. All the Particular Engagements are reduced to Two Kinds.
— All the particular engagements which may be comprised under
this general and indefinite obligation are distinguished into two
kinds, which include them all without exception. The first is, of
those which the person to whom the heir succeeds may impose
upon him; and the second is, of all those which are independent
of the will of the said person. Thus, the legacies are of the first
of these two kinds; and the passive debts of the deceased, that is,
those which are owing by him, are of the second kind.4


V.


2096. Several Charges which may be imposed on the Heir.— The
charges which one may impose on his heir or executor are of
several sorts, such as legacies and donations made in view of
death, which we shall treat of in the fourth book; substitutions
and fiduciary bequests, which shall be the subject-matter of the
fifth book; and all other dispositions which the deceased may
have made, and which put his heir under some engagement; such
a3 that which may regard any restitutions to be made by him, his
funeral expenses, if he has given any directions about them, and
others of the like nature.°


» Bee the following articles.
, ihis is a consequence of the first article. L. 8, D. de acquir. vel omit. hored.

‘ There can be no engagement but what belongs to one or other of these two kinds.
* See the fourth and fifth books, and the eleventh section of this title.


96 THE CIVIL LAW. {PART 11. BOOK L


VI

2597. Charges to which the Heir ts liable, although the Deceased
has not expressly obliged him to them.— The charges to which the
heir or executor is liable, although the person to whom he succeeds
has ordered nothing concerning them, are likewise of several sorts ;
such as the debts owing by the deceased, whether he owed them
upon the account of his own affairs, or for other persons for whom
he was bound ; the duties of the lands and tenements which are
part of the inheritance; the debts and other charges of the suc-
cessions which the deceased may have inherited ; the reparation
of the damages which he may have been the cause of through
some fault, or other means; the funeral expenses; and all other
engagements whatsoever, either of the person or the goods of the
deceased, which may affect his inheritance, although he has not
obliged his heir to them expressly by any disposition.‘


VIL


2598. Two Sorts of Engagements of the Deceased, whick do not
pass to the Heir.— As we must not comprehend indifferently un-
der the goods of a succession all that may have belonged to the
deceased person to whom the heir or executor succeeds, as has
been said in the fifth article of the first section; so neither must
we indifferently reckon among the engagements of the heir or ex-
ecutor all those which the deceased may have been under: for
there are two sorts of engagements which end with the person,
and which do not pass to his heirs, as will appear in the two fol-
lowing articles.


VI.


2599. The First Sort of Engagements which do not pass to the
Heir.— The first sort of engagements which do not pass to the heirs
or executors of the deceased contains certain functions which the
public order of society requires that some persons should be en-
gaged in, whether they will or not. Thus, the engagement of
those who are called to the offices of sheriff, consul, collector, and
to other offices which are called municipal offices, or to the ad-


f These charges are easily understood of themselves, and that which may have any
difficulty in it shall be explained in its proper place. Seo the sixteenth article of the first
section, and the tenth section of this title.

S See the two following articles.


TIT. 1. SEC. VI.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 97


ministration or government of a hospital, or any other endowment
of charity, the engagement of a tutor or guardian, the commis-
sions that are appointed for functions which the order of justice
makes necessary, such as those persons into whose hands litigious
goods are sequestered, and others of the like nature, are so many
engagements, the exercise of which ends by the death of the per-
sons who were chosen for the said functions." For they are of
such a nature, that the heir or executor may either be incapable
of them, or may have some privilege which may exempt him from
them. But although these charges do not pass to the heirs or ex-
ecutors, and they cease upon the death of those who are erigaged
in them, yet the heirs or executors will be liable for the conse-
quences which may regard them, according to the rules which have
been explained in another place!


IX. ”

2600. The Second Sort of Engagements which do not go to the
Heir, — The second sort of engagements which do not pass to the
heits or executors contains some of those into which people can-
hot enter but voluntarily, and by mutual consent of all parties, and
Which are such that the parties concerned choose reciprocally one
another upon some considerations which are limited to their persons.
Thus, persons who give to their attorneys or agents the charge
either of all their affairs in general, or of some affair in particular,
and the attorneys or agents who accept of this charge, enter into
a voluntary and mutual engagement, by the trust and confidence
Which they have in one another! Thus, those who enter into
partnership together, whether it be a partnership of all their goods,
ora particular partnership for carrying on any trade or commerce,
form among themselves a voluntary tie or engagement, in prospect
of the advantages which they may reap from one another by the
industry, fidelity, and other qualities that each of them considers
in the other™ Likewise those who, having some differences with
one another, agree to refer the matter to arbitrators, may perhaps
take this way of adjusting matters, only because of the particular
friendship, or other considerations, which they may perhaps have


* See the fifth article of the sixth section of Tutors. See the title of Syndics, Direc-
torr, ie.

' See the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth articles of the fourth section of Tttors.

' See the sixth article of the fourth section of Prozies.

" See the fourteenth article of the fifth section of Partnership.

VOL. I. 9


98 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK L


one for the other." So that in all these cases the engagements of
the one towards the other are founded upon motives which are
limited to the persons: for which reason it is just that their ties
and engagements should end by their death. But their heirs or
executors, in the same manner as those of tutors, are bound for all
the consequences which may regard them, pursuant to the rules
which have been explained in their proper places.°


SECTION VII.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS WHICH MAY BE IMPOSED ON AN HEIR OR
EXECUTOR, AND BY WHAT KIND OF DISPOSITIONS.


Art. I.


2601. Charges which may be imposed on an Heir. — One may
impose on an heir, whether he be heir by testament or heir at lew,
all those kinds of charges which have been mentioned in the fifth
article of the foregoing section, and, in general, all manner of
charges without distinction; provided they be possible, honest,
and lawful. For whatever is impossible, or contrary to good man-
ners and decency, or is declared to be unlawful by any law, the
same can be of no force to oblige any one.*


IL


2602. By what Dispositions the said Charges may be imposed. —
All the charges, in general, which may be imposed on heirs or ex-
ecutors, are regulated by two sorts of dispositions. One is, of
those which are called dispositions in view of death, which are
revocable, and which have not their effect but by the death of the
person who has made the disposition, such as testaments, codicils,
and donations made in view of death; which comprehends lega-
cies, fiduciary bequests, substitutions, and whatever else may be
ordained by these sorts of dispositions. The other kind is of
those which are irrevocable, such as donations which are to have
their effect in the lifetime of the donor, and other acts of the same
nature, which may contain some engagement that one imposes on,


® See the sixth article of the first section of Compromises.

© See che sixth section of Partnership, the sixth, seventh, and eighth articles of the
fourth section of Proxies, and the sixth article of the first section of Compromises.

® Nov. 22, c. 2;-—1. 5, D. test. quemad. aper.;—1. 185, D. de reg. fur.


TIT. I. SEC. VII.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 99


his heir. Thus, for example, he who in his lifetime should make
a donation of a house, or other tenement, may by the same con-
tract charge his heir or executor to suffer after his death a service
on another house or tenement, which is part of his inheritance, for
the behoof of the said house or tenement which he had made
over by deed of gift, not being willing to subject himself to that
service during his own lifetime. .Thus, one may make a contract
for founding a college, or hospital, the execution whereof should
not commence till after the death of the founder, although the con-
tract be irrevocable.”


IIL


2603. What these Dispositions ought to be.— To oblige the heir
orexecutor to the performance of the charges which the person
to whom he succeeds has a mind to impose upon him, it is neces-
sary that the dispositions by which the said charges are enjoined
be such as may have effect. And in order to give them their
elect, it is necessary that they be made according to the rules
which follow. After which they are in the place of laws to the
heir or executor®


IV.


2604. First Rule, that the Persons who dispose be capable of
disposing. — The first rule for the validity of the dispositions
which contain the charges that are imposed on heirs or executors
is, that the said dispositions be made by persons who have power
to make them, and in whom the liberty of disposing does not
meet with any obstacle, by their being under any of the incapaci-
hes which have been explained in the second section, or others
which shall be explained in their proper places.4


V.


2605. Second Rule, that the Persons who are to receive the
Benefit thereof be not incapable of it. — We may lay it down as a
second rule, that the dispositions by which any charge, imposed
on an heir or executor, in favor of some person, such as a legacy,
a fiduciary bequest, and others of the like kind, ought to be made
in favor of persons capable of receiving these sorts of benefits.*


* This is a consequence of the preceding article. © See the following articles.

" See the second section of Testaments.

* We cannot give to those whom the laws have made incapable of receiving. See the
écond section of Testaments.


100 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART It. BOOK I.


VI.

2606. Third Rule, that the Dispositions be made in due Form. —
The third rule is, that the said dispositions be made according to
the form prescribed by law. Thus, as to dispositions made in
view of death, it is necessary to observe therein the number of
witnesses, and the other formalities, which shall be explained in
their places.£ So, likewise, as for dispositions which are to take
effect in the lifetime of the parties, it is necessary that they be
such as the laws prescribe. As if it is a donation which is to take
effect in the lifetime of the donor, it is necessary that it should be
accepted by the donee, and registered.£


VIL


2607. Fourth Rule, that the Dispositions do not exceed the
Bounds prescribed by Law.— The fourth rule is, that the charges
imposed by the said dispositions do not exceed the bounds which
the laws have set to the liberty of disposing, in order to preserve
to the heirs, whether they be instituted by testament, or succeed
to an intestate, the portion of the goods of the succession which
the law has reserved to them. Thus, the testator cannot, by any
charge or imposition whatsoever, diminish the legitime of his
children or parents. Thus, in the provinces of France which are
governed by the Roman law, the testator cannot bequeath above
three fourth-parts of the estate which he leaves behind him; and
the heir or executor may get the legacies to be reduced, so as that
there may remain to him at least one fourth part of the succession.
And the fiduciary bequests have likewise their bounds." And in
the provinces of France which have their particular customs, one
cannot bequeath more than what the said customs allow of.


VIL


2608. Difference between that which is defective by the Fourth
Rule, and that which is so by the others.— There is this difference
between the dispositions which are defective by one of the first
three rules which have been just now explained, and those which
are contrary to the fourth; that these are not altogether null for
having exceeded the bounds of the liberty which every one has to


€ See the third section of Testaments, and the first section of Codicils.
E See the second and fifteenth articles of the first section of Donations.
b See the title of the Legitime, that of the Fulcidian Portion, and that of the Trebellianic


TIT. L. SEC. VIII.) HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 101


dispose, but are reduced within the said bounds; and that the
dispositions which are made contrary to one of the three other
rules, that is, either by persons who have not the power of making
them, or in favor of persons who are not capable of receiving any
benefit by them, or if they are defective in some formality, the
want whereof is sufficient to annul them, such dispositions have
no effect at all, and are noways obligatory!


IX.


2609. The Detatl of what Particulars relate to these Four Rules
shall be explained in its proper Place.— All these causes, which
may either annul testaments and other dispositions, or hinder
them from having their entire effect, shall be explained in their
proper places.! And it is sufficient here to give this short view of
these general principles, and to observe their order.


X.


2610. In what Manner these Dispositions ought to be performed.
— When the charge imposed upon the heir or executor, whether
it be a legacy or any other charge, ought to have its effect either
in whole or in part, he ought to perform it in the manner pre-
scribed him by the testament or other disposition. And if there
arise any difficulties concerning it, they are to be decided by the
rules which shall be explained in their proper place.


SECTION VIII.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS WHICH ARISE FROM THE QUALITY OF HEIR
OR EXECUTOR, ALTHOUGH THE PERSON TO WHOM HE SUCCEEDS
DOES NOT IMPOSE ANY.


Art. IL
%11. The Heir is bound for all the Charges of the Inheritance,
dlhough they were unknown to the Deceased. — Every heir, whether
he be heir at law or instituted by a testament, who accepts an
inheritance, engages himself thereby to all the charges of the in-


This is a consequence of the four preceding articles.
' See the places referred to on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh articles.
" See the sixth, seventh, and eighth sections of Testaments, and the eleventh section
of the sane title. . |
9°


102 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK |.


heritance without distinction, and even to those which perhaps the
person to whom he succeeds was ignorant of. And as he has all
the effects, and all the rights of the inheritance, even those which
have fallen to it since the death of the person to whom he suc
ceeds, so he is also bound for all the charges which have hap
pened since the said death.


IL


2612. For the Charges of the Inheritances which had fallen to the
Person to whom he succeeds. — If, in the succession which passes to
an heir or executor, there happens to be other successions which
the deceased or his authors had inherited, all the charges of those
several successions are confounded and united in the person of
this heir or executor, and he becomes liable for them all.®


IIL


2613. For the Substitutions or Fiduciary Bequests, with which
the Deceased was charged. — If there are any goods in a succession
which are subject to some fiduciary bequest or substitution, with
which the deceased or his authors had been charged, the heir or
executor will be bound to restore them to the persons who shall
appear to have the right to them when the cases thereof shall
happen.°


IV.
2614. For all other Charges, Claims, and Demands on the Suc-


cession. — The heir or executor is bound in general, and without
distinction, for all the debts owing by the deceased, and for all
other kinds of charges whatsoever, and for the claims and de-
mands which creditors or others may have against the deceased,
or on the goods of the inheritance.


V.


2615. For the Damages occasioned by any Offence or Crime of the
Deceased. — We must reckon among the charges for which the
heir or executor is bound, although the deceased may have ordered


® See the second article of the fifth section, the first article of the sixth section, and the
second article of the following section.

b See the sixteenth article of the first section.

© See the title of Substitutions, in the fifth book.

@ ZL. 2, C. de hared. act. See the following section. °


TIT. I. BEC. VIII] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 103


nothing about them, the restitution and satisfaction which the de-
ceased may owe for damages he has done by some crime or of-
fence’ This shall be the subject-matter of the tenth section.


VI.


2616. For the Debts which are payable only after his Death. —
We may likewise place in the same rank the debts which could
not be demanded from the deceased during his lifetime ;-as if he
had bound himself for a sum of money which was not to be paid
till after his death ; or if the person who was surety for him, hav-
ing paid the debt .after his death, demands his reimbursement
from the heir or executor, which he could not demand from the


deceased!


VIL


2617. For the Funeral Expenses. — Lastly, the heir or executor
is bound for the funeral expenses of the person to whom he suc-
ceeds which shall be the subject-matter of the eleventh section.


A Taste or THE PLAN or THE Ricats aNp Cuarees or HE1Rs
oR EXEcuTors.


2618. We must add here, by way of conclusion or recapitula-
tion of this and the three foregoing sections, that, as has been
rematked in the preamble to the fifth section, we have endeavoured
to lay down in these four sections, as it were in a plan, a general
idea of the rights of heirs and executors, and of their engagements,
in which one might see them altogether, and in order, without
adding the detail of the rules of all those different matters which
ought to be explained in different places. And it is now ne-
cessary that we should subjoin here a summary view of the said
nghts and engagements, as it were in a table of the said plan, and
there mark the places where the particular rules relating to each
matter are to be met with. Some may, perhaps, think that it
would have been more proper to have placed this table at the
head of the fifth section, immediately after the remark which is
there made; but we have judged it. more convenient that we
should first explain the said rights and engagements, in order


, See the tenth section.
L.7, D. de reb. auth. jud. possid. ; —d. 1. in f-
5 See the eleventh section.


104 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART LL BOOK L


to avoid confusion and obscurity, being persuaded that this table
will be more easily understood here, after the reading of those
four sections, than it would have been had it been placed befare
them.


The Rights of Heirs and Executors, and the Places where they are
treated of.


1. The right of accepting or renouncing the inheritance, which
includes the right of deliberating. See the first section of the sec-
ond title of this first book, and the third title of the same book.

2. The right of accepting the succession with the benefit of an
inventory. See the second title of the same book.

3. The right of a legitime, for the heirs to whom itis due. See
the third title of the third book.

4. The right of getting the legacies, fiduciary bequests, and sub-
stitutions reduced to what is regulated by the law. See the third
title of the fourth book, and the fourth title of the fifth book.

5.: The right of selling, or making over by deed of gift to others,
the inheritance, or disposing of it otherwise. See the seventh
article of the thirteenth section of this title, the second article of
the fourth section of the Contract of Sale, and the twenty-fourth
and twenty-fifth articles of the tenth section of the same title.

6. The right of transmitting the succession to their heirs. See
the tenth section of Testaments.

7. The rights of coheirs to come to a partition of the inhemt-
ance among them. See the fourth title of this first book.

8. The right of accretion among the coheirs. See the ninth
section of Testaments.

9. The right of collation of goods among coheirs. See the
fourth title of the second book. :

10. The right of reversion to those who ought to have it. See —
the third section of the second title of the second book. |


Charges imposed upon the Heir or Executor by the Will of the
Person to whom he succeeds, and the Places where they are
treated of.


1. The charge of paying the legacies. See the second title of
the fourth book.

2. The charge of restoring fiduciary bequests. See the said sec-
ond title of the fourth book, and the third title of the fifth book.

3. The charge of executing all the other dispositions of the per-


TIT. I. SEC. IX.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 105


son to whom the heir succeeds. See the eleventh section of
Testaments, and the title of Legacies, and that of Subststutions,
both direct and fiduciary.


Charges of the Heir or Executor which are independent of the Will
of the Person to whom he succeeds, and the Places where they
are treated of.


1. The charge of acquitting the debts due from the succession,
and whatever else may be due from the heir or executor. See the
following section.

2. The charge of acquitting the damages occasioned by any
crime or offence of the person to whom the heir succeeds. See
the tenth section of this title.

3. The charge of acquitting the funeral expenses. See the
eleventh section of this title.


SECTION IX.


IN WHAT MANNER THE HEIRS OR EXECUTORS ARE BOUND FOR THE
PASSIVE DEBTS, AND FOR ALL THE OTHER CHARGES OF THE IN-
HERITANCE.


2619. A.rnoves all the articles of this section make mention of
no other charges in particular besides the passive debts, that is,
the debts owing by the deceased, yet the rules which are here
explained ought to be applied to the other sorts of charges, such
as legacies of different kinds of things, funeral expenses, and all
others. For there are none of them which may not be converted
into passive debts by reducing their estimation to a certain sum of
money, if the heirs or executors fail to acquit them Thus, the
rules of this section are common to all the kinds of charges of an
inheritance, according as they may be applied to them.


Art. L


2620. Divers Kinds of Charges. —- We must comprehend under
these words of passive debts and charges of an inheritance which
the heir or executor is bound to acquit, not only all that was
owing by the deceased upon his own account, and all that which


* L.72, D. de verb. obl. See the first article of the eighth section of Legacies.


104 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOK lL.


to avoid confusion and obscurity, being persuaded that this table
will be more easily understood here, after the reading of those
four sections, than it would have been had it been placed before
them.


The Rights of Heirs and Executors, and the Places where they art
treated of.


1. The right of accepting or renouncing the inheritance, which
includes the right of deliberating. See the first section of the sec-
ond title of this first book, and the third title of the same book.


2, The right of accepting the succession with the benefit of an _


inventory. See the second title of the same book.


3. The right of a legitime, for the heirs to whom itis due. See —


the third title of the third book.


4. The right of getting the legacies, fiduciary bequests, and sub- —


stitutions reduced to what is regulated by the law. See the third
title of the fourth book, and the fourth title of the fifth book.

5. The right of selling, or making over by deed of gift to others,
the inheritance, or disposing of it otherwise. See the seventh
article of the thirteenth section of this title, the second article of


the fourth section of the Contract of Sale, and the twenty-fourth


and twenty-fifth articles of the tenth section of the same title.
6. The right of transmitting the succession to their heirs. See
the tenth section of Testaments:


7. The rights of coheirs to come to a partition of the inherit |


ance among them. See the fourth title of this first book.
8. The right of accretion among the coheirs. See the ninth
section of Testaments.


9, The right of collation of goods among coheirs. See the '


fourth title of the second book.


10. The right of reversion to those who ought to have it. See.


the third section of the second title of the second book.


Charges imposed upon the Heir or Executor by the Will of the


Person to whom he succeeds, and the Places where they art
treated of.


1. The charge of paying the legacies. See the second title 0
the fourth book.


2 The charge of restoring fiduciary bequests. See the said sec |


ond title of the fourth book, and the third title of the fifth book.


3. The charge of executing all the other dispositions of the pet


D FOR THE
P THE IN-


106 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK I.


‘he has imposed on his heir or executor, but, in general, all the
rights which may affect the inheritance.


I.


2621. The Heir is bound for the Debts, although they exceed the
Value of the Goods of the Inheritance. — The heir or executor who
accepts the inheritance purely and simply, that is to say, who does
not take the benefit of an inventory, of which mention has been
made in the fifth article of the fifth section, is bound indefinitely
and without distinction for all the debts owing by the deceased,
and for all the other charges of the inheritance, whatever sum they
may amount to, and although they exceed very far the value of
the goods of the inheritance. For it depended only on him, either
not to accept the succession at all, or to take the benefit of an
inventory. And having entered to the inheritance without this
precaution, he has engaged himself irrevocably for all the charges,
whatever they are.>


Il.


2622. Three Sorts of Debts, those which are merely Personal,
those which have a Mortgage, and those which are Privileged.—
The engagements of heirs or executors for the passive debts are
different, according to three different kinds of debts. The first is
of those which are called purely personal: the second is of those
which have a mortgage for their security: and the third is of those
which are privileged. We must distinguish these three different
sorts of debts, in order to distinguish likewise the rights of the
creditors against the heir or executor, and the different engage-
ments which the heir is under to the creditors.°


IV.


2623. Definition of these Three Kinds of Debts.— The purely
personal debts are those which consist only in a bare promise, or
other title or security, which obliges only the person of the debtor,’
without having any mortgage or privilege on any part of his
estate. The hypothecary debts are those for the security of which


® All these different charges are acquitted by the heirs according to the rules which
shall be explained in this section.

b Z. 8, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hered.
. © See the following articles.

4 § 1, Inst. de act. ; —1. 25, D. de oblig. et act.


TIT. I. SEC. IX.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 107


the creditor has a mortgage.* And the privileged debts are those
which have some of the privileges that have been explained in the
fifth section of Pawns and Mortgages.


V.


2624. Preference of the Creditors of the Deceased to those of the
Heir, in the Goods of the Inheritance.— The creditors of the de-
ceased for debts purely personal, such as those who are called cred-
itors by bond or note, that is, who have only a bare promise under
the debtor’s hand, and in general all those who had no mortgage
on the estate of the deceased, their debtor, are nevertheless pre-
ferred in the goods of the deceased before the creditors of the heir
or executor, even although they may have mortgages for the se-
curity of what is owing to them. For although the goods of the
deceased be mortgaged to the creditors of the heir, if he had mort-
gaged to them all the goods which he should acquire for the
future, yet the goods of this inheritance are, in the first place, ap-
propriated for the payment of the debts of the deceased, and have
been transmitted to the heir only upon this condition, that he
should acquit the debts. And it is still with much greater reason
that the creditors of the deceased are preferred who have a mort-
gage or privilege on those very goods.‘


VI


2625. Preference of the Creditors of the Hetr to those of the De-
ceased, in the Goods belonging to the Hetr.— The creditors of the
deceased, even those who have mortgages for the security of their
debts, have no mortgage on the proper goods of the heir or exec-
utor, until he either engages his estate to them, or they get a sen-
tence of condemnation against him. But this mortgage, which
they may have on the estate of the heir, will take place only after
the mortgage of the proper creditors of the heir to whom he had
engaged his estate before. For the deceased who was their debtor


neither did nor could give them a mortgage on the estate of his
heir£


VIL


2626. Creditors who have neither Mortgage nor Privilege share
equally in Proportion to their Debts. — When there are several cred-


* See the second article of the first section of Pawns and Mortgages.
" L. 6, D. de separat. See the ninth article.
6 L. 29, D. de pign. et hypoth. ; —1. 1, in f. C. comm. de legat.


108 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK I.


itors of the deceased, who have neither mortgage nor privilege for
their debts, they come in share and share alike, both in the goods
belonging to the heir, and in those which belonged to the deceased,
and every one receives his share of them in proportion to his debt,
if there are not goods enough to satisfy the whole debts.*


VIIL


2627. The Creditors of the Deceased come in all alike on the
Goods of the Heir.— If there are creditors of the deceased who
had mortgages, they are paid out of the effects which belonged to
their debtor, according to the order of their mortgages; but if the
goods of the deceased are not sufficient to acquit them, and
they come upon the goods of the heir for their payment, in that
case they come in jointly with the other creditors of the deceased
who had no mortgage. For they have all of them their right
against the heir only from the same time, and from the day that
he accepted the inheritance. But the creditors of the deceased,
whether they had mortgages or no, who first get a mortgage on
the estate of the heir, whether it be that be engages himeelf to
them in this manner, or that they obtain judgment against him,
will be preferred before the others in the goods belonging to the
said heir.


TX.


2628. Separation of the Goods of the Inheritance from those of
the Heir. — In all the cases where there is a competition between
the creditors of the deceased and those of the heir, all the creditors
of the deceased are preferred in the goods which belonged to the
deceased before all the creditors of the heir. And in order to their
exercising of their right, they may demand a separation of the goods
of the inheritance from those which belong properly to the heir.


h 7.1, § wlt. D. de tribut. act. See the second section of the Cession of Goods.

17.2, inf, L 4, C. qué potior ;—1.11, D.eod. See the two preceding articles. We
must not confound, in this article, the right which the creditors of the deceased have
against the heir, with the mortgage which they have on the estate of the heir. For all the
creditors of the deceased, whether they had mortgages from the deceased or not, acquire
their right against the heir the very moment that he accepts the inheritance, as is said in
the article ; but they have each of them their mortgage on the estate of the heir only
from the time that he obliges himself to them in this manner, or that he is condemned by
& sentence.

' L. 2, C. de bon. auth. jud. possid. See the title of the Separation of the Goods of the De-
ceased, &c. The creditors of the heir have the same preference on their part as to the
goods belonging to the heir, and may demand this separation, as has been remarked in
the preamble to the same title of the Separation of Goods.


:


TIT. 1. SEC. 1X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 109


X.

2629. The Hetrs are bound personally for their Portions in the
Inheritance, and such of them as have the Goods which are mort-
gaged for a Debt are bound for the whole Debt. — When there are
two or more heirs, the creditors of the deceased ought to divide
their demands against every one of them according to the portions
they have in the inheritance, and they cannot sue any of them for
the portion of the debt that falls to the share of the others, nor can
they demand the whole debt from any one of them alone. But
as for the debts which are secured by a mortgage, or which have
a privilege, the creditors may demand their payment out of the
effects which are subject thereto, although they have fallen to the
lot of any one of the heirs singly. And this is what is meant by
the common saying, that the heirs are bound for the debts of the
succession personally every one for his proportion, and hypothecarily
for the whole™ Thus, the creditors preserve their rights entire on
the inheritance, for they exercise their mortgage and their privilege
on the goods which are subject thereto; and they use their right
against all the other goods of the succession, having an action
against every one of the heirs according to the share which they
have in the inheritance.


XL


2630. The Debt secured by Mortgage or Privilege is divided
with Respect to the Heirs.— Although the debt which is secured
by a mortgage or privilege is not divided with respect to the cred-
itor, and he may demand the whole from the heir who is in pos-
session of the goods which are subject to it, yet the debt is di-
vided among the heirs; and he who, being in possession of the
eflects which are subject to the mortgage or privilege, has paid the
whole debt, or is sued for payment of it, shall be indemnified by
his coheirs, as shall be shown in the article which follows."


XIL


2631. How all the Debts are divided among the Coheirs.— All
the debts, whether they be barely personal, or secured by a mort-
gage or privilege, are divided among the heirs, so as that each of


" L. 2, C. de heredit. act. ;—1. 38, D. de legat.2. See the twelfth and fifteenth articles
of this section, and the sixteenth article of the first section of Pawns and Mortgages.
" This is a consequence of the foregoing article. See the following articles, and the
uxteenth article of the first section of Pawns and Mortgages.
VOL. If. 10


110 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK L


them ought to bear his part thereof according to the share he has
in thé inheritance, unless it be that one of the heirs has been
charged by the deceased to acquit the whole debt, or to pay more
than his proportion of it. Thus, the heir who is sued for more
than his proportion of a debt which is purely personal cannot be
condemned to the creditor for more than his share amounts to.
For, with regard to the heirs, it would not be just that one of
them should be bound to pay the portion of the other. And as
for the creditor, he is at liberty to seize upon the whole estate be-
fore any of the heirs take their portions out of it, and if he does it
not, it is but just that the security which he had on all the goods
of the deceased for his whole debt should follow the said goods,
and be divided according as they are divided. But as for the
debts secured by a mortgage or privilege, as it is just that the
creditor should preserve his mortgage or his privilege, so he may
either exercise his right on the effects which are subject to it, or,
without derogating from his security, he may sue each heir for his
portion. And if the heir who is in possession of that part of the
estate which is subject to the mortgage or privilege is sued for
the whole debt, he may have his recourse against his coheirs, who
shall indemnify him, every one according to his share.°


XH


2632. The Debts are divided among the Coheirs, even against
the Exchequer. — The liberty which the heirs have, of dividing
among them the debts which are purely personal, hath its effect
with respect to all sorts of creditors whatsoever, and even against
the exchequer.?


XIV.


2633. The Insolvency of one of the Heirs does not hinder this
Division. — The same liberty of dividing the debts purely per-
sonal among the coheirs hath its effect even in the case where
one of them may prove insolvent. For the creditor ought to
blame himself for not having taken his security on the whole


goods of the succession before they were divided among the
coheirs.1


C. si unus ex plur. hered. credit. See tho fifteenth article.
heered. act.


Q
=. &


TIT. I. SEC. X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 111


XV.

2634. The Debts are divided according to the Portions of ‘the In-
heritance. — Seeing the debts are divided among the coheirs
according to the shares which they have in the inheritance, it is
therefore upon this foot that each of them pays his proportion of
them; and although it may happen among coheirs, that besides
their hereditary portions, whether they be equal or unequal, there
is some legacy or other advantage left to one more than to the
others, yet he will not be charged with the debts but in proportion
to the share which he has in the inheritance.


SECTION X.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE HEIR OR EXECUTOR, ON ACCOUNT
OF CRIMES AND OFFENCES COMMITTED BY THE PERSON TO WHOM
HE SUCCEEDS.


2635. A.ruoves the principal rales of the engagement of heirs
or executors for the crimes and offences of those persons to whom
they succeed are different according to our usage from what they
are in the Roman law, yet it was not proper to leave out this
matter entirely, it being such an essential part of the matter of
successions, and the rules thereof being of such a necessary and
frequent use.

2636. In order to understand aright the difference between the
Roman law and ours in this matter, and to know what are the
rules of the Roman law which we retain, and those which we
reject, it is necessary to observe the principles thereof, which
follow.

2637. It appears from the laws of the Digest, and those of the
Code, which relate to this matter, and which are scattered up and
down in divers places, that, in relation to the condemnation of the
heirs of those who were guilty of crimes and offences, they made
one first general distinction between offences which were called
private, in which every one could sue only for his own particular
interest, such as theft, injury, and some others, and the crimes
Which they called public, because all persons were admitted to
prosecute the offender, in order to bring him to condign punish-


* L.1, Csi cortum pet. See the twelfth article.


110 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK 1.


them ought to bear his part thereof according to the share he has
in thé inheritance, unless it be that one of the heirs has been
charged by the deceased to acquit the whole debt, or to pay more
than his proportion of it. Thus, the heir who is sued for more
than his proportion of a debt which is purely personal cannot be
condemned to the creditor for more than his share amounts to.
For, with regard to the heirs, it would not be just that one of
them should be bound to pay the portion of the other. And as
for the creditor, he is at liberty to seize upon the whole estate be-
fore any of the heirs take their portions out of it, and if he does it
not, it is but just that the security which he had on all the goods
of the deceased for his whole debt should follow the said goods,
and be divided according as they are divided. But as for the
debts secured by a mortgage or privilege, as it is just that the
creditor should preserve his mortgage or his privilege, so he may
either exercise his right on the effects which are subject to it, or,
without derogating from his security, he may sue each heir for his
portion. And if the heir who is in possession of that part of the
estate which is subject to the mortgage or privilege is sued for
the whole debt, he may have his recourse against his coheirs, who
shall indemnify him, every one according to his share.°


XU


2632. The Debts are divided among the Coheirs, even against
the Exchequer. — The liberty which the heirs have, of dividing
among them the debts which are purely personal, hath its effect
with respect to all sorts of creditors whatsoever, and even against
the exchequer.?


XIV.


2633. The Insolvency of one of the Heirs does not hinder this
Division. — The same liberty of dividing the debts purely per-
sonal among the coheirs hath its effect even in the case where
one of them may prove insolvent. For the creditor ought to
blame himeelf for not having taken his security on the whole
goods of the succession before they were divided among the
coheirs.2


TIT. I. SEC. X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 111


XV.

2634. The Debts are divided according to the Portions of ‘the In-
heritance. — Seeing the debts are divided among the coheirs
according to the shares which they have in the inheritance, it is
therefore upon this foot that each of them pays his proportion of
them; and although it may happen among coheirs, that besides
their hereditary portions, whether they be equal or unequal, there
is some legacy or other advantage left to one more than to the
others, yet he will not be charged with the debts but in proportion
to the share which he has in the inheritance?


SECTION X.


OP THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE HEIR OR EXECUTOR, ON ACCOUNT
OF CRIMES AND OFFENCES COMMITTED BY THE PERSON TO WHOM
HE SUCCEEDS.


2635. ALtuoves the principal rules of the engagement of heirs
or executors for the crimes and offences of those persons to whom
they succeed are different according to our usage from what they
are in the Roman law, yet it was not proper to leave out this
matter entirely, it being such an essential part of the matter of
successions, and the rules thereof being of such a necessary and
frequent use.

2636. In order to understand aright the difference between the
Roman law and ours in this matter, and to know what are the
rules of the Roman law which we retain, and those which we
reject, it is necessary to observe the principles thereof, which
follow.

2637. It appears from the laws of the Digest, and those of the
Code, which relate to this matter, and which are scattered up and
down in divers places, that, in relation to the condemnation of the
heirs of those who were guilty of crimes and offences, they made
one first general distinction between offences which were called
private, in which every one could sue only for his own particular
interest, such as theft, injury, and some others, and the crimes
which they called public, because all persons were admitted to
prosecute the offender, in order to bring him to condign punish-


t TL. 1, C.si certum pet. See the twelfth article.


102 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK I.


heritance without distinction, and even to those which perhaps the
person to whom he succeeds was ignorant of. And as he has all
the effects, and all the rights of the inheritance, even those which
have fallen to it since the death of the person to whom he suc
ceeds, so he is also bound for all the charges which have hap-
pened since the said death.


IT.


2612. For the Charges of the Inheritances which had fallen to the
Person to whom he succeeds. — If, in the succession which passes to
an heir or executor, there happens to be other successions which
the deceased or his authors had inherited, all the charges of those
several successions are confounded and united in the person of
this heir or executor, and he becomes liable for them all.>


TIL


2613. For the Substitutions or Fiduciary Bequests, with which
the Deceased was charged. — If there are any goods in a succession
which are subject to some fiduciary bequest or substitution, with
which the deceased or his authors had been charged, the heir or
executor will be bound to restore them to the persons who shall
appear to have the right to them when the cases thereof shall
happen.°


IV.
2614. For all other Charges, Claims, and Demands on the Suc-


cession. — The heir or executor is bound in general, and without
distinction, for all the debts owing by the deceased, and for all
other kinds of charges whatsoever, and for the claims and de-
mands which creditors or others may have against the deceased,
or on the goods of the inheritance.*


V.


2615. For the Damages occasioned by any Offence or Crime of the
Deceased. — We must reckon among the charges for which the
heir or executor is bound, although the deceased may have ordered


® See the second article of the fifth section, the first article of the sixth section, and the
second article of the following section.

> See the sixteenth article of the first section.

© See the title of Substitutions, in the fifth book.

¢ L. 2, C. de hered. act. See the following section.  °


TIT. 1. SEC. VILII.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 103


nothing about them, the restitution and satisfaction which the de-
ceased may owe for damages he has done by some crime or of-
fence® This shall be the subject-matter of the tenth section.


VL


2616. For the Debis which are payable only after his Death. —
We may likewise place in the same rank the debts which could
not be demanded from the deceased during his lifetime ;-as if he
had bound himself for a sum of money which was not to be paid
till after his death; or if the person who was surety for him, hav-
ing paid the debt after his death, demands his reimbursement
from the heir or executor, which he could not demand from the
deceased.‘


VIL


2617. For the Funeral Expenses. — Lastly, the heir or executor
is bound for the funeral expenses of the person to whom he suc-
ceeds,S which shall be the subject-matter of the eleventh section.


A TasLE or THE PLAN OF THE Ricats aNnp CHarees oF HEeEtrrRs
or Execvurors.


2618. We must add here, by way of conclusion or recapitula-
tion of this and the three foregoing sections, that, as has been
remarked in the preamble to the fifth section, we have endeavoured
to lay down in these four sections, as it were in a plan, a general
idea of the rights of heirs and executors, and of their engagements,
in which one might see them altogether, and in order, without
adding the detail of the rules of all those different matters which
ought to be explained in different places. And it is now ne-
cessary that we should subjoin here a summary view of the said
rights and engagements, as it were in a table of the said plan, and
there mark the places where the particular rules relating to each
Matter are to be met with. Some may, perhaps, think that it
would have been more proper to have placed this table at the
head of the fifth section, immediately after the remark which is
there made; but we have judged it. more convenient that we
should first explain the said rights and engagements, in order


* See the tenth section.
"1.1, D. de veb. auth. jud. possid. ;—d. l. in f.
5 See the eleventh section.


104 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT IL BOOK L


to avoid confusion and obscurity, being persuaded that this table
will be more easily understood here, after the reading of those
four sections, than it would have been had it been placed before


them.


The Rights of Heirs and Executors, and the Places where they are
treated of.

1. The right of accepting or renouncing the inheritance, which
includes the right of deliberating. See the first section of the sec-
ond title of this first book, and the third title of the same book.

2. The right of accepting the succession with the benefit of an
inventory. See the second title of the same book.

3. The right of a legitime, for the heirs to whom itis due. See
the third title of the third book.

4. The right of getting the legacies, fiduciary bequests, and sub-
stitutions reduced to what is regulated by the law. See the third
title of the fourth book, and the fourth title of the fifth book.

5, The right of selling, or making over by deed of gift to others,
the inheritance, or disposing of it otherwise. See the seventh
article of the thirteenth section of this title, the second article of
the fourth section of the Contract of Sale, and the twenty-fourth
and twenty-fifth articles of the tenth section of the same title.

6. The right of transmitting the succession to their heirs. See
the tenth section of Testaments.

7. The rights of coheirs to come to a partition of the inherit-
ance among them. See the fourth title of this first book.

8. The right of accretion among the coheirs. See the ninth
section of Testaments.

9, The right of collation of goods among coheirs. See the
fourth title of the second book.

10. The right of reversion to those who ought to have it. See
the third section of the second title of the second book.


Charges imposed upon the Heir or Executor by the Will of the
Person to whom he succeeds, and the Places where they are
treated of.


1. The charge of paying the legacies. See the second title of
the fourth book.

2. 'The charge of restoring fiduciary bequests. See the said sec-
ond title of the fourth book, and the third title of the fifth book.

3. ‘The charge of executing all the other dispositions of the per-


TIT. I. SEC. 1X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 105


son to whom the heir succeeds. See the eleventh section of
Testaments, and the title of Legacies, and that of Substitutions,
both direct and fiduciary.


Charges of the Heir or Executor which are independent of the Will
of the Person to whom he succeeds, and the Places where they
are treated of.


1. The charge of acquitting the debts due from the succession,
and whatever else may be due from the heir or executor. See the
following section.

2. The charge of acquitting the damages occasioned by any
crime or offence of the person to whom the heir succeeds. See
the tenth section of this title.

3. The charge of acquitting the funeral expenses. See the
eleventh section of this title.


SECTION IX.


IN WHAT MANNER THE HEIRS OR EXECUTORS ARE BOUND FOR THE
PASSIVE DEBTS, AND FOR ALL THE OTHER CHARGES OF THE IN-
HERITANCE.


2619. A.tsoves all the articles of this section make mention of
no other charges in particular besides the passive debts, that is,
the debts owing by the deceased, yet the rules which are here
explained ought to be applied to the other sorts of charges, such
as legacies of different kinds of things, faneral expenses, and all
others. For there are none of them which may not be converted
into passive debts by reducing their estimation to a certain sum of
money, if the heirs or executors fail to acquit them Thus, the
rules of this section are common to all the kinds of charges of an
inheritance, according as they may be applied to them.


Art. L


2620. Divers Kinds of Charges.—- We must comprehend under
these words of passive debts and charges of an inheritance which
the heir or executor is bound to acquit, not only all that was
owing by the deceased upon his own account, and all that which


* L. 72, D. de verb. obl. See the first article of the eighth section of Legacies.


106 THE CIVIL Law. [PART IL. BOOK |.


‘he has imposed on his heir or executor, but, in general, all the


rights which may affect the inheritance.


IL


2621. The Heir is bound for the Debis, although they exceed the
Value of the Goods of the Inheritance. — The heir or executor who
accepts the inheritance purely and simply, that is to say, who does
not take the benefit of an inventory, of which mention has been
made in the fifth article of the fifth section, is bound indefinitely
and without distinction for all the debts owing by the deceased,
and for all the other charges of the inheritance, whatever sum they
may amount to, and although they exceed very far the value of
the goods of the inheritance. For it depended only on him, either
not to accept the succession at all, or to take the benefit of an
inventory. And having entered to the inheritance without this
precaution, he has engaged himself irrevocably for all the charges,
whatever they are.”


Ii].


2622. Three Sorts of Debts, those which are merely Personal,
those which have a Mortgage, and those which are Privileged.—
The engagements of heirs or executors for the passive debts are
different, according to three different kinds of debts. The first is
of those which are called purely personal: the second is of those
which have a mortgage for their security: and the third is of those
which are privileged. We must distinguish these three different
sorts of debts, in order to distinguish likewise the rights of the
creditors against the heir or executor, and the different engage-
ments which the heir is under to the creditors.°


IV.


2623. Definition of these Three Kinds of Debits. — The purely
personal debts are those which consist only in a bare promise, or
other title or security, which obliges only the person of the debtor,‘
without having any mortgage or privilege on any part of his
estate. The hypothecary debts are those for the security of which


® All these different charges are acquitted by the heirs according to the rules which
shall be explained in this section.

b Z. 8, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hared.
. © See the following articles.

© § 1, Inet. de act.; —1. 25, D. de oblig. et act.


TIT. I. SEC. LX.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 107


the creditor has a mortgage.° And the privileged debts are those
which have some of the privileges that have been explained in the
fifth section of Pawns and Mortgages.


Vv.


2624. Preference of the Oreditors of the Deceased to those of the
Heir, in the Goods of the Inheritance.— The creditors of the de-
ceased for debts purely personal, such as those who are called cred-
itors by bond or note, that is, who have only a bare promise under
the debtor’s hand, and in general all those who had no mortgage
on the estate of the deceased, their debtor, are nevertheless pre-
ferred in the goods of the deceased before the creditors of the heir
or executor, even although they may have mortgages for the se-
curity of what is owing to them. For although the goods of the
deceased be mortgaged to the creditors of the heir, if he had mort-
gaged to them all the goods which he should acquire for the
future, yet the goods of this inheritance are, in the first place, ap-
propriated for the payment of the debts of the deceased, and have
been transmitted to the heir only upon this condition, that he
should acquit the debts. And it is still with much greater reason
that the creditors of the deceased are preferred who have a mort-
gage or privilege on those very goods.‘


VI.


2625. Preference of the Creditors of the Heir to those of the De-
ceased, in the Goods belonging to the Heir.— The creditors of the
deceased, even those who have mortgages for the security of their
debts, have no mortgage on the proper goods of the heir or exec-
utor, until he either engages his estate to them, or they get a sen-
tence of condemnation against him. But this mortgage, which
they may have on the estate of the heir, will take place only after
the mortgage of the proper creditors of the heir to whom he had
engaged his estate before. For the deceased who was their debtor
neither did nor could give them a mortgage on the estate of his
heir


VIL
2626. Creditors who have neither Mortgage nor Privilege share
equally in Proportion to their Debts. — When there are several cred-


* See the second article of the first section of Pawns and Mortgages.
" L. 6, D. de separat. See the ninth article.
5 £. 29, D, de pign. et hypoth. ;—t. 1, in f. C. comm. de legat.


108 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOX I.


itors of the deceased, who have neither mortgage nor privilege for
their debts, they come in share and share alike, both in the goods
belonging to the heir, and in those which belonged to the deceased,
and every one receives his share of them in proportion to his debt,
if there are not goods enough to satisfy the whole debts.


VIL


2627. The Creditors of the Deceased come in all alike on the
Goods of the Heir.— If there are creditors of the deceased who
had mortgages, they are paid out of the effects which belonged to
their debtor, according to the order of their mortgages; but if the
goods of the deceased are not sufficient to acquit them, and
they come upon the goods of the heir for their payment, in that
case they come in jointly with the other creditors of the deceased
who had no mortgage. For they have all of them their right
against the heir only from the same time, and from the day that
he accepted the inheritance. But the creditors of the deceased,
whether they had mortgages or no, who first get a mortgage on
the estate of the heir, whether it be that he engages himself to
them in this manner, or that they obtain judgment against him,
will be preferred before the others in the goods belonging to the
said heir!


IX.


2628. Separation of the Goods of the Btheritance from those of
the Heir. — In all the cases where there is a competition between
the creditors of the deceased and those of the heir, all the creditors
of the deceased are preferred in the goods which belonged to the
deceased before all the creditors of the heir. And in order to their
exercising of their right, they may demand a separation of the goods
of the inheritance from those which belong properly to the heir!


b 7.1, § ult. D. de tribut. act. See the second section of the Cession of Goods.

' 7.2, in sf, 14, C. qui potior; —1.11, D.eod. See the two preceding articles. We
must not confound, in this article, the right which the creditors of the deceased have
against the heir, with the mortgage which they have on the estate of the heir. For all the
creditors of the deceased, whether they had mortgages from the deceased or not, acquire
their right against the heir the very moment that he accepts the inheritance, as is said in
the article ; but they have each of them their mortgage on the estate of the heir only
from the time that he obliges himself to them in this manner, or that he is condemned by
& sentence.

! [. 2, C. de bon. auth. jud. possid. See the title of the Separation of the Goods of the De-
ceased, &c. The creditors of the heir have the same preference on their part as to the
goods belonging to the heir, and may demand this separation, as has been remarked in
the preamble to the same title of the Separation of Goods.


TIT. L SEC. 1x.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 109


X.

2629. The Heirs are bound personally for thetr Portions in the
Inheritance, and such of them as have the Goods which are mort-
gaged for a Debt are bound for the whole Debt.— When there are
two or more heirs, the creditors of the deceased ought to divide
their demands against every one of them according to the portions
they have in the inheritance, and they cannot sue any of them for
the portion of the debt that falls to the share of the others, nor can
they demand the whole debt from any one of them alone. But
as for the debts which are secured by a mortgage, or which have
a privilege, the creditors may demand their payment out of the
effects which are subject thereto, although they have fallen to the
lot of any one of the heirs singly. And this is what is meant by
the common saying, that the heirs are bound for the debts of the
succession personally every one for his proportion, and hypothecarily
for the whole™ Thus, the creditors preserve their rights entire on
the inheritance, for they exercise their mortgage and their privilege
on the goods which are subject thereto; and they use their right
against all the other goods of the succession, having an action
against every one of the heirs according to the share which they
have in the inheritance.


XI.


2630. The Debt secured by Morigage or Privilege is divided
with Respect to the Heirs.—- Although the debt which is secured
by a mortgage or privilege is not divided with respect to the cred-
itor, and he may demand the whole from the heir who is in pos-
session of the goods which are subject to it, yet the debt is di-
vided among the heirs; and he who, being in possession of the
eflects which are subject to the mortgage or privilege, has paid the
whole debt, or is sued for payment of it, shall be indemnified by
his coheirs, as shall be shown in the article which follows.


XII.


2631. How all the Debts are divided among the Coheirs.— All
the debts, whether they be barely personal, or secured by a mort-
gage or privilege, are divided among the heirs, so as that each of


" L. 2, C. de heeredit. act. ; 1. 38, D. de legat.2. See the twelfth and fifteenth articles
of this section, and the sixteenth article of the first section of Pawns and Mortgages.
" This is a consequence of the foregoing article. See the following articles, and the
sixteenth article of the first section of Pawas and Mortgages.
VOL. If. 10


vie ame oe Se Se CS --


110 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK lL


them ought to bear his part thereof according to the share he has
in thé inheritance, unless it be that one of the heirs has been
charged by the deceased to acquit the whole debt, or to pay more
than his proportion of it. Thus, the heir who is sued for more
than his proportion of a debt which is purely personal cannot be
condemned to the creditor for more than his share amounts to.
For, with regard to the heirs, it would not be just that one of
them should be bound to pay the portion of the other. And as
for the creditor, he is at liberty to seize upon the whole estate be-
fore any of the heirs take their portions out of it, and if he does it
not, it is but just that the security which he had on all the goods
of the deceased for his whole debt should follow the said goods,
and be divided according as they are divided. But as for the
debts secured by a mortgage or privilege, as it is just that the
creditor should preserve his mortgage or his privilege, so he may
either exercise his right on the effects which are subject to it, or,
without derogating from his security, he may sue each heir for his
portion. And if the heir who is in possession of that part of the
estate which is subject to the mortgage or privilege is sued for
the whole debt, he may have his recourse against his coheirs, who
shall indemnify him, every one according to his share.°


XIIL


2632. The Debts are divided among the Cohetrs, even against
the Exchequer. — The liberty which the heirs have, of dividing
among them the debts which are purely personal, hath its effect
with respect to all sorts of creditors whatsoever, and even against
the exchequer.?


XIV.


2633. The Insolvency of one of the Heirs does not hinder this
Division. — The same liberty of dividing the debts purely per-
sonal among the coheirs hath its effect even in the case where
one of them may prove insolvent. For the creditor ought to
blame himeelf for not having taken his security on the whole
goods of the succession before they were divided among the
coheirs.?


. 2, C. si unus ex plur. hared. credit. See the fifteenth article.
hared. act.


£9 0

Sal

3 yo fo
>)
e


TIT. I. SEC. X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 111


XV.

2634. The Debts are divided according to the Portions of ‘the In-
heritance. — Seeing the debts are divided among the coheirs
according to the shares which they have in the inheritance, it is
therefore upon this foot that each of them pays his proportion of
them ; and although it may happen among coheirs, that besides
their hereditary portions, whether they be equal or unequal, there
is some legacy or other advantage left to one more than to the
others, yet he will not be charged with the debts but in proportion
to the share which he has in the inheritance.


SECTION X.


OP THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE HEIR OR EXECUTOR, ON ACCOUNT
OF CRIMES AND OFFENCES COMMITTED BY THE PERSON TO WHOM
HE SUCCEEDS.


2635. ALTHoves the principal rules of the engagement of heirs
or executors for the crimes and offences of those persons to whom
they succeed are different according to our usage from what they
are in the Roman law, yet it was not proper to leave out this
matter entirely, it being such an essential part of the matter of
successions, and the rules thereof being of such a necessary and
frequent use.

2636. In order to understand aright the difference between the
Roman law and ours in this matter, and to know what are the
rules of the Roman law which we retain, and those which we
reject, it is necessary to observe the principles thereof, which
follow.

2637. It appears from the laws of the Digest, and those of the
Code, which relate to this matter, and which are scattered up and
down in divers places, that, in relation to the condemnation of the
heirs of those who were guilty of crimes and offences, they made
one first general distinction between offences which were called
private, in which every one could sue only for his own particular
interest, such as theft, injury, and some others, and the crimes
which they called public, because all persons were admitted to
prosecute the offender, in order to bring him to condign punish-


* £1, C. of certum pet. Seo the twelfth article.


112 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK L


ment, and even those who had suffered no damage thereby, such
as the crimes of high treason, parricide, sacrilege, and others.*
2638. As to private offences, they distinguished in them the satis-
faction which was to be made to the person who had suffered the
damage, and which is commonly called the civil interest, from the
pecuniary penalties to which the offender was obnoxious, over and
above the reparation of the damage. Thus, for example, in theft,
when he whose goods were stolen did not prosecute the thief in
the extraordinary manner by an accusation, that is to say, crim-
inally, as he might have done if he had pleased,” and he sued
him only in a civil action, that is, for his civil interest, or the dam-
age which he had sustained, and not for the punishment of the
crime which regards the public; the reparation that was due to
the injured party consisted in the restitution of the thing which
was stolen, or of its value, with damages, and he had over and
above for the pecuniary penalty the quadruple of the value of the
thing stolen, if the thief was taken in the act, or the double if he
was not taken in the act They distinguished likewise between the
cases where there had been an action brought against the person
who was guilty of the offence in his lifetime, and those where the
action was only commenced after his death against his heir. Ac-
cording to these distinctions, when the offender had been cited
into jadgment in his lifetime, if he happened to die before sen-
tence passed against him, his heir was condemned, not only to
make reparation of the damages, but also to pay the pecuniary
penalty, according to the nature of the offence, as the double or
quadruple in the case of a theft; and it was judged that the
deceased, having been prevented by an action which in the event
appeared to be well founded, had incurred the penalty, and
that the heir ought to pay it. But if there had been no action
brought against the deceased, and it was only begun against
the heir, in that case he was not liable to the pecuniary mulct.4
And as for the reparation of damages, they made another distinc-
tion between the case where the heir of the offender, who was not
sued in his lifetime, reaped some advantage from the offence, as if


* § 1, Znst. de publ. jud.

b V7.1. ult. D. de furt.; —1. 18, D. de condict. caus. dat.

© §5 et § ult. Instit. de obl. qua ex delict. nase.

d 7, 33, D. de obl. et act.;—1. 58, eod.; —§ 1, in f. Inst. de perpet. ef tempor. act. ;—
l. 164, D. de reg. jur. ; —1. 139, eod.;—1. 87, eod. Seeing the heir of him against whom
an action was commenced in his lifetime was obliged to pay the pecuniary mulct, he was
with much more reason bound to make reparation for the damage.


TIT. I. BEC. X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 113


the thing stolen was still in being, and in his possession, or if the
inheritance was anyways augmented thereby, and the case where
the inheritance was noways bettered by it. In the first case, the
heir who reaped advantage from the offence was bound to restore
all the clear profit which he had thereby; and in the second case,
the heir having no advantage by the offence, he was not bound to
make any restitution.®

2639. As for the public crimes, seeing there are two sorts of
punishments, those which affect the person of the offender, such
as are all corporal punishments, the deprivation of an office, and
others of the like nature, and pecuniary punishments, such as
fines and forfeitures,£ and seeing it is only the punishments of
this second kind that can pass to the heirs, the Roman law made
this difference between the pecuniary punishments of private
offences and those of public crimes; that as to the former, the
heirs, as has been already mentioned, were liable to them if the
action was begun against the offender himself in his lifetime,
although he died before sentence of condemnation, because the
death of the offender in this case did not extinguish the action for
the offence. But as for the pecuniary punishments of public
crimes, they did not fall upon the heirs, unless there had been a
sentence of condemnation against the deceased; and although
there had been an accusation lodged against the offender, yet if
he died before condemnation, as his death extinguished the crime
itself, so likewise its consequences did not subsist any longer#
There were only two sorta of crimes excepted, for which the crim-
inals were prosecuted even after their death. One was the crime
of high treason,® and the crime of those persons who, to prevent
their condemnation, made way with themselves! The other sort
was of those crimes, the prosecution whereof regarded chiefly a
pecuniary interest, such as the embezzling of the public money,
extortion, and the crime of those persons who, having been in-
tusted with the administration of the public money, detained part
of it in their hands: In the two crimes of the first sort, it was


* L. 38, D. de reg. jur.;—I. 26, D. de dolo; —l. 44, D. de reg. jur.; —l. un. C. ex delict.
def. in quant. heered. conven. ;—v. 1. 2, § ult. D. vi bon. rapt.;—v. 1. 4, in f. D. de incend.
nan. naufr. ;— 1. 2, § ult. D. vi bon. rap.

"1.90, D. de accusat. ; ~ 1.1, in f. D. de ponis.

§ L. 20, D. de accusat.;—l. 2, C. ad. leg. Jul. repet.

» V.d.l. 90, D. de accusat. ; —I. ult. D. ad leg. Jul. maj.

| T. penult. C. si reus vel accus. mort. fuer. ;— toto tit. C. de bon. cor. qui mort. sibi conse.

' L. adt. D. ad leg. Jul. pecul.

10°


114 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK |.


the nature of the crime itself which demanded the prosecution
thereof after the death of the criminal; and in the other crimes of
the second sort, it was the quality of the effect of the crime which
caused a loss that was necessary to be repaired. And it was for
the same reason that, in some other crimes, the consequence of the
pecuniary interest made it necessary to sue for the said pecuniary
interest even after the death of the offender. Thus, in the crime
of adultery, seeing the husband of the wife who was found guilty
of this crime had a right to his wife’s portion, and that the heir of
the wife could not demand it back of the husband, he was allowed
to bring proofs of his wife’s adultery, even after her death*
Thus, the heir was sued in relation to the confiscation of mer-
chandise which the exchequer had acquired a right to on account
of the crime of the deceased, who had defrauded the public of the
customs due for the said goods" Thus, in the case of an heir
who had neglected to prosecute the murderers of the person to
whom he had succeeded, seeing the said inheritance was for that
reason forfeited to the exchequer, this pecuniary interest therefore
was the cause why the said heir was prosecuted for this neglect
even after his death.° Thus, in the crime of forgery, it was neces-
sary, after the death of the party accused, to prove the crime, in
order to recover against the heir the profit which he had made by
the forgery.» And in these and the like cases, seeing, after the
death of the party accused, the prosecution was not for personal
punishments to be inflicted on the person of the offender, but only
for the pecuniary interest; the cognizance thereof was therefore in
that case taken away from the criminal judge, and left to the
determination of the judge who had cognizance of the civil inter-
est, that being the single matter in question after the death of the
offender.1 We may further observe, in relation to this subject, that
there was in the Roman law another sort of crime, for which the
son of the offender was prosecuted, even although he was not heir
to his father. It was the case where an officer of the army, who
was intrusted with the money appointed for the subsistence of the
’ soldiers, died, having part of the said moneys in his hands which
he had not accounted for! And this was so established, because
of the great importance it was to the public that such moneys
should be secure; and it is not improbable but that this law may


m L. ult. C. ad leg. Jul. de adult. P Z.12, D. de lege Corn. fais.
® L. 8, D. de publican. q ZL. 6, D. de publ. jud.
° L. 22, D. de senat. silan.; —1. 9, D. de jure fisci. ® ZL. ult. C. de Primipdo.


TIT. I. SEC. X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 113


have been founded on the presumption that the children of this
officer had reaped the benefit of the money, which had been thus
diverted from its true use, and upon a kind of equity in making
the children as it were sureties for their fathers in a debt that is so
singularly privileged, because of the benefits and advantages
which the children have received from their parents, even those
who refuse to enter heirs to them: and the said law may likewise
have had this for its motive, to engage parents not to be guilty of
an infidelity which might be punished in the person of their chil-
dren. As to which it may be observed, that, both in the Roman
law and in the usage of France, there are crimes of which even
some personal punishments pass to the children of the criminals,
as in the crime of treason and embezzlement of the public
money.‘

2640. We must further observe upon what has been said con-
cerning the punishment of crimes, that in the Roman law we ©
must not confound capital crimes, that is, those which are pun-
ished by natural or civil death, with those crimes which were
called public. For there were capital crimes which were not pub-
lic, that is to say, the accusation whereof was not permitted to all
persons indifferently ; and there were likewise some public crimes
which were not capital; which it is necessary to take notice of,
in order to obviate some difficulties which might perplex those who,
hot being sufficiently instructed in these principles, might have a
mind to inform themselves more fully in the body of the Roman
law of all this detail, which it would be needless to explain here.

2641. To conclude these remarks on the Roman law touching
this matter, we shall only add, that as for the civil interest, and the
reparation of the damage occasioned by all other crimes, except
those in which the principal concern was a pecuniary interest, as
has been just now explained, the party accused happening to die
before his condemnation, the crime was extinguished; and al-
though he had been accused before his death, yet his heir, who
teaped no benefit by the crime, was not liable to make any satis-
faction; but it was thought sufficient to hinder the heirs of the
olenders, and of their accomplices, from reaping any benefit
thereby.*


‘V1.5, C ad leg. Jul. mayest. See the ordinance of Blois, art. 183, and that of Fran-
asl, in March, 1545, art. 1.

' £5, D. de calum.; —1. un. C. ex del. def. in quant. hared. conven. See the last of the
lexts cited under the letter e.


116 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK |


2642. According to the usage in France, which is partly con
formable, and partly opposite, to the Reman law, the heirs are
never subject to the pecuniary punishments which we call fines,
nor to forfeitures, except when there is a sentence of condemnation
against the deceased from which there lies no appeal, even al-
though the accusation had been brought against the offender in his
lifetime. And all prosecutions for crimes cease by the death of
the party accused, unless it be the crime of treason, whether it be
against God or man, duelling, self-murder, even although there
was no precedent crime, and rebellion against justice with open
force, if the person accused was killed in the scuffle." But as for
the civil interest, and the reparation of the damage occasioned by a
crime or offence, the heirs of the person who has caused the dam-
age are bound for it indifferently, whatever nature the crimes and
offences be of, and without any distinction between the cases
where the deceased himself has been judicially accused and prose-
cuted, and the cases where the action has been brought only
against the heir: and likewise without distinguishing between the
cases in which the heir has some benefit from the crime or offence,
and those where he reaps no manner of advantage.

2643. This law is so natural and so just, that it seems strange
that any persons should have followed other rules. For although
an heir does not reap any manner of profit from the crime of
the person to whom he succeeds, and there has been no accu-
sation nor any action commenced against the deceased for the
damage which he had caused; yet it is enough to oblige the heir
to repair the damage, that he succeeds to all the effects of the de-
ceased; seeing he is by that means bound for all the charges, and
that the said goods, which, being in the possession of the deceased,
were to be responsible for all his engagements, of what nature
soever, cannot pass but with this condition to his heir, who suc-
ceeds in the place of the deceased, and represents him. And if it
is just to reckon among the charges of an inheritance, not only all
those for which there were express titles against the deceased,
such as obligations, promises, and others of the like nature, but
likewise all those charges of which there was no title at the
time of his death, provided only that they can be verified by
such proofs as the law admits, it is likewise equally just to


@ Seo the first article of the twenty-second title of the ordinance of the month of Au-
gust, 1670.


TIT. I. SEC. X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 117


reckon among those charges the obligation which is contracted
by him who causes any damage by a crime, or an offence, see-
ing he obliges himself as effectually by his deed as by his word.
And if his will engages him when he makes a promise, or obliges
himself to any one for just causes, and which turn only to the
advantage of those to whom he becomes bound, it engages him
much more when he does any harm or damage, since by that he
obliges himself, not only to the person to whom he does the dam-
age to repair it, but he likewise engages himself towards the pub-
lic to suffer the punishment which his crime or offence may
deserve. So that, of all the ways in which it is possible for one to
oblige himself, the validity of none of them does so much concern
both the public and private persons, as does that of the engage-
ment into which one enters by the commission of crimes or of-
fences ; since it is of infinitely greater importance to the society of
mankind, and to the particular persons who suffer the damages
occasioned by crimes and offences, that the said damages should
be repaired as much as possible, than it concerns either the public,
or private persons, that other engagements, even the most lawful,
should be performed.

2644. It follows from these truths, which may be ranked among
the first maxims of equity, that the heir, who by virtue of this
quality, being in possession of all the goods of the inheritance, is
bound for all the engagements of the person to whom he succeeds,
cannot be discharged from the obligation to repair the damages
which the deceased has caused by his crimes or offences, neither
under pretext that there accrues no benefit to the said heir, nor
because there has been no condemnation, accusation, or action
against the deceased. For as to the pretext of the heir’s not
having reaped any advantage, besides that in the crimes where
the deceased did reap profit, such as that of robbery, theft, forgery,
or others of the like kind, although the things themselves that
were thus unlawfully acquired by the deceased are not perhaps
extant in the inheritance; yet it is reasonable to presame that the
inheritance has been thereby increased, since it may contain some
goods and effects which have been purchased with the moneys
got by the theft or robbery. And although the offence committed
by the deceased were of such a nature as never to have yielded
any profit, such as the setting a house on fire, murder, or other
crime of the like kind, yet the advantages which the heir reaps
by the goods of the inheritance are to him in lieu of a profit,


118 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK |.


which was bound for the reparation of the damages occasioned by
the crime or offence of the person whose estate he has: and this
engagement ought not to be distinguished from the others. And
as to the case where there has been no demand made against the
deceased, it is true, that where the reparation of the damage has
not been demanded from the deceased, but only from his heir,
this circumstance may serve to acquit him, if the demand was not
made until a long time, or some time at least, after the death of
the person who had committed the crime or offence, and who was
never prosecuted for it, although he lived some considerable time
after he had committed the crime. For in this case the delay
may have proceeded from fear lest the deceased should have
been able to justify himself, if the action had been brought
against him, or the prosecution begun, during his life: and it is
by the circumstances that one ought to judge of the effect which
this delay ought to have. But since it may readily fall out that
the person who has done some damage by a crime or an offence
dies before any action can be brought against him, and that it
may happen, likewise, that for a long time the author of the crime
or offence was unknown; these, and such like circumstances, may
be just reasons for the excusing the delay of the person who has
suffered the damage, and who has brought his action only against
the heir of the person who did if. Thus, it is with very good
reason that our usage has rejected the general and indefinite rule
which acquitted the heir from the demand of reparation of dam-
ages, when it was brought only against him, and when it appears
that he has not reaped any benefit from the act of the deceased
who caused the damage. And it is likewise the usage with us,
that in cases where actions for the civil interest, even in capital
crimes, are brought only against the heir, and have not been ad-
judged against the deceased, the heir is obliged either to make
good the damage or to justify the deceased, that is, to vindicate
his memory. So that our law is in one sense less indulgent to
heirs than the Roman law, with respect to the reparation of dam-
ages ; and it is, on the contrary, less severe in another sense, in re-
gard to pecuniary punishments, to which the heir is not liable ac-
cording to our usage, not even for bare offences, unless sentence
of condemnation has passed against the deceased. And both the
one and the other of these two rules, which are directly opposite
to those of the Roman law, are founded on the principles of equity,
which on one side, as to what concerns the reparation of damages,


= ee ee ee


TIT. 1. SEC. X.| HEIRS AND BXECUTOBRS. 119


obliges the heir to perform the engagement under which the de-
ceased was to repair the damage which he had done, and which
on the other side, in what relates to fines or pecuniary punish-
ments, frees the heir from a punishment which ought to be purely
personal against the author of the crime or offence, and which
ought not to pass to the heir, except after that a sentence of con-
demnation passed against the deceased has constituted it a debt
which may be demanded, and made it a charge or burden of the
inheritance. But if the offender dies before his condemnation, the
prosecution ceases with respect to all punishments, unless it be
in those crimes which are punishable by law after the death of the
offenders, as has been already observed.

2645. ‘These rules of our usage, which charge the heirs with the
civil interest and restitutions due on account of crimes and tres-
passes committed by those persons to whom they succeed, whether
there has been any demand made against the deceased, or that it
has been made only against the heir, and whether the heir have
reaped any benefit by the crime of the deceased, or not, are like-
wise conformable to the canon law, which obliges the heirs to
make restitution and reparation of damages without these distinc-
tions.* So that these rules being equally agreeable to the laws of
the church and of the state, and also to the law of nature, we have
thought proper, notwithstanding they are different from the rules
of the Roman law, to rank them in their order in this section,
which is their proper place; it being noways inconsistent with
the design of this book, which is to give us upon each particular
matter all the several rules that are conformable to the law of
nature and to our usage. We may likewise observe in relation
to the engagements of heirs for the crimes and trespasses of those
to whom they succeed, that the lawyer Julian, one of the most
renowned authors of the laws of the Digest, was of opinion that
the heir of a judge, who had taken money or some present, or
been guilty of some other misdemeanour in the execution of his
office of a judge, was accountable for the same. But the opinion
of this lawyer, agreeably to our principles and to equity, was re-
jected by all the other lawyers; and it has been taken notice of in
the body of the Roman law, only to show that Julian was the
only lawyer who was of this opinion.’

2646. We shall add, by way of conclusion, two reflections on


® Bee the third article. Y L. 15, § 1, etl. 16, D. de judiciis.


120 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK 1.


the Roman law concerning this matter. One arises from the re-
marks which have been made upon the several cases where one
might, pursuant to the principles of the said law, sue the heirs for
reparation of damages in certain crimes, although there had been
no accusation brought against the offender, because the principal
matter in dispute was in relation to a pecuniary interest. It may
be said of this rule, that if it was just when this pecuniary interest
was the principal matter in question, it was no less just in an ac
tion where a pecuniary interest was still demanded, although the
- demand of the said interest was joined with some other principal
matter, of which the pecuniary interest was only an accessory.
For the reality in a pecuniary interest, whether it be as a principal
or as an accessory, is equally essential to him who suffers the loss.
And the nicety which distinguishes between these two ways of
considering this interest, either as a principal or as an accessory,
can never be a just principle to favor the heir, and rain him who
suffers the loss.

2647. The other reflection relates to another principle of the
Roman law, according to which, even in those cases where the
pecuniary interest of the person who suffers the damage is an ac-
cessory, yet the heir of him who has caused the damage is -never-
theless answerable for it. It is in all the cases of the several en-
gagements, whether they be contracted by covenant or any other
manner of way, in which there is fraud or deceit, by which one
suffers some loss or damage. In all these cases the heir was
liable for the damage* Thus, the heir of a person into whose
hands any thing was deposited was accountable for the fraud of
the deceased, who, in breach of the trust committed to him, had
either embezzled or damaged the thing which was deposited with
him. Thus, the heir of a tutor was obliged to repair the damage
which the tutor had caused to the minor by any misdemeanour
during the tutorship. Thus, the heir of him who had sold one
thing for another, or some merchandise that was adulterated, was
bound to make good the damage which the buyer might suffer by
the said fraud. And it appears from the last of the texts cited
here, that the engagement of the heir in these sorts of cases was
founded on this, that there was a fraud committed against the
faith of a contract; as if it were not equally just to punish the in-
iquities, the violences, the crimes, and to repair the damages oc-


® ZL. 49, D. da oblig. of act. ; —. 12, cod. ;—t. 7, $ 1, D. depos.


TIT. ¥. SEC. X.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 121


casioned by them, which destroy the general engagement that is
contracted among mankind in general by the union which forms
their society, as to punish and repair the infidelities which are con-
trary to the particular engagements of covenants, and as if the
precept of doing harm to no person were not universal, and for all
sorts of cases without distinction. Since, therefore, there can be
no person who is not bound to all others in all the duties which
the society that unites all mankind together does require ;* it fol-
lows, that the same duty which obliges heirs to repair the dam-
ages which the person to whom they succeed may have caused,
when the deceased was obliged by some particular engagement,
lays them under no less an obligation to repair the damages oc-
casioned by acts which are a violation of the general engagement
of doing harm to no mortal whatever.


Art. I.


2648. We must distinguish between the Pecuniary Punishment
and the Civil Interest. — In all the cases where the question is con-
ceming the engagement of an heir for the crimes and offences of
the person to whom he succeeds, it is necessary to distinguish that
which concerns the punishment inflicted on account of the public
interest from the reparation of the damage which the crime or
offence may have occasioned. Thus, corporal punishments, and
pecuniary punishments,* which are called fines, regard the public
interest: and the restitutions, and the satisfaction which is made
lor the losses and damages sustained, relate to the reparation that
is due to the persons who have suffered the damage.


IL |

2649. How the Heir may be liable to the Pecuniary Punishment.
~ When the question relates to the pecuniary punishment, and
there has been no sentence of condemnation passed against the de-
ceased, the heir cannot be liable thereto, unless he has been an ac-
complice in the crime or offence. For this punishment regards
only the person who has deserved it, and his death prevents his
condemnation. But if there had been a sentence of condemna-
tion against the deceased, the pecuniary punishment in which he


* Ephes. iv. 25; — Koclus, xvii. 14.
, £20, D, de accusation. ; — 1. 1, tn f. D. de pants.

frat. vi bon. rapt. ;—§ 15, Inst. de obl. ques ex delict. nasc. ; — 1.13, D. ratam rem haberé.
VOL. Il. 11


122 . HE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK L


had been condemned would be a charge and debt on the inherit-
ance, which the heir would be bound to acquit, as well as the
other debts.°


IIL


2650. The Heir is always bound for the Oivil Interest. — When
the question is about the reparation of damage caused by some
crime or offence, whether the succession of the offender has been
increased thereby or not, his heir will be bound to make it good,
although there had not been any action or prosecution commenced
against the deceased ;4 provided that the fact be proved in the
manner that is usually observed in the like cases.°


© LT. 20, D. de accusat. Although this text relates only to public crimes, yet, according
to the usage in France, the rule is common to all offences, as has been mentioned in the
preamble.

d 7. 13, C. de contr. et commit. stipul.; —1. 2, in fine, C. de fruct. et lit. exp.;—I. 11, § 2,
in fine, D. de publ. in rem act. Although these texts relate to other matters, yet they may
be applied here, seeing they have relation to that truth of the law of nature, that the heir
is bound for the act of the deceased to whom he succeeds. And because this is the rule
observed with us in conformity to the canon law, and that we prefer it to the Roman law
which is contrary to it, we have set it down in this article, judging it more expedient, for
the reasons which we have explained in the preamble, to place this rule among the others,
and to support it with those texts out of the civil law, and likewise with these which fel-
low, taken out of the canon law, rather than to leave a matter of this consequence in
doubt. 16, g. 6, c. 3, v. 12, g. 2, c. 34, c. 3, extr. de pign.;—c. ult. de sepult. In litteris
tuis continebatur, quod cum H multis fuisset criminibus irretitus, qui ecclesiarum incen-
dium, diabolo instigante, commiserat, tandem in egritudine constitutus, accepta pceniten-
tia de commissis per manum Capellani sui fuit a sententia anathematis absolutus: sed
moriens ecclesiasticam sepulturam habere nequivit. Quapropter, si ita res se habet, man-
damus ut corpus ejusdem, appellatione cessante, facias in cosmeterio sepeliri: et heredes
ejus moneas, et compellas, ut his quibus ille per incendium, vel alio modo, damna contra
justitiam irrogaverat, juxta facultates suas, condigne satisfaciant, ut si a peccato valeat
liberari. C. 5, de raptor. et incend.

It appears by these texts, that not only there is no mention made in them of the dis-
tinctions of any action brought against the deceased, or of the case in which the heir has
reaped some profit, but that this last text obliges the heirs to repair without any distinc-
tion all the damages which the deceased may have caused, which implies likewise the
duty of inquiring into the damages, in order to make reparation. And we see by the case
of burning of churches mentioned in this chapter, that it is no matter whether the heir
reaps any benefit by the crime of the deceased or no.

© When an action for the civil interest and for reparation of damages is brought against
the heir of a person who, having committed the crime or offence, dies before he is prose-
cuted or condemned, the plaintiff is nevertheless admitted to prove the crime or trespass,
and the heir on his part is likewise received to vindicate the memory of the deceased, that
is, to justify him from the accusation, if there be occasion for it, either by showing that
the proofs of the accusation are not sufficient, or by matters of fact which may justify the
deceased, and prove his innocency, and free the heir from being condemned in the civil
interest, or reparation of the damages in question.


TIT. I. BEC. XI] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 123


SECTION XI.
OF FUNERAL CHARGES.


2651. We have explained in the sixth section what are, in gen-
eral, the different sorts of charges to which the heir may be liable,
such as the debts owing by the deceased, restitutions, legacies,
funeral expenses, and others. And seeing every one of the said
charges contains a detail of several particulars, which ought to be
set down in their proper places, we shall treat of legacies, of fidu-
clary bequests, and of substitutions, in the fourth and fifth books,
because they are charges ordained by testaments, or other dispo-
sitions. And as for the other charges which are common both to
successions by testaments and to those of intestates, they have
been explained in the three foregoing sections, except that of fu-
neral charges, which shall be the subject-matter of this.

2652. Although the texts of the Roman law quoted on the arti-
cles of this section have relation to the heathenish ceremonies
that were used in funerals at Rome, before the Christian religion
was known there ; yet they agree nevertheless with the rules ex-
plained in these articles, which are to be understood of the funeral
expenses that are applied to the uses approved of by the church.


Art. L


2653. What are the Funeral Charges. — By funeral] charges are
meant all the expenses necessary to be laid out after the death of
any person, whether it be on the body of the deceased, as to em-
balm it, and to transport it, if there is occasion for it, and to inter
it, or for the services and honors which are usual at funerals.*


IL.


2654. The Funeral Charges are privileged. — The charge of the
funeral expenses affects all the goods of the deceased, as much as
if the person who furnishes the things necessary had contracted
for them with the deceased himself.» And he has, moreover, a
pivilege on the said goods, as has been mentioned in the four-
teenth article of the fifth section of Pawns and Mortgages.


* L. 87, D. de religios. et sumpt. fun.;—v. 1. 14, § 8, ef seq. eod.
* L.1, D, de religios. et sumpt. fun.
© L. 45, eod.


194 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK L


TIL

2655. They ought to be regulated according to the Estate and
Quality of the Deceased, and other Circumstances. — If the said
charges are regulated and advanced by any other person than the
heir, whether it be in his absence or without his knowledge, they
ought to be moderated according to the circumstances of the
quality and estate of the deceased, the usage of the place, and
other circumstances which may justify the prudence and integrity
of the person who advances them. And the heir will not be
bound to reimburse that which has been laid out over and above
what the said circumstances might demand.


IV.


2656. Without Regard to the unreasonable Dispositions of Testa
tors. — If the deceased himself had regulated what should be laid
out on his funeral, the heir would be obliged in that case to exe-
cute the said will of the deceased, provided that it contained noth-
ing contrary to law or good manners, and that the expense did
not exceed the bounds which the condition and estate of the de-
ceased would require, according to the usual custom and the cir-
cumstances. For heirs are not bound to execute the unreasonable
dispositions of those to whom they succeed.*


V.


2657. If any other besides the Heir had laid out those Expenses,
how he may recover them.— If any other person than the heir lays
out the funeral expenses, with a design to do an act of civility or
charity towards the deceased, having no intention to apply for a
reimbursement thereof, the heir will in that case be discharged
from it, provided that this intention be sufficiently proved, for it
would not be just to presume it. But to obviate all uncertainties,
the persons who advance the funeral expenses ought to make
known their intention, whether it be to recover the expenses they
lay out, or to give them, if the circumstances might render their in-
tention any way doubtful!


d J, 14, § 6, D. de relig. a sumpt. fun. ; —1. 12, § 5, cod.

© 1.14, § 6, inf: D. de relig. et sumpt. fun.

f L. 14, § 7, D. de religios. et sumpt. fun. See the fourth article of the second section of
the third title.


TIT. 1, BBC. XiI-] HEIRS AND BXEQUZORS. 125


SECTION XII.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF COHBIRG TO ONE ANOTHER.


2658. Wen there are two or more heirs who succeed jointly to
an inheritance, whether it be by testament or as next of kin, there
are formed between them divers sorts of engagements, by the bare
eflect of the quality of coheirs. For being to possess jointly, or to
divide among them the goods of the succession, they are mutually
engaged to the consequences of the possession which they have in
common, and to those of the partition which they make of the
said goods among them.

2659. These engagements of coheirs to one another are of two
sorts. One is of those which precede the partition; the other is
of those which are formed by the partition itself, or which are con-
sequences of it. The engagement, for example, to divide the
inheritance, and that of taking care of the common thing, pre-
cede the partition ; and the warranty against evictions which one
of the coheirs may suffer of the lands and tenements which fall to
his share, and the payment of the charges which fall upon him,
are of the number of those engagements which follow after the
partition. We shall explain in the fourth title the engagements
which relate to the partition, for it is a matter of such extent, that
it requires a separate title in its proper place; and the others shall
be the subject-matter of this section.


Art. L


2660. The Coheirs ought to inform one another reciprocally of
what they have or know of the Inheritance. — The first engagement
of coheirs to one another, before the partition of the inheritance, is
to inform one another reciprocally of what each of them either has
or knows of the goods and of the charges of the inheritance. And
such of them as happen to have in their possession any of the
goods of the inheritance, or have the charge of them, ought to take
the care of them that is required by the following rule.*


IL
. 2661. The Care which Coheirs ought to take of the Goods belong-
tng to them in common. — Whoever of the coheirs is charged with


© See the following article.
11°


126 THE CIVIL Law. [PART IT. BOOX 1.


any of the goods of the succession, or a part of them, or with some
affair or other thing in particular, ought to take the same care
thereof as he does of his own proper affairs, and he will be re-
sponsible to his coheirs for the consequences which may be laid to
his charge for not having taken that care. But if, for want of un-
derstanding or experience, the said heir was not very capable of
looking after his own affairs, and that, by reason of this defect, he
had failed to do that for the goods of the inheritance which were
committed to his charge which any other more skilful and more
diligent person would not have omitted to do, he shall not be
accountable for it;* as one would be who should intrude himself
into the management of another man’s affairs in his absence, or
without his knowledge ;° or as a tutor,‘ a curator, or an attorney or
agent;* or others whose duties oblige them to the same diligence
and watchfulness in other men’s affairs that a careful and diligent
master takes of his own. For whereas these sorts of persons
either intrude themselves, or are chosen and appointed for these
kinds of functions, under the necessity of acquitting themselves
well of their several functions, because they do not concern their
own proper affairs, but those of others, and that therefore they
ought to discharge them with all imaginable application; coheirs
do not make choice of one another, but happen to be bound one
to the other, either by the will of a testator, or by the law, which
calls them all jointly to the inheritance. So that each of them
ought to take his precautions as to the trust he puts in the others,
and to blame himself for the consequences that may attend the
conduct of his coheir in whom he has confided. And, moreover,
the affairs of the inheritance belonging to them in common, each
of them is bound only to take the same care of them as he does of
his own affairs, in the same manner as a copartner®£


TIL


2662. They ought to divide the Profits which they have made. —
The heir who before the partition has had the enjoyment of any
lands or tenements, of a rent, or other thing belonging to the in-


b ZT. 25, § 16, D. fam. ercise.

© See the second article of the first section Of those who manage the Affairs of others
without their

4 See the ninth article of the third section of Tttors.

* See the first article of the second section of Curators.

€ See the fourth article of the third section of Prories.

& See the second and third articles of the fourth section of Partnership.


TIT. 1. SBC. X11] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 127


heritance, ought to divide with his coheirs the fruits and other reve-
nues which he has received. And even the heir who shall happen
to have had the enjoyment of the whole inheritance, whilst his co-
heirs were ignorant of their right, or were absent, ought to be ace
countable to them for the profits which he has made out of the
common estate.


IV.


2663. And even what has been added to it by Industry, the Ex-
penses being deducted.—If he who has enjoyed the fruits and
other revenues of the inheritance had, by his industry, made more
thereof than his coheirs would have been able to do, he shall be
bound nevertheless to restore the value of the profits which he has
made. For there are no fruits, or at least but very few, which are
reaped without some industry, and it is still the land that has pro-
duced them! But out of the profits which he has made, he is
allowed to deduct the expenses he has been at, which would be
allowed even to an unjust possessor!


V.


2664. They ought to reimburse one another the Interest of Money
thich has been advanced.—If an heir or executor has laid out
money, either necessarily or to advantage, on the affairs of the
inheritance, he shall recover it, together with the interest due from
the time that he advanced it.™


‘1.9, C. fam. ercisc.; —l. 86, eod.; —1. 2, C. de petit. hared.;—I1. 20,§ 38, inf. D. de
hered. pet.;—1.17, C. fam. ere. See the ninth and tenth articles of the third section of
Interest, Costs, and Damages, and Restitution of Fruits.

' L. 56, D. de heered. petit.

| L. 36, § ult. D. eod.

" L.18,§ 3, D. fam. ercisc. ;—1. 67,42, D. pro socio; —l. 52, $10, ed. The condi-
tion of coheirs ought to be in this respect the same with that of partners. See the elev-
enth article of the fourth section of Partnership, and the fourth article of the second sec-
tion Of those who have, &.

We have put down in the article, that the heir or executor recovers the interest of what
he lays out necessarily or to advantage; although it is said in the first of the texts cited
on this article, that, if the heir has disbursed any thing honestly and fairly, he shall have
the interest of it. For it may happen that an imprudent heir may lay ont honestly fool-
ish expenses. Thus the honesty and integrity of the heir ought to be reduced to expen-
xs which it is just to allow ; that is to say, such as are necessary or profitable.

We have likewise said in the article, that the said interest is due from the time that the
honey was advanced, although it be said in the same text, that it is due from the time
of the delay, ex die more. For thia interest is due to this heir in the same manner as to
* partner, as has been said in the eleventh article of the fourth section of Partnership, and
the reciprocal honesty and integrity which coheirs owe to one another demands this mu-
tual justice among them.


1238 THE CIVIL, LAW. [PamT 11. BOOK 1


VI

2665. They ought to bring into the Mass of the Inheritance the
Things which ought to be brought in.—In the cases where the
coheirs may have any goods which ought to be brought into
the mass of the inheritance, they are obliged every one of them to
bring in reciprocally all the goods which they have of this kind, in
order to augment thereby the mass of the inheritance, and that
they may be comprised in the partition, according to the rules of
this matter explained in their proper place.®


VIL


2666. One Heir cannot make any Changes without the Consent
of the Others. — Whilst the goods of the inherigance remain undi-
vided, none of the coheirs can make any change in them, against
the will or without the knowledge of the others; and much less
can he alienate them. And any one of them that does not ap-
prove of the change or alienation may hinder it;° unless the
same should be necessary for the common good. As if any neces-
sary repairs were to be made, or things to be sold which could not
well be preserved from perishing. For in these cases the judge
would have no regard to the unreasonable opposition of a co-
heir.?


VI.


2667. Engagement to come to a Partition. — We may reckon
among the engagements which precede the partition, that very
engagement which obliges the heirs to come to a partition, when
any one of them demands it; for each of them has a right to have
separately to himself that which may fall to his share of the goods
of the inheritance, although the others should be willing to keep
them in common.!


™ See, touching this matter of bringing goods into the mass of the inheritance, the
fourth title of the second book. See the thirteenth article of the fifth section, and the
fourth article of the first section of Partitions.

° ZL. 28, D. comm. divid.

P L. 13, D. fam. erciscund. ;—1, 5, D. de hered. pet.;—d.l.in f. pr. See the sixth,
seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth articles of the second section Of those who chance to have
any Thing in common together, where other rules on the same subject are explained.

9 ZL. 84, D. fam. ercisc. See the eleventh article of the second section Of those who
chance to have any Thing in common together.


TIT. I. SEC, XrH1.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 129


SECTION XIII.


OF THOSE WHO ARE IN THE PLACE OF HEIRS OR EXECUTORS,
ALTHOUGH THEY ARE NOT REALLY 80.


2668. TuExe are, properly speaking, only two kinds of heirs,
those to whom the law gives the succession, and those who are
called to it by a testament; and the name of heir is given only to
those who succeed by one or other of these two ways. But there
are other titles which transmit all the goods of a person after his
death to other kinds of successors, or rather possessors, who, al-
though they are notgheirs, have nevertheless the same rights, and
are subject to the same charges. This shall be the subject-matter
of this section.


Art. I.


2669. The Exchequer ts tn the Place of Heir to the Goods of a
Condemned Person.— All the goods of persons condemned to
death, or to other punishments which imply forfeiture of goods,
accrue to the king, and he is in the place of universal successor ;
but the quality of heir does not suit with him. For whereas the
estate does not pass to the heir but by the death of the person to
whom he succeeds, forfeiture is a title which deprives the con-
demned person of his estate before his death, and appropriates it
to the king, as exercising the sovereign authority of justice, and
the rights which appertain to it. And the lords of manors, who
have the right of forfeiture within their own lands, have it only as
an accessory to the right of justice; and they are not looked upon
as heirs, but become masters of the forfeited goods.*


* Damnatione bona publicantar, cum vita adimitur, ant civitas. Z. 1, D. de bon. dam.
See the preface to this second part, no. 14.

Forfeiture had not the same effect by the Roman law that it has by our usage in
Franee. For, according to our usage, the children of those persons whose goods are for-
Rited do not succeed to them, nor have they any share in their goods. But by the Ro-
man law they were allowed a share of them. Which was founded on motives of equity
ind of humanity, that the children might not be punished for the crime of their fathers,
Mwhieh they had no hand, and that they might not be deprived of a succession which
lature destined for them, nor be reduced to a necessity which might have fatal conse-
(ences, Which is particularly pointed at by these words of a law: — Cum ratio naturalis,
(easi lex queedam taeita liberis parentinm heereditatem addiceret, velut ad debitam suc-
esionem eos vocando, propter quod et in jure civili suorum nomen eis indictum est: ac
% judicio quidem parentis, nisi meritis de causis summoveri ab ea successione possuls:


130 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IT. BOOK I.


IL

2670. And to the Estates of Aliens, or Foreigners. — The goods
of foreigners who die without being naturalized, and who leave
behind them no lawful heirs born in France, or naturalized, who
are capable of succeeding to them, belong to the king, by virtue of
the right which he has of succeeding to the estates of aliens’
And he takes the said goods, not as heir, but as master or owner
of goods to which no person can have any right.


TIL


2671. And of Bastards. — Bastards who die without children
lawfully begotten, and without making a will, having no heir,
their estates for this reason belong to the king and he succeeds to
them, not as heir, but as possessing as master an estate which
cannot pass to any successor.°


IV.


2672. And of those who have no Relations.— Those who die
without descendants or ascendants, and without any relations,
either by father or mother, and who have not disposed of their
estates by will; they dying without heirs, their estates belong to
the king, by virtue of the right which he has to succeed to all per-
sons who die without heirs or executors.4


sequissimum existimatum est eo quoque casu quo propter pcenam parentis aufert bona
damnatio, rationem haberi liberorum, ne alieno admisso, graviorem pcenam luerent, quos |
nulla contingeret culpa: interdum in summam egestatem devoluti. Quod cum aliqua
moderatione definiri placuit, ut qui ad universitatem venturi erant, jure successionis ex ¢5
portiones concessas haberent. ZL. 7, D. de bon dam. It is not necessary to draw a paral-
lel here between the Roman law and the law of France in this matter, that being no part
of the design of this book. We shall only observe, that there are some customs in France
where confiscations do not take place.

b See the ninth article of the second section of this title, and the eleventh article of the
second section of Persons. See the third article of the fourth section of this title, and the
remark that is there made on it.

© See the eighth article of the second section of this title, and the third article of the
first section of Persons. What is said in this article of the king’s succeeding to bastards
is to be understood likewise of the lords of manors within the bounds of their respective
lands.

d 7.1, C. de bon. vac. et de inc. ;—1. 4, eod. What is said in this article concerning the
king’s right to the succession of those who die without heirs or executors is likewise to
be understood of lords of manors within the bounds of their lands.

It is necessary to remark on this article what has been said concerning the succession
of the husband to the wife, and of the wife to the husband, in default of relations, in the
preface to this second part, no. 11, and what shall be said on the same subject in the
third section of the third title of the second book, that when there is no testament, and


TIT. 1. SBC. XU] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 13)


V.

2673. All these Sorts of Goods go to the King, with their Bur-
dens.— These four ways by which estates are acquired to the
king, to wit, forfeitare, succession to aliens, to bastards, and to
those who die without heirs, have all of them this in common,
that, as they transmit all the goods to the king, so he is in the
place of universal successor, and the said goods remain subject to
all the debts, and to the other charges.


VI.


2674. The Universal Donee is in Place of Hetr.— We may reck-
on among the number of those who are in the place of heirs, al-
though they have not that quality, universal donees, that is, those
to whom any person makes over by deed of gift in his lifetime all
the goods which he possesses at present, or shall afterwards ac-
quire. For these donees having all the goods, they are bound for
all the charges, by the effect of their title. But the name of heir is
not applicable to them, because the goods which the donor pos-
sessed at the time of the donation did from that moment belong
to them irrevocably, and the donor could not alienate them. And
although he might dispose of his other goods, which he acquired
afterwards, by alienations which he was at liberty to make in his
lifetime, yet he could not leave them by will to other persons.


Thus, it is as donees that they succeed to the goods, and not as
heirs!


Where the deceased has left no relations, the husband succeeds to the wife, and the wife to
the husband, and exclude the exchequer.

It is to be observed, likewise, on the subject of successions for want of relations, that
there are some customs in France, where, upon failure of relations by one stock, the lord
of the manor is preferred to the relations of the other stock; so that in those customs
thove who have only effects which they have inherited of one stock, and leaving behind
them only relations of the other stock, die without heirs.

* L. 4, C. de bon. proecr. seu damn. When estates devolve to the crown by any of the
¥ays explained in this article, they belong either to those who have a mortgage on the
king’s demesnes, or to those who farm them, or in case there be neither mortgages Dor
fmers who can claim any right to the said estates, the king usually makes grants of
them, which, according to the ordinances, are always made upon this condition, that the
grentees shall acquit all the charges. See the ordinance of Charles VII. of the 30th of
January, 1455. Vid. lib. 1 ef 2, C. de petit. bon. subl.

' See the eighth article of the first section of Donations, and the thirty-fifth law, § 4, Cod.
dedon., which is there cited, and which approves of universal donations of all the goods.
Sed et si quis universitatis faciat donationem, sive bessis, sive dimidie partis sus sub-
Mantz, sive tertise, sive quarte, sive quantecunque, vel etiam totius, &c. This law has
raised a donbt whether by the Roman law one can make a donation of the goods which
he shall afterwards acquire, because there can be no delivery of them, as there may be of


1382 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11, BOOK L


VIL
2675. The Purchaser of the Inheritance is in Place of Heir.—
We may likewise consider him as heir to whom an inheritance
has been sold, although he is not in effect heir, not having suc


goods which one has in his present possession; and this might be given likewise as
another reason for it, that by the Roman law one cannot divest himself of the liberty of
making a will, by an irrevocable institution of an heir, not even in favor of marriage.
Pactaum quod dotali instrumento comprehensum est, ut si pater vita fangeretur, ex
sequa portione ea qu nubebat cum fratre, heres sui patris esset, neque ullam obligatio-
nem contrahere, neque libertatem testamenti faciendi mulieris patri potuit auferre. JZ. 15,
C’. de pactis. But according to the usage in France, one may name a universal heir by
an institution in a contract which cannot be revoked, as has been already mentioned in
the preface, no. 10. And one may likewise give all his goods which he enjoys at present,
or shall acquire for the futare, by a donation that is to have its effect in his lifetime, and
is irrevocable, provided the donor reserves to himself a usufruct, or something where-
upon to subsist. For it would be contrary to equity and humanity, that he should be
stripped of all. Thus the universal donee may, after the death of the donor, take posses-
sion of all the goods, in the same manner as the heir. But because he who has made a
donation of all his goods, present and to come, may alienate the goods which he has ac-
quired since the donation, and contract new debts, it is but just that, after the death of the
donor, the donee should be at liberty to content himself with the goods which the donor
had at the time of the donation, and to bear the charges thereof which were due at that
time, and to renounce the goods acquired by the donor after the donation, and by that
means to free himself from the debts and charges contracted afterwards. For which rea-
son it is, that in this case a universal donation of all one’s goods, present and to come, is
distinguished into two donations: one, of all the goods which the donor possesses at the
time of the donation ; and the other, of those goods which the donor may acquire after-
wards. Which distinction is commonly founded on this, that, in stipulations which con-
tain several sums or several things, there are as many stipulations as there are sums or
things (L. 29, D. de verb. oblig.) ; for it is certain, that he who has stipulated from a debtor
things of several kinds may demand only such of them as he pleases. But this maxim
does not prove that all sorts of covenants may be divided; and if this division should be
prejudicial to the interest of one of the parties, it would be necessary, according to anoth-
er rule, either to execute the whole covenant or to break it entirely ; because, when thers
is an obligation on both sides, the mutual engagements ought to subsist. See the seventh
article of the second section of Covenants, and the tenth and eleventh articles of the first
section of Rescissions. L. 39, in f. D. de oper. lib. ;—. 16, in fin. D. de admin. et per. tutor.
Thus, we may add as more particular reasons why the donation of goods which the donor
is in present possession of ought to subsist, first, because the said donation is pure and
simple by the contract, and the donation of goods to be acquired implies a condition
that the donor shall afterwards acquire goods, which he cannot be said to do, if he ac-
quires no more than what is necessary to pay the debts; for, properly speaking, that is
only to be called goods which remains after the debte are paid. And in the second place,
it would not be just that the donor should have it in his power to annul the donation by
contracting debts. Which has been a motive for ratifying the donation of the goods
which were in the possession of the donor when he gave them away ; in which there is no
injury done to the creditors who have contracted only after the donation, which they
ought to have known of. But if the donee has taken possession of the goods after the
death of the donor, without making an inventory of them, he cannot afterwards divide the
donation: and his case is the same as if he were heir purely and simply. See, as to the
division of an act, the remark on the nineteenth article of the fifth section of Testaments.


TIT. I] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 133


ceeded to the deceased, and having the goods only by the title of
sale. But as he has the rights belonging to the heir, and, being
in possession of all the goods, is bound for all the charges, he is
therefore in the place of heir.€


VIIL


2676. The Curator to a Vacant Succession represents the Heir.
— When a succession is abandoned, and the creditors get a cura-
tor to be named, or when a curator is named to successions to
which there is no apparent heir, in order to take care of the effects,
the said curators prosecute the hereditary actions, and acquit the
charges ; and those who have any claim or demand on the estate
bring their actions against them. Thus, they represent in this
sense the persons either of the heirs, if there be any, or of those to
whom the goods may belong


TITLE II.


OF HEIRS OR EXECUTORS WITH THE BENEFIT OF AN
INVENTORY.


2677. We have seen, in the fourth article of the fifth section of
the first title, that the heir or executor who doubts whether the
succession be advantageous may take a time to deliberate whether
he shall accept or refuse it; and in the fifth article of the same
section, that, in case of any such doubt, the heir or executor may,
without deliberating, accept the succession with the benefit of an
inventory. Which has this effect, that if the charges appear after-
wards to exceed the value of the goods, he will be accountable
only for so much as the goods amount to; whereas, if he did not
make use of the said benefit, he would be simply and purely heir


§ L.2,§ 9, D. de heared. vel act. vend. See the eighth article of the first section of the
ird title.


* L.2,§1, D. de cur. bon. dando. See the fifteenth article of the first section of Cura-
ors. Vacant successions, to which there is no apparent heir, are put under the adminis-
tation of a curator until an heir shall appear, or until the goods are acquired either to the
king or to the lord of the manor. And curators are likewise named to estates that are
aandoned to the creditors, till the goods be sold for payment of the debts.

VOL. II. 12


134 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK L


or executor, and liable to all the charges of the inheritance, al-
though the effects should not be sufficient to acquit them.

2678. Of these two ways which the law has established for the
security of heirs or executors, the first that was in use at Rome
was the right of deliberating. This right was invented, as it is
said in a law, both for the interest of the dying persons, that they
might have heirs to succeed them, being thereto allured by the
liberty which they had to inform themselves of the state of the
goods and affairs of the succession before they should engage in
it; and likewise for the advantage of the heirs themselves, that
they might not be obliged to engage themselves too hastily in that
quality.*

2679. The method of using this right of deliberating was after
this manner; the heir who was called to a succession, either by
a testament, or as having right to succeed to one dying intestate,
applied to the magistrate for a time to deliberate, and a delay was
granted him at least of a hundred days.> During that time, the
papers belonging to the deceased were communicated to the heir,
and he examined all the debts owing by the deceased, by the titles
or deeds of the creditors, in order to take his measures for accepting
or refusing the succession.© And even those who named their
heirs might, by the ancient law, regulate by their testaments a
certain time which they gave them to deliberate, after the expira-
tion of which, the heir who did not accept the succession within
that time was excluded from it;4 but this was afterwards abol-
ished.

2680. This faculty of deliberating was of no other use but to
give the heir time to examine whether it would be for his advantage
to accept the succession, or whether it would be better for him to
renounce it: and seeing he was obliged after that time to resolve
either to accept the inheritance purely and simply, and to engage
himself for all the charges, or to renounce it, without being at lib-
erty to choose any middle way, there followed from thence several
inconveniences, both to the heirs and also to the legatees and
creditors. For the heirs might easily be deceived by the appear-
ance of the goods, the charges whereof might be difficult, or even


® 11.5 et 6, D. de interrog. in jur. fac.

b Z.1,§1, D. de jur. delid.; —L. 2, eod.

¢ 7. 28, D. de acq. vel omitt. hered. ; —1. 5, D. de jur. delib.
3 V. Ulp. tit. 22, § 27, et seg.

* L.17, C. de jur. delib.


TIT. IL] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 135


impossible, to be known, they being often secret and hidden; and
they being once engaged in burdensome successions, they could
not be afterwards at liberty to renounce them. And they might
likewise be deceived in another manner, by renouncing succes-
sions which might happen to be of greater value, and attended
with fewer charges, than did appear, which was to the prejudice of
the creditors and legatees. These inconveniences lasted for several
ages, and, until the time of Justinian, without any other remedy
besides that of an exception which the Emperor Gordian had made
in favor of soldiers who happened to be engaged in burdensome
successions, to whom the said emperor granted this privilege,
that their own goods should not be subject to the charges of the
succession,‘ which was difficult to be put in practice without an
inventory, by which it might appear wherein the goods of the
succession did consist. And at last Justinian established in
favor of all heirs, whether they succeeded by testament or to in-
testates, of whatsoever quality or condition, without any distinc-
tion, a liberty to accept with the benefit of an inventory the suc-
cession that falls to them, that is to say, on condition that they
shall not be liable to the charges farther than the value of the
goods, of which an inventory ought to be made by a public ofh-
cer. Which has this effect, that the creditors, legatees, and other
persons concerned, may have knowledge of all the goods of the in-
heritance which are appropriated to them, and that the heir does
hot engage his own estate, but obliges himself only to account
for what is contained in the said inventory; and by this means
full and entire justice is done, both to the heirs, to the legatees,
and to the creditors.

2681. As the first use of the benefit of an inventory is to give to
the heir or executor the liberty of deliberating whether he shall
accept the succession or not, and of doing it with the greater safe-
ty, because of the knowledge of the goods and charges of the in-
heritance which he may have from the inventory, so this benefit of
an inventory has not abolished the use of deliberating; and Jus-
tinian has,reserved it in the same law by which he has established
this other benefit. Which has this effect, that those who doubt
Whether it be not more advantageous for them not to accept the
inheritance at all, even with the benefit of an inventory, rather
than to engage themselves therein, may determine themselves and


' L. ult. in princip. C. de jur. delib. 5 See the second section of this title.


136 THE CIVIL LaW. [PART Il. BOOK h


take their final resolution after having deliberated thereon; and
that they may likewise without deliberating accept the succession
with this benefit, which secures their own estates, since they do
not engage themselves for more than the value of the goods.
Thus, we may distinguish in this matter the right to deliberate,
and that of using the benefit of am inventory, which shall be ex-
plained in the first two sections of this title; and in the third we
shall explain the effects of the said benefit.


SECTION I.
OF THE RIGHT TO DELIBERATE.


Art. I.
2682. The Heir may deliberate. — The heir or executor, who,
being ignorant of the charges of the inheritance, is afraid to en-
gage himself therein, may take the time allowed by law for delib-


erating, before he declares whether he will accept the succession
or not.


IL


2683. He informs himself by the Inventory.— To put the heir or
executor in a condition to deliberate, it is necessary that he should
have the means of informing himself of the goods and charges of
the succession; and that he and all other persons concerned may
have this information, the judge directs an inventory to be made
of all the deeds and writings belonging to the inheritance, which
are communicated to them.°


Il.


2684. Curators named to the Succession while the Heir is delib-
erating. — If, during the time that the heir is deliberating, there
should fall out some affair in which it should be necessary to com-


® L. 8, D. de jure delib. ; —i. ult. § 18, in f- C. cod. By the ordinance of 1667, in the
title of Delays for deliberating, the heir has three months from the time that the succession
is open to make the inventory, and forty days thereafter to deliberate.

> See the texts quoted under the letter e, in the preamble to this title. As it is only
by the means of the inventory that the heir can come at this knowledge, the ordinance
cited on the foregoing article has made provision accordingly, as has been already ob-
served, by making the time allowed for deliberating to commence only after the invento-
ry is made.


TIT. 11. SEC. 1.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 137


mence a suit, for the preservation of some right belonging to the
inheritance, or to defend it against some claim or pretension, and
the matter could not admit of delay, it would be necessary to
name a curator to the inheritance, in order to prosecute its rights,
and to defend it until the heir, by accepting the succession, may
be in a capacity to act himself.


IV.


2685. Sale of Things which are perishable. — If, in the same case,
when the heir delays to accept the succession, or to renounce it,
there be goods belonging to the inheritance which by being kept
are in hazard of perishing, or of being damaged, or of diminishing in
their value, such as fruit, grain, liquors, or things which it would
be more advantageous to sell than to keep, such as horses or other
beasts that are not necessary, and which would occasion an ex-
pense; the heir or curator of the succession may sell and dis-
pose of those kinds of things, in order to preserve the money that
is got for them in the inheritance, observing in the said sales the
forms prescribed in such cases.4


V.


2686. Acquitting the Charges that are pressing. — If there were
any debts due from the succession, which it might be necessary to
pay off speedily, the moneys arising from the sales that are to be
made, according to the rule explained in the foregoing article,
should be employed for that purpose, or things which are the least
necessary might be sold, or debts that are owing to the estate
might be called in, in order to clear off the said demands, or to
satisfy the other expenses that are equally necessary, such as the
foneral charges, the tillage of the lands, necessary repairs, and oth-
ers of the like nature, according as the judge should direct.


* L.3, D. de curat. fur. See the fifteenth article of the first section of Curators. See-
ing the time allowed to the heir for deliberating is mach shorter by the ordinance cited
on the first article than it was by the Roman law, and that the delay for deliberating rans
only from the time that the inventory has been made, we must understand what is said
in this and the following articles, not only of what happens during the delay for deliber-
ating after the inventory is made, but likewise of the time that the inventory is making,
and before it be set about.

4 £.5,§ 1, D. de jure delib. These sales are made by cant or auction, and by permis- —
sion of the judge; uniese it be that the inconsiderableness of the things that are sold, and
the consent of the parties interested, may excuse the charges of these formalities. See
the following article.

* L. 6, D. de jur. delib. ; —l. 7, in f. cod. ; —d. L. 7, in princip. ; — 1. 5, §.1, inf. cod.

12°


138 THE OLVIL LAW. [Part 11. BOOK L


VL

2687. Alimony to the Children during the Time that they deliber-
ate. — If the heirs are infants, who deliberate concerning the in-
heritance of their father, mother, or other ascendant, and they have
no other means of subsistence during the time that they have for
deliberating, they may in the mean while obtain from the judge a
moderate provision out of the goods of the succession for their
maintenance! For there is less inconvenience in taking a provis-
ion of this nature out of the estate, although the children should
renounce the succession, than there would be in depriving them of
it during the delay which the law allows them. And if it should
happen to be in the case of a succession of a father, on which the
children should have some demand in right of their mother, who
is already deceased, this provision, being deducted out of their de-
mands, would still admit of less difficulty.


VIL


2688. Many Heirs successively have each of them a Right to de-
liberate. — If several persons were called to the same succession,
one in default of the other, as if a testator, having instituted an
heir, and foreseen the case, either that the said heir should die be-
fore him, or that ‘he would not accept the succession, had substi-
tuted another in his place; or that the testamentary heir, or the
heir to an intestate, renouncing the succession, the next in degree
of kindred should be willing to accept it; in all these cases the
heir who is called to the succession in default of another would
have the same right to deliberate, as he had in whose place he
succeeds£ For the time granted for deliberating cannot begin


f 1.9, D. de jur. delib.;—I. ult. C. de ord. cogn.;—v. 1. 51, D.de heared. pet. Although
the words of the second text cited on this article, and the fifty-first law, D. de hcred.
pet., relate to other matters, yet we may apply here that which concerns the moderating
of these sorts of provisions, the equity whereof is founded on the necessity of maintaining
the children, but which ought to be as little burdensome to the creditors as is possible.

We must observe upon this article, that the provisions mentioned therein have fewer
inconveniences according to the present usage in France, than they had in thé Roman
law, by which the time for deliberating was much longer. See the remark upon the first
article.

5 L. 10, D. de jur. delib. See the title of Vulgar Substitutions. We must not confound
the condition of him who succeeds to an heir, purely and simply as his heir, with the con-
dition of heirs who are substituted one to the other, or who take the place of a first heir, to
succeed in his default. For whereas these have the right to deliberate whether they shall
accept the same inheritance in the same manner as the heir had, in whose place they suc-
ceed ; he who becomes pure and simple heir to another, who had accepted the inheritance,


TIT. Ii. BEC. 11.] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 139


to run, with respect to each heir, but only after he is called to
the succession.


VIIL


2689. The Heir who dies while he is deliberating transmits his
Right to his Successors.— if the heir who was deliberating hap-
pens to die before he has declared his mind, he transmits his right
to his heir or executor, who may deliberate likewise whether he
shall accept or refuse the succession that was fallen to the de-
ceased.®


SECTION II.


HOW ONE BECOMES HEIR OR EXECUTOR WITH THE BENEFIT OF AN
INVENTORY.


Arr. L


2690. One may become Heir with the Benefit of an Inventory,
without deliberating. — Every heir or executor, who doubts whether
the succession be advantageous or not, and who is afraid to en-
gage himself in it, may beforehand demand that an inventory be
made of the effects, and of the deeds and writings belonging to
the inheritance ; and without taking time to deliberate, he may
declare that he accepts the succession with the benefit of an inven-
tory, And by this means he will be liable for the debts and
charges of the inheritance only in so far as the goods belonging
to the deceased shall be sufficient to acquit, and his own estate
will not be chargeable therewith.


IL


2691. The Inventory ought to be made according to Form.— The
creditors, the legatees, and all other persons who have any claim
on the inheritance, having an interest in this inventory, the heir or
executor cannot make it by himself, but it ought to be made by a


has not right to deliberate whether he shall accept that inheritance or not; but it goes to
him with the same engagements which the person was under who had accepted it, and to
whom he succeeds.

* L. 19, C. de jur. delib. See, concerning this right of transmission, the tenth section
of Testaments.

* L. edt. § 2, C. de jur. deliber.; —d. 1. § 4.


149 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK 1.


public officer, and according to the form which the law and usage
have established in this matter.”


TIL


2692. It ought to take ts all the Goods.— This inventory ought
to contain all the goods of the succession that were sealed up by
order of the judge, or are discovered by persons who have any
knowledge thereof. And the heir or executor ought likewise to
declare what he knows of them, and to swear that he does not de-
tain or conceal any effects belonging to the inheritance.°


IV.


2693. The Omissions may be supplied.— If the creditors or lega-
tees, and other persons concerned, should discover that things
have been omitted in the inventory, or should anyways mistrust
it, they will be admitted to prove the omissions and frauds which
they shall allege.¢


V.


2694. Punishment of Diverting the Effects. —If the heir or ex-
ecutor had secretly conveyed away any of the effects belonging to
the succession, er failed to discover what he knew thereof, this
unfair dealing would be punished in such a manner as the quality
of the act might deserve, according to the circumstances.*


SECTION III.
OF THE EFFECT OF THE BENEFIT OF AN INVENTORY.


Art. I.
2695. The Heir with the Benefit of an Inventory is bound only
for the Value of the Goods. — He who, having got an inventory


» Z. ult. § 2, C.de jur. delid. According to the usage received in France, the inventory
ought to be made by authority of justice, after having sealed up the places where the
writings and other effects belonging to the inheritance are kept.

© ZL. ult. § 2, C. de jur. deli. By the usage in France, not only is the heir obliged to
give in a declaration upon oath, but likewise the servants of the deceased are obliged to
declare upon oath what they know touching the effects of the deceased.

@ 7. ult. $10, C: de jur. delib.

® Illo videlicet observando ut si ex hmreditate aliquid hxredes surripuerint, vel celave-
rint, vel amovendum curaverint, postquam fasrint convicti, in duplum hoc restituere, vel


TIT. 11. SEC. 111] HEIRS AND EXECUTORS. 141


made according to form, declares himself heir with the benefit of
an inventory, will not be liable for the charges of the succession
but in so far as the value of the goods belonging to the deceased
amounts to, and his own estate will not be anyways chargeable
therewith,* as has been said in the first article of the second section.


IL


2696. The Legacies are reduced according to the Goods. — If
the heir or executor, who has the benefit of an inventory, be bur-
dened with legacies exceeding the sum which one is allowed to
dispose of by will,> he may get them to be reduced in proportion
to the goods which remain clear, after the debts and other charges
are deducted.°


HL


2697. The Heir who is a Creditor preserves his Debt.— If this
heir, who has the benefit of an inventory, was himself a creditor
to the deceased, his quality of creditor shall not be confounded
with the quality of heir, which makes him debtor to himself; but
he shall preserve his right whole and entire, in the same manner
as the other creditors, and that with the mortgages and privileges
which he had for the security of his debt.4


IV.


2698. And recovers his Expenses. — All the expenses which the
heir who has the benefit of an inventory has been at, whether it
be for the funeral of the deceased, for making the inventory, or for
repairs, and all other necessary charges, shall be allowed him out
of the goods of the inheritance which he shall have received.


V.


2699. He ought to sell the Movables.— The heir who has the
benefit of an inventory not being bound to discharge the debts


hereditatis quantitati compntare, compellantur. L. ult. § 10, inf. C. de jur. delib. This
penalty of the double is not in use in France; but the heir who should be found guilty of
rach unfair practices would be proceeded against according to the circumstances. And if
they shall appear to be such as to render the heir unworthy of the benefit of an inventory,
he may be debarred of it.

* L. ult. § 4, C. de jur. delib.

> See the third title of the fourth book.

© L. ult. § 4, C. de jur. delib. ; —I. 39, §.1, D. de verb. signif.

" L. ult. § 9, inf. C. de jur. delib. © DT, ult. § 9, C. de jur. delib.


142 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOX |


but with the goods of the inheritance, he ought to sell the mova-
bles, as the readiest means for paying off the debts.


VI


2700. He is only bound to render an Account.— When the heir
shall pretend that the goods of the succession are exhausted in pay-
ing the debts, legacies, and other charges, he shall be under no fur-
ther obligation to those who have any claim on the goods of the
succession than to give an account of them, in which he is to
charge himself with the goods according to the inventory, and to
put down in his discharge all the debts and other charges which
he has acquitteds


VIL


2701. He ts not obliged, in paying the Creditors, to observe their
Order. — Although the goods of the succession be not sufficient
to acquit all the charges, yet the heir or executor who has the
benefit of an inventory may pay off the creditors who come first
to demand their debts, if there be no attachment of the goods, or
other hindrance on the part of the other creditors. For he is not
bound to know who are the creditors, nor in. what order they are
ranked. And those who come after all the goods of the succes-
sion are disposed of to other creditors, ought to blame themselves
for their delay.®


VIL


2702. He may pay off the Legatees if the Creditors do not ap-
pear.— If the creditors do not appear, the heir or executor may
pay off the legacies. But if there should not remain effects
enough to satisfy the creditors, they may oblige the legatees to
give back what they have received. For the legacies are due only
after the debts are paid! And in such a case, greater regard
ought to be had to the interest of the creditors, which is not to


f See the text quoted on the fourth article of the first section. This sale ought to be
made after the publications which are necessary for bringing in many buyers, and for pre-
venting the frauds which are usual in private sales. And it is so ordered by some cus
toms in France.

& L.ult.§ 4, C. de jur. delib. It is only by an account that the heir who has the bene
fit of an inventory can show that he has employed the goods for paying the debts and
clearing the other charges.

b 7. ult. § 4, C. de jur. delib.

' 7, ult. § 4, inf. C. de jur. delib. ; —d. 1. ult. § 5.


TIT. 111.} HOW A SUCCESSION IS ACQUIRED. 143


lose what is justly due to them, than to the interest of the leg-
atees, which consists only in reaping a benefit which is to be
taken only out of the goods of the succession that shall remain
clear after payment of all the debts.


TX.


2703. The Lands which are given in Payment remain subject
to the Mortgages.— If any creditors had taken in payment lands
or tenements which were part of the succession, and other prior
creditors should happen to appear afterwards, they might exer-
cise their right of mortgage, if they had any, on the said lands
or tenements which had been given to the other creditors;
and the heir who had the benefit of an inventory would not
be bound either in warranty to those who had taken the said
lands or tenements in payment, nor for what the other creditors
may come short in the payment of their debts, farther than to
the value of the goods of the succession which may remain in
their hands.” -


TITLE III.


IN WHAT MANNER A SUCCESSION IS ACQUIRED, AND HOW IT IS
RENOUNCED.


id


2704. Te reader sees plainly that these words of this title, i
what manner a succession is acquired, do not regard the manner
in which one is called to the quality of heir or executor; for it has
already been sufficiently explained that one is made heir either
by the disposition of the testator, or by the provision of the law;
but they have respect only to the manner in which he to whom a
succession is fallen, whether it be by testament, or as next of kin


'L.41,§ 1, D.dereg. jur. It is hardly possible, according to the usage in France, that
it should happen that an heir should pay off legacies before the debts. For the benefit of
a2 inventory is made public, both by its being entered in the acts of court, and by the
public notice that is given before the sale of the movables, as has been observed on the
fifth article. But it may so happen that some creditor may have been hindered from
bringing in his claim, either by reason of his absence or for some other cause, which
ought not to be of prejudice to the heir, who paid the legacies honestly and fairly, without
aay intent to defraud the creditors.

™ L. ult. $§ 6 et 7, C. de jur. delid.


144 ; THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BO


to an intestate, and who has as yet done no act whereby he
cepts that quality, may declare himself heir, if he will make u:
his right, and acquire the goods of the succession. And t
other words which follow, how i is renounced, are to be ul
stood of the ways by which he who is called to be heir or ex
tor may signify his refusal of it. For he may either accept of
quality, or renounce it. And since he may explain himsel
several ways, and since he may likewise do some acts w
would make him heir or executor, although he should hav
such intention, the different ways in which an heir or exec
may carry himself with respect to the succession that is falle
him, whether it be in accepting or renouncing it, shall be the
ject-matter of this title. And in the first section we shall ex;
the acts which engage one in the quality of heir or executor,
which imply the entry to or acceptance of the succession. In
second, we shall show what are the acts which may have som
lation to the quality of heir or executor without engaging o1
it. The third shall be concerning the effects and consequenc
the acceptance of the inheritance. And in the fourth we shal
plain what belongs to the renunciation of the inheritance.


SECTION I.
OF THE ACTS WHICH ENGAGE ONE IN THE QUALITY OF HEIR
- EXECUTOR.
Art. L


2705. In what the Engagement to the Succession consists. —
engagement in the quality of heir or executor ought to hav
same effect as if the heir or executor had treated with the
ceased to whom he succeeds, as has been said in its proper p
and it is the same thing in effect as if it had been agreed bet
them that, if the heir or executor would accept that qualit
should have all the goods of the succession, and should like
be bound to acquit all the charges.* Thus, in order to judg


* See the eighth article of the first section of the first title. This kind of tre:
tween the deceased and his heir or executor is made on the part of the deceased
testament, when there is one, and on the executor’s part in the moment that he s
the succession. For the testator explains in his testament his intention to leave his
to his executor on condition that he shall satisfy all the charges; and the executor,


TIT. III. SEC. 1.] HOW A SUCCESSION 18 ACQUIRED. 145


the acts of the heir whether they engage him in this quality or
not, we ought to consider in them the relation which they may
have to this intention of the deceased, that the heir, by taking the
goods, should subject himself to all the charges. And according
as his conduct shall show that he is willing to fulfil the said inten-
tion of the deceased, it will prove his engagement, as shall be
explained by the rules which follow.


IL


2706. One may accept the Succession, either by express Acts, or
otherwise. — According to this first rule, we must distinguish two
sorts of acts which may form the engagement of the heir to acquit
the charges of the succession; those which signify expressly his
intention to take the goods, and to engage himself for all the
charges, as if he declares that he accepts the succession;> and
those which have the same effect, although he do not explain
himself; as if he takes possession of the goods of the inheritance,
or if he does some other act which shows that his design is to
have the goods.


TIL


2707. What are the Acts of an Heir.— All the acts which an
heir nfiy do in that quality, that is, acting as heir, oblige him as
such, whether it be that he does that which he cannot do but as
heir, or that the act which he does denotes his willingness to be
heir. The meaning and use of this rule will better appear from
the articles which follow.‘


IV.


2708. The Heir who in that Quality receives Payment of a Debt
acts as Heir.—- The heir who receives that which he has no right


cepting the succession, does the same thing as if he subscribed to this condition in the
wil. And when there is no testament, the engagement is nevertheless the same. For
the law which gives the succession imposes on the heir that is to succeed to it the same
condition of acquitting the charges. So that in this case the heir, receiving the succes-
fon from the law, obliges himself in the same manner.
_ We may apply to this engagement of the heir or executor to the charges which are
‘™mposed upon him by the deceased, the usage of the ancient Roman law, by which testa-
Dents were made by an imaginary sale, which the deceased made to his heir. See the
— on the thirty-first article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general.

hes C. unde legitim. et unde cognat.
: L.8, C. de jure deib. See the following articles.

See the following articles.

VOL. {1 13


146 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK |.


to receive but in that quality, does an act which properly belongs
to the heir* As if he receives payment from one that is debtor to
the inheritance; for by receiving it he declares his intention to
make use of his right of heir.


V.


2709. And if he pays a Debt of the Succession. — If the heir
makes payment of a debt to one of the creditors of the succession,
he thereby declares that he accepts the succession, and engages
himself to acquit the charges,‘ since he acknowledges himself to
owe what he pays, and which he does not owe but as heir.


VI


2710. If he takes any of the Goods, or reaps the Fruits.— If he
who is called to an inheritance takes any of the goods belonging
to it after that it is open, as if he reaps the fruits of any ground, if
he cultivates it, if he farms it out, if he takes any of the movables
of the succession, if he sells them, or disposes otherwise of then,
and, in general, if he takes that which he had no right to take but
as heir, or if he disposes of any goods of the succession as master
and owner, he makes himself thereby heir


VIL e


2711. Although he errs in the Fact.— The heir who has taken
possession of some particular thing which was not part of the suc-
cession, but which he by mistake thought did belong to it, does
even in that an act of heir. For he declares his intention to ac-
cept of that quality, and by that means obliges himself to it.5


VIII.


2712. He who disposes of the Inheritance makes himself Heir. —
The heir who, even before he intermeddles any way with the in-
heritance, sells it, or gives it to another, or disposes of it other-
wise, makes himself heir, and remains bound for all the charges in
the same manner as if he had accepted the succession. For to
sell or dispose of it is to make use of it as master!


L. 20, § 4, in f D. de acquir. vel omitt. hoered.
2, C. de jure delib. ; — 1. 8, C. de inoff. test.
7, Inst. de hared. qual. et diff. See the text quoted on the fourth article.
» D. de acquir. vel omitt. heered.


e
f
6 9
b 7. 88
'Z.2, C. de legat. See the eighteenth article of the first section of Heirs and E-recutors


L.
§

L.
L.


TIT. 111. SEC. I.] HOW A SUCCESSION 18 ACQUIRED. 147


IX.

2713. As also he who receives a Sum of Money to renounce it. —
If he who was called to a succession receives a sum of money, or
any other thing, to renounce it, and to let it go to the person who
has right to succeed in his place, he does even by that renunciation
an act of heir. For by receiving a price for the succession he
sells it!


xX.


2714. And also the Executor who renounces by Collusion with the
Heir of Blood. — If the testamentary heir, colluding with the heir
of blood, had renounced the succession in order to leave the estate
to him, and that even without any valuable consideration, both of
them designing by this fraud to render the testament altogether
ineffectual, he would nevertheless be bound to pay the legacies
and other charges. For this collusion would be, in a manner, a
disposal of the inheritance, and his knavery would deserve this
just punishment.”


XL


2715. And likewise he who has embezzled any of the Effects. —
Ifa son, or other heir to the deceased, who should pretend to ab-
stain from the inheritance, had embezzled any of the effects belong-
ing to it, he would by that means have engaged himself to the
charges ; for his condition ought not to be any better for having
subtracted the effects knavishly, than if he had taken as heir that
which he has embezzled in this manner."


XII.


2716. If he embezzles after having renounced, he is guilty of
Theft.— It would not be the same thing in the heir or executor,
who, after he has renounced the inheritance, should embezzle or
purloin any of the effects belonging to it. For he would not by


in general. Although the text quoted on this article speaks only of him who has sold the
inheritance, yet the disposing of it in any other manner has the same effect.

' L. 2 D. ei quis omiss. caus. testam.; —1. 1, C. si omiss. sit caus. test. Seo the foregoing
article, and the eighteenth article of the first section of Heirs and Executors in general.

" L.1, § ult. D. si quis omiss. caus. test. ab int. vel al. m. p.h. The heir of blood is like-
Wise bound for the legacies in this case. As to which the reader may consult the eigh-
teenth and nineteenth articles of the third section of Testaments, and the remarks which
tre there made on them.

* L. 71, § 4, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hered.


148 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOK I.


this act render himself heir, unless the circumstances were such 33
that it ought to have this effect; but he would thereby commit a
theft, for which he would be punished.°


XIIL


2717. The Next of Kin, being instituted by Testament, cannot stick
to the Legal Succession in Prejudice of the Legatees.— If the tes-
tamentary heir were the same person who had right to succeed to
the testator if he had died intestate, and he, thinking to avoid the
payment of the legacies and other charges imposed by the testa-
ment, should renounce the testamentary succession and cleave to
his right of succeeding to the deceased as dying intestate, he
would not by that be deprived of the succession,? but he would
nevertheless be bound to execute the testament. For the testator
might have named another person for his heir or executor, and he
cannot have the goods of the deceased unless he executes his will.


XIV.


2718. A Minor ts relieved against any Act he has done as Heir.
— The heir who is a minor cannot do any act of heir which may
engage him irrevocably to that quality. And if the succession
with which he has intermeddled proves to be burdensome, he is
relieved from it."


XV.


2719, If the Minor who ts relieved has for his Coheir one that is
of Age, the said Coheir remains, nevertheless, Heir. — If the minor
who renounces the succession which he had already accepted had
a coheir of full age who had likewise accepted the inheritance for


° ZL. 71, § ult. D. de acquir. vel omitt. hared.

P L.17, § 1, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hoered.

q ZL. 1, D. si quis omiss. caus. test.; —d. 1. § 9, in f.;—I. 8, C. si omiss. sit caus. test. We
mast observe on this rule, that, in the provinces of France which are governed by their
customs, if the testator charges his heir at law with more than he has power to give away
by the custom, the said heir may stick to his right which belongs to him by the custom,
and get the dispositions of the testament to be reduced in so far as they encroach on his
right. For the testator could not dispose to his prejudice.

© D. 57, § 1, D. de acg. vel om. heered. See the tenth and following articles of the first
section of Rescissions and Restitution of Things to their First Estate. The creditors can
suffer no manner of inconvenience from a minor's renouncing an inheritance which he
had accepted. For seeing there is always an inventory made of the goods when the heir
that succeeds is a minor, the said inventory preserves the rights of the creditors, and the
minor is as it were an heir with the benefit of an inventory.


TIT. Ill. SEC. 11.) HOW A SUCCESSION I8 ACQUIRED. 149


his portion, the said coheir will nevertheless remain heir after the
minor has renounced. But he will be liable to the charges only
for his own portion, and will not be bound for those which fell to
the share of the minor; the creditors preserving their rights in
order to prosecute them pursuant to the rules which have been
explained in the ninth section of the first title.*


XVI.


2720. We must add to the foregoing Rules those of the following
Section. — One may be able to judge by the rules explained in
this section, and by the examples of the cases which have been
here quoted, what are the acts which may engage one in the qual-
ity of heir or executor. And it will be easy to apply to the partic-
ular facts which may happen, and to the circumstances, the use of
these rules, together with those which shall be explained in the
following section.*


SECTION II.


OF THE ACTS WHICH HAVE SOME RELATION TO THE QUALITY OF
HEIR OR EXECUTOR, BUT WHICH DO NOT ENGAGE ONE IN IT.


Art. I.


2721. To act as Heir, tt is necessary that he who acts should know
that he is such. — The acts which an heir or executor may chance
to do whilst he is ignorant of the death of the person to whom he
succeeds, and when he acts upon other considerations, put him
under no manner of engagement. For to act as heir it is neces-
sary that the person who acts should know that he is such, and
that the succession be open, that is to say, that the person to whom
he has a right to succeed is dead. Thus, he, who, being presump-
tive heir to a person that is absent, whether he be instituted by
testament or has a right to succeed in case the said person dies
intestate, took care of his affairs during his absence, and continues
to take the same care after his death, before he knows any thing
of his death, does not engage himself to the inheritance. And he


’ L. 61, D. de acquir. vel omitt. heved. See the remark on the foregoing article.
' This article is a consequence of the foregoing articles, and of the following section.
13 *


150 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BO


would be as little engaged if he were ignorant that he was
although he knew of the death of the said person.*


IL.


2722. And that the Act proceed from no other Cause. — It
so happen that an heir or executor, who knows of the dea
the person to whom he is to succeed, may do some acts whi
their own nature would be reckoned acts of the heir, but whic
the circumstances are to be distinguished from them. Thu
instance, if a son who was living in a house which his father
given him the use of during pleasure continues to dwell in.
some time after his father’s death, without declaring his |
whether he will be heir to his father or not; this possession v
he has of the house will not be a sufficient reason for conclt
that it is as master and owner of the house that he has conti
to live in it since his father’s death; and it will be no hindran
him why he may not renounce the inheritance, if nothing els
engaged him in it. For although his precarious title was
end by his father’s death, yet this bare detention of a house v
is part of the inheritance, having no relation to the quality of
would oblige him only to pay the rent of the house to him
shall succeed as heir, or to the creditors of the inheritance.


NL :


2723. The Heir at Law who knows not that there tsa Teste
does not approve tt by declaring himself Heir. — It is not al
enough to make an heir liable to the charges of the inherit
that he does some act as heir, even although he knows that
heir, and also that the person to whom he is to inherit is de
he is ignorant by what title he is to succeed. Thus, for exa:
if one who had right to succeed to a person dying intestate


* L. 19, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hared. ; —l. 27, eod.

b 7.1, C. de repud. vel abst. hered. ;—1. 4, C. und. legit. et unde cognati. We have
rule put the case of another house different from that wherein the father of the sa
son lived, that we might speak only of the fact of the bare dwelling in a house be!
to the inheritance, and to avoid the jumbling together other acts of an heir, wh
son would be obliged to prevent, with respect to the movables and papers which
happen to be in the house where the father lived, if after his death the son should c
to dwell in it. For by reason of the said movables and papers, the son would be
to get them speedily sealed up, in order to have an inventory taken of them, unless
a mind to enter heir simply and purely, without the benefit of an inventory. See,
tion to what is said of a precarious possession, the second and thirteenth articles
first section of the Loan of Things to be restored in Specie.


TIT. 111. SEC. 11.) HOW A SUCCESSION I8 ACQUIRED. 151


the said person instituted his heir by a testament, and he, knowing
nothing of the said testament, enters to the succession as next of
kin, and the legatees should come afterwards and set up a tes-
tament, which would engage him in such charges that he would
choose rather to renounce the inheritance than to keep it, he might
abstain from it: and he would cease to be heir in the same man-
ner as one who is instituted by a testament, and who, believing it
to be a good will, and not being next of kin, had entered to the
succession, of which he should happen to be afterwards deprived
on account of the nullities which should be discovered in the said
testament.®


IV.


272A. We must distinguish the Motives of the Acts.— First Ex-
ample. — Among the acts which an heir or executor may do, it is
necessary to distinguish between those which can have no other
cause besides an intention which implies the acceptance of the in-
heritance, and those which may proceed from other causes, and
from which it does not necessarily follow that he who does them
is heir. Thus, what one does out of a motive of duty, as if the
son takes care to bury his father, this office which he does to his
deceased parent is not reputed to be acting as heir. Thus, the
heir who, while he is deliberating whether he shall accept or not,
lays up the effects of the succession in safety, does not declare by
that action that he is heir. But in these and the like cases, it is
by the quality of the acts, and the circumstances, that we distin-
guish what is to be looked upon as an acting as heir, and what
ought not to have that effect.!


V.


2725. Second Example.— The heir who, without any design of
accepting this quality, but barely to prevent the loss or ruin of a
thing belonging to the inheritance, takes some care of it, or, having


¢ L. 22, D. de acquir. vel omitt. heared. Although the dispositions of testaments which
load the heir too much may be reduced, as shall be shown in the third title of the fourth
book, and in the fourth title of the fifth book; yet secing there may be dispositions which
are not subject to this reduction, as shall be explained in the same places, and that other
considerations, and even that of being engaged in lawsuits about the said reductions, may
oblige the testamentary heir not to accept the conditions of the testament, there may he
cases where the rule explained in this article may have its use.

4 ZT. 20, D. de acquér. vel omitt. hored.; —d. 1. 20,41; —v. 1.4, D. de relig. & sumpt.
Sun.


152 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK L


some just reason to believe it to be his own, takes possession of
it, does not thereby engage himself to be heir, provided that the
circumstances show his intention and his integrity.


VIL


2726. Another Example.— If the heir was in partnership with
the deceased, to whom he was to succeed, or if they had something
in common“together, and this partner who was instituted heir, ex-
ercising his right, after the death of the other, to the thing which
belonged to them in common, does it in such a manner as to re
strain himself to his own proper right, without confounding it
with the right which belonged to the deceased, and which by the
quality of heir had accrued to him; those acts, being confined to
his own proper right, will not be a sufficient ground to declare him
heir, no more than the care which he may have taken of the thing
belonging to him in common with the deceased‘


VII.


2727. When one ts forced to act as Heir, tt does not engage
him. — If it has happened that an heir has been forced by any per-
son to do some act, which, if he had been at his own free liberty
when he did it, would have made him heir, the said force, being
well proved, would render the act of no effect, and he would never-
theless be admitted to renounce the successions


VIIL


2728. Precautions to be taken by the Heir, who ts afraid lest he
should engage himself by some Act.— The heir or executor, who
should find himself under a necessity of doing some acts which
he feared might be made use of to tie him down to the acceptance
of that quality, may beforehand declare his intention by some in-
strument in writing, wherein he may protest that what he does or
shall do shall be without taking upon him the quality of heir, but
barely either for preserving the goods of the succession, or for the
other causes which may oblige him to act, and which he may spe-
cify in his protest. And in this case, if what he has done appears
to be sincere, the acts done pursuant to this protest will do him
no manner of prejudice. It is by the means of this precaution


© L. 20, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hoered.
€ L. 78, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hared.
6 L. 85, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hered.


TIT. 111. SEO. 111.) HOW A SUCCESSION 16 ACQUIRED. 153


that the heirs who are not willing to engage themselves to accept
the succession ought in such like cases to provide for their secu-
rity®


SECTION III.


OF THE EFFECTS AND CONSEQUENCES OF THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE
INHERITANCE.


Art. I.


2729. Two Effects of the Acceptance, the Right to the Goods
and the Possession. -— It is necessary to distinguish two effects of
the acceptance of the inheritance. One is, that which makes
heir or executor master of all the goods, and of all the rights be-
longing to the succession, although he be not as yet in possession
of them; and the other effect, which is a consequence of the
former, is, that he may take possession of them. The heir be-
comes master of the goods by a bare act, by which he declares or
signifies that he is heir, although as yet he possesses no part of
the inheritance.* And he does not acquire the possession of the
goods till he begins to possess them according to the rules which
have been explained in the title of Possession.


IL


2730. The Possession is not necessary to one’s becoming Heir.
— As soon as the heir or executor has done any act which en-
gages him in that quality, whether he possesses the goods of the
inheritance, or a part of them, or even although he has none of
them in his possession, yet he may exercise the rights belonging
to the heir or executor, and he is likewise bound for all the
charges,> :


ir


2731. The Acceptance of the Succession is carried back to the
Time of the Death which laid the Succession open. — Seeing the
heir or executor, who accepts the succession only some time after


© 1. 90, § 1, D. de acquir. vel omit. hered.; —1. 14, § 8, D. de relig. et sumpt. fin.

* L. 6, C. de jur. delib. See the second article of the first section. L. 1, D. de bonor.
pos. See the following article.

* L. 88, D. de acquir. vel omitt. hored.


154 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOK I.


the death of the person to whom he succeeds, is reputed heir or
executor from the moment of the said death, as has been said in
another place ;° all the goods which augment and all the charges
which diminish the inheritance, after the said death, will fall to
him. And whatever has been laid out for the preservation of the
goods, or acquitting of the charges, whether it was by a curator, if
there was any, or by other persons, will be on his account, unless
he has good reasons for not approving the said disbursements.


IV.


2732. Effect of the Acceptance, to oblige to pay all the Charges.
— The heir who is of age, and who has once taken upon him that
quality without the benefit of an inventory, enters irrevocably into
all the engagements which are the consequences thereof


V.


2733. Another Effect, the Right of transmitting the Inheritance.
— There is another effect of the acceptance of the succession,
which is the right that it gives to the heir or executor, if he hap-
pens to die after this acceptance, to transmit or convey the in-
heritance to his heir or executor. This is that right which is
called the right of transmission of the inheritance, which we shall
treat of in its proper place. And it is enough here barely to
mention it.


VI


2734. In what Sense the Acceptance regards the Goods which
do not remain in the Inheritance. — Although the acceptance of
the succession is limited to the goods which remain therein after
the death of the person to whom the heir or executor succeeds,
and does not extend to those goods to which the right that the
deceased had did determine by his death, as has been observed
in another place ;£ yet the heir or executor does nevertheless take
possession of those sorts of goods, whether it be to preserve them
for the persons to whom they are to be restored, as if they were


© See the fifteenth article of the first section of the first title.

d 7. 188, D. de reg. jur. ; —1. 28, § ult. D. de stip. serv.

* See the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth articles of the first section of the first title,
and the sixth section and the other following sections of the same title.

f See the tenth section of the title of Testaments.

© See the fifth article of the first section of Heirs and E-xecutors in general.


TIT. IIL SEC. 1V.] HOW A SUCCESSION IS ACQUIRED. 155


goods substituted, or even to continue to reap the fruits of them, .
according to the conditions of the substitution. And he enters
likewise into the engagements which the deceased was under in
relation to the said goods. Thus, for example, if the deceased
had damnified them, the heir or executor would be bound for the
damages which the owners had suffered, and for the charges of
the said goods which the deceased had failed to acquit during the
time that he enjoyed them.


SECTION IV.
OF RENOUNCING THE INHERITANCE.


Art. I.

2735. Every Heir may renounce the Succession. — Every heir
or executor is at liberty to accept the succession, or to abstain
from it, and to renounce it; provided he has not done any act
which may have engaged him in that quality.*


IL


2136. How the Succession ts renounced.— The heir or executor,
who has a mind to renounce the succession, may do it by acts
which signify his intention so to do. Thus, he might cause notice
to be given to the creditors, and to the legatees, that he will not
accept the succession, and that he renounces it. He might like-
wise make such a declaration to the person who has the right to
succeed in his place. And this renunciation ought to be made
either judicially, or otherwise by some act intimated to the party


towhom notice ought to be given, and executed honestly and
fairly.


iL


2737. In order to renounce, it is necessary that one should know
kis Right, and that the Succession be open. —~ As in order to act as


* L. 18, D. de acq. vel omitt. hoered.

* L.95, D. de acq. vel omit. hered. Seeing the renunciation of the succession may
have consequences which make it necessary that there should remain proofs of it, whether
ithe for the discharge of the heir or executor who renounces, or for the behoof of the
person who has right to succeed in his default, or for the interest of the creditors; the re-
lanciation cannot be well done but by some public instrument in writing, which may be

to all parties concerned.


156 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK I.


heir or executor it is necessary that the heir or executor should
know the death of the person to whom he is to succeed, and that
he should know likewise that he is called to the inheritance,‘ s0 it
is also necessary, in order to renounce the succession, that the heir
or executor be not ignorant of the said death, nor of his own right
to succeed. For in order to renounce a right it is necessary that
the person who renounces should have it in his power to acquire
it,{ and know of it.


IV.


2738. The Heir who has renounced cannot afterwards retract.—
Although the renunciation of the succession seems to have no
other effect but to free him who might be heir or executor from
that quality, without obliging him to any thing, yet it has this effect,
that he who has once renounced a succession cannot afterwards
claim it if the person who had right to succeed in this default has
taken his place. Thus the heir who has renounced has engaged
himself to the other who succeeds in his place, to let him enjoy
peaceably the inheritance, whereof he has relinquished to him all
the effects and the charges.‘


Vv


2739. One cannot renounce the Inheritance in Part.— As the heir
or executor cannot divide his acceptance of the inheritance, to take
one part of it, and leave the rest, as has been said in the fifth arti-
cle of the third section; so neither can he divide his renunciation,
by relinquishing one part of the inheritance, and keeping the re-
mainder. But he ought either to renounce the whole succession,
or to keep it entire£


© See the first article of the second section.

4 7. 18, D. de acquir. vel omitt. poss. ; — 1. 4, eod.

© L. 23, D. de acq. vel omitt. hered. This rule has no relation to the renunciations of
daughters, of which mention has been made in the preamble of the second section of Heirs
and Erecutors in general. For those renunciations concern only successions to come, aud
are founded on motives which render them lawful and honest, and consequently reasons-
ble; whereas it would be uncivil and unreasonable that an heir should renounce a succes-
sion, unless it were ander the circumstances mentioned in the article.

£ T.1, C.dedolo. If the heir who has renounced should afterwards repent of it, whilst
all things are yet entire, no other person having appeared to claim the inheritance, noth-
ing would hinder him from resuming his right.

& TL. 20, C de jure delib.


TIT. IV.] PARTITION AMONG COHEIRS. 157


TITLE IV.
OF PARTITIONS AMONG COHEIRS.


2740. Ir is an engagement which all persons are under who
have any thing in common among them, to come to a partition
when any one of them desires it. For they may, indeed, all of
them have the joint enjoyment of the thing which belongs to them
in common, if this undivided enjoyment thereof be agreeable to
them, and suit with their conveniency ; but if any one of them is
desirous to have his portion to himself, it would be contrary to
justice and to good manners to force him to have it always undi-
vided, since that would be a perpetual occasion of strife and con-
tention among them, as has been observed in another title.*

2741. As we have explained in the same place the mutual en-
gagements of those who have any thing in common together with-
ont a covenant, so we have there set down the rules which have
relation to their engagement of dividing the common thing, and
the said rules may be applied to partitions among coheirs. But
since we have not there explained this kind of partition in particu-
lar, nor even in general the nature of partition, which is of greater
extent among coheirs than among all other persons, we shall ex-
Plain in this title all that belongs to this matter, both what has not
been explained in that other title, and what is necessary to be ex-
plained here.

2742, If any reader shall find fault, that we have not inserted
under this title that rule of the Roman law which relates to parti-
tions which parents may make of their goods amongst their chil-
dren, he may see what is said on this subject in the preamble of
the first section of the title of Testaments.

2743. It is proper to acquaint the reader here, that although it
might be expected that we should explain under this title the mat-
tet of collation of goods which the coheirs are bound to bring into
the mass of the inheritance, in order to be comprised in the parti-
tion, yet we shall not treat of it here. For this matter takes in a
great many particulars which ought to be distinguished from the
Matter of partitions, and it shall be explained in a separate title by
itself, which shall be the fourth of the second book.


® See the eleventh article of the second section Of those who chance to havs, &e.
VOL. I. 14


158 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK I.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF PARTITION, AND IN WHAT MANNER IT IS MADE.


Arr. L

2744. Definition of Partition.— The partition of the goods of
the inheritance among coheirs is nothing else but the exercise of
the right, which they have all of them reciprocally, to take out of
the goods which belong to them in common each of them one
portion separated from the portions of the others, which is to be to
him in lieu of the undivided share which he had in the whole.
And it is the same thing in all other partitions of a thing which
two or more persons have in common. For those who have any
thing in common among them cannot be compelled to possess it
always jointly and in common. Thus, every one of the coheirs
may oblige the rest to come to a partition of the inheritance.»


IL


2745. Partition is as an Exchange.— It follows from this nature
of partition, that it is as it were an exchange, which the parties
who divide make among themselves; the one giving his right in
the thing which he relinquishes for the other’s right in that which
he takes to himself. Thus, for instance, when, in a partition among
two coheirs, the one takes a certain estate in land for his share, the
other a house, he who takes the land retains the right which he
himself had to the one half of it, and acquires the right which his
coheirs had to the other half; and he who takes the house retains
in the same manner the right which he himself had to the one half
of it, and acquires the other half which belonged to the other


TIL


2746. Or as a Sale.— The partition being considered under
another view may be compared to the contract of sale. For al-
though one of the coparceners does not buy any thing from the
other, yet they estimate among themselves that which they are to
divide, and every one of them takes a share of the goods in pro-


= L. 1, D. fam. ercise.;—I. 8, C. eod.

b 1.43, D. fam. ercisc. See the eleventh article of the second section Of those who
chance to have any Thing, &c.

© 1.77, § 18, D. de legat. 2; —L. 90, § 3, inf. D. fam. ercise.


TIT. IV. SEC. 1] PARTITION AMONG COHEIRS. 159


portion to the share which he had in the price which they set upon
all the goods of the inheritance.*


IV.


2747. All the Goods of the Inheritance are divided. — The par-
tition ought to take in all the goods without exception, movables
and immovables, rents, debts owing to the estate, and, in general,
all sorts of effects whatsoever that are in the succession, and which
ought to go to the heirs. We must likewise take in among the
goods that are to be divided, those which the heirs, or any one of
them, are bound to bring into the mass of the inheritance, pursu-
ant to the rules which shall be explained in the title of Collation of
Goods. But if, after the partition has been made, there should ap-
pear goods which had not been comprised therein, it would be
reformed, or a new partition would be made, either of the whole
estate, or only of those goods which were omitted.‘


V.


2748. And likewise all the Charges.— As the heirs divide all
the goods of the inheritance which they know of, so they ought


4 1.1, C. comm. utriusque judic. tam famil.g.c.d. Seemg the valuations which co-
heirs make among themselves of the goods which they divide are of no other use but to
facilitate the giving to every one of them so much of the goods as he ought to have for
his portion, this comparison of partition to the contract of sale is limited to the idea
Which is given of it in this article; and as it has not the other marks of this contract, so
it ought not to have the consequences thereof. Thus, the coheirs who divide the goods
of the inheritance are not bound to pay the fines of alienation, and the other dues which
might be demanded in a contract of sale, not even as to the moneys which one of the co-
heirs may be obliged to pay in to his coheir to make their shares equal, which is called
the balance of the partition. Which happens when it is not possible to divide all the
goods of the succession in such a manner as to make all the portions equal, as when
there are some goods that cannot be divided, and which exceed the value of one share;
or when it is altogether impossible to divide the goods into equal portions without oblig-
ing the one to pay in some money to the other for rendering the shares equal. For in
these cases there is this difference between the money given for balancing the shares, and
the price in a sale, that in the contract of sale the buyer had no right in the thing that is
told, and he purchases it entirely by a commerce, wherein he engages himself voluntarily.
Bat in a partition, he who pays in the money had a right in the whole thing which he
takes, and a right which came to him by a title independent of his will. Thus he does
hot buy any thing, but being engaged to take for his portion some of the goods which
are of greater value than what his share amounts to, he is obliged to make the condition
of his coheir equal to his own. So that this return of money being only an accessory
that is essential to the partition, it does not change the nature of it, but becomes a part
thereof, and does not give to the partition the characters of a contract of sale, which are
quite different.

* L. 2, D. famil. ercise. ; —1. 25, § 20, eod. f 7. 20, § 4, D. fam. ercisc.


160 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT Il. BOOK 1.


likewise to divide the debts owing by the deceased, and the other
charges. For there are no more goods than what remain after
all the charges are deducted.£


VIL


2749. Warranty for Evictions, and for the Charges. — If after the
partition there appear any new charges, whether ‘they be debts or
others, or if any of the lands divided be evicted, the heirs shall
warrant one another against such evictions, and shall do one an-
other justice reciprocally, either by a new partition or otherwise,
pursuant to the rules which shall be explained in the third sec-
tion.®


VIL


2750. Equality of the Condition of the Coparceners.— The goods
and the charges are divided among the coheirs according to the
portions which they have in the inheritance, so as that what every
one has for his portion be estimated on the same foot with what
the others have for theirs; and that they bear likewise their re-
spective proportions of the charges, making their condition always
as equal as is possible, both as to the advantages and disadvan-
tages in the goods and in the charges.


VIIL


2701. If the Equality cannot be exact, in what Manner tt is to be
supplied. — If the goods and charges which are to be divided are of
such a nature that it is not possible to give to all goods of the same
quality, and to divide the charges equally, and in such a man-
ner as that the condition of every one may be equal to that of the
others, this equality is made up by joining to the goods of the great-
est value the heaviest charges, or by indemnifying in some other
way those who should suffer any disadvantage, either by returns
of money from one share to another, or by other accommodations
which may as much as is possible render equal the condition of
the coheirs. Thus, for example, if in order to have the use of a
house, or other tenement, which falls to the lot of one, it should be
necessary to subject to some service another house or tenement
which is in the lot of another, this service ought to be established,


& L.1, D. de bonor. possess. ; —1. 39, § 1, D. de verb. signif.
b 7. 25, §4 20 et 21, D. fam. ercisc. See the third section.
' 2.19, inf. D. fam. erciscund.


TIT. IV. SEC. 1] PARTITION AMONG COBEIRS. 161


and the inconvenience thereof ought to be otherwise made amends
for, either by the valuation of the lands and tenements, or in some
other manner. And, in fine, the coparceners ought mutually to
bear with some inconvenience for the ease and conveniency of
one another, and always to prefer that which is most advantageous
for them all in general, to what might be for the interest of any
one of them in particular.!


IX.


2752. What the Deceased owed to the Heir is reckoned Part of
the Charges. — We must reckon among the charges of the inherit-
ance that which the deceased may have owed to one of the heirs.
For here the quality of debtor is not confounded with that of
creditor any farther than for the share which this heir ought to
bear of his own debt, and he will remain creditor to the other heirs
for all the overplus.”


X.


2153. The Goods which cannot be divided are to be sold by
Auction, -—- When there are in the inheritance such kinds of goods
as are not capable of being divided, such as an office, or a
house which cannot be divided, or other effects which none of the
heirs either can or is willing to take, whether it be because of the
price, or for other reasons, which may make it necessary to sell the
goods in order to divide the price of them, they are sold by auc-
tion, as has been said in another place ;* or if any one of the heirs
is willing to take the goeds that are to be sold, at the price which
they shall agree on among themeelves, he shal] have a less share
of the other goods, or shall refund to the others that which they
ought to have out of the goods which he keeps to himself°


AL


2754. The Auction may be made publicly.— Seeing this sale by
auction is to be for the common good of the coheirs, every one of
them may demand that it be public, may bid himself for the
thing exposed to sale, and insist that all persons be received to


A L. 22, § 4, D. fam. erciscund.; —1. 22,4 8, eod.;—1. 4, in f. D. comm. divid.;—L 21,


=I. 20, § 1, D. fam. erciscund.
* See the twelfth article of the second section Of those who chance, &.
* Bee the same article. Z. 55, D. fam. ercisc.


14°


162 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IT. BOOK I.


bid, in order to raise the price of that which none of the coparce-
ners either could or would take in his lot?


XIL


(2755. If the Thing ts adjudged to one of the Heirs as betng the
Eighest Bidder, the others cannot claim any Share of tt by offeriag
their Share of the Price. — If it is one of the heirs to whom the
thing that is sold by auction is adjudged, he shall remain sole and
unchangeable proprietor of it, and none of the other heirs shall
have right to claim any share in it by paying in his part of the
price, even although it were a thing that were capable of being
divided. For it is a voluntary and irrevocable alienation, and he
to whom the thing is adjudged may say that he did outbid others
in the price only, that he might have the whole to himself; and the
others cannot divide his title.1


XIIL


2756. Where the Deeds belonging to the Succession are to be
lodged.— As the partition of the goods and right of the succession
gives to every one of the heirs in particular that which falls to his
share, so likewise each of them ought to have only the deeds and
writings which relate to the goods and rights which he has in his
lot. And if there are any writings which are of common use to
several of the heirs, the principal heir keeps possession of the orig-
inals, which he is to exhibit whenever there is occasion, and in the
mean while he gives copies of them to the others; or if they do
not agree to dispose of them in this manner, the writings are de-
posited in the hands of a public notary, or they will be otherwise
disposed of, as the judge shall direct." And as for the dispositions
of the deceased, whether they be a testament, codicil, or others,
they remain in the hands of the notary before whom they were
sped, that he may give authentic copies of them to the heirs; or if
they happen to be among the papers of the testator, or in the cus-
tody of other persons, they are either disposed of according as the
heirs do agree among themselves, or if they cannot agree, the
Judge will give directions therein!


P LZ. 8, C. comm. divid. See the place quoted on the foregoing article.

9 This is a consequence of the sale by auction, which was only done in order to alien-
ate the thing which either could not be divided, or which the heirs were not willing to
divide, that they might share the price among them. V. J. 7, § 13, D. comm. divid.

' L. 7, D. fam. ercisc.

* L.. 4, § ult. D. fam. ercisc. See the sixteenth article of the second section Of those who


TIT. IV. SEC. 1.] PARTITION AMONG COHEIRS. 163


XIV. -

2757. Who is the Plaintiff in a Demand of Partition. — If, in
order to have a partition, the coheirs go to law with one another,
seeing they all demand that which falls to their share, and that
their engagements are reciprocal, they are therefore all of them in
the place of plaintiffs, in the same manner as in the other kinds of
partitions of things that are common. But although they are all
in effect plaintiffs in that respect, yet he is only considered as
plaintiff who first began the suit. For in judicial proceedings this
quality is not regulated by the nature of the rights which those
that go to law together have one against the other, but by the
first demand that brings the matter into judgment.‘ Thus, even
in causes where only one person is obliged towards the other, as a
debtor to his creditor, who has naturally on his side the right to
demand that which is due to him, it may happen that this debtor
becomes the plaintiff; as if he summon his creditor to deliver him
up a bond which he pretends to be null or discharged, or to apply
towards payment of the said debt a sum which he has already
paid. For these are in effect demands which he makes to his
creditor.


XV.


2758. A New Partition for an Heir who appears afterwards. —
If it should happen that, after the partition was made, there should
appear a new coheir or coexecutor, whose long absence had given
occasion to believe that he was dead, or whose right was un-
known, as if a second testament which was not known of had
called him with the others to the succession, this first partition
would be annulled, and it would be necessary to make a new par-
tition with him of all the goods that are still in being, and of the
value of those which have either been consumed or alienated, that
he may have his portion of the whole inheritance."


XVL


2159. Wrong done in a Partition. — When there is any consid-
erable wrong done in a partition, even although the coparceners


hence to have, &c. This article is conceived in such terms as to make it conformable to
the usage in France.

*E.2,$1, D. comm. divid.

* L.17, C. fem. ercisc


164 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK 1.


should all of them be of age, yet this damage may be repaired,
pursuant to the rule explained in another place.*


XVIL


2760. Three Ways of making a Partition. — Partitions may be
made three ways; either by the heirs themselves, if they know the
value of the things and can agree among themselves; or by arbi-
trators or skilful persons, whom they choose by mutual consent;
or judicially, if they cannot agree among themselves; in which
case the partition is made by skilful persons, who are named by
the judge, if the heirs themselves do not every one of them name
some persons on their part?


SECTION II.


OF THINGS WHICH ENTER OR DO NOT ENTER INTO THE PARTITION;
AND OF THE EXPENSES LAID OUT BY THE HEIRS OR EXECUTORS,
WHICH THEY MAY RECOVER.


2761. We shall not put down here among the goods which en-
ter into the partition, those which are liable to be brought into the
mass of the inheritance by way of collation, although they are to
be divided as well as the others, because the matter relating to
the collation of goods is explained in another place, as has been
mentioned at the end of the preamble of this title.


Art. L


2762. Three Sorts of Goods which a Person deceased may have
had. — We must distinguish among the goods which dying per-


* See the fourteenth article of the second section Of those who chance, &., and the re-
mark that is there made upon it See likewise the ninth article of the sixth section of
Covenants, and the fourth article of the third section of the Vices of Covenants, and the
third article of the third section of Rescisstons.

Y L. uk. D. fam. ercisc. <A partition may be made by mutual consent, whether it be
that the heirs do it themselves, or by arbitrators or bkilfal persona. And if they do not
agree among themselves, the partition is made by a decretal order of the judge, in which
case every one of the parties names skilful persons on his side, or if the parties refuse
to name, the judge names them. And this is a nomination which the judge makes by
virtue of his office; which does not hinder the parties from giving in their reasons of
recusation against the persons named by the judge, in order to have other skilfal persons
named who are not suspected. Seo the twenty-first title of the ordinance of the mouth of
April, 1667.


TIT. IV. SEC. Il.} © PARTITION AMONG COHEIRS. 165


sons leave behind them three different sorts which they may have
had. The first is of those goods wherein the right which the de-
ceased had to them ceased by his death, such as those of which he
had only the usufruct, or which were subject to a substitution, and
others of which mention has been made in the fifth article of the
first section of the first title. The second is of those goods which
the deceased may have given away in legacies, or otherwise, to
other persons than his heirs or executors. And it is this third sort
of goods which come into partition or distribution, whether the
deceased died testate or intestate.*


II.


2763. In what Case Goods bequeathed or substituted may enter
into the Partition. — Although the things bequeathed by a testator,
and the goods which he may have had that were subject to a sub-
stitution, or to a fiduciary bequest, are not comprised among the
goods of the succession, which are to be divided among the heirs ;
yet nevertheless, if the legacy was conditional, so that the legatee
was not to have the thing bequeathed but upon a condition, or in
a case which it was altogether uncertain whether it would happen
or not, or that the fiduciary bequest was only to take place in a
time which was not as yet come; in all these cases the heirs
Inight in the mean while divide those kinds of things, they taking
among themselves the necessary precautions for the events which
might oblige them to restore the goods, and giving to the lega-
tees, and to the persons who may have right to the substituted
goods, the security which shall be spoken of in its proper place.®


IIL


2764. The particular Legacies which are given to any of the
Heirs or Excecutors do not enter into the Partition. — We may
reckon among the things which do not enter into the partition
that which a testator gives as a particular legacy to some one of
his heirs or executors, over and above his equal share with the
others. For that heir or executor is to take the said thing before
the partition.°


* L. 2, D. fam. ercise.

* 1.12, §2, D. fam. ercisc.; —1. 96, § pen. D. de leg.1. Bee the seventh article of the
tenth section of Legacies, and the nineteenth article of the first section of Substitutions both
direct and fiduciary.

© L.17, § 2, D. de legat. 1.


166 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK lL


IV.
2765. The Goods which are to be restored are not divided.—
We must likewise exclude from the partition all those goods of
the succession that have been acquired by ways which oblige the


possessors to restore them; such as things that have been got by
stealth or robbery.*


V.


2766. Nor the Things which can only serve for some ill Use.—
We ought likewise to place in the same rank those kinds of things
which can be applied only to some ill use, such as books of magic,
and other things of the like nature, which ought to be suppressed.’


VI.


2767. The Revenues which every Heir has received come into
the Partition. — Besides the goods which are extant in the inherit-
ance at the time of the partition, or which ought to be brought
into it by way of collation, the mass of the inheritance ought to
be augmented with the fruits and revenues of the common goods
which every one of the heirs may have enjoyed by himself, for he
ought to be accountable for them, pursuant to the rule explained
in the third article of the twelfth section of Heirs and Executors
in general, and the said fruits are a part of the goods of the suc
cession which come into the partition.


VIL


2768. The Expenses latd out about the Fruits are to be deducted
out of them.— The expenses which the heirs or executors have


d 7.4, § 2, D. fam. evcisc. See the last article of the second section Of those who
chance, &.

° L. 4,§ 1, D. fam. ercisc. See the seventeenth article of the second section Of those
who chance to have, &.

f ZT. 20, § 8, D. de hared. pet.; —1. 2, in f. C. de pet. hered. See the third article of the
twelfth section of Heirs and Executors in general, and the texts which are there cited.
It is in the sense explained in this article that we ought to understand what is said in
these texts, that the fruits angment the inheritance. But if the goods of a succession were
to be estimated, in order to adjust, for example, the Falcidian portion or the legitime, we
ought not in that case to comprise in the said estimate the fruits and other revenues which
the heirs who were in possession of the inheritance may have enjoyed. For the said
fruits would not increase the mass of the goods of the deceased ; but they would be only
an accessory, Which would belong to every one of the heirs according to his share in
the inheritance. See the seventh article of the first section of the Falcidian Portion, and
the eleventh article of the third section of the Legitime.


TIT. IV. SEC. 11.] PARTITION AMONG COHEIRS. 167


been at, either in cultivating the lands, or in gathering and preserv-
ing the fruits, are to be deducted out of the fruits which they are
bound to account for to one another. So that there enters into the
partition only so much as remains of the clear value of the fruits,
after the expenses are deducted.£


VUE


2769. Although there be no Fruits, yet the Heir recovers the
Charges he has been at in cultivating the Lands.— Although the
expenses laid out by one of the heirs or executors, in order to reap
the fruits, such as those for cultivating the lands, and others of the
like nature, happen to be ineffectual, either when there is no crop
at all, or when the crop is less than the expenses; yet the heir or
executor who had laid them out will nevertheless recover them,
for they were necessary for the common interest.>


IX.


2770. The Heirs recover the Necessary and Useful Expenses, al-.
though the Event makes them Unprofitable.— It would be the same
thing if an heir or executor had been at any expense to preserve
any of the goods belonging to the inheritance, even although the
thing on which the expense was laid out should happen to perish,
as if a house which he had caused to be propped up in order to
prevent its fall was afterwards consumed by fire. For there is this
difference between the condition of this heir or executor, as of
every honest and fair possessor, and that of an unjust possessor,
that whereas the unjust possessor cannot recover the necessary or
profitable expenses which he has laid out on the thing which he
possessed unjustly, unless the thing itself is still in being, and is
improved by the said expenses, and that, on the contrary, he loses
his expenses if the thing has perished, or is noways the better for
what has been laid out upon it; the heir or executor, and every
other honest and fair possessor, recovers these sorts of expenses,
although the thing be totally destroyed!


X.
2771. Three Kinds of Expenses. — Among the expenses which
an heir or executor may have laid out on the goods belonging to


GL. 36,4 wlt. D. fam. ercisc.
» 1. 37, D. de hosred. pet. See the following article.
* L. 38, D. de haved. pet. ; —1. 51, D. fam. ercisc.


168 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1%. BOOK L


the inheritance, we must distinguish three sorts of them. Those
which are necessary; those which, although not necessary, are
nevertheless useful; and those which have been laid out only for
pleasure, without any necessity, and without any profit! And ac-
cording to these differences, the heir or executor recovers or does
not recover his expenses, by the rules which follow.


XL


2772. Necessary Expenses. — The necessary expenses are those
which one is obliged to lay out in preserving the goods, and for
preventing their perishing, or being damaged; such as the or-
dinary repairs in buildings, those which are made to prevent their
fall, that which is laid out in planting new trees in the room of
others that are dead, or blown down, and other such like expenses,
the want of which would cause some damage to the inheritance;
which is the reason why the heirs who have been at any expenses
of this kind ought to recover them.”


XII.


2773. Useful Expenses. — The useful expenses are those which,
although they are laid out without necessity, yet augment the
estate; such as the planting of an orchard, or some additional
building to a house, in order to raise the rent of it. And these
sorts of expenses ought to be repaid to the heirs or executors who
have laid them out.®


XIII.


2774. Expenses laid out for Pleaswre.— The expenses which, be-
ing neither necessary nor useful, are laid out only for pleasure,
such as a superfluous building, water-works, painting, carving, and
others of the like nature, which an heir had laid out, knowing that
he had coheirs, are not recoverable, and he who has laid them out
ought to blame himself for it° But this justice may be done him,


1 Z. 1, D. de impens. in res dot. fact. Although this law has relation to another matter,
yet it may be applied here, as likewise those which are cited on the following articles.
See, touching the several sorts of expenses, the eleventh article and the other following
articles of the third section of Dowries, and the sixteenth and following articles of the
tenth section of the Contract of Sale.

‘m ZT. 1, §1, D. deimpens. in res dot. fact.; —d. 1.1, §3;— 1. 79, D. de verb. signif. ; —v.
l. 39, D. de heered. petit.

» 1.5, 4 ult. el. 6, D. de tmpens. tn res dot. fact.; —l. 7, in f. eod.; —1. 79, § 1, D. de
verd. signif. ; —d. § in fin.

° L.7, D. de impens. in res dot. fact.;— 1. 79, § 2, D. de verb. signif. Ex duobus fratri-


TIT. IV. SEO. I.] PARTITION AMONG COHEIRS. 169


to leave, if it is possible, in his lot the land or tenement on which
the said expenses have been laid out, without estimating it at a
higher rate upon that account, or even to reimburse the said heir
of so much as the land or tenement on which the said repairs have
been made is really the better for them; for in that case these
expenses would be useful. But if the said heir had laid out these
kinds of expenses, being ignorant that he had any coheirs, and
looking upon himself to be the sole owner, it would be but just
and equitable that he should suffer no manner of prejudice from
his honest and fair dealing, and that some regard should be had
thereto in the partition, according as the circumstances might re-
quire.?


XIV.


2775. Expenses for Pleasure which are Useful. — We must not
reckon in the number of expenses made for bare pleasure those
which are laid out in embellishing a land or tenement, or other
thing which is the more salable by reason of the said ornaments.t


- XV.


2776. Damages against the Heir who delays the Partition. — If
one of the heirs should refuse to divide the goods of the succes-
sion, and to bring into it things which are liable to perish, such
as cattle that are in his possession, and it should happen during
his delay that these sorts of things, which might have been sold,
did really perish, he would be liable for them, because this loss
might be imputed to him. Which is to be understood only of the
cases where, there being no dispute among the heirs as to the right
of any of them to the succession, he who puts off the partition
could have no reasonable excuse for hisdelay. But if an heir who
is in possession of the inheritance fairly and honestly, believing


bas uno quidem sus statis, alfo vero minore annis, cam haberent communia predia rus-
tica, major frater in salta communi habenti habitationes paternas, ampla edificia sdifi-
caverat, cumque eundem saltum cum fratre divideret, sumptus sibi, quasi re meliore ab
eo facta, desiderabat, fratre minore jam legitima etatis constituto. Herennius Modesti-
Bas respondit, ob sumptus nulla re urgente, sed voluptatis causa factos, eam de quo que-
ritur, actionem non habere. L. 27, D. de negot. gest. Although this brother mentioned
m™ the text could not perhaps claim in the rigor of the law to be reimbursed of these kinds
of expenses, yet equity would seem to require that some amends should be made him
some other way, as is explained in the article.

P L.39,§ 1, D, de harred. petit.

4 L. 10, D. de exp. in res dot. fact.

VOL. I. 15


170 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pag 11. BOOK L


himself to be sole heir, should contest the right of one who, pre-
tending likewise to be heir, should demand of him the goods of
the succession ; these sorts of losses which should happen during
their controversy ought not to be imputed to him. For it would
be as an unforeseen accident. And even although he had foreseen
it, yet the fear of this event would not oblige him to abandon the
right which he pretended to have singly to the goods of the in-
heritance*


SECTION III.


OF WARRANTIES BETWEEN COHEIRS, AND OF THE OTHEE CONSE-
QUENCES OF THE PARTITION.


2777. Ir is not necessary to repeat bere what is meant by war-
ranty, nor the general rules relating to this matter, which have been
explained in the title of the Contract of Sale ;* and in this section
we shall treat only of the rules which are peculiar to the warranty
between coheirs.


Arr. L


2778. Warranty is reciprocal among the Cohetrs. — As coheirs
have their portions of the inheritance by the same title and the
same right which is common to them, so their condition ought to
be the same; and they ought all of them to have the same securi-
ty for what is given them as their shares. Thus, the partition
of the inheritance implies the condition, that the portions of the co-
heirs shall remain bound reciprocally for the warranty of one an-
other,* by the rules which follow.


IL


2779. Two Different Effects of this Warranty. — We must dis-
tinguish two different effects of the warranty between coheirs, ac-
cording to two different kinds of goods that may be in the succes-
sion. One is of those things which are really in being, movables
or immovables, and which may be seen and touched, such as a


® L.. 40, D. de hared.

* See the third article of the second section of the Contract of Sale, and the tenth sec-
tion of the same title.

* LZ. 25, § 21, D. fam. ercisc.


TIT IV. SEC. I11.] PARTITION AMONG COHEIRS. 171


horse, a suit of hangings, jewels, and other movables; a house, a
vineyard, a field, and other immovables. The other is of rights,
such as a bond, a rent, a sentence or judgment, a transaction, or
other title which may create a debt, or some other right.” In the
partition of things which are really in being, and may be seen and
felt, the warranty is, not that those things do really exist and are
in being, for that every one sees. But since it is possible that
they may be no part of the inheritance, if it should happen that
any one should claim a right of property in them, the heirs ought
to warrant one another that the said goods are really and truly a
part of the succession.° And in the partition of the debts due to
the succession, and of the other rights, since one may be ignorant
whether there be any such debts or rights at all belonging to the
estate, or not, whether a rent be still due, or whether it has been
redeemed, if an obligation is annulled by payment, or by some other
cause; the warranty for debts and rights implies that they not
only are a part of the inheritance, but that they actually are such
as they appear, that they are really and truly due, and that they
do belong to the heir to whose lot they fall;4 unless it be that this
warranty has been otherwise regulated among the heirs, as shall
be said in the fourth article.


IIL


2780. Warranty for the Debts due from the Succession, and the
other Charges. — Besides this warranty which the heirs owe to one
another with respect to what enters into the partition, that what
every one has in his lot is a part of the inheritance, and that it be-
longs to no other person, they ought likewise to warrant one an-
other against all suits at the instance of the creditors to the suc-
cession, or of others who shall pretend to have mortgages, or other
securities, on that which has fallen to the lot of one of the heirs.


IV.


2781. The Heirs may regulate differently the Warranties. — The
warranties explained in the two preceding articles are natural and
just. And although no mention had been made of them in the


» Tas de reb. corp. et incorp.
— 25, § 21, D. fam. ercisc. See the second and third articles of the first section.
‘ L. 4, D. de heered. vel act. vend. ;—1. 74, § ult. D. de eviction. Although these texts
respect other matters, yet they may be applied here.
* See the following article.


172 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART It. BOOX 1.


partition, yet they would be tacitly implied, and the heirs would
be reciprocally obliged to them. But if they agree either to add to
these warranties, or to take any thing from them, their agreement
will be to them instead of a law. Thus, for the debts owing to
the succession, they may agree that they shall warrant one an-
other, not only that they are due, but likewise that the debtors are
solvent, and will pay the debts, or that the heirs will make them
good to one another, either after a bare refusal of payment from
the debtor, or after the using of such diligence for recovery of them
as they shall agree on. And they may, on the contrary, divide the
said debts without any warranty on the one part or the other, not
even as to those which may happen to have been acquitted, or of
which perhaps there remains nothing due for some other reason.
Which may be equitable upon several considerations, as, among
others, if they were heirs to a merchant who sold by retail, and
who had left behind him a great many small debts, the warranting
of which would only give occasion to a great many lawsuits.‘


V.


2782. The Heirs warrant one another for their respective Propor-
tions of the Charges. — If in the partition of a succession, which is
burdened with debts or other charges, the heirs have engaged to
one another to acquit each of them some part of the said debts
and charges, they shall reciprocally warrant one another against
them, and every one shall acquit the charges which he has taken
upon himself. And if they have made no agreement touching
this matter, they must acquit the charges in proportion to the
shares which they have in the inheritance, and every one of them
shall warrant the others for his portion of the charges.£


VL


2783. And for those which appear only after the Partition. — If
after the partition there should appear any new debts, or new
charges, which were not known of before, as if some of the lands
should appear to be burdened with a ground-rent, or with other
charges besides the usual duties of quitrents, and others of the
like nature, or that some part of the goods should appear to be
subject to a substitution, these new charges, whatever kind they


€ BE. 14, C. fam. ereise. See the twenty-fourth and following articles of the tenth sec-
Sale.


TIT. IV. SEC, 111.] PARTITION AMONG COHEIRS. 178


were of, would regard all the heirs, and they would reciprocally
warrant one another against them.®


VIL


2784. The Casualties after the Partition regard those to whom
they happen.— The losses which may happen by casualties after
the partition regard him to whose lot the thing has fallen which
perishes, or is damaged. As if it was grain, liquors, beasts, or
other things subject to these kinds of losses, or a land or tenement
situated on the bank of a river, which has been carried away by a
flood, or a house burnt down by fire. For in all these cases, and
even those that are the least foreseen, the thing not being any
more in common, he whom the partition has made master of it
suffers the loss thereof:


VIII.


2785. The Heir is bound for a Loss which has happened in Con-
sequence of an Act which he may be blamed for. — If, by a conse-
quence which may be imputed to the act of one of the heirs,
there happens some loss or damage to any of the goods of the in-
heritance, he shall be liable for it. Thus, for example, if an heir
having committed some crime or offence, and his goods being
seized, some of the goods belonging to the inheritance had been
seized among them, and this seizure had been attended with
the loss of some profit or income which might have been drawn
from the said goods, or the said goods had been damaged by
the seizure, or it had occasioned other damages, he whose crime
or offence had had this consequence would bear singly the loss
which his own act had occasioned, and he would warrant his
coheirs against it And it would be the same thing, although
this heir had committed no offence, if the damage proceeded from
his act. As if a creditor to the inheritance, whom he was obliged
to pay off, had caused other goods of the succession to be seized
than those which had fallen to his lot. For in this case he would
be accountable for the damages that his coheirs might suffer
thereby.


* L. 9, C. de hoered. pet. ' 1. 6, C. de pignor, act.
| T, 90, D. comm. divid. We have given in this article another example than that men-
tioned in the law which is here quoted, to make the rule conformable to the usage in
France, by which contumacy is not punished with that rigor which sometimes may be
wyust. But this matter does not belong to this place.
15*


174 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART IT. BOOK 1.


IX.

2786. The Hetr who disposes of any Thing privately bears clone
the Losses which attend tt.— If any one of the heirs disposes by
himself of any of the goods belonging to the inheritance, with de-
sign to make an advantage thereby to himself, without the privity
of his coheirs, as if he sells a thing, lets it out to hire, or farms it
out, he shall not only be bound to pay in to his coheirs the profit
which he shall have made by it; but if his act is attended with any
loss, as if the person to whom this heir has sold or let the thing
proves insolvent, he alone shall bear the loss which happens, instead
of the profit which he designed to have made by it for himself.
And he shall be answerable to his coheirs both for the rents of the
lands and tenements which he has let or farmed out, and for the
value of the goods which 26 has sold.™


= ZT. 6, § 2, D. comm. divid. ;—v. 1. 5, C. de adif: priv. What is said in this text of 2
partner may be applied to a coheir.


BOOK II.


OF LEGAL SUCCESSIONS, OR SUCCESSION TO
INTESTATES.


2787. Havine explained in the first book all that belongs in
common both to legal successions, or subcession to intestates, and
to testamentary successions, we must now proceed to the matters
which are peculiar to these two kinds of successions, and explain
the detail of each of them in their order. As to which it is neces-
sary to observe, that in the books of the Roman law the testamen-
tary successions have the first place ;* but we have thought it more
natural to begin with the succession of intestates; and that chiefly
for two reasons. The first is, because, as has been remarked in
another place,® the successions to intestates are more natural than
the testamentary successions, and of a much more universal and
more necessary use, seeing we might do very well without the
testamentary successions, but the legal successions, or successions
to intestates, are absolutely necessary. And the customs of
France own none else for heirs but those of the blood and family
of the deceased. So that it may be said that the testamentary
successions are, as it were, exceptions to the natural law of legal
successions, and that the liberty of disposing of one’s estate by
testament, in favor of other persons than the heirs of blood, and
especially the power of making other heirs, is as it were a dispen-
sation from the common and universal rule, which calls the heirs
of blood to the successions. Thus, as it is necessary to know the
common order itself, before we inquire into the changes which
have been made in it, so the matters relating to the succession
of intestates ought to take precedence. And before we treat, for


* L.1, D. si tab. test. ull. ext.
* See the preface to this second part, no. 8.


176 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IL


instance, of the liberty which a testator has to dispose of his
goods by testament to the prejudice of his children, it is necessary
to know that the children ought naturally to succeed to their
father.

2788. The second consideration which has induced us to begin
with the legal successions is, that the matters belonging to these
successions are much shorter, and much easier, than the matters
concerning testaments, which contain a vast number of particu-
lars, full of different sorts of difficulties ; and that it is the method
in all arts and sciences to begin, as much as is possible, with that
which is easiest, and which leads to the knowledge of what is
most difficult. Thus, we had reason to believe that it would be
on one side more natural to give to the legal successions the first
rank, in which they are placed by the order of the society of man-
kind, which regulates the use of: successions; and that on the
other side it would be more methodical, in explaining these two
matters which ought to be distinguished, to observe the order and
method of sciences, which requires that that which is most simple,
most easy, and most natural, should precede that which is more
intricate, more difficult, and less natural. And although it is true,
that, when the question is to judge, in any particular case, who it
is that is to succeed, it is necessary to begin by inquiring whether
there is any testament that may have its effect, because, if there is
any such, the testamentary heir excludes the next of kin;° yet it
does not follow from this bare consideration, which relates only to
the question who shall succeed, that in general the right of suc-
cession by testament is a matter whereof the rules ought to pre-
cede those which belong to the succession of intestates. For the
order of the questions that occur in any cause, and the order of
the rules by which they are to be decided, have nothing belonging
to them in common.

2789. It is not necessary to point out here the particular order
of the several matters which compose this second book, Of Legal
Successions, or Succession to Intestates ; since that appears suffi-
ciently by the titles of the said matters. Neither shall we take up
any time here to explain the principles of natural equity, which
transmit the successions to the heirs of blood. The reader may
see on this subject what has been said concerning it in another
place.*


° L. 8, C. comm. de succes. d See the preface to this second part, no. 4.


TIT. I. SEC, 1.] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 17


2790. There are three orders or persons who succeed to intes-
tates: that of children and other descendants; that of fathers
and mothers and other ascendants; and that of brothers and sis-
ters and other collateral relations. And these three orders shall
be the subject-matter of the first three titles of this book. We
may add, as a fourth order of heirs to intestates, that which in
default of relations calls the husband to the succession of his wife,
and the wife to the succession of her husband.° But this kind of
succession being reduced to one single rule, it is not necessary to
distinguish it under a separate title ; and we shall add it in a sec-
tion at the end of the third title.


TITLE I.


IN WHAT MANNER CHILDREN AND OTHER DESCENDANTS
SUCCEED.


SECTION I.
WHO ARE THE CHILDREN AND DESCENDANTS.


ArtTicze I.


2791. Who are the Ohildren.— By children are meant properly
those who are in the first degree, that is to say, the sons or the
danghters who are born immediately of the person to whom they
are to succeed. And the name of children 1s likewise given in a
second sense to all the descendants which are spoken of in the fol-
lowing article. And when we would distinguish these from the


children of the first degree, we give them the name of grand-
children.*


IL.


2792. Who are the Descendants. — The descendants are those
Who are born of the son or daughter: whether they be in the seo-
ond degree of grandson, granddaughter, or in the third degree, or


«Bee the preface to the second pert, no. 11.
L. 220, D. de verb. signif. ;—v. § wit. Inst.‘qui test. tut. dar. poss.


178 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK IL


other more remote degree. For whatever degree they are in, at
ever so great a distance, they are called descendants, or grand-
children ; and they have likewise the general name of children of
those of whom they are descended.®


TIL


2793. All Descendants are included under the name of Children.
— Under the name of children and descendants are comprehended
sons and daughters, grandsons and granddaughters, without dis
tinction either of sex or degree, and whether they be descended of
sons or of daughters, and whether they be under the power and
authority of their father or not.


IV.


2794. Bastards are not comprised under the name of Children.
— By the name of children are understood only those who are law-
fully begotten; and this name is not given to bastards, but when
it is accompanied with some addition, such as that of natural
children, or some other which may distinguish their condition
from that of legitimate children. And when the question is con-
cerning the succession of an intestate, as bastards have no share in —
it, so they are not comprised under the name of children.!


V.


2795. Children born in the Seventh or Eleventh Month.— We —
must reckon in the number of children that are not legitimate, —
those who are born within so short a time after the marriage of ©
their mother, that the husband has just reason to say that he 1s
not their father ;* and likewise those who are born so long a time
after the death of the husband, that it is reasonable to judge that —
they have been conceived only after his death.‘


REMARES ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2796. We have not set down in this article the precise time
mentioned in the texts here quoted, because the shortest time
which is marked for a forward birth, and the longest time for a
backward birth, may be joined with such circumstances as to


> ZL. 104, D. de verb. signif. ¢ ZL. 56, D. de verb. signif.
@ See the eighth article of the second section of Heirs and E-xrecutors in general.
© L. 3, § ult. D. de suis ef legit. harred. ; —l. 12, D. de statu hom.

© L. 3, § penult. D. de suis ot legit. heved.;—v. Nov. 39, c. 2.


TIT. I. SEC. 1] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 179


make us doubt of the certainty of the rule concerning the time
necessary for a lawful birth. Neither does there appear any
natural principles by which it may be demonstrated that a child,
, in order to its being born at the due time, must needs have been
conceived a hundred fourscore and two days before its birth, and
that a child born within a shorter time after the marriage cannot
be legitimate. Neither do we know of any natural principles
which demonstrate that a birth cannot be delayed beyond the
tenth month. For as to the forward birth, although we had the
experience of children certainly conceived at a certain day, born
afterwards on the hundredth fourscore and second day, and which
had lived a long time, and other proofs of children born one or
two days sooner, which were not able to live; yet we could not
infer from thence that the space of a hundred fourscore and two
days is so precisely necessary, that it is absolutely impossible for a
child to live, if it wants one day of the said time. And if it
should happen, that a child which had been certainly conceived
about five months only before its birth should nevertheless live
several years, which very credible persons affirm that they have
seen, this event would not be looked upon as an effect impossible
to nature, but as being natural, although very singular. And as
to the birth in the eleventh month after the husband’s death, it is
known that there are examples, both ancient and modern, of chil-
dren who have been adjudged to be legitimate, although born a
long time after ten months from the death of their father. So that
itdoes not seem possible to regulate the just time of a woman’s
going with child, in order to determine that a child is illegitimate,
ifit is born a few days sooner, or a few days later. And it is not
reasonable that a question of this importance should depend on a
rile which undertakes to fix the time of the operations of nature,
and especially of those which the combination of different causes
does diversify, and where it does not seem possible to point out
the precise bounds of what nature is able, or not able, to do. But
it seems reasonable that, in the particular cases where the question
is whether a child be legitimate or not, the doubt arising from
this, that the child’s birth is either too forward or too backward,
Wwe should join to the common rules which result from the texts
quoted on this article, as to what concerns the time of a woman’s
going with child, the consideration of the particular circumstan-
ces, in order to decide wisely and prudently a question of so great
consequence, in which the honor of a mother, the state of a child,


180 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Ti. BOOK Il.


and the quiet of the families, which have an interest both in the
one and the other, are all equally concerned.°


VI


2797. Of Posthumous Children.— The children who are not as
yet born when their fathers die, whom we call posthumous chil- |
dren, and likewise those who are taken out of their mothers —
womb, she being dead before she was brought to bed, are reck- |
oned in the number of children who succeed. And although they —
are not as yet born, when the successions which they are to inhert —
fall to them, by the death of their father, mother, or others their
relations; yet they belong to them upon condition that they shall —
be born alive, and they are considered as heirs already before their —
birth.¢ |


VIL |
2798. Of Stillborn Children. — Stillborn children are not counted |
in the number of children who succeed. And although they were
alive in their mothers womb at the time that the successions
which concerned them fell, yet they have no share in them. For
they are considered in the same manner as if they never had been
born.®


VIIL


2799. Of Monsters. — We ought likewise much less to place in
the number of children those lumps of flesh, or monsters, which
are born without human shape.'


TX.


2800. The Child born during the Marriage is presumed to be the
Child of the Husband.— The child which is born of a married
woman is presumed to be the husband’s: and it is held for legiti-
mate, unless the contrary is proved!


* See the fifth article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general, and the
remark which is there made on it.

& L.1, D. de ventre in poss. mitt. Although these posthumous children are not as yet
born when the succession falls to them, yet it belongs to them, and it is kept for them till
their birth. See the seventh article of the following section, and the fourteenth article of
the first section of Curators.

6 See the fourth article of the second section of Heirs and Executers in general, and the
fourth and fifth articles of the first section of Persons.

' See the fourth article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general, and the
fourteenth article of the first section of Persons.

' Pater is est quem nuptise demonstrant. L. 5, D. de in jus vocand.


TIT. J. SEC. 11.] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 181


SECTION II.
THE ORDER OF THE SUCCESSION OF CHILDREN AND DESCENDANTS.


2801. Ir is not necessary to give an account here of the several
dispositions of the Roman law touching the succession of children,
in the number of whom they reckoned those who had this name
given them by adoption, nor of the differences which they made
between the children that were emancipated, and those who re-
mained under the father’s power and authority; between the
grandchildren by sons, and those by daughters; between the rela-
tion by the male sex, which they called agnation, and the relation
by the female sex, which they called cognation. These differences,
as to what concerns successions, had given occasion for several
mules; so that, by the ancient law, the children who were emanci-
pated were excluded by their brothers who remained in the family
under their father’s power; the children of daughters were excluded
from the inheritance of their grandfather by the mother’s side, by
the sons and their children, and even by the collateral relations,
who were of the number of the agnates. But in progress of time
these differences were very much moderated ;* and at last the Em-
peror Justinian quite abolished these distinctions, and called indif-
ferently to the successions the children who were emancipated, as
well as those who remained under their father’s power, and with-
out making any difference of sex or parentage by agnation or cog-
Ration.»


Art. I.


2802. All the Children succeed by Equal Portions. — If the per-
son who dies, whether it be man or woman, leaves children behind,
they shall succeed to the deceased by equal portions, without dis-
tinction of sex, and without any difference between those who are
emancipated and those who have remained under their father’s
power; and if there is only one child, son or daughter, such child
shall have the whole.*


"V.L1,4§2 64, D. de suis et legit.;—l. 9, C. eod.; —U. 12, eod.;—I. 14, C. de legit.
-i~~ tit. Enet. de heered. qua ab int., § 14, of seq., of tit. de senat. Tertul. a de senat.


» Nov. 118, c. I, c. 4.
*L.1,§ 5, D. si tab. test. nul. ext. unde lib.; — Nov. 118,c.1. The cases in which there
VOL. Il.


184 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 11. BOOK IL


leave always three shares for the children which may be born of a
widow who is left big with child. And although it happens some-
times that there are two children at a birth, yet this would -not be
a sufficient reason for laying aside always two shares, when an
inheritance is to be divided during the time that a widow is with
child ; for it would give too frequent occasion to make a new pat-
tition. And the inconvenience is much less in making a new
partition when there happen two children at a birth, than in mak-
ing it every time that there is only one. But it is more convenient
and more natural for the children concerned in the partition to de-
fer it till the widow of the deceased is brought to bed, that they
may see whether there is any live child born or not, whether there
are two, or only one. And if there should be only daughters
alive, in a case where the eldest son was to have something by
way of distinction over and above his equal share with the rest, it
would be necessary likewise to defer the partition upon this ac
count, that they might know whether it is a son or a daughter
that is born. It is upon these considerations that we have not
followed the rule explained in this text, and that we have made it
conformable to equity and to our usage.


VIL


2809. Curator to the Child that is in the Mother’s Womb. — In
the case of a widow’s being big with child, if it is necessary to do
any thing for the security of the rights of the child that is to be
born, whether it be in the case of a partition, if it is necessary that
one should be made, or for other causes, such as that of exercising
the rights and managing the goods which may belong to him, a
curator is named for these functions, as has been said in its proper
place.t


VOL


2810. Provision for the Widow Big with Child. — If, in the case
of the foregoing article, the widow should demand a provision out
of the goods of the inheritance for her subsistence and mainte-
nance during her being with child, on the child’s account, this would
be granted her in proportion to the quality of the persons, and the
goods of the deceased, although she should have.an estate of her


& ZL. 1,§ 17, D. de vent. in poss. mitt. a cur.ei. See the fourteenth article of the first
-section of Curators.


TIT. I. BEO. I1.] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 185


own. For this provision being for a child that is to be born, and
which is to have its share in the inheritance, both the public inter-
est, humanity, and religion do all of them require that even more
care should be taken for it than for the children that are already
porn. And this provision would be taken out of the ready money
belonging to the inheritance, if there is any, or out of the other
effects which may be most easily and most readily converted into
money." But if it should appear that the widow, in order to get
this provision, had feigned herself to be big with child, she would
be obliged to restore to the heirs whatever she had received upon
that account!


IX.


2811. Provision for the Child whose State is called in Question.
— If in the same case there should be other children of a former
marriage, or heirs of blood in default of children, who should pre-
tend that the child which the widow is big with, or which is al-
ready born, is not legitimate, so that it should be necessary to
have a judicial determination touching the state of this child that
is born or to be born;! during the time that this question remains
undecided, the child’s mother or its curator might demand a provis-
ion out of the goods of the succession for its alimony. And if the
lawsuit should last a long time, the allowance would be increased
according to the expense, including likewise therein that which is
laid ont on his studies, and other necessary expenses, according to
the quality of the persons and the greatness of the estate. For in
such a controversy we ought to presume during the time that it is


* I. 1, $$ 19 ef 20, D. de vent. in poss. mitt. et curat. efus ;—l. 5, eod. ; —I. 1, § 15, end.
' L. 1, § ult. D. de ventre in poss. mitt.
Si cui controversia fiet an inter liberos sit, et impubes sit causa cognita perinde pos-
sessio datur, ac si nulla de ea re controversia esset. L. 1, D. de Carbon. edicto.
_ We have left out the remaining part of this law, which directs that the jadgment touch-
ing the state of this child should be deferred until it has attained the age of puberty, un-
less, as it is said in the third law, ¢ 5, of the same title, it should appear to be for the
child's advantage not to have the judgment delayed; as if there should be danger of los-
ing the proofs which might be of service to him. But if the other children, or the heirs
vho should controvert the state of this child, should refuse to agree to such a delay, and
to leave the child in possession in the mean while, the usage in France would not approve
of such delay. And it would be just, for the common interest both of this child and of
1 adversaries, to have the question touching the state of the child decided with its tutor
curator. And if the cause should be determined against him, the judgment which
thould be given would be only as it were provisional, and would not hinder him from
‘plying afterwards to have it reversed, as well as every minor who hes not been sufii-
cently defended.
16°


186 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK II.


undecided, both in favor of the mother that she hath not been un-
faithful to her husband, and in favor of the child that it is legiti-
mate; and it would be of a much worse consequence to have de-
prived the child of its nourishment and education, if it should ap-
pear to be legitimate, than to have diminished the inheritance in
so much as had been applied to that use, although it should be
afterwards adjudged that the child is not legitimate™ Thus, this
allowance is not refused, although the state of the child may ap-
pear doubtful, which it ought to be if it were evident that the
child had no manner of right."


X.


2812. The Descendants exclude the Ascendants from Successions.
—-If the deceased has left behind him children, or only grand-
children, and if his father or mother or other ascendants have sur-
vived him, his children or grandchildren, of both sexes, in what de-
gree soever they are, will exclude his father and mother, and they
will likewise exclude from the succession all other ascendants, and
much more all collaterals. For it is the natural order, that estates
should go from fathers to their children.°


XI.


2813. Of the Case where the Father and Son die at the same Time. -
— Seeing the son does not succeed to his father but when he sur-
vives him, and since it may happen that they may both die to-
gether, so that it cannot be known which of them died first, it is
necessary in this case to regulate who shall succeed to the estate
both of the one and the other. Thus, for instance, if it should
happen that a father and his son had perished together in a battle
or in a shipwreck, and it were impossible to know which of them
had survived and succeeded, whether the son had survived the father
or the father the son, that the estate of him who died first might
go to the heirs of the other, it would be presumed that the son had
survived and succeeded to the father. And it would be the same
thing if it were the mother and the son. For this being the natu-
ral order, it is supposed that the event has been conformable to it;
and this presumption may be founded on this, that it is natural to


m J. 5, § 8, D. de Carton. ed. ;— 1. 6, § 5, eod.

® L.8,§ 4,e0d. Although this last text does not relate to the provision for alimony,
but to the inheritance itself, yet it may be applied to the one as well as to the other.

° D.11, C. de suss et legit. lib. ; — Nov. 118, c. 1.


TIT. 1. SEC. I1.] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 187


think that, by reason of the difference of age, the son, being the -
more robust, has resisted death the longest.”


XIL


2814. Of the Case where the Mother and the Child on the Breast
die together. — Although in the case of the preceding article it is
presumed that the father died first, yet if for another case we
should suppose that it were a sucking child who died with its
mother, whether it were in a shipwreck, by fire, or some other ac-
cident, it would be presumed, because of the weakness of the child,
that the mother had lived longest. And the same thing would be
presumed in every child that has not as yet attained the age of
puberty, whether it be that the case had happened to the son and
the mother or to the son and the father.4


REMARKS ON THE Two Precepine ARTICLES.


2815. It is necessary to remark on this and the foregoing article,
that, these rules appearing to be founded on the presumptions of
what naturally happens, it would seem that they ought to be
fixed, and always the same in all sorts of cases without distinc-
tion, That is to say, that whatever the consequence might be,
elther for or against those who have any interest whether the fa-
ther or son died first, and without any regard to the consideration
which the interest of one of the parties might deserve above that
of the other, we ought always to judge in the same manner.
Nevertheless, we see in some laws that, in these sorts of cases
Where it is not known which of the two died first, the presumptions
are different, according to the consideration of the persons con-
cerned. Thus, for example, in the case mentioned in the first of
the texts cited on the preceding article, where the question was,
whether the relations of the father ought to inherit his estate,
Which would have been just if he had survived his son, or
whether the mother ought to inherit the father’s estate, as having
passed to the son if he died only after his father, the Emperor
Adrian decided in favor of the mother, that the son had survived
his father. Thus, on the contrary, in a like case, where a person
who had been set free from slavery died together with his son by


PL.9,§1, D. de reb. dub. ;—1. 28, eod.;—d.1.§4. See the following article, with

remarks upon it. See likewise the fifteenth article of the fourth section of Proofs and
Presumptions, and the remark upon it.

1 L. 26, D, de pact. dotal.; —1. 23, D. de reb. dub.; —1. 9, in f. cod.


188 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK Il.


the same accident, so that it was uncertain if either of them or
which of them did survive, another law presumes in favor of the
patron; that is, of the master who had given this person who had
been a slave his freedom, that the son had not survived his father,
that the father’s inheritance might go to the patron;* for he had
right to succeed to the person whom he had made free from slav-
ery, and who died without children. And this law prefers him to
the person who ought to be heir to the son, unless it were clearly
proved that the father died first: Si cum filio suo libertus simul pe-
rierit, intestati patrono legitima defertur hereditas ; si non probatur
supervizisse pairi filius. These are the words of this law, which
explains afterwards the motives of this decision, founded on the
consideration of the person of the patron. Hoc enim reverentia
patronatus suggerente dicimus.

2816. We see also, that, in a like event of a father and a son
having perished together in a shipwreck, or by some other acci-
dent, another law presumes, under another view, that the son did
not survive the father. It is in the case where a testator had re-
quired his heir to restore his estate, or a part of it, or some particu-
lar thing, to another person after the death of this heir, if he should
die without children. It is said in that law, that if the person who
was charged with this fiduciary bequest» having only one son, this
son and his father had died at the same time by some accident, so
that it was impossible to know which of them had survived, it
would be presumed that the son had not survived, and that there-
fore the case of the fiduciary bequest had happened, the person
who was charged with it having died without children, which
would make the estate to go to the person for whose benefit the
fiduciary bequest was devised; whereas, had it been presumed that
the son had survived, it would have made the case of the fiduciary
bequest to cease; and the son having succeeded to his father, he
would have transmitted the estate to his heir. St quis susceperit
quidem filium, verum vivus amiserit, videbitur sine liberis decessisse.
Sed si naufragio, vel ruina, vel aggressu, vel quo alio modo simul cum
patre perierit ( filius) an conditio, si sine liberis pater decederet, de-
fecerit videamus, et magis non defuisse arbitror. Quia non est ve-
rum fiium ejus supervizisse. Aut igitur filius supervixit patri, et
extinait conditionem fideicommissi : aut non supervizit, et extitit con-


® Z. 9, § 2, D. de reb. dub.


> This is the name which is given to these sorts of dispositions, which we shall treat
of in the fifth book.


TIT. I. SEC. It] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 189


ditio. Oum autem quis ante et quis postea decesserit non apparet,
extitisse conditionem fideicommisst magis dicendum est. L.17, § 7,
D. ad senat. Trebell. It would seem as if we might reasonably
conclude from this decision, that, since it presumes contrary to the
natural order, and against the rule explained in the eleventh arti-
cle, that the son did not survive the father, it is founded only on the
favor of the fiduciary bequest, to make it subsist against the heir of
the son. And since it was sufficient for the person who was to be
benefited by the fiduciary bequest, that the son had not survived,
whether he died before his father, or only in the same moment
with him;° the law barely supposes that the son did not survive,
and that therefore the condition of the fiduciary bequest was
come to pass, which accomplishes the intention of the testator,
which was to prefer nobody to the pergon who was to be bene-
fited by the fiduciary bequest, but the children of his heir, in case
he should have any who should succeed him.

2817. It appears from all these several questions which arise
from the case where the father and son die together, that the laws
decide differently touching the order of their death, according to
the differences of the persons concerned, judging in favor of the
mother, that the father died first; deciding, on the contrary, in favor
of the patron, that the son did not survive; and in favor of the
fiduciary bequest, that the condition on which it was left has hap-
pened by the father dying without leaving any children alive be-
hind him. And in this last case, it is not the favor of the person
for whose benefit the fiduciary bequest is left that occasions this
decision, but barely the quality of its being a cause relating toa
fiduciary bequest, which was singularly favored in the Roman
law. But if, in the same case of this fiduciary bequest, it were
the widow of the father and mother of the son who died together,
who should pretend that, according to the rule of the eleventh arti-
cle, and the order of nature, her son had outlived his father, and
that therefore the condition of the fiduciary bequest had not hap-
pened, since, the father having died the first, he did not die without
children, would it be presumed against the mother in favor of him
who was to have the benefit of the fiduciary bequest, that the son
had survived his father; and would it not be just, on the contrary,
to presume in favor of the mother, that the son had lived longest,
seeing the mother would have for her, on one side, the natural pre-


®° D117, § 7.


190 " THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I1. BOOK I1.


sumption that the son ought to survive the father, and, on the
other side, the favor of her quality of mother, which, according to
the spirit of the laws which we have just now quoted, would seem
to decide in her favor? The consequence seems to be very well
grounded, and, in order to judge the better of it, it may be re-
marked that there result from the laws which we have quoted,
and from others relating to this subject, three different manners of
decision in cases of this nature. The first, which supposes that
according to the order of nature the son has survived the father;
the second, which makes an exception to this first in the case of
a child who is under the years of puberty; and the third, which
supposes that the father and son died in one and the same mo-
ment. And it is very certain that one of these cases must of ne-
cessity happen; that is to say, either that the father dies first, or
that he dies last, or that both the one and the other die at the same
moment. It may be said of the third of these three kinds of pre-
sumption, that it ought to be abolished, if it were the rule to pre-
sume always that the son who is adult survived the father, and
that the father survived the son that was under the age of fourteen
years. For by this rule we ought never to presume that both of
them died in the same instant; and all the questions would be
decided by the age of the son. Since, therefore, it is certain that
the laws presume sometimes that the son, even although he be of
the age of fourteen years, has not survived, it follows from thence
that those laws suppose that it may naturally happen, either that
the son dies first, or that both the one and the other die in the
same instant; and this is likewise a truth which reason sufficiently
convinces us of. For it may happen several ways, that the mother
may perish under the ruins of a building sooner than the child
whom she suckles. It may happen that a son may be killed in a
battle before his father; and on the same occasions, and likewise
on all others, it may so fall out, that they both die in the same in-
stant, or that even he who by reason of his age, or some other in-
firmity, might be presumed to die first, does nevertheless die the
last. It is upon this natural diversity of events that the different
manners in which the laws decide questions of this nature are
founded, presuming sometimes that the death of both has hap-
pened in the same instant, as it may fall out, and at other times
that one of the two died first, not by the presumption of the equal-
ity or difference of their ages, or of other causes, but by presuming
that that has happened which may be most advantageous to the


TIT. I. SEC. 11] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 191


party whose cause is most to be favored. For whereas if we knew
certainly the truth of the event, whatever it were, it would be neces-
sary to decide conformably thereto; the uncertainty of what has hap-
pened, when we can have no proofs of it, makes the law to deter-
mine with authority that that has happened which the natural bias
seems to demand, as appears by the examples which we have just
now explained. And this manner of deciding may have its foun-
dation in a principle of equity which is very natural; for, seeing
it is impossible on one side to know the truth, and necessary on
the other side to come to some decision, which cannot be made
but by sapposing one of the cases which may happen, there is only
the law which can substitute its authority, in the place of the de-
cision which the truth would make, if it were known. It is in this
manner that we ought to reconcile those decisions which are so
different; whence it seems to follow, that, in the questions of this
nature, we ought to join to the knowledge of the matter of fact,
such as it may be gathered from the circumstances, the consider-
ation of the persons concerned, that we may decide the matter by
all these views pursuant to the principles which result from the
reflections on all the said laws.

2818. If, in order to make application of these principles, we
suppose that, a father and his only son of about thirteen years of
age having died together, the widow, mother of the said son, de-
mands the goods of the father, together with those of the son, pre-
tending that the son outlived the father, and consequently suc-
ceeded to him; and that the collateral relations of the father de-
mand his inheritance, and likewise over and above that which the
father was entitled to out of the goods of the son; and ground their
pretension on this, that, the son not having as yet fourteen years
of age, we ought to presume that the father outlived him; how
ought this question to be decided? Would it be adjudged that
the son, because of his tender age, died the first, and that there-
fore the mother is to have no share in the goods of her son? Or
will it be presumed, in favor of the mother, that the son has sur-
vived the father? And even although it were a child of much
younger years, would the mother be deprived of that which she
ought to have, if it were certain that her son had survived, since it
may even have happened that the father died before the son, by
reason of other circumstances besides that of age, which is not a
certain proof that the son died first? Or would it be supposed
tather that both the one and the other died in the same instant,


192 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOX IL


in order to give to the mother the estate of her son, whom the
father did not survive, and to the collateral relations the father’s
estate, to which the son did not succeed, he not having survived
the father? The first of these three ways of deciding this ques-
tion would appear too hard. And since it is possible that the son
may have survived, it would seem that we ought not to decide the
doubt by the contrary supposition, which deprives the mother of
all manner of share in the goods of her son which came to him by
his father; which consideration will be an inducement for deciding
the doubt according to the second manner; since the third would
still have this hardship in it, that the mother would be thereby de-
prived of that which even the customs, which appropriate the goods
to those of the stock from whence they came, give her out of the
goods which the son has inherited of his father.

2819. If we suppose for another case, that a father who had sev-
eral sons dies with one of them, so that it cannot be known which
of them died first, and that this son, having some estate of his
own, had made a testament, and therein named one of his friends
his universal heir, and that, the brothers coming to divide among
them their father’s estate, this heir of their brother should pretend
that the son had survived the father, and that therefore he ought
to have, not only the goods belonging to this son, but likewise the
share which fell to him of his father’s estate; would this question
be decided in favor of this heir, by presuming that the son died
last, or would it be determined in favor of the brothers, upon the
presumption that they died both in the same instant, and that
so the brother’s heir has no share in the goods of the father, and
that he ought to take only the goods which their brother may have
had some other way? This heir would be founded on the pre-
sumption that the son had survived and succeeded his father:
and the brothers would have to urge on their side, not only the
consideration which is so much favored of the natural equity
which calls them to succeed to their father’s estate, and which ex-
cludes this stranger from it; but likewise this reason, that, there
being no manner of proof to show which of the two died first, nor
any reason to presume in favor of the stranger, against the inter-
est of the brothers, it ought to be presumed that both the one and
the other died in the same instant, with as much or rather more
reason than in the case of the fiduciary bequest which has been
spoken of. So that, according to the principles which we have just
now been inquiring into, it would be enough for this heir that he


TIT. 1. SEC. I1.] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 193


should have the proper goods of the son, without having any share
in those which the son would have inherited of his father, if it had
been certain, as it is not, that he did survive him.

2820. We might give other examples of the like cases, but
these few are sufficient for a matter which so rarely happens; and
it is enough to have taken notice of these several principles,
which seem to be sufficient for all the different cases of this na-
ture.4


XIIL


2821. Children have the Right of Transmission. — Children and
other descendants are considered as being in some manner masters
of the estate of their father or mother, grandfather or grandmother,
and other ascendants, even before their death. And when that
does happen, it is not so much a succession which the children ac-
quire, as a continuation of a right which they had already, with
this difference between this right and the inheritance, that whereas,
during the life of the ascendant to whom they succeed, they had
his estate as it were in partnership with him, and that his posses-
sion preserved it to them, they have now all alone the sole and
entire right to the estate after his death. Thus, although they
should know nothing of his death, and even although they should
be ignorant of their own right, as if they should happen to be
young children, yet the estate would be entirely theirs" Which
has this effect, that if the son who has survived his father, and
who has not renounced the succession, happens to die before he
has entered to it, or even before he knows that it is fallen to
him, he would transmit, that is to say, would make his right to


‘ ¥.1. 39, § 1, D. de religios. et sumpt. fun. ;—1.9,§ 1, D. de reb. dub.; —d. 1. § ult.; —
L16, cod. ;—d. L. 16, §1;—U. 17 e 18, eod.;—d. 1. 18,§ 1. It appears by these texts,
the words whereof we have not set down here, that the ordinary presumption is that the
two died in the same instant, since it cannot be said of any of them that he survived the
other. So that it is only by circumstances, or upon particular considerations, that the
Contrary is presumed.

_ Bee the fifteenth article of the fourth section of Proofs and Presumptions, the seventh ar-
Ucle of the second section of Pupillary Substitution, and the eighteenth article of the first
wetion of Substitutions, direct and fiduciary.

' L.14, D. de suis et legit. haved. ;—1. 11, D. de lib. et post. ; —§ 8, Inst. de hared. quae
a ist. Although these words suus heres do not agree to all children in the Roman law,
and children emancipated from their father’s power lost this quality, yet these texts
i nevertheless conformable to the usage in France, which does n6t make this distinction

children in matters of snccession, and which, even under the Roman law itself,
Was abolished by Justinian. . Nov. 118, c. 1.
VOL. II. 17


194 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK II.


pass to his heirs. And this is what is called the right of transmis-
sion, of which we shall speak in its proper place.*


XIV.


2822. Provision for the Children who deliberate whether they
shall accept the Inheritance. — Although children and other de
scendants, who survive their fathers and mothers, and others their
ascendants, are seized of their estate, as has been said in the pre
ceding article, yet they have nevertheless the liberty to deliberate
whether they will accept the inheritance, or whether they will ab
stain from it. And if, during the time that is given them for de-
liberating, they demand some allowance for their substance, it is
granted unto them, as has been said in another place.‘


XV.


2823. Fathers have the Usufruct of Successtons which fall to
their Children. — It is necessary to remark in relation to the suc-
cessions of ascendants which go to their children, and other de-
scendants, that they have not always a full and plenary right to
them. For if the son who is under his father’s authority succeeds
to his mother, or other ascendant by the mother’s side, his father
shall have the usufruct of the goods of that succession, as shall be
explained in the following title.


XVI.


2824. Rights which pass to those of the Family who do not suc-
ceed to the Estate.— We must likewise observe upon the some
subject of the succession of children and other descendants, and
likewise in general touching all successions of intestates, whether
they be descendants, ascendants, or collaterals, that there may be
in the inheritance certain rights which go to the heirs of blood, al-
though they be deprived of the succession by a testament, or even
that they renounce it. Thus, the right of patronage annexed to a
family passes to those to whom the title gives it, although they do
not succeed to the estate* Thus, the right of being interred in


®* See the tenth section of Testaments.

€ See the sixth article of the first section of Heirs or Executors with the Benefit of an In-
ventory

" See the second section of the following title.

x [. 9, D. de jur. patron. ; 1. 47, § 4, D. de bon. iibert. Although the right of patron-
age which is spoken of in this article be of a different nature from that mentioned in this
law, yet it may be applied to it, seeing these two rights have one and the same name, and


TIT. 1. SEC. I11.] SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 195


the burying-place of the family passes equally to those who are of
the family, whether they inherit the estate or not7


SECTION ITI.
OF THE LINES AND DEGREES OF PROXIMITY.


2825. Aursoves the subject-matter of this title be limited to
that which concerns children and other descendants, and it may
seem for that reason that we ought to speak here only of the lines
and degrees of descendants; yet the connection there is between
the lines and degrees of ascendants, descendants, and collaterals
does not allow this matter to be divided ; but seeing we are about
to explain here the lines and degrees of descendants, it is proper
likewise to join the others.

2826. Seeing these lines and degrees of proximity, or consan-
guinity, are more easily distinguished in a figure, we have inserted
one at the end of this section. But it is necessary beforehand to
explain what is meant by degrees of proximity, and by the lines
which the said degrees compose ; for it is by those lines and de-
grees that we see what is the proximity between two persons; and
this shall be the subject-matter of this section.

2827. The knowledge of the degrees of proximity is not only
necessary in the matter of successions, but likewise in other mat-
ters; as in tutorships, that those may be named tutors who are
telated to the minors, and those excused who are not: in the chal-
lenges or recusations of judges who are relations: in the admis-
sion of witnesses, either in civil or criminal causes, in order to
receive or reject the testimony of those who are related to the par-
fes:* in marriages, which are unlawful between those that are
within certain degrees of relationship or affinity.

2828. The prohibitions of marriages within the degrees of prox-
imity and affinity, which had been established by the Roman law,


that the one as well as the other goes to the nearest relations, although they do not suc-
ceed as heirs to the estate. The patronage spoken of in this article is the right which
the church has granted to the founders of some benefices, and their descendants, to pre-
sent to the ordinary, who has the right of institution, persons who are capable. Which is
’ matter that does not come properly within the design of this book.

7’ V.L 6, D. de relig. ef sumpt. fin.

* L.10, D. de gradibus et affin.

* 1.11, C. de nuptiis.


196 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK Il.


have been very much enlarged by the canon law, which is observed
in France° But this matter does not belong to this place ; for here
it sufficeth to point out the order of the degrees of kindred in so
far as concerns successions. And as for the degrees of affinity or
alliance, as the same have no relation to successions, allies by
marriage having no manner of right to inherit, we shall say noth-
ing of them. The degrees of affinity are sufficiently distinguished
by those of proximity; for in order to know the degree of affinity
between the husband and the relations of his wife, and between
the wife and the relations of her husband, there is no more re-
quired but to place the husbands in the same degree in which
their wives are, and the wives in the same degree with their has-
bands.

2829. Seeing all the articles of this section have relation to the
figure of kindred which is placed at the end of it, and that without
the sight of the said figure it will be difficult for beginners to un-
derstand aright all this detail; they are to take notice that it will
be convenient for them to have the figure before them at the read-
ing of each article, and before they look into it to read the adver-
tisement which we have set down at the end of this section, for
the right understanding the use of the said figure.


Art. L


2830. What are the Degrees of Proximity or Consanguinity. —
Seeing proximity between two persons proceeds either from this,
that they are descended one from the other, which makes the con-
nection between ascendants and descendants, or from their being
both descended of one and the same person, which makes that of
collaterals; we judge, therefore, of the proximity between two per-
sons by the number of generations which make both the one and
the other of the said connections. And these generations are called
degrees, by which we step from one person to another in order to
make the computation of their kindred, in the manner which shall
be explained in the following articles.


Il.


2831. What are the Lines of Consanguinity. — By lines of con-
sanguinity is meant the succession of degrees or generations which


© V. 35, q. 4. d 7. 7, C. com. de success.
* LZ. 10, § 10, D. de grad. et afin.


TIT. I. SEC. I1.] | SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 197


are between one person and another. And as there are three
orders of proximity, that of ascendants, that of descendants, and
that of collaterals, so there are likewise three orders of lines.»


IIL


2832. Laine of Ascendants. — In the order of ascendants of the
person whose relation we want to know, we place above him his
father, his grandfather, his great-grandfather, and his other ances-
tors, each of them in their rank according to their degrees, and the
first degree is that which ascends from the son to the father, the
second from the father to the grandfather, the third from the grand-
father to the great-grandfather, and so on successively with the
others, according to the same order. Thus, the father is in the
first degree to his son, and the grandfather in the second degree to
the grandson, and so on with the rest. It is these degrees whereof
the situation one above the other makes the line of ascendants,
which, being joined with that of the descendants, of which we
shall speak in the following article, makes together only one
lines


IV.


2833. Line of Descendants. — In the order of descendants of the
person whose relation is in dispute, we place under him his son,
his grandson, and the other descendants, every one in his rank ac-
cording to their degrees, the first of which is that which descends
from the father to the son, the second from the son to the grand-
son, the third from the grandson to the great-grandson, and the
others in the like manner, according to the same order. Thus, the
gon is in the first degree to the father, and the grandson in the
second degree to the grandfather, and so on with the rest.1 It is
these degrees whereof the situation of one under the other makes
the line of the descendants, which, as has been said in the preced-
ing article, makes only one line with that of the ascendants.


V.


2834. Line of Collaterals. — In the order of collaterals there is
this difference that distinguishes it from the orders of ascendants
and descendants, that whereas there is only one line of ascendants


* £1, D. de gradib. et affin.

© £.1,§ 3, D. de grad. et affin.; —d.l.§4;—d.1 § 5.

{ L.1,§ 8, D. de gradib. et affin.; —d.l.§4;—d.1.§ 5.
17°


198 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BO


and descendants, there are as many lines of collaterals as the
places of ascendants and descendants, including therein the
of the person whose kindred we inquire into. For at his sic
his brothers, at his father’s side are his uncles, at his son’s sic
his nephews, and so on with the others in several lines bot
cending and descending, as shall be explained in the tent
following articles, and as appears plainly enough by the f
These are the lines which are called collateral, because they :
the side of the direct line of ascendants and descendants. Sc
in order to reckon the degrees of kindred between two coll
relations, it is necessary to find in the direct line the first «
descendants that is common to them, that is, the first of 1
both the one and the other are descended, and then to cour
degrees which ascend from one of them to that common par
ascendant, and those which from that ascendant descend t
other. Thus, between two brothers there are two degrees
first, which ascends from one of the brothers to their father
the second, which descends from the father to the other br
Thus, there are four degrees from one cousin-german to an
two which ascend from one of them to his father and grandf
and two which descend from the said grandfather to the
cousin. And it was in this manner that proximity was rec]
among those persons in the Roman law, placing the broth
the second degree, and the cousins-german in the fourth. Bi
the canon law, which is observed in France, as has been ss
the preamble of this section, the same degrees are consideres
der another view, and the computation is made in another
ner, by placing brothers in the first degree, and cousins-germ
the second. For they are compared among themselves acco
to their situation under the common parent or ascendant. ‘
the two brothers are in the first degree under their father, an
two cousins-german are in the second degree under their g
father. We shall see in the tenth and following articles whi
lates to the other collaterals; but this difference between the c
and civil law is only in the collateral line, for as to the ascene
and descendants the degrees are the same in both laws.


¢ L.1,§ 4, D. de gradi. et afin. Since, by the manner of counting the degrees s
- ing to the Roman law, the brothers are in the second degree, and are the first anc
est in the order of collaterals, it is therefore said that in that order there is no fi
gree. D.t.§1;—d.1.1,§ 6;—l. 10, § 15, end.


TIT. 1. SEC. III.] | SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 199


VI

2835. Divers Lines of Ascendants and Descendants. — Although
we reckon only one line of ascendants, and one of descendants,
which between them make no more than one line, which ascends
from the children to the fathers, and descends from the fathers to
their children, and is called direct; yet each of these two orders of
ascendants and descendants has under other views several lines,
which are to be distinguished for divers uses. For whereas, for
example, it is necessary to consider only one line of ascendants
and descendants on the father’s side, when the question is to com-
pute the degrees from father to son between an ascendant and
a descendant ;‘ yet if we will distinguish the ascendants on the
father’s side and on the mother’s side of one and the same person,
and his descendants of sons and daughters, there are several lines,
as shall be explained in the three following articles.


VIL.


2836. Lines of Ascendants by the Father's Side and Mother's Side.
— If we will reckon all those who are in the order of ascendants
of any person, there is first a line which ascends from that person
to his father, to his grandfather by the father’s side, to his great-
grandfather by the father’s side, and to the other ascendants from
father to father: and there is another line which ascends from the
same person to his mother, to his grandmother by the mother’s
side, and so on to the others from mother to mother. But these
lines not containing all the ascendants, there are several other lines
to be imagined, in order to comprehend them all, as shall be ex-
plained in the article which follows.¢


VIL


2837. Multiplication of Ascendants, and their Lines. — To un-
derstand aright the order of those other lines of ascendants, besides
the two which have been mentioned in the preceding article, it is
necessary to consider, that the number of ascendants increases
always the double at every degree. Thus, every one has in the
frst degree only his father and his mother, and in the second he
has his grandfather and grandmother by the father’s side, and like-
wise his grandfather and grandmother by the mother’s side. So
that whereas in the‘first degree there are only two persons, there


This is a consequence of the first. article.
© This is likewise a consequence of the first article.


200 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK II.
‘


are four in the second, and in the third there are eight, which are
the father and mother of the grandfather by the father’s side, the
father and mother of the grandmother by the father’s side, the
father and mother of the grandfather by the mother’s side, and the
father and mother of the grandmother by the mother’s side. And
according to this order, in mounting always to the ascendants of
each person, we shall go by several lines which branch out at each
generation. And by this progression we shall find sixteen persons
in the fourth degree, thirty-two in the fifth, sixty-four in the sixth,
one hundred twenty-eight in the seventh, and so on with the rest.
Which would make above thirty millions of persons in the five-
and-twentieth generation in ascending. So that by continuing
we should find, in much fewer generations than what have been
since the first man, many more ascendants of each person than
there have been men since the creation. But as many of the
ascendants of one person are descended from the same ancestors,
the lines which were branched out join together again at the
first common ascendant, from whom the others were descended.
Thus, this multiplication, being often interrupted by these common
ascendants, ceases and is reduced in such a manner, that we come
at last to the only common ascendant from whom all mankind is
descended.


IX.


2838. Difference between the Lines of Ascendants, and those of
Descendants. — There is this difference between the lines of de-
scendants and the lines of ascendants, that these are the same for
all persons ; for every one has the same order of ascendants that
any other has, although the number of the ascendants of all per-
sons is unequal, according as they have more or fewer common
ascendants in the sense explained in the preceding article. But it
is not the same thing with respect to the lines of descendants;
for these lines branch out, and are divided differently according to
the number of the children and descendants; and they end or are
extended more or less, according as the generations cease or are
continued. So that in many families all their descendants come to
an end, and in many others their posterity will remain to the end
of the world. Thus, the lines of the descendants of each family
are diversified. But if we want only to see the degrees or genera-
tions between one single ascendant and one single descendant,


b 7. 10, § 18, D. de gradid. et afin. ; — 2. 8, § ult. eod.


TIT. I. SEC. 111.] | SUCCESSION OF DESCENDANTS. 201


from father to son, there is no occasion to imagine more than one
line, whatever number of degrees there may be between the two:'


X.


2839. Divers Lines of Collaterals. — As there are several lines
of ascendants and descendants, in the sense explained in the pre-
ceding articles, although we reckon only one when we count the
degrees from an ascendant to a descendant, or from a descendant
to an ascendant ; so we may also distinguish several lines of col-
laterals, according to the several degrees which they take up;! as
shall be explained in the articles which follow.


XI


2840. Three Orders of Collaterals.— In order to make the
knowledge of these several lines of collaterals easier, and to avoid
confusion therein, we may distinguish the said lines into three
orders. The first contains only one line, which is that wherein
are placed brothers, cousins-german, second-cousins, and the other
cousins who are at the side of the person whose kindred we in-
quire into, and in such a manner that they are all of them in an
equal distance with the said person from the ascendants that are
common to them. The second order contains several lines which
are above that of the brothers; and in the first of the said lines
are the uncles, in the second the great-uncles, and so on with the
others, ascending from line to line. And in each line at the side
of the uncles and great-uncles, and of the others upwards, are the
cousins, who are at a less distance than this person from their
common ascendant. And the third order of these lines contains
also several lines which are underneath that of the brothers; and
in the first of the said lines are the nephews, in the second the
sons of nephews, and so on with the others, descending from line
to line. And in each of these lines at the side of the nephews
and sons of nephews, and the others downwards, are the cousins,
who are farther removed than this person from their common as-
cendant. Thus, all the collaterals are comprehended in the sev-
eral lines of these three orders, under the names of brothers, uncles,
nephews, and cousins of both sexes.™


' This is a consequence of the foregoing articles.

| See the following articles. To understand aright this and the following articles, it is
hecessary to have the figure before us.

" See the figure, and the sth, 9th, and 10th articles of the first section of the third title.


202 TRE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOX II.


Xfi.

2841. The Proximity of the Degrees of Collaterals is not regu-
lated by the Order of the Lines. — This distinction of three orders
of the lines of collaterals has not this effect, that all those of one
line are either nearer or remoter from the person whose relations
we inquire into than all those of another line; but, excepting
the brothers, there are some in each line who are nearer to this
person than some in all the other lines; and there are likewise
in each line some who are more remote from the same person
than some in all the other lines. Thus, the uncle who is in the
first line of the second order, and the nephew who is in the first
line of the third order, are nearer than the cousin-german, who
is in the line of the first order. And it is easy to see by the figure,
the different proximities of all the degrees in all the lines of these
several orders.”


XIIL


2812. Situation of the Lines of Collaterals. — Of these three
orders, the first, which begins with the brothers, has only, as has
been said, one line, which crosses and divides that of the ascend-
ants and descendants, in the point where the person whose kin-
dred we inquire into is placed. Butas to the other two orders, the
one has as many lines as there are ascendants, and the other as
many as there are descendants. And of all those lines which are
parallel to those of the brothers, those of the second order are
above, and every one of them crosses the place of one of the as-
cendants. And the lines of the third order are underneath, and
_each of them crosses the place of one of the descendants. Thus,
we may observe this difference between the said three orders, that
in the first, which has only one line, all those who are in it, and
the person whose kindred we search into, are equally distant from
the ascendants whom they have in common; that in the second,
which is composed of the lines that cross the places of the ascend-
ants, all those who are in it are nearer to the common as-
cendants than the person whose kindred is in question; and
that in the third order, which is made up of the lines ~which
cross the places of the descendants, all those who are in it are
more remote than this person from the ascendants that are com-
mon to them.°


® See the figure. © See the figure.


"ee ee ae Pe OTT Abavus \
7. Propalrius o| Greet Grericd Wh.


—


LiLE Great Mmedas OES tithers Mather. coe |
patrut ie on the Pt Abavia |
Filius . ;


AN


P , Paro le \h
lime Crutrtadbe core ent” oma grr
| \ platter ons Hee /
2 rit i |
/ Propatriua \,
Prone pos ‘
Tide Cemesrire 7 .
\ pare the Ai } ' Patruus * ATune ule
‘ thede ‘Propioris\ The Cheleor ~ \franimetherg The Dncle
| Sobrini Filius Mathers | =e c \ or Mothers
Secortel Chiaelry — Arether / \ diretier
oaemae) Tet”
|  ~ uit x (_ Wrater \ Pater \
/ Prepioris ’ oa rhgeean Father. |
‘Sobrin Nepow | rere
| | Fhe erry or phe \gnrt fhe Mathers | a SALE
‘ i i Mita r


Senerted Conanti x. ale Pf ;
\ gun the Alatheny _ ret |


/¥ratris * |


/Patrvelis Alii L Weiitinae F Sie ter
\, i,

A === The. fort potas 4 / P
| Ff THE “Sy eaaaralee ti ‘ 4 . gt

/ Fratris ‘ ies F, _

Matruchs Nepowi es wide“ 1h

ae? | — / Pratria * Sororia

oo ee Coarse | / ; \ ;
SA ner rnnedst oresf? Filitis | Filius
Lt ss state” Jepiee or | JS ephew or


Sts ters Son


TH > “ag Wire Mars oo
Fratria Yo 7


og Oe Filius
Aor


Filia


ss [ Nepos \
i 1 ™. Greene! Meyer
‘ Fretrie | ose Arethers }
Pronepos TAS erasudacr,’
Greeat @rerud |" ~ “2,
Vege or =
oer thee fy


a


Se pos
Greed a da

hts plis
Crane


- 2
— Pd
= Sreatt
4 . OG raaadaen
— eS Prone plies iw
= eer creat Grandi ja
_ — = SS “ DW


_—— — = =.


= ©


Pieter drat
foma See
Abneptis
lhe Grevd-
irrerieda cree


of commit
me nennar rie. f the other accor
. pee


batedean 1 the "Roman iat
ne ae - eT seen ov)


- s :
valine enti - ven R29 ¢ Pal ‘Ty oe
nie pEALOE 7: pg nding to the tte my has, iuvepnt
“aS . ag aanergt ‘
rhe : AED oo dal « wo'dex CCE en Wrewmsr Wat
SO ee wi. queers aw
y' 4 AE BS ce maa ee, Feet : .


is persia tig "FR
“nabersGin ni eee 4 oe
0 the easy ghee
pons oY Saag
ai Sagar thi a
spb ip are iH i ¥ frat ye. 4
nd. CE eee - thir
PPR. 2 sstccriect


n x r common | oa ascen¥awe' are in the sare degree of digg yt.
hd ! : ware 9! wey *
* “hace from_ont Tree that « them \ ie ; * dzone. the commo ones ,


oy


ascendant) .aith. tim t- those Gee at Te I Mstantes, from : .
AINE -ascendant p ir-the game degree to OE: ‘another. .,
en '.3 : who is most Py mete.fomn that ascendamrt i fo regs",
» “Waid ore 0 Which mak@ pmputation of all the degretyy...
Sees: 7 Sh,
metar7, f \
Neuter.
ADVERTISEMENT FOR SE OF THE F'cure.
Since there may be occasi¢ nt the degrees of consan-
guinity according to the ma nero. the Roman law, or according
to that of the canon law, the wing figure serves both for the
one and the other. For in eagiiivigd@the number of the degrees is
differently marked for the twa@pey mber at the top marking the
degrees according to the canéa-laix,.and the number below accord-
ing to the Roman law. ‘ Roe ie
As for the lines, they are y UR @letes ad which they —
_sd


204 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Il.


TITLE If.


IN WHAT MANNER FATHERS, MOTHERS, AND OTHER ASCENDANTS,
SUCCEED.


2844. Tue succession of parents to children is not according to
the order of nature, as in the succession of children to parents.
But when it does happen that parents outlive their children who
die without children, it is but just that they should not suffer the
double loss both of their children and also of the goods which they
may leave behind them; and this sort of succession of ascendants,
which in one sense is not natural, is in another respect conform:
able to the law of nature, which calls them to the succession as
being the next of kin, and to equity, which gives them this com-
fort under their loss.

2845. It is perhaps because the succession of ascendants is not
conformable to the order of nature, that it has been so differently
regulated by divers laws among the Romans, both with respect to
fathers and also with respect to mothers. As for fathers, seeing
they had the property of every thing which their children who were
not emancipated could acquire, excepting only the peculiar patri-
monies of which we shall speak in the preamble of the second sec-
tion of this title, the goods of the said children whom their fathers
survived did not pass to any heir, but they remained to the fathers
who had a right to the said peculiar patrimonies, if their children
left no children behind them, and died without disposing of them.
And as for the children who were emancipated, and who had ac-
quired some estate, their fathers did not succeed to them by the
ancient law, unless that when they did emancipate them they had
taken the precaution to secure to themselves the right of succeed-
ing to them, by observing a formality which had this effect, and
without which they did not succeed to them.*

2846. As to the mothers, they had not in the beginning any
share in the succession of their children, whether they were eman-
cipated or not, and likewise the children did not succeed to their
mother. In process of time mothers did succeed, but differently,
according to the different times and the whimsical changes that

many laws made in their right of succession, by the distinctions of


‘


© V. § ult. Inst. de legit. agn. success.


TIT. 11. BUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 205


the cases where the mothers succeeded in conjunction with the fa-
ther alone, or with the father and brothers of their deceased chil-
dren, or with the father and the brothers and sisters, or with the
brothers and sisters without the father, or with the brothers with-
out sisters, or with the sisters without brothers. Which made
many different combinations, and as many rules which diversified
the ways which fathers and mothers succeeded to the children.”
But without entering into this detail, which would be of no man-
ner of use, we shall confine ourselves to the latest laws, which
have fixed all those changes, and which are in use in the prov-
inces where the Roman law is received as their custom.

2847. Here we may observe the inconvenience of the succession
of ascendants in making the goods to pass from one family to an-
other; when a mother, for instance, sueceeding to her son who
had already inherited the succession of his father, transmits his pa-
ternal estate either to her children by a second husband, or to other
persons. And it is the same thing with respect to the father and
other ascendants who succeed to their children.

2848. Kk is against this inconvenience that provision has been
made by that rule of the customs in France which directs that im-
movables which come by descent from their ancestors shall not re-
mount. Which has been explained in another place.° And be-
cause the said rule did not extend to the provinces where the Ro-
man law takes place as custom, it was there provided for by that
ordinance which is called the edict of mothers,? which ordains
that mothers shall succeed only to the movables, and other goods
which their children may have acquired otherwise than by the fa-
ther’s side; and that they shall have only the usufruct of the half
of the immovables which came to their children by descent from
the father’s side. But that edict is restrained to mothers, and does
not make the least alteration with respect to fathers and other as-
cendants.

* 1.10, D. de suis et legit.;— 1. 2,§ 9, D. ad senat. Tertull. et Orphit.;—d. l. §18;—


tit. Inet. de senat, Tertull. et tit. de senat. Orphit.;—1. 2, C. ad senat. Tert.;—1. 4, eod.; —
L7, eod.;—d.l.§1;—1.9, C. de leg. heered.; — 1. 14, eod. ; —1. 15, eod. ; — Nov. 22, c. 47,
} 2;— Nov. 118, c. 3; — Nov. 84, ¢. 1.

© See the preface to this second part, no. 4, and the remark on the sixth article of this
section.

“Of King Charles IX., an. 1567.


VOL. II. 18


206 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK Il.


SECTION I.


WHO ARE THOSE THAT ARE CALLED ASCENDANTS, AND IN WHAT
MANNER THEY SUCCEED.


Arr. L


2849. Who are the Ascendants.— We use frequently the names
of parents and ascendants to signify indifferently all the persons
from whom every one derives his birth. And in this sense the fa-
ther and mother are of the number of ascendants, and they are
placed in the same line.* But because they are in the first degree,
they are distinguished from the other ascendants; and the name
of ascendants belongs more properly to grandfathers and the other
ancestors above them.


IL


2850. Who are the Grandfathers and Ancestors.— We call by
the name of grandfathers those who are in the degree immediately
above the father and mother. Thus the name of grandfather be-
longs to the father’s father and to the mother’s father. And we
call in general by the name of forefathers the great-grandfather
and others above him.> But this last name is never made use of
in the singular number, when we speak only of one ascendant.


III.


2851. Ascendants of both Sexes. — The rank of ancestors com-
prehends the two sexes. And as to what concerns successions, the
ancestors of both sexes are called indifferently to those which may
belong to them,° as shall be explained in the articles which follow.


IV.


2852. In what Manner the Father and Mother succeed. — The
father and mother succeed equally to their sons or daughters who
die without children. And if both the one and the other survive,
they divide the inheritance between them; or whichsoever of the


* [.4,§2, D.dein jus voc. Although the French word parent does often in the French
language take in the collateral relations, yet they often use it for the ascendants, as when
one speaks of the duty of children towards their parents.

b F.10, § 7, D. de gradib. et affin.

© Nov. 116, c. 2, inf


TIT. I. SEC. 1.] SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 207


two survives alone succeeds to the whole inheritance,’ saving the
goods which shall be spoken of in the following section®. But if
the son or daughter to whom the father or mother, or both of
them, are to succeed, had brothers or sisters of the whole blood,
these brothers and sisters would have their share in the succession,
as will be shown in the seventh article.£


V.


2853. The Nearest Ascendants exclude the Remotest.— If there
are many ascendants who survive their common descendants, they
who are in the nearest degree will exclude those that are more
remotes Thus, the father alone, or the mother alone, or both
together, exclude the grandfathers and grandmothers, and the
grandfathers exclude the great-grandfathers. For there is no rep-
resentation among ascendants, as there is among descendants.


VL


2854. A Kind of Representation among the Ascendants.— Al-
though there be no right of representation among ascendants, to
make those who are at the greatest distance to concur in the suc-
cession with the nearest; yet there is among them another kind of ~
representation which has another effect. That is, when there
are several ascendants who concur in the same degree, some of
them by the father’s side, and others by the mother’s side; for if
this case should happen, the succession of the descendants would
be divided into two moieties, one of which would be-given to the
ascendants by the father’s side, and the other to those of the moth-
ers side, although the number should be less on one side than on
the other ; the paternal ascendants being considered as taking
the place of the father, and the maternal as succeeding in that of
the mother!


4 Nov. 118, c. 2. As to what concerns the mother, see what has been remarked in the
preamble to this title.

* See the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth articles of the following section.

See the seventh article of this section, and the remark that is there made on it.

& Nov. 118, ¢c. 2. See the second and third articles of the second section of the forego-
ing title. The rule explained in this article is quite opposite to the spirit of the customs
of France, which by the rule, paterna paternis, materna maternis, of which mention has
been made in other places, prefer the remotest ascendants to those who are nearer, with
respect to the goods descended from their stock. Which secms to be more equitable and
more natural; and there seems even to be something of a hardship in the contrary rule.
See the remark on the following article.

" Nov. 118, c. 2.- This rule is not to be extended to any other of the provinces in


208 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 11. BOOK II.


VIL

2855. The Brothers and Sisters of the Whole Blood succeed with
the Ascendants. — The father and mother, and all the other ascend-
ants, exclude all the collaterals from the succession of their chil-
dren and other descendants, except the brothers and sisters of the
whole blood, who succeed by the head with the father and mother,
or other ascendants, to the succession of their brother or sister. So
that if, for example, the father and mother, or one of them, or, in
default of them, other aseendants, survive one of their sons, the
succession will be divided between them and their other children,
brothers or sisters of whole blood to the deceased, by equal por-
tions, and by the head, according to the number of persons which
the father, the mother, or, in default of them, the other ascendants,
make together with their children.'


REMARK ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2856. It is to be remarked on this rule touching the concurrence
of brothers and sisters of the whole hlood with the father, or
mother, and the other ascendants, that several interpreters have
been of opinion, that this concurrence took place only with respect
to the father and mother; and that the other ascendants ought to
be excluded by the brothers. And their opinion is grounded on
these words of the text, si et pater aut mater fuerint ; the meaning
of which they took to be, that it is only the father and mother
who can succeed jointly with the brothers, and that consequently
the other ascendants do not concur in the succession. But besides
that the whole sequel of this text calls to the succession, together
with the brothers, the ascendants in the nearest degree, without
any distinction, and that the condition even of the remotest as-
cendants is more favorable than that of the brothers; we need
only to remark, that that which led those interpreters into this
opinion was the fault of the translator of this novel, who, instead of


France, besides those which are governed by the Roman law. For in the provinces
which are governed by their customs, the paternal goods being appropriated to the rela-
tions by the father’s side, and the maternal goods to those related by the mother’s side,
the ascendants on one side exclude those on the other from the goods descended from
their stock ; and they succeed to them notwithstanding that other rule of the customs,
that the immovables which come by descent from ancestors do not ascend ; that is to say,
do not go to the ascendants. For the motive and use of this rule is only to hinder the
ascendants of one stock from succeeding to the estate descended from the other stock,
that the said estate may not be transmitted from one stock to the other.

' Nov. 118, c.2. Seo the following article.


TIT. 11. BEC. 1.] SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 209


these words in the Greek original, ei xa ranjp 4 pyrip etgoav, which
signify, et st pater aut mater fuerint, that is to say, that although
it were even the father or mother, has put it, si et pater aut mater
fuerint, that is, provided it be the father or mother. Having taken
for an equivocal expression the words «ai, et si for si e¢. So that
whereas it is in the original, that the brothers succeed jointly even
with the father and mother who are the nearest ascendants ; they
fancied that it was only the father and mother who had right to
succeed jointly with the brothers, as if it were a favor granted to
the father and mother, not to be excluded by the brothers.


VOL


2857. When the Ascendants, Brothers and Nephews, succeed to-
gether. —If in the case of a brother or sister of the whole blood,
who should succeed to a brother or sister jointly with the father
or mother, or other ascendants, as has been said in the foregoing
article, there should happen to be children of a brother of the
whole blood that is deceased ; the children of the said brother would
succeed likewise with the ascendants, and with the brothers and
sisters of the deceased, and would have among them the share
which their father, brother to the deceased, would have had if he
had lived.™


REMARKS ON THE PrREcEDING ARTICLE.


2858. Although in the text cited there is mention made only of
the children of a brother, and not of those of a sister, yet there
appears no reason to make any distinction between them. And it
seems, that, as the rule explained in the preceding article calls to
the succession the sisters, as well as the brothers, with the ascend-
ants, the rule in this article ought not to exclude the children of
sisters, since they represent their mothers, as well as the children
of the brothers represent their fathers.

2859. But there arises from the rule of this article another dif-
fculty, which proceeds from this, that the 127th novel speaks only
of the case where the children of a brother succeed jointly with
their uncle, brother to the deceased, and with an ascendant, and
that it makes no mention of the case where there is no brother to
the deceased, but only some ascendant, and the children of a
brother that is deceased. Thus, it might be called in question


m Nov. 127, ¢. 1.
18°


210 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT II. BOOK II.


whether in this last case the children of the deceased brother should
succeed with an ascendant, or whether they should be excluded by
the ascendant, in the same manner as they would have been before
this 127th novel, which has established this new right in their fa-
vor, contrary to the disposition of the 118th novel, which called
only the brothers alone with the ascendants. But since this 127th
novel, which calls the children of the brothers to the succession of
their uncle, together with his other brothers and the ascendants,
has only made mention of the case where there are brothers of the
deceased, and says nothing of the case where there are no brothers,
the most learned interpreters have been of opinion that this law
has left the case, of which it makes no mention, to be decided by
the 118th novel, which, by not calling them to the succession, ex-
cludes them from it. It would have been an easy matter for Jus-
tinian to have explained himself so as to have left no difficulty in
this case. But perhaps this law, as well as many others, has been
made with a view to some particular case, rather than with a de-
sign to make a general law for regulating all the cases which might
be comprehended under it; and that for that reason the law was
restrained to the particular case which gave occasion for it. To
which we must add, that if it were necessary to examine the ques-
tion whether, when the deceased has no brothers, but only nephews
with an ascendant, the nephews ought to succeed together with
the ascendant, it might be with some reason urged in favor of the
nephews, that the change which is the occasion that the deceased
has left no brothers behind him ought not to make their condition
less favorable, nor deprive them of the right of representation,
which is granted to them when there are brothers. But in reason-
ing upon what is determined in this case by these two novels, the
118th and the 127th, it may be alleged against them, that, on one
side, the rules concerning the interpretation of laws direct, that
the new laws which derogate from the old ones be restrained to
that which they expressly determine :* and that, on the other side,
the nephews have not the right of representation, except in the
cases where these two laws have given it them; and that by the
ancient law, when there were only nephews of the deceased to
succeed to him, they divided the succession by the head, according
to their number, without any representation.f


* See the sixteenth and eighteenth articles of the second section of the Rules of Law.
t See the last remark on the eighth article of the second section of the third title of this
book.


TIT. 11. SEC. 11.] | SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 211


IX.

2860. Ascendants have the Right of Transmission. — As children
and other descendants succeed to their fathers and mothers, and
other ascendants, in such a manner that the goods of the inherit-
ance are acquired to them before they do any dct as heir, or even
before they know the death of the ascendant to whom they suc-
ceed; so fathers and mothers, and other ascendants, have the same
night. And if, having survived their descendants, to whom they
succeed, they should happen to die before they had entered to the
succession, they would transmit it to their heirs."


X.


2861. Ascendants of Bastards. — As we do not reckon in the
number of children who succeed to their fathers and mothers, and
other ascendants, those who are not lawfully begotten, so we do
not place among the persons who have right to succeed to their
descendants the fathers and mothers, or other ascendants, of this
sort of children.°


SECTION II.


OF THE RIGHTS WHICH SOME ASCENDANTS MAY HAVE, EXCLUSIVE
OF THE OTHERS, IN THE GOODS OF THE CHILDREN.


2862. Ax. that has been said touching the succession of ascend-
ants in the preceding section relates to the order in which they are
ranked by the laws which call them to the successions of their
descendants, and how they succeed according to their ranks. And
in this section we shall explain some peculiar rights which some
ascendants may have, exclusive of others, on the goods of their
descendants.

2863. For the better understanding this matter concerning the
rights of parents in the goods of their children, and the laws which
relate thereto, it is necessary to remark that, by the ancient Roman
law, the sons who were still in their father’s family, that is to say,
the children who were not emancipated, but were still under their
father’s authority, could have nothing of their own. And all that


” See the thirteenth article of the second section of the foregoing title, and the remark
that is there made, as also the tenth section of Testaments.
* See the eighth article of the second section of Hairs and Executors in general.


212 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK II.


could fall to them, either by succession or donation, or whatever
they acquired by any other way, even by their own industry, be-
longed to the father,* saving only that which the son who was still
under his father’s authority might get either by his service in the
army, or by his skill at the bar.” For what the son who was in
his father’s family had acquired by any of these two ways was en-
tirely his own, his father having no manner of right to it, not so
much as the usufruct of it; to which was afterwards added that
which the son should acquire in the exercise of any public office
or dignity, or in any employment that had a public salary annexed
to it. It was this sort of goods which they called by the name of
peculium, and which they distinguished into peculium castrense, by
which was meant all that they acquired in the war, and peculium
quasi castrense, which comprehended all that was got by those
other ways. There was likewise another sort of peculinm, to wit,
that which the father gave out of his estate to his son who was
still in his family, whether it were in money or other things, that
he might manage it apart, and improve it. But the profit of this
pecultum belonged to the father, as proceeding from his own es-
tate.?

2864. As to the children who were emancipated, whatever they
could acquire was their own; and this was one of the effects of
emancipation, which was called for this reason the benefit of
_ being able to acquire goods, beneficium bonorum querendorum-.

2865. Afterwards the emperors gave to the children who were
under their father’s authority the property of the goods which they
had of their mother, and of what they got in marriage, or by some
free gift, and the fathers retained the usufruct of the said goods‘
And at last Justinian ordered that all the goods which the chil-
dren, even those who were not emancipated, should acquire, the
same should be entirely their own, in whatever manner they ac-
quired the said goods, whether by their own industry, or by suc-
cession, or by some liberality, or otherwise, but under two re-
serves ; one was of the profit which the son, who was still in his
father’s family, — have made of the patrimony which his father


® § 1, Inst. per quas pers. cuig. acquir.
Sah wee de collat.;—1.1,§ 6, D. ad senat. Trebell. ;—I. 8, § 5, D. de


» poss.
© L. ult. C. de inof. test. See the third article of this section.
d Toto tit. D. de pecul.
© L.1, D. si a parent. quis manum. sit.
ZL. 1, C. de bon. mat. ;—1. 1, C. de bon. qua lib. ; —L. 5, end.


TIT. IL. SEC. 11.] SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 213


had intrusted to his care and management, the property of the said
profit belonging still to the father, as it did formerly according to
the ancient law; and the other reserve was of the usufruct which
Justinian gave to the father of all which the children who were
not emancipated should acquire, except those sorts of peculiar
patrimonies of which both the property and usufruct belonged
wholly to the children by the ancient law, in which he made no
manner of alteration.*

2866. These different dispositions of the Roman law with re-
spect to the right of fathers in the goods of their children belonged
likewise to the father’s father, who had kept his grandchildren still
under his power, and he had the same rights on their goods; but
here we have made mention only of the father, and not of the
grandfather, for a reason which shall be explained in the remark
on the first article of this section.

2867. Seeing the subject-matter of this section takes in the dis-
tinction of children who are emancipated, and of those who are
not, it is necessary to remark concerning emancipation that which
has been said of it in the fifth and sixth articles of the second sec-
tion of Persons, and to add thereto, that we see in the customs of
France the distinction of children who are emancipated, and of
those who are not; but with remarkable differences, which dis-
tinguish the said customs among themselves, and which distin-
guish them likewise from the provinces which are governed by the
Roman law. These differences consist, not only in what relates
to the rights of parents in the goods of their children not eman-
cipated, but also in the ways by which children are held to be
emancipated. Thus, as touching the nghts of parents to the
goods of their children not emancipated, there are some customs
which give the usufruct, not only to the father, but also to the
mother, and to the survivor of them, of the goods of their children,
until they come of age. There are some customs which retain
still something of the ancient Roman law, in that by the said
customs donations made to children who are not emancipated
belong to the father, notwithstanding the change which Justinian
made in the said ancient law, as has been already taken notice of.
Other customs, again, give to the father the property of all the
movables which the son may chance to acquire before he accom-
plishes the age of five-and-twenty years. And other customs dis-


5 L. 6, C. de bon. qua hb.


214 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOK [.


pose differently concerning the same thing. And in some of them
it is even said, that the paternal authority does not take place
there.

2868. As to the ways by which children are held to be emanci-
pated, the most universal is that which is almost everywhere in
use by marriage, because the husband becomes thereby the head
of his wife and family. Emancipation is likewise performed by
an act made in due form.". There are some customs where the
son is emancipated by his attaining the age of twenty years, others
at the age of five-and-twenty, or if he has a public office,! or if he
carries on a trade separately by himself, with the knowledge and
approbation of his father and mother. There are, again, some
customs where the son is held to be emancipated if he lives in a
distinct habitation from his father, which may be gathered from
the twenty-fifth novel of the Emperor Leo. In some customs
marriage does not emancipate the children of noblemen, unless the
same be therein expressly mentioned; neither does it emancipate
persons of an inferior rank, until that after their marriage they
have lived a year and a day out of the house, and separate from
their fathers. And there are likewise some provinces which are
governed by the Roman law, where marriage does not eman-
cipate.

2869. We have made here these remarks concerning the differ-
ent dispositions of the Roman law and of the customs of France,
not only because of the relation they have to the subject-matter of
this section, but to show by this diversity of dispositions, without
mentioning others of the Roman law, which it would have been
superfluous to explain here, that, as it has been remarked in other
places, the matters which may be regulated by arbitrary laws are
subject to this multiplicity of rules, not only in different places, but
even in the same places, according to the times and the different
views of those who have the right of making the rules.!

2870. It remains only that we should acquaint the reader, that,
among the many rules relating to the subject-matter of this sec-
tion, we have confined ourselves to those which are both agree-
able to the Roman law, and most universally received; which
takes in all the principles and rules which are most essential in
this matter.


b VY. 1. ult. C. de emancip. Id.
iV. § 4, Inst. quib. mod. jus pat. pot. solv.; —1. ult. C. de consul.
! See tho eleventh chapter of the Treatise of Laws.


TIT. 31. SEC. 11.| SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 215


Arr. L

2871. The Father has no Right in the Property of the Goods ac-
qutred by the Children. — Of all the goods which the children may
acquire by their labor or industry, or which may come to them by
any other title whatsoever, whether they be emancipated or not,
whether they be adult or under the age of puberty, whether they be
males or females, the father has no right in the property of them,
which belongs solely to the children,* saving only the profit which
may have arisen from the goods of the father, which he had put
into the hands of his son who was not emancipated. For the
property of the said profit would belong to the father;> but he
has in the goods acquired by his son a right to the usufruct of
them, which shall be explained in the following articles.


IL


2872. The Father has the Usufruct of the Goods of his Children
who are not emancipated. — The father has the usufruct during his
life of the goods which his children who are not emancipated may


have acquired. Unless it be of the goods that are excepted by
the rules which follow.


IIL


2873. The Father has not the Usufruct of the Son’s Peculiar Pat-
rimony. — The father has not the usufruct of what his son who is
not emancipated may have of that sort of peculiar patrimony
which is acquired either in the army or at the bar, or in the exer-
cise of some dignity, of some office, or public employment.‘


® 7. 6, C. de bon. que lid.

b 1, Inst. per quas pers. cuiq. acquir. In this article we have made mention only of
the father, and not of the grandfather, with respect to the usufract; and likewise in the
following articles there is mention made only of the father; because that whereas by the
Roman law the son who was married remained still in the power of his father, and that
thus the grandchildren, as well as their fathers, remained likewise under the authority of
their grandfather, who had for that reason the usufruct of their goods; by the usage in
France, the son who marries being emancipated by the marriage, except in some particu-
lar places, as has been observed in the preamble to this section, the father has neither the
property nor the usufruct of any thing that the married son acquires. And the usufruct
of whatever the children of this married son may acquire belongs to their father, and not
to their grandfather. But if it should so happen that the grandfather or father had little
or no estate of their own, nor the usufruct of any goods belonging to their children or
grandchildren, they would have always a right to take what is necessary for their mainte-
nance out of the estate belonging to their children, as shall be shown in the tenth article.

© See the first of the texts cited on the foregoing article.

4 2.6, C. de bon. qua lib.; —o. 1. ult. C. de inoff. test.  l. un. C. de castr. omn. palat.


218 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART It. BOOK IL


and mother’s side, who happen to be in the like want, have the
same right.”


XL


2881. Parents are bound to nourish and maintain their Children.
— As children are obliged to nourish and maintain their parents,
so parents on their part are bound to take the same care of their
children, not only because of the usufruct which they may have
of their goods, but by the right of blood, and according as the
estate of the parents may be sufficient for that purpose, unless it
be that the children render themselves unworthy thereof. And in
general it is a reciprocal duty between ascendants and descend-
ants, that such of them as are able ought to maintain those who
are in want.”


XII


2882. Parents and Children are not bound for one another's
Debts. — We must not reckon among the necessaries which
parents have a right to have supplied out of their children’s goods,
the debts which they owe. For the duty of children towards their
parents is limited to what may regard their persons. And it is
the same thing as to the debts of the children with respect to their
parents. But if a father, or other ascendant, were in prison for
debt, and his son had the means of delivering him out of prison,
by obliging himself to produce him when required, or to pay the
debt if he was able, if the son should fail in this duty towards his
father, his ingratitude would deserve that he should be disinher-
ited according to the circumstances.°


XTIL


2883. The Mother is not bound to maintain the Children, but in
Default of the Father. — This duty of nourishing and maintaining


m L.1, C. de alend. lib. ac parent. ; —I. 2, eod. ; —1. 5, §§ 2, 8, et 4, D. de agnosc. et al.
lib. ;—d.1.§ 19; —1 5, C.de patr. pot. It is to be remarked on this article, that the
fathers and mothers of bastards have the same right. And although the text quoted on
this subject speaks only of the mother, yet it is the same equity with regard to the father,
when he is known. And this duty is likewise reciprocal on the part of the parents to-
wards the children of this kind. See the remark on the eighth article of the second sec-
tion of the first title of the first book.

> L. 5, § 8, D. de agn. @ al. lib. ; —1. ult. C. de alen. lib. ac parent.;—I1. ult. § 5, D. de
bon. quae lib. ;—1. 5, § 12, D. de agnosc. et alend. lib. ;— Nov. 117, c. 7, in f-

° L.5, § 16, D. de agnosc. et al. lib. ; —1.1, C. fil. pro patr. vel pat. pro fil. See, concerning
what is said of disinheriting, the third article of the second section of Undutifiul Testaments.


TIT. 11. SEC. 11.] SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 219


the children belongs principally to the father, and the mother is
not bound to it, except where the father’s estate is not sufficient.
Thus the mother, who, in case of the neglect, or refusal of the fa-
ther, or in case of his absence, has been obliged to supply her child
with those necessaries out of her own estate, may recover it out of
the father’s estate, unless it shall appear that she has only given
such things as she might have given out of a motherly affection,
even although the father had maintained the child out of his own
estate.?


XIV.


2884. It is the same Thing with Respect to the Grandfather by the
Mother’s Side. — The children of daughters cannot claim their
maintenance out of the estate of their grandfather by the mother’s
side, except in the case where the father or grandfather by the fa-
ther’s side is not able to maintain them. For the children of the
married daughter are under the power of their father, and out of
the family of their grandfather by the mother’s side.‘


XV.


2885. Two Sorts of Rights which Ascendants have in the Goods of
their Children. — All the foregoing rules respect the rights which
parents have in the goods of their children during their children’s
life. And as to the goods which they leave behind them at their
death, if they die without children, their nearest ascendants who
survive them succeed to them, as has been explained in the pre-
ceding section, unless it be in such goods as are excepted by the
following rules.


XVI.


2886. The Things given by the Ascendants revert to them. — If in
the inheritance of a person who dies without issue, and who leaves
behind him a father and mother, or other ascendants, there should
happen to be some goods which had been given to the said person
by one of the ascendants who survive him, he who gave the said
goods may take them back again, by virtue of the right which is
called reversion, and he will exclude from them all the other as-
cendants, even the nearest, who would exclude him from the rest
of the goods.’

 L.8,§ 14, D. de agn. ot al. Ub. q L. 8, D. de agn. et al. led.


the places quoted in the article.
* See the following section, where the right of reversion is explained.


220 THE CIVIL Law. [PART IL. BOOK IL


XVIL

2887. The Father takes back the Profts which have proceeded
from his Goods. —It is necessary likewise to remark, as an excep-
tion to the rule which calls jointly to the succession all the as-
cendants in the same degree, that, if a son who was not emanci-
pated, whom his father had intrusted with the management of
some small patrimony, had made any profit by it; his father and
his mother happening to survive him, whatever profit had been
made of the said patrimony which the father had intrusted the son
with would belong to the father, he having as it were already a
right to it before the son’s death, as has been explained in the first
article; and the mother would only have a share in the other
goods which the son had acquired some other way. And it would
be the same thing in the cases where the brothers of the whole
blood should likewise succeed, whether it were with the father
alone, or with the father and mother.


XVIIL


2888. The Change made by Second Marriages. — We must in the
last place take notice of one other cause which occasions some
change in the rights of fathers, mothers, and other ascendants, to
the goods of their children; which is the case where the father,
mother, or other ascendant, who has children, happens to marry
again, which is a matter that is necessarily to be distinguished, and
which we shall speak of in its proper place."


SECTION III.
OF THE RIGHT OF REVERSION.


2889. We have already spoken of the right of reversion in the
sixteenth article of the foregoing section, where it was necessary
to make mention of it, as being one of the rights which the as-
cendants have in the goods of the descendants; but we spoke of it
there only in general, and for order’s sake. And seeing this matter
has some rules which are peculiar to it, they shall be explained in
this section.

t § 1, Inet. per quas pers. cuig. acquir. See the law quoted on the first article, in which


there are these words, Non ex ejus substantia cujus in potestate sit.
" See the fourth title of the third book.


TIT. 11. SEC. T1l.] | SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. a2


2890. The right of reversion, which gives back again to the as-
cendants the things which they had given to their descendants,
who die before them without leaving behind them any children, is
so natural, that it has been equally received both in the ancient and
modern Roman law; and it is likewise received in France, both
in the provinces which are governed by their customs, and in those
which follow the Roman law. We see in the laws two motives
of equity, which make this right of reversion to be just and favor-
able. One is, to give to the ascendants this comfort, of not suf-
fering at the same time the double loss of their children and of the
goods which they had stripped themeelves of in their favor* And
the other motive, which is a consequence of the former, is not to
discourage ascendants from exercising their liberality towards their
descendants, as it might happen if they should have any reason to
fear this double loss.” But although these motives of the right of
reversion regard equally the father and mother, and all the as-
cendants by the father and mother’s side, yet the reversion was
limited in the Roman law to the father, and to the ascendants by
the father’s side, who had in their power the children to whom
they had given any thing; and the mother, with the ascendants
on her side, bad not this right unless they had stipulated it And
some interpreters have been of opinion, that Justinian had entirely
abolished this nght, and that the father and grandfather by the fa-
ther’s side were excluded from it by his 118th novel, because that
by the said law he calls equally the ascendants to the successions of
the descendants, according to the order of their proximity, without
reserving to them this right of reversion; from whence they have
concluded, that if, for example, a grandfather by the father’s side
had made a gift to his grandson, who should happen to die, leav-
ing behind him his mother and this grandfather, the mother would
exclude the grandfather from having that which he had given to
his grandson.

2891. This interpretation, which is so widely different from the
spirit of the said law, has not been received in France, and it may
be said that the words of this novel of Justinian cannot have this
effect. For this right of reversion, which is so expressly estab-
lished by several laws, and so equitable that it is as it were a


* L. 6, D. de jure dot. ;—I. 4, C. solut. matr.
» 2.9 C de ton. que lib.
© See the texts cited on the second sie “end Oi wank Wel Ges made upon it.
V. Nov. Leon. 25.
19°


222 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK 11.


part of the law of nature, could never be abolished by a law that
makes no mention of it. And we should have reason to exclaim
against the hardship of a law which should ordain, in the case
which we have just now mentioned, that the mother should ex-
clude the grandfather from the right of reversion. Thus, Justinian
not having expressly abolished this right by the said novel, it
ought to subsist, according to that rule concerning the interpreta-
tion of laws which directs us to reconcile the ancient laws with
the new, by interpreting the one by the other, and giving to them
all the just effect which their intention demands, in every thing
where they are not contrary to one another, and in that which the
latter laws have not abrogated. But if this rule comprehends
likewise the arbitrary laws, it ought with much more reason to be
understood of the laws that are founded on natural equity, and es-
pecially those which, as this law touching the right of reversion to
ascendants, have for their principles truths which cannot be called
in question without a kind of inhumanity.

2892. If, therefore, we examine this 118th novel according to
this rule, we shall find nothing in it that may give us any reason
to think that Justinian had a design to abolish the right of rever-
sion. And it may likewise be added, that the natural effect of the
right of reversion is to make the goods that are subject to it, not to
be considered as a part of the succession of the person to whom
they had been given, but to be excepted and separated from the
succession, in order to be returned to the ascendant who has this
right. For the gifts of ascendants to their descendants imply this
tacit condition, that, if it happens that the donor survives the donee
who dies without children, he shall take back again that thing
which he stripped himeelf of only with the view of transmitting it
to his descendants. Thus, this thing, with respect to the ascendant
who gave it, may be considered as not being a part of the inherit-
ance of the donee, and by consequence not subject to the laws
which regulate successions.


Art. I.
2893. Definition of Reversion.— By the right of reversion is
meant the right which a donor who survives his donee has to take


back the things which he had given him, as oe be explained by
the following rules.


4 See the eighteenth article of the second section of the Rules of Law.
® L. ult. C. comm. utr. jud.


TIT. Il. SEC. II1.] | SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 223


IL.

2894. Two Sorts of Reversion, either by the Law or by Agree-
ment.— We ought to distinguish two sorts of the right of rever-
sion: that which the law gives to fathers and other ascendants,
although there be no agreement about it; and that which has been
stipulated by an express agreement, whether it be by an ascendant
or any other donor, even a stranger,” that is to say, one to whom
the donee is noways related.


IIL


2895. The Reversion by Agreement ts regulated by the Agree-
ment.— The reversion by agreement hath its effect, such as it is
settled by the agreement, whether it be between ascendants and
descendants, or other persons.


IV.


2896. Reversion of Things given in Favor of Marriage.— If a
father, a mother, or other ascendant, having endowed a daughter,
or made some present to one of his or her children or descend-
ants, in favor of marriage, survives the donee who dies without
issue, the donor shall take back the things. And although the
reversion of the said things has not been expressly stipulated, yet
the donor shall have them before any other heir, and even prefer-
ably to the nearest ascendant, who, perhaps, may exclude him
from the inheritance of the said donee.*


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2897. Although the texts cited on this article, and those which
have been quoted on the first and second articles, do not extend to


* Li ult. C. comm. utr. jud.;—l. un. $18, C. de rei ux. act.; —d.§ in f.; — v. Ulp. tit.
6,§5;—v. Nov. Leon. 25. Although the reversion which is mentioned in these last texts
was of a larger extent than that which is spoken of here, and had this effect, that the
dowry was restored to the donor, not only in the case where the daughter that was en-
dowed died, but even in her lifetime in case of a divorce; yet we have added these two
texts, in order to observe therein two things. One is, that when a stranger gave a por-
Gon with a woman in marriage, he had not this right of reversion, unless he had stipu-
lated it: and the other is, that they reckoned in the number of strangers even the moth-
er and the ascendanta by the mother’s side, because they had not the daughter in their
power. See, touching this remark, that which is made on the fourth article.

_* The agreement about the reversion having nothing unlawful in it, it hath its effect accord-
ing tothe rules of covenants. See the texts cited on the foregoing article, and the eleventh
article of the second section of Dowries. See the close of the remark on the fifth article.

* L. 6, D. de jure dot.;—I. 4, C. sol. matrim.;—1. 17, in f. D. de senat. Maced. ; — |. 2,
C. de bom. quce sb. See the sixth, seventh, and eighth articles of the second section of the
title of Dowries. :


224 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT II. BOOK II.


the mother, and the other ascendants by the mother’s side, yet we
have nevertheless comprehended in the article all the ascendants
without distinction. For according to the usage in France, they
have all of them this right of reversion, and the same equity makes
the reversion to be as just on their pert as on the part of the fa-
ther. There are even some customs in France which extend the
right of reversion, not only to the mother, and the ascendants on
the mother’s side, but even to collateral relations, even although
there be no agreement for so doing. And this right is likewise
given to collaterals in some places in France which are governed
by the Roman law; but in other places they have it not, except
where it is expressly stipulated.

2898. We must remark on this article, that although these dis-
positions of the Roman law regard only dowries and donations
made in favor of marriage, yet, seeing the right of reversion is no
less just in the other sorts of donations, the greatest part of the
customs in France have extended it to all donations in general
by express dispositions. And it is the common usage in France,
both in the customs which have made no express provision therein,
and likewise in the provinces which follow the Roman law, that
the reversion in favor of ascendants takes place in all sorts of do-
nations, although there be no express stipulation to that purpose.

2899. We must likewise further observe, in relation to the same
dispositions of the Roman law, that they do not distinguish the
case where the descendant, who is the donee by his contract of
marriage, dies without issue, from that in which he leaves children
behind him; which gave rise to a question, which usage has de-
cided between two parties, one of which pretended, that although
the descendant who was the donee left children behind him, yet
the reversion took place; the other alleging that the reversion was
not to take place but in the case where the donee died without
issue.* It is this second opinion that has been established as the
rule: and it is so just and so natural, that it may be said that it is
not only the plurality of voices, but that it is also reason, which
has established it as a rule; since donations in favor of marriage,
and the dowries of daughters, have the same end as marriage, and
respect not only the donees, but likewise their descendants. From
whence it follows, that when there are children who survive their
fathers or mothers, to whom the donation had been made in favor


" It may be observed touching these opinions, that both the one and the other have
some foundation in the Roman law. V. i. 12, D. de pact. dotal. ; — Ulp. tit. 6, § 4.


TIT. Il. SEC. I1¥.] SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 225


of marriage, the motive of the donation subsists in their persons;
and they make the motive of the reversion to cease, which is to
prevent the donor’s falling at the same time into the double loss
both of his goods and of his child, as has been observed in the
preamble of this section. For if the donee leaves children behind
him, the ascendant who was the donor, and who survives him,
considers in those children the person whom they represent, and
he sees the goods which he had bestowed pass to the use which
engaged him to give them away.

2900. Seeing the consideration of the children of the donee
makes the reversion to cease when the children survive him, a
question has been started, whether in this case the right ceases in
such a manner that, if the said children should happen to die be-
fore the ascendant who was the donor, he would be deprived
of the right of reversion. But because the said children are con-
sidered themselves as donees of their grandfather, as we have
just now observed, it would seem that it might be urged, that, the
donation being continued in their persons, the right of reversion
was only suspended in their favor, and that it begins to have its
eflect whenever the donation ceases to have its effect by their
death. For in that case this donor who survives both the donee
and the donee’s children is in the same condition as if he had sur-
vived the donee dying without issue. Since by his surviving all
this branch of his descendants, on whose account the donation was
made, he survives in effect his donees, and comes within the mo-
tive of the laws which grant the right of reversion.

2901. Although the donation was not made in favor of mar-
nage, yet it seems that it would be fully as equitable that the chil-
dren of the donee should make the reversion to cease in that case ;
and that, on the contrary, it should take place if the donor did sur-
vive the donee and his children. For every donation from an as-
cendant to a descendant has a view to the settlement of the person
and family of the donee; and the motives of the rules of reversion,
which we have just now explained, seem to be common to all
soris of donations in favor of children.


V.


2902. This Right does not hinder the Profits which arise out
of the Goods subject to the Reversion. — In the case of the pre-
ceding article, the profits which the wife of the donee has a right
‘0 out of the donation made to her husband by his father or other


226 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK I.


ascendant, in favor of their marriage, and the profits which the
husband has a right to in the same manner out of his wife’s mar-
riage portion, would have their effect; and the reversion would be
diminished by those kinds of profits, whether they were regulated
by the contract itself, or by custom, or some other law. For this
donation and this dowry being in favor of the marriage, they ought
to follow the conditions thereof, which are sach, that whatsoever is
given to the wife is subject to the rights of the husband; and
whatsoever is given to the husband is likewise subject to the rights
of the wife, unless it has been otherwise agreed on.°


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2903. Although there should be no covenant to regulate these
profits, as there was in the case of the text cited, yet if they are
regulated by custom, it is equally just that they should dimin-
ish the reversion. For the donor knew sufficiently this conse-
quence of his donation, and that the goods which he gave would
be subject to these sorts of profits. Which regards as well the
profits that the wife has a right to out of the things given to her
husband, as the profits which the husband has a right to out of his
wife’s marriage portion. And since the text cited on this article
takes in the whole dowry, according to the agreement that had
been made, with much more reason may it be applied to the profits
which consume only a part of it.

2904. If, besides the profits that belong to the wife out of the
things given to her husband, she had likewise her dowry to re-
cover, and the other goods of the husband were not sufficient to
answer the same, would the reversion, of which the case had hap-
pened, the husband being dead without children, hinder the wife
from recovering her dowry out of the things given to the husband?
Seeing this restitution of the dowry is a consequence of the con-
tract of marriage, the things which are given to the husband ought
to be comprehended among the goods of the husband which are
responsible for the dowry; and this is a charge which the donor
could not be ignorant of, since the dowry was promised only on
the assurance that all the goods belonging to the husband should
be answerable for it; which included particularly the things given
on account of the marriage, unless they had been excepted by an
express clause.*


© L. 12, D. de pact. dot.
® See the seventeenth article of the first section of Substitutions direct and fidaciary-


TIT. Il. BEC. IT1.] SUCCESSION OF ASOENDANTS. 227


2905. But if the donee had contracted debts, could his creditors
hinder the effect of the reversion? Or could the donor allege
against the creditors, that the goods which he had given are ap-
propriated to him in the case of the reversion, and that the donee
could not mortgage them to his prejudice, no more than an heir
who is charged with a substitution can engage the goods which
are subject to the substitution? And would it likewise be said
that this donee could not alienate the goods subject to the rever-
sion, nor dispose of them by testament ?

2906. As to the alienation and mortgage of the goods which are
given, we must consider what are the motives of the donations
made by ascendants to their descendants, and judge by those
motives of the use that the donee may make of the things given
him, what right he has to them, and what right the donor has still
in them. The intention of the ascendants who make presents to
their descendants is always, without doubt, that the goods which
are given may serve towards the settlement of the donee, and to
all the uses that shall be consequences of the said settlement,
which implies all the uses that any master of a family may make
of the goods for his person and for his family. Thus, this donee
has over those goods which are given him the right to make use
of them according as his affairs shall require ; which supposes the
liberty of using them in the same manner as any proprietor may
use the goods that are his own. And the donor has on his part
his right of reversion ‘in the said goods, if the case does happen.

2907. If we put in the scales this right of the donor, and that of
the donee, in order to give to the one and to the other their just
effect, we see that, the donee being master of the things given him,
and given towards his settlement, it is a consequence of such a
donation, that he may use them according as his affairs shall
oblige him, and as the said settlement and all its consequences
may demand. Which implies the necessity of using them so as
to mortgage and alienate them. For if, for example, this donee
is a person that has occasion to purchase an office, it will become
just and necessary that the creditors who shall lend him money
upon a mortgage of the goods given, or those to whom he shall
sell them in order to lay out the price in the purchase of the said
office, should have nothing to fear on the score of the right of re-
vergion, since their security upon the office might fail them in case
it be suppressed, or fall in its value. From whence it follows, that
adonee may for any other affair mortgage the goods which are


228 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART It. BOOK It.


given him, as well as the rest of his goods; and that what he may
do for one affair, he may do for all others, since the right of rever-
sion does not put the donee under tutorship, and does not oblige
him to examine so nicely whether he employs to advantage the
goods which the donation has made him master of; and that the
creditors of the said donee are not bound on their part to take any
other precautions than those which are usually taken with all
debtors who possess only free goods, which they may dispose of
as being absolutely masters of them, since the reversion ought not
to be compared to a substitution, which leaves no liberty to the
possessor to dispose of the goods to the prejudice of the person
who is substituted to them; otherwise it would be necessary that
a contract of marriage, in which a father endows his daughter,
should be made public as a substitution, in order to preserve to
him his right of reversion. And it is so just and so natural that
the reversion should cease with respect to the creditors of the
donee, that some customs in France, which ordain that the goods
given by ascendants should return to them without the burden of
the debts of the donee, do add, that the goods given are neverthe-
less subject by way of supplement to the debts of the donee, in
case his other goods should not be sufficient to discharge them.
2908. Lastly, it may be said, that the nature and proper char-
acter of the right of reversion is to distinguish, in the mass of the
goods belonging to the succession of the donee, the things that
were given, and that are subject to this nght, in order to take
them out of the mass, and to return them back to the donor, not
as if he had always remained proprietor of them, but as succeed-
ing to such of the said goods as remain still in the inheritance.
Thus, it is by a kind of succession that the donor takes back the
things which he had given; and we see that some customs in
France, instead of giving to fathers and mothers, and other as-
cendants, the reversion of the things given to their children and
descendants, do barely ordain that they shall succeed to the things
which they gave them. It follows from this nature of reversion,
whether we will consider it as a succession to the things that are
given, or as a right independent of the quality of heir, and which
the ascendant, who is the donor, acquires a right to by the donation
iteelf, that the effect of this right is limited, according to the nature
of such donation, to distinguish in the inheritance the things that
were given, in order to take them away from any other heir be-
sides him who has the right of reversion; but that the reversion


TIT. 1. SEC. I1-] SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 229


ought not to have the retroactive effect of an appropriation, which
may hinder the donee from mortgaging or alienating the goods,
and which may turn, not only to the prejudice of the donee, but
even to the prejudice of third persons, who had reason to look up-
on the things that were given as being a part of the donee’s goods,
as well as the other goods which he possessed by any other title.
And although it may be said against the creditors who were prior
to the donations, that they had not reckoned upon the goods
which were given to their debtor after their debt was contracted,
yet their condition ought not to be distinguished from that of the
creditors who were posterior to the donation. For besides that
the condition of the last creditors ought not to be better than that
of the first, the goods which the debtor should afterwards acquire
were likewise engaged to his prior creditors, and the destination
of the things that were given for the use and benefit of the donee
implied much more the acquitting of what he already owed, than
the facility of borrowing and contracting new debts.

2909. Although the donee may dispose of the goods given him
to the prejudice of the reversion by alienating or mortgaging them,
it does not thence follow that, if he commits any crime, he subjects
the said goods to confiscation. For this kind of engagement is
not of the nature of those which hinder the effect of the reversion,
since, on the contrary, the civil death of the donee who is con-
demned ought to have the same effect to make way for the right
of reversion as the natural death would have; but if the condemned
person had children, it might be said, in behalf of the forfeiture,
that the case of the reversion had not happened, and that therefore
the forfeiture ought to take place; since, the children hindering the
effect of the reversion, the things that were given would still be-
long to the donee that is condemned, and by consequence would
be included in the forfeiture. But since the children make this
ight of reversion to cease, when they survive after the natural
death of the donee their father, and since the goods fall to them
by the said death, might we not give the same effect to the civil
death, and make the said goods to pass to the children of this
donee, not as a succession which should give them the right of
their father, for the condemned person has no heirs, but as an
eflect of the donation and of the intention of the donor, who, be-
cause of the incapacity which has happened to the donee, would
have the things given to pass to the donee’s children? for they were
not only given to this donee, but the intention of the donor was,

VOL. II. 20


230 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part 11. BOOK IL


that the children should have them after their father, preferably to
himself. Or we might under another view consider the donee as
being dead without children, since he died without heirs; and re-
store to the donor the things which he had given, but with the
charge of keeping them for the children of his child to whom he
had made the donation. This we thought fit to mention, because
it has been adjudged after this manner in one of the parliaments
of France, and because this temperament seems to be conformable
to equity, and to the spirit of the rules of law.

2910. As to the dispositions which the donee might make by a
testament, we see that some of the customs in France have lim-
ited this right of reversion to the case where there are no children
and no disposition made by the donee; which leaves a liberty of
disposing to the prejudice of the reversion, both by alienations
and by dispositions made in prospect of death. And this rule
seems to be taken from the 25th novel of Leo, where he blames,
as an abuse which had crept in contrary to the ancient law, the
usage of not being at liberty to dispose by testament, to the preju-
dice of the reversion ; and he reéstablished the said liberty, reserv-
ing only to the donor his legitime, or the Falcidian portion. But
we see, on the contrary, in some provinces which are governed by
the written law, that they observe there a law that is quite the
reverse, which favors in such a manner the right of reversion, that
not only the donee cannot dispose of the things that are given
him by testament, but that he cannot even alienate or mortgage
them.

2911. From these two extremes, the one, which permits the
donee without distinction either to alienate, to mortgage, or to
dispose by testament; and the other, which takes from him the lib-
erty of all manner of disposition whatsoever; it has happened that
in some places, where the law touching this matter is not so pre-
cisely determined, there have arisen several lawsuits touching the
validity of dispositions made by donees, to the prejudice of the
right of reversion which the law gives to ascendants who are do-
nors; which has made many people wish that some provision
were made therein. And if it may be allowed in the mean while
to make one bare reflection on rules which are so opposite the
one to the other, it would seem that, as to the alienation and
mortgage, the reasons which have been observed render the rule or
usage which allows them favorable; and that as to testamentary
dispositions, as they are not of the same necessity for the beboof


TIT. II. SEC. II.] SUCCESSION OF ASCENDANTS. 231


of the donee as is the liberty of mortgaging and alienating, so
neither are they within the intention of the donor, but, on the
contrary, we ought not to presume that he intended that a legatee
should be preferred to him, it would not seem unjust that the re-
version should take away the liberty of disposing by testament.
And if, for instance, a grandfather by the father’s side had given to
his grandson an estate in land situated in a country that is gov-
erned by the Roman law, and the said grandson had devised
it to his mother, who survived him, together with his said grand-
father, or if he had devised the said land to one of his friends, it
would seem to be consonant both to humanity and equity that the
said grandfather should have that effect of the right of reversion,
soas to have the preference both of the mother and also of the
stranger; and that we might with very good reason, and without
trespassing against the principles and spirit of the laws, judge that
the said legacy had proceeded either from a principle of ingrati-
tude in the donee, if he thought that the donor would outlive him,
or from a persuasion that his grandfather would die before him.
And either the one or the other of these considerations, being
backed with the favor of the right of reversion, might unjustly
make the said legacy give place to the right of reversion, and in-
troduce the rule of the provinces where testamentary dispositions
are prohibited, to the prejudice of the right of reversion. And as
it would be neither reasonable nor possible to make the validity of
the dispositions of donees, to the prejudice of the right of reversion,
to depend on the quality and circumstances of the said disposi-
tions, so as to ratify and confirm some of them which might be
favorable, and to annul others as containing some hardship, and
likewise because the rule ought to be simple and uniform, it would
seem just, if there were a necessity of making a choice between
these two opposite rales, to annul rather all dispositions of donees
made to the prejudice of the right of reversion, than to confirm
them all without distinction; and this rule, as well as that
which permits the alienation and the mortgage of the said goods,
would be without any manner of inconvenience. For those who
should be afraid of the effect and consequences either of the one or
the other, might regulate the conditions of the donations, and of
the reversion, as they should think fit, and either restrain or enlarge
by their covenants the liberty to alienate, to mortgage, and to dis-
pose by testament ; for covenants of this kind would be very lawful.®


e


» See the twenty-seventh article of the second section of the Rules of Law.


282 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT IL. BOOK IL


2912. All that has been said hitherto concerns the right of rever-
sion as it is regulated by law, although there has been no agree-
ment about it. But if the reversion is stipulated by an express
covenant, whether it be by an ascendant or any other person, re-
lation or stranger to the donee, the reversion in that case will have
the effect which it ought to have by the covenant. And unless it
makes express mention of the liberty to dispose, it is the common
opinion, that, as an express stipulation seems to have more force
than that which is barely given by the law, the reversion which is
founded on an agreement hinders all dispositions; which is still
more equitable with respect to donors who are not ascendants.
For since they have not the same affection for the establishment
of the donees and their families as ascendants have, it is natural to
presume thet the covenant by which the reversion is stipulated
takes away from the donee the liberty of all dispositions to the
prejudice of the donors.

2913. We have perhaps enlarged too much on a subject which
has but a few rules in the Roman law; and perhaps, likewise, we
have said too little on a’subject that is of so frequent use and so
full of difficulties. But we thought that, without entering into a
particular inquiry into the several sorts of difficulties, which would
be endless and of no profit, it was necessary to take notice of the
most material; and that it might be sufficient for deciding all
those which may arise, to establish the principles on which the
decisions may depend.


VI.


2914. The Father has the Reversion of the Dowry given by
the Grandfather on the Father's Side.— If a young woman that is
endowed by her grandfather on the father’s side, having survived
her grandfather, dies without children, her father being alive, the
father takes back the dowry as if he himself had given it, although
he be not heir to his father, who was grandfather to the daughter;
and he excludes from it the mother, and the other children whom
he has by her, and who might succeed with him. For as it is the
duty of the father to endow his daughter, so it was for the father’s
sake that the grandfather did endow his granddaughter. And this
dowry reverts to him by a double right, both as representing his
grandfather, and as taking back a gift which his father had given
for him, and on his account. Which is the reason why this right
is in his person independent on the quality of heir to his father,


TIT. III. SEC. 1.] SUCCESSION OF COLLATERALS. 283


grandfather to the daughter, and that it was acquired to him in a
manner from the moment of the donation, that it might have its
effect whenever the case thereof should happen.‘


TITLE III.


IN WHAT MANNER BROTHERS, SISTERS, AND OTHER COL-
LATERALS, SUCCEED.


2915. We have seen in the preamble of this second book, that
there are three orders of persons whom the laws call to the succes-
sions. The first is that of children, and other descendants. The
second, of fathers, and mothers, and other ascendants. And the
third is of collaterals; who are so called, because they descend,
every one by his line from father to son, from an ascendant that is
common to them; which is the reason that they are placed one
at the side of the other, underneath the person from whom they
descend. —


SECTION I.
WHO ARE THE COLLATERALS.


Art. I.


2916. Defnition of Collaterals.— By collaterals are meant all
those who, being neither ascendants nor descendants to one
another, are descended either from the same father, or the same
mother, or from another ascendant that is common to them.
Thus, brothers and sisters are collaterals to one another; thus, the
uncle and nephew are also collaterals to one another ; and cousins
the same.*


' 1.6, D.decollat. Although the law cited on this article seems contrary to the 79th
law, D. de jure det., yet we thought that the equity which was the motive thereof cught to
make the rule, withont its being necessary to examine in what manner these two laws
may be reconciled.

" L.1, D. de grad. et affin.; —1. 9,4 1, C. de natur. lid,

290 *


SA. THE CIVIL Law. [PART It. BOOX IL


IL

2917. Three Kinds of Brothers: Brothers of the Whole Blood,
Brothers by the Father's Side, and Brothers by the Mother's Side.—
Among the collaterals, the nearest are brothers and sisters,’ who
are of three sorts. ‘Those who are born of the same father and of
the same mother, whom we call brothers of the whole blood;
those who are born of one and the same father, but of different
mothers, who are called brothers by the father’s side; and those
who have one and the same mother, but different fathers, whom
we call brothers by the mother’s side.‘


IIT.


2918. Uncles, Aunts, Nephews, and Nieces. — The nearest of kin
after brothers and sisters are uncles and aunts ; that is to say, the
brothers and sisters of the father or mother: and nephews and
nieces; that is to say, the children of brothers or sisters.°


IV.


2919. Divers Sorts of Uncles, Aunts, Nephews, and Mieces.—
As we must distinguish among brothers and sisters those who are
brothers or sisters of the whole blood, that is to say, by the same
father and mother, from those who are only of the half blood,
that is, who have only in common the same father, or the same
mother; so likewise among uncles and aunts we may distinguish
between those who are brothers of the whole blood to the father
or mother, and those who are only brothers by the half blood, that
is, either by the father’s side alone, or by the mother’s side alone.
And the same distinction may be made among nephews and
nieces, between those who are children of brothers or sisters of the
whole blood, and those who are children of brothers or sisters by
the half blood.‘


b 7.1, D. de grad. et affin. © Nov. 118, ¢. 3

d Dic. 3. © L.1,§ 5, D. de grad. et affa.

f We take notice here of these several sorts of uncles and aunts, and of nephews and
nieces, in order to distinguish these different kinds of relations. For although these dif-
ferences are not considered in the Roman law, which restrains to brothers and sisters
alone the distinction of brothers by the whole blood and brothers by the half blood, and
calls to successions all the other collaterals according to their degrees, without distinguish-
ing whether they be related by the father alone, or the mother alone, or by both, as shall
be explained in the ninth article of the following section; yet it is necessary to know these
different sorts of kindred; and they are of use in the customs of France, which appropri-
ate estates inherited by descent to the nearest of kin on the side, and in the line, from
which they descended ; as has been already remarked.


TIT. 11. SEC. 1.] | SUCCESSION OF COLLATERALS. 235


V.

2920. Great-Uncles and Great- Aunts. — The great-uncle is the
brother of the grandfather or grandmother, whether it be by the
father’s side or mother’s side. And the brothers of the remoter
ascendants, such as great-grandfather, great-grandfather’s father,
and others, are likewise comprised in our language under the
name of great-uncles ; who may be distinguished by the degrees
of first or second great-uncle; and it is the same thing with re-
spect to great-aunts, whether those great-uncles and great-aunts
be related by the whole blood or by the half blood to the ascend-
ant whose brothers and sisters they are.*


VI.


2921. Grandnephews and Grandnieces.— The grandnephew is
the nephew’s son, grandson to the brother or sister, whether he be
descended of the whole blood, or of the half blood. And all the
descendants of nephews are likewise called grandnephews, who
may be distinguished by the degrees of first and second grand-
nephew. And what is here said of grandnephews ought like-
wise to be understood of grandnieces."


VIL


2922. Cousins.— All the other collaterals are comprehended in
our language under the name of cousins; the nearest of which are
the children of brothers and sisters, whom we call cousins-german ;
whether they be the children of brothers of the whole blood, or of
the half blood. And it is the same thing with respect to the
children of sisters, whether they be sisters of the whole blood, or
of the half blood; or to the children of brothers and sisters. For
in what manner soever the brothers and sisters are linked together,
the name of cousins-german is given indifferently to the children
of the one with respect to the children of the other. And as for
the other cousins more remote, they are to be distinguished ac-
cording to their ranks, in the orders of the collaterals, which shall
be explained in the following articles!


VIIL
2923. First Order of Collaterals. — We must distinguish in the
collaterals of any person three different orders. The first is of


5 £.1,§ 6, D. de grad. et affin.; —v. 1. 10, § 15, et seq.
* L.1,46, D. de grad. et aff.;—v. 1. 10, § 15, ef seq.
’ L. 10, § 15, D. de grad. et affin.


236 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT HH. BOOK II.


those who are placed at the side of that person in the same line,
in such a manner that they are all equally distant with the said
person from the first ascendant that is common to them. Thus,
brothers and sisters are at the same distance from their father.
Thus, cousins-german are at the same distance from their grand-
father. And second-cousins are at the same distance from ther


great-grandfather.


19.4


2924. Second Order of Collaterals.— 'The second order of the
collaterals of any person is of those who are at a less distance than
they from the first ascendant that is common to them. Thus, the
uncle is not in so remote a degree from his father as is his nephew,
who is grandson to his father. Thus, the cousin-german of the
father of any person, who is called uncle according to the way in
Brittany, being grandson of the great-grandfather of the said per-
son, is not at so great a distance as that person is from the said
great-grandfather. Thus, the cousins-german of all the other as-
cendants of any person are less remote than the said person from
the first ascendants who are common to them.


».¢


2925. Third Order of Collaterals. — The third order of the col-
laterals of any one is of those who are more remote than the said
person from the first ascendant that is common to them. Thus,
the nephew is at a greater distance from-his grandfather than his
uncle, who is son to the said grandfather. Thus, the son of the
cousin-german of any person, who is called uncle after the manner
of Brittany, is at a greater distance from his great-grandfather,
who is their first common ascendant. Thus, all the descendants
of cousins-german, and of the others who are in the first order, are
more remote than the said person from the ascendant. of whom
they are all descended.”


! This is a consequence of the preceding articles, and which may be easily understood
by a view of the table of kindred.


TIT. 11]. SEC. 11.] SUCCESSION OF COLLATERALS. 287


SECTION II.
THE ORDER OF THE SUCCESSION OF COLLATERALS.


2926. It is to be observed on this section, that whatever shall
be said therein touching the proximity among collaterals, who ex-
clude one another according as they are nearer, is to be understood
only with regard to the provinces in France which are governed
according to the written law. For in the customs of France there
are two contrary rules. One which is common to all the customs,
which calls to the succession of estates inherited by descent, not
the nearest collaterals without distinction, but those who are near-
est on the side from whence the said estate of inheritance descended.
Thus, the cousin-german on the father’s side of the deceased will
succeed to him in the goods which descended to him from the
father’s side, although the deceased had left behind him a brother
by the mother’s side, who was nearer to him than the said cousin-
german. The other rule, which is peculiar to some customs, is
that which admits of representation in the collateral line to an in-
finite degree, which makes that collaterals of a more remote de-
gree are not excluded by others who are nearer.


Art. I.


2927. Brothers are the first in the Order of Collaterals.— The
succession of one that dies without children, or other descendants,
and without father or mother, or other ascendants, passes to the
collaterals. And if the deceased had brothers or sisters they will
succeed in the first place,“ and will exclude all the others. But
brothers and sisters succeed differently, according to the distinc-
tions which shall be explained in the following articles.


IL


2928. Brothers of the Whole Blood exclude the others.— If the
pereon whose succession is to go to his brothers alone, when there
is no descendant or ascendant, hath left behind him brothers of
the whole blood, and likewise other brothers of the half blood,
whether they be by the father’s side alone, or by the mother’s side
alone, or of both these kinds, the brothers of the whole blood, who


\


® Nov. 118, ¢. 8.


238 | THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Ii. BOOK I.


would have concurred with the ascendants if there had been any,
will succeed all alone, and exclude the others,> and their descend-
ants. And this rule, as well as those which follow, is to be
understood of sisters as well as brothers, whether the sisters be
alone, or that with them there are likewise brothers, seeing their
condition ought to be equal. But for the greater clearness, and
for brevity’s sake, we shall only name the brothers alone.


IL.


2929. The Children of Brothers of the Whole Blood concur with
their Uncles. — If, together with the brothers of the whole blood,
there are children of another brother of the whole blood, who died
before the brother whose succession is to be divided, those chil-
dren will represent their father, and will concur with their uncles,
brothers to the deceased; and will have among them all the share
which their father would have had if he had been alive.4


IV.


2930. The Children of the Brothers of the Whole Blood exclude
the Brothers of the Half Blood. — If the deceased left behind him no
brothers of the whole blood, but only children of a brother of the
whole blood, that bad died before him; and if there were alive
brothers of the deceased by the half blood, either by the father’s side
alone, or the mother’s side alone, or of both these sorts together;
the children of the brother of the whole blood, nephews to the de-
ceased, would be preferred before their uncles, brothers to the de-
ceased by the father’s side alone, or by the mother’s side alone,


b Nov. 118, c.3. See, concerning what is said in this article of the brothers concurring
with the father and mother and other ascendants in the succession of their brother, the
seventh article of the first section of the second title.

© Nov. 118, ¢. 3.

d Nov. 118,c. 3. We must obeerve in this article the first case of the representation
among collaterals. See, touching this right of representation, the fourth, sixth, seventh,
and eighth articles; and as for the representation in the direct line, see the second and
third articles of the second section of the first title.

It may be remarked, in relation to the right of representation among collaterals, that
the said right hath its bounds, as it is explained in this article, and in the fourth, sixth,
seventh, and eighth articles, and that it hath likewise the same bounds in many of the
customs in France ; but in some of them the representation takes place in the collateral
line without any limitation, as has been observed in the preamble to this section: and
that in other customs there is no representation at all in the collateral line; unless the
same has been established by covenant; and that there are even some customs which have
abolished the representation in the direct line of descendants, as has been remarked on
the socond article of the second section of the first title.


TIT. III. SEC. 11.} SUCCESSION OF COLLATERALS. 239


and would exclude them from the succession in the same manner
as their father would have done if he had been alive; and al-
though they are in a remoter degree than their uncles, yet, repre-
senting their father, they come in his place.


V.


2931. Brothers by the Father's Side alone, and those by the Moth-
er’s Side alone, concur together.— When there are no brothers of
the whole blood, nor any of their children, and there are brothers
either by the father’s side alone, or by the mother’s side alone,
or brothers of both these sorts, they divide among them indiffer-
ently the succession by equal portions, according to the number of


persons.‘
REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2932. It may be observed on this article, that some interpreters
have been of opinion, that, in the case where brothers born of the
same father, and of a different mother, concur with the brothers by
the mother’s side alone, these ought to inherit the goods of their
brother which he had by his mother, and those other brothers to
inherit the goods he had from his father, and that they should
divide only among them the goods which their deceased brother
had acquired some other way. This opinion is grounded on this,
that Justinian had made a law before this 118th novel, by which
he had ordained, that in the succession of any person, who, dying
without children, should leave behind him a father, together with
brothers, the father in this case should have the property of no
part of the goods, but only the usufruct thereof; and that the
brothers should have the property; and that if the deceased had
goods which he had inherited from his mother, the brothers by the
same mother with the deceased should be preferred in those goods
to the other brothers.* It is this law which seems to have given
rise to the rale in the customs of France, which transmits the
goods to the families from whence they came; and which appro-
priates the paternal goods to the relations by the father’s side, and
the maternal goods to those on the mother’s side, paterna paternis,
materna maternis, which has been extended to all the degrees in
the collateral line. But other interpreters have thought that Jus-
tinian had abolished this distinction between paternal and ma-


© Nov. 118, ¢. 3. E Nov. 118, ¢. 8. 2 1.18, § 2, Cod. de legit. heered.


240 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK IL


ternal goods by the 118th novel, and that he had abrogated that law
which had established it; having made no mention of the distinc
tion of goods in his 118th novel, no more than in his 84th novel,
where, in regulating a succession between brothers by the same
father and mother, and brothers by the father’s side alone, and
brothers by the mother’s side alone, he prefers the brothers by the
same father and mother, and makes no distinction of these two
sorts of goods, although the occasion did require it. Here he had
an opportunity of explaining his mind in this matter, whether his
intention had been to abolish this distinction, or, without abolish-
ing it, to leave to the brothers by the father’s side the paternal
goods, and to those by the mother’s side the maternal goods, and
to give the preference to the brothers by the same father and
mother only in the other kinds of goods. One word added to
these two novels, or at least to the 118th novel, would have re-
moved this difficulty; but since this novel excludes indifferently
the brothers by the father’s side alone, or by the mother’s side
alone, from the succession of their brothers, when there are broth-
ers both by the same father and by the same mother, they seem
to be thereby excluded equally from all sorts of goods. And it is
probably in this sense that this novel has been understood in one
of the provinces in France which are governed by the written law.
Seeing they have there derogated from it by a contrary rule, which
directs that the brothers of the half blood, whether it be by the
father alone, or by the mother alone, should succeed with the
brothers of the whole blood to the goods which came from their
stock.»


VL


2933. The Children of Brothers of the Half Blood represent their
Fathers.— As the children of brothers of the whole blood concur
with their uncles, who were likewise brothers to the deceased by
the whole blood ; so the children of brothers of the half blood con-
cur likewise with their uncles of the same quality, when the said
uncles succeed to their brother, uncle to the said children; and
every one of them representing their father, they take among them
all the portion that he would have had if he had been alive.


b See the sixty-fifth article of the fifth chapter of the Clstoms of Bourdeaur, and Country
of Guienne.
& Nov. 118, ¢. 3.


TIT. Ti. SRC. 11.} SUCCESSION OF OOLLATERALS. zl


Vil.

2934. The Right of Representation is limited to Brothers’ Chil-
dren. — The right of representation, which puts children in the
place of their deceased fathers, that they may succeed in the same
manner as their fathers would have done if they had been alive, is
limited to the children of brothers, and is not extended to the chil-
dren of other collaterals, who succeed all by the head, according to
their number of persons and degree of proximity, the nearest always
excluding the remotest. ‘Thus, when the deceased has no brothers,
but only uncles, and children of another uncle deceased, the children
of the deceased uncle are excluded by the uncles that are alive.®


VOL


2935. The Nephew ts preferred to the Uncle, although in the same
Degree. — If the deceased left behind him neither descendants nor
ascendants, nor brothers, nor sisters, but only an uncle and a
nephew, the nephew would succeed to him, and exclude the uncle.
For although they are both of them in the same degree of prox-
imity, yet the nephew has the right of representation of his father,
brother to the deceased, who would be preferred before the uncle ;!
and the uncle on his part has no manner of right of representation,
according to the rule explained in the foregoing article.


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2936. Some interpreters have been of opinion, that the rule ex-
plained in this article ought only to be understood of the cases
where there are brothers to the deceased who are living and ex-
clude the uncle ; but that when there are only uncles and nephews,
without brothers to the deceased, they ought to succeed together ;
and the succession is so regulated by the customs of some places.
But there are many considerations which seem to require that the
nephews to the deceased should be preferred to his uncles, even in
the case where the deceased has no brothers alive. For besides
the reason taken notice of in the article, that it is only the children
of brothers that have the right of representation, as has been men-
tioned in the preceding article, and that the uncles do not repre-
sent their father, grandfather to the deceased, if we examine the
words of the text quoted on this article, they bear so naturally the
sense of giving always the preference to the nephews of the de-


h Nov. 118, c. 8. ' Nov. 118, e. 3.
VOL. If. 21


2A2 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK Il.


ceased before his uncles, that they do not seem to be capable of
having any other construction put upon them. For, first, it is
there said that the nephews are considered as being in the same
degree with their fathers, by the right of representation. Thus,
the law gives them a rank which precedes that of the uncles of
the deceased. And, in the second place, it is there said expressly,
that the nephews of the deceased are preferred before their uncles;
which would not be true if the uncles might succeed together
with the nephews, and were only excluded by the brothers.

.2937. Might we add to these reasons, that it is natural that in-
heritances should descend rather than ascend? . And that thus, the
nephews being in the rank of descendants, they ought to be pre-
ferred to the uncles, who are in the rank of ascendants. But this
argument would prove too much, if we should extend it to the col-
laterals who are in a remoter degree than the uncles and the
nephews; for, as shall be shown in the following article, the 118th
novel calls to the succession all the collaterals without distinction,
except brothers and brothers’ childen, according to their degrees;
the nearest always excluding the remotest; and those who are
in the same degree concurring together, without any distinction
of the lines which are below that of the brothers, and of those
which are above it, and without any representation.

2938. But if we suppose that the nephews, children of the
brother of the deceased, are children only of a brother of the half
blood, ought they to be preferred to the uncle of the deceased?
It would seem that the same reasons which give the preference to
the children of brothers of the whole blood give it likewise to the
children of brothers of the half blood. For besides that the double
tie is only considered among brothers, and that among all the other
collaterals the proximity alone distinguishes their ranks, according
to the rule of the following article, the children of brothers of the
half blood representing their fathers, who would exclude the uncles
of the deceased, they have the same right which their fathers
would have had if they had been alive.

2939. We ought not to omit adding here a remark concerning
another case which falls out very often, and in relation to which
some interpreters have started a question. It is the case where an
inheritance being to be divided among the children of brothers to
the deceased, he having no brothers alive, and the said children
being in an unequal number, three, for example, of one brother,
and four of another, whether those children of the brothers ought


TIT. II. SEC. 11.]_ SUCCESSION OF COLLATERALS. ‘243


to succeed by the head, according to their number, or by represen-
tation, the children of each brother taking the share which their
father would have had. Before the 118th novel of Justinian, this
question was decided by the 2d law, § 2, D. de suis et legit. hered.,
which provided that the children of brothers should succeed by the
head, according to their number. Hec hereditas proximo agnato, id
est, et quem nemo antecedit, defertur: et si plures sint eyusdem gradis,
omnibus in capita scilicet. Ut puta, duos fratres habui, vel duos pa-
truos; unus ex his unum filium, alius duos reliquit: hereditas mea
im tres partes dividitur. It is true, that this 118th novel has given
to the children of brothers the right of representation, which has
occasioned some to fancy, that in this case the children of brothers
deceased ought likewise to have this right. But the benefit of the
representation given to the children of brothers by this novel is
only to make them concur with their uncles, brothers to the de-
ceased, to take the portion that their father would have had if he
~ had been alive. And the motive of this law is not to distinguish
the condition of the children of brothers among themselves, when
there are no brothers to the deceased, and to make the nephews to
the deceased by several brothers share unequally, according as the
children of one of the brothers shall happen to be in a greater
number than the children of another; so that this motive of the
representation ceases among them when they succeed all alone,
and without brothers to the deceased. And they succeed them
only according to their proximity, which being equal makes them
succeed by the head. And it is in this manner that their succes-
sion is regulated by the laws of the Visigoths, which are for the
most part taken from the Roman law : — Qui moritur, si fratres aut
sorores non reliquerti, et filios fratrum et sororum reliquerti; si ex
uno fratre sit unus filius, et ex alio fratre vel sorore forsitan plures,
omnem hereditatem defunctt capiant; et equaliter per capita divi-
dant portiones. Lib. 4, legis Wisigotorum, tit. 2, capitul. 8.


TX.


2940. All the other Collaterals succeed according to their Proxim-
tly.— After brothers and the children of brothers, all the other col-
laterals succeed according to their degrees of proximity, without
any other distinction, the nearest excluding always the remotest.
And if there happen to be several in the same degree, they suc-
ceed equally by the head, and according to their number.!


1 Nov. 118, ¢. 3.


244 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOX Il.


SECTION III.


OF THE SUCCESSION OF THE HUSBAND TO THE WIFE, AND OF THE
WIFE TO THE HUSBAND.


2941. Ir is not necessary to repeat here what-has been said con-
cerning this kind of succession in the preface to this second part,
no. 2, and in the preamble of this second book, where the
reader may see the reason which has obliged us to set down this
rule.


Art. I.


2942. How the Husband succeeds to the Wife, and the Wife to the
Husband. — The husband succeeds to his wife, and the wife to her
husband, if either of them die without children, without relations,
and without a will; and the survivor will exclude the excheauer*


TITLE IV.
OF THE COLLATION OF GOODS.


29043. Wen there are children, or other descendants that suc-
ceed to their father, mother, or other ascendants, whether by testa-
ment or by law, when the person dies intestate,* they ought recip-
rocally to bring in that which they had received out of the estate
of the person to whom they succeed; that is to say, to join it to
the mass of the goods of the succession, and to divide it among
them with the other goods, according as they may be obliged to
this collation by the rules which shall be explained in this title.

2944. The first use that was made in the Roman law of the col-
lation of goods, and which was the origin of it, was a consequence
of the ancient law, which excluded the children that were emanci-
pated from the succession of their fathers, when there were chil-
dren that were not emancipated. For when afterwards the eman-


® T.un. C. unde vir. e uxor. ; —l. un. D. eod.
® See the tenth article of the third section of this title.


TIT. IV.] COLLATION OF GOODS. 245


cipated children were permitted to share in the succession, they
were obliged to bring into the mass of the inheritance, that was to
be divided in common among them and their brothers who had
remained still under their father’s power and authority, that which
the emancipated children had acquired from the time of their
emancipation. Because, as has been remarked in other places,
that which the emancipated son acquired after his emancipation
did belong wholly to himself; whereas all that the son who was
not emancipated acquired on his part belonged wholly to his fa-
ther, except only that which was reckoned as a peculiar patri-
mony, of which we have spoken in its proper place.» Thus there
were two considerations that favored this law of the collation of
goods; one was, because the emancipated son succeeding to his
father reaped the benefit of whatever his brother that was not
emancipated had acquired. And the other was, because that
although the son who was not emancipated had made no acquisi-
tions, yet it was by favor that the emancipated son shared in the
succession with him, and therefore it was but just that the succes-
sion should be augmented with what he had acquired only by the
benefit of his emancipation.

2945. In process of time, all the children without distinction,
whether they were emancipated or not, having been allowed to
enjoy the absolute property in whatever they acquired, as has been
remarked in the preamble of the second section of the second title
of this book, this first kind of collation ceased.° And the use of
the collation was reduced to the goods which the children, whether
they were emancipated or not, had acquired by the liberality of
the ascendant to whom they were to succeed, together with the
other children who had not received the like bounties from the
said ascendant.

2946. It is of this kind of collation that we are to treat under
this title. And as this matter takes in that which concerns the
nature of the collation, the persons who are obliged to it, together
with the persons to whom the collation is to be made, and the
goods that are subject to it, these three parta shall be the subject-
matter of three sections.


> See the fifth article of the second section of Persons, the beginning of the preamble to
the second section of the second title of this second book, and the third article of the third
section of this title.
© V.L ult. C. de collat.
21°


be, - Poe


~


246 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOK 11.


SECTION I.
OF THR NATURE OF THE COLLATION OF GOODS.


Art. L ‘


2947. Definition of Collation. — The collation of goods is the
engagement of the children, and other descendants, to bring in-
to the mass of the inheritance of their father, mother, or other
ascendant to whom they are desirous to succeed, the things which
had been given them by the said ascendant, that they may be di-
vided between them and their coheirs, in the same manner as the
other goods of the succession. And the equity of this collation is
very evident,* the same being founded on the natural equality
among the children in the succession of their ascendants, and upon
the presumption that such a gift was made only by way of ad-
vancement to the donee of a part of that which he might expect
out of the succession.


II.


2948. What ought to be restored does not properly come under
the Name of Collation. — It follows, from the rule explained in the
foregoing article, that the collation being only to be understood of
something which did already belong to the heir who is obliged to
make the collation, we ought not to include in this matter of the
collation of goods that which is a part of the inheritance, and
which one of the heirs possesses by some other title; as if he was
depositary of a thing which the deceased had deposited in his
hands, or debtor for a sum of money which the deceased had lent
him, or that he was by some other means in possession of some
of the goods of the inheritance. For this heir would be bound to
make restitution of these kinds of things upon another score than
that of collation. Neither must we reckon among the things sub-
ject to the collation treated of here a sum of money which a
testator, who leaves by his will to one of his children a certain
estate in land, or some office, obliges him to pay in to the other
children, in consideration of the said advantage.”


e
" L.1, D. de coll. bon. We do not put down here the rest of this text, the same not
being in use with us. But these first words may be applied in gencral to all the cases
where the collation ought to take place. See the seventh and following articles of the
third section.
Since the collation is understood only of the things which had been given to the


TIT. IV. SEC. 1.] COLLATION OF GOODS. 2A7


a0

2949. All the Children are obliged to this Collation, without Dis-
tinction. — The engagement of the heir of an ascendant that is
obliged to this collation towards the other heirs of the same ascen-
dant, being founded upon the motives explained in the first article,
which agree equally to the children of both sexes, to the children
that are emancipated and to those who are not, to the children
and grandchildren of all degrees; this engagement is common
without distinction to all these sorts of children and descendants,
for all the things that may be subject to the collation, according
to the rules which shall be explained in the third section.°


IV.


2950. The Collation ts regulated by the Law, or by some Act of
the Testator or Donee.— The collation of goods among coheirs is
made in two cases, and differently. One is the case where the
ascendant, to whom his children or other descendants are to suc-
ceed, has directed nothing touching the collation of the goods
which he has given to one of the children; which would be no
hindrance why the said donee should not be obliged to the colla-
tion by the bare effect of the preceding rules, and of those which
shall be explained in the third section ; and this collation is founded
on equity, and on the law which has established it. The other is
the case of a collation ordained by some disposition of the donor,
such as the donation itself, or a testament, which has regulated
the conditions thereof.*


V.


2951. How these Two Sorts of Collations are regulated. — If
the person to whom two or more heirs are to succeed has made
some disposition for regulating the collations which they shall
make among themeelves, the said disposition will be instead of
a law, according to the rules which shall be explained in their
places And if the deceased has ordered nothing concerning the
collations among his heirs, they shall have for rules those that are
explained in this title.
children by the ascendants to whom they succeed, it is only improperly that we can give
the name of collation to the restitutions which are spoken of in this article.

* L.17, C. de collat. Although this text makes mention only of the collation in the
succession of intestates, yet it takes place likewise in the testamentary successions. See
the tenth article of the third section.


4 See the eleventh article of the third section.
. ne ee eereae article of the first section of the first title of the third book.


aE ee eee


248 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK Il.


VI
2952. Collation of the Revenues. — The heir who is bound to
bring in to his coheirs that which had been given him, ought like-
wise to bring in the fruits or other revenues thereof, according to
the nature of the goods, such as the interest, if it ia money, the
said revenues to be counted from the time that the succession was


open.f
VIL


2953. He who is bound to collate recovers the Expenses laid oul
upon the Goods subject to the Collation. — If for the preservation of
the thing subject to collation, or for other necessary causes, the
heir who ought to bring it in has been at any charges, he shall
recover the value of them, or retain the thing; as if he has laid
out any thing on the necessary repairs of a house, or if he has
carried on a lawsuit for the recovery of a debt, or of some right.
For these sorts of expenses diminishing the goods, the collation of
them is likewise diminished in so much


VIll.


2954. The Heir must either bring in what he has received, or take
less for his Share. — The heir who is bound to bring in what he
has received by advancement may satisfy that obligation in two
manners. One is by bringing in actually the thing that is subject
to the collation, that it may be included in the mass of the goods,
in order to be divided with the rest. And the other way is by
retaining that which he ought to bring into the mass, and taking
so much less out of the rest of the goods. These are the two


€ L.5,§ 1, D. de dot. collat. Although this text speaks only of the dowry, yet the rea-
son is the same for all collations. And although it be said here that the interest is due
by him who delays to bring in what he is bound to do, and that it may be doubted wheth-
er the interest be due before the demand, yet it is but just that it should run from the
moment that the succession to which the collation is to be made is open; and as the
other goods of the succession, and the revenues which they produce, are reckoned in the
partition from that time, so the goods subject to the collation are of the same kind, and
are a part of the inheritance, and therefore the fruits and produce thereof are due as well
as the other goods. This is regulated after this manner by some of the customs, and is 8
consequence of the rule explained in the sixth article of the second section of Partitions.
And it may be likewise said, that every heir who has goods subject to collation acts an
unfair and dishonest part if he does not bring them in, or does not declare what goods he
has of this kind.

& L.1,§ 5, D. de dot. collat. See the twelfth and the following articles of the third sec-
tion of Dowries.


TIT. IV. SEC. 11.] COLLATION OF GOODS. a9


ways of collation which are expressed in these words, to bring
into the mass of the goods, or to take less out of it®


IX.


2955. He who brings in the Goods subject to Collation inereases
the Number of the Sharers in the Partition.—- The collation is made
in such a manner, that, whatever is brought in being added to the
mass of the goods, the whole is divided into as many portions as
there are heirs; including those who collate, and those to whom
the collation is made:!


SECTION II.


OF THE PERSONS WHO ARE BOUND TO COLLATE, AND TO WHOM
THE COLLATION OUGHT TO BE MADE.


Art. I.


2956. There is no Collation but among Children. — It is only the
children or other descendants, heirs to their fathers, mothers, or
other ascendants, who are obliged to the collation treated of in
this title; because the motives of the laws which ordain this col-
lation agree only to them.


II.


2957. He who renounces the Inheritance does not collate, unless
tt be for the Legttime or Child's Part of the others. — If the chil-
dren, or other descendants, who had goods subject to collation,
abstain from the inheritance, the collation ceases. And as they
take no share in the other goods of the inheritance, so neither do
they give to the other children or descendants any share of the
goods which they had acquired before the succession was open.>


5 T.1,§ 12, D. de coll. bon. ;—1. 5, C. eod.; — Nov. 97, ¢. 6.

''L.1, inf. D. de coll. bon.

" See the first and third articles of the first section, and the texts which are there cit-
ed. See the following articles.

Of the three orders of heirs, descendants, ascendanta, and collaterals, it is only the first
in which are to be found the motives of the right of collation explained in the preceding
tection. And the case of collation does never happen even among ascendants; for the
descendants do not make any presents to them. And as for the collateral successions,
the motives of the collation not agreeing to them, there is never any collation in them
unless it be ordained by the person whose inheritance is to be divided.

> 1. 25, C. fum. erciscund. ;— 1. ult. D. de dot. collat. This liberty of being free from


250 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Ii.


But if what remains in the succession is not sufficient for the
legitime, or child’s part of the other children, reckoning in the
father’s estate the goods that ought to have been brought in by
him who abstains from the inheritance, if he had declared himself
heir; in that case he would be obliged to give part of them to the
others, so as to make up what they want of their legitime, or
child’s part.°


TIL


2958. To whom the Collation ought to be made. — As the colla-
tion takes place only among children that are coheirs, so it is due
only to those who have these two qualities. Thus, the children
who have no share in the inheritance, whether it be that they
renounce it, or that they are excluded from it by being disinherited,
have likewise no share in the collation.‘


SECTION III.


OF THINGS WHICH ARE SUBJECT’ TO COLLATION, AND OF THOSE
WHICH ARE NOT.


Arr. I.


2959. Two Sorts of Goods of Children.— We must distinguish
two sorts of goods, which children or other descendants may have,
that are to divide among them the succession of their father,
mother, or other ascendant. One sort is of the goods which they
had from their father, mother, or other ascendant, by some title,
which the following rules make subject to collation. And the
other sort is of the goods which they may have acquired any
other way, by what title soever it may be; whether by the liber-
ality of other persons besides their ascendants, or by their own
industry, or by other ways.*


the collation upon renouncing the inheritance is generally received in France, except in
some particular customs, where children who are donees in the families of those who are
ignoble are obliged to bring into the mass of the inheritance whatever has been given
them by the father, or mother, or other ascendants, although they renounce the succession
of the donor.

¢ L.un. C. de inoff. dot. ;—1. 5, C. de inoff. donat.

4 This is a consequence of the first article.

* There can be no goods but what are contained under one or other of these two kinds.


TIT. IV. SEC. 111.] COLLATION OF GOODE. 251


IL.

2960. The Goods acquired otherwise than from the Ascendants
are not subject to Collation. — Whatever the children may have ac-
quired any other way than from the goods of their ascendants,
whether they have acquired it by a testamentary succession, or by
succeeding to intestates, or by donation, or any liberality of other
persons, or by their own industry, belongs entirely to themselves,
and is not subject to collation.”


TIL


2961. The Peculiar Patrimonies of the Son are not subject to Col-
lation. — The peculiar patrimonies which have been mentioned in
the third article of the second section of the second title are the
proper goods of the son who is still under his father’s power, which
not being descended to him from his father, or other ascendant, are
not subject to collation. And seeing these sorts of goods belong
s0 absolutely to the son, that his father has not so much as the
use and profits of them, it would not be just that the coheir should
have any share in them.* But that which a son who is still under
his father’s authority may have gained, by his management and
administration of some goods which the father had intrusted him
with, belongs properly to the father, and is subject to collation.!


IV.


2962. The Son does not bring in that which the Father was bound
lo give him.—-If a father had been required by a testament, or
other disposition of any person, to give to his son a sum of money,
or some other thing ; that which the son possesses under this title
would not be subject to be brought into the succession of his fa-
ther; because it would not be to the father’s bounty that the son
owed this thing.°


V.


2963. The Expenses of Education are not brought in. — The chil-
dren, or other descendants, succeeding to the inheritance of their
father, or mother, or other ascendant, do not bring in that which
has been laid out upon their studies, or in other expenses which


© See the first article of the second section, Jn what Manner Fathers succeed.

© L.1,§ 15, D. de collat. bon. ;— I. ult. C. eod.

“ L.19, C. de collat. See the first and seventeenth articles of the second section of the
second title.
-* L.1,§19, D. de collat.


252 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL BOOK IL.


their education may have required. For these sorts of expenses
are what parents are bound to lay out upon their children, and are
as it were a debt which they ought to acquit.’


VI.


2964. The Things given to one of the Children, as an Advantage
over and above what the others have, are not subject to Collation. —
The things given to children, or other descendants, that they may
have what is so given as an advantage over and above what the
other children their coheirs have, are not brought into the mass of
the inheritance collated, if it is evident that it was the express will
of the donor, that what he gave should remain with the donee as
an advantage over and above his equal share with the rest of the
heirs, or that it should not be subject to collation£ But if, upon
a computation of the thing given as an advancement to a child,
together with the goods which remain in the inheritance, it should
be found that the other children had not their legitime, or child’s
part of the whole, the donee would be obliged in this case to bring
into the mass of the goods so much as to make up the legitime,
or child’s part, of the others, even although he should be willing to
content himself with the gift, and to renounce the inheritance.


VIL


2965. Dowries and Donations in Favor of Marriage are brought
into the Mass of the Goods. — Whatever a father, mother, or other
ascendants, whether they be by the father’s or mother’s side, of
both sexes, give to their children or other descendants, on occasion
of their marriages, whether it be to a son as a settlement upon
him in favor of his marriage, or to a daughter for her marriage
portion, or otherwise, according to the different uses of donations
of this kind, is subject to collation. Thus children, sons or daugh-
ters, succeeding to the inheritance of an ascendant from whom
they had received such like liberalities, ought to bring them into
the mass of the goods of the inheritance:!


€ L. 50, D. fam. ercisc.

§ Nov. 18,c.6. If there were a donation or other disposition which should contain a
gift as an advantage to one child over and above what the others should have to their
shares, this bare expression of giving that by way of preference or distinction to that
child would make the collation to cease. For otherwise, if the child were obliged to
pir aaa ile the others, it would be no particular advantage to the said

» Nov. 92,c.1. See the fourth and fifth articles of the third section of the Legitime.

* £17, C. de collut. Although this text makes mention only of the succession to in-


TIT. IV. SEC. T11.] COLLATION OF GOUDS. 253


VIL.

2966. Collation of the Dower when the Husband is Insolvent. —
If a daughter, having been endowed by her father, mother, or other
ascendant, should come to inherit to him, and her husband, who
had received and squandered away her marriage portion, should
happen to be insolvent, she would nevertheless be obliged to
reckon it in the mass of the goods to be divided between her and
the other heirs, if by the circumstance this loss may be imputed
to her; as if she had neglected to secure herself by a separation of
goods, or to take other precautions for the security of her marriage
portion! But if nothing can be laid to her charge, as if she was
a minor, and the said loss had happened through the fault of the
person who had given the marriage portion, her father, for exam-
ple, or her grandfather by the father’s side, who, in default of the
father, who was either dead, or absent, or interdicted, or in a state
of madness, being obliged to endow his granddaughter, had paid
the portion to the husband whose insolvency was apparent, or at
least much to be feared, she might be discharged from this colla-
tion, according to the circumstances, by bringing in only the action
for the restitution of the marriage portion, against the husband or
his heirs.™ But if it was the grandfather by the mother’s side, or
other ascendant, who, not being under any obligation to endow the
young woman, had given her a sum of money for her portion out
of mere liberality, she being either of age, or under the tuition of
her father, mother, or of a tutor, the loss of this portion, although
the donor had paid it to the husband when insolvent, would not
free her from the obligation of accounting for it to her coheirs, if
she would succeed as heir to the donor who gave her the said por-
tion. For this loss would be a casualty which could not be im-
puted either to the donor or to his heira.


testates, yet it is the same thing in testamentary successions. Must we comprehend under
liberalities in favor of marriage which are subject to collation, that which a father, a moth-
er, or other ascendant, makes a present of to his son, or his daughter-in-law, to his daugh-
ter, or his son-in-law, sach as is mentioned in this law, the expenses of the wedding, the
wedding clothes, the wife’s paraphernalia, or other presents according to custom! There
are some customs in France which direct these sorts of presents to be brought in, and
others which exempt them from the collation. Thus we ought to judge of this matter
according to the usage of the place, if there is any, or according to the circumstances of
~ quality of the persons, of the nature of the presents, and of their value.


™ D.c.6,§1. We have endeavoured to form this article upon such pert of the text
8s agrees with our usage.
VOL. It. y=) Ais


-


ee gm Lee a aR SS EIS IS SESE EGRESS a


2A ' THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK I.


IX.

2967. All other Donations are brought wto the Mass of the In
heritance. — Besides the donations in favor of marriage, and the
marriage portions of daughters, all other donations made by a fa-
ther, mother, or other ascendant, to a son, or a daughter, or other
descendant, married or unmarried, ought to be brought into the
succession, whether the deceased made a testament or died in-
testate, unless the donee has been discharged from the collation by
the donor, as has been said in the sixth article. And although
the collation be not enjoined by the testament, when there is one,
yet the donee is nevertheless obliged to it.


X.


2968. Whatever may be reckoned as a Part of the Legitime, or
Childs Part, ought be brought in. — All that the children and other
descendants have received from their father, mother, or other as-
cendants, which might be reckoned to them as part of their legi-
time, or child’s part, is subject to collation. Thus, the moneys
which have been laid out on the purchase of some office for one
of the children, and other such like liberalities, ought to be brought
into the mass of the inheritance. For otherwise these bounties
would be advantages which would destroy the equality among
the children.°


XI.


2969. The Collation ts due, whether the Deceased left behind him
a Testament, or died Intestate.— As the collation which the chil-
dren and other descendants who succeed to.their father, mother,
or other ascendants, owe reciprocally to one another, is equally
due, whether the ascendant to whom they succeed has enjoined
it by some disposition, or whether he has given no orders about
it; so it is the same thing with respect to the collation, whether
the donor has left behind him a testament, or died intestate; and
it is likewise indifferent whether, when there is a testament, the
collation is enjoined by it, or whether it makes no mention at all
of it. For it is only the express will of the donor that can free


« Nov. 18,¢.6. See the eleventh article. L.13, C. de collat.;— |. penult. C. fam. ercise.
Seeing this law speaks of donations without distinction, and exempts from the collation
only him who renounces the inheritance, it follows that, on the contrary, he who does not
renounce is bound to bring in all sorts of donations.

° ZL. 20, C. de collat.


TIT. IV. SEC. I] COLLATION OF GOODS. 255


the donee from bringing in the gift» And if a testator has omit-
ted to direct in his testament the collation of the donations which
he had made before, the law supplies that omission, and presumes
that he had forgotten the donations which are subject to collation.t


XIL


2970. The Daughter brings into the Succession of the Father the
Portion given her by the Grandfather on the Father's Side. — If the
grandfather by the father’s side had endowed his granddaughter,
the father being alive, and after the death of this grandfather the
father who had survived him had left together with this daugh-
ter other children, or grandchildren, who were to succeed to him
as his heirs, she would be obliged to bring into the inheritance of
her father the portion which the grandfather had given her. For
seeing it was the duty of the father to endow his daughter, it was
for him that the grandfather gave her her marriage portion. So
that it was the same thing as if the father had given the portion
out of his own estate. Which makes the said portion to be sub-
ject to collation, that the other children, who are heirs to their
father, may have a share in it."


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2971. Although the law cited speaks only of the right of rever-
sion of this marriage portion in favor of the father, yet we have
thought proper to draw from thence the rule explained in this ar-
ticle for the collation, and that upon two considerations. One is,
that this law, being placed under the title of collation, we may
conclude from thence that it has been put there with this view,
that the collation is due in this case. The other is, that the same
equity which makes us to consider the marriage portion given by
the grandfather as if if were given by the father, in order to give
to the father the right of reversion of this portion, as having pro-
ceeded from himself, demands likewise that the same portion
should be brought into the father’s inheritance, since we ought to
look upon it as having proceeded from the father, and that if he
had survived her, the reversion of this portion would have aug-
mented his succession. And besides, seeing this daughter finds
in her father’s succession that of her grandfather, it is just likewise,
for this reason, that this portion should be brought into it. Thus,


P Nov. 18, c. 6. Q Nov. 18, ¢. 6. t 7. 6, D. de collat.


256 TRE CIVIL Law. [PART M1. BOOK It.


as we have put down the rule drawn from this law for the right of
reversion among the other rules of this matter, the same reason
has induced us to set down here such another rule for the right of
collation.

2972. It seems to follow from the rule explained in this article,
that if a grandfather had made any present to his grandchildren,
their father being alive, who afterwards succeeded to the grand-
father, he ought to bring into the grandfather's succession the
presents which had been made to his children. And it is so reg-
ulated by the customs of some places, which have likewise direct-
ed that the grandson succeeding to his grandfather by represen-
tation of his deceased father should bring into the mass of the
goods that which the said grandfather had given to his father.
Which is founded upon this, that, as this son succeeds to the
grandfather in the place of his father, it is but just that he should
bring in what his father would have been obliged to do if he had
succeeded ; and, in general, it is equitable in all cases that the
equality which is the foundation of the right of collation should be
observed among all the descendants who are to share the succes-
sions of their ascendants.> |


XJIL


2973. The Things which have perished without the Fault of the
Donee are not brought in. — If the things that were given had
perished without the fault of the donee, whether it be after or be-
fore the succession was open, he would not be bound to bring in
their value. For whatever perishes in such a manner that the loss
thereof cannot be imputed to the act of any person, the loss falls
upon the owner of it, and upon all those who have any right in it.’
And as to the profits which the donee may have reaped from the
things which were given him, those which he had made before the
succession was open belonged entirely to himself, and were no
part of the inheritance. But if the thing did not perish till after
the succession was open, then the profits which had been made
after the succession was open would be considered as a part of the
succession, and subject to collation. And, in general, the children .
that are coheirs to their ascendants ought to bring into the mass
of the inheritance reciprocally, for the benefit of one another, all


® See the sixth article of the third section of the second title of this second book.
> See the close of the following article.
® L. 2, § 2, D. de collat.


TIT. IV. SEC. IT1.} COLLATION OF GOODS. 257


that reason and equity can demand for making their condition as
equal as is possible.‘


XIV.


2974. What is consumed by Use ought to be brought in.— We
must not comprehend in the number of things perished, which
have been mentioned in the foregoing article, those which perish
by casualties, such as a house by fire, a land or tenement carried
away by a flood or inundation, movables taken away by robbery.
But we ought not to place in this rank the things which perish by
their own nature, such as cattle; or those which are consumed by
their use, such as money, corn, liquor. For although these things
are not in being when the case of their collation happens, yet the
donee is nevertheless bound to bring in their value, because the
delivery which had been made of them to him had given him all
the use that could be made of them."


Ganepa Remarx.


2975. It is not proper to enlarge here on the several questions
which may arise from this matter of collation; for besides that
these questions are not contained in the laws, they are not within
the design of this book. It suffices here to lay down the principles
on which the decisions of those questions which have not their
proper rules in the customs do depend. And whereas the variety
of questions would only serve to confound and perplex the reader,
the bare view of the principles, rightly understood, gives all the
light that is necessary for all sorts of difficulties.


' D.§ 2. See the sixth article of the first section.
" This is a consequence of the nature of those sorts of things.


99 *


ena


, BOOK III.


OF TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSIONS.


2976. Tue general reflections which might be made here on the
subject-matter of testamentary successions, before we enter on the
particular detail thereof, having been necessary, and more properly
set down, in another place, it is not proper to repeat any of them
here; and it is sufficient to advertise the reader, that he may see
on this subject what has been said of it in the foregoing preface.*

2977. Neither is it proper to repeat here what has been said in
the preamble of the second book, to give an account why we have
thought it fitting to treat of the succession to intestates before the
testamentary successions, although these are explained in the first
place in the Roman law.


TITLE I.
OF TESTAMENTS.


2978. In the Roman law, and in the provinces of France which
are governed by the written law, the name of testament in the
proper signification of it, is applied only to dispositions which
contain the institution and appointment of an heir or executor;
and all the other dispositions, in which there is no heir or executor
named, are called codicils, or donations made in prospect of death.

2979. According to this distinction of testaments and codicils,
or donations in prospect of death, there ought to be no testaments


® See the said preface, no. 5, and the following.


TIT. 1. TESTAMENTS. 259


at all in the provinces which are governed by their customs, but
only codicils, or donations in prospect of death; because in the
customs there can be no other heirs but those of blood, and they
give only the name of universal legatees to the persons who suc-
ceed to all the goods which one has power to dispose of by will.
But, nevertheless, they do give the name of testaments to dis-
positions made in view of death, which contain only particular
legacies; and with much more reason may we give the name of
testaments to the dispositions which name universal legatees,
seeing they are bound for the charges in proportion to the share
which they have of the goods, in the same manner as if they were
heirs or executors, and that they may even have all the goods in
the customs where the testator is at liberty to dispose of all his
acquests, and of all his movables, if the testator were a person
whose estate consisted wholly of goods of these two kinds, and
who had no estate of inheritance which came to him by descent
from his ancestors.

2980. We make here this remark, to advertise the reader that
we shall, in the sequel of this work, use the word testament both
in the one and the other of these two senses, which comprehend
all the dispositions that are made in view of death; but we shall
do it in such a manner, that it will be easy to distinguish in each
place whether it ought to be understood either barely of dispo-
sitions which contain the institution of an executor, or only of
the others.

2981. We have not inserted 4 in this title that rule of the Roman
law, that the power of making a testament is part of the public
law. For, besides that in all the customs it is on the contrary
received as the universal, and as it were public law, that no one
can make a testament, that is, an institution of an heir or execu-
tor; we ascribe, properly speaking, this character of public law
only to what relates to matters in which the public has an interest,
such as matters belonging to the exchequer, matters criminal, and
others of the like nature.” And although it be true, that, the
power of making a testament being established and regulated by
the laws which make one of the principal parts of the universal
order of human society, it may be said in this sense, that the
power of making a testament is part of the public law; yet the


* L. 8, D. qui test. fac. poss.
* See the fourteenth chapter of the Treatise of Laws, no. 27.


200 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK TIL


nature of testaments is not thereby distinguished from that of
many other matters, which are as much or more necessary in this
order of society than testaments; such as several sorts of cove-
nants, guardianships, and others, the use of which is established
and regulated by the laws. Thus, testaments are no more a part
of the public law than guardianships and other matters; unless
that any one should think that it might be said that testaments
were in another sense part of the public law under the Roman
law, because at first people were allowed to make their testa-
ments in the public assemblies.° But it does not seem as if this
were the reason why it is said in the Roman law, that testaments
are part of the public law, because there were other ways of mak-
ing one’s testament in private, even whilst that other way was in
use.


SECTION I.


OF THE NATURE OF TESTAMENTS, AND THEIR KINDS.


2982. Testaments wholly written with the Testator’s Hand. — It
is fit to acquaint the reader, that he will find nothing in this sec-
tion concerning that kind of testaments which are called holo-
graph, that is, entirely written and signed with the testator’s hand,
without any witnesses. For although they have been approved
by a novel of Theodosius and Valentinian,* and though the proof
of the testator’s will may be fully as authentic, or rather more, by
this writing, than by his declaration before witnesses; yet since
the testaments written with the testators own hand, without wit-
nesses, are not of universal usage, and are not received in the Ro-
man law but with the testimony of seven witnesses, the testator
being dispensed with there only from signing it with his own
hand,® we have not thought proper to set down here a rule con-
cerning the use of these testaments without witnesses, contrary to
the express provisions of the Roman law received in many places.

2983. Testaments of poor Country People. — Neither shall we
make any mention in this section of the testamenta of poor coun-
try people, which are called testamenta rusticorum, in which the


© § 1, Inst. de test. ord. 2 Nov. 2, § 1, de testam.
> ZL. 98, § 1, C. de testam.


TTT. I. SEO. 1.] TESTAMENTS. RGL


laws dispense with the exact observance of the formalities, as
appears by the last law, Cod. de testam. For as the privilege
which that law gives for these sorts of testaments is only to dis-
pense with the number of seven witnesses, in the places where so
many persons cannot be found who know how to write their
names, and to make the number of five witnesses sufficient in this
‘case; so this privilege seems altogether useless, according to our
usage in France, which requires the presence of a public notary
with witngsses, and where it is not necessary that the witnesses
be persons who’can write. But there is seldom want of such
witnesses in a place where there are public notaries.

2984. Testaments among Children. — There is likewise another
kind of testaments, which we have thought fit to leave out in this
section, which is that of testaments among children, that is to say,
dispositions which a father makes among his children, whether by
way of testament, or by way of partition. This kind of testa-
ments is distinguished from all the others for this reason, because
sach wills were so favorable in the Roman law, that, in whatever
manner a father explained his intention of dividing his estate
among his children; whether by a testament begun and not fin-
ished, sive captum, neque impletum testamentum, or by a letter, sive
per epistolam, or by any other witing whatsoever, sive quocunque
alio modo scripture, quibuscunque verbis vel indictis inveniantur re-
licte ; this will, although ever so imperfect and void of form, was
nevertheless to be executed* This seems to proceed from the
same spirit of the Roman law, which gave fathers such an abso-
lute authority over their children, that at first they had power to
disinherit them without any cause, as has been observed in another
place.* This license given to fathers, in making their wills among
their children, does not seem to be founded on the favor of the
children’s interest, since, on the contrary, it 1s the common interest
of the children that their fathers should preserve the natural
equality among them. Thus, the consideration of the children is
not a motive that renders the wills of parents favorable, when they
give greater advantages to some of their children than to the oth-
ers. And if this favor of the children were to be considered in
the difficulties that arise concerning wills made by fathers among
their children, it would help rather to annul them, if they are de-


© V.U. 16, 21, 4 U. ult. C. fam. ercisc. ; —i. 21, § 1, C. de testam.
© See the preface to this second part, no. 7.


262 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOK LIL


fective in point of form, than to supply the want of formalities, in
order to make them valid, when they destroy that equality which
is to preserve union among brothers.

2985. This excessive license in the imperfect wills of fathers
among their children was restrained by Justinian, who by his 18th
novel, c. 7, ordains that they should be signed either by the father,
or by the children. And by his 107th novel he added that the
father should write with his own hand the date and the names of
his children; and that he should likewise set down with his own
hand, at length, and not in numbers or ciphers, the portions which
he should regulate for every one. But although it seems that all
these precautions ought to suffice to make these testaments valid,
even without witnesses; yet many interpreters have been of opinion
that none of these laws dispense with the necessity of witnesses.
And he that is reckoned the most able of the said interpreters, be-
ing consulted in a question concerning the validity of a father’s
testament among his children, was of opinion, that the number of
witnesses was necessary ; and that all testaments of fathers among
their children, without this formality, were null; and gives partic-
ular answers to all the laws above mentioned, to show that none
of them dispense with this formality.

2986. It is upon these considerations, that although the use of
these testaments or partitions among children is received in some
provinces, and that they are there approved of, although they want
the formalities, yet, seeing this is not a universal usage, we have
not thought proper to lay it down here as a general rule, that the
imperfect and unformed will of a father among his children ought
to subsist: for this would be a law too uncertain and undeter-
mined, since it would leave fathers at liberty to dispense with all
sorts of formalities in their testaments, so as that there could be
no testament so imperfect, but what would be made valid in this
manner, if we should give to the words of these laws the indefi-
nite extent which they seem to have, and which does noways
agree with the character of plainness and clearness that is neces-
sary to make rules certain and fixed as they ought to be. So that
it is to be wished that there were, in relation to this matter, some
fixed rules, which might either subject these testaments to the
formalities of others, or regulate the formalities that cannot be
dispensed with in them; as has been done in the customs of
some provinces, which have regulated the formalities of par-

titions made by fathers among their children. In some cus-


TIT. 1. SEC. 1.] TROTAMENTS. 263


toms these partitions are not received, unless the children have
consented to them. Others require in such partitions the pres-
ence of a public notary, and two witnesses, as in all other testa-
ments ; it having been judged necessary, that an act so serious,
and of such importance, as a testament among children, should be
made with as much application and exactness as a testament
which calls strangers to be heirs or executors; but especially when
a father will make unequal partitions among his children, and
when there is less inconvenience in favoring the equality among
children, and in requiring in the wills of fathers formalities that
are easy, than in approving without distinction the imperfect and
undigested wills of parents, which perhaps are only rode draughts
of what they project in their imaginations, without coming to a
final resolution therein, and which give occasion of strife and con-
tention among the children.


Artice I.


2987. Definition of a Testament. — A testament is an institution
or appointment of an heir or executor, made according to the for-
malities prescribed by law; whether that together with the said
institution there be any other disposition, or that there be nothing
in it besides the bare institution.*


® Quinque verbis potest (quis) facere testamentum ; ut dicat Lucius Titius mihi heres
esto. Z.1,§ 3, D. de hered. inst.

‘Testamentum est voluntatis nostre justa sententia de eo quod quis post mortem suam
fieri velit. ZL. 1, D. qui test. fac. poss.

It follows from the first of these texts, that the essential part of a testament is‘the insti-
tation of an heir or executor, seeing these words, J will that such a one be my heir or execu-
tor, make a testament. 3

The interpreters are divided among themselves upon this question, whether the defini-
tion of a testament, as it is set down in the second text here quoted, be so just and exact
as a definition ought to be. And many, even of those of the greatest learning among
them, undertake the defence of it against those who say it is not exact. As to which we
may say, that if the anthors of the laws have not always in their definitions and in their
expressions that justness and exactness which logicians and mathematicians have, it is
bat just that that defect should be supplied, in order to give to the laws the natural sense
which one clearly sees their intention does demand. But seeing we endeavour in this
book to render every thing intelligible to every reader, and to observe throughout the
whole, as much as we are able, that exactness; we have judged that, in order to give the
just idea of a testament, and such as may distinguish it from other dispositions made in
prospect of death, we ought to form the definition of a testament in the manner in which
it is conceived in this article. For whereas the other dispositions are only of a part of the
goods, it is essential to the testament that there be named in it an heir or executor, who
is the universal successor. Soe the first article of the first section of Heirs and Execwtors
in


general.
Is is to be remarked on this definition, that it does not agree with the dispositions which


ee ee ee 6 ge ee Pe Se ee, PS ee, —


S64 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOX IIL


IL.

2988. The bare Naming of an Executor makes a Testament.— It
follows from this definition of a testament, that it comprehends
two essential characters necessary to be distinguished. One is,
that it contains the disposal of all the testator’s goods; and the
other is, that it is a disposition made in view of death, which may
be revoked. We shall explain in the two following articles the
effects of these two characters, and in what manner they are com-
prehended in the definition explained in the first article.


IIL


2989. The Testament implies the Disposal of all the Goods.—
Since it is essential to a testament that it contain the institution
of an heir or executor, and that the heir or executor is universal
successor of all the goods that are not particularly bequeathed,
every testament implies the disposal of ,all the goods; whether it
be that the whole is left to the heirs or executors, or that others
are to have a share with them: which makes no alteration in the
nature of a testament ; and all the different dispositions that may
happen to be in it make only one act, which contains a declaration
of the testator’s will, as to the disposal of all the goods which he
shall happen to leave behind him.


IV.


2990. The Testament hath its Effect only by the Death of the
Testator.— The testament is a disposition made on occasion of
death, that is, made in the view that the person who disposes of
his goods by testament has of his own death, and with design that
his disposition shall not have its effect till after his death ; for it is
only by this death that the heir or executor has his right. From
whence it follows, that, the testament having no effect till the
death of the testator, he is always at liberty to revoke it, and
either to change it by making another, or to destroy it quite by
suppressing it, without making another. Thus, when there hap-
pen to be several testaments of one and the same person, it is
always the lest that ought to subsist, except in so far as this
people may make of their estates in the customs. For, as has been observed in the pre-


amble of this title, one cannot have other heirs in the customs than the heirs of blood.
b This is a consequence of the definition of a testament. See the two articles which
follow


© This is also a consequence of the definition. See the first article of the firet section
of Heirs and Executors in general.


TIT. I. SEO. 1.} TESTAMENTS. 265


last testament should ratify and confirm the dispositions of the
former.


V.

2991. The Heir of Blood is Testamentary Heir, if he is éasti-
tuted. — Although the testator name no other heir or executor, but
the person who ought to succeed to him, if he died intestate; yet,
if he accepts the inheritance or succession, he shall be testa-
mentary heir, and bound in this quality to discharge the legacies,
and all the other charges imposed by the testament;®* for it is
only by this title that he enjoys a succession which the testator
might have left to others if he had pleased.


VI


2992. The Testament ought to contain the Institution of an Hetr
or Executor.— Dispositions made in view of death, which do not
contain the institution of an heir or executor, are not properly
testaments, but codicils or donations because of death.‘


VIL


2993. The Will of the Testator is in Place of a Law.—It fol-
lows from the liberty which the laws give to persons to dispose of
their effects by a testament, that all the wills of a testator, whether
it be in what relates to the appointment of an heir or executor, or
the other particular dispositions which he may have made, are in
the place of laws both to the executor, if he accepts of the syoces-
sion, and also to the legatees, if they accept their legacies ;* but
this is to be understood with this reverse, that the testator has
ordained nothing contrary to law or good manners® For with


“ De eo quod quis post mortem suam fieri velit. Z.1, D. qui test. fac. poss. Prius tes-
tamentum rumpitur cum poeterius rite perfectum est. L. 2, D. de inj. rupt. irr. fact. test.
Ambulatoria enim est voluntas defuncti usque ad vite supremum exitum. L. 17, D. de
adim. vel trunsf. leg, Although this last text does not, strictly speaking, relate to what is
said in this article, yet nevertheless it may be applied to it.

See, touching the nature of dispositions because of death, what has been said of that
eid eae of the title of Donations that have their effect in the lifetime of the

mor.

* See the seventeenth article of the fifth section, and the texts which are there quoted.

"§ 2, Inst. de codicill.

5 L. 120, D. de verb. signif. ; — Inst. de leg. Falcid. ; — Nov. 22, ¢. 2.

b 1.55, D. de legat. 1; —1. 13, D. de testam. ;—1. 15, D. de condit. instit. This indefi-
nite liberty of testators is naturally restrained within the bounds of what is not contrary
to law, as is said in the article; and a testator can ordain nothing that is contrary to the
deposition and spirit of any law. Thus, he cannot prohibit his heirs or executors from

VOL. II. 23


266 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK III.


respect to the testator, his dispositions have the authority of the
law, which permits him to make them; and as to those who re-
ceive any benefit by a testament, their acceptance of it engages
them to the charges which it may contain, in the same manner as
if they had treated with the testator, he leaving to them his estate
upon the conditions, and with the charges, which he has ex-
plained, and they accepting the estate with those charges; and in
the same manner likewise as if they had treated with the persons
to whom the testator engages them!


VIL


2994. The Testament ought to depend on the Will of no other
Person but the Testator. — Since the dispositions of a testament
have their effect by the will of the testator, which is in place of a
law, it is only from this will that they have their force. And if
a testator, instead of choosing and naming his heir or executor
himself, had said in his testament that his will was that such a
one should be his heir or executor, whom a certain person, whom
he should name, should choose and call to his succession ; this in-
stitution would be lame, and have no effect. For it would want
the character that is essential to a testament, of containing the
proper will of the testator, and not that of another person. And it
would be even contrary to equity, that the choice of an heir or ex-
ecutor.should depend on any other person than him who has the
right to dispose of his estate: seeing, on one hand, the testator
may be deceived by that person, who after the testator’s death may
abuse in several respects the confidence which he has put in him;
and, on the other hand, he who should happen to be chosen heir or
executor would owe this benefit less to the indefinite will of the
testator, than to the choice of him who had the right to name the
heir or executor.!


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


2995. Although we have endeavoured throughout the whole of
this book to confine ourselves to the rules and remarks that seemed


making partition of his estate. Thus, he cannot direct that a substitution which he has
made in his testament should not be published and enrolled. Thus, he cannot deprive
his children of their legitime, or child's part.

i § 5, tn fin. Inst. de oblig. que quas. ex contr. nasc. ; — 1. 3, in fin. D. quibus ex caus. in poss.
eatur. See, touching the engagement of the heir or executor, the eighth article of the first
section of Heirs and Erecutors in general.

' TL. 82, D. de heered. instit. See the twenty-fifth article of the fifth section of this title,
and the remark that is there made on it.


TIT, I. BEC. 3.] TESTAMENTS. 267


necessary, and to abstain from every thing that is only matter of
curiosity; yet we cannot forbear to remark here, that there is
among the laws of Spain a rule directly contrary to that which is
explained in this article. For there it is permitted to every one to
name a person to whom he gives power to make his testament for
him, and to dispose of his goods after his death, and to choose for
him such heirs or executors as he shall think fit. And whatsoever
is ordered by this person, who is commissioned to make the testa-
ment, whom they call cometido & fazer testamento, is observed in
the same manner as if the deceased had ordained it; excepting
only, that he cannot name himself heir or executor, nor disinherit
the children or other descendants of that person whose testament
he makes, nor substitute to them by any manner of substitution,
nor name a testator to them, unless he has express power from the
deceased so to do. V. la ley 31 de Toro, and the additions to the
laws of Alphonso IX., part 6th, title of Testaments.


TX.


2996. Two Sorts of Questions concerning Testaments: What the
Testator had Power to do, and what he had a Mind to do. — It fol-
lows from the rules explained in the foregoing articles, that there
are only two sorts of questions that can arise from the dispositions
of a testament, when it is made according to form, and ought to
subsist. One is of those where the question is to know whether
the disposition of the testator has nothing in it that is contrary to
law; and the other is of those where the matter in question is to
know what has been the testator’s intention. For it is his inten-
tion that ought to serve as a rule, if it is not contrary to law.™


X.


2997. One cannot institute an Heir or Excecutor, so as that his
Institution shall begin, or cease to be, after a certain Time. — Since
the heir or executor, that is named in a testament, ought to be
universal successor to all the goods and all the charges of the de-
ceased, a testator cannot institute an heir or executor in terms
which limit the institution, either not to take place but within a
certain time after the testator’s death, or to cease to have effect
after a certain time which he has prescribed; so as that, in the
first case, the succession should be without any heir or executor


" L.37, D. de cond. et dem. See, touching the difficulties in the interpretation of tes-


268 THE CIVIL Law. [PART IL. BOOK IL


during all that time; and that in the second case there should be
no heir or executor after the time limited is expired. For it 1s
essential to the quality of heir or executor, that he take the place
of the deceased after his death; and that the succession do not
yemain vacant, and without a master, who may prosecute the
righte and acquit the charges of it. But although this disposition
should have no effect, yet the testament which contains it would
not be null for this single defect, and the beir or executor would
be reputed such from the time of the testator’s death, and for all
the time to come, as much as if the institution had not been lur
ited in this manner."


XI.


2908. The Testament hath its Effect by the Acceptance of the
Heir or Ececutor.— Although the nature of the testament, and its
validity, consists in this, that it contains the will of the testator,
and that it is by this will that it ought to have its effect; yet it
hath its effect only when the heir or executor, accepting of this
quality, engages himself thereby to all the dispositions of the tes-
tator, and to all the charges of the inheritance.°


XIL


2999. Divers Kinds of Testaments.— There are testaments of
divere kinds, and which ere distinguished, not by that which is
essential to their nature, which is the institution of an heir or ex-
ecutor, common to all testaments, but by the different formalities
which the laws have established for the use of persons who have a
mind to dispose of their estates, according as these formalities may
agree either to the quality of the person or to the circumstances


™ Hereditas ex die, vel ad diem, non recte datur: sed vitio temporis sublato, manct
institutio. DL. 34, D. de kered. inst. It is not the same thing with respect to bare lega-
cies and legacies in trust, which may begin to be due, or cease, at a certain day. For in
this there is no manner of inconvenience; the right to the thing bequeathed remaining
with the heir or executor, whilst the legatee has it not, and reverting to him when the
legatee ceases to have it.

This rule is not contrary to that other which permits the testator to charge an heir or
executor to deliver over the succession after a certain time to another person, who sac-
ceeds in his place by a fiduciary bequest, which we shall treat of in its proper place. For
the succession does not by this means remam vacant; and besides, this heir or executor
who restores the inheritance continues nevertheless to be heir or executor, and to be
‘ bound for the charges, against which the successor ought to indemnify him. See the
eighth article of the first section of Substitutsons.

° ZL. 55, § 2, ad senat. Trebell. See the eighth article


TIT. {. BEC. I] TESTAMENTS. 269


of the condition in which he is, as will appear by the following
articles.


XU


3000. Zestamenis of those who are Blind, Deaf, or Dumb.— As
to what concerns the persons of the testators, we may make one
prime distinction of testaments which may be made by those whom
some infirmities render incapable of certain ways in which others
may make their testaments. Thue, persons who are blind, deaf, or
dumb can make their testaments only with such formalities as
they are capable of, as shall be explained in the following section.!


XIV.


3001. Military Testaments.— The same consideration of the
diference in testators furnishes us with another distinction of
testaments that are made by officers in the army, and soldiers that
are actually engaged in their military functions, and taken up‘in
such a manner that it were not possible for them to observe the
formalities which the law prescribes in testaments. For the law
dispenses with these formalities in persons who are in this con-
dition, that it is impossible for them to observe them, and facil-
itates their dispositions, as shall be explained in the third section.’


XV.


3002. Testaments in Time of a Plague.— The same consider-
ation of the conjunctures in which testators cannot observe the
formalities necessary to a testament has induced the lawgivers to
relieve those that are obliged to make their testaments in a
time of plague from observing therein rigorously all the formal-
ities which they have prescribed. We shall explain in the third
foe the temperament which they allow of whenever this case

pena*


XVI.


2003. Secret Testaments.— Seeing a testator may reasonably
Wish that his will may be kept secret till after his death, he may


P See the following articles.
‘ See the seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh articles of the following section,
and the remarks om them,
Fis tp dinesath artes Se ihe ba ea:
* See the sixteenth article of the third section.
93 *


270 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK III.


make a private and secret testament, in the manner that shall be
explained in the third section.


XVII.


3004. Several Originals of one and the same Testament. — In
what manner soever a testament is made, the testator may, if he
pleases, make only one original testament, or make two or more
originals, for the surer preservation of his will, depositing them in
different places, or keeping one original in his own custody, and
depositing another in the hands of some other person."


XVIII.


3005. The Testament ts common to all Parties that have an Ir
terest under tt.— Seeing a testament is a title that belongs in
common to the heirs or executors, to the legatees, to the persons
who are substituted, or other persons who have interest in any of
the dispositions thereof, every one of those who may have any in-
terest under it has a right to have this title in his custody. But
since they all cannot have the original testament, every person
that has an interest in it may get a copy of it written in due forn,
and signed by the public officer that has the custody of the origi-
nal; and such a copy will serve in place of the original.*


SECTION II.


WHO MAY MAKE A TESTAMENT, AND WHO IS CAPABLE OF BEING
HEIR OR EXECUTOR, OR A LEGATEE.


3006. THERE are two things to be considered in a testament, in
order to know its validity and what effect it may have. One is,
to know whether the person that has made the testament had
power to make one; and whether the persons in favor of whom
the testator has disposed of his goods are capable of receiving
what is given them; and this shall be the subject-matter of this
section. The other is, to know if the testament is made according
to form ; which shall be explained in the following section."


© See the seventeenth article of the third section.

& ZL. 24, D. qua test. fac. poss. See the ninth article of the seventh section.
* 1. 2, D. testam. quem aper. inspic. et descr.

" L. 4, D. qui test. fac. poss.


TIT. 1. BEC. 11.] _ TESTAMENTS. 271


3007. It is to be observed on the subject-matter of this section,
that besides the causes of incapacity of receiving a benefit by a
testament, which are here explained, we have in France two rules
which annul the dispositions of some persons made in favor of
others, to whom it is prohibited to give any thing. One is of the
ordinance of Francis L, in the year 1539, art. 131, and of Henry
IL, in the year 1549, art. 2, which annuls all donations, whether
by testament or otherwise, that may be made by minors to their
tutors, curators, guardians, and other administrators, during their
administration, or to other persons for their behoof. And the
other is that of some customs which forbid the dispositions made
by the wife in favor of her husband, or by the husband in favor of
his wife; which some customs restrain to the dispositions of the
wife in favor of her husband, and do not prohibit those of the hus-
band in favor of his wife. ;

3008. It may also be proper to observe, in relation to the ca-
pacity of making a will, that there are some customs where a
married woman is not allowed to make her will, unless it be with
the permission of her husband, or that she had this power given
her by the contract of marriage.

3009. We must remark here, with respect to the incapacity of
making a will, that we have not set down in this section a rule of
the Roman Jaw, which some readers, perhaps, may find fault with,
and therefore we have thought fit to give the reason why we have
omitted it. It is that rule which directs that persons who doubt
of their state and condition may not make a will; from which
Tule soldiers were excepted, who had power to make a will not-
withstanding this doubt. Thus, he who was uncertain whether
he was under his father’s power, or emancipated, could not make
a testament,’ because a son that was still in his father’s family
could not make a will.

3010. We have judged it proper not to insert this rule here: for
to all appearance there can never happen any case where it can
be put in practice ; and whenever there is a testament, it is natural
to presume that he who made it did not doubt. of his having
power to make it; and one would not start the question to know
Whether he was in this doubt or not. But even although we
should suppose that a.testator had some reason to doubt of his


a 15, D. de test. mil. © 7.11, § 1, D. ed.
L.9, D. de jur. codicil.


272 THE CIVIL Law. [Parr Is. BOOX II.


condition, and that'he was really uncertain of it, would this reason
alone be sufficient to hinder him from making his will? Thus,
for example, if we suppose that a young man of the age of four
teen years complete, being out of his own country, and not know-
ing precisely the day of his birth, should happen to fall sick, and
should make a testament, being uncertain whether he was of si-
ficient age to make a will or not; bat still, thinking it better to
make a testament, that may be valid if it should appear that be
had the age that was necessary, than to omit making one, becauz
that the testament which he should make would be null if it ap
peared that he was not of the age that is required ; would it be said
of such a testament, that it ought to be annulled, because the ter
tator was ignorant of a fact which, if he had known it, would have
added nothing either to his age or to his experience? But would
ever any one think of demanding whether this young man knew
his own age? And if any one should start this doubt, which
would appear very odd, would it not be sufficient that this testator
had really the age and power requisite for making a testament, to
make it valid in these circumstances? To which we may add,
that since this rule did not take in the case of soldiers, we may
infer from thence that even the authors of it did not look upon it
to be a rule of the law of nature; for in that case it would not
have been just to dispense with the observance of it, even in
soldiers. But the law of nature demands that truth should always
have its effect, and that he who has acquired a right should not be
deprived of it, under pretext that he doubts whether his right be
secure. This effect of truth has been found so just, even by the
authors of the niceties in the Roman law, that we see in a law
that he who, being his own master, and free from his father’s au-
thority, and by that means capable of inheriting an estate that had
fallen to him, might inherit it, although he not only doubted of his
being his own master, but was falsely persuaded of the contrary,
thinking himself still to be under his father’s power® Thus, they
were convinced that truth ought to supply, not only a doubt, but
even an error of this kind.


Art. L


3011. Those who are under no Incapacity may make a Will. —
To know who are the persons that have the power of making a


© See L. 21, D. de cond. et dem.


- IT. 1. BRO. TI] TESTAMENTS. 273


. testament, or receiving any benefit by one, if is necessary to know


. whom the law has rendered incapable thereof; for whoever is
_ under no incapacity is capable both of the one and the other.*


IL


$012. Males wader Fourteen, and Females under Twelve Years
. of Age, cammot make a Will.— The causes which render persons in-
capable of making a will proceed from some one of those qualities
which have been explained in the title of Persons; such as the
qualities of unripeness of age, of being a foreigner, being under
sentence of death, and others. Thus we may reckon, as the first
cause of incapacity of making a testament, the want of that age
which is called in the Roman law pubertas, that is, fourteen years
_ complete in males, and twelve years complete in females; for
_ those that have not accomplished this age cannot make a will.>
And although even one that had made his testament before he
had attained fourteen years of age should not die till a long time
after, so that it might be said that, being of age sufficient, and ca-
pable of making a testament, he had approved of that which he
had made when he was under age by not altering it; yet this
testament, being null in its origin, would not be made valid by this
crcumstance.° |


REMARKS ON THE PrREcEDING ARTICLE.


3013. We have said in the article, that it is necessary to have
this age complete, annem completum, as is said in the second of the


* L. 4, D. qui test. fac. poss.

> Testamemtam facere non possunt impuberes quia nullam eorum animi judicinm est.
§ 1, Last. qutb. non est perm. fac. testam.

It seems to have been a doubt heretofore in the Roman law, whether eunuchs could
make a will, because they could never attain to a true puberty: and they were allowed to
make a will only at the age of eighteon years. Paulus, bb. 8, Sent. Ht. 4,§ 2. But the
Emperor Constantine allowed them to make their wills at the same time that others did.
L. 5, Cod. qui test. fac. poss.

A qua state testamentum vel masculi vel foominsw facere possunt, videamus. Verius
in masculis quidem quartum decimam annum spectandum: in fominis vero duodeci-
mum completum. Utrum autem excessisse debeat quis quartam decimum annum ut tes-
tamentam facere poesit, an sufficit complease? propone aliquem kalendis Januariis na-
tum, testamentum ipso natali suo fecisse, quarto decimo anno, an valeat testamcntum ?
Dico velere. Plus arbitror, etiam si pridie kalendaram fecerit, post sextam horam noc-
tis, valere testamentum. Jam enim complesse videtur annum quartum decimum, ut
Marciano videtar. L. 5, D. qui test. fac. poss.;—v. 1.1, D. de manumiss.

* Si filins familias aut pupillus tabulas testamenti fecerit, signaverit, secundum eas
bonorum possessio dari non potest. Licet filius familias sui juris, aut pupillas pubes fac-


274 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK U1.


texts quoted on it; but the words following raise a difficulty which
we ought not to pass over in silence; for although the natural
sense of these words, fourteen years complete, seems to require that
the last moment of the fourteenth year should be expired, since it
is only at that moment that it is accomplished, yet what follows
in the said law appears to be contrary to it. For these words,
utrum excessisse debeat, an sufficit complesse, and the rest that fol-
lows, purporting that the testament is good if it is made on the
birthday, or even on the eve thereof, intimate sufficiently that the
year is held for accomplished before the last moment of it is ex-
pired, in what manner soever we understand the eve of the birth.
For that may be understood two ways. The one is, in counting
the eve of the birthday according to the computation of the days
of the year; so that in the case of one born the first day of Jan-
uary, which is the case of this law, the eve of the birthday would
be the last day of December. The other way is, in taking for the
eve of the birthday the four-and-twenty hours which precede the
moment of the said birth.

3014. It seems to be the first of these two ways to which this
law determines the eve of the birthday, since it supposes a testa-
ment made in the morning of the said eve, without distinguishing
at what hour the testator was born. So that since, according to
the Roman usage, the day begins at midnight,’ it seems that, ac
cording to this rule, a testament might be good, although it should
precede the moment of the testator’s birth more than four-and-
twenty hours. For if we suppose, according to this law, that the
birthday is the Ist of January, and that the eve of the said day
begins from the midnight of the foregoing day, that is, at midnight
between the 30th and 3lst of December; and that the testator,
born in the afternoon of the 1st of January, makes his will in the
morning of the 31st of December; it would seem that, according
to the terms of this law, this testament ought to be good, although
it preceded more than a whole day the moment of the testator's
birth, since it would be true that it had been made on the eve of
the said birth. But this seems neither to be regular, nor conform-
able to our usage, as shall be shown hereafter.

3015. It may be observed, with respect to this way of holding
the year for accomplished in the beginning of the last day, that it


tus decesserit. Quia nullsx sunt tabule testamenti, quas is fecerit, qui testamenti faciendi
facultatem non habuerit. JZ. 19, D. qus testam. fac. poss.
@ V. 1. 8, D. de feriis.


TIT. I. SEC. I!.] TESTAMENTS. 275


was not so in all sorts of cases; for not only prescriptions require
the entire accomplishment of the year, as has been said in its
place, but even as to the age which excuses one from being tutor,
it is necessary that the last moment of the last year should be ex-
pired.° In relation to which it may be said, that there would be as
much, or more, reason for excusing one from being tutor in the last
day of his seventieth year, as for granting leave to one to make a
testament on the last day of his fourteenth year. And as to what
concerns the full age for making a testament, it seems that the
sense of these terms, a year complete, is understood, according to
our usage, of a year expired, especially in the customs; for those
which fix the age for making a will require the years to be accom-
plished, and those also which mention any thing of the matter do
none of them almost allow of the making of a will before the age
of twenty years in sons, and eighteen in daughters, even as to
the estate which they may have besides what has come to them
by descent ; and as to the estate which they have inherited by de-
scent, they require five-and-twenty years. So that the spirit of
these customs is not to favor a dispensation in point of time; and
likewise they do not insinuate, as this law does, that the year
should be held for accomplished at the beginning of the last day,
and much less the eve of it. Therefore we have restrained ourselves
in the article from saying that it is necessary that the age should
be accomplished, that is, that they should have the age which the
law requires; for this expression might be accommodated even to
those usages which should only demand that the last day should
be begun, taking it in the sense of these words of the second of the
texts quoted on this article, Utrum excessisse debeat, an sufficit com-
plesse. The difficulty which has engaged us to make this remark
might be placed among the number of those which may require
some regulation.


Il.


3016. Sons who are still under their Fathers Authority cannot
make a Will. — Sons who are still under their father’s power and
authority, not having been emancipated, cannot make a testa-
ment,? unless it be to dispose of those sorts of peculiar goods of
Which they are wholly and solely masters, and which we have
spoken of in the proper place.*


, Excessisse oportet 70 anos. L. 2, D. de excus.;—1. un. Cod. qui etat.
L. 6, D. qui test. fac. poss. ; —1. penult. C. qui test. fac. poss.
* L. wt. C.eod. This rule, with the exception as to these peculiar goods, is observed in


276 THE CIVIL Law. [Pat iI. BOOK MI.


IV.

3017. Madmen cannot make a Testament, except tn a Lucid Inter-
val. — Those who are in a state of madness cannot make a testa-
ment, unless it be that they have intervals of reason, which may
saffice for such a disposition, and that the testament be begun and
accomplished, in all its formalities, in an interval where the use of
reason has been perfectly free‘


V.


3018. Old Men, Sick and Infirm Persons, may make a Will.— The
infirmities of old age, and diseases which do not take away the
use of reason, are no hindrance to those who are in that condition
to make their will.


VL


3019. A Prodigal cannot make a Testament.— Prodigals who
are interdicted, being incapable of administering their goods dur-
ing their life, are likewise incapable of disposing of them in view
of death. For the same cause which deserves the punishment of
interdiction deserves likewise that of the incapacity of making a
testament. And whether we consider the bad use that a prodigal
who is interdicted may make of the liberty to make a will, or the
consequence of punishing him for his bad conduct by depriving
him of this liberty, although he might even make a good use of it,


some customs. See, touching these peculiar goods, and touching emancipation, what has
been said thereof in the preamble of the second section, How Fathers succeed, and in the
third article of the same section.

Although it may seem that this rale, which renders sons who are still under the pater-
nal power incapable of making a testament, was in the Roman law a consequence of this,
that the son who was still under his father’s jurisdiction could acquire nothing but what
belonged immediately to his father, excepting those peculiar goods which are mentioned
in the article ( Ulpian. tit. 20, 4 10); yet it appears by the second text cited on this article,
that Justinian, who gave to sons living still under the father’s power the property of the
goods which they might happen to acquire, leaving only to the fathers the asufruct of
them, did not grant to them however the power to dispose of any other goods by testa-
ment besides those peculiums: which shows us that the Emperor Justinian was of opin-
ion, thut the liberty of disposing of the said peculiar goods was not so much an effect of
the right of property as of the merit of the son, who, having rendered himself worthy of
such an acquisition, had likewise the privilege to dispose thereof. And as for the other
goods, he could not become capable of disposing of them but by emancipation.

f L. 2, D. qui test. fac. poss. ;—1. 9, C. qui test. fac. poss.;—§ 1, Inst. quid. non est perm.


. teat.

& L.8, C. qua test. fac. poss. ; —1. 2, D. eod. There are some customs where dispositions
made in view of death are null, if the persons who have made them have not survived
three months after making the said dispositions. See the preface to this second part,
no. 7. y


TIT. I. SEC. 11] TESTAMENTS. av


it is for the interest of private families, and also of the public, that
a person of so bad a conduct as a prodigal that is interdicted
should not have power to make a will.>


ReMARES ON THE Precepine ARTICLE.


3020. With respect to this matter of a prodigal’s testament, we
may distinguish between that which he makes after his interdic-
tion, and that which he may have made before. And the Emperor
Leo, in his 39th novel, makes even a distinction of the testa-
ments which prodigals make after their interdiction, approving
those which are reasonable, and rejecting the others. But besides
that the novels of the Emperor Leo are not received in France,
this distinction serves only to raise lawsuits: and it is easier and
more equitable to annul without distinction every testament made
by a prodigal after his interdiction. But as to the testament made
before the interdiction, there is greater difficulty to know if it
ought to subsist. And although the question be decided by the
texts cited on this article, which determine that this testament
should have its effect, yet it will not be amiss to consider some
inconveniences that may follow from this rule. For as it is certain
that prodigals are interdicted only for their bad conduct which
has preceded the interdiction, and that it is because of this bad
conduct that they are incapable of making a testament; so the
same reason which requires that the testament made after the in-
terdiction should be annulled, seems likewise to demand that the
testament made before the interdiction should also be annulled.
For it is natural to presume, that since a prodigal never thinks of
making a testament, unless he is put upon it by other persons, so
he would not have made his will but by the influence of his ac-
complices in his debaucheries, and in their favor. And it might
likewise happen, that a testament, which ought to be altered be-
cause of the changes that may have happened in the family of the
prodigal after his interdiction, could not, nevertheless, be reformed,
because the prodigal after his interdiction being ineapable of mak-
ing a will, he could not make any new dispositions.


VII.


3021. He who is both Deaf and Dumb cannot make a Will.— He
who is both deaf and dumb, whether from his birth or otherwise,


» 7. 18, D. qui test. fac. poss. ; —§ 2, Inst. quib. non est perm. fac. test.
VOL. Il. 24


278 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOK I11.


and who can neither write nor read, being incapable of giving any
sign of his will, is incapable of making a testament. But if one,
who, during the time that he was neither deaf nor dumb, had
made a testament in due form, happens afterwards to fall under
these two infirmities, although this accident renders him incapable
of confirming his will, or altering it if he would, yet the testament
which he had made in the time that he was capable of doing it
would still subsist.!


VITIL


3022. If he knows how to write, he may make a Testament. —
He who, not having been born both deaf and dumb, should be-
come so by some accident, after having learned to write, might
make his testament; for he might explain his will by writing it
himself, and observing in it the formalities which shall be ex-
plained in the third section:


IX.


3023. The Deaf Man who can speak may make a Will. — Those
who are only deaf without being dumb, as if their deafness hap-
pened only after they had acquired the use of speech, may make a
testament; for they are capable of explaining their intentions;
and much more, if they know how to write.™


X.


3024. Dumb Persons who are not Deaf may make a Will, if they
know how to write.— Dumb persons, although they are so from
their birth, yet if they are not deaf, and know how to write, since
they are able to explain their will, are capable of making 4
testament. But if they cannot write, not being able to explain


' 7. 6,§ 1, D. qui test. fac. poss.;—1.10, C. qui test. fac. poss. It appears from the first
of these two texts, that, by the ancient law, he who was only deaf without being dumb,
and he who was only dumb without being deaf, could not make a testament. Because he
that was deaf could not hear the persons whose presence was necessary to the making of
his testament, and he that was dumb could not explain his intention to the witnesses.
But they might make a testament if they obtained leave from the prince. VV. L. 7, eod.
See the following articles.

| ZL. 6, § 1, D. qui test. fac. poes.;—1. 10, C. qui test. fac. poss. See the eighteenth and
twentieth articles of the third section, and the remark on the seventeenth article.

™ J. 10, C. qui test. fac. poss. See the twentieth article of the third section, and the
remark on the seventeenth article of the same section.


TIT. I. BEC. I1.] TESTAMENTS. 279


themselves but very imperfectly and by signs, they have not the
liberty of making a testament."


XL


3025. Blind Persons may make a Testament. — Persons that are
blind, whether they be such from their birth or otherwise, may
make their testament, observing therein the formalities which shall
be explained in the third section.°


XIL


3026. Strangers cannot make a Testament. — Strangers, who are
called aliens and foreigners, cannot make a testament, or other dis-
position in view of death


XTIL


3027. A Monk may make a Will before his Profession.— Pro-
fessed monks are incapable of making a testament after they have
taken upon themselves the vows. But they may make their will at
any time before they take the vows, even although they wear the
religious habit, during the time of their probation or novitiate; and
their testament will have its effect as soon as they have made their
solemn profession. For that is considered as a civil death; which,
stripping them of all their goods, has the same effect, with respect
to their testament, as a natural death.


XIV.


3028. Persons condemned to Death cannot make a Testament. —
Persons condemned to death, or to other punishments which im-
port civil death, and confiscation of goods, cannot make a testa-
ment. And this state annuls even the testament which they may
have made before their condemnation, and before they committed
the crime. But if he who, having appealed from his condemna-


" L. 10, C. qué test. fac. poss. See the seventeenth and twentieth articles of the third
section. |


° See the twentieth article of the third section.

P See the eleventh article of the second section of Persons, the ninth article of the sec-
ond section of Heirs and Executors in general, and the other articles which are there cited.
We must except from this rule the case which has been observed on the third article of
the fourth section of Heirs and Executors in general.

3 See the twelfth article of the second section of Persons, the tenth article of the second
section of Hetrs and Erecutors in general, and the other articles which are there cited.

* L. 8,41, D. qui test. fac. poss. ;—1. 1, § 2, D. de leg. 3;—1. 6, § 8, D. de inj. rupt.


280 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 1. BOOK IIL


tion, and having made afterwards his testament, happens to die
before the appeal has been determined, this testament, or any
other which he had made before his condemnation, would have its
effect. For in criminal matters the appeal extinguishes the sen-
tence. And seeing, after the death of the party accused, there can
be no further condemnation, his condition remains the same that
it was before he was condemned But we must except from this
rule those who are condemned for, or accused of, those sorts of
crimes which may be prosecuted after the death of the criminal ;
for in these cases the validity of the testament depends on the
event of the accusation.‘


XV.


3029. Bastards may make a Testament.— The incapacity of
bastards is limited to exclude them only from succeeding to intes-
tates, and does not hinder them from disposing of their effects by
a testament."


XVL


3030. Difference between the Incapacity of Foreigners, of Con
demned Persons, and that of others.— There is this difference to
be remarked among the several incapacities which we have just
now explained, that the incapacity under which foreigners are,
and that of persons condemned to death, do not only annul the
testaments of those who are under either of these two incapacities
at the time that they make their testament; but if they shall hap-
pen to him who had made his testament when he was under no
incapacity, and if he chances to be under either the one or the
other of these two incapacities at the time of his death, his testa-
ment will be annulled. For all those who die in this state can
have no heirs or executors. But the other incapacities which may
happen to a testator after he has made his testament, although
they should continue to the moment of his death, yet they make
no change in his testament. Thus, profession in religion, after a
testament, is a kind of civil death; but which is so far from an-


* L. 9, D. qui test. fac. poss.; —i. 1, § 8, D. de leg. 8; —1. 18, § 2, D. qui test. fac. poss. ;
—1.1, § ult. D. ad senat. Turpill.

t L. 20, D. de accus. et inscript. See the eleventh article of the second section of Heirs
and Executors in general, and the other articles which are there quoted.

" See the eighth article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general, and the
articles there cited.


TIT. I. SEC. 11.} TESTAMENTS. 281


nulling the testament, as the incapacity of a condemped person
does, that it has the quite contrary effect, to confirm it, and to lay
the succession open, and to call thereto the person that is named
heir or executor. Thus, madness, and the other infirmities which
happen to a testator after his testament, and which render him in-
capable of making a new one, fix his will to what it was at the last
moment that he had the free use of it.*


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3031. It is in the sense of the rule explained in the beginning of
this article, that we ought to understand that other common rule,
which says, that a testament which was valid in the beginning
becomes null, if afterwards things happen to be in such a condi-
tion that, if the testament were then made, it would be of no
force. Que in eam causam pervenerunt, a qua incipere non pote-
rant, pro non scriptis habeniur. LL. 3,§ alt. D. de his que pro non
script. Quia in ewn casum res perventt a quo incipere non potest.
L. 19, D. ad leg. Aquil. But this last rule, if it were applied
without distinction, would often mislead us; for it frequently hap-
pens that an act subsists, although he who made it afterwards
falls into a state in which he could not make it. Thus, a mar-
riage is not annulled by the husband or wife’s becoming mad; nor
a contract of sale, although the seller is afterwards interdicted as a
prodigal. And it is the same thing with respect to testaments, in
the other cases explained in this article. And it is likewise said in
another rule, that it is no new thing for that which has once been
valid not to cease to be so, although the case happens that one is
in such a condition, that, if he did it at that time, it would be in-
valid. Non est novum, ut que semel utiliter constituta sunt, durent,
cet ille casus extiterit a quo isitium capere non potucrunt. LL. 85,
$1, D. de reg. jur.


XVIL
3032, The Subject-Matter of the following Articles. — We have
explained in the foregoing articles what relates to the capacity or
incapacity of making a will; and it now remains that we should
inquire who are the persons that may be named heirs or executors,
or receive any benefit by a testament: which depends on knowing
who are the persons that have not this right; for besides them, all


* L. 8, § 1, D. qué test. fac. poss.; —1.1,§ 2, D. de leyat.3; ~ 1. 6,§ 8, D. de injust. rupt. er.
9A*


282 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK IIL.


others have it. And there are two sorts of persons who have it
not; those who are incapable, and those who are unworthy of it’


XVIIL


3033. Difference between the Incapacity of making a Will, and
that of receiving Benefit by one.— The incapacities of making a
will, and those of receiving benefit by one, are not the same; for
there are persons incapable of making a testament, who are not
incapable of receiving benefit by one. But there is no person who
is capable of making a will, who is not likewise capable of receiv-
ing benefit by a will. And there are some who are incapable
both of the one and the other, as we shall see by the following
articles. :


XIX.


3034. Persons incapable of making a Testament, bud capable of
receiving Benefit by one. — Persons who have not the age required
for making a will, madmen, those who are both deaf and dumb
from their birth, prodigals that are interdicted, and those whom
some infirmity renders incapable of making a testament, are not
for that incapable of being named heirs or executors, or of receiv-
ing any other advantage by a testament. For although they may
be incapable of alienating their goods, and disposing of them, yet
nothing hinders them from being capable of acquiring and possess-
ing goods.*

XX.


3035. Persons incapable both of the one and the other. — For-
eigners, professed monks, and persons condemned to death, are
incapable of receiving benefit by a testament, whilst they remain
under these incapacities, as has been explainéd in its place.>


Y See the articles which follow.

* See the following articles. We may remark on what is said in this article, that all
those who are incapable of making a testament are likewise incapable of receiving any
benefit under a testament; that althongh all strangers are incapable of receiving any ben-
efit by a testament, yet it may happen that a stranger may be capable of making a testa-
ment in the case that has been observed on the third article of the fourth section of Heirs
and Executors in general. But this case does not hinder the rule from being true in gen-
eral; for that stranger cannot make a testament but by virtue of a dispensation which
suspends his incapacity, but does not make it to cease totally.

® See the seventh article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general.

b See the ninth, tenth, and eleventh articles of the second section of Heirs and Execu-
tors in general, and the other articles there cited.


TIT. I. SEC. 11] TESTAMENTS. 288


XXI.

3036. Bastards capable of receiving Benefit by a Testament. —
Although bastards are incapable of succeeding to intestates, yet
they may: be instituted heirs or executors, and may receive any
other benefit by a testament, except in some cases, which are ex-
plained in their proper places.


XXIL


3037. Children which are not born. — Children who are not yet
born may be instituted heirs or executors in a testament, not
only by their fathers and mothers, but by any other person, and
even by strangers. They are likewise capable of receiving lega-
cies, or any other benefit by a testament.4


XXIL


3038. Children which are not conceived. — We must reckon
among the number of those who are capable of receiving benefit
by a testament, children who are not as yet conceived, and who
shall be born. For not only may the parents of those children in-
stitute them heirs or executors, or substitute them to others, but
every other person that is capable of making a will may name for
his successor a child which shall be born of the marriage of such
persons, whom he is desirous to gratify in this manner, although he
is noways related to the said persons. And this institution will
have its effect, if at the time of the testator’s death there is a child
conceived of this marriage, although it is born only after the said
death. And one may likewise substitute children which shall not
be born until a great many years after the death of the person
who makes the disposition‘


XXIV.
3039, One may institute an Heir or Executor, without naming


© See the eighth article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general, and the
articles there quoted, and the remarks on that eighth article.

4 See the thirteenth article of the second section of Heirs and E-xrecutors in general.

* Posthumus alienus recte heres instituitur. Jnst. de bonor. poss. See the thirteenth
article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general. Such an institution would
be as it were conditional, in case the said child should be conceived at the time of the tes-
tator’s death.

\t is very usual, in favor of contracts of marriage, to make such institutions of children
Which shall be born of the ‘said marriage, or to give some advantage to the males, or to
the eldest children, who shall be born of the said marriages.

' Bee the third tithe of the fifth book.


204 THB CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK LIL


him expressly, designating him only by some Distinguishing Quality.
— It is not necessary for the instituting of an heir or executor, that
he be named by his name in the testament ; for the institution will
have its effect if he is designated by his quality, or by such cir
cumstances as may distinguish him, and make him so well known,
that there can be no doubt of the institution’s being in his favor.
As if the testator had named for his heir or executor a bishop, a
first president, an attorney-general, the dean of a ‘chapter, or some
other person who may be distinguished and marked out precisely
by some particular quality in a certain places


RemMaRES ON THE Prgecepine ARTICLE.


3040. What is said in this text of an institution which should
be made in terms reproachful to the heir or executor, to describe
him by that distinction, has not been set down in the article. For
besides that in all appearance it never happens, at least among us,
that a testator should be willing to affront his heir or executor, at
the same time that he leaves him his estate, it might so fall out
that a father, justly irritated against his son because of his disor-
derly life, and yet not being willing, or even not able, to disinherit
him, but being only desirous to show the just occasion he has had
in his lifetime to be dissatisfied with this son, and to make him
sensible of his anger in order to bring him back to his duty, should
declare in his testament, that although his son had rendered him-
self unworthy of his succession by his disorderly life, yet for all
that he names him his heir or executor: and this disposition would
not be null.* But if the heir or executor, not being son to the
testator, was institated with some reproachful or injurious expres-
sion or description, it is by the circumstances that we ought to
judge whether such an institution may have any cause which
ought to make it to subsist, the heir or executor being willing to
accept of the succession, or whether the institution is so far con-
trary to reason and good manners that it ought to be annulled.


XXV.


3041. The Heir or Executor may be a Person unknown to the
Testator.— One may likewise name for his heir or executor an un-


§ Si quis nomen heredis quidem non dixerit, sed indubitabili signo eum demonstrave-
rit, quod pene nihil a nomine distat, non tamen eo quod contumeliz causa solet addi, va-
let institutio. LZ. 9, § 8, D. de hered. instit.

* L. 48, § 1, D.de heered. inst.


TIT. 1. SEC. 11] ' ‘FESTAMENTS. 286


known person, provided that the testator, who, perhaps, has never
seen the said heir or executor, points out his person by such cir-
cumstances as may make him easily known; as if it is the son
of one of his brothers, or other near relation, whom he had never
seen because of a long absence; or even a stranger distinguished
by some mark, such as some particular favor which the testator
may have received from him, and which he explains in such a
manner, that, although the author of this kindness was unknown
to him, yet this circumstance may afterwards make him easily
known.*


XXVL

3042. The Institution Null, by Reason of the Uncertainty of the
Heir or Executor. — if the testator, in the naming of his heir or ex-
ecutor, should express himself in such an obscure and equivocal
manner, that it is not possible to know whom he intended to name
for his heir or executor, it being impossible that such an institn-
tion can have its effect, it would remain null. Thus, for example,
if there are two persons of the same name, who are equally
friends to the testator, and he should name one of them to be his
heir or executor, but in such a manner that it is not possible to
distinguish which of the two he meaas, this uncertainty would ex-
clude both the one and the other from the succession :! for it could
not be said that both those persons should be heirs or executors,
since the testator intended only one of them; and it could not be
said of either of the two, that he was the person whom the tes-
tator had made choice of. Thus, in this case, if it were possible
that it could happen, it would be juster to leave the succession to
the next of kin, than to hazard the giving of it to one of the two
whom the testator was not willing to have for his successor; and
this event ought to be imputed to the testator’s want of exactness.


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3043. If the case of this article could fall out, and the two per-
sons of the same name should agree among themselves to divide
the succession, could the next of kin hinder the same by reason of
the nullity arising from the uncertainty, which makes it impossible


b 7.11, C. de heared. inst. ;— § ult. Inst. eod.; —v.1. 46, D. cod. See the following ar-
ticle.

' TL. 68, $1, D. de haved. inst. Seo the twenty-fifth article of the eleventh section of
Legacies.


286 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART It. BOOK IIL


to discover which of the two is the heir or executor? Or might
they say that one of them is certainly the person whom the testa-
tor had called to his succession, and that therefore, they both yield-
ing to one another reciprocally the right that each of them might
have to it, their agreement among themselves would have the effect
of rendefing the succession common to them? Since one of the
two is certainly called to the succession, and gives a share of it
to the other, and it ought to be indifferent to the next of kin,
who is deprived of the succession by the testament, whether it re-
main entire to one alone, or whether it be divided among two.
But since the quality of executor, or testamentary heir, cannot be
acquired but by the will of the testator, the agreement of these
two persons cannot make them both heirs or executors: for be
sides that the person whom the testator had a mind should be his
heir or executor cannot be sure himself that he bas this quality;
it is most certain as to the other, not only that he cannot be her
or executor, but likewise that he cannot he coheir or coexecutor,
since, although the person from whom he derives his right should
be acknowledged for the true heir or executor, yet he cannot make
a coheir or coexecutor, who shall immediately succeed to the testa-
tor in one half of the succession. And the said conveyance or as
signment would only make him a purchaser of that moiety of the
succession, and not an heir or executor chosen by the testator.
Thus, since neither of the two can be certainly heir or executor,
nor by any means coheir or coexecutor, such a disposition, which is
impossible to be executed, ought to remain null.


XX VIL


3044. Persons Unworthy cannot receive any Benefit by a Tests
ment. — We may reckon in the number of persons who cannot
receive any benefit by a testament, those who have rendered them-
selves unworthy of it. And since the causes which may have this
effect have been explained in their proper place,* and there is
nothing necessary to be repeated here, it is sufficient for the order
of the subject-matter of this section, that we have here taken no-
tice of it.


K See the third section of Heirs and Executors in general.


TIT. 1. SEC. 111] TESTAMENTS. 287


SECTION III.
OF THE FORMS AND FORMALITIES NECESSARY IN TESTAMENTS.


3045. We call those things forms or formalities of an act, which
the laws have established to be proofs of its verity, and thereby to
establish its validity. Thus, to make a sale, an exchange, a lease,
a loan, or other covenant, which may have its effect, it is necessary
to make an act of it, that is, a writing which may explain the in-
tention of the parties, to be signed by them; or if one or other of
them cannot write their names, that it be made in the presence of
@ notary public and two witnesses, or of two notaries without wit-
nesses.® Thus, to have a right of mortgage according to our
usage, a covenant signed only by the parties would not be suf-
ficient; but it is necessary that the act which is to give the mort-
gage should be passed either in a court of justice, or before two
notaries, or before one notary and two witnesses. Thus, for the
validity of a donation that is to have its effect in the lifetime of
the donor, it is not enough that the act thereof be written and exe-
cated in the presence of notaries public, but it is moreover neces-
sary that it be enrolled.>

3046. We see, in all these sorts of acts, that these formalities
have been invented in order to make them valid, that is, to make
them have their effect by the proof which they make of their truth.
But if it is necessary in all sorts of acts that they should have
some formality to prove their truth in order to give them the effect
which they ought to have, there is as much or more necessity
that an act so serious and of so great importance as is a testament
should be accompanied with proofs of the will of the testator,
which may not only remove all suspicion of the forging of another
will than his, but which may give also his testament the character
of a will well concerted, by the firmness and authority of which
the peace and quiet of the families that are interested in it may
be established.

3047. It was upon these considerations that in the Roman law,
which allowed the making of a testament by word of mouth and


* See, touching the necessity of making acts in writing, the remark that has been made
on the twelfth article of the first section of Covenants, and the preamble of the second sec-
Gon of Proofs.

* See the fifteenth article of the first section of Donations.


238 THE CIVIL Law. [Part IL BOOK II.


without writing, it was ordained, that it could not be made with-
out the presence of seven witnesses above fourteen years of age,
and citizens of Rome. And the same number of witnesses was
likewise made necessary for written testaments.

3048. This usage as to the number of seven witnesses is pre-
served in the provinces of France which are governed by the writ-
ten law; but in the other provinces no more witnesses are re-
quired to testaments than to contracts, and two witnesses suffice
with a notary public, or two notaries without other witnesses.
And there are even some places where they are governed by the
written law, where the same formality suffices for testaments.
But instead of this great number of witnesses, some customs have
prescribed other forms; such as that the testators shall read over
and over the testaments which they have dictated to the notaries
public, and that express mention be therein made that this formal-
ity hath been observed. We may add, as to what concerns the
formalities of testamenta, that by the ordinances of Orleans, art.
27, and of Blois, art 63, one may make a testament before a cn-
rate or a vicar, instead of a notary public, observing therein the
usual formalities.

3049. We have thought fit not to set down among the rules of
this section that rule of the Roman law which requires that the
witnesses should be called expressly for that end. This formality
was judged necessary for testaments that were not written ;° but
according to the usage in France, which requires that the testa-
ment be in writing, it suffices if the witnesses are present at the
reading and signing of the testament. And although the notaries
usually make mention in the testaments that the witnesses have
been expressly called for that purpose, yet it seems that the testa-
ment ought not to be null, although this formality was omitted ;
for it is always certain that the witnesses have been desired to do
this office, and this truth is sufficiently proved by their presence and
signing. And we see even in the Roman law, that although the
‘witnesses had not been called expressly for the testament, yet it
was sufficient to acquaint them that their testimony was desired
in that affair. Licet ad aliam rem sint rogati, vel collecti, si tamen
ante testimontum certiorentur ad testamentum se adhibitos, posse eos
testimontum suum recte perhibere. LL. 21, § 2, D. qut test. fac. poss.


© See the remarks on the only article of the fourth section.


TIT. L S£c. 111.] TESTAMENTS. 289


Arr. I.

3050. Seven Witnesses are necessary to a Testament. — It is ne-
cessary for the validity of a testament, that the testator make it to
be read in the presence of a public notary, and of seven witnesses
that sign it with him. And if the testator or witnesees know not
how, or are not able, to write, it is necessary that mention be made
thereof in the testament.*


IL


3051. The Witnesses ought to be present, and sign if they can. —
All the witnesses ought to be present at the same time, and in the
same place where the testament is made, so as to hear the whole
tenor of the testament. And although the testament had been
written before, and in their absence, yet it is sufficient that they all
be present to hear the testament read in presence of the testator;
and that he declare to them that the said testament contains his
will, of which the said writing, together with their uniform testi-
mony, is to make the proof; and that, at the same time, without
being interrupted by other business, the witnesses see the testator
sign the testament, and they sign it with him.> For it is by the sign-
ing that the testament is to be accomplished, and to have its form.°

* Septem testibus adhibitis, et subscriptione testium. § 3, Inst. de test. ord. Si unus de
septem testibus defuerit, vel coram testatore omnes eodem loco testes suo, vel alieno an-
nilo non signaverint, jure deficit testamentum. L. 12, C. de testam. Septem testium
presentia in testamentis requiratur, et subscriptio a testatore fiat. Z. 28,4 1,e0d. Seo
the following article.

Instead of sealing by the witnesses, which is mentioned in this law, and which is not ia
use with us except in some places, it is only the signing of the witness that is required,
who is to write his name if he can, and is able to sign ; and if not, the notary ought to
make mention of it, according as it has been directed by the ordinance of Orieans, art. 84,
and that of Blois, art. 165. See another form of a testament in the seventeenth article.

The rule explained in this article is to be understood according to the usage of the
provinees which are governed by the written law. ‘For in the customs so great a number
of witnesses is not required, as has been explained in the preamble of this section. As
to which it is to be observed in general, on the formalities of testaments, that we ought to
observe those that are in use in the place where the testament is made: for the formali-
ties being different in divers places, every place keeps to its own; and one ought not to
set them aside in order to make use of those of other places, which perhaps may not be
known there, and may be such that the notaries public either would aot or could not sub-
stitute in the room of those they had been accustomed to. Thus, every place having a
right to keep to its own approved usage, and which has passed into a law, it is sufficient
for the validity of a testament, to observe therein the formalities that are used in the place
Where it is made. V.1. 9, Cod. de testam.

> Lai, C. de testam.

* D.1 21. See, as to the signing by the testator and witnesses, what has been said
thereof in the first article.

VOL. If. 20


290 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK 111.


IL
3052. The Witnesses ought to be above Fourteen Years of Age.
— The witnesses ought to be above fourteen years of age, and to
have none of the defects or other causes which may make their
testimony null; as shall be explained by the following rules.


IV.


3053. Women cannot be Witnesses. — Although women may
bear witness in matters of fact of which the proofs depend on the
declarations of persons who may happen to have any knowledge
of them, even in crimes, yet they cannot be witnesses to a testa-
ment. For there is this difference between voluntary acts where it
is necessary to have witnesses, and the other cases of the proofs of
facts, that in these we are not at liberty to choose whom we will to
be witnesses, whereas in testaments and other acts the choice of
the witnesses is altogether voluntary; and therefore, the function
of bearing witness in these matters being more natural to men, it
is not so proper to take in women among them.


V.


3054. Mad Men, Deaf and Dumb Persons, and Prodigals, cannot
be Witnesses.— Mad men, deaf and dumb persons, and prodigals
who are interdicted, cannot be witnesses in a testament.f


VI.


3055. Nor Persons noted with Infamy. — Persons noted with in-
famy cannot be witnesses in a testament, no more than in other
acts£ Thus, all those who have been condemned to any punish-
ment that renders them infamous, whether it be that the sentence
of condemnation expresses the note of infamy, or that this note is
a consequence of it, cannot be witnesses. And those whose pro-
fession may render them infamous are under the same inca-


pacity.2
VIL
3056. Nor Strangers who are called Aliens.— Strangers who are


4 Rogatis testibus septem numero, civibus Romanis, puberibus omnibus. L. 21, C de
testam. ; — § 6, Inst. de test. ord.

© Neque mulier. § 6, Inst. de testam. ord. ; — I. 20 5 a2 geet oe eee:

f § 6, Inst. de test. ord. ; —1. 18, D. qui testam. fac. poss.

& § 6, Inst. de testam. ord.; > —1. 96, D. qui test. fac. poss

b See the third and fifth articles of the third section of Prooft.


TIT. I. BEC. 111.] TESTAMENTS. 291


called aliens cannot be witnesses in a testament.' For the laws
extend the incapacity of making a testament, and of receiving
benefit by a testament, to that of being a witness to one. And it
might happen that the stranger, who is taken to be a witness,
might be under some incapacity which was not known.


VIIL


3057. The Capacity of the Witness is considered at the Time of
making the Testament. — The quality of the witness, by which we
are to judge if his testimony ought to be received, is considered
only at the time of making the testament; for it is sufficient that
he was then capable of being a witness. And the incapacity
which had preceded the testament, but which had then ceased, or
which happened only after the making of the testament, would be
no hindrance why his testimony ought not to subsist; for it was
only at the time that the testament was made that he performed
the function of a witness.


IX.


3058. The Heir or Executor cannot be a Witness.— The heir or
executor named in a testament cannot be a witness to it: for it is
his own affair; and he is the principal person interested in the
validity of the testament.”


Remarks ON THE Precepinc ARTICLE.


3059. If it were a private and secret testament, made in the
manner which shall be explained in the seventeenth article, and if
the testator had caused it to be signed by the person whom he had
named in it his heir or executor, taking him for one of the wit-
nesses, the better to conceal the contents of his will, would this
testimony be rejected? and would the testament upon this ac-
count be null? ‘The ground of doubting of it is, because that in
these kinds of testaments the witnesses do not bear testimony to
the dispositions made by the testator, which are unknown to them,


' Rogatis testibus septem numero, civibus Romanis. L. 21, C. de testam. Testes adhiberi
possunt ii cam quibus testamenti factio est. § 6, Inst. de test. ord.

By the reason of the rule explained in this last text, persons condemned to any punish-
ment which imports civil death cannot be witnesses; which is likewise extended, by the
usage in France, to professed monks.

| L. 22, § 1, D. qui testam. fac. poss.

" L. 20, D. qui testam. fac. poss. ; —1. 14, D. de reb. dub. ; —1. 22, C. de testam. ; —§ 11,
Instit. de test. ord.


292 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK 113.


but only to the declaration which he made to them, that they were
contained in the writing or paper sealed up, which he only showed
them, without reading it to them. Thus, the heir or executor, who
should know nothing of his being instituted by this testament, to
which he was called to be a witness, would not bear testimony to
his being named therein heir or executor, for that he could not
know; but only to the bare declaration of the testator, that his
will was contained in that secret writing or paper sealed up; and
which he might bear witness to, without being suspected of par-
tiality in his testimony by reason of his interest under the will.
So that it would seem that the motive of the law, which rejects
the testimony of the heir or executor, would cease in such a case
as this, unless there were some particular circumstances which
might make some alteration; and that therefore this institution
might upon these considerations have its effect.

3060. We have not inserted in the article, that the legatees may
be witnesses to a testament, as the text bears from whence it is
taken. For besides that it seems that this law, among the Ro-
mans, was a consequence of the custom which they had, to give
always something to the witnesses of a testament, as a recom-
pense for the favor they did in bearing witaess, which nevertheless
would extend only to very small legacies,* the liberty of taking
indifferently for witnesses legatees in considerable sums seems
contrary to the general rule, that no one can be a witness ina
case where his interest is concerned, as has been explained in its
proper place ;> neither would our usage approve the procuring of
witnesses with money: for although the integrity of witnesses to
a testament would not be liable to suspicion for having received
some acknowledgment, as would be the integrity of witnesses that
bear testimony in other matters, for which testimony it is prohib-
ited by the Roman law, as well as by ours, to take or give any
thing,® yet it is not decent that we should purchase with money
witnesses to a testament. It is because of these considerations,
and of the rule which requires that no man bear witness in his
own affair, that in many customs we find it expressly ordained,
that legatees, and others interested in the testament, cannot be
witnesses to it. And although there be this difference between
the customs and the written law, that in the greatest part of the


® V. d.i. 14, D. de red. dub. ; —1. 22, C. de test.
> See the sixth article of the third section of Proo/s. -
¢ L.1,§1, D. de leg. Cornel. de fals., et de senat. Libon.


TIT. 1. SHO, 111.] _ TESTAMENTS. 293


customs there is required only the presence of two witnesses, with
a notary public, to make a testament valid, whereas seven wit-
nesses are required by the written law, it is so easy a matter every-
where to find witnesses, that there is no occasion to engage them
to it by legacies, or other advantages. And it might even happen
more readily in the provinces which are governed by the written
law, than in the customs, that a testator should exhaust his estate,
whether by a testament, or even by a codicil, in giving many con-
siderable legacies ; and therefore it would seem to be of too great
a consequence to admit the testimony of legatees indifferently.
And since the validity or nullity of the testimony of legatees ought
not to depend on particular circumstances, so as to leave it to
the discretion of the judge to admit or reject it; and since it would
be necessary to have a fixed rule, which should either admit or re-
ject without distinction the testimony of all legatees; it would
seem more just to reject their testimony, since there can be no in-
convenience in it, and there might be some in admitting it; and
besides, it is just that, if the testator will deprive the heirs of
blood of what they have a natural right to, he ought to take
proper measures for doing it.


x.


3061. Nor his Children, Father, or Brothers. — The same reason
which makes the testimony of the heir or executor to be rejected
is the cause, likewise, why we do not receive the testimony of his
children, his father, or his brothers; for the testament being the
affair of the heir or executor, it is necessary to have other wit-
nesses to it than persons who are so nearly related to him, and
who of themselves may be interested in the validity of an institu-
tion which may in several ways turn to their advantage."


Remarks ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3062. Although the text cited is restrained to children that are
not emancipated, who are still under the authority of the same
father, yet it seems that this distinction would not be agreeable to
ourusage. And if the rule did not extend to children that are
emancipated, as well as to those who are not, it might very easily
happen that, since, by the rale which shall be explained in the
twelfth article, several witnesses may be taken out of the same


© ¢ 10, Inst. de testam. ordin.
2


294 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOX Ill


family, all the witnesses, or the greatest part of them, should be
the father, the children, or brothers of the heir or executor.

3063. If the witnesses were uncles, first-cousins, or other near
relations of the heir or executor, would their testimony be re
ceived? It seems that, the law having made mention only of
brothers, and of brothers only who are not emancipated, it
has not rejected the testimony of other near relations. As to
which matter, we may take notice of a difference between the
effect of the proof by witnesses in an inquest, or in an information,
and the effect of the proof by witnesses in a testament, in a dona-
tion, in a sale, in a transaction, or other contract. In inquests and
informations, there is often only the bare faith of the witnesses
which makes the proof; and therefore they reject in them the wit-
nesses who are relations, as has been explained in the eighth article
of the third section of Proofs. But in testaments, and in contracts,
the principal proof consists in the writing signed by the persons
who make the said acts, if they can write, and by the notary; so
that the proximity, which in inquests and informations makes the
testimony of relations to be rejected, seems not to be of the same
consequence in testaments, or in contracts. But if all the wit-
nesses to a testament were uncles, or cousins-german of the heir
or executor to a testator, who could neither read nor write, would
the validity of the said testament be without dispute? It would
seem to be so by this law, which rejects only the testimony of
brothers ; and, on the contrary, it would seem to be otherwise by
the general rule, which rejects the testimony of near relations; and
in this case, the will of the testator not being proved by his
sign manual, it is the more necessary that the fidelity of the wit-
nesses should be unexceptionable. So that this is a difficulty
which deserves to be adjusted by some rules, unless we might ex-
tend to it that of the ordinance (1667, tit. 22, art. 11) which rejects
the testimony of relations. But this ordinance relates only to in-
quests, and excludes from giving their testimony in them even chil-
dren of second-cousins.

3064. We may likewise remark, on the same subject, another
difference between testaments and contracts, which consists in
this, that in contracts the parties are present, and that their mutual
consent is sufficiently proved by their presence and signature, if
they are persons that know how to write, or by the signing of the
notaries; so that the witnesses are not very necessary, unless the
truth of the contract be called in question. But in testaments the


it ie i


TIT. 3. SEC. I11.] TESTAMENTS. 295


heirs of blood, who are the parties concerned, are not present, and
the testator disposes of his effects by himself as he thinks good;
which the law does not allow him to do, unless he observes much
greater formalities than those which are sufficient for the proof of
contracts. Thus, it seems to be agreeable to the spirit and intention
of the law, that the fidelity of witnesses to a testament should be
free from all manner of suspicion ; and that the motive of the law,
which requires a greater number of witnesses in testaments than
what is necessary for any other proof, seems likewise to demand
that the fidelity of the witnesses should not be liable to suspicion
by reason of their being too near of kin to the heir or executor; as
to which matter, it is to be wished that there were some fixed and
certain rule.


XL


3065. The Father, Children, and Brothers of the Testator cannot
be Witnesses. — Seeing the testament is the affair of the testator,
as well as of the heir or executor, the father, the children, and the
brothers of the testator cannot serve as witnesses to his testament.
And in this matter is rejected the domestic testimony of those per-
sons who compose all of them together only one family.°


XI.


3066. Many Persons of the same Family may be Witnesses. —
Several persons of one and the same family may be witnesses to a
testament. ‘Thus, the father and several of his children may render
this office to a testator;? for if they are all equally capable of this
function, their relation among themeelves is no obstacle to it.


XIIL


3067. A Testament may be made at any Hour. — There is no
hour unseasonable for making a testament, and it may be made
at all hours either of the day or night.?


° § 10, Inst. de test. ordin. ; —§ 9, Inst. de testam. ord. Since all the dispositions of tes-
taments are to the prejudice of the lawful heirs, it is not very natural that a testator
should call to be witnesses to his testament those persons whom he designs to exclude
from his succession. But if it should happen that a son should complain of the testament
of his father, to which his brothers, who had great advantage by the said testament, had
been called to be witnesses, the rule, with respect to him, would be just. But if the next
heirs were brothers to the testator, and had been witnesses to a testament of their brother
made after the death of their father, it would seem that they ought not to complain of a
testament which they had approved of in this manner.

P § 8, Inst. de test. ordinand. ; — 1. 22, D. qui test. fac. poss.

1 L. 82, § 6, D. qui test. fac. poss.


286 THE CIVIL Law. [PART Il. BOOK III.


to discover which of the two is the heir or executor? Or might
they say that one of them is certainly the person whom the testa-
tor had called to his succession, and that therefore, they both yield-
ing to one another reciprocally the right that each of them might
have to it, their agreement among themselves would have the effect
of rendeting the succession common to them? Since one of the
two is certainly called to the succession, and gives a share of it
to the other, and it ought to be indifferent to the next of kin,
who is deprived of the succession by the testament, whether it re-
main entire to one alone, or whether it be divided among two.
But since the quality of executor, or testamentary heir, cannot be
acquired but by the will of the testator, the agreement of these
two persons cannot make them both heirs or executors: for be-
sides that the person whom the testator had a mind should be his
heir or executor cannot be sure himself that he has this quality;
it is most certain as to the other, not only that he cannot be heir
or executor, but likewise that he cannot he coheir or coexecutor,
since, although the person from whom he derives his right should
be acknowledged for the true heir or executor, yet he cannot make
a coheir or coexecutor, who shall immediately succeed to the testa-
tor in one half of the succession. And the said conveyance or as
signment would only make him a purchaser of that moiety of the
succession, and not an heir or executor chosen by the testator.
Thus, since neither of the two can be certainly heir or executor,
nor by any means coheir or coexecutor, such a disposition, which is
impossible to be executed, ought to remain null.


XXVII.


3044, Persons Unworthy cannot receive any Benefit by a Testa-
ment. — We may reckon in the number of persons who cannot
receive any benefit by a testament, those who have rendered them-
selves unworthy of it. And since the causes which may have this
effect have been explained in their proper place,* and there is
nothing necessary to be repeated here, it is sufficient for the order
of the subject-matter of this section, that we have here taken no-
tice of it.


K See the third section of Heirs and Executors in general.


TIT. 3. BEC. I18.] TESTAMENTS. 287


SECTION III.
OF THE FORMS AND FORMALITIES NECESSARY IN TESTAMENTS.


3045. We call those things forms or formalities of an act, which
the laws have established to be proofs of its verity, and thereby to
establish its validity. Thus, to make a sale, an exchange, a lease,
a loan, or other covenant, which may have its effect, it is necessary
to make an act of it, that is, a writing which may explain the in-
tention of the parties, to be signed by them; or if one or other of
them cannot write their names, that it be made in the presence of
a notary public and two witnesses, or of two notaries without wit-
nesses." Thus, to have a right of mortgage according to our
usage, a covenant signed only by the parties would not be suf-
ficient ; but it is necessary that the act which is to give the mort-
gage should be passed either in a court of justice, or before two
notaries, or before one notary and two witnesses. Thus, for the
validity of a donation that is to have ita effect in the lifetime of
the donor, it is not enough that the act thereof be written and exe-
cuted in the presence of notaries public, but it is moreover neces-
sary that it be enrolled.

3046. We see, in all these sorts of acts, that these formalities
have been invented in order to make them valid, that is, to make
them have their effect by the proof which they make of their truth.
But if it is necessary in all sorts of acts that they should have
some formality to prove their truth in order to give them the effect
which they ought to have, there is as much or more necessity
that an act so serious and of so great importance as is a testament
should be accompanied with proofs of the will of the testator,
which may not only remove all suspicion of the forging of another
will than his, but which may give also his testament the character
of a will well concerted, by the firmness and authority of which
the peace and quiet of the families that are interested in it may
be established.

3047. It was upon these considerations that in the Roman law,
which allowed the making of a testament by word of mouth and


* See, touching the necessity of making acts in writing, the remark that has been made
on the twelfth article of the first section of Covenants, and the preamble of the second sec-
tion of Proofs.

» See the fifteenth article of the first section of Donations.


298 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK Il.


into writing in the presence of witnesses, there may happen two
kinds of difficulties in it. One is, to know what number of wit-
nesses may be sufficient in this testament; and the other is,
whether the witnesses alone are sufficient, without a public no-
tary, vicar, or curate, or some other public officer.

3076. As to the ordinary number of witnesses, the law dispenses
therewith, but does not determine how many are absolutely neces-

Quamvis tt neque legitimum numerum testium adhibuerini.
Ought there to be five witnesses in the places where seven are re-
quired in any other testament besides a military one? or would
two be sufficient in all places, as they are in many? The same
reason which we have remarked on written testaments seems to
prove that two would be sufficient, seeing that number suffices
regularly to make a proof,>

3077. As for the other difficulty, whether the presence of a no-
tary, or any other public person, be necessary, it would seem that
since, in proofs by witnesses, whether it be in inquests for civil
matters, or informations for crimes, it is necessary that the wit-
nesses do give their testimony in the presence of the judge, so
likewise it should be necessary that’ the testimony of those who
are called to be witnesses to a testament should be in the presence
of a public notary, curate, or vicar, or some other person exercising
these functions, unless that the testament were signed by the tes-
tator: for otherwise it would be as easy to find out two witnesses
to sign a writing which might be easily forged, as to find witnesses
to depose to a will that is not written.

3078. We do not pretend to give here these remarks for rales,
but only as reflections upon the principles on which the law touch-
ing this matter seems to depend, and to give a reason why we
have conceived this article in general terms, without marking pre-
cisely what are the formalities required in military testaments.
For on one side, seeing these testaments are in use with us, it was
necessary to take notice of the rule concerning them; and on the
other side, we could not pretend to fix the formalities required in
them, since that cannot be done but by a law; and it were to be
wished that some provision were made therein.


XVI.
3079. Of a Testament made in the Time of a Plague.— The par-


® Instit. de milit. testam.
© See the thirteenth article of the third section of Proofs.


_ a ee ae ee eee


TIT. I. SBCs 111] TESTAMENTS. 209


ticular hindrances which may happen to testators, and which may
make it impossible for them to observe the formalities required in
testaments, are not sufficient to dispense with the observance of
them, and to make the testaments valid where they are wanting,
for this pretext would have two mischievous consequences. But
in case of the common calamity of a plague, where the just fear
of danger is an invincible obstacle to the formality of bringing
together the witnesses and the testator, the law dispenses there-
with; and it is sufficient, without assembling the witnesses to-
gether, to communicate to them separately the will of the testator,
and to make them sign it likewise apart. But as to the number
of witnesses, the time of a plagne does not dispense therewith.'


REMARKS ON THE PREcEDING ARTICLE.


3080. Although the text cited marks precisely enough, that
those who make their testament in a time of plague are relieved
only from the formality of assembling the witnesses together, and
not as to their number; yet several interpreters have been of
opinion that five witnesses were sufficient in these sorts of tes-
taments, and that some other*formalities might be dispensed with
therein; which has occasioned several lawsuits. But we have
thought proper to fix this rale in the sense of the law; for when
the disposition of a law appears to be certain and precise, it wants
no interpretation: and it is not to interpret a law, but to make a
new one, to dispense with the number of witnesses which the law
has not dispensed with; although nothing would have been more
natural and more necessary than to have expressed therein the
liberty of making a testament with five witnesses, if it had not
been judged necessary to have seven. ‘The giving way to such
interpretations, according as every one might imagine to be just,
would take away all force from the rules, and would throw every
thing into the greatest uncertainty. It is enough to give unto
equity that extent which the sense and spirit of the law might re-
quire; especially when it concerns arbitrary laws, and those which
have regulated the precise formalities which are to be observed in
testaments.° For there is much less inconvenience in not favor-
ing testaments contrary to the rules which prescribe the formal-
ities of them, than in slighting these forms; seeing in general the


' L.8, C. de testam.
* See the fourth article of the second section of the Rules of Law.


306 THE CIvit LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOK IL


rrullities of testaments have no other inconvenience in them than
to leave things in the natural order, which calls the heirs of
blood to the successions, and to oblige the testators to take their
measures aright, when they shall have a mind to change the said
order.


XVIL


3081. Secret Testaments.— The great consequence it is of to
testators, and to their families, that the dispositions which they
may make by their testaments should remain secret and unknown
to every body besides themselves till after their death, if they
desire it, has given occasion to the inventing of a sort of tes
tament which has this effect, and where the witnesses give a cer-
tain testimony to the will of the testator, although the contents of
the will are unknown to them. And it is this sort of testament
that is called private or secret; the form of which is after this man-
ner, that the testator who knows bow to read and write, or only to
read, writes his testament himself, or gets it written by another,
and he reads if over, and finding all the contents thereof to be
conformable to his intentions, he presents this writing, folded up
and sealed, to a public notary, and to seven witnesses assembled
together at the same time, declaring to them that that is his tes-
tament, but without suffering them to read it, or telling them what
are the contents of it; and having signed it in their presence upon
the back, or upon the cover, if he knows how or is able to sign, he
gets the witnesses or the notary to sign it; observing what has
been said in the first article with respect to the testator and wit-
nesses who cannot or are not able to sign."


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3082. Although the last words of the text cited seem to include
the testators who cannot read, yet we have not thought fit to give
them this sense; and that upon two considerations. The first is,
that these words, si literas testator ignoret, being followed by these,
vel subscribere nequeat, they may be naturally understood of him


* L. 01, C. de testam. In this article we have made use of the words folded and sealed,
which are the same with those in the text. For although it would seem by the following
words of the text, that it is enough if the testament is folded up or put under a cover, yet
it is usual to seal it. And it is necessary so to do when the testament is put into a cover
signed by the notary and the witnesses; for otherwise it would be easy to put another
testament under the sazhe cover.


TIT. L SEC. 111.] TESTAMENTS. 301


who cannot write, although he can read. And taking them in
this sense, this text may be applied to two cases; one, where the
testator does not know how to write, although he -kaows how to
read; and the other, where the testator can weite, but is hindered
from signing by some indisposition, which is pointed at by these
words, vel subscribere nequeat. And since it is said in the text,
that the testator may get his testament written by some other per-
son, this clause shows clearly enough that it is not necessary for the
testator to know how to write, provided he can read. The second
consideration is, that there would be too many inconveniences in
confirming the secret testaments of persons who cannot read,
since it may happen that the person who writes their testament
for them may abuse the trust that is in him, and write things quite
different from their will; and it might be said that such a testament
would be without any proof, for the testator himself would not be
perfectly sure that it was his will which had been written, and the
witnesses would have no manner of knowledge of it. Thus, such
a testament would be contrary to the spirit and intention of the
laws. For they require formalities in testaments for no other rea-
son but to give a perfect assurance that what they contain is the
will of those who make them. It is true, that a testator who
knows neither how to write nor read might choose for the writing
of his testament a person of such integrity, that there might be no
manner of doubt that his will was written very faithfully ; but there
would still remain the consequence of the inconveniences for
those persons who could not make or had not made so good a
choice; and, in general, such a testament as this would be without
any manner of proof, since it would depend on the fidelity of one
only witness, that is, of the person who had written it.

3083. Seeing there are deaf and dumb persons who know bow
to write, there is nothing hinders why they may not make their
testament after the manner explained in this article.


XVIIL


3084. The Manner of Opening a Secret Testament. — Since the
proof of a testament made in the manner explained in the fore-
going article is drawn from the declaration that the testator has
made to the witnesses, that his will is contained in the writing
which he produced to them, it is necessary for this proof that, after
the death of the testator, the secret writing in which the testament
ought to be contained should be put into the Hands of the judge

VOL, U. 26 ,


302 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Itt.


that he may open it, after the witnesses and notary have been
summoned before him to acknowledge their handwriting, and to
bear testimony that it is the same writing which the testator de-
clared to them to be his testament. And after it has been verified
in this manner, it is then opened.*


XIX.


3085. Verification of the Signatures before the Opening. — If any
of the witnesses had not signed, or if some of those who did sign
are either dead or absent, the testament ought to be verified and
opened in the presence of such of the witnesses as are to be
found, and who have signed it, and of the notary, if he is not dead
or absent. And if either the notary or some of the witnesses
cannot appear before the judge because of some lawful imped-
iment, such as sickness, the verification with respect to them should
be made in the place where they are. But if all of them are
either dead or absent, and it is necessary to open the testament
without delay, the judge may call before him some persons of
probity who are well acquainted with the handwriting of the no-
tary and witnesses, and after proof made of their handwriting he
may open the testament. And this verification may afterwards
be confirmed, by getting the notary and witnesses who had been
absent when the testament was opened to own and acknowledge
their own hands


XX.


3086. Testament of a Blind Man.— Although blind men can
neither write nor read, nor see the persons who are present at the
making of their testament, they may, notwithstanding, make a will,
as well as other persons who can neither write nor read; for they
may signify their will and get it put down in writing, and declare,
in presence of seven witnesses and a notary, that what they have
got reduced into writing, and which shall be read in the presence
of the witnesses and notary, is their testament; which shall have
its effect, being signed by the witnesses who are able to sign, and
by the notary. And if there are witnesses who cannot or are not


x IJ. 4 et 5, D. testam. quemad. aper

Y L. 6, D. testam. quemadmod. pore 7, eod. ‘We have taken no more of this
seventh law than what agrees with our usage, which does not easily dispense with the ap-
pearance of the witnesses; and this last text is to be understood only of the case where
the witness can by no means appear before the judge.


TIT. 1. BEC. 111] TESTAMENTS. 303


able to sign, the notary shall make mention of it, as has been said
in the first article.


XXI.


3087. A Sort of Testament fit for all Persons. — All persons who
are capable of making a testament may make it by writing it
themselves, or getting it written by whom they will, and declaring,
in the presence of a notary and seven witnesses who are under no
incapacity of performing this function, that the writing which shall
be read in their presence, and in presence of the testator, is his
testament, and signing it himself, and getting it to be signed; as
has been said in the first two articles. And it is this sort of testa-
ment that is the most common, and which may suit the blind, the
deaf, and the dumb, and those who know neither how to write
nor read.®


XXIL


3088. The Testament is Null if t wants any of the Formalities. —
We may discern by the rules explained in this section what are
the formalities necessary in the several sorts of testaments, and
consequently what are the defects which may render them null.
And there remains only to observe, as a last rule concerning these
formalities, that every testament in which any of the formalities
prescribed by the laws is wanting ought to be annulled; since
otherwise it would be to no purpose to ordain them.» Thus, a
testament would be null if it had only six witnesses in places
where seven are required, or if it was not signed by the testator or
by the witnesses who could sign. And the favor of the persons
who are called to the succession or to a legacy is of no considera-
tion at all to dispense with the formalities; for it would be neces-
sary in this case to have an express dispensation from the laws;
and they have, on the contrary, expressly declared, that the prince
himself can receive no benefit by a testament that is not made in
due form of law.°


* L. 8, C. qua test. fac. poss. We see in this text the two ways of making a testament
in writing or without writing. But seeing by the usage in France all testaments ought to
be in writing, and in presence of a notary, blind men may with much more reason make
their testaments after the manner explained in this article.

* See the texts cited on the first and second articles.

> L.1, D. de injust. rupt. irr. fact. test.

© L. 7, C. qua test. fac. poss. ; —1. 3, C. de testam. ; —1. 23, D. de legat. 8.


304 THE CIVIL Law. [PART Il. BOOK tI.


REMARKS ON THE PrecEDING ARTICLE.


3089. Some interpreters have been of opinion, that the rule ex-
plained in this article ought to be dispensed with in legacies left to
pious usea, and that they onght to subsist even in a testament
that has only two witnesses, and even although one of the two
witnesses was only a woman. And they have likewise extended
the favor of these kinds of legacies so far as to make testaments
valid that are null by reason of other defects, much more essential
than formalities. But how great soever the favor of legacies for
pious uses may be, yet, the laws not having excepted them from
this rule, they are necessarily subject to it, as well as other legacies
that are as favorable, such as legacies to servants, to poor rela-
tions, or to other indigent persons, or legacies left in consideration
of restitutions which the testator thought himself bound to make.
The liberty of making such exceptions to rules exceeds the bounds
of interpretation ; and there would arise too many inconveniences
from this license, which serves only to multiply lawsuits, of which
we have store enough from other sources. So that it seems more
just and more natural to keep to the law, and to prefer to the lib-
erty of breaking in upon it the necessity of having fixed rales, and
to wait till a provision is made by some other law in favor of leg-
acies to pious uses, if it is necessary; and the rather, because tes-
tators, if they are afraid lest some nullities should destroy the leg-
acies which they have left in their testaments to pious uses, have
two ways to provide against it; one, which is the surest way, is
for themselves to execute their good intentions, and to give their
charity in their lifetime, rather than to leave it to be taken after
their death out of an estate which will be no longer theirs; and
the other way is, to take good advice in making their testaments.


SECTION IV.
OF THE CODICILLARY CLAUSE.


3090. Definition and Use of the Codicillary Clause. — Seeing the
most skilful testators may sometimes doubt, and have reason to
fear lest there be nullities in their testaments ; as if any one of the
witnesses should happen to be under some incapacity of bearing
testimony, which the testator was ignorant of, or for other causes ;


vit. 1. 880. Tv.] TESTAMENTS. 306


many testators therefore use this precaution, for the greater secu-
rity of having their wills executed, to add to their testaments this
clause, which is called codicillary, whereby they ordain, that, if
their will cannot be valid as a testament, it may be valid as a
codicil, or otherwise in the best form that it can be valid.* And
this clause, expressed in a testament, hath this effect, that whereas
were it wanting, and there should happen to be in the testament
some nullity, it would not be valid even as a codicil ;» this clause,
being added to the testament, gives it the nature and validity of a
codicil, provided that it have all the formalities necessary in codi-
cils, and that, for example, if there were some witnesses whose
testimony ought to be rejected, there should remain five, at least,
whose testimony ought to be received; because, as shall be said in
its proper place, five witnesses are necessary to a aaa


REMARKS ON THE PreceDING PaRAGRAPH.


3091. Although it is not said in the laws cited on this paragraph,
that, to make a testament valid as a codicil, it ought to have the
formalities requisite to a codicil ; yet it cannot be doubted, that, if
the formalities requisite to a testament are wanting, it ought to
have those that are necessary to a codicil; because otherwise it
would not be as a codicil that it would be valid. But it might be
said, that, however defective the testament might be, it ought to
subsist; which is neither equitable nor conformable to the spirit
and intention of the laws, which have received this way of supply-
ing the want of formalities in a testament; for these laws are not
made to give testators the liberty of making their testaments valid,
although they be defective in the forms, by saying only that they
will have them to have their effect such as they are. But the
principle of these laws is, that, since it is free for every person that
can make a will to make it either in the form of a testament or
of a codicil, it is consequently free for them to give to an act
which cannot be valid as a testament the validity of a codicil, if
it can have the effect of one. But this must agree with that other
general principle in the matter of testaments and codicils, that in
these two sorts of dispositions it is necessary to observe the for-
malities prescribed by the laws. From whence it follows, that no


oe testam. mil. ; —1. 41, § 8, D. de vndg. ef pupill. subst.; —1. 8, § 1, C. de co-
* L.1, D. de jure codicill. ; —1. 8, § 1, C. de codicill.


* See the fourteenth article of the first section of Codicils.
26 *


306 THE CIVIL Law. [PART IL BOOX ft.


act can be valid as a codicil, unless it has the formalities of one.
Thus, since the use of the codicillary clause presupposes on one
side the liberty of making either a testament or a codicil, and on
the other side the necessity of making a disposition in due form,
the said clause implies two intentions that the person has who
puts it into his testament. The first, which is pure and simple, is
the intention to make a testament; the other is conditional, that
if this act, which he makes as a testament, cannot have the effect
of one, it may be a codicil. And it is by this second will that the
act, which without this clause would be a null testament, for
want of the formalities necessary to a testament, will subsist as a
codicil, provided that it have the nature of one, that is, that it
have the formalities requisite to one; because these formalities,
joined to this second will of the testator, make this act to be in
effect a true cédicil ; whereas, if a testator, having a mind to make
a testament without this clause, had called only five witnesses to
it, or, having a mind to make a codicil, has called only four, he
would have made neither testament nor codicil. For in the first
case, having a mind to make only a testament, he would have
made it null; and having no mind to make a codicil, it could not
be said that he had made what he had no intention to make.
And in the second case, the act which should be attested only
by four witnesses would be neither testament nor codicil.

3092. It is upon these considerations that the invention of the
codicillary clauses has been founded. And if their use were now-
a-days limited to the giving the validity of codicils to testaments
in which these clauses are expressed, this matter would be plain
and easy. But the different provisions that we see concerning
this matter in the Roman law, and the comments of interpreters,
have occasioned a great deal of confusion and uncertainty in it,
and have given rise to many difficulties, which for many ages
past have occasioned many lawsuits in the provinces which are
governed by the written law. And since it is impossible to under-
stand aright these difficulties without an exact explication of all
that is essential in this matter of the codicillary clauses, we shall
endeavour, for the giving some light to it, to explain here the rise
and progress of the use of these clauses, in order. to discover in
these sources the causes of the difficulties which perplex this mat-
ter, and the principles which may put an end to them.

3093. The origin of the codicillary clauses has been a natural
consequence of the intricate formalities which the Roman law re-


TIT. 1. BBC, I¥.] TESTAMENTS. 307


quired in the making of testaments; and these formalities pro-
ceeded from the liberty they had at Rome to make a testament
without writing. For since it was necessary that the remem-
brance of the testator’s will should be preserved without writing,
and only by the fidelity of the witnesses whom he had called to
be present at his declaring it; it was but reasonable not to suffer
such a serious act to be made cursorily in the presence of two wit-
nesses, met with by chance; and it was for this reason that it
was ordained that there should be seven witnesses, citizens of
Rome, called on purpose, and that they should be present at the
making of the testament, and during the whole time of the act,
and without interruption. And to make the testament more au-
thentic, they added to these formalities, that the testator could
not institute an heir or executor, or leave legacies, but by using
certain expressions, and that the said dispositions in other terms
should be null.» And although these formalities were less neces-
sary in written testaments, yet they were observed likewise in
them by a kind of tradition or custom, as well as in those which
were made by word of mouth, and without writing, and which
were called nencupative testaments ; for they kept the use of these
two sorts of testaments, written and unwritten.

3094. Seeing, therefore, the number of witnesses, and these other
formalities, made the way of making a testament very difficult,
and that those who made their testaments with the greatest exact-
hess might be easily deceived in them, an expedient was thought
of to supply the want of formalities, by adding to the testament a
codicillary clause. And the effect of this clause was given even to
some testaments, where it was judged that the expressions of the
testators might supply the want of it; and this gave occasion to
several roles. For on one side we see, in some laws, that the de-
lective testament cannot be valid as a codicil, but in the cases
where the testator declares expressly that that is his intention.
Si non valuit (testamentum) ea scriptura quam testamentum esse
toluit, codicillos non faciet, nisi hoc expressum est. L. 41, §3, D. de
tule. et pupill. subst. Nisi id ille complexus sit, ut vim etiam codi-
cillorum scriptura debeat obtinere. L. 8, § 1, C. de codic. And
this expression was so necessary, that it is said in one law, that
the legacy even of liberty to a slave was null, if the nullity of the


_ § wt Inst. de testam. ord. ; —I1. 21, § 2, C. de testam.
dey, Ulp. tit. 1; —1. 15, C. de test. ; —1. 26, eod. ; —I. 21, C. de legat. ; —I. 2, C. commun.


308 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOX It.


testament was not repaired by the expression of the codicillary
clause. Si pure non subsistit testamentum, tn hoc nec Kbertates
{cum non fuisse adjectum, ut pro codicillis scriptum valeret, pro-
ponas) recte datas constabit. LL. 11, C. de test. manum. But on
the other side, there are other laws which give the effect of codicils
to testaments defective in point of form, although the codicillary
clause was not therein inserted. Thus, we see in a law, that a
testator having declared in his testament that he had written it
without the help of any lawyer to assist him in observing the
formalities, choosing rather to follow what his reason dictated to
him, than to subject himself to the trouble of a nice observation
of all these formalities, and judging that if he erred in any one of
them, yet the will of a person in his right senses ought to be held
for just and lawful; it was decided that these expressions should
have the same effect as an express codicillary clause. Lucius
Titins hoc meum testamentum scripsi sine ullo jurisperito, rationem
animi mei polius secutus, quam nimtam et miseram diligentiam. Et
si minus aliquid legitime, minusve perile fecero, pro jure legitimo
haberi debet hominis sani voluntas ; deinde heredes institutt. Que-
situm est, intestati ejus bonorum possessione petita, an portiones ad-
scripte ex causa fidet commisst peti possunt ? respondi, secundum ea
que proponerentur, posse. LL. 88, § ult. D. de legat.2. Thus, we
see that other laws give the effect of codicillary clauses to expres-
sions that mark the testator’s desire that his will should be ex-
ecuted; as, for example, if it was said in a testament, that the
testator desired it might subsist in whatever manner it could
have its effect. £2 his verbis, que scriptura pater-familias addidit,
révrny viv Biabqxny Botdouas elva: xuplay émt wdons éfovotas. Hoc testamen-
tum volo esse ratum quacunque ratione poterit ; vidert eum volutsse
omnimodo valere ea que reliquit, etiamsi intestatus decessisset. L.
29, § 1, D. qui test. fac. poss. Or if a testator had said, that, in
case his dispositions could not be valid as a testament, he en-
treated those who should succeed to him as dying intestate to
execute his intention. Ex testamento quod jure non valet, nec fider
commissum quidem, si non ab intestato quoque succedentes rogati
probentur, peti potest. L. 29, C. de fidei com. It may be farther
added on the same subject, that we see in another law, that the
bare consideration of the singular affection of the testator towards
a legatee, and of the quality of a legacy that is favorable in its
own nature, makes the codicillary clause to be supplied in a testa-
ment that is null, in order to oblige the children of the testator,


TIT. L. SEO. IV.] TESTAMENTS. 309


his heirs, to acquit this legacy. In testamentum quod perfectum
non eral, clumne sue libertatem et fidei commissa dedit: cum omnia
«i ab intestalo egissent, quesit tmperator, an ut ex causa fidei com-
missi manumissa futsset? et interlocutus est. Etiamsi nihil ab
inlestato pater pettissel, ptos tamen filios debuisse manumittere eam
quam pater dilexisset. Pronunciavit igilur recte eam manumis-
sam: et ideo fidet commissa etiam ei prestanda. L. 38, D. de fidet
comm. libert.

3095. All these examples, and some others that are to be met
with in other laws, have given occasion to the interpreters to sup-
ply in many cases the codicillary clause; and some of them, even
those of the first rank, have been of opinion that this codicillary
clause may be supplied in all testaments, as being implied in
them, because it is inserted in the greatest part of them, and it is
the intention of all testators that their wills should have their effect
as much as is possible.

3096. These first remarks are sufficient to let us see from
whence the use of the codicillary clauses has sprung, what has
been the progress thereof, and that this progress was not made
without having many lawsuits upon the bare questions, whether
testaments in which are found some nullities may subsist; wheth-
er by the effect of any expression whieh may serve as a codicil-
lary clause, or in consideration of the qualities of the legacies, or
other circumstances. But besides these kinds of difficulties or
questions, there are others of another sort, which relate to the ef-
fect that codicillary clauses ought to have when they are in tes-
taments. And for the right understanding of the nature of these
questions, we must, in the first place, remark what has been said
in the preamble of the title of Testaments concerning the difference
which is made in the Roman law between testaments and codi-
cils; which consists in this, that in a testament one may institute
an heir or executor, and give legacies, and that in a codicil one
can only bequeath legacies, but not institute an heir or executor’
And we must likewise observe a second use of codicils in the Ro-
man law, which consists in this, that although one cannot insti-
tate an heir or executor by a codicil, yet in it the testator may dis-
pose indirectly of the succession, by entreating or requiring his
next of kin, who has right to succeed ab intestato, to restore it to
the person whom he names in the codicil; which hath this effect,


© V.§ 2, Inst. de codicill.; —1. 2, C. cod.


310 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IL


that the next of kin, who is desired or required by a codicil to
restore the succession to another person, is obliged to restore it
to him, reserving to himself a fourth part of the estate which the
law gives to heirs or executors who are overburdened with legacies
and fiduciary bequests. So that, according to the Roman lav,
one may and may not make an heir or executor by a codicil,
which depends on the manner in which he expresses himself
therein. For if the testator should make use of those terms which
the Roman law calls direct and imperative, as when one says,
Titius heres esto, that such a one be my heir or executor, this kind
of expression, which was proper only in testaments, would be of
no use in a codicil. But if the testator in his codicil should make
use of those expressions which the same laws call oblique or tndi-
rect, which are in terms of entreaty or request,° as if one should
say, I entreat my heir to restore my inheritance to such a one ; this
turn of expression, which does not institute directly for heir or ex-
ecutor the person to whom the testator is desirous to leave his es-
tate, but which is addressed to the heir to entreat him to restore it,
makes a fiduciary bequest, that is, a disposition which he who ex-
presses himself in this manner recommends to the faith and in-
tegrity of his heir at law, or next of kin, and which obliges him to
execute this will. e

3097. By the opening of this gap, which gave to these oblique
or indirect words the virtue of making an heir or executor in a
codicil, there remained no other difference between an institution
in indirect terms by a testament, and this institution in indirect
terms by a codicil, except that the heir or executor named in the
codicil being to receive the succession from the hands of the heir
at law, who is desired to restore it to him, he had only three fourth-
parts of the estate‘ whereas he that was instituted heir or exec-
utor directly by the testament had the whole. Thus, there might
arise from all these principles a doubt whether the codicillary
clause, being in a testament that is null, and which calls to the
succession another than the heir of blood, could have the effect
of making this testament to be considered as a codicil which
should contain a fiduciary bequest of the inheritance: that is,


d 7. 2, § ult. D. de jur. codicil. ; —§ 2, Inst. de codicill. idem ; —v. 1. 12, §1, D. de injust.
rupt. trr. fact. test.; —l. 2, C. de codic.

© Verba directa, § 2, Inst. de codic. ; — verba inflexa, 1. 15, C. de testam. ; — verba preca-
ria, 1. 41, § 3, D. de vulg. et pup. ; —l. 2, C. comm. de legut.

£ See the fourth title of the fifth book.


TIT. I. SEC. IV.] TESTAMENTS. sil


whether this clause would give to the said testament the same
effect that a codicil would have had, in which the testator had en-
treated his heir at law to restore the inheritance to the person that
is instituted heir or executor in this testament that is null; or
whether this clause ought to have no other effect than to make
the testament valid as a bare codicil, which should contain no
manner of fiduciary bequest of the inheritance, and whether it
would make the testament valid only as to the legacies, and other
particular dispositions that may be made by a codicil, since with
respect to the inheritance there was wanting in this testament the
expression of the entreaty to the heir at law. to restore it to him
that was instituted, in case the testament should be found null.
But it was judged that the codicillary clause supplied the want of
this expression. And we see in many laws that this clause had
the effect of making the testament that was null to be considered
as a codicil, which should contain the fiduciary bequest of the in-
heritance, and that the heir at law was obliged to restore it to him
who was named heir or executor by the testament that was null,
but which subsisted by virtue of the codicillary clause. And the
said heir at law had only his fourth part of the inheritance, togeth-
er with that other advantage regulated by the Emperor Theodo-
sius, that the person who was instituted heir or executor by the
testament which contained the codicillary clause was obliged to
take his choice of one of the two ways in which he might demand
the inheritance ; the one, by founding his demand on the codicil-
lary clause, and the other, by insisting on the institution contained
in the testament. For if he had begun by making his choice of
this second way, and the testament should appear to be null, he
could not afterwards have recourse to the codicillary clause,’ un-
less that the person instituted in the testament was a descendant
or ascendant of the testator, the law giving to the heirs of this
quality the right of having recourse to the codicillary clause, if the
testament were annulled, provided that the said person instituted,
who was in the line either of descendants or ascendants, was in
the rank established by the said law. |

3098. In fine, we must observe on the principles of the Ro-
man law touching this matter of the formalities of testaments,
which were become so difficult and perplexed, and which had
confined the expressions of the testators to certain terms, as has


5 L. ult. C. de codic. b DL ult. § 2, C. de codic.


312 THE CIVIL Law. [PART Il. BOOK III.


been already remarked, that the distinction of direct words and
of words indirect, for the institution of an heir or executor, was
abolished by the Emperor Constantine in the same manner
as he had abolished the set forms for actions, that is, certain
words which those who were to make any demand in a court of
Justice were obliged to make use of, upon the penalty of losing
what they had to demand. And the Emperor Justinian did like-
wise afterwards abolish the same distinction of direct and indirect
words in legacies and fiduciary bequests, giving to these two sorts
of dispositions the same nature and the same form™ From
whence it follows, that these emperors had abolished that which
formerly made the difference between a testament and a codicil,
as to the manner of instituting an heir or executor in the one and
the other. For that which made this difference was, that direct
words were useful for instituting an heir or executor in a testa-
ment, and that the same words were altogether useless for making
an heir or executor in a codicil. Thus, seeing the ancient law had
permitted the institution of an heir or executor in a codicil by ob-
lique and indirect words, it would seem that, if after these laws
there had happened a lawsuit, in which the question had been to
know whether the institution of an heir or executor in direct words
in a codicil could be valid, he who, being instituted heir or execu-
tor in this manner, should have pretended that this institution
ought to subsist, would not have argued amiss, if he had said, that
truly, according to the ancient law, his institution was null, be-
cause it was in direct terms in a codicil; but that, since by the
same ancient law it would have been valid if it had been in in-
direct words, it ought now to have its effect, after these laws
had abolished the difference between these direct and oblique ex-
pressions, without reserving the use of indirect words for codicils.
And if this cause had been argued before the Emperor Constan-
tine, in all appearance he would either have given it in favor of
the person that was instituted in this manner; or, if he had had a
mind to preserve the distinction between the testaments and codi-
cils, as to the institution of an heir or executor, he would have
abolished the institution of an heir or executor by a codicil, in
whatsoever terms it had been made; or, in fine, he would have
made a restriction to his law, and have declared the use of indi-
rect words to be necessary in the institution of an heir or executor


' 7.15, C. de testam. 1.1, C.de formul. = L. 2, C. comm. de legat.


TIT. J. SEC. IV.] TESTAMENTS. 313


by a codicil ; which does not seem to be very agreeable to the spirit
and intention of his law, seeing it abolished the difference between
the two sorts of expressions direct and oblique.

3099. It is true that it does seem that this sense has not been
given to that law of Constantine, seeing the compilers of the Di-
gest and Code have inserted therein several laws which preserve
this ancient law of the necessity of indirect words to make an heir
or executor in a codicil. But it is known that they have inserted
there a great many other laws which ought to have been left out,
if care had been taken not to insert any thing that had been
changed. And whatever sense we give to this law, there remains
always in the laws relating to this matter, as well as others, a
great deal of confusion, uncertainty, and obscurity.

3100. We could have wished to have been able to abstain from
making here all these remaks, and to have excused ourselves from
explaining all these particular niceties of the Roman law, since
they seem not to agree with our usage, which demands rules that
are more simple and more natural. But, seeing these niceties are
the sources of the matter of codicillary clauses which are in use in
many provinces, and that they contain the principles of the law
concerning these clauses, it was necessary to explain all these par-
ticulars, in order to discover perfectly the natare and the difficul-
ties of the questions that arise in this matter. |

3101. These questions, as has been already said, are of two
sorts; some of them relate to the effect that codicillary clauses
ought to have; and the others concern the distinction of disposi-
tions which may or may not have the effect of a codicillary clause.
Thus, for a first example of the difficulties which concern the
elect of codicillary clauses, there are some interpreters who have
made it a question, whether one who is instituted heir or executor
by a former testament, made in due form, would be obliged to re-
store the inheritance to one that should be instituted by a second
testament that is null, but having in it a codicillary clause, in the
same manner as the heir at law would be obliged to do it; and in
case that he should be obliged to restore it, whether he should re-
tain the fourth part as the heir at law has right to do, or whether
he should have nothing at all. Thus, for a second example, some
interpreters have started the question, whether a codicillary clause
in an undatiful testament would have the effect to oblige the son
that is disinherited, and who had got the testament to be annulled,
to restore the inheritance to the person who is instituted heir or

VOL. II. 27


314 THE CIVIL Law. | [PaRT 11. BOOK mI.


executor, reserving to himself his legitime, or child’s part. And
they have been of opinion, as to the first of these two cases, that
the codicillary clause ought to make the testament that is null for
want of formalities to subsist, leaving the fourth part of the estate
to the person instituted by the first testament; and that, in the
second case, the codicillary clause ought to make even the unduti-
ful testament to subsist; and that although it were annulled, yet
the codicillary clause obliged the son, who was unjustly disin-
herited, to restore the succession to the person instituted heir or
executor by the said testament. And they have founded their de-
cision of the first case upon the virtue of the codicillary clause,
which they have judged to be of equal force to take away the suc-
cession from the testamentary heir instituted in a former testa-
ment made in due form, as well as from the heir at law. And as
to the decision of the second case, they have founded it on the
115th novel of Justinian, chap. 3, because it is there said, that if,
in a testament that is null by reason of the disinheriting of mak-
ing no mention therein of the testator’s children, there were some
legacies, or some fiduciary bequests, quedam legata vel fidei com-
missa, they would nevertheless subsist, and must be paid, daré ills
quibus fuerint derelicta. From whence these commentators infer,
that, a general fiduciary bequest being more favorable than a par-
ticular one, this term of fiduciary bequest in this novel ought to
comprehend the universal fiduciary bequest of the whole inhert-
ance; as if this testator disinheriting his son had charged him, in
case his testament should be annulled, to restore the succession to
the person instituted heir or executor therein ; and that therefore,
if this son procures the testament to be annulled, he shall be
bound to restore the inheritance to the said heir or executor, re-
taining only his legitime, or child’s part, out of it.

3102. We see in these questions, and in the decisions of them
by the said doctors, the use and the consequences of these nice-
ties; and that in the second of these questions their interpreta-
tion goes on one side to an extreme hardship, against a son that
is unjustly disinherited, and that on the other side it is contrary to
the very letter of the said novel of Justinian, the nattral meaning
of which is in relation to legacies and particular fiduciary bequests,
which are of the same nature with legacies; but has no relation
to a universal fiduciary bequest of the whole inheritance, which
he could not mean in that place.

3103. As to the other sort of difficulties, where the point in


TIT. L SEC. IV.] TESTAMENTS. 815


question is whether the expression of the testator ought to have
the effect of a codicillary clause, or whether it ought to have no
such effect; as we have seen that some of the laws which have
been remarked upon on this subject have given the effect of codicil-
lary clauses to expressions which showed a strong desire in the tes-
tator that his testament should be executed, and that other laws
have even confirmed legacies, in consideration of the persons of the
legatees, which might render the bequests of the testator favora-
ble: these examples have been the cause that there remains an
indefinite liberty of giving the effect of codicillary clauses to dispo-
sitions that have nothing in them which expressly carries the sense
of these clauses.

3104. It is easy to imagine, that according to these principles
there ought to happen many questions concerning wills, which
may be pretended either to have expressions in them that are
equivalent to codicillary clauses, or that they ought to be excepted
from ‘the rules of formalities for particular reasons. And if the
bare conjecture of a strong desire in the testator to have his will
executed may have the effect of a codicillary clause, it is easy to
supply the want of it for this reason in every testament, as the
most able interpreters have been of opinion ought to be done, as
has been already remarked. For it may be said with assurance,
that every testator desires, as earnestly as he can, that his will
should be executed. And, besides, there would be no inconven-
lence if the testaments which for want of some formality are null
should have the effect of codicils, if they have the formalities
hecessary thereto.

3105. Neither does it seem to be anyways inconvenient, if the
forms of testaments were the same in all places, whether they be
to be made in the presence of one notary public and two wit-
nesses, or of two notaries, which would make the use of codicil-
lary clauses to be quite laid aside, as we see by experience in the
customs which require no other formalities. For seeing no more
are required than these few, and that they are essential, none of
them ought to be omitted ; and if there were only one single wit-
hess, instead of two, which are necessary, or only one notary, in-
stead of two, without any witness, these nullities would not be
done away with by a codicillary clause. So that of all the lawsuits
which might arise on account of defects in point of form, and of
these subtilties and various effects of the codicillary clauses, there
is scarcely one ever heard of in the customs, and that through the


816 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOK IIL


bare effect of this plainness and simplicity in the formalities of
dispositions made in prospect of death, and without any manner
of inconveniency attending it.

3106. Some persons may imagine, that seeing the customs do
not permit the institution of an heir or executor, and that they
knowing no other heirs besides those of blood, one ought not to
give the name of testament, but only that of codicil, to disposi-
tions in prospect of death that may be made in the customs; and
that therefore the liberty of disposing of one’s goods by a testa-
ment, being less in the customs than in the provinces which are
governed by the written law, where heirs may be made by a testa-
ment, fewer formalities are there required. But it may be said, on
the contrary, that there is more reason to multiply these formalities
in the customs, than in the places which are governed by the
written law. For besides that, in general, the dispositions which
transmit the goods to others than the heirs of blood are odious ip
the customs, seeing one may, in some of them, dispose by will of
all the acquests, and of all the movables, the person instituted
heir or executor, who is called universal legatee, carries away all
the goods, if there be only these two sorts. So that there would
be as much, or rather more, reason to require many more formali-
ties for testaments in the customs, than in the provinces which
are governed by the written law. And we ses, likewise, that some
customs have invented another kind of formality, more trouble-
some in one respect than those of the Roman law, but, however,
more proper to prevent more essential defects in testaments than
that of the formalities. For in order to guard against importa-
nities, and other evil practices on the weakness of testators, who
make their testaments in their last sickness, those customs declare
testaments null which have not been made before the death of the
testator within a certain time limited by the said customs, as has
been observed in other places." And this precaution hath this
effect, that whereas those who do not make their testaments till
they are sick, and in fear of death, have not all of them that free-
dom of mind, or the firmness, that is necessary to make dispo-
sitions that are well concerted, and are exposed to the flatteries
and importunities of persons who besiege them, and who often
hinder those from admittance to them who might give wholesome


® See the preface to this second part, no. 7. See the fifth article of the second section
of this title, and the remark that is there made on it.


TIT. 1. BEC. I¥.] TESTAMENTS. 817


advice, but contrary to their interest, those who make their testa-
ments when they are in full strength of body and mind are not
exposed to any one of all these inconveniences; and nobody can
complain, that, if he will make a testament, the law obliges him,
for his own proper interest, to take precautions which are both
pradent and easy.

3107. It is not, therefore, the greater or the less liberty to dispose
of one’s goods by testament, that distinguishes the usage of the
customs from that of the written law, in what relates to the for-
malities of testaments. And we know, likewise, that in some
places, where the Roman law is observed with the greatest exact-
ness, only two witnesses are required to a testament, and that by
the canon law a greater number is not necessary” But seeing in
all places it is necessary that testaments, as well as all other acts,
should be made with such formalities as may make a proof of the
‘verity, and that that proof may be made many ways, by several
sorts of formalities, it was free for those who made the laws to
make choice of the said formalities. Therefore in the Roman law
they had reason to require that great number of witnesses, and
the other formalities which have been mentioned, to make proof
of a testament which might be made without any writing, and the
remembrance of which could not consequently be preserved but
by the help of such precautions. Thus, on the contrary, in all
the provinces of this kingdom, it being required that every testa-
ment should be in writing, this great number of witnesses is the
less necessary; and we do not find any inconveniences in the
places where two witnesses suffice for testaments, as well as for
all other acts. But although it should be necessary that there
should be seven witnesses to a testament, yet at least we might
be without that distinction of the different ways of making heirs
or executors, either by a testament in direct words, or by a codicil
in terms of a fiduciary bequest. Thus, it would be an easy
matter to remove all these difficulties by plain and simple rules,
which should substitute, in the place of these troublesome and
useless subtilties, the natural order of a uniform way of making
dispositions ; which would be agreeable even to the spirit of the
Roman Jaw, where it is owned that plainness and simplicity are
characters essential to laws.’ But if this truth is common to all


° C. 10, de testam.
P § 7, Inst. de fideicom. haredit. ; — § 8, Inst. de legit. agn. suce.; — 1. 22,41, C. de furt. e
Serv. corr.
corr. -


318 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IT. BOOK Ml.


laws, it is more especially peculiar to those which concern matters
in which the multiplying of rules may multiply inconveniences.

3108. We have made here all these remarks, and all these reflec-
tions on the codicillary clause, and on the different ways of mak-
ing an heir or executor by a testament or by a codicil, in order to
explain what it is that makes the difficulties in this matter, and to
give a reason why we have inserted in this section one only rule
of the nature and use of the codicillary clause when it is ex-
pressed, and why we have omitted to set down among the number
of rules those which we meet with in the body of the Roman
law, which do not appear to be so very natural, and which are so
little agreeable to that plainness and simplicity that are essential
to laws, and which are, on the contrary, very proper to multiply
difficulties.

3109. But if any reader should be of opinion that we ought to
have inserted here such of the said rules of the Roman law as are
received in some of the provinces, we think that this may be
enough to satisfy them that, in a matter that is so arbitrary, and
where the rules of it are so full of difficulties, we have explained
what is to be found relating thereto in the Roman law; seeing they
have in these remarks what might have been reduced into rules,
and that this way of treating a matter of this kind, explaining
what are the principles thereof, and what the difficulties, may suit
with the usages of all places, and not break in on any of them, but
only shows the great occasion there is to have rules that are more
plain and simple.


SECTION V.


OF THE SEVERAL CAUSES WHICH MAY ANNUL A TESTAMENT IN
WHOLE OR IN PART, ALTHOUGH IT BE MADE IN DUE FORM, AND
OF THE DEROGATORY CLAUSES.


3110. Autaovas the use of derogatory clauses is a matter which
comes within the order of those of this section, and that mention
is made thereof in the title of the section, yet we have not thought
fit to put down among the rules of this section any rule concern-
ing these clauses; and that it would be sufficient to mark here
their order, and to give the reasons that have obliged us to speak
of them nowhere else but in this preamble.


TIT. I. SEC. V.} TESTAMENTS. 319


3111. We call those derogatory clauses, which testators put in
their testaments when they fear lest they should be obliged after-
wards. to make other dispositions against their will, upon consider-
ations that may oblige them thereto, and are willing to annul the
said dispositions beforehand, and to make those to subsist which
they had made in the first testament. It is with this view that
those testators who are desirous that their first testament should
not be revoked by a second, put into the first testament a clause
by which they ordain, that, if afterwards they should happen to
make another testament, it may have no effect, unless it contain
certain words which they express in the first, and which they put
there for a mark, that, if they are repeated in the second, it shall
subsist, and that it shall be null if it does not contain them.
These clauses are called derogatory, because they derogate from
the validity of the second testament, if they are not expressed in
it And it is no matter what these words are, nor whether they
have any sense or not, no more than the watchword.

3112. We have thought fit not to insert among the rules of this
section any thing concerning these derogatory clauses; because,
although they are very much in use, yet they are altogether un-
known in the Roman law; and those who first invented them
have built only upon consequences drawn from some laws which
have nothing in them’ that expressly countenances these sorts of
clauses; and, on the contrary, the effect that is given them is
altogether opposite to the principles and dispositions of the Roman
law, which do not allow that we should deprive ourselves of the
liberty of making new dispositions, and of changing or revoking
the first whenever we please.

3113. The authors of the derogatory clauses have gone upon
this, that it is said in one law,* that, if a testator had declared in
the beginning of his testament, that he does not give to such a one
that which he shall give in the latter part of his testament, quod
Titio, infra legavero, id neque do, neque lego; the legacy left to
such a person in the latter part of this testament would be null by
the effect of this first will. From whence these doctors have
drawn this consequence, that a testator may annul a second testa-
ment by such a clause as this in a former. They add upon the
same subject what is said in another law, that if a testator had
said in his testament, chat if there were found therein two legacies


® Z. 12, § 8, D.de legat. 1. b 7.14, D. eod.


320 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr 1%. BOOK IIT:


to one and the same person, his will was that there should be only
one of them due, and that in the same testament he had left two
legacies to one legatee, there would be only one of them that
should subsist. And they likewise made use of an addition of
Tribonian’s to another text.° It is in the case where the testator
having said in the beginning of his testament, that, if tn the sequel
of it he should leave two legacies to one and the same person, there
should be due only one of them, and he had left several legacies to
the same legatee, the law decides that they should be all due;
because this testator could not put himself under the necessity of
not being able to change his former disposition. But by this ad-
dition it is said that this legatee shall not have all those legacies,
unless the testator has ordered it so by a second disposition in ex-
press terms, which derogates from the former. From whence these
doctors have drawn this consequence, that when the testator an-
nuls the second testament by a former, as by a derogatory clause,
this second disposition remains null, unless the testator should de-
clare that his will and intention is, that, notwithstanding the de-
rogatory clause, his second will should be executed. But since the
exception added to this law is an addition of Tribonian’s, easy to
be known by the style, it may be said that this law proves rather
that the second disposition revokes the former. And this is like-
wise a certain principle in the matter of testaments, as shall be
explained in its proper place. And besides, this addition of Tri-
bonian’s has no relation to two testaments, to have the effect of
annulling the second by a derogatory clause in the former; but it
is limited to the making valid the first disposition of a testament
which annuls other dispositions of the same testament, or of a
codicil, which in the Roman law makes a part of the testament,
and draws from it all its force® Thus, this law, as well as the
others which we have just now remarked upon, is in the case of
one only testament which contains two opposite dispositions, one
of which ought necessarily to hinder the effect of the other; which
has no precise relation to the dispositions of two testaments made
at different times. So that none of these laws prove that we may,
by the Roman law, make a disposition in a former testament
which shall annul those of a second. And, on the contrary, those
very laws, and all the others that may have any relation to this


© TL, 22, D. de legat. 3.
4 See the first article, and the following articles of the fifth section.
© £.2,42, 13, § 2, D. de jure codicill.


TIT. L. SEC. V.] TESTAMENTS. AR


matter, prove two traths quite opposite to the use of derogatory
elauses in a former testament to annul those which the testator
might happen afterwards to make: one is, that it is always the
last will which annuls the former, when it is contrary to them ;‘
and the other is, that no man can deprive himself of the liberty
to dispose, and to revoke former dispositions‘ It is in conformity
to these two principles, that it is decided in the sixth law, § 2, D.
de jure codicill, that if a testator, having declared that he de-
sired that no regard might be had to any codicil he should make,
unless it was written and signed with his own hand, should hap-
pen afterwards to make a codicil, which he had neither written
nor signed with his hand, this codicil would nevertheless be con-
firmed, because, as it is said in that law, the last wills of testators
derogate from the former, que postea geruntur prioribus derogant.
Thus, it may be said that the use of derogatory clauses is not
agreeable to the spirit of the Roman law, nay, that it is directly
contrary to it. And it has been so determined by one of the in-
terpreters, who best understood the law relating to this matter.
3114. As for other reasons besides the authority of the laws, we
see, on one hand, that the use of the derogatory clauses consists in
giving to testators the means of making a second testament, which
they would have to serve for nothing, after that they have made a
former which they are desirous may be executed; that this second
testament may serve to amuse the persons in whose favor it has
been made, the testator thinking within himself, at the same time,
that nothing is more remote from his intention than this second
testament, which is already annulled beforehand in his mind. We
know that there have been pagans that would not have had the
conscience to make use of an expedient of this nature. But even
although this expedient could be of any good use, yet it is not
without a great many inconveniences: for it may happen that he
who has a mind to engage a testator to make a testament in his
favor may take his measures accordingly before any other testa-
ment has been made, and may get the testator to make a secret
testament, sealed up, and put into his custody, and in which he
may have procured a derogatory clause to be inserted, of which
the testator perhaps is not capable to comprehend the consequence,
or which he may have forgot; so that any second testament which


f Suprema voluntas potior habetur. L. 22, D. de leg. 3.
& Nemo enim eam sibi potest legem dicere, ut a priore ei recedere non liceat. D.1.
b Bee the like decision. LZ. wlt. D. de legat. 2.


Bee THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IIL.


he should make might be of no effect. And it might likewise so
fall out, that the persons who should engage the testator to make
a second testament, having already made a former with a deroga-
tory clause in it, might get him to add in the second a clause
which might derogate from the derogatory clause of the former,
getting the testator to declare that he had forgotten the terms of the
said clause, or to make use of other expressions which might rea-
der ineffectual the precaution of the derogatory clause in the for-
mer testament. It may likewise so happen, that a testator who is
desirous, and that for good reasons, to change a former testament,
may have forgotten that he had put in it a derogatory clause, as if
the testament had been made many years before, or he had even
forgotten that he had made any at all; and thus the second testa-
ment he should have a mind to make would be useless. It might
likewise happen, that a testator had made a former testament out
of some passion that had disgusted him with his relations, and
had moved him to leave his estate to some stranger, who had taken
the precaution to get a derogatory clause put into the testament;
and that this testator should afterwards repent himself of it, and,
being desirous to leave his estate to his nearest relations, brothers
or others, he should make a second testament with this intention;
but that he had omitted, either through forgetfulness or ignorance,
to make mention of the derogatory clause of the former testament;
so that the effect of the said clause would be in this case to prefer
an unjust and angry will to a disposition that is most just and
equitable. Thus, it may be said that this precaution of the derog-
atory clauses is much more inconvenient than it is useful ; without
reckoning the many lawsuits which the invention of these clauses
has added to the great number of others, which are already more
than the judges can well decide, and which disturb the peace and
quiet of families.

3115. All these considerations have induced us to think, that, al-
though it be true that the derogatory clauses are generally used,
yet that we might, without transgressing the authority of the said
usage, forbear setting down here any rule concerning this matter.
And although there were no inconvenience in the use of the said
derogatory clauses, yet this matter has two characters which ex-
clude it from coming within the design of this book. One is, that
it is no part of the Roman law; and that not only it is not a part
thereof, but is directly contrary to it: and the other is, that it is no
more a part of the law of nature. And besides, the remarks


TIT. I. BEC. V.] TESTAMENTS. 323


which we have just now made contain all the principles of this
matter.


Arr. L


3116. A First Testament is annulled by a Second. — Besides
the want of formalities which may annul a testament, there are
other causes which may have the same effect. And we may
reckon as the frst of them a second will of the testator who makes
another testament. For as every testament implies the disposal
of the whole estate, two different testaments cannot subsist to-
gether, but the second annuls the first;* as shall be explained in
the following articles.

. @


Il.


3117. Although the Second make no Mention of the First. — Al-
though the second testament make no mention of the first, yet
nevertheless it revokes it by the bare effect of the will of the tes-
tator, who, being at liberty to change his dispositions to the mo-
ment of his death, declares sufficiently by those which he makes
in his second testament, that his will is that the first should re-
main without effect.” But if in the second testament the testator
makes only some additions, some deductions, and some alterations
in the former, whether it be in the naming of the heir or executor,
or in the legacies; whatever he confirms of the first testament
shall have its effect as making a part of the second.


Il.


3118. Provided that the Second be in due Form, although tt re-
main without Execution. — A first testament made in due form
cannot be annulled by a second, unless the same be likewise in due
form ; for otherwise this second will, having for its proof only an act
that is null, would be null likewise, and would not have so much
as the effect to revoke the former dispositions which should still
be in being. But if the second testament has all the necessary
formalities, it is no matter although it remain without execution,
whether it be that the heir or executor, and legatees, if there are


* § 2 Inst. quib. mod. test. infirm.; —l. 1, D. de inj. rept. See the foarth article of the
first section of Codicils.

> LZ. 4, D. de adim. vel transfer. legat.; —I. 1, § 1, D. de bon. poss. sec. tab. See the thir-
teenth and fourteenth articles.

© L. 2, D. de injust. rep. irr. fact. test.


324 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK ITI.


any, renounce the right they have by it, or that they die before the
testator, or that they are become incapable, so that this testament
has no effect. For this second will, being in due form, does, never-
theless, annul the former. Thus, the testator dies without a testa-
ment, the first being annulled by the second, and the second fail-
ing to have its effect.‘


IV.


3119. A Testament which may subsist with fewer Formalities
revokes a Former.— We must not reckon in the number of tes-
taments that would not be sufficient to revoke a former testament,
those in which the laws dispense with a part of the formalities,
such as military testaments, and thos& which are made in a time
of plague. For if these testaments which want some formalities
have those which are sufficient to render them valid, they revoke
the former testaments.*


V.


3120. A Testament in Favor of the Heir of Blood, attested by Five
Witnesses, revokes the former which called a Stranger to the Suc-
cession. — It must likewise be remarked on this rule, that we ought
to except from it the case where the testator, having, by a former
testament, named for his heir or executor another person than him
who had right to succeed to him if he had died intestate, had in-
stituted for his testamentary heir or executor his heir at law by
the second testament; for in this case this second testament, al-
though null, revokes the former, provided only that it have five
witnesses, and the favor of the heir of blood makes it to subsist.‘


VI.


3121. The Birth of a Child annuls the Testament.— A testa-
ment made with all the formalities is, nevertheless, annulled by
the birth of a child whom the testator had not instituted his heir
or executor:© for since the inheritance is due to the children, both


4 § 2, Inst. quid. mod. test. infirm.

¢ L. 2, D. de injust. rupt. irr. fact. testam. Although this text speaks only of the mili-
tary testament, yet a testament made in a time of plague, according to the rule explained
in the sixteenth article of the third section, will have the same effect, since it will subsist.

f Z. 2, D. de injust. rupt. irr. fac. testam.; —1. 21, § 8, C. de test. See, in the preface to
this second part, no. 8, and the third article of the seventh section of this title.

& L.1, D. de inj. rupt. irr. fac. test. ;— l. un. C. de ordin. judse. See the fifteenth article
touching Legacies in this testament.


TIT. I. BEC. V.] TESTAMENTS. 325


by law and by nature, if they have not deserved to be disinherited,
the child which is born to the testator after the making of his tes-
tament is his heir. And it is presumed that the reason why he
did not revoke this testament was because he was prevented by
death.


VIL


3122. Unless the said Child dies before the Testator. — If in the
case of the preceding article the child born after the testament
should happen to die before the death of the testator, its father, the
said testament would have its effect: for since it is the death of
the testator that gives the testament its effect, and that at the time
of the said death the cause which ought to annul the testament
of this father would not be any more in being, nothing would
hinder its validity. And all the dispositions thereof would be
executed upon this just presumption, that the testator, not hav-
ing revoked them after the death of the said child, had confirmed
them:!


VIIL


3123. The Testament in which the Children are omitted is Null.
— The testament of him who, having children, or parents if he has
no children, makes no mention of them therein, is annulled with
respect to the institution of the heir or executor; for he ought to
have named them his heirs or executors; or, if he had a mind to
disinherit them, he ought to have mentioned the reasons for which
he did it as shall be explained in the second title.


TX.


3124. The Unjust Disinheriting of Children annuls the Testament.
— If the testator who has children disinherit any of them without
just cause, his testament will be annulled as to the institution of
the heir or executor. And it would be the same thing if the tes-
tator who had no children had disinherited without just cause his


b 1.7, D. de bon. damn. See the preface to this second part, no. 3.

' L.12, D. de inj. rup. irr. f test.

| L.1, D.de injust. rupt. irrit. fac. test.;— Nov. 115, ¢.3 a 4. See the following article
and the sixteenth article, with the remark that is there made on it. This omission of the
father or mother, who make no mention of their children in their testaments, is called in
the Roman law preterition, distinguished from disherison, for in this the children are
Bamed and disinherited.

VOL. I. 28


326 THE CIVIL LAW. [paRT II. BOOK II.


father or mother, or other ascendants,”™ as shall be shown in the
second title of this book.


X.


3125. The Institution is of no Effect, tf the Testamentary Heir re-
nounces. — When the person who Is instituted heir or executor by
a testament renounces the inheritance, the institution of the tes-
tamentary heir having no effect, the next of kin is called in the
place of him who was named by the testament."


XL


3126. The Testament is annulled if the Testator dies tncapable of
making one.— If he who had made a testament happened after-
wards to fall into a state that renders him incapable of having
heirs or executors, as if he happens to lose his right of natural-
ization, or is condemned to some punishment that carries with
it a civil death, as has been explained in its place, and remains
in that condition till his death, the testament which he had made
before will be annulled. For since every testament hath its effect
only at the moment of the death of the testator, he who at the
time of his death cannot leave his goods to heirs or executors can-
not by consequence leave any use of a testament from which no-
body can reap any profit.°


XIL


3127. The other Changes, or the Length of Time, do not annul a
Testament.— All the other changes that might happen between
the time of making the testament and the death of the testator,


m J. 8, § penult. D. de inoff: test. ; —1. 30, D. de liber. ef post hered. inst. ;— 0. Now. 115,
c. 3 et 4, and the sixteenth article of this section.

® L. 1, D. de inj. rupt. irr. fact. test. ; — 1. 181, D. de reg. jur. We have not said in the
article, that the testament will be null without distinction as to all the dispositions it may
contain, concerning which it will be necessary to see the nineteenth article, with the re-
mark made on it.

° L. 6, §5, D. de inj. rupt. irr. f. test.; —d.l.§6. See the sixteenth article of the sec-
ond section of this title, the texts which are there cited, and the remarks made thereon,
and the twentieth article of this section.

This article is to be understood only of the case mentioned in it, where the testator is
at the time of his death incapable of having heirs or executors ; for if he was only incapa-
ble of making a will, as if after having made his testament he had professed himself a
monk, or was fallen into a state of madness, or under some other infirmity which rendered
him incapable of making a testament, yet his testament would nevertheless have its effect,
because he would not be incapable of having for his heirs or executors those whom he
had made choice of when he was capable of doing it.


TIT. I. SEC. V.| TESTAMENTS. 327


even those which might make us presume some change of his will,
would not annul it. And although there may have passed a
great number of years in the said interval, and during that long
time the testator’s estate had been much augmented or dimin-
ished; or some of the legatees were dead; or the person whom
he had chosen to be his heir or executor, because he was poor, and
had many children, should happen to be rich, and to have no chil-
dren; or there had happened other changes of the like nature;
his testament would nevertheless be executed, unless he had re-
voked it, either by some contrary disposition made in due form,
or in the manner explained in the twenty-first article. For it
ought to be presumed that he had persevered in the same will,
having made no change in his testament, being able to have done
it, and that his intention was that this testament should be ex-
ecuted in what manner it could, according to the condition that
matters should be in at the time of his death.


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3128. We have not set down in this article the words that fol-
low in the text cited, that if the testator revoke his testament, either
in the presence of three witnesses, or by an act in a public registry,
this revocation, together with the lapse of ten years after the tes-
tament, will make it to be null. Sin autem testator tantummodo
dizerit, non voluisse prius stare testamentum, vel aliis verbis uten-
do contrariam aperuit voluntatem, et hoc vel per testes idoneos non
minds tribus, vel inter acta manifestaverit, el decennium fuerit emen-
sum ; tunc trritum est testamentum, tam ex contraria voluntate, quam
ex cursu temporal. And instead of this way of revoking a testa-
ment, we have put down only in the article, that the testator may
revoke it, either by an act made in due form, or in the manner
explained in the twenty-first article, that is, by tearing, razing,
or defacing it. For it seems that that which in the Roman law
made the use of those other ways of revoking a testament neces-
sary, either by an act in the public registry, or by a declaration in
presence of witnesses, was, that testaments, as well as all other
acts, might be made without any writing ;* and that therefore, as
testaments made after this manner did subsist in the memory of
the witnesses, a contrary act was necessary to annul those that


P L. 27, C. de testam.
* See the twelfth article of the first section of Covenants. Li. 9, 10, Cod. de fide instr. 5
—L 21, § 2, Cod. de testam. ; —1. 26, ead.


328 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK IIL


were not written. And it was perhaps for the same reason, in
that testaments did subsist without writing, that before Justinian’s
reign the laws which that emperor abolished by the law quoted on
this article had regulated that a testament should be null after ten
years from the day of its date.» Which may have been founded
upon this, that the memory of a testament which was not written
could not be so easily preserved after so long a time, whether be-
cause of the death of all the witnesses, or seme of them, or their
forgetfulness. And this revocation of testaments by the course of
ten years may have been extended to those that were written, in
the same manner as they extended the formalities of testaments
that were not written; as has been remarked in other places. But
Justinian did not content himself with the bare effect of the space
of ten years, to revoke even testaments that were not written;
and he ordained, without making any distinction by this law, that
to revoke a testament there should be necessary both the course of
ten years, and likewise a declaration of the testator in the presence
of three witnesses, or an act in the public registry: from whence it
follows, that, without the circumstance of this time, an act before
three witnesses would not be sufficient, and that it would be ne-
cessary to have an act more authentie to revoke the testament; so
that it would seem that Justinian looked upon the revocation of a
testament as an act of the same nature with the making of a tes-
tament, because it implies a disposition of-the inheritance: so that
one might conjecture from this law, that, to revoke a testament
within the ten years from its date, the same number of witnesses
should be necessary as in making a testament. And as to the
manner of revoking a testament by the effect of time, as by this
law of Justinian the time alone is not sufficient to annul it; so it
is still less sufficient with us, where every testament ought to be
in writing. But although every testament ought to be in writing,
yet a contrary act is not always necessary to revoke it, for the
testator needs only to tear or cancel his testament, so that the use
of an express revocation cannot be necessary, except in the case
where a testator cannot have the original testament in his power.
either by reason of absence, or for other causes; and in this case
the difficulty would remain, to know whether it would be neces-
sary to have an act with the same number of witnesses that are
required to a testament, as it seems to follow from this law of Jus-


* V. 1. 6, Cod. Theodos. de testam. et codiciil.
> Sce the preamble of the third and fourth sections.


TIT. 1. SEC. V.| , TESTAMENTS. 328


tinian, who is not contented with three witnesses, except in the
case where the ten years are elapsed after the date of the testa-
ment. But as we have seen in the fifth article, that a testament
with five witnesses in favor of the heir at law annuls a former
testament in which a stranger was instituted heir or executor; and
that he who has a mind to revoke his testament without making
another cannot but know that, if he die without a testament, he
leaves his estate to his next of kin; so therefore five witnesses
ought to suffice to make the revocation of his testament valid.
And this revocation ought to have the same effect as if he insti-
tuted his heir at law by a second testament. For one may say of
him who revokes his testament without making another, that he
institutes for his heir or executor him who ought to succeed to
him if he died intestate, not by an institution in express terms, but
which is tacit in the expression, and express in the intention ; and
likewise with this advantage in favor of the said heir at law, that
he is willing to leave him the estate without any diminution by
legacies or other bequests. And if this revocation were made in a
place where only two witnesses are required to a testament, the
same number would be sufficient; since in testaments, and other
acts, we ought to observe the formalities that are used in the
places where they are made; as has been remarked on the first
article of the third section.

3129. But if there were only two witnesses to such a revocation,
in a place where a greater number of witnesses is necessary to a
testament, and the testator had persevered in the said will to his
death, although he had not survived ten years after the making of
it, the proof which would result from an act of this nature, joined
with the favor of the heir at law, would it not be sufficient to an-
nul the testament, in the same manner as, in all sorts of other acts,
and even for a donation of one’s whole estate to take effect in the
lifetime of the donor, two witnesses are sufficient with a notary, or
two notaries without any witness? This question might be ranked
in the number of those which demand rules for deciding them. And
without deciding it, it seems reasonable to believe, that, since Jus-
tinian required only three witnesses with the space of ten years,
and judged in this case the revocation of the testament just and
favorable, although without the formality required in a testa-
ment, an act made before two public notaries, or one notary and
two witnesses, setting forth in an authentic manner the will of
the testator to revoke his testament, might have this effect; espe-

o 98 #


330 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL BOOK II.


cially since it would seem that fewer formalities are necessary to
leave the inheritance in the natural order to the heir at law, than
what the law requires to deprive him of it, and that it does not
seem necessary that he who, after having made a testament,
changes his mind and is willing to die intestate, should make a
second testament in the same form and manner.


XVIT


3130. The Testament may be either entirely annulled, or only as
to the Institution, or as to some other Clause.— Among the different
causes which annul the wills of testators, and which have been
explained in the foregoing articles, we must distinguish between
those which destroy entirely the whole testament, so that there
does not subsist so much as any one disposition in it, either for
the institution of the heir or executor or for the legacies, and
those which only annul either the institution of the heir or exec-
utor, or some other disposition, without touching the rest; which
depends on the rules that follow.4


XIV.


3131. The Second Testament annuls or changes the First, ac-
cording to the Dispositions tt contains. —In the case of a second
testament, the first is either entirely annulled in all its parts, or
only in that which the second may have changed in it, as has
been said in the second article. Thus, the effect of the will of the
testator in his first testament depends on the effect which his will
explained in the second testament ought to have. And by the
second testament we are always to understand that which is the
last, how many soever the former testaments are.’


XV.


3132. The Birth of a Child annuls the whole Testament that made
no Mention of it. — In the case of the birth of a child, which the tes-
tator did not foresee, and of which he had made no mention in the
testament, it is entirely annulled, and nothing of it subsists, even
although the testator had instituted by the said testament his
other children which he had at that time.‘ For it may be said,


9 See the following rules.

* This is a consequence of the first and second articles.

* L.1,§ 1, D. de bon. poss. sec. tab.

¢ Si pater duos filios heredes instituerit, et agnatione posthumi ruptum testamentam


TIT. I. SEC. V.] TESTAMENTS. 331


with respect to the dispositions of that testament, that, if the testa-
tor had foreseen the birth of this child, he would have burdened the
succession with fewer legacies, or perhaps would have left none at
all. And it might likewise happen, that, if this testament ought to
subsist, this child would be reduced to its legitime, or child’s part,
contrary to the intention of the testator; so that we ought to pre-
sume of such a testament, that the dispositions thereof are con-
trary to those which the birth of this child would have obliged the
testator to make if he had foreseen it.


XVI.


3133. The Legacies of Undutiful Testaments subsist.— If a tes-
tator having children, or, if he is without children, having parents,
makes no mention of them in his testament, or if he disinherit
them without just cause, the testament will be null only with re-
spect to the institution of other heirs or executors in the place of
his children or parents, and all the other dispositions of the said
testament will have their effect."


XVIL ‘


3134. The Next of Kin being instituted, cannot renounce the Exe-
cution of the Testament, that he may succeed to the Testator as dying
Intestate. — In the case where the heir at law or next of kin is in-
stituted heir or executor by a testament, if, to avoid payment of the
legacies, he should pretend to renounce the testamentary succes-
sion, and keep to his right of succeeding to the deceased as dying


faerit, qnamvis hsereditas pro duabus partibus ad eos pertineat, tamen fideicommisse li-
bertates preestari non debent, sicut nec legata quidem aut fideicommissa preestare coguntar.
L. 47, D. de fideicom. libert.;—1. 24, § 11, eod. See the sixth article. We may gather
this consequence from this text, that even the most favorable legacies would be revoked
in this case, since it annuls the legacies of liberty given to slaves. But if there were in the
said testament a legacy left to servants, in lieu of wages due to them, it would not be so
much a legacy as an acknowledgment of a debt which ought to be acquitted; and it
would be the same thing, if the testator had charged his heirs or executors with some res-
titation which he was obliged to make. For the cause which would annul this testament
would not annul the proof that it would make of a trath of this nature.

* Nov. 115, ¢. 3. This text relates to the testaments of fathers and mothers, and other
sscendants; and the same thing is ordained at the end of the fourth chapter of the same
novel, with respect to the testaments of children who forget or disinherit their fathers,
mothers, or other ascendants.

By the ancient law, the legacies and other bequests of undutifal testaments were an-
Dulled, as well as the institution of the heir or executor. See the remark on the fifth arti-
dle of the fourth section of Undutiful Testaments.


Cd


332 THE OVIL Law. [PART It. BOOK IIL


intestate, he would nevertheless be bound to acquit the legacies
and the other charges regulated by the testament.*


XVIIL


3135. If he that ts instituted Heir or Executor in the Testament
renounces by Collusion with the Next of Kin, the Testament shall
subsist with Respect to all the other Dispositions. — If he that is in-
stituted heir or executor in a testament renounces the succession
on purpose that it may go to the heir at law or next of kin, the
heir at law will be obliged to pay the legacies and the other
charges of the testament, although he had given nothing to the
person named heir or executor in the testament to induce him to
leave the inheritance to him, and the said executor had done it out
of mere favor and courtesy to the heir at law


XIX.


3136. If he renounces without this Collusion, what will be the
Effect of this Renunciation.— If in the same case, where another
person is instituted heir or executor in the testament than the heir
at law, he should renounce the inheritance, not out of any consid-
eration for the interest of the heir at law, but because he did not
find his account in accepting the inheritance, this institution
would be of no effect, as has been said in the tenth article. Thus,
the inheritance passing to the heir of blood, the testament would
remain without effect in its most essential part, which is the in-
stitution of an heir or executor."


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3137. We have mentioned in this article only the bare nullity
of the institution of the testamentary heir or executor, and not the


* L.1, D. si quis omiss. causa testam.;—d.l.§9,in f See the following article, and
the fourth article of the first section.

Y L. 1, § ult. D. si quis omiss. caus. testam.; —Il. 4, eod. See the eighteenth article of
the first section of Heirs and Evecutors in general.

We have not put down ia this article, that it is necessary that the design of defeating
the legatees should appear clearly, as is said in the first part of this last text. For besides
that in the sequel thereof it is said that this rule shall take place chiefly, if there were any
designs to destroy the dispositions of the testament; which seems to intimate that, even
withont this design, the heir at law would be bound for the legacies ; another considera-
tion arising from what shall be remarked on the following article has induced us not to
add this restriction to the rule explained in this article.

2 [.1,in f. D. de tnjust. rup. irr. fact. test.; —1. 9, D. de testam. tut. ; —1. 20, D. de bon.
poss. contr. tab. ; —1. 2, in f. C. si omiss. sit. caus. test.


TIT. 1. 8EC. V.| TESTAMENTS. 333


absolute nullity of the whole testament, and of all the other dis-
positions that it might contain, although it was the rule of the Ro-
man law, explained in the texts cited upon this article, that all the
dispositions should remain null, if he that was instituted executor
or testamentary heir did not accept of the succession. This rule
was founded upon this, that the institution of the heir or executor
was considered as the most essential part of the testament, and
the foundation of all the other dispositions. Which went so far
in the ancient Roman law, that it was necessary to begin the tes-
tament by the institution of the heir or executor, and that all the
legacies which preceded the said institution were null, even those
which gave liberty to slaves,* although there were no other nullity
in the testament. It was upon the same principle that they made
likewise the validity of the legacies to depend on the executor’s
acceptance of the inheritance. So that it depended altogether on
the executor to make the legacies valid by his accepting the in-
heritance, or to annul them by renouncing it.

3138. It appears clearly from these principles of the Roman law,
that this rale, which annuls the legacies for want of a testamen-
tary heir or executor, cannot have place in the customs of France,
seeing they do not acknowledge any testamentary heir, and that
testaments in the said customs are, according to the spirit of the
Roman law, nothing else but codicils. And as for the provinces
which are governed by the written law, the case is so rare, since
the invention of the benefit of an inventory, for legacies to be lost
by the testamentary heir’s renouncing the inheritance, that it has
never perhaps once happened. For what person is there who is
instituted by a testament, who having hopes to reap some advan-
tage from the succession, and being at liberty to accept it with the
benefit of an inventory, will readily renounce it? And if he re-
fases it only because it is really burdensome, the legatees lose
nothing thereby, seeing legacies are paid only after the debts.

3139. It is true, that in the ancient Roman law it might very
well happen that a testamentary heir might renounce an inherit-
ance which would have proved advantageous. For before the in-
vention of the benefit of an inventory, as there was no medium
between accepting purely and simply the inheritance, and renoun-
cing it, it might easily fall out that a testamentary heir might re-
hounce a succession, which the apparent charges might render


2 V. § 34, Inst. de legat.


334 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IIL.


suspicious, although the goods of the succession might be more
than the charges; and it was in that time that this law was estab-
lished. But after the invention of the benefit of an inventory, it
cannot well be supposed that this case should happen, that a suc
cession, in which there may remain goods to the heir or executor,
should be abandoned. And in fine, although it should happen
that a testamentary heir should renounce a succession, of which
the goods are sufficient to clear all the charges, and to pay off
either the whole legacies or a part of them, it does not seem to be
just, nor agreeable to our usage, that the legatees should lose
their legacies because the heir or executor would not accept of the
inheritance. For as this rule of the Roman law, which annuls
the legacies when he that is instituted heir or executor abandons
the succession, has had for its foundation only these niceties
which we have just now explained; so, likewise, it may be con-
sidered as a pure nicety, and may be said to be contrary to the
first and most essential principle of the Roman law itself in the
matter of testaments, which is, that the will of the testator ought
to serve as a law, as has been remarked in its proper place ;° since
this will is not limited to the institution of an heir or executor,
but respects likewise the legacies, and sometimes legacies that are
more favorable than the institution itself, and which the testator
will have acquitted independently of the will of his heir or exec-
utor, and even against his will if he should oppose it.

3140. It may be said further, that it is contrary to equity to
make bequests, that are just and reasonable, to depend on the
whimsical humor of an heir or executor; and to make legatees
lose the recompenses of their services and other good deeds, on
which may depend the subsistence of their families ; and that for
no other reason but that of a bare nicety, which can be of no ad-
vantage to any person besides the heir at law, who could not ex-
pect the succession but with the condition of acquitting the leg-
acies, if he had been called to it by the testament, and who, not
being called to succeed by the testament, ought to content him-
self with taking the place of him that is instituted by the testa-
ment, with the charges which the testator had imposed upon him.
So that we might in this case, more than in any other, put in
practice the sentiment of the most learned commentators, who will


b See the seventh article of the first section of this title, and the fifth article of the fol-
lowing section.


TIT. 1. SEC. V.| TESTAMENTS. 335


have the codicillary clause to be supplied in every testament, as
has been said in the fourth section; which would have this effect,
that this heir at law would be obliged to acquit the legacies in de-
fault of him that is instituted heir or executor by the testament;
and that although he were heir by another title than the testa-
ment, yet he ought not to have the benefit of the succession with-
out acquitting the charges of it, according to these words of one
of the laws concerning this matter, Quocungue enim modo heredi-
tatem lucrifacturus quis sit, legata prestabit. L.1,§9,in f. D. st quis
om. caus. test. For although these words do not precisely relate
to the case in question, yet the sense and meaning of them is ap-
plicable to it.

3141. Although all these considerations seem sufficient to make
the legacies subsist, when the testamentary heir renounces the
succession, yet the validity of the legacies in this case may like-
wise be founded on another principle of equity, and which is also
of the Roman law, that in the cases where the question is con-
cerning the validity of an act, in which are contained two things
that have some connection with one another, if one of the two
cannot subsist, yet the act is nevertheless valid for that which may
subsist without the other. Thus, for example, when by one and
the same act two persons have bound themselves as sureties for
another, if one of the said persons could not bind himself, as if it
was either a minor or a woman, who by the Roman law could
not oblige herself for other persons, the act which would be null
with respect to the said woman or minor would subsist for the
other, who would remain obliged solely for the whole debt. It is
only the acts of which no one part can subsist but by the validity
of the whole together, that are annulled in the whole by the nul-
lity of any part; as if, two arbitrators being named by a compro-
mise, one of them either could not or would not accept thereof,
the nomination would be altogether fruitless with respect to them
both; for one of them cannot judge without the other; so that
the nomination of one alone would subsist to no purpose. But
even in the cases which relate to only one thing, which can admit
of no division, the laws suppose a division therein, in order to
make the acts subsist so far as is possible. For it is the spirit and
intention of the laws to give to all sorts of acts all the effect that
they can reasonably have. Thus we see, even in the Roman law,


* L. 48, D. de fidei ; —1. 8, C. ad senat. Vel. 4 L.7,§ 1, D. de recept.


336 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK I.


that Justinian having dispensed with the registering of donations
that should be under a sum which he had regulated, he ordained
that the donations exceeding the said sum, which were not regis-
tered, and which for want of being registered ought to be null,
should subsist for the sum that might be given without being reg-
istered. So that that donation was partly null, and partly had its
effect. Thus, by our usage, a donation of all one’s goods, present
and to come, may be divided by the donee, who may restrain it to
the goods which the donor had at the time of the donation, as has
been remarked on the sixth article of the thirteenth section of Heirs
and Executors in general.

3142, It is from these principles that the rule of the canon law
has been taken, which says, that that which may be valid ought
not to be annulled because of its connection with that which is
invalid: Utile non debet per inutile vitiari. C.37 de reg. jur. tn 6.
Which is to be understood of the cases where this connection is
not such that one of the two things cannot subsist without the
other. Thus we may say, that, according to the same principles,
it is equitable that a testament which is without effect as to the
institution of an heir or executor should, nevertheless, subsist as
to the other dispositions, since they have no necessary connection
with the said institution, each of them having its cause in the in-
tention of the testator, which makes them independent one of
another. For as his will is in general, with respect to them all
together, that they should have their effect, so his will is in partic
ular, with respect to every one of them, that it should be executed,
even although the others could not have their effect.

3143. Upon the same subject we may remark a decision of the
Emperor Antoninus, in a cause which was argued before him;
the question was, to know whether, a testator having blotted out
in his testament the names of his executors, the legacies with
which his executors were charged in the said testament ought to
subsist. The emperor's advocate, who was of counsel against the
legatees, pretended that the said legacies were escheated, that is,
of no effect for the legatees, and that they did belong to the ex-
chequer, according to the law which was then in being;‘ and he
quoted the rule, that, for want of a testamentary heir, all the dispo-


© ZL. 34, C. de donat. ; —1. 36, in f. eod. ; — Nov. 162, c. 1, § 2. According to our usage
in France, every donation that is not enrolled is entirely null. See the fifteenth article of
the third section of Donations.

f V7.1. un. § 1, ef seg. C. de cadue. toll.


TTT. I. BEC. V.} TESTAMENTS. 337


sitions of the testament were null, Non potest ullum testamentum
valere quod hearedem non habet. But the emperor, who, knowing
this rule, had said before of himself that these legacies could not
be valid, having ordered the partie and their advocates to with-
draw, that he might reflect at more leisure upon the matter, made
them be called in again, and told them that it was just that the
said legacies should be confirmed But if it is equitable to make
the legacies subsist in a case where the testator seemed to annul
his testament by blotting out the names of his executors, there is
much more reason to confirm the legacies of a testament, in which
the testator has made no manner of change or alteration, and
where nothing has happened but the unjust caprice of the testa-
mentary heir, who, notwithstanding he may, without any injury to
himself, enter heir with the benefit of an inventory, takes a course
which can be of no use but to destroy the legacies, without reap-
ing amy advantage thereby himself. It is true, that in the case of
this law it was the cause of the exchequer against the legatees,
and that this emperor preferred the interest of the legatees to
thaf of the exchequer; but he might have given up the right of
the exchequer, without making the legacies to subsist, and might
have left to the heir at law the whole inheritance. Thus, the prin-
ciple of equity, which was the foundation of the emperor’s decis-
ion, might likewise very justly decide in favor of the legatees, in
the case where their right is called in question only by the deed
of the executor, and not by any change of will in the testator; for
in this case the condition of the legatees is more favorable than
in that where the testator, by blotting out the names of his execu-
tors, did himself give a mortal wound to his testament.

3144. It is upon account of all these considerations, that we
have been induced to be of opinion, that this rule of the Roman
law, which annulled the legacies when the testamentary heir did
not enter to the inheritance, is not conformable to our practice ;
which might likewise be founded on a rule of the Roman law,
which says that the legacies belong to the legatees from the
moment of the testator’s death, without waiting till the testa-
mentary heir accepts the inheritance; and that, if he happens to
die before he takes upon him the execution of the will, they trans-
mit their right to their legacies to their heirs® It would seem to


© L. 3, D. de his quae in test. del. ind. vel inscrib.
» See the first article of the ninth section of Legacies.
VOL. II. 29


338 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaAR? U1. BOOK II.


be a consequence natural enough from this principle, that, since
the legatee has acquired his right before the testamentary heir
accepts of the succession, he should not lose it by his non-accep-
tance of it; and especially in our usage, which prefers always
natural equity to niceties. To which may be applied the words
of the same law, which contains this decision of the Emperor An-
toninus which we have just now explained: In re dubia benig-
niorem interpretationem sequi non mtnus justius est, quam tutius ;
that is to say, that in doubtful cases the safest and best way is to
follow that which is most equitable.

3145. We must in the last place observe concerning the va-
lidity of the legacies in the cases where the testamentary heir
renounces the inheritance, that by the first novel of Justinian,
chap. 1, if any one of the heirs or executors, being charged with
legacies, did delay to acquit them for a whole year, he was de-
prived of his right to the inheritance, which event to the heiy or ex-
ecutor substituted in his place, if there was any; and in default of
him to his coexecutor, and in default of executors, or testamentary
heirs, to the heirs at law; but still with the charge of acquitting
the legacies. And if there was neither substitute nor coexec-
utor, or they would not accept the inheritance, and the person
whose right it was to succeed in case there had been no testament
had likesvise refused, then the goods went to the legatees. It
would seem to be very conformable to the same spirit which
moved the lawgivers to take such a multitude of precautions for
having the legacies acquitted, that they should not be annulled in
the case where the testamentary heir renounces the inheritance,
no more than in the case of this novel, where the heirs who are
called in default of the executor that delays to acquit the legacies
do renounce likewise, and where the law uses all possible means
to prevent the legacies from perishing.


XX.


3146. The Incapacity happened to the Testator annuls all the
Dispositions of the Testament. — When the testament is annulled
by reason of a change in the state of the testator, which has put
him under an incapacity of having heirs or executors, as has been
said in the eleventh article, this testament will not only be null as
to the institution of the heir or executor, the testator not being
capable of having any, but likewise as to all the other dispositions


TIT. I. 8EC. V.} TESTAMENTS, 339


of the testament, even the most favorable ; for his incapacity ren-
ders them all null.*


XXL


3147. The Testator may annul his Testament by tearing or
razing tt. — If the testator tears the original of his testament, or if
he razes or crosses the subscriptions, or by any other means puts
his testament into such a condition, by rasures or dashes, that it
appears that his intention was to annul it; it will remain null,
although there has heen no other testament made.>


XXIL


3148. The Blots and Dashes made by Chance, or against the Will
of the Testator, do not annul the Testament. — If the testament
had been torn or blotted out by some chance, or some impru-
dence, or out of malice, contrary to the intention of the testator,
and the truth of the said fact appeared to be well proved; it
would nevertheless have its effect, if what remained entire of the
testament should sufficiently explain the dispositions of the testa-
tor® But if there was any clause defaced in such a manner that
it is not possible to read so much of it as would be necessary to
make it to be understood, the impossibility of knowing justly
what the testator had written or caused to be written therein
would hinder the execution of it.


XXIII.


3149. The Additions made to explain the Testament do not an-
nul 4. — If after the testament is entirely written and signed, and
the witnesses are withdrawn, the testator had a mind to make
some change in it, he could not do it but by a new disposition
made according to form : but if, without an intention to alter any


* L. 6, § 5, D. de inj. rupt. irr. fact. test. See the eleventh article.

> ZL. 22, § 3, D. qui testam. fac. poss.; —1. 30, C. de testam.

© L. 80, C. de testam.; —1. 1, D. de his qui in testam. del. ; —d. |. § 1.

“ D.1.1,§ 2;—d.1.1, $8. ° If the notaries or witnesses knew the contents of the place
that is defaced contrary to the intention of the testator, and the circumstances should ren-
der favorable the proof that their declaration might make, it seems reasonable that in
this case their testimony should be received ; which would be conformable to this last
text, where it is said that that which is defaced without any design of the testator, and
which cannot be read, ought to be executed. For it cannot be executed unless it be
known; and unless it can be read, it cannot be known but by the declaration of the no-
tary and witnesses who may know it. And this proof wonld have nothing in it contrary
to the ordinances and our usage.


340 THE CIVIL Law. [PART ll. BOOK I.


thing material in the will, he had a mind only to add some words
to explain a dark and equivocal expression; as if, having be-
queathed a set of horses, having more than one set; or a suit of
hangings, without naming which suit, he having many; or hav-
ing left a legacy to a person whom he had not described clearly
enough ; he should explain, either in the margin, or at the bottom
of the testament, what set of harses or what suit of hangings he
meant to give, or should mark more precisely the qualities that
may distinguish this legatee, additions of this kind, or others of
the like nature, would not annul the testament: for they would
make no alteration in the will of the testator, and would not con-
tain any new bequest; but would only explain some obscurity in
those which he had already made, and which without this explica-
tion would have raised after his death difficulties how to judge, by
interpretations and reflections on the circumstances, what had
been his intention.®


XXIV.

3150. We ought to judge of Rasures and Additions according to
the Oirewmstances. — In the questions which concern the regard we
ought to have to rasures, dashes, additions, or other changes which
may happen in a testament, and wherein we are to judge of the
effect they ought to have, we must distinguish between what was
done at the time of making the testament, and was approved of
in presence of the notary and witnesses, and what was done after-
wards, after that the testament was perfected. In the first case,
whatever is approved of in the presence of the notary and wit-
nesses makes a part of the testament. And, in the second case,
we ought to distinguish what has been done after making the tes-
tament, by the testator himself, whether it were to explain any
thing in the testament, as in the cases of the foregoing article, or
through inadvertency, or with a design to annul the testament by
rasures that might have this effect, or with other views, from that
which is done by other persons, either without any design, or out
of malice, or to forge something into the will. And it is by these
several views, and the foregoing rules, that we are to judge, ac-
cording to the circumstances, what ought to be the effect of these
changes.‘


© LT. 21, § 1, D. qui testam. fac. poss.
¢ ZL. 12, C. de testam.


TIT. I. sac. V.] TESTAMENTS. o41


XXV.

3151. A Testament made by Force is Null. — Seeing the testa-
ment ought to contain only the will of the testator, which ought
to be free; if it were proved that a testator had been obliged by
some violence, or other unlawful way, to make a testament, or
other dispositions in view of death, not only would they be null,
but the author of this attempt would be punished for it, as for a
crime, according to the quality and circumstances of the facts


REMARKS ON THE PrREcEDING ARTICLE.


3152. We must not confound with the unlawfal ways spoken
of in this article certain ways which a great many persons make
use of to engage the testator to make his will in their favor, such
as services, good offices, caresses, flatteries, presents, the interpo-
sitions of persons who cultivate for them the good will of the tes-
tator, and engage him to make some bequest in their favor: for
although these kinds of ways may be inconsistent either with de-
cency or good conscience, or even contrary to both, yet the laws
of men have not inflicted any penalties on those who practise
them. And when these sorts of impressions have had the success
to engage the testator to make voluntarily the dispositions he was
entreated to do, yet they become his will; and the motive of the
ways which have engaged him thereto does not render them null;
since it suffices that he has made them voluntarily and freely.
Thus, this commonplace of all those who, complaining of the dispo-
sitions of a testament, say that it was put upon the testator against
his will, is only an uncertain and fruitless argument, unless it be
founded upon circumstances ofsome unlawful way ; and if the
testament has not been really and truly suggested, in such a man-
ner that the testator himself had not explained his own inten-
tions; but that, for example, persons taking advantage of the
weakness of a sick man at his last gasp, had contrived a testament
which they presented to him, and, after having read it over to him,
asked him whether he was not willing to approve all the clauses
of it, and he had answered, Yes; this would be a suggestion really
and truly unlawful, and which, being proved, would annul dispo-
sitions made after this manner.”


£1, C. si quis aliq. test. prohib. vel coeg. See the tenth article of the third section of
Heirs and Executors in :
* See the twenty-seventh article of this section, and the eighth article of the eleventh
section of Testaments.

99 *


342 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK III.


XXVI.

3153. The Testament is Null with Respect to him who forcibly
hinders the Revoking of tt.— We ought to reckon among the
number of dispositions that ought to be annulled, that which a
testator, being desirous to revoke, had been hindered from doing it
by violence, or some other unlawful way, on the part of those who
were to reap advantage from the said dispositions: for with re-
spect to them, they, by rendering themselves upworthy of the said
dispositions, would render them null, according to the rule that
has been explained in its place.


XXVIL


3154. The Dispositions procured by some Good Office or Service
are not Null.— We must not count among the unlawful ways
which may annul a testament, the civilities, the good offices, the
services, which one relation may render to another, a friend to his
friend, a wife to her husband, or a husband to his wife, in order to
deserve, by that means, some kindness, or to prevent the making of
dispositions to their prejudice, which might be the effect of some
bad impression made upon the testator by false reports, or other
causes, and which they might be desirous to remove, and to in-
duce the testator to have more favorable thoughts of them by these
kinds of good offices.!


SECTION VI.


=
OF THE RULES OF INTERPRETING OBSCURITIES, AMBIGUITIES, AND
OTHER DEFECTS OF EXPRESSION IN TESTAMENTS.


3155. Havine explained the nature and forms of testaments,
and the several causes which may annul them, it is proper, in the
next place, to explain the rules that are necessary to give to testa-
ments that do subsist their just effect, by the interpretation of the
clauses which may give occasion to any difficulty or doubt, either
as to what may concern the institution of the heir or executor, or
the other dispositions.

3156. The difficulties which may demand some interpretation


h See the tenth article of the third section of Testaments.
iT. ult. D. si quis alig. test. prohib. vel coeg.; —I1. ult. C. cod. See the remark on the
twenty-fifth article.


TIT. I. SEC. vI.] TESTAMENTS, 343


in testaments are of two sorts. One is of those which arise from
some obscurity, from some ambiguity, or some other defect of ex-
pression ; and the other is of those which may proceed from some-
thing else than a defect of expression, and which render it neces-
sary to find out the intention of the testator by some other ways
than by the knowledge of the sense of the words. The difficul-
ties of the first kind shall be the subject-matter of this section;
and those of the second shall be explained in the following section.

3157. We may apply to these two sorts of difficulties some of
the rules which relate to the interpretation of covenants, and like-
wise some of those which concern the interpretation of laws.
And it will be easy to discover which of those rules may be ap-
plied here by the bare reading of the second section of Covenants,
and of the second section of the Rules of Law. All the rules ex-
plained in this and the following section are to be understood, not
only of testaments, but of all dispositions made in prospect of
death, although there is mention made only of testaments.


Art. L


3158. Three Sorts of Expressions. — There are three sorts of
expressions to be distinguished in testaments. The first is of those
that are perfectly clear; the second, of those that are so obscure
that it is impossible to give them any meaning; and the third is
of those in which there is some obscurity, some ambiguity, or
some other defect, that may render the sense of them uncertain.
And each of these kinds of expressions hath its proper rules,
which shall be explained in this section“ \


TL


3159. — First Sort of Expressions, those that are Clear.— The .
expressions which are perfectly clear do not admit of any interpre-
tation to make their sense known, since their clearness makes it
evident enough. And if the disposition of the testator appears to
be clearly and distinctly explained thereby, we ought to keep to
the sense that appears by the expression.°


IIL
3160. Second Sort of Expressions, those that have no Meaning
* See the following articles.


b 2.95, § 1, D. de leg. 3;—1. 8, inf. C. de lib. prater. vel exhared. Seo the fifteenth ar-
ticle, and the last article.


344 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOK HL


at all.— The expressions which cannot have any meaning are re-
jected as if they had not been written, and do not hinder the
others from having their effect.°


IV.


3161. Third Sort of Expressions, those which are Obscure.—
The expressions in which there is some obscurity, some ambi-
guity, some double meaning, or other defect, which may render
their sense uncertain, ought to be interpreted by the rales which
follow.?


V.


3162. The First Rule of the Interpretation of Testaments, the

Will of the Testator.— Since the law permits testators to dispose
of their goods by a testament, it follows that the will of the testa-
tor holds therein the place of a law.® Thus, the first rule of all in-
terpretation of testaments is, that the difficulties in them ought to
be explained by the said will of the testator, as far as it can be
known from the whole tenor of the testament, and the other
proofs that may be had of it, and that it is just and reasonable,
and has nothing contrary to law or good manners! And it is to
this first rule that all the others which concern the interpretation
of testaments are reduced ;£ as will appear throughout the rest of
this section, and in the following.


VL


3163. The Uncertainty of the Expression ts explained by the In-
tention of the Testator.— If there is in a testament any ambiguity,
o1 other defect of expression, which may have a meaning different
from the will of the testator, which is otherwise well known, we
ought to prefer the intention of the testator to that other meaning.


© ZL. 2, D. de his que pro non script.

4 See the articles which follow.

* See the first and seventh articles of the first section.

€ ZL. 1, D. qui test. fac. poss. ; —1. 15, D. de condit. instit.

& L.5, D. de necess. serv. hered. instit. There is this difference between covensnts and tes-
taments, as to the manner of interpreting them; that in covenants we must consider dif-
ferently either the common will of those who treat together, or the bare will of one of the
two, without regard to the will of the other, according to the principles which have been
explained in the second section of covenants. But in testaments, where the testator alane
explains his will, that will alone is always the only rule. See the texts cited on the sev-
enth article of the first section.


TIT. I. SBC. V3.) TESTAMENTS. 945


Thus, for example, if he who had a mind to institute an heir or
executor contents himself with naming him by his surname, with-
out adding either his quality, or other circumstances which may
distinguish him from other persons that have the same name, it is
by the ties of friendship or relation that the testator may have had
with one of the two or more of the same name, that we are to
judge which of them he intended to name for his heir or executor.
‘Thus, for another example, if the testator had erred in the name
of his executor, calling him James instead of John, and there
were another person of the same name and surname which the tes-
tator had made use of, but to whom the qualities which he had
considered in the choice of his executor could not agree; the same
circumstances of friendship, kindred, or others, which might serve
to distinguish the person whom the testator had in his mind for
his executor, would make him to be preferred to the person who
was named only by mistake, contrary to the intention of the said
testator. And it would be the same thing in a mistake of the like
nature concerning any of the legatees.®


VIL


3164. A False Description does no Prejudice to a Bequest that ts
otherwise sufficiently Clear.—If the testator, having sufficiently
explained himself, either as to the person of his executor or of a
legatee, or as to the thing bequeathed, had added, the better to
specify either the person or the things, some quality or other mark
which should appear to be false; as if, having named the executor or
legatee, he had added these words, who is son of such a one, or of
such a country; or that, having devised some land or tenement, de-
scribed by its name or by ita,situation, or otherwise, he had added,
that he had bought the said land or tenement of such a person; all
these additions, although they should be found to be false, would
make no alteration in the dispositions, which otherwise are clear
enough. For if the persons or things are sufficiently described by
the first expression, what is added to describe them more plainly,
being superfluous, will only be a mistake which can do no prej-
udice.!


» § 99, Instit. de legat. ;— 1. 4, C. de testam. ; —1. 17, § 1, D. de condit. e demonstr. See
the twenty-sixth article of the second section.

' 2D. 75, § 1, D. de leg. 1;—I. 76, § 3, D. de leg. 2; —1. 48, § ult. D. de heered. instit. ; —
§ 30, Inst. de legat.;—i. 17, D. de condit. et demonstr.;—1. 10, D. de aur. arg. See the
fifth article, and the eleventh article of the eighth section.


346 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART U. BOOK IIL


VIIL

3165. The Obscurities and Ambiguities are explained by the Cir-
cumstances. — If there are in a testament any expressions which
are not determined to a certain meaning by the natural significa-
tion of the words, and that there is in them some obscurity, some
ambiguity, or other defect, which makes it uncertain what it was
the testator had a mind to express; these sorts of expressions will
be interpreted by the proofs that may be gathered of his will from
the different circumstances that may serve to that end, and from
discerning the effect of these circumstances by the use of the rules
that follow,


IX.


3166. Interpretation of a Legacy that has Relation to two Things,
and must be fixed to one.—If the testator express himself in
a legacy in such a manner that his expression seems to have re-
lation to two things, one of which alone he has in view, and he
has not sufficiently determined which of the two he has a mind to
bequeath, we shall judge of his intention by the circumstances
which may give any light thereto. Thus, for example, if a testa-
tor, who had two pictures, one of a St. John by Raphael, the other
of a battle by Rubens, having only these two pieces of the said
two painters, had bequeathed his battle of Raphael, the expression
of the name of the painter would mark the St. John, and that of
the history of the picture would point out the battle. Thus, this
expression would have some relation to both the pictures; and it
would seem that the legatee might demand a picture of Ra-
phael’s. But because the history of the picture of the battle would
denote it more sensibly than the mame of Raphael would do
that of the St. John, and these pictures would be more distin-
guished by their subjects, which are so different, than by the dif-
ferent names and merits of the painters, the legatee would have
the battle, although it were of another hand than of Raphael.


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.
3167. If we suppose, for another example, that a testator, who


had a black Spanish horse and a white Barbary horse, had be-
queathed his white Spanish horse, would the legatee have the


1 E. 24, D. de red. dub.; —1.8, D. eod. See the following articles.
@ 1, penult. D. de reb. dub.


TIT. I. SEC. VI.] TESTAMENTS. 347


Spanish horse or the barb? The kind would denote the Spanish
horse, and the color the barb; which might be a foundation for
two opposite interpretations. For if the testator was ignorant of
the difference between a barb and a Spanish horse, it might be
presumed that it was the barb which he had bequeathed, having
distinguished him by the color, which he could not but know.
But if we suppose that the testator knew perfectly well the differ-
ence between a Spanish horse and a barb, will not his making
mention of the Spanish horse induce us to think that he did not
err in the kind, and that he had really a mind to give a Spanish
horse ; and that thus the error being only in the color, and not in
the kind, it would be a mistake either of the person who wrote the
testament, or of the testator himself, who, by having added the
color, had rendered his expression uncertain? . Or will it be said,
that, the color making a greater distinction than the kind, the tes-
tator hath bequeathed the barb? Or, lastly, will one choose rather
to decide the doubt in favor of the executor, and give him his
choice, by the rule explained in the sixth and following articles of
the seventh section; or in favor of the legatee, and give him the
choice, pursuant to the rule explained in the tenth and following
articles of the same section? Which would depend on the cir-
cumstances which might make the presumption to be in favor of
the legatee ; for if the circumstances did not decide it for him,
and if the question were in an equal balance, and really doubtful,
it would be the heir or executor that ought to have the choice.


X.


3168. A Mistake in the Name of the Thing bequeathed does no
Harm to the Legacy.— If he who has a mind to devise some land
or tenement errs in the name, whether it be through forgetfulness,
or because he had a design to change the name thereof, or through
some mistake, and gives to the said land or tenement the name of
some other, but so as that this mistake appears otherwise by the
circumstances, and that his will be sufficiently known, the legacy
shall have its effect for the land or tenement which he had a mind
to give, although he has mistaken its true name.”


XL


3169. The Words which are necessary to make the Sense perfect,
may be supplied. — If it happens that through some forgetfulness or


® L. 4, D. de legat. 1.


348 TBE CIVIL LAW. [PAR® II. BOOK IIL


mistake, whether it be of the testator himself, if he writes his own
testament, or of the person whom he employs to write it, there are
wanting in some expressions necessary words, so that it cannot
have any meaning without adding them, and that by such addi-
tion the sense is perfect, this omission will be supplied by suppos-
ing the words that are wanting to be there inserted. Thus, for in-
stance, if a testator had said, J insttiute such a one, without adding
the word heir or executor, it would be supplied. Thus, in a leg-
acy, where it should be said only, to such @ one the sum of so much,
it would be reasonable to suppose the words, I give and bequeath.
Thus, in all sorts of imperfect expressions, where one may judge
by the expression itself, or by the sequel of the testament, what
are the words omitted, which would naturally make up the sense
which the testator had in his mind, it would be just to supply
them.°


XII.


3170. Example of a Conjecture for discovering the Uncertain In-
tention of the Testator.-— If the expression is defective, not because
of the omission of a word that is necessary to be supplied for
making the sense perfect, as in the case of the foregoing article,
but because of some uncertainty, or obscurity, that could not be
cleared up by any other expression in the testament; and the ex-
planation thereof should depend on the knowledge of the inten-
tion of the testator, which he had not sufficiently made known; it
would be necessary in this case to have recourse to the other
proofs or presumptions which might discover the said intention.
Thus, for example, if a testator had left to one person a yearly
pension, without explaining the sum, as it would be certain, on
one side, that this legacy ought to subsist, and uncertain, on the
other, to what sum the testator had a mind to fix it, it would be
necessary to regulate this pension in the manner that it might be
reasonable to suppose the testator would regulate it himself, if he
were alive. Which would depend on the circumstances of the
quality of the testator, and largeness of his estate; on the quality
of the legatee, and greatness of his wants; on the quality of the
heirs or executors, whether they were descendants or ascendants to
the testator, or collateral relations, or nothing of kin to him; and
if they were children, in what number they were. But if this tes-


° L. 67, § 9, D. de legat. 2; —l. 10, C. de fideicom. ; —1. 1, § penult. D. de hared. instit.;
— 1.7, C. de test. See the following articles.


TIT. L. SEC. VI.] TESTAMENTS. 349


tator was wont to give every year to the said legatee something
for his maintenance, or alimony, the legacy might be regulated on
the same foot with what the testator was wont to give him in his
lifetime.”


XIIL


3171. Another Example of the Interpretation of a Defective Ex-
pression.— We may add, for another example of a defective ex-
pression, which it would be necessary to interpret by the intention
of the testator, a legacy left in these terms: I give and bequeath
unto such a one the sum of so much until she ts married, without
mentioning that this sum should be paid her every year to the
time of her marriage; which would give rise to the question,
whether it would not be only a legacy of this sum to be paid once
for all, or whether it would be an annual legacy to the time of the
marriage. And it is this last sense that these words ought to
have, wntil she is married; for they ought to have their meaning
and their effect, and they can have no other: so that these last
words prove that the testator, who has made use of this expression,
had a mind that this sum should be paid every year, until the
marriage of this legatee, unless there were particular circum-
stances in the case, and such as might require that another inter-
pretation should be given to the words. @


XIV.


3172. The Legacy of a House takes in the Garden, which ts a
Part of it.— If a testator who had a house buys a garden that is
adjoining to it, and afterwards devises the said house, without
making mention of the garden, it will be judged by the circum-
stances whether the garden ought to be comprehended under the
legacy, or whether it ought not: for if the testator had bought this
garden to join it to another house than that which he had devised
by his will, or to build a separate house upon it, or for any other
use than that of accommodating the house devised, it might not
be comprehended in the legacy. But if the testator had bought
this garden only for the conveniency of the said house, and to
make it more healthy and more agreeable, and having made
a passage from the house to the garden, he had looked upon it as


? LZ. 14, D. de ann. leg. See the twelfth article of the fifth section of Legacies.
4 Z. 17, D. de ann. leg.
VOL. II. 30


’
350 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK M1.


one of its dependencies, the legatee would have the garden, to-
gether with the house.” For the testator would have made of
these two distinct things only one messuage contained under the
name of the house devised. And it is likewise the usual custom
to understand by a house, not barely that which is designed for
lodging, but likewise the courts, the stables, the garden, and the
other dependencies and conveniencies that happen to be joined
to it.’


XV.


3173. That which is evident from the Terms ts not interpreted.
— If a testator, being ignorant of the true use of the words, had
left a legacy in terms which he believed did comprehend certain
things that he had a mind to bequeath, but which the natural
meaning of the said terms would not comprehend, and there
was nothing in the sequel of his testament that discovered this
intention, but the legatee pretended only to prove that the tes-
tator understood the said words in the sense that he had a mind to
give to his legacy, such a proof would not be received for giving
to the expression of a testament another meaning than that which
the words bear, being taken in the sense they would have in the
common acceptation of them. Thus, for instance, if a testator de-
signing to give all his movables to a legatee, had made use of the
word wfensils, thinking that the said word comprehended them all,
this legacy would be restrained to the movables that are commonly
comprehended under this name. For although it is true that the
intention ought to be preferred to the expression, yet that is only
when the sequel of the testament discovers clearly the said inten-
tion; but not in cases where there is no doubt to be made of the
meaning of the expression: for in that case the only presumption
that can be admitted is, that the testator has said what he had a
mind to say, and that he had no mind to say what he has not said


XVI.


3174. The Word Children is understood only of those that are
lawfully begotten.— It follows from the rule explained in the


' L.9, § 6, D. de leg.3. See the fifth article, and the eighth article of the fourth section
of Legacies.

* L.7,§ 2, D. de suppellect. leg. See the following article.

t ZL. 69, D. de leg. 3;-—1. 4, D. de leg. 1;-——1. 7, § 2, D. de suppell. leg.; —d.§ in f- Seo
the second article.


TIT. I. SEO. VI. TESTAMENTS. 351


preceding article, that the expressions ought to be taken in the
sense which common usage gives to the words.". Which is not to
be always understood of the general and indefinite sense that all
words may have; but of the sense which has relation to the sub-
ject-matter of the expression of the testator; and to the intention
which he may have had. Thus, for example, the word son in-
definitely and in general comprehends a bastard and a son lawfully
begotten; but if a testator who had children lawfully begotten,
having likewise a bastard, had made some dispositions in which
he had named his children, or his sons without distinction, either
instituting them his executors, or leaving them some legacy; or
if a testator who had no children of his own had named for his
executors the children of another person, or had given them any
legacy, this naming of sons, or children, which may be applied to
bastards, would not comprehend them.* For besides that we
ought not to presume that this was the intention of the said tes-
tators, the names-of sons and children are not applied to bastards
in the indefinite expressions, but when they are certainly compre-
hended under the subject-matter of the expression. And this case
being excepted, the indefinite signification of the words sons and
children do not agree to them, except when the words are qualified
with the addition of bastards to distinguish them.


XVIL


3175. The Regard that ought to be had to the Destination of the
Testator. — If in the expression of things bequeathed either to the
heirs or executors, or to the legatees, there were any uncertainty
as to what ought to be comprehended under it, and what ought to
be excepted from it, it would be necessary to regulate the extent,
and to fix the bounds thereof, according as we might be able to
judge what the testator himself comprehended under it, if his in-
tention appeared either by some destination that he had made of
the things bequeathed, or by some other way. Thus, for example,
if a merchant who carried on different commerces in several prov-
inces, and had divers warehouses for selling lis goods, as at Rouen
and Bourdeaux, and in other towns, had left in his testament to
one of his heirs or executors, or to a legatee, all the stock of his
trade at Rouen, and to another all the stock of his trade at Bour-


* L. 7,4 2, D. de suppell. leg.
* Filiam eum definimus qui ex viro et uxore ejus nascitur. L.6, D. de statu hom. Justi
liberi. ZL. 5, in f. D. de in jus voc.


aun TBE CIVIL LAW. {PART 11. BOOK IIT.


deaux, and there should happen to be at Bourdeaux at the time
of his death merchandise which he had bought for Rouen, where
he designed to sell it; the said goods would belong to him who
was to have the stock of the trade at Rouen: for although the
goods, being at Bourdeaux at the time of the testator’s death,
might seem to be part of the stock at Bourdeaux, yet the testa-
tor, by having destined them for the stock of his trade at Rouen,
has made them part of that stock, and they would belong to him
who ought to have that stock. Thus, in the same manner, if there
were other goods bought at Rouen to be transported to Boor-
deaux, they would belong to him who was to have that stock at
Bourdeaux. And if, the goods not being as yet bought, the money
designed for buying them were sent, and were still extant, either
in specie or bills of exchange, this money, wherever it were, being
part of the stock of the trade of that place where the goods were
designed to be sold, would belong to the executor or legatee who
ought to have the said goods’


XVIII


3176. Other Examples of the same Rule.— We may give, for
another example of the rule explained in the foregoing article, the
case where a testator having devised a country-house, with the
movables, horses, and cattle which he used to keep there, it should
happen that at the time of the testator’s death there should be a
set of horses which he commonly used in town, at the said coun-
try-house, whether it was because he died suddenly, or that they
had been sent thither to be put out to grass for some time, or for
some other reason; for by this rule these horses would not be
comprehended in the said legacy, which ought to be understood
only of the cattle and other things destined to be always in the
said place. And for the same reason this legacy would include
the plough-horses designed for the service of the said house, which
should happen to be elsewhere at the time of the testator’s death ;
for the different destinations of the testator would explain his in-
tention, and show what should be reckoned to belong to the said
house, and what not. And the chance which in this case, as in
that of the foregoing article, makes that a thing destined for one
place happens to be in another, does not change its destination.


Y L. 35; d.l. ¢ 3, in princip. et in f. et § penult. et ult. D. de hosed. inst. ;—d. 1. 35, § 3,
D. de heered. instit. See the following article.
= L. 44, D. de legat. 8; —1. 67, eod. ; — 1. 86, in f. D. de legat. 8.


TIT. 2 MEG. VEL] TEBTAMEN TB. 853


Thus, for another example of the same rule explained in the pre-
- ceding article, if a testator, having bought by one and the same
contract, and for one and the same price, two estates of different
names, but which joined to one another, and having confounded
the two together in his possession, by letting them both to farm by
the same lease, under one of the two names only, or by inserting
them in the same manner in his book or memorandum of his
affairs, makes afterwards a devise in which he names only one
estate by the same name under which he had confounded the two,
declaring that he devises it such as he had purchased it, and with-
out making any reserve or mention of the other estate; this de-
vise under these circumstances will comprehend both the estates,
which it would not do if there were only the bare circumstance
of the purchasing both the one and the other by one and the same
contract, and for one and the same price.*


XIX.


3177. Divers Views for discovering the Intention of the Testator.
— It follows from the rules explained in the foregoing articles, that,
in all the cases where the question is how to interpret the expres-
sions of a testator, it is by the proofs or presumptions which may
discover his intention that we are to judge of them; and this de-
pends on the different circumstances that may have any relation
to the difficulty that is to be adjusted. Thus, we consider the
qualities of the persons, and those of the things, if those qualities
can be of any use to discover the said intention. Thus, we dis-
tinguish the several usages of the places, either for the sense of the
words, or for the other difficulties which the said usages may help
to explain, and especially the particular usages of the testators in
the economy and management of their affairs; and we take what
we can have from their memorandums and journals of their affairs,
and other such like circumstances.® But the regard that is usually
had to all these views is of no use, unless it be directed by two
other general views, which ought to be the first in all interpreta-
tions. One is, not to expose an expression that is clear in itself to


* Z.91,§ 3, D. de legat.3. We have put down in the article on the case of this last
text, that the two estates were adjoining to one another ; for if they were situated in dif-
ferent places, one single name could not agree both to the one and the other, and their
separation would make two different estates, which could not be comprehended ander one
proper name.

> L. 50, § ult. D. de legat. 1;—1. 18, § 3, in f. D. de instruc. vel instr. legut.

30°


354 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK 11.


interpretations contrary to the natural sense;° and the other is,
not to prefer to reasonable presumptions of the intention of the
testator a sense altogether opposite, under pretext of adhering
slavishly to the literal sense of an expression, which the sequel of
the testament, and the circumstances, would oblige us to ander
stand otherwise, in order to reconcile it with the said intention‘
Thus, in general it depends on the prudence of the judge, to ex-
amine whether an expression ought to be taken precisely in the
literal sense, or if it is necessary, or equitable, to interpret it: and
he ought to be careful in applying the proper rules by which it is
to be interpreted.


SECTION VII.


OF THE RULES FOR INTERPRETING THE OTHER SORTS OF DIFFI-
CULTIES BESIDES THOSE OF THE EXPRESSIONS.


3178. Besipes the difficulties that may arise from the defects of
the expressions in testaments, there are others which have other
causes, and which cannot be prevented by dispositions expressed
in the clearest terms. Some of them proceed from the change
that is made by unforeseen accidents, and which oblige us to con-
jecture, by presumptions which may be grounded on the known
intentions of the testator, what he himself would have ordered, if
he had foreseen these accidents. Others are occasioned by some
error the testator was under in a matter of fact that was unknown
to him, and where it appears clearly enough by his dispositions
what he would have ordered if the truth which he was ignorant of
had been known to him. And others have other causes altogether
different. Although it is very difficult, and even impossible, for
those who begin the study of the law to comprehend these several


© L. 25, § 1, D. de legat.8. See the second and fifteenth articles.

4 TZ. 69, § 1, D. de legat. 8.

° L. 17, C.de fideicomm. If, besides the ways explained in this article for discovering
the intention of the testator, there should be found other testaments, although revoked,
we might explain by the former testamonts that which is obscure and uncertain in the
testament which subsists, if the difficulty happens to be more clearly explained in any of
the other testaments, provided that this is done without making valid any part of the said
testament which has been revoked.

As to the use of the rule explained in this article, we must understand it in the sense
which results from all the rules that have been explained in the foregoing articles of this
section, for it has relation tothem. See the last article of the following section.


TIT. 1. 8EC. Vil.} . TESTANENTS. 355


kinds of difficulties without some examples, yet it is not proper to
give any here, because each sort of difficulty is to be explained in
its proper place in this section; and we shall there set down the
examples that are necessary for understanding them aright. But
we have been obliged to mark in general these kinds of difficulties,
and to give here this idea of them, in order to show the difference
which distinguishes them from the difficulties which have been the
subject-matter of the foregoing section.

3179. It is necessary to remember here the last remark which
has been made in the preamble of the foregoing section, concern-
ing the rules of some other titles, which may have some relation
to the interpretation of testaments. We shall not make here, nor
in the sequel of this section, any division or distinction of the
several sorts of cases in which the interpretations that shall be
spoken of here are necessary, in order to reduce the said cases to
certain kinds. For besides that the greatest part of them are
such, that it is not possible to comprehend them under peculiar
ideas that have precise characters to distinguish them from all
the others, and that there are even some of them of which every
one by itself would demand a proper kind; this exactness would
not only be useless, but will produce, under the appearance of
some order, a real confusion; and it is enough that all these cases
are contained under the general idea that the title of this section
gives of them; and that under this title the reader shall have the
rales that are necessary for this matter, and the examples which
show the application of them, and the use that may be made of
them in all the cases that may arise from all sorts of events.


Art. I.

3180. The First Rule of this Interpretation is the Will of the Tes-
tator.— The first rule for the interpretation of the difficulties
which are the subject-matter of this section, as well as of those
which have been explained in the preceding section, is the will of
the testator. And whether this will appears by the dispositions
themselves, or by clear and certain consequences that may be
drawn from them, or even by conjectures only, it is always by the
knowledge that can be had thereof that we are to decide the mat-
ter, by adjusting the difficulty in the manner that we judge the
testator himself would have done it, according to the views and
sentiments which his dispositions show him to have had.*


@ L. 5, C. de necess. serv. leered. instit. See the fifth article of the preceding section.


356 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1%. BOOK III.


Il.

3181. Interpretation by the Esteem which the Testator had for the
Persons. — If the difficulty which makes it necessary to interpret
the testament depends barely on the consideration that the testa-
tor may have had for one of the persons interested in the said in-
terpretation more than for the other, the question will be decided
in favor of that person for whom the testator is judged to have
had the greatest esteem: which will depend either on the partic-
ular proofs that may be had of it from his dispositions, or an the
rules which follow.”


IIL

3182. Interpretation tn Favor of the Heir of Blood against a
Stranger. — Between two heirs or executors whom a testator had
called to his succession ; the one, who was not of his family, by a
former testament, made in due form; and the other, who had right
to succeed to him if he died intestate, and whom he had instituted
by a second testament, in which there was wanting some formal-
ity; the consideration of the heir of blood, or next of kin, would
render his cause so favorable above the other, that, as it has been
explained in another place, the law would give him in this case
the succession,’ contrary to the rule which prefers a former testa-
ment made in due form to a second in which some formality is
wanting; which we repeat here only to show the spirit of the
law, which in doubtful cases favors the heir of blood. From
whence it follows, that in the cases where it is necessary to inter-
pret some disposition of a testator, which concerns some person of
his family, and another no ways related to it, if all other circum-
stances were equal, the tie of kindred would decide the matter, by
the presumption that the testator had had a greater consideration
for his relation than for a stranger.


IV.


3183. Institution of a First Executor preferred toa Second Institu-
tion made in due Form. —- If he who had already made a testament,
hearing afterwards, by a false report, that the executor whom he
had instituted was dead in a foreign country, made a second tes-
tament, in which he had declared that, not being able to have for


b See the articles which follow.
© See the fifth article of the fifth section, where it is explained what are the formalities
which are required in this second testament.


TIT. 1. BEC. Vike} TESTAMENTS. 307


his executor the person whom he had named by his first testament,
he named such a one; and if after the death of the said testator
the executor instituted by the first testament should happen to ap-
pear, he would be preferred to him that had been instituted by the
second, only because of this error. For the expression of the mo-
tive which had induced the testator to name another executor
would be a sufficient reason to convince us that he would not
have done it if he had known the truth. Thus, his expression
showing his error would have the same effect as if he had insti-
tuted this second executor upon this condition, that he should be
executor only in case the first were really dead, and that if the

first executor were alive he should succeed, and exclude the other.4


V.

3184, In the Case of the Preceding Article, the Legacies of the
Second Testament would subsist. — If in the case of the foregoing
article the second testament contained legacies, the first executor
would be bound to acquit them, in the same manner as if he had
been named executor in this second testament.°


ReMARKS .ON THE PrEcEDING ARTICLE.


3185. If the case of the preceding article had happened, and
there were likewise legacies in the first testament different from
those of the second, this first executor, who, as it is said in the
present article, would be obliged to acquit the legacies of this
second testament, would not be bound to pay those of the first:
for although his institution, which was the most essential part of
the first testament, ought to subsist, and it was burdened with the
legacies of the said first testament; yet they would be annulled by
the rule which determines that the second testament annuls the
first. And this executor might likewise say, that it is not by the
validity of this first testament that his institution, which it con-


4 Z. ult. D. de heered. inst. See, as to what is said in this text, that Falsus modus non
solet obesse, that which is said in the twenty-first article.

If in this second testament the testator had not explained the motive that had induced
him to name another executor, the bare error in which he was as to the death of this first
exeentor would not have been a sufficient reason for annulling the institution of the sec-
ond. For although he had had no thought of the death of the first, he might have had
other motives for this change, whether it had been that he had ceased to have the same
consideration for him that he had before, or that the second executor had by his civilities
engaged the testator to make this second disposition, or for other causes. See the follow-
ing article.

* L. ult. in f. D. de haved. inst.


358 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I}. BOOK II.


tains, ought to subsist, but by the effect of the intention of the tes-
tator explained in the second; which marked expressly that he
named another executor besides him, for no other reason but be-
cause, believing him to be dead, he supposed that he could not
succeed to him; which implied the tacit condition, explained in
the preceding article, and the will of the testator, that, if the first
executor were alive, he should succeed to him: but that this tacit
condition, and this will of the testator, which had the effect to an-
nul the institution of the executor in the second testament, and to
confirm that of the first, did noways concern the legacies of this
first testament which the second did not confirm; and that there-
fore the revocation of those legacies in the first testament which
had been made by the second ought to subsist, although the revo-
cation of the institution of the executor of the first testament did
not subsist.

3186. We see by this event a pretty odd effect which deserves
our consideration. It is, that the condition of this second exec-
utor, for whom the testator had a much greater consideration than
for the legatees of the same testament by which he was instituted,
is much more disadvantageous than that of the said legatees;
since they are to have all that the testator had a mind to give
them, and that he who was to have had the whole bulk of the es-
tate will have nothing at all: so that the intention of this testator
happens to be frustrated, in that the condition of the legatees
will be better than that of this executor.

3187. We may make here a last reflection on this difference be-
tween the condition of this executor and that of these legatees, that
it is impossible for human laws to be so exact as to regulate all the
cases that may possibly happen in such a manner as that, by ob-
serving always these laws, whether according to the letter or accord-
ing to the spirit of them, there shall arise no inconvenience from
them ; and that such provision shall be always made for all sorts
of events, that nothing in any one of them shall be contrary to
that which equity may demand; but we see frequently those sorts
of inconveniences which connot be redressed. And there would
be no other remedy for this inconvenience besides the civility of
the first executor, who, considering the condition of him in whose
place he succeeds, and the good will that his benefactor had to-
wards the said person, should be disposed, upon this consideration,
to give him a share of the goods which he takes away from him.
This is what equity and humanity would seem to oblige this first


TIT. I. SEC. Vi1.| TESTAMENTS. 359


executor to do, especially if he stood less in need of the goods of
the succession than the second executor. We know by history
that there have been several good moral heathens, who would not
have failed to do so in the present case; and the spirit of the di-
vine law, the first principles of which were unknown to them, does
inspire much more strongly these sentiments into such persons as
make it the rule of their actions. And it is only by the spirit of
these principles that a full and perfect provision is made for every
thing, and in such a manner that, whatever event happens, there
cannot follow from it any consequences that may deserve the
name of inconveniences.


VL


3188. The Executor is in general more favored than the Legatee.
— If the difficulty which may depend on the consideration of the
persons happens to be between the executor and a legatee, so that
all other considerations happen to be equal, and that, nothing de-
ciding either for one or the other, the doubt is reduced to this single
point, to know which of the two ought to be the most favored, it
will be the executor. For besides that the testator has without
doubt had a greater consideration for him than for the legatee, he
is in the place of a debtor, and the legatee in place of the creditor ;
and in doubtful cases the condition of the debtor is always fa-—
vored.! But if any circumstances render the condition of the leg-
atee more favorable, they will make the preference of the executor
to cease; which cannot be well understood but by examples, such
as these that follow.


VIL


3189. First Example of the Preference of the Executor.— If a
testator, who had two lands or tenements of the same name, but of
different value, had devised one of them without distinguishing it
from the other, naming it only by the name that was common to
both, and without marking in any thing which of the two he had
a mind to devise; the executor in this case would have the choice
of them, and might retain the most precious to himself, and give
that which is of the least value to the legatee. For the question
would be altogether independent of all other considerations be-


€ See the thirteenth and fifteenth articles of the second section of Covenants. See the
articles which follow.


360 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK 122.


sides that of knowing who should have the choice, whether the
executor or the legatee. Thus, in this precise doubt, which would
depend barely upon knowing which of the two the testator had
the greatest consideration for, the rule explained in the preceding
article would decide it in favor of this executors


VIIL


3190. Second Example.—If a testator, having two or more
silver basins of different values, had bequeathed one of them
without specifying which, the executor might give only that of the
least value; and by that he will have satisfied the legacy. And it
would be the same thing if a testator, having two horses of the
same name, as two coursers, or called by other proper names, had
bequeathed a horse, calling him by his name.


TX.


3191. Third Example.— If it happened that of one and the
same testament there were two originals, which the testator had
made at the same time, one to be deposited either in the hands of
a notary public or some other person, and the other to be kept by
himself; or that there were two engrossed copies of one and the
same testament, the minutes or instructions of which had been
lost by fire or some other accident, and that in one of the copies,
or in one of the originals, the same legacy to one and the same
person was of a lesser sum, and of a greater sum in the other ori-
ginal or copy, and that there appeared no rasure in the writing,
nor any suspicion of alteration or forgery, the legatee could de-
mand only one of the two sums, and that even the least. For this
accident making it impossible to know the intention of the testa-
tor, thereby to decide which of the two sums the legatee might
demand, and there being nothing to determine that the legatee
ought to have the choice, the executor would have it, and would
be bound only to give the lesser sum.!


X.


3192. First Example where the Legatee is favered.— We must
not extend the rule explained in the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth


& L. 39, § 6, D. de legat. 1;—1. 17, § 1, cod. ; —1. 82, § 1, eod. ' See the seventh section
of the title of Legacies.

h L. 87, § 1, D. de legat. 1;—L 32, § 1, eod.; —v. 1.4, D. de trit. vin. vel ol. leg. Seo
the seventh section of the title of Legacies.

' TL. 47, D. de leg. 2. Soe the seventeenth article of the first section.


TIT. I. SEO. VII.] | ‘FESTAMBENTS. o61


articles beyond the cases of the said articles, or other cases of the
like nature ; for if other considerations may require an interpreta-
tion favorable for the legatee, or some other temperament between
his interest and that of the executor, the disposition of the tes-
tator might be interpreted by these other considerations accord-
ing to the circumstances. Thus, for example, if.a testator had be-
queathed a horse indefinitely and in general, or a watch, or a suit
of hangings, since in all these things there are qualities altogether
different, good and bad, the legacies of this kind being favors pro-
portioned to the qualities of the testator and of the legatee, and to
the other circumstances which may discover the intention of the
testator, it would be contrary to the good will that the testator
bore towards the legatee, to leave it to the choice of the executor to
give the worst of the said things to the legatee; and it would be
likewise contrary to the good intention which the testator had for
the executor, to give the legatee power to choose the most precious
individual of that kind of things that was bequeathed: which makes
it necessary to regulate a legacy of this kind by a temperament
that fixes between these extremities, equally unjust and opposite to
the intention of the testator, a medium which may not be contrary
either to the interest of the executor, or to the consideration
which the testator had for the legatee. Thus, such a legacy would
be moderated to a reasonable choice between the extremities of
the best and the worst, to give to the legatee either a watch, or a
horse, or a suit of hangings, or any other thing among several of the
same kind, such as might be conformable to his circumstances,
to those of the testator, to the goods of the succession, and to the
other circumstances that might come into consideration for the
regulating of the said temperament; whether it be that there were
many of these sorts of things in the inheritance to choose out of,
or that, there being no such things among the goods of the succes-
sion, the executor were obliged to procure them elsewhere.!


XL


3193. Second Example.— The temperament which has been just
now explained in the preceding article, for regulating these sorts of
indefinite legacies by some medium between the opposite inter-


! 7. 31, D. de legat.1. See the following article. The rule explained in this article
demands reflections that are not set down here, they being reserved fora more proper
place. See the preamble of the seventh section of Legacies, and the first articles of this
seventh section.

VOL. II. 31


362 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I1. BOOK III.


ests of the executor and legatee, is so natural and so reasonable,
that it ought to be used likewise in the case of a legacy, where the
executor is left at liberty to give out of several horses any one he
pleases, or to give any one thing he thinks fit out of many of the
same kind, which may be not only of different prices, but also of
different qualities, good or bad; for this liberty would not extend
so far as to give the executor power to give the worst of them all;
but would leave him only the right to keep the best, and to give
out of the middle sort one which the legatee could not reasonably
refuse.™


XI.


3194. The Third Example.— If a testator had bequeathed a
yearly pension or alimony to a legatee, to engage him to remain
in company with another person that was dear to the said testa-
tor, whether it be that the legacy was conceived in terms that im-
posed that condition, or that it was said that the alimony or pen-
sion should be paid as long as the legatee tarried with the said
person, and that the said person should happen to die before the
legatee, who had lived with him until the time of his death; the
pension or alimony would be continued, unless the expression of
the testator showed clearly that it was his intention that the pen-
sion or alimony should cease after the said death. For besides
the favorableness of a legacy of this kind, which is regularly un-
derstood to be during the whole life, it might be said that this leg-
atee had performed that which the testator had in his view as the
motive of the legacy. And it would be justly presumed even of
the legacy of alimony, to be paid so long as the legatee should live
with the said person, that the intention of the testator was only to
oblige the legatee to continue with him as long as the said person
should uve: :


XIIL


3195. Fourth Example. — If he who had devised a land makes
some addition to it, whether it be that he builds a house upon it,
or that he adds to it some other piece of ground for the use of a
service, or some other conveniency, these and other such like
changes, which may increase either the value or extent of the thing


™ ZL. 100, D. de legat. 1.
_ ® ZB. 20, D. de ann. leg. & fideicomm. ; —1. 18, § 1, D. de alim. vel cib. legat.,—1.1, C. de
legat. See the twelfth article of the fifth section of Legacies.


TIT. I. SEC. VII.] TESTAMENTS. 368


devised, will not have effect to revoke the legacy; but will show,
on the contrary, that the testator had a mind to augment it.
Thus, the expression of the testament, which did not comprehend
this augmentation that is made afterwards, will be interpreted
against the executor. Thus, on the contrary, if the testator had
diminished the thing devised, as if he had alienated a part of the
land devised, or pulled down a building in whole or in part, the
legacy thereof would be diminished in so much.


XIV.

3196. Fifth Example.— If a testator had left a legacy to a
woman in case the first child she should have were a son, and it
happened that she had at one birth a son and a daughter, and that
by some chance it could not be known if the son had been born
before or after the daughter, it would be presumed in favor of the
legatee, that the condition had come to pass.?


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3197. Although this text be in the case of a legacy of liberty
left to a slave, which made this disposition favorable; yet it seems
that the decision ought to be the same in any other legacy that
should depend on such a condition. For it would seem, more-
over, that in the case of this text, although it should be certain
that the son was born the last, yet it might be presumed that the
testator, not foreseeing that the woman should have two children
at one birth, had meant that, if she had a male child at her first
delivery, the legacy should be due. And the literal interpretation,
which would decide that, the son being born the last, the condition
of the legacy had not happened, would appear a nicety opposite
to the sense which might be naturally gathered from the intention
of this testator, who had considered as the first child, not him that
should be the first of two children at one and the same birth, but
a male child that should be born at the woman’s first delivery.
This seems to be the manner in which reason and equity would
interpret the intention of the testator in this doubt, if there should
be any. In re dubia benigniorem interpretationem sequi non minus
justius est, quam tutius. L.3, D. de his que in test. del.


° L. 8, D. de legat. 1;—1. 24, §§ 3 of 4, cod. ; —2 10, D. de legat. 2. See the fourteenth
article of the fifth section. See the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth articles of the fourth
section of Legacies.

P LZ. 10, § 1, D. de red. dub.


304 TBE CIVIL Law. [PART IL BOOK III.


XV.

3198. Sixth Example.— When a testator bequeaths to a ser-
vant, or other person, the sum that shall be necessary to instruct
him in a trade, it does not depend on the executor to limit the
legacy to the trade that this legatee might learn at the cheapest
rate: but it ought to be understood of the trade that will suit best
with the quality, the age, the inclination, and the disposition of
this legatee; unless it be that these circumstances should demand
a trade wherein the apprenticeship would be so very expensive,
that it might be judged by the quality of the testator, and quan-
tity of his estate, that his intention restrained the legacy to an ap-
prenticeship that should cost less.t


XVI.


3199. Example of a Case where the Event changes the Dispos:
tion of the Testator.— We have seen in the ninth article, that it
may happen by some chance that it is not possible to know the
intention of the testator; and it happens likewise by other sorts
of events, that although this intention is perfectly known, and
that we discover clearly all that the testator had in view, the
event, which, instead of the case which he did foresee, produces
another which his disposition did not comprehend, requires that
it be regulated in a manner different from what the testator had
ordered for the case that he did foresee. But here we ought to
take his intention for our rule, and to order in the case that has
happened what we judge the testator himself would have ordered,
considering his intention in the case explained in his testament.
Thus, for example, if a testator had ordered, that if, at the time of
his death, he had one son, he should be his sole heir or executor,
but that, if he had two sons, they should share equally his succes-
sion; that if there were two daughters, they should likewise divide
his inheritance between them in two equal portions; and that if
he had a son and a daughter, the son should have two thirds
of his estate, and the daughter one third; and it happens that
this testator leaves behind him two sons and one daughter, this
unforeseen case ought to be regulated by the proportion that the
testator had settled between the condition of the sons and that of
the daughters, in the case where there should be one son and one
daughter. And since his intention was, that a son should have


@ L. 12, D. de legat. 3.


TIT. 1. SEO. Vil.) TESTAMENTS. S05


twice as much as a daughter, and that the condition of the sons
should be equal, we ought to presume that, in the case of this
event, he would have given according to the same proportion two
fifths to each of his two sons, and one fifth to his daughter. And
it is in this manner that the succession ought to be divided in this
case


XVIL


3200. Another Example of the same Kind. — If a testator, not
having as yet any children, had left his wife big with child, and
had instituted her executrix together with the child that should be
born, giving one third of his estate to the mother if it should be a
son, and the half if it should be a daughter, and the wife was
delivered both of a son and a daughter, the son would have one
half, and the daughter and the mother would share the other half
between them. And by this means the intention of this testator
would be accomplished ; for his will was that the son should have
the double of what the mother had, and that the mother should
have as much as the daughter.’


XVIIL


3201. Another Example of the Interpretation of a Disposition in
a Case unforeseen. — If a testator who had two sons and a grand-
daughter by another son, having substituted his sons one to the
other, in case the first who died should have no issue; and having
substituted his granddaughter to them both, in case both the one
and the other should die without children; it happened that one
of the brothers died, leaving children behind him, and that the
other brother, having outlived his nephews, died without children,
the substitution of the granddaughter would have its effect with
respect to him that died last. For although she was not called to


t T. 8), D. de heared. inst. This manner of interpretation will agree to all the different
combinations of other numbers of sons and daughters which a testator might leave behind
him at his death; and the equity thereof is founded on the proportion which the testator
himself had regulated. And although it is not certain to suppose that a testator will
always observe the same proportion in all the possible combinations of the number of
sons and daughters; and although he might augment or diminish the portions of the sons
and daughters upon another foot, according to the differences of their number, and alter
the said portions, yet we cannot enter into the conjectures of these changes, beceuse they
would have no certain foundation. 8o that thie rule will be always just in the like cases.
See the following article.

5 See the same case explained for another use in the fifth article of the second section
of the Rules of Law. 31°


366 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK III.


the substitution except in case the two brothers should die with-
out children, and that this case had not happened; yet seeing in
these sorts of dispositions it is the intention of the testator which
ought to serve as a rule, we ought to presume that the testator,
who had called his granddaughter to the succession of his two
sons after him who should die last, if they both died without
children, would have much rather directed in the case that has
_ happened, if he had foreseen it, that she should succeed to this
brother who died last. And it would be equally unreasonable
, nd unjust, that she who, by the disposition of the grandfather, was
to have both the portions, if her uncle who died last without chil-
dren had succeeded to the uncle who died first, in case he had left
no children, should be deprived of the portion of her uncle who
died in the last place, to whom she was substituted, as well as to
the other:


XIX.


3202. Another Example in an unforeseen Case. — If a testator
had instituted for his heir or executor the child who should be
born of his daughter, then big with child, and before this testa-
tor had made his will his daughter was already brought to bed
without his knowing any thing thereof, they not happening to
meet together in the same place; this institution of a child to be
born would have its effect for this child, although already born: for
it was the same child on which this testator had a mind to settle
his estate."


XX.


3203. Another Example in another Case unforeseen.— We may
add to the case explained in the preceding article another like to
it, in that the terms in which the testator expresses himself do not
agree with the event, but where his intention does nevertheless


' Z. 57, § 1, D. ad senat. Trebell. We have set down in the case of this article, that the
children of the brother who died first died before their uncle; for if they had survived
their uncle, it might be said, according to the sentiments of one of the most learned inter
preters who has commented on this text, that it would be very hard they should be ex-
cluded from the succession of their uncle by a cousin who was substituted to her uncles
only in case both the one and the other should die without children. V. J. pen. C de
impub. et al. subst.

u Z,. 25,4 1, D. de kb. et post. hored. inst. This example appears to be superfiuous, for
it is not possible it should enter the mind of any one to doubt of the decision. But see-
ing it is consonant to the law, and that it may be of use for the application of this rule to
other cases that are less evident, we have thought fit to add it to the others.


TIT. 1. BEC. Vil.| TESTAMENTS. 367


serve asarule. It is the case where a father who had only chil-
dren under age had substituted one of his relations or friends to
the child that should die the last, not having attained the age of
puberty, that is, fourteen years complete in the male sex, and
twelve in the female; which is done by that kind of substitution
called pupillary, which shall be treated of in its place ;* if it hap-
pened in this case that these two children died together, so that it
could not be known if they died both at the same instant, or if one
of the two had survived the other, this substitution would seem to
cease, by the expression which called the person substituted to
succeed only to him who should die the last, since it cannot be
said of any one of the two that he died first or last. But because
the intention of the testator was, that the survivor of the brothers
should succeed to the other, and that the person substituted should
inherit both the successions, in that which should fall last of all,
the substitution to the longest liver includes the case where, the
two dying together, neither of them outlives the other: for neither
of them remains to exclude the person substituted; and with re-
gard to him, both the one and the other may be considered as dead
in the first place, and as dead in the last place, since neither of
them died before the other, nor after the other.’


XXI.


3204. Another Example.— If a testator, who had no child, had
instituted him that should be born of his marriage, or had made
some other disposition in favor of the said child; as if he had
added to the said institution, that, if he had several children, they
should all be his heirs or executors, and that the eldest should have
something over and above his equal share with the others, which
he should explain; and it happened that the wife of the said tes-
tator being dead, without leaving him any children, he had mar-
ried another, by whom he had children; these bequests would
have, with respect to them, the effect which they would have for
the children of the first marriage, if there had been any. For the
intention of this testator had in view the children which he might
have afterwards.


Z See the second title of the fifth book.
Y L. 34, D. de vulg. & pup. subst. ;—~i. 11 ue aie s 1.9, D. de reb. dub,
® U1. 4 4 5, D. de lib. at post. hered. inst.


368 THE OIVIL LAW. [Part 11. BOOK ITI.


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3205. We have added to the case explained in the text cited,
which relates only to the simple institution of the heir or executor,
the case of some advantage left to the eldest son over and above
his equal share with the other children. For if there were only a
bare institution of a child, or of several children, it would be the
same thing for making them succeed as heirs to their father, whether
there were any testament or not. So that what is remarkable in
this text consists in this, to show that the disposition of the father,
of which it might be doubted whether, the same being made with
a view to children of the first marriage, it should have its effect
with regard to those of a second, ought to be executed in favor of
the children of this second marriage, as it would have been for
those of the first marriage, if there had been any issue by it. And
as to the liberty of instituting a posthumous child, which seems to
be the principal subject of this text, we have inserted nothing
thereof in this article; because we have spoken of it in its proper
place in the twenty-second article of the second section of Testa-
ments, and in the thirteenth article of the second section of Hetrs
and Executors in general.


XXIL


3206. The Validity of a Bequest is independent of the Motive ex-
plained by the Testator.— When a testator has fully explained
himself, either as to the institution of the executor, or devise of a
legacy, and that he adds thereto some motive of his disposition, the
said disposition will nevertheless have its effect, although it should
be found that the fact explained by the testator, as his motive,
were not true. Thus, for example, if the testator had said, I give
to such a one, because he has done me such a piece of service; al-
though this service had not been done, yet the will of the testator,
which would be sufficient alone, although he should give no rea-
son for it, would make this bequest valid; and the motive that is
added thereto marks only either that the testator has been de-
ceived, or that he had a mind to make his bequest more favorable.
But if he had explained his motive in such a manner, that it ap-
peared that his intention was to make it a condition on which the
effect of his bequest should depend ; as if he had said, My will is,
that there be paid to such a one the sum of so much, in case it
shall appear that he has done such a business, or on condition that


TIT. 1.-SEC. VII. TESTAMENTS, 969


he do it; these bequests, and others of the like kind, would be
conditional, and would depend on the execution of that which the
testator had explained.*


XXIIL


3207. Dispositions of Testators which are not to be executed. —
Sometimes it is necessary not to follow the dispositions of the
testator, although he has clearly enough explained his intention ;
whether it be that there was ground to presume that he was igno-
rant of some fact, the knowledge of which would have obliged him
to make another disposition, or becanse what he had ordered was
really unjust or unreasonable. Thus, for example, if the testator
had named one to be tutor to his children, or to have the care of
their education, whom the relations and the judge knew to be so
unfit for it, that this choice ought not to be confirmed ; or if a tes-
tator had directed extravagant expenses for his burying, or if he
had made any dispositions contrary to good manners, or even to
good sense, by some folly; all such sorts of dispositions would not
be executed. And a proper provision would be made for the
guardianship of the children, the funeral expenses, or other things
necessary to be regulated, either by the testator’s relations, or the
judge, according to the quality and circumstances of the fact.>


XXIV.


3208. In what Sense Testators may, or may not, derogate from
the Laws.— The rules which declare that testators cannot, by any
clause in their testaments, exempt their dispositions from being
subject to the law, nor order any thing therein contrary to law,°
ought to be understood only of dispositions which some law had
rendered illegal, and which should be contrary to the spirit of the
law. Thus, for example, it would be to no purpose for a testator
to ordain that his testament should not be null, although he had
called only three witnesses to attest it. Thus, it would signify
nothing to impose either upon his executor or a legatee a condi-
tion which the law would not allow him to perform; as if he
should bequeath any thing to an infant, on condition that he


® £.17, 4 2, D. de condit. et demonst. ; —1. 72, § 6, eod.;—d. i. 17,43. See the tenth
and eleventh articles of the eighth section.

© Z.10, D. de confirm. tut.; —1. 7, in f. D. de ann. legat. et fid.; —I1. 14, § 6, in f: D. de
relig. ; —L. 113, § ult. D. de legat.

© ZL. 55, D. de legat. 1.


370 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK II.


should marry before he were fourteen years of age. Thus, a tes-
tator cannot forbid his heir or executor to take that quality upon
him with the benefit of an inventory. For all these dispositions
would be directly contrary both to the letter and spirit of the law,
and of no other use but to gratify a fantastic humor. But if a
disposition of a testator should derogate from the provision of any
law, only in a case where the spirit of the law would not be trans-
gressed, and upon a motive which the laws would not disapprove
of, such sorts of dispositions would have nothing in them contrary
to law, and therefore would subsist. Thus, for example, although
the laws ordain that the father shall have the usufruct of the goods
acquired by his son that is not emancipated, yet they permit a
testator, who has a mind to leave a legacy to a son that is under
his father’s power, to deprive the father of the legatee of his right
to.the usufruct of the thing bequeathed. Thus, although the law
does not allow minors to oblige themselves, nor alienate their
goods during their minority, yet if a testator had left to a minor
either a sum of money or other thing, on condition that he should
become bound to one of the creditors of this testator, or that he
should sell one of his lands or tenements for a certain price toa
person named in the testament ; these conditions would’have their
effect, and the infant legatee who should accept of this legacy
would be bound to perform them, without being able to free him-
self from them under pretext of his minority, except by renouncing
the legacy, in case the said conditions should make it disadvanta-
geous. Thus, in general, in all the cases where the point in ques-
tion is to know whether the clause of a testament which seems
opposite to some law, or to derogate from it, ought to subsist, we
ought to judge thereof by the spirit of the said rule, by distinguish-
ing that which of itself is illegal, or contrary to the provision of
some law, understood according to its intention, according to its
spirit, and according to its motive, from that which may have its
effect without transgressing the spirit of the law, although it may
be in appearance contrary to the terms thereof.


XXV.


3209. Two Different Testaments that subsist.— If there should
be found two different testaments of one and the same person, of
the same date, and both in due form, and in the one the testator


4 Nov. 117, ¢. 1.


TIT. 1. SEC. VIl.] TESTAMENTS. 371


had named other executors than those named in the other; these
two testaments would only make one which should subsist, and
all these several executors would divide the succession among
them. For these testaments being made at the same time, neither
of the two would be revoked by the other. And it would be pre-
sumed either that the testator had a mind to keep secret the dispo-
sitions of one of these testaments, showing only the other, or that
some other motive had engaged him to divide them.°


XXVIL


3210. Divers Views for the Interpretation of Testaments. — It
follows from the rules explained in this and the foregoing section,
that the doubts which may arise in testaments are decided differ-
ently, according to the different causes from whence they may pro-
ceed; according to the different presumptions whereby we may
judge of the intention of the testator, either by discovering what
he had in his view, or even supplying that in the cases where any
of the rules that have been just now explained may oblige us to
do it; according as the dispositions of the testaments are conform-
able to the laws, or are contrary thereto; and according to the
other views that the several rules may give, and the circumstances
demand. ‘Thus, sometimes it is necessary to observe literally the
terms of the expressions, and sometimes they ought to be inter-
preted either by a temperament of equity when they will admit
thereof, and when it is necessary ;‘ or by the consideration of one
of the persons interested, if the case is such that this consideration
ought to be of any weight. Thus, when the difficulty arises
from the very words of the testator, it ought to be resolved by
the rules explained in the foregoing section. And if it proceeds
from anywhere else besides the testament, and some unforeseen
accident has given occasion to it, it ought to be decided in the
manner that equity tells us the testator himself would have de-
cided it," pursuant to the rules which have been just now ex-
plained. And in general, it is the duty of the judge, and his wis-
dom will direct him, to apply in every case the rules that are most
suitable to it!

* L. 1, § 6, D. de bonor. poss. sec. tab.

f 1.3, D. de his que in testam. delent.; —1. 10, inf. D. de reb. dub.

8 See the second article, and those which follow.


h 7. 16, D. de condit. et demonstr.
1.7, C. de fideic. See the last article of the preceding section.


372 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK 11.


SECTION VIII.


OF THE CONDITIONS, CHARGES, DESTINATIONS, MOTIVES, DESCRIP-
TIONS, AND TERMS OF TIME, WHICH TESTATORS MAY ADD TO
THEIR DISPOSITIONS.


3211. Since the dispositions of testators ought to be propor-
tioned to their intentions, which they ought to explain, and the
said intentions are diversified according to the different views
which they may have from the conjunctures in which they hap-
pen to be, and the different regards which they ought to have to
the circumstances which they are to consider, and to the events
which they are to foresee ; this diversity obliges them to take dif-
ferent precautions for the execution of their wills. And it is this
that has naturally given rise to the use of conditions, charges, and
other additions to bequests in testaments, which shall be the sub-
ject-matter of this section. Thus, the rules which are here ex-
plained, as well as those of the foregoing sections, relate to all
sorts of dispositions in prospect of death, institutions of executors,
substitutions, legacies, and others, according as each rale may
be applied, either to all these sorts of dispositions, or to some of
them.


Art. I.


3212. Definition of Conditions in Testaments. — Conditions in
testaments are particular dispositions, which are part of the other
dispositions of the testator, and which he adds to them in order
to regulate the effect which he is willing they should have, if a case
which he foresees does or does not happen; whether it be that he
makes the validity of what he orders in this manner to depend on
this event, or that he is only willing to make some change therein,
according to the case that shall happen. Thus, for example, a tes-
tator may bequeath a marriage-portion to his daughter in case she
marries, and this legacy will depend on the event of her marriage,
and will not have its effect till she does marry. Thus, a testator
may devise a land or tenement on condition that, if the legatee
leaves children behind him, he shall have the property thereof, and
transmit it to them; and that if he has no children, he shall only
have the bare usufruct of it, and that after his death the property
shall go to another: which will make this legacy to have different


TIT. I. SEC. Vill] TESTAMENTS. . 873


effects, according as it happens that the legatee has children or
has none.* ae.


IL


3213. Definition of Charges. — Charges are engagements which
the testator imposes on his executor or other person to whom he
leaves any thing by his will; as if he charges his executor, or a
legatee, with the usufruct of some land or tenement, with a ser-
vice, with an annuity, in favor of a third person.”


IL


3214. Definition of Destinations. — Destinations are directions
given by the testator, whereby he appropriates to certain uses the
things which he bequeaths. Thus, for instance, if a testator leaves
a sum of money to a hospital, to be laid out on a building, or on
movables, or some other thing, this is a destination which he
makes of this legacy.


IV.


3215. Definition of Motives.— Motives are the causes which tes-
tators sometimes express as the reason that has induced them to
make certain bequests; and they are of two kinds. One is of the
motives which relate to the time past, and which precede the dis-
position of the testator; and the other is of the motives which
regard a fact that is to come, the hope and expectation of which
engage the testator to make some disposition. Thus, for the
time past, the considerations of affection, esteem, and gratitude
for good offices and services done, are motives which engage one
to name an executor, or to leave a legacy. Thus, for the time to
come, the hope or expectation that a relation and friend of the
testator’s will be willing to take upon him the guardianship of his
children, is a motive which engages the testator to leave him a
legacy. And these motives, whether for the time past or the time
to come, may make the dispositions conditional, or may not have
that effect, according as the testator shall have declared his inten-
tion; as shall be explained hereafter.


* L.2, D. de condit. ec dem. Soo what has been said of conditions in covenants, in the
fourth section of Covenants.

© 1.15, D. de usw et usufr. leg.; —1.36, D de condit. et dem.

© £17, § alt. D. de condit. et dem.

4 § 31, Znst. de leg. © See the tenth article.

VOL. 11. 32


374 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Mt.


V.

3216. Definition of Description.— Description is an expression
which the testator makes use of instead of the name of the per-
son or thing which he means, or which he adds to specify it more
expressly, and to distinguish it. As if, instead of naming an ex-
ecutor or a legatee, he describes him by his quality; if he gives
to the eldest son of such a one; if, having devised an estate, he
adds its situation and its bounds; if, having bequeathed a picture
of such a history, he adds the name of the painter, or mentions
from whom he had the picture


VL


3217. Definition of the Terms of Time. — The terms of time are
the delays which the testator adds to his dispositions, whether it
be to defer the execution of them, or to make their validity to
depend thereon, as shall be explained in the twelfth article. And
these terms or delays are of two sorts; one is of a certain time, as
to the first day of such a year, or within so many years to be
reckoned from such a day ;£ the other of an uncertain time, as at
the time of the death of some person, or at the time of his mar-
riage.®


VIL


3218. The Charges, Destinations, and Conditions are often cow
founded together.— Although the conditions, the charges, and
destinations are distinguished in the manner that has been just
now explained, yet, as the word condition is commonly used in
our language, it comprehends often the charges and destinations ;
and the word charge takes in likewise the conditions. Thus, it
is said of a legacy or devise, that charges the devisee of a land or
tenement with a service, that this devise is left on condition that
the said devisee should suffer such a service; thus it is said of the
legacy of a sum of money destined for a building, that the said
legacy is left on condition that the legatee should build. Thus
we say of a legacy left on condition that the legatee should
restore to the executor a certain writing, a movable, or other thing,
that this legacy is left with the charge of restoring the said writ-
ing or movable. And, in fine, it is said of a legacy destined for


f LT. 34, D. de cond. et dem.;-—1. 17, D. de condit. et dem. See the eleventh article.
§ ZL. 30, D. de legat. 1.
h 7.1, § 2, D. decond. at dem. See the twelfth and thirteenth articles.


TIT. 1. SEC. VIII.] TESTAMENTS. 375


some purchase, or for some work, that it is left with this charge,
or upon this condition, that the said purchase or work be made or
done by him who is charged with it. But we must take care with
respect to this usage which confounds these words in one and the
same sense, that we do not, for all that, confound charges, destina-
tions, and conditions together; for although they have often the
same effect, yet their natures are different; which it is necessary
to distinguish for the right use of the rules, as will appear by the
following articles.


VIIL


3219. The Charges may be conceived either as Conditions, or
simply as Charges.— The charges may be conceived two ways:
one, in such a manner that they may make in reality conditions
on which the effect of the testator’s dispositions may depend; and
the other, so as not to have the use of conditions. Thus, for ex-
ample, if a testator bequeaths to a creditor of one of his friends a
sum of money, or some other thing, with charge to the said lega-
tee to restore to the said friend the bond or obligation of what he
owes him, or with charge to desist from a lawsuit which he has
commenced against him; these charges make the said legacy con-
ditional, and are in effect conditions, without the performance of
which the legatee shall have no part of the legacy. But if a tes-
tator devises an estate of a thousand livres yearly income, with
the charge of paying out of it every year a rent of two hundred
livres for a foundation; this charge will not be a condition upon .
which the effect of the said devise will depend, but will only give
to those to whom this rent ought to be paid a right to distrain the
fruits of the said estate, and the other goods of the legatee, if, hav-
ing accepted the legacy, he does not acquit the charge.'


TX.


3220. The Destinations may, or may not, have the Effect of Con-
ditions. —- The destinations, as well as the charges, may be con-
ceived either in terms which make them to be a condition, or to
have the effect thereof; or in other terms, and without this effect.
Thus, for instance, if a testator charges his executors to give a
sum of money to a young woman when she marries, to be to


1 See the following articles. The usage of these words, charges and conditions, is com-
monly confounded in our language.
' This is a consequence of the preceding articles.


376 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK IIL


her instead of a marriage portion, this destination will have the
effect of a condition; and if this young woman does not many,
or if she dies before she is of age to marry, this legacy will be
null™ Thus, on the contrary, if a testator leaves a sum of money
to a hospital, to be laid out there on some edifice; although this
edifice should happen to be built by some other means, or should
not be necessary to the said hospital, yet this destination would
be no obstacle why the sum should not be due, that it may be
laid out upon some other work, of an equal or greater advantage
for the said house: for the intention of the testator was not that
this donation should have the effect to make the legacy condi-
tional.”


X.


3221. The Motive may either be tn the Stead of Conditions, or nol
have the Effect thereof.— The motives, as well as the charges and
destinations, may be conceived either in terms which make them
to have the effect of a condition, or in such terms that make
them not to be considered as a condition; whether it be that
the said motive respect the time past, or the time to come. Thus,
for example, for the time past, if a testator bequeaths a sum of
money to one of his friends, because he has taken care of his
affairs, this legacy will not be conditional: and although this leg-
atee may not have taken this care, yet the legacy will nevertheless
be due,’ according to the rule explained in the twenty-second arti-
cle of the seventh section. But if the testator has explained this
motive in the terms of a condition, the legacy will not be due un-
less it appears that the legatee has satisfied it; as if the testator
had said, I bequeath to such a one, if it shall appear that he has
done such a business.” And it is by the expression of the testator,
and by the circumstances, that we are to judge whether these
sorts of legacies are pure and simple, or whether they are condi-
tional.1 Thus, with respect to the time to come, if a testator be-
queaths to one of his relations or friends a sum of money to be
paid after his death, adding to the legacy, that he hopes the legatee


o 7.1, C. de his que sub. mod. ® ZL. 4, D. de adm. rer. ad eivit. pert.

° § 31, Inst. de legat.

P Sed si conditionaliter enuntiata fuerit causa, alind juris est. Veluti, hoc modo, Titio
si negotia mea curavit, fundum meum do, lego. D. § 31, inf; —/. 17, § 8, D. de cond. at
dem.

q L. 72, § 6, D. de condit. et dem.


TIT. I. GEC. VII] TESTAMENTS. 377


will assist the testator’s children with his counsel and good offices
when there shall be occasion; this motive will oblige the legatee
only in point of honor, and this legacy, which is payable before
the said good offices, will not be revoked, although they are not
performed. But if a testator leaves a sum of money to an attor-
ney or solicitor, that he may take care of instructing and soliciting
a lawsuit, that is either already commenced or to be commenced,
this motive will be instead of a condition; and this legatee will
not be entitled to the legacy, unless he perform the condition ac-
cording to the will of the testator, and the state of things. Thus,
for another example, if a testator leaves a sum of money to one of
his relations or friends, to engage him to accept the guardianship
of his children, and the legatee refuses it, he shall have no right


to the legacy.


XL


3222. The Descriptions may sometimes imply a Condition. — De-
scriptions do not usually imply a condition, but are distinguished
from conditions in this, that they for the most part have regard to
the past and present time, whereas the greatest part of conditions
respect the time to come.’ But there may be descriptions con-
ceived in terms which give them the nature of conditions. Thus,
there is no condition when a testator, the better to describe a land
or tenement that is devised, and sufficiently specified, adds that it
is the land or tenement which he purchased of such a one, or that
such a one gave him; and this legacy is independent of the truth
of this description, so that although it were false, yet the legacy
would nevertheless have its effect: for the testator may have been
deceived as to these circumstances; and it is sufficient that what
he had a mind to give is well enough known otherwise.' Thus, on
the contrary, if a testator had bequeathed that which was due to
him by a debtor whom he named, this legacy would imply the
condition that there was a debt owing, and if nothing was due,
the legacy would be null. Thus, in like manner, if a testator had
bequeathed the fruits that should be gathered in such a ground the
year of his death, this description would imply the condition that
there should be some crop, and if there were none, the legacy
would be without any effect". But if the testator, having be-


* L.111, D. de legat. 1. ® L. 34, § 1, D. de condit. et den.
' D. 1 34, D. de condit. et dem. ; —1. 17, ead.
* L. 15, § 1, D. de leg. 1;—l. 1, § wlt. D. de condit. at dem.

32°


378 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK MTL


queathed a sum of money, should add afterwards that the said
sum should be paid to the legatee out of the produce of such a
crop, or out of the moneys which should be found in such a place;
these descriptions, being added only to show his heirs or executors
whence they might easily pay the said legacy, would not make it
conditional, unless they were expressed in such terms as might
make one judge that the testator had a mind to bequeath only
what could be made of such a crop, or other thing, which he had
thus specified.


XIL.


3223. The Term of an Uncertain Time makes the Legacy condi-
tional. — Example. — The terms of legacies fixed to a certain day,
such as the first day of such a year, or within such a time, do not
make a condition on which the legacy may depend; and the effect
of these terms is only to defer the delivery of the legacy, the right
of which is already acquired to the legatee, and which, were it not
for the term, would be due instantly ;” but the term of an uncer-
tain day implies a condition on which the legacy depends. Thus,
for example, if a testator bequeaths any thing to an infant when
he shall have attained the age of fourteen or one-and-twenty
years complete, to a friend when he shall purchase such an office,
to a young woman when she shall be married; these legacies im-
ply the condition that the said time shall happen, that the legatee
shall be of age, that he shall purchase such an office, that the
young woman shall be married; and this condition is the same as
if the testator had left the legacy in case the legatee should live to
that term, and that, if he died before, the legacy should be null."
Thus, we must not confound the legacies which are made payable
at an uncertain time with the legacies payable at a certain term.


XITIL:


3224. Another Example.— The uncertainty of the times on
which depend the legacies explained in the foregoing article con-
sists in this, that it is uncertain if those times will ever happen; for


x L. 96, D. de leg. 1;—1. 26, D. quand. dies leg. ced.

Y ZL. 21, D. quand. dies leg. vel fid. ced.

® L. 75, de cond. et dem. ; —1. 21, D. quand. dies legat. ced. ; — 1. 22, eod. ; — v. |. un. § 7,
C. de caduc. toll. See the following article, with the remark on it, and the sixteenth arti-
cle of the ninth section of Zegacies. See, touching legacies at the age of fourteen years,
the same sixteenth article of the ninth section of Legacies, and the remark that is there
made on it.


TIT. I. SEO. VAL] TESTAMENTS. 379


it may not happen that the legatee lives to be of age, or that he has
such an office, or that a young woman marries. But there are
times uncertain in another manner, although it be certain that
they will happen, and which do nevertheless make the disposition
of the testator to be conditional; as, for instance, if he charges his
heir or executor to restore at his death either the whole inheritance,
or a certain land or tenement, to another person: for in this case,
although it is certain that the time of the death of this heir or ex-
ecutor will happen, yet since it is uncertain, if, when it does hap-
pen, the person in whose favor the said disposition is made is not
dead, this uncertainty renders the disposition conditional, and im-
plies the condition that this person do survive the said heir or ex-
ecutor.*


REMARKS ON THE PrREcEDING ARTICLE.


3225. We have not put down in the article what is said in the last
of the texts cited, that the legacy due at the time of the legatee’s
death is not conditional, and that he transmits it to his heir or ex-
ecutor. For it does not seem probable that it will ever come into
any one’s mind to leave a legacy so useless to the legatee, and of
which no one could have any benefit except the legatee’s heir or
executor, who perhaps might be no relation to the testator, nor so
much as known to him. And if the testator had a mind to leave
only to the children of this legatee, and after his death, he would
have expressed himself in another manner. But although this case
should never happen, yet we make this remark here on occasion of
this text, that we may add at the saine time the reason why the
uncertainty of the time of the legatee’s death does not make the
legacy conditional, as the uncertainty of the time of the executor’s
death does. Which proceeds from this, that, in the case of a leg-
acy due at the time of the executor’s death, it may happen that
the legatee may die before him, in which case there will be neither
legacy nor legatee ; whereas, in the case of a legacy due at the
time of the legatee’s death, it cannot happen that the legatee
should die before the time in which the legacy ought to begin to
have its effect, which is the time in which he dies. Thus, it will
be in the last moment that he passes from life to death that this


legacy will have its effect, to pass from the legatee to his heir or
executor.


* L. 79, $1, D. de condit. et dem.;—1. 1, § 2, D. eod.;—1. 4, D. quando dies legat. vel
Sideic. ced. See the seventeenth article of the ninth section of Legacies.


380 TBE OIVIL LAW. [PaRr BOOK IIL


XIV.

3226. It is necessary to distinguish the Different Sorts of Dispo
sitions, to be able to judge aright of them.— It follows from these
different manners in which testators may diversify their disposi-
tions, that, in all the cases where the question is to interpret any of
them, it is necessary to examine its nature, to know whether it is
pure and simple, or conditional, and whether it contains any of the
other characters which have been just now mentioned, in order to
discover by the said characters, and by the expressions of the tes
tator, what may have been his intention, and how his disposition
ought to be executed.» Which depends on the preceding rules,
and those that follow, and which relate chiefly to conditions.


XV.


3227. Three Sorts of Conditions with Respect to the Divers Sorts
of Facts or Events on which they depend. —~ Conditions are of sev-
eral sorts, and may be distinguished into different classes, accord-
ing to the different views under which they are considered. If we
consider them with respect to the divers sorts of facts or events on
which they depend, there are three sorts of them. The first is of
those which depend solely on the act of the person to whom the
condition is enjoined; the second, of those which depend on
events in which the act of that person has no share; and the
third is of those which depend partly on the act of the said per
son, and partly on an event that is independent of his act. The
condition, that a legatee shall give a sum of money, do some
work, discharge what is owing him by one of his debtors, that he
shall not raise a building so high as to prejudice the light and
prospect of a house belonging to a friend of the testator’s, and
such other like conditions, are of the first of these three kinds. A
legacy of a sum of money, on condition that there be so much clear
got of a lawsuit that is still depending, or in a commerce which is
not as yet ended, would be of the second kind. And we may give
for an example of the third sort, the condition imposed on a lega-
tee to buy a house of a third person, either in order to give it to
some other person, or to fit up an apartment in it for a hospital,
for this condition would depend partly on the act of him on
whom it was imposed, and partly on the will of the owner of the
said house, or perhaps even on a casualty, which might render it


b This is a consequence of the preceding rules. See the articles which follow.


TIT. 1, BEC. VIIt.} TESTAMENTS. 381


impossible. As if the situation of the said house should expose
it, together with the ground on which it stood, to be destroyed by
the overflowing of a river, or by a torrent, and that in fact the
house and ground should happen to perish.


XVL


3228. Three Sorts of Conditions with Respect to Time. — Condi-
tions may likewise be distinguished into three kinds, according to
the times to which they may have relation. One is of those which
respect the time past; as if a testator bequeaths a sum of money,
in case the same shall be found to be due to him from a business
already began in his absence by some friend of his whom he had
intrusted with it, but the event of which he does not as yet know.
The second kind is of the conditions which relate to the present
time; as if a testator leaves a legacy to a stranger or alien, in case
he be naturalized at the time of making the testament, or at the
time of the testator’s death, which will be the present time of the
succession’s being open. The third is of conditions which have
respect to the time to come; as if a testator leaves a legacy in
case the legatee shall happen to purchase an office. But it is only,
properly speaking, this third kind which has the true character of
a condition, which is to suspend, until the same does happen, the
disposition of the testator which depended on it: whereas the con-
ditions which relate either to the time past or present do not sus-
pend any thing; and at the moment of making the testament, or of
the death of the testator, it is then determined either that the dis-
position is null if the condition has not happened, or if it has hap-
pened, that the legacy shall have its effect. And there is nothing
in suspense but the knowledge whether it has happened or not.


e XVIL


$229. Two Sorts of Conditions, Express and Tacit.— We must
likewise distinguish, under another view, two sorts of conditions,
which comprehend them all. One is of those which are express,
and the other of those which are called tacit. The express condi-
tions are all those which the testators express in terms of condi-
tions, or other terms equivalent; and those conditions are called
tacit, which, without being expressed, are tacitly implied in the


* L. 60, D. de condit. et demon.
« L. 16, D. de inj. rupt.; —I. 8, § 13, D. de bon. libert.; —1. 10, in f. D. de condit. inst.


882 THE CIVIL Law. [PART Il. BOOK IIL


clauses of the testament. Thus, when a testator bequeaths the
fruits of a ground, or such a year, or the profits which arise from
such an affair, these sorts of legacies imply the tacit condition,
that there shall be fruits gathered in the said ground, and that
some profit shall be made of the said affair when it shall be ended*
But these sorts of conditions which are implied do not make the
legacies of this kind conditional with this effect, so as to make the
right of the legatee to depend on them. For before that it be cer-
tain, in the case of the legacy of a crop, whether there will be any
fruits, or not; and in the case of the legacy of the profits arising
from such a business, whether there will be profit or loss thereby ;
the legatee has acquired his right to what fruit the ground may
produce, or to what profit may arise from the said business. And
the legatee has so fully acquired this right before the event gives
him the use of the legacy, that, if he should happen to die in the
mean while, he would transmit his right to his heir. So that the
effect of this condition is not such as that the validity of the
legacy depends thereon, but it is only such that the legacy, witb
out being null, may happen to be of no manner of profit to the
legatee.‘


XVIII.


3230. Impossible Conditions. — Another kind of conditions is
made up of those which are impossible. And we must reckon in
this number, not only that which is impossible by nature, but like-
wise that which is contrary to law, good manners, or decency. As,
for example, if a testator had bequeathed a marriage portion to a
young woman of ten years of. age, on condition that she should
marry within a year; or if he had left a legacy, on condition that
the legatee should fix his domicile in a certain place. For the
condition of this marriage would be coatrary to law; and that of
fixing his domicile in a certain place, being contrary to the just and
natural liberty that every one has to choose his dwelling-place,
would be in some manner contrary to good manners and decency.
Thus, these sorts of conditions oblige to nothing at all, no more
than those which are naturally impossible, and they are held to be
the same as if they were not written. For that is considered as
impossible which cannot be done without breach of the law, or of
good manners and decency. And if there were in a testament


* L. 1, § ult. D. de condit. et dem. f 7.99, D. de condit. et dem.


TIT. 1. BEC. VIU.| TESTAMENTS. 383


conditions either naturally impossible, or contrary to law and good
manners, the dispositions which the testator should make to de-
pend on them would nevertheless have their effect, although these
conditions should have nones


XIX.


3231. Another Kind of Impossible Conditions.— There may be
conditions which, without being naturally impossible, and without
having any thing in them contrary to law and good manners, can-
not be fulfilled, because of some event which makes the perform-
ance of them impossible: and in that case, the disposition which
depended on such a condition will have its effect, or will not have
it, according as the quality of the condition may mark what was
the intention of the testator. Thus, for example, if a testator had
devised a tenement, or other thing, on condition that the legatee
should give a sum of money to some person before the legacy
should be delivered to him, and that the said person should happen
to die before the testator ; the non-performance of such a condition,
that is become impossible, would be of no prejudice to the legacy,
and the legatee would have it without paying the sum of money:
for the intention of this testator was to leave two legacies; one to
this legatee, and the other to that person. So that the fruitfulness of
the one legacy does not annul the other, no more than in the cases
of the twenty-ninth article." Thus, on the contrary, if a testator
had left a legacy to a young woman, in case she should happen
to be married to such a relation or friend of the testator’s, and
the said relation or friend should chance to die before the said
marriage, the legacy would be null. For the intention of this tes-
tator had for its object only this marriage!


XX.


3232. Dispositions made with a View to procure others are Un-
lawful. — We ought to reckon among the conditions that are con-
trary to good manners, those which a testator adds to a disposition
in favor of some person, in order to procure to himself the like
benefit. As if he should institute such a one for his heir or execu-


8 L. 8, D. de condit. & dem. ; — 1.1, D. de condit. inst. ;—1.14, D. eod.; —1. 71, § 2, D. da
condit. et demonstr. ; -—1. 15, D. de condit. inst. See the twelfth article of the fourth section
of Covenants.

h See the twenty-ninth article of this section.

i ZL. 4, C. de condit. inst. tam legat. quam fid. ;—v. D. de condit. ot dem.


382 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK In.


clauses of the testament. Thus, when a testator bequeaths the
fruits of a ground, or such a year, or the profits which arise from
such an affair, these sorts of legacies imply the tacit condition,
that there shall be fruits gathered in the said ground, and that
some profit shall be made of the said affair when it shall be ended:
But these sorts of conditions which are implied do not make the
legacies of this kind conditional with this effect, so as to make the
right of the legatee to depend on them. For before that it be cer-
tain, in the case of the legacy of a crop, whether there will be any
fruits, or not; and in the case of the legacy of the profits arising
from such a business, whether there will be profit or loss thereby;
the legatee has acquired his right to what fruit the ground may
produce, or to what profit may arise from the said business. And
the legatee has so fully acquired this right before the event gives
him the use of the legacy, that, if he should happen to die in the
mean while, he would transmit his right to his heir. So that the
effect of this condition is not such as that the validity of the
legacy depends thereon, but it is only such that the legacy, with-
out being null, may happen to be of no manner of profit to the
legatee.‘


XVIII.


3230. Impossible Conditions.— Another kind of conditions is
made up of those which are impossible. And we must reckon in
this number, not only that which is impossible by nature, but like-
wise that which is contrary to law, good manners, or decency. As,
for example, if a testator had bequeathed a marriage portion to a
young woman of ten years of age, on condition that she should
marry within a year; or if he had left a legacy, on condition that
the legatee should fix his domicile in a certain place. For the
condition of this marriage would be coatrary to law; and that of
fixing his domicile in a certain place, being contrary to the just and
natural liberty that every one has to choose his dwelling-place,
would be in some manner contrary to good manners and decency.
Thus, these sorts of conditions oblige to nothing at all, no more
than those which are naturally impossible, and they are held to be
the same as if they were not written. For that is considered as
impossible which cannot be done without breach of the law, or of
good manners and decency. And if there were in a testament


© ZT. 1, § ult. D. de condit. et dem. f 7.99, D. de condit. ot dem.


TIT. I. BEC. VII.] TESTAMENTS. 383


conditions either naturally impossible, or contrary to law and good
manners, the dispositions which the testator should make to de-
pend on them would nevertheless have their effect, although these
conditions should have none.t


XIX.


3231. Another Kind of Impossible Conditions. — There may be
conditions which, without being naturally impossible, and without
having any thing in them contrary to law and good manners, can-
not be fulfilled, because of some event which makes the perform-
ance of them impossible: and in that case, the disposition which
depended on such a condition will have its effect, or will not have
it, according as the quality of the condition may mark what was
the intention of the testator. Thus, for example, if a testator had
devised a tenement, or other thing, on condition that the legatee
should give a sum of money to some person before the legacy
should be delivered to him, and that the said person should happen
to die before the testator ; the non-performance of such a condition,
that is become impossible, would be of no prejudice to the legacy,
and the legatee would have it without paying the sum of money:
for the intention of this testator was to leave two legacies; one to
this legatee, and the other to that person. So that the fruitfulness of
the one legacy does not annul the other, no more than in the cases
of the twenty-ninth article." Thus, on the contrary, if a testator
had left a legacy to a young woman, in case she should happen
to be married to such a relation or friend of the testator’s, and
the said relation or friend should chance to die before the said
marriage, the legacy would be null. For the intention of this tes-
tator had for its object only this marriage:


XX.


3232. Dispositions made with a View to procure others are Un-
lawful. — We ought to reckon among the conditions that are con-
trary to good manners, those which a testator adds to a disposition
in favor of some person, in order to procure to himself the like
benefit. As if he should institute such a one for his heir or execu-


° L.8, D. de condit. @ dem. ; — 1.1, D. de condit. inst. ;—1. 14, D. eod.; —1. 71, § 2, D. de
condit. ef demonstr.;-—-1.15, D. de condit. inst. See the twelfth article of the fourth section
of Covenants.

* See the twenty-ninth article of this section.

' L. 4, C. de condit. inst. tam legat. quam fid. ; —v. D. de condit. et dem.


384 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pag? 11. BOOK 11.


tor, in case the said person hath, on his part, named this testator
to be his heir or executor. And it would be the same thing in a
legacy left on such a condition. And, in general, in what manner
soever those dispositions are conceived which tend to the procur-
ing of others from those persons in whose favor they are made,
whether it be that the testator expects the said dispositions to be
made in his own favor, or in favor of other persons; or that he
gives to one person, in order to get from another ; all these kinds
of dispositions are contrary to good manners, and are unlawfal'


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3233. These sorts of dispositions, so mean and sordid, which
are mentioned in this article, must needs have been very frequent
at Rome, seeing it was necessary to have a law to repress them,
which was a decree of the senate, of which mention is made in the
texts cited on this article. This rule is not very necessary with
us; for although we have other unfair ways enough practised
among us, in order to procure favorable dispositions from: testators,
yet we see but few persons who think of laying such snares as
these, and as few who suffer themselves to be caught in them.

3234. We are not to reckon in the number of the dispositions
spoken of in this article, the mutual testaments of two persons, who
institute reciprocally one another heir or executor; for neither of
the two anticipates the will of the other, in order to procure the
said institution in his favor; but both the one and the other hav-
ing a reciprocal affection, which can only proceed from just causes,
there is no reason why the one and the other should not express it
by such an institution as this is. And it is expressly enough ap-
proved of by these words of the first of the texts cited on this ar-
ticle: — Non eas (institutiones) senatus improbavit que mututs affec-
tionibus judicia provocaverunt. It is for these reasons that the re-
ciprocal testaments have been approved of by the novel of the
Emperor Valentinian, De Testamentis, and by our usage, and like-
wise between husband and wife in some customs.


XXL


3235. Not those which are made as an Acknowledgment of a
Former Benefit. — If the testator did not make his disposition in


1.70, D. de hored. instit.; —1L 11, C. de test. mil.;—1.1, in f. D. de his que pre non
script. ;— 1, 64, D. de leg. 1; —1. 71, § 1, D. de heered. inetit.; —v. 1. 2, aod. ; — 1. 29, ead.


TIT. 1. SEC. VItI.] TESTAMENTS. 365


favor of a person to depend on what he should expect from him;
but that having known, for example, that a person had left him
something by his testament, he, on his part, out of a sense of grati-
tude, should leave something to the said person, or to some of his
children or friends, on his account; such a bequest, not being
made with a view to procure the like from the said person, would
have nothing unlawful in it


XXIL


3236. One or more Conditions of the same Disposition. — Since
conditions depend on the will of the testator, and are arbitrary, —
one may make a disposition to depend, not only on one, but on
more conditions, whether they be in relation to a fact in the power
of the person whom the said disposition concerns, or of another na-
ture. And if there be several conditions joined together, so as that
the testator imposes them all together, the fulfilling of one of the
conditions will not be sufficient to validate a bequest which de-
pends on the accomplishment of them all. But if it depends only
upon one or other, the accomplishment of the first will give it the
effect which it ought to have.®


XXTIL


3237. The Will of the Testator is the First Rule whereby to in-
terpret the Conditions, and other Sorts of Dispositions.— In all
the cases where there may arise difficulties concerning conditions,
charges, destinations, motives, descriptions, and terms of time, the
first general rule, and which is common to all these sorts of dif-
ficulties, is always the will of the testator. Thus, it is by the
knowledge that we may have of his intention, that we are to regu-


™ DL. 71, D. de heared. int. In the article we have not made use of the expression in-
stanced in this text, J institute such a one my heir or executor, for the same share or portion that
ancther has instituted me his heir or executor. For although the said disposition does not
seem to be made with a design to procure another, and that, on the contrary, it seems to
presuppose the other to be already made; yet, seeing it may have relation to the testa-
ment of a person who is still alive, and who may make another, and seeing it implies the
condition that this testator shall be heir or executor to the other, since he gives only in
proportion to what the other shall have left him; such a disposition as this does not seem
to be very decent, and is not agreeable to our usage. Wherefore we have put down in
the article another case, which may snit with our usage, and which points ont the charac-
ter by which we are to distinguish, in dispositions which are relative to others, those which
may be reckoned lawful from those which are not, according to the principles explained
in this and the foregoing texts.

® L. 5, D. de condit. inst.

VOL, I. 33


386 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK IIL


late them. And the use of this general rule depends in particular
on the preceding rules, and those which follow.


XXIV.


3238. Conditions which depend on the Act of the Eaecutor or
Legatee. — The conditions which depend solely on the act of the
person to whom the testator has enjoined them ought to be ful-
filled in the manner that he has regulated, and as soon as they can
conveniently be performed. And his disposition hath its effect, or
ceaseth to have it, according as the said person accomplisheth or
' doth not accomplish the condition, whether it consist in doing or
not doing, in acquitting or giving, or in suffering some charge, or
what other nature soever it be of, provided only that the condition
have nothing in it that is impossible, or contrary to law and good
manners.?


XXV.


3239. Condition of not doing Something. — As to the conditions
which oblige not to do something ; as, for instance, not to raise a
building so high as to hinder the light or prospect of a house, pro-
vision ought to be made for the security of the person interested,
according to the nature of the condition, whether it be by the bare
submission of the person on whom the condition is imposed, or
otherwise, according to the circumstances.1


XXVI.


3240. Conditions which do not depend on the Act of the Execw
tor or Legatee.— The conditions which depend upon events, in
which the act of the heir or executor, or legatee, has no share,
have their effect by the event itself, whenever the case happens, or
fails to have it, if the case does not happen Thus, for example,
a legacy of a sum of money, upon condition that so much clear
gain shall be made by a business or commerce that is not as yet
ended, will be in suspense until the event; and if there be any
clear profit, the legacy will have its effect,.either in whole or in
part, according to the quantity of the profit that is made, or will
remain without effect, if there be no profit at all.


° LT. 19, D. de condit. et dem.

P L. 29, D. de condit. et dem. ; — 1. 218, D. de verb. sign.

@ ZL. 7, D. de cond. e dem.;—v. Nov. 22,c. 44. See the forty-sixth article.
¥ [2.2 10, § 1, D. de condit. et dem.


TIT. I. SEC. VIII.} TESTAMENTS. 387


XX VII.

3241. Conditions which depend on the Act of Third Persons. —
We must reckon in the number of conditions which depend on
events wherein the act of the heir or executor, or legatee, has no
share, those which depend upon the act of third persons; as if a
testator had left a legacy or a sum of money to be laid out ac-
cording to his intention, in case the same should be approved by
a person whom he should name, such as the executor of his testa-
ment, or other person, leaving it to the said person to execute or
not to execute his intention, which he had explained to him; as,
for example, if it was for making a restitution, which the testator
was in doubt whether he was obliged to make or not, and the de-
cision of which doubt he was willing should depend on the said


person.’
XXVIII


3242. Conditions which depend on the Combinations of Acts and
of Events. — The conditions which depend partly on the act of
the executor or legatee, and partly on some event, whether it be
the act of third persons, or a casualty, have their effect differently,
or have it not, according to the nature of the conditions and the
circumstances, by the rules which follow.‘


XXIX.


3243. Examples of Conditions which depend partly on the Act of
him who is charged with them, and partly on the Act of other Per-
sons. — If the executor or legatee were charged with a condition
which did not solely depend on his act, but which should depend
also on the act of another person, whom the disposition of the
testator might concern, and who should refuse to do what was
necessary to be done on his part towards accomplishing the con-
dition, it would be sufficient, if the executor or legatee did, on his
part, all that depended on him. Thus, for example, if the condi-
tion were to give a sum of money to a person, or to build some-
thing in a public place, or for the use of a particular person, and
those whom the said disposition did concern would not accept of
the sum of money, nor suffer the work to be done, it would be the
same thing as if the condition were accomplished."


* L.1, D. de legat. 2. See the thirty-first article.

* See the following articles. .

* L.8, D. de condit. inst. ; — 1. 24, D. de cond. a dem. ;—1. 81, § 1, eod. ;—1. 5, § 5, D.
quand. dies leg. ced. ; —1. 14, D. de cond. et dem. See the following article.


368 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pam® IL BOOK HI.


XXX.

3244. Another Example of the Same.— If the condition should
depend partly on the act of him on whom it is imposed, and partly
on the act of another person, without whom the said condition
could not have its literal accomplishment, but it should be pos-
sible to supply in another manner that which the intention of the
testator might seem to demand of the executor or legatee who
is charged with the condition, he might satisfy it by aecomplishing
the said intention in the manner that were possible. Thus, for ex-
ample, if an executor or legatee were charged to buy a house, or
other tenement, for some person to whom the testator had a mind
‘to give it, and the proprietor would not sell the said house or tenie-
ment, or would not sell it but for an extravagant price ; the execu-
tor or legatee would satisfy the condition by paying down the just
value of the said house or tenement to the person to whom the
testator had a mind to give it.*


XXXI.


3245. If the Condition depends entirely on the Act of a Third Per-
son. — If the condition were entirely dependent on the third per-
son, as in the case of the twenty-seventh article, the disposition of
the testament would have its effect, such as should be regulated by
the said third person, according to the power given him in that
matter by the testator.’


XXXIL


3246. Example of a Condition which, although depending on the
Act of other Persons, must be accomplished.— It is not always
enough that an executor or a legatee do all that is in his power
towards accomplishing a condition which depends partly on his
act, and partly on the act of other persons; for there are condi-
tions which are of such a nature, that no sort of obstacle can dis-
pense with them, and which must necessarily be accomplished in
order to give effect to the dispositions which depend on them.
Thus, for instance, if a testator had instituted a foreigner his ex-
ecutor, or given him a legacy, on condition that he should be nat-
uralized at the time of the death of the testator, and that, having
used his endeavours, he could not obtain his naturalization in time,
this institution and this legacy would be without effect, because


* L.8,§ 2, inf. D. de condit. ingt.; —L 14, § 2, D. de legat. 8.
Y This is a consequence of the twenty-seventh article.


TIT, L SEC. Vitl.] TESTAMENTS. 389


the said executor, or the said legatee, would remain still under the
incapacity which the said condition was to have removed, and
which could not be removed in any other way.


XXXITIL


3247. Another Example.— We see by the example explained in
the preceding article a case where the incapacity of the legatee is
joined with the non-performance of the condition; but there may
be cases where, without the incapacity of the legatee, the legacy
would be null, although it should be noways his fault that a con-
dition which depended on his act, and on that of the other per-
sons, were not accomplished. Thus, for example, if a testator
having left a sum of money to one of his friends, on condition that
he should accept and exercise the tuition of his children, and that,
in case he did not exercise it, the legacy should be reduced to a
lesser sum, or be wholly null, it had happened that the legatee
being willing to accept and exercise the tuition, it was judged to
be for the benefit of the minors that another tutor should be as-
signed them, and accordingly another was actually named; the
condition not being fulfilled, the legacy would be either wholly
null, or diminished according to the disposition of the testator.
And although the condition depended, not only on the act of the
legatee, but also on the act of other persons, and it was not the
fault of the legatee that it was not executed, yet his good will
would not be enough to satisfy the condition. For besides that
the relations and the judge, who were the other persons whose
act was necessary for accomplishing the condition, had no interest
whether the legacy should subsist or not, this legacy was given
out of a motive of recompensing a good office, and upon condition
that the same should be effectually performed.*


* DL. 62, D. de heared. instit.

* Conditionum verba, qu testamento prescribuntur, pro voluntate considerantur. Et
ideo, cum tutores testamento dati, quoniam interea puer adoleverat, id egerit, ut curatores
ipsi constituerentur, conditio fideicommissi talis prsescripta, si tutelam in annum octavum
decimam gesserint, defecisse non videbitur. ZL. 101, § 2, D. de cond. ea dem. See the tenth
article.

In order to understand this text, it is necessary to remark, that by the Roman law, as
has been said in the preamble of the title of Tidors, the tuition ended when the pupil ar-
rived at the age of puberty, which was fourteen years in males, and twelve in females;
and during the rest of the minority, to the age of five-and-twenty years complete, curators
were assigned them. So that in the case of this text, the legatees having exercised the
tuition to the age of fourteen years, and the curatorship to the age of eighteen years, the
question was to know if, the testator having put down for a condition that the legatees

30 ®


390 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK IM.


XXXIV.

3248. A Rule for Conditions which depend partly on the Act of
those to whom they are enjoined, and parily on the Act of others. —
It follows from the rules explained in the foregoing articles, that in
the cases where testators charge their executors or legatees with
conditions which depend partly on their own act, and partly on
the act of other persons, it cannot be laid down as a fixed and
general rule, either that those bequests are all null if the condition
is not effectually accomplished, or that they all have their effect,
and are held to be accomplished, if it is not the fault of the execv-
tor or legatee that the condition is not fulfilled: for there are some
cases where the conditions are held to be accomplished, although
they be not so in effect, provided that the person who was to sat-
isfy the condition has done all that was in his power towards it;
and there are others where it is absolutely necessary that the con-
ditions be accomplished. But the only general rule, and which is
common to all these sorts of conditions, is, that we must judge of
them by their nature, by the quality of the acts on which they de-
pend, by the interests of the persons whom the testator has con-
sidered, by the motive which he had in his view ; that we must dis-
tinguish among the motives, those where it appears that the tes-
tators have absolutely intended that the condition should be ac-
complished, as in the case of the preceding article, from those
where it may be reasonably presumed that the testators have re-
quired only the act of the person on whom the condition was im-
posed, as in the case of the twenty-ninth article. And it is by all
these views, and others which may help to discover the intention of
the testator, that we are to judge of conditions, giving them such
an effect as the intention of the testator may seem to demand.”


XXXV.


3249. A Rule whereby to distinguish Conditional Dispositions
from those which are not so.— It is not enough, as to what con-


should act as tutors till the pupil should attain the age of eighteen years, they had satis-
fied the condition, having been tutors only to the age of fourteen, and curators to the age
of eighteen years. But the intention of the testator being that they should take care of all
the concerns of the children till they should be fall eighteen years old, the condition is ful-
filled, although the expression be not in the literal sense. Seeing the case of this text
does not agree with our usage, where the tutorship lasts to the age of twenty-five years
complete, we have put another case to serve for the rule explained in this article. This
rule results from this text by the reason of contraries.
b This is a consequence of the preceding rules.


TIT. I. SEC. VIII.] TESTAMENTS. 391


cerns conditions, to discern between those which depend on the
act of the persons on whom they are imposed, and those which
may depend on something else, and to make the other distinctions
of conditions explained in the fifteenth, sixteenth, and other fol-
lowing articles ; but it is necessary likewise to distinguish, among
the several sorts of dispositions which contain charges, destina-
tions, motives, descriptions, and terms of time, those which are
conceived in the nature of conditions, and which have the effect
thereof, from those which do not make conditions, according to
the rules and examples which have been explained in the seventh,
eighth, and other following articles. Thus, for another example,
in the case of a motive and a destination specified in the testa-
ment, if a testator had bequeathed a rent, a pension, or some usu-
fruct to one of his friends for his maintenance, this motive ex-
plained after this manner would not make a condition which
would give the executor a right to require some security from the
legatee that he should employ the said legacy on his maintenance,
or to oblige him to account to him for it. For although this dis-
position implies, with respect to the legatee, the intention of the
testator that this legacy should serve for that use, yet this motive,
respecting only the person of the legatee, would leave to his man-
agement the use of the legacy, unless the testator had directed
some precaution independent on the will of the legatee, and that
for particular reasons, such as the poverty of the legatee and his
want of conduct. Thus, on the contrary, if a testator had left toa
young woman a sum of money for her portion when she should
marry, this motive, this destination, and this time marked by the
testator would make the legacy conditional ; and if the said young
woman should die before she married, it would remain null.°


XXXVI


3250. It is necessary to consider in Dispositions whether they con-
tain Conditions, and what ts the Effect of them.— There are two
things to be considered in the dispositions of testators as to con-
ditions: one is, to know whether the disposition be conditional or
not, which depends on the preceding rules; and the second is, to
know what ought to be the effect of the condition when the dis-
position is conditional, which depends on the relation which the
conditions have to the events. And seeing the differences of events
are infinite, and that the examples of some facilitate in all the rest


© See the other articles cited in this.


392 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK IL


the use of the rules, and are even given in the laws for rales, we
shall perceive more and more this use in the examples and rules
which follow.4


XXXVIL


3251. The Condition which ought to distinguish Two Heirs or Ex-
ecutors not happening, they succeed equally. — If a testator had in-
stituted his two brothers his heirs or executors, on condition that
whichsoever of the two should purchase such an office he should
have two thirds of the estate, and the other a third, and one of the
two should accomplish the condition, he would have the two
thirds; but if neither of the two should buy the office, whether it
were that they were not able or not willing to do it, they would
share the estate equally between them. For both the one and the
other were called to the succession, and they ought not to be dis-
tinguished except by the condition if it should so happen.®


XXX VIL


3202. A Condition may chance to be accomplished in the Testa-
tor’s [ifetime.—- The greater part of conditions ought to be ac-
complished only after the death of the testator, and in obedience
to his will; but there may be some conditions which happen to be
accomplished in the testator’s lifetime without this view, and
which have nevertheless their effect. Thus, for instance, if a leg-
acy of a sum of money is left on condition that the legatee buy
such an office, or marry the testator’s daughter, and he have
bought the said office or married the daughter before the testator’s
death, he shall have the legacy: for in these sorts of conditions it
is equal for the effect of the disposition of the testator whether
they come to pass before or after his death; and it is sufficient that
his will be found to be performed in the manner that it ought to
be, if the condition be such as that it ought to be fulfilled only once
for alls But if it can be reiterated, it must be satisfied in the
manner which shall be explained in the following article.


XXXIX.


3203. If this Condition is an Act that may be reiterated, it must
be accomplished. — If, in the case of the foregoing article, the condi-


d See the following articles. © L. 23, D. de condit. inst. ; —1. 24, end.
€ L.11,§ 1, D.de condit. et dem.;—1.2,e0d.  & L.10, ed.


TIT. . SEC. Viti.| TESTAMENTS, 393


tion did depend on an act which might be reiterated; as if it was
to give a sum of money to a hospital, and he who was charged
with the condition had already given the like sum to the same
hospital before he knew any thing of the testament, he would
nevertheless be bound to give such another sum to fulfil the condi-
tion, especially if the testator knew of the gift which the legatee
had already made; for this liberality may be reiterated." And the
gift which he had made of his own accord, not being an effect of
the disposition of this testator, who intended that this gift should
proceed from his bounty, was, with regard to the intention of this
testator, only a chance, which, not satisfying his intention, did not
accomplish the condition!


XL.


3254. If there be a Term joined to the Condition, tt ts necessary
to watt till the Term. — If a testator requires his executor or a leg-
atee to give a sum of money to some person, in case that within a
certain time the said executor or legatee have no child, or upon
some other condition, and the said executor or legatee happens to
die without children, or the other condition chances to be accom-
plished, before the time specified, the legacy will not be payable
till the term be expired. For although it be already certain by the
event that the legacy is due, seeing the condition is come to pass,
yet the expression of the testator implies the term of payment to
be after the said time shall be expired.!


“XLL


3255. Conditions do not admit of a Division. — Conditions do not
admit of a division, so as that an executor or a legatee may pre-
tend to content himeelf with a part of what is given him, he per-
forming only a part of the condition that is enjoined him; but he
can have nothing at all unless he accomplishes the whole condi-
tion. Thus, for example, if a tenement is devised on condition
that the legatee pay a sum of money to every one of the execu-
tors, or to other persons, or that he acquit some debts of the suc-
cession which shall be specified to him, he cannot divide the leg-
acy by dividing the condition, in order to have part of the legacy
in proportion to what part of the debts he has been able or willing


tL. M1, D. dae condit. ot dem. 1D. 2, inf. D. end.
L. 4, § 1, D. de condit. et demit.


3o4 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT I. BOOK IIL


to acquit; but he ought to pay and acquit the whole, unless he
will renounce the legacy.™


XLIL


3256. The Condition imposed upon several Persons may be divid-
ed among them. — If one only condition which is imposed on two
legatees be such as that it may be divided, as if a testator devises
a land or tenement to two of his friends, on condition that they
acquit a certain sum of money, they divide the condition between
them, and pay each his share of the sum, in order to share the leg-
acy between them. And if one of them alone, upon the other's
refusal, acquits the whole sum, he shall have the whole legacy.
Or if there be only one of them who acquits his proportion, and
the other fails to acquit his, he shall have a part of the legacy pro-
portionably to what he shall have acquitted, if the will of the tes
tator can bear that the condition and the legacy be divided. But
if the condition is indivisible, as if the legacy was given on condi-
tion that the legatees should do some work, the legacy cannot be
divided so as to give a share of it to one of the legatees in propor-
tion to what he should pretend to do of the work; but the legacy
would either be divided between them, if both of them together
had fulfilled the condition, or given entirely to one of them who
should fulfil it


XLIIL


3257. A Legacy for a Work is to be regulated according to the
Estate of the Testator.— If a testator had charged his executor or
a legatee to build some edifice, whether it were for public con-
venience or ornament, or for some pious use, such as a church for
a parish, or an apartment, in some hospital, and had regulated the
sum for defraying the charges thereof, the executor would be
bound to pay what had been regulated by the testator. Butif he
had not declared the sum, nor specified the manner in which the
edifice was to be built, the same would be regulated according to
the estate and quality of the testator, and the use for which the
said building was designed.


. 56, D. de condit. et dem. ; —1, 23, eod.
6, D. de condit. aden. ;—I 112, § 2, eod.; —1. 6, C. de condit. inf. tam leg. 9- fed.


TIT. I. SRC. VIN.] TESTAMENTS. 306


XLIV.

3258. The Condition, “If the Testator should die without Chil-
dren,” ts fulfilled if the Father and Son die at the same Time. — If a
legacy or a fiduciary bequest is left to a person in case the executor
or legatee who is burdened with it should die without children, and
it happens that the said executor or legatee, having only one child,
perishes with him either in a battle or in a shipwreck, or by some
other accident, so that it is impossible to know whether both
the one and the other die in the same instant, or if one of them
survive the other, and which of the two; the intention of the tes-
tator being that the fiduciary legatee should be preferred to
all others, except a child of the executor’s or legatee’s, and there
remaining no child who has right to exclude him, the case of the
fiduciary bequest would be come to pass.”


XLV.


3259. The Dispensation of Age does not accomplish the Condition
of Majority. — If the disposition of a testator, whether it were the
institution of an executor or other disposition, should contain the
condition of majority in the executor or legatee, this condition
would not be accomplished any other way than by the age of ma-
jority. And the dispensation of age, which might be obtained by
the person whom the testator required to be of full age, would not
satisfy the condition.’

XLVL

3260. Divers Ways of Providing for the Execution of Conditions,
and other Dispositions. — The conditional dispositions of testators,
and others which may oblige the executor or legatee to some
security or precaution, are executed according as the intention of
the testator and the circumstances may seem to demand. And
provision is made in this matter different ways, either according
to what the testator himself has ordained, if he has explained him-
self about it, or in the manner which may best suit with the in-
terest of the persons who may be concerned in the said bequests.


P L.17,§ 7, D. ad senat. Trebell. See the seventh article of the second section of Pu-
Substitution, and the eighteenth article of the section of Direct Substitutions. See
the eleventh and twelfth articles of the second section, Jn what manner Children succeed,
and the remarks which are there made.
1 L. ult. C. de his qpui ven. ct. imp.
* L.12, D. qui satisd. cod. cog.;—1. 13, eed. The word cavere in these texts does not


G65 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pamr 11. BOOK ZIL


Thus, a testator may, for the greater security of his legacies, and
of the other charges with which he burdens his succession, name
an executor of his testament, who shall take possession of all his
goods, in order to acquit the legacies and the debts, and to restore
to the heir the goods which may remain after payment of the
debts and legacies, as shall be explained in the eleventh section
Thus, the heir or executor of a testament may retain the fund ofa
legacy of a sam of money which is destined for some use, until it
be applied to the said use. Thus, in a legacy left on condition
that the legatee shall remit to one of his debtors the debt which
he owes him, the heir or executor may oblige him, upon delivering
the legacy, to give up the said debtor’s bond, or-to give an acquit-
tance of the debt if he had no bond for it. Thus, a legacy ofa
rent to be paid out of a certain land or tenement would have its
security upon the said land or tenement, and upon the other goods
of the succession, and of the heir or executor. Thus, in the differ-
ent charges and conditions, whether it be to give, to do, or not to
do, it is by the circumstances that we ought to regulate what
ought to depend solely on the faith and integrity of the executor
or legatee, and what may demand some other kind of security-
Thus, in general, the legatees, as well as creditors, who may have
ground to fear that the executor is not in good circumstances, and
that he may misapply the effects of the succession, may secure
them by having them sealed up by order of the judge, unless the
executor gives them satisfaction, either by finding sureties or by
other ways.‘


XLVIL


3261. A Legacy which is given on Condition that the Executor
does approve thereof ts not Conditional. — We must not reckon in
the number of conditional bequests a legacy which the testator has
bequeathed in terms that seem to demand the approbation or con-
sent of his executor. As if he had bequeathed a sum of money,
if his executor should think well of it, or should judge it to be
just and reasonable, or had added some other such like expres-
sion, even although he had left the legacy on condition that his
executor should be pleased with it. For these térms would not


signify the giving of surety, but only to oblige himself, or to promise, or to make, as it is
called, his submission.

° £.7, d.l. $1, D. de condit. et dem. ; —1. 18, eod. ; —v. Nov. 22, c. 44.

© Z.1, D. ut legat. seu fideicom. serv. caus. cav.;—d. t. § 2.


TT?. 1. SHC. TX.} TESTAMENTS. 397


make the legacy to depend on the will of the said executor, but
they would show only that the testator had considered his execu-
tor as a reasonable person, whom he was willing to engage by this
civility to execute his intention with pleasure and cheerfulness."


SECTION IX.
OF THE RIGHT OF ACCRETION.


3262, The Right of Accretion in Legal Successions. — The right
of accretion is the right which each of two heirs to the same suc-
cession, or of two legatees of the same thing, has to take the share
or portion of the other, who either cannot or will not take it him-
self. In order to understand well what this right is, it is necessary
to consider it in a case where we may easily discover what its na-
ture is, and what its origin. If we suppose that, a father leaving
behind him two children, there is one of them who renounces the
succession, or renders himself unworthy of it, or is incapable of it
by reason of some condemnation or otherwise, or who is justly
disinherited ; his share or portion, which he either could not or
would not take, remaining in the mass of the inheritance, it will
belong entirely to his brother, who will be the only person left to
succeed as heir. And it would be the same thing in collateral
successions of brothers, or other more remote relations, if, two or
more coheirs being called together to the same succession, one of
them either would not or could not take his part therein.

3263. This right of the heir, who acquires the portions of the
others, is called accretion, because the portion of the person who
does not succeed accrues to him who succeeds alone, so that he
has the whole. We see, in these cases of legal successions, that
this right of accretion is altogether natural in them, being founded
on this, that the law which calls the heirs of blood to successions
calls them thereto according to their number, and in such a man-
her that, if they are two or more in number, they share among
them the inheritance by equal portions; and if there be only one,
he alone has the whole. For it follows from this rule, that it is
only the concurrence of several coheirs together which divides the
succession among them, and that therefore, as any one of them


" L, 35, D. de lagat. 1.
VOL. IT. 34


398. THE OIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK IIL


ceases to take his share or portion, it remains in the inheritance,
and is acquired to the others by virtue of the right which they
have to the whole, which will remain entire to one alone if there
be no more heirs than one.

3264. The Right of Accretion in Testamentary Successions. —
As to testamentary successions, it may be said that the right of
accretion is not so evidently just and natural in them as it is in
the legal successions. For if, in the case of two testamentary
heirs, who are not heirs of blood, one of them not being willing
or capable to succeed, it should be necessary to decide to whom
his share or portion should belong, whether to the testamentary
coheir, or to the heir of blood; the right of this testamentary heir
would not be so perfectly evident against the heir of blood as is,
in the case of a succession to an intestate, the right of the heir of
blood, who is found to be sole heir by the default of his coheir,
who cannot or will not take any share or part in the inheritance.
For in this second case, the right of this heir of blood cannot be
controverted by any person whatsoever; and in the first case of
the testamentary coheirs, the heir of blood would have strong
reasons to urge against the testamentary heir who should claim
the share or portion of the other; as shall be remarked hereafter.

3265. This question is decided by the Roman law in favor of
the testamentary heirs. And seeing the right of accretion is
natural to the heirs at law, and that the quality of heir, which is
common to the testamentary heir and to the heir at law, makes
the heir universal successor to all the goods of the deceased, the
Roman law has regulated that, the testator having had a mind to
exclude his heirs at law, or next of kin, from his succession, and to
dispose of it by will, the testamentary heirs were the only persons
called to the whole inheritance ; and that therefore he who was in-
stituted heir only for a part became heir to the whole, if the he
to the other part would not or could not accept it. It was proba-
bly upon this principle, which makes the quality of heir to give a
universal right, by which the whole inheritance is acquired to him
among the heirs who proves to be the only one who is willing or
capable to accept of it, that this other rule of the Roman law was
founded, to wit, that a succession cannot be regulated partly by
testament, and partly without it;* so as that a testator should be
able to dispose by testament only of one part of his estate, insti-


* L. 17, D. de reg. jur.;—§ 5, Inst. de hared. inst.


TIT. I. BBC. 1X.] TESTAMENTS. - 308


tuting, for example, an heir or executor for one half of it, without
disposing also of the other half. For in this case the heir or ex-
ecutor who was instituted for one half was heir to the whole, and
excluded from the other half the heir at law, or next of kin, who
was not called by the testament. And even although the heir
named by the testament had been instituted heir only in a certain
land or tenement, which is properly speaking no more than a lega-
cy, yet the quality of heir being given him, he was universal herr
to all the goods of the succession.®

3266. It results from this first remark on the right of accretion
among heirs at law, and on that which takes place among testa-
mentary heirs, that there is this difference between these two
sorts of accretion, that it may be said of that among heirs at law,
that it is of the same natural right as the law which gives them
the succession. For as it is naturally just and equitable that, if
two heirs of blood be equally called by their proximity, they ought
to share the succession between them, so the same equity de-
mands that the inheritance should remain entire to him who
proves to be sole heir by the exclusion of others. But it may be
said of the accretion in testamentary successions, that it derives
its force more from the positive law than the law of nature. For
if, in the case of a testament which calls to the inheritance other
heirs than those who are the heirs of blood, the law had ordained
that there should be no right of accretion among them, unless the
testator had expressly ordered it to be so, but that the share or
portion of him who would not or could not be heir should go to
the heir at law, together with the charges of the testament, and
that so there should be two heirs, one by testament and the other
by law, it could not be said of such a law that it was contrary to
the law of nature. And it might even be alleged in favor of the
heir at law, that it would be natural enough, seeing the testator @
intended to give to each of the heirs named by his testament only
a portion of the inheritance, that each of them should be reduced
to his portion; and that the share of the testamentary heir who
either could not or would not succeed should be left to the heir
at law, in the same manner as he would have the whole if none of
the testamentary heirs did succeed. And the right of the heir at
law to the vacant portion would be with much more reason just


* V.1.41, in fin. D. de vulg. et pup. subst.;—1. 2, § 2, D. de bon. poss. sec. tab.; —§ 5,
Inst. de hred. instit.


400 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaR? IL. BOOK II.


and natural, if the testator had instituted one only heir for a moiety
or other portion of the inheritance, or even only for one single
tenement; seeing in these cases proposed in the Roman law, as
bas been already observed, the presumption would be natural
enough, that the testator had a mind that the rest of his goods
should go to his heir at law. And although it would happen by
the law which in these cases should call the heir at law to succeed
with the heir by testament, that he to whom the testator had given
the title of heir would not be universal heir, and that the succes-
sion would be regulated partly by testament, and partly as of one
dead intestate; yet there would be nothing in these two events
contrary to the law of nature, and which an arbitrary law could
not ordain. For as to the first, although the testamentary heir
who should remain the only one of the two instituted by the tes-
tator would not be universal heir, and the heir at law would
share the inheritance with him, it would nevertheless be always
true that the title of heir would be universal, but divided between
two heirs, as it happens as often as there are more heirs than one,
whether they be heirs by testament, or heirs at law. And as to
the second, although one part of the succession would belong to
the testamentary heir, and the other to the heir at law, the testa-
ment having its effect only for one of the heirs whom the testator
had named in it, yet this event would do nothing else but give to
two different laws the natural effect both of the one and of the
other: for it would give to the law of nature the effect of making
the heir of blood to inherit, and to the law which permits the mak-
ing of an heir by a testament the effect of giving to the testamen-
tary heir, who should be found capable of succeeding, the portion
of the inheritance which the testator had a mind to give him.
Thus, the intention of the testator being accomplished, the law
which permits the use of testaments would be so likewise. To
which we may add, that it is so far from being contrary to the aw
of nature for a testamentary heir to share the inheritance with the
heir at law, and for one to succeed by testament, and the other by
the bare effect of consanguinity, that in our customs there can be
no institution of an heir, who is called universal legatee, where we
do not see the succession regulated partly by law, as of one dead
intestate, and partly by testament; since the universal legatee suc-
ceeds by the testament, and the heir at law succeeds by the law,
and that even against the testament. Which does not hinder both
the one and the other from having a universal title, as two cohers


TIT. I. HC. 1X.} TESTAMENTS. 401


have, whether they succeed as next of kin to an intestate or by
testament, who divide the succession between them. And we see
likewise in the Roman law, that not only divers sorts of goods go
to divers sorts of heirs,° as well as by our customs, but that he
who had a right to make a military testament had power to leave
his succession partly regulated by testament, and partly by the
disposition of the law as dying intestate4 And it is known that
several interpreters have been of opinion, that in divers cases every
testator, although he had not the privilege of making a military
testament, left part of his succession to be disposed of by law,
while he disposed of the other part by testament. And even
in the cases where the right of accretion was to take place by
the Roman law, it might happen that the succession might be
divided, and go part of it to one of the heirs by testament,
and part of it to the exchequer, when by the fiscal laws the ex-
chequer seized on the share or portion of the heir who could not
succeed, and excluded the coheir from it, who, had it not been for
the said fiscal laws, would have had the right of accretion.° So
that we may reasonably conclude that which has been already ad-
vanced to be now sufficiently proved, that whereas the right of
accretion in legal successions is a part of the law of nature, in
testamentary successions it derives its force only from a positive
law. :

3267. The right of accretion which hath been mentioned hither-
to respects only coheirs; but it was extended to legatees, to whom
one and the same thing is bequeathed in terms which ought to
have that effect: for this right doth not always take place among
legatees of the same thing, as it does among coheirs of the same
succession. But according to the different expressions made use
of by the testators, there might or there might not be a right of ac-
cretion among the legatees, which depends on the rules that shall
be explained hereafter.

3268. Causes of the Difficulties in the Matter of the Right of
Accretion. — It may be remarked, as a consequence of the reflec-
tions which have been just now made on this right of accre-
tion, which takes place among testamentary heirs as well as


* See the second section of the second title of the second book.

dL. 6, D. detest. mil. ;—1. 2, Cod. end.

* Ulp. tit. 94, § 12.

£ See, concerning all that has been said for the heir at law, the remark on the sixth ar-


ticle.
34 ¢


402 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK III.


legatees, that whereas this accretion derives its force only from the
positive Jaw, and in legal successions it may be said to be a part
of the law of nature; this is an effect of that difference between
these two sorts of accretion, that as for that accretion which nat-
urally belongs to the heirs at law, there does not seem to arise any
difficulties from it; whereas there occur many difficulties in the
accretion which takes place in testamentary dispositions, as we
see by experience in the Roman law. For although mention be
made there of the right of accretion in legal successions yet we
find no difficulties or questions started concerning the right of ac-
cretion, except in testamentary successions ; which proceeds from
hence, because the right of accretion in legal successions being a
necessary consequence of a principle that is simple and natural,
which is the right that the law gives to the heir of blood to have
the whole succession, when he happens to be the only heir ; there
is nothing more easy than to know whether this right takes place.
But, on the contrary, the right of accretion in the dispositions of
testators depends on two principles which are arbitrary, and sub-
ject to different interpretations. One is the will of testators, whose
dispositions may either give occasion to the right of accretion or
prevent the same. And the other is the law prescribed by divers
rules, which the Roman law hath established concerning this mat-
ter. So that as it may be said, that these rules are not there ex-
plained with that order and clearness that is necessary for under-
standing them aright, so that one may be able to judge thereof by
their connection, and that the dispositions of testators, which are of-
tentimes conceived in obscure terms, and the different combinations
of the circumstances which arise from the events, make it often-
times very uncertain how to find out the true will of the testators,
as well as how to apply the rules which may relate thereto; this
matter of the right of accretion has been rendered so intricate, that
some interpreters have said, that there is not one matter in the law
of so great difficulty as this is; although it be likewise true, that
there is no matter in the law of which the use is Jess necessary ;
since we might have been very well without the rules of the right
of accretion, if it had been limited to legal successions, and to the

cases where the testator should appoint it to take place. A law of
this simplicity and easiness would have prevented the trouble of

a great many rules, and a great many lawsuits, and would have


& 1.9, D. de suis et legit. hared.


TIT. I. SEC. Ix.] TESTAMENTS. 403


been attended with no manner of inconvenience. For where
would be the inconvenience, if the share or portion which one of
the testamentary heirs could not or would not take should remain
to the heir at law, the other testamentary heir having what the tes-
tator left him; or if that which one of the legatees refused, or
could not take, should go to the heir, the other legatee contenting
himself with the share or portion left htm by the testament; or, in
fine, if a testamentary heir, who should be instituted alone, and only
for a share or portion of the inheritance, according to the examples
which we see of such like institutions in the Roman law, or for
some one land or tenement in particular, were reduced to that
which the testator had left him? It would seem that, if any law
had regulated things in this manner, either it would not be said
that these events are inconveniences, or if they should be thought
so, yet they would still appear less than that of the difficulties
which arise from the law concerning the right of accretion, in the
manner that we find it regulated by the Roman law.

3269. We have made here all these remarks on the right of ac-
cretion, in order to give an idea of its origin, of its nature, and of
the general principles relating to this matter. And we have
thought proper to add here occasionally the reflections which have
been made for distinguishing, in the matter of accretion, that which
is of the law of nature from that which it has from the positive
law, established by pure arbitrary laws, and which might have been
otherwise regulated. We have made these reflections, as also those
which shall hereafter be explained, only with a view to unravel the
difficulties of this matter which the interpreters own to be so great
in the Roman law. For to understand rightly any matter whatso-
ever, and the difficulties which may arise in it, it is necessary, or at
least useful, to distinguish exactly, in the common ideas which are
given us of it, between that which is essential to its nature and
that which is not. And although, this view having engaged us in
an inquiry into the principles of the Roman law, which have been
the foundation of the right of accretion in testamentary succes-
sions, we have been obliged to remark on the nature of these prin-
ciples, that the law of accretion could have been very well spared,
except in successions of intestates, and in the cases where the
testators had particularly directed it to take place in their disposi-
tions; yet we did not pretend to leave out of this book the rules
of the Roman law relating to this matter; since, on the contrary,
they compose this section, and are even presupposed as the founda-


404 THE CIVIL Law. [part II. BOOK MIL


tion of the remarks which are still to be made. But we thought
ourselves at liberty to make these reflections, and that even those
who should not approve of them would not, however, condemn
the liberty of proposing them as bare speculations, without re-
quiring any person’s approbation of them.

3270. After these general remarks on the right of accretion, it
remains only that we add some other particular observations on
the detail of this matter, and which are necessary for clearing up
the difficulties in it. Seeing the right of accretion in legal succes-
sions hath its foundation in this, that the coheirs are joined to-
gether by the tie which is made between them by the succession
that is common to them; the right of the heir who is called to in-
herit the shares or portions which become vacant is in effect a sim-
ple and natural right to take the whole, because none of the other
heirs take any part of it from him. So that one may as well say,
and with as much or more reason, that he has the whole because
his right to the whole suffers no diminution by the concurrence of
other heirs, as to say, that he has the whole by the accretion of
the portions of the others. It is in imitation of this right of the
heirs at law, that the Roman law hath given to testamentary heirs
the right of aceretion, as has been already explained; so that the
foundation of their right of accretion is their union with one an-
other, because of the quality of coheirs or coexecutors of a succes-
sion that is common to them; which is the reason why they are
said to be conjoined, that is, jointly called to the inheritance ; as it
is also said of two or more legatees of one and the same thing,
that they are jointly called to the legacy that is common to them.
And seeing testators, who institute several executors, or who give
to several legatees one and the same thing, may express them-
selves in different manners, and may join them together by divers
expressions, which may have different effects; the Roman law has
distinguished three manners in which executors and legatees of
one and the same thing may be linked or joined together in a
testament.®

3271. The first is that which joins them by the thing itself that
is devised to them, although they be not joined by one common
expression ;! as if a testator institutes, in the first place, one ex-
ecutor, and then institutes a second by another clause, without dis-
tinguishing their shares or portions; or if he gives a house to


b 7. 149, D. de verd. signif. iE. 89, D. de legat. 3.


TIT. 1. SEC. Ix.] TESTAMENTS. 405


a legatee, and gives afterwards and separately the same house to
another legatee by another clause. We make choice of this ex-
ample, because, although this manner of devising may seem to be
whimsical to us, and to be very improper for a testator who has
any sense, or who is used to be anyways exact in his affairs, yet
the examples of it are frequent in the Roman law.

3272. The second manner is that which joins together the ex-
ecutors or legatees both by the thing and by the expression of the
testator ;! as if he institutes such a one and such a one his execu-
tors; or if he gives to such a one and such a one a house or some
land.

3273. The third is that which joins the persons together only
by word, and not by the thing; as if a testator devises a land or |
tenement to such a one and such a one by equal portions.”

3274. We express here these three manners of devising, just as
they are explained in the laws which make mention of them; but
we must not take this distinction of the manners in which a testa-
tor may join together executors or legatees of one and the same
thing to be a division of a geometrical or metaphysical exactness,
so as that it may agree equally to executors and to legatees, and
as if each of these manners had always the same effect indiffer-
ently for legatees as for executors in what concerns the right of
accretion. We should be often mistaken, if we always under-
stood it so; and we should find even that an expression, which in
some laws is given for an example of one of these manners, is
given elsewhere for an example of another. Thus, it is said in
one law, that this expression, J institute such and such a one my
heirs, each of them for a half, makes a conjunction both by the
thing and by word." And in another law this expression, I give
and bequeath to such and to such a one such a land or tenement, by
equal portions, makes only a conjunction by words, and not by the
thing.

3275. We see that these two expressions are exactly like to one
another ; for to institute or bequeath by moiety, or by equal por-
tions, is the same thing: and yet, nevertheless, they are given for
an example of two sorts of conjunction wholly different from one
another, and so vastly different, that in one there is a right of accre-
tion, and not in the other; but the laws in which these instances


! ZL. 142, D. de verb. signif. ;— 1. 89, D. de legat. 3. m D.1.89, D. de legat. 3.
® ZL. 142, D. de verd. signif. © ZL. 89, D.


406 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK III.


are given do not mark in what manner we ought to reconcile this
apparent contrariety, which proceeds from the difference between
legacies and an inheritance. This difference consists in that which
hath been already remarked, that as to what concerns an inherit-
ance or succession, in what manner soever one institutes two heirs
or successors, whether by one and the same clause, or separately ;
whether one expresses their shares or portions, or makes no men-
tion of them; yet nevertheless they are joined together by the
thing, that is, the inheritance, which one considers as indivisible,
and there is always between them a right of accretion, for the rea-
sons which have been explained: and it is for these reasons that,
with regard to an inheritance, this expression, I instiiute such and
such a one my heirs, each for a half, makes a conjunction or union
by the thing. But as for legacies, if a thing is bequeathed to two
persons by portions, whether equal or unequal, seeing the thing
bequeathed may be divided either by its parts, if it is divisible, or
by its estimation, if it is indivisible; this expression, I give and
devise to such and to such a one such a land or tenement, by equal por-
tions, makes no conjunction by the thing. Thus each legatee hath
his right limited to his share or portion ; and if one of the legatees
either cannot or will not take his portion, it will not be therefore
vacant, and without an owner, but the heir will have the benefit of
it, and the other legatee will have all that the testator had a mind
to give him, that is, the portion which he left him.

3276. It is according to this distinction that we must under-
stand the divers effects of these expressions, which are perfectly
like to one another, and which perplex the reader, if they are not
taken differently every one in its proper sense. But this is not the
only difficulty that we find necessary to be cleared up in this mat-
ter; for we meet with other difficulties in other laws. Thus, for
example, it is said in some laws, that, when two legatees are joined
together, the thing is given entire to every one of them, and that
it is divided only when they concur and meet together ; and that
therefore there is between them a right of accretion. Conjunctim
heredes institut, aut conjunctim legari, hoc est, totam hereditatem, et
tota legata singulis data esse, partes autem concursu fieri. L. 80,
D. de legat.3. And we see in other laws, that if the legatees of
one and the same thing are disjoined, they have each of them the
whole, so that if they concur, they share the legacy between them :
and if one of the two does not take his part, it accrues to the
other. Si disjunctorum aliqui defictant, ceteri totum habebuni. L.


TIT. I. SEC. IX.] TESTAMENTS. 407


un. § 11, Cod. de cad. toll. ;—1. 33, D. deleg:1. It would seem to
follow from these two texts, that, the conjunction and disjunction
having equally the effect to give the right of accretion to the lega-
tees, they will always have it, in what manner soever they be lega-
tees of one and the same thing; which does-not hold true of those
to whom the legacy divides the thing ; for between them there is no
accretion. So that, to reconcile these several rules, it is necessary
to understand, in the first of these two texts, the word conjoined of
legatees who are conjoined by the thing ; as if a testator bequeaths
one and the same thing to two persons, without distinction of por-
tions: and in the second, we must understand the word disjoined
of those who are disjoined only by the words, and who are con-
joined by the thing; as if a testator, having bequeathed a thing to
a legatee, bequeaths the same thing to another person by another
clause, as it has been already remarked.

3277, We shall not enlarge here on the detail of the other par-
ticular difficulties which we meet with in the laws concerning this
matter ; for such a particular inquiry would only perplex the reader
to no purpose: as, for example, the differences which the ancient
Roman law made in the right of accretion, between a legacy which
was called per damnationem, by which the heir was required to
give a thing to a legatee, and the legacy which they called per
vindicationem, by which the thing was given to the legatee, so as
that he himself might take it out of the inheritance ; as if the tes-
tator had said, I will that such a one take such a thing.” Accord-
ing to these divers manners of bequeathing one and the same
thing to two legatees, the right of accretion might take place, or
not take place, between them.1 And it suffices to remark in gen-
eral on all the difficulties of this matter, that they remain such both
in the ancient and modern law of the Romans; that even the laws
which explain the principles and general rules thereof contain ex-
pressions which the interpreters explain by senses quite opposite
to one another, to which the said expressions give just occasion, as
appears by some of the texts which have been taken notice of in
this preamble, and by others, in which they have suffered the an-
cient difference between these two sorts of legacies, which have
been just now mentioned, to subsist, although it had been abol-
ished by Justinian. Which is one of the causes of the difficulties
in this matter; and it has given occasion to one of the ablest of


P § 2, Inst. de leg.;— Ulpian. tit. 24, §§ 3 a 4. @ Ulpian. tit. 24, §§ 12 ef 13.


408 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 11. BOOK 111.


the interpreters to charge those with stupidity or negligence, who
were employed to collect out of the books of the ancient lawyers
the extracts which compose the Digest, for not having taken due
care to keep out of the said extracts that which was abolished of
the ancient law, and for having by that means left in several places
texts contrary to others which they have inserted."

3278. One may judge by all these reflections, that the difficul-
ties which arise in this matter of the right of accretion are almost
of the same nature with those of codicillary clauses in testaments
But there is this difference between these two matters, that, as for
codicillary clauses, there are no rules certain enough in the Roman
law, from which we could gather a fixed and stated law in rela-
tion to them, as has been remarked in the fourth section ; and for
that reason we have not been able to give any particular rules con-
cerning them. But as for the right of accretion, seeing the dispo-
sitions of testators may ofttimes give occasion to it, and seeing
we have in the Roman law many rules concerning it, which may
be rendered clear and certain, we have composed this section of
them; and we have endeavoured to set them in that light and
order which is necessary to make them easy, as much as we have
been able, amidst the difficulties which we have just now ex-
plained. For although Justinian did make a law,‘ one part where-
of is in relation to this matter, and it is there said, that he had
judged it necessary to examine it thoroughly, fully, and with
exactness, in order to make it clear to every one’s underatanding,
yet this project seems to be very lamely executed.

3279, After all that has been said of the right of accretion in
this preamble, the reader is sufficiently advertised that this matter
is of the number of those which are common to testamentary
institutions and legacies, to fiduciary bequests and substitutions,


F Cujac. ad titul. 24 Ulp.

* L. un. 410, C. de caduc. toll. [This right of accretion in the civil law is the same as
the right of survivorship in the common law of England; and Bracton, De Legibus, lib. 4,
fol. 262. b, speaking of survivorship, calls it expressly by the name of jus accrescendi :
which shows that the law of survivorship is originally derived from the civil law, and
therefore the rules laid down in the civil law touching the right of accretion must be of
great use to decide any difficulties that may arise in relation to survivorship. But there
is this difference to be taken notice of between survivorship at common law and the night
of accretion in the civil law, that sarvivorship at common law takes place, not only in suc
ceesions and inheritances, but likewise in grants and other conveyances; whereas the
right of accretion by the civil law takes place only in successions of intestates and all tes-
tamentary dispositions, but not in contracts and deeds of gift. Perez. in Cod. lub. 6, tit. 55,
no. 9.]


TIT. I. SEO. IX.} TESTAMENTS. 409


and that the rules which shall be explained in this section relate
chiefly only to testamentary successions. For although, in the be-
ginning of this preamble, we bave given for an example of the
right of accretion, that which hath place among heirs at law, yet
that was only to make the nature of this right more intelligible in
testamentary successions, to which the use of the rules concerning
this matter ought to be restrained, since in legal successions there
can happen no difficulty, every heir having his natural right to the
whole, when he is left all alone. So that, as to the right of accre-
tion in legal successions, we shall make no express mention there-
of, except in the third article; which, however, will be no hin-
drance why we may not apply to them whatever is in the other
articles, that may suit with them.


Arr. L


3280. Use of the Right of Accretion.— When there are two or
more heirs or executors of one and the same succession, or two
or more legatees of one and the same thing, and some one of
the said executors or legatees takes no part of the inheritance or
legacy, whether it be that he renounces it, or that he is found to be
incapable or unworthy of it, or that he chances to die before the
testator, the portion which he was to have had goes to the other
executors, or other legatees, according as the disposition of the
testator ought to have this effect; which depends on the rules that
follow. And it is the same thing among several persons to whom
an inheritance or a legacy is left by substitution, or a fiduciary be-
quest.*


IL
3281. Definition of this Right.— The right which executors, leg-
atees, and the persons substituted to them, have to reap the benefit
of the portions of one another, when there are any among them
who will not or cannot take the portions belonging to them, is
called the right of accretion, because the vacant portion accrues to
the portions of the others.»


TIL


3282. Accretion among Coheirs at Law.-— Among coheirs at
law there is always a right of accretion: for the inheritance be-


® See the following articles. b See the articles which follow.
VOL. IL.


410 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOK 111.


longs to the nearest of kin who is capable of succeeding. Thus,
he ought to have it entire, if there be no coheir, or if those who
were called to the inheritance with him would not, or could not,
take their part in it.© But if one of the coheirs should die after
the succession was open, when he did not know that it was, or
before he had accepted it, he would transmit his right to his heirs,
and his coheir would have no part in his portion by accretion.*


IV.


3283. In Testaments tt depends on the Manner in which the Ex-
ecutors or Legatees are joined together. — The right of accretion in
testamentary dispositions depends on the manner in which the
testator hath explained his intention among several executors, sev-
eral legatees, or several persons substituted to them, and on the
conjunction which the words of the testator make among them.
For it is according as they are joined together by one and the
same right, or as their portions are distinct, that they have the
right of accretion, or that they have it not; which depends on the
rules that follow.


V.


3284. Three Manners in which Executors or Legatees may be
conjoined. — Two or more executors or legatees may be joined, or
called jointly to the same inheritance, or to the same legacy, in
three manners. The first is, when they are conjoined only by the
inheritance, or the thing that is left them, and called to it by dif-
ferent and separate expressions; as if a testator institutes one ex-
ecutor by a first clause, and by a second another executor; or if
he bequeaths a thing to one legatee, and afterwards calls another
legatee to the same thing. The second manner is, when the tes-
tator joins the persons both by the thing and by the expression ;
as if in one and the same clause he institutes two executors, or
names two legatees of the same thing. The third is, when the
testator joins the persons only by the words, and distinguishes
their portions; as if he should institute two executors, or be-
queath the same thing to two persons by equal portions.’ We


© L. 9, D. de suis et legit. hared.

4 This is a consequence of our rule, that the dead gives seizin to the living. For this heir
having succeeded before his death, his right would be vested in him, and would pass to
his heirs.

* See the articles which follow. See the eighth article.
f ZL. 142, D. de reg. jur.;—1. 89, D. de legat. 3. Although this distinction has been ex-


TIT. I. SEC. 1X.] TESTAMENTS. 4i1


shall see in the articles which follow the use of these three sorts of
conjunction or union.


Vi.


3285. Among Coheirs or Coexecutors there is always a Right of
Accretion. — When the question is about the inheritance or suc-
cession, in what manner soever it be that the heirs or executors
are called to it, whether jointly or separately, and whether their
portions be distinguished or not, there is always among them a
right of accretion. For as the right to the inheritance is a uni-
versal right, which comprehends all the goods and all the charges,
and this right is indivisible, that is, one cannot be heir only
for a part, so as that the other part remain vacant and be with-
out heirs, the portions of those who are not willing or who are
not capable to succeed are acquired to the others. Thus, the
heir who has once accepted his own portion will succeed to that
which shall be vacant, without having the liberty to renounce it,
and he will be liable to bear the charges of it; which is to be
understood not only of the heirs instituted in the first place, but
also of those who are substituted to them; whether it be that the
several heirs are substituted one to another, or that other per-
sons are substituted to the heirs. For in all these cases, he who
hath acquired one portion of the inheritance, whether as being in-
stituted in the first place, or as being substituted, cannot renounce
the other portions, which, by the effect of the institution or substi-
tution, may accrue to him.


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3286. What is said in this article, that a portion of the inherit-
ance cannot remain vacant, and that he to whom it ought to ae-
crae cannot refuse it, is not contrary to what hath been said in the
preamble of this section, that it would have been noways against
the law of nature if the vacant portion were left to the heir at law;


plained in the preamble, yet it was necessary to repeat it here. For we were obliged to
speak of it in the preamble, in order to help the explaining of the difficulties mentioned
there; and it ought to be placed here, as being a part of the rules.

We shall see, in the three following articles, the reason why in the third of these man-
ners the example is given only of legatees, and not of heirs or executors.

§ L. 58, § 1, D. de acg. vel omitt. harred. ;—1. 85, eod. ; — 1.6, C. de impub. et aliiz substit. ;
—Lun.§ 10, C. de caduc. toll. ; —1. 2, C. de hared. inst. See, as to what is said in this
article, that the right of the heir is universal and indivisible, the eleventh and twelfth arti-
cles of the first section of Heirs and E-xecuiors in general.


412 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOK 111.


although in that case it would be true that this heir at law, to
whom the vacant portion ought to belong, might refuse it. For
the rule which ordains that the vacant portion cannot be refused
by him to whom it ought to accrue, presupposes that he has ac-
cepted his portion, either purely and simply, or with the benefit of
an inventory: and it is only in this case that he cannot refuse
the other portions on the same condition upon which he has ac
cepted his own. And since he would be at liberty to refuse the
other portions if he had not accepted his own, s0 it would be
equally just that this heir at law, who had entered into no manner
of engagement on account of the inheritance, should have it in his
power either to accept of the vacant portion or to refuse it. There
would be in all this nothing contrary to justice or equity: and
the same thing may be seen in our customs, since it is certain that
if it should happen that, an heir at law having accepted the in-
heritance, the universal legatee should renounce the legacy, this
heir, who could have no share in the goods comprised in the leg-
acy if the legatee had accepted of it, could not, upon the legatee’s
refusal, renounce those goods, in order to get rid of the charges;
but he would be accountable to the creditors for all the debts of
the inheritance, and for the particular legacies, to the value of what
the testator had power to bequeath.


VII.


3287. The Accretion among Coheirs or Coexecutors is regulated
according to their Portions in the Inheritance.— When there is a
right of accretion between several, who are either instituted or sub-
stituted heirs or executors, those to whom the vacant portions ac-
crue have their share in them, in proportion to the shares which
they have in the inheritance."


VOL


3288. The Coheirs have this Right differently, according as they
are conjoined or disjoined from one another. — The right of accretion
among heirs or executors is not always such, as that they all have
this right reciprocally between them. For if a testator divides his


b Cum quis ex institatis qui non cum aliquo conjunctim institatus est, heres non est,
pars ejus omnibas pro portionibus heoreditariis accrescit. Neque refert primo loco quis
institutas, an alicui substitutus heres sit. 2. 59, 43, D. de hared. inet. It is to be re
marked on this text, that for the right understanding of these words, non cum elique cow
junctim, the reader needs only to consult the following article.


TIT. I. BEC. IX.] TESTAMENTS. 413


succession in portions, and gives, for instance, one half to two or
more heirs, and the other half to some others; one of these heirs
not succeeding, his portion will remain in the mass of that half of
which it was a part, and will accrue to the coheirs of the said half,
and not to the coheirs of the other half. But if there were any
one of the heirs who was instituted singly by himself for a moiety,
or some other portion, of the inheritance, and he could not or
would not take it, it would accrue entire to all the other heirs,
without distinction, according to their portions in the inherit-
ance! .


IX.


3289. This Right hath Piace among Coheirs who are not con-
joined. — If in the case of the preceding article all those who
were called to a portion distinct from the others were incapable
of succeeding, or should renounce their portion, the right of accre-
tion, which took place only among them for their parts, as long as
any one of them was capable of succeeding, would pass to the
other heirs of the other portions, and that portion which should
become vacant would accrue to them. For in that case, seeing
that portion could not remain vacant when there is an heir to the
other, he would have the whole; and he could not confine himself
to his own portion, and renounce that which had become vacant,
although it should be found to be burdensome, by reason of the
charges laid upon it; because the inheritance, as has been said in
the sixth article, is indivisible: and the heir who happens to be
left alone, although he was instituted heir only for a portion, ought
to accept the whole inheritance.!


X.


3290. Among Legatees of one and the same Thing there may be
or may not be a Right of Accretion. — It is not the same thing as
to the right of accretion, between legatees, as between coheirs or
coexecutors; for the right to the inheritance being a universal
right, and indivisible, there is always among coheirs or coexecutors
a right of accretion ; but legacies being restrained to the things be-
queathed, which may be divided at least by estimation, although
the things should be indivisible in their own nature, it is not ne-


' 1. 63, D. de hared. inst.; —1. un. § 10, C. de caduc. toll. See the following article.
' See the sixth article, and the texts cited on it.


35 *


414 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART If. BOOK IL


cessary that there should be always a right of accretion among
legatees. But they either have or have not this right among
them, according as the expression of the testator may give it
them, or exclude them from it, as shall be explained by the rules
which follow.”


XI


3291. There is a Right of Accretion among Legatees who are
conjoined by the Thing. — If a testator bequeaths one and the same
thing to two or more legatees, without any mention of portions,
as if he gives and bequeaths a house to such a one and such a
one, these legatees being conjoined by the thing bequeathed, there
will be between them a right of accretion, in the same manner as
if the testator had added, that the thing should belong entirely to
him of the two legatees who should be left alone to reap the bene-
fit of the legacy. Thus, it is only their concurrence that divides
the legacy between them, and gives to every one his part of it:
and if one of them cannot or will not receive his portion, it re-
mains to those who have taken or shall take theirs.”


XIL


3292. If the same Thing is bequeathed to Two Persons by Two
Clauses, each has a Right to the Whole, but their Concurrence divides
tt.— If a testator had bequeathed the same thing to two legatees
by two different expressions and separately, as if, having be-
queathed a house by a first clause to a first legatee, he bequeathed
it again afterwards to another legatee by another clause, such @
legacy might be conceived in three manners, which would have
three different effects. The first in such a manner as that, in the
second legacy, the intention of the testator should appear to be to
revoke the former; and in this case the first legacy would remain
null. The second, so as that he would have each of the legatees
to have the whole legacy, the house going to one, and the heir be-
ing charged to give the value of it to the other legatee; which
would be executed, provided the said intention were express and
clearly explained. The third is, if by the two clauses of the tes-
tament the house were bequeathed entire to each of the two lega-
tees; and in this case, they both accepting the legacy, their con-


™ See the following articles.
= L. 80, D. de legat. 8; —1. 3, D. de usufr. accresc. ;— Ulp. tit. 24,§ 12. See the ff
teenth article.


TIT. 1. SEC. 1X.] TESTAMENTS. 4135


currence would divide it, and each of them would have the half of
the thing bequeathed in this manner. But if in this last case there
should be one of the two legatees who either could not or would
not have any share in the legacy, the whole would belong to the
other; not so much by right of accretion, as that because the
whole was given him, and that his right not being diminished by
the concurrence of the other, it would remain entire to him, but
with the charges which ought to pass to this legatee, according
as the disposition of the testator should demand it; for there
might be some of the charges limited to the person of the other
legatee, who would take nothing.°


° We make use of this example, which in all appearance will not happen ; but it is be-
cause it is frequent in the Roman law, and that it explains one of the manners of union
or conjunction spoken of in the fifth article. It is of this manner that it is said, that one
and the same thing may be bequeathed to two persons separately, disjunctim, separatim ;
and it conjoins the legatees by the thing. This conjunction had this effect in the ancient
law of the Romans, that each of those legatees had the whole (U/p. tit. 24, §§ 12 et 31),
that is, one the thing, and the other the value of it. Which was altered by Justinian, and
regulated in the manner as it is expressed in this article, as will be seen by the text which
follows.

Ubi legatarii vel fideicommissarii duo forte, vel plures sunt quibus aliquid relictum sit.
— Sin antem disjunctim fuerit relictam: si quidem omnes hoc accipere et potuerint et
maluerint, suam quisque partem pro virili portione accipiat. Et non sibi blandiantur ut
unus quidem rem, alii autem singuli solidam ejus rei estimationem accipere desiderent :
cam hojusmodi legatariorum avaritiam antiquitas varia mente susceperit, in uno tantum
genere legatorum eam accipiens, in aliis respuendam esse existimans. Nos autem omni-
modo repellimus, unam omnibus naturam legatis et fideicommissis imponentes, et anti-
quam dissonantiam in unam trahentes concordiam. Hoc autem ita fieri sancimus, nisi
testator apertissime, et expressim disposuerit, ut uni quidem res solida, aliis antem exis-
timatio rei singulis in solidum prstetur. Sin vero non omnes legatarii, quibus separa-
tim res relicta sit, in ejus acquisitionem concurrant: sed unus forte eam accipiat: hec
tolida ejus sit, quia sermo testatoris omnibus prima facie solidum assignare videtur : aliis
supervenientibus partes a priore abstrahentibus, ut ex alioram quidem concursu prioris
legatum minuatur. Sin vero nemo alius veniat, vel venire potuerit, tunc non vacuatur
pars quse deficit, nec aliis accrescit, ut ejus qui primus accepit, legatum augere videatar,
sed apud ipsum qui habet solids remaneat, nullius concursu diminuta. Et ideo si onus
fuerit in persona ejus apud quem remanet legatum adscriptum: hoc omnimodo impleat,
ut volontati testatoris pareatur. Sin autem ad deficientis personam hoc onus fuerit col-
latum, hoc non sentiat is qui non alienum, sed suum tantum legatum imminutum habet.
Sed et varietatis non in occulto sit ratio: cum ideo videatur testator disjunctim hoc reli-
quisse, ut unusquisque suum onus, non alienum agnoscat. Nam si contrariam volebat,
nulls erit difficultas conjunctim ea disponere. L. un. § 11, C. de caduc. toll.

Si quidem evidentissime apparuerit, ademptione a priore legatario facta, ad secundum
legatum testatorem convolasse, solum posteriorem ad legatum pervenire placet. Sin au-
tem hoc minime apparere potest, pro virili portione ad legatam omnes venire ; acilicet,
Disi ipse testator ex scriptura manifestissimus est, utramque eorum solidam accipere vo-
luisse. ZL. 33, D. de legat. 1.

Although this last law be taken out of the Digest, yet those who are acquainted with
the style of the ancient lawyers, the authors of the texts which are collected together in


416 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK IL.


XITIL

3293. Among Legatees by Portions there is no Accretion. — If the
same thing is bequeathed to two or more legatees, but so as that
the testator divides it among them, as if he bequeaths it to them
by equal portions, or assigns to every one his own, there will be
no right of accretion among them. For their title divides them,
and gives to every one his right to his legacy separated from that
of the others, and restrained to his own portion. So that, if any
one of the portions of these legatees should become vacant, the
others would have no right to it;? but it would go either to the
heir or executor, if it was he that was charged with the legacy, or
to a legatee, if the testator had charged one legacy with this other;
as if he had devised a land or tenement to a legatee, and had
charged him to give to others, either a portion of the said land, or
the usufruct of the whole or of a part thereof, or a sum of money
to be divided among them.


XIV.


3294. Divers Cases of Accretion between Joint Legatees. — If it
should happen that, one and the same thing being bequeathed
jointly, and without distinction of portions, to several persons, as
has been mentioned in the eleventh article, one of the legatees,
being a posthumous child, should not come into the world, or that
another legatee should happen to be dead before the making of
the testament, and the testator knew nothing of it, the portions
which, by these events, would become vacant, would accrue to the


the Digest, and with that of Tribonian, will easily perceive that these expressions are of
his style; and that he has accommodated this law to the change which Justinian had
made by the other law which has been just now quoted, having abolished that ancient
law which gave the whole thing to each of the legatees to whom it was bequeathed sepa-
rately, in the manner explained in this article.

We have said at the end of the article, that the legatee who shall have the whole lega-
cy shall acquit the charges which ought to pass to him according to the disposition of the
testator; and we have not said, in general, as it is expressed at the end of the first of these
two texts, that he would not be bound for the charges which the testator had imposed oa
the other legatees of the same thing, and who should take no share in it. For besides
that it is very difficult, not to say impossible, for a legatee to refuse a legacy, if the charge
does not exceed the value of it; yet although this case should happen, it would be by the
circumstances, and by the manner in which the testator had expressed himself, that we
ought to judge if his intention was, that the charge imposed on the legatee who should
take no part of the legacy should be limited to his person, or that it should affect the
thing bequeathed, and that it ought to pass to the legatee who should have the whole leg-
acy to himself.

P ZL. 1, D. de usufr. accrese.


TIT. I. SEC, Ix.] PESTAMEN BS 413


others.2 And it would be the same thing if one of these legatees,
who was alive when the testament was made, should happen to
die before the testator.


XV.

3295. Accretion in Legacies and Successions is a Consequence of
the Conjunction by the Thing. — It results from all the rules which
have been here explained, that, the right of accretion among heirs
or executors being an effect of the rule which ordains that the in-
heritance cannot be divided so as that part thereof shall go to the
testamentary heir, and pert thereof to the heir at law, the said
right is aequired by the thing itself, that is, by the inheritance.
From whence it follows, that the inheritance ought to go entire to
him who happens to be the only person who is to succeed, whether
he was united to others by the expression, or was called to the
succession separately, or was even restrained to one distinct por-
tion. For seeing this portion cannot remain to him single by
itself, it draws to him the portions of the others when they be-
come vacant; so that it is always by the thing that heirs or exec-
utors are conjoined with one another. And among legatees the
right of accretion is likewise an effect of their being conjoined by
the thing, as appears by the rules explained in the articles which
relate to the legacies.*


4 ZL. 16, § 2, D. de legat. 1; —1. un. § 3, C. de cadue. toll.

FD... un. § 4.

* Si totam, an partem ex qua quis heres institutas est tacite rogatus sit restituere, ap-
paret nihil ei debene accrescere, quia rem non videtur habere. JL. 83, D. de acquir. vel
omit. hered.

We do not quote here this text because of the rule that is explained in it, that he who
is charged with a tacit trust of the inheritance, or a part of it, has not the right of accre-
tion; for if the fiduciary bequest be in favor of a person to whom the testator could not
give any thing, neither the person for whom the trust is created, nor the heir that is charged
with it, will have any share in the fiduciary bequest. And if it be in favor of a person
to whom the testator might lawfully give, it will be very evidently the person for whom
the trust is who will have the benefit of the right of accretion, if it is to take place; and
it will be his business to regulate it with the person who is charged to restore to him the
whole inheritance or a part of it. But we have put down here this text only on account
of these last words in it, quia rem non videtur hubere, because they show that it is to the
thing that the right of accretion is annexed ; which is a principle that we thought neces-
tary to be explained in this article. See the texts cited on the eleventh article.


418 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK III.


SECTION X.
OF THE RIGHT OF TRANSMISSION.


3296. WHEN an heir or executor has accepted a succession, if he
dies afterwards, it is without doubt that he transmits the said suc-
cession, that is, makes it to pass to his heirs and executors with
his other goods. If a legatee dies after he has acquired his right
to the legacy, he transmits it in the same manner to his successor;
and it is not of this manner of transmitting that we treat here.
But if the heir or executor, or legatee, dies before he has known or
exercived his right, it does not appear to be so certain that they
transmit it in this case to their heirs and executors. And this
doubt had given occasion in the Roman law to many questions,
concerning which several rules have been made, which mark dif-
ferently in what cases heirs and legatees transmit, or do not trans-
mit, their right to their heirs; that is, in what condition their right
ought to be at the time of their death, in order to make it pass
from them to their successors.

3297. Although the right of transmission in the Roman law
respects successions of intestates as well as testamentary succes-
sions, and it may seem for this reason that we ought to have
treated of this matter among those which are common to the two
sorts of successions, yet we have placed it among the matters relat-
ing to testaments. For in our usage there can be no difficulty as
to the transmission of legal successions, because of our rule, that
the dead gives seiztn to the living, as shall be explained hereafter.
Thus, the rules which concern the difficulties of transmission are
in our usage limited to testamentary dispositions, whether it be
for legacies and fiduciary bequests, or for inheritances.

3298. We may make the same remark on the rules of the Ro-
man law which concern the right of transmission, as we have
made on those relating to the right of accretion, that the origin of
transmission, as well as that of accretion, is found in the natural
order of legal successions. For as the right of accretion between
two children, for example, who survive their father, is founded
upon this, that it is natural, when the two concur together, for
them to divide the inheritance between them, and that, if one of
the two be left alone, he should have the whole; the right of trans-
mission is founded upon this, that it is natural also, if a son who


TIT. I. BEC. X.| TESTAMENTS. 419


has outlived his father happens to die before he has entered upon
the succession, or even before he knew of his father’s death, that
he should transmit to his children the right which he had, and
that his children taking his place should use his right, which be-
comes theirs. ‘Thus, he transmits to them the right which he had
acquired by the death of his father, and he would transmit it in
the same manner to other heirs, whether heirs by testament or
heirs at law, because this succession had passed naturally to him,
and was become a part of the goods of his own inheritance. It
was in this manner that the use of transmission began in the Ro-
man law; but it was limited to the children who were under the
power and jurisdiction of their father when he died, and who were
called sui Aaredes. And the children who were emancipated, not °
being sut heredes, they had not this right of transmission, if they
died before they knew and had exercised their right to the inherit-
ance. And it was the same thing, and that with much more
reason, as to the other heirs of blood.”

3299. As for testamentary successions, there was no transmis-
sion in them, unless the testamentary heir or executor had known
and exercised his right;° and even children who were instituted
heirs or executors by the testament of their parents were deprived
of it, as well as strangers, and they began to have the right of
transmission of the testamentary successions of their ascendants
only by a law of the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian, who
gave to children and other descendants this right of transmission,
not indifferently to transmit the testamentary successions of their
ascendants to their executors, whether they were strangers or rela-
tions, but only in favor of their children and other descendants.*
And seeing this law speaks only of testamentary successions, and
not of successions of intestates, the most learned of the interpreters
have been of opinion that it made no change in the successions of
intestates, and that the children who are not sui heredes have by
this new law the transmission only of what goods come to them
by virtue of the testamentary dispositions of their ascendants; and
that as to the successions of intestates the ancient law subsists,
which does not give the transmission to children who are not
emancipated, but only to those who, being under the father’s juris-


* L. 4, C. qui adm. ad bon. possess. poss. ; — 1. 2, C. ad senat. Orph.
Z9, D. de suis et legit. hered.

© L. un. § 5, C. de cadue. toll.

“ L. wn. Cod. de his qui ante apert. tab. ; —1. un. § 5, Cod. de caduc. toll.


42 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK M1.


diction, were sut heredes. Thus, we see that by the Roman law
the transmission has place in testamentary successions only for
children, and in legal successions only for such children as were
not emancipated. And as for all other heirs, whether heirs by tes-
tament or heirs at law, they had not this right if they died before
they knew that the succession was fallen to them, or before they
had entered upon it. And this rule was so strictly observed, that
although it were because of absence that the child was ignorant
of the death of his father, he had no right of transmission if he
died in that ignorance of his right. And it was out of mere favor
that the Emperor Antoninus excepted the case of absence on ac-
count of the public.‘

3300. There was another exception in favor of heirs, whether
heirs by testament or heirs to intestates, who died within the time
which the law gave the heir to deliberate whether he would ace-
cept of the inheritance or refuse it. And they who died within
the said time, without explaining their intentions therein, trans-
mitted their right to their heirs.£

3301. As to legatees, their condition, in what concerned the
right of transmission, was more advantageous in the Roman law
than that of the heirs or executors: for they acquired their right
the moment that the testator died, if the legacy was pure and
simple ; and if the legacy was conditional, the right of the legatee
depended in that case, as it was but just, on the accomplishment
of the condition, and he did not acquire it till the condition was
accomplished." Thus, the legatee of a legacy pure and simple
happening to die after the testator, without knowing any thing of
the legacy, transmitted his right to his heir; and if the legacy was
conditional, and the legatee died before the condition was fulfilled,
as he had acquired nothing himeelf, so he transmitted nothing to
others ; which was also natural and just.

3302. This difference between the condition of legatees and that
of heirs or executors, as to what concerns the right of transmission,


¢ L. 7, Cod. de jure dalib. ; — 1. un. § 5, C. de caduc. toll.

f L. 86, D. de acq. vel omitt. hered.

& See the eighth article of this section. There was another case in the Roman law,
where the testamentary heir transmitted his right, if he died before he entered upon the
inheritance. But seeing this case has no conformity with our usage, we do not explain it
here; and we only take this notice of it here to satisfy those who might be apt to find
fault with the omission, and those who may have a mind to consult it in its proper place.
V. 1. 8, § 30, D. de senat. Silan. ;— 1. penult. C. de his quab. ut ind.

bh See the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth articles of this section.


TIT. I. SEC. X.| TESTAMENTS. 421


had been established in order to avoid an inconvenience, which
would have happened if the right of the legatee had not vested
in him at the moment of the death of the testator. For seeing in
the Roman law the validity of the legacies depended on the ac-
ceptance of the inheritance, so that if the heir or executor re-
nounced the inher?tance, the legacies remained null, as has been
explained in its proper place,! it might have happened that, if the
right had not vested in the legatee but by the executor’s ac-
ceptance of the succession, which depended on the executor, and
which the executor might put off, the legatee who should die in
the interval between the death of the testator and the executor’s
acceptance of the inheritance would have lost his right, and have
transmitted nothing to his heirs. It was for the preventing of this
inconvenience, that it was regulated, in regard to legatees, that the
right to the legacy should be vested in them at the moment of the
death of the testator, that they might have the right of transmit-
ting it to their heirs. Thus, it was a favor which was granted
them, to distinguish their condition from that of the heirs or ex-
ecutors, in what concerns transmission. And as this favor was
granted only to prevent that inconvenience, so it had not place in
the cases where the inconvenience was not to be feared. Thus,
for legacies which could not be transmitted, such as a legacy of
the usufruct of any thing, or a legacy of liberty to a slave, which
are legacies confined to the persons of the legatees, the legatees
did not acquire their right to them but from the day of the heir’s
entering upon the inheritance.!

3308. In our usage the transmission of successions of intestates
takes place indifferently, not only for children, but also for all the
next of kin, whether they be descendants, ascendants, or collateral
relations. For according to our rule, the dead gives seizin to the
living, his next lineal heir who ts capable of succeeding to him, of
which mention has been made in another place,” the heirs of blood


| See the nineteenth article of the fifth section of this title, and the remark that is made
Upon it.

' Lun. § 2, D. quando dies ususfr. leg. ced.; —U. 2 et 8, D. quando dies leg. ced. But if
this legatee of a usufruct, having survived the testator a whole year, had died before the
heir had accepted the succession, would it have been just that the heir of the said usufruc-
tuary should lose the fruits of that year? This difficulty cannot happen in our usage,
where equity would do justice to the usufructuary or to his heir. And one or other of
them would have the fruits which ought to belong to him from the time that the succes-
sion was open, according to the disposition of the testator, and according to the rales of
usufruct, which have been explained in the title of that matter.

™ See the preface to this second part, no. 7,

VOL. II. 36


422 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK III.


acquire their right to the succession the very moment that it is
open, although the death of the person to whom they succeed be
unknown to them, and they be ignorant of their right to suc-
ceed, and do not so much as know that the deceased was their
relation. It follows from this rule, that if the heir at law, or next
of kin, who survived but one moment the person to whom he had
right to succeed, happens to die immediately after him, without
having exercised or known his right, he transmits it to his heirs.

3304. As for legacies, our usage gives to all legatees the right
of transmission of pure and simple legacies, which may pass to
their heirs; and if the legatee who has survived the testator dies
before he had knowledge of the legacy, he transmits it nevertheless
to his heir in the same manner as the heir at law or next of kin
transmits to his heir the inheritance.

3305. There remains, then, no other difficulty, except in the
transmission of testamentary successions; and there would remain
none even in that, if the rule which gives the right of transmission
to legatees when they have outlived the testator had been ex-
tended to testamentary heirs or executors. A rule so easy and so
plain as this would have put an end to many difficulties which
still remain in the principles of the Roman law concerning this
matter, and would have removed inconveniences therein, which
seemed to deserve that some provision should have been made to
guard against them, as well as those relating to legatees. For if
it would be hard for a legatee who should die before the executors
accepting of the inheritance, that he could not transmit his right
to his heirs, it would not be less hard for children, or other succes-
sors of an executor, that because he was ignorant of his right to
the inheritance, whether through absence or for other causes, he
could not transmit it if he died in this ignorance ; and that thus a
mere chance should distinguish his condition from that of an ex-
ecutor who should die after he had known of his right, although
he had made no step towards exercising it. For he would never-
theless transmit his right to his heirs, if he died within the time
which the law allowed to testamentary heirs or executors for de-
liberating, as has been already observed.

3306. It seems very strange that by this law the testamentary
heir, who has known his right, and neglected it, should transmit
to his heirs the succession that was fallen to him; and that if the
same heir had been ignorant of his right, he could have trans-
mitted nothing. This inconvenience might have been sufficient


TIT. 1. BEC. X.] TESTAMENTS. 423


to justify a rule, which, at the same time that it removed the in-
convenience, would have besides been useful to put an end to all
the difficulties of this matter. And it is without doubt upon this
consideration, that, in one of the provinces of France where the
Roman law is most followed, they have established it as a rule or
custom, that the dead gives seizin to the living, in what manner so-
ever he succeeds, whether by testament or without testament® And
if this rale be just in the Roman law for legatees, that they should
have their right at the moment of the death of the testator, what
injustice would there be in it, if it should take place likewise for
the testamentary heirs or executors? since it is true of the testa-
mentary heirs, as well as of legatees, that they hold their right by
the same title of the will of the testator, and of the law which au-
thorizes the said will; and that this title is still more favorable for
the said heirs or executors than for legatees, whom the testator
has less considered than his heir or executor; and, in a word, that
the testament having its effect by the death of the testator, it is at
the moment of the said death that the testamentary heir ought to
take the place of him to whom he succeeds. And it is also the
rule, that, at what time soever afterwards the said heir or executor
accepts of the inheritance, he is considered as if he had accepted it
at the moment of the said death, and is bound in the same manner
for all the charges that were fallen due before he accepted the suc-
cession.°

3307. Will it be objected against the transmission of an inherit-
ance in the case where the testamentary heir died without know-
ing any thing of the testament, that one cannot acquire a right
which he knows nothing of; and that, the quality of heir or ex-
ecutor implying engagements, it is necessary for acquiring an in-
heritance that the heir or executor should know the right which is
fallen to him; and that therefore he, having been ignorant of it,
has had no share in the inheritance, and consequently could not
transmit it to his heirs? But these reasons would prove in the
same manner, that there would be no transmission even in succes-
sions of intestates ; and they would prove likewise, that the lega-
tees who had known nothing of the legacies left them could not
transmit them to their heirs, at least those whose legacies should
be subject to some charges.


" See the customs of Bourdeaux and country of Guienne, article 74.
* See the fifteenth article of the first section of Heirs and Executors in general.


424. THE CIVIL LAW. [PART U. BOOK tt.


3308. Will it be said that the testator has considered only the
- persons of his executors, and not the persons of their successors,
and that therefore, the executor being dead without having acquired
the inheritance, his heirs or executors ought to have no share in
it? But this reason would prove the same thing as to legatees;
and since it proves nothing with respect to them, neither ought it
to prove any thing with respect to executors. Thus, the only
natural effect of this reason would be to prove, that, if he who is
instituted heir or executor dies before the testater, the institution
does not pass to his heirs; but if the said heir or executor sur-
vives the testator, it would be against his intention to deprive him
of the right of transmission, since every testator means, that, if
those whom he institutes his heirs or executors do survive him, all
the goods of the inheritance should be theirs in the moment that
his death should divest him of them. To which we may likewise
add this consideration, which is common both to the executor and
to the legatee, that it is not absolutely true that the testator hath
only considered their persons. For it is very usual for a friend to
institute his friend his heir or executor in consideration of his chil-
dren, and to leave a legacy to a friend upon the same motive; so
that the transmission in these cases is agreeable to the intention
of the testator. But even in the cases where the intention of the
testator is confined to the sole person of the executor and legatee,
the right of transmission is not therefore the less comprehended in
the disposition of the testator. For it is for the interest of the
executor and of the jlegatee, that the goods which come to them
by a testament should pass to the use of their affairs, whether it
be to acquit their debts, or for other uses, which cannot be done
except by the right of transmission. Thus, it may be said that,
the right of transmission being founded on all these principles of
equity, it was not so much a favor done to the legatees im the
Roman law, as an act of justice, in giving them the right of traas-
mission, although they should happen to die before they knew
any thing of the legacy; and that the same justice might be like-
Wise extended to testamentary heirs or executors without any
inconvenience.

3309. It seems reasonable to conclude fom all these reflections,
that, since neither natural equity nor reason renders the condition
of the testamentary heir worse than that of the legatee, it would
have been just to have made it equal as to the right’ of transmis-
sion; and that the rule which should have ordered it so, being


TIT. I. SEO. X.] TESTAMENTS. 425


founded on principles so natural as these, would have been much


more useful than the several subtilties which one meets with in .


this matter, as well as in others of the Roman law. So that it
would have been convenient that the rule, the dead gives seizin
to the kwing, had been made common throughoat in successions
by testament, as well as those without testament, as we have seen
that it is m one of the provinces of France where the Roman law
is most in use, and where they have very prudently judged, that it
is mach more useful to establish transmission without distinction
in all sorts of successions, whether it be an heir that succeeds by
testament, or without testament, whether he knew of his right, or
died before he knew any thing of it, than to introduce distinctions
fall of inconveniences without any advantage, and serving for no
other use than to give occasion to many lawsuits. It is without
doubt upon these considerations, that, although this particular
custom in one province, which is governed by the written law,
seems to insinuate that in the others they follow the Roman law,
yet some authors have thought that, the maxim, that the dead
gives seizin to the Kving, is become universal throughout the
whole kingdom in testamentary successions, as well as in succes-
sions of intestates.

3310. It is to be remarked on this matter of transmission, that
it contains some particular rales which would be of necessary use,
even although transmission should take place in testamentary suc-
cessions ; as, for example, that which concerns the transmission of
conditional dispositions: and that there are also other rales which
relate to the transmission of legal successions, such as those which
are explained in the first articles, which regard in general the
nature of transmission.

3311. All these several sorts of rules shall be explained in this
section, and shall take in every thing that belongs to this matter
of transmission. But seeing the use of rules and principles is
much facilitated by the application of them to the particular cases
to which they may agree, and that we have been obliged to ex-
plain many of these cases in the ninth section of the title of Leg-
actes, the reader may be pleased to have recourse to that section
at the same time that he reads this.


Arr. I,


3312. Definition of Transmission.— Transmission is the right
which heirs or executors, or legatees, may have to convey down
36 *


426 THE CIVIL LAW. [pagT 1. BOOK Ill


to their successors the inheritance or legacy which belongs to them,
in case they die before they have exercised their right.*


IL


3313. To what Transmission is limtted.— It results from the
definition explained in the preceding article, that when the heir or
executor has entered upon the inheritance, and the legatee has
received the legacy, it is not any longer by the transmission that
their right passes to their heirs, but barely by succession, in the
same manner as their other goods.” For transmission is under-
stood only of the right which the heir or executor, or legatee, may
have to convey to his heirs a right which he himself had never
exercised, and which may have been altogether unknown to him,
as will be seen in the sequel of this section.


IL


3314. Transmission takes Place when the Right is acqutred.—
The heir or executor and the legatee have this in common, that
both the one and the other have the night of transmission, at the
same time that the right to the inheritance, or to the legacy, vests
in them. For having at that time their right in their own per-
sons, it is a consequence thereof, that they should transmit it to
their heirs, even although they themselves should die before they
had received any thing, the one of the inheritance, or the other
of the legacy; as, on the contrary, if when they die they had no
manner of right in their own persons, they could transmit nothing
to their successors.


IV.


3315. The Transmission depends on the Condition in which the
Right is at the Time of the Death.—t follows from the preced-
ing articles, that, when the question is about the mght of trans-
mission, it is necessary to consider in what condition the right of
the heir or executor, or that of the legatee, was at the time of
his death. And this depends on the rules which shall be ex-
plained hereafter.¢


® L.7,tnf. C. de jure deaib. See the preamble of this section.

b This is a consequence of the definition of the right of transmission.

© See the following article, as also the eighth and tenth articles. See, in relation to
this article and those that follow, the sixth and the other following articles of the ninth
section of Legacies.

4 This is a consequence of the preceding articles.


TIT. I. SEC. X.] TESTAMENTS. 427


V.

3316. There is no Transmission if the Testamentary Hew or
Legatee dies before the Testator.— There is likewise this common
to the testamentary heir and to the legatee, that although their
rights have the testament for their title, yet nevertheless, if it hap-
pens that they die before the testator, although after making the
testament, there is in that case no transmission; for the testament
was not to have its effect but by the death of the testator. So
that when their death precedes that of the testator, they have no
right, and consequently do not transmit any thing® And there
would be still less ground for transmission if the testamentary
heir or legatee were already dead before the testament was made,
it being possible that the testator knew nothing of the death!


VI


3317. The Institution and the Legacy may be conceived in Terms
which make them to pass to the Heirs.— We may add, as another
rule that is common to testamentary heirs and to legatees, that if
the testator had conceived his dispositions in such terms as to
show that it was his will, that, in case his heir or executor, or his
legatees, should chance to die before their right fell to them, the
said right should pass to their children, or in general to their heirs ;
such a disposition would have its effect, not so much by the right
of transmission, as by the proper right of the said children or heirs
of the testamentary heir or legatee, who would in this case be
called by the testator by way of substitution to the others


VII.


3318. The Acceptance of the Inheritance gives the Right of Trans-
mission. — If he who is instituted heir by a testament, having ac-
cepted of the inheritance, should chance to die before he touched
any thing thereof, he would transmit to his heirs the right to


* Pro non scriptis sunt iis relicta qui vivo testatore decedunt. Ex §§ 2 ef 3, l. un. Ci de
caduc. toll.

f L. 4, D. de his qua pro non script.

& Since the will of the testator holds the place of a law, nothing would hinder such a
disposition from having its effect. And we have set down this rule here, because it is a
precaution used by many for preventing the events which make the transmission to cease,
by taking care to have added to the dispositions of testators, when it is their will that it
should be so, some expression that may have this effect to make the inheritance or the
legacy to pass to the successors of the testamentary heir or legatee, in their default; as
is, for example, this expression, that the testator gives to such a one and his heirs.


£23 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK IIL


gather in the effects belonging to it. For by his acceptance of it
he had acquired the quality of heir, and the right to the inherit-
ance" Thus this right, as well as all the others which he might
have, would pass to his heirs,! and that with much more reason
than in the case of the rule that follows.


VOL


3319. The Testamentary Heir who dies within the Time for de-
liberating transmits his Right. — If, during the time that the law
gives the testamentary heir to deliberate in whether he will accept
or refuse the succession, he happens to die without having done
any one act as heir, he knowing of the testament, whether it be
that he was really deliberating about it, or that he had not in any
manner explained his mind therein, but only that he had not re-
nounced the inheritance; the law presumes from his silence that
he was deliberating, and he transmits his right to his heirs, who
may in their own right accept the inheritance or renounce it!


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3320. We have not set down in the article that which is said in
the text cited, that the heirs of the heir have no more time for de-
liberating than what remained to the deceased. For if there re-
mained only two or three days, or so little tame that it was not
possible for them to exercise their righte, equity would require that
they should have a longer delay. And as it is not agreeable to
our usage to be so very rigorous in such like cases, it would seem
just to grant unto them the same delay that the ordinance of 1667,
tit. 7, art. 1, gives to heirs to deliberate in, seeing that delay is
only forty days after the inventory.

3321. We have mentioned in this article only the case where
the testamentary heir knew of the testament, and died within the
time allowed by the law for deliberating ; and have said nothing
of the case where the heir who knew of the testament had let the
time for deliberating slip, without making any declaration, and
died after the said time was expired. For although by the Roman
law that heir did not transmit his right to his heirs,* yet our usage
seems to be opposite to that rigor.

3322. And seeing by the ordinance of 1667 the delay for de-


b See the first article of the third section, Zn what Manner a Succession is acqvired.
' ZL. 87, D. de acq. vel om. hared.
1 L. 19, C. de jure delib. © £.19, C. de jure delib.


TIT. ¥. SEC. X.} TESTAMENTS. : 429


liberating is only, as has been already mentioned, of forty days
after the inventory, whereas by the Roman law they had whole
years to deliberate in, and that this time of forty days would be
too short a time to take away the right of transmission, it does not
suit with our usage, as has been likewise already taken notice of,
to obeerve this rigor in the cases of nan-performance of that which
ought to be done within a certain space of time, unless there were
some equity in the striet observance of the said rigor: as, for ex-
ample, to exclude one who had a right to dissolve a sale by virtue
of a power or equity of redemption, and who should not come
within the time fixed for bringing the action for that purpose.
Thus, the heir and his successor would be always received to exer-
cise their right, and would not be refused all such delays as should
appear to be just and necessary.”

3323. But if the testamentary heir should chance to die before
he knew of his right, would he transmit it to his successor, whether
he died within the time allowed for deliberating, or after the said
time? It might be urged in favor of the transmission, that as in
the Roman law the heir who knew of his right did not transmit
it, if he died without declaring his mind, having let the time pass
which the law allowed him for deliberating, as has been just now
observed, so it would seem to follow, by the rule of contraries,
that this time ought not to run against the heir who should die
without knowledge of his right; in the same manner as, in the
Roman law, the time given to the heir at law to demand the pos-
session of the goods that were fallen to him did not run against
the heir who was ignorant that the succession was fallen to him.*
And if it is just to grant a delay to the living heir, who was igno-
rant of his right, although the time regulated by the law be ex-
pired, as that delay is granted by an express rule of the ordinance
of 1667, tit. 7, art. 4, is it not as equitable to grant to the succes-
sor of this heir, who begins to know the right of the deceased, the
same delay which would have been granted to the deceased, had
he been in a condition to demand it? And as it has been found
just in the Roman law, that the heir who knew of his right, and
died within the time allowed for deliberating, should transmit it to
his successors, although he had done nothing to show his accept-
ance of the inheritance, provided only that he had not renounced


b See the ordinance of 1667, tit. 7, art. 4.
© L. 2, D. quis ordo in bon. poss. servet.;—l. 8, C. qui adm. ad bon. possess. poss.


430 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK IIL


it; may it not be said of the heir who dies in ignorance of his
right, that the time for deliberating ought not to run against him ?
And it having been impossible for him to deliberate, some time
for deliberating ought not to be refused to his successor. From
whence it follows, that the transmission to this successor is as just
as that to the heir of him, who, having known his right, had neg-
lected it to the time of his death, which happened within the
time allowed for deliberating, and who did, nevertheless, transmit
the succession to his heirs, according to the rule explained in this
article.

3324. The reader may join to these considerations the reflec-
tions which have been made on this subject in the preamble of
this section, and particularly that which has been remarked toucb-
ing the sentiment of those who think that it is at present the gen-
eral usage of the kingdom, that the rule, the dead gives seizin to the
living, extends to testamentary successions.


10.¢


3325. When the Institution or Substitution of an Heir is Condi-
tional, he has no Right to transmtt, unless the Condition be come to
pass.— If an institution of a testamentary heir, or a substitution,
was conditional, and the condition not being come to pass at the
time that the succession fell, or that the substitution could have
taken place, the heir, or the person substituted to him, should hap-
pen to die; as he would have had no right himself, s0 he could
transmit nothing to his heir. Thus, for example, if a testator had
instituted or substituted one of his relations or friends, on con-
dition that he had children, or in case he were married, his death
happening before the condition, whether before or after the suc-
cession fell, or the substitution could take place, would have an-
nulled in his person all use of the right to inherit the succession,
and to transmit it.™


X.
3326. Transmission of a Legacy that is Pure and Simple. — As to
the legatee, if the legacy is pure and simple, that is, without condi-
tion, his right vests in him at the time of the testator’s death, as is


™ § 9, Inst. de hered. inst. It is the nature of conditions, that what depends on them
should have its effect or remain null, according as they happen or not happen. See the
first article of the eighth section.


TIT. I. SEC. x.] TESTAMENTS. 431


explained in its place:" and if he chances to die before he has
demanded or even known of his legacy, he transmits his right to
his heirs.°


XL


3327. Transmission of a Conditional Legacy. — If the legacy
was conditional, that is, if it depended on the event of a condition,
the right would not vest in the legatee till after the condition had
bappened ; and if the legatee died before, as he had no right to the
legacy himself, so he would transmit none to his heir. And al-
though the condition should afterwards come to pass after the
death of this legatee, yet this event would be useless to his heir.
Thus, for example, if a testator had left a legacy on condition that
his heir should die without children, and it happened that the leg-
atee died before the heir, who afterwards died without children,
this event would be useless, both to the legatee who was already
dead, and to his heir, to whom he had not transmitted any right,
he having had none himself.?


XIL


3328. Transmission of a Legacy to an Uncertain Day. — As there
are legacies which are made to uncertain days, and which are con-
ditional, as has been explained in its place,‘ these sorts of legacies
are of the same nature with those which depend on other sorts of
conditions : and as to what concerns the right of transmission, they
are regulated in the same manner as other conditional legacies,"


*® See the preamble of this section, and the first, second, and third articles of the ninth
section of Legacies.

° L. 5, $1, D. quand. dies legat. vel fideic. ced. ; —I|. un. $1, in f. C. de cad. toll. ;—1. 5,
D. quand. dies legat. vel fid. ced.

P L. 41, D. de cond. ea dem. ;—1. 59, eed. See the fourth and eleventh articles of the
ninth section of Legacies. It is necessary to remark on this article the difference which
the laws make between conditions in testaments and those of covenants. The difference
consists in this, that in the dispositions of testators there is only the testator himself who
regulates the effect of his disposition; and if it does not expressly comprehend the heirs
of him in whoee favor the disposition is made, it is limited to his person, that is, if the
right is not acquired to that person during his life, he can transmit nothing of it to his
heir. But in covenants there are two persons, who treat both for themselves and for their
heirs, if they are not excepted. Thus the effect of conditions in covenants passes to the
heirs. See the thirteenth article of the fourth section of Covenants.

1 See the twelfth and thirteenth articles of the eighth section.

" This is a consequence of the nature of these legacies, which, being conditional, are not
transmitted, except in the case that the condition be come to pass before the death of the
legatee, as has been said in the preceding article.


432 THE CIVIL LaW. [PART IL. BOOK IL


XFIL

3329. The Rales of Transmission may be applied to Substitutewns,
and to Fiduciary Bequests.— The rules which concern the right of
transmission for testamentary heirs and legatees may be applied
to those who are substituted to them, and to those for whose ac-
count any thing is devised m trust to others, whether it be the
whole inheritance, or some particular thing, which the heir or 2
legatee had been charged to restore to them, according as these
rules may be applicable to them. Which it is easy to discern, and
therefore noways necessary to repeat the same rules with regard
to them. Thus, when a testator hath substituted to his heir an-
other heir, to succeed to him in case the first either could not or
would not accept the succession; or has obliged his heir to
restore the inheritance to another person when the said heir shall
die; or a testator hath charged his heir or a legatee with a sam
of money in trust, or with other things which ought to pass
after their death, or within a certain time, to other persons: in all
these cases the persons substituted, and the persons for whose ac-
count the fiduciary bequest is made, surviving those after whom
they are called, and happening to die afterwards before they knew
and exercised their right, or before the event of the conditions, if
there were any, transmit or do not transmit their right in the same
manner, and according to the same rules, which have been just
now explained for heirs and legatees.*


SECTION XI.
OF THE EXECUTION OF TESTAMENTS.


3330. THE execution of testaments is naturally the duty of the
testamentary heirs, who, remaining masters of the goods, are bound
for all the charges. And the legatees, on their part, and all the
other persons interested in the execution of the testaments, have
the liberty to look after it, and to procure the execution of what
concerns themselves. But seeing there are some dispositions of
testators, the execution of which depends solely on the integrity of
the testamentary heir, and that those very dispositions, of which the
parties concerned may sue for the execution, may remain with-
out effect, either by reason of the death or absence of such parties,


© L. 11, § 6, D. de legat. 8; —1. 81, D. de acquir. vel om. hored.


TIT. 1. SEC. XI.} TESTAMENTS. 433


or by the knavery of the Heir, or for other causes, care has been
taken, by the use of executors of testaments, to have the wills of
testators accomplished without any regard to the honesty or knav-
ery of their testamentary heirs.

3331. In the Roman law we see very few examples of the case
where the testator commits to other persons than to the testamen-
tary heir himself the execution of his dispositions; and we do not
find there any rule which hath established in general the use of
executors of testaments, who are charged with the entire execution
of the testament; whereas the use of executors of testaments is so
much approved and favored by our customs in France, that they
ordain all the movable goods of the succession to be put into the
hands of those to whom the testator commits this function; and
for this reason the executors are obliged to make an inventory of
the goods, and the heir ought to be called to assist at the making
of it; or the testator may, if he pleases, when he names an execu-
tor, ordain a certain sum of money to be put into his hands, for
executing the dispositions which he shall commit to his care.

3332. Although these dispositions be not common to all the
customs, and in many of them, as well as in divers places which
are governed by the written law, there is little or no use of ex-
ecutors of testaments; yet seeing it is everywhere free for testa-
tors to name them, and that in general due care ought to be taken
for the execution of testaments, we shall explain in this section
what is essential to this matter, and what may be gathered from
the Roman law concerning it.


Arr. L


3333. The First Security for the Execution of Testaments ts, that
they be known, and deposited in some Public Place. — The first pre-
eaution necessary for the security of the execution of the wills of
testators is, that the testaments or other acts which contain their
dispositions be known to all persons who have any interest under
them, and that they be deposited in some safe place, where the
parties concerned may have free access to them as occasion re-
quires. And it is for this reason that the testaments which are
sealed up, and kept secret, are opened in the manner which has
been explained in its place,* and that the others remain in the
hands of public notaries, who take down the minutes or in-


® Seo the eighteenth and nineteenth articles of the third section.
VOL. IIe 37


434 ‘THE CIVIL Law. [PART 11. BOOK IIL


structions thereof, that they may give out attested copies thereof
to those persons whom the said dispositions of the testators may
any way concern. And there are even some dispositions which,
for the greater security, ought to be made public in a court of
justice, and enrolled, that is, entered in the public register, that
the memory of them may be preserved.°


IL


3334. The Use of Executors of Testaments.— Seeing there are
often dispositions in testamenta, the execution of which depends ~
wholly on the integrity of the testamentary heirs, and that many
heirs fail in the performance thereof, it is free for testators to com-
mit to other persons the execution of their dispositions, which they
are not willing should depend altogether on their testamentary
heirs ; and the persons to whom the testators give this power, are
called executors of testaments.*


© See the fifteenth article of the first section of Partitions among coheirs or coexecutors.

© ‘When testaments contain substitutions, they ought to be made public, as shall be said
in its proper place. See the end of the preamble to the third title of the fifth book.

4 In testamentis quedam scribuntur, que ad auctoritatem duntaxat scribentis referan-
tur, nec obligationem pariunt. Hec autem talia sunt, si te heredem solum instituam et
scribam, uti monumentum mihi certa pecunia facias; nullam enim obligationem es
scriptura recipit, sed auctoritatem meam servandam poteris, si velis, facere. Aliter at-
que si cohsrede tibi dato item scripsero; nam sive te solum damnavero, uti mont-
mentum facias, cohseres tuus agere tecum poterit familie erciscunds, uti facias, quoniam
interest illius; quin etiamsi utrique, jussi estis hoc facere, invicem actionem habebitis.
L. 7, D. de ann. legat. & fideic. Si quis Titio decem legaverit, et rogaverit, ut ea restituat
Mevio: Msviusque fuerit mortuus, Titii commodo cedit, non heredis, nisi duntaxat
ut ministrum Titium elegit. 2.17, D. de legat. 2.

Si testator designaverit per quem desiderat redemptionem fieri captivorum, is qui spe-
cialiter designatus est legati vel fideicommissi habeat exigendi licentiam: et pro sua coa-
scientia votam adimpleat testatoris: sin autem persona non designata, testator absolute
tantummodo summam legati vel fidcicommissi taxaverit, que debeat memoratee cause
proficere, vir reverendissimus episcopus illius civitatis ex qua testator oritur, habeat facal-
tatem exigendi quod hujus rei gratia fuerit derelictum, pium defuncti propositam, sine
ulla cunctatione, ut convenit, impleturus. JZ. 28, § 1, C. de episc. et cler.

We see in the first of these texts, that, for want of a person who might oblige the
testamentary heir to execute the will of the testator, the heir is left at liberty to do it or
not, as he pleases; which shows the use and necessity of executors of testaments.

It may be remarked on the second of these texts, that a sum of money might be put
into the hands of a legatee, that he might dispose thereof as executor of the will of the
testator, which was known to him, ut ministrum.

As for the third text, it is necessary to see the sixth article and the remark upon it

We see, in the 68th novel of the Emperor Leo, the use of executors of testaments : qui-
bus testatores bona illorum existimatione moti, testamentarias de rebus suis prescriptio-
nes committunt.

[The character of executor, as described in this article, is more applicable, with us in


TIT. I. SEC. XI] TESTAMENTS. 435


Til.

3335. Execution of a Disposition committed to the Testamentary
Heir, or to another Person.— The testator who names several tes-
tamentary heirs, and who confides more in one of them than in
the others, may charge him in particular with the execution of
some dispositions of his testament, empowering him to take out of
the estate the fund which may be necessary for the execution of
the said dispositions: and he may likewise commit this care to a
legatee, or appoint some other person for it, although he should
give him nothing for his trouble, in consideration of the quality of
the testator, and of that of the executor, or though he should leave
him a legacy for his pains, as it is lawful for him to do.®


IV.


3336. Security for Conditional Legacies.— If among the lega-
cies there were any of them conditional, whether it be that the
execution of the testament were committed to one of the testa-
mentary heirs, or to a particular executor of the testament, the
fund for paying these conditional legacies would remain with the
testamentary heirs, they giving to the legatees security for their
legacies according to the circumstances, as has been explained in


its places
V.


3337. Execution of Indefinite Dispositions. — The execution of a
testament consists not only in the payment of the legacies, and
acquittance of the other charges, which are committed to the ex-
ecutor of the testament, according as they are regulated in the tes-
tament ; but there may be some dispositions whereof the destina-
tion may depend on the will of the executor, or other person to
whom the testator shall have referred it; as, for example, if he had


England, to what we call an overseer of a will, than to the executor. For some testators,
having named execators of their wills, do also appoint some persons, whom they have
a more special trust and confidence in, to be overseers of their wills, that is, to see to the
due performance and execution of all the several dispositions in their wills. But although
there should be no such overseers appointed, yet it is not much to be questioned, that due
care will be taken to oblige the executors to a strict performance of all the dispositions in
the will, by the persons who shall have an interest in the said dispositions, and who will
have the aid of the law to compel the executors to perform the will of the deceased.]

e L. 107, D. de lagat. 1;—1. 96, § 3, eed. See the texts cited on the foregoing article.

f See the seventeenth law, D. de leg. 2, cited on the second article.

5 See the forty-sixth article of the eighth section, and the seventh article of the tenth


section of Legacies.


436 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART Ii. BOOK Tit


left a sum of money to be distributed to poor families, or to re-
deem captives, or to be laid out on other charitable works, without
determining any thing in particular, leaving it to the person
whom he shall have named in his testament to apply the charity
where he shall think it most proper


VL

3338. Execution of Dispositions whick ere neglected. — Vf, the
testator having named nobody for the execution of his testament,
the testamentary heir should fail to acquit the charitable legacies —
left to some church or hospital, the officers of justice might take
care to see the will of the deceased executed. But if the legacy
were indefinite, such as that of a sum of money to be distributed
to poor people, the testator leaving the disposal thereof to his tes-
tamentary heir, he could not be sued at law for legacies of this
kind ; for he may have acquitted them very honestly; and nothing
would oblige him to give an account thereof, seeing the testator
had excused him from doing it!


VIL


3339. The Executor is to give an Accownt.— Seeing the execa-
tor of the testament is to discharge that function out of the stock
of goods which shall be put into his hands either by the testa-
mentary heir, or by decree of a court of justice, he is obliged to
give an account how he has disposed of the goods which have
been put into his hands, to produce acquittances of the legacies,
and of the other charges, except as to what the testator had a
mind to trust to his own integrity, as in the case of the fifth arti-
cle; and he may likewise put down in his account the charges
which he has been at in executing the testament.


bh See the twenty-eighth law, Cod. de episc. et cler., cited on the second article. See
the following article, and the remark upon it.

7. 28, § 1, C. de epiec. et clerc. According to the usage in France, it is the duty of
the king’s council at law to apply to the courts of jastice for their assistance towards the
execution of these sorts of dispositions, if they are neglected by the testamentary heirs
and by the persons who ought to take care of the said dispositions, such as the governors
and administrators of hospitals, the ecclesiastics who are intrusted with the administra-
tion of the goods belonging to the chrarches, and other persons who may have any inter-
est in the said legacies.

k This is a consoquomes of the fanotien of the executor of a testament.


TIT. 11. TESTAMENTS. 437


TITLE II.
OF AN UNDUTIFUL TESTAMENT, AND OF DISHERISON.


3340, Tux liberty which the ancient Roman law gave to parents
to disinherit their children without any cause, as has been ob-
served in the preface to this second part,* was followed by so great
a number of disherisons,® that it was found necessary to set bounds
to it, by giving to the children who should pretend to be unjustly
disinherited, whether by their fathers, or mothers, or other ascend-
ants, the right of complaining of those dispositions which were
called undutiful, because they were contrary to the duty of parents,
which ties them to leave their goods to their children, who have
done nothing to deserve the being deprived of them. And at last
Justinian regulated by an express law the causes which might de-
serve disinheriting.

3341. They called the action which the law gave to children
against the testaments in which they were disinherited the
Querela, that is, the complaint of undutifulness; and it was per-
mitted likewise to make such a complaint against excessive dona-
tions and marriage portions given to some of the children, or to
other persons, if the said dispositions were undutiful, that is, if
they did not leave to all the children their legitime, or child’s part.

3342. Besides the disinheriting, which may be either just or un-
just, there is another manner of depriving children of the inher-
itance, and that is by not naming them, or making no mention of
them in the testament, which is called in the Roman law preteri-
tion, and is distinguished from an express disherison by this differ-
ence, that whereas a disherison may be just if there are just
eauses for it, preterition cannot but be unjust, there being no cause
assigned.

3343. To soften what a complaint of undutifulness might con-
tain in it that might be injurious to the memory of the testator,
they gave to this complaint in the Roman law the pretext of a
presumption that the testator had not the free use of his reason,
and that it was for want of his right senses that he made such a
disposition. But in our usage we do not observe this precau-
tion, and we charge the testator very freely with inhumanity, in-


* See the preface, no. 7. b L.1, D. de inoff. test. ¢ L. 2, D. de inoff. test.
37 *


438 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IIT.


justice, and hardship, or with having been influenced by passion,
and the instigations of a mother-in-law, or of some other persons.

' 3344. The same equity which made the complaint of children
to be received against the undutiful testaments of their parents,
made likewise the complaints of fathers and mothers, and other
ascendants, to be received against the testaments of their children,
who deprived them of their successions without just cause, whether
by expressly disinheriting them, or passing them by without taking
any manner of notice of them in their testaments.


SECTION I.


OF THE PERSONS WHO MAY COMPLAIN OF A TESTAMENT, OR OTHER
UNDUTIFUL DISPOSITION.


3345. We shall not insert in this section that law of the Ro-
mans which allowed bastard children to complain of the unduv-
tifulness of the testament of their mothers*® For in France
bastards are incapable of all legal successions, as has been ob-
served in its place.®

3346. It is to be remarked, that we ought not to reckon among
the children who are allowed to complain of their not being in-
serted in the testaments of their fathers, and other ascendants,
daughters who have renounced their right to the successions: for
seeing they cannot succeed to one who dies intestate while there
are male children, or any descended of males, there is no obliga-
tion to call them to the succession by testament.°


Arr. I.


3347. Children cannot be disinherited without a Just Cause. —
Testators who have children, or other descendants, whom the law
calls to succeed to them if they die intestate, according to the
rules which have been explained in their place,* cannot disinherit
them, unless they have some one of the causes which shall be ex-
plained in this title.»


® L. 29, § 1, D. de inoff. testam.

> See the eighth article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general.

© See the remark on the first article of the second section, Jn what Manner Children suc-
ceed.
® See the second section, Zn what Manner Children succeed.

b Nov. 1, tn pref. 4 2;—1. 1, D. de tnoff. testam. ; — Nov. 115, c. 3. See the first, sec-
ond, and third articles of the second section.


TIT. I. SEC. 1. TESTAMENTS. 439


IL
3348. Neither Fathers, nor Mothers, nor other Ascendants.— The
testators who have no children, and who are survived by their
fathers, or mothers, or other ascendants, cannot disinherit them,
unless for some one of the causes which shall be likewise explained
in this title.°


III.


3349. Preterition of Children hath the same Effect as Disherison
without Cause. — If a father, or other ascendant, without expressly
disinheriting one of his children, makes no mention of him in his
testament ; this silence, which is called preterition, is considered in
the same manner as disherison which has no cause.!


IV.


3300. And also the Preterition of Parents. —~ The preterition of
parents in the testaments of their children, to whom they have a
right to succeed if they die intestate, if there are no descendants
to exclude them from the succession, hath the same effect as the
preterition of children in the testaments of their fathers. For al-
though, by the order of nature, parents are not called to succeed to
their children, and ought not to expect this sorrowful succes-
sion; yet it is just that, if, contrary to this order, the parents
survive their children, they should not be deprived of their in-
heritance.®


V.


3301. Parents cannot disinherit their Children, although they leave
them their Child's Part by other Dispositions. — Although a testator
who has children leave them their legitime or child’s part by
some donation, legacy, or other disposition ; yet he may not disin-


* Omnibus tam parentibus quam liberis de inofficioso licet disputare. Z.1, D. de inoff.
testam. Nam etsi parentibus non debetur filioruam hereditas, propter votum parentum, et
naturalem erga filios caritatem ; turbato tamen ordine mortalitatis, non minus parentibus
quam liberis pie relinqui debet. L. 15, D. de inoff. testam.

Sancimus non licere liberis parentes suos preterire, aut quolibet modo a rebus propriis,
in quibus habent testandi licentiam, eos omnino alienare: nisi causas quas enumeravimus
in suis testamentis specialiter nominaverint. Nov. 115,c.14. See the fourth article of
the second section.

? Hujus verbi de inofficioso testamento vis illa est, docere immerentem se, et ideo in-
digne preeteritum, vel etiam exhereditatione sammotum. JL. 5, D. de inoff. testam. ; —
L 8, eod.; — Nov. 115, c. 3. See the texts quoted on the first article.

* See the texts cited upon the first article, as also upon the third article.


440 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK UL


herit them by his testament, or pass them by without taking any
notice of them therein. But he ought to institute them heirs or
executors in his testament, unless he mentions therein some just
causes for disinheriting them.


REMARKS ON THE Precepine ARTICLE.


3302. It may be remarked on the text cited, that the interpreters,
even the most skilful among them, have been of opinion that the
meaning thereof is, that, to make the testament of a father valid, it
is necessary that what he leaves to his children should be given
them by way of institution; and that otherwise the testament in
which their filial portion or child’s part is left them without the
quality of heir would be null. And this opinion is so universal,
that it passes for a rule; although it be certain that the author of
those extracts which are commonly called authentics, taken out of
the novels of Justinian, and which are inserted in the places of the
Code to which they have relation, seems not to have understood
this text in that sense. For in the authentic Non cet C. de ib.
preter., which is taken from thence, he has made no mention of
the necessity of leaving the filial portion to the children by way of
institution: which he ought not to have failed to do, if it had been
his own opinion; seeing in the authentic Novissima C. de inoff. tes-
tam., taken out of the eighteenth novel, chap. 1, he bad been care-
ful to insert in it what was ordained by the said novel, that the
filial portion might be left to them, not only by way of institation,
but also by a bare legacy or a fiduciary bequest. Sive quis illud
institutionis modo, sive per legati, idem est dicere, et st per fidetcom-
misst relinquat occasionem. These are the terms of that eighteenth
novel, which he has contracted in that authentic Novisstima, in
these words, quoquo reticti titulo; which is directly contrary
to what this opinion will have to have been regulated by the
hundred and fifteenth novel. So that this author having con-
ceived in these terms the authentic Novissima, and having in the
authentic Non licet made no mention of the necessity of this insti-
tution, it seems plain enough that he did not believe that this han-


f Sancimus non licere penitus patri vel matri, ant avo vel avis, proavo vel proavim,
suum filium vel filiam, vel ceeteros liberos preeterire aut exhwredes in suo facere tests-
mento: nec si per quamlibet donationem, vel legatam, vel fideicommissum, vel aliam
quemcunqae modum eis dederit legibus debitam portionem: nisi forsan probabuntor m-
grati: et ipsas nominatim ingratitudinis causas parentes suo inseruerint testamento. Noe.
115, ¢. 3.


TIT. 11. SEO. 1.] “TESTAMENTS. 441


dred and fifteenth novel ought to be taken in this sense. And if
we examine carefully the terms of this hundred and fifteenth
novel, either in the original Greek or in the Latin, we shall not
find that it is said there that the legitime or filial portion ought to
be left by way of institution; but only that it is there said, that
fathers and mothers, and other ascendants, cannot disinherit their
children, nor pass them over in silence in their testaments, even
although they had left them their filial portion by some donation,
legacy, or fiduciary bequest, or in some other manner whatsoever,
unless there were just causes for disinheriting them, and that the
same were expressed in the testament. Sancimus non licere libe-
ros preterire, aut exharedes im suo facere testamento; nec, si per
quamlibet donationem, vel legatum, vel fideicommissum, vel alium
quemcunque modum, eis dederit legibus debitam portionem : nisi _for-
san probabuntur ingratt, et tpsas nominatim ingratitudinis causas
parentes suo inseruerint testamento. Which words seem only to
imply, that it is not lawful to disinherit children, or pass them
over in silence in a testament, although by other dispositions, of
what nature soever they may be, the parent had given them their
filia] portion, as by donations or codicils; and that, if after these
dispositions a father or other ascendant makes a testament, he is
obliged to make mention therein of his children, and cannot disin-
herit them without just cause. And to show that this sense is al-
together natural, we might add, that seeing Justinian speaks in
this place only of a testament which should contain a disherison
or preterition of children, as appears evidently from the words
which have been just now quoted, it seems to follow from thence,
that, when he says that disinheriting was not allowed by a testa-
ment, although the children had their child’s part left them by do-
nations, legacies, or fiduciary bequests, he meant only other dispo-
sitions, and not the testament itself, in which he supposes them to
be disinherited or omitted. For can any one say that a father
who disinherits his son could ever think of leaving him his filial
portion by a legacy or fiduciary bequest, in the same testament by
which he disinherits him? And much less can this be said of a
testament wherein the son is passed over in silence by a preterition.
So that we may say that, Justinian having said that one cannot
disinherit, nor pass over in silence, children in a testament, even
although their filial portion had been left them by a donation, a
legacy, or a fiduciary bequest, or in any other manner whatsoever,
he did not mean that this other manner of giving the filial portion


442 THE OfVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK 11.


should be in the testament itself by which the child is disinherit-
ed or omitted; but that he meant only to ordain thereby, that a
father, or other ascendant, should not only not have power to disin-
herit his children without cause, but even not to pass them over in
silence in a testament; and that such a testament should be null,
although the testator had given to his children by some other title
their child’s part. But even although that other title should bea
testament by which the children had been instituted heirs or exec-
utors, whether for their child’s part or otherwise, that institution
would not hinder the nullity of a second testament, in which they
should be passed over in silence or disinherited; which is the
subject-matter of Justinian’s rule, explained in the words above
cited, and which regard only the nullity of a preterition, or unjust
disherison, and which he judges to be such independently of all
other dispositions by which the legal portion due to the children
may have been left them.

3353. We may likewise add on the same subject, that Justinian
has been careful to observe, in several places, that he had not suf-
fered any thing to be put into his code which was contrary to
other dispositions therein contained; and that he has renewed the
same observation on the matter concerning the successions of chil-
dren in one of his novels,* where he proves that he has not abro-
gated a law of the Emperor Theodosius; and that it cannot be
pretended to be contrary to one of his, for this reason, because that
law of Theodosius is in his code. From whence one might
gather, if this declaration of Justinian’s were perfectly sure, that it
was not his intention in this hundred and fifteenth novel to make
it necessary that the children should be instituted heirs, in order to
prevent a complaint of unduatifulness ; since, besides the eighteenth
novel, we find in the code of this emperor many laws, and even
some of his own, which forbid the complaint of undutifulness
when the testator has left any thing to his children, by what title
soever, whether of legacy or fiduciary bequest ;” and which in this
case give the children only a right to demand a supplement of the
portion due to them by law.

3304. We have not made this remark in opposition to the ordi-
nary sense every body gives to this hundred and fifteenth novel,
nor to condemn the usage of this sense thereof, which has passed


® Nov. 158, c. 1.
b ZL. 29, 30, 31, 32, C. de inoff. test. ;—v. 1. 8, § 6, D. eod.


TIT. I. BEC. 1] TESTAMENTS. 443


into a rule, since it may be said otherwise that this rule is alto-
gether equitable, and that it is just that, the children being called
by their birth to the inheritance of their parents, it should be left to
them with the title of heirs, which nature and the laws give them.
And this rule would be particularly just in the cases where parents
should call to their succession other heirs together with the chil-
dren. But if a father, having many children under age, had insti-
tuted for his universal heiress their mother, his wife, of whom there
was no reason to fear that she would have other children by a
second husband, and he had failed to make use of the name
of heirs with relation to his children, fixing only their filial portion
or child’s part at certain sums; there would be some inconven-
ience in annulling a testament of this nature for that defect: as
there would be likewise an inconvenience in annulling a testament
wherein a father had made a partition of his goods among his
children, without giving them in the testament the name of heirs,
if no other fault were found in it. And seeing it happens often, in
some provinces which are governed by the written law, that fa-
thers make such dispositions for the good of their children who are
under age, instituting their widows heiresses, and regulating at
certain sums the portions due to their children by law, in order to
avoid the charges and trouble of seals, inventories, and partitions,
and upon other reasonable considerations, we have thought it
proper to make this observation; and we have been likewise in-
duced thereto by the fidelity that is due to the true sense of the
laws.


VI.


3355. Undutiful Testaments are annulled as to the Undutiful In-
stution. — The testaments which are found to be undutiful, either
because children or parents are omitted in it, or because they are
unjustly dismherited, are annulled as to the undutiful institutions


VIL


3356. How the Complaint of Undutifulness passes to the Heirs of
the Person disinherited.— If the person who had a right to com-
plain of an undutiful testament had children, and chanced to die
before he had exercised his right, and made his demand; the chil-


° L.8,§ 16, D. de inoff. testam.; —v. Nov. 115, ¢. 3, in f- ef cap. 4, in f. See hereafter
the fifth article of the fourth section, and the sixteenth article of the fifth section of Testa-
ments.


aad THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL BOOK IIL


dren might complain of the said testament in the right of the de-
ceased, unless he had approved the testament before his death.»
But if there were other heirs, they could not exercise the complaint
of undutifulness, unless the deceased had entered the complaint in
his own lifetime!


REMARKS ON THE PrReEcEDING ARTICLE.


3357. It may be remarked on this article, that it follows from
the first of the texts that are cited on it, that the children of the
person disinherited are excluded as well as he from the inheritance,
and that therefore, when a father disinherits his son who has chil-
dren, the disherison which deprives the son of the goods of the
testator cuts off likewise his children, and all that are descended
of him, from having any share or benefit therein. For if it were
the intention of the law to exclude from the succession only the
person of the son disinherited, and not his children, and if they
might succeed in their own right, in default of their father who is
disinherited, it would not be necessary to give them the right of
complaining of the undutifulness of the testament after the death
of their father, unless it were only to vindicate the honor of his
memory, which is not the case of this text; the sequel of which
shows, that the son who is disinherited transmits to his children
the same right which he had to complain of the testament. From
whence it follows, that, the law giving this right to the children, it
supposes that in their own persons they have to share in the in-
heritance from which their father has been excluded, unless they
justify his memory, and get the disherison annulled. And although
it be said in another law, that the son who is disinherited is con-
sidered as being dead, and that his children succeed in his place,
debent nepotes admitti nam exheredatus pater eorwm pro mortuo
habetur, L. 1, § 5, D. de conjung. cum emanc. lib. ejus, yet this
text has relation to a sort of disinheriting which was frequent in
the ancient Roman law, and had nothing odious in it, not being
founded on the ingratitude of the children; but it turned some-
times to their advantage. Multi non note causa exheredant filios,
nec ut eis obsint, sed wt ets consulant (ul puta tmpuberibus) cisque
fideicommissam hareditatem dant. L.18, D. de liber. et post, But
the disherison which a son may have deserved by his bad cenduct


h 7. 34, C. de inoff: testam.; —d. |. in f.; —1. 6, § ult. D. end.
iL. 36, inf C. eod.


TIT. IL. SEC. I.] TESTAMENTS. 445


is a punishment which ought to extend to his children; for other-
wise it would be useless, and would not even affect the son who is
disinherited, since he would have by means of his children the use
of the goods which he could not have himself.


VIIL


3308. An Eevoluntary Preterition.— If a father or mother, who
had two or more children, having disposed of their goods among
them by a testament, happened afterwards to have another child,
of which no mention was made in the testament, and died without
altering it; this testament would do no prejudice to the rights of
the said child. For if it was through negligence that the said tes-
tament was not reformed, it would be an undutiful one: and if it
was a pure effect of a sudden and unforeseen death ; as if it was a
mother who died in childbed of the said child, whose birth she per-
haps waited for, in order to settle her will; the presumption that
she could not have for the said child any other than the tender sen-
timents of a mother would supply the want of a testament, which
this unforeseen accident had put her out of a condition to make.
So that this child would still have the same portion of the in-
heritance which he ought to have had if there had been no testa-
ment at all! But if the said father or mother, having no children
at the time of making their testament, had instituted other heirs
or executors, it would be annulled by the birth of this child, either
as being an undatiful testament, or as being vacated by the said
birth.™


IX.


3359. If, of two or more Children, one alone ts disinherited,
without being particularly named, the Disherison is null.— If a
father, who had two or more children, having a mind to disinherit
one of them, did express himself in such a manner as not to dis-
tinguish him from the other childyen, saying only that he disin-
herited his son, without specifying him by name, or describing him
by some other mark; this disherison, which would not fall upon
one son more than the others, would be without effect, even as to
him whom it might be reasonable to presume that the father in-
tended to deprive of his succession."


' 1.3, C. de inoff. test.

™ See the sixth article of the fifth section of Testaments.
” L. 2, D. de lib. ef post.

VOL. If.


446 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK III.


X.

3360. Provision for the Son who ts disinherited, pending the Ap-
peal from the Sentence given tn his Favor. — If, the son who is
disinherited having procured the testament to be declared undu-
tiful by a sentence, he who was instituted heir or executor therein
had appealed from the sentence, and pending the appeal the son
should demand a provision of alimony out of the estate ; this pro-
vision would be decreed him according to the value of the estate
and his quality.°


XI.


3361. The Portion of a Child whose Disherison subsists accrues
to the other Children. — If, of two children whom a father had dis-
inherited, one of them enters no complaint against it, he renoun-
cing the inheritance for his part, or, having entered his com-
plaint, he has been declared to be duly and justly disinherited,
and the other disinherited child on his part gets the testament to
be annulled, and comes in for his share of the inheritance with the
other children; every one of them will have in the partition of the
estate his portion, according to their number, without taking him
in who is found to be justly disinherited, or who has renounced.
For he having no share in the inheritance, the portion which he
ought to have had remains in the mass of the estate, and accrues
to him who was unjustly disinherited in conjunction with the other
children. And if this child should happen to be the only one r-
maining, he would have the whole estate.?


XIL


3362. Children to whom their Parents leave less than thetr Legt-
time or Childs Part have the Supplement of tt.—If the children
have no other ground of complaint against the testaments of their
parents, but that the portion left them therein is not so large as
what they have a right to by lay, or that the testator hath made
his disposition which relates to them to depend on some condition
or on a time which suspends the effect thereof; these would not


© LZ. 27, § 3, D. de inoff. testam.

P L.17, D. de inoff. test.; —v. 1.16, eod.;—1.1,§ 5, D. de conjung. cum emanc. ld. ¢.
If one of the sons disinherited had only delayed to bring his action, without approving of
his being disinherited or renouncing the inheritance, his portion would not accrue to the
other children by this silence. But the others might oblige him to explain himself; and
it would be necessary to have the question about his disherison judicially discussed, m
case he should not acquiesce under it. V. 1. 8, § 8, D. de tnoffic. testam.


TIT. I. BEC. 1.] . TESTAMENTS. 447


be sufficient grounds for having the will declared void, on account
of its being undutiful, but they could only demand the supplement
of the portion due to them by law; and the conditions, or other
causes of delay, would be without effect, so as that they might
have their whole right at the time of the death by which they ac-
quire it.?


XIIL


3363. The Favor of the Person who is instituted Heir or Execu-
tor will not make the Disherison to subsist. — Whatever may be
urged, either on the score of piety, duty, or other consideration
whatsoever, in favor of the disposition of a testator who had un-
justly disinherited one of his sons, the testament would neverthe-
less be annulled. For the institution of children is the first duty
of parents in their testaments."


XIV.


3364. Brothers and Sisters cannot complain of a Testament, as
being Undutiful, unless the Person instituted Heir or Executor be an
Infamous Person. — Of all the persons whom the law calls to the
successions of persons dying intestate, it is only those who are in
the line of ascendants and descendants from the testator who may
complain of the testament as being undutifal. And this right
does not pass to any of the collaterals, not even to brothers and
sisters: and they cannot complain of the testaments of their
brothers or sisters who institute other heirs or executors, unless
the institution were such as were contrary to good manners and
decency, because of the quality of the person who is instituted
heir or executor, as if it were an infamous person:


4 L. $2, C. de inoff. testam. ; — 1. 29, 30, ef 31, cod. See the fifth article, and the remark
that is there made on it.

* Si imperator sit heres institutus, posse inofficiosum dici testamentum, sepissime re-
scriptum est. J. 8, § 2, D. de inoff. testam.

The case of this text appears to be so different from our usage, that we did not think it
proper to give such an instance. For who with us, to make the disherison of his children
lo subsist, would ever think of instituting the king his heir? And yet this case must
needs have been very frequent at Rome, seeing it is said in the text that it has been often
decided, that although the prince were instituted heir by an undutifal testament, yct that
should be no hindrance why a complaint against it, as being undutiful, should not be re-
ceived.

* £.1, D. de inoff. test.;—1. 21, C. eod.; —1.27, C.eod. Justinian having abolished
the difference between the agnati and cognati by his hundred and eighteenth novel, why
should not the brothers by the mother’s side have the same right as brothers by the father’s


448 THE CIVIL LAW. . [PART Ii. BOOK Itl.


SECTION II.
OF THE CAUSES WHICH RENDER A DISHERISON JUST.
Art. L
3365. Children canmot be disinherited without a Just Cause. —
Seeing nature and the laws, which call children to the succession
of their parents, look upon the goods of the parents as belonging
already to the children, even in the lifetime of their parents ; they
cannot be deprived of them, if they have not deserved such a pun-
ishment, which, taking from them the goods, does at the same
time stain their honor, and exposes them to yet greater evils.
Thus, the laws have restrained the liberty of disinheriting, of
which fathers might be apt to make a bad use, either through an
unjust passion, or by the impressions of a mother-in-law, or of other


persons: » and they have regulated the causes which may deserve
disinheriting.°


Il.


3366. Two Sorts of Causes of Disinheriting. — The causes of
disinheriting children may be distinguished into two sorts ; one, of
those which concern the person of the parents, as if. a son has at-
tempted any thing against the life of his father; and the other is
of such as, without attempting any thing directly against the per-
sons of the parents, may deserve their displeasure; as if a son
engages himeelf in an infamous possession, as shall be mentioned
in the following article. But although these causes be different,
according to these two views, yet the laws give the name of causes
of ingratitude to all those which may deserve disinheriting ;4 qual-
ifying with this name every thing that is contrary to the duty
which children owe to their parents. For this duty implies the
abstaining from every thing that may justly draw upon the chil-
dren the wrath of their fathers.


side? And would it not also be equitable, that the other near relations beyond the de-
gree of brothers should have a right to annul an infamous institation, since it would be
nevertheless contrary to decency and good manners, and against the spirit of the law, al-
though the testator should have neither brothers nor sisters ?

® Z. 19, in f. D. de liber. et post heered. inst. vel exhaered. ;—1. 5, D. de inoff. test.

b ZL. 3, cod. ;—1. 4, eod.;—1. 18, C. ead.

© See the articles which follow.

d Nov. 115, €. 8.


TIT. 11. BEC. ] TESTAMENTS, 4A9


Il.

3367. Divers Causes of disinkeriting Children. — Fathers and
mothers, and other ascendants, may disinherit their children, if
they have attempted to take away their life, either by poison or
by other ways;° if they have ‘struck them,’ or abused them, or
committed any grievous offence against them;* if they have not
relieved them out of prison, by engaging to present them in judg-
ment, or to pay the debt for them, as far as their own circum-
stances will allow them ;* if they have suffered them to remain in
captivity, while they were able to’ redeem them;! if, the father
having been med, they have neglected to perform those offices to-
wards him which that condition may have required ;! if by any
violence, or other unlawful way, they had hindered him from dis-
posing of his estate by will; and if the father had died without
being able to make his will, and to disinherit the son who had
been guilty of this violence, this son would nevertheless be deprived
of the inheritance ;™ if they have accused their parents of other
crimes besides treason against the king or the state;" if a son has
committed incest with his mother-in-law ;° if he had contracted
any familiarity with scelerates, and led the same kind of life with
them; if he had taken up an infamous profession, which his
father did not follow; % if a daughter prefers an infamous life to a
married state.’


* Nov. 115, e.3,§ 5. See on this article the third section of Hers and Executors in


general.

f Si qnis parentibus suis manus intulerit. D. c. 3, § 1.

8 Si gravem et inhonestam injuriam eis injecerit. D. cc. § 2.

Si quemlibet de preedictis parentibus inclusum esse contigerit, &c. D.c. § 8.

' Si onam de preedictis parentibus in captivitate detineri contigerit, &. D.c. § 18.

' Si quis de predictis parentibus furiosus fuerit, &. D.c. § 12.

™ Si convictas fuerit aliquis liberorum ex eo quia prohibuerit parentes suos condere
testamentum, &. D.c.§9. See the tenth article of the third section of Heirs and Erec-
stors in general.

® Si cos in criminalibus causis accusaverit, que non sunt adversus principem, sive rem-
publicam. D. c. § 3.

Si delator contra parentes filias extiterit, et per suam delationem gravia eos dispendia
fecerit sustinere. D. c. § 7.

° Si noverce sus filius eese immiseuerit. D.c. § 6.

P Si cum maleficis hominibus ut maleficus versatur. D.c.§4. It is in the Greek
pera happaxey, cum veneficis. But whatever sense we give to this word, it would seem
that this cause of disinheriting ought not to be confined to the frequenting of the compa-
Ry and imitating the example of one kind only of wicked persons.

4 Si prester volantatem parentum inter arenarios, vel mimos sese filius sociaverit;
Fs hae professione permanserit: nisi forsitan etiam parentes ejusdem professionis fuerint.

.c. $10.

* Si aliqui ex preedictis parentibus volenti sus filis, vel nepti maritum dare, et dotem

38 %


450 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT 11. BOOK If.


IV.

3368. Divers Causes of disinheriting Parents. — Children can-
not disinherit their parents, except where they have a just cause
for it; as, if they have attempted any thing against their life ;* if
they have put them in danger of losing it by some accusation, ex-
cept it be in the case of treason, mentioned in the foregoing arti-
cle ;* if the father has been guilty of incest with the wife of his
son;" if the parents have employed unlawful means to hinder
their children from making their testaments;* if they have aban-
doned them in their madness, or in their captivity ;* and if the
father or mother have attempted to take away the life or senses,
the one of the other, by poison or otherwise, their common child
may disinherit the author of such a crime.*


secundum vires substantis sus pro ea prestare, illa non consenserit, sed lnxuriosam de-
gere vitam elegerit. D.c.§11;—v. 1. 19, C. de inoff. test.

We have not inserted in this article the last of the causes of disinheriting, which Justin-.
ian has collected in his hundred and fifteenth novel, which is that of heresy. For the.
usage of this cause having ceased for a long time in France, whilst the Protestants had
the free exercise of their religion, it hath ceased in the present situation of affairs for the
contrary reason, in that the late edict and declarations have taken away from them that
liberty of conscience which they formerly enjoyed.

Although Justinian had restrained the causes for disinheriting children to those which
we have just now explained, and had rejected all others, yet we have in France another
cause of disinheriting brought into use by the ordinances, which have given permission to
fathers to disinherit their children who marry against their consent, allowing only sons
after they have accomplished thirty years of age, and daughters after they are past five-
and-twenty, to marry themselves, after they have in a dutiful manner desired the counsel
and advice of their fathers and mothers. Edict of Henry II., in the year 1556. Ordinance
of Blois, art. 41. And might not there be other just causes of disinheriting? As, for in-
stance, if a son had attempted to murder his mother-in-law, his father’s wife? if on any
occasion he had failed in any essential daty towards his parents, such as to furnish them
with necessaries in their wants ?

* Si venenis, aut maleficiis, aut alio modo parentes filiorum vite insidiati probabuntur.
Nov. 115, ¢. 4, § 2.

¢ Si parentes ad interitum vite liberos suos tradiderint: citra tamen causam que ad
majestatem pertinere cognoscitur. D.c. 4, § 1.

" Si pater nurui suw sese immiscuerit. D.c. 4, § 3.

* Si parentes filios suos testamentum condere prohibuerint, in rebus in quibus habdent
testandi licentiam. D. c. § 4.

Y Si liberis vel uno ex his in furore constituto, parentes eos curare neglexerint. D.
ce. 4, § 6.

* His casibus etiam cladem captivitatis adjungimus, &c. D.c. 4, § 7.

® Si contigerit autem virum uxori sus ad interitam, aut alienationem mentis, dare ve-
nenum: aut uxorem marito, vel alio modo alterum vite alterius insidiari: tale quidem,
utpote publicam crimen constitutum, secundum leges examinari, et vindictam legitimem
promereri decernimus: liberis autem esse licentiam nihil in suis testamentis de facultati-
bus suis illi persons: relinquere que tale scelus noscitur commisisse. D. c. 4, § 5.


TIT. 11. SEC. I11.] TESTAMENTS. 451
V.

3369. The Causes of Disinheriting ought to be proved.— It is
not enough to justify the disinheriting, that the parents, or the
children, mention the causes of it in their testaments ; but the per-
sons who are instituted heirs or executors ought to prove the facts
upon which the disinheriting is grounded: and if they prove them
not, it will be null.®


VI 7


3370. The Husband ts not deprived of his Wife's Dowry, for th
Ingratitude of his Wife towards the Parents who gave it.— Al-
though parents may deprive their ungrateful children of their es-
tate, and even revoke donations which they may have made. in
their favor, as has been said in its place ;° yet if a daughter who
was endowed by her father or mother, or any other ascendant, had
fallen into the crime of ingratitude, the marriage portion that was
‘given or promised to the husband would nevertheless be due to
him: for as to him the charges of the marriage, which he is bound
to bear, are a just title for him to keep the said marriage portion,
or to demand it, without any regard to the act of his wife.*


SECTION ITI.


OF OTHER CAUSES WHICH MAKE THE COMPLAINT AGAINST A
TESTAMENT, AS BEING UNDUTIFUL, TO CEASE.


Arr. L


3371. The Complaint against a Testament, as being Undutiful,
ceases by the Approbation of the Testament. — If the person who is
disinherited, although without just cause, had once approved of
the testament, the disherison would have its effect, whether it
was by an express act that the testament had been approved, or
by acts which did imply the said approbation, as shall be explained
by the rules which follow.®


> By the ancient Roman law, the son who was disinherited, and who had a mind to
bring his complaint, was obliged to make it appear that he was unjustly disinherited.
L. 5, D. de inoff. test. ; —1. 28, C. de inoff. test. Bat Justinian ordered that the causes of
disinheriting should be proved, nisi forsan probabuntur ingrati. Nov. 115, c.3. And it is
also the general rule, that no accusation is regarded unless it be proved.

© See the second article of the section of Donations.

4 L. 69, § 6, D. de jure dot. ; —v. 1. 24, C. eod.

* L. 81, in f. D. de inoff. test. See the following articles.


452 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IT. BOOK It.


Il.

3372. If the Person disinherited, being a Lepatee, receives the
Legacy, he approves of the Disherison. — If, in the same testament
which contains the disherison, there were a legacy left to the per-
son disinherited, as if a father, having disinherited his son, had left
him a legacy, saying, that, although he were unworthy to have any
share at all in his succession, yet he left him out of commiseration
a certain sum, or a pension for alimony, and this son had received
the legacy, he would thereby have approved the testament, and
could not any more complain of his being disinherited. But if this
son who is disinherited chanced to discover some flaw in the testa-
ment, that would be sufficient to annul it; as if it was forged, or
null through some nullity which had been hid; the legacy which
he had received would not bar him from the right of impugning
such a testament.®


it.


3373. What a Guardian does for his Minor owzht not to hurt
himself, nor what he does to himself to be of any -Prejudice to his
Minor.— If it should happen that the person who is disinherited
is guardian to one to whom the testator has left a legacy by the
same testament which contains the disherison, and that, by virtue
of his office of guardian, he had received the legacy left to his minor,
this would not be an approbation of the testament with respect to
himself ; and what the interest of his minor had obliged him to do
would be no hindrance to his bringing his complaint in his own
name against the said testament, as being undutiful. And if, on
the contrary, a father, having disinherited his son who is a minor,
had by the same testament left a legacy to one who happens after-
wards to be appointed guardian to the said son that is disinherit-
ed, the complaint which the function of this guardian would oblige
him to enter against the said testament, as being undutiful, would
not render him unworthy of this legacy. And likewise the demand
of the legacy would not exclude him from bringing a complaiat
against the testament, as being undutiful, on the behalf of his
minor, if it be well grounded.© And it would be the same thing
if a guardian were bound, as such, to impeach the testament of
the father of this minor, as being forged, if in the said testament,


> Z.10, § 1, D. de inoff. test. ;—1. 5, D. de his que ut indig. aufer. See the seventh and
eighth articles.
© § 4, Inst. de inoff. testam. ; —§ 5, eod.; —1. 29, D. de his qua ut tnd.


WIT. I. BEC. 111] TESTAMENTS. 453


which by the event was declared to be genuine, there were a lega-
cy left to the said guardian.‘ For in all these cases the guardian
exercises the rights of two persons, who are distinguished in him,
that of the guardian and that of his own; so that he does himself
no prejudice by any thing which his duty of guardian requires of
him.


IV.


3374. He who approves of the Testament by any Act, is excluded
From entering a Complaint against tt as being Undutiful.— If he
who would complain of a disherison, or of some other undutiful
disposition, had treated with the person instituted heir or executor,
either for the whole inheritance, or a part of it; if he had bought
any of the effects thereof from him, knowing him to be heir or ex-
ecutor; if he had hired of him some house belonging to the suc-
cession ; if he had paid him a sum of money which he was in-
* debted to the testator, or had receivéd payment of a sum which
the said executor, or a legatee, had been charged by the testator
to pay to bim: these kinds of acts, and others of the like nature,
would be approbations of the testament, which would bar him
from bringing a complaint against the same, as being undutiful.°


V.


3375. This Complaint prescribes in Five Years’ Time, if there be
no Just Cause for the Delay. — If the son that is disinherited, being
of full age, had let five years pass without entering his complaint,
after he knew he was disinherited, and, being present on the place,
he had suffered the person who was instituted heir or executor,
whether it was his brother or any other person, to continue in
peaceable possession of the goods of which the disherison had
stripped him, without being able to allege any excuse which had
hindered him from bringing his action; this voluntary silence,
being joined to the presumption that the disposition of his father
was just, would make it be presumed, under these circumstances,
that he had approved of it, and therefore his complaint ought not
after that to be received.‘


4 7. 30,§ 1, e0d. See the fifth article of the second section of Legacies, and the seventh
and eighth articles of this section. The said tutors would be very ill advised, if they
should omit to make the protestations which are usually made in the like cases.

© £. 23, § 1, D. de inoff. test.; —1. 8, § 10, eod.; —. 8, §.1, C. ead.

TZ. 2, C. in quib. caus. in integr. test. nec n. est ; —1. 14, in f. C. de inoff. test. ;—L. 8, § ult.

. eod.


454 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1]. BOOK UL


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3376. Although this prescription of five years may seem to be
too short a time to extinguish a demand of an inheritance, and
an heir may bring his action for an inheritance at any time
within thirty years, yet we ought to make a great difference be-
tween the silence of a disinherited son who forbears to commence
his action under the circumstances explained in this article, and
the silence of an heir who is not deprived of the inheritance by an
act of disherison: for whereas he who is not disinherited has only
the ordinary prescription to be afraid of, and his right remains
entire whilst the time of that prescription is not expired; the son
who is disinherited is excluded from the succession by an express
title which deprives him of it, and makes it to pass to another.
So that it is both his duty and his interest, and for his honor, to
annul the said title, if it is possible for him: and if he lets the five
years run, having no excuse to plead, it may be alleged against
him, either that he has suffered this time to pass, that the proofs of
the causes of the disherison might perish, or that his silence was
only the effect of his consciousness that he was justly disinherited.
It is because of these considerations that we have judged the rule
of the Roman law, which makes the complaint against an unduti-
ful testament to cease after five years’ silence, when there appears
no just cause for the delay, to be just and equitable, especially
under the circumstances which we have added, and that thus our
usage might approve of it.


VI


3377. If the Action of Complaint is let drop for Want of Prose-
cution, it is not afterwards received. — If a son who is disinherited,
having entered his complaint against the testament, lets his action
drop for want of prosecuting it within the time limited by law, this
silence, or non-prosecution of the suit, would be instead of an ap-
probation of the testament, against which he had brought his com-
plaint.¢


VIL


3378. The Complaint on the Score of Undutifulness does not ex-
clude the Action on the Head of Forgery, nor the Action of Forgery
the Complaint of Undutifulness.— If he who is disinherited by a


& L. 8, § 1, D. de inoff: test.


TIT. IL SEC. IV.] TESTAMENTS. 455


testament which he pretends to be forged, having first entered his
action on the score of forgery, had been cast in it; that would not
bar him from bringing his complaint against the testament, as _be-
ing undutiful. For although the testament were not forged, yet
the disherison might be unjust. And if, on the contrary, having
begun with his complaint against his being disinherited, he had
been declared to have been duly disinherited, he might nevertheless
impugn the testament, as being forged. For if the testament is
forged, the disherison cannot subsist, even although it had been
ratified in jadgment.>


VIIL


3379. One may plead the Nullities of the Testament, or the Un-
dutifulness of tt, successively one after the other.— If he who had
right to complain of a testament as being undutiful should like-
wise pretend that there were some nullity in the form of the testa-
ment, and that for the quicker despatch, and to avoid a suit about
the undutifulness, he should desire that the question touching the
nullity might be discussed in the first place, it would be just and
equitable to begin first with that question; and if he should be
cast in that, to admit him afterwards to his complaint against the
testament, as being undutiful. Or if, having begun with this com-
plaint, he had discovered afterwards some nullity in the testament,
as if some of the witnesses were under some incapacities which
had not been known, and which came afterwards to be discovered,
it would be just to admit that allegation! But if the circum-
stances do not require that these two causes should be divided, it .
would be proper to join them together in one and the same
action.«


SECTION IV.


OF THE EFFECTS OF THE COMPLAINT AGAINST A TESTAMENT, AS
BEING UNDUTIFUL.


Art. L
3380. If the Testator has left less than the Legitime or Portion
due by Law, it ought to be made up.— If the complaint of unduti-
b £. 14, C. de inoff. test. ' 7.16, C. de inoff. testam.


k 7.8, § 12, D. eod. We have added these last words to the article, because it is our
usage not to divide actions that may be joined in one.


456 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK II


fulness were against a testament in which no other wrong were
done to the person who complains of it, except that he was there-
by reduced to a portion less than what was due to him by lew,
without branding him with any accusation, the effect of the com-
plaint would only be to procure him a supplement of his legitime,
or portion due by law, such as it ought to be, according to the
rules which shall be explained in the following title.*


Il.


3381. The Testament being declared Undutiful, all the Children
succeed as tf there had been no Testament at all. — If the testa-
ment is declared to be undutiful, the institution of the heirs or ex-
ecutors whom the testator had put into the place of the complain-
ant will be vacated, if the said heirs or executors were others than
the children of the testator. And if they were his children, who
ought to share the inheritance with him who was unjustly disin-
herited, their portions would be diminished, by taking from them,
not barely the legitime or portion due by law to the person disin-
herited, but the entire portion which he would have had in the
inheritance, if there had been no testament at all.»


TIL


3382. A Case where the Complaint of Undutifulness augments the
Portion of the Son who is instituted. — If a testator, having two
sons, had instituted one of them his heir or executor for a less por-
tion than that which would have come to his share if his father
had died intestate; and, making no mention of the other son, or
disinheriting him, had instituted a stranger his heir or executor for
the surplus of his estate; the said institution being made void be-


® LT. 32, C. de inoff. test. ; —l. 30, eod. See the fifth article of the first section, and the
remark upon it.

b Quantum ad institutionem heredum pertinet, testamento evacuato, ad parentum he-
reditatem liberos tamquam ab intestato ex squa parte pervenire. Nov. 116, c. 3, mm /-

It would seem as if this text related only to the nullity of the institution of heirs that
were strangers, in the room of the children disinherited ; and that, as the undatiful testa-
ment is annulled only as to what concerns the disinheriting, and that the legacies be-
queathed therein do subsist, as shall be shown in the fifth article, if the testator, having
disinherited only one of his children, had institated his other children in unequal portons,
it would seem not to bo agreeable either to equity or to our usage, that the nullity of the
disherison should render the condition of the children equal which the father had distin-
guished by his will. For which reason some have been of opinion, that this rale ought
only to comprehend the bare nullity of the disherison. See the following article, and the
remark made on it.


TIT. Il. BEC, IV.] TESTAMENTS. 457


cause of the preterition or disherison, the complaint of undutiful-
neas would have this effect, that the inheritance would be divided
between the two sons, as if there had been no testament made.
By which means it would happen that the son who was instituted,
profiting by the complaint of the other son who was excluded,
and thereby getting a moiety of the estate, would have more to
his share than was left him by the testament.°


IV.


3383. Extravagant Donations and Dowries are diminished to
make up the Legitime, or Portions due by Law to Children or Par-
ents. — If a father, or other ascendant, had made donations either
to some of his children, or to other persons, or settled dowries or
marriage portions, so as to diminish his estate in such a manner
as that there would not remain effects enough to satisfy the legi-
time, or portions due by law to the other children, reckoning into
the estate the value of the things given away; these extravagant
donations and dowries would be liable to be complained of, as
being contrary to the duty of parents towards their children, were
there a testament or not; and so much would be cut off from the
said donations and dowries as would be necessary to make up the
legal portions of the children, even although the donees, and the
daughters who had been endowed, should be willing to abstain
from the inheritance. And if, the donor having no children, his
succession were to go to his father or other ascendants, they might
demand in the same manner their legitime or legal portion of the
inheritance out of the said excessive donations.*


V.


3384. The Legacies of an Undutiful Testament subsist.-—— The
testament which is undutiful because of an unjust disherison, or
a preterition, is made void only in so far as concerns the institu-
tion of another heir or executor in the place of him who is disin-
herited. Thus, when he who is instituted heir or executor is some


© £.19, D. de inoff. testam. There is this difference between the case of this article and
that of the remark which has been made on the foregoing article, that in this it is because
of the exclusion of the stranger heir that the portion of the son who was not disinherited
happens to be augmented.

d V. toto titulo Cod. de inoff. don.;—I. un. Cod. de inoff. dot.;— Nov. 93. To avoid
the length of many citations, we refer the reader to these titles, the substance of which is
comprehended in this article. See the third article of the third section of the following
title.

VOL. I. 39


458 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK I.


other person, and not one of the children, the institution remains
without any effect at all: and if they be children who are insti-
tuted by the undutiful testament, their institution is reduced in
such a manner, that he who was unjustly disinherited has as much
as he would have had if there had been no testament at all, as has
been said in the second article. But the legacies, the fiduciary
bequests, and all the other dispositions of the undutiful testament,
subsist, and have their effect, whether the person disinherited were
a descendant or an ascendant,® as has been remarked in another
place


REMARKS ON THE PreceDING ARTICLE.


3385. By the ancient Roman law the legacies of a testament
which was declared to be undutiful, whether because of a disheri-
son or preterition, were annulled as we]l as the institution, and
that for this reason, because the testament was considered as hav-
ing been made by a man out of his senses. Filio praterito, qui
fuit tn patria potestate, neque libertates competunt, neque legata
prestantur. L.17, D. de injust. rup. irr. fact. test. Oum tnoffcio-
sum testamentum arguttur, nihil ex eo testamento valet. L. 28, D.
de inoff. testam. And if the legacies had been paid, the legatees
were bound to restore them. Nec legata debentur, sed soluta repe-
tuntur. L.8,§ pen. eod. This rule had its justice, supposing a
disherison or preterition to be altogether unjust. But seeing it is
very rare, and hard to be imagined, that parents will be moved to
disinherit their children, or children their parents, without great
cause; it has been thought equitable on this consideration to ratify
and confirm the legacies and other dispositions of testaments
which contain disherisons that are annulled. And although it
does happen from hence that the condition of the legatees proves
to be more favorable than that of the person who is instituted heir
or executor, whom the testator, nevertheless, valued more than the


* Si vero contigerit in quibusdam talibus testamentis queedam legata, vel fideicommissa,
aut libertates, aut tutorum dationes relinqui, vel quelibet alia capitula concessa legibus
nominari, ea omnia jubemus adimpleri, et dari illis quibus fuerint derelicta, et tanquam in
hoc non recissum obtineat testamentum. Nov. 115, cap. 3, in sine.

This text relates to the testaments of children, and the same thing is ordained at the
end of the following chapter with respect to the testaments of parents.

Si quid autem pro legatis, sive fideicommissis, et libertatibus, et tutorum dationibas,
aut quibuslibet aliis capitulis, in aliis legibus inventum fuerit huic constitutioni contrari-
um, hoc nullo modo volumus obtinere. D. Nov. cap. 4, in fine.

f See the sixteenth article of the fifth section of Testaments.


TIT. 111.] LEGAL PORTION. 459.


legatees, as it may fall out on other occasions, as has been already
remarked in another place;* yet this event in such a case would
cause no inconvenience. For the condition of an heir or executor,
who possessed unjustly the place of the person disinherited, and
who perhaps contributed to the getting him disinherited, ought
not to be so favorable as that of the legatees, seeing the disposi-
tions in which they are concerned do not b the same injury to the
person disinherited.


TITLE III.


OF THE LEGITIME, OR LEGAL PORTION DUE TO CHILDREN OR
PARENTS.


3386. We have seen in the foregoing title, that parents ought
to leave to their children, and children to their parents, a certain
portion of their estate. It is this portion that is called the legitime,
or legal portion, which shall be the subject-matter of this title.

3387. The legal portion of children was, by the ancient Ro-
man law, only a fourth part of the portion which they would have
had if the parent had died intestate Thus, an only son had for
his legal portion the fourth part of the whole estate; and if there
were two sons, they had each of them the fourth part of one half
of the estate, that is to say, an eighth part of the whole; and so
in proportion, according to their number.

3388. This legal portion was fixed to this small proportion of
the estate at a time when they began to set some bounds to the
liberty that every one had to dispose of his goods as he thought
best,” and even to deprive his children of them. And whereas it
seems natural that the children should have either the whole es-
tate, or the greatest part of it, and that the liberty of bequeathing
should be limited to some small portion of the estate, as it is reg-
ulated by our customs; the Romans left the greatest share of the


* See the fifth article of the seventh section of Testaments, and the remark made there
Upon it.

* Quarta debits portionis. JL. 8, § 8, D. de inoff. test.

» Uti quisque legassit de re sua ita jus esto. Inst de lege Fale. ex 1. 12 tabb.; — Nov.
22, cap. 2.


460 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK ML


estate to the free disposal of the testators, and restrained the right
of the children to a small portion. So that what is said of legacies
in a law, which calls them a small diminution of the inheritance,
which ought to belong wholly to the heir or executor, would be
more applicable to this legal portion of the children, which is in
effect only a small retrenchment of the inheritance, the whole of
which may be left to one sole legatee, of whom one would be very
much in the wrong to say that his legacy were only a small dimi-
nution of the inheritance.

3389. Justinian was sensible that this portion allotted to the
children by law was not sufficient, and he augmented it, but with
moderation, distinguishing the legal portion according to the num-
ber of the children, and giving to them all, if they were four in
number, or under, a third part of the whole estate, and the half of
the estate if the children were five or more in number: so tbat
this third, or this half, is equally divided among the children, and
the two thirds, or the other half, remain for the legacies. Thus,
what number soever there be of children, the legal portions of
them all together, when they are reduced to it, are at most but
equal to the share of the legatees; and if the children be fewer in
number than five, the legatees have double the portion which is
reserved by law for the children. |

3390. Our customs in France have almost all of them distin-
guished between the several sorts of estates and goods, between
estates of inheritance and estates of purchase, between goods mov-
able and immovable; and according to these different sorts of es-
tates and goods, they have regulated differently the liberty of tes-
tators, not only with respect to the children, but even in favor of
the heirs of blood the most remote, whom they can only deprive
of a certain portion of estates of inheritance. And some customs
have made no manner of distinction of goods, but have restrained
the liberty of disposing by testament to a small portion, such as
one fourth part of all the goods in general, and reserved three
fourth parts of the whole to the heirs of blood, whether they be
children or others. Thus, these customs give a great deal more to
the most distant relations than they allow to be given to legatees;
and the portion of the estate which they appropriate to the heirs
of blood, and which they cannot be deprived of by a testament, is
much greater than the legitime, or legal portion, of the children in
the provinces which are governed by the written law.


€ ZL. 116, D. de legat. 1.


TIT. Il. SEC. 1.} LEGAL PORTION. 461


3391. It is not our business to examine here which of these
two laws is most just and equitable, whether the Roman law or
the law of our customs: both the one and the other may be use-
ful in their different ways. For if on one hand it be just that es-
tates should be appropriated to the families, and that the great
liberty that is taken in making dispositions, very often unjust,
should not strip the children and the other heirs of blood; so on
the other hand it may be of service if the said heirs, and especial-
ly the children who are incapable of being wrought upon by bet-
ter motives, be kept to their duty out of fear of seeing themselves
reduced to a very small portion reserved to them by the law.

3392. All the rules relating to this matter of the legitime, or
legal portion, respect either the persons to whom a portion is due
by law, or the quantity of the said portion, or the goods out of
which it is taken, and the manner in which it is regulated; which
shall be the subject-matter of three sections.


SECTION I.


OF THE NATURE OF THE LEGITIME, OR LEGAL PORTION, AND TO
WHOM IT IS DUE.


3393. Ir is necessary to make the same remark here, as has been
made in the foregoing title, that we are to except out of the num-
ber of children to whom a legitime, or legal portion, is due,
danghters who by their contract of marriage have renounced their
right and pretensions to their parents’ inheritance, in consideration
of a marriage portion. For although this marriage portion may
prove to be less than the legitime which would accrue to them by
law out of the goods of their fathers who have endowed them;
yet the uncertainty of the events which may diminish the said
goods is one of the motives which justify the renunciation of a
fature and uncertain profit, for a certain and present portion."

3394, We must likewise take notice, in relation to this matter of
the legitime, of the regulation that was made for the legitime of
mothers out of the successions of their children, by that ordinance
which is called the edict of mothers, of which mention has been


¢ See what has been said on this subject im the preface to this sevond part, no. 7.
* See, concerning these renanciations, what has been said in the preamble to the sec-
ond section of Heirs and Erecutors in general.
39°


462 THE CIVIL Law. [parr It. BOOK In.


made in the preamble of the first section, Is wnat Manner Fathers
and Mothers succeed.


Arr, I.

3395. Definition of the Legitime.— The legitime, or legal por-
tion, is a certain share of the inheritance which the laws appropri-
ate to those persons who cannot be deprived of the quality of heir,
and to whom they give a right to complain of undutiful wills
And this has occasioned the liberty of devising by will to their
prejudice to be restrained, so as that there may remain for them a
share of the inheritance, of which they cannot be deprived by any
disposition.®


IL


3396. The Legitime ts due to Descendants and Ascendants.—
There are two orders of persons to whom the laws give a legitime,
to children out of the estates of their parents, and to parents out
of the estates of their children. But if in the same succession
there are both children of the deceased and also parents, there will
be only a legitime for the children: for they exclude the parents
from successions.”


IIL.


3397, All Children who are capable of inheriting have a Right
to a Legitime.— All the children of both sexes have, without dis-
tinction, the right to demand a legitime, or legal portion, whether
they be in the first degree of sons or daughters, or whether they
be descended one or more degrees lower, provided only that they
be called to the inheritance, whether it be in their own name, or
by representation, as has been explained in its proper place.°


IV.


3398. The Legitime of the Children of the First Degree is regu
lated according to their Number. — When there are only children
of the first degree, they have each of them their legitime by equal
shares. And if there are at the same time children of the first de-


* ZL. 8,§ 11, D. de inoff. test. ; —1. 5, C. de inoff. don. ; — Nov. 18, cap. 1, in f. See the
following article.

> See the articles which follow, and the first title of the second book.

© Children are called to the legitime in the same order as to the succession of one who
dies intestate, according to their rank, explained in the second book, title 1, section 2


TIT, II. SEC. 1.] LEGAL PORTION. 463


gree alive, and grandchildren descended from others deceased, the
succession is divided according to the number of the children of
the first degree who are still alive, and of those who, being dead,
have left children who represent them; and these grandchildren
have only among them the legal portion which the person whom
they represent would have had: for it is that legal portion which
falls to their share.


V.


3399. And that of Children of Remoter Degrees is regulated by
their Stocks of whom they are descended. — If there were no child
of the first degree alive, but several grandchildren of the second
degree, or other degree more remote, they would have all of them
their legal portions, not according to their number, but the descend-
ants of each son would have among them the legitime which
their father would have had. And every one of these descendants
would have their share in the said legitime, greater or lesser, ac-
cording as they are more or fewer in number.


VI


3400. Among Ascendants the Legitime ts due only to the nearest.
— The second order of persons to whom a legitime, or legal por-
tion, is due, is that of parents, that is, of fathers and mothers, and
other ascendants.‘ But there is this difference between them and
children, as to what concerns the legitime, that seeing the nearest
ascendants exclude the remotest from the successions of descend-
ants, and that in the order of ascendants there is no right of rep-
resentation, as there is in the order of descendants, it is only the
nearest ascendants to whom a legitime is dues


VIL


3401. If the Ascendants are many in the same Degree, one Half
of the Legitime goes to those of the Father's Side, and the other
Half to those of the Mothers Side. —If the nearest ascendants


. This is a consequence of the foregoing article, and of the order of the succession of
children.

* This is a consequence of the same order.

* Noo. 1, in praef. § 2.

§ See the second book, title 2, section 1, article 5. We must take this article in the same
sense as what has been said of the succession of ascendants, so as that they may preserve
the right of reversion of estates that are subject to it. Seo the third section of the same
second title.


44 THR CIVIL Law. [PART il. BOOK 11.


happen to be many in the same degree, some paternal and some
maternal, the total of their legitime will be divided, not by the
head, according to their number, but in two parts, one for the as-
cendants of the father’s side, and the other for the ascendants of
the mother’s side; although the number of those of one side be
greater than the number of those of the other. And if there be
ascendants only of one side in the same degree, their legitime is
divided by heads.®


VIIL


3402. Brothers have no Legitime. — Although brothers may
complain of an undutiful testament of their brother, in the case of
the last article of the first section of the foregoing title, yet they
have not for all that a right to a legitime. For in that case it is
the whole inheritance that the law gives them, and in all other
cases they may be deprived by testament of all share in the in-
heritance:!


SECTION II.


WHAT 18 THE QUOTA OR QUANTITY OF THE LEGITIME, OR LEGAL
PORTION.


Agr. L
3403. Different Quotas of the Legttime.— The quota of the
legitime is the portion of the whole goods of the inheritance, which
is appropriated to him to whom a legitime is due. And the said
portion is differently regulated, as shall be explained by the follow-
ing articles.* a.


IL.

3404. The Legitime of Children differs according to their Num-
ber. — With respect to children, the law hath differently regulated
their legitime, according to their number,’ by the rules which
follow.


b See the second book, title 2, sect. 1, art. 6.

* See the last article of the first section of the preceding title.

* Substantis pars. Nov. 18,cap.1. Definita mensura. D.c.
b See the following articles.


TIT. 111. SEC. 11.] LEGAL PORTION. . 466


it.

3405. If there be Four Children, or under that Number, they have
a Third Part of the Estate. — If there are four children, or a lesser
number, they have all of them together for their legitime a third
part of the estate; so that this third remains entire to one only
child, if there be no more than one, or is divided among them all,
according to their number, each of them having for his legitime his
share of this third part.


IV.


3406. If there be Five or more Children, they have a Moiety of
the Estate. — If there are five children, or a greater number, they
have all of them among them for their legitime the half of the
estate ; so as that the said half be divided among them all accord-
ing to their number, each of them having for his legitime his share
of the said moiety ; and that it remain entire to one only child, if
there is but one.4


ve V.

3407. Those who come by Representation have only one Share
among them. — We must understand the two preceding articles in
the sense explained in the third, fourth, and fifth articles of the
first section; so as that the children who come by representation,
of what number soever they consist, may have among them only
the share of the person whom they have right to represent.*


VI.


3408. The Legttime of the Ascendants ts the Third Part of the
Estate. — Seeing the legitime, or legal portion, of the ascendants is
not more favorable than that of the children, and that there is for
the legitime of an only child, and even of four children, but a third
part of the estate, there is likewise only a third part for the as-
cendants, to be divided among them, if they are more in number
than one‘


REMARKS ON THE Precepine ARTICLES.


3409. It is certain that a legitime is due to ascendants, seeing
the law gives them a right to complain of the undutifulness of


© Nov. 18, ¢. 1. 4 Nov. 18, c. 1.
® See the said articles, and the second book, tit. 1, sect. 2.
£ Nov. 18, cap. 1, in fine.


466 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Il.


their children’s testaments, which it would not give them if it did
not appropriate to them a part of the inheritance, which cannot be
taken away from them. But when Justinian regulated the legal
portions by his eighteenth novel, the texts whereof have been cited
on the preceding articles, he confined himself to the legitime of
children, and did not expressly regulate that of parents. So that
it has been doubted whether the legitime of parents ought to be
the same with that which has been settled for the children. And
seeing, by this regulation of Justinian, the legitime of the children
has been diversified according to their number, having been fixed
to a third part of the inheritance when there are only four chil-
dren, or a lesser number, and to the moiety when there are five
children, or upwards, as has been said in the third and fourth arti-
cles ; there was ground to doubt whether, after this regulation, the
ascendants ought to have either a third, or a moiety, or only the
ancient legitime, which was the fourth part of what would have
fallen to them had the party died intestate, as has been said in
the preamble of this title. This question has been decided by
usage, and by the opinions of interpreters, who have judged that
the legitime of parents ought to be a third part of the inheritance.
And this opinion may be grounded on the last words of that
eighteenth novel of Justinian ; for after having there regulated the
legitime of children, he says that the same thing shall be observed
with respect to all persons to whom the ancient law gave the
right to complain of a testament as undutiful, and a fourth part of
the inheritance for their legitime. Hoc observando in omnibus per-
sonts in quibus ab initio antique quarte ratio de inofficioso lege de-
creta est. ‘These words, which are the same that have been
quoted on this article, seem to comprehend clearly enough the
ascendants, and can be understood only of one legitime, without
distinction of their number, since we ought not to suppose that
there are more than four ascendants concurring together to the
succession. ‘Thus, it would seem reasonable on that account, that
their legitime should be regulated to a third part at least. To
which we may add, that Justinian, speaking of the legitime due to
parents in the eighty-ninth novel, chap. 12, § 3, says there, that he
has already fixed the said legitime. Si vero habuerint hi qunos
predizimus aliquos ascendentium, legitimam eis relinquant partem
quam lex et nos constituimus. Which can be applied to nothing
else but to the regulation in his eighteenth novel.

3410. This first question concerning the legitime of ascendants


TIT. Ill. SEC. I1.] LEGAL PORTION. 467


has been followed by another, which has divided the same inter-
preters into two parties. It is in the case of a testator, who, hav-
ing no children, leaves behind him one ascendant, and brothers of
the whole blood, and institutes either his brothers or strangers his
heirs or executors, leaving to the ascendant only a small portion
of the inheritance, such as does not satisfy him; whether, in this
case, the ascendant’s legitime be a third part of the whole estate,
or only a third of the portion which the said ascendant would
have had if there had been no testament, the brothers concurring
with him. :

3411. Of these two parties, one pretends that the legitime of
parents is always the same, namely, a third part of the estate: and
the others will have the legitime in this case to be only a third of
the share that the ascendant would have had, if there had been no
testament. So that if, for example, there were two brothers, as
the ascendant’s portion, if there were no testament, would be a
third, as has been shown in its place,” his legitime ought to be a
third of that third; and this is their reason, which has given rise
to this question. They establish for a principle and general rule
in the matter of the legitime, or legal portion, that every legitime
is nothing else but a portion of that share of the inheritance which
would have accrued to him who demands his legitime, in case
there had been no testament. From whence they infer, that when
the deceased leaves behind him brothers by the same father and
mother, the legitime of the ascendant is diminished according to
their number; since, when there is no testament, the hundred and
eighteenth novel, chap. 2, calls to the succession the brothers of
the whole blood, together with the ascendants, by equal portions.
From whence it follows, according to their principle, that the
legitime of an ascendant, when the deceased leaves behind him
brothers, is only a third part of the share which he would have had
in conjunction with the brothers, if the deceased had died intes-
tate. So that if there were, for instance, seven brothers, the legi-
time of the ascendant, who would have had, if there had been no
testament, only an eighth part of the inheritance, would be only a
four-and-twentieth part. And to this reason they add, that, if the
legitime of the ascendants were always a third part of the whole
estate, it would fall out that their legitime might be much greater
than the portion which would have fallen to their share if there


* See the seventh article of the first section of the second title of the second book.


468 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK III.


had been no testament: since, in this very case of the seven
brothers, the portion that would fall to them, in case there were no
testament, would be only an eighth part, and yet, nevertheless,
their legitime would be a third; which, they say, would be a great
inconvenience.

3412. The others, on the contrary, have been of opinion, that
the legitime of ascendants, in all cases where it ought to take
place, is always a third of the inheritance to be divided among all
the ascendants, as that of the children is always either a third or
a half, according to their number, to be shared among them.
Which is founded on the remarks that have been just now made,
and on this, that the rule of the ancient Roman law, which fixed
the legitime at a fourth part of the portion that would be due if
there were no testament, bas been altered by Justinian, who has
regulated the legitime, not at a portion of the share that would fall
to them if there were no testament, but at a certain portion of the
total of the inheritance, to wit, a third, or a moiety. Thus, the
legitime is independent of the portion, greater or less, which one
might have in case there were no testament. To which they add,
that, the brothers having no legitime reserved to them by law, they
cannot come in for any share of the legitime of the ascendants to
diminish it.

3413. One sees that these difficulties are a consequence of the
law of Justinian, which has called the brothers of the whole blood
to the succession with the ascendants, when there is no testament.
For if the brothers of the whole blood did not concur in the suc-
cession with the ascendants, no more than the brothers by the
mother’s side only, there would never have been any doubt con-
cerning the manner of regulating this legitime of the ascendants.
From whence it seems reasonable to conclude, that seeing the
whole difficulty proceeds barely from the novelty of that law
which diminishes the portion of ascendants succeeding to one who
dies intestate, when there are brothers, and that there is no proof
that Justinian intended by that law to lessen the legitime of
ascendants, nor to render it uncertain, according as the brothers
should be in a greater or lesser number, those of the second party
may agree, without any prejudice to their cause, that the legitime
ought to be a portion of that share which one would have if the
deceased had died intestate; adding to it what seeins to be agree-
able to reason and justice, to wit, that this rule ought to be under-
stood of the portion which he who demands the legitime would


TIT. Ill. SEC. I1.] LEGAL PORTION. 469


have, in case he succeeded alone to the person dying intestate, or
that nobody concurred in the succession with him, except persons
to whom a legitime would be likewise due. For in this sense it
will always hold true, according to the ancient law, that the legi-
time will be a portion of what one would have if the deceased had
died intestate, as may be seen in the legitime of children regulated
by Justinian; since it is certain that the third or half of the estate
which he gives to the children makes a third or half of the succes-
sion, which they would have entire if there were no disposition
that curtailed them of it.

3414. The other difficulty then that remains is to know whether
Justinian, when he granted the favor to brothers of the whole blood
to call them to the succession with the ascendants, intended there-
by to make such a confusion as to overturn the order and the prin-
ciples of the legitime, or legal portions, and to make a rule which,
without being anyways explained, should have this effect, that a tes-
tator, leaving behind him a father and eleven brothers, might give
to his father only a six-and-thirtieth part of his estate, and noth-
ing at all to his brothers, leaving the five-and-thirty portions to a
stranger. Nothing obliges us to judge that Justinian’s law, which
calls the brothers together with the ascendants to the inheritance
of their brothers, ought to make such a change in the legitime of
the ascendants; but this law is limited to the successions of those
who die intestate. And although it may happen by this law, that
the legitime of an ascendant may be much greater than the por-
tion he would have had in the inheritance if the deceased had
died intestate, yet this is no greater inconvenience than that which
happens with respect to the legitime of children, that when they
are only four in number, their legitime, which ought to be greater
than if they were five in number, is nevertheless smaller. For in
this case every one of the four children has only a fourth part of a
third, which is only a twelfth part; whereas among five children,
each of them has a fifth part of a moiety, which makes a tenth
part of the whole. These kinds of consequences are natural to ar-
bitrary laws, as has been observed in other places, and are not
such inconveniences as ought to make any change in them.

3415. It seems reasonable to conclude from all these reflections,
and from the words of the eighteenth novel quoted upon this ar-
ticle, that Justinian has fixed the same legitime for ascendants as
for children, when they have a third; and that this legitime of the
ascendants is always the same, whether there be brothers, who

VOL. II.


470 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK III.


concur with them in the succession, or whether there be none.
And this rule can be attended with no inconvenience, whatever
case may happen. For if we suppose that a son institutes his fa-
ther or his mother, and his brothers of the whole blood, his heirs or
executors by equal portions, the father and mother could not com-
plain of a testament which gives them all they would have had by
law, had there been no testament. But if this son had instituted
a stranger his heir or executor, together with his father, leaving his
father not so much as what the law allots him, it would be for the
interest of the brothers that the father should have a third part,
seeing this third would come to them after the father’s death.
And, in fine, if the brothers were instituted with the father or
mother, but by unequal portions, so as that the father or mother
should have less than some of the brothers, it would not be just,
nay, it would be a hardship in the brothers, to reduce their fa-
ther or mother to a third part of the portion which each of them
would have if there were no testament.


SECTION III.


OUT OF WHAT GOODS THE LEGITIME I8 TAKEN, AND HOW IT I8
REGULATED.


Art. I.

3416. The Legitime ts regulated according to the Value of the
Goods. — Seeing the legitime is a portion of the inheritance, it is
out of all the goods in gross that it ought to be taken,* not by di-
viding each land or tenement, each right, or other goods, separately
by themselves, in order to give a part of every one thereof to him
to whom a legitime is due; but by estimating the whole effects
belonging to the inheritance, and so to give him his share of the
said effects, to the value of his portion.


II.


3417. The Demand of the Legitime is a Demand of a Partition.
— If he to whom a legitime is due insists on having his share of
the inheritance, not in value, but in hereditary effects, the heir or
executor cannot refuse it. And if they do not agree among them-


* Tertia propriss substantiss pars. Nov. 18, c. 1.


TIT. III. SEC. 1IT.| LEGAL PORTION. 471


selves, it is necessary to make a partition, and to give for the legi-
time goods of the inheritance which may make it up. For the
legitime being a part of the inheritance, the demand of a legitime
is in effect a demand of a partition ;" which ought to be made ac-
cording to the rules explained in their place.


TIL


3418. Goods given away in the Testator’s Lifetime are subject to
the Legitime. — Seeing the securing of a legitime to the persons to
whom it is due is to hinder any dispositions that might diminish
their share in the estate of him who ought to leave this legitime,
it must be taken, not only out of the goods which he has left be-
hind him, but also out of the goods which he may have disposed
of by donations made in his lifetime to his children, or to other
persons, or by marriage portions to daughters; for otherwise these
kinds of dispositions might quite destroy a legitime. Thus, it is
taken out of the goods alienated in this manner, as well as out of
those which remain in the inheritance.*


IV.


3419. The Children who are Donees may abstain from the In-
heritance, but their Donations are subject to the Legitime.— If the
children to whom the parents had made donations, or given mar-
riage portions, to the prejudice of the other children, should pre-
tend to content themselves with what had been already given
them, and offer to renounce their share in the inheritance; they
might very well abstain from taking upon them the quality of heirs,
and by that means free themselves from the charges of the succes-
sion; but their donations would be liable to be diminished in order
to make up the legitime of the other children.


V.


3420. Dowries and Gifts are reckoned as a Part of the Legitime.
— All the kinds of goods which may be liable to be brought into
hotch-pot in case of a partition, such as the donations mentioned
in the foregoing article, and those which may have been made to
the same persons who demand a legitime, enter into the mass of


b T. 36, C. de inoff. test. © See the title of Partitions.

4 Z.1, C. de inoff. donat. ; —v. tot. h. tit. et l. un. C. de inoff. dot.;— Nov. 92. See the
fourth article of the fourth section of the foregoing title.

© Nov. 92.


472 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK IIL


the goods from whence the legitime is to be taken, and contribute
towards it. Thus, when the legitime is due to him who ought to
bring in goods to the mass of the inheritance in case of a parti-
tion, he ought to reckon what he has received as a part of his legi-
time; and what may be wanting to make it up is either taken
from the others, or out of the bulk of the inheritance. And if he
who demands the legitime has received nothing, he takes it out of
the whole inheritance: and the donees who have received too
much ought to contribute to it in proportion’


VL


3421. The Fruits of the Legitime are due from the Time the Suc-
cession is open. — Seeing the legitime is due at the moment that
the succession is open, the fruits and other revenues of it are like-
wise due from the said moment; and the testator cannot hinder it
by any disposition.¢


VIL

3422. The Legitime cannot be subject to any Charge, Delay, or
Condition. — If the testator had made some disposition which he
intended should be in lieu of the legitime of one of his children,
and having settled it either at a certain sum, or in some particular
goods, or even at a certain portion of the inheritance, he had added
thereto some condition, or some delay for the delivery or payment
of what he had left, or some other charge; these conditions, these
delays, these charges, would be without effect, if what he had
given did not exceed the value of the legitime. For as it is noth-
ing else but a certain portion of the inheritance which cannot be
diminished by the testator, he can neither charge it with any bur-
den, nor retard the payment or delivery of a thing which ought to
go to his children at the time of his death, and that without any
diminution.®

VIIL

3423. The Legitime of Children of different Marriages is not
distinguished. — If there are two or more children of the same
father or mother by different marriages, their legitimes will not be
distinguished by the difference of those marriages; but all the

f L. 29, inf. C. de inoff. tet. See the title of the Contribution of Goods.


& Nov. 18, c. 8.
h L. 32, C. de inoff. teat.


TIT. Iv] TESTAMENTS AVTER SECOND MARRIAGES. 473


children of the same father, or of the same mother, although by
different marriages, will have each of them their legitime, accord-
ing as the number of them all together shall demand!


TITLE IV.


OF THE DISPOSITIONS OF THOSE WHO HAVE MARRIED A
SECOND TIME.


3424. Every body is sensible of two truths in relation to second
marriages, and both the one and the other are equally agreeable
to religion and to nature. One is, that second marriages are not
unlawful; and even the church condemns those who esteem them
such.* And the other is, that the liberty of marrying a second —
time, howsoever lawful it may be even for such as have children
by a former marriage, is nevertheless attended with some mark of
distinction, by fvhich the laws of the church and of the state dis-
tinguish the condition of those who marry again from that of per-
sons who have not taken the same liberty. As to the church, the
canon law forbids the receiving into holy orders those who have
been twice married.” And it makes likewise some other distinc-
tions of second marriages, which are sufficiently known, and which
it is not our business to speak of here. As to the laws of the
state, they have set bounds to the dispositions which persons who,
having children, do marry a second time, may make of their es-
tates.

3425. The motives of these laws of the church and of the state,
in relation to second marriages, are different according to their
different views. For the church considers in them a kind of in-
continency, which it tolerates, but which makes the persons ap-
pear in her eyes less pure, and by that means less fit to exercise
those sacred functions of which the holiest persons ought to ac-
count themselves unworthy. And the laws of the state consider
in second marriages the inconvenience of the wrong which per-
sons who marry again do to their children. And to prevent the


' Mow. 29, c. ult. ® S1,g. 1, ¢. 11, 12, 18.
> 1 Tim. 8, 2; —dist. 26, et tit. de bigam. non ordin. ; —v. Nov. 6, c. 5.
40*


474 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IIL


dispositions which parents, whose affection for their children may
be alienated by a second marriage, might make to their prejudice,
the laws have appropriated to the children the goods which came
from their fathers or mothers to the survivor of the two who mar-
ries again. They have likewise restrained the dispositions which
the survivor who marries again might make of his or her own
proper goods in favor of the second husband, if it is the mother, or
of the second wife, if it is the father who has married again. And
they have given the name of punishment of second marriages to
that which they have ordained on this subject in favor of the chil-
dren of those persons who marry again.°

3426. It is these rules which restrain in favor of the children the
dispositions of fathers and mothers who marry again, that we are
to treat of under this title, and which our usage has taken from
the Roman law. For even that ordinance which is called the
edict of second marriages, made by Francis IL in the year 1560,
hath been taken from thence, as we shall observe on the articles of
this title which have relation to those of the said ordinance.

3427. By second marriages, whether it be that of the husband
or of the wife, is understood every marriage which is not the first;
and whatever number of marriages there may have been, they are
all comprehended under this name of second marriages, with re-
. spect to that party of the married couple who had been married
before. For as to the other party who had never been married
before, it cannot be said to be a second marriage.

3428. It may be remarked here, that besides the punishments of
second marriages which relate to the dispositions of goods, there
were others in the Roman law against the intemperance of women.
Thus, those who married again within the year of mourning
were noted with infamy.‘ And there were several other punish-
ments ordained against them. Thus, she who abandoned her-
self to a slave became slave to the master of him to whom she
prostituted herself, if she persevered in that amour after a denun-
ciation made by the master of the said slave ; which was abolished
by Justinian‘ Thus, Constantine declared the crime of those
women who prostituted themselves to their own slaves, even in
private, to be capital.s

3429. Of these several sorts of punishments, there is only that

© Nov. 2, c. 2, § 1;— Nov. 22, c. 23. 6 7.1, C. de sec. nup.


© D.L1;—L2, eod.;—1. 12, C. de admin. tut. Lun. C. de senat. Claud. toll.
& L. un. C. de multer. ques se propr. serv. junz.


TIT. Iv.] TESTAMENTS AFTER SECOND MARRIAGES. 475


which relates to the second marriage of a widow within her year
of mourning that has been received into use with us; but even
this punishment has been abolished, and we observe the canon
law, which has rejected it.* For although the incontinency of a
woman who marries again within her year of mourning gives her
justly a bad reputation, and great inconveniences may follow
from it, because of the doubt that may arise which of the two
husbands should be reckoned father of a child who should be born,
for example, seven or eight months after the marriage of a widow,
which she had contracted within two months after the death of
her first husband; yet the church tolerating these sorts of mar-
riages to avoid a greater evil, it absolves from the legal infamy the
widows who marry again before the said term. And as for the
other punishments which do not suit with our policy, which does
not admit of slaves, those laws have served as a pattern with us
for the regulation which was made by one of the articles of the
states of Blois, by which it was ordained that widows who married
again foolishly to persons that were unworthy should not have
power to make any dispositions in favor of such husbands, and
that they should be even interdicted the free administration of their
estates! :

3430. As to the subject-matter of this title, it is necessary to
distinguish two sorts of rules which have been made concerning
second marriages, in order to preserve the rights of the children
whose father or mother contract a second marriage. One is of
those rules which secure to the children the goods which their
father or mother, who marries again, inherited from the father or
mother of these children who died first. And the other is of such
rules as relate in general to all the other goods of the person who
has contracted a second marriage. And these two sorts of rules
shall be the subject-matter of two sections, which shall be preceded
by a first section, wherein it is necessary to distinguish the several
sorts of goods which a person who marries again may be pos-
sessed of.


» C. penult. et ult. de sec. nup. ! Ordinance of Blois, article 182.


476 TBE CIVIL Law. [Part I. BOOK IIL


SECTION I.


OF THE SEVERAL SORTS OF GOODS WHICH PERSONS CONTRACTING
A SECOND MARRIAGE MAY BE POSSESSED OF.


Agr. L

3431. Three Sorts of Goods belonging to the Persons who marry
@ Second Time. — We must distinguish three sorts of goods which
a person who contracts a second marriage, having children by a
former, may be possessed of: those which came to the wife from
her first husband, if it is the wife, or from the first wife, if it is
the husband ; those which come to the husband or wife from some
one of their common children; and those which they may have
acquired some other way.*


IL


3432. Two Sorts of Goods which the Husband or Wife may have
from one another.— A wife may have from her first husband, or a
man from his first wife, goods of two sorts; that which any one of
them may have acquired by their contract of marriage, and that
which the party who dies first may have left to the survivor by a
testament or other disposition.>


III.


3433. Goods which the Husband acquires from the Wife, or the
Wife from the Husband, by their Marriage.— We must reckon
among the goods which the husband acquires from the wife, or
the wife from the husband, by their contract of marriage, all and
every thing that is stipulated by the contract itself, or given by the
law or by custom without stipulation, in favor of one party, out
of the goods of the other, whether the said goods, stipulated or not,
have any peculiar name, such as that of nuptial gains, dower, aug-
mentation of dowry, or any other such like name, or that it be
some other right which has no particular name.


* There can be no goods which are not comprehended in this division.

» These two kinds comprehend all. See the first, second, and following articles of
the second section. The second part of this article is to be understood of dispositions
which are allowed between husband and wife. For there are customs which prohibit dif-
ferently these dispositions, as has been observed in the preamble of the second section of
Heirs and Executors in general.

© See the first and following articles of the second section, and the texts cited on those
articles.


TIT. IV. SEC. 11.] TESTAMENTS APTER SROOND MARRIAGES. 477


IV.

3434. Goods which came to the Father or to the Mother from their
Children. —'The goods which may come to the father or to the
mother from some of their common children consist either in the
usufruct they may have of the goods of their children, or in the
property of what may fall to them of their succession, whether by
testament, or when they die intestate.*


V.


3435. Goods of the Father or Mother coming by other Titles. —
All the other goods which fathers and mothers who marry a
second time may have, are those which they have had either of
their own patrimony, or have acquired by their industry, or by
other titles besides those which have been just now specified.®


VL
3436. These several Sorts of Goods have their different Rules. —
It has been necessary to distinguish these different kinds of goods.


For there is none of them but what is the subject-matter of some
one of the rales which follow‘


SECTION II.


THE RIGHTS WHICH CHILDREN HAVE TO THE GOODS WHICH THEIR
FATHER OR MOTHER WHO MARRIES A SECOND TIME HAD ACQUIRED
FROM THE PARTY WHO DIED FIRST.


Art. I,

3437. The Children have a Right to the Goods which came from
their Father or Mother to the Person who marries again. — When
a man who survives his wife, or a wife who survives her husband,
contracts a second marriage, having children by the former, all the
goods which came to them from the party deceased, whether on
the score of gains acquired by their contract of marriage, or by
dispositions, whether the same are to have their effect in the life-
time of the giver, or after his death, or in any other manner what-


4 See the first and second sections, In what Manner Fathers succeed, &c.

* See, touching these sorts of goods, the third section.

We must compare the articles of this section with those of the two following seo-
tions, according as they have relation to one another.


478 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART LI. BOOK 11.


soever, are appropriated to the common children from the moment
of the second marriage,* as shall be explained by the rules which
follow.


IL


3438. The Children acquire the Property of the said Goods by the
Second Marriage of their Father or Mother.— Of all the sorts of
goods mentioned in the preceding article, the property thereof ac
crues to the children from the moment of the second marriage of
the father or mother: and the person who marries a second time
has only the usufruct of these sorts of goods during life, and can-
not make any alienation, engagement, donation, or other dispo-
sition of them.”


JIL.


3439. And the Goods belong to them by equal Portions. — This
property accrues to the said children by equal portions. And the
father or mother who marries again has not the liberty to choose
among the children, in order to prefer or benefit some of them
before the others, neither in the total of these sorts of goods, nor
in a part of them. For the second marriage is equally prejudicial
to them all, and they are all of them equally concerned and in-
terested therein.°


® See the following articles, and the texts cited on them.

6 Fominz que susceptis ex priore matrimonio filiis, ad secundas (post tempus lactui
statutum) transierint nuptias: quidquid ex facultatibus prioruam maritorum sponsalium
jure, quidquid etiam nuptiarum solennitate perceperint, aut quidquid mortis causa dons
tionibus factis, aut testamento jure directo, aut fideicommissi, vel legati titulo, vel cajusli-
bet munifice liberalitatis premio ex bonis (ut dictum est) prioram maritoram fuerint
adsecutez : id totum, ita ut perceperint, integrum ad filios, quos ex preecedente conjagio
habuerint, transmittant. 2.3, C. de sec. nupt. Habeant potestatem possidendi tantum
atque fruendi in diem vite, non etiam alienandi facultate concessa. D.1. 3; — Nov. 2,¢.2;
~— Nov. 22, c. 23 a 24;— 1. ult. C. de bon. mat.

Generaliter censemus, quocunque casu constitutiones ante hanc legem mulierem libens
communibus, morte mariti matrimonio dissoluto, que de bonis mariti ad eam devoluts
sunt, servare sanxerunt: iisdem casibus maritum quoque ques de bonis maulieris ad eum
devoluta sunt morte mulieris matrimonio dissolato, communibus liberis servare. JL. 5, C
de sec. nupt.

It is from these laws that the second head of the edict of July, 1560, has been taken,
which prohibits widows who marry a second time from giving to their new husbands
any share of the goods which they had by the gift and liberality of their deceased hus-
bands; and directs that the said goods may be preserved to their common children ; and
ordains the same thing with respect to husbands, as to the goods which came to them by
their wives.

© Nov. 22, c. 25.


TIT. IV. SEC. 11.] TESTAMENTS AFTER SECOND MARRIAGES. 479


IV.

3440. We do not distinguish the Origin of the Goods in which
the Husband or Wife has Gain.— Whether the wife’s marriage
portion was of her own proper goods, or whether it came from
some other hand, and, in consideration of her marriage, her
father, or some other persons, had given it to her; all the gains
and advantages which may accrue to the husband out of these
sorts of goods are considered as come from the goods of the wife,
and are subject to the rules which have been just now explained.
And likewise the gains and advantages which the wife may have
out of the goods of the husband, whatever way he came by them,
are considered as goods come from the husband, and are subject to
the same rules.


V.


3441. These Gains accrue to the Children, although they be not
Heirs either to the Father or Mother. — Seeing the right of the chil-
dren to these sorts of goods which have been just now mentioned
in the preceding articles accrues to them by the bare effect of the
second marriage of the father or mother, as has been said in the
second article; these goods do belong to them, although they be
not heirs either to their father or their mother. And the children
who are their heirs will not exclude those who shall have re-
nounced the inheritance. But if any one of the said children,
whether he be heir or not, either to the father or to the mother,
having once acquired his right, happens to die, leaving children be-
hind him, he may dispose of these gains among them unequally,
in the same manner as he may of his other goods.


VL


3442. When the Children die Intestate, the Father or Mother who
Marries a Second Time has no Share in the Goods which the said
Children inherited from their Deceased Father or Mother. — If
one of the children whose mother had married a second time
should happen to die, leaving behind him his said mother and
brothers, he would have the liberty to dispose in favor of his
mother of all his several sorts of goods, and even of those goods
of his father’s which had come to him by the effect of the rules


« Now. 22, c. 93, inf,
* Nov. 22, c. 26,§1;—~1.7, C. de sec. nupt.;—d.l. 7, in f:


450 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK II.


which have been just now explained ; and his brothers would have
no right to claim either the usufruct or property of the things left
to their mother by such disposition’ But if the son had died
without disposing of his part of the goods which he had from his
father, the mother would have no right of property in them, the
same remaining to the other children, whether it be that she married
again the second time before the death of her son, or only after*
For seeing the goods which are appropriated to the children by
the second marriage of their mother do belong to them all equally,
by the title which is common to them, they have among them the
right of accretion therein. But as for the usufract of that share of
the father’s goods which belonged to the deceased son, and for all
the other goods which he may have had any other way than by
his father, or that he might have acquired by his own industry, or
by succession, or otherwise, the mother would succeed to them,
either as to the property or usufruct thereof, according to the rules
which have been explained in their place.»


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3443. We have restrained the rule explained in this article to
the mother only, without extending it to the father, because the
novel of Justinian from whence the rule has been taken is limited
to the mother ; but it would seem that their condition ought to be
equal. And seeing the rules explained in the preceding articles,
which by the former laws related only to mothers, have been ex-
tended to fathers by subsequent laws, as appears by the last text
cited on the second article, and that Justinian has, in other places,
made this general remark, that all the punishments of second
marriages are common to the husband and the wife; it seems that
we may justly conclude from this principle, that this rule, as well
as the others, ought to regard the men as much as the women.
Contra binubos pene communes et viri sunt et mulieris. Nov. 2, cap.
2, in fin. Communis mulieris et virti mulcta. Nov. 22, cap. 23. To
which we may add the example of another law of the same em-
peror, who, having enacted much severer punishments against the
women, when they separated from their husbands without just
cause, than against the men for the same case, did afterwards
make those punishments equal, and that for this reason, that in 2


£ Nov. 22, c. 46, § 1, inf. 5 D.c. 46, § 2.
h See the remark on the succession of mothers at the end of the preamble to the title,
In what Manner Fathers succeed, and the fourth article of the first section of the same title.


TIT. IV. SEC. I1l.}] TESTAMENTS AFTER SECOND MARRIAGES. 481


like offence their punishment ought to be the same: J delicto
enim equali, similes ets imminere penas justum esse putamus. Nov.
127, cap. 4. Thus, the spirit of all these rules seems to require
that there should be an equality between the man and the wife for
all the consequences of second marriages.


SECTION III.


OF THE DISPOSITIONS WHICH PERSONS WHO HAVE MARRIED TWICE
MAY MAKE OF THEIR OWN PROPER GOODS.


Art. L


3444. The Person who marries twice cannot give more to the
- Second Husband or Wife than what is equal to the Share of such of
his or her Children as has the least Share.— Although the father
or mother who has married a second time retain the property of
all the goods, excepting what is appropriated to the children of
the first marriage, pursuant to the rules explained in the preced-
ing section; and nothing hinders them from alienating the said
goods, and even giving them to other persons, provided they do
not thereby encroach on the legitime, or portion reserved by law
to the children; yet this liberty is bounded by one of the punish-
ments of second marriages. For it is not allowed to the wife
who, having children by a former marriage, has married a second
time, to dispose of any sort of her goods in favor of the second
husband, nor to the husband to dispose in favor of the second wife,
whether it be by their second contract of marriage, under the title
of nuptial gains, dower, or other disposition whatsoever, whether
the same be to take effect in the lifetime or after the death of
the giver, unless they reserve to every one of the children as
much as is given away ; and the gift will be limited to the portion
which the person who has married the second time shall have left
to the child to whom he or she has left the least share.*


* Non liceat plus novercs vel vitrico testamento relinquere vel donare, seu dotis vel
ante nuptias donationis titulo conferre, quam filius vel filia habet, cui minor portio ultima
voluntate derelicta vel data faerit. 2. 6, C. de sec. nupt.

It is from this law that the first head of the edict of July, 1560, is taken, which prohib-
its women who have married twice from giving any part of their goods or movables of
the estates which they themselves have purchased, or which have come to them by de-
scent from their ancestors, to their new husbands, to the father, mother, or children of
their said husbands, or other person who may be presumed to be in trust for them, more

VOL. IT. 41


482 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK It.


IT.

3445. Netther directly nor indirectly by the Interposition of other
Persons. — If, to elude the rule explained in the foregoing article,
the person who has married a second time had made some dispo-
sition in favor of persons interposed, in order to transmit by them
to the second husband, or to the second wife more than what had
been left to any child of the first marriage who had the least share;
the said disposition would be reduced in the same manner as if it
had been made in express terms to the second husband, or to the
second wife.”


TIL.


3446. The Computation of the Goods is made according as they
are found at the Time of the Death.— We must understand what
is said in the first article, concerning the reduction of what is left -
to the second husband or wife to the portion of the child of the
first marriage who has the least, not of the portion of the goods
which the father or mother who makes the disposition may have
at the time of making the said disposition that is liable to be re-
duced, but of the portion of the goods which they shall be found
to have at the time of their death. For the goods may be either
augmented by acquisitions, or diminished by alienations and losses.
And it is only at the time of the death of the father or mother
that it can be known what portions the children will have in their
goods, so that the gift to the second husband or wife may be com-
pared with the portion of the child who shall have the least, and
be made equal to it.°


IV.


3447. What ts cut off from the Gift belongs in common to the
Children of the First Marriage. — This diminution of the gift made
to the second husband or wife does not accrue to that child who
has the least share in the parent’s estate; but it goes to all the
children together by equal portions. For it is in favor of them all
that the diminution is ordained.*


than what they have given to such of their children to whom they have given the least
share of their estates.

b Z. 6, C. de sec. nupt. ; — Nov. 22, c.27. This is so regulated by the edict of July,
1560, concerning second marriages, as has been remarked on the foregoing article.

© Nov. 22, cap. 28.

d Nov. 22, cap. 27.


TIT. IV. SEC. I11.] TESTAMENTS AFTER SECOND MARRIAGES. 483


V.

3448. The Children of divers Marriages take each of them the
Goods which their Parents had by the Marriage of which they are
descended. When there are children of divers marriages who
come to share the goods of their father or mother, those of each
marriage take out of the mass of the inheritance that which came
by the marriage of which they are descended to their father or
mother whose succession they divide. And although the second
marriage have not been followed by a third, yet the children of
this second marriage have the same right, and the same approba-
tion of what ought to come to them, as those of the first marriage
have in the goods that belong to them.* But the other goods,
which are the proper goods of the father or mother who leave
children of different marriages, are divided among all the children
- by equal portions, unless there be some disposition that distin-
guishes them which cannot be set aside as being undutiful, and
which does not encroach on the right of their legitimes or legal
portions.‘


VI


3449. The Usufruct left to the Survivor is not lost by the Second
Marriage, unless it was left on that Condition. — If the surviving
father or mother had had a usufruct which the deceased husband
or wife had left by any disposition whatsoever, such usufructuary
would keep it, although he or she married a second time, unless it
had been left on condition that the right to it should cease upon
marrying again. And the father who marries again retains with
much more reason the usufruct which he had of the goods of his
children, and even of those goods which the said children had of
their mother.®


© Nov. 22, c. 29;—l. 4, inf. C. de sec. nupt.

f ZL. 4, D. ad senat. Tertull. et Orphit. ; —d. 1. 4, C. de sec. nupt.
& Nov. 22, c. 32.

bh J. ult. C. de bon. mat.


482 TRE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IT.


II.

3445. Netther directly nor indirectly by the Interposition of other
Persons. — If, to elude the rule explained in the foregoing article,
the person who has married a second time had made some dispo-
sition in favor of persons interposed, in order to transmit by them
to the second husband, or to the second wife more than what had
been left to any child of the first marriage who had the least share;
the said disposition would be reduced in the same manner as if it
had been made in express terms to the second husband, or to the
second wife.”


TIL


3446. The Computation of the Goods is made according as they
are found at the Time of the Death.— We must understand what
is said in the first article, concerning the reduction of what is left -
to the second husband or wife to the portion of the child of the
first marriage who has the least, not of the portion of the goods
which the father or mother who makes the disposition may have
at the time of making the said disposition that is liable to be re-
duced, but of the portion of the goods which they shall be found
to have at the time of their death. For the goods may be either
augmented by acquisitions, or diminished by alienations and losses.
And it is only at the time of the death of the father or mother
that it can be known what portions the children will have in their
goods, so that the gift to the second husband or wife may be com-
pared with the portion of the child who shall have the least, and
be made equal to it.°


IV.


3447. What ts cut off from the Gift belongs in common to the
Children of the First Marriage. — This diminution of the gift made
to the second husband or wife does not accrue to that child who
has the least share in the parent’s estate; but it goes to all the
children together by equal portions. For it is in favor of them all
that the diminution is ordained.*


than what they have given to such of their children to whom they have given the least
share of their estates.

b ZL. 6, C. de sec. nupt.; — Nov. 22,c.27. This is so regulated by the edict of July,
1560, concerning second marriages, as has been remarked on the foregoing article.

© Nov. 22, cap. 28.

4 Nov. 29, cap. 27.


TIT. IV. SEC. 11!.] TESTAMENTS AFTER SECOND MARRIAGES. 483


V.

3448. The Children of divers Marriages take each of them the
Goods which their Parents had by the Marriage of which they are
descended. — When there are children of divers marriages who
come to share the goods of their father or mother, those of each
marriage take out of the mass of the inheritance that which came
by the marriage of which they are descended to their father or
mother whose succession they divide. And although the second
marriage have not been followed by a third, yet the children of
this second marriage have the same right, and the same approba-
tion of what ought to come to them, as those of the first marriage
have in the goods that belong to them. But the other goods,
which are the proper goods of the father or mother who leave
children of different marriages, are divided among all the children
’ by equal portions, unless there be some disposition that distin-
guishes them which cannot be set aside as being undutiful, and
which does not encroach on the right of their legitimes or legal
portions.£


VIL


3449. The Usufruct left to the Survivor is not lost by the Second
Marriage, unless it was left on that Condition. — If the surviving
father or mother had had a usufruct which the deceased husband
or wife had left by any disposition whatsoever, such usufructuary
would keep it, although he or she married a second time, unless it
had been left on condition that the right to it should cease upon
marrying again® And the father who marries again retains with
much more reason the usufruct which he had of the goods of his
children, and even of those goods which the said children had of
their mother.»


* Nov. 22, c. 29;—1. 4, in f. C. de sec. nupt.

! L. 4, D. ad senat. Tertull. et Orphit.; —d. 1. 4, C. de sec. nupt.
& Nov. 22, c. $2.

h L. ult. C. de bon. mat.


BOOK IV.


OF LEGACIES, AND OTHER DISPOSITIONS MADE
IN VIEW OF DEATH.


3450. Leeacrgs, and the other dispositions made in view of
death, which are to be treated of in this book, are distinguished
from testaments, which have been discoursed of in the preceding
book, in this, that it is essential to a testament that it contain an
institution of an heir or executor, which is a general disposition of
all the testator’s goods, although there were nothing else in the
testament besides this bare institytion, seeing the heir or executor
is universal successor; whereas these other dispositions are only
particular dispositions of certain things. nd it is for this reason
that, although one may make these sorts of dispositions in a tes
tament, as one may make a testament without any other disposi-
tion besides the bare institution of an heir or executor, and one
may give legacies and make other dispositions in view of death
by other acts than a testament, it has been necessary to distin-
guish these two matters, and to give to every one its separate
rank.


TITLE I.


OF CODICILS, AND OF DONATIONS IN PROSPECT OF DEATH.


3451. Copicius are dispositions made in view of death, which
are distinguished from testaments by two characters. One is that
of their formalities, which are fewer than those of testaments; and
the other is that of their use, which is limited to legacies and fidu-


TIT. I. SEC. I.] CODICILS. 485


ciary bequests, whereas a testament ought necessarily to contain
an institution of an heir or executor. Thus, all dispositions made
in view of death, in which there is no heir or executor named, will
only have the nature of codicils, or donations in prospect of death,
and not of a testament, even although they should have all the
formalities required to a testament; which must not be under-
stood in the sense of the Roman law, and of the provinces where
the same is observed. For in the customs, as they admit of no
testamentary heir, the distinction between testaments and codicils
is there altogether useless; and they give there the name of testa-
ments to all dispositions made in prospect of death.

3452. We shall not repeat here, touching the difference between
the use of testaments and that of codicils, what has been said
thereof in the fourth section of Testaments, where the matter of the
codicillary clause, which is often inserted in testaments, hath been
handled. The reader will be pleased in reading this title to con-
sult that section of the codicilldry clause, where we have been
obliged, in order to explain the effect of the said clause in testa-
ments, to explain some rules which relate to the use of codicils;
and he will find there at the same time the rules of the Roman
law concerning this matter, which he might expect to meet with
here. We say nothing here of donations made in prospect of
death, which shall be the subject-matter of the third section.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE AND USE OF CODICIL8, AND OF THEIR FORM.


ArtTicre I.
3453. Definition of a Codicil. — A codicil is an act which con-
tains dispositions in prospect of death, without the institution of
an heir or executor."


IL


3454. To make a Codicil, one must have Power to make a Testa-
ment. — Although the codicil do not contain the institution of an
executor, as a testament, yet nobody can make a codicil if he has
not a right to make a testament. For the liberty of disposing of


® § 2, Inst. de codic.; —I. 2, C. eod.
41°


486 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOX IV.


a part of one’s goods supposes the same qualities as those that are
necessary for disposing of the whole. Thus, they who are inca-
pable of making a testament cannot make a codicil.


HL


3455. One may make a Codicil either with a Testament or with-
out a Testament. — As it is free for every one who has power to
make a testament either to make a testament or a codicil, one may
equally make either the one without the other, or both together,
whether in this last case the testament precede or follow the codi-
cil, or both the one and the other be made at the same time; and
whether also the testament confirm the codicil that is already
made or to be made,’ or that it make no mention of it at all, pro-
vided only that the testament which is made after the codicil do
not annul it.£ And the liberty of all these different manners of
disposing is the effect of that which every one has, who has a right
to make a will, to dispose either of all his effects by a testament,
naming an heir or executor, or only of a part of them by legacies,
and other particular dispositions in a codicil, if he intends to have
no other heirs besides those of his blood. And one may likewise
make several codicils, either at the same time or at different times


IV.


3456. One may make several Codicils, which may subsist all to-
gether. — Besides the difference between a testament and a codicil,
which results from the rules explained in the first article, it is ne-
cessary to remark a second difference, which is a consequence of
the former, that, seeing the testament contains a universal disposi-
tion of the totality of the testator’s goods, there cannot be several
testaments of which all the dispositions subsist together; and the
last testament annuls the dispositions of the former, if it does not
expressly confirm them. But codicils containing only particular
dispositions of a part of the goods, one may make several codicils,
as has been said in the Pecone article, and they subsist all of


> TL. 6, § 8, D. de jure cod.

© See, touching the causes which make this capes the second section of Zestaments.

4 § 1, Inst. de cod.

¢ I. 8, D. de jure cod.

f Bee the eighth article.

8 § alt. Inst. de codic.

h 7.1, D. de injust. rupt. ; ~§ 2, Inst. quid. mod. teat. infirm. See the first article of the
fifth section of Testaments.


TIT. I. SEC. I.] CODICILS. 487


them, except the changes which a testament or the last codicils
may have made!


V.


3457. The Codicil makes a Part of the Testament when there is
one.—— When there is together both a testament and a codicil,
whether they be made at one and the same time, or at different
times, and whether the testament or codicil make mention of one
another, or make no mention, the codicil is considered as making
a part of the testament™ For the dispositions both of the one
and the other are equally the last will of the testator, and the par-
ticular dispositions of the codicil ought to be considered as con-
tained in the general disposition which is essential to the testa-
ment. Thus, the dispositions of the testament and those of the
codicil are interpreted the one by the other, and are reconciled
with one another in such things as may subsist both of the one
and the other. But if one of them makes any alteration in the
other, the last disposition, even in the codicil, will have its effect
in that which may be regulated by a codicil."


VI.


3458. The Next of Kin is charged with the Execution of the Cod-
icils, when there is no Testament. — As when there is a testament
he who is instituted heir or executor is bound to execute the dis-
positions of the codicils, so when there is no testament it is the
heir at law, or next of kin, who is charged with the execution of
them,° in the same manner as if he were instituted heir or executor
by a testament. For he might have been deprived of the inherit-
ance, and it was out of free good-will that the deceased has left it
to him.» Thus, the dispositions of a codicil have, with regard to
him, the same effect as if they were ordained by a testament in
which he were made heir or executor.!


VIL


3459. Difference between the Two Sorts of Codicils.— It follows
from the two foregoing articles, that there is a difference between


| TL. 6, D. de jure codic. ' See the eighth article.

™ L, penult. D. testam. quemad. aper.;—1. 16, D. de jure codic.

" We have added these last words, because, as shall be said in the ninth article, one
cannot dispose of the inheritance in a codicil.

° L. 16, D. de jure codic.

P L. 8, § 1, D. de jure codic. 9 L. 2, § 2, eod.


488 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I]. BOOK Iv.


the two sorts of codicils, that is, those which happen to be accom-
panied with a testament, whether the same follow or precede the
codicils, and those of persons who die without a testament ; that
these last are in lieu of a testament, containing all the dispositions
of the deceased, in the same manner as if he had made a testa-
ment and named therein his heir at law for his executor, charging
him with what should be contained in the codicil; whereas the
codicil of him who has likewise made a testament has relation to
that testament,’ and makes a part of it, as has been said in the
fifth article.


VIL


3460. The Codictl hath its Effect, although tt be not expressly con
firmed by the Testament. — If he who had made a codicil makes
afterwards a testament in which he makes no mention of the cod-
icil, the codicil will nevertheless have its effect. For although it
be not expressly confirmed by the testament, yet it is confirmed in
so far that it has not been revoked. And it is presumed that the
testator has persevered in the same mind, since he has ordered
nothing to the contrary. But if the testament contained any dis-
positions contrary to those made in the codicil, or if it made any
alteration in them, the last will would be the rule.


TX.


3461. One cannot impose by a Codicil a Condition on which the
Institution of the Heir or Executor shall depend.— As one cannot
by a codicil make an heir or executor, so likewise one cannot take
away the inheritance by a codicil, nor consequently impose on the
heir or executor a condition on which it should depend whether
he should be heir or not; nor can he take away a condition of this
nature imposed by the testament. For these sorts of dispositions
would have the effect to take away and give the inheritance;
which cannot be done but by a testament, to which more formali-
ties are required than to a codicil."


F Intestato patrefamilias mortuo, nihil desiderant codicilli: sed vicem testamenti exhi-
bent. Testamento autem facto, jus sequuntur ejus. LZ. 16,tn f. D. de jure codic. We
may give to this text the meaning explained in this article, although it has another which
shall be mentioned in the remark on the fourth article of the following section.

* § 1,10 f. Inst. de codic. ; —1. 3, § 2, D. de jure codic.

t ZL. 5, in f. D. de jure codic.

" L. 6, D. de jure codic.; — 4 2, Inst. de codic. ; — 1. 27, § 1, D. de condit. inst.


TIT. 1. SEC. I1-] CODICILS. 489


X.

3462. Five Witnesses are required to a Codicil.— For the valid-
ity of a codicil, itis necessary that it should be attested by five
witnesses of the same quality with those who are allowed to be
witnesses to a testament.*


XI.


3463. Rules of Testaments which agree to Codicils.— We may
add, as a last rule of the nature and use of codicils, that we must
apply to them and observe in them all the rules of testaments
which may have relation to and agree with codicils. Thus, we
may apply to codicils the rules which relate to the capacity or in-
capacity of persons, whether to make dispositions in prospect of
death, or to receive any liberality by such dispositions, the rules
touching the interpretation of the said dispositions, those of condi-
tions, and, in general, all the other rules of testaments which may
be applied to codicils.7


SECTION II.
OF THE CAUSES WHICH ANNUL CODICILS.


Art. I,


3464. The Codicil is Null for Want of the Necessary Formalities.
— The codicil is nnil if it wants the number of five witnesses who
have the qualifications necessary for giving testimony, or if it
wants any one of the other formalities explained in the third sec-
tion of testaments.*


= TZ ult. § ult. C. de codic. The formalities of codicils, as well as those of testaments,
depend on the usage of the places, as has been said concerning the formalities of testa-
ments. See the first article of the third section of Testaments.

Y One may be able to judge of the truth and use of this rule by the relation which the
rules concerning testaments, which have been already explained, have to codicils.

* See the text cited on the tenth article of the first section, and the remarks on the same
article, and the third section of Testaments.

It is necessary to observe, as to the formalities explained in that third section of Testa-
ments, that there are some rules of that section which do not agree to codicils; as, for ex-
ample, those of the ninth and tenth articles, which say that the heir or executor, his chil-
dren, his father, and his brothers, cannot be witnesses to the testament; for in a codicil
there is no heir or executor.


490 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK Iv.


IT.

3465. Or tf tt is revoked by a Second.— A first codicil is an-
nulled by a second which revokes it.» But if the second makes
only some changes in the first, both the one and the other will
subsist in what the second shall not have changed. And if the
second makes no alteration at all in the first, both of them will
have their effect.°


JIL.


3466. Or by a Testament. — A testament subsequent to a codicil
may either confirm it, or revoke it, or make some alteration in it,
with much more reason than a second codicil may: which de-
pends on the manner in which the testator shall have explained
himself in the said testament.‘


IV.


3467. The Birth of a Child annuls the Testament and Coditcil. —
If he who, having no children, had made a codicil and a testament,
happens afterwards to have children, the testament and the cod-
icil will be void.®


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3468. This text relates only to- the case where there is both a
codicil and a testament: and it is said in another text, that when
there is only a codicil without a testament, the birth of a child
does not annul it. Agnatione sut heredis nemo dixerit codicillos
evanuisse. LL. pen. D. de jure cod.;—1l. 16, eod. This difference,
which the Roman law makes betweeil a codicil without a testa-
ment and the codicil of him who had also made a testament, is
founded upon this, that he who makes a codicil, and dies without
making any testament, dies with an intention to leave his succes-
sion to his heir at law, and that therefore his intention is that his
heir at law should execute the codicil; whereas, when there is both
a testament and a codicil, it is a rule in the Roman law that the
codicil shall follow the condition of the testament, and that it shall


b 1. 8, C. de codic.

© This is a consequence of the power which one has to make several codicils. See the
fourth article of the first section.

4 See the fourth, fifth, and eighth articles of the firat section.

¢ Rupto testamento posthumi agnatione, codicillos quoque ad testamentum pertinentes
non valere, in dubium non venit. JZ. 1, C. de codic.


TIT. I. SEC. II] CODICILS. 491


subsist if the testament ought to subsist, or that it be void if the
testament is annulled. Intestato patrefamilias mortuo nihil deside-
rant codicilli, sed vicem testamenti exhibent: testamento autem facto,
jus sequentur ejus. LL. 16, in fine, D. de jure cod.

3469. This law, which makes all the codicils of those who have
made no testament to subsist without distinction, might in certain
cases trespass against equity. For if we suppose that a man who
was not married, and had no hopes of having any children, had
made a codicil in which he had disposed of the greatest part of his
estate, thinking to leave the remainder, which would be the least
part of it, to his heir at law, a collateral relation, and one who did
not stand in need of it; and that afterwards he should happen to
marry, and to have children, and to die without revoking this cod-
icil, either through forgetfulness, or because he had been surprised
by death; it would seem very hard to make such a codicil to sub-
sist in a case where even a testament would be annulled, not only
as to the institution of an heir or executor, but as to all the other
dispositions thereof, even the most favorable.” And if equity re-
quires that the birth of a child should annul in its favor all the dis-
positions of a testament, the same equity would seem likewise to
require that the birth of a child should annul also the dispositions
of a codicil, although it be not accompanied with a testament;
seeing this circumstance is wholly indifferent to the right of the
child, who is as much or more injured by the dispositions of such
a codicil, as he can be by a testament. So that, seeing the motive
which has induced us to receive into our usage the dispositions of
the Roman law is only the equity thereof, which renders those dis-
positions of the Roman law which we observe just in all places,
and at all times, and that we reject such dispositions thereof as
seem to deviate from that equity, and which savor too much of
those niceties which we see so frequent there, we did not think it
proper to set it down as a rule, that the birth of a child does not
annul a codicil when there is no testament. Neither have we put
down the contrary in this article; but we have contented ourselves
with making this remark here concerning this difficulty, in which
we should be afraid to trespass against equity if we should lay it
down as a general rule, either that all codicils are valid when
there is no testament, or that they are null when there is a testa-
ment which is found to be null. For this first rule would be at-


* Bee the fifteenth article of the fifth section of Testaments.


492 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


tended with the inconvenience that has been just now taken notice
of, if the birth of a child should not annul a codicil that is not ac-
companied with a testament. And it may be said of the other
rule of the Roman law, which annuls indifferently all codicils
when there is a testament which proves to be null, whether the tes-
tament be made after or before the codicil, or be made at the same
time, that it may also have its inconveniences, except in the cases
where the codicils and testaments have such a connection with one
another that the dispositions which they contain ought all of
them either to subsist or perish together; as, for example, if a
testator, who, having no mind to explain his particular dispositions
by a testament, had only named his heirs or executors in the
testament, requiring them to execute the dispositions which he
should afterwards make by a codicil, had accordingly made a
codicil which contained legacies with which he burdened his heirs
or executors differently and apart, one with some, and the others
with others, and it happened that this testament proved to be
null, either by reason of the incapacity of the heirs or executors, or
for want of some formalities; one might without transgressing
against justice or equity annul this codicil so linked and united to
this testament. But if a testator, who, without any design of
making a testament, had first made a codicil, containing some
dispositions in favor of poor relations or servants, or for some
charitable uses, should afterwards chance to make a testament,
and institute for his heir or executor either his heir at law, or even
some other person, would it be necessary, in order to do justice,
that, if this testament should prove null, the codicil should like
wise be annulled, because it is the rule in the Roman law, that,
when there is a testament, all codicils are to follow the fate
thereof ?

3470. All that has been said here touching the difference of
codicils in the cases where there is no testament, and in the cases
where there is, concerns only the provinces which are governed by
the written law. For as to the customs, the reader has already been
sufficiently informed, that, as all the dispositions which are made
there are only codicils, seeing they cannot there make an heir by
a testament, this difference is of no manner of use in them. And
as for the provinces which are governed by the written law, we
have seen there, and there are still to be seen at this day, several
lawsuits which are occasioned by the difficulties which arise from
certain cases which are pretended to be excepted from the rule of


TIT. I. SEC. I1I.] DONATIONS IN PROSPECT OF DEATH. 493


the Roman law, which annuls all codicils when there is a testa-
ment which is found to be null. It is easy to imagine that the
liberty of excepting certain cases is a source of many lawsuits.
Which makes it to be wished that there were on this subject some
regulation, which should make the validity of codicils either to de-
pend absolutely on that of testaments, when there are any, or to
be wholly independent on them, or which should give some tem-
perament thereto, if any that is just and necessary can be found.


V.


3471. Other Causes which annul Codicils.— We may add, for a
last rule concerning the causes which may annul a codicil, that we
must join to those causes which proceed from the want of formali-
ties, and to the others that have been just now explained, some
others of the number of those which also annul testaments; such
as if the person who had made a codicil dies under an incapacity
incurred by a sentence of condemnation; if the codicil has been
made by force; if he who made it did afterwards cancel it.‘


SECTION III.


OF DONATIONS MADE IN PROSPECT OF DEATH.


3472. IT is necessary to distinguish, in these terms of donation in
prospect of death, two different ideas of two things which they signi-
fy in their common acceptation with us. For we may understand
by these terms the deed or writing which contains the disposition
of the donor, as we understand by the word codicil the writing
which contains the legacies; and we may likewise understand by
these terms of donation in prospect of death, the very disposition
itself, that is, the beneficence contained in the writing, as the
legacy is contained in the codicil. Thus, whereas with respect to
legacies we make use of two distinct words, to wit, that of codicil,
which signifies the writing in which the legacies are contained,
and the word legacy, which signifies the dispositions made in the
codicil; in the case of donations made in prospect of death we
have only this one term, which has both senses, and which signi-
fies equally the disposition of the person who gives, and the wnit-


f See the fifth section of Testaments.
VOL. IT.


404 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IT. BOOK Iv.


ing which contains the said disposition; which may proceed from
hence, that usually the terms donation in prospect of death are
only made use of when there is one only donation made by a par-
ticular act or writing; whereas codicils may contain one or more
legacies, and likewise other dispositions.

3473. It was necessary to observe the distinction of these two
meanings which the terms donation in prospect of death may
have, in order to prevent the reader’s forming to himself a wrong
idea of what is the subject-matter of this section. For he might
imagine that this section should contain all the rules which may
relate to donations made in prospect of death, either as to the
formalities of the acts or writings which contain these sorts of dis-
positions, or as to their nature. And he might likewise fancy,
that, as in the preceding sections we have explained only what
concerns codicils, without saying any thing of legacies, which shall
be the subject-matter of the subsequent title, so we should make
the like distinction in donations because of death. But since we
are to explain the detail of the rules relating to legacies only in the
following title, and the said rules are applicable to donations
made in prospect of death, they being of the nature of legacies, we
shall explain in this section only such rules concerning donations
made in prospect of death as ought to be separated from those of
legacies, whether it be that the said rules relate to the donation
itself, that is, to the liberality of the donor, or to the writing which
contains it; and it will be easy to distinguish in every article what
it relates to.

3474. Before we proceed to the explanation of the few rules of
which this section consists, it is proper to observe, that, seeing the
bare word donation comprehends the donations that are to take
effect in the lifetime of the donor, as also the donations that are to
have their effect only after the donor’s death, it is necessary to dis-
tinguish aright the nature of these two sorts of donations, and for
that end to consult what has been said of this matter in the pre
amble to the title of Donations that have their Effect in the Life-
time of the Donor, and likewise what is there said of the maxim,
To give and to retain ts good for nothing ; which has been ex-
plained in the same place.


Art. L


3475. Definition of a Donation made in Prospect of Death. — A
donation made in prospect of death is a disposition made by him


TIT. I. SEC. I1l.] DONATIONS IN PROSPECT OF DEATH. 495


who, not being willing to strip himself in his lifetime of the thing
which he intends to give away, desires that after his death it may
go to the person whom he has a mind to favor with it, and that he
should have it rather than his heirs.*


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3476. In the Roman law they distinguished three sorts of dona-
tions because of death. The first is of those where, without any
present danger of death, one gives out of a view that he must some
time or other die. The second is of those where the donor, find-
ing himself in some danger of death, gives in such a manner that
he strips himeelf of the thing which he gives away, and conveys it
to the donee, whom he makes master of it. And the third is of
those donations where, in the same case of a danger of death, one
gives in such a manner that the thing given shall not belong to
the donee till after the donors death. Julianus libro septimo
decimo Digestorum tres esse species mortis causa donationum ait.
Unam cum quis nullo presentis periculi metu conterritus, sed sola
cogitattone mortalitatis donat. Aliam esse speciem mortis causa
donationum ait, cum quis imminente periculo commotus, ita donat, ut
statim fiat accipientis. Tertium esse genus donationum ait, si quis
periculo motus non sic det ut statim faciat accipientis, sed tunc
demum cum mors fuertt secuta. L. 2, D. de mort. caus. donat ; —
§ 1, Insttt. de donat.

3477. We shall not set down here as rules these three ways of
giving in prospect of death. This distinction does not agree with
our usage ; for it is to be observed that the second of these three
sorts of donations in prospect of death has a character quite op-
posite to the essential character we give to donations made in
view of death, which is, that they are revocable, and that they do
not put the donees in possession till after the death of the donor.
Whence it follows, that this second sort of donation would be a
donation that takes effect in the donor’s lifetime, since it would
put the donee immediately into possession. And it is to be ob-
served, also, that by our usage those who are in imminent danger
of death, through sickness or otherwise, cannot make donations
that are to have their effect in the donor’s lifetime. As to the
two other sorts of donations in prospect of death, according to


* Mortis causa donatio est, cum quis habere se valt quam eum cui donat: magisque
eum cui donat, quam heredem suum. LZ. 1, D. de mort. caus. donat.;—4§ 1, in f. Inst. de
donat.


496 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOK Iv.


our usage it is indifferent whether the person who makes the
donation because of death be in immediate danger of it, or

‘not. And they must all of them be:in writing, and made in due
form.

3478. What has been just now said, that by our usage those
who are in imminent danger of death cannot make donations that
are to have effect in the lifetime of the donor, is to be understood
of donations of immovable goods, or of sums of money, or of
other things that are not actually delivered to the donee ; for what
is actually delivered, the donation thereof is good and valid, unless
it be done in fraud of the law, or of custom, beyond the bounds of
what one may give away in prospect of death.

3479. It may likewise be remarked concerning that usage of the
Roman law as to donations in prospect of death, that they reck-
oned in the number of such donations the other ways by which it
may happen that one has something because of the death of an-
other, which they called mortis causa capio; as if a father gave
something because of the death of his son. It would be needless
to instance in more examples of this kind, there being nothing in
this matter that deserves our observation. V. 2 8, 12, 18, e¢ 21,
D. de mort. causa donat. et capion.


IL


3480. Wherein Donations made in Prospect of Death and Codi-
cils do agree, and wherein they differ. — There is this difference be-
tween a codicil and a donation in prospect of death, that the name
of codicil is given indifferently to all acts which contain the several
dispositions which one may make in prospect of death besides
that of the institution of an executor, whatever number there be
of the said dispositions, and of what nature soever they may be;
but by a donation in prospect of death is properly understood
only one single particular disposition. Thus, he who, besides
making a testament and codicils, if he had a mind to make any,
or without making either testament or codicil, had a mind to dis-
pose of a sum of money, or other thing, in favor of some person,
might give to the act or writing that should contain the said dispo-
sition the name of donation because of death, which one does not
give to the other acts which contain several dispositions: but he
might likewise give to this disposition the name of codicil. Thus,
it is the same thing for a donation in prospect of death, whether it
be expressed under this name in a writing made expressly for that


TIT. I. SEC. I11.] DONATIONS IN PROSPECT OF DEATH. 497


purpose, or whether it be contained in a codicil, either under the
name of legacy, or under that of donation.”


III.


3481. Formalities of Donations made on Account of Death. — Do-
nations made in prospect of death being of the same nature with
codicils, the same formalities ought to be observed in them: and
as five witnesses are required to a codicil, the same number is like-
wise necessary to a donation in prospect of death.


IV.


3482. Who may make Donations in Prospect of Death. — The
same persons who may or may not make testaments or codicils,
may also or may not make donations because of death. For the
same capacity is required for this sort of dispositions as for the
two others.¢


V.


3483. The Rules of Codicils agree to Donations made in Prospect
of Death. — We ought to apply to the acts or writings which con-
tain donations made in prospect of death, the other rules which
relate to codicils, as they may agree with them. And it will be
easy to discern those rules without repeating them in this place.*


VI.


3484, And also the Rules of Legacies.— As to what concerns
the nature of donations made in prospect of death, it being the
same with that of legacies,‘ they have also the same rules, which
shall be explained in the following title.


b See the sixth article of this section, and the third article of the first section of Lega-
cies, and the texts cited on them. As to this whole article, the reader may consult the
preamble of this section.

© Bee the text cited on the tenth article of the first section of Codicils, and the remark
there made upon it. Quinque testibus preesentibus. ZL. ult. C. de donat. caus. mort.

d See the second section of Testaments.

® See the two preceding sections.

61, Inst. de donat. ; — v. i. ult. C. de donat. caus. mort.


42°


498 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IV.


TITLE II.
OF LEGACIES.


3485. Lecacies are particular dispositions on account of death,
which distinguish the legatees from the heir or executor, in that
the legatees succeed only to that which is taken off from the in-
heritance to be given to them, and that they are as it were particu-
lar successors; whereas the heir or executor is universal successor
to the whole mass of the goods.

3486. There is likewise this difference between legatees and ex-
ecutors, that an executor cannot be made but by a testament,
whereas legatees may be made, not only by a testament, but also
by a codicil. And it is the same thing for the legacies, whether
they be contained in one or other of these two sorts of disposi-
tions, which are distinguished with regard to legacies only in this,
that the legacies left by a testament are due from the executor, and
those left in a codicil, without a testament, are due from the heir
at law, or next of kin.

3487. It is necessary also to remark here, as we have done in
other places, that in the customs of France, if a testator institutes
any other person for his heir or executor besides him who has a
right to succeed by law, if there were no testament, they do not
give him the name of heir, but only that of universal legatee. For
although he succeeds to all the goods and to all the nights which
the testator has power to dispose of, yet the customs give the
name of heir only to the heir of blood, to whom they appropriate
the goods which they do not allow the testator to dispose of; and
this legatee is distinguished from particular legatees by this quality
of universal legatee. Thus, the disposition made in his favor is
not called the inheritance, even although it should comprehend all
the effects of tlie testator, if he had none but what he had power
to dispose of; but it is only called a universal legacy.

3488. Seeing there are some matters which are common both
to legacies and to the institution of an heir or executor, and that
it was necessary to explain them under the title of Testaments, we
shall not repeat here what has been already explained of these
matters, as that which concerns the rules of the interpretation of
the dispositions of the testator, those relating to conditions, de-
scriptions, and other manners which may diversify the said dispo-


TIT. 11.] LEGACIES. 499


sitions, the rales concerning the right of accretion, of transmission,
and others which have been explained under the title of Testa-
ments. Neither shall we say any thing here of the formalities
necessary to legacies, this matter having been explained in the
same title of Testaments, and in that of Codicils, which are the dis-
positions by which legacies are given. And, in general, the reader
ought to apply to legacies all the rules explained in those other
titles, according as they are capable of being applied thereto. And
under this title we shall treat of the rules which are peculiar to the
matter of legacies.

3489. It is further to be remarked, that under the name of leg-
acy it is necessary to comprehend that kind of dispositions on
account of death which are called particular fiduciary bequests,
distinguished from legacies in the ancient Roman law both by
their name and their nature, but confounded with one another by
the latter laws, which have given to the said fiduciary bequests the
nature of legacies, and have made these two sorts of dispositions
equal in every thing.* But because there is in reality some differ-
ence between legacies and particular fiduciary bequests, and that
we shall be obliged to make use of this term fiduciary bequest,
and to quote laws in which it is mentioned, it is necessary not
only to inform the reader thereof, but to explain here, on this sub-
ject, that which ought to precede the rules, in order to make them
rightly understood.

31490. A fiduciary bequest is a disposition by which the testator
prays his heir or executor to deliver to some person either the
whole succession, or a part thereof, or something in particular.
The first use of fiduciary bequests was such, that it depended
wholly on the heir or executor either to comply with this request
of the testator’s, or not to comply with it, as he thought fit; and it
was from thence that the Latin word fideicommissum came, be-
cause it was committed or remitted to the faith and integrity of
the heir or executor; but afterwards the heirs or executors were
compelled by law to execute these sorts of dispositions.®

3491. The fiduciary bequests of the whole inheritance, or of a
part of it, are a matter which shall be explained under the third
title of the fifth book. And as for particular fiduciary bequests,
although, as has been just now remarked, they have been made


® Per omnia exxquata sunt legata fideicommissis. JZ. 1, D. de legat. 1.
b V. tit. Inst. de fideicom. hured. et tit. de sing. reb. per fideicom. relict.


500 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


like unto legacies, yet it is necessary to distinguish in these fidu-
ciary bequests two sorts of rules: those which are common to
them and to legacies, which shall be explained under this title;
and some others that are peculiar to them, which shall be explained
in the second section of the third title of the fifth book.

31492. It is necessary, finally, to remark on the subject-matter of
this title, that, donations made in prospect of death being distin-
guished from legacies only by name, as has been remarked in the
third section of the preceding title, we must apply to those donsa-
tions the rules which shall be explained under this title. Thus,
the reader must remember that what shall be here said only of
legacies ought likewise to be understood of fiduciary bequests,
and of donations because of death, unless there be some difference,
which it will be easy to discern.

3493. It is not needful to explain here the different kinds of leg-
acies which had been in use in the Roman law. For although
this knowledge might be of use for the right understanding of the
texts of some laws, Justinian having confounded all these sorts of
legacies together, giving to them all the same nature and the same
effect, yet the explanation of this distinction would be useless.
However, we may take notice of one way of bequeathing, which had
been rejected by the ancient law, and which Justinian has allowed,
and which with ua might either be approved or rejected, according
to the circumstances. It was that manner of bequeathing which
they called, by the way of punishment, pane nomine,’ when the
testator ordained or forbade something to his heir or executor, or
imposed some condition on him, adding thereto a penalty either
of doing or giving something in case he should fail to execute the
will of the testator. Thus, by our usage, a testator might legally
order the payment of a legacy at such a time, and impose the pay-
ment of interest as a punishment for his delay to make payment.
Thus, a testator might require his heir or executor to take into
partnership with him in his commerce a person to whom he had a
mind to procure that advantage; adding, that, in case his said heir
or executor would not receive such a one for his partner, he should
give him a certain sum of money. But our usage would not ap-
prove of a testator’s enjoining his heir or executor to marry, or not
to marry, his daughter to such a one, or, if he should contravene


© § 2, Inst. de legat.; —1.1, C. comm. de legat.
4 § ult. Inst. de legat.; —1. un. C. de his que pen. nom.


TIT. If. BEC. 1.] LEGACIES. 501


his order, to give to such a one the sum of so much. And al-
though such a legacy seems to be approved by Justinian, contrary
to the ancient law which condemned it, yet it would seem to be
an encroachment on the liberty of marriage, and by that means be
contrary to decency and good manners.


SECTION I.


OF THE NATURE OF LEGACIES, AND OF PARTICULAR FIDUCIARY
BEQUESTS.


3494. Tae remark which has been made in the preamble of this
title, on fiduciary bequests, explains the reason why we add to the
title of this section particular fiduciary bequests.


Art. I.
3495. Definition of a Legacy. — A legacy is a particular dispo-
sition, because of death, in favor of some person, either by a testa-
ment or a codicil.*


IL
3496. Definition of a Particular Fiduciary Bequest.— A partic-
ular fiduciary bequest is a disposition by which the executor or a


legatee is entreated to restore, or to give to a third person, a cer-
tain thing.®


ITI.


3497. Legactes, Particular Fiduciary Bequests, and Donations
because of Death, are all of the same Nature.—It is the same
thing for the validity of the dispositions of a testator, whether he
express himself in relation thereto in the words of a legacy, or of
a fiduciary bequest, or a donation because of death; for all these
sorts of dispositions have the same nature and the same use:° and
whether the testator express himself in terms of entreaty to his
executor, or whether he commands him, or, without addressing
himself to the executor, explains his will, the executor will be


e V.d. § ult.

@ L. 36, D. de legat. 2; — § 1, Instit. se aaa de legat. 1.
b Inst. da sing. red. per. fideicom. relict

© ZL. 1, D. de legat. 1;—1. 87, D. de legat. 3; —§ 1, Inatit. de donat.


502 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART lI. BOOK IV.


bound to execute it. And it is the same thing if it is a legatee
whom the testator requires or entreats to give or remit a sum of
money, or any other thing, to a third person.°


IV.


3498. Wherein consists the Validity of these Dispositions. — The
validity of legacies, of fiduciary bequests, and of donations on ac
count of death, implies two things; the quality of the disposition,
which is that wherein their nature does consist, and the formalities
of the acts which contain them, whether they be testaments, codi-
cils, or donations.‘


V.


3499. Their Nature, and the Formalities to be observed in them.
— The quality of these dispositions which constitutes their nature
consists in the essential characters which the laws prescribe, and
on which it depends whether they have their effect, or whether
they be null. And the formalities respect the acts or writings
which contain these dispositions, and which are the proof of their
verity ; which is held to be well established, when the said acts
are according to the form regulated by law. These formalities
have been explained in their proper place. And as for the nature
and characters of these dispositions, we must join to what has
been said of that matter in the first three articles all the rules of
this title, and of the preceding titles, in so far as we can judge
they have any relation to them.


VI


3500. Essential Characters of these Dispositions. — It is essential
to the validity of these three sorts of dispositions, that the persons
who make them have the power to do it, that those in favor of
whom they are made be not incapable of them, and that the
things which are disposed of be such as may be disposed of.
These three characters shall be the subject-matter of the two fol-
lowing sections, where we must understand what shall be said only
of legacies as if it had been also expressed of fiduciary bequests,
and of donations because of death»


4 7. 2, C. com. de legat. © Z.1, C. comm. de leg. Seo the seventh article.

f See the following article.

& See the third section of Testaments, the first section of Codicids, and the third article of
the third section of the same title.

» See the two following sections.


TIT. HH. BEC. I.] LEGACIES. 503


VIL.

3501. A Testator may burden the Legatees with Legacies to
other Persons. — A testator may burden with a legacy, or a fidu-
ciary bequest, not only his executor, but likewise a legatee, as has
been said in the third article. And if he had made a testament, or
a codicil, or a donation because of death, he might burden by new
dispositions those to whom he had given something by former
ones, which, having been made only in prospect of death, may
suffer this diminution


VIL


3502. A Thing left to several Persons is divided equally among
them. — if one and the same thing is bequeathed to two or more
persons, without distinction of portions, it will be equally divided
among them, share and share alike.


IX.


3503. A Legatee of several Legacies cannot restrain himself to
those that are without Burden. — As one may bequeath one and the
same thing to several persons, so one may leave to one person dif-
ferent legacies, either without a charge or with a charge: and the
legatee may accept those which he shall think fit, and reject the
others; unless it be that those which he refuses would oblige him
to some charge. For in this case he could not divide the lega-
cies, and by accepting one he would be liable to the charges of
the others.


Xx.


3504. Legacies are only due after all the Debts are paid.— We
may add as a last rule of the nature of legacies, and of other dis-
positions on account of death, that since testators can dispose
only of their goods, the debts owing by the testator, even those
that are the least favorable, are preferred before all his dispositions,
of what kind soever they be."


i Zorum, quibus mortis causa donatum est, fideicommitti quoquo tempore potest. L.
77, § 1, D. de legat. 2. See the last of the texts cited on the third article.

We have added in the article, that the testator may charge with legacies those to whom
he has given something by preceding dispositions made in prospect of death; for he could
not impose new burdens on those to whom he had made simple donations that were to
have their effect in his lifetime.

1 Z. 19, § ult. D. de leg.

= 7. 5, $1, D. de leg. 2.

a LZ. 66, § 1, D. de leg. Fale.


004 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II.-BOOK Iv.


SECTION II.
WHO MAY GIVE LEGACIES, AND WHO MAY RECEIVE THEM.


3005. We must understand what shall be said of legacies here-
after in the sense which comprehends particular fiduciary bequests
and donations because of death, as has been already sufficiently
remarked ; and it is for brevity’s sake we insert here only the word


legacy.


Arr. I.


3506. Who may give Legacies. — The same persons who may
make a testament may give legacies. Thus, to know if a person
may give a legacy, we must examine if he is not under some of
the incapacities which hinder a man from making a testament,
and which have been explained in their proper place.*


II.


3007. At what Time are we to consider the Capactty or Incapactly
of the Person who leaves the Legacy.— Seeing the rules touching
the incapacity of bequeathing are the same with those of the
incapacity of making a will, the rules concerning the time when
we are to consider the incapacity of the person who disposes are
the same with respect to legacies as with respect to the instite
tion of an executor, and they are explained in the same place.


II.


3508. Who may receive Legacies. — All persons who are capable
of being named executors of a will are also capable of receiving
legacies; and it is only such as are capable of being executors
that are capable of being legatees. Thus, in order to know who
those persons are, we need only to consult the rules which are set
down in their proper place.°


IV.
3509. Persons unworthy of Legacies.— We must not rank in


the number of persons incapable of legacies those who render


® See the second section of Testaments.
b See the fourteenth article, and those that follow, of the second section of Testaments.
© See the same second section of Zestaments.


TIT. 11. SEC. 11] LEGACIES. 5065


themselves unworthy of them. Thus, for example, a legatee who
by collusion with the next of kin, or out of some other motive,
should conceal the testament, in which he had a legacy left him,
would render himself unworthy of it* And every legatee in
whom should be found any one of the causes which render the
heir or executor unworthy of the inheritance, and which have been
explained in their place, would be also unworthy of the legacy.


V.


3510. The Same.— We must not reckon among the persons
unworthy of legacies him who, being next of kin, had impugned
as null the testament which contained a legacy in his favor. For
although the testament were confirmed against his pretension, yet
seeing it did not anyways injure the honor of the deceased, and
that he only exercised a right which he ought not to be deprived
of by this legacy, nothing could be imputed to him that should
render him unworthy of the legacy. But if this legatee, after hav-
ing received his legacy, should impeach the will as being forged,
pretending that the executor had made it, and the will should be
confirmed by sentence, he would lose the legacy, because of the
injury he had done to this executor. But if the legatee who is
next of kin, having received the legacy left him, should afterwards
attempt to annul the testament because of some flaw therein,
which ought to have this effect, such as the incapacity of the per-
son instituted heir or executor, his action would be received, and
it would be no ber to him that he had approved the testament by
receiving his legacy. And, in general, when the question is
whether a legatee who receives his legacy loses the right which
he may have to the inheritance, it is by the circumstances of his
person, of his condition, of his age, and others, that it ought to
be decided.‘


VI


3011. Particular Rules concerning Persons who may receive Leg-
aces. — Although, for understanding who the persons are to whom
legacies may be left, it be sufficient to know, that whoever is not
incapable of being heir or executor may be a legatee; yet there


¢ Z. 25, C. de legat.

* See the third section of Heirs and Executors in general.

{ L.7,§ 1, D.de his que ut ind. auf. See the second and following articles of the third
section of an Undutifid Testament.

VOL. Il.


506 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


are in relation to this subject some particular rules, which it is
necessary to distinguish from this general rule, either because they
are exceptions to it, or for other considerations, which one will be
able to judge of by the rules which follow.s


VIL


3512. One may bequeath Alimony to a Person incapable of other
Legacies. — The incapacity of inheriting or receiving a beneiit
by some disposition made in prospect of death does not compre-
hend legacies of alimony. For the same being of an absolute
necessity to whosoever lives, it is but equitable that all persons
whatsoever should be capable of receiving it. Thus, one may
bequeath alimony even to those who are under sentence of death,
or condemned to other punishments, which imply civil death ;.and
whilst they continue in life, they may enjoy a legacy limited to
this use.*


VIUL


3513. The Testator may leave a Legacy to his Executors.— A
testator may leave a legacy, not only to other persons besides his
executors, but even to the executors themselves, if they be more
in number than one ; for one executor alone having all the goods
of the inheritance, he cannot owe himself a legacy. Thus, where
there are two or more executors, the testator may bequeath either
to any one of them alone, or to every one of them, what he thinks
fit, and distinguish them by particular dispositions of certain
things!

IX.


3514. A Legacy left to Two Executors, how to be divided. — If a
testator had left a legacy in common to two of his executors or
testamentary heirs, they would share it by equal portions, although
their portions in the inheritance were unequal, unless the testator
had distinguished the portions of the legacy in the same manner
as those of the inheritance. But, not having done it, their con-


& See the following articles.

bh 1.8, D. de his que pro non script. The same motives which make a legacy of alimo-
ny to a person condemned to death, or to any other punishment which implies civil death,
to subsist, seem to justify the like legacy in favor of an alien who should stand in need of
this relief; and his incapacity of inheriting ought not to exclude him from the benefit of
a legacy of this nature.

1 2.17, § 2, D. de leg. 1.


TIT. I. BEC. 11] LEGACIES. 507


dition, although different in respect of the inheritance, is the same
in the legacy.!
X.


3515. The Testamentary Heir, who is also a Legatee, may keep
to his Legacy, and renounce the Inheritance. — If the testamentary
heir, who is likewise a legatee, renounces the inheritance, he will
not be for that deprived of his legacy. For it was free for him to
abstain from one of the two favors, and to keep to the other™
And if it was a son that was instituted heir in part, and named a
legatee by the testament of his father, he might likewise keep to
the legacy, without being charged with contravening the will of
the testator his father; since he might very decently excuse himself
from meddling in the affairs of the inheritance, and leave it to
those who were called to the succession with him.


XI.


3516. One may leave a Legacy to Unknown Persons, and in what
Sense. — A testator may leave a legacy to a person unknown, and
even uncertain, provided that some circumstances mark his inten-
tion, and the motive that induced him to it, by which we may
come at the knowledge of the person to whom he has left the
legacy. Thus, for example, if a testator had bequeathed a sum of
money to a person who should do such a piece of service either to
himself, or some one of his children, or of his friends; he who
should happen to be the person who rendered this service would
be the legatee, although the testator had died without knowing
who had done him that good office.°


XII.


3017. A Legacy to one of many Persons.— One may leave a
legacy to one person among many, as to one of the children of a
son, or of a relation, or of a stranger; whether the testator explain
the circumstances which might distinguish this legatee, or that he
leaves the choice of him to his heir or executor, or to some other
person. And in the first case, if the legatee is sufficiently dis-
tinguished, he alone will have the legacy, or if he is not sufficiently
distinguished, all the children will have their share in it. But, in


1 L. 67, § 1, D. de leg. 1. m 7.17, § 2, D. de leg. 1.
© L. 87, eod.;—1. 12, C. de lag. © 7. 5, D. de reb. dub.


508 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


the second case, he who shall have been named by the heir or
executor, or other person, to whom the testator had given the
power of naming, will be the legatee. And if he who had the
power of naming dies without having named any one, the legacy
will belong either wholly to one child alone, if there remains no
more than one, or it will belong in common to those who shall
remain. Thus, although the legacy were destined only for one
child, yet, none of them being distinguished from the others, it
would go to them all.P


XIIL


3018. A Legacy to a Town, or other Corporation.— One may
leave a legacy to a town, or other corporation whatsoever, whether
spiritual or secular, and direct that it be applied to some honest
and lawful use, such as for public buildings, for maintaining the
poor, or for other charitable uses, or for the public good of the said
society.1 And we must consider as a legacy left to a town, or
other corporation, that which is left to those who compose the
said body, as to the inhabitants of such a town, or otner place, to
the canons of such a chapter, to the monks of such a monastery:
But we must not reckon in the number of corporations capable of
legacies those which are not duly established and approved. But
if the legacy were left personally to the particular persons who
had a mind to form themselves into a society, that they might
reap the benefit of the legacy, either every one for himself in par-
ticular, or for the society in general, when it should be established,
the legacy might subsist according to the circumstances*


SECTION III.
WHAT THINGS MAY BE DEVISED.


3019. As to things which may be devised, it is necessary to
observe a distinction of legacies of two sorts. One is of the leg-
acies of things, of which the property passes to the legatee; and
the other is of legacies which do not convey to the legatee the
property of any thing, but only an enjoyment, or the use and


P L.17, $1, D. de leg. 2; —v. L. 24, eod. ; —I. 67, $ 2, D. de legat. 2; —d. |. 67, § 7.
@ L. 177, D. de leg. 1; —2. 128, eod.
© 1. 2, D. de reb. dub. ® L. 90, D. dered. dub


TIT. 11. SEC. 111.] LEGACIES. 509


profits of a thing for some time, or during his life, such as a
usufruct, a pension, alimony, or other annuity. The legacies of
the first of these two kinds shall be explained in this and the fol-
lowing section, and those of the second sort shall be the subject-
matter of the fifth section.


Art. I.


3520. One may devise every Thing that is in Commerce. — One
may devise all sorts of things, movables or immovables, rights,
services, and things of any other kind that are in commerce, and
that may pass from the use of one person to that of another.*


IL


3521. One cannot devise Things that are Public or Consecrated.
— Since one can devise only what may pass to the use of the
legatee, the legacy of a public thing, or of a consecrated place,
would be without effect, and the legatee would not so much as
have the value of these sorts of things, whether the testator was
ignorant of the quality of the things, or knew it. And in this last
case such a disposition would be the act of a madman.


NL


3522. One may bequeath a Thing belonging to another Person.
— Although one cannot dispose of what belongs to others, yet a
testator may bequeath a thing which belongs to another. And
such a legacy may have its effect, or not have it, according to the
rules which follow.


REMARKS ON THE PreEcepinG ARTICLE.


3523. Although it may seem somewhat strange that one can
bequeath a thing which he has no right to dispose of, and espe-


« 7. 41, D. de legat.1. See the following article.

> Campum Martium, aut foram Romanum, vel sedem sacram legari non posse constat.
Sed et ea preedia Ceesaris quee in formam patrimonii redacta, sub procuratore patrimonii
sunt, si legentur, nec estimatio eoram debet prestari. L. 39, § penult. et ult. D. de legat. 1.
Furiosi est talia legata testamento adscribere. Dict. i. § 8, inf.

What is said in this article of a consecrated place is to be understood of holy, sacred,
or consecrated places that are sct apart for public use, such as a church or church-yard.
For the legacy of a house in which there was a chapel for the use of the said honse
would comprehend the chapel, in the same manner as the legacy by an ecclesiastic of his
silver-chapel would take in the consecrated plate belonging to it.

* Non solum testatoris vel heeredis res, sed etiam aliena legari potest. § 4, Znat. de lag.

43 *


510 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IV.


cially a thing which he knows to be another’s, and that it does not
seem possible that one in his right senses should make such a dis-
position ; however, seeing a testator may oblige his heir or execu-
tor to purchase an estate for the use of a legatee, this would be in
effect to bequeath a thing that is anothers. Thus, we must under-
stand what shall be said in the following article as meant of dis-
positions of this quality, or such that one may judge that the tes-
tator did not intend to make a ridiculons legacy of a house, for
instance, belonging to his neighbour, without having any circum-
stance that may justify such a disposition from the imputation of
extravagance. For it ought to have some foundation and some
motive that may agree with good sense, and render it just.

3524. It would seem that it is only in this sense that we are to
understand the rules which we find in the Roman law touching
this matter, and that the authors of those rules neither could, nor
intended thereby to, authorize the impertinent dispositions of
things to which neither the testator nor his heir or executor had
any right, and when there was no circumstance that could make
such a disposition appear to be reasonable; as we ought likewise
to believe, that, by permitting a testator to bequeath what did not
belong to him, they did not thereby mean that a testator might in
conscience give away, or a legatee retain, a thing bequeathed,
which belonged neither to the testator nor to his heir or executor.
We add this last reflection because of the sentiment of some
authors, who have been of opinion that the canon law condemns
as unlawful all legacies of things belonging to other persons;
which they found upon the decretal of the fifth chapter, De testa-
mentis, although that decretal be only in a particular case, where
the legatee, being in possession of the thing bequeathed, refused to
give it back, pretending to found his right to the thing on the rule
of the civil law, which had permitted the testator to bequeath it to
him. No person could ever imagine that in such a case the leg-
acy ought to divest the proprietor of his right. These are the
words of that decretal: Filius noster, F. conquestus est, quod quon-
dam P. pater suus aliqua Ecclesiae vesire, sepulture sue gratia,
juris alieni reliquit. Et quidem leges hujus sacult hoc habent, ul
heres ad solvendum cogatur si auctor ejus rem legavit alienam: sed
quia lege Dei, non autem lege hujus seculi vivimus, valde mihi vide-
tur wnjurius, ut res tibt legata, que cujusdam Ecclesie esse perhi-
bentur, a te teneantur, qui aliena restituere debuisti. It is true, that
the terms of this decretal seem to condemn in general the rule of


TIT. 1. SEC. 111.] LEGACIES. 511


the.civil law, as being opposite to the divine law; but seeing it is
only with respect to the injustice of this legatee, and that a legacy
conformable to the remark we have just now made, or to the case
which shall be explained in the sixth article, would have nothing
in it contrary to the divine law, it is necessary, in order to give to
this decretal its proper and just meaning, to apply it rather to the
bad use that one would make of the rule of the civil law, than to
the rule itself.


IV.


3525. A Testator may bequeath a Thing which he knows ts not
his own. — If the testator knew that the thing which he bequeathed
was not his own, the testamentary heir or executor will be bound
either to give the thing itself to the legatee, if he can have it of
the owner at a reasonable rate ;4 or if he cannot purchase it, or will
not,? he must give the value of it. For the intention of the testa-
tor was, that the legatee should reap the benefit of the legacy.
But it will not be presumed that the testator knew that what he
bequeathed was not his own, unless this fact be proved ; and it is
the legatee that is to make proof of it, for he who is the demand-
ant is obliged to establish his right.‘


V.


3026. The Legacy is Null if the Testator thought that the Thing
he bequeathed was his own. — If it is not proved that the testator
knew that the thing which he bequeathed was not his own, the
legacy will be null. For it is presumed that he gave it away only
because he thought it was his own, and that otherwise he would
not have charged his testamentary heir or executor with a legacy
of this nature.£


VL


3527. Exception to the foregoing Rule.—TIf the legacy of a thing
which the testator took to be his own, and which was not so, had
been given in favor of a near relation of the testator’s, or of a per-
son of that consideration that it would make it a duty in the tes-
tator to leave him such a legacy, it would have the effect that the


q § 4, Znst. de leg. ; — 1. 30, § ult. D. de leg. 3.

* D. § ult. in f-

$4, inf Inst. de leg. See the following article.

6 § 4, Inst. de leg. ; —I. 36, in f. D. de usu et usufr. leg.


512 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT M11. BOOK Iv.


circumstances might demand. Thus, for example, if a testator
had bequeathed to his widow, whom he left without an estate, the
usufruct of some land or tenement which was not his own, and
which he believed was his own, thinking that the said land or
tenement was part of a succession that had fallen to him a little
before his death, the testamentary heir or executor of this testator
would be obliged to pay to the said widow an annuity to the
value of that usufruct, or the usufruct itself, if he could agree for
it with the proprietor at a reasonable price.®


VIL


3028. If the Thing belongs to the Testamentary Heir or Execv-
tor, tt ts equal whether the Testator know or be ignorant of this
Fact. — If the thing bequeathed did belong to the testamentary
heir or executor, it would be the same thing whether the testator
knew or were ignorant of that fact, and the testamentary heir
would be bound to acquit the legacy. For even although this
testator had believed that the thing was his own, yet we ought
not to presume in this case that, if he had known that it was not
his own, he would not have bequeathed it, and would not have
been willing to burden his testamentary heir with the procuring it
some other way; since he might have very reasonably judged that
it would be as easy for his testamentary heir to give that which
was his own as that which should be a part of the inheritance.
Thus, we ought to presume to the contrary, that he, having a mind
to leave this legacy, would not have been diverted from doing it,
although he had known that the thing belonged to his testamen-
tary heir or executor:


VIL


3529. If the Thing bequeathed belongs already to the Legatee,
the Legacy is useless. — If the thing bequeathed did belong to the
legatee, the legacy would be null. For he could not acquire a new
right to what was already entirely his own. And we ought to
presume that, if the testator had known it, he would not have made
such a disposition. Thus, it would remain always null, although
it should afterwards happen that this legatee should alienate the
thing that was bequeathed to him, and he could not so much as
demand the value of it.!


h 7. 10, C. de legat. ' 7. 67, § 8, D. de legat. 2.
''§ 10, Znst. de legat.;— i. 13, C. eod.


TIT. 11. BEO, I11.] LEGACIES. 613


. IX.

3530. If the Legatee has acquired by a lucrative Title what was
bequeathed to him, the Legacy will be Null. — If after a testator
had bequeathed a thing which was not his own, and which he
knew was not his own, the legatee had acquired the property of it
for a valuable consideration, as in a sale, the legacy would subsist,
and the value of it would be due to the legatee; for he ought to
reap the profit of the legacy. But if he had acquired the thing by
a lucrative title, as by gift, or by another legacy from the propri-
etor thereof, the legacy of the testator, who was not owner of the
thing bequeathed, would remain null, unless it should appear that
his intention was that the legatee should have in this case, besides
the thing itself, likewise its value. But if this intention was not
very evident, it would be sufficient for the legatee to have without
any charges the very thing which the testator intended to give
him, although he came by it another way, since by that the in-
tention of the testator would be accomplished.™


X.


3531. A Legacy of the same Thing to the same Person by two
Testators. — If it should happen that two testators had be-
queathed the same thing to one and the same person, and that by
the effect of one of the two legacies the legatee had been made
master of the thing bequeathed, he could not pretend by the other
legacy to have the value of it. For the intention of both the tes-
tators would be fulfilled, since he would have that which both the
one and the other had a mind to give him. But if he had re-
ceived by one of the two testaments the value of the thing before
he had the thing itself, which might afterwards come to him by the
other legacy of the testator, who was master of it, he would have
the benefit thereof, and the testamentary heir would be obliged to
give it him. For the value which he had already received would
not discharge the testamentary heir of him who had bequeathed a
thing which was his own; and it would not be just that this testa-
mentary heir should reap the profit of the thing bequeathed.


XL


3032. Two Legacies of one and the same Sum are not two
Legacies of the same Thing. — We must not reckon among lega-


™ § 6, Inst. de legat.;—I. 21, § 1, D. de legat. 3; —I. 88, § 7, inf. D. de leg. 2.
* § 6, taf. Inst. de legat.


512 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT NM. BOOK Iv.


circumstances might demand. Thus, for example, if a testator
had bequeathed to his widow, whom he left without an estate, the
usufruct of some land or tenement which was not his own, and
which he believed was his own, thinking that the said land or
tenement was part of a succession that had fallen to him a little
before his death, the testamentary heir or executor of this testator
would be obliged to pay to the said widow an annuity to the
value of that usufruct, or the usufruct itself, if he could agree for
it with the proprietor at a reasonable price.”


VIL


3028. If the Thing belongs to the Testamentary Heir or Execw
tor, tt is equal whether the Testator know or be ignorant of this
Fact.— If the thing bequeathed did belong to the testamentary
heir or executor, it would be the same thing whether the testator
knew or were ignorant of that fact, and the testamentary heir
would be bound to acquit the legacy. For even although this
testator had believed that the thing was his own, yet we ought
not to presume in this case that, if he had known that it was not
his own, he would not have bequeathed it, and would not have
been willing to burden his testamentary heir with the procuring it
some other way; since he might have very reasonably judged that
it would be as easy for his testamentary heir to give that which
was his own as that which should be a part of the inheritance.
Thus, we ought to presume to the contrary, that he, having a mind
to leave this legacy, would not have been diverted from doing it,
although he had known that the thing belonged to his testamen-
tary heir or executor:


VIL


3029. If the Thing bequeathed belongs already to the Legatee,
the Legacy ts useless. — If the thing bequeathed did belong to the
legatee, the legacy would be null. For he could not acquire a new
right to what was already entirely his own. And we ought to
presume that, if the testator had known it, he would not have made
such a disposition. Thus, it would remain always null, although
it should afterwards happen that this legatee should alienate the
thing that was bequeathed to him, and he could not so much as
demand the value of it!


& 7.10, C. de legat. ' 7. 67, § 8, D. de legat. 2
1 § 10, Znst. de legat.; — i. 18, C. eod.


"TT. Ti. BEBO. 111. LEGACIES. 613


. IX.

3530. If the Legatee has acquired by a lucrative Title what was
bequeathed to him, the Legacy will be Null.— If after a testator
had bequeathed a thing which was not his own, and which he
knew was not his own, the legatee had acquired the property of it
for a valuable consideration, as in a sale, the legacy would subsist,
and the value of it would be due to the legatee; for he ought to
reap the profit of the legacy. But if he had acquired the thing by
a lucrative title, as by gift, or by another legacy from the propri-
etor thereof, the legacy of the testator, who was not owner of the
thing bequeathed, would remain null, unless it should appear that
his intention was that the legatee should have in this case, besides
the thing itself, likewise its value. But if this intention was not
very evident, it would be sufficient for the legatee to have without
any charges the very thing which the testator intended to give
him, although he came by it another way, since by that the in-
tention of the testator would be accomplished.”


X.


3531. A Legacy of the same Thing to the same Person by two
Testators.— If it should happen that two testators had be-
queathed the same thing to one and the same person, and that by
the effect of one of the two legacies the legatee had been made
master of the thing bequeathed, he could not pretend by the other
legacy to have the value of it. For the intention of both the tes-
tators would be fulfilled, since he would have that which both the
one and the other had a mind to give him. But if he had re-
ceived by one of the two testaments the value of the thing before
he had the thing itself, which might afterwards come to him by the
other legacy of the testator, who was master of it, he would have
the benefit thereof, and the testamentary heir would be obliged to
give it him." For the value which he had already received would
not discharge the testamentary heir of him who had bequeathed a
thing which was his own; and it would not be just that this testa-
mentary heir should reap the profit of the thing bequeathed.


XI.


3032. Two Legacies of one and the same Sum are not two
Legacies of the same Thing. — We must not reckon among lega-


™ § 6, Inst. de legat.;—1. 21, $1, D. de legat. 3; —1. 88, § 7, inf. D. de leg. 2.
" § 6, in f. Inet. de legat.


514 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr I. BOOK Iv.


cies of one and the same thing, those which consist in a like sum
of money, or in a like quantity of those sorts of things that are
given by number, weight, or measure; but only those where two
testators happen to devise one and the same land or tenement, or
other particular thing which is the same in substance. Thus, the
legacies of the like sums of money to one and the same legatee in
the testaments of two different persons, would have their effect:
and if two testators had bequeathed each of them a pension, or ali-
mony, to a legatee, either of the same or different sums, both the
legacies would be due; for it was the intention of each of the two
testators to give to the legatee a part of his goods. Thus, the leg-
acy of the one would not hinder the effect of the legacy of the
other. And it would be the same thing in the case of two annui-
ties, or rents of another nature, if, the legatee having acquired one
of them by a donation, or by some other title, the ether should be
afterwards left him by a testament.°


XIL


3033. The Devise of a Land or Tenement in which the Testator
has only a Share, ts reduced to that Share. — If a testator, having a
land or tenement in common with another person, had devised the
same, without mentioning his portion of it, but saying barely, that
he devised the said land or tenement, the devise would have its
effect only for the portion thereof that did belong to the testator.
For it would be presumed that he meant only to give away the
share that he had in the said land or tenement.’


XIIL


3034, A Legacy to a Debtor of what he owes. — A creditor may
bequeath to his debtor all that he owes him, or a part of it. But
this legacy, as all other legacies, does no prejudice to the creditors
of the testator, who are preferred to all the legatees, as has been
mentioned in the last article of the first section; and the debtor
who is legatee for what he owes will not be discharged from his
debt, unless there be goods enough in the inheritance to satisfy all
the creditors of the testator, and likewise the Falcidian portion
due to the testamentary heir, as shall be shown in the following
title.4


° L. 87, D. de legat. 2. P ZL. 5, § 2, D. de leg. 1.
@ Liberationem debitori posse legari jam certum est. JL. 3, D. de liber. leg. Omnibas
debitoribus ea qua debent recte legantur: licet domini eorum sint. JZ. 1, D. ead.


TIT. 11. SEC. 113.] ‘LEGACIES. 515


REMARKS ON THE PreEceEpING ARTICLE.


3530. It appears from the two texts cited, that it was a doubt in
the Roman law whether a creditor could bequeath to his debtor
that which he owed him. The doubt was founded, as appears by
these words, licet domini eorum sint, upon this, that one cannot
bequeath to a person what is already his, and that what is due by
a debtor is still the debtor’s, until he strips himself of it by paying
it to his creditor. We make this remark only because of the diffi-
culty which the reader might find in these texts. For as to the
validity of such a legacy, who can doubt of it? But we must
add on this subject one reflection more, which another text, relat-
ing to the manner in which a testator might discharge his debtor,
. seems to deserve. It is a law in which it is said, that if a creditor,
being sick, had delivered into the hands of a third person the bond
or obligation of the sum due to him by one of his debtors, charg-
ing the said person to give him back the said bond or obligation
in case he should recover, and to deliver it up to the debtor in case
he should die, and this Jast case happened, the heir or executor
of the said creditor could not demand the said debt of the debtor.*
It is to be remarked on this decision, that such a disposition would
not be just, and ought not to be executed, except with several pre-
cautions, which divers circumstances might demand. For, in the
first place, it would be null if it were made to defraud the cred-
itors of a person who should give such an order. And secondly,
since this disposition would be only a donation in prospect of
death, it would be liable to be curtailed both for the Falcidian
portion of the testamentary heir, which shall be treated of under
the following title, and for the legitime or legal portions of the
children. And it would likewise be subject to the diminution
which the customs make of all dispositions made in prospect of
death in favor of the heirs of blood. But although there should
be no cause for diminishing or reducing the same, and the ques-
tion were not only about the validity of such a disposition, yet the
circumstances thereof might give rise to difficulties. Thus, for
example, if we suppose that a creditor, to whom a rent was due,
had deposited the engrossed copy of the deed, by which the rent
was constituted, in the hands of a third person, that he might de-
liver up the same after his death to his debtor ; seeing there would


* L. 8, § 2, D. ge liber. leg.


516 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK Iv.


be no other proof of this will of the deceased besides the declara-
tion which the depositary should make of it, and that the title or
deed by which the rent was constituted would remain entire, the
original minute thereof being lodged in the hands of the notary
public, the bare declaration of this depositary would not be saff-
cient to prove a disposition made in prospect of death, and to an-
nul a debt, the title whereof would still be subsisting, and of which
there would appear no discharge or acquittance. But if we suppose
that the title by which this rent was constituted were an obliga-
tion of which there were no original minute, and that the heir or
executor of this creditor had caused the same to be seized in the
hands of the depositary before he had delivered it to the debtor,
pretending to dispute the validity of such a disposition, or not
agreeing that the deceased ever had such an intention; the ques-
tion in such case would seem to depend on the Grcumstances of
the sum, the goods of the deceased, the quality of the depositary,
and other circumstances which might help us to judge whether the
declaration of the depositary ought to supply the want of a dispo-
sition in prospect of death made according to form.


XIV.


3036. The Legacy of what is due from one of two Persons who
are indebted for the same Sum acquits only him to whom t ts left.
— If a testator, to whom two debtors should be engaged each of
them for the whole debt, bequeaths to one of the two that which
he owes him, this legacy will acquit only that legatee, and the
other will remain obliged for his portion. For although the lega-
tee was bound for the whole debt, yet the legacy would have its
entire effect by discharging him of his share of the debt, since he
will not be anyways accountable for the portion of his fellow-
debtor, who will owe that all alone* But if these debtors were
copartners, and it appeared that the intention of the testator was
to annul the debt in favor of the company, the legacy would be
common both to the one and the other.’


XV.


3537. The Legacy of a Delay of Payment to a Debtor discharges
him of the Interest for that Time. — A testator may bequeath to
his debtor a respite for the payment of that which he owes him.


tL. 8, § 8, D. de liber. leg. : *D.L8,§4.


"TIT. IL. BEC. 111.] LEGACIES. 517


And this legacy will have this effect, that the testator’s heir or ex-
ecutor cannot for the time of that forbearance demand any interest.
And much less could he pretend to costs and damages, if the debt
were of such a nature as the default of payment might give a
handle for such a demand.*


XVI


3038. In what Sense the Father, who is Guardian to his Son, may
be discharged from giving an Account of his Administration. — If
a son, whose father had been his guardian, happening to die with-
out children before the father had made up ‘the account of his
guardianship, had ordained by his testament that his executors, if
he had named others together with his father, should not demand
of him any account of his administration, this disposition would
have its entire effect; for it was in his power to give nothing at all
to these other executors. But if this testator had children to
whom the grandfather ought to give an account, it would be rea-
sonable to give to such a disposition the temperaments that equity
might require, according to the circumstances, so as not to oblige
the grandfather to so. strict an account as might be required of an-
other guardian, and likewise not to do any thing to the prejudice
of the children, under pretext of the favor that ought to be shown
to the grandfather."


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3539. It is to be remarked on the rule explained in this article,
that we have turned it in such a manner as to accommodate it to
our usage. For we should not observe the rule, such as it is ex-
plained in the text quoted on this article. And if a father, who
had had the tuition of one of his children, having also other chil-
dren, had alienated the goods of the child whom he had under his
tuition, and had gathered in some of his debts; he would be
bound to give an account of them to his grandchildren, heirs to
their father whose guardian he was, since it would not be just that
his other children should have the profit of the goods of their
brother to the prejudice of his children, their nephews.

3540. It may be observed in relation to the accounts of the ad-
ministration which fathers may have of the estates of their chil-


* Z. 8, § 2, D. de liber. leg. Seo the third article of the second section of Interest, Costs,
and Damages.
© L. 28, § 8, D. de liber. leg.
VOL. Il.


518 THE CIVIL LAW. [paRT Il. BOOK IV.


dren, that by the disposition of some customs the fathers are tutors,
guardians, or stewards to their children, and have the enjoyment
of their revenues without being liable to give an account. But
this is to be only of what the father may consume for his own use,
but not of what he may alienate.


XVIL


3541. A Legacy of a Thing laid in Pawn.—If a testator be
queaths a thing which he had pawned to a creditor, the executor
will be bound to pay the debt in order to redeem and deliver to
the legatee the thing bequeathed, unless the words of the legacy,
or other proofs, should make it appear that it was the intention of
the testator to charge the legatee with the payment of the debt
But if the pledge had been sold for the debt by the creditor, the
executor would be bound to give the value of it to the legatee, un-
less he should prove that the intention of the testator was that the
legacy should be null in that case.*


REMARKS ON THE Precepine ARTICLE.


3042. We have not put down in this article that which is said
in the oth section, Inst. de legat., that the testamentary heir is not
bound to redeem the thing bequeathed, except in the case when the
testator knew that it was in pawn. For besides that it is always
to be presumed that every man knows what is of his own act and
deed, and that a debtor is not ignorant that he is indebted, and
that his goods are mortgaged for his debts, whether he has laid
any particular thing in pawn in the hands of his creditor, or has
only mortgaged his goods in general; it may be remarked that in
the first text cited on this article, and likewise in the beginning of
the 57th law, de legat. 1, it is said that the legatee is not bound to
redeem the thing bequeathed, although the testator was ignorant
that it was in pawn, if we judge that, if the testator had known it,
he would have left another legacy of equal value to that legatee.
Thus, this presumption being always natural enough, it is also
natural that the testamentary heir should redeem the thing that is
bequeathed. To which we may add, that, by the second text cited
upon this article, it would seem that the legatee is not bound to
acquit the debt unless he be charged so to do by the testament;


1.6, C. de fideic.; —1. 57, in f. D. de legat. 1; —v. 1.15, D. de dote prorleg.;—§ 5,
Inst. de legat. See the fifteenth article of the eleventh section.


TIT. Il. SEC. II] LEGACIES. 519


and that, if he pays the debt, he may get himself to be substituted
to the creditor, in order to recover from the testamentary heir what
he shall have paid for redeeming his legacy. And, in a word, it
may be said that according to our usage it can never happen that
a legatee should be bound to redeem the thing bequeathed, unless
the testator has obliged him to do it. For since, according to the
texts that have been quoted, that burden lies on the testamentary
heir, if the testator knew that the thing bequeathed was mortt-
gaged, and that by our usage all mortgages are founded on titles
or deeds which affect in general all the goods of the debtor, we
ought always to suppose that the mortgage was known to the
debtor. And in the case of a legacy of movables that have been
pawned to a creditor, the testator can never pretend to be ignorant
of that engagement. Thus, it is not likely that in our usage there
should ever be occasion for a proof of the knowledge which the
testator might have of the engagement of the thing bequeathed,
these sorts of proofs being otherwise directly contrary to our
usage. So that, excepting the case of an express will of the testa-
tor, which should oblige the legatee to redeem the thing be-
queathed, it would seem that the burden of it ought always to lie
on the testamentary heir.


XVIIL


3543. One may bequeath Things that are not in Being. — One may
bequeath things which are not as yet in being, but which are to
come; as the fruits that shall grow on such a ground, or the profit
which shall be made of a certain commerce: and these sorts of
legacies imply the condition that the thing thus bequeathed shall
happen in its time, and they have their effect according to the
event


XIX.


3544, A Legacy of a certain Quantity of Corn to be taken out
of a Orop, or out of a certain Place. — If a testator had bequeathed
a certain quantity of corn to be taken out of such a crop, or out
of a granary, and the said quantity is not found there, the legacy
will be restrained to the quantity that is there found. But if the
legacy were of a certain quantity of corn, without determining


y LE. 11, D. de leg. 3; —1. 24, D. de leg. 1.
® ZL. 5, D. de trit. vin. vel ol. leg. ; —1. 8, § 2, D. de leg. 2.


520 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL BOOK IV.


whence it should be taken, the said quantity would be dune, al-
though there were no corn in the inheritance,* in the same manner
as a legacy of a sum of money, which would be equally due,
whether there were any money in the succession, or whether there
were none at all.


XX.


3545. An Indefinite Legacy of Movables.— When a testator
hath bequeathed movables, such as his hangings and other furniture
of his house, or the movables of a country-house that serve for the
management of a farm, this legacy will have the bounds or extent
that the expression and intention of the testator may give to it
And if it appears that his intention was to give only what he had
at the time of making the testament, what he shall happen after-
wards to acquire will not be comprehended in the legacy. As, on
the contrary, if it appears that the legacy is meant of the movables
that shall be found at the time of his death, it will comprehend
every thing that shall be then sound which is of the nature of the
things bequeathed.°


XXI.

3046. The Legacy of a Thing specified as belonging to the Tes-
tator is Null, if the Thing ts not found among his Goods. — When 2
testator bequeaths a certain thing which he specifies as being his
own, the legacy will not have its effect unless that thing be found
extant in the succession. Thus, for example, if he had said, J be-
queath to such a one my watch, or my diamond ring, and there
were not found in the succession either diamond ring or watch,
the legacy would be null‘ But if he had said, I bequeath a dia-
mond ring, or a watch, the legacy would be due, and would have
ita effect, as shall be explained in the following article.


XXIL
3547. A Legacy of a Thing indetermined in its Kind, how it
ought to be understood. One may bequeath not only a certain
thing described in particular, as such a horse, such a watch, such
a suit of hangings ; but indefinitely and in general a horse, a suit


« 7.8, D. de trit. vin. vel de legat. b ZL. 12, D. de legat. 2.

© I. 98, D. de instr. vel instr. legat.; — 1. 7, D. de avr. arg. See the thirteenth and four-
teenth articles of the following section.

d 2. 32, § 5, D. de leg. 2.


TIT, Il. SEO. 11.) LEGACIES. | 621


of hangings, a watch, or other things of the like nature. And
seeing these sorts of things may be of different qualities in the
same kind, if the legacy does not mark the price of them, or does
not determine in particular what the thing bequeathed ought to
be, whether there be several of that thing in the succession, or
whether there be none at all; the executor or testamentary heir
cannot give the worst, nor the legatee choose the best. But this
legacy will be moderated according to the circumstances of the
quality of the testator and of the legatee, and the other circum-
stances which may help to discover the intention of the testator,
pursuant to the rule explained in the tenth article of the seventh
section of Testaments, and the others which shall be explained in
the seventh section of the title of Legacies.


XXIII.


3548. A Legacy of a Work to be done.— One may bequeath,
not only sums of money, rights, debts, and all other things, but
likewise some work to be done; as if a testator charges his exec-
utor or testamentary heir to rebuild the house of some poor man,
or to do some other work, whether for a public use or for some
particular person.‘


XXIV.


3049. An Indefinite Devise of a Land or Tenement is Null, if the
Testator has none. — If a testator who had two or more houses
had devised a house without determining by any circumstance
which of his houses he had a mind to give, the devise would be
good, and the executor or testamentary heir would be obliged to
give one of the houses, according to the rules which shall be ex-
plained in the seventh section. But if this testator who had de-
vised a house had none of his own, or if, having no lands, he had
devised a land indefinitely, these devises would remain without
any effect. For one could not know what the testator had meant;
and it might be said that the testator himself did not know his
own meaning, and that he jested with him to whom he left such


a legacy


© L. 87, D. de legat. 1;—1. 110, eod. See the second and following articles of the sev-
eath section. We must observe the difference between the case in this article, and that
of a legacy which should give to the legatee the right to choose, which shall be explained
in the fifth article of the seventh section.

FL. 49, § ult. D. de legat. 2. 6 L. 71, D. dela. 1.


44°


522 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 11. BOOK Iv.


SECTION IV.
OF ACCESSORIES TO THINGS BEQUEATHED.


Arr. L


3550. Definition of Accessories.— An accessory to a thing be-
queathed is that which, not being part of the thing itself, has,
nevertheless, such a connection with it, as that it ought not to be
separated from it, and ought to follow it. Thus, the shoes and
halter of a horse, and the frame of a picture, are accessories to
them.*


IL


3551. Two Sorts of Accessories.— We may distinguish two
sorts of accessories to things bequeathed: those which follow
naturally the thing, and which are comprehended in the legacy,
although they be not mentioned; and those which are not added
to the legacy except by a particular disposition of the testator.
Thus, the legacy of a watch comprehends the case of it, and the
legacy of a house includes the keys thereof. Thus, on the con-
trary, the legacy of a house will not comprehend the movables that
are in it, unless the testator have expressed the same.®


HL


3552. How we distinguish that which is an Accessory to a Thing.
-—— There are accessories to certain things which are not separated
from them, such as the trees planted in a ground: and these sorts
of accessories follow always the thing bequeathed, if they are not
excepted in the legacy. And there are accessories which, although
separated from the things, yet follow them likewise, such as the
harness of a set of coach-horses, and others of the like nature.
There may be also a progression of accessories to accessories, such
as precious stones set in the case of a watch. And lastly, there
are certain things of which it may be doubted whether they be
accessories to others or not. And this may depend on the dispo-
sition of the testator, and on the extent or bounds he gives to his
legacies, as he sees good. Thus, there is no other general rule in


® Que rebus accedunt. ZL. 1, § 5, depos. Ut vestis homini, equo capistram. D. §.
b See the articles which follow.


TIT. Il. SEO. IV.) LEGACIES. 523


doubts concerning what ought to go along with the thing be-
queathed as its accessory, besides the intention of the testator,
whose expression, together with the circumstances and usages of
the places, if there be any, may help us to judge what ought to be
accounted accessory, and what not.° But if the disposition of the
testator leave the thing in doubt, we may in every particular case
judge of what ought to be comprehended in the legacy as acces-
sory, and what not, by the particular rules on the several cases
explained in the articles which follow.


IV.


3553. Accessories to a House.—If a testator devises a house
without specifying any thing as to what he intends should be
comprehended in the said devise, the legatee or devisee will have
the ground, the edifice, and its dependencies, such as a court, a
garden, and other appurtenances of the house, with the paintings
in fresco, and other ornaments or conveniences, which, according
to the expression of some customs, are fixed to the house with
cramp-irons and nails, or with plaster, with intent that they should
always remain there; for these sorts of things are of the nature of
immovables. But there will be no movable comprehended in this
legacy except the keys, and other things, if there were any, which,
being of the like use, would be equally necessary.


V.

3504. The Edifice is an Accessory to the Ground, and likewise
what is added to tts Extent.— If he who had devised by testament
a land or tenement makes afterwards some addition to it, as if he
adds any thing to ite extent, or if he builds some edifice upon it,
these augmentations become part of the ground, and go to the
legatee, unless the testator hath otherwise ordered by his testa-
ment.


VI.


3555. Another Accessory of the same Nature.— It would be the
same thing in a devise of a particular estate in land, if the testa-
tor, after having devised it, had added to it new buildings, and


© ZL. 18, § 3, inf. D. de instr. vel instrum. leg.

4 Z. 21, D. de instr. vel instrum. leg.; —1. ult. D. de suppell. legat.

© L. 10, D. de legat. 2;—1. 44, § 4, D. de lag.1;—1.39, D. de leg. 9. See the seventh
and eighth articles. See the fourteenth article of the sixth section of TJestaments.


é


G24 THE OIVIL LAW. [PAR? IL. BOOK rv.


even new rights, or if he had purchased grounds in order to enlarge,
either a park, or some other land or tenement belonging to the
said estate. For all these sorts of augmentations would be acces-
sories that would follow the devise, either because of their nature
of accessories, or because it could not be presumed that the testa-
tor intended to separate these sorte of things, in order to leave
them without the land to his executor or testamentary heir.


VIL


3556. How that which is added to the Land that is devised be-
longs or does not belong to the Devisee. — If the legacy were of one
entire estate in land, and if after the making of the testament the
testator had added to it some lands adjoining, this augmentation
might belong either to the devisee or to the testamentary heir, ac-
cording as the said new purchase might be considered as an acces-
sory to the legacy, or as being wholly independent of it. For if,
for example, it were a purchase of a parcel of land made with a
view to make a field square, or to serve as a place to draw water
from for the use of other grounds, or for some other service, or
even as an addition only to the land devised, these acquisitions
would be accessories that would go with the legacy or devise, in
the same manner as that which should be found to be naturally
added to it by some change made by the course of an adjoining
river. But if the land that is purchased, and which borders on the
land that is devised, were of a different nature from that which is
devised, such as a meadow joining to a vineyard which the testa-
tor had devised; or if the land acquired by the testator were
equally contiguous to the land devised by him, and to another
land which the testator had left to his executor; these sorts of ac-
quisitions would not be accessories to the legacy, unless we should
be obliged to judge otherwise by the disposition of the testator,
and the circumstances which might explain his intention£


VIL


3007. An Augmentation of the Land devised which hath the
Effect to revoke the Devise.— If a testator, who had devised a
land, builds afterwards upon it, this acoessory to the land will go


€ This is a consequence of the preceding article.

S L. 24, § 2, D.de leg. 1; —1. 10, D. de leg. 2. It appears by these texts, that these
angmentations of the land are meant of that which is added by the testator, with intent
to make it a part of the land that is devised.


#1. 11. BHC. Iv.] LEGACIES. 625


with the land to the legatee, unless it should appear that the tes-
tator intended to revoke the legacy, as has been said in the fifth
article. And if, for example, a testator, having devised a place in
a town to build in, afterwards builds a house in it; or if, hav-
ing devised a garden, orchard, or other place, he builds in it a sum-
mer-house or lodge; these buildings under these circumstances
will belong to the legatee. But if he had built in a ground which
he had devised either a house or other conveniences necessary for
a farm to which he had joined the said ground, giving the said
farm to another legatee, or leaving it to his heir or executor, it
‘would be judged, from the use of the said building, that he had
revoked the legacy.®


IX,


3558. The Devise of a Ground comprehends the Service neces-
sary to the said Ground from another Ground that is Part of the
Inheritance. — If, for the use of a ground of which the testator
had devised the usufruct, the service of a passage through another
ground of the inheritance were necessary, the executor or other
legatee to whom the ground that ought to be subject to the ser-
vice does belong would be obliged to suffer it. For the legatee
ought to enjoy the ground subject to the usufruct in the same
manner as it was enjoyed by the testator who took his passage
through his own ground: and this accessory is such, that it is the
intention of the testator that it should follow the legacy!


x.


3559. A Reciprocal Service between the Legatees of Two Con-
tiguous Houses. — If a testator, who had two houses joining to one
another, devises one of them to one legatee, and the other to an-
other, or devises one of them, and leaves the other to his heir or
executor; the partition-wall of these two houses, which had for its


b 7. 44,§ 4, D. deleg.1. The circumstances mentioned in the article show clearly
enough the change of the will of the testator.

i Z. 15, $1, D. de usw. legat. Although this text speaks only of the service that is ne-
cessary to the legatee of a usnfruct, yet the same equity would require that this service
should be likewise given to the legatee of the property. And the presumption of the tes-
tator’s intention would be the same in this legacy as in the other, since it cannot be sup-
posed that he intended to make a fruitless devise, and seeing this devise could not have
its use without this service, which changes nothing in the use that the testator himself
made of his own lands, in making one ground to serve for the necessary passage to
another.


526 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK rv.


sole owner the testator, will become common to the two propri-
etors of these two houses. Thus, the reciprocal service on this
common wall will be as an accessory which will follow the legacy!


XI.


3560. The Legatee ought to have the Use of the Thing be-
queathked. — If, of two houses belonging to a testator, whereof one
is left to the heir or executor and the other given to a legatee, or
both are given to two legatees, one of them could not be raised
higher without taking away the light of the other, or damaging it
very much; the executor or legatee who should chance to have
the first house could not raise it but in such a manner as that
there should remain for the other house so much light as should be
necessary for the use of it. For it was not the testator’s intention
that either his executor or this legatee should render the legacy of
the other house useless.”


XIL


3061. The Movables of Houses, whether in Town or Country, are
not Accessories to them. — The legacy of a house in the town does
not comprehend the movables that are in it, unless they are ex-
pressly added by the testator. Nor does the legacy of a house in
the country take in what movables may be in it that are necessary
for cultivating the lands, and for gathering in the harvest" But
this legacy comprehends the things that are fixed to the building,
such as in certain places presses and tubs.°


XIIL


3562. In what Manner Accessories to a Country-House are under-
stood. — The legacy of a country-house, together with what shall
be found in it necessary for cultivating the lands, and gathering in
the harvest, comprehends the movables which may serve for these
uses? And if there be any doubt as to the extent which this leg-
acy ought to have, it must be interpreted by the presumptions of
the testator’s intention, which may be gathered from the words of
the testament, and from the circumstances; and we may like-
wise make use of what lights can be had from the usage of the
places.


| 7. 4, D. de servit. leg. © ZL. 21. ead.
™ 1. 10, D. de servit. prod. urd. ;—d. b. in f. P ZL. 12, D.de instr. vel instrum. legat.
® L.2,$1, D. de instr. vel instrum. legat. q ZL. 18, § 8, inf. eod.


TIT. Il. SEC. IV.] LEGACIES. 527


XIV.

3063. The Legacy of a House with its Movables. — If a testator
had devised a house with all its movables, this legacy would com-
prehbend all the movables that were in it destined for the furniture
of the said house ; such as beds, hangings, pictures, tables, chairs,
and other things of the like nature. But if there should be found
in it hangings, or other movables, laid up and destined either for
sale, or for the use of another house, the legatee would have no
right to them.’ And if, on the contrary, some movables of this
house should chance to be somewhere else at the time of the tes-
tator’s death, as if a suit of hangings had been lent out, or given
to be mended, whatever were out of the house upon such an ac-
count would nevertheless be comprehended in the legacy-*


XV.


3064. Papers are not comprehended in a Legacy of all Things
found in a House.— If in the legacy of a house the testator had
comprehended in general and indefinite terms every thing that
should be found in the said house at the time of his death, without
excepting any thing; this legacy, which would comprehend all
the movable things, and even the money,‘ would not comprehend
the debts owing to the testator, nor his other rights, the deeds or
titles whereof should be found in the said house. For the debts
and rights do not consist in the papers which contain the deeds or
titles of them, and have not their situation in a certain place."
But their nature consists in the power which the law gives to
every one to exercise them. Thus the deeds or titles are only the
proofs of the rights, and not the rights themselves.


XVL


3065. The Accessory may be a Thing of much greater Value than
that whereof it is an Accessory.— The accessories which ought to
follow the thing bequeathed are judged to be such only by the use


© ZL. 44, D. de leg. 3. ® L. 86, eod.

t Z. 44, D. de leg. 3; —1. 82, § 2, D. de usu ef usuf: et red. leg. It follows from these
texts, that this legacy would comprehend the money, if it were not excepted.

a L. 86, D. de leg. 2. Debts and other rights have not a situation in a certain place,
and are not comprehended in places as things corporeal are. We may remark this dis-
tinction between rights and other things in a law which speaks of it on another occasion.
Quod si nec qus soli sant sufficiant, vel nulla sint soli pignora, tunc pervenietur etiam
ad jura. L.15, § 2, in fine, D. de re jud. We seo by this text the distinction between
rights and things corporeal.


§28 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


that is made of them, and not by their value: so that the acces-
sory is frequently of a much greater value than the thing itself to
which it is accessory; and it goes, nevertheless, to the person to
whom the thing is bequeathed. Thus, for example, precious
stones set in the case of a watch are only an ornament and an ac-
cessory to it, and yet they follow the legacy of the watch.*


SECTION V.


OF LEGACIES OF A USUFRUCT, OR A PENSION, OR ALIMONY, AND
OTHER THINGS OF THE LIKE NATURE.


3566. WE have not put down in this section the rule of the Ro-
man law by which it is ordered, that, if a testator had bequeathed
a usufruct to a town or other corporation, it should last a hun-
dred years. And seeing we have explained in another place® the
reason why we have not thought proper to insert this rnle among
the others, it is not necessary to repeat it here.


Art. IL


3567. A Legacy of a Usufruct.— When a testator bequeaths 2
usufruct, or the enjoyment of a house or other tenement, the con-
dition of the legatee will be the same as of other usufractuaries,
and his enjoyment will have the same extent and the same
bounds. And he will likewise be liable in the same manner for
the charges of the houses or lands of which he has the usufruct.
Thus we may apply to this legatee the rules relating to usufruct,
which have been explained in the title of the said matter.*


IL


3568. A Legacy of a Usufruct to several Persons, and of the
Property to one of them.—TIf a testator had devised to two or
more legatees the usufruct of a house or lands, and the property
thereof to the survivor of them, this legacy would regard all the
legatees in two manners; for it would be pure and simple with
regard to all of them as to the usufruct, and conditional likewise
in respect of them all as to the propriety; every one of them


® L. 44, D. de adil. ed.; —I. 6, $1, D. de aur. arg. mund.
® See the end of the preamble of the title of Usufruct.
* See the title of Usufruct. See the ninth article of the preceding section.


TIT. If. SBC. V.| LEGACIES. 529


being called to the propriety thereof upon condition of their sur-
viving the others.”


JIL


3569. The Usufruct of Movable Things.— Since one may be-
queath the usufruct of movable things, if a testator had be-
queathed to his wife the usufruct or enjoyment of his house, and
of all the things that should be found in it at the time of his
death, excepting the gold and silver, and there were in the said
house merchant-goods in which the testator traded, and which
he kept there for sale, this usufruct would not comprehend these
sorts of things.t For it would be restrained to that which should
appear to be destined to be kept in the said house.


IV.


3570. How the Legacy of a Portion of the Fruit subsists after
the Land ts sold.— If a testator had bequeathed a portion of the
produce or income of a certain land or tenement, and the executor
should afterwards sell the said land, the legacy would nevertheless
subsist. And it will be regulated not on the foot of the same por-
tion of the interest of the price of the sale, but according to the
value of that portion of the fruits, whether it exceed the said inter-
est, or fall short of it. For the legacy was of that which the said
portion might be worth every year. Thus this change shall hurt
neither the executor nor the legatee.*


V.


3071. The Burden ona Legacy of a Usufruct passes to the Ex-
ecutor, tf the Legacy does not take Place.— If the legatee of a usu-
fruct had been burdened by the testator with a fiduciary be-
quest to some other person, and the said legatee either could not
or would not accept the legacy, the heir or executor who should
reap the benefit of the legacy would be obliged to satisfy the
said fiduciary bequest. For although this bequest regarded only
the person of the legatee because of his usufruct, and the said
usufract does not subsist any longer; yet the enjoyment of the
thing bequeathed, which was burdened with this fiduciary bequest,


» ZL. 11, D. de red. dub.

© See the third section of Usufruct.
@ L. 32, § 9, D. de usu et usufr. lag.
© ZL. 21, D. de ann. legat.

VOL. II. 45


630 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART H. BOOK Iv.


does not go to the testamentary heir or executor but with this
charge!


VI


3572. The Difference between an Annual Legacy, and a Legacy
of a Usufruct.— One may bequeath a certain sum of money, or a
certain quantity of corn, or other things, by way of pension, to be
paid every year to the legatee, either during a certain time, or dur-
ing his life. And there is this difference between a legacy of this
nature, and a legacy of a usufruct, that in this last the legatee has
an uncertain enjoyment, and may have either more or less, or
sometimes nothing at all; and that an annual legacy of a certain
quantity is always the same. There is also this difference be-
tween these two kinds of legacies, that whereas the legacy of a
usufruct is only one legacy of a right to enjoy always, as long as
it shall last, an annual legacy contains as many legacies as it
may last years. For every year the legatee ought to receive of
the executor the revenue which is bequeathed him. Thus this leg-
acy is, as it were, conditional, and implies the condition that the
legatee should be living at the beginning of every year, in order to
have right to the legacy, and to transmit the right of that year to
his heir or executor.


VIL


3073. Another Difference. — There is likewise this difference be-
tween the legacy of a usufruct and an annual legacy, that a legacy
of a usufruct cannot be perpetual, because it would annul the
right of property ; but an annual legacy may be perpetual, whether
it be in favor of a corporation or of the heirs of some family.»


VIIL


3074. Another Difference.— There is also this other difference
between these two kinds of legacies, that if the lands which are
subject to a usufruct should produce nothing, the right of the usu-
fractuary would be of no use. But the legacy of a certain quan-


f LZ. 9, D. de usu et usufr. leg.

8 L. 4, D. de ann. leg. See the following articles. See, as to what is said at the end of
this article concerning the transmission of an annual legacy, the ninth article; and as for
the usufruct, there is no transmission of it, for it perishes by the death of the usufractua-
ry. See the first article of the sixth section of Usufruct, and the foarth article of the first
section of the same title, and the remark there made upon it.

b 7. 92, C. de lag.


TIT. IT. SEC. V.] LEGACIES. 531


tity of corn, wine, or other things, is altogether independent of
what may be reaped in the harvest or vintage. And even although
such a legacy were assigned to be taken out of the crop of every
year, it would nevertheless be due in a year when there was no
crop, provided that the other years could supply the said deficiency,
and that the intention of the testator were not contrary thereto:


IX.


3975. An Annual Legacy is acquired at the Beginning of the
Year.— Annual legacies accrue to the legatee when the year be-
gins; and although he dies as soon as the year is begun, yet the
legacy for that whole year is due! For it is natural that a legacy
which is in lieu of a fand for a maintenance should be acquired
beforehand.


X.


3576. A Legacy that ts payable in several Years ts of another
Nature than an Annual Legacy. — We must not reckon in the num-
ber of annual legacies a legacy of a certain sum that is made pay-
able every year until a certain time, for some other cause than
that of a maintenance or alimony, no more than a legacy of a sum
made payable at several terms of several years. For these pay-
ments being thus divided only to lessen the charge of the execu-
tor, these legacies would be of the same nature with others, and
as one single legacy, of which the entire right would accrue to the
legatee at one and the same time. So that this legatee happen-
ing to die before these years were expired, he would transmit to
his heir or executor the annual payments that should remain
due.™


XI.


3577. How we are to judge whether a Legacy of a Sum of Mon-
ey to be distributed on a certain Day be perpetual, or only for one
single Time.—If a testator had left a legacy of a charity to be
given on a certain day, or of a sum of money to be distributed,
either to the canons of a chapter, or to the ecclesiastics of such a
parish, or to some other such like use, upon some festival or so-


} 7.17, $1, D. deann. leg.; —1. 18, D. de trit. vin. vel ol. leg.

1 7.1, C. quando dies leq. vel fid. ced. ;—v. 1.5, D.de ann. leg.;—1. 12, D. quando dies
leg. ced. See the sixth article.

= 7. 20, D. quand. leg. ced.


582 THE CIVIL LAW. [PakT II. BOOK Iv.


lemnity which should return every year, as on a saint’s day, or on
some festival of some of the mysteries of religion, without men-
tioning expressly that the said charity or dole should be reiterated
every year on the said day, we should judge by the circumstances
whether the intention of this testator was to leave a legacy of a
sum to be paid only for one single time, or to be paid yearly at
the return of the said day. Which would depend on the quality
of the person, on the largeness of his estate, on the words of the
testament, on the motive of the legacy, on the fund set apart for
the said charity or dole, and on the other circumstances which
might help us to judge of the intention of this testator.


XIL


3078. Legacies of Alimony are for Life. — Legacies of alimony,
or of a maintenance, last during the life of a legatee, unless the
testator has limited the time. For alimony, and a maintenance,
left indefinitely, not being restrained to a certain duration of time,
are for the whole time that the legatee shall stand in need of
them, which comprehends his whole life.°


XIIL


3579. A Legacy of Alimony to the Years of Puberty ts wnder-
stood to be meant of full Puberty. — Seeing a legacy of alimony, or
of a maintenance, is altogether favorable, if a testator had devised
such a legacy to last only until the legatee should attain the age


™ Cum quidam decurionibus divisiones dari volaisset die natalis sai: Divi Severus et
Antoninus rescripeerunt, non esse verisimile testatorem de uno amne sensiaee, sed de per-
petuo legato. L. 23, D. de ann. leg.

Attia fideicommissum his verbis reliquit, quisquis mihi heres erit, fidei ejus committo,
uti det ex reditu canaculi mei et horrei, post obitum, sacerdoti, et hierophylaco, et libertis,
qui in illo tempore erunt, denaria decem die nundinarum quas ibi posui. Quzero, utrum
his duntaxat qui eo tempore quo legabatur, in rebus humanis, et in eo officio fuerint, de-
bitum sit, an etiam his, qui in locum eorum successerunt? Respondit, secandum ea quz
proponerentur, ministerium nominatorum designatum, ceterum datum templo. Item
quero, utrum uno duntaxat anno decem fideicommissi nomine debeantar, an etiam ia
perpetuum decem annua prestands sint? Respondit, in perpetuum. L. 20, eod.

Although these texts seem not to make the perpetuity of a legacy of this kind to de-
pend on the circumstances, yet it appears evidently that the legacies there mentioned are
declared to be perpetual only because of the circumstances which result from the quality
of the said legacies, according to the usage of those times. And as for the usage with us,
it ia hardly possible that such a doubt should happen; for a testator who should leave a
perpetual legacy of the nature of these explained in the article would not fail to express
it, and to assign a fund for a charge of this kind.

° L. 14, D. de alim. vel cib. leg.


TIT. Il. SEC. V.] LEGACIES. 583


of puberty, it would not end till he had attained the age of full
puberty, that is, eighteen years complete in males, and fourteen in
females.”


XIV.


3580. A Legacy of Alimony comprehends Clothing and Lodging.
— A legacy of maintenance, or barely of alimony, comprehends
food, raiment, and lodging, unless the testator shall have set some
bounds to it; for one cannot live without clothes and lodging.
But this legacy does not comprehend that which relates to the in-
struction of the legatee, either for a trade, or some profession, or
for his learning at school. For these wants are of another nature,
and are not so necessary as food, clothing, and lodging.*


XV.


3581. Legacies of Alimony are regulated according to the Cir-
cumstances. — If a testator had bequeathed alimony or a mainte-
nance indefinitely, without specifying any thing, and if he had been
wont to maintain the person to whom he had left this legacy, it
would be regulated on the same foot: if not, it would be fixed
either at a certain sum of money yearly, or a certain quantity of
necessaries to be paid in specie, and in proportion to the quality
of the legatee, the quality of the testator and of his estate, the
consideration which the testator might have had for the person of
this legatee, either out of affection to him or because of some duty
or other tie, and according to the other circumstances which might
help us to judge of the intention of the testator’ as has been said
in another place.’


XVI.


3582. How a Legacy of Alimony which the Testator had been
used to give in his Lifetime is regulated. — If he who always gave
alimony or a maintenance to a person leaves him a legacy of what
he was wont to give him, and it does appear that he gave him
differently, sometimes more, and sometimes less; the legacy will
be regulated upon the foot of what he gave the last time imme-


P L. 14, § 1, D. de alim. vel cib. leg. See, touching these two sorts of puberty, the re-
mark on the eighth article of the second section of Persons.

q L. 6, D. de alim. vel cid. leg. ; —1. 7, eod.; —l. ult. eod.

* LE. 22, D. de alim. vel cib. leg.

* See the twelfth article of the sixth section of Testaments.


45 *


534 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I}. BOOK IV.


diately preceding his death, whether he had given more before that
time, or less.‘


XVII.


3083. A Legacy of Alimony ts due, although the Legatee have
been maintained some other Way. — Although legacies of alimony,
or maintenance, be destined for the diet, clothing, and lodging of
the legatee, yet if the testamentary heir does not furnish them to
the legatee, and he have them somewhere else, and even gratis,
this testamentary heir, or his heirs or executors if he were dead,
would nevertheless be accountable for the arrears to the said lega-
tee. And the cessation of payment for several years would be of
no manner of prejudice to him, either for the time past or the time
to come. For although the motive of the testator was barely that
the legatee should be maintained, and he has had his mainte-
nance, yet this was a charge that the testator imposed on his tes-
tamentary heir; and on his part it would be unjust that he should
reap the benefit of it, as it is just on the part of the legatee, that
he should have the advantage both of the bounty of this testator,
and of the liberality of other persons who had nourished and
maintained him, or of his own industry, if he had lived by that*


XVIII.


3084. Legacies of Alimony are favorable. — Legacies of aili-
mony are distinguished from the greater part of other legacies, by
the consideration of the necessity that renders them so favorable,
that one may bequeath alimony even to persons that are incapable
of other legacies, as has been said in its place* And if a legacy
of alimony or maintenance, or of a yearly pension, were made in
favor of poor persons, it might be ranked in the number of lega-
cies to pious uses, which are the subject-matter of the ensuing sec-
tion.


* L. 14, § 2, D. de alim. vel cid. leg.
" ZL. 10, § 1, D. de alim. vel cid. leg. ; — 1. 18, § 1, ed.
* See the sixth article of the second section.


TIT. Il. BEC. VI.} LEGACIES. 535


SECTION VI.
OF LEGACIES TO PIOUS USES.


Art. I.


3585. What are Legacies to Pious Uses. — Legacies to pious
uses are those legacies that are destined to some work of charity,
whether they relate to spiritual or temporal concerns. Thus, a leg-
acy of ornaments for a church, a legacy for the maintenance of a
clergyman to instruct poor children, and a legacy for their suste-
nance, are legacies to pious uses.


IL


3086. Difference between Legacies to Pious Uses, and other Leg-
acies, by their Motives and their Use. — We may make this a first
difference between legacies to pious uses, and the other sorts of
legacies, that the name of legacies to pious uses is properly given
only to those legacies which are destined to some work of piety
and charity, and which have their motive independent of the con-
sideration which the merit of the legatees might procure them ;
whereas the other legacies have their motives confined to the con-
sideration of some particular person, or are destined to some other
use than to a work of piety or charity, as shall be shown in the
article which follows.


qIf.


3087. Difference between a Legacy to Pious Uses, and a Legacy
which regards the Public Good. — All legacies which have not for
their motive the particular consideration of some person are not,
for all that, of the number of legacies to pious uses, although they
be destined for a public good, if that good be any other than a
work of piety or charity. Thus, a legacy destined for some pub-
lic ornament, such as the gate of a city, for the embellishment or
conveniency of some public place, and others of the like nature,
or a legacy of a prize to be given to the person who should excel
others in some art or science, would be legacies of another nature
than those to pious uses.°


© Dispositiones pii testatoris. L. 28, C. de epise. et cler.
> It is in this motive that the essential part of legacies to pious uses does consist.
¢ ZL. 117, D. de leg. 1; —1. 193, end.


536 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 13. BOOK IV.


IV.

3088. A Legacy toa Pious Use, without any Particular Destina-
tion, how to be applied. — If a legacy to pious uses was not des-
tined to any particular use, as if a testator had left a legacy in
general, either to the church, or to the poor; the legacy to the
church would be for the parish church of the place where the tes-
tator lived ; and the legacy to the poor would be for the hospital
of that place, if there were any: if there were no hospital, the
legacy would go to the poor of that parish. And it would be the
same thing, if, instead of a bare legacy, the testator had instituted
for his testamentary heirs the church or the poor?@


V.


3589. Execution of Legacies to Pious Uses.— If the testator
himself had not directed particularly the application of a legacy
to pious uses, as if he had left a legacy to the poor indefinitely in
a place where there were no hospital; or for the redemption of cap-
tives, without specifying in what place; the execution of these dis-
positions would depend on the executor of the testament, or other
person to whom the testator had explained and intrusted his inten-
tion. And if there were no person to whom he had imparted his
will, and it were not safe to trust to the integrity of the testa-
mentary heir, the ordinary judge would give directions therein,
at the instance of the persons whose duty it should be to see these
legacies duly applied.


REMARK ON THE PREcEDING ARTICLE.


3590. What is said in the text cited, that, if the testator has
named nobody for the execution of his legacies to pious uses, the
bishop of the place may demand the sum bequeathed, in order to


4 Si quis in nomine magni Dei et Salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi hereditatem, ant lega-
tum reliquerit, jubemus, ecclesiam loci illius, in quo testator domicilium habuerit, accipere
quod dimissum est. Nov. 131,c.9. It appears by this text, that it was the usage of
those times to leave legacies to God. And if such a legacy ought to belong to the charch
of the place, with much more reason ought a legacy that is left to the church indeGnitely
to belong to the testator’s parish church.

* Si quidem testator designaverit per quem desiderat redemptionem fieri captivorum,
is qui specialiter designatus est, legati vel fideicommissi habeat exigendi licentiam : et pro
sua conscicntia votum adimpleat testatoris. Sin autem persona non designata, testator
absolute tantummodo summam legati vel fideicommissi taxaverit, qus debeat memorat#
cause proficere: vir reverendissimus episcopus illius civitatia ex qua testator oritur he-
heat facultatem exigendi quod hujus rei gratia facrit derelictum, pium defancti proposi-
tum sine ulla cunctatione, ut convenit, impleturus. JZ. 28, § 3, C. de eptso. et cler.


TIT. II. SEO. Vi.] LEGACIES. 537


execute the intention of the testator, is not altogether conformable
to our usage. For the bishop may indeed take care that the lega-
cies left to the poor be duly applied, but it is not he himself that
demands and receives the sums appropriated to these sorts of lega-
cies. And if it be necessary to sue the executor at law, this func-
tion will belong to the persons who are charged with this care,
such as the governors of a hospital or an almshouse, accord-
ing as these legacies happen to be destined. And if the legacy
were not appropriated to any particular house, as a legacy of an
alms to be distributed on a certain day in a certain place, which
were not applied to any particular hospital, or a legacy to the poor
in a place where there were no house allotted for them, the officers
of justice would be obliged to give directions therein at the in-
stance of the king’s procurators. Which does not hinder the
bishops and curates from doing their diligence on their part to
procure the execution of these sorte of legacies. "We may consult
on this subject the ordinances which have provided for the recovery,
preservation, and administration of the goods belonging to the


poor.
VIL


3590). Destination of a Pious Legacy to another Use than that
which the Testator had appointed.—If.a pious legacy were des-
tined to some use which could not have its effect, as if a testator
had left a legacy for building a church for a parish, or an apart-
ment in a hospital, and it happened, either that before his death
the said church or the said apartment had been built out of some
other fand, or that it was noways necessary or useful, the legacy
would not for all that remain without any use; but it would be
laid out on other works of piety for that parish, or for that hos-
pital, according to the directions that should be given in this mat-
ter by the persons to whom this function should belong.‘


* See the edict of 1561, the ordinance of Moulins, art. 73, that of Blois, art. 65 and 66,
_ and that of Mélun, art. 10.

f Legatum civitati relictum est, ut ex reditibus quotannis in ea civitate memories con-
servandz defuncti gratia spectaculum celebretur, quod illic celebrari non licet. Qusro
quid de legato existimes? Modestinus respondit: cum testator spectaculum edi voluerit
in civitate, sed tale, quod ibi celebrari non licet: iniqaum esse hanc quantitatem quam in
Spectaculum defunctus destinaverit, lucro hsredam cedere. Igitur adhibitis heredibus,
et primoribus civitatis, dispiciendum est, ia quam rem converti debeat fideicommissum,
ut memoria testatoris alio et licito genere celebretur. Z. 16, D. de usu et usuf. et red. leg.

Although this text relates to another sort of dispositions, yet the rule that results from
it is with much more reason very just in legacies to pious uses.


538 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOK Iv.


VII.

3591. Privilege of Legacies to Pious Uses.— Since legacies for
works of piety and charity have a double favor, both that of their
motive for holy and pious uses, and that of their utility for the
public good, they are considered as being privileged in the inten-
tion of the law.®


SECTION VII.


OF LEGACIES OF ONE OF SEVERAL THINGS, AT THE CHOICE OF THE
EXECUTOR, OR OF THE LEGATEE.


3592. We have endeavoured to form the rules which compose
this section in such a manner as that they may reconcile some
contrarieties, at least such in appearance as we meet with, in some
laws relating to this matter. Thus, for example, it is said in one
law, that if a testator hath bequeathed in general a man, that is to
say, a slave, the legatee shall have the choice of the person: Homine
generaliter legato, arbitrium eligendi quem acctperet, ad legatarium
pertinet. L. 2,§1, D. de opt. vel el. leg. And it ia said in another
law, that if a testator hath bequeathed in general a silver basin,
he having several, and not distinguishing which basin he intends
to give, the testamentary heir will have it in his choice to give
which basin he pleases. Sed etst lancem legaverit, nec apparuerit
quam, eque electio est haredis quam velit dare. L. 37, tn fine, D.
de leg. 1.

3593. It would seem by these texts, that whoever should take
both the one and the other in a literal sense might think it in-
different in point of law whether the election were given to the
testamentary heir or to the legatee, which certainly cannot be
just; but in order to reconcile them together, it is necessary to ob-
serve a distinction of the ancient Roman law between legacies
which were called per vindicationem, and those that were called


& See the sixth article of the eighth section, and the remark on the fourth article of the
second section of Codicils.

The favor of legacies to pious uses may distinguish them from other legacies in the
cases mentioned in the places which we have just now quoted; and, in general, this favor
may be considered in the cases relating to the interpretation of any disposition for a lega-
cy to a pious use.

See, concerning this subject of privileges of legacies to pious uses, the preamble to the
second section of the Fulcidian Portion.


“FIT. Ii. SEO. VI] LEGACIES. 539


ger damnationem, of which mention hath been made in another
place.* In the legacies of the first sort, the legacy being conceived
in these or the like terms, J will that such a one take a horse out
of my stable, the legatee had the choice, for he himself took the
thing that was bequeathed to him. And it is of a legacy of this
kind that we are to understand the first of the texts which have
been now quoted. And in the legacies of the second kind, the
legacy being conceived in these terms, I will that my heir give to
such a one one of my horses, the testamentary heir made the choice,
for it was he that was charged to give the thing that was be-
queathed.” And it is of a legacy of this second kind that we are
to understand the second text. Thus, although the differences of
these two sorts of legacies, and of some others, of which it would
be to no purpose to speak here, have been abolished,° yet it is ne-
cessary to make use of them for conciliating the contrarieties of
these, and of many other laws, which have very much perplexed
several interpreters, and that not without reason. And we may
likewise say of these two kinds of legacies, which were thus dis-
tinguished in the Roman law, that their different expressions may
point out some difference in the intention of the testator; and that
that expression which gives to the legatee the right to take seems
to have a greater relation to the right of choosing than that which
charges the testamentary heir to give to the legatee.

3594. We have been obliged to make this reflection on a dif-
ficulty which it was necessary to clear up before we should pro-
ceed to explain the rules relating to this matter. But seeing in
our usage there is only one manner of expression used by testa-
tors, which has no relation to any one of these two sorts of lega-
cies that were distinguished in the Roman law, and that almost
all legacies are conceived in these terms, I give and bequeath to
such a one, or, if it is in the name of a third person, gives and be-
queaths ; these expressions mark nothing at all of the intention of
the testator that favors either the testamentary heir or the legatee.
Thus, unless the legacy be conceived in such a manner as to leave
the choice either to the one or to the other, it must be interpreted
according to the rules that have been explained in the sixth, sev-
enth, eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh articles of the seventh sec-
tion of Testaments. And since it is not proper to repeat in this


® See the preamble of the ninth section of Testaments.
b V. Ulp. tit. 24, § 14.
© § 2, Inst. de legat.


M2 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART It. BOOK Iv.


show all that there is in the inheritance of that kind of thing of
which the election is bequeathed. And if there should be any
which by some chance, without the act of the executor, had not
appeared, the legatee, who, without knowing any thing of them,
had made his choice, might choose anew after he came to the
knowledge of them. But if among all these things there should
be any one that was singularly necessary to the executor for
matching some other goods of the succession, it would be equita-
ble to except it out of the choice of this legatee, especially if the
executor is willing to make up to the legatee what this necessary
thing should exceed the others in value, if none of the others be
found of an equal value to it. For the right of the legatee does
not extend so far as to put it in his power to hurt the executor.


VI


3600. A Legacy left to the Choice of a Third Person. — If the tes-
tator had left to a third person the choice of the thing bequeathed,
either because he did not think the legatee capable of making the
said choice, or because he was willing to make use of that tem-
perament between the interests of the executor and of the legatee,
the legacy would be fixed by that third person. And if he should
fail or refuse to determine it, the right of election would go to the
legatee, who might demand of the executor such of the things as
he should pitch upon, providing it were not the most precious of
all, but a thing of middle value between ‘that which were most
precious and that of least value* And in case they could not
agree among themselves, the election would be determined by the
arbitration of some person whom they themselves should agree on,
or who should be named by the judge.


b 7}. 4 @ 5, eod.

' As the execator or testamentary heir ought not to abuse the liberty of election, as has
‘been said in the preceding article, so neither ought the legatee to abuse it when he has it.
Homine legato, actorem non posse eligi. Z.37, D. deleg.1. See the tenth article of the
seventh section of

k 7. ult.41, C. comm. de legat.

} Arbitri officiam invocandum est. L. 18, in f. D. de servit. pred. rust. The delay of
@ year, mentioned iu the first of these two texts, would not be agreeable to our usage nor
to equity. For seeing this third person who should put off so long the making of this
choice was named only that he might make a reasonable choice, and that others can do
it as well as he, it would not be just to wait so long a time till he should be pleased to
determine the matter, especially if the thing bequeathed were of such a nature as to be in
hazard of perishing during the delay.


TIT. 11. SEC. VII. LEGACIBS. 541


the house in which the testator lived, unless it should appear by
the circumstances that his intention was to bequeath the other.
But if the expression of the testator should not determine particu-
larly for any one of the two houses, as if he had barely devised
one of his houses, or if, having two lands called by the same name,
be had devised one of them, the executor might give only the
house or the land that is of least value;° for by that he will have
satisfied the legacy. And in general, in all doubts of this nature,
where nothing determines to one of the things which are compre-
hended in a legacy, the presumption is for the executor, as has
been explained in another place.*


IV.


3598. A Legacy left to the Choice of the Executor. — If a testa-
tor had bequeathed a silver basin, having several of that sort, the
executor would be at liberty to give which silver besin he pleased.
For the legatee would have that which was left him, and this is a
consequence of the rule explained in the third article. And the
executor would with much more reason have this liberty if the tes-
tator had left the choice to him. But if the legacy were of things
which, although of the same kind, might be of different qualities,
good or bad, such as horses, hangings, the liberty of choosing,
which the executor would have, would not extend to a power of
choosing a suite of old hangings that are falling to pieces, or a
horse that is broken-winded. For it could not be presumed that
the testator had given this extent to the right of election which he
had left to his executor‘


V.


3599. A Legacy left to the Choice of the Legatee.— When a
testator gives to the legatee the right of choosing out of several
things, such as the horses in his stable, any of them which he
pleases, and in like manner of other things, the legatee has the
liberty to choose the most precious of them.£ And to put the leg-
atee in a condition to make this choice, the executor is obliged to


© ZL. 37, § 1, D. de leg. 1;—I. 89, § 6, D. de leg. 1.

+ on the sz, sent, an oder following artcln of the eoveth scion of Tate
ments.

© L.. 31, in f. D. de leg. 1.

€ L110, D. de leg. 1. See the twenty-second article of the third section, and the
eighth and tenth articles of the seventh section of Testaments.

& L. 2, D. de opt. vel elect. leg.

VOL. II. 46


544 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK IV.


IX.
3603. Penalty when the Legatee defers to make the Choice.—Ii ,
the choice belongs to the legatee, and he puts it off, he will be
liable for the costs and damages which may have been occasioned
by his delay, in the same manner as the executor is liable for the
consequences of his delay. Thus, for example, if two horses, one
whereof (whichsoever he should choose) had been left him by
legacy, should happen to die during his delay to make his option,
and that the said loss might be imputed to him, because the exec
utor, who had no occasion for any of the horses, and might have
been able to sell the horse which the legatee would have left him,
and would not have been obliged to keep both the horses, might
recover against this legatee costs and damages for that expense
and that loss, according to the circumstances?


X.


3604. If there remain only one of the Things whereof the Choice
was bequeathed, tt belongs to the Legatee. — If after the death of
the testator, and before the election, whether it were to be made
by the legatee or by the executor, the things of which the election
was to be made should happen to perish, without the fault either
of the one or the other, one of the things is lost to the legatee, and
the others to the executor.t But if there remains only one of
them, it belongs to the legatee. For although his legacy was of
a right to choose, and there is now no room left for choice, yet
the intention of the testator was that the legatee should have one
of them ; and therefore he ought to have that which is the only one
that remains.


XL


3605. If, after the Choice is made, the Thing chosen perishes, the
Legatee bears the Loss of tt.—If after that he who was to choose,


P See the text cited on the seventh article, in which these werds are to be remarked:
Ne venditio quandoque eligente legatario interpelletur.

4 The first part of this article may have its use in a case where the testamentary her
were to deduct the Falcidian portion. For one would not reckon to him as pert of hs
Falcidian portion the value of that thing which the legatee was to have, but only the other
things which were to have been his own. See the seventh and eighth articles of the frst
section of the Fulcidian Portion.

Whether the choice belongs to the executor or to the legates, if there remains oaly
one, it goes to the legatee. For this event determines the thing that remains to be the
legatee’s, as much or rather more than the choice would do that which should be choses.


TIT. IT. SEC. VII.] LEGACIES. 345


whether it was the executor or the legatee, has made and declared
nis choice, the thing chosen should happen to perish, the loss of it
would fail upon the legatee, and he would have no right to those
things that should remain. For the choice had distinguished that
thing which he was to have, and had made it his own. So that it
is he who ought to bear the loss of it


XII.


3606. He who has made his Choice cannot change and make an-
other. — The executor or legatee, who has once made his option,
whether judicially or extrajudicially, by mutual ‘consent, cannot
afterwards change or make another choice. For the right of
choosing, which the testator had given him, igs consummated by
this first choice.‘


XL


3607. The Choice cannot be made before the Executor has accepted
the Succession. — The legatee who has the right of choosing can-
not make his choice till the executor has accepted the succession.
For till then, there being no executor, there would be no party to
whom he could intimate his choice, and who could either contest
it or approve it, and deliver the legacy. So that it would be to no
purpose that he had made his choice.”


XIV.


3608. The Legutee of what shall remain after the Choice of an-
other will have all, if no Choice ts made.—If a testator had be-
queathed one or two things out of many at the choice of one
legatee, and the remainder of them to another, and he who had
this choice would not make use of his right, all the things would
belong to the second legatee, and the executor would have none of
them. For the expression of those things that should remain after
the choice of the first of the two legatees would comprehend them
all, if he took none of them.*


* Sticham aut Pamphilum, utrum heres mens volet Titio dare: si dixerit hwres Sti-
chum se velle dare, Sticho mortuo liberabitur. Z. 84, § 9, D. de leg. 1.

Although this text speaks only of the case where the choice belongs to the heir or ex-
ecntor, yet the rule is with mach more reason just in the case where the legateo has him-
eelf made the choice.

t Z. 84, § 9, D. de legat. 1; —1. 20, D. de opt. vel elect. leg. } —1. 5, D. de legat.1;—1. 11,
in f. D. de legat. 2.

~ ZL. 16, D. de opt. vel elect. legat. ® F117, D. de opt. vel elect. leg.

46° ;


546 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK Iv.


XV. .

3609. The Right of Election passes to the Heir or Executor of
the Legatee.— If the legatee who had a right to choose dies with-
out having made a choice, he transmits to his heir or executor
both his right to the legacy and the right of election.’


SECTION VIII.
OF THE FRUITS AND INTEREST OF LEGACIES.


3610. By fruits of legacies we are to understand, not only the
product of lands, but likewise all other sorts of revenues or profits
that may be made of any other thing. And by interest is meant
the reparation of damages which debtors of sums of money, who
fail to make payment, owe from the time of the demand, as has
been explained in the title of Interest.

3611. As to the fruits of lands devised, it is necessary to distin-
guish between those which are upon the ground at the time that
it is delivered to the legatee, and which are commonly called the
fruits hanging by the root, and those which have been separated
from the ground by the executor before he delivered it, and which
were separated only after the death of the testator. These are the
subject-matter of this section, as also the interest and other reve-
nues that were fallen due before the delivery of the legacy; and
the fruits hanging on the ground at the time of the delivery are,
as it were, accessories, which have been treated of in the fourth
section.


Arr. L


3612. Three Sorts of Things that may be bequeathed.— We may
distinguish into three kinds all the things which testators have
the liberty to give away in legacies. The first is of those which of
their own nature produce no revenue; such as a watch, a picture,
silver plate. The second is of those things which of their own na-
ture produce a revenue; as a house, a meadow, or other ground,
a herd of cattle, hackney-horses to those who let them out to hire,
and other things of the like nature. The third is of sums of


Y L. 19, D. de opt. vel elect. leg. See the tenth and following articles of the tenth see
tion of Testaments, and the seventeenth article of the ninth section of this title of Zeganes.


TIT. II. SEC. VIII.] LEGACIES. 547


money, which of their own nature produce nothing, but which,
making the price of every thing that is in commerce, are the instru-
ment of the commerce itself: which is the reason why the laws
condemn those who are dilatory in paying the sums which they
owe in damages, which they have fixed to what is called interest,
of which mention has been made in its proper place.* And we
may place in this third rank all the legacies which are reduced to
a valuation, such as a legacy which a testator should make of
some work, or other thing that he should oblige his executor to do
for a legatee, or a legacy of a thing which the executor could not
give in specie; for in this case he would owe the value of it.”


II.


3613. If the Testator has regulated the Frutts and Revenues of
the Legacy, his Will will serve as a Rule.— If a testator had reg-
ulated by his disposition what concerns the fruits or other revenues
which the thing devised may produce, his will must serve as a
law, and the executor will be accountable or not accountable for
them, according as the testator shall have ordered. Thus, he who
devises a land may order it to be delivered either after the harvest
is over, or after some years, during which space of time he leaves
the enjoyment of it to his executor°


JIL


3614. The Fruits of Legacies are due only from the Time they
are demanded. — If the testator has ordered nothing about the
fruits and other revenues which the things devised might produce,
they will be due only from the time that they are demanded. But
if the executor had dealt any way knavishly, as if he had con-
cealed the testament, he would be liable, not only for all the fruits
from the time of the testator’s death, but likewise for costs and
damages, if there had been any.*


® See the title of the Loan of Money and other Things to be restored in Kind.

b See the sixth article of the first section of the same title of the Loan of Money and
other Things to be restored in Kind. Ubi quid fieri stipulemur, si non fuerit factum, pecu-
niam dari oportere. ZL. 72, D. de verb. obl.

© L. 5, C. de necess. serv. hered. inst. See, touching the interest of money, the fourth
article.

4 In legatis et fideicommissis fructus post litis contestationem non ex die mortis conse-
quantur, sive in rem sive in personam agatur. JZ. ult. C. de usur. et fructid. legat. seu fidet-
Com. , — j, 1, eod. e

Is qui fideicommissum debet post moram, non tantum fructus, sed etiam omne dam-
num quo affectus est fideicommissarius, prestare cogitar. ZL. 26, D. de leg. 3; —I. 23, D.


548 THE CIVIL Law. [Part 11. BOOK IV.


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3615. It is necessary to observe on this article a difficulty which
ought not to be suppressed. For, besides that it has divided the
interpreters, it requires that some necessary reflections should be
made on the rule explained in this article. This rule discharges
the executor, not only from the interest of money, and of other
things which produce no revenue, but likewise from the fruits of
lands and tenements which produce a revenue, and obliges him to
make restitution of these fruits only after a legal demand. And
seeing it makes no exception, it comprehends not only the cases
where the executor and the legatee should have equally knowledge
of the testament, and where the legatee should neglect to demand
his legacy, but also the cases where, the legatee being ignorant
of his legacy, the executor who should know of it, and see that
he was obliged to deliver the thing devised, should nevertheless
retain it; which seemed to those interpreters to be contrary to
equity. For it cannot be said, especially in the Roman law, that
the things devised are a part of the goods of the inheritance, and
may be considered as belonging to the testamentary heir until the
time of their being delivered; seeing it is a principle of the Ro-
man law in the matter of legacies, that the propriety of the thing
bequeathed belongs to the legatee from the moment of the tes-
tator’s death; and although the legatee know nothing of his
right till a long time after, yet his acceptance of the legacy has
this effect, that he is accounted to be master of the thing be-
queathed from the moment of the testator’s death, and that he is
so much master of it, that it is said in a law that the thing be-
queathed passes to the legatee in the same manner as the goods
of the inheritance pass to the testamentary heir, and that the tes-
tamentary heir never had any right to them.*


de leg. 1;—. 8, 39, D. de usur. See the tenth article of the first section of Subststutions
direct and fiduciary, and the fifteenth article of the second section of the same title.

We have not put down in the article that the fruits are due from the contestation of
suit, as it is said in the first of these texts; but that they are due from the time of the de-
mand. For by our usage, and by the ordinances, a legal demand hath the effect of the
contestation of suit in the Roman law. See the remark on the fifth article of the first
section of Interest.

We have added to the article the exception of the case of knavery in the executor. For
this rule cannot be contrary to the general rule, which obliges every knavish possessor to
make restitution of the fruits, with much more reason than him who is backward in pay-
ing what he owes after it has been demanded of him. See the fourth article of the third
section of Interest.

* L. 86, § 2, D. de leg. 1;—1. 64, in f. D. de frt.; — 1. 80, D. de legat. 2.


TIT. 11. SEC. VIII. LEGACIES. 549


3616. It would seem to follow from these first reflections, that,
since the fruits belong regularly to the proprietor of the ground,
those of a ground devised did belong to the legatee or devisee
from the death of the testator; and that the testamentary heir
who was not ignorant of the testament, having known that he
was in possession of goods that were not his own, ought to be
obliged to restore those fruits. These reasons could not be un-
known to those who framed the laws cited on this article; and
what still augments the difficulty is, that Justinian has made an
exception from the rule explained in this article in favor of lega-
cies to pious uses, having ordained, with respect to these sorts of
legacies, that no inquiry should be made whether the legacy had
ever been demanded, but that it should suffice that, the testamen-
tary heir not having delivered the legacy, he should be reckoned
guilty of delay ipso jure, that is to say, by the effect of the law
itself.

3617. To resolve this difficulty, some of those interpreters have
been of opinion, that it was necessary to restrain the laws, which
discharge the testamentary heir from the fruits until the time of a
legal demand, to the case of a legacy of a thing that was not the
testator’s own; but these laws are conceived in too clear terms to
admit of so remote a sense. Others say that their meaning is,
that the testamentary heir is not accountable for all the fruits
which the legatee might have reaped by his industry, and that he
is only liable for those which he has really and truly gathered;
but this distinction does not suit with these laws, and does not
remove the difficulty. There are some who think that these laws
are to be understood of the fruits which had been gathered before
the death of the testator, and not of those which have been
gathered since his death; but what right could the legatee pre-
tend to the fruits which accrued to the testator in his lifetime?
Others will have it, that the testamentary heir is obliged to restore
the frnits reaped after his entering to the possession of the inher-
itance, and not those reaped before; but these laws discharge the
testamentary heir from the restitution of the fruits without any
distinction ; and his right of enjoyment takes in the fruits preced-
ing his entering to the inheritance, for they belong to him, and he
recovers them from those who had gathered them. So that his
condition ought to be the same as to the fruits of both these


> See the last article.


550 THE CIVIL Law. [paRT Il. BOOK IV.


times. And lastly, there are some who have thought it necessary
to distinguish between the legacies which are called per damnatio-
nem, and the legacies per vindicationem, of which mention bas
been made in the preamble to the foregoing section; that in these
the fruits are due to the legatee from the time of the testamentary
heir’s entering to the succession; and that in those they are due
only from the time that the testamentary heir has been guilty of
delay. But there would be as much, or more, reason to give to
the legatee the fruits from the time of the testator’s death in the
case of a legacy per damnationem, seeing in this case the testa-
mentary heir who was charged to deliver the thing bequeathed
would be more faulty than he would be in the case where the leg-
atee himself ought to take the thing bequeathed to him; and
besides, the distinction of these two sorts of legacies hath been
abolished, as has been remarked in the same place. It seems like-
wise that the first of the texts cited on this article relates to both
these sorts of legacies indifferently, and that these two expressions,
sive in rem, sive in personam agatur, may be understood, the one
of the legacy per damnationem, which the legatee demanded by a
personal action, and the other of the legacy per vindicationem,
which was demanded by a real action. Whence it appears to fol-
low, that, even when the distinction of these two sorts of legacies
was in use, the rule explained in this article was equally applica-
ble to the one sort and to the other.

3618. We relate here the several sentiments of those interpret
ers, to show that this rule which discharges the testamentary heir
or executor from the fruits of legacies until the time of a legal
demand, seemed to them to be unjust, being taken in a literal and
general sense. But seeing none of all these interpretations ap-
pears to agree with the sense of these laws, the terms whereof are
so clear and distinct, and that the exception which Justinian has
made from this rule in favor of legacies to pious uses determines
for the sense which discharges in general the testamentary heirs or
executors from the fruits of legacies until the time of demand; it
is but fair and ingenuous freely to own, that Justinian’s intention,
and that of the preceding laws, was to make a general rule of it,
which, after the manner of other general rules, should be observed
in cases where there were no cause to make any exception from it.
Thus Justinian hath excepted from this rule legacies to pious
uses. Thus one may except the cases where the executor should
be guilty of any roguery. And if, for example, an executor had


TIT. 1. BEC. VII.| LEGACIES. 551


concealed a codicil which contained legacies, he would be, without
doubt, condemned to make restitution of the fruits and interest of
those legacies, if the said codicil came to light. But when no
unfair dealing can be imputed to the executor, and it was not
his fault that the legatees had no knowledge of the testament, and
had not received their legacies, the circumstances might justly
discharge the executor from making restitution of the fruits which
he had enjoyed. Thus, for example, if a testament having been
opened in a court of justice, or deposited with a notary public
living in the place where the testator had his abode, and it having
by that means been known and made public, there were some of
the legatees whose place of abode was unknown, or even whose
persons were not known, or who were absent in a remote country,
so that it was not possible to acquaint them; the executor who
on one part ought to continue in possession of the goods, and to
take care of them, and who on the other part ought to remain
proprietor of what cannot be acquired by the legatees, whether it
be that they cannot or will not receive their legacies, or that they
are incapable of them, may without injustice remain in possession
of all the goods of the inheritance, and enjoy those that had been
bequeathed as well as the other goods. So that his enjoyment of
those things not being a usurpation, and since it may have some
other good foundation besides the negligence of the legatee, it is
but just that the executor under these circumstances should be
free from any fear of being afterwards called upon to make resti-
tution of the fruits which he had enjoyed without any fraud or
covin. ‘Thus the rule which frees him from this restitution hath
its equity founded in the circumstances which may clear him from
all roguery ; and it hath likewise its usefulness for the public good,
because of the inconveniences which it removes of an infinite
number of difficulties that would happen if executors were obliged
without distinction to restore all the fruits which they had gathered
since the death of the testator. And seeing the delay of payment
of legacies may happen, either through the roguery of the ex-
ecutor, or without any knavish dealing on his part, and that such
knavery ought not to be presumed without proof, it was but just
to presume uprightness and integrity in an executor who should
have several excuses to allege. But this law being founded only
on the presumption of the integrity of the executor, and on the
consequences of the public good, which demands that all occa-
sions of lawsuits should be cut off as much as is possible, it would


5652 THE CIVIL LAW. - [PARP II. BOOK Iv.


be altogether useless for justifying the conscience of an execator,
who, although nobody should be able to discover and prove his
roguery, ought to tax himself with it, and, if he would do justice
upon himself, ought to restore the fruits which he had unjustly
reaped of a land or tenement that was devised, and which he
might have delivered to the devisee.


IV.


3619. The Interest of Legacies of Money is duc only from the
Time of the Demand.— Legacies of money, and other things
which of their nature produce no revenue, ought to be paid, as ail
other legacies, at the time appointed by the testament; or if there
be no time fixed, they are due after the death of the testator.
But although they be not acquitted at the time appointed, yet
interest is only due from the time of the demand;° unless the
testator had ordered that the legatee should have the interest.4


V.


3620. Profit of Legacies, which is of another Nature thase the
Fruits or Interest. — If the thing bequeathed were of such a na-
ture as that it ought to produce to the legatee profits of another
sort than the fruits of the ground, or interest of money, as if it
were a certain number of mares, or a set of instruments and
machines for some manufacture, the executor who is in fault for
not delivering the legacy will be accountable for the profits which
these sorts of things might yield. But if the legacy were of a
stud of mares, the colts would be a part of the legacy, and would
belong to the legatee, although the executor had not been guilty
of any delay in delivering the same.°


VI.


3621. The Fruits and Interest of Legactes to Pious Uses are due
without any Demand. — The executor who does not pay the lega-
cies to pious uses within the time regulated by the testator, if he
has set any time, or within the delay that is necessary according
to the quality of the testator’s disposition, will be accountable for
the fruits, the interest, and other revenues, according to the nature


© L.1, C. de usur. et fruct. legat.


4 The interest in this case would not be usurious; for it would not be a loan, but the
liberality of the testator, which would increase the legacy.
© £. 26, D. de legat. 3; —~ 1. 8, D. de user. ; — 1. 39, eod.


TIT. 11. SEC. Ix.} LEGACIES. 553


of the thing bequeathed, to reckon from the term, if there was any
set by the will, or from the death of the testator, if there was no
term fixed‘


REMARK ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3622. Although the justice of this rule be founded, not only
on the favor of legacies to pious uses, but also on this particular
consideration, that these legacies may be unknown or neglected
by the persons who ought to call for them, such as the governors
of a hospital, and others who happen to be intrusted with this
care; yet this is not always precisely observed, lest such a strict-
ness should happen sometimes to degenerate into rigor. And it is
even prudent for governors of hospitals not to exact legacies to
pious uses in such a manner as to make them uneasy and burden-
some to families. For such a rigid conduct as this might some
time or other divert those who were injured by it from making
the like dispositions in favor of hospitals, and incline them to dis-
pose to some other uses of what they had piously designed for the


poor.


SECTION IX.
HOW THE LEGATEE ACQUIRES HIS RIGHT TO THE LEGACY.


3623. Ir has been remarked at the end of the preamble to the
tenth section of Testaments, where the right of transmission is
treated of, that mention should likewise be made of it in this place
in some articles relating to this right. But what shall be said in
these articles ought not to be taken for a repetition of what has
been said in that tenth section of Testaments. For there we have
explained the rules of transmission in general, and here we shall
only make application of those rules to some cases where it is
necessary to show their use.


Arr. I.


3624. The Legatee acquires his Right at the Instant of the Tes-
tator’s Death. — Seeing the legatee acquires his right by a testa-
ment, or other disposition made in consideration of death, and


ZT, 46, §§ 4 et 5, C. de episc. et cler.; —v. Nov. 181, c. 12.
VOL. IL. 47


554 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT LI. BOOK Iv.


that these sorts of dispositions are confirmed, and have their effect
at the moment of the death of the person who has made the dis-
position, the right to the legacy is acquired to the legatee at the
same instant," unless it be that the will of the testator has made
some change to it; and that depends on the rules which follow.


IL


3625. Legacies of Two Sorts, either Pure and Simple, or Condi-
tional. — We must distinguish two sorts of legacies: those which
are pure and simple, that is to say, whose validity does not depend
on any condition: and those which are conditional, and which
have not their effect but by the event of the condition on which
they depend ; as if a testator devises a certain estate in land, on
condition that the legatee happens to have children.” And the
right to these several legacies accrues differently to the legatees
by the following rules.


IL


3626. The Pure and Simple Legacy ts acquired at the Moment
of the Death of the Testator. — If the legacy was pure and simple,
the legatee acquires his right to it at the moment of the death of
the testator, whether he knew or was ignorant of the testament
and the said death. And if the thing devised be a house or lands,
or some movable thing belonging to the inheritance, or any other
thing that is actually among the goods of the succession, it passe:
directly from the deceased to the legatee, and he is master of it
and the executor has no manner of right to it.° Or if it bea
thing that is not part of the succession, or a sum of money, he has
a right to have it delivered to him at the time that the executor
shall be obliged to deliver it.¢


IV.


3627. As also the Conditional Legacy, the Condition whereof 1s
fulfilled before the Testator’s Death.—If, a legacy being condi-


* Si purum legatum est, ex die mortis dies ejus cedit. Z. 5, § 1, D. quand. dies lag. rd
Jid. ced. Heoredis aditio moram legati quidem petitioni facit, cessioni diei non facit. L.‘,
eod. See the tenth article of the tenth section of Testaments.

b Puram legatam. L. 5, § 1, D. quand. dies legat. vel fideic. ced. Legatum sub condi-
tione relictum. D. 1. § 2.

© Z. 5, § 1, D. quand. dies leg. vel fideic. ced. ; —1. 80, D. de legat. 2; —1. 75, § 1, ead. ; —
l. 64, in f. D. de furt.; —I. ult. C. quand. dies leg. vel fideic. ced. ; — l. 3, eod.

4 See the tenth section.


TIT. Il. BEC. IX.] LEGACIES. 555


tional, the condition was come to pass in the lifetime of the testa-
tor, or at the time of his death, this event would make the condi-
tional legacy to become pure and simple; so that the legatee would
acquire his right to it at the time of the testator’s death.®


V.


3628. If the Condition does not happen till after the Testator’s
Death, the Legacy hath not its Effect till tt happens. — If the con-
dition comes to pass only after the death of the testator, the right
of the legatee will not vest in him at the time of the said death,
even although the condition should depend on his own act, and
he should offer to perform it, unless the executor should accept
his offer. But the legacy will not be due to him till after he shall
have actually fulfilled the condition, or, if it was independent of his
act, till it shall have come to pass.


VI.

3629. Three Sorts of Legacies necessary to be distinguished for
the Effect of the Right of the Legatee.—It is necessary to distin-
guish three sorts of legacies, with regard to the time at which the
legatee may have acquired his right, and to the time in which he
may exercise the said right: the legacies that are pure and simple
without any term, the legacies that have a certain term, and the
legacies that are conditional. And this difference hath the effect
that shall be explained by the rules which follows


VIL


3630. Difference between the Time when the Legacy is acquired,
and the Time when tt may be demanded. — In all sorts of legacies it
is necessary to distinguish two several effects of the right of the
legatee. One, which renders him master of the thing bequeathed,
whether he may demand immediately the delivery of it, or may
not demand it as yet; and the other, which puts him in a condi-
tion to demand the delivery of it. It is of this first effect that it
is said, that then the time is come in which the legatee’s right
vests in him, and the legacy is due. And it is of the second effect
that it is said, that then the time is come when the legatee may
demand the legacy. Thus, when the legacy is pure and simple,


* See the sixteenth article of the eighth section of Testaments.
* L. 5, § 2, D. quand. dies leg. vel fideic. ced. ; —1. un. § 7, C. de caduc. toll.
8 See the following articles.


656 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT IJ. BOOX IV.


and without any term, the moment of the death of the testator
hath both these effects; and the time is then come in which the
right to the legacy vests in the legatee, and in which likewise he
may demand the thing bequeathed. Thus, when there is a term
prescribed for the payment of the legacy that is pure and simple,
the first of these two effects comes to pass on the day of the tes-
tator’s death; and the second does not bappen till the day of the
term. Thus, when the legacy is conditional, and without any
other term, it hath these two effects at the moment that the con-
dition comes to pass; or if it has a term, the second effect is sus-
pended until the said term. And if the condition is not come to
pass, the time is not come in which the right to the legacy is ac-
quired, and much less the time of demanding it.®


VII.


3631. The Legatee transmits or doth not transmit the Legacy to
his Heirs or Executors, according to the Condition in which his
Right is when he dies.—It follows, from the preceding articles,
that if the legatee chances to die before he has received tbe thing
bequeathed, the legacy may pass, or may not pass, to his heirs or
executors, according to the condition in which his right is at the
time of his death. And he transmits the legacy if the right to it
was vested in him, or he does not transmit it if the time was not
come that the legacy was due to him:


TX.


3632. Two Cases in which there can be no Transmission. — Of
what nature soever the legacy be, if the legatee was dead at the
time of making the testament, or if he dies before the testator, his
heir or executor will have no right to the legacy. For the legatee
himself could have no right to it but at the time of the testator’s
death, which was to give the effect to his testament.


X.


3633. The Conditional Legacy ts not transmitted tf the Condition
be not come to pass. — If the legacy is conditional, and the legatee
dies before the condition of the legacy be fulfilled, he dies without


bh 7.9, D. ut legat. seu fideic. caus. caveat ;—1, 21, D. quando dies leg. vel fidetc. ced. ; —
I. 213, D. de verb. signif.

{ T.5, D. quand. dies leg. vel fideic. ced.; —1. 1, § 2, D. de condit. et demonstr.

| See the fifth article of the tenth section of Testaments.


TIT. I. SEC. IX.] LEGACIES. 557


having had any manner of right to the legacy: so that he trans-
mits no right to his heir or executor.™


XI.


3634. The Legacy is transmitted, although the Legatee die before
the Term of paying the Legacy. — When the legacy is pure and
simple, whether there be a term fixed for payment of it, or whether
there be no term fixed, the legatee who has survived the testator,
having thereby acquired his right to the legacy, transmits it to his
heir or executor, whether he die before or after the term.


XIL


3635. Which are the Legacies that are truly Conditional. — We
must not reckon in the number of conditional legacies all those
in which the testator may, perhaps, have made use of the word
condition. For, as it has already been observed in its proper place,
conditions are often confounded with the charges which testators
impose on legacies, which renders this word condition equivocal.
But we ought not to call any legacies conditional, except those
whereof the validity depends on a condition, so as that until it be
accomplished the legatee can have no manner of right? Thus,
for example, if a testator bequeaths a sum of money in case the
legatee be married at the time of the testator’s death, or that he
have children, or that he be provided of an office, these are condi-
tional legacies, although the word condition be not expressed in
the testament. But if the testator devises a land or tenement, on
condition that the legatee suffer therein a service for the use of
other lands or tenements which he devises to some other person,
this expression will indeed impose upon the legatee the charge of
this service, but it will not make the legacy conditional ; and if
the legatee dies before the right of service have been put in use,
the legacy will nevertheless be transmitted to the heir or executor
of the said legatee.


XIIL
3636. The Legatee who leaves his Wife big with Child transmits


™ See the eleventh article of the tenth section of Testaments.
® See the texts cited on the seventh and eighth articles of this section, and the third ar-
ticle of the tenth section of Testamenis.
© See the seventh and following articles of the eighth section of Testaments.
P See the same articles, as also the second article of this section.
47°


558 THE CIVIL Law. [PART It. BOOK Iv.


the Legacy left him on Condition that he have Children. — If the
condition of a legacy were, that the legatee should have children,
the testator having ordered that when he should have children the
executor should give him either a sum of money or a certain house
or land, and the said legatee should die without having children,
but should leave his wife big of a child that should afterwards be
born, this legacy would have its effect; and this legatee would
have transmitted his right to his heir. For his heir would be this
child, whom the testator had in view when he made his testament,
and whose birth had accomplished the condition.?


XIV.


3637. Indecent or tmpossible Conditions do not suspend the Leg-
acy. — If the testator had made the legacy to depend on a condi-
tion that was either unjust, indecent, or impossible, seeing this
condition would be of no manner of obligation, as has been
shown in its proper place, this legacy would be of the nature of a
pure and simple legacy, and the legatee happening to die before
he received it would transmit his right to his heir or executor.™


XV.


3638. Legacies left to an uncertain Time are Conditional. — Ex-
ample. — Legacies whose effect depends on an uncertain time, that
is, of which there is no certainty that it will ever happen, are of the
same nature with conditional legacies. For they imply the condi-
tion that they shall not have their effect unless the said time comes
to pass. So that if the legatee of a legacy of this nature should
chance to die, the said time not being as yet come to pass, he
would not transmit the legacy to his heir or executor. Thus, for
example, if a testator had left a sum of money to a legatee in case
he should arrive at the age of majority, this legatee happening to
die before he attained the age of majority, his heir or executor
would have no right to the legacy.’


q L. 18, D. quand. dies legat. ced. ; —1. 20, D. ad senat. Trebdell.

 L. 5, §§ 8 af 4, D. quand. dies leg. ced. See the eighteenth article of the eighth section
of Testaments.

* Si cui legetur cum quatuordecim annorum erit: certo jare utimur, ut tune sit quatu-
ordecim annoram, cum impleverit. Z. 49, D. de legat. 1.

Non putabam diem fideicommissi venisse, cum sextaumdecimum annum ingressus fuis-
set, cui erat relictum, cum ad annum sextumdecimum pervenisset. Et ita etiam Aurelias
Imperator Antoninus ad appellationem ex Germania judicavit. 2. 48, D. de condit. a
dem. ; —v. i. 74, §1, D. ad senat. Trebell.


TIT. Il. SEC. IX.] LEGACIES. 559


REMARK ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


_ 3639. We must take notice, that we have added to the texts
quoted on this article the citation of the 74th law, § 1, D. ad senat.
Treb., because it is contrary to them. For whereas it is said in
these texts, that if a legacy or fiduciary bequest be left to a person
when he shall have fourteen years of age, or, as it is expressed
in the second text, when he shall attain the age of fourteen, the
legacy will not be due until these years are completed ; it is said
in that other law that it suffices that they be begun. It is true
that that is in a case where the circumstances made this decision
favorable; but it is, however, the same expression explained in
two different senses. In our usage, this expression, when he shall
arrive at such a year, or, when he shall attain to such a year, seems
to be meant of the year begun. But this other expression, when
he shall have attained the age of majority, is not equivocal, and
demands majority, which is not acquired but by the five-and-twen-
tieth year being complete. For which reason we have made use
of this expression in the article, that we might not say any thing
contrary to any one of these texts, and that we might make it suit
with our usage.


XVI


3640. Another Example.— We may give for another example
of a legacy which depends on an uncertain time, that which a tes-
tator should bequeath in such terms as to make the legacy to de-
pend on the death of his executor; as if he should charge him to
give or deliver when he should die such a house or land, or other
thing, to a legatee. For although this case be different from that
of the preceding article, in that it is certain that the time will
. come when the said executor will die, whereas the majority of the
legatee may perhaps never come to pass; yet in this case, as well
as in the other, the time is uncertain, and it implies the condition,
that, when the time shall come to pass, the legatee shall be in
a condition to reap the profit of the legacy, and that he be then
alive. So that if this legatee chance to die before the executor, he
will have acquired no right to the legacy, and he will have trans-
mitted nothing to his successors.‘


t Z. 4, D. quand. dies leg. vel fid. ced.; —1.18, in f. cod. See the thirteenth article of
the eighth section of Testaments, and the remark which is there made on it.


560 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK IV.


XVII.

3641. The Legatee who dies before the Election transmits his
Right.— We are not to reckon among conditional legacies, o
those which depend on an uncertain time, a legacy left to the
choice of the legatee, or of the executor. For although, if the leg-
atee should happen to die before the election had been made, it
would remain uncertain which were the thing bequeathed, and
that the legacy could not have its effect, in order to be acquitted.
till after this choice had been made; yet the right of the legatee
was vested in him independently of this election, which was only
to determine which was the thing bequeathed, and not to vest the
right to it in the legatee. Thus, although the legatee should die
before the election were made, yet he would transmit his right to
his heir.*


XVIIL


3642. Legacies annexed to Persons are not transmitted. — Lega-
cies which are annexed to the person of the legatee, such as a ust-
fruct, an annuity, a legacy of alimony, and others of the like
nature, which the testator intended only to bestow on the person
of the legatee, are not transmitted to his heir. And if, for exam-
ple, a testator had given leave to one of his friends to dig stone
out of a quarry, or to use a passage, or other service, for some
ground, this right being only for the use of the said person, his
death would make it to cease, unless the expression of the testator
should relate likewise to the heirs of the legatee.*


XTX,


3643. An Annual Legacy contains several.— The legacy of a
sum of money to be paid every year to a legatee during his life,
either by way of pension, or for alimony, or otherwise, is consid-
ered as containing so many legacies as there shall be years in the
life of the said legatee; and the legacy of every year is due to
him as soon as it is begun, pursuant to the rules explained in an-
other place” Thus, his right to every legacy is acquired according
as he goes out of one year into the other. And when he dies, he
transmits to his heir, not only the arrears of the years that were


© L. 19, D. de opt. vel elect. leg. See the fifteenth article of the seventh section.
x ZL. 8, § 3, in f. D. de liber. leg. ; —1. 39, § 4, D. de leg. 1; —1. 6, D. de servit. lagat.
Y See the sixth and ninth articles of the fifth section.


TIT. II. SEC. IX.] LEGACIES. 561


fallen due, but also of the year which he had begun, and which his
death has interrupted."


XX.


3644. Example of a Legacy annexed to the Person of the Lega-
tee. — If a father who had two sons, one of age, and the other un-
der fourteen years, had named them both his executors, and given
to the youngest some lands or houses, and a sum of money to be
paid him after his majority, leaving till that time this sum, and the
enjoyment of those lands or houses, to his eldest son, on condition
that he should acquit the charges of the estate, and that he should
give every year to their mother a certain pension for the mainte-
nance of the youngest son, and the eldest son should chance
to die before this time had expired, his death would make this en-
joyment which he had of the said lands to cease; and it would
not go to his children, or other heirs, whom he should leave be-
hind him. For although, if he had lived, the enjoyment would
have lasted to the time regulated by the testament, yet it was
given him only as a personal bounty annexed to the good
office which he was to render to his brother, and which the father
had considered as a function of a tutor, although this second son
had other tutors. Thus, the death of the eldest son putting an
end to the motive of the father, which was limited to the person
of the eldest son, would likewise put an end to an enjoyment
which the father had left to him only with this view.*


XXI.


3645. The Delay of the Right of the Executor does not suspend
that of the Legatee.—- When the succession is open by the death
of the testator, if it happens that there be not as yet any testa-
mentary heir or executor; as if he who was named to be so were a
posthumous child not yet born, or if the executor should defer ac-
cepting of the succession, or if he could not accept it, by reason
that some condition kept his right in suspense ; the legacy is nev-
ertheless vested in the legatee, and he has his right secure.>


® DL. 10, D. quand. dies leg. ced. ; —1. 12, eod.;—d.i. §153—1.1, C. eed. ;—d. f. 12, § 8.

= ZL. 21, § ult. D.de ann. leg. It must be observed on this text, that the tutorship ended
at the age of fourteen years according to the Roman law, as has been mentioned in the
preamble of the title of Tutors.

b 1.7, d. 1. §§ 1 et 2, D. quand. dies leg. ced. See the nineteenth article of the fifth sec-
tion of Testaments, and the remark that is there made on it.


562 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT It. BOOK IV.


XXII.

3646. A Legacy whose Effect is suspended, and which is trans-
mitted. — If a testator had devised to one of his friends a land
which he had in marriage with his wife, and to his wife instead of
the said land a sum of money, and after the testator’s death,
his widow delaying to make her election whether she would take
the legacy of the sam of money, or her land, the legatee should
happen to die before she had made her option, he would transmit
his right to his heir. And if the widow should afterwards resolve
to take the legacy of the money, that of the land which he had
with his wife in marriage would go to the heir of this legatee.
For although this legacy did imply the condition that the widow
should part with the land, yet seeing she might have determined
herself as to the choice at the moment that the succession was
open, and that this delay was not within the intention of the tes-
tator, as the waiting for the event of another sort of condition
which he had imposed would be, but this delay arising only from
the act of a third person, it is altogether foreign to the testator’s
intention, and ought not to hurt the legatee.°


RemaRK ON THE PrecEDING ARTICLE.


3647. It is said in the text cited, that it was rather a delay
which the testator had annexed to this legacy, than a condition on
which he had made it to depend. But this legacy did in effect
imply this condition, that the widow should accept the legacy of
the money, and part with the land. For if she had taken back the
land, there would have been nothing for the legatee, unless the
testator had devised to him alternatively either the land which he
had in marriage with his wife, or the sum of money. But al-
though the legacy be in this sense conditional, yet seeing the con-
dition consists in the choice which the wife is to make, it would
not be just that her delay should make the legacy to perish. And
seeing it was both natural, and agreeable to the intention of the
testator, that this election should be made immediately after the
testator’s death, this delay, which proceeds from the act of a third
person, and not from the intention of the testator, ought not to
prejudice the right of the legatee. And if the widow chooses the
sum of money, this election is considered as if it had been made,
as it ought to have been, at the moment of the testator’s death.


© L. 6, § 1, D. quand. dies leg. ced.


TIT. II. SEC. X.] LEGACIES. 568


XXIIL

3648. The Legacy, with which the Person who is substituted Ex-
ecutor ts charged, is acquired by the Death of the Testator.— Ifa
testator, having substituted a second heir or executor to succeed
him in default of the firat, by that form of substitution which is
called vulgar, which shall be explained in the first title of the
fifth book, had made a bequest, with which he had charged only
the heir or executor who was substituted in the second place, and
not him who was instituted in the first, and it so fell out that
the legatee died before the inheritance passed to the person substi-
tuted to the first heir or executor, the legacy would be transmitted
to the heir of this legatee. For the inheritance could not pass to
the substituted heir but with this burden; and he, coming to suc-
ceed in the room of the first heir, is reputed to be heir from the
moment of the testator’s death, pursuant to the rule which hath
been explained in its place:* so that he ought not to profit by
the death of the legatee, which happened during this delay of his
coming to the inheritance. And it would be the same thing in the
case of that sort of substitution which is called pupillary, which
shall be considered in the second title of the fifth book, if the per-
son substituted to the pupil were charged with the legacy.° And
although in these two cases of these two sorts of substitution the
legacy implies the condition that the person who is substituted
shall succeed, yet it is not for all that conditional. For with re-
gard to the person substituted who is charged with the legacy, it
is pure and simple, since it cannot fall out that he should be heir
or executor without owing the legacy.


SECTION X.
OF THE DELIVERY AND WARRANTY OF THE THING BEQUEATHED.


Art. L
3619. The Legatee ought to have the Legacy delivered to him,
and not to take tt by Force. — Since the legacy is to be taken out
of the inheritance, the possession whereof passes from the testator
to the executor, it is from his hands that the legatee ought to have


4 See the fifteenth article of the first section of Heirs and Executors in general.
© Z.1, D. quand. dies leg. ced.; —1. 7, §§ 8 et 4, D. eod.


564 THE CIVIL Law. [PART IL. BOOK Iv.


the thing that is bequeathed ; and in what terms soever the bequest
be conceived, even although the testator should ordain that the
legatee should take the thing bequeathed, yet he cannot seize
upon it, and take it out of the possession of the executor, without
his consent. For it would be an act of violence, which is unlav-
ful. But if the executor should refuse to deliver the thing to him,
he ought to apply to justice for an order to have it delivered.


IL


3650. The Executor ought to take Care of the Thing be
queathed. — While the thing bequeathed remains in the custody 0:
the executor, he is bound to preserve it until he delivers it to th
legatee ; and if it perishes, or is damaged, through his fault or neg-
ligence, he will be accountable for it: for he is obliged to take ex
act care of it, and he ought to answer for the faults that are con-
trary to this care.®


III.


3651. Legacies without any Term or Condition are due from tt
Acceptance of the Succession. —'The legacies for the delivery or pav-
ment of which there is no term set, and which are not conditional
ought to be paid immediately after the executor has accepted tk
Buccession.°


IV.


3652. The Legacy ought to be delivered in the Place where ui
at the Time of the Testator’s Death. — The thing bequeathed onght
to be delivered to the legatee in the place where it is at the time
of the testator’s death; unless it should appear that it was his ir
tention that it should be delivered in another place; in which cas


* L.1,§ 2, D. quod. leg, If the legacy were of an immovable thing, it would seem ©
be less necessary to oblige the legatee to make a demand of it from the executor in cat
he did not of his own accord offer to deliver it; but it might happen that the execu
should have a mind to contest the legacy, or that he might have a right to retain the px
session of it for some time, as if it were a house of which he had the keys, and in whi
there were movables belonging to the inheritance ; or if it were some lands of which tx
crop was to be his. And there might be other just causes why the legatee should not pz
himself in possession of the legacy. So that the rule appears to be just for all sorts
legacies without distinction ; and it is so ordered by many customs. The legacy oxgt
to be delivered either by the executor of the testament, or by the heir.

b ZL. 47, §§ 4. 5, D. de legat.1. See the eleventh article of the first section of Sete-
tutions direct and fiduciary. See the eleventh article of this section.

© ZL. 32, D. de leg. 2.


TIT. I. 8EC. X.] LEGACIES. 565


the executor must cause it to be transported thither at his own
charges.4


V.


3653. If a Horse that is bequeathed were run away in the Life-
time of the Testator, the Executor is not obliged to make Search after
him. — If the legacy was of & horse, or of a herd of cattle, or of
animals of other kinds, and before the death of testator the
horse had run away, or some of the cattle strayed, the executor
would not be bound to make search after the horse or herd, and
to bring it back; and if the legatee would reap the benefit of the
legacy, he would be obliged to be at this expense himself. But if
this case had happened after the death of the testator, the ex-
ecutor would be obliged to be at this expense, pursuant to the rule
explained in the second article.*


VI


3654. The Legatee is liable to Costs and Damages for not receiv-
ing his Legacy. — If the thing bequeathed were of such a nature
as that, the legatee delaying to receive it, the executors should by
his delay suffer some loss or damage, the legatee would be bound
to make it good. Thus, for example, if it were a legacy of cattle,
the legatee would be liable for the charges of keeping them, of
feeding them, and for the other costs and damages which the
executor might chance to be at. Thus, for another example, if
through the legatee’s default of receiving wine, corn, or other
things which should take up places or movables necessary for
other uses, the executor should lose the occasion of letting out to
hire the said places or could not himself make use of them and the
other things for his own concerns, the legatee would be answer-
able for all these damages. But the executor could not pour the
wine out of the vessels, or throw the corn out of the barns, under
pretext of the delay.‘


VIL


3655. Security for Legacies and Fiduciary Bequests.—If the
legatees should be in fear of losing their legacies, and should be
unwilling to leave the goods of the inheritance to the disposal and


4 2.47, D. de leg.1;—1. 88, D. de judic.;—L un. C. ubi fideic. pet. op.
° L. 8, D. de legat. 2;—1. 108, D. de legat. 1.
€ ZL. 8, D. de trit. vin. vel ol. leg.

VOL. II.


566 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK Iv.


management of the executor, they might provide against such
danger, either by obliging him to give caution, or some other secn-
rity, or by getting an order for seizing the goods, and sealing up
the places in which the movables and papers belonging to the in-
heritance should be, in order to have an inventory of them made,
and to have them exposed to sale, if that should be necessary for
their payment. And it would be the same thing for the security
of fiduciary bequests


- VIL


3656. Two Cases where the Father and Mother, being charged
with a Fiduciary Bequest to their Children, ought to give Security.
— If a father or a mother instituting his or her children or grand-
children executors, had substituted to them their children or other
descendants, the persons substituted could not demand security
for the goods of the fiduciary bequest from their father or mother
who should be charged therewith, unless they had married a sec-
ond time, or that the testator, out of a mistrust of their conduct,
had expressly ordered some security to be given.>


10.6


3657. The Executor recovers what he has laid out on the Lega-
cies and Fiduciary Bequests. — If the executor who is charged with
a legacy or a fiduciary bequest has been at any charges for the
preservation of the thing bequeathed, he will recover them, unless
they are such as ought to be taken out of the profits or revenues
of the thing. Thus, for example, if an executor being charged
with a fiduciary bequest of a house which he should restore after


& L.1, D. ut legat. seu fideic. serv. caus. cav. ; —d. 1.1, §10;—d. 1. §2;—1.1, Ci at om
poss. legat. vel fid. serv.c.m. It is said in the second and seventh laws of this title in the
Code, that the testator may discharge the testamentary heir from giving security for the
payment of the legacies and the fiduciary bequests; and it is very just that a testator
should have this liberty. But our usage and equity would apply some temperament in
this matter, should the testamentary heir make a bad use of the testator’s indulgence to
him ; and if there were any danger for the legatees, they might apply for remedy to a
court of justice. For it would be presumed, even as to the testator’s will, that he did not
intend to countenance any knavish dealing on the part of his testamentary heir.

h 1. 6,d. l. § 1, C. ad senat. Trebell. Although the security mentioned in this law seems
to be meant of a caution or bail, according to the ordinary meaning of this word satisda-
tionem, yet the most learned interpreters take it in another sense which this word may
bear, and that is a bare submission, which would be but a slender security in case there
were occasion for any: and it would seem as if the ase of this rule ought very much to
depend on that which equity may require, according to the quality of the goods, that of
the persons, and the other circumstances that might come into consideration.


TIT. It. BEC. X.] LEGACIES. 567


his death, and, the said house having perished, or being damaged
without any fault of his, he had rebuilt it, or repaired it, this ex-
pense would be estimated in proportion to the quality and neces-
sity of the repairs, and the condition in which the house was at the
time of the testator’s death, the time that it had lasted, and ac-
cording to the other circumstances necessary to be considered in
making the said estimate!


X.


3658. He ought to acquit the Charges of the Lands devised until
the Time of Delivery.— The executor is also bound to acquit the
taxes, ground rents, and other charges of the things devised,
whether they fel] due in the time of the testator, if there remain
any arrears due, or since the testator’s death, during the time that
the executor had the enjoyment of them. And if he is obliged to
restore the fruits which he has reaped, these kinds of charges will
be deducted out of them.


XL


3659. The Executor bears the Loss, if the Thing perishes after
his Delay to deliver it. — If, the executor being in fault for not de-
livering the thing bequeathed, it happens to perish, or to be dam-
aged, even although it were by an accident, he will be accountable
for it. For if the thing bequeathed had been delivered, the lega-
tee might have perhaps either prevented the loss of it, or might
have sold it!


XIL


3660. All other Loss, whereof nothing can be imputed to the Ex-
ecutor, falls on the Legatee.— If it was the legatee who, having it
in his power to receive the thing bequeathed, had delayed to do it,
the loss or diminution which might happen would fall upon him.
And it would be the same thing if the thing bequeathed had per-
ished before the time that it was to be delivered, and nothing
could be imputed to the executor.


i 7.58, D. de leg. 1. See the twelfth article of the first section of direct Substitutions.

k 7. 39, § 5, D. de leg. 1.

1 7. $9, § 1, D. de leg.1;—L 47, § ult. cod. ; —i. 8, C. de usur. et fruct. leg. ; —i. 108, § 11,
eod. If it were lands or houses that were devised, and they perish by the overfiow-
ing of a river, as it is said in the second of these texts, it would require particular circum-
stances to make the testamentary heir answerable for this loss; for it is not s0 easy to sell
lands or houses as a movable thing.

= J. 26, § 1, D. de legat. 1.


568 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK Iv.


XNIL

3661. When a Thing is bequeathed indefinitely, the Execator
ought to warrant the Thing which he gives. — If the legacy were in
general of a thing indefinitely, such as a horse, a suit of hangings,
without specifying any particular suit, or any particular horse, the
executor would be bound to warrant the thing which he had given
for acquitting this legacy, if it should happen that the legatee were
evicted of it. And whether the thing had been found among the
goods of the inheritance, or that the executor had taken it some-
where else, aud that he knew or were ignorant whose it was, he
would be bound to give another in its place; for the testator
meant to make a useful bequest.”


XIV.

3662. Warranty of the Legacy of a Thing particularly named. —
If the legacy were of a thing particularly named by the testator, as
if he had devised such a ground, or such @ movable, which be be-
lieved to be his own, but which in reality was not his, the ex-
ecutor would be bound only to deliver the thing specified in the
testament, and would not be obliged to warrané it. For it weuld
be presumed that the testator had devised it only beeause he took
himself to be the owner of it, and that he would not have made
such a devise if he had known that the thing was not his own.’
Thus, in a like case, if a father, disposing of his goods among his
children, had charged one of them with a fiduciary bequest for an-
other of the children of some land or tenement which the testator
believed to be his own, he who, in performance of this disposition,
had delivered the said land or tenement to his brother, at the time
required by the fiduciary bequest, would not be bound to warrant
the said land or tenement, if his brother should chance to be evict-
ed thereof. But if, instead of a fiduciary bequest, the father’s dis-
position were a partition that he had made among his children,
giving to one of them this land or tenement for his share, his ce-
heirs would be bound to warrant the said land or tenement,? pur-
suant to the rules explained in their place.t


° L. 29, § 8, D. de ley. 3; —1. 58, D. de evict. ;—v.l. 71, § 1, D. de lag. 1. See the fol-
lowing article.

° ZL. 45, § 11, D. de legat. 1; —§ 4, Inst. de legat. See the fifth article of the third sec-
tion.

P L. 77, § 8, D. de legat. 2.

9 See the sixth article of the first section and the first article of the third section of
Partitions.


TIT. H. SEC. X.] LEGACIES. 569


XV.

3663. If he who evicts the Thing from ihe Legatee is obliged to
restore the Price, & will go to the Legatee.— If the legatee of
lands or houses be evicted of them, and he who evicts them is
obliged to restore the price of them, this price which is restored
will belong to the legatee, and not to the executor. For the inten-
tion of the testator in devising to him the said ands or houses im-
plies his intention that the legatee sheuld at least have the benefit
of the price. Thus, for example, if the devise were of lands pur-
chased by the testator with a reservation of power to the seller to
redeem them, whether the said lands were part of the king’s de-
_ mesnes, or belonging to some particular person, the money that

should be for redeeming the lands would belong to this legatee.


XVL


3664. The Executor cannot be restored against the Payment of a
Legacy, although it be Null.— If an exccutor had voluntarily ex-
ecuted a disposition of the testator by acquitting a legacy or fidu-
ciary bequest which should be found to be null, he could not
afterwards dispute the validity thereof. For having accomplished
a disposition which his reason and conscience had obliged him to
approve and execute, he could not revoke what he had done out
of motives which made this payment a duty incumbent on him.


XVII


3660. Nor likewise of a Legacy which he had paid before the
Condition on which tt was left was accomplished. — Since the ex-
ecutor may aeqait a Jegacy which he cannot be compelled by law
to pay, he may with much more reason deliver sooner than he is
obliged either a legacy or a fiduciary bequest, whether it be uni-
versal of the whole inheritance, or particular of a sum of money,
or of some other thing, for the delivery of which a term was set
which would delay the execution thereof, or even to which a con-
dition were annexed which would suspend the validity of it. And
although after the delivery of the thing, the condition on which it
was left not happening, the disposition should be found to be null;
yet this event would not have the effect to make this payment not
to subsist. For the executor might discharge the legatee of the
condition, and acquit the legacy or fiduciary bequest as pure and


© L. 78, $1, D. de legat. 2. L. 2, C. de fideicomm.
48 *


570 , THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT Il. BOOK Iv.


simple, since he might acquit a legacy that was null from the be-
ginning, as has been shown in the sixteenth article.‘


XVIIL


3666. Exception to the Preceding Article, as to the Interest of s
Third Person. — The rule explained in the preceding article is to
be understood of the cases where a payment made before it falk
due would be of no prejudice to third persons. For if, for exan-
ple, an executor were charged to restore after his death, either the
whole inheritance, or a part of it, or a sum of money, to some per
son, and in case the person who. is substituted should die be
fore the executor, the testator had called another person to succeed
to the same fiduciary devise, the executor who, having a mind to
favor the person substituted in the first place, had delivered up to
him the thing which was devised in trust, would not be discharged
of it, if the person substituted in the first place should die before
him; and the right of the person substituted in the second place
would remain entire for him to exercise it, the case happening that
he outlived the executor.”


ESD


SECTION XI.


HOW LEGACIES MAY BE NULL, REVOKED, DIMINISHED, OR TRANS
FERRED TO OTHER PERSONS.


Art. L


3667. A Legacy may be either Null at first, or become so after-
wards. — A legacy may be null two ways, either by reason of a


t Post mortem suam rogatum restituere hssreditatem, defuncti judicio et antequam sai
munus impleat, posse satisfacere, id est restituere hsreditatem, quarta parte vel retenta,
vel omissa, si voluerit, explorati juris est. Z. 12, C. de fidete.

Although no mention be made in this text of a legacy or fiduciary bequest that is left
upon a condition, yet it cannot be doubted that the executor who should know of the coa-
dition, and who without waiting for the accomplishment of it should execute the dispos-
tion of the testator, could not revoke his approbation of the said disposition. And this
approbation ought to subsist with much more reason than that of a disposition which is
void from the beginning, of which notice hath been taken in the preceding article.

* L. 41, § 12, D. de legat. 8. If the case explained in this article should happen, the
person substituted in the second place might, without waiting for the death of the execa-
tor, take care that the goods should not go to the person substituted in the first place un-
leas with the burden of his right, if the case on which the same is founded should happen,
and unless sufficient security were given that the goods should be preserved.


TIT. It. SEC. Xt.] LEGACIES. . 571


nullity which is in the legacy from its beginning, or by reason of
some cause which happens afterwards and annuls it. Thus, a
legacy is null from its beginning, if the testament which contains
it be null;* if the testator was incapable to dispose of his goods
at the time that he made his will; if the thing bequeathed could
not be given away, as if it was a thing belonging to the public.
Thus, a legacy which was not null at first is afterwards an-
nulled, if the testator falls under an incapacity which lasts till his
death ;4 if the legatee happens to be at the same time under a like
incapacity ;* if he dies before the testator;‘ and if the thing be-
queathed should happen to perish.®


IL


3668. A Legacy may be either revoked, or diminished, or trans-
ferred from one Legatee to another.— A legacy may be revoked,®
or diminished, by taking something from it;! or it may be trans-
ferred from one legatee to another,« according as the second dis-
positions alter the former, as shall be hereafter explained.


Hid.


3669. A Legacy that is Null in its Beginning remains always so.
— If a legacy is null in its beginning, at the time that the testament
is made, and in such a manner as that, if the testator should hap-
pen to die at the same time, the legacy would be useless, it will
not be afterwards made valid at what time soever the testator
chances to die, and what change soever may happen. For the
vice which hath annulled this legacy from its beginning is not to
be repaired; but this is to be understood in the sense of the rules
which follow.!


® See the third section of Testaments.

b See the second section of Testaments.

© See the second article of the third section of

4 See the twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth articles of the second rection of Hairs and
E-xecutors in general.

* See the third article of the second section of Legacies.

f See the seventh article of this section.

& See the nineteenth article of this section.

b See the cleventh article, and those that follow.

§ See the twenty-second and twenty-third articles.

K See the twenty-fourth article.

' 7. 29, D. dereg jur.;—i. 201, eod.;—1. 1, D. de reg. Caton. The rale explained in
this article is the same with that which is called in the Roman law the Catonian Rule, of
which we have taken notice in the remark on the thirty-first article of the second section


572 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


IV.

3670. An Ezample of this Rule.— If one under the age of for.
teen, having made his testament, and being afterwards arrived 1t
that age which rendered him capable of making a testament, diss
without making another, this testament, which would have been
null if the testator had died immediately after he made it, will r-
main such, although at the time of his death he was capable of
making a testament. For the incapacity under which he was a
the time of making his testament is not removed by the capacity
which he acquires afterwards, and which changes nothing in the
preceding time.™


V.


3671. Another Example of this Rule. — If the legacy was vicious
and null in its origin, by reason of the nature of the thing be
queathed, as if it was a public place, this legacy, which would
null if the testator had died at the time he made his testament,
would not be valid afterwards, even although it should happen
that before his death the thing bequeathed had changed its nature
and had come into commerce. For this change, not being fot
lowed by a new disposition of the testator, would leave the former
disposition in its nullity" And i would be the same thing ifis
testator having bequeathed a thing which belonged to the legatet,
it should happen afterwards that this legatee had alienated it be
fore the testator died. For although the legacy would have been
good if this chamge had preceded the devise, yet, seeing it wa!
pull at the time when the thing bequeathed was already the leg
atee’s own, it remains so for ever after.°


of Heirs and Executors in general. See that remark, as also what has been said in the
second section, and in the second section of Testaments, touching the several sorts of ints:
pacity, in order to apply to this and the following articles such of those rules as may ©
applicable to this section.

™ See the second artiele of the second section of Zestaments.

® Si talis sit res cujas commerciam non sit, vel adipisci non potest, nec ssetimatio ef
debetar. § 4, Jnst. de legat.

Tractari tamen poterit, si quando marmora, vel columns: faerint separate ab xdite:.
an legatum convalescat. Et siquidem ab initio non constitit legatum, ex post facto me
convalescet. Quemadmodam nec res mea legata mihi, si post testamentum factum foer
alienata: quia vires ab initio legatum non habuit. Sed si eub conditione legetar, pote
legatum valere. Si exiatentis conditionis tempore mea non sit. L. 41, § 2, D. dele |.
See, in relation to the last words of this last text, the following article.

© See the third and eighth articles of the third section.


TIT. 11. BEO. XI.} LEGACIES. _ 573


VI.

3672. An Exception to this Rule as to Conditional Legacies. —
The rule explained in the preceding article does not take place in
conditional legacies. Thus, for example, in the same case of the
foregoing article, of a legacy of a thing that was not in commerce,
if the testator had bequeathed it upon condition, in case it should
change its nature, and be capable of being acquired by the legatee;
this legacy, which without this condition would remain null if the
testator had died after making such a disposition, would have its
effect, if this change should afterwards happen before the death of
the testator. Thus, for example, if a testator had left a legacy to
a foreigner on condition that he should be naturalized, this legacy,
which without this condition would have been null if the testator
had died immediately after making his testament, would have its
etfect if the said foreigner should happen to be naturalized before
the death of the testator. For in these cases, and others of the
like nature, the conditions have this effect, that the validity or nul-
lity of the legacy remains in suspense until the event either annuls
it or makes it valid.


VII.


3673. The Legacy is Null if the Legatee was dead before the
Testament was made, or if he dies before the Testator.— The leg-
acy becomes null if the legatee dies before the testator. For it
was only at the moment of the testator’s death that the legatee’s
right could accrue to him. So that he, not being alive at that time,
cannot acquire it: for which reason he does not transmit to his
heir a right which he himself never had. And the legacy would
be null with much more reason, if the legatee had been dead be-
fore the testament was made, the testator knowing nothing of his
death.‘


VOW


3674. The Charge imposed on the Legacy which proves to be
Null passes to him who reaps the Benefit thereof. — If, in the case


P L. 4, D. de reg. Caton. ; —I. 41, § 2, in f. D. de legat. 2; —1. 62, D. de heered. inst. ; —
l. 18, D. de leg. 2; —1. 1, § 2, D. de reg. Cut. See the close of the second text cited on the
fifth article. See the remark on the thirty-first article of the second section of Heirs and
Executors in general, where notice is taken of the case of this sixty-second law, D. de
heared. inst.

9 ZL. 4, D. de his que pro non scrip. hab. ; —l. un. § 2, C. de cad. toll. See the fifth arti-
cle of the tenth section of Testaments.


574 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


where the legacy happens to be null because of the legatee’s dy-
ing before the testator, the said legacy had been accompanied with
some charge, as if the testator had obliged the legatee to give a
sum of money, or something else, to some other person, the nullity
of the legacy would not annul the charge which the testator had
imposed on it in favor of this third person. For it was as it were
another legacy, which ought to subsist. Thus, this charge will go
to the person who reaps the benefit of the legacy, whether it be
the executor, or another legatee who was substituted to him that
could not reap the benefit of the legacy, or that was joined wit!
him in the bequest, and who, by right of accretion or survivorship,
ought to have the thing bequeathed."


REMARKS ON THE PREcEDING ARTICLE.


3675. It is to be observed on this article, that we have set down
in it only the case where the legatee happens to die before the tes-
tator, and not the case where he was dead at the time of making
the testament, although both these cases be comprehended in the
preceding article. For there was this difference in the Roman
law between these two cases, that in that case where the legatee
was dead before the testament was made, not only was the legacy
null, but also the charge annexed to the legacy ;* whereas in the
other case the charge subsisted.> This difference was founded
upon this, that the legacy left to the legatee who was already dead
was held as not being written, and as a disposition as null as if it
had never been made; whereas the legacy to the legatee who was
living when the testament was made, and who died before the
testator, was only confiscated, and fell to the exchequer before the
change which Justinian made by the law cited on this article.
Which hath no manner of relation to our usage, since with us the
exchequer never reaps the profit of legacies that are null. Bat it
may be remarked touching those legacies which are held to be not
written, that there were cases in which the charges imposed on
the said legacies were to subsist... And what was just in thoee
cases according to the Roman law would seem in our usage, and
according to the principles of equity, to be so in all cases: and
if a testator had charged a legatee, who was already dead be


¥ ZL. un. § 4, C.de cadue. toll.

® L. un. § 8, C. de caduc. toll.

> See the text cited on this eighth article.

© D.§3;—1. 17, D. de lag. Corn. de fals. ; —1. ult. D. de his qua pro non script. hab.


WIT. 1. BEo. x1.] LEGACIES. 575


fore the testament was made, to give a sum of money or other
thing out of his legacy to another person, the executor or other
person who reaps the benefit of the thing bequeathed ought to be
bound to acquit the said charge ; since it would be, as is said in
the article, as it were, another legacy which the testator had a mind
to give, the validity of which it would seem ought not to depend
on that of the legacy which was to bear the said charge.


1X.


3676. A Legacy that was Good at the Time of making the Tes-
tament may become Null by a Change. — A legacy, which would
have had its effect if the testator had died immediately after the
making of his testament, may become null in process of time, if,
before the legatee has acquired his right, there happens a change,
which puts things into such a condition, that, if they had been the
same at the time that the testament was made, the legacy had
been void. Thus, for example, if a legatee who was capable of a
legacy at the time of making the testament, be incapable thereof
at the time of the testator’s death; as if he was a professed monk,
or condemned to a punishment which should carry along with it a
civil death; or if the thing bequeathed, which at the time of mak-
ing the testament was in commerce, be at the time of the testa-
tor’s death destined to a public use; these legacies, which would
have been useful if the testator had died before these events, are
null after they have happened.‘


X.


3677. Remark on the Preceding Article.— We have said in the
preceding article, that a legacy which was useful in its origin may
become null, if, after the making of the testament, it happen that
things be in such a condition, that, if they had been the same at
the time the testament was made, the legacy would have been
null; and we have not said that in general and without distinc-
tion every legacy is annulled by an event of this nature. For it
may happen that such a change may not have the effect to annul
the legacy. Thus, for example, if a testator who at the time of
making his testament was capable of doing it happened to be in-
capable thereof at the time of his death, because he was fallen


/


' Z. 3, § 2, D. de his que pro non script. hab. ; —v. 1. 12, D. de jur. fisc. See the follow-
ing article. See the sixteenth article of the second section of Zestaments, and the remark
that is there made on it.


576 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pakr II. BOOK Iv.


into a state of madness; this kind of incapacity would not hinder
the validity of the testament, nor that of the legacy. So that the
rule of the preceding article ought not to be literally understood in
the sense of the words of the text from which it is drawn. Bat
this rule, and also that of the third article, are to be taken in the
sense that hath been given them, and according to the tempera-
ments which result from the examples and exceptions that have
been explained, every one of which sufficiently explains the cause
which distinguishes it from the cases to which these rules ought
to be applied.*


XL


3678. Divers Ways of revoking Legacies. — Example. — A tes-
tator may revoke legacies either by express dispositions, such as a
second testament or a codicil, or without any express disposition,
as if he disposes otherwise of the thing bequeathed. Thus, for
example, if a father, who had devised to his daughter certain lands,
happening afterwards to marry her, gives her the same lands for her
marriage portion, the legacy will be tacitly revoked by such a dis-
position. And this daughter, having these lands for her dowry,
cannot pretend a second effect of this legacy.*


XIL


3679. The Legacy of a Debt is revoked tf the Testator procures
Payment of t#.— If a testator had bequeathed to his debtor the
debt which he owed him, and afterwards he obliged the debtor
to pay it, the legacy would be revoked” For it was not a sum of
money to be received that was bequeathed, but an acquittance.
Thus the payment annuls the legacy.


XIIL


3680. The Alienation of the Thing bequeathed revokes the Leg-
acy.-— If a testator sells, or alienates any other way, the thing be-
queathed, the legacy is revoked. For seeing he strips himself of it,
much more doth he deprive the legatee of it who was to have it
from him?


" See the preceding articles, the fourth article of the second section of Testaments, and
the sixteenth article of the same section, together with the remark that is there made
upon it.

* Z.11, C. de legat.

Y L.7,§ 4, D. de liber. leg.

* Si rem snam testator legaverit, eamque necessitate urgente alienavcrit, fideicommis-


TIT. il. SEC. X3.} LEGACIES. 577


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3681. We have thought proper to leave out of this rule that
which is added in the first of the texts cited, that, if the testator
has sold for an urgent necessity the thing which he had be-
queathed, the legacy is not revoked unless the testamentary heir
prove that the testator had an intention to revoke it. And we
have also thought proper to leave out what is said in the second
of these texts, that the sale of the thing bequeathed is no hin-
drance why the legacy should not subsist, if, when the testator sold
it, he had not an intention to revoke the legacy* & non adimendi
animo vendidit, nihilominus deberi. And we have set down only
the bare rule, that the alienation annuls the legacy, and such as we
see it in other places without these exceptions. It is in this man-
ner that the lawyer Paulus has quoted this rule in the fourth
book of his Sentences, tit. 1. § 9, Testator supervivens st eam rem
quam reliquerat vendiderit, extinguitur fideicommissum. And we
see in a law, that the sale of the thing bequeathed annuls the leg-
acy in such a manner that, if a testator, having sold a slave whom
he had bequeathed, should afterwards purchase him, this slave
would not be due to the legatee, although he belonged to the tes-
tator at the time of his death, unless the legatee could prove that
the testator had a new intention to leave him to him.* Seeing,
therefore, the rule is, that the alienation annuls the legacy, and that,
to make the legacy subsist, it was necessary, by the Roman law,
to have proofs of the testator’s intention, in order to know whether
he intended that the legacy should subsist or not, it was not proper
to add to the rule these exceptions which do not suit with our
usage. For we do receive no other proof of the will of the testa-
tor than his testament, together with the known circumstances
which may explain his intention. And the inconveniences would
be infinite, if such proofs were admitted, as well as proofs of cov-
enants prohibited by the ordinances.

3682. As to what concerns the case of a sale which the testator


sum peti posse; nisi probetur, adimere ei testatorem voluisse. Probationem autem mu-
tates voluntatis ab heredibus exigendam. JL. 11, § 12, D. de leg. 3.

Si rem suam legaverit testator, posteaque eam alienaverit; Celsus putat, si non adi-
mendi animo vendidit, nihilominus deberi. Idemque Divi Severus et Antoninus rescripse-
runt. § 12, Jnst. de leg.

* V. 1. 15, D. de adim. vel transf. leg.

b See the ordinances quoted on the twelfth article of the first section of Covenants, and
at the end of the preamble of the second section of Proo/s.

VOL. II. 4


578 THE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK rv.


may have made out of necessity, it would be necessary likewise
in that case to come to proofs of the testator’s intention. For it is
said in the first of thesé texts, that, notwithstanding the necessity,
the heir or executor ought to be admitted to prove that it was
the testator’s intention to revoke the legacy, whence it would foi-
low that the legatee would be received on his part to prove the
contrary ; because, in the matter of proofs of facts, each party is
at liberty to make his proof* Thus, this proof, which it would be
necessary to make in order to know whether the testator, having
alienated the thing bequeathed out of necessity, had had an in-
tention to revoke the legacy, would likewise be contrary to our


usage.
XIV.


3683. A Donation has the same Effect.— If he who had be-
queathed a thing had afterwards given it away to some other per-
son than to the legatee, this donation would annul the legacy with
much more reason than a sale. For one may be obliged to sell
out of necessity a thing which he had bequeathed, and that with-
out changing the good will which he ‘had for the legatee; but
one cannot be presumed to give it away to another except freely,
preferring the donee to the legatee.*


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3684. It is said in another law, that although the donation be
found to be null, yet the legacy nevertheless is revoked ;* which is
founded upon this, that the donation, although it be in itself nuil,
yet marks the express intention of the testator to revoke the leg-
acy. And if, for example, a testator, having made a deed of gift
of a thing which he had before bequeathed to another person than
the donee, had continued in the same mind as to that donation un-
til his death, it would be certain that his intention was to revoke
the legacy. And although the heir or executor of the said donor
should afterwards procure the deed of gift to be annulled by reason
of some flaw in it, yet he might pursuant to this law maintain
against the legatee that his legacy was annulled. But if it was
the donor himself that had procured the deed of gift to be va-
cated, and he afterwards had made no change in his testament,


© See the sixth article of the first section of Proofs.
« ZT. 18, D. de adim. vel transf. legat.
* DL. 24, § 1, D. de adim. vel tranef. legat.; —v. 1. 3, § ult. D. de instr. vel instrum. leg.


TIT. Il. SEC. XI.] LEGACIES. , 579


and had died without making other dispositions, that donation
which the testator himself had revoked, ought it to have the effect
of revoking a legacy which he had suffered to remain in his testa-
ment? And would there not be just ground to presume that this
testator intended that his legacy should have its effect, not only
because of his revoking the deed of gift, but because that, having
made no alteration in his testament, he had confirmed all the dis-
positions thereof, and had signified his will to die in the same in-
tentions, and that they should all of them have the same effect that
the death of testators gives to their testaments ?


XV.


3685. The Pawning of the Thing bequeathed does not revoke the
Legacy. — Although the testator pawns after the making of his
testament the thing which he had bequeathed, yet that will be no
revocation of the legacy. For the making of his testament doth
not debar him of the use of his goods, and this use of them does
not annul the dispositions of his testament, which will have their
effect, or not have it, according to the condition in which things
shall be at the time of his death. Thus, although it be true that
the pawning of the thing may be followed by an alienation of it,
yet nevertheless, if the thing that is pawned belong still to the tes-
tator at the time of his death, it passes to the legatee ; and the ex-
ecutor will be obliged to redeem it, as has been said in another
place.” For it is a general obligation upon him to acquit all the
debts of the inheritance.


XVI.


3686. Nor the Changes of the Thing which reform and renew tt.
— If after the making of the testament some changes are made in
the thing that was bequeathed, although they be such that, if the
nature of the thing can bear it, all its parts be renewed, yet all
these changes of the thing bequeathed make no change in the
legacy. Thus, the legacy of a ship, or of a house, or other edifice,
is not revoked, although it be wholly repaired piecemeal and by
degrees. Thus, the legacy of a flock of sheep is not revoked, al-
though there remain not one of the first that were bequeathed.


b See the seventeenth article of the third section. Z. 3, C. de leg. ;—-§ 12, Inst. de leg.
© Z. 94, § ult. D. de leg. 1;—1. 65, § ult. D. de leg.1. See the following article. The
changes of the parts that make up a whole do not hinder the thing from being considered
as being always the same, although there remain not one of the first parts of which it


580 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK Iv.


For these changes being made on the thing itself, none of them
changes it entirely; so that it remains the same after the
change. ,


XVIL


3687. The Legacy of a Flock of Sheep subsists although there
remain not one Head of those that were in tf at ferst. ~~ The legacy
of a herd of cattle may be augmented or diminished by the changes
that may happen to it, and it passes to the legatee such as it is at
the time that it falls due to him, whether it be increased since the
time of making the testament, or lessened. And although there
should be left one mare only of a stad, or only one sheep of a
flock, although it could not be said that this one sheep was a flock,
or that one mare a stud, yet, seeing this remnant was a part of
the stud or flock bequeathed, it was comprehended in the legacy,
and would remain as part of it, in the same manner as the ground
on which a house stood that is burnt down would belong to the
legatee of that house.4


XVIIL


3688. If the Thing bequeathed changes tts Nature, the Legacy is
revoked.— If the changes of the thing bequeathed be such as,
though the matter or substance thereof may remain, yet the thing
itself becomes thereby of another nature, or falls under another
condition, so as that it is not any longer comprehended under the
expression of the thing that was bequeathed, the legacy is revoked
by this change. Thus, for example, if a testator who had be-
queathed woollen or silk stuffs had afterwards made clothes of
them, he would have by that revoked the legacy. Thus, for an-
other example, if a testator, having bequeathed some precious
stones, should afterwards apply them to some other use, such as
for the ornament of the hilt of a sword, of the case of a watch, a
case of instruments, or other trinket, the legacy would be revoked
by this change Thus, for another example, if a testator, having


consisted. Thus, a house that is often repaired is always the same. Thus, a court of ju-
dicature, a nation, a regiment, and even the bodies of men and of animals, are always con-
sidered as being the same, although it may happen that after a long time there remain
not one of the small parts that composed them. For these things are in one sense always
the same, for the reason explained in the article. V. 1. 76, D. de judiciis.

@ L. 91, D. de legat. 1; —l. 22, eod.

* Lana legata, vestem qua ex ex facta sit, deberi non placet. ZL. 88, D. de legat. 3.

€ Item quero: si probari possit, Sciam uniones et hyacintos quosdam in aliam speciem


TIT. Ml. SEQ. Xi.] LEGACIES. 581


bequeathed trees, either felled or to be felled, had afterwards built
a ship, or done some other work with the said trees, the legacy
would be useless. And if, on the contrary, a testator, having be-
queathed a ship, should take it to pieces, the legacy would also be
revoked, so as that the legatee could not lay claim to any of those
pieces ;" for it was only a ship that was bequeathed. And it
would be the same thing if the thing bequeathed should chance to
perish, so as that what should remain of it were of another nature
than that which was bequeathed. Thus, for example, if, a herd of
cattle or flock of sheep being bequeathed, there should not remain
any one of them at the time of the testator’s death, but only the
hides or the wool, the legatee would have no right at all to these
remains!


XIX.


3689. If there remains nothing of the Thing bequeathed besides
Accessories, the Legacy is annulled. — If the thing happens to per-
ish, and there remain some accessories of it, none of them will be
due to the legatee; for he was not to have these accessories ex-
cept with the thing itself, which he cannot have. Thus, for ex-
ample, if a horse that had been bequeathed with his harness


ornamenti, quod postea pretiosius fecit additis aliis gemmis et margaritis convertisse: an
hos uniones vel hyacintos petere possit, et heres compellatur ornamento posteriori exi-
mere, et prestare? Marcellus respondit, petere non posse. Nam quid fieri potest, ut le-
gatum vel fidei commissum durare existimetur, cum id quod testamento dabatur, in sua
specie non permanserit? nam quodammodo extinctum sit. JZ. 6, § 1, D. de aur. arg.

& Sed et materia legata, navis, armarinmve ex ea factum non vindicatur. D. l. 88,§1,
D. de leg. 8.

b Nave autem legata dissoluta, neque materia, neque navis debetur. D. /. 88, § 12.

i Mortuo bove qui legatus est, neque corium, neque caro debetur. JZ. 49, D. de legat. 2.
Bee the following article.

We must understand the rule explained in this article in the sense which is there given
to it by the examples which are there brought, in order to apply it to the other cases of
the like nature.

It may be observed on the first of the texts cited on this article, that it is said in another,
that the clothes which have been made of wool that was bequeathed were due to the lega-
tee, unless the testator changed his will. Si lana legetur et vestimentum ex ea fiat, legatum
consistere ; si modo non mutaverit testator voluntatem. L. 44, § 2, D. de leg. 2. But seeing
that first text does not put that condition, that the testator in making those clothes had
an intention to revoke the legacy, and that, as has been observed on the thirteenth article,
it is not agreeable to our usage to have recourse to these sorts of proofs; it follows from
thence, that, according to our usage and that first text, the legacy ought to remain revok-
ed by the said change, if there be nothing in the expression of the testator which may
make it to be presumed that the legacy does subsist.

49 ® =


582 THB CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK IV.


should chance to die, the legatee would have none of the har.
ness.!


XX.


3690. Particular Expressions derogate from general ones. — Ex-
ample. — If a testator who had bequeathed his house furnished, or
his house together with all the furniture, had added to this legacy
a particular clause by which he had bequeathed to the same per.
son his hangings, this addition would not diminish the legacy of
all the furniture, and would not reduce it barely to the hangings.
But if, having bequeathed the house furnished, or the house with
all its furniture, he had added that he bequeathed likewise such a
particular suit of hangings, such as those which contain such a
history, or that are in such a hall; the mentioning of these partic-
ular hangings would exclude the others, and would show that he
did not think that the legacy of the furniture of the house would
take in the hangings, and that he meant to give only those hang-
ings which he had particularly mentioned. For in this case, and
others of the like nature, what is particularly specified derogates
from the general expression which comprehended the whole.™


XXL


3691. Another Example of the Rule explained tn the Preceding
Article. — It follows from this rule, which declares that the expres-
sion by which a particular thing is specified derogates from the
general expression which besides that thing takes in others, that if
a testator had bequeathed to one of his friends all the horses in his
stable that were come of his own stad, and to another all his
saddle-horses; and that among these there were some that had
been taken out of his own stud; they would be excepted out of
the legacy of the horses come of the stad, and comprehended in
the legacy of the saddle-horses. For the quality of saddle-horses
determines to this particular kind the general expression of horses
come of the stud, which may agree to other kinds of horses." But
if a testator had bequeathed to one the horses, or other things, of a
certain kind, and to another those of another kind, and it proved
that some of them, being of both kinds, were comprehended under


1 11.1 et 2, D. de pecul. leg.

= LZ. 80, D. de reg. jur.; —1. 12, § 46, D. de instr. vel instrum. leg. ; —1. 18, § 11, cod. > —
1. 9, D. de suppell. leg.

> L. 99, § ult. D. de legat. 3; —v. l. 15, D. de pec. leg.


TIT. 1. SEC. XI.] LEGACIES. 583


both the expressions, there being nothing to fix them to any one of
them in particular; those which should be found to be only of one
of the two kinds would belong to the legatee of that kind; and
those which should appear to be comprehended under both kinds
would belong in common to the two legatees. Thus, for example,
if the testator had bequeathed to one of them his coach-horses, and
to the other his saddle-horses, and that there were some horses
which served both for the coach and saddle, all the other horses
would be divided between the legatees according to the uses for
which the horses served, and the horses common to both uses
would be in common to both the legatees.°


XXIL
3692. The Legacy ts diminished by the Diminution of the Thing
bequeathed. — If he who had devised his jewels, pictures, or other
things, or even certain lands, sells a part of them, the legacy sub-
sists only for what remains. For as the legacy would be aug-
mented if the testator had added to the thing devised, so is it di-
minished when he takes any thing from it?


XXIIL


3693. By separating a Part of the Land or Tenement devised, to
join i to another. — If, without alienating the land or tenement de-
vised, or any part thereof, the testator separates a portion of it, in
order to join it to another land or tenement; as if, in order to en-
large a meadow or an orchard, he takes off a piece of a ground
which he had devised; such a separation would lessen the legacy.
For what is taken away from it becomes part of another land or
tenement, to which the legatee will have no right.1


XXIV.


3694. The Legacy being transferred, it is taken away from the First
Legatee. — When a testator, by a second disposition, transfers to a
second legatee the same thing which he had before given to an-
other person, the legacy of the first legatee is so far annulled by
this legacy to a second, that, although it should happen that the
second legatee should die before the testator, yet the first legatee
would have nothing of the legacy: for the first disposition, which


° D.1. 99, in f.
P L.8, D.deleg.1. See the fifth and sixth articles of the fourth section.
* ZL. 4, § 8, D. de leg. 1.


664 THE OIVEL LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOK I¥.


was in his favor, was revoked by the second” But if the testator
had imposed any charge or condition on the legacy which he
transfers in this manner, it would pass with the legacy to the second
legatee, unless it were annexed to the person of the first legatee,
or that it was the intention of the testator not to charge the second
legatee with that burden‘


XXV.

3695. A Revocation of one of two Legacies, which doth not annul
any one of the two.—If a testator had left two legacies to two
persons of the same name, and by a second disposition he had
revoked the legacy to one of them without distinguishing which
of the two, so that it could not be known which of the two
legacies was revoked, both would subsist: for it would be more
just and equitable that the revocation which is obscurely ex-
pressed should be without effect, rather than to give it the effect of
annulling two legacies, one of which ought certainly to subsist, ac-
cording to the intention of the testator. But if, on the contrary,
the testator had made only one bequest to one af two persons
bearing the same name, so that it could not be known by the cir-
cumstances to which of the two he intended to leave the legacy,
the legacy would be without any effect either to the one or the oth-
er. For the executor would be answerable only for one legacy, and
neither of the two pezsons could prove that he was the legatee.'


XXVI.


3696. If the Legatee renders himself unworthy of the Legacy, tt
is revoked. —~- A legacy which was good, and made in due form,
might be annulled, although the testator should make no manner
of disposition, either express or tacit, to revoke it, if it should
happen that the legatee should render himself unworthy of it by
any of the causes explained in their proper place."


XXVII.


3697. Legacies are diminished without the Act of the Testa-
tor, by the Falcidian Portion. — Although the testamentary heir or


' ZL. 8, D. de adim. vel transf. legat. * L. 95, D. de condit. et dem.

t L. 8, § 7, D. de adim. vel trans. legat. See the twenty-sixth article of the second sec-
tion of Testaments, and the remark which is there made on it, and which may be applied
to the second case of the present article.

" See the said causes in the third section of Heirs and E-recutera in general.


#1T. 111.} FALCIDIAN PORTION. 565


executor should pretend that the goods were not sufficient to
acquit the legacies, yet he is nevertheless charged with them, if he
accepts of the quality of heir or executor, purely and simply. But
if he only takes upon him this quality with the benefit of an inven-
tory, he will be accountable for the legacies only to the value of
the goods that shall remain after the debts are paid, and moreover
he may deduct from them the defalcation which shall be spoken of
under the following title.*


TITLE III.
OF THE FALCIDIAN PORTION.


3698. By the Falcidian portion, which took its name from the
author or inventor thereof, is meant the fourth part of the inherit-
ance which the Roman laws appropriated to the testamentary
heirs or executors, reducing the legacies to three fourths of the
whole estate; so that the testamentary heir or executor was to
have at least one fourth part entire, and the legacies could no way
diminish it. This law was equally just both for the interest of the
testators, of the testamentary heirs or executors, and of the leg-
atees. For seeing the testators might perhaps overvalue their
estates, or believe that they had more effects than really they had,
and under this persuasion exhaust their whole succession with leg-
acies, and so oblige their testamentary heirs or executors to re-
nounce their succession, rather than to acquit the legacies without
some defalcation, the interest which the testamentary heirs or
executors have therein is altogether evident; and it is likewise the
interest of the legatees rather to suffer a defalcation of their lega-
cies than to lose them entirely, if, upon the executor’s relinquish-
ing the succession, the disorder in the affairs of the succession
were to be attended with this consequence.

3699. The use of the Falcidian portion relates only to the dis-
positions of such testators, whose estates are situated in the prov-
inces which are governed by the written law. For with respect
to estates situated in the customs, seeing the said customs do reg-


® See the following title, and that of Hare or Executors with the Benefit of an Inventory.


586 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK Iv.


ulate what share of the estate ought to remain to the heirs at law,
and what is left to the disposition of the testator, the reduction of
legacies is differently regulated by the respective bounds which
each custom has set thereto.


SECTION I.


OF THE USE OF THE FALCIDIAN PORTION, AND WHEREIN IT
CONSISTS.


Arr. I.

3700. The Legacies cannot exceed Three Fourth-Parts of the
Goods. — The Falcidian portion is the fourth part which the exec-
utor may retain of the goods of the euccession, when the legacies
exceed the three fourth-parts.*


e IL


3701. All the Debts are to be paid before the Legacies, and even
preferably to the Falcidian Portion due to the Executor. — The
fourth part, which the executor ought to have, is taken out of all
the goods in general, but the goods are understood to be only such
as remain after the debts are paid. Thus, the executor retains in
the first place the fund that is necessary for paying the debts, and
in the next place his own fourth part for the Falcidian portion out
of what remains clear.” And we must reckon in the number of
debts, that which appears to be due to the executor, if he was a
creditor of the deceased, of what nature soever the debt were, even
although it were a legacy or a fiduciary bequest which had been
left to the deceased in trust for him. So that if, for example, a
father to whom a legacy had been left in trust for his children,
with liberty to him to choose which of them he would give it to,
had left it to them all, instituting them heirs or executors in equal
portions, and had bequeathed so many legacies as to give occa-
sion to deduct the Falcidian portion, every one of his children, in
computing his own Falcidian portion, might deduct his share of
the legacy left in trust to the father for his use, as a debt due to
him. For although the father had the liberty of choosing any


© L.1, D. ad leg. Fale.
> L. 66, D.ad leg. Fale. ; —1. 89, § 1, D. de verb. signif.


TIT. 11. SEC. 1.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 567


one of them to give it to, yet his failing to make the choice ren-
dered him debtor to them all for what he was obliged to restore.°


iI


3702. And likewise the Funeral Expenses. — It is necessary also
to deduct out of the goods the funeral expenses, which are pre-
ferred not only before legacies, but even before the debts, although
there should not be effects enough in the succession to satisfy all
the creditors. And this expense ought to be moderated so as not
to exceed what is necessary.


IV.


3703. The Executor has not the Falcidian Portion unless he make
an Inventory.— The executor cannot demand the Falcidian portion
if he has not claimed the benefit of an inventory, and does not
make it appear, by an inventory made in due form, that the goods
are not sufficient to satisfy all the charges. But the executor who
takes upon him that office purely and simply, without claiming
the benefit of an inventory, cannot pretend to the Falcidian portion,
although it were true that the goods were not sufficient to answer
all the charges.


V.


3704. The Heir at Law has Right to the Falcidian Portion. —
Although the Falcidian portion seems only to belong to executors
or testamentary heirs, yet seeing legacies may be left by a codicil
without naming any executor, and that in this case the heir at law
is bound to pay the legacies, he has also right to the Falcidian por-
tion. For the succession is as much due to him as to any other
who might be instituted heir or executor by a testament.


VI.


3705. All Disposttions made tn View of Death are subject to
the Falcidian Portion.— All the kinds of dispositions that are
made in view of death, such as legacies, fiduciary bequests, gifts
in consideration of death, whether they be made by a testament
or by other acts, are subject to the Falcidian portion ;£ unless they


° ZL. 6, C. ad leg. Falc. ; —1. 84, D. ad ley. Fale.

4 § 8, Inst. de leg. Fale.;—I. penult. D. de relig.;—1. 1, § wit. D.ad leg. Fale. See the
eleventh section of Heirs and Executors in general,

* Nov. 1, c. 2;—d.c. 2,42. Sec the tenth article.

f £. 18, D. ad leg. Fale. & L.77, $1, D. de legat. 2.


S88 SEE CIVIL Law. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


be excepted from it, pursuant to the rules which shall be explained
in the last two sections of this title.


VIL


3706. The Falcidian Portion is taken out of the Goods which are
found in the Succession at the Time of the Testator's Death.— The
fourth part, which the heir or executor ought to have for the Fal-
cidian portion, is computed according to the value of the goods of
the inheritance at the time of the testator’s death. For as it is at
that time that the succession is open, so the same consists in what
effects are found to belong to it at that time;* and the fruits and
revenues of the time subsequent to the testators death cannot
augment the fund for the legacies, nor be reckoned to the executor
as a part of his fourth which he ought to have for the Falcidian
portion, the revenues or income whereof ought to belong to him!


VII


3707. The Goods are valued according to what they are worth ai
that Tune. — Seeing the Falcidian portion falls due to the heir or
executor at the moment of the testator’s death, and that it is taken
out of all the goods that are found at that time in the inheritance,
the goods ought to be estimated on the foot of what they might
be worth at that time, whether the valuation be made by mutual
consent of the executor and the legatees, or by order of the judge!
And in making the estimate of the lands, regard ought to be had
to what they may be worth the more because there were fruits on
the ground ready to be cut down in harvest-time, soon after the
testator’s death.=


IX.


3708. The Losses of the Goods fall upon the Executor, if he ac-
cepis purely and simply.— When the executor accepts the succes-
sion purely and simply, all the losses and diminutions of the
goods of the inheritance, and even those which may happen
by mere casualty, will fall upon him, and the legatees will not
thereby suffer any diminution of their legacies; unless they had


h 7. 56, D. ad. leg. Fale. See the following article.

1 7. 15, § 6, inf. eod.

' See the first of the texts cited on the preceding article, and that cited on the tenth
article.

= 1.9, D. ad leg. Fale.


TIT. IT. SEC. 1.] FALOIDIAN PORTION. 589


given occasion to those losses by some fault which might be laid
to their charge."


x.


3709. Difference between the Heir or Executor with the Benefit
of an Inventory, and him who hath not that Benefit. — Although
the heir or executor does not accept the inheritance simply, but
with the benefit of an inventory, yet the losses and diminutions
of the goods will affect him in that quality. For by the goods of
the inheritance are understood those that are found in it at the
time of the testator’s death, which lays the succession open, as has
been said in the seventh article. But there is this difference be-
tween the heir or executor with the benefit of an inventory, and him
who has taken that character purely and simply, without the said
benefit, that whereas this last has no way to defend himself against
the losses which fall upon him inevitably, the beneficiary heir or
executor is still at liberty to renounce the inheritance, he giving
an aceount of what he has received; and if he does renounce, the
changes that have happened since the death of the testator will
affect only the creditors and legatees. But the disorder of affairs
that would ensue upon his renunciation may induce the legatees
to bear a part of the losses, and to compound with the heir or ex-
ecutor; and in this case the diminution of the legacies and the
Falcidian portion are regulated among them by common consent,
according as they can agree the matter.°


XL


3710. The Estimate made by the Testator does not regulate the Fal-
cidian Portion. — If the testator had made an estimation either of
all his goods, or of a part them, either in his testament, or by some
other disposition, neither the testamentary heir on his part, nor the
legatees on their part, would be obliged to regulate their rights upon
that foot, if the estimate made by the testator were either above or
under the true value of the things at the time of the testator’s death.
For as it is justice that does assign to them their portions, so it is
the truth of the value of the goods that ought to regulate them.”


_" E. 30, D. ad leg. Fale. See the tenth article of the first section of Heirs and Erecutors
in general.
° L. 73, D. ad leg. Falc. As to what is said in this text concerning the profits which
augment the goods of the inheritance, see the fifteenth article.
PL. 15, § ult. D. ad leg. Fale. ; —1. 68, § 1, aod.
VOL. I. 50


580 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK Iv.


AIL

3711. The Valuation of the Goods ought to be made with the
Knowledge of all the Legatees.— If it be necessary to make an
estimate of the goods, in order to regulate the Falcidian portion
between the executor and the legatees, the valuation ought to be
made with the knowledge of all the parties concerned, whether it
be made by order of court, or by the mutual consent of parties;
and even at the instance of any one single legatee who should de-
mand it only for a small legacy. But if the estimation were made
only with the knowledge of some of them, it would be of no force
to bind the others who should refuse to agree to.it. And the ex-
ecutor may likewise call the creditors, in order to satisfy them how
much the goods are leasened by the debts owing to them, and also
to setile with them the value of the goods, in case they are willing
to take any of them in payment of what is due to them.%


XIII.


3712. Precaution for the Falcidian Portion with Respect to Goods
that are wncertain. — If among the goods of the inheritance there
were any of such a nature as that it were uncertain whether they
ought to be reckoned in settling the Falcidian portion ; as, for ex-
ample, if there were a lawsuit depending touching the property of
some lands, or for a certain debt; or if it should depend on the
event of some condition, whether a certain land or tenement, or a
certain right, should or should not be part of the inheritance;
these sorts of goods would not be reckoned as present goods, in
order to regulate the fund for the legacies, and the proportion of
the Falcidian portion ; for these pretensions might prove vain and
fruitless. But the Falcidian portion would be settled on the foot
of the present goods. And as to those pretensions, the executor
and the legatees would adjust among themselves the security that
might be found necessary for doing justice to each other, accord-
ing as the expectation of the event and the circumstances might
require. Thus, the executor, who would not be bound to compre-
hend these uncertain goods in the computation of those of the in-
heritance, would oblige himself, in case they should remain in the
inheritance, to augment the legacies proportionably. And if some
particular considerations had induced him to acquit all the lega-
cies, or some of them, on the foot of the augmentation which


4 Z.1, § 6, D. si cut plusg. per leg. Falc. lic. leg. esse dic.


TIT: Ill. SEC. 1.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 591


these goods in dispute would make to the legacies, if in the event
they should be found to be part of the inheritance, the legatees
would oblige themselves to restore, in case these goods should ap-
pear not to belong to the inheritance, what they may have received
on that account: and they might likewise settle among themselves,
under some penalty, an estimation of the said rights, such as they
are, ata certain price, balancing the hazard of the loss or profit
which might accrue by the event either to the executor or to the
legatees.*


XIV.


3713. The Diminutions of the Charges, and the New Funds, di-
minish the Falcidian Portion.— If there were charges of the in-
heritance which should happen to cease, such as debts said to be
owing by the deceased which shall appear to be paid, legacies,
which are afterwards annulled, or by the means of other causes
there were any fund of goods of the inheritance which should
come to the executor, at what time soever the same should accrue
to him, whether at the time of the testator’s death, or a long
time after; all these sorts of profits accruing to him by reason of
his quality of executor, they would augment the fund for the lega-
cies, and would diminish the share which he was to have had out
of the legacies for his Falcidian portion.


XV.


3714. Goods discovered after settling the Falcidian Portion di-
minish it. If after liquidating the Falcidian portion, and paying
off the legatees, the executor having retained in his hands what
was to be deducted from the legacies, there happened to be discov-
ered some goods of the inheritance which were unknown to the
legatees; as if there had fallen to the testator in his lifetime an in-
heritance of an absent person, whose death he knew nothing of;
this event, which would augment the goods, would likewise cause
a proportionable revocation to be made of what had been taken
off from the legacies; and the legatees might demand from the
executor the share that ought to come to them of these goods
which have been newly discovered: and this would undoubtedly


* L. 73, § 1, D. ad leg. Fale. ; —1. 63, eed. See the fourth article of the second section.
See the latter end of the tenth article of this section.

* L. 11, D. ad leg. Fale. See the following article. Z.50, D. ad leg. Fale. ; —1. 51, eod. ;
—[. 52, § 1, eod. :


562 TUR CIVIL LAW. [PamT 11. BOOK IV.


be still more reasonable, if they were goods which the executor
had industriously concealed from the knowledge of the legatees*
But we ought not to reckon as an augmentation of the goods of
the inheritance, that which may arise from the fruits and other
profits of the goods of the deceased; as if a herd of cattle had in-
creased in number: for these profits, and all the fruits and reve-
nues, belong to the executor," except those which may have pro-
ceeded from the things bequeathed, and which for the same reason
would belong to the legatees, according to the rules explained in
the eighth section.


XVI.


3715. If the Thing bequeathed cannot be divided, the Falcidian
Portion is regulated by Estimation.— Although the Falcidian
portion diminishes the legacies, and takes off something from
every one of them, and if they consist in sums of money, grain,
liquors, and other things, out of which it may be easy to take a
part for the Falcidian portion, one may retain it out of the thing
iteelf; yet if, on the contrary, it be of such a nature that it cannot
be divided, as a horse, a diamond, a service, the building of some
edifice, and others of the like kind, the Falcidian portion whereof
eannot be taken out of the things themselves, the matter is adjust-
ed by estimation, whether it be that the executor gives to the leg.
atee the value of what his legacy may amount to, or that the leg-
atee gives back to the executor the value of what he was to have
out of the legacy for his Falcidian portion. And if several execu-
tors were charged with a legacy of a thing that could not be di-
vided, such as that of some work or building, although the nature
of the legacy would make every one of the executors answerable
for the whole legacy, because of its indivisibility, yet every one of
them might acquit himself by offering his share of the price of the
work or building, deducting only what he ought to retain for his
Falcidian portion?


* This is a consequence of the preceding article: for the inheritance comprehend aif
the goods that may accrue to the executor in that quality, at what time soever they
come to be known, and at what time soever he accepts the inberitance; because his accept-
ance of the inheritance hath this effect, that it makes him to be considered as if he had
succeeded from the moment of the testator’s death, and as having had from that instant
his right to all the goods of the inheritance. See the fifteenth article of the first section,
and the fifth article of the second section, of Heirs and Exeovtors in general.

" See the text cited on the tenth article.

* ZL. 80, §4, D. ad leg. Falcid. See the ninth section of Heirs and Execuiors in general.


TIT. Ill. 8p. 41.] FALOIBIAN PORTION. 393


SECTION II.


OF THE DISPOSITIONS THAT ARE SUBJECT TO THE FALCIDIAN
PORTION.


Art. I.


3716. The Falcidian Portion ceases in certain Cases. — The Fal-
cidian portion ceases in divers cases, whether it be on account of
obstacles that are on the part of him who claims it, which shall be
explained in the following section; or by reason of other causes
which make it to cease, which shall be treated of in the fourth
section. And there are some dispositions, of which it may be
doubted whether the Falcidian portion be due out of them or not,
which shall be the subject-matter of the rules that follow.*


Il.


3717. The Favor of the Legacy or of the Legatee does not hinder
the Falcidian Portion. — The favorableness of the legacies doth
not exempt them from being subject to the Falcidian portion;
whether it be that the favor respects the quality of the legatee, even
although it were a legacy left to the prince, or that it respects the
use of the legacy itself, as if it were a legacy for alimony.°


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3718. We have not set down in this rule the exception that is
made to it by the greatest part of the interpreters, in favor of leg-
acies to pious uses, which they conceive to be exempted from the
Falcidian portion by the disposition of the hundred and thirty-first
novel of Justinian, chap. 12, for it does not seem to bear that
sense. And the most learned of the interpreters have been of this
mind; and their judgment in this matter may be founded on two
considerations which result from the words of this novel. One is,
that the words seem to relate only to the testamentary heir who is
backward in acquitting the legacies left to pious uses: and the
other is, that there is nothing in this law which lays it down as a
general rule, that legacies. to pious uses are not subject to the
Falcidian portion, as would have been necessary in order to abol-


® See the places quoted in this article.
b LL. 4, C. ad leg. Fale.
¢ ZL. 89, D. ad leg. Faleid.

50 *


594 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT 1. BOOK rv.


ish the ancient law which subjected this sort of legacies to it;*
which Justinian himself seems to have presupposed in a law,’
where, speaking of the precaution used by some testators, who, in
order to avoid the deduction of the Falcidian portion out of their
legacies to captives, instituted them their heirs or executors, he
explains himself in these terms: S quis ad declinandam legem Fal-
cidiam, cum destderat totam suam substantiam pro redemptione cap-
tivorum relinquere, eos tpsos captivos scripsertt hederes ..... St enim
propter hoc a speciali herede recessum est, ut non Falcidie ratio in-
ducatur, &c. If the Falcidian portion had not been due out of leg-
acies to pious uses, it would have been nowise necessary to in-
stitute the captives heirs or executors in order to avoid it. To
which we may add, that the same emperor, in his first novel, at
the end of the second chapter, ordaining that the Falcidian portion
shall take place if the testator hath not expressly forbidden it, adds
for a reason, that it may so happen that there are in his testament
legacies to pious uses, which would make this prohibition of the
testator’s favorable, forsan etiam quedam juste et pie relinquent.
Which would not be a reason for favoring the express prohibition
of the Falcidian portion, if it had not taken place in legacies to
pious uses ; seeing in this case this prohibition would be super-
fluous. But if in the hundred and thirty-first novel he had in-
tended to establish it as a rale, that pious legacies should not be
subject to the Falcidian portion, he would have explained it in such
@ manner as to make it to be understood; whereas his expression
marks, on the contrary, that he restrains his disposition to the case
of a testamentary heir who refuses to acquit the legacies to pious
uses, and who says that there are not effects sufficient to do it
Si autem heres que ad pias causas relicta sunt non tmpleverit, di-
cens relictam sibi substantiam non sufficere ad tsia; precipimus,
omni Falcidia vacante quidquid inventiur in talt substantia proficere
provisione sanctissimi locorum episcopi ad causas quibus relictum
est. These are the words of this novel, which seem to intimate


* Ad municipia quoque legata, vel etiam gus Deo relinquuntur, lex Falcidia pertinet.
L.1, § 5, D. ad leg. Falcid.

One of the most learned interpreters, who is of the number of those who understand
this novel of the testamentary heir who is backward in paying the legacies to pious uses,
has been of opinion, that in this first law, § 5, ad leg. Falcid., instead of these words, vel
etiam ea, we ought to read, non etiam ea. It is on the third section of the third title of the
fourth book of the Sentences of Paulus that he hath made this remark. But as to this
novel, this author is of the sentiment which we have just now explained.

b 7. 49, C. de episc. et cler.


TIT. 11. 8EC. 11.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 595


that the motive of this law was not to make a rule of it for dis-
charging pious legacies from the Falcidian portion, but only to re-
press the infidelity or delays of executors; which would seem to
have no manner of relation to the cases where nothing can be im-
puted to the executor. It is true, that, if these words are not
express enough to gather from them that Justinian had made a
general rule to exempt legacies to pious uses from the Falcidian
portion, so neither are they clear enough, nor express enough, to
show that his intention was to take away the benefit of the Fal-
cidian portion out of pious legacies only from the executor who is
backward in acquitting them; seeing he speaks of an heir or ex-
ecutor who alleges only for an excuse of his delay, that there were
not goods sufficient to satisfy them, which would be a lawful ex-
cuse enough if the heir or executor could retain the Falcidian por-
tion out of legacies to pious uses; and yet Justinian will not al-
low this excuse to be received. So that one might think that in
his judgment it was none; and that perhaps he intended, that,
notwithstanding this excuse, the legacies to pious uses should be
acquitted without any defalcation. It is without doubt the ob-
scurity and uncertainty that exist in these words of this novel
that have divided the interpreters; and it is likewise that which
hath obliged us to make here this remark, in order to give a rea-
son why we have set down no rule for the Falcidian portion in
legacies to pious uses; because we had no right to determine a
difficulty of this nature, and we ought not to give any thing
for a rule but that which hath the character of a perfect certainty,
or the authority of a precise law. But it were to be wished that
some regulation were made touching this difficulty.


IIL


3719. How the Falcidian Portion ts regulated when there are
Conditional Legacies. — If the effect of a legacy depends on a con-
dition, which is not come to pass when the executor and the leg-
atees settle the Falcidian portion, it being then uncertain whether
the legacy will be due, or whether it will be void, this uncertainty
obliges the executor, and the legatees whose legacies are pure and
simple, to fall upon some expedient for doing mutual justice to
one another, according to the event which the conditional legacy
shall have. And since, if, the condition being accomplished, the
legacy should appear to be due, the other legacies would be di-
minished in proportion, and it would not be just that before this


506 THE CIVIL LAW. [PakT II. BOOK Iv.


event these legacies should be either suspended or diminished;
the proper expedient to be taken is, that the executor should with-
out delay acquit the legacies that are pure and simple, and that
the legatees who receive payment of their legacies should oblige
themselves, and give security, if it is thought necessary, both to the
executor, and to the legatee whose legacy is conditional, that, if the
condition shall come to pass, they will restore what ought to be
deducted out of their legacies towards the payment of this condi-
tional legacy.?


IV.


3720. A Legacy of a Service is subject to the Falcidian Portion.
— The legacy of a service, which the testator had appointed to be
taken either out of a house, or some other tenement, belonging to
the inheritance or to the executor, is subject to the Falcidian por-
tion. For the service is an inconvenience, which lessens the value
of the house or tenement that is subjected to it, and which may be
estimated at a certain price. Thus, this legacy contributes as well


4 Ys cui fideicommissum solvitar, sicut is cui legatum est, satisdare debet quod amplius
ceperit quam per legem Falcidiam ei licuerit, reddi: Veluti cam propter conditionem alio-
rum fidcicommissoram vel legatorum legis Falcidie causa pendebit. ZL. 31, D. ad ie.
Faleid.

Si propter ea qus sub conditione legata sunt pendet legis Falcidis ratio, presenti dis
data non tota vindicabuntur. ZL. 53, eod.

Sed et si legata quedam pure, quedam sub conditione relicta efficiant, ut, existente
conditione, lex Falcidia locum habeat: pure legata cum cautione reddantar. Quo casa
magis in usu est, solvi quidem pure legata, perinde ac si nulla alia sub conditione legats
fuissent. Cavere autem lcgatarios debere ex eventa conditionis quod amplius accepis-
sent redditum iri. JL. 73, § 2, eod.

Cantionibus ergo melius res temperabitur. L. 45, § 1, eod.

Interdum omnimodo necessarium est solidum solvi legatario, interposita stipulatione,
quanto amplius quam per legem Falcidiam ceperit reddi. Veluti si que a pupillo legats
sint non excedant modum legis Falcidise : veremur autem ne impubere eo mortuo alia le-
gata inveniantur, que contributione facta excedant dodrantem. Idem dicitur, et si prin-
cipali testamento queedam sub conditione legata sunt, que an debeantur incertum est: et
idco si heres sine judice solvere paratus sit, prospiciet sibi per hanc stipulationem. J. 1,
§ 12, cod. See the thirteenth article of the first section.

It may be remarked on the second of the texts cited on this article, that instead of these
words, non (ofa, some authors have thonght that we ought to read tamen tota ; and their
criticism or conjecture seems to he pretty well grounded. For it would not be just that,
for a legacy which may perhaps never be due, the legatees should suffer a defalcation of
their legacies. But if this is no error of the transcribers, and there were really in the
original the words non tofa, it would be necessary to understand this rule of the cases in
which the condition could not admit of any long delay. For if it were but for a short
time that the event was to be expected, the executor might retain the proportions of those
legatees who would not wait for the event, obliging himself to pay them their whole lega-
cies in case the conditional legacies should have no effect.


\ IT. It. BEC. 11.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 597


as other legacies, according as it may be estimated: and the lega-
tee ought to restore to the executor the share of the said estima-
tion that shall be necessary for making up the Falcidian portion.°


V.


3721. The Legacy of the Payment beforehand of a Debt that is
due at a certain Term, or on a certain Condition, is subject to the
Falcidian Portion. — If a testator who owed a sum of money, or
other thing, the payment or delivery of which was to be made only
some time after death, or which was due only upon a condition
that was not yet come to pass, had ordered by his testament that
the said delivery or payment should be made after his death to this
creditor, without waiting for the term fixed for the payment or de-
livery, or the event of the condition; it would be a legacy subject to
the Falcidian portion, according to the estimation of the advantage
which would redound to the legatee from this legacy, whether it
were on account of the paying beforehand a debt that was due
only at a certain term, which would consist in the interest of the
money from the time of the testator’s death to the time of the
term, or because of the assurance of the conditional debt which
might happen not to be due by the event; and this would amount
to the value of the debt, if the condition on which it was due
should not come to pass.‘


Vi.


3722. The Legacy of a Debt which the Debtor is not able to pay
is not reckoned in the Computation of the Falcidian Portion. — If the
creditor of an insolvent debtor had bequeathed his debt to a third
person, this legacy would not be comprehended in the number of
those which are subject to the Falcidian portion. For as this
desperate debt would not be reckoned as part of the goods, so like-
wise this legacy would be no diminution of them. But if the tes-
tator had bequeathed this debt to the debtor himself, seeing this
debtor might afterwards become solvent, one would take the precau-
tions explained in the third article touching conditional legacies


ReMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3723. We have thought proper to give to the text cited the sense
that is explained in the article. For as it would be unjust to


© L.7, D. ad leg. Falcid. f Z.1, § 10, D. ad leg. Faleid.
& L. 22, § pen. ef ult. D. ad leg. Falcid.


598 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK Iv.


reckon this debt among the goods of the inheritance, so it would
not be equitable that the other legatees, who would reap no profit
by it, should suffer a defalcation of their legacies upon account of
this legacy, which would be no diminution of the goods with which
the executor would be chargeable for payment of their legacies;
and the executor, reaping in this manner the advantage of the
deduction from their legacies, should have more than his Falcidian
portion of the effective goods with which he would be charged
And although it be true that this legacy would be useful to the
debtor himself, and that, as is mentioned in the text, he would re
ceive this effect of the testator’s liberality, that he would be ac
quitted of the debt, and that thus it would be in reality a legacy;
yet the Falcidian portion is not granted to the executor in consid-
eration of the profit which the legatees make of their legacies, but
only because of the diminution which the inheritance suffers by
the legacies.


VIL.


3724. Three Sorts of Cases to be regulated for the Falcidiaa
Portion.— From all the rules which have been explained in the
preceding section, and in the present, it follows that there are two
ways of regulating the Falcidian portion, according to two sorts
of cases in which it may have place. The first is simple, and
common in all the cases where the goods and the legacies have
their value fixed. And the second is for the cases where there are
goods in expectation, which are uncertain, or where there are con-
ditional legacies, and where these uncertainties oblige the parties
concerned to take the precaution of having sureties, as has been
said in the third article of this section, and in the thirteenth of the
preceding section. But there is a third sort of legacies of a nature
which requires a third manner of regulating the Falcidian portion ;
which are the legacies of alimony, or of a pension, or of a usufract;
and this third manner depends on the rule which follows.*


VIIL


3725. The Falcidian Portion is due out of a Legacy of a Usw-
fruct, and in what Manner tt ts regulated. — Seeing the legacies of
alimony, of yearly pensions, of annuities, of a usufruct, and others
of the like nature, consist only in a revenue which is to cease by


h See the following article.


TIT. Ill. SEC. 1.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 599


the death of the legatee, one cannot make a just and precise esti-
mation of the value of these legacies, in the same manner as one
may do of others. But'seeing it is necessary to fix the value of
every legacy, in order to regulate the foot of the Falcidian portion
with regard to all the legacies, the value of legacies of a usufruct,
or of a pension, or of alimony, may be regulated at the price
which the legatee might get for his legacy, according to his age, if
he had a mind to sell it. But this estimation, which may serve
to regulate the Falcidian portion of all the legacies hath not this
effect with respect to this legatee, that he ought to pay on this
foot, and from the time of the testator’s death, the Falcidian por-
tion of the price of his legacy. For he might chance to die the
first year, and in that case, instead of being a legatee, he might be-
come a debtor to the inheritance. And likewise, on the other
hand, the diminution which this legatee ought to bear of his leg-
acy on account of the Falcidian portion ought not to be delayed
and put off to the end of the years that the usufruct or pension
may last: but this Falcidian portion ought to be regulated, and
taken yearly out of the usufruct or pension, in proportion to the
diminution that is settled for all the legacies. And if, for example,
the Falcidian portion cuts off a sixth part of all the legacies, in-
cluding the legacy of the usufruct or pension, according to the val-
uations that shall have been made of all these legacies, the said
legatee will owe every year for the Falcidian portion a sixth part
of what he enjoys, unless they should agree by mutual consent to
settle it on another foot.


REMARKS ON THE PREcEDING ARTICLE.


3726. Seeing it was not possible to reconcile all the texts cited,
- and to reduce them to a fixed sense that might agree to them all,
we have endeavoured to form the rule on what we have been able
to gather from the texts, by the reflections which we have been
obliged to make on their different dispositions.

3727. It is said in the first text, that, to regulate the Falcidian
portion of a legacy of a usufruct, the ancients had been of opin-
ion that it was necessary to make an estimation of the right of
the said usufruct; but that this opinion of the ancients is not ap-
proved, because one may take the fourth part of a legacy of a
usufruct, as well as of other legacies. And afterwards it is there


2.1, § 9, D. ad leg. Fale.; —d. l. § 16;—1. 47, eod. ; —1. 55, eod. ; —1. 68, eod.


598 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


reckon this debt among the goods of the inheritance, so it would
not be equitable that the other legatees, who would reap no profit
by it, should suffer a defalcation of their legacies upon account of
this legacy, which would be no diminution of the goods with which
the executor would be chargeable for payment of their legacies;
and the executor, reaping in this manner the advantage of the
deduction from their legacies, should have more than his Falcidian
portion of the effective goods with which he would be charged.
And although it be true that this legacy would be useful to the
debtor himself, and that, as is mentioned in the text, he would re-
ceive this effect of the testator’s liberality, that he would be ac-
quitted of the debt, and that thus it would be in reality a legacy;
yet the Falcidian portion is not granted to the executor in consid-
eration of the profit which the legatees make of their legacies, but
only because of the diminution which the inheritance suffers by
the legacies.


VIL


3724. Three Sorts of Cases to be regulated for the Falcidian
Portion. — From all the rules which have been explained in the
preceding section, and in the present, it follows that there are two
ways of regulating the Falcidian portion, according to two sorts
of cases in which it may have place. The first is simple, and
common in all the cases where the goods and the legacies have
their value fixed. And the second is for the cases where there are
goods in expectation, which are uncertain, or where there are con-
ditional legacies, and where these uncertainties oblige the parties
concerned to take the precaution of having sureties, as has been
said in the third article of this section, and in the thirteenth of the
preceding section. But there is a third sort of legacies of a nature
which requires a third manner of regulating the Falcidian portion ;
which are the legacies of alimony, or of a pension, or of a usufruct;
and this third manner depends on the rule which follows.*


VIL


3725. The Falcidian Portion ts due out of a Legacy of a Usu-
fruct, and in what Manner it is regulated. — Seeing the legacies of
alimony, of yearly pensions, of annuities, of a usufruct, and others
of the like nature, consist only in a revenue which is to cease by


bh See the following article.


TIT. 111. SEC. 11.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 099


the death of the legatee, one cannot make a just and precise esti-
mation of the value of these legacies, in the same manner as one
may do of others. But'seeing it is necessary to fix the value of
every legacy, in order to regulate the foot of the Falcidian portion
with regard to all the legacies, the value of legacies of a usufruct,
or of a pension, or of alimony, may be regulated at the price
which the legatee might get for his legacy, according to his age, if
he had a mind to sell it. But this estimation, which may serve
to regulate the Falcidian portion of all the legacies hath not this
effect with respect to this legatee, that he ought to pay on this
foot, and from the time of the testator’s death, the Falcidian por-
tion of the price of his legacy. For he might chance to die the
first year, and in that case, instead of being a legatee, he might be-
come a debtor to the inheritance. And likewise, on the other
hand, the diminution which this legatee ought to bear of his leg-
acy on account of the Falcidian portion ought not to be delayed
and put off to the end of the years that the usufruct or pension
may last: but this Falcidian portion ought to be regulated, and
taken yearly out of the usufruct or pension, in proportion to the
diminution that is settled for all the legacies. And if, for example,
the Falcidian portion cuts off a sixth part of all the legacies, in-
cluding the legacy of the usufruct or pension, according to the val-
uations that shall have been made of all these legacies, the said
legatee will owe every year for the Falcidian portion a sixth part
of what he enjoys, unless they should agree by mutual consent to
settle it on another foot!


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3726. Seeing it was not possible to reconcile all the texts cited,
and to reduce them to a fixed sense that might agree to them all,
we have endeavoured to form the rule on what we have been able
to gather from the texts, by the reflections which we have been
obliged to make on their different dispositions.

3727. It is said in the first text, that, to regulate the Falcidian
portion of a legacy of a usufruct, the ancients had been of opin-
ion that it was necessary to make an estimation of the right of
the said usufruct; but that this opinion of the ancients is not ap-
proved, because one may take the fourth part of a legacy of a
usufruct, as well as of other legacies. And afterwards it is there


! 2.1, § 9, D. ad leg. Fale.; —d. 1. § 16;—1. 47, eod.; —L. 55, eod. ; —1. 68, eod.


602 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOK Iv.


legatee? The one would be very soon, and the other very late ; and
‘every one of these ways would be attended with strange incon-
veniences. Should it be every year that a part of the total of this
Falcidian portion should be taken? But upon what foot could every
year’s share be regulated? And if it were, for example, a legacy
of a pension of one thousand livres which was computed to last
thirty years, and a sixth part was to be taken off from it for the
Falcidian portion, which would amount to five thousand livres,
how could one divide this sum so as not to take more of it one
year than another, since it could not be known how long the leg-
atee had to live, and that, if he should live only five years, all his
usufruct would be consumed by the Falcidian portion ?

3732. We may add on the subject of this sixty-eighth law, that
it is taken out of a book which Amilius Macer, who is the author
of this law, had composed in relation to the right to the twentieth
penny which the exchequer claimed out of all successions and
legacies; so that it seems that the computations which we see in
this law for the respective ages have been made as it were a tariff
for settling this right; and although mention be there made of the
Falcidian portion, as if these computations had been made to reg-
ulate it, yet an able interpreter has conjectured, that in all proba-
bility it was Tribonian who made that application of it to the
Falcidian portion: which would be to suppose that he had made
no manner of reflection on the infinite difference that was to be
made between the use of the computations explained in this law
for the several ages with respect to this right of the twentieth
penny, and the use of the same computations with respect to the
Falcidian portion. For as to this right of the twentieth penny, as
it was necessary to pay it out of every legacy once for all, so it
was necessary to fix the value of a legacy of a usufruct, in order to
know what share of it the exchequer was to have. And it was for
this reason that the said law fixed by that regulation the manner
of estimating the value of the twentieth penny, although at too
high a rate, for the reasons which have been remarked on the com-
putations of the several ages. But for regulating the Falcidian
portion of a legacy of an annuity for life, or of a usufruct, it would
not be just to have recourse to the manner of computation laid
down in that law, and to take the number of years which it gives
to the duration of the usufruct, or of the annuity, according to the
age of the legatee, in order to make the legatee pay the Falcidian
portion of that sum total.. This computation, even although it


TIT. HI. SEC. 11] FALCIDIAN PORTION. GOL


live, which will make thirty thousand livres; and it is of this sum
that he will owe the Falcidian portion. Quantitas alimentorum
triginta annorum computetur, ejusque quantitatis Falcidia prestetur.
And after having enumerated the computations of these several
ages, it is said afterwards, that it was then the usage to reckon
thirty years of life, not only for those who were but twenty years
old or under, but also for those who did not exceed thirty years of
age; and that as for those who were upwards of thirty, the usage
was to reckon the number of years which they wanted of sixty.
Thus it was, for example, twenty-five years for a legatee who was
thirty-five years old, and ten for a legatee who was fifty years old;
so that they never reckoned more than thirty years.

3731. It is easy to judge, by the different dispositions of all these
laws, what are the difficulties which result from them, and the in-
conveniences of these several ways of regulating the Falcidian por-
tion which are there explained. But I cannot forbear remarking
on this sixty-eighth law, which is generally looked upon to be the
principal rule of this matter, that the years of the ages are settled
there on two different bottoms, none of which would be taken
now for a rule in estimating a usufruct or an annuity, after the
computations that have been made upon observation of the num-
ber of persons which die at every age. For according to these
computations there are but few children that attain to the age of
thirty years ; few persons that are past twenty years, who arrive at
fifty. Thus, if a legatee of a usufruct were only four or five
years old, one would not estimate his usufruct at the rate as if he
were to live thirty years; and for this age, and all others, one
would rather follow the method now used for valuing of annuities.
But even although it were certain that a legatee of a usufruct
would live thirty years, or even although an annuity had been
given to one and his successors for the space of thirty years, this
usufract or this annuity would not be worth the sum to which
these thirty years would amount, seeing a rent for perpetuity
would not be worth so much. Thus, it would be very unjust to
regulate the Falcidian portion upon the foot of such an estimation,
which would make a legacy of a usufruct, or of an annuity of a
thousand livres a year, to be estimated at a higher rate for the
Falcidian portion than a legacy of a rent for perpetuity of the like
sum, which would not be worth above twenty thousand livres.
But at what time should this Falcidian portion be taken? Should
it be at the time of the testator’s death, or after the death of the

VOL. Il. ol


604 THE CIVIL LAW. [Par H. BOOK rv.


not pretend to the Falcidian portion: for this quality engages him
to all the charges without distinction, and that even beyond the
effects of the inheritance. And it is only the beneficiary hei or
executor who, having made an inventory of the goods, is no fur-
ther accountable for the legacies, and other charges, than as there
are goods in the succession sufficient to acquit them, he deducting
out of the legacies the fourth part of the goods for the Falcidian
portion.


IL.


3734. The Beneficiary Heir or Executor who defrauds, loses the
Falcidian Portion of the Goods which he attempted to conceal. —
Although the heir or executor have made an inventory, yet if it be
found that he has defrauded the legatees, by withdrawing or con-
cealing some effects of the inheritance, he will be deprived of the
Falcidian portion of those effects which he had attempted franda-
lently to withdraw or conceal.» But we must not reckon in the
number of heirs or executors who have withdrawn or concealed
the effects, him who should pretend that a thing which he claims
as his own ought not to be comprehended among the goods of
the inheritance, although it should afterwards appear that the
same thing was a part of the inheritance: for it was a preten-
sion which he might have had without any knavish design, and
which, although it should appear to be unjust, yet, being inti-
mated to the legatees, would not have the character of a frandu-
lent diverting the effects of the succession.°


IIL.


3735. And also of the Legacy which he attempted to suppress. —
If the executor has been guilty of any fraud in endeavouring to
make the legacies or fiduciary bequests to perish, as if he had sup-
pressed a codicil which contained them, or by any other way, he
will be obliged to acquit those legacies or fiduciary bequests whole
and entire, without deduction of the Falcidian portion.‘


® See the fourth article of the first section of this title, and the second article of the first
section of Heirs and Executors in general.

b 1. 6, D. de his quae ut ind. ;—v. 1. 24, D. ad leg. Falcid. ; —1. 48, D. ad senat. Trebell.
See the following article.

¢ ZL. 68, § 1, D. ad leg. Fale.

4 1. 59, D. ad leg. Fale.


TIT. II. SEC. 111] FALOIDIAN PORTION. 605


IV.

3736. The Hetr at Law,or Next of Kin, doth not lose the Falcid-
ian Portion, for offering to renounce the Right he has by Testament.
—- If the heir at law or next of kin, being instituted executor by a
testament, should pretend to renounce his testamentary institution,
that he might succeed to the deceased as dying intestate, and so
free himself from the burden of the legacies, seeing he would not
be deprived of the inheritance, as has been said in another place,
and that he would remain under the obligation of acquitting the
legacies, he would not be deprived of the Falcidian portion.®


V.


3737. When several Executors are charged with different Leg-
acies, every one retains his own Falcidian Portion out of the Leg-
acy he is charged with. — If there be several heirs or executors in-
stituted in divers portions of the inheritance, and the portions
of some of them be charged with legacies from which the others
are exempted, every one will retain his own Falcidian portion out
of the legacies with which he is charged, and must not supply the
same out of the portions of the inheritance which belong to the
other heirs or executors. Every one likewise will deduct out of
his own portion of the inheritance the debts and other charges
which the testator shall have imposed upon it.


VL


3738. Legatees who are charged with Legacies have not the Fal-
cidian Portion. — If a legatee had his legacy burdened with some
disposition in favor of a third person, such as a sum of money, or
other charge which should diminish his legacy, or quite exhaust it,
he would not for all that have a right to the Falcidian portion;
but he would be bound either to acquit the whole charge, or to re-
nounce the legacy. For the Falcidian portion is granted only to
heirs or executors, and the legatees cannot claim this benefit in
their own right.*


* ZL. 18, § 1, D. si quis om. caus. test. See the seventeenth article of the fifth section of
estaments


! 2.77, D.ad leg. Fale. See the seventh and following articles of the fourth section.

8 L. 8, D.ad leg. Fale.

b 7. 47,§1, D. ad leg. Falcid. See the following article. The reasons for establishing
the Falcidian portion, which have been explained in the preamble of this title, agree only
to heirs or executors.

§1°


606 TBE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Iv.


VIL

3739. Unless it be that their Legacies suffer this Diminution on
Account of the Executor.— If in the case of the preceding article,
the executor being overcharged with all the legacies, the Falcidian
portion were to take place in them, the abatement which‘a legatee
who is burdened with other legacies would sustain thereby of his
own legacy, the same being taken out of his entire legacy, would
diminish proportionably this particular legacy with which he was
charged by the testator: for it would be on account of the execnu-
tor that the said diminution had happened:!


SECTION IV.


OF THE CAUSES WHICH MAKE THE FALCIDIAN PORTION TO CEASE,
OR WHICH DIMINISH IT.


Art. J.


3740. The Testator may forbid taking the Falcidian Portion. —
Although the Falcidian portion be a right which by law accrues to
the executor who is willing to make use of it, and that a testator
cannot hinder his dispositions from being subject to the laws ;* yet
it is nevertheless permitted to a testator to oblige his executor to
acquit the legacies without deducting the Falcidian portion. And
if he orders it so in express terms, the Falcidian portion will not
take place. For this is an exception made by the law itself, and
the executor is at liberty either to accept the inheritance on this
condition, or to renounce it.”


1 Z. $2, § 4, D. ad leg. Fale. See the fifth article of the following section.

* See the twenty-eighth article of the second section of the Jules of Law.

b Si debitor, creditore hmrede instituto, petisset, ne in ratione legis Falcidis ponends
creditum suum legatariis reputaret: sine dubio ratione doli mali eacepuonts apud arbi-
trum Falcidis defuncti voluntas servatar. ZL. 12, D. ad leg. Falc.

Si in testamento ita scriptum sit: Heres meus Lucio Titio decem dare damnas esto: et
quanto quidem minus per legem Falcidiam capere poterit, tanto amplius ei dare damnas
esto: sententie testatoris standum est. JZ. 64, eod.

It would seem by these texts and some others, that by the ancient law the testator
might forbid the Falcidian portion, and the contrary seems to be established by other laws
(Z. 27, D. ad leg. Fale.) ; which has divided the interpreters. But this difficulty hath been
removed by the first novel of Justinian, who has permitted the prohibition of the Falcidian
portion in the manner it is explained in the article. Nov. 1, c. 2, in fine.


_ TIT. IT. SEC. Iv.] FALOUDIAN PORTION. 607


II.

3741. The Legacy of an Immovable, with a Prohibition to alienate
tt, is not subject to the Falcidian Portion.—lf a testator had de-
vised some immovable thing, whether it were to some one of his
own family or to some other person, and had directed that the
said immovable should not be alienated, it being his intention that
the same should always remain with the legatee and his succes-
sors; the executor of this testator could not pretend to have the
Falcidian portion of an immovable devised after this manner: for
the prohibition to alienate it implies the will of the testator that
the same should remain without any diminution to the legatee
and to his successors.°


III. .


3742. The Testator who ts Debtor to his Executor may forbid
him to reckon his own Debt for the Falcidian Portion. — If, the per-
son who is instituted executor being a creditor to the testator, it
were ordained by the testament that the said executor should not
reckon his own debt for diminishing the goods of the inheritance,
this disposition would hinder the diminution of the legacies which
the said debt might have occasioned for the Falcidian portion.‘


IV.


3743. The Falcidian Portion doth not take Place in Military Tes-
taments. — The dispositions of military testaments are not subject
to the Falcidian portion.


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3744. Is it a great favor to him who, by a military testament,
names an heir or executor, and gives several legacies, to take away
the right of the Falcidian portion from his heir or executor, who
might by this means come to have nothing at all, if the inheritance
should be exhausted with legacies? And will not this privilege
in this case turn against the intention of the testator, who, if he
had foreseen this event, would have without doubt moderated the
legacies in favor of his testamentary heir, whom he had a greater
value for than for the legatees? Or shall this rule be reduced to


© Now. 119, c. ult.

4 See the first of the texts quoted on the first article.

© In testamento militis jus legis Falcidie cessat. L.7,C.ad leg. Falcidiam; —I. 12, C.
de test. mil. ; — l. 92 ef 1.17, l. ult. D. ead.


O68 THB CIVIL LAW. [Parr I. BOOK Iv.


the case where the disposition of the soldier or officer of war would
amount only to a codicil, which would respect only the heir at law
or next of kin, in favor of whom he had made no manner of dis-
position? We have, however, set down this rule without any dis-
tinction, the laws relating to it being precise. But it seems that,
if the case should happen that there were nothing at all left, or
but a small matter, for the heir, whether he succeed as heir at law
or by testament, it would be equitable to mitigate the rigor of the
law, seeing it was not the intention of the testator to strip him of
all the goods.


V.


3745. The Devisee of a Land or Tenement charged with a Pew
ston to be taken out of the Fruits of the said Land or Tenement
doth not retain the Falcidian Portion, although he himself bears it.
— If a legatee were charged with a yearly pension for alimony to
some person, and his legacy were diminished by the Falcidian
portion, but only so far as that there would remain still enough for
the said alimony, this legatee would nevertheless bear the said
charge entire, without any deduction. For it would be presumed
of such a disposition, that it was the testator’s pleasure that a leg-
acy of this nature should not suffer any abatement, and that the
legatee should content himself with what might remain clear after
the said charge were acquitted, unless it should appear that this
was not the intention of the testator; as if, for example, the legacy
charged with the said alimony were of the same nature, and as
favorable, as the other£


REMARKS ON THE PreEceDING ARTICLE.


3746. It is to be observed on this article, that it is an exception
to the rule explained in the seventh article of the preceding sec-
tion: so that it is an exception from another exception. For the
rule explained in that seventh article declares that the legatees
may retain the Falcidian portion when they themselves bear it,
which makes an exception to the general rule explained in the
sixth article of the same preceding section, which says that the
legatees cannot retain the Falcidian portion out of their legacies,
because it was established only for the benefit of heirs or execu-
tors. Thus, the rule explained in this present article is founded


f ©. 91, § 1, D. de ann. leg. ; —1. 25, § 1, eod.; —1. 77, §1, D. de leg. 2.


TIT. Il. BHO. IV.| FALOIDIAN PORTION. 609


on two principles which it joins together; one whereof is general,
that legatees have no right to the Falcidian portion ; and the other
particular, in favor of a legacy of alimony specially assigned on
the fund of a legacy, which the testator had given to the legatee
only upon this condition. For although legacies of alimony be
subject to the Falcidian portion when it is the executor that is
charged with them, as has been said in the second article of the
second section; yet the laws distinguish the condition of the leg-
atee from that of the executor, and favor the executor more than
the legatee, as has been said in the sixth article of the seventh
section of testaments. Thus, they tetrench the legacies of alimony
when they diminish the portion of the inheritance which ought to
remain with the heir or executor, and they do not retrench a leg-
acy of that kind when it is only a legatee that is charged with it,
although his legacy be thereby diminished or reduced to nothing.


VL

3747. What augments the Inheritance diminishes the Falcidian
Portion. — The diminution of legacies on account of the Falcidian
portion may cease altogether, or be lessened, if it happens that the
executor reaps the benefit of some disposition of the testator’s,
which accrues to him as heir or executor; for he may reap advan-
tage by other dispositions which would not have the same effect:
and this depends on the rules which follow.£


VIL


3748 Whatever comes to the Executor in that Quahty diminishes
the Falcidian Portion. — If a testator, having instituted two heirs
or executors, substitutes them mutually to one another in that
manner which shall be treated of in its place,» ordaining that, if
one of them either will not or cannot take part in the succession,
the other may have it entire; and one of the said executors
having his share of the inheritance charged with legacies subject
to diminution on account of the Falcidian portion, the case of the
substitution should come to pass, so as that the said heir or exec-
utor should reap the benefit of the other's portion coming to him
by virtue of the said substitution; this profit would diminish the
Falcidian portion which he might have retained out of the legacies
with which his share of the inheritance was burdened. For this


6 See the following article. b See the first title of the fifth book.


603 THE CIVIL LAW. [PamT Il. BOOK Iv.


the case where the disposition of the soldier or officer of war would
amount only to a codicil, which would respect only the heir at law
or next of kin, in favor of whom he had made no manner of dis
position? We have, however, set down this rule without any dis
tinction, the laws relating to it being precise. But it seems that,
if the case should happen that there were nothmg at all left, a
but a small matter, for the heir, whether he succeed as heir at law
or by testament, it would be equitable to mitigate the rigor of the
law, seeing it was not the intention of the testator to strip him of
all the goods.


V.


3745. The Devisee of a Land or Tenement charged with a Pew
ston to be taken out of the Fruits of the said Land or Tenemed
doth not retain the Falcidian Portion, although he himself bears i.
— If a legatee were charged with a yearly pension for alimony to
some person, and his legacy were diminished by the Falcidian
portion, but only so far as that there would remain still enough for
the said alimony, this legatee would nevertheless bear the said
charge entire, without any deduction. For it would be presumed
of such a disposition, that it was the testator’s pleasure that a leg-
acy of this nature should not suffer any abatement, and that the
legatee should content himself with what might remain clear after
the said charge were acquitted, unless it should appear that this
was not the intention of the testator; as if, for example, the legacy
charged with the said alimony were of the same nature, and s
favorable, as the other!


REMARKS ON THE PrecepDING ARTICLE.


3746. It is to be observed on this article, that it is an exception
to the rule explained in the seventh article of the preceding sec
tion: so that it is an exception from another exception. For the
rule explained in that seventh article declares that the legatees
may retain the Falcidian portion when they themselves bear it,
which makes an exception to the general rule explained in the
sixth article of the same preceding section, which says that the
legatees cannot retain the Falcidian portion out of their legacies.
because it was established only for the benefit of heirs or exect-
tors. Thus, the rule explained in this present article is founded


f Z. 21, § 1, D. de ann. lag. ; —I. 25, § 1, eod.; —L. 77, §.1, D. de leg. 2.


TIT. II. SEC. Iv.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 611


portion ought to take place either only in the legacies assigned
upon one portion of the inheritance, or in the legacies both of the
one and the other; the son in this case happening to die before
his father, and the person substituted having in that case in his
own right the two portions confounded together in one only in-
heritance, in the same manner as if he had been instituted sole
universal heir or executor, all the legatees would have the advan-
tage thereof, for the reason explained in the seventh article™ But
if, the son having succeeded to his father, and dying before he ar-
rived at the age of fourteen years, the person substituted to him
did after his death enter to the succession, the legatees who had
their assignments on the son, and whose legacies might be sub-
ject to the Falcidian portion, would not reap any profit from the
portion of the inheritance which the substituted person had in his
own right. For, as has been said in the eighth article, their leg-
acies were assigned only on the portion of the inheritance which
the testator had appropriated for the payment of them, and not on
the portion which was left originally to the substituted heir or ex-
ecutor in his own right™ But if, in the case of the same testa-
ment, the portion of the heir or executor who was substituted to
the son under fourteen years of age being overburdened with leg-
acies, so as that the Falcidian portion ought to take place in it,
the said heir or executor happened to succeed the son who died
under the age of fourteen, his Falcidian portion would be dimin-
ished ; and the legatees who had their assignments on him would
reap the benefit of that which should come to him by virtue of the
substitution: for it would be in the quality of heir or executor
that he would succeed to it."


X.


3751. A Rule that results from the Four Preceding Articles. — It
follows from the rules explained in the four preceding articles, that,
if legacies assigned on the share of the inheritance left to one of
two testamentary heirs be subject to the Falcidian portion, it is
not diminished by the change which makes that share of the in-
heritance to pass to the other heir: for he acquires it such as it is,
and with its charges, and it doth not augment the charges of his
own share. But if the testamentary heir whose share is charged
with legacies acquires another share of the inheritance by the


= 1.87, § 4, D. ad leg. Fale. = D.1§5.


612 THE CIVIL Law. [PART Il. BOOK Iv.


effect of a right of accretion, or of a substitution, the legatees who
have their assignments on his share of the inheritance will reap
the benefit of what shall come to him of the share of the other
heir. For whereas, in the first case, the legatees whose legacies are
subject to the Falcidian defalcation cannot say to the heir who
acquires the share which is charged with their legacies, that he
profits to their prejudice, seeing their condition remains the same
as if there had been no change, and such as it was regulated by
the testator; in the second case, the heir who reaps the benefit of
the share of the other cannot say to the legatees who had their
assignments on his portion of the inheritance, that their legacies
were limited to bis portion: for seeing they have their assignment
on him, they reap the benefit of whatsoever part of the inheritance
comes to him, as has been said in the seventh article.°


XL


3752. What ts bequeathed to one of the Excecutors, to be taken oul
of the Share of the Inheritance that is left to the other, does not
diminish the Falcidian Portion. — If one of the coheirs or coexecu-
tors has his share of the inheritance charged with a legacy to the
other, and the said executor, who is also a legatee, be on his
part charged with legacies to be paid out of his share of the in-
heritance, so that the Falcidian portion ought to take place in them,
the legacy which he receives out of the share of the other execn-
tor will not diminish the Falcidian portion that is due from those
legacies which he is charged with. For it is not as executor that
he receives this legacy; and we do not reckon among the goods
which are liable to satisfy the legacies, any other besides those
that come to the executor in that quality, and by virtue of his right
to the inheritance, and not those which may accrue to him by any
other title. Tims, thie legacy coming to him in the same manner
that it would to another legatee, he does not reckon it as part of
the Falcidian portion that is due to him?


XIL
3753. Falcidian Portion between Ooexrecutors who are Legatees.
— If, in the case of the preceding article, an executor being charged
with a legacy to his coexecutor, the Falcidian portion ought to


© This is a consequence of the preceding articles.
P ZL. 74, D. ad leg. Fale. ;—1. 91, eod. ; —1. 29, eod. See the following article.


TIT. Ill. SEC. Iv.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 613


take place; this legacy would be subject to it as well as all the
other legacies; for it would diminish in the same manner the
fourth part of the goods. But if both one and the other execu-
tor were charged with reciprocal legacies, and they were in the
case that the Falcidian portion ought to take place, whether on
the part of one of them only, or on the part of both; that which
one of the said executors would have to receive of the legaey
which the other was to pay him would be compensated with the
Falcidian portion due out of the legacy which he owed him recip-
rocally. And seeing this compensation would make up a part of
the Falcidian portion of the total of the legacies, he would retain
out of the legacies due to the other legatees only what should be
wanting to make up the Falcidian portion of all the legacies in
general, deduction being made of so much of it as would be satis-
fied by the said compensation.?


XIII.


3754. An Executor instituted for several Shares of the Inherit-
ance ought to confound them together, in order to make up the Fal-
cidian Portion of the Legacies that are assigned on all the Shares.
— It follows also from the same rules, that if an executor were in-
stituted for two different shares of the inheritance, as for a fourth
part by way of preference over and above his equal share with his
coexecutor, and for a moiety of the other three fourths, and that
each of these shares, or only one of them, should chance to be so
overcharged with legacies, that there would be room for the Falcid-
ian portion to take place therein; it would be necessary to con-
found the shares together, and the total would be subject to all the
legacies that are to be paid out of both shares. For it would be
in quality of executor that he would reap the profit both of the
one and the other!


XIV.


3750. If the Legatee of a Conditional Legacy succeeds to the
Executor, if the Legacy takes Effect, tt will not diminish the Falcid-
tan Portion of the Legacies left by the said Executor.— If an ex-
ecutor who is charged with a conditional legacy had instituted
the legatee for his executor, and the condition an which the said


@ ZL, 22, D. ad leg. Fale. ; —v. l. 78, D. de hared. insti. ; —1. 15, D. de his qua ut ind.
® L.11,§ 7, inf. D. ad leg. Fale.;—1. 20, C. de jur. delib.
VOL. Il. 52


614 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT II. BOOK Iv.


legacy depended did afterwards come to pass; since the benefit
which this legatee would have by the said legacy would accrue
to him by the title of legatee, and not by that of successor to the
executor who was charged with the legacy, what he gets by it
would not augment the fund for payment of the legacies with
which he had been charged by the executor to whom he succeeds,
and would not diminish the Falcidian portion, if it took place."


XV.
3756. The Charge imposed on one of the Executors concerns him
alone for the Falcidian Portion. —If a testator had c one


of his executors to acquit out of his share of the inheritance a
debt owing by the deceased, the diminution of the goods which
the payment of the said debt would occasion would, in the com-
putation of the Falcidian portion, regard only that share of the
inheritance which belongs to that executor who is charged with
the payment of the debt,‘ and would augment his Falcidian por-
tion in proportion.


XVL


3757. The Legacy of which the Delivery or Payment is deferred,
ts of less Estimation for the Falcidian Portion.— If there were a
devise of some land or tenement which was not to be delivered
to the devisee till after a certain time, the profits thereof in the
mean while accruing to the executor; or a legacy of a sum of
money, which was not to be paid till after some time; it would be
necessary to deduct out of the estimation of the said legacies for
the Falcidian portion so much as the delay of the delivery or pay-
ment would take off from what the legacies would have been
worth, had they been immediately due at the time that the succes-
sion fell; at which time an estimate ought to be made of the
goods of the succession, and of the legacies."


XVII.


3758. The Executor who has paid, or promised to pay, the whole
Legacy, has no Claim to the Falcidian Portton.— The executor
who, without retaining the Falcidian portion, had voluntarily
obliged himself to acquit a legacy entirely, without any abatement,

© L. 4, D. ad leg. Fale. t L. 8, D.ad lag. Fale.


" LZ. 45, D. ad lag. Fale. ;—1. 73, § 4, eed. See the fourth article of the second section
of the Trebeliianic Portion. Seo the sixth article of the second section.


TIT. ll. SEC. Iv.] FALCIDIAN PORTION. 615


or had actually paid it, could not afterwards pretend to deduct the
Falcidian portion; for he would have renounced his pretensions
to it by paying in this manner, or by engaging to pay the whole
legacy. And it would be presumed that he had done so with no
other view but to satisfy fully and amply the dispositions of his
benefactor: which presumption would be sufficient to make the
payment or delivery of the thing bequeathed to subsist.*


XVIL


3759. Unless he paid, or had promised to pay, by an Error in Fact,
and not in Law. — If it was through some error in fact that the
executor had acquitted an entire legacy without deduction of the
Falcidian portion ; as if he had paid it before he knew of a codi-
cil containing other legacies which gave occasion to a defalcation ;
he might recover what he had paid more than he ought. But if it
was through an error in law that he had paid too much, as if he
had acquitted a legacy which he thought was not subject to the
Falcidian portion; or was ignorant that he had a right to retain
it; he could not afterwards pretend to make any defalcation/.


* XIX.


3760. The Falcidian Portion ts not lost by the bare Effect of
Time. — The executor is not deprived of the Falcidian portion by
the effect of time, whilst things are still entire, that is to say, that
he has done nothing by which he is deprived of it; as he would be
if he had voluntarily acquitted, or obliged himself to acquit, the
legacy. But whilst he remains debtor of the legacy, he preserves
his right of retaining the Falcidian portion; or if, having acquit-
ted the legacy, he had compounded and taken security for pre-
serving the Falcidian portion, he could not lose it but by the time
of prescription which would set aside a debt of another nature."


XX.


3761. The Falcidian Portion of several Legacies due to one and
the same Legatee may be retained out of that which is last paid. —
If an executor who is charged with divers legacies to one and the


* Z.1, C. ad leg. Fale. ; —1. ult. in f. C. cod. See the second article of the second sec-
tion of the Zrebellianic Portion.

Y L.9, C.ad lag. Fale. See the second article of the second section of the Trebellianic
Portion. See the first section of the Vices of Covenants.

* LD. 58, D. ad leg. Fale.


616 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK IV.


same legatee hed acquitted some of them without retaining the
Falcidian portion out of them, he might retain it for all the leg-
acies out of those which he had not as yet paid: and it would be
the same thing, with much more reason, if, in the case of a legacy
of a sum of money, or other thing, he had paid one part of it with-
out deducting the Falcidian portion of that part which he had
paid: for in all these cases it would be presumed, that, having in
his hands stock enough for the total sum of the Falcidian portion,
he had reserved the deduction of it to be made out of what re
mained to be acquitted, either of one sole legacy, or of many. So
that this remainder would be answerable to him for it, unless the
payments which he had made should imply some engagement that
ought to deprive him of the Falcidian portion.


XXL


3762. The Executor who, under Pretext of the Falcidian Portion,
delays to acquit the Legacies, will be Kable for Interest, if the Fal-
cidian Portion is not due.-—— The executor who, under pretext of
the Falcidian portion which he had no right to pretend to, had de-
ferred to acquit the legacies, would be obliged to pay interest for
the time of this delay, which would Bave no other cause than his
own knavish dealing.®


® 1.16, D. ad leg, Fale.; —d.l. § 1.
b 7. 89, § 1, D. ad leg. Falc.; —v. 1. 2, C. de usur. et fruct. legat.


[By the word executor, as used in this title, the translator means what he has elsewhere
denominated the testamentary heir. See Book 8, Title 1, Section 1.— Ep.]


BOOK V.


OF SUBSTITUTIONS AND FIDUCIARY BEQUESTS.


¢


3763. THe word substitution, in general, hath two significations,
which it is necessary to distinguish. The one comprehends the dis-
positions of testators, who, having instituted an executor, and fear-
ing lest he should be either incapable of the office, or not willing to
accept it, name another person to be their executor in default of
the former. The other comprehends the dispositions of testators
who have a mind that their goods should pass from one succes-
sor to another, so as that he who is called in the first place, having
succeeded to the estate, m@y transmit it after his death to the
second; and if there be several called to the succession, that the
estate may pass from the one to the other successively and
gradually.

3764. The first of these two sorts of substitutions is that which
is called vulgar, from the name which it had in the Roman law,
because the use of it was frequent, in order to prevent the cases
where it might happen that the executor instituted in the first
place might not succeed; as if he should chance to die before the
testator; if he should renounce the inheritance; if he was incapa-
ble of succeeding; if he rendered himself unworthy of it. And be-
cause in these last two cases, and in many others, the exchequer
seized upon what the executor or legatee were incapable of acquir-
ing, the fear of this event obliged the testators to make vulgar sub-
stitutions. And even the fear of the executor’s renouncing the
inheritance might likewise induce many testators to make use of
this kind of substitution: for before that Justinian had established
the benefit of an inventory, the executor having no medium be-
tween accepting the inheritance purely and simply, and renoun-


® L.un. in pr. C. de cad. toll. ; —v. Ulp. tit. 17; —1. 1, D. de jur. fisc.
52 *


618 THE CIVIL Law. [PART IL BOOK V.


cing it, the difficulty of knowing exactly the state of the goods,
which made it necessary to give to the executors whole years to
deliberate in, and which was attended with the inconveniences
that have been remarked in the preamble of the third title of the
first book, might oblige many executors to renounce the succes-
sions.

3765. The other kind of substitution, which makes the goods
to pass from one successor to another, is that which was properly
called fideicommissum in the Roman law, a fiduciary bequest, be-
cause the use of it was frequent by dispositions in terms of en-
treaty, by which the testator requested his executor to restore
either the whole inheritance, or some particular thing, to the per-
son whom he named, leaving it wholly to the conscience of his
executor whether he would fulfil his will or not. These fiduciary
bequests did at first depend on the integrity of the executors ;>
but afterwards they had the same force and efficacy as the other
dispositions of the testator’s;° and the use of them was very fre-
quent, as well as that of vulgar substitutions. But the word sub-
stitution, in the Roman law, is more particularly applied to valgar
substitutions; and the fiduciary substitutions are hardly known
there, except under the name of fidefcommissum, or fiduciary be-
quest; for one could not substitute in this manner so as to make
the estate to pass from one successor to another, unless by expres-
sions conceived in terms of entreaty, or others of the like nature,
’ of which mention has been made in the fourth section of Testa-
ments, and not in terms direct and imperative,* of which we have
also spoken in the same place, and which it is not necessary to
repeat here. It sufficeth to remark on this subject, that by the
Roman law it was only fathers that could substitute in this man-
ner in direct terms to their children, who were under the age
required by law for the making of a testament, and were under
their father’s authority; which was done by that substitution
which is called pupillary, of which we shall have occasion to speak
hereafter: and soldiers, who could moreover substitute in the same
manner to their children who were of age sufficient to make a
will,* as also to other executors besides their children.£ And these
substitutions had in these cases the effect of fiduciary bequests.


b § 1, Inst. de fideicom. hered. © D.§ 1, Inst. de fideicom. heered
4 ZL. 7, D. de vulg. et pupill. subst. ;—§ ult. Inst. de pupill. subet.

© 1.15, D. de vuly. et pupill. subst. ; —1. 6, C. de testam. milit.

€ ZL. 41, D. de testam. milit.


PART II. BOOK v.] SUBSTITUTIONS AND FIDUCIARY BEQUESTS. 619


But by our usage, it is indifferent whether the testator expresses
himself in direct imperative terms, or in terms of entreaty; and
in what manner soever a substitution is conceived which makes
the estate to pass from one successor to another, it hath its effect
if the intention of the testator is fully explained. And these sorts
of dispositions are called either by the name of fiduciary substitu-
tions, because of the origin which they had in the Roman law by
the use of fiduciary bequests, or by the name of gradual substi-
tutions, because they make the estate to pass to the substituted
persons one after another in several degrees. And they are like-
wise called purely and simply substitutions; so that in our com-
mon usage the bare word substitutions is understood of those
of this last kind, because they are much more frequent than either
the vulgar or pupillary substitution; and in what manner soever
they be conceived, whether in terms of entreaty, or in terms direct
and imperative, they have, as we have just now said, the same
effect.

3766. It is to be observed in relation to these substitutions or
fiduciary bequests, that they may be imposed, not only on the ex-
ecutor, if the substitution be of the whole inheritance, or of a part
of it, or of a certain land or tenement that is left to him, but also
on a legatee, if the testator intends that the thing bequeathed
should pass to another successor, as shall be explained in its
places

3767. We see that there is this difference between these fidu-
ciary bequests and vulgar substitutions, that in these there is only
one successor who succeeds immediately to the testator; for if he
who is instituted executor may and will succeed, the substitution
will be without effect: and if the executor who is called in the
first place do not succeed, the person substituted will be the first
executor, who will succeed immediately to the testator; and
although there have been several called and substituted, the one in
default of the others, yet the first to whom the succession does
accrue excludes all the others, and the substitution is annulled
from the moment that one of them has been executor. But in
the fiduciary bequests, he who is substituted succeeds after the
executor ; and if there be several of them called successively, every
one of them has the right to succeed after the other; and the
goods which are subject to the fiduciary substitution pass from


§ See the second section of the third title of this fifth book.


620 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK Vv.


the one to the other by degrees, according as the persons are called
to the said substitution. And seeing this sort of substitution hath
the effect to preserve estates in families, the usage of it is frequent
in the provinces of France which are governed by the written
law, not only in families of quality, but likewise among the in-
ferior sort of people.

3768. We must also take notice of another sort of substitution
which is likewise in use in the provinces of France which are
governed by the written law, which is called pupillary substitution,
because it is made by a father, who, having a child under the age
required for making a will, and under his authority, ordains that,
if the said child does not succeed as executor to him, or if he does
succeed, and happens to die before he arrives at the age necessary
for making a will, the person substituted should succeed in his
place. Thus this substitution implies the two others, for it hath
these two effects: the first of the vulgar substitution, which is to
call the substituted executor to the succession of the testator, in
case his son should not be his executor; and the second of the
substitution which makes the estate to pass from the one degree
to the other, seeing it makes the estate to pass from the person of
the son to that of the substitute. And the Roman law hath
likewise given to this pupillary substitution a third effect, which is
to make, not only the goods of the father’s succession to pass to
him who is substituted executor, but also the goods of the son to
whom the father has substituted, if it should happen that he had
left other goods besides those that came to him from his father.
Thus the testament of the father, which contains a pupillary sub-
stitution, is considered as containing two testaments, that of the
father and that of his child; the law permitting the father, who
makes his own testament, to make at the same time one for his
son, who is incapable of making a will before he attains the age
of puberty. Which is the reason why this substitution is annulled
as soon as he to whom his father hath substituted in this manner
hath attained the age of puberty.

3769. It is these several kinds of substitutions that shall be the
subject-matter of the four titles of this fifth book; in the first of
which we shall treat of the vulgar substitution; in the second, of
the pupillary; in the third, of substitutions direct and fiduciary;
and in the fourth, of a right which is called the Trebellianic por-
tion, which is to executors who are charged with a substitution
the same thing as the Falcidian portion is to executors who are
overburdened with legacies.


TIT. 1. BEC. 1] VULGAR SUBSTITUTIONS. 621


TITLE I.
OF VULGAR SUBSTITUTIONS.


3770. In this title we shall treat only of the substitution that
is purely vulgar, and which is not joined to the pupillary substi-
tution; and we reserve to the following title that which relates to
these two substitations when they are joined together.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE AND USE OF VULGAR SUBSTITUTION.


AxtioLg I,
3771. Definition of Vulgar Substitution.— Vulgar substitution
is an institution of an executor who is called in default of another,
who either cannot or will not take upon him that quality.*


IL


3772. As soon as the Executor accepts, the Vulgar Substitution
ceases. — If the person who is instituted executor, and is called in
the first place to succeed to the testator, enters to the succession,
the vulgar substitution is annulled: for it ought not to take place,
except in the case where the first executor does not succeed.
Thus, the right of the substituted executor becomes useless from
the moment that the person who is instituted executor makes use
of his right.”


JIL


3773. One may make several Degrees of a Vulgar Substitution.
— One may substitute, not only a second executor in default of a
first, but a third in default of a second, and likewise others in sev-
eral degrees. And he is said to be instituted executor who is
called in the first place, and the others are the substituted execu-
tors, one in default of the other, every one in his degree.*


® Lucius Titius heres esto, si mihi Lucius Titius heres non erit, tunc Seius heres mi-
hi esto. ZL. 1,§1, D. de vulg. & pup. subst.

b This is a consequence of the definition of this substitution.

© L. 86, D. de vulg. et pup. subst.

4 7.1, D. de vulg. et pup. subst. Although the rule explained in this article, which was


622 TRE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK V.


IV.

3774. One may substitute either many to one, or one to many,
and the Coexecutors to one another. — As one may institute several
executors, so likewise one may substitute to them in one or more
degrees, and differently, naming either to every one of them a par
ticular substitute, or one only substitute to them all, or many sub-
stitutes to one, and diversify the number of the degrees, and of
the persons of the substitutes. And one may also substitute the
coexecutors reciprocally to one another.®


V.
3775. One may substitute toa Legatee.— One may substitute,
not only to an executor, but also to a legatee, so as that, if he


either cannot or will not acquire the legacy, the same may go to
him whom the testator shall have substituted in his place‘


SECTION II.
RULES PECULIAR TO SOME CASES OF VULGAR SUBSTITUTIONS.


Art. L


3776. Among Coexecutors mutually substituted to one another, tht
Shares of the Substitution are the same with those of the Institution
— If a testator, having instituted several executors in unequal por
tions or shares of the inheritance, substitutes them reciprocally to
one another, every one of the substitutes, if the case does happen,
will have such part in the substitution as is proportionable to the
share which he had in the institution, unless the testator regulates
it otherwise. Thus, for example, if an executor is instituted fora
moiety of the inheritance, another for a third, and another for 2


of frequent use in the Roman law, for the reason remarked in the preamble of this bosk,
may 20em not to agree with our usage, it being neither necessary nor usual with us ©
make such a provision of executors; yet it might happen that a testator, who shoal
chance to have for his next of kin only strangers that were not naturalized, might inst-
tute them executors in this manner, that the succession might go to whichsoever of the=
should happen to be naturalized, and capable of succeeding him, at the time of his death

° L. 36, § 1, D. de vulg. et pup. subst. The same remark may be made on this article
which has been made on the preceding, that it is a difficult matter in our usage for one @
have occasion for making such like dispositions.

£ L. 60, D. de legat. 2.


TIT. 1. SEC. 11] VULGAR SUBSTITUTIONS. 623


sixth part, and the executor who was to have the moiety does
not succeed, he who was to have the third having the double of
what he who had only a sixth part was to have, this last executor
will have only a third part of the inheritance, and the other will
have the two thirds.*


IL


3777. The Reciprocal Substitution among Coexecutors is re-
strained to the Survivors, when the Case happens. —If in the case
of several executors instituted, and reciprocally substituted to one
another, some of them renounce the inheritance, they will by that
means be excluded from the substitution; and if the case of the
substitution does happen, it will be only for the benefit of those
who shall have accepted the executorship. But if it should hap-
pen, that, in the case of several executors substituted to one an-
other, some of them having accepted the succession, one of the
number dies before that another, who renounces the succession, de-
clares his intention so to do, his renunciation, which would make
way for the substitution for the share of the inheritance that he
was to have, would make it go only to the surviving executors.
And those who should happen to be dead before the said renunci-
ation, having had no part in the substitution, which was not open
till after their death, would transmit nothing thereof to their heirs
or executors.”


HL


3778. He who is substituted to the Substitute is substituted like-
wise to him who ts imstituted. — If a testator institutes two execu-
tors in the first degree, and substitutes them reciprocally to one an-
other, or only one of them to the other, and substitutes a third
person to the coexecutor who is substituted; the substitution of
this third person will have this effect, that he will be substituted
for the whole, if the case happens that neither of the two coexecu-
tors succeeds.°


© ZL. 94, D. de vulg. e pup. subst. ;—I. 8, in f. cod. ;—I. 5, eod.;—1. 1, C. de impub. of
al. subst


> ZL. 28, D. de vulg. et pup. subst. ;—1. 45, § 1, eod.;—1. 10, eed. We have put down no
example in the article, it being easy for every person to frame one to himself, and the rule
may be easily understood without any example.

© L. 27, D. de vulg. pup. subst. See the sixth article of the ninth section of Tesia-
ments.


624 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOK Y.


IV.

3779. The Institution of one of two, whichsoever of them shall
survive, implies the Substitution of the Survivor to the Person who
dies first.— An institution of two executors may be conceived in
terms which imply a reciprocal substitution to one another, al
though the testator has not ak hi the substitution, nor made
any distinction of first or second degree ; as if he had named two
of his friends, calling to his inheritance whichsoever of the two
should survive him: for, as both the one and the other would suc-
ceed, if they should happen to be both alive at the time of the
death of this testator, so the death of one of them leaves the suc
cession entire to the other, in the same manner as if he had been
expressly substituted. And it would be the same thing between
two legatees, called to a legacy by a disposition of the like n»-
ture.?


V.


3780. If the Substitute dies before the Case of the Substitution,
he does not transmit his Right to his Heir or Executor. — Since the
substituted executor has no right to the inheritance, except in the
case where he who is instituted in the first place does not succeed ;
if it therefore so falls out that the substitute dies before the first
executor has declared his mind, whether he will accept the execu-
torship or refuse it, he dies without any right to the inheritance,
and consequently transmits no right to his heirs or executors.


VI


3781. He who is substituted to one of the Ooexecudors is prefer-
red before the Coexecutor who has the Right of Survivorship. — If,
in the case of two or more executors, there were one of them to
whom the testator had substituted another person, and he who hed
a substitute died without succeeding, his right would go to the
substitute: for although the coexecutors have the right of accre-
tion or survivorship, yet this right gives place to the substitution,
which, by the choice of the testator, prefers before them the per
son who is substituted.‘


4 71 94, 25, ef 26, D. de hesred. inst.
° ZL. 81, D. de acg. vel omitt. hered.
f L. 2, § 8, D. de bonor. poss. sec. tab.


TIT. I. 8EC. H.] VULGAR SUBSTITUTIONS. 625


VII.

3782. Among Coexecutors, he who has accepted one Share of
the Inheritance cannot renounce the Shares which fall void. —
If, several executors being substituted one to another, some of
them accept their portions of the inheritance, they will have also
the shares of those who shall renounce, and they cannot refuse
them£ For the inheritance cannot be divided, and it passes


whole and entire to whomsoever has any portion of it, if he be
left all alone?


VIII


3783. An Executor substituted to himself.— It might so happen
that an executor might be substituted to himself, if, in case of his
not being able to succeed by a first institution, he were called to
the succession by a second institution, which might have effect.
Thus, for example, if a testator had instituted an executor, in case
he were of age at the time of the testator’s death, and had added,
that, if this institution should be without effect because the con-
dition thereof was not accomplished, the same executor should
succeed to him, provided he were at that time free from the pater-
nal authority ; this executor might succeed by this second institu-
tion, if, the condition of the first institution failing, it should happen
that at that time he was free from the paternal authority, although
he were a minor!


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3784. It was in doubt whether a decision which seems to be of
80 little use as that which is explained in this article ought to be
placed among the others, seeing it is in a case which seems hardly
possible to fall out in the manner as it is explained in the text
cited on this article. For it is supposed in this text that a testator,
having instituted an executor under a condition, adds afterwards,
that he substitutes him purely and simply, without a condition.
It would seem that such a disposition could be nothing else than
the effect of some strange, fantastical humor. For it would be
more simple and more natural not to impose on the executora |
condition with which he dispenses at the same time, than to im-


5 L. 6, C. de irepub. et al. substit.
b See the twelfth article of the first section of Heirs and Executors in general, and the
sixth article of the ninth section of Testaments.
' L. ult. §.1, D. de vulg. et pup. subst.
VOL. Il. O38


626 THE CIVIL Law. [PakT II. BOOK V.


pose this condition by a first clause, and to discharge him of it by
a second. This consideration has induced us to put down in the
article a case that is different, and that gives the same view as
was intended to be given in this text of a case where a person is
substituted to himself, that is to say, of a case where one is called
to the inheritance in two manners, one of which failing, the other
may have effect; which may give an idea of the distinctions which
ought to be made in certain cases of different rights which one
may have to one and the same thing by divers views, or by divers
titles which it may be necessary to distinguish. And it is becanse
of the use of these sorts of distinctions, that we resolved to add
this article to the others.

3785. It may be remarked on these sorts of cases, where a per
son is, as it were, substituted to himself, that an institution of this
kind implies, as it were, two alternative conditions, that in default
of the first condition the second may make the institution to have
effect.


TITLE II.
OF PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION.


3786. It is not necessary to repeat here what has been said of
pupillary substitution in the preamble of this fifth book. If any
one should find fault, that we have not inserted in this title the
rule of the Roman law which says that the pupillary substitution
transmits to the substitute all the goods of the child to whom he
is substituted, even to the exclusion of the mother of the said
child from her legitime or legal portion of the same;* he may see
what has been said on this subject in the Treatise of Laws, chap.
11, no. 24, and the remark on the eleventh article of the first section
of this title. We were of opinion, for the reasons there explained,
that the hardship of that law was inconsistent with equity, which is
the spirit of ours; seeing, in order to favor the liberty of testaments,
it gives in the case of this substitution such a latitude to them as
makes the first sentiments of the law of nature give place toa
mere nicety. For it is agreeable to the law of nature, that the


e L. 8, § 5, D. de tnoff. testam.


TIT. 11] PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION. 627


mother who survives her son should have a share of his goods;
and it is inhuman to strip her of them in order to make them go
to a stranger, and that upon no other ground than because it is not
the child himself who does this injustice to his mother, but that it
is his father, whom the law hath empowered to make the testa-
ment of his child, who is not of age sufficient to make one for
himself: as if the power of making the testament of a child im-
plied a right to make it such as an enemy to the mother of the
said child would make it, and that the father making a testament
for his son might make for him such a disposition as would have
been reckoned inhuman had it been made by the son himself.
Justice may surely be administered without the help of such rules.
However, these sorts of subtilties were accounted so good reasons
in the spirit of the Roman law, that they were called benign tn-
terpretations ; an example whereof we see in another case, and
against a mother. It is in the case likewise of a pupillary substi-
tution made by a father in a codicil. The person who was sub-
stituted demanded the goods in opposition to the mother, who al-
leged that the substitution was null, and it was so in fact; for
the father could not substitute by a codicil. But the benign inter-
pretation was against the mother, and this disposition, which could
not be valid as a substitution in a codicil, was confirmed as a fidu-
ciary bequest,’ by a nicety which has been explained in the fourth
section of Testaments. One might imagine in these two cases,
that it was as just to prefer in them the motker to the substitute,
and the law of nature to niceties, as in another case where the
authors of those very niceties made them give way to this natural
law, which ought to give the preference to the mother before the
substitute. It was in a case where a testator, leaving kis wile big
with child, had instituted her his executrix for one moiety of his
estate, and his posthumous child for the other moiety; and ap-
pointed, in case the posthumous child should not be born alive,
that another person whom he named should be his executor. The
posthumous child was born, and died before he was of age sufh-
cient to make a will. This event called the said substitute by the
terms of the substitution; but because the father had instituted his
wife together with this child, the same lawyer who had decided
that the pupillary substitution excludes the mother from her legi-
time, or legal portion, determined in this case that, the father hav-


b 7. 76, D. ad senat. Trebell.


628 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOX V.


ing instituted the mother jointly with his child, it was to be pre-
sumed that it was much more his intention that the mother should
succeed to the child. And Justinian adds to this reason, that, the
mother having survived her child, the substitution ought not to
take place, and that the mother ought to exclude the substitute
This reason might very well have induced them to decide the case
in question in the same manner; and the same justice required, not
only that the mother should not be deprived of her legitime or le-
gal portion, but that she should even be preferred for the whole
succession to the substitute, upon this presumption, which is so
natural, that the father who substituted a stranger to his son that
was an infant presupposed that the mother would die first, and
that, if he had foreseen that she would have outlived her son, he
would not have made such a substitution.


SECTION I.


OF THE NATURE AND USE OF PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION, AND OF
THOSE SUBSTITUTIONS WHICH ARE COMMONLY CALLED EXBM-
PLARY, COMPENDIOUS, AND RECIPROCAL.


Art. I.


3787. Definition of Pupillary Substitution. — Pupillary substito-
tion is a disposition made by a father, who, having a child under
age, and subject to his authority, institutes him his executor, and
substitutes to him another person to succeed to him in default of
the said child, in case he should not be executor to his father; or if
he should succeed also to the said child, in case he should die be-
fore he were of age sufficient to make a will."


IL


3788. One may substitute to a Posthumous Child.— One may
substitute in this manner, not only to a child who is already born,
but also to a posthumous child, who should be under the power of
the testator if he were born.>


© LZ. ult. C. de instit. ef substit.
® Inst. de pupil. subst. See the text cited on the following article.
b ZL. 2, D. de vulg. et pupill. subst.


TIT. IL. SEC. I.] PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTIONS. 629


III.

3789. The Pupillary Substitution comprehends the Vulgar. — 'The
pupillary substitution implies two different substitutions, and for
that reason it is said to be twofold. ‘The first calls the substitute
in case the child does not succeed to his father, which is the case
of the vulgar substitution. And the second calls the substitute in
case, that, the child having succeeded to his father, he chances to
die before he attains the age of puberty; which is the case like to
a fiduciary bequest, which makes the succession to pass from one
executor to the other. And when a father makes a pupillary sub-
stitution, it comprehends both the one and the other case.°


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3790. The rule explained ‘in this article is not founded on the
nature of these two sorts of substitutions; for their characters and
their use are wholly different; and there is no essential connection
between the one and the other. But what occasioned in the Ro-
man law that the expression of the one comprehended both, as is
said in the second of these texts, was the frequent use of these two
sorts of substitutions that were joined together. And the consti-
tution of those emperors, of which mention was made in the sec-
ond text, and which was in all probability a consequence of that
usage, established the same into a fixed rule.

3791. It may be remarked on this article, that it is not there said
that the expression of one of these substitutions comprehends like;
wise the other, as it is said in the second of the texts cited on this
article, but only that the pupillary substitution comprehends both.
For if, for example, a testator, having instituted his son that was
under fourteen years of age, had added, that, in case the said child
should die before him, such a one should be his heir or executor, it
would seem that according to equity one might question whether
this substitution ought to have the effect of calling this substitute,
in case that the said child, having outlived and succeeded his fa-
ther, had died before he arrived at the age of puberty, and whether
it would not be a slavish observance of the niceties of the Roman
law, if we should give to the said substitution this effect in the
like case. For this testator having clearly explained himself as to
the case where the child should die before him, his expression
_ would seem to have no other extent than to that single case which


© L.1, $1, D. de vulg. et pup.; —1. 4, eod.
03 *


630 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOK V.


he had expressed, especially if we suppose, as it is natural to sup-
pose of almost all testators, that he who made such a disposition
was ignorant of the connection which the Roman law made be-
tween the vulgar substitution and the pupillary. And we see even
in a law, that although the vulgar substitution to a son under age
comprehends the pupillary, yet that it is to be understood only of
the cases where it does not appear that the intention of the testa-
tor is contrary. S& modo non contrariam defuncti voluntatem exti-
tisse probetur.* But if a testator had substituted after the pupillary
manner to his son under age, without explaining himself in any
other way, one might think that, having made use of that indef-
nite expression, his intention was that it should be taken in the
sense which the laws give it.


IV.


3792. The Pupillary Substitution comprehends the Goods of the
Child. — Of these two substitutions, the first, which is the same
with the vulgar, makes the person who is substituted to be imme-
diate heir or executor of the father, if the child does not succeed ;
and the second transmits to the substitute, not only the goods of
the father, if the child has succeeded to him, but also all the goods
that may accrue to the child in any other manner of way.*


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3793. This effect of the pupillary substitution, to transmit to the
substitute the proper goods of the child, was a consequence of the
extent which was given by the Roman law to the paternal author-
ity, and of the rule which, as is mentioned in the following ar-
ticle, makes the father’s testament to be considered as the testa-
ment of the son. It may be said of this rule, that it derives its
authority only from a mere positive law, which has no essential
connection with natural equity, and is even in some measure op-
posite to the principle of equity, which calls the heirs of blood to
successions, and makes their condition more favorable than that of
the testamentary heirs, as hath been remarked in other places.*
So that it seems not to agree with the spirit of the general law of
this kingdom, which is far from countenancing these niceties.
And although the same be observed in many places, yet we have


* L. 4, C. de imp. et al. subst.
4 Instit. de pupill. subst.
* Sce the cighth article of the preface to this book.


TIT. Il. SEC. I.] PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION. 631


thought proper to make this reflection here for the use of other
provinces which are governed by the written law, but where these
sorts of dispositions of the Roman law are not observed in so lit-
eral a sehse, because of the mixture they have in the said provin-
ces of Their own customs and the written law together. And I
may venture to say, that there would arise no manner of inconven-
ience from the non-observance of this rule, which strips the heirs
of the chijd who dies before he is of age to make a will, not only
of the gagds which he had by descent from his father, but of the
child’s own proper goods, to make them go to the substitute, and
especially in the cases where a testator was ignorant of this effect
of a substitution which he had made to his son under age, without
any other view than that which he would have had in substituting
to a child that had attained the age of puberty. |


V.


3794. So that tt contains Two Testaments, that of the Father, and
that of the Child. — It follows from these rules, that the testament
of the father, who makes therein a pupillary substitution, disposes
of two different successions, and contains, as it were, two testa-
ments, that of the father, who disposes thereby of all his own goods,
and that of the child. For the pupillary substitution transmitting
to the substitute both the goods which the child has had of his fa-
ther, and likewise those which he has acquired otherwise, it has the
same effect as an institution would have which the said child
should have made in favor of this substitute, if he had been ca-
pable of making a testament.


Vi


3795. One cannot substitute after the Pupillary Manner to a
Child that is not tn his Power.— If the child under age were out
from under the jurisdiction of his father, as if he was emancipated,
the father could not substitute to him after the pupillary manner.
For the right of making such a substitution is granted only to the
paternal authority, and is not a bare effect of the incapacity of
making a testament, under which the child labors who is not ar-
rived at the age of puberty.


© § 2, Inst. de pup. subst. ; —1. 2, D. de vulg. et pup. subst. See the remarks on the pre-
ceding article.
f See the text cited on the second article.


632 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK V.


VIL

3796. This Substitution ends when the Infant attains the Age of
Puberty. — The pupillary substitution remains in suspense unul
the infant has attained the age of puberty, or dies before he arrives
at it. But as soon as he attains the age of puberty, this substitu-
tion is annulled ; so that although he should die immediately after,
even without making a will, yet the substitute would have no
share in his goods, nor in those of the father£


VIII.


3797. Substitution to a Child in a State of Madness, which is
called Exemplary.— Those who have children or grandchildren
that are mad may substitute to them as to children under age,
although they be of age sufficient to make a will. And it is this
substitution that is commonly called exemplary, because it has
been invented after the example of the pupillary, which it imitates
in this, that madness putting the children into a condition like to
that of children under age, as to what relates to the incapacity of
disposing of their estates, the law gives to fathers the power of
making a will for them, and of disposing in favor of a substitute,
even of the legitime or child’s part of their own inheritance, which
they are obliged to leave to those children who are in a state of
madness, as well as to their other children.®


IX.


3798, None are called to this Substitution besides the Children or
Brothers of the Heir or Executor who is Mad.— If those children
who are in a state of madness had children who did not labor un-
der the same infirmity, one could not substitute to them other per-
sons besides their own children And if, having no children, they
had brothers, the substitution could not be made in favor of other
persons than those very brothers, or some of them.*


X.


3799. If the Madness ceases, the Substitution is at an End. — If
the madness should chance to cease, this substitution which had
no other foundation would cease also, even although he to whom
the father had substituted in this manner had made no testament,


8 § 8, Inst. de pupill. subst. h 7.9, C. de tmp. et al. subst.
1 £.9, C. de imp. et al. subst. kK D.L9,m/.


~


TIT. 11. SEC. 1] PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION. 633


but by the bare effect of his recovery of his senses. For it would
be justly presumed that, not having been willing to make a testa-
ment when he could, his intention was to have no other heirs but
those of his blood; and it could not be presumed that he had a
mind to approve the testament of his father which preserved the
memory of his madness. And much more would the substitution
be annulled if he had made a testament in a lucid interval, al-
though his madness did afterwards return upon him)!


XI.


3800. A Mother and other Ascendants may make this Sort of Sub-
stitution. — Seeing substitutions to children who are in a state of
madness are not only a bare effect of the authority which the pa-
ternal power gives, but an office of humanity which parents may
exercise towards their children ; all the ascendants, and even moth-
ers, may substitute in this manner.”


RemMaRKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3801. We have endeavoured to distinguish and to explain, in
these eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh articles, all that there is in
the ninth law of the Code de impub. et al. subst. relating to this ex-
emplary substitution, without touching on a difficulty which has
divided some interpreters, and of which we shall take notice here.
It is said in this law, as it is put down in the article, that all as-
cendants, and even the mother, may ‘substitute to their children
which are in a state of madness. And it does not appear that in
this law any distinction is made between the effect of such a sub-
stitution made by mothers, or other ascendants, who have not un-
der their power the child to whom they substitute, and that which
is made by a father who has the said child under his power. This
has induced some interpreters to be of opinion, that, as the substi-
tation made by the father hath its effect in both the cases ex-
plained in the third article, that is to say, in the first, if the child


| 1.9, C. de impub. a al. subst. Seo the fourth article of the second section of Testa-
ments


™ Humanitatis intuitu parentibus indulgemus, &. JZ. 9, C. de impub. ef aliis subst.
This word parentibus takes in the father and the mother; and these other words of the
same law, parenti qui vel gue testatur, comprehend expressly the mother.

We do not put down here among the rules of these several sorts of substitutions that
of the Roman law, which we see in the forty-third law, D. de vulg. et pup. subst., touching
a substitation, which one could make by permission from the prince to a child who was
damb: for these sorts of permissions are not in use with us.


634 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT IL. BOOX Vv.


does not succeed, and in the second, if, having succeeded, it dies
before it arrives at the age of puberty; so likewise the substitation
of the mother to her child which is mad ought also to have its
effect both in the one and the other of these two cases. And this
opinion seems on one part to be founded on the letter of the said
law, which permits all ascendants, and even the mother, to make
this substitution after the example of the pupillary; and on the
other part, because it was not necessary to grant them a permis-
sion to make a substitution in the first of these two cases, which
is a vulgar substitution permitted to every body. So that, this
iaw granting unto them without distinction, in the same manner
as to a father, leave to make this exemplary substitution, this per-
mission would be useless if it respected only the first case. How-
ever, these interpreters have been censured by another, who
charges them with having invented of their own head this permis-
ain for the second case, to the mother and to the ascendants who
have not the child under their power. But we may say that, if
they have erred, it is the law itself that has led them into the er-
ror, And there would, perhaps, be as much reason to find fault
with Justinian, or those who composed this law of his, that they
have not conceived it in sach terms as might distinguish the sub-
stitution of the mother from that of the father, if it had been their
intention so to do; seeing this distinction was very easy and very
wecessary to be made. We may add, in favor of these interpreters,
that a certain author has observed, that he who has censured
them on this occasion has been himself of their opinion in other
Wacea® But we may do them all that justice, to own that their
ditherence in opinion has been a natural consequence enough of
the little exactness that we see in many of the laws of Justinian.
And it may be said of this law in particular, that it would seem
that, accarding to the views which those persons ought to have
had who were employed to compose it, they have not clearly
enough explained their meaning therein. The matter in question
Was to give to mothers, and other ascendants, who have not their
children under their jurisdiction, a new power to substitute to their
children who were mad, and to whom even fathers could not, be-
fore this law, substitute in this second case without the permission
of the prince. So that, in order to frame this law, the compilers
thereof were to give to fathers the power of substituting to their


* Fubret. in § 1, Lest. de pup. subet.


TIT. 11. 8EC. I.] PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION. 635


children in a state of madness, without this permission from the
prince, and to regulate with respect to mothers, and all other as-
cendants, wherein should consist the new power that was to be
given them over and above that of the substitution for the first
case, which they had already, as all other persons have. Thus,
the matter was to know, first, whether this power should not ex-
tend to the substitution for the second case, as well as for the first.
In the second place, it was to be considered whether, by granting
them this power of substituting for the second case, the said power
would comprehend, not only the goods which the child should in-
herit of the person who did substitute, but also the proper goods
of the child, in the same manner as the pupillary substitution
made by the father did, and which served as an example for the
substitution to children in a state of madness. And in a word,
seeing this substitution was permitted to the mother and to all the
ascendants, in imitation of the pupillary substitution; if it was
not the intention of the compilers of the law that this imitation
should be entire, and that they had a mind to set bounds to it, it
would have been proper to have expressed them, and not to have
left obscurities and ambiguities which divide the most able inter-
preters.


XIL


3802. Compendious Substitution. — As one single expression
comprehends two substitutions, the vulgar and the pupillary, as
has been mentioned in the third article, 80 we may by one and the
same expression add to these two a third sort of substitution,
which is the fiduciary, of which we shall treat in the following
title. And it is this manner of substituting that is called compen-
dious, the same being conceived in terms which comprebend these
three different sorts of substitution; as if a testator, instituting
his son who is under fourteen years of age, substitutes to him an-
other person in case he should die before the age of twenty-five
years.° And these three substitutions have their effect, as shall be
shown in the article which follows.


° L. 15, D. de vulg. et pup. subst. ; —1. 8, C. de impub. et al. subst. Although these laws
speak only of a compendious substitution made by a soldier in direct terms, and
therefore the compendious substitution in the sense of these laws be properly a military
substitution founded upon the privilege of soldiers, of which notice has been taken in the
Preamble of the fifth book, which empowered them to make a substitution in direct terms
to their adult children ; yet we have nevertheless conceived the rule in terms which take
in all persons without distinction. For besides that according to our usage all persons


636 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 11. BOOK v.


XITL

3803. Effect of the Three Substitutions in the Compendious one.
— Of these three substitutions, comprehended in the said expres-
sion of compendious substitution, the first, which is the vulgar,
hath its effect only in case that the child be not heir or executor,
and it ends as soon as he has succeeded to the deceased. The
second, which is the pupillary, hath its effect only in case the child
dies before he arrives at the age of puberty, and it ends so soon as
he attains that age. And the third, which is the fiduciary, begins
only to have its use after that the son, being arrived at the age of
puberty, dies within the time regulated by the said substitution.’


XIV.


3804. Difference of the Effects of these Three Substitutions. —
We must observe this difference between these three substitutions,
that the vulgar substitution transmits to the substitute the goods
of the testator, if his son does not succeed to him; that by virtue of
the pupillary the substitute acquires both the goods of the testator
and those of his son, if he has succeeded to him; and that the
fiduciary substitution is limited to the goods which the son by suc-
ceeding to his father inherited of him :4 which is to be understood
according to the rules which shall be explained in the following
title.


XV.


3805. Reciprocal Substitution. — That is called reciprocal substi-
tution whereby two or more heirs or executors are substituted re-
ciprocally to one another. Thus, a testator may substitute his
heirs or executors one to another, either by a simple vulgar substi-
tution, whether it be that he institutes his children that are adult,
or under age, or other person; or by a pupillary substitution, if he
institutes his children who are under the age of puberty; or bya
fiduciary substitution, if he institutes two or more heirs or execa-


may in their dispositions make use of direct terms or others, as has been remarked in the
same place, and in the preamble of the fourth section of Testaments, and that we ought
only to consider in the expressions of testators the intention which is explained by the
words they make use of, whatever they be; we give commonly the name of compendioas
substitutions to such as comprehend the three sorts, whatever terms they be conceived in;
whether the testator was a soldier or not, and whether the fiduciary substitution were to
determine after the child had attained a certain age, or ought to take place at what age
soever the child should happen to die.

P Sce the texts cited on the foregoing article.

9 Sce the texts cited on the twelfth article, and the remark on the fourth article.


Ir iT. Il. SEC. 11] PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION. 637


ttors, whether they be his children or others, to succeed to him, and
ordains that their shares of the inheritance shall go to those who
zare substituted, if the cases of the substitution fall out. And one
xmay also make a reciprocal substitution among legatees.t


SECTION II.


PARTICULAR RULES CONCERNING SOME CASES OF PUPILLARY SUB-
STITUTIONS.


Arr. L


3806. He who is substituted to an Infant cannot accept one Suc-
cession without the other. — If, in the case of a pupillary substitu-
tion, the son who is under the age of puberty, having succeeded to
his father, happens to die before he attains the age of puberty,
leaving behind him other goods besides those of the succession of
his father, he who is substituted to the son cannot divide his right,
and accept one of the two successions, and renounce the other;
but he must either accept both together, or renounce both the one
and the other. For the testators intention was, that he should
succeed both to his son and to him, and he has made only one

succession of the two. And although they be in effect two suc-
cessions, yet the testament being the sole title both for the one
and the other, the substitute, who cannot divide his title, cannot
likewise take one of the successions without taking also the other.


IL


3807. Not even although he were Coheir or Coexecutor with the
Infant. — If he who is substituted to an infant was likewise insti-
tuted heir or executor with him for some portion of the inherit-
ance, and both the one and the other had entered to the suc-


t D.4,§ 1, D. de vulg. et pup. subst. ; —1. 37, § 1, D. de hered. inst. Although these texts
bave not relation to the three kinds of substitution mentioned in the twelfth article, but
ynly to the vulgar and the pupillary, yet nothing can hinder a testator from making a re-
ciprocal fiduciary bequest among his testamentary heirs or legatees. But secing every
reciprocal substitution is only the same with respect to an executor or legatee as with re-
spect to other persons, and that with respect to every person it is at least of one of the
three kinds, the reciprocal substitution is not so much a kind of substitution distinguished
from the others, as a manner proper to render common to two or more substitutes the
same substitution, or substitutions, if there be more than one.

® ZL. 10, § 2, D. de vulg. e pup. subst. ; —1. 20, C. de jur. delib. See the fourth article of
the first section, and the remark that is there made on it.

VOL. II. oA


638 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT Il. BOOK Y.


cession, the case of the pupillary substitution happening after-
wards by the death of the son under the age of puberty, the sub-
stitute could not renounce the portion of the inheritance of the
father which had been acquired by the said son, and which the
substitution would transmit to him.»


TIL


3808. The Reciprocal Substitution between Two Infants compre-
hends both the Cases. — If a father who had two infant children,
both under the age of puberty, substitutes them one to another by
a@ reciprocal substitution, without specifying either the case of vul-
gar substitution, or that of the pupillary, this substitution would
comprehend both.


IV.


3809. The Reciprocal Substitution between an Infant wneder the
Age of Puberty and an Adult Person is only Vulgar.— If the re-
ciprocal substitution was made by a father between two children,
one of whom was past the age of puberty, and the other under it,
it would be limited to the case of the vulgar substitution ; for there
would be only this case common to the two brothers. And seeing
the pupillary substitution could not take place with respect to the
succession of him who should be adult, and that their condition
ought to be equal, the pupillary substitution, which is fruitless for
the one, would likewise be so for the other;¢ unless it were that
the testator had distinguished them by substituting the adult per
son to his infant brother, who was under the age of puberty, for
both the cases, and the infant brother to the adult brother for the
first case, or by expressing otherwise the intention which he might
have therein.


V.


3810. He who is substituted to an Infant under the Age of Pr
berty, and to another Executor, is substituted to both only in the Case
of the Vulgar Substitution. — If a testator, instituting another ex-
ecutor with his infant son who is under the age of puberty, such
as his relict, who is mother to his son, substitutes to both of them
another executor, in case it should happen that neither the one nor


© L. 20, C de jure del. © £.4,4 1, D. de vulg. of pup. abet.
@ ZL. 4,42, D. de vulg. ot pup. subst. © D. 4.


‘TIT. ll. SEC. 1.] PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION. 639


the other should succeed to him, this substitute could not pretend
that the said substitution were pupillary with. regard to the son:
for seeing it could not with respect to the mother have any other
effect than that of a vulgar substitution, and it being only the
same with respect to both, it would be only vulgar with regard to
the son‘


VI


3811. He who is substituted to Two Infants under the Age of Pu-
berty succeeds only to him who dies last. — If a father of two chil-
dren who are under the age of puberty, having instituted them his
executors, substitutes to them another person, in case that both the
one and the other should die before they attain the age of pu-
berty, this substitution will not have its effect, except in the case
that they both die under the age of puberty; and the substitute
will have no share in the succession of him that dies first. For
the intention of the father was, that each of his children should
succeed to the other, and that the substitute should not be called
to the succession, but in the case where the two brothers should
chance to die before they attained the age of puberty#


VIL


3812. He who is substituted to him who dies last succeeds to both
af they die together. — If, in a like case of two infant children under
the age of puberty, the testator had substituted another person to
such of the two as should die last; and they both happened to
die together, as in a fire, or in a shipwreck, so that it could not
be certainly known which of the two died last, or if, in reality,
they both died at the same instant, this substitute would succeed
both to the one and to the other. For besides that we may look
upon him to have died last whom the other did not survive, the
intention of the father in calling this substitute to the succession


f ZL. 4, C. de impub. ef al. subst. We must not look upon the rule explained in this arti-
cle to be an exception to that which has been explained in the third article of the first
section. For that of the said third article is naturally confined to the case of a disposition
which snbstitutes only to an heir or executor who is under the age of puberty, and does
not extend to a substitution which would call another heir or executor in conjunction
with him who is under the age of puberty. Thus, the conjunction of another heir or ex-
ecutor with one who is under the age of puberty makes that the substitution, which is
only one and the same with respect to both, and is only vulgar with regard to the other
heir or executor, cannot be pupillary with respect to him who is under the age of puberty.

& L. 10, C. de tmpub. et al. subst.


640 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK V.


of him who should die last, and who onght to succeed to the
other, was that the-two successions should go to him.™


VIIL

3813. The Vulgar Substitution to an Infant under the Age of Pw-
berty is not ended by his Entry to the Inheritance, if he renounces
afterwards. — If a son under the age of fourteen years, to whom
the father had substituted another person, having entered to the
succession, does afterwards renounce it, either he himself by his
own act, or his tutor for him, the vulgar substitution will have its
effect. For although, the son having once taken upon him the
quality of executor, this substitution seems to have ceased, yet his
renunciation of the inheritance puts the things in the same state
and condition as if he had renounced from the time of his fa-
ther’s death!


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3814. Although it be a difficult thing for this case to fall out,
that a substitute should be willing to accept of a succession which
the son refuses, ‘yet it is not altogether impossible: and besides,
the rule shows that the right of the substitute, which seemed to be
extinguished by the infant’s entering to the inheritance, is not so
in reality, and is only in suspense, to revive again in case the son
should happen to renounce the inheritance; seeing this case opens
the way for the vulgar substitution. Thus, this rule seems to de-
cide in express terms a question which some interpreters say is one
of the most difficult, that is, whether the substitation revives when
the infant who is under the age of puberty, having accepted the
succession, gets himself relieved from the said act, and renounces
the inheritance. And it seems likewise to decide another question
which they propose concerning pupillary substitution, which is,
whether, a son under the age of fourteen years, to whom his father
had made a pupillary substitution, having outlived his father, and
happening to die before he accepted the succession, the same
would go to the substitute, or to the heir at law or next of kin of
the said infant son; who would pretend that the case of the sub-
stitution had not happened, because, the son having survived the


b 1.34, D. de vulg. et pup. subst. —1. 11, D. de bon. poss. sec. tab. ; —1. 9, D. de reb. dub.
See the eighteenth article of the first section of the following title, and the remarks on the °
twelfth article of the second section, How Children succeed.

i ZL. 44, D. de re judic.


TIT. ll. SEC. 11.| PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION. 641


father, he would be his heir, swus heres, and have a right to the
estate actually vested in him, although he was ignorant of his
right; and that by this means he would have excluded the substi-
tute, and transmitted the inheritance to his heir; but since, by the
rule explained in this article, the substitute succeeds, even not-

*-withstanding the son’s entry to the inheritance, when he is after-
‘wards relieved from the said act, and renounces the inheritance,
and by consequence the substitute is not absolutely excluded by
the son’s entry; so it may be said, that neither is he excluded
by the son’s surviving the father, when the son does not enter to
the inheritance, since before he accepts the inheritance his qual-
ity of son and heir at law does not hinder it from being uncertain
whether he will be testamentary heir or not, seeing he may re-
nounce his right; and seeing, moreover, it is certain that, when he
does renounce, things will be in the same state and condition as if
he had never been testamentary heir, for the same reason which
makes the heir or executor who only accepts the succession a long
time after it has been open to be nevertheless considered as being
heir or executor from the moment that the succession was open,
as has been said in its place* From whence it follows, that the
renunciation of the infant who is under the age of puberty makes
the substitute who accepts the succession to be reputed heir or ex-
ecutor, in the same manner as if the substitution had been open
at the moment of the testator’s death.

3815. We ought likewise to examine here a third question,
which is started by the same interpreters, which is to know if the
executor to whom the testator hath made a vulgar substitution,
happening to die whilst he deliberates whether he will accept or
not, will transmit the right of deliberating to his successor, or if
the inheritance will go to the substitute. Those who will have
the substitution to take place found their opinion on this, that the
law which empowers the person who deliberates to transmit his
right to his successor» is a new law, which ought not to be ex-
tended to the case where there is a substitute. But although this
be a new law, yet it is a natural and just one; and the testator
did not intend that the substitution should deprive his testamen-
tary heir of the benefit of this law, and take from him the right of
deliberating ; for if his intention had been such, he ought to have


® See the fifteenth article of the first section of Heirs and Executors in general.
» See the eighth article of the tenth section of Testaments. ‘
54 &


640 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK v.


of him who should die last, and who ought to succeed to the
other, was that the:two successions should go to him*


VUL

3813. The Vulgar Substitution to an Infant under the Age of Pw-
berty is not ended by his Entry to the Inheritance, if he renounces
afterwards. — If a son under the age of fourteen years, to whom
the father had substituted another person, having entered to the
succession, does afterwards renounce it, either he himself by his
own act, or his tutor for him, the vulgar substitution will have its
effect. For although, the son having once taken upon him the
quality of executor, this substitution seems to have ceased, yet his
renunciation of the inheritance puts the things in the same state
and condition as if he had renounced from the time of his fa-
ther’s death!


REMARKS ON THE Parecepine ARTICLE.


3814. Although it be a difficult thing for this case to fall out,
that a substitute should be willing to accept of a succession which
the son refuses, ‘yet it is not altogether impossible: and besides,
the rule shows that the right of the substitute, which seemed to be
extinguished by the infant’s entering to the inheritance, is not so
in reality, and is only in suspense, to revive again in case the son
should happen to renounce the inheritance; seeing this case opens
the way for the vulgar substitution. Thus, this rule seems to de-
cide in express terms a question which some interpreters say is one
of the most difficult, that is, whether the substitution revives when
the infant who is under the age of puberty, having accepted the
succession, gets himself relieved from the said act, and renounces
the inheritance. And it seems likewise to decide another question
which they propose concerning pupillary substitution, which is,
whether, a son under the age of fourteen years, to whom his father
had made a pupillary substitution, having outlived his father, and
happening to die before he accepted the succession, the same
would go to the substitute, or to the heir at law or next of kin of
the said infant son; who would pretend that the case of the sub-
stitution had not happened, because, the son having survived the


bh £34, D. de vulg. et pup. subst. ;—1.11, D. de bon. poss. sec. tab. ; —1. 9, D. de reb. dub.
See the eighteenth article of the first section of the following title, and the remarks on the °
twelfth article of the second section, How Children succeed.
tL. 44, D. de re judic.


TIT. 1. SEC. I1.] PUPILLAERY SUBSTITUTION. 641


father, he would be his heir, swus heres, and have a right to the
estate actually vested in him, although he was ignorant of his
right; and that by this means he would have excluded the substi-
tute, and transmitted the inheritance to his heir; but since, by the
rule explained in this article, the substitute succeeds, even not-
“withstanding the son’s entry to the inheritance, when he is after-
wards relieved from the said act, and renounces the inheritance,
and by consequence the substitute is not absolutely excluded by
the son’s entry; so it may be said, that neither is he excluded
by the son’s surviving the father, when the son does not enter to
the inheritance, since before he accepts the inheritance his qual-
ity of son and heir at law does not hinder it from being uncertain
whether he will be testamentary heir or not, seeing he may re-
nounce his right; and seeing, moreover, it is certain that, when he
does renounce, things will be in the same state and condition as if
he had never been testamentary heir, for the same reason which
makes the heir or executor who only accepts the succession a long
time after it has been open to be nevertheless considered as being
heir or executor from the moment that the succession was open,
as has been said in its place.* From whence it follows, that the
renunciation of the infant who is under the age of puberty makes
the substitute who accepts the succession to be reputed heir or ex-
ecutor, in the same manner as if the substitution had been open
at the moment of the testator’s death.

3815. We ought likewise to examine here a third question,
which is started by the same interpreters, which is to know if the
executor to whom the testator hath made a vulgar substitution,
happening to die whilst he deliberates whether he will accept or
not, will transmit the right of deliberating to his successor, or if
the inheritance will go to the substitute. Those who will have
the substitution to take place found their opinion on this, that the
law which empowers the person who deliberates to transmit his
right to his successor” is a new law, which ought not to be ex-
tended to the case where there is a substitute. But although this
be a new law, yet it is a natural and just one; and the testator
did not intend that the substitution should deprive his testamen-
tary heir of the benefit of this law, and take from him the right of
deliberating ; for if his intention had been such, he ought to have


°


* See the fifteenth article of the first section of Heirs and Ezecutors in general.
> See the eighth article of the tenth section of Testaments. :
54 2


644 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK V.


Roman law to terms of fiduciary bequests, and of prayer and
entreaty, in all sorts of testaments, and to direct terms in the tes-
taments of soldiers, who had the privilege of making use of these
terms in substituting, as the father had also in a pupillary substitu-
tion, when he substituted to his infant son who was under the
age of fourteen, and not emancipated from the paternal authority.
So that these two words of direct and fiduciary substitutions
have in France the same sense, and signify that sort of substito-
tion which transfers from one successor to another the goods which
the testator has made subject to the substitution. And we have
had the more reason to use these two expressions without distinc-
tion, because under the Roman law, as has been observed in the
fourth section of Testaments, the use of direct expressions and of
expressions by way of prayer and entreaty was confounded, and
this difference abolished for the institution of an heir, and for
legacies and particular fiduciary bequests, by two different laws,
the one of the emperor Constantine,* and the other of Justinian ;*
which led naturally to the confounding in the same manner the
use of these different expressions in the substitutions of an
inheritance, or of a part of an inheritance, and generally in all
sorts of dispositions; seeing there is nothing more true than what
is added at the end of the law of Justinian’s, that laws regard
things, and not words: Nos enim non verbis, sed ipsis rebus lerem
imponimus.

3818. Seeing a testator may substitute either to all his estate,
or a part of it, or only to particular things, such as a house, a fief,
or other thing; we shall explain the rules of these two sorts of
substitutions in the first two sections of this title, and in the third
some rules that are common to both the one and the other.

3819. It is to be observed in relation to gradual substitutions,
by which estates are conveyed to many persons successively, that
by the fifty-ninth article of the ordinance of Orleans the substitu-
tions were restrained to two degrees, exclusive of the institution
of the first heir or executor; and the said ordinance having oc-
casioned many lawsuits, on account of the preceding substitutions
which were to extend beyond two degrees, it was ordained by the
fifty-seventh article of the ordinance of Moulins, that the substi-
tutions which were prior to the ordinance of Orleans might be
extended to four degrees, and that for the future they should be


® ZT. 15, C. de testam. b 7. 2, C. comm. de leat.


TIT. 11] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 645


limited to two degrees. But this ordinance is not observed in
some places, where they retain the usage of extending the substi-
tutions, even to four degrees besides the first institution. And this
usage has, in all appearance, taken its rise from the hundred and
fifty-ninth novel of Justinian, where, in a particular case, he ex-
tends the prohibition to alienate the estate out of the family to
four generations, although it is done in a dark, ambiguous manner,
so as that we cannot clearly collect from thence a general rule
which may restrain all substitutions to four degrees. Which may
be an effect of the manner in which it is believed that this novel
was composed by Tribonian, the same which he made use of
with respect to other novels, of which an ancient Greek author
says, that he sold them for money to those who stood in need of
them, and were willing and able to pay for them.°

3820. Besides these ordinances which have regulated the degrees
of substitutions, that of the month of January, 1629, has made three
other regulations in relation to this matter of substitutions and
fiduciary bequests. The first is by the hundred and twenty-fourth
article, that the said degrees shall be computed by the number of
persons, and not by the stocks. The second is by the hundred
and twenty-fifth article, that fiduciary bequests shall not take place
in movables, except it be jewels of a very great value. And the
third is, that they shall not take place in the testaments of poor
country people. But this ordinance has not been strictly observed.
And in the provinces which are governed by the written law, all
persons without distinction make substitutions of all their goods.
And as to the number of degrees, we see that even in the places
where they have retained the use of substituting even to four de-
grees, yet the said number of degrees is extended in such a man-
ner that they are computed, not according to the number of per-
sons, but according to the stocks. Thus several brothers substi-
tuted to one another make but one degree; whereas, by that
ordinance, each substitute was to be reckoned one degree. And
this likewise is the rule in all other places. For the degrees of
substitutions are nothing else but the places of the persons substi-


¢ That is to say, that Justinian, in composing his constitutions, which are called novels,
took the advice and assistance of Tribonian, — that famous Tribonian, so well known by
his cunning and dexterity, and by his avarice,— who, in composing these new constitu-
tions, took money from those whose interests gave the occasion for making the said laws;
and he worded them and altered them as they had a mind, making use of expressions that
were dark, difficult, and equivocal, such as were capable of several meanings. Harmeno-
polus, lib. 1, tit. 1, 10.


646 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOK Vv.


tuted, who succeed one after another. Thus, a second son being
substituted to his eldest brother, and happening to succeed to him
in the fiduciary bequest, makes the first degree in the said fidu-
ciary bequest; and the third brother, who shall succeed to the sec-
ond, will make the second degree therein. And although it be
true that these brothers are among themselves in the same degree
of generation, yet there is this difference between the computation
of degrees in substitutions and that of degrees in generations, that
in these the number of children who are descended from one and
the same father is no obstacle to their being all of them in the
same degree of generation; and these degrees are not multiplied
but by divers generations from father to son, which descend from
one to the other by several degrees. But in fiduciary bequests, the
persons substituted coming only one after the other, each in his
respective order, every one of them makes his own degree inde-
pendently of the degree of generation which the persons substi-
tuted may be in among themselves; and there cannot be two af
them in the same degree, except in the case where several substi-
tutes are called jointly to succeed together to the fiduciary bequest
at the same time; as if several children were substituted together
to their father, that they might share among them the fiduciary
bequest after his death. For as they succeeded all together at the
same instant, there would be in respect to them all only one
change from their father to them; which would make only one
degree, which they would make up all of them together.

3821. Besides this regulation which has set bounds to the de-
grees of substitutions, in order to put a stop to the inconveniences
which attend the liberty of substituting without restriction, the
ordinances have made another regulation which is of no less im-
portance; which directs that all dispositions, whether they be sach
as are to have their effect in the lifetime of those who make them,
or after their death, which contain fiduciary bequests or substitu-
tions, shall be published and enrolled, to the end that persons who
have any thing to transact with the possessors of the goods which
are substituted, and others who have an interest therein, may not
be imposed upon.*

3822. We may add as a last remark, that in our language the
word substitute is indifferently made use of, either to signify that
one person is substituted to another, or that an estate is subject


4 The edict of the month of May, 1553; — Ordinance of Moulins, article 57.


TIT. ISI. SEC. 1.] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 647


to a substitution. Thus we say that a testator has substituted
such a one to his executor, or to a legatee. And we say likewise,
that he has substituted or entailed such an estate, such a land. °


SECTION I.


OF SUBSTITUTIONS OR FIDUCIARY BEQUESTS OF AN INHERITANCE,
OR A PART OF ONE.


Art. IL


3823. Definition of Substitutions or Fiduciary Bequests. — A sub-
stitution or fiduciary bequest is a disposition which transmits a
succession, or a part of one, or certain goods, from the person of
the executor or legatee to another successor, after the time regu-
lated by the testament.»


IL


3824. Who may substitute. — The liberty of substituting is the
same with that of instituting executors and bequeathing legacies;
and whoever can name executors or legatees may also substitute
to them other persons to take one after another the goods which
he shall have appropriated to them.°


IIL.


3825. Divers Ways of substituting to an Inheritance or a Part
of one.— Whether there be only one executor instituted, or wheth-
er there be many, the testator may substitute either to the whole
inheritance, or a part of it. And if there be several executors, he
may restrain the substitution to the portions of some of them
whom he shall think fit to charge therewith; leaving the others
free to them. And he may likewise either substitute his execu-
tors one to another, or substitute only to one of them either one
of his coexecutors or other persons; or charge one of his executors
to restore the fiduciary bequest to such of the coexecutors as the


® § 2, Inst. de fideic. hared. ; —~ Inst. de sing. reb. per fideic. rel.

b D. § de fideic. hared.; —1. 16, § 7, D. ad senat. cons. Trebell.; — 1. 78, § 9, eod.

© The same capacity is required for every disposition that may be made by a testament
as for making a testament. See the second section of Testaments.

* § 8, Inst. de fideic. her.


648 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOK ¥.


said executor should think fit to make choice of: and the liberty
of this choice which the said executor will have will be noways
contrary to the necessity he will be under of restoring the sid
fiduciary bequest to some other person.© But the effect of this
liberty will be either to restore it to the coexecutor whom he shall
have made choice of, if he makes any choice, or to leave it to all
the coexecutors jointly, if he chooses none of them singly‘


IV.

3826. The Substitution is limited to the Goods which the Testator
leaves. — In all the cases where an executor is charged with a sub-
stitution, he cannot be obliged to give more than he receives!
And if, for example, a testator had requested his executor to insti-
tute by his testament another person for his executor, this dispo-
sition would be restrained to the goods of the said testator. And
although his executor should accept of the executorship, yet he
would be at liberty to dispose of his own proper goods.» Fr oth-
erwise this testator would sell his kindness for more than the worth
of what he had given.


V.


3827. The Executor who is charged with a Substitution may re-
tain a Fourth Part of what was left him.— He who is instituted
executor, and charged with a substitution, whether it be of the
whole inheritance, if he is sole executor, or of the portion thereot
which is left him by the testament, if he is only executor for a part,
not only cannot be engaged by a substitution to restore more then
what is left him by the testator, but he cannot even be obliged to
restore the whole. And as the executor who is charged with a
legacy may retain a fourth part of the inheritance for the Falcidian
portion, so the executor charged with a substitution may retain a
fourth part of the inheritance, if he is universal heir or executor, or
a fourth part of his portion, if he is only heir or executor for a
part: and it is this fourth part which is called the Trebellianic por-
tion, of which we shall treat under the following title.


e Z. 7, § 1, D. de red. dub.

f See the twelfth article of the second section of Legacies.

& L. 114, § 8, inf. D. de leg. 1.

b T.17, D. ad senat, Trebell. ; —d. i. 114, § 6, D. deleg.1. See the following article.
' See the fourth title.


TIT. Iil. SEC. 1.| DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 649


VI

3828. The Frusts of the Goods which are substituted remain to
the Executor, tf the Testator does not otherwise dispose of them. —
The executor, who is charged with a substitution which would
oblige him to restore to the substitute all the profit he had made
by the goods of the testator, would not be bound to restore the
fruits of the inheritance which he had reaped until the time that
the substitution was to take place. For these fruits were only a
revenue arising from the inheritance, which was his until the case
of the substitution should happen. Thus, these fruits having ac-
crued to him, they ought to remain his, unless the testator had
otherwise disposed of them™


VIL


3829. The Executor who ts charged to restore all that he has had
of the Goods of the Deceased, ought to restore that which he has re-
ceived, either as a Legacy or otherwise, out of the Inheritance. — If
in the case of the preceding article the executor had received, not
only that which belonged to him as executor, but also some legacy
which his coexecutor had been charged to pay him, or some advan-
tage which was left him by a disposition of the testator over and
above what his coexecutors had; these sorts of advantages would
be comprehended in the substitution, which is conceived in such
terms as would oblige the executor to restore all that he had re-
ceived of the goods of the testator, unless his disposition could be
interpreted in another sense.’


VIIL


3830. The Substitution may be either to a Certain Time, or upon
Condition. — The testator may not only charge his executor to re-
store the inheritance to another person at the time of the death of
the said executor, but likewise to restore it after a certain time, as
at the time when the substitute shall be of fullage. And one may
also substitute upon condition, as if the substitute were called only
in case that he should have children.”


k 7.18, D.ad senat. Trebell.; —d.l. 4 2;—1. 57, eod. See the following article, and
the fourth title. V. /. 32, eod.
1 7. 16, C. de fideic.
™ § 2, in f. Inst. de fideic. hered. See the texts cited on the first article under the let-
b.


VOL. Il. 50


650 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART IL. BOOK ¥.


IX.

3831. The Executor ought to restore the Fruits of the Fiduciary
Bequest from the Time of his Delay, and is also liable to Costs and
Damages tf there be Ground for such a Demand. — If the executa
who is charged with a fiduciary bequest delays to make restitution
thereof after the time or case of the substitution is come to pass,
and the person in whose favor the substitution was made has
made a legal demand thereof, he will be accountable for all the
fruits, the revenues and interest, from the time of the demand, or
even from the time that the substitution was to take place, if he
had knavishly detained the goods which were to have been _deliv-
ered by virtue of the substitution, as if he had concealed the testa-
ment. And he would be liable also in this case for costs and
damages to the person to whom the goods were to be restored, if
there were any room for such a demand."


X.


3832. If the Executor is not it Delay, he is not bound to make
Restitution of the Frutts.— If the substitute to whom the goods
were to be restored, knowing nothing of his right, had neglected to
demand them of the executor who was charged to restore them,
and had suffered him to enjoy them beyond the time at which the
restitution ought to have been made, the said executor would not
be bound to restore the fraits which he had reaped during that
time. For besides that he might look upon the said goods as his
own until the person for whom he held them in trust had stripped
him of them, he might either doubt of the validity of the substi-
tution, or not know that the same was open, or presume that the
person who was substituted to the goods was willing that he
should enjoy them.°


= J. 26, D. de legat.8. See the following article. See the fourteenth article. Whea
& party is condemned to pay interest or to make restitution of the fruits, the same is is
place of damages; and by our usage no other damages are adjudged except in partice-
lar cases where there is notorious knavery, or they be due by the nature of the engage-
ment, as to which the reader may consult the preamble of the title of Interest, Costs, and
Damages.

© Si hseres post multum temporis restituat, cam presenti die fideicommissam sit, de-
ducta quarta restituet. Fructus enim qui pertepti sant, negligentia petentis, non jadico
defuncti percepti videntur. JZ. 22, § 2, D. ad senat. Trebell.

Although this text relates to another rule, explained in the fourth article of the second
section of the Ttebellianic Portion, yet it implies that which is explained ia this article,
and it is a consequence thereof which it is easy to comprehend. It may be said with re-
spect to this article, that this executor ought to be discharged from the restitution of the


TIT. 11. SEC. 1] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 651


XL

3833. What Care the Executor ought to take of the Goods that
are substituted. — The executor who is charged with a substitution
or fiduciary bequest of the inheritance is bound to take care of it;
but the care which he is obliged to take is only such as that there
be no room to charge him with any fault or negligence that may
border upon knavery. And the diligence which he may have used
in some affairs would not render him the more obnoxious, although
he had failed to use the same diligence in other affairs of the like
nature. Thus, for example, if he had gathered in some debts of
the inheritance, that would not make him answerable for other
debts.?


AIL


3834. The Executor recovers the Expenses he has laid out on the
Fiduciary Bequest. — The executor who restores the inheritance to
the person who is substituted to him may not only retain the
fourth part of it for the Trebellianic portion, but all the expenses
he has been at on account of the inheritance.%


SIL


3835. If a Father who is charged with a Fiduciary Bequest for
his Children dissipates the Effects, they may be taken out of his
Hands.— If a father had been charged to restore to his son
an inheritance, and had squandered away and dissipated the ef-
fects thereof, or committed other frauds, he might be obliged to
restore the said effects to his son, although he were still under his
father’s jurisdiction, and although the fiduciary bequest were upon
the condition that it should not take place till after the son were
emancipated, or at some other term. And if this son should hap-
pen to be in his minority, the administration of the goods would


fraits with much more reason than the executor who is charged with a legacy. See the
third article of the eighth section of Legacies, and the remark that is there made on it.

P L. 22, § 3, D. ad senat. Trebell. ; —1. 58, § 1, cod. ; —. 108, § 12, D. de ley.1. See the
second article of the tenth section of Legacies. It is necessary to remark upon this arti-
cle, and upon the second article of the tenth section of Legacies, the difference between an
executor charged with a legacy, and him who is charged with a universal substitution of
an inheritance, or of part of an inheritance, in that the engagement of this last having a
larger extent, and his own interest being concerned therein, it would seem that he was
not bound to take the same care as the executor who is charged only with one thing for a
less time, and where the interest of another person is concerned, which he ought less to
neglect than his own.

q L. 22, § 3, D. ad senat. Trebdell. Sco the ninth article of the tenth section of Legucies.


652 TRE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK V.


be committed in the mean while to a curator. For as it would be
neither just nor decent to oblige the father to give security for the
fiduciary bequest, so on the other hand it would be equitable to
prevent the loss of the goods by the only means that would be
possible, that is, by taking them out of his hands. But if the fa-
ther had not whereupon to subsist otherwise, a maintenance would
be allotted him out of the goods which he held in trust for his son”


XIV.


3836. Punishment of the Executor who detains the Goods of the
Fiduciary Bequest. — If, after an executor who is charged with an
inheritance in trust has restored it, other goods belonging to the
inheritance be discovered which he has fraudulently kept back, he
will be bound to restore them, together with the fruits or other
revenues of the same, and likewise will be liable to costs and
damages, if there be room for any such demand. But if the
restitution had been made by virtue of a transaction or other
agreement executed fairly and honestly, which had discharged him
in such a manner from all after-reckoning as that the goods which
were not restored ought to be comprehended therein, he will re-
tain them!


XV.


3837. The Charges pass with the Goods to the Substitute. — Af-
ter the executor who is charged with a fiduciary bequest of an in-
heritance has made restitution of it, as all the goods and all the
rights belonging to the said inheritance pass to the person for
whose behoof the fiduciary bequest was made, so he ought also to
bear the charges of the inheritance, and to warrant the executor
who has restored the inheritance to him against all the charges
thereof*


XVI.


3838. Children charged with a Fiduciary Bequest retain their
Legitime, or Child's Part.— If a father or other ascendant, having


* LZ. 50, D. ad senat. Trebell. Seo the twentieth and twenty-first articles.

° LD. 78, § ult. D. ad senat. Trebell. It is necessary to remark on this article, as to what
relates to damages, the difference between the executor who is guilty of delay, of which
mention has been made in the ninth article, and the executor who detains the goods of
the fiduciary bequest. For there is much more reason to condemn this last in damages.
See the ninth article, and the remark that is there made on it.

t Z.1,§ 2, D. ad senat. Tredell.


TIT. It. SEC. 1.] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 653


instituted one of his sons for his executor, had charged him with
a fiduciary bequest of the whole inheritance, or a part of it, or of
some goods, this disposition would not diminish the legitime or
filial portion due to the said child, and he would retain it. For
children cannot be deprived of their legitime, and they ought to
Ihave the same free of all charges, as has been said in its place."


REMARKS ON THE PREcEDING ARTICLE.


3839. Besides the legitime or filial portion which children who
are charged with substitutions or fiduciary bequests may retain, it
has passed into a custom that they may moreover retain the Tre-
bellianic fourth part, of which we have already made mention,
and which we shall explain in the last title. Thus, for example,
an only son charged with a fiduciary bequest will have for his leg-
itime or filial portion the third part of the goods, and for his Tre-
bellianice portion the fourth part of the other two thirds which he
is obliged to restore; which makes in all the half of the whole, and
hath given occasion to the common saying, that the son hath
the deduction of two fourth-parts, although this deduction does
not always amount to a half, and ought to vary according as
the number of children varies the quota of their legitimes or filial
portions, pursuant to the rules explained in the title of the Legt-
time or Filial Portion.

3840. Most authors agree, that this usage is taken from the
canon law in the 16th chapter de Testamentis, because that decre-
tal affirms a sentence of a judge who had decreed this double de-
duction of the legitime, and also of the Trebellianic portion. And
some have pretended that these two deductions may be founded
on consequences drawn from some of the Roman laws, but there
is not one of them on which this deduction can be founded; nay,
on the contrary, the most able interpreters look upon this double
deduction to be an error. But although it be an error against the
Roman law, yet it is noways an error against equity, nor against
the law of nature, which appropriates to children the goods of
their fathers. And it is, on the contrary, a rule which, seeing it
renders the condition of the children more advantageous than it
was under the Roman law, although only in the cases where they
are burdened with substitutions or fiduciary bequests, ought to be
received as favorably in the provinces which are governed by the


® Nov. 89, c. 1;—1. $2, C. de inoff. testam. See the title of the Legitime.
do °


654 THE CIVIL LAW. [part 11. BOOK V.


written law as is, in the provinces which are governed by their
customs, that custom which appropriates the greatest part of es-
tates to the heirs of blood, and even to collateral relations of the
remotest degree, to whom it gives much more than the Roman
law gives to children, and so as no disposition made in consider-
ation of death can lessen the same. And likewise this double de-
duction has been accounted so equitable in itself that it has been
received everywhere.

3841. It is in all probability because of these considerations that
some interpreters have been of opinion, that this double deduction
ought to be extended to legacies as well as to fiduciary bequests,
and that children overcharged with legacies ought to have in the
first place their legitime or child’s part, and next the Falcidian
portion of the surplus, which would certainly be as equitable in
this case as in the others. And there would likewise be much
more reason for granting to children overcharged with legacies the
deduction of the Falcidian portion, over and above their legitime or
child’s part, than for granting them the deduction of the Trebelli-
anic portion in the case of substitutions, because children are not
commonly charged with substitutions, unless it be in favor of their
own children, or of the descendants of the person who has made
the substitution, whereas legacies may be in favor of other persons
than those of the family : and because the executor who is charged
with fiduciary bequests has the use and profits of the goods until
the time of the restitution comes ; but the executor who is charged
with the legacy is stripped of it from the time that the succession
is open. But other authors have, on the contrary, been of opinion,
that this rale of the two deductions, which they say has been es-
tablished only by an error, ought not to be drawn to consequences
beyond the ancient rules. And this last opinion has prevailed
over the other; and therefore they have only extended in some
places the double deduction of the legitime and of the Trebellianic
portion in favor of ascendants who are charged with fiduciary be-
quests by their descendants.


XVIL
3842. The Wife's Jointure, and also a Woman’s Marriage Portion,
are taken out of the Substituted Goods. — If the legitime or child’s
part of a son who is charged with a substitution is not sufficient
to settle a jointure on his wife proportionable to what she brought
with her in marriage, and to answer the other rights and claims


TIT. Ill. SEC. 1.] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 655


which she may be entitled to by virtue of her marriage, the other
goods that are substituted would be subject to the same, and so
much would be taken from them as should be found necessary to
make up the deficiency in the legitime or child’s part for these
purposes. For fathers and other ascendants, who charge their
children and other descendants with substitutions or fiduciary be-
quests, do not mean thereby to restrain them in their conduct, and
to hinder them from marrying. Thus, the goods which they leave
them are first appropriated to the jointures and other rights of
their wives, according as the quality of the persons may demand.
And if it were a daughter charged with a fiduciary bequest, she
would in like manner retain out of the substituted goods that
which would be necessary for her marriage portion, suitable to her
quality, if her legitime or child’s part were not sufficient for it.*


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


38413. We might gather as a consequence from the last of the
texts cited, that the double deduction of the legitime and of the
Trebellianic portion, of which mention has been made in the re-
marks on the preceding article, is not agreeable to the Roman law:
for if Justinian had thought that a son who was burdened with a
fiduciary bequest was to have both his legitime or child’s part, and
also the Trebellianic portion, in all probability he would have ex-
pressed it; and seeing that he gave leave to deduct out of the fidu- .
ciary bequest a jointure for the wife of the heir or executor who
should be charged therewith, and added, as he has done in this text,
that, if the legitime or child’s part were not sufficient for that pur-
pose, the said jointure ought to be taken out of the other goods that
were subject to the fiduciary bequest, he would not have failed to
have added likewise the Trebellianic fourth part, and to have said,
that, if the legitime and the Trebellianic portion were not sufficient,
the surplus should be taken out of the rest of the substituted goods.
As to which it may be remarked, that, seeing by this new right of
the double deduction, the son who is charged with a substitution
of the inheritance retains the half of the goods for his legitime and
Trebellianic portion, it would seem that the fiduciary bequest
ought not likewise to be diminished by taking from thence a joint-
ure for the wife of the heir or executor who should be charged
with the said fiduciary bequest; especially if, according to the sen-


= ZL. 22, § 4, D. ad senat. Zrebell. ; — Nov. 89, ¢. 1.


656 THB CIVIL Law. [PART 11. BOOK V.


timent of some, this deduction on account of jointures and mar-
riage portions should be extended beyond the first degree of the
substitution, and if the persons who are substituted, being charged
to restore the same goods to other substitutes called to the succes-
sion after them, should have the power of making the same deduc-
tion every one in their order.


XVIIL


3844. He who is substituted to the Portion of One of Two Per-
sons who shall die last succeeds to netther of them, if they both die
together. — If a father, instituting his children his executors, had
charged such of them as should die last to restore his portion
of the inheritance to another person, and it happened that all
these children died at the same time, their heirs would succeed to
them, and would exclude the substitute: for he was substituted
only to one of them who should die the last, and only for his por-
tion. Thus the substitution would be without effect, unless the
person substituted should prove that one of the two survived the
other ; since, if it canriot be known which of the two died last, the
condition of the substitution is not come to pass; and the substi-
tate cannot say of any one of them that he has succeeded to
him.


XIX.


3845. A Child born to a Son who ts charged with a Substitution
makes the Substitution to cease.— If a testator, having instituted
one of his children or descendants his heir or executor, had
charged him with a fiduciary bequest or substitution of the inherit-
ance, either in favor of other descendants of the same testator,
brothers, uncles, or nephews to the said executor, or in favor of
other persons; the said fiduciary bequest or substitution would
not have its effect except in the case that the said executor should
die without issue; and if he left any issue, the said fiduciary be-
quest or substitution would be null: for the intention of this teste-


Y L. 84, D. ad senat. Trebell. See the remark on the twelfth article of the second sec-
tion, Jn what Manner Children succeed. Seo the seventh article of the second section of
the preceding article. It is to be remarked on the seventh article here quoted, and on
this present article, that in this the substitution was only of the portion of one of the two
brothers; so that, the substitute not being able to make appear which of the two broth-
ers has survived the other, he will have no portion at all. But in the case of the seventh
article above mentioned, the intention of the testator called the substitute to the succes-
sion of both the brothers, as has been remarked there.


TIT. Ul. 8EC. 1] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 657


tor could not have been to prefer the substitutes to these chil-
dren.'


XX.


3846. The Executor ought to make an Inventory, and to give
Securtly, if tt be necessary for the Preservation of the Fiduciary
Bequest.— Seeing the executor who is charged with a fiduciary
bequest either of the whole inheritance, or of a part of it, cannot
accept it but with this charge, he is obliged to make an inventory
of the goods, in order to preserve the right of the substitute. And
this inventory ought to be made either. in presence of the substi-
tute, if he can be there; or if he is not present, or even is not
born, the executor ought to make it in such manner as the judge
shall direct. And both in the one and the other case, besides the
inventory, the executor is bound to give security, if the circum-
stances require it, and unless the testator has discharged him from


giving any.*
XXL


3847. Even the Father and Mother are obliged to give Security
in Two Cases for the Fiduciary Bequest.— If the exccutor were a
father, or other ascendant, charged with a fiduciary bequest in be-
half of his own children, he would be excepted from the rule of
giving security, unless the testator had obliged him to do it, or the
said executor had contracted a second marriage.”


SECTION II.


OF SUBSTITUTIONS OR PARTICULAR FIDUCIARY BEQUESTS OF CERTAIN
THINGS.


3848. Szxine particular fiduciary bequests of certain things are
of the nature of legacies, as has been shown in the title of Lega-
cies, we must apply to these fiduciary bequests the rules of that
title which are applicable to them.


= L. 102, D. de condit. et dem. ;—v. |. jubemus, C.ad senat. Trebell. ; —1. 30, C. de fideic.
® Z.1,D. ut legat. seu fid. serv. caus. cav.;—d.l.§ 10;—1. 1, Cut in poss. legat. vel


Sid. 8. c. m.; — Nov. 1, c. 2, §1;—1 2, C. ut in possess. leg. vel fid. s. c. m. See the fourth
article of the first section of the Falcidsan Portion.
b L. 6, C. ad senat. Trebdell.


658 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK V.


Arr. L
3849. One may substitute Things of all Kinds. — One may make
a substitution or fiduciary bequest of particular things of all kinds,
such as a fief, a house, or other tenement, and of other sorts of
goods, of a sum of money, and of every other thing which one has
a mind should go from one successor to another.*


IL
3850. One may charge with a Fiduciary Bequest either the Ex-
ecutor or a Legatee. — The testator may charge with a fiduciary
bequest of a particular thing, either his own executor, or a legatee,
whether the thing be a part of the inheritance, or belong to the ex-
ecutor or legatee, or to some other person.®


II.


3801. Different Manners of Substituting. — These substitutions
or fiduciary bequests of particular things may be made in several
manners; which may be distinguished either by the differences of
the expressions which the testators may make use of, or by the
differences which may diversify the dispositions of this nature,
independently of the ways of expressing them.°


IV.


3852. All Expressions which explain the Intention of the Testator
are sufficient for a Fiduciary Substitution. — As to the expressions,
in what manner soever the testator may have explained himself, his
known intention ought to serve as a rule. And even the expres
sions which seem to leave the fiduciary bequest to the discretion
of the executor or legatee who is charged with it, oblige him as
much as those which ordain it in express terms. Thus, for exam-
ple, if a testator had said that he is sure his executor, or a lega-
tee, will restore to such a one such a thing, or he entreats him
to restore it, these expressions would make a fiduciary bequest,
which would not depend on the will of the person whom the said
disposition might concern.4


® Inst. de sing. reb. per fideic. relict.

> Inst. de sing. reb. per fid. rel. ; —§ 1, eod.; —I. 50, D. de legat. 2.

© See the following articles,

4 Z.11, 419, inf. D. de legat. 8; —1. 115, D. de leg. 1; —l. 118, eod.; —L 2, C. comm.
de legat. et fid. ; —1. 67, § ult. D. de legat. 2. See the forty-seventh article of the eighth
section of Testaments.


TIT. It. 8EC. 11.| DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 659


V.
3853. Divers Manners of Dispositions which have the Nature of
a Fiduciary Substitution. — Example.— As to the different manners
of dispositions which have the nature of fiduciary substitutions,
this diversity depends on the will of the testator;* who may, for
example, either make a simple fiduciary bequest, charging his ex-
ecutor, or a legatee, to restore to such a one a land or tenement or
other thing; or forbid the alienation of a fief or other estate out of
his own family, or that of his executor, or of a legatee, to whom he
had devised it: for this prohibition to alienate the said fief or es-
tate would imply a substitution in favor of those of that family to
which the same was appropriated‘


VI.


3854. One may make a Fiduciary Substitution in Favor of Per-
sons to be born.— One may make a fiduciary substitution of a
particular thing either in favor of certain persons, naming them,
or of persons that are not as yet born, but who may be born,§ or
even indefinitely in favor of a person who shall be chosen out of a
family by the executor or the legatee who is charged with the fidu-
ciary substitution.”


VIL


3855. Order of the Fiduciary Substitutes, if there be several to
succeed successively. — If the fiduciary substitution respects several
persons who are called successively one after another, the substi-
tutes will succeed in the order regulated by the testator, if he has
given any directions about it, or according as they shall be called
by the executor or legatee who is charged with the fiduciary sub-
stitution, if the testator has left him the liberty to regulate the
order of their succeeding, which depends on the following rules.!


VOL


3856. Different Manners of regulating this Order. — The testa-
tors may regulate differently the order of the fiduciary substitutes,


© See the articles which follow.

€ See the twelfth article.

& See the thirteenth article of the second section of Heirs and Executors in general ; the
twenty-second and twenty-third articles of the second section of Testaments, and the third
article of the second section of Legacies.

h 7. 57, § 2, D. ad senat. Trebdell.

t See the following articles.


660 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 12. BOOK ¥.


according to their different intentions. Thus, a testator may name
them every one in the rank which he pleases to give them. Thus,
he may without naming them point them out by some deanp
tion, such as the eldest males of his descendants. Thus, he my
simply substitute those of his family. And what he may do wit
respect to his children and descendants, or those of his own {ar
ily, he may likewise do the same with respect to the childs
either of the family of his executor, or that of a legatee, if he sub
stitutes to him.*


IX.

3857. A Fiduciary Substitution made indefinitely etther to on f
a certain Family, or to a certain Family.— If the fiduciary subsi-
tution be indefinite in favor of some one person of a family whot
the testator had not any other way described, as if he had charged
his executor or a legatee, having children or grandchildren, to lea
to one of them a house or some other tenement, this andete-
mined fiduciary substitution would leave it to the executor or leg
atee who is charged with it to make choice of the person: and le
would fulfil the same by leaving the substituted goods to any om
of the family! whom he should please to pitch on, even althoag?
he should leave it to the remotest of the family, preferring him
those who were in a nearer degree.™ But if the fiduciary subst
tution were not limited to one of the family; as if the testator bed
substituted indefinitely those of his own family, or of the familr
of the executor or of the legatee, those of the said family wi
should happen to be in the nearest degree would exclude the
most remote, and those who should happen to be in the same ¢
gree would succeed jointly, unless there should be ground ©
judge otherwise of the intention of the testator by circumstancs
which might discover the same."


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3858. We have added at the end of the article the temperamet’
of the intention of the testator: for if, for example, a person of
great quality had ordained that a land which had been erected
into a title of a duchy, county, or barony, should remain in bi


K See the texts cited on the following article.
1 Z, 67, D. de legat. 2.

m D. 1. 67, § 2;—l. 114, § 17, D. de legat. 1.
= 1. 32,4 ult. D. de legat. 2; —1. 69, § 3, eod.


FIT. 111. SEC. 11.] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 661


family, it would be presumed that his intention was to appropri-
ate the same to the eldest heirs male, and not to leave a handle
for lawsuits and wrangling by the division of an estate of this
kind. As to which it may be observed, that it is very difficult for
a case of such a substitution to fall out so indefinite as not to dis-
tinguish either the degrees, or the eldest of each degree, or the
males from the females; for those who make substitutions do not
usually fail to make these distinctions. But if a testator had failed
to do it, the rule explained in this article would point out the or-
der of the substitutes, and would distinguish those who are called
either jointly together, or by preference; and even in cases where
the testators have explained themselves the most clearly, there
may fall out events in which the use of this rale may be necessary.


X.


3859. If the Executor who was to choose the Fiduciary Substitute
out of several did not make the Choice, they will all of them have
a Share in the substituted Goods. — If, in the case of the preceding
article, the executor or the legatee who was to choose the substi-
tute should happen to die without having named him, the substi-
tuted goods would belong in common to all those among whom
the choice was to be made. For seeing no one of them would
have more right than the other, and that there would remain no-
body to distinguish them, the testator, who was the only person
who could. give direction therein, not having done it, but having
considered them all alike, they would be all of them called to-
gether; and if there remained only one of them, he would have
the whole.°


XL


3860. The Fiduciary Substitute who ts chosen by the Executor
derives his Right only from the Testator.— The fiduciary substi-
tute who bas been named by the executor who had the power of
choosing him from among others, derives his right only from the
testator, and not from the person who has chosen him, although it
was in his power not to have named him. Which hath this effect,
that if, for example, this executor, having declared this choice by
his testament, bad therein bequeathed to the person whom he then
named for the substitute the thing which was subject to the fidu-


° L. 67, § 7, D. de legat. 2.
VOL. Il. 56


662 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOX V.


ciary substitution, it would not be in effect a legacy : for he would
not thereby give any thing that was his own, since he would only
leave what he was obliged to restore, having only the liberty of
choosing the person to whom he was to restore it. ‘Thus, he could
much less impose on this fiduciary substitute any condition, or any
charge.?


XIL


3861. The Prohibition to alienate does not oblige, unless tt be
made in Favor of some Person.— What has been said in the fifth
article, that the prohibition to alienate may imply a fiduciary sub-
stitution, ought to be understood of a prohibition that has some
cause, and which is in favor either of a family, or of a person, to
whom the testator intended that the thing of which he had pr-
hibited the alienation should go. For a bare prohibition to an ex-
ecutor, or to a legatee, to alienate certain lands or tenements,
without having some regard to the children of the said executor
or the said legatee, or to other persons, would have no manner of
effect, and would be no obstacle why the said executor or legatee
might not justly alienate lands that would be his in such a man-
ner as that no other person would have any right, or expectation,
or interest whatsoever in them by the will of the testator.1


XATIL


3862. The Prohibition to alienate certain Lands, and. to dispose
of them out of the Family, does not take away the Choice of one of
the Family. — If a testator, naming for his executor his son who
had children, had forbidden him to alienate certain lands, requiring
him to leave them in his family, this executor could not give
away the said lands to others than his children; but he might
leave them to any one of his children whom he should please to
name. For by leaving them to one, it would still be in the family
that he had left them. And although the persons substituted
should be the descendants of this testator, and he had an equal
affection for them all, yet his expression would mark that he
left it to his son to choose any one. of his own children, and that
what he had in view was only to appropriate the said lands to his
family, to prevent their going to any other family, whether it were


PL. 67, D. de legat. 2; —d.1.§ 1, inf; —1. 7, § 1, D. de rob. dub.
q L114, § 14, D. de legat. 1.


TIT. 11%. SBC. 11.) DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 663


by an alienation or other disposition of the executor who is
charged with the substitution.


XIV.


3863. The Fiduciary Substitute ought to have either the Thing
subject to the Substitution, or tts Value. — If an executor or a-lega-
tee were charged with a fiduciary bequest, which could not be
otherwise performed than by giving to the substitute the value of
that which the testator intended should be given him, this value
would be due to him from the said executor or legatee. Thus, for
example, if he were charged to buy a certain house, or certain
lands, for the fiduciary substitute, and the proprietor of the said
house or lands would not sell them, he would owe the price of
them. Thus, for another example, if he were charged to instruct
a young man in a trade, of which some accident had rendered him
incapable, as if he was fallen lame, or become blind, this fiduciary
bequest would be estimated in money.’


XV.


3864. The Fruits and Interest of the substituted Goods are due
from the Time of the Delay.— The executor or legatee who is
charged with a fiduciary substitution of a particular thing owes
the fruits and interest thereof from the time that he delays to ac-
quit it after it is due, in the same manner as the executor who is
charged with a fiduciary substitution of the inheritance, pursuant
to the rule explained in the ninth article of the first section; and
he is also liable to damages pursuant to the same rule, if there
should be room for such a demand.'


XVI


3865. The Executor cannot revoke the Payment of the Fiduciary
Bequest, which proves Null if he has once acquitted it.— If there
were some nullity in the formalities of the testament, or some
other defect which would annul the fiduciary bequest, and the ex-
ecutor who was charged with it had acquitted it; he could not
oblige the fiduciary substitute to restore back to him that which he


r 7. 114, § 15, D. de legat. 1; —d. 1 114,417. See the ninth article, and the remarks
made on it.

* ZL. 11,§ 17, D. de legat. 3; —L. 14, § 2, ead.

t 7, 26D. de legat. 8. See the third article of the eighth section of Legacies, and the
remarks there made upon it; as also the ninth article of the first section of this title.


664 THE CIVIL LAW. [PakT Il. BOOK V.


had willingly paid; and the pretext that the fiduciary bequest was
not due would be useless. For he would by that payment only
have fulfilled more faithfully the intention of his benefactor.“


XVIL


3866. The Legatee charged with a Fiductary Bequest which
proves to be Null reaps the Benefit of tt, and wot the Executor. —
If, a legatee being charged with a fiduciary bequest out of his
legacy, it should happen that the thing substituted could not be
restored, as. if the substitute were become incapable of it, or by
reason of some other event; the executor could not pretend that
this fiduciary bequest which proves useless ought to return to him,
but the legatee would reap the benefit of it. For it was a charge
upon his legacy, which ceases in his favor.*


SECTION ITI.


OF SOME RULES COMMON TO FIDUCIARY SUBSTITUTIONS OF AN IN-
HERITANCE, AND TO THOSE OF PARTICULAR THINGS, AND TO
TACIT FIDUCIARY SUBSTITUTIONS.


3867. We must not confine the rules that are common to these
two sorts of fiduciary substitutions to the rules which shall be ex-
plained in this section; for it is easy to judge that the rules for
the interpretation of testaments, and many others that have been
explained in several places, may be applied to them. But we
have put down in this section some rules that are not so general,
and which agree more particularly to these two sorts of fiduciary
substitutions.


Arr. L


3868. One may substitute etther one Person alone, or many.—
All substitutions or fiduciary bequests, whether they be universal,
of the whole inheritance, or particular, of certain things, may be
made either in favor of one person alone, or of many, whom the
testator calls to the succession, that they may divide it among
them, whether it be in equal or unequal shares


" ZL. 2, C. de fideic. x L. 38, § 6, D. de legat. 3.

© § 1, Inst. de vulg. subst. Although this text relates chiefly to the vulgar substitution,
yet it may be applied to the fiduciary substitution, and the testator hes the same liberty
in this as in the other.


TIT. III. SEC. 11.] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. - 66


IL
3869. One may substitute in one or more Deprees.— Whether
there be only one substitute or many, the substitution may either
end with the first degree, or be extended to several degrees from
one substitute to another successively. And the substitution be-
comes open to every degree, when, the pergon who filled the pre-
ceding degree happening to fail, another succeeds in his place.°


TIL


3870. One may substitute the same Persons who may be instt-
tuted Executors.— All persons who are capable of succeeding are
also capable of being substituted. Thus, one may substitute as
well as institute children not yet born; persons unknown to the
testator, but whom he sufficiently describes in order to distinguish
them ; and in general one may substitute all persons who, at the
time that the substitution becomes open, may be in a condition to
reap the benefit of it, and in whom there is no manner of inca-


pacity.
IV.


3871. Persons incapable of Fiduciary Substitutions.— We must
reckon in the number of persons incapable of fiduciary substitu-
tions, all those to whom the laws prohibit the giving of any thing
by a testament: which takes in not only strangers who are called
aliens, and those who are civilly dead, whether it be by a sentence
of condemnation which ought to have this effect, or by a profes-
sion of some religious order, but also all other persons to whom
some law or some custom forbids us to give any thing.*


V.


3872. Tacit Fiduciary Substitutions are forbidden. — Seeing
those who intend to make dispositions that are prohibited make
use of other persons’ names, to whom they give that they may re-


b Inet. de vulg. subst. The same remark is to be made on this text that has been made
on the preceding article. See, concerning the degrees of substitutions, the preamble of
the first section.

© Seo the first article, and the thirteenth article of the second section of Heirs and Ex-
ecutors in general; the first, seventeenth, twenty-second, twenty-third, twenty-fourth, and
twenty-fifth articles of the second section of Testaments; and the third article of the sec-
ond section of Legacies.

4 See the second section of Heirs and Executors in general, and the preamble to the
same section.

56 *


666 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 11. BOOK Vv.


store it to those to whom they cannot give, we give the name of
tacit fiduciary substitutions to these secret dispositions which in
outward appearance regard the persons whose names are made
use of, and which in reality and in secret are intended for those to
whom the law forbids to give. And these sorts of fiduciary be-
quests or substitutions are unlawful, as much as a disposition
would be in which the persons to whom it is not lawful to give
had been expresely named.*


VL


3873. The Crime of those Persons who lend thetr Names to Tacit
Fiduciary Substitutions. — The persons who lend their names to
these tacit fiduciary substitutions or bequests, whether they en-
gage themselves by writing, or by word of mouth, or in whatever
manner it be that they receive any thing with design to restore
it to the persons to whom the testator could not give, are con-
sidered in the eye of the law as if they had stolen that which they
may receive by virtue of such a disposition. And they are so far
from being under an obligation thereby to restore what they have
received to the persons whom the testators had in their view, that
they contract no other engagement than to restore to the executors
that which they may have received on that account, together with
the fruits and interest thereof that were fallen due even before the
demand.‘


VIL


3874. How Tacit Fiduciary Substitutions are proved. — The
tacit fiduciary substitutions and bequests may be proved, not only
by writings, if there are any, but likewise by the other sorts of
proofs, according to the rules which have been explained in the
title relating to this matters


REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING ARTICLE.


3875. It is necessary to observe on this article and on the text
that is here cited, that there is a difference between our usage
and the Roman law as to tacit fiduciary bequests or substitutions;
which consists in this, that by the Roman law the exchequer


* See the texts cited on the following article.

f L. 46, D. de heered. petit.;—~1.18, D. de his que ut ind.;—1. 108, D. de legat. 1;—
1. 10, D. de his ques ut indig.

& L.8,§ 5, D. de jur. fisci.


TIT. If. SEC. I11.| DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 687


reaped the benefit of a tacit fiduciary bequest which was made in
favor of a person to whom it was not lawful to give, and that by
our usage it is the heir or executor who has the advantage thereof.
Thus they were more reserved under the Roman law than we are
in France, as to the proofs of tacit fiduciary bequests, and in order
to avoid the favoring of the cause of the exchequer too much, they
required a strict proof of the fraud, as appears from the text cited
on the article; and we see in another text, that presumptions,
which might serve as proofs in our usage, were not sufficient. It
was in the case of a testament of a husband who had instituted
for his universal heir or executor his wife’s father. The question
was, whether it was not a fraud against the laws which were then
in force, and which did not suffer in certain cases the husband to
make his wife his universal heiress or executrix :* and it is decided
in that law, that the bare consideration of the paternal affection
which united this testator’s father-in-law to his wife, to whom he
could not leave all his estate, was not a sufficient presumption
that it was a tacit fiduciary bequest, made with a view that the .
estate should be restored to the testator’s widow. Si gener soce-
rum heredem reliquerit, tacttt fidetcommisst suspicionem sola ratio
paterne affectionis non admittit.” If the like question should hap-
pen in the provinces which are governed by their peculiar customs,
where the husband cannot give any thing to the wife, nor the
wife to the husband, they would reject this presumption, as it
might be rejected when the interest only of the exchequer was
concerned; and, on the contrary, they would have great regard to
the said presumption, not only in consideration of the understand-
ing which might be presumed to be between the father and the
daughter, but likewise for this other reason, which some customs
have established by an express law, that persons who are not
allowed to give to one another by their testaments, such as the
husband to the wife, the wife to the husband, are as much tied up
from giving to other persons to whom the hasband and wife may
succeed. Thus the prohibition of dispositions made by minors in
their testaments in favor of their tutor or guardian, is extended to
his children; and this is expressly regulated so by some customs.


VIIL


3876. One cannot restore the Goods that are substituted before the
Time of the Substitution comes, if the too precipitate Restitution turns


® Ulp. tit. 15 et 16. b 7. 25, D. de his qua ut ind.


668 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT II. BOOK v.


to the Prejudice of the Substitute.— The executor or legatee who
is charged with a fiduciary substitution is not tied up to wait for
the time in which the substitution is to take place, and he may re-
store beforehand to the substitute the goods which are subject to
the fiduciary substitution, provided that it be without prejudice to
the interest of other persons, as has been explained in another
place," and provided also that this precipitate restitution do not
turn to the damage of the fiduciary substitute, contrary to the in-
tention of the testator. For if, for example, a testator had charged
his executor or a legatee with a fiduciary bequest of a yearly pen-
sion, to be paid to some poor person for his maintenance, or of a
sum of money payable after a certain time, to be laid out to some
- use for the benefit of the person for whom the said fiduciary be-
quest was intended, euch as the bringing him up to some trade,
or the giving of a marriage portion to a poor young woman; he
who should be charged with these fiduciary bequests could not in
the first case advance in one payment all the several yearly sums
which were destined for alimony, unless some circumstances
should render this advancing of the payment more profitable to
the person for whom the said alimony was bequeathed: and in
the second case, if the person for whose benefit the fiduciary be-
quest was made were not as yet of age sufficient to learn a trade,
or the said young woman ripe for marriage, the advanced pay-
ment, without the precaution of taking security that the money
should be applied to the purposes for which it was designed, would
not acquit the executor who bad paid it. But if the term for the
payment of the legacy in trust were only in favor of the execu-
tor, and no other persons had any interest therein, he might with-
out difficulty pay the same before the term.!


IX.


3877. A Donation has the Effect of an Election of a Substitute,
whom the Donor was empowered to choose. — If he who was
charged with a fiduciary bequest or substitution at the time of his
death, in favor of some one of his children whom he should think
fit to choose, had given in his lifetime to one of his children the
things which were subject to this fiduciary bequest, this donation
would be in the place of an election, if the same were not revoked.
For although the liberty of this choice ought to last until the


& See the seventeenth and eighteenth articles of the tenth section of Legacies.
iL. 18, D. de ann. leg.


TIT. If. SEC. 111.] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 669


death of the person charged with this fiduciary substitution, and
it would be for the interest of all the children that the said dona-
tion should not destroy the said liberty; yet it would be sufficient
that the donee had been made choice of, and that the said choice
had not been revoked; seeing the said choice would be confirmed
by the will of him who, having it in his power to make another
choice, had not done it. So that it would be the same thing as if
this choice had been made at the time of his death*


X.


3878. The Bounds of the Liberty to give to one of the Substitutes
more than to the others. — If a testator, having instituted his son
his heir or executor, had charged him to restore to his children his
inheritance, praying him at the same time to give to one of them
whom he should name to him something more than would fall to
the share of the others, the said executor would not have an indefi-
nite liberty to give to this son the greatest part of the inheritance,
but only a power to regulate and settle some small advantage for
him, that would not make too great an inequality between him
and the others.


XI.


3879. Order of the Substitutes in divers Degrees. — Vf a father
who had several children, having instituted his wife his executrix,
had entreated her to restore his inheritance to their children, or
to such of them as should happen to be alive, or to restore it to
their grandchildren, or to any one of them whom sbe should
choose, or to some one of his family whom she should name; a
disposition conceived in these terms would not leave to the said
executrix an indefinite liberty to choose whomsoever she should
think fit from among these three sorts of substitutes. But this ex-
pression would call in the first place all the children of the first de-
gree, and they would all of them be preferred to all the grandchil-
dren of the testator; and in default of the children, she might
choose among the grandchildren, but could not prefer to them the
collateral relations, whom she could not call to the succession but
in default of the children and grandchildren.™


k 7.77, § 10, D. de leg. 2.

! ZL. 76, § 5, D. de legat. 2.

™ 1.57, $2, D. ad senat. Tredell. What is said here of the choice from among the
grandchildren must be understood without prejudice to their legitime or child's part.


670 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK V.


XII.

3880. The Parttes who are mutually substituted to one another
may renounce the mutual Substitution. — If two brothers, who are
substituted reciprocally to one another in case one of them should
die without issue, had agreed between themeelves that the substi-
tution or fiduciary bequest should have no effect, this agreement
would annul the substitution: for they might discharge one anoth-
er from it, that each of them might possess freely that which his
father had left him, and that neither of them might have any
temptation to wish for the other's death. Which consideration
renders such an agreement so favorable, that minority alone would
not be sufficient to set it aside, unless it should appear by the cir-
cumstances that one of the parties had sustained damage by the
agreement.”


XIII.


3881. The Prescription of substituted Goods runs both against
the Executor and likewise against the Substitute. — If a third per-
son, who had honestly and fairly possessed some goods which
were subject to a fiduciary bequest or substitution for so long a
time as to acquire a right by prescription, computing therein the
time which had run against the executor who was charged with
the fiduciary substitution, the substitute could not deduct that
time upon pretence that the prescription could not run against the
executor to his prejudice. For the executor was the master of the
goods, and it was his business to enter a claim, in order to inter-
rupt the prescription: and the substitute might. likewise on his
part have watched for his own interest. And it would be the
same thing if it were some right belonging to the inheritance,
which, for want of a demand on the part of the executor, had been
lost by prescription”


XIV.


3882. The Prescription of Lands substituted, which are alien-
ated by the Usufructuary, divests the Substitute of the Property


® L.11, C. de transact. ;— 1. 16, C. de pact.

° 2.70, § ult. D. ad senat. Trebell. Seo the eleventh article of the first section. See the
following article. We must understand this and the following article, of fiduciary be-
quests or substitutions which had not been published or enrolled, pursuant to the ordi-
nances which have been taken notice of at the end of the preamble of this title. ‘or if a
substitution of a land, for instance, had been enrolled, the right of the substitutes would
be preserved against all purchasers and other occupiers.


TIT. 11%. SEC. 121.) DIREOT SUBSTITUTIONS. 671


thereof. — If a legatee of a usufract of lands which are subject to
a fiduciary substitution had disposed of the property of the said
lands, by his testament, in favor of a person who, being ignorant of
the fiduciary substitution, had possessed the said lands during the
time required for prescription; this possessor could not any more
be molested in his possession by the substitute.?


XV.


3883. The Fiductary Substitution after the Death of the Execu-
tor or Legatee is not open by their Civil Death. — If it should hap-
pen that the executor or legatee, who is charged with a fiduciary
substitution that ought to take place at his death, should fall into
a state of civil death, whether it were by a sentence of death, or
by a condemnation to some other punishment, which would be at-
tended with the confiscation of his goods; this civil death and this
confiscation would not lay open the fiduciary substitution. For
besides that the substitution would be understood only of a nat-
ural death, and that the substitute might die before the execu-
tor or legatee, it might so happen that the sentence of condemna-
tion might be annulled by an act of grace of the prince, and that
so this executor or legatee, being restored to his former state and
condition, would enter again to the possession of his goods, or
might acquire others. Thus, this fiduciary substitute could not
demand the goods that are substituted: but it would be just, in
such a case, that provision should be made for the security of the
substituted goods, by precautions to be taken between the fidu-
ciary substitute and those to whom the substituted goods should


go.t
XVI


3884. The Substitution to an Executor or Legatee, in case he
should die without Issue, remains without any Effect if he leaves
Children behind him. — If an executor or legatee were charged
with a fiduciary bequest or substitution, in case he should happen
to die without issue, and he had children who survived him,
this fiduciary substitution would remain without any effect. And
even although these children should renounce the succession of


P L. 36, D. de usu et usuf. e red. legat. We must make the same remark on this article
which has been made on the preceding.

9 ZL. 48, § 1, D. de jure fisci. As to the precautions mentioned in the article, see the
third article of the second section of the Falcidian Portion.


672 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT IL Boor ¥.


their father, yet the substitute would have no right, because th
condition of the fiduciary substitution would not be accomplished,
and because the intention of this testator was not to engage tk
said children to become heirs to their father, but to leave to hin
the free use and disposal of the substituted goods, in case k
had children.’


REMARKS ON THE PrecepING ARTICLE.


3885. It is not so much for the case explained in this article that
we have added this last rule to this title, as for the consequenc:
which may be gathered from it for resolving a question which é
commonly proposed, and which is expressed in these terms, to wi.
If the children who are in the condition are in the disposition; that
is to say, if the children, who, surviving their father, make the nigh!
of the substitute to cease, are themselves substituted.

3886. This question has divided the interpreters, the greates!
part of whom have been of opinion, that the children are subst
tuted. Others, and among them the most able interpreter of then
all, are of a contrary opinion; and to support it they quote the
text cited on this article, and some others, but without explaining
the consequences which they gather from them: and seeing now
of those texts precisely decide this question, and that it is 20 fr
quently started that we cannot well dispense with examining
it would seem that it might be urged against the opinion of thor
who will have the children to be substituted, that the text cited
this article, and all the others which decide that the fiduciary su>
stitution, in case there be no issue, ceases when there is issue, seed
to imply the consequence that there is no substitution with respec
to the children. This consequence is not only founded on this
reason which is expressed in the texts, that the condition of th
fiduciary substitution is not come to pass; for to this one might
reply, that this reason respects only the substitute; but it is a»
founded on this, that we see that in all the laws which mentiot
this case, and which decide it after the same manner, there is 10
any one of them in which it has been thought fit to add any words
to this effect, that truly the fiduciary substitution was null in respec!
~ of the substitute, but that it would go to the children, as being
comprehended in the disposition of the testator, and called by him


t 2.114, § 13, D. de leg. 1;—11, C. decond. ine. ; — 0. 1. 6, § 2, C. ad seat. Trebell ;—
1. 85, D. de hoered. inst.


TIT. Il. SEC. IU.] DIRECT SUBSTITUTIONS. 673


to the substituted goods. This addition seems to be so natural
and so necessary, that seeing none of the authors of these laws
have thought of it, we may conclude from thence that they did not
think that the substitution took in the children. And among
these texts there is not one of them where this addition would
have been more natural and more necessary than in the text cited
on this article, and which we have made choice of for that reason:
for the circumstance of the children’s renouncing their father’s suc-
cession made it still more necessary to have added, that although
they were not heirs to their father, yet they would nevertheless
reap the benefit of the fiduciary substitution.

3887. We may add to these reasons, although they seem to be
decisive enough in themselves, that, if we examine into the inten-
tion of the testator who substitutes to his executor, or to a legatee,
tn case he has no children, it does not seem as if he had any the
least view of calling the children to the substitution: for if that
had been his intention, he would have substituted the children in
the first place, and not called another substitute except in default
of them. Thus, when the testator does no other thing but barely
dispose in favor of a fiduciary substitute in case he have no chil-
dren, his intention appears to be, that, in case there be children,
their father shall not be any longer charged with the fiduciary sub-
stitution, but shall have free liberty to dispose of the goods in fa-
vor of such of his children as he shall think fit to choose, or of
other persons.

3888. We think that we may venture to say in relation to this
question, that the interpreters who have invented it have made
a doubt of that which the simplicity of the principles sets in a
clear and evident light, and that their sentiment is contrary to the
rules: and the author whom we just now quoted was of this opin-
ion as to this matter.” The reader may have remarked in some
places of this book such like opinions of the interpreters, opposite
to the spirit of the laws. And we make this reflection here, that
we may have an opportunity of observing further, that we see in
this question, and in the sentiment of those interpreters, a remark-
able example of the difficulties which they have started in the mat-
ter of substitutions, framing in this manner questions, and decid- -


* Deficientibus superioribus conjecturis, negarem et pernegarem eos qui sunt in condi-
tione esse in dispositione, ex 1. Gallus, &c. Cwyjac. consult. 35. These conjectures, taken
from the words of the testament about which this author was consulted, make no altera-
tion in his opinion touching the general position.

VOL. Il. 57


674 THE CIVIL LAW. [PakT Il. BOOK v.


ing them by other principles than those of the laws, and taking
afterwards their own decisions for new principles, from which they
raise and resolve in the same manner other questions. Thus it is
that they have perplexed this matter of substitutions, which, al-
though in itself sufficiently intricate, may nevertheless be reduced to
principles and rules that are plain enough, and which are sufficient
for resolving all the questions that can arise, or that can be imagined.
It is to these principles and to these rules that we have confined
ourselves in this book, as well as the others, having endeavoured
to comprehend therein every thing that is in the laws which is
conformable both to our usage and to equity, without leaving out
even the particular cases which are specified in the laws, and
which may make the use of the rules easier.


TITLE IV.
OF THE TREBELLIANIC PORTION.


3889. By the Trebellianic portion is meant the fourth part
which the laws appropriate to executors who are charged with a
universal fiduciary bequest of the whole inheritance, or of a part
of it, which distinguishes the Trebellianic portion from the Falcid-
ian portion. For the Falcidian portion relates to legacies and to
particular fiduciary bequests of certain things.

3890. This fourth part was called the Trebellianic portion be-
cause of a decree of the senate, which was named thus from
the name of one of the consuls of that year in which it was
made, ordaining that the executor who should be charged to re-
store the inheritance to the fiduciary substitute should be dis-
charged of all the debts and burdens, and that the same should
pass with the goods to the substitute. But seeing the executors,
who had but little or no profit from the inheritance which they
were obliged to restore, refused to accept it when they were only
to make restitution of it, it was ordained by another decree of the
senate that the executor who should be charged with a fiduciary
bequest of the inheritance might retain the fourth part thereof.
But because of some inconveniences in this last decree of the sen-
ate, which it would be to no purpose to mention here, Justinian


TIT. Iv. TREBELLIANIC PORTION. 675.


confounded the two decrees of the senate together, giving to the
first the effects of them both, in such parts of them as he intended
should subsist both of the one and the other. So that the name
of Trebellianic portion has ever since been applied to this fourth
part that is taken out of the fiduciary substitutions of inheritances.
But this Trebellianic fourth part being founded on the same
equity, and being of the same nature, with the Falcidian portion,
or rather being only a sort of Falcidian portion, in that it re-
trenches the dispositions of a testator who should charge his exec-
utor to restore more than three fourths of the inheritance; this af-
finity between these two fourths has been the reason why the laws
have confounded them together, and that they have even given to
the Trebellianic portion the name of the Falcidian* And seeing
for this reason the rules of the Falcidian portion do almost all of
them agree to the Trebellianic portion, it is necessary that we
should join them to those which shall be explained in this title, in
which we shall confine ourselves to such rules as are necessarily
to be distinguished from those of the Falcidian portion. And as
to the rules of the Falcidian portion, which have no relation to the
Trebellianic portion, they come within so narrow a compass, and
are so easily distinguished, that it would be altogether useless to
make any remark on them here, seeing they may be easily dis-
cerned by the bare reading of them.

3891. We shall say nothing here of the double fourth part which
belongs to children who are charged with fiduciary substitutions,
to avoid repeating what has been said of this matter in the six-
teenth article of the first section of Direct and Fiduciary Substitu-
tions. The reader ought not to be surprised that he finds in this
title only a few articles; for it was necessary that we should con-
fine ourselves to the rules of which it is composed. And all the
rules which may be thought to be wanting here, and which swell
in the body of the Roman law the title relating to this subject,
have been explained either under the title of the Falcidian Portion,
as we have just now remarked, or in the other titles of this fifth
book, where we have set down every rule in its proper place.


® V. 0. 6, C. ad senat. Trebel. ; — 1.1, § 19, ead.


676 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART II. BOOK V.


SECTION I.


OF THE USE OF THE TREBELLIANIC PORTION, AND WHEREIN IT
CONSISTS.


Art. L


3892. Definition of the Trebellianic Portion.— The Trebelli-
anic portion is the fourth part of the inheritance, which ought to
remain to the executor who is charged to restore it


IL.


3893. It takes Place for an Executor who has but a Part of the
Inheritance. — If he who is charged with a fiduciary substitution
be heir or executor for a part only of the inheritance which he is
charged to restore, he will have the Trebellianic portion out of it,
which will be the fourth part of his portion of the inheritance.
And it would be the same thing if several heirs or executors were
charged to restore their shares of the inheritance, or only some of
them theirs: for every one of them would have the Trebellianic
portion of his own share.>


TIL


3894. The Testator may, in Lieu of the Trebellianic Fourth Part,
assign to the Executor etther Houses, Lands, or some other Thing.
— Although the fourth part which ought to remain to the executor
be a quota of the inheritance, which makes it necessary that there
should be a partition of the estate made between the executor and
the fiduciary substitute; yet the testator may assign to the exec-
utor a certain land or tenement, or other thing, or even a sum of
money in lieu of the said fourth part; and in this case, if the ex-
ecutor restore the whole inheritance to the fiduciary substitute,
excepting what is thus reserved to him by the testator, the subst-
tute would be solely answerable for all the charges; whereas if
the executor should take the fourth part of the inheritance, the
goods and the charges of the inheritance would be divided between
them proportionably to their shares.°


® § 5, Inst. de fideic. heared.

b $2 inf. eod.;—§ 8, inf. cod.

© § 9, Inst. de fideic. hared. ; —l. 80, § 8, D. ad senat. Treb.; —t. 2, C. eod.; —L. 47, § 1,
D. ad leg. Fale.


KIT. IV. SEC. 11.] TREBELLIANIC PORTION. 677


SECTION II.


OF THE CAUSES WHICH MAKE THE TREBELLIANIC PORTION TO
CEASE, OR WHICH DIMINISH IT.


Arr. I.


3895. The Testator may forbid the Deduction of the Trebellianic
Portion. — If the testator has expressly forbidden the deduction of
the Trebellianic portion, the executor is at liberty either to accept
or refuse the inheritance; but if he does accept it, he will be
obliged to fulfil the fiduciary substitution without retaining any
thing.*


IL.


3896. The Executor who restores voluntarily the whole Inherit-
ance, without retaining any Thing, cannot afterwards demand the
Trebellianic Portion. — If the. executor who might have retained
the Trebellianic portion had restored the whole inheritance, with-
out any deduction, he would not afterwards be admitted to de-
mand it: for it would be presumed that he had made restitution
of the whole inheritance only that he might fulfil more punctually
the fiduciary substitution; unless it should appear by the circum-
stances that some error in fact, or some other cause, ought to de-
stroy this presumption.®


° IIL


3897. The Fiduciary Substitute, who ts charged with a Second
Restitution, has no Right to the Trebellianic Portion. — If the fidu-
ciary substitute of the inheritance, or of a part of it, were likewise
charged to restore it to another person, he could not deduct a sec-
ond Trebellianic portion out of it, although the executor who had
restored the inheritance to him had retained his fourth part: for
the Trebellianic portion is due only to the executor who succeeds
immediately to the testator, unless the testator has likewise grant-
ed it to this fiduciary substitute.°


* D.1, § 19, D. ad senat. Trebell. ; — Nov. 1, c. 2, § ult.;—d.§ in f. See the last article,
and the remark that is there made on it.
b FT. 68, § 1, D. ad senat. Trebell. See the fifteenth and sixteenth articles of the fow'
section of the Falcidian Portion.
¢ ZL. 47,§1, D.ad leg. Fale. ; —1.1, $19, D. ad senat. Trebell. ; —1. 55, § 2, eod.
o7 *


678 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART Il. BOOK V.


IV.

3898. How the Fruits are reckoned or not reckoned as Part of
the Trebellianic Portion. — If the goods subject to the fiduciary
substitution were to be restored only some time after the death of
the testator, or after the existence of a condition on which the
substitution should depend, the fruits which the executor had
reaped before the substitution was open would be reckoned to
him as part of his Trebellianic portion. But the fruits reaped by
the executor after the time that the fiduciary substitution was
to take place, when the restitution of the substituted goods was
delayed only through the negligence of the substitute, would not
be reckoned as part of the Trebellianic portion due to the said ex-
ecutor.®


V.


3899. The Fruits are not reckoned to the Children as Part of
their Trebelliantc Portion.— The rule explained in the preceding
article, which reckons to the executor the fruits as part of his Tre-
bellianic portion, relates only to such executors as are not children
or descendants of the testator. For the fruits which the children
enjoy before the fiduciary substitution is open with which they are
charged by their father, mother, or other ascendant, accrue to
them without any diminution of the claims or demands which
they may have upon the inheritance which they are charged to re-
store ; whether it be that the fiduciary substitution be in favor of
their own children, or other descendants of the testator. And they
will have, over and above the fruits which they may have enjoyed,
their entire fourth part of the whole inheritance, even although the
testator had ordained that those fruits should be reckoned as part
of it‘


VI.


3900. Penalty of the Executor who is charged to restore the br
heritance, and who has not made an Inventory of the Effects.—
Seeing the Trebellianic portion is a fourth part of the inheritance,
the executor who pretends to retain this fourth part ought to show


4 7. 18,§ 1, D. ad senat. Trebell. ; —1. 52, § 5, cog.

e J. 22, § 2, eod. See the sixteenth article of the fourth section of the Falcidian Por-
tion, the ninth article of the first section of Substitutions, and the fifteenth article of the
second section of the same title.

f 7. 6, C. ad senat. Trebell.


TIT. IV. SEC. 11.] TREBELLIANIC PORTION. 679


what the goods of the inheritance consist in, in order to regulate
that which he may retain, and that which he ought to restore.
And this is what he cannot do but by making an inventory of all
the goods of the inheritance: which lays a double tie on this ex-
ecutor to make the said inventory, both for his own interest, that
he may establish his right to the Trebellianic portion, and regulate
the proportion of it, and for the interest of the fiduciary substitute,
that he-may be able to judge of the fidelity of the restitution of
the substituted goods, as has been mentioned in the twentieth
article of the first section of Substitutions. Thus, the executor
who, being charged with a fiduciary substitution of the inheritance,
or of a part of it, had neglected to make an inventory of the goods,
would be very justly deprived of the Trebellianic portion, unless
it were in a case which should not require this precaution, or that
particular circumstances should exempt him from this penalty,
which would be justly inflicted on him in case his not having
made an inventory could be anywise imputed to his want of fidel-
ity, or to his neglect.s


REMARKS ON THE Precepinc ARTICLE.


3901. It is to be remarked on this article, and on the twentieth
article of the first section of Substitutions, that several interpreters
have been of opinion, that, although the executor who is charged
with a fiduciary substitution of the inheritance has neglected to
make an inventory of the goods, he is not for that omission to be
deprived of the Trebellianic portion. And the chief foundation
on which they build their opinion is, that, the privation of the Tre-
bellianic portion being a punishment, it ought not to be inflicted
on the executor unless there be an express law that has established
it: that it is true, that the laws have ordained that the executor
shall forfeit his right to the Falcidian portion of legacies when he
has neglected to make an inventory; but that this punishment
ought not to be extended to the executor who is charged with a
fiduciary substitution of the inheritance, or of a part of it, because
penal laws are not to be extended beyond the cases for which they
were designed. The other interpreters, on the contrary, ground
their opinion on the necessity of an inventory, in order to justify
the fidelity of the executor in making the restitution; and they


& See the texts cited on the twentieth article of the first section of Direct and Fiduciary
Substitutions.


680 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT M1. BOOK V.


add, that whatever the laws have regulated in the matter of the
Falcidian portion is common to the Trebellianic portion, because
of the confusion which the laws have made of these two fourths
into one, as has been observed in the preamble of this title, and
that the same reasons make it necessary to have an inventory in
the one case as well as the other; and that likewise Justinian in
his first novel, chap. 2, where he ordains that the Falcidian por-
tion shall be forfeited in case there be no inventory, obliges the
executor to satisfy, not only the entire legacies, but also the fidu-
ciary bequests: Non retinebit Falcidiam, sed complebit legatarios
et fideicommissartos ; which words those of the other party restrain
to fiduciary bequests of particular things, and that with very good
reason.

3902. This question has been variously decided in divers tribu-
nals of Europe, and there have been likewise contrary judgments
given thereupon in several parliaments of this kingdom, in which
they have always had a due regard to the particular circumstances
of each case. For it is certain that there are cases in which it
would not be just to deprive the executor of the Trebellianic por-
tion for want of an inventory; as, for example, if an executor were
charged to restore the inheritance at the same instant that he
should accept it; because in this case, which was very frequent
under the Roman law, there would be no inventory to make, the
fiduciary substitute having nothing to do but to take the declara-
tion of the executor who restores the inheritance to him, and so to
take possession of the goods. And the like case might happen if
a testator who had a mind to convey his inheritance, or a part of
it, to a relation or friend who was absent in a foreign country, had
instituted another person his executor, and had charged him to re-
store the inheritance which he left to him in trust to his absent
friend as soon as he should return, and the said absent person
chanced to return about the time of the testator’s death; for the
executor in this case, being willing to restore the substituted in-
heritance at the same time that he accepted it, would have no oc-
casion to make an inventory in order to preserve his Trebellianic
portion. There are also other cases in which it would not be just
to deprive the executor of the Trebellianic portion for his not hav-
ing made an inventory; as, for example, if the executor were 4
minor, and his guardian had omitted to make the said inventory,
or if the death of the testator had happened in the time of a
plague. And if in these and other the like cases the fiduciary sub-


TIT. IV. SEC. 11.] TREBELLIANIO PORTION. 681


stitute should pretend that the restitution were not entire, he would
be allowed to bring proofs of the goods, and of their value. We
were in doubt whether we should except also the case where the
executor should happen to be a son of the testator’s, and was
charged with a fiduciary substitution in favor of his own children:
if, for example, the substitution were only for the benefit of one of
the children, and the circumstances should give ground to pre-
sume, that some favor had been shown to the other children in
prejudice of the substitution. What gives occasion to the doubt
is, that on the one part the father might prejudice the interest of
the child who was to have the benefit of the substitution, and
might diminish the restitution in favor of the other children; and
that on the other part the said father of the substitute being to re-
tain out of all the goods of the testator both his legitime and also
the Trebellianic portion, according to the remark made on the
sixteenth article of the first section of Substitutions, the same is
considered as a part of his legitime. So that it might be a hard-
ship to deprive him of it for want'of an inventory. But if the ex-
ecutor were a stranger, or even a collateral relation, and charged
with a fiduciary substitution, it would seem to be just that for the
want of an inventory he should forfeit the Trebellianic portion, as
he would forfeit the Falcidian portion on the same account, there
being the same reasons for both. And although we should sup-
pose that Justinian in this nove] had only the Falcidian portion in
his view, yet it does not seem to be necessary that we should have
an express law to oblige the executor who is charged with a fidu-
ciary substitution to make an inventory of the goods, in order to
prove his fidelity in making restitution of them. This duty is en-
joined by the law of nature, and by consequence it is natural also
that the want of an inventory should be punished by some pen-
alty, which ought to be at least the privation of a benefit which,
consisting in a quota of the inheritance, could not be given to the
executor unless he should make appear what the inheritance con-
sisted in; seeing otherwise it would be an encouragement to fraud-
ulent concealments of the effects.

3903. It is upon these different considerations that we have
thought proper to compose this article in the manner in which
it is conceived, in order to reconcile the letter of the rules of law
with equity, which ought to be the life and spirit of them.


APPENDIX.


EXPLANATION


OF THE MANNER IN WHICH THE TEXTS OF THE ROMAN LAW
ARE REFERRED TO IN THE FOREGOING TREATISE.


Tue several parts of the Corpus Juris Crvitis, which are principally re-
ferred to in The Civil Law in tts Natural Order, are the Institutes, Digest
or Pandects, Code, and Novels.


The INstiTUTEs are divided into four books, each of which is divided into
titles, which are severally subdivided into sections or paragraphs.


The Dicest is divided into fifty books, each book into titles, each title
into laws (sometimes also called fragments), and many of the laws into
sections or paragraphs. Books 30, 31, and 32, which treat of legacies and
trusts, are not divided into several titles, but contain each of them a single
title only, with the same rubric, namely, de legatis et fideicommissis.


The Cope is divided into twelve Books, each book into titles, each title


into laws, and the laws frequently into paragraphs or sections, in the same
manner with the Digest.


The Novets, or New Constitutions, are numbered, and divided into
chapters.


The several books, titles, laws, and paragraphs are numbered consecu-
tively. The titles only have a rubric.


The general plan of reference to the Institutes, Digest, and Code is by
the rubric of the title, or, where the rubric is long, by the first two or
three words of it, with the number of the law, and also of the paragraph
where the law cited is thus divided. The words of the title are weually
abbreviated.

VOL. II. 58


686 APPENDIX.


The Digest is denoted by the letter D.; the Institutes, by the letter Z, or
the abbreviation Inst. ; the Code, by the letter C., or Cod. ; the Novels, by
the letter V., or Nov.


The letter L. is used to designate a law; the sign §, 8 paragraph or
section of a law.


The mode of reference will be best explained by a few examples.


L. 2, D. de fidej. et mand. — This reference denotes the second law of
the title of the Digest de fidejussoribus et mandatoribus, which will be
found by reference to the subjoined table to be the first title of the forty-
sixth book.


L. 29, § 6, D. mand. — This refers to the sixth section or paragraph of
the twenty-ninth law of the title of the Digest mandaté vel contra, which is
the first title of the seventeenth book.


L. 10, § ult. D. mand. — The last paragraph of the tenth law of the
same title of the Digest.


L. 1, C. de fidej. min. — The first law of the title of the Code de fide
jussoribus mtnorum, which is the twenty-fourth title of the second book.


§ 1, Inst. de duob. reis. — Institutes, the first paragraph of the title de
duobus reis stipulandi et promittendi, which is the sixteenth title of the
third book.


L. pen. C. de non num. pec.— The last law but one of the title of the
Code de non numerata pecunia, which is the thirtieth title of the fourth
book.


The abbreviation eod. denotes the title given in the reference next imme-
diately preceding: thus, L. 9, § ult. eod., immediately following the refer-
ence L, 20, § 2, D. de pign. act., denotes the last paragraph of the ninth
law of the title of the Digest de pignoratitia actione vel contra, which
is the seventh title of the thirteenth book.


If the last reference be to a different part of the Corpus Juris Civilis
from the first, the part referred to is designated by the proper letter or
abbreviation : thus, L. ult. Cod. eod., following immediately after L. 4, D.
in quib. caus. pign. vel hyp. tac. contr., which is the second title of the
twentieth book of the Digest, denotes the last law of the Code contained
in the title bearing the same rubric with the title of the Digest referred
to, namely, the fifteenth title of the eighth book, in quibus causis pignus
vel hypotheca tacite contrahitur.


The words in fine, or the abbreviations én fin., in f., denote that the
particular passage referred to is at the end of the law or paragraph thus
designated.


EXPLANATION OF REFERENCES. 687


The letters D. 1. denote the said law, that is, the law designated by the
reference next immediately preceding. D. UW. are used when more than
one law is referred to. JD. ¢., the said title. D. §, the said section or
paragraph.

Some of the titles contain but a single law. When this is the case, the
reference is in this form: L. un. C. ut caus. post pubert. ads. tut., or the
only law in the title of the Code ut cause post pubertatem adsit tutor, which
is the forty-eighth title of the fifth book.


The words in principio, or the abbreviations in pr., tn prin., denote the
beginning of the law, or of the other particular part referred to. Where a
law is divided into several paragraphs, the first is not numbered, and is
referred to in this manner. Thus, by ZL. 1, én prin. D. de calumniat., is
meant the paragraph at the beginning of the first law of the title of the
Digest de calumntatoribus, which is the sixth title of the third book.


L. 71, in f. princ. D. de fidej. et mand.— At the end of the paragraph
commencing the law seventy-first, &c.


The letter V., as V. 2. 1, § 3, dc. (that is, see the passage referred to),
indicates that the law designated is referred to, not as directly, but only by
analogy, supporting the principle to which it is cited.


L. un. § 17, versic. sin autem, Cod. de rei ux. act. — This refers to the
seventh paragraph of the only law of the Code, book fifth, title thirteen, de
ret urorie actione, &c., at the sentence commencing with the words sin
autem.


The three books 30, 31, and 32 of the Digest, which treat of legacies
and trusts, each of which contains but a single title, with the rubric de
legatis et fideicommissis, are referred to as de legat. 1, de legat. 2, de legat.
3. Thus, L. 37, § 5, D. de legat. 3, denotes the Digest, book 32, law
37, § 5.


According to a still more ancient mode of reference, which occurs once
or twice, the initial words of the law cited are given instead of its number.
Thus, L. st ut certo, D. Commodati vel contra, denotes the fifth law of
the sixth title of the Digest, book 13.


A TABLE


OF THE RUBRICS OF THE SEVERAL TITLES OF THE INSTI-
TUTES, DIGEST, AND CODE, ARRANGED IN ALPHABETICAL


ORDER.


P A.


de Abigeis. D. 47, 14.

de Abolitionibus. C. 9, 42.

de Acceptilatione. D. 46, 4

de Acceptilationibus. C. 8, 44.

de vars et inscriptionibus. D. 48,
2 2

de Acquirenda et retinenda possessione.


de Acguirenda vel amittenda possessione.
41,2.

de heeds vel omittenda hereditate.
D. 29,2. C. 6, 30.

de Acquirendo rerum dominio. D. 41, 1.

de Acquisitione per arrogationem. I. 3, 10.

de Actione rerum amotarum. D. 25, 2.

de Actionibus. I. 4, 6.

de Actionibus emti et venditi. D. 19, 1.
C. 4, 49.

de Actore a tutore vel curatore dando, C.5,
61.


de Ademtione legatorum. I. 2,21. D. 34,4.
de Ademtione li D. 40, 6.

Ad exhibendum. D.10,4. C. 8, 42.
de Adimendis vel transferendis legatis. D


C. 9, 137.
D. 48, 16.


34,4. I. 2, 21.

Ad lege Aquiliam. D. 9,2 14,3.

3

Ad legem Corneliam de falsis. (. 9, 22.
D. 48, 10.

Ad legem Corneliam de sicariis. D. 48,
8. C. 9, 16.

Ad legem "Fabiam de plagiariis. C. 9,
20. 48, 15.

Ad legem Falcidiam. D. $5, 2. C. 6,
50. 1.2, 22.

Ad legem Juliam de adulteriis. D. 48,
5. C.9,9.


ae legem onan de ambitu. C. 9, 26.
48, 1
ce legem “Soliam majestatis. D. 48, 4.


Ad lege Juliam peculatas, ete. D. 48,
13 . 9, 28.
Ad legem Juliam repetundarum. C. 9,
37. D. 48, 11.
Ad legem Juliam de vi publica. D. 48,
6. C.9, 12.
Ad — ca de vi privata. D. 48,
7.
Ad toy Viselliam. C. 9, 2.
de Administratione et periculo tutorum e
curatorum, etc. . 26, 7.
de Administratione rerum ad civitates pet
tinentium. D. 50, 8.
de Administratione rerum publicarnm. C.
11, $0.
de Administratione tutorum vel curatoram,
etc. C. 5, 37.
Ad municipalem et de incolis. D. 50, 1.
de Adoptionibus. I.1,11. C. 8, 4&
de ees et emancipationibus, ete.


er 86. Macedonianum. C. 4, 28. D.


Ad SC. + mois I.3,4. C. 6,57.

38, 17.

Ad SC. Tertullianum. I. $, 3. C. 6,
56. D. 38, 17.

ae ie Trebellianum. D. 36,1. C.6,


Ad "aC. Turpillianum, etc. D. 48, 16.


C. 9, 42. 45.
Ad SC. Velleianum. D. 16, 1. ae


de Advocatis diversorum judiciorum.


2, 7. :
de Advocatis diversorum judicum. C. 2, 8


TABLE OF TITLES.


de Advoeantis fieci. C. 2, 9.

de Edificiis privatis. C. 8, 10.

de Acdilitiis actionibas. C. 4, 58.

de /Edilitio edicto, ete. D. al, 1.

de Astimatoria actione. D. 19, 3.

de Agentibus in rebus. C. 12, 20.

de Agnoscendis et alendis liberis, ete. D.
25,3. C. 5, 25.

de Agricolis, et censitis, et colenis. C. 11,


de Agricolis et mancipiis dominicis, etc. C.
11, 67.
de Albo scribendo. D. 50, 3.
de Aleatoribus. D.11,5. C.3, 43.
de ater liberis ac parentibus. C. 5, 25.
25, 3.
de Alexandria primatibus. C. 11, 28.
de Alienatione judicii mutandi causa facta.
D. 4,7. C. 2, 55.
de Alimentis pupillo prestandis. C. 5,50.
de Alimentis vel cibariis legatis. D. 34, 1.
de erat et paludibus, et pascuis, etc.
7,41
de Annali exceptione Italici contractus tol-
lenda, etc. C.7, 40
de Annonis civilibus. C. ‘WL, 24.
de Annonis et capitatione administrantium,
ete. ©. 1, 52.
de Annonis et tributis. C. 10, 16.
de Annuis legatis et fideicommissis. D.
An per aliam cause appellationum red-
di possunt. D. 49, 9.
servus pro suo facto post manumis-
sionem teneatur. C. 4, 14.
de Apochis publicis, ete. C. 10, 22.
de Apostatis. C. 1, 7.
de Apparitoribus comitis Orientis. C. 12,
57.


de eure ie magistrorum militum, etc.
de Apparitoribus prefecti annonz. C. 13,


de Apparitoribus preefecti urbi. C. 12, 54.
de ate sa preefectorum preetorio, etc.


de Appartribas proconsulis et legati. C.
de Appellationibas et consultationibus. C.
62.


de Appellationibus et relationibus. D. 49, 1.
de er its recipiendis vel non. D.
Apad eum, a quo appelletur, atiam cau-
agere compellendam. D. 49, 12.
de Aaiaaues C. 11, 42.
de a hag aquss pluvie arcends. D. 39,
3, 43.


de Aqua quotidiana et estiva. D. 43, 20.
A quibus appellare non licet. D. 49, 2.
Arbitrium tutele. C. 5, 51.

de Arboribus ceedendis. D. 43, 27.

Ps Arborum hn act oas D. pM
eer retio, thesanris in fertur.

10, be.


58 *


689


de Assertione tollenda. C. 7, 17.

de Assessoribus, et domesticis, et cancella-
riis judicom. C.1,51. D.1, 22.

de Assignandis libertis. D. 38, 4.

de Assignatione libertorum. I. 3, 8.

de Athletis. C. 10, 53.

de Atiliano tutore, etc. I. 1, 20.

de Auctoritate et conscnsu tutorum et cura-
torum. D. 26, 8.

de Auctoritate preatanda. C. 5, 59.

de Auctoritate tutorum et curatoram. I.1,
21.

de Auri publici persecutoribus. C. 10, 72.

de Auro, argento, etc., et statuis legatis. D.


34, 2.
de Auro coronario. C. 10, 74.


B.


de Bonis auctoritate eae possidendis, etc.
C.7,72. D. 42, 5.6

de Bonis damnatorum. D. 48, 20.

de Bonis eorum, qui ante sententiam vel
mortem sibi consciverunt, vel accasa-
torem corruperunt. D. 48,21. C. 9,
50.


de Bonis libertorum. D. 38} 2.

de Bonis libertorum et jure patronatus.
6,4. D. 37, 14.

de Bonis maternis et materni generis. C. 6,
60


C.


de Bonis proscriptorum seu damnatorum.


, 49.

de Bonis, que liberis in potestate constitu-
tis, etc., acquiruntar. C. 6, 61.

de Bonis vacantibus et de incorporatione.
C. 10, 10.

de Bonorum possessione contra tabulas. D.
37,4. C. 6, 12. 13.

de Bonoram possessione ex tcstamento mi-
litis. D. 37, 14.

de Bonorum possessione furioso, etc., com-
petente. PD. 37, 3.

de Bonorum possessione secundum tabulas.


D. 37,11. C. 6, 1.
de Bonoram possessionibus. I. 3,9 D.
87,1


Cc.


de Cadaveribus punitoruam. D. 48, 24

de Caducis tollendis. C. 6, 51.

de Calumniatoribus. D. 3,6. C. 9, 46.
de Canone framentario urbis Rome. C. 11,


22.

de oa largitionalium titulorum. C. 10,

de Capiendis et distrahendis Rene tri-
butorum causa. C. 10, 21.

de itatione civium censibus eximenda.

- 1l, 48.

de Capite minatis. D. 4, 5.

de Capitis deminutione. I. 1, 16.

de Captivis et de postliminio, etc. D. 49, 15.


690
de Carboniano elicto. D. 37, 10. ©. 6,
1


de Castrensianis et ministerianis. C. 12,
26.

de arene omnium palatinoram peculio.

12, 31.

de Castrensi peculio. D. 49, 17.

de Castrensi peculio militum et preefectia-
norum. C. 12, 37.

de Censibus. D. 50, 15.

de Censibus, et censitoribus, ete. C. 11,57.

de Cessione bonorum. D. 42, 3.

de Classicis. C. 11, 12.

de Cloacis. D. 43, 23.

de Codicillis. I. 2,25. D. 29,7. C. 6,

36.

de Cohortalibus principibus, ete. C. 12, 58.

de Collatione at ad igo

de Collatione bonorum. Ds 37, 6.

de Collatione donatorum vel relevatorum,
ete. C. 10, 28.

de Collatione fundorum fiscalium, cte. C.


11, 73.
de ee fandorum patrimonialiam, etc.
. 11, 64.
de Collationibus. C. 6, 20.
de Colegins et chartopratis, ete. C. 11,


de Collegiis et corporibus. D. 47, 22
de or mad detegenda. D. 40, is ¢ 7,


de Colonis Iilyricianis. C. 11, 52.

de Colonis Palestinis. C. 11, 50.

de Colonis Thracensibus. C. 11, 51.

de Comitibus consistorianis. C. ‘1s, 10.

de Comitibus et archiatris sacri palatii.
12, 13.

de Comitibus et tribunis scholaram. C. 12,
Il.

de Comitibus, qui provincias regunt. C. 13,
14.


de Comitibus rei militaris. C. 12, 12.
de Commeatu. C. 13, 43.
de Commerciis e¢ mercatoribus. C. 4, 63.
Comminationes, epistolas, etc., auctori-
tatem rei judicate non habere. C. 7,
57.
Commodati vel contra. D. 13, 6.
de Commodato. C. 4, 23.
Communia de legatis et fideicommissis,
ete. C. 6, 43.
ae de manumissionibus. C. 7,


Gonenits de successionibus. C. 6, 59.
Communia de nsucapionibus. C. 7, 30.
Communia prediorum, tam urbanorom,
quam rusticorum. D. 8, 4.
appar utriusque judicii, tam fami-
ae ®, quam comm. div. C.


8, 38.
Communi dividaundo. D. 10,8. C. 2 37.
de Communi servo manumisso.
de eee rerum


de Goanesiali seen D. 16,2. C. 4,381.


a oe


APPENDIX.


de Concubinis. D. 25,7. C.5, 96.
de Concussione. D. 47, 13.
de Condictione causa data, causa mon sece-
ta. D. 12, 4.
de Condictione ex lege. D. 13, 2.
de Condictione ex lege, et sine cansa vel in-
jasta causa. C. 4,9.
de Condictione fartiva. D.13,1. C.4,8
de Condictione indebiti. D.12,6. C.4,5
de Condictione ob causam datorum. C. 4. 6.
de eee ob turpem causam. D. 12,
5. 4,7.
de Condictione sme causa. D. 12, 7.
de Condictione triticiaria. D. 13, 3.
de Sai et demonstrationibas, ete.
35, 1
de Conditionibus insertis tam in legatis,
tam in fideicommissis ct libertatibas.
. 6, 46.
de Conditionibus institutionum. D. 28, 7.
de Conditis in publicis horreis. C. 10, 26.
de Conductoribus et procuratoribus sive ac-
reir prediorum fiscalium, ete. C.
11, 71
de Confessis. D. 42,2. C. 7, 59.
de Confirmando tutore vel curatore. D. 26,
8. C. 5, 29.
de Conjungendis cum emancipato liberis
ejus. D. 37, 8.
de Consortibus ejusdem litis. C. 3, 40.
de Constituta ia. C.4,18. D.13,5.
de ac cea princippm. D. 1, 4.


de Consulibus, etc., et de preefectis et magis-
tris militam, et patriciis. C. 12, an


C. {de Contractibus judicum vel coram, qui sunt


circa eos, etc. C. 1, 53.
de Contrahenda emtione, e¢ de pactis inter
emtorem et venditorem, ete. D. 18,1.
de Contrahenda emtione et venditione. C.


4, 38.

de Contrahenda et committanda stipulatio-
ne. D. 8, 38.

de Contraria tutele et utili actione. D.
27, 4.

de Contrario judicio tutele. C. 5, 58.

de Conveniendis fisci debitoribus. C. 10,2.

Creditorem evictionem pignoris non de-


bere. C. 8, 46.

de Crimine expilate hereditatis. C. 9, 32.
D. 47, 19.

de Crimine peculatus. C. 9,28. D. 48, 13


de Crimine sacrilegii. C. 9, 29.

de Crimino stellionatus. C. 9, HM.

de Cupressis ex luco Daphnensi, etc., non
excidendis. C. 11, =


de Curationibus. I. 1, 23
de Curatore bonis dando. Dp. 42, 7.
de Curatore furiosi vel prodi C. 5, 70.


de Curatoribus furioso et aliis extra mino-
res dandis. D. 27, 10.

de Curiosis et stationariis. C. 12, 23.

de Cursa publico, etc. C. 12, 51.

de Custodia et reorum. D. 48,3.

de Custodia reorum. C. 9, 4.


TABLE OP TITLES.


D.


«ie Damno infecto, et de suggrundiis et pro-
tectionibus. D. 39, 2.
Debitorem venditionem pignoris impe-
dire non posse. C. 8, 29.
dle Debititoribus civitatum. C. 11, $2.
ale Decanis. C.12, 27.
die Decretia ab ordine faciendis. D. 50, 9.
de Decretis decurionum super immunitate
concedenda. C. 10, 46.
Ge Decnrialibus urbis Romex. C. 11, 13.
Ge Decurionibus et filiis eoram. D. 50, 2.
C. 10, 31.
de Dedititia libertate tollenda. C. 7, 5.
de Defensoribus civitatum. C. 1, 55.
de Delatoribus. C. 10, 11.
Depositi vel contra. D. 16, 3. C. 4,
34


de Desertoribus et occultatoribus eoram. C.
12, 46.

de Dignitatibus. C. 12, 1.

de Dilationibus. C.3,11. D. 2, 12.

de Discussoribus. C. 10, 30.

de Distractione pignorum. D. 20,5. C. 3,
28


de Diversis officiis et apparitoribus judicum,
etc. C. 12, 60.

de Diversis preediis urbanis et rusticis tem-
plorum ct civitatam, etc. C. 11, 69.

de ee regulis juris antiqui. D. 50,
l


de Diversis rescriptis et pragmaticis sanc-
tionibus. C. 1, 23.

de Diversis temporalibus preescriptionibus,
et de accessionibus possessionum.


44, 3.

de Dividenda tatela, ete. C. 5, 52.

de Ba eet rerum et qualitate. D. 1, 8.

.% 1.
de Divisione stipulationum. I. 3, 18.
Divortio facto, apud quem liberi morari

et educari debeant. C. 5, 24.

de Divortiis et repudiis. D. 24, 2.

de Doli mali et metus exceptione. .D. 44,


4.
de Dolo malo. D.4,3. C. 2, 21.
de Domesticis et protectoribus. C. 12, 17.
de Donationibus. I. 2,7. D.39,5. C.8,
54.
de Donationibas ante naptias, etc. C. 5, 3.
de Donationibus causa mortis. C. 8, 57.
D. 39, 6.
de Donationibus inter viram et uxorem. D.
24,1. C.5, 16.
de Donationibus, qaxz sub modo vel condi-
tione, etc., conficiuntur. C. 8, 55.
de Dote cauta, nou namerata. C. 5, 15.
de Dote prale D. 88, 4.
de Dotis collatione. D. 37, 7.
de eeu promissione et nuda pollicitatione.
.5,11
de Duobus reis constituendis. D. 45, 2.
de Duobus reis stipulandi et promittendi.
I. 3,16. C. 8, 40.


691


E.


de Edendo. D.2,1% C.2, 1.
de Edicto divi Hadriani tollendo, ete. C.
6, 33.
de Effractoribus et expilatoribus. D. 47, 18.
de a aaa iberorum. C. 8, 49.
1, 7.
de Emendatione propinquorum. C. 9, 15.


de Emendatione servorum. C. 9, 14.
de Emtione et venditione. JI. 3, 28. D.
18, 1.
de se) cui libertatis causa bona addicuntar.
3, 11.
de Eo, er quem factum erit, quo minus


quis in judicio sistat. D. 2, 10.
de Eo, qui pro tutore prove curatore nego-
tia gessit. D. 27,5. C.5, 45.
de Eo, quod certo loco dari oportet. D.
13, 4.
de Episcopali audientia, ete. C. 1, 4.
de Episcopis et clericis, ete. C. 1, 3.
de Equestri dignitate. C. 12, 32.
de Erogatiene militaris annonz. C. 12, 38.
de Errore advocatorum, ete. C. 2, 10.
de Errore calculi. C. 2, 5.
Etiam ob chirographariam pecuniam pig-
nus teneri posse. C. 8, 27
Etiam per procuratorem causam in inte-


grum restitutionis agi poese. C. 2, 49.
Eum, qui appellaverit, in provincia de-
fendi. D. 49, 1.


de Eunuchis. C. 4, 42.

de Evictionibus. C. 8, 45.

de Evictionibus et dupla stipulatione. D.
21, 2.

de Exactoribus tributoram. C. 10, 19.

de Exceptione rei judicate. D. 44, 2.

de Exceptione rei vendits et tradite. D.
21, 3.

de Exceptionibus. I. 4, 13.

de Exceptionibus, preescriptionibus et pree-


jadiciis. D. 44,1.
de Exceptionibus seu preescriptionibus. C.
8, 36.


de Excoctione et translatione militarium an-
nonarum. C. 12, 39.

de Excusationibus artificnm. C. 10, 64.

de Excusationibus manerum. C. 10, 47.

de Excusationibus tutoram vel curatorum.
I. 1,25. D. 27,1. C.5, 62.

de Excusationibus veteranoram. C. 5, 65.

Ex delictis defunctorum in quantum he-

redes conveniantur. C. 4, 17.

de Exercitoria actione. D.14,1. C.4, 25.

de Exheredatione liberorum. I. 2, 13.

de Exhibendis et transmittendis reis. C. 9,
3. D. 48, 3.

de Expensis ladorum publicoram. C. 11,


4l.

Expilatw hereditatis. D.47, 19. C.9,
32.

Ex quibus causis infamia irrogatur. C.
2,12. D. 3,2.

Ex quibus causis majores XXV. annis


692


et eee sen eaeeeane: D. 4,6. C.
2, 54
de Exsecatione rei jadicate. C. 7, 53.
de Exsecutoribus et exactoribus. C. 12 6}.
de Extraordinariis cognitionibus, etc. D.


50, 13.
de Extraordinariis criminibas. D. 47,11.


F.


de Fabricensibus. C. 11, 9.

de Falea causa rere legato vel fideicom-
misso. C.6

de Falea moneta. C. 9, 4.
Familie erciscundw. D.10,2. C. 3, 36.
de Famosis libellis. C. 9,36. D. 47, 10.
de Feriis. C. 3, 12.
de Feriis, et dilationibus, et diversis tempo-
ribas. D. 2,12. C.3, 11.

de Fide et jure haste fiscalia, ete. C. 10,3.

de hear pr eal hereditatis petitione.

. 5, 6.

de Fideicommissariis hereditatibus. I. 2, 23.

de Eco mieeerile libertatibus. D. 40,
5. C.7,4.

de Fideicommissis. C. 6,42. D. 30-83.

de Fide instrumentorum. D. 22, 4.

de Fide instramentorum, et amissione ¢e0-
ram, et apochis, ete. C. 4, 21.

de Fidejussoribus. I. 3, 20.

de car carwirs et mandatoribus. D. 46,
1. C. 8, 41.

de Fidejussoribus, et nominatoribas, et here-
dibus tutorum et curatoruam. D. 27, 7.

de Fidejussoribus minorum. C. 2, 24.

de errata tutorum vel curatornm.

. 5, 57.
de Fidaciaria tutela. I. 1, 19.
de Filiisfamilias, et quemadmodum pro his
r teneatur. C. 10, 60.

de Filiofamilias minore C 2, 23.

de Filiis officialium militarium, qui in bello
moriantur. C. 12, 48.
Finium regundorum. D. 10,1. C. 3,39.
de Fiscalibus usuris. C. 10,8
de Fluminibus, ne quid in flumine vom
ripave ejus fiat, ete. D. 43,1

de Fonte. D. 43, 22.

de Formulis et impetrationibus actionum
sublatis. C. 2, 58.

de Fructibus et litiam expensis. C. 7, 51.

de Framento Alexandrino. C. 11, 27.

de Frumento urbis Constantinopolitane.
C. 11, 23.

de Fugitivis. D. 11, 4.

de ae satire colonis patrimonialibus, etc.


de Fundis et saltibus rei dominics. C. 11,
66.


de Fundis limitrophis, etc. C. 11, 59.
de Fundis patrimonialibus, etc. C. 11, 61.
de Fundis rei stirs et saltibus divinm do-


mus. C. 11, 65.
de Hunde dotali. 'D. 98, 5. C. 5, 23.


APPENDIX.


de Fundo roa vel instrumento legato.
. 33
de Furibus ‘balneariis. D. 47, 17.


D. 47, 2.
de Furtis et servo corrupto. C.6, 2 D.
Il, 3.


G.


de Generali abolitione. C. 9, 43.
de tedistoibae penitus tollendis. C. 11,


de Glande legenda. D. 43, 28.

de Gradibus ionis. I. 3, 6.

de Gradibas, et affinibus, et nominibus ¢o-
ram. D.38, 10.

de Grege dominico. C. 11, 75.


EL
de arias et Manicheis et Samaritis.
.1, 5.

de Heredibus instituendis. I. 2,14. D.28,
5. , a4.

de Heredibus tutoram vel curatoruam. C. 5,

de Heresitariis actionibus. C. 4, 16.

de Hereditate vel actione vendita. D. 18,
4. C. 4,39.

de Hereditatibus decurionum, naviculario-
ram, ete. C. 6, 62.

de Hereditatibus, qum ab intestato deferun-
tar. 1.3, 1.

de Hereditatis petitione. D. 5,3. C.3, 31.

de Heredum qualitate et differentia. I. 2, 19.

de His, qu ex publica collatione illata
sunt, non usurpandis. C. 10, 73.

de His, que in testamento debentur, etc.


D. 28, 4.
de ov ng poenes causa relinquuntar. D.


de His, psi peen® nomine in testamento
vel codicillis scribuntur. C. 6, 41.
de His, que pro non scriptis habentar.


34, 8.

de His, quw sub modo legata seu fideicom-
missa relinquuntar. C. 6, 45.

de His, a ut indignis auferuntur. D.
34, 9


do er que vi metusque causa gesta sunt.
C. 2,20. D.4,2

de His, qui accusare non possunt. C. 9, 1.

de His, qui ad ecclesias iant. C.1, 12.

de His, qui ad statuas confugiunt. C. 1, 25.

de His, ig anon domino manumissi sunt


; 0.
de His, qui ante apertas tabulas bereditatem
transmittunt. C. 6, 52.
de His, qui a principe vacationem impetrs-
verant. C. 10, 44.
de His, quibus ut indignis hereditates aufe-
rantur, etc. C. 6,35.


TABLE OF TITLES.


de His, qui effaderint vel dejecerint. D.


9, 3.

de His, qui ex officio, quod administrarunt,
conveniuntur. C. 11, 38.

de His, qui ex publicis rationibus mutuam
pecuniam acceperunt. C. 10, 6.

de His, qui in ecclesiis manumittuntur. C.


1, 13.
de His, qui in cxsiliam dati, vel ab ordine
moti sunt. C. 10, 59.


de His, qui in priorum creditorum locum
succedunt. C. 8, 19.

de His, qui latrones vel aliis criminibus reos
occultaverint C. 9, 39.

de His, qui non impletis stipendiis sacra-
mento soluti sunt. C. 10, 54.

de His, qui notantur infamia. D.3,2. C.
2, 12.

de His, qui numero liberorum vel pauper-
tate excusationem meruerunt. C. 10,
51.

de His, qui parentes vel liberos occiderunt.


9, 17.
de His, qui potentiorum nomine titulos pre-
diis affigunt, ete. C.2,15.
de His, qui per metum judicis non appella-
verunt. C. 7, 67.
de His, qui se deferunt. C. 10, 18.
de 7s qui sibi adscribunt in testamento.
9, 23


de His, qui sponte munera publica subeunt.
43


de His, qui sui vel alieni juris sunt. D. 1,


de His, qui veniam etatis impetraverunt.
2, 45


de Homine libero exhibendo. D. 48, 29.
de Honoratorum vehiculis. C. 11, 19.


L


de Tis, per quos agere possumus. [. 4,
10.
de pean sui vel alien{ juris sunt. [. 1, 8.
1, 6.
de Immunitate nemini concedenda. C. 10,


5.
de Impensis in res dotales factis. D. 25, 1.
de Imponenda lucrativa descriptione. C.
10, 35.
de Impuberum et aliis substitutionibus. C.
, 26.
de Incendio, ruina, naufragio, etc. D. 47, 9.
de Incertis personis. C. 6, 48.
de Incestis et inutilibus nuptiis. C. 5, 5.
de Incolis, et ubi quis domicilium habere
videtur, etc. C. 10, 39.
de Indictionibus. C. 10, 17.
de Indicta viduitate et lege Julia Miscella
tollenda. C. 6, 40.
de In diem addictione. D. 18, 2.
de Infamibas. C. 10, 57.
de Infantibus expositis liberis et servis, etc.
C. 8, 53.


693


de Infirmandis pcenis ccelibatus et orbitatis,
etc. C. 8,58. ,

de Ingenuis. JI. 1, 4.

de Ingenuis manamissis. C. 7, 14.

de Ingratis liberis. C. 8, 50.

de In integrum restitutione minorum XX V.
annis. C. 2, 22.

de In integrum restitutione postulata, ne
quid novi fiat. C. 2, 50.

de In integrum restitutionibus. D. 4, 1.

de Injuriis. I. 4, 4.

de Injuriis et famosis libellis.
C. 9, 35. 36.

de Injusto, rupto, irrito facto testamento. D.
28, 3.


de In jus vocando. D. 2,4. C. 2, 2.
In jus vocati ut eant, aut satis vel cau-
tum dent. D. 2, 6.
de In litem dando tutore vel curatore. C.
5, 44.
de In litem jurando. D 12,3. C. 5,388.
de Inofficiosis donationibus. C. 3, 29.
de Inofficiosis dotibus. C. 3, 30.
de Inofficioso testamento. I. 2, 18. D. 5,
2. C.3, 28.
In quibus casibus tutorem vel curatorem
Se tutor vel curator dari potest.
. 5, 36.
In quibus causis cessat longi temporis
prescriptio. C. 7.34.
In quibus causis coloni censiti dominos
accusare possint. C. 11, 49.
In quibus causis in integrum restitutio
necessaria non est. C. 2, 41.
In quibus causis militantes fori preescrip-
tione uti non possunt. C. 3, 25.
In quibus causis pignus vel hypotheca
tacite contrahitur. D. 20, 2. C. 8,
15.
de In rem verso. D. 15,3. C. 4, 26.
de a ere ventre custodiendoque partu.
. 25, 4.


D. 47, 10.


de Institoria actione. D. 14, 3.

de Institoria et exercitoria actione.
25. D. 14,1.

de Institutionibus, et substitutionibus, et
restitutionibus sub conditione factis.
C. 6, 25.

de Instructo vel instrumento legato. D.
33, 7.

Inter alios acta, etc., aliis non nocere. C.


7, 60.
1.4,15. C.8,1.


C e 4,


de Interdictis.

de Interdictis, et relegatis, et deportatis. D.
48, 22.

de Interdictis sive extraordinariis actioni-
bus. D. 43,1.

de Interdicto matrimonio inter pupillum et
tutorem, etc. C. 5, 6. ae

de gi dr pace in jure faciendis, etc.


11,1,
de Inatilibus stipulationibus. I.3,19. D.
8


» 39.
de Irenarchis. C.10, 75.
de Itinere actuque privato. D. 43, 19.


694


J.


de Judeis et ceelicolis. C. 1, 9.
Judicatam solvi. D. 46, 7.
de Judiciis. C. 3, 1.


APPENDIX.


de Legibus, et constitutionibus principem,
et edictis. C 1, 14.

de Legitima agnatorum tutela. L }, 15.

de Legitima agnatorum successione. L3,2.

de Legitima parentum tutela. I. 1, 18.


de Judiciis, et ubi quisque agere vel conve- | de Legitima patronorum tutela. L 1, 17.


niri debeat. Oy Le
de Judiciis publicis. D. 48,1. I. 4, 18.


de Legitima tutela. C. 5, 30.
de Legitimis heredibus. C. 6, 58.


de Jure aureorum annuloram. D. 40, 10. | de Legitimis tutoribus. D. 26, 4.


. 6, 8.
de Jure codicillorum. D. 29, 7. I. 2, 25.
C. 6, 36.


de Jure deliberandi. D. 28, 8.


de Libellis dimissoriis, qui spostoli dican-
tur. D. 49, 6.

de Liberali causa. D. 40,12. C. 7, 16.

de Liberatione legata. D. 34, 3.


de Jare deliberandi, et de adeunda vel ac- | de Liberis et postumis heredibus instituen-


quirenda hereditate. C. 6, 30. D.
29, 2.

de Jure dominii impetrando. C. 8, 34.

de Jure dotium. D. 23,3. C.5, 12.

de Jure emphyteutico. C. 4, 66.

de Jure fis. D. 49,14. C. 10,1.

de Jure immunitatis. D. 50, 6.


dis vel exheredandis. D. 28, 2.
de Liberis exhibendis, item ducendis. D. 43,
30. C. 8,8.
de Liberis preteritis vel exheredatis. C. 6,
3


28.
de Libertinis. J.1,5. C. 10, 56.
de Libertis et eorum liberis. C. 6, 7.


de se ea propter calumniam dando. de Libertis universitatam. D. 38, 3.
59.


bcos |


de Litigiosis. D. 44,6. C. 8, 37.


de Jurejurando sive voluntario, sive neces- | de Litis contestatione. C. 3, 9.
aario, sive judiciali. D. 12,2. C.4, 1.| de Litorum et itinerum custodia C. 12, 45.


de Jure liberorum. C. 8, 59.

de Jure naturali, gentium et civili. I. 1, 2.
de Jure patronatus. D. 37,14. C.6, 4.
de Jare personarum. [. 1, 3.

de Jure reipublice. C. 11, 29.

de Jurisdictione. D. 2, 1.


de Litteraram obligatione. I. 3, 21.
Locati conducti. D. 19, 2.
de Locatione et conductione. I. 3, 94.
de Locatione preediorum civilium, ete. C.
11, 70.
de Locato et conducto. C. 4, 65.


de Jurisdictione omnium judicum, et de foro | de Locis et itineribus publicis. D. 43, 7.


competente. C. 3, 13.
de Juris et facti ignorantia. D.22,6. C.
, 18.
de Justitia et jure. I.1,1. D.1, 1.


L.


de Latina libertate tollenda, etc. C. 7, 6.
de Legationibus. D. 50,7. C.10, 63.
de Legatis. I. 2,20. C. 6, 87.

de Legatis et fidcicommissis. D. 30-32.


de Loco publico fruendo. D. 43, 9.
de Longi temporis prescriptione, que pro
libertate, etc., opponitur. C. 7, 22.
‘de Lucris advocatorum, et concussionibns
officiorum, etc. C. 12, 62.
de Luitione pignoris. C. 8, 31.


M.
de i dear conveniendis. D. 27, 8.


’


de Legatis prestandis contra tabulas bono- de Magistratibus municipalibus. C. 1, 56


rum possessione petita. I. 37, 5.
de Lege Aquilia. I. 4,3. D. 9,2. C.3,
35.


de Lege commissoria. D. 18, 3.

de Lege Cornelia de falsis et de SC. Libo-
niano. D. 48,10. C. 9, 22.

de Lege Fabia de plagiariis. D. 48,15. C.
9, 20


de Lege Falcidia I.2, 22 D.35,2. C.
6, 50.

de Fusia Caninia tollenda. I. 1, 7.
C. 7,3.

de Lege Julia ambitus. D.48, 14. C.9, 26.

de Lege Julia de annona. D. 48, 12.

de Lege Julia repetundarum. D. 48.11. C.
9, 27.

de Lege Pompeia de parricidiis. D. 48, 9.

de Lege Rhodia de jactu. D. 14, 2

de Legibus, senatusque consultis et longa
consuetudine. D.1,3. C. 1, 16.


| de Magistris sacrorum scriniorum. C. 12, 9.
de Majuma. C. 11, 45.
‘de Maleficis et mathematicis, ete. C. 9, 18
de Mancipiis et colonis patrimonialiam, etc.
fundorum. C. 11, 62.
de Mandatis princippm. C. 1, 15.
Mandati vel contra. D.17,1. C.4,35
,de Mandato. I. 3, 26.
de Manumissionibus. D. 40, 1.
de Manumissionibus, que servis sd univer-
sitatem pertinentibus imponuntur. D.
40, 3.
de Manumissis testamento. D. 40, 4.
de Manumissis vindicta. D. 40, 2.
de Mendicantibus validis. C. 11, 25.
de Mensoribus. C. 12, 28.
de Metallariis et metallis, ete. C. 11, 6.
de Metatis ct epidemicis. C. 12, 41.
de Metropoli Beryto. C. 11, 21.
! de Migrando. D. 43, 92.


TABLE OF TITLES.


ar ari vaca I. 3,11. D. 29, 1.

. 6, 21.

de Militari veste. C. 12, 40.

de Minoribus XXV. annis. D. 4, 4.

de Modo mulctarum, que a judicibus infli-
guotar. C. 1, 54.

de Monopoliis et conventu negotiatorum il-
licito, etc. C. 4, 59.

de Mortis causa donationibus et capionibus.
D. 39, 6. C. 8, 57.

de ee inferendo et sepulcro edificando.

- ii, 8

de Maulieribus, in quo loco munera, etc., vel
honores agnoscant. C. 10, 62.

de Mulieribus, que se propriis servis janxe-
rant. C.9, 11.

de Muneribus et honoribus. D. 50, 4.

de Muneribus et honoribus non continuan-
dis inter patrem et filium, etc. C. 10,
40


de Maneribus patrimoniorum. C. 10, 41.
de Manicipibas et originariis. C. 10, 38.
de Maurilegulis, etc. "e. 11, 7.

de Mutatione nominis. C. 9, 25.


N.


de Natalibus restituendis. D. 40, 11.
de Naturalibus liberis et matribus eorum,
etc. C. 5, 27.
de Naufragiis. C. 11, 5.
Naute, caupones, stabularii ut recepta
restitaant. D. 4, 9.
de Nautico fenore. D. 22,2. C. 4, 33.
de Nautis Tiberinis. C. 11, 26.
de Navibus non excusandis. C. 11, 3.
de Naviculariis, ete. C.11, 1.
de Necessariis servis heredibus instituendis
vel substituendis. C. 6, 27.
Ne Christianum mancipium hereticus,
< Judeus, vel paganus habeat, etc.
.1, 10.
Ne de statu defanctorum post i na
nium gueratur. D. 40, 15. C. 7,
21.
Ne fidejussores vel mandatores dotium
dentur. C. 5, 20.
Ne filius pro patre, vel pater pro filio
emancipato, vel libertus pro patrono,
vel servus pro domino conveniatar. C.
4, 13.
Ne fiscus rem, quam vendidit, evincat.


Ne fiscus vel respublica procurationem

ae patrocinii causa in lite prestet.
° 3, 18.
Negotiatores ne militent. C. 12, 35.
de Negotiis gestis. D.3,5. C. 2, 19.

Ne liceat in una eademque causa tertio
provocare, ete. C. 7, 70.

Ne liceat potentioribus patrocinium liti-
gantibus prestare, etc. C. 2, 14.

Nemini licere signum salvatoris Christi,
etc., aut sculpere, aut pingere. C. 1, 8.


695


Ne opers a collatoribus exigantur. C.
10, 24.

Ne pro dote bona quondam mariti addi-
cantur, ete. C. 5, 22.

Ne quid in flumine publico fiat, quo
aliter aqua fluat, etc. D. 43, 13.

Ne quid in loco publico fiat. D. 43, 8.

Ne quid in loco sacro fiat. D. 43, 6.

De quid oneri publico imponatur. C.

1,4.

Ne quis eum, qui in jus vocabitar, vi
eximat. D. 2, 7.

Ne quis in sua causa judicet, etc. C. 3, 5.

Ne quis liber invitus actum reipublice
gerere C. 11, 36.

Ne rei dominicw vel templorum vindi-
catio temporum preescriptione summo-
veatur. C. 7, 38.

No rei militaris comitibus vel tribunis
lavacra prestentur. C. 1, 47.

Ne rusticani ad ullum obsequium devo-
centur. C.11, 54.

Ne sanctum baptisma iteretur. C. 1, 6.
e sine jussu aaa ap certis judicibus
liceat confiscare. C. 9, 48.

o tutor vel curator vectigalia conducat.

. 5, 41.

Ne uxor pro marito, vel maritus pro

car vel mater pro filio conveniatar.
. 4, 12.

Ne vis fiat ei, qui in possessionem missus
est. D. 43, 4.

ae innovari appellatione interposita.

. 49, 7


9 e
de Nili oe non rumpendis. C. 9, 38.


Non licere habitatoribus metrocomis
loca sua ad extraneum transferre. C.
1], 55.


de Non numerata pecunia. C. 4, 30.
de Novationibus et delegationibus. D. 46,


2. C. 8,42

de Novi operis nuntiationse. C. 8, 11. D.
39, 1.

de Noxalibus actionibus. I. 4,8. D. 9, 4.
C. 3, 41.


Cc. 7,


Nulli licere in frenis, etc., margaritas,
etc., aptare, etc. C. 11, 11.
de Numerariis, actuariis, et chartulariis, eto.
C. 12, 50.
de Nundinis. D. 50, 11.
de Nundinis et mercationibus. C. 4, 60.
de Nuptiis. 1.1,10. C.5, 4.


de Nado jure Quiritum tollendo.
25


O.


de Oblatione votoram. C. 12, 49.
de Obligationibus. I. 3, 13.
de ar hr et actionibus. D. 44, 7.
. 4, 10.
de Obligationibus ex consensu. I. 3, 22.
de Obligationibus, qum ex delicto nascun-
tur. I. 4,1.


de Obligationibns, quze quasi ex contractu
Nuascunotur. I. 3, 27.

de Obligationibus, que quasi cx delicto
nascuntur. J. 4, 5.

de Obsequiis parentibus et patronis prx-
standis. D. 37, 15.

de Obsequiis patrono preetandis. C. 6, 6.

de Officio assessorum. D. 1,22. C. 1, 51.

de Officio civilium jadicam. C. 1, 45.

de Officio comitis orientis. C. 1, 36.

de Officio comitis rerum privataram. C.1,
33


de Officio comitis sacrarum largitionum.
C. 1. 32.

de Officio comitis sacri palatii. C. 1, 34.

de (Ofticio comitis sacri patrimonii. C. 1, 35.

de Officio consalis. D.1, 10.

de Officio diversorum judicum. C. 1, 48.

de i ejus, cui mandata est jurisdictio.

1, 21.

de Officio ejus, qui vicem alicajus jadicis
vel presidis obtinet. C. 1, 50.

de Officio judicis. I. 4, 17.

de Officio juridici. D. 1, 20. C.1, 57.

de Officio magistri militum. C. 1, ‘29.

de Officio magistri officioram. C. 1, 31.

de Officio militarium judicum. C. 1, 46.

de Officio przfecti annonw. C. 1, 44

de ar prefecti augustalis. D. 1, “I. C.

37.


de Officio preefecti prestorio. D.1, 11.
de Officio prefecti prwtorio Afric, etc. C.


1, 27.
de Officio prefecti preetorio Orientis et Il-
ici. C. 1, 26.
de cio preefecti arbi. D.1,12. C. 1, 28.


de Benge prefecti vigilum. D.1,15. C.


1, 43.
de Officio presidis. D.1, 18.
de Officio pretorum. D.1,14. C. , a
de ae proconsulis et legati. D.


de Officio procuratoris Cesaris vel ratio-
nalis. D.1, 19.

de Officio questoris. D.1,13. C. 1, 30.

de Officio rectoris provincis. C. 1,40

de Officio vicarii. C. 1, 38.

de Omni agro deserto, etc. C. 11, 58.

de Operibus publicis. D. 50,10. C. 8,12

de Opocris libertorum. D. 38,1. C. 6,3

de Operis novi nuntiatione. D. 39, 1. C.
8, 11

de Operis servorum. D.7,7. C. 3, 38.

de Optione vel electione legata. D. 33, 5.

de Ordine cognitionum. C. 7, 19.

de Ordine judiciorum. C. 3, 8.

de Origine jaris, ete. D.1,2


P.


de Pactis. D.2,14. C. 2,8.

de Pactis conventis tam super dote, quam
super donatione ante nuptias et para-
phernis. C. 5, 14.


APPENDIX.


de Pactis dotalibus. D. 23, 4.
de Pactis inter emtorem et venditorem com-


positis. C. 4, 54
de Pactis pignoram et ‘de lege commissaris
ignoribus rescindenda. C. &, 35.


m p
ree ees ae C.1,
de Palaiiia of domibas dominics. C. 1],
76.


de Palatinis sacrarum largitionum e¢ rerum
privatarum. C. 12, 24.

de Partu pignoris ct omni causa. C. &, 25.

de Pascuis publicis et privatis. C. 11, 60.

de Patria potestate. 1.1,9. C. 8, 47.

de Patribus, qui filios sucs distraxerant. C.
4, 43.


de Peculio. D. 15, 1.
de Peculio ejus, qui libertatem meruit. C.
7, 23.


de Peculio legato. C. a 8.

de Pecunia constituta. .183,5 C4
18.

de Pedaneis judicibus. C. 3, 3.

de Penz legata. D. 33, 9.

de Perfectissimatus dignitate. C. 12, 33.

de Periculo eorum, qui pro magistratibas
intervenerunt. C. 11, 34.

de Periculo et commodo rei vendite. D.
18,6. C. 4, 48.

de Periculo nominatoruam. C. 11, 33.

de Periculo successorum perentis. C. 10,
61.

de Periculo tutoram et curatorum. C. 5,


38.
de Perpetuis et temporalibus actionibus. I.


me quae ao nobis acquirater. I.


Per a personas nobis obligatio acqui-
ratur. I. 3, 28.

de Petitione hereditais. C.3,31. D.5,3.

de Petitionibus bonorum sublatis. C. 10,


12.
de Pignoratitia actione vel contra. D. 15,
7 C. 4, 24.
de ae aE et hypothecis, etc. D. 20, 1.
. 8, 14 “


de Pistoribus. C. 11, 15.
de Plus petitionibus. C. 3, 10.
Plus valere quod agitur, quam quod
simulate concipitur. C. 4, 22.
dc ra judicis, qui male judicavit, etc.
7, 49.


de Peena temere litigantium. I. 4, 16.
de Poenis. D. 48,19. C. 9, 47.
Penis creditores pracferri. C.


10, 7.
de Pollicitationibus D. 50, 12.
de hr ata et auri illatione. C. 10,


de Porularibas actionibus. D. 47, 23.
de Possessoria hereditatis petitions. D. 5, 5.
de Postliminio reversis et redemtis ab hosti-


bus. C. 8, 51.


‘de Postulando. D.3,1. C. 2,6.


TABLE OF TITLES.


Ge Postumis keredibus institnendis vel ex-
heredandis. C. 6, 29.

de Potioribus ad munera nominandis. C.
10, 65.

de Prebendo salario. C. 10, 36.

de Prediis decurionum sine decreto non
alienandis. C. 10, 33.

de Prediis et tliis rebus minoram sine de-
creto non alienandis. C. 5, 71.

de Prediis et omnibus rebus naviculario-
rum. C. 11, 2.

de Prediis tamiacis et de his, qui ex colonis
dominicis, etc., procreantar. C. 11,
68.

de Prefectis pretorio sive urbi et magistris
militam in dignitatibus exequandis.
C. 12, 4.

de arepoate agentium in rebus. C. 13,


de Preepositis laborum. C. 12, 18.
de Prepositis sacri cubicali, ete. C. 12, 5.
de sa aaa longi temporis, ete. C. 7,


de Presciption XXX. vel XL. annorum.

de Pesci verbis et in factum actioni-
bus. D.19,5. C. 4, 64.

de Pretoribus, et honore preeture, et colla-
tione, etc. C. 12, 2.

de Pretorio pignore, etc. C. 8, 22.

de Preevaricatione. D. 47, 15.

de are et Salviano interdicto. D. 43,
26

de Precibus iepeesiGe offerendis, ete. C.
1, 19.

de Primicerto, et secundicerio, et notariis.


12,

de Primipilo. C. 12, 63.

de Principibus agentinm in rebus. C. 12,
22.


de Privatis carceribus inhibendis. C. 9, 5.
de Privatis delictis. D. 47,1
de ae as corporatoram urbis Rome.
Il, 14.
de Privilegiis domus posee vel rei pri-
vatez,etc. C. 11, 74.
de Privilegiis eorum, qui in sacro palatio
militant C. 12, 29.
de Privilegiis scholarum. C. 12, 80.
de PM Cits urbis Constantinopolitans.
11, 20.
de Privilegio dotis. C. 7, 74.
de Privilegio fisci. C. 7, 78.
de Probationibus. C. 4, 19.
de Probationibus et presumtionibus. D.
22, 3.


de Procuratoribus. C. 2, 138.
de Procuratoribus et defensoribus.


2.
Pro derelicto. D. 41, 7.
Pro donato. D. 41, 6.
Pro dote. D. 41, 9.
Pro emtore. D. 4}, 4.
de Professoribus et medicis. C. 10, 52.
de Professoribus, qui in urbe Constantino-


VOL. II. 59


D. 8,


politana docentes ex lege meruerunt
comitivam. C. 12, 15.
oeerere vel pro possessore. OD. 41,


de Proibi sequestratione pecunis. (C.


Pro legato. D. 41, 8.
Pro quibus causis servi premio li-
bertatem accipiunt. C. 7, 13.
Pro socio. D. 17, 3. C. 4, 87.
Pro suo. D. 41, 10.
de Proxeneticis. D. 50,1. C. 5,1.
de Proximis sacrorum scrinioram, ete. C.


12, 19.
Publice letitis vel consulum puntiato-
wie sk. etc., ne quid accipiant i um.

12, 64


de ew e veceue, et commissis.
. 39, 4.

de Publicians in rem actione. D. 6, 2.

de Publicis judiciis. I. 4,18. D. 48, 1.

de Pupillari substitutione. L 2, 16.


Q.


de Quadriennii prescriptione. C. 7, 37.
de Quadrimenstrais brevibus. C. 1, 42.


Que in frandem creditoram facta sunt,
ut restituantar. J). 42,8. C. 7, 75.
Barri res exportari non debeant. C. 4,


Que Di  Pignori obligari possunt, etc.


Gus ipasa vel hypothecsws date -ob-
ligari non unt. D. 20, 3.
Quse res venire non possunt, et qui ven-
dere vel emere vetantur. C. 4, 40.
Que sententis sine appellatione rescin-
dantur. D. 49,8. C. 7, 64.
Que sit longa consuetudo. C. 8, 55.
de Questionibus. D. 48,18. C. 9, 41.
de Questoribus, et magistris officiorum, ete.
- 13,6


Quando appellandum sit, et intra que
. 49,4


tem , 4.

Quando civilis actio criminali prejudicet,
ete. C. 9, 31.

Quando decreto opus non est. C. 5, 72.

Quando de peculio actio annalis est. D.
15, 2.

Quando dies legati vel fideicommissi
cedit. C. 6, 53.

Quando dies legatoram vel fideicommis-
sorum cedat. D. 36, 2.

Quando -— ususfructus legati cedat.


ex bonis decurionum, etc.
Quando ex facto tutoris vel curatoris
minores agere vel conveniri possunt.
D. 26,9. C. 5, 39.
Quando fiscus vel privatus debitoris sui
debitores possit vel debeat.
C. 4, 15.


viduas, vel alias mise
cognoscat, ete. C. 3, 14.

Quando libellus principi datas litis con-
testationem faciat. C. 1, 20.

Quando liceat ab emtione discedere. C.


4, 45.

Quando liceat unicuique sine judice se
vindicare, ete. C. 3, 27.

Quando mulier officio tatele fangi po-
test. C. 5, 35.

Quando non petentium partes petentibus
accrescant. C. 6, 10.

Quando provocare non est necesse. C.
7,64. D. 49,8

Quando tutores vel curatores esse desi-
nant. C. 5, 60.


Quemadmodum civilia manera indicun-
tar. C. 10, 42.
— servitutes amittuntur.
. 8, 6.
Quemadmodam testamenta aperian oa
ees : 6


C. 5, 68.
Qui wtate vel professione se excusant.
C. 10, 49.
Qui bonis cedere possunt. C. 7, 71.
Quibus ad conductionem bonorum fisca-
liam accedere non licet. C. 11, 72.
Quibus ad libertatem proclamare non
licet. D. 40,13. C. 7, 18.

Quibus alienare licet, vel non. I. 28.

Quibus ex causis in possessionem eatur.
D. 42, 4.

Quibus ex causis majores in integrum
restituantur. C. 2,54. D. 4,6.

Sara ee causis manumittere non licet.

Quibus modis jus patrie potestatis sol-
vitar. I. 1, 12

Quibas modis obligatio tollitur. I. 8, 29.

Quibus modis pignus vel hypotheca sol-
vitur. D. 20, 6.

oo modis re contrahitar obligatio.

3, 14.
aes a testamenta infirmantur.


Quibus modis tutela finitur. I. 1, 22.

Quibus modis usasfructus vel usas amit-
titar. D.7, 4.

Quibus muneribus excusentar ii, qui
post impletam militiam vel advocatio-
nem per provincias suis commodis
vacantes commorantur, ete. ©. 10, 55.


de Quibus muneribus vel preestationibus


nemini liceat se excusare. C. 10, 48.
Quibus non competit bonoram posses-
sio. D. 38, 13.
Quibus non est pormissum facere testa-
mentam. I. 2, 12.


APPENDIX.


rescriptio. . 7, 35.


p :
de net ge as ad eundem judicem eatur.
- 11,2


Quibus res judicata non nocet. C. 7,
56


Qui dare tutores vel curatores possunt,
et qui dari possunt. C. 5, 34.

Qui et advexsus quos in integrum restitai
non possunt. C. 2, 42.

Qui et a quibus manumissi liberi non
fiunt, et ad legem liam Sentiam.
D. 40, 9.

Qui et ex quibus causis manumittere non
possunt. L 1, 6.

Qui legitimam personam standi in judi-
ciis habeant vel non. C. 3, 6.

Qui manumittere non possunt, et ne iz
arg creditoram manumittatar.

»7, Al.

Qui militare possunt vel non possunt,
etc. C. 12, 34.

Qui morbo se excusant. C. 5, 67;—
10, 50.

a non possunt ad libertatem pervenire.

7, 12.

Qui numero liberorum se excusant. C.
5, 66.

Qui numero tatelarum. C. 5, 69.

Qui petant tutores vel curatores, et ubi

gece D. 26,6. C. B31.

i potiores in pignore ve eca
habeanter etc. S. 20,4. C. 8, 18.
Qui pro sua jurisdictione judices dare

darive possunt. C. 3, 4.

Quis a quo appelletur. D. 49, 3.

Quis ordo in possessionibus servetur.
D. 38, 15.

Qui satisdare tur, vel jurato pro-
mittant, etc. . 2, 8.

Qui sine manumissione ad libertatem
perveniunt. D. 40, 8.

Qui testamenta facere possint, et quem-
admodum testamenta fiant. D. 28,
1. C. 6, 22. 23.

Qui testamento tutores dari possunt. I.
1,14. D, 26,2. C.5, 28.

Quod cujusque universitatis nomine rel
contra eam agatur. D. 3, 4.

Quod cum eo, qui in aliena potestate est,
negotium gestum esse dicetur. I. 4,
7, D.14,5. C. 4, 26.

Quod falso tutore auctore gestum esse
dicatur. D. 27, 6.

Quod jussu. D. 15,4. C.4, 26.

Quod legatorum. D. 43,3. C. 8, 3.

baie metus causa gestum erit. D. 4, 2.

. 2, 20.

Quod quisque juris in alterum statuerit,
ut ipse eodem jure utatur. D. 2, 2.

Quod viaut clam. D. 43, 24.

Quomodo et quando judex sententiam
proferre debeat, etc. C. 7, 43.

Quo quisque ordine conveniatur. C.11,
35


®


TABLE OF TITLES.


rs appeliationes non recipiuatar.
. 7, 65.

Quoram bonorum. D. 43,2. C. 8, 3.
Quorum legatorum. C.8,3. D. 43, 3.


R.


de Raptu virginam eeu viduarum, nec non
sanctimonialium. C. 9, 13.
Ratam rem haberi et de ratihabitione.
D. 46, 8.
de Ratiociniig operam Lara et de
patribus civitatum. C. 8, 13.
de aig alienis non alienandis, etc. C. 4,


de Rebus auctoritate judicis Sar seu
vendendis. D. 42.5. C.7

de Rebus creditis et jerejesuado® ‘6. 4, 1.

de Rebus creditis, si certum petetur, et de
condictione. D. 12, 1.

de Rebus dubiis. D. 34, 5.

de Rebus eorum, qui sub tatela vel cura
sunt, sine decreto non alienandis, etc.
D. 37, 9.

de Rebus incorporalibus. I. 2, 2.

de Receptatoribus. D. 47, 16.

de Receptis arbitris. C. 2, 56.

de Receptis, qui arbitrinm receperunt, etc.


D. 4, 8.
de Regula Catoniana. D. 34, 7.
de lis juris. D. 50, 17.


de Reis postalatis. C. 10, 58.

de Re judicata. C. 7, 52.

de Re judicata, et de effectu sententiarum,
et de interlocutionibus. D. 42, 1.

de Rei uxorie actione, ete. C. 5, 13.

de Rei vindicatione. D.6,1. C. 3, 32.

de Relationibas. C. 7, 61.

de Religiosis et sumtibus funerum. D. 11,
7. C€.3, 44.

Rem alienam gerentibus non interdici

reram suarum alienatione. C. 4,


53.

de Re militari. D. 49, 16. C. 12, 36.
de Remissione pignoris. - & 26.
de Remissionibus. D. 48

ea ae vel sdcieeeut salvam fore.

46, 6

de Replicationibus. I. 4, 14.
de Boteme bonorum possessione. C. 6,


de Repudiand vel abstinenda hereditate.
6, 31
de Repu, et judicio de moribus sublato.
de Reputationibus, que fiunt in judicio in
integrum restitutionis. C. 3, 48.


de Requirendis reis. C. 9, 40.
de uirendis vel absentibus damnandis.
. 48, 17.


Rerum amotaruam. C. 5, 21.
de DL divisione et qualitate. L 2, 1.
1, 8.
de Rerum permutations. D. 19, 4.


de Reram Sara Pasa et preescriptis ver-
bis. C. 4, 64.

de Rescindenda venditione, ete. D. 18, 5
C. 4, 44.

de Restitationibus militum et eorum, qui
reipublicw causa absunt. C. 2, 51.

de Revocandis donationibus. C. 8, 56.

de Revocandis his, que in fraudem credito-
ram alienata sunt. C. 7,75. D. 42, 8.

de Ripa manienda. D. 43, 15.

de Ritu nuptiaram. D. 23, 2.

de Rivis. . 43, 21.


8.


de Sacrosanctis ecclesiia, etc. C. 1, 2.

de ——— hospitibus non prestando. C.
2, 42.

de Salviano interdicto: D. 43, 33.

de Satisdando. C-. 2, 57.

eter arr om one tutorum et curatorum. I.

de Satisdationibus. I. 4, 11.

de Secundis nuptiis. C. 5, 9

de Seditiosis, ete. C. 9, 30.

de Senatoribus. D. 1, 9.

de Senatusconsultis. Cc. 1,16. D.1,3.

de SC. Claudiano tollendo. C. 7, 24.

de SC. Macedoniano. D. 14, 6. C.4, c

de oe ne I. 3, 4. D. 38, 17.


de Ph Silaniano et Claudiano. D. 29, 5.

de SC. Tertulliano. I. 8, 3. D. 38, 17.
C. 6, 56.

de Sententiam passis et restitutis. D. 48,
28. C.9, 51.

Sententiam rescindi non posse. C. 7,

50.

de Senteutia, qux ae sine certa quantitate pro-
fertur. 7, 46.

de Sententiis adversus fiscum latis retrac-
tandis. C. 10,9

de Sententiis et interlocutionibus omniam
judicum. C. 7, 45.

de perigas ex periculo recitandis. C. 7,


de Sententiis prefectorum pretorio. C.7,


42.
ae Sententiis, que pro eo, quod interest,
proferuntur. C. 7, 47.
_de Separationibas. D. 43, 6. C. 7, 72.


de Sepulcro violato. D. 47, 12. C. 9, 19.
de Servis exportandis, etc. 'D. 18, 7.
Ge Servis fugitivis, et —_ mancipiisque
| civitatam, etc. C. 6, 1.
de oe reipublices manumittendis. C.
9


de Servitute legata. D. 33, 3.
de Servitutibus. I.2,3. D. 8, 1.


| de Servitutibus et aqua. C. 3, 34.
| de oral preediorum rusticorum. D.
8, 3.


' de Servitutibus predioram urbanoram. D.


| as.


de Servo corrapto. D.11,3. C. 6, 2.
de Servo pignori dato manumisso. C. 7, 8.


Si adversus creditorem. C. 2, 38.

Si adversus creditorem prescriptio oppo-
natur. C. 7, 36.

Si adversus delictum. C. 2, 35.

Si adversus donationem. C. 2, 30.

Si adversus dotem. C. 2, 34.

Si adversus fiscum. C. 2, 37.

Si adversus libertatem. C. 2, 31.

Si adversus rem judicatam restitutio pos-
tuletur. C. 2, 27.

Si adversus solutionem a tutore vel a se
factam. C. 2, 33.

Si adversus transactionem vel divisio-
nem in integrum minor restitui velit.
C. 2, 32.

Si adversus usucapionem. C. 2, 36.

Si adversus venditionem. C. 2, 28.

Si adversus venditionem pignoram. C.


2, 29
Si ager vectigalis id est emphyteutica-
rius petatur. D. 6, 3.


Si aliena res pignori date sit. C. 8, 16.

Sia non competente jadice ju
esse dicatur. C. 7, 48.

Si antiquior creditor pignus vendiderit.
C. 8, 20.

Sia parente quis manumissus sit. D.

, 12.
Si certum petatar. C. 4, 2.
Si oo res pignori "data sit, C. 8,


Bi < ee jus vel utilitatem publicam,
etc., fuerit aliquid postulatam vel im-
petratum. C. 1, 22.

Si contra matris voluntatem tutor datus
sit. C. 5, 47.

Si cui plus, quam per legem Falcidiam
licuerit, legatum esse dicetur. D. 35, 3.

Si curialis relicta civitate rus habitare
maluerit. C. 10, 87.

Si de momentanes possessione fuerit ju-
dicatum. C. 7, 69.

Si dos constante matrimonio soluta fae-
rit. C. 5, 19.

Si ex falsis instramentis vel testimoniis
judicatum sit. C. 7, 58.

Si ex noxali causa agecnr, quemadmo-
dum caveatar. D. 2, 9

Si ex pluribus tutoribus vel caratoribus
aren vel unus agere, etc., possint.

8i familia furtum fecisse dicetur. D.
47,6

Si in causa judicati pignus captam sit.
C. 8, 23.


ed
Si in communi eademque causa in inte-
restitutio postaletur. C. 2, 26.

Si in frandem ni a libertis alienatio
facta sit. C.6,5. D. 38, 5.

Si ingennus esse dicetar. D. 40, 14.

Si is, qui testamento liber esse jussus
erit, post mortem domini, etc., surri-
puisse, ctc., quid dicetur. D. 47, 4.


APPENDIZ.


de Silentiariis et decurionibus corm. C.


12, 16.

Si liberalitatis im socius sit
herede decesserit. C. 10, 14.

Si major factus alienationem factam se
decreto ratam habuerit. C. 5, 74

Si major factus ratum habuerit. C. 2
46


Si mancipium ita fuerit alienatus. &
manumittatur, vel contra. C. 4,57.
Si mancipium ita venierit, ne prostitss

tur. C. 4, 56.
Si mater indemnitatem promisit. (C.i,
46


Si mensor falsum modum dixerit. D.
11, 6.

Si minor a hereditate se abetimeat. C :.
39


Si minor se majorem dixerit, vel maiz
probatus fuerit. C. 2, 43.

Si mulier ventris nomine in
calumniz causa esse dicetur. D. 8

Sine censu vel reliquis fandam cm
parari non posse. C. 4, 47.


dicatam | de sa aes" rebus per fideicommissum rei:


I. 2, 24
sin nuptiee ex reecripto petantur. C.5%
Bi cain sit causa testamenti C. é


Sit em hereditatis petatur. D. 5,4

Si pendente appellatione mors interves
nt. D. 49,13. C. 7, 66.

Si per vim vel alio modo absentis tare
ta sit possessio. C. 8, 5.

Si pignoris conventionem numeratio pe
cuni@ secuta non sit. C. 8, 33.


Si pignus pignori datum sit. C. &, %.
Si plures una sententia condemnati suz-
7, 55.


Si post creationem quis deceaserit. (


si proper inimicitias creatio fac <

10, 66.

Si propter publicas pensitationes vende.
faerit celebrata. C. 4, 46.

Si quacunque preeditus potestase, etr..&
suppositaram jurisdictiomi suze sd-~
rare tentaverint nuptias. C. 5, 7.

Si quadrupes pauperiem fecisse dicacc
I.4,9. D.9,1.

Si quid in frandem patroni factan «:
D. 38,5. C. 6, 5.

Si quis aliquem testari prohibuert *.

rit. D. 29,6. C. 6,34

Si quis alteri, vel. sibi sub " alterins a
mine, vel aliena pecunia emerit. { -
50.


Si quis caationibus in judicio sict2:
causa factis non obtemperaverit. -
2, 11.

Si ae 0. eam, cujus tutor fuerit, corrap<-


Bi quis ignorans rem minoris esse
decreto comparaverit. C. 5, 73.
Si quis Imperatori maledixerit. C.%


TABLE OF .TITLES.


Si quis in jus vocatus non ierit, etc. D.
2, 5.
Si jus dicenti non obtemperaverit.
. 2,3


Si quis omissa causa testamenti ab in-
testato, etc., possidet hereditatem. D.
29, 4.

Si rector provincia, vel ad eum perti-
nentes, sponsalitia dederint. C. 5, 2.

Si reus vel accusator mortuus fuerit. C.


9, 6.
Si seepius in integrum restitatio postu-
letur. C. 2, 44.


Si secundo nupserit mulier, cui maritus
usumfructum reliquit. C. 5, 10.

Si servitus vindicetar, vel ad alium per-
tinere negetar. D. 8, 5.

Si servus aut libertus ad decurionatum
adspiraverit. C. 10, 82.

Si servus exportandus veneat. C. 4, 55.


Si servus extero se emi mandaverit. C.
4, 36.

Si tabule testamenti exstabunt. D.
87, 2.


Si tabule testamenti nulle exstabunt,
unde legitimi. D. 38,6. C.6, 14.

Si tutor vel curator falsis allegationibus
excusatus sit. C. 5, 63.

Si tutor vel curator intervenerit. C. 2,
25


Si tutor vel curator magistratus creatus
appellaverit. D. 49, 10.

Si tutor vel curator non gesserit. C. 5,
35.

Si tator vel curator reipublice causa
absit. C. 5, 64.

Si unus ex pluribus appellaverit. C. 7,
55.

Si unus ex pluribus heredibus, etc., par-
roe suam debiti solverit vel acceperit.

. 8, 82.

Si ususfructus petatur, vel ad alium per-
tinere negetur. D. 7, 6.

Si ut omissam hereditatem, etc., acquirat.
C. 2, 40.

Si vendito pignore agatur. C. 8, 30.

Si ventris nomme muliere in essio-
nem missa, eadem possessio dolo malo
ad alium transiata esse dicatur.
25, 5.

de Societate. I. 3, 25.
de Solutionibus et liberationibus. D. 46, 3.


C. 8. 43.
de Solutionibus et liberationibus debitorum
civitatis. C. 11, 39.


Soluto matrimonio dos quemadmodum
petatur. D. 24,8. C.5, 18.
de Spectaculis, et scenicis, et lenonibus. C.
11, @


de Sponsalibus. D. 23, 1.

de Sponsalibus, et arrhis sponsalitiis, et
proxeneticis. C. 5, 1.

de Sportulis et sumtibus, etc., et exsecuto-
ribus litium. C. 3, 2.

de Statu hominum. D. 1, 5.


og *


D.|de Testamentaria tutela. D. 26, 26.


701


de Statuis et imaginibus. C. 1, 24.
de Statu liberis. D. 40, 7.
Stellionatus. D. 47, 20.

de Stipulatione servornum.
45, 3.

de Stipulationibus pretoriis. D. 46, 5.

de Stratoribus. C. 12, 25.

de Studiis liberalibus urbis Rome et Con-
stantinopolitane. C. 11, 18.

de Suariis et susceptoribus vini, etc. C, 11,
16.

de Successione cognatorum. I. 3, 5.

de Successione libertorum. I. 8, 7.

de Successionibus sublatis. I. 3, 12.

de Successorio edicto. D. 88,9. C. 6, 16.

de Suffragio. C. 4, 3.

de Suis et legitimis heredibus. D. 38, 16.

de Sais et legitimis liberis, et ex filia et
nepotibus ab intestato venientibus. C.
6, 55.

de Summa trinitate et fide catholica, etc.

1,1
Sumtus injuncti muneris ad omnes col-

legas pertinere. C. 11, 37.

de Sumtuum recuperatione. C. 10, 67.

de Suppellectile legata. D. 33, 10.

de Superexactionibus. C. 10, 20.

de Superficiebus. D. 43, 18.

de Superindicto. C. 10, 18.

de ir Sa prespositis et arcariis. C.
10, 70.


I. 3,17. D.


de Suspectis tutoribus et curatoribus. I. 1,
26. D. 26,10. C.5, 48.


T.


de Tabulariis, scribis, etc. C. 10, 69.

de Tabulis exhibendis. D. 48,5. C. 8, 7.

de Temporibus et reparationibus appella-
tionum, ete. C. 7, 63.

de Temporibhs in integram restitutionis,
ete. C. 2, 53.

de Termino moto. D. 47, 21.

Testamenta quemadmodum aperiantur,

inspiciantar et describantur. D. 29, 3.
C. 6, 32.

de Testamentaria manumissione. C. 7, 2.


C. 5,

38. I. 1,14.

de Testamentis, et quemadmodum testa-
menta ordinentur. C. 6,23. D. 28, 1.

de Testamentis ordinandis. L 2, 10.

de bdr militis. D.29,1. C. 6, 2l.

2, 11.

de Testibus. D 22,5. C.4, 21.

de Thesanris. C. 10, 15.

de Tigno juncto. D. 47, 3.

de Tironibus. C. 12, 44.

de Tractoriis et stativis. C. 12, 52.

de Transactionibus. D. 2,15. C. 2, 4.

de Tributoria actione. D. 14, 4.

de Tritico, vino, vel oleo legato. D. 33, 6.

de Tutele, et rationibus distrahendis, et
utili curationis causa actione. D. 27,3.


702


de Tutelis. I. 1,13. D. 26,1.


de Useuris.


APPENDIX.


C. 4, 32.


de Tutore vel curatore, qui satis non dedit.| de Usuris, et fructibus, et causis, ete. D.


C. 5, 42.


22, 1.
de Tutoribus et curatoribus datis ab his, qui} de Usuris et fructibus legatoram seu fidei-


jus dandi habent, ete. D. 26, 5.


commissorum. C. 6, 47.


de Tutoribus vel caratoribus illustrium, etc. |de Usaris pupiliaribus. C. 5, 56.


C. 5, 33.


U.


Ubi cause fiscales vel divine domus, etc.,
agantur. C. 3, 26.

Ubi causa status agi debeat. C. 3, 22.

Ubi conveniatar, gai certo loco dare

romisit. C. 8, 18.

i de criminibus agi oporteat. C.3, 15.
Ubi de hereditate agatar, etc. C. 3, 20.
Ubi de possessione agi oporteat. C. 3,

16


Ubi de ratiociniis tam Per quam
privatis agi oporteat. C. 3, 21.

Ubi et apud quem cognitio in integrum
restitutionis agitanda sit. C. 2, 47.
Ubi fideicommissum peti oporteat. C.

‘3,17. :
Ubi in rem actio exerceri debeat. C. 3,


19.
Ubi petantur tutores vel curatores. C.
5, 82.
Ubi pupilli educari debeant. C 5, 49.
Ubi pupillus educari vel morari debeat,
et de alimentis ei prestandis. D. 27, 2.
Ubi quis de curiali, vel cohortali, aliave
conditione conveniatur. C. 3, 23.
Ubi senatores vel clarissimi civiliter vel
criminaliter conveniantar. C. 3, 24.
Unde cognati. D. 38,8. C. 6, 15.
Unde legitimi. D. 38,7. C. 6, 15.
Unde liberi. C. 6,14. D. 88, 6.
Unde vi. C.8,4. D. 43, 16.
Unde vir et uxor. D. 38,11. C. 6,18.
de Usucapione pro donato. C. 7, 24.
de Usucapione pro dote. C. 7, 28.
de ba ie ar pro emtore vel transactione.
. 7, 26.
de Usucapione pro herede. C. 7, 29.
de Usucapione transformanda, etc. C. 7,
81.
de Usucapionibus et longi temporis poases-
sionibus. 12,6. D. 41,3.
de Usu et habitatione. I. 2, 5.
de Usu, ct usufructu, et reditu, et habita-
ieee et operis per legatum, etc., datis.
2


. 93, 2.
de Usufructu. I. 9, 4.
de Usufructu accrescendo. D. 7, 2.
a quemadmodum caveat.
. 7,9.
de Usufructu earnm rerum, que usu con-
sumuntur vel minuuntur. D. 7, 5.
de Usufructu, et habitatione, et ministerio
servorum. C. 3, 33.


de Usuris rei judicate. C. 7, 54.
de Usurpationibus et usacapionibus. D.


41, 8.

Ut actiones ab herede et contra heredes
incipiant. C. 4, 11.

Ut armoram usus inscio prineipe inter-
dictus sit. C. 11, 46.

Ut cause post pubertatem adsit tutor.
C. 5, 48.

Ut dignitatum ordo servetur. C. 12, &

Ut ex legibus senatusveconsaltis bozo-
ram io detur. D. 38, 14.

Ut in flamine publico navigare Licest.
D. 43, 14.

Utin possessione legatoram seu fidei-
commissorum causa esse liceat. D.
36, 4.

Ut in possessionem legatorum seu fidei-
commissorum servandoram causa mit-
tatur, etc. C. 6, 54.

Ut intra certum tempus criminalis quee-
tio terminetur. . 9, 44.

Uti possidetis. D. 43,17. C.8, 6.

Ut legatorum seu fideicommissorum ser-
vandorum causa caveatur. D. 36, 3.

Ut lite pendente, vel post provocationem
ant definitivam sententiam nalli liceat
Imperatori supplicare. C. 1, 21.

Ut nemini liceat in emtione specierum
se excusare, etc. C. 10, 27.

Ut nemini liceat sine jadicis anctoritate
signa rebus imponere alienis. C. 2,
17


Ut nemo ad suum patrocinium suscipiat
rusticanos, etc. C. 11, 53.

Ut nemo invitus agere vel accusare co-
gatur. C. 3, 7.

Ut nemo privatus titulos prediis suis
vel alients imponat, ete. C. 2, 16.

Ut nulli patrie same administratio sine


rire permissu principis permittatur.
-1,41.


Ut nullus ex vicaneis pro alienis vicaneo-
ram debitis teneatur. C. 11, 56.

Utomnes judices, tam civiles, quam
criminales, post administrationem de-
econ quingungintsa dies in civitati-

us, etc. permaneant. C. 1, 49.

Ut que desunt advocatis partiam jadex

ond aes C. 2, 11.

de Utrubi. D. 43, 31.

de Uxoribus militam et eoram, qui reipab-

lice causa abeunt. C. 2, 52.


Vv.


de Usufractu, et quemadmodum quis utatar | de Vacatione et excusatione muneram. D.


fruatar. D. 7, 1.


3 «


TABLE OF TITLES.


de Vacatione publici muneris. C. 10, 45.
de Variis extraordinariis cognitionibus, etc.


D. 50, 13.
Vectigalia nova institui non posse. C.
4, 62.


de Vectigalibus et commissis. C. 4, 61.

de Venatione ferarum. C. 11, 44.

de Vendendis rebus civitatis. C. 11, 31.

de Venditione rerum fiscalium cum privatis
commanium. C. 10, 4.

de Ventre in possessionem mittendo et cu-
ratore ejus. D. 37, 9.

de Verborum et rerum significatione. C. 6,


38.
de Verborum obligatione. I. 3, 15.
de Verborum obligationibus. D. 45, 1.
de Verborum significatione. D. 50, 16.


703


de Veteranis. D. 49,18. C. 12, 47.

de Veteranorum et militum successione.
D. 38, 12.

de Veteri jure enucleando, etc. C. 1, 17.

de Veteris numismatis potestate. C. 11, 10.

de Via publica et itinere publico reficiendo.
D. 43, 11

de Via publica, et si quid in ea factam esse
dicatur. D. 43, 10.

Vi bonorum raptorum. I. 4, 2. C. 9,

83


Vi bonorum raptoram, et de turba. D.
4 ‘
de Vi et vi armata. D. 43,16. C.8, 4.
de Vindicta libertate et apud concilium
manumissione. C. 7, 1.
de Vulgari substitutione. I. 2, 15.


de Vestibus holoveris et auratis, etc. C.|de Vulgari et pupillari substitutione. D.
28, 6.


11, 8.


?


INDEX.


INDEX.


(The numbers, except those to which the letter p. is prefixed, refer to the paragraphs ; thoes which are
accompanied by the letter p. refer to the pages at the commencement of the firet volume, which contain
the 7Yeatise of Lawe.}


ABSENCE, two sorts of, as regards prescription, 2222, note.
ACCIDENTS, the engagements formed by, 1596.
happen by act of God or of man, 1597.
by act of man either with or without fraud, 1598.
different effects of, as to the consequence of loss, 1599.
ACCOMPLICES in frauds on creditors, 1647.
ACCOUNT, by some customs, need not be given by fathers of the estates of their chil-
dren, 3540.
ACCOUNTS of merchants, tradesmen, &c., prescribe in six months, 2194.
ACCRETION, the right of, defined, 3262.
in legal successions, 3263.
in testamentary successions, 3264.
how considered by the Roman law, 8265.
difference between the two sorts of, 3266.
the right of, among Jegatees, 3267.
difficulties attending it in testamentary dispositions, 3268.
inasmuch as it depends, 1. on the will of testators, 2. on the rales
_ prescribed by the Roman law, 3268.
remarks on, founded on the rules of the Roman law, 3269.
its foundation, 3270.
difficulties in understanding, 3276.
difficulties in the Roman law, 3277.
difference arising from the codicillary clauses, $278.
Justinian’s law concerning, 3278.
the same as the English right of survivorship, 3278, note s.
its use, 3280.
definition of, 3281.
always exists among coheirs at law, 3282.
depends on the manner in which the executors or legatees are
joined, 3283.
which may be in three manners, 3284.
always exists among coheirs and coexecators, 3285.
and is regulated according to their portions in tho inheritance, 3286.
but not always reciprocal among them all, 3287.
obtains among coheirs who are not conjoined, 3288.


708 INDEX.


ACCRETION.
the right of, may or may not exist between legatees of the same thing, 3289.
exists between legatees conjoined by the thing, 3291.
how, where the same thing is given to two persons by two different
clauses, 3292.
does not exist among legatees by portions, 3293.
cases of, between joint legatees, 3294.
is a consequence of conjunction by the thing, 3295.
annexed to the thing, 3295, note s.
ADULTS, and minors, how distinguished by the Roman law, 2220, note.
ADVICE, or recommendation, 1137.
AGE, 89.
of majority and minority, 104, 105.
AGNATION, 2801.
ALIENS do not succeed, 2502.
incapacity of, ceases by naturalization, 2511.
effect of the incapacity of, 2529.
the exchequer is heir to the estates of, 2669.
ANNUITIES, arrears of, do not produce interest, 1954, note.
ANTICHRESIS, 1684.
ARBITRATORS, should give their award within the time limited, 1106.
may have power given them to extend the time, 1107.
delay for instructing the cause, 1108.
cannot retract or change their award, 1109.
must give judgment together, 1110.
their power limited by the compromise, 1111.
who may be arbitrators, 1112.
women cannot be, 1113.
ASCENDANTS, the succession of, 2844.
who are ascendants, 2849.
who are the grandfathers and ancestors, 2850.
are of both sexes, 2851.
how the father and mother succeed, 2852.
the nearest exclude the remoter, 2853.
a kind of representation among, 2854.
brothers and sisters of the whole blood succeed with ascendants, 2855.
when the ascendants, brothers, and nephews succeed together, 2856.
have the right of transmission, 2860.
of bastards, 2861.
the rights which some ascendants have, exclusive of others, in the goods of the
children, 2862.
the father has no right in the property of goods acquired by the children, 2871.
but has usufract of goods of his children who are not emancipated, 2872.
but not the usufruct of the son’s peculiar patrimony, 2878.
nor of the gifts of the princé, 2874.
nor of that given on condition that the father shall not have such usafruct, 2875.
the father succeeding to his son with the brothers, has not the usufruct of their
portions, 2876.
his duty in relation to goods of which he has the usufruct, 2877.
he has the property of all he reaps from the usufruct, 2878.
if he suffer the son to enjoy the profits, they belong to the son, 2879.
have alimony and other necessaries out of their children’s estate, 2880.
parents bound to nourish and maintain their children, 2881.


INDEX. 709


ASCENDANTS.
parents and children not bound for each other’s debts, 2882.
the mother not bound to maintain children except in case of the neglect of the
father, 2883.
have two sorts of rights in the goods of their children, 2885.
the things given by, revert to them, 2886.
the father takes back the profits which have proceeded from his goods, 2887.
the change in the rights of, by second marriages, 2888.
ASSIGNMENT of litigious rights, 2272, note.
AWARDS, the authority of, 1094.
usual to fix a time when arbitrators shall pronounce, 1097. (See ArsirraToRs.)


BANKRUPTCY, and discomfiture, the difference between them, 2344, note.
BASTARDS, defined, 76.
the succession of, 2455.
do not succeed to intestates, 2497.
of bounties which may be given to, 2498 - 2501.
incapacity of, ceases by marriage of parents, 2510.
but only for the time to come, 2515.
effect of the incapacity of, 2528.
the exchequer is heir to the estates of, 2671.
BENEFICES, possession of, 2141, note. :
BILLS OF EXCHANGE, the nature of, 1193.
three parties to, 1194.
characteristics of the covenants respecting, 1195-1198.
regulated by the ordinance of 1673, 1199.
the engagements of those receiving money in order to pay the same in another
place, 1200.
BIRTH, eve of, how computed, 3013.
the tie of, and principles of the laws which are the consequences of it, p. 13.
BISSEXTILE, 2391, note.
BORROWER of things to be restored in specie, his eagagements, 574.
what care he is to take, 575.
what, if he borrow for the lender's interest, 576.
what, if the thing is lent for the common interest, 577.
what, where the contract regulates the degree of care, 578.
not responsible for accidents, 579.
distinction made by the divine law, 579, note m.
of the care he should take of the thing lent more than of his own, 580.
when he agreés to be accountable for accidents, 581.
estimation of the thing lent, 582.
accountable for accidents, if the thing is put to another use than that for which it
was lent, 583.
penalty for misusing the thing, 584.
if the thing be damaged, 585.
cannot keep the thing by way of compensation for a debt, 586.
must bear expenses necessary for the use of the thing, 587.
of things to be restored in kind, must repay at the term agreed on, 664.
is not discharged by accident, 665.
liable to pay intcrest after the term and demand, 666.
of other things than money, must repay their value, 667.
time and place of estimation of the value of such things, 668.
must make payment in the same quantity and quality, 669.
VOL. II. 60


710 INDEX.


BORROWER.
liable for interest on the value of such things, 670.
not liable for interest on interest, 671.
BROKERS, the use of, 1201-1203.
the office of, 1204.
the lawfal use of brokage, 1205.
the engagements of, 1206.
engagements of those who employ them, 1207.
the salary of, 1208.


CALUMNY in the Roman law, 1973, note.
CATONIAN RULE, 2534.
CAUTIONS. (See Sunsrizs.)
CESSION OF GOODS, 2238, 2328.
additional respite by the French law, 2829.
the respites of the Roman law, 2330.
not allowed to all debtors, 2331.
why refused by the customs of France, 2332.
defined, 2338.
does not wholly discharge the debtor, 2336.
comprehends rights acquired after the cession, 2838.
must be made under oath, 2339.
does not immediately divest debtor of property in goods, 2340.
debtor must own himself to be such, 2341.
does not discharge sureties, 2342.
has its effect as to all the creditors, 2343.
CIVIL LAWS, how distinguished, p. 78.
CODICIL, definition of, in the Roman law, 2978.
how distinguished from testament ; formalities and use of, 3451.
defined, 3453.
cannot be made by one incapable of making a testament, 3454.
may be made either with or without a testament, $455.
several may be made and all subsist, 3456.
makes a part of the testament, if there be one, 3457.
to be executed by next of kin, if there be no testament, 3458.
difference between the two sorts of, 3459.
has effect, though not mentioned in subeequent testament, 3460.
cannot impose a condition on which the institution of heir or executor sul
depend, 3461.
must be attested by five witnesses, 3462.
formalities of, depend on usage of places, 3462, note x.
certain rules of testaments apply to, 3463.
null, if wanting in the necessary formalities, 3464.
or if revoked by a second, 3465.
or by a subsequent testament, 3466.
and in case of the birth of a child, 3467.
but only where there is also a testament, 3468.
of those who have made no testament, subsists without distinction, by the Romi!
law, 3469.
inconveniences and want of equity of this rule, 3469.
by the customs, al! dispositions are codicils, 3470.
other causes of annulling, 3471.
CODICILLARY CLAUSE, defined, 3090.


INDEX. 711


CODICILLARY CLAUSE.
must have the formalities of a codicil, 8091.
difficulties arising from the use of, 8093.
origin of, in the Roman law, 3093.
intention of testator, 3094.
may, perhaps, be supplied, 3095.
difficulties as to the effect of, 3096.
effect of, considered, 3097.
had its origin in the niceties of the Roman law, 3100.
questions arising from the use of, 3101.
use and consequences of these questions, 3102.
whether testator’s will shall have the effect of, $103.
expressions in wills equivalent to, 3104.

COGNATION, 2801.

COLLATERALS, 2915.
defined, 2916.
three kinds of brothers, 2917.
various degrees of, 2918 — 2923.
three orders of, 2923 - 2925.
succession of, by the customs of France, 2926.
brothers first in order, 2997.
brothers of whole blood exclude others, 2928.
children of brothers of whole blood concur with their uncles, 2929.
representation among, 2929, note.
children of brothers of whole blood exclude brothers of half blood, 2930.
brothers by father’s or mother’s side alone, concur together, 2931.
children of brothers of half blood represent their fathers, 2933.
representation limited to brother’s children, 2934.
the nephew preferred to an uncle of same degree, 2935.
all others succeed according to their proximity, 2940.

(See ConsanGuinitTY.)
COLLATION OF GOODS, 2943.
its origin, 2944.
defined, 2947.
what ought to be restored, does not come under the head of collation, 2948.
all children obliged to make, 2949.
made in two cases, 2950.
how regulated, 2951.
of revenues, 2952.
expenses laid out on goods subject to, recovered, 2953.
of the heir who is bound to collate, 2954.
goods divided into as many portions as there are heirs, 2955.
no collation but among children, 2956.
ceases, if children abstain from the inheritance, 2957.
to whom to be made, 2958.
two sorts of goods of children, 2959.
goods acquired otherwise than from ascendants not subject to, 2960.
nor the peculiar patrimonies of sons, 2961.
nor what the father was bound to give his son, 2963.
nor expenses of education, 2963.
things given to children as an advantage over what the others have, not subject
to, 2964.

dowries and donations in favor of marriage subject to, 2965.


712 INDEX.


COLLATION OF GOODS.

of dower, where husband is insolvent, 2966.

all other donations are brought into the succession, 2967.

whatever may be reckoned as a part of the legitime is subject to, 2968.

due whether deceased were testate or not, 2969.

dowry given a daughter by her paternal grandfather subject to, 2970.

things that have perished without fault of donee not subject to, 2973.

what is consumed by use subject to, 2974.
COMMUNITIES, 111.

their incapacities, 111, notea. (See Comrorarions.)
COMPENSATION, 2287.

some debts not to be compensated, 2288.

defined, 2289.

prevents the circuit of two payments, 2290.

takes place though the debts be not equal in quantity, 2291.

has effect of itaelf, and by virtue of law, 22932.

accounts should be stated year by year, and compensation made as the sums fall

due, 2293.

may be made by the judge, 2294.

one compensates only in his own right, 2295.

both debts must be clear and liquid, 2296.

there must be no exception to annul the debt, 2297.

debts not due cannot be compensated, 2298.

no compensation against debts of pnblic taxes, 2299. .

no compensation in a thing deposited or lent, 2300.

in crimes and offences, 2301.

of debts equal in the sums, but otherwise unequal, 2302.

we can only compensate what may be given in payment, 2903.
COMPROMISES, their use, 1094.

why so called, 1095.

defined, 1098.

manner of proceeding in, 1099.

oblige only to the penalty, 1100.

general or particular, 1101.

expires at the time limited, 1102.

and by the death of either party, 1108.

one cannot compromise accusations of crime, 1104.

nor cases which relate to the state or honor of persons, 1105.
CONDITIONS, in testaments, defined, 3212.

the nature of, 3325, note m. .

in testaments and covenants, their difference, $327, note p.

in covenants, 205, 224.

(See Covenants, Donations, Satz, TesTaMEnt.)

CONDEMNED PERSONS, the exchequer heir to, 2669.
CONFESSIONS, three ways of obtaining them, 208] - 2083.

of the party serve as proof, 2086.

through an error of fact, may be rectified, 2087.

through an error of law, cannot be revoked, 2088.
CONFISCATIONS, 2457.
CONSANGUINITY, 2825.

the degrees of, 2830.

the lines of, 2831.

line of ascendants, 3832.


INDEX. 713


CONSANGUINITY.
line of descendants, 2833.
collaterals, 2834.
divers lines of ascendants and descendants, 2835.
lines of ascendants by father’s side and mother’s side, 2836.
multiplication of ascendants and their lines, 2837.
difference between lines of ascendants and descendants, 2838.
divers lines of collaterals, 2839.
three orders of collaterals, 2840.
proximity of, not regulated by order of lines, 2841.
situation of lines of collaterals, 2842.
(See CoLttaTERALs, ASCENDANTS, DESCENDANTS.)
CONTESTATION OF SUIT, 1949, note £
CONTRIBUTION, where goods are sacrificed for common safety, 1617.
estimation of value, 1617, note.
all goods saved contribute, 1618.
except ship's provisions, 1619.
precaution for the security of, 1620.
of damage to the ship, 1621.
where masts are cut away, 1622.
does not take place where ship is cast away, 1623.
where goods taken out to lighten a ship are lost in the lighter, 1624.
where, in such case, the ship is cast away, and not the lighter, 1625.
where a vessel is saved from wreck by throwing goods overboard, but is after-
wards lost, 1626.
if one recover goods thrown overboard in the first danger, 1627.
ceases when goods thrown overboard are recovered, 1628.
where goods remaining in the ship are damaged by throwing other goods over-
board, 1629.
CORPORATIONS AND COMMUNITIES, 1435 - 1438.
engage to ratify acts of their syndics, 1448.
and to allow their expenses, 1449.
engagements of, how limited, 1450.
how the directors of, are bound in their own names, 1451.
engagements of, not divided among the members, 1452.
succeed by testament, 2505.
COSTS. (See DamaGes.)
COUNTER LETTERS, 2032.
cannot prejudice third persons, 2033.
COVENANTS, nature, use, and various kinds of, 140 - 1432.
meaning of the word, 144.
defined, 145.
the subject-matter of, 146.
of four sorts, 147.
not obligatory without a cause, 148.
in donations, acceptance forms the covenant, 149.
some have a name, some not, but all oblige the parties thereto, 150.
perfected by mutual consent, 151.
obliging by the intervention of a thing, 152.
written, or unwritten, 153.
written, may be made before a notary, or signed only by the parties, 154.
unwritten, how proved, 155.
made before a notary, prove themselves, 156.
60°


714 INDEX.


COVENANTS.
@ signatare contested must be proved, 157.
made before notary, how perfected, 158.
may be made by proxy between absent persons, 159.
who may enter into, 160.
must be made with knowledge and freedom, 161.
no one can covenant for others, or to their prejudice, 162.
except proxies, 163.
and certain others, according to the power given them, 164.
where one treating for a third person undertakes for his consent, 165.
are in the place of laws, 166. :
obscurities and doubts to be interpreted by intention of parties, 167.
or by the usages of the place, 168.
different clauses interpreted by each other, 169.
intention followed rather than words, 170.
fraudulent obscurity, &c., interpreted against party using it, 173.
alternative obligation is in the choice of the party obliged, 174.
for things whose value may be more or less, 175.
the price estimated at common rate, 176.
time and place of estimation of things, 177.
expressions having no sense rejected, 178.
errors in the writing of, 179.
limited to matters of which they treat, 180.
interpretation of judicial covenants, 181.
three sorts of engagements in, 182.
the reciprocal performance of, 183.
suspension of the performance of, 184.
penalties for non-performance, 185.
without a term of payment or delivery, 186.
place of performance, 187.
obligee not in delay till the last moment of the term expires, 188.
care which one intrusted with the property of another by covenant is bound to
take, 189.
no one accountable for accidents, 190.
he who reaps the profit shall bear the loes, 191. -
in which the estimation of value is referred to arbitration, 192.
perfect integrity required in all, 193.
contractors must deal honestly as to third persons, 194.
the liberty of taking advantage does not extend to frand, 195.
delays for performance are arbitrary, and depend on circumstances, 196.
all manner of pacts may be added to, 198.
ordinary engagements may be altered, 199.
deceit and fraud excluded from all, 200.
in all, every one may renounce his own right, 201.
particular pactions limited to their subject-matter, 202.
conditions in, 203.
defined, 204.
condition and burden used indifferently, 205.
the events provided for by conditions, of three sorts, 206.
conditions of three sorts, according to their effect, 207.
express and tacit conditions, 208.
conditions on which the accomplishment depends, 209.
effect of the event of such condition, 310.


INDEX. 715


COVENANTS.

condition on which the dissolution depends, 211.

effect of the event of such condition, 212.

consequences of conditional covenants, how regulated, 213.

conditions relating to past or present time have their effect immediately, 214.

impossible conditions annul, 215.

the effect of conditions passes to heirs, 216.

condition independent of deed of contractor has its effect immediately, 217.

condition depending on the deed of contractor may suffer a delay, 218.

unless such delay destroy the essence of the contract, or cause damage, 219.

of him who hinders the accomplishment of condition, 220.

clauses of nullity and penal clauses, 221.

their effect, 222.

non-performance of one contractor does not annul, 223.

concerning an uncertain event, 224.

which are null, defined, 225.

null, of which the nullity is not yet known, 226.

causes of the nullities of, 227.

persons incapable of contracting by, 228.

different degrees of such incapacity, 229.

liable to be annulled may become valid, 232.

a natural obligation, 233.

annulled by mistake and violence, 234.

concerning things public and holy, null, 235.

annulled by change of the thing sold, 236.

obligations without a cause are null, 237.

null by fault of one contractor, their effect, 238.

annulled, the consequences of, 239.

nullity mast be declared by sentence of a court, or by consent, 240.

which are null are void also as to third persons, 241.

difference between nullity and dissolution, 242.

causes which dissolve, 243.

the latter covenants derogate from the first, 244.

new, are without prejudice to the rights of third persons acquired by former cove-

nants, 245.

dissolved by the event of a condition, 246.

effect of clauses of nullity, 247.

dissolved by agreement, 248.

dissolved and annulled by fraud, 249.

dissolved in some cases by damage without fraud, 250.

of the events which dissolve, 251.

dissolved for non-performance, 252.

effects and consequences of dissolution, 253.

accessory, dissolved with the principal covenant, 254.

must be dissolved by authority of justice, or by consent, 255.
COZENAGE IN MORTGAGING, 1677. (Seo SteLuionate.)
CREDITOR AND DEBTOR, defined, 649.
CREDITORS, acts to defraud, 1630.

such frauds of several sorts, 1631.

fraud by assignment of movables, 1631.

by the Roman law a debtor might renounce a succession, in fraud of his cred-

itor, 1682.
what debtors do to defraud their creditors is revoked, 1633.


716 INDEX.


CREDITORS.
fraudulent bounties, 1634.
of alienation to purchasers for a valuable scinsideration: 1635.
of alienations to purchasers knowing to the fraud, 1636.
such purchaser shall make restitution, 1637.
the intention to defraud must be followed by the effect, 1638.
divers ways of defrauding, 1639.
a dowry settled to defraud creditors, 1643.
receiving only what is due commit no fraud, 1644.
exception to this rule, 1645.
engagements following from frauds on creditors, 1646-1649.
accomplices of frauds on, 1647.
punishment of debtor who defrauds, 1648.
where a tutor participates in a frand on creditors, 1649.
three sorts of, 1732.
privileges of creditors of two kinds, 17383-1735.
Privilege defined, 1736.
priority of time does not affect privileged creditors, 1737.
effect of the privilege, 1738.
privilege of the seller, 1739.
privilege of one who lends money for a purchase, 1740.
privilege of him who lends to preserve the thing, 1741.
privilege for improvements, 1742.
effect of this privilege, 1743.
privilege of architects and workmen, 1744.
privilege of him who lends to the undertaker of a work, 1745.
privilege of carriers, 1746.
privilege on the fruits of an estate for the payment of rent, 1747.
privilege of a quitrent and of the pension due from an emphyteutical ten-
ant, 1748.
privilege on the movables of a tenant, 1749.
of the movables of under-tenants, 1750.
privilege for the rents of other buildings, 1753.
privilege of the king, 1754.
where a creditor has a mortgage prior to that of the king, 1755.
king preferred before all creditors, having neither mortgage nor privilege, 1758.
privilege of funeral charges, 1759.
privilege of law charges, 1760.
privilege on goods of public depositaries, 1761.
further privilege by the customs of France, 1761, note.
privilege as to the deposit in being, 1762.
who innovate, lose their privilege, 1763.
concurrence of creditors for several deposits, 1764.
the effect of privileges, 1765.
difference of privileges, as to appropriation of goods, 1766.
competition and preference among privileged creditors, 1767.
having the same privilege, preference among, 1768.
three orders of, 1769.
Substitution explained and defined, 1770, 1771.
the simplest is assignment, 1772.
effect of assignments, 1773.
other ways of substitution, 1774.
by authority of justice, 1775.


INDEX. T17


CREDITORS.
by payment made to the creditor, 1777.
assignment substitutes to the mortgage and to the privilege, 1779.
substitution without assignment, 1780.
how a third person may acquire the right of, 1781.
how he may acquire the privilege of, 1782.
how the privilege may be acquired without substitution, 1783.
where a creditor pays off a prior creditor, 1784.
a purchaser substituted to the creditor whom he pays off, 1785.
substitution by attachment, 1786.
substitution is void after payment, 1787.
validity of substitations, &c., depends on the state of the creditor's right at the
time, 1788.
CRIMES AND OFFENCES, p. 82.
public and private, by the Roman law, 2637.
CURATORS, 1279. °
usage as to, 1402-1407.
of madmen, 1408.
when a minor is mad, 1409.
madness to be proved judicially, 1410.
& son may be curator to a mad father or mother, 1411.
when a son, under jurisdiction, is mad, 1412.
a husband cannot be curator of a mad wife, 1413.
madness with lucid intervals, 1414.
the infirmities which require a curator, 1415.
of prodigals, 1416.
@ prodigal must be proved such, 1417.
a son cannot be curator to a prodigal father, 1418.
duration of the curatorship of prodigals, 1419.
to the effects of an absent person, 1420.
to a child unborn, 1421.
to a succession, 1422.
to goods relinquished by a debtor to creditors, 1423.
a creditor may be curator to the goods of his debtor, 1424.
power of, 1425.
oath and administration of, 1426.
difference between curators and tutors, 1427.
engagements of, 1428.
action of those appointed to persons, 1429.
action of those appointed to goods only, 1430.
action of those appointed to the goods of an absent person, 1431.
action of him whose charge is at an end, 1432.
effect of the action of curators, 1433.
have mortgage for their security, 1434.
CUSTOMS, p. 79.
and usages the interpreters of laws, p. 83.
and laws abolished by disuse, p. 83.


DAMAGE occasioned by faults which do not amount to a crime, 1546.
occupant liable for damage by any thing thrown from a house, 1547.
the prohibitions of so throwing things extend to all places, 1548.
occupant also liable to a fine, 1549.
if any one is killed, 1550.


718 INDEX.


DAMAGE.
if there are several occupants, 1551.
where one occupies the whole house and lets chambers, 15532.
of those who take scholars or apprentices, 1553.
where things are thrown ont with design to hurt, 1554.
where things are hung out, so that they fall, 1555.
from tiles falling, 1557.
done by living creatures, 1558.
master of cattle answerable for damage done by them, 1560.
and also to a fine, 1561.
cattle doing damage to be driven out without violence, 1563.
various kinds of, by horses, oxen, dogs, and wild beasts, 1564-1571.
by the fall of a building, 1572.
owner of ruinous building may be summoned to demolish it, 1573.
permission may be given to provide against such danger, 1574. |
negligent proprietor liable for damages, 1575.
where the building falis before the proprietor has been warned, 1576.
to superfluous ornaments of a building thrown down by another, 1577.
where the house falls by accident after the owner has been warned, 1578.
where the decayed house is owned by several, 1579.
new works prohibited, 1580.
a new work which one may make, even to his neighbour’s inconvenience, 1581.
a new work that one cannot do to his neighbour’s prejudice, 1582.
one cannot change the ancient course of waters, 1583.
jadicial prohibition to innovate, 1584.
building in public places prohibited, 1585.
where there is no intention of doing harm, 1586.
occasioned by failure of delivery, 1587.
caused by an innocent act, 1588.
precautions to be used in works from which damage may arise, 1586.
from ignorance of what one is obliged to know, 1587.
from fire, 1591.
done to avoid imminent danger, 1592.
where one neglects to prevent damage that he is bound to prevent, 1593.
from an accident preceded by some act that gave occasion to it, 1594.
when such accident was preceded by an unlawful fact, 1595.
DAMAGES, of several sorts, and their causes, 1900.
may be reduced to two kinds, 1901.
may be also distinguished by the intention, 1902.
he who is answerable for, should indemnify, 1903.
difference between interest, and costs and damages, 1904.
for non-payment of money, are uniform, 1905.
how judged and regulated, 1917.
as to the quality of the act of the person from whom they are due, 1918.
as to the events which follow such act, 1919.
present, and damages to come, how estimated, 1929.
reparation regulated by a view of the cause and consequences thereof, 1931.
& vulgar distinction concerning, 1932.
reparation regulated by the judge, or by skilful persons, 1933.
certain damages regulated by the judge alone, 1935.
costs in a lawsuit, 1941.
restitution of fruits, 1943.
defined, 1960.


INDEX. 719


DAMAGES.
two questions, 1. whether any are due, 1961.
2. in what they consist, 1962.
the estimation of damages, 1964.

, for which reparation may be demanded are of two sorts, 1965.
either for a loss sustained, or for a failure of profit, 1966.
difference in, as respects fraud, 1967.
whether or not caused by negligence or other fault, 1968.
may be due, though not occasioned by any fault, 1969.
of consequences which appear remote, yet enter into the estimation of, 1970.
estimate of, for losses which depend on fature events, 1971.
the prudence of the judge in estimating, 19732.
against litigious persons, 1973.
the stipulation of a sum in lieu of, 1974.
estimated in money, 1975.
one may be the cause of loss and not liable for damages, 1976.
questions relating to, 1977.

DECISIVE OATH, 2083, 2084.
DEFAMATORY LIBELS, 2558, note.
DELEGATION may be made in two manners, 2316.
all delegations imply novation, 2317.
defined, 2318.
can be only by consent of all concerned, 2319.
and assignment, difference between, 2320.
the assignment of a debt, or the obligation of a third person, does not constitute, 2322.
to the creditor, or to another by his order, 2323.
is a kind of novation, 2324.
the person delegated cannot revive the former obligation, 2325.
nor use the exceptions he had against the person who delegated him, 2326.
DELIVERY, defined, 270.
of movables, how made, 271.
of immovables, 272.
the clause of precarious possession tacitly understood, 273.
of things incorporeal, 274.
the first effect of, is the translation of the full property, 275.
effect of, where the seller was not owner, 276.
another effect is the right to prescribe, 277.
effect of, between the buyers of the same thing, 278.
the time of, 279.
the place of, 280.
damages for delay of, 281.
wherein such damage consists, 282.
consequences of gain or loss which do not enter into such damage, 283.
damages due though sale be annulled, 284.
seller cannot annul the sale by failure to deliver, 285.
hindered by accident, 286.
where seller is in danger of losing the price, 287.
where seller and buyer are both in delay, 288.
DEPOSIT, the use of, 679.
demands particular fidelity in the depositary, 680
sequestration, 681 — 683.
of things immovable, 684.
wagers, 685.


720 INDEX.


DEPOSIT.
necessary deposits, 686, 733.
of things distrained, 687.
of the goods of travellers, 690.
defined, 691.
should be gratuitous, 692.
immovables may be deposited, 693.
people may deposit goods of others; even thieves, 694.
of restitution to the owner, 695.
when the thing may be restored to another than the owner, 696.
may be taken back at the owner’s pleasure, 697.
of the place where the thing should be restored, 698.
depositary charged with the produce, 699.
where depositary has leave to use the thing, 700.
where the thing belongs to several, 701.
where depositary becomes insolvent after payment of his portion to one of several
coheirs, 702.
several owners may agree that any one of them may call for the thing, 703.
a thing deposited with several persons, 704.
if depositary use the thing without leave, 705.
of a thing for the benefit of depositary, 708.
of a coffer containing many things, 707.
of the expenses of keeping the thing, 708.
depositary shall recover the charges of preserving the thing, 709.
and charges of transportation, 710.
of the discharge of depositary, 711.
foundation of the care of depositary, 712.
the care required of depositary, 713.
fraud or negligence of depositary, 714.
of a depositary negligent in his own affairs, 716.
where the thing is lost without depositary’s fault, 717.
where the degree of care is regulated by agreement, 718.
of a depositary who offers himself, how far accountable, 719.
of a depositary who has sold the thing, and bought it again, 720.
if depositary delay restitution, 721.
where the thing may be restored in one of many places, 722.
of the executor or administrator of depositary, 723.
if executor of depositary sell the thing, 724.
the circumstances excusing such an act, 724, note g.
depositary cannot detain the thing in compensation for a debt, 735.
necessary deposit defined, 733.
such deposit is by agreement, 734.
the duty of depositary of a necessary deposit, 785.
DEROGATORY CLAUSES, 3110.
defined, 3111.
unknown to the Roman law, 3112.
and contrary to it, 3115.
reasons Offered for the invention of, 3113.
inconveniences and dangers of, 3114.
DESCENDANTS, who are children, 2791.
who are descendants, 2792.
all descendants included under the name of children, 2798.
bastards not included, 2794.


INDEX. 721


DESCENDANTS.
of children born in the seventh or eleventh month, 2795.
posthumous, stilborn children, and monsters, 2797 - 2799.
a child born during marriage presumed legitimate, 2800.
children succeed by equal portions, 2801.
grandchildren succeed by representation with children of first degree, 2802.
as also among themselves, if there are no children of the first degree, 2803.
how children of different marriages succeed, 2805.
they take the rights of their fathers and mothers, 2806.
the portion of the child unborn, 2807.
curator of such child, 2808.
provision for a widow big with child, 2809.
provision for the child whose state is questioned, 2810.
exclude ascendants, 2812.
where the father and son die at the same time, 2813.
of the mother and child at the breast who die at the same time, 2814.
children have the right of transmission, 2821.
provision for children while deliberaging, 2822.
fathers have the usufruct of successions falling to their children, 2823.
rights which pass to those of the family who do not succeed to the estate, 2824.
DETENTION, three causes of, 1. the right of property, 2119.
2. the will of the owner, 2120.
3. usurpation, 2121.
which the owner cannot take away, 2140.
DISCOMFITURE, OR INSOLVENCY, 2344.
defined, 2345.
a creditor possessing a pledge preferred as to that pledge, 2346.
the seller preferred as to the thing sold by him, 2347. _-
where a debt is conditional, 2348.
DISCUSSION among several tutors, 1339.
in favor of a third possessor, 1704.
in favor of sureties, 1866.
jadicial sureties may be prosecuted without discussion, 1867.
DISHERISON, 3340.
of the action given to children in case of, 3341.
distinction between preterition and, 3342.
insanity of testator presumed therein, 3343.
action given likewise to ascendants, 3344.
law as to bastards, 3345.
children cannot be disinherited without cause, 3847.
nor parents, or other ascendants, 3348.
children may not be disinherited even though a legacy be left them, 33851.
in the Code of Justinian, 3352, 3353.
children of the person disinherited excluded from the inheritance, 3357.
null, unless the child be clearly designated, 3359.
of alimony for the son, pending the appeal of the executor, 3360.
the portion of a child whose disherison subsists accrues to the other children, 3361.
but not where the son had only delayed the bringing of his action, 3361, note p.
where less than the legitime is left, 3362.
cannot be made to subsist by the favor of the executor, 3363.
where the emperor is instituted heir, 3363, note r.
children may not be disinherited without just cause, 3365.
causes of disinheriting children, 3366, 3367.
VOL. II. 61


722


DISHERISON.


of parents, divers causes of, 3368. e

causes to be proved by executor, 3369.

of the burden of proof by the ancient Roman law, 3369, note 6.

a husband may not be deprived of his wife’s dowry by reason of her ingrat-
tude, 3370.

has its effect where the party has once approved of the testament, 3371.

where the party disinherited accepts a legacy, 3372.

where the party disinherited is guardian to a legatee; 3378.

where the party has approved the testament by certain acts, 3374.

complaint against, to be made within five years, 3375.

the justice of this prescription, 3376.

if the action commenced be dropped, it may not be subsequently revived, 33/7.

cannot subsist where testament is forged, 3378.


DISPENSATION OF AGE, 2393.
DIVISION, the benefit of, among sureties, 1871, note.
DONATIONS, are of two sorts, 906.


those taking effect in life, and those after death, their difference, 907.

consequence of this difference, 908.

“ To give and to retain avails nothing,” 909.

divers ways of giving, 912.

between man and wife, 913.

abolished by the Roman law, 914.

except those taking effect after death of donor, 915.

dispositions of various Customs in relation to, 916.

defined, 918.

no donation without acceptance, 919.

where the donee is incapable of accepting, 920.

he who gives only what he is bound to makes no donation, 921.

remuneratory, 922.

are irrevocable, 923.

what may be given, 924.

may be of all or of part of donor’s goods, 925.

not augmented by fruits reaped after the gift, 926.

either pure and simple, or conditional, 927.

conditions of three sorts, 928.

when perfected, admit no new burdens, 929.

difference between the motives and conditions of, 980.

reservation of the usufruct, 931.

registration of, 932.

alimony afforded from motives of liberality, 933.

the first engagement of donor is, not to revoke, 934.

the second, delivery of the thing, 935.

reservation of the use and profits is instead of delivery, 936.

the third engagement, warranty, 937.

if fraud of the donor occasion loss to donce, 938.

donor cannot be obliged to perform more than he is able without being redaced (0
want, 939.

interest of the things given, 940.

the first engagement of donee is to acquit charges, 941.

the second, gratitude, 942.

of ingratitude not resented by donor, 943.

of revocation, where children are afterwards born to the donor, 944.


INDEX. 723


DONATIONS IN PROSPECT OF DEATH, 3472.
two significations of the term, 3472.
distinguished from those which take effect in lifetime of donor, 3474.
defined, 3475.
three kinds of, by the Roman law, 3476.
by the civil law, those near death may not make donations to take effect in life-

time, 3477.

that is, of immovables, unless delivered, 3478.
other usages of Roman law respecting, 3479.
wherein they differ from, or agree with, codicils, 3480.
the formalities of, 3481.
who may make, 3482.
rules of codicils apply to, 3483.
and also those of legacies, 3484.

DOWRY, foundation of the rules of, 828. ;
distinction between goods of the dowry and the paraphernalia, 829.
remarks on the privileges of, 831 — 834.
defined, 835.
enjoyed by husband for the charges of marriage, 836.
in what manner the husband is master of, 837.
consists of money or other things estimated, 838.
estimation makes the thing to be at the husband’s peril, 839.
consequences of this estimation, 840.
may be of all, or of a part of the woman's estate, 841.
profits of, which are not revenues, 842.
stones taken out of a quarry are revenues, 843.
of lands purchased with the wife’s portion, 844.
of the gains of the wife or husband surviving, 845.
the husband cannot alienate lands he got in marriage with the wife, 847.
nor subject them to services or other burdens, 848.
the alienation of, 849.
settlement of, implies the condition that the marriage be accomplished, 850.
the father endows his daughter, 851.
&@ woman not under paternal jurisdiction settles her own dowry, 852.
presumed to be given by the father from his own estate, 853.
dos profectitia, 854.
proceeding from father, reverts, if he survive, 855.
foundation and use of this right, 856.
so reverting, subject to profits due to the husband, 857.
if the father is a prodigal, 858.
coming from other ascendants, 859.
reversion of, as to strangers, 860.
what a father owes his daughter not considered as a dowry, 861.
settled by the mother, 862.
warranty of, 863.
the husband’s engagements concerning, 864.
of the care he should take of the goods pertaining to, 865.
of his diligence against debtors, 866.
if the husband innovate the obligation, it is at his own peril, 867.
if he receive interest from a debtor of the dowry, 868.
how prescription may be imputed to the husband, 869.
restitution of, 870.
accessions of, 871.


TA INDEX.


DOWRY.
to whom to be restored, 872.
restitution may be diminished by the husband's gains, 873.
and by repairs and other charges, 874.
three sorts of expenses of, 875.
necessary expenses, 876.
annual and ordinary expenses to be borne by husband, 877.
ground charges are taken out of the fruits, 878.
useful expenses, how recovered, 879.
how we are to judge of necessity or usefulness of sach expenses, 880.
if the repairs of, perish by accident, 881.
expenses for pleasure, 883.
repairs for pleasure, 883.
when settled to defraud creditors, 1642.
cannot be prescribed during marriage, 2223.
(See PanarnennaL Goons.)


EMANCIPATION OF CHILDREN, 2867. (See Persons.)
ENGAGEMENTS, the several kinds on which society is founded, p. 8.

the spirit of the second law in all, p. 19.

demand the use of a government, p. 20.

are the foundation of the particalar laws which relate to them, p. 21.

general rules arising from, p. 22.

are instead of laws, p. 22.

formed without a covenant, 1271 - 1275.

of those who manage the affairs of others without their knowledge, 1453-1455.

to continue an affair begun, 1456.

the care to which they are bound, 1457.

of the neglect of such affairs, 1458.

an affair undertaken without necessity, 1459.

of him who manages only one affair, 1460.

of accidents, 1461.

if the absent person die before the affair is ended, 1462.

interest of minors received on account of absent persons, 14638.

of him who manages the affair of one person believing it to belong to another, 1464.

if a woman manages the affair of an absent person, 1465.

of those who act through necessity, 1466.

a case where the most exact care is not required, 1467.

of him whose business has been managed by another without his knowledge, 1468.

1. to ratify and execute what has been well done, 1469.

2. to reimburse his expenses, 1470.

excessive expenses reduced, 1471.

8. to pay interest on money advanced, 14732.

unnecessary expenses, 1473.

if what has been usefully done perish by accident, 1474.

of approbation of what has been ill done, 1475.

of expenses incurred from motives of liberality, 1476.

such expenses to be judged by circumstances, 1478.

formed by accidents, 1596.

of things left on another’s land by an inundation, L602.

of things thrown into the sea in danger of shipwreck, 1603.

provision of victuals in a common danger, 1604.

of repairing changes in the condition of places caused by an accident, 1605.


INDEX, | 725


ENGAGEMENTS.
if such changes cannot be repaired, 1606.
of mixture of things belonging to several persons, 1607.
one may seek for what he has left in another’s ground, 1608.
are reciprocal and not reciprocal, 1609.
all accidents causing gain or loss do not form engagements, 1610.
of him who has found a thing lost, 1601, 1612.
of him who recovers what he had lost, 1613.
of him on whose ground the property of another has been thrown by acci-
dent, 1613, 1614.
the rights of such person, 1615.
contribution in case of loss of goods thrown overboard for common safety, 1616-1629.
following from frauds on creditors, 1646.
the consequences which add to engagements and strengthen them, 1650.
three ways of annulling or diminishing, 2236.
EQUITY, pp. 37, 85.
ERROR of fact, defined, 1224.
of law, defined, 1225.
there can be no ignorance of the law of nature, 1226.
difference between errors of fact and law, 1227.
of minors, does them no prejudice, 1228.
of persons of full age, has divers effects, 1229.
of fact which is the only cause of a covenant, 1230.
if not the only cause of the covenant, 1231.
ignorance of facts is presumed, 12332.
of fact, caused by frand, 1283.
effect of, to be judged by circumstances, 1234.
of computation, 1235.
in law, not sufficient to annul covenants, 1236.
in law, if the only cause of the covenant, 1237.
of customs, 1237, note.
of law, of no avail in certain cases, 1239.
of law, when not the only cause of the covenant, 1240.
ESSOINS, or the excuses of witnesses, 2058.
ESTIMATION of goods sacrificed at sea, 1617, note.
EXCEPTIONS AND DISPENSATIONS, their foundation and nature, p. 60.
two sorts of exceptions to laws, p. 90.
EXCHANGE, 444.
rules of the Roman law concerning, 445.
the rules of sales apply to, except those of price, 446, 450.
defined, 447.
no distinction of buyer and seller, 448.
eviction in, 449.
of lands mortgaged for other lands, 1648, note.
EXCHEQUER in the place of heir to condemned persons, 2669.
and to the estates of aliens, 2670.
and to bastards, 2671.
and to those who have no relations, 2672.
EXECUTOR, need not be mentioned by name, 3039.
may be unknown to testator, 3041.
must be certainly described, 3042.
cannot be a witness, 3058.
nor can his children, father, or brothers, 3061.
61°


726 INDEX.


EXECUTOR.
distinction of direct and oblique words in the institution of, abolished, 3098.
renouncing the inhcritance, 3125. -


the executor first instituted preferred, 3183.
his condition, 3186.
his inconveniences, $3187.
the use and necessity of, 3834.
must give an account, 3339. (See Here.)
EVICTION, defined, 371.
, of tenant, 484.


FACTORS, the bounds of their power, 1185.

where one is substituted to take charge of a ship or cargo, by the one intratc’
with it, 1186.

of minors or women employed as, 1187.
where several partners employ one factor, all are bound, 1189.
are not obliged in their own names, 1191.
how the power of factors expires, 1192.

FALCIDIAN PORTION, whence its name, 3698.
applies only in provinces governed by written law, 3699.
defined, 3700.
not to be taken out till debts are paid, 3701.
and funeral expenses, 3702.
executor cannot have, unless he make an inventory, 3703.
the heir at law has a right to, 3704.
all dispositions made in view of death subject to, 3705.
computed according to value of goods at testator’s death, 3706.
which are valued according to their worth at that time, 3707.
losses of goods fall on executor if he accept purely and simply, 3708.
difference between such executor and one with the benefit of an inventory, 3703.
not regulated by the estimate of testator, 3710.
valuation of goods should be with knowledge of all concerned, 3711.
precaution as to uncertain goods, 3712.
diminished by diminution of charges and new funds, 3713.
and by discovery of other goods, 3714.
regulated by estimation if the thing bequeathed cannot be divided, 3715.
ceases in certain cases, 3716.
not diminished by favor of the legacy, 3717.
whether legacies to pious uses are exempt from, 3718.
how regulated where there are conditional legacies, 3719.
legacy of a service is subject to, 3720.
legacy of the payment of a debt not due, subject to, 3721.
legacy of a debt due from an insolvent debtor not subject to, 3722.
equity of this rule, 3723.
three sorts of legacies to be provided for, 3724.
due from legacy of a usufruct, and how regulated, 3725.
how this rule is deduced, 3726.
the various provisions of different texts, 3727 - 3730.
the provisions of the sixty-eighth law concerning, 3731.
equitable manner of regulating, 3732.
only the beneficiary heir has a right to, 3733.
of goods concealed by executor, is lost to him, 3734.
also that of legacies which he has attempted to suppress, 3735.


Va


INDEX. 727


FALCIDIAN PORTION.
the heir at law renouncing his right by testament does not lose his right to, 3736.
where several executors are charged with different legacies, 3737.
legatees charged with legacies have no right to, 3738.
except where a diminution happens on account of the executor, 3739.
testator may forbid taking, 3740.
legacy of an immovable not to be alienated is not subject to, 3741.
when testator is a debtor to his executor, 3742.
dispositions of military testaments not subject to, 3743, 3744.
where a legatee is charged with an annual pension, 3745, 3746.
diminished by what augments the inheritance, 3747.
and by what comes to the executor in that quality, 3748.
executor remaining alone does not contribute to legatees having assignments on
the portion of the other executor, 3749.
and so in the case of a pupillary substitution, 3750. :
rule concerning, in case of accretion or substitution, 3751.
not diminished by legacy to one executor to be taken from the share left to the:
other, 3752.
between coexecutors, who are legatees, 3753.
where the executor is instituted for several shares of the inheritance, 3754.
not diminished by the accomplishment of a conditional legacy, where the legatee
succeeds to the executor, 3755.
chatge on one executor augments only his share of, 3756.
how estimated, when payment of legacy is deferred, 3757.
cannot be deducted by executor who has paid or promised to pay whole legacy, 3758.
unless he have done so through an error of fact, 3759.
not lost by the mere effect of time, 3760.
of several legacies to one legatee retained out of that which is last paid, 3761.
executor claiming without right is liable for interest, if he delay payment of lega-
cies, 3762.
FIDUCIARY BEQUESTS, definition and use of, 3490.
particular, two sorts of rules concerning, 3491.
particular, defined, 3496.
(See Lreacy.)
FORCE, the nature of, and its effects on liberty, 1241.
every kind of force, violence, and threat unlawful, 1244.
rule of the Roman law concerning, 1246.
defined, 1247.
covenant to which a party has consented through force is null, 1248.
divers ways of using force, 1249.
if a magistrate use unlawfully his authority, 1250.
where used on another than him whose consent it is intended to obtain, 1251.
what is done by force is null, 1252.
effects of, to be judged by circumstances, 1253.
used to obtain a compliance with that which is just, 1254.
counsel and authority do not impose force, 1255.
what is done by authority of a court of justice is not force, 1256.
FORFEITURES, 2457.
by the Roman law, 2669, note.
FRAUD, defined, 1259.
judged by the quality of the fact and the circumstances, 1260.
never presumed, but must be proved, 1261.
dolus re ipsa, 12632.
(Seo CREDITOR.)


728 INDEX.


FRIENDSHIP, the nature and kinds of, p. 26.


difference between friendship and the love enjoined by the second law, p. 27.


a natural consequcnce of the second law, p. 28. .
is mutual and free, p. 28.
and conjugal love, their difference, p. 29.
and love of parents and children, their difference, p. 30.
its use in society, p. 30.
FUNERAL CHARGES, 2651 - 2653.
are privileged, 2654.
regulated by the estate and quality of the deceased, 9655.
unreasonable dispositions of testator respecting, 2656.
how recovered back if any other than the heir has paid them, 2657.


GOVERNMENT, the order of, to keep men within their engagements, p. 19.


HABITATION, 970.
defined, 977.
extends to the whole family, 978.
extends to the whole house, or a part, 979.
the right of, may be transferred, 980.
the right of, is for life, 981.
expires by death of usufructuary, 1006.
HEIR AND EXECUTOR, 2461.
defined, 2463.
two sorts of heirs, 2464.
the heir is in the place of the deceased, 2470.
the engagement of, has three characters, 2471.
is irrevocable, universal, and indivisible, 2472-2474.
esteemed such from the death of the person whom he succeeds, 9477.


who divests himself of the inheritance, remains liable for all the changes, 2479.


who sells his right, is reputed heir, 2480.

where the portions of heirs are not regulated they will be equal, 2482.
who may be heir, 2483.

married daughters excluded by some customs of France, 2484.
other incapacities by these customs, 2486.

all persons may be heirs, if there be no cause excluding them, 2487.
two sorts of incapacity, as to causes, 2489.

stillborn children and monsters, 2490.

children who die as soon as born succeed, 2491.

whether a child born alive before its time inherits, 2492.

a child born after the mother’s death inherits, 2495.

mad, deaf, and dumb persons, and prodigals, inherit, 2496.

aliens do not succeed, 2502.

professed monks do not succeed, 2503.

nor persons condemned to death, or those civilly dead, 2504.
corporations and communities succeed by testament, 2505.
children unborn when the succession fell succeed, 2506.

who unworthy of being heir or executor, 2546.

difference between the usage of France and the Roman law, 2547.
who is unworthy, excluded from the inheritance, 2549.

the causes which render him unworthy, 2550, 2562.

who is unworthy restores the fruits and interest, 2563.

diffcrence between the causes that render heirs unworthy, 2564.


INDEX. 729


EIEIR AND EXECUTOR.
if the cause subsist at the time of the testator’s death, 2565.
if the cause had ceased at that time, 2566.
distinction of causes with respect to the two kinds of succession, 2567.
who can have no heirs or executors, 2568.
persons incapable of making a testament cannot have testamentary heirs, 2570.
bastards dying intestate have no heirs but their children, 2571.
aliens have no heirs or executors, 2572.
monks have cither testamentary heirs or heirs at law, 2573.
condemned persons have no heirs, 2574.
persons who have no relatives have no heirs at law, 2575.
the rights of, 2576, 2577.
first, to accept the succession and take possession of the goods, 2578.
entrance on the inheritance takes effect from the date of the death, 2579.
may renounce the inheritance, 2580.
may deliberate whether or not to accept, 2581.
may demand that legacies and bequests be reduced, 2583.
may sell or otherwise dispose of the inheritance, 2584.
transmits the inheritance to his heir, 2585.
does not succecd to certain rights, 2586.
rights of heirs of blood to the legitime, 2587.
right of partition among, 2588.
accretion, 2589.
collation of goods, 2590.
reversion, 2591.
the engagements of, to the succession by the effect of acceptance, 2592.
& general engagement for all the charges of the inheritance, 2594.
the particular engagements of, are of two kinds, 2595.
the charges which may be imposed on, 2596.
the charges to which he is liable, 2597.
two engagements of deceased do not pass to, 2598.
1. public offices, 2599.
2. engagements made by mutual consent, 2600.
all lawfal charges may be imposed on, 2601.
dispositions regulating these charges, 2602.
what necessary for the validity of these dispositions, 2603.
1. the person must be capable of disposing, 2604.
2. they must be in favor of persons capable of receiving, 2605.
8. they must be in due form, 2606.
4. they must be within the bounds prescribed by law, 2607.
difference of effect of these rules, 2608.
how these dispositions should be performed, 2610.
bound for all the charges of the inheritance, 2611.
for charges of successions that deceased had inherited, 2612.
for substitutions and fiduciary bequests deceased had inherited, 2613.
for all other charges, debts, and demands on the succession, 2614.
for damages by any crime of the deceased, 2615.
for debts payable after his death, 2616. é
for funeral expenses, 2617.
a plan of the rights and charges of, 2618.
bound for debts though they exceed the inheritance, 2621.
three kinds of engagements and debts, 2622.
creditors of the deceased preferred to those of the heir, in goods of the inherit-
ance, 2624.


730 INDEX.


HEIR AND EXECUTOR.

creditors of heir preferred to those of the deceased, in goods belonging to ce
heir, 2625.

creditors without mortgage or privilege share equally, 2626.

creditors of deceased come in all alike on the goods of the heir, 2627.

separation of goods of, from those of the inheritance, 2628.

bound for the debts, personally, each for his share, and hypothecarily for the
whole, 2629.

mortgage or privileged debt, divided with respect to, 2630.

how all the debts are divided among, 2631.

debts are divided, even against the exchequer, 2632.

division not hindered by insolvency of an heir, 2633.

debts divided according to portions of the inheritance, 2634.

engagements of, on account of the crimes of the deceased, 2635.

principles of the Roman law, 2636.

usage of France respecting, 2642.

these usages conform to those of the canon law, 2645.

distinction between the pecuniary punishment and the civil interest, 2648.

how liable to pecuniary punishment, 2649.

always bound for the civil interest, 2650.

engagements of heirs to each other, 2658.

should inform each other of what they have, or know of, the inheritance, 2660.

of the care they should take of the common gooda, 2661.

should divide the profits they have made, 2662.

should reimburse each other the interest of money advanced, 2663.

should bring into the inheritance all goods which ought to be brought in, 2665.

one cannot make changes in the goods without the consent of all, 2666.

engagement to come to a partition, 2667.

universal donee is in the place of heir, 2674.

the purchaser of an inheritance is in the place of, 2675.

the curator to a vacant succession represents, 2676.

may deliberate whether or not to accept, 2682.

informs himself by the inventory, 2683.

curators are named while he deliberates, 2684.

and perishable things are sold, 2685.

pressing charges are acquitted, 2686.

alimony allowed to children while they deliberate, 2687.

many heirs successively have each the right of deliberation, 2688.

who dies while deliberating transmits his right, 2689.

with the benefit of an inventory, 2690.

punishment of, for concealing effects, 2694.

engagements of, to the succession, 2705.

he who acts as heir should know that he is heir, to be-charged as such, 2731.

and the act must procced from no other cause, 2722.

the heir at law, who does not know that there is a testament, does not approve
by declaring himself heir, 2723.

acts of, how to be distinguished, 2724.

when one is forced to act as heir, 2727.

precautions to be taken by, 2728.

accepting the inheritance, 2729.

renouncing the inheritance, 2735.

the heir of blood may be testamentary heir, if he is instituted, 2991.

his duties, if he accept the inheritance, 2991.


INDEX. 731


HEIR AND EXECUTOR.

must take the place of deceased after his death, 2997.

heir at law may not renounce the execution of a testament, so as to succeed as if

to an intestate, 3134.
(See Execuror, Inneritanceg, Partition, Susstitution, Succession, TES-
TAMENT, TRANSMISSION. )
HUSBAND AND WIFE, how they succeed to each other, 2942.
(See Dowrr.)

HYPOTHECARY ACTION, prescribes in forty years by the Roman law, 1797, note.


INCAPACITY, different kinds of, have different effects, 2507.
difference with respect to the two kinds of succession, 2508.
some incapacities cease, others last always, 2509.
of bastards ceases by marriage of their parents, 2510.
of aliens, by naturalization, 2511.
of monks, by the nullity of their vows, 2512.
of condemned persons, by pardon, 2513.
may cease for time past and future, or only for the fature, 2514.
of bastards and aliens ceases only for the future, 2515, 2516.
of monks and condemned persons may cease for both, 2517, 2518.
three different times to be considered as to the incapacity of testamentary suc-
cessions, 2520.
one time only to be considered in the succession of intestates, 2521.
effect of, happening after the succession of an intestate is open, 2522.
of bastards, the effect of, 2528.
of aliens, the effect of, 2529.
of monks, the effect of, 2538.
of condemned persons, the effect of, 2539.
takes place only from the time of condemnation, 2540.
if the condemnation subsist, the incapacity subsists, 2541.
ceases in some cases, 2542.
difference between the Roman and French law, 2543.
one cannot bequeath to one incapable by the intervention of other persons, 2545.
INHERITANCE, comprehends only the goods and rights transmissible to a suc-
cessor, 2467.
may be without goods, 2468.
divided among the heirs, 2475.
not accepted, represents the deceased, 2476.
effect of the acceptance of, 2729.
possession not necessary to one’s becoming heir, 2730.
acceptance relates to the time of death, 2731.
acceptance obliges to pay all charges, 2732.
and gives the right of transmission, 2733.
effect of acceptance as to goods which do not remain in the inheritance, 2734.
every heir may renounce, 2735.
how he may renounce, 2736.
heir should know his right, 2737.
heir who has renounced, cannot retract, 2738.
one cannot renounce in part, 2739.
(See Herz.)
INNKEEPER, the engagements of, 1172.
are either express or tacit, 1173.
how accountable for the act of his servants, 1174.


732 INDEX,


INNKEEPER.

the care to which he is bound, 1175.

answerable for thefts, 1176.

accountable for the acts of his family, 1177.

and for the acts of servants done in the inn, 1178.
INSOLVENCY. (See Discomyriture.)
INSTITUTION OF HEIRS, by contract, 2443.

received in France, 2444.

bat prohibited by the Roman law, 2445.

essential principles relating to, 2445 - 2450.
INTEREST, why fixed, and costs and damages undctermined, 1906.

& natural cause of difference between them, 1909.

consequences of this difference, 1912.

exceptions to the rule fixing interest, 1914.

defined, 1944.

in what it consists, 1945.

when due, 1947.

purchaser of lands owes interest of the price, 1948.

due after the demand of a debt, 1949.

of costs of suit, 1949, note g.

may be stipulated when not due otherwise, 1950.

of marriage portions, 1951.

due from those who convert the money of others to their own profit, 1952.

on interest cannot be demanded, 1953.

is due on other revenues than interest, 1954.

to what the prohibition of interest on interest refers, 1955.

@ case where interest on interest is due, 1957.

arises from four causes, 1958.

how to judge whether it be due or not, 1959.
INTERROGATION of a party ordered by the judge, 2089.

the party should answer clearly and precisely, 2090.

the use of interrogations, 2091.

of answers to, made through an error of fact, 2092.

the effect of interrogations, 2093.

the answers are not decisive in favor of those making them, 2094.

difference between them and a demand to see writings of one of the parties, 2%
INVENTORY. One may become heir with the benefit of an inventory, 2690.

to be made in due form, 2691.

must include all the goods, 2692.

omissions in, may be supplied, 2693.

punishment of heir for diverting the gooda, 2694.

heir with the benefit of, bound only for the value of the goods, 2695.

the legacies are reduced, 2696.

the heir who is a creditor preserves his debt, 2697.

and is allowed his expenses, 2698.

such heir should sell the movables, 2699.

heir only bound to give an account, 2700.

not bound to observe the order of creditors in paying the debts, 2701.

he may pay legacies if creditors do not appear, 2702.

lands so given in payment remain subject to mortgages, 2703.

the benefit of an inventory, 3138.


JURISDICTION. Agreement between the spiritual and temporal jurisdiction, p.


INDEX. . 133


KINDRED. The ties of kindred and affinity, and their principles, p. 15.
(See ConsanauinitY.)
KINGS, the protectors and defenders of the laws of the church, p. 48.


LAW. The first principles of all laws unknown to the pagans, p. I.

the certainty of these principles, p. 2.

the knowledge of the first principles of laws attained by the knowledge of
man, p. 3.

the first law of man, p. 6.

the second law of man obliges to unity, p. 6.

society founded on these two laws, p. 7.

relation of the state of man in this life to the exercise of the first law, p. 8.

to the exercise of the second law, p. 9.

laws of spiritual powers which relate to temporal things, p. 46.

of temporal powers concerning spiritual things, p. 46.

the nature and spirit of laws, and their kinds, p. 49.

two sorts of laws, immutable and arbitrary, p. 49.

examples of, their nature and origin, pp. 50, 51.

the difficulties arising from the immutable laws, the first cause of arbitrary
laws, p. 51.

the immutable laws implied in these sorts of arbitrary laws, p. 54.

the second cause of arbitrary laws, matters of which the use has been in-
vented, p. 54.

natural matters have arbitrary laws and invented matters have nataral laws,
p- 55.

few arbitrary laws in natural matters, p. 56.

many in arbitrary matters, p. 56.

of the Roman Law, the Canon Law, the Ordinances, and the Customs, p. 56.

the particular rules of the law of nature are nowhere collected but in the body of
the Roman law, p. 57.

the justice and authority of all laws: difference between that of natural and
arbitrary laws, p. 58.

the distinction of immutable laws: of those which admit or not of dispensation
and exception, p. 59.

the importance of distinguishing the characters and spirit of the laws, p. 61.

examples of the distinction between immutable and arbitrary laws, p. 62.

the danger of violating natural law under pretext of preferring it to an arbitrary
law, p. 64.

discernment of the spirit of the laws necessary for deciding questions, p. 66.

the necessity of studying the laws of nature, p. 66.

natural laws regulate what is past, and what is to come, though never promul-
gated, p. 82.

arbitrary laws regulate only the time to come, after publication, p. 82.

natural laws which seem sometimes as if abolished, p. 70.

different effects of some natural laws, p. 71.

Divine and Haman, Natural and Positive, p. 72.

distinction of the laws of religion and those of policy, p. 73.

the Law of Nations, p. 76.

the Public Law, p. 77.

Private Law, p. 77.

the Civil Law, p. 77.

division of laws in the Roman law, p. 78.

divers ways of dividing laws under different views, p. 78.


VOL. II. 62


INDEX.


‘written law: Customs, p. 79.


where new laws have relation to old ones they should be interpreted by cach
other, p. 82.

in force to be presumed useful and just, p-. 83.

customs and usages the interpreters of, p. 83.

laws and customs abolished by disuse, p. 83.

the laws and customs of neighbouring places serve as examples and rales, p. 84.

laws to be judged by their whole tenor, p. 84.

the intent of, to be followed rather than the terms, p. 84.

defect of expression, how supplied, p. 85.

laws which are interpreted favorably, p. 85.

laws which are strictly interpreted, p. 85.

the rigor of the law; equity, p. 85.

the divers uses of laws, p. 86.

they restrain what is indirectly against their intention, p. 87.

not made for one single case, p. 87.

extent of, according to their design, p. 88.

importance of distinguishing three sorts of laws, p. 89.

a general idea of the subject-matters of all laws, p. 92.

remarks on the ordinances, customs, the Roman law, and the Canon law, p. 95.

all matters of law have a natural order, p. 96.

the foundation of this order, p. 96.

remarks on the matters of the public law, p. 103.

what we understand by law and rule, 5.

these terms used without distinction, 6.

the science of, consists in knowledge of the written rules, 7.

rales of, defined, 8.

two sorts of laws or rules, 9.

which are the rules of the law of nature, 10.

which are the arbitrary rules, 11.

the rules of, also divided into three kinds, 12.

two ways of abusing the rules, 13.

exceptions are rules, 14.

exceptions are of two kinds, 15.

laws ought to be known, 16.

arbitrary rules of two sorts, written laws and customs, 17.

whence customs derive their authority, 18.

of nature determines what is past and what is to come, 19.

arbitrary law determines only what is to come, 20.

the effect of new laws as to what is past, 21, 22.

when new laws begin to have their effect, 23.

abolished or changed in two ways, 24.

wherein the use and authority of, consist, 25.

punish what is done in fraud of them, 26.

and annnl or restrain what is done contrary to their prohibition, 27.

general, and not made for particular persons or cases, 28.

and comprehend all cases to which their intention may serve as a rule, 29.

equity is the universal law, 30.

of the use and interpretation of rules, 31, 34.

to be interpreted by equity, 35.

the intention of the lawgiver, in arbitrary laws, regulates the use of this equity,
36, 37.


INDEX. 735


several views necessary for the interpretation of, 38.

two kinds of interpretations, 39.

the spirit of laws, 40.

natural laws misapplied when consequences follow contrary to equity, 41.

arbitrary laws misapplied when consequences are opposed to the intention of the
lawgiver, 42.

the rigor of the law, 43.

mitigated by equity, 44

when to follow equity, and when the rigor of the law, 45, 46.

the rigor of, when it must be followed, has its equity, 47.

the interpretation of obscurities and ambiguities in, 48.

to be interpreted by its motives and whole tenor, 49.

how an omission may be supplied, 50.

when we must go to the prince for interpretation of, 51.

must be followed, though its motive be unknown, 52.

laws which are liberally interpreted, 53.

what laws to be construed strictly, 54

certain laws not to be extended beyond what their words expressly mention, 55.

grants of princes to be interpreted favorably, 56.

laws to be interpreted by one another, 57.

and by ancient usage and practice, 58.

when to be interpreted by customs, 59.

extend to every thing essential to their intention, 60

of the extension of laws which permit any thing, 61.

of the extension of laws which forbid any thing, 62.

tacit prohibitions, 64.

how rights are acquired by the effect of, 65.

how one may renounce such rights, 66.

has effect, independently of the will of particular persons, 67.

danger of misapplying the rules of, 68.


LAWSUITS, p. 33.
LEASE, 453.


annulled by a sale, 486.

may be dissolved by legatee, 487.
from one having only a usufruct, 491.
of what estates they are made, 494.


LEASE, PERPETUAL, or emphyteutical, 544.


definition of, 545.

may be made of all lands, 546.

the difference between perpetual and other leases, 547.
perpetuity of the emphyteutical lease, 548.

perpetual lease shares the right of property, 549.
property direct and useful, 550.

mutual engagements resulting from perpetual lease, 551.
perpetual tenant bears losses by accident, 552.

he cannot commit waste, 553.

may be ejected for non-payment of rent, 554.

if ejected, is not reimbursed for improvements, 555.


LEASES OF FARMS, 4983.


defined, 494.
what other things may be farmed out, 495.
difference between leases of houses and farms, 497.


736 INDEX.


LEASES OF FARMS.
the effect of the uncertainty of events, 498.
accidents of two sorta, 499.
renewing of, 500.
effects of a tacit renewal of, 501.
how the farmer should use the lands, 508.
the farmer who shares the frnits with the owner bears the loss of all accidents, 505.
the effect of accidents in a lease for only one year, 506.
where an inconsiderable loss happens without an extraordinary accident, 507.
where the loss is considerable, 508.
compensation of good and bad years, 509.
the loss of seed and tillage falls on farmer, 510.
the farmer cannot quit his farm, 511.
what the proprietor is bound to furnish to the farmer, 512.
movables and tools given to the farmer, 513.
of repairs made by the farmer, 514.
the expenses he has been at, the lease being interrupted, 515.
improvements made by the farmer, 516.
if the farmer is molested by the proprietor, 517.
of the trouble which the proprietor could not prevent, 518.
LEGACY, validity of, where the executor renounces, 3145.
which has relation to two things, how interpreted, 3166, 3177.
shall take effect, though the testator mistake as to the name, 3168.
words necessary to give meaning to, may be supplied, 3169.
obscurity in, how cured, 3170, $171.
of a house includes the garden which pertains to it, 3172.
that which is evident from the terms of, is not interpreted, 3173.
the terms to be taken in the sense given by common usage, 3174.
and regard to be given to the destination of the testator, $174, 3175.
of a second testament to be paid by the executor instituted by the first, 3184.
bat not the legacies of the first, if different from those of the first, $185.
is valid independently of the motive explained by the testator, 3206.
with a term of uncertain time, is conditional, $3223, $294.
due at the time of legatee’s death, 3225.
for a work is to be regulated according to the estate of the testator, $257.
given on condition that the executor approve thereof, is not conditional, 3961.
may begin to be due, or cease, on a certain day, 2997, nete a.
conditional, security for payment of, 3236.
how distinguished from testament, 3450.
the rules of testaments apply to, 3488.
the name of, comprehends particular fiduciary bequests, 3489.
rules of, to apply to donations and fiduciary bequests, 3499.
with a penalty affixed, allowed by Justinian, 3493.


definition of, 3495.

particular fiduciary bequests and donations because of death, of the same B&
tare, 3497.

wherein consists the validity of these dispositions, 3498.

their nature and formalities, 3499. :


what essential to their validity, 3500.

may be charged on executors and legatees, 3501.
left to several, to be divided among them, 3502.
due only after all debts are paid, 3504.

who may give, 3506.


INDBX. — 7387


LEGACY.
the incapacity of giving, 3507.
who may receive, 3508.
who unworthy of, 3509.
particular rules for determining who may receive, 3511.
of alimony may be received by all persons, 3512.
may be left to executors, if more than one, 3513.
to two executors, how divided, 3514.
not to be taken from heir who renounces the inheritance, 3515.
may be left to a person unknown, if sufficiently described, 3516.
may be left to one person among many, 3517. :
and to towns or corporations duly established, 3518.
legacies distinguished into two sorts, 3519.
every thing in commerce may be devised, 3520.
but not things public or consecrated, 3521.
a thing belonging to another may be bequeathed, 3522, 3523.
rales of the Roman law concerning such bequests, 3524.
valid where testator bequeaths what he knew was not his, 3535.
but null unless proved that he knew it to be so, 3526.
exception in favor of certain persons, 3527.
of a thing belonging to heir or executor, valid, 3528.
null where thing bequeathed belongs to legatee, 3529.
and where legatee has already acquired it by a lucrative title, 8530.
of same thing to same legatee by two testaments, 3531
two legacies of the same sum, not the same thing, 3532.
of land or tenement reduced to the estate of the testator in the premises, 3533.
to a debtor of his debt, 3534, 3535.
of a debt due from two, acquits only the legatee, 3536.
of respite of payment discharges debtor from interest on it, 3537.
by a son to his father of ‘discharge from giving an account of his guardianship of
him, 3538, 3539.
of a thing pawned, 3541.
such thing to be redeemed by the heir, 3542.
of things not yet in being, 3543.
of a certain quantity of corn of such a crop, 3544.
of movables, what it comprehends, 3545.
of a specified thing void, if it be not found, 3546.
of a thing indetermined, how understood, 3547.
of a work to be done, 3548.
of a house or land void, if testator had none, 3549.
accessories to, defined, 3550.
two sorts of, 3551.
accessories, how to be distinguished, 3552.
accessories to a house, 3553.
the edifice and augmentations accessory to lands, 3554.
also lands purchased by testator after devise, 3555.
when such additions are not accessories, 3556.
augmentations having the effect to revoke, 3557.
of land includes service necessary to the enjoyment of the same, from other
grounds of the inheritance, 3558.
reciprocal service between legatees of adjoining houses, an accessory to, 3559.
legatee shall have the use of, as beqneathed, 3560.
of a house, what are accessories to, 3561.
62°


738 INDEX.


LEGACY.

of a country-house, what its accessories, 3562. 3

of a house with all its movables, 3563.

what not comprehended thereby, 3564.

accessories to, judged by. their use, and not their value, 3565.

of a usufruct, 3567.

of a usufruct to two persons, the property thereof to the survivor, 35638.

of the usufruct of movables, 3569.

of a portion of fruits, subsists after land is sold, 3570.

of a usufruct with a charge thereon, if declined by legatee, passes with the charce
to the heir, 3571.

of a usufruct and an annual legacy, their differences, 3572 — 3574.

annual, accrues when the year begins, 3575.

payable in several years, not an annual one, 3576.

of a charity, whether or not perpetual, 3577.

of alimony lasts for life, 3578.

of alimony until puberty, 3579.

of alimony comprehends clothing and lodging, 3580.

and is regulated by circumstances of testator and legatee, 3581.

and by the amount last given by testator in his lifetime, 3582.

of alimony due though legatee has been otherwise supported, 3583.

legacics of alimony are favorable, 3584.

legacies to pious uses, defined, 3585.

distinguished from other legacies by the motives, 3586.

difference between such and legacies for the public good, 3587.

when not destined for any particular use, how applied, 3588.

of the execution of legacies to pious uses, 3589.

who may demand the sum so bequeathed, 3590.

how such legacies shall be applied if they cannot take effect according to the
will, 3591.

privilege of legacies to pious uses, 3592.

of one of several things at the choice of the executor or of the legatee, 3592.

per vindicationem and per damnationem, distinction between, by the Roman law, 3533.

no such distinction in the civil law, 3594.

of one of several things, may be in three ways, 3595.

1. where no mention is made who shall have the choice, 3596.

2. where the expression used determines the choice, 3597.

8. where left to the choice of the executor, 3598.

left to the choice of legatee, 3599.

but neither heir nor legatee shal] abuse this liberty of election, 3599, note

left to the choice of a third person, 3600.

the delay of a year not according to our usage, 3601.

he who has the choice ought not to delay it, 3601.

of fraudulent delay after citation, 3601, note m.

penalty for such delay of executor, 3602.

penalty when the legatee delays, 3603.

if only one thing whereof the choice was bequcathed remain, it belongs to the
legatee, 3604.

if, after choice, the thing chosen perish, the loss shall fall on the legatee, 3605.

the choice once made, may not be changed, 3606.

choice cannot be made till the executor has accepted the succession, 3607.

legatee of remainder after the choice of another, has all if no choice be made, 3608.

the right of election passes to the heir or executor of legatee, 3609.


INDEX. 739


LEGACY.

the fruits afd interest of, 3610.

the fruits of lands, 3611.

three sorts of things may be bequeathed, 3612.

if testator have regulated the fruits of the legacy, his will shall serve as a
rule, 3613.

the fruits of, dne only from the time they are demanded, 3614, 3615.

except in case of fraud of executor, 3614, note d.

exception by Justinian in favor of legacies to pious uses, 3616.

different interpretations of this rule, 3617.

of money, interest on, due from time of demand, 3619.

of profits which are neither fruits nor interest, 3620.

to pious uses, the fruits and interest of, due without demand, and the executor
accountable for them, 3621.

such rale not to be rigidly enforced, 3622.

how legatee acquires his right to, 3623.

right to, acquired at the instant of testator’s death, 3624.

is pure and simple, or conditional, 3625.

pure and simple, acquired at the moment of testator’s death, 3626.

conditional also, if condition has been fulfilled, 3627.

otherwise, does not vest till condition comes to pass, 3628.

three sorts of, as to the effect of legatee’s right, 3629.

difference between time when legacy may be acquired, and time when it may be
demanded, 3630.

transmitted, or not, to heirs of legatee, according to the condition in which his
right was at death, 3631.

in two cases there can be no transmission of, 3632.

conditional, not transmitted, if condition be not fulfilled, 3633.

pure and simple, transmitted though legatee die before the term of payment, 3634.

what legacies truly conditional, 3635.

transmitted to posthumous child of legatee, 3636.

not annulled by indecent or impossible conditions, 3637.

left to an uncertain time, conditional and not transmitted, 3638 - 3640.

is transmitted though legatee die before making his election, 3641.

annexed to persons, not transmitted, 3642.

an annual, contains several legacics, 3643.

annexed to the person of legatee, example of, 3644

vests in legatee, though executor’s right is in suspense, 3645.

example of one whose effect is suspended and is transmitted, 3646.

with which the person who is substituted executor is charged, is acquired by tes-
tator’s death, 3648.

may not be taken from executor without his consent, 3649.

should be delivered by the executor or the heir, 3650.

without term or condition due from the acceptance of the succession, 3651.

to be delivered in the place where it was at testator’s death, 3652.

of a horse or other animal that has run away, 3653.

security for the payment of, 3655.

parents charged with fiduciary bequest for their children should give security, 3656.

the use of this rule depends on circumstances, 3656, note h.

an executor charged with, may recover such charges as he has becn at on account
of it, 3657.

taxes and other charges on, to be acquitted by executor, 3658.

if the thing perish after delay of executor to deliver it, he is accountable for it, 3659.


740 INDEX.


LEGACY.
other losses fall on legatee, 3660. é
bequeathed indefinitely must be warranted by executor, 3661.
warranty of a thing not particularly named, 3662.
validity of, voluntarily paid by executor, cannot afterwards be disputed by him, 3664.
nor of one paid before condition accomplished, 3665.
except where a third person is interested, 3666.
may be either null at first, or may become 50, 3667.
may be revoked, diminished, or transferred, 3668.
null in the beginning, remains null, 3669 ~ 3671.
the Catonian rule of the Roman law, 3669, note i.
exception in case of a conditional legacy, 3672.
null if legatee die before testator, or before the testament was made, 3673.
such nullity does not annul charge in favor of a third person, 3674.
distinction made by the Roman law, 3675.
originally valid may become null by change, 3676.
qualifications of this rule, 3677.
divers ways of revoking, 3678.
of a debt revoked by payment, 3679.
revoked by alienation of the thing bequeathed, 3680, 3681.
case of sale by necessity, 3682.
annulled by donation of the thing bequeathed, 3684.
revoked though such donation be null, 3684.
not revoked by the pawning of the thing, 3685.
nor by such changes as reform the thing, 3686.
of a flock, subsists, though only one remain, 3687.
revoked by a change of nature of the thing, 3688.
annulled, if only accessories of the thing remain, 3689.
particular expressions derogate from general, 3690.
diminished by diminution of thing bequeathed, 3692.
and by separating a part of land devised to join it to another, 3693.
transferred to another, null as to first legatee, 3694.
revocation of one of two legacies, which does not annul either, as intended, 3695.
may be annulled if legatee render himself unworthy, 3696.
diminished by the Falcidian portion without the deed of the testator, 3697.
(Sse Testament, TRANSMISSION.)
LEGAL SUCCESSIONS, 2787 - 2790.
LEGATEE, more favored than the executor, 3192-3198.
distinguished from executor by being particular succesgor, 3485.
and because appointed, not only by testament, but by codicil, 3486.
universal, 3487.
may be charged with legacies to others, 3501.
of several legacies may not accept those only that are without any charge, 3503.
whether or not one who receives his legacy shall lose his right to the inherit-
ance, 3510.
not receiving his legacy liable for costs and damages, 2654.
may apply to court of justice if in danger of losing his legacy through the ex-
ecutor, 3655, note g.
of lands, shall have their value if evicted, 3663.
LEGITIME, or the legal portion, 3386.
what by the ancient Roman law, 3387.
reasons for this proportion, 3388.
augmented by Justinian, 3389.


INDEX. 741


LEGITIME.
distinctionseade by the customs of France, 3390.
reasons for these different rales, 3391.
the rules relating to, respect either the persons to whom portions are due, or the
quality of the portions, 3392.
daughters renouncing their inheritance for a marriage portion, excepted, $393.
of mothers out of the successions of their children, 3394.
defined, 3395.
due to descendants and ascendants, 3396.
to all children capable of inheriting, 3397.
of children of first degree regulated by their number, 3398.
of children of remoter degrees, by the stocks of whom they are descended, 3399.
due only to the nearest ascendants, 3400.
where there are many ascendants of the same degeee, on both sides, 3401.
brothers have no right to, 3402. .
the quota of, how regulated, 3403.
of children regulated according to their number, 3404.
if there be four, or less, they have a third of the estate, 3405.
if five, or more, a moiety thereof, 3406.
those coming by representation have only one share among them, 3407.
of ascendants is a third of the estate, 3408, 3409.
where testator leaves one ascendant and brothers of whole blood, two opinions
exist, 3410.
by one, is a third of the share that ascendant would have had, if there had been
no testament, 3411.
by the other, is, in all cases, a third of inheritance, 3412.
consequences of the law of Justinian concerning, 3413, $414.
for ascendants the same as for children, when they have a third, by that law, 3415.
estimated according to value of the whole estate, 3416.
demand of, in effect a demand for partition, 3417.
to be taken also out of goods alienated in lifetime, 3418.
and from donations of children renouncing the inheritance, 3419.
all goods liable to be brought into hotch-pot, in case of partition, contribute
to, 3420.
revenues of, due from the moment the succession is open, $421.
not subject to change, delay, or condition, 3422.
of children of different marriages not distinguished, 3423.
LENDER of things to be restored in specie cannot take back the thing till after the
use, 588.
how in the case of a precarious loan, 589.
of ‘defects of the thing loaned, 590.
of expenses laid out on the thing borrowed, 591.
of thing to be restored in kind, must be the owner of the thing, 659.
or he conveys no property to the borrower, 660.
must engage that the thing be fit for its use, 661.
must not exact more than what he has lent, 662.
payment of part of a debt which is not controverted, 663.
(See Loan.)
LESSEE, the engagements of, 466.
how the thing hired should be used, 467.
misusing the thing hired, 468.
what care he should take of it, 469.
accountable for the acts of his servants, 470.


742 INDEX.


LESSEE.

of damage done by an enemy of, 471.

who quits possession for fear of some danger, 472.

who leaves the premises leased, 473.

repairs, 474.

who absconds, 475.

bound to restore the thing and pay the rent, 476.

the movables of, and fruits, mortgaged for the rent, 477.

of house may be turned out, if owner should want it, 478.

and likewise, if he wish to repair the house, 479.

and for non-payment of the rent, 480.

and if he make a bad use of the house, 481.

liable for interest on rent from the time of demand, 482.

(See Leasz, Letrine axp Hrerna.)

LESSOR, is bound. to procure free enjoyment of the thing leased to the lessee, 483.

liable for damages in case lessee is evicted, 484.

bat not when disseized by a superior force, 485.

liable for damages if house become inconvenient, 488.

bound to reimburse lessee charges he has been at to preserve the thing hired, 489.

expressing himself obscurely shall have his words interpreted against him, 492.

(See Lease, Lussex, Letrrxa axp Hiring.)

LETTING AND HIRING, 451 - 454.

defined, 456.

who is lessor and who lessee, 457.

accomplished by bare consent, 458.

what things may be let, 459.

if a thing that is not one’s own, 461. :

the rent may be in money or a part of the fruits, 462.

the lowness of rent does not vacate leases, 4638.

underletting, 464.

leases pass to heirs or executors, 465.

engagements of the lessee, 466 — 482.

engagements of the lessor, 483 —- 492.

of the defects of the thing hired, 490.
LOAN of things to be restored in specie, 556.

of precarious loans, 55°.

the distinction of little consequence in the civil law, 558.

of things to be restored in specie, defined, 559.

precarious loan defined, 560.

does not oblige but by delivery of the thing, 561.

the lender remains proprietor of the thing, 562.

both movables and immovables may be lent, 563.

of things consumed in the using, 564.

of things belonging to another, 565.

the lender regulates the manner and time of the use, 566.

limited to the natural and ordinary use of the thing, 567.

the time of, limited to the continuance of the use for which the thing is lent, 568.

of restitution of the thing, 569.

may be for the convenience of either party, or both, 570.

precarious loan ended by the lender’s death, 571.

who may borrow or lend. 572.

the engagements of, pass to heirs and executors, 573.

of things consumed in the using, 593.


INDEX, 743


LOAN.

two characters of things that are lent, 594.

of the word Loan, 598.

how distinguished from sale, 600. : ,
from exchange, 601.
from the loan of things to be restored in specie, 602.
from the contract of letting and hiring, 603.

what it has in common with these contracts, 604.

of things to be restored in kind, defined, 647, 648.

creditor and debtor defined, 649.

what may be lent in this way, 650.

delivery necessary to form the engagement, 651.

other obligations converted into loan, 652.

the obligation of, cannot exceed the thing lent, 658.

of the change of the value of money, 654.

of the change of value of provisions, 655.

a loan in appearance, which is a sale, 656.

of a thing to be sold in order to lend the price of it, 657.

money deposited in order to be lent, 658.

of money to sons under the paternal jurisdiction forbidden, 672.

such loan may be made to a son emancipated, 677.

if the obligation has been acquitted by the son, or approved by the father, it is

valid, 678.
(See Borrower anp LENDER.)
LORDS OF MANORS, heirs to those dying within their manors, without heirs,
2672, note.


MAN, his nature, and religion, p. 6.
MANDATES, signification of, 1121.
in the Roman law, 1122.
MARRIAGE, the divine institution of, p. 12.
two engagements in, 823.
1. the engagement of the persons, 824.
2. the covenants concerning the goods, 825.
tacit condition in contracts of, 830.
all lawful pacts may be made in a contract of, 846.
of the dispositions of those marrying a second time, 3424.
distinctions made by the laws of church and state in respect to second mar-
riages, 3424.
reasons for such distinctions, $425.
taken from the Roman law, 3426.
panishment of second marriages, 3428.
abolished by our law, 3429.
two sorts of rules as to sccond marriages, 3430.
three sorts of goods belong to persons marrying a second time, 3431.
two sorts of goods which husband and wife may have from one another, 3432.
goods which husband and wife acquire from each other by marriage, 3433.
goods coming from common children, 3434.
goods coming by other titles, three several sorts of, 3435.
goods subject to different rules, 3436.
in case of second marriage, children shall have the goods which come from their
other parent to the one marrying again, 3437.
the parent having only the use of such goods during life, 3438.


744 INDEX.


MARRIAGE.
such property accrues to children by equa! portions, 3439.
no distinction made as to origin of goods in which husband or wife have ther
gains, 3440.
such gains accrue to children though not heirs, 3441.
if a child die intestate, the mother has no right in such goods, but they go to the
other children, 34432.
this rule subsequently extended to the father, 3443.
bequest to second husband or wife, limited to portion left to the child having the
least share, 3444.
if such rule be evaded, disposition is reduced, 3445.
goods to be computed as found at the time of death, 3446.
such diminution goes to all the children equally, 8447.
children of divers marriages take each the goods the parent had by that marriage
from which they descend, 3448.
surviving parent having a usufruct left by the deceased one, docs not lose it on
. marrying again, unless left on that condition, 3449.
MARRIED WOMEN, incapable, by some customs, of making a will, 3049.
MASTERS OF SHIPS, the engagements of, 1180.
answerable for the acts of their servants, 1181.
of persons undertaking the carriage of goods, 1182.
the care to which they are bound, 1183.
the engagements of, by their agents, 1184.
MINES, right of the king to the product of, 2151, note.
MINOR, his engagements to the tutor, 1357.
ought to allow all reasonable expenses, 1358.
stewards, 1359.
of alimony to parents, brothers, and sisters of the minor, 1360.
his estate mortgaged to the tutor, 1362.
the immovables of, cannot be alienated without necessity, 2395.
formalities to be observed in the sale of, 2396.
of sale by the tutor without observing these formalities, 8397.
(See Resriturion, Turor.)
MINORITY, ends at twenty-five, 2391.
dispensation of age, 2393.
MONKS, do not succeed, 2508.
incapacity of, ceases by the nullity of their vows, 2512.
effect of the incapacity of, 2538.
MORTGAGE, a consequence of engagements, 1651.
origin of, 1652.
difference between the Roman and civil laws as to movables in reletion 10,
1654 — 1656.
signification of the words pawn and mortgage, 1657.
is for the security of obligations, 1658.
for a conditional debt, 1659.
for a future loan, of no effect, 1660.
on an estate in expectation, 1661.
whether it extend to the whole estate, or is limited to a part thereof, 1662.
when a debtor makes a new purchase, having mortgaged all his ostate, 1662, note /-
accessories of, 1663.
living creatures cannot be mortgaged, 1663. note m.
the proceeds of the thing mortgaged, whicn 1s separated from it, not subject
to, 1664.


INDEX. 745


MORTGAGE.

of buildings erected on lands mortgaged, 1665.

when a house mortgaged is burned and rebuilt by the debtor, 1666.

changes of the land do not extinguish, 1667.

of lands purchased from the fruits of land mortgaged, 1668.

when such lands are exchanged, 1668, note r.

of one estate to two creditors at the same time, 1669.

in such case the one in possession is preferred; 1670.

of the undivided portion of one of several coheirs, 1671.

of creditor on lands of a deceased debtor, extends to every portion of such lands
for the whole debt, 1672.

all the coheirs of a creditor deceased have their security on what was mortgaged
to such creditor, 1673.

is undivided, 1674.

what cannot be sold cannot be mortgaged, 1675.

‘one may mortgage land not his own, 1676.

cozenage or stellionate, 1677.

tutor or guardian may mortgage, 1678.

of things incorporeal, 1679.

rents and obligations, how subject to, 1679, note.

things that cannot be mortgaged, 1680 — 1683.

antichresis, 1684.

the creditor who has a right to the issues and profits of lands mortgaged may farm
them out, 1685.

one may mortgage his estate for the debt of another, 1688.

approbation of the persons whose property has been mortgaged by another, 1689.

conventional and legal, 1690, 1697.

conventional, how established, 1691.

is either general or special, 1692.

special, is of two sorts, 1693.

either simple or privileged, 1694.

acquired in three ways, 1695.

express or tacit, 1696.

the first effect of, is the right to sell the pledge, 1699.

second, the right to follow the thing mortgaged, 1700.

third, the preference of the first creditor, 1701.

fourth, security for all the consequences of the debt, 1702.

these effects follow, whether the mortgage be general er special, 1703.

discussion in favor of a third possessor, 1704.

general and special, as respects discussion, 1704, note.

how a subsequent creditor may secure his mortgage against prior creditors, 1705.

sale of the thing mortgaged, 1707.

stipulation that the pledge shall belong to the creditor, in default of payment, 1709.

where several things are mortgaged for the same debt, 1710.

whether debtor may release the thing mortgaged, by giving another thing in its
place, or Dy offering bail, 1711.

where several things are engaged for the same debt, whether debtor can release
one, 1712.

* moneys from the fruits of the thing mortgaged to be applied first to payment of

interest, then of the debt, 1713.

effect of, before the term of payment, 1714.

for a conditional debt, 1715.

of a second creditor, its effect on a thing engaged to another, 1716.


VOL. II. 63


746 INDEX. s


MORTGAGE.
of the expenses the creditor has laid out upon the thing mortgaged, 1717.
improvements of the pledge made by the creditor, 1718.
creditor does not lose his debt if evicted from the premises, 1719.
how the creditor is put in possession of his pledge, 1721.
debtor cannot take back the pledge without consent of creditor, 1722.
limited to the right which the debtor had, 1723.
effect of, depends on the effect of obligation, 1724.
engagement of the creditor to take care of the pledge, 1725.
if it perish by accident, 1726.
if creditor use the pawn, 1727.
if creditor receive from the sale of pledge more than the debt comes to, 17328.
if he enjoy the fruits in lieu of interest, 1729.
if the pledge receive augmentation, 1730.
the creditor cannot acquire property in the pledge by prescription, 1731.
of the crown, 1755, 1756.
is extinguished by payment, 1789.
by novation, 1790.
by the oath of the debtor and by judgment, 1791.
and by every thing that is instead of payment, 1792.
by consigning the debt, if creditor refuse to receive payment, 1793.
revives if the payment does not subsist, 1794.
becomes extinct if the pledge ceases to be in commerce, 1795.
or if it perish, 1796.
annulled, if the debt is extinguished by prescription, 1797.
lost to creditor, if debtor loses his right to the pledge, 1798.
redhibition of the thing mortgaged, 1799.
creditor consenting to alienation of the pledge loses his mortgage, 1800.
where the creditor consents that his pledge be engaged to another, 1801.
revives, if the alienation does not take effect, 18032.
how we should understand the creditor's consent to the alienation, 1803.
(See Szranarion, Discussiox, Novariox.)


NOVATION, 2304.
defined, 2305.
never presumed, but must appear, 2806.
changes in a former obligation do not innovate it, 2307.
of several debts into one, 2308.
annuls mortgages and other accessories of the obligation, 2309.
who may innovate, 2310-2313.
by a third person, 2314.
all debts may be innovated, 2315.
(See DeLzeaTion.)


OATH, the uses of, 2096 - 2099.
defined, 2100.
not taken unless directed, 2101.
how a matter is referred to the oath of the party, 2102.
the judge may order the oath without the request of the party, 2103. :
if the party refuses to swear, the fact will be held as confessed, 2104.
the fact may be referred back to the oath of the other party, 2105.
where the party, being willing, is excused from swearing, 2106.
reference to the adversary’s oath may be revoked, 2107.


, INDEX. 747


OATH.
these cases depend on the discretion of the judge, 2108.
decisive, where a matter is referred to the oath of the party, 2109.
and extinguishes the action, 2110.
where writings proving the contrary, are subsequently found, 2111.
this oath used only in civil matters, 2112.
the effect of, with respect to persons interested with the parties, 2113.
neither benefits nor hurts third persons, 2114.
only parties interested, or those representing them, can refer a matter in dispute to
the oath of the party, 2115.
OWNERS IN COMMON, 1479.
may be so in two ways, 1480.
donees or legatees of the same thing, 1483.
coheirs, coexecutors, 1484.
heir or executor of a partner, 1485.
purchasers of shares undivided, 1486.
engagements of, 1488.
1. care of the thing, 1489.
2. communication of profits, 1490.
3. reimbursement of expenses and interest, 1491.
of damage to the thing, 1492.
no proprietor can make any change in the thing without consent of the others, 1493.
penalty for so doing, 1494.
if they suffer such change, 1495.
he shall restore things as they were, 1496.
he who has consented to the change cannot retract, 1497.
engagement to divide, 1498.
if the thing cannot be divided, 1499.
charge on one of lands that are divided, 1500.
wrong done in the partition, 1501.
warranty, 1502.
of the deeds and writings belonging to, 1503.
of things not lawful to be divided, 1504.
things acquired by evil means, 1505.
OWNERS OF ADJOINING LANDS, 1506.
difference between houses and lands, 1507.
distance from the confines for building, &c., 1508.
of partition walls, 1509.
of regulating the confines, 1512.
who may sue for regulation, 1513.
when to be discussed, 1514.
must not plant or build within a certain distance of the confines, 1515.
of encroachment, 1516.
if there are no landmarks, 1517.
of him who removes landmarks, 1518.
power of those appointed to settle confines, 1519.
lands separated by a highway, 1520.
lands with a brook running through, 1521.


PARAPHERNAL GOODS, what are, 884, 885.
difference between dowry and, 886.
different usages and customs concerning, 887, 888.
defined, 889.


748 INDEX.


PARAPHERNAL GOODS.
the wife may dispose of, 890.
in what manner she may enjoy, 891.
if they consist in rents, debts, or movables, 892.
husband's care of, when delivered to him, 893.
how distinguished from goods of the dowry, 894.
what the wife is possessed of without an apparent title belongs to the husband, 895.
PARTITION, 2740.
defined, 2744.
may be considered as an exchange or sale, 2745.
all the goods and charges of the inheritance are divided, 2747, 2748.
warranty for evictions and for charges, 2749.
coparceners are equal in condition, 2750.
if the equality cannot be exact, 2751.
what deceased owed to the heir, a part of the charges, 2752.
goods which cannot be divided sold at public auction, 2753.
if an heir become a purchaser, 2755.
the deeds of the succession, 2756.
who is plaintiff in a demand of, 2757.
& new partition, 2758.
wrong done in partition, 2759.
three ways of making, 2760.
three sorts of goods of a deceased person, 2762.
when goods bequeathed or substituted enter into, 2763.
particular legacies to heirs do not enter into, 2764.
goods to be restored do not enter into, 2765.
nor things of ill use, as books of magic, 2766.
the revenues of each heir enter into, 2767.
expenses to be deducted therefrom, 2768.
the heir recovers charges he has been at in cultivating the lands, 2769.
heir recovers necessary and useful expenses, 2770.
three kinds of expenses, 2771 - 2775.
damages against heir who delays partition, 2776.
of an estate mortgaged, 1671, note =.
(See Herns.)
PARTNERSHIP, its origin and use, 737 - 741.
defined, 742.
of the shares of partners in the common property, 743.
of their shares in the gain or loss, 744 ~746.
the difference of contributions and of portions, 747.
the shares may be equal, though the contributions be unequal, 748.
of inequality in the share of loss and gain, 749.
one partner may be discharged of all loss, 750.
fraudulent, is unlawful, 751.
unlawful partnerships, 752.
differs from other contracts in the extent of the engagements, 75S.
can be contracted only by mutual consent, 754.
the difference between holding of things in common and partnership, 755.
heir or executor of a partner, not a partner, 756.
even if so stipulated in the contract, 757.
a partner of one, not a partner of the others, 758.
may be contracted without writing, 759.
persons who buy a thing together not partners, 760.


INDEX. 749


PARTNERSHIP.
partners may make all lawful pacts, 761.
pacts concerning the duration of, 762.
penal clauses, 763.
pacts regulating the shares, 764.
of gifts under color of partnership, 765.
either general or particular, 766.
to what profits it extends, 767.
of profits does not extend to inheritances, 768.
of all manner of estate and goods excludes nothing, 769.
even a personal reparation of damage to one partner, 770.
of the personal condemnation of one partner, 771.
unlawful profits do not enter into, 772.
limited to the things put into the community, 778.
when the contract is obscure, how interpreted, 774.
the debts of the community and of the partners, 775.
what a partner may or may not take out of the common stock, 776.
of the extraordinary expenses of a partner, 777.
unlawful expenses of a partner, 778. ’
requires unity and fidelity among the partners, 779.
of the care and vigilance of partners, 780.
partners responsible for deceit and gross faults, 781.
accidents, 782.
if a partner appropriate to himself, or convert to his own use, partnership prop-
erty, 783.
use of the common thing without fraud, 784.
loss or damage caused by a partner, 785.
the service which he may do, not compensated by such loss, 786.
@ partner answerable for the act of the person whom he has taken into partner-
ship for his share, 787.
loss and gain occasioned by the under-partner, 788.
the expenses of partners, 789.
the particular loss of a partner occasioned by the affairs of the community, 790.
particular gains or losses on account of the partnership, 791.
losses of the joint stock common to the partners, 792.
insolvency of a partner, 793.
one partner cannot bind the others unless empowered by them, 794.
® partner cannot take out his capital from the common stock, 795.
of him who proposes a partner and answers for him, 796.
benefit of partners as to what they owe one another, 797.
if the partner be unworthy of this benefit, 798.
this benefit cannot be claimed by sureties, heirs, or executors, 799.
one partner can do nothing in the affairs of the community against the will of the
others, 800.
dissolved by the consent of partners, 801.
may be broken by each partner when he pleases, 802.
@ partner is not freed from his obligations by a fraudulent renunciation of, 803.
unseasonable renunciation of, 804.
unseasonableness to be judged by the interest of the whole community, 805.
profit after the renunciation, 806.
a fraudulent and unseasonable renunciation never permitted, 807.
the renunciation of no use till known to the other partners, and meanwhile is
prejudicial to the party renouncing, 808.
63 *


750 INDEX.


PARTNERSHIP.
the term being expired, every one may withdraw, 809.
dissolved by consent, 810.
ceases when the thing for which it was contracted ceases to be, 811.
where a partner becomes incapable of contributing, 812.
may be broken off by the guardian of a prodigal or a madman, 815.
dissolved by the death of a partner, 814.
the civil death of a partner, 815.
sharing of profits, losses, and charges, 816.
the rights and engagements of the heir or executor of a partner, 817.
how he shares the profits and losses, 818.
is bound to make good the engagements of the deceased, 819.
and is bound for the faults of the deceased, 820.
not interrupted by death of a partner if the death is not known, 821.
in a farm as to the heirs or executors of a partner, 822.
the act of one partner binds all, 1190.
PATERNAL POWER, 101, note #.
(See Persons.)
PAWN, defined, 1617. (65°68
living creatures may be put in pawn, 1663, note m.
a debtor may borrow his own goods which are in pawn, 1686.
if not sufficient for payment of the debt, the debtor is accountable for the sur-
plus, 1687.
creditor cannot take the pawn by force from the debtor, 1698.
agreement as to the sale of, 1708.
where the debtor fraudulently gives one thing for another, 1720.
(See Morroace.)
PAYMENT, 2240.
defined, 2241.
how the debtor acquits himself, 2242.
applies to all engagements, 2243.
of what was not due, 2244.
one may pay before the term, 2245.
effect of, 2246.
made by another than the debtor, 2247.
frees the sureties and mortgages, 2248.
made to obtain an assignment of the debt, 2249.
sale of the pawn does not acquit the debt, except insomuch as is raised by the
sale, 2250.
several acquittances of several debts made by one payment, 225}.
two obligations of the same debtor acquitted by one payment, 2252.
the effect of general or particular acquittances, 2253.
alleged by a debtor, must be proved by him, 2254.
of rent for three years last past, proves that of former years, 2255.
the creditor is not obliged to divide his payment, 2256.
divers ways of making, 2257.
delegation is payment, 2258.
an assignment of a debt without warranty is payment, 2259.
novation is payment, 2259.
the oath of the debtor is instead of, 2261.
if the thing due perishes, 2262.
if the creditor succeeds to the surety, or the surety to the creditor, 2263.
consignment of the debt when creditor refuses to reccive payment, 2264.


INDEX. 751


PAYMENT.
must be of that which is due, 2265.
of work to be made by a certain man, 2266.
ceasion of goods makes payment in another thing than what was due, 2267.
of some other thing in lieu of money, 2268.
where the creditor is evicted from part of the land taken in payment, 2269.
must be in money not suspected, 2270.
persons jointly bound for the same debt, and sureties, may pay, 2271.
any person may pay for another, 2272.
to a common creditor by one with the money of another, 2273.
an attorney may make or receive payment, 2274.
to one who has no power to give an acquittance, 2275.
tutors and curators may make and receive payment, 2276.
to one of many creditors, each of whom has a right to the whole, 2277.
one of several coheirs can receive only his own portion, 2278.
made to one accused of crime, 2279.
the debtor of several debts may pay either, 2280.
is applied to particular debts at the choice of the debtor, 2281.
applied to that debt which it is most advantageous to the debtor to acquit, 2282.
the overplus after discharge of one debt to be applied to the others, 2283.
first to be applied to the discharge of interest, 2284.
even though the acquittance name both principal and interest, 2285.
how the proceeds of things mortgaged for several debts are to be applied, 2286.
PECULIUM, 2459, note.
PEREMPTION of instance, 2195.
PERSONS, how the civil law distinguishes persons, 69.
what is the state of persons, 70.
two sorts of qualities make the state of persons, 71.
difference between the Roman and civil law in respect to, 72.
distinctions of persons made by nature, 738.
distinction of, by the sex, 74.
difference between Roman and civil law, in regard to the state of women, 74, note a.
distinctions by birth and of the paternal authority, 75.
lawful issue and bastards, 76.
stillborn children, 77.
abortive children, 78.
children unborn, 79.
posthumous children, 80.
children born after the mother’s death, 81.
hermaphrodites, 82.
eunuchs, 83.
madmen, 84.
deaf and dumb, 85.
madness does not change the state of, 86.
monsters, 87.
when reckoned among children, 88.
distinction of persons by age, 89.
distinctions of, by the civil law, 90.
the three chief distinctions of, by the Roman law, 91.
another distinction in France; nobility, 92.
burgesses, 93.
vassals, 94.
distinction of, in Great Britain ; nobility and commoners, 95.


freemen, 98.
causes and consequence of slavery, 99.
manumised persons, 100.
who are fathers of a family, and who sons, 101.
of the paternal power, 101, note 3.
emancipation does not change the natural right of the paternal power, 102.
who are masters of their own rights, 103.
who are of ripe age and who of unripe age, 104.
minors and majors, 105.
prodigals, 106.
natural-born subjects and strangers or aliens, 107.
their incapacities, in France, 107, note g.
of civil death, 108.
professed monks and nuns, 109.
clergymen, 110.
communities, 111.
their incapacities, 111, note a.
POLICY, the spirit of, p. 41.
and religion have laws in common, p. 74.
laws of temporal policy, p. 75.
POSSESSION, its use, 2117.
property and detention, difference between them, 2117.
and property should not be confounded, 2118.
distinction between that which is of right and that which is of fact, 2122.
civil and natural, 2123.
divers meanings of the word, 2124.
connection between property and, 2125, 2128.
and property acquired and preserved, the one by the other, 2126.
defined, 2127.
there cannot be two possessions of the same thing, 2129.
what may be possessed, 2130.
consisting in rights only, 2131.
is preserved without actual detention, 2132.
of living creatures, 2133.
bare detention without some right is not properly called possession, 2134.
one may possess by others, 2135.
precarious possession, 2136.
is either honest or knavish, 2137.
surreptitious possession, 2138.
possessor is presumed to be the right owner, 2139.
often separated from the actual detention, 2140.
possessors maintained in their right till a better title is proved, 2141.
of church benefices, 2141, note.
of him who has held for a year preferred where two claim to be possessors, 2142.
the question of, to be decided before that of property, 2143.
demand of, to be made within one year, 2144.
adjudged in favor of the most probable title, or the thing is sequestered, 2145.
the right to, acquired with the property, 2146.
difference between acquiring the right to possess and acquiring actual posses
sion, 2147.


INDEX.


POSSESSION.
often gives the property, 2148.
in these cases, is a title for the property, 2149.
gives title to what no other has a right to, 2150.
as when one finds precious stones, &., 2151.
acquired by hunting and fishing, 2152
by capture from an enemy, 2153.
of a thing abandoned, 2154.
of a thing lost, where the owner cannot be found, 2155.
of a treasure found, 2156.
of what nature adds to lands, belongs to the master of the ground, 2157.
of buildings acquired to the master of the ground, 2158.
and so of what is planted in the groand, 2159.
of what is added to movables, 2160.
in what it consists, 2161.
by the bare laying of hands on the thing, 2162.
which is taken only by delivery, 2163.
what delivery gives possession, 2164.
delivery and taking possession of movables, 2165.
of immovables, 2166.
of rights, 2167.
can be only of a thing certain and determined, 2168.
how preserved, 2169.
may be retained by other persons, 2170.
one may take possession by himself or by an agent, 2171.
the possessor succeeds to the right of his author, 2172.
lost by the intention of alienating or relinquishing, 2173.
things lost or thrown into the sea are not relinquished, 2174.
is lost, by adverse possession for a year, 2175.
Ist effect of, is the enjoyment, 2176.
2d, in certain cases, to give the property, 2177.
$d, by long possession, to acquire the property, 2178.
4th, to make the possessor be considered as master, 2179.
effect of a fair and honest possession, 2180.
of a knavish possession, 2181.
by force, 2182.
not interrupted by force, 2234.

PRESCRIPTION, nature and use of, 2183.
abolished by the divine law, 2184.
of all sorts of rights, 2186.
reduced in France to thirty years, 2190.
and usucapio, difference made by the Roman law, 2193.
other prescriptions by the ordinances of France, 2194.
defined, 2196.
effect of, 2197.
when acquired, 2198.
the possessor joins to his possession that of his anthor, 2199.
and may sometimes join the possession of another person, 2200.
acquired only by a continued possession, 2201.
not hindered by intervals without apparent possession, 2202.
not interrupted by an interval without a possessor, 2203.
what may be prescribed, 2204.
rights and actions prescribed, 2205.


764 INDEX.


PRESCRIPTION.

applies to certain things out of commerce, 2206.

services prescribe, 2207.

acquired only by honest and fair possession, 2208.

without a title, 2209.

where the possessor has lost his title, 2210.

of him who purchases fairly and honestly of an unjust possessor, 2211.

effect of a good and bad conscience in the same case, 2212.

heir or executor answerable for the knavery of the deceased, 2213.

but not the donee or legatee, 2214.

of arrears of rent and annual duties, 2215.

may be acquired by the possession of others, 2216.

ceases when the law renders it useless, 2217.

what cannot be prescribed, 2218.

of debts due at a certain time Or on a certain condition, 2219.

does not run against minors, 2220.

if a major is interested with a minor, 2221.

in what sense it does not run against absent persons, 2222.

wife’s dowry cannot be prescribed during marriage, 2233.

warranty does not prescribe, 2224.

hindered by knavery of the possessor, 2225.

where several possessions are joined, a good conscience is necessary in each of

them, 2226.

those who possess for others cannot prescribe, 2227.

possessor cannot change the title of his possession, 2228.

hindered by a vice in the title, 2229.

some vices annul the title, but do not hinder prescription, 2230.

interrupted by a judicial demand, 2231.

and by a demand by one of many creditors, 2232.

and by demand made against one of many debtors, 2233.
PRESUMPTIONS, are of two sorts, 1999.

some have the force of proofs, 2000.

defined, 2064.

are strong or weak, 2068.

the foundations of, 2066.

are conclusive or uncertain, 2067.

of proof by the force of, 2069.

of the regard that should be had for, 2070.

the effect of, depends on certain rules, 2071.

a fact which cannot be presumed, but must be proved, 2072 — 2075.

example of one that proves nothing, 2076.

in the proof of an ancient fact, 2077.

example of another kind, 2078.

respecting the secret intentions of persons, 2079.
PRETERITION, how distinguished from disherison, 3342.

of children has same effect as disherison without cause, 3249.

and also of parents, 3250.

involuntary, 3258.

(See DisHeERison.)

PRINCIPLES, of two sorta; one that may be reduced to rules; the other not, p. 80
PRIVILEGE. (See Crepirors.)
PROCURATION, or letter of attorney, defined, 1125.

may be conditional, 1130.


INDEX. 755


PROCURATION.
may confer an indefinite or limited power, 1132.
for the affair of a third person, 1135.
to manage the affairs of a third person, its effect, 1136.

(See Proxy.)

PRODUCTION of papers, 2095.

PROOFS. What is a proof, 1995.
different sorts of, 1996.
defined, 2003.
are of two sorts, 2004.
facts which do not require proof, 2005.
he who advances a fact must prove it, 2006.
defendant must prove facts on which his defence rests, 2007.
either party may prove the contrary of facts alleged by the adversary, 2008.
both are free to allege facts and prove them, 2009.
provided such facts are relevant, 2010.
a thing adjudged is held to be true, 2011.
the effect of, depends on the prudence of the judge, 2012.
the judge should examine, 1. if they are according to form, 2013.
2. if they are conclusive, 2014.
by writing, 2015.
Public Registers, 2018.
what are written proofs, 2019.
their use, 2020.
written proofs are the strongest, 2021.
by witnesses not received against writing, 2022.
unless it be pretended that the writing is forged, 2023.
written acts have not the force of, unless in due form, 2024.
the witnesses to a written act are not admitted to prove the contrary, 2025.
written acts have effect only against the parties thereto and their representa-

tives, 2026.

no man can make a title to himself by his own evidence, 2027.
the original of written acts must be produced, 2028.
when copies may be used, 2029.
where mention is made of one deed in another, 2030.
deeds that contradict each other, 2031.
of counter letters, 20382.
counter letters cannot prejudice third persons, 2033.
by witnesses, 2034.
difference between proof by chance witnesses and by witnesses in deeds, 2035.
examination of witnesses ad futuram rei memoriam abolished in France, 2036.
its inconveniencies, 2037.
general inquest about customs abolished in France, 2038.

PROXIES, mandates, and commissions, their origin and use, 1114.
various kinds of, 1115-1118.
what common to all kinds of, 1119.
the rales of, common to commissions, 1120.
defined, 1126.
how the covenant is formed, 1137.
if the proxy is present, 1128.
of the manner of giving the power, 1129.
may be general or special, 1181.

PROXIMITY, 2825. (See ConsancurnityY.)


756 INDEX.


PROXY.
his function is gratuitous, 1133.
may be constituted for an affair in which he himself is also interested, 1134.
how engagement is formed between the proxy and him who appointed him, 1132
expenses laid out by, 1139.
if he have laid ont more than the owner would have done, 1140.
interest of money advanced by, 1141.
appointed by two or more persons, 1142.
of the losses sustained by, 1143.
bound to execute the order if he accepts, 1144.
order to be executed fully, 1145.
extent of the power, 1146.
of the care proxies and other agents are obliged to, 1147.
may better the condition of him who employs him, but cannot make it worse, 1149.
who buys at a higher price than he was authorized to give, 1150.
bound to give an account, 1151.
& proctor cannot stipniate for a share of what may be recovered in a lawsuit, 1152
power of one having a general procaration, 1153.
must have a special power for transacting or alienating, 1154.
non-performance of the procuration, 1155.
two proxies for the same thing, 1156.
if one of them transact without the other, 1157.
power of, ends by revocation, 1158.
and by the naming of a second, 1159.
may discharge himself after acceptance, 1160.
is bound to inform his principal, 1161.
who is unable to execute the commission or inform his principal, 1162.
procurations expire by the death of the giver or the acceptor, 1163.
who continues to act, being ignorant of the death of his principal, 1164.
if his heir or execator act for him aftcr his death, 1165.
PUPILLARY SUBSTITUTION. (See Sussrircrion.)


QUASI CONTRACTS, 1277, note.
QUESTIONS of fact, and questions of law, 1961, note.


RECEIVERS OF WHAT IS NOT DUE, 1520.
obliged to restore, 1524.
of payment made by one thinking himself to be debtor, when he was not, 1525.
payment by a third person for a debtor, 1526.
creditor does not give back what has been paid before the term, 1527.
if one pay by mistake or willingly what is not dae, 1528.
of payment made in a doubtful case, 1529.
of him who owes one of two things, 1530.
restitution of a thing which one has without a just title, 1538.
payment which debtor need not have made, 1534.
of unlawful acts, 1535.
three sorts of, 1536 - 1539.
the engagements of, 1540.
1. restitution of money with interest, 1541.
2. care of the thing, 1542.
restitution of the fruits, 1542.
augmentation of the thing, 1543. ®
where one has sold what belonged to another, 1544.


INDEX. Vo”


RECEIVERS OF WHAT I8 NOT DUE.

the owner bound to refund what has been laid out in preserving the thing, 1545.
REDHIBITION, defined, 397.

seller should declare defects of thing sold, 398.

what defects are intended, 399.

of immovables, 400.

buyer has his action though seller be ignorant of defects, 401.

~ of damages where the seller is ignorant, 402.

of damages where seller knew of such defects, 403.

restores both parties to the same condition, 404.

of changes happening to the thing before, 405.

where defects are evident, or declared by seller, 406.

where they may easily be known or presumed, 407.

where geller declares the thing to have some quality which renders it better, 408.

where an estate is sold, “such as it is,” 409.

ambiguity or other defect in the words of the seller interpreted against him, 410.

of deceit as to the thing sold, 411.

a defect of one thing out of a set, 412.

does not take place in public sales, 4153.

of the time for bringing an action of, 414.
RELIGION, the most natural foundation of the order of society, p. 40.

and policy founded on the order and appointment of God, p. 41.

the spirit of, p. 41.

distinction between the ministry of the spiritual and temporal powers, p. 42.

their union for maintaining order, p. 43.

why the ministry of these two powers is placed in different hands, p. 43.

both established by God, p. 45.

the one subject to the other in their respective functions, p. 45.

and policy have laws in common, p. 74.

of the laws common to both, p. 75.

difference between the arbitrary laws of religion and those of human policy, p. 75.
RENTS AND OBLIGATIONS, how subject to mortgage, 1679, note.

(See Lease, Lessor, LESSEE.)

RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS, 2349.

and restitution signify the same thing, 2350.

rescissions prescribe in ten years, 2194, 2355.

defined, 2356.

a deed may be annulled without proof of fraud, 2357.

depends on the pradence of the judge, 2359.

should not be granted easily, 2360.

effect of, as to third persons, 2361.

heirs may be relieved in right of the deceased, 2362.

can only be demanded by a special proxy, 2363.

is hindered by ratification, 2364.

reciprocal effects of, 2365.

limitation of, 2366.

of part which has effect for the whole, 2367.

when to be demanded, 2368.

when time of prescription begins to run, 2369.

how computed as to heirs and executors, 2370.

of alienation of lands of a minor, 2398.

of improvements made on such lands, 2399.

of contracts in favor of majors, 2401.


VOL. Il.


758 INDEX.


RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS.
the vices of covenants are the cause of, 2403.
frand between heirs, 2404.
of a partition, 2405.
of contracts of sale, 2406.
RESTITUTION, 2349.
defined, 2356.
against sentences or decrees, 2358.
of minors, the cause of, 2372.
is independent of the honesty or knavery of the party, 23753.
a minor is not relieved in all cases without distinction, 2374.
nor against what has been done for good cause, 2375.
nor when he cheats or does damage, 2376.
nor when guilty of crime, 2377.
nor if he has represented himself to be of age, 2378.
minors relieved in all other cases, 2379.
of minors extended to all acts or deeds without distinction, 2380.
minor relieved who has renounced or accepted an inheritance or legacy, 2381.
and if he has accepted an inheritance which becomes unprofitable, 2382.
if the succession so renounced has been cleared by another heir, 2383
takes place for profits which minor should have had, 2384.
minor relieved from engagements which would ran him into lawsuits, 2385.
and against a compromise, 2386.
and against an omission, 2387.
and in case of money borrowed and squandered, 2388.
between two minors, 2389.
not hindered by the authority of the tutor, 2390.
the surety of a minor, 2392.
hindered by the minor’s ratification on coming of age, 2394.
of s purchase made by a minor, 2400.
of majors on account of absence or other cause, 2407.
against sentences by Roman law, 2407, note.
RESTITUTION OF FRUITS is a reparation of damages, 1978.
how far it extends, 1979.
signification of the word Fruits, 1980.
the unjust possessor bound to restore the fruits he has enjoyed, 1981.
the upright possessor not bound to restore such fruits, 1982.
the upright possessor restores the fruits after a legal demand, 1963.
the fruits cut down go to the upright possessor, 1984.
of revenues that come in successively, 1985.
ceases when the upright possessor is obliged to restore the fruits, 1996, 1987.
subject to the deduction of the expenses laid out on them, 1988.
fruits belong to the owner of land, and not to him who tills it, 1989.
unjust possessor bound to restore fruits lost through his negligence, 1990.
heir or executor of unjust possessor succeeds to his engagements, 1991.
estimation of fruits and other revenues, year by yer 1992.
how estimated in France, 1992, note.
of the revenues of movables, 1993.
no interest due for fruits till after a demand, 1994.
(See Damaces.)
REVERSION, the right of, 2889.


received both in ancient and modern Roman law and in France, 2890.
dofinod, 2893.


INDEX. 709


REVERSION.


of two sorts, 1. by law; 2. by agreement, 2894.

by agreement regulated by the agreement, 2895.

of things given in favor of marriage, 2896.

extends to mothers by the usage of France, 2897.

and sometimes to other donations than dowries, 2898.

this right does not hinder the profits of goods subject to the reversion, 2902.

whether the creditors of donee can hinder, 2905.

case of the mortgage or alienation of the goods, 2906.

nature and character of the right of, 2908.

when the donee commits a crime, 2909.

dispositions of donee by testament, 2910.

when regulated by covenant, 2912.

the father has the reversion of the dowry given by the grandfather on the father’s
side, 2914.


REVOCATION. (See Lxcacr.)
RULES of the canon law, p. 46.


4


what the natural rules are, p. 51.
impossible to make a particular rule for every individual, p. 53.
how applied, p. 62.
two sorts of natural rules, p. 67.
are general, or common to several matters, or peculiar to one matter only, p. 88.
advice concerning the use of rules, p. 91.
(See Laws.)


SALE, origiri and use of the contract of sale, 256, 257.


definition of, 258.

perfected by bare consent of parties, 259.

how such consent is given, 260.

who may sell or buy, 261.

three engagements in the contract of sale, 262.

1. engagements that are expressed, 263.

2. engagements from the nature of the contract, 264.

3. engagements established by laws and usages of the country, 265.
engagements of seller are, 1. delivery of the thing sold, 266.
2. to take care of it till delivery, 267.

3. warranty, 268.

4. respects the faults of the thing sold, 269.

perfected by delivery, 275, note a.

not annulled by failure of seller to deliver, 285.

what care geller should take of the thing sold, 289.

such care may be regulated by agreement, 290.

if buyer is in delay, seller is discharged from care, 291.

the engagement of seller not to sell too dear, 294.

of bayer not to buy at too low a price, 295.

buyer engages to pay the price, 296.

the time and place of payment, 297.

if buyer do not pay, seller may detain the goods, 298.

delay of buyer caused by accident, 299.

the buyer in delay shall pay interest, 300.

three cases in which the buyer owes interest, 301.

if seller take back the goods for want of payment, the buyer must indemnify, 302.
dissolution of, for non-payment, 303.


760 INDEX.


SALE.

buyer cannot elude the sale by non-payment, 204.

other charges which buyer must make good, 305.

buyer in danger of eviction need not pay the price, 306.

buyer bound to take care of the thing in cases where the sale is liable to be dis-
solved, 307.

what things may be sold, 308.

things incorporeal may be sold, 609.

of things not yet in being, 310.

of an uncertain expectation, 311.

in gross and by bulk, 312.

by number, weight, and measure, 313.

by wholesale and retail, how perfected, 314.

upon trial, 315.

accessories are included in, 316.

some things separate from the edifice included in, 317.

the accessories of movables, 318.

of one of two things, 319.

of thing belonging to another, 320.

the price of, can be nothing else than money, 321.

where, instead of the price agreed on, the seller receives enother thing in pay-
ment, 322.

one or more prices of the same thing, 323.

where the price is uncertain and apknown, 324.

the price of, is arbitrary, 325.

any pactions may be added to the contract of sale, 326.

depending on a condition, 328.

dissolved by a condition, 329.

of the earnest penny ; its effect, 330.

where nothing is said of it in the contract, 331.

the clause of nullity, 332.

of the power of redemption, 333.

of changes in the thing sold, 334.

changes before accomplishment affect the seller, 335.

changes after sale affect the buyer, 336.

likewise changes between sale and delivery, S36, note 6.

the seller bears losses happening after he is in delay, 337.

where both parties are in delay, 338.

of losses of things sold by number, weight, and measure, 339.

of profit and loss in case of a thing sold on trial, 340.

of one of two things, where one perishes, 341. :

on condition, where thing perishes before the event of the condition, 342.

on condition, where the thing is diminished, but not destroyed, 343.

the party who should perform a condition cannot take advantage of his own nor-
performance, 344.

loss must be borne by him whose fault occasions it, 345.

the fruits belong to him who is master at the Gme when they are gathered, 346.

of agreements providing for losses, 347.

how to determine who shall bear profit or loss, 348.

of sales that are null, 349.

of the causes which annal, 350.

persons in public office cannot sell or buy, by the Roman law, 351.

provisions of French ordinances concerning, 351, note 6.


INDBX. 761


SALE.
tutors and guardians cannot buy of their wards, 352.
factors under same incapacity, 353.
heir burdened with a substitution cannot sell, 354.
minors, madmen, and prodigals cannot sell, 355.
things public cannot be sold, 356.
things consecrated, and immovables of corporations, eannot be sold, 857.
an estate entailed cannot be sold, 358.
dower lands cannot be sold, 359.
things of which the commerce is forbidden, 360.
depending on condition, null if condition do not come to pass, 361.
null through error of the contractor, 362.
of error of the quality of the thing sold, 363.
transacted through fraud or violence is null, 364.
rescission of, where price is less than half the value, 868.
time of estimation of price, 366.
how tme value to be estimated, 367.
the buyer may restore, or make up the fall price, 868.
this rescission independent of fraud, 369.
restitution of the fruits of the thing, 370.
eviction, 371.
other things diminishing the right of purchaser, 372.
warranty, 373 — 397.
divers kinds of troubles which dissolve, 381.
redhibition and abatement of price, 397 - 414.
other causes of the dissolution of, 415, 416.
difference between nullity and dissolution of, 417.
possessor cannot lose his possession bat by the authority of justice, 418.
of damages, 419.
dissolution restores all to the same condition they were in, 420.
when annulled, seller is reinstated in his right, 421.
the power of redemption by covenant, 422.
with power of redemption implies a condition, 423.
where the power is granted after the contract is past, 424.
continuance of the power of redemption, 425.
of the fruits after an offer to redeem, 426.
conditional agreement to dissolve, 427.
its effect, 428.
may be vacated though there be no such clause, 429.
dissolution of, by consent, before performance, 430.
dissolution of, by consent, after performance, 431.
the causes of forced sales, 432.
forced sale defined, 433.
a forced sale for the public good, 434.
sale of provisions, 435.
a forced sale for a particular necessity, 486.
if the person who might be compelled consent to the sale, 437.
if he refuse to sell, 438.
effect of these kinds of sales, 439.
of fields lying near the highway, 440.
by decree of a court of justice, 441.
by auction, 442.
(See Detivery, REDHIBITION.)


64°


762 INDEX.


SEPARATION OF GOODS between husband and wife, 896.
made in two cases, 897.
defined, 899.
cause of, 900.
effect of, 901.
the wife cannot alienate such goods, 902.
she may distrain husband's goods for her dowry, 903.
and also for her paraphernal goods deposited with the husband, 904.
and also for her gains, 905.
to secure creditors, 1804-1808.
defined, 1809.
independent of the mortgage, 1810.
legatees have the right of, 1811.
for a conditional debt, 1812.
cannot take place, if heir has already alienated the goods, 1813.
not prevented by the engagements of the executor, 1814.
may take place through several successions, 1815.
takes place when the debtor succeeds to his surety, 1816.
and when surety succeeds to debtor, 1816, note.
does not prejudice the right against the heir, 1817.
not prevented by privileges, 1818.
may be demanded by one of the heirs or executors, if a creditor, 1819.
prevented by confusion of goods, 1821.
and by novation, 1822.
difficulties concerning, regulated by the discretion of the judge, 18323.
SEQUESTRATION, 681 - 688.
how distinguished from a deposit, 728.
(See Dzrosrr.)
SEQUESTRATOR by consent of parties, defined, 726.
may be obliged to perform the trast by each of the parties who has named
him, 727.
his possession and its effects, 729.
must account, 780.
bow discharged, 731.
SERVICES, their origin and use, 1015.
have two characteristics, 1016.
are commonly settled by covenant, 1017.
defined, 1018.
in what they consist, 1019.
are for lands and tenements, 1020.
are of divers sorts, 1021.
two general kinds of, natural and those established for convenience, 1092.
of houses and lands, 1023.
the right of service comprehends accessories, 1024.
the right and use of, regulated by the title establishing them, 1025.
interpreted favorably for liberty, 1026.
may be established by authority of justice, 1027.
the right of, may be acquired by prescription, 1028.
the manner and use of, regulated by the ancient condition of the places, 1039.
lost or diminished by prescription, 1030.
are annexed to lands and tenements, 1031.
the right of service gives no right of property to the land which owes the sr
vice, 1032.


INDEX. 763


SERVICES.

one service may serve for two lands or tenements, 1033.

which appear to be useless, 1034.

of lands and tenements having several owners, 1035.

how preserved against prescription, 1036.

the possession of one owner preserves the service for all, 1037.

the privilege of one partner prevents the prescription from ranning against the
others, 1038.

various services of buildings, 1089 ~ 1043.

the right of resting on another's building, 1044.

one cannot trespass on his neighbour’s ground, 1045.

what one may do in his own ground to the inconvenience of his neighbour, 1047.

inconveniences which the neighbour ought or ought not to suffer, 1048.

various services of lands, 1049 - 1054.

the proprietor is bound to suffer the service, 1055.

and all works necessary for the use thereof, 1056.

the obligations of him whose wall ought to bear the building of another, 1057.

if necessary to repair a partition wall, 1058.

of repairing a wall that serves for supporting a building, 1059.

the proprietor of land owing a service may relinquish it, 1060.

if the estate to which service is due be divided, 1061.

when two services are due from one tenement to another, 1062.

he who has a right of service can innovate nothing, 1063.

overloading of a wall subject to service, 1064.

repairs for the use of the service, 1065.

of damage which is a natural consequence of the service, 1066.

he to whom a service is due cannot communicate it to others, or extend its
bounds, 1067.

the right of, perishes with the land or tenement, 1068.

and on the confusion of the property of the two lands or tenements, 1069. '

if proprietor afterwards sell the land which served, 1070.

where a land or tenement that is between two others hinders the use of the ser-
vice, 1071.

prescription of, 10732.

different ways of prescribing, 1073.

prescription of, whose use is interrupted by intervals of time, 1074.

continuation of prescription from one possessor to another, 1075.

continues where an estate is sold by decree of court, 1076.

SOCIETY, a plan of, founded on the two first laws by two sorts of engagements, p. 8.

destination of man to society by two kinds of engagements, p. 10.

the first kind of engagements which unite men in society, p. 11.

the natural engagements of marriage and birth, p. 11.

the second kind of engagements, p. 16.

of two sorts, voluntary or involuntary, p. 17.

the troubles which disturb society, pp. 32, 33.

the state of, after the fall of man, and how God makes it to subsist, p. 33.

all disorders a consequence of man’s disobedience, p. 33.

self-love the source of disorders in, p. 34.

and made by God to contribute to its subsistence, p. 35.

four foundations of the order of, p. 36.

God’s government over, p. 37.

the authority which God gives to the supreme powers, p. 38.

religion the most natural foundation of the order of society, p. 40.


764 INDEX.


SOLIDITY, among debtors and creditors, its nature, 1824 ~ 1828.
among debtors, defined, 1829.
does not exist unless expressed, 1830.
does not hinder the division of the debt, 1831.
in all obligations, parties may bind themselves each for the whole, 1832.
the condition of such parties may be different, 1833.
relief of him who pays for the othera, 1834.
- does not cease by an action against one of them, 1835.
@ personal exception of one debtor does not discharge the others, 1836.
a demand of the debt from one hinders prescription with respect to the ocher
debtors, 1837.
among creditora, wherein it consists, 1838.
how acquired, 1839.
if one creditor demand the debt without the others, 1840.
if he innovate or assign the debt to others, 1841.
a demand by one interrupts the prescription against the other creditors, 1842.
one creditor cannot prejudice the others, 1843.
STELLIONATE, distinguished from fraud in general, 1257.
defined, 1263.
exception to the rule, 1264.
the effect of, 1265.
in mortgaging, 1677.
STEWARDS, 1309.
SUBSTITUTION, two significations of, $763.
1. vulgar, 3764.
2. fiduciary or gradual, 3765.
the latter may be imposed on legatee, 3766.
difference between them, 3767.
pupillary, its three effects, 3768.
¢ the Trebellianic portion, 3769.
vulgar, defined, 3771.
annulled as soon as executor accepts, $772.
several degrees of, 3778.
the different modes of, 3774.
applies also to legatee, 3775.
among coexecutors mutually substituted, the shares of substitation are the same
as those of the institution, 3776.
reciprocal, restrained to the survivors, when the case happens, 3777.
a third person substituted to a coexecutor, substituted to both, 3778.
an institution of two executors may imply reciprocal substitation of sa
vivor, 3779.
substitute dying before the case of the substitution does not transmit his right, 3780.
the right of accretion gives place to substitution among coexecutors. 3781.
coexecutor accepting one share may not renounce those which fall void, 3782
an executor substituted to himself, 3783.
explanation of this rule, 3784.
which implies two alternative conditions, 3785.
hardship of the Roman law, 3786.
papillary, defined, 3787.
one may substitute to a posthumous child, 3788.
the pupillary comprehends the vulgar substitution, 3789.
origin of this rale, 3790.
comprehends the goods of the child, 3792.


INDEX. 765


SUBSTITUTION.
a result of the paternal authority given by the Roman law, 3793.
@ testament making, disposes of two successions, 3794.
a child emancipated, not subject to, 3795.
pupillary, annulled when infant attains puberty, 3796.
exemplary, to children in state of madness, 3797.
none called to, except children of brothers of the heir who is mad, 3798.
at an end, if such madness cease, 3799.
all ascendants may substitute in this manner, 3800.
difficulty arising from this rule, 3801.
compendious, 3802.
comprehends three substitutions; when they take effect, 3803.
the difference of effect of these three, 3804.
-reciprocal, which may be also among legatees, 8805.
one substituted to an infant cannot accept one succession without the other, 3806.
even though he be coheir or coexecutor with him, 3807.
reciprocal, between two infants, comprehends both cases, 3808.
between an infant under puberty and an adalt, is vulgar, 3809.
where one is substituted to an infant and to another executor, is vulgar as to
both, 3810.
where one is substituted to two infants, he succeeds only to him who dies last, 3811.
and to both, if they die together, $812.
has its effect, where an infant, having entered on the succession, afterwards re-
nounces it, 3813.
such renunciation has the same effect as if substitution had been open at the tes-
tator’s death, 3814.
where executor dies while deliberating, 3815. ;
direct and fiduciary, 3816.
why no distinction is made between these terms, 8817.
direct, three modes of, 3818.
gradual, the degrees of, restrained by divers ordinances and usages, 3819, 3820.
dispositions containing substitutions and fiduciary bequests must be enrolled, 3821.
meaning of the word substitute, 3823.
or fiduciary bequest, defined, 3823.
who may substitute, 3824.
divers ways of substituting, 3825.
limited to goods that testator leaves, 3826.
executor charged with, may retain a fourth part of the inheritance, 3827.
fruits of goods substituted remain to executor, unless testator have otherwise
directed, 3828.
a legacy to an executor comprehended in, unless otherwise directed, 3829.
may be either to a certain time, or on condition, 3830.
executor charged with, and delaying after demand, accountable for the fruits, and
liable for costs and damages, 3831.
but not if substitute neglect to demand, 3832.
what care an executor charged with, is bound to take of the inheritance, 3833.
difference between such executor and one charged with a legacy, 3833, note p.
executor restoring inheritance to the substitute may retain expenses he has in-
curred, 3834.
a father charged with, who dissipates the effects, shall have them taken out of
his hands, 3835.
punishment of an executor charged with, who fraudulently detains a part of the


goods, 3836.


SUBSTITUTION.

charges pass with goods to the substitute, 3837.

children charged with fiduciary bequest not thereby deprived of their legitime, 3838.

and may also retain the Trebellianic portion, 3839.

origin and equity of this usage, 3840.

which, by some authorities, extends to legacies, 3841.

jointures and marriage portions are taken out of the substituted goods, 3842.

remarks on Justinian’s law respecting this dedaction,-3843.

when one is substituted to the survivor of two, does not take effect, where both
die together, 3844. :

ceases, where issue is born to a son charged with, 3845.

executor should make an inventory and give security to preserve rights of sab-
stitute, 3846.

even though a father or mother, except in two cases, 3847.

particular fiduciary bequests of certain things, 3848.

may be of all kinds of things, 3849.

either executors or legatees may be charged with, 3850.

different manners of substitating, 3851.

any expressions showing testator’s intention sufficient, 3852.

different dispositions which have the effect of, 3853.

may be made in favor of persons to be born, 3854.

substitutes succeed successively, in the order given by the testator, 3855.

different manners of regulating this order, 3856.

made indefinitely to one of a family, 3857.

the intention of testator to be judged by circumstances, 3858.

if executor die without naming the substitute out of several, all have a share ia
the goods, 3859.

the substitute named by executor derives his right from testator only, 3860.

a prohibition to alienate does not bind, unless made in favor of some person, 3861.

prohibition to alienate lands out of the family does not take away the choice of
one of such family, 3862.

the substitute shall have either the thing to be given him, or its value, 3863.

fruits and interest due from the time of delay, $864.

an executor having paid a fiduciary bequest cannot revoke it, if it afterwards prove
nall, 3865.

legatee charged with, reaps the benefit of it, if it prove null, 3866.

rules for interpretation of testaments apply to, 3867.

may be in favor of one, or of many, 3868.

open to every degree, 3869.

all capable of succeeding are capable of being substituted, 3870.

persons incapable of fiduciary substitutions, 3871.

tacit fiduciary substitutions forbidden, 3872.

of persons who lend their names to such, 3873.

how tacit fiduciary substitutions are proved, 3874.

difference between Roman and civil law in respect to, 3875.

goods subject to, may not be restored before the time, unless it be without preje-
dice, 3876.

a donation has the effect of election of a substitute, where donor was empowerel
to choose one, 3877.

limits of the liberty of giving more to one substitute than to others, 3878.

order of substitutes in different degrees, 3879.

parties mutually substituted may mutually renounce, 8880.

prescription of substituted goods runs against both executor and substitute, 3881.


INDEX. 767


SUBSTITUTION.
prescription of lands substituted, alienated by usufructuary, divests substitute of
his property therein, 3882.
not opened by the civil death of executor, 3883.
to an executor in case he die without issue, is of no effect if he leave children, 3884.
how, if the children are substituted, 3885.
different opinions concerning this, 3886.
difficulties and perplexities caused by interpreters, 3888.
of a surety to a creditor, 1887, note.
(See CreprToR.)
SUCCESSIONS, their necessity and use, p. 31.
two ways of succeeding, p. 31.
to be distinguished from engagements, p. 31, 2408.
their nature and use, 2409.
three kinds of, 2410.
legal and testamentary, 24132.
the order of legal successions, 2415.
1. of children to parents, 2416.
2. of parents to children, 2417.
8. of collaterals, 2419.
legal, conformable to the order of nature, and consistent with natural affection, 2420.
testamentary, 2421.
whether testamentary or legal successions are most favorable, 2434.
three differences between them, 2438 - 2441.
of those who leave neither relations nor testament, 2451.
of husband and wife, 2452, 2453.
of the exchequer in default of heirs, 2453.
of bastards, 2455.
of aliens, 2456.
of persons of a servile condition, 2458.
defined, 2465.
two sorts of, 2466.
the charges of, of three sorts, 2469.
several successions of one heir to another, all pass to the last heir, 2478.
of intestates does not take place if there is a testament which subsists, 2481.
how acquired, and how renounced, 2704.
engagements of the heir to, 2705.
one may accept, either expreasly or otherwise, 2706.
what are the acts of an heir, 2707.
he who receives payment as heir acts as heir, 2708.
so, if he pay a debt of the succession, 2709.
and if he take the goods, or reap the fruita, 2710.
although he does it by mistake, 2711.
he who meddles with the inheritance makes himself heir, 2712.
also, he who sells the succession, 27153.
also, the executor who renounces by collusion with the heir of blood, 2714.
also, he who embezzles the effects, 2715.
but not after he has renounced, 2716.
where the next of kin is instituted by testament, 2717.
® minor relieved against acts he has done as heir, 2718.
if his coheir is of full age, 2719.
succession to intestates, 2787 — 2790.
(See Herr.)


SURETIES (or CAUTIONS), their use, 1844.
the obligation of, is accessory to another obligation, 1645.
the use of, extends to all manner of engagements, 1846.
suretyships are of three sorts, 1847 -— 1849.
defined, 1850.
surety may be given for all lawful engagements, 1851.
even for a natural obligation, 1852.
security may be given for a debt to be contracted, 1853.
can be bound for no more than the debtor, 1854.
bat may be for less, 1855.
one may become surety without the knowledge of the debtor, 1856.
Reither security nor warranty can be given in crimes, 1857.
security cannot be given im some lawful engagements, 1858.
security for a dowry, 1858, note.
are not discharged by the restitution of the principal debtor, 1859.
of minors and sous under jurisdiction, 1859, note.
of minors have action against them if not saved harmless, 1960.
the engagements of, 1861.
taken in a court of justice, 1862.
the heirs or execators of, 1863.
ouce accepted cannot be rejected, 1864.
for public officers, how far liable, 1865.
cannot be sued till after discussion of the principal debtor, 1866.
except in the case of judicial sureties, 1867.
and where the debtor is absent and has no visible estate, 1868.
discussion does not extend to goods alienated by the debtor, 1969.
cannot oblige the creditor to sue the debtor, 1870.
where there are several of the same thing, 1871.
if the obligation of one is annulled, the others answer for his portion, 1872.
have all the defences that the debtor has, 1873.
their engagements follow the obligation, 1874.
the debtor should save the surety harmless, 1875.
how indemnified, 1876.
may sue the debtor before demand by the creditor, 1877.
if the surety pay before the term, 1878.
may pay after the term, without demand, 1879.
if he pay what was not due, 1880.
if he pay being ignorant of the debtor's defence, 1881.
if he pay having a defence peculiar to himself, 1882.
if he make no defence, or negiect to appeal, 1883.
if he pay without informing the debtor, who pays 8 second time, 1884.
for a thing deposited or lent, 1885.
if the surety is discharged by the creditor, 1886.
the remedy of one who pays against the other sureties, 1887.
answer for each other, 1888.
po surety of an unlawfal obligation, 1889.
obligation not annalled by a personal exception in favor of the principal deté-
or, 1890.
obligation void in case of fraud of the creditor, 1891.
circumstances which make the obligation of, to be void or valid, 1893.
discharged by the annulling of the obligation, 1893.
or by the innovation of the debt, 1894.
in a lease, not bound on the renewal, 1895.


INDEX. 769


SURETIES.
discharged by debtor succeeding to the creditor, or creditor to the debtor, 1896.
if creditor or debtor succeed to the surety, or the surety to either of them, 1897.
a suit by the creditor against one of several, does not discharge the others, 1898.
for the delivery of a thing that perishes, 1899.
(See Discussion, Divisron.)
SYNDICS, the use of, 1439.
by whom named, and how, 1440, 1441.
the person named included in the number of voters, 1442.
the power of, 1443.
duration of their power, 1444.
the care of, 1445.
the engagements of, 1446, 1447.


TESTAMENT, the use of, 2421.
authorized by the law of God, 2422.
origin and differences of the provisions of the Roman law and the customs of
France respecting, 2423 - 2433.
can have effect only by death of testator, 2535.
definition of, in the Roman law, 2978.
in provinces governed by the customs, 2979.
the power of making, not especially a part of the public law, 2981.
written with the testator’s own hand and without witnesses, 2982.
of poor country people, 2983.
among children restrained by Justinian, 2984, 2985.
how regulated by the customs of some provinces, 2986.
definition of, 2987.
essential characteristics of, 2988.
implies the disposal of all the goods, 2989.
takes effect only on the death of testator, 2990.
the heir of blood is testamentary heir, if instituted, 2991.
must contain the institution of an heir or executor, 2992.
will of testator is in the place of a law, 2993.
must contain the proper will of the testator, 2994.
two questions arise from, 2996.
takes effect on acceptance of the heir or executor, 2998.
divers kinds of, 2999.
of deaf and dumb, and blind persons, 3000.
of officers and soldiers in service, 3001.
made in time of a plague, 3002.
secret and private, 3003.
common to all having an interest therein, 3005.
validity and effect of, 3006.
the causes of incapacity of receiving a benefit by, 3007.
persons incapable by the Roman law of making, 3009, 3010.
who incapable of making, $011.
males under fourteen, and females under twelve, incapable of making, 30132.
eunuchs under eighteen incapable of making, until permitted by the Emperor
Constantine, 3012, note 8.
sons under their father’s authority cannot make, 3016.
madmen cannot make, 3017.
old, sick, and infirm persons may, 3018.
& prodigal may not, after interdiction, 3019.
VOL. II. 65


770 INDEX.


TESTAMENT.
deaf and dumb persons cannot make, 302).
unless they can write, 3022.
the deaf man who can speak may make a will, 3023.
and so dumb persons not deaf, if they can write, 3024.
blind persons may make, 3025.
aliens and foreigners cannot make, 3026.
a monk, after taking the vows, cannot make, 3027.
persons condemned to death cannot make, 3028.
bastards may make, 3029.
incapacity of aliens to make, considered, 3030.
valid at first, may become nall, 3031.
who may be executors of, 3032.
who may receive benefit by, 3032.
incapacities of making and receiving benefit by, 3033.
persons incapable of making, but capable of receiving a benefit by, 3034.
persons incapable of both making and receiving by, 3035.
bastards may receive benefit by, 3036.
children unborn may receive benefit by, 3037.
children not conceived may receive benefit by, 3038.
heir need not be named by name, 3039.
reproachful terms used in, 3040.
persons unworthy cannot receive benefit by, 3044.
forms necessary in making, 3045.
use of forms, 3046.
seven witnesses required by the Roman law, 3047.
and in some provinces of France, 3048.
in others only two required, 3048.
witnesses must be present at the reading and signing of, 3049.
seven witnesses necessary in provinces governed by written law, 3050.
but not by the customs of some places, 3050, note a.
Witnesses must all be present and see testator sign, 3051.
witnesses must be above fourteen years, 3052.
women cannot be witnesses to, nor can mad, deaf and dumb persons, prodigals, i2-
famous persons, or aliens, 8053 - 3056.
capacity of witness considered at the time of making, 3057.
difference between contract and, 3064.
the father, children, and brothers of testator cannot be witnesses to, 3065.
several of the same family may be witnesses to, 3066.
may be made at any honr, 3067.
formalities for different kinds of, 3068.
formalities of military, 3069.
three kinds of milifary testaments, 3072.
1. those not in writing, 3078.
2. those signed by the testator, 3074.
8. those reduced to writing before witnesses, 3075.
what number of witnesses necessary to a military testament, 3076.
whether the presence of a notary is necessary, 3077.
made in the time of a plague, 3079.
secret testaments, 3081.
of persons who can neither read nor write, 3082.
secret, of deaf and dumb persons who can write, 3083.
secret, the opening of, 3084.


INDEX. 771


TESTAMENT.
verification of signatures of witnesses to secret, 3085.
of blind men, 3086.
8 sort of testament fit for all persons, 3087.
when null for want of form, 3088.
simple formalities of, in the customs, 3105.
nall by some customs, unless made a certain time before death, 3106.
formalities required by different laws, 3107.
the first testament is annulled or changed by a second, 3116, 3131.
even though not mentioned therein, 3117.
if the second be in due form, 3118.
or if formalities are dispensed with by law, 3119.
annulled by birth of a child, 3121, 3132.
unless it die before the testator, 3122.
null, if the children be not named, 3123.
or if they be unjustly disinherited, 3124.
null if testator die incapable, 3126, 3146.
not annulled by other changes, 3127.
revocation of, 3128.
may be entirely annulled, or only as to some particular disposition therein, 3130.
legacies of undutiful testaments subsist, 3133.
not annulled by renunciation of the heir to avoid the payment of legacies, 3134.
nor when he renounces by collusion with the next of kin, $135.
when he renounces without such collusion, 3136.
provisions of the Roman law, 3137-3144.
incapacity of testator annals all the dispositions of, 3146.
may be annulled by testator’s rasing or tearing, 3147.
but not when defaced by chance, against his will, $148.
and this may be proved by the notary and witnesses, 3148, note.
not annulled by explanatory additions thereto, 3149.
rasures and additions in, to be judged by circumstances, 3150.
made by threats or violence, null, 3151.
flattery not sufficient to annul, 3152, 3154.
null, with respect to him who forcibly hinders the revocation, 3153.
interpretation of, 3155.
difficulties in the interpretation of, 3156.
rules of interpretation, 3157.
modes of expression in, 3158.
1. where the meaning is clear, 3159.
2. where there is no meaning, 3160.
8. where the meaning is obecure, 3161.
to be interpreted from the whole tenor thereof, 3162.
covenants and testaments, difference in their interpretation, 3162, note.
testator's intention to prevail in case of ambiguity, 3168.
bequest in, not prejadiced by a false addition, 3164.
obscurities to be explained by circumstances, 3165.
of difficulties in interpretation, 3178.
rales of interpretation, 3179.
1. the will of the testator, 3180.
2. his esteem for the persons, 3181.
8. the heir of blood favored rather than a stranger, 3182.
two testaments of the same date, in due form, 3209.
views for the interpretation of, $210.


772 INDEX.


TESTAMENT.

condition defined, 3212.

charges defined, 3213.

destinations defined, 3214.

motives defined, 3215. -

description defined, 3216.

terms of time defined, 3217.

charges and conditions often confounded, $218.

charges may operate as conditions, 3219.

destinations may have the effect of conditions, 3220.

motives may have the effect of conditions, 3221.

description may imply a condition, 3222.

conditions are considered as to the facts on which they depend, 3227.

conditions as to time, 3228.

conditions express and tacit, 3229.

conditions impossible or contrary to law and good manners, 3230, 3231.

conditions made with a view to procure a like benefit to the testator, void, $232.

such dispositions forbidden by the Roman law, 3233.

matual testaments, 3234.

made in acknowledgment of former benefits, 3235.

dispositions depending on more than one condition, 3236.

conditions to be interpreted in general by the will of the testator, 3237.

conditions depending on the act of the executor or legatee, 3238.

of conditions obliging not to do a certain thing, $239.

conditions not depending on the act of the executor or legatee, 3240.

conditions depending on the act of a third person, 3241.

conditions depending partly on the act of the executor, and partly on some
event, 3242 ~- 3244.

condition entirely dependent on a third person, 3245.

conditions depending on the act of a third person, which must necessarily be
accomplished, 3246, 3247.

rules for judging of such conditions in order to give effect to the testator’s inten-
tion, 3248.

how to distinguish conditional dispositions from those which are not eo, 3249.

of the relation which conditions have to events, 3250.

where two executors are instituted and the condition does not happen, they suc-
ceed equally, 3251.

conditions accomplished before the death of the testator yet have their effect, 3252

bat if such condition is a fact that may be reiterated, it mast be accomplished, 3255.

if a term be joined to a condition, it is necessary to wait till the term expire, $24.

conditions may not be divided, 3255.

& condition imposed on several may be divided, 3956.

the condition “if A die without children,” fulfilled if A and his san die at the
same time, 3258.

condition of majority not accomplished by the dispensation of age, 3259.

means of securing the performance of the conditions of, 3260.

how different legatees of the same thing may be joined, 3270.

1. by the thing itself, 3271.

2. by the thing itself and expression of testator, 3272.

8. by word only, and not by the thing, 3273.

this distinction not exact, and does not apply equally to executors and liegt
tees, 3274.

the exeeation of, and the duties of heirs, 3330.


INDEX. 773


"TESTAMENT.
the duties of executors by customs of France, 3331.
precautions for insuring performance of these duties, 3333.
executors, their use and necessity, 3334.
overseers of, in England, 3334, note d.
execution may be committed to the testamentary heir or to some other per-
son, 3335.
the execution of indefinite dispositions, 8337.
the execution of dispositions neglected by the heir, 3338.
undatifal testaments, 3340.
who may complain of them, 3345, 3346.
undutiful, annulled as to the undutiful disposition, 3355.
how the right of complaint of undutifulness passes to the heirs of the de-
ceased, 3356.
collaterals may not complain unless an infamous person be instituted, 3364.
a complaint on the score of forgery does not bar a subsequent one for undutifal-
ness, 3378.
nullity and undutifulness may be pleaded successively, 3379.
effect of complaint against, as undutifal, 3380.
where the person is reduced to a portion less than was due to nim by law, 3380.
if declared undutifal, all the children succeed as if there had been no testa-
ment, 3381.
where the complaint augments the portion of the son instituted, 3382.
extravagant donations diminished, 3383.
undutifal, the legacies thereof subsist, 3384.
but by the ancient Roman law were void, 8385.
(See Herr, Lecacy, Revoocarion.)
TESTATOR, the will of, a law to the executor and to the legatees, 2993.
may make two or more originals of his will, 3004.
rules for discerning the intentions of, 3177.
where the court changes the disposition of, 3199, 3205.
dispositions which are not to be executed, 3207.
when he may or may not derogate from the law, $208.
precautions of testators in executing their wills, $211. .
to interpret the dispositions of, 3226.
THINGS, how the laws consider them, 1132.
the foundations of the distinctions of, 113.
distinctions natural and made by law, 114.
what common to all, 115.
difference between Roman and civil law, 115, note a.
things public, 116.
things belonging to towns or other places, 117.
distinction of movables and immovables, 118.
immovables, 119.
trees and buildings, 120.
hanging fruits, 121.
accessories to buildings, 123.
movables, 124.
which are living or dead, 125.
animals, wild and tame, 126.
movables consumed in the using, 127.
distinctions formed by nature and by law, 128.
which enter into commerce and those which do not, 129.


65 °


774 INDEX.


THINGS.
consecrated to religion, 129.
corporeal and incorporeal, 130.
allodial lands and lands burdened with quitrents and other duties, 131.
mines, 133.
coin, 138.
treasure, 134.
another distinction of, made by the laws, 135.
purchase, 136.
inheritance, 137.
paternal estate, 138.
maternal estate, 139.
TRANSACTIONS, their use, 1077.
defined, 1078.
divers ways of transacting, 1079.
limited to their subject-matter, 1080.
with one of parties interested are of no prejudice to the others, 1081.
with any other than the adverse party are of no effect, 1082.
concerning a right are of no prejudice to a like right accruing subsequently, 1083.
the stipulation of a penalty may be added to, 1084.
with the surety of debtor, 1085.
have the force of judgments, 1086.
made null by fraud, 1087.
and by error, 1088.
derogating from a right of which the title is unknown, 1089.
grounded on forged writings, 1090.
not annulled by the damage suffered by one of the parties, 1091.
made to color an illegal act, null, 1092.
concerning a lawsuit in which judgment has been given, though the parties do not
know it, 1093.
TRANSMISSION, the right of, 3296.
in the Roman law respects successions of intestates as well as testamentary suc-
cessions, 3297.
its origin found in the natural order of legal succession, 3298.
limited in the Roman law to children sui heredes, 3298.
the right of, did not exist in testamentary successions unless the heir or executor
had exercised his right, 3299.
existed in testamentary successions only for children, 3299.
in legal successions only for children not emancipated, 3299.
exception in favor of heirs dying within a certain time, 3300.
in the case of legatees, 3301.
the condition of legatees more advantageous than that of heirs and executors, 3302.
by the civil law, the succession of intestates takes place not only for children, but
for all the next of kin, 3303.
of legacies given by the civil law to all legatees, 3304.
of testamentary successions, difficulty in respect to, 3305.
by the customs of Bourdeaux, 3306.
objections answered, 3307.
founded on principles of equity, 3308.
contains rules of necessary use, 3310.
defined, 33132.
how limited, 3813.
takes place as soon as the right to the inheritance vests, 3314.


INDEX. 749


*"EFRANSMISSION.
depends on the condition in which the right is at the time of the death, 3315.
does not exist where testamentary heir or legatee dies before the testator, 3316.
unless so expressed in testator’s will, 3317.
is acquired by the acceptance of the inheritance, 3318.
where the testamentary heir dies within the time allowed for deliberation, 3319.
where the heir, knowing of the legacy, dies without making any declaration con-
cerning it, 3321.
time allowed for deliberation by the ordinance, 3322.
where the heir dies ignorant of his right, 3323.
does not take place where the institution of heir is conditional, and the condition
does not come to pass, 3325.
of a legacy pure and simple, 3326.
of a conditional legacy, 3327.
of a legacy to an uncertain day, 3328.
in the case of substitutions and fiduciary bequests, 3329.
TREBELLIANIC PORTION, how Saenepined from Falcidian, 3889.
why so called, 3890.
many rules of the Falcidian pueden apply to, 3891.
defined, 3892.
due to an executor charged with a fiduciary substitution having only part of the
inheritance, 3893.
testator may assign houses, lands, or money, in lieu of, 3894.
or may forbid the deduction of, 3895.
executor who has restored the whole inheritance may not afterwards claim, 3896.
a fiduciary substitute charged with a second restitution has no right to, 3897.
how the fruits are reckoned, or not, as a part of, 3898.
the fruits not reckoned to children as a part of, 3899.
an executor charged to restore the inheritance, who has made no inventory, is de-
prived of, 3900.
different opinions concerning this law, 3901.
different cases jndged by circumstances, 3902.
TRUTH, what it is, 1996.
a thing adjudged is held for true, 2011.
TUTOR, the necessity of guardianships, 1276.
the nature of this engagement, 1277.
difference between Roman and civil law as to tutorships, 1278 ~- 1281.
tutorship defined, 1283.
duration of tutorship, 1284.
the nearest relations should be appointed, if there is no reason to the contrary, 1285.
may be named by the parents, 1286.
one or more may be named, 1287.
honorary, and onerary, 1288.
should be confirmed by the judge, 1289.
with or without surety, 1290.
the one who offers security preferred, 1291.
the father or grandfather is instead of, 1292.
who may be, 1293.
takes an oath of faithful administration, 1294.
tutorship is general and indefinite, 1295.
should take advice of the relations of their minors, 1296.
custom of France concerning this, 1297.
the council of the tutor, 1298.


776 INDEX.


TUTOR.
the function of, 1299.
his power and authority, 1300.
of the expenses which a tutor may lay out, 1301.
the administration of, reaches to all affairs, 1302.
extent and limits of his power, 1303.
who abuses his power, 1304.
whom the father had ordered to follow the mother’s advice, 1305.
how the tutor acts for the minor, 1306.
effect of tutor’s authority, 1307.
restitution of the minor notwithstanding the tutor’s authority, 1308.
where a tutor has a claim against his minor, another tutor is substituted, 1309.
tutor cannot accept an assignment to a debt owing by his minor, 1310.
is obliged to act, 1311.
is to look after the minor’s education, 1312.
the mother of a minor intrusted with his education unleas otherwise provided, 1313.
if she marry again, 1314.
expenses of the minor, how regulated, 1315, 1316.
when the education of the minor is regulated by his father’s will, 1317.
a minor without an estate, 1318.
the second engagement of tutor is the administration of the estate, 1319.
must make an inventory of minor’s goods, 1320.
this being done, the deeds and writings are put into his hands, 1321.
and he is put in possession of the goods, 1322.
custom of France as to lands of minors, 1322, note.
should sell movables belonging to the minor, 1323.
cannot purchase the goods of minor, 1324.
if among movables there are some necessary for the use of the estate, 1325.
if tutorship is to last but a short time, 1326.
of movables of value, such as jewels, 1327.
should regard the advantage of the minor rather than the disposition of the
father, 1328.
small and desperate debts to be sold, 1329.
of the money arising from sales, 1330.
who is a creditor of the minor, and who compounds with the other creditors, 1351.
must pay interest for moneys which he neglects to invest, 1332.
is allowed time to invest such moneys, 1333.
usage in France respecting this, 1333, note.
if the minor’s revenues exceed the expenses, 1334.
of the revenues from new funds, 1335.
discharged, if he has no opportunity of investing to advantage, 1336.
if he neglect to invest, or to take his discharge, 1337.
the administration of two or more tutors, 1338.
division and discussion among several tutora, 1339.
which shall be preferred where there are many, 1340.
the obligations of honorary tutors, 1341.
the last engagement of, to give an account after his tutorship is ended, 1342.
obliged to give account during his administration, if necessary, 1343.
charge and discharge on tutor’s accounts, 1344.
may charge all reasonable expenses, 1345.
the estate of, is mortgaged to the minor, 1346.
if a mother who is guardian marry again, 1347.
sureties of tutors, their obligations, 1348.


INDEX. 707


XUOTOR.
should be discussed before surety is sued, 1349.
of those who certify tutors to be solvent, 1850.
of those who nominate a tutor, 1351.
heirs or executors of, 1352.
their duty, as to affairs begun before tator’s death, 1353.
as to new affairs, 1354.
if the heir of, assume the tutorship, 1355.
the surety discussed before the co-tutor, 1356.
allowed interest for money which he advances, 1361.
has a mortgage on the minor’s estate, 1362.
privilege of, in his mortgage, 1363.
causes for which a tutor may be removed, 1371.
a tutor removed for dishonesty is branded with infamy, 1372.
punishable misdemeanours of, 1373.
the causes which render persons incapable, or excuse them from being tators, 1374.
difference between incapacity and an excuse, 1375.
women cannot be guardians but to their own children, 1377.
mothers and grandmothers may be guardians, 1878.
the father-in-law may be tutor, 1378.
minors cannot be tutors, 1379.
the infirmities which render persons incapable of being, 1380.
a son of fall age may be, 1381.
other causes for not confirming the nomination of, 1382.
excuses are of two kinds, 1383.
incapacity is an excuse, 1384.
those past seventy years of age excused, 1385.
the number of children is an excuse, 1386.
three tutorships excuse from a fourth, 1887.
or one burdensome tutorship, 1388.
enmity between minor's father and tutor excuses, 1389.
certain lawsuits excuse, 1390.
a lawsuit between the minor and next of kin to the tutor, 1391.
excuse on account of privilege, 1392.
ecclesiastical persons cannot be tutors, 1393.
poverty and want of industry excuse, 1394.
when nominated should act till discharged, 1895.
acceptance precludes all excuses, 1396.
of incapacity happening after the nomination, 1397.
privilege acquired after the nomination, 1398.
excuses happening after entering on office do not discharge, 1399.
when the tutor and minor live in different places, 1400.
excuses, no one of which alone is sufficient, 1401.
or guardian who participates in a fraud on creditors, how liahle, 1649.
may mortgage the estate in his charge, 1678.
TUTORSHIP, at an end when minor is of age, 1364.
of several minors, 1365.
administration of, after majority, 1366.
terminated by death of the minor, 1367.
or by death of the tutor, 1368.
or by the civil death of either, 1369.
or by excuse or removal of the tutor, 1370.


78 tC INDEX.
UNDERTAKER, 457.
UNDERTAKINGS of work by the great, defined, 519.
the difference of undertakers, as they furnish the materials or not, 590.
of the architect who furnishes every thing, 522.
the conditions of, 523.
what things to be regulated by the judgment of skilful persons, 524.
undertakers answerable for ignorance, 525.
and for defects of materials they are to furnish, 526.
of the care they are bound to take, 527.
of the defect of the thing, 528.
the care of carriers and watermen, 539.
work to be done to owner's satisfaction, or the arbitration of a third person, 530.
work made according to the owner’s direction, 531.
if the work perish, before it is approved, 532.
if an edifice perish while building, 533.
if the workman is to furnish every thing, and the whole perish, 534.
of accessories to the engagement of the undertaker, 535
the engagements of the person who gives work to be done, 536.
he owes the price, with interest, if he be in delay, 537.
he may be discharged from advancing the price, in case of danger, 538.
if the thing perish through his act, or its own defect, 539.
if the work be not done at the time agreed, 540.
of the laborer whose fault it was not that he did not work, 541.
if the master delay to receive the work, 542.
if the undertaker is at any charge, 543.
UNIVERSAL DONEE is in the place-of heir, 2674.
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSOR, the king is, in certain cases, 2673.
UNLAWFUL COVENANTS, of two sorts, 1266.
in what respect covenants are contrary to law, 1267.
null, and liable to punishment, 1268.
the effect of, 1269.
when one may or may not recover what is unjustly given, 1270.
whether condition of the receiver is better than that of the giver, 1270, note.
USE, how distinguished from usufract, 969.
defined, 971.
when it implies the usufruct, 972.
he who has the use ought not to incommode the proprietor, 973.
cannot be traneferred, 974.
accruing to husband or wife, is for both, 975.
lasts during life, 976.
of movables, its bounds and extent, 991.
expires by death of usufructuary, 1006.
and by limitation, 1007.
USUFRUCT, 948.
defined, 949.
of movables and immovables, 950.
comprehends all sorts of revenues, 951.
the usufructuary makes the fruits which he gathers his own, 952.
the rent of the lease belongs to the usufructuary as the fruits do, 953.
the revenues of, acquired successively, shared between the proprietor and usufre~
tuary, 954.
the usufructuary may anticipate the harveat, 955.
increased or diminished by change in the estate, 956.


INDEX. 779


US8UFRUCT.

changes which the usufructuary may make in the estate, 957.

trees own down, 958.

dead trees, 959.

trees blown down may be employed in repairs, 960.

vine props, 961.

service accessory to, 962.

of conveniences not necessary for the enjoyment of, 963.

the usufructuary has the services, 964.

improvements and repairs which the usufructuary may make, 965.

such improvements cannot be taken away by him, 966.

usufructuary may sell, transfer, or give away his right, 967.

he may interrupt the lease, 968.

of movables, 982.

of things which perish in the use, 983.

of movables in a totality of goods, 984.

in what this usufruct consists, 985.

of living creatures, 986.

the usufructuary of a herd of cattle should supply out of the fruits the places of
those who die, 987.

but not so, in the case of animals that do not produce young, 988.

of things consumed in the use gives a property in them, 989.

and use of things so consumed is the same thing, 990.

if the usufructuary of movables can let them, 991.

the usufructuary should make an inventory of the things subject to, 993.

and give security to make restitution, 994.

and preserve and take care of the things, 995.

should use the thing as a good husband would, 996.

should acquit the charges, 997.

and ought to make necessary repairs, 998.

a person having the bare use has the same engagements, 999.

of relinquishing a usufruct in order to avoid the charges, 1000.

the proprietor is bound to leave the enjoyment of the fruits and the use free, 1001.

he cannot change the place or thing even for the better, 1002.

he should remove obstacles against which he is bound to guarantee, 1003.

he should reimburse the usufructuary who has made repairs which he was bound
to make himself, 1004.

the usafructuary enjoys the things in the condition in which he finds them, 1005.

use and habitation expire by death of usufructuary, 1006.

and when the time to which they were limited has elapsed, 1007.

restitution of, to a third usufructuary, 1008.

if the thing perish, 1009.

inundation, 1010.

of what remains of the land or tenement, 1011.

difference between uniVersal and particular, 1012.

of changes in the land or tenement, 1013.

the remainder of the thing destroyed belongs to the PrOpeeiors 1014.

(See Lzcacyr.)
USURY, 607.

condemned by the divine law, 608.

what causes justify the seeonning of profit in the contract of letting and hir-
ing, 610-622.

prohibited by the law of God, and naturally unlawful, 623.


780 INDEX.


USURY.
of the objections of usurers in their defence, 625.
1, that they do a kindness, 625. °
answer to this objection, 626 — 628.
2. loss, 3. want of gain, 629.
4. the profit of the borrower, 630.
its iniquity, 631.
the bad consequences of, 632.
prohibitions of, in the law and the prophets, 633.
forbidden at Rome, 633.
objection from the permission to the Jews to lend to strangers, 634.
answer to this objection, 635 - 638.
objection that the gospel has not forbidden usury answered, 639, 640.
objection from the liberty of usury under the Roman law, 641, 642.
unlawful without exception, 643.
the prohibitions of, reach to all usurious contracts, 644.
exception of cases where the term has elapsed, and a jadicial demand of paymezi
been made, 645.
exception of contracts for annuities, 646.


VALUATION, 443.
VICES OF COVENANTS; what they are, and examples, 1209-1213.
have a different effect as they are higher or lower in degree, 1215.
(See Exor, Force, Fraup, Untawrcr Covenaxrs.)


WAGERS, 685.
WAR, p. 33.
WARRANTY, 373.
none against violence, casualty, or acts of the sovereign, 374.
in law and by deed, 375, 377.
the seller cannot be discharged from a warranty against his own deed, 378.
regulated by particular customs, 379.
of damages for eviction, 380.
where sale is dissolved by eviction, the seller must restore the price with da-


ages, 382.
if the thing is not changed at time of eviction, 383.
if it be diminished, 384.
if it have increased in price, 385.


if the purchaser has made improvements, 386.

how such improvements to be estimated, 387, $88.

if seller have sold knowingly the goods of another, 389.

he who is bound to warrant cannot evict, 390.

where the purchaser who is molested does not give notice to the seller, 391.
the buyer is only bound to give notice of the disturbance to the seller, 392.
may be demanded before disturbance, 398.

of law in the sale of rights, 394.

in the sale of an inheritance, 395.

in the sale of a debt, 396.

of dowry, 663.

is reciprocal among coheirs, 3778.

two kinds of, 2779.

for the debts due from the succession of other charges, 2780.

may be otherwise regulated by the heirs, 2781.


INDEX. 781


WARRANTY.

against their proportion of the charges, 2782.

against new charges after the partition, 2783.

losses after partition, where they fall, 2784.

heir bound for a loss happening by his act, 2785.

heir who disposes of goods privately bears the loss that may happen on them, 2786.
WITNESSES to a written act are not admitted to prove the contrary, 2025.

examination of, ad futuram rei memoriam, abolished in France, 2036.

about customs and their evidence, 2039.

the use of, is infinite, 2040.

who may be a witness, 2041.

two qualities necessary in, probity and steadfastness, 2042.

whose probity is suspected, 2043.

interested in the facts, 2044.

interested in the party, 2045.

who are relations or allies, 2046.

who are friends, 2047.

who are enemies, 2048.

dependent on the party producing them, as domestica, 2049.

who waver in their deposition, 2050.

two, necessary to make a proof, 2051.

many may be produced, 2052.

how their evidence is to be judged, 2053.

whose integrity is unimpeached, may be mistaken, 2054.

may be compelled to give evidence, 2055.

should be interrogated by the judge, 2056.

must be sworn, 2057.

the excuses of, 2058.

who are exempt from attending by reason of their dignity, 2059.

living out of the jurisdiction of the court, 2060.

the advocate of a party cannot be a witness, 2061.

the expenses of, to be paid by the party summoning, 2062.

the punishment of false witnesses, 2063.

(See Proor, TesTaMENT.)


END OF VOL. II.
