The Civil Law in its Natural Order, Vol. I (Jean Domat; William Strahan, trans.; Luther S. Cushing, ed., 1850)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of Cushing's 1850 edition, vol. I (https://archive.org/details/civillawinitsna01domagoog_202507).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CIVIL LAW
IN ITS NATURAL ORDER.


By JEAN DOMAT.


SruuslateD trem the Prencd,
Br WILLIAM STRAHAN, LL. D.,


Sad


ADVOCATE I DocTOnes’ CoOnEsDIS.


EDITED,
FROM THE SECOND LONDON EDITION,


By LUTHER S. CUSHING.


IN TWO VOLUMES.


VOLUME I.


CONTAINING THE TREATISE OF LAWS, PRELIMINARY BOOK, AND
PART I. OF ENGAGEMENTS.


BOSTON: |
CHARLES C. LITTLE AND JAMES BROWN.
1850.


HARVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY
FROM THE LIBRARY OF
PHILIP HOWES SEARS

JANUARY 5, 1934


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1850, by


CHoagies C. Lirrite axyp James Brows,


in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusctts


ADVERTISEMENT.


Tue author of the following work, Jean Domar, was
born at Clermont, in the province of Auvergne, in France,
on the 30th of November, 1625, and died in Paris, in 1696.
Having been educated to the profession of the law, he was
appointed king’s advocate in the presidial court of Clermont,
which office he held and exercised for thirty years. Besides
attending to his official duties, Domat undertook the task
of reducing to order the civil laws of his country, so far at
least as they were identical with, or founded in, those of
ihe Roman Code. His general plan was, in the first piace,
to unite, classify, and arrange, in their natural order, the
principles of the civil laws, properly so called; then, to
digest and arrange in order those principles which more
properly belonged to the public law; and, lastly, to make
a selection from the texts of the Roman law of such as
might be most useful for the understanding of the French
law. The first and most important of these works was
published at Paris, in 1694, two years before the author's
death. The second was not published until after his de-
cease.

The celebrated Chancellor D’Aguesseau, then advocate-
general at Paris, and who, at a later period of his life,
assisted and encouraged Pothier in the publication of his
Pandects, was instrumental in facilitating the execution of
Domat’s work, by bringing the author to Paris, and intro-
ducing him to the favor and notice of the king. His opin-


1V ADVERTISEMENT.


ion of The Civil Law in its Natural Order is expressed in
the following recommendation, long afterwards addressed to
his son, advising him to study that work: —

“ No one has gone more profoundly than Domat into the
true principles of law, or explained them in a manner more
worthy of a philosopher, of a jurisconsult, and of a Chris-
tian. After having ascended to first principles, he descends
and follows them out even to their most remote consc-
quences. He develops them in an order almost geometrical.
All the different kinds of laws are detailed in his work,
with the characters which distinguish them. It is the best
made and the most finished plan of civil society; and I
have always regarded it as a precious work, which I have
seen grow and almost spring into birth from between my
own hands, such was the author’s friendship for me. You
ought to esteem yourself happy, my dear son, to find this
work written before you entered upon the study of juris-
prudence. You will imbibe from it the spirit, not only of a
jurisconsult, but of a legislator, if you read it with the
attention which it deserves: and you will be enabled, by the
principles which it will give you, to distinguish for yourself,
in the course of your reading, that which belongs to natural
and immutable justice from that which is only the work of


ADVERTISEMENT. v


The treatise of The Civil Law in its Natural Order was
translated into English by Dr. Srranan, and first pub-
lished in London, together with a translation of The Public
Law, in two volumes, folio, in 1720. A second edition
appeared in 1737. The following extracts from the trans-
lator’s preface will serve to explain his views of the impor-
tance and utility of the work to his countrymen: —

* The author’s design in compiling this work was, not to
make a new abridgment of the whole body of the civil
law, which had been done long before his time by many
eminent hands; but his view was to give to the world
something new in its kind, and what had not been attempted
by any other lawyer before him; to wit, a collection out of
the body of the civil law of all the natural rules of justice
and equity which are applicable to the most common trans-
actions between man and man, either im a private or public
capacity, in a clear and easy method, and disentangled from
the niceties and forms of law, with which they are mixed
and interwoven in the body of the civil law.

“Tt is most certain, that it is in the body of the civil
law that we have the most complete, if not the only, collec-
tion of the rules of natural reason and equity, which are to
govern the actions of mankind; and therefore it is that it
has been called ratio scripta, written reason, as containing
the most perfect rules of reason for deciding all differences
that may arise among men in their intercourse with one
another. But the Roman lawyers who were the compilers
of that work, having inserted therein many things peculiar
to their own form of government which are now obsolete,
and having intermixed with the fundamental principles of
justice and equity some niceties of the law which are not
of so general use at present, and which render the study of
the civil law too irksome and tedious for those who do not
intend to make it their profession; the author of this col-
lection has removed that difficulty by leaving out such parts
of the civil law as are not at present of so general use,

VOL. I. a*


vi ADVERTISEMENT.


and selecting all the fundamental maxims of law and equity,
which must be the same in all countries, and applying them
to the most common affairs of human life, in a plain, easy
method, and in their natural order. So that the reader
here finds under the same title all the rules of law which
have any relation to the subject of the said title, and which
lie dispersed under different titles in the body of the Roman
laws, and cannot be there learned without great study and
application.

“This work no sooner appeared in public, than it was
received with universal applause among men of learning,
and has been justly reckoned one of the improvements of
learning which we owe to the last century. There have
been several editions thereof in France in a few years; and
it has been thought to be of so great use in other countries,
that it has been translated into several other languages. I
thought that it might not be of less service here in England
than in other countries, and therefore was induced to render
it into English, that all the subjects of this kingdom in gen-
eral might have the benefit of it. There are many persons
of great learning in England, who have not had oppor-
tunities of acquiring such a thorough knowledge of the
French tongue as to be able to understand perfectly the


ADVERTISEMENT. vii


“Since I first read this book, I have always been of opin-
ion that an English translation of it would be of the great-
est service here in England; and the rather, because of late
years the study of the civil law here in England has been
so much neglected, and has met with so great discourage-
ment, that we are in a manner become strangers to it; and,
under a groundless apprehension of its being an encroach-
ment on the law of the land, we are like to lose all the real
advantages which may be reaped from it in subseryiency to
our own laws, and which all other nations, except ourselves,
do at this day enjoy.

* In all other countries where the study of the Civil Law
is cultivated, they have peculiar laws and customs of their
own, of which they are as tenacious as we can possibly be
of ours. And yet they are so far from banishing or dis-
couraging the study of the civil law, under an apprehen-
sion of its encroaching upon their own municipal laws,
that, on the contrary, they give the professors thereof all
possible encouragement; they study it as a qualification for
the better understanding of their own laws, and make it
subservient to them in all respects, by applying the general
rules of natural reason and equity which are contained
therein to clear up any difficulties or obscurities, and to
supply any defects or omissions that may occur in their
own municipal laws. And this is the only use that is made
of the civil law in most countries at this day; not that
they receive it by virtue of any power or authority that the
Roman emperors had to impose their laws upon other
nations, which pretence now must be looked upon as very
frivolous ever since the declension of the Roman empire;
but they receive it only as containing the most complete, if
not the only, collection of rules of natural reason and equity,
which may come in aid of their own municipal laws, and
serve as a rule for deciding all cases wherein their own laws
and customs are silent.”

The late Mr. Justice Story, in the preface to his work on


Will ADVERTISEMENT.


Bailments, the pages of which bear ample ‘testimony to the
use which the learned author has made of Domat’s labors,
thus bears emphatic testimony to his merits: —“ The work
of Domat, entitled The Civil Law in its Natural Order,
considering the age and the circumstances under which it
was written, is a truly wonderful performance. His method
is excellent, and his matter clear, exact, and comprehensive.”

The object of the author, in this learned treatise, was to
disembarrass those of the principles and provisions of the Ro-
man law which are of general interest and application from
the technicalities with which they are more or less accom-
panied in the compilations of Justinian; and, by presenting
them in a natural and at the same time scientific method, to
render them more intelligible, and their attamment more
easy and agreeable, to those who have not made the system
of the Roman law a distinct study. And though the work
was particularly adapted to the French jurisprudence of
the age in which it was written, it is not less applicable at
the present day to every system of legal institutions, of
which the Roman law is either a part, or in which it is
recognized and resorted to as a body of written reason.
Presenting the results of the Roman jurisprudence, without
the processes by which those results have been attained, the
work of Domat is entirely different in its character from the


ADVERTISEMENT. ix


part from those of France, Spain, or Holland, are founded
to a greater or less extent in the Roman law.

These considerations have induced a belief, on the part
of the publishers, that a modern edition of this celebrated
work would be acceptable to the profession, and have led
them to undertake a republication of the English trans-
lation of it by Dr. Strahan, under the superintendence of
the present editor.

In the preparation of this edition, the principal purpose
of the: editor,:in -eompliance -with the wishes-of the pul-
lishers, has been to bring the tranalation within a’ reason-
able compass, without ‘omitting any: portion of ‘the original
woek.- ‘This ‘has been effected by leaving out’ fot: the most
part: the texte..of the Reman lew referred te anil cited by
the anthor, which, in-the translation, ave quoted at lengtht
sad by: omitting nearly all the translator's notes; which,
buing merely explanatory of.the common and statute law —
e€ Bagiand, as it stood in his time, wauld be entirely unset-
isfectory at the present day, end may. therefore very welll
be spared. The texts, however, have been inserted in some
cases, where they seemed necessary in order to render the
author’s remarks intelligible. Where the translator’s notes
have been retained, they are included in brackets.

The notes of the author himself, although referring in
many instances to the old French law, which, in form at
least, has been superseded by the modern codes, have been
scrupulously retained; inasmuch as, in every place out of
France where French law still prevails to any extent, it
is the old law, and not the new codes, to which recourse
must be had.

The references to the Roman law, which are made accord-
ing to the method in use in Domat’s time, have been pre-
served. Being now as accurate, probably, as they could be
made upon any system, it was thought that the risk of |
mistakes, in changing them for any of the more modern
forms of citing, would be hardly compensated by any sup-


x ADVERTISEMENT.


posed advantages of the latter over the former. But in
order to render the references readily intelligible, and to
facilitate the use of them, an alphabetical list of all the
rubrics of the several titles of the Institutes, Digest, and
Code is subjoined in an Appendix to the second volume,
preceded by an explanation of the manner in which the
references to them are made.

The translation of Dr. Strahan, though substantially
accurate, is by no means an elegant production. But, as it
did not consist either with the avocations of the editor, or
with the wishes of the publishers, to make a new one,
nothing more has been attempted than to improve the old.
The work has accordingly been collated with the latest
French edition; the translation, where it has been found to
be erroneous, has been made to conform to the original;
the orthography and punctuation have been carefully re-
vised ; antiquated and peculiar expressions have been modi-
fied ; and such errors of the press as had escaped notice
in the former editions have been corrected.

In order to facilitate a reference to the work, the para-
graphs have been numbered consecutively, from the begin-
ning to the end. The only mode of reference to the former
editions is by the Part, Book, Title, Section, and Article, or


Cuarp. I.


o


<<6


. :


Bet BERS


PAT ROS


Pee es ts


CONTENTS.


THE FIRST VOLUME.


TREATISE OF LAWS.


Of the First Principles of all aes S. 4

A Plan of Society, on the Foundation of the First Two Laws, by
Two Kinds of Engagements . ; :

Of the First Kind of Engagements

Of the Second Kind of Engagements

Of some General Rules which arise from the Engagements that
have been mentioned in the Preceding Chapter, and which are
so many Principles of the Civil Law . ; : ;

Of the Nature of Friendships, and their Use in Society

Of Successions.

Of Three Sorts of Troubles which disturb the Order of Society j

Of the State of Society after the Fall of Man, and how God makes
it to subsist .

Of Religion and Policy : and of ‘the Ministry of the Spiritual and
Temporal Powers. :

Of the Nature and Spirit of Laws, and their Different Kinds

Reflections on some Remarks in the Preceding Chapter, which are
a Foundation of several Rules touching the Use and cia
tion of Laws :

A General Idea of the Subject-Matters of all the ere - Reasons
for making Choice of those which shall be treated of in this
Book . :

A Plan of the Matters soutained in this Book of the Civil Law
in its Natural Order . ae <& w= i


ify


xi


OF THE RULES OF LAW


Secr. I.


I.


Sect. I.
i.


Sect. I.


I.


CONTENTS.


THE CIVIL LAW.


PRELIMINARY BOOK.


TITLE 1,


OF THE RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL.


Of the several Sorts of Rules, and of their Nature
Of the Use and Interpretation of Rules . ‘


TITLE Il.


OF PERSONS.
Of the State of Persons by Nature
Of the State of Persons by the Civil Law


SiThE Bid,


OF THINGS.


Distinctions of Things by Nature
Distinctions of Things by the Civil Laws


IN GENERAL, PERSONS,


AND THINGS.


108
116


135
141


149
152


be not partic oe .
it * jn paftl loularty’ a a, cs é
Y. ., OF Covenants which : :
VL Of the Dissolation of :


_ «OF THE QONTRAGT, OF ALE.
‘Of the. Netara of the Centon of Helps ae. tn: nes Memos a0


Saez. L.
perfected 197
I. Of the Engagementa which the Seller is under to the Buyer _ pe
apis Of the Engagements which the Buyer is under to the Seller. = ‘s
_, IV. Of the Merchandise, or Thingwhichissold . . . «.., 918
V. Of the Price =. «  .e ly, 915
‘VIEL Of Conditions and other Pacts in a Contract of Sale i. 6 MN
VIL Of the Changes of the Thing sold; and how the Dow‘ or Gain
accruing thereby belongs to the Seller, ortothe Buyer . . 219
‘VIII. Of Sales that are Null | Sake 294
IX. Of the Reaciasion of Sales, on Account of the Lowness of the Price 298
X. Of Eviction, and other Troubles to the Purchaser . . . 290
Xi. Of Redhibition and Abatement of the Price . 6 fe RR
XII. Of other Causes of the Dissolution of Sales... - 943
XHHE. Of sowe Matters which have Relation to the Contract of Sale - 48
TITLE III.
OF EXCHANGE é F ‘ ; é ; ; ; ; ‘ ‘ 252
TITLE IV.


OF HIRING, AND LETTING TO HIRE, AND OF THE SEVERAL KINDS OF LEASES.


Secr.I. Of the Nature of Letting and Hiring . ; es -  « 256
II. Of the Engagements of the Lessee . , : ‘ , ‘ 259
III. Of the Engagements of the Lessor .  . ; é - « 264
IV. Of the Nature of the Leases of Farms . ; j 267
V. Of the Engagements which the Farmer is ander to the Proprietor 271
VI. Of the Engagements which the Proprietor is under to the Farmer 274

VII. Of the Nature of Undertakings of Work by the Great, and of other
Ways of letting out Man’s Labor and Industry : 276

VII. Of the Engagements of the Person who undertakes any Work « or
Labor , 278

IX. Of the Engagements of the Peron who ives mae. any Work or
Business to be done : ; . 281
X. Of Leases of Perpetuity, or for a tae: Term of Yars , 283

b


VOL. I.


xiv


CONTENTS.


TITLE V.,


OF THE LOAN OF THINGS TO BE RESTORED IN SPECIE, AND OF A PRECARIOUS LOAN,


Sect. I, Of the Nature of the Loan of Things to be restored in Specie, and
of a Precarious Loan.’ : : ‘ ; . 299
Ii. Of the Engagements of the Borrower . ; ; : 293
Il. Of the Engagements of the Lender. : ; . . 207


TITLE VI.


OF THE LOAN OF MONEY, AND OTHER THINGS TO BE RESTORED IN EIND, AXD OF


Sect. I.


Seer. I.
Il,
II.


IV


Fr


q =


USURY.


Of the Nature of the Loan of Things to be restored in Kind ». wat


Of the Engagements of the Lender : : : . 321

Of the Engagements of the Borrower a ‘i , . oon

Of the Prohibitions to lend Maney to Sons living under the Paternal
Jurisdiction ‘ ; , ; : ; ; R . 324


TITLE VII.


OF A DEPOSIT, AND OF SEQUESTRATION.


Ut the an of a Deposit ; P , . . o20
Of the Engagements of the Depositor . ; : oad
Of the Engagements of the Depositary, and his Hette, Bxecntors:

or Administrators . ‘ ; . ‘ . . . 835
Of Sequestration by Consent of Parties . : 40
Of a Necessary Deposit . : ‘ . 42


TITLE Vili.


Sscr. I.


i.
ii.


Sect. I.


Secr. I.


| '. OF the Separation of Goods betwen he Hien and Wis - 304
TITLE X. |
GF DOMATIONS THAT HAVE THRIR EFFECT IN THR LIFETIME OF TEE DONOR.
Of the Natare of Donations that ‘take Eifhot in tho I ifetime'of the ~*~
Donor . ewe 400
Of the Engagements of the Donor . 2 405
Of the san aera casi sof tho Revoking of Done


OF UsuUFRUCT.


Of the Nature of Usufruct, and of the Rights of the Usufructuary 409
Of Use and Habitation . : . 415
Of the Usufruct of Things which are consuined or impaired by Use 419
Of the Engagements of the Usufractuary, and of him who has the
bare Use, to the Proprietor é 423
Of the Engagements which the Proprietor is under to the Usufruc-
tuary, and to him who has the bare Use ~ 8 ew lee 4B
How Usufruct, Use, and Habitation expire . ; ; ; 497


TITLE XiIi.


OF SERVICES.


Of the Nature of Services, of their Kinds, and the Manner how they


are acquired : ‘ . 432
Of the Services of Houses and other Buildings : ‘ . 439
Of the Services of Lands . ‘ ; . 442
Of the Engagements of the Proptictos of dis Land’ or Tenement

which owes the Service. 444
Of the Engagements of the Proprietor of the Land or r Tenement for

which a Service is due . : ; : ‘ ; : . 446
How Services come to cease. : : : : : . 448


TITLE XIII.


OF TRANSACTIONS.


Of the Nature and Effect of Transactions . : ‘ : . 452
Of the Dissolution of Transactions, and of Nullities inthem . 455


TITLE XIV.
OF COMPROMISES.


Of the Nature of Compromises, and of their Effect . ; . 459


XVI CONTENTS.


Seot. If. Of the Power and Engagement of Arbitrators; and who may be an
Arbitrator, and who not : , : . ; ; . 4


TITLE XY.


OF PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS.


Sect. Il. Of the Nature of Proxies, Mandates, and Commissions ; |
Il. Of the Engagements of the Person who employs another as his
| Proxy, Factor, or Agent, in any Bosiness . ' .


il. Of the Engagements of a Proxy and other Agents; and of their
Power . : ; 4
IV. In what Manner the Power of the — or other Agant expires 4


TITLE XVI.


OF PERSONS WHO DRIVE ANY PUBLIC TRADE, OF THEIR FACTORS AND AGENTS, A
OF BILLS OF EXCHANGE.
Sect. I. Of the Engagements of Innkeepers . . ‘ - Yt
Il, Of the Engagements of Masters of Ships, Coachmen, and Carriers 4
If, Of the Engagements of those who carry on any other Public Trade,
by Land orbySea . ‘ ‘ ; : ; : : |
IV, Of Bills of Exchange : . ; : ; . 4


TITLE XVII.


OF BROKERS, OR DRIVERS OF BARGAINS.


Seer. I. Of the Engagements of Brokers ; ‘ - . 4
It, Of the Engagements of those who employ Rites - ‘ , 4


TITLE XVIII.


OF THE VICES OF COVENANTS.


CONTENTS. xvii


Seor. II. Of the Engagements of Tutors . 629
lV. OF the Eagagements of thoad who ard Sureties for Tutors; asia of
those who name them; and of their Heirs and Executors . 542
V. Of the Engagements of SGnors totheir Tutors... 544
VI. Of the Ways which put an End to the Tutorship, and of the Depriva-


tionof Tutors. =. 547
Vil. Of the Camis which render Persons incapable of being ‘Tors, an
of those which excuse them from that Office . : . §49
TITLE. 11.
OF CURATORS.
Ser. 1. Of the several Sorts of Curators, andof their Power. . . 658
fl, Of.the Engagements of Curators .  . . 863


Il. Of the Kngngemente of thons to whem Carstors axp annigned . 564


TiETLE ITI.


OF SYNDICS, DIRECTORS, AND OTHER ADMINISTRATORS OF COMPANIES AND CORPORA-
TIONS.


Seer. I. Of the Nomination of Syndics, Directors, and other Administrators
of Companies and Corporations, and of their Power . « BT
Il. Of the Engagements of Syndics and other Directors : . 669
I. Of the Engagements of Corporations and Communities who commit
the Administration of their Affairs to ia ene or


others . d 570


TITLE IV.


OF THOSE WHO MANAGE THE AFFAIRS OF OTHERS WITHOUT THEIR KNOWLEDGE.


Sect. I. Of the Engagements of him who does the Business of another


Person without his Knowledge 573
IY. Of the Engagements of the Person whose Business hath been managed
by another, without his Knowledge. , 577
TITLE V.


0? THOSE WHO CHANCE TO HAVE ANY THING IN COMMON TOGETHER, WITHOUT
A COVENANT.


Sect. I. How one and the same Thing may belong in Common to several


Persons, without a Covenant . 582
Ii. Of the Mutual Engagements of those who have Something in Com-
mon together, without a Covenant ; ‘ 583


b*


Xvili CONTENTS.


TITLE VI.
OF THOSE WHO HAVE LANDS OR TENEMENTS BORDERING UPON ONE ANOTHER.


Sect. I. How Lands or Tenements border and confine upon one another 589
II. Of the Reciprocal Engagements of the Proprietors or Possessors of
Lands and Tenements bordering upon one another . . «. 591


TITLE VII.


OF THOSE WHO RECEIVE WHAT I8 NOT THEIR DUR, OR WHO HAPPEN TO HAVE IN
THEIR POSSESSION THE THING OF ANOTHER, WITHOUT A COVENANT.


Sect. I. Some Examples of the Cases which are the Subject-Matter of this
Title, and which have Nothing in them that is Unlawful . 595
II. Other Examples of the same Matter, in Cases of Unlawful Acts 599

III. Of the Engagements of him who hath eae ee to
another Person without a Covenant. . 601
IV. Of the Engagements of the Master of the Thing ie - 603


TITLE VIII.


OF DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS WHICH DO NOT AMOUNT TO A CRIME OR
OFFENCE.


Sect. I. Of that which is thrown out of a House, or which may fall down


from it, and do some Damage ; ‘ . : ‘ ‘
II. Of Damages done by Living Creatures. 607
TM. Of the Damage which may happen by the Fall of a Building, o or of
any new Work. 611


IV. Of other Kinds of Damages 0 decanioned by Faults, without either
Crime or Offence : - 617


CONTENTS. XIX


BOOK IIL.
OF THE CONSEQUENCES WHICH ADD TO ENGAGEMENTS, OR WHICH
STRENGTHEN AND CORROBORATE THEM.
TITLE L


OF PAWNS AND MORTGAGES, AND’ OF THE PRIVILEGES OF CREDITORS.
Seor. 1. Of the Nature of a Pawn and Mortgage, and of the Things which


are capable of being thus engaged or not ‘ 646
Il. Of the several Sorts of Mortgages, and of ‘thé Manner how a Mort-
gage is acquired ‘ G62
Il. Of the Effects of the Mortsege, and of the Engagements which it
forms onthe Debtor’s Part . ' '.
IV. Of the Engagements of the Creditor to the Debtor, Bernas of the
Pawn or Mortgage . of : , ~ 877
¥. Of the Privileges of Creditors : 680
VI. Of Substitution to the Mortgage or to the Privilege of the Creditor 694
VU. In what Manner the Mortgage ends, orisextinguished . . ‘00


TITLE Il.


OF THE SEPARATION OF THE GOODS OF THE DECEASED FROM THOSE OF THE NEKIER
OR EXECUTOR, BETWEEN THEIR RESPECTIVE CREDITORS.


Sect. I. Of the Nature and Effects of the Separation . : . 708
II. In what Manner the Right of Separation is sxtiliguished or lost 711


TITLE IIL.
OF THE SOLIDITY AMONG TWO OR MORE DEBTORS, AND AMONG TWO OR MORE
CREDITORS.
Sect. I. Of Solidity among Debtors ; F ‘ ; : ; . 713
If. Of Solidity among Creditors . : ; , ; : - 717
TITLE IV.


OF CAUTIONS, OR SURETIES.


Secr. I. The Nature of the Obligation of Cautions or Sureties, and the Man-


ner in which it is contracted ; : - 720
II. Of the Engagements of the Surety to the Creditor : .  « 726
Il. Of the Engagements of the Debtor towards his aes and of the

Surety towards the Debtor. : ; ; . 730
IV. Of the Engagements of Sureties to one anothae ; : : 735


V. How the Engagement of Sureties ends, or is annulled ~ +» 736


XX CONTENTS.


TITLE V.


OF INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES, AND RESTITUTION OF FRUITS.


Sect. I. Of Interest - ; ; ; j : 5 : ‘


II. Of Damages . : . ; : . :
Ill. Of the Restitution of Fruits : : : : ‘ :
TITLE VI.
OF PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS, AND OF AN OATH.
Szct. L Of Proofs in General ‘ ; ‘ : : ' ;
II. Of Proofs by Writing . : : ; ; .
IiI. Of Proofs by Witnesses’. : ; : . oe
IV. Of Presumptions . ‘
V. Of the Interrogation and Confession of the Parties . ‘


TITLE VII.


OF POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION.


Sect. I. Of the Nature of Possession ‘ :
II. Of the Connection between Possession and Property, and how one
may acquire or lose the Possession ‘ :
Ill. Of the Effects of Possession
IV. Of the Nature and Use of Prescription, and of the Manner i in . which
itis acquired . ‘ :
V. Of the Causes which hinder Prescription


323


845


853
864


867
881


a es ee


TREATISE OF LAWS.


CHAPTER I.
OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF ALL LAWS.


l. The First Principles of Laws were unknown to Pagans.


One would think, that nothing ought to be better known
by men than the first principles of the laws which regulate
both the conduct of every one in particular, and the order of the
society which they compose together: and that even those per-
sons who have not the advantages of religion, by which we learn
what those principles are, ought at least to discover them in
their own breasts, seeing they are engraved on all our hearts by
nature. Nevertheless, we see that the most learned of those
who were ignorant of what religion teaches us concerning them,
knew so little of them, that they have established rules which
violate and destroy them.

Thus the Romans, who have excelled all other nations in cul-
tivating the civil laws, and who have made so great a number
of very just ones, took the same license as other people did, to
take away the lives of their slaves and of their own children.
As if the power which the quality of father, and that of master,
gave them, could dispense with the laws of humanity.

This extreme opposition between the equity which shines in
the just laws made by the Romans, and the inhumanity of this
license, shows plainly that they were ignorant of the sources of


® V.1. ult. C. de patr. pot. ; — § 1 et 2, Inst. de his qui sui, vel alieni juris sunt.
VOL. I. 1


2 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuar. 1.


that very justice which they understood, since they violated in
so gross a manner, by these barbarous laws, the spirit of those
principles which are the foundations of all the justice and equity
that is in their other laws.

This error is not the only one by which we may judge how
much they were strangers to the knowledge of those principles ;
we have another very remarkable proof of it, in the idea which
their philosophers gave them of the origin of the society of man-
kind, of which those principles are the foundation. For they
were so far from knowing them, and from perceiving how they
ought to form the union of men, that they imagined that
men lived at first as wild beasts in the fields, without any com-
munication, and without any tie to one another, until one of
them bethought himself that it was possible to join them to-
gether in society, and began to civilize them for that purpose.*

We shall not stop here to inquire into the causes of this
strange contrariety of light and darkness in men who were the
most learned of all the heathens; and how they could know so
many rules of justice and equity, without perceiving in them the
principles on which they depend. The very first elements of
the Christian religion explain this riddle; and what it teaches
us concerning the state of man, discovers to us the causes of
this blindness, and informs us at the same time what are these
first principles which God has established, as the foundations of
the order of the society of mankind, and which are the sources
of all the rules of justice and equity.

But although these principles are known to us only by the


light of religion, vet it points them out to us in our very nature


CHAP. 1.] FIRST PRINCIPLES OF LAWS. 3


ticulars which are to depend upon them; it is of importance to
consider what are the principles of laws, in order to know the
nature and firmness of the rules which depend on them. And
we may judge of the certainty of these principles, by the double
impression which such truths ought to make upon our minds,
which God reveals to us by religion, and makes us to apprehend
by our reason. So that we may say, that the first principles of
laws have a character of truth, which touches and persuades
more than that of the principles of other human sciences, » And
that whereas the principles of other sciences, and the

truths which depend upon them, are only the object of the simi,
and not of the heart, and that they do not even enter into the
minds of all persons; the first principles of laws, and the par-
ticular rules essential to these principles, have a character of
truth which every body is capable of knowing, and which affects
the mind and the heart alike. Thus the whole man is pene-
trated by them, and more strongly convinced of them than of
the truths of all the other human sciences.

There is nobody, for instance, but whose heart and mind tell
him, that it is not lawful to kill him, or to rob him, nor to kill
or rob others; and who is there that is not more fully persuaded
of these truths than of any theorem of geometry? Nevertheless
these very truths, that murder and robbery are unlawful, how-
ever clear and evident they are, have not a degree of certainty
equal to that of the first principles on which they depend; for
whereas these principles are rules which admit of no dispensa-
tion or exception, these truths are liable to exceptions and dis-
pensations. As for instance, Abraham might lawfully kill his
son, when the Lord of life and death commanded him to do it:*
and the Hebrews took, without any crime, the riches of the
Egyptians, by order of the Master of the universe, who gave
these riches to them.‘


TL The Knowledge of the First Principles of Laws is attained
to by the Knowledge of Man.

We cannot take a more simple and surer way for discover-
ing the first principles of laws, than by supposing two prime
truths, which are only bare definitions. One is, that the laws
of man are nothing else but the rules of his conduct; and the


© Gen. xxii. 2. d rod. xi. 2; xii. 36.


4 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHap. 1.


other, that the said conduct is nothing else but the steps which
a man makes towards his end.

In order, therefore, to discover the first foundations of the
laws of man, it is necessary to know what is the end of man;
because his destination to that end will be the first rule of the
way, and of the steps that lead him to it, and consequently his
first law, and the foundation of all the others.

To know the end of a thing, is only to know why it is made.
And we know why a thing is made, if, by observing how it is
made, we discover what its structure may have relation to.
Because it is certain, that God has proportioned the nature of
every thing to the end for which he has designed it.

We all know and feel, that man hath a soul which animates
a body, and that in this soul there are two powers or faculties ;
an understanding, which is capable of knowing, and a will,
capable of loving. Thus we see that it is to know, and to love,
that God has made man, and consequently that it is to unite
himself to some object, in the knowledge and love of which
his quiet and happiness consist; and that it is towards this
object that he ought to direct all his steps. From whence it
follows, that the first law of man is his destination to the
knowledge and love of that object, which ought to be his end,
and in which he is to find his happiness: and that it is this law,
which, being the rule of all his actions, ought to be the principle
of all his laws.

To know, therefore, what is this first law, what is the
spirit of it, and in what manner it is the foundation of all


cuaP. 1] FIRST PRINCIPLES OF LAWS. a


all that is contained in the earth and in the heavens is only a
provision made of things necessary for all our wants, which will
perish when they cease. And we see plainly, that every thing
there is so little worthy both of our mind and our heart; that
as for the mind, God hath hidden from it all other knowledge
of the creatures, besides what concerns the ways of using them
well; and that the sciences, which apply themselves to the
knowledge of their nature, discover nothing in them besides
what may be of use to us, and grow darker and more unintel-
ligible, the more they attempt to penetrate into that which is of
no use tous.’ And as for the heart, every body knows that the
whole world is not capable of filling it; and that it was never
able to make any of those persons happy, who have set their
affections most upon it, and have enjoyed the greatest share of
it. Every body is so fully convinced of this truth, that there is
no oceasion to persuade any one of it. And in fine, we must
learn from him who has formed man, that it is he alone who, as
he is his principle, is also his end:* and that it is only God
alone who is able to fill the infinite vacuity of that mind and
of that heart which he has made for himself.”

It is therefore for God himself that God has made man.' It
is that he may know him, that he has given him an understand-
ing; it is that he may love him, that he has given him a will;
and it is by the ties of this knowledge, and of this love, that he
would have men to unite themselves to him, that they may find
in him their true life, and their only happiness.!

It is this construction of man, who is formed to know and to
love God, which makes him to be like God." For since God
alone is the sovereign good, it is his nature to know himself
and to love himself; and it is in this knowledge, and in this
love, that his happiness does consist. So that it is to be like
him, to be of a nature that is capable of knowing him and of
loving him; and it is to partake of his happiness, to attain to
the perfection of this knowledge and this love."


€ Keclus. iii. 22. & Rev. xxxii. 13 ; — Joa. xli. 4.
b Pal. xvii. 15. § Prov. xvi. 4; — Deut. xxvi. 19 ; — sa. xliii. 7.
1 Deut. xxx. 20; —John xvii. 3.
™ Gen. i. 26; — Wiad. of Sol. ii. 28 ; — Ecclus. xvii. 1 ;— Coloss. iii. 10.
® 1 John iii. 2.
1°


6 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuap. I.


IV. The Nature of Man.


Thus we discover, by this resemblance which man has to
God, what it is his nature consists in, his religion, and his
first law. For his nature is nothing else but that being which
is created after the image of God, and capable of possessing that
sovereign good, which is to be his life and his blessedness.


V. The Religion of Man.
His religion, which is the collection of all his laws, is notb-
ing else besides the light and the way which lead him to that
life.°


VL The First Law of Man.


And his first law, which is the spirit of his religion, is that
which enjoins him to search after and to love that sovereign
good; to which he ought to raise himself with all the force
of his mind, and of his heart, which are made on purpose to
possess it.?


VIL The Second Law of Man.


It is this first law which is the foundation and first prin-
ciple of all the others. For this law, which commands man
to search after and to love the sovereign good, being com-
mon to all mankind, it implies a second law, which obliges
them to unity among themselves, and to the love of one an-
other; because, being destined to be united in the posses-


VIL The Foucinn ofthe Roky of Mankind on hte Te

iecisee bile aa
satis incakind: tn the: poscedin of thal common etid;' hath
begun to form: among them a ‘prior union, in ‘the use: of the
means which guide them to that other. union: And he: has
made this last union, in which their happiness is to consist, to
depend on the good use of that first union, which is to form their


society.

It is in order to unite them in this society, that he hath made
it essential to their nature. And.as we see in the nature of. man
his destination to the sovereign good, we shal] also discover in
it his destination to society, and the several ties which engage
him to it from all parts; and that these ties, which are conse-
quences of the destination of man to the exercise of the first two
laws, are at the same time the foundation of the particular rules
of all his duties, and the fountain of all laws.

Bat before we proceed any farther, to show the connection
which links all the laws with these first two, it is necessary to
obviate the reflection which it is natural to make on the state
of this society ; which, although it ought to’ be founded on the
first two laws, does nevertheless subsist, notwithstanding the
spirit of these laws has but very little influence in it; so that it
seems as if it maintained itself by other principles. However,
although men have violated these fundamental laws, and
although society be in a state strangely different from that
which ought to be raised upon these foundations, and cemented
by this union; it is still true, that these divine laws, which are
essential to the nature of man, remain immutable, and have -
never ceased to oblige men to the observance of them: and it is
likewise certain, as will hereafter appear, that all the laws which
govern society, even in the condition in which it is at present,
are no other than consequences of these first laws. Thus, it
was necessary to establish these first principles: and besides,
it is not possible to comprehend aright the manner in which
we see society subsist at present, without knowing the natural
state in which it ought to be; and considering in it the union,
which the divisions of mankind have broken, and the order
which they have inverted.

In order to judge, therefore, of the spirit and use of the laws,


8 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHap. 1


which maintain society in the condition in which it is at pres-
ent, it is necessary to draw a plan of this society on the founda-
tion of the two primary laws, to the intent that we may dis-
cover in it the order of all the other laws, and the connection
which they have with these first two. And then we shall see
what method God hath taken to make society subsist in the
state in which we see it at present, and among those persons who,
not governing themselves in it according to the spirit of the
fundamental laws, ruin the foundations which he had laid for it.


CHAPTER II.


A PLAN OF SOCIETY, ON THE FOUNDATION OF THE FIRST TWO
LAWS, BY TWO KINDS OF ENGAGEMENTS.


L The Relation which the State of Man in this Life has to the
Exercise of the First Law.


ALTHOUGH man was made to know and to love the sov-
ereign good, yet God did not put him immediately in pos-
session of that end, but placed him first in this life, as the way
to attain to it. And seeing man cannot move towards any
objects by other steps than the light of his understanding,
and the motions of his will, God hath made the clear knowl-
edge and the unchangeable love of the sovereign good, in


CHAP. 11.] PLAN OF SOCIETY, 7]


that all things in it that present themselves to his view, both in
himself and in all other creatures, are so many objects given
him to engage him to if. For as to the first law, he ought
to perceive by the sight and use of all these objects, that they
are so many lineaments and images of that which God would
have men to know, and to love in him.


IL The Relation which the same Slate of Man has to the Exer-
cise of the Second Law.

And as to the second law, God hath so sorted and matched
men among themselves, and adapted the universe to all man-
kind, that the same objects which onght to excite in them the
love of the sovereign good, engage them likewise to society, and
to a mutual love of one another. For we see nothing, and we
know nothing, either without man, or within him, but what
points out his destination to society.

Thus, without man, the heavens, the stars, the light, the air,
are objects which present themselves to mankind, as a good
common to them all, and of which every person hath the entire
use. And all the things which the earth and the waters bear or
bring forth, are likewise of common use; but in such a manner,
that not any one of them passes to our use, but by the labor of
many persons. And this renders men necessary one to another,
and forms among them the different ties for the uses of agricul-
ture, commerce, arts, sciences, and for all the other communica-
tions which the several wants of life may demand.

Thus, within man, we see that God hath formed him by an
inconceivable conjunction of spirit and matter together; and
that he hath created him, by the union of a soul and a body, in
order to make of the said body united to the soul, and of the
said divine structure of senses and members, the instrument
of two uses essential to society.

The first of these two uses is, that of uniting the minds and
hearts of men among themselves ; which is effected by a natural
consequence of the union of the soul and the body. For it is
by the use of the senses united to the mind, and by the impres-
sions of the mind upon the senses, and of the senses upon the
mind, that men communicate to one another their thoughts and
their sentiments. Thus, the body is at the same time the in-
strument and the image of that mind and of that heart, which
are the image of God.


10 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. II.


The second use of the body is, that of applying men to all
the different labors which God hath rendered necessary for sup-
plying all their wants; for it is for labor that God hath given us
senses and members. And although it be true, that the labors
which employ man at present are a punishment which God in-
flicts on him, and that God hath not given unto man a body fit
for labor, to punish him by the labor itself; yet it is certain, that
man is so far destined by nature for labor, that he was com-
manded to work even in the state of innocence.” But one of
the differences between the labors of that first state of man, and
these of the present, consists in this, that the labor of man, in
his state of innocence, was an agreeable occupation to him,
without pain, without disgust, without weariness; whereas our
labor is imposed on us as a punishment. Thus, the law which
enjoins labor is equally essential both to the nature of man, and
to the state to which his fall hath reduced him. And this law
is also a natural consequence of the two primary laws, which,
by placing man in society, engage him to labor, which is the
bond of it; and appoint to every one his particular work, in or-
der to distinguish, by the different labors, the several employ-
ments, and the different conditions, which are to compose the
society.


III. Destination of Man to Society by Two Kinds of Engage-
| ments.


It is thus that God, having destined mankind for society, hath
formed the ties which engage him to it. And seeing the gener-


the rule of his duties. For the duties of men towards one
another are nothing else but the effects of the sincere love
which every man owes to another, according to the engagements
under which he happens to be.

These particular engagements are of two kinds. The first is,
of those which are formed by the natural ties of marriage, be-
tween husband and wife; and of birth, between parents and
children. And this kind comprises likewise the engagements
of kindred and affinity, which are the consequences of birth and


marriage.
The second kind takes in all the other sorts of engagements,
which draw all manner of persons nearer to one another, and
which are formed’ differently, either by the several comminica>
tions which pass ‘amiong men of their ldbor, of their industry,
services, and other assistances; or by those which relate to the
use of ‘things. And this comprehends all the different uses of
arts; of employments, and of possessions of all kinds, and every
thing else’ that ‘may link persons together, according to tle dif-
ferent wants of life; whether by free and gratuitots communi-
cations, or by commerce. : |
’ It is by all these engagements of these two kinds, that God
forms the order of the society of mankind, to link them together
in the exercise of the second law. And seeing he marks in every
engagement what it is that he enjoins to those whom he puts
under it; one perceives in the characters of the different sorts
of engagements, the foundations of the several rules of that
which justice and equity demand of every person, according to
the conjunctures in which his particular engagements place
him.


CHAPTER III.
OF THE FIRST KIND OF ENGAGEMENTS.


I. Natural Engagements of Marriage and of Birth.
Tae engagement which marriage produces betwixt the hus-
band and the wife, and that which birth makes between them
and their children, forms a particular society in every family, in


12 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. II!


which God links the said persons more closely together, in order
to engage them to a continual practice of the several duties of
mutual love. It is with this view that he has not created all
men, as he did the first; but that he hath made them to be born
of the union which he has formed between the two sexes in
marriage, and to be put into the world into a state subject to a
thousand wants, where the help of both sexes is necessary to
them for a long time. And it is from the manner in which
God hath formed these two ties of marriage and birth, that
we must discover the foundations of the laws which relate to
them.


IL Divine Institution of Marriage, and the several Principles of
the Laws which depend on it.

In order to form the union between man and woman, and to
institute marriage, which was to be the source of the multiplica-
tion and union of mankind; and to give to the said union
foundations proportionable to the characters of the love which
was to be the bond of it; God created in the first place only
man alone," and then took out of him a second sex, and formed
woman of one of the ribs of man,> to show, from the unity of
their origin, that they make only one being; where the wo-
man is taken out of man, and given to him by the hand of
God* as a companion, and as a help meet for him,? and
formed out of him.’ It was in this manner, that he linked
them together by this union, which is so strict, and so holy,
and of which it is said, that it is God himself who hath


FIRST “RIND OF ENGAGEMENTS. 13


Thus, marriage being a tie formed by the hand of God, it
ought to be celebrated in a manner becoming the holiness of the
divine institution which hath established it. And it is a natu-
ral consequence of this divine order, that the marriage be pre-
ceeded and accompanied by decency, by the reciprocal choice of
the persons who engage in it, by the consent of parents, who are
in many respects in the place of God; and that it be cele-
brated by the ministry of the Church, white this union onght to
receive the divine benediction.

Thus, the husband and wife being given the one to the other
by the hand of God, who unites them in one complete being,
that cannot be separated; a marriage which has been once law-
fully contracted, ean never be dissolved.' |

Thus, this union of persons in marriage is the foundation of
civil society, which unites them in the use of their goods and
of all other things.

Thus, the husband being, by divine appointment, the head of
the wife, he has over her a power proportionable to the rank he
has in their union. And this power is the foundation of the
authority which the civil laws give to the husband, and of the
effects of this authority in the matters where it hath its use.

Thus, marriage being instituted for the multiplying of man- .
kind, by the union of the husband and wife, linked together in
the manner in which God unites them ; all manner of conjunction
besides that of marriage is unlawful, and cannot give other than
an illegitimate birth. And this truth is the foundation of the
laws of religion, and of civil government, against unlawful con-
junctions ; and of the laws which regulate the state of children
which issue from such unlawful conjunctions.

The tie of marriage, which unites the two sexes, is followed
by that of birth, which unites to the husband and wife the chil-
dren which are born of their marriage.


IIL The Tie of Birth and Principles of the Laws whitch are the
Consequences of tt.

It is in order to form this tie, that God hath established
that man should receive his life from his parents, in the
bosom of a mother; that his birth should be the fruit of the
pains and labors of the said mother; that he should be born in-


1 Matt. xix. 9.
VOL. I. 2


14 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. 111.


capable of preserving this life into which he enters; that he
should continue in ita long time in a state of weakness, and
stand in need of the help of his parents, in order to his subsist-
ing, and being educated in it. And as it is by this birth that
God forms the mutual love, which so strictly unites him, who, by
begetting his own likeness gives him life, with him who receives
it; so he gives to the love of parents a character suited to the
condition of children in their birth, and to all the wants which
are the consequences of this life which they have given them ;
that he may engage them, by the said love, to the duties of edu-
cation, instruction, and all the other paternal duties. And he
gives to the love of children a character suited to the duties of
dependence, obedience, gratitude, and all the other filial duties,
to which they are engaged by the benefit of life, which they
hold in such a manner of their parents, of whom God makes
them to be born, that he teaches us, that without them they
would not have that life." And this obliges them to render to
their parents all manner of assistance, and all manner of service
in their wants; and especially in those of old age, and other
weaknesses, infirmities, and necessities, which afford children an
occasion of paying to their parents duties which answer the first
benefits which they received from them.

It is this order of birth, which, by forming the engagements
between parents and children, is the foundation of all their du-
ties, the extent whereof it is easy to discover by the characters
of these different engagements. And on these very principles
depends all that the civil laws have regulated touching the ef-


amar, my FIRST WIND OF WAGRMANTS. 4


for. temporal, goods: bging..givan: tomen fog all the different ne
cessities of life, and being. galy.a ogneequence, of, that beneSibs
it, is. agrooable te.the order. of nature, that, after the death of the
pasenis, the. children, should inherit their goods, as an accessory
to the:life which they have receiyed from them...  .. .

The ,tie of birth, which unites. fathers apd mothers to. theiz
children, unites.them likewise to those.who are.,porn and de.
scended of their children, . And this tie makes all the descend,
ants.to: he considered as children, and all the ascendants a4, bey
ing in the sank.of fathers, or mothers.

. It: may be.remnasked on the difference of the characters of the
love which unites the husband. and the wife,.and of that which
unites parents and children, that it is the opposition of these
different characters, which is the foundation of the laws which
prohibit marriage between ascendants and descendants in all
degrees, and between collateral in some degrees. And it is easy
to perceive the reasons of such prohibition, by barely reflecting

on what has been just now remarked in reference to these char-
acters, on which itis not necessary to enlarge here. i,


IV. The Tics of Kindred and Affinity, and their Principles. 1

Marriage and birth, which unite so strictly the husband and
wife, parents and children, form also two other sorts of natural
ties, which are consequences of them. The first is, that of col-
lateral relations, which is called kindred; and the second is, that
of allies by marriage, which is called alliance, or affinity.

Kindred unites the collateral relations, who are those persons
whose birth hath its origin from one and the same common
ascendant. They are called collaterals, because, whereas the
ascendants and descendants are in a direct line from father to
son, the collaterals have every one their own line, which termi-
nates in that of the common ascendant. Thus they are at the
side of one another ; and the foundation of their tie and kindred
is, their common union to the same parents, from whom they
derive their birth.

This is not the proper place to explain the degrees of kindred ;
it is a matter which makes a part of that of successions. And
it sufficeth to remark here, that this union of kindred is the
foundation of several laws; such as those which forbid marriage
between persons who are near of kin; those which call them to
successions, and to guardianships; those of the challenges of


16 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHAP. Iv.


judges, and exceptions against witnesses, who are relations to
the parties, and others of the like nature.

Affinity is the tie and relation which is made between the
husband and all the kindred of the wife; and between the wife
and all the kindred of the husband. The foundation of this tie
is the strict union between the husband and the wife, which
makes that those who are tied by kindred to one of the two, are
of consequence tied to the other: and this affinity makes the
husband consider the father and mother of his wife as being in
the place of father and mother to himself: and her brothers,
her sisters, and her other relations, as being to him in the stead
of brothers, sisters, and relations: and the wife looks in the
same manner upon the father and mother, and all the kindred
of her husband, as having the same relation to herself.

This relation of affinity is the foundation of those laws which
forbid marriage between persons that are allied in a direct line
of ascendants and descendants, in all degrees ; and between col-
lateral allies, within the compass of certain degrees: and like-
wise of the laws which call allies to tutorships, of those which
reject judges and witnesses who are allied to the parties, and of
others of the like nature.


CHAPTER IV.


CHAP. TVv.] SECOND KIND OF ENGAGEMENTS. 1?


It is to form this second sort of engagements, that God mul-
tiplies the wants of men; and that he makes them necessary to
one another for getting all these wants supplied. And he makes
use of two ways to place every one in the order of the engage-
ments for which he designs him.

The first of these two ways is the ranging of persons in soci-


ety, where he assigns to every one his place, that he may point |


out to him by the situation of it the relations which tie him to
others, and the duties that are peculiar to the rank which he
holds; and he places every one in his proper rank, by his birth,


by his education, by his inclinations, and by the other effects of |


his conduct, which range and dispose men in their places, It is
this first way, which produces to all men the general engage-
ments arising from their conditions, their professions, their em-
ployments, and which places every person in a certain condition
of life, of which his particular engagements are to be the con-
sequences,

The second way is the ordering of the events and con-
junctures, which determine every one to particular engage-
ments, according to the occasions and circumstances in which
he happens to be.


IL These Engagements are of Two Sorts; those which are Vol-
untary, and those which do not depend on the Will.

All these sorts of engagements of this kind are either volun-
tary, or involuntary. For seeing man is a free agent, there are
engagements into which he enters willingly: and seeing he has
a dependence on the Divine Providence, there are some engage-


ments under which God puts him without his own free choice. |


But whether the engagements depend on the will, or be alto-


gether independent on it as to their origin, man acts freely both |


in the one and the other: and his whole conduct implies always
these two characters; one, of his dependence upon God, whose
order he ought always to obey; and the other, of his liberty,
which ought to move him to it. So that all these sorts of
engagements are proportioned both to the nature of man, and
to his condition in this state of life.


IIL Voluntary Engagements.


Voluntary engagements are of two sorts. Some are formed
mutually between two or more persons, who bind and engage
2 #


cee


18 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. Iv.


themselves reciprocally to one another by their free will: and
others are formed by the will of one of the parties alone, who
engages himself to other persons, when the said persons do not
treat with him.

It will be easy to distinguish these two sorts of engagements
by some examples. Thus, for voluntary and mutual engage-
ments, we see that becanse of the several occasions which men
have to communicate to one another their industry and their
labor, and for carrying on the different commerces of all things,
they enter into partnership, they let and hire, they buy and sell,
they barter, and make with one another all sorts of covenants.

Thus, as to the engagements which are formed by the will of
one party alone, we see that he who becomes heir or executor
obliges himself to the creditors of the succession; that he who
takes upon himself the management of the affair of an absent
person, without his knowledge, obliges himself for the conse-
quences of the affair which he has begun; and in general, that
all those who voluntarily enter upon employments oblige them-
selves to the engagements which are the consequences of them.


IV. Engagements independent on the Will.


The involuntary engagements are those under which God
puts men without their own choice. Thus, those who are
named to the offices which are called municipal, such as
those of mayor, sheriff, consul, and others of the like nature,
and those who are engaged in some commissions of justice,
are obliged to execute them, and cannot avoid doing it, un-


ryt


CHAP. Tv.] SECOND KIND OF ENGAGEMENTS. 19


livelihood, lays an obligation on all their fellow-members to exer-
cise towards them mutual love, by imparting to them a share of
those goods which they have a right to. For every man, being
a member of the society, has a right to live in it; and that
which is necessary to those who have nothing, and who are not
able to gain their livelihood, is by consequence in the hands of
the other members; from whence it follows, that they cannot
without injustice detain it from them. And it is because of
this engagement, that in public necessities private persons are
obliged, even by constraint, to assist the poor according to their
wants. Thus, the condition of those who suffer any injustice,
and who are under oppression, is an engagement to those who
have in their hands the ministry and authority of justice, to em-
ploy it for their protection.
V. The Spirit af the Second Law in all Engagements.

We see in all these sorts of engagements, and in all the
others which we can imagine, that God forms them, and
puts men under them, merely to employ them in the exer-
cise of mutual love; and that all the different duties pre-
scribed by engagements are nothing else but the several
effects which this love ought to produce, according to the
conjunctures and the circumstances. ‘Thus, in general, the
rules which command us to render to every man what is his
due, to wrong no man, to be always faithful and sincere, and
others of the like nature, enjoin only effects of mutual love.
For to love is to wish well, and to do good; and no man
loves those whom he injures, nor those to whom he is unfaithful
and unsincere. Thus, in particular, the rules which ordain the
tutor to take care of the person and estate of the minor who is
committed to his charge, command him only the effects of that
love which he ought to have for this orphan. Thus, the rules of
the duties of those who are in offices, and in all other sorts of
engagements, general or particular, prescribe unto them nothing
but what the second law demands, as it is easy to perceive in
all the particular engagements. And it is so true, that it is the
commandment of loving which is the principle of all the rules
of engagements, and that the spirit of these rules is nothing else
but the order of that love which we owe reciprocally to one an-
other, that if it happens that one cannot, for example, restore
to another what he has of his, without breaking in upon this


20 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuaP. IV.


order, the duty is suspended until it may be performed accord-
ing to this spirit. Thus, he who has the sword of a madman,
or of any other person, who demands it in a transport of passion,
ought not to restore it to him, until he be in a condition not to
make a bad use of it; for it would not be love to him, to give
him his sword in these circumstances.

It is after this manner, that the second law commands men to
love one another. For the intent of this law is not to oblige
every one to have for all other persons that inclination which
is produced by the qualities which render an object amiable;
but the love which it commands consists in wishing to others
their true good, and in procuring it for them, as much as is in
our power. And it is for this reason, that, seeing this command
is independent on the merit of those we ought to love, and that
it excepts nobody, it obliges us to love those who are the least
amiable, and even those who hate us. For the law which they
transgress is nevertheless binding on us, and we ought to wish
their true good, and to procure it,’ as much out of hopes of re-
claiming them to their duty, as out of fear of transgressing our
own.

We have here made these reflections, to show that, seeing it
is the second law which is the principle and spirit of all those
laws relating to engagements, it is not enough to know, as the
most barbarous people do, that we ought to render to every one
his due, that we ought to wrong no man, that we ought to be
sincere and faithful, and the other rules of the like nature; but
it is necessary, moreover, to consider the spirit of these rules, and


METH] SROOKR AND: OF BAGAGMENTS. =~.


ments, that they demand the use of a government, to restrain
every one within the order of those that are peculiar to him.
Itis for this governmens that: Ged hath established the authority
of the powers that are necessary to maintain society, as will
appent in: the.tenth ehapten., And-wo shell only remark. here,
om the .subject.of government and. in relation to engagements,
thet. thers: ase meny engagements which are formed by this. or-
der of government, as between princes and subjects, between
sige saya ager gaara a a
parhone, and likewise others ‘which belong to. thiserder.


‘VIL The Engagements are. the Foundations of the particular
:, . Laws. which relate to them

‘1 ema give this general idea of al] Teme premen)
sorts of engagements of which mention has been made hitherto.
For sinde: it is by these ties that God engages mien to all the
difieeent duties,.and that he hath put into each engagement the
foundations ‘of the duties which depend on it, it is in these
gouress thet:‘we onght to find the principles and the spirit of the
laws, aceontling to the engagements to which they have reler
tion. . We. have seen, in the engagements of marriege and
birth, the principles of the laws which relate to them; and we
must discover in the other engagements, which have been just
now explained, the principles of the laws which are peculiar to
them.

We shall confine ourselves to such as relate to the civil laws;
and seeing the greatest part of the matters treated of in the civil
law are consequences of the engagements that have been spoken
of in this chapter, we shall explain in the following chapter
some general rules which flow from the nature of these engage-
ments, and which are at the same time the principles of the
particular rules concerning the matters which arise from the said


engagements.


22 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuap. v.


CHAPTER V.


OF SOME GENERAL RULES WHICH ARISE FROM THE ENGAGEMENTS
THAT HAVE BEEN MENTIONED IN THE PRECEDING CHAPTER,
AND WHICH ARE SO MANY PRINCIPLES OF THE CIVIL LAW.


Tue general rules which we have just now mentioned, and
which are gathered from all that hath been said in the preceding
chapter, and also in the others, are these which follow; and
which we shall explain in so many articles, as consequences of
the principles which have been laid down. It followa, then, from
these principles, —


I. 1st Rule.— Engagements are instead of Laws.


That every man being a member of the body of the society,
every one ought to discharge in it his duties and his functions,
according as he is determined to them by the rank which he
holds in it, and by his other engagements. From whence it fol-
lows, that the engagements of every person are to him, as it
were, his proper laws.


II 2d Rule.— Submission to the Powers.


That each particular person being linked to this body of the
society of which he is a member, he ought to undertake noth-
ing that may disturb the order of it. And this implies the en-


oman. %.] RRL Sea -
‘Thies; those who, without:doing injury to: others; fall into some
disorder which gives offence to the public, whether ih. their -per
sons, or.as to their goods, as'those do-who fall into despair, those
who biaepheme, or who. swear, those who squander away their
estates, and,:in:a weed, all those who offend egainst good‘ miia-

mers, maodesty, ow deceney, in such.@ manner asto violute the
extexnal- order of behaviour, are justly peniabed. ig de deere,
ecoording #0 the quality: of the disorder.


IV. 4t Rale,— To do Wrong to no Man, and to jive every. one

| his Due. 5S dae
- “Seat in all the engagements of one person to anogher,
whether voluntary or involuntary, which may be the subject-
matter-of civil laws, they owe reciprocally to one another that
which is required by the two precepts included in the second
law: one, to do to others what they should do-te us;* and thé
other, not to do to any body what we would not haye othess do
to: ust rit hpr des rear lieeben ri aad
ee, ee ok re rey coe eae


v. Sit, Haley Sincerity and Honesty i Voluntary ond Mea
Emgagements.


That, § in voluntary and mutual engagements, those whe treat
together owe to one another sincerity in explaining reciprocally
what it is that they engage themselves to, fidelity in the exe-
cution of it, and every thing which the consequences of the
engagements into which they are entered may demand£ Thus
the seller ought to declare sincerely the qualities of the thing
which he sells, he ought to take care of it until he delivers it,
and he ought to warrant it after he has delivered it.


VL 6th Rule. — Fidelity in what Involuntary se Nad de-
mand.


That, in involuntary engagements, the obligation is propor-
tioned to the nature and consequences of the engagement,


& Ecclus. xi. 21;—1 Cor. xiv. 40;—1.10, § 1, D. de just. et jure;— § 2, Instit. de
his qui sui vel al. juris sunt.

© Matt, vii. 12; — Luke vi. 31.

4 Tobit iv. 15.

¢ L.10, § 1, D. de just. e jure, —§ 3, Instit. eod.

f Phil. i. 10; — Prov. xii. 22; — Ecclus. xxix. 3.

& L. 2, § ult.. D. de obl. et act.


2A TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHap. v.


whether it consists in doing, or giving, or in any other sort of
obligation.» Thus, the tutor is obliged to govern the person,
and to administer the goods, of the orphan who is under his
care, and to do every thing which the said government and
administration may render necessary. Thus, he who is called
to a public office, although it be against his will, ought to
execute it. Thus, those who without any agreement happen to
have any thing in common together, such as co-heirs and oth-
ers, owe reciprocally to one another what their engagements
may require.


VIL 7th Rule.— Ali Deceit unlawful, in all Sorts of Engage-
y ments.


That in all sorts of engagements, whether voluntary or invol-
untary, it is forbidden to use any infidelity, double dealing, de-
ceit, knavery, and all other ways of doing hurt and wrong.'!


VIIL 8th Rule.— Engagements where Justice can constrain the
Parties.


That, seeing all the particular persons compose together the
society, whatever respects the order of it lays an engage-
ment on every one of them to do what the said order demands
of him; and if he does not do it willingly, he may be com-
pelled to it by the authority of justice. Thus, when persons
are named to public offices in towns and other places, such
as those of mayor, sheriff, and other offices or commissions of
the like nature, they are compelled to execute them.’ Thus, by


the Roman law, those who were aseigned to be tutors were


cuar. v.] GENERAL RULES. 25


ought to be proportioned to the different wants which ren-
der the use of them necessary, it is free for all persons who
are cupable of engagements, to bind themselves by all manner
of covenants, as they think fit, and to diversify them accord-
ing to the differences of affairs of all kinds, and according
to the infinite variety of combinations that arise in affairs from
the conjunctures and the circumstances? Provided only that
the agreement have nothing in it contrary to the rule which fol-
lows.


X. 10th Rule. — All Engagements contrary to LG Good Man-
eS an cia 9678. are wnlannful.
a eel lei hee

conformable; to. the cader of society; and that those: which are
contrary, to it are unlawful, and punishable according to the d»
gree of their opposition. Thus, employments which are con-'
trary to this order are criminal engagements. Thus, prom-
ises and covenants which violate the laws, or good manners,
oblige the parties to nothing, except to ie pene eee ee
misdemeanour may deserves ..

Wa Gkall cc, ix Gos covecal thativre Geeaiol et i Gucci:
laws, what is the use of all these principles; and * euffiveth: to
take notice of them here, as being general rules, on which de- -
pend an infinite number of particular rules in this whole detail
of matters.


XL Transition to the following Chapter.


We did not think proper to mix among the engagements
which have been mentioned hitherto, another kind of tie, which
unites men more closely together than any one of all the en-
gagements, except it be those of marriage and birth. It is the
tie of friendship, which produces in society an infinite number
of good effects, both by the good offices and services which
friends render one to another, and by the assistance which
every one receives from the persons who are allied to his friends.
But although friendships make a chain of ties and relations
of a large extent, and of great use in society, yet it was not
proper to mix friendships with engagements, because they are
of a nature which is distinguished from them by two charac-


PL. 1, D.de pact; —1.7,§ 7, D.de pact. 1 L. 6, Cod. de pact. — See Matt. xiv.
VOL. I. 3


26 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuaP VI.


ters: one, that there is no friendship in which love is not re-
ciprocal; whereas, in engagements, love, which ought to be mu-
tual in them, is not always so: and the other, that friendships
do not make a particular kind of engagement, but are conse-
quences which arise from engagements. Thus, the ties of kin-
dred, of affinity, of offices, of commerce, of business, and others,
are the occasions and causes of friendships; and they presup-
pose always some other engagement, which brings those persons
together who become friends.

It is this use of friendships, which is so natural and so neces-
sary in society, that does not allow us to pass them quite over
in silence. And it is this difference between their nature and
that of engagements, which hath obliged us to distinguish them,
and therefore we have made them the subject of the following
chapter.


CHAPTER VI.
OF THE NATURE OF FRIENDSHIPS, AND THEIR USE IN SOCIETY.


I. The Nature of Friendships, and their Kinds.


FRrienpsuiP is a union that is formed between two persons,
by the reciprocal love which the one bears towards the other.
And as there are two principles of love, so there are two kinds


em,


CHAP. VIL] NATURE OF FRIENDSHIPS. 27


ways mixed with that benefit which their friends receive from
them. Whereas those who love one another, by the spirit of
their union in the sovereign good, do not regard their own proper
good, but the common good of both, and a good whereof the
nature is in this diflerent from that of all other goods, that no
one can have it to himself alone, unless he desire it likewise for
others, and unless he do sincerely all that is in his power to help
them to attain to it. Thus, those who are united to their
friends by this tie do really and in earnest seek for the good
and advantage of those whom they love; and seeing they de-
spise all other good, besides this alone, which they love solely and
with all their heart, they are much more disposed to give their
estates, and their lives, for their friends, if there be oceasion for
it, than those persons can be who love only out of a principle of
self-love.

This distinction between friendships which are contracted out
of a spirit of the first law, and those which are made only out
of self-love, is not so exact as that it may be said that every


- friendship is either entirely of the one, or entirely of the other


of these two kinds. For in the small number of those in which
is found the spirit of the primary laws, there are few of them so
perfect, as to be altogether free from self-love; and we see some
friendships, where one of the friends contributes on his part only
self-love, although the other be moved by another spirit. And
all these sorts of friendships are adapted to the present state of
society, according to the different dispositions of the persons
whom they link together.


Il. Difference between Friendship and the Love enjoined by the
Second Law.


It is easy to judge by this account of the nature of friendship,
that, since it is a reciprocal tie between two persons, there is a
great deal of difference betwixt friendship and the love which is
enjoined by the second law. For the duty of that love is inde-
pendent on the reciprocal love of the person whom we are com-
manded to love: and, although on his part he do not love us,
and if he even hate us, yet the law will have us to love him:
but because friendship cannot be formed but by a reciprocal
love, it is not enjoined to any person in particular. For what
depends on two persons cannot be the subject of a command
to one of the two alone: and besides, seeing friendship cannot


28 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuaP. VI


be formed but by the charm which every one of the friends
finds in his friend, nobody is obliged to contract a friendship
where that charm is not found. And likewise we see no
friendship but what hath for its foundation the qualities which
friends search for in one another; and which is kept up only by
the good offices, the services, the benefits and other advantages
which make in each friend the merit which attracts and nour-
ishes the esteem and love of the other.

It is because of this necessary correspondence between friends,
that friendships are contracted only between persons who, hap-
pening to be joined together in some engagements which draw
them nearer to one another, chance to have dispositions proper
for uniting them; such as the equality of conditions, a conform-
ity of age, of manners, of inclinations and sentiments, a recip-
rocal disposition to love and serve one another, and others of the
like nature. And we see, on the contrary, that friendships are
contracted and kept up with difficulty, and but very rarely, be-
tween persons whom their conditions, their age, and the other
qualities distinguish in such a manner, that the natural state of
friendship is not to be found in them, for want of the correspond-
ences, and of the liberty which friends ought to take with one
another.


II The Command of the Second Law leads Men to Friend-
ship.

But although it be true, that friendships are not commanded

to any one in particular, yet they are nevertheless a natural con-


=I na


al
;


pm der harg.7 polo Sag Aor pout ‘ate ‘fred bévause “one
rear yen acrdoytertammperieerverietacactderabadcareeen
that 208 proper: to form ‘@ fri |
“silvhallonrs troen thove tivo eburacers of fiendsltps, that,
they ought to be- reciprocal and ‘free, a men ‘is always at lide
notdn-engage in friendships, and that he ‘ought even to shun
thece ‘which ‘may be attended’ with bad conséquénces:' ~And it
follows ‘sléo, that ‘the: most soliil- arid the ‘strictest ‘friendships
«may be weakened and destroyed, if the conduct of one of the
friends gives ocdasion to it. And ‘not only aré colinesses ‘and
raptares in friendships not unlawful: but sometimes they are
even neseesary, and consequently just, with respect to that fiend
‘who on his. part fails in any duty. | Thus, when one ‘of thé
fehends violates the friendship either by some’ act of infidelity, of
by failing in some essential duties, or by requiring titings ‘that
exe wnjust;: it is free for the other not to look upon’ him any
more as a friend; who: bath in reality ceased to be so; and saci
to the causes of the coldness and rupture, one may
either break off the friendship altogether, or dissolve it with:
out an open rupture; provided only, that he who has # just
provocation given him by his friend do not on his part give any
cause of disgust, and that in this change he preserve still, instead
of friendship, that other kind of love which nothing can dispense
with.


V. Difference between Friendship and Conjugal Love.


All these characters of friendship, which it is free for one to
contract, and free for him to break, and which subsists only by the
mutual correspondence of the two friends, show plainly that we
cannot give the name of friendship to that love which unites
the husband and the wife, nor to that which ties parents to their
children, and children to their parents. For these ties form a
love of another nature, very far different from that which makes
friendship, and which is much stronger. And although it be
true, that the husband and the wife make choice of one another, .
and engage freely in marriage; yet their union being once
formed, it becomes necessary, and they cannot dissolve it.


30 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. VI.


VI. Difference between Friendship, and the Love of Parents and
Children.


We see likewise what are the differences which distinguish
friendship from the love of parents towards their children, and
of children towards their parents. For besides that this love
is not reciprocal whilst the children remain incapable of loving,
there are other characters which demonstrate plainly enough,
that it is of a nature altogether different from that of friendships. —
And although there be no choice of persons in this love, yet
it hath other foundations, much more solid than the firmest and
strictest friendships.

What has been just now remarked touching the distinctions
between friendships, and the love that is formed by the ties of
marriage and of birth, does not extend to the love of brothers, and
other relations. For although nature forms a tie between them
without their own choice, which obliges them naturally to the
mutual love of one another; yet this engagement is not attend-
ed with friendship, except when they find in one another quali-
ties whereupon to ground it. But when proximity of blood
happens to be accompanied with the other qualities which make -
friends, the friendships of brothers, and of other near relations,
are much firmer than those of other persons.


VII. Use of Friendships in Society.

It appears, by these few general remarks on friendships, what
their nature is, and what the principles are which depend on
them; but seeing this is not a matter treated of in the civil


CHAP. V1I.] OF SUCCESSIONS. 31


VIIL Transition to the following Chapters.

To finish the plan of society, it remains that we give an
idea of successions which perpetuate it, and also an idea of the
troubles which disturb its order; and we shall see afterwards
in what manner it is that God makes it to subsist in the pres-
ent state.


CHAPTER VII.


OF SUCCESSIONS.


We do not speak of successions here, with an intention to
give the whole detail of that matter in this place; but only to
give a view of it in the plan of society, where it ought to be dis-
tingnished, because successions make a great part of that which
passes in society, and are one of the matters which the Roman
laws treat of most copiously.


I, The Necessity of Successions, and their Use.

The order of successions is founded on the necessity of
continuing and transmitting the state of society from the
passing generation, to that which follows; and this is done
insensibly, by making certain persons to succeed in the place
of those who die, that they may enter upon their rights, their
offices, and their relations and engagements, which are capable
of passing to posterity.


IL Two Ways of Succeeding.


This is not the proper place to explain the different ways
of succeeding, whether by the order of nature, and the disposi- |
tion of the laws, which call to successions the descendants, the
ascendants, and other relations; or by the will of those who die,
and who name their heirs or executors. We shall see, in the
plan of the matters of law, the distinction of these ways of
succeeding, and the order of the particular matters which con-
cern successions.


IIL Successions are to be distinguished from Engagements.
We shall only observe here, that successions are to be distin-


32 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. VIII.


guished from engagements, which have been the subject of the
foregoing chapters. For although successions make an engage-
ment, into which those persons who succeed to others enter, and
which obliges them to bear their burdens, to pay their debts, and
to other consequences; yet it is not under the idea of engage-
ments that we are to consider successions; but they ought to be
considered under the view of the change which makes the goods,
the rights, the burdens, the engagements, of those who die to
pass to their successors. And this includes so great a variety
of particular matters, that they shall make one of the two parts
of the book of The Civil Law in tts Natural Order.


CHAPTER VIII.


OF THREE SORTS OF TROUBLES WHICH DISTURB THE ORDER OF
SOCIETY.


I. Troubles which disturb the Order of Society.


WE see in society three sorts of troubles, which disturb the
order of it; lawsuits, crimes, and wars.


II. Lawsuits.


Lawsuits are of two sorts, according to the two ways
in which men fall out among themselves, and encroach one


i fe i ih


CHAP. IX.) STATE OF SOCIETY AFTER THE FALL. 33


guilty; the second, by repairing as much as is possible the evil
which they have done; and the third, by restraining the wicked
by the example of punishments. And it is by these three
views, that the laws have proportioned the punishments to the
crimes, and to the several offences.


IV. Wars.

Wars are an ordinary consequence of the differences which
fall out between the sovereigns of two nations, who being
independent on one another, and having no common judge, do
themselves justice, by the force of arms, when they cannot or
will not have mediators to make peace between them ; for they
take in that case for laws, and for decisions of their differences,
the events which God gives to wars. There is likewise another
sort of wars, which are only a bare effect of violence, and of the
attempts made by a prince, or a state, upon their neighbours.
And lastly, there are some wars which are nothing but rebellions
of subjects, who revolt against their prince.

Wars have their peculiar laws in the law of nations; and
there are consequences of wars which are decided by the civil
law.


V. Transition to the following Chapter.
There remains only, for finishing the plan of society, to
consider how it subsists in the present state, where the spirit


of the primary laws, which ought to be the only cement of it, is
so little regarded.


CHAPTER IX.


OF THE STATE OF SOCIETY AFTER THE FALL OF MAN, AND HOW
GOD MAKES IT TO SUBSIST.


I. All the Disorders in Society have been a Consequence of Man's
Disobedience to the First Law.


WuHaTEVER we see in society that is contrary to order is a
natural consequence of the disobedience of man to the first
law, which commands him to love God. For this law being


34 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuaP. 1x.


the foundation of the second, which enjoins men to love
one another, man could not violate the first of these two
laws, without falling at the same time into a state which
hath carried him to a breach also of the second law, and con-
sequently to disturb the order of society.

The first law was to unite men in the possession of the sov-
ereign good: and they found in that good two perfections
which were to make their common happiness: one, that it is
capable of being possessed by all persons; and the other, that it
may be the entire happiness of every one in particular. But
man having transgressed the first law, and having gone astray
from the true happiness, which he could find nowhere but in
God alone, he hath sought after it among sensible goods, in
which he found two defects opposite to these two characters of
the sovereign good: one, that these goods cannot be possessed
by all; and the other, that they cannot make the happiness of
any one. And it is a natural effect of the love and pursuit of
the goods which have these two defects, that they create divis-
ions among those who set their hearts upon them. For seeing
the capacity of the mind and heart of man, which is formed for
the enjoyment of an infinite good, cannot be satisfied with these
finite goods, which cannot belong to many, nor are they suffi-
cient to make any one man happy; it is a consequence of this
state into which man has brought himself, that those who place
their happiness in the possession of goods of this kind, happen-
ing to meet together in the pursuit of the same objects, fall out
among themselves, and break through all sorts of ties and en-


CHAP. 1x.] STATE OF SOCIETY AFTER THE FALL. 35


It is therefore the disorder of love that hath disordered the
society ; instead of that mutual love, the character of which is
to unite men in the pursuit of their common good, we see
another love quite opposite to it prevail, whose character hath
justly given it the name of self-love; because he in whom this
love reigns, seeks only after those goods which he makes entirely
his own, and which he loves in others only in so far as he can
draw advantage ont of them to himself.

It is the poison of this love which benumbs the heart of man,
and makes it heavy; and which, by depriving those whom it
possesses of the view and love of their true good, and by con-
fining all their views and all their desires to the particular good
to which it engages them, is, as it were,a universal plague,
and the source of all the evils that infest society. So that it
would seem that, since self-love undermines the foundations of
society, it ought to destroy it; and this leads us to inquire in
what manner it is that God supports society in the deluge of
evils which are produced in it by self-love.


IIL Of Self-Love, which is the Bane of Society, God hath made
a Remedy to contribute towards its Subsistence.

We know that God hath permitted evil to happen in the
world, only because he foresaw that by his almighty power
and infinite wisdom he should be able to draw good out of
it, and a much greater good than a pure state of good things
would have been, without any mixture of evil. Religion
teathes us the infinite good which God hath drawn out of
so great an evil as the state to which sin hath reduced man-
kind: and that the incomprehensible remedy which God has
made use of to draw him out of it, hath raised him to a
state of greater happiness than that which he enjoyed before
his fall. But whereas God hath made this change for a
good cause, and which proceeds only from himself, we see
in his government of society, that from so bad a cause as
our self-love, and from a poison so contrary to mutual love,
which ought to be the foundation of society, God hath made
use of it as one of the remedies for preserving it in being. For
it is of this principle of division that he hath made a tie which
unites men together in a thousand manners, and which supports
the greatest part of engagements. One may be able to judge
of this use of self-love in society, and of the relation which such


36 TREATISE OF LAWS. omar. 1x.


a cause hath to such an effect, by the reflections wnich it will
be easy to make on the following remark. |

The fall of man not having freed him from his wants, and
having on the contrary multiplied them, it hath also augmented
the necessity of labor and of commerce, and at the same time
the necessity of engagements, and of ties; for no man being
sufficient of himself to procure the necessaries and conveniences
of life, the diversity of wants engages men in an infinite num-
ber of ties, without which they could not live.

This state of mankind induces those who are governed only
by a principle of self-love to subject themselves to labors, to
commerce, and to ties which their wants render necessary. And
that they may reap advantage from them, and preserve in them
both their honor and their interest, they observe in all these in-
tercourses integrity, fidelity, sincerity ; so that self-love accom-
modates itself to every thing, that it may reap advantage from
all things. And it knows so well how to adapt its different
steps to all its views, that it complies with all duties, and even
counterfeits all virtues. And every one perceives in others, and,
if he studied himself, would discover in himself, those refined
ways which self-love knows how to employ for hiding and dis-
guising itself under the appearances even of those virtues which
are most opposite to it.

We see, then, in self-love, that this principle of all the evils is,
in the present state of society, a cause from whence it derives
an infinite number of good effects, which in their nature being
true and real goods, ought to have a better principle; and thus


CHAP. 1X.] STATE OF SOCIETY AFTER THE FALL. 37


see in the world, which is governed by the spirit of the primary
laws.

The second is the secret government of God over society in

The third is the authority which God gives to sovereign

rs.

The fourth is that light which remains to man after his fall,
and which discovers unto him the natural rules of equity. And
it is with this last that we shall begin, and ascend gradually to
the others.


V. The Natural Knowledge of Equity.

It is this light of reason, which, by discovering to all men
the common rules of justice and equity, is instead of a law ~
to them, which hath remained in all their minds, amidst
the darkness which self-love hath spread over them, Thus,
all men have on their minds the impressions of the truth
and authority of these natural laws: that we must do harm
to no man; that we must render to every one his due ;
that we must be sincere in our engagements, and faithful
in executing our promises; and of other the like rules of jus-
tice and equity. For the knowledge of these rules is insepa-
rable from reason; or rather, reason itself is nothing else but
the view and use of all these rules.

And although this light of reason, which gives a view of these
truths even to those persons who are ignorant of the principles
of them, does not so far prevail in every one, as to be the rule
and guide of his conduct, yet it reigns in all persons in such a
manner, that the most unjust persons are so far in love with
justice, as to condemn injustice in others, and to hate it. And
it being the interest of every one in particular that others should
observe these rules, the multitude agree together to reduce those
to obedience who transgress the said rules, and who do harm to
others. And this shows plainly, that God has engraven on the
minds of all men this kind of knowledge, and love of justice,
without which society could not last. And it is by the help of
this knowledge of the natural laws, that even the nations which
have had no knowledge of religion have made their societies to
subsist.

© Rom. ii. 14; 1. 7, D. de bon. damn.
VOL. I. 4


38 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. IX.


VI The Government of God over Society.


This light of reason which God gives to all men, and
these good effects which he draws from their self-love, are
causes which contribute to the supporting of the society of
mankind by the help of men themselves. But we ought to
be sensible, that it has a foundation which is much more
- essential, and much more solid, which is the providence of
God over mankind, and that order in which he preserves so-
ciety in all times, and in all places, by his almighty power
and infinite wisdom.

It is by the infinite force of that almighty power, that he, con-
taining the universe as a drop of water, and as a grain of sand,
’ is present everywhere; and it is by the mildness of his infinite
wisdom that he disposes and orders all things.°

It is by his universal providence over mankind, that he di-
vides the earth among men, and that he distinguishes nations
by that diversity of empires, kingdoms, republics, and other
states; that he regulates the bounds and duration of them by
the events which give them their rise, their increase, and their
end; and that amidst all these changes he forms and maintains
the civil society in every state, by the distinctions which he
makes of persons to fill all the employments, and all the places,
and by the other ways in which he regulates and governs every
thing.”


VIL The Authority which God gives to the Supreme Powers.


wehne§ 86 svars oF WOuiErY sere Yer vat. #
make a distinction between other men, but renders them all
equal,' God distinguishes some of them, that he may give unto
them another sort of power, the ministry of which extends to
the universal order of all kinds of engagements, and to every
thing that relates unto society: and he gives the said power in
different manners, in kingdoms, in commonwealths, and in the
other states, to kings, to princes, and to the other persons whom
he elevates to that dignity, by birth, by election, and by the
other ways in which he ordains or permits that those whom he
destines to that rank should be called toit. For it is always
the almighty providence of God that disposes of that series
and chain of events, which precede the elevation of those whom
he calls to government. Thus, it is always he who places them
in the seat of authority; it is from him alone that they derive
all the power and authority that they have; and it is the min-
istry of his justice that is committed to them.™ And seeing it
is God himself whom they represent in the rank which raises
them above others, he will have them to be considered as hold-
ing his place in their functions. And it is for this reason, that
he himself gives the name of gods to those to whom he com-
municates the right of governing and judging men; because it
is a right which is natural to him alone

It is for the exercise of this power, that God puts into the
hands of those who hold the first place in the government the
sovereign authority, and the several rights that are necessary for
maintaining the order of society, according to the laws which
he hath established in it.

It is for the preserving of this order, that he gives them the
right to make the laws? and regulations that are necessary for
the public good, according to different times and places; and
the power of inflicting punishments on crimes.*

It is on account of the same order, that he gives them the
right to communicate, and to divide to several persons, the ex-
ercise of that authority, which they themselves are not able to
exercise all alone in its several branches; and that they have


' Z. 32, D. de reg. jur. 1 Eeclus. xvii. 17.

= Wiad. of Sol. vi. 3;— Rom. xiii. 1;—John xix. 11;— Rom. xiii. 4; — Exod.
xviii. 15 ; — 2 Chron. xix. 6.

® Exod. xxii. 28;— Peal. lxxxi. 6 ; — John x. 35 ; — Exod. xxii. 8.

© Wied. of Sol. vi. 4; — Deut. xvii. 19.

P Proo. viii. 15. 9 Rom. xiii. 4.


40 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuaP. 1x.


the power of establishing the different sorts of magistrates,
judges, and officers, that are necessary for the administration of
justice, and for all the other public functions.‘

It is because of the same order, for supplying the necessary
expenses of the state within, and for defending it from without,
against the attempts of strangers, that sovereigns have the right
to raise the necessary taxes, according to the occasions which
- may require them.*

It is to settle and confirm all these uses of the authority of
temporal powers, that God commands all men to be subject to
them.‘


VIIL Religion.


Lastly, we ought to look upon religion as the most natural
foundation of the order of society. For it is the spirit of re-
ligion that is the principle of the true order that ought to be in
society. But there is this difference between religion, and all
the other foundations of society, that whereas the others are
common to all places, the true religion is only known and
received in some states; and even in those where it is known,
the spirit of it doth not so far prevail as to influence all persons
to follow the rules of it. But yet itis certain, that, in the places
where profession is made of the true religion, society is in its
most natural state, and in the most proper for being maintained
in good order, by a concurrence of religion and civil policy,
and by a union in the ministry of the spiritual and temporal
powers.


CHAP. X.] RELIGION AND POLICY. 41


CHAPTER X.


OF EELIGION AND POLICY: AND OF THE MINISTRY OF THE SPIR-
ITUAL AND TEMPORAL POWERS.


L Religion and Policy founded on the Order and Appointment
of God.

Ir cannot be doubted but that religion and policy have
their common foundation in the order and appointment of
God ; for a prophet tells us, that it is he who is our Judge, our
Lawgiver, and our King, and that it is also he who is the Saviour
of mankind. Thus, it is he who in the spiritual order of religion
establishes the ministry of the ecclesiastical powers.’ Thus, it
is he who in the temporal order of policy makes kings to
reign,* and gives to sovereigns all the power and authority which
they have, [From whence it follows, that seeing religion and
policy have only the same common principle of the divine
order, they ought to agree together, and to support one another
mutually, and in such a manner as that private persons may be
able to pay a punctual and faithful obedience both to the one
and the other; and that those who are employed in the minis-
try, both of the one and the other, may exercise it according to
the spirit and the rules which reconcile them together. And it
is likewise certain, that true religion and good policy are always
united together. J

Il. The Spirit of Religion.

It is well known, that the spirit of religion is to bring back
men to God, by the light of the truths which it teaches them,
and to draw them out of the by-paths of self-love, in order to
unite them in the exercise of the first two laws; and that there-
fore the essence of religion respects chiefly the inward part of
the mind and heart of man, the good dispositions of which ought
to be the principle of the external order of society.


IL The Spirit of Policy.
But because all men have not this spirit of religion, and that


® Isa. xxxiii. 22. b John xx. 21; — Matt. x. 16;—1 Cor. iv. 1.
€ Prov. viii. 15.
4*


42 TREATISE OF LAWS. [oHaP. x.


many even carry themselves so as to disturb the said external
order; the spirit of policy is to maintain the public tranquillity
among all mankind,‘ and to keep them in this order, whether
they have the inward dispositions to it or not, by employing for
that end even force and punishments, according as there is occa-
sion: and it is for these two different uses of religion and pol-
icy, that God hath established, both in the one and the other,
powers whose ministry he hath proportioned to their spirit and
to their ends.


IV. Distinction between the Ministry of the Spiritual Powers,
and that of the Temporal.


Thus, seeing the end of religion is only to form good disposi-
tions in the inward part of man, God gives to the powers who
exercise the ministry of it a spiritual authority, which tends
only to regulate the mind and the heart, and to insinuate the
love of justice, without the use of any temporal force upon the
outward part. But the ministry of the temporal powers of the
civil policy, which tends only to regulate the external order, is
exercised with the force that is necessary for restraining those
who, not being lovers of justice, commit such excesses as dis-
turb the said order.‘ .

Thus, the spiritual powers instruct, exhort, bind, and loose the
inward part of man, and exercise the other functions that are
proper totthis ministry. And the temporal powers command
and forbid in what relates to the outward man; maintain every
one in his rights; dispossess usurers; chastise the guilty, and


cuap. x,] RELIGION AND POLICY. 43


V. Their Union for maintaining of Order.

But these differences between the spirit of religion and the
spirit of policy, and between the ministry of spiritual powers
and that of temporal powers, have nothing in them that may
be any hindrance to their union; and the same powers, spiritual
and temporal, which are distinguished in their ministry, are unit-
ed in their common end of maintaining order in society, and
they mutually assist one another for that purpose. For it isa
law of religion, and a duty incumbent on those who exercise
the ministry of it, to recommend and to enjoin to every one
obedience to the temporal powers, not only out of fear of their
authority, and of the punishments which they inflict, but as
an essential duty, and out of a principle of conscience’ and
a love of order. And itisa law of temporal policy, and a duty ~
of those who are employed in the ministry of it, to maintain the
exercise of religion, and to employ even the temporal authority
and force against those who disturb the order of it. ‘Thus these
two powers agree together, and mutually support one another. —
And even when the spirit of the spiritual ministry seems to de-
mand something that is contrary to the spirit of the temporal
policy; as when the ministers of the spiritual power intercede
for the life of the greatest criminals, whom they condemn only
to penances, and whom the civil magistrate condemns to death ,
the same spirit of the spiritual ministry of religion, which re-
quires princes and judges to do their duty, does not oblige them
to use this clemency. And the temporal judges condemn justly
to death those whom the ecclesiastical judges condemn only to
works of charity, fasting, and other penances.


VI Why the Ministry of these Two Powers ts placed in different
Hands.


‘It is because of these differences between the spirit of relig-
ion and that of policy, that God hath separated the ministry
of them, that the spirit of religion which governs the inward
man, and which ought to insinuate itself into the hearts of men
by the love of justice, and by a contempt of temporal goods,
should be inspired by other ministers than the temporal powers,
who are armed with the terror of penalties and punishments for


5 Rom. xiii. 1, 2,5;—1 Pet. ii. 13; + Wied. of Sol. vi. 4.


44 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuar. x


maintaining the external order, and whose ministry chiefly re-
lates to the use of temporal goods. And it was so essential to
the order of these two administrations to have them distinct,
and to have the spiritual power separated from the temporal,
that although they be naturally united in God, yet when he ap-
peared upon earth, in order to establish his spiritual kingdom, he
abstained from the exercise of his power over temporal things.
And all the use which he made of his greatness and power was
wholly opposite to the grandeur and power which belong to a
temporal kingdom. For at the same time that he manifested
the divine grandeur of his spiritual kingdom by the light of the
truths which he taught» by the glory of the miracles which he
wrought, and by all the remarkable circumstances of his com-
ing, which he had caused to be foretold by his prophets, and
which were fit to accompany the reign of a prince of peace,
who came to give unto men other things than those that set them
at variance with one another ;™ he took not any one of the
marks of temporal power; he exercised no function of it; nay,
he refused to be judge between two brothers, when one of them
entreated him to do it." And to show that the use of the tem-
poral power was to be separated from his spiritual kingdom, he
left that power to the temporal princes, and he himself paid oebe-
dience to them. Thus, in his birth, he made the circumstance
of the place where he was to be born to depend on his obedi-
ence to a law of a heathen prince. Thus, during his life, he
taught his disciples to render unto princes what is their due;
and he himself paid tribute, although none was due from him,


CHAP. X.] RELIGION AND POLICY. 45


which did some damage to the inhabitants of the place where
he wrought it. But that very miracle, which plainly showed his
omnipotent power over temporal things, served as a proof that
he abstained from all other use of that power, only that he
might show the distinction between the spiritual kingdom which
he came to establish, and the temporal empire which he left unto


Lastly, we know that, when he established the ministers of
his spiritual kingdom, and when he gave them the rules of their
conduct, and marked out to them the bounds of the power
which he intrusted to them, he gave them no power over tem-
porals. And we see likewise, that not any one of them took
the least share in the ministry of the temporal power; that, on
the contrary, they submitted themselves to it; and that, at the
same time that they exercised their spiritual ministry without
any regard to the authority of the temporal powers who opposed
them in it, they taught their disciples obedience, and paid it
themselves, to those very powers, in all things belonging to their


Tt follows from all these truths, that the spiritual
have the exercise of their ministry in spiritual things;* and that
they do not intrude themselves upon temporals. And likewise
that the temporal powers have the exercise of their ministry in
temporal things," and do not encroach upon spirituals: that
the two governments are established immediately by the hand
of God.


VOL The Authority of the Powers of one Order over those of
the other, in their respective Functions.


And that those who exercise the power in one of them are
subject to those who exercise the power of the other, in all mat-
ters depending on it. And likewise we see, that those who
have been animated by the spirit of God have governed them-
selves according to these very rules, and have observed the sub-
mission that is due to each of the powers of these two orders.


IX. Example.
Thus, when God made choice of Nathan for the spiritual


© Brod. xxviii. 1;—9 Chron. xix. 11;— Heb.v.1.  * 2 Chron. xix. 11.


46 TREATISE OF LAWS. [ouap. x.


ministry of the correction of David, the temporal power of this
king did not withhold the prophet from speaking to him with a
force suitable to the authority of the ministry which he exer-
cised; and that prince received likewise the correction with hu-
mility.* But, on the contrary, when the same prophet had a
mind to know the intention of that prince concerning the choice
of his successor, and whether he meant that it should be either
Solomon, or Adonijah, he approached him with the greatest
humility and respect, beseeching him to let him know which of
the two he would be pleased to make choice of to reign after
him.


X. Obedience to both the Governmenis.


It would be easy to bring other examples of the like nature, to
show how it is necessary to distinguish the authority of the spir-
itual powers from that of the temporal powers, and in what
manner those persons have exercised their authority who have
governed themselves according to the just rules, by confining
themselves to their own proper ministry, without meddling with
the other. But it sufficeth for the design proposed, to have given
this general idea of the two governments of religion, and of civil
policy; that we may discern therein the spirit and use both of
the one and the other; that we may see in it the principles
which reconcile them, and which distinguish them; and that we
may be able to judge, by all these views, of the manner in which
they concur to support the order of society.


XI. Laws of Spiritual Powers, which relate to Temporal Things.


CHAP. X.] RELIGION AND POLICY. 47


ecclesiastical powers regulate temporal concerns. It appears, on
the contrary, that at the beginning of the canon law, where
distinction is made between the Divine laws and human laws,
it is said that the human laws are the laws of princes; that it

is by these laws that the rights to every thing which man can
possess are regulated; and that even the goods of the church
are preserved to it only by the authority of these laws; becanse
it is to princes that God hath given the ministry of the govern-
ment in temporal things." Since, therefore, there can be nothing
im the eanon law which overturns this rule, it follows that the
rales which we see in it concerning temporal matters are capa-
ble of being reconciled with this principle; which it is no bard
matter to do, if we make reflection on the use which the rules
relating to temporal affairs have in the canon law. For we
shall find that, for example, the rules concerning the order in
jodicial proceedings relate to the ecclesiastical jurisdiction ;
that those about crimes establish there the canonical punish-
ments, that is to say, the punishments which the church enjoins
for the penance of criminals; that the rules which relate to
contracts, testaments, prescriptions, and to other matters of the
like nature, relate to them only in reference to spirituals, as be-
cause of the prohibition of certain commerces to ecclesiastics,
beeause of the religion of an oath, and because of the use of
covenants for churches, and particular church-men, and because
of other views of the like nature; that some of these rules are
only answers of the popes to consultations ; and lastly, that
whatever rules there are there, which relate purely to temporal
things among laymen, ought to be considered only as rules
binding the subjects of the territories of the see of Rome, in
which the popes are temporal princes; and without the said
territories, they have no other authority than what is given
them by the princes who receive the use of them among their
subjects. Concerning which it may be observed, that these sorts
of constitutions in the canon law concerning temporal matters
show plainly enough that they are naturally derived from the
temporal authority, seeing the greatest part of them have been
taken out of the Roman law, although it be true that some of
them are contrary to it. But it is not necessary that we should
treat of that matter in this place.


® Distinct. 8, can. 2.


48 TREATISE OF LAWS. {ouar. &.


As to the regulations which temporal princes may have made
touching spiritual matters, they have not extended their author-
ity to the spiritual ministry that is reserved to the ecclesiastical
powers, but they have only employed their temporal authority
to put the laws of the church in execution, in the external order
of the government of the church. And even those very ordi-
nances, which our kings themselves call political laws, tend only
to maintain the external policy of the church, and to restrain
those who disturb it by transgressing the ecclesiastical laws.*


XIIL Kings are the Protectors and Defenders of the Laws of the
Church.


And likewise it appears from the ordinances themselves, that
the princes ordain nothing in them, but what properly belongs
to their temporal power, and call themselves therein the protect-
ors, guardians, and defenders of the faith, and executors of what
the Church teaches and ordains.>


XIV. Agreement between the Spiritual and Temporal Jurisdic-
tion.

Another difficulty might be started in relation to some mat-
ters, where it would seem as if the spiritual and temporal juris-
diction encroached one upon the other; as, for example, when
the temporal jurisdiction takes cognizance of the right of pos-
session in benefices; and when the ecclesiastical jurisdiction
judges of temporal concerns between ecclesiastical persons
But as to what concerns the possession of benefices, it is a mat-


CHAP. Xt] NATURE AND SPIRIT OF LAWS. 49


quences of these two primary laws; and that they are likewise
the sources of all duties, and the foundations of the different
kinds of laws: and we have begun to descend from those gen-
eral principles, to the principles which are peculiar to the civil
laws. It remains at present, before we proceed to inquire into
the detail of these laws, and of the matters of which they treat,
that we examine more minutely the nature and spirit of laws in
general, and the characters which distinguish their different
kinds; that we may thereby discover the foundations of many
rules that are essential to the knowledge and right use of the
civil laws: and this shall be the subjectsmatier of the two fol-


lowing chapters.


CHAPTER XL. .-4... -s


; KIND.


"ee FX akan 4


h Ape. Sorts Lea: Foal Emenutable, ond Ariirary Tee
ieee Of these Laws. ' |

Au the dite ae an it is possible to conceive of the
several sorts of laws that are expressed by the names of divine
and human laws, natural and positive, spiritual and temporal,
law of nations, civil laws, and by all the other names that can
be given them, may be reduced to two kinds, which comprehend
all laws of what nature soever; one is, of the laws which are
immutable, and the other, of the laws that are arbitrary. For
there is not any one law but what has one or other of these
characters; which it is of moment to consider, not only for ap-
prehending aright this first general distinction of laws into these
two kinds, which ought to precede the other ways of distin-
guishing them, but because it is these two characters which
are the most essential part in the nature of all laws; and there-
fore the knowledge of them is necessary, and of great use in the
study of the civil law.

The immutable laws are so called, because they are natural,
and so just at all times, and in all places, that no authority can
either change or abolish them: and the arbitrary laws are

5


VOL. I.


50 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuap. x1.


those which a lawful authority may enact, change, and abolish,
as there is occasion.

These immutable or natural laws are all of them such as are
necessary consequences of the two fundamental laws, and which
are so essential to the engagements which form the order of so-
ciety, that it is impossible to alter them without destroying the
foundations of the said order: and the arbitrary laws are those
which may be differently established, changed, and even quite
abolished, without violating the spirit and intent of the funda-
mental laws, and without destroying the principles of the order
of society.


IL Example of Immutable Laws.


Thus, seeing it is a consequence of the first fundamental law,
that we ought to obey the higher powers, because it is God that
hath established them; and because it is a consequence of the
second fundamental law, that we ought to do harm to no man,
and that we ought to render to every one his due; and because
all these laws are essential to the order of society; they are for
this reason immutable laws. And it is the same thing with re-
spect to all the particular rules which are essential to this order,
and to the engagements which follow from the primary laws.
Thus, it is a rule essential to the engagement of a tutor, that, be-
ing in the place of a father to the orphan who is committed to his
charge, he ought to be careful in looking after the person and
the estate of the said orphan; and it is likewise an immutable
law, that the tutor ought to take this care. Thus, it is a rule


Dee CL Ch} eS rs PT) DOT Se ee


bac


OHAP. XI.] NATURE AND SPIRIT OF LAWS. 51


things, and they regulate them differently according to the
times and places.


IV. Origin of the Immutable Laws.


It appears from this first idea of the nature of immutable
laws, that they derive their origin from the two prime laws, of
which they are only an extension; and that, for example, the
natural rales of equity which have been. observed, and the oth-
ers of the like nature, are nothing else but what the spirit of the
second Jaw demands in every engagement, and what it points:
out to be essential and necessary to it.


Vv. Gngw of tae Arvurary Laws. =
.:, das Sor the arbitrary laws, we may remark two different causes
which have rendered the ‘use of them necessary in. society, and
which have been the sasha gece a
wary laws which we see in the world. |


Whe Fk Ce of ery Leh Diet wi
arise from the Immutable Laws.


pilee fiext of these two causes is the necessity of regulating
“tein difficuities which arise in the application of the immuter
We laws, when the said difficulties are such as that they cannot
be provided against but by laws, and when the immutable laws
do not regulate them. We shall be able to judge of this sort of
difficulties by some examples.


VIL First Example.


Thus, for a first example of the necessity of arbitrary laws:
it is a natural and immutable law, that fathers oyght to leave
their estates to their children after their death; and it is also
another law which is commonly placed in the number of the
natural laws, that one may dispose of his goods by a testament.
If we give to the first of these two laws an extent without any
bounds, a father may dispose of nothing by testament ; and if
we extend the second law to an indefinite liberty. of disposing
of all by will, as did the ancient Roman law, a father may ex-
clude his children from having any share in his inheritance, and
may give all his goods to strangers.

We see by these consequences, which are so opposite to one
another, and which would follow from these two laws taken in


§2 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. x1.


an indefinite extent, that it is necessary to set some bounds
both to the one and the other, which may reconcile them to-
gether. And if all men did govern themselves by prudence,
and by the spirit of the primary laws, every one would be a just
interpreter of what the law, by which children succeed to their
parents, demands of him in particular, and likewise of what he
is obliged to by virtue of that law which allows every one to
dispose of his effects by testament. For he might proportion
the dispositions of his testament to the condition of his estate,
and of his family, and to the duties which he may owe to his
children, and to other persons, according as he may be under
obligations either to make some grateful requital, or to do some
act of liberality. But because all persons do not govern them-
selves according to the spirit of the primary laws, nor according
to prudence ; and some persons, abusing the liberty of disposing
of their goods by will, or perhaps being ignorant of the state of
their goods, and of their affairs, violate the duty which they owe
to their children ; seeing it is not just to leave an indefinite lib-
erty to those who may abuse it, and that it is not possible to
make a particular rule for every one; it was necessary, for rec-
onciling these two laws, and for reducing them into rules com-
mon to all men, to make an arbitrary law, which might restrain
the liberty of disposing by will to the prejudice of children, and
which might preserve to them a certain portion of the goods of
their parents, which it should not be in the power of their par-
ents to deprive them of; and it is this portion, fixed by an arbi-
trary law, which is termed the legitime, or filial portion.


ra og
Cy


cHaP. xi.| NATURE AND SPIRIT OF LAWS. 53


that the owner of a thing cannot be deprived of it but by just
titles and conveyances ; it will follow, that whosoever can show
that either he himself, or they from whom he derives his right,
have been owners of an estate, although they had been ont of
possession of it for more than a century, will be restored to the
said estate, and turn out the possessor, unless, together with his
long possession, he can show a title which hath taken away the
right of the first owner. And if, on the contrary, we extend too
far the rule which makes it be presumed that the possegeors are
owners of what they possess; we shall be guilty of injustice, by
taking away the property from all those who happen not to be
in possession.

lt is evident, that the contrariety to which these two laws
might lead us, one of them restoring the first owner against ay
ancient possessor, and the other maintaining a new poseersor
against the right owner, required that it should be regalated by
an arbitrary law, that they who are not in possession, and who
should notwithstanding claim the right of property, should be
bound to assert and prove their right within a certain time; and
that after that time the possessors, who had not been molested
in their possession, should be maintained in it. And this is what
has been done by the anes laws, which settle the times of
prescriptions.


IX. A Third Example.


Thus, for a third example, it is a natural and immutable law,
that persons who have not as yet attained to a firm and steady
use of their reason, for want of age, instruction, and experience,
should not have the management of their estates and affairs;
and that they may have it after they shall have acquired reason
and experience enough. But seeing nature doth not produce in
all men at the same age that ripeness of reason which is neces-
sary for the management of affairs, and that it comes sooner in
some, and later in others; in order to apply this law to use, it
has been found necessary to make an arbitrary law, for settling
a rule that might be common to all men. Thus, the civil laws
of some countries have left it to the fathers to regulate to what
age their children should remain under the conduct of a tutor ;*
and in other countries they fixed a certain period of age, under


® Gal. iv. 2.
5° |


64 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHap. XI.


which persons were to be in that state which is called minority,
and above which they were to be reputed majors.


 X. Fourth Example.


Thus, for a last example, it is a natural law, that he who buys
should not take advantage of the necessity of the person who
sells, and that he should not buy at too lowa price.” But be-
cause it would be a thing of troublesome consequence in trade
to annul all the sales where a thing is sold under its true value,
it has been regulated by an arbitrary law, that sales should not
be dissolved on account of the lowness of the price, except
in the case where lands and tenements are sold for less than the
half of the just value. And the laws connive, for the public
good, at the injustice of buyers, where the damage done is less
than the half of the value, unless there be other particular cir-
cumstances in the sale, which may make it necessary to re-
scind it.


XL The Immutable Laws implied in these Sorts of Arbitrary
Laws.


We must observe in all these examples, and others of the like
kind of arbitrary laws, which are consequences of the immuta-
ble laws, that every one of these arbitrary laws hath two char-
acters, which it is of importance to discern, and to distinguish
in them, and which make, as it were, two laws in one. For in
these laws, there is one part of what they ordain which is of the
law of nature, and there is another part of them which ia arbi-


NATURM AND. SPIRIT..OF -LAWS. &


Thus, for example, fiefs have been invented, quitrents, annuities,
the right of redemption, substitutions, and other usages of the
like nature, the establishment of which was arbitrary. And
these matters, which are the invention of man, and which may be
termed for that reason arbitrary matters, are regulated by a vast
number of laws of the same nature.

Thus, we see in society the use of two sorts of matters. For
there are some which are so natural, and so essential to our most
common wants, that they have been always in use, in all places,
such as exchange, letting and hiring, deposit, the contract of
loan, and many other covenants; guardianships, successions,
and many other matters; and there is also the use of matters
that are invented. But it is to be observed, that even those mat-
ters of which men have invented the use have always their
foundation in some principle of the order of society. Thus, for
example, fiefs have their foundation, not only in the general lib-
erty of making all sorts of covenants, but also in the advantage
which redounds to the public, by engaging in the service of the
prince, in the time of war, those to whom capital fees and mesne
fees have been given, and their successors. |

Thus, substitutions, or entails, are founded upon the general
liberty which every one has to dispose of his estate with the view
of preserving the estate in families, the conveniency of taking
away from certain heirs, executors, or legatees, the liberty of
disposing by will, of which they might make a bad use, and
other motives of the like nature.


XITL The Natural Matters have Arbitrary Laws, and the In-
vented Matters have Natural Laws.


It is to be observed, likewise, on the subject of these matters
which have been invented by men, that although it would seem
that they ought to be regulated wholly by arbitrary laws, yet
nevertheless they have many immutable laws relating to them:
in the same manner as we see that the other matters, which may
be called natural, are not only regulated by natural and immu-
table laws, but that they have also arbitrary laws.


XIV. Examples.


Thus, it is an immutable law in the matter of fiefs, that we
ought to observe in them the conditions regulated by the title
which contains the grant of the fief. Thus, in the natural mat-


ie
ee i)
Ce


56 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. XL


ter of tutorships, it is an arbitrary law that hath fixed the num-
ber of children which exempts from that office. So that it
appears by these examples, and by others which have been
already taken notice of, that in all matters, both natural and
others, there is a mixture of immutable laws and of arbitrary laws.


XV. Few Arbitrary Laws in Natural Matters.


But with this difference, that in the natural matters there are
few arbitrary laws, and that the greatest part of the laws relating
to such matters are immutable; and that, on the contrary, there
is an infinite number of arbitrary laws in those matters which
have been invented.


XVI. Many Arbitrary Laws in Arbitrary Matters.


Thus we see in the Roman law, that, as the greatest part of
the matters contained in it, which are of use now-a-days, are
natural matters, so the rules concerning them are almost all
of them natural laws; and that, on the contrary, the greatest
part of the matters of our customs being arbitrary matters, the
greatest part of their rules are arbitrary also, and different in
divers places ; and we see likewise, in the arbitrary matters which
are regulated by the ordinances, that almost all their rules are
also arbitrary.


XVII. Two Sorts of Arbitrary Laws: those which are Conse-
quences of the Natural Laws, and those which regulate Matters
that are invented.


wane] MATUMS:AND .APIMT.O¥. LAWS. e


sorts of books, which are made use of in Franées:e@hd that ie,
the books of the Roman law, the canon law, the exdinances;

and the customs. From whence we may distinggish, ender an-
other view, four kinds of arbitrary laws that are im use in. tis


‘The first comprehends some arbitrary laws of the body of the
Roman law, which have been received in this. kingdom, and —
which derive their authority with us from the use which we give
them; such as, for instance, that law which has been already
taken notice of, touching the rescission of sales om account of
loss sustained by the sale in more than the half of the. real
value; the laws which regulate the formalities of wills and te»
taments, the time of prescriptions, and the other laws of thet
kind, whith are received either throughout the whole Kington,
or only in some provinces.

The second sort is that of the arbitrary laws which are taken
out of the canon law, and received in use with us. Such are
many rules relating to church benefices, and other ecclesiastical
matters; and some of them even in matters of the evil lew.

The third is, of the arbitrary laws which are established by the
ordinances of our kings. Such as those whieh regulate the
tights of the prince’s demesies, the punishments of crimes, the
order of judicial proceedings, and many other matters of several
kinds.

The fourth sort of arbitrary laws consists of those which we
call customs, such as we see in most of the provinces, and
which regulate several matters ; such as fiefs, the community of
goods between husband and wife, dowries, the filial portions of
children, the right of redemption by one of the family, the right of
redemption of fiefs, and many others. And all these customs are
so many arbitrary laws, which, in relation to the same matters,
are different in divers places. And because these customs were
a kind of laws, which, not being written, were preserved only by
use, and this use was often uncertain; our kings have caused
to be collected together, and reduced into writing, in each
province, and in each place, the customs which were there re-
ceived, and have given them the sanction of laws and rules.


XIX. The particular Rules of the Law of Nature are nowhere
collected but in the Body of the Roman Law.


We have, then, in France, as there is in all other countries, the


58 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. XI.


use of natural laws and of arbitrary laws. But with this differ-
ence between these two sorts of laws, that all the arbitrary laws
which we have, being contained in the ordinances, and in the cus-
toms, and in such arbitrary laws taken out of the body of the
Roman law, and of the canon law, as we observe as cus-
toms, all these laws have a certain and fixed authority. But
as for the laws of nature, seeing we have nowhere the detail
of them except in the books of the Roman law, and that they
are placed there not in the best order, and mixed with many other
laws which are neither natural nor in use with us, their authority
is so weakened by this mixture, that many persons either are
not willing, or not capable, to discern that which is certainly just
and natural from that which reason and our practice do not
admit of. Concerning which matter, the reader may observe
what hath been said of it in the preface to this book.


XX. The Justice and Authority of all Laws: the Difference be-
tween that of Natural Laws, and that of Arbitrary Laws.


It is easy to perceive from this distinction of natural laws and
arbitrary laws, and from the remarks which have been made on
these two kinds of laws, what are the different characters of
their justice and of their authority. And seeing it is the justice
and the authority of laws which give them the force which
they ought to have upon our reason, it is of moment to con-
sider and to distinguish what is the justice and authority of nat-
ural laws, and what is the justice and authority of arbitrary
laws.


The universal justice of all laws consists in the relation whic


CHAP. XI.] NATURE AND SPIRIT OF LAWS. 59


pointment, which commands all men to obey them. But as
there is a difference between the justice of natural laws and the
justice of arbitrary laws, so likewise their authority is distin-
guished in a manner suited to the difference of their justice.

The laws of nature being justice itself, they have a natural
authority over our reason, which is given us for no other end but
that we may discern justice and truth, and may submit to it.
But because all men have not always their reason clear enough
for discerning this justice, or their heart upright enough for
obeying it, civil policy gives to these laws another empire over
men, independent on their approbation of them, by the authority
of the temporal powers, who compel men to obey them. But
the authority of the arbitrary laws consists purely in the force
which they derive from the power of those who have a right to
make laws, and in the appointment of God, who commands
obedience to be paid to them.

This difference between the justice and authority of natural
laws, and that of arbitrary laws, hath this effect: that whereas
arbitrary laws cannot be naturally known unto men, they are
facts which men may be ignorant of; but the laws of nature
being essentially just, and the natural object of reason, no man
cai say, that he wants the light of reason which teaches us
them. For which reason, arbitrary laws do not begin to have
their effect, till after they have been promulged. But the laws
of nature have always their effect, without any promulgation.
And seeing they can neither be changed nor abolished, and
that they have their authority from themselves, they are always
binding upon men, and no one can pretend ignorance of them.


XXL Remarks on the Distinction of Immutable Laws, which
admit neither of Dispensation nor Exception, and of those which
do admit of them.

But although the natural or immutable laws be essentially
just, and although they cannot be changed; yet we must take
care not to imagine from this idea of natural laws, that, because
they are immutable, and suffer no change, they therefore are
such that there can be no exception to any one of the laws
which have this character. For there are many immutable laws
which admit of exceptions and dispensations, and yet do not
lose the character of immutable laws; as, on the contrary,
there are many of them which admit of no dispensation or
exception.


60 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuap. x1.


This difference, which distinguishes these two sorts of laws,
hath its foundation in this, that laws have their justice and au-
thority, only because of the relation which they bear to the
order of society, and to the spirit of the two fundamental laws;
so that if it happen that the order of society, and the spirit of
those fundamental laws, require that some of the immutable
laws be restrained, either by exceptions or by dispensations, they
admit of those mitigations; and if nothing can be changed
without violating the said spirit and the said order, they do not
admit either of dispensation or exception. But even the laws
which do admit of these restrictions do not for that reason cease
to be immutable ; for it is still true that they cannot be abol-
ished, and that they are always certain and irrevocable rules,
although they be less general because of these exceptions and
dispensations. All these truths will better appear by some ex-
amples.

Thus, the laws which enjoin honesty, fidelity, sincerity, and
which forbid deceit, fraud, and all manner of tricking, are laws
which can admit of no dispensation or exception.

Thus, on the contrary, the law which forbids swearing admits
of a dispensation in the case of a judicial oath, when it is ne-
cessary to give testimony to the truth; and an oath is also made
use of as a corroboration of the engagement of those who are
admitted into offices.

Thus, the law which commands the performance of cove-
nants suffers an exception and dispensation in the case of a
minor, who engages himself rashly to his own prejudice.


cmap. x1.] NATURE AND SPIRIT OF Laws. 61


alter the character of the immutable laws to which they are ex-
ceptions; and that thus all the laws are reconciled one with
another and agree among themselves, by the means of that com-
mon spirit which is the justice of every one of them. For the
justice of every law is included within its proper bounds, and
none of them extends to what is otherwise regulated by another
law. And it will appear in all sorts of exceptions and dispen-
sations, which are reasonable, that they are founded upon some
law. So thatwe must consider the laws which admit of excep-
tions as general laws, which regulate every thing that commonly
happens; and the laws which make the exceptions and dispen-
sations as particular laws, which are peculiar to certain cases;
but both the one and the other are laws and rules equally just,
according to their use and their extent.


XXL The Importance of distinguishing the Characters and
more the Spire of the Laws.

"(All these reflections on the distinction of immutable laws and
etbitrary lawe,.on their nature, their justice, their authority,
show plainly of what importance it is to consider, ander all —
these views, what ie the spirit and design of all these laws; to
d@acern. whether they have the character of .immutable laws,
oof arbitrary laws; ¢o distinguish between the general rules,
and the exceptions to them, and to make the other distinctions
which have been remarked; and the same may be said of
the distinctions which shall be mentioned hereafter. Never-
theless, it appears plainly enough by experience, that although
there be nothing more natural and more real than the founda-
tions of all these remarks, many seem either to be ignorant of
them, or to despise them; and do not so much as perceive: the
bare difference between the immutable laws and the arbitrary
laws. So that they consider them all, without distinction, as
having the same nature, the same justice, the same authority,
and the same effect. For seeing they compose all of them
together an infinite medley of rules concerning all matters, both
natural and invented, and that they have only one common
name of laws, they mistake in this medley the characters which
distinguish them, and often take natural rules for bare arbitrary
laws, especially when the said rules have not the evidence of the
first principles on which they depend, and are only remote
consequences of them. For not perceiving in that case the

VOL. I. 6


Mm... . « asths r0OUt~‘; (|


62 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHap. xI.


connection which the said rules have with their principles,
they do not discover the foundation and the certainty of their
truth.

And since, on the contrary, arbitrary laws are always clear
and evident, because they are written, and contain only sensible
dispositions, which for the most part are comprehended with-
out reasoning, most men receive a much stronger impression
from the authority of arbitrary laws, than from natural rules,
which do not so sensibly affect the mind. And when it happens
that persons, whose judgment is not so exact, and whose memo-
ries are stuffed with a great number of laws of all kinds, want
this view, and do not make the reflections that are necessary for
a right use of the laws, and for giving to every one of them its
just effect, there is great hazard of their considering them under
false views, and of making wrong applications of them; espe-
cially when they endeavour, as most people do, to find out laws,
not for the support of reason, but of the party whose cause they
have espoused; and then they have no other view but to give
to the rules an extent suited to the sense which may most serve
their interest.

It is easy to see by experience the ways in which persons go
astray who thus confound the laws: and we may perceive, by
barely reflecting on the different sentiments of people touching
questions of all kinds, that those who fall into an error are
engaged in it for want of some one of these views; and that
those who reason justly discover the truth, only because they
discern the ways of distinguishing, of choosing, and of applying


Ae Oe | Lit:


CHAP. XI] NATURE AND SPIRIT OP LAWS. 63


that there is often danger of people’s erring, by reason of their
not discerning these matters, although so easy to be done.

All those who have any knowledge of the Roman law may
remember that law that is taken out of one of Papinian’s de-
cisions, which says, that the pupillary substitution excludes the
mother from her legal portion of the inheritance: that is to
say, that, if a father substitutes either a relation, or a stranger, to
his son, to succeed him in case he dies before he arrives at the
age of puberty, the person so substituted shall succeed him,
even although the mother of this child had survived him; and
by this substitution, she will be deprived of her legal portion of
her child’s inheritance.*

This decision is founded upon this reasoning of Papinian;
that it is not the son who deprives his mother of his goods; but
that it is the father, who, by virtue of the liberty which he had to
dispose of them, has made them go to the substitute.

If we examine this decision, it will appear, that the ground
of the question was the apparent opposition between a natural
law and an arbitrary law; and that the arbitrary law, which
gave leave to the father to substitute, and by an extension of
that liberty even to deprive the mother of her legal portion,
and to transmit the goods to the substitute, was preferred
before the natural law, which calls the mother to the inheritance
of her son.

I do not here quote this example with design to lessen the
just esteem that is due to so celebrated a lawyer. But it is
known that he gave this judgment according to the principles
of that ancient law of the Romans, which favored the liberty of
disposing by testament, and which at first went to that excess,
that fathers could disinherit their children without cause. It
was by the spirit of this principle that he invented that subtilty,
that it was not the son who did this wrong to his mother, but
that it was the father: quia pater hoc et fecit.

Thus, this decision being founded only on the principle of
this unbounded liberty of disposing of one’s estate by testament,
even to the depriving children of their filial portion, which is a
principle that is neither natural nor in use with us, we ought
not to take for a rule a subtilty, which, to favor this principle,
deprived the son of his legal portion of the goods of his father,


© ZT. 8, § 5, D. de inoff, test.


64 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuaP. XI.


and the mother of her legal portion of the goods of her son; for
this decision made all the goods of the testator to go to the sub-
stitute, without allowing the son to transmit any part of it to
his heirs.

We may therefore place this subtilty among many others of
the Roman law which we reject, because that law is received
with us only as written reason, and subtilties, being contrary to
natural right, are contrary to reason. And although there be no
occasion to quote any authority, to prove that we ought to pre-
fer natural right to these subtilties, yet we may found this truth
on the authority of the same lawyer, who in another question,
much of the same nature, has decided in favor of natural right.
It was in the case of another substitution, made by a grand-
father to his grandson, in case he should die before he attained
to the age of thirty years, in which case he ordered that the
goods should be restored to a son of this testator, uncle to the
grandchild. 'The case happened, the grandson died before the
age of thirty, but left children. And from this circumstance
Papinian decided in favor of the children, that the substitution
was annulled ; for the reason, that it was equitable to conjecture
that the testator had not sufficiently explained his intention, and
that although he had made no mention of the case of his grand-
son having any children, yet he did not intend to deprive those
children of their father’s inheritance.4 Such a conjecture as
this, in the first case of the pupillary substitution, might have
made it to be presumed, that the father did not foresee that the
son might die before his mother; and it was much easier for


reo I =F eT ihe af 1 — cs £ j rye


cnaP, Xt. NATURR AND SPIRER OR-}aWs. @


appears by this example, and as it-would: be easy te show from.
others, it behooveth likewise to take heed, that, under the pre:
text of preferring natural laws to arbitrary laws, we do not ex-
tend a natural law beyond the just bounds which are set to it
by an arbitrary law, which reconciles it with another natural
law, and which gives to the one and to the other theis just
eflect each; and that we do not thus violate that. other natural
law, while we think of touching only the arbitrary law. :


XXXVI. Example. . edhe He. ci
Thus, for example, it is a natural law, that he who has been.
the author of any damage ought to repair it, But if we should
extend this law so far, as to oblige the debtor who had not paid
at the term to make good all the damage which the creditor
may have suffered for want of his payment; as if an estate had
been seized and sold, or if his house had fallen down, because
he had not that money which he would have laid out in repair.
ing it; such an application of this law, which is highly just, and
altogether natural, in obliging one to repair the damage which
he has done, would be unjust, because it would violate an arbi-
trary law which regulates all damages, to which the debtor may
be made liable for default of payment, to that reparation of
damages which is called interest, and which is fixed to a certain
portion of the sum that is due, which at present is about the
twentieth part; and that by violating this arbitrary law, one
would infringe two natural laws which are the foundation of it:
one, which does not allow that men should be made accounta-
ble for unforeseen events, which are rather effects of the divine
providence, and accidents, than consequences that can reason-
ably be imputed to them; and the other, which will have the
infinite variety of the different damages, which creditors suffer
for want of payment of what is due to them, to be fixed to a
in and uniform reparation of damages, which may be com-
mon to all the cases which have the same common cause of the
default of payment at the term, without distinguishing the events
which cause different sorts of losses. For besides that the dif-
ference of the losses is an effect of the difference of the acci-
dents, which nobody is obliged to answer for; the diversity of
the reparations would be a source of as many lawsuits as there
would be creditors, who should pretend to distinguish them-
6 *


66 | TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. XI.


selves by the quality of the loss which had been occasioned by
the default of payment.


XXVII. Discernment of the Spirit of the Laws necessary for
deciding Questions.

We see again in this example, as we have already seen in the
others which have been mentioned to show the necessity of ar-
bitrary laws, that there are difficulties which make it necessary
to fix a general regulation by an arbitrary law. But there
is an infinite number of other sorts of difficulties which arise
every day in the application of the laws to differences between
particular persons, where it is neither necessary nor possible to
establish precise rules: and the decision of difficulties of this
kind depends on those who are to judge of them; which re-
quires on one part an exact judgment and understanding; and
on the other, a knowledge of the principles, and particular rules,
that they may be able to judge of the apparent opposition be-
tween the rules on which the contrary opinions are founded, and
those which give rise to the difficulty ; and to discern by the spirit
of these rules the bounds and extent that ought to be given to
them, and the consequences which will follow from the restrain-
ing too much either the one or the other, or from extending it
too far. Itis by these, and the other views of the principles of the
interpretation of laws, which have been already mentioned, and of
those which shall be explained in their proper places, that we are


enabled to make a true and just application of the rules.
XXVIII.


The Necessity of studying the Laws of Nature.— The


Fa algun of ar ool So thet there: sllerlal canbe
which make it necessary to study these natural laws with exaet-
ness and application. oe:
Phe he first of ‘these causes is, that, these natural rules being very
umerons, ‘variety and their multitude is the reason why
ind reasoi ‘alone is not sufficient to enable any one to find them
out, and to ‘apply them to all occasions, as will appear by the’
reading of “all these rales in the detail of matters.
The'setond cause of the necessity of knowing exactly the
ural laws is, that these laws are the foundations of the whole
sience of law’: and it is always by arguments drawn from the
nétoral laws, that we examine and resolve questions of all kinds,
whether they arise from the applitent opposition of two natural
wwe, or from that of a natural ‘taw to an arbitrary law, or only
from the opposition between two arbitrary laws; for from thence
atiees’‘an infinite number of all these sorts. And it is easy to
jereeive; that, as it is’ necessary, for deciding of questions, to
redson from the nature and spirit of the rules, from their use,
their bounds, their extent, and from other the like views, so we
cannot found our reasonings, nor form our decisions, but upon:
the ‘nataral principles of justice and equity.


themselves to the view of every one:’


XXIX. Two Sorts of Natural Rules: Examples both of one and
the other Sort.


We must likewise observe concerning this necessity of the
study of the natural laws, that they are of two sorts. One is,
of those of which the mind is convinced without any reasoning,
by the evidence of their truth, such as these rules: that covenants
are in the place of laws to those who make them; that the sell-
er ought to warrant.what he sells; that the depositary ought to
restore the thing deposited. And the other is, of those rules
which have not this evidence, and of which the certainty is not
discovered except by some reasoning, which shows their connec-
tion with the principles on which they depend. We shall see by
examples this second sort of rules, and the necessity of study
for the knowing of them.

If a man who has no children makes a donation of his goods,
and afterwards has children, it is a rule that the donation doth
not any longer subsist, and the equity of this rule is very evi-


68 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuaP. XI.


dent. For nature destines to the children the goods of their
fathers; and it was understood, that he who made the gift
when he had no children would not have given if he had had
any, or been in hopes to have any; and this made a tacit condi-
tion in his donation, that it should not subsist but in case he had
no children. But if it so falls out, that the children born after
the donation die before the donor has done any thing to revoke
it, there arises a doubt, to know if the donation is confirmed by
this death of the children, or if it remains null. And itis not
so clear that the donation is null in this case, as it is clear that
it is null when the children live. For seeing the donation was
revoked only in favor of the children, it may be doubted whether,
this motive ceasing when the children are no longer in being,
the law which annulled the donation ought to cease also, and
if the donation ought not to reassume its force ; or whether, on
the contrary, the donation, being once annulled by the birth of
the children, is not so for ever; so that the said birth of the
children brings back the goods into the family, to remain therein,
according to the expression of the law of the Romans which
hath established the rule of the revocation of donations by the
birth of children. For it is said in that law, that the goods re-
turn to the donor, who remains master of them, and may dispose
of them at his pleasure Which seems to decide tacitly that
the donation remains null: and this rule is of the number of
those whose evidence is not so clear.

We shall add only a second example, out of a thousand which
we meet with in the body of the laws. If two persons who are


emar. xt] NATURE AND SPIRIT OF Laws. 69


cided; and no man departs from his right, except out of fear,
and when there is danger of being unsuccessful in the event.
Thus, in the case where the difference does not remain any longer
undecided, and where there is no more uncertainty, nor danger,
the ignorance under which the person lay, in whose favor sen-
tence was given, ought not to hinder the effect which the an-
thority of a jadgment gives to truth and to justice. And thus
it is that the law doth determine it in the case of sentences from
which there lies no appeal. And this rule is likewise of the
number of those which in themselves have not such an evidence
as removes all manner of doubt.*

These two examples show plainly enough the difference be-
tween the rales whose equity appears at first view without any
reasoning, and those of which the equity is discovered only by
some reflections. But although it be true in these examples,
and in an infinite number of the like nature, that in the cases
where natural equity doth not form so evidently the decision,
it would seem as if one might take indifferently for the rule
either the one or the other of the contrary opinions, and that
therefore the rule which is preferred ought not to be looked upon
as a natural law, but only as an arbitrary law; yet it is most
certain, that all the rules of this kind, of which there is so great
a nomber in the Roman law, and which determine to one of the
opposite opinions by some principle of natural equity, are con-
sidered, not as laws purely arbitrary, but as natural laws, and
such in which the reason of equity hath prevailed, and formed
the decision. And thus we look upon all these laws as written
reason, that is to say, that which reason makes choice of among
the opposite sentiments. And we reckon only those to be pure
arbitrary laws, whose dispositions are such, that it cannot be
said, that a law different from them would be contrary to the
principles of equity. Thus, for example, it is altogether indif-
ferent to natural equity, whether for the entry of new vassals
any thing be due to the lord of the fee under the name of relief,
or any other right of the like nature, or that there be nothing
due to him besides bare homage; that the fines for alienations
be due only in sales, or that they be due for all sorts of acquisi-
tions; that there be a dowry settled by custom, without any
contract, or that there be none, unless it be agreed upon. ‘And


» See the seventh article of the second section of Transactions.


*


70 TREATISE OF LAWS. {cuaP. XL


likewise these sorts of things, and others of the like nature, are
differently regulated in divers countries, and it cannot be pre-
tended in any one of them, that these rules are natural laws:
and they are received only upon the bare authority of usage, and
as laws purely arbitrary; but the rules which are drawn from
the decisions collected in the body of the Roman laws, such as
those which we have just now taken notice of, have the charac-
ter of natural laws, by reason of the principles of natural equity
from whence they are deduced.


XXX. Natural Laws which seem sometimes as if they were
abolished.


It is likewise necessary to be observed, in relation to the dis-
tinction between natural laws, and positive, or arbitrary laws,
that there are some rules of the natural law which seem to be
sometimes abolished by contrary laws, as if they were only ar-
bitrary laws. Thus, the law which calls to the succession of a
father the daughters in conjunction with the sons, is a law en-
tirely natural, and yet it was not observed in the law which God
himself gave to the Jews; for by it daughters did not succeed
to their fathers, when there were males. And it was a question
worthy of being decided by God himself, whether daughters
who had no brothers might succeed to the estate of their fathers.
And God commanded, that in this case they should succeed!

But although it would seem by this law which thus excluded
daughters, that it may be said, either that the law of nature
does not require that daughters should succeed, or that the law


kingdom of France there are some customs, where the daugh-
ters who are married by their fathers, even without a marriage
portion, are deprived of all manner of right to the succession,
although they do not renounce it, unless the right of succession
be expressly reserved to them; because the fathers having set-
tled their daughters in other families by marriage, this establish-
ment is to them instead of all patrimony, and of all share in the
successions. ‘Thus, the laws which exclude the daughters when
there are sons do not derogate from the natural law, which calls
the daughters to successions ; because they give them, in lien of
the right of succession, another advantage which is ene
- it.
os oe XXXL Different Effects of s some Natural Laws.
ay We must, i in the last place, make this remark on the subject |
of the laws of nature, that there are some of them, which, al-
thoagh they be owned for such in all governments, have not,
however, everywhere the same extent and the same use. Thus
there-in-no government, wherein it is not owned to be agreeable
te. the law of nature that brothers, and other collateral relations,
should succeed to those who leave behind them neither descend-
ampte--nor. ascendants; but this right is very differently consid-
ered in divers places. For in the provinces of the kingdom of
France which are governed by their own customs, the right of
the heirs of blood is so much considered as a natural law, that
the said customs do not own any other heirs, and they appro-
priate to them a part of the estate, greater in some places, and
lesser in others, but which in all these customs is called the in-
heritance which cannot be taken from them; so that only the
remainder of the estate, which is over and above the portion
reserved to them by custom, can be disposed of to their preju-
dice. But in the other provinces, which have for their custom
the written law, that is, the Roman law, every one has power
to deprive his collateral relations, and even his brothers, of all
his goods, and to give them to strangers. So that the law of
nature, which calls the heirs of blood to successions, loseth its
use in these provinces, when they are excluded by a testament,
and hath its effect only in the successions of persons who die
intestate.

It appears by the extent which these customs give to the nat-
ural law, which calls the collateral relations to inheritances, and


72 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. xr.


by the bounds which are set to it by the written law, that they
have not in all places the same idea of the natural law which
calls collaterals to successions ; whereas people have everywhere
the same idea almost of all the other rules of the law of nature,
and attribute to them the same effect. As, for instance, all
governments receive alike the natural rules of equity, which
oblige the heirs to acquit the burdens of the succession, and
contractors to perform their covenants, and others of the like
nature.

This difference between the uniform use in all places of al-
most all the natural rules of equity, and the divers ways of ex-
tending or limiting that natural rule which calls collaterals to
successions, proceeds from this, that there is no rule which
leads to any thing contrary to those sorts of rules which are ob-
served alike in all places; whereas there is a rule which leads to
the restraining of that which calls the collaterals to successions.
For the laws permit people to make dispositions of their goods
by a testament; and the use of this liberty doth necessarily di-
minish the right of the heirs of blood. And since nature doth
not fix this liberty to a certain point, the written law hath ex-
tended it to the power of disposing of all one’s goods, to the
prejudice of his collateral relations, and the customs have re-
strained it to a certain portion of the goods; although the same
customs allow the depriving of the collateral relations of all
share in the inheritance, by deeds of gift executed in the lifetime
of the donor; because there is this difference between donations
executed in the lifetime of the donor, and dispositions made in


XXXIIL Remark on the Words “Divine Laws.”

Some may perhaps think, that the divine laws are not all of
them immutable; seeing God himself hath abolished many of
those which he gave to the Jews, because they were not agree-
able to the state of the new law. But it is still true, that those
very laws were immutable by man, and that the divine laws
which regulate our present state are no more susceptible of any
change. Concerning which it is to be remarked, that the dig-
nity of this name of divine laws is reserved to those which con--
cern the duties of religion, such as the two fundamental laws,
the Decalogue, and all the precepts contained in the Holy Serip-
tures about faith and manners: and as to the detail of the im-
mutable rules of equity, which relate to matters of contracts,
testaments, prescriptions, and other matters treated of in the
civil laws, although these rules derive their justice from the di-
vine law, which is the fountain of them, yet they have only the
name of natural laws, or of the law of nature; because God has
engraven them on our nature, and hath made them so insepa-
rable from reason, that it alone is sufficient for understanding
them, and that even those persons who are ignorant of the first
precepts, and of the spirit of the divine law, know these natural
rules and make laws of them to themselves.


XXXIV. Distinction of Laws of Religion, and of Laws of
Policy.

After this first distinction of laws immutable, and of arbitrary
laws, we must observe a second, which comprehends likewise
all the laws under two other ideas: one of the laws of religion,
and the other of the laws of civil policy: and these are two dis-
tinctions which must not be confounded; as if all the laws of
religion were immutable, and all the laws of policy were only
arbitrary laws. For there are in religion many arbitrary laws,
and in policy many laws that are immutable. Thus, there are
in religion laws which regulate certain ceremonies relating to
the external part of divine worship, or some points of church dis-
cipline, which are arbitrary laws, enacted by the authority of
the spiritual powers: and there are in policy immutable laws,
such as those which enjoin obedience to the supreme powers ;
those which command to give to every one his due, and to do
hurt to no man; those which command honesty, sincerity, fidel-

VOL. I. 7


74 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. XL


ity, and which condemn deceit and cheating; and an infinite
number of particular rules, which depend on the first funda-
mental laws. So that it is common both to religion and to
policy, to have both the use of immutable laws, and that of arbi-
trary laws; and we must therefore distinguish by other views
the laws of religion, and those of policy.

The laws of religion are those which regulate the conduct of
man by the spirit of the two primary laws, and by the inward
dispositions which incline him to all his duties towards God,
and towards himself, and towards others, either in private
affairs, or in what concerns the public order. And this takes
in all the rules of faith and manners, and also all those relat-
ing to the external part of divine worship and to church disci-
pline.

The laws of policy are those which regulate the external
order of society among all men, whether they know or are
ignorant of religion; whether they observe the laws thereof, or
have them in contempt.


XXXV. Religion and Policy have Laws in Common, and eack
of them hath its proper Laws. — Examples of these Three Sorts.


We may be able to judge by these first remarks about laws
of religion, and laws of policy, that they have rules which are
common to them both, and that both the one and the other
have some rules that are peculiar to each of them.

Thus, the laws which command obedience to the natural
power of parents, and to the authority of the spiritual and tem-


cHaP. XL] NATURE AND SPIRIT OF LAWS. 7


XXXVI The Laws common to Religion and Policy have their

But it is to be remarked, in relation to the laws which are
common to religion and to policy, that they have in every one
of these states a different use from what they have in the other,
For in religion these laws oblige to an upright intention in the
heart, which may not only fulfil the letter of the law outwardly,
but which may observe the spirit and design of it inwardly: and
in policy, one satisfies the laws by observing them outwardly,
and attempting nothing against their prohibitions. So that
although religion and policy have their common principle in the
divine appointment, and their common end of regulating and
governing men, yet they are distinguished by the means which
they use for accomplishing their end, in that religion regulates
the inward disposition of the mind, and the manners of men, in
order to move them to their duties; and policy exerciseth its
ministry only over the external actions of men, without meddling
with the internal disposition of the mind.


XXXVIL Difference between the Arbitrary Laws of Religion,
and the Arbitrary Laws of Human Policy.

We must also observe this difference between the arbitrary
laws of religion, and the arbitrary laws of civil policy, that these
are commonly called human laws, because they are laws which
men have established, and because it is human reason that is
the principle of them. But although the arbitrary laws of relig-
ion be also established by men, yet they are not called human
laws, but canons and ecclesiastical constitutions, or laws of the
church, because they are grounded on the direction of the holy
spirit which governs the church.

It is not necessary to enlarge further here on this distinction
of the laws of religion and of the laws of civil policy. It re-
mains only that we consider the general order of the laws of
temporal policy, that we may see what rank the civil laws have
therein.


XXXVIIL Laws of Temporal Policy.


The laws of temporal policy are of many sorts, according to
the different parts of the order of society, of which they are the
rules.


76 TREATISE OF LAWS. [coHap. XL


XXXIX. The Law of Nations.


Seeing all mankind make one universal society, which is
divided into divers nations which have their separate govern-
ments, and seeing nations have with one another different inter-
courses and communications, it was necessary that there should
be laws to regulate the order of these communications, both for
the princes among themselves, and for their subjects; which
takes in the use of embassies, negotiations, treaties of peace,
and all the ways in which princes and their subjects carry on
their intercourse, and keep up their engagements with their
neighbours. And even in wars, there are laws which regulate
the manner of declaring war, which moderate acts of hostility,
which maintain the use of mediations, of truces, of suspensions
of arms, of capitulations, of the safety of hostages, and other the
like matters.

All these things could not be regulated but by some laws:
and seeing nations have no authority to impose laws one upon
another, there are two sorts of laws which serve as rules to
them. One is of the natural laws of humanity, hospitality,
fidelity, and all those which depend on these first laws, and
which regulate the manner of behaviour which the people of dif-
ferent nations are to use towards one another in times of peace
and of war. And the other is that of the regulations which
nations agree on by treaties, or by usages which they establish,
and which they mutually observe. And the infractions of these
natural laws, of these treaties, and of these usages, are re-


HEAR MTT APS PR OR LAWS.


XL. The Public Law.

The first is, of those laws which relate to the public order of

the government, such as the laws denominated laws of the state,
which regulate the manner in which sovereign princes are called
to the government, whether it be by succession or election;
those which regulate the distinctions and the functions of the
public offices for the administration of justice, for the govern-
ment of the army, for the management of the public revenue,
and of those offices which are called municipal offices; those
which concern the rights of the prince, his demesnes, his rev-
enues; the government of cities, and all the other public regula-
tions.


XLI. Private Law, or that which regulates the Affairs between
Private Persons. | |

The second is, of those laws which concern the private prop-
erty of persons, and to which we give the name of private law;
which comprehends the laws regulating covenants, contracts of
all kinds, guardianships, prescriptions, mortgages, successions,
testaments, and other matters of the like nature between private
persons.

ALIL The Civil Law.

It is to these laws which regulate matters between private
persons, and the differences which may arise from them, that
most people appropriate the name of the civil law. But this
idea would take in also under the name of the civil law many
matters belonging to the public law, to the law of nations, and
even to the canon law; since it often happens that there arise
differences and disputes between private persons in matters of
the public law; as, for example, in the execution of offices, in
the levying of the public taxes, and in other the like matters;
and that such disputes between private persons happen also in
matters belonging to the law of nations, by the consequences of
wars, reprisals, treaties of peace; and even in ecclesiastical mat-
ters, as touching church benefices, and others. And, in fine, the
distribution of justice to private persons implies the use of
many laws, which are general regulations of the public order,
such as those which establish punishments for crimes, those
which regulate the order of judicial proceedings, the duties of

7 @


78 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cnmap. x1.


judges, and their different jurisdictions. So that it is a different
matter to frame a just idea, which may distinguish nicely and
precisely the civil law from the public law, and from the other
kinds of laws.


XLIIL Divers Ways of conceiving the Laws which compose the
Civil Law.

It is this mixture of all these several sorts of laws which
diversifies the ways of distinguishing them, and which renders
it difficult to reconcile the sense which is given in the Roman
law to these words civil law, with the meaning which we ascribe
to them; as it is also difficult to reconcile the ideas which we
commonly have of the law of nature and of the law of nations,
with those ideas which the distinctions in the Roman law give
us of them.


XLIV. Division of Laws in the Roman Law.


The Roman law distinguished laws into the public law, which
concerned the state of the republic, and private law, which re-
lated to the rights of private persons." This private law they
divided into three parts; the first was of the law of nature, the
second of the law of nations, and the third of the civil law. .
The law of nature they reduced to that which is common to men
and to beasts.P They extended the law of nations to all the
laws that are common to all people, and under it they compre-
hended the contracts which are in use in all nations :4 and they
restrained the civil law to the laws which are peculiar to one


cHaP. x1. NATURE AND SPIRIT OF LAWS. 79


covenants ; and which does not restrain the law of nature to
that idea which is given of it in the Roman law, But since
there is nothing more arbitrary than the ways of dividing and dis-
tinguishing things which may be considered under divers views,
and since the different distinctions may have their several uses,
provided we do not conceive false ideas of that which is essen-
tial to the nature of the things, it is of no great moment to
take up time in making the reflections which might be made on
these different ways of distinguishing the laws; and it sufficeth
to have made the remarks which are most material on their na-
ture, and their characters, and to have given these general ideas
of them, by which every one may be able to form unto himself
the distinctions which shall appear to him to be most just and
most natural. And as to the idea which we ought to form of
the civil law, it sufficeth to observe, that we never restrain the
meaning of the word civil to the laws peculiar to one city, or to
one people; neither do we extend it to all the laws which regulate
the matters from which there may arise differences between pri-
vate persons. As, for instance, we distinguish the civil law from
the canon law, and even from the customs and ordinances: and
the signification of the term civil seems to be fixed to the laws
which are collected in the body of the Roman law, to distinguish
them from our other laws. And we likewise give simply the
name of civil laws to the books of the Roman law; and it is by
this name that they are entitled, although this word is restrained
in the same books to another sense, as has been just now re-
marked. Thus, the civil law in this sense will comprehend many
matters of the public law, and even matters ecclesiastical, which
are collected in the books of the Roman law: and it will likewise
include every thing contained in those books which is not in use
with us, and which nevertheless is a subject proper to be studied
by those who apply themselves to the study of the Roman law,
because of the application that may be made of such matters
to those which are in use with us.


XLVL Written Law.— Customs.


It remains only that we take notice of one more distinction of
laws, which is that which is commonly made into written laws
and customs. By the written law is meant the laws that are set
down in writing; and in France this name is given particu-
larly to the laws that are written in the body of the Roman law.


80 TREATISE OF LAWS. [ouap. x1


Customs are the laws which were not originally written, but
which have been established, either by the consent of a people,
and by a sort of agreement to observe them, or by an insensible
usage which has given them the authority of laws.

We shall see in the thirteenth chapter what are the subject-
matters of all the kinds of laws, in what manner soever they are
distinguished, and what are the matters which we have chosen
out from among them to explain in this book: and we shall lay
down a plan of them in the fourteenth chapter.


XLVIL Two Sorts of Principles: One, of those which may be
reduced into Rules; and the other, of those which cannot be
fixed into Rules.


Before we make an end of this subject of the nature and spirit
of laws, we must observe one difference which distinguishes the
use of some of the principles that have been explained from
that of others, and which consists in this, that there are many of
these principles which are of such a nature, that it is easy and
necessary to reduce them into fixed rules, which may be easily
applied; whereas the others cannot be reduced into such rules.

These principles, for instance, that arbitrary laws are as facts —
which people are naturally ignorant of, and that it is not permit-
ted to any one to be ignorant of the natural laws, are two
truths which may be reduced into two fixed rules, which may be
easily applied. One, that arbitrary laws are not binding, and
have not their effect, till after they have been promulged: and
the other, that natural laws have their effect without any pro-


ent views which they may give in the particular application of


alt the mies,
XLVIL emer on thse Two Sori of Princpls.— Transition
wePaed ee 4h te the following Chapter.


Fide Widheenes between: the EE EE
gether’ certain rales, and those-which cannot bé fived in the enme
manner, hath made it neccesary to add here some reflections on
fa past of the principles which have been established, in order to
Ghmever in tiem truths, from which may be formed many rules
macessary for ths - understanding of the Roman laws, and


en: whieh they depend, these reflections shall be made the on»


chapter.

iihndds oo what concerns that other kind of principles, which
come be-téduced into rules, it sufficeth to remark in general,
that the: right ‘use of these sorts of truths ought to depend on
‘end understanding, and on the several views which

my bodied from stady, from experience, and from the different
calties that are to be regulated do arise. And it is in this use of
the judgment, and in the clearness of the understanding, enlight-
ened by all these views, that the most essential part of the sci-
ence of law doth consist; which science is nothing else but the


art of discerning justice and equity.’


* L.1, D. de just. et jure.


82 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. XIL


CHAPTER XII.


REFLECTIONS ON SOME REMARKS IN THE PRECEDING CHAPTER,
WHICH ARE A FOUNDATION OF SEVERAL RULES TOUCHING THE
U8E AND INTERPRETATION OF LAWS.


I. Natural Laws regulate both the Time past and the Time to
come, although never promulged, and the Arbitrary Laws
regulate only the Time to come, after Publication.


WE have seen that the natural laws are truths which nature
and reason teach men, that they have of themselves the justice
and authority which oblige people to obey them, and that no-
body can pretend ignorance of them: that, on the contrary, the
arbitrary laws are as facts naturally unknown to men, and
which are not binding till after they have been promulged.
From whence it follows, that natural laws regulate both the
time to come and the time past.* But arbitrary laws do not
meddle with the time past, which is regulated: by the preceding
laws, and have their effect only for the time to come:” and it is
to give them this effect that they are put down in writing, that
they are promulged, that they are recorded, to the end that no-
body may pretend ignorance of them. And because it is not
possible to make them known to every one in particular, it suf-
ficeth to give them the force of laws, that they be made known
to the public. For then they become public rules which every


ee


likewise te interpret them, in the same manner as.ancient: rules
are usefal in the interpretation of such es are newly established.
erste abe wdoremarck ry laws matally sapport and
explain one another? ee


, 2 Aeiit bee i J


All, Prmention for the Uoefness a Tifa of « Lenachteding


We tae: Pes: ‘arbitrary laws, ‘whether ‘they - be! estab-
Rehed by ties who have the right to make laws, or by some
‘amuge arid custom, are always founded upon some usefulness,
either t6 ‘prevent or put a stop to inconveniences, or upon some
@tker view ‘ef the public good: from whence it follows, that
though the said laws may cause other inconveniences, in the
place ef tlites which they have removed, and that sometimes we

‘what were the motives of enacting these sorts of
reas d Wherein their usefulness consists, yet’ we ought still to
patoume that the law which is in force is useful and just, until

ey eater law o ahetished by aiease: « "
Vite Ba ae!


Pe "E¥.-Oustoms ond Usages are the Interpreters of Lows...
‘110¥Fe: have seen that customs and usages serve as lnws : © ioe
Witenes it follows, that if customs and usages have the force of
laws, with much more reason are they to be used as rules in the
interpretation of other laws. And there is no better rule for ex-
plaining obscure and ambiguous laws, than the manner in
which they have been interpreted by custom and usage.®


V. Disuse abolishes Laws and Customs.


We have shown that the authority of customs and usages is
founded on this reason, that it ought to be presumed that what
has been observed for a long time is useful and just;! from
whence it follows, that if any law, or custom, hath been a long
time in disuse, it is abolished! And as its authority was
founded upon the long usage, so the same cause can take it


4 See the fourteenth article of the first section of the Rules of Law.

© See the ninth and eighteenth articles of the second section of the same Bus:
! See the thirteenth article of the same section.

5 See the tenth and eleventh articles of the first section.

b See the eighteenth article of the second section.

i See the tenth article of the first section.

' See the seventeenth article of the first section.


84 TREATISE OF LAWS. {cuaP. XIL


away. For it shows that what has ceased to be observed is no
longer useful.


VL The Laws and Customs of the Neighbouring Places serve as
Examples and Rules.


It follows also from the same presumption, which makes us
judge that what has been long observed is useful and just, that
if in some provinces, or other places, they want rules for certain
difficulties in matters which are there in use, but which are
not so minutely regulated there as to determine these sorts of
difficulties, and it appear that the said difficulties are regulated
in other places, where the same matters are likewise in use; it
is natural to follow the example of those places, and especially
that of the chief towns. Thus, we see in the Roman law, that
the provinces conformed themselves to the usage of Rome.™


VIL We must judge of the Meaning and Intent of a Law by
its whole Tenor.


We have seen that it is by the spirit and intendment of the
laws that we are to understand and apply them: that, in order
to judge aright of the meaning of a law, we ought to consider
what its motive is, what are the inconveniences against which
it provides, and what is the usefulness which may redound from
it; the relation it hath to ancient laws, the changes it makes in
them; and to make the other reflections, whereby we may be
able to apprehend rightly its meaning: from whence it follows,
in the first place, that, in order to find out by all these views the


anam |6 Ws AD-UTEEPEEVaTION OF Laws. -
Som the tees, and whi ia found t be coutmzy to dhe intent
of the law.
a Ta: | CT
TE Tr pi the Decaf pres, by the Ione of :
Moe aR a terge to cure
oh thet a mee
peenshous of lawe are defective, we must supply them, so. as to
rane etree onan aaleneare cia aes aicasrae
shpat etd ee of ov fe
Pegrsglt is tle gel ae

tf BRS X.. Lows which are interpreted favorably.
‘pBade dn libewine another eonsequence of the same remark on
the spirit of lawe, that some of them are to be interpreted in
such a manner, as to give them the whole extent they are capa-
ble of, without violating justice and equity ; and others, on the
doiteetry; ste ‘to be restrained to a more limited sense.‘ ‘Thus,
the :tnws which relate in general to what is of natural liberty,
thous wihiel: permit all -sorte of covenants, and all those which
fiver equity, are to be interpreted with all the extent that cam
ts - given ‘than, without encroaching upon other laws, or upon
goed -meamuers* § For which reason, the. —— a en
fevor-i-thie manner are called favorable causes.


XI. Laws which are strictly interpreted.

But the laws which derogate from this liberty, those which
prohibit what of itself is not unlawful, those which derogate
from common right, those which make exceptions, which grant
dispensations, and others of the like nature, ought to be re-
strained to the particular cases which they regulate, and to what
is expressly included in their dispositions.’


XII. Equity. — Rigor of the Law.


We may place among these different interpretations, which
give some extent to laws, or which restrain them, the rules which


© See the third and twelfth articles of the second section of the Rules of Law. See
in that twelfth article the cases where it is necessary to have recourse to the prince for
the interpretation of the law.

P See the eleventh article of the second section.

4 See the fourteenth article of the second section ; — /. 1, D. de const. pecun.

" See the fifteenth article of the second section.


VOL. I. 8


86 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. X1I.


concern the temperaments of equity, which may be used on
some occasions, and the rigor of the law, which must be fol-
lowed on others.

But we shall not stop here to give examples of these several
interpretations, nor to explain the difference between equity and
the rigor of the law, and that which concerns the use of the one
and the other. This detail shall be explained in its proper place’
We shall only observe touching these sorts of causes which are
commonly called favorable causes, such as those of widows,
orphans, churches, marriage portions, testaments, and others of
the like nature, that this favor ought always so to be under-
stood, as not in the least to prejudice the interest of third per-
- sons, and that the favor of these sorts of causes is not to be
extended beyond the bounds of justice and equity.


XIIL Interpretation of the Benefits of Princes.


Upon the same principle of the favorable interpretation of
some laws, and the strict interpretation of others, doth depend
the rule of two different interpretations of the will of princes,
in the gifts and privileges which they grant to some persons.
For when the said gifts are such, as that we may give to them
a full and entire extent, without any prejudice to other persons;
they are always interpreted in favor of the person whom the
prince had a mind to honor with this benefit, and an extent is
given to it suitable to what the liberality that is natural to princes
does demand. But if it be such a gift and privilege as cannot
be Pinel nish in this ‘manner ee pre] oe to other per-

} 1 sd


CHAP. XI.| USE AND INTERPRETATION OF Laws. 87


punish and restrain those who transgress their different disposi-
tions; whether it be that they do not accomplish what the laws
prescribe, or that they do what the laws forbid, or that they
transgress the bounds of what they permit. And according to
the ways in which their dispositions, and their design, are vio-
lated, they deprive those of their eflects who do not fulfil what
they enjoin; they punish those who do what they forbid, or who
do not that which they command; they annul that which is
done contrary to the order which they prescribe; they repair the
consequences of their infractions; they take vengeance for every
thing that violates their dispositions; and, in fine, they maintain
their authority by all the ways that are necessary for preserving
order.®


Xv. Lanes restrain not only what ts | directly contrary to their
_ Dispositions, but also what is indirectly against their Tatention._

iJ: féliows libewise from the same remark on the justice.and
euthielty:of laws, that they restrain not only whet is directly:
appetite to.their express dispositions, but also what is.indizecthy.
quiduiary:qother intention. : And whether it appear thet ‘botit.
this apinit and letter of the law be violated, or that only the spisit.
Gicthe: law: be: teanegreesed,‘ and the letter of it scemingly ob
aaa aca ta a a a

e x


XVL Laws are made for what happens commonly, and not for
one single Case.


It is also another consequence of laws being the rules of the
universal order of society, that no law is made to serve only for
one person, or for one case, or for one singular and particular
fact; but they provide in general for what may happen, and
their dispositions respect all the persons, and all the cases, to
which they extend” And therefore the wills of princes, which
are limited to particular persons, and to singular facts, such as a
pardon, a gift, an exemption, and others of the like nature, are
favors, concessions, privileges, but not laws. And although very
often they be singular cases which are the motives of new laws,


* See the eighteenth and twentieth articles of the first section of the Rules of Law.
® See the nineteenth article of the first section.
Y See the twenty-first and twenty-second articles of the first section.


88 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuap. xi.


yet they do not regulate even those very cases which have given
occasion to the said laws, and which were otherwise regulated
by preceding laws; but they only take care to regulate for the
future cases like unto those which gave rise to them. Thus, in
France, the edict about mothers, and that about second mar-
riages, have provided against the inconveniences to come, and
the preceding cases have been regulated according to the dispo-
sitions of the laws that were in force before that.*


XVII. Extent of the Laws, according to their Design.


Lastly, it is another consequence of the preceding remark,
that, since laws are general rules, they cannot regulate the time
to come, so as to make express provision against all inconven-
iences, which are infinite in number, and that their dispositions
should express all the cases that may possibly happen ; but it is
only the prudence and duty of a lawgiver to foresee the most
natural and most ordinary events, and to form his dispositions in
such a manner as that, without entering into the detail of the
singular cases, he may establish rules common to them all, by
discerning that which may deserve either exceptions or particular
dispositions." And next it is the duty of the judges to apply
the laws, not only to what appears to be regulated by their ex-
press dispositions, but to all the cases where a just application
of them may be made, and which appear to be comprehended
either within the express sense of the law, or within the conse-
quences that may be gathered from it.


XVIIL There are Rules which are general and common io all


CHAP. x1.) USE AND INTERPRETATION OF LAWS, - &


matters, such as those which enjoin honesty and sincerity, and
which forbid deceit and fraud, and others of the like nature.
Others are common to many matters, but not unto all. Thus,
this rale, that covenants are in place of a law to those that make
them, agrees to sales, exchanges, letting and hiring, transactions,
and to all the other kinds of covenants, but has no relation to
the matter of guardianships, nor to that of prescriptions. Thus,
the rule of rescission, upon account of the party’s being dam-
aged in more than the half of the just price, which takes place
in the alienation of lands by a sale, doth not take place in an
alienation made oF a transaction. .
be LiL LES She SWE. ee ee eri
“The. doperionce af daingwishing these ieee Sorts, a
tw ts a -~ : as
A folbows Seu this samen that tein of iameuaneasi in: the
dup and dppiication of the laws,to observe and to distinguily
distinetions


thi rifles whith -are:dommon to all matters without

thes whith extend to several matters, but not unto ells. and
thene=tviieh ure peculiar only to one; that we may avoid falling
indy the enor, to ‘which many persons are. liable, of extending &
vale that'ie peculiar to one matter to another, where it has no
wee, and? even ‘where it would be false. Thus; for example, we
eid thie rdlein ‘the Roman law, that in- ambiguous: expres-

sions we must chiefly consider the intention of the person aa ane
speaks ;° this indefinite rule being found in a title of several
rales concerning all matters, and not pointing out what matter it
properly belongs to, it seems to be general and common to all:
and if we apply it indifferently to all matters, we shall draw
the same inference from it in contracts as in testaments, where
we are to interpret the ambiguous expression by the intention of
the person whose will it is intended to explain. However, this
application, which will be always just in testaments,‘ will be
often found false in contracts, for in testaments it is only one
person alone who speaks, and his will ought to serve as a law.
But in covenants, it is the intention both of the one and the other
party which is the law common to both. Thus, the intention


» See that distinction in the fifth article of the first section of the Rules of Law.
* In ambiguis orationibus, maxime sententia spectanda est ejus, qui eas protulisset.
++ 96, D. de reg. jum.
¢ It is remarkable that this 96th law, D. de reg. jur., above cited, is taken out of the
treatise of Mecian about devises in trust.
g*


90 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. XIT.


of the one party ought to answer to that of the other, and it is
necessary that they understand one another, and that they agree
together. And according to this principle, it often happens that
it is not by the intention of the person who speaks that the am-
biguous clause is to be interpreted; but rather by the reasonable
intention of the other party. Thus, in a sale, if the seller hath
made use of an ambiguous expression concerning the qualities
of the thing sold; as if, in selling a house, he said that he sold
it with its services, without distinguishing whether they be ser-
vices which the house owes, or which are due to it; and the
house is found to be subject to a service which was not known,
such as a right of passage, a service of not raising a building
higher, or other of the like nature, the great inconveniency of
which would have either prevented the buyer from buying at
all, or from giving so great a price for it, if he had known of the
service; this ambiguity of the expression of the seller will not
be interpreted by his intention, but by the intention of the
buyer, who had no reason to imagine that the house was sub-
ject to any such service. And this seller shall be bound for all
the effects of warranty, pursuant to the rules of this matter.


XX. Discernment of the Exceptions.


We have seen that some laws are so general, and so certain
everywhere, that they do not admit of any exception; and,
on the contrary, that there are many laws to which there are
exceptions. It follows from this rule, that we must not indif-
ferently apply the general rules to all the cases that seem to be


i 4 *
- a ™ . . |
j =F hi 15 oii} a Li =


CHAP. XII.] USE AND INTERPRETATION OF LAWS. 1)


ments from the general roles concerning the formalities of testa-
ments; and it is also another arbitrary rule, according to the
usage of France, that the rescission of a sale, on account of lands
being sold for less than half of the true value, does not take
place in sales made publicly by order of a court of justice.
Thus, it is a natural law, that we cannot enter into covenants
that are contrary to the laws and to good manners; and _ this
law makes an exception to the general rule, that we may make
all sorts of covenants. And it is by another natural law, that
an exception is made to the rule of the restitution of minors, in
the case of such engagements as were reasonable for them to
enter into, and where any prudent, discreet man would have
done the same.

It is easy to perceive, that the exceptions which are made by
arbitrary laws are observed and learned by bare reading, and
by memory, and that it is by study that we must learn them.
But the discerning the exceptions which are of the natural law
does not always depend on bare reading, and it requires reason-
ing. For there are natural exceptions which we do not find
written down in laws; and even those which are written are
not always joined to the rales which they restrain. So that
the! kriowiedgo of! exceptions, which is : ‘pO necessary, demands
éjunily both study in general, and a particular attention to. the
spirit and design of the laws which are to be applied; to the
end we may not encroach upon the exceptions, by giving too
large an extent to the general rules.


XXIL Advice concerning the Use of the Rules.


We may add, as a last remark, and as a consequence of
all the others, that all the different views which are so neces-
sary in the application of laws demand a knowledge of their
principles, and of their detail; and this implies the light of good
sense, accompanied with study and experience. For without
this foundation one is in danger of making false applications of
the laws; either by misapplying them to other matters than
those to which they have a relation; or by not discerning the
bounds which are set to them by exceptions ; or by giving too
large an extent to equity against the rigor of the law, or to the
rigor against equity ; or for the want of the other views which


are to regulate the use of laws<


& See the last article of the second section of the Rules of Law.


92 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaP. XII.


CHAPTER XIII.


A GENERAL IDEA OF THE SUBJECT-MATTERS OF ALL THE LAWS:
REASONS FOR MAKING CHOICE OF THOSE WHICH SHALL BB
TREATED OF IN THIS BOOK.


I. All the Subject-Matters of Laws are either of Religion or
of Temporal Policy. .

As we have already seen that all the different sorts of laws
are reduced to two kinds, which comprehend them all, one of
the laws of religion, and the other of the laws of temporal
policy ; and that, of these last, some are common both to the
one and the other kind; so we ought likewise to distinguish all
the matters of laws into two kinds, one of the matters of the laws
of religion, and the other of the matters of the laws of policy,
supposing that, among all these matters, there are some of them
that are common to both the kinds.


Il. Matters peculiar to Religion.


Thus, the matters which concern the mysteries of faith, the
sacraments, the inward disposition of the mind, the discipline of
the church, are spiritual matters, which are proper to religion.


IIL Matters peculiar to Civil Policy.
And the matters which relate to the formalities of testaments,


to come thats ofthe laws of teapot poley, and to point
ee


V. Dives Sorts of Matters of Temporal Policy.

Pho. soatiets of teenporal policy ‘are :of three sorts, scotading
to the three kinds of laws of this policy which heve been already
ormare ial bain law — ee ané *the
private jaw...

; | VL These of the Low of Nations.

‘+. She. mutéers of the law of nations, in the sense which : this
‘tata has with us, as has been already remarked, ave the ways
by which’ the : different intercourses and correspondeness are
wemiadon between one nation and amother, suck as weatics of
peace, traces, suspensions of arms, sincerity in negotiations, the


VIL Those of the Public Law.

lee mations ef the public law are those which concern the
Pint regan of every state, the ways of calling to
the sovereign power kings, princes, and other potentates, by euv-
cession, by election; the rights of the sovereign, the administra-
tion of justice, the militia, the treasury, the different functions
of magistrates and other officers, the government of towns, and
others of the like nature.


VIII. Those of Private Law.


The matters of private law are the engagements between
private persons, their commerces, and whatever may be neces-
sary to be regulated among them, either for preventing of dis-
putes, or for ending them; such as contracts and covenants of
all kinds, mortgages, prescriptions, guardianships, successions,
testaments, and other matters.


IX. Remark on the Ordinances, the Customs, the Roman Law,
and the Canon Law; to show what are the Matters that come
withis the Design of this Book.

In order to explain what are all the matters that shall be
treated of in this book, and the reasons of the choice which has


94 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuap. XITl.


been made of them, it is necessary to make first of all a remark
on the several laws that are in use in the kingdom of France.

In France there are four different kinds of laws,—the ordi-
nances, and the customs, which are the laws peculiar to that
kingdom ; and such parts of the Roman law, and of the canon
law, as are there observed.

These four sorts of laws regulate in France all matters, of
what nature soever; but their authority is very different.

The ordinances have a universal authority over all the king-
dom, and are all of them observed in all parts of the kingdom,
except some of them whose dispositions respect only some of
the provinces.

The customs have their particular authority ; and each cus-
tom is confined to the limits of the province or place where it
is observed.

The Roman law hath in the kingdom of France two different
uses; and hath for each of them its proper authority.

One of these uses is, that it is observed as a custom in many
provinces, and is there in the place of laws in several matters.
These are the provinces of which it is said, that they are gov-
erned by the written law; and for the usage of those provinces
the Roman law has the same authority as in the other provinces
their peculiar customs have.

The other use of the Roman law in France extends to all the
provinces, and comprehends all matters; and it consists in this,
that those rules of justice and equity which are termed the writ-
ten law, because they are written in the Roman law, are ob-


CHAP. x1tt.] GENERAL IDEA OF THE SUBJECT. _ 6


X. What these Matters are.— Reasons for the Choice that has
been made of them.

Having made these remarks, it is now easy to show what
view the author proposed to himself in the choice of the mat-
ters which he thought proper to comprehend in this book, and
to distinguish them from those which he thought fit to exelude.

Among all the matters which are regulated by these four sorts
of laws which are in use in France, viz. the ordinances, the ens-
toms, the canon law, and the Roman law, there is a great num-
ber of them which are distinguished from all the others, in a
manner which has been the reason of the choice that has been
made of them.

The matters which are thus distinguished from the others are
those of contracts, such as sales, exchanges, letting and hiring,
loan, partnership, a deposit, and all other covenants; of guardi-
anships, prescriptions, mortgages; of successions, testaments,
legacies, substitutions; of proofs and presumptions; of the state
of persons; of the distinctions of things; of the manner of
interpreting laws; and many other matters, which have all of
them this belonging to them in common, that the use of them is
more frequent and more necessary than that of other matters.

The author considered that these matters are distinguished
from all the others, not only in that the use of them is more fre-
quent, but particularly in that their principles and their rules are
almost all of them natural rules of equity, which are the founda-
tions of the rules of the matters regulated by the ordinances and
customs, and even of such matters as are not known in the Ro-
man law. For all the matters regulated by the ordinances and
customs have therein no other laws besides some arbitrary rules ;
so that it is upon the natural rules of equity that the principal
law and decision of such matters depend. Thus, for example,
in the matter of fiefs, the customs have only regulated the
different conditions of them in divers places; but it is by the
natural rules of covenants, and by other rules of equity, that
questions touching these matters are decided. Thus, in the mat-
ter of testaments, the customs regulate the formalities of them,
and what dispositions testators may or may not make; but it is
by the rules of equity that the questions are decided touching
the engagements of heirs or executors, the interpretation of the
wills of testators, and all the other matters in which there may


96 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHap. xIv.


be any difficulty. For, as has been already observed in another
place, it is always by these rules that questions of all kinds are
discussed and decided.

Since, therefore, it is in the Roman law that these natural rules
of equity have been collected together, and that they are there
collected in the manner which has been observed in the preface,
and which renders the study of them so difficult and perplexed;
it is this that engaged the author in the design of this book, and
to make choice of these matters, of which the plan may be seen
in the following chapter.


CHAPTER XIV.


A PLAN OF THE MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK OF THE
CIVIL LAW IN ITS NATURAL ORDER.


I All Matters of Law have a Natural Order.


Aut the matters of the civil law have among themselves a sim-
ple and a natural order, which forms them into one body, in
which it is easy to see them all, and to perceive with one view
in what part every one hath its rank. And this order is founded
on the plan of society which has been already explained.


Il The Foundation of this Order.


cHaP. xtv.] PLAN OF THE MATTERS. 97


The second concerns the ways in which the civil laws con-
sider and distinguish persons by certain qualities which have
relation to engagements or successions; as, for example, the
qualities of a father of a family, or of a son living under the
father’s jurisdiction, of a major or a minor, the qualities of a
child lawfully begotten, or of a bastard, and others of the like
nature, which constitute what is called the state of persons.

The third comprehends the ways in which the civil laws dis-
tinguish the things which are for the use of men, with respect to
engagements and successions. Thus, with respect to engage-
ments, the laws distinguish the things which enter into com-
merce from those which do not enter into it; such as things
public and things sacred; and with respect to successions, a dis-
tinction is made of goods paternal and maternal, of estates of
inheritance and those of purchase.


IIL, The General Division of the Matters of this Design into
Two Parts; the First of Engagements, and the Second of Suc-
cesstons.

According to this order, we shall divide all the matters of this
work into two parts. The first shall be of engagements, and
the second of successions. And both the one and the other
shall be preceded by a preliminary book; the first title of which
shall contain the general rules concerning the nature and inter-
pretation of laws; the second shal] be of persons; and the third
of things.


IV. These two Parts are preceded by a Preliminary Book of the
Rules of Law in general, of Persons, and of Things.

As to the distinction of the matters of the first part, which is
of engagements, it is to be remarked, as has already been
shown in the plan of society, that engagements are of two
kinds.

The first is of those which are formed mutually between two
or more persons, by their will and consent; and this is done by
covenants, when men engage themselves mutually and volun-
tarily in sales, exchanges, in letting and hiring, in transactions,
compromises, and other contracts and covenants of all sorts.

The second is of such engagements as are formed otherwise
than by mutual consent; such are all those which are made
either by the will of one person alone, or without the will of

VOL. I. 9


98 TREATISE OF LAWS. {cHaP. xrv.


either of the parties. Thus, he who undertakes to manage the
affair of his absent friend engages himself by his will, without
the consent of the absent person. Thus, the tutor is engaged to
his pupil, independently of the will of the one or the other.
And there are divers other engagements which are formed with-
out the mutual will of those who are bound by them.

All these sorts of engagements, whether they be voluntary or
involuntary, have divers consequences, which are reduced to
two kinds. The first is of those sorts of consequences which
add to engagements, or which strengthen them; such as mort-
gages, the privileges of creditors, obligations in which several
persons are bound each for the whole, suretyships, and others
which have this character of adding to engagements, or of
strengthening them.

The second kind of the consequences of engagements is of
those which annul them, or which change them, or diminish
them ; such are payments, compensations, novations, resciseions,
restitutions of matters to the first state they were in.


V. Division of the Matters of the First Part into Four Books.


It is to these two kinds of engagements, and to these two
kinds of their consequences, that all the matters of this first
part are reduced: and they shall be ranked there into four
books.


VI. First Book, of Engagements by Covenant.


The first shall be of covenants, which are voluntary and mv-
tual engagements.


CHAP. xrv.] PLAN OF THE MATTERS. ‘99


X. Matters of the First Book.

This first book, of covenants, shall have in the beginning there-
of a title of covenants in general. For, seeing there are many
principles and many rules which are common to all the kinds
of covenants, order requires that we should not repeat those
common rules in every covenant to which they belong, but that
we should gather them all together in one place. We shall
afterwards rank under particular titles the different kinds of
eovenants, and we shall add, at the end of the first book, a last
title, of the vices of covenants, such as fraud, stellionate, and
others; in which we shall treat of the effect which error and
ignorance, whether it be of fact or of law, force and fear, and
other vices, have in the covenants wherein they happen to be.

We have inserted in this first book of covenants the matter
of usufruct, and that of services, because usufruct and services
are often required by covenants, as by donations, by sales, by
exchanges, by transactions, and by other contracts. Thus,
although a usufruct and a service may be acquired by testa-
ment, yet it is natural that these matters, which ought to be
only in one place, should be put down in the first place to which
they have relation.


AL Matlers of the Second Book.

The second book, which shall be of engagements without a
covenant, shall take in those which are formed without a mutual
consent; such as the engagements of tutors, those of curators,
who are named ‘either to persons, such as minors, prodigals,
madmen, and others, or to goods, as to a vacant succession;
the engagement of persons who manage the affairs of others in
their absence, and without their knowledge, and that of the per-
sons whose affairs have been managed; the engagements of
persons who chance to have something in common together
without a covenant; and there are divers other sorts of invol-
untary engagements, and some which are even formed by ac-
cidents.


XIL Matters of the Third Book.


The third book shall treat of the consequences of engage-
ments, whether they be voluntary or involuntary, which add to
them, or corroborate them. and shall contain the several matters


100 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cuaP. XIV.


which have this character; such as mortgages, the privileges of
creditors, the obligations of persons bound jointly together each
for the whole sum, suretyships, costs, and damages. This book
shall likewise take in the matter of proofs and presumptions,
and of an oath, which are consequences of all sorts of engage-
ments, and which corroborate them. And although proofs and
an oath serve likewise to dissolve engagements, yet this matter,
which ought not to be put in several places, ought to be inserted
in the first place where it comes in naturally. We shall like-
wise place among the consequences which strengthen and
fortify engagements, possessions and prescriptions, which con-
firm the rights which people acquire by covenants, and by other
titles. And although prescriptions have also the effect to annul
engagements, yet it is natural to place them in this book, for the
same reason that proofs are taken into it.


XIII. Matters of the Fourth Book.

The fourth and last book of this first part shall be of the con-
sequences which diminish, change, or annul engagements, and
which shall contain the matters which have this character; such
as payments, compensations, novations, delegations, rescissions,
and restitutions.


XIV. The Second Part, which ts of Successions.
The second part, which is to be of successions, comprehends
a great number of matters, and different enough to make a di-
vision of them into five books.


cuaP, Xrv.] PLAN OF THE MATTERS. 101


these matters should go before, they shall be contained in a first
book.


XVIL Second Book, of Legal Successions,
Which shall be followed by a second, in which legal succes-
sions shall be explained.


XVIIL Third Book, of Testamentary Successions,
And by a third, which shall contain testamentary succes-


XIX. Fourth Book, of Legacies, and Donations in Prospect of
Death.


Seeing it often happens that persons who name heirs, or ex-
ecutors, in their testaments, and those also who will have no
other heirs besides the heirs of blood, do not leave all their
goods to their heirs, or executors, but make particular donations
to other persons by testaments, or codicils, or other dispositions
made in prospect of death; these sorts of dispositions shall be
the subject-matter of a fourth book.


XX. Fifth Book, of Substitutions, and Legacies in Trust.
And lastly, seeing the law has added to the liberty of making
heirs, or executors, and legatees, that of substitutions, and of
devises in trust, which call a second successor in the place of
the first heir, or executor, or of the first legatee; this matter of
substitutions, and of devises in trust, shall be the subject-matter
of a fifth book.


XXI. Matters of the First Book.


- The first of these five books, which shall be of successions in

general, shall contain the matters that are common to the two
kinds of successions ; such as the engagements of the quality of
heir, or executor, the benefit of an inventory, the manner of ac-
cepting an inheritance, or succession, or of renouncing it, and
the partitions among co-heirs, or co-executors.


XXII. Matters of the Second Book.
The second book, which shall be of legal successions, shall
explain the order of these successions, and the manner in which


children and other descendants are called to them; as also
9° |


102 TREATISE OF LAWS. [cHaPp. XIV.


fathers, mothers, and other ascendants; brothers, sisters, and
other collaterals. These legal successions are also called suc-
cessions of intestates: and this word is particularly made use of
in the Roman law, because the heirs at law, who are the heirs
of blood, do not succeed except when there is no testament;
but this is not to be understood of persons to whom a, legitime,
or child’s part, is due by law.


XXIII. Matters of the Third Book.


The third book, which shall be of testamentary successions,
shall contain the matters which concern testaments, their formal-
ities, disherison, undutiful testaments, the legitime, or filial
portion, and the dispositions of those who have contracted a

second marriage.


XXIV. Matters of the Fourth Book.


The fourth book shall be concerning legacies, and other dispo-
sitions made in prospect of death: and in that we shall treat of
codicils, of donations in prospect of death, and of legacies.


XXV. Matters of the Fifth Book.


The fifth book shall contain the matters relating to the several
kinds of substitutions, and of legacies and institutions of heirs,
or executors, in trust for others.


XXVI. The Conclusion of this Plan of the Matters.— Reasons
for the Order observed in tt.


CHAP. XIv.] PLAN OF THE MATTERS. 103


Covenants in general, we have placed that of the Contract of Sale,
because that, of all the covenants, there is not any one which
contains so many particular matters as the contract of sale, and
because the rules of that contract agree to many other cove-
nants, and give a great deal of light to other matters. ‘Thus,
for other the like considerations, all the other matters have been
ranged in the order which they have; but it would be too te-
dious, and to no manner of purpose, to give a reason in each
particular matter for the situation in which it is placed. We
shall only observe, that, although the matter touching mortgages
might have been placed in the number of covenants, because it
is usually by covenant that the right of mortgage is acquired,
yet it was proper to put this matter in another place, because the
mortgage is never a primary covenant and a principal engage-
ment, it being always an accessory to some other engagement,
and often to engagements which are contracted without any
forma] covenant, such as those of tutors and guardians, and oth-
ers also, in which the mortgage is acquired by law. Thus, this
matter hath naturally its order in the third book: and the same
reasons have obliged us to place the matter of suretyships, and
those of obligations, wherein severa] persons are bound jointly
for the whole debt, in the same rank.


XXVIL Remark on the Matters which belong to the Public Law.


We must observe, in the last place, that, besides the matters
which are to be treated of in this book according to the plan
which has been just now drawn of them, there are others which
are contained in the body of the Roman law, and which are also
in use in France, and for which reason it would seem as if they
ought to have been comprehended in this book; such as the
matters relating to the exchequer, to cities and corporations,
criminal matters, the order of judicial proceedings, and the duties
of judges. But these matters being regulated by the ordinances,
and being a part of the public law, it was not proper to insert
them here. And because there are in the Roman law many es-
sential rules concerning these matters, which, being natural
rules, are in use with us, the topics to which they relate will
make the subject of a separate and distinct work. It will be
proper, however, to indicate here the order of these matters, and
also of those of our customs which are unknown to the Roman
law.

All these matters of the public law ought to be preceded by


104 TREATISE OF LAWS. (cmap. xIv.


those which shall be explained in this book. For, besides that
they presuppose many rules which shall be there explained, it is
natural, since the public law has a relation to private persons,
that the matters which concern private persons should go be-
fore those which are of the public law; and it is probably for
these reasons that, in the Roman law, the matters concerning
the exchequer, and those relating to cities or corporations, and
criminal matters, have been placed after the others. Thus, after
the matters treated of in the present work, we may place those
fiscal and municipal matters which concern the rights of the
prince and the police of cities, those matters which regard cor-
porations, and other bodies and communities, and those which
relate to crimes and punishments. The order of judicial pro-
ceedings, comprehending the practice both in civil and criminal
cases, and the functions and duties of judges, as it is a matter
which has relation to all the others, seems properly to belong at
the end of the whole.

As to those matters which are peculiar to the customs of
France, such as fiefs, the right of redemption belonging to fami-
lies, wardships, the community of goods between husband and
wife, the institutions of heirs by contract, the prohibition of
bequeathing a part of the goods to the prejudice of the heirs of
blood, the renunciations by daughters of their right to succes-
sions, and every thing which the customs have in particular
relating to successions, donations, and other matters, it is not
necessary to mention their rank here; it being easy to judge that
these matters relate either to engagements, or to successions.


3 7E ae


,. heathy : , ma ti}


ts aes


CIVIL LAW IN ITS NATURAL ORDER.


PRELIMINARY BOOK.


THE CIVIL LAW.


PRELIMINARY BOOK,


OF THE RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL, PERSONS, AND


1. The Subject-Matter of this Book.— We have given the
name of Preliminary to this book, because it contains three
kinds of matters, which, being common to all the others treated
of in this work, and necessary for understanding them aright,
ought to be placed first in order. And, indeed, the matters con-
tained in this book are, as it were, the first elements of the law;
for, before we descend to a particular inquiry into the rules of
the law, it is necessary, in the first place, to know, in general, the
nature and several kinds of these laws, and the ways of under-
standing and applying them justly. And this shall be the sub-
ject-matter of the first title of this book.

2. And because in the examination of the several matters
treated of in the body of the law, and in particular laws, we
must always consider the persons whom the said matters and
laws relate to; and because there are in all persons certain
qualities, with respect to which they are considered and distin-
guished by the laws, and which have a particular relation to all
the matters treated of in the body of the law; these qualities,
and these distinctions of persons, shall be considered in the
second title of this book.

3. And the third title shall contain the ways in which the
laws consider and distinguish the several kinds of things, by the
qualities which fit them for the use and commerce of persons ;
and according as these uses and this commerce of things enter
into the order established by the laws.


108 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


TITLE I.
OF THE RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL.


4. The Matters treated of in this Title. — The rules which shall
be explained under this title concern in general the nature, use,
and interpretation of laws. And seeing these rules are common
to all the matters contained in the body of the law, and are of
constant use, the reader is advised not to content himself with
a bare and simple reading them over, but to peruse them dil-
igently from time to time, and to have recourse to them al-
ways upon occasion. It will not be improper for him to read
likewise, at the same time, the eleventh and twelfth chapters of
the Treatise of Laws.


SECTION I.
OF THE SEVERAL SORTS OF RULES, AND OF THEIR NATURE


5. Of the Ideas formed by the Words “Laws” and “Rules.” —
We understand commonly by these words laws and rades, that
which is just, that which is commanded, that which is regulated.
But whereas the laws ought to be written, to the end that the
writing may fix the sense of the law, and determine the mind to
conceive a just idea of that which is established by the law, and


TIT. 8EC.1.] RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL, 109


7. It is not necessary, after what has been said of laws and
rules in the Treatise of Laws, to define anew in this title what a
law is, and what a rule: it will be sufficient here to give an idea
of the rules of law, in the sense which comprehends the written
rules ; because it is in the knowledge of all the written rules,
that the whole science and study of the law consist.


Arricie I.


8. Definition of Rules. —The rules of law are short and clear
expressions of that which justice requires, in the respective
cases. And each role hath its peculiar use for those whom its
provision may concern. ‘Thus, for example, it may happen,
through several accidents, that the buyer is dispossessed of what
he has bought, or molested in his possession, by those who pre-
tend to be owners of it, or to have some right to tt; and the
justice that is common to all these kinds of accidents, which
requires the seller to put a stop to all evictions, and other
troubles, is contained in the expression of this rule, that every
seller ought to warrant that thine which he has sold

II.

9. Two Sorts of Rules, Natural and Arbitrary. — Laws, or
rules, are of two sorts; one is of those which flow from the law
of nature and equity; and the other is of such as derive their
origin from the positive law, which are otherwise called human
and arbitrary laws, because they have been established by men.®
Thus, it is a rule of the law of nature, that a donation may be
revoked, because of the ingratitude of the donee; and it is a
rule of the positive law, that donations which are to have their
eflect in the lifetime of the donor and donee ought to be
enrolled.


TIL


10. Which are the Natural Rules. — The rules of the law of
nature are those which God himself hath established, and which
he communicates to mankind by the light of reason. These are
the laws which have in them a justice that cannot be changed,
which is the same at all times and in all places; and whether


* L.1, D. de reg. jur. ;—1. 23, D. de verb. sign.

» 1.9, D. de just. e jur.;—1 11, D. de just. et jur. Bee the eleventh chapter of
the Treatise of Laws.

VOL. I. 10


110 THE CIVIL Law. [PREL. BOOK.


they are set down in writing or not, no human authority can
abolish them, or make any alteration in them. Thus, the rule
which obliges the depositary to preserve and to restore the
thing committed to his keeping, that which obliges one to take
care of the thing he has borrowed, and other rules of this kind,
are all of them natural and immutable rules, which are observed
in all places.


IV.


11. Which are the Arbitrary Rules.— Arbitrary rules are all
those that have been established by men, and which are such,
that, without offending natural equity, they may either prescribe
one thing, or a thing quite different. Thus, for instance, it was
free for men to establish or not to establish the use of fiefs.
Thus, a longer or shorter term of years might have been fixed
for prescriptions ; and a greater or lesser number of witnesses to
a testament. And this diversity, which is not fixed by nature,
makes these laws to derive their authority from the arbitrary
regulation made by the lawgiver who has established them;
and consequently renders them liable to changes.*


V.


12. Another Division of Rules. — The rules of law, whether
natural or arbitrary, are of three kinds. Some of them are
general, which agree to all matters; others are common to
several matters, but not to all; and many are peculiar only
to one matter, and have no relation to others. For example,


.


TIT. 1.8EC.1.] | RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 111


that, in the use and application of the rules of law, it is neces-
sary to discern in every one its limits and its extent.


VI

13. Two Ways of abusing the Rules. — All these rules cease
to have their effect, not only when they are drawn beyond their
limits, and applied to matters to which they have no manner of
relation, but likewise when, in the application of them to the
matters to which they belong, they are either falsely or wrong-
fully applied, contrary to the true intent of them. Thus, the
rule for making void all sales, in which any one of the par-
ties is damaged above the half of the just price, would be ill
applied to a sale made by way of accommodation in a trans-
action.‘

VIL

14. Exceptions are Rules. — Exceptions are rules which limit
the extent of other rules; and they prescribe contrary to the
general rule, out of a particular view, which renders either just
or unjust that which the general rule, being understood without
any manner of exception, would on the contrary have rendered
either unjust or just. Thus, for example, the general rule, that
we may make all manner of contracts, is limited by the rule
which forbids those that are contrary to equity and good man-
ners. Thus, the prohibition to alienate things that are sacred
is limited by the rule which allows them to be sold for neces-
sary causes, certain formalities being observed in the sale.é


VITIL


15. Two Sorts of Exceptions. — Exceptions, as well as rules,
are of two kinds. Some of them are of the law of nature, and
others of the positive law; as appears by the examples in the
foregoing article, and by all the other exceptions, every one of
which may be reduced to one or other of these two kinds.5


ample of rules common to many matters : — Contractus legem ex conventione accipi-
wt JZ. 1,§ 6, D. depos. As to particular rules, each title hath its own. V. i. 2, Cod.
de resc. ,

‘71, in f- D. de reg. jur.

SL. 1,D. de pact.;—l. 4, C. de inut. stip.;—1. 7, § 7, D. de pact.;—l. 6, Cod.
ewd.;—I 31, C. de sacrosanct. ecel. ; — v. 1. 14, et auct. hoc jus eod.

» This is a consequence of the preceding and second articles of this section.


112 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


IX.

16. Laws oughi to be known.— All laws ought either to be
known, or at least laid open to the knowledge of all the world,
in such a manner, that no one may with impunity offend against
them, under pretence of ignorance. Thus, the natural rules
being truths that are unchangeable, the knowledge of which is
essential to reason, nobody can pretend ignorance of them, since
they cannot say that they are destitute of common reason,
which makes these rules known. But arbitrary laws have not
their effect, till the lawgiver has done all that is possible to
make them known; and this is done by the ways that are com-
monly practised for the publication of these kinds of laws; and
after they are promulged in due form, it is presumed that they
are known to every body, and they oblige as well those who
pretend ignorance of them, as those who know them! :


X.


17. Two Sorts of Arbitrary Laws, Written Laws and Oustoms.
— Arbitrary rules are of two sorts. The one is of those that
have been originally enacted, written, and promulged, by those
that had the legislative authority ; and such are, in France, the
edicts and ordinances of the kings. The other is of such laws,
of whose origin and first establishment there is nothing appears,
but which are received by universal approbation, and by the
constant use that the people have made of them time out of
mind ; and these are the laws or rules to which we give the
name of customs.*


TIT. 1. SEC.1,] § RULES OP LAW IN GENERAL. 113


they have, either by the ancient consent of the inhabitants of the
said provinces, or of the princes who governed them!


XII.


19, Natural Laws regulate what is Past, and what is to come.
— The laws of nature being highly just, and their anthority
always the same, they determine equally all, that is to come, and
all that is past, which remains undecided.™


XIII.


20. Arbitrary Laws regulate only what is to come.— Although
the justice of arbitrary laws is founded upon the public good,
and upon the equity of the motives which give rise to them ;
yet seeing they derive their authority only from the power of
the lawgiver, who determines us to what he prescribes, and
wens: rent fe seaphereselsshgergea: einen emi
hutown te the people by publication, they regulate enly what
—— ee eo vt
Heo naek
3: et ve 1 XIV. no ae
7 Bhs Phe Byes of New Laws with respect to sohet to ais
Pho alfaive which happen to be depending, and undeckded, at the
tihwe when new laws are enacted, are judged by the tenor of the
preceding laws; unless, for some particular reasons, the new
laws mark expressly that they shall take place even in things
that are past. Or that, without any such expression, the new
laws be such as ought to serve for a rule to what is past; as if
the new laws serve only to revive a former law, or a rule of nat-
ural equity, which had been altered by some abuse; or that they


1 Id custodiri oportet, quod moribus et consuetudine inductum est. ZL. 32, D. de
led. Inveterata consuetudo pro lege non immerito custoditur. Nam cum ips»
leges nulla alia ex causa nos teneant, quam quod judicio populi receptex sunt, mefito
et ea, qu sine ullo scripto populus probavit, tenebunt omnes. Nam quid interest
suffragio populus voluntatem suam declaret, an rebus ipsis et factis? D. l. $2, $1,
D. de legib. Tam conditor quam interpres legum solus Imperator juste existimabi-
tur: nihil hac lege derogante veteris juris conditoribus, quia et eis hoc majestas im-
perialis permisit. L. ult. in fin. cod. de leg. et const. prin. Communis reipublics sponsio.
£.1 41 2, D. de legid.

Although these last words be spoken of laws, and not of customs, yet they agree to
castoms as much, or rather more, than to laws. See the ordinance of Charles VII.,
of the year 1458, Art. 125, and of Lewis XII., of the year 1510, Art. 49, for reducing
the customs into writing.

™6¢ 11, Inst. de jur. nat. gent. et civ.;—l. 11, D. de justit. et jur.

" L. 7, C. de legib.

10°


114 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


regulate questions, for the deciding of which there was no law
nor any custom in being. ‘Thus, for instance, when the king
ordained that the price of offices should be distributed according
to the order of mortgages, that law served as a rule for the
causes that were undecided in the provinces, where they had
no custom to the contrary, to serve them as a rule.°


XV.


22. Another Effect of New Laws, as to what is Past. — As new
laws regulate what is to come, so they may, as occasion requires,
change the consequences that former laws would have had. But
this is always without prejudice to the right that any persons
had already acquired. Thus, for example, before the ordinance
of Orleans, one might have made substitutions in several de-
grees, without any bounds, and that ordinance did limit the sub-
stitutions that should be made thereafter to two degrees besides
the institution. But whereas that ordinance did not for the
future hinder the effect of the substitutions which had been
made before, the ordinance of Moulins did reduce to the fourth
degree, besides the institution, the substitutions which had been
made before the ordinance of Orleans. And at the same time,
it excepted the substitutions of which the right was already
fallen and acquired, although it was beyond the fourth degree.”


XVI.


23. Of the Time when New Laws begin to be in Force.—
Arbitrary laws begin to have their effect for the time to come,


TIT. 1.8EC.1.] RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 115


XVII

24. Two Ways by which Laws are repealed.— Arbitrary laws,
whether they are established by the authority of a lawgiver, or
by custom, may be abolished or changed two ways; either by
an express law, which repeals them, or makes some alteration in
them ; or by a long disuse, which changes or abolishes them."

XVIII.

25. Several Effects of Laws.— The use and authority of all
laws, whether natural or arbitrary, consists in commanding, for-
bidding, permitting, and punishing."

XTX.

26. Laws restrain whatever is done in Fraud of them. — Laws
restrain and punish, not only what is evidently contrary to the
sense of their words, but likewise every thing that is directly or
indirectly against their intent, although it seem to have nothing
contrary to the terms of the law, and also every thing that is done
in fraud of the law, and toeludeit.t Thus, the laws which forbid
the giving or bequeathing any thing to certain persons annul
the donations or bequests made to other persons interposed, that
they may transmit the bounty to those who are capable of re-
ceiving it in their own names.


XX.


27. Laws annul or restrain what is done contrary to their
Prohibition.— If a law forbids, either in general to all persons,
or in particular to some sort of persons, certain contracts, or a
certain commerce, or contains other prohibitions, of what kind
soever; whatever shall be done contrary to these prohibitions,
with all its consequences, shall either be annulled or restrained,
according to the quality of the prohibition and that of the con-
travention; and that even although the law make no men-
tion of the nullity, and that it leave the other penalties undeter-
mined.*


© § 11, Lest. de jur. nat. gent. et civ.; —l. 32, in f. D. de legib.

° L.7, D. de leg.

t 7D. 5, C. de legib. ; —1. 29, D. eod. ; —1. 30, eod.

" L. 5, C. de legib. The law would be very imperfect, if it should not annul what
is done contrary to its prohibitions, and if it should let the contravention of them go
wapunished. Ulp. t. 1,4 2;—v. L. 63, D. de rit. nup.


116 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


XXI.

28. Laws are General, and not made for One Case or One
Persom — Laws are never made for one particular person, nor
limited to one single case; but they are made for the common
good, and prescribe, in general, what is most useful in the ordi-
nary occurrences of human life.*


XXIL


29. Sequel of the foregoing Rule.— Seeing the laws embrace,
in general, all the cases to which their intention may be applied,
they do not express in particular the several cases to which they
may have relation. For this particular enumeration, as it is im-
possible, so it would be to no purpose. But they comprehend
in general all the cases to which their intention may serve as a
rule. ¥


XXITL


30. Equity is the Universal Law.— If any case could happen
that were not regulated by some express and written law, it
would have for a law the natural principles of equity, which is
the universal law that extends to every thing.*


SECTION II.


OF THE USE AND INTERPRETATION OF RULES.


TIT. 1. SBC. U.] RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 117


ing. And this kind of interpretation is limited to the expression,
that it may be known what the law says. The other is, when it
happens that the sense of a law, how clear soever it may appear
in the words, would lead us to false consequences, and to decis-
ions that would be unjust, if the laws were indifferently applied
to every thing that is contained within the expression. For, in
this case, the palpable injustice that would follow from this ap-
parent sense obliges us to discover by some kind of interpreta-
tion, not what the law says, but what it means; and to judge
by its meaning how far it ought to bn ecthecnlenh: mini telaat,-oms
the bounds that ought to be set to its sense. And this kind of
interpretation depends always on the temperament that some
other rule gives to the law, which we should be in danger of mis-
applying, if we did not explain it. For it is this temperament
that gives to the said law its use and its verity. But this mat-
ter will be better understood by examples. And in order to
make them the more useful for such as have least knowledge
and experience, we shall set down one example so clear, that
it will convince every body, at first sight, that we onght not
always to take the law in the literal sense; and we shall sub-
join another, in which it will not be so very easy to discern this
trath.

32. Examples.— There is no rule in law more evident and
certain than this, that a depositary ought to restore the thing de-
posited to the person who intrusted him with it, whenever he
shall please to call for it; but if the owner of money deposited
has lost the use of his reason when he calls for his money, every
body must own that it would be a great injustice in the deposi-
tary to give it him back. For who does not see, that there is
another rule which forbids the giving to a mad man a thing that
may perish in his hands, or which he may make a bad use of,
and that to restore it to him would be to do him prejudice ?
Thus, it is by this second rule that we interpret and limit the
sense of the other.

33. This is another most certain rule, that the heir succeeds
to the rights of the deceased; but this rule would be ill applied
to the heir of a partner, who should pretend to succeed to the
deceased in his quality of partner, for that does not descend to
the heir. And this is founded upon another rule, which requires
that partners should choose one another reciprocally: and by
this rule it would be unjust that the heir of a partner should be


118 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


partner, unless he were approved of by the other partners, and
they likewise approved of by him. Thus, this second rule
obliges us to interpret the sense of the other, and to restrain it.
And we see in this second example, that it is not so easy in it
as in the first to discover the principle upon which this interpre-
tation is grounded, and which gives to each of these rules its
just effect, by limiting the sense of the first.

34. It appears by these examples, and will appear likewise in
all the others, where it is necessary to interpret the sense of a
law, that this interpretation, which gives to the law its just effect,
is always founded upon some other rule, which requires another
thing than what appeared to be regulated by the sense of the
law not rightly understood.

35. The View of Equity is the First Way to interpret the Laws.
— It follows from this remark, that, for the right understanding
of a rule, it is not enough to apprehend the apparent sense of
the words, and to view it by itself; but it is necessary likewise
to consider if there are not other rules that limit it. For it is
certain that, every rule having its proper justice, which cannot be
contrary to that of any other rule, each rule hath its own justice
within its proper bounds. And it is only the connection of all
the rules together that constitutes their justice, and limits their
use. Or rather, it is natural equity, which, being the universal
spirit of justice, makes all the rules, and assigns to every one its
proper use. From whence we must infer, that it is the knowl-
edge of this equity, and the general view of this spirit of the
laws, that is the first foundation of the use and particular inter-


TIT. SEC. 11.] RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 119


table, before the arbitrary law was enacted. Thus, for instance,
it is just and equitable, that he who has courteously lent his
money, without taking a note for it, should be admitted to prove
the loan, if he has other proofs than a note which he omitted
to take, and the debtor denies that he borrowed the money,
And the same equity requires also the same usage in the other
kinds of covenants. But because it is for the public good, and
agreeable to equity, not to leave room for too great a facility of
bringing false proofs, and because it is sufficient to advertise
those who lend, or who make other agreements, to take a note
in writing, the ordinance of Moulins, and that of 1667, which
have forbid the proofs of covenants without writing, when they
exceed the sum of one hundred livres, have by that regulation
set just bounds to the liberty of receiving proofs of covenants.
And if some proofs are received contrary to the letter of that
ordinance, as in the case of a necessary deposit, such as that
which is made in the case of fire, it is because the intention of
the ordinance doth not extend to this case, where it has been
necessary to make the deposit, and impossible to take a receipt

37. Another Example.— Thus, for another instance of the
effect of the will of the lawgiver, in what relates to the interpre-
tation of arbitrary laws by natural equity, the same equity re-
quires, that a buyer should not take any advantage of the neces-
sity of a seller, to purchase a thing at too lowa price. And
upon this principle, it would seem to be just to annul all sales
in which the price falls short of the true value of the thing, either
a third or fourth part, or even less, according to the circum-
stances. But the inconveniences that would attend the making
void all sales in which the parties should be found to sustain
such damages, gave occasion to a law, which restrains the liber-
ty of annulling sales on account of the lowness of the price to
the sales of immovables, in which the damage sustained should
exceed the half of the just value of the thing sold. And this
law puts a stop to all other use and all other application of
equity, as to any damage sustained in the price of any thing
sold.


38. Several Views necessary for the Interpretation of Laws. —
In order to make a right use of this fundamental principle for
the interpretation of laws, which is equity, it is not enough to
observe in each rule what the light of reason finds to be equita-


120 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


ble in its expression, and in the extent which it seems to have;
but we must join to this a general view of universal equity, that
we may discern in the cases which are to be regulated, whether
there are not other rules that demand a justice altogether differ-
ent, to the end we may not pervert any rule from its true use,
and that we may apply to the matters of fact, and to their cir-
cumstances, the rules that agree to them. And if they are nat
ural laws, we are to reconcile them by the extent and limits of
their truth; or if they are arbitrary laws, we are to fix their
equity by the intention of the lawgiver.

39. The reader must take heed that he do not confound these
kinds of interpreting laws, which we have been just now speak-
ing of, with those interpretations that are reserved to the sover-
eign, of which mention shall be made in the twelfth article of
this section. And it will be easy to perceive the difference be-
tween these two kinds of interpretations, by the rules which
shall be explained in this section.


Arr. I.


40. The Spirit of Laws.— All rules, whether natural or arbi-
trary, have their use, such as it is assigned to every one of them
by universal justice, which is the spirit of them all. Thus, the
application of the laws is to be made, by discerning what it is
that this spirit demands; which in natural laws is equity ; and
in arbitrary laws is the intention of the lawgiver. And it is in
this discerning faculty that the science of the law does chiefly
consist.*


TIT. 1. SEC. 11.] RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 121


sequence contrary to equity, if the lender were allowed to take
back the thing lent during the time that the borrower is actu-
ally employing it to the use for which he borrowed it, and from
whence it cannot be taken without some damage to the borrower,
For this rule ceases to take place in this case, because of another
rule, which requires that the lender should suffer the borrower to
reap the advantage of the favor he bestows on him, and that he
ought not to turn his kindness into an injury.


iL.


Jrom thomconirarg to the Intention of the Lawgiver:—~ If on arbir
wary: law being applied to 2 case which it seems to include, there
follows a eomecquence contrary to the intention of the lawgiver,
the rule ‘ought sot to be extended to that case. Thus, for ex
pesons with respect to whom they are to be null, does not render
them ‘euch ‘with respect to the executor who is burdened with the
wabetitatinn ; beeatise the executor was obliged by another rule to
eaase pablitation.of it to be made, as being charged with the exe-
exthion ofthe. dispositions of the testator; and he ought not te
reap any benelit by his own negligence, or his dishonesty.
IV.


43. Of the Rigor of the Law.— We must not take for injus-
tices contrary to equity, or to the intention of the lawgiver, those
decisions which seem to have some hardship in them, which is
called the rigor of the law, when it is evident that that rigor is
essential to the law from which it flows, and that no temperament
can be applied to the said law without annulling it. Thus, for ex-
ample, if a testator, having indited his testament, and having read
it over in the presence of witnesses, takes the pen in his hand to
sign it, and dies in the very instant; or if after the testator has
signed it, he forgets to get it signed by one of the witnesses ; or
if there is wanting to the testament any one of the formalities


> 7.188, D. de reg. jur. ; —1. 90, eod. ;—1. 17, § 3, D. de commod. See art. 1 of sect.
3, of the Loan of Things to be restored in Specie.

© ZL. 13, § 2, D. de excus. tut. See the ordinance of Moulins, art. 57, and that of
Heary IL in the year 1553, art. 4; —v. 1. 12, § 3, C. de adif. priv.


VOL. I. 11


122 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


required by law or by custom; this testament will be absolutely
null, whatever certainty we may have of the will of the testator,
and however favorable the contents of his testament may be; be-
cause these formalities are the only way which the law allows of
for proving the will of a testator. Thus the rigor which annuls all
testaments, in which the formalities required by law are wanting,
is essential to those very laws; and to mitigate the rigor of them
would be to annul them quite.?


V.


44. The Mitigation of the Rigor of the Law.— If the hardship
or rigor of a law be not a necessary consequence of the law, and
inseparable from it, but the law may have its effect by an in-
terpretation which mitigates the said rigor, and by some tempera-
ment, which equity, that is, the spirit of the law, requires; we
must in this case prefer equity to the rigor which the letter of the
law seems to demand, and follow rather the spirit and intendment
of the law, than the strict and rigid way of interpreting it. Thus,
in the case of a testator, who devises his estate in this manner,
that if his wife, whom he leaves big with child, be brought to bed
of a son, he shall have two thirds of his estate, and his wife one
third; and if the child in the mothers womb happen to be a
daughter, the mother and the daughter shall divide the estate
equally between them; if the mother happens to bring forth both
a son and a daughter, the rigor of the law seems to exclude the
mother, because she is not called to any part of the succession, in
the case that has happened. However, the father having declared


TIT. 1. SEC. H.] RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 128


a son die at the same time, as in a fight, so that it is not possible
to know which of them survives the other; and if the widow,
mother to the son, claims against the heirs of the father that part
of the father’s estate which would have fallen to the son if it were
certain that he had outlived his father; the rigor of the law would,
in this ease, exclude the mother, because, the father and the son
having died at the same time, and there being no evidence that
the son was the longest liver, he cannot be said to have succeeded
as heir to his father. And so the estate of the father would go to
his own heirs, and not to the heirs of the son. But equity re-
quires, that in this doubt it should be presumed, in favor of the
mother, that it was the father who died first. And this is likewise
the natural order.
VI.

45. When we ought to follow either Equity or the Riger of the
Lew.— It follows from the foregoing rules, that we cannot lay it
down as a general rule, either that the rigor of the law ought to be
always followed, contrary to the temperament of equity, or that it
ought always to yield to equity. But this rigor becomes an in-
justice, in the cases in which the law will admit of an equitable
interpretation; and it is, on the contrary, a just rule, in the cases
where such an interpretation would destroy the law." Thus, the
word rigor of the law is taken either for a hardship that is unjust
and odious, and no ways conformable to the spirit of the laws, or
for a rale that is inflexible, but which has nevertheless its justice.
And we must be careful never’ to confound the use of these two
ideas ; but we ought to make a right discernment, and to apply
either the just severity, or the temperament of equity, according
_ to the preceding rules, and those which follow.


VIL


46. We are not at Liberty to follow indifferently either the Rigor
of the Law, or ity. — It is never free and indifferent for us to
choose either the rigor of the law, or equity, so as to be at liberty
in one and the same case to apply either the one or the other in-


& L.9,§1, D. de reb. dub. It is to be remarked, as to this second instance, that it
is to be understood only of such estates as mothers have a right to succeed to, pur-
suant to the ordinance of Charles IX., commonly called the Edict of Mothers.

» This article is a consequence of the foregoing rules.


124 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


differently, and without injustice. But in every fact we must de-
termine ourselves either to the one or to the other, according to
the circumstances, and to what the spirit of the law requires
Thus, we must judge according to the rigor of the law, if the law
admits of no mitigation; or according to the temperament of
equity, if the law will bear it.!


VIIL


47. The Rigor of the Law, when tt is necessary to be followed,
hath its Equity.— Although the rigor of the law seems to be dis-
tinct from equity, and to be even opposite to it, it is nevertheless
true, that, in the cases in which this rigor ought to be followed,
another view of equity makes it just. And as it never happens
that what is equitable is contrary to justice, so likewise it never
happens that what is just is contrary to equity. Thus, in the ex-
ample of the fourth article, it is just to annul the testament in
which the formalities required by law are wanting; because an act
of such consequence ought to be accompanied with serious cir
cumstances, and sure proofs of its truth. And this justice hath its
equity in the public good, and in the interest which even testators
themselves have, especially such as are sick, that that may not be
easily taken for their will which it is not very certain that they
have declared so to be.!


TX.


48. Interpretation of Obscurities and Ambiguities in a Law.—
The obscurities, ambiguities, and other defects of expression which


TIT. 1. 8EC.11.]  |§ RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 125


x:

49. A Law to be interpreted by its Motives, and the Tenor of it.
— For understanding aright the sense of a law, we ought to con-
sider well all the words of it and its preamble, if there be any, that
we may judge of the meaning of the law by its motives, and by
the whole tenor of what it prescribes; and not to limit its sense to
what may appear different from its intention, either in one part of
the law taken separately, or by a defect in the expression. But
we must prefer to this foreign sense of a defective expression, that
which appears otherwise to be evident by the spirit of the whole
law. Thus, it is to transgress against the rules and spirit of
laws, to make use, either in giving of judgment or counsel, of
any one part of a law taken separately from the rest, and wrest-
ed to another sense than what it has when it is united to the
whole.*


XI.


50. How an Omission in a Law may be supplied. — If there hap-
pens to be omitted in a law any thing that is essential to it, or
that is a necessary consequence of its disposition, and that tends
to give to the law its entire effect, according to its motive; we
may in this case supply what is wanting in the expression, and
extend the disposition of the law to what is included within its
intention, although not expressed in the words.°


XII.


51. In what Cases we must have Recourse to the Prince for the
Interpretation of a Law.— If the words of a law express clearly the
sense and intention of the law, we must hold to that. But if the
trae sense of the law cannot be sufficiently understood by the in-
terpretations that may be made of it, according to the rules that
have been just now explained, or, the sense of the law being
clear, there arise from it inconveniences to the public good; we
must in this case have recourse to the prince, to learn of him his
intention, as to what is liable to interpretation, explanation, or miti-


" L.%, D. de legib. ; —1. 6, § 1, D. de verd. sign. ; —1. 13, § 2, D. de excus. tut. See the
preceding articles. See, upon the word preamble, the 134th law, § 1, D. de verd. obl.

° L.13, D. de testib.;—1. 11, D. de prescr. verd.; —1. 17, C. de excus. tut.;—l. 7,
§ 2, D. de juried. Sec in this section the 21st, 22d, and 23d articles, which serve as ex-
amples of this.


11°


126 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


gation; whether it be for understanding the law, or mitigating it
severity.?


XIII.


52. We must follow the Law, although its Motive be unknown. —
If, the true meaning of a law being well known, although we are
ignorant of its motive, there seems to arise from it some inconven-
ience that cannot be avoided by a reasonable interpretation, we
must presume that the law has nevertheless its usefulness, and its
equity, founded upon some view of the public good, which ought
to make us prefer the sense and authority of the law to the reason-
ings that may be brought against it. For, otherwise, many laws
very useful and well established would be overthrown, either by
some other views of equity, or by subtilty of reasoning.2


XIV.


03. Laws which are favorably extended. — The laws which are
in favor of that which the public good, humanity, religion, the
liberty of making contracts and testaments, and other such like
motives render favorable, and those which are made in favor of
any persons, are to be interpreted in as large an extent as the
favor of these motives, joined with equity, is able to give them;
and they ought not to be interpreted strictly, nor applied in such
a manner as to be turned to the prejudice of those persons in
whose favor they were made."


PZ. 9, C. de leg.;—L 1, eod.; —TI. ult. eod. ;— Nov. 143;—L 11, D. eod. "That


i


TIT. 1. 3EC. 11.] RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 127


XV.

4. Laws which are restrained. —'The laws which restrain our
natural liberty, such as those that forbid any thing that is not in
itself unlawful, or which derogate in any other manner from the
general law; the laws which inflict punishments for crimes and
offences, or penalties in civil matters; those which prescribe cer-
tain formalities; the laws which appear to have any hardship in
them; these which permit disinheriting, and others the like, are to
be interpreted in such a manner as not to be applied, beyond what
is clearly expressed in the law, to any consequences to which the
lawe do not extend. And, on the contrary, we ought to give to
such laws all the temperament of equity and humanity that they |
are capable of.
| ~ XVL
_ &6. Laws which ere not to be extended beyond what their Words
expressiy mention. —If any law or custom happens to: be estab-
lished upon particular considerations, contrary to other rules, or to
the: general law, it ought not te be drawn to any consequence be-
yund, the cnees which the words of the law mark expressly: Thus,
the.cedinange which forbids the receiving proof of contracts ex»
quoting. the.vaiue of one hundred livres, and the proof of facts dié-
ferent from what appears to have been agreed on, does not extend
to facts of another nature, where a contract does not come into
question.*


XVIL.


56. The Grants of Princes are favorably interpreted. — The
favors and grants of princes are to be favorably interpreted, and
ought to have all the reasonable extent that the presumption of
the liberality that is natural to princes can give them ; provided
that they are not extended in such a manner as to cause prejudice
to other persons."


® This is a consequence of the preceding rules. ZL. 42, D. de poen.;—l 155, § ult.
D. de reg. jer.;—t. 11, D. de pan.; —vid. |. 32, eod.; —1L. 19, D. de lib. ef post. ; —
L10,§1, D.dereb dub.;—1.14, D. de legib.; —i. 24, D. de pign. Although the ex-
ample of this slave be quoted in this law 10, § 1, D. de reb. dub. upon the subject of
testaments, yet it may be also applied here.

' ZL. 141, D. de reg. jur.; —l. 14, D. de legib. ; — v. l. 39, eod.

° L. 3, D. de const. princip.; —1. 2, § 16, D. ne quid in loco publ. fiat; —v. l. 2, C. de


,


128 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


XVIII.

57. Laws are interpreted one by another. — If the laws in which
there is some doubt, or other difficulty, have any relation to other
laws which may help to clear up their sense, we must prefer to all
other interpretations that which they may have from the other
laws. Thus, when new laws have reference to old ones, or to
ancient customs, or ancient laws to modern ones, they are inter-
preted one by the other, according to their common intention, in
so far as the latter laws have not abrogated the former.*


XIX.


58. Laws are interpreted by the Practice. —If the difficulties
which may happen in the interpretation of a law, or custom, are
explained by an ancient usage, which has fixed the sense of the
law, and which is confirmed by a constant series of uniform de-
crees, we must stick to the sense declared by the constant practice,
which is the best interpreter of laws.”


XX.


D9. In what Cases the Customs of Neighbouring Places, and of the
Chief Towns, serve as Rules to the other Places. — If any provinces
or other places want certain rules for solving difficulties in matters
that are there in use, and the said difficulties are not regulated by
the law of nature, or by any written law, but depend on custom
and use, they ought in this case to regulate themselves by the prin-
ciples that follow from the customs of those very places. And if
that does not determine the difficulty, they ought to follow what


TIT. I. sEc. 1] RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 129


munity of goods, and other matters of the like nature. Thus,
judges being established to administer justice, their authority ex-
tends to every thing that is necessary for the exercise of their fune-
tions; such as the right of inflicting penalties on those who con-
travene the orders of justice; and it is the same thing as to all the
other consequences of their ministry.*
XXIL
61. The Laws which permit any Thing are extended from More
to Less. —In the laws which permit any thing, we draw the
consequence from the greater to the lesser. Thus, those who
have a right to give away their goods for nothing, have much
more aright to sell them. And, in like manner, those who have a
right to appoint executors by a testament, have with much greater
reason a right to bequeathe particular legacies,”


XXTIL


62. The Laws which forbid extend from the Lesser to the Greater.
—In the laws which forbid any thing, we draw the consequence
from the lesser to the greater. Thus, prodigals, who are not al-
lowed to have the management of their own estate, are with much
greater reason rendered incapable of alienating it. Thus, those
who are declared to be unworthy of some office, or some honor,
are much more unworthy of a greater office, and of a more con-
siderable honor.


XXIV.


63. An Exception to the two preceding Rules. — This extension
of laws from the lesser to the greater, and from the greater to the
lesser, is limited to the things which are of the same kind with
those that are mentioned in the law, or which are such that its
motive ought to be extended to them, as in the examples of the
foregoing articles.‘ But we must not draw the consequence either
from the greater to the lesser, or from the lesser to the greater,
when they are things of a different kind, or such as the spirit of


* ZT. 2, § 5, mf. D. de aquad aque pluvie arcend.; —l. 7, § 2, D. de juried. ; —
L 2, cod.


> 7. 21, D. de reg. jur.;—l. 168, eod.;—1. 26, eod. See the two following articles.

© L. 4, D. de senatorib.; —1.7, § ult. D. de interd. et releg.;—1. 5, D. de serv. export.
Bee the following article.

4 1.110, D. de reg. jur. ;—l. 165, eod. ; —1. 4, D. de fundo dot.


130 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


the law is not applicable to. Thus, the law which permits per
sons who have attained to the years of marriage, although minors,
to bind themselves by contracts of marriage, and to engage their
estates for the performance of the covenants that are consequences
of the marriage, would be wrongfully applied to other sorts of
contracts, although of less importance. Thus, the liberty which
an adult person has in his minority, to divide his whole estate by
will, would not be rightly extended to the liberty of making over
any part of it by a deed of gift that should take effect in his life-
time. Thus, the power which belongs to a lord of a manor, who
has a royalty, or ample jurisdiction for the administration of justice
within his own lordship, by a special grant of the sovereign, would
be wrongfully applied to such as have grants only of an inferior
jurisdiction, and in causes of lesser moment. Thus, it would be
improper to extend the power of the highest judicial tribunal toa
court of subordinate or inferior jurisdiction. Thus, the laws which
brand persons with infamy would not be rightly extended to the
confiscation of goods, although honor is much more valuable than
any goods.


XXV.

64. Tacit Prohibitions. — If any law should put a stop to the

inquiry into any abuse, by pardoning it for the time past, this
would be in effect to forbid it for the time to come.‘

XXVI.

65. How Persons acquire Rights by the Effect of Laws. — When


TIT. I, SEC. 11, RULES OF LAW IN GENERAL. 131


a right comes to any person by the disposition of a law, this right
is acquired by the effect of the law, whether the person knows or
does not know the law; and likewise whether he knows or is ig-
norant of the fact on which depends the right which the law gives
him. ‘Thus, the creditor whose debtor happens to die acquires a
right against the heir, or executor, although he knows nothing of
the death of his debtor, and even although he is ignorant that the
law binds the heirs, or executors, or administrators, for the payment
of the debts of the persons to whom they succeed. Thus, the son
is heir to his father, althoughi he is ignorant of his right to succeed,
and knows nothing of the death of his father. And it is a conse-
quence of this rule, that the rights of this nature, which persons
aequire by the effect of the law, pass to their heirs, executors, or
administrators, if they themselves happen to die before they have
used or known their right.*

66. How One may renounce a Right acquired by a Law. — It is.
free for persons that are capable of using their rights, to renounce.
what the laws have established in their favor. Thus, one that is
of age, and under no incapacity, such as madness, or interdiction,
may renounce a succession which falls to him by law. Thus, per-
sons who have privileges granted them, either by law or by par-
ticular favor, are at liberty not to make use of them.” But this
liberty of renouncing one’s right does not extend to the cases in
which third persons have an interest, nor to those where the re-


5 L. wit. C. de harred. act. ; — § 3, inst. per quas pers. nob. acq.; — 1.18, C. de jur. deliver. ;
—s.L 5, D. si pars hered. pet. ; —1. 30, § 6, D. de acg. vel om. her. ;—d. l. $1, et tt. de
vestr. in poss. mit.;—l. 6, C. de tmpubd. et al. subst.; —l. 5, D. si pars her. pet.; —d. l.
§1;—L. 30, § 6, D. de acg. vel om. her. ;—1. 3, § 10, D. de suts et leg.;—v. Ll. un. C.de
his qui ante ap. tab. We are to understand this rule in the manner that it is expressed,
of rights acquired by the disposition of a law, and not in general of what is acquired by
other ways, which the laws authorize; as when a legacy is acquired by the will of a
testator. On this rale depends that other which is received in the customs of France,
that death puts the living into possession ; which signifies, that the heirs of blood acquire
their right to the succession, although they be ignorant of the death of him to whom
they succeed ; because it is the law that calls them to the succession. But legatees, and
executors of testaments, being called only by the will of the testator, and not by the law,

their right is not the same; which difference shall be explained in its proper place, when
We come to treat of successions. V.1.1, C. de his qui ante ap. tab.
‘7.51, C de episc. et cler.;—1. 29, C. de pact.; — 1. 46, D. de pact.;—v.1. 4, § 4,

D. si quis cout. ; — 1. 8, D. de transact. ; —i. 13, D.comm. pred. See the next article, and

te second article of the fourth section of the Vices of Covenants.


132 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


nouncing of one’s right would be contrary to equity, or good
manners, or prohibited by some law.


XXVIIL


67. The Dispositions of particular Persons cannot hinder the
Effect of the Law.— The laws have their effect independently
of the will of particular persons. And no person can hinder,
either by contracts, or by testament, or otherwise, the laws from
regulating what concerns such things. Thus, a testator cannot
hinder, by any precaution whatever, the laws from having their
effect against any disposition he may make in his testament con-
trary to law. Thus, contracts that are made against law have no
manner of effect!


X XIX.


68. Discernment necessary for the Right Use of the Rules.—
From all the rules which have been explained under this title, we
may infer this as a last rule; that there is great danger of mis-
applying the rules of law, if we have not a very ample knowledge
of all the particular rules, and of the several views that are neces-
sary for interpreting and applying them aright!


TITLE II.


TIT. 1] PERSONS, 133


of nature establishes among all men,* yet they distinguish per-
sons by certain qualities, which have a particular relation to the
matters of the civil law, and which make that which is called the
state of persons, These are the qualities which are treated of in
the Roman law, under the title De Statu Hominum. But we do
not find either in this title, or in any other, what it is that prop-
erly makes the state of persons. We see only that there are dif-
ferent qualities, such as those of being a freeman, and a slave, a
father, and a son; and other qualities, which are said to make the
state of persons. But we do not there find any thing that points
out to us what is common to all these qualities, which might help
us to conceive a just and precise idea of the character necessary to
a quality, so as to be able to say that it concerns, or doth not con-
cern, the state of a person.

70. What is the State of Persons. — It is this that has engaged
us to consider, in all these qualities, what it is they have in com-
mon among them, and what it is that distinguishes them from
the other qualities, which have not the same effect. And it ap-
pears that the distinction of these qualities which make up the state
of persons, from those which have no manner of relation to it, is
a natural consequence of the order of society, and of the order of
the matters treated of in the Roman laws. For as we have seen,
in the plan of these matters, that the Roman laws have for their
object engagements and successions; we shall likewise see that
the qualities which these laws consider, in order to distinguish the
state of persons, have also a particular relation to engagements
and successions ; and that they have all of them this in common,
that they render persons capable, or incapable, of all manner of .
engagements, or of some only, or of successions. Thus, as to en-
gagements, persons that are of full age are capable of all engage-
ments, voluntary and others, of contracts, guardianships, and pub-
lic employments; and minors are incapable of several sorts of
engagements, and particularly of those which do not turn to their
advantage. Thus, for successions, children lawfully begotten are
capable of inheriting, and bastards are incapable of it; and it


will appear in all the other qualities that make up the state of ~


persons, that they give some capacity, or incapacity. So that it


letter of the law, or interpret it according to the rules explained under this title, and to
observe the other remarks that have been made in it.
* Quod ad jus naturale attinet, omnes homines xquales sunt. LZ. 32, D. de reg. jur.
VOL. 1. 1


134 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


may be said, that the state of persons consists in this capacity, or
incapacity, which it is easy to discern by these qualities; for they
are of such a nature, that every one of them is, as it were, in a
parallel line to another that is its opposite; and there is always
one of the two opposites to be met with in every person. Thus
there is nobody but who is a major or a minor; legitimate, or il-
legitimate. And it is the same thing with respect to all the other
qualities, as will appear in the sequel of this title.

71. Two Sorts of Qualities which make the State of Persons.—
The distinctions made among persons by the qualities which regu-
late their state are of two sorts. The first is of such as are nato-
ral, and regulated by the qualities which nature itself marks, and
distinguishes in every person. Thus, it is nature that distin-
guishes the two sexes and those who are called hermaphrodites.
The second sort is of such distinctions as are established by hu-
man laws. Thus, slavery is a state that is not natural, but which
men have established. And, according to the different distinctions
of these two kinds, every person has his state regulated by the
order of nature, and that of the law.

72. A Remark on the State of Persons, with Respect to the Ro
man Law, and our Practice. — The reader must observe that we
have inserted in this title some distinctions of persons, that are
not mentioned in the Roman law, among those which make up
the state of persons. [For example, it is said in the Roman law,
that madness does not change the state of the person®; and we
see likewise there, that in the title of the State of Persons, no
mention is made of majority and minority. But, nevertheless,


hscrisistabdaliniibiaaadiaitiities not bind be ccna
insidman from:\eing a. freeman and a ‘father. And, in fine, ac
sending tothe wage among: us, if it were made a. question, with
respect to our practice, whether a person were mad or not, we
should call that question a case relating to the state of the per-
som; 25 -we give this.name to all the lawsuits in which the chief
matter in:debate is concerning the state of persons.


SECTION I.
OF THE STATE OF PERSONS BY NATURE.


93. Pranustions of Porous by Nature. — The distinctions which
make the state of persons by nature are founded upon the sex,
the birth, and the age of every person; including under the dis-
tinetions made by the birth those which depend on certain de-
féets and imperfections in the conformation of the parts of the
body, which some persons have from their birth; such as that of
both. sexes in hermaphrodites, the incapacity of begetting children,
td some others. And although some of these defects may hap-
pen by accident, after the birth, yet, in what manner soever we
consider them, the distinctions which these defects make of per-
sons do still belong to the order of distinctions made by nature,
and they have their place in this section.


Arr. IL


74. Distinction of Persons by the Sex.— The sex, which distin-
guishes the man from the woman, makes this difference between
them, with respect to their state, that men are capable of all man-
ner of engagements and functions, unless it happen that any one
is excluded from them by particular obstacles; and women are in-
capable, upon the bare account of their sex, of several sorts of
engagements and functions. Thus, women cannot exercise the
office of a magistrate, nor be witnesses to a testament, nor plead at
the bar, nor be guardians, except to their own children. And this
makes their condition in many things less advantageous, and like-
wise in others less burdensome, than that of men.*


® Femine ab omnibus officiis civilibus vel publicis remote sunt, et ideo nec ju-
dices esse possunt, nec magistratum gerere, nec postulare, nec pro alio intervenire, nec


136 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


IL
75. Distinctions by Birth, and of the Paternal Authority.— Birth
puts children under the power of those of whom they are bom


procuratores existere. ZL. 2, D. de reg. jur. Mulier testimonium dicere in testamento
non poterit. Z. 20, § 6, D. qui test. facere poss. Foemins tutores dari non possunt,
quia ad munus masculorum est, nisi a principe filioram tutelam specialiter postulest.
L. ult. D. de tut. In multis juris nostri articulis deterior est conditio foeminarum, quam
masculorum. JL. 9, D. de stat. hom.

By the ancient Roman law, in the law of the Twelve Tables, women were under
perpetual guardianship, which was afterwards abolished. V. in fragm. 12 tab., Gt. 18,
§ 6;— Ulp., tit. 11, § 18. And by the same law, women did not inherit, not eren to ther
own children, nor their children to them; which was likewise abrogated. Inst. de
Senat. Tert. And by the decree of the senate called the Velleian Decree, women
could not be sureties for other persons. Tit. D. et Cod.ad Senat. Vell. Which has
been abolished in the greatest part of the provinces of this kingdom, by the edict of
the month of August, 1606, which has forbidden the usage of expressing in the obli-
gations of women their renouncing the Velleian privilege, and which has declared
their obligations to be valid, without the said renunciation.

By our custom married women are under the power of their husbands. And this
is agreeable both to the natural and divine law. “Thy desire shall be to thy husband,
and he shall rule over thee.” Gen. iii. 16. “Wives, submit yourselves unto your own
husbands, as unto the Lord. For the husband is the head of the wife.” Eph. v. 22, 23;
—1 Cor. xi. 3;—1 Pet. iii. 1. It is because of this power that the husband hath over
his wife, that, by our custom, she cannot bind herself without the authority of her
husband, except in certain cases. Thus, a wife who is a public merchant, and drives
a trade separate from that of her husband, may oblige herself without his expres
authority. For it is with the consent of the husband that she carries on that trade
Thus, in some provinces in France, wives may oblige themselves without the authority
of their husbands as to the goods which they have, besides those which are part ef
their marriage portion. Sec the fourth section of the title of Dowries.

It is likewise because of this power which the husband has over the wife, that ia
some provinces marricd women cannot oblige themselves in any respect, not eves
with the consent and authority of the husband, for fear lest he should use his authority


power
‘taake « perticnlar character of the paternal power,’ which consti-
totes. sha iatnte, of apua.that are subject to the. father’s anthor-


idp;.. tha: @jetination.of. which shall be explained in the second
aection, ..... be gtk: as
co ies oo eet 9 ed


. 76. Zapofel Ieome, and. Bastards.— Children lawfully begotten

oun. thone who. are, born of a marriage lawfully contracted.¢ And
aye such.as are.born out of lawfnl wedlock.

. 92.. Stillborn Children.—~— Children that are born dead are consid-

ered os éf. they .had never been born, or conceived


*Pive


We shall not here enlarge any farther on the power and authority of the husband,
either by the Roman law or by our custom. But we have been obliged to make
these remarks on the differences between our custom and the Roman Law, with re-
spect to the state of woman ; because they are the foundation of the rules which we
observe for the capacity or incapacity of women, as to engagements.

& Exod. xx. 12;— Ecclus. vii. 28; iii. 7.

© Inst. de patr. potest ; —1. 8, D.de his qui sui vel al. jur. sunt ; — § 2, Inst. de patr. potest.

4 £6, D. de his qui sui vel al. jur. sunt.

© ZL. 23, D. de stat. hom. ; — Deut. xxiii.2. Marriage being the only lawful way ap-
poimted for the propagation of mankind, it is but just to distinguish the condition of
bastards from that of children lawfully begotten. And it is because of this distinction,
that the laws declare bastards incapable of succeeding to persons who die intestate; and
ss they cannot inherit to any person, they being reckoned to be of no family, so nobody
succeeds to them, but their own lawful issue ; as shall be explained in its proper place.
See the Ordinance of Charles VI. of 1386.

€ TZ. 129, D. de verd. sign.; — 1. 2, Cod. de post. hered. inst. Stillborn children are so
much considered to be in the same condition as if they had never been conceived, that
the inheritances which fell to them while they were alive in their mother’s womb go to
the persons to whom they would have belonged, if these children had never been con-
ceived. And they do not transmit such inheritances to their heirs, because the right
which they had to them was only an expectation, which implied a condition that they
should come alive into the world, to be capable of them. See hereafter, art. 6.

12° —


138 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


V.


78. Abortive Children.— Abortive children are such as by an un-
timely birth are born either dead, or incapable of living*


VIL


79. Children Unborn.— Children who are still in their mother’s
womb have not their state determined; neither ought it to be, but
by the birth. And till they are born they cannot be reckoned in
the number of children; not even for the benefit of their fathers,
in order to procure to them the rights and advantages which accrue
to parents by the number of their children® But the hopes that
they will be born alive make them to be considered, in whatever
concerns themselves, as if they were already born. Thus, the in-
heritances which fell to them before their birth, and which belong
to them, are kept for them; and curators are assigned to them, to
take care of these inheritances for their behoof! Thus, the mothe
who procures her own abortion is punished as a murderer.


VIL


80. Posthumous Children.— Posthumous children are those that
are born after the death of their father, and who by this birth are
distinguished from those who are born during the father’s lifetime,
in that posthumous children are never under the power of their


& The state of abortive children may be considered under two views. One isto know
if, when they are lawfully begotten, and born alive, they are capable of inheriting, ead
transmitting an inheritance to their heirs, which shall be explained in its place. The


e
TIT. I. SEC. 1] PERSONS. aan


father, and are not of the number of sons subject to the fathel's
authority; of whom mention will be made in the eae —
the second section.”


81. Children born after their Mother's Death.— Chikdwen: that
are born after the death of their mothers, and who are taken out


of the mother's womb after she is dead, are of the same condition
with other children." a -


TX.


82. Hermaphrodites.—Hermaphrodites are those who-have the
marks of both sexes; and they are reputed to be of that sex in
which nature most prevails in them.°


xX.


83. unwchs.—FEnunuchs are those whom a defect of conforma-
Seared Ue anmae vader a cceees from their birth, or any
nena ne ere er


XL


4... Madmen.— Madmen are those who are deprived of the use
of reason, after they have attained the age in which they ought to
have it; whether it be that this defect is natural to them from
their birth, or has happened by some accident. And seeing this
condition renders them incapable of all manner of engagements,
and of the management of their estate, they are put under the


tuition of a guardian.?
XII.


85. Persons that are Deaf and Dumb, and others laboring under
the like Infirmities.— Persons that are both deaf and dumb, or
those who by other infirmities are rendered incapable of managing


= L. 3, § 1, D. de inj. rupt.

® L. 12, D. de lib. a post. ;—1. 6, D. de inoff. test.

° L. 10, D. de stat. hom. ; —1. 15, § 1, D. de testi. ; —v. I. 6, in f. D. de lid. et post.

P § 9, Inst. de adopt. ; —1. 128, D. de verb. sign. ; — Deut. xxiii. 1. It appears by these
texts who are those that are to be reckoned in the number of eunuchs, and why it is that
they are incapable of marriage.

§ L. 40, D. de reg jur.; —I.5, eod. ;—§ 3, Inst. de curat.;—1.2 e I. 7, D. de curat.
fer. See the first article of the first section of Guardians, and the thirteenth article of
this section.


140 , THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


their affairs, are in such a condition that guardians are appointed
to them, as well as to madmen, to take care of their affairs, and of
their persons, as occasion requires.’


XIIL


86. How Madness, or Imbeciltty, does not change the State of Per-
sons.— Those who labor under madness, or under any of the other
infirmities above mentioned, do not lose the state which their other
qualities give them. And they retain their dignities, their privi-
leges, the capacity of inheriting, their right to their estates, and
likewise such effects of the paternal power as are consistent with
that condition’


XIV.


87. Monsters.— Monsters, who have not human shape, are not
reputed in the number of persons, and are not reckoned as chil-
dren to their parents. But such as have what is essential to
human shape, and have only some excess, or some defect, in the
conformation of their members, are ranked with the other chil-
dren."


XV.


88. A Case in which Monsters are reckoned among the other
Children. — Although monsters who have not human shape are
not placed in the number of persons, and are not considered as
children, yet they are reckoned as such, when it is for the behoof
of the parents, and are allowed to fill up the number of chil-


TIT. If. SEC. 11] PERSONS. 14


son, as to enable them to be masters of their own conduct’ But
because nature does not mark in every one the time of this matu-
rity, the civil law has regulated the times in which persons are
judged capable both of marriage and other engagements. And
we shall see, in the following section, the distinctions which the
law has made of minors and of majors; of those who have at-
tained to the years of maturity, and those who have not."


SECTION It.


wh
ee


“Oy HE STATE OF ‘PERSONS BY THE CIVIL Law.


90. Distinction of Persons by the Civil Law. — The distinctions
which the civil law makes of the state of persons are those that
are established by arbitrary laws; whether it be that these dis-
tinctions have no foundation in nature, as that of freemen and
slaves ; or that some natural qualities have given rise to the said
distinctions, such as majority and minority of age.

91. The Principal Distinctions of Persons in the Roman Law.—
The Roman law considered chiefly three things in every person;
that is, liberty, country, and family; and under these three views
it made three distinctions of persons. The first, of freemen and
slaves ; the second, of citizens of Rome, and strangers, or of such
as had lost the right of citizen by a civil death; and the third, of
fathers of a family, and of sons subject to the father’s authority.*
These last two distinctions are in use with us, although the rules
we observe in them are different from those of the Roman law.
And as to the state of slavery, although there are no slaves in
France, yet it is necessary to know the nature of that state. For
this reason, we shall set down under this title these three distinc-
tions, together with the others which we have in common with
the Roman law.

92. Some Distinctions in Use with us.— The Nobility.— We
have in France a distinction of persons, which is not in the Ro-
man law, or which is very different from any thing that is to be
found there. And since for this reason it is not to be set down in


Y L.1, D. de min.
® See the Sth and 9th articles of the 2d section.
® V.L 7, § ult. D. de Senator.


142 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


the articles of this section, and yet it being considered as belong-
ing to the state of persons, this distinction shall be explained here
in a few words. It is that which nobility makes between gentle-
men, and those who are not, whom the French call Rotusiers.
Nobility gives to those who are of that order divers privileges and
exemptions, and a capacity of holding certain offices and benefices
appropriated to gentlemen, and of which those who are not of
noble extraction are incapable. Nobility makes likewise in some
customs a difference as to successions. This nobility is acquired
either by birth, which ennobles all the children of those who are
noble; or by certain offices, which ennoble the descendants of
those who have enjoyed them; or lastly, by letters of nobility,
which are obtained from the king, as a recompense for some sig-
nal services.

93. Burgesses.— We distinguish in France between the inhab-
itants of towns, who have certain rights, exemptions, and privi-
leges annexed to the right of citizenship of those towns, with a
capacity of bearing offices in them; and the people who live in the
country, and in little villages, who have not the same privileges
nor the same rights.

94. Vassal, Subjection to the Court of a Lord of a Manor or
Perpetual Lessee.— To these distinctions we must add_ those,
which are made by some customs, of persons of a servile condi-
tion, which distinguishes them from those who are of a free con-
dition, in that they are bound by the said customs to some person
al servitudes, which relate to marriages, testaments, and succes
sions. But these servitudes being differently regulated by the


TIT. I. SEC. 11] PERSONS. 143


95. Distinction of Persons in Britain. — Nobility. — Commoners.
— It may not be improper to add one word here touching the dis-
tinction of persons in Great Britain. The nobility, strictly taken,
is what makes up the peerage of Great Britain, and consists of
lords spiritual and temporal, who have a seat and vote in parlia-
ment, and are divided into five ranks, or degrees, viz. duke, mar-
quis, earl, viscount, and baron. All who are not peers of the
kingdom come under the general name of commoners, who may
be distinguished into two classes. The first takes in all the gen-
try, of what denomination soever they be; whether baronets,
knights, eaquires, or gentlemen. Baronets and knights are made
by creation, The honor of baronet is hereditary, and descends to
the male issue. ‘That of a knight-batchelor is only personal, and
dies with the person on whom the said honor is conferred, The
titles of esquire and gentleman are acquired either by birth, by
profession, or by certain offices, which ennoble those who have
served in them, and their descendants. Under the other class may
be comprehended the yeomanry, or freeholders, who have lands
and tenements of their own, to the value of at least forty shil-
lings a year, all citizens, tradesmen, and day-laborers.

96. Persons of a Servile Condition. — To these distinctions we
must add another, which is mentioned in our books of the com-
mon law, and that is of persons of a servile condition, who are
called villains, from the Latin word villa, a country farm, where
they were appointed to do service. Of these bondmen, or villains,
there were two sorts in England, one termed a villain in gross,
who was immediately bound to the person of his lord and his
heirs; the other was a villain belonging to a manor, who in the
Roman law is called glebe adscriptitius, being bound to his lord
as a member belonging and annexed to a manor, whereof the lord
was owner. There are not, properly speaking, any villains now
in England; and therefore it is not necessary to say any more
concerning the state of villainage, it being enough barely to have
mentioned it.”


Arr. I.


97. Slaves.— A slave is one who is in the power of a master,
and who belongs to him in such a manner, that the master may
sell him, dispose of his person, his industry, and his labor; and


* This and the preceding paragraph were added by the translator.


144 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


who can do nothing, have nothing, or acquire any thing, but
what must belong to his master.*


IL.


98. Freemen.— Freemen are all those who are not slaves, and
who have preserved their natural liberty ; which consists in a right
to do whatever we please, except in so far as we are restrained
by law, or hindered by some outward violence.®


IIL
99. Causes of Slavery.— Men become slaves by captivity in
time of war, among nations where it is the custom that the con-
queror, by saving the life of the person conquered, becomes his
master, and makes him his slave. And it is a consequence of
the slavery of women, that their children are slaves by ther
birth.°


IV.


100. Manumised Persons. — Manumised persons are those who,
having been slaves, are made free.4


V.


101. Who are Fathers of a Family, and who Sons of a Family.
— The sons and daughters of a family are persons who are sub-
ject to the father’s authority; and the fathers or mothers of a
family, whom we call likewise heads of a family, are the persons
who are not subject to the father’s authority ;* whether they have


et at 1 REBOONB 7 6


oy pac pe Seem aap as heads of « family;
i children. of — ice


VI.


102. Emancipation does not alter the Natural Right of the Pater-
nal Power.— Emancipation, and the other ways which set the
son or daughter free from under the father's authority, regard only
the effects which the civil laws give to the paternal power, but
ehange nothing in those that are of natural right’
.. 408, .Who are those that are said to he Masters of their own
Rights, According to these two distinctions of freemen and -
slaves, of fathers and sons, there is no ee
under the power of another, or in his own; that is to say, master
of his own rights™ And this does no ways hinder the son thatis
emancipated from, being subject to the authority whieh the law- of
ature gives kis father over him; nor 6 minor, who happens to be
weparaliyare iat aaa maa


* «


a tutor os


4 E196, § 2, D. deowh signif. The paternal power is the foundation of several inca-
ities in sons; but which are different in the Roman law and in our customs. Thus,
in the Roman law, sons who lived in subjection to the father’s authority were first of all
of acquiring any thing. But all that they did acquire by any way whatsoever
belonged to their fathers, excepting the peculium, if the father thought fit to let them
have it. And afterwards they had the power of acquiring, and the fathers had the usu-
fract of all that their sons acquired. And then some exceptions were made, and the
fathers had not any longer the usufruct of certain goods. But it is not necessary to
explain here all these changes, nor the different kinds of uanfract which fathers have of
the goods of their children in the provinces of this kingdom, whether it be under the
name of usufruct, or under the name of wardship.

Thus, likewiee, in the Roman law, sons who were still under the father’s jurisdiction,
eould not oblige themselves by borrowing money. Toto tit. ad senatusc. Maced. Thus,
in France, sons subject to the paternal authority cannot marry, without the consent of
their fathers and mothers, unless they are upwards of thirty years of age, and daughters
sr aa a a a aa to the ordinances of 1556 of Blois, and

1339,

Thus, in France, marriage emancipates children from the paternal jurisdiction.
Whereas under the Roman law the son and daughter that were married remained, nev-
estheless, under the power of the father, unless he emancipated them when he married
them. L. 5, Cod. de cond. insert. tam in leg. quam in fidei com. ;—1.7, Cod. de nupt. ; —l.
1, Cod. de bon. ques lib.

1 L. 8, D. de cap. minut.

™ Tnst. de his qui sui vel al. jur. sunt ; —1. 1, D. eod.: —1. 3, D. de stat. hom.

VOL. I. 13


146 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


VIIL


104. Who are of Ripe Age, and who of Unripe Age.— Males who
have not attained the age of fourteen years complete, and females
who are under twelve, are said to be of an unripe age, and are
called in the Roman law Impuberes. And sons who have attained
the age of fourteen years complete, and daughters who are of
the age of twelve, are reckoned to be of ripe age, and are distin-
guished in the Roman law by the name of Adulti.®


IX.


105. Majors and Minors.— Minors are those of both sexes who
are not as yet five-and-twenty years complete; and they are
under tutelage till that age. When they have completed the last
moment of the five-and-twentieth year, they are then said to be
of full age, or majors.°


X.


106. Prodigals.— We ought to place in the rank of minors,
those persons who are forbid the management of their own af-
fairs, as being prodigals, although they be of full age; because
their bad conduct renders them incapable of managing their own
estate, and of entering into engagements, which is the conse-
quence of the former. And therefore the care of all their con-
cerns 1s committed to a guardian.P


XL


107. Natural-born Subjects, and Strangers. — We call natural:


TIT. 11. SECT. 11.] PERSONS. 147


not been naturalized by letters patent of the prince, are nnder the
incapacities which are regulated by the ordinances, and by our
customs."


XIL


108. Civil Death.— Civil death is the state of those persons
who are condemned to death, or to other punishments which are
attended with the confiscation of goods. And therefore this state is
compared to natural death, because it cuts off from the civil life
those persons who fall under it, and renders them, as it were,
slaves to = onmeamaie which is maar on thom?


bs wv pi 8.


Shei - S07. Ce XI


4300. Professed Monks ond Nuns.— Professed monks, of zane,
ge. under-anether. kind of civil death, which. is voluntary.;: into
which state they enter by their vows, which render them incapable
of marriage, or of having any property in temporal goods, .or
entexing into any engagements which are consequences of the


8


110. Glergymen. -— Clergymen are those who are set apart for
the ministry of God’s worship; such as bishops, priests, deacons,
sub-deacons, and those who are called to other orders. And this
state, which distinguishes them from laymen, renders them inca-
pable of marriage, in such as are in holy orders, and worketh also
other incapacities in the matters of commerce prohibited to the
clergy, and entitles them to the privileges and exemptions which


-


4 ZL. 17, D. de stat. hom. ; — Nov. 78, c. 5; —1.1, C. de heer. inst. ; —1. 6, § 2, D. eod. ; —
Lin verbo Cives Romani, D. ad leg. Fale. ; — v. auth. omnes peregrini, C. comm. de
success.

‘In France, strangers, who are called aliens, alibi nati, are incapable of successions, and
of making a testament. They are not capable of enjoying offices or benefices ; and they
are under the other incapacities regulated by the ordinances, and by our usage. See the
ordinance of 1386, that of 1431, and that of Blois, art.4. We must except from these
incapacities some strangers to whom our kings have granted the rights and privileges of
Batives, and natural-born French.

* L. 29, D. de pan. ; er aaa al an aaa s— §§ 1 & 3, end. ;—/. 17,
D. ds pen. ;—l. 1, C. de hared. inst

° Auth. ingressi, ex Nov. 5, cap. 5; ‘0 dle Spates Roden =: Now: 76. In France, the
estates of persons who are professed religious, do not go to the monastery, but to their
heizs, or those to whom they are pleased to give them. And they cannot dispose of them
for the use of the monastery.


148 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK


have been granted to them by the canons of the church, by the
ordinances, and by the custom of the kingdom:


XV.


111. Communities. — Communities, ecclesiastical and secular,
are assemblies of many persons united into one body, that is,
formed with the prince’s consent, without which these kinds of
assemblies would be unlawful" And these bodies, and corpora-
tions, such as chapters of churches, universities, monasteries, town
corporations, companies of trade, and others, are established for
the forming of societies that may be useful either to church,* or
state ;’ and they are accounted as persons,’ having their own
proper goods, their rights, and their privileges. And among other
differences which distinguish them from particular persons, these
societies are under some incapacities, which are accessory, and
natural to this state: as particularly that of being incapable of
alienating their stock without just cause.*


TITLE III.


OF THINGS.


112. In what Manner the Laws consider Things. — The civil
laws extend the distinctions which they make of things to every


TIT. Ill SBC, 1.] ‘THINGS. 149


thing that God hath created for the use of man. And as it is for
our use that he hath made the whole world, and that he destinates
for the supplying of our wants every thing that is here on the earth
below, or in the heavens above ;* it is this destination of all things
to our different wants which is the foundation of the different
manners in which the laws consider and distinguish the different
kinds of things, in order to regulate the several uses and commerce
which men make of them.

113. The Foundations of the Distinctions of Things. — The divine
providence, which forms a universal society of mankind, and which
divides it into kingdoms, towns, and other places, and settles in
every one the families and the particular persons who compose
them, does likewise distinguish and dispose in such a manner all
the things that are for the use of man, that many things are com-
mon to all mankind; others common to one kingdom; some to a
town, or some other place; and other things enter into the posses-
sion and commerce of particular persons.

114. It is these distinctions of things, and the other different
ways in which they have relation to the use and commerce of
men, that shall be the subject-matter of this title. And because
there are some distinctions of things, which are altogether natural,
and others which have been established by laws, we shall explain
in the first section of this title the distinctions made by nature,
and in the second, those that are made by the laws of men.


SECTION I.


DISTINCTIONS OF THINGS BY NATURE.


Art. I.

115. Things common to all.— The heaven, the stars, the light,
the air, and the sea, are all of them things belonging so much in
common to the whole society of mankind, that no one person can
make himself master of them, nor deprive others of the use of
them. And likewise the nature and situation of all these things
is entirely proportioned to this common use for all men.*


lord of the manor, for the loss of the perquisites that would accrue by the futare changes
of masters. See the ordinances of Philip III. 1275, Charles VI. 1372, and others.
© Dent. iv. 19;— Wied. of Sol. ix. 2.
® Deut. iv. 19;— § 1, Inst. de rer. div.; — 1.2, §1,D.eod. It is to be remarked on this
13°


150 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


IL
116. Things public. — Rivers, the banks of rivers, highways, are
things public, the use of which is common to all particular per-
sons, according to the respective laws of countries. And these
kinds of things do not appertain to any particular persons, nor do
they enter into commerce.” But it is the sovereign that regulates
the use of them.


III.


117. Things belonging to Towns, or other Places.— We reckon
among the number of public things, and of such as are out of
commerce, those which belong in common to the inhabitants of a
town, or other place, and to which particular persons can have no
right of property; such as the walls and the ditches of a town,
town-houses, and public market-places.°


IV.


118. Distinction of Immovables and Movables.— The earth
being given to men for their habitation, and for the production of
all things necessary for supplying all their wants; we distinguish
in it the portions of the surface of the earth which every one occu-
pies, from the things that may be separated from it, for our use.


article, and the two following, that our laws differ from the Roman law in regulating the
use of the seas, except in so far as concerns that natural use of them, in the communic#
tion which all nations have with one another, by a free navigation over all the seas.
Thus, whereas the Roman law allowed every body indifferently to fish, both in the sea,
and in the rivers, § 2, Jnst. de rer. div. in the same manner ag it allowed bunting, § 1%


TIT. 111. SEC. t.] THINGS. ‘a


And it is this that makes the distinction of what oe
ables, and movables, or goods movable.‘ pote 1 fas gti ¥-
= v. | =
. 190 Auprbiubléei~clémovebioe ure, sil-the perta-of thes eure
fuod ob:thié: casts, in: whet iinasiner soever they are. distinguisheds
whetheriimto-places for: buildings, or into -woods, meadows, ‘arable
land, vineyards, orchards, or otherwise, and to whomscever. they
belong’


=


ee ee ; VI
490, Thess ond Baldnge.— We comprehend likewise ander


122. Accessories to Buildings. — Whatever sticks to houses, and
other buildings, such as any thing that is fastened with iron, lead,
plaster, or any other manner of way, to the intent that it may
always continue so, is reputed to be immovable.®


IX.


123. Movables.— Movables are all those things that are dis-
joined from the earth and the waters; whether it be that they
have been separated from it, as trees that are fallen, or cut down,
fruits that are gathered, stones taken out of a quarry; or that they


4L.1, D. deed. ed.;—1. 8, § 4, C. de bon. que lib.;—1. 830, C.de jur. dot. ; —I. 93,
D. de verb. sign.

* L.1, D. de eed. ed. ;—1. 17, § 8, D. de act, empt. et vend.

t Bee the two following articles.

& L. 44, D. de rei vend.

b £17, D. de act. empt. et vend.; —d.L § 8; —d.L § 9;—d.b. § 7.


152 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


are by nature distinct and separate from the earth, and from the
water, as living creatures.


X.


124. Movables, living and dead.— Movable things are of
two sorts. There are some which live, and move themselves,
as animals; and the things that are inanimate are called dead
movables.!


XI.


125. Animals, wild and tame. — Animals are of two sorts. One
is of those that are tame, and serve for the ordinary use of men,
and are in their power; such as horses, oxen, sheep, and others.
The other sort is of those animals that live in their natural liberty,
out of the power of man; such asthe wild beasts, fowls, and fishes.
And the animals of this second sort are applied to the use, and
come into the power of men, by hunting and fishing, according as
the use of these sports is permitted by the laws.”


XIL


126. Movable Things that are consumed by Use.—In movable
things we distinguish those that may be used, and yet kept entire;
such as a horse, a suit of hangings, tables, beds, and other things
of this kind; from such as we cannot use without consuming
them, such as fruits, corn, wine, oil, and the like.®


TIT. IIL. BEC. I1.] ‘THINGS. 153


section are formed by nature, and the laws have only taken notice
of them, or added something to them; as, for example, what has
been explained in the third and eighth articles. But these treated
of in this section owe their chief establishment to the laws.
Arr. L

128. Distinction of Things that enter into Commerce, and those
that do not.— The laws reduce all things to two kinds, One is of
those that do not enter into commerce, and which cannot belong
to any one in particular; such as those that have been explained
in the first three articles of the preceding section. 'The other sort
is of such as enter into commerce, and of which any one may be-
come master.*


IT.

129. Things consecrated and set apart for Divine Worship. —
Religion, and the civil laws, which are conformable to it, distin-
guish the things which are destinated to divine worship from all
others. And among those which are made use of in this worship,
we distinguish between things that are consecrated, such as
churches and the communion cups, and things that are religious
and holy, such as churech-yards, the ornaments, oblations, and other
things dedicated to the service of God. And all these kinds of
things are out of commerce, while they continue under this desti-
nation to the divine service.>


iL


130. Things corporeal and incorporeal.— The civil laws make
another general distinction of things, into those that are sensible
and corporeal, and those which we call incorporeal, in order to dis-
tinguish from every thing that is sensible certain things which
owe their nature and their existence wholly to the laws: such as
an inheritance, an obligation, a mortgage, a usufruct, a service ;
and, in general, every thing that consists only in a certain right.°


IV.
131. Allodial Lands, and Lands burdened with Quitrents or


* Inst. de rer. div. ; —Il. 1, D. eod.

‘1.1, D. de div. rer.; —§ 8, Inst. de rer. div. See the sixth article of the eighth sec-
ton of the Contract of Sale, concerning the sale of things consecrated.

* Inet. de reb. corp. et tnoorp.; — § ult. eod. ; —1. 1, § 1, D. de divis. rer.


154 THE CIVIL LAW. [PREL. BOOK.


other Duties. — Among the immovables that are in commerce,
and serve for the common use of men, there are some which par
ticular persons may possess fully in their own right, without any
burden. And there are other immovables, which are burdened
with certain duties and services, that are inseparable from them.
Thus, we have in this kingdom lands which are called allodial,
or free lands, which pay neither quitrent, nor any other such ac
knowledgment.4 And there are other lands, which, having been
given away originally with the charge of paying a quitrent irre-
deemable,* or upon other conditions, such as those of fiefs, de
scend to all sorts of possessors, with the burdens annexed to
them.


V.


132. Mines. — We may reckon among lands which particular
persons cannot possess fully in their own right, those in which
there are mines of gold, silver, and other metals, or matters in
which the prince has a right.‘


VI.

133. Coin. — We may place among things distinguished by the
laws, the public coin, which is a piece of gold, silver, or other
metal; the form, weight, and value of which are regulated by the
prince, in order to make it the price of all things that are in com-
merce.£


d 7. ult. § 7, D. de censid.


TIT, 111. SEC, 11] THINGS. 156


Vil.

134. Treasure.— The laws distinguish likewise that. which we
eall a treasure; which is, according to the definition given of it in
the laws, an ancient deposit of money, or other precious things,
that have been deposited time out of mind in some hidden place,
where it is discovered by some chance, and whereof the true owner
cannot be known.*


VIL


135. Another Distinction of several Sorts of Goods. — Besides
the distinctions of things which have been spoken of in the preced-
ing articles, the laws consider under other views, and by other
general distinctions, the goods or estates which particular persons
are possessed of. 'T'hus, they distinguish, in the estates of particu-
lar persons, between those which are of their own purchase, and
those that come to them by descent or inheritance ; and in estates
of inheritance, they make a distinction between the paternal and
maternal estates.


IX.


136. Perchase.— We call that estate which one has acquired
by his own labor and industry, an estate of purchase.’


X.


137. Inheritance. — An estate of inheritance is that which de-
scends to us from the persons to whom we have a right to succeed
as heirs.


XL


138. Paternal Estate.— ‘The paternal estate is that which de-
scends to us from our father, or other ascendants or collateral re-
lations of the father’s side."


XII.
139. Maternal Estate.— The maternal estate is that which de-


* 1.31, § 1, D. deacg. rer. dom. It is not the business of this place to explain to
vhom it is that the treasure ought to belong. V. 1. un. C. de thesaur.

See the following articles, and the remark on the last.

' L.6, C. de bon. quer lib. ;—I. 8, D. pro socio.

* L. an. C. de impon. lucr. descr. ; — 1.10, D. pro socio; —v. I. 3, C. de bon. quae lib.

* 1.16, C. de prob. ; —l. 10, D. pro soc.


156 THE CIVIL LAW. {PREL. BOO


scends to us from our mother, or other ascendants or collateral
relations of the mother’s side.°


° L. 1, C. de bon. mat. ;—1. 8, C. de bon. que lib. Although the texts which are quoted
on these last foar articles have relation to these several sorts of estates, yet this dis-
tinction hath not the same use in the Roman law as it hath in our customs; which
make different heirs of estates of purchase, estates of inheritance, paternal estates, and
maternal estates. This distinction hath likewise place in the matter concerning the
power of redemption.


PART I.


OF ENGAGEMENTS.


THE CIVIL LAW.


PART I.


OF ENGAGEMENTS.


BOOK I.


OF VOLUNTARY AND MUTUAL ENGAGEMENTS BY
COVENANTS.


140. The Nature of Covenants. — Covenants are engagements
made by the mutual consent of two or more persons, who make
a law among themselves to perform what they pence to one
another.

141. The Use of Covenants.— The use of covenants is a natu-
tal consequence of the order of civil society, and of the ties which

God forms among men. For as he has made the reciprocal use
of their industry and labor, and the different commerce of things,
necessary for supplying all their wants, it is chiefly by the inter-
vention of covenants that they agree about them. Thus, for the
use of industry and labor, men enter into partnership, hire them-
telves, and act differently the one for the other. Thus, for the use
of things, when they have occasion to purchase them, or a mind
topart with them, they traffic in them by sales, and by exchan-
ges; and when they only want them for a certain time, they
either hire or borrow them; and according to their other different
wants, they apply to them the different sorts of covenants.

142. Divers Kinds of Covenants. — It appears from this general
idea of covenants, that the word covenant comprehends not only
all contracts and treaties of what kind soever, such as sale, ex-
change, partnership, hiring, and letting to hire, a deposit, and all


160 THE CIVIL LAW. (PART. I. BOOK L.


other contracts, but likewise all particular pacts that may be add-
ed to any contract, such as conditions, charges, reserves, clauses
of nullity, and all others. This word covenant comprehends like-
wise the acts by which we make void, or change by a new con-
sent, the contracts, treaties, and pacts by which we are already
bound.

143. The Order of this Book of Covenants. — It is of all these
kinds of covenants that we design to treat in this book. And be-
cause there are many rules which agree to all the kinds of cove-
nants, such as those which concern their nature in general, the
ways by which they are formed, the interpretation of such as are
obscure or ambiguous, and some others; these kinds of common
rules shall be the subject-matter of the first title, which shall be of
covenants in general. We shall afterwards explain the detail of
the particular rules belonging to each kind of covenant, every one
under its proper title. And in the last place we shall subjoin a
title concerning the vices of covenants, which is a matter essen-
tially necessary to the subjects treated of in this book.


TITLE Il.


OF COVENANTS IN GENERAL.


SECTION I.


TIT. I. SEC. 1.] COVENANTS. 161


themselves, or to dissolve a former engagement, or to make some
change in it.
UL
146, The Subject-matter of Covenants.— 'The subject-matter of
covenants is the infinite diversity of the voluntary ways by which
men regulate among themselves the communication and com-


merce of their industry and labor, and of all things, according
to their wants.


IV.


147. Four Sorts of Covenants, by Four Combinations of the Use
of Persons and Things.— The commerce and communications for
the use of persons and things are of four sorts, which make four
kinds of covenants. For those who treat together either give to
one another reciprocally one thing for another,‘ as in a sale, and
in an exchange ; or they do one thing for another, as if they under-
take the management of one another’s concerns ; or otherwise one
of the parties does something, and the other gives something," as
when a laborer gives his labor for a certain hire; or, lastly, one
of them either does or gives something, the other neither doing
nor giving any thing, as when a person undertakes without any
gratnity to manage the affairs of another;! or that one gives
another something out of mere liberality.


V.


148. No Covenant obligatory without a Cause.— In the first three
sorts of covenants, the transaction between the parties is not gra-
tuitous, the engagement of one of the parties being the founda-


©€ D.L§3;—L. 8, D. de obl. et act.

4 7. 35, D. de reg. jur. ; —§ ult. Inst. quib. mod. toll. obl.

¢ L.1,§ 3, D. de pact. ; —§ ult. Inst. de verb. obl.

f Ant do tibi, ut des. Z.5, D. de prescrip. verb.

5 Aut facio, ut facias. D. l.

» Ant facio, ut des. D.1. Aut do, ut facias. D.J. Stipulationnm quedam in dando,
quedam in faciendo consistunt. ZL. 2, D. de verb. obl.; — L. 8, D. de obl. et act.

i 0.1, § 4, D. mand. ;

1 Z.1, D. de don.; —I. 7, C, de his quae vi metusve causa gesta sunt. In this article we
have made only one combination of the case where one does a thing, and the other gives
something, whereas the Roman law distinguishes it into two; one, where one of the par-
ties does something, and the other gives; and the other, whero one of the parties gives,
and the other does something for it. But in effect it is only one bare character of a cov-
ezant, and one simple combination of giving on one side, and doing on the other, who-

1A®%


162 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


tion of the engagement of the other. And even in the covenants
where only one of the parties seems to be obliged, as in the loan
of money, the obligation of the borrower is always preceded by
the lender’s delivering what he gives in credit, before any cove-
nant is formed. Thus, the obligation which is contracted in these
kinds of covenants, which are for the benefit only of one of the
parties covenanting, hath always its cause from something that is
either done or to be done by the other party :™ and the obliga
tion would be null, if it were really without any cause.


VI


149. Donations have their Cause.—In donations, and in the
other contracts where one party alone does or gives something,
and where the other neither does nor gives any thing, it is the ac
ceptance that forms the covenant.° And the engagement of the
donor hath for its foundation some just and reasonable motive;
such as some good office done by the donee, or some other merit
in him,? or even the bare pleasure of doing good to others. And
this motive stands in place of a cause, on the part of the person
who receives the benefit, and gives nothing.


VIL


150. Some Covenants have a Proper Name, and others not ; bud
they all oblige to what is agreed on.—Of these different kinds of
covenants, some are of so frequent use, and so well known every-
where, that they have a proper name; such as a sale, a loan,
hiring, and letting to hire, a deposit, partnership, and others’


TIT. I. SEC. 1] COVENANTS, 163
they have a peculiar name or not, have always their effect, and
oblige the parties to what is agreed on.”

VIIL


151. Consent makes the Covenant.— Covenants are perfected by
the mutual consent of the parties, which they give to one another
reciprocally.* Thus,a sale is perfected by the bare consent of
the parties, although the merchandise be not delivered, nor the
price paidy


IX,

152. Covenants which oblige by the Intervention of a Thing. — In
the covenants which oblige the party to make restitution of what
he has received, whether it be of the same individnal thing, as in
the case of a loan of a thing to be restored in specie, or a deposit;
or whether restitution is to be made, not of the same individual
thing, but of something of the same kind, as in the loan of money
or provisions; the obligation is not contracted but when the con-
sent of the parties is accompanied with the delivery of the thing.
And it is for this reason that it is said, that these kinds of obliga-
tions are contracted by the intervention of the thing," although
the consent of the parties be also necessary.*


X.


153. Covenants either Written or Unwritten.— The consent which
makes the covenant is either in writing, or without it.° The un-
written covenant is made either by the interposition of words, or
by some other way, which signifies or presupposes the consent.
Thus he who receives a deposit, although he do not speak, obliges
himself to the engagements of depositaries.°


* L.1, D. de pact. It is not necessary to explain here the difference that was made in
the Roman law between the contracts which had a name and those which had none.
These subtilties, which are not in use with us, would perplex the reader to no purpose.

® F. 2, § 1, D. de obl. et act.; — I. 48, eod. ; —1. 52, § 9, eod.

Y Inst. de empt. et vend.;—I1.1, D.de pact. As to the accomplishment of covenants,
see the next article, and the second article of the first section and tenth article of the sec-
ond section of the Contract of Sale.

® Inst. quib. mod. re contr. obl. ; — § 2, eod.; — § 3, cod. ; —1. 1, §§ 2, 3, 4, 5, D. de obl. et
act,;—1. 2, D. de reb. cr.

® L. 4, D. de obl. at act.; —1. 1, § 3, D. de pact.

» Inst. de empt. et vend. ; —§ 1, Inst. de obl. ex cons. ; —1. 2, §.1, D. de obl. et act. ; — 1.17,
C. de pact.

© L. 2, D. de pact. ; — l. 52, § 10, D. de obl. ef act. ; —l. 17, C. de pact.


164 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


XL
154. Written Covenants made either before a Notary Public, or
signed only by the Parties. — Written covenants are made either
in the presence of a public notary,’ or only signed and sealed by
the parties themselves ; whether it be that the whole deed is writ-
ten by the parties who covenant, or that they barely put their
names to it.®


XII.

150. Proofs of Unwritten Covenants. — If the truth of an un-
written covenant is called in question, it may be proved either by
witnesses, or by the other ways which are prescribed in the rales
concerning proofs.‘


XIII.


156. Covenants made before a Notary carry their Proof along
with them.— Covenants made before a notary public carry along
with them the proof of their truth, by the signature of the public
officer.


XIV.


157. Verification of a Sign Manual that ts contested. — If the
signature of a covenant that is signed only by the parties is con-
tested, it must be proved.®


XV.
158. What perfects Covenants made before a Notary. — Cove


Te


rts -piation please


TIT. t. sec. 11. COVERED: 5: *e


xvn
15 BBD Gbedindhth y seater Dekveen absent Parenansa Covieania
imncy ‘beenadleysistenly between ‘persons who are present; bak like
‘hts bebiveten thot thed ave absont} by yroxy*! or. othe media,


tet, wen eve by dation oon iucse ol cue dep vue er oot doer
yl te,
erases
léf
_¥ . ““e o- * *
eas ' BEOTION: ™ eee alae


es ante He. ee eee a
inten aiaca aun sac a. xartaD “on oor
NANTS, AND OF. THe: RULES: POR INTERPRETING THEM: >:
Aan L
“+260, . Whe say eater into Covenants, and of what: Sort: they tiust
bysns: Boeing dovenants : “ought to be proportioned: to the whats:to
Whisk: tey ‘hute'telation; they are therefore arbitvary, and: shok
tb: fitske! them;. and all: persons may: entat
fnite ail mancer of eorenaute? provided only that the pétson: be
ea, sia ep rN lea et
ee


13


161. Covenants ought to be made wittingly and willingly. — Cov-
enants being voluntary engagements which are formed by the
eonsent of the parties concerned, they ought to be made with
knowledge, and with freedom; and if they want either the one of
the other of these characters, as if they are made through mistake,
er by compulsion, they are null, according to the rules which shall
be explained in the fifth section.®


: a hae elec:
a


1 ZL. 2, § 2, D. de ob. et act.;—1. 2, D. de pact.

= LZ. 10, tn fine, D. de pact.

= ZL. 2, § 2, D. de obl. ef act. ; —§ 1, Inet. de obl. ax cons. ; —I. 2, D. de paet.

© Dd. it.

= T.1, D. de pact.

> Thus, some persons are incapable of all manner of covenants. § 8, Inst. de imut.
stip. ;— 1.3, § 12, D. de ol. et act. Others cannot covenant to their prejudice, such as
persons under age. L. 28, D. de pact.

* £.6,C. de pact.; ;—L1, § 7, D. de pact.;—L. 27, § 4, cod .s—§ 28, Inst. de imu.
stip.; —1.7, § 7, D. de pact. See the fourth section of the Vices of Covenants,

4 2.57, D. de obf. ef act.; ~1. 116, § 2, D. de reg. jur.;—v. 1. 9, D. de contr. empt.

° L. 116, D. de reg. jur.; —v. tit. quod metus cauea, See the title of the Vices of Cove-


ahead e


166 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


Ill.

162. No Persons can covenant for others, nor to their Prejudice.
— Covenants being formed by the consent of parties, no man can
covenant for another, unless he has power from him so todo. And
much less can any persons do prejudice, by their covenants, to
others.


IV.


163. 1st Exception. Proxies may covenant for their Constituents.
— Proxies may covenant for those persons from whom they have
power so to do;® and they may engage them so far as the power
reaches which they have received from them.»


V.


164. 2d Exception. Of those who have a Right to treat for oth-
ers.— Tutors and curators, governors and heads of corporations,
and masters of companies, factors and agents that are employed
in any particular commerce, and all persons who have others sub
ject to their power, or under their conduct, or who represent others,
may make covenants in their names, according to the extent of
their ministry or power,' as shall be explained in its proper place
with respect to every one of these kinds of persons.


VI


165. Of him who treats for another, undertaking for his Consent.
—If a third person treats for one that is absent, without his
order, but undertakes for his consent, the absent party does not en-


TIT. I. SEC. T1.] VRAIS. :


ture of theeovenazit, the comsequences to which he shall leaeiads
occasion; and tlic:-other cizcnumstances.:: But. after that. the absent
person has ratified what was done in his name, although it. psove
to his prejadice, he cannot afterwards complain of it.!


- 166. Covengats are in Place of Laws.— When the covenants
are finished, whatever has been agreed upon stands in place of «
law to those who made them ;™ and they. cannot be revoked but
by common consent of the parties,” or by the other ways which
shall = ee in the sixth section.


Rous FOR THE invensunearion OF Covenants.


is. BOE, We otk VOL - ae

167. 1st Rule. Obscurities and Doubts are to be interpreted by
the Common Intention of the Contractors. — Seeing covenants are to
be formed by the mutual consent of those who treat together, every
one of them ought to explain in the covenant sincerely and clearly
what he promises, and what he pretends to. And it is by their
common intention that we are to explain whatever may be ob-
secure or doubtful in the covenant.’


IX.


168. 2d Rule. Interpretation made by Usage, or by other Ways.
— If the common intention of the parties does not appear from the
words of the covenant, and if it can be interpreted by any custom
or usage of the place where it was made, or of the persons who
made it, or by other ways, we must keep to that which shall ap-
pear to be the most probable, under all these views.1


X.


169. 3d Rule. To judge of the Sense of every Clause by the
Tenor of the whole Deed.— All the clauses of covenants are inter-


' L. 9, D. de neg. gest.; —§ 3, Inst. de inutil. stip. ; — § 20, eod.

= L. 23, D. de reg. jur.;—l.1, § 6, D. depositi ;—I. 1, D. de pact. ; —1. 34, D. de reg.
jw. See the twenty-second article of this section.

" § ult. Inst. quid mod. toll. obl.; — 1. 35, D. de reg. jer.

* L389, D. de pact. ; —1. 21, D. de contr. empt.; —1. 99, D. de verb. obl.

? L. 34, D. de reg. jur.; — 1. 168, § 1, eod.

* L. 34, D. de reg. jur.;—l. 114, eod.


168 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


preted one by another, in giving to each one the sense which re-
sults from the tenor of the whole deed; and even from what is set
forth in the preamble to it.


XI.


170. 4th Rule. The Intention to be preferred to the Expression.
— If the words of a covenant appear to be contrary to the inten-
tion of the contractors, which is otherwise evident, we must fol
low this intention, rather than the words.’


XII


171. 5th Rule. Of Clauses that have a Double Meaning.— If the
words of a covenant have a double meaning, we must take that
which is most conformable to the common intention of the con-
tractors ; and which has the greatest affinity to the subject-matter
of the covenant.*


XIIT.


172. 6th Rule. Interpretation in Favor. of him who ts obliged. —
The obscurities and uncertainties of the obligatory clauses are to
be interpreted in favor of him that is obliged, and we must always
restrain the obligation to the sense which diminishes it.* For he
that obliges himself is willing only to be engaged for as little as
he can, and the other party ought to have taken care to have it
clearly explained what he pretended to.* But if there are othe
rules which demand that the interpretation be made against the
person who is obliged, as in case of the following article, the obli-


TIT. 3, SEC. H.} COVENANTS. 169 -


fect of expression, be an effect of the knavery or fault of him who
ought to explain his intention, it is to be interpreted against him,
because he ought to have explained distinctly what his meaning
was. Thus, when a seller makes use of an equivocal expression
concerning the qualities of the thing which he sells, his words are


XV.


174. 8th Rule. The alternative Obligation is in the Choice of
him who is obliged. — If one is obliged indeterminately to one or
other of two things, he is at liberty to give that which he pleases,
if the covenant contains nothing to the contrary."


XVI.


175. 9th Rule. Obligations of Things whose Goodness and Value
may reach to more or less. — In the covenants, where one is obliged
for things whose value may reach to more or semen TTS. to
the difference of their qualities, such as provisions,” some kinds of
works,° or other things, the obligation is not extended to that _
which is best, and of the greatest price, but is moderated to that
which is called good and merchantable4 And the debtor, for ex-
ample, who owes wheat, discharges himself of his obligation, if he
gives wheat that is good and vendible; because it is presumed
that the contractors did not think of any other but that which is of
common use. But if the covenant regulates that which is due, or
if the intention of the contractors appears by the circumstances, we
must hold to that.


XVI.


176. 10th Rale. How the Price of Things is regulated.— If
ima covenant the parties omit to regulate the price of a thing;
it is to be estimated neither at the highest nor lowest price,


* L. 39, D. de pact. ; —1. 21, D. de contr. empt.; —1. 38, D. de contr. empt. ; — 1.172, D.

trey, jar. ; — V. i. 69, § 5, D. de evict. ; —1. 89, D. de act. empt. et vend. See the tenth

tte of the third section of Hiring and Letting to Hire ; and the fourteenth article of the

deventh section of the Contract of Sale.

, 2:10, im fine, D. de jur. dot. — 1. 25, D. de contr. empt. ;—v. 1. 21, in fine, D.de act. empt.
1.75, § 1, D. de verb. obl.; —d. 1. § 2; —I. 52, D. mand.

‘ L. $4, § 1, D. de verb. oblig.

“L.19, § 4, D. de aed. ed. ; —I. 18, eod. ;—d. 1. 18, § 1:—2. 16, § 1, D. de op. lib,
‘1.5, § 9, D. de verb. obl.; — V. |. 52, D. mand.

"2.16, § ult. D. de pign.

VOL. 1. 15


170 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOX L


but at the common rate, without any regard to the particular cir
cumstances of the affection which either the one or other of the
contractors might have had for the thing that is to be estimated,
or of their want of it But we ought only to consider what it is
worth in reality ;! what it would be worth in its common use to
any person whatsoever; and what it might be reasonably sold for!


XVIIL


177. 11th Rule. Of the Time and Place of the Estimation. — The
estimation of things which have not been delivered at the time
and place appointed, as of wine, corn, and other things of the like
nature, is made according to the value they had at the time, and
in the place where they ought to have been delivered.™


XIX.
178. 12th Rule. Eapressions which have no Sense.— The ex-


pressions which can have no sense any manner of way are
rejected, as if they had not been written.”


XX.

179. 13th Rule. Faults in the Writing.— The faults in the
writing, which may be repaired by the sense clearly understood,
do not hinder the effects which the covenant ought to have.

XXI.


180. 14th Rule. Covenants are limited to the Matters of which
they treat. — All the clauses of covenants have their sense limited


TIT. 1. BEC. 1H.] COVENANTS. TL


under treaty. For we ought not to presume either that a person
engages himself, or discharges another of his engagement, unless
his will is clearly explained, and rightly understood:


XXIL

181. 15th Rule. Interpretations of Judicial Covenants. — If it
happens that a covenant is made only in obedience to an order of
court; as if a judge orders a plaintiff to make some abatement in
order to receive what he demands, or that security be given for
certain things; in these and the like cases, if the act or deed which —
contains the engagement that is enjoined by a sentence, or decree,
happens to have any ambiguity or obscurity in it, it ought to be
interpreted by the intention of the sentence, or decree, in execution
of which it is made’


SECTION III.


OF ENOAGEMENTS WHICH FOLLOW NATURALLY FROM COVENANTS,
ALTHOUGH THEY BE NOT PARTICULARLY MENTIONED THEREIN.


Arr. I

182. Three Sorts of Engagements in Covenants. — Covenants
oblige not only to what is expressed in them, but likewise to every
thing which the nature of the covenant demands; and to all the
eonsequences which equity, law, and custom give to the obliga-
tion which the parties have contracted.*. So that we may distin-
guish three sorts of engagements in covenants. Those which are
expressly mentioned ; those which are natural consequences of the
covenants ; and those which are regulated by some law, or some
costom. Thus, it is by natural equity that a partner is obliged
to take care of the common affair which is in his hands; that he
who borrows a thing to use it ought to preserve it carefully ; that
the seller ought to warrant that which he has sold; although the
covenants make no express mention of these things.® Thus, it is in
Virtue of a law, that whoever purchases an estate for less than half


19,§ 1, D. de trans. ;—1. 5, D. de trans.;—L 8, C. eod.  —d. L. 9, in f- de trans.
"L.9, D. de stip. proet. ; —1. 52, D. de verb. obl.

"1.9, § ult. D. de oll. et act.; ;—L 31, § 20, D. de ed. ed. ;—1. 17, § 1, D. de aqua ea

one pluy. are.

* Ll, § 1, D. de act. empt.


172 THE OIVIL Law. [Part 1. BOOX |.


the just value, is obliged either to restore it, or make up the price.
Thus, in the lease of a house, some customs continue the lease be-
yond the term for a certain time, unless the contractors have dero-
gated from it. And all these consequences of covenants are, as it
were, tacit pacts, which are understood, and which make a part of
the covenant. For the contractors consent to every thing that is
essential to their engagements.°


IL


183. Reciprocal Performance of Covenants.—In all covenants,
the engagement of one of the parties being the foundation of the
engagement of the other, the first effect of the covenant is, that
every one of the contractors may oblige the other to execute his
engagement, by performing what he is bound to do on his own
part, according as one or other of the parties is obliged by the
covenant. Whether it be that the articles of the covenant are to
be performed on both sides at one and the same time; as if it is
agreed on in a sale, that the price shall be paid at the time of the
delivery of the goods; or whether it be that performance is to be
made first by one of the parties, as if the seller is obliged to deliver |
the goods, and has given some respite of time for payment of the
price, or by the other, as if the buyer be to pay the money down,
before the goods are delivered.4


II.


184. Exceptions to the foregoing Rule.— If when a covenant is
not at all executed, or when it is done only by one of the parties,


|


TIT, 1. sec. Wt] COVENANTS. 173


IV.

185. Penalties of the Non-performance of Covenants.— In all
covenants, it is the second effect of the engagement, that he who
fails in the performance of what he is bound to, or delays to do it,
whether it be for want of ability or want of will, shall be bound
to make good the damages of the other party, according to the
nature of the covenant, the quality of the non-performance or de-
lay, and the circumstances of the case‘ And if there is ground
to dissolve the covenant, it shall be dissolved, with a reservation of
the penalties which ought to follow from it against him who shall
have failed to perform his part of the engagement.


V.

186. An Obligation without a Term. — If it has been omitted in
a covenant to express the term of payment, or delivery of any
other thing promised, it is a consequence of the covenant, that,
since the term is added only in favor of the person who is obliged,
ifno time is allowed him for performing what he ought to do or
to give, he is bound to do it or to give it immediately, and with-
ont delay. Unless it happens that the performance of the cove-
nant implies the necessity of a delay, as if the performance is to
be made in another place than that where the parties entered into
the covenant.*


VE


187. The Placé of Payment, or other Performance of Covenants.
— If, in a covenant which obliges one to deliver any movable
thing, it has been omitted to express the place where the delivery
ought to be made, the thing shall be delivered in the place where it
thall happen to be at the time; unless it is by the knavery of the
person who ought to deliver it, that it has been removed from the
place where it ought to be; or that it appears to have been the
intention of the contractors, that the thing should be delivered in
another place.


' L.5,§ 1, D. de proesc. verd.; —1. 29, § 2, D. de ad. ed. See concerning damages, the
mrenteenth and eighteenth articles of the second section of the Contract of Sale.

tL. 5, § 1, D. de presse. verb. ; — 1. 60, D. de ed. ed. ; —L 6, C. de pact. int. empt. et vend.
comp. ;—1L 6, C. de her. vel act. ; — 1.31, D. de reb. cred.

ML. 14, D.de reg. jur.; —LAl, § 1, D. de verb, obl. ; — § 2, Inst. eod. ; —d. 1. 41, § 1, in f-

'T.12, § 1, D. depos. ; —1. 88, D. de jud.; —v. ll. 10, 11, 12, D. de rei vind. ;—L9, D.
& 00 quod cert. loc.


15°


174 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 1


VIL

188. The Delay lasts till the last Moment of the Term ts expired.
— He who has a term for paying, delivering, or doing any thing, is
not in delay, nor can-he be sued, till the last moment of the tem
is expired. For it cannot be said that he has not satisfied his
obligation, till the delay is fully expired. Thus, he who is bound
to make payment within a year, a month, or a day, has for his de-
lay all the moments of the year, the month, or the day.!


VIIL


189. Of the Care which one ought to take of that which belongs
to another, when the Charge of tt is committed to him by some Cov-
enant. — It is a natural consequence of many covenants, that those
who have the charge either of a thing or of an affair belonging to
another person, or which belongs to them in common, are bound
to take care of it; and they are answerable for their knavery, their
faults, their nealigences, but in a different manner,™ according to
the different causes for which the thing is committed to their
charge, whether it be for their own interest alone, as he who bor
rows a thing of another to make use of it;" or for the bare interest
of the owner, as the depositary ;° or for their common interest, as
in the case of a partner.» And they are obliged to more or less
care and diligence, according to the rules which shall be explained
in each kind of covenant: but if it be adjusted in the covenant
what care he ought to take who is intrusted with the affair, or
thing, of another person, or which is in common to them both, it
is necessary to keep to that.4


TIT. & SEC. tH.] COVENANTS. 175


agreed on’ or that the loss or damage may be imputed to some
fault, for which one of the contractors is accountable; as if a thing
which ought to have been delivered happens to perish, while he
who ought to deliver it refuses to do it

X.

191. He who reaps the Profit ought to bear the Loss.— As it
often happens, after covenants are agreed on, that the same thing,
or the same affair, is an occasion of gain or loss, according to the

icty of accidents; it is always understood, that he who reaps
the profit ought to bear the loss;* unless it be that the loss ought
to be imputed to the fault of the other party. Thus, as the buyer,
after the sale, has the advantage of the changes which make the
thing better; he suffers likewise the loss of those that make it
worse." Uniless:the loes may be imputed to the seller; as if the
thing perishes, or is diminished, whilst he is in delay to deliver it

Xi.

192. The Estimation referred to some Persons.—In the cove-
nants in which an estimation is to be made, as of the price in a
sale, of the value of a rent, of the quality of a work, of the shares
of gain and loss which partners ought to have, and others of the
like nature; if the contractors refer the matter to the arbitration
of a third person, whether they name him or not; or even to the
arbitration of one of the parties; it is the same thing as if they
had referred it to the arbitration of persons of probity and skill in
the matter. And whatever shall be awarded contrary to this rule
will not be of any force; because the intention of those who make
such references to other persons implies the condition, that what
shall be regulated in the matter shall be reasonable; and their de-
sign is not to oblige themselves to what may be arbitrated beyond
the bounds of reason and equity :” but if the person named either


' L. 23, D. de reg. jur. in f.; —1. 1, C. de commod. ; —v. l. 39, D. mand. See the sixth
wticle of the second section of the Loan of Things to be restored in Specie.

* £5, D. de reb. cred. ;—v. 1.11, § 1, D. locat. cond. ;—1. 11, D. de neg. gest.; —1. 1,
| 4, D. de obl. ef act.

' Z.10, D. de reg. jur. ; —§ 3, Inst. de empt. et vend. ; —l. 13, § 1, D. commod.

* L.1, C. de per. et com. r. v.

* L. 14, D. de per. et com.

Y L. 76, & seg. D. pro socio; —|. 24, D. loc. ;—1 30, D. de opt. lib. It is necessary
here to observe the difference between this sort of arbitrators, and arbitrators named in a
compromise, and what shall be said of them in the title of Compromises. See |. 76, D. pro
teeta.


176 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT I. BOOK |


could not or would not make the estimation, or died before he
could make it, the covenant in that case would be null. For it
contained the condition, that the estimation should be made by
that person."


XII.


193. A Perfect Integrity is required in all Kinds of Covenants.—
There is no sort of covenant in which it is not understood that
the one party is bound to deal honestly and fairly by the other,
and to do whatever equity may demand;* as well in the manner
of expressing himself in the covenant, as in the performance of
what is covenanted, and of all the consequences of it.» And alk
though in some covenants this honest and fair dealing has a larger,
and in some a lesser extent, yet it ought to be sincere in all cove
nants ; and each party is obliged to every thing that the same may
require, according to the nature of the covenant and the conse
quences that it may have° Thus, in a sale, this integrity forms s
greater number of engagements, than in the loan of money. For
the seller is obliged to deliver the thing sold;4 to keep it till the
time of delivery ;° to warrant it; to take it back again, if it has
such faults as that the sale ought to be made void. And the
buyer has likewise his engagements; which shall be explained ia
their place. But in the loan of money, the borrower is bound only
to restore the same sum, with the interest, if he does not pay
at the term after demand:


* I. 75, D. pro socio; —l. ult. C. de contr. empt.
* LT. 4, ©. de obl. et act. ; —1. 31, D. depos,


ed it with him, and to restore it to the person who appears
he true owner:


XIV.


, Be what Sense we ought to understand that it ts lawful for
arty to cheat the other. — The ways by which every one man-
is own interest, at the time he contracts with another, and
sistance of one party to the pretensions of the other, within
unds of that which is uncertain and arbitrary, and which
be regulated, have nothing in them contrary to honesty.
vhereas it is said that it is lawful, for example, in sales, for
 overreach the other, this ought to be understood of the ad-
ze which the one party takes of the other, in that extent
is uncertain and arbitrary ; such as in the greatness or low-
f the price;™ but this liberty ought not to be extended to
aud.


XV.


. Delays are arbitrary for the Performance of Covenants, ac-
yr to the Condition of Things.—In all covenants in which
f the contractors is obliged to do or give a thing, or to ac-
lish in any other manner that which is agreed on; and es-
lly in those in which the non-performance is to be attended
a dissolution of the contract, or with some other penalty, it
titable, and for the public interest, that the covenants be not
diately dissolved, nor the penalties incurred for every sort of
erformance indifferently. Thus, for example, if the buyer
not pay the price at the time appointed, the sale shall not be
ntly annulled, even although it had been so agreed on; but a


178 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1, BOOK 1,


sale be made void. And in the other cases of backwardness,
whether of payment, or delivery of any thing, the judge onght in
prudence to grant such delays as may be reasonable, according to
the circumstances."


SECTION IV.


OF THE SEVERAL SORTS OF PACTS WHICH MAY BE ADDED TO COY-
ENANTS; AND PARTICULARLY OF CONDITIONS.


197, Amone the several sorts of pacts that may be added to all
manner of covenants, some are of common use to all the kinds
of covenants, such as conditions, clauses of nullity, and other;
and there are some which are peculiar to some kinds of cove
nants, such as the power of redemption to the contract of salt
We shall only set down here such as are common to all sorts of
covenants ; and what are peculiar to some covenants shall be it
serted in their proper places.


Arr. I.


198. An Indefinite Liberty for all Sorts of Pacts. — Seeing cor
enants are arbitrary, and vary according to the wants of mankind;
we may to all sorts of covenants, contracts, and treaties, add ull
manner of pacts, conditions, restrictions, reservations, general ae
quittances, and others, provided that they have nothing in them
contrary to law and good manners.*


‘IT. I. SEC. Iv.] COVENANTS. 179


ccording as it is agreed on.» Thus the seller, although naturally
ound to warrant what he has sold, may free himself from all
ther warranty besides that of his own act and deed.° And the
quity of these arguments is grounded on the particular motives
rhich the contractors have to enter into them. That seller, for
istance, is discharged from warranty, because he sells the thing
t a lower price.


IIL.


200. Exception of that which would be against Honesty.— The
berty of augmenting or diminishing engagements is always re-
trained to what may be done honestly, and without fraud or deceit.
ind deceit is always excluded from all manner of covenants.


IV.


201. Every one may renounce his own Right. — In all covenants,
very One may renounce his own right, and that which is for his
dvantage ;° provided that what he does be not contrary to equi-
y, law, and good manners, nor to the interest of a third person‘


V.


202. Pactions are limited to their Subject-matter.— The partic-
ar pactions which are added in contracts are limited to the mat-
er which occasions them, and are not to be extended to that
which the contractors had not in view.&


Or ConpDITIONS.


VI.
203. Definition of Conditions, their Use, and different Effects.


—It being usual in covenants for the parties to foresee accidents
that may produce some change which they are willing to guard
against, they therefore regulate what shall be done if those cases
dohappen. And this is what is done by the use of conditions.


‘ L. 93, D. de reg. jur.

* L.11, § 18, D. de act. empt. et vend. See the fifth, sixth, and seventh articles of the
tenth section of the Contract of Sale.

“1.97, § 3, D.de pact.; —I. 1, § 7, D. dep. ; —1. 28, D. de reg. jur.;—1. 69, D. de verb.
tm.; —1.7, § 7, D. de pact.

* L. 46, D. de pact. ; — |. 29, C. eod. ; —I. 41, D. de min.

TL. 74, D. de reg. jur.; —1. 27, § 4, D. de pact. See the third article of the second
section. V1. 4,§ 4, D. si quis caut.; —v. |. 8, D. de trans.

6 See the twenty-first article of the second section of this title. Z. 27, § 4, D. de pact.


180 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 2. BOOK L


204. Conditions, therefore, are pactions which regnlate thet
which the contractors have a mind should be done, if a case
which they foresee should come to pass. Thus, if it is said thet,
in case a house that is sold be found to be subject to such a se-
vice, the sale shall be void, or the price lowered, this is a condi-
tion: for the parties foresee a case, and they guard against it
Thus, if a house is sold on condition that the purchaser shall not
raise it higher, the seller foresees that the buyer may make this
change, and he provides against it, that he may preserve the
lights of another house different from that which he sells.

205. We have added this second example, to show that the
burdens which contractors impose upon one another in covenants
are of the same nature with conditions. For it is, properly speak-
ing, a burden imposed upon the purchaser, not to have power to
build his house higher; but this burden implies a condition, as if
it had been said, that, in case the purchaser should offer to raise
his house, the seller might hinder him. And it is for this reason, |
that we often make use of the word condition, and of the word
burden, indifferently ; and we say, on such a condition, or with
such a burden. And we likewise use the word conditions in
the plural number, to denote the different agreements in a treaty,
because they all of them oblige in such a manner, that, if it hap-
pens that the parties fail in performing them, or act contrary t
them, they are liable to the penalties of non-performance, |

206. The events foreseen by conditions are of three sorts
Some of them depend on the act of the persons who treat te
gether, as if it is said, In case that a partner engages himeelf in


ak a
x net


: ee as if it is said, that, if» house
| which is let be given without the movables that were promised,
the rent shall be lessened so much. .
208. There are some conditions expressed, and there are others
tacit, which are understood without being expressed. The express
| conditions are all those which are expressly mentioned; as when
it is said, if such a’thing be done, or not; if such « thing happen,.
ornot. The tacit conditions are those ‘which are inplied in a».
_ covenant, without being expressed; as if it is said, in the sale of
_ an estate, that the seller reserves to himself the fruits of that
year; this reservation implies the condition, that there shall grow
 frnits, in the same manner as if had been said, that he reserved
the fruits, in case there should be any.*
VIL
209. Of the Condition on which depends the Accomplishment of a
— In the covenants whose accomplishment depends on
the event of a condition, all things remain in suspense, and in
the same condition as if there never had been any covenant, until
the condition happens. ‘Thus, in a sale which is to be perfected
t la a condition, the buyer has in the mean while
c: station, without any right either to enjoy the thing, or to
ie it by prescription." But the seller continues to be master
of the thing sold, and the fruits of it belong to him! And if the
condition does not happen, the contract is void.!
VIL.

210. Effect of the Event of this Condition.— The condition on
which depends the accomplishment of a covenant being come to
pass, it makes the covenant effectual, and produces the changes
_ Which onght to follow from it. Thus, a sale being perfected by
the event of a condition, the buyer becomes instantly master of
the thing; and this change has the other consequences which are
the effects of the covenant.™


* £73, D. de verb. obl.; —L.1, § 3, D. de cond. et dem.

\ 1.4, D. dein diem add. ; — § 4, Inst. de verb. obl. ; —L 54, D. de verb. sign.

'L.& D. de per. ef com. r. v.

1. 32, D. de contr. empt.; :—L 8, D. de per. et com. r. v.

* L. 1, D. de contr. empt.; —1. 8, D. de per. et com. r, 0. 'The event of the condition
huth sometimes a retroactive effect. ‘Thus, the mortgage stipulated in a conditional obli-
fuion will have its effect from the date of the obligation, whenever the condition shall
toms to pass. See the seventeenth article of the third section of Mortgages.

YOU. 1. 16


182 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 1


1 b.¢

211. Of the Condition on which the Dissolution of a Cove
nant depends. —In covenants which are already perfected, but
which may be dissolved by the event of a condition, all things re
main in the mean while in the same condition they were in by
the covenant; and the effect of the condition is in suspense, until
it happens. Thus, if it is said that a sale which is perfected
shall be void, in case that within a certain time a third person
give a greater price for the thing sold, the buyer until then re
mains master, he preseribes, he enjoys the fruits; and if the thing
perishes, he bears the loss of it.


X.


212. Ejfect of the Event of this Condition. —The case of the |
condition which is to annul a covenant being come to pass, the
covenant shall be void.° And this change shall have the effects |
which ought to follow from it, according to the rules which shall
be explained in the sixth section, and in the rule that follows.


XL

213. In what Manner the Consequences of Conditional Covenanlt
are regulated. — Whatever happens either before or after thé
event of the condition, it is regulated according to the state @
which things are at the time. ‘Thus, when a sale is perfected, and
is to be annulled in case a certain condition happens, the bayéll
is in the mean while master of the thing; he prescribes, he enjayt
the fruits of it; and if it happens to perish, he bears the loga®


ar easttaai ANA wh too tse “hia
come vy lt wih og hy


rhic reno mation tthe ine to come, bu ely
have their effect immediately; and
same time either accomplished or annulled,
+ which it ought to have from the condition.
2 tears ep ala lattes toe Rapes po
Sci one te casa ce
in sich «port the sale Is ether Instany accomplish, i
: Sis arrived in port; or instantly void, if it is not
"And the covenant is not in suspense, although the per
not But it is only the performance which is was-
y know whether the condition has happened,


- : el unti
XIII.

. Of Inipossible’ Conditions. — Conditions that are impossible
mu Base Goteimiutte to which they are added!


XIV.

216. The Effect of Conditions passes to Heirs. — If the con-

ions do not happen till after the decease of the contractors, they
¢ their effect with respect to their heirs and executors."


XV.


. Conditions which do not depend on the Act of the Con-
rs have their Effect immediately. — If the condition on which
nds the accomplishment or dissolution of a contract, or the
mg any change in it, be independent of the act of the con-
s, it hath its effect immediately when it happens, or as soon
Snare: Thus, for example, if it is agreed, that a sale of
© shall not take its effect, unless a regiment of horse arrives


8, D. de peri. et com. r. v.
, D. de reb. cred. ; —v. 1. 38 et 39, eod. ; —1. 100, D, da verb. oblig.
E31, D. de obl. et act.

iii, est, ds inet. atip. ; —1. 8, D. de per. et com.-r. v,


shad
f


184 THE O1VIL LAW. [PaRT lL. BOOK L


within such a time; it shall have its efiect so soon as the regiment
arrives ; or it shall remain null, if the regiment does not arrive.
Thus, when an estate is sold on condition that, if it be found sub-
ject to a certain charge, the sale shall be dissolved, it will depend
on the buyer to break the sale, if the estate appears to be subject
to that charge ;* unless it be such a one as is in the seller’s power
to free the estate of, and that the circumstances make it reasonable
to allow him a time for doing it.


XVI.


218. Conditions which depend on the Act of the Contractors
may suffer a Delay. —If the condition depends either wholly, or
in part, on the act of one of the contractors, and he has not
satisfied it within the time, it is understood that, in the cases
where it would be equitable to grant a delay, it ought to be
granted according to the circumstances; as when the delay has
occasioned no damage, or, if there is any, when it may be repaired
Thus, when an estate is farmed out, or a house let, on conditios
that the proprietor shall make some repairs within a certain time,
the lease shall not be immediately void, although the repairs be
not finished precisely within the time. But prudence will direc
the judge to grant a delay according to the circumstances; either
without damages, if the tenant has suffered no prejudice by the
delay, or with reparation of the damage which the delay may hare
occasioned.’


XVIL


TIT. I. SEC. 1V.} ° COVENANTS. 185


will likewise depend on the seller to break the contract, if the
buyer does not pay in ready money. Thus, in all the cases, it is
by the circumstances that we must judge whether there be room


for granting a delay for performing a condition, or other engage-
ment.*


XVIIL
220. Of the Party who hinders the Accomplishment of the Condi-
tion. — If the event or fulfilling of a condition be hindered by the
party whose interest it is that it do not happen, whether it depend
on his act or not, the condition with respect to him shall be held
as fulfilled. And he shall be obliged to what he was bound to do,
to give, or suffer, in case the condition happened."


Or Cuavuses or Nutuity, anp Penat CuavsEs.


221. Clauses of nullity are those by which it is agreed that the
covenant shall be null in a certain case. As if it is said, that a
transaction shall be void, if such a thing be not done, or given,
within such a time.

Penal clauses are those which add a penalty for default of per-
formance of that which is agreed on. As is in general the penalty
of damages, and in particular the penalty of a certain sum.


XIX.


222. The Effect of Clauses of Nullity and Penal Clauses. —
Clauses of nullity and penal clauses are not always executed to
the rigor; and covenants are not dissolved, nor penalties incurred,
in the very moment which the contract bears; even although it
should be agreed on that the contract should be void, by the bare
deed, and without any ministerial act of justice. But these sorts
of clauses have their effect regulated by the discretion of the
Judge,* according to the nature of the covenants, and the circum-
stances, pursuant to the foregoing rules.


XX.


23. It does not depend on him who fails in performing what he
Promised, to annul the Covenant by his Non-performance. — If it is


* See the fifteenth article of the third section.
*L.161, D. de reg. jur.
* L.135, § 2, D. de verb. obl. See the preceding rules, and the tenth article of the sec-
oad section of Partnership.
16*


186 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK 1.


said that a contract shall be made void, in case one of the con-
tractors fail to perform on his part any one of the engagements he
is bound to; the clause of nullity shall not have this effect, to
make it depend on him to annul the contract by not performing
what he has promised; but it will depend on the other party,
either to force him to make performance, or to have the contract
declared void, and such damages allowed him as shall be due.
Thus, when it is said that a sale, a transaction, or other contract,
shall be annulled upon failure of payment, it will not depend on
him who is bound to pay, to annul the covenant by not making
payment.>


XXL


224. Covenants concerning an Uncertain Event.—In covenants
where persons treat of a right, or other thing which depends on
some certain event, and from which there may accrue either
profit or loss, according to the difference of events that may hap-
pen; it is free for the parties to treat in such a manner, that the
one, for example, renounce all profit, and free himself from all
loss; or that he take a certain sum in lieu of all that he could
expect of profit; or that he charge himself with a certain loss for
all the losses which he had to fear. Thus, a partner who is de
sirous to withdraw from the partnership may adjust with his
copartners what present and certain profit he shall have, or what
loss he shall bear, whatever accident fall out. Thus, an heir may
treat with his coheirs to give up all his right in the inheritance,
for a certain sum, and oblige them to indemnify him from all


a _ eeveNENTe": me
OT ee ON. i ae eS Le ee kl ee TLD A he De lies
eo See " @HOTION. Wa 8 inane
ew OD Td feed fh ae an ae cere
er soe eremures wun som tru ox mmm onsen “Boe


: “.. adage
- Azr. L


" $45. Dighton of Covenants that ore Moll. Covenants that ase
wilt dee’ tives which, for want: of some desential character, have
 et'the uubare ofa covenant: As if one of the contractors was
tender’ any tefirraity of mind or body, which rendered: him tneape-
ii of haoeiek: @hat anpqunent is ieukss* cus uk wk 4
thing belonging to the: public, a thing set apart for a sacred use,
or any other thing that could not be bought or sold; ort the
thing sold did already belong to the buyer.” :

596. Covenants Null, although the Nullity be not yet known. —
The covenants which are null in their origin are in effect suck,
whether the nullity can be immediately discovered, or whether the
covenant appears to subsist, and to ‘have some effect. Thus,
when a madman sells his estate, the sale is immediately null from
the beginning, although the purchaser be in possession of 'the
estate, and enjoy the fruits of it, and although at the time of the
sale this condition of the seller was not known. And it is the


same thing, if one of the contractors has been compelled by
force.°


ITI.


227. Causes of the Nullities of Covenants. — Covenants are
null, either because of the incapacity of the persons, as in the


ia sdmittmg the renunciations of daughters in contracts of marriage, contrary to the tenor
the Roman law. V. 1. 3, C. de collat.

We mast take heed in the use of this rule concerning treaties about uncertain events,
2 to extend it to cases where the consequences would be repugnant to law or good
Matners. As, for instance, if two presumptive heirs should treat together concerning the
futare inheritance of the person to whom they are to succeed as heirs. For this agree-
mex would be unlawful, unless it were made with the express consent and approbation
the person concerning whose inheritance they treat, as shall be explained in its proper
Place, "VL gO da pad.

* Bee the title of the Vices of Covenants.

| $8, nat. cle iat. stip.

$9 ed. Seo the first article of the sixth section.
* § 2, Inet. de inut. stip.; —1. 1, C. de resc. vend.


188 THB CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


example of the preceding article; or because of some vice in the
covenant, as if it is contrary to good manners ;¢ or because of
some other defect, as if it is not to be accomplished but by the
event of a condition which is not come to pass;®* or for other
causes.*


IV.


228. Incapacity of Persons. — Persons may be incapable of con-
tracting, either by nature, or by some law. Thus, by nature,
madmen,® and such persons as, because of some infirmity, are
not able to express themselves," are naturally incapable of all sorts
of covenants. Thus, by the prohibition of the law, prodigals
who are interdicted are incapable of making covenants to their
prejudice.!


V.


229. Different Incapacities of Persons. — The incapacities of
persons are different, and have different effects. Some persons
are incapable of all contracts; such as madmen, and those who
cannot express themselves: others are only incapable of such
covenants as are to their prejudice; such as minors and prodigals
And married women cannot contract any obligation whatsoever
in some provinces, unless they are authorized by their hus
bands.!


VIL
230. Two Sorts of Nullities, either by Nature, or by some Law.


TIT. 1. SEC. Vv.) COVENANTS. 189


rally vicious and null" ‘Thus, it is by a law that the sale of an
entailed estate is unlawful and void.° .
VIL

231. Covenants which are Null on one Part, and not on the other.
— There are covenants which may be declared null on the part of
one of the contractors, and which subsist, and oblige irrevocably,
on the part of the other. Thus, the contract between one that is
of full age, and one under age, may be annulled with respect to
him who is under age, if it is not to his advantage ; and it subsists
with respect to him that is of age, if the minor does not demand
to be relieved.” And this inequality of the condition of the con.
tractors has nothing in it that is unjust. For he that was of age
knew, or ought to have known, the condition of him with whom
he treated.4


VII.


232. Covenants that are Null which may be validated. — Cove-
nants which were liable to be annulled by reason of the incapacity
of the persons, become valid afterwards, if, when the incapacity
ceases, the persons ratify or approve the covenant. Thus, when
a minor, being come to age, ratifies or executes the contract which
te had made in his minority, this contract becomes irrevocable,
as if he had made it after he was of age.


IX.


233. A Natural Obligation. — Persons who are not by nature
incapable of contracting, and who are only incapacitated by the
Pohibition of some law, do nevertheless tie themselves by their
covenant to a natural obligation, which, according to the circum-
stances, may have this effect; that although they cannot be com-
peled by law to make good what they have promised, yet, if they
do perform their engagement, they cannot afterwards be relieved.*
Thus for example, by the Roman law, a son who is still in the


* L185, D. de reg. jur.; —v. 1.7, C. de red. al. n. al.

* 1.7, C. de red. al. non al.

PL.13,§ 29, D. de act. empt. et vend.

11.19, D. de reg. jur. |
4g ob1% D. de cath. o cons. tut. et cur.;—1.2, O. si maj. fact. rat. hab.; —1. 8, § D.

Rin,


* L.10, D.de obl, et act.;—1.16,§ 4, D. de fidejuss.;—1.1,§ 17, D.ad leg. Fale. ; —
L443 D. de sol. ;—v. L. 10, D. de verb. signif. ; — et l. 84, § 1, D. de reg. jur.


190 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


power of his father, although of age, cannot oblige himself by bor-
yowing money; but if he pays what he has borrowed, he cannot
afterwards recover it.« Thus, in the provinces where a married
woman cannot bind herself, not even with the consent of her hus-
band, if after the husband’s death she pays what she had promised,
she cannot plead the nullity of her engagement for recovering
what she has paid.


X.


234. Error and Force annul Covenants.— The covenants in
which the persons, even those who are capable of contracting, did
not know what was necessary to be known in order to form
their engagement, or had not the liberty of consenting to it, are
null. Thus, the covenants in which the contractors mistake one
another’s meaning, the one meaning to treat of one thing, and the
other of another, are null, through the want of knowledge, and of
their consent to one and the same thing." Thus, covenants in
which the liberty of the contractors is restrained by some violence
are also null.*


XI.


230. Covenants about Things which cannot be bought or sold ere
Null. — Covenants in which people treat about things which car
not be bought or sold, such as things set apart to a holy use, things
belonging to the public, are null.’


XIL


TIT. 1. SEC. V.] COVENANTS. 191


XTIL
237. Obligations without a Cause are Null.— In covenants where-
in any one is obliged without a cause, the obligation is null“ And
it is the same thing, if the cause happens to cease.” But it is by
the circumstances that we must judge whether the obligation hath
its cause or not.


XTV.

238. The Ejfect of Covenants that are Null through the Fault of
one of the Contractors. — The covenants which happen to be null
through some cause for which one of the contractors ought to be
responsible, as if he has alienated a thing set apart to » holy use,
or which belongs to the public, although they are null, yet they
have this-effect, to oblige the party who is in fault to make good
the damages which he has occasioned to the other.° a


a Ve
239. The Consequences of Covenants annulled. —Tf a covenant,
although null, has had some consequence, or some effect, and.is
declared to be void, the contractors are restored to the condition
which they would have been in, if there had been no covenant at
all, in so far as the circumstances will allow, and with the restitu-
tions that may be due from him who is liable to make them.‘


XVI.


240. The Ministry of Justice for annulling Covenants.— Although
a covenant proves to be null, yet he who complains of it can-
not restore himself to his own right, unless the other party con-
sent to it. But he must have recourse to the authority of justice,
whether it be to get the nullity declared by a sentence, and him-
lf reinstated in his right, or to get the sentence of the court put
in execution, in case it should meet with opposition.® For when
itis necessary to make use of force, the public justice of a coun-
by suffers none but what she herself employs.


" See the fifth article of the first section.

 L.4, D. de condit. sine caus.

* § whe. Inst. de emptione et venditione ; —v. 1. 3, C. de reb. alien. non alien.

“1.1,§1, D. de in int. restit.

* 1.18, D. quod met. caus.;—1. 1, C. de resc. vend.;—v. 1. 9, C. sol. mat.;—v. 1. 1,
D. wi poesid. See the fourteenth article of the following section, and the second section
Ot the Vices of Covenants.


192 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


XVIL )

241. Covenants which are Null are useless to Therd Persons, as
well as to the Contractors themselves. — If the covenants by which
any right accrues to third persons prove to be null, they have no
more effect with respect to those persons, than with respect to the
contractors. Thus, the creditor has no mortgage on the estate
which his debtor had acquired by a contract that was null.‘


SECTION VI.
OF THE DISSOLUTION OF COVENANTS WHICH WERE NOT NULL.


Art. I.

242. Difference between Covenants that are Null, and those that
are dissolved.— There is this difference between the nullity and
dissolution of covenants, that the nullity makes it never to hare
been a real covenant, but only the appearance of one ;* wheres
the dissolution annuls a covenant which was in force.»


Il.


243. Divers Cases which dissolve Covenants. — Covenants which
were valid may be dissolved, either by consent of the parties who
change their minds ;° or by the effect of some paction, which has
been added to the covenant itself, such as a power of redemptioa,!
a clause of nullity;* or by the event of a condition;‘ or by a ree
titution;® or by a rescission of the contract,» on account of some


—


TIT. 1 SEC. ¥L) _ © COVENANTS. 193
gate from them, have the effect which the contractors intend they


should have, whether it be to annul or to alter what they had


agreed upon; and they put the contractors in the condition in
which they have a mind RTS Seprclengng en
fares the circumstances ‘wil allow! |


| .p-conliy


rrr |) 6 a re tt) Ee i | fed syle veaeee
Persons have acquired by former Covenants.— The changes which
the contractors make-in their former covenants by those of a later


_ sequired by the first covenants. ‘Thus; sale which was already


i, and executed in all its parts, being dissolved only by the
bare will of the seller and buyer, the buyer’s creditor retains his
right of mortgage on’ the estate, which returns to the seller, by the
bare-voluntary dissolution of the contract of sale! But. if the
covenant was dissolved by the effect of a clause in the contract,
such as the event of a condition, or a power of redemption ina
sale, this mortgage would vanish, and the contractors would enter
eta raya ety the effet of thelr covennut. rotten


an. <a, ep Vv. ir’ Unt

26. A (ey dissolved by the meade a Condition. —~ Cov
enants which are accomplished but upon condition that, if such a
case happens, they shall be void, continue in force till the condi-
tion happens, and then they are dissolved, pursuant to the four-
teenth and fifteenth articles of the fourth section.™


VI.


47, Effect of Clauses of Nullity.— If it is said in a covenant,
that it shall be void in case one of the contractors fails to perform
tome engagement, the non-performance does not dissolve and
annul the covenant, but in conformity to the rules explained in the
tighteenth and nineteenth articles of the fourth section


E12, C. de pact.
' 1.63, D, de jur. dot. ;—L. 9, D, de lib. caus.;—1.10, D. de jurejur. Sce the four-
tent and fifteenth articles ofthe twelth section of the Contract of Sale, and the remarks
thereon.
gk he Renrtoreh wed Sheen: eciiclen of she Socsib eention, unl tha finerkconth unt
of this,
" See the eighteenth and nineteenth articles of the fourth section, and the fourteenth
Stticle of this.
VOL. I. 17


194 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK t.


VIL
248. Covenants annulled by Agreement. — If a covenant leaves a
liberty to one of the contractors to recede from his bargain within
a certain time, or if there is a power of redemption, or other
clauses which may annul the covenant some other way, the put-
ting these clauses in execution dissolves and annuls the covenant,
according to the agreement of the contractors.°


VII


249. Covenants repealed because of Fraud. — Covenants in which
one of the contractors is overreached, and cheated by the fraud of
the other, or by any other unfair way, are dissolved or annulled
when the injured party complains of it, and proves the fact?


TX.


250. Damage without Fraud, which is called Dolus re ipsé.—
adequacy of Price. — There are some covenants in which the bere
damage, although without fraud, is sufficient to annul the cove
nant. Thus, for example, the partition of an inheritance among
coheirs is annulled by reason of too great an inequality ;4 and a
sale, on account of the lowness of the price,” or defect of the
thing sold;* according to the rules, which shall be explained in
their proper places.


X.


251. Events which dissolve Covenants.— Covenants are some
times dissolved by the bare effect of some event. Thus, for ir


TIT. I. SEC. VI-} | COVENANTS. 195


the purchaser, by the right of redemption, which belongs to the
“next lineal heir, who comes in place of the purchaser. And many
other events annul covenants, in different ways, according to the
condition in which they put things.


XI.


2592. Covenants dissolved for Non-performance.— The non-per-
formance of covenants on the part of one of the contractors may
give occasion to their being annulled; whether it be through want
of ability, or of will, in the party to perform his engagement, al-
though there be in the contract no clause of nullity; as if the
seller does not deliver the thing sold. And in these cases, the cov-
enant is dissolved, either immediately, if there is ground for it, or
after a reasonable delay, and with such damages as the non-per-
formance may have occasioned.’


XII.


253. The Effects and Consequences of the Dissolution of Cove-
nants.— In all the cases where covenants are dissolved, if it is by
the will of the contractors, they are mutually restored to the con-
dition in which they have a mind to be by common consent. And
if the covenant is repealed in a judicial way, the contractors are
put into the condition which ought to follow upon the dissolution

of the contract; and they are condemned to such restitutions,
damages, and other consequences as the covenant ought to have,
according to the circumstances, and with a due regard to the dif-
ferent causes of the dissolution; which depends on the prudence
of the judge,* according to the foregoing rules, and the others which
shall be explained under the title of Rescission of Contracts, and
Restitution of Things to their First Estate.


XTIL


24. The Accessory Covenants are dissolved with the Principal.
—The principal covenants being annulled, those which are con-
sequences and accessories to them are so likewise.*


’ This role is a consequence of the preceding rules. JL. 1, D. de act. empt. et vend. ;—
(4. Ceod. See the following article, the fourteenth and fifteenth articles of the fifth sec-
ton, and the seventeenth and eighteenth articles of the second section of the Contract of

é.

*L.1,§ 2, D.de min. ; —1. 135, § 2, D.de verb. oll. ;—1. 10, D. de rei vind. ; — 1.68, eod.
* L.1, C. de cond. ob caus. dat.


196 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT L BOOK!


XIV.

255. The Authority of Justice in dissolving Covenants, and execul-
ing what ts decreed. — When a covenant is not dissolved by
common consent, the party who complains cannot molest the
other; but he ought to have recourse to justice, to get the covenant
declared void, and the sentence of the judge put in execution.’


TITLE II.
OF THE CONTRACT OF SALE.


256. Of the Origin and Use of the Contract of Sale.— The ne
cessity of having the property of the greatest part of things whic
we stand in need of, and especially of those which we cannot use
without consuming or wasting them, and consequently without
being masters of them, hath been the origin of the ways of so
quiring things, and of transferring the property of them from one
person to another.

257. The first commerce for this use was that of giving one
thing for another. And this way of traffic is called exchange ;* m
which, to have a thing which we stand in need of, we give anothe,
which is useless, or less necessary to us. But because exchange,
or bartering of commodities, seldom or never suits with the a
cumstances of all parties, either because the contractors have net


TIT. 1. SEC. I.] CONTRACT OF SALE. 197


SECTION I.


OF THE NATURE OF THE CONTRACT OF SALE, AND IN WHAT
MANNER IT IS PERFEOTED.


Arr. I.


258. Definition of Sale.— The contract of sale is a covenant by
which one gives a thing for a price in current money; and the
other gives the price to have the thing.*


II.


259. The Sale is perfected by the bare Consent. — The sale is per-
fected by the bare consent of the parties, although the thing sold
be not as yet delivered, nor the price paid.”


IIL


260. How the Consent is given.— The consent which makes
the sale is given either in presence of the parties, or in their ab-
sence; or in writing, or by word of mouth; or under the hand of
the parties, or before a public notary: pursuant to the rules ex-
plained in the title of Covenants© And after the sale is thus per-
fected, it is not any longer in the power either of the seller or
buyer to revoke his consent; although it were immediately after
the contract is ended; unless both parties should agree jointly to
dissolve it.‘


IV.


261. Who may sell and buy, and what Things may be sold. — All
sorts of persons may buy and sell, unless they are under some
incapacity, or that the thing sold is not vendible, or unless there
be some other vice in the sale; according to the rules which shall
be explained in the eighth section.


* L.5,$1, D. de presc. verb.; —1. 2, § 1, D. de contr. empt.; —§ 2, Inst. de empt. e
vead. ; — 1.1, D. de contr. empt.

> See the eighth article of the first section of the title of Covenants ; — Inst. de obl. ex con-
sensu ;—l.1,in f. D. de contr. empt. ; -— Inst. de empt. e vend. See the tenth article of the
second section concerning the manner in which it is necessary to understand that the bare
consent perfects the contract of sale.

© See art. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16, of the second section of Covenants.

¢ 2.13, C. de contr.empt. See the fourteenth and fifteenth articles of the twelfth section.

* See the second article of the second section of Covenants.

17°


198 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT f. BOOX 1


V.

262. Three Sorts of Engagements in the Contract of Sale. — The
contract of sale, as all other contracts, forms three sorts of engage-
ments. The first is of those which are expressed in the contract;
the second, of those which are the natural consequences of the
sale, although the contract makes no mention of them; and the
third is of such engagements as the laws, customs, and usage of
the country have established‘


VI.


263. The First Sort is of the Engagements that are expressed.—
The first of these three sorts of engagements reaches to all the
particular covenants, and to all the different pacts, which may be
added to the contract of sale; such as conditions, clauses of nuk
lity in default of payment, the right of redemption, and others of
the like nature, which shall be explained in the sixth section ; and
these covenants make a part of the contract, and are in the place
of laws.s


VIL


264. The Second Sort ts of the Engagements which arise from
the Nature of the Contract.— The second sort of engagements
which are the natural consequences of the contract of sale, com-
prehends those under which the seller may be to the buyer,
and the buyer to the seller, although the contract make no
mention of them. These engagements oblige the parties in the
same manner as the contract itself, of which they are conse


T82. 1. 620.144! COWSRAG?. GF -8aL. Lae


regulated, in the ee er eee eee
ennui the sale.


| SECTION II.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS WHICH THE SELLER IS UNDER TO THE BUYER.


Arr. L
266. The First Engagement of. the Seller is to deliver the Thing
sold. — People buy things for no other end but to have them in
their own power, and to possess them. Thus, the first engage-
ment which the seller is under is to deliver the thing sold, although
the contract make no mention of it* And the rules of this en-
gegement shall be explained in the fifth article, and those that


. IL

267. The Second Engagement of the Seller is to take Care of
the Thing sold till the Time of Delivery.— It is a consequence of
this first engagement of the delivery, and therefore is reckoned as
@ second engagement, that until the time of the delivery the seller
is.obliged to keep and to take care of the thing sold,” pursuant to
the rales which shall be explained in the twenty-fourth article, and
those that follow..


iit

268. The Third Engagement is that of Warranty. — This is
another consequence of the delivery, and makes a third engage-
ment, that the seller ought to warrant, that is, secure the buyer in
the peaceable possession of the thing sold. And: this obliges the
seller to put a stop to the pretensions of every one that claims,
either a right of property in the thing sold, or any other right
which might disturb the buyer in the possession and enjoyment
of the thing he has bought. For it is the right to possess and to
enjoy that he has bought.© I shall explain the rules of this en-
gagement in the tenth section.


' £8, C. de locate ; —1. 19, end.

= 1.11, § 2, D. de act. empt. et vend.

» ZL. 36, D. de act. et vend. ;

© L.1, D. de wict.; — vo. l. 0 et 70, cod.; —I. 11, § ult. D. de act. empt. et vend.


200 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pant & BOOK 1.


IV.

269. The Fourth Engagement relates to the Faults of the Thing
sold. — Since people buy things only to employ them to the uses
for which they are destined, this is a fourth engagement which the
seller is under to the buyer, to take back the thing sold, if it has
such faults and defects as render it unfit for its use, or too trouble-
some, or to diminish the price of the thing; whether the defects
were known to the seller or not. And if he knows them, he is
obliged to declare them® The rules of this engagement shall be
explained in the eleventh section.


Or DE tivery.


V.


270. The Definition of Delivery. — Delivery is the
of the thing sold into the power and possession of the buyer


VL


271. The Delivery of Movables.— The delivery of movables
is made, either by transporting them into the power and posses
sion of the buyer,’ or without this transportation, by the delivery
of the keys, if the things sold are kept under lock and key,* og by
the bare will of the seller and buyer, if the things could not be
transported ;! or if the buyer had already the thing sold in his cus-
tody by another title, as if it was deposited into his hands, or if he
had borrowed it.!


VIL


FIF. We SEC. 13.] CONTRACT OF SALE. aul


buyer upon the place; or only showing him it at a distance ;” or
by consenting that he take possession of it;% or by the seller’s
acknowledging that, if he continue to possess it, it shall be only
precariously; that is, in the same manner as he who possesses a
thing belonging to another person, on condition to restore it to the
owner, whenever he shall be pleased to call for it And if the
seller reserves for himself the use and profits, this reservation shall
likewise be in the place of delivery.*


VUL


273. The Clause of Precarious Possession tacitly wnderstood. —
If the clause of precarious possession has been omitted in a con-
tract for selling an immovable thing, it is tacitly understood, as to
the effect of giving the buyer a right to take possession of the
thing, if it is not already possessed by others. For the sale trans-
ferring the property of the thing, it implies the consent of the
seller that the buyer should take possession of it.’


TX.


274, Delivery of Things Incorporeal. — Things incorporeal, such
as an inheritance, a debt, or any other right, cannot properly be
delivered," no more than touched ;* but the power of using them
is in lieu of delivery. Thus, the seller of a right of service does as
it were deliver it, when he suffers the buyer to make use of it’
Thus, he who sells or transfers a debt, or any other right, gives to
the buyer or assignee a kind of possession by the power which he
gives him to exercise this right, in causing the transfer or assign-
ment to be intimated to the debtor, who, after the said intimation,
cannot own any other master or possessor of this right but the
assignee to whom it is transferred.


X.
270. The First Effect of the Delivery is the Translation of the


PL. 18, § 2, D. de acg. vel amitt. poss. 9 ZL. 12, C. de contr. empt.

' L. 6, § 2, D. de precario ; —1. ult. eod.;—1. 1, eod. See the second article of the first
vection of the Loan of Things to be restored in Specie, and of a Precarious Loan.

* L. 28, C. de donat. ; —1. 35, § ult. eod. See the third article of the second section of
Deations. This article regards only the delivery, and not the ways of taking possession ;
of which mention shall be made in the title of Possessions.

‘ L. 3,41, D. de act. empt. et vend. ; — |. 12, C. de contr. empt.

" L. 48, § 1, D. de acg. rer. dom.

* { 2, Inst. de reb. corp. Y L. ult. D. de servit.


202 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK 1.


full Property. — The first effect of the delivery is, that, if the seller
is the right owner of the thing sold, the buyer becomes at the
same time fully master of it, and acquires a right to enjoy it, to
use it, and to dispose of it,? he paying the price, or giving surety
to the seller; unless the seller is contented with the simple bond
or promise of the buyer.* And it is this effect of the delivery
which is the perfect accomplishment of the contract of sale.


XL


276. Another Effect of the Delivery, with Respect to him who has
bought the Thing honestly from one who was not the right Owner;
and that is the Right of enjoying tt.— If the seller was not the right
owner of the thing sold, the buyer does not become master of it
by having it delivered to him.» But if he has bought the thing
honestly and fairly, believing that the seller was master of it, he
looks upon himself, and is so looked upon by others, as if he were
in effect the true owner of the thing. And this possession of the
buyer's, which he has ground to believe to be a rightful and lawful
possession, ought to have the same effect as if he were really and
truly master of the thing. Thus he possesses it, enjoys it, and
makes the fruits his own, without being in danger of restoring
what he has used and consumed during the time he was ignorant
that the thing belonged to another person.


* L. 20, C. de pact. ; —§ 40, Inst. de rer. divis. ; —1. 31, D. de acg. rer. dom.

® § 41, Inst. de rer. div. ;—1.19, D. de contr. empt.; —1. 538, eod. This article is not com
trary to what has been said in the second article of the first section, that the sale is pa-
fected by the bare consent. For we must distinguish in the contract of sale, and ia all


TIT. I. 8EC. U.] CONTRACT OF SALE. 203


XIL
277. Another Effect of the Delivery, the Right to prescribe.—
Another effect of the delivery of the thing sold, although the seller
were not the master of it, is, that the buyer, who believes the seller
to be the right owner, prescribes ; and acquires the property after a
sufficient possession, that is conformable to the rules which shall
be explained in the titles of Possession, and Prescriptions.


XIIL


278. Another Effect of the Delivery between two Buyers of the
same Thing.—If the same thing is sold to two buyers, whether by
the same person or by two different sellers, the first of the two
to whom it had been delivered, and who is in possession of it, will
be preferred, although the thing was sold first to the other person;
unless it be that one of the sellers was not the master of the thing
sold, and that the other was; for in this case he who bought it
of the master will be preferred to him to whom the thing was de-
livered.¢ And in all the cases, the other buyer will have his action
of warranty against his seller‘


ex donatione, aliave qualibet justa causa, eque bona fide acceperit, naturali ratione pla-
euit, fructus quos percepit ejus esse pro cultura et cura. Et ideo, si postea dominus
supervenerit, et fandum vindicet, de fructibus ab eo consumptis agcre non potest. §35,
Inst. de rer. div. Dolum auctoris bone fidei emptori non nocere, certi juris est. L. 3, C.
de per. et com.rei vend. To understand rightly the meaning of these words, pro cultura
@ cura, which are in the thirty-fifth section, Inst. de rer. divis., it is fit to take notice of
the words of the twenty-fifth law, D. de usur., — omnis fructus non jure seminis, sed jure soli
percipitur. And likewise the possessor who comes fairly and honestly by the possession
does enjoy the fruits which grow without sowing and without cultivating.

4 LT. 43, D. de acg. vel amitt. poss ; —I. 26, eod.

¢ L.9,§ 4, D. de public. in rem act.;—l. 31, § 2, D. de act. empt. e vend.;—1.15, C. de
ret vend.

 L. 6, C. de heered. vel act. vend. This rule may seem contrary to that which is con-
tained in the second article of the first section, and to the rule of the second article of the
seventh section. For by these two rules the sale is so far accomplished by the bare effect
of the consent, that, if the thing sold perishes before it is delivered, the loss is the buyer’s ;
from whence it would seem to follow that the buyer was already master of the thing, and
that therefore by the second sale the seller sold the thing belonging to another person,
and that the first buyer may claim it as his. But, as we have already remarked on the
tenth article of this section, it is only by the delivery that the sale receives its full accom-
plishment, which makes the purchaser master of the thing sold. Thus, he who buys the
last. but of the seller who has the thing still in his possession, and gets possession of the
thing, is preferred to the first buyer, who has himself to blame for not taking possession
of the thing, in order to make himself master of it. And it is likewise for the interest of
the public, that persons should not be disturbed in their possessions by sales transacted in
private, or antedated. It is upon these principles that some customs have expressly de-
termined, that a second purchaser of an estatc, who gets first possession of it, is preferred
to him who had bought it first.


204 THE CIVIL LaW. [Parr I. BOOK L


XIV.

279. Of the Time of Delivery.— The delivery of the thing sold
ought to be at the time regulated by the contract. And if the
contract says nothing of it, the seller ought to deliver the thing
without delay; unless the delivery should require that the thing be
transported into another place, for the doing of which a delay
would be necessary.£


XV.

280. Of the Place of Delivery.— The delivery ought to be in
the place agreed on. And if the contract makes no mention of
the place of delivery, the seller ought to deliver the thing sold in
the place where it happens to be at the time; unless the intention
of the contractors seems to demand that the delivery should be
made in another place


XVL


281. Damages for the Delay of Delivery.—If the seller fails to
deliver the thing sold on the day and at the place where the de
livery ought to be made, he shall be bound to make good the
damages which the buyer shall sustain by his delay; pursuant to
the rules which follow.


XVIL


282. Wherein consist the Damages. — The seller who is in delay
to deliver the thing sold is accountable for the damage which his
delay shall have occasioned, according to the condition of the


TIT. II. SEC. I2.] CONTRACT OF SALE. 205


things again at the place, or the loss which he suffers, if, for his
own use, he was obliged to buy others at a higher price than what
he had agreed to give at the time of the sale.’


XVIIL


283. Consequences of Gain, or Loss, which enter not into the Dam-
ages. — The profit or loss, which is to be computed as part of the
damages of the buyer, ought to be restrained to that which may
be imputed to the delay, and which is a natural and ordinary con-
sequence of it, and which it was easy to foresee: such as the dam-
ages explained in the case of the preceding article; and such as
would likewise be, in the same case, the charges which the buyer
had been at, in going to receive and to transport the provisions
which he had bought, and the other immediate consequences which
it is natural to expect from the delay. But we ought not to ex-
tend the damages to consequences that are remote, and altogether
unforseen, which are rather an extraordinary effect of some event,
and of some conjuncture of affairs flowing from the divine provi-
dence, than of the delay of the delivery. Thus, for example, if, the
seller not delivering at the time and place corn which he has sold,
the buyer has, for want of having the corn delivered to him, missed
an opportunity of sending that corn to another place, and of selling
it there at a higher rate than it was at in the place where it ought
to have been delivered. Or if, for want of having that corn, he
has been obliged to send away workmen, and put a stop to a
work, the interruption of which occasions him a considerable loss,
the seller will not be bound to make good either this gain which
the buyer has missed of, or this damage which he has suffered,
which are not so much consequences that may be imputed to the
delay of the delivery, as effects of the divine providence, and acci-
dents for which no man ought to be accountable.”


XIX.


284. Damages are due, whether the Sale subsists or not.— Beside
the damages which the seller is liable to for not delivering the
thing sold, he incurs likewise on the same account another penalty,
which is, that the sale may be annulled, if there is ground for it.


1 Z 31,41, D. de act. empt. et vend. ; —1, 21, § 3, D. de act. empt. et vend.;—l. ult. D.
de condict. trit.; —l. 59, D. de verb. obl.
= [. 21, § 3, D.de act. empt. e vend.;—1. 43, in f. D. eod. Sea the title of Interests,
Costs, and Damages, and Restitution of Fruits.
VOL. 1 18


206 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK 1.


As, for instance, if he who was obliged to deliver a merchandise
on the day of an embarkation, or on the day of a fair, fails to do
it, he will be obliged to take back his goods, if the buyer pleases,
and to restore the price, if he has already received it. And he
will be, moreover, bound to make good the damages for not hav-
ing delivered the goods at the time and place appointed. And
even in the cases where the sale subsists, the seller is nevertheless
bound to make good the damages. Thus, the seller who, by de-
laying to deliver an estate which he has sold, deprives the pur
chaser of the enjoyment of the fruits, is bound in the value of the
fruits, although this delay be not enough to annul the sale."


XX.


285. It does not depend on the Seller to annul the Sale, by his Fail
ing to deliver the Thing.— It never depends on the seller to elude
the effect of the sale, by his failing to make delivery of the thing;
and he may be always forced to deliver it, if it is possible, provid
ed that the buyer performs his part of the contract. In the same
manner, likewise, the buyer cannot procure the sale to be annulled,
by his not paying the price at the term appointed, as shall be
made appear in the proper place.


XXL
286. The Delivery hindered by an Accident.—If the delivery
hindered by an accident, as if the seller had been robbed of the
thing sold (that is, if it has been taken from him by force), the sell-
er will not be liable to damages;? unless the accident happened


TIT. 11. SEC. 11.] CONTRACT OF SALE. 207


XXIII.

288. The Seller and Buyer both in Delay.—If the buyer and
seller are equally in delay, the one in receiving, and the other in de-
livering, the buyer, whose fault it is that he did not sooner receive
the thing sold, cannot complain of the delay of the delivery.


Or rae CustTopy or THE THING SOLD.


XXIV.


289. What Care the Seller ought to take of the Thing sold. — If
the thing sold remain in the custody of the seller, he is obliged to
take care of it until the delivery; not only in the same manner as
he takes care of what is his own, but he is to take the same care
of it as he who has borrowed a thing for his own use! And he
is to be accountable, not only for what he may do knavishly, but
for every neglect and every fault which a careful and diligent mas-
ter of a family would not readily fall into! Because the contract
of sale is as much for the interest of the seller as of the buyer. ®


o


XXV.


290. The Care which the Seller is to take may be regulated by
Agreement.— If it is agreed to ease the seller of the trouble of
looking after the thing sold, or if the parties have regulated the
Manner in which the seller shall be bound to take care of it, he
will be no further obliged, than to take such care as is specified in
the agreement. And, moreover, he will be accountable for what-


ever may happen through his knavery ;” or through any neglect of
his which is so gross as to border upon fraud.


get of an eviction. Z. 18, §1, D.de per. et com. r. v.;—l. 31, § 8, D. de ced. ed. ; —v.
22D. de harred. vel act. vend. See the eleventh article of the third section.

'L. 51, D. de act. empt. et vend. ; —l. 17, D. de contr. empt.

' Custodiam venditor talem preestare debet, quam prestant hi, quibus res commodata
est. ut diligentiam praestat exactiorem, quam in suis rebus adhiberet. L.3, D. de per. et
commodo rei vend. See the second article of the second section of the Loan of Things to be
restored in Specie.

' Si venditur eam diligentiam adhibuisset in insula custodienda, quam debent homincs
fragi, et diligentes prestare, si quid accidisset, nihil ad eum pertinebit. Z. 11, eod.

lam, et culpam recipiunt mandatum, commodatum, venditum. JL. 23, D. de reg. jur.

his quidem et diligentiam. D. J. 23. Talis custodia desideranda est a venditore,
quilem bonus paterfamilias suis rebus adhibet. Z. 35, § 4, D. de contr. empt.

* Ubi utriusque autilitas vertitur, ut in empto, — et dolus, et culpa prestatar. JZ. 5, §

2, D. commod.
" L. 23, D. de reg. jur. ; —1. 35, § 4, D. de contr. empt.
) D. 1. 23, D. de reg. jur. 2 L. 29, D. mand.


208 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pam? 3. BOOR }


XXXVI

291. If it ts the Buyer's Fault that he does not receive the Goods,
the Seller is discharged from his Obligation to take Care of them.—
If the buyer is in delay to receive the thing sold, whether it be
after the term fixed for the delivery, or after giving the buyer wam-
ing, if no term is fixed, the seller shall be discharged from his ob
ligation to take care of it, and shall be no further liable than for
what may happen through his knavery.*


Or WaRRANTY.


292. Warranty being a consequence of eviction, the rales com
cerning it shall be explained in the tenth section, which treats of
this matter.


Or Deciarine THE Favuts oF THE THING SOLD.


293. The engagement which the seller is under to declare the
faults of the thing sold, is a part of the matter of redhibition; and
the rules concerning it shall be explained in the eleventh ser
tion.

294. The Engagement of the Seller not to sell too dear. —I have
not set down in the number of engagements under which the seller
is to the buyer, the natural duty of not selling too dear;° because
there would be too many inconveniences in annulling sales on 0
count of excess in the price. And the civil policy connives at a8
injustice which the buyers usually suffer willingly; and restrain
it only in the sale of such things as have their price regulated by
the public.


r to the seller.


Arr. L
Engagement of the Buyer to pay the Price.— The first en-
ent which the buyer is under is to pay the price, and to pay
he day and at the place regulated by the sale; whether it
he time of the delivery of the thing sold, or before, or after,
ing as has been agreed on. For the buyer does not become
‘of the thing sold but by this payment, or by some other
which is in lieu of it.
IL

The Time and Place of Payment.— If there is nothing reg-
by the sale, as to the time and place of payment, the buyer
to pay the price at the time when and the place where the
are delivered.”


IIL


The Seller may detain the Thing sold for Lack of Payment.
he buyer does not pay at the time appointed, and the seller
tas yet delivered the goods, he may keep them by way of
: until he be paid.°


IV.


. Delay caused by an Accident.— The buyer is not faulty for
aking payment, if he delays it only because of an obstacle
he meets with from some accident. As if the overflowing


- o rw na ~


210 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaxT I. BOOK L


of a river hinders him from going to the place where he ought to
make payment.‘


V.


300. The Interest of the Money is instead of all Damages ocew
stoned by the Delay of Payment of the Price.— The buyer is bouad
in no other damages, for the bare delay of paying the price, but
the interest of the money. And whatever loss the failure of pay-
ment may have caused, or whatever profit it may have prevented,
the reparation of the damage occasioned by the failure of pay-
ment is reduced to the interest of the money; this being regulated
by the law to be instead of all damages of this kind, as shall be
explained in the title of damages.


VL


301. Three Cases in which the Buyer owes the Interest of the
Price. — The buyer owes the interest of the price in three cases
By agreement, if it isstipulated. By a legal demand, if, after the
term of payment is come, he pays not. And by the nature of the
thing sold, if it produces fruits or other revenues, such as a field,
or a house, the interest of the price is due without either covenam
or legal demand.


VIL


302. If the Seller takes back his Goods for Want of Payment.—
If, in default of payment of the price, the seller finds himsedl
obliged to detain or to take back the thing sold, and its value be


TX.


Rt does not depend on the Buyer to elude the Sale by his not
— It never depends on the buyer to elude the effect of the
‘his failing to pay the price. And the seller hath it always
‘thoice to force him to make payment, if on his part he per-
vhat he is bound to by the contract!


X.


Another Engagement which the Buyer is under, as to the
es which fall to his Share to pay, and the Damages for which
‘countable. — If, betwixt the time of the sale and delivery,
er is obliged to be at any charge in preserving the thing
rif he sustains any damage by the delay of the buyer to
away; as if materials that were sold take up a place, the
which must be paid, or, the place being the seller’s own, he
1e rent of it; the buyer shall be bound to refund this charge,
make good this damage.


XL


The Buyer is not obliged to pay the Price, tf he is in Dan-
an Eviction. — If the buyer discovers before payment, that
idanger of an eviction, and if he makes this appear, he

be compelled to pay the price till after he is secured in his
ion.


XIL


Another Engagement of the Buyer.— This is another en-
ent which the buyer is under to the seller, that he is bound


212 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


to take care of the thing which he has bought, in all the cases
where it may happen that the sale may be dissolved ; whether by
his own act and deed, as by his failing to pay the price, or by the
effect of a clause of the contract, as if there were inserted in ita
power of redemption. And in these and the like cases, the buyer
ought to be responsible for the bad condition in which the
thing may happen to be through his fault or negligence."


SECTION IV.
OF THE MERCHANDISE, OR THING WHICH I8 SOLD.


Art. L


308. What Things may be sold. — All sorts of things may be
sold, except those of which the commerce is impossible, or pro
hibited by nature, or by some law,* pursuant to the rules which
shall be explained in the eighth section.


IL


309. Things Incorporeal, such as Rights, may be sold. — We may
sell not only things corporeal, such as movables and immovy
bles, animals, fruits; but likewise things incorporeal, such as $
debt, an inheritance, a service, and all other rights.>


iL
310. Sale of Things to come.— Sometimes things to come st


ds that are in a shop, orin a ship, all the corn that is in a
, or all the wine that is in a cellar.


VI


Sale by Number, Weight, and Measure. — Provisions, or
tings which are counted, weighed, or measured, may be sold
no gross or by the bulk, for one and the same price; or at
e of so much for every piece, for every pound, for every
or other measure.‘


VIL


How Sales by Wholesale and Retail are accomplished. —
provisions or other commodities are sold by the bulk,
8 is perfect at the same time that the parties are agreed
he goods, and the price, as in the sale of other things ; be-
is known precisely what is sold. But if the price is regu-
; the rate of so much for every piece, for every pound, and
y measure, the sale is not perfect but as to so much as is
l, weighed, measured£ For the delay to count, weigh, and
e is, as it were, a condition which suspends the sale, till it
wn by that what is sold.


VOL


Sale «pon Trial. — The things which the buyer reserves for
od trial, although the price be agreed on, are not sold till
e bayer is satisfied with the trial, which is a kind of condi-
1 which the sale depends." But if the sale is already ac-
shed under this reservation, that if the buyer is not content


214 THE CIVIL, LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


with the thing sold within a certain time, the sale shall be die
solved, it will be a condition the event of which will annul the
sale, which in the mean while is held to subsist


1 D.¢


316. The Accessories of a Thing sold are included in the Sale.
— Whatever makes a part of the thing sold, or is an accessory to
it, is included in the sale, unless it be reserved. ‘Thus, the trees
which are in a ground, the hanging fruits, the vine-prope which
are in a vineyard, the keys of a house, the pipes which convey
water to it, the services, and whatever is fixed to the house with a
design that it should remain there for ever, and the accessories of
this kind, make a part of that which is sold, and belong to the
purchaser!


X.


317. Things separate from the Edifice, which are included in the
Sale. — Things which are not fixed to the edifice, but whose use
is an accessory to it,as the rope and buckets belonging to a well;
the cocks of a fountain, its vase, and other things of the same
kind; and likewise those things which have been separated from
the edifice with intention to fix them to it again, are accessories,
and are included in the sale; but not such things as were intended
to be fixed to it, and never were actually fixed. And in order to
make a particular judgment of the cases in which all these sorts
of accessories enter into the sale, or do not enter, it is necessary
to consider the circumstances of the use of those things, of thei


TIT. 1. SEC. Vs) CONTRACT OF SALE. 215


which may be separated from them, are included in the sale, or
are not ineluded, according to the circumstances. Thus, a horse
being exposed to sale without his harness, the buyer will only have
the bare horse; and if he is offered to sale with his harness on,
tha buyer will have all, unless in both cases it has been otherwise


agreed on.”
XII.

319. In the Sale of one of two Things, the Choice belongs to the
Seller. — If a sale is made of one or other of two things, as of
one of two horses, without mentioning whether the choice shall
belong to the seller, or buyer, the seller may give which of the two
he pleases. For he is in the place of a debtor, and consequently
may give that which is of least value?


wGR0.: Sale of a: Thing belonging to ancther Person.-~ Sines it
eiten happens thet the possessors are not the right owners of what
they, ponsees;:‘and that likewise the purchasers may not kiow
' whether the sellers are, or are not, the true owners of the things
. Which they sell; it is natural that one should have power to sell a
fhing of which he is not master; and the sale subsists till the true
are ee eee noms


tElae


SECTION V.
OF THE PRICE.


Art. I.


321. The Price of the Sale can be nothing else but Money.— The
Price of the sale can never be any other thing than current money,
Which makes the estimate of the thing sold; and if for the price
any other thing is given, or any work done, it will be either an ex-
change, or some other contract, but not a sale.*


"1.38, D. de od. ed. ; —d. 1. 88, § 11.

* L. 3, § 6, D. de contr. empt.

? See the fifteenth article of the second section of the title of Covenants, and the seventh
tide of the seventh section of this title.

‘ L. 28, D. de contr. empt.

‘Lope. C. de rer. perm. ; — § 2, Inst. de empt. of vend.


216 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


IL

322. If, instead of the Price agreed on, the Seller receives aw
other Thing in Payment.— Although a sale cannot be made but
by fixing the price in current money, yet the contractors may by
the same contract agree to give, in payment of the price of the
sale, either movables, or debts, or other effects. And in this case
there are, as it were, two sales, which it is necessary to distin-
guish. The first is, where the price is not paid in ready money;
and the second is, that in which he who owes the price is, as it
were, the seller of that which he gives to discharge himself of the
price.” But although there are two sales in effect which are trans-
acted between the same persons, yet, to avoid the multiplicity of
acts, they are considered as one only act, in which the two sales
are confounded, the second sale being eclipsed under the first
Thus, by contracting the ideas which distinguish these sales, the
two are taken for one alone. Because it happens that the same
sum of money makes the price of both sales, and that each buyer
discharges himself of the price of that which is sold to him with
out giving money, by giving, in lieu of the price, the thing which
he sells on his part.


HI.


323. One or more Prices of one and the same Sale.— There is
only one price of the sale, when one thing alone is bought, o
many things by the bulk. But when things are bought by
number, weight, or measure, each piece, each pound, each bushel,
hath its price, according to the ageeement.*


TIT. Ti. SEC. VI.] CONTRACT OF BALE. 217


such like cases, the price will not be certain and known, but by
the estimation or other event, which shall fix it.®


V.


325. The Price of Sales is arbitrary.— There are some com-
modities, of which the price may be regulated for the public good ;
as it is, for example, in bread, and other things, in some countries.
But setting aside these regulations, the price of things is undeter-
mined. And since it ought to be differently regulated according
to the different qualities of the things, and according to the plenty
or scarcity both of money and of the commodities, the easiness or
difficulty of the carriage, and the other causes which increase or
diminish the value ; this uncertainty of the price makes an extent
of more and of less, which requires that the seller and buyer should
adjust between themselves the price of the sale. And the injus-
tices in the price are not restrained, except in so far as has been
remarked in the beginning of the third section.‘


SECTION VI.
OF CONDITIONS AND OTHER PACTS IN A CONTRACT OF SALE.


Art. I.


326. We may add to the Contract of Sale what Pactions we will.
— We may add to the contract of sale, as well as to all other
contracts, all manner of covenants and pactions that are lawful.


Such as conditions, clauses of nullity, a power of redemption, and
others.


Or ConpITIONs.


827, The rules touching conditions in sales are the same with
those which have been explained in the fourth section of the title
of covenants, to which we need only add the following rules.


"$1, Inst. de empt. et vend.; —l. ult. C. de contr. empt.;— 1. 7, § 1, D. de contr. empt. ; —
017,41, et § ult. D. de contr. empt. See the eleventh article of the third section of Cove-
Rants


'L.1,§11, D. de off. pref. urd. ; —1. 8, C. de resc. vend.

* See the second article of the second section, and the first article of the fourth section
Of the title of Covenants.

* See the sixth article, together with those that follow, of the fourth section of the title
Of Covenants.


VOL. I. 19


218 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


IL

328. Effect of the Condition on which the Sale depends.— In the
sales whose accomplishment depends on the event of a condition,
all things-remain in the same state as if there had been no sale,
until the condition comes to pass. Thus, the seller remains
master of the thing, and the fruits are his. But the condition
being fulfilled, the sale is perfected, and hath the effects which it
ought to produce.°


IIL


329. Effect of the Condition which dissolves the Sale. — In sales
which are accomplished, and which may be dissolved by the event
of a condition, the buyer remains master until that event. And
in the mean while he possesses, enjoys, and makes the fruits his
own ; and he prescribes likewise, but his prescription is of no pre}
udice to the right of the person who is to become master by the
event of the condition.?


Or Earnest.


IV.


330. The Earnest hath its Effect according to Agreement. — The
earnest penny is, as it were, a pledge which the buyer gives to the
seller in money, or some other things; whether it be to signily
more certainly that the sale is perfected;* or to be in place of
payment of a part of the price; or to regulate the damages to be
recovered of the party who shall fail to perform the articles of the


ak a
ca 2 2


- ae SPT
Bak, Eee


im, ¢ 7A one, oF Nour’ “me Case oF ‘Nox-pavaar.


"928. ime of Meldity, Ts in 0 waned scasmunaih vande in cose
trasts-of salé; thint if the buyer does not pay the price at the time
sd; the. sale shall: be vaid... And since this agreement makes
ee ee
in the twelfth section.


nf


Or tan Powsz ‘or Repemprrion.
. $33. Power of Redemption.— The power of redemption is an


 gqgreement, by which the seller is at liberty to take back the thing,


he restoring the price. And this is another way of ee the
sare gen cate adic a |


BSG. Gs


epee, aoe i} : : :


SECTION VII.


a Be. ¥
Na


{. OF THE CHANGES OF THE THING SOLD; AND HOW THE LOSS OR GAIN


ACCRUING THEREBY BELONGS TO THE SELLER, OR TO THE BUYER. |


334. Change of the Thing sold.— It often happens that, before


the sale is entirely consummated, ‘several events change the state
di f the thing sold; make it better or worse, augment or diminish


it; and even that the thing perishes, either through its own nature,
or by some casualty. And since these changes occasion profit
or loss, which regards differently either the seller or buyer, pro-
vision is made for adjusting that matter by the rules which follow.


Arr. I

330. The Changes before the Accomplishment of the Sale regard
the Seller. — All the changes which happen before the sale is ac-
complished regard the seller, because the thing is still his, and the
buyer has no right to it. And as the seller is at liberty not to
finish and perfect the sale, if the thing happens to be better, so
likewise the buyer has the same liberty, if there happens a change
Which makes it worse.*


II.
$36. The Changes after the Sale regard the Buyer.— All the


* Inst. de empt. et vend.


220 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


changes which happen after the sale is accomplished regard the
buyer. And if the thing perishes before the delivery, he bears the
loss, and is nevertheless bound to pay the price. And he reaps
the profit likewise of all the changes which make the thing better”
For after the sale the thing is looked upon to be his, and the seller
keeps possession of it only with the buyer’s consent, and with
design to restore it to him.


TIL


337. The Changes which happen after the Seller is in Delay for
not delivering the Thing are at his Peril. — If the changes which
diminish the thing sold, or which destroy it, between the time of
sale and the delivery, happen after the seller is in fault for not
delivering it, he bears the loss, although the changes should happen
without any fault of his, and even by pure chance°® And he loses
both the thing, and the price, which he ought to restore, if he had
received it. For if the thing had been delivered, the buyer might
have either sold it, or prevented the loss some other way ; and, ina
word, the seller ought to blame himself for his delay in not deliver
ing it in due time.

IV.

338. If both are in Delay.—If, the delivery of the thing being
delayed by the fault both of the seller and buyer, there happenss
change which lessens the thing sold, or which destroys it altogether;


the buyer cannot charge the seller with delay, since he himeell
being in delay, either by reason of his absence, or because of some


TIT. 1.8EC.VL] = ‘CONTRACT OF SALE. 221


wards using his diligence, the seller does not deliver the thing;
the changes which have happened during the last delay will fall
upon him who has been last in fault for the thing's not being
delivered.*


Vi
339. Of Things sold by Number, Weight, or Measure. —In the
sales of things which are sold by number, weight, or measure,
all the diminutions and all the losses which happen before the
things are counted, weighed, or measured, fall upon the seller ; for
until then there is no sale. And the changes which happen after-
wards regard the buyer.*


Vi.

340. Sale upon Trial. — If a thing is sold upon trial for a certain
time, on condition that it shall not be sold but in case it pleases
the buyer, all the changes, and the profit or loss which happen
before or during the time of trial, the sale not being as yet ac-
complished, will accrue to the seller, who is still the master

VII.

S41. If, in the Sale of one of two Things, the one happens to per-
ish.— If one of two things is sold, whether the choice be left to the
seller or buyer, and after the sale one of the two perishes, during
the delay regulated for the choice, the seller is bound to give the
other, although it should happen to be the best; for he owes one
of the two. And if both perish, the buyer owes nevertheless the
ptice; for, had it not been for this engagement, the seller might
have rid himself of both the things; and that which the buyer was
to have had is lost to him.


VUL
342. If the Thing perishes before the Event of the Condition
which ouxht to accomplish the Sale.— In the sales of which the ac-
complishment depends on a condition, if the thing sold perishes
before the event of the condition, the loss shall be the seller's,
although the condition should come to pass afterwards. For he


4 ZT. 51, D. de act. empt. et vend. ; —1. 17, D. de per. et comm. r. v.

© b. i, $1, D. de per. a com. See the seventh article of the fourth section.
90, § 1, D. de prase. verb. ; — d. I. in prince. ; — 1. 13, § 1, D. commod.

& L. 34, § 6, D. de contr. empt.


BBY THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


was still the master of it, and the thing being destroyed, it cannot
any more be sold. And, in fine, it was understood by the cos-
tractors, that that only was sold which should be in being at the
time that the condition should come to pass.»


IX.

343. If in the same Case the Thing is diminished, or becomes
better. — If in the same case the thing is not destroyed, but dimin-
ished, and the condition comes to pass which accomplishes the
sale, the loss shall fall upon the buyer! For the seller has been
obliged to keep the thing for him until the event of the condition
And seeing this event makes the buyer master of the thing, he
ought to bear this loss in the same manner as he would have
reaped the benefit of the changes which would have made the
thing better.


X.


344. It does not depend on the Person who ought to perform 6
Condition, to take Advantage by his not performing tt.— When a
condition is put in favor of one of the contractors, or which may
turn to his advantage, if this condition depends on the act of the
other party, either in part or in whole, the person who ought to
fulfil the condition is not at liberty to fail in the performance of
this engagement, that he may take advantage therefrom to the
prejudice of the party whose interest it is that the condition be
fulfilled. Thus, for example, if in a sale made on condition that
the thing should be delivered on a certain day, and in a certaif


TIT. Ty SEC. VII] CONTRACT OF SALE. 223


shall be void ; if it happen in the mean while that the thing dimin-
ishes in its price, it does not depend on the buyer to annul the
sale by failing to make payment, that he may thereby avoid taking
the thing, and bearing the loss: for this condition was in favor of
the seller, and not of the buyer."
XL

345. Loss occasioned by the Fault of one of the Contractors. — In
all sorts of cases, where the thing sold perishes, or becomes worse,
by the fault of the seller or buyer, he whose fault has occasioned
the loss ought to bear it, and to blame himself for it


XII.

346. The Fruits belong always to him who is Master at the Time
they are gathered.— We must not reckon among the changes
which happen to things sold under condition, the fruits and reve-
nues which they may produce. For they belong always to the
person who is master of the thing at the time they are gathered,
althongh it happen that by the event of the condition he is no
longer master of it. Thus, in the sales of which the accomplish-
ment depends on a condition, the fruits do in the mean while be-
long to the seller; although, if the condition happens which ought
to accomplish the sale, the loss and the gain which may fall out
in the mean while by the changes of the thing sold belong to the
buyer. And in the sales which are perfected, and which may be
annulled, by the event of a condition, the fruits in the mean while
belong to the buyer; although, if the condition happens which
dissolves the sale, the loss and gain which may accrue from the
changes of the thing sold regard the seller.° Because, in all these
cases, the changes that happen to the thing regard the person who
is to be master of it, and he ought to have it in the condition in
which it is; but the fruits and other revenues which fell due be-
fore the event of the condition having been separated from the
thing sold, they remain with him who was at that time master of
the thing.


= £. 6, C. de legib. ; —I. 3, D. de leg. commiss. See the nineteenth article of the fourth
section of Covenants.

® L. 203, D. de reg. jur.

© L. 2, D. de in diem add.;—l. 4, eod. See the text of the twentieth law, § 1, D. de
preacr. verb., already quoted on the sixth article of this section.


224 , THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT I. BOOK L


XITIL
347. If the Parties have regulated by Agreement on whom the
Loss shall fall, they must hold to that.— If there is any agreement
in the contract of sale which derogates from the preceding rules,
and which obliges either the seller or buyer to bear the loss which
naturally did not belong to him, they must stick to the agree-
ment.” For every one may renounce what is for his own advan-


tage.
XIV.


348. What is to be considered, in order to judge who ought to
bear the Loss, and reap the Profit.—It follows from all these
rules concerning the changes that happen to the thing sold, that, in
order to judge who ought to bear the loss, or reap the profit, it is
necessary to consider what the thing is which is sold, and what
enters into the sale; if the sale be perfected, or not; if it is pure
and simple, or conditional; if, the sale being once accomplished, it
is afterwards dissolved; if there is any delay in the delivery; if
any fault has given occasion to the change; and the other circum
stances, in order to know, by the state of things, who was the
master at the time of the change, or who, without being master,
ought to bear the loss, or reap the profit.’


SECTION VIII.


TIT. I. SEC. VII5.] CONTRACT OF SALE. 225


wise annul sales, pursuant to the rules which have been explained
in the fifth section of the title of Covenants; and it will be suf-
ficient here to take notice of the rules that are peculiar to nullities
in sales.


Or PEersons WHO CAN NEITHER SELL NOR BUY.


351. It was forbidden by the Roman law, to those who were in
any public office, to purchase, in the places where they exercised
their jurisdiction, either lands, or even movables, during the time
of their administration, without express leave to do it; except it
was in what they consumed for diet and clothing. And the
same prohibitions extended likewise to their domestics* But in
France, offices being perpetual, the officers may purchase of any
persons that are willing to sell; and such like prohibitions with
respect to them are limited to the purchases of estates, or rights,
litigated in the court of which they are judges, and to other ac-
quisitions which they may have extorted by concussion, or any
other misdemeanour.®


Arr. I.


302. Tutors and Guardians cannot buy the Goods of those who
are committed to their Care. — Tutors, guardians, and other admin-
isrators can purchase nothing of the goods of minors, and other
persons who are under their charge, either directly in their own
hames, or by the interposition of other persons.*


* L. un. Cod. de contract. jud. ; —d. 1. §§ 2 et 3;—1U. 46, 1. 62, D. de contr. empt.;—1.
40,42, D. de jure fisct.

> By the ordinances of St. Lewis, in 1254, of Philip the Fair, in 1520, and of Charles VI.,
in 1388, it is prohibited to all bailiffs and seneschals to purchase immovables during the
time of their administration.

By many ordinances, it is prohibited to officers and persons of great power and author-
ity,or who have any privilege of having their causes tried only before certain judges, to
accept of sales or assignments of rights, in order to carry the parties from one tribunal
toanother. And all judges, advocates, and proctors are likewise forbid to accept of sales
Or assignments of litigious rights. See the ordinances of Charles V. in 1356, of Francis I.
in 1535, ch. 12, art. 23, of Orleans, art. 54, of Lewis XII. in 1498, art. 3, and in 1510, art.
I7. See likewise the second article of the third section of Payments, and the remark that
is there made.

It is likewise proper to take notice here of the prohibitions in the ordinance of Orleans,
ut. 109, to gentlemen and officers of justice, to deal in merchandise, and to take farms,

tither in their own names, or in the names of others for their behoof, under penalty to the
gentlemen, of forfeiting their nobility; and to the officers of justice, of losing their places.

See the fourth article of the second section of the Vices of Covenants.

* L. 34, § ult. D. de contr. empt.; —l. 5, § 8, D. de auct. et cons. tut. ;—d.l. § ult.


226 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT. I. BOOK L


IL.

303. Factors are under the same Incapacity. — Factors, and thoee
who are intrusted with the care of the affairs of others, cannot pur
chase the goods of those whose affairs are committed to their man-
agement,° unless they purchase them of the owners themselves.


TIL


304. The Heir burdened with a Substiution.— The heir or ex-
ecutor who is burdened with a substitution cannot sell the estate
which he possesses only on condition to restore it.°


IV. 8
355. Minors and others.— Minors, madmen, prodigals, and


other persons who are debarred from the administration of their
estates, cannot sell them; and their sales are null,‘ if they have
not been made in due form.


Or THInecs WHICH CANNOT BE SOLD.


V.


356. Things Public. — Whatever nature and the laws make
common, either to all mankind in general, or to a kingdom, ort
town, cannot be sold. ‘Thus, seaports, highways, public market
places, with the walls and ditches of towns, and all other things
which this common and public use ineapacitates for sale, cannot
be sold.°


TIT. II. SEC. VIII.] - CONTRACT OF SALE. 227


VIi.
358. An Estate entailed.— An estate subject to a substitution
cannot be sold whilst the substitution lasts.¢


VIL


359. Dower Lands.— The lands which a married woman brings
along with her in dowry to her husband cannot be sold in the
places where it is prohibited to alienate them, unless it be in cases
that are excepted, and where the rules prescribed for such sales
are observed.®


10.6 |
360. Things of which the Commerce is forbidden.— Things of
which the commerce is prohibited by some law cannot be sold;
such as.arms to an enemy, and other things of the like nature.!


Or THE OTHER CAUSES WHICH ANNUL SALES.


X.


361. Sales null through the Default of a Condition. — The sales
of which the accomplishment depends on a condition remain null,.
if the condition does not come to pass; and it is the same thing
if the thing sold perishes before the condition happens!


XI.


362. Error in the Contractors.—If the seller and buyer have
ered, so that it appears that the seller meant to sell one thing,
and the buyer thought of purchasing another, the sale will be
null.


§ See the third article of this section.

© Tit. D. de fundo dotal.; —l. un. in f. C. de rei uxor. act. See the thirteenth article
of the first section of Dowries.

' Tit, C. que res ven. non possunt, et tit. que res export. non debent. We have not set down
here, among the rules touching things which cannot be sold, that rule of the Roman law
Which prohibits the alienation of things that are litigious, and annuls all such sales, to
vhomsoever they are made. Because our custom has limited these prohibitions to sales
made to persons who, by their authority or quality, are able to create trouble to those
ho pretend a right to what is in dispute; such as the judges, and other officers who
have a share in the administration of justice. V. tit. D. e& Cod. de litigios., and the pre-
amble to this section.

TZ. 8, D. de per. & com.

= 1.57, D. de ob. et act.; —1. 9, D. de contr. empt. See the tenth article of the fifth
‘ection of Covenants.


228 THE CIVIL LaW. [Parr I. BOOKL


And much more will it be so, if the seller sold si one com-
modity for another.®


XIL


363. Error in the Qualities of the Thing sold.— If the error is
not in the substance of the thing sold, but in its qualities, we must
judge by the circumstances whether the sale ought to subsist, o


not.° And this depends on the rules which shall be explainedin —


the eleventh section.


XII.
364. Fraud and Violence.— If the sale has been transacted by
fraud or violence, it will be null; pursuant to the rules which shal
be explained in the title of the Vices of Covenants”


SECTION IX.


OF THE RESCISSION OF SALES, ON ACCOUNT OF THE LOWNES Of
THE PRICE.


Arr, L
365, Damage in more than Half the Price.— In the sales of it
movables, if the price be less than the half of the real value, ie
seller may get the sale to be declared void."


Il.


T. Il. SEC. 1X.] CONTRACT OF SALE. 229


e true price, by which we must examine if there is any damage,
ight to be made according to the highest price that the thing
ight justly be worth at the time of sale; because that price is
st, and we ought to favor the seller who is wronged.°


IV.


368. The Buyer has tt in his Choice to give back the Thing, or
tke up the full Price.— If the thing is sold for less than the half
its just price, the buyer shall have it in his choice, either to re-
ore the thing, and to take back the price which he has paid, or
‘make up the just price, and to keep the thing.*


V.


369. This Rescission is independent of Fraud. — This rescission
m account of the lowness of the price is independent of the honesty
otknavery of the buyer. And whether he knew or was ignorant
of the value of the thing sold, it suffices for rescinding the sale,
that the price be less than the half of the true value.


VI


370. Restitution of the Fruits against the Person who knows he
has no good Title to the Possession. — If there is no other defect
in the sale besides the damage of more than the half of the just
price, the buyer will be obliged to restore the fruits only from the
time of the demand, or the interest of the remaining part of the
price, if he keeps the thing. But if there were other vices in the
sale, such as usury, fraud, or violence, he will be bound to make
restitution of the fruits, even from the time of his possession of
the thing, deducting the interest of the price which he has paid
for it.f


* It is a consequence of the motive of humanity, which has made this rescission to be
received.

47.9, C.de resc. vend.

* D.1. 8, C. de rese. vend. Et si nullus dolus intercessit stipulantis, sed ipsa res in se
olam habet. JL. 36, D. de verb. obl. This is what is called dolus re ipsa.

{ L.17, C. de resc. vend.


VOL. I. 20


230 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part 1. BOOK 1


SECTION X.
e
OF EVICTION, AND OTHER TROUBLES TO THE PURCHASER.


Art. IL
371. Definition of Eviction. — Eviction is the loss which the
buyer suffers, either of the whole thing that is sold, or of a part of
it, because of the right which a third person has to it.®


IL


372. Of the other Troubles. —'The other troubles are thos
which, without touching the property of the thing sold, diminish
the right of the purchaser; as if any one pretends a right to the
usufruct of lands that are sold, to a ground-rent, a service, or othe
charges of the like nature.>


IIL

373. Warranty.— The buyer from whom the thing is evicted,

or who is troubled in his possession of it, or in danger of being ®,

has his recourse against the seller, who ought to warrant him, thet

is, to put a stop to the eviction, and other troubles, as shall be
shown in the following articles.°


IV.


374. No Warranty against Violence, Casualty, or the Act:of te
Sovereign. — The seller is not bound to warrant the buyer agaist
acts of mere force and violence, casualties, or against the act of he


TIT. I. SEC. X.] CONTRACT OF 8ALE. 2al


kind of warranty, which is a warranty by deed, or covenant, such
as the seller and buyer are pleased to regulate among them-
selves.°


VIL


376. Warranty in Law. — Warranty in law, or natural warranty,
is the security which every seller is bound to give for maintaining
the buyer in the free possession and enjoyment of the thing sold;
and for putting a stop to evictions, and other troubles that shall
be given to the buyer by any person whatsoever, who shall pretend
either a right of property, or any other right in the thing sold, by
which the right which ought naturally to be acquired by the sale
would be diminished. And the seller is obliged to this warranty,
although it be not stipulated by covenant.‘


VIL


377. Warranty by Deed.— Warranty by deed, or covenant, is

the security which the seller promises, either greater or lesser than
what he is bound to by law, according as the parties have agreed
between themselves. Thus, they may add to the warranty in law;
as if it be agreed, that the seller should warrant the buyer against
the act of the sovereign. And they may likewise restrain the war-
ranty in law; as if it be agreed, that the seller should only warrant
against his own proper act, and not against the rights of other
persons, or that he shall only restore the price in case of eviction,
and not the damages. And all these agreements have their jus-
tice, in that the buyers purchase at a cheaper or dearer rate, or
upon other views; and in that the purchaser buys in effect only
what is sold, and such as the seller is willing to warrant it.


VUE


378. The Seller cannot be discharged from the Warranty against
his own proper Act. — The seller cannot be discharged from the
warranty against his own proper act and deed, not even by an
express agreement; for it would be contrary to good manners that
he should be allowed to act a dishonest part.»


e LZ. 11, § 1, D. de act. empt. et vend.

f ©. 6, C. deevict. ; —1. 11, § 2, D. de act. empt. et vend. ; —l. 1, D. de evict. ; —v. 1. 10,
eod.; —1. 11, § 8, D. de act. empt. et vend. ; —I. 11, § 17, D. de act. empt. et vend.

6 £.11,§ 1, D. de act. empt. et vend. ; —d. 1. 11, § 18.

b £. 1, § 7, D. de pact.; —1. 27, § 4, D. de pact.


232 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part lL. BOOK L


IX.

379. Warranties regulated by Particular Customs. — If besides
the natural warranty, and the warranty by agreement, there is any
particular custom, or usage, in a place, which prescribes any sort
of warranty, the seller shall be bound to such warranty!


X.


380. Damages for Eviction, and other Troubles. —If the pur
chaser loses the thing by eviction, or is troubled in his possession,
the warranty shall have its effect,! pursuant to the rules explained
in the articles which follow.


XI.


381. Divers Effects of the Troubles which are given to the Seller.
— There are troubles which of their nature dissolve the sale; as
when the proprietor evicts the thing from the purchaser.™ Othes
there are which of their nature may dissolve or not dissolve the
sale, according to the circumstances. Thus, an action in right o
a mortgage does not annul the sale, if either the seller or purchase
acquits the debt; but if the estate is adjudged to the creditors, the
sale is dissolved. And in all these cases, whether it be that the
sale subsists or is dissolved, the seller is answerable for the dam»
ges according to the effect of the trouble.


XII.


382. Restitution of the Price, with Damages. —TIf the sale
dissolved by an eviction, the seller is bound to restore the price,


FIT. 11. SKC. X.} CONTRACT OF BALE. 233


f the purchaser of an estate in lands which are evicted had paid
2 fine of alienation.”


XIV.


384. If the Thing is diminished at the Time of the Eviction. —
[f, on the contrary, the thing sold is wasted or diminished, whether
xy its own nature, as an old house, or by a casualty, as if a flood
1as carried away a part of an estate; or if, the thing being in the
same condition, its value is diminished by the effect of time; in
all these cases, and others of the like nature, where the thing sold
is worth less at the time of the eviction than the price which the
buyer paid for it; he can recover against the seller only the pres-
ent value of the thing, such as it is at the time of the eviction.!
For it is only in this present value that the buyer’s loss doth con-
sist. And as the diminution which preceded the eviction regard-
ed the buyer, he ought not to be a gainer by the eviction.


XV.


385. If the Thing has increased in Price. — But if the thing hap-
pens to be worth more at the time of the eviction than it was at
the time of sale, the price having been augmented by the effect of
time, the seller shall be bound to the buyer for what the thing is
worth at the time of the eviction. For he loses in effect this
value, the thing being evicted from him; and his condition ought
not to be made worse by this event, against which the seller is
bound to warrant him.


XVI.


336. If the Purchaser has made Improvements. — If the thing
sold happens to be improved at the time of the eviction, by the
act of the purchaser, as if he has either planted or built on an
estate, he shall be indemnified by the seller as to what the estate
would have been worth, at the time of the eviction, if it had not
been improved ; and he will moreover recover the expenses he has
been at in improving it; and he cannot be turned out of posses-
sion, till he is reimbursed the said expenses, either by the person
who evicts the estate, for he ought not to reap the profit of those


PL. 60, D. de evict.
1L. 70, D. de evict. ; —1. 66, in f. D. eod.; —I. 64, eod.; —I. 45, D. de act. empt. et vend.
' L. 66, in f. D. de evict. See the preceding article, where this law is quoted. L. 45,
td,;— 11, ead.
20 °


234 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


improvements; or by the seller, who is bound to warrant him
against the eviction. And he shall have his action both against
the one and the other.’


XVIL


387. The Regard which is to be had to the Fruits which have
been reaped, in order to make an Estimate of the Improvements.—
In making an estimate of the charges laid out by the purchaser of
an estate on improvements, as if he has made a plantation in it,
we must balance the charges laid out with the fruits arising from
the improvements, and which have increased the rent of the estate.
So that if the fruits which the purchaser has reaped from the in-
provements acquit the principal sum and interest of the moneys
laid out on them, there will be no reimbursement due; it being
enough for the buyer that he loses nothing. And if the fruits
come short of the charges laid out on the improvements, the pw-
chaser will recover the remainder of the money he has laid out,
both principal and interest ;* for he ought to lose nothing. Butif
the fruits which the purchaser has reaped from the improvements
exceed the charges he has been at, he shall have the advantage of
them.


XVIII.


388. The Circumstances oblige us to regulate differently the Dif
culties relating to the Improvements. — If the charges laid out upon
the improvements are less than their value, the purchaser who #
evicted will recover only the charges he has laid out. And if, on the


TIT. II. SEC. X.] CONTRACT OF SALE. 235


recover no more than the real value of the improvements. But,
according to the circumstances, it will be prudent in the judge not
to deprive the buyer of reasonable charges, such as the master of
the thing might and ought to have laid out; and likewise not to
overburden the seller, or the person who evicts. And it is neces-
sary to regulate these matters according as the nature of the ex-
penses may require, or the quality of the persons, the necessity or
usefulness of the improvements, and whatever else may be fit to
be considered in the state of the things."


XIX.


389. If the Seller has sold the Goods of another Person, knowing
them to be such.—TIf,in the cases of the preceding article, the
seller had sold that which belonged to another person, knowing it
to be so, he would be bound to refund, without any distinction, all
the charges laid out by the purchaser.*


XX.


390. He who is bound to warrant cannot evict.— The persons
who are obliged in warranty to the buyer cannot disturb him in
his possession, whatever right they may have to the thing sold.
Thus, the heir of the seller, being in his own right proprietor of
the thing sold, cannot evict it from the buyer, whom he is obliged,
by his quality of heir, to warrant in his possession.’


XXI.


3891. If the Purchaser who is molested does not give Notice of it,
or does any other Prejudice to the Condition of his Warrantor. — If
the purchaser who is molested suffers himself to be condemned by
default; if he defends himself ill; if he does not give notice to the
seller of the action that is brought against him; if he consents to
a reference, or transaction, without the seller’s knowledge; or if he
in any other manner prejudices the condition of his warrantor, he
cannot demand warranty against an eviction, which he has nobody
to blame for but himself.


" L. 38, D. de ret vind. ; —1. 25, in f. D. de pign. act. See the nineteenth article of the
third section of Mortgages.

¥ L. 45, §1, nf D. de act. empt. et vend.

Y L. 1, D. de except. rei vend. ; —d. l.§ 1;—l. 14, C. de ret vind.

t 1. 55, D. de evict.; — 1. 53, § 1, eod. ; —1. 56, § 1, eod.; —v. l. 63, end.


236 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


XXIL
392. The Buyer is only bound to give Notice to the Seller of the
Disturbance that ts given him. — After that the buyer has intimated
to the seller the action that is brought against him, he is not
bound either to defend it, or to appeal if he is condemned. And
whether he defends it or not, the seller will remain bound to war
rant him against the event.


XXIIL


393. Warranty may be demanded before the Purchaser is molested.
— If the purchaser discovers that the seller has sold him that which
belongs to another person, and which the seller knew to be such,
he may bring his action against the seller, although he be not 2s
yet disturbed in his possession, to oblige him to remove the dam
ger of the eviction; and to recover the damages which he may
suffer by such a sale.”


XXIV.


394. Warranty of Law in the Sale of Rights. — As in the sales
of movables and immovables, natural warranty obliges the seller
to deliver and warrant a thing which is in being; so likewise in
the sales or conveyances of rights, such as a debt, an action, a
inheritance, natural warranty obliges the transferrer to transfer 8
right which subsists, a debt which is due, an inheritance whic
has fallen, an action which may be prosecuted. And if the tranr
ferrer had not the right which he sells and transfers, the sale would
be null; and he would be bound to restore the price, and to make


TIT. 3. SEC. XI.] CONTRACT OF SALE. 237


he be expressly obliged to it by covenant. But if he had already
received any profit from any thing belonging to the inheritance, he
ought to restore it to the person to whom he sells the inheritance,
as being included in the sale, unless he has expressly reserved it.°


XXVI.


396. Warranty in the Sale of a Debt. — He who sells and trans-
fers a debt ought only to warrant that what he transfers is really
and truly due to him. And he is not to warrant the debtor to
be solvent, unless he is obliged to it by the conveyance he has
made to him of the debt! For it is only a right which he sells.


SECTION XI.
OF REDHIBITION AND ABATEMENT OF THE PRICE,


Art. IL
397. Definition of Redhibition.— By redhibition is meant the
dissolution of the sale, because of some fault or defect in the thing
sold, which is such that it is sufficient to oblige the seller to take
back the thing and to annul the sale.*


Il.


398. The Seller ought to declare the Defects of the Thing sold. —
The seller is obliged to declare to the buyer the defects of the thing
sold, which are known to him.» And if he has not done it, either
the sale shall be annulled, or the price diminished, according to
the quality of the defects; and the seller shall be bound to make
good the damages of the buyer, by the rules which follow.


II.


399. Distinction of the Defects of the Things sold. — Since it is
not possible to restrain all the perfidious dealings of sellers, and
that the inconveniences would be too great to dissolve or call in


“1.2, D. de harred. vel act. vend.;—1.1, C. de evict.; —1. 14, in f. 1.15, D. de horred.
td act. vend. ; — J. 2, § 9, eod.

* L.2.§1, cod.

"1.4, D. de hared. vel act. vend. ;—I, 74, in f. D. de evict.

* 1.21, D. de adil. ed.; — 1.1, § 1, in fine, eod.

61.4, §1, D. de edil. ed.


238 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK |.


question sales, for all manner of defects in the things sold; we con-
sider, therefore, only those defects which render the things alto-
gether unfit for the use for which they are bought and sold, or
which diminish that use in such a manner, or render it so incon-
venient, that, if they had been known to the buyer, he would have
either not bought them at all, or at least not given so great a
price for them. ‘Thus, for example, a beam that is rotten is unfit
for the use for which it is designed. Thus, a broken-winded horse
does less service, and it is too troublesome to make use of him
And these defects are sufficient to dissolve a sale. But if a horse
is only dull in answering the spur, this defect will make no man-
ner of change. And in general, it depends on the custom of the
place, if there is any such, touching this matter; or on the pr-
dence of the judge, to discern by the quality of the defects whether
the sale ought to be dissolved, or the price lessened, or whether
any regard at all ought to be had to the defect.


IV.


400. Redhibition of Immovables.—In the sales of immovable
there may be ground for redhibition, or abatement of the price, if
there are any defects which give occasion to it. Thus, the pu
chaser of a field may get the sale dissolved, if there arise out of
that ground malignant vapors, which render the use of it danger
ous. Thus, for a service which did not appear, and which the
seller did not declare, the purchaser may procure an abatement of
the price,t and even a dissolution of the sale, if the service is %
very burdensome as to give occasion for it.


TIT. If. BEC. XI] CONTRACT OF SALE. 239


seller ought not to reap the advantage of an apparent value, which
the thing sold seemed to have, and yet had it not.


VI
402. Damages, if the Seller is ignorant of the Defects. —In the
same case, where the defects of the thing sold were unknown to
the seller, he shall be bound, not only to take back the thing, or
to abate the price, but likewise to indemnify the buyer as to the
charges which the sale has put him to; such as expenses for car-
riages, the duties for entry, or others of the like nature.


VIL


403. Damages, tf the Seller knows the Defects. — If the seller

knew the defects of the thing sold, he shall be bound, not only in
damages according to the foregoing rule, but he will further be
accountable for the consequences which the defect of the thing
may have occasioned. Thus, he who had sold a flock of sheep,
which he knew to be infected with a contagious distemper, without
declaring it, would be bound to make up the loss of the other
sheep belonging to the buyer which had been infected with this
contagious distemper. And it would be the same thing, if the
eller was obliged to know the defects of the thing sold, although
he pretended to be ignorant of them; as if an architect who fur-
nishes materials for a building had made use of such as were not
sound and in good condition, he would be accountable for the
damage that should ensue thereupon.®


VII.


404. All Things restored to the same Condition by the Redhibi-
tion, —If the defect of the thing sold gives occasion to the redhi-
bition and dissolution of the sale, the seller and buyer shall be
restored to the same condition as if there had been no sale at all.
The seller shall restore the price, with the interest of it, and shall
reimburse the buyer for whatever he has laid out for the preserva-
tion of the thing sold, and for the other consequences of the sale,
according to the foregoing rules. And the buyer shall restore the
thing to the seller, together with all the profit which he has reaped


'L.1,§1, D. de adil. ed. ; —1. 23, §§ 1 et 7, eod.;—I. 27, eod. ; —d. 1. 27, in fine. Sce
the following article.


 L.13, D. de act. empt. et vend.;—1.1, C. de edil. act.;—1. 45, D. de contr. empt.; —
19.45, D. le. See the second article of the eighth section of Hiring and Letting to Etre


o anaes


240 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK 1


from it. And, in a word, all things shall be reciprocally restored
on both sides to the same condition they were in before the
sale.®


IX.


405. Change of the Thing before the Redhibition.— All the
changes which happen to the thing sold, after the sale, and before
the redhibition, whether the thing perishes, or is diminished, with
out the fault of the buyer, and of the persons for whom he is an
swerable, affect the seller, who is bound to take back the thing;
and he likewise reaps the profit of the changes which make the
thing better!


X.


406. If the Defects are evident, or declared by the Seller.—i
the defects of the thing sold are evident, as if a horse has his eyes
put out, the buyer cannot complain of these sorts of defects, which,
being visible, he could not be ignorant of;! no more than of those
defects which the seller told him of™


XI.


407. If the Defects may be known or presumed. — If the defects
of the thing sold are such as the buyer might have easily knows,
and been certain of; as if a field is subject to be overflowed; ifs
house is old; if the beams of it are rotten; if it is il] built; the
buyer cannot complain of these sorts of defects, nor of others of
the like nature. For the thing is sold to him such as he sees it"


TTR. Hi. Ome. X14 CONTRACT OF SALE. |


the ciroumstaness of tne opns t

has expressed, of the knowledge ich m orc {to 6
of the truth, contrary to what! has id,ofthen ner to.
he engaged the buyer; and, abo _|, it is y to co if
these qualities have made a: iit at t
would not have been concluded. A sCOr cit
stances, either the sale shall be « lv, . di d;
and the seller shall be bound in nag if: is grot for it.
Thus, for example, if the seller of 1 has it to be
allodial, and has sold it as such, and th ype to be
subject to a quitrent, and the buyer is oblig to a fine
of alienation; the seller shall be bound to yt ‘e
chaser from these charges, and the other a qu cordi
to the circumstances, even although he had beenigno t at:
jands were subject to this quitrent. But if the: | (ily
made use of those expressions which are usual  «& !
praise at random their goods which they have a mi to il, >
bayer, who ought not to have taken his measures t S-


ex
sions of that kind, cannot procure the sale to be « ed <
any such pretext.°


XIIL
409. As Estate sold such as it is.— If an estate in land is sold


such as it is, or in the same condition as the seller has fairly en-
joyed it, or with its rights and conditions; these expressions, and
others of the like nature, are no hindrance why the seller should
not remain obliged to warrant the lands against hidden services,
and all unknown charges; such as a ground-rent to which the land
should be found to be liable.P


XIV.


410. Defect i Expression by the Seller.— The seller is obliged
to explain clearly and distinctly which is the thing that is sold, in
what it consists, its qualities, its defects, and every thing that may
give occasion to any error, or mistake. And if there is in his


* £18, D. de edsl. ed. ; —i. 21, §§ 1 € 2, D. de act. empt. et vend. ;—1. 19, eod. ;—d. lL.
19, ed. ;—d. §3;—1. 48, eod.; —v. l. 16, D. de heered. vel act. vend. ; —1.13, § 8, D. de
od.empt. See the twelfth and fourteenth articles of the third section of Covenants, and
the second article of the third section of the Vices of Covenants.

P Li wdt. § ult. D. de contr. empt. ; —v. 1. 69, § 5, D. de evict. ; —1. 61, D. de adil. ed. See
the following article.


VOL. 1. 21


P


L


242 TRE CIVIL LAW. [Part 1. BOOK I


words any ambiguity, obscurity, or other defect, they are to be in-
terpreted against him.?


XV.


411. Deceit in the Thing.— He who has sold one thing for
another; an old thing for a new; a less quantity than what he
mentioned ; whether he was ignorant of the defect or conscious of
it, is bound to take back the thing, or to abate of the price, and
to make good the damages which the buyer shall have suffered”


° : XVI.


412. Redhibition because of the Defect of one of many Things
which sort with one another.—If of several things which mate
one another, such as the pieces of a suit of hangings, horses be
longing to one and the same set, and other things of the like
nature, one of them happens to have the defects which are saft-
cient to dissolve the sale, it shall be dissolved for the whole. For
it is equally the interest both of seller and buyer not to unmate
these kinds of things.’


XVIL


413. Redhibition does not take Place in Sales which are mete
by Order of Court.— Redhibition and diminution of the price, be
cause of the defects of the thing sold, do not take place in pubbe
sales, which are made by a decree of a court of justice. Form
these sales it is not the proprietor who sells, but it is the authority
of justice, which is in the place of the seller, and which adjudges


OF OTHER CAUSES OF THE DISSOLUTION OF SALES.


' Divers Causes of the Dissolution of Sales. — Sales may be
ved for several causes ;— by the seller's failing to deliver the
sold ;——by the buyer’s failing to pay the price;—on ac-
of the defects of the thing sold ;— on account of the low-
if the price ;— because of eviction ;— because of the event
sondition ;— by the revocation which the creditors of sellers
of sales made to defraud their creditors ; — by the power of
\ption vested in the heir of line, which dissolves the sale with
*t to the buyer, and transfers it to the lineal heir, who is sub-
od in the place of the buyer; —by the power of redemption
.lords have in regard to their feudal lands, and others; — by
rer of redemption stipulated by covenant ;— by virtue of a
ional agreement to dissolve the sale in case of a certain
;—by reason of the non-performance of some of the cove-
stipulated in the sale;— by the mutual consent of seller
yuyer;— by reason of fraud, force, error, and the other
ds of restitution, rescission, or nullity.

» Of all these causes, the first six, and the last, which is that
lity, have been explained under this title. The revocation of
made to defraud creditors comes under the title of That which
to defraud Creditors. The power of redemption vested in
eir of line, and that which attends feudal lands, do not come
aly within the design of this work; for they are peculiar to
ustoms, and the power of redemption belonging to the heirs
le is abolished by the Roman law ;* rescissions and restitu-


244 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


sale in case of a certain event, the non-performance of the cove-
nants, and the consent of buyer and seller. But we must, in the
first place, explain some rules that are common to all the ways of
dissolving sales.


Rutes Common To THE Di1sso.vuTION or SaLes.


Arr. IL


417. Difference between the Nullity and Dissolution of a Sale.—
There is this difference between the dissolution and nullity of a
sale, that the nullity makes it to have been no sale from the begir-
ning ;* and the dissolution makes the sale to cease which had
been accomplished ; but does not make it never to have beea,
even although it should be dissolved by the will of the seller and
buyer.>


IL


418. The Possessor cannot be turned out of Possession, but by
the Authority of Justice. — Whatever be the cause of the dissolt-
tion of a sale, if it is controverted, and the buyer, or any other
person having his right, is in possession, the seller cannot take —
back the thing sold but by the authority of justice.


iil.


419. Damages, if there is Ground for any.—Tf the sale u
vacated by the act of one or the other of the parties, who has
been the occasion of some damage, he shall be bound to make it


TIT. 1 SEC. X11] CONTRACT OF SALE. MG


Vv. ee eee

421. The Seller is reinstated in his Right.— When the sale is

annulled, the seller takes back that which he has sold, without

any of the charges which the buyer may have burdened it with;

because the seller is reinstated in his right, as if be hed never been
divested of it!


Or tae Power or RepEMPrTiIon By Covenant.


VI.


422. Power of Redemption by Covenant.—The power of re-
demption by covenant is a paction, by which it is agreed that the
seller shall have the liberty to take back the thing sold, he restor-
ing the price to the buyer, or so. much of it as has been paids


Vil.


423. A Sale with the Power of Redemption implies a Condition.
— A sale with the power of redemption implies a condition, that
the sale shall be void, if the seller buys the thing back again.®
And when he does so, he enters again into his right by virtue. of
that condition. Thus, he takes a eee
charges to which the buyer may have subjected it.


VII.
424. The Power of Redemption granted some Time after the


' L. 60, D. de ed. ed. ‘This rule is understood only of the charges to which the buyer
tal subjected the thing by his own proper deed ; as if he had subjected the lands he had
bought to a quitrent, to « service, or if he had mortgaged them to his creditors ; and it does
tot concern the fine of alienation which belongs to the lord of the manor on account of
thesale, For this charge of paying the fine of alienation was a consequence of the con-
met, which was as much the act of the seller as of the buyer. So that the estate which
ws cold remains burdened with it, if the buyer did not pay it. But if the sale was an-
mulled for a cause which proceeded solely from the act of the seller, as if his creditors
wed upon the lands which were sold, it is just in this case that the buyer be indemni-
el by the seller as to the fine of alienation which he has paid. There are even some
atoms which give him the fine of alienation in the case of estates sold by a decree of

the court, leaving the lord at liberty to take the same, he restoring to the purchaser the
first fine of alienation he had received of him.

See upon this article the fourteenth and fifteenth articles which follow. See the second
wtele of the first section, and the tenth article of the second section, with the remarks
made thereon.

' L.2, C. de pact. int. empt. et vend. compt.;—L. 7, eodem ;—1. 12, D. de preesc. verb. ;
—11, C. quando deer. non est op.

by, 7, C de poet. int. empt. et vend. comp. ; —1. 2, eod.

o1*


246 THE C1VIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


Contract is past.— If the power of redemption was granted only
after the contract of sale was finished, it will be of no manner of
prejudice to the charges and mortgages to which the buyer may
have subjected the thing after the contract was past, and before he
granted the power of redemption!


IX.


425. The Continuance of the Power of Redemption. — The
power of redemption may be granted, either indefinitely, witb
out marking the time within which the seller may redeem, o
fixing a certain time, after which this power of redemption shall
cease! If the power is granted indefinitely, it lasts as long as the
time limited for prescription™ If it is restrained to a certain time,
the seller is not immediately excluded when the time expires ; but
a delay is granted to him in the same manner as to the bayer,
when the sale ought to be dissolved for want of payment at the
term.?


X.

426. The Fruits after an Offer made to redeem.— The seller &
ercising his power of redemption of lands which he had sold, the
purchaser ought to restore to him the fruits from the day that i
made his demand, with a tender of the price in due form.°


Or tHe ConpitionaL AGREEMENT TO DissoLvE THE Sats, 4
or NoON-PERFORMANCE.


|
|


TIT. U1. SEC. Xu.] CONTRACT OF SALE.


in case of the non-performance of the other covenant that is part
of the contract of sale; as if it is said, that, if a house which is
sold, and declared to be free from a service, shall appear to: be
subject to it, the seller shall be bound to take it back again.


XIL


428. Effect of these conditional Dissolutions.— The clauses: for
dissolving the sale, in case of non-payment at the time appointed,
or of non-performance of any other article of the contract, have
not the eflechimmediately to dissolve: the sale, upon: the failure of
performance ; but a delay is granted for fulfilling what has been

, unless) the: thing cannot admit of a delay; as if the
seller fails to deliver the goods which he promised to have ready
against the day of an embarkation.‘


XUL

429, The Sale vacated, although there be no Clause of Dissolution.
— Although there be no clause of dissolution for non-payment at
the set time, or non-performance of any other article of the con-
tract, yet the sale shall nevertheless be-.dissolved, if the failure of
payment and the non-performance give occasion for it, after the
according to the circumstances. For the parties do not
intend that the contract should subsist, unless each of them per-

forms his engagement.


a} _


Or tue Dissoturion or THE Sate By THE Murvat Consent
OF THE SELLER AND Buyer.


XIV.

430. Dissolution of the Sale by Consent before Performance of
Articles. — If the seller and buyer dissolve the sale, before the
thing sold has been delivered and the price paid, the sale not
being as yet consummated, and all things being entire, both
parties are discharged from their engagements ; and are by mutual
consent restored to the same state as if there had been no sale.


1 See the eighth article of the third section, and the nineteenth article of the second
) action.

‘ See the second and fourth articles of the third section of Covenants, IL. 6, C. de pact.

M, enpt. et vend. compos.

* See the fifth article of the first section of Covenants.

'L.2, D. de resc. vend.; —§ ult. Inst. quibus modis tollitur oblig.;— 1 58, D. de pact. ; —


248 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


XV.

431. Dissolution of the Sale by Consent, after Performance of
Articles. — If, the sale being consummated, the price paid, the
thing delivered, and the buyer in possession, the seller and buyer
agree afterwards to dissolve the contract, without any other cause
than their bare will; it is not so much a dissolution of this sale,
as a second sale which the buyer makes to the person who had
sold the thing to him. Thus, this first seller does not take back a
thing that is his own, since his sale of it had divested him of his
right to it; but he buys, in effect, the thing belonging to another
person; and it goes to him burdened with the charges and mort
gages to which the person who bought the thing of him, and
sells it back to him again, may have subjected it in the mean
while.*


SECTION XIII.


OF SOME MATTERS WHICH HAVE RELATION TO THE CONTRACT OF
SALE.


Or Forcep Sates.

432. Causes of Forced Sales. — It happens very often that things
which belong to particular persons are found to be necessary fot
some public use; and if in these cases they refuse to sell them,
they are forced to it by the authority of justice. Because that,


_ ‘TIT. H. 8EC. XII] CONTRACT OF SALE. 249


all things being made for the use of the society, before any thing
passes to the use of particular persons, they possess them only
upon this condition, that their private interest shall give way to
the public interest, in the necessities which may require it. Thus,
a private man is bound to sell his lands, or tenements, if they be
found necessary for some public work. And there are also other
causes for which the public justice obliges persons to sell their
possessions, and that even for the interest of private persons, as in
the case of the fourth article of this section. We may observe in
the Roman law, concerning the subject of forced sales, some sin-
gular cases where the proprietors were forced to sell. Thus, by a
constitution of the Emperor Antoninus, masters who used their
elaves ill were obliged to sell them.* Thus, when one of several
masters of a slave, who belonged in common to many, was willing
to give him his liberty, the other masters were forced to sell him
their portions.» Thus, when a thing belonged in common to the
exchequer and to private persons, the exchequer might of itself
sell the whole thing, although the share it had in it were never so
small, and the other proprietors were obliged to part with their
shares to the purchaser, for their proportionable part of the price


agreed on.°
Art. I.


433. Forced Sales.— Forced sales are those to which persons
are compelled by authority of justice, for the public good, or some
other just cause.®


Il.
434. A Forced Sale for the Public Good. — If a house, or other


tenement, appears to be necessary for a public use; such as the
building of a parish church or enlarging it, to make a church-
yard, for making a street or enlarging it, for making any fortifica-
tion or other work for the public conveniency; the proprietor is
compelled by public authority to sell the said house, or tenement,
at a reasonable price.”


® V. § 2, Inst. de his qui sui vel al. jur. sunt.

>’ FT. 1, § 1, C. de comm. serv. man. ; — 1. 16, D. de sen. Silan.

L. un. C. de vend. rer. fisc. cum priv. comm. ; —1. 2, C. de com. rer. alien.

* See the following articles.

b This is a consequence of what has been remarked in the beginning of this section.
Vil. 11, D. de evict. in verbo, Possessiones ex precepto principali distractas. Ordinance
of Philip the Fair, of the year 1303.

See an example of the use of a ground belonging to a private man, for the public con-


250 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L BOOK. |


TIL
435. Sale of Provisions.— In the case of a public necessity,
and at a time when there is a great scarcity of corn, such persons
as have great plenty of it by them are compelled to sell it at
reasonable price. And the civil policy obliges butchers and baken
to sell their goods likewise at a reasonable rate.‘


IV.


436. A Forced Sale for a Particular Necessity. — If the situation
of two fields happen to be such, that there is no going to the one
without passing through the other, the proprietor of the fied
through which it is necessary to pass is obliged to sel] this ser.
vice in the place which will be the least inconvenient for him’
For it is not reasonable that the other field should remain alto
gether useless.


V.


437. If the Person who might be compelled consents to the Sak.
— If, in the case where the proprietor of a field may be forced to
sell it, he consents voluntarily to the sale, this will be a covenant,
of which the conditions will be such as the parties shall have reg
ulated them by common consent in the contract.‘


VI.


438. If he refuses to sell. — If the proprietor refuses to sell, and
suffers himself to be forced to it by a court of justice, the sentence
or decree which shall be pronounced against him shall be in the


rit, 11. SEC, XtI.| CONTRACT OF SALE. 251


VIL
439. Effect of these Kinds of Sales.—In the cases where the
proprietor is divested of his land or tenement for some public use,
be cannot be obliged to any warranty. For, besides that he is
divested of it against his will, the land or tenement being put out
of commerce by this change, it is not any longer subject to mort-
gages, nor to evictions. But the purchasers, such as church-
wardens, or the corporation of a town, remain bound to the lord
of the manor, for the rights which he had upon the said lands;
and they are to indemnify him as to the consequences of this
change, according to the quality of his rights, and the customs of
the places. And the creditors of the person who is divested of
his land, or tenement, have their right upon the price."
VIL
440. Fields lying near to the Highway.— If by any accident,
such as a flood, a highway is taken off, or rendered impracticable,
the proprietors of the adjacent fields are bound to furnish a high-
way, but without having power to sell what they lose by that
means! For it is a casualty which turns their fields, or a part of


them, into a highway; and this situation of their lands engaged
them to suffer this event.


Or Saves By DecrEE or a CourT OF JUSTICE.


IX.


441. Distresses and Sales by Decree of a Court of Justice. —
Creditors have a right to demand that the goods of their debtors
be exposed to sale; and these sorts of sales are forced, and are
made by a decree of a court of justice.


Or Save sy Cant or AUCTION.


X.
442. Sale by Cant or Auction.— When a thing, which cannot


srs acetone oseadany eoused uiesee of these kinds of sales.

11.14, in f. D. quemadm. serv. amitt. This rale is to be understood of an ancient high-
way. Bat if for the public conveniency a way were changed, to make it shorter, or to
make a way altogether new, it would be necessary to indemnify the particular persons for
the share of their grounds that goes to the making of this new way.

| See the ninth article of the third section of Mortgages.

“I do not enter here into a particular discussion of this matter of sales by decree; which


252 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


be divided without great difficulty, such as a house, or which can-
not be divided at all, such as a judicial office, belongs in common
to several persons, and they either cannot, or will not, agree
among themselves about it; they sell it, in order to divide the
price of it among them; and they give it to the highest bidder,
either among themselves, or strangers, whom they admit to bid
for it. And this way of sale is called cant, or auction.


Or Va.uaTION.


XI.


443. Valuation.— It often happens that, many things having
been sold by the lump together, for one sum, without distinguish-
ing the price of each, it becomes necessary afterwards to know
the price of each particular; and to regulate how much every one
of the things may be worth upon the foot of the price that was
given for the whole. And this way of making an estimate i
what is called valuation. Thus, for example, if one of several
lands that were sold for one and the same price happens to be
subject to a fine of alienation, it is by a valuation that this fine is
regulated. And it would be the same thing, if it were necessary
to make a particular estimate of a portion of a house, or othe
estate.”


TIT. 111] EXCHANGE, 253


yet order did require that we should explain the rules of the con-
tract of sale before we should say any thing of exchange, for the
reasons which have been remarked at the end of the plan of the
matters treated of in this book. Exchange has been the first com-
merce which men made use of to acquire the property of things;
the one party giving to the other what was either useless, or less
necessary to himself, that he might get from the other a thing
which he stood in need of»

445, Particular Rules of the Roman Law as to Exchange. —

Although the use of exchange be wholly natural, yet this contract
had, in the Roman law, rales which seem not to be very natural
in our practice. For exchange was considered in the Roman law
as a contract without form, which was placed among those con-
tracts which have no particular name; the effect of which was,
that, when there was only a simple contract of exchange, without
delivery on one side or the other, it produced no right to demand
the execution of the contract;* and when delivery was made only
by one party, he who had made it had no right to demand that
which the other party was bound to give him in counterchange,
and he could only take back the thing which he had given. But
since it is natural, and agreeable to our practice, that all cove-
nants should be performed,’ we give to this contract its entire
perfection. And the parties who have bound themselves in the
contract are compelled mutually to execute it in the same man-
ner as in the contract of sale; and as they were likewise com-
pelled in the Roman law, when the exchange was attended with
& stipulation.

446. The Rules of Sales serve for Exchange.— Exception. — All
the matters relating to exchange being almost the same with those
belonging to the contract of sale, because of the affinity between
these two contracts, we shall repeat nothing here of what has been
sid of the contract of sale; it being sufficient to advertise the
reader, that we may apply to the contract of exchange all the rules
of sales, except those which have no relation to it; such as the
rules concerning the price; because in exchange there is no price.
Thus, the rules touching the engagement of the buyer to pay the


‘ Z.1, D. de contr. empt.
* L. 8, C.derer. perm; ;—l.1, § 2, D. de rer. perm.
“2.1, § wit. D. de rer. perm. ;—1. 5, 1. 7, C. eod.


* L.1, D. de pact.
(Ls, C. de rer. perm. ; s— 1. 33, C. de trans.
VOL. I. 22


254 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


price, those relating to the power of redemption, and others of the
like nature, are not applicable to exchange. But the rules touch.
ing delivery, those concerning warranty, with the other engage
ments of the seller, those relating to the changes of the thing
sold, the nullities of sales, eviction, redhibition, and others of the
same kind, are rules common to sales and to exchanges. So thst
it will suffice to set down here, as rules peculiar to exchange,


those which follow.®


ArTicLE L


447. Definition of Exchange. — Exchange is a covenant, by
which the contractors give to one another one thing for anothers
whatever it be, except money; for in that case it would be a sale?


IL


448. In Exchange, both the one and the other hold the Place of
Seller and Buyer. — In the contract of exchange, the condition of
the contractors being equal, in so much as both the one and the
other give one thing for another, we cannot in it make a distine
tion of a seller and a buyer, no more than of a price and a met
chandise° But both one and the other hold the place at the same
time, both of seller of the thing which he gives, and of buyer of
that which he receives.4


Il.


449. Eviction in Exchange.— If he who has taken a, thing 1
exchange is evicted of it, he holds the place of buyer, and bes


TIT. Iv.] LETTING AND HIRING. 255


TITLE IV.


OF HIRING, AND LETTING TO HIRE, AND OF THE SEVERAL
KINDS OF LEASES.


451. The Matters of this Title.— This title contains the com-
merce used among men, for communicating to one another the
ase of things, or of their industry and labor, for a certain price.
This covenant is of a most necessary and most frequent use. For,
since it is not possible that all men should have in their own
property all the things which they stand in need of, nor that every
one should do that himself which cannot be had without industry
and without labor; and that it would not be just that the use of
the things of others, or of their industry and labor, should be
always gratuitous; it has, therefore, been found necessary to make
a traffic of all these things. Thus, he who has a house which he
does not inhabit himself, gives the use of it to another for a cer-
tain rent. Thus, people hire horses, coaches, hangings, and other
movables. Thus, lands are farmed out to tenants; or laborers are
hired to till them. Thus, people make a traffic of their industry
and their labor, either by the great, or at the rate of so mucha
day, or by other bargains.

452. All these kinds of covenants have this in common, that in
every one of them the one party enjoys the thing belonging to
another, or uses his labor for a certain price: and it is for this
reason that, in the Roman law, they are all of them comprised
under the names of letting and hiring: letting on the side of one
of the parties, who is called the lessor; and hiring on the side of
the other party, who is called the lessee. And here it is necessary
toremark, that whereas, in the letting of things, the lessor is he
who gives the thing, and the lessee is he who takes it; in the
letting of labor, the lessor is he who gives a work to be done, and
the person who undertakes the work, and who gives his labor and
industry, is called the undertaker.

453. It is to these several sorts of covenants that we give the
general name of lease, such as the lease of a house, the lease of a
farm, a lease of work to be done, either at the rate of so much for
every day’s work, or by the great; because in all these covenants
the one party gives to the other, either a thing to be enjoyed, or a

* Work to be done.


256 , THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


454. Although the name of letting and hiring be common in
the Roman law to all these sorts of engagements, and we have
comprehended under one and the same title, and without dis
tinction, leases of houses, and movables, and farms, as also the
undertaking of a building, or any other work, with the other
covenants of this kind; yet we have thought it very proper to dis
tinguish between the letting to hire a house, a horse, or any other
thing, and the lease of a farm, and the undertaking of any piece
of work ata price agreed on. For these matters are not only
distinguished by their names, but they have likewise some differ
ences in their nature, and in their rules. And because they have
all of them some characters and some rules which are common to
them all, we shall explain in the first section, under the name of
letting and hiring in general, those characters which belong to
them in common; and in the same section, and the two following,
we shall likewise gather together many of those common rales;
and in the following sections we shall explain what is particale
in the leases of farms, and in the other kinds of leases.

455. All these matters shall be contained in nine sections, fo
which we have added a tenth, which treats of emphyteutical
leases, or leases for perpetuity, which are of a different natore,and _
have different rules, from the usual leases of farms, by which &
enjoyment of the lands is granted only for a certain time.


SECTION I,


If. IV. SEC. L.] LETTING AND HIRING. 257


IL
457. Who ts the Lessor, and who the Lessee.— He who gives a
ing to be enjoyed is called the lessor,‘ and the same name is
ven to him who gives out any piece of work to be done* He
ho has the enjoyment of any thing by hiring it, or taking a lease
’ it, is called the lessee ;‘ as also he who undertakes the doing
‘any works who is likewise called undertaker. But in the let-
ag out of labor and industry, or in undertaking of any work
r the great, or at the rate of so much a day, or so much a meas-
‘e, the workmen or undertakers are likewise in some sense to be
counted lessors; for they let out and give their labor and indus-


y=
IIL


458. Letting and Hiring is accomplished by the bare Consent.—
‘his contract is of the number of those which are accomplished
y the bare consent, in the same manner as the contract of sale;
nd these two contracts have a great affinity one to the other, and
nany rules which are common to both:


IV.


459. What Things may be let.— We may let to hire all things
which the hirer can restore back to the letter, after he has enjoyed
them. From whence it follows, that we cannot let to hire, no


“1.9, § 2, D. locat.; —1. 19, § 2, eod. e 7. 22, § 1, D. locat.;—1. 36, eod.
L.8, C. de locato. & L. 2, C.de locato.
‘1.99, § 2, D. loc.


'L.1, D. locat. cond. ; —1. 2, D. eod. ; — Inst. de loc. et cond. ; —§§ 1, 3, Inst. eod. The
contract of hiring and letting is, as the contract of sale, accomplished by the bare con-
fent, when the parties are agreed as to the thing that is to be given to be enjoyed, or
the work that is to be done, and as to the rent or hire. And it is in this respect that this
contract resembles the contract of sale, both the one and the other having a price and
& merchandise; from whence it happens that, in some bargains, it is doubtful whether
they be a letting and hiring or a sale. As, for instance, where onc makes a bargain
with a goldsmith that he shall do some piece of work, and shall furnish the silver as
well as the fashion ; — this bargain seems to belong to the contract of letting and hiring,
although in effect it be a sale. Item queritur, si cum aurifice Titius convenerit, ut is ex
aur0 suo certi ponderis, certeeque formz annulos ei faceret, et acciperct verbi gratia de-
cem aureos; utrum emptio, an locatio et conductio contrahi videatur? Cassius ait, ma-
teriz quidem emptionem et venditionem contrahi, operse autem locationem et conduc-
tonem. Sed placuit tantdm emptionem et venditionem contrahi. § 4, Jnst. de locat. et
cad. As to the rules which belong in common to sale, and to the contract of letting and
hiring, it is easy to judge of them by the bare reading of this and the foregoing title.

' This is a consequence of the definition of letting and hiring.


99 *


258 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


more than we can lend, so as to have back the thing lent in spe-
cie, such things as are consumed by the use of them; such ws
corn, wine, oil, and other provisions.”


V.

460. The Profits of Animals.— Animals which produce any rvr-
enue or profit, such as sheep, which yield wool, lambs, and manure
for lands, and other animals of the like kind, may be in a manne
let to hire to one who undertakes to keep them, and to feed them,
for a certain portion that is allotted him out of the profits that
arise from the said animals, provided the agreement have nothing
in it that is usurious, by reason of the excessive profit reserved to
the owner.


VI


461. The Letting of a Thing which ts not one’s own. — We may
let, as well as sell, a thing which belongs to another person
Thus, he who possesses honestly a thing of which he believe
himself to be the true owner, although he is not, and he who has
a right to the use and profits of a thing, without being master of
it, as the usufructuary, may let and farm out what they possess in
this manner.°


VIL


462. The Rent, or Hire,in Money, or a Portion of the Fruits.—
The rent, or hire, of what is let out, may be regulated, either #
money, as it is in sales, or in a certain quantity of provisions, ori


fIT. IV. SEC. 11.] LETTING AND HIRING. 259


ertainty of the value of the profits for the time to come may
ustify the agreement between the proprietor and fatmer, in fixing
t rent certain, instead of that value which is uncertain.!


IX.


464. Lhberty to let to others what we ourselves have a Lease of.
— He who has a lease of a house, or farm, may let it out to
ythers, unless it has been otherwise agreed upon.


X.


465. Leases go to Heirs or Executors.— The engagements
which are formed by the contract of letting and hiring pass to
the heirs or executors of the lessor, and to those of the lessee.


SECTION II.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE LESSEE.


Art. L


466. Engagements of the Lessee. — The engagements of the
person who takes any thing to hire are, to put the thing to no other
we than that for which it is hired; to use it well; to take care of
it; to restore it at the time appointed; to pay the rent or hire;
and in general he ought to observe whatever is prescribed by the
covenant, by law, and by custom.*


II.


467. How the Thing which is hired ought to be used. — He who
takes a thing to hire cannot put it to any other use than that for
Which it is given him, nor use it in any other manner than what is
agreed upon: and if he does otherwise, he shall be bound to make


' L.53, D. loc., —1. 52, D. eod. See the tenth article of the fifth section of Covenants,
and the eleventh article of the eighth section of the Contract of Sale.

' L.6, C. de loc. ; — 1. 60, D. eod.

* 1.19, § 8, D. loc. ; —I. 10, 1. 29, 1. 34, C. eod.

{In the translation of this article, I have joined the word erecutors to that of heirs ; be-
cause the law of England makes a distinction in leases, some of which descend to the heir,
tad some to the executor. Leases for life are of the nature of freeholds, and therefore
descend to the heir. Leases for years are chattels, and go to the executor.]

* These engagements shall be explained in the articles which follow. See the first ar-
cle of the third section of Covenants.


260 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaR? 1. BOOK 1


good the damage that follows thereupon. Thus, he who hires
a horse to ride on cannot make use of him for a packhone.
Thus, the tenant of a house who is tied up by his lease not to
make a fire, or not to put hay in a certain place, cannot do either of
these things; and if he does, and there happens a fire, he shall be
liable for damages, although the fire were occasioned only by some
accident; for it is the tenant’s fault that has given occasion to ths
accident.”


TIL


468. Of him who misuses the Thing.— He who has takea 8
thing to hire is obliged to use it well and carefully, as a good
master would do, and neither to do, nor suffer any thing to be
done, which may be of prejudice to the person who lets it oat
Thus, the tenant of a house ought not to suffer the usurpation
of a service which is not due. Thus, he who has hired beasts
of burden ought not to load them excessively; and if he does it,
or misuses in any other manner of way the thing hired, he shall


be answerable for it.°


IV.


469, What Care he is obliged to, who has taken a Thing to Mire
— Seeing he who takes a thing to hire uses it for his own behool
he ought to take care to keep it, and to preserve it: and he is ac
countable, not only for the damage which may happen through bis
knavery, or through any gross fault of his which comes near to i}
but likewise for the damage which may be occasioned by otha


fault, any damage trom some of his enemies; as if the
ny, to be revenged of him for some bad treatment, sets
5 on fire where the tenant lives, or cuts down the trees of
| which the farmer occupies, he shall be accountable for
iwes; for it is through his fault that these mischiefs do


VIL


Wf the Lessee who quits Possession for Fear of some Dan-
a country farmer, or a tenant of a house which stands in


2. loc. 3 —v. 1. 27, § 9, D. ad leg. Aquil. ; —1. 25, § 7, eod. ; — 1. 60, § 7, e0d. See
cle of the fourth section of Damages occasioned by Faults, and the fifth article
bh section of this title.
ot seem reasonable that the tenant should be discharged of the faults of his
under-tenants, although he were no way to blame for the choice of their
or, besides that the event shows that he has made a bad choice, he ought to
he act of those to whom he has given the use of the house which was in-
‘to him; and the act of those persons becomes his own with respect to the
has let the house to him, and who treated only with him. To which case it
amiss to apply the words of the last law, D. pro socio. Directo cum illius per-
ese, cujus persona in contrahend4 societate spectata sit. And besides, cither
mant is able to pay the damage occasioned by the fire, in which case the chief
no loss, since he may recover it of the under-tenant; or he is insolvent, and
the chief tenant ought to be answerable for him; for he could not make
n of the proprietor worse, who had chosen an able tenant to be answerable for


autem ipsius et illud adnumeratur, si propter inimicitias ejus vicinus arbores
L. 25, § 4, D. koe.

@ sense explained in this article that we are to understand this law. That
farmer and tenant ought not to be answerable for the damage done by an
as thew have given occasion to it by their own fault. In relation to which


262 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK 1


a lonely place, leave the house or farm, for fear of some danger,
without acquainting the owner, in case they were able to do it,
and if the quitting of the house or farm has been attended with
some damage, it is to be judged by the circumstances of the
danger, and of their conduct, whether they ought to be accounts
ble for the rents and damages, or if they ought to be discharged
of them£


VIIL
473. If the Tenant leaves his House, or the Farmer his Fara.—
If a tenant ceases, without cause, to inhabit the house which be
has hired, or a farmer to cultivate the grounds which he has taken
to farm, they may be sued before the term, both for the rent, and
likewise for the damages which the owner sustains thereby.


IX.


474. Repairs. —If the tenant or farmer is obliged to any re
pairs, whether by the lease, or by the customs of the places, he
will be compelled to make them, and be liable in damages to the
lessor if he have not made them:


X.


475. If the Tenant absconds.— If the tenant of a house disep
pears without paying the rent, the owner may have recourse ®
justice, to get an order for opening the house, within the time thd
the judge shall appoint; and for making an inventory of th
movables which shall be found in it, that out of them he may —


dah ise


The Owner may turn out the Tenant, if he wants the House
— If the owner of a house which is let happens to want
8 own use, he may oblige the tenant to restore it to him,
the time that shall be determined by the judge. For since
ier does not let his house, but only because he has no occa-
it himself, it is a tacit condition that, if he shall have occa-
it, the tenant shall be bound to deliver it up to him°® But
ier may renounce this right by the lease.’


XIV.


If the Owner wants to repair his House.— The tenant is
: obliged to quit the house, if the owner has a mind to re-

And if the repairs which he intends to make are neces-
if it be to repair any part of the house that is like to fall,
1er will not be liable for any damages to the tenant; but
discharge the tenant of the rent, or to restore it if it has
ready paid; for it is an accident. But if the repairs are
olutely necessary, the owner will be bound to make good
‘ages which the tenant suffers by the interruption of his
Thus, if the chief tenant has let the house to under-ten-
a greater rent than what he is bound to pay by his lease,
ier is obliged to make this good to the tenant, and to se-
n against the demands of the under-tenants for the inter-
of their leases. But if the repairs may be made in a


D, in quid. caus. pign. vel hyp. t. contr. ; — 1. 5, C. de loc.; —1. 7, D. in quid. caus.


@
264 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRr & BOOK L


short time, with little trouble to the tenant, und without oblig-
ing him to remove, he ought to bear with this small incon
venience.‘


XV.


480. The Tenant may be turned out for Non-payment of his Real.
— If the tenant does not pay his rent, the proprietor may tum
him out by the authority of justice, within the time that shall be
prescribed by the judge to the tenant, either to pay or to re
move.°


XVI


481. The Tenant may be turned out, if he make a bad Use of the
House.— The tenant may likewise be turned out by authority of
justice, if he makes a bad use of the house he has hired; as if he
damages the house; if he exposes it to the hazard of being
burned, by making fire in a place where he ought not; if he cm
ries on any unlawful commerce in the house, or suffers others to
do it; or if he makes a bad use of the house any other manner d
way


XVIL


482, Interest of the Rent, or Hire. — If the tenant who owes hi
rent, or he who gives out any work to be done, does not pay tk
rent, or hire, at the time appointed, he will be liable for the #
terest from the time of the demandJ


Il.

Eviction.— If the tenant is expelled by arf eviction, the
s liable in damages for the interruption of the lease. For
sh this be a kind of casualty, yet the lessor is, notwithstand-
und to procure a free and undisturbed possession of the
o the tenant, and to put a stop to all claims made by any
verson to the thing that is let, in the same manner as the
s obliged to do with respect to the thing he sells.®


OL


The Tenant dispossessed by a Superior Force.— If the ten-
urned out by the act of the prince, by a superior force, or by
ther accident; or if the land or tenement is destroyed by
idation, by an earthquake, or other event; the lessor, who
und to give the land or tenement, cannot demand any rent
ind will be obliged to restore so much of it as he has re-
, but without any other damages; for no man is to be ac-
ble for accidents.°


IV.


Sale annuls the Lease.— If the lessor sells a house, or any
sstate, which he had let out, the lease is annulled by this
of the proprietor; and the purchaser may use and dispose
thing as he pleases; unless the seller has obliged him to
ae the lease. But if the purchaser turn the tenant out, the


266 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part I. BOOK L


lessor is bound for the damages which this interruption of the
lease may have caused.*


V.


487. The Legatee may dissolve the Lease. — If the lessor devises
the house or lands which he has let out, and dies, the legatee is
not obliged to continue the lease made by the testator; for he is a
new proprietor, as is the buyer. But if the tenant is turned out
by the legatee, he will recover his damages against the heir or ex-
ecutor, who is bound to make good the act of the deceased®

VL :

488. If an Inconveniency happens unexpectedly. — If a house that
is let becomes too inconvenient, although without the act of the
lessor; as if a neighbour, raising his building, darkens the lights;
the lessor is bound to make good the damages of the tenant, who
may, if he pleases, vacate the lease. For although this be an ac
cident, yet the house being let for its use, in the condition it was
in at the time of letting, whatever be the cause that makes it les
useful, the damage ought to fall upon the lessor.


VIL


489. Of the Expenses laid out by the Lessee. — Tf the lessee
finds himself under a necessity of being at some charge in pre
serving the thing he has hired; as if the tenant of a house hss
propped up that which was in danger of falling; or if he has bees
at any other necessary expense, which he was not bound


t of this accident; but only to give back the hire or rent.
w example, if, in a pasture-ground which is farmed out,
ppen to be herbs which destroy the farmer’s cattle, the pro-
who was ignorant of this defect, either because these herbs
of a sudden, or having fome other just cause of his ig-
will not be accountable for the loss of the said cattle, but
xt demand any rent for the ground.»


TX.


4 Lease from him who has the Use and Profits.— If the
id only the use and profits of the thing let, and the lease
nited to the time which the usufruct may last, his heir or
will be liable for the damages occasioned by the interrup-
he lease, when the usufruct expires.!


X.


[f the Lessor expresses himself obscurely, his Words will be
ed against him. — The lessor is obliged to make known to
»e wherein consists the thing which he lets, to declare its
and to explain every thing that may give occasion to any
mistake. And if he has expressed himself in dark or am-
terms, his words will be interpreted against him.


SECTION IV.


AYP TWEE Na TIT AP TRE TRaARRR AF Fal A.


268 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 1. BOOK L


mon to leases of farms, and ought to be applied to them, except
some articles of which it is easy to judge that they have no rele
tion to them. Thus, what has been said of the landlord’s right to
turn the tenant out of his house, if he has occasion for it himeeif,
has no relation to a lease of lands. In the same manner it will
- be easy to judge of the other rules which ought, or ought not, to
be applied to leases of farms. And it remains only to explain m
this section, and the two following, what is singular in the natare
of leases of farms, and in the engagements of the farmer, and
those of the proprietor, that so we may pass on to the other mat
ters of this title.


Agr. L

494. Definition of Leases of Farms, and of what Estates they are
made. — Leases of farms are contracts, by which lands are let out,
which naturally produce fruits, whether by culture, as arable land,
vineyards; or without culture, as a coppice, a fish-pond, pastare-
ground. And this distinguishes the leases of these kinds of pow
sessions from the leases of houses, and other buildings, which pre
duce no manner of fruit; and which are let only for the conver
iency of dwelling in them, or for some other use.*


IL


495. What other Things may be farmed out.— We may likewne
let to farm the grounds which produce other kinds of revenues,
a quarry to dig stone out of, places out of which they dig grave,
potter’s clay, coal, lime, and other matters; and, in general, evey _


which may diminish, or quite destroy, the revenue.*


V.

The Effect of the Uncertainty of Events. — This uncertainty
events, which may diminish the revenues which are farmed
quite destroy them, as likewise of those which may aug-
hem, makes the parties, in their contracts about farms, to
‘ith the view of this hope and of this danger. And it is
i reason that they may covenant that the farmer shall not
l any diminution of his rent because of barrenness, hail, or
ecidents.*


VI


Accidents of two Kinds, Natural, and those which are the
Man. — The covenant which obliges the farmer to pay his
\otwithstanding accidents, does not extend to that which
appen by the hand of man, such as an open force, a war, a
id other accidents of the like kind, which no man could fore-
But it is to be understood only of what falls out naturally,
h the injury of the weather, and which it is reasonable to
; such as a frost, an inundation, and other cases of the like


VIL


Renewing of the Lease.— If, the term of the lease of a
ing expired, the lessor suffers the farmer to remain in poe-


and the farmer continner tn manage the farm. the li =e iz


270 THE CIVIL LAW. [Par I. BOOK L


VIIL

001. Divers Effects of a tacit Renewal of the Lease.— The tacit
renewal of the lease continues it either only for the year which is
begun anew, or even for two years, or for the same space of time
as the first lease, or for a shorter time, according to the intention
of the contractors and the circumstances. Thus, when the lease
is of such a nature, that there is an inequality of the produce be
tween one year and another, as if, in a lease of arable lands for
several years, there were a greater number or some of the best
fields to be ploughed up one year more than the other, the tacit
renewal of the lease could not be for less than two years. Thus,
in leases of houses, the landlord and the tenant may, when ‘they
please, interrupt the lease that is thus tacitly renewed, they giving
one another a certain time to provide themselves in, according ae
it is regulated by custom, or by the judge. But if it is a place,
the use of which demands in its own nature a longer
of time, then the renewing of the lease will take place for the time
of that use. Thus, the tacit renewing of the lease of a bam
reaches to the time of harvest, and that of a wine-press, to the
season of the vintage.®


TX.


502. The tacit Renewal of the Lease renews the same Condition.
— The tacit renewal of the lease renews likewise all its cond
tions. For it is only a continuance of the first lease, with all is
consequences. But if in the first lease there were sureties, the


engagement ends with the lease, and is not renewed by the tet


do, tf they were his own.— The farmer ought to use the
he has in farm as any prudent, discreet man would do,
r were his own, and to keep them, preserve and cultivate
in the manner as is agreed on by the lease, or regulated by
1, And he cannot, to increase his profits out of the lands,
any innovation which may be of prejudice to the proprietor.
if in a farm there are arable lands, he cannot sow them
they ought to lie fallow, nor sow wheat when he ought
> sow barley or oats, if these changes would make the lands
n a worse condition at the end of the lease than they ought
when they are restored to the proprietor. And the farmer
likewise to cultivate the grounds in their proper seasons,
cording to custom.*


IL


, The Fruits are mortgaged for the Rent.— The fruits and
' of the ground that is farmed out are mortgaged for the
f the farm, whether the farmer continues in the possession of
rm himself, or substitutes another in his place, or lets it out
ler-tenants.”


Tit


. The Farmer who shares the Fruits with the Owner bears
oss of all Accidents.— He who holds a farm on condition to
to the proprietor a certain portion of the fruits, and to keep
emainder for himself, for his manuring and sowing the
ids, can claim nothing from the proprietor, either for the till-


272 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRt t. BOOK L


the land, and the farmer or tenant the seed and the tillage; each
of them hazarding the portion of the fruits to which this partner.
ship entitles him.°


IV.


906. The Effect of Accidents in a Lease which ts only for one
Year. If a farmer, who has a lease only for one year, and is
obliged to pay his rent in money, reaps nothing because of some
accident, such as a frost, a storm of hail, an inundation, and otber
cases of the like nature; or even because of some act of man, as
if in a time of war the whole crop is destroyed, or taken away by
force ; he shall be discharged from paying his rent, or shall recover
it if he has already paid it For it is but reasonable that, in the
case of a lease, where the lessor secures to himself a rent, the
lessee should be secure of enjoying something: and besides, the
lease is of the fruits which the farmer shall reap, and which its
presupposed that he will reap. But if it was agreed that the a
cidents should fall upon the farmer, he will then be obliged
pay his rent, notwithstanding these losses.


V.


507. A Small Loss occasioned by the Nature of the Lands, o
Fruits, or some other Cause. — If without an extraordinary act
dent, and only through the nature of the land itself, and of te
fruits, or because of some ordinary event, there happens some los
that is not very considerable; as if the fruits are not of a good
quality, or not in quantity enough; if tares growing up wi


ice shall think fit to decree.


VIL


Compensation of Good and Bad Years. — If, the lease being
) or more years, there happens in some of them accidents
occasion losses, whether it be of the whole fruits or a
vart of them, and these losses are not compensated by the
of the other years, the farmer may demand an abatement
rent, according as the quality of the loss and the other cir-
inces may render his demand just. But if there was any
mt in the lease, or any custom of the place, which did regulate
ve of losses of this kind, it would be necessary to keep thats


VIL


The Loss of the Seed and Tillage falls on the Farmer.—
the accidents which cause any loss to the farmer, for which
y claim an abatement, either of the whole rent, or a part of
cannot demand any damages, either for the profits which
tht have reaped, or even for the seed or tillage." For he
jliged to be at these charges, that he might have a right to
tits.


5, § 6, D. loc. ; —1. 15, § 2, D. loc. See the following article.

| C. de loc. ; —v. l. 18, eod. ; —I1. 15, § 4, D. loc.; —1. 19, C.eod. See the preced-
des.

loss happened the first year of the lease, and proved to be of the whole crop,
t be necessary that, in expectation of the end of the lease, to judge wheth-
! would be ground for an abatement or not, the farmer should be compelled


thea @vet waawa rent. the consennences of which might nerhans diminish tha


274 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


TX.

511. The Farmer cannot quit his Farm.— The farmer cannot
quit his farm, nor cease to manure it; and if he fails either to till
the ground, or to perform any other engagement, as if he was
obliged to any repairs, the proprietor may bring his action against
him, both to compel him to perform his engagements, and to
make good the damages which he has suffered by the interruption
of the lease.!


SECTION VI.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS WHICH THE PROPRIETOR IS UNDER TO THE
FARMER.


Arr. I.

512. What the Proprietor is bound to furnish to the Farmer.—
Besides the engagements which the person is under who lets any
thing to hire, which are explained in the third section, he who les
out a country farm ought to furnish that which the lease obliges
him to, for manuring the grounds, and gathering in the fruits,
such as barns, tubs and presses for making wine, and other things,
according as it is agreed between the parties, or regulated by
custom.*


II.
513. Movables and Tools given to the Farmer.— If the propre —


TIT. IV. BEC. VI.] LETTING AND HIRING. 275


prietor will be obliged to reimburse him of what he has laid out,
or to discount it on the rent.°


IV.


515. The Expenses which the Farmer has been at, the Lease being
interrupted.— If a farmer, whose lease might be interrupted by
some event which he ought to have foreseen, has nevertheless
been at some charges, in hopes that he should enjoy the farm for
a certain time; as if he has laid up any great store of provisions,
bought cattle, or been at other expenses of this kind; he cannot
pretend to recover any of them, if his lease is interrupted by the
2vent which he had reason to expect. As if it was a lease
granted by one who had only the use and profits of the estate,
which came to cease by the death of the usufructuary, who had
let out only what right he himself had; or a lease that was to be
dissolved by the event of some condition. For the farmer know-
ing that these expenses might become altogether useless, he was
willing to run the hazard of the losses which he might suffer


thereby.
V.


516. Lnprovements made by the Farmer. — If a farmer has made
improvements which he was not bound to make; as if he has
planted a vineyard, or an orchard, or made other improvements of
this kind, which have increased the revenue of the farm; he will
recover the expense he has been at on this account, pursuant to
the rale explained in the seventeenth article of the tenth section of
the Contract of Sale?


VI


517. If the Farmer is molested by the Proprietor.— If the farmer
is molested either by the proprietor himself, or by persons whom
the proprietor might hinder from giving him any disturbance, he
shall be liable to make good the damages which the farmer sus-
tains, and all the profit which he might have made of his farm
during the time which his lease had yet to run; unless the trouble
that was given him was only of a few days, and that, matters
being still entire, he were reéstablished in the peaceable possession


of his farm.‘
* L. 55, § 1, D. loc. d 7.9, § 1, D. loc.
* L. 55, § 1, D. loc. ; —l. 61, D. loc. ; —I. 16, C. de evict.

TL. 24, § 4, D. loc.; — 1. 33, in f. D. loc.


276 THE CIVIL LAW. [raRT I. BOOK L


VIL

518. Of the Trouble which the Proprietor could not prevent. —If
the disturbance given to the farmer is an open violence, or a fact
which the proprietor is not able to hinder, and for which he is not
accountable, he shall be obliged only to abate of the rent in pro-
portion to the farmer’s loss by this disturbance; or to give back so
much of it as he had already received. But he will not be bound
to make up the profit which the farmer might have made, if he

had enjoyed his farm peaceably.®


SECTION VII.


OF THE NATURE OF UNDERTAKINGS OF WORK BY THE GREAT, AND
OF OTHER WAYS OF LETTING OUT MAN’S LABOR AND INDUSTRY.


Art. L
519. Definition. — In undertakings of work by the great, and
the other ways of letting out the labor of workmen, the lessor is
he who gives out the work, or business to be done; and the leseee,
or undertaker, is he who undertakes the business or work.*


IL


520. Difference of Undertakers, according as they furnish any of
the Materials, or not. — The undertaker is sometimes only charged
with the bare work, as an engraver to whom a seal is given to be
engraven ; or with a bare labor, as a carrier; or sometimes he is


TIT. IV. SEC. vVit.] LETTING AND HIRING. 277


he is only to farnish the workmanship, it will be a letting to hire,
or an undertaking by the great.


] V.


522. Of the Architect who furnishes every Thing. — If an archi-
tect who undertakes a building engages to furnish the materials, it
will be a letting to hire, and not a sale, although it seems as if he
sold the materials. For besides that his principal obligation is to
give his direction and oversight for the building, he does not sell .
the ground, to which the building is only an accessory.


V.


523. Conditions of Undertakings. — In undertakings of work by
the great, and other covenants which respect the labor of persons,
the parties may regulate what shall be furnished by him who gives
out the work to be done, the quality of the work, the time within
which it shall be finished, and other conditions of this kind; and


whatever shall be regulated by the contract ought to be per-
formed.°


VI


524. What Things are to be regulated by the Judgment of Stkilful
Men. — If all that is to be done or furnished by the undertaker is
not plainly enough regulated by the contract; as if the quality
of the materials which he is to furnish, or the quality of the work,
is not expressed, or the time not fixed; all these things, and others
of the like kind, shall be regulated either according to custom, if


there is any concerning this matter, or by the judgment of skilful
persons.!


* L. 2, § 1, D. loc.;—§ 4, Inst. eod. It is to be remarked, touching the case spoken of
in this article, and others of the like nature, that, all bargains of this kind implying the
condition that the work shall be well done, it may be said that, at the time of the con-
tract, it is, as it were, a letting to hire, and an undertaking by the great; and that in the
execution of the contract it is, as it were, a sale. And this is it that has given occasion
to the doubt, mentioned in the texts quoted on this article, whether it were a sale or a let-
ting to hire. See the following article.
“1.29, § 2, D. loc. See the second article of the first section, and the ninth article of
the following section.
* L.15,§1, D. loc. See the seventh article of the second section of Covenants.
See the sixteenth article of the second section of Covenants, and the sixth article of
the following section.


VOL. 1. 24


278 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


SECTION VIII.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE PERSON WHO UNDERTAKES ANY
WORK OR LABOR.


Art. I.


525. Undertakers answerable for their Ignorance. — Besides the
. engagements which are common to all persons who hire a thing,
and which have been explained in the second and fifth sections,
those who undertake any business or work ought, moreover, to be
answerable for all the defects occasioned by their ignorance; for
they ought to know how to do that which they undertake, and it
is their fault if they are ignorant of what they profess.*


526. Defects of the Materials which the Workman is to furnish
— If the undertaker is obliged to furnish any materials for the
work, as an architect, who has undertaken to furnish the materials
for a building, he ought to give them good and well conditioned;
and likewise to answer for the defects which he is ignorant of; for
he is bound to give that good in its kind which he ought to give; _
as he who lets a thing to hire is obliged to give it such as it onght
to be for the use for which it is designed.®


IIL.
527. What Care Workmen and Undertakers are bound to takt.=


IT. IV. SEC. VIII] LETTING AND HIRING. 279


lings belonging to several persons, had given to one that which
*longed to another although by mistake.°


IV.


528. Of the Defect of the Thing.— If that which is given to a
orkman to be wrought perishes in his hands, without his fault,
id merely through a defect in the thing itself; as if an amethyst
hich is given to be engraven happens to break in the hands of
e engraver, through some defect of the matter, and not through
s unskilfulness, he shall not be accountable for it, unless he has
idertaken the work at his own peril.4


V.


529. The Care of Carriers and Watermen. — Carriers and water-
en, and all those who undertake to carry merchant goods, or
her things, are answerable for the custody, carriage, and trans-
wtation of the things which they take under their charge, and to
ye all the application and take all the care of them that is possi-
e. And if any thing perishes or is damaged through their fault,
‘the fault of the persons whom they employ, they ought to an-
ver for it.°


VI


030. Work to be done to the Owner's Content, or the Arbitration
f another Person. — If it is agreed that a work shall be done to the
‘wner’s satisfaction, or according to the arbitration of a person
vho is named, the workman shall be bound only to deliver the
work good, such as will be approved of by skilful men‘ For
these kinds of covenants imply the condition, that what shall be
regulated shall be reasonable.’


© L. 13, § 6, D. loc. ; —1. 34, in f. D. de dam. inf. ; —l. 40, D. loc. ; —1. 5, §.1, D. naut.
eaup.; —1. 60, § 2, D. loc. See the second article of the second section of the Loan of
Things to be restored in Specie ; the fourth article of the third section of Deposit ; and the
fifth article of the first section of Persons who drive any Public Trade.

“1.13, § 5, D. loc.

* L.13, § 2, D. loc. ; —1. 25, § 7, D. eod. See the fourth article of the second section
Of Persons who drive any Public Trade.

1.24, D. loe.

’ See the eleventh article of the third section of Covenants. The Emperors Gratian,
Valentinian, and Theodosius ordained, that the undertakers of public works, and their
bein, should be answerable for the space of fifteen years for the defects of the work. L. 8,


C.de oper. publ.


280 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


VIL
531. Work made according to the Master's Direction. — Although
the workman ought to answer for the defects of the work, yet if
the owner himself has ordered and directed the work, he cannot
complain of it.


VIL


532. If the Work perishes before it is approved of.— If one has
given materials to a workman, to make a work at a certain rate for
the whole, the undertaker will not have performed his engage
ment, nor be discharged from it, until the whole work has been ex-
amined, and it appears to be such as it ought to be. And if it is
a work which consists of several pieces, or is to be measured, and
a certain price to be paid for each piece, or each measure, the ur
dertaker shall be discharged in proportion to what shall be counted
or measured and approved of. And, on the contrary, the under
taker shall bear the loss of his work, and make good the damage
of the master (if he suffers any), for so much of the work as i
found not to be of the quality which it ought to have. But if, a
the case of either of these two bargains, the thing perishes by as
accident before the work is proved, the master shall bear the los,
and be accountable for the price of the work, especially if it was
his fault that the work was not proved; unless it did appear thst
the work was not such as ought to be received.!


IX.
533. If the Edifice perishes while tt is Building.—If an art


IT. IV. SEO. 1X.] LETTING AND HIRING. 281


X.

534. If the Worleman is to furnish every Thing, and the whole per-
kes.— If the workman was to furnish all the materials, as in the
ase of the third article of the seventh section, and the thing per-
hes by an accident, before the work has been delivered, the
thole loss, both of the stuff and fashion, will fall upon the work-
ian. For this is a sale, which is not accomplished till the work-
ian has delivered his work.


XI.


535. Accessories to the Engagement of the Undertaker. — He
tho has undertaken a work, a labor, the carriage of something, or
ay other thing of this kind, is not only bound to perform what is
ctpressly contained in the bargain, but likewise to do every thing
tat is accessory to the work, or thing which he has undertaken.
‘has, masters of stage-coaches, wagoners, and carriers, pay the
ls and ferry-boats which are on the road; for these are charges
hich respect the carriage." But they do not pay the customs,
nd other duties which are laid upon the goods which they carry.
‘or these duties have nothing to do with the carriage of the goods,
vat are exacted of the owners.


SECTION IX.


OP THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE PERSON WHO GIVES OUT ANY WORK
OR BUSINESS TO BE DONE.


Arr. I.

036. Engagements of the Person who gives any Work to be done.
— He who gives out a work to be done is obliged to furnish to
the undertaker that which he is bound to by the bargain; whether
itbe to farnish any stuff, to give the workman his diet, or that he
is obliged to any other thing.*


IL.


537. He owes the Price, with the Interest, if he is in Delay. —
He ought likewise to pay the price, whether it be after the whole


" This is a consequence of the third article of the seventh section.
* L. 60,§ 8, D. loc.
"L.15,§1, D. loc. See the first article of the sixth section.

24 g


282 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


work is finished and delivered, or in proportion to the quantity of
the work that is done, or even beforehand, according as it has
been regulated by the agreement; and if he fails to pay at the
term, he shall be obliged to pay the interest of the price from
the time of the demand.®


TIL


538. Discharge from advancing the Price in Case of Danger.—
If it was agreed that the price of the work, or a part of it, should
be paid beforehand, and afterwards there appeared to be danger
in advancing the money, he that gave out the work cannot be
compelled to advance the money, unless the undertaker gives secr


rity.
IV.


539. If the Thing perishes through some Defect in ttself, or by
the Act of him who gives it out.— If a thing that is given out to
a workman, to have something done to it, happens to perish be
cause of some defect in the thing itself, or by some act which ke
who gave it out ought to answer for, he will be liable to pay th
workman what he had done and furnished for the work, as in the
case of the fourth article of the eighth section.*


V.


540. If the Work is not done against the Time appointed. — If tt
has not been the fault of the workman, or artificer, that the work
has not been finished within the time agreed on, and skill —


rIf. IV. SEO. X.] LETTING AND HIRING. 283


indertaker would be liable to make good the damages of the de-
ay, and ought to blame himself for having undertaken what he
was not able to perform.


VI.


541. Of the Laborer, whose Fault tt was not that he did not work.
— If it has not been the fault of the laborer, that he did not do
he work, or perform the service, which he had promised within a
certain time; and that during that time he has not been em-
sloyed any other way; he who engaged him in his service is
xound to pay the salary for the time which he has made the
laborer lose.‘


VIL


542. If the Master delays to receive the Work. — If he who gave
out the work to be done delays to receive it after it is finished,
or refuses it without a good reason, and the thing perishes after
his delay, he shall nevertheless be bound to pay the price of the
works


VIL
543. If the Undertaker is at any Charge.— If, besides the work-
manship, the workman, or undertaker, has been at any expense in


preserving the thing, the person who gave the work out shall be
bound to reimburse him.®


SECTION X.
OF LEASES OF PERPETUITY, OR FOR A LONG TERM OF YEARS.


44. The Subject-matter of this Section. —- Emphyteutical leases,
or leases for perpetuity, or a long term of years, have been a con-
sequence of the leases of farms. For since the owners of barren
lands could not easily find tenants for them, a way was invented,
o give in perpetuity such kind of lands, on condition that the
grantee should cultivate, plant, and otherwise improve them, as
the word emphyteusis signifies. By this agreement, the proprietor


1.38, D. loc.; —1. 19, § 9, cod. ; —d. 1. 19, § ult. ; —v. l. 61, § 1, D. loc.
6 L. 36, D. loc.
» See the seventh article of the third section.


284 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK!


finds on his part his account, by assuring to himself a certain and
perpetual rent; and the perpetual tenant finds likewise his advan-
tage, in laying out his labor and industry to change the face of
the ground, and to make it fruitful.

Seeing the matter of emphyteutical or perpetual leases takes in
quitrents, and other kinds of ground-rents, and that the conditions
of perpetual tenants are different, according to the diversity of
their grants, and according to the custom and usage of places, we
are not to enter here into the detail of this matter. Thus, we
shall not insert here the rules of law concerning fines of alienation,
nor those which relate to the right which the lord of a manor hes
on lands that are part of his manor, which are different in different
countries, but shall confine ourselves to such rules as are of the
Roman law. And we shall lay down only the general principles
which are both agreeable to the Roman law and to our usag,,
such as are observed in all the customs, and are the fundamental
maxims of the law touching this matter.


Arr. L
545. Definition of Perpetual Leases.— A perpetual or empbly-
teutical lease is a contract by which the owner of an estate is
land gives it to a tenant to cultivate and improve it;* and to
enjoy it and dispose of it for ever,” on condition that the tenam
pay him a certain rent in money, corn, or other kind,° and that he
bear the other charges which they agree on.


I.


TT. IV. SEC. X.] LETTING AND HIRING. 285


TIL
547. Difference between Perpetual and other Kinds of Leases. —
‘erpetual leases are distinguished from the common leases of
irms* by two essential characters, which are the foundation of
1e rules that are peculiar to perpetual leases. The first is the
erpetuity of the lease ;‘ and the second is the translation of a kind
[ property.


{V.


548. Perpeteity of the Emphyteutical Lease. — The perpetuity of
xe emphyteutical lease makes it to pass, not only to the heirs of
1e perpetual tenant, but likewise to all those who succeed to his
ght, whether by donation, sale, or any other kind of alienation.
ind they can never be dispossessed by the owner of the lands,
nd his successors,® unless in the cases which shall be explained in
his section. :


V.


49. The Perpetual Lease shares the Rights of Property. — The
translation of property which is made by perpetual lease is pro-
portioned to the nature of this contract, where the owner gives the
lands and reserves the rent. And by this covenant there is made,
as it were, a partition of the rights of property between the owner
of the lands and the perpetual tenant. For the owner who grants
the perpetual lease remains master in so far as to enjoy the rent
Which he has reserved, as the fruit of his own proper lands, by
which he retains the chief right of property, which is that of enjoy-
ing the thing as owner of it, together with the other rights which
he has reserved to himself. And the perpetual tenant, on his part,
acquires the right of transmitting the estate to his successors for
ever, of selling it, giving it away, alienating it, with the burden of
the rights which the lessor of the lands has reserved to himself; as
also a right to plant, to build, and to make what other changes he


* 43, Inst. de locat. et cond. ;—1. 1, C. de jur. emphyt.

"43, Inst. de locat. et cond. ;—1. 1, C. de off. com. sacr. pil.; —U. 1 et 5, C. de locat. pred.
Gel. ;~1. 10, Cod. de loc. et cond.

1.12, C. de fund. patr. See the following articles. There are some emphyteutical
leases which are not perpetual, but only for a long term of years, such as a hundred, or
matty nine years.

13, Inst. de locat. et cond.


286 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT. 1. BOOK L


shall think proper, for improving the estate, which are so many
rights of property.!
VI


590. Property Direct and Useful.— The rights of property which
the master retains, and those which are conveyed to the perpetual
tenant, are commonly distinguished by the names of direct prop
erty, which is given to the right of the master; and sseful prop
erty, which is given to the right of the tenant. The meaning of
which is, that the first master of the estate retains his original
right of property, except in so far as he transmits a share of it
the perpetual tenant; and that the perpetual tenant acquires the
right of enjoying and disposing of the estate, with the burden of
the rights that are reserved to the master of the lands. And itis
for this reason that, in the Roman law, the perpetual tenant is
considered in a double capacity, either as being or not being the
master of the estate, according to the different views and the di
ferent effects of these two kinds of property.


VIL


551. Mutual Engagements which result from the Perpetual Lesx.
— The perpetual tenant, on his part, is obliged to pay the per
petual rent, and to perform the other conditions regulated by ks
lease, and by custom; such as the duty of fines of alienation
which those persons are bound to pay who come into the estate
of the perpetual tenant, either upon all kinds of changes of a tex
ant, or upon some, or only upon sales, according as it is regulated


IP. IV. SEO. x.] LETTING AND HIRING. 287


VIIL

552. Who bears the Losses occasioned by Accidents. — It follows
‘om the nature of these perpetual leases, that all the accidents
rhich destroy only the revenues, or the improvements made by
lanting, building, and others, of what kind soever they be, that are
1ade by the perpetual tenant, are to his loss. For he was obliged
» make improvements, and it was for his behoof that the estate
ras improved. And the accidents which destroy the lands fall
oth upon the master, who suffers the loss of his estate, and like-
rise on the perpetual tenant, who loses the improvements which
e had made upon it.


IX.


553. The Perpetual Tenant cannot commit Waste.—It is like-
wise a consequence of the nature of perpetual leases, that the per-
petual tenant cannot commit waste, or damage the estate, nor
even take away the improvements which he had made upon it.
And if he commits waste, the master of the lands may get the
perpetual lease to be vacated, may enter again to the possession
of his estate, and oblige the tenant to repair what has been
wasted. But the perpetual tenant may make what changes are

wefal, and such as any careful and diligent master would do;

such as the cutting down of old trees, in order to plant new ones;
the demolishing that which is falling to decay, in order to rebuild
it; and others of the like nature.°


X.


d4. The Perpetual Lease vacated for Non-payment of the Rent.
—This is also another consequence of the nature of perpetual


Tight is founded on the losses or diminutions which may happen to the estate, and on the
injustice that it would be to force the tenant to pay a perpetual and excessive rent, if the
estates were not able to afford it; since, in leases for a few ycars, eases and abatements
of the rent are granted to farmers, because of the diminution of the fruits of the ground.
See the following article.

"L.1, C. de jur. emphyt.; —§ 3, Inst. de loc. et cond. We have not set down in this
atticle the case of the loss of a part of the lands, as if an inundation has carried off the
half or more or less of the estate. For although what remains is liable for the whole
rent, yet the liberty which the perpetual tenant has of yielding up the estate to the mas-
er pats it in his power to free himself of the rent by abandoning the estate, or that which
remains of it, in the condition in which he ought to restore it, pursuant to the rules estab-
lished for cases of this kind.

* Nov. 7, cap. 3, § 2;—~ Nov. 120, c.8;—1. 15, D. de usufr. Although this law relates
tothe usufructuary, yet it may with much greater reason be extended to the perpetual
tenant, who possesses only on condition that he do improve the lands.


288 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 1.


leases, that, in case of non-payment of the rent, the perpetual
tenant may be ejected, even although there were no clause for
vacating the lease in this case? unless he makes payment within
the time limited by the judge.4
Te

555. The Expenses are not refunded. — If the perpetual tenant
has made improvements on the estate, and is ejected for default of
payment of the arrears of his rent, he cannot pretend to be rem
bursed his expenses." For the estate was given him on conditioa
that he should improve it. But it will be prudent for the judge
to grant, according to the quality of the improvements, and/#e))
other circumstances, a reasonable delay, that the perpetual tenant
may be thereby in a condition, either to pay what he is in arreat
and to retain the estate, or be able to sell 11"


TITLE V.


OF THE LOAN OF THINGS TO BE RESTORED IN SPECIE, AND
A PRECARIOUS LOAN.


506. Our language having no proper word whereby to expres
this contract, which the Romans call commodatum, where wm
lends a thing to another gratuitously, that he may use it, and ™ 7)


'e Ve BEC. Ie] LOAN OF THINGS. 289


JJ treat in the following title. For these are two different cove-
its, which are not to be blended together; the covenant which
‘xplained under this title obliging the borrower to restore the
ne individual thing which he borrowed, as when one borrows a
se; and the other covenant obliging the borrower to restore a
ag of the same kind, as when one borrows money, and other
ngs, which we cease to have in our possession when we make
:of them. The loan of things that are to be restored in specie
» contract which results naturally from the union which society
ablishes among mankind. For since men have not always the
vans of buying or hiring all the things which they stand in need
and which they want only for a little time, humanity obliges
em to assist one another with the loan of such things as they
and in need of.
do7. A precarious loan is the same kind of contract with the
an of things that are to be restored in specie, and differs from it
aly in this, according to the Roman law, that whereas the loan
{things to be restored in specie is for a time proportioned to the
ecessity of the borrower, or even for a certain time regulated by
he contract, the precarious loan is undetermined, and lasts no
onger than it pleases the lender.

008, This distinction between the loan of things to be restored in
wecie, and the precarious loan, is not much in use with us; and
we make but little use of this word precarious, except in immova-
bles, as in a sale, or other alienation, when he who alienates an
estate acknowledges that, if he remain in possession of it, it shall
only be precariously. Which is expressed in this manner, to
denote that he shall not hereafter possess his estate but by permis-
Son from the purchaser, and in the same manner as he possesses
a thing who has borrowed it. See the seventh article of the sec-
ond section of the Contract of Sale.


SECTION I.


OP THE NATURE OF THE LOAN OF THINGS TO BE RESTORED IN
SPECIE, AND OF A PRECARIOUS LOAN.


Art. I.
009. Definition of this Loan.— The loan of things that are
) be restored in specie is a covenant by which one gives a
VOL. I. 20


290 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT ft. BOOK L


thing to another, that he may put it to a certain use, and keep
it as long as his occasions require, without paying any price for
the use of it. For if there were a price, it would be a letting
to hire.*
IL

560. A Precarious Loan.— A precarious loan is when a thing
is lent at the desire of the person who borrows it, to be used
during the time that the lender is willing to let him have it; and


on condition that he shall restore it whenever the owner is pleased
to call for it.>


TIL


561. The Loan does not oblige, but by the Delivery of the Thine.


— The loan of things that are to be restored in specie is oneo!
those kinds of covenants, whereby one obliges himself to restor
a thing; and, consequently, where the obligation is not contracted
but by the delivery of the thing borrowed.*


IV.


562. The Lender remains Proprietor of the Thing. — It is th
nature of this contract, that the lender remains proprietor of the
thing which he lends, and consequently that the borrower #
obliged to restore the same individual thing which he has ber
rowed, and not another of the same kind, For otherwise it would
not be a loan of things to be restored in specie, but another kind
of loan, as where one borrows provisions, or money, to const


ae 4 LOAN OF THINGS, 991


n this way things which are consumed, or which cease
eing used, such as money and provisions; for to lend
der to consumption would be a contract of another
at is, a loan where the things lent are not to be restored
but in kind. But we may lend these kinds of things,
tve them restored in specie, if we lend them for any
han that of consumption: as if we lend money to make
r to deposit, on condition that the borrower take it up
restore the same in specie*


VIL.
e Loan of that which is Another’s.— We may lend that
ot our own. ‘Thus, he who possesses a thing honestly
what he possesses and what he believes to be his own.
Uso a loan of this kind, when one lends that which he
inavishly, knowing it to belong to anothers


VILL.
e Lender is to regulate the Manner and Time of the
belongs to him that lends the thing to regulate in
ner, and for what time, the borrower is to have the


TX.


e Loan ts presumed to be for the Natural Use of the
Hf the use to which the thing borrowed is to be em-
not regulated by the contract, it is limited to the natu-
linary service that may be had from it. Thus, he who
rse is presumed to lend him for a journey, and not for


X.
e Continuance of the Loan is proportioned to the Use for
Thing is lent.— If the time of the loan is not regulated
itract, it is limited to the continuance of the use for
thing is lent. Thus, a horse being lent for a journey,


. D. commod.;—I. 4, eed. See the fourth article of the first section of Zd-
g- .
commod. ; —1. 16, eod. ; — |. 64, D. de judic.


| D. commod. See the eleventh article of the second section.
D. enumed. ; — d. 1. 5, § 7.


292 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOS L


he who borrows him has the use of him daring the time that is
necessary for performing the said journey/
XI.

569. Restitution of the Thing at the Time and Place agreed on
— If it has been agreed, that the thing lent shall be restored with
in such a time, and at such a place, and the borrower fails to
perform what he promised, he shall be liable for the damage
which he has been the cause of, according to the circumstan-
ces.”


XI.

570. A Loan may be either for the Conveniency of the Borrower
or Lender, or both.— A thing may be lent, either for the bar
interest of the borrower; and this way of lending is the mo#
usual; as if I lend my horse to a friend, to make a joumey i
his own business: or it may be lent for the mere behoof of te
lender; as if I lend my horse to one whom I employ to go tig
the country about my affairs: or the loan may be for the commos
advantage both of borrower and lender; as if a partner lends lis
horse to his copartner, to go and look after the common concer
of the company”


XU


571. The Precarious Loan ends by the Death of the Lender.—
A precarious loan is at an end by the death of the lender, bud
is not so with the ordinary loan of things; for the precarious


TIT. V. SEC. 11.] LOAN OF THINGS. 293


may add what other covenants they please; and we must apply
to this contract the other general rules of covenants.°


XV.


573. The Engagements of the Loan pass to the Heirs, or Exec-
stors.— The engagements which are formed by the loan pass to
the heirs or executors of the lender, and of the borrower.4


SECTION II.
THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE BORROWER.


Art. I.


574. Engagements of the Borrower.— The engagements which
he is under who borrows a thing are, to take care of it,* to use it
according to the intention of the lender,” and to restore it® at the
time appointed,‘ and’in good case® ‘These several engagements
shall be explained by the rules which follow.


IL


575. What Care the Borrower is obliged to take. — He who has
borrowed a thing for his own use is obliged to take care of it, not
only as he takes care of what is his own, if he is not careful
enough of his own concerns, but with all the exactness that is
usually observed by the most diligent persons; and he is to answer
for all the loss and damage that may happen for want of sucha
due care.£ For seeing he has the free and gratuitous use of that


P See the third article of the second section, the first article of the third section, and
the first article of the fourth section of Covenants. V. 1.1, § 2, et l. 2, D. commod.

@ L. 3, § 3, D. commod. ; — 1.17, § 2, eod. Sce, touching the engagement of the heir or
executor, the twelfth article of the third section of Deposit.

® LT. 18, D. commod.

b ©. 17, § 3, D. commod.

© § 2, Inst. quid. mod. re contr. obl.; — 1.1, § 3, D. de obl. a act

4 L. 17, § 3, D. commod.

e FT. 3, § 1, D. commod.

f 7,. 18, D. commod.;—l. 1, § 4, D. de obl. et act. ; —§ 2, Inst. quibus mod. re contr. obl. ;
—l.5,§ 5, D. commod. See the fourth article of the third section of Deposit, and the
third article of the eighth section of Letting and Hiring.

There is this difference in the Roman law, between the ordinary loan of things to be
restored in specie, and a precarious loan, as to the care that is to be taken by the borrow-
er, that, in the precarious loan, hc who possesses precariously the thing belonging to
another is accountable only for what he does fraudulently, and for the faults which come

95 *


294 THE CIVIL LAW. [PakT L BOOK L


which is lent him, he ought to preserve it with all the circumspec-
tion that is possible to be used by the most careful persons.


TIL


576. What Care he ts obliged to, who borrows the Thing for the
Master's Behoof.— If the thing has been lent only for the interest
of the lender, he who has borrowed it on this account will not be
bound to take the same care of it as if he had borrowed it for his
own proper use. But he shall be bound only for what may hap-
pen through his knavery,§ or through any gross fault, that is next
door to fraud. For it would not be reasonable, that, to do service
to another, he should be obliged to such a strict care as to be ar-
swerable for the least neglect, or the smallest fault.


IV.


577. What Care he is obliged to, who borrows for the Lender's
Interest as well as his own.—If the thing has been lent for the
common interest both of lender and borrower; as if one partner
borrows the horse of his copartner, to go and look after any affair
in which the company is concerned, he shall answer for what falls
out, not only through his knavery, but through his neglect and
his want of care! For he borrows partly for his own interest, and
he receives a favor in a matter that concerns him.


V.


578. If the Contract regulates the Care that is to be taken —
If it has been agreed what care the borrower shall be obliged to


TIT. V. SEC. IL] LOAN OF THINGS. 295


borrowed only during the time and for the purpose for which it
was lent him, and the thing perishes, or is damaged, without his
fault, by the bare effect of some accident, or because of the nature
of the thing itself; he is not answerable for it; for no blame can
be laid at his door. And no covenant obliges naturally to answer
for these sorts of events, which are a bare effect of providence, and
which affect those who are the owners of the things to which the
loss happens.*


VIL


580. The Regard which the Borrower ought to have to the Thing
borrowed, more than to his own.— If the thing borrowed perishes
by an accident, against which the borrower might have guarded,
by employing his own thing, he shall be obliged to make it good:
for he ought not to have used it, except for want of his own.
And it would be the same thing, if in a fire he had let the thing
he borrowed perish, that he might save his own.


VIIL


e
581. The Borrower may take upon himself all Accidents. — If, in
view of some danger that was to be feared, it was agreed that the
borrower should be accountable for all accidents, he shall be bound
to make good the damage that happens thereby.° For it was in
his power not to tie himself up to this condition, and it is he him-
self who has put the thing in danger.


= L. 5, § 4, D. commod. ;—l1.1, C. eod. ; —1. 23, in f. D. de reg. jur. ; —1. ult. D. commod. ;
—l. 18, D. commod. ; —v. |. 20, eod. ; —1. 2, § 7, D. de adm. rer. ad civit. pert. ;— 1.19, D.
commod. See the sixth article of the second section of Proxies, and the twelfth article of
the fourth section of Partnership.

We may take notice, upon this article, of the distinction which is made by the divine
law, between the case where the thing borrowed perishes in the absence of the owner, and
where it perishes in his presence. In this last case, the loss falls upon the owner ; and in
the first, on the borrower. “If a man borrow aught of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or
die, the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good. But if the owner
thereof be with it, he shall not make it good.” Exod. xxii. 14,15. This distinction, is it
grounded on this, that the master, being present, sces that the borrower is not any ways
to blame for the loss of the thing; and that if the borrower were to be acquitted of the
loss which happens in the owner's absence, it would give occasion to borrowers to mis-
wse or neglect the things which they borrow, and even to pretend a loss which had not
happened ?

® 1. 5, § 4, D. commod.

° L.1, C. de commod. ;—1. 7, §15, D.de pact. ; —1. 5, § 2, D. commod. ; — v. l. 21, § 1, eod.
See the seventh article of the third section of Deposit.


296 THE CIVIL Law. [Pam t. BOOK L


IX.

582. Of the Thing lent and estimated.— If the thing lent is
estimated between the lender and borrower, in order to adjust
what the borrower shall restore; in case he do not restore the
thing itself, he shall be accountable for this value, although the
thing should perish by an accident? For he who lends in this
manner does it that he may secure to himself, in all events, the
recovery, either of the thing which he lends, or of the value, if the
thing perishes.


X.


583. If the Borrower puts the Thing to another Use than that for
which it was lent, he is accountable for Accidents. — If the thing
lent perishes by an accident, because the borrower put it to another
use than that for which it was lent him, he shall be bound to make


it good.!
XI.


e@

584. Penalty for misusing the Thing.— If the lender declares
for what use he lends the thing, and for what time, his intention
shall serve asarule. And if nothing of this is mentioned, the
borrower cannot employ the thing, but in the natural and ordinagy
use for which it is proper, and during the time that is necessary
for the occasion for which it was lent. And if he puts it to any
other use, contrary to the intention of the lender, or against hs
order, he commits a kind of theft: and he shall be bound to make |
good the losses and damages that happen thereupon!


TIT. V. SEO. MI.] LOAN OF THINGS. 207


XIII.
586. The Thing borrowed is not kept by Way of Compensation for
a Debi.— He who has borrowed a thing cannot keep it by way
of compensation for what the lender may be indebted to him.*


XIV.


587. Expense laid out for the Use of the Thing.— If, to make
use of the thing borrowed, it is necessary to be at some expense,
this falls to the share of the borrower."


SECTION III.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OP THE LENDER.


Art. L

588. He who has lent a Thing cannot take tt back till after the
Use.— He who has.lent a thing cannot take it back till it has
served the use for which it was lent. For it was free for him not
to have lent it; but having lent it, he is obliged, not only in com-
mon civility, but likewise by the effect of the contract, to suffer
the thing to be employed to that use ; for otherwise the loan, which
ought to be a kindness, would prove an occasion of cheating and
doing mischief*


IL.


089. How the Thing may be taken back, which is lent precari-
ously. — In the precarious loan, the lender may take back the thing
before the use for which it was lent is served; for he did not lend
it for a certain time; but, on the contrary, on condition that he
might take it back when he pleased. However, this is not to be
extended to an indiscreet liberty of taking back the thing without
any delay, and at an unseasonable time, which might occasion
damage to him who was using it; but such a time ought to be
allowed for restoring the thing as appears to be reasonable by the
circumstances.°


© C. wt. C. de commod.

* See the fourth article of the following section.

* £.17, § 8, D. commod. ; —d. § inf.

b L.1, § 2, D. de prec.

© £.10, § 3, D. de quast.; —I. 90, D. de reg. jur. ; —I. 183, eod.


298 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK |


TIL

590. Of the Defects of the Thing lent.— If the thing lent has
any defect which may be of prejudice to the borrower, and if this
defect was known to the lender, he shall be accountable for any
damage that shall happen thereby to the borrower. As if to hold
wine, or oil, he has lent vessels which he knew to be spoiled ; if to
prop up a building, he has lent timber which he knew to be rotten.
For we lend to do service, and not to do mischief.*


IV.


591. Expenses laid out on the Thing borrowed.— The expenses
which are necessary in order to make use of the thing borrowed,
such as the feeding and shoeing a horse that is lent, are due by the
borrower. But if there happen any other charges, such as for cur-
ing a horse of some hurt, which he received without any fault of
the borrower, the lender shall be bound to pay such expenses as
these, unless they are so very inconsiderable, that the benefit
which the borrower reaps from the use of the thing lent should
oblige him to defray them.®


TITLE VI.


OF THE LOAN OF MONEY, AND OTHER THINGS TO BE RESTORED
IN KIND; AND OF USURY.


TIT. v1.] LOAN OF MONEY. 290


another kind of covenant is necessary ; and this is the loan which
we shall discourse of under this title.

594. Two Characters of Things which are lent.—'To understand
aright the nature of this loan, it is necessary to consider in this
kind of things two characters, which distinguish them from all
others; and which are the foundation of some distinctions that
are necessary to be observed between this loan and the other con-
tracts of which we have spoken.

595. The first of these characters is, that we cannot use money,
corn, liquors, and other things of the like nature, but by ceasing to
have them. nd this is a natural effect of the providence of God,
who, designing man for labor, has made these kinds of things so
necessary to him, and has made them of such a nature, that they
cannot be had but by labor, and that we cease to have them as
soon as we use them; to the end that this want, which always re-
turns, may oblige man to a labor which lasts as long as his life.

596. The second character which distinguishes these things from
all others is, that whereas in other things it is very hard to find
many of the same kind, which are perfectly like to one another,
and which have the same value and the same qualities, we may
easily in things of this kind find many that are exactly the same,
both in value and in quality. Thus, all pistoles, all crowns, and all
other pieces of money, have the same alloy, the same weight, the
same stamp, the same value; and every one of them serves in-
stead of all others of the same kind; and we may likewise make
up the same sum in other species of coin. Thus we have grain
for grain, liquors for liquors, of the same quality, and of the same
measure, or of the same weight.

097. The Nature of this Kind of Loan, and the Characters which
distinguish it from the Loan of Things to be restored in Specie, and
from other Contracts. — These two characters of the things of this
kind are the foundations of the commerce which is made of them
by this sort of loan. For since we cannot have the use of them,
and restore the same things, as we might have of a suit of hang-
ings, a horse, or a book, we borrow them on condition to restore as
much of the same kind; which is easy to be performed, since it
depends wholly on counting, weighing, or measuring; and this is
the covenant which we distinguish by the name of a loan of things
to be restored in kind.

598. Thus we see that in our language the word Joan is com-
mon to the loan of money, and to the loan of a horse; and that


300 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L BOOK L


although they are two sorts of covenants, whose natures are dif
ferent, and which have also in the Latin tongue different names,
yet we give indifferently to the one and the other the name only
of loan; because both sorts have this in common, that the one
lends to the other, on condition to have the same thing restored to
him, if it be such as that the use. of it does not consume it, or to
receive another thing exactly like to what was lent, and which may
serve instead of it, if the thing lent was such that it could not be
used without being consumed or given away. But since, as has
been remarked in the foregoing title, we must not confound these
two kinds of covenants together, we have therefore thought proper
to distinguish them by different names.

599. It appears from this use of the loan, which shall be the
subject-matter of this title, what the nature of it is, and that it is
a contract in which the lender gives a thing, on condition that the
borrower shall restore to him, not the same thing in substance, but
as much of the same kind. So that it is essential to this contract,
that the thing lent should pass in such manner to the borrower, as
that he may become master of it, in order to have a right to con
sume it. And it is from this use of this kind of loan, that we may
discern what it has in common with sale, with exchange, with the
loan of things to be restored in specie, and with letting and hiring;
and what it is that distinguishes it from these other kinds of cove-
nants.

600. It is common to sale, and to the loan of things to be re
stored in kind, that the thing is alienated; but in a sale it is alex


ated for a price; and in a loan it is given on condition to mee |


TIT. VL] LOAN OF MONEY. 801


borrower is only to use the thing, and to restore it after he has
done with it; and in the loan of things to be restored in kind, the
borrower is allowed to consume the thing, and to give to the lender
another of the same kind and value. :

603. It is common to the contract of letting and hiring, and to
loan, that a thing is given to be used. But in letting and hiring
the use of the thing is granted for a hire, and on condition that
the same thing be restored ; whereas, in this kind of loan, the use
of the thing is granted without any other charge than that of re-
storing as much of the same kind.

604. It is common to these five sorts of covenants, that the par-
ties covenanting do there treat of the things, only with a view to
the use which may be made of them; but they treat about this
use of the things in a very different manner. One way, which is
proper to the loan of things to be restored in specie, and to let-
ting and hiring, is where the contractors treat only of the bare
use, and not of the property of the things; for in these. contracts
there is no alienation of the thing. The other way, which is pecu-
liar to sale, to exchange, and to the loan of things to be restored
in kind, is where the parties treat only of the bare property of the
things, and where they are alienated without any regard to the
use which shall be made of them, and in such a manner, that, al-
though the thing should perish as soon as the contract is accom-
plished, and before it were possible for him who receives the thing
to make any use of it, yet the contract would remain entire.
Whereas the loan of things that are to be restored in specie and
the contract of letting and hiring do not subsist, if the thing per-
ishes before he who receives it has been able to use it; and the
‘contract vanishes, if the thing perish. From whence it follows,
that he who has taken a thing by sale, by exchange, or by a loan,
which obliges him to restore it in kind, is become proprietor of the
thing ; and that when he uses it, it is his own thing that he uses.
But in the loan of things to be restored in specie, and in letting
and hiring, it is another man’s thing that is used by the borrower
and by the hirer.

605. Use of the Remarks which have been made.— We have
made here all these remarks on the different natures of the things
which are lent, either by a loan which obliges to make restitution
in specie, or by a loan which obliges to a restitution in kind;
upon the characters that are common to loan, and to other kinds
of covenants, and upon those which distinguish them ; in order to

VOL. I. 26


302 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pam 1. BOOK 1.


lay the foundations of the rules of loan, which shall be explained
in this title.

606. And these remarks will likewise serve, together with others
that shall be made hereafter, to discover what are the causes which
render it unlawful to take interest for money lent; and why this
interest, which is otherwise called usury, and which was suffered
by the Roman law, is so little countenanced with us, that our laws
punish usury as a very great crime. We give the name usury to
every thing that the creditor, who has lent either money or pro
visions, or other things which are consumed by use, may receive
over and above the value of the money or other thing which he
lent.

607. Of Usury, and the Causes which render it naturally wnlaw-
ful. — Although this matter of usury, being otherwise regulated by
our laws than by the Roman law, be without the bounds of the
design of this work; yet seeing it is an essential part of this kind
of loan we are now treating of, and that the knowledge of it is of
most frequent and necessary use, and that it hath its principles in
the law of nature, we thought it not proper to omit it in this title
of loan. But to keep to the method which we proposed, not to
insert in the detail of the rules any others than such as are both
agreeable to the Roman law, and to our usage, we shall blead
what relates to usury with the particular rules of loan; and we
shall mention here, at the head of this title, all that we shall think
fit to say on this subject.

608. To establish the principles upon which we are to judge
whether the interest of money lent be lawful or not, we need 5


TIP. Vi.) LOAN OF MONEY. 303


consider what the nature of this contract of loan is, in order to
judge whether it be just to take interest for it or not. And we
shall easily perceive by the natural principles of the use which
God has given to this contract in the society of men, that usury is
a crime which violates these principles, and undermines the very
foundations of the order of society.

609. The two ways of lending, whether it be that of the loan
of things to be restored in specie, which has been treated of under
the foregoing title, or the loan of things to be restored in kind,
which is athe subject of this title, derive their origin, as all the
other covenants, from the order of society; and they are natural
and essential to it. For it is essential to this order, where men
are linked together by mutual love, and where every one has for a
rale of the love which he owes to his neighbour that which he has
for himself, that there should be ways whereby men may assist
one another gratuitously, both with things and with their persons.
And as there are covenants established for such commerces be-
tween them as are not gratuitous, so there ought also to be for
such as are. Thus, seeing men may traffic with one another about
the property and use of things, there are therefore covenants
established for the said traffic; such as sale, exchange, and letting
and hiring; which makes it to be of the nature of these cove-
nants not to be free and gratuitous. Thus, seeing men may com-
municate to one another freely, and without any reward, both the
property and use of things, there are therefore covenants by which
they may acquire things in this manner, the nature of which is, for
this reason, that they should be gratuitous, such as donation, and
the loan of things to be restored in specie.®

610. It is therefore certain, that there are two ways by which

people may communicate to one another the use of things. One
is gratuitous, and the other for a recompense, in such things where
this commerce may be lawful. Thus, the owner of a horse may
either let him out for a hire, or the price of the service which
the said horse may render ; or he may lend the use of him gratui-
ously, and without any reward. And these two sorts of covenants
have their nature and characters different, which ought not to be
confounded together.

611. It remains, therefore, in order to know whether we may

take interest for the loan of money, or not, that we examine


© § 2, Inst. quibus mod. re contr. obl.


304 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT I. BOOK L


whether, as there are two ways of giving the use of a horse, of a
house, a suit of hangings, and other things of the like nature, one
by the loan of things to be restored in specie, and without any
recompense, and the other by letting it to hire for a certain price,
and both the one and the other honest and lawful, there be like
wise two ways of giving money, corn, liquors, and the other things
of the like kind; one by a free gratuitous loan, and the other by
letting them out for hire, or a gainfulloan. So that, as it is indif-
ferently just and natural that he who gives his horse should have
his choice of saying that he either lends it, or that he lets it out,
it may be likewise equally natural and just for him who gives his
money, his corn, his oil, his wine, to have it in his choice to say
that he lends it out upon interest, or without interest.

612. This is, without doubt, the point in question, which depends
on the knowledge of the causes which justify the will of him,
who, instead of lending his horse, will only let him out for a cer
tain profit; and on the inquiry whether there be also causes which
justify the will of him who will not lend his money, or his pro
visions, but on condition that he shall have interest for them
And in order to judge of this parallel, we must consider what it is
that passes in the contract of letting and hiring, and likewise see
what passes in the loan of money, or provisions.

613. In the hiring of a horse, a house, and other things, he who
lets it out may justly stipulate the price of the service and use
which he who hires the thing may reap from it, whilst he whos
the owner of it ceases to enjoy it, and to make use of it; and he
likewise has for a title to justify him in so doing, that sort of


TIT. VI-] LOAN OF MONEY. 305


the produce of his labor, or the service of his horse, to dwell in
his house, to reap the fruits of his lands, or to have the benefit of
the other uses that may be made of the thing that is let out to
hire. But although this agreement seems to be a just title for
taking a salary, a hire, or other revenue, yet it would not be suf-
ficient to justify the profit that is made by letting to hire, if it
were not attended with the other characters that are essential to
this contract, and which are such, that, if they were wanting, the
covenant, for the profit to be made thereby, would be unjust. So
that, although it were true that one might make such a stipula-
tion for the interest of money, or provisions, in consideration of
the advantage which the borrower might make of them, which
cannot be, as shall be shown hereafter; yet the want of these
other characters which are necessary to justify the profit that is
made by letting and hiring would render the interest of money
unlawful. And in order to judge of it, we are only to consider
what those characters are which are to be found in letting and
hiring, and not in a loan, and without which even the profit that
is made by letting to hire would be unlawful.

617. In letting and hiring, it is necessary that he who hires the
thing should be at liberty to make use of it, and enjoy it, accord-
ing to the quality of the agreement; and if he were hindered from
doing so by an accident, he would be discharged from the rent or
hire. But in a loan, the borrower remains bound, whether he
uses the thing that he has borrowed, or is hindered by some acci-
dent from using it.

618. In letting and hiring, the person who hires the thing is
obliged only to restore the same thing which he has hired; and if
it perishes in his hands by any accident, he is not answerable for
it, and is not obliged to restore any thing. But in a loan of this
kind, the borrower is obliged to restore the same sum, or the same
quantity, which he had borrowed, although he should at the same
time lose it by an accident.

619. In letting and hiring, the diminution, be it sensible or in-
sensible, which happens to the thing that is let, by the use which
is made of it by the person who has hired it, falls upon the owner,
who had let it out. But in a loan of this kind, the lender suffers
no diminution, nor bears any loss.

620. In letting and hiring, the lessee uses that which belongs to
another ; for he who lets a thing remains master of it; and if he
were not, he would have no right to take a rent, or hire, for the

26 &


306 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK I.


use of it. But in this kind of loan, the borrower becomes master
of the thing that is lent him; and if he were not, he could not
use it. So that when he makes use of it, it is his own thing that
he uses ; and the lender has no longer any right to it.

621. We see, by this parallel of the characters which distinguish
the contract of letting and hiring from that of loan, what are in
the contract of letting and hiring the natural causes which justify
the profit which he makes who lets out his labor, his lands, or any
other thing; and that, to render the rent or hire thereof lawful, it
is necessary that he who lets out a thing should retain the prop-
erty of it, and that he remaining master of the thing should bear
the loss or diminution of it, if it perishes, or is diminished. And
he must, moreover, warrant the enjoyment and use of the thing to
him who hires it, and if this enjoyment should be interrupted, and
cease, even although it were by an accident, he could not demand
the rent or hire. Which makes the condition of the lessee such,
that he is sure of enjoying the thing of another person, without
being in danger of paying any thing for it if he does not enjoy it,
and without the hazard of losing the thing if it perishes.

622. These are the natural foundations which render these sorts
of commerce lawful, where onc puts a thing into the hands of
another person, for some gain or profit that accrues to both. And
we see, on the contrary, that he who lends money, or provisions,
upon interest, does not ascertain any profit to the borrower, and
yet, nevertheless, secures to himself a certain gain; that he does
not so much as warrant the usc of the thing which he gives; and
that, on the contrary, although the thing which he lends should


TIT. VI.] LOAN OF MONEY. $07


principles of the nature of covenants, and which are the founda-
tion of the justice of the profits that are made by all these sorts
of commerce. So that it is not strange that usury should be
looked on as so odious and so criminal a practice, and that it
should be so rigorously condemned, both by divine and human
laws, and so severely repressed, both by our religion and civil
policy.

624. It would not be necessary, after these proofs of the iniquity
of usury, to answer the objections that are brought by usurers, |
seeing it cannot be doubted that an unlawful commerce cannot be
tolerated on any pretext whatsoever. And, besides, the law allows
of none, and condemns all usury without distinction, and without
having any regard to all the motives that are made use of to jus-
tify it, and to excuse it. But because the pretexts for usury, how-
ever unjust they may be, have this effect, that those who make
use of them pretend that the general rule prohibiting usury
admits of the exceptions which they would make to it, it is neces-
sary to show, by the answers to these objections, and to these
pretexts, that this rule admits of no exception whatsoever.

625. First Pretext of Usurers, that they do a Kindness. — All the
pretexts of usurers centre in this, to say that they do a kindness;
that they deprive themselves of the gain which they might make
of their money, or other things which they may lend; and even
that the loan occasions them loss. And, in fine, that the borrower
makes profit by it, or reaps some other advantage from it.

626. Answer. — It is true, that to lend is to do a kindness, and
this is the natural and essential character of the contract of loan.
But it is for this very reason that we can lend only gratuitously,
in the same manner as we can only make a gift, or bestow alms,
without any recompense. And it would be very strange, that, by
means of a contract, the essential use of which is to do a kind-
ness, we should make merchandise of that very kindness. As,
therefore, it would be against all order for him who makes a free
gift, or bestows alms, to sell that favor which he does by giving;
and it would not be any longer either a gift, or any alms;
it is likewise contrary to order, that he who lends should sell his
kindness. For, in a word, it is so essential to all manner of kind-
ness that it should be gratuitous, that even in the covenants where
one may lawfully receive a profit for doing a kindness, it cannot
be the kindness itself which is turned into commerce. But every
profit has some other cause. Thus, he who lets his house to one


308 THE CIVIL Law. [PART I. BOOK L


who cannot find another does him a kindness; but he shall not
for this reason be at liberty to take from this tenant, whom he is
willing to oblige, a greater rent than he would take from one
whom he did no ways intend to oblige by letting it; otherwise it
might be said, that we may sell dearer to a friend than to a
stranger, seeing we should sell to him with the circumstance of
having a mind to oblige him, which we should not have in our
thoughts if we sold to a stranger.
_ 627. We cannot, therefore, make use of the pretext of doing s
pleasure to excuse usury, but as a blind, and with intention to
overthrow the order of the first laws, which enjoin us to do good
only because they require us to love; and which do not suffer us
to sell that love which they command every one to have in his
heart towards his neighbour.

628. This truth, that a kindness cannot be bought and sold,
is so natural, that by the Roman law, which allowed of usury, as
shall be shown hereafter, a debtor could not even compensate with
the interest which he owed a good office done to his creditor.
And we have a remarkable instance of it in one of the laws of the
Pandects,‘ where it is said, that, if one who is indebted in a sum
of money, which of its own nature produces no interest, under
takes the management of the affairs of his creditor, in his absence,
and without his knowledge, he is obliged to pay the interest of
that sum, after the term of payment is expired, without any de-
mand. And the good office which he renders is so far from being
reckoned a compensation for that interest, that it is laid down as
a rule in that law, that every good office which the debtor renders


TIT. VL] LOAN OF MONEY. 309


629. Second and Third Pretext, Loss, or Want of Gain.—
Azswer. — All the consequence, then, which the creditor who
lends his money with this view can draw from this good intention
of his to do a kindness is, that he ought to lend it gratis; and if
the loan is not agreeable to him with this condition, which is in-
separable from it, he has nothing to do but to keep his money, or
put it to some other use. And he will not have reason to com-
plain, either that the loan deprives him of a gain, or that it oc-
casions him any loss. And this may serve as an answer to the
objection made by those who say that by lending they cease
to gain, or that they even lose, seeing they are at liberty not to
lend ; seeing the contract of loan was not invented for the benefit
of those who lend, but for the convenience of those who borrow ;
and, in fine, that people may lay out their money in purchasing
annuities, or employ it some other way besides that of lending it
on interest ; which can never become innocent under any pretext
whatsoever, seeing there is none but what God has foreseen, and
which his express prohibition of usury shows to be unwarrantable.
Thus, we see that both the church and the state have prohibited
usury by so many laws, not as a bare injustice, but as a great
crime. For the councils and the canons do so severely repress
usury, that they condemn, even as heretics, those who stand up in
defence of it;! because that in effect it is an error against the
spirit and first principles of the law of God. And the ordinances
punish it so severely, that the penalty of usury in France is,
for the first offence, an ignominious fine (which is called Pamende
honorable) and banishment, and for the second offence, death.
And by that law the usurer is to be hanged, although he should
allege in his defence that by lending his money he ceased to
gain, or that even he sustained some loss or damage thereby.

630. Fourth Pretext, the Profit of the Borrower.— Answer. —
The pretext of the profit which the borrower may make of the
money which he borrows, is of no greater consideration in the
eye of the law, than the other pretexts before mentioned; and it
likewise is nothing else but an illusion; seeing this profit, if any
were to be made by the borrower, could not be a sufficient title to
justify the lender’s taking interest. For it is the rule touching
future profits, that, to be entitled to a share of them, one ought to


' Can. 1, 4, 5, D. 47, toto tit. de usur. ;— Clem. de usur.
| Ordinance of Blois, art. 202.


310 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK 1


ran a hazard of the losses which may happen, instead of the profits
which were hoped for. And the condition of being entitled to a
share of a future gain implies that of not profiting, unless there
be gain made, and even of losing, in case any loss does happen.”
One cannot, therefore, without breach of humanity, nor even with-
out a crime, discharge himself froin the loss, and ascertain to him-
self a gain. To which we must add what has been said touching
the causes which justify the taking of profit.

631. Iniquity of Usury. — There remains, then, no other title for
the justification of usury, besides the covetousness of the lender,
and the necessity of the borrower. And it is likewise the combi-
nation of these two different kinds of evils which has been the
occasion and the source of the commerce of usurers. So that
whereas the divine providence forms the conjuncture which brings
the person who is in want near to him who is able to relieve him,
that the sight of the necessity of the one may dispose the other to
exercise his charity or humanity," the usurer makes of this con-
juncture a snare ; according to the Scripture phrase, he lies in wait,
to make a prey of those who fall into it.°

632. Bad Consequences of Usury.— We shall not dwell upon
the other characters of the iniquity that is to be found in usury,
such as idleness,” which it leads the usurer into, by reason of the
facility of making profit without industry, without hazard, and
without trouble; the liberty which the lender has to take his
interest immediately, and to demand his principal whenever he
pleases; and the slavery? into which usury brings the debtor,
under the burden of paying always to no purpose, and of seeing


TIT. vi.] LOAN OF MONEY. 311


society, raises troubles and disorders in it; and troubles of such
dangerous consequence, that we know that at Rome usury was
the occasion of many seditions;™ and it is upon this account
that our laws have extended the punishment of usurers even to
death.

633. Prohibitions of Usury in the Law and the Prophets.—
Usury forbidden at Rome.— These several evils which are occa-
sioned by usury, and the characters of inquity which are dis-
covered in it by the principles of the law of nature, are just
causes of the prohibition of it by the law of God.* And we
cannot doubt of usury’s being a great crime, when the prophets
call it an abomination, and place it in the same rank with idola-
try, adultery, and other great crimes. Which plainly shows, that
usury is contrary to the spirit of the law of nature. For if there
were no greater difference between lending one’s money without
interest, or upon interest, than there is between lending a horse
and letting him to hire, it would be impious and absurd to
imagine that the law of God, which does not forbid the taking
hire for a thing that is let out, should have forbidden the taking
interest for money lent, and should have placed it in the number
of the most enormous crimes. So that it must necessarily be,
that the law of nature, which is not transgressed by letting and
hiring, is so by usury: and it is so in reality in all the several ways
that have been mentioned, and which render usury so contrary to
humanity, and give it a character of iniquity so naturally sensible,
that it has made it odious even to those nations which were
ignorant of the first laws:" for it was prohibited at Rome in the
first ages of the commonwealth, and long before the gospel was
known there; and it was even more rigorously prohibited than
theft. Since, whereas the punishment of theft was only the double
of the thing stolen, that of usury was the quadruple.* Thus usury
was looked upon among the Romans as a very pernicious crime;
and thus we likewise see that an eminent Roman, being one day
asked what he thought of usury, made no other answer to the
person who asked him the question, than by asking him again


' Sane vetus urbi fanebre malum ; et seditionum, discordiaruamque creberrima causa.
Tacit. 6 Annal. Anno Urbis 786.

° Lev. xxv. 35, 36, 37; — Deut. xxiii. 19, 20;— 2 Esdr. v. 7.

t Peal. xv. 1, 6;— Ezek. xviii. 8,9, 11, 12,13; v.175 xxii. 12.

" Cic. lib. 1, de Offic.

% Marc. Cato de Re Rust. ; — Tucitus 6 Annalium, Anno Urbis 786.


312 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


what he thought of murder’ And the author who has taken
notice of this answer has said, in another place, that usury kills’
We know, likewise, that another author of greater antiquity, im
raillery, makes one who wanted money to say, that, if he could
not get any to borrow, he would take some upon interest; to
show that it is contrary to the nature of loan to take interest
for it.*

634. Objection from the Liberty granted to the Jews to lend upon
Usury to other Nations. — It may be objected by some, as to the
prohibitions of usury by the law of God, that they were made
only for the Jews among themselves, but that they were at liberty
to lend upon usury to strangers;> and that usury is not expressly
prohibited by the gospel; in order to infer from thence, that itis
not unlawful by the law of nature: and it may be likewise imag
ined, with respect to that ancient law among the Romans, that it
was afterwards abolished, and that usury was afterwards per
mitted at Rome, as appears both from the digest and the code.
And it will not be amiss to give an answer to these last diff-
culties, for the satisfaction of those who may not so readily per
ceive the answers to them, although they be easy to be under
stood.

635. Answer.—It is true, that the law of God, which forbade
usury to the Jews, allowed them to lend upon usury to strangem.
But we must not divide the law against itself; and this liberty
cannot change the idea which God gives us of usury, both in the
law itself, and likewise by the prophets. For seeing they tell us
that usury is an abomination, it is necessary that this truth should —


TIT. Vi] LOAN OF MONEY. 813


nations, whom they were commanded to look upon as enemies,
whom they were to destroy without mercy,* for fear lest those
who composed the elect people should cease to look upon those
strangers as enemies to God and them, and should enter into such
ties and engagements with them, as to be drawn over to their
idolatry and their other crimes.

637. The bare reflection on this first truth is sufficient to war-
rant our drawing this inference from it, that the liberty under the
old law of lending upon usury to strangers, joined with the pro-
hibition of usury among the Jews themselves, proves nothing else
but a divine dispensation to take usury from those nations whom
they were to consider as enemies, and to exterminate from off the
earth; and that this liberty was of the same nature and character
with the command that was given to the same people, when they
went out of Egypt, to borrow and carry away with them the
most precious movables of the Egyptians‘ And as this com-
mandment does not prove that it is lawful to steal, and does not
hinder theft from being a crime contrary to the law of nature, so
the liberty of taking usury in the like circumstances does not
prove that usury is not such as God describes it, both in
his written law, and by the law which he has engraven on
the mind of man, and which the heathens themselves were not
ignorant of.

638. The other truth which is to be observed is, that the divine
law was given to a stiff-necked and ignorant people,f and who,
because of their stubbornness, were indulged by the same law in
some things which were prohibited enough by the law of nature.
Thus, for example, that written law tolerated divorce, and per-
mitted it,> although contrary to the law of nature, and to that
strict union which God himself has formed between the husband
and wife ; and of which it is said, that it is not lawful for man to
put them asunder.! And as the permission of divorce under the
ancient law would be a very false principle to justify it now-a-
days, so likewise that which was given to the Jews to lend upon
usury to strangers cannot be looked upon by us as a rule since
the publication of the gospel. For in the same manner as no-
body doubts now that divorce is unlawful, and that it is a truth,


4 Dest. vii. 2.

© Exod. xxiii. 24, 33 ; — Deut. vii. 4; —1 Kings xi. 2; — Exod. xxxiv. 13.
f Erod. xi. 2, and xii. 85. & Exod. xxxii. 9; — Deut. ix. 6.
b Deut. xxiv. 1. i Matt. xix. 5,8; — Gen. ii. 23.


VOL. I. 27


314 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


and a rule both of the law of nature and the revealed law of God,
that marriage is indissoluble; so likewise we can no more doubt
but that usury is a crime against the law of nature, and against
the law of God; and that the toleration of usury with regard to
strangers is abolished by the gospel, as well as the permission of
divorce; seeing it is certain under the new law, by which trath is
unveiled, and divested of the types and figures of the old law;
that there are now no people rejected, or distinguished in the
sight of God;™ that the Samaritan is become neighbour to the
Jew ;" and that now there is no distinction of Jew and Greek, nor
of other stranger, seeing they are all of them called to the new
law, and are united to it under the obedience of their common
Lord.° So that the liberty to lend upon usury to strangers cannot
subsist for those to whom nobody is any more a stranger, and
who are commanded to look upon all men, of what nation soever,
without distinction, as their brethren. And we may likewise add
to these truths, that even before the gospel the prophets who pre
pared the minds of the people to receive the new law condemned
usury, without distinguishing between brothers and strangers, as
appears from the passages that have been quoted.

639. Another Objection that the Gospel has not forbidden Usury.
— Answer.— As to the gospel, it is said that usury is not there
prohibited, because in one place where our Saviour Jesus Christ
hath spoken of loan, he has not there in express terms forbidden
the taking of interest; but has only said, that we must lend with
out hopes even of receiving back what we have lent.» The com
sequence would be much better and more natura] to conclude


TIT. VI.] LOAN OF MONEY. 316


had prohibited as a very great crime, and one of those that are
most contrary to charity.

640. If it be therefore true, that we dare not so much as have
a thought that Jesus Christ has said any thing contrary to truth,
we must acknowledge that this saying alone, that he is come to
perfect the law, implies the prohibition of usury as much as that
prohibition is contained in all those most holy and refined pre-
cepts which he has given us, in order to dissuade us from setting
our affections on earthly things. And we cannot be of opinion
that he has permitted the great liberty of usury, without being
guilty of an impiety which comes very near to blasphemy. For it
is nothing less than blasphemy against the divine sanctity of Jesus
Christ to say, that he who is come to give the law its perfection
has been more indulgent in the matter of usury than was even
that law which he came to perfect; and that that divine lawgiver,
of whom it had been foretold, that he would deliver his people
both from usury and all other iniquity,’ and that he was to wean
men from setting their affections on the things of this world,
should countenance covetousness to that excess, as to suffer a
commerce which the old law and the prophets had condemned as
a most heinous crime, and which is so directly opposite to the
principles of his gospel.

641. Another Objection.— Liberty of Usury under the Roman
Law. — Answer. — As to the liberty of taking usury granted by
the Roman law, that is an authority which can no ways counter-
balance that of the law of God, nor that of the councils, and the
ordinances of our kings, which condemn usury and punish it.
But we may say, moreover, that this liberty of usury mentioned in
the books of the Roman law is no other than a relaxation of
the prohibitions that had been made of it, as has been already
observed. So that what we see concerning usury in those books
is no more than a condescension to an evil, which had got the
better of all the remedies used to prevent it, and an abuse which
passed for a just title, and which went even to that excess, that we
see in one of the laws of the digest,’ that it was a lawful cove-

nant to stipulate, not only interest from the time of the loan to

the time of payment, but even to stipulate over and above a

larger interest, if the debtor should fail to pay at the time ap-

pointed,


T Peal. \xxii. 14. * DT. 12, D. de usur.


316 THE CIVIL LAW. [PakT I. BOOK t


642. But we may say, further, that this liberty of usury under
the Roman law was unjust, even according to the principles of
those very lawyers who did justify it. For we see in a law that
is taken from one of the most eminent among them, that the gain
made by usury is not natural. Usura non natura pervenit, sed jere
percipitur. L.62, D. de ret vind. Usura pecunia, quam percipiams,
in fructu non est: quia non ex ipso corpore, sed ex alia causé est, id
est, nova obligatione. L.121, D. de verb. signif. And what is added
in the law 62, D. de ret vind., that usury which is not a natural
profit is exacted by virtue of a right, does not signify that #
was due by any law; but that right was a stipulation which they
thought sufficient to justify their taking of usury, although they
themselves were of opinion that a bare paction was not sufficient
for that purpose. Which plainly shows, that they knew of 20
other title to warrant their taking of usury, besides the formality
of a stipulation. As if usury, which they knew to be naturally
unlawful, and such as could not even be demanded by virtue df
any paction, were become lawful by the bare pronunciation of the
words which made the stipulation.

643. Usury unlawful without Exception. — All these proofs, which
show that usury is not only unlawful, but that it is a crime, do
likewise sufficiently evince, that there is no case wherein it is law
ful; and that every covenant, or commerce, whereby interest is
taken for a loan, whatever pretext is made use of to color it,
a criminal usury, most piously condemned by the law of God,
and that of the church, and most justly punished by the ord-
nances.


TIT. Vi. SEC. 1] LOAN OF MONEY. 317


stead of interest, lands to be enjoyed till the payment of the debt,
although the revenue of the said lands might be of much greater
value than the interest of the money lent.*

645. Interest lawful after the Term, and a Judicial Demand of tt.
— It is not necessary to acquaint the reader, that under the prohi-
bitions of usury we are not to take in the cases where, the borrower
not paying at the time appointed, the creditor demands payment
of his money judicially, with interest for the delay of payment
after the demand. For then the lender not being any longer
obliged to grant a new delay, it is but just that he should have in-
terest to indemnify him for the loss he sustains by the injustice of
the debtor, who fails to pay at the time appointed. But this inter-
est hath nothing in it like to that which the creditor takes before
the demand, whether it be that the debtor consents to it volun-
tarily, or that the creditor exacts it otherwise.

616. Contracts in Relation to Annuities.— Neither is it necessary
to observe here, that we are not to comprehend under usury the
contracts in relation to annuities. For there is this essential dif-
ference between a loan and an annuity, that, whereas in a loan the
debtor may be compelled to pay the principal sum at the term, he
who owes an annuity may keep the principal as long as he pleases,
paying the annuity. And, moreover, the contract of an annuity is
a real sale, which he who takes the money on this score makes;
for he sells in effect a certain revenue out of his whole estate, in
consideration of a price.


SECTION I.


OF THE NATURE OF THE LOAN OF THINGS TO BE RESTORED IN
KIND.


Art. I.


647. Definition of this Kind of Loan.— The loan of things to
be restored in kind is a covenant by which one gives to another a
certain quantity of those kinds of things that are given by num-
ber, weight, or measure; such as money, corn, wine, and other
things of the like nature, on condition that, since one ceases to


* L.17, Cod. de usur.
ory 6


318 THE OIVIL LAW. [Part 1. BOOK L


have such things in his possession whenever he uses them, the
borrower shall restore, not the same individual thing he borrowed,
but as much of the same kind, and of the like quality.


IL
648. The Thing ts alienated. — In this kind of loan, the thing
lent is alienated, and the borrower becomes proprietor of it; for
otherwise he would have no right to consume it.»


TIL.


649. Definition of Creditor and Debtor.— He who lends such
things as are consumed by use is called creditor, because of the
credit he gives to the promise of the person to whom he lends;
and he who borrows is called debtor, because he is bound to re
store the same sum, or the same quantity, which he has borrowed
But persons may likewise become debtor and creditor for other
causes besides that of loan; because there are other ways of being
indebted, as well as by borrowing. Thus, in a sale where the
price is payable at a certain term, the seller is creditor as to the
price, and the buyer is debtor of it. Thus, in letting and hiring,
the proprietor is creditor of the rent or hire, and the tenant s
debtor of it.


IV.
650. What Things may be lent in this Manner.— We may lead


in this manner of loan all things that are of such a nature that
they may be repaid in kind, in the same quantity, and of the


‘TIT. VI. SEC. 1] LOAN OF MONEY. 319


in quality, that the creditor cannot be compelled against his will
to take in payment one thing for another.


V.


651. Delivery necessary in the Loan to form the Engagement. —
In the contract of loan, the borrower obliging himself to restore a
sam of money, or a certain quantity, equal to what he has bor-
rowed ; this contract is of the number of those where the obliga-
tion is not formed but by the delivery of the thing for which the
borrower obliges himself.‘


VI


652. Why all Obligations are converted into that of Loan. —
Since money makes the price of all things that are vendible,
and it is often necessary to reduce into money the value of the
things which one owes to another, it is frequent and natural to
convert into an obligation of loan those which proceed from other
causes that are quite different. Thus, for example, when persons
make up their accounts of sums of money, or other things, with
which they supplied one another, when they agree their differ-
ences by transactions, and in other cases of the like nature, if he
who is found to be debtor by the balance of the account, by the
transaction, or by other causes, does not pay in ready money that
which he owes, he binds himself by an obligation of loan, be-
cause what he owes is estimated in money, and he becomes
debtor for it, in the same manner as if he had borrowed the sum
of money that is equivalent to the thing which he was to have
given.s


VIL


603. The Obligation of a Loan cannot exceed the Thing lent.—
The creditor may stipulate with the debtor for less than what he
has lent, but not for more. For he may give, but not take too
much. And if it should appear that an obligation were for a
greater sum than that which had been lent, it would be null as
to the overplus, that being without a cause.


*D.L 2, § 1, in f. D. de red. cred.

Inst. quib. mod. re contr. obl. See the ninth article of the first section of Covenants.

€L.42, D. de fidejuss. et mand. ;— I. 3, § 3, D. de senat. Maced.; —l. 5,418, D. de
triad. act.

‘L.11,§1, D. de red. cred. See the fifth article of the first section of Covenants.


320 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr ©. BOOK L


VIL

654. Of the Change of the Value of Money.—In the loan of
money, the debtor is obliged only to repay the same sum; and ifit
happens that after the loan the species rises in value, he is not
bound to pay the present value of the species which he received,
but only so much as they were worth when he borrowed them.
And if, on the contrary, the value of the species is diminished, the
debtor nevertheless is bound to pay the sum he borrowed!


IX.


655. Of the Change of the Value of Provtstons.— In the loan
of corn, wine, and other things of the like nature, whereof the
price rises or falls, the debtor owes the same quantity which he
has borrowed, and neither more nor less, whether the price be risen
or fallen! Unless it be that, in the case of augmentation of the
price, it should appear by the circumstances that the creditor had
made an usurious loan; as those do, for example, who in the time
of harvest lend their corn, which is then at a low price, that they
may receive the same quantity in another season, when it will be
dearer.


X.


656. A Loan in Appearance, which ts a Sale.—If one gives
money to receive corn, or other things of the like nature, or give
these kinds of things to receive money, it is not a loan, but a sak,
lawful or unlawful, according to the circumstances."


IT. Vi. SEO. H.] LOAN OF MONEY. 321


eep the price, as money lent; then in that case if the thing per-
thes by an accident before the sale, the loss will fall upon the
wnesx ; for it was for his own interest that he gave the thing.”


XIL


G58. Money deposited in Order to be lent.—If he who borrows
rith a design to purchase, or to lay out the money some other
ray, takes the money into his keeping, on condition that the loan
hall not be contracted till the purchase is made, or the money be
therwise employed, and it happens that the money is lost by
ome accident, this person with whom it was deposited will be an-
werable for it, in the same manner as if the loan were consum-
1ated, because it was for his behoof that the money was left with
im.°


SECTION II.
OP THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE LENDER.


Art. L


659. The Lender ought to be Owner of the Thing, that he may
ransfer the Property to the Borrower.— The first engagement of
me that lends things to be restored in kind is, that he be owner
of the thing which he lends, in order to transfer the same right to
the borrower. For people borrow these kinds of things for no other
end but to use them as their own, and to have the liberty of con-
suming them.*


II.


660. If the Thing lent belongs to a Third Person. — If the lend-
etis not owner of the thing which he lends, he does not convey
the property to the borrower. And if he who is the true owner of
the thing finds it in being, and claims it as his own, and proves his
nght to it, the borrower shall have his recourse against the lender,
and recover damages of him.»


"L.11, D. de reb. cred.; —1. 4, eod. See the following article.

*L. 4, D. de red. cred.

‘ L.2,§ 4, D. de reb. cred. ; — Inst. quib. mod. re contr. obl.;— d. 1.2, § 2, D. de reb. cred.
See the following article.

‘1.10, D. de red. cred. ; —v. 1. 13, init. ef §.1,e0d. See the sixth article of the tenth
“ction of the Contract of Sale.


322 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaBT £. BOOZ


Til.

661. Redhibition in Loan.— The second engagement of the
lender is, to give the thing such that it be fit for its use. For itis
for this use that it is borrowed. Thus, he ought to give money
that is neither counterfeited not cried down, and corn, or liquors,
that are not spoiled or sophisticated. And he is to warrant them
against all these defects, according to the rules explained in the
eleventh section of the Contract of Sale.°


IV.


662. The Lender can ask no more than what he has lent.— The
third engagement of the lender is, not to exact any thing either in
value or quantity over and above what he has lent.4


V.


663. Payment of a Part of the Debt which is not controverted.—
If the debtor of a sum of money, or of any other thing, contests
with some reason a part of the debt, and offers to pay the overplus,
the judge may oblige the creditor to receive payment of that pat
which is not controverted ; for the judge is bound in humanity,
and by virtue of his office, to lessen the occasions of lawsuits’


SECTION III.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE BORROWER.


?. Vi. SEO. I1t.] LOAN OF MONEY. 323


e incursion of an enemy, before the borrower could make use

it, he is nevertheless bound to restore as much; because he
as made master of it by the loan; and it is he that ought to
ar the loss.»


HL


666. Interest due after the Term, and legal Demand. — If he
ho has borrowed money fails to pay it at the term, he will be
‘and to pay interest from the time that a legal demand of it has
en made, that the creditor may be indemnified for the loss he
stains by the delay.


IV.


667. Payment of the Value of the Things lent.—If he who has
mrowed other things than money does not repay them at the
rm, or does not give them such as they ought to be, he shall pay
e value of them.‘


V.


668. Time and Place of the Estimation of Things lent.— The es-
mation of a thing lent, which the debtor delays to pay after the
rm, such as wine, corn, and other things, is made according to
ie price of that commodity at the time when and place where it
ught to be delivered, because it was due at that time, and in that
Nace. And if the time and place were not regulated by the cove-
iant, the estimation will be made according to the price which
the thing bears at the time and place where it is demanded. Un-
less it be that the circumstances of the case, and the presumptions
of the intention of the contractors, should require this estimation
to be regulated on another foot.


VI.


669. Payment in the same Quantity and Quality. — He who has
borowed corn, wine, or other things of the like nature, without
having them estimated at a certain price, which would make a
bale, ought to restore corn, wine, and the other things, not only in


* 42 Inst. quib. mod. re contr. obl. ; — 1.11, C. si cert. pet.

* L. 32, D. de usur. See the fifth article of the tirst section of the title of Interest.
"1. wh. D. de condict. tritic.

* L.22, D. de reb. cred.

' See the ninth article of the first section.


324 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT L 2008 |


the same quantity, but of the like quality with those which he had
received.s


VIL


670. Interest of the Value of the Thing lent.—If he who owes
these kinds of things does not pay them at the term, or ther
value, he will be liable for the interest of them on the foot of their
estimation, reckoning from the time that the creditor made a legal
demand of them.»


VIIL


671. Interest of Interest Unlawful.— The debtor by a contract
loan can never owe interest for the interest which he is in arrean
of to his creditor!


SECTION IV.


OF THE PROHIBITIONS TO LEND MONEY TO SONS LIVING UNDEE
THE PATERNAL JURISDICTION.


672. Causes of these Prohibitions.— The lending of money
sons who are still under the power and tuition of their fathers, be
ing to them an occasion of debauchery, is one of the pernicious
effects of usury. And it was by reason of the facility of borrow
ing money of usurers, that the corruption of the manners of the


T1¥, Vi. GEL. Iv.) LOAN OF MONEY. 825


to the quality of the use to which the son put the money which
he had borrowed.

673. But because the lending of money in general to sons that
are under the paternal jurisdiction is not unlawful in itself, and
becomes unjust only by the circumstances of the bad use to which
they put the money; the general prohibitions of lending money to
those who are under the tuition of their parents, not being part of
the law of nature, but only a positive law of the commonwealth
of Rome, have not the force of a law in France. And it is
not agreeable to the usage with us, to annul without distinction,
as that decree of the senate did, all the obligations of loan to sons
living under the power of their fathers, but only those where the
loan is an occasion of debauchery; and it depends on the pru-
dence of the judges to distinguish them according to their circum-
stances. The rules, therefore, which shall be laid down in this
section, are to be considered as principles of equity, which may
be applied by the judge according as he sees proper.

674. It is necessary to remark on this subject of lending money
to sons living under the jurisdiction of their fathers, that this reg-
ulation respects not only sons who are minors, for their minority
alone would be sufficient to annul the obligation ; but that it ex-
tends to those who, being of full age, are still under the paternal
jurisdiction, not having been emancipated. See the fifth and sixth
articles of the second section of the title of Persons.


Art.


670. In what Manner it ts forbidden to lend Money to Sons living
under the Paternal Jurisdiction.— Those who lend money to sons
living under their father’s jurisdiction, without a just cause, and
only to assist them in their debauchery, cannot demand what they
have lent in this manner.* And it would be the same thing, if, in-
stead of lending money, the lender had disguised the obligation
under the color of another contract, or lent other things than
money. And it is by the circumstances that we ought to judge
of the motive of the loan, and whether it ought to subsist, or be
annulled.@


*L.1, D. de senat. Maced.
* T.3.§ 8, D. de senat. Maced.
*L.7,§ 3.
i Touching the lawful causes of lending money to sons living under the paternal juris-
diction, see the said law 7, 44 18 and 14.
VOL. I. 28


326 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK 1.


IL

676. The Death of the Father does not validate the Loan made to
the Son. — The obligation of sons living under the paternal juris
diction, which is liable to be vacated by reason of the vice of the
motive of the loan, will not be validated by the death of the
father® For it was vicious in its origin, and it is not so much in
favor of the son that it is annulled, as out of hatred to the credi-
tor, who had made an unlawful loan‘


III.


677. It is not forbidden to lend Money to a Son that is emance
pated. — After the son is emancipated from the father’s jurisdiction,
these prohibitions cease, and his obligation subsists, without any
inquiry into the motives of the loan. And it would be the same
thing, if he who was not really emancipated did act so as to be
publicly reputed master of his own concerns.®


IV.
678. If the Obligation of the Son has been acquitted or approved.
— If the father has approved or ratified the obligation, if he pays
a part of it, or if the son acquits it himself, the obligation or the
; payment cannot afterwards be revoked.'!


7


1% Vil.) DEPOSIT. S27.


ause the things would not be safe in their custody, or for other
auses. And in all these cases care is taken of the things, by put-
mg them into the hands of persons whom the owners believe to
e honest, and who are willing to take charge of them. It is this
ovenant which is called a deposit.

680. The Consequence of the Fidelity of the Depositary. — See-
ig a deposit is made mostly in private, and without writing, and
; being a contract of frequent and necessary use, and the safety
f the thing deposited depending on the honesty of the person
rho takes charge of it;* so there is no engagement which more
articularly demands fidelity, than that of the depositary.

681. Sequestration. — The first kind of deposit is transacted
mly between two persons, the one who deposits the thing, and
he other who takes charge of it. But there is another sort of de-
osit, when, two or more persons being in dispute about the rights
f property or possession, which every one of them pretends to
ave in one and the same thing, they deposit it into the hands of
third person, who is called sequestraior, that he may keep it till
he controversy is decided, and then restore it to the person who
hall be declared to be the right owner. And the use of this
equestration is to prevent the mischiefs that would happen in
ase any of the parties should attempt by force to take possession
f the thing, and exclude the others. ‘Bhus, the effect of this
equestration is to preserve to every one of the persons that
gree to it the right which they have to the thing sequestrated, by
reserving the thing itself; and to deprive them all of the use of
his right, in so far as concerns the possession and enjoyment, lay-
ng up safely the fruits or other revenues, if the thing produces
ny, that they may be restored, together with the thing itself, to
the person who shall be found to be the true owner.

682. The sequestrator may be named either by the common
consent of the parties, when they all agree to it; or by the judge,
when the uncertainty of the true owner of a thing controverted,
and the necessity of committing it to the care and keeping of
somebody, oblige the judge to order the thing ta be sequestered
Pending the suit. And this is a judicial sequestration, which is
different from one made by consent of parties, that being a cove-
nant, and the other a regulation made by the judge.

683. The judicial sequestration does not come within the design


* Totum fidei ejus commissum. L. 1, D. depos.


328 THE CIVIL LAW. [paRT I. BOOK L


of this work, it being a part of the order that is observed in judicial
proceedings; but because the natural rules of sequestration by
consent of parties have for the most part their use in judicial
sequestrations, we may apply to them the rules of this title which
have any relation thereto.

684. Deposit of Things immovable.— Although the use of a
deposit might seem to be confined to things that are movable,
because of the origin of the word, which implies that the thing
deposited is to be moved from one place to another, and though
sequestration is chiefly used in things immovable; yet nevertheless
things that are movable may be sequestered, when the possession
is controverted, and things immovable may be committed to one’s
keeping, by way of deposit, when there is occasion for it; as those
persons do, who during their absence give their house, with all that
is in it, in keeping to a friend, with whom they leave the keys;
and the house itself is, as it were, deposited into the hands of the
person to whose care it is committed, whether he dwell in it or not

685. Wagers.— There is another sort of deposit in wagen,
when the wagerers deposit the bet in the hands of a third person
Thus people lay wagers, where the bet is to be given to the mos
skilful in some lawful exercise, such as fencing, wrestling, ranning,
and others; and this was the only kind of game where it was
lawful by the Roman law to play for money; and even at this,
the Romans were allowed to play but for a very small matter; the
wealthiest were not to exceed a shilling a time.>

686. Seeing this deposit of wagers has no other rules besides
those of other deposits, and the agreement of the wagerers, we


TIT. VIt. BEC. 2.) DEPOSIT. 328


care of them. And the Roman laws punished such as did not
restore things that were deposited on such dolefal occasions, by
obliging them to pay double the value.°

688. Since this deposit, although necessary, is always a kind of
agreement, either express or tacit, and obliges in the same man-
ner, and by the same rules, as other deposits, it shall likewise be
inserted in this title.

689. Deposit of Things distrained.— We do not set down
among the matters treated of under this title, the deposit of things
that are distrained from debtors, and which the magistrate com-
mits to the keeping of certain persons. For besides that this de-
posit is not a covenant, it is a part of the order of judicial pro-
seedings, and does not belong to the design of this work, although
many of the rules explained in this title may be applied to it.

690. Things deposited with Innkeepers. — There is likewise
another sort of deposit, of clothes and goods which travellers put
mto the hands of innkeepers, masters of ships, and carriers. But
eeing this deposit is only a consequence of the engagements of
those kinds of persons, who are accountable, not only for their own
proper deed, but also for that of their servants and agents, this
matter will come in more properly under the sixteenth title of
this book, where the engagements of such persons shall be con-
sidered.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF A DEPOSIT.


Art. I.
691. Definition of a Deposit.— A deposit is a covenant, by
which one person gives to another something to keep;* which he
is to restore whenever the depositor shall think fit to call for it.


II.


692. The Deposit ought to be gratuitous. — The deposit ought to
be gratuitous; for otherwise it would be a hiring and letting to
hire, where the depositary would let out his care.°


* L.1, §§1 et 4, D. depos. ; — § 17, Inst. de action. wa 5
* L.1, § 22, eod. ae 9
28°


330 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr I. BOOK L


JIL
693. Immovables may be deposited.— Although a deposit be
properly only of movables, yet immovables may be deposited, as
a house, or any other tenement, with the fruits arising from it


IV.


694. People may deposit the Goods of others; and a Thief may
deposit what he has stolen. — People may deposit, not only what is
their own, but likewise what belongs to others ; whether they came
_ by the possession of the thing honestly, as an agent, or factor; or

whether they came by it dishonestly. ‘Thus even thieves and
robbers may deposit what they have taken by theft or robbery.
For it is reasonable that the thing should be preserved, in order to
be restored to the true owner.


V


695. Restitution of the Thing to its Owner.— When one de
posits the goods of another man, the depositary is not obliged to
restore them to the person who deposited them, if the right owner
appears and claims his goods. Thus, if it is a thief that has de
posited what he stole, the fidelity required in a deposit does net
‘oblige the depositary any longer to the thief; but the knowledge
of the theft obliges him to restore the thing to its owner! But if
there is any doubt as to the right of the person who calls himself
owner, or if his right is disputed by the person who has deposited
the thing; the depositary becomes in that case a judicial depos


tary, and, as it were, a sequestrator. And he is to wait for the ~


rit. Vil. SEO. 1] . DEPOSIT. - 331


1onesty. And it is by the circumstances that we are to judge
whether the depositary ought to have restored it to another than
he owners


VIL


697. The Thing deposited may be taken back when the Master
aleases. — Since it is the nature of a deposit, that the things are
not deposited for the behoof of the depositary, as things are lent
lor the use of the borrower, but for the bare advantage of the de-
positor, he may take back the thing deposited whenever he
pleases ; even although the time of restitution were regulated by
the contract. For it depends on the owner to take back the thing
deposited whenever he pleases, provided he do not do it at an
onseasonable time, when the depositary cannot restore it, because
of some impediment which he is not to blame for.


VIIL


698. Of the Place where the Thing deposited ought to be restored.
— The deposit obliging the depositary only to the bare custody
of the thing, it is the nature of this contract that the thing de-
posited be restored in the place where it is kept; and the deposi-
tary is not obliged to transport it in order to deliver it, unless he
has knavishly removed it out of the place where he ought to have
kept it.!


IX.


699. The Produce of the Thing deposited is likewise compre-
hended in the Deposit.— The deposit extends not only to the thing
that has been deposited, but if the thing produces any fruits, or
other profits, whatever is the produce of it will likewise be com-
prehended in the deposit, and the depositary will be charged with
the produce, as well as with the thing itself that was deposited.
Thus, he who has undertaken the charge of a flock of sheep must
restore the wool and the lambs which they produce!


X.


700. Leave given to the Depositary to make Use of the Thing de-
posited. — If one deposits money, or any other thing, giving leave


6 1.11, D. depos. bh 7.1, §§ 45, 46, D. dep. ; —1. 1, § 22, D. eod.
i 7. 12, § 1, D. depos. 11, §§ 23 et 24, D. depos. ; —1. 38, § 10, D. de usur.


332 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


to the depositary to use it, and he makes no manner of use of it,
~ he shall be liable only to the engagements of a depositary, and
pursuant to the rules which shall be explained in the third section
But if he uses the thing deposited, his engagements changing its
nature, he shall be bound, either according to the rules of the loan
of things to be restored in specie, if it is a thing that is not de-
atroyed by its use, or according to the rules of the loan of things
to be restored in kind, if the thing is of such a nature that it
ceases to be in the borrower's possession as soon as he makes
use of it™


XI


701. If the Thing deposited belongs to several Persons. — If the
thing deposited belongs to several persons, whether it be that it
had several owners at the time that it was deposited, or that #
has passed to several cohcirs of the person who deposited it, the
depositary ought not to restore it but to all of them together, if it
is a thing that cannot be divided; or he ought to give to every
one his share, if the thing is divisible, such as a sum of money,
and all the partners are agreed as to their portions. And if
the thing deposited was sealed up, it shall not be opened, but ia
presence of all the owners, that it may be delivered to them all
together. But if any of them were absent, or if there was a dix
pute among those that were present, the depositary ought not #
restore the thing deposited, till security is given him that he shall
not be molested by any of the parties; or till he be judicially di
charged of his trust, by consigning the thing in court, according to _


TIT. Vel. GEC. 1. DEPOSIT. aS


the hands of the depositary, yet since that heir received only his
own portion by his diligence, before the insolvency of the deposi-
tary, or loss of the thing, the others ought to bear the loss of that
event, either as an effect of their own negligence, or as an accident
happening to them.
XTIL

703. If, the Thing deposited belonging to many Owners, it be
agreed that any one of them may call for itt.— If many persons
deposit the same thing, and it be agreed that one of them, or
every one of them alone, may take back the whole thing that is
deposited, the depositary will be discharged of his trust, by restor-
ing the thing to the person who had right singly to call for it.
And if it is not regulated to whom the thing deposited shall be
delivered, it shall be restored according to the rule explained in
the eleventh article?


XIV.


704. A Thing deposited with several Persons.-— If two or more
persons are become depositaries of one and the same thing, each
of them shall be bound for the restitution of the whole. For the
thing deposited is not restored, unless it be restored entire; and
they shall be answerable for one another in case of any fraud
committed by any one of them; neither will the action that is
brought against one of the depositaries take away the right of
suing afterwards all the others, until the whole thing is restored.9


XV.


705. If the Depositary uses the Thing deposited. —'The deposi-
tary who uses the thing deposited, against the owner’s will, com-
mits a sort of theft; and he will be liable for all the damages
which the owner suffers thereby.’


XVI.


706. A Thing deposited for the Behoof of the Depositary. — If
the thing is deposited for the behoof of the depositary, as if any
goods are left with him to be sold, that he may keep the price as
money lent; or if a sum of money is given him on condition that,


P LZ. 1, § 44, D. depos.
4 2.1, § 48, D. depos. ;—v. 1. 15, D. de tutela et rat. dist. ; — |. 22, D. depos.
¥ § 6, Inst. de obl. que ex del. nasc. ; —1. 8, C. depos.


334 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK 1.


if he meets with a purchase, he shall make use of the money; and
it happens that what was given him on that condition perishes
before it was used, this depositary shall be bound to make it good,
even although it perished by an accident* For he was not a de
positary under obligation to restore the thing to the owner, but to
sell it, and to lay out the money on his own affairs, which changes
the nature and effect of the deposit.


XVIL


707. A Coffer deposited, in which are many Things. — One may
deposit things which are not shown to the depositary ; as if one
gives him in keeping a coffer sealed up, or under lock and key,
without letting him know what is in it, whether it be money,
papers, or other things. And in this case, he is bound only to r-
store the coffer in the same condition, without being accountable
for the things which the depositor may pretend to have put in it
But if the depositor has shown to the depositary all the particular
things that were in the coffer, the latter ought to answer for every
one of the things which he took charge of.


SECTION II.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE DEPOSITOR.


Arr, I.
708. Expenses of keeping the Thing deposited— If the depositary


FIP. vit. SRO. 111. -  Derosir. — 335


n his custody some cattle, he has been at the charges of their
10urishment.>


TIL.


710. The Charge of Transportation. — If, to restore the thing
leposited, carriages are necessary for transporting it, the deposi-
tary is not bound to be at the charges, and the owner is obliged
to go and fetch it, and to be at the charges of transporting it, if
any are necessary, or to reimburse the depositary, if he has ad-
vanced the money.°


IV.


711. Discharge of the Depositary.—If the depositary is not
willing to keep the thing deposited any longer, and offers to
restore it, either after the time fixed by the contract, if any such
regulation was made, or even before, the depositor shall be bound
to take back the thing, provided it be not at an unseasonable time,
when, the depositary being able to keep the thing without any
loss, the owner cannot conveniently take it back. For in this
case, it would be necessary to regulate a time for discharging the
depositary of his trust.4


SECTION III.


OP THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE DEPOSITARY, AND HIS HEIRS, EX-
ECUTORS, OR ADMINISTRATORS.


Art. I.


712. The Foundation of the Care of the Depositary.— The de-
positary being obliged to keep the thing intrusted with him, he is
by consequence bound to take some care of it.* But because he
does this service for nothing, and only to do a kindness, his con-
dition is distinguished from that of other persons, who for their


* L. 23, D. depos. ; —1. 8, in f. D. eod. See the seventh article of the third section of
Lating and Hiring, and the fourth article of the third section of the Loan of Things to be
ratored tn Specie.

* L. 12, D. depos.

4 By the same reason that the depositor is permitted to take back the thing deposited
before the time, and whenever he pleases. See the seventh article of the first section of
this title. V. I. 1, § 36, D. depos. in verbis, Si hoc voluerit: si hoc recusaverit.

* L.1, D. depos.


336 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK t


own advantage have in their possession things belonging to
others; such as he who borrows, and he who hires; and the de
positary is bound only according to the rules which follow.


IL.

713. Care of the Depositary.— The depositary is bound to take
the same care of the things deposited that he does of his own
And he would be unfaithful to his trust, if he were less careful of
them than of what belongs to himself.


IT.


714. Fraud or Negligence near akin to it.—If the depositary
suffers the thing deposited to be lost, to perish, or be spoiled,
through any fraud or knavery, or through any fault or negligence
of his that cannot be excused, he shall be bound to make it good;*
and the fault will be of this nature, if it is such as the depasituy
would not have readily fallen into, according to his usual manage
ment of his own concerns.‘


IV.
715. The same.—It is also an excusable fault, and which the
depositary ought to account for, if he fails to use such precautions


as no other person would omit, such as keeping money under lock _
and key.*


V.
716, A Depositary negligent of his own Affairs. — If the depos


ITF. Vit. Ske. 171] DEPOSIT. 5a?
VL

717. If the Thing ts lost without the Depositary’s Fault.— Tf the
‘hing deposited happens to be lost, or perishes, whether through
its own nature, as if a horse, although he be kept, makes his
2scape, and is lost; or by an accident, which cannot be imputed
to the depositary, he shall be discharged, by restoring whatever
‘emains of the thing deposited.¢


VIL


718. Agreement touching the Quality of the Care to be taken by
‘he Depositary. — If, because of some particular consideration, it
ras been regulated what the depositary shall be bound to, his en-
zagement shall be to him in place of a law. And he shall be
yound to answer, either for what shall happen for want of the care
which he promised to take, or for the events which he has charged
umeelf withal. For the thing would not have been intrusted
with him, but upon this condition."

VIIL

719. A Depositary that obtrudes himself. — If the depositary, not
yeing desired, offers of his own accord to take care of the thing
leposited, he shall be accountable, not only for what he does
randuiently, and for gross mistakes, but likewise for other faults.
For the depositor might have chosen another depositary that
would have been more careful. But this depositary shall not be


answerable for what may happen without his fault, through some
accident."


IX.


720. Of the Depositary who has sold the Thing deposited and
bought it again.—If the depositary, having sold or otherwise
alienated the thing deposited, recovers it again, and keeps it as a
Jeposit, he shall be accountable thereafter, not only for what he
joes fraudulently, and for gross errors, but also for the least faults


ions of this text in a sense which agrees with the preceding rules. For we ought not to
lischarge indifferently all depositaries of the losses which may happen through their sloth-

6 LZ. 1, C, depos. ;—v. 1. 12, § 3, 2. 14, § 1, D. eod. ; —I. 23, in f. D. de reg. jur.;—v.
. 5, § 2, D. de cond. caus. dat. caus. n. sec. ; — v. l. 20, D. depos. ;— Exod. xxii. 13.

b 7. 1, § 6, D. depos. ;—d. 1. § 35; —I. 23, D. de reg. jur.; —1. 1, C. depos. ; —1. 7, § 15,
2. de pact.

i LT. 1, § 35, D. depos.

VOL. I. 29


338 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRt 1. BOOK L


he commits, as a punishment of his former knavery in selling the
thing!


X.


721. If the Depositary delays to restore the Thing.— If the thing
deposited being demanded, the depositary who is able to restore
it delays to do it, his delay will make him answerable, not only
for the least faults he commits, but likewise for the accidents that
may fall out after the time of the legal demand." But if the
thing perishes through its own nature, without any accident, and
if it would have perished although the depositary had restored #
in time, this loss not being an effect of his delay, he is not 2
countable for it.


XL
722. When the Thing may be restored in any one of many Piaces.
— If it is agreed that the thing deposited shall be restored in any


one of many places, the depositary shall have the choice of the
place.°


XIL
723. Executor or Administrator of the Depositary. — The e:
ecutor or administrator of the depositary is accountable for the
act of the deceased, even for the fraud which he has bees
guilty of.


TIT. VII. SEC. I11.] DEPOSIT. 339


ecutor or administrator, being ignorant of the trust, sells the thing
deposited, believing it to be a part of the succession; as if it hap-
pen that the memorandum which the depositary had made to dis-
tinguish the thing deposited from his own, being sealed up with
other papers, it is necessary in the mean while to sell some of the
movables, and the thing deposited chances to be among them, hav-
ing no mark to distinguish it from the goods of the deceased; as
if it was a horse, which, standing in the stable with other horses,
had been sold, the person who deposited him having perhaps neg-
lected to take him away; this event would be, as it were, an
accident that would discharge this executor or administrator from
making restitution of the thing deposited, he paying always the
price which he got for the thing when he sold it.1 The proprietor
would nevertheless retain his right of claiming the thing, in whose
hands soever he should find it.


XIV.


725. A Thing deposited does not enter into Compensation. — The
depositary cannot detain the thing deposited with him, in compen-
sation of what the depositor owes him, even although it were
another deposit; but each depositary shall be obliged to restore
the thing deposited with him.’


q Z. 1, § ult. el. 2, D. depos. We have set down in this article the particular circum-
stances which may justify the conduct of this executor or administrator. For there may
be other circumstances, where the executor or administrator would not be easily dis-
charged on his pretending ignorance of the trust; since he is accountable for the act of
the deceased, as has been said in the foregoing article; and the deceased was obliged
to distinguish the thing deposited from his own by some mark, or some memorandum.
Thos, it seems to be by the circumstances of the quality of the persons and of the thing
deposited, of the conduct of the depositary and his executor or administrator, and other
circumstances of the like nature, that we ought to judge of the obligation of the deposita-
ry's executor or administrator.

It is to be remarked on the law cited on this article, that, although it discharges the
executor or administrator of him who had borrowed a thing, if the said executor or ad-
ministrator had sold it, in the same manner as it discharges the executor and administra-
tor of the depositary, yet we have not set down this rule in the title of the Loan of Things
to be restored in Specie. For whereas the deposit is only for the behoof of the depositor,
the loan of a thing for use is barely for the advantage of the borrower. And for this rea-
son it seems to be just that this loss should fall upon the executor or administrator of the
borrower, rather than on the lender. See Frod. xxii. 14.

* Zi, C. depos. ;—l. ult. C. de compens. in f.


340 THE CIVIL LAW. _ [PaR? t. Boor 1


SECTION IV.
OF SEQUESTRATION BY CONSENT OF PARTIES.


Arr. L

726. Definition of a Sequestrator by Consent of Parties. — The
sequestrator by consent of parties is a third person, chosen by two
or more persons to keep as a deposit a movable or immovable
thing, the property or possession of which is controverted among
them, and to restore it to the person who shall be acknowledged
to be the true owner. Thus every one of them is considered s
if he alone had deposited the whole thing. Which distinguishes
such depositors from those who, depositing a thing that belongs to
them in common, have only each of them their share in it®


IL


727. Every one of those who have named the Sequestrator may
oblige him to the Discharge of his Trust. — While a thing is unde
sequestration, each of the persons who have deposited it is com
sidered as capable of being declared the owner of it. And this
gives them all, and every one of them in particular, a right to see
that the sequestrator carefully performs the trust which he is
bound to by his office, whether it be in preserving the thing, @
if it is houses or lands that are deposited, in repairing and eat
tivating them.°


TIL


rit. Vil. BEC. IV.) DEPOSIT. 342


IV.

729. The Sequestrator’s Possession, and its Effect.— While a
ching is deposited, the owner retains the possession, and his depos-
tary possesses for him. And in sequestration, the possession of
he right owner remains in suspense; for it cannot be said of any
me of the pretenders to the thing sequestered, that he possesses the
hing, since, on the contrary, they are all of them divested of the
xossession. But because the sequestrator possesses the thing only
n order to preserve it to the person who shall be declared the true
ywner, this possession, after the controversy is ended, will be con-
sidered, with respect to the owner, as if he himself had always
yossessed it. And this possession will be allowed a good posses-
sion to establish a title by prescription.‘


V.


730. The Sequestrator must account.— After the controversy is
nded, the sequestrator is obliged to account to the person who is.
idjudged to be master, and to restore to him the thing seques-
rated, with the fruits, if it produces any, he being paid his salary,
ind his expenses.°

VI


781. Discharge of the Sequestrator.— If the sequestrator is de-
irous to be discharged of his trust, and the persons who named
tim, or any one of them, does not consent to it, he ought to apply
nimself to the judge, and to get them all to be cited in order to
name another person in his room. For he having accepted a
commission which has divers consequences, and which ought to
have lasted till the controversy was ended, he ought not to be dis-
charged without just cause.


VII.
732. Rules of Deposit which may be applied to Sequestration. —
We may apply to sequestration the rules of a deposit which have
any relation thereto.’


“1.17, §1, D. depos. ;— 1.39, D. de acq. vel am. possess.
* This is an essential condition of this kind of deposit, which is granted only in order
etree emer ne shall be declared the right owner. L. 6,41, D.


‘1.8, § 2, D. depos.


TL5,§ 1, D. depos.
29°


L


342 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


SECTION V.
OF A NECESSARY DEPOSIT.


Arr. I
733. Definition of a Necessary Deposit. — A necessary deposit is
that of things which are saved in a fire, an earthquake, or ship
wreck, in an incursion of robbers, a tumult, or any other sudden
and accidental occasion, which obliges the owners to put what
they can save into the hands of the first persons they meet wits,
whether it be neighbours or others.*


IL
734. This Deposit is by Agreement.— This deposit, although ne
cessary, is nevertheless voluntary, and by agreement, because the
delivery of the things to the persons with whom they are deposited
Js in place of a covenant, express or tacit.”


TIL


735. The Duty of a Depositary in a Necessary Deposit. — He
with whom a thing is deposited through necessity is bound to be
as faithful to his trust as, or rather more than, any other depos
tary, not only because of the compassion which the occasion of
this deposit demands, but because of the necessity which puts the
thing into his hands, the owner not being at liberty to choose a»
other depositary. And if he fails to restore the thing deposited,
or misbehaves in his trust, it is for the public good that this inf


TIT. Vili. PARTNERSHIP. a43


TITLE VIII.


OF PARTNERSHIP.


737. The Origin of this Contract, and its Use.— All mankind
together makes one universal society, in which those who happen
to be linked together by their wants form among themselves dif-
ferent engagements, proportioned to the causes which render them
necessary one to another. And among the different ways in which
the wants of men tie them together, this of Partnership, which
shall be the subject of this title, is of necessary and frequent use;
so that we see many partnerships, and those of many sorts.

738. The origin of this kind of ‘union proceeds from the nature
of certain works, of certain commerces, and other affairs, which
are of so large an extent, that they demand the union and appli-
cation of many persons. It is this which engages men to erect
companies for carrying on manufactures, for trading into foreign
countries, for farming the king’s revenues, or those of particular
persons, and for managing other affairs of several kinds, according
as they demand the united labor, industry, care, credit, purse, and
other assistance of many persons. And the use of these kinds of
partnership is to facilitate the undertaking, the work, the trade, or
other affair for which the partnership is contracted; and to secure
to every one of the partners out of the share which he has con-
tributed, in conjunction with his copartners, such profits and ad-
vantages as none of them could be able to make by themselves.

739. The first sort of partnership is limited to certain kinds of

affairs, or commerces ; but there are others, where the partners en-
ter into a community of all that they are able to make by their
industry and labor. ‘There are likewise some partnerships, where
the partners agree to a reciprocal communication of all that they
may acquire, by donation, succession, or in other ways. And
there are some where the partners agree to a community of all
goods whatsoever, without exception.

740. These are the several sorts of partnerships, which differ
from one another according to the interest and intention of the per-
ons who join in them, that we shall treat of under this title.

741. We ought not to set down in the number of partnerships
the unions of persons that have any thing or any affair in com-
mon, independently of their will, such as coheirs, the legatees of


344 THE CIVIL LAW. [PamT 1. BOOK L


one and the same thing, and those who, through other causes,
chance to have something between them that is not divided, or
some affair belonging to them in common without any agreement.
For these ways of having a thing in common are quite of another
nature than partnership, which is formed by consent, and they
shall have a place among the matters to be treated of in the sec
ond book.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF PARTNERSHIP.


Art. L
742. Definition of Partnership. — Partnership is a covenant be
tween two or more persons, by which they join in common, either
their whole substance, or a part of it; or unite in carrying on some
commerce, some work, or some other business, that they may share
among them all the profit or loss which they may have by the
joint stock which they have put into partnership.*


IL °


743. The Shares of Partners in the Common Thing. — The things
or affairs that are in common among partners belong to every one
of them, for the shares that are allotted to them by their cove
nant.>


FIP. VIEL. SEC. I,J PARTNERSHIP. . be


tions not being distinguished, the condition of every individual
partner ought to be the same with that of the others.*


V.


746. The Share of the Profit regulates that of the Loss. — Al-
though the partners have not expressly designated both the por-
tions of the gain and those of the loss, yet if the portions of the
gain have been expressed, those of the loss will likewise be regu-
lated on the same foot. And if, without saying any thing of the
gain or loss, it be sufficiently expressed what every one has put
into the common stock, the portions of the gain and loss will be
the same with those of the stock.


VI
747. Difference of Contributions, and of Portions.— Seeing the
partners may contribute differently, some more and others less, of
labor, industry, credit, favor, money, or other thing, it is free for
them to regulate in an unequal manner their portions, or shares,
according as every one ought to have his condition more or less


advantageous, in proportion to the difference of what they con-
tribute.‘


VIL


748. Equality of Shares, notwithstanding the Difference of Contri-
butions. —It is not necessary for the equality of shares of the
partners in the profit arising from the partnership, that all their
contributions should be equal, that every one should furnish as
much money, as much industry, as much credit, as every one of
the other partners: but according as they contribute differently,
one more money, another more industry, a third more credit, their
condition may be equal, by the equality of the advantages arising
from these different contributions. And very often it is agreed,
and with reason, that one of the partners shall contribute only his
industry, and the other all the stock, and that nevertheless the
profit shall be equal, because the industry of the one is worth the
money of the other.é


“ L.99, D. pro soc. ;— § 1, Inst. eod.

* § 3, Inst. de societ.

* L.29, D. pro soc. ;— § 1, Inst. de societ. ; —1. 80, D. pro soc.
© § 2, Inst. de societ. ; —1.1, C. eod. ; —1. 5, § 1, D. pro soc.


\


346 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK &


VIIL

749. Inequality of the Share of the Gain, and of the Share of the
Loss. — This is another effect of the inequality of the contribo-
tions, that two partners may agree that the one shall have s
greater share of the profit than he shall bear of the loss; and that
the other, on the contrary, shall bear a greater part of the los
than he shall have in the profit. And thus, for example, the
partners may agree, that one shall have two thirds of the profit,
and bear one third of the loss, and that the other shall have one
third of the profit, and bear two thirds of the loss; which is to be
understood in this manner, that in case in several affairs of the
partnership there be gain on one side and loss on another, that is
only reckoned to be gain which shall remain clear after all the
losses are deducted.»


TX.


750. One of the Partners discharged of all Loss.— The same
consideration of the different contributions of the partners may
likewise justify the covenant by which it is stipulated, that one of
the partners shall have a share of the gain, and be altogether free
. from loss; because, for example, of the usefulness of his credit, his
favor, his interest, or of the pains which he takes, the journeys
which he makes, and the dangers to which he exposes himself!
For these advantages which the company reaps from him com-
pensate that which the partners grant him, by freeing him of the _
losses. And he might very lawfully have refused to engage him
self except on this condition, without which he would not have


TIT. VIll. SEC. 11.] ‘PARTNERSHIP, 347


upon one of the partners, without his having any share of the
profit, and that the whole profit should go to the other partner,
without his bearing any share of the loss™


XL


752. Unlawful Partnership. — We cannot enter into partnership,
except it be of a commerce, or other thing, that is honest and
lawful. And all partnerships contrary to this rule would be
criminal."


XII.


753. Difference between Partnership, and other Contracts, as to
the Extent of the Engagements.— The contract of partnership is
in this different from other contracts, that every one of the other
contracts hath its engagements limited and regulated by its par-
ticular nature; whereas partnership has a general extent to the
engagements of the different affairs, and of the several covenants
into which the partners enter. Thus, their engagements are gen-
eral and indefinite, such as those of a tutor, or of one who under-
takes the care of another’s concerns in his absence, and with-
out his knowledge°® And likewise honesty and fair dealing
have in this contract an extent proportioned to that of the en-
gagements.? 3


SECTION II.
IN WHAT MANNER PARTNERSHIP IS CONTRACTED.


Art. I.


754. Partners ought to choose one another reciprocally. — Part-
nership cannot be contracted but by the consent of all the part-
ners, who ought reciprocally to choose and approve of one
another,* in order to form among themselves a tie, which is a
kind of brotherhood.


= 1.3, § ult. D. pro soc.;—L. 29, § 2, D. eod.

® L. 57, D. pro soc. ; —l. 35, § 2, D. de contr. empt. ; —1. 53, D. pro socio.
° L. 38, D. pro soc. See the beginning of the second section of Tutors.
P L. 3, C. pro soc.

® Inst. de obl. ex. cons.

» L.63, D. pro soc.


48 THE CIVIL Law. {PaRe L S00x 1


IL

750. Difference between having a Thing in common, and being &
Partnership. — It is not enough to form a partnership, that two ao
more persons have any thing in common among them, such =
the coheirs of one and the same inheritance, legatees, donees,
or purchasers of one and the same thing. For these ways of
having something in common among many, not implying the
reciprocal choice of the persons, do not link them together in pezt-
nership.°


IIL


756. The Heir or Executor of a Partner is not a Partner. — The
choice of the persons is so essentially necessary to the constituting
of a partnership, that even the heirs or executors of the partnes
themselves do not succeed to this quality of partner,’ because it
may happen that they are not fit for it; and likewise, that even
they may not either relish the commerce that is carried on by the
partnership, or not approve of the persons of the copartners. And
hence it is that, since the tie of partners can be no other than vob
untary, the partnership is broken off by the death of one of the
partners, in the manner which shall be explained in the fifth and
sixth sections.


IV.


757. It cannot be stipulated that the Heirs or Executors shall be
Partners. — If it had been agreed among the partners, that the
partnership should be continued between their heirs or executor,


TIP. VIlI. SEO. ¥2) PARTNERSHIP. 349


the others, but only wiui vu. partner who has associated him‘
And this will make among them a second partnership, distinct
from the fivst, and limited to the share of that partner who has
associated to himself another.


VL


759. Partnership may be contracted without Writing, and which
Way. — As consent may be given either in writing or without
writing, and even among persons that are absent, by letter, proxy,
or any other mediator, so partnership may be contracted all these
ways, and also by a tacit consent, and by acts which make proof
of it. As if persons carry on a joint trade, and share the profit
and the loss And the partnership lasts as long as the partners
are willing to continue in their union.®


VIL


760. Of these who buy a Thing together.— If two or more per-
sons, having a mind to buy the same thing, agree, in order not to
raise the price by bidding against one another, to buy it jointly
together, either by one of themselves, or by # third person; this
agreement makes the thing bought to belong to them in common,
but it does not join them in partnership. For they are not linked


together by the choice of the persons, but only by the thing which
they have in common:


VIL


761. The Partners are at Liberty to enter into all Manner of Law-
fal Pacts. — People may in partnerships, as in all other contracts,
make all manner of lawful pactions. Thus, they may contract a
conditional partnership, whether it be that they will have their
partnership to commence only after the condition has happened,
orthat they will have it to take its effect immediately, and to be
dissolved by the existence of the condition.


IX.
762. Pacts concerning the Duration of the Partnership. — Part-


1. 19, D. pro sc. ; —1. 20, eod. :—L 47,§ 1, D. de reg. jur.
5’ L. 4, D. pro soc. See the eighth, tenth, and sixteenth articles of the first section of


© § 4, Inst. de societ.; —1. 5, C. pro soc. See the fifth section of this title.
' L. 33, D. pro soc. ; —l. 29, D. comm. divid. 1 7.1, D. pro soc.; — 1. 6, C. eod.
VOL. I. 30


350 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part 1. BOOK}


nership may be contracted so as to begin either immediately, o
after a certain time, and to last either to the time agreed on, a
during the life of the partners, and in such a manner that, if
there are many copartners, the death of one of them may no
interrupt the partnership among the others.”


x.


763. Penal Clauses. — We may add to the contract of partner
ship penal clauses against him who shall contravene what hes
been agreed on; whether it be by doing what he ought not, o
not doing what he ought to have done® But the effect which
these kinds of penalties are to have is to be regulated by the pro-
dence of the judge, according to the circumstances.”


XL


764. Pacts for regulating the Shares. — The partners may either
regulate themselves the shares which every one is to have in the
partnership, or they may refer the matter to the arbitration di
other persons; and if they have referred it to other persons, o
even to one of themselves, it will be the same thing as if they hed
referred it to the arbitration of skilful and reasonable men; end
what is determined herein by the persons named will not take
place, if any of the partners has reason to complain of the
award.1


m= ZL. 1, D. pro soc.
= Without this agreement, the death of any one of the partners would dissolve the pat


PIT. Vill. SRC. Tit.] PARTNERSHIP. 351


XIL

765. A Gift wnder Color of a Partnership. — If a partnership were
contracted only to color a deed of gift from one of the contractors
to the other, so that the profits should belong wholly to one of the
partners, this would not be a partnership, there being only one
person who reaps the whole profit. And if such a contract were
entered into for the behoof of a person to whom the other cannot
make over any thing by deed of gift, the contract would be null
and unlawful, as being made to elude the law.


SECTION III.
OF THE SEVERAL SORTS OF PARTNERSHIPS.


Art. L

766. Partnerships are General, or Particular.— Partnerships
are either general, of all the goods of the partners; or particular,
of some goods, some commerce, or of some farm, or other thing:
and the goods which are put into the partnership become com-
mon to all the partners, although they are not delivered, and
although they remain in the possession of the partner who was the
owner of them before the partnership was contracted. For the
intention of the partners to communicate the goods makes a
tacit delivery of them; and each of the partners possesses for
all the others the thing belonging to them in common which is
in his custody.


Il.


767. The Partnership of Profits, or Pure and Simple. — If, in a
contract of partnership, the parties had omitted to express of
what goods, what business, or what commerce the partnership
was to consist; and it was barely said, that they joined in
partnership, or that the partnership should be of the gain and
profit which the partners should make, without naming any thing
in particular; the partnership would extend only to the profits
which the partners might make by the trade and business which
they should carry on jointly together.®


* L. 5, § 2, D. pro soc. ;—l. 35, § 3, D. de mort. caus. donat.

* LZ. 32, § 24, D. de donat. int. vir. &@ uror.

* L.5, D. pro soc. ; — Inst. de societ. in princ. ;—I.1, § 1, et l. 2, D. pro soc.
> L.7 aL 8, D. pro soc. ; —I. 45, § 1, D. de acg. vel omitt. heared.


352 THE OCfVit. Law. [Parr t. BOOK L


lil.

768. The Partnership of Profits does not include Inheritances,
Legacies, and Gifts.— A partnership of gains and profits does not
comprehend inheritances, legacies, gifts, whether they be gifts
that are to have their effect before or after the death of the giver,
nor that which the partners may have acquired any other way
than by their industry, or from the effects which they have put
into the joint stock. For these sorts of acquisitions have ther
causes and their motives in the persons of those to whom they
happen ; such as some merit, some tie of friendship or relation, or
the natural right of inheriting; which are advantages that the
partners did not mean to communicate to one another, unless
the same be particularly expressed, because they are not the same
in every one of the partners. Neither does this kind of partner
ship take in the debts owing to the partners, except they be
such as may have arisen from the affairs or commerce of the
partnership.°

IV.


769. A Partnership of all Manner of Estate and Goods excindes
nothing.— A general partnership of all manner of estate and
goods includes every thing that may belong to the partners, or be
acquired by them, by any cause whatsoever. For the general ex-
pression of all manner of estate and goods leaves nothing oat
And successions, legacies, donations, and all other sorts of acquék
sitions and profits, are comprehended under it, unless they are
specially reserved.*


TIT. VIII. SEC. III.] PARTNERSHIP. 353


such as his son, or otherwise, he will also be bound to communi-
cate it® For a partnership of all manner of estate and goods
leaves nothing proper or peculiar to the partner.


VI


771. The Personal Condemnation of a Partner. — If, on the con-
trary, one of the partners is condemned on an accusation which
he has drawn upon himself by his own folly, he alone shall bear
the punishment which he has merited. But if he is unjustly con-
demned, the injustice ought to fall upon all the partners, and not
on him alone. And the same distinction is to be made in the
other kinds of condemnations in civil causes, according as the co-
pertner has been well or ill grounded in his claim, or has defended
himself ijl or well.£ Thus, in both these cases, it will depend on
the equity of the partners, or prudence of their arbitrators, to dis-
cen aright between the losses which the copartner ought to bear
alone, and those which ought to fall on the whole partnership.


VOT.


772. Unlawful Profits do not come into the Joint Stock. — The
wlawfal and dishonest gains which a copartner may make do not
eater into the partnership ; and he who makes them ought alone
tobe chargeable with making restitution of what he has ill got.
But if the other partners share with him in his unlawful gains,
they will become his accomplices, and be liable to the same pun-
ishment which he may have deserved.’


VOL


773. Partnerships are limited to the Things put into the Commu-
sity. — Partnerships are limited to the kinds of goods, commerce,
or other things, which the partners are willing to join in com-
mon; and do not extend to those things which they have no mind
to put into the community. Thus, for instance, if two brothers
enjoy in common the inheritance of their father, and continue in
a partnership of the profits and losses which accrue from thence,
they may for all this possess each of them in particular whatever
they may acquire any other way.>


¢ LT. 52, § 16, D. pro socio. f T. 52, § ult. D. pro soc.
8 L. 52, § 17, D. pro soc. ; —I. 53, eod. ; —1. 55, inf. eod.
b 7. 52, § 6, D. pro socio


354 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOKL


IX.

774. If there ts any Obscurity in the Contract of Partnership, to
know what it comprehends. — If the partnership happens to be co»
tracted in terms which give occasion to doubt whether all the estate
present and to come is comprehended in it, or only the presest
estate in possession, or there are other such like doubts; they
are to be interpreted by the ways in which the partners themselves
shall have executed their contract, and by the circumstances whic
may be able to show their intention, according to the foregoing
rules, and the general rules of the interpretation of covenants!


X.


775. Debts of the Community and of the Partners. — The- debts
owing by. the community, and its other charges, are to be paid out
of the common stock; and the partnership being ended, each
partner owes his share of them in proportion to the share he has


in the joint stock. But the moneys borrowed by a partner, which


have not been put into the common cash, or have not been laid out
to the use of the community, are the peculiar debt of him who
borrowed them!


XL


776. What the Partner may or may not take out of the Publ
Stock. — In a universal partnership of the whole estate am
goods, of all profits, and of all expenses, each partner can only
dispose of his own share, and he ought not to take ont of i
common stock for his particular expenses more than what is ©


11. SEC. IV.] PARTNERSHIP. 355


en out of the joint stock, and it happen that one of the
rs hath a daughter to marry, and that the others have none,
ughter will nevertheless have her portion out of the joint

And this partner will have this advantage over the others,
+ any injustice, for each of them might have had it. And
te in which they were all of them, under the same uncer-
of the event, and with the same right, having rendered their®
on equal, it made also their agreement just.


XIII.


Unlawful Expenses.— The expenses which the partners are
aming, debauchery, or other unlawful practices, are not to
*n out of the common stock.°


SECTION IV.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS’ OF PARTNERS.


Art. I.


Unity and Fidelity among the Partners. — Partners being
by a general engagement,* in a sort of fraternity,” to act the
‘the other as every one would do for himself, they owe re-
lly to one another an upright fidelity and integrity, such as
agage every one of them to share with the others whatever
ave belonging to the community, with all the profits, fruits,
her revenues which they may reap from it; and not to keep
ing to themselves, but what they may lawfully do by their
0°


Il.


Care and Vigilance of the Partners. — Besides the fidelity
the partners owe to one another, they likewise owe their
r the affairs and effects of the community. But whereas
delity admits of no bounds, they are obliged, with respect


, D. pro soc.

,§.1, D. pro soc. As to the expenses which are laid out on account of the part-
ee the eleventh article of the following section.

he twelfth article of the first section.

he first article of the second section.

$1, D. pro. soc. ; —1. 3, C. eod. ; —1..1, in f. D. eod. ; — 1. 38, § 1, eod.


306 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOE


to the care which they owe, to use only the same application and
vigilance in the common affairs as they use in their own.


TI,


781. Partners accountable for Fraud, and Gross Faults. — This
duty of care and vigilance which the partners owe to one another,
* being regulated by the care which they have of what is their own,
it does not extend to the greatest exactness that the most careful
and diligent persons are capable of; but it is limited to make them
responsible for all deceit, and for all gross faults. And if a part
ner, who takes the same care of the common affairs as he does of
his own, falls into some slight fault without any evil intention,
he is not accountable for it: and the other partners ought to
blame themselves for not having made choice of a more carefal
partner.°


IV.


782. Accidents.— Partners are never responsible for any actr
dent; unless they have given occasion to it by some fault io
which they ought to answer. As if a partner has suffered a thing
which he had in his custody to be stolen.


V. |


783. If a Partner appropriates to himself, or converts to his om
Use, any Thing belonging to the Community. — If one of the pare —
ners appropriates to himself or conceals any thing belonging ¥
the community, or if he puts it to his own use contrary to the it


TIT. VIII. SEC. 1V.] PARTNERSHIP. 357


ing to the community, such as any movable thing which he has
made some use of, it will not be presumed that, because he had
the thing in his custody, and made use of it, therefore he is guilty
of theft; but that he, being the owner of it in some part, did make
use of his own right, being confident of having the consent of his
copartners.!


VIL


785. Loss or Damage caused by a Pariner.— If by some fault,
violence, or other unlawful means, a partner occasions damage to
the community, he shall be bound to make it good.!


VIL


786. The Service which a Partner does is not compensated with
the Loss which he occasions. — If the same partner who has caused
any damage, or who through his fault and negligence has given
occasion to some loss, which may be imputed to him, happens in
other respects to have procured some profit to the community, the
profit which he has procured will not be compensated with the loss
which he has occasioned. For he was bound to procure this profit,
and consequently cannot compensate it with the loss.™


IX.


787. The Partner ts answerable for the Act of the Person whom
he has taken into Partnership for his Share. — If one of the part-
ners has taken another person into partnership with him for his
particular share, and has suffered him to meddle in any affair of
the community, he shall be accountable for the act of the said
person, and must make good to his copartners the loss which this
third person shall have occasioned to the community. For it is
his fault that he has made a bad choice, and that he did it without
the knowledge and consent of the other partners.”


X.


788. Loss and Gain occasioned by the Under-Partner. — If this
under-partner happens to have been the author of loss in one re-


' LD. 51, D. pro soc. 1 7.47, §1;—ll. 48 et 49, D. pro socio.

™ Il. 25 a 26, D. pro soc. ; —1. 23, § 1, eod. If this loss were not occasioned by some
fraud, or other unfair way, if it were small, and the profit were considerable, and wholly
Owing to the industry of that partner, would this compensation be unjust ?

® L. 23, D. pro soc.


358 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L BOOK L


epect, and of profit in another, the loss and profit will not be com-
pensated together in this case;° no more than in the case of the
loss occasioned by the partner who had procured profit, as has beea
already mentioned in the eighth article, because the act of this
under-partner is the act of the partner himself.


XI.


789. The Expenses of the Partners. — The partners recover out
of the joint stock all their necessary, useful, and reasonable ex-
penses which regard the community, and which they have been at
on account of the common affairs; such as travelling expenses,
whatever they have laid out on the carriage of persons or goods,
workmen’s wages, necessary repairs, and other the like charges.
And if the partner who has been at these expenses had borrowed
the money upon interest, or having advanced the money hin-
self, his copartners have been backward in reimbursing him, he
will likewise recover the interest of the money from the time that
he advanced it, although he has not made any legal demand of
it. But the partners do not recover the expenses which they have
laid out unnecessarily, or for their own pleasure.?


XIL


790. The Particular Loss of a Partner, occasioned by the Affatrs
of the Community.— If a partner suffers any particular loss is
doing the business of the community, as if he exposes himself t
any danger, and, for instance, in a journey which he makes for the
common affairs, he is robbed of his clothes, and of the mone


TIT. VIII. SEC. IV.] PARTNERSHIP. 359


XIII.

791. Particular Gams or Losses on Account of the Partnership. —
If it happens that the partner by the occasion of some affair of the
community reaps some profit; as if the affairs of the community
give him access to a person from whom he receives a favor, or if
they give him light into some particular affair in which the commu-
nity is no ways concerned, and he makes advantage of it: or if,
on the contrary, the partnership is to him an occasion of loss, as if
the care of the common affairs makes him neglect his own: or if
any one out of spite to the society forbears to do him the good
offices they were wont to do; these kinds of gains and losses will
concern him alone. Because these events have for their causes,
either the particular conduct of the said partner, or his merit, or his
negligence ; or some other fault, or some chance: and because the
conjuncture which links together these causes with the occasion of
the affairs of the community is, as it were, an accident, which
does not affect the community, but only the partner to whom these


things may have happened.


XIV.


792. Loss of Things designed to be put into the Common Stock. —
All the losses of the joint stock are common to the partners. But
in order to judge whether the money or other thing which is lost
ought to be considered as part of the common stock, it is not
enough that it was designed to be put into it, but we must consider
the circumstances in which the things are when the loss happens.
Thus, for example, if the money which a partner was to furnish
for buying of merchandise perishes in his own hands, before he

has put it into the common cash, or laid it out on the common
concern, the loss is his own. But if this money was to be carried

a journey, in order to buy something for the public account, and it

happens to be robbed on the way, the community bears the loss of

it, although it was not yet laid out on their account; because it


the conveniency which the affair of the community gave him to do his own business
ought not to be prejudicial to his copartners.

It is necessary to remark on the fourth section of this fifty-second law, and on the sixty-
first law cited on this article, that their disposition corrects the hardship of the last sec-
tion of the sixtieth law, which says, that a partner who is wounded on occasion of an
affair belonging to the community bears the charges of his own cure; and that for this
reason, because that although he suffers this expense on account of the community, yet it
is not for the community that the expense is laid out.

° £. 60, $1, D. pro socio.


360 THE OIVIL Law. [PaRT 1. BOOK b


was on the community’s account that it was carried, and the part-
ner’s destination of it to the public use was accomplished on his
part. So that the money was transported at the peril of the whole
community. And in other such like events, the lose falls or falls
not upon the community, according to the state of things. And
we must discern whether the partnership is already formed; what
is the destination of the money, or other thing, that is to be put
into the joint stock; what steps have been taken towards putting
it in, and the other circumstances by which we may be able to
judge if the thing which perishes ought to be considered as being
already in the common stock, or as belonging still to the person
who was to put it in!


XV.


793. Insolvency of a Partner.— If one of the partners has ad-
vanced money, or has entered into some engagement, against
which the community ought to indemnify him; every one of the
partners must reimburse or indemnify him in proportion to thei
shares. And if he is not able to recover the share of one of the
partners who is insolvent, or cannot for other reasons get payment
of him, this share of the deficient partner must be paid by all the
other partners. For it was on the community’s account that this
partner advanced the money, or entered into the engagement ; and
the losses as well as the gains ought to be shared.‘


XVL
794. One Partner cannot engage the others unless they have ew —


TIT. VII. SEC. IV.] PARTNERSHIP. 361


XVIL

795. A Partner cannot take his Capital out of the Common Stock.
-— The partners cannot take out of the common stock that which
they have put into it, because the whole stock belongs to the
community, and cannot be diverted nor diminished but with the
consent of all the partners while the partnership lasts” And it is
no more lawful for a partner to diminish the common stock, than
it is to break off from the partnership unfairly, and with a sinister
view!


XVIII.


796. Of him who proposes a Partner, and answers for him. — If
one is received into a partnership by order and upon the recom-
mendation of a third person, who proposed him to the partners
and who answers for him, this third person will be accountable
for the act of the partner whom he recommended, in the same
manner as he would be for his own proper act, if he himself were


@ partner.*
XIX.


797. Benefit of Partners as to the Payment of what they owe to
one another. — If a partner happens to be indebted to his fellow-
partners on account of the partnership, without being chargeable
with any misdemeanour or knavery, and is not able to pay all
he owes, without being reduced to great necessity, his copartners
are obliged, not only out of humanity, but also because of the
brotherly tie that is between partners, to have compassion on him,
whether their partnership be universal of all their estate and goods,
or only particular of certain things. And they ought not to exact
ngorously all that he owes them, if he is not able to pay it with-
out being reduced to great extremity. But they ought to make the
payment easy to him, whether by taking lands or houses, movables,
and other effects, at a reasonable price, or dividing the payments,
granting delays, or other favors and eases, according to the cir-
cumstances. And whatever constraints they should make use of
beyond these limits, and contrary to this temperament, may be


ordinance of Blois. See the fifth article of the second section of Covenants, and likewise
the title of Partnerships in the ordinance of 1673.

¥ See the fifth article of this section.

* See the third and the following article of the fifth section.

® L. ult. D. pro soc.


VOL. I. 31


362 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT I. BOOKL


mitigated by the intervention of the judge, according to the qual-
ity of the partners, the nature and quantity of the debt, the goods
of the debtor, those of the creditor, and other views of the state of


things.®
XX.


798. If the Partner renders himself unworthy of this Beneft.—
This humanity which copartners owe to one another is not doe
to him who has knavishly made away his effects, that he might
avoid payment, or who, to prevent sentence being given against
him, disowned the quality of a partner, or has in any other mar
ner of way rendered himself unworthy of such a favor.°


XXI.


799. This Benefit does not extend to the Sureties, nor to the Heirs
or Executors of the Partners. — The sureties of a partner, those
who are bound to answer for what he does, his heirs or executon,
and other successors, cannot claim this benefit; because their obli-
gation is quite of another nature; the sureties, and those who are
accountable for the act of a partner, being bound, with this view
of the partner’s proving insolvent, to make good whatever he shall
happen to owe; and the heirs, executors, or administrators, hav-
ing accepted of the succession, cannot lessen the charges of it


XXIL


800. One Partner can do nothing in the Affairs of the Comsnunits,
against the Will of the other Partners.— The partners cannot do —


IF. VIII. SEC. V.] PARTNERSHIP. 363


SECTION V.
OF THE DISSOLUTION OF THE PARTNERSHIP.


Art. I.


801. The Partnership is dissolved by the Consent of the Partners.
- As partnership is formed by consent, so is it in the same man-
er dissolved, and it is free for all the partners to break off their
artnership, and to give it over whenever they please, even before
1e end of the term which it was to have lasted, if they all agree
> it®


Il.


802. Each Partner may break off Partnership when he pleases. —
‘he tie which is among partners being founded on the reciprocal
hoice which they make of one another, and on the hopes of some
rofit, it is free for every one of the partners to break off partner-
1ip whenever he pleases ; whether it be because there is no good
greement among the partners, or that some necessary absence, or
ther affairs, make the partnership burdensome to him who is de-
rous to leave it; or that he does not like a commerce which the
artners are about to undertake; or that he does not find his ac-
ount in the partnership, or for other reasons. And he may give
ver partnership without the consent of the other partners, and that
ven before the time at which it was to have ceased, and although
| have been agreed that none of the partners should break off
he partnership till the time agreed on were expired. Provided
hat the partner does not break off with some sinister view; as if he
yuits the partnership that he may buy for himself alone what the
whole community had a mind to purchase, so that he may make
some other profit, to the prejudice of the other partners, by his
leaving them : or provided he does not quit after some business is
began, or at an unseasonable time, which may occasion some loss
or damage to the community.®


ITI.
803. A Fraudulent Renunciation of Partnership does not free the
" L. 65, § 8, D. pro socio; —1. 5, C. eod.


* L.63, in fine, D. pro soc.; —U. 14, 15, et 16, eod.;— 1. 65, § 4, cod. ;—d. I. 65, § 6;
U5, C.eod.;—§ 4, Inst. eod.;—L.14, D.eod. See the following articles.


364 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L BOOK L


Person who so renounces from his Engagements. — The partner
who breaks off partnership with an unfair design disengages his
copartners from all engagement to him, but does not disengage
himself from his obligations to them. Thus, he who should with-
draw himself from a universal partnership of their whole estate,
present and to come, that he alone might inherit a succession fallen
to him, would bear the whole loss, if the succession which he
alone inherits should prove burdensome; but he would not deprive
his copartners of the profit, if the succession should prove advan-
tageous, and they have a mind to share in it. And in general, if
a partner breaks off at an unseasonable time, which occasions the
loss of some profit to the community, which otherwise it might
have made, or which causes any other damage, he will be bound to
make it good. As if he quits before the time to which the pert
nership was to have lasted, abandoning a business with which he
was charged. And he who breaks off the partnership in this man
ner shall have no share in the profits which shall happen to be
made afterwards; but he shall bear his part of what losses shall
afterwards happen, in the same manner as he would have bees
bound to do if he had not quitted the partnership.


IV.


804. An Unseasonable Renunciation. — The partner who
nounces the partnership at an unseasonable time, not only doe
not free himself from his engagements to his copartners, but
answerable for all the losses and damages which his unseasonable
renunciation may have caused to the society. Thus, if a partoe


TIT. VIII. SEO. V.] PARTNERSHIP. 365


VI.

806. Profit after the Renunciation. — If, after a fair and lawful
renunciation, the partner who has quitted the partnership begins
anew to carry on any commerce from which he reaps some profit,
he will not be bound to share it with his former partners.‘


VIL
807. A Fraudulent and Unseasonable Renunciation is never per-


mitted. — A fraudulent and unseasonable renunciation is never
permitted, whether the contract of partnership has provided
against it or not. For this would be repugnant to fidelity, which,
being essential to the contract of partnership, is always understood
to be comprehended in it.s


VII.

808. The Renunciation is of no Use till it is known, but is in
the mean While prejudicial to him who has made it. — The renuncia-
tion is of no use to the person who has made it, till it be made
known to the other partners; and if in the interval after the renun-
ciation, and before it is known to the other partners, he who has
renounced makes any profit, he will be obliged to share it with his
copartners; but if he suffers any loss, it will all fall upon himeelf.
And if in this space of time the other partners reap any gain, he
will have no share in it; and if they suffer any loss, he must bear


his part of it.
IX.


809. The Term of the Partnership being expired, every one with-
draws himself with Impunity.— The time which the partnership
was to last being expired, each partner may withdraw himself
without the imputation of having quitted fraudulently, or unsea-
sonably ;! unless his withdrawing himself should chance to preju-
dice some affairs which were not then quite finished.


X.


810. Partnership is dissolved by Consent. — Partnership, whether
universal or particular, may be dissolved in the same manner as it
is contracted, as well among persons absent as present, not only


€ L. 65, § 3, D. pro soc. 8 L. 17,
b £.17,§1, D. pro soc. iZ
31°


366 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK |


by the express consent of all the partners, but tacitly, by acts
which show that they break off their partnership. As if every
one of them drives separately the same trade and business which
they had before carried on in company together ; if the commerce
in which they dealt happens to be prohibited; if they engage ina
lawsuit, with which it is impossible the partnership can subsist;
or if they show by any other signs and tokens that they break off
their partnership.


XL


811. The Partnership ceases when the Thing for which %& was
contracted ceases to be. — If the partnership was only for a certain
commerce, or some particular affair, it is at an end whenever thst
commerce or that affair is finished. And it would be the same
thing if the partnership had relation to a thing that happens to
perish, or of which the commerce ceases to be free; as if the part
nership was for the farm of some lands taken by the enemy in 8
time of war.™


XII.


812. If a Partner becomes incapable of contributing, either *
Money or Industry. — If one of the partners is reduced to such 8
condition, that he cannot contribute to the community what hes
obliged to furnish, whether in money or in labor, the other part
ners may exclude him from the society; as if his goods are seized
on, if he has relinquished them to his creditors, if he labors under
any infirmity, or any other inconvenience, that hinders him from


'. VIII. SEC. V.] PARTNERSHIP. 367


to be understood only for the time to come, and the partner
.o may chance to be excluded for any one of these causes
ght to lose nothing of the profits which may come to his share
proportion to the contributions which he had already made.


XIIL
313. The Guardian of the Prodigal and Madman may break off
Partnership. — As the partners may break off partnership with
wodigal and a madman, so likewise the guardian of the prodi-
| and of the madman may renounce the partnership in their
mes.°


XIV.


814. The Death of a Partner.— Since the partnership cannot
bsist but by the union of the persons who have reciprocally
osen one another, and that it is sometimes supported by the
dustry of one person alone, the death of one of the partners
iturally dissolves the partnership with regard to them all; unless
be that they have agreed that it shall subsist among the sur-
vors; or that, without any such previous agreement, the survi-
ors are willing to continue together in partnership.’


XV.


815. The Civil Death of a Partner. — The civil death of a part-
et has the same effect with regard to the partnership as the
atural death. For the person being out of a condition of acting,
nd his goods being confiscated, he is with regard to the partner-
hip as if he were really dead.4


XVI.
816. Sharing of Profits, Losses,and Charges. — The partnership


eng ended, the partners reciprocally reimburse themselves of
‘hat they have advanced, and share their profits; and if there
inain any debts to be paid off by the society, and expenses to
laid out, and any future profits or losses, they take their respec-
ve sureties for all these consequences.’


' L. wlt. C. pro soc.

L. 65, § 9, D. pro soc. ; —l. 59, eod. See the last article of the following section. JL.
D. pro soc.

L. 65, 4 12, D. pro soc. ; —§ 7, Inst. eod. ; — 1. 63, § ult. eod.

See the eleventh article of the fourth section. ZL. 27, D. pro soc. ; —I. 38, eod. ; — 1. 65,
b, eod.


368 THE CIVIL Law. [PaR? L BOOK L


SECTION VI.


OF THE EFFEOT OF THE PARTNERSHIP WITH REGARD TO THES
HEIRS AND EXECUTORS OF THE PARTNERS.


Arr. L


817. Rights and Engagements of the Heir or Executor of 6
Partner.— Although the heir or executor enters into all the rights
of the person to whom he succeeds,* yet the heir or executor of a
partner, not being a partner himself, has no right to intermeddle
in the affairs of the community in the quality of a partner. Thus,
he who succeeds to a partner who was book-keeper to the com-
pany, or who was employed in buying things, or doing other
business for the service of the company, cannot take upon him
any of these functions. But although this heir or executor hes
not the quality of partner, yet he is with respect to the othe
partners what those persons are to one another, who have aay
thing in common together without a covenant. And this gives
him a right to inquire into what passes in the community, and #
call the other partners to account for the preservation of his ows
interest. And, in fine, he enters into the rights and engagements
which are annexed to the bare quality of heir or executor, as shal
be explained by the following rules.»


IL
818. Jn what Manner the Heir or Executor shares the Profit


IT. VIII. SEC. VL]. PARTNERSHIP. 369


vas under Obligation to do.— Although the heir or executor be
lot a partner, yet he is nevertheless obliged to make good the
ngagements of the deceased that pass to him; and he ought not
mly to pay in the contributions, but also to satisfy what other
lemands may be made on account of the partnership. Thus, if
he deceased had in his hands any affair, or any business, of which
he management might be transmitted to his heir or executor, he
yught to finish what remains to be done, with the same care and
the same fidelity that the deceased himself would have been


obliged to.
IV.


820. The Heir or Executor bound for the Faults of the Deceased.
— The heir or executor of the partner is likewise bound to the
emmunity for the act of the deceased, and for all the loss or
damage which the deceased may have occasioned, either by
knavery, or by faults which he was to answer for.°


V.


831. The Partnership is not interrupted by the Death of a Part-
wer, if the said Death is not known.— If the death of a partner
happens before they have begun the business for which they
entered into partnership, and the said death is known to the
other partners, the partnership is at an end, at least with respect
to the person deceased, and his heir or executor; and it is free for
the partners to exclude the said heir or executor out of the part-
hetship, as it is for him not to engage in it. But if, the said death
being unknown to the other partners, they begin the business, the
heir or executor of the deceased shall have his share in it, and
shall succeed to the charges of it, and to the profits or losses
which shall arise from it For the contract of partnership has
had this effect, that the ignorance of the death of the partner, and
the upright intention of the partners, have made the engagement of
the deceased, upon which they had treated, to subsist; and have
formed out of it a new engagement, which is reciprocal between
the surviving partners and the heir or executor of the deceased


partner.


" L. 40, D. pro soc. ; — I. 1, § 2, D. de reg. neg. gest. ; —l. 35, D. pro soc.
* L. 35, in fine, et 36, D. pro soc.
1. 65, §.10, D. pro soc. See the seventh article of the fourth section of Prozies.


370 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaR? 1. BOOK L


VI

822. Of Partnership in a Farm, with Respect to the Heirs or
Executors of the Partners. — All that has been said in dives
places of this title concerning the dissolution of partnership,
whether by the death of one of the partners, or by the will and
consent of them all, and touching the manner in which the
engagements of the partners descend, or do not descend, to their
heirs and executors, is not to be understood indifferently of part-
nerships in which other persons are interested; such as the part
nerships of farmers, or undertakers of any work. For in these
kinds of partnerships we must distinguish two engagements; one,
of the partners among themselves, and the other, of all the part
ners to the person of whom they take either a farm, or any thing
to do. And since this last engagement descends to the heirs or
exccutors of the partners, it is a consequence of it, that, they
being under a common engagement to others, they be mutually
engaged to one another. And if this tie does not make them
partners, as those are who have voluntarily chosen one anotbe,
yet it has this effect; that, for example, the executor or admini>
trator of a farmer being bound to perform the conditions of the
lease to the lessor, and having the right to manage the farm, or
cause it to be managed for his behoof, this right and this engage
ment distinguish his condition from that of the executors a
administrators of other kinds of partners, in that he cannot be
excluded from the farm, even although the partners had ad
begun to manage it before the death of the partner to whom ke
succeeds.®


TIT. 1x.] DOWRIES. 371


the other is made by the contract of marriage, which contains the
covenant relating to their goods.*

824. The Engagement of the Persons.— The engagement of
marriage, in what relates to the union of the persons, the manner
in which it ought to be celebrated, the causes which render it
indissoluble except in some singular cases, and other the like
matters, are not within the design of this book, as has been ob-
served in the plan of matters in the fourteenth chapter of the
Treatise of Laws.

825. The Covenants concerning the Goods.— As to the cove-

nants about the goods, some of them come within the design of
this book, and others not; and in order to distinguish them, we
must divide them into three sorts. The first is of those covenants
which are not agreeable to the Roman law, although they are in
use with us in France, whether it be throughout the whole king-
dom, such as the renunciations made by daughters of successions
that may happen to fall to them ;" institutions of heirs or execu-
tors by way of contract, and which are irrevocable ;° or which are
peculiar only to some provinces, such as the community of goods
between husband and wife. The second is of those which are
conformable to the Roman law, but which are only received in
some provinces, such as the augmentation of dowries after mar-
riage. And the third sort is of such covenants as are agreeable
both to the Roman law and to the general usage of this kingdom,
such as those which concern the dowry, or the goods which the
wife may have besides her dowry; which the Romans call by the
name of paraphernalia.

826. It is only this last sort of covenants, which, being both
agreeable to the Roman law, and in use with us, is of the
number of matters which come within the design of this work.
But as to the community of goods between man and wife, joint-
ures, the augmentation of marriage portions, and other matters
Which are peculiar to some customs, or to some provinces, they
have their proper rules in the customs of the places where they are
received, and which we are not to meddle with here. We shall
only observe, that these matters, as also those of the institutions
of heirs or executors by way of contract, and of the renunciations
of daughters, have many rules taken out of the Roman law, which


* These two sorts of engagements are expressed and distinguished in the marriage of
Tobias. Tobit vii. 13, 14.
> L. 3. C. de collat. © LT. 15, C. de pact. ;—l. 5, C. de pact. conv.


372 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L BOOK 1


will be found in this book in their proper places, in the matters to
which they have relation. Thus many rules of partnership, and
of other contracts, may be rightly applied to the community of
goods between man and wife, wherever it is in use: and many of
the rules of successions, as also of covenants, may be applied to
the contracts of marriage which settle inheritances as by will

827. The Subject-Matter of this Title.— 'There remains, thea,
for the subject-matter of this title, only the rules of the Roman
law which concern the dowry, or marriage portion, and the goods
which the wife has besides her portion; among which we shall
only set down those rules which are of common use. But we shall
not insert among them some particular customs of the Roman
law, although observed in some countries; as, for instance, the
privilege of the dowry before the creditors of the husband who
were prior to the contract of marriage.

828. The Foundation of the Rules of Dowries.— The rules of
dowries have their foundation in the natural principles of the boad
of matrimony, by which the husband and wife make one body, of
which the husband is the head. For it is an effect of this unios,
that the wife, putting herself under the power of the husband, sab-
jects likewise to his dominion her goods, and which go. to the ss.
of the society, or partnership, which they form together.

829. Distinction of the Goods which are Part of the Dowry, and
those which are called Paraphernal Goods.— According to this prt
ciple, it would be natural for all the goods of the wife to be com
prehended in her dowry, and that she should have none but what
enter into this partnership, and of which the husband, who beas


TIT. 1X.] DOWRIES. 373


moment that the contract is formed, the covenants of the contract
of marriage are in suspense till the marriage is solemnized; and
imply this condition, that they shall not take place but in case the
marriage be accomplished; and that they shall remain void if it
is not accomplished. But when the celebration of the marriage
follows the contract, it gives the contract a retroactive effect, and it
has its effect from the day of itsdate. Thus, the mortgage for the
security of the dowry is acquired from the date of the contract,
and before the celebration of the marriage.

831. Remarks on the Privileges of Dowries.— Some may per-

haps take notice and find fault in reading this title, that nothing
is said in it of some maxims of the Roman law in favor of dow-
ries ; such as those which say, in general, that the causes relating
to the dowries are favorable, and that it is for the public interest
that dowries be preserved ;‘ that in doubtful cases judgment ought
to be given for the dowry :£ and in particular those maxims which
give to dowries certain privileges, such as the privilege among
creditors, and the preference even to those that have prior mort-
gages;" and that privilege which, in favor of dowries, validated
the obligation of a woman who had bound herself for the dowry
of another, although by the Roman law women could not be
bound for other persons. But as to these privileges, that of the
preference of the dowry to the husband’s creditors, even to those
that have prior mortgages, is received only in some places, and
everywhere else it is looked upon as an injustice. And the law
which validates the obligations of a woman for another’s dowry
is useless after the edict of the month of August, 1606, which per-
mits women to bind themselves for others, as has been remarked
on the first article of the first section of the title of Persons.

832. And as for these general maxims, that the causes of dow-
nes are favorable, that the public is interested in their preservation,
and that in doubtful cases judgment ought to be given in favor of
the dowry ; since they do not terminate in any thing particular ex-
cept to show that they are privileges of the Roman law, and see-
ing they may be very readily misapplied, it was not thought proper
to set them down here as rules.


1, D. sol. matr. ; —1. 2, D. de jur. dot.


. 68, D. de jur. dot.; —l. 10, § 4, eod.
70, D. de jur. dot. ; —1. 85, D. de reg. jur. ; —I. ult. C. de senat. Vell.


VOL. I. 32


374 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


833. It is likewise necessary to observe, that in the Roman law
there are other regulations in relation to the matter of dowries,
which, although they be founded on natural equity, yet we have
not thought fit to. insert under this title. Thus, we have not
put down this rule, that the husband being sued by the wife for
the restitution of her marriage portion, or for other matters, or the
wife sued by the husband for what she may be indebted to him,
they ought not to be constrained with the same severity as debtors
for other causes, and cannot be obliged to pay more than what
they are able to do, without being reduced to want. And the
reason why we have not made an article for this rule is, that in
the Roman law it was a consequence of divorce, which was al-
lowed among the Romans, and which is unlawful; and that ac
cording to our usage the wife having no action against her hus
band, nor the husband against the wife, except in the case of a
separation from bed and board, or a separation only as to their
goods, this rule has no relation either to the one or other of these
two cases; and that, in fine, in all the cases where equity requires
that the rigor of prosecutions at the instance of creditors should
be mitigated, it is customary with us to leave the mitigation
this severity to the discretion of the judge, according to the cr
cumstances. As to which it will be proper to see the twentieth
article of the fourth section of Partnership.

834. We have also omitted to set down under this title that
other rule of the Roman law, and which is likewise founded ona
principle of equity, that the fruits of the dowry which are reaped
the last year of the marriage ought to be divided between the hue


TIT. IX. BEC. 1} DOWRIES. 375


was reckoned to begin from the same day of the year that the hus-
band entered into possession of his wife’s lands" But this rule,
which in the case of divorce was necessary for the doing of jus-
tice both to the wife and to the husband, is not so necessary in the
case of the dissolution of the marriage by the death of one or
other of the parties. For whereas in the case of divorce it would
have been very unjust, that a woman married just before the be-
ginning of harvest, and divorced as soon as harvest was over,
should be stripped of the revenue of her estate for the whole year;
in the case of the dissolution of the marriage by the death of the
husband or wife, the justice which may be due to either the one or
other of them, or to their heirs or executor, is not limited precisely
to this rule. And besides this way of dividing the fruits of the
wife’s dowry between the survivor of the married couple, and the
heirs or executors of the deceased, our customs have established
other ways altogether different. Thus, in some customs, the fruits
of the wife’s dowry for the last year go to the husband, subject to
the burdens which the said customs make him liable to; and in
others, the survivor gathers all the fruits that are hanging by the
roots in the estate that is restored, with the burden of paying half
the charge of tillage and seed; and in others, again, the fruits are
divided into two equal shares. And these different usages have
in general their equity founded in this, that those who marry do
contract on the conditions of these customs, unless they derogate
from them by express clauses. And in particular each usage is
founded either upon the uncertainty of the event which may give
some advantage to the person who shall survive, or upon other
motives which render these partitions just and equitable.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF DOWRIES, OR MARRIAGE PORTIONS.


Art. I.


835. The Definition of a Dowry.— A dowry is the goods which
a woman brings in marriage to her husband, that he may enjoy
them, and have the administration of them during their marriage."


® J. 5,4 1. 6, D. sol. matr. ® ZT. 1, D. de jur. dot.; —1. 10, § 3, eod.


376 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT i. BOOK 1.


IL
836. The Husband enjoys the Dowry for the Charges of the Mar-
riage. — The revenues of the dowry are destinated to be a help
towards the maintenance of the husband, the wife, and their fam-
ily, and towards defraying the other charges of the marriage.
And it is on the account of these charges that the husband has
a right to the enjoyment of it.>


IIL.


837. In what Manner the Husband is Master of the Dowry.—
The right which the husband has to the dowry of his wife isa
consequence of their union, and of the power which the husband
has over the wife herself. And this right consists in this, that he
has the administration and enjoyment of the goods of the dowry,
which the wife cannot take from him; that he may sue at law, is
his own name as husband, for the recovery of the goods of the
dowry out of the hands of third persons who detain them wrong
fully, or are debtors of them;* and that he thus exercises, in hs
own name as husband, the rights, and prosecutes the action,
which relate to the dowry, in such a manner as makes him to be
considered as if he were master of the goods, but which does not
hinder the wife from retaining the property of them.* And its
these several effects of the rights of the husband, and of thoee df
the wife, to the dowry, which make the laws to consider the
dowry both as being the goods of the wife, and likewise the
goods of the husband.


IV.


IT. IX. SEC. 1. DOWRIES. 377


ebtor for the money given in dowry, or for the price of the things
stimated. For this estimation makes it a sale of the things to
im; and the dowry consists in the price agreed on.°


V.


839. The Estimation makes the Thing to be at the Husband's
'ertl.— If the things thus estimated happen to be damaged, or to
erish during the marriage, it is the husband who, being pro-
rietor of the things, bears the loss of them, as he would reap the
rofit, if there were any. But the profit and the loss of the things
rhich have not been estimated belong to the wife, who has always
‘tained the property of them<


VL


840. Consequences of this Estimation.— In the case where the

hings which are part of the dowry are estimated, the rules
oncerning them are the same with those which have been
xplained in treating of the contract of sale. For this estimation
8 a true sales


VIL


841. The Dowry may be of all the Woman's Estate, or of a Part
of it.— The dowry may comprehend either all the estate of the
wife present and to come, or only all the estate she has at present,
ora part of it, according as it has been agreed between them.®
And the goods of the wife which are no part of the dowry are
called paraphernal goods, of which we shall speak in the fifth
section.


VIII.


842. Profits of the Dowry which are not Revenues. — If the hus-
band reaps from the portion which he had in marriage with his
wife any profit which may be reckoned a revenue, it belongs to
him. But if the said profit is not of the nature of fruits and
revenues, it is a capital, which augments the dowry. Thus, the
vuttings of coppice-woods, the trees which are taken out of nur-


© £1.10, § 4, D. de jur. dot.; —1. 5, C. de jur. dot.
€ Z. 10, D. de jur. dot.;—1. 10, C. eod.; —d. 1. 10, D. de jur. dot.; —1. un. § 9, in f- C.
5 L. 10, § 5, in f. D. de jur. dot.;—1. 1 et 1.10, C. end.
b 1.4, C. de jur. dot.; —l. 72, D. eod. toto tit. D. de jur. dot.
32 *


378 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


series, are revenues. But if the husband fells great trees which
the wind has thrown down in a wood, in a warren, or an orchard;
if he takes down the materials of an edifice gone to decay, which
it is neither useful nor necessary to rebuild; all the profits which
arise from these kinds of things, the expenses being deducted, are
capital stocks which go to the augmentation of the dowry. And
it would be the same thing if there should happen any addition
to the lands which are part of the dowry, whether it be in their
extent, as if a piece of ground lying near a river happens to
receive any accretion from it; or in their value, as if a right of
service, or such like, be discovered to belong to them:


IX.


843. Stones taken out of Quarries, and other Matters. — The
stones of quarries, and the other matters which are taken out of a
ground, such as chalk, plaster, sand, and the like, are revenues
which belong to the husband. Whether it be that the said mat
ters appeared at the time of the marriage; or that the husband
made the first discovery of them;! in which case he recovers the
expenses he has been at in putting the ground in a condition of
yielding this new revenue" But if these matters are such that
they cannot be reckoned among the fruits, and that they do tot
make a yearly revenue, but a profit to be made only for onc,
the said profit will be a capital stock, and the dowry will be i-
creased by the profit made out of these matters, the charges being
first deducted"


TIT. 1X. SEC. 1.] DOWRIES. 379


XI.

845. The Gains of the surviving Husband or Wife.— It may be
agreed, that the husband surviving the wife shall have a certain
profit out of the wife’s estate. And this profit may be stipulated,
either in case there be children of the marriage, or even in case
there happen to be none;? and they may likewise regulate some
profit for the wife, out of the husband’s estate, in case she outlives
him.


XII.


846. Liberty of all Lawful and Honest Pacts.— In contracts of
marriage, as in all others, the parties contracting may make all
manner of agreements, whether relating to the dowry or other-
wise, provided that the agreement have nothing in it that is un-
lawful, dishonest, or that is forbidden by any law or custom.‘


XIII


847. The Husband cannot alienate the Lands he got in Marriage
with his Wife.— The lands which the husband got in marriage
with his wife can neither be alienated, nor mortgaged by the hus-
band, even although the wife should consent to it."


XIV.


848. Neither can he subject them to Services or other Burdens. —
The prohibition of alienating the lands which are the wife’s por-
tion includes that of subjecting them to services, or suffering those
due to them to be lost, and of making their condition worse any
other way:


PL. un. § 6, C. de ret ux. act.; —1. 19, C. de donat. ante nupt. ; —1. 12, D. de pact. dot. ;
— Ul. 2, 26, eod. ; —1.1, D. de dote preleg.;—v. 1.9, C. de pact. convent. ;— et Nov. 97, c.
1, de equal. dot. et propt. nupt. don. et augm. dot.

It is to be remarked on this article, that the customs of places regulate differently the
gains as well of the husband as of the wife; and these gains regulated by the customs are
acquired of right, although there were no express agreement about them.

4 ZL. 1, § ult. C. de ret ur. act. See the twentieth article of the first section of the
Rules of Law.

° DL. un. § 15, Cod. de ret ur. act. This article is to be understood according to the
usage of the countries where the wife cannot alienate her dowry. But she may alienate
it in some countries, with the husband's consent. It is necessary likewise to observe, that,
in some countries, the wife cannot so much as bind herself, even with the consent of her
husband ; which preserves her whole dowry entire to her, whether it consist in movables
or immovables.

° L. 5, D. de fund. dot.


$80 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT. i BOOK b


XV.

849. Exception for the Alienating of the Dowry.— If during the
the marriage there happens any extraordinary case, which may
require the alienation of the wife’s dowry, such as that of redeem-
ing out of captivity, or out of prison, the husband, the wife, or
their children, or other necessary causes; in such cases the aliens-
tion may be permitted by a decree of court, the judge inquiring
into the merits of the cause, and into the circumstances.*


XVI.

850. The Settlement of the Dowry implies the Condition that the
Marriage shall be accomplished. — All settlements of dowries im-
ply the condition that the marriage shall be accomplished. And
the covenants relating to the dowry, as all the other covenants in
a contract of marriage, are annulled, if the marriage is not solem-
nized, or if for some cause it be declared null and void.*


SECTION II.


OF THE PERSONS WHO GIVE THE DOWRY, AND OF THEIR
ENGAGEMENTS.


Art. I
851. The Father endows his Daughter. — The daughter who
marries ought to be endowed by her father, if he be alive. For
the duty of the father to take care of his children, and to pro


TIT. IX. skc. 1.) DOWRIES. 361


IL
852. The Maid, or Widow, that ts from under her Father's Juris-
diction, settles her own Dowry. — When a maid, or widow, that is
no longer under the jurisdiction of her father, marries, she settles
her own dowry, and stipulates the conditions of it.>


HL
8521. The Settlement of the Dowry of a Maid that is a Minor. —
When a young woman under age marries after the death of her
father, seeing she is mistress of her own estate, although under
the care of a. tutor, or guardian, yet it is she herself that settles
her dowry, with the consent and approbation of her tutor, or


guardian.°
IV.


853. If the Father endows his Daughter, tt is presumed to be out
of his own Estate, and not out of what the Daughter may have of
her own besides. — If a father, whose daughter has an estate of
her own, which she inherited of her mother, or some other person,
and of which the father has the management, as being his daugh-
ters tutor or guardian, settles on her a marriage portion, without
specifying whether it is out of the daughter’s proper estate or his
own; he is reputed to give it, not as tutor or guardian, to his
daughter, but as her father, and because of the duty incumbent on
him to endow his daughter, and that out of his own estate. And
it would be the same thing, although this daughter were already
emancipated.4


Ni


84. The Dowry given by the Father is called “ Dos Profectitia.”
~The dowry which the father gives his daughter out of his own
estate is, with respect to him, distinguished in the Roman law by
the name of Dos Profectitia, because it is from the father that it
Proceeds.°


VI.
855. Reversion of the Dowry which proceeds from the Father. —
» Tot. tit. D. de jur. dot.
¢ 1. 28, C. de jur. dot.


4d 7.. 5, § 12, D. de jur. dot. ;—1. ult. C. de dotis promiss.
© L.5, D. de jur. dot. ; —d.1. 5, § 11, D. de jur. dot.


382 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


The dowry which proceeds from the father returns to him, if he
survives his daughter, and she dies without children‘


VIL

856. The Foundation and Use of this Right.— This right of
reversion of the dowry is preserved to the father, although the
daughter had been set at liberty from under the father’s jurisdic
tion by emancipation. For this right is not annexed to that kind
of paternal authority which is lost by emancipation, but to the
natural right which is inseparable from the name of father:* and
that it may be as a comfort to him under the loss he sustains by
his daughter’s death.®


VHL


857. The Dowry which comes from the Father is subject to the
Profits due to the Husband.— This right of reversion does not
hinder the husband from retaining out of the dowry which came
from the father that which belongs to him as his profit, according
as it has been agreed on;! or as the matter is regulated by the
customs of the places.


TX.


858. If the Father ts Mad, or a Prodigal. — If the father were
put under the care of a guardian, as being out of his senses, or ss
being a prodigal, or for other causes; or if he were absent, or 8
any other condition which should oblige the magistrate to tak
care of the marriage and endowment of his daughter; the mar


TY. IX. SEC. 11.] DOWRIES. 383


onsidered as a dowry proceeding from the father, and settled by
iim on his daughter.


Xx.


859. The Dowry coming from the Grandfather, and other As-
endants on the Fathers Side.— All that has been said of the
ather, with respect to the dowry coming from him, and reverting
to him, is likewise to be understood of the grandfather, and other
ascendants on the father’s side.!


XL
860. Reversion to Strangers.— All persons, parents or stran-
gers, may give a marriage portion. But they have not the right


of reversion, unless they have stipulated it. For it is a free and
imevocable gift which they have been pleased to make.”


XIL


861. What the Father owes to the Daughter is not considered as
0 Dowry coming from him.— If the father endows his daughter
only out of what he has of hers, or was obliged to give her, as if a
stranger had given a sum of money to the father, on condition
that he should lay it out as a portion for his daughter, this dowry
will not be considered as coming from the father;? but it will
be reckoned a portion proceeding from another person, and the
daughter’s own patrimony. And it would be the same thing, if
the father was indebted to the daughter on any other account.4


XTIL
862. Dowry settled by the Mother.— Although it be a duty


‘1.5, § 3, D. de jur. dot.; —d.1. 5, § 4.

L. 5, D. de jur. dot. See the remark on the following article.

" L. 41, D. de jure dot.

"DL. 24, C. de jur. dot.;—l. un. § 13, C. de ret ux. act. Why should not the mother,
aod the ascendants by the mother’s side, have the right of reversion, which they seem to
be excluded from by this thirteenth section, which ranks them in the number of stran-
gerst Have not they the same reasons as the father. Ne filis amiss, et pecunie dam-
nam sentiret. ZL. 6, D. de jure dot. Our customs deprive the ascendants of the succes-
sions of their children in estates of inheritance, which they do not suffer to ascend, for

fear they should pass from one line to another. But they preserve to the mother, and the
wher ascendants on her side, the right of reversion in the same manner as to the father.
See the seventh article of this section.

P L. 5,49, D. de jur. dot.

qD.1 5,491.


384 THE CIVIL Law. (rar? 2. BOOK L


properly incumbent on the father to endow his daughter, and
he cannot endow her out of the mother’s estate;™ yet if the
mother has goods which are no part of her own dowry, she may
endow her daughter out of them. And if the father is not able to
give a portion to his daughter, the mother may in that case endow
her out of her own dowry, observing the temperaments which the
customs prescribe in the like cases."


XIV.


863. Warranty of the Dowry.— The persons who give a dowry,
or marriage portion, whether it be in money, land, or things of
another nature, can no more dispose of what they have once given
away, or promised; and they are obliged to warrant the lands
that are given, the debts that are transferred, and the other thing,
according to the agreement made, or according to the rules of


warranty which those persons are bound to who sell or trans |


any thing.


SECTION III.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE HUSBAND WITH RESPECT TO TH
DOWRY, AND OF THE RESTITUTION OF THE DOWRY,


Arr, I
864. The Husband's Engagement to bear the Charges of i
Marriage. — The husband having the dowry in his power, with #


|
|


X. SEC. S11] DOWRIES. 285


I.

5. Of the Care which the Husband ought to take of the Effects
ining to the Dowry.— Seeing the husband enjoys the dowry,
has it in his possession, as much for his own interest as his
5; he ought to take the same care of it as he does of his
affairs and his own proper goods. Thus he ought to sue the
rs, repair and cultivate the lands and tenements, and in
al have a watchful eye over every thing that relates to the
rvation of the effects pertaining to the dowry. And if
gh his fault, or negligence, there happen losses and diminu-
_or he commits waste on the estate, he shall be bound to
} them good ;° as likewise to make good the accidents which
be occasioned through faults for which he is accountable.°


II.


3. Diligence against the Debtors. — Although the husband be
ed to sue the debtors who have in their hands any part of
rife’s portion, and if he neglects to enter his action when it
efor him to do it, he is bound to make good all that shall
en to be lost through his negligence ; yet nevertheless, if the
xx of the dowry is the father, or a donor, we ought not to
ire of the husband that he should use the same diligence
ast them which he ought to use against a stranger. But it is
mable in this case to give some grains of allowance, accord-
is the circumstances may require.


IV.


7. If the Husband innovates the Obligation, it is at his own
.—If a husband changes the nature of a debt pertaining to
lowry, by innovating the obligation, this change will be at


5, § 2, D. commod. ;— 1. 23, D. de req. jur.; —1. 17, D. de jur. dot.;—l. ult. C.
 conv.;—l. 33, D. de jur. dot. See the following article. ZL. 7, § 12, D. solut.


66, D. solut. matrim.

20, § 2, D. de pact. dot. ;— 1. 33, D. de jur. dot. We have thought proper to qual-
rale in the manner that it is set down in this article. For our usage is not in this
lar so indulgent to the husband as this thirty-third law, D. de jure dot., seems to be.
on one hand, it would be too hard to oblige the husband to use against a father-in-
against a donor, the most rigid severity for recovering the debt; so, on the other
t would not be just that he should be absolutely excused from using any manner
ence at all. So that it is necessary to apply some temperament, which may regu-
conduct according to the circumstances. Sce the twentieth article of the fourth
of Partnership.

ree 33


386 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


his own peril, and he will remain charged with the debt, as if he
had received it.®
V.

868. If the Husband receives Interest from a Debtor of the
Dowry.— The husband who receives interest from a debtor of the
dowry, delaying on that account to call in the principal sum
which he might have demanded, will be answerable for the debt,
if the said debtor becomes insolvent.


VI.


869. How Prescription may be imputed to the Husband. — If the
lands or tenements which are part of the dowry be possessed bys
third person, and the husband suffers the whole time limited for
prescription to run out, he shall be answerable for it. Unless it
be that at the time of the marriage the prescription was very neif ”)
being accomplished, and that there remained so little time to rm,
that the husband could not be blamed for not interrupting a pr
scription which was acquired without his knowledge.


Vil.


870. The Case of Restitution of the Dowry.— The last engage
ment of the husband is to restore the dowry, whenever the a
happens that it onght to be restored. As if the wife dies withoul
children before the husband; if the marriage is declared null and
void; if they are divorced, or separated from bed and board; orf
the wife obtains a separation of goods only because of the hue
; if the dowry was given to the husband at tht ©


band’s poverty


TIT. 1X. SEC. 111.] DOWRIES. | 387


mented the capital of the dowry, and which ought not to belong
to the husband. Thus the augmentations of the nature of those
which have been mentioned in the eighth and ninth articles of the
first section, are to be restored with the dowry:!


IX.


872. To whom the Dowry ought to be restored. — When the case
of restoring the dowry happens, it ought to be restored either to
the wife, if she has survived her husband, and be of age to receive
it; or to her heirs, executors, or administrators, or to her father, if
it was he that settled it, or to the other persons to whom the


dowry may appertain.'
X.
873. The Husband's Gains diminish the Restitution of the Dowry.
— If it has been agreed in the contract of marriage, or if it be


regulated by custom, that the husband surviving should retain a
part of the dowry, the restitution will be diminished in so much.”


XI.


874. Repairs and other Expenses lessen the Dowry.— The resti-
tation of the dowry is also lessened by the repairs, and other
charges which the husband, or his heirs, executors, or administra-
tors, have been at in preserving the effects of the dowry, according
to the nature of those disbursements, and the rules which follow.2


XII.


875. Three Sorts of Expenses.— The expenses which the hus-
band, or his heirs, executors, or administrators, may have been at,
are of three sorts. Some are necessary, such as those which are
laid out in repairing a building which is ready to fall, and which
ought to be preserved. Others are useful, although not necessary,
such as the planting of an orchard. And there are some which
are neither necessary nor useful, and which serve only for pleasure;
such as paintings, or other ornaments.°


' 7. 52, D. de jur. dot.

! £2 D. sol. matr.; —I. 10, eod. ; —I. 6, D. de jure dot. ; —1. un. § 13, C. de ret ux. act. ;
—l 2, C. de jure dot.

™ See the eleventh article of the first section.

® See the following articles.

© ZL. 1, D. de imp. in res dot. fact. ;—d.1.1,41;—d.11, §3;—L 5, § ult. et 1. 6, eod. ;
a=] 7 ond.


388 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK 1.


XII

876. Necessary Expenses. — For the necessary expenses, the
husband may retain the lands or tenements pertaining to the
dowry, or a part of them, according to their value; and may keep
possession of them till he is reimbursed; and this is the reason
why this sort of expenses is said to lessen the dowry.’ For itis
in effect lessened by the necessity of cutting off from it that which
is due to the husband, on the account of an expense without
which the lands or tenements might have gone to ruin, or been
damaged, or diminished, and which the husband was obliged
lay out, that he himself might not be made accountable for the
loss that should happen.?


XIV.


877. The Husband bears the Charges of the Annual, and Ordinery
Expenses. — The expenses which are laid out daily, and of cours,
either on the preservation of the lands and tenements, such as the
lesser repairs of a house, or for cultivating the lands, such as tilling
and sowing, or gathering in the fruits, are taken out of the fruits
themselves, and out of the other revenues, and are a charge 0a
them. For the fruits and revenues are understood only to be thst
which remains of clear profit, after deduction of the expenses that
have been necessarily laid out in order to be able to enjoy. 8
that the husband does not recover these kind of expenses. Bat
he recovers those which pass the bounds of what is necessary for
preserving the lands and tenements in good case, and for enjoying
them."


PIT. 1X. SEO. I1!.] DOWRIES. 389


he husband, or his heirs, executors, or administrators. And
ilthough these expenses have been laid out without the wife’s
sonsent, yet they have their action for recovering them.'


XVII


880. How we are to judge of the Necessity or Usefulness of the
Expenses. — Since there may arise difficulties about determining
what expenses are necessary, or not, and what are useful, or not,
t is to be left to the prudence of the judge to decide this matter
iccording to the circumstances. And this depends on divers
riews, and on the regard that is to be had to the quality of the
ands and tenements, and other things on which the expenses have
yeen laid out, as if it is to preserve or to better a house, or to
recover a debt; to the quality of the repairs and other changes ;
lo the convenience or inconvenience that may follow from thence ;
to the proportion that may be between the expense and the im-
provement; and to other considerations of the like nature. Thus,
for instance, if for the cultivating of a country farm it is ne-
cessary to build a barn to it, or some other edifice, this may
be reckoned a necessary expense; and if there is in a house
& place fit for making a shop in, this may be reckoned a useful


expense.


'Liun. § 5, C. de res uror. act.; —l. ult. D. de fund. dot. See the thirteenth article of
this section. It is to be remarked on the said thirteenth article, and on the present, that
what has been said on the thirteenth article touching the right which the husband has to
detain the necessary expenses, and what is said in the present article of the action which
the husband has for recovering the expenses which are only useful, ought to be understood
according to our usage; which is such, that, of what nature soever the expenses be, wheth-
er useful or necessary, the husband, who in this quality was in possession of the estate
Pertaining to the dowry, cannot be dispossessed, nor his heirs, executors, or administra-
tor, avainst their will, but by authority of justice. And this is likewise observed, al-
though there should be no reimbursement of expenses due; and this was also the prac-
bee under the Roman law. JZ. 9, C. solut. matr. And this is the rule for all possessors,
that they cannot be turned out of possession but by authority of justice. Sce the fifteenth
article of the sixth section of Covenants. But as to what concerns the reimbursement
of the husband, and the right he has to detain the dowry for the expenses, it depends
always on the prudence of the judge to determine whether the husband, or his heirs,

executors, or administrators, ought to remain in possession till they are reimbursed.
And this they are to judge of by the circumstances; such as the quantity of the expenses,
the value of the lands and tenements; the security which the husband, or his heirs, exec-
Utors, or administrators, may liave some other way ; the value of the fruits; whether the
enjoyment of some part of the fruits may not suffice for their reimbursement; the quality
of the persons and of their estates; and other circumstances of the like nature.
° DL. 15, in f. D. de imp. in res dot. ; —1. 7, § ult. D. sol. matr. ;— 1. 6, D. de imp. in res


do. f.
33 *


390 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


XVIII.

881. If the Repairs perish by Accident. — If it so fall out that
the repairs perish through some accident, the husband, or his heirs,
executors, or administrators, will nevertheless recover the charges
they were at in making them. Because the work entitled them to
the recovery of the expenses which they laid out on it; and the
property of the repairs belonging to the wife, it is she that bean
the loss of them.*


XIX.


882. Expenses for Pleasure.— The expenses which are laid out
merely for pleasure, without either necessity or usefulness, are not
recoverable, even although the wife had engaged the husband to lay
them out. For he ought to blame himself for an expense which
he had a mind to throw away


XX.


883. Repairs for Pleasure. —If the repairs made for pleasure
are such, that they can be taken away without being destroyed,
the husband, or his heirs, executors, or administrators, may take
them away, in case of a refusal to reimburse them of the charges
which they have been at in making them. But if they are of such
a nature that they can be of no use when taken away, such as
painting in fresco, it is not permitted to deface them. For this
would be doing harm without reaping any profit!


TIT. 1X. SEC. Iv.] DOWRIES. 391


885. Thus, when the wife gives to her husband in marriage
only all the estate which she has at present, or some particular
goods, the remainder which she either has at present, or may after-
wards have, by inheritance or otherwise, will be paraphernal. But
if she gives in marriage all her estate present and to come, in
that case she can never have any paraphernal goods.

886. The difference between the dowry and the paraphernal
goods consists in this, that whereas the revenues of the dowry
belong to the husband, the revenues of the paraphernal goods are
the wife’s own: and she may dispose of the said revenues, and of
the principal itself, without the authority of her husband.

887. This nature of the paraphernal goods, which are no part
of the dowry, together with the liberty given to the wife to dis-
pose of the revenues of the said estate, without consulting her
husband or asking his consent, seems to have something in it
contrary to the principles of their union. For, as the husband is
the head of the wife, and has the charge of the family, it would
seem just that he should be master of all the revenues of his
wife’s estate ; which, as well as those of the husband, ought to be
employed for the common use of man and wife, and of their fam-
ily; and this liberty which the wife has of enjoying a separate
estate independently of her husband is likewise an occasion

sometimes of troubling the peace and tranquillity which the mar-
riage union requires. And we see likewise, that, in the same law
of the Romans which takes away from the husband all right over
the paraphernal estate, it is owned to be just that the wife, put-
ting herself under the conduct of her husband, should likewise
intust him with the management of her estate.” However, both
the Roman law and our customs have received the usage of para-
phernal goods; some of them having only regulated that, if in the
contract of marriage the wife does not specify what goods she
intends to allot for her dowry, all the estate which she is seized
or possessed of at the time of the contract is to be reputed as
her dowry.

888. There are again others, which have so favored the use of
paraphernal goods, and the liberty of wives to dispose of them,
that, although the same customs do not allow the wife either to
alienate or to mortgage her dowry, not even with the consent and
approbation of her husband, yet they allow her to enjoy and to


b LZ. 8, C. de pact. conv.


392 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


dispose of her paraphernal goods, not only without the authority,
but even without the consent, of her husband. And this dispo-
sition is favorable in the said customs as well as in the ‘provinces
which are more particularly governed according to the civil law,
where it is obrerved. Because, the community of goods betweea
the husband and wife not being received in use there, seeing the
wife has not the profit either of the revenues of her own portioa,
which belong to the husband, nor of the estate which he may
acquire during the marriage, they leave her the liberty to augment
her own estate by the profits which she may be able to make of
her paraphernal goods.


Art. I.


889. Definition of the Paraphernal Goods. — The paraphersal
goods are all the goods which a married woman has, besides those
which have been given with her in marriage to her husband. And
these goods are, as it were, a sort of peculium, or private posse
sion, which the wife reserves to herself over and above her downy,
which goes to the husband.®


HI.


890. The Wife may dispose of her Paraphernal Goods. —The
wife may dispose of her paraphernal goods, without the authority
and consent of her husband; and may put them to what use she
pleases, the husband having no right to control her, even although
she had delivered them into his custody.®


TIT. IX. BEC. Iv.] DOWEIES. 393


IV.

892. If the Paraphernal Estate consists in Movables.— If the
paraphernal estate, or a part of it, consists in rents, debts, or in
movable effects, the wife may either keep them in her own cus-
tody, or put them into the hands of her husband, getting him to
sign an inventory of them, as an acknowledgment of the receipt


of the goods.?
V.


893. The Husband's Care of the Paraphernal Goods delivered to
kim. — If the paraphernal goods are put into the husband’s cus-
tody, he is obliged to take the same care of them as of his own
goods, and he will be made accountable for the faults that are
inconsistent with this care.


VI


894. How these Goods are distinguished from the Goods of the
Dowry. — The paraphernal goods are distinguished from the goods
of the dowry by the contract of marriage, which ought to express
what goes to the dowry. And all the goods which are not com-
prehended in the dowry, either expressly or tacitly, are reckoned to
be paraphernal, even although the wife should deliver them to the
husband, together with the goods of her dowry; unless it should

appear, at the time of the delivery, that the said goods were only
an accessory with which the wife intended to augment her dowry.


VIL


895. What the Wife is possessed of without an apparent Title
belongs to the Husband. — We ought not to reckon in the number
of the paraphernal goods, nor of the other goods of the wife, those
which she may chance to have in her custody, or which she may
pretend to belong to her, unless it appear that she has a just title
to them; as if she has acquired them by inheritance, or gift, or that
she was possessed of them at the time of her marriage. And

all the other goods which she may chance to have, of which the
title does not appear, and it is not known whence she had them,
belong to the husband. For otherwise it must be presumed that


4 £.9, § 3, in f. D. de jur. dot.; —d. § 3;—v. 1. ult. C. de pact. conv.

e L. ult.in fC. de pact. conv. ; —. 9, § 8, inf: D. de jur. dot. See the second article of
the third section of this title.

{ L. 9, §§ 2 et 3, D. de jur. dot.


394 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 1


the wife has come by these goods only by cheating her husband,
or by other unlawful wayss And even the profits which she may
happen to make by her frugality, her labor, and industry, belong
to the husband, as fruits and revenues, and as services or offices
which the wife owes to the husband.®


SECTION V.
OF THE 8EPARATION OF GOODS BETWEEN THE HUSBAND AND WIFE


896. The Connection between this Matter and that of Dowries.—
The separation of goods between the husband and wife is one of
the causes of the restitution of the dowry. And therefore, this
matter being an accessory to that of dowries, the rules concerning
it shall be explained in this section.

897. The separation of goods is made in two cases. The fint
is, when the wife procures a separation from her husband’s bed,
because of his cruel usage of her; for a separation from the hu»
band’s bed implies a separation of goods. And the second is,
when the disorder of the husband’s affairs obliges the wife to take
back her own estate.

898. The separation from the husband’s bed is a matter which
does not come properly within the design of this book ; it being
altogether different in our usage from that which was the effect of
a divorce under the Roman law. And we shall only treat here
of the bare separation of goods.


TIT. IX. SEC. V.| - DOWRIES. 306


which she may have brought to her husband, are left with him on
condition that he bear the charges of the marriage; she cannot
demand the separation of goods, except when the disorder of the
husband’s affairs puts him out of a condition of being able to bear
the said charges, and that the goods which he has of his wife’s are
in danger. Thus, the separation ought to be decreed in a court of
justice, after hearing the cause, and upon sufficient proof that the
bad condition of the husband’s affairs, and the smallness of his
estate, put the goods of the wife in danger.>


III.


901. Effect of the Separation.— The separation of goods being
granted to the wife only because her goods were in danger, and
because the husband was not able to bear the charges of the mar-
riage ; the engagement of the husband to manage the goods of the
wife, and to bear these charges, passes to the wife by the separa-
tion of goods. So that she takes upon her again the administra-
tion of her own goods, and bears these charges, employing her
revenues for the maintenance of her husband, herself, and their


children.°
IV.


902. The Wife who has obtained a Separation of Goods cannot
dhenate them.— The separation of goods gives the wife only a
ight to enjoy her own goods, and to take care of them; but she
cannot alienate them,‘ except in so far as the laws and customs of
the country may allow her.


V.


903. She may distrain the Goods of the Husband, and cause them
lo be sold for her Dowry. — If the dowry consists in money, debts,
or other effects which are not in being, the wife may, by virtue of
the separation, distrain and cause to be exposed to sale the goods
of the husband, and others that are mortgaged to her, even
although they be in the hands of a third possessor.


> L. 24, D. solut. matr. ; — v. |. 22, § 8, eod.; —L. 30, in f. C. de jure dot.
¢ ZL. 29, C. de jure dot.

4 7. 29, C. de jur. dot.

* See the thirteenth and fifteenth articles of the first section.

f L. 29, C. de jur. dot.


396 THE OIVIL Law. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


VI
904. She may do the same for the Recovery of her Parapherad
Goods which she gave her Husband. — If, besides the goods of the
dowry, the wife had put into her husband’s custody her parapher
nal goods which are not in being, she may recover them in te
same manner as the goods of her dowry.


VIL


905. As also for her Gains.— If by the contract of marriage
there are gains due to the wife out of the husband’s estate, she
may recover them in the same manner as she recovers her dowry,
whether it be to preserve her right of property in them, if she
is not to have the enjoyment of them till after the husbands
death, or that she may enter on the actual enjoyment of them;
according as the quality of the said gains shall happen to be reg
ulated, either by the contract of marriage, or by the customs and
usage of the places.® |


TITLE X.


OF DONATIONS THAT HAVE THEIR EFFECT IN THE LIFETDE
OF THE DONOR.


906. Two Sorts of Donations.— Differences between Donations —


TIT. X.] DONATIONS, 397


may be revoked. The other difference between donations that
take effect in the lifetime of the donor, and those which have their
effect only after his death, is a consequence of the former, and
consists in this, that he who gives during his lifetime divests him-
self of that which he gives away, and transfers it to the donee,
who becomes master of it; whereas he who gives only in prospect
of death loves rather to keep than give away, and remains until
nis death proprietor of what he gives, having a right to deprive
the donee of it, and to dispose of it otherwise as he pleases.
Thus, whereas the donation that takes effect in the lifetime of the
donor strips the donor himself, the donation made in prospect of
death strips only his heir or executor.*

907. It is because of this last difference between the donations

that take effect in the donor’s lifetime, and those which take effect
only after his death, that the customs which do not permit testa-
mentary dispositions to the prejudice of the next heirs, except as
to a certain portion of the goods, reduce to the same portion do-
nations made in prospect of death; and that, on the contrary, they
permit donations that have their effect in the donor’s lifetime to
the prejudice of the heirs, because the donor not only strips his
heirs, but also himself, of what he gives away. And these sorts
of donations which strip the donor have no other bounds than
those which have been set to them by the several customs of par-
ticular places; whether it be for preserving to the children their
filial portions, or for restraining largesses between certain persons,
or for other causes.

908. It follows from this nature of donations that take effect
in the donor’s lifetime, that, they being covenants irrevocable which
strip the donor of what he gives away, every donation that has
hot this character, and which leaves the donor at liberty to revoke
iis a donation of no force; that is to say, it is not, properly
speaking, a donation that is to take place in the lifetime of the

donor.

909. It is on this principle that the common rule in this mat-
ter depends, viz. that to give and to retain avails nothing. The
meaning of which is, that if the donor keeps what he gives away,
he does not divest himself, and does not give. Which maxim has
‘his extent, that it annuls not only the donations in which the do-
lors reserve a liberty of disposing of the things given, but likewise


® L. 35, § 2, D. de mort. caus. donat.
VOL. I. 34


398 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 1. BOOK L


ali those donations in which there happen to be circumstances de
noting that the donor has not divested himself, and that the donee
has not been made irrevocably master of the thing that was
given him. Thus a donation, whereof the deed or title remains in
the custody of the donor, the donee having no duplicate of it, o
of which the minute or draught is not put into the hands of:
public notary, in order to draw up the instrument, would be s
void donation ; because the donor would retain the liberty of an-
nulling it.

910. Donations made in prospect of death are one of the mat
ters treated of in the second part of this work; and the present
title relates only to donations that have their effect in the lifetime
of the donors, because they are covenants. But to avoid the re
peating always the expression at large of donations that take effect
in the lifetime of the donors, we shall use only the simple word of
donations.

911. Donations are liberalities which are natural in the order of
society, where the ties of parentage and friendship, and the several
engagements, lay different obligations on persons to do good, either
out of gratitude for favors received, or out of an esteem of ment,
or out of a motive of assisting those that are in want, or upon
other considerations.

912. There are divers sorts of ways of giving, and doing of
good, as well as of commerce. And as we make a commerce of
industry, labor, services, and also of things, we do the same like
wise of gratuitous deeds; but we give the name of donation only
to that kind of liberality by which we strip ourselves of the things;


TIT. x.} DONATIONS. 399


said principles the spirit of the different rules which are observed,
either in the provinces that are governed by the Roman law,
or in the customs. And they are contained in the following
remarks.

914. The strict union between man and wife being an occasion
to them to exercise their liberality towards one another, according
to their affection and their estates; the use of these sorts of dona-
tions was attended with so great inconveniences, that it was abol-
ished by the Roman law. For it appeared from experience, that
the easy temper either of the husband or of the wife impover-
ished the one to enrich the other; that the application of the party
that was most covetous to procure largesses from the other, en-
gaged them in cares and views entirely opposite to their duty of
educating their children, or diverted them wholly from any thoughts
of it; that the one party refusing to comply with the desires of
the other, in giving what was asked, it was an occasion of strife
and contention; and, in fine, the Roman lawgivers were of opinion,

that the conjugal love ought to subsist and to be nourished by a
more honorable motive than that of self-interest.°

915. But seeing the principal consideration which induced the

Roman lawgivers to annul donations between man and wife was
to prevent their impoverishing one another in their lifetime, and
that the donor might not be destitute of all manner of substance
alter the dissolution of the marriage, whether it were by death or
divorce, the donations which were to take effect only after the
death of the donor, not producing the same ill consequences, were
permitted between man and wife. And they gave likewise this
elect to donations which were intended to take place in the life-
time of the donor, that, if they were not revoked by the donor in
his lifetime, they should be confirmed by his death, and be as valid
as if they had at first been made in prospect of death.

916. The dispositions of the customs in relation to donations
between man and wife are different, according to the regard which
they have had to the motives upon which these donations were
annulled by the Roman law, or according to the other views of
the spirit and principles of the said customs. ‘Thus some of them
have allowed donations between man and wife of the property of
movables, and of the immovables of their own acquisition; and

likewise of a part of the estate which came to them by inheritance ;


© [1 1. 2. et 3, D. de donat. inter vir. et uxor.


400 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part I. BOOK L


but they would have these donations to be revocable. Thus the
same customs, and many others, have approved of donations be
tween man and wife that take effect in the lifetime of the dona,
and allow them to be irrevocable, provided they be only of an ex
joyment of the movables and immovables of the donor’s own por
chase, and that they be reciprocal. And the disposition of these
customs is founded on this principle, that the liberality being r-
ciprocal, and both the one and the other party being uncertain of
the event which would entitle the longest liver to the benefit of the
gift, these kinds of donations are not attended with the same in-
conveniences as where the condition of both parties is not equal,
and that they have nothing in them which may disturb the peace
and tranquillity of the state of matrimony, or which is contrary to
the honor of marriage.

917. But other customs, under other views, have forbid all dix
positions made by the wife in favor of her husband, even although
they were made in prospect of death; notwithstanding the same
customs allow the husband to give to his wife all his estate bya
donation that is to take place in his lifetime, reserving only to the
children their filial portions. And these customs regulate the mat-
ter thus, because they make the wife’s condition less advantageous
in other respects, the community of goods not being there re
ceived; and because they will secure the wife’s estate against the
dispositions to which the husband’s power and authority over her
might engage her.


If. X- SEC. 1.] DONATIONS. 401


II. :
919. No Donation without Acceptance.— There is no donation
vithout acceptance. For if the donee does not accept, the donor
s not divested of the thing which he gives, and his right remains
still with him.®


Iii.


920. If the Donee ts incapable of accepting. — If the donee is
incapable of accepting, as if it be a child which cannot speak, nor
express any desire of having the thing given, the acceptance must
be made by a person that is capable of accepting for him, such
as his father, his tutor, or guardian.°


IV.


921. Who gives what he is bound to give does not make a Dona-
tion.— A donation is a liberality, and he who gives only what he
owes, or what he is obliged to give, does not make a donation,
but acquits himself of a debt, or of some other engagement.
Thus, he who gives in order to fulfil a condition in a testament,
a of a donation which burdens him with it, is not a donor, even
athough it were out of his own substance that he had been


charged to give.!
V.


922. Remuneratory Donations. — The donations which are
called remuneratory, and which are made in recompense of ser-
Viees, are not properly donations, except when that which is given
Could not be demanded by the donee; and the recompense which
the donee could demand is not in effect a donation.


VI.
923. Donations are irrevocable.— Although a donation be a


liberality, yet it is irrevocable, as other covenants are;‘ unless it
be with the consent of the donee, or for some one of the causes
which shall be explained in the fourth section.


’ 7.19, § 2, D. de donat.;—1. 69, D. de reg. jur.;—l. 156, § ult. eod.; —1. 10, D. de
ton. > — i. ult. C. de revoc. donat.

¢ ©. 26, C. de donat.

dL. 35, $1, D. de mort. caus. donat. ; — 1. 82, D. de reg. jur. ; —1. 29, D. de donat.; —1 1,
ed.; —1. 8, D. de don.

e L. 27, D. de donat. ; — v. l. 34, § 1, eod. ; —l. 82, D. de reg. jur.

© ¢9 Inst. de donat.;—1. 1, D. de don. ; —1. 35, § ult. C. de don.

34°


‘IT. X. SEC. L] DONATIONS. 403


sharges, and perform the conditions which the donor has enjoined
im.”


XI


928. Three Sorts of Conditions.— The conditions in donations,

as in other covenants, are of three sorts. Some are such, that the
validity of the donation depends on the existence of the condition ;
others make void the donation which had subsisted; and others
make only some change, without annulling the donation.° Thus,
donations made in favor of marriage imply the condition, that
they shall not have their effect till the marriage be accomplished.?
Thus, a donation being made upon condition that, if the donee
dies before the donor, the things given shall return to the donor,
this condition annuls a donation which had subsisted.1 And this
other condition, that after a certain time, or in a certain case, the
donee shall be bound to deliver the things given, or a part of them,
to another person, neither annuls nor accomplishes the donation;
but makes the change in it which has been agreed on, and obliges
the donee to deliver the things to the person to whom the restitu-
tion ought to be made.


XII.


929. When the Donation is perfected, it admits of no new Bur-
dens. — After the donation has been accomplished, it is no longer
inthe power of the donor to impose on the donee any new con-
dition or charge, even although he were father to the donee.’


XIII.


930. Difference between Motives and Conditions of Donations.
— We are to make a great difference in donations between the
motives which the donors express as the causes of their liberality,
and the conditions with which they burden them. For whereas
the default of a condition annuls the conditional donation ; yet it
subsists, although the motives expressed in it prove not to be true.
Thus, if it is said in a donation, that it is made on account of


= [. 9, C. de donat.

® See the fourth section of Covenants.

P See the last article of the first section of the title of Dowries.
@ L. 2, C. de donat. que sub modo.

t L. 3, C. de donat. que sub modo.

* L. 4, C. de donat. que sub modo.


404 7 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRt 1. BOOK L


services done, or to facilitate to the donee the making of a pu
chase which he had a mind to, the donation will not be annulled,
although no services have been rendered, nor the purchase made.
For there remains still the absolute will of the donor, who may
have had other motives besides those which he has expremed
But if it was said, that the donation is made only on conditics,
that what is given be laid out on such a purchase, such as the
buying of an office, and the office is not bought, the donation wil
have no effect.


XIV.


931. Reservation of the Usufruct.— In all donations, whether they
be universal of all one’s estate, or particular of certain things, the
donor may reserve to himself the use and profits of the things
which he gives.”


XV.
932. Registering of Donations. — Donations ought to be reg |
tered, that every body may know the engagement, which bemg
unknown might give occasion to many frauds.*


XVL
933. Alimony afforded out of Liberality, or otherwise. — We


may place in the number of donations the expenses which amy
person is at for another out of a motive of liberality, and without —
hopes of recovering them; as if one is at the charges of maintal

ing a near relation; and what has been given in this manmet —


— ee 5 es


re Ey oe =


IF. X. SEC. IL] DONATIONS. | 405


e


SECTION II.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE DONOR.


Art. I.


934. First Engagement of the Donor, not to revoke. — The
rst engagement of the donor is, that he cannot annul the dona-
on, when he has once given his consent to it; and he cannot
~voke it,* except for just reasons; such as if he was forced to
sake it, if he was incapable of contracting, or if he was in one of
he cases which shall be explained in the third section.


IL


985. Second Engagement, the Delivery. — The second engage-
ment of the donor, and which is a consequence of the first, is to
perform the donation, and to deliver the thing given, and he may
be constrained to it by the donee, or by his heirs, executors, or ad-
ministrators.>

II.
936. Reservation of the Use and Profits is in Lieu of Delivery. —

When there is a reservation of the use and profits in a donation,


that serves instead of a delivery.


IV.

87. Third Engagement, Warranty. — It is likewise a third en-
gagement of the donor, that, if he is obliged for the warranty of
the things given, he ought to warrant them. But if he has not
engaged himself for the warranty, and it happens that he has
given what was not his own, believing honestly that he was the
ight owner of it, he is discharged from the warranty. For it is
presumed that he meant only to exercise his liberality in things
that were his own.!


V.


938. If the Knavery of the Donor occasions any Loss to the Donee.
—If the donor was guilty of any knavish dealing, as if he gave a


* L.5, C. de revoc. don. ; —1. 8, l. 6, eod. See the sixth article of the first section.

b § 2 Inst. de donat.; — 1. 35, C. eod.

© TZ. 28, C. de donat. ; —I. 35, § 5, ead. See the seventh article of the second section of
ve Contract of Sale.

¢ 1. 2, C. de evict. ; — 1. 18, § ult. D. de donat. See the following article.


406 THE CIVIL LaW. [PART 1. BOOK!


thing which he knew was not his own, he would be bound to
make good the losses and damages which the donee may chance
to sustain through his knavery.


VI.


939. The Donor cannot be constrained to more than what kets
able to give without being reduced to Want.— The donor cannot
be obliged to perform what he has promised, but in so far as hes
able, without being reduced to want. For it would be unjust
that his liberality should be an occasion of inhumanity to bs
donee.‘


VIL.

940. Interest of the Things given. — The donor owes no interes!
for the things given, even after the delay, unless they are expresly
stipulated, or unless there has been a condemnation in a coutd
justice. And they will not be due but from the time they haw
been demanded, and according as the circumstances may requ;
as if a sum of money has been given for a marriage portions


SECTION IIl.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE DONEE, AND OF THE RE VOKING OF
DONATIONS.


Art. L


TIT. X. SEC. 111] DONATIONS. 407


ungrateful to the donor, the donation may be revoked accord-
ing as the deed of the donee may have given occasion for it.
Thus, the donor may revoke the donation, not only if the donee
makes any attempt upon his life or honor, but likewise if he
commits any violence or outrage upon his person, or does him any
injury; or if he occasions him any considerable loss by unfair


practices.°


III.


943. Ingratitude dissembled by the Donor. — The right of revok-
ing a donation because of the ingratitude of the donee does not
pass to the heir, executor, or administrator of the donor, if he him-
self, having known the ingratitude, did not resent it.°


IV.


944. Revocation of the Donation, because of Children being after-
words born to the Donor. — If, after a donation made by a person
who had no children, he happens to have children born to him, the
donation will be void, upon presumption that he who gave hav-
ing no children would not have given if he had had any, and that
he gave only upon this condition, that, if he should happen to
have children, the donation should be of no force.4


* L. ult. C. de revoc. don.; —1. 9, eod. Although the causes of ingratitude, which may
tufice for revoking a donation, be restrained by this last law of the code, de revoc. don., to
these which are expressed in this article, yet we put them down only as an example.
For there may be other causes which may deserve that a donation should be revoked ; as,
for instance, if the donee should refuse alimony to his donor when he is reduced to great
straits.

* L. ult. C. de revoc. donat. ; — 1.1, inf. eod.

41.8, C. de revoc. don.; —v. l. 6, § 1, C. de inst. et subst.; —1. 102, D. de cond. et dem. ;
~1 40, § ult. D. de pact. Although this law be only in favor of the patron who had

made a donation to one whom he had set free from slavery, yet we observe it indiffer-
ently for all persons. But if the donation was small, and made by a person who had a
plentiful estate, to a donee that was in poor circumstances, and for favorable causes,
would such a donation be revoked by the birth of a child ?

If this child happens to die before the donor has revoked the donation, ought it to sub-
sist, the cause of the revocation having ceased by the child’s death? or is it annulled in

sach a manner by the child’s birth, that its death cannot make it revive? These words
of the law, revertatur in ejusdem donatoris arbitrio ac ditione mansurum, seem to signify
that the donation is annulled, and that the donor takes back irrevocably what he had giv-
en. Which may be confirmed by the sixth law, § 1, de inst. et subst., where it is said, that
if a father burdens his son who had no children with a substitution, the said substitution
will vanish whenever the son comes to have children, evanescere substitutionem. To
which we may add, that the child which is born to the donor after the donation, being
seized by its birth of a right to succeed to its father, this right annuls the donation, and


408 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1 BOOK 1.


TITLE XI.
OF USUFRUCT.


945. Reasons for treating of Usufruct in this Place.— In th
foregoing title mention has been made of the reservations of usv-
fruct which are made in donations; and the like reservations may
also be made in marriage settlements, in sales, exchanges, transac
tions, and other covenants.* We may likewise by express cove
nants settle on any person the usufruct of a thing without the
property. So that seeing usufruct may be settled by contracts,
it isa kind of covenant. And although it be likewise acquired by
testaments, and other dispositions made in prospect of death, or
even by the laws, such as the usufruct which the laws, the ordi-
nances, and the customs give to parents in the estates of their chil-
dren, whether it be under the name of usufract or wardship; yet
we choose to place this matter here, which, since it can only be m
one place, ought to be put in the first where there is occasion to
speak of it, as has been remarked in the plan of matters.

946. The practice of settling the usufruct of a thing without
the property is natural in society, not only becanse of the indef._.
nite liberty of all sorts of covenants, but also because of the use
fulness of separating on many occasions the right of property from
that of the present enjoyment. And this separation which ®
made naturally by the commerce of letting to hire and to farm, #
likewise made very justly upon other views; whether it be in de


TIT. XI. SEC. 1.] USUFRUCT. 409


usufructuary, or to the executor, or to another legatee. In all
these cases, whether it be that the usufract be settled by covenant,
by testament, by a law, or by custom, the nature of it is still the
same, unless the title by which the usufruct is settled makes some
distinction ; and it is this matter of usufruct in general which is
the subject-matier of this title.

947. We may likewise consider as a kind of usufruct, to which
several rules of this title may be applied, the right which the in-
cambents of church benefices have to enjoy the revenues belonging
to them. And this kind of usufruct has this peculiar property
belonging to it, that the estates which are subject to it do not be-
long to any particular owner, but to the church.

948. Those who have read this matter of usufruct in the Roman
law may be apt to find fault that we have omitted to set down
under this title the rule which is to be met with in the eighth law,
D. de usufr. et usu leg., and in the fifty-sixth law, D. de usufr. Which
laws say, that if the usufruct of a thing be given to a town, or
other corporation, it lasts a hundred years. But besides that the
case of such a u ufruct is so very singular and odd, that it does
not deserve a rule ;4 if one were necessary, it would not seem just
to make the proprietor lose, by a usufruct, the enjoyment of his
estate for three or four generations; and it would be much more
reasonable to limit it to thirty years. For which opinion we have
the authority of another law.


SECTION I.


OF THE NATURE OF USUFRUCT, AND OF THE RIGHTS OF THE
USUFRUCTUARY.


Art. I.


9419. Definition of Usufruct.— Usufruct is a right to use and en-
joy a thing which is not our own, preserving it whole and entire,
without spoiling or diminishing it.*


© § 1, Inst. de usufr.
4 See the twenty-first article of the first section of the rules of law.
e V.L 68, in f D. ad leg. Falc.
® Ususfructus est jus alienis rebus utendi, fracndi, salva rerum substantia. Z.1, D. de
usufr.; — Inst. ed. Sve on these last words, without spoiling or diminishing i, that
which shall be said in the third section.
VOL. I. 30


410 THE CIVIL LAW. [PagT 1. BOOK L


IL.

950. Usufruct of Movables and Immovables.— We may have
the usufruct not only of things immovable, but also of movable:
such as a suit of hangings, a herd of cattle, and of other movable
things,” according to the rules which shall be explained in the third
section.


TIL


951. Usufruct comprehends all Sorts of Revenues.— The usv-
fruct consists in the full and entire enjoyment of all the kinds of
fruits, revenues, conveniences, and uses which may be reaped from
the thing of which one has the usufruct. Such are the fruits of
trees, the cuttings of coppice-wood, the young trees which may
be taken out of a nursery without spoiling it, all crops, the honey
of bees; and in general the usufructuary enjoys and uses every
thing without reserve. And we may likewise have the usufruct
of movables and immovables, from which we reap no other use be-
sides that of bare recreation.°


IV.


952. The Usufructuary makes the Fruits which he gathers his
own. — The usufructuary who at the moment that he acquires his
right, and that it begins to take place, finds fruits hanging on the
trees, or unseparated from the ground, which are ripe, may gather
them, and they are his own. And if the usufruct happens to be
extinct, either by the death of the usufructuary, or otherwise, in
the time of harvest, the portion of the fruits which the usufructu


iade ie ci OO:


TIT. XI. SEC. 1.] USUFRUCT. 411


V.

953. The Rent of the Lease belongs to the Usufructuary, as the
Fruits do.— If the fruits of lands which are subject to a usu-
fruct were let to farm, the usufructuary who has actually ac-
quired his right at the time of the harvest shall receive of the
farmer the rent of the farm, in the same manner as he would have
gathered the fruits, in case there had been no lease. And although
the usufruct come to be extinct between harvest-time and the
term of payment, yet the usufructuary, or his heirs, executors, or
administrators, will receive the whole rent of the lease, for that
crop.*


VI


954. The Revenues which are acquired successively are shared
between the Proprietor and the Usufructuary, in Proportion to the
Time. — The revenues which are acquired successively, and from
moment to moment, such as the rents of a house, belong to the
usufructuary in proportion to the time that his right lasts. Thus,
when a usufruct commences from the first of January, and ceases
before the end of the year, the proprietor shall have the rents
which accrue after the usufruct is extinct, and the usufructuary,
or his heirs, executors, or administrators, shall have the rents for the
time that the usufruct lasted‘


VII.


955. In what Manner the Usufructuary may anticipate the Har-
vest.— The usufructuary may gather, before a perfect maturity,


ent titles; such as a testament, a contract, a law, as has been taken notice of in the pre-
amble to this title; so we ought to follow in each kind of usufruct, as to what concerns the
rights of the usufructuary, whatever has been regulated in that matter by the title, al-
though it be different from the rule explained in this article. Thus, the enjoyment which
the incumbents of church benefices have of the fruits belonging to them is a kind of usu-
fruct which is regulated in another manner. For since the fruits of the benefice belong
to the incumbent on account of the charges and burdens, the fruits of the last year, reck-
oning the year to commence, as is the rule, from the first of January, are shared between
the executors or administrators of the late incumbent and his successor in the benefice, in
proportion to the time that the late incumbent lived the last year. Thus the fruits of the
dowry, after the dissolution of the marriage, are shared differently between the survivor
and the heirs or executors of the deceased, according to the different customs of places, as
has been remarked in the preamble to the title of Downes. Thus the usufruct of fathers,
and wardships, are regulated according to the provisions made in such cases by the re-
spective customs and usages of places.

© L. 58, D. de usu/r.

f L. 26, D. de usufr.


412 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK I.


the fruits whose nature is such that it is either customary, or more
profitable, to gather them before they are fully ripe. Thus we do
not wait for the full maturity of olives, hay, or of a copse. But
the usufructuary ought.to tarry till the time of full maturity for
harvest, and for the vintage.


VIIL


956. Augmentation or Diminution of the Usufruct, by the Change
happening to the Estate.— The usufruct increases or diminishes
in proportion to the augmentation or diminution which may hap-
pen to the estate that is subject to the usufruct. And as the usw
fructuary bears the loss or diminution of his usufruct if the
estate perishes, or is damaged by an inundation, by fire, or other
accident,» so likewise he reaps the advantage of the changes
which make the estate better or larger. As if the event of a law-
suit acquires to the estate a service, or a greater extent of ground;
or if the neighbourhood of a river brings to it some addition!


IX.


957. Changes which the Usufructuary may make in the Estale,
for raising the Revenue.— The usufructuary may open a quarry
in the ground of which he has the usufruct. For the stones which
he digs out of it are instead of fruits; and it is the same thing
with respect to the other matters which he shall get out of the said
ground. And he may likewise pluck up by the roots a plantation,
as of vines, for instance, to make some such change in it, provided
that the estate be improved, and the revenue increased by it. For


TF. Xl. BEC. 1] USUFRUCT. 413


X.

958. Trees blown down.— The trees blown down by the wind,
or by some other accident, belong to the proprietor of the ground
of which they were a part. So that he is obliged to carry them
away at his own charges, that they may no ways incommode.
And the usufructuary receiving no benefit by them, he is not
obliged to plant new ones in their stead.™


XI.


959. Dead Trees.— The dead trees belong to the usufructuary
as a kind of revenue, but with the charge of planting new ones in
their room.”


XII.


960. Trees blown down may be employed in Repairs. — If the
places subject to a usufruct happen to stand in need of some
repair, to which the trees that are blown down by some accident
may be serviceable, the usufructuary may make use of them for


that purpose.°


XITIL.


961. Vine Props:— The usufructuary may take trees out of a
wood, for making props for the vines, provided he does not do any
damage to the wood.?


XIV.


962. Service accessory to the Usufruct.—If the usufructuary
of a piece of ground cannot have access to it but through another
ground belonging to the person who created the usufruct, this
passage will be due to the usufructuary. Thus, if a testator has
bequeathed the usufruct of a piece of ground, to which one can-
not enter but through another ground of his succession, and this
other ground remains with the executor, or is devised to another
legatee, the executor or the legatee holding this ground of the
testator will be obliged to suffer the service of the passage ;1 and


= L. 19, § 1, D. de usufr. ; —I. 59, eod. See the following article.

® L. 18, D. de usufr.

° L.12, D. de usufr.

P ZL. 10, D. de usufr.

@ L.1,§1, D. si ususfr. pet. ; —d.l. 1, § 2;—l. 15, § 1, D. de usu ef usufr. leg.
Qe


414 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


to give it such as shall be found necessary for cultivating and
enjoying the ground that is subject to the said usufruct.?


XV.


963. Conveniences which are not necessary to the Usufructuary. —
If, in the case of a usufruct bequeathed, the usufructuary wants
some conveniences which are not absolutely necessary for the en-
joyment, such as that of a passage, he cannot pretend that the
executor should furnish him such sorts of conveniences. Thus,
he cannot demand that they should give him more convenient
lights for a chamber, a more easy passage, or a liberty to draw
water out of a well. For the usufruct is limited to the enjoyment
of the thing, such as it is at the time that the usufructuary ac
quires his right.®

XVI.

964. The Usufructuary has the Services. — The usufractuary
may in his own name sue for the right of a service, if any is due
to the estate of which he has the use and profits, and may sue the


neighbour who owes it, in the same manner as the proprietor him-
self might do.


XVIL


965. The Improvements and Repairs which the Usufructuary may
make. — The usufructuary may make, in the estate of which he
has the usufruct, improvements and repairs, useful or necessary,
and even for his bare pleasure; provided he does not make the


: T: ii 1 pa


TIT. XI. SEC. 11.} USUFRUCT. 415


repairs, whether useful or necessary, or for his pleasure, he can
demolish nothing of what he has built, nor take away any thing
but what may be preserved after it is taken away.*


XIX.

967. The Usufructuary may transfer, sell, and give away his
Right. — The usufructuary may either enjoy the thing of which
he has the usufruct himself, or he may let out his right to
another; he may likewise transfer, sell, or give away his usufruct.
And the disposition which he makes of it is to him instead of an
enjoyment of it, and preserves his right.”


XX.


968. He may interrupt the Lease.— 'The usufructuary has the
liberty of interrupting the lease which the proprietor had made,
in the same manner as the buyer has;* unless it be otherwise
regulated by his title. For having the right of enjoying the
whole revenue, and commonly during his life, he is as it were
master, and is not obliged to let the farmer enjoy a profit which
belongs to him.


SECTION II.
OF USE AND HABITATION.


969. Difference between Use and Usufruct. — Use is distin-
guished from usufruct by this, that whereas usufruct is a right to
enjoy all the fruits and revenues which the estate that is subject
to it is capable of producing, use consists only in a right to take
out of the fruits of the ground such portion of them as may be
consumed by use, and which is necessary for the person who has
the use, or which is settled by his title; and the surplus belongs
to the proprietor of the estate. Thus, those who have the right of
use in a forest, or a coppice, can only take out of it what is
necessary for their use, or regulated by their title. And he who
has the use of any other ground can only take out of it what may


* £. 15, D. de usufr. See the last article of the third section of the title of Dowries.
Y L. 12, § 2, D. de usufr.; —I. 67, eod.
? £. 59,§1, D. de usufr. See the fourth article of the third section of Letting and


HAirina.


416 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK I.


be necessary to supply the occasions he shall have of those kinds
of fruits which the said ground produces; or the use may be even
restrained to certain kinds of fruits or revenues, without extend-
ing it to others. Thus we see in the Roman law, that he who
had only the simple use of a piece of ground had no share of the
corm or oil that grew in it;* and that he who had the use of 2
flock of sheep was restrained only to make use of them for dung-
ing his ground, and had no share either in the wool or lambs;
and even for the milk, it is said in some places that he could take
only a very small portion of it; and in other places it is said he
had no right to any of it.”

970. Of Habitation. — Habitation is in houses what use is in
lands; and whereas he who has the usufruct of a house may
enjoy the whole house, he who has only a right of habitation has
his enjoyment of it limited to what part is necessary for him, or
settled by his title. As to which it is necessary to observe, that
although the word habitation appears to be restrained in some
laws to the sense explained in this definition ;° yet it seems in
others that habitation, as also the use of a house, implies the
enjoyment of the whole house. So that it is not so much by the
sense of these words habitation and use, that we are to extend o
limit the enjoyment of those persons who have these sorts of
rights, as by the terms of the title by which it is conveyed, which
may help us to judge of the intention, either of the testator, if this
right is acquired by testament, or of the parties contracting, if it
by contract that it is settled.‘


TIT. XI. SEC. 11.] USUFRUCT. 417


IL
972. When the Use implies the Usufruct.—If the fruits out of
which he who has the use of them has a right to take whatever is
for his occasions are so inconsiderable on the ground of
which he has the use, that there is precisely no more than what
his occasions require, he shall have the whole, in the same manner


as the usufructuary.°


IIL


973. He who has the Use ought not to incommode the Proprietor.
— He who has the use of a piece of ground has liberty to go
into it to use his right, but without giving any trouble to the
proprietor.’


IV.


974. The. Use cannot be transferred to other Persons. — Seeing
the right of use is limited to the person of him to whom the use
is granted, he can neither sell, let to hire, nor give away, a nght
which is personal to him, and which passing to another person
might be more chargeable or more inconvenient to the proprie-
tor© And if there should be any difficulty to know whether he
who has the use may use his right otherwise than in person, it
ought to be adjusted by the title, by the quality of the persons,
and by the other circumstances.


V.
975. How the Use acquired to the Husband or the Wife is for


both. — The right of use, as also that of habitation, which accrues
either to the husband or to the wife by a legacy, or other disposi-
tion made in prospect of death, is communicated from the one to
the other; and they will use this right in common together during
the life of the person to whom it is given.’ For he who hath
bequeathed either a use or a habitation to one of the parties
joined together in wedlock, hath had no mind to exclude the other
from sharing in it. But if a right of use of some fruits was


¢ LT. 15, D. de usu et hahit.

4 7.11, D. de usu et habit. ; —§ 1, Inst. eod.

¢ L.11,in f. D. de usu et habit. ; —§ 1, in fin. Inst. eod. ; —1. 12, § ult. D. eod. See the
tenth article of this section.

LT. 2,§1, D. de usu et hab.;—l. 4, § 1, eod. See the eighth article. JZ. 9, eod. ;—
l. 12, § 2, in f. eod. ; —1. 101, § 2, D. de cond. et demonstr.


418 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


bequeathed either te the husband or to the wife before they were
married, the marriage happening afterwards would not make the
condition of the proprietor worse ; and the use would be limited
to what had been regulated by the title. And it would be the
same thing had the use been acquired by covenant, either before
or after the marriage. And in all these cases, it is by the circum-
stances that we are to judge of the effect which the title ought to
have.s


VI.
976. The Use lasts during Life.— The right of use is not only


for one or more years, but it lasts during the life of him who has
the use, if it is not otherwise provided by the title of the said right*


VIL
977. Definition of Habitation. — Habitation is a right to dwell
in a house, and he who hath this right hath as it were a use ors
usufruct, according as his title extends or limits the right of ip
habiting!!


VITL


978. Habitation extends to the whole Family. — The right d
habitation extends to the whole family of the person who has ths
right. For he cannot dwell separately from his wife, his childres,
and his servants. And it is the same thing if this right belongs to
the wife! And this is understood likewise of the habitatis
which was acquired before the marriage.


TIT. XI. SEO. III.] USUFRUCT. 419


appears to be regulated by the title. But if the habitation is
given indefinitely, without naming either the whole house, or any
part of it, but only either according to the condition or the neces-
sities of him who acquires the right, it will comprehend all neces-
sary conveniences, even although nothing should remain for the
proprietor."


X.


980. The Right of Habitation may be transferred. — He who has
a right of habitation in a house, or in a part of it, may assign over
and let out his right to another, without dwelling in the house
himself unless his condition is otherwise regulated by his
title.


XI.
981. The Right of Habitation is during Life.— The right of
habitation, as well as that of use, is not limited to a time, but it
lasts during the life of the person who has the right.


SECTION III.


OF THE USUFRUCT OF THINGS WHICH ARE CONSUMED OR IMPAIRED
BY USE.


982. Usufruct of Movables.— Things movable are either wholly
consumed, or at least impaired, by use. Thus, grain and liquors
are wholly consumed when one uses them; and cattle, hangings,
beds, and other movables, suffer some diminution by use, and even
by the bare effect of time, although they are not used; and at
last these things perish. But nevertheless a kind of usufruct has
been established of all movable things, and even of those which
perish by being used. This usufruct is acquired two ways; either
by a particular title, as if one makes a gift of the usufruct, or bare
use, as of a suit of hangings or other movables; or by a general


® [.15, D. de usu et halit.;—l. 18, D.de usu et hab. We see in this last law both the
cases; one, where the habitation extends to the whole house; and the other, where it is
confined to a part of it. See the seventh article of this section.
° £. 13, C. de usufr. ; —§ 5, Inst. de usu et habit.
P L. 34, D. de rey. jur. See the fourth article of this section.
q LZ. 10, § 3, D. de usu et habit. See the sixth article.


420 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK I.


title, if they chance to be comprehended in a totality of goods,
such as a succession, of which one has the usufruct. And it is
this kind of usufruct of which the rules shall be the subject-matter
of this section.


Art. IL


983. Usufruct of all Sorts of Things. — Although it seems not to
be natural that we should have the usufruct of movable things
which perish in the use, such as corn and liquors; yet the laws
have received a kind of usufruct of this sort of things, as of all
others which we are capable of possessing.* For in effect there is
not any one of these things from which we may not draw some
use, and we may establish in them a kind of usufruct, according
to their nature, by the following rules.


IL


984. Usufruct of Movable Effects in a Totality of Goods.-— He
who has the universal usufruct of a totality of goods has also th
tight to enjoy and use all the movable effects according to thet
nature; to consume what is liable to be consumed in its ordinary
use ; to gather from the living creatures the profits which they yield;
to receive the interest of debts which bear interest; and to make
use of every thing according to its natural use, either for its reve
nue, or for its conveniency, or for bare pleasure.®


Ill.
985. In what this Usufruct consists. — The usufract of move —


Li ian"


TIF. Xi. SEC. 11.] USUFRUCT. 421


IV.

986. Usufruct of Living Creatures. — The usufructuary who
has living creatures in his usufruct may draw from them the rev-
enues and services which the master himself would draw. Thus,
he may employ the oxen in carriage and tillage, the horses either
to carry and draw, or to till the ground, or to ride upon, according
to the uses for which they are destined; the sheep to dung the
grounds; and from them he may likewise draw the profit of the
lambs, the milk, and the wool.4


Vv.


987. The Usufructuary of a Herd of Cattle ought to supply out

of the Fruits the Places of those which die.—TIf it is of a stud of
mares, a herd of cattle, or a flock of sheep, that one has the usu-
fract, the usufructuary will have the colts, the calves, the lambs, the
wool, and all the services and other profits, according to the nature
and use of these animals ;* but still on condition that he preserve
entire the number which he hath received, and that, when any of
them die, he fill up their places out of the fruits. For it is enough
for him to enjoy the profits which he reaps from the animals, and
tohave over and above whatever exceeds the number which he is
bound to keep entire.‘


VI


988. The Usufructuary of Animals which do not produce young
ones ts not obliged to supply the Places of those that die.— If it
happens that the usufruct is of such animals as cannot produce
young ones for supplying the places of those that die, such asa
setof horses or mules, or any one beast alone, the usufructuary
will not be bound to fill up the place of that which dies, if its
death happens without his fault.


VIL


989. Usufruct of Things which are consumed by Use.— The usu-
fract of thmgs which are consumed in the use carries along with
it the property of them, since one cannot use them but by con-
suming them. But the usufructuary is distinguished from the


4 £12, § 3, D. de usu et habit. ;—d.1.12,§4;—d.L § 2.
© See the preceding article.

 L. 68, § ult. D. de usufr. ; — I. 70, § 2, ead. ; —d. Ll. § 42.
E L. 70, § 3, D. de usufr.

VOL. I.


TIT. XI. SEC. Iv.] USUFRUCT. 423


a ship for a voyage by sea, may let such things to hire. But he
cannot let out those things which are not destined to be let to hire.
For although the usufruct gives a full right to enjoy all the profit
which may be drawn from the things that are subject to it, yet this
right in movables ought to have its bounds, because the misuse of
them may destroy or damage them. So that the ways of using
them ought to be regulated according to the title, and according
to the circumstances of the quality of the persons, the nature of
the things, the use which a good and careful husband ought to
make of them, and other the like circumstances.!


SECTION IV.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE USUFRUCTUARY, AND OF HIM WHO
HAS THE BARE USE, TO THE PROPRIETOR.


Arr. L


993. The Usufructuary ought to make an Inventory of the Things
subject to the Usufruct.— The first engagement of the usufructu-
ary is to charge himself with the things of which he has the usv-
fract, whether they be movables or immovables: and to make an
inventory of them in writing, in presence of the persons interest-
ed, that it may appear in what things they consist, and in what
condition they are when he receives them: in order to regulate
what he is to restore after the usufruct is expired, and in what con-
dition he ought to give the things back.*


IL


994. He ought to give Security to make Restitution. — The sec-
ond engagement of the usufructuary is to give the necessary secu-
rity to the proprietor for the restitution of the things of which he
has the usufruct ; whether by his bare promise of making restitu-
tion or by giving surety for his doing it, according as the title of
the usufruct may oblige him, or the circumstances of the nature
of the things, of the quality of the persons, and others of the like
nature, may demand. As if it is a usufruct of things which
perish in the use, or which may be easily damnified. And the


17. 15, § 4, D. de usuf. ;—d. 1. § 5;—1. 12, § 4, D. de usu et habit. See the foregoing
article.
* DL. 1,§ 4, D. de usuf. quem cav. For this usage see the seventh article.


424 THE CIVIL LAW. [parr 1. BOOK L


security for restitution implies likewise that of restoring the things
in the condition in which they ought to be.»


TIL.


995. He ought to take Care of the Things subject to the Usufruct.
— The third engagement which the usufructuary is under is to
preserve the things of which he has the usufruct, and to take the
same care of them as a good husband would do of what belongs
to him. Thus he who has the usufruct of a house ought to be
watchful against fire. Thus, he who has the usufruct of beasts
ought to take care that they be well kept, fed, and looked after.


IV.


996. He ought to use the Things as a good Husband would do.—
The fourth engagement of the usufructuary is to use and enjoy
the things of which he has the usufruct in the same manner as a
good husband would do, drawing from them such advantages as
he can make, without misusing or damnifying them, and without
changing even what is destined for bare pleasure, although it were
to improve the revenue. Thus, he cannot cut down the trees d
an avenue in order to make a kitchen garden, or to sow com i
the place.t


V.


997. He ought to acquit the Charges. — The fifth engagement d
the usufructuary is to acquit the charges of the things of whid
he has the usufruct, such as the land-tax, and other imposts and


OE PETG 5 |


TIT. XL. BEO. LV.] UsUFRUCT. 4%


small repairs of a house, to plant trees in the room of those which
die in the ground, to manure and improve the lands, and to make
the other lesser repairs, and to lay out the expenses which may be
necessary for the cultivation and preservation of the places. But
he isnot bound to be at the charge of the greater repairs, such


as the rebuilding of a house that is fallen without any neglect
of his!


VIL


999. Engagements of the Person who has the bare Use. — All the
engagements of the usufructuary are common to him who has the
bare use, in proportion to his right of use. Thus, when his right
gives him the whole thing, as if he has a right to inhabit a whole
house, he ought to charge himself with what is delivered to him,
to give the necessary security, take care of the places, use them
without misusing or damaging them, make the repairs, and bear
the other charges which the usufructuary would be bound to do.
But if his right is limited, as if he has only a part of a house, he
is liable to repairs and other charges only in proportion to what
he possesses.


VIIL


1000. The Relinquishing of the Usufruct or Use to avoid the
Charges. — If the usufructuary, or the person who has the bare use,
chooses rather to relinquish his right than to bear the charges
of it, he will be freed from the charges, except only those which
became due in the time of his enjoyment, and the wastes which
either he himself, or the persons for whom he is accountable,
may have committed. And he will have the same liberty of
rlinquishing his right, even after he has been condemned in a
court of justice to acquit the charges to which he was liable.®


'L.7, C. de usuf.;—1. 7, § 2, D. de usufr.;—1. 18, cod. ; —I. 4, § 1, D. de oper. serv.
6 L.18, D. de usu et hab.
"TL. 64, D. de usuf. ; — I. 65, eod.


426 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L. BOOK L


SECTION V.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS WHICH THE PROPRIETOR I8 UNDER TO THE
USUFRUCTUARY, AND TO HIM WHO HAS THE BARE USE.


Art. L


1001. The Proprietor ought to leave the Enjoyment of the Fruits,
and the Use, free.—- The proprietor is bound to deliver to the
usufructuary, and to him who has the bare use, the places and
other things subject to the usufruct, or to the use; or to suffer
him to take possession of them, without putting him to any trouble
or inconvenience. And the persons who have these rights may sue
the proprietor, as well as all other possessors of the things subject
to the said rights, for a liberty to enjoy them.*


IT.


1002. He cannot change the Condition of the Places, although ts
the better.— The proprietor cannot, either before or after th
delivery, make any change in the places and other things subjed
to a usufruct, or use, by which the condition of the usufractusry,
or of him who has the use, is made worse, although it were #
make improvements. Thus, he can neither raise a building
higher, nor make a new one, in a ground where none was before;
unless it be with the consent of the usufructuary, or him who he
the use. Much less can he grub up a wood, pull down an edifxe,


impose services on it, or make any other changes that may betlyp


7. ODL g Od CS


TIT. XI. 8EC. VI.] USUFRUCT. 427


sustained by the non-enjoyment.° As if there were an eviction,
or some other trouble, against which the proprietor is bound to
warranty, or if he should refuse him any necessary service which
he is bound to give, as in the case of the fourteenth article of the
first section.


IV.


1004. He ought to reimburse what is laid out on Repairs, which
he himself is bound to make.— If the usufructuary has made any
necessary repairs beyond those which he is bound to make, the
proprietor ought to reimburse him for what he has laid out on that
account.*

V.

1005. The Usufructuary enjoys the Things in the Condition he
finds them. — The proprietor is not bound to rebuild, or restore to
good condition, that which happens to be demolished or damaged
at the time that the usufruct is acquired, unless he himself were
the author of the damage, or he were obliged by his title to
put the things in a good condition. But the usufructuary is
restrained to the right of enjoying the thing in the condition in
which it is at the time when he acquires his right; in the same
manner as he who acquires the property of a thing ought to have
it only such as it was at the time when he acquired it.


SECTION VI.
HOW USUFRUCT, USE, AND HABITATION EXPIRE.


Art. I.


1006. These Rights expire by the Death of the Usufructuary, and
of him who hath the Use. — Usufruct, use, and habitation expire
by the natural death, and by the civil death of the person who
had the right to them, because this right is personal.*


€ This is a consequence of the right of the usufractuary. L.1,§1, D.si usus/r. pet. ; —
@ 5, § 3, ea § ult. D. eod.

4 7.7, C. de usuf.

e L. 65, 4.1, D. de usuf.

2 L. 3, § ult. D. quib. mod. ususfr. amit. ; —l. 3, C. de usufr.; —1. 16, in f. C. de usufr. ;
— § 3, Jnst. de usuf.


428 THE OIVIL. LAW. [PaRT L. BOOK L


IL
1007, And when the Time which they ought to last is elapsed.—
If the title of the usufruct, of the use and habitation, has limited
the right to it to commence or determine at a certain time, o
upon the existence of a certain condition, the right will not com-
mence, nor determine, till the condition shall happen, or the time
be elapsed.®


Til,


1008. Restitution of the Usufruct to a third Usufructuary.— If
the usufructuary is charged to restore the usufruct to another per
son, his right to the usufruct will determine whenever the time of
making the said restitution comes.


IV.


1009. If the Thing perishes. —~ The right of usufruct is limited
to the thing on which it is assigned, and does not affect the other
goods. So that it expires whenever the land or tenement, o
other thing which is subject to it, happens to perish before the
death of the usufructuary, or of the person who has the use; s
if a piece of ground be carried away by an inundation, or a howe
be burnt down or ruined. And in this last case, the usufractany
would not even have the usufruct of the materials, nor of the
place on which the house stood. For the usufruct was specially
settled upon a house; and it was restrained to what was specified
in the title.4


TIT. Xt. SEC. V1.] USUFRUCT. 429


VI.

1011. Usufruct of what remains of the Land or Tenement. — If
it happens that a part of a house perishes, and that there remains
another part of it, the usufruct will be preserved of that part of
the house which remains, and of the place on which stood the
part of the house which is destroyed. For the said place makes
a part of the said house, and is an accessory to the part of it that
remains.


VIL


1012. Difference between a Universal Usufruct, and one that is
Particular. — In the cases in which the thing subject to a usufruct
happens to perish, we ought to observe this difference between the
usufract of a totality of goods, and that of a particular thing; that
whereas the particular usufruct of a house, for example, is extinct
in such a manner whenever the house perishes, either by a fall, or
by fire, or other casualty, that the usufructuary has no manner of

usufruct in the place which remains; on the contrary, if his usu-
fract was universal of all the goods, he shall have the usufruct of
the place where the house stood, and of the materials which may

_ Chance to remain; for they are a part of the totality of goodss

. And it would be the same thing in the usufruct of a country
farm, where the buildings shall happen to go to ruin; for in this
case the usufruct would be preserved on the place which should
remain, as being an accessory, and making a part of the whole of
the said farm.»


VIII.


1013. Changes in the Land or Tenement.—If there happens
any change in the thing subject to a usufruct; as if a pond is
dried up, if arable land becomes a marsh, if a forest is converted
into meadow, or arable ground; in all these and the like cases,
the usufruct either ceases, or does not cease, according to the
quality of the title of the usufruct, the intention of those who
settled it, the time when these changes happen, whether before
the usufructuary has acquired his right, or only after, the causes
of these changes, and the other circumstances. Thus, in a usu-
fract of the whole goods, no change extinguishes the usufruct of
what remains; and the usufructuary enjoys the thing in the con-


! 1. 53, D. de usufr. & DL. 34, § ult. D. de usufr. ; —d. l. in fine.
b 11. 8 a 9, D. quid. mod. ususfr. v. us. am.


q —:


430 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


dition to which it is reduced. Thus, in a particular usufruct be-
queathed by a testator of some piece of ground, if he himself
changes the face of the places after he has made his testament,
and of a meadow, for instance, of. which he had devised the
usufruct, he makes a house and a garden; in these and the like
cases, where the changes in the things denote the change of the
will, they annul the legacy of the usufruct, which was limited to
things that are no longer in being. But in a usufruct that is
acquired by covenant, the proprietor is not at liberty to make
what changes he pleases; and he who should change the nature
or condition of the things, without the consent of the usufructe-
ary, would be bound to indemnify him. And as to the changes
which happen by casualties, whether before or after the usufroct
is acquired, it determines, or is preserved, according to the forego
ing rules, and to what happens to be regulated by the usufracte
ary’s title! |


IX.


1014. The Remainder of the Thing which is destroyed belongs ts
the Proprietor. — If the thing subject to a usufruct chances to
perish, or comes to be changed in such a manner that the usufroc
subsists no longer, what remains of the thing belongs to theprt-gy
prietor. Thus, the materials of a house that is demolished, the
hides of the beasts of a herd of cattle which should happes to
perish through some accident, ought to be delivered to the pn
prietor; for the right of the usufructuary was limited to the enjoy
ment of what was in being, and it is extinct by this change,’


Ir. x11.] SERVICES. 431


\oreover necessary for the use of things, that there should be sub-
ctions, dependences, and connections between one thing and
10ther, without which there is no putting them in use. Thus,
© things movable, there are none of them, or but very few, that
me to our hands in the condition in which they ought to be for
ir service, but through a concatenation of the use of many
cher things; whether it be for digging them out of the places
om whence they are to be fetched, or for making them fit for
se, or for applying them to effectual service. Thus, for immova-
les, there are none of them likewise, or but a few, from which
ne may reap either the fruits, or the other revenues, except by
re use of divers things; and even oftentimes by making one
round or tenement serve for the use of another; as we make, for
nstance, one piece of ground serve for giving passage to another,
« one house for receiving the water that falls from another neigh-
xouring house. It is these sorts of subjections of one land or
tenement for the use of another, which we call services ; but we
do not give this name to the subjections which render one mova-
ble thing necessary for the use of another thing, whether movable
or immovable.

1016. These services have two characters, which distinguish
them from all other use that may be made of one thing for the
weof another. The first is, that they are perpetual ;* whereas
every one of the other subjections is of no duration. And the
other is, that, in these services of lands and tenements, the land or
tenement subject to the service belongs always to another owner
than the person who is master of the land or tenement to which
the service is due. For we do not give the name of service to the
nght which the master of a land or tenement has to make use of
it for himself.»

1017. It is these kinds of services which subject the land or
tenement of one person to the use and service of the land or tene-
ment of another, which shall be the subject-matter of this title ;
Which we have placed among covenants, because services are
most commonly settled by covenant,’ as in a sale, in an exchange,
in a transaction, in a partition; and although they are sometimes
established by testament, or by a decree of a court of justice, yet


* L. 28, D. de serv. pred. urb.

» 1.10, D. cum pred. ; —l. 26, D. de servit. prod. urban.

© L. 5, D. de servit.;—§ ult. Inst. de servit. See before, at the beginning of the title of
4
mifract.


432 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT L. BOOK L


it was more proper to bring in in this place a matter which cannot
be inserted in many places, and which is ranked here according to
its natural order.


SECTION I,


OF THE NATURE OF SERVICES, OF THEIR KINDS, AND THE MANN
HOW THEY ARE ACQUIRED.


Arr. L

1018. Definition of Service. — Service is a right which subject
a land or tenement to some service, for the use of another landa@
tenement, which belongs to another master; as, for example, it
right which the proprietor of an estate has to pass through te
grounds of his neighbour, to get at his own."

IL

1019. In what Service consists.— All services give to the pm
sons to whom they are due a right which they would not law
naturally ; and they diminish the liberty of the use of the land&
tenement which owes the service, subjecting the owner of tht
said land or tenement to what he ought either to suffer, or do,a@
not do, for leaving the use of the service free. ‘Thus, he whor
land is subject to a right of passage ought to bear with the inca
veniency of the said passage; thus, he whose wall ought to bet
the building that ‘is raised upon it is bound to repair the sid


I. SEQ. 1.) SERVICES. 433


1e said service does not pass to the person but because of
ind or tenement. Thus, one cannot have a service which
its in the right of going into another man’s ground, to gather
or to walk in it, nor for other uses which have no relation to
f a land or tenement.© But such a right would be of another
>, as, for example, it would be a letting to hire, if the right
purchased for a sum of money.


IV.


1. Divers Sorts of Services.— Services are of several sorts,
ling to the divers kinds of lands or tenements, and the dif-
uses which may be made of one land or tenement for the
e of another. ‘Thus, for houses, and other buildings, the one
jected for the use of the other, either not to be raised higher,
receive the waters which fall from the other, or to bear some
{ the weight of the other house, by fixing a beam in the
and the like: and for lands, one is subjected for the use of
her, either to a passage, or to a draught of water, or to other
of a different sort.‘


V.


2. Two General Kinds of Services.— All services are com-
nded under two general kinds; one is, of such as are natural,
f an absolute necessity, as the discharge of the water of a
g, which runs into the ground which is below: the other is,
ose which nature does not make absolutely necessary, but
1 men establish for a greater conveniency, although the land
rement which serves be not naturally subjected to the other.
it is agreed that a house shall not be raised higher, that it may
inder the prospect of another house; that it shall receive the
's falling from the adjacent house: that the possessor of a
of ground may draw water out of a spring or a rivulet
e neighbouring ground, either at certain times, such as to
* his grounds; or for constant use, such as to convey
‘in a pipe through a neighbouring ground, for the use of
atain.°


1, D. de servit. ; —1. 1, $1, D. comm. pred. ;—l. 8, eod. ; —§ 3, Inst. de servit. ; —
, D. de servit. pred. rust. ; — 1. 20, § ult. eod.

2, D. de servit. pred. urban. ; —l.1, D. de servit. prad. rust. passim his titalis.

is is @ consequence of the nature of services. See hereafter, the tenth article of
tion.

ee & 37


434 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaR? 1. BOOK


VI.

1023. Services of Houses and Lands.— All the kinds of ser-
vices are either for the use of houses and other buildings; o
for the use of lands, such as meadow ground, arable land, o-
chards, gardens, and others; whether they be situated in town oa
country.‘


VIL


1024. Accessories to Services.— The right of service compre
hends the accessories, without which it cannot be used. Thu,
the service of drawing water out of a well or spring implies th
service of a passage to get to the well: thus, the service of a pes
sage implies the liberty of building or repairing a work that is
necessary for making use of the said passage; and if the wak
cannot be made in the place allotted for the passage, one may
work in the adjacent parts, according as the necessity requires;
but in repairing, one ought not to make any innovation in th
ancient condition of the places


VIII


1025. Services are regulated by their Titles.— The right and
use of a service is regulated by the title which establishes it: and
it hath its bounds and its extent according as has been covenanted, _
if the title is a contract; or according to what has been prescribed
by the testament, if the service has been established by testament
Thus, he to whom a service is due cannot make its conditem
heavier, neither can the person who owes the service prejudice iit


I. SEC. I.] SERVICES. 435


massage were not regulated by the title, it would be settled
advice of skilful persons.»


IX.


3. Services are interpreted favorably for Liberty. — Seeing
‘8 derogate from the liberty that is natural to every one to
use of what is his own, they are restrained to what is pre-
necessary for the use of the persons to whom they are due;
1e lessens the inconveniency of them as much as is possible.
he who has a right of passage through another man’s field,
hose title does not specify the place through which he may
1as not the liberty of choosing his passage wheresoever he
8; but it will be assigned him through the place that is least
‘enient to the proprietor of the ground which serves; and
r example, across a plantation, or through a building. But
title of the service, or the possession, regulates the pas-
although it be through a place that is very inconvenient
: proprietor of the ground which serves, yet he must stand


X.


1. Services that are necessary may be decreed by the Judge.
vices are established and acquired, not only by covenant, or
tament,' but also by authority of justice, if the services
are refused be naturally necessary. Thus, when the pro-
‘ of a piece of ground cannot go to it without passing
th a neighbouring ground, the judge obliges the proprietor of
id ground to grant the passage through the place that is least
renient, allowing him a suitable recompense for his loss.™
is necessity is in place of a law; and natural equity de-
} that a ground should not remain useless, and that the said
stor ought to suffer for his neighbour what he would wish
to suffer for him in the like case.


, D. de servit.; —d.l. 4, §1;—v. 1. 29, D. de serv. pred. rust. ;—I1. 14, D. comm.
-v. 1.14, D. si servit. vind. ; — d.l.§1;—l. 13, § 2, D. de servit. pred. rust. ; —d.
— 11, § 1, D. de serv. pred. urb.

}, D. de servit. pred. rust. ; —1. 9, D. de serv. ; —lUl. 21 et 22, D. de servit. pr. rust.
cond article, and the remark that is made upon it.

D. de servit. See before, the beginning of the title of Usufruct.

2, D. de relig. See the case of this law in the fourth article of the thirteenth sec-
e Contract of Sale.


436 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part 1 BOOK L


XL
1028. Services may be acquired by Prescription. — The right of


service may be acquired without a title, by prescription."


XIL


1029. The Manner of the Service may be known by the Conditios
of the Places. — The proof which may be drawn from the anesent
condition of the places is a kind of title for preserving and estab
lishing a service by prescription. And it serves also to regulate
the manner and nse of the service. Thus, the entry of a passe,
the bounds of a way, a skylight in a house, a water-pipe clappel
on against a wall, a roof of a house with a jutting ont, and ola
the like marks of services, regulate the use of them. Andit®
not permitted either to him who hath the service, or to him wit
ought to suffer it, to innovate any thing in the ancient conditie: |
of the places.°


XII.


1030. Services are lost or diminished by Prescription. — B=
ing a service may be acquired by prescription, with much mom
reason may a freedom from a service be acquired the same wap
And if he whose land or tenement was subject to some sme
has freed himself from it, during a time sufficient for acquiring®
prescription, the service subsists no longer. Thus, he whose hous
was subjected to the service of not being raised higher, is not ay
more subject to the said service, if, after having raised his hom
higher, he has possessed it so raised during the time required @


TIT. XII. SEC. 1.] SERVICES. 437


XIV.

1031. Services are annexed to the Lands and Tenements. — Ser-
vices being annexed to the lands and tenements, and not to per-
sons, they cannot pass from one person to another, unless the land
or tenement passes likewise. And he who has a right of service
cannot transfer it to another, keeping the land or tenement to him-
self, nor assign over, let out, or lend the use of it. Thus, he who

- has a draught of water cannot share it with others. But if the
land or tenement for which the draught of water was established
be divided among many proprietors, as among coheirs, co-legatees,
joint purchasers, or otherwise; each share will retain the use of
the service in proportion to its extent, although some shares should
stand less in need of it, or the use of it were less serviceable to
them than to the others.


XV.


1032. The Property of the Place which serves belongs to the Mas-
ter of the Land or Tenement that owes the Service.— The part of
the land or tenement that is subject to a service out of which the

- gervice is taken, such as the way for a passage, belongs to the
master of the land or tenement which serves; and he who re-
etives the service has no right of property in that part of the

‘land or tenement that serves, but only a right to use it for his
service."


G4 TSEy WE


XVI.
1033. A Service may be for the Use of two Lands or Tenemenits.


— One and the same service may serve for the use of two lands
or tenements. Thus, a discharge of water may serve for two
houses: thus, a passage, or an aqueduct, may serve for two or
~ More lands or tenements.


XVII.


1034. A Service which appears to be useless.— Although a ser-
Ye may appear to be useless, such as a draught of water to him
_ Whose land or tenement is in no want of it, or who has water
-~ ough in his own grounds; yet one may retain or purchase such


{L.24, D. de servit. pred. rust. ; —1. 33, § 1, D. eod. See the fifth article of the
= section.
r © |. 95, D. de servit. pred. rust. ; —1. 4, D. si servit. vind.
* 1.15, D. com. pred.
37°


438 THE CIVIL LAW. [pant 1. Boox 1


service. For, besides that one may possess things that are useless,
it may so happen that there may be occasion to use them.


XVIIL


1035. Of Lands and Tenements which have several Owners. —
He who has the property of an estate only in common with othen,
without any division of the several shares, cannot subject any
part of it to a service without the consent of all his copertners:
and any one of them may hinder it," until that the estate being
divided into shares, every one may impose a service on his own
share, if he thinks fit. And, likewise, he who possesses in com-
mon and undivided a portion of the land or tenement to which
the service is due, cannot by himself free the land or tenement
which owes the service; but the service remains for the portion
of the others. For the services are for every part of the land a@
tenement to which they are due, and every one of the proprietas
has an interest in the service for his own portion.*


XIX.


1036, Possession of Services by Tenants, and other Possexsort
— Services are preserved against prescription, not only by the mu
that is made of them by the proprietors of the lands or tenement
to which they are due, but likewise by the use made of them by |
all other possessors, who are in the place of the master; such #
farmers, tenants, usufructuaries, and even those who poset
wrongfully ; for they preserve to the master the possession of Is
service’


TIT. XII. SEC.-11.] SERVICES. 439


yet every one preserves only his own right, and prescription may
ran against the others who do not use their right."


XXL.


1038. The Privilege of one Partner hinders Prescription against
the others. —If one of the proprietors of a land or tenement be-
longing to them in common, and to which a service is due, has
any quality which hinders prescription from running against him,
as if he is a minor, the service is not lost, although all the pro-
prietors cease to use it, because the minor preserves it for the
whole land or tenement.*


SECTION II.
OF THE SERVICES OF HOUSES AND OTHER BUILDINGS.


Art. I.

1039. Services of Buildings. — The services of houses and other
buildings are of several sorts, according to thei* wants; such as
that of receiving the water that falls from another house, the lights
of a house, the prospect, a right of fixing a beam in another’s
wall, a passage, and others of the like nature.* But there is none
of them which is naturally necessary, and in such a manner as
that he who builds on his own ground can oblige his neighbour
to suffer a service for the use of his building, if he has neither a
title nor a nght of possession to justify it. For he may and
ought to raise his building wholly on his own ground, keeping the
necessary distance, and not encroaching any ways on his neigh-
bour’s ground which joins to his.” And if any service is necessary
to him, and he has it not, he cannot acquire it but by a mutual
consent.


Il.


1040. Discharge of Waters from the Houses. — The right of dis-
charging the waters from off the roof of a house is a service which


2 L. 6, D. quemad. serv. amitt.

® ZL. 10, D. quemad. serv. amitt.

@ L. 2, D. de servit. pred. urban. ; — § 1, Inst. de servit.

» Z. 14, D. de servit. pred. urb.; — V. 1. 12, C. de adif. priv. See the eighth and ninth
articles of this section.


440 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


may be differently established, either in such a manner that the
whole roof may have a jutting out on another man’s ground, and
so let its waters drop from the eaves there; or all its water may
be gathered together, and run through one gutter jutting out from
the building, or through a pipe clapped on against the walL*


IIL


1041. A Sink or Drain. — The discharge of a sink or drain into
a neighbouring ground is a service for the use of a house, and one
may establish others of the like nature, according as occasion re
quires.?


IV.


1042. The Lights and Prospect of a House.— The lights of s
house are open places for receiving light into a chamber or other
room; and a prospect hath, besides the light, an open view of the
adjacent parts, whether in town or country.®


V.


1043. The Services for the Lights of a House are of Two Sorts.
— The services for the lights of a house are of two sorts. Oneis
of those which give to the proprietor of a house the right of oper
ing his own wall, or a partition-wall, for receiving light on the side
where his neighbour’s tenement stands, with a right to hinder his
neighbour from raising his building so high as to take away the
said light! And the other sort is of such services as give a right
to hinder the neighbour from opening his own wall or a partitior


(KI. SEO. 11.) SERVICES. 441


1 give the right of a free prospect, with power to hinder the
eat building from being raised so as to take away the pros-

And the other is of such services as give the proprietor a
to hinder his neighbour from having either prospect or light
e side on which they join, or to oblige him to have it only
as is conformable to his title."


VIL


lS. The Right of resting on another's Building.— The right
iting a building on another's is a right to fix in our neigh-
3 wall a plank, a building, or other thing. And when it is a
ion-wall, the joint proprietors have a right to rest any thing
every one on his own side; and the same wall serves recip-
y to two masters for two services. But whether the wall be-
to one master alone, or be a partition-wall, they ought not to
t otherwise than is reasonable, and according as is regulated
e service!


VII.


46. One cannot trespass on his Neighbour’s Ground. — Al-
hh @ proprietor may do in his own ground whatever he pleases,
e cannot make in it any work which may deprive Its neigh-
of the liberty of enjoying his own, or which may cause him
damage. Thus, the proprietor of a piece of ground, on
1 there is no building, cannot raise one whose roof may jut
m his neighbour’s ground, and there discharge its waters.
, one cannot make a plantation, or a building, and other
s, but at certain distances from the confines. Thus, one
of make a stove, an oven, or any other work against even a
tion-wall which may be in hazard of being damaged by it.
as for such sorts of works as may do hurt, and which cannot
iade but at certain distances, or with other precautions, we
t, with regard to them, to observe the rules which custom and
iave established.


8, D. de servit. pred. urban. ; —1. 15, eod. ; — 1. 2, eod. ; — 1. 40, eod.

2, D. de servit. pred. urb.;—l. 6, § 2, D. si serv. vind. ;—l. 38, D. de serv. prod.
-1.14, $1, D. st serv. vind.

14, D. de serv. pred. urd. ; —l. 61, D. de reg. jur. ;—1. 18, D. de servit. prad. urb. ;
, cod. ; — 1. 13, eod.; —v. 1. 8, § 5, 117, § 2, D. st servit. vind. See the follow-
cle, and the second article of the first section of the title Of those who have Lands
wes bordering upon one anather. There are customs which regulate the manner in
uch works ought to be made, as are mentioned in this article.


442 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOKL


TX.

1047. What one may do in his own Ground, to the Prejudice of
his Neighbour. — Although one ought not to make any work by
which his neighbours building may be damaged, yet every one
has the liberty of doing in his own ground whatsoever he pleases,
even although it should occasion to his neighbour some other sort
of inconvenience. Thus, he who is not subject to any service
may raise his house as high as he pleases, although by the said
elevation he should darken the lights of his neighbour’s hous.
For this kind of work alters nothing in the fabric of the other
house; and he who is the master of the house ought to hav
placed his lights so as to be out of danger of this inconvenience,
which he had no right to hinder, and which he might have easily
foreseen.™


X.


1048. Inconveniences which the Neighbour ought or ought not t
suffer.— The works, or other things, which every one may make,
or have in his own ground, and which send into the apartments of
others who dwell in the same house, or into the neighbounng
houses, a smoke or smells that are offensive, such as the warksel
tanners*and dyers, and the other different inconveniences which
one neighbour may cause to another, ought to be borne with, if the
service of them is established". And if there is no service settled,
the inconvenience shall either be borne with, or hindered, according
to the quality of the places and that of the inconvenience, and
according as the rules of the civil policy, or the usage of the plac


TIT. XII. SEC. II] SERVICES. 443


several sorts, according to the several wants; such as a passage to
go from one field to another, a right to draw water in another
man’s ground, an aqueduct, or others of the like nature.


IL


1050. Passage.— The right of passage is a service which may
be established different ways according to its title; either for the
passage of a man on foot only, or for one on horseback, or for a
beast loaded, or for a wagon.


HL °


1051. A Draught of Water.— The draught of water is a right
to take in a neighbour’s ground water out of a spring or brook, to
carry it into another ground, either at what time one pleases, or
by intervals and at certain seasons, or constantly without inter-
mission.°


IV.


1052. Aqueduct. — An aqueduct is a conveyance of water |
from one ground to another, either in pipes under ground, or above
ground.4


V.


1053. Other Sorts of Services. — One may establish services of
another nature, for divers uses. Such as the right of taking out of
a neighbour’s ground sand, stone, lime, for the use of another
ground; of fetching water out of a neighbour’s ground, and of
gathering and depositing there the fruits of another ground, till
they can be conveniently carried away at a certain season; of
having in another man’s ground a causeway along the banks of
a river, a canal, a ditch, or any other work, with a right of free
ingress and egress to the ground for repairing the work, and other
different services, according to people’s wants.


, D. de servit. pred. rust. ; — § 2, Inst. de serv.

, D. de servit. pred. rust.

» § 2, D. de aqua quot. et est.; —d.l.43;—v. l. 2, § 2, D. de serv. pred. rust.

, D. de servit. pred. rust. ; — 1. 11, §.1, D. comm. pred.

, $1, D. de serv. pred. rust.; —1.5, § 1, eod.;—d. § 42 1.6;—1. 3, $1, eod.;—
1. 23, § 1, eod.; —1. 1, § ult. D. de aqua et aq. pluv. We see in the thirteenth section, /. 1,
D. de comm. pred., an example of another kind of service, of a piece of ground which has
in it a quarry, and out of which the proprietor is bound by some title or custom to Ict


a 7.1
’ 7.1
¢Z.1
qd 7.1
eZ.1


444 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


VI.

1054. Services for the Use of Cattle. — One may have likewise
services for the use of cattle which are kept in a ground, either for
watering them at a fountain in a neighbouring ground, or for de-
pasturing them at certain seasons.‘


SECTION IV.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE PROPRIETOR OF THE LAND OBR
TENEMENT WHICH OWES THE SEBRBVICE.


Art. L
1055. He ought to tolerate the Service.— The proprietor of the
land or tenement which serves is bound to suffer the use of the
service, and to do nothing that may either hinder the said use, or
diminish it, or render it inconvenient; and he ought to change
nothing in the ancient condition of the places, nor in any thing
else necessary to the service.*


IL


1056. He ought to tolerate the Works necessary for the Use of the
Service. — He ought likewise to suffer the works necessary for
repairing and keeping in good condition the places, and other
things destined for the service.” But he is not bound to repair the
places at his own charge,° unless he be obliged to it by the titk,
or by a possession that is equivalent to a title.


TIT. XII. SEC. I¥.] SERVICES. 4A5


of another, or any other burden, is obliged to have it such as may
be sufficient for bearing the burden; and he is bound likewise to
maintain it in such condition, and to repair it if there be occasion.*
Unless it were that the excess of the load had thrown it down, or
damaged it. And in this case he who has overloaded it will be
bound to lessen the burden, to repair the wall, and to make good
the damages and Joss which this overloading may have caused.®


IV.


1058. If it is necessary to repair a Partition-wall.—If one of
the proprietors of a partition-wall, upon which each of them may
rest any thing on his own side, has made embellishments on it,
such as painting, or carving, and the wall opens, or falls down,
or the other proprietor is obliged to demolish it, in order to
rebuild it such as it ought to be for the service, the two proprie-
tors shall contribute equally to the charges necessary for restoring
the wall to the condition in which it ought to be. But the loss
of the embellishments will fall upon him who made them‘


V.


1059. Expenses for repairing a Wall that serves for supporting a
Building. — If it is necessary to rebuild a wall which serves for
bearing a building, or supporting any thing belonging to another
person, he who is owner of the wall, and who ought to maintain
itin good condition, will be liable only for the charges necessary
torepair the wall; and whatever is laid out either in demolishing
that which rested on the wall, or in supporting it, will be borne
by the person who had the right to rest the said thing on the
wall.s


VI.


1060. The Proprietor of a Land or Tenement which serves may
relinquish tt. — If the proprietor of a land or tenement which owes
a service, or of a wall which is subject to bear the building of
another person, chooses rather to abandon his right of property,
than to make the repairs which his service obliges him to, he shall


‘ L. 6, § 2, D. de servit. vind. ; —1. 8, eod. ; — 1. 33, D. de servit. pred. urb.
* L. 14, 61, D. st servit. vind.
1.13, § 1, D. de servit. prad. urb. See the fifth article of the fifth section of Damages
terasioned by Faults.
KL. 8, D. si servit. vind.
VOL. I. 38


446 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART. 1. BOOK IL


be discharged from them by relinquishing the land or tenement
For it was the land or tenement that was bound to serve, and nol


the person.»
VIL


1061. If the Estate to which the Service ts due be divided —
If an estate to which a right of passage is due be divided among
several proprietors, the service will be preserved to each portion,
for it was due to every individual part of the estate. But the pro
prietor of the ground which owes the service of the passage will
be bound to give it only in the same place for all the proprietor,
and they cannot use the service but by agreeing among thenm-
selves so as not to enter into the ground which owes the service
but at the place where the service was established.!


VIIL


1062. When two Services are due from one Tenement to anolh
er.—If a tenement is subject to two services, as, for instance,
a house which cannot be raised higher to the prejudice of the
prospect of a neighbouring house, and which is also bound to
receive the water that comes from it, and if the proprietor of the
house which serves happens to purchase the liberty of one of the
two services, without making any mention of the other; as if he
purchases the liberty to raise his building higher, and to take away
his neighbour’s prospect; he cannot extend the said liberty to the
prejudice of the second service, which still subsists, and he must
raise his building no higher than that it may still be capable of


it. SEC. -V.] SERVICES. 447


tuse it but according to his title, without innovating any
either in the land or tenement which owes the service, or in
1 to which the service is due, that may make the condition
service harder. Thus, he cannot overload a wall, enlarge
age, advance the eaves of a house whose waters his neigh-
3 bound to receive, nor make any other changes of the like
which may increase the service, or render it more incon-
t; and he can only lessen it or make it easier.


II.


l. Zhe Overloading of a Wall that serves. — If he who has
; to rest any thing on the wall of another, or on a wall be-
g to him in common with another, shoves the wall forward,
tloads it in such a manner that the wall which was suf-
for the service is by that means thrown down or damaged,
ll be liable for all the damage that happens thereby.>


TIL


5). Repairs for the Use of the Service.— He to whom a ser-
;due ought to make the repairs necessary for using it, such
» repair of the way of his passage, of his aqueduct, and
of the like nature.


IV.


6. Of the Damage which is a Natural Consequence of the Ser-
-If the land or tenement which serves suffers any damage
atural consequence of the service, as if a piece of ground
flowed by a torrent, which has been occasioned by the ser-
f a conveyance of water from thence; if the roof of a
is damaged by the fall of an extraordinary quantity of rain,
comes from the roof of the neighbouring house whose
it was bound to receive; he to whom the service is due
1t be accountable for such sort of damages. But if he had
any change in the condition of the places, contrary to the
‘his service, and the said change had been the occasion of
mage, he would be bound to make it good.‘


», § 5, in f. D. de servit. pred. urban. ; —1. 11, eod.;—l. 1, C. de servit. ; —1. 14, D.
vind. ; —d.l. 14,4 1;—l. 20, § 5, D. de servit. pred. urd.

9, § 1, D. de dam. inf.

$2, D. st servit. vind. See the second and third articles of the fourth section.
0, § 1, D. de servit. preed. rust.; —1. 1, § 14, D. de aqua et aque pluv. arc.


448 THE OIVIL LAW. [Parr 1. BOOK


V.

1067. The Right of Service is not to be extended beyond is
Bounds, nor can tt be communicated to others.— He to whom any
service is due not only cannot communicate the use of it to any
other, but he may not even extend it for his own use beyond what
is given him by the title. ‘Thus, he who has a draught of water
for a particular ground cannot use it for his other grounds; and
if the draught of water be only for one part of a ground, he can
use it only for that part.


SECTION VI.
HOW SERVICES COME TO CEASE.


Art. I.

1068. The Right of Service perishes with the Land or Tenement
— The service ceases when the thing comes to be in such 4 con
dition that there is no using it; as if the land or tenement wha
owes the service, or that for whose behoof it was established, hap
pens to perish; and it would be the same thing if, the land or ter
ement subsisting, the cause for which the service was established
should chance to cease. Thus, for example, if a spring from
whence the neighbour has a right to fetch water happens tlo®
dried up, he would lose the right of entering into the ground wher
the spring was. But if the spring should chance to flow agai
even after the time appointed for prescription, the service wout


IT. XM. SEO. VI.] SERVICES. 449


ght which the master has over his own estate is not called a
arvice.»


IIL


1070. If after this Confusion the Proprietor sells again the Land
r Tenement which served.—If the proprietor of the land or ten-
ment for which the service was established acquires the property
f the land or tenement which serves, and afterwards sells it again
vithout reserving the service, it is sold free. For the service was
mnulled by the rule explained in the foregoing article: and it is
10t reéstablished to the prejudice of the new purchaser, on whom
this charge was not imposed.


IV.


1071. When a Land or Tenement, that is between two other
Lands or Tenements, hinders the Use of the Service. — If between
the land or tenement that serves, and that to which the service is
due, there be another land or tenement, which hinders the use of
the service, the service is suspended whilst the said obstacle
tenains. Thus, for example, if between two houses, one of which
cannot be raised so high as to prejudice the prospect of the other,
there stands a third house, which, not being liable to the said ser-
vie, has been raised, and does obstruct the said prospect, the pro-
pnetor of the house which owes the service may raise his. Thus,
he who had a right of passage loses the use of his service, if be-
tween his ground and that which serves there be another ground
which is not bound to grant the passage, and so by that means
makes his right of passage useless. But if these obstacles chance
to be removed, as if the house standing between the two be
deinolished, or if a passage be acquired through the ground which
separated the other two, he to whom the service was due recovers
the use of it.


 £.1, D. quemad. serv. am. ;— 1.10, D. com. pred. ; —1. 26, D. de servit. pred. urb.

¢ L. 30, D. de servit.

¢ Si forte qui medius est, quia servitutem non debcbat, altius extulerit sdificia sua ut
am ego non videar luminibus tuis obstiturus, si xdificavero: frustra intendes, jus mihi
on esse ita edificatum habere, invito te; sed si intra tempus statutum, rursus depo-
serit sedificium suum vicinus, renascetur tibi vindicatio. JL. 6, D. si serv. vind. In rus-
cis prediis impedit servitutem medinm predium, quod non servit. JL. 7,§ 1, D. de serv.
ned. rust.

We have not set down in this article that which the words of the law, tnfra statutum
mpus, seem to imply, viz. that this right docs not revive but when there is no prescrip-
on. For we see, on the contrary, by the laws citcd on the first article of this section,


38 *


450 THE CIVIL Law. [PART 1. BOOK |


V.
1072. Prescription of Services. — Services are lost by prescrip
tion; or they are reduced to so much as is retained of them by
possession during the time sufficient for prescription.


Vi.


1073. Different Ways of Prescribing, according to the Difer-
ences of Services. — The services which consist in some action on
the part of those to whom they are due, are lost by prescription,
when the persons to whom the services are due cease to make te
of them. As a passage, and a draught of water, which are lost
by prescription, wnen the persons to whom they are due cease to
pass, or to draw water. But the services which consist barely in
fixing the state of the places in which no innovation Is to &
made, such as a service of not raising a building higher to hinder
a prospect, a discharge of the water from off a neighbouring hous,
are never lost by prescription, except when there is a change o
the state of the places which annuls the service, and which lass
during the time limited for prescription; as if the proprietar ol 1
house which is subject toa service, having raised it higher, hu


that prescription ought not to run against him who could not use the service. Qoed =
non negligentii, aut culpi sui amiserat, sed quia ducere non poterat. And alee?
that be not the same case with this of the fourth article, yet there may be cream
in the cases comprehended in it which may make it reasonable that the service shoe ®
preserved against prescription. Thus, for example, if the possessor of three houses SP
ing one of them to himself, has sold that in the middle, and given away the thin], map
ing on the buyer and on the donee the service of not raising their houses higher; a#&
happens that the purchaser of the house in the middle is evicted of it by a thiuul pees


TIT. XI. SEC. VI.] SERVICES. 451


continued in possession of this change, or if the waters have been
discharged another way.‘


VIL


1074. Prescription of Services, whose Use is not perpetual, but
interrupted by Intervals of Time.— If the use of a service is not
perpetual, but by intervals of some years, such as a service of a
passage for going to a copse, which one uses only at the time they
cut down the wood, either once in five years, or every ten years,
or after any other long interval of time, and only during the time
necessary for cutting down and transporting the wood; the pre-
scription against such a service is not acquired in the ordinary
time of ten years, in the places where the time for prescription is
limited to ten years; but the time ought to be fixed either to
twenty years, or to more or fewer, according to the time limited
for prescription in the places, and by the customs observed therein,
if there are any, and according to the quality and intervals of the
service, and other circumstances£


VIIL


1075. Continuation of Prescription from one Possessor to another.
— If a right of service passes from one proprietor to another, the
time of prescription which had run against the first proprietor is
joined to the time which has run against the second, and prescrip-
tion is acquired against him by these two times joined together.®
As, on the contrary, a second possessor acquires a service by the
possession of his predecessor joined to his own.


IX.


1076. When an Estate is sold by a Decree of Court, the Services
nevertheless continue. —If the estate which owes the service is
sold by a decree of court, the service is nevertheless preserved; for
it is sold in the condition it is in. And much more is the service
preserved, if it is the estate to which the service is due that is
decreed to be sold:


7. 6, D. de servit. pred urb.; —I. 6, § 1, quemad. serv. am.
8 L.7, D. quemad. servit. amit. ; —l. ult. C. de servit.

b £18, $1, D. quemad. servit. am.

I 7. 23, § 2, D. de servit. pred. rust.


452 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr I. BOOK L


TITLE XATITII.
OF TRANSACTIONS.


1077. Use of Transactions.— There are two sorts of ways for
terminating by mutual consent lawsuits, or for preventing them.
The first is the way of an agreement between the parties, who
settle either by themselves or by the counsel and assistance of
their friends, the conditions of an agreement, and who submit
themselves to the said conditions by a treaty; and this is what is
called a transaction. The second is the award of arbitrators, to
whom the parties refer their differences by a compromise. So that
transactions and compromises are two kinds of covenants, the first
of which shall be the subject-matter of the present title; and that
of compromises shall be explained in the following title.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE AND EFFECT OF TRANSACTIONS.


Arr. I,

1078. The Definition.— A transaction is an agreement betwet
two or more persons, who, for preventing or ending a laweul
adjust their differences by mutual consent, in the manner whie
they agree on; and which every one of them prefers to the hope


TIT. XIII. SEC. I.] TRANSACTIONS. 453


it, or frees himself from it. Thus, he who complained of a sen-
tence either gets it to be reformed, or acquiesces under it. And,
in fine, the parties transact on the conditions to which they are
willing to agree, according to the general rules of contracts.»


1008


1080. Transactions are limited to their Subject-Matter. — 'Trans-
actions regulate only the differences which appear clearly to be
comprehended in them by the intention of the parties, whether
it be explained by a general or particular expression; or it be
known by a necessary consequence of what is expressed; and
they do not extend to differences which the parties never intended
to comprehend in them.°


IV.


1081. A Transaction with one of the Parties interested is of no
Prejudice to the others. — If he who had, or might have had, a dif-
ference with several persons, transacts with one of them for what
concerns him in particular, the transaction will be no hindrance
why his right should not subsist against the others; and why he
may not either sue them at law, or transact with them in another
manner. Thus he to whom two tutors are accountable for one
and the same administration may transact with one of them for
his part, and sue the other. Thus, the creditor of a person de-
ceased, or the legatee, may transact his claim with one of two
heirs, or executors, for his portion, and sue the other coheir, or co-
executor, for what falls to his share to pay.


V.


1082. A Transaction with another than the Adversary. —If he
who has a difference transacts it with one whom he believes to be
his adverse party, but is not, the said transaction will have no
effect. Thus, for instance, if a creditor to an inheritance trans-
acts with one whom he took to be heir, but who was not, this


b 7. 38, C. de trans. ; —l. 6, eod. ; — 1. 20, eod. toto tit. D. et C. de trans. What is said
in the thirty-eighth law, C. de trans., that it is no transaction where one docs not give, or
promise, or keep something, ought not to be taken in the strict literal sense. For one
may transact without either giving, or promising, or retaining any thing. ‘Thus, he who
is sued as surety for another may be discharged of this suit, althongh there be nothing
‘ither given, or promised, or retained, on either side.

¢ £.9, 41, D. de trans. ;—d. l. § 3;—d. l. in fine ; —I. 5, eod.

@ L.1, C. de trans. ; —1. 15, D. de tut. et rat. distr.


454 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IL.


transaction will be without effect, both with regard to the creditor,
and also with regard to the true heir* For the true heir could
not be bound by the deed of another person; and the creditor was
under no obligation on his part to the heir, with whom he did not
treat, and for whom he might perhaps have less consideration
than for the person whom he took to be heir.


VL


1083. A Transaction concerning one Right is of no Prejudice to
another Right of the like Nature, which accrues afterwards. — If he
who had transacted concerning a right which he had in his own
person, acquires afterwards a like right which belonged to another,
the transaction would be of no prejudice to this second right
Thus, for example, if one come to full age has transacted with
his tutor for the account of the share of his father’s estate that fell
to him, and he succeeds afterwards to his brother, to whom the
same tutor was likewise accountable for his share of his father’s
estate, this transaction will not hinder the same questions whic
it had adjusted as to one portion from subsisting with regard t
the other; and this second right remains whole and entire!


VIL


1084. A Transaction with the Stipulation of a Penalty.—We
may add to a transaction the stipulation of a penalty against te
party who fails to perform it. And in this ease the non-perlorm
ance of what has been agreed on gives a right to exact fi
venalty, according as the agreement has been made, and pursuasl


TIT. XIU. SEC. 11.] TRANSACTIONS. 455


IX.

1086. Transactions have the Force of Judgments. — Transactions
have a force equal to the authority of things adjudged, because
they are in the place of a judgment, which is so much the stronger
because the parties have consented to it; and because the engage-
ment which delivers the parties from a lawsuit is altogether
favorable:


SECTION II.


OF THE DISSOLUTION OF TRANSACTIONS, AND OF NULLITIES IN
THEM.


Arr. I.

1087. Fraud in a Transaction makes it Null.— The transactions
in which one of the parties contracting has been engaged by the
fraud of the other have no effect. Thus, he who by a transaction
relinquishes a right which he was not able to maintain, for want
of a title which his adversary concealed, would be restored to his
nght if the truth should come to light. And it would be the
same thing with an heir who had transacted with his coheir, who
bad fraudulently concealed from him the true state of the inheri-
tance.*


Il.


1088. Error has the same Effect.—If he who had acquired a
Nght by a testament which he knew nothing of, derogates from
this right by a transaction with the executor, the said transaction
will be without effect, when the testament comes to appear; and
that even although the executor had known nothing of it. Thus,
for example, if the debtor to an estate transacts, and pays a debt
which had been remitted by the testament; if a legatee or a
trustee transacts about a right which was regulated by a codicil ;
they may get the transaction to be repealed. For the testament,
or the codicil, was a title common to the parties, and it ought not
to lose its effect by a transaction which was only a consequence
of the ignorance of this truth.®
8 ZT. 20, C. de trans. ; —I. 2, C. eod. ; —I. 65, §.1, D. de cond. ind.


® 7.19, C. de trans. ; —1. 9, § 2, D. eod. ; — v. I. 65, § 1, D. de cond. ind.
b ZL. 3, § 1, D. de trans. ; —1. 12, in fine eod. ; — I. 6, eod.


456 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 3. BOOK L


Il.

1089. If the Transaction derogates from a Right of which the
Title is unknown. — If he who by a transaction derogatea from a
right fallen to him by a title which he knew nothing of, but which
was not concealed from him by his adverse party, comes after
wards to recover the said title, the transaction may either subsist,
or be annulled, according to the circumstances. Thus, in the case
of the foregoing article it is annulled. Thus, on the contrary, if it
was a general transaction concerning all the affairs which the
parties might have with one another, the writings newly discov-
ered relating to one of the differences, which neither of the parties
knew any thing of, would not change any thing in the transaction,
the intention of the parties having been to compensate, and to ex-
tinguish all sorts of pretensions.°


IV.


1090. When a Transaction is founded on Forged Writings. —¥
a transaction has been grounded on forged writings, which passed
for true ones, and the forgery be discovered afterwards, he who
complains of it may procure the transaction to be annulled, in all
that has been regulated on that foundation. But if the transee
tion contained other points, which had no dependence on the
forged writings, they would subsist. And there would be no
other changes made, except such as should be occasioned by the
discovery of the truth which had remained in the dark because of
the forged writings.*


TIT. X11. SEO. U.] TRANSACTIONS. 457.


VI.

1092. A Transaction made to color an Unlawful Contract. — The
transactions which are made only to color an illegal act, and to
make another kind of contract which is prohibited by some law,
to pass under the name and appearance of a transaction, are null.
Thus, for instance, if those who are intrusted with the administra-
tion of the affairs of a town treat with one of its debtors, who by
his interest with them obtains a discharge, under the color of a
feigned transaction, the said transaction will be annulled. And
it would be the same thing in case of a deed of gift made, under
color of a transaction, in favor of a person to whom one could not


give legally.
VIL


1093. A Transaction concerning a Lawsuit, in which Judgment
has been given, although the Parties know nothing of tt.— If after
judgment has been given in a lawsuit, without the knowledge of
the parties, they agree it by a transaction, the transaction will
subsist, if there lies an appeal from the sentence. For since the
lawsuit may still be continued, the event remains uncertain. But
if there lies no appeal from the sentence, as if the matter has been
decided by a final judgment from which there lies no appeal, the
transaction would be null. For there was no longer any law-
suit depending, and the parties transacted only because they pre-
supposed that the matter in dispute was not decided, and that
neither of them had acquired his right. So that this error, together
with the authority of things adjudged, makes that which has been
judicially determined to be preferred to a consent, which he who
has desisted from his right would not have given, had it not been
that he believed himself to be in a danger in which he was nots


mimimam quantitatem, quam solam in bonis fuisse dicebat, his, quibus fideicommissum
debebatur, restituit. Postea, repertis instrumentis, apparuit quadruplo amplius in heere-
ditate fuisse: quesitum est, an in reliquum, fideicommissi nomine, conveniri possit? re-
spondit, secundim ea que proponerentur, si non transactum esset, posse. L. 78, § ult. D.
ad Trebell. We must not extend this law so fur as to take it in a sense contrary to what
has been said in the first article. For if this heir or executor had been guilty of any
fraud, he could not take any advantage of the transaction.

By the ordinance of Charles IX. of 1560, damage alone, without fraud or force, is not
sufficient to dissolve transactions.

f 7. 12, C. de trans. ; —v. l. 5, § 5, D. de donat. int. vir. et uz.

6 L.11, D. de transact. ; —1.7, D. eod. ; —1. 32, C. de trans. ; —1. 23, §1, D. de cond.
tnd. ; — d. § in fine.

VOL. I. 39


458 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


TITLE XIV.
OF COMPROMISES.


1094. The Use of Compromises. — Although there be judges
appointed for deciding all differences, and one of the contending
parties cannot oblige the other to plead before any other judge;
yet it is natural that it should be free for the two parties to agree
to make choice of other persons to be their judges. And those
who, being desirous to make up their differences, cannot agree
among themselves as to the conditions of their accommodation,
may refer the matter to arbitrators, who are so called because the
persons who choose them give them power to arbitrate, and to
regulate what shall seem just and reasonable to them, for termi
nating the differences of which they are made judges.*

1095. The covenant by which arbitrators are named is called
a compromise, because they who name the arbitrators promise
reciprocally to one another to execute whatever shall be arbi-
trated; and the judgment pronounced by the arbitrators is called
an award.

1096. The Authority of Awards. — 'The authority of awards i
founded on the will of those who have named the arbitrator
For it is this will which engages those that make the reference to
execute what shall be arbitrated by the persons whom they hare
chosen to be their judges. But because the effect of sentence


® We must not confound the arbitrators named by compromise, of which mentions
made in this title, with third persons to whom it is referred to make an estimate of my —


TIT. XXIV. SEC. 1.] COMPROMISES. 450


worn ounced by arbitrators cannot be the same with that of sen-
ences pronounced by judges, who have authority to judge, and to
at ‘their judgments in execution; and because also the parties
yho choose arbitrators do not divest themselves of the right of
retti mag that which has been wrongfully arbitrated to be reformed ;
ye Persons therefore who make the reference do not oblige them-
selves absolutely to execute what shall be awarded; but they
only engage themselves either to abide by the award, or to a
certain penalty which the contravener shall be bound to pay to
the other.

1097. Time given to the Arbitrators to pronounce their Award. —
¥t is usual, and even necessary, in compromises, to fix a time
within which the arbitrators shall pronounce their award. For, on
the one hand, a delay is necessary for instructing the arbitrators,
and putting the things in a condition of being determined ; and, on
the other hand, this time ought to be limited, because it would
not be just that it should be in the power either of the arbitrators
or parties to put off the final decision for ever. So that the power

of arbitrators determines at the time limited by the compromise.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF COMPROMISES, AND OF THEIR EFFECT.


Art. I.

1098. Definition of a Compromise. — A compromise is a cove-
nant by which persons who have a lawsuit, or difference with one
another, name arbitrators to decide the matter; and oblige them-
selves reciprocally, either to perform what shall be arbitrated, or to
undergo a certain penalty of a sum of money, which the person
who shall contravene the award shall be bound to pay to the
other, who is willing to stand to it.*


Il.


1099. The Manner of proceeding in Compromise. — The parties
who have put their differences in compromise declare their pre-
tensions, and prove them, as the method is in a court of justice,
by producing writings and evidences, observing in this the order


a L. 44, D. de recept. ; — l. 2, eod.


460 THE CIVIL LAW. [part


which they agree on by mutual consent, or which is reg
the arbitrators.”


TIL.


1100. The Compromise obliges only to the Penalty.—‘l
of the compromise is to oblige him who shall refuse tc
the award to pay the penalty.


IV.


1101. A Compromise is either General or Particular. —
compromise either in general all differences, or only som:
in particular. And the power of the arbitrators is limite
is explained in the compromise.‘


V.


1102. The Compromise ends when the Time limited for
— The compromise, and the power which it gives to a
ends when the time which it prescribed is expired, altt
award has not been pronounced.®


VI


1103. If the Compromise ts at an End by the Death of
Parties. — The compromise expires likewise by the des
of the parties, and does not oblige the survivor to the
executors of the other, nor those heirs or executors t
vivor; unless it has been otherwise settled by the compn


If. XIV. SEO. 11.) COMPROMISES. 461


forgexy, and others of the like nature* For, on the one side, the
public interest is concerned in these sorts of causes, which makes
the lking’s advocate, or attorney-general, a party in them, whose
fonction is to sue for vengeance of a public crime, without regard
to what passes between the parties: and, on the other side, the
patty accused can neither defend his honor, nor his innocence,
which is attacked in public, but in public, and before the judges
who exercise the ministry of justice: and it would be contrary to
good manners, and, moreover, useless for him to submit volun-
tarily to justify his innocency before arbitrators, who, having no
share in the administration of justice, could neither justify nor
condemn him.


\4


VIIL


1105. Nor a Cause tn which the State or Honor of a Person ts con-
gaz cemmed.— Neither can we compromise causes which relate to the
ra «Cate of persons." As if the question were to know whether one
wi legitimate or a bastard, whether one is a professed monk or

~ bet, whether a gentleman or a plebeian. Nor can such causes be
put to arbitration, the consequence whereof may interest our
honor or dignity in such a sort, that good manners do not allow


«. _ 8 to compromise their event, nor to choose judges for deciding
2 them.


SECTION II.


OF THE POWER AND ENGAGEMENT OF ARBITRATORS,; AND WHO MAY
BE AN ARBITRATOR, AND WHO NOT.


Art. I.


1106. The Arbitrators ought to give their Award within the Time
limited by the Compromise. — The arbitrators ought to give their
award within the time limited by the compromise, and it would
be null if it were given after the said time is expired. For


their power is then at an end, and they are no longer arbi-
trators.*


S L. 32, § 6, D. de recept. See the following article.
b L.. 32, § 7, D. de recept.; —I. ult. C. ubi caus. stat. agi debet.
® L.1, C. de recept.

39°


462 THE CIVIL LAW. (Parr!


IL
1107. Power to the Arbitrators to prorogue the Tim
parties may give power to the arbitrators to prolong t
and in this case their power lasts during the time of
rogation.°


TIL


1108. Delay for instructing the Cause.—If the con
regulates a certain time for instructing the cause which
trators are to decide, they cannot give their award till
time is expired” -


IV.


1109. Arbitrators cannot change their Award. — The a
having once given their award, they cannot retract it, ne
any thing in it. For the compromise was only to g
power to give an award, and when that is done their po
an end. But their power is not at an end by an inte
sentence, or an incident in the cause, and they may give
interlocutory sentences on such incidents as often as
requires.4


V.


1110. Arbitrators cannot judge, unless they are all togei
there are several arbitrators named by the compromise, {
not give their award unless they all see the process, :
judgment of it together. And although the greater part h


TI. XV.] PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS. 463


must observe the conditions which are there prescribed; and if
they judge otherwise, their award is null.


VIL


1112. Who may be Arbitrators, and who not.— All persons may
be arbitrators, except such as are under some incapacity or in-
firmity which renders them unfit for that function.£


VIIL


1113. Women cannot be Arbitrators. — Women, who because of
their sex cannot be judges, are likewise incapable of being named
arbitrators by a compromise," although they may exercise the
fanction of skilful persons, as to things within their knowledge, in
any art or profession in which they are skilled. For this function
is not of the same quality with that of a judge.


TITLE XV.
OF PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS.


1114. The Origin and Use of Proxies, Mandates, and Commis-
sions. — Absence, indisposition, and many other impediments, do
often hinder persons from looking after their own affairs, and in
these cases he who cannot act himself chooses a person whom he
empowers to do what he would do himself if he were present.

1115. Thus, those who have any affair to be transacted, and
cannot be present themselves, such as a sale, a partnership, a trans-
action, or other affairs of all kinds, give a power to other persons

to treat for them. And he to whom this power is given is called
a proxy, or attorney, he being constituted to take care of the in-
terest, and to procure the advantage of the person who has em-
ployed him.

1116. Thus, they whose dignity or great employments hinder
them from looking after their domestic concerns choose persons to
whom they give power to take care of them; and those persons
are called either comptrollers, stewards, or by other names, accord-


f 1. 32, 4 15, D. de recept. & L.9,§ 1, D. de recept. h 7. ult. C. de recept.


464 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part I. BOOK 1


ing to the quality of the persons who employ them, and the affairs
committed to their charge.

1117. Thus, they who have offices or employments, of which
the functions may be performed by others than themselves, such
as receivers, farmers of the king’s revenue, and many others, en-
ploy in the execution of these offices deputies and clerks.

1118. Thus, they who deal in any commerce by land or ses,
whether by themselves or in partnership with others, have like-
wise their factors and agents to manage the particular concerns of
their business, which they themselves have not leisure to look
after.

1119. What is common to Proxies and Commissions. — All these
ways of deputing other persons in the place of the masters have
this in common to them; that those who commit to others the
care of their affairs, and those who charge themselves with them,
enter into covenant with one another, by which the master, on his
part, regulates the power which he gives to him whom he consti-
tutes his proxy, or whom he appoints his agent, for his particular
affairs, or for the business of his office; and he who charges hin-
self with the business accepts, on his part, of the power and charge
intrusted to him; and both the one and the other enter into the
engagements which follow from the said covenant.

1120. The Subject-Matter of this Title. — It is this kind of cove-
nant and these engagements that shall be the subject-matter of
this title. And seeing the rules concerning proxies, or letters of
attorney, are almost all of them common to commissions, and to
other the like ways of deputing one person in the room of another,


TIT. XV. SEC. 1.] PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS. 465


1122. It is to be remarked as to the word mandate, that it had
also in the Roman law other meanings, to signify other sorts of
covenants, which have relation to these mentioned in this title.
Thus, they gave the name of mandate to the transaction between
a debtor and the person who becomes his surety; because the
debtor was considered as requiring or praying his surety to engage
for him. Thus, they expressed by the same name the agreement
between a person who transferred a debt and him who accepted
it; considering the transferrer as giving order to his debtor to pay
the debt to another, and the person accepting the transfer as being
vested with the right of the transferrer to receive that which is
transferred to him.

1123. But seeing this matter of transfers does not properly belong
to this place, and that it has been treated of in the contract of sale,
of which the assignments of rights is a kind, and that the matter
of sureties is also of another nature, and belongs to another place ;
we shall not take in these matters under this title.

11234. We shall not say any thing here of proctors, or attorneys
at law, for managing lawsuits, they being officers who have their
functions regulated, the greatest part whereof do not depend on
the will of the persons who constitute them, but on the rules and
practices of the respective courts of justice, which is a matter that
does not come within the design of this treatise. And as to their
fanctions, in which they ought to follow the directions of their cli-
ents, we may apply to them the rules which shall be explained in
this title.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS.


Art. L
1125. Definition of a Procuration, or Letter of Attorney. —A
procuration, or letter of attorney, is an instrument, by which he
who is not at leisure to look after his own concerns gives power
to another to do it for him, as if he himself were present. Whether
it be that he is barely to manage and take care of some estate, or
some affair, or that he is to treat in his name with others.*


® T.1, § 2, D. de procur. ; —1. 35, § 8, eod. ; — 1. 43, eod.


466 THE CIVIL LaW. [Part 1. BOOK L


IL
1126. Definition of a Proxy.— A proxy is the person who does
the business of another, having a power from him.”


ITT.


1127. How the Covenant is formed between the Person who ap-
points a Proxy and the Proxy.— 'The covenant which makes the
engagements between the proxy and the person who constitutes
him is formed when the procuration, or letter of attorney, is
accepted. And if the parties are not present, the covenant »
accomplished whenever the proxy charges himself with the order
that is contained in the procuration, or letter of attorney, or exe
cutes it. For then his consent is joined to that of the person
who has constituted him.°


IV.


1128. If the Proxy is present.—If the proxy is present, and
accepts of the procuration, or letter of attorney, charging himeelf
with the execution of what is contained in it, the covenant s
formed at the same time.4


V


1129. The Manner of giving the Power. — One may gives —
power to treat, act, or to do any other thing, not only by a procam
tion, or letter of attorney, in due form, but also by a bare missive let
ter, or note in writing, or by a third person who carries the order, #@
by other ways which explain the commission or power thats


TIT. XV. SEC. I.] PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS. 467


VIL

1131. Procuration General or Special.— One may constitute a —

proxy, either for all affairs in general, or for some only, or for one

particular affair. And the proxy has his power regulated accord-

ing to the extent and bounds set to it in the procuration, or letter
of attorney.


VIIL


1132. Power Indefinite, Regulated, and Limited.— The procura-
tion may contain either an indefinite power to the proxy to do
whatever he thinks proper, or only a power limited to what shall
be expressly mentioned in the procuration.". And the engagements
of the master, and of the proxy, are different, according to this
difference of the procurations, and according to the rules which
shall be explained in the second and third sections.


IX.
1133. The Function of a Proxy is Gratuitous. — Proxies doing


commonly an act of kindness, and performing the office of a friend,
their function is gratuitous: and if it were agreed to give any
salary, it would be a kind of letting and hiring, where the person
who should act for another would give for a certain price the use
of his industry and labor! But the reward that is given without
agreement, and as an honorable acknowledgment of a good deed,
is of another kind, and does not change the nature of the procura-
ton


X.


1134. A Proxy for an Affair in which he himself is interested.
—A proxy may be constituted, not only for the bare interest of
the person who constitutes him, but sometimes also for the
interest of the proxy himself, where both the one and the other
are interested in the same thing. Thus, in a contract of sale,
the seller may constitute the buyer his proxy, to recover out of the
hands of a third person the titles of his right to the estate that is
sold: and the purchaser may appoint the seller his proxy, to
receive from a depositary, or from a debtor of the purchaser, the


§ L.1,§ 1, D. de procur. ; —d. § in fine. h 7.12, C. mand. ;—1. 46, D. mand.

'L.1, § ult. D. mand. ; —§ ult. Inst. eod. 1 7. 6, eod.

= L. 2, § 4, D. mand. ;—§ 2, Inst. eod.;—l. 34, D. de procur.; —1. 42, § 2, eod.;—
l. 55, eod.


468 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOX I.


money which he destines for the payment of the price of the
sale.


XI.


1135. A Procuration for the Affair of a Third Person. — One
may by a procuration, a mandate, or commission, charge one
with the affair of a third person, whether he who gives the order
or he who accepts it have interest in the affair or not." And the
said order puts the person who gives it under a twofold engage
ment; for it obliges him to answer to the third person for what
shall have been ill transacted by the person whom he employs m
his concerns;° and it lays him likewise under an obligation &
the person whom he has employed in the concerns of that thid
person, to be accountable to him for all the consequences of th
engagement into which he makes him enter; such as that of ge
ting what he shall have transacted well to be ratified by the pary
concerned, and of procuring him reimbursement of all the reasoe
able charges he shall have been at.?


XII.


1136. The Effect of a Procuration to manage the Affairs ft
Third Person.— Although nobody can properly contract for a>
other,’ yet if he who has undertaken to be the friend of an absest
person, to manage an affair, to cultivate an estate, or to do any
other thing for the said absent person, fails, without just cans, @
execute what he has promised, he shall be liable for the come
quences of his non-performance of the said engagement, acca’


TIT. XV. SEC. Il.] PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS. 469


XIIL

1137. Of Advice and Recommendation. — We must distinguish
between procurations, mandates, and commissions, wherein one
gives an express charge, with design to form a covenant that
obliges, and the ways of engaging by an advice, by a recommen-
dation, or by other ways which imply no design of forming a cov-
enant, but which have regard only to the interest of the person
to whom the advice is given, or of him who is recommended,
and which leave the person at free liberty to do, or not to do, what
is advised or recommended. For in these cases there is no en-
gagement formed, and he who follows an advice, or who grants
any thing upon a recommendation, does not expect that the adviser
or recommender should answer for the events." But if the person
who gave-the advice, or who recommended, was guilty of any
fraud; or if he engages one in some loss that may be imputed to
him, as if he should persuade one to lend money to an unknown
person, to whom one lends barely on the assurance which he gives
that the money shall be faithfully repaid, he shall be bound to


make it good.‘


SECTION II.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE PERSON WHO EMPLOYS ANOTHER AS
HIS PROXY, FACTOR, OR AGENT, IN ANY BUSINESS.


Art. L

1138. How the Engagement is formed between the Proxy and
him who appoints him.— He who has given a procuration, com-
mission, or other order, to an absent person, begins to be engaged
to him from the moment that he to whom the order is given has
begun to execute it; and his first engagement is to approve and
ratify what has been done pursuant to the power which he has
given.*


IT.
1139. Expenses laid out by the Proxy or Agent.— If the proxy,


or other agent, has been at any expense in executing the order


® ZT. 2, § ult. D. mand. ; —§ 6, Inst. eod. ; —1. 12, § 12, D. eod.
* L. 47, D. de reg. jur. ; —l. 6, § 5, D. mand. ; —v. 1. 10, § 7, eod.; —I. 1, D. quod jussu.
a ©. 3, § 1, D. mand. See the first article of the fourth section.

VOL. I. 40


470 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part I. BOOK 1.


with which he was charged, as if he has made a journey, or
advanced a sum of money, he who has employed him shall be
bound to reimburse him of the reasonable charges which he has
laid out in executing the order; even although the affair had not
the desired success, unless it miscarried through his fault.» Bat
he will not recover the useless or superfluous expenses which he
has laid out without order.°


TIL


1140. If the Proxy has disbursed more than the Owner would
have done. — Although the expenses laid out by the proxy should
excced what the owner of the thing would have bestowed on it, if
he had looked after it himself, yet the owner will be bound never-
theless to refund all that has been disbursed reasonably and hon-
estly, although with less precaution and less husbandry than he
himself would have used.‘


IV.


1141. The Interest of Moneys advanced by the Proxy. — He
whose procuration, or other order, hath obliged the person charged
with it to advance money, whether it be that the proxy, or other
person employed, have borrowed the money, or advanced it of his
own, shall refund, not only the money laid out, but also the inter
est of it, according to the circumstances, whether it be becausesiyg
the interest which he who hath made the advance hath paid for
the money himself, if he borrowed it; or to indemnify him as &
the loss which the said advance may have occasioned him. Fa


TIT. XV. SEC. II.] PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS. 471


there be no express mention made in the contract of every one of
them being bound for the whole. For he who hath executed the
order hath done it on the engagement of every one of them who
gave it; and he may say that he would not have done it without
this security of having every one of them bound for all the conse-
quences of the order which had been given.


VI


1143. Of the Losses sustained by the Proxy on Account of the
Affair which he takes in Hand.—If a proxy or agent suffers any
loss or damage on account of the affair which he has taken in
hand, we must judge by the circumstances whether the loss ought
to fall on the proxy, or on the person whose affair he manages.
Which will depend on the quality of the order which was to be
executed, — the danger, if there was any, — the nature of the event
which has occasioned the loss, — the connection between the event
and the order that was executed, — the relation which the thing
lost, or the damage sustained, had to the affair which was the oc-
casion of it, —the quality of the persons, — that of the loss, — the
nature and value of the things lost,—the causes of the engage-
ment between the person who gave the order and him who exe-
cuted it, — and on the other circumstances which may charge the
one or the other with the loss, or discharge them of it. As to
which we must cast into the balance the consideration of equity,
and the sentiments of humanity which one ought to have, whose
interest has been the cause or occasion of loss to another.®


€ L. 59, § 3, D. mand.

& See the twelfth and thirteenth articles of the fourth section of Partnership, and the re-
mark on the twelfth article. LZ. 26, § 6, D. mand. ;—d. l. 26,§ 7;—1.61, §5, D. de furtis.
We have not set down in this article any particular examples, that we might not perplex
the rule. But we shall here subjoin some instances which may be of use for making the
application of the rule.

If he who charges himself with the affairs of another person takes such care of them
as to neglect his own concerns, the losses which he may suffer on this account will lie at
his own door, for he ought to have taken proper measures for his own affairs at the time
when he undertook the management of the affairs of others. See the thirteenth article of
the fourth section of Partnership.

If a person undertaking to go for another to a place where his own business obliges
him to take some money along with him, and he embracing the occasion, and carrying
the money, was robbed of it, the person who had engaged him to make the journey will

‘not be liable for the said loss, which does not concern him in any manner whatsoever.

If any one being obliged to make a journey or voyage, which robbers, a hazardous
passage by sea, or other dangers, render perilous, engages another person to perform the
said journey or voyage, who is willing to expose himself to the danger, whether it be


472 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK 1.


SECTION III.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF A PROXY AND OTHER AGENTS, AND OF
THEIR POWER.


Art. L

1144. Liberty of accepting the Order, Necessity of executing i.
— Asa proxy and other agents are at liberty not to accept the
order and power which is given them, so they are bound, if they
do accept it, to execute it; and if they fail to do it, they will be
liable for the damages which they shall have occasioned by ther
not acting; unless they have a lawful excuse to plead, such »
sickness, or some other just cause of hindrance.*


II.


1145. The Order is to be executed in its Full Extent. — The
procuration, or other order, ought to be executed fully, according
to the extent or bounds of the power given.”


III.


1146. Extent and Limits of the Power.— If the order or power
given marks precisely what is to be done, he who accepts and er
ecutes it ought to keep close to what is prescribed in it. And if


through necessity, because of the recompense promised him for his pains, or out of pu
gencrosity, and he is robbed, or loses his baggage by shipwreck, or is wounded, the pe
son who exposed him to this danger that he might free himself from it, will be heve
no share in the loss, and shall he not be bound to bear either the whole loss, or a pert ed
it, according to the circumstances ?

If one friend, lending to another friend money which is to be transported to the comslly
in order to pay off a debt, undertakes likewise to carry it to the country, and as be is g&


(V. BEC. 11.] PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS. 478


der or power be indefinite, he may set such bounds to it, or
tsuch extent, as may reasonably be presumed to be agree-
to the intention of the person who gives it; whether it be
regard to the thing itself that is to be done, or the way of
it


IV.


i. The Care that Proxies and other Agents are obliged to.—~
es and other factors or agents are obliged, both in honor
uty, to take care of the affairs which they have undertaken
k after, and to manage them, not only with integrity, but also
diligence and exactness. And although they be negligent in
own affairs with impunity, yet they ought to have in the con-
of others which they undertake to manage more circum-
ion than in their own; and they are accountable for the
ge which their negligence may have occasioned; but not for
ente.¢


V.


8. Bounds of this Care. — It cannot be imputed as a fault to
ry or other agent, if, in the discussion of an affair committed
on, such as the transacting or prosecuting a lawsuit, he does
varch into the nicest subtilties for the interest of the person
1as employed him. But it sufficeth if he gives a reasonable
ation, and his conduct be such as good sense and honesty
‘equire.®


VI


9. One may better the Condition of the Person who employs
ut cannot make tt worse.— The proxy, or other agent, may
the condition of the person who employs him, but cannot
it worse. Thus, he may buy a thing at a lower price than
1e was empowered to give, but he cannot buy it dearer.


, D. mand. ; —1. 12, C. eod. ; —1. 46, D. eod. See the fourth article of the second
f Covenants.
3, D. de reg. jur. ;—1. 13, C. mand. ; —1. 11, C. eod. ; —1. 8, § 10, D. eod.; —1. 29,
. 9, C. eod. ; —1. 21, C. end.
0, D. mand. ; —1. 29, § 4, eod. Although this last text relates to a surety, yet
8 applied to a proxy. And likewise this law is placed in the title A/andats,
the surety is as it were a proxy, as has been remarked in the preamble to this
-e the ninth article of the third section of Sureties.
D. mand. ; —d. 1. § 2; —§ 8, Inst. eod. ; — 1.49, D. de procur. ; —1. 5, D. mand. ;
§ 2, cod.
40°


474 THE OIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


VIL

1150. If the Prozy buys at a dearer Price than he was empow-
ered to give. — If he who had power to buy at a certain price buys
the thing dearer, and the person who had employed him refuses ts
ratify the bargain, the proxy or factor will be at liberty to confim
himself to the recovery of the price which he was empowered to
give ; and in this case the ratification cannot be refused himsi
there are no other circumstances.


VIIL


1151. Proxies and other Agents are bound to give an Account.—
Proxies and other persons employed in the management and s¢
ministration of any business are bound to give an account of ther
management, and to make restitution honestly of what they hare
received, such as the fruits, if there were any, and other profits, asd
every other thing that may have accrued from the affair which they
managed; and they also recover their expenses. And if it bes
been agreed to give a salary, or if any be due, as if it is a factor
or steward, the salary must be paid them. And in this case thy
will not recover the expenses which they are obliged to lay out of
their own salaries.2


IX.


1152. Advocates and Proctors cannot stipulate a Share of wh
shall be recovered in a Lawsuit, nor purchase Litigious Rights.—
Although a proxy or agent may receive a salary, yet he whos
employed as a proctor or attorney at law in a lawsuit canst


', SEC. IlI.] PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS. 475


X.
. The Power of him who has a General Procuration. — He
as a general procuration for the administration of all the
and all the concerns of another person may call in the
refer a matter in dispute to the oath of the party, receive the
and pay off what is owing.™ And in general all proxies
0 whatever is comprehended within the letter of the procu-
or intention of the persons who have employed them, and
rer naturally follows from the power that is given them, or
ssary for executing it." Thus, the power of receiving what
implies that of giving a discharge; thus, the power of
ding a debt implies that of distraining the goods of the


XI.


~ A Special Power is requisite for transacting or alienating.
eneral procuration is not sufficient to empower one to de-
in another’s name the rescission of a contract or restitution of
to their former state and condition; for to do this a change
is necessary, which ought to be expressed. Neither is such
ral power sufficient for transacting or alienating, but a
power is requisite for that purpose. For to transact and to
e is commonly to diminish the goods. And it is only the
of them who can dispose of them in this manner. But a
or agent who has only a general power may sell the fruits,
her things which may easily be spoiled, and which a good
id ought not to keep.°


XII.


. Non-performance of the Procuration, Things remaining still
‘ former State. — If the proxy or other agent hath failed to
2 the order which he had received, the things being in such
ition that there arises no prejudice from thence to the per-
ho employed him, the bare non-performance of the order
s him to nothing.P


8, D. de procur.;— 1.17, § ult. D. de jurejur. ; —I. 59, eod.
i, D. de procur. ; —v. l. ult. § ult. D. mand.
y § 1, D. de min. ; — 1. 60, D. de procur. ; — l. 63, eod.

§ 6, D. mand.


476 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


XIIL

1156. Two Proxies for the same Thing.— If two persons have
been made proxies, or intrusted with the direction of the same
affair, and both the one and the other undertake it, they will be
answerable each of them for the whole, unless the power that s
given them regulate it otherwise. For the affair is intrusted
both to the one and the other; and each of them makes himself
answerable for it when he accepts the order.?


XIV.


1157. When two Proxies are named, and one transacts withou
the knowledge of the other.— If, two persons being named proxies
for doing a thing which one of them might do without the other,
such as receiving payment of a debt or prosecuting a lawsuit, one
of them has done the business by himself, he has consummated
the power of both; and the second has no more power in whats
already done But if the two were named to treat jointly about
an affair, and not onc without the other, nothing would oblige
the person who employed them, except what has been transacted
jointly by them both together. For they could not divide the
power which they had but in conjunction with one anothe.
Thus, for instance, if two persons had an indefinite power to
transact a lawsuit of the persons who employed them, and one
transacts it without the other, the transaction may be disavowed
by the party concerned. For he had not the power to transact
the business all alone ; and the presence of the other might have
helped to better the condition of their principal.


Y. BRO. IV.] PROXIES, MANDATES, AND COMMISSIONS. 477


ikes known his revocation to the person whom he revokes,
rat all things be still entire. But if the proxy or other
had already executed the order, or begun to execute it,
he knew any thing of the revocation, it would be without
as to what had been already executed; and he will be
nified as to any obligation into which the said order may
ngaged him.*


IL


D. The Naming of a Second Proxy revokes the Power given
First. — He who, having appointed one to be his proxy or
does afterwards name another for the same business, re-
by that the power which he had given to the first.” But if
st had already executed the order before he knew of the
tion, he who had appointed him could not disavow what
i done.


HY.


0. The Proxy may discharge himself after having accepted
‘ocuration.—- The proxy or other agent may rid himself of
igagement after having accepted the procuration or com-
m, whether it be that he has particular reasons so to do,
is being seized with a distemper; or that some business has
out that hinders him; or that he had no other reason for his
1, but his own will and pleasure. But it is necessary, if he
s to execute the order which he took in hand, that his refusal
thout fraud, and that he leave all things entire, and in such
dition that the master may be able to do the business him-
x by another. And if the proxy or other agent abandons
saves the thing in danger, he shall be bound to make good
image that ensues thereupon,° according to the rules which


IV.


1. He ought to acquaint his Principal with the Change of his
ution. — If the proxy or other agent will throw up the procu-


2, § 16, D. mand. ; — § 9, Inst. eod.; —I. 15, eod. See the first article of the sec-
ion.

B1, § ult. D. de procur.

2, § ult. D. mand. ; —d. § in fine ; —l. 27, § 2, eod. ; —1. 20, D. de procur. ; —v.
ult. et Ul. seq. D. cod. ; — |. 22, et seg. D. mand. See the following articles.


478 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK 1


ration, or commission which he had accepted, he cannot do it
but by making it known to the person who employed him. And
if he fails to do that, he shall be bound to make good all
damages and losses. For having taken charge of his affair, it
would be a cheating of him to abandon it without acquainting
him beforehand.‘


V.

1162. If the Proxy is not able to acquaint his Principal with the
Impediment that hinders him to execute his Order. —If he who had
accepted a commission or other order is not able to execute i
because of some obstacle that has happened, and which he could
not know; as if, in a journey which he had undertaken, be fal
sick by the way, and can give no advice of it, or that the advie
proves useless, coming too late ; the losses which may follow from
the non-performance of the order in such cases will fall on the pe
son who gave it. Because they are unforeseen accidents, which
regard the master. | |


VI.


1163. Procurations and other Orders expire by the Death either
of the Giver or Acceptor. — Procurations and other orders expire
by the death of the person who gave the order, or of him whos.
cepted it. But this is to be understood according to the rules
which follow.


VIL


1164. A Proxy who continues to act, being ignorant of the Death
of the Person who employed him.— If the proxy or other agem
being ignorant of the death of the person who had employed him,


yr rey ye i a mt 1


Tif. XVI] PUBLIC TRADERS. 479


VIIL

1165. If the Heir or Executor of the Deceased Proxy acts after
his Death. — If the proxy or other agent happens to die before he
began to execute the order, and his heir or executor, being
ignorant that the power was at an end by the said death, takes
upon himself to execute the order, whatever he does will be of no
prejudice to the master, and will be annulled. For this ignorance
does not give the heir or executor a right which he had not,
and which went no farther than the person who was made
choice of.» :


TITLE XVI.


OF PERSONS WHO DRIVE ANY PUBLIC TRADE, OF THEIR FAC-
TORS AND AGENTS, AND OF BILLS OF EXCHANGE.


1166. The Matters contained in this Title. — The covenants of
which we have spoken hitherto, except that of a necessary deposit,
are transacted by the mutual consent of the persons who are will-
ing to treat together: and the engagements which are formed by
those covenants are preceded by a reciprocal liberty which the
parties contracting have to treat with one another, and to make
choice of one another; that is to say, if they do not like of one
person, they may treat with another, or keep from treating and
engaging themselves at all. But there are other covenants in
Which one has not the choice of the persons with whom he is to
feat, nor is he at liberty to abstain from all manner of engage-
Ment: and where necessity obliges him to have to do with certain
Persons who drive public trades, of which the laws, for this reason,
have settled the conditions; on purpose that these persons may
Rot make a bad use of the necessity which people are under to

teat with them and to trust them.


Of the person from whom he received his order, and he could not give notice of it to
the heirs or executors, who happen to be absent, might not he, and even ought not he, to
®xecute the order ?

» [.57, D. mand. But if the heir or executor of the proxy, knowing the order that
vas given him, and secing that the absent master could not look after his own affair, and
hat there would be danger of some loss if he did not take care of it, would not he be
bliged to do what was in his power, such as to continue to till the lands, or to gather in


1¢ harvest ?


480 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT I. BOOKL


1167. Thus, travellers are obliged to trust their clothes and bag.
gage in inns; which produces an engagement between them and
the innkeepers.

1168. Thus, they who, having any journey or voyage to male
to places to which they may have the convenience of going ins
stage-coach by land, in a ship by sea, or in a boat on a river, and
having no travelling equipage of their own, are obliged to make
use of those public conveyances both for their persons, their clothes,
and their goods. And this forms a reciprocal engagement be
tween them and the masters of those public conveyances. Aad
it is the same thing with respect to those who, without travelling
themselves, have clothes or goods to send from one place to
another.

1169. Although it may seem as if the engagements of ine
keepers and carriers were only the same with those of letting and
hiring, and of a deposit, it being by a kind of letting and biing
that we treat with them, and that they become depositaries df
what is committed to their charge; and that, therefore, ther
seems to be need of no other rules for them than what we have
in these two kinds of contracts; yet the consequence of the fide
ity that is required in these kinds of professions subjects them to
other rules that are peculiar to them. And there is this besides
particular in these kinds of commerces, that the persons who drive
them not being able of themselves to manage their whole but
ness, because of the multitude of persons who have to deal with
them, and that at all hours of the day they are necessitated t
employ other persons to look after their concerns; this obliges —


IT. XVL SEO. 1.] PUBLIC TRADERS. 481


ff which the public is concerned; such as the commerce of a
ank, remittance of money, and others which are carried on by
ankers and other traders. Which requires that we should insert
a this title some rules which relate in general to all these kinds
f commerces, and the engagements that are peculiar to them.
ind because one of these commerces, which is that of bills of
xchange, is a kind of covenant distinct from all the others, we
hall explain the nature of it, and the principles that are essential
o it, together with its rules that are common to the Roman law
md to our practice, without entering into the particular regula-
ions made in this matter by the ordinances of the kingdom.
1171. Remark on some Laws quoted in this Title. —It is to be
observed in relation to the laws quoted in this title, that the great-
est part of the rules of the engagements of innkeepers, carriers,
end others which we shall have occasion to mention here, are scat-
tered up and down in the several titles of the Roman law which
treat of these matters; so that some of them which relate, for
instance, to innkeepers, are applied only to carriers, and others
‘which are common not only to innkeepers and carriers, but also
to all other sorts of engagements which shall be treated of under
this title, are only applied to some of them in particular. So that
wehave been obliged to apply the rules of one of these matters
to the others, wherever they suit with them.


SECTION I.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF INNKEEPERS.


Arr. I.

1172. Engagements of Innkeepers. — There is formed between
the innkeeper and traveller an agreement, by which the innkeeper
obliges himself to the traveller to lodge him, and to take care of
his baggage, horses, and other equipage ;* and the traveller on his

part binds himself to pay his charges.


I.


1173. A Covenant either Express or Tacit with the Innkeeper. —
This engagement is formed usually without any express covenant,


* L.1, D. naut. caup. stab.
VOL. I. 41


482 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT L. BOOK L


by the traveller’s bare entering into the inn, and his depositing his
baggage and other things into the hands of the master of the
inn, or of those whom he appoints to take care of it.»


IIL


1174. In what Manner the Innkeeper is made accountable for the
Things by the Act of Domestics.—'The innkeeper is accountable
for the acts of those of his family and of his domestics, according
to the functions in which they are employed. Thus, when a tar
eller gives to the servants who have the keys of the chamben a
cloak-bag, or other things, or when he puts his horse into the
stable, under the care of the hostler, the master of the inn 5
answerable for them. But if the traveller upon his arrival dé
livers a bag of money to a child, a scullion, out of the masters
and mistress’s sight, the innkeeper will not be answerable for a beg
of this consequence deposited in such a manner.®


IV.


1175. Care of the Innkeeper.— The master of the inn is obliged
to watch, or cause to be watched by others, with all possible car,
all the things that the traveller brings and deposits in the in,
whether it be in the presence or absence of the master. Thus, be
is answerable, not only for his own faults, but even for the leat
neglect, either in himself or servants; and he is only discharged
from what may happen by such accidents as the greatest car
could not have prevented.!


T¥. XVI. 8Ec. 11.] PUBLIC TRADERS. 483


1eir custody ; and that they be made answerable even for thefts.
‘or otherwise they might with impunity commit the thefts them-
2]ves.°
VI

1177. They are accountable for the Acts of any of their Family
r Domestics. —If any one of the domestics, or of the family of
xe innkeeper, causes any loss to a traveller, as if he steals from
im even that which was not specially intrusted with any of the
reople of the inn, or if he damages his goods, the master of the
nn shall be accountable for the value of the thing lost, or of the
damage done.‘


VIL
1178. They answer for their Servants only for what they do in
the Inn. — The engagement of the innkeeper, for the act of his
domestics, is limited to what is done in the inn; and if any of his
servants steals any thing, or does any damage in another place,
the master is not accountable for it


SECTION II.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF MASTERS OF SHIPS, COACHMEN, AND
CARRIERS.


1179. In this section we shall treat only of those engagements
Which relate to the care that masters of ships, coachmen, and car-
Hers are bound to take of the baggage and goods which they
fake the charge of. As for their other engagements, the reader
ay have recourse to the eighth section of Letting and Hiring, and

to the tenth and eleventh articles of the second section of Engage-
wents that are formed by Accidents.


¢ 2.1, $1, D. naut. caup. stabul. ;—1.5, D. naut. caup.; — 1. un. § 8, D. furt. adv. naut.
wp. stab. See the third article of the eighth section of Letting and Hiring.

f 7.1, D. farti adv. naut.;—d. 1.1, § ult.; —l. 6, § 3, D. naut. caup. ;—1. 5, § 1, eod.;
v.11, § 2, D. de exercit. act.; —§ ult. Inst. de obl. quae quas. ex del. nase.

5 ZL. alt. D. naut. caup. stab.


484 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. Boor:


Art. L

1180. Engagements of Masters of Ships, and their Care. — Th
master of a ship or other vessel, who undertakes to carry by se
persons, baggage, or merchandise, is answerable for what is re
ceived on board his vessel, either by himself or by his agents
Which is not to be understood of the rowers, for instance, is a
galley; for it is none of their business to look after the lading
And he is accountable for all the loss or damage that shail hep
pen, either on board his ship, or on the quay, if the baggage ant
goods are received there. In the samme manner the innkeepers ar
responsible, as has been said in the foregoing section.*


Il.


1181. They are accountable for the Act of their Servants.—Tw
master of the vessel is answerable for the act of his mates ax
other agents, and of the persons employed in the service of th
ship, and for navigating her. And if any of them causes any le
or damage on board the vessel, the master must answer for it’


III.
1182. Persons that deal in Land and Water Carriage.— Tho
who undertake the carriage of goods by land or water are answ


able for the baggage and goods which they take charge of; &
cording to the rules explained in this and the foregoing section’


IV.
1183. The Fault of Masters of Ships and Land Carriers.—AD


TIT. XVI. SEC. Ul.] PUBLIC TRADERS. 485


SECTION III.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THOSE WHO CARRY ON ANY OTHER *
PUBLIO TRADE, BY LAND OR BY SEA.


Arr. L


1184. Engagement of Masters by the Act of their Factors or
Agents. — Those who keep merchant-ships for some trade; those
likewise who for some commerce have warehouses, shops, or pub-
lic offices ; as also bankers, and, in general, all those who in their
business by land or sea make use of factors, agents, and other
overseers, are represented in what relates to that business by the
persons whom they set over it, in such a manner that the act of
their factors or agents is their own proper act. Thus, they are
obliged to ratify what has been concluded with their factors or
agents. Thus, they answer for the fact, fraud, or deceit of the
persons whom they have set over their business."


IL


1185. The Bounds of the Power of Factors, and other Overseers.
— Factors and overseers oblige by their act those who have em-
ployed them only in what relates to the commerce or business
over which they are placed. Thus, he who is appointed super-
cargo of a ship, in order to traffic, to buy, sell, or barter, engages
his master or principal in every thing relating to those affairs.
Thus, he who is put in master of a ship, in order to transport per-
sons and goods, engages the owner as to what concerns the said
transportation. And both the one and the other bind likewise
their master or constituent for all the consequences of the said
commerce and transportations ; such as the necessary expenses for
equipping and refitting the ship. Thus, all other factors and over-
seers have their power regulated by the quality of their commission.”


Til.


1186. Of him who is substituted by the Person chiefly intrusted
with the Ship or Cargo.— If he who is set over a ship, whether


®* L. 3, D. de inst. act. ; —l. 18, D. eod. ; —l. 5, eod. ; —1. 5, §§ 1 ef 2, cod. ; —I1. 1, § 1, D.
de exercit. act.;—l.1, D. de inst. act.;—1.1, D. de exercit. act. ;—1.1, § 10, D. de ezer-
at. act.;—Il. 5, § 3, D. de inst. act. See the fifth article of the second section of Covenants.

b 7. 5, §§ 11 12, D. de inst. act.; —l. 1, § 7, D. de exereitoria actione;—l. 1, § 3, D.
he exercit. act.;—d.l. § 12.

41*


486 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


it be as master of her, for transporting goods and passengers, or
as supercargo, for trading, substitutes another in his place, to do
his office, the act of this substitute, employed by the person
who was first intrusted with the ship or cargo will oblige the
owner of the ship, or the merchant, in the same manner as the
act of the person whom he first intrusted; although the said per
son had no power to substitute another in his place. For the ne
cessity of treating with him who seems to have the charge of the
ship or cargo, together with the power which he has received from
the person who was first intrusted, and the reasonable presump
tion that it is by order of the owner of the ship or lading that be
exercises the said office, give to what he does the same force as if
the thing were done by the owner of the ship or cargo himeelf.
Otherwise particular persons would be liable to be cheated upon
the public faith. But this rule is not to be extended indifferently
to factors and others set over any commerce or business at land,
where the necessity of treating with them is not the same, aad
where it is easier to learn who is the person employed as factor,
and how far his power extends.°


he


1187. When a Minor or Woman is employed as a Factor.—W
the factor or overseer be a minor, his engagements will oblige the
master as much as if he were of age. For he who has made
choice of him ought to blame himself for the consequences of te
choice which he has made. And it would be the same thingifs
woman were appointed factor, or set over any commerce whit


FIT. XVI. SEC, I11.] PUBLIC TRADERS. 487


VI.

1189. The several Partners in a Commerce are all of them an-
swerable in the whole for what their Factor does. — If several part-
ners concerned in the same commerce, or other affair that is in
common among them, employ one and the same factor, his act
will oblige every one of the partners for the whole of what he does
or contracts. For every one of them has set him over the busi-
ness; and the person who has contracted with the factor has per-
haps had in his view only one of the partners, and has transacted
with the factor purely in consideration of the security which he
proposed to himself by having that partner bound for what the fac-
tor promised.‘


VIL


1190. When several Partners drive any of these Public Trades,
the Act of one Partner binds all the others for the whole. — If
two or more persons manage by themselves in partnership any of
these public trades, he who has treated with one of the partners, in
the name of the company, shall have all the other partners bound
in the whole for what he has contracted.é


VI.


1191. The Factor is not obliged in his own Name. — Factors and
agents, who treat only in this quality, are not bound in their own
names by the engagements which they contract, on account of the
business which is intrusted to them, and in the name of their mas-
ters.»


IX.


1192. In what Manner the Power of a Factor or Agent expires.
— The power of factors and agents is determined by their revoca-
tion. But if, after they are recalled, they treat with persons who
knew nothing of their being recalled, what they shall have trans-


are reputed to be of full age, as to any thing done by them in the way of their commerce
and bank ; and they cannot be restored against any damage they may have suffered under
pretext of minority.

f L. 59, § 3, D. mand. ; —v. 1. 2, D. de duobus reis const. ; —1. 13, § 2, D. de institor. act. ;
—l. 6. § 1, eod.;—l. 4, §§ 1 a 2, D. de exercit. act. See the sixteenth article of the fourth
section of Partnership.

§ £.1, § ult. al. 2, D. de erercit. act. See the seventh article of the title of Partner-
whips in the ordinance of 1673, quoted at the end of the preamble.

bh 7. ult. D. de inst. act.


488 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


acted will oblige the master; unless the revocation has been pub
lished, if it was the custom so to do; or that by other circam-
stances the person who treated with the factor might have known
that he ought not to have treated with him!


SECTION IV.
OF BILLS OF EXCHANGE.


1193. Explanation of the Nature of Bills of Exchange. — The
commerce of changing money for money is carried on two ways.
The first is, by changing the species of money for others of the
same value; such as pieces of silver for gold, and the coin of ose
country for that of another. The second is, where one gives
money to a banker or other person in one place, that he may
remit it to another place, whether it be within or without the
kingdom. And it is only this second kind of commerce that we
shall treat of here. For the other is only a bare sort of exchange,
which is a contract of which we have explained the rules in its
proper place. This commerce of remitting money from one place
to another is carried on by the means of bills of exchange.And..
in order to the right understanding of the nature and rules of th
matter, we must consider in this commerce the several persons
concerned in it, and what passes with regard to every one of
them. |

1194. There are commonly in the commerce of bills of @ |


CVE. SEC. IV.] PUBLIC TRADERS. 488


gave ithimon:' oc iition. We must in the next place
der the different covenants that pass between those persons.
3%. The covenant which passes between the person who
the money, and him who undertakes to remit it to another
» hath in it some particular characters which distinguish it
all other kinds of covenants that may seem to have some
iblance with it. It is not a sale; for nobody sells or buys in
nd in the contract of sale there is a seller, who gives some-
else than money, as there is a buyer who gives nothing but
‘'y. It is not an exchange; for those who barter or exchange
hing, give something different from what they receive; and
party takes for his own use a thing which he stands in need
id gives away another thing which he can spare; but in the
nerce of bills of exchange, he who gives his money takes
ng in counterchange, and does not give one thing that he
receive another of a different kind; since he who received
money may restore the same individual species which be
red. It is not a deposit; for he who has received the money
ins answerable for it, although it should be lost by an unfore-
aceident. It is not a loan; because he who receives the
y does not borrow it. It would be a letting and hiring, if
ho receives the money did nothing else but barely carry it to
lace whither it ought to be remitted, having a certain allow-
for carrying it, as is usual for messengers, carriers, and mas-
of stage-coaches to do, who take the charge of a bag of
y, to carry it from one place to another, without answering
cidents, and according to the rules that have been explained
> title of Letting and Hiring ; but when he who receives the
y engages himself by a bill of exchange to remit it to another
, the money remains in his hands, at his peril, and is no
r the money of the person who gave it. Thus, it is not a
g and hiring; and consequently it is a covenant different
all the others, which consists in the commerce of trans-
1g money belonging to a person from one place to another,
which is distinguished from all these other kinds of covenants
e characters which we have just now remarked.

6. The covenant that passes between the person who has
‘ed the money, whether banker or other person, and him to
1 he gives order to pay it in another place, is a partnership,
y are partners and correspondents with one another; or it is
curation, or commission, if the correspondent be only the


490 THE CIVIL Law. [PaRT L. BOOK L


factor or agent of the person who has received the money. Thos,
this covenant hath its rules, which have been explained in the
title of Partnership, and in that of Proxies, or letters of attorney. _

1197. The covenant between the person who has paid the
money, and him to whom he gives his order to receive it, is either
an assignment, if he substitutes him in his place, and transfers his
right to him; or it is a procuration, if he gives him barely the
power to receive the money for his use. Thus, this covenant
hath its rules in the title of the Contract of Sale, where mention
hath been made of transfers and assignments; or in that of
Proxies.

1198. There is lastly another covenant, which passes between
him who paid down the money, and the person who is ordered to
answer the bill of exchange, when he accepts the bill. And this
covenant is the same with that which passed between him who
paid in the money, and him who received it; for it only adds the
obligation of him who accepts the bill to that of the person who
drew it; and it obliges the person who accepts the bill to pay
on the day and in the place specified in the bill.

1199. It will be easy to gather from these remarks what is the
nature of bills of exchange, and what are the rules which we or
to take from the other kinds of contracts, in order to apply them
to what is transacted in this. What remains, therefore, would
only be to explain the rules that are proper and peculiar to bills a
exchange. But since the detail of this matter is regulated by the
ordinance of 1673, under the title of bills of exchange, and thatol
the interest of change and rechange, it will be sufficient to add ®


TIT. XVIl.] BROKERS. 491


receive money on condition to deliver the same sum at a certain
time, and in another place, either themselves, or by their corre-
spondents, are obliged to pay the same, or cause it to be paid by
others, at the time and place appointed ; and if they fail to do it,
they are answerable for all the loss and damage which shall
accrue thereby to him who gave the money on this condition,
according as the said damage is regulated bv law or custom.*


TITLE XVII.
OF BROKERS, OR DRIVERS OF BARGAINS.


1201. Use of Brokers. — We may add to all the different kinds
of covenants a matter which is as it were an accessory to them ;
that is, the use of brokers, or drivers of bargains, whose profession
is to bring dealers together, and to mediate bargains between
those who, according to their respective wants, are desirous, the
one to sell and the other to buy; or to exchange, to let, or to hire,
and to deal in any other commerce or affair, of what nature soever
it be.

1202. This use of brokers is principally necessary in the sea-
ports, and in trading-towns, to facilitate to strangers and others
the commerce which they deal in, by addressing them to the per-
sons with whom their business is, making known the intentions of
the one to the other; serving as interpreter, if there be occasion ;
and rendering them the other services which they are capable of
doing by their mediation. And there are even public officers,
whose functions oblige them to deal in this sort of business; such
as brokers licensed by public authority.

1203. This matter belongs to this place, not only as a conse-
quence of covenants, but also because it contains a kind of cove-
nant which passes between brokers and those who employ them,
by which they regulate among themselves the conditions of the
use and consequences of their mediation in driving the bar-
gains.

® L.7, § 1, D. de eo quod cert. loc.; —l. 9, eod. ; —v. 1.1, C. ubt conv. qui cert. loc. d. p.
See the titles of the ordinance of 1673, quoted at the end of the preamble.


492 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 3. BOOK L


SECTION I.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF BROKERS.


Art. L


1204. The Office of a Broker.— The engagement of a broke
is like to that of a proxy, a factor, or other agent; but with this
difference, that the broker being employed by persons who have
opposite interests to manage, he is, as it were, agent both for the
one and the other, to negotiate the commerce and affair in whic
he concerns himself. Thus, his engagement is twofold, and con
sists in being faithful to all the parties, in the execution of what
every one of them intrusts him with. And his power is not to
treat, but to explain the intentions of both parties, and to negotiate
in such a manner, as to put those who employ him in a conditios
to treat together personally.*


IL


1205. The Lawful Use of Brokage.— All brokers have ther
functions limited to such commerce and affairs as are lawful and
honest, and to the ways allowed for treating them and bringing
them to a good issue. And all brokage in such commerce and
other things as are unlawful, or by unlawful ways in such things
as are permitted, forms no other engagement than that of repaiing
the harm that has followed upon it, and of undergoing the pemsr
ties which such unlawful dealing may have deserved, according


Mr. xvi.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 493


are bound to warrant their own fact, or that it should appear that
they had been guilty of some fraud in the matter.°


SECTION II.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THOSE WHO EMPLOY BROKERS.


Art. I.

1207. Engagement of those who employ Brokers. — Seeing the
yersons who employ brokers give them their orders, they are
pbliged to ratify whatever is transacted pursuant to the power
which they gave; in the same manner as those who appoint
proxies, or ‘who give commissions and other mandates


IL.


188. Salary of Brokers. — If the broker does not give his ser-
Vice for nothing, he who has employed him owes him a salary,
either such as has been agreed on, or according as it is regulated,
if the broker be an officer who has his salary taxed, or such as
thall be decreed him by the judge, if the parties do not agree the
Matter by mutual consent. For this function being lawful, it
ought to have its salary proportionable to the nature of the com-
merce or other affair, to the quality of the persons, to the time
employed about the business, and to the pains taken by the
broker,>


TITLE XVIII.
OF THE VICES OF COVENANTS.


1209. What are the Vices of Covenants.— By vices in cove-
nants is meant whatever is contrary to their nature and to their
essential characters. Thus, it is an essential character of all sorts


€ L. 2, D. de prozenet.

* See the first article of the second section of Proxies.

> L.1, D. de proxenet.; — 1. 8, D. eod. ;—v. 1.7, D. mand. ;—1. 1, C. eod.;—v. 1. 15, D.
de preesc. verb.

VOL. I. 42


494 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK L


of covenants, that the persons who make them have sufficient rea-
son and knowledge of what is necessary to be done towards forn-
ing the engagement into which they are to enter.* And it isa
vice in a covenant, if one of the parties contracting has wanted
this knowledge ; whether it were through a natural infirmity, as if
he was a madman, or through some error, of the nature of those of
which we shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

1210. Thus, it is an essential character of all covenants, that
they be made with freedom and liberty ;> and it is a vice ina
covenant, if one of the contracting parties has been forced to it by
any violence.

1211. Thus, it is another essential character of all covenants,
that the treaty be carried on with sincerity and integrity ;* and it
is a vice in a covenant, if one party cheats the other by some
fraud or surprise.

1212. Thus, it is also an essential character of all covenants,
that they contain nothing that is unlawful and dishonest ;¢ and it
is a vice in a covenant, if any thing is inserted in it contrary to
law or good manners.

1213. Thus, in fine, it is an essential character of all cove
nants, that the persons who make them be capable of contracting;‘
and the covenant is vicious, if one of the contracting parties was
incapable of the engagement into which he has entered.

1214. The Vices of Covenants have a different Effect according
as they are higher or lower in Degree. — These vices of covenants
may be found in them in different degrees ; and according as they
are in a higher or lower degree, they annul or do not annul the


TIT. xvit1.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 495


valid, this legatee would not lose the right he had by this second

codicil, which he knew nothing of; and the treaty would be null,

because of the want of the knowledge of this fact. But if the
want of knowledge does not hinder the person from knowing well
enough what it is he obliges himself to, this defect will not be
suficient to annul the covenant. Thus, he who has treated with
his coheirs about their portions of the inheritance, while they
were as yet all of them ignorant of certain debts, or other burdens,
that come to be discovered afterwards, cannot pretend that this
want of knowledge is sufficient to annul the treaty, when those
debts and burdens come to light. For it was not upon an exact
and perfect knowledge of all the particular rights and charges of
the inheritance that his engagement was founded; but it suffices
to confirm it, and to make it irrevocable, that he knew that an
inheritance consists of rights and of charges which are often un-
known even to the most clear-sighted heirs; and that under the
uncertainty of more or less which could not be known, he has
taken his chance of losing or gaining in a thing that was
altogether uncertain.

1216. Thus, the want of liberty may be such ag that it annuls
the covenant; as if one of the covenanting parties was carried
away by force, and threatened with death if he did not engage
himself. But if he complains only that the dignity or authority
of the person with whom he treated made such impressions on
him as to oblige him to give a consent, which he would not have
done without that circumstance; these sorts of impressions, not
being accompanied either with force or threatening, leave the
liberty entire, and do not make the covenant void.

1217. Thus, deceit is not always such that it sufficeth to annul
the covenants; for it has only this effect when one makes use of
some unlawful means, with a design to cheat, and engages thereby
the person who is cheated to give a consent which he would not
have given, if he had known any thing of the trick that is put
upon him. As, if one, who has in his custody the title of a ser-
Vice due from his own estate, conceals the title, and transacts with
the person to whom he owes the service, and gets him to desist
fom claiming it; this deceit will annul the transaction. But if
the deceit is not that which engageth the party to contract, and if

he might have guarded himself against any cheat, it may be such
88 may not be sufficient to annul the covenant; as if he who sells
@ horse does not tell the buyer that he is apt to stumble, or does


496 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part L pOOE t.


not answer the spur, or has any other such like faults which ar
not sufficient to make the sale void. For this kind of deceit is
not restrained, no more than the injustice of those who sell dearer
or buy cheaper than the true value; unless the price were regu
lated, as it is in some things by the civil policy, or by the common
custom of trade. But these cases excepted, it is not possible te
fix the just point between what is over and what is under the tme
value. Hence it is that it is said in a law of the Romans, that it
is naturally lawful to sell dearer and to buy cheaper than the tre
value; and in this manner to cheat one another‘ So the lw
expresses it; the meaning of which is, that the advantage which
the seller or buyer may have one over the other as to the price
either is not in effect a cheat, or, if it be attended with no othe
circumstances, it goes unpunished.£

1218. Thus, the incapacity of persons may be such that it a»
nuls all the covenants they engage in, such as that of a madman;
or only such as renders them incapable of some covenants, but net
of all without distinction; such as that of married women Rm
some provinces, and of minors, who cannot engage themselves u~
less the obligation turn to their advantage.

1219. It is only unlawful covenants, and such as are contrary
law and good manners, that are wholly null without any temper
ament; for this vice cannot be tolerated in any degree.

1220. The vices of covenants which suffice to annul them have
two effects. One is, to give occasion for dissolving the covenant
if the person who complains of it desires that it may be dissolved
And the other is, to oblige him who had used some unfair meant


TP. XVIII. SEC. 1.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 497


he title of the Loan of Money, that usury is not prohibited by the
Roman law,* this matter does not properly come within the design
of this work, and it hath its rules in the laws of the church, in the
ordinances, in the customs, and in our usage.

1222. As to the other vices of covenants, we shall reduce such
ts shall be treated of under this title to four kinds. The first is,
of those which are opposite to the knowledge that is necessary for
contracting; the second is, of those which encroach on liberty ;
the third kind is, of such vices as are contrary to sincerity and in-
tegrity; and the fourth is, of such as are contrary to law and good
manners. And these shall be the subject-matter of the four sec-
tions into which the title shall be divided.

1223. We shall not speak here of the vice which proceeds from
the incapacity of the persons; for as there are different incapaci-
ties of minors, of married women (who in some provinces cannot
bind themselves at all, and in others not without the consent of
their husbands), of prodigals who are debarred from the manage-
ment of their own estates, of madmen, and others; every one of
these incapacities shall be explained in its proper place. And as
to this matter, the reader may consult the title of Persons, the fifth
section of the title of Covenants, the title of Tutors, that of Cura-
tors, as also that of Dowries.


SECTION I.
OF IGNORANCE OR ERROR IN POINT OF FACT OR LAW."


Art. L
1224. Definition of Error in Fact.— Error, or ignorance of fact,
Consists in not knowing a thing which is. As if one who is
hamed executor of a will knows nothing of the will; or if he
knows of the will, and is ignorant of the death of the testator.


II.


1225. Definition of Error in Law.— Error, or ignorance of law,
onsists in not knowing what a law prescribes. As if a donee is


b VU. 1,§ 3,1. 11, §1, D. de pign.; —l. 39, D. de pign. act.; —1. 14, C. de usur.
* See concerning this matter the first section of the title Of those who reorve what is not
ar Due.
* 7, 1,$1, D. de jur. a fact. ign.; —d. l. § ult.
42°


TIT. XVII. SEC. 1.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 499


to their prejudice, cannot always, as minors, be relieved against

the damage which they may have sustained by their covenants,
through ignorance of the law, or error in fact. But in some cases
they may have relief, and in others they must bear with the loss,
as shall be explained in the following rules.


VIL


1230. Of Error in a Fact, which is the only Cause of the Cove-
xant.— If the error in fact be such that it is evident that he who
has erred has consented to the covenant only because he was
ignorant of the truth of a fact, so that the covenant happens to
have no other foundation than a fact contrary to the truth which
was unknown; such an error will be sufficient to annul the cove-
nant, whether the party covenanting has engaged himself in any
loss, or whether he has neglected to make use of a right that was
fallen to him. For not only does the covenant prove to be with-
out a cause, but it has for its foundation only a false cause.
Thus, if it happens that the heir or executor of a debtor, who in
his lifetime had paid the debt, of which the acquittance cannot be
found, obliges himself to the heir or executor of the creditor, he
being ignorant of the payment already made; the obligation will
be without effect, whenever the acquittance is found. Thus, if it
happens that two executors dividing between them a succession,
the one leaves to the other goods that were bequeathed to him by
a codicil, and that afterwards this codicil proves to be forged; he
may demand a new partition.


VIll.


1231. If the Error in Fact is not the only Cause of the Covenant.
— If the error in fact has not been the only cause of the covenant,
and if it hath some other cause independent on the fact which was
wknown to the party covenanting, this error will not hinder the
covenant from having its full effect. Thus, they who transact about
all their affairs in general, cannot complain of having erred in the
fact of one of them in particular. Thus, the heir who has sold


'L.9, D. de jur. et fact. ign.

5 See the fifth article of the first section of Covenants.

6 Z. 116, § 2, D. de reg. jur.; —l. 8, D. de jur. et fact. ign.; —Il. 9, eod.; —I. 23, D. de
condict. ind.; —1. 4, C. de jur. et fact. ign. ; —l. 3, § 1, D. de trans. ; — 1.12, in fine, eod. ; —
1 6,cad. See the following article.


500 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK |.


the inheritance will not be relieved against the sale, because he
did not know all the effects that belonged to the inheritance!


IX.


1232. Ignorance of Facts is presumed. — Ignorance of facts is
presumed, when there is no proof to the contrary. But this pre
sumption, which is always natural in facts that do not concem w,
does not take place in things which concern us. For every ones
presumed to know what is his own proper act and deed:!


X.


1233. Error caused by Fraud. — If it is by the fraud of one o
the contracting parties that the other has been cheated by an err
of fact, as if one concealed a title or deed belonging to the other,
the covenant will be made void; and he who has concealed ths
title will be liable to make good all the loss and damage that shall
have ensued upon the said fraud.™


XL


1234. We are to judge of the Effect of the Error by the Owrcm-
stances. —In all the cases where one of the contracting parties
complains of an error in fact, we may judge of it by the foregoing
rules, according to the circumstances; such as the quality and cor
sequence of the error: the regard which the contractors have lad
to the fact which appeared to them to be true, and which prow’
to be otherwise: the effect which the truth that was hidden woull
have produced, had it been known to them: the easiness or dill


IT. XVIII. BEC, I.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 501


XII.

1235. Error of Computation.— The error of computation is a
nistake, when in reckoning we put one number instead of another
which was the true one, and which we should have set down had
itnot been for that mistake. Which is a kind of error in fact
different from all other errors, in that it is always repaired®© For
itis always certain that the parties intended only to set down the
trae number, and they could not make another number supply its


place.


XTIL


1236. Effect of the Error in Law.— An error in law is not suf-
ficient, as an error in fact is, to annul covenants.” For the ablest
men alive may be ignorant of facts;4 but nobody is excused from
knowing the laws, and persons are subject to them although
they be ignorant of them.’ This error or ignorance of the law


hath its different effects in covenants, according to the following
rules,


XIV.


1937. If the Error in Law be the only Cause of the Covenant.—
If the ignorance or error in, law be such that it is the only cause
of a covenant in which one obliges himself to a thing which he
was not bound to otherwise, and there be no other cause on which
the said obligation can be founded; the cause proving to be false,
the obligation will be null. Thus, for example, if he who pur-
chases a fief situated in a custom where no fine is payable for the
purchase, goes to the lord of the manor, and compounds with
him for the fine which he supposed to be due; this covenant, which
has no other foundation besides this error alone, will not oblige
the purchaser to pay the fine which was not due.*


* L.wn. C. de err. calc.

PL. 2, D. de jur. et fact. ign.

1D.L 2.

" See the ninth article of the first section of the Rules of Law.

‘ L. 8, D. de jur. et fact. ignor. See the following article. It is to be remarked with
Fespect to the example mentioned in this article, and that of the sixteenth article, that the

ce of the dispositions of the customs is an ignorance of law, as much as the igno-

Fmace of the ordinances and other laws. For although the dispositions of customs be con-
Fadered as facts, because, being only part of the positive law, and different in different
laces, it is natural that they be not all known, even to the most knowing persons: yet
Nevertheless they have the force of laws, which have their effect with regard to those that
we ignorant of them, as well as those who know them.


502 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK |.


XV.

1238. Another Effect of the foregoing Rule.— The foregoing
rule not only takes place in preserving the person who errs from
suffering any loss, as in the case there explained; but it takes
place, likewise, to hinder him from being deprived of a right which
he did not know belonged to him. Thus, for instance, if the
nephew of an absent person takes care of his affairs, and, the
absent person happening to die, the brother of the deceased, as his
heir and next of kin, demands of the nephew an account of his
intromissions with the effects of the deceased; the nephew gives
an account, and restores to his uncle all that remained in be
hands belonging to the said succession, for want of knowing that
he succeeded likewise to the deceased, by the right of repr
sentation of his father, who was brother to the deceased; he may
afterwards, being informed of his right, demand his part of the
succession.

XVI.

1239. A Case wherein the Ionorance of the Law is of no Avail.
— If by an error or ignorance of the law one has done himeelf 4
prejudice, which cannot be repaired without breaking in upon te
right of another person, this error will make no change or alter
tion to the prejudice of that other person. ‘Thus, for example, il
he who has been born and bred in a country where persons a
reputed to be majors at the age of twenty years, treats in anothe
country, where the laws continue the minority to the age of five


(VIII. SEC. 11.] = VICES OF COVENANTS. 503


red by a title which the law does not allow to be annulled
count of any such damage sustained."


XVIL


10. If the Error in Law ts not the only Cause of the Covenant.
the error in law has not been the only cause of the covenant,
he who has done himself some prejudice may have had
other motive, the error will not be sufficient to annul the
rant. Thus, for example, if an executor treats with a legatee,
pays him, or obliges himself to pay him, his whole legacy,
nowing any thing of the right which he had to detain part of
cause the testator had bequeathed beyond what he had right
spose of, either by law or custom; this covenant will not be

For this executor may perhaps have obliged himself to pay
rhole legacies, out of a motive of executing fully and entirely
rill of the deceased to whom he succeeds. And it would be
ame thing with respect to the heir or executor of a donor,
had executed or ratified a donation, which he did not know
null for want of being registered.*


SECTION II.
OF FORCE.


Ll. The Nature and Effects of Force upon Liberty. — To know
is the effect of force in covenants, and what degree it ought
of to make them void, it is necessary that we know what
e of liberty is requisite in the making of covenants; and that

sserve that there is a great difference between the character

e liberty that sufficeth for rendering our actions good or bad,

he character of the liberty that is necessary in covenants.

[2. In the case of liberty to do good or evil, to commit a
» an injustice, a bad action, violence may well weaken, but it

not altogether destroy, that liberty. And he who, yielding to


quis patremfamilias esse credidit, non vana simpiicitate deceptus, nec juris igno-
sed quia publice paterfamilias plerisque videbatur: sic agebat, sic contrahebat, sic
yas fangebatur: cessabit senatusconsultum. L. 3, D. de senatusc. Maced. It ap-
y this law, that if this creditor had erred in law he had lost his debt. See the re-
a the fourteenth article.

9, C. ad leg. Fale. ; — 1. 9, § 5, D. de jur. et fact. ign.


504 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


force, commits a crime, chooses to forsake his duty that he may
avoid an evil of another kind. So that, notwithstanding the force,
he commits the evil freely and of choice. But in covenants, when
one of the parties has been forced to consent to it, the condition in
which his liberty was did not leave him the use of it that was
necessary for giving a consent which might bind him and render
the covenant valid.

1243. The difference of these ways in which force is considered
with respect to the liberty necessary in actions, and with respect
to the liberty which one ought to have when he enters into a
covenant, consists in this, that in actions, when the case is about
the not committing of a crime, either in matters of faith, or in
morals, he who in such a conjuncture yields to force, and commits
evil, might and ought rather to have suffered the evils with which
he was threatened, than fail in what he owed to truth or justice;
the love of which, had he been sincere in it, would have enabled
him to stand out against all terrors whatsoever, rather than
abandon so essential a duty. Thus the force has not quite de
stroyed his liberty, but, weakening it, has engaged him to makes
bad use of it, and to choose freely to commit an evil action, that
he might avoid suffering. But when the case is about a force that
does not compel us to the breach of any duty, but which puts u
only under the necessity of bearing a loss, he who finds himaelfg
in such a conjuncture, that he must either abandon his interest,
or, for the preservation of it, expose himself to the effects of Wi
lence, is in such a condition that he cannot use hia liberty @
choosing to preserve what others have a mind to make him lee


TIT. XVII. SEC. 11.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 605


in covenants, that if the violence be such that prudence and
reason oblige him who is assaulted to abandon some part of his
goods, some right, or other interest, rather than make resistance ;
the consent which he gives to a covenant that strips him of his
goods, to ward off the danger that threatens him, has not the
character of the liberty that is necessary for entering into engage-
ments, and whatever he does in this condition, against his interest,
ought to be annulled.

1244. What Force annuls Covenants. — It is further to be ob-
served on the same subject of the effect of force in covenants, that
all manner of force, all violence, all threatenings, are unlawful;
and that the law condemns, not only such as expose the life to
danger, or the body to any torment, but also all sorts of bad
treatment, and all forcible means. And, in fine, it is to be re-
marked, that, seeing all persons have not the same courage to
resist violence and threatening, and that many are so weak and
fearful that they cannot stand out against the least impressions,
we ought not to limit the protection of the laws against threaten-
ings and violence so as to restrain only such acts as are capable
to overcome persons of the greatest courage and intrepidity. But
it is just likewise to protect the weakest and most fearful; and it
is chiefly on their account that the laws punish all acts of violence
and oppression.” Thus, as the laws punish those who by some
deceit or surprise take advantage of the simplicity of others,
although the deceit does not amount to a direct forgery or other
excess ;° so likewise with much greater reason do the laws chas-
tise those who by any violent means strike terror into the minds
of weak persons, although the violence do not go so far as to put
the life in danger.

1245. It follows from all these principles, that, if a covenant has
been preceded by any act of force, any violence, any threatening,
that may have obliged the person who complains of it to give a
consent contrary to justice and to his own interest, it will not be
necessary for obtaining a redress, to prove that his life was in
danger, or his person exposed to any other great violence. But if
it shall appear by the circumstances of the quality of the persons,
of the injustice of the covenant, of the condition in which the per-
son was who brings the complaint, of the acts of violence, or of
the threatenings, that the party gave his consent barely because


b Levit. vi. 2; xix. 13. ¢ Z.1, D. de dolo.
VOL. I. 43


506 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK |


of the force he was under; it will be just to annul a covenant,
which has no other cause or foundation besides the force that has
been used against him who has been engaged in a covenant con-
trary to justice and to his own interest.

1246. We have made here all these remarks, in order to establish
the natural principles of the rules relating to this matter; and to
give a reason why we have not inserted among the rules of this sec-
tion that rule of the Roman law which says that we are not to
reckon as violences sufficient to annul a consent those which can
only influence weak and fearful persons; but that the violence must
be such as to strike a terror capable of intimidating persons of the
greatest courage ;4 which another rule reduces to the danger of life,
or torment of the body ;° for it is most just and reasonable, and
likewise agreeable to our practice, that, all manner of violence being
unlawful, we should restrain even those acts of it that do not go
to so great excess, and that reparation should be made of all the
prejudice occasioned by acts of violence which engage the weakes
persons to do a thing that is unjust and contrary to their interest
Which is founded likewise on some rules of the Roman law, by
which all force is declared unlawful, and all acts of violence pro
hibited, even although they are employed to procure one’s self
justice‘ And these rules are so essential a part of the Jaw o
nature, that there would be no order in the society of mankind,
were not even the least acts of violence repressed.


Art. I.
1247. Definition of Force.— By force is meant all unlawfnl i


TIT. XVIII. SEC. I1.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 507


: Il.

1249. Divers Ways of using Force.— Although the violences
offered, and the menances that are used, do not go to that extrem-
ity as to put the life in danger, yet if other unlawful means are
used, such as the keeping one shut up till he grants what is de-
manded of him, if one exposes another to the hazard of some
2vil, the reasonable fear of which obliges him to give a forced con-
sent, the said consent will be without effect; and the person who
1as used such unfair means to obtain it will be condemned to
nake good the damage, and undergo other punishments which he
shall have deserved according to the circumstances. Thus, if he
nto whose hands were deposited papers, or other things, denies
hat the said things were left with him; or threatens to burn
what he is bound to restore, unless the person to whom the things
leposited belong give him a sum of money, or other thing, which
1e unjustly demands; whatever shall have been consented to in
this manner will be annulled; and the depositary will be punished
‘or his treachery, and for this exaction, according to the circum-
stances.°


IV.


1250. If a Magistrate abuses his Authority to intimidate one in
order to extort a Consent.— If a magistrate or other officer uses
his authority contrary to justice, and by threatenings, or other un-
lawful ways, whether it be for the interest of others or his own,
engages any person to give a consent, which is given purely out of
fear of the evil which he is capable of doing, the consent extorted
by such violence will be annulled ; and the magistrate will be an-
swerable for the damage which he shall have caused,‘ and be lia-
ble to the other penalties which such a misdemeanour may have
merited.


¢ FZ. 8,§1, D. quod met. caus. ; —l. 1, eod. ; — |. 22, eod. ; —l. ult. § 2, eod. The laws do
not allow private persons to make use of any violence or force whatsoever, not even to
do themselves justice. And therefore much less do they permit them to use violence, to
threaten, to intimidate, in order to extort a consent to an unjust pretension. See at the
end of the preamble to this section the law cited under the letter f. See also the sev-
enth article of this section, and the sixteenth article of the fifth section of Covenants. Sce
also Lev. vi. 2, 3, 4, 5.

4 L.3, § 1, D. quod met. caus. ;—l. ult. C. de his que vi metusvec.g.s. See the cighth
ection of the Contract of Sale, in the preamble.


508 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK L


V.

1251. Violence upon other Persons than him whom they have e
Mind to force to a Consent. — If the violence, the threats, or other
ways of the like nature, are used towards other persons than him
from whom they intend to extort a consent; and they intimidate
him by the impression which the fear of seeing those persons
exposed to any evil treatment makes upon him, as if it is his wile,
his son, or any other person whose sufferings ought sensibly to
affect him, the consent obtained by such means will be annulled,
and the party offending be liable to damages and other penalties,
according to the circumstances.


VI


1252. What ts done by Force is null, even with regard to thou
who did not use it. — All that has been done by force will not only
be null with respect to those who have used the force, but ale
with respect to all other persons who pretend to take advantage d
it. For what is of itself unlawful cannot subsist in favor of any
person whatsoever, even although the persons who have done tk
violence reap no profit by it.!


VII.


1253. We are to judge of the Effects of the Force by the Circew
stances. —In all cases where the question is about annulling §
covenant, or any consent that is pretended to have been given o@
of fear of some violence, or other bad treatment, we are to judge
of them by the circumstances ; such as the injustice that has bee


IT. XVIII. SEC. 11.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 609


VIII.

1254. When Force ts used to oblige one to comply with a Thing
lat is just.—If violence has been made use of, instead of legal
1eans, to force one to a compliance with a thing that is just, such
s a debtor to pay what he owes; the persons who have had re-
ourse to violent means will be liable to damages, and such other
unishment as the violence may have deserved, and even that of
he loss of the debt which shall have been exacted by such illegal
ourses, according as the quality of the act may give occasion
hereto.®


IX.


1255. Counsel and Authority do not impose Force.— The ways
which have nothing of violence and injustice in them, but which
make only impressions to induce people to a compliance by other
lawful and honest motives, are not sufficient to annul covenants.
Thus, the counsel and authority of persons, the respect due to
whom engages people to a condescension, such as that of a father,
a magistrate, or other persons placed in some dignity, and who in-
terest themselves in persuading and inducing persons to enter into
some covenant, without using any violence, or threatening, are
motives of which the impression has nothing contrary to liberty,
and which does not annul the covenants. Thus, the son who, by
the father’s persuasion, becomes surety for him, cannot complain
as if the respect which he had for the paternal authority had en-
gaged him to it by force. Thus, he who becomes bound to a per-
son in great power cannot pretend that his obligation is the less
Valid upon that account.!


X.


1256. An Order of a Court of Justice is not Force.— What-
ever is done in obedience to the authority of justice, and to the
order of a judge within the bounds of his ministerial function,
cannot be pretended to be done by violence; for reason demands


"1.12, § 2, D. quod met. caus.; —1. 18, in f. eod.; —1. 9, C. de oblig. et act. See the re-
mark on the third article of this section.

: L.6, C.de his que vi metusve c.g. s.; —v. 1.2, C. ne fiscus vel resp. ; — v. 1.26, § 1, D. de
Pym. We see by this law, that we are not to understand indefinitely that other rule which
says that we ought not to take that to be the will of a son which he does in obedience
the will of his father. Velle non creditur qui obsequitur imperio patris. LL. 4, D. de


Peg. jur.
43°


510 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 1.


that we should pay obedience to those who are in authority
over us.!


SECTION III.
OF FRAUD AND 8TELLIONATE.


1257. Stellionate. — Stellionate is distinguished from fraud in
general ; for although it be but a kind of fraud, yet it hath its proper
name. The word stellionate hath its rise in the Roman law, where
the Romans distinguished by the name of stellionatus all such
cheats, impostures, and other criminal frauds which had no proper
name of their own. But they chiefly gave this name to that kind
of fraud or crime which those persons are guilty of, who, having
sold or mortgaged a thing to one person, sell it to another, without
telling him any thing of the first engagement.*

1258. It is in this last meaning that we take the word stellio
nate, restraining it to that kind of fraud where persons who, hav-
ing sold, transferred, or mortgaged a certain thing, afterwards
sell, transfer, or mortgage it to another, without acquainting
him with the first engagement; which is such a character in fraud
as to make it amount to a crime, and which is restrained by pur
ishments according to the circumstances.


Art. L
1259. Definition of Fraud.— By fraud is meant all surprise, —


TIT. XVII. SEC. I1I.] VICES OF COVENANTS. 511


annul them. Thus, in a contract of sale, what the seller speaks at
random, to set off the merchandise which he sells, although very
often contrary to truth, and consequently against justice, is not re-
puted to be such a fraud as is sufficient to annul the sale, if they
be only such cunning artifices as the buyer may easily guard him-
self against, and on which the sale doth not depend. But if the
seller declares a quality of the thing which he sells, and thereby
engages the buyer to purchase it; as if he sells a land or tenement,
with a right of service which is not due to it; this will be a fraud
sufficient to annul the sale. Thus, in all cases where the question
is to know if there be any fraud, it depends on the prudence of
the judge to find it out, and to punish it, according to the quality
of the fact and the circumstances. And as we ought not, on the
one hand, easily to annul covenants, for every thing that may not
be within the bounds of a perfect sincerity; so, on the other, we
ought not to suffer simplicity and honesty to become a prey to
double-dealing and knavery.°


ITI.


1261. Fraud is never presumed, but ought always to be proved. —
Seeing fraud is a kind of crime, it is never presumed if there be
no proof of it.°


IV.


1262. Difference between Personal Fraud and that which ts called
Dolus re ipsa. — We must distinguish the fraud mentioned here
from the damage which happens without the act of the parties
contracting. As if, in the partition of an estate, one of the parties
happens to be aggrieved by an excessive valuation of what falls to
his share, or if a purchaser is wronged by some vice in the thing
sold, although the seller was ignorant of the said vice. It is this
damage, without the fraud of any person, which is called dolus re
ipsa, because one of the contractors happens to be cheated by the
thing itself, without any fraud on the part of the other. But per-
sonal fraud, which is that treated of under this title, implies a de-
sign of one of the contractors to cheat the other, and the actual


b ZF. 1, $1, D. de dolo;—1. 1, § 2, D. de doli mali e met. except.; —1.1, D. de dolo ; —
2. 37, D. de dolo;—Il.19, D. de adil. ed. See the twelfth article of the eleventh section of
the Contract of Sale.

¢ [. 6, C. de dolo.

d £. 36, D. de verb. ob. See the ninth article of the sixth section of Covenants.


612 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 1


accomplishment of the cheat* As if a son, concealing his father’s
testament, transacts with a creditor who had lost the title or
voucher of the debt owing to him, which the father had owned
in his testament to be a just debt, and makes the creditor by this
means lose his debt. There is this difference between these two
kinds of wrong, that that in which there is no personal fraud barely
annuls the covenants, and entitles the party to damages, if there be
room for it ;* whereas personal fraud may sometimes be punished,
according to the circumstances.


Vv.


1263. Definition of Stellionate. — Stellionate is that sort of fraud
which is practised by him who assigns, sells, or mortgages the
same thing which he had already assigned, sold, or mortgaged
to another, and who conceals the former engagements And he
likewise is guilty of stellionate who pawns one thing instead of
another, if it is of less value," such as copper instead of gold; or
who pawns a thing that is not his own:


VL ;


1264. Exception to the former Rule.—If the thing which is
pawned or mortgaged to a second creditor, after it hes bees
pawned or mortgaged to a former, be sufficient to satisfy both,
then it will not be reckoned stellionate.!


VIL :
1265. The Effects of Stellionate.— Stellionate not only annul


TIT. XVIII. SEC. IV.] | VICES OF COVENANTS. 513


SECTION IV.
OF UNLAWFUL AND DISHONEST COVENANTS.


Arr. L


1266. Two Sorts of Unlawful Covenants. — Unlawful covenants
are those which are contrary to law. And as there are two kinds
of laws, the law of nature and the positive law of man, so there
are likewise two kinds of unlawful covenants; to wit, those which
are contrary to the law of nature and good manners, and those
which transgress the positive law of man. Thus, it is against the
law of nature and good manners to treat about the committing of
a robbery or a murder ; and these sorts of covenants are in them-
selves criminal and always null." Thus, it is against the positive
law of man to sell to strangers certain kinds of merchandises,
when such commerce is prohibited by some particular law.®


IL.


1267. Is what Respect a Covenant is contrary to Law.— We
ought not to place without distinction in the number of unlawful
covenants, as being contrary to law, all those in which the parties
agree on something contrary to a law; but only those which are
against the spirit and intention of the law, and which are such as
are forbidden by the law. Thus, this covenant, wherein it is
agreed that the seller shall only warrant his own acts and
promises, makes between the seller and buyer a rule contrary to
that of the law, which ordains that the seller shall warrant the
thing sold against all evictions whatsoever. But that agreement
is nevertheless lawful; for, this law being made only in favor of
the purchaser, he may renounce what the law hath enacted for his
benefit ; and this the laws do not prohibit.°


Il.


1268. Unlawful Covenants liable to Pumsshment. — Unlawful
covenants are not only null, but are also liable to punishment,


* L. 6, C. de pact.

» See the ninth article of the ninth section of the Contract of Sale.

© L. 29, C. de puct.;—1.1, § 10, D. de oper. nov. nunt. Sec the twenty-seventh article
of the second section of the [ules of Law.


514 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK L


according as they transgress the prohibition and spirit of the
law.


IV.


1269. Effect of Unlawful Covenants. — Unlawful covenants
oblige to nothing, except to make good the damage which they
occasion, and to suffer the punishments which the persons may
have deserved who made them.*


V.


1270. When one may or may not recover what ts unjustly giren.
— If the covenant is unlawful only on the part of him who
receives, and not of him who gives, as if a depositary demands
money for restoring the thing deposited with him, or a thief for
giving back what he has stolen, he who has given money on such
an account may demand it back, although the receiver have pe
formed his agreement. But if the covenant be unlawful both a
the part of the giver and receiver, as if one who has a lawssi
depending gives money to the judge to engage him to give judy
ment in his favor; or if one person gives money to another #
engage him to do an evil action; he who has given the moneys
justly stripped of what he has laid out on such an account, sal
he cannot recover it. And he who received the money cams
reap the profit of the price of his crime; but both the one and i
other will be chastised by making restitution, and undergoing i
punishments which they shall have deserved.s


BOOK Il.


OF ENGAGEMENTS WHICH ARE FORMED
WITHOUT A COVENANT.


1271. The Subject-Matter of this Second Book.— We have ex-
lained, in the Treatise of Laws,* the origin and nature of the sev-
wal sorts of engagements which God produces among men, the
better to link them together in society; and we have endeavoured
to discover in those sources the principles and spirit of the laws
which relate to the same engagements. For since God hath made
the society of mankind essential to their nature, that he might em-
ploy them in the duties of mutual love, which he enjoins them by
the second law; it is by the engagements under which he puts
them that he determines every one to the particular duties which
he has a mind to prescribe to him. So that it is from the nature
of those several engagements that we must discover their respec-
tive rules, and particularly the rules of such engagements as are
the subject-matter of the civil law.

1272, In order to a more particular inquiry into the several mat-
ters treated of in the civil law, we have made a plan of them,? in
which we have distinguished two kinds of engagements. One is
of those which are formed by the mutual will of two or more per-
sons in covenants ; and it is this kind which has been the subject-
Matter of the first book. The other is of those engagements
Which are formed without the mutual will of the parties, but only
either by the act of him who engages himself without the par-
ticipation of the person to whom he is engaged, or even without
the will of either of the parties, and by a bare effect of the divine
Providence. And it is this second kind of engagements without a
covenant, which we shall treat of in this second book.


® Chap. 1, n. 8; ch. 2,.3; ch.8; ch. 4. b The Treatise of Laws, chap. 14.


516 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK II.


1273. It will be easy to discern, by the bare reading of the table
of the titles of this book, the engagements which are formed by
the will of one person alone, from those which God produces in-
dependently of the will of both parties.

1274. The engagements which are formed by the will of the
person alone who engages himself have this in common with the
engagements that are formed by covenants, that, both the one and
the other sort having for their cause the will of persons, there may
be some of them which may not be just, and which may be contra-
ry to law or good manners; and in these engagements the parties
lay themselves under no other obligation than that of repairing the
evil that is done by them. But the engagements which have only
for their cause the divine providence, and which are independent
on our wills, such as guardianships, public offices, and those which
are formed by accidents, and by events brought to pass by God,
without our participation, can have nothing in them that is unjust
And it is the hand of God, by which they are formed, that points
out in every one of them what is the duty they oblige us to. Thas,
whereas the greatest part of men, looking on these engagements,
when they are painful and unprofitable, as being only a grievous
and heavy yoke, contrary to their interests and inclinations, shake
them off as much as they can with impunity; they ought, on the
contrary, to reverence in them that order of God which is a law to
us, and to execute it with that fidelity and carefulness which we
owe to whatever he commands.

1275. Of all the engagements which are formed withont a core
nant, that of the greatest importance, which comprehends in it te


TIT. 1] TUTORS. 517


TITLE I.


OF TUTORS.


1276. Necessity of Guardianships. — It is equally for the benefit
of religion and civil government, that those who are deprived of
their fathers, before they come to an age in which they may be ca-
pable of governing themselves, should be put, till they arrive at
such age, under the conduct of some person who may be to them
instead of a father, as much as is possible, and who may take upon
himself the care of their education and the management of their
estates. Andi it is to the persons who are called to this office that
we give the name of tutors, or guardians. It is not necessary to
explain here what that state is which we call minority, during
which persons are under tuition or guardianship, and how long it
lasts. The reader may have recourse to what has been said on
this subject in the Treatise of Laws, the eleventh chapter, No. 9,
and in the title of Persons, Sect. I. art. 16, and Sect. II. art. 8
and 9.

1277. The Nature of this Engagement.— The engagement of
tators or guardians is among the number of those which are
formed without a covenant; for it obliges those who are called to
that office, whether they will or not, by a just effect of the order of
society among men, which does not permit that orphans should be
abandoned. Thus, this duty naturally falls on those that are their
nearest of kin, both because their relation engages them to it more
strictly, and because the care of the estates of minors belongs
properly to those whom the law calls to succeed them, if there

are no causes which may excuse them from accepting the said
office, or if they are under no incapacities which may exclude
them from it. As the tutor is obliged, without his will, to take
care of the person and estate of the minor, so it is likewise just
that the minor, on the other hand, should be reciprocally bound to
the tutor, to ratify, after he is come to age, whatever the tutor
hall have rightly managed, and to allow him the expenses which
he shall have reasonably laid out. So that the guardianship
Makes a reciprocal engagement between the tutor or guardian and
the pupil, in the same manner as if they had contracted with one
another. And it is for this reason that this engagement is
Called in the Roman law a quasi contractus, that is, like to an
VOL. I. 44


518 THE CIVIL LAW. {PART I. BOOK It


engagement produced by a contract between persons who treat
together.®

1278. Difference between our Usage and the Roman Law as lo
Tutorships or Guardianships. — Before we proceed to the explans-
tion of the rules relating to tutorships or guardianshipe, it is
necessary to remark on this subject some differences between our
usage and the Roman law; for without the knowledge of these
differences the reader would be perplexed, in many articles, about
the application of the rules which are here quoted.

1279. The first of these differences consists in this, that by the
Roman law tutors were given only to males under the age of
fourteen years, and to females under the age of twelve; and not
to persons that were above that age; and the tutorship ended
when the pupils attained to the said respective ages of twelve and
fourteen, which were called puberty. As to adult persons, or those
who were arrived at the age of puberty, they had only curators
assigned them till they accomplished the age of five-and-twenty
years, which was the full majority, according to the Roman lav.
And even the said curators were given only in two cases: one,
when the minors themselves agreed to it;” and the other, whea
the persons who had matters to settle and adjust with the minos
procured curators to be assigned them, that they might prose
cute against the said curators the actions which they had against
the minors. But the tutor was discharged by the puberty of his
pupil, and could not so much as be named his curator if he de
clined itt He was obliged only, after his tutorship was at an ead,
to put the minor in mind to ask for a curator, and if he had affam


TIT. 1] TUTORS. +619


‘well as by the Roman law, it is only after the completion of this
age that persons are held to be capable of all sorts of engage-
ments, without hopes of being relieved against them in considera-
tion of their age. So that in this title, therefore, we shall only
make use of the name fuwlor, both as to those minors who are under
the age of puberty, and those who are above it, and who are called
adults, although in the laws which shall be quoted the words tutor
and curator must be understood in the sense which they had in the
Roman law.

1280. We must observe, as a second difference between our
usage and the Roman law, that by the Roman law certain per-
sons were called to tutorships preferably to all others, such as
those who had been named by the father in his testament, and
for want of such nomination the next of kin‘ and if there were
many in the same degree of kindred, they were all called together.
But in France the usage is, that the relations of the minor are
called to appear before the judge who has the appointment and
nomination of the tutor, in order to see such tutor assigned, and
they do not implicitly follow the will of the father who had nomi-
nated a tutor by his testament, nor the order of the proximity of
blood. But the relations are at liberty to make another choice, if
they think there is occasion for it. And this liberty takes place,
not only in the cases where the persons, whom the proximity of
blood would call to the tutorship, should have just grounds of
being excused from it, or should be incapable of it, but it is made
use of to discharge very often the next of kin, who have no legal
excuses to offer why they should be exempted from it. And it is
for this reason that in France all tutorships are said to be dative ;
and although this usage is founded on a principle of equity, be-
cause in reality it may so happen that the next of kin, who has
not, perhaps, sufficient excuses to exempt him from the tutorship,
may not have the qualifications that are necessary to make a good
tutor; yet this liberty is very often turned to a bad use, and the
nearest relations, who often have not the good of the minors so
much in their view as to get themselves delivered from the burden
of the tutorship, contrive, by their intrigues, to get it settled on the
remotest relations ; which is an abuse that ought to be corrected,
by some proper regulation for that purpose.


i £.1, D. de testam. tut. ;— Instit. de leg. agn. tut.;—1.1 4 l. 6, D. de leg. tut. ; — Nov.
118, cap. 5. Bee the eighth article of the first section.


520 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IL


1281. The third difference between our usage and the Roman
law consists in the manner of appointing tutors to minors. For
seeing there was not in Rome any public officer who did the
functions which in this kingdom are performed by the king’s proc
tors in the respective jurisdictions, it was required that the
mothers of the minors, their relations, their friends, or their Gber-
tines, that is, those who had been set at liberty from slavery by
the ancestors of the minors, should apply to the magistrates to
have tutors assigned them£ But in France it is the duty of the
king’s proctors, and of those who perform the functions of that
office in the inferior courts of lords of manors, to see that minors
have tutors assigned them; and the mothers, or relations, who
have a mind to see that due care be taken of it, may apply to the
said officers for their assistance in this matter.

1282. As to the other differences which may happen to be be
tween our usage and the Roman law, they shall be taken notie
of in their proper places, and it is not necessary to say any thing
of them here.


SECTION I.


OF TUTORS, AND OF THEIR NOMINATION,


Arr. L
1283. Definition of Tutorship.— The tutor is he to whom ®
committed the care of the person and estate of the minor. An


TIT. 1. BBC. 1.] TUTORS. 521


IL

1285. The nearest Relations ought to be appointed Tutors, if there
isno Reason to the contrary.— Although it be natural to name
for the tuition of a minor him whom the nearness of blood calls
to be the minor’s heir and successor ;* yet seeing that it may often
happen that the nearest relations are either incapable of being
tators, or have lawful excuses for declining the said office, we may
name for tutors relations of a remoter degree,‘ or, in default of re-
lations, those who are allied by marriage, and even strangers, if
there be no relations or allies who can be named, that is, who are
capable of being tutors, and who have no lawful excuse for de-
dining the office. And if, in the place where the pupil resides,
there be no person fit to be tutor, one may be chosen out of the


neighbouring places.¢
IV.


126. Nomination of the Tutor by the Father or Mother. — Fa-
thers* and mothers! may name tutors to their infant children.
But although their choice be a presumption of the capacity and
solvency of the person whom they have named, yet others may be
named in their place, if there be any cause which requireth the
making of another choice. For it may happen, either that the
father has made a bad choice, or that some change hath afterwards
happened either in the morals or substance of the person whom
he has named.!


V.


1287. One or more Tutors may be named.— We may name to
only one minor one or more tutors, if his condition and the large-
ness of his estate require the administration of several persons.™
And the tutors manage either jointly together the whole estate of
the minor, or each of them apart that which is separately commit-


between those who are under puberty and those who are adult, and the duration of the


torship.
* L.1, D. de leg. tut.
7.1, $1, D. de leg. tut.
8 L. 24, D. de tut. et cur. datis; —1. 1, § 10, D. de mag. conv. ;—1. 32, D. de testam. tut.
lee the twenty-fifth article of the seventh section.
b 7.1, D. de testam. tut.
i 7, 4, $1, ed.
1.10, D. de conf. tut.; —1. 3, § 3, D. de adm. et per. tut.
@ [. 27, D. de tut. et cur. dat. ; —1. 3, D. de adm. et per. tut.; —d. 1.41; — 1. 24,§ 1, cod.
4i°*


522 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK iL


ted to his charge, according to the rules which shall be explained
in its proper place.”


VI.


1288. Tutors Honorary and Tutors Onerary.— Beside the tuton
who are commonly given to minors of all conditions for the mas
agement of their affairs, sometimes others are named, who ar
called honorary tutors, when the condition of the minor deserves
it. And their function is to watch over the administration of _
those tutors who act, and to advise them; and for distinetion’s
sake, the tutors who have the burden of the actual management
of the minor’s concerns are called onerary tutors.°


VIL


1289, Tutors ought to be confirmed by the Judge.— All tutor,
whether they be named by the father or mother of the minora
whether they be called to the office by proximity of blood ar lv
otherwise chosen, ought to be judicially confirmed by the judged
the guardianship ; that is, the judge of the place where the mur
hath his residence.?


VUL


1290. Tutors with Surety, or without it.— The nomination 4
tutors may be made two ways, as to what concerns the safetyd
the minor’s estates. One is, when those who name them iniom
themselves well of the solvency of the tutors, without oblm
them to give security: and the other is, when the tutors are 9@


E = . 4 * re |
ors Or vwuariisanshiin v ite TIyvy oe Sect


ak
tii L ari


IT. 1. SEC. 1.] TUTORS. 523


hich takes place only with respect to those who are willing to
ecept the tutorship or guardianship on that condition.


IX.


1291. Preference of the Tutor who offers to give Security.— If,
f two or more persons who are named tutors, one offers to give
curity and the others make no such offer, he who offers to give
ecurity shall be preferred, if there is no reason for preferring
mother, either on the account of morals or for other causes.


X.


1292. The Father or Grandfather Tutor. — The father hath the
administration of the goods of his children; with respect to which
he is to them instead of a tutor by law.’


XL


1283. Who may be Tutors.— All persons may be named tutors,
who are not under some incapacity, or who have not some lawful
excuse for being exempted from the said office ;* so that it is only
necessary to know who are the persons that are by law declared
incapable of the office of guardianship, or exempted from it. And
this shall be the subject-matter of the seventh section.


XII.


1294. The Tutor takes an Oath of Faithful Administration. —
The tutor being named, he takes an oath in court faithfully and
truly to execute the said office, and to procure on all occasions the
good of the minor."


own accord, because of the interest which they may have in the preservation of the effeots
belonging to the estate; the said offer giving them the preference before others who
might be called to the tutorship, and who might be less solvent. See the following arti-
de, and the thirteenth article of the third section.
*£.17,§ 1, D. de test. tut.;—1. 138, in fine, D. de tut. et curat. dat. ; —1. 21, § 5, D. eod.
Bee the thirtieth article of the third section.
* L.5, C. de dolo; — Inst. de leg. per. tut.; —l. 7, C. de cur. fur. See the fifth article of
the first section of Curators.
' 7.1, § 3, D. de excus.
© Novell. 72, c. ult. ; —v. 1. 7, § 5, C. de curat. fur. See the first article of the sccond
Rection of Curators.


524 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK IL


SECTION II.
OF THE POWER OF TUTORS.


1295. Tutorship or Guardianship is a General Engagement.—
It is to be remarked in general, on this and the following sections,
that, the office of a tutor extending to all that concerns the gor.
ernment of the person or management of the estate of the miner,
it comprehends all that variety of engagements which the affai
of all kinds which may fall out render necessary. And this dis
tinguishes tutorship or guardianship from the particular engage
ments that are formed; for example, either by sale, by letting to
hire, by a loan, by a deposit, and others of the like nature. Fa
whereas those engagements have their limits regulated by thex
nature, the variety of things that fall under the administration of
tutors makes their engagement to be general and indefinite* We __
shall explain in this and the following sections the rules whit
relate to the administration of tutors, their engagements, and ti
power which they have by law.

1296. Tutors ought to take Advice of the Relations of thar
Minors.— It may not be amiss to observe here how proper it®
for tutors to consult with the relations of their minors, as to th
manner and method of their education, the laying out of ther
money, the management of their affairs, the regulating thet
expenses of all kinds, and in every thing else in the exereie of
their tutorship that may admit of any difficulty,

1297, In France it is the constant custom and usage to nam


rit. I. SEO. 11] TUTORS. §25


1298. We see some footsteps of this in the Roman law itself,
that in certain cases the magistrate did, of his own accord, and by
virtue of his office, take the advice of the relations, either touching
the education of the minor, when there happened to be any diffi-
culty in it, or concerning the alienation of any part of his estate.»
And there is, likewise, in the Roman law an example of a council
appointed to the tutor by the father of the minor.© But our usage
with respect to the council of the tutor is different, and extends
in general to his whole administration; and it is according to this


usage that we are to interpret the rules which relate to the power
of tutors.


Art. I.


1299. The Function of a Tutor.— The tutor being named to be
in the place of a father to the minor, his office implies two general
obligations; one relates to the government and education of the
person of the minor; and the other concerns the administration
and care of his estate. Thus, the law gives to the tutor the power
and authority that are necessary for these functions,* and obliges
him likewise to discharge them with that exactness and fidelity
which such a trust requires.” |


IL


1300. The Power and Authority of the Tutor.— The power and
authority of the tutor extend to every thing that may be necessary
for the right use of his administration; and the laws consider him
as a father of a family, and even give him the name of master.
But he is only to administer as a good and careful husband, and
is bound to give an account of the use which he shall have made
of the power that is given him.


IIL


1301. The Eapenses which the Tutor may lay out.— The tutor
may lay out all expenses that are necessary, useful, or decent, for
the affairs of the minor, for repairs, for the charges of lawsuits, for


» T.1, C. wbé pup. educ. debeat ; —I1. 5, § 11, D. de reb. eor. qui sub. tut.
* LZ. 5, § 8, D. de adm. et per. tut.

° 1.1, D. de tut.; —§ 1, Inst. eod.

» See the rules of this and the two following sections.


© L.10, D. de adm. et per. tut.; —l. 27, eod.; — 1. 157, D. de reg. jur.;—l. 7, § 8, D.
Pro emptore.


526 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK IL


a journey, and on other such like occasions, according as the
quality of the minor’s estate, the nature of affairs and circum-
stances, may require. And in case there be any doubt about the
usefulness or necessity of the expenses, he ought to get them reg
ulated by the judge. But the expenses cannot exceed the reve-
nue or income, unless it be in cases of great necessity for the
good of the minor.


IV.


1302. Administration of Affairs. — The administration of the
tutor reaches to every thing that is necessary or useful to the mé
nor. Thus, he may pay off the debts owing by the minor, if they
be clear and liquidated, he may acquit the charges, call in the debts
that are due to him, and make the necessary repairs. But be
cannot alienate the immovable goods of the minor except fa
necessary causes, such as the discharging of debts, if they are pres
ing or burdensome; and that only when the ready money, the rents,
the debts owing to the minor, and his other movable effects, ae
not sufficient to discharge what he owes. In which case, the alie
ation is to be made after a judicial inquiry into the matter, by the
advice of the relations, after the tutor has given in a statement of
the minor’s effects, by a short inventory and account, and after i)
sale has been judicially decreed, in which the formalities preseribed
in such sorts of sales are to be observed."


V.


1303. The Extent and Limits of the Power of the Tutor.—Te —


4


TIT. L SEC. U.] TUTORS. 627


begin to prosecute a lawsuit that is not well grounded, nor refer a
debt to the debtor’s oath, unless there be no possible way of
proving the debt, and this be the only remedy that is left; and,
in a word, he cannot in any thing make his pupil’s condition
worse.£


VI.


1304. Of the Tutor who makes a Bad Use of his Power. — If the
tator abuses his power, whether it be through fraud and knavery,
or through some fault, he shall be answerable for it; as if he omits
to take counsel in an affair that requires it, if he makes a bad pur-
chase, being prevailed on by bribery and favor, or if he commences
or carries on a suit that is ill founded.»


VIL


1305. If the Father has ordered the Tutor to follow the Mother’s
Advice.— If the minor’s father had ordered the tutor to govern
himeelf, in the management of his son’s concerns, wholly by the
advice of the mother, and that in that case he should not be ac-
countable for the event, he would nevertheless be made answer-
able for what he had wrongfully transacted by the mother’s ad-
Vie, if the same was imprudent. But if the advice was reason-
able, nothing could be laid to the tutor’s charge for having fol-
lowed it.!


VIL


1306. Es what Manner the Tutor acts by the Minor.— The tutor
etercises his power in the affairs of the minor two ways. One is
by authorizing his minor to act when he is present; and the other
is by acting as tutor, whether the minor be present or not. In both


which cases he is responsible, both for what he authorizes, and for
what he does.


CL. 40, § ult. D. de adm. et per. tut. ; —1. 22, eod.; —1. 3, § 5, D. de reb. eor. q. 8. t.3 —
L6 C. de adm. tut. ; —I. 35, D. de jurejur. ; —v.l. 17, §§ 1 e 2, eod. See the fifth article
the second section of Covenants. See the tenth article of this section. See the second
Sticle of the second section of Novations.

‘1.7, § 2, D. de adm. et per. tut. ; — 1. 57, eod.; —1. 6, C. eod. See the ninth and elev-
th articles of the third section.

' 7.5, § 8, D. de adm. et per. tut.
' 7.1, § 2, D. de adm. et per. tut.;—v. d.l. $3 et 4. See the ninth article of the third


528 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pat 1. BOOK fn.


IX.

1307. Effects of the Tutor’s Authority. — The power and auther
ity of the tutor have this effect, that whatever he does is consid
ered as the proper act of the minor. And whether he oblige
himself for the minor as his tutor, or whether others oblige
themselves to him in this quality, and whether he obtains jude
ment against others, or judgment passes against him, it is the
minor that becomes thereby creditor or debtor, and the obligation
and condemnations have their effect for or against him.


X.
1308, Restitution of the Minor notwithstanding the Tutor's A»


thority. — If the minor has suffered considerable loss by what te
tutor has transacted even honestly and uprightly, whether with e&


without the minor’s concurrence, the authority of the tutor will & |


no hindrance why the minor may not have relief in this casei
there be ground for it," according to the rules which shall be &
plained in the title of Restitution of Things to their First Sate
For the tutor has only power to preserve the estate of the mine,
and not to waste it.


XI.


1309. In an Affair between the Tutor and the Minor another Tex
is substituted. — If the tutor hath in his own name any claim age —
his minor, he cannot authorize him in any thing relating to
own concern. But in this case a curator or substitute tutor ®
given to the minor, who is to defend him against the pretenses!


TIT. I. SEC. IIL] TUTORS. 529


XIL
1310. The Tutor cannot accept an Assignment of a Debt owing by
Ais Minor.— The tutor cannot accept an assignment of a debt
owing by his minor; and if he does, he shall lose® the debt that
is assigned; unless the circumstances justify what he does, as if
the tutor pays a debt with his own money, that he may put a stop
to or prevent an attachment of the goods of the minor.!


SECTION III.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF TUTORS.


Arr. I.


1311. The Tutor is obliged to act.— He who hus been named
tutor, and who has no excuse, is obliged to accept and execute
the tutorship. And he shall be accountable, not only for what he
has managed ill, but also for what he has omitted to do


IL.


1312. The First Engagement of the Tutor ts to look after the
Minors Education.— The first engagement of the tutor is to
take care of the person of his minor, to look after his education
and conduct, and to lay out therefor necessary and reasonable
charges, according as the quality and estate of the minor may


require.”
III.


1313. The Minor’s Mother ts intrusted with his Education, if it
s not otherwise provided. — The mothers of minors are intrusted
with their education, although they have not the guardianship;
unless there be just reasons to deprive them of it; which, in case
of doubt, ought to be determined by the judge, with the advice of
the relations.


P Nov. 72, c. 5.

4 ZL. 21, D. de reb. eor. qui sub tut.

® L. 1, D.de adm. et per. tut. ;—d. l.§ 1;—l. 1, D. de tutela et rat.; —l. 6, C. de test. tut. ;
“=~ L 5, § ult. D. de adm. et per. tut. See the ninth articlo of this section.

b ZL. 12, § 3, D. de adm. et per. tut. See the fifth and following articles.

© [.1, C. ubé pup. educ. ; — Nov. 22, c. 38. We have not inserted in this rule, that the
@maother by marrying a second husband forfcits the education of her children by the first

i as the law quoted on this article seems to determine. For although this con-
VOL. I. 45


530 THE CIVIL LaW. [Part 1. BOOK I.


IV.

1314. Of the Mother who marries a Second Husband.— If the
mother of the minor has married a second husband, the education
of her children may be taken from her, or left to her in her mar.
ried state with her second husband, according as the circum-
stances may require.‘


V.


1315. Expenses of Education.— The education of the minor
comprehends his food and raiment, his lodging, medicines, salaries
to preceptors, charges laid out on his studies and other exercises;
and, in general, all necessary and reasonable expenses, according
to the quality and estate of the minor.


VI


1316. How these Expenses are regulated. — The expenses of
education ought to be regulated in such a manner, that nothing
decent or necessary be wanting to the minor, according to his com-
dition and his revenue; and likewise that his whole income be
not laid out on his education.£ And even as to minors who have
the greatest estates, the expenses of their education ought to be
moderated. And if the estate of the minor increases or is dim»
ished, the expenses of education may be augmented or diminished
in proportion, if it be necessary.®


VIL
1317. The Will of the Father about the Minor’s Education —U


TIT. I. SEC. I1.] TUTORS. 631


education for his son, it may be moderated; as, on the contrary,
it may be augmented, if what the father has appointed be not suf-
ficient, according to the condition and estate of the minor. Thus,
one might commit the education to other persons than those
named by the father, if it should be found that the conduct of the
said persons would expose either the life or manners of the minor
to any danger. And if the father had intrusted the education of
his son to the person whom he had substituted to succeed him in
the estate, the judge ought in prudence, with the advice of the
minor’s relations, to prevent both the danger and even the suspi-
cion of it, if there should appear to be any ground for it. Thus,
in other difficulties of the like nature, it will be prudent to follow
or not to follow the directions of the father, according as the con-
sideration of the advantages of the minor may require!


VIIL


1318. A Minor without an Estate.— If the minor have no estate,
or has not sufficient for his maintenance, the tutor is not obliged
to contribute any thing of his own towards it. For the office of a
tator consists only in taking such care as the administration of
the minor’s concerns may demand.'


IX.


1319. The Second Engagement of the Tutor is the Administra-
tion of the Estate. — The second engagement of the tutor concerns
the administration of the estate of the minor. And this engage-
ment obliges him to take the same care of the goods and affairs
of his minor, as a careful master of a family takes of his own.
Thus, the tutor must answer for any fraud, and for faults that are
contrary to this care; but not for the bad success of what shall
have been nightly managed, nor for accidents.”


X.


1320. Inventory of the Goods of the Minor. — The first duty of
the tutor, as to the administration of the goods of the minor, is to


i 7.2, § ult. D. ubi pup. educ.;—l. 1, D. eod.;—I. 5, eod.; —I. 3, §1, cod. See the
eighteenth article.

UD. 1, § ult. D. ubi pup. educ.

= 1. 33, D. de adm. et per. tut.;—Il. 10, eod.;—I.1, D. de tutela et rat.;—1. 7, C. arb.
tut. ; —1. 3, § 7, D. de cont. tut. et ut. act.;—Il. 4, C. de per. tut. See the thirty-fourth
article.


532 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK Fr.


make an inventory of them, as the judge shall direct, before he
enters upon the management of the estate; that he may know
what he is charged withal, and that he may be able to give an
account of it when his tutorship is at an end. But if, before the
making of the inventory, there happens any affair which does not
admit of delay, the tutor may give order about it, according 2s
necessity shall require.”


XI.


1321. The Inventory being made, the Writings and Effects are
put into the Hands of the Tutors.— The inventory of the goods
being made, all the deeds and writings are delivered over into the
hands of the tutor, that he may take care of the affairs, call in the
debts, use all necessary diligence in lawsuits, and give order about
every thing wherein the interest of the minor is concerned.’ But
as to lawsuits, he ought neither to commence any for the mine,
nor defend any that are brought against him, without the advice
of the persons of whom he is to take counsel in the matter. And
he ought likewise to govern himself by their advice, in suing i")
debtors of the minor, that he may not engage him in any fruities
lawsuits against debtors who are not solvent. And, in fine, io a
things doubtful, the tutor ought to govern himself according &
the advice of the relations of the minor.


XII.


1322. The Tutor is put into Possession of all the Goods.—M
the immovables belonging to the minor are likewise put into the


TIT. I. SEC. II] TUTORS. 533


without delay, and put out the money to interest, or employ it in
the purchase of lands. But if there should happen to be any just
cause of delay, as in that case the tutor ought not to be blamed -
for not using too precipitate a diligence, so likewise he ought
not to be excused if he has been guilty of any negligence on his


parts
XIV.


1324. The Tutor cannot purchase the Goods of the Minor. —
The tutor cannot purchase the goods of his minor, either directly
in his own name, or by the interposition of a third person. For
besides that he cannot be seller and buyer of the same thing, he
might easily cheat, and purchase at an under rate what he has the
sale of.


XV.


1325. Exception to the Rule for the Sale of Movables. — If
among the movable things there be some which are of necessary
use to the estate of the minor, such as cattle in a farm, wine-
presses, or vessels for the vintage, and others of the like nature,
these kinds of movables are to be kept.


XVI.


1326. Another Exception. — If the guardianship is to last but a
short time, the minor being near at age, and it be found more
useful to keep the movables that may be necessary to him when
he comes to be of age, since, if he has them not of his own, he


q L.7,§1, D. de adm. et per. tut.; —1. ult. § ult. C. eod. ; —1. 22, in fine, C. eod. ; —1. ult.
C. quando decreto opus non est ; — I. 3, C. de peric. tut. ; —1. 24, C. de adm. tut. By the an-
ejent law of the Romans, the tutor was not only obliged to sell the movables, but even
the houses, because of the danger of fire; domus vel alix res periculo subject. L.5, § 9,
D. de adm. et per. tut.; —|. 22, C. de adm. tut. The Emperor Constantine forbade the sale
ef any immovable, or even movable goods, without a judicial inquiry into the matter and
@ decree of the judge, except clothes, and such living creatures as were not of necessary
wase to the minor, which the tutor was permitted to sell without any previous order from
the judge. D. 1. 22. In France, by the ordinance of Orleans, article 102, tutors are
@bliged, as soon as they have made an inventory, to sell by authority of a court of justice
aall the movable goods that are not perishable, and to put out the moncy to interest, or
Ro employ it in the purchase of lands or houses, by the advice of the relations and friends.
Bee the fifteenth article.
° L. 5, § 2, D. de auct. et cons. tut. ; —d. 1.4 3;— 1. 9, D. de reb. eor. g. 8. t.


® LD. 22, in fine, C. de on tut. See the seventeenth article.
eo


534 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IL


must necessarily purchase them of others, the tutor may be ex-
cused from selling them.‘


XVIL


1327. Another Exception.— If for other reasons it be necessary
or useful to the minor to keep some of the movables, such as
jewels, pictures, and other precious movables belonging to en
illustrious family, or sets of horses, and other things necessary to
the person or estate of the minor, care aught to be taken, in these
and the like cases, to reserve such kinds of things, according 8s
the quality of the minor, the use of such movables, and other ar
cumstances, may require."

XVIII.

1328, The Advantage of the Minor is to be preferred to the Dw
position of the Father. — If the father of the minor hath forbiddes,
by some disposition, the sale of his movables, the tutor shall ner
ertheless be under an obligation to sell them ; unless there be some
particular consideration that obliges him to keep them. Asi
this ought to be regulated by the judge, with the advice of the
relations.*


XIX.
1329. Small and Desperate Debts ought to be sold. — If among
the goods of a minor there be debts owing to him, which it may
be more useful to sell than to sue for at law, because of i


danger of being at fruitless charges: as, for example, if, in i


TIT. I. SEC. III.] TUTORS. 530


sold, the necessary formalities being observed in the sale, and the
other debts, with the recovery of which it may be more advanta-
geous to charge the tutor, may remain unsold/


XX.


1330. How the Money is to be employed. — All the moneys aris-
ing from the sale of the movables and other effects, as also the
ready money that is found among the goods of the minor, ought
to be employed by the tutor in paying off the minor’s debts, if he
owes any, and acquitting the other charges which he is liable to.
And what money remains over and above ought to be laid out
on the purchase of lands, or houses, or put out to use* And
we must reckon among the debts which the tutor is bound to
acquit, that which is owing to himself by his minor.


XXI.


1331. Of a Tutor who is Creditor to his Minor, and compounds
with the other Creditors. —If the succession of the father of the
¢ minor be burdened with debts, and the tutor, being one of the
creditors, compounds with the others for some abatement, in order
to keep the minor from renouncing the succession, he shall be
obliged to grant the same abatement of his own debt. Unless it be
that, for some particular considerations, the friends and relations
of the minor think fit to excuse the tutor from such composition.


XXIT.


1332. The Tutor obliged to pay Interest for the Minor’s Money
when he neglects to employ it for the Pupils Behoof. — 'The moneys


Y These sorts of debts being as much, or rather more, liable to perish than movable

there is the same reason for selling them.

2 LT. 24, C. de adm. tut.

a ZL. 9, § 5, D. eod.;—l. 8, C. qui dare tut. By the ordinance of Orleans, art. 102, tutors
and curators are obliged to lay out the moneys on the purchase of annuities, or lands
and tenements, with the advice of friends and relations, upon pain of paying in their own
names the interest of the money. This ordinance having directed the money to be laid
out either on lands and tenements, or in annuities, it has excluded the putting it out to use

a loan, as being unlawful.

» 7. 59, D. de adm. et per. tut. If the relations of the minor should find it reasonable
to distinguish the condition of the tutor from that of the other creditors, in consideration
of his care about the minor’s concerns, and of the advantage he had procured to him by
obtaining from the other creditors an abatement, which perhaps he himself was not in a
condition to grant for the debt duc to him, it might be just not to oblige the tutor to stand
to the same composition for his own debt.


a
536 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK LL


which shall arise by the redemption of annuities and the payment
of other debts owing to the minor, as also the moneys which shall
come to him by succession or otherwise, shall be employed in the
same manner as the moneys arising from the sale of the movables
in purchasing lands, or houses, or annuities. And if the tutor does
not use all reasonable diligence to find out such a purchase, or if
he converts the money of his minor to his own use, he shall be
bound to pay interest for the sums which he shall have neglected
to put out. :


XXIII.


1333. The Tutor has some Time allowed him for laying out the
Minor’s Money. — The tutor is not bound to pay interest for the
minor’s money from the moment that he received it. But a ct
tain time is allowed him to look out which way he can most saiely
lay it out for the benefit of the minor, whether it be money that
was lying in ready cash at the time when the inventory was made,
or money arising from the sale of movables or from other causes,
or even what is saved out of the minor’s revenues or income, @
which we shall speak in the following article.*


XXIV.


1334. What is saved out of the Revenue, how to be employed —t
the revenues of the minor exceed the expenses, the tutor is obliged
to accumulate what remains over and above every year, to mabe
a capital stock of it, to be laid out in the purchase of lands or tes
ments, or annuities, when it amounts to such a sum as mayl


TIT. 1. BEC. I1.] TUTORS. 537


.jadged sufficient for such a use; which if he has neglected to do,

he shall be bound to pay the interest of the remaining capital
stock arising from what is saved of the said revenues, pursuant
to the rule explained in the foregoing article.*


XXV.


1335. How the Revenues arising from the new Funds ought to be
employed. — The rents and other revenues which shall arise from
the funds that have been made out of the moneys which have been
saved out of the revenue, are likewise to be accumulated into capi-
tal stocks, to be employed in the purchase of lands or tenements,
or annuities, whenever they amount to sums sufficient for that
purpose, as has been said in the preceding article, and according
as the duration of the guardianship will allow of it. For all the
money arising from the revenues being out of the hands of the
debtors, and in the hands of the tutor, it is reckoned as a capital
stock to the minor, which ought to be laid out for his advantage‘


XXVI.


1336. If there be no Opportunity of laying out the Money to Ad-
vantage. — If there be no opportunity found of putting out the
money to a lawful and profitable use, the tutor will be discharged.
But in order to have this discharge, he ought to take the neces-
sary precautions, use his diligence, and procure proper attestations
of the counsel given him by the persons with whom he was bound
to advise, by which it may appear that the money has remained
by him in specie, and that it was not possible for him to employ
it to advantage Otherwise he will be answerable for it, accord-
ing to the rule explained in the following article.


XX VII.


1337. If the Tutor neglects to employ the Money, or to take his
Discharge. — If the tutor does not lay out the money, and does
not take the necessary precautions to justify his not doing it, he
will be liable to pay in his own name interest for the money.


¢ Z.. 5, D. de adm. et per. tut. See the preceding article, with the remark on it, as also
the following article. Ifthe tutor be indebted in his own name to his minor, he shall be
bound to include in the capital stock arising from the revenues the interest which he
himself owes. For he ought to have paid it; and it is the same thing with respect to
him as if he had received the interest from another debtor. Z. 38, D. de neg. gest.

f 7. 1,§ 12, D. de adm. et per. tut. ; — 1. 58, § 1, cod.

& L. 3, C. de usur. pup. ; —l. 12, § ult. D. de adm. et per. tut. See the following article.


538 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IL


For in this case it is justly presumed that he has converted the
money to his own use.®


XXVIIL


1838. Of the Administration of two or more Tutors. — If a mi-
nor has two or more tutors, and by their nomination there is
assigned to every one of them his particular charge, their admis
istration will be distinct and separate; and none of them shall be
accountable for the administration of the others! But if the same
administration be committed to two or more tutors, they will be
all of them answerable for the whole. And whether they be
willing to exercise their office jointly or separately, or agree
among themselves to commit the management to one of ther
number, or whether they all neglect the administration, they shall
all of them be bound one for the other, because it is their commoa


charge.!
XXIX.


1339. The Benefit of Division and Discussion among many Te
tors. — If two or more tutors have been named to act jointly, and
to be answerable for one another, yet notwithstanding this oblige
tion for the whole that every one of them is under, when the
minor comes to call them to account for their administration, be
will be obliged to divide his action among those who have inter
meddled in the management, and to discuss every one of them for
his respective administration, or his heirs and executors, before
he can sue one tutor for the other, unless that some of them should


TIT. I. SEO. IIT.) TUTORS. 539


XXX.

1340. When there are many Tutors, who shall be preferred? —
If two or more tutors, named for the administration of the same
guardianship, cannot agree either to act jointly together, and to
answer one for another, or to intrust the management to one
alone, the others answering for him; and if there be one of them
who offers to give security, that he may have the sole manage-
ment, the other tutors not offering the like security, he shall be
preferred and intrusted with the sole management" But if all
the tutors offer to give security, then he who is the most capable
and most responsible, both as to his own person and as to his
surety, shall be preferred. For it is better that the minor’s affairs
be managed only by one person; and the other tutors, in this case,
shall not be bound to answer for his administration.® If none of
the tutors offer to give security, and they do not agree either to act
jointly together, or to let one of their number manage for the
others, the administration shall be divided among them; and in
this case every one will be accountable only for his own. Or if
the administration is committed to one of them alone, the other
tators refusing to answer for him, they shall be discharged.»


XXXTI.


1341. The Obligation of Honorary Tutors.— Although hon-
orary tutors be not bound to concern themselves in the manage-
ment of the minors affairs,as the onerary tutors are who are
charged with the administration, yet nevertheless, if, in the nomi-
nation of an honorary tutor, some particular function had been
assigned him, and he had failed in it, or by connivance or an in-
excusable negligence he had winked at the bad management of
the onerary tutor, he might be made accountable for it according
to the circumstances.1


bon. dando ; —d. 1.1, § 18, D. de tut. et rat. distr. ;—Il. 2, C. de divid. tut. We do not ex-
plain in this article what the meaning is of these words division and discussion, because
it appears plainly enough from the sequel. See the third article of the first section of the
Solidity among Two, §c.

= L. 17, D. de test. tut. ; —4§ 1, Inst. de satisdat. tut. ; — 1. 4,in fine, C. de tut. vel cur. gti
sat. n.d.

° L. 18, D. de test. tut.; —I. 8, § 6, D. de adm. et per. tut.

P L. 3, §§ 6, 7, 8, 9, e 1. 4, D. de adm. et per. tut. ; —I. 55, eod. ; — § 1, Inst. de satisdatio-
mibus tut. See the ninth article of the first section.

a L. 60, § 2, D. de rit. nupt. ; —1. 3, § 2, D. de adm. et per. tut. See the sixth article of
the first section. We have not conceived this rule in the rigor which it had by the Ro-
man law ; and we have drawn it up in terms which agree with our practice.


540 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT L BOOK L


XXXIL

1342. The Tutor ought to give an Account after his Tutorship is
ended. — The last engagement of the tutor is to give an account
of his administration ; to answer for what he shall have ill] managed
or neglected to do; to pay in the sums of money remaining in his
hands, together with the interest thereof from the day of balan
cing the account; and to restore the fruits which he shall have
reaped." And the engagement of giving an account is so indir
pensable, that although the father of the minor in naming the
tutor had exempted him from giving an account, he would never-
theless be obliged to it; for otherwise the misdemeanours of a
tutor might go unpunished; which is neither consistent with good
manners nor public justice.


XXXIIL


1343. Case where the Tutor is obliged to give an Account duiag
his Administration.— Tutors are not only bound to give an a
count after their trust is at an end, but they are likewise obliged
to do it during their administration, if there falls out any thing
that may make it necessary. Thus, for example, if the minors
creditors seize on his goods, in order to sell them, the tutor mut 9
give in a summary account of the minor’s eflects, that it may ap
pear whether he has not ready money enough to pay off the debts’


AXXIV.


1344. Charge and Discharge in Tutors’ Accounts. — Tutors
ought, in stating their accounts, to charge themselves with whal


TIT. I. SEC. 111] TUTORS. 541


if there be ground for it, as where they have used all necessary dili-
gence against a debtor, who proves to be insolvent. For tutors,
although they be obliged to an exact and faithful administration,
yet they ought not to be made accountable for the event.


XXXV.


1345. The Tutor allowed all reasonable Expenses. — Tutors may
charge in their accounts all the expenses that a reasonable admin-
istration has obliged them to lay out.* In the number of which
we must reckon the expenses which a tutor has laid out by the
advice of the persons who were appointed to be his counsel, and
those that have been directed by the judge, unless there should
appear to be some fraud on his part” But if any accident renders
those expenses useless which it appeared reasonable to lay out, the
tator will nevertheless recover them.


XXXVI.


1346. The Minor has a Mortgage upon the Estate of the Tvtor.
— All the estate of the tutor is mortgaged, from the time of his
nomination, for what he shall appear to be indebted to his minor,
after stating his accounts.


XXXVII.


1347. Of the Mother who is Guardian, and marries a second
Husband. — If the mother who is guardian to her children marries
a second husband before she gets another tutor named to them,
and gives in an account of her administration, and pays off or
gives security for what she is indebted to them, the estate of the
second husband will be mortgaged to the minors for all that the
mother shall appear to be indebted to them by the balance of the
account, both for the time past before the marriage, and for what
follows after.


® 7.9, C. arbttr. tut. ; —1. 3, § 7, D. contr. tut. et ut. act. See the ninth article.

= 7. 1,§ 4, D. de contr. tut. e ut. act. See the third article of the second section.

Y L. 5,§15, D. de red. cor. qui sub. tut. Although this text belongs to another subject,
yet it may be applied to this case.

& ZT. 3,4 7, D. de contr. tut. et ut. act. See the seventh article of the second section Of
those who Manage the Affairs of others without their Knowledge.

® ©. 20. C. de adm. tut.;—I. 7, §5,in f. C. de cur. fur.; —1.1,§1, C. de ret ur. act.
fee the sixth article of the fifth section. Nov. 118,c.5,in f See the fifth article of the
second section of Mortgages. See, hereafter, the sixth article of the fifth section.

b L. 6, C. in quib. caus. pign. vel hypoth. tacite contrahatur ; — 1. 2, C. quando mulier tutela

VOL. I. 46


542 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK 1.


SECTION IV.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THOSE WHO ARE SURETIES FOR TUTOSS;
AND OF THOSE WHO NAME THEM; AND OF THEIR HEIRS AND
EXECUTORS.


Art. IL


1348. Sureties of Tutors, to what they are obliged. — Those who
become sureties for tutors are bound for all that the tutors may
chance to owe on account of their administration* But if, after
the tutorship was expired, the tutor intruded himself into some
new affair of the minor’s, which was not a necessary consequence
of the tutorship, he who was his surety will not be answerable
for it.”

IL.

1349. The Tutor ought to be first discussed before an Action &
brought against his Surety. — If the sureties of tutors are bound
only as simple sureties, without renouncing the benefit of de
cussion, they cannot be sued till after a discussion of the estate
of the tutors for whom they are bound;* and that according to
the rules which shall be explained in the title of Cautions w
Sureties.


III.
1350. Of those who certify the Tutor to be Solvent. — Among


SEC. IVv.] TUTORS. 513


reties of tutors we are to reckon those who, without binding
elves expressly as sureties, have certified that the tutor was
t; for they ought to answer for him as much as if they were
reties.4


IV.


1. Of the Persons who name a Tutor.— If the persons who
the nomination of a tutor have been guilty of any mis-
mour, as if they have named a person who was appar-
insolvent; the persons who named him must answer for
But before the minor can bring his action against those
1amed the tutor, he ought to discuss the tutor and his
age


V.
2. Engagements of the Heirs or Executors of Tutors. — The
wr executors of the tutor are bound to answer for his whole
istration, and even for the damages occasioned by his fraud
‘ligence, as also for what he may have failed to look after.
hey must give in an account for him, as he ought to have
aimself.

VI.
3. The Duty of the Heirs or Executors of Tutors in Affairs
by the Tutors before their Death. — Although the heirs or ex-
3 of tutors be not tutors, yet if the heir or executor of the
Jeceased be a man come to full age and capable of business,
bliged to take care of the affairs which the tutor had begun,
other tutor be named, or till some other provision be made


a; and if he should fail to do it, either through fraud or gross
ence, he would be made accountable for it.s


ben f. D. de fidej. tut.

|, C. de magistr. conv. We say nothing here of the engagements of magistrates
minors, in what concerns the nomination of tutors. For our usage is altogether
} from the Roman law, which obliged the magistrate to give to the minor a tutor
' solvent, and to take good security from those who were bound to give it. JL. 1,
5, D.de magistr. conv. But by our usage the magistrate only confirms the nom-
of a tutor who is chosen by the relations of the minor, and gives him the oath.
the judges are not answerable for the solvency of the tutors, unless they have
ilty of some prevarication which may oblige them to it.

it. C. de hared. tut. ; —1. 2, eod. ; —1. 10, C. ard. tut. ; —I. 12, eod.

6, § 1, D. de tut.; —1. 1, D. de fidejuss. et nom. et her. tut. Seo the following arti-
the third article of the sixth section.


544 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK 0.


VIL
1354. Of new Affairs which fall out after the Tutor’s Death.—
As for the affairs which were not begun by the tutor, and which
came not to the knowledge of his heir or executor, he is not bound
to take care of them. But if through gross neglect he had aban-
doned an affair of the minor’s which he knew of either by himself
or others, he would be made answerable for it.*


VIII.


1355. If the Heir or Executor takes upon himself the Tedorskig.
— If the heir or executor of the tutor takes .upon himself the ad-
ministration of the tutorship, he shall be bound to take the same
care as if he were tutor!


IX.


1356. The Surety is discussed before the Co-tutor.— If there be
several tutors bound for one and the same administration, and one
of them hath a surety, the other tutors cannot be sued on account
of that tutor, till after the discussion of hia surety.)


SECTION V.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF MINORS TO THEIR TUTORS.


Art. I,
1357. A general Engagement of the Minor to the Tutor.—®%


1EO. ¥.] TUTORS. 645


being come to full age, ought to allow to his tutor, in the
t of his administration, all the expenses which shall have
iid out on his person, his estate, and his affairs, according as
tall appear to have been necessarily or usefully laid out, or
e been settled by the judge in the cases where the tutor


vand to procure such a regulation.”


Ii.


|. A Steward. — If the tutorship be such as that, for the ease
tutor, it be necessary to give him the assistance of a stew-
e salary which he shall give to such person will be allowed
his account, according as it shall have been regulated dur-
+ tatorship, or as it shall be adjudged at the stating of the
it, and in proportion to the quality of the minor, and the
of his estate and affairs; the tutor remaining always re-
dle for the deed of the persons whom he shall have employed
st him. And although the tutor have not really employed
ard, yet he will nevertheless be allowed the expenses of one,
dministration required this assistance.°


IV.


|. Alimony to the Father and Mother, Brothers and Sisters, of
nor.— If the father, mother, or brothers and sisters of a
under tuition had no means of subsistence, and the minor
1 estate, he would be bound to allow to his tutor the ex-
which he had laid out in supplying those persons with the
aries of life,t according to the regulation which shall have
1ade in this matter.


V.


l. The Tutor allowed Interest for the Money which he ad-
.— If the tutor has been engaged in some expenses, having
id in his hands either of the minor’s revenues or of his
fects, so that he hath been obliged to borrow, or advance
‘of his own, the interest of the money which he shall have


, § 4, D. de contr. tut. ef ut. act. See the fifth article of the second section.
8,§ 1, D. de tutelis ;—1. 24, D. de adm. et per. tut.; — 1.3, § ult. D. eod.;—1.1,
¢ tut. a rat. distr.
3, § 2, D. de adm. et per. tut.; —l. 4, in f. D. ubi pup. educ. See the fourth arti-
» second section of the Rescission of Contracts. According to the practice with us,
ight not to lay out these kinds of expenses without having them first allowed and
| by the judge.

46 °


546 THE CIVIL LaW. [Part I. BOOK EL


advanced will be allowed him, till a sufficient fand can be raised,
either out of the minor’s revenues, or otherwise, for his reimbune-
ment.®


VL


1362. The Tutor has a Mortgage on the Minor’s Estate. — As
the minor hath his mortgage on the estate of the tutor, for all that
the tutor may chance to owe him on account of his administr-
tion, so the tutor likewise hath on his part a mortgage on the
estate of the minor, for the sums that the minor may chance to be
indebted to him by his account‘ For the engagement of the
tutor and that of the minor being reciprocal, and being contracted
at the same time, the mortgage, which is an accessory to the es-
gagement, is contracted likewise in the same manner. And if,
for example, the minor, being come to full age, borrows money of
any one before his tutor has made up his accounts, and it appear
upon the balance of the account that the tutor is creditor, the
tutor’s mortgage will be prior to the debt contracted by the minor
after he came of age.


VIL
1363. A Case where the Tutor is privileged in his Mortgage—
Besides this mortgage, the tutor hath likewise a privilege for th
money which he has laid out in the recovery or preservation @


the minor’s estate and debts. And he is preferred, in his map
gage on such estate and debts, to other creditors.“


© [. 3,41, D. de contr. tut. et ut. act.; —d. 13,4 4;—d.L 45. Sec the fifth ated


, SEC. VI.} | ' TUTORS. 547


SECTION VI.


rTHE WAYS WHICH PUT AN END TO THE TUTORSHIP, AND OF
THE DEPRIVATION OF TUTORS.


Art. I.
44. The Tutorship is at an End when the Minor comes of Age.
1e office of tutor is at an end when the person who. was
* tuition comes of age. For being arrived at full age, he
take upon himself the care of his estate, and of his affairs.
he benefit of age by indulgence hath not the same effect."


I.
iS. Of the Tutorship of several Minors. — If there are two or
minors under the tuition of one and the same tutor, the
n ends for every one as they respectively arrive at age; and
10 has attained the years of majority may oblige the tutor to


an account of his administration, although the tutorship con-
still with respect to the others.


1808 :


6. The Consequence of the Administration after Majority.—
ugh the tutorship ends the moment that the minor arrives at
ge of majority, yet the tutor is not so discharged by this
ze as that he may immediately abandon all further care of
linor’s concerns. But he ought to continue his administra-
as to those affairs which he cannot neglect without occasion-
ome loss or damage to the minor. And he ought to give
‘about every thing that is necessary, and which does not
t of delay, till he has given up his accounts, or till he has,
ing for a convenient time to make up his accounts, delivered
the affairs and papers into the hands of his minor, who is
me major, that he may look after them himself.°


e


w. quib. mod. tut. fin.;—1.1, C. quando tut. vel cur. esse desinant ; — Inst. de curat.
: remarks in the preamble of this title. See, as to the benefit of age, the twenty-
article of the second section of the Rescission of Contracts.

39, § 17, D. de adm. et per. tut.

un. C. ut caus. post pubert. ads. tut. ;—1. 5, § 5, inf. D. de adm. et per. tut.;—d. l.
v.l. 27, D. de appel.; —l. 13, D. de tut. e rat. dist. Sec the sixth article of the
ection.


548 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK IL


IV.

1367. The Death of the Minor puts an End to the Tutorship.—
The tutorship likewise expires by the death of the minor.‘ But
so as that the tutor ought not to abandon that which requires
his care, till the heirs of the minor be in a condition to dir
charge him of it, according to the rule explained in the foregoing
article.

V


1368. As also the Death of the Tutor.— If the tutor dies during
the tutorship,® it is thereby at an end, not only with respect to
himself, but also to his heirs and executors. And they shall be
bound only according to the rules explained in the fourth section.


VL


1369. The Civil Death etther of Tutor or Minor hath the sam
Effect.— The tutorship ends likewise by the civil death either of
the tutor or of the minor‘ For as to the tutor, the civil death
renders him incapable of that office; and as to the minor, it puts
him out of a condition of standing in need of a tutor, being no
longer master of his own person, nor of any estate. But the tutor
is obliged, after the civil death of his minor, to take care of his
estate, pursuant to the third and fourth rules of this sectior,
for the benefit of those to whom he shall be bound to give an a
count of it.


» I. BEC. Vil] TUTORS. 549


minor, that he may lose them; if he abandons the affairs; if he
ents himself, and refuses to appear, leaving the minor’s con-
ns in disorder; if he does not furnish the necessaries for his
10r’s maintenance and education, having wherewithal to do it;
l, in general, if there are any other just causes for removing
1, although it were only negligence, if it be such as makes
necessary to put the management of the minor’s affairs into
ex hands.*


IX.

372. The Tutor that is removed for his Dishonesty is branded
h Infamy.— The tutor who is removed from his office, because
his fraudulent dealing, is branded with infamy; but he is not
who is removed on account of his negligence, or his unfitness
such a charge. And if the cause of his removal be not ex-
ssed in the sentence of his deprivation, his removal will not be
snded with any mark of infamy; it being reasonable to pre-
ne, in that case, that the tutor was removed only for his negli-
ee or incapacity.!


x.


373. Misdemeanowrs that are punishable. — If a tutor has pro-
ed the tutorship by bribery, or if his misdemeanours be such,
it, besides the removing him from his trust, he deserves some
ler punishment, he shall be liable to such punishment as the
tare of the act shall deserve.


SECTION VII.


THE CAUSES WHICH RENDER PERSONS INCAPABLE OF BEING
UTORS, AND OF THOSE WHICH EXCYSE THEM FROM THAT OFFICE.


1374. We have not put down in this section, among the inca-
Cities and excuses which may suffice for discharging any one
m the office of tutor, that which was regulated by Justinian,*


L. 3, § 5, D. de susp. tut. ; —d. 1. 8, § 17; —d. 1. 8, §§ 14 4 15;—1. 7, § ult. eod.; —d.
41;—l. 3,4 12, eod.

L. wit. C. de susp. tut.; —1. 3, § ult. D. de suspect. tut. ; —I. 4, §§ 1 € 2, D. de susp. tut.
ZL. 9, D. de tute. ; —1.3, § 15, in f. D. de susp. tut.;—~1.1, § 7, D. de off. pref. urbdi;
1, § ult. D. de ousp. tut.

Nov. 73, c. 1.


550 | THE CIVIL LAW. - [PART I. BOOK IL


that those who were either creditors or debtors to minors should
be incapable of being their tutors. For although the person who
is named tutor should be found to be either debtor or creditor to
the minor, yet our usage provides sufficiently for the safety of mi-
nors, by ordering an inventory of their goods to be made, and to
be lodged in court; which preserves the titles of their claims, o
defences against their tutors, and by appointing them a curator, or
substitute-tutor, to defend them in any disputes they may chance
to have with their tutors.> But if the debt, or other affair, that
is in dispute between the tutor and the minor, be such that it is
evidently more for the advantage of the minor to have another
tutor, it will in that case be prudent for the judge to oblige the
relations to make choice of another tutor.


' Arr. I
1875. Difference between Incapacity and an Excuse. — Ince
pacity excludes from the tutorship even those who would willingly


accept of it;* and an excuse dispenses with those who might be
tutors if they pleased.>


IL


1376. Causes of Incapacity and Excuses.— The causes of ine
pacity have their foundation either in natural equity, or in some
particular law.°


= |


III.
1377. Women cannot be Guardians, but to their own Children —


TIT. L. SEC. VII.] TUTORS. 551


mothers may be tutoresses or guardians to their own children;
for the authority which nature gives them over their children, and
the affection which they have for their interests, except them from
the rule which excludes women from guardianships. And as the
mother is capable of being tutoress or guardian, so the guardian-
ship may be likewise committed to her second husband, father-in-
law to the minor.


V.


1379. Minors cannot be Tutors. — Minors cannot be tutors, be-
cause they themselves are under tuition, and stand in need of the
assistance of others in the managements of their own concerns


VL


1380. Dsfirmities which render Persons incapable of being Tutors.
— Those who labor under any infirmity, which disables them from
looking after their own concerns, are incapable of being tutors;
such as persons who are mad, blind, deaf, dumb, and those who
are under any habitual malady which produces the same effect."
And if these kinds of accidents happen to a tutor after he has
been named, and even after he has acted as tutor, he shall be ex-
cused. But if the disease or infirmity which seizes the tutor
during the tutorship be only for a time, a curator may be named
in the mean while to supply the place of the tutor during his ill-
ness, if there be occasion.!


VI.


1881. A Son that is of Age may be a Tutor. — A son who is of
fall age, although under the father’s authority, may be a tutor; but
the father will not be accountable for his son’s administration, if
he does not oblige himself to it either expressly or tacitly, as if he
himself acts and intermeddles in the administration of the minor's
estate. But a bare consent to his son being named tutor, and to
his taking upon him the administration, does not bind him


* L. ult. D. de tut. ; — tot. tit. C. quando mulier tut. off. f. p.; — Nov. 118, c. 5.
"1.3, C. de contr. jud. tut.; —v. 1.2, C. de interd. mar. ; —I. 32, § 1, D. de adopt.
© 413, Inst. de excus. tut.; —1. ult. C. de leg. tut.
£.1,§ 2, D. de tut.; —d.l. § ult.; —1. 10, § 1, D. de legit. tut.; — 1. un. C. qui morbo;
23, C. qui dare tut. ; —I. 10, in f. D. de excus. ; — § 7, Inst. eod.
[.11, D. eod.; —1. 40, D. de excus.
L. 10, § 8, eod.
" 1.7, C. de tut. ; —1. 21, D. de adm. et per. tut.


552 THE CIVIL LAW, [PART I. BOOK IL


VIL

1382. Other Causes for not confirming the Nomination of « Te
tor. — If, besides the cases of incapacity just now mentioned, there
should happen to be in the person who is named tutor any other
cause which might render him unworthy of the office or give
ground of suspicion, the judge ought in prudence not to confina
such nomination. Thus, for example, if it should be found ont
that the tutor gave money to get himself named, not only should
the said nomination not be confirmed, but this offence would de-
serve to be punished. Thus, he whom the father had forbid to be
named tutor to his son ought not to be admitted to that office
without very pregnant reasons. But that exclusion would pot
any way blemish the reputation of the said person.° Thus, he
ought not easily to be admitted as tutor who makes interest to get
himself named.’


IX.


1383. Excuses of Two Kinds. — The excuses alleged by tutor
to free themselves from the tutorship are, in the same manner
incapacities, founded either upon some natural impediment, of os
some particular law.


X.


1384. Incapacity serves as an Excuse.— The causes of inct
pacity which may be fairly alleged may likewise serve as excuses
thus minority, and the infirmities which render persons ineapable
of being tutors, ought to excuse them from the office*


TIT. L SEC. Vil} TUTORS. 558


he is excused. The children which are unborn, although conceived,
are not reckoned in the number of the children which serve as an
excuse. And the grandchildren, and other descendants of children
that are deceased, are counted as representing the person of whom
they are descended. Thus several children of one son are reck-
oned in this case only as one child‘


XII.


1387. Three Tutorships excuse from a Fourth.— He who has
already the burden of three tutorships may excuse himself from ac-
cepting a fourth, We do not reckon as so many tutorships those
of many minors, when the estate of all the minors is managed by
ene and the same administration." Neither do we reckon in the
number of tutorships that serve as an excuse the engagements of
honorary tutors, nor that of the sureties of tutors.*


XIV.


1388. One Tutorship that is Burdensome will serve as an Excuse.
— If one tutorship alone be of such extent, or so burdensome, that
it would be hard to call the tutor to a second tutorship, he shall be
excused.’


XV.


1389. Enmity between the Minor’s Father and the Tutor. — If
there had been a mortal hatred between the father of the minor
and the person who is named tutor, and there never was any
reconciliation between them, the tutor shall be excused from ac-
cepting the office.


¢ Z. 2, § 2, D. de excus.;—1. 1, C. qui num. lib. se excus. ; — Inst. de excus. tut.; —d. I. 2,
§3, D. de excus. ; —d. 1. 2,4 4;—l. 1, C. qui num. lib.; —d. l. §§ 6, 7. We have not
limited in this article what is said of grandchildren to those descended of males, in which
tense it is limited in the seventh section above quoted. For although daughters and their
children be in another family, yet it often happens that the daughters and their children
tre as much or more chargeable to the fathers than the sons are; and it would be hard,
that a grandfather on the mother’s side, who has the burden of children of several daugh-
ters deceased, should be deprived of the benefit of this excuse. And therefore it is that
Our usage admits for an excuse the guardianship of grandchildren by daughters.

* L.3, D. de excus. ;—l. 2, § ult. cod.;—. unic. C. qui num. tut. See the following

article.

* L.15, § 9, D. de excusat.

YL. 31, § 4, D. de excus.

® § 11, Just. de excus. tut. ; —1. 6, § 17, D. de excus.

VOL. I. 47


554 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK UL


XVL
1390. Lawsuits which excuse.— If there be a lawsuit between
the minor and the person whom they intended to name tutor,
which calls in question the minor’s legitimacy, or claims a right to
all his estate or a great part of it, the said person shall be excused
from the tutorship. But lawsuits of a small consequence will nc
serve to excuse him.*


XVIL


1391. A Lawsuit between the Minor and the Next of Kin to his
Tutor.— If the minor happens to have a considerable lawsuit
against the father or mother, brothers, sisters, or nephews, of the
person who is named to be his tutor, both humanity and the inter-
est of the minor do require that the said person be excused from
being tutor. For he ought not to be engaged in a guardianship
Which will oblige him to go to law with his nearest relations;
and the minor ought to have a tutor who may be under no temp
tation to betray his trust.®


XVIIL


1892. Excuse on Account of Privilege. — Persons who, on ac
count of their employment or for other causes, are privileged with
an exemption from being tutors, shall be excused from the office;
which depends either on the nature of the employments, if they be
such as in their own nature ought to give an exemption from the
office of tutor, such as an embassy, the command of an army.@
garrison, or on the particular grant of the said privilege by some


TIT. I. SEC. VII.) TUTORS. 555


XIX.

1393. Ecclesiastics are exempted from being Tutors. — Ecclesi-
astical persons cannot be named tutors or curators. For the holi-
ness of their sacred function obliges them, that they may be the bet-
ter able to attend the duties of it, to disengage themselves from all
other cares; and exempts them from all engagements to an ad-
ministration of temporal concerns. But if a clergyman be willing
to take charge of the education and government of orphans that
are his relations, it shall be lawful for him to accept of the tutor-
ship of them, that he may take care of their persons, and occa-
sionally, likewise, of their estate, which has so necessary a connec-
tion with their persons.*


XX.


1394. Poverty and Want of Industry may serve as an Excuse. —
If he who is called to the office of a tutor has not an estate sul-
ficient to bear the charges of it, if he can neither read nor write, or
if he is not industrious enough to manage his own concerns, or if
his own affairs demand his whole time and labor, he may be either
excused from the tutorship or confirmed in it, according to the
quality of the persons, the nature of the estate, and the other cir-
camstances.® |


XXL


1395. The Tutor who is named ought to act till he ts dis-
charged. — Although he who has been named tutor appeals from
his nomination, and he has a just excuse, he shall nevertheless
be bound as tutor till he is discharged of the trust; and he is
obliged to act provisionally in the mean while till his appeal be
determined.‘


XXII.


1396. Acceptance of the Tutorship cuts off all Excuses. — If he
who had an excuse has accepted of the tutorship, or acted volun-
tarily as tutor before he gave in his excuse, he cannot be after-
wards admitted to excuse himself


4 7. 52, C. de episc. et cleric. ; — Nov. 123, c. 5.

e LT. 6, § ult. D. de excus. ; — § 8, Inst. eod. ; —Ul. 7, 40, § 1, cod. ; —§ 6, Inst. eod.

f ZL. 31, D. de excus.; —l. 20, D. de adm. e per. tut.; —l. 39, § 6, eod. ;—v. 1. 16, C. de
excus. tut.

& L. 2, C. si tutor. vel cur. fal. alleg. exc. sit ; —1. 17, § 5, D. de excus.


556 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L&


XXTIL
1397. Incapacity that happens after the Nomination. — If, after
that the tutor has accepted of the tutorship, he falls under some
incapacity, as if he becomes blind, deaf, dumb, if he runs mad, o
is seized with other infirmities which render him incapable of ex-
ercising the office of tutor, he shall be discharged from it, and an-
other tutor will be named in his place.®


XXIV.

1398. Privilege acquired after the Nomination. — The privileges
which one acquires after his nomination to the tatorship do not
excuse him from it. For they are granted only to exempt thove
who are not as yet under any engagement. Thus, he who has
been prevented by his nomination before he acquired the privilege
cannot plead his privilege in order to be discharged!

XXV.

1399. An Excuse happening after the Tutor’s Entering upon his
Office. — The grounds of excuses which do not proceed from an
incapacity, and which happen only after the nomination of the
tutor, will not procure him his discharge from the office. Thus,
the number of children which serve as an excuse, or the age af


seventy years being completed after he has entered upon the a¢
ministration of the tutorship, will not excuse him from it!


XXVL
1400. When the Tutor and Minor have diferent Places of Abode.


vir. 11.] CURATORS. 567


XXVII

1401. Several Excuses whereof none is sufficient of ttself.— If
he who is named tutor has no ground of excuse which is of itself
sufficient, such as the age of seventy years complete, or the num-
ber of children that is required; but that he is only, for example,
sixty years of age, and has two or three children; these excuses,
of which every one is insufficient by itself, will not be sufficient,
when put all together, to procure him a discharge from the tutor-
ship.*


TITLE II.
OF CURATORS.


1402. Usage as to Ourators.— Curator of one that ts Mad or
Infirm. — As there are other causes besides the infirmity of age
which render persons incapable of governing themselves and their
affairs, such persons who happen to be in that condition are put
under the conduct of others, who are to them instead of tutors,
and who are called curators. Thus, curators are appointed to per-
sons that are mad, and to those who, because of some infirmity,
are incapable of managing their own concerns; such as, for in-
stance, those who are both deaf and dumb.

1403. Curator of a Prodigal.— Among persons incapable of
governing themselves we reckon prodigals, who lavish away their
estates in foolish and idle expenses. And the same reason which
obliges the public to take the management of their estates out of
their hands makes it necessary to give them curators to look after
their concerns.

1404. Curator to a Minor who has a Tutor. — Sometimes, like-
wise, a curator is assigned to a minor who has a tutor, when it
happens that the tutor and minor have some difference or some
tight to be adjusted between them.


© 7. 15, § 11, D. de excusat. But if this tutor were sixty-nine years of age and had
four children, would it not be as just, or rather more so, that he should be discharged, than
if he were seventy years of age and had no children, or only forty years, with five children ?

® See the eleventh article of the second section of Tutors, and the preamble to the sev-
nth section of the same title.


Am 8


558 THE OIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK


1405. Ourator to Goods which are not claimed by any Owner. —
There is yet another sort of curators, the use of which is necessary
for taking care of goods that are abandoned, and which no persoa
looks after. As in the case of a long absence of any one from his
estate, without committing the care of it to any body; or in the
case of an inheritance without heirs, or which the heirs have re
nounced ; or if a debtor relinquishes all his estate to his creditors.
In all these cases, and others of the like nature, where goods are
without any owner, or without any person to look after them,
curators are appointed to take care of them, and to preserve them
for the use and benefit of those who either have or shall have a
right to them.

1406. The Subject-Matter of this Title. — All these kinds of cure-
tors being charged with the goods and affairs that are committed to
their care, and some of them likewise with the care of pereom,
such as the curators of those who are mad; their trust is of the
same nature, and subject to the same rules, with that of tutors, m
what relates to their engagement, the reasons that may serve to
” excuse them from the office, and all other things that are commoa
to both offices. So that we must add to this title the rules of the
foregoing title which may be applied to this.

1407. Another Sort of Curators which does not belong to this
Place.— We do not place among the number of curators that ar
to be treated of under this title, those who are named in criminal
prosecutions in certain cases against the memory of persons who
are prosecuted after their death; such as those who have bees


FIT. I. SEC. 1.] CURATORS. - 559


IT.

1409. When a Minor is Mad.— A curator is not assigned to
any one as a madman, unless he has attained the age of majority.
For if a minor be in a state of madness, it is sufficient, and like-
Wise more decent, to appoint him a curator on account of his mi-
nority, rather than because of his madness; at least till he arrive
at the years of majority.>


IIL.


1410. The Madness ought to be judicially proved.— The mad-
ness of a person of full age ought to be proved judicially, in order
to his having a curator assigned him. For, besides that it is only
by the authority of justice that a curator can be appointed, it may
sometimes happen that a person may counterfeit himself to be
mad for some particular end,° or that others out of interest may
represent him to be mad without any ground.


IV.


1411. The Son may be Curator to his Father or Mother, if they
are Mad.— The son may be named curator to his mother who is
mad; as also to his father in the same case.4


V.
1412. When a Son, living under the Father's Jurisdiction, is Mad.


— If a son, who is still under his father’s jurisdiction, falls into a
state of madness, no curator is assigned him, because his father is
- naturally charged with the government of his person and the ad-
ministration of his estate.


VI.
1413. The Husband cannot be Curator of his Wife that is Mad.


~In the cases where it may be necessary to name a curator to a
married woman, or to her who is contracted in marriage, whether
it be on account of madness or for other causes, neither the hus-
band, nor the person with whom she is contracted can be named
Curators.


> 7.3, $1, D. de tute. © J. 6, D. de cur. fur. et al.

@ L. 4, D. de our. fur. ;—1.1, in fine, D. eod. ; —l. 2, eod.

¢ L. 7, C. de cur. fur. See the tenth article of the first section of Tutors.

 L.2, Cod. qui dare tut.; —1. 14, D. de curat. fur.; —§ 19, Inst. de excus. tut.

& Z. 1, § ult. D. de excus. tut. This rule seems to be founded either on the interest


560 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pak 2 BOOK 1.


- VIL

1414. Madness with lucid Intervals.— The curator of a person
whose madness comes and goes by intervals does not exercise his
function but during the fit of madness, and ceases to exercise it in
the lucid intervals, when the person’s reason is fully reéstablished ;
but the office of this curator lasts during the life of the person
that is mad, to avoid the trouble of naming a curator at every
new fit of madness."


VOL


1415. Infirmities which require a Ourator.— Curators are given
to all persons who, by reason of some infirmity, are incapable of
the administration of their estates and affairs; such as one who
is deaf and dumb; and all those who by other the like infirmities
are brought under the like incapacity}


TX.


1416. Curators of Persons who are declared Prodigals. — Thoee
who lavish away their estates in foolish, extravagant expenses,
and whose bad conduct makes it necessary to declare them prod-
gals, and to interdict them judicially, are deprived of the adminis
tration of their affairs, and of the management of their estate,
the charge of which is committed to a curator. And the same
course would be taken with a woman whose manners and conduc
should give occasion to such an interdiction!


which the husband may have in the affair, which should require the appointment of ace


TIT. I. SEC. 1} CURATORS. 561


X.

1417. A Prodigal ought to be proved such.— The interdiction
of a prodigal cannot be decreed, and a curator assigned to him,
till after his bad conduct shall have been proved™ And he whom
his father shall have declared a prodigal in his will is presumed to
be such;" unless it should appear by the circumstances that no
regard ought to be had to such a declaration.


XI.


1418. The Son cannot be Ourator to his Father who is a Prodi-
gal.— The son cannot be named curator to his father, who is
declared a prodigal, although he may be curator to his father who
is mad?


XII.


1419. Duration of the Ouratorship of a Prodigal. — The office
of a curator to a prodigal is not at an end till the interdiction is


judicially taken off.
XIII.


1420. Ourator to the Effects of one that is absent.— If any per-
son happens to be long absent, without committing to any one the
care of his effects and affairs, and it be necessary that somebody
should look after them ; in that case a curator is named to take
care of them.!


XIV.


1421. Curator to a Child that is yet unborn.— If a widow hap-
pens to be big with child at the time of her husband’s death, a
tator cannot be named to the child till it is born. Butif it be
necessary, a curator is appointed to look after the rights of the child


= £.1, D. de cur. fur. D DL. 16, § ult. eod.

® Z.1,§1, D. de curat. fur.

P L.1, D. de curat. fur. Although it be trae that the amendment of the manners of a
prodigal, as well as the return of a madman to his right senses, puts them both in a con-
dition to resume the care of their affairs; yet it is necessary, however, with respect to the
prodigal, that, as he has been judicially interdicted, so the interdiction should be judicially
taken off, as well for the discharge of his curator as for the security of those who shall

have business to transact with him.

9 L. 6, § ult. D. de tut.; —I. 3, C. de postlim. revers. ; —v. l. 6, § ult. D. quibus ex caus. tn

Bons. eat. ; —1. 15, D. ex quibus caus. may. ; — 1. 22, §1, D. de rebus auct. jud. possid. ; —§ 4,
Iaat. de curat.


562 THE CIVIL LAW. , [Part 1. BOOK IL


that may be born, and to take care of the effects which are to be
his as soon as he is born.’


XV.


1422. A Curator to a Succession. — If a succession happens to
be without heirs or executors, as if the deceased left behind him
no relations, nor instituted any person his executor by will, or
he who had a right to succeed had renounced the succession of
were absent, or during the time he was deliberating about ac-
cepting the succession, and refused in the mean while to inter-
meddle, it should be found necessary to appoint some person to
look after the affairs and to take care of the goods; a curata,
in this case, is named to the succession, who is to exercise that
function, for the preservation of the goods, either for the benefit of
the creditors, or of those to whom the succession shall appertain-*


XVI


1423. Curator to Goods relinquished by a Debtor to his Creditors.
— When a debtor relinquishes his effects to his creditors, they may
procure a curator to be appointed, to take care of them,‘ or they
may name some of their own number to have the direction of them.


XVII.


1424. A Creditor may be Curator to the Goods of his Debtor.—
We may name for a curator to the goods relinquished by a debtor,
or to his inheritance after death, one of his creditors, or some other
person, to take care of the estate."


TIT. 11. SEC. I1.] CURATORS. 563


lated by the power which is given to them, and they have a right
to do every thing that their office requires.*


SECTION II.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF CURATORS.


Art. L


1426. Oath and Administration of Curators. — All these sorts of
curators, of which mention has been made in the foregoing sec-
tion, are bound, in the same manner as tutors, to take an oath
faithfully to discharge their trust, to make an inventory of the
goods committed to their charge, and to take the same care of
every thing belonging to their administration as tutors are bound
to do in relation to theirs.*


IT.


1427. Difference between Tutors and Curators. — There is almost
no other difference between the engagements of curators and
tators, except that tutors are named both for persons and for the
estate belonging to the said persons, and that their administration
never lasts longer than till the majority of the persons committed
to their charge; whereas some curators are appointed only for
goods, and the duration of their office is not limited to any time,
but continues or ends according as the cause which has given oc-
casion to their nomination continues or ceases.°


Hil.


1428. Engagements of Curators. — The rules which have been
explained in the title of Tutors, and which may agree to the func-
tions and engagements of curators, ought to be applied to them.
As, for example, that they cannot take assignments to rights or
debts against those whose curators they are; that their estates are
mortgaged, from the day of their nomination, for the sums for


® [.2,§ 1, D. decurat. bon. dando. See the third article of the second section.
®* L.7,§ 5, C. de cur. fur. ; — Nov. 72, c. ult.; —d.l. 7, § 6, in f.; —1. 13, D. de excus. ;
~~ 1 33, D. de admin. et per. tut. et cur. See the law quoted upon the second article of the
ing section. See the twelfth article of the first section of Zutors, and the third arti-
Cle of this section.
6 7. 18, D. de excus. See the preceding section.


564 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK 1


which they shall be found to be accountable; that they cannot
alienate any part of the estate of those committed to their charge,
without observing the formalities prescribed by law. And so it
is with respect to the other rules, where the dispositions and mo-
tives of the said rules may have any relation to the office of cura-
tors.°


SECTION III.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THOSE TO WHOM CURATORS ARE
ASSIGNED.


Art. L


1429. Action of Ourators appointed to Persons.— The curaton
which are appointed for persons, and for the goods belonging to
the said persons, have their action for recovering what shall be due
to them, and for indemnifying them for all that they shall have
well transacted, and for the other consequences of their admin
tration ; either against the persons themselves to whom they have
been curators, if they are capable of auditing their accounts, a
against their heirs and executors, or other persons to whom the
said account ought to be rendered.*


II.


1430. Action of Ourators appointed to Goods.— The curatas
whose administration relates only to goods, and not to persom, —


FIT. Il. SEC. 111.] CURATORS. 565


those to whom the goods shall belong, and that with much more
reason than he who of his own accord takes upon him the care of
the goods of an absent person.°


IV.


1432. Action of a Ourator whose Charge is at an End.—If a
curator having acted, another be named in his stead, whether it be
that the former ceases to be curator because of his excusing him-
self, or for other reasons, he shall have his action for what he has
acted against the persons interested in the affairs that have been
committed to his administration, and whom his nomination has
put under an engagement to him; and he may likewise bring his
action against the curator who is named in his room, who will in-
timate it to the persons concerned.*


V.


1433. Effect of the Action which Curators have.— By this action
the curators recover all that they have reasonably laid out of their
own, with the interest of the money which they have advanced, if
they have advanced any; and what may be due to them on the
seore of salary for their administration. And they procure a ratifi-
eation of what they have transacted honestly and well.


VI.


1434. Mortgage which Ourators have for their Security. — The
curators of madmen, of those laboring under any infirmity, of
prodigals, and absent persons, have their mortgage on all the
estate belonging to the persons to whom they have been curators.
And the curators to vacant successions, and other estates, have
their mortgage on the estates that have been committed to their
administration. And all these curators have likewise their priv-
ilege and preference on the goods which they have recovered, or
preserved, for the money which they have laid out to that end;
as, for example, for the charges of a lawsuit for recovering a debt,
or for the charges of repairing a house, or other tenement‘


© See the second article of this section. Inst. de obl. que quasi ex contr. ; —1.5, D. de obl.
fact. See the second section Of those who manage the Affairs of others.
¢ This is a conscquence of the foregoing articles.
* See the first, second, third, and fifth articles of the fifth section of the title of Tutors.
© See the sixth and seventh articles of the fifth section of Tutors, and the twenty-fifth
®€ticle of the fifth section of Pawns and Mortgages.
48


VOL. I.


566 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK IL


TITLE III.


OF SYNDICS, DIRECTORS, AND OTHER ADMINISTRATORS OF
COMPANIES AND CORPORATIONS.


1435. Of Communities and Corporations, and of the Persons ap-
pointed to have the Direction of their Affairs.— We have seen, in
the title of Persons, that there are communities and corporations,
ecclesiastical and secular, such as chapters, religious houses, cor-
porations, and communities of towns, universities, companies of
trades, and others of the like nature; and that these communities
are considered as holding the place of persons. For as particular
persons have their rights, their privileges, their estates, their affairs,
their burdens, so these communities have likewise theirs; bat
with this difference among others, that whereas every particalar
person is master of what belongs to him, and disposes of it solely
according to his own will and pleasure, if there be no obstacle ia
the way, such as a minority, or some other incapacity, no one of
the particular persons who compose those communities, nor the
whole body together, have that nght; nor can they dispose in
the same manner of what belongs to the community. Thus, they
cannot alienate their estate, except for just causes, and according
to the formalities prescribed by law. Which is founded upon
this, that those communities being erected, whether they belong
to the church or state, with a view of promoting thereby the pub
lic good, which requires that they should always subsist, it ®


FIT. 111. 8EC. I.] SYNDICS AND OTHER DIRECTORS. 567


engagement without any covenant; for such nominations are
often made without the previous consent of the persons who are
chosen. Thus, this kind of engagement being formed without a
covenant, it is one of the matters to be treated of in this book, and
shall be the subject-matter of this title.
_ 1437. We must not confound this engagement with that which
is formed between such corporations or communities, and those
whom they appoint their proctors or agents in any business ; for
this engagement is made by covenant, and is comprehended in the
matter of the title of Prozies.

1438. We shall not speak here of the other matters which may
relate to communities, such as their use, their origin, the manner
in which they are formed, their rights, their privileges, and the
rest ; for these matters do not belong to this place, but are a part
of the public law, of which mention has been made in the four-
teenth chapter of the Treatise of Laws, No. 27. But the subject-
matter of this title is restrained to what relates in general to the
nomination and power of those syndics, or governors, and direc-
tors, and the engagements which are formed between them and
the persons who name them, in what relate to the affairs with
which they are charged.


SECTION I.


OF THE NOMINATION OF SYNDICS, DIRECTORS, AND OTHER ADMIN-
ISTRATORS OF COMPANIES AND CORPORATIONS, AND OF THEIR
POWER.


Arr. L


1439. Use of Syndics and other Directors. — Those who have
permission to form a company or corporation have also their
tights, their privileges, their goods, their affairs; and all the mem-
bers not having leisure to attend at the same time the business of
the community, they may appoint persons to take care of it, who
are called syndics, or by some other names.*


IL.
1440. By whom they are named. — The syndics and other direc-


® L.1, $1, D. quod cui. un. nom.


568 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK IL


tors of the affairs of companies and corporations are named by
the members of those communities, unless some particular law
hath otherwise provided for the choice of the said persons. And
if the corporation be such, that all who are members of it cannot
meet together, or ought not all of them to have a share in the
direction of the common affairs, they choose a certain number of
the members, according as it is provided by the regulations and
usage of the community; and that number, which represents the
whole body, names those who are to be intrusted with the care of
the affairs.>


IiL


1441. In what Manner they are named.— The nomination of
such governors and directors is made by plurality of voices, when
those who have a right to vote are assembled in the manner and
in the number prescribed by the rules or custom of the comm»
nity, as if it be necessary that there should be two thirds of the
members present, or any other proportion, or a certain number;
and those who have a right to vote in the nomination ought to
observe therein the formalities which are prescribed them.


IV.


1442. The Person who is named is reckoned in computing te
Number of the Votes. — 'To make up the number of voters that #
necessary in such nominations, we may reckon the person who #
named, if he was of the number of those who assisted at th
nomination.‘


TIT. 11. SEG. IL] SYNDIC§ AND OTHER DIRECTORS. 569


And it ceases also by a revocation, if that can take place; pro-
vided it be done according to rule, and be known to the person
who is revoked, and to those who had business with him‘


SECTION II.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF SYNDICS AND OTHER DIRECTORS.


Art. I.


1445. The Care of Syndics and Directors.— Those who are
named by companies and corporations to have the direction of
their affairs are obliged to the same care and diligence as factors
or agents. And they are answerable, not only for any fraud and
gross negligence which they may be guilty of, but also for all faults
that are contrary to the care required of them.*


IL.


1446. Their Engagements.— The syndics, and other directors,
who undertake an affair by order of the community which has
named them, are obliged to take care of all the consequences of
it Thus, he who is ordered to commence a lawsuit is bound to
prosecute it in all its consequences during the continuation of his
administration. And, in general, he is obliged to answer for his
conduct to those who’ have employed him, and to show his war-
rant and authority to those whom he sues or with whom he treats,


and to procure from the community a ratification of what he shall
have transacted.>


IIT.


1447. Other Engagements.— The other engagements of these
syndics and directors are pointed out to them by the functions
which are committed to them, and by the power which is given
them. Thus, those of mayors and sheriffs are regulated by the
nature of their offices ; and those of a syndic, or other governor


'1.6,§ 2, D. quod cui. un. nom. Seo the first article of the fourth section of Prories.

* £6,438, D. quod cui. un. nom. ; —1. 6, D. de adm. rer. ad civ. pert. See the fourth
ticle of the third section of Prories. This obligation hath not its effect against the
“tperiors and procurators of convents, who are persons civilly dead, against whom the
mmunity hath not this recourse.

L.6,§ 3, D. quod cui. un. nom.
®


4


570 THE OIVIL LAW. [PamT 1. BOOK 1.


and director of a chapter, or other corporation, by the power and
functions which are appointed them. And, in general, all overseen
and administrators have the functions proper to their offices, ac-
cording as they are either settled by the rules and usage of the
society, or particularly committed to them by those who name
them.°


SECTION III.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF CORPORATIONS AND COMMUNITIES WHO
COMMIT THE ADMINISTRATION OF THEIR AFFAIRS TO SYNDICS,
DIRECTORS, OR OTHERS.


Art. I.

1448. Engagement to ratify what their Syndics or Directors é.
— The corporations and communities which have named syndis
or other directors for the administration of their affairs are bouad
to ratify what they have well transacted pursuant to their power:
For seeing all the members of the community cannot act in a body _
together, nor even know all of them the concerns of the commun
ty, it is presumed that they know as much of their affairs as i
person does whom they have intrusted to the management a
them; that whatever comes to his knowledge comes likewise
theirs; and that what he does, or what is transacted with hims
transacted with all the members of the community, provided i®
within the bounds of the power which they have given him*


Il.


TIT. II. SEC. 111.] SYNDIC8 AND OTHER DIRECTORS. 571


committed the direction of their affairs, except within the limits of
the engagements which they are empowered to contract, and ac-
cording as they are advantageous to the community. Thus, for
example, if a community has given power to borrow money, it will
not be obliged except for such sums as have been usefully em-
ployed for its behoof;° or if it has given a power to sell, the sale
will not subsist, except where it has been made for a necessary


cause, and where the formalities prescribed in such sorts of sales
have been observed.?


IV.


1451. How Directors or Administrators of Communities may
be bound in their own Names.—If a community be discharged
from the engagement contracted by the person whom it has in-
trusted with the administration of its affairs, we are to judge by
the circumstances whether the administrator ought in his own per-
son to make good the engagement to those who have treated with
him. Thus, for example, if the magistrates of a town have bor-
rowed money to pay their debts, or to be laid out to some other
use for the benefit of the corporation, and the creditor trusts the
money with them, they may pay the debts, or lay it out to the
other use ; if they have failed to employ this money for the behoof
of the public, they must answer for it in their own names. Thus,
on the contrary, if the director or administrator of a community
tells an estate belonging to it to a purchaser who asks no other
security than an order of the community empowering the said
person to sell, and the sale be made by the said person in that
quality, and pursuant to the power granted him, and afterwards
the said sale comes to be annulled, for having been made without
hecessity, and without observing the usual formalities, the said di-
rector or administrator shall not be bound to warrant the sale.
Thus, in general, directors or administrators who treat for com-
munities are bound for what is their own particular act and
deed to those who have trusted to their integrity, but are not
bound for the act of the community, if they have acted only in
Conformity to the power which it gave them.®


© L. 27, D. de reb. cred. ;—1.11, D. de pig. et hyp.
4.1.14, C. de sacr. eccles.; — Nov. 7, c. 1; — Nov. 120. See the following ariicle.
* L. 27, D. de reb. cred. Sce the preceding article touching alienations, and the remark


Qn the first article of the second section, concerning the engagements of syndics and di-
Tectors.


572 THE OIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK IL


V.

1452. The Engagement of a Community is not divided among
all the Members.— The engagement of a corporation of com-
munity is not divided among the persons who compose it, 80 as
to become the engagement of every one of the members in par
ticular; and it is only the community that is bound by the act
of the person to whom it has committed the administration of its
affairs. And as the particular members do not enter in their own
names into the obligation contracted by the community, unless
they engage themselves expressly, so those who oblige themselves
to communities do not by that engage themselves to every one of
the members of the said communities in particular.


TITLE IV.


OF THOSE WHO MANAGE THE AFFAIRS OF OTHERS WITHOUT
THEIR KNOWLEDGE.


1453. The Duty of taking Care of the Affairs of Absent Pers
— The Subject-Matter of this Title. —The law which enjoim
us to do for others what we would that they should do for
obliges those who happen to be in a conjuncture where the @
terest of absent persons is abandoned to take what care ol
they are able. The bare sentiments of humanity, not to speas
of religion, recommend this duty towards absent ns, aid


TIT. IV. SEC. 1.] MANAGERS OF OTHERS’ AFFAIRS. 573


between the master of an affair and the person who takes care of
it without his knowledge. Thus this kind of engagement hath its
rank in this place.

1454. It is to be observed as to this title, that there is this differ-
ence among others between the administration of tutors and cura-
tors, and that of persons who manage the affairs of others with-
out their knowledge; that whereas tutors and curators, being
named or confirmed by authority of justice, have their mortgage
on the whole estate of the persons who have been under their
care, and curators to goods upon the goods of which they have
had the administration, those who manage the affairs of others
without their knowledge have not the same privilege; but they
have the preference which they may have acquired on account of
moneys laid out, either for the preservation of a thing, or recovery
of a debt.”

1455. Seeing there is a great resemblance between the engage-
ment of those who manage the affairs of others without their
knowledge, and that of factors or agents, we must join to this
title the rules of the title of Proxies which are applicable to this
subject.


SECTION I.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF HIM WHO DOES THE BUSINESS OP
ANOTHER PERSON WITHOUT HIS KNOWLEDGE.


Art. I.

1456. Engagement to continue an Affair that ts begun. — The
civil law obliges nobody to take care of the affairs of others,
except those who are charged with them by reason of some par-
ticular duty, such as tutors, curators, and other administrators.
But he who undertakes willingly the care of the affair of another
person is not any longer at liberty to abandon it; for he shall be
bound for the consequences of his administration to continue what
he shall have begun till he has made an end of it, or till the master
be in a condition to look after it himself; and he shall be account-
able for what he shall have done, or neglected to do.* And the


» See the sixth article of the third section of Curators, and the fifth section of Pawns
® L. 20, C. de neg. gest. ; —l. 21, § 2, D. eod.; —§ 1, Inst. de obl. que quasi ex contr. ; —
@. 2, D. de neg. gest.


574 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK 11.


person for whom he shall have acted shall on his part be bound
to him in the engagements which shall be explained in the second
section.


IL


1457. Care of an Affair which one has wndertaken.— He who
has undertaken the affair of another person without his knowledge
is obliged to take the same care of it as if he were constituted the
other’s agent or factor ; for he is instead of one: and seeing he does
a good office, he ought to do it so as that it be no ways prejudicial,
either through his negligence or through any other fault. Thus,
he shall be accountable, not only for any fraud or unfair dealing
which he may be guilty of, but likewise for want of care. And
even although he should be negligent in his own proper concer,
yet he is bound to take a very exact care of the affairs of another
person which he has undertaken, and he will be answerable for the
faults that are contrary to this care; unless the circumstance
make it appear reasonable to abate something of the rigor, accord-
ing to the rule which shall be explained in the last article of this


section.»
Hil. 7
1458, Jf he who meddles with the Affairs of an Absent Perm
neglects some Part of them.— If the person who has unde


taken the management of the affairs of one that is abel
neglects a part of them, and his taking the management upom
him hinders other persons from looking after them, he shall &


TIT. IV. SEC. 1.] MANAGERS OF OTHERS’ AFFAIRS. 575


profit that it may yield will belong to the absent person. But if
there happens to be in the same affair loss one way, and gain
another, he who has undertaken it may compensate the gain with
the loss which he is to bear.¢


V.


1460. Of him who manages only one Affair.— He who is not
obliged to concern himself any ways in the affairs of another per-
son may confine himself to one affair, and not meddle with the
others, if there be no connection between them.°


VI |


1461. Of Accidents.— Although he who does the business o
another have engaged himself in it of his own accord, yet he is
not answerable for accidents, and for the other events which may
render ineffectual the good office which he had done.


VIL


1462. If the Absent Person dies before the Business is ended. —
If the absent person, whose business another hath undertaken,
happens to die before the business be ended, or if he was already
dead before the said person intermeddled with it, he will be obliged
to continue his administration for the behoof of the heirs and ex-
ecutors, or other persons who may have an interest in the said
affair; for it is a consequence of his engagement which we must
consider in its origin, without regard to the change of masters that
May happen


VIL


1463. Interest of Moneys received on Account of the Absent Per-
SOx, — If, in the administration of the affairs or estate of an absent
Person, there remains, after deduction of all necessary charges, any
*am of money in the hands of him who has the management, and

convert it to his own use, or neglect to lay it out for the behoof
Of the owner, as if he fails to discharge a debt of the absent per-

®0n, which carries interest; in these and the like cases, whether


“2.11, D. de neg. gest.
© L. 21, § 2, D. de neg. gest. ; —l. 16, eod. ; —1. 20, C. eod. See the sixth article of this


© L. 92, C. de neg. gest.; —1. 22, D. eod. See the seventh article of the second section.
© £3, D. de neg. gest. ; —d. l. 3,§ €;—1. 12, § ult. eod. ; — 1. 21, § 2, vod.


576 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pamt lt. BOOK IL


he was guilty of any unfair dealing or not, or of any negligence
for which he might be blamed, he may be liable for the interest
of the said sum, according to the quantity thereof, the time which
he kept it by him, and the other circumstances.®


IX.


1464. Of him who manages the Affair of one Person, believing
it to belong to another. — If any one, through mistake, has map-
aged an affair which he believed to be the concern of one of his
friends, and it proved to be the affair of another person, there is
no manner of engagement formed between him and his friend
whom he thought the affair concerned; but only between the
master of the affair and him, in the same manner as if he had
known the truth: 7


X.
1465. If a Woman manages the Affairs of an Absent Persea —


If a woman has taken upon herself the management of the afhin
of another person without his knowledge, she will be account
ble for them according to the foregoing rules; for although wome
cannot be named tutoresses or guardians, except to their ows
children, yet they enter into the engagements which may am
from an administration into which they intrude themselves!


XI.
1466. Of those who act through Necessity. — Those who tiroum
some necessity find themselves obliged to take upon them i


‘TIT. IV. SEC. 11.) MANAGERS OF OTHERS’ AFFAIRS. 677


business voluntarily. And they have likewise, on their part, the
same actions against the persons whose affairs they manage, and
that with much greater reason than he who engaged himself in
the business without any necessity.


XII.


1467. A Case where he who acts is not obliged to the most exact
Care. — Although those who intrude themselves into the affairs of
others be bound regularly to a most exact care of them, according
to the rule explained in the second article; yet, if the circum-
stances be such that it would be a hardship to require such an
exact care of him who had managed the affair of another, some
abatement might be made from the rigor of the law in this case, and
he be made responsible only for such faults as might be imputed
to a dishonest and unfair dealing. Which abatement ought to
depend on the quality of the persons, on the tie of friendship or
relation between them, the nature of the affair, the necessity there
was to look after it, as if it was to prevent a seizure or sale of
the goods of the absent person, on the difficulties which it may
have been attended with, the conduct of the person who has taken
upon himself the management, and on the other circumstances of
the like nature.’ .


SECTION II.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE PERSON WHOSE BUSINESS HATH
BEEN MANAGED BY ANOTHER, WITHOUT HIS KNOWLEDGE.


Arr. I.

1468. The Foundation of the Engagements of him whose Affair
ath been managed by another. — He whose business another hath
managed for him without his knowledge is bound to him in all
that the consequences of what he has transacted may require.*
And this obligation is contracted, although the person be ignorant
of it, by the duty of gratitude for this good office, and compre-
hhends the engagements which shall be explained in the following
rules.


® FT. 8, § 10, D. de neg. gest. ; —1. 18, C. de neg. gest.

° ZL. 3, § 9, D. de neg. gest.

a Z.1, D. de neg. gest.; —§ 1, Inst. de obl. quae quasi ex cont.
VOL. I. 49


578 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


IL

1469. Engagement to ratify and execute what hath been well
done.— He whose affair hath been well managed is engaged to
him who has taken care of it, to free and indemnify him as to the
consequences of his administration; as, for instance, to pay for
him what he has promised, to save him harmless from the engage
ments into which he has entered, and to ratify what he has wel
done.”


TIL


1470. Reimbursement of Expenses.—If he who has managed
the affair of an absent person has laid out on it expenses that are
necessary or useful, and such as the absent person himself would
and ought to have done, he shall recover them.°


IV.


1471. Excessive Expenses.— If in a necessary expense mor
hath been laid out than was necessary, it will be reduced to vet
ought to have been laid out on the business.*


V.


1472. Interest of Money advanced.— If he who has laid om
these expenses has been obliged either to borrow the money upd
interest, or to advance it himself to his own loss, the master of the
affair will be bound to pay the interest of the sums advanced
even although he who has advanced the money shall have beet
obliged through some necessity to take upon the care of the

-<


» IV. SEC. I1.] MANAGERS OF OTHERS’ AFFAIRS. 579


master was neither able nor willing to make; for he ought
to have engaged the master anclecrestty in an expense which
ald be burdensome to him.


Vil.


474. If what hath been usefully done perishes by some Accident.
[f the expense has been necessary, and such as the master him-
would have been obliged to make, and if, by some accident,
at has been usefully done perishes, or is lost; the master shall
ertheless be bound to refund the money to the person who has
| it out, and who cannot be blamed for the loss of the thing.
as, for example, if a friend of an absent person, whose house
s in danger of falling, takes care to have it propped up, if he
'8 provisions necessary for the sustenance of his family, and the
ise or provisions perish by fire, or by some other accident,
hout any fault of the person who has done the said services, he
| nevertheless recover the money which he had laid out on thems


VIL


\475. Approbation of what has been tll done.— If he whose
air hath been managed by another has approved of what has
en done, after having had information of the matter, he cannot
erwards complain of it, even although he should have reason
t to approve it; unless some fraud be afterwards discovered,
hich did not at first appear."


IX.
1476. Of Good Offices done out of Duty, or out of Liberality. —


he expenses which one person is at for another, out of a motive
‘liberality, or out of the duty of charity, cannot be recovered,
ad are not placed in the rank of expenses laid out by those who
anage the affairs of others, in hopes of being repaid what they
tall have advanced of their own. Thus, for example, if an uncle
ves alimony to his niece, and he afterwards, repenting of his
yerality, or of this duty to which his proximity of blood engages
m, demands to be reimbursed of what he has laid out on this
count, his demand will not be received. And it would be the


£10, § 2, D. de neg. gest.

| DL. 22, D. de ney. gest.;—l. 10, § ult. D. eod. ; —d. 1. 10,§ 1, D. eod. See the thirty-
b article of the third section of Tudors.

' L. 9, D. de neg. gest.


580 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK IL


same thing, and with much more reason, in the case of a mother,
who had maintained her own children. But if, besides thet
maintenance, the mother had likewise disbursed some money on
their affairs, and it appeared that she did it with a view of recor-
ering it, she may oblige her children to repay her!


X.


1477. Exception to the foregoing Article. — If any one has laid
out for another those kinds of expenses which the duties of rele-
tion or charity require, and such as he may either do out of
liberality, or with a design to recover what he shall have laid ost;
the intention of the person who has laid out the money will sere
as a rule, either to oblige him for whose behoof the money bas
been laid out to repay it, or to discharge him of the said oblige
tion. And we are to judge of this intention by the circumstances
of the quality of the person, of their estates, of the precaution
taken by him who lays out such kinds of expenses, and other d
the like nature.'

XI.

1478. We ought to judge of such Kind of Expenses by the Or
cumstances. — ‘The greatest proximity of relation is not sufficient ®
found a presumption, that the expense which one has laid ont f 7
another was intended as a mere bounty. And although ther i
not been any protestation or declaration of a design to recor
payment of what is advanced, yet, if it shall appear by the cium
stances that there was no intention of giving it, the person wiv


. ved OWNERS IN COMMON. 581


TITLE V.


)F THOSE WHO CHANCE TO HAVE ANY THING IN COMMON
TOGETHER, WITHOUT A COVENANT.


479. Things belonging in Common to several Persons, without
ovenant.— When one and the same thing happens to belong
common to two or more persons, without their entering into
‘covenant about it; such as an inheritance among coheirs, or
‘wacy of the same thing to several legatees; there is formed
ong them divers engagements, according as their common
wests may require. ‘Thus, he who has the thing belonging to
m in common in his custody ought to take care of it; thus,
y ought to reimburse one another of what has been laid out on
preservation ; thus, they ought to make an equal partition of it.
d it is these engagements, together with others of the like na-
2, which shall be the subject-matter of this title.

480. A thing may belong in common to several persons two
nner of ways. One is, when each of the partners has his right
ire and undivided in the whole thing; thus, all the goods of an
eritance are in such a manner common to the coheirs, that
ry individual thing in the inheritance belongs to them all till
partition is made. The other way is, when every one of the
sons to whom the thing belongs in common has his share or
tion of it regulated, although the partition has not been made.
us, a testator may devise to two persons a piece of land, of
ich he appoints to one legatee one half to be taken on one side,
| to the other legatee his half to be taken on the other side ;
ich will render common to them both at least that part of the
d where the bounds must be settled for separating the one’s
re from the other. And there will be formed engagements
ween these persons ; such as that of obliging them to come to
yartition, and to make restitution of what the one may chance
owe to the other, on account of fruits which have been reaped
; of the common estate.

[481. We shall not make mention here of the community of
ds, which is established by several customs between husband
1 wife. For although this community be contracted without
y express covenant, by the bare effect of the marriage ; yet it is
natter which belongs properly to the said customs, which have

49° :


582 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK L


differently established the rules of it in different places; to which
we may likewise apply the rules of this title, as also those of the
title of Partnership, according as they are applicable to it.

1482. By what is said here, that the community of goods be
tween husband and wife is a matter which properly belongs to
the customs, is meant only that it is expressly established by
several customs; which doth not hinder but that, in the other cus-
toms which make no mention of it, and in the provinces whid
are governed by the Roman law, the parties may agree, by con
tract of marriage, on a community of goods between husband and
wife, as they might have done by the Roman law, as appears
from the sixteenth law, § 3, D. de alim. et cib. leg. But that was
@ community, or partnership, settled by agreement; and seeing
all these communities, whether settled by custom or agreemest,
have their rules either in the customs, or in the contract of partae
ship, and in general in the covenants of the agreement, ther
remains nothing of this matter which is necessary to be added tt
what has been explained in the title of Covenants, in that of Pat
nership, and in the present title.


SECTION I.


HOW ONE AND THE SAME THING MAY BELONG IN COMMON TY
SEVERAL PERSONS, WITHOUT A COVENANT,


Pr. V. SEC. II.] OWNERS IN COMMON. 583


hts and charges of the inheritance which they have in common.
id the said union is formed without a covenant.”


IIL


1485. The Heir or Executor of a Partner. — The heir or execu-
‘of a partner is united without any covenant with the partners
the deceased to whom he succeeds; and although he be not a
rtner himself, yet this union is an effect of the right which he
yaires in the thing that is common.


IV.


1486. Purchasers of Shares undivided.— He who purchases a
wre of a right, or other thing belonging in common to several
rsons, enters into their common ties and engagements, without
rtnership or covenant. And it is the same thing if several pur-
asers purchase every one of them singly and separately different
ares, undivided, of one and the same thing.!


V.


1487. Engagements arising from the Community of a Thing. —
the cases of the foregoing articles, and in all other events of
e like nature, which render one and the same thing common to
ro or more persons without a covenant, there is formed among
em divers engagements by the bare effect of their interest in the
ing that is common to them. And these engagements shall be
(plained in the following section.°


SECTION II.


9? THE MUTUAL ENGAGEMENTS OF THOSE WHO HAVE SOMETHING
IN COMMON TOGETHER, WITHOUT A COVENANT.


Art. I.


1488. General Engagements of those who have a Thing in Com-
on, — The engagements of those who have something in com-


» T.31, D. pro socio; — 1. 25, § 16, D. fam. ercisc.

© L. 68, § 8, D. pro socio. See the third article of the second section, and the whole
xth section of Partnership.

4 Z. 31, D. si pro socio.

© § 3, Inst. de obl. que quasi ex contr. ; —|. 32, D. pro socio; —I. 25, § 16, in f D. fam.
isc.


584 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOX


mon among them without a covenant are, in general, to divide it
when any one of the parties concerned desires it; to do one a»
other justice as to the gains and losses; to account for the profit
which they have made, and for the expenses laid out on the com
mon thing; to answer every one for his own proper deed, and for
the damage which he shall have occasioned to the common thing;
according as these engagements and their consequences shall be
explained in the rules which follow.


Il.


1489. Care of the Common Thing.— While the thing belong
ing in common to coheirs or others remains undivided, the propr-
etor who has it in his custody is obliged to take the same care of
it as if it were wholly his own; and he will be answerable, not
only for all fraud and deceit which he shall be guilty of, but like
wise for faults contrary to the care that is required of him. But he
is not bound to the same diligence as he is who takes upon hum
self voluntarily the charge of the affair of another person; becanse,
in the present case, it is his own interest which has engaged him
in an affair in which he was concerned, and it is only by chance
that he happens to be engaged in a thing in which another person.
has an interest. So that he is bound only to take the same careal
the common thing as of his own proper concerns.”


IIT.


1490. Communication of the Profits.— He who has had the &
joyment of the common thing ought to communicate all the fruit


TIT. V. SEC. 11.] OWNERS IN COMMON. 585


the same, with interest from the time that he advanced the money.!
For these expenses have preserved the thing, or have rendered it
more valuable, and may have been chargeable to the person who
has advanced the money.


V.


1492. Damage done to the Common Thing.— Those who have
an affair or other thing in common together are mutually account-
able to one another for their management and their conduct in
relation to it; and every one of them must answer for the damage
or loss which they may have occasioned to the common thing’


VI


1493. One Proprietor cannot, without the Consent of the others,
make any Innovation in the Common Thing. — None of the propri-
etors of a common thing can make any change in it, without the
approbation of all parties concerned; and any one of them alone
may, in opposition to all the rest, hinder the innovation! For
every one of them is at liberty to preserve his right such as it is.
But this is to be understood of changes which are not necessary
for the preservation of the thing. For it would not be reasonable
to let the thing perish through the caprice of one of the proprie-
tors.


VIL


1494. The Penalty of making a Change against the Will of the
other Proprietors. — If one of the proprietors makes a change in the
common thing without necessity, the other opposing it, he shall
be obliged to restore things to the condition in which they were at
first, if it can be done, and to make good all the damages which
he shall have occasioned.£


VII


1495. If the Change has been suffered by the other Proprietors. —
If the change has been known and suffered, although without an


4 ZL. 4,43, D. comm. divid. ;—1. 11, eod.;— 1. 31, § ult. D. de neg. gest. ; —1. 67, § 2, D
pro socio ; — |. 52, § 10, eod. ; —I. 18, § 3, D. fam. ercise.

¢ L. 14, D. comm. divid. ; —1. 8, § 2, D. eod. ; —1.19, C. fam. ercise.

f 7. 28, D. comm. divid. ; —I. 5, in fC. de auth. prest. Although this text has relation
to another subject, yet it may be applied here.

& L. 28, D. comm. divid. See the text cited on the following article.


586 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK IL


express consent, he who has suffered it cannot oblige the other
proprietor to restore the things to their first condition.


IX.


1496. Change made without the Knowledge of one of the Parties
concerned. — If one of the proprietors makes some change, in the
absence or without the knowledge of the others, which occasions
them some loss, or which they have just cause not to approve of
he shall be obliged to restore things as they were,' in so far as is
possible, and as equity shall require. And if he has caused any
damage, he shall be bound to make it good.


X.


1497. He who has once consented to the Change cannot after-
wards complain of it. — He who, having seen the change, has con
sented to it, cannot afterwards complain of it, even although he
should suffer from it some loss or damage.


XI.


1498. Engagement to divide the Common Thing. — It is always
free for every one of those who have any thing in common among
them to divide it; and although they may agree to put off the per
tition to a certain time, yet they can make no such agreement ss
never to come to a partition.™ For it would be contrary to good
manners, that the proprietors should be forced to have always an
occasion of falling out, by reason of the undivided possession of s
common thing.


TIT. V. SEC. I1.] OWNERS IN COMMON. 587


who either is not willing, or perhaps not able, to bid for it himself,
desires that it may be so.”


XITl.

1500. A Charge laid upon one of the Lands that are divided.—
If, in a partition of several lands, or of one piece of land into two
or more portions, it be necessary to subject one of the said por-
tions, or one of the lands, to some service, for the use of the oth-
ers, such as a passage, a draught of water, or other the like
service ; the arbitrators, or skilful persons, who shall be named to
adjugt the several shares or portions, may impose the service on
the land which ought to be charged with it° In which case, the
condition of the copartners is to be made equal some other way,
either by a return of money, or by giving a greater share of the
land to the person who is burdened with the service, or by other


ways.
XIV.


1501. Wrong done in the Partition. —If there happens to be
any considerable wrong done in the partition to any of the parties
concerned, even although they be of age, whether it be by the
means of some fraud in one of the copartners, or even although
nothing can be laid to the charge of either, the said wrong shall be
remedied by a new partition.?


XV.


1502. Warranty between the Copartners. — After the partition of
the things which were in common, each of the copartners is in the
place of a seller to the other; and they ought reciprocally to war-
rant to one another their portions against evictions. Thus, for ex-
ample, if the creditor to an inheritance, the effects of which have
been divided among the coheirs, executes his mortgage against
one of them after the partition of the estate; the other coheirs
ought to warrant him against the said mortgage for their respective
portions, even although no mention had been made of warranty in
the partition.1

® L. 8, C. comm. divid.;—1.1, C. eod.; —I. 55, D. fam. ercise.

© L. 22, § 8, D. fam. ercisc.

P L. 8, C. comm. utr. jud. By the usage in France, the wrong done in a partition ought
to be between a third and a fourth part in order to entitle the party aggrieved to a new
partition.

@ Z.3, C. comm. utr. jud. ;—I. 14, C. fam. ercise. ; — 1. 25, § 21, D. fam. ercisc.


588 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK IL


XVL
1503. The Deeds belonging to the Common Things, in whose
Hands to be deposited. — The deeds and writings appertaining to
the common things, which are common to all the copartners, may
be left in the custody of one of them, who takes charge of them,
and gives his copartners collated copies of them, promising to pro-
duce the originals whenever it shall be necessary. Thus, among
coheirs, the writings remain in the hands of the principal hei.
But if there be no feason for preferring one of them to the rest, a
if they cannot agree among themselves, they may cast lots who
shall have the keeping of them, or the judge may determine the
matter, or the writings may be deposited in the hands of a publie
notary, who may give every one of the parties concerned an at
thentic copy. But it is not usual to out it to cant or auction who

shall have the keeping of the deeds?


XVIL


1504. Of Things which it is not lawful to put into the Partition.
— If, among the common goods which are to be divided between
two or more persons, there happen to be things of such a nature
as that they cannot serve but to ill purposes; such as poisons, d
which no good use can be made, books of magic, and other thing
of the like nature; they shall not enter into the partition, but ti
copartners, or the judge, if the matter comes to his knowleds
ought to dispose of them in such a manner as that no bad uw
may be made of them.


XVIII.


TIP. VI. SEC. 1.] | OWNERS OF ADJOINING LANDS. 589


TITLE VI.


OF THOSE WHO HAVE LANDS OR TENEMENTS BORDERING UPON
ONE ANOTHER.


1506. Tene is another kind of engagement without covenant,
which is formed between the proprietors of lands and tenements
confining upon one another, by the bare effect of the situation of
those lands and tenements, which obliges the proprietors to settle
the boundaries of their several lands and tenements, if they are
uncertain ; or to keep to their respective possessions within the
bounds already marked out, if any such there be.


SECTION I.


HOW LANDS OR TENEMENTS BORDER AND CONFINE UPON ONE
ANOTHER.


Arr. I.

1507. Difference between Houses and Lands. — The use of
boundaries is chiefly for lands, where there is no building to
regulate the extent of them; but houses and places inclosed with
walls, whether in town or country, have their limits settled by
ancient walls, whether they be partition-walls, belonging in com-
mon to the neighbours, or walls belonging peculiarly to one of
them alone.®


II.


1508. The Distance from the Conjfines, for Planting, Building, or
making any other Work.— Although the lands confining together
be distinguished by the line which separates them, and is the
boundary of them, which is marked out by landmarks; and
the total of every one of the lands bordering upon one another
belongs entirely, and as far as to the outmost extent of the con-
fines, to him who is proprietor of it; yet he cannot however enjoy
bis land in such a manner as to be at liberty either to plant, build,

r do what he has a mind to, close upon the confines, but, accord-


® L. 4, § 10, D. fin. regund. See the following article.
VOL. I. 50


590 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK IL


ing to the nature of the plantation, building, or other work, he
ought to keep the distance which is regulated by the custom and
usage of the place.>


TIL.


1509. A Partition- Wall, and a Wall that belongs wholly to one.
— When a wall is just on the confines, it is a partition-wall; and
being common to the two bordering lands or houses, it serves as
a boundary to them. But he who builds on his own proper
ground has the wall to himself, provided he keeps the necessary
distance from the wall that is common to both.‘


IV.


1510. Lands separated by a Highway.— Lands which are sep
arated by a highway do not border upon one another; and the
proprietors of those lands have no occasion to settle their limit;
unless a change of the highway should happen to make it ne
cessary.®

V.

1511. Lands with a Brook running through them. — The rivalets
which are not of public use, and which are the property of pap
ticular persons, whose lands they run across, do not regulate the
limits of the said lands; but each proprietor has his own bounds
such as they are settled by his title or possession.£


VI.


TIT. VI. SEC. Il.] OWNERS OF ADJOINING LANDS. 591


that after the date of the titles or deeds there may happen divers
changes in the confines, they are also regulated by possession,
and by the regard which ought to be had to those changes. As if
a proprietor of two lands, which had their respective bounds, in
the sale of one of them marks out other bounds to it than it had
before ; or if other changes happen to be made by different pur-
chases, or successions, which confound or distinguish the lands.
And, in a word, we may regulate the confines by any other ways
which may lead us to the knowledge of them.é


VIL


1513. Who may sue for a Regulation of the Conjfines. — Tenants
for a long term of years, usufructuaries, or mortgagees, may, as well
as proprietors, bring their action to have the confines settled be-
tween them and the possessors of the neighbouring lands.®


VIL


1514. The Question about the Conjfines is to be discussed after
that relating to the Possession. —If the same parties who are at
law about the confines contest likewise the possession of the
places whose confines are in debate, it will be necessary, in the
frst place, to determine the possession! For the question relating
to the confines concerns the property, which ought not to be de-
cided till after the right of possession is determined.!


SECTION II.


OP THE RECIPROCAL ENGAGEMENTS OF THE PROPRIETORS OR
POSSESSORS OF LANDS AND TENEMENTS BORDERING UPON ONE
ANOTHER.


Arr. I.


1515. Distance from the Conjfines for Planting or Building. —
The proprietor, or other possessor of lands, in making a plantation,
& building, or other work, ought to keep the distances between his
Work and the confines, according as they are regulated by custom


© 7.11, D. fin. regund. ; —1. 2, C. cod. ;—1. 12, D. fin. reg.
bg L. 4, § 9, D. fin. regund.

* ZL. 3, C. fin. reg.

© Sco the seventeenth article of the first section of Possession.


592 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr I. BOOK E.


and usage.* nd if he transgresses therein, he will be obliged to
demolish his building, pluck up his plantation, and restore things
to the condition in which they ought to be, and to make good the
damages which his undertaking shall have occasioned.


IL


1516. Encroachment beyond the Confines. —If the possessor of
an estate encroaches upon his neighbour’s ground beyond the
confines, he will be liable for the damages occasioned by hi
undertaking, and to make restitution of the fruits, or other profits,
from the time of his usurpation. But he who shall have tran
gressed his bounds and enjoyed the fruits of his neighbouw's
ground innocently, thinking that it was his own, will be obliged
to restore the fruits only from the time of the legal demand.*


IIL


1517. If no Landmarks appear.— If the confines of two estates
become uncertain, whether by the deed of the proprietor or pos
sessor of one of the estates, or by an accident; as if an inundy
tion has carried away the landmarks, or some other accident
has taken away the knowledge of the separation of the estates; i
will be necessary to set new landmarks, by the advice of skill
persons, or according to the titles of the estates, or by the othe
ways which have been mentioned in the sixth article of the hint
section; and he who shall have encroached upon the other shall
be bound to make restitution of the fruits, or other revenues, af
of the damages, if there be occasion.*


TIT. Vii] RECEIVERS OF WHAT 18 NOT DUE. 593


V.

1519. Power of those who are appointed to settle the Confines.—
The arbitrators, or skilful persons, appointed to settle the confines,
may, according to the circumstances of the condition of the places,
of the obscurity of the bounds, and of the conveniency of both
proprietors, either divide what is in dispute, if the right of each
party be uncertain; or adjudge it wholly to one of them, if there
be ground for it; or bound the estates in another place, leaving on
one side as much as is taken off on the other, or obliging him who
happens to be the gainer by this change to make some return to
his neighbour.


TITLE VII.


OF THOSE WHO RECEIVE WHAT IS NOT THEIR DUE, OR WHO
HAPPEN TO HAVE IN THEIR POSSESSION THE THING OF AN-
OTHER, WITHOUT A COVENANT.


1520. Different Ways of having the Thing of another without a
Covenant. — It may fall out by divers accidents, that one may
chance to have in his possession the thing of another, and be
obliged to restore it, although there have been no covenant be-
tween them to form this engagement. Thus, he to whom one
pays, through mistake, a sum of money which was not due to
him, is obliged to restore it. Thus, he who, believing himself
to be the only heir, had taken possession of all the effects of an
inheritance, is obliged to restore to the others who have right to
the same inheritance that which comes to their share. Thus,
he who finds a thing that has been lost ought to restore it to
the owner. Thus, the possessor of a piece of ground, on which
things have been cast that had been carried away by a flood,
Ought to restore them, or to let the owner come and take them
aWay.

1521. We see by these examples, that it happens two ways
that one may have the thing of another without a covenant. For
©he may have it either by a mere casualty, as in the last two


§ £.2,§1; U.3 4, D. fin. regund.
ne


594 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK IL


¢ cases; or by a consequence of a voluntary act, as in the first two
instances.

1522. The Subject-Matter of this Title. — In what manner soever
it be that one has in his possession the thing belonging to another,
whether through mere accident, or by a consequence of some vol
untary act, the engagements are almost the same. But we have
not thought it proper to mix and confound these two sorts of
events together; and we treat only here of such events as make
one person to have in his possession the thing of another, without
covenant, by the consequence of some voluntary act, as it happens
to him who receives what is not his due. For the other way o
having the thing of another by a bare casualty is a part of the
subject-matter of the ninth title, where we treat in general of the
engagements which are formed by accidents ; whether the accident.
puts into the possession of one person the thing of another,as 0 |
the two cases which have been just now mentioned ; or that will
out that there be formed another sort of engagement, as happen
to him whose goods have been saved in a danger of shipwred,
by the loss of other goods which have been thrown overboard ™
save the ship; for he whose goods have been saved ongh! ©
bear his share of the loss; and this engagement is forme
although one has not the thing of another. So that the read
will have in the ninth title, and in this, all the rules which oo
cern the different ways in which one person may have in
possession the thing of another; and the ninth title will a
tain, moreover, the other sorts of engagements which are forme
by accidents.


‘F. Vil. SEC. I.] RECEIVERS OF WHAT IS NOT DUE. 505


SECTION I.


ME EXAMPLES OF THE CASES WHICH ARE THE SUBJECT-MATTER
OF THIS TITLE, AND WHICH HAVE NOTHING IN THEM THAT I8
UNLAWFUL.


Art. I.


1524. He who receives what is not due to him is obliged to re-
we it.— He who receives payment of what is not due to him,
ren although he were truly persuaded that it were due to him,
id he who pays it were of the same mind likewise, acquires
» manner of right to what is paid him in this manner; but he
ight to restore it. Thus, he who has received a legacy by virtue
‘a testament which appears afterwards to be forged, or of no
lidity, ought to restore what he has received on that account.
nd it would be the same thing, although the testament were not
rged or invalid, if the legacy happened to be revoked by a cod-
il, which did not appear till after the payment.*


IL


1525. Of Payment made by him who thought himself to be a
ebtor and was not.— If a creditor receives payment from the
nds of one who, thinking himself to be his debtor, was not really
debted to him, and paid only in the belief that he acquitted his
wn debt, this payment does not acquit the true debtor, and
bliges him who receives it to make restitution of what is paid
im barely through this mistake. Thus, for example, if a pre-
umptive heir, being informed of the death of his relation to whom
had a right to succeed, and knowing nothing of a testament
which cuts him off from the whole inheritance, pays off a debt
owing by the deceased before he intermeddles with the goods of
the succession, thinking thereby to discharge himself as being heir,
end laying out his own money to that end, the creditor who shall
have received that money shall be bound to restore it, and shall re-
tain his right or demand upon the estate of the deceased.” But


* L. 2, § 1, D. de cond. ind. ;—§ 6, Inst. d. obl. quce quas. ex contr.

* L.65, § ult. D. de condict. indeb. ; — 1.19, § 1, D. de cond. indeb. See the seventh ar-
ticle of the first section of the Vices of Covenants. This rule is to be understood of the
Cae where he who believed himself to be heir or executor, and who was not, had paid out


596 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK


if the said creditor had destroyed the title which was the evidence
of his debt, as if it was a bond which he had torn in pieces, so that
his debt would be either lost, or in danger of being so, the pay-
ment in this case would subsist; and he who paid the money
would have himself to blame for it, and he would have his actios
against the heir or executor, for recovering what he had paid for
his behoof.


II.


1526. Of Payment made by a Third Person for the Debtor.— Ii
third person pays to a creditor what he knows to be owing &
him by another, the said creditor will not be obliged to restore %
for he has received only what was his due; and this third person
may have been willing to acquit the true debtor,


IV.


1527. The Creditor does not give back what has been paid hin
before the Term. — If a debtor pays before the term, even although
the thing were not to be due till after his death, the creditor whe
receives the said payment, although he had no right to demand,
may nevertheless retain it. For the debtor might, if he thonght &
pay before it was due, and he has paid only what he owed* Bat
if it was a conditional debt, which depended on the event @ |
something which had not as yet happened, and which might pe
haps never happen, he who had received payment of it throug
some mistake could not retain it; for he was not as yet a credilet
But if the condition were such that it must necessarily happe


TIT. Vil. BEO. 1.] RECEIVERS OF WHAT I3 NOT DUE. 597


known to the debtor. As, for example, if a debtor having paid his
debt to the heir of his creditor, there appeared afterwards a testa-
ment by which the creditor had forgiven the debt. But he who,
knowing he has means whereby to defend himself against his cred-
itor, does nevertheless pay willingly, cannot demand what he has
paid. For it was in his power to renounce the reasons or defences
which he may have had to avoid paying the debt.‘


VI


1529. Payment made in a Doubtful Case.— He who, being in a
doubt whether he owes or not, pays at all adventures to free him-
self in case it should appear that he were really indebted, may re-
cover what he shall have paid, if it be found in reality that he
owed nothing; unless it shall appear that in the doubt the parties
had a mind to put an end to their dispute by the said payment,
and that it was in lieu of a transaction. For in this case the pay-
ment subsists.®


VIL


1530. Of him who owes One of Two Things. — If he who owed
one of two things has given them both, either by mistake or out of
4gnorance, he who has received them shall not have the liberty to
choose which of the two he has a mind to keep; but the debtor
shall retain the right of choosing and of leaving with the creditor
the thing which he pleases to give him, and of taking back the
other.*


VII.


1531. Example of another Kind.— He who happens to be in
possession of a thing belonging to another, whether it be movable
or immovable, by what title soever he possesses it, whether by sale,
donation, or other title, is obliged to restore it to the owner, when-
ever he appears, and makes out his right. Thus, the purchaser
of a piece of ground, which is recovered from him at law by
the right owner, is obliged to restore it to him; and this engage-
ment is of the number of those that are formed without a cove-
nant.!


f Z.1, § 1, D. de cond. inded.; —I. 26, § 3, D. eod.
© L. ult. C. de cond. indebit.

b 1. pen. C. de cond. indebit.

' See the tenth section of the Contract of Sale.


598 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRt I. BOOK IL


IX.

1532. Another Evansle. — The heir who, during the absence of
his coheir, or believing himself to be sole heir, takes possession of
all the goods, obliges himself without a covenant to restore to the
other his share of the inheritance, whenever he shall appear*


X.


1533. Restitution of a Thing which one has without a fust Title.
— He who happens to have the thing of another without a just
cause, or to whom a thing was given for a cause which ceases, or
upon a condition which does not happen, having no longer aay
cause for keeping it, ought to restore it. Thus, he who had re
ceived a dowry for a marriage which does not take effect, or which
is annulled, ought to restore that which was given only upon that
account| Thus, with much greater reason, are they who have
received money, or any other thing, for an unjust cause, bound te
restore it.


XI.


1534. Payment of a Debt which tt was in the Debtor's Power ad
to have paid.— The debtors who acquit voluntarily debts whic
they might have procured to be declared null in strictness of law,
although natural equity made them just debts, cannot afterwanls
deny the debt which they have once approved of™ ‘Thus, fore
ample, if a married woman who had entered into bond without
the approbation or consent of her husband, or even with his edt
sent, in the customs where a wife cannot be bound, brs = in ber


TIT. Vil. SEC. 11.] RECEIVERS OF WHAT IS NOT DUE. 599


SECTION II.


OTHER EXAMPLES OF THE SAME MATTER, IN CASES OF UNLAWFUL
ACTS.


1535. By unlawful acts we understand here, not only those
which are prohibited by some express law, but all those which are
contrary to equity, honesty, or good manners, although there be
no written law which makes mention of them. For whatever is
contrary to equity, honesty, or good manners is contrary to the
principles both of divine and human laws.


Art. L


1536. Three Sorts of Unlawful Acts.— It may happen three
ways, that by an unlawful act one may receive a sum of money
or other thing from another person. For the act may be unlaw-
fal either only on the part of him who gives, or only on the part
of him who receives, or on the part both of the giver and receiver.
Thus, he who under pretext of civility should make a present to
one who he knew would be his judge or arbitrator, and who on his
part was altogether ignorant of the motive of the said present,
would give unlawfully what the said person might receive without
any offence to justice. Thus, when any person, either by himself
or others, exacts a sum of money, or other things, to hinder him
from committing some greater violence, or makes one deliver up
to him the titles of some debt or some right which he owes, the
said act is only unlawful on the part of the person who commits
the violence, and not on the part of him who suffers it. Thus,
when a person receives money of another, either himself or by a
third hand, to commit some crime, some offence, or some injustice,
the act is unlawful, both on the part of him who receives and
of him who gives.


Il.


1537. An Act Unlawful only on the Part of him who gives. —If the
act be unlawful only on the part of him who gives, he who has
Feceived will not be obliged to give it back, unless it be that the
Circumstances regulate his duty in another manner. Thus, in the


® L.1, D. de condict. ob turp. vel inj. caus.


600 THE CIVIL LAW. [Parr I. BOOK I.


case of him who had received a present, being ignorant of the un-
just motive of giving it, as has been explained in the first article,
if the said motive chanced afterwards to come to his knowledge,
he would be obliged either to abstain from the function of judge
or arbitrator, or to give back the present which he had received, or
even to do both the one and the other, according as prudence and
equity might require under the circumstances of the quality of the
persons and of that of the act.>


III.


1538. An Act that is Unlawful only on the Part of the Recetver.—
When thie act is unlawful only on the part of him who has re
ceived a thing for an unjust cause, he who has given it may recover
it again, although the receiver have performed what he was boand
to by his engagement.© And nothing can excuse the receiver from
making restitution, even although the thing were not demanded of
him, nor from the other punishments which the fact may deserve,
if it comes before a court of justice.


IV.


1539. An Act Unlawful both on the Part of the Giver and of th
Receiver.— If the act be unlawful both on the part of him whe
gives and on the part of him who receives, the giver shall lose &
servedly what he has employed to so ill a purpose, and shall bar
no action for recovering itt And the receiver cannot retain the
unjust profit: and even although he had executed the unlawsl
engagement for which he had received the money or other thing


TIP. VII. BEC. III.] RECEIVERS OF WHAT IS NOT DUE. 601


SECTION III.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF HIM WHO HATH SOMETHING BELONGING
TO ANOTHER PERSON WITHOUT A COVENANT.


Art. L


1540. Restitution of Money, with Interest, tf there be Ground for
it. — The engagement of him who happens to have a sum of money
belonging to another person, whether it be that he had received it
in payment of a debt that was not due, or that he had come by it
some other way, consists in restoring the said money without in-
terest,* except from the time of the demand, provided he has acted
honestly and fairly. But if there was on his part any knavish
dealing, he shall be obliged to pay the interest of the money from
the time that he began to act knavishly.


Il.


1541. Care of the Thing. — If it be any other thing besides money
that is to be restored, he who begins to know of his engagement to
make restitution ought to take care of the thing, and to preserve
it till he restore it. But if the thing happens to be damaged, or
even perishes, whilst the possessor was verily persuaded that it
was his own, and before it had been demanded of him, and he was
without blame for not restoring it, he would not be accountable
for it, even although the thing had perished through his negligence.
For his condition ought to be the same as if he had been the owner
of the thing. But after the demand, if he was in delay, he would
be answerable for every” thing that should happen, even without
any fault of his.


IIT.


1542. Restitution of the Fruits.—If it is land or houses which
is to be restored, or any other thing which produces some revenue,
the possessor who is bound to restore the thing is bound also to
restore with it the fruits or revenues which he has reaped, either
only from the time of the demand, or even for the whole time of


2 ZL. 1, C. de cond. ind.
b 1.13, D. de rei vind.; —l. 15, § ult. cod. ;— Ul. 45, eod.
VOL. [. ol


602 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK 1


his enjoyment of it, according to the nature of the cause which
had transferred the thing into his hands, and the circumstances:


IV.


1543. Of the Augmentation happened to the Thing which is to be
restored. — If the thing which is to be restored chanced to be aug-
mented while it was in the possession of him who is bound to
restore it; as if a herd of cattle was increased in number, or a
piece of land adjoining to a river became greater; the whole mux
be restored.*


V.


1544. If he who had a Thing belonging to another has alienated
tt.— If he who had a thing belonging to another, believing in
good earnest that he himself was the true owner of it, had under
this honest, sincere persuasion alienated the thing, he would be
bound only to restore what profit he had made by it, such as the


¢ 7.15, D. de cond. indeb.; —1. 38, § 2, D.de usur.; — 1. 65, § 5, D. de cond. indeb. There
are many cases in which the honesty and fair dealing of the possessor do not discharge
him from the restitution of the fruits. See the ninth, tenth, and fourteenth articles of the
third section of Interest, Costs and Damages, &. Vid. |. 7, § ult. D. a 1. 12, D. de cond.
caus. dat.

The laws cited upon this article have not relation to all the cases explained im the
first section, but only to the case of him who has received a thing that was not due ®
him: and if it produces any fruits or other revenues, these laws oblige the possessor with
out any distinction, although he have enjoyed the thing honestly and fairly, to restore the
fruits, although he who had received money that was not due to him is not bound to pay
the interest of it, as has been said in the first article of this section. But we thought thet
this rule, which may be just in certain cases, might in other cases prove a hardship which


TIT. viti.] DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS. 603


price which he got for it, if the thing was sold, although he had
not sold it for the full value.


SECTION IV.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE MASTER OF THE THING.


1545. The Master ought to refund what has been laid out in the
Preservation of the Thing.— He whose thing hath been in the
possession of another, and who recovers it, even although it were
from one who had detained it knowing himself not to be the true
owner of it, is obliged to refund the possessor of all that he has
usefully laid out in preserving the thing; and if there be fruits to
be restored, out of them must be deducted the expenses which the
possessor has been at in gathering them.*


TITLE VIII.


OF DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS WHICH DO NOT AMOUNT
TO A CRIME OR OFFENCE.


1546. The Subject-Matter of this Title. — We may distinguish
three sorts of faults from which some damage may proceed.
Those which amount to a crime or offence: those of the persons
who fail in the performance of the engagements which they are
bound to by covenant; such as a seller who does not deliver the
thing sold; a tenant who does not make the repairs which he is
bound to by his lease: and those which have no relation to cove-
nants, and which do not amount to a crime or an offence; as if
out of wantonness one throws out any thing at the window which
spoils a suit of clothes; if beasts, for want of being carefully
watched, do any damage ; if a house is set on fire through impru-
dence ; if a building that is gone to decay, for want of being re-
paired, falls upon another, and damages it. Of these three sorts

© LZ. 26, § 12, D. de condict. ind.


* ZL. 65, § 5, D. de condict. indetit. ;—1. 46, D. de usur. See the eleventh article of the
third section of Interest, Costs and Damages, &c., and the remark on the said article.


604 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 1


of faults, it is only these of the last kind which are the subject
matter of this title. For crimes and offences ought not to b
blended with civil matters; and all that relates to covenants ha
been explained in the first book.

The reader may, with respect to the matter of this title, consult
that of Interest, Costs and Damages, &c.


SECTION I.


OF THAT WHICH 18 THROWN OUT OF A HOUSE, OR WHICH MAY
FALL DOWN FROM IT, AND DO SOME DAMAGE.


Art. I.


1547. He who inhabits the House ts Kable for the Damage.—Tke
who inhabits a house, whether he be the proprietor of it, tenant,
or other, is liable for the damage which is caused by any thing
thrown out or poured out of any place of the said house, whethe
by day or by night. And he ought to answer for it to him wh
shall have suffered the damage, whether it was he himself tht
threw it out, or any of his family or domestics, even although #
were in his absence, or without his knowledge.*


IL


1548. The Prohibitions of throwing any Thing out of Houses te
gard the Security of all Sorts of Places. — Seeing the prohibition


TIT. VIL. SEC. L.] DAMAGES OCCASIONED. BY FAULTS. 606


may have established, or to such other penalty as the judge shall
think fit ta inflict, according to the circumstances.!


IV.


1550. If any one is killed or hurt.—If that which has been
thrown out causes the death of any person, or wounds him, the
person who did it will be tried for it in a criminal prosecution.
And he shall be punished according to the nature of the act, and
will be liable to make good the damage that is done. And the
master of the house will likewise be liable to a fine, and to such
damages or other penalty as he may appear to deserve, according
to the circumstances”


V.


1551. If several Persons inhabit the same Place. — If several per-
sons inhabit the same place from whence any thing hath been
thrown or poured out, every one of them will be answerable for
the whole damage; unles8 it can be known which of the mas-
ters, or of the persons for whom each master is answerable, has
caused it. But if their habitation be distinct, every one is only
answerable for what shall be thrown out of the places which he


occupies.‘
VI.


1552. If one has the whole House, and lets out Chambers. — Al-
thongh the proprietor or principal tenant of a house occupies only
a small part of it, if he lets chambers, or lodges one of his friends
im some of them, he shall be answerable for the act of the person
whom he receives into his house. But if it appear out of what
room the thing has been thrown, the action may be brought either
against the person who lodges in the said room, or against him
who has the whole house® And this last will have his recourse


against the other.


© 7.1, D. de his qui effud. vel dejec.

@ The penalties are arbitrary in France.

© Z.1, D. de his qui effud. vel dejec.

€ 7.1, § wlt., ll. 2 & 3, D. de his qui effud. vel dejec.; —1.5,e0d. See the following article.

6 L. 5, §§ 1 et 2, D. de his qui effud. vel dejec. See the foregoing article. The civil
policy of towns takes notice only of those who occupy the houses, because they consider
them as inhabitants who are answerable to the public for the persons whom they receive
into their houses, as to what concerns the matter of policy which is here treated of.


o1*


606 THE CIVIL LAW. [PakT I. BOOK IL


VIL
| 1553. Of those who take into their Houses Scholars or other Per-
sons. — Schoolmasters, tradesmen, and others, who take into their
houses scholars, apprentices, or other persons, to instruct them in
some art, manufacture, or trade, are answerable for the act of
those persons.®


VIL


1554. If any Thing has been thrown out with Design to do Hurt.
— All the foregoing articles are to be understood of that which
has been thrown down or poured out through carelessness, and
without any design. But if it has been done with design, the in-
jury, the offence, or crime, will be chastised with severer pun-
ishments, according to the nature of the act and the circun-
stances:.!


TX.


1555. Prohibition to have any Thing hung out, which may fall
and do Mischief.— If there be any thing hung out from the roof
of a house, from a window, or any other place from whence the fall
of it may do some harm or damage, he who inhabits the house o
place from whence it is hung out will be condemned in such fine ss
shall have been regulated by the policy of the town, or such as shall
be inflicted by the judge, according to the circumstances; even al
though the thing did not fall, and although it had been put there
by another than the master of the house. For it is for the public
interest that people should walk securely and without danger from


TIT. VII. SEC. II.) DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS. 607


XI.

1557. Tiles falling from the Roof of a House.— If tiles fall
from the roof of a house which was in good case, and by the bare
effect of a storm, the damage which may happen by such fall is
an accident for which the proprietor or tenant of the house cannot
be made accountable. But if the roof was in a bad condition, he
who was bound to keep it in repair may be liable to make good
the damage that has happened, according to the circumstances."


SECTION II.
OF DAMAGES DONE BY LIVING CREATURES.


1558. Tae order which links mankind in society together
obliges them, not only to do no manner of harm themselves to any
mortal whatsoever, but likewise obliges every one to keep what is
in his possession in such a condition that nobody may receive
from it any hurt or damage; which implies the duty of keeping up
living creatures that any one has in his possession, so as that they
may not be able to hurt the persons of men, nor to cause them any
loss or damage in their goods.

1559. The most frequent damage which is caused by living
creatures is that which cattle do in the country, by feeding in
places where, or at times when, the owners of them have no right
of pasturage. Seeing what concerns these sorts of damages is
otherwise regulated by the customs of many places than it was by
the Roman law, we shall put down here only some general rules
which may be of common use, and not what is contained in the
Roman law contrary to the customs, nor yet what is particular in
the customs relating to this matter. Thus, for example, it was not
permitted by the Roman law to impound cattle which had done
any damage ;* but this some customs do allow of, as also of keep-
ing them some time for a proof of the damage; and they likewise
inflict a fine on the owners or possessors of such cattle, although
the damage have been done only by cattle that have strayed or
made their escape from their keeper.


® ZL. 24, § 4, 1. 43, D. de dam. inf. Although the laws cited upon this article relate to
the case of a neighbour who had taken proper care to prevent the danger, yet would
it not be jast that a proprietor or tenant of a house should be punished for a negligence
which had been followed by such an accident? See Deut. xxii. 8.

® ZL. 39, § 1, D. ad legem Aqui.


608 THE CIVIL LAW. [PamT 1. BOOK 1


Art. I.

1560. The Master of the Cattle ts answerable for the Damage
which they do.—If any cattle that are kept, or that have escaped
out of custody, have depastured in a place where the master of the
cattle had not the right of pasturage, or at a time when the pes»
turage was not permitted, he shall be accountable for the dam
age which his cattle shall have caused.*


IT


1561. He is also liable to a Fine.-—If any one depastures his cat-
tle in a ground which is not liable to pasturage, or at a time when
the pasturage ought to cease, the master or other possessor of the
cattle will not only be liable to make good the damage, but like-
wise condemned in a fine such as the act may deserve, according
to the circumstances.”


Il.

1562. Other Damage besides that of grazing tn another Mans
Ground.— If cattle that are kept or not kept do any other dam-
age besides that of feeding in another man’s ground, as if they
break or damage trees, the master or other possessor will be obliged
to make good the damage, and will likewise be fined, if there be
ground for it.°


IV.


1563. The Cattle ought to be driven out of another Man's Grou
ercnont paring them. — He who shall bave amet the cattle 6 ol


TIT. VITI. SEO. 11.) DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS. 609


owner or who has charge of them will be answerable for it, if he
could or ought to have prevented the evil. Thus, a mule-driver,
@ wagoner, or other carrier, who hath not strength or skill enough
to hold in a mettlesome horse or an unruly mule, will be liable for
the damage which they shall cause; for he ought not to have un-
dertaken what he had not skill or strength enough to perform.
Thus, he who by overloading a horse or other beast, or by not
avoiding a dangerous step, or by some other fault, occasions a fall
which causes damage to some passenger, will be made accountable
for the said act. And in all these cases, he who suffers the dam-
age shall have his action against the carrier, or against the person
who employed him.*


VI.


1565. Of an Ox that pushes with his Horns.— If an ox has a
trick of pushing with his horns, and wounds any one or causes
any other damage, the master who has neglected to shut up this
ox, or to give such warning that people might avoid him, shall be
answerable for the harm he shall do‘


VIL


1566. Of Horses who bite or kick.— Those who have horses or
mules which kick or bite ought either to warn people of their
being vicious, or to take care to have them well watched, to pre-
vent all occasions of danger; otherwise they will be made liable
for the damage which they shall happen to do#


VIII.


1567. Of Dogs who bite.— If a dog who has a trick of biting
is not kept up, or if he gets loose for want of being well looked
after, and wounds any one, the master of the dog will be liable to
make good the damage. And that with much more reason, if it


© ZL. 8, § 1, D. ad leg. Aquil.; —l. 1, § 4, D. st quadr. paup. fec. dic.

f ZL. 52, § 3, D. ad leg. Aquil. ; —v. Exod. xxi. 29, 36.

6 L.1, § 4, D. si quadrup. paup. fec. dic. ;—l. ult. eod.;—l. 1, § 7, eod.

We must take care, in applying this last text, not to impute too easily to the master of a
horse, or of any other beast, the accidents which may have been occasioned by the impru-
dence of those to whom they happen. Thus, for example, if one who is ignorant whether
a horse kicks or not, goes too near him without necessity, and lays his hand on his crup-
per, standing within reach of a kick, it is an act of imprudence, because one ought to mis-
trust; and such an imprudence may occasion the horso’s striking, where no blame could
be imputed to the master of the horse.


610 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK IL


was a dog who ought to be chained up, and who was not put oat
of a condition of hurting those who might come near him through
inadvertency.®


IX.


1568. Of Wild Beasts.— Those who have wild beasts, such as
lions, tigers, bears, and others of the like kind, ought to keep them
in such a manner that it be not in their power to do any ham;
and they shall answer for all the damage that is occasioned by
their not being strictly kept up!


X.


1569. If a Beast does hurt, being provoked.— If a dog or othe
creature bites, or does any other damage, only because he has bees
provoked or egged on, he who shall have given occasion to the
evil that has happened shall be accountable for it; and if it be the
same person who has suffered the evil, he ought to blame himself
for it.


XL


1570. If the Beast hath been stirred up by another Beast.—If
the beast which has done the damage hath been exasperated aad
stirred up by another beast, the master of this beast which stimed
up the other to do the damage shall be accountable for it.™


XII.
1571. Jf one Beast kills another belonging to another Master.—


TIT. VIII. SEC. III.) DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS. 611


obliged either to abandon the beast which has done the dam-
age, or to make good the other's loss."


SECTION III.


OF THE DAMAGE WHICH MAY HAPPEN BY THE FALL OF A BUILD-
ING, OR OF ANY NEW WORK.


1572. Seeine in this matter our usage is different from the dis-
position of the Roman law, and that we do not observe the rule
which directed him whose building was in danger of being dam-
aged by the fall of another building gone to decay to be put into
possession of the ruinous building, if the owner thereof did not
give him surety for the damage that was to be apprehended from
it, we have endeavoured to turn and accommodate to our usage
the rules of the Roman law, according as they may be applied


Art. I.


1573. The Owner of the Ruinous Building may be summoned to
demolish or repair it.— If a building is in danger of falling, the
proprietor of the adjoining house or tenement, seeing his own
suilding in hazard of being damaged by the fall of the other, may
summon the owner of the ruinous building, either to pull it down,
yr to repair it, so as that there may be no more danger from it.®
And seeing it is an evil to come, which may happen every mo-
ment, and which it is necessary to prevent, if he does not give
speedy satisfaction, the magistrate will give order about it, accord-
ung to the rules which follow.


IL


1574. Permission from the Judge to provide against the Danger.
— If the proprietor of the building, whose fall may do hurt to his
meighbour, after having been legally summoned to prevent the
evil, neglects to take care of it, he whose tenement is in danger
from the fall of the other may demand provisionally, that he him.
self may be permitted to do whatever skilful persons shall judge


ZL. 1, § 11, D. si quadr. paup. fec. dic. a T. 4, § 1, D. de damn. inf.
L. 2, D. de damn, inf. ;—1. 7, § 1, cod. ;— 1. 1, eod.


612 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK B.


necessary to prevent the fall of the said building, whether by prop-
ping it up, or demolishing it, if there be occasion; and he shall
recover from the proprietor of the decayed building the expenses
which he shall have laid out on this account.”


TIT.


1575. He will recover Damages against the Negligent Proprietor.
— If, during the delay of the proprietor who is condemned o


summoned to demolish or prop up his building, it chances to fall,
he will be liable to damages, according to the circumstances"


IV.


1576. If the Building falls before the Proprietor has been warned
to repair it.— If the building falls before any warning has bees
given to the proprietor, he will not be obliged to make good the
damage, if he is willing to abandon both the ground and mate
rials of the building; in which case he will not be obliged »
much as to carry off the rubbish. For he who has suffered the
damage ought to blame himself for not having timely enough pro-
vided against the danger which he might have easily foreseen
But if the proprietor will have back the materials of his building.
or keep the ground on which it stood, he shall be bound to make


b LZ. 7, D. de damn. inf. ; —1. 28, eod.; —1. 15, § 84, eod.
¢ L. 7, D.de damn. inf. ; — ll. 28, 29, eod. If because of the danger from the fillda —
ruinous building, or of the damage which its fall may have cansed to an adjoining es
the proprietor or tenants of the said house have been forced to quit their dwulling: of!
the said house has either been thrown down by the fall of the other, or eo damaged Gee


TIT. VIII. SEC. I11.] DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS. 613


good all the damage caused by the fall of his building, although
no warning had been given him to repair it before it fell. And he
will also be obliged in this case to remove from his neighbour’s
ground, not only the materials of the building which may serve
again, but likewise all the rubbish which will be of no use.‘


V.


1577. Of the Superfluous Ornaments of a Building that is thrown
down by the Fall of another. — If, by the falling of a building which
had thrown down another, there be ground for recovering damages,
and if there was painting, carving, or other ‘ornaments serving
barely for pleasure, in the place which was thrown down by the fall
of the other building ; the things of this kind, being of superfluous
use, would not be estimated at their full value. But the said
estimation would be made with moderation, and with a tempera-
ment of justice and humanity, according as the quality of the fact
which may have given occasion to the damage, that of the per-
sons, and the other circumstances, might require.°


VL


1578. When a House is thrown down by an Accident, after the
Owner has been warned to repair tt. — If a house which was going
to decay, and for preventing the fall of which the neighbour had
given warning to its owner, is afterwards thrown down by an ac-
cident, such as a flood, or a violent storm of wind, and the fall of
it throws down the adjoining house, the proprietor of the house
whose fall throws down the other will not be accountable for this
accident; unless it be that the flood or storm has thrown down
the house only because of the bad condition it was in‘


@ £.10,§ 1, D. de neg. gest. ;—i. 6, D. de damn. inf.;— 1. 7, §§ 1 4 2, D. eod. See the
fourth and fifth articles of the second section of the title of Engagements formed by Acci-
dents.
© Z. 40, D. de damn. inf. We must observe here tho difference between this case and
that of the fourth article of the fourth section of Services, where he who throws down a par-
tition-wall to make it sufficient for the use of the service owes nothing for the value of the
paintings which his neighbour had on the said wall. For in the case of that fourth arti-
ele, each proprietor had a right to pull down and rebuild the partition-wall according as
the use of the service required, and consequently is not liable to damages. And he who
‘was at the expense of these superfluous things ought to blame himself for having ex-
sposed them to this accident, by putting them on a wall to which another had an equal right
with himself. But in the present case it is quite the contrary; for it is by the fault of the

that his building has thrown down the other.
f 7. 24, § 10, D. de damn. inf.
VOL. I. 02


614 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK It


VIL
1579. If the Decayed House belongs to several Owners. — If the
building, whose fall hath caused some damage, belongs to several
owners, they will not be answerable each for the whole damage;
but every one in proportion to the share which he had in the
house that is fallen


VIIL


1580. New Works prohibited. —'Those who make any new
work, that is, who make any change in the condition of the
places," whether it be in estates lying in the city or country,
whether in places belonging to particular persons or in those of
public use, ought to serve their own conveniency in such a ma
ner as not to trespass in the least on the right of other pereons
concerned in the change which they pretend to make! For
although one may make upon his own estate whatever changes
he stands in need of; and often even although they may be hartfal
to other persons, as shall be explained in the following article ; yet
one cannot make those alterations which another person may have
a right to hinder. Thus, although one may raise his house higber,
and thereby prejudice his neighbour, by taking away his prospect;
yet he who is subject to the service of not raising his building
higher no longer has that liberty, while the service can have
its use! Thus, he who with regard to a spring of water in is
estate, or a rivulet running through his grounds, might let it die
charge itself according to the natural course which the wate
should take, may have lost this liberty by the right which a neigh


TIT. VIII. SEC. 111.] DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS. 615


estate, and to repair the damage which he may have caused by
his innovation."
JX.


1581. A New Work which one hasa Right to make, although it
may prejudice his Neighbour.— He who in making a new work
upon his own estate uses his right, without trespassing either
against any law, custom, title, or possession, which may subject
him to any service towards his neighbours, is not answerable for
the damage which they may chance to sustain thereby, unless it
be that he made that change merely with a view to hurt others,
without any advantage to himself. For in this case it would be
@ pure act of malice, which equity would not allow of. But if the
work were useful to him, as if he made in his estate any lawful
repairs, to secure it against the overflowings of a torrent or river,
and his neighbour’s grounds were thereby the more exposed to
the flood, or suffered from thence any other inconvenience, he
could not be made answerable for it. Thus, he who, digging for
water in his own ground, should thereby drain a well or spring in
his neighbour’s ground, would be liable to no action of damages
on that score.” For, in these and the like cases, these events are
casualties and natural effects of the condition into which he who
makes the changes has had a right to put the things. And it is
not his act which causes the damage.


X.


1582. A Work which one cannot do to the Prejudice of his Neigh-
bour.— If the work which a proprietor would make in his own
ground be contrary to any law or custom, or if it be an under-
taking that is against a title or possession, to the prejudice of a
neighbour who might thereby suffer some damage, the neighbour
may hinder him from making it, and will likewise recover damages
for what he shall have suffered thereby. Thus, he who digging in
his own ground beyond the distance which is allowed, should en-
danger the foundation of his neighbour’s house, would be answer-
able for it?


= J. 20, D. de op. nov. nunt. ; — 1. 21, § 4, eod. ;—1. 8, eod.; —d. 1.1, § 14.

© D. 1, § 12, D. de aq. et aq. pluv. arc. ; —l. 21, eod. ; —1. 24, § 12, D. de damn. inf. See
the ninth article of the second section of Services. DL. 2, § 9, D. de aq. 4 ag. pluv. are. ; —
2. 38, D. de rei vind.

Pp L. 24, § 12, D. de damn. inf.


616 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK IL


XL

1583. One cannot change the Ancient Course of the Waters.—
If rain-water or other waters have their course regulated from one
ground to another, whether it be by the nature of the place, or by
some regulation, or by a title, or by an ancient possession, the pro
prietors of the said grounds cannot innovate any thing as to the
ancient course of the waters. Thus, he who has the upper grounds
cannot change the course of the water, either by turning it some
other way, or rendering it more rapid, or making any other changes
in it to the prejudice of the owner of the lower grounds. Neither
can he who has the lower estate do any thing that may hinder hu
grounds from recciving the water which they ought to receive, aad
that in the manner which has been regulated.1 But the change
which happen naturally without the hand of man, and which cause
some loss to one of the neighbours, and profit to the other, ought
either to be suffered or remedied, according to the rules which shall
be explained in the subsequent title.


XIL


1584. Prohibition to innovate.— He who pretends that a new
work which another undertakes is prejudicial to him, ought to ap
ply himself to the judge, who may prohibit him either to begin the
work, or to continue it if it is begun, till judgment be gives
whether the work ought to be permitted or forbidden. And these
prohibitions may be granted provisionally, upon the bare com
plaint of the new undertaking, if it be any ways doubtful whether
it may do hurt or not.


rill. SEC. 1V.] DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS. 617


SECTION IV.


‘THER KINDS OF DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS, WITHOUT
EITHER CRIME OR OFFENCE.”


Art. L

6. Damage occasioned by Faults, without an Intention of doing
»—— All the losses and all the damages which may happen by
st of any person, whether out of imprudence, rashness, igno-
of what one ought to know, or other faults of the like nature,
ver trivial they may be, ought to be repaired by him whose
idence or other fault has given occasion to it. For it is a
g that he has done, even although he had no intention to do
. Thus, he who, playing imprudently at mall in a place
> there might be danger for those that are passing by, chances
rt any one, will be answerable for the harm which he shall
caused.®


IL


17. Fatlure of Deliverance of a Thing to the Owner. — The
e in the performance of an engagement is also a fault which
give occasion to damages, which the party who fails will be
to. Thus, a seller who refuses to deliver what he has sold,
ositary who delays to restore the thing deposited with him,
cecutor who detains the thing bequeathed, and all those
having in their possession a thing which they ought to
© up, refuse or delay to do it, are liable, not only for the
ges which their delay shall have occasioned, but also for the
of the thing, if it perishes after they shall have been in fault
ot delivering it; even although the thing should perish by
accident. For that accident might not have happened to the
if it had been in the hands of the owner, or he might have
sed of it before it perished.>


e upon this subjcet the second section of the title of Interests, Damages, §c.
1, D. de injur.;—L 5,§1, D. ad leg. Aquil. ; —1. 9, § ult. cod. ;—J. 10, eod. ; —
nd.


5, D. de reb. cred. See the seventeenth article of the second section, and the third
of the seventh section of the Contract of Sale, and the tenth article of the third
of Deposit.

52°


618 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK it


TIT.

1588. Damage caused by an Innocent Act.— If there happess
any damage by an unforeseen consequence of an innocent st,
when no blame can be charged on the author of the act, he wil
not be answerable for such a consequence. For this event will
have some other cause joined with that of the act, whether it be
the imprudence of the person who has suffered the damage, a
some accident. And it is either to this imprudence, or to this
accident, that the damage ought to be imputed. Thns, fora
ample, if any one goes across a public mall whilst people ar
playing in it, and the ball, being already struck, chances to but
him; the innocent act of the person who struck the ball does na
make him answerable for an event, which ought to be impute
either to the imprudence of the person to whom it has happened,
he could not be ignorant that that was a public mall, or to amen
accident, if that act was altogether unknown to him, and if not}
ing of imprudence could be imputed to him who struck the ball’


IV.
1589. Precaulions to be used in Works from whence any Domart


may happen.— ‘Those who make any works, or do any other
thing from whence may ensue some damage to other persons,
be answerable for the damage, if they have not taken the nec


sary precautions to prevent it. Thus, masons, carpenters, a


others, who, by the help of scaffolds and machines, carry up thet |
materials, those who from the top of a tree cut down the branche ©
of it, ought to give warning to the persons whom their work mig —


ii emake bale * oni are rar J ite ‘bale i am ebiat=


T. VIII. SEC. IV.] DAMAGES OCCASIONED BY FAULTS. 619


rough ignorance of things which one ought to know. Thus,
hen an artificer, for want of knowing what belongs to his pro-
wion, commits a fault which causes some damage, he is an-
rerable for it. Thus, if it happens that a carman not having
thtly laid the stones which he has loaded on his cart, one of
em falls out and does some harm, he must answer for it.


° VL
1591. Fire. — Fire almost never happens without some fault, at
ast that of imprudence, or negligence ; and those through whose


alt, let it be never so slight, a fire has happened, will be answer-
le for all the damage it does‘


VO.


1592. Damage done to avoid a Danger. — It happens sometimes
at a voluntary act causes damage, and yet that he who is the
use thereof is not answerable for it. Thus, for example, if a
dden gust of wind drives a ship upon the anchor-cables of
other ship, or upon the nets of fishermen, and the master of the
ip that is thus drove by the wind, not being able to disentangle
mself any other way, orders his men to cut the cables, and the
ts, he will not be answerable for this damage, which the said
c dent rendered necessary. And it is the same thing with re-
ect to those who, in a fire, not being able to save a house which
just going to take fire, throw down the said house in order to
eserve the others. For, in these kinds of events, it is the acci-
mt which causes the loss, and every one bears that part of it
1ich falls to his shares


VIL.


1593. Damage which another Person might have prevented. —
108e who, having it in their power to prevent a damage which


iT. 9, § 5, D. locat.;—§ 7, Inst. de leg. Aquil.;—1.7, § ult. l. 8, D. ad leg. Aquil.;

!. $7, § 33, eod. See the fifth article of the second section.

LZ. 3,§ 1, D. de off pref. vig. ; —1. 9, D. de incend. ; —1. 44, D. ad leg. Aquil. ; —1. 27,
eod.


, D.
i L. 29, § 3, D. ad leg. Aquil. ; —1. 49, § 1, eod.; —v. 1. 3, § 7, D. de incend. ;—1l. 7, § 4,
quod vi aut clam. See the second article of the second section of Interest, Costs and
mages. We have not put down in this article, for the case of fire, the example given
this law, of a private person who throws down his neighbour's house adjoining to his
n; for that liberty presupposes a necessity of doing it for the good of the public, of
ich a private person ought not to be judge. But in the cases of this article orders are
‘en by the magistrates or by the multitude, who, seeing the imminent danger, have a
ht to provide against it.


TIT. 1x.] ENGAGEMENTS FORMED BY ACCIDENTS. 621


X.

1595. Damage caused by an Accident preceded by a Fault.— If
the accident is a consequence of an unlawful act, and if there fol-
lows from it any damage, he whose act has given occasion to it
will be liable to make good the damage; and that with much
more reason than if the accident were only a consequence of some
imprudence, as in the cases of the fourth article. Thus, for exam-
ple, if a creditor takes, without the authority of justice, a pledge
from his debtor against his consent, and if the said pledge chances
to perish by some accident in the hands of that creditor, he shall
be accountable for it.”


TITLE IX.
OF ENGAGEMENTS WHICH ARE FORMED BY ACCIDENTS.


1596. We shall see in this title a kind of involuntary engage-
ments, and which have no other cause besides mere accidents.
By accidents are meant the events which do not depend on the
will of those to whom they happen, whether the said events be the
pause of gain or of loss. Thus, to find a treasure and to lose one’s
purse are accidents of these two kinds.

1597. Accidents happen either by the act of man, such as a rob-
bery, a fire; or by a pure effect of the providence of God and of the
ordinary course of nature, such as thunder, lightning, a shipwreck,
an inundation; or by an effect proceeding partly from a natural
pause, and partly from the act of man, such as a fire which hap-
pens by stacking up hay before it is well dried.


article the case related in this thirtieth law, § 3, D. ad leg. Aquil., which declares that, if he
who caused his stubble to be burnt had taken all the precautions that were necessary, he
would not be answerable for the burning of his neighbour’s corn, which was occasioned
by a sudden gust of wind. For it would seem that that event ought to have been fore-
seen, and that it might have even been prevented by plucking up by the roots all the
stabbie that was near to the neighbour's corm, or putting off the burning of the stubble till
harvest was over; and, in a word, that, in all such cases where we ought not to do the
thing intended without taking the necessary precautions for preventing the damage which
may ensue from thence to other persons, we ought either quite to abstain from that which
may-cause any damage, or take upon ourselves the event, if we run the hazard of it.
And likewise the law of God seems in this case to oblige, without any distinction, him who
has kindled the fire to repair the damage which it shall have caused. See Exod. xxii. 6.
®= L. B, D. de piqn. act.


TIT. 1X. SEC. 1.] ENGAGEMENTS FORMED BY ACCIDENTS. 623


those who have lost theirs, and a thousand others of the like nature.
But we treat only here of the engagements which are such that
the civil laws allow those who are under them to be constrained
to the performance of them, as will appear from the several exam-
ples which shall be produced in the first section, which is made up
of those different examples, in order to show in which manner
these sorts of engagements are formed: and in the second section
we shall explain all their particular consequences.


SECTION I.


IN WHAT MANNER ARE FORMED THE ENGAGEMENTS WHICH ARISE
FROM ACCIDENTS.


- Art. I.

1601. Of him who finds a Thing that ts lost. — He who finds a
thing that is lost ought to restore it to its owner, if he knows or
may know to whom it belongs; and if he keeps it without an
intention to restore it, or without endeavouring to discover the
owner, he commits a theft.*


II.
1602. Of that which ts left on another’s Ground by an Inunda-


tion. — If an inundation throws down a house, and carries away
the materials or movables of it into some ground, the proprietor
or possessor of the said ground is obliged to let the master of the
said house have access to the ground, and to suffer him to carry
away that which the inundation hath left on it. And it would be
the same thing with regard to a boat or any other thing carried
away by the force of the waters.>


IL.


1603. Of that which ts thrown into the Sea in a Danger of Ship-
wreck.— If in a danger of shipwreck it be found necessary to


® ZT. 43, § 4, D. de furt.; —d. l. § 7; — Deut. xxii. 1, 2, 3; — Levit. vi. 3.

The engagements of him who finds a thing, and of him to whom it belongs, shall be
explained in the first and second articles of the second section.

We are not to reckon treasures in the number of things lost; for we call only that a
treasure which having been hid, the owner of it is not any more known. See, concerning
treasures, the seventh article of the second section of Possession.

& 7. 5,§ 4. D. ad erhib. Sce the third, fourth, and fifth articles of the second section.


624 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part I. Boor nr.


throw overboard a part of the lading in order to save the rett,
those whose baggage or goods have been saved are obliged to
bear their share of the loss of that which hath been thrown over
board for the common safety,° according to the rules which shal
be explained in the following section.


IV.


1604. Provision of Victuals in a Common Danger. — If in a vor-
age by sea, or upon any other the like occasion, where many pe-
sons may chance to be in company together, the provisions of
victuals fall short, and it be found that some of the company have
some provisions in store for themselves, when it is not possible to
procure any for the other passengers any other way ; what som
of the company have in store for their own particular use become
common to the whole company.’

V.

1605. How the Change of Places which has happened by an Ar
cident may be repaired. — If an accident makes a change in i
state or condition of some places, by which any one is damage.
and if it be just to restore things to their first condition,
event obliges those in whose ground any work is to be made
order to restore things as they were at first, to give leave to iim
who suffers the damage to do the work, or to do it themselves, @ ©
to contribute towards it in case they be under an obligation t @
it. Thus, for example, if a running water which crosses &
grounds of several persons flows back on the upper grounds &


TIT. 1X. 8EC. 1} ENGAGEMENTS FORMED BY ACCIDENTS. 625


and even without the act of man, yet if they can be remedied
efter they have happened, those who suffer such losses ought not
to be deprived of the remedies that are lawful and possible, pro-
vided that in reéstablishing the things they do no harm, or that
they make good any damage they may chance to do” But if the
change were of such a nature, that it would not be just to restore
the things to their first condition, as if a flood, having loosened the
rocks that were in a ground, had transported them to another, and
by that means had made one of the grounds better than it was,
and the other worse; that event being a pure effect of the divine
providence, which, having changed the face of the places, hath
likewise changed the possessions of the proprietors of the said
grounds; none of the proprietors can pretend to make any new
change in the ground of the other, except by his consent. And
he cannot even do any thing in his own ground, but that
which he may do without encroaching on the rights of his


neighbours.
VI


1606. If the Change cannot be repaired.—If the change of the
places that has happenned by an accident be irreparable, the loss
we the gain which shall follow from the said change will accrue
30 those to whom the event shall have been profitable or hurtful,
und there will lie no obligation on the one to indemnify the other.
hus, for example, if a river insensibly leaves one side and extends
teelf more towards the other, what ground it takes away from
me proprietor is lost to him, and what it leaves to the other is
im addition to his estate‘ Or if a river changes its channel, the
laces which it occupies by its new course will be lost to those
who were the proprietors of them, and the proprietors of the
ands adjoining to the old channel will have the benefit of what
ihall be thereby added to their grounds;® and yet there is no en-
ragement formed between those who gain by the change, and
hose who lose by it, for the one does but acquire what the other
oses. And those who by the change of the course of the river
ave lost their grounds, have no right to the lands which the river
lid once occupy for its channel, and which it has abandoned. But


¢ FT. 2, § 6, D. de aqua ef aq. pluv. arc.; —v. d.l.§ 4. Sec the following article.
f 7.1, C. de alluv. ;—§ 20, Inst. de rer. divis.
& § 23, cod.

VOL. I. 53


626 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part I. BOOX IL


they ought to bear with an event which hath no other cause be
sides the providence of God, which has deprived them of their por


session.2


VIL


1607. Mixture of Things belonging to several Persons.— Whes
it happens that two or more things belonging to several master
are, against their will or without their knowledge, so mixed to
gether that they cannot easily and without inconvenience be sep
arated, so as to give back to every one his own; this whole man
becomes common to the persons whose things are mixed; not so a
for all of them to have a common undivided right to the whok,
for the one has no right to the thing of the other that is mixed
with his, but their right is in proportion to the share which evey
one has in the whole mass. And this event forms among them
the engagement either to divide the thing in the manner that
possible, or to do one another justice otherwise, by valuing every
one of the things which have been mixed together. ‘Thus, for i
stance, if two pieces of gold belonging to two persons have bees
melted down into one mass, or a stuff hath been made of wn
belonging to several owners, or things of different kinds her
been mixed together any other manner of way, such as die
ent metals, or liquors of different sorts; in these cases it is pec
sary either to divide the thing, if it is possible to divide it, and ©
give to every one in proportion to the value he has in the whet
mass; or to make an estimate of the whole, and to divide the pet
on the same foot. But if this mixture hath been made voluntary


5 ie * - .
nv ‘owners oO ne 7! og ac7Pme i ns Boe ye fre


TIT. IX. SEC. I.] ENGAGEMENTS FORMED BY ACCIDENTS. 627


them to take away the things, provided the damage which may
be done by removing them be made good.


IX.


1609. Engagements reciprocal or not reciprocal. — Of the engage-
ments which are formed by accidents, some of them are recipro-
eal, and oblige one party as well as the other; and others are
obligatory only on one side. Thus, in the case of the first article,
if he who hath found a thing that is lost knows the owner of it,
and can immediately restore it to him without being at any
charges, the obligation is only on his part. But if he has been at
any expense, either in advertising it or having it cried, in order to
find out the owner or for conveying it to him, the owner in this
case is bound to reimburse the finder of what he is out of pocket
on his account. So that in this case the engagement will be mu-
tual; and in all the other cases it is easy to discern whether the
engagement be reciprocal or not.™


X.


1610. Loss and Gain without Engagements. — All the accidents
which cause gain or loss do not, however, always form engage-
ments. And if, for example, a ship that in a storm is driven
against another happens to damage it, that accident does not lay
the master of the vessel that hath damaged the other under any
manner of engagement, unless the damage hath happened by the
master’s fault, or by the fault of persons for whom he is answer-
able. For it is a bare effect of this accident; and sometimes even
he who suffers damage by an accident, from whence there ariseth
profit to another, cannot for all that pretend to any indemnity on
account of his loss, as in the cases of the sixth article?


XL


1611. Different Effects of Accidents, as to the Consequence of the
Loss. — It follows from the foregoing articles, that no general rule


} Thesaurus meus in tuo fundo est, nec eum patcris me effodere. — Labeo ait, non esse
iniquum juranti mihi non calumnie causa id postulare, vel interdictum, vel judicium ita
dari, ut, si per me non stetit qaominus damni infecti tibi operis nomine caveatur, ne vim
facias mihi, quominus eum thesaurum effodiam, tollam,exportem. JL. 15, D.ad exhib.
The case of the law here quoted is not properly a treasure. See the seventh article of the
second section of Possession.

® This is a consequence of the foregoing articles.

® LT. 29, § 2, D. ad leg. Aquil. ; —d. l. § 4.


TIT. IX. SEC. 11.] ENGAGEMENTS FORMED BY ACCIDENTS. 629


And when he does restore it, whether it be money or any other
thing, he cannot detain any part of it, nor demand any thing for
having found it” But he will recover only what expenses he has
been at, as shall be explained in the following article.


IL.


1613. Engagement of him who recovers what he had lost.— The
person to whom one restores the thing which he had lost is
obliged on his part to repay the money that has been laid out,
either in keeping the thing or in delivering it to him; as if it was
some strayed beast which it was necessary to feed, or that the
carriage of the thing from one place to another had obliged the
person in whose custody it was to be at some charges; or if any
money has been laid out in advertisements, or having the thing
cried, in order to give notice to the owner. And if he who deliv-
ews the thing to the owner be not the same person who found it,
and if he gave any thing to get it from the finder, he will recover
it of the owner.


Til.


1614. The Right which one has to take out of another's Ground
any Thing of his that has been thrown there by Accident.— The
proprietor of a ground on which is thrown the rubbish of a building
that is fallen down, or that which a flood hath carried away from
another’s ground, is obliged to suffer him who has had the loss to
take away what remains, and to allow him such free access to his
ground as is necessary for that end But upon the conditions
that are explained in the following article.


IV.


1615. Sequel of the foregoing Article. — In the cases of the
foregoing article, he who desires to have back the materials of his
building that is fallen down, or that which a flood hath carried
away from his land and thrown upon another man’s ground, is


» 7. 43, § 9, D. de furtis. Although he who restores a thing which he has found has
mo right to demand any thing for it, yet, nevertheless, if the finder be a poor body, he may
take lawfully and honestly what the owner shall think fit to give him; although it would
be very dishonorable in any other person to receive the least thing whatsoever on that
aecount.

¢ LZ. 2, § 5, in f. D. de aqua 4 ag. pluv. arc.

@ See the text cited upon the second article of the first section, and those which are
cited in the following article. ZL. 9, § 1, D. de damn. inf.

03 *


630 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK ll.


obliged on his part not only to indemnify the proprietor of the
said ground as to what damage shall happen to be done by his
taking away the things which have been thrown upon it, but he is,
moreover, bound to repair all the damage which has been already
done to the ground by the things since they were cast upon it'
But if he chooses rather not to take away any thing, he will owe
nothing; for if he abandons to the proprietor of that ground all
that has been cast upon it, he is not bound to make good a dam-
age that has happened by the bare effect of that accident: and it
is enough that he loses what the accident has carried away from
him!


V.


1616. Another Consequence of the Third Article.— If he whore
materials, or other things, have been thrown by these accidents oa
the estate of another person, be desirous to take them away, k
will be obliged, besides the making reparation for the damage su-
tained by the owner of the ground, to take away as well the u&
profitable stuff that can be of no manner of use, as that whichs
useful, and which he is desirous to take away, and to clear entirely
the surface of the ground on which the things have been thrown! _


Vi.


1617. Contribution for the Loss of what ts thrown into the Sau
a Danger of Shipwreck.— When, in order to lighten a ship thats —
in danger of shipwreck, part of the cargo is thrown overboard, ant
the ship by that means is saved, this loss is common to all thee


TIT. IX. SEC. I1.] ENGAGEMENTS FORMED BY ACCIDENTS. 631


make in all sixteen thousand crowns; and by this contribution
those who had lost the twenty thousand crowns, recovering sixteen
thousand of them, will be losers only of a fifth part, as all the
others."


h 7.1, D. de Rhodia ; —1. 2, § 2, eod.; —1. 2, § 4, eod. Upon what foot is it that we
must regulate the contribution for indemnifying those whose goods or other effects have
been thrown overboard? It is said in the second law, § 4, D. de lege Rhodia, that it ought
to be on the foot of the estimate as well of what is lost as of what is saved ; that it is no
matter that the things lost could have been sold for more than they cost, because the
business is to make up a loss which one has sustained, and not a gain which they have
failed to make; but that as to the things which have been saved, and which ought to
bear their part of the contribution, they ought to be valued, not upon the foot of what
they cost, but upon the foot of what they may be sold for. This is the meaning of that
text, of which here follow the words : — Portio autem pro estimatione rerum, que salvw
sunt, et earam que amiss sunt, prestari solet. Nec ad rem pertinet, si he, que amissx
sunt, pluris venire poterunt: quoniam detrimenti, non lucri fit prmstatio: sed in his re-
bus, quarum nomine conferendum est, estimatio debeat haberi, non quanti empte sint,
sed quanti venire possunt. If it be just that the estimate of the things which are saved
should be made upon the foot of what they may be sold for, because it is that value which
Ihas been saved from the danger, why should not that which has been lost in order to
save the rest be estimated on the same foot? And if we suppose, in the case of two mer-
chants who had bought goods of the same kind, at the same price, in the same place, to
be sold again in the same seaport town whither the ship was bound, that the goods of
one of the merchants were thrown overboard to save the ship at the entry into the port,
where it was in danger of being cast away, and that the goods which are preserved are
sold immediately in the said seaport town for more than they cost, would it not be just
that those which have been lost only to save the others should be valued on the same
foot? since there was no reason for throwing overboard the goods of one merchant more
than the other, nor for distinguishing their condition. To which we may add, that, as we
shall observe on the fifteenth article, the contribution ought not to be made till after the
ship is got into port, and in safety; and that as it is only then that the contribution is to
be made, it seems reasonable that the whole should be estimated on the foot of what the
things are worth at the time of unlading, all charges being deducted. And it is probably
for these very reasons that regulations have been made, ordaining that the goods which
have been thrown overboard should be estimated on the same foot as those which have
been saved, and according to the price for which they should be sold. Sce the laws of
Oleron, art. 8, and the ordinances of JWisbuy, art. 20 and art. 39. But secing the goods
are not all sold in the port where the ship arrives, and that many of them are often to be
farther transported by sea or land, and have consequently new dangers to undergo, and
seeing there may happen many diminutions of the profit in the sales, and even losses by
several accidents, it would be neither just nor possible to regulate the contributions on
the foot of what the goods shall be sold for, after that the goods and owners are dispersed
in several places. So that the contribution being to be made in the port of delivery, it
seems a necessary consequence that the value of the goods should be settled in the said
port, not upon the foot of what the goods shall be sold for, which it is impossible to
know ; nor upon the foot of what they cost at first, as well for the reasons that have been
already remarked, as because it would not be possible to know justly the prime cost, and
that such a valuation might be liable to a great many cheats; but the estimate ought to
be made on the foot of the price at which the goods and other effects may be reasonably
valued at their arrival in the port, according to the several views and different regards
which may help us to make a just estimate.


632 THE CIVIL LAW. {PART 1. BOOK f.


VIL

1618. Upon what Foot the Contribution is paid.— Every thing
that is saved from shipwreck by throwing the goods overboard
into the sea pays contribution according to its value, without any
distinction between that which is of less burden, such as jewels,
and that which is of greater, such as metals. For it is the value,
and not the weight, of the thing that has been saved from perish
ing that comes into consideration: and so the master of the ship
contributes in proportion ;‘ but those on board the ship do not
contribute any thing for their persons,' except it be for their clothes,
their rings, and other things which they have about them.”


VIIL


1619. Victuals pay no Contribution. — The provisions which are
put on board the ship, for no other end but to be consumed daring
the voyage, pay no contribution ;* for these kinds of things are for
the common use. But we must not place in this rank corn, wine,
and other things of the like sort, which are not put on board the
ship to be there consumed, but are there as goods to be transported
from one place to another.


IX.


1620. Precaution for the Security of the Contribution. — Those
whose goods have been thrown overboard to save the ship may,
for their security, hinder the unlading of the goods that remainos
board the ship till they have paid their proportion of the loss, a
may procure them to be attached in case they are landed.°


TIT. IX. SEC. I1.] ENGAGEMENTS FORMED BY ACCIDENTS. 633


XL

1622. If because of Danger the Masts of the Ship are cut down,
the loss of them ts common. — If to prevent a shipwreck the masts
and yards are cut down and thrown overboard, or other things
are thrown overboard to lighten the ship that it may not perish,
that loss will be common. For it is not an effect that the storm
hath caused, as if the violence of the storm had broke the masts
or yards, or done any other damage which would be within the
case of the foregoing article; but it is an effect of the fear of the
common danger, and therefore the loss of it ought to be common.’


XII.


1623. No Contribution due tf the Ship is cast away.— If the ship
is cast away, and in the wreck some save their goods or other
things, they will not be obliged to contribute any thing on their
part towards making up the loss which the others suffer. For it
is not by the loss of the ship and of the other things which perish
that they save theirs; but every one saves what he can out of the
common wreck; and the contribution takes place only when those
are to be indemnified whose loss hath saved what remains to the
others."


XIIL


1624. If to lighten a Ship, that it may get into Port, Goods are
wladen inio a Lighter, and the Lighter be cast away.—If to
lighten a ship, that it may be able to enter into a river, or into a
port, it be necessary to take out a part of the lading, and that
what has been put on board a lighter happens to perish before it
gets to land; that loss will be common, and what has been left in
the ship must contribute to make up the loss. For it was for
the interest of the ship that the goods were put on board the


lighter?
XIV.


1620. If in the same Case the Ship is cast away, and not the
Tighter. — If in the case of the foregoing article the ship is cast
away, and the lighter gets safely into port, there will be no con-
tribution for the goods lost on board the ship, but the loss will fall


9 Z. 3, D. de leg. Rhod. ; —1. 5, § 1, eod. ; —1. 2, § 1, inf. cod.
* ZL. , D. de leg. Rhod.; — 1. 7, D. eod.
* LZ. 4, D. de leg. Rhod.


634 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK u.


upon those to whom the goods appertained. For the unlading
of the goods into the lighter was not done for the advantage of
those to whom the goods belonged; and the loas of the ship did
no ways contribute to the saving of the goods put on board the
lighter.'


XV.


1626. If a Vessel saved from Shipwreck by throwing Goods
overboard is cast away in another place, and some of the Goods
saved out of the Wreck. — If a ship that has been saved from one
danger of shipwreck, by throwing some of the goods overboard,
happens afterwards to be cast away in another place; and that,
by the help of divers or otherwise, a part of what was lost in the
shipwreck is recovered ; those whose goods have been recovered
out of the wreck must contribute to make up the loss of what be
been thrown overboard in the first danger." For the goods whic
are recovered out of the wreck would have perished in the ht
danger, had it not been for the loss of the things that were the
thrown overboard.


© L.4, D.de leg. Rhod. If it had been agreed, when the goods were unladen ootol &
ship into the lighter, that, if the ship alone or the lighter alone should happen to * ae
away, the loss of either should be common, that agreement would be executed, Ger ©
ing nothing unlawful in it. Might it be said in the case where the ship & colon
when no such agreement had been made, that such a covenant waz understood, elem)
the parties had forgot to make express mention of it; and that, the ship having bem i=
ened for the good of all the parties concerned, and the most valnable goods, perhaps, ==
on board the lighter with a common design of saving the whole lading of the a &
intention of all the parties had been to make the events common to all, and dat wae


TIT. IX. SEC. 1].] ENGAGEMENTS FORMED BY ACCIDENTS. 635


XVI

1627. If one recovers his Goods that were thrown overboard in
the First Danger. — If, in the case of the foregoing article, he
whose goods had been thrown overboard in the first danger hap-
pens to recover them, he will not be bound to contribute towards
making up the loss of what perished in the second danger. For it
is not by the means of this loss that he recovers what he lost in
the first danger.


XVIL


1628. When the Things thrown overboard are recovered, the Con-
tribution for them ceases. —If the things that have been thrown
overboard chance to be recovered, or a part of them, the contribu-
tion for the loss of them will cease in proportion. And if the con-
tribution has been already paid, those who have received it must
restore it to the others.’


XVIIL


1629. If, by the throwing of some Goods overboard, others which
remain in the Ship are damaged.—lIf, in a danger which hath
made it necessary to throw goods into the sea, it happens that
other goods, being uncovered by the throwing of the uppermost
goods into the sea, have by that means received some damage;
as if the waves of the sea have got into them, and spoiled them;
that loss will be made good by contribution, as being a sequel of
the loss of the goods thrown overboard.*_ And the owner of those
damaged goods will contribute on his part for the loss of the
goods that were thrown overboard, but only upon the foot of the
value of his goods after they have been damaged; for it is only
that value which he saves.*


2 ZT. 4,§ 1, in fine, D. de leg. Rhod. See the following article.
Y L. 4, § 7, D. de leg. Rhod.

3 £4, § 2, D. de leg. Rhod.

® D.L. 4, i fine.


636 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK IL


TITLE X.
OF THAT WHICH IS DONE TO DEFRAUD CREDITORS.


1630. The Subject-Matter of this Titl. — Although the frauds
done in prejudice of creditors be commonly transacted by agree-
ments between the debtors and those who are in the secret with
them, yet the engagements which arise from the said frauds, and
which lay those who are accessory to the fraud under an obligs-
tion to the creditors, are nevertheless of the number of those er
gagements which are formed without a covenant; for there is no
manner of covenant that passes between the accessories to the
fraud and the creditor.

1631. The frauds committed by debtors and their accomplices,
to make creditors lose what is due to them, are of several sorts,
and form the engagements which shall be the subject-matter of this
title. As to this matter of frauds done to the prejudice of crediton,
it is to be observed, that the frauds which debtors may do by mak.
ing assignments of their immovables are much less frequent will
us than they were under the Roman law; for the Romans ae
tracted often without writing;* and even a mortgage could &
acquired by an unwritten covenant, and by a bare paction;’
which rendered all frauds easy. But according to our usage, al
contracts which exceed the value of one hundred livres onght @
be in writing;* and a mortgage is not acquired except by a deel


i ore Py a al i elie Be


TIT. x.] ACTS TO DEFRAUD CREDITORS. 637


‘Which was founded upon this, that every body may abstain
from augmenting his estate* So that they did not look upon
any thing as a fraud done to the prejudice of creditors, except
what was a diminution of the estate which the debtor had already
acquired. Neither did the Romans reckon that among the frauds
done to the prejudice of creditors, when an heir or executor paid
the total of legacies and bequests in trust, without retaining those
portions which are called the Falcidian and Trebellianic portions,
of which we shall treat in the second part of this work; because it
was thought that the heir or executor had the liberty to deprive
himself of that which the law gave him right to retain out of lega-
cies and bequests in trust, and that he might thus fully perform
the will of the dead. And the reason which induced us not to
put down these rules here is because there are some customs
which direct that, if a debtor renounces a succession that is fallen
to him, his creditors may demand to be substituted to his right,
that they may accept the succession, if they hope to find their ac-
count in it. And this does no harm to the debtor; for if the suc-
cession be profitable, it is but just that his creditors should reap
the benefit of it; and if, on the contrary, it be burdensome, they
do not any way engage him, and oblige only themselves to the
charges of the succession. And as to the portions allowed to be
detained by the Falcidian and Trebellianic laws, if, the legacies
and bequests in trust not being as yet paid by the heir or execu-
tor, his creditors put a stop to the payment of them, that the Fal-
eidian and Trebellianic portions may be deducted, it seems to be
reasonable that they should be allowed to use the right of their
debtor. For it is natural and agreeable to our usage, as also to
the rules of the Roman law, that creditors may exercise all the
rights and actions of their debtors, as it is expressly said in the
first law, Cod. de pret. pign., of which these are the words :— Si
pretorium pignus quicumque judices dandum alicut perspexerint :
non solum super mobilibus rebus, et immobilibus, et se moventtbus,
sed etiam super actionibus que debilori competunt, precipimus hoc
eis licere decernere. To which we may add, that it may be that
the creditor had reason to reckon among the securities which he
took on the estate of his debtor that of the successions which were
like to fall to him.


° L. 6, D. qua in fraud. cred. ;— v. |. 28, D. de verb. sign. ; — 1.119, D. de reg. jur.; —
L 134, eod.
VOL. I. 54


638 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pam I. BOOK 11


SECTION I.


OF THE SEVERAL SORTS OF FRAUDS WHICH ARE DONE TO THE
PREJUDICE OF CREDITORS.


Art. IL


1633. Whatever Debtors do to defraud their Oreditors is revoked.
— Whatever debtors do to defeat their creditors, by alienations and
other dispositions, of what nature soever, is revoked, according as
the circumstances of the fact and the rules which follow may give
occasion to it.


IL.


1634. Fraudulent ‘Bounties. — All the dispositions which debton
make on the score of liberality, to the prejudice of their creditor,
may be revoked, whether he who receives the liberality knew &
the prejudice done thereby to the creditors, or whether he was ie
norant of it. For his honesty and integrity do not hinder th
thing from being unjust, that he should profit by their loss. Bat
if the donee received the bounty with an innocent intentios,
knowing nothing of the prejudice the creditors would suf
thereby, and if the thing that was given be no more in being, ast
he reaped no manner of profit from it, he would not be bound ®
restore a benefit from which there accrued to him no manner a
advantage.®


IIT.


TIT. X. SEC. I.] ACTS TO DEFRAUD CREDITORS. 639


IV.

1636. Alienations made to Purchasers who are conscious of the
Fraud. — Although the fraudulent alienation be made for a valua-
ble consideration, such as a sale, yet if it be proved that the pur-
chaser has been a partaker in the fraud, that he might profit by it,
getting the thing upon that account at a cheaper rate, the aliena-
tion will be revoked, without any restitution of the price to the
purchaser who is an accomplice in the fraud,’ unless the money
which he paid for it be still in being, in the hands of the debtor
who sold the thing to him.


V.


1637. To make a Purchaser conscious of the Fraud, he must
know of the Design to defraud.— To oblige him who purchases a
thing of a debtor to make restitution of it, it is not enough that
the purchaser knew that the said debtor had creditors; but he must
have been privy to the design of defrauding them. For many of
those who have creditors are not insolvent, and one does not be-
come an accomplice in the fraud except by taking part in it.‘


VI.


1638. The Intention to defraud must be followed with the Effect,
otherwise the Alienation cannot be revoked. — If the intention to de-
fraud is not attended with the effect, and the creditors suffer no
real loss by it; as if, for example, when the creditors are suing at
law for their debt, or are preparing to bring their action, the debtor
satisfies them by the sale of his goods or otherwise, the alienation
which had been made to their prejudice will have its effect. And
if afterwards the debtor borrows money, the new creditors cannot
revoke the first alienation, which was not made to their prejudice ; &
but if the new creditors had lent their money to pay off the old
ones, and if their money was actually employed to that use, they
may revoke the alienation, although it was made before they lent
their money. For in this case they would exercise the rights of
the first creditors, in whose place they succeeded by reason that
their money was employed to pay them off, according to the rules
which shall be explained in their proper place.


€ 1.7, D. qua in fr. cred. © L. 8, eod.

£ ZL. 10, § 2, D. que in fraud. cred.; —d. l. 10, § 4.

8 L. 10, § 1, D. que in fraud. cred. ; —1. 15, l. 6, eod. ; —1. 1, C. qué man. n. poss.
» See the seventh section of Pawns and Mortgages.


640 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 1.


VIL

1639. Divers Ways of defrauding.— All the ways by which
debtors diminish fraudulently their stock of goods, to defraud ther
creditors, are unlawful; and whatever is done to their prejudice by
such ways will be revoked. Thus, donations, sales at an under
price, or for a counterfeit price, for which the debtor gives an acquit-
tance, assignments made to third persons, fraudulent discharges,
and, in general, all contracts and other deeds and dispositions made
to defraud creditors, will be annulled:


VOL


1640. Other Sorts of Frauds. — If, to defraud creditors, a debter,
colluding with his own debtor, gives up a mortgage or pawn whit
he had for the security of his debt;' if to extinguish a debt x
furnishes his debtor with exceptions which he had no just title t,
or if he refers to the debtor’s oath a debt which be had snufficiest
evidence to prove;™ if he compounds the matter by transactis
with an unfair and dishonest intention, or if he gives an acqui
tance without payment;" if he lets himself be nonsuited in a jut
demand by collusion with his debtor, or if he suffers a creditor &
obtain judgment against him ina suit where he had just and bee
defences ;° if he drops an action commenced ;” if he suffers a des
to prescribe by collusion with his debtor;? and if he does or omit
to do any other thing by which he causes a loss, or a voluntary
diminution of his goods to the prejudice of his creditors; * whatewt
shall have been done by such collusion will be revoked, and te
creditors will be substituted to the first rights of their debtor!


TIT. X.8EC.1.] | ACTS TO DEFRAUD CREDITORS. 641


really due,‘ and even the principal sum, if it was a debt that was
only due upon a condition not yet come to pass. And, in this
case, care would be taken to provide for the security of those to
whom the money ought to return, whether it be the creditor, if the
condition is fulfilled, or those who ought to receive the money, if
the condition is not fulfilled.


Xx.


1642. Other Frauds. If a debtor obliges himself, to the prejudice
of his creditors, for things which he does not owe, if he gives
money or any other thing to persons to whom he owed nothing,
or if he commits other frauds of the like nature, the whole will be
revoked by his creditors."


XL


1643. A Dowry settled to defraud Creditors. — We must not
reckon, in the number of fraudulent liberalities which may be re-
voked, that which is given on the score of dowry or marriage
portion, whether it be by the father of the woman or by other per-
sons, when the husband is ignorant of the fraud. For although
the dowry may be given fraudulently by those who endow the wife,
yet the husband who receives the dowry on a valuable considera-
tion, and who without the said dowry would not have engaged in
the state of matrimony, ought not to lose it* But if the husband
was a partaker in the fraud, he may be made accountable for what
concerns his own act, according to the circumstances’


© Z. 10, § 12, D. que in fr. cred. ;—1.17, inf. eod.

® L. 3, D. qua tn fraud. cred.

z L. 2, § 1, in fine, D. que in fraud. cred.

yY D.§1;—l. 14, in fine, eod. ;—1. 10, § 14, eod. ; —I. 2, C. de revoc. his que in fraud.
ered. alien. sunt. By the ordinance of Francis I., of the 8th of June, 1532, and of Charles
IX, in January, 1563, the settlements of dowries or marriage portions could not exceed
ten thousand livres. Which, among other motives, might have that of preventing frauds
im marriage settlements. But these ordinances are of no manner of use.

We must observe on this article the difference between the condition of a husband to
whom a portion is given in marriage with his wife, without his being concerned in any
fraud whatsoever, and who receives what has been promised him for a dowry from the
person who made the settlement, although the said person may have done it with inten-
tion to defraud his creditors, and the condition of a husband who has been partaker in the
frand that was done to the creditors by giving him with his wife an excessive dowry. For
this husband, being an accomplice in the fraud, might be made answerable for it, accord-
ing to the circumstances. But the other husband, in the first case mentioned, would
have a right to receive the dowry which had been promised him, in the same manner as


54 *


642 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRt. 1. BOOK Iv.


XII

1644. He who receives what is due to him commits no Fraud. —
The creditor who receives from his debtor that which is due to
him commits no fraud, but does himself justice by taking care of
his own interest, as it is lawful for him to do. And although his
debtor be found insolvent, and because of the said payment there
does not remain enough to satisfy the other creditors, or there
even remains nothing at all for them, he is not bound to restore
what he has received for his own payment; but the other creditors
ought to blame themselves for not having been as watchful of ther
interest as he has been of his who has got payment.*


XTIL


1645. Exception to the foregoing Article. — If, after the seizure
of the goods of a debtor, or after a debtor has assigned over his
goods for the satisfaction of his creditors, one of them receives
payment of his debt, either out of the stock of the goods that have
been seized, or out of what has been made over to the crediton,
he shall be obliged to share with the other creditors what he has
received; because, in that case, he takes to himself that which be
longs in common to all the creditors.* But this is not to be under
stood of what one who has seized on the movables of his debtor
may have received, by the means of his diligence, before the other
creditors have entered their actions.”


every creditor may receive what is due to him, although there should not remain escagt
to satisfy the other creditors.
We must likewise distinguish, upon this article, between the dowry which a womat


TIT. X. BEC. 1.] ACTS TO DEFRAUD OREDITORS. 643


SECTION II.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THOSE WHO COMMIT THESE FRAUDS, OR
WHO PARTAKE IN THEM.


Art. L


1646. Engagements which follow from Frauds done to Creditors.
— He who shall have partaken in a fraud done to creditors shall
be bound to restore whatever he has received by such means,
together with the fruits or other profits, and the interest, if it is
money, to be reckoned from the day on which he received it. And
all things shall be restored to the same condition in which they
were before the fraud.*


Il.


1647. Accomplices of the Frauds. — All those who contribute to
frauds done by debtors to their creditors, whether they reap profit
by them, or whether they lend barely their names, are bound to
repair the wrong they have done. Thus, those who accept of
fraudulent assignments to what is due to the debtor are bound to
deliver up to the creditors the titles of the said credits, together
with their assignments, or that which they have received of the
debt themselves, or caused the debtor to receive, who borrowed
their name.®


Il.


1648. Punishment of the Debtor who defrauds his Creditors.—
The debtor who has defrauded his creditors is not only bound to
repair, as much as can be done out of his estate, the effect o the
fraud, but he ought likewise to be condemned to such penalties
as his unfair dealing may deserve, according to the circumstances.


IV.


1649. When a Tutor or Guardian partakes in a Fraud done to
Creditors. — If a tutor or guardian becomes partaker in any fraud


2 L. 10, §§ 19 et 20, D. que inf raud. cred.; —d. 1. 10, § 22; —L. 38, § 4, D. de usur.

b J. 14, D. que in fr. cred. See the following article.

© L. ult. § ult. D. que in fr. cred.; —1. 1, eod. See the ordimance of Orleans, art. 143,
that of Blois, art. 205, and others which inflict penalties on those who are guilty of fraud-
walent bankruptcies.


644 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK 1


which a debtor commits against his creditors, by favoring in thal
quality the unfair dealing of the said debtor, by any act which
relates to the person whom the said tutor or guardian has unde
his charge; he shall be bound personally for the loss which bis
fraud may have caused. And the minor, whose estate the tutor
or guardian had the administration of, shall likewise be bound to
repair the fraud, although he knew nothing of it, but he will be
liable only for so much as he shall have profited thereby."


4 T.10, § 5, D. que in fr. cred.; —d. 1 § 11. Although these laws make no mentios
of what the tutor may be obliged to bear in his own name for his own proper art, ye &
is most certainly liable to the loss which his deceit shall have occasioned, as are all thee
who do harm by their fraudulent dealings. JZ. 1, 4 1, D. de dolo.


BOOK III.


OF THE CONSEQUENCES WHICH ADD TO EN-
GAGEMENTS, OR WHICH STRENGTHEN AND
CORROBORATE THEM.


1650. Havine explained the several sorts of engagements which
are the subject-matter of the civil law, and which are formed
either by covenant, of which we have treated in the first book, or
without covenant, such as those which have been explained in the
second book ; it remains now, in order to finish the first part of
this work, pursuant to the plan laid down in the last chapter of
the Treatise of Laws, that we explain the consequences of engage-
ments. And in this third book we shall treat of the consequences
which add to engagements, or which strengthen and corroborate
them ; and in the fourth we shall examine the consequences which
annul engagements, or which diminish them.


TITLE I.


OF PAWNS AND MORTGAGES, AND OF THE PRIVILEGES OF
CREDITORS.


1651. The Mortgage or Pawn ts a Consequence of Engage-
ments. — The first and most frequent of all the consequences of
engagements, whether they arise from covenants, or whether they
are formed without covenant, is that of a pawn or mortgage ; that
is to say, the appropriation of the estate or goods of any person,
for a security of their performance of the engagement they are
under. The meaning and use of these two words shall be more
fully explained in the first article of the first section.


646 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK It.


1652. Origin of Mortgages. — Pawns or mortgages derive their
origin, and that very naturally, from engagements which cannot
be executed, unless the person who is engaged be seized or pos-
sessed of some estate. For the greatest force of obligations, and
the most perfect integrity in those who are bound, would be all to
no purpose, if they had no estate; and the security even from
those who have estates would not be entire, if the mortgage did
not appropriate their estates for the payment of their creditors;
because, the debtors divesting themselves of their estates, either by
donations or by sales or other titles, and the estate when alien-
ated being no longer the debtor’s estate, the creditors would be
without remedy, if they had not the right to claim the estate
which has been alienated, into whose hands soever it may have
passed. And itis by the use of a mortgage that this right hath
been established.

1653. We shall say nothing here of the privileges of creditors;
for that shall be the subject-matter of the fifth section; neither
shall we make here any other remarks on the nature of mortgages,
their kinds, the things which are subject to them, the ways by
which they are acquired, and what else relates to this matter.
For the order and place of every one of these things will suff-
ciently appear by the distinction of the sections of this title.


SECTION I.


OF THE NATURE OF A PAWN AND MORTGAGE, AND OF THE THING


TIT. I. SEC I.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 647


jecting to this right of prosecution movables, which are so liable
to change masters, have induced our lawgivers to settle the law in
relation to this matter otherwise in this kingdom. And the rule
with us is, that the mortgage or pawn upon a movable thing
lasts no longer than whilst the thing is in the custody of the per-
son who is bound, or than he who has it for his security is in pos-
session of it. But if the debtor makes it to pass into other hands,
either by alienating it or pawning it, the creditor cannot any
longer lay claim to it. And this rule is expressed in these words,
that Movables have no sequel by a mortgage.

1656. The usage, then, in France, as to movables is, that credi-
tors exercise their right to them two ways. One is, when the
movable is in the custody of the creditor, who has it in his posses-
sion, and holds it in pawn. And the other is, when the movable
is in the custody of the debtor, or of other persons who keep it in
his name; such as a depositary, or one who has borrowed it, or
another creditor who has a thing in pawn, the value of which ex-
ceeds that of his debt. In the first case the creditor may cause
the thing to be sold, if the debtor consents to it; or upon his re-
fusal, the creditor may have an order from the judge for selling it;
in order to pay himself out of the price which it yields, and that
preferably to all other creditors, even although they be prior in
time, but not to the prejudice of a creditor who has a privilege on
the same pawn.* In the second case the creditor may seize on
and expose to sale a movable thing belonging to his debtor, if he
has a mortgage upon his estate, or leave from the judge to attach
his goods. And if other creditors concur with him by other
attachments or actions, he shall be preferred to them, if he has
made the first seizure; unless it be that all the goods of the
debtor are not sufficient to satisfy all his creditors. For in this
case of insolvency, the first who seizes or attaches the goods is
not preferred, and there is no preference in favor of any of the
creditors, except such as have some privilege; and all the other
creditors share in proportion to their claims, as shall be explained
in the fifth title of the fourth book. Whereas, in immovables, the
creditors are preferred the one to the other, according to the
priority of their mortgages; which proceeds from the difference
which our usage puts between immovables, which are capable of
a mortgage, and movables, in which the mortgage has no sequel.


* See the remark on the fourth article of the fifth section.


648 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK IIL


And when the movable thing is neither in the custody of the
creditor nor of the debtor, nor of any other in his name, the debtor
having alienated it, the creditor then has no longer any right to
it, except in the case which shall be observed on the fourth article
of the fifth section.


Articte L

1657. Signification of the Words “Pawn” and “Mortgage.” —
The word mortgage signifies commonly the same thing as the
word pawn; that is, the appropriation of the thing given for the
security of an engagement; and these two words are used indif-
ferently in the same sense. But the word pawn is more properly
applied to movable things, which are put into the hands and keep-
ing of the creditor; and the word mortgage signifies properly the
right acquired by the creditor upon the immovables which are
appropriated to him by his debtor, although he be not put into
possession of them.*


IL.


1658. Mortgages are for the Security of Obligations. — The
mortgage being established for the security of the several sorts of
obligations and engagements, there is no engagement in whic
one may not give a mortgage for the security of the creditor.
Thus, those who borrow, who sell or buy, who let or take to
hire, or who enter into other engagements, may add thereto the
mortgage of their estate, for the greater security of the person te
whom they oblige themselves.°


TIT. 1. SEC. I.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 649


mortgage is acquired from the day of the contract; both to the
husband on the estate of those who contract for the wife’s portion,
and to the wife on the estate of the husband, that she may recover
her dowry when there shall be occasion for it. And as a mort-
gage may be given for a conditional debt, so likewise a mortgage
may be given upon condition for a debt which is pure and simple,
so as that the mortgage may not have its effect till the condition
is fulfilled.


IV.


1660. A Mortgage for a Loan that is to be contracted has no
Effect. — If a person, foreseeing that in a short time he may have
occasion to borrow money, obliges himself beforehand for the sum
which he shall afterwards borrow, and mortgages his estate for this
loan that is to be contracted; the mortgage stipulated on such ac-
count will be without effect. For a mortgage is only an accessory
to an engagement that is already formed; and till it be formed
there is no loan, for the person may perhaps not borrow money at
all. And besides, if a mortgage could be acquired in this manner,
it would be easy by an obligation of this nature, made to a person
whoee name is borrowed for that purpose, to defraud the creditors
from whom one would afterwards borrow.!


V.


1661. Mortgage on an Estate to come.— Those who bind
themselves by any engagement whatsoever may, for the security
of their performance of the engagement on their part, appropriate
and mortgage, not only the estate they are masters of at the time
of contracting, but likewise all the estate which they shall be after-
wards seized or possessed of. And this mortgage extends to all
the things which they shall afterwards acquire, that are capable of


¢ L. 5, D. de pign. at hyp.; —l. 13, §.1, D. qui pot. ;—l. 1, D. qui pot.; —d. I. § 1.

See, concerning the conditional mortgage, the twenticth article of this section and the
seventeenth article of the third section. JZ. 13, § 5, D.de pignor. See the following ar-
ticle.

@ L. 4, D. qua res pign. vel hyp.;—1.11, D. qui potior ; — Inst. quid. mod. re contr. obl.
See the latter part of the text cited on the foregoing article, taken out of the first law, D.
qui potior. If the obligation was made for a loan already contracted, it would carry in it
the proof of the delivery of the money, although the creditor had not delivered it till some
time after the date of the obligation, and yet the mortgage would nevertheless have its
effect. Every day obligations are given for sums of money that are not to be delivered
till some time after, and in another place ; but the engagement is already formed, and
the delivery of the money may be retarded by some obstacle without any unfair dealing.

00


VOL. I.


650 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IIL


being mortgaged, by what title soever it be that they acquire them,
and even to those which are not in being when the obligation is
contracted; so that the fruits which shall grow upon the lands wil
be comprehended in the mortgage of an estate to come.*


VI


1662. How a Mortgage extends to the Whole Estate, or is re-
strained to Part of the Estate.— Although the obligation of the
mortgage does not make express mention of the estate to come, or
that the person contracting mortgages his estate without the add:-
tion of the word all; yet the obligation will take in both the estate
in possession, and also that in reversion. But if the mortgage be
only particular, and restrained to certain lands and tenements, it
will have no effect upon the others.


VIL


1663. Accessories of the Mortgage.— Although the mortgage be
restrained to certain things, yet it will nevertheless extend to all
that shall arise or proceed from that thing which is mortgaged, or
that shall augment it and make part of it. Thus, the fruits which
grow on the lands that are mortgaged are subject to the mortgage
while they continue unseparated from the ground Thus, whea
a stud of horses, a herd of cattle, or a flock of sheep is put im
pawn into the creditor’s hands, the foals, the lambs, and other
beasts which they bring forth, and which augment their namba,
are likewise engaged for the creditor’s security. And if the whole
herd or flock be entirely changed, the heads which have renewed


ore encore? if é


te i b ihe we


ee i


TIT. 1. SEC. 1.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 651


mortgage extends to that which has augmented the ground!
Thus, a house that is built on a ground which is mortgaged is
subject likewise to the mortgage. And if, on the contrary, a
house be mortgaged, and it perishes by fire, or falls through decay,
the mortgage will subsist on the ground where the house stood
Thus, when a debtor mortgages a piece of ground of which he
had only the bare property, another enjoying the usufruct of it,
when the said right to the usufruct comes to be extinct, the mort-
gage will comprehend the ground together with the fruits.™


VIL


1664. The Proceed of the Thing mortgaged, and which is sepa-
rated from it, is not subject to the Morigage.— All that has been
said in the preceding article is to be understood only of the aug-
mentations or accessories, which are a part of the thing that is
mortgaged, and does not extend to that which is the proceed of it,

‘ bat is separated from it, and changes its nature. For, as for ex-
! ample, if one takes timber out of a forest that is mortgaged, to
¢ employ it in a building, or in making a ship, the mortgage which
5 ome has on the forest will not extend to this timber that has been
= taken out of it.
. 3


IX.


- 1665. Of a Building raised on a Ground that is mortgaged. — If
= a third possessor of a ground that is subject to a mortgage builds
= wpon it, the mortgage that is upon the ground will extend likewise


i 7. 16, eod. ; —1. 18, § 1, D. de pign. act.
! 7. 21, D. de pign. act. ;—v. 1. 29, § 2, D. de pign. et hyp.
= ZT. 18, §1, D. de pign. act. Although living creatures be of the number of movable
' @&ects, which by our usage are not capable of being mortgaged, yet they may be put in
Pawn into the hands of a creditor, to be as a security to him for a legacy, for a rent, or
@ther debt. And it would be the same thing if a herd of cattle had been bought with the
Raoncsy of a creditor, to whom it would be appropriated as a security for his money. For
Saas creditor would retain his preference on the said herd of cattle as long as it continued
am the possession of the proprietor, his debtor. See the remark on the fifth article of the
@@d section, and that which has been said in the preamble of this section, and the remark
@un the fourth article of the fifth section.
® 7. 18, § 3, D. de pign. act. Our usage, according to which movables have no sequel
Sey ow mortgage, farnishes us with another reason why these kinds of changes make the
to cease on that which becomes movable, and which is no longer in the posses-
@em of the debtor or creditor. Thus, the timber that is separated from the forest, and the
mmaterials of a house that is gone to ruin, being alienated by the debtor, the purchaser
Wenseceses them free from the mortgage which a creditor had on the said forest or on the
@una@ house.


nif


652 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK Ub


to the building; for the building is an accessory which follows
the nature of the ground, and which belongs, likewise, to the pro
prietor of the ground. But the creditor who exercises his right o
mortgage on the ground that is built upon, cannot have it ad
judged to him but with the charge of reimbursing the said poeses-
sor who has raised the building for the expenses he has laid out
upon it, provided that the expenses do not exceed the value of the
building; for if they do exceed it, it would not be just that the
creditor should be obliged to refund them.°® But whether the
building be worth more than what it cost, or worth as much, o
less, it will be free for the said possessor to retain the ground and
the building, if he pays the debt.


X.


1666. When a House that is mortgaged is burnt down and rebuil
by the Debtor. — If a house that is mortgaged happens to be burst
down, and is rebuilt by the debtor, the creditor will have the same
mortgage both upon the ground and the new house, and that with
much more reason than in the case of the foregoing article? =


XI.

1667. Of the Change of the Face of the Land or Tenement ta
is morigaged.— The other changes which may be made by a7 |
possessor of a ground that is subject to a mortgage do not ext ©
guish it, but the mortgage subsists upon the ground, whether ii ©
made worse or better, and in the condition that it happens te & |
Thus, for example, if a house is turned into a garden, a field B® ©


ln oe on 8


@IT. I. SEC. I.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 653


will not be subject to it; no more than an estate that is purchased
with the money or other thing which the creditor had in pawn;*
for the mortgage may very well extend to the accessories of the
thing that is mortgaged, according to the rule explained in the
seventh article; but it does not pass from one thing to another
which was not included in the deed of mortgage.


XITL


1669. Of an Estate that is mortgaged at the same Time to two
Creditors. — If one and the same estate be mortgaged to two
creditors for different causes at the same time, without distinguish-
ing one portion for one of the creditors and another for the other,
each of them shall have his mortgage upon the whole estate for
his whole debt. And if the whole estate be not sufficient for both
the creditors together, their right will be divided, not by moieties,
but in proportion to the difference of the debts owing to them.
For each creditor having his mortgage upon the whole estate for
his whole debt, their concurrence divides their rights upon the same
foot. And if, for example, there be ten thousand livres due to one
of the creditors, and five thousand to the other, and the estate
which is mortgaged to them be not worth fifteen thousand livres,
the one creditor will have two thirds for his mortgage, and the
ether one third.’


XIV.


1670. Is an Equality of Mortgage the Possessor is preferred. —
If, in the case of two creditors to whom the same thing is mort-


® ZL. 3, C. tn quid. caus. pign. ; —1.7, in fine, D. qui pot. If a debtor acquires by an ex-
change another land or tenement in lieu of that which he had mortgaged, would this ex-
change of the said land or tenement make the mortgage to pass to the land or tenement
which the debtor has got in exchange? If the mortgage was limited by a covenant to
the land or tenement given away in exchange by the debtor, it would seem that the mort-
gage ought not to change, no more than it ought to extend to both the lands or tene-
ments. For besides that it is the nature of the mortgage to affect only the land or tene-
ment that is engaged, and to follow it, the change which should discharge from the mort-
gage the land or tenement given away in exchange by the debtor, and which should
eharge with it the land or tenement which he receives in exchange, would be attended
with inconveniences which would cause injustice to the creditors of the persons who make
the exchange, not only by the inequality which might happen in the value of the two


- Jamds or tenements, but because of other consequences, of which it is easy to judge with-


oat further explication. But if this debtor had mortgaged all his estate, present and to
come, the mortgage would extend to both the lands or tenements.
® ZL. 16, § 8, D. de pign. et hyp. ; —I. 10, eod. ; —1. 20, 4.1, D. de pign. act. See the three
following articles.
Ah *


654 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IL


gaged for the whole at the same time, one of them is put into
possession, he shall be preferred. For the possession distinguishes
their right in favor of him who, besides the equality of the title,
has the advantage of being in possession.£ But if one part d
the thing is mortgaged to one creditor and the rest to anotbe,
each shall have his separate right on his own portion.


XV.


1671. Of a Mortgage upon the undivided Portion of one of the
Coheirs to an Estate. — If an estate belonging in common, with
out any division or partition, to two or more persons, such a
copartners, coheirs, or others, one of them has mortgaged to his
creditor either all his estate or the right which he had to thet
estate, this creditor will have his mortgage upon the undivided
portion of his debtor, as long as the estate shall remain in com
mon. But after the partition, the right of this debtor being limited
to the portion that has fallen to his lot, the mortgage of his crediter
will be also limited to the same. For, although before the parte
tion the whole estate was subject to the mortgage for the und
vided portion of this debtor, and though a right which is acquiml
cannot be diminished; yet, seeing the debtor had not a simp
and immutable right of enjoying his share of the estate alway
undivided, but that his right implied the condition of a liberty &
all the proprietors to come to a partition in order to assign ©
every one a portion that might be wholly and entirely their om |
the mortgage, which was only an accessory to the debtor's right
implied likewise the same condition, and affected only that whic
should fall to the debtor’s share, the portions of the others remal |


A a


w


TIT. 1. SEC. I.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 655


XVI.

1672. The Creditors Mortgage on the Lands of a Person de-
ceased extends io all the Portions of the said Lands, even after
they are divided among the Coheirs.— The partitions which co-
heirs make among themselves of the lands or tenements of a suc-
cession make no change in the mortgage which the creditors of
the deceased had on the said lands or tenements; and each land
or tenement remains engaged for the whole debt. Thus, the co-
heir who possesses one land or tenement of the succession, having
paid his share of the debt, cannot hinder his land or tenement
from being seized on for the portions of the other coheirs, no more
than if that portion of the debt had been paid by the deceased
hhimeelf. For the mortgage affects every particular land or tene-
ment of the succession, and every part of the said land or tene-
maent for the whole debt.” And this heir will only have his recourse
against his coheirs for their portions.


eetnine his right after the partition among the proprietors, and that he has his usufract
entire upon the portions of all the proprietors. These laws are founded upon this nicety,
that the usufructuary or the mortgagee, having their right entire and undivided upon the
whole estate, the partition ought not to take away their right. But this right of theirs is
$m effect no other than what has been explained in the article. And likewise this nicety
would be attended with an infinite number of inconveniences, if persons interested in a
pertition, whether they be copartners or others, after they have made a partition without
fraud, might be disturbed by the creditors of one of their number, and all their portions
might be seized and sold for the debt of one person alone. To which may be applied
the last words of the only law, Cod. si commun. res pign. data sit : — Unde intelligis con-
tractum ejus nullum prejudicium dominio vestro facere potuisse.

The difficulty would still be much greater in the case of a partition of a succession con-
sisting of movable effects, and of one only land or tenement, which it would be either im-
possible or very inconvenient to divide into shares, or even although there were more
lands or tenements than one in the succession, which the heirs or executors would be
obliged for their conveniency to divide, so that some of them should have only for their
shares movable effects, and but little, or perhaps nothing at all, in the lands and tene-
ments. For, in this case, the creditors of the coheir or coexecutor who should chance to
have in his lot either little or nothing at all of the lands and tenements would find them-
selves disappointed in the hopes they may have entertained of having a mortgage upon
the lands or tenements that made part of the succession. But these creditors ought to
have a watchful eye before the partition, both over the movables and immovables, that
toshing be done to their prejudice. For if the partition were made without fraud, they
might be told that their security was only upon what might fall to the share of their
_ debtor; and if, for example, that debtor had wasted and dissipated the movable effects


BA


. Which fell to his lot, it would not be just that the shares of the others should go to the


t of his debts.

Y L.8, § 2, D. de pign. act.;—I. 2, C. si unus ex plur. hered. credit.; —1. 16, C. de distr.
Bign. ;—1. 1, C.deluit. pign. It is upon this rule that this common maxim is founded,
Ghat the heirs are bound by virtue of the mortgage for the whole debt, although they are
ound personally only every one for the portion of the inheritance that falls to his


mbes a
———


pas Aa Goren AD ERLOTD:


1674. The Mortgage is undivided. — The mortgag
undivided appropriation of all that is mortgaged, for
of all that is due; and in such a manner, that, for exa
lands or tenements be mortgaged for one and the sa)
mortgage hath not this effect, that each land or teneme
only for a part of the debt; but, of what value soever |
are, both the one and the other, bound for the whole |:
one of the said lands or tenements happens to peris
gage remains entire for the whole debt upon the land
which is still in being.* And likewise, although the
half or other share of the debt, the two lands or teneme
to be bound for what remains unpaid. For it is the
mortgage, that all that is mortgaged serves as a sec
whole debt, and even all the parts of each land or te!
is mortgaged are all of them bound for all that is due.


XIX.


1675. What may not be sold cannot be mortgaged.
only pawn and mortgage such things as may be sold
may not be sold cannot likewise be mortgaged. For
benefit of the mortgage consists only in the alienatio
be made of the thing mortgaged, for the payment of '
upon that security.°


share. For the personal action is divided among the persons of the heirs:
shall be explained in its proper place. But the mortgage subsists undir
equally all the lands and tenements that are subject to it, and all the pa


TIT. I. BEC. 1.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 657


XX.

1676. A Mortgage given by a Debtor on a Land or Tenement
that is not his own.— As one may sell a thing which belongs to
another person,’ so likewise may he mortgage it; whether it be
that the owner consents to the mortgage, or that he ratifies it;* or
that the mortgage be conditional, to have its effect when he who
engages a thing that is not his own shall become master of it.
But if the debtor pawns or mortgages a thing as his own, which
he knows does not belong to him, he is guilty of cozenage, which
knavish practice the Romans distinguished by the name of sféel-
Honatus, and discouraged by severe penalties. However, if after-
wards he becomes master of the thing, the mortgage will then
have its effect; but without prejudice to the mortgages of the
ereditors of the person to whom the thing belonged.


XXI.


1677. Cozenage or Stellionate in Mortgaging. — He who, having
mortgaged a certain land or tenement, specified and particularly
named, to one creditor, engages it afterwards to another, without
giving him notice of the first mortgage, commits an infidelity
which is called by the name of stellionate. And if this second eredi-
tor be a loser thereby, the debtor not having wherewithal to satisfy
all his creditors, he ought to be punished for this his knavish deal-
ing, according as the act may deserve; and especially if he had
declared to the second creditor, that the land or tenement which he
mortgaged to him was not engaged to others; for in this case the
knavery would be the greater. And even although the debtor
should have goods enough besides for the satisfaction of his credi-
tors, yet he would be answerable for the consequences. And if, for
example, that land or tenement had been given to the second credi-
tor for assigning a rent, the debtor might be constrained by reason
of that fraud to redeem the rent, or he might be otherwise punished,
according to the circumstances. But the crime of stellionate is not


tract of Sale, what are the things which may not be sold. But there are other things
which one cannot mortgage, although they may be sold. See hereafter the twenty-fourth
and following articles of this section.

4 See the thirteenth article of the fourth section of the Contract of Sale.

© L. 20, D. de pign. act.

f L. 16, § 7, D. de pign. et hyp.

& L. 36, § 1, D. de pign. act.

b L. 41, eod. ;—1. 5, C. si alien. res pig. dat. sit. See the twenty-first article of the third
section.


658 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK 111.


imputed to him who, having once mortgaged his whole estate,
does afterwards mortgage again either all his estate in general, or
some part of it in particular; neither is that crime imputed to him
who mortgages the same land or tenement to several creditor,
whose credits, when they are all put together, do not exceed the
value of the land or tenement that is mortgaged!


XXII.


1678. How Tutors, Guardians, or Factors may mortgage the Es
tates of Persons committed to their Care. — Tutors, guardians, fac-
tors, or agents appointed by letter of attorney, and others who have
power, either by their offices or by virtue of some order, to borrow,
and to pawn or mortgage the estates of those whose affairs are
committed to their care, may mortgage the said estates, according
to the power which they have by virtue of their offices, or of the
orders which they have from the persons for whom they act. Bat
if they are the estates of minors or of some community, the er
gagement, and the. mortgage, which is a consequence of it, have
not their effect, unless the obligation has turned to their advantage,
and unless the formalities prescribed in such contracts have bees
observed.


XXIII.


1679. Mortgage of Things Incorporeal.— One may pawn wd
mortgage, not only corporeal things, that 1s, such things as may &
felt and touched, but. also things incorporeal, such as debts, se
tions, and other rights; and the eflects of this sort are compe
hended in the general mortgage, although they be not particulary


TIT. 1. SEC. I.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 659


XXIV.

1680. Things which cannot be mortgaged.— The general mort-
gage, in what terms soever it be conccived, does not extend to
things which humanity forbids us to strip our debtors of, and
which consequently ought not to be comprehended in the mort-
gage. Thus, a creditor cannot seize or take in pawn the neces-
sary wearing-apparel of his debtor, his bed, or his other movables
and utensils that are of the like necessity to him. Neither can the
debtors give in pledge such things specially and by name. For
the creditor could not stipulate such an engagement, without
transgressing the rules of equity and good manners.”


XXV.


1681. Things necessary for the Tillage of the Ground cannot be
put in Pawn.— Beasts belonging to the plough, ploughs, and
other things necessary for tilling and cultivating the ground, are
not capable of being mortgaged or pawned, and cannot be seized
on by the creditor; not only because of the presumption that it
was not the intention of the debtor and creditor to strip the debtor
of things destined to so necessary a use, but likewise because of
the prejudice which the public might suffer from such an interrup-
tion of the agriculture.°


XXVI.


1682. Things which are not in Commerce cannot be pawned or
morigaged.— Things which do not enter into commerce, and
which cannot be sold, such as things belonging to the public,


into other hands. But obligations and other personal debts are of the nature of movables,
and cannot be seized by the creditor when they are out of the debtor's possession. For
although the creditor might cause them to be scized whilst they belong to the debtor, vet
he cannot prosecute them after the debtor has assigned them over to another person,
and the said assignment has been intimated to the person who is indebted to this debtor,
or he has accepted of the assignment. Offices are reckoned to be in the number of im-
movables, and are capable of being mortgaged. Sce the edict of February, 1683. See,
concerning the seizure of movable effects, the end of the preamble of this section. See,
as to things corporeal and incorporeal, the third article of the second section of the title
of Things.

® I. 6 a 7, D. de pign. eat hypoth. ; — 1.1, C. que res pign. obl. poss. vel non. See Exod.
xxii 26; — Deut. xxiv. 6, 17 ;— Job xxiv. 3.

See, upon this and the following articles, the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth articles
of the thirty-third title of the ordinance of the month of April, 1667, and that of Orleans,
art. 28, that of Blois, art. 57, the edict of the 16th of March, 1595, and other regulations.

© L.7, C. que res pign. obl. poss. v.n.;— 1. 8, eod.


660 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IIL


things sacred, cannot be pawned or mortgaged, while they remain
destined to the said uses.?


XX VIL


1683. The Benevolence of the Prince, and the Pay of Offcen
and Soldiers. — The benevolence of the prince, the subsistence
and pay of officers and soldiers, are of the number of those things
which cannot be distrained. For it is for the public good that
such money should not be diverted from the use to which it wa
appropriated, for the necessary service of the prince and of the
country.


XXVIIL


1684. The Mortgage called Antichresis.— The mortgage may
be settled two different ways. One is, when the debtor mortgages
houses or lands, for the security of what he owes, but still keeps
possession of them himself. The other is, when the debtor pas
his creditor into possession of the houses or lands which he mot
gages to him, allowing the creditor to reap the fruits and profits
of them as a compensation for the legal interest which the debtx
is obliged to pay. And this last sort of mortgage is called in th
Roman law antichresis. Thus, for example, if a father-in-law,
who owes his son-in-law the portion which he promised with hs
daughter, gives him houses or lands to enjoy, that he may reap
the profits and fruits of them in lieu of the interest of the mar
riage portion; this is such a mortgage as the Romans calle
antichresis, And this contract gives the creditor, over snl


FIT. 1. SEC. 1.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 661


XXIX.

1685. The Creditor who has a Right to the Issues and Profits
may farm them out.— The creditor who has a right to the issues
and profits of the lands which are mortgaged to him may farm
them out.*


XXX.


1686. When the Debtor borrows his own Goods that he has laid
is, Pawn. — When the creditor is put into possession of the thing,
movable or immovable, that is given him in pledge, he has a right
to keep it till he is paid what is owing to him; and the debtor
cannot turn the creditor out of possession, nor make use of his
own thing, without the consent of his creditor. As if, for example,
the thing given in pawn be a movable thing, which the creditor is
willing to let his debtor have the use of for a time, it will be a
kind of loan, which will give the creditor a right to take posses-
sion of it again, the debtor’s possession during the time that he
uses his own thing being only precarious.


XXXI.


1687. If the Pawn be not sufficient to pay the Debt, the Debtor
will still be accountable for the Surplus. —If it happens that the
pawn which a creditor has taken for his security be not sufficient
for his payment, and that the creditor cannot be charged with any
fault whereby he may have diminished the value of the pawn, he
will recover the surplus of his debt out of the other goods of his
debtor."


° XXXIL


1688. One may mortgage his Estate for the Debt of another
Person.—One may mortgage his estate, not only for his own
proper debts, but likewise for the debts of others; in the same
manner as one may become surety for other persons.*


XX XIII.


1689. Approbation of the Person whose Thing is mortgaged by
another. — If a debtor mortgages that which belongs to another


~e


® L. 23, D, de pign.; —1. 11, § 1, eod. t 7. 35, § 1, D. de pign. act.

© L. 28, D. de reb. cred. ; —1. ult. § 4, C. de jure dom. imp. ; —1. 9, D. de distr. pign. ; —
10, C. de ol. et act.

= L. 5, § ult. D. de pign. et hyp.

VOL. I. 56


TIT. 1. SEC. I1.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 663


man law, by the bare effect of a covenant or agreement, if the mort-
gage was thereby stipulated, and even without any indenture in
writing, and without the presence or assistance of any public
officer whatsoever; in which the Emperor Leo made some change,
by requiring the presence of three witnesses of probity and integ-
rity. But by our usage in France, covenants do not establish a
right of mortgage, although it should be therein expressly men-
tioned, unless the said covenants are made in the presence of pub-
lic notaries. For, unless this formality were observed, it would
be an easy matter for debtors who should have a mind to defraud
their creditors to give to their latter creditors ancient mortgages, by
antedating the same. Thus, when we shall hereafter make men-
tion of a conventional mortgage, it is always to be understood of
covenants made in the presence of notaries public.


Art. L


1692. The Mortgage is either General or Special.— One may
mortgage either all his estate in general, or only some part of it,
which he particularly specifies. And this makes two first kinds
of mortgage, the one general and the other special; and one may
also join both the one and the other together, engaging at the
same time both all his estate in general, and likewise some part
of it in particular, which he expressly mentioned.


IL


1693. The Special Mortgage is of two Sorts. — The special
mortgage is of two sorts. One where the creditor is put into
possession, and the other where the thing that is engaged remains
in the debtor’s custody. Thus, in the mortgage called antichre-
sis, the creditor is in possession of the thing engaged to him; and
in the bare special mortgage, the debtor remains in possession of
the thing that is mortgaged. Thus, one may give his movables
for security, whether he delivers them to his creditor, or whether he
keeps them in his own hands. But the appropriation of a mova-
ble for the security of a debt is not, properly speaking, special,
but whilst the thing is in the custody of the creditor, or he has
a preference upon it before other creditors.®


4 LZ. 4, D. de pign. © D. 11, Cod. qui potior.

® LZ. 15, § 1, D. de pign. et hyp. ; — Novel. 112, c. 1.

& 7.11, D. de pign. act.;—I. 11, § 1, D. de pign. et hyp. See the fifth section, concern-
ing the Preference of Creditors.


664 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L BOOK IIL


YI.

1694. The Mortgage is either Simple or Privileged. — The matt-
gage, under another view, may be divided into two other kinds;
one is that of the simple mortgage, and the other is that which
gives a preference or a privilege. The simple mortgage is that
which is barely an appropriation of the thing mortgaged, without
any other difference, among many creditors to whom the same
thing has been engaged at different times, than that he who is
first in time will be preferred to the others who have no privilege;
and the mortgage which is privileged is that which gives a prefer-
ence without respect to time. Thus, the creditor whose money
has been laid out in repairing or rebuilding a house is prefered
before the creditors who had a prior mortgage upon the seid
house.°


IV.


1695. Three Ways of acquiring a Mortgage.— The mortgage is
acquired three manner of ways; either with the consent of the
debtor by agreement, if he engages his estate;* or without the
debtor's consent, by the quality and bare effect of the engagement,
the nature of which is such that the law has annexed to it the
security of a mortgage, as in the cases mentioned in the following
article ;° or, lastly, the mortgage is acquired by the authority of
justice,f although the law had given no mortgage, which happens
when the creditor who had no mortgage obtains a sentence d
condemnation in his favor; for the sentence or decree which con-
demns the debtor gives a mortgage to the creditor, although ne
Te de { Ly) i 5 Ls -


TIT. I. SEC. 11.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 665


which is acquired by a title or deed wherein the mortgage is ex-
pressed, such as a bond or a contract.6 And that is called a tacit
mortgage which is acquired by right," although it be not particu-
larly mentioned; such as that which minors, prodigals, and idiots,
or madmen, have on the estates of their tutors or guardians ;! such
as the king has on the estates of the farmers and receivers of his
revenue ;! and some others, which shall be explained in the fifth
section.


VI.


1697. A Mortgage is either Conventional or Legal.— The dis-
tinction explained in the foregoing article, of an express mortgage
and of a tacit mortgage, may be applied to that of a conventional
mortgage and of a legal mortgage, of which mention has been
made in the preamble of this section; for the conventional mort-
gage is expressly stipulated by the agreement, and the legal
mortgage is understood, whether it be expressed or not.™


VIL


1698. The Oreditor cannot by Force take the Pawn from his
Debtor. — A mortgage cannot be acquired but by one of the ways
explained in the fourth article; and the creditor cannot of himself
either take possession of an immovable thing or seize upon a mov-
able thing belonging to his debtor, unless he consents to it, or
it be by the authority of justice, if the debtor does not consent.
Thus, much less may the creditor enter the house of his debtor, to
take pledges out of it." And if a movable thing, taken away in
this manner without the consent of the debtor, should chance to
perish, although by a mere accident, the loss of it would fall upon
this creditor.°


& L. 4, D. de pign. et hyp.

b ZL. 4, D. in quid. caus. pign. vel hyp. tac. contr.

§ ZT. 20, C. de adm. tut.; — Nov. 118, c. 5, in f.; —1.19, § 1, Z. 20, 21, 22, D. de reb.
auct. jud. poss.;—l.1,§ 1, C. de rei ur. act. See the thirty-sixth article of the third seo
tion of Jutors.

' ZL. 2, C. in quid. caus. p. v. hyp. tac. Sec the nineteenth article of the fifth section.

= LT. 2, C. de pret. pign. Sce the fifth article.

® LZ. 11, C. de pign. act. ; —I. 3, C. de pign. et hyp. ; — Deut. xxiv. 10, 11.

© L. 30, D. de pign. act.


06 *


666 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L. BOOK Iu.


SECTION III.


OF THE EFFECTS OF THE MORTGAGE, AND OF THE ENGAGENENTS
WHICH IT FORMS ON THE DEBTOR'S PART.


Art. I.


1699. The First Effect of the Mortgage is the Right to get the
Thing that is mortgaged or pawned exposed to Sale. — The use of
the mortgage being to secure to the creditor his payment, the first
effect of the mortgage is the right to sell the pledge or thing mort
gaged, whether the creditor has been put into possession of it, a
whether it has remained in the hands of the debtor.*


IL


1700. Second Effect, a Right to follow the Thing mortgaged.—
The second effect of the mortgage is, that into whatsoever hand
the thing mortgaged passes, whether it be that the debtor engages
it to a second creditor, giving him power to sell it, which he hed
not given to the first; or that he puts the second creditor
possession; or that he sells the thing, or gives it away, or dispose
of it otherwise, or that he is stripped of it without his own act aud
deed ; the creditor to whom he had before mortgaged it has a nght
to follow the thing, and to evict it from the possessors.” :


TIT. I. SEO. I11.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 667


IV.

1702. A Fourth Effect, Security for all the Consequences of the
Debt. — This is likewise a fourth effect of the mortgage, that it
serves as a security, not only for what is due at the time that the
mortgage is contracted, but also for all the consequences that shall
arise from the said debt, and which shall augment it; such as the
interest of the principal sum, costs and damages, expenses laid out
im preserving the pledge, and others of the like nature And the
creditor shall have his mortgage for all these consequences, from
the day that he has it for the principal debt.


V.


1703. These Effects take place whether the Mortgage be General
oy Special. — All these effects of the mortgage take place equally
on the land or tenement that is mortgaged, whether the first credi-
tor had a general mortgage on all the debtor’s estate, or a special
mortgage on some particular land or tenement; and whether, like-
wise, the mortgage which the other creditors have be general or
special. Thus, he who has the first a general‘ mortgage is pre-
ferred before him who has the second mortgage, although it be
special. Thus, likewise, the first mortgagee who has a special
mortgage is preferred before the second who has a general mort-


gage.


VI.


1704. Discussion in Favor of a Third Possessor.— Although the
creditor who has a mortgage, whether general or special, may ex-
ercise his right on all the lands and tenements that are subject to
the mortgage, and even on those which are in the possession of
third persons; yet it seems agreeable to equity, that, if he can
hope to recover payment of his debt out of the other effects which
remain with his debtor, he should not begin with troubling the
third possessor, even although his mortgage was special; but that
before he molests the third possessor, and gives occasion to the
consequences of having a recourse against the debtor, he ought to
discuss the other effects remaining in the debtor’s possession.®


4 LZ. 8,§ ult. D. de pign. act.

* L. 18, D. qui pot. in pign.;—v. l. 8, D. de pign

f £2, D. qui pot. tn pign. ; — l. 6, C. eod. a a caesar

& L. 2, C. de pign. et hyp.; —1. 9, C. de distr. pign. ; —l. 47, D. de jur. fise.; —1t.1, C.
de conv. fisc. deb. ;— Nov. 4,c.2. We have set down here this rule about discussion, be-


TIT. 1. SEC. I11.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 669


mortgage on the same estate for all that it is worth. But he may
secure his mortgage by paying off that which is due to the credi-
tors who have a prior mortgage to his, or by depositing the
money, in case the creditors refuse to take it.®


VIL


1706. The Same.— The payment which a creditor makes to
another prior creditor secures him his pledge only with regard to
the creditors who are posterior to him whom he pays off. But it
is useless to him with respect to all other creditors who are prior
to his own mortgage, and to that which he has paid off!


mticle, established in favor of a third possessor who is in possession of houses or lands
mortgaged to a creditor. And this discussion has nothing in common with that of a spe-
lal mortgage before a general one. For, on the contrary, although the mortgage which
& ereditor has on a house or lands which are in the hands of a third possessor be a spe-
al mortgage, yet he cannot exercise it against this third possessor, until he has first dis-
emased the remaining part of the estate that is subject to his mortgage. And this is
banded on a principle of equity, which seems to require that this third possessor should
net Be disturbed in his possession without a necessity, and that he be not forced to have
bie recourse against the debtor, and that the debtor be not exposed to the consequences
of a warranty; but that this third possessor should remain unmolested in his possession,
(ii it shall appear, by the discussion of the other effects, whether the creditor may be paid
without molesting the third possessor. It is because of these reasons, and on the founda-
liom of the last text cited on this article, that the discussion in favor of a third possessor
is received in some customs; although in others the creditor may bring his action imme-
Mately against the third possessor of the thing on which he has his mortgage, and that
epon another view of equity, because of the inconveniences which may ensue if the other
efects are not sufficient to satisfy the mortgagee. For in that case the discussion proves
altogether fruitless, and is of no other use but to multiply lawsuits and costs, which are
thargeable both to the creditor, the debtor, and even to the third possessor, seeing the
hemses or lands which he is in possession of will prove thereby to be engaged for a
greater sum than they were before the discussion; whereas the condition of the posses-
por might have been better if he had discharged the debt at first, in order to keep the
estate he was in possession of. So that it might perhaps be more advantageous both
to the creditor, the debtor, and also to the third possessor, if there were no discussion
wall. For the possessor ought to take his measures aright, and to make his choice,
either not to demand the discussion, or to be contented to bear the charges of it in case
the discussion prove fruitless by the event.

Is will be needless to explain here some other differences which were in the Roman
law between the special and gencral mortgage, seeing they are not in use with us. V.
L 12, Cod. de don. inter vir. et uror.; — |. 3, Cod. de servo pign. dato man. ; — Nov. 7, c. 6.

b 7. 5, C. qui potior ;— 1.1, eod. This depositing of the money ought to be made ac-
cording to the formalities prescribed by our usage, that is, with the permission of the
jadge, and after calling the adverse party to sce the money deposited.

Ig is to be remarked on this article, that we do not speak here of the substitution to the
aacient creditor. See, concerning the said substitution, the sixth article of the sixth sec-
tion.

i This is a consequence of the preceding article. ZL. 12,§ 1, D. qui pot.


TIT. I. SEC. 111] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 671


not be sold till after a certain time, or simply, that it should not
be sold at all; the sale in the first case could not be made till
after the time limited ; and in the second case, the creditor might
sammon the debtor to pay, and in default of payment might pro-
cure an order for the sale, after a delay to be regulated by the
judge. For the effect of that agreement is not to render the pawn
always useless.™


XI.


1709. Stipulation that the Pledge shall belong to the Creditor in .
Default of Payment.— Although the thing pawned or mortgaged
be given that it may be sold in default of payment, yet the credi-
tor cannot stipulate, that, if he is not paid at the term agreed on,
the pledge shall from thenceforth be his in lieu of his payment.
For such a covenant would be contrary to humanity and good
manners, seeing the pledge may chance to be of greater value, or
esteemed by the debtor to be worth more than the debt; and be-
cause it is given to the creditor only for his security, and not that
he may take advantage of the poverty of his debtor But the
debtor and creditor may agree, that, if the debtor does not pay
within a certain time, the thing engaged shall remain as sold to
the creditor for the price which they shall then regulate between
themselves, when the sale is to take effect. And this is a condi-
tional sale, which has nothing unlawful in it,° provided that the
thing be estimated at a reasonable price, either by a court of jus-
tice, or by the mutual consent of debtor and creditor, and with a
liberty to the debtor either to part with the pledge to the creditor
at that price, paying the overplus, if the pledge be not enough to
acquit the debt; or to have it sold by cant or auction; or to take
it back himself, he paying the debt. And if the debtor makes
choice of this last expedient, the judge may fix a time for his pay-
ing the debt, and taking up his pledge.


™ Ubi vero convenit ne distraheretur, creditor si distraxerit, furti obligatur: nisi ei ter
faerit denuntiatum ut solvat, et cessaverit. L. 4, D. de pign. act.

These three summonses, or notices, are not in use with us. For, as has been remarked
om the ninth article, the pledge cannot be sold but by an order of the judge, if the debtor
does not consent to the sale. So that we have conceived this tenth article in a manner
eonformable to our usace.

® LT. ult. C. de pact. pign. See the eighth article of the third section, and the eleventh
and twelfth articles of the twelfth section of the Contract of Sale.

© FZ. 16, § ult. D. de pign. et hyp. See the fourth article of the fifth section of the Con-
tract of Sale, and the seventeenth article of the second section of Covenants. L. ult. C. de


jure dom. impetr.


672 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK In.


1710. When several Things are pawned or mortgaged for the
same Debt.— If several things are pawried’ or mortgaged for one
and the same debt, whether by a special or general mortgage, the
creditor has it in his choice to exercise his right of mortgage upon
which of them he pleases? Thus, the creditor to whom al] the
movables are engaged may seize upon and cause to be sold such
of the movables as he pleases; and he may likewise choose
among the immovables. But although all the movables and im
movables of a debtor be mortgaged, if the debtor be a minor, the
creditor cannot expose to sale nor seize upon the immovables til
he has first discussed the movables.4


XIII.


1711. Whether the Debtor may release one Paton by giving
another in tts Stead, or by offering Bail.—'The debtor who
mortgaged a thing, or given it in pawn, cannot disengage it wil
out the consent of the creditor, even although he should offer bal;
for this security is not equal to that of the pawn. But if he offen
another pawn which is worth as much or more than that whet
he gave at first; and if, for example, instead of a bed, a mit @
hangings, or other movable that is pawned, the debtor, who
occasion for them, offers silver plate of a sufficient value, am
which is his own; it would be equitable not to indulge the asé
itor in his unreasonable capricious humor, if he should refase®
accept of it. |


XIV.


FIT. f. SEC. 11h]... PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 673


e Xv '
1713. The Moneys arising from the wie! of the Thing pawned
or. mortgaged must first be applied to the Discharge ‘of the Interest,
and next of the Debt. — Seéing the mortgage is given asa security,
not only for the principal debt, but also for the” interest, if any is
due; and that the interest is a recompense for the loss which the
creditor sustains by the debtor's delaying to. acquit the principal
debt; the moneys which may be raised frémn ‘the ‘fruits of the
thing pawned or mortgaged, not being sufficient to acquit both the
principal and interest, must be applied in the first place to the dis-
charge of the interest. For the debtor must begin with indemni-
fying his creditor for the damage he has sustained by this delay.'


XVI


1714. Effect of the Mortgage before the Term of Payment.—
Although the term of payment be not yet come, yet the creditor
may exercise his right of mortgage for his security, according to
the circumstances. Thus, he may oppose the sale of his pledge,
whether it be a movable or immovable thing, in order to preserve


his right."
XVIL


1715. Mortgage for a Conditional Debt.— If a mortgage hath
been given for the security of a debt which depends on the uncer-
tain event of a condition, he who may become creditor when the
condition shall happen, not having as yet acquired his right, can-
not in the mean while bring his action for the mortgage, whether
it be to get the pledge that is engaged to him to be sold, or that
he may be put in possession of it. But when the condition shall
have happened, it will have that effect which is called retroactive,
which will give to the obligation and to the mortgage their force
from the day of contract, in the same manner as if there had been
no condition at all inserted. So that this creditor will be preferred
before the intermediate creditors; that is to say, those who have
become creditors between the date of this conditional contract


which have no sequel by a mortgage, if the creditor takes of them in pawn to a much
greater value than his debt, there might be a hardship in such a proceeding which might
justly deserve to be repressed.
* See the fourth article of this section. Z. 35, D. de pignor. act. See the fifth and sev-
enth articles of the fourth section of Payments.
© L. 14, D. de pign. e hyp. See the following article.
VOL. I. o7


674 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK In.


and the event of the condition. And he may in the mean whik,
before the condition has happened, watch for the preservation of
his right, either by preventing fraudulent alienations, or hindering
seizures of the estate subject to his mortgage, or interrupting the
prescription of a third in possession.*


XVIIL


1716. Effect of the Mortgage of a Second Creditor spor a Thing
engaged to another.— If a debtor, who has already mortgaged
land or tenement to a creditor, engages it to a second, although
this debtor, to avoid the crime of stellionate, declares to the second
creditor that the said land or tenement is already engaged to
another, the mortgage of the second creditor will have its effect
not only upon so much of the land or tenement as remains over
and above the value of what is due to the first creditor; butit
affects the whole land or tenement, so as to render all and every
part of it subject to this second mortgage, after the first creditor
shall have been paid off. And it would be the same thing
although the debtor had particularly expressed that he engaged to
the second creditor only what should remain after the paymentol |
the first. For after the first creditor is paid off, the remainde
would comprehend the whole land or tenement?


XIX,
1717. Of the Expenses which the Creditor has laid out on tt |
Pledge.— All the effects of the mortgage which have been m= |


* L.13,§ 5, D. de pign. et hyp.; —1.9,§ 2, D. qui pot.;s—1. 1,41, e008 Bee hele


TIT. 1. SEC. I11.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 675


tioned hitherto are as so many engagements to which the debtor
is liable. And this is likewise another, that if the creditor has
been at any necessary charges for the preservation of the pledge,
whether he was in possession of it or not, the debtor is bound to
reimburse him, although the thing were no longer in being; as if
a house repaired by the creditor had been carried away by a flood,
or burnt down without his fault. And if the pledge be still in
being, and in the custody of the creditor, he may detain it for ex-
penses of this kind; for they augment the debt, and are a part
of it.


XX.


1718. Improvements of the Pledge made by the Creditor. — If the
creditor has been at any expense which was not necessary for the
preservation of the pledge, but which has augmented the value of
it; as if he has improved a land or tenement which was mortgaged
to him by way of antichresis, that is, that he should reap the fruits
of it in lieu of the interest of his debt, so that the debtor, not be-
ing in a condition to repay the charges of the improvements, be
reduced either to suffer the land or tenement to be sold, or to aban-
don it; these kinds of expenses will be moderated according to
the circumstances. Thus, for example, if the debtor himself had
begun these improvements, he will have less reason to complain
of them; or if the creditor has reaped from the said improvements
fruits to a greater value than the interest of the money which he
laid out on them amounts to, he will be entitled to a smaller sum
for his reimbursement. And according to the other circumstances,
such as the persons, the nature of the land or tenement, the quality
of the improvements, the value of the fruits which the creditor
shall have reaped, the time that he has enjoyed the fruits, and
other circumstances of the like nature, it will be necessary to take
such a medium as may not favor either the severity or hardship of
the creditor, or the unreasonable nicety of the debtor.*


XXI.


1719. The Creditor does not lose his Debt if his Pledge is
evicted from him.—If the creditor is paid by the debtor’s aban-


® LZ. 8, D. de pign. act. ; —1.6, C. de pignor. The creditor has not only a mortgage for
this sort of expenses, but he has also a privilege. See the sixth article of the fifth section.

® L. 25, D. de pign. act. ; — v. 1. 38, D. de rei vind. See the seventeenth and eighteenth
articles of the tenth section of the Contract of Sale.


676 THE CIVIL LAW. [Part 1. BOOK I


doning to him the land or tenement on which he had his mot
gage, and afterwards another creditor of this debtor comes and
evicts the said land or tenement from him; or if the creditor, hav-
ing been paid in money by virtue of an order of the judge, he
having given security to make restitution in case the condition
of a debt prior to his should come to pass, be obliged to return the
money he had received in payment, as in the case remarked on
the seventeenth article; his debt revives again. For it was extir
guished only on condition that the payment which was made to
him, whether in land or money, should have its effect.*


XXIL


1720. When the Debtor gives in Pawn one Thing instead of ar
other. — The debtor who gives in pledge to his creditor one thing
for another, as copper gilt for silver gilt, is guilty of the crime of
stellionate, for which he may be punished according to the cireum-
stances.°


XXIIL


1721. How the Oreditor is to be put in Possession of his Pledge.
— If a creditor has a mind to take possession of his pledge by
virtue of an agreement which entitles him so to do, and the debtor
opposes it, he cannot turn the debtor out of possession by force;
but he ought to have recourse to justice, to be put into possession
by the authority of the judge, who will give him possession if he
sees that he has a right to it.4


XXIV.


TTT. I. SEC. IVv.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 677


than what the debtor had. For it is only this right that the debtor
has engaged.‘
XXXVI


1724. The Effect of the Mortgage depends on the Effect of the
Obligation. — All that has been said in this section concerning
the effects of a mortgage is to be understood only of the cases
where the obligations, of which the mortgage is a consequence,
may subsist and have their effect. For the mortgage being only
an accessory to the obligation, it hath not its effect but when the
obligation to which it is an accessory ought to have its effect.
Thus, the obligation of a minor who has mortgaged his estate
being confirmed when he is of age, the mortgage on his estate is
likewise confirmed. Thus, in the case of those sorts of obligations
which are called natural obligations, of which mention has been
made in the ninth article of the fifth section of Covenants, the effect
of the mortgage depends on that which the obligation shall haves


SECTION IV.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE CREDITOR TO THE DEBTOR, BECAUSE
OF THE PAWN OR MORTGAGE.


Art. I.


1725. The Creditor is to take Care of the Pledge which is in his
Possession. — The creditor who is not in possession of his pledge
contracts no manner of engagement towards his debtor; but if he
has the pledge in his custody, his first engagement is to take care
of it. And not only will he be answerable for the losses and
damages which he may have caused by his own act and deed; but
he will be accountable likewise for what shall happen through any
negligence, or any fault, which a careful and circumspect person
would not readily be guilty of.*


f ©. 3,§1, D. de pign. ; —d. §. in fine.

& L. 14, § 1, D. de pign. et hyp. ; —l. 5, eod.

® ZL. 23, D. de reg. jur.; —I. 13, § 1, D. de pign. act. ; —1. 14, eod. ; —§ ult. Inst. quib. mod.
re contr. obl. ; — 1, 24, § ult. D. de pign. act. ; —1. 8, in fine, C. de pign. act. ;—I. 7, eod.


o7 *


678 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK UL


IL

1726. If the Pledge perishes by an Accident.—If the pledge
perishes in the hands of the creditor by an accident, he does not
answer for it, and preserves nevertheless his right on the other
goods of his debtor.” But if the accident was a consequence of
some negligence, or of some fault, such as the theft of a movable,
or the burning of a house, occasioned by the want of care in the
person who enjoys the fruits of it in lieu of the interest of bis
money, or who possesses it by virtue of some other engagement,
he would be answerable for it.


IIL


1727. Of the Creditor who uses the Pawn.— The creditor who
uses the pawn, against the will of the owner, commits a kind of
theft. For it is not given him in pawn that he may make use
of it, but that it may serve as a security to him for his payment;
and the thing may be the worse for using.


IV.


1728. If the Creditor receives from the Sale of the Pledge more
than the Debt comes to.— If the creditor receives from the sale of
the pledge more than the debt amounts to, he will be obliged to
restore the overplus, together with the interest from the time of his
delay, although it have not been demanded of him, uniess he has
used his endeavours to pay it.!


V.


TIT. I. BEC. IV.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 679


his debt comes to, is obliged to restore the surplus to the owner of
the pledge. But if the fruits or other revenues of the houses or
lands which are mortgaged by way of antichresis be uncertain,
and the creditor is to content himself with them instead of the
interest of his debt, whether the same chance to exceed or fall
short of the interest, and this agreement have nothing in it con-
trary to law, as in the case of the twenty-eighth article of the
first section, the creditor will not be obliged to give back any of
the fruits or revenues which he reaps from the thing mortgaged,
although they should exceed the interest of his debt. For seeing
he could not demand the deficiency in case the fruits should hap-
pen to be less than his interest, so likewise he is not obliged to re-
store the overplus. But if this mortgage by way of antichresis
should appear to have any thing in it contrary to law, or the dam-
age sustained in the fruits to be excessive and usurious, or if the
creditor had no just title to his possession and enjoyment, he
would be obliged to compensate the overplus of the fruits with
the principal sum that should appear to be legally due to him.°®


VI


1730. If the Pledge receives any Augmentation. — Whatever
augmentation may happen to the thing mortgaged, whether by ac-
cident or otherwise, the creditor having contributed nothing of his
own towards it, the same belongs to the debtor; and the creditor
ought to restore it to him, although the pledge was in his posses-
sion when this change happened to it. For these augmentations
are accessories to the right of property which belongs to the
debtor.‘


VIL.


1731. The Creditor cannot acquire the Property of the Pledge by
Prescription. — This is also an engagement of the creditor, who is
in possession of a pledge, and of his heirs and executors, that they
remain perpetually obliged to restore the pledge after payment of
the debt, and can never pretend to have acquired the property
thereof by prescription.®


© Z.1, C. de pign. act.;—ll. 2 a 8, eod.;—1. 1, D. de distr. pign. ; — I. 24, § 2, in f. D.
de pign. act.; —l. ult. C. de distr. pign.; —1. 17, C. de usur. See the twenty-eighth article
of the first section.

f ZL. 21, § 2, D. de pign. et hyp.

& L. 10, C. de pign. act.; — 1. ult. eod. See the eleventh article of the fifth section of
Possession.


680 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK 1


SECTION V.
OF THE PRIVILEGES OF CREDITORS.


1732. Three Sorts of Creditors. — We must distinguish betweea
three sorts of creditors: those who have neither mortgage nor
privilege, such as he who has only a bare promise for money lent;
those who have a mortgage without a privilege, as he who has an
obligation for money lent, passed before notaries public; and those
whose credit has some privilege that distinguishes their condition
from that of other creditors, and which gives them a prefereace to
those whose credit is prior to theirs. Thus, he who has lest
money to buy a house, or to repair it, is preferred, as to that house,
before other creditors of the same debtor, although they have mort
gages on it which are prior in date.

1733. Two Sorts of Privileges.— The privileges of creditors are
of two kinds. One is, of those which give the creditors a prefer
ence on all the goods, without any particular assignment on any
one thing; as, for example, the privilege of the expenses of a law
suit and that of funeral expenses. And the other is, of those whie
assign to the creditors their security on certain things, and _not.os
the other goods; such as the privilege of those who have [eal
money to buy a piece of ground or to build on it, the privilem
of the landlord of a house on the movables of his tenant for i
rent of his house, and other privileges of the like natare,

1734. We shall not put down among the rules of this secties


|


TIT. I. BEC. V.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 681


is not founded on the quality of the credit, but on the security
which the creditor has taken by getting possession of the pledge.
But this does not extend to immovables, the possession of which
does not give any preference to the creditor, if he has it not other-
wise. And as to movables, seeing they are not subject to mortgage
by our usage, the creditor who has a movable in pawn, and in his
own possession, hath his security on it. See the preamble of the
first section of this title, and that of the title of the Cesston of
Goods.*


Arr. I.

1736. Definition of Privilege.— The privilege of a creditor is
the distinguishing right which the nature of his credit gives him,
and which makes him to be preferred before other creditors, even
those who are prior in time and who have mortgages.*


IL

1737. Priority of Time is of no Importance among Privileged
Creditors. — Among creditors who are privileged, it is no matter
which of them is first or last in order of time; for they are distin-
guished only by the nature of their privileges. And if two credi-
tors have a privilege of the same kind, although their debts be of
different times, yet they ought to be paid in the same order and in
the same proportion.”


YL.


1738. Effect of the Privilege.— All the privileges of creditors
have this in common, that the least of them gives the preference
before creditors who are such only by writing, or by mortgage, and
others who have no manner of privilege. And among those who
are privileged there are some who have the preference before oth-
ers, according to the different qualities of their privileges.


IV.


1739. Privilege of the Seller.— He who has sold an immovable
thing, for which he has not received the price, is preferred before
the creditors of the purchaser, and before all others, as to the thing
that is sold. For the sale implied the condition that the pur-


* V.L. 10, D. de pign.
® L. 32, D. de red. auct. jud. poss. ; —1. 5, D. qui potior.
b L. 32, D. de reb. auct. jud. poss. ¢ [.5, D. qui pot.


682 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK In.


chaser should not be master of the thing till he had paid the
price. Thus, the seller who has not received the price may either
keep the land or tenement, if the price was to be paid before
delivery, or he may follow it into what hands soever it may have
passed, if he has delivered it before payment.*


V.


1740. Privilege of him who lends Money for a Purchase.— He
who lends money to the purchaser, to pay the price of his par
chase, has the same privilege as the seller would have if he were
not paid. For it is the lenders money that makes the purchase
to become part of the estate of the purchaser. But, in order to
transfer the right of the seller to him who lends the money for bis
payment, it is necessary to observe the precautions which shall be
explained in the sixth section.


4 7.19, D. de contr. empt.; —1. 53, cod. ; —§ 41, Inst. de rerum divis. ; ~L 13, § 8, D.é
act. empt. et vend.;— I. 22, D. de heared. vel act. vend. ;— 1.31, § 8, D. de adil. edicto. By
the third article of the edict of the month of August, 1669, as to the king’s mortgages, de
seller in this case is preferred before the king.

The rule which gives this preference to the seller ought to be understood only m the
case where it appears by the contract of sale that he has not been paid. For if he bed
given an aquittance and taken a promise or bond for his payment, he would have Jost bis
preference, the contract appearing to be acquitted. Otherwise those who should afer
wards lend to this purchaser might be deceived. And besides, the novation of the oblige
tion extinguishes the mortgage. See the second article of the seventh section.

It is to be remarked on this article, that by our usage it takes place only in nee?
bles, and we have limited it to this sense. For as concerning movables, seeing they om
no sequel by mortgage, and that the seller has lost the property of them by delivery
them to the buyer, he may seize upon them while they are in the hands of the bere, al
he will have likewise the preference on them for the payment of the price; but if them


TIT. I. SEC. V.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 683


VI

1741. Privilege of him who lends to preserve the Thing. — The
creditor whose money has been laid out in preserving or repairing
the thing, as, for example, to secure a piece of ground dgainst the
current of a river,to prevent the fall of a house, or to rebuild it
after its fall, has a privilege. For he has preserved the thing in
being for the common interest, both of the proprietor and credi-
tors; and it is as it were his own, to the value of what he has
laid out upon it!


VIL


1742. Privilege for Improvements. —'Those whose money has
been laid out on the improvement of an estate, such as to make a
plantation, or to build upon it, or to augment the apartments of a
house, or for other the like causes, have a privilege upon the said
improvements, as upon a purchase made with their money


VITIL


1743. Effect of this Privilege. — This preference in respect of
the improvements is limited to what remains of them in being,
and does not affect the whole body of the estate, as does the pref-
erence on account of repairs which have preserved the whole es-
tate in being. For if there remains nothing of the improvements,
the estate not being any thing the better for them, and nobody
profiting by them, there remains no longer any cause for prefer-
ence. And when the improvements do subsist, the privilege of
him who has been at the charges of them takes place only on the
value of what remains of the improvements.®


IX.


1744. Privilege of Architects and Workmen.— Architects and
other undertakers, workmen, and artificers, who bestow their labor
on buildings or other works, and who furnish materials, and in


€ T. 25, D. de reb. cred. ; —I. 24, § 1, D. de reb. auct. jud. poss. ; —1. 1, D. de cess. bon. ; —
L296, D. de reb. auct. jud. poss. ; —1. 5, D. qui pot. ; —Il. 6, eed. See the law quoted on tho
third article.

© L. 34, D.de reb. auct. jud. poss. ; — 1. 26, eod. See the fifth article of this section. Z.1,
D. in quib. caus. pign. v. h. tac. contr.

» Quasi pignus retinere potest cam rem. L. 13, § 8, D. de act. empt. et vend. These
words, which are for the seller, may be applied to this article. For he who has made the
improvements is, with regard to them, in the stead of a seller. Sce the thirty-first article
of this section.


TIT. I. SEO. V.| PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 685


preference on the fruits that grow on it for the payment of his
rent. And this preference is acquired by law, although the lease
make no mention of it. For these fruits are not so much his
pledge as they are his property, till he has got payment of his
rent.”


XIII.


1748. Privilege of a Quitrent and of the Pension due from an
Exphyteutical Tenant.— He who has made a grant of an estate,
on condition to have a quitrent paid him out of it, or who has
given an emphyteutical lease of it for a yearly rent or pension, has
@ privilege for his said quitrent or pension upon the fruits grow-
ing on the estate, and also upon the land itself, into what hands
soever it may pass. And if the possessor of this estate sells it, or
mortgages it, or farms it out, or disposes of it otherwise, or if it
be seized on and sold, the first owner will be paid off his quitrent
or pension, as well out of the land itself, or out of the moneys aris-
ing from the sale of it, preferably to all the creditors of the pos-
sessor, as out of the fruits of the ground which are in being and
in the hands of the possessor.°


XIV.


1749. Privilege on the Movables of the Tenant of a House, for the
Rent, and Consequences of the Lease. — The movables which ten-
ants have in the houses which they rent are engaged to the land-
lord of the house, and preferably to other creditors, for his security,
not only of his rent, but of the other consequences of his lease;
such as dilapidations, if any have happened through the fault of
the tenant, and all expenses, costs, and damages which the tenant
may be liable to on account of his lease.?


® L. 7, D.in quib. caus. pign. vel hyp. tac. contr. ; — 1. 3, Cod. eod. This preference is to
be understood, according to our usage, of fruits which either are not separated from
the ground, or are still in the possession of the debtor. For if he has sold and delivered
them to one who has bought them fairly and honestly, they cannot be seized on in the
hands of the purchaser. Thus, he who in a market buys corn of a farmer cannot be sued
by the proprietor of the ground where the corn grew for the payment of the rent of his
farm, for he ought to have taken care of his payment. This privilege which proprietors
have for the rent of their farm belongs even to those who have no lease in writing. For
it is enongh that it appears that the fruits which they lay claim to are the produce of their
ground. Sce the fourteenth article.

° £.15, D qui pot.; —l. 31, D. de pign. et hypoth.

P L. 4, D. in quib. caus. pign. vel hyp. tac. contr. ; — 1. ult. Cod. eod. ; —I. 5, C. de loc. ; —
i. 2, D. in quib. caus pign. See the eighteenth article. Although this text does not men-


VOL. I. 58


686 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK m


XV.

1750. Of the Movables of the Under- Tenants. — If there are
under-tenants, who occupy only one apartment or other portion of
a house, their movables are engaged only for the rent of what
they occupy. And if they pay their rent to the tenant who let i
to them, the landlord, who did not attach the rent while it wasm
their hands, can pretend nothing, either on their movables or ther
rents: for they may pay their rent to the person who let the lodg-
ings to them ; although if they pay it to the landlord of the house,
it will be a good payment, if the tenant owes him his rent!


XVL
1751. Exception to the two foregoing Articles.— The prefs


ence which is spoken of in the two preceding articles is to &
understood only of the movables which the tenant has im t
house as furniture to it, or which he designs always to keep in
and not of such goods as he has put there with design to tram
port them to another place; as, for example, a suit of hanging
which he had bought to send to another houses


X VIL.
1702. Another Exception. —If a tenant takes into the howe
which he rents another person, giving him his lodging gratis, &
movables of the said lodger will not be engaged for the resid


that part of the house which the tenant accommodates im
with.


X VIIt.


j
j
|


TIT. I. SEC. V.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 687


warehouses, granaries, and of all other places, upon the goods
which the tenants of the said places may have in them.'


XIX.


1754. Privilege of the King.— All the effects of those who are
indebted to the crown, whether they be officers that are account-
able either for farms, or other receipts and disbursements of the
public money, are mortgaged for all the sums of this nature
which they may chance to owe, although there be no express
obligation of them, nor condemnation in a court of justice."


XX.


1755. The Date of the Mortgage of the Crown. — The mortgage
which is acquired to the crown, on the estates of officers who are
accountable, farmers, and others, who receive the public money,
takes its origin from the moment of the title of their engagement;
as from the date of the lease, if it be a farm; the date of the
patent, if it be an office; or the date of the agreement or com-
mission.*


XXI.


1756. In a Competition of Mortgages, that of the Crown takes
place only tn its Order. — The creditors who have a mortgage prior
to that of the king preserve their right on the immovables of their
debtors. And the mortgage which the king has takes place only
in its order.’


© Z. 3, D. in quib. caus. pign.

® LZ. 2, C. in quib. caus. pign. vel hyp. tac. contr.; —l. 3, C. de privil. fisct ; — 1. 46, § 3, D.
de jur. fisct. See the fourth article of the edict of the month of August, 1669. The rulo
explained in this article docs not only relate to officers that are accountable, and to others
indebted to the crown, but it is also to be applied to those who receive and collect the
pablic money in the towns and open country ; such as consuls, receivers, collectors, and
others, whether they take an oath in judgment, or whether they officiate upon their bare
nomination. Sec the next following article, and the twenty-third article, with the remark
on it

= L. 3, C. de priv. fisc. This mortgage of the crown is regulated after this manner by
the fourth article of the edict of the month of August, 1669.

YL. 2, C. de priv. fisc.; —I. 8, D. qui pot. ; — l. ult. eod. See the following article. We
must add to this article, that, with respect to offices, the king has the preference on the
moneys of the office on account of which the debt is due, not only preferably to the credi-
tors by mortgage, but even preferably to the seller himself, on the price of the office, and
the perquisites annexed to it, according to the second article of the edict of the month of
August, 1669. Which is grounded on this, that the office was originally granted by the
king with this burden, and that it is therefore the proper pledge of the king, engaged by
privilege for whatever the officer may be indebted on account of the office.


688 THE CIVIL LAW. [Pant I. BOOK In.


XXIL

1757. Exception to the foregoing Rule. — 'The foregoing mle is
to be understood only of the immovables which the debtor had
acquired before his engagement to the crown. But as to thoe
which thé debtor acquired after the said engagement, the king »
preferred before the creditors who are prior to his mortgage,
although all the debtor’s estate, present and to come, had bees
mortgaged to them. And in this concurrence of mortgages, whic
begin to have their effect in the moment that the new _ purchase 5
made, the mortgage of the king takes place before the others*


XXITL


1758. Preference of the King before all Creditors who tor
neither Mortgage nor Privilege. — With regard to creditors wh
have neither mortgage nor privilege, but only a bare personal a
tion, the king is preferred before them on the immovables, becan#
he has always a tacit mortgage without covenant. And he he
also the preference on the movables before those who attach them,
and before all the creditors who have no privilege. But the ce’
tor who has upon the movable one of the privileges explained =
this section, is preferred before the king.*


* LL. 28, D. de jure fisc. Pursuant to this text, the same thing hath been ordame! ¥
the third article of this very edict of the mouth of August, 1669, buat with an excepiee &
the preference of the seller and of him whose moneys have been Laid oet om the pe
chase, provided that mention be made of the moneys being so employed in ihe ete
and deed of contract. We might add, as a reason for this preference of the king oe @
estate that is acquired after that the officer has been concerned in the receipt of the pl


Ce Pers


TTT. 1. SEC. V.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 689


XXIV.

1759. Privilege of Funeral Charges.— Merchants, tradesmen,
and others, to whom any thing is due for funeral charges, have
their action against the heirs or executors, and if there be no heirs
or executors, they have it against the goods of the deceased, as
if they had contracted with him; and they have, moreover, a privi-
lege, even although the goods of the deceased should not be suffi-
eient to pay his debts; provided these charges do not exceed what
was reasonable to be laid out on the funeral, according to the
quality and estate of the deceased. For the necessity of this
expense makes it necessary to favor with this privilege those
who furnish it. But if the funeral charges exceed these bounds,
even although the deceased himself had ordered them by his last
will and testament, the privilege will be restrained to what shall
be judged reasonable and just, according to the circumstances.°


XXV.


1760. Law Charges.— The expenses of proving the will, or
taking administration, of making inventories, of sales, orders of
court, and discussions of movables or immovables, and all other
necessary law charges, are preferable to all other debts.° For all
the creditors are concerned in these expenses, they being laid out
for their common interest.


XXVIL


1761. Preference on the Goods of Public Depositaries, for Things
deposited in their Hands.— In a competition among the creditors
of public depositaries, whose function is to receive the sums of
money or other things that are to be deposited by order of court,
the persons who are to receive back what has been thus consigned
or deposited are preferred, on the proper goods of these deposita-
ries, before their private creditors, who have neither mortgage nor
privilege. And this preference is founded upon the interest which


these imposts, there is no mortgage for them on the immovables, unless it be in places
where the land-tax is a real burden; but only a preference on the fruits. And it is for
this reason that we have not quoted on the privilege of the king this text of the first law,
Cod. in quib. caus. pign. vel hyp. tac. contr.: —Universa bona eorum qui censentur vice pig-
morum tribatis obligata sunt.

& Z. 15, D, de relig. et sumpt. fun. ; —l. 1, eod.;—v. 1.17, D. de reb. auct. jud. poss. ; —
L132, § 5, D. de relig. et sump. un. ; —l. 14, §§ 8, 4 6, D. eod.

¢ L. 8, in f. D. depos. ; —1. 71, D. ad leg. Fale. ; —l. ult. § 9, C. de jure delib. See the
thirty-second article.

58 *


690 THE CIVIL LAW: {PART 1. BOOX IL


the public has in the safety of those deposits which people ar
obliged to consign into their hands.*


XXVII.


1762. Preference as to the Deposit that is in Being. — If among
the things deposited, of which mention has been made in the


d 7, 24, § 2, D. de reb. auct. jud.poss.; —I. 8,.D. depos. Besides the privilege explakel
in this article, the usage in France gives to creditors who are to receive back mowen@
other things consigned by order of a court of justice two other sorts of security. Une
a mortgage on the whole estate of the depositary who is charged with these sorw of &
posits; and this mortgage is the effect of the authority of justice, pursuant to what bes
been said in the fourth article of the second section. For as it is the public justic Os
charges them with these deposits, so it appropriates their whole estate for the sammy
of the things deposited. So that the persons to whom the things deposited are ti
stored will be preferred before the other creditors of the depositary who hare morgage
if the thing was deposited before their mortgage was granted. The other security eG
appropriation of the office whose function it is to receive deposits of thie nature @e
as are in France the offices of the receivers of moneys brought into court, and thos of a
commissaries of the chitelet, who are depositaries of moneys or other effects, when (ey
proceed to seal up the effects, and to make inventories, and on other occasions of the iis
nature. Jor as the function of receiving these deposits is proper to these office, Gy
ure naturally appropriated for the security of those whom justice puts under the neceslly
of depositing in their hands. ‘Thus, this appropriation of the office for the secant #
these deposits gives a privilege to the creditors who are to receive them, aod male
them preferable to all the creditors of the sail officer who have mortgages, even aliboep
they be prior in time. But this is to be understood only of offices that are peculiarly &&
tined to this function. For if the court had ordered the moneys to be deposited Ee
hands of another officer, whose office was not intended for this function, the dept
put into his hands by the authority of justice would give, indeed, a mortgage spe &
office, but it onght not to give a preference. For his private creditors would fied the
selves deceived by this preference, which they could not possibly foresee; where:
creditors of the person who by his office is a public depositary cannot bat know the
office is appropriated for indemnifying the creditors of things deposined jnio } |


TIT. I. SEC. V.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 691


foregoing article, there be some of them in being, those who have
deposited them, or the persons to whom they ought to return,
will recover them preferably to all other creditors, for it is their
own proper goods.


XX VIIL


1763. He who innovates the Debt loses his Privilege.— If he
who was creditor to a public depositary because of moneys depos-
ited into his hands, such as those who are to receive back moneys
that have been consigned by order of court, or for some other
cause, has innovated his debt, and changed the nature of the de-
posit, as if he has taken a bond as for money lent, he will be enti-
tled no longer to any privilege; and it would be the same thing
es if he had left his money in the hands of the depositary, that
he might receive interest for it; for he will have thereby changed
the nature of the deposit, and converted it into a contract of loan‘


X XIX.


1764. Concurrence of Creditors for several Deposits. — The
three preceding articles relate to the competition between creditors
who are to receive sums of money or other things deposited, and
the particular creditors of the public depositary. But as to the
ereditors of sums of money or other things deposited, if they come
in competition with one another for their respective deposits, the
privilege which they had all of them on the office of the receiver,
and their preference before his particular creditors, being common
to them all, they lose the effect of it among themselves, and they
come all in to share equally in the price of the office, in propor-
tion to their respective claims£ So that, for example, all the


more than of others which might be started on this subject; we make only this transitory
remark, to show how much it is to be wished for that this matter were fully settled.

© L.%, § 2, D. de reb. auct. jud. poss.

f L. 24, § 2, D. de reb. auct. jud. poss. He who takes interest for a sum of money which
he had deposited into another's hands becomes creditor of it as of money lent. For the
Geposit produces no interest, neither can the depositary owe any. So that when he pays
interest, it is because he does not keep the money any longer as a deposit, but con-
verts it to his own proper use, with the consent of the person who ought to receive it.
And the receiving of interest, although it is not lawful on the part of the creditor, yet it
fs always a mark of the intention of the creditor and of the debtor to change the deposit
into a contract of loan.

& L. 7, § ult. D. depos. We are to understand the concurrence explained in this article
ealy with respect to all the creditors of one order, considered together as having one and
the same credit, and to all those of the other orders considered in the like manner for the


692 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK tL


creditors of one order, whose consignment was prior, coming in
competition with creditors of another order, whose consignment
was made a long time after the first, there would be no preference
given to the first on the price of the office that is subject to thet
privilege ; but each order of creditors would have a proportionable
share of the price, according to the value of the effects consigned
by every one of them. For it is by virtue of their privilege that
the creditors of these orders are entitled to receive the price of ths
office, which was made a part of the estate of this officer only
upon condition of its being equally appropriated for the secunty
of all the sums of money or other things that should be therealier
deposited in the hands of the said officer.


XXX.


1765. Effect of Privileges.— All privileges make a particular ap
propriation, which gives to the creditor who is privileged the thy
for his pledge, although there be neither covenant nor condemat
tion which expressly mentions this preference. For it is anneal
to the title of the credit, by the nature of the debt, and althoart
no express mention be made of it. And if the debt were not @
itself privileged, it could not be made such by the effect of a cove
nant.®


XXXI.


1766. Difference of Privileges as to the Appropriation of Goole
— Among the privileges of creditors, there are some which ale
only one particular thing, and do not reach to the rest of &


FIT. I. BEC. V.} PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 683


to buy lands or tenements, or to make improvements on them, do
not extend to all the goods of the debtor; but are limited to the
things appropriated for the security of that particular debt! And
these creditors have against the remainder of the debtor's estate
only a personal action) or a mortgage, if they have stipulated it.
But law charges and the funeral expenses have their preference
upon all the goods without distinction.


XXXII.


1767. Competition and Preference among Creditors who are privi-
leged.— Among creditors who are privileged, some of them are
preferred before others, according to the nature of their privileges,
and the disposition of the laws or customs." Thus, he who
has furnished money to repair a house which was in danger of fall-
ing is preferred to the seller of that house, who demands the price
of the sale. Thus, he who has let a barn to a farmer will be pre-
ferred for the rent of his lease before the proprietor to whom the
farmer is indebted for the rent of the farm, on which the fruits
which are put into the barn grew. Thus, the expenses at law being
the debt of all the parties, they are preferred to all privileges what-
soever. Thus, those who have privileges on movables are preferred
to the privilege of the king" Thus, funeral charges are preferred
before the rent due to the landlord of the house, on the movables
of the tenants. Thus, in all the cases of a concurrence of privi-
leges, their preference is regulated by the distinctions which the
‘nature of the said privileges makes.


XXXL


1768. A Case of Preference among Oreditors who have the same
Privilege. — If he who sells a house occupied by a tenant reserves
to himself the rent of the house for a certain time, and it be agreed
that the movables of the tenant shall serve as a pledge for the se-
eurity of the rent reserved to the seller, as well as for the rent which
shall fall afterwards due to the buyer; the seller shall be paid in
the first place out of the movables, if their agreement has not regu-
lated it otherwise.”


§ See the foregoing article. This is a consequence of the nature of a privilege.

§ 7.17, C. de pign.

™ This is a consequence of the nature of privileges. See all the articles of this section.
® See the remark on the twenty-third article.

© LZ. 14, § 1, D. de rel. et sumpt. fun. P ZL. 13, D. qué potior.


694 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK


XXXIV.

1769. Three Orders of Creditors. — It follows from all the pre
ceding rules, that among creditors there are three orders The
first is, of those that are privileged, who go before all the others
and take place among themselves according to the distinctions of
their preferences. The second is, of those that have morigages
who have their rank after the privileged creditors, according to the
dates of their mortgages. And the third is, of creditors by writing,
and others who have only personal actions, who, not being distiv-
guished either by privilege or mortgage, come in therefore jointly
together, and share equally in proportion to their debts.4


SECTION Vi.


OF SUBSTITUTION TO THE MORTGAGE OR TO THE PRIVILEGE OF
THE CREDITOR.


1770. Eaplanation of the Nature of Substitutions, and of ther
Kinds.— Although this matter of the substitution to the righted
creditors, being in itself simple and natural, ought to be plain an
easy; yet the different ways of acquiring the substitution, and ti
inconveniences which one may fall into for want of observing &
every one of them that which is essential to it, cause a myultiplicity
of combinations which may perplex this matter, and render i
obseure and difficult. For whieh reason we have judged @
would be useful, before we proceed to explain the rules thereol &


a r ll BS


TIT. I. SEC. VI.} PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 695


rights, such as the sale of an inheritance, which transmits to him
who buys it all the rights of the heir, that he may exercise them
in the same manner as the heir himself might have done. Others
are particular, of a certain thing, such as the assignment of a bond.
Some are gratuitous, as an assignment made by a donor to a do-
nee, when the donation contains debts due to the donor, or other
rights. And there are some assignments which are made for a
valuable consideration ; as if a debtor assigns a debt that is owing
to him for the payment of his creditor, or if a creditor makes over
to a third person, for a certain price, a debt that is due to him.

1773. All these sorts of assignments have this effect, that the
assignee succeeds in the place of the creditor, and that he may ex-
ercise the rights which are made over to him in the same manner
as the creditor might have done himself before the assignment,
and with the benefit of the mortgage and privilege which the cred-
itor had.

1774. There is another manner of substitution to the rights of a
creditor, when his debtor, borrowing money to pay what he owes
him, agrees with the person of whom he borrows, that the moneys
shall be applied towards the payment of that creditor, and that
the person who lends the money shall be substituted in the place
of the said creditor. And this acquires to this new creditor the
right of the first, provided it be mentioned in the acquittance that
the payment is made with his money. For the debtor who had
power to engage himself to the first creditor may also engage him-
self on the same conditions to him who pays off the first creditor ;
and by putting him in the place of the first creditor who receives
his moneys, he does no wrong to his other creditors, and changes
nothing in their condition.

1775. The substitution may likewise be acquired without the
consent of the creditor, by an order of the judge, and that either
with the debtor’s consent, or sometimes even without it. Thus, a
tutor who is willing to acquit with his own money a debt owing
by his pupil to a creditor, who refuses to substitute him in his
room, may procure an order to be made for substituting him in
the place of the creditor upon his acquitting the debt. And in
this case the authority of justice transfers the right of the creditor
to the person who pays him, provided he produce the order of
court for his substitution, and make it appear that the creditor has
been paid with his moneys. For the judge does to him who pays
for another only the same justice that is due to him from the

debtor, and that without prejudice to any other person.


TIT. I. SEO. VI.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 697


ment; yet the assignment, which is made at the same time, has
the same effect as if the creditor had sold his nght to him who
pays him. And as to the effect of the assignment, it is the same
thing to him who pays for the debtor, whether it be the person
who is bound jointly with him for the debt, or his surety, or a
third person.*


IL


1780. Substitution without an Assignment.— Those who, with-
out an assignment from the creditors, procure an order from the
judge appointing them, upon their paying the creditors, to be sub-
stituted in their place, acquire by the payment the rights of those
creditors, their mortgages, and their privileges; and even those
of the king, if they purchase the debt that is due to him, and
get themselves to be substituted in his stead.®


TIL


1781. In what Manner a Third Person may acquire the Right of a
Creditor. — To acquire without the authority of justice the right
of a creditor and his mortgage, it is sufficient to have one of these
two things; either that he who pays the creditor take an assign-
ment from him, as has been said in the first article, or that he
agree with the debtor that, upon paying the debt for him, he shall
be substituted to the rights of the creditor, and that in this case it
be mentioned in the acquittance, that the payment was made
with his money. For then, although the creditor should refuse to
substitute, yet he who pays will acquire his right, by the effect of
the payment, and of the agreement with the debtor. And it
would be the same thing, if, the moneys lent being put into the
hands of the debtor with this agreement, that he who lends the
money should be substituted to the rights of the creditor who is
discharged with it, the debtor should afterwards make the pay-
ment himself, declaring in the acquittance that it is with the
money borrowed of that person. But if the payment is made
only upon the bare acquittance of the creditor, and not accom-
panied either with the one or the other of these two ways of ac-
quiring the substitution, it will procure to him who pays only a
bare action against the debtor, for recovering from him the sum


® 1. 6, D. de hared. vel act. vend.;—l.7, C. de obl. et act.;—1.6,eod. See the fourth
article. L. 36, D. de fidejuss.;—1. 76, D. de solut.

b Z. ult. C. de privil. fuse.

VOL. I. 09


i]
| , 698 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOO


\j : paid on his account, even although it should be expressed ii
| | acquittance, that the payment was made with the moneys o
third person. For it might be presumed that he had acq
i only what he owed.°


IV.


. ’ 1982. How a Third Person acquires the Privilege of a On
| — He who pays a creditor that is privileged succeeds to his
lege, whether it be by an assignment from the creditor,
| makes over to him simply his right, or by a substitution
by the judge; as has been said in the second article; or
agreement with the debtor, as shall be explained in the follc
a) article.4
: V.
: 1783. How the Privilege is acquired without Substitution.—
may acquire the privilege of a creditor without substitution, }
ey same manner as a mortgage, by an agreement with the @
,| that he who shall pay for him shall have the privilege. And
} no matter whether the payment be made to the creditor
ia) who lends the money, or by the debtor with whom the mone
ail | been intrusted, provided that, both in the one and the other
|) it appears by the acquittance that the payment is made will
| money of that person, as has been said in relation to the |
| | : gage in the third article.


© £. 21, C. de pign. ef hyp. ;—l 1, C. de his quiin prior. ered. ioe. oun, ; —L 4,,
ee far a i Pe rr a a i : a a i Te a5 by i =a :


1 arte


FIT. I. BEC. VI.} PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 699


VI

1784. Of a Creditor who pays off a Creditor more ancient than
himself. — He who, being already a creditor, pays off another cred-
itor of the same debtor who is prior to himself, succeeds to his
mortgage, although he have made no such agreement, nor received
any substitution. For his quality of creditor makes it to be pre-
sumed that he pays him who is a more ancient creditor, with no
other view than that he may succeed in his place, and thereby
secure his own debt, which distinguishes his condition from him
who, having no such interest, pays for the debtor without substitu-
tion, and of whom it may be said, that perhaps he was under an
obligation to the debtor to pay for him‘


VIL


1785. A Purchaser substituted to the Oreditors whom he pays off.
— The purchaser of an estate, employing the price of his purchase
for the payment of the creditors to whom the estate was mort-
gaged, is substituted to their right to the value of what he pays
them. For by paying them with the price of their pledge in order
to secure it to himself, he preserves ‘it to himself for the value of
what he pays them, against other subsequent creditors, although
they be prior to his purchase.


VIll.


1786. Substitution by an Attachment. — The creditor who, by
virtue of his mortgage or of an order from the judge, attaches the
rights and actions which his debtor has against those who are
indebted to him, procuring what he has attached to be adjudged
to him, is substituted to the mortgages and privileges which his
debtor had for the debts that are attached.


the debtor’s bond to him who advanced the money will serve as a proof that the occasion
ef the loan was to pay off the creditor, and the creditor’s acquittance will prove that the
money was put to that use. And as to what is said in the law cited on this article, that
there must be no interval of time, that is to be applied to the usage of the Roman law,
according to which covenants were often made without any writing; and therefore the
distance of time might have occasioned the loss of the proof how the moneys had been


yed.
£ 1. 16, D. qui pot. in pign. ; —v. l. 11, § 4, eod. ; —I1. 12, § 9, eod.; —1. 17, end.
6 L.3, C. de his qui in prior. cred. loc. suc.; —1. 17, D. qui pot. See the preceding ar-


bh 7.1, C. de pret. pign. The debt which is attached is adjudged to the creditor who
attaches, such as it belonged to the debtor.


FIT. I. SEC. VII.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 701


that the payment should be entire, of all that is due for principal,
interest, and charges.>


IL


1790. By a Novation.— Novation, which extinguishes the first
obligation, changing it into a new one, extinguishes also the mort-
gage which was an accessory to it, if it is not reserved.°


III.


1791. By the Oath of the Debtor, when the Debt is referred to
tt, and he swears that he owes nothing, or by a Judgment which
acqutts him. — Whatever annuls the debt discharges the mort-
gage. Thus, when a debtor, to whose oath the debt is referred,
swears that he has paid it, or when he is acquitted by a judgment
from which there lies no appeal, the debt and the mortgage are
aanuiled. And it is the same thing in all the cases where the
obligation subsists no more.!


IV.


1792. By every Thing that is instead of Payment. — Whatever
may be reckoned to be in the place of payment extinguishes the
mortgage. Thus, for example, if the creditor contents himself
either with a surety, or with another debtor instead of the former,
or with another pledge instead of the first; in all these cases,
and others of the like nature, the mortgage ceases, if it appears to
have been the intention of the parties to discharge the mortgage,
and to restrain the creditor to these other sureties, although his con-
dition become thereby less advantageous.


V.


1793. By consigning the Debt in Case the Creditor refuses to
receive Payment. — If it is by reason of the creditor’s refusing his
payment that he detains the pledge, or insists to have it exposed
to sale, the debtor may tender the money in court, and consign it,
in order to his being discharged from the debt, to hinder the sale,


b 7. 25, $14, D. fam. ercise.; —1. 2, in f. C. debit. vend. pign. imp.n. p.;—l. 6, C. de
distr. pign. See the fourth article of the third section of this title.
¢ £.11,§1, D. de pign. act. See what novation is in the title of Novations.
4 ZL. 13, D. quib. mod. pign. vel hyp. sol. ;—l. 6, eod.
© L. 6, D. quib. mod. pign. ; —1. 9, § 8, D. de pign. act.;—1. 3, C. de lat. prgn.
AQ ¢


TIT. I. SEC. VII.] PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 703


TX.

1797. The Prescription of the Debt extinguishes the Mortgage.
— If the debt for which the mortgage was given be extinguished
by prescription, the mortgage, which was only an accessory of the
debt, is annulled.


X.


1798. If the Debtor loses his Right to the Pledge, the Creditor
loses his Mortgage on it.—If the debtor who has mortgaged a
land or tenement happens to lose the right he had to it, as if he is
stripped of it by an eviction, or by a power of redemption vested in
a former owner or in the next of kin, or by other causes, the mort-
gage which he had assigned on the said land or tenement does
not subsist any longer, unless it was by his own proper act that
he lost his right; as if, for example, when he was able to defend
himself against the said eviction or power of redemption, he
yielded to it; if he neglected to demand the sale of an estate,
seized on in the hands of a third person, and which belonged to
him; if he did not defend himself in a good cause; or if he
abandoned any other way his right. For in all these cases the
creditor may exercise the rights of his debtor in order to pre-
serve his own.”


XI.


1799. Effect of Redhibition of the Thing morigaged.—If a
debtor who had bought a house, or lands, or a movable, and had
afterwards engaged it to a creditor, has a mind to dissolve the
sale by redhibition, that is, by obliging the seller to take back the
thing sold because of some defect in it, his creditor may hinder
him, unless the debtor provides for his security, either by giving him
the price which the seller shall be obliged to restore to him, or by


1 7.6, D. quib. mod. pign.;—1. 12, D. de divers. temp. prasc.; —1. 3, C. de. preesc. 30
vd 40 ann. By the Roman law the hypothecary action was extinguished only by a pre-
Seription of forty years against the debtor and his heirs, and likewise against a third pos-
sessor, if the debtor was still alive. Thus, the hypothecary action was of a longer dura-
tion than the bare personal action. See the end of the preamble of the fourth section of
Possession and Prescription. This prescription of forty years is observed in some provin-
ces. But we have conceived the rule according to the common and natural usage, which

@ives no longer duration to the hypothecary action than to the bare personal action, for
the reason explained in the article.

= JL. 3, D. quid. mod. pign. ; — |. pen. C. de non. num. pec.


TIT. I. BEC. VII.| PAWNS AND MORTGAGES. 705


the creditor to the alienation of his pledge, the knowledge which
he may have of it, nor the silence which he keeps after he knows
it; as if he knows that his debtor is about selling a house which
is mortgaged to him, and says nothing of it. But, in order to de-
prive him of his nght, it is necessary that it appear by some act
that he knows what is doing to his prejudice, and that he con-
sents to it. And a creditor does not lose his mortgage by his
consent, except when it appears evidently that his intention is to
resign it, or that there be ground to charge him with dishonesty,
for not having declared his right, when he was under an obliga-
tion to do it. Thus, for example, if he who had mortgaged
specially a house or lands to a former creditor, for an annuity,
engages it in the same manner to a second creditor, for another
annuity, declaring to him that the said house or lands were not
mortgaged to any body else, and the first creditor signed the con-
tract either as a party or a witness, he will have thereby rendered
himself an accomplice to this false declaration, and cannot exercise
his mortgage on the said house or lands to the prejudice of this
second creditor. Thus, on the contrary, if a creditor signs, as wit-
ness, a contract of marriage or other deed, by which his debtor
engages all his estate, he shall not lose his mortgage for not
having entered his protestation. Thus, he who signs, as witness,
a testament, in which the testator devises houses or lands that are
mortgaged to the said witness, will not lose his mortgage. And
in general we ought to judge of the effect of these approbations
by signature or otherwise, according to the circumstances of the
quality of the acts, of that of the persons, of the knowledge which
they may have of the wrong which either their approbation or
their silence may do to their own interest and to that of others,
of their sincerity or disingenuity, of the intention of the contractors,
and other circumstances of the like nature.


® ZL. 8,§ 15, D. quib. mod. pign. ; —1. 9, §.1, D. quib. mod. pign. ; —1. 84, § 2, D. de leg.
2;—v. l. 8, D. de resc. vend. ; — 1. 39, D. de pign. act. It is necessary to remark, on this
article, the difference there may be between a creditor's signing an instrument as a party,
and his signing it only as a witness. Whatever he signs as a party binds him without
doubt. But in deeds which he signs as a witness, and where the signature is put only for
a testimony to the truth of what is transacted between the contracting parties, one cannot
draw a consequence from the witness’s signing that may be of prejudice to him, unless
he should give occasion by his signing for one of the partics to be cheated, as in the
cease of the witness who signs the contract in which is inserted the false declaration ex-
plained in the article. For in that case the silence of the witness implies a disingenu-
ity, which makes him accessory to the knavery of his debtor. But if a witness does not
contribute any thing on his part to the cheating and overreaching any of the partics, and


TIT. 13.] SEPARATION OF GOODS. 707


their part, lest the heir or executor, who is their debtor, engaging
himself in an encumbered inheritance or succession, his goods
should go to the creditors of the deceased, to their prejudice, the
same. equity demands that they may have power to distinguish
and separate the estate of the heir or executor from that of the
deceased. As to which it is necessary to observe, that, although
the condition of the creditors of the heir or executor, and that of
the creditors of the deceased, ought to be equal, yet the Roman
law had ordered it otherwise, and did not allow the separation of
goods to the creditors of the heir or executor for this reason, that,
a debtor being at liberty to bind himself, he may make the con-
dition of his creditors worse, by entering into new engagements to
their prejudice But this nicety has not been received into use
with us; and it has been thought reasonable that the liberty which
a debtor may have to contract new debts, although prejudice may
arise from thence to his creditors, ought not to be drawn to such
a consequence. For if it is permitted to this debtor to engage
himself to new creditors by accepting a succession charged with
debts, his creditors ought not to be debarred from making use of
the right which they have on his goods to prevent their being sub-
jected to the charges of that succession; and it is fully as equi-
table to grant them this separation as it is to grant it against
them, to the creditors of the deceased, for the goods of the suc-
cession.

1807. It is true that, in certain cases, the Roman law did grant
the separation of goods to the creditors of the heir or executor;
as if he accepted a burdensome inheritance or succession, in order
to defraud his creditors: and even in this case it did not grant it
easily. And this separation had likewise place in some other
cases, which it would be needless to mention here; but these
exceptions were not sufficient to do justice to the creditors of the
heir or executor, and our usage allows them this separation with-
out distinction.

1808. This remark concerning our usage in this matter will
serve as an advertisement, that we are to extend to the creditors
of the heir or executor the rules which shall be set down in this
title, although mention be made only of the creditors of the


= Z.1,§ 2, D. de separat. b V. 1.1, § 5, et seq. D. de. separat.


708 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART tL. BOOK Itt


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE AND EFFECTS OF THE SEPARATION.


Art. L


1809. The Case of Separation. — When the creditors of a d
ceased person are afraid that the heir or executor is not solves
they may procure an order from the judge for separating t
effects of the inheritance or succession from those of the heir
executor, that they may secure to themselves the goods of t
deceased, their debtor, against the creditors of his heir or ¢
ecutor.*


IL,


1810. The Separation is independent on the Mortgage. —Tb
right of this separation is independent on the mortgage, and em
itors by writing may demand it. For the bare effect of their de
gives them a preference on the estate of their debtor, before i
creditors of his heir or executor, to whom the deceased was und
no obligation.”


IIL.

1811. Legatees have the Right of Separation.— The legaiee
of the deceased have the same right to demand this separatiot
for they are creditors to the succession. But the creditors of 0
deceased are preferred before them, because he could not gv


FIT. 1. GEC. 1.) SEPARATION OF GOODS. 709


V.

1813. If the Heir or Executor has already alienated the Goods of
the Deceased, there can be no Separation. — If, before the separation
was demanded, the heir or executor had alienated, without any
intention of defrauding the creditors, goods of the succession,
whether movables or immovables, or even the whole succession,
the creditors of the deceased could not demand the separation of
what had been alienated. For the heir or executor, who in that
quality was master of the goods, had power to dispose of them.
But this alienation with respect to the immovables would be of
no prejudice to the creditors of the deceased who had mortgages
on them ; and they might exercise their mortgage and their privi-
lege, if they had any against the possessors, in the same manner
as they might have done if the deceased had made the aliena-
tion.’ |

VI


1814. The Engagement made by the Heir or Executor does not
hinder the Separation. — If the heir or executor had pawned or
mortgaged movables or immovables belonging to the inheritance
or succession, before the separation was demanded, the creditors
of the deceased will nevertheless obtain a separation of those goods
that are engaged# For the separation has place as long as the
property belongs to the heir or executor, and that engagement does
not divest him of it.


VIL


1815. The Separation takes Place ina Second and Third Succes-
sion, and beyond that.— If the goods of an inheritance or succes-


© L. 2, D. de separat. Although it may seem as if this law related only to the sale of
the imheritance or succession, yet the tenor and motive of it comprehend particular
alienations, and the last words of the law show it plainly enough.

£ The alienation, into what hands soever the lands and tenements that are mortgaged
pass, do no prejudice to the mortgage, as has been observed in the foregoing title. It fol-
lows from this rule, that, with regard to the immovables alienated by the heir or executor,
the creditors of the deceased, who had no mortgage on them, have lost their right to them,
and that there remains to them only the personal action against the heir or executor, and
the right of a separation of the goods that may still remain in the hands of the heir or
executor. And as to the movables alienated by the heir or executor, the creditors of the
deceased, even those who have mortgages, have lost their right to them, in the same
manner as they would have lost it if the alienation had been made by the deceased; for
they had not acquired a right of property in them by the death of the deceased.

& L. 1, § 8, D. de separat.

VOL. I. 60


-—_ —~—


710 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK IL


sion pass from the heir or executor to his heir or executor, and
from him again to his successors, and so down to other heirs and
executors successively, so that the first inheritance or succession
and the following ones are confounded together in the hands of
the heirs and executors to whom they descend, the creditors of
each inheritance or succession will follow the goods belonging to
the same from one heir and executor to the other, and may demand
a separation of them.”


VIIL


1816. If the Debtor succeeds to his Surety, the Separation takes
Place.— If a debtor for whom another person was engaged as
surety happens to succeed to him, the creditor may demand against
the creditors of his debtor the separation of the goods of the de
ceased, without any opposition from the creditors of the surety, a
those of the debtor who succeeds to him as heir or executor; fa
although the obligation of the deceased surety be confounded in
the person of the debtor who succeeds to him, yet the creditor does
not lose the security which he had on the goods of the surety, a0
more than that which he still retains on the goods of his debtor!


TX.


1817. The Separation does not prejudice the Right against te
Heir or Executor. — The creditor who, having demanded the sepr
ration, has not been able to procure payment out of the goods dd
the deceased, retains still his right against the heir or executor.
But the creditors of this heir or executor will be preferred before


a
l fete a oe


THT. I. BEC. IL] SEPARATION OF GOODS. 711


XI.

1819. If one of the Heirs or Executors be a Creditor, he may de-
mand the Separation. — If among the coheirs or coexecutors there
be one of them who is creditor to the deceased, he may demand
the separation, against the creditors of the others, excepting only
as to the portion of his debt which he himself ought to bear.”


SECTION II.


IN WHAT MANNER THE RIGHT OF SEPARATION IS EXTINGUISHED
OR LOST.


1820. We shall not insert among the rules of this section that
of the Roman law, which did not allow the separation after five
years ; for this prescription is not in use with us.


Art. IL


1821. If the Confusion hinders the Separation.— If the goods of
the deceased happen to be confounded with those of the heir or
executor, so as that it is not possible to distinguish and to show
what things are part of the succession, and what not, the separa-
tion in this case will not take place; for the confusion hinders the
effect of it. And it ought to be presumed that what does not ap-
pear to be part of the succession belongs to the heir or executor.
Otherwise, the creditors of this heir or executor would be obliged
to prove the right which he has to all the things he has in his pos-
session, which would neither be just nor possible.*


IL


1822. Novation hinders also the Separation. — If a creditor of the
deceased innovates his debt, and contents himself with the obliga-
tion of the heir or executor, he cannot demand the separation of
the goods of the deceased. For he is no longer a creditor to the
deceased, but to the heir or executor.»


TIT.


1823. Difficulties which are regulated by the Prudence of the
Judge. — If, the separation being demanded, there occur difficulties


= ZL. 7, C. de bon. auth. jud. poss. ® L.1,§ 12, D. de separat.
& 7.1, § 10, D. de separat.


‘a = 8
‘ae ‘ow. ee. ee


712 THE CIVIL LAW, [PART 1. BOOK mt


in it, as if the confusion of the goods makes the distinction o
them uncertain, or that, by reason of other circurnstances, then
arises a doubt whether the separation ought to take place or not
it will depend on the judge to give such order and direction

therein as he shall judge to be most prudent, according to the em»
dition of the things.°


TITLE Itt.


O¥ THE SOLIDITY AMONG TWO OR MORE DEBTORS, AND ANOS
TWO OR MORE CREDITORS.


= =———_—  —— ———————


1824, The Nature of Solidity.— There are two ways by wha
two or more persons may be debtors of one and the same thing
One is, in the cases where they all of them together owe the whot
debt, but so as that each of them owes only a portion of it, Am
the other, in the cases where they are all bound for the whole &&
in such a manner that any one of them alone may be constrain!
to pay the whole.

1825. This second manner is what is called solidity, it giviat
the creditor a right to exact the whole debt from any one of ti
debtors he pleases to choose. This right may be acquired tw
ways; either by the effect of a covenant, as if several persons ber
row a sum of money, and oblige themselves every one for &


TTT. Il. BEC. 1] SOLIDITY. 713


nants; and the rules concerning it, which shall be here explained,
may suffice for the other, according as they are capable of being
applied to it, and particularly to the solidity which may arise
from faults which are not accompanied with any crime or offence,”
and which are one of the matters that come within the design of
this work, the same having been treated of in the eighth title of
the second book.

1827. This solidity ts to be understood only of what concerns
the interest of the creditor, and does not hinder the debt from
being divided among the debtors, according to the portion that
each of them ought to bear of it.

1828. As a debt may be due in the whole by every one of the
debtors to the creditor, so, likewise, there may be another sort of
solidity, of a debt due to many creditors, whether by one debtor
alone or by many, if the condition of the debt be such that, as
every one of the debtors who is bound for the whole debt may be
constrained alone to pay the whole, so every one of the creditors
among whom the solidity is may have alone and by himself the
sight to exact the whole debt, and to discharge the debtor of it,
wath respect to all the other creditors.


SECTION I.
OF SOLIDITY AMONG DEBTORS.


Art. L
1829. Definition of Solidity.— The solidity among debtors is
the engagement which obliges every one of them to the creditor
for the whole debt."


IL.


1830. There ts no Solidity unless it be expressed. — The obliga-
tion of two or more debtors, who promise one and the same thing,
does not bind every one of them for the whole, unless it be partic-
ularly so expressed in the obligation.» And each debtor will be
bound only for his own share of the debt. And it would be the


© See the fifth article of the first section of Damages occasioned by Faults, &.
® L. 3,§ 1, D. de duod. reis;—L. 2, C. eod.;—§ 1, Inst. cod. See the third article.
» ZL. 11, tn fin. D. de duobd. reis ; —1. 47, D. locat.

60 *


714 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L. BOOK fit


same thing if two or more persons were condemned by a court al
justice to pay one and the same thing, and that the sentence did
not expressly bear that each of them should be liable for th
whole For in a doubt, obligations are to be interpreted in fava
of those who are bound.‘


Ii.

1831. The Solidity does not hinder the Division of the Debt ane
the Debtors. — Although it has been agreed that every one of th
debtors should be bound for the whole debt, yet it is neverthele
divided among them; and the creditor cannot immediately sue am
one of them for the whole debt. But before he demand from on
the portions due by the others, he ought to discuss every one fo
his own portion; and he may afterwards recover the portions «
those who were not able to pay from the other remaining debton
For the clause of solidity being inserted in the obligation only f
the creditor’s greater security, the solidity implies the conditi#
that each debtor obliges himself to pay for the others only in cas
that some of them fail to pay their proportions. Thus, when sa
of the debtors prove insolvent, or because of their absence
creditor cannot get payment of their portions of the debt, @
other debtors answer for them, and every one bears his part of &
deficiency in proportion to his own share. But if the debtors wh
are bound each of them for the whole debt renounce this benel
which the law gives them, and which is called the benefit of dims
ion, every one of them may be constrained alone to pay the wha
debt; for every one may renounce what the law establishe: i


TIT. Itt. SKC. 1.] SOLIDITY. 716


IV.

1832. Ee all Sorts of Obligations the Parties may bind themselves
for the whole.— The obligation may be such as to bind every one
of the parties for the whole debt, let the cause of the engagement
be of what nature soever it will. Thus, several persons may
oblige themselves after this manner, in a loan, in a sale, in a con-
tract of letting and hiring, in a deposit, and in all other sorts of
engagements. And one may bind himself in this manner for a
legacy, for a guardianship, for an engagmement entered into by
order of the judge, and for all other causes whatsoever.®


V.


1833. The Condition of Parties who are obliged each of them for
the whole may be different. — Although the solidity renders the
eondition of the parties who are bound jointly together equal, in
that every one of them is bound for the whole; yet they may be
otherwise distinguished by differences which render the obligation
maore or less hard with respect to some than to others. Thus, in
the case of two persons bound solidly for the same thing, one may
give particular securities which the other does not, as a pledge or

- Thus, the obligation of one may be pure and simple,
whilst that of the other is conditional; or the term of payment
may be shorter for one than for the other. But these differences
ere no hindrance why the creditor may not sue him who owes
without a condition, or whose term is come, without waiting for
the condition or term of the other.®


VI


1834. Relief of him who pays for the others.— If one of the
debtors who are obliged solidly together pays for the others, he
shall have his remedy against them for recovering their proportions,
and so much as every one of them ought to pay of the portions
of those who prove insolvent, but no more. For as the debt is
divided, with respect to the creditor, so the relief of him who pays
for the others is divided also, and is limited, with regard to each
debtor, to his portion, because it is only his portion that is paid
for him.!


6 1.9, D. de dwobd. reis ; —I. 18, § 9, D. locat. ; —1. 14, D. de duob. reis.

8 T. 7, D. de duob. reis ; —§ ult. Inst. eod.; —1. 6, § 1, eod.; —v. 1. 9, § 1, end.

' 2.2, C. de duobd. reis. It is in this manner that this relief ought to have its effect, if
tee debtor who pays for the others has no other right besides the indemnity which they


716 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART L BOOK [


Vil.

1835. The Action against one of the Deblors does mot make i
Solidity to cease. — If, among several debtors who are bound ev
one of them for the whole debt, the creditor seeks for payme
from one of them whom he chooses, without suing the others;
retains nevertheless the liberty of bringing his action afterwa
avainst the other debtors, whether the first to whom he address
himself were solvent or not.!


VUL


1836. The Personal Exception which one of the Debtors ©
have does not serve for the others.— All the exceptions which !
parties who are obliged may have against the creditor, and whi
are not limited to their persons, but which have relation tot
common obligation, serve for the discharge of all the pert
obliged. Thus, for example, if the obligation hath been @
tracted by force, if it is contrary to good manners, if it is null, if
is acquitted, these kinds of exceptions which relate to the oblig
tion are common to all the parties who are bound by it. Botd
personal exceptions which some of the parties obliged may ie
such as a minority, the interdiction of a prodigal, or some cham
of condition, which should make the recovering of the debt a
impossible or difficult to the creditor, such as a natural oo
death, and the other obstacles of the like nature, which mig
happen on the part of some of the debtors, would mot binder?
effect of the solidity with regard to the others™ For these ae
tions and these changes do not extinguish the debt, and @


TIT. Il. SEC. 11.} SOLIDITY. 717


for example, if one of the debtors should appear to be in his own
right a creditor to their common creditor, his fellow-debtors might
demand of their common creditor a compensation of the portion
of the debt which would fall to the share of their fellow-debtor,
who is creditor to him. And as to the overplus of what might
still be due from their creditor to this their fellow-debtor, they
eould not demand a compensation of it, unless they had otherwise
the right of this their fellow-debtor.®


IX.


1837. The Demand of the ‘Debt from one of the Debtors hinders
; ' Bvescription by the others. — If the creditor of several persons who
: are indebted for one and the same thing brings his action against
,, MY one of them, his demand will preserve his whole right, and
* sil hinder prescription with respect to the other debtors.°


SECTION II.


OF SOLIDITY AMONG CREDITORS.
a...


a Arr. L

w 1838. Wherein consists this Solidity.— The solidity among
several creditors hath not this effect, that every one of them may
eppropriate the whole debt to himself, and deprive the others of
“Qheir shares; but it consists only in this, that every one of them
has a right to demand and receive the whole, and the debtor re-
mains quit, with respect to them all, by paying the debt to any
one of them.*


IL.


2%. 1839. How it is acquired.— This solidity depends on the title
wwhich may give it, and on that which may show that what is


~ug™ Z. 10, D. de duob. reis. It is in the sense of this article that we are to understand
Kast text. For it would not be just to compel one of the debtors to pay the portion

om who should have a compensation to make with the creditor. Since, if this com-
Spameation were not made, and the debtor who had right to make it should prove insol-
‘want, those who shall have paid for him would be without relief for having paid what he
‘QA mot owe or what he might have justly compensated.

© See the seventeenth article of the fifth section of Possession and Prescription, and the
Baw which is there quoted, and the fifth article of the following section.

@ 7. 13, § ult. D. de acceptil. ; —1. 31, § 1, D. de novat.; —§ 1, Inst. de duob. reis.


718 THE CIViL LAW. [PART I. BOOK


owing to several persons is due to every one of them in th
whole. Thus, when two persons lend a sum of money, or sell :
house or lands, they may treat in such a manner as that the pay
ment may be made to any one of the two singly; and they wi
be creditors each of them for the whole, either of the money les
or of the price of the sale. But if it were only said that a dete
should owe a sum of money to two creditors, without mentioniy
any thing of the solidity, in that case each creditor could demam
no more than his own portion.°
IL.

1840. If one Creditor demands the Debt without the others.—l
in the case of two or more creditors, where each of them but
right to demand and receive the whole debt, one of them dow ®
mand it, the payment cannot be made to the other creditor with
out him. For he has determined the debtor not to pay, unles ©
consents to it; and it may so happen, that those who do noi @
in their claim may have lost their right.


IV.


1841. Jf he innovates or makes over the Debt to anctie.—
When one of the creditors of one and the same debt may sa
demand the whole debt, and receive it, he may also innovate &
debt, and delegate or assign it over to others; for he might @&
charge the debt, and even give an acquittance, without recent
any thing. But this creditor ought to account to the othe =
these changes.°


rit. Tv.) SURETIES. 719


VL
1843. One of these Creditors cannot do any Prejudice to the
thers. — The use which one of the creditors may make of the
ight to demand alone, and receive, the whole debt, cannot hurt the
thers. And he ought to account to them for the manner in which
shall have used this right.£


TITLE IV.
OF CAUTIONS, OR SURETIES.


1844. Use of Cautions and Sureties.— No body is ignorant of
be frequent use of cautions or sureties. These two names are
iven to those who oblige themselves for others whose obligation
} mot thought sufficient, whether it be for money or for other
auses. They are called cautions because their obligation is a
peurity. They are called sureties, because it is upon their faith
nat those to whom they engage themselves rely. This is the orig-
eal signification of these two words.

‘4845. The obligation, therefore, of cautions or sureties is an ac-
sssory to another obligation. Thus, we call the person for whom
be surety binds himself the principal debtor.

1846. The use of sureties extends to all manner of engage-
rents, and comprehends two sorts of suretyships. One is con-
srning the payment of a sum of money, or the performance of
yme other engagement, such as the undertaking of a work, a
rarranty, and others of the like nature; to assure the person to
thom the surety engages himself, that what is promised by the
tincipal debtor shall be performed. The other sort of suretyship
Hates to the validity of the obligation in the cases where it may
e liable to be vacated, as if the principal debtor were a minor,
though able to pay, the engagement of the surety would be, not
miy to pay the debt if the minor’s obligation were not annulled,
at to make good the obligation in case the minor should be re-
eved from it, and to pay for him.*


6 This is a consequence of the nature of this kind of solidity among creditors. For
wy have not left their debt to the hazard which of them can get payment of it first.
® See the second article of the fifth section.


7) THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOor In


1847. Suretyships may be divided into three sorts. The firsti
of those that are given willingly, and by mutual! consent, for
manner of engagements, whether they be formed by covenants
otherwise. Thus, one gives caution for a loan, for a warranty, &
the price of a sale, for the rent of a lease, and for other obliguiiea
which are contracted by covenants. Thus, tutors and guardian
sometimes give security.

1848. The second sort is of suretyships enjoined by some im
Thus, by the Roman law, plaintiffs and defendants were oblige
to give caution for several causes relating to judicial proceeding
Thus, in France, by an edict of the month of January, 1557, the
to whom any thing falls by devolution are obliged to give canta
to pay what shall be adjudged. And there are other cass t
which the ordinances oblige to give caution, which it would ®t
no purpose to mention here.

1849. The third sort of suretyships is of those ordered ty @
judge, whether he does it at the instance or upon an offerol &
parties, or ex officio. Thus, sometimes a thing that is in dim
is adjudged to one of the parties provisionally, he giving seam]
to restore it if it be so decreed. ‘Thus, bail is ordered to be gimm
for the appearance of a prisoner, who is set at liberty on this oe
dition. Thus, in settling the rank of payment armong creditem?
is ordered that those who shall receive sums which may be it
to be demanded back shall give caution to pay them back agut
to prior creditors, to whom the said sums shall be found to be @s
as in the case of a conditional debt, as has been remarked oo @
seventeenth article of the third section of Pawns and Morigwe


TIT. IV. SEC. I.] SURETIES. 721


IL.

1851. Caution may be given for all Manner of Engagements. —
There is no honest and lawful engagement to which we may not
add the security of a caution to that which the principal debtor
gives himself,’ provided that the giving of the said caution be not
contrary to good manners. For there are lawful engagements in
which it would not be decent to give security.°


HL


1852. It may be given for a Natural Obligation.— This use of
suretyships in all manner of engagements extends not only to
those which are made with the mutual consent of the parties by
covenants, to those of tutors and curators, to those even of sureties
themselves (for we may take security for a surety), and, in general,
to all other sorts of engagements in which the civil laws give the
creditor an action against the person who is obliged, and which
are called, for this reason, civil obligations;4 but caution may
also be given for that sort of obligations which are called barely
natural, of which we have spoken in the ninth article of the fifth
section of Covenants. For in these sorts of obligations there is
formed a natural engagement, which he who becomes surety for it
makes good in his person, although in the person of the principal
debtor it be useless. Thus, in the customs where the wife, who is
in the power of her husband, cannot be bound any manner of
way, if the husband becomes surety for the obligation of his wife,
he shall be obliged, although the obligation of the wife remains
always null.


IV.


1853. Security for a Debt to be contracted.— We may give se-
curity, not only for a present obligation, or for one that has been
already contracted, but also for an obligation to be contracted; as
if he who foresees a business for which he may stand in need of
money gives beforehand the security of a surety to the person who


» 7.1, D. de fidejuss. ; —1. 8, § 6, cod. ; —§ 1, Inst. eod.

© See the ninth article.

4 ZL. 8 §$ 1 a 2, D. de fidejuss. et mand. ;—d.1. 8, § 4, § ult. D. cod. This surety of a
sarety, that is taken in a court of justice, is termed in France a certifier ; because he cer-
tifies or undertakes that the first surety is good.

© ZL. 16, § 3, D. de fidej.; —§ 1, Inst. eod. See the ninth article of the fifth section of
Covenants


VOL. a 61


TIT. IV. SEC. I.] SURETIES. 723


independently of the will of his debtor; and as to the surety him-
self, he may do this good office to his absent friend, in the same
manner as one may take care of the affairs of an absent person.°


VIL


1857. bs Crimes there ts no giving of Security, no more than
Warranty.—In the matter of crimes and offences, those who
commit them by order of other persons, or who make themselves
accomplices of them, cannot take security or warranty for being
saved harmless from the events which may follow thereupon, or
for assuring to themselves the profits which may arise from thence.
For the obligation of such a surety and of such a warranty would
be another crime. But he who has committed a crime or an
offence may give security for the civil interest, and even for the
fines, and other pecuniary mulcts, which he may have incurred by
his offence. For it is just, and for the public good, that they
should be acquitted.?


TX.


1858. Some Honest and Fair Engagements in which it ts not law-
Sul to take Security.— There are some honest and lawful engage-
ments in which one cannot take security, because the nature of
the engagement would make the taking of security to be reckoned
an indecent thing. Thus, it would be contrary to good manners
for a partner to give security to his copartner that he will not
cheat him, or for an umpire to give security that he will pronounce
sentence in the matter referred to him, or judge uprightly. Thus,
in a case of another nature, one ought not to take security for
the restitution of a dowry, either from the husband, or from other
persons who are to receive it for his use, such as his father or his
guardian. For the dowry being an accessory to the engagement
of the marriage, it would be unworthy of the strict union of matri-
mony, which puts the wife under the power of the husband, with
whom she intrusts her person, to demand any such security.1. And


© See the title Of those who manaye the Affairs of others without their Knowledge.

P L. 8, § 5, D. de fidejuss.;—l. 70, § ult. D. de fidejuss.

@ Z.1, C. de fidej. vel mand. dot. dent. ; —1. 8, C. de pact. conv. Seeing our usage allows
an indefinite liberty of inserting in contracts of marriage all sorts of covenants, and even
some which would be unlawful in other contracts, such as the institution of an heir that
is irrevocable ; it would seem that for that reason, and in consideration of the favor of
dowries, the taking of security for a dowry ought not to be forbidden, and that the surety
who binds himself on that account ought not to be discharged from his engagement, es-
pecially if the dowry be in danger. But nevertheless we have thought proper to insert


724 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK mm


it would be a seed of discord in families, which ought to be united
by marriages. But the father and mother of the husband may
oblige themselves for their son to make restitution of the dowry.
For the obligation of their goods is the same with that of the son
who is to inherit them. And it is usual, that he who marries hu
no other estate besides what his parents give him, either at th
time of the marriage, or at their death; which makes their oblige
tion for the security of the dowry to be just and reasonable.
X.

1859. The Surety is not discharged by the Restitution of the Prix
cipal Debtor. — Although the obligation of a surety be only a
accessory to that of the principal debtor, yet he who has bound
himself surety for a person who may get himself relieved from his
obligation, such as a minor, or a prodigal who is interdicted, is not
discharged from his suretyship by the restitution of the principal
debtor; and the obligation subsists in his person, unless the rest
tution were grounded upon some fraud or other vice which should
have the effect to annul the right of the creditor. But the ber
restitution of the principal debtor is an event which the crediie
did foresee and guard against, by securing his debt by the add-
tional obligation of a surety, who on his part could not be ime
rant of this consequence of his engagement."


XI.


1860. The Minor saves his Surely harmless,if he is not relierel
from his Obligation.— The surety for a minor has his action #


TIT. IV. BEC. 1] SURETIES. 725


relief against him to save him harmless, if the obligation has been
profitable to the minor. But if it has not been advantageous to
him, and he on that account has been relieved from it, he may
likewise be relieved from his obligation to indemnify his surety.


XII.


1861. The Giving of Counsel and Recommending do not bind one
as Surety. — The engagement of sureties consists in this, that
they oblige themselves in their own names to be answerable for
the effect of the obligation for which they become sureties. But
those who, without any design of engaging themselves, recommend
the person who is to be bound, or advise the treating with him,
do not by that means bind themselves as sureties, unless there
‘were on their part some fraud, or other circumstances which ought
to make them guarantees of the event.‘


XIIL


1862. Qualities of Caution or Security taken tn a Court of
Justice.—- When a private person receives security, he accepts or
rejects, as he thinks good, those who are offered to him as sureties,
and he settles his security in such manner as he and his debtor
can agree. But when caution or security is taken in a court of
justice, it is the office of the judge to receive or reject it, according
as the person who offers the security, and the surety himself, can
show that the security is sufficient; which depends on three quali-
ties that are to be considered in sureties, according to the engage-
ments for which they are to be answerable: the solvency of the
persons, the facility of suing them at law, and the validity of their
engagement. Thus, the want of an estate, the dignity of the per-
sons, and the other qualities which make the suing them at law
difficult, and their incapacity of being bound, are causes for re-
jecting the cautions or sureties that are offered in a court of
jastice."


XIV.
1863. Heirs or Executors of Sureties.— The engagements of


® L.1, C. de fidej. min. See the second article of the fifth section.
® See the last article of the first section of Proxies, Mandates, &c.
© L. 2, D. qui satisd. cog. ; —1. 7, eod. ; —1.3, D. de fidej. Although some of these texts
do not relate to all manner of sureties, yet we may apply them to the rule explained in
this article.
Al *


TIT. IV. BEC. I1.] SURETIES. 727


IL

1867. Exception as to Judicial Sureties.— Those who are judi-
cial sureties may be prosecuted without a previous discussion of
the principal debtor,” not only because they oblige themselves to
the court of justice, the authority whereof requires it should be so,
bat also because of the nature of the debts in which this security
may be found to be necessary. For they are such, that one ought
not to allow in them the delay of a discussion. Thus, for ex-
ample, if, pursuant to an order of justice for the payment of credi-
tors, one of them receives a sum of money, on condition that he
give security to restore it to other persons to whom the said
money ought to go, in a certain case, as that of the birth of a
child, who is called to a substitution, or other the like case; the
giving of this security is ordained only to the end that the said
money may be immediately repaid, if the case does happen, and
that it be delivered to the person who ought to have it, in the
game manner as if the money had remained in the hands of the
receiver of all moneys deposited in court, which ought to be deliv-
ered up without delay. And we shall see in the other cases of
judicial sureties a like equity for not admitting in them the benefit
of discussion.


il.


1868. Another Exception, when the Debtor is Absent, and has no
visible Estate.— If the principal debtor is absent, or has not a
visible estate, so that no action can be brought against him, or
he made to pay, the surety may be sued; unless he obtains a
delay from the court, in order to find out some effects belonging
to the debtor, or to make him pay the debt, after which delay,
if the creditor is not satisfied, he may compel the surety to pay
the debt.


—L 55, in f. cod. ;—1. 116, D. de verb. oblig. Besides this benefit of discussion, which is
in this article, there are two others which sureties have. See the sixth article

of this section, and the first article of the fourth section, with the remark upon it. This
benefit of discussion is granted only to those who are bound barely as sureties, for their
obligation is explained by this quality. But if those who, with regard to the princi-
pal debtor, are only his sureties, make themselves principal debtors with respect to the
creditor, and oblige themselves, as is usual in this quality, equally with the principal debt-
or for the whole debt, renouncing this benefit of discussion, they are no more to be con-
sidered as sureties. See the third article of the first section of the Solidity among two or
more, &c., with the remark upon it. See the two following articles.

& Z. 1, D. jud. solv. ; —v. Inst. de satisd., et l. ult. §.1, C. de usur. re jud.

© No. 4, c. 1.


a


798 : THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT le BOOK UL


IV.

1869. The Discussion does not extend to Goods alienated by te
Debtor. — The discussion which the creditor is obliged to make d
the goods of the debtor, before he sues the surety, does not extend
to the goods on which he has a mortgage, and which have pase
from the hands of the debtor to purchasers and third possessor;
but only to the goods which the debtor has actually in his posse
sion. And the creditor cannot sue the third possessor till be bus
first discussed the goods of the debtor, and likewise prosecuted his
personal action against the surety. But he cannot exercise te
mortgage which he has upon the estate of the surety, except i
the case where he cannot recover payment out of what is inte
hands of a third possessor."


V.


1870. The Surety cannot oblige the Creditor to swe the Detter,
— Although it be the interest of the surety that the credite
should recover payment from the debtor, yet he cannot oblige the
creditor to sue him for it. For the creditor may defer the diecee
sion of the principal debtor, without losing the security whe
he has taken by having another person bound for the debt? Ba
if a minor, whose guardian had given security for his administ®
tion, being come of age, and, finding his guardian indebted to km
and at that time able to pay him, should neglect to sue lim
and in the mean while the guardian should become insolvent, &
surety ought not in this case to be easily condemned to the mint
For the engagement of this surety was only to answer for i


TIT. IV. BEC. II.] SURETIES. 729


VI

1871. In what Manner several Sureties are bound.— If several
persons become sureties for one and the same thing, every one of
them is answerable for the whole. For every one of them engages
for the whole debt or other engagement, and to make up what the
principal debtor shall not be able to pay. Thus, their obligation
naturally binds every one of them for the whole debt, after the
discussion of the principal debtor. But their obligation is divided
in the same manner, and for the same reason, as that of principal
debtors, who are jointly bound each of them for the whole debt.
Thus, when the sureties are solvent, the creditor can demand from
each of them only his share of the debt. But the portions of
those who are insolvent are thrown upon the others, and every one
bears his part thereof upon the foot of his own portion of the
whole debts


VIL.


1872. If the Obligation of one of the Sureties is annulled, the
others answer for his Portion. —If, of two or more sureties, one
happens to have sufficient reasons for vacating his obligation; as
if it was a minor, or a married woman who had no power to bind
herself, or who is not bound according to form; the other sureties
will be answerable for the portion of this surety who is dis-
charged.®


VIIL


1873. What are the Exceptions of the Debtor that are common to
the Surety.— All the defences which the debtor has against the
creditor are common to the sureties. As if the obligation, ora
part of it, happens to be acquitted ; if it is prescribed; if the debt
was referred to the debtor’s oath, and he had sworn, either that he
never owed any thing, or that he had paid it; orif he has other
exceptions of the like nature. For the surety is only answerable
for what shall be legally due; and whatever annuls or diminishes
the obligation of the debtor annuls or diminishes the obligation of


& § 4, Inst. de fidejuss. ; —1. 26, D. eod. —1. 10, § 1, C. eod. See tho first article of the
fourth section. This right which sureties have to divide their obligations is called the
benefit of division. See the third article of the first section of the Solidity, &c., the first
article of this section, and the first article of the fourth section, with the remarks on
those articles, where it appears that those who have this benefit may renounce it.

b 7. 48, D. de fidejuss.


730 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK Mm


the surety, which isan accessory to the other. Thus, he may make
use of these defences, although the principal debtor should decline
to use them himself But if the defences of the principal debtor
are only drawn from his own person; as if he may obtain relief
because he was a minor when he contracted the obligation; if &
cannot be sued because he has made over all his effects o lw
creditors, or because they have been confiscated ; these sorts of a
ceptions will not avail the surety. For it was to guard aguint
them that the ereditor got the surety to be bound.’


TX.


1874. The Engagement of the Surety follows the Obligatioa—
The engagement of the surety is not limited to the person of th
creditor to whom he obliges himself, but his obligation is annexal
to that of the principal debtor, and passes with it to the pemom
who shall afterwards have the right to it. And if, for example, a
heir or executor takes security from one that is debtor to the
heritance, and is obliged afterwards to restore the inheritance
another, either because of a substitution, or because, his institutia
not subsisting, he ceases to be heir or executor; this surety wil
remain obliged to him to whom the inheritance shall be restored*


SECTION IIl.


OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE DEBTOR TOWARDS HIS SURETY, 49
OF THE SURETY TOWARDS THE DEBTOR.


TIT. IV. SEC. I11.] SURETIES. 731


for the debtor only in this quality. For it implies the engagement
to save him harmless.


IL


1876. Indemnity for the Consequences of the Suretyship. — If the
creditor, not receiving satisfaction from the principal debtor, brings
his action against the surety, and forces him to pay the debt, the
surety will recover from the debtor both the principal sum and in-
terest which he shall have paid to the creditor, as also the interest
of the said principal and interest. For with regard to him, all the
money which he has paid on the debtor’s account is a capital of
which he ought to be indemnified, in the same manner as, and
with much more reason than, a factor or agent, who does the busi-
ness of an absent person without his knowledge; seeing what
moneys they advance, they do it of their own accord, and that it
is by constraint that the surety makes payment. And if he suffers
otherwise any damage, or is put to any charges, as if the credi-
tor sues him, or attaches his goods, he will also be reimbursed of
the expenses which he shall have been put to, and of all of his
damages, and likewise of the charges he shall be at in suing the
debtor for his reimbursement.>


IIL


1877. A Case where the Surety may sue the Debtor for his Indem-
sity before he has been called upon by the Creditor.— If the princi-
pal debtor fails to pay the creditor at the term, the surety may sue
him after the term is expired, to oblige him to acquit the debt,
although the creditor demand nothing. And if the indemnity of
the surety were in hazard, he might sue the debtor, even before
the term, for his own safety. Thus, when the debtor squan-
ders away his estate, or his goods are attached, the surety may
pat in his claim, and take such other measures for his own
safety as the circumstances of the danger shall render neces-


sary.°


® ©. 8, D. de negot. gest. ;—1. 4, eod. ; —1. 20, § 1, D. mand.

b This is a consequence of the preceding article. § 6, Inst. de fidejuss. ; —I. 45, § 6, D.
mand. ; —1.50,§ 1, eod. See, touching the interest of sums paid by the surety, the fourth
article of the second section of Proxies, and the fifth article of the second section Of those
who manage the Affairs of others.

© 7. 38, § 1, D. mand.


732 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK It


IV.
1878. Jf the Surety pays before the Term.—If the surety pap
before the term, he cannot bring his action for relief against te


debtor till after the term is elapsed.t For he had no power t
make the condition of the debtor worse, who is not bound to py
till the term comes.


V.


1879. He may pay after the Term without being called on. —Tw
surety may, if he pleases, pay after the term. And although k
has neither been adjudged to pay the debt, nor sued by the owt
tor, yet he will nevertheless have his action of relief against &
debtor. For the obligation both of the debtor and surety was®
pay at the term. So that he acquits the common engagement

VI.

1880. Jf he pays imprudently what was not due. — Although th
surety may pay the debt without being sued for it, he ought mt
however to do any prejudice to the exceptions which the principal
debtor might have against the creditor. And if, for example,
surety, knowing that the debtor had either paid or had suficial
grounds for annulling the debt, pays it nevertheless, he cannot®
cover from the debtor what he shall have acquitted in this manne’


VIL


1881. If the Surety pays, being ignorant of the Exceptions oii
the Debtor has against the Debt.— If the surety, being summon!


tT. IV. SKC. I11.] SURETIES. 733


be compelled to pay the debt, there might be ground, according
‘to the circumstances, for imputing to the surety that he had paid
it wrongfully.


VIIL


1882. If the Surety pays, notwithstanding he had an Exception
Sor kis own Person.— If the surety had any defence peculiar to
himself, which was not common to the debtor; as if he was a
minor, and for that reason might get himself relieved from his ob-
igation ; or if he had any other personal exception, and if he pays
the debt voluntarily, without taking advantage of the said excep-
tion, he will nevertheless have his action for relief against the
@ebtor. For by having waived his own right, he has done no
wrong to the debtor, and he has only acquitted him of what he
owed."


IX.


1883. If the Surety does not make any Defence when sued, or

' gagtects to appeal from the Sentence.— If the surety, being sued
". ‘by the creditor, does not use the means for obtaining a delay
~ which he might make use of; as if he does not allege in his de-
fence certain nullities in the proceedings in the cause, which would
' got be sufficient to discharge the debtor, and, after having ac-
"  quainted the debtor with the creditors demand, pays the debt;
the debtor cannot blame him for not having taken the advantage
of such defences. But if, the surety being condemned to pay the
debt, whether it be after having defended himself, or without mak-
img any defence, he does not appeal from the sentence, or if he
oes appeal, but does not acquaint the debtor therewith; and, in
jemeral, whatever be the conduct of the surety, and whatever
event it may have, it is by the circumstances of his conduct, and
ef that of the debtor, that we must discern whether the surety
ought to have defended himself or not, or to have appealed or not;
whether he has defended himself well or ill, if he has given timely
notice to the debtor, if he has paid the debt rightfully or wrong-
fally, if he has paid more than was due; and by these circum-
stances we are to judge whether the surety ought to recover either
barely what was owing by the debtor, or also the charges he has
been at, or if he ought to lose them!


bh 7. 29, § 6, D. mand. ! 7. 29, § 4, D. mand. ; — Ll. 8, § 8, eod.
VOL. I. 62


730A. THE CIVIL LaW. [Part L soor


A.

1884. If the Surety does not acquaint the Debtor that he has pa
the Debt for him. — If, the surety having paid the debt withouts
quainting the debtor, the debtor pays it a second time, the swe
will have no relief against him. For he would be in the faults
having suffered the debtor to be in danger of paying twice.’

XI

1885. Surety for a Thing deposited, or for a Thing lent.—T|
engagement of the surety being only accessory to that of the pm
cipal debtor, he is bound only precisely for that which is ows
by the person for whom he engages himself. ‘Thus, for examp
if one had taken security from a depositary, or from him whol
borrowed a thing for use, he who becomes surety for such an &
gagement would not be obliged to make good the thing depos
or lent, if it should chance to perish by an accident; but he woe
only be bound to answer for the fraud and negligence of 8
principal debtor; for it was in that only that the obligation @
sisted.”


XII.


1886. If the Creditor gives the Surety a discharge of the Deit-
If the creditor, or another person having his right, gives a2 ®
quittance to the surety, with intention to make him a presests
the debt, as a recompense for some service, or out of some ou
motive, this surety may recover the debt from the debtor; for &
favor was designed for the surety alone, and not intended far®


late nt the debtor 171 it F OT a ff i orl os


WIT. IV. SEO. 1V.] SURETIES. 735


SECTION IV.
OF THE ENGAGEMENTS OF SURETIES TO ONE ANOTHER.


Art. I.


1887. In what Manner one of the Sureties paying the Debt may
sue his Fellow-Sureties for their Shares of it. —If one of the sure-
ties pays the debt, he shall have his relief only against the debtor,
and not against his fellow-sureties; for he acquits only his own
engagement; and since the payment which he makes, without


.. aking use of the benefit of division against the other sureties,


Are 0 oe


wom


: ~@xtinguishes the principal obligation, that of the fellow-sureties,
‘which was only an accessory to it, subsists no longer. But if, in


spaying the debt, he gets himself to be substituted to the creditor,


: ‘Re will have his right for recovering the shares of every one of the


gether sureties. This substitution by the creditor having this effect,
$hat although the right of the creditor seems to be annulled by
the payment, yet this right subsists so as to pass from the person
of the creditor to him who pays for the others. For it is as it
were a sale which the creditor makes to him of his rights. And


_ ¥¥f the creditor refuses the substitution, he who pays the debt may


a |


- Jwocure an order for it from the judge.*


® Z.11, C. de fidejuss. ; —1. 39, D. eod. ; —§ 4, Inst. eod.;—1.17, D. eod.; —I. 36, D.
oud. ; —I. 41, § 1, e0d. See the sixth article of the second section.
t This substitution of the surety to the creditor for recovering the shares of his fellow-
ureties, is a third benefit granted to sureties. So that sureties have three benefits which


: ‘Hessen their engagement and facilitate their relief. The first is the benefit of discussion,


in the first article of the second section. The second is the benefit of division,
@uplained in the sixth article of the same section. And the third is this benefit of the
gasaion of the rights of the creditor, explained in this article. The effect of the first ben-
oft of discussion is, that the surety cannot be sued till after the goods of the principal


. @dtor have been discussed. The effect of the second benefit of division is, that, when


@bere are several sureties for one and the same debt, each of them can only be sued for his
e@wn share, if the others are able to pay ; but if any of them be insolvent, or their obliga-
tion be found to be null, or be liable to be rescinded, their shares will be thrown upon the
others, as has been said in the sixth article of the second section. And the effect of the
third benefit of the cession of the rights of the creditor is, that the surety who pays the
exeditor recovers from every one of the other sureties their proportions of what he has


We are to understand the use of the benefits of discussion and division only in favor of
those who have not renounced them. For if they have renounced them, they are, with
tgard to the creditor, in the same condition as the debtor. See the third article of the
frst section of the Solidity, &.


736 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1 DOOR Mm


IL

1888. Fellow-Sureties answer for one another. — It is an engage
ment of sureties among themselves, that, if there be several sa
ties for one and the same debtor, and there be one of them that)
| insolvent, or whose obligation is null or liable to be rescinds
every one of the others ought to bear his proportion of the shu
of the surety who is insolvent,® or whose obligation does not mi

sist. For they are all of them sureties for the whole debt!


SECTION V.
HOW THE ENGAGEMENT OF SURETIES ENDS, OR 18 ANNULLED


Arr. L


1889. There can be no Surety of an Obligation that is Uslaets
| — If, in the principal obligation, there is any essential] vice wi
may annul it, as if it has been contracted by force, if it is conta
i to law or to good manners, if it is founded only on a frand, oe
i some error which may suffice to annul it; in all these cases &

| obligation of the surety is likewise annulled.* For no one @
| take surety for validating engagements that are vicious in tha
I selves.


LJ IL
1890. The Exception which the Principal Debtor has on Acom


of his own Person does not discharge the Surety. — Vf the pinap


®
fit) LF ai ae =| I omepeths


BPsi oa 2a aos


TIT. IV. 8EC. V.] SURETIES. 737


obligation to the creditor.” For it was only to make good the
obligation of the minor in case he should be relieved from it on
account of his age, that the creditor took the additional security of
-@ surety.


IIL


1891. Fraud of the Creditor with Regard to the Surety. — If be-
sides the personal exception which might be a sufficient ground
for annulling the obligation of the principal debtor, without inval-
idating that of the surety, there was any fraud on the part of the
creditor, whether in the business which was the subject-matter of
the obligation, or in the manner of engaging the surety, the obliga-
tion of this surety would be annulled. Thus, for example, if one
who is willing to lend money to a minor upon security gives to
the person who is to become surety for the minor false proofs of
his being of age, the obligation of the surety will be annulled.


IV.


1892. Circumstances which may render the Obligation of the
Surety Null or Valid. —In all the cases where the principal obli-
‘gation is liable to be annulled, it is by the circumstances that
we are to judge whether the obligation of the surety will sub-
sist or not. Thus, the surety of a minor remains bound in the
ease of the eleventh article of the first section. And, on the con-
trary, he is discharged in the case of the third article of this sec-
tion. Thus, when the obligation has for its cause some commerce
os some disposition prohibited by law, as if he who has a mind to
give something to a person, to whom it is prohibited by some
Jaw or custom to give any thing, makes a fictitious contract for
the benefit of the said person, or of a third person who lends his
mame for that purpose, and he adds to the said contract the
security of a surety, the obligation of the surety will be without
effect, as well as that of the principal debtor. Thus, in general, to
jadge of the validity or invalidity of the engagement of the surety,
it is necessary to consider the quality of the principal obligation,
whether it be lawful or unlawful; the sincerity or disingenuity of
the parties; the motive which has induced the creditor to take an
additional security, as if it was because the obligation was unlaw-


b 7.1, C. de fidejuss. min. See the two following articles, and the tenth and eleventh
articles of the first section. |
© LZ. 2, C. de fidejuss. min.


A9*


738 THE CIVIL LAW. | PART L BOOK In


ful; or only to supply the insolvency or incapacity of the prineipa
debtor, as if he were a minor, who, because of his minority, cou
not validly oblige himself, although the obligation were not m
lawful in its own nature; if he who is bound as surety for &
other has voluntarily offered himself, and engaged the creditor t
accept of him, or if he has been engaged by any unfair dealings
the part of the creditor; and it is by these circumstances, =
others of the like nature, that we are to judge of the effect whic
the obligation of the surety ought to have."
V.

1893. The Surety is discharged if the Obligation does not subm
any more. — If the debtor annuls his obligation, either by payment
or by some other way that discharges him, as if, the matter bem
referred to his oath, he swears that he has paid the debt, or that}
did not owe any thing, if he is discharged by a sentence, by!
transaction, or other covenant with the creditor; in all these cass
the engagement of the surety is annulled. For he was oblige
only to pay what should be due.*


Vi.


1894. Or if it is innovated.— If the debt is innovated betwen
the creditor and the debtor, without the surety’s obliging hime!
anew, his obligation does not subsist any longer. ‘Thus, he w®
was creditor for the price of a sale, and who had a surety bom
for it, having given an acquittance thereof, and having taken [res
the buyer alone his bond, as for money lent, cannot after that @


TIT. IV. SEO, V.] SURETIES. 739


has renewed it by a second, he who was surety for the first obli-
gation will not be so for the second, unless he obliges himself
anew. Thus, he who renews with his farmer a lease that is ex-
pared, either by granting him a new lease, or by a tacit continu-
ance of the former, will not have him engaged as a surety who was
bound for the first lease, unless he obliges himself anew. For it
is another obligations


VIIL.


1896. If the Debtor succeeds to the Creditor, or the Creditor to
the Debtor.— If the creditor becomes heir or executor to the
debtor, or the debtor to the creditor, the confusion which is made
im the person of the said heir or executor, of the qualities of cred-
itor and debtor, makes that the obligation does not subsist any
more ; and this confusion annuls likewise the obligation of the
surety. For he cannot owe to the heir or executor a debt against
which the heir or executor himself is bound to indemnify him.
And there is no longer either debt or debtor.)


IX.


1897. If the Creditor or Debtor succeeds to the Surety, or the
Surety to any one of them.— If it happens that the debtor or credi-
tor be heir or executor to the surety, or that the surety succeed in
that quality to one or other of them, in all these cases there arise
different confusions of the qualities of debtor, creditor, and surety,
every one of which annuls the engagement of the surety. For if
he succeeds to the debtor, he himself becomes principal debtor,
and consequently ceases to be surety. And if he succeeds to the
exeditor, he is no longer bound, seeing he cannot be bound to him-
self. But if it is the creditor that succeeds to the surety, he will
not be bound to himself, but will retain only his right against the
debtor. And lastly, if it is the debtor that succeeds to the surety,
there remains no longer any suretyship, but only a principal obli-
gation in the person of the debtor. And he could not even plead
the exceptions which the surety may have had to allege in his
own person; as if he was, for example, a minor.!


& ZL. 13, § 11, D. locat.; —1. 7, C. eod.
b 7. 38, § 1, D. de fidejuss. ; —1. 21, § 3, eod.; —v. I. 71, eod.
i 7. 14, D. de fidejuss. ;—1. 71, in f. prince. D. eod.; —1. 5, D. de fidejuss.


740 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. Boo


X.

1898. The Creditor’s Pursuit of one of the Fellow-Sureties
not discharge the others.— Since the engagement of the fi
sureties does not cease to subsist, although the creditor sue
of them before he brings his action against the others; the
when there are several sureties for one and the same debt, th
which the creditor commences against one of them does not !
him from bringing his action afterwards against the others.


XI


1899. The Surety for the Delivery of a Thing that perisl
Although the obligation of him who is bound to give orr
a thing is annulled if the thing perishes by an accident
the surety, if there was any, is no longer obliged; yet nev
less, if the thing does not perish till after the debtor has be
fault for not delivering it, as if a seller does not deliver wh
has sold, or if one does not restore what he has hired or borr
his obligation continues to subsist, and makes that of the :
to subsist likewise." For he ought to answer for the act «
person for whom he engaged himself.


TITLE V.


OF INTEREST, COSTS AND DAMAGES, AND RESTITUTION


7" 1


gr. v.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 741


of some thing, or who damnify it; as he does who, having bor-
rowed a horse, loses him or lames him; or he who turns his cattle
& grazing into the field of another person, who does not owe him
that service. The other kind is of the damages caused by those
who, without destroying or damaging any thing, give occasion to
some loss of another nature. As if he who owes a sum of money
does not pay it at the term, if he who sells fails to deliver the
thing sold, if he who undertakes a work does not perform it.

1902. We may distinguish damages by another view, according
to the intention of those who cause them. Some are the effects
of a bad design, as of a crime, of an offence, of a cheat: and
others happen without any bad design in the person who is ac-
eoantable for them; but barely either out of negligence, or through
some fault, or even through an inability to perform some engage-
‘nent.

1903. Of what nature soever the damage be, and from what
wamse soever it may proceed, he who is answerable for it ought
#0 repair it by an amends proportionable either to his fault, or to
his offence, or other cause on his part, and to the loss which has
happened thereby, according to the rules which shall be explained
in this title. Before we enter on the explanation of these rules, it
is necessary to make here some reflections on the principles on
which they depend, the knowledge whereof may make the use of
these rules more easy and more profitable in the several cases
where it is necessary to apply them.

1904. Difference between Interest and Costs and Damages. —
All the sorts of reparations of damage are reduced to two kinds:
one which is called barely interest, and the other costs and dam-
ages. Interest is the reparation or satisfaction which he who owes
a sum of money is bound to make to his creditor for the dam-
age which he does him by not paying him the money he owes
him ; as if he who has borrowed a sum of money does not pay
# at the term; if a purchaser does not pay the price of the sale;
if a tenant does not pay the rent of the house which he hires, or a
‘farmer the rent of his farm. All the other reparations of damage,
of what nature soever the damage may be, are called costs and
damages; as if a tenant neglect to make the repairs which he is
bound to by his lease, and the house be thereby damaged; if a
pertner neglects to take care of a thing belonging to all] the part-
agers in common, with which he is intrusted, and the same perishes ;
if a tutor fails to gather in the debts that are owing to his minor,


TIT. v.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 743


1907. We may remark, as the first and most sensible of these
differences, that, among all the causes which may give occasion to
a reparation of damages, there is none so frequent as the default
of paying a sum of money that is due, and that there is likewise
none from whence there arises so great a variety of damages to be
repaired ; so that, if every creditor had a right to have the damage
estimated which he may suffer for want of the money that was
due to him, each demand of payment would be attended with an
infinite number of discussions of the different damages which the
creditors might allege they had sustained. One would pretend
that, for want of payment, his goods had been seized and sold, and
he by that means ruined; another would allege that his house
had fallen down for want of money to repair it; a merchant would
pretend a considerable loss in his trade; and according as the
different wants and conjunctures should diversify the events, every
one would distinguish himself by the circumstances of his loss
and of his damage.

1908. Had there, therefore, been no other cause for fixing by
Jaw a uniform reparation for all the sorts of damages which may
arise from the non-payment of sums of money, besides the consid-
eration of retrenching this infinite multitude of different liquida-
tions and lawsuits which would follow thereupon, we could not
well be without such a regulation. But another difference, which
distinguishes the engagement of debtors of sums of money from
all other sorts of engagements, is a natural cause, which makes this
regulation to be as equitable in itself as it is useful to the public.

1909. This difference consists in this, that the damages which
proceed from other causes than the non-payment of money arise
from some engagement which distinguishes and points out the
nature of the damage which one may be accountable for if he
fails to perform his engagement, which is not to be met with in the
engagement of those who owe sums of money. Thus, for exam-
ple, when a tenant obliges himself to the small repairs of a house
which he rents, his engagement points out to him precisely that
he obliges himself to those repairs, in order to preserve the house
in the good condition in which it is at the time it is let to him,
and that consequently, if he fails to make the said repairs, he will
be liable for the damage that shall ensue thereupon, and be obliged
to restore the house in the same condition in which it was at the
time when he hired it. Thus, when an undertaker of a building
obliges himself to make it such as it ought to be according to his


TIT. v.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 745


what the damage will be for which they will be accountable in
case they do not perform their engagement, and that this knowl-
edge makes them foresee precisely what they oblige themselves
to, and what the damages which they shall cause may amount
to, one finds in every one of the said engagements a just founda-
tion whereby to distinguish the reparation that may be due, and to
ascertain the same. But as the bare quality of the engagement
of those who owe money does not distinguish their condition, and
does not point out to them precisely what may be the damage
that may ensue upon their failing to make payment, and as
besides they are all obliged only to one and the same thing, which
is to pay a sum of money, their engagement is not a principle by
which we can distinguish the reparations to which they may be
liable, nor does it oblige them differently to the respective dam-
ages which the creditors may suffer, according to the diversity of
the events. But these events are, with respect to the debtors, as
accidents which they could not foresee, and which their obligation
did not comprehend.

1912. It follows from this difference between the engagement
of persons who are indebted for sums of money, and all the other
sorts of engagements, that in one and the same contract, of the
nature of those which are binding on both sides, it may happen,
and does often so fall out, that although the engagement of the
contractors be reciprocal, that is, that each of them on his part be
bound to the other, yet their engagements are neither alike in
their nature nor equal in their estimation, but are of different na-
tures ; and the same contract limits the engagement of one of the
contractors to the bare interest of a sum of money, if it is not paid
at the term of payment, whilst the engagement of the other party
is indefinite, and may be extended to damages of a far greater
value. Thus, in a contract of sale, the obligation of the seller in-
forms him that he is obliged to deliver the thing sold, and to
warrant it with the qualities which it ought to have; which lets
him know that, if the thing sold is not delivered, if it has not those
qualities which it ought to have, if it is evicted from the pur-
chaser, he must answer for the damages which shall ensue there-
upon, according to the rules explained in the second, tenth, and
eleventh sections of the Contract of Sale. But the same contract
of sale doth not form any such engagement on the part of the
buyer. For it does not point out to him what damage the seller
may sustain for want of his money, whether he shall suffer any at

VOL. I. 63


746 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK 11


all, or whether, on the contrary, it may not endanger the loss;
his trade and commerce; whether such a disappointment ms
not occasion his goods to be seized and sold; or what other dar
age the seller may sustain thereby. Thus, whereas with mgu
to the seller, the events which subject him to damages hayn
been foreseen, he cannot say, when they happen to the buy
that they are accidents which he could not foresee, and for whi
" he ought not to be answerable; whereas the buyer, on the co
trary, may say, in respect of the different losses which may he
pen to the seller, that not any one of them has been foreseen, a:
that therefore those which happen are, with regard to him, ae
dents which his obligation did not point out to him; and he ms
ry allege that, if the seller had proposed that, in case such aeciden
should happen, the buyer should be answerable for them, he wou
not have bought upon those terms, nor exposed himself to 0
| danger of such consequences, in case of failure to pay the price:
| the thing sold.

1913. It is easy to perceive the same difference of engagement
in one and the same contract, in leases of lands and houses, an
in other sorts of engagements, even those that are entered int
without covenant. But we must not draw this consequence
| from the difference we see between the engagement of one part
and that of the other, that those who owe only money are ne
liable to damages if they fail in their payment, under pretet
that their engagement does not precisely point out to them wha
will be the damage that will ensue upon their non-paymesl
For it being certain that they do wrong to their creditors by oa


a ®
abe ie TT) ] = Lis ia id py a i fe othide a re Fy -" 5


TIT. V.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 747


ages upon one and the same foot, it could not be made more just
and more certain than by fixing it at the value of the common
profits that may be made of money by a lawful commerce. And
this is what has been done by comparing money, which makes
the price of all things, to those things which produce naturally
some profit, and by regulating the profit of a sum of money ac-
cording to the profit that is made of a thing of like value. And
seeing the most ordinary and most natural profits are those which
lands yield, the reparation of damages which ought to be made to
creditors in sums of money, who are not paid at the term of pay-
ment, is estimated at the rate of the usual produce or revenue of
a piece of land of the same value with the sum that is due. Thus,
for example, if the common value of the revenue lands is a French
sol, or penny, in the livre, the reparation of damages which will be
due from a debtor who owes the sum of a thousand livres which
he does not pay, will be of fifty livres a year, which is the revenue
that is commonly reaped every year from a piece of ground that
may be worth a thousand livres. And it is upon the same foot
that annuities are regulated, where he who purchases an annuity
out of the estate of his debtor does nothing else but purchase
@ yearly revenue in money, which may be of the same value with
the ordinary revenue that may be made of a piece of ground
which might be purchased for the money he lays out on the an-
nuity. But since the value of the revenue of lands is subject to
changes, and the same rises or falls according to the scarcity or
plenty of money, and for other causes which render it necessary
to make different estimations, according to the changes which the
times may produce, the laws regulate differently the standard of
the interest of money and that of annuities, according as those
changes may require. Thus, we have seen in France, as has been
already observed, annuities and interest of money reduced from
ten to between eight and nine per cent, and lowered by degrees
to five in the hundred, which is the present standard.

1914. Exceptions to the Rule which fixes the Interest of Money.
— All these considerations, which justify the rule by which the
interest of sums of money is fixed at a certain portion of the
principal, are to be understood only of the cases where the debtors
cannot be charged with any blame, that may deserve a reparation
of another kind. And this rule does not justify the debtors who,
being able to pay, are unwilling to do it; and much less does it
justify those who, rather than pay their debts, hoard up their


748 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IIL


money, and let poor families starve for want of their own. This
sort of iniquity is of another kind than the bare delay of debtor
who have not wherewithal to pay their debts at the time ap
pointed ; and this hardship would deserve punishments of a &
verer kind than a bare reparation proportioned to the damages
which it may occcasion. It was for this reason that the ordinance
of Orleans in France required the judges to condemn those wh
should be found in arrears for wages due to laborers and wor-
men, to pay the double of what they owed* And although
this ordinance be not observed, and such unjust debtors go um
punished, yet we thought fit to insert this remark to show tha!
this impunity is not agreeable to the spirit of the law, and that
there are occasions in which the crying injustice of those debter
might be punished, agreeably to the intention of the law.

1915. We must also except from this rule, which fixes the inte
est of sums of money that are owing, bankers who do not puncte
ally answer bills of exchange. For this kind of obligation beth
particular characters which distinguish it, as to which the reade
must consult what has been said thereof in the fourth sectiond
the title of Persons who drive any Public Trade, &c., where we =
that the engagement in bills of exchange is not only to pay a sam,
but implies the circumstance of remitting the money from ont
place to another, which renders the party who fails in the perio
ance of his engagement liable to other damages besides the bar
delay of paying what he owes. And this matter is regulated by
the ordinance of 1673, in the title of Bills of Exchange, and in thal
of The Interest of Change and Rechange.*


TIT. v.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 749


to regulate them. For we ought first of all to consider the quality
of the act from whence the damage proceeded, as if it is a crime,
an offence, a cheat: or if it is barely some fault, some neglect, or
an involuntary non-performance of an engagement. For, accord-
ing to these differences, the reparation of damages may be greater
or lesser, as we shall see hereafter. And we ought also to con-
sider the events which have ensued upon the said act, and wheth-
er they be such as ought to be imputed to him who is author of
the act, or whether there be other causes mixed with it, so that all
those consequences ought not to be imputed to him.

1918. As to what concerns the quality of the act of the person
from whom a reparation of damages is demanded, the question is
only to know if there be on his part any design to hurt, or any
knavery, or if there be no such thing. And seeing it is an easy
matter to know it, either by the act itself, or by the circum-
stances, without any help of rules, it is sufficient to remark barely
here, that it is by this first view that we ought to examine the
questions concerning damages.

1919. As to the events which may ensue upon the act of him
who is charged with the damage, there may arise difficulties about
them, which may very well deserve rules for deciding them. For
it is to be observed, that it often happens that there arises from
one only act a chain of consequences and events which cause
divers damages, whether it be that those events have been the
immediate consequences of the said act, so as that it may be
averred that it was the real and only cause of them, or that they
may be ascribed to other causes which have no dependence on the
said act, but to which that act had barely given occasion, or that
they happen to be joined with the said act by some accidents.
And according to these differences of events, there may be a dif-
ference in the damages, so that some of them may be justly im-
puted to the author of the act, and it may not be reasonable to
charge him with others.

1920. We shall be able to judge of these several sorts of events,
and of the regard which ought to be had to them in questions re-
lating to damages, by the two following examples. And we shall
see likewise, at the same time, the divers effects which the act of
the person who is answerable for the damage ought to have in
these questions, according to the quality of the act, and the motive
thereof.

1921. We may suppose for the first case, that a merchant hav-

63 *


TIT. V.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 751


the sale of the goods cannot be so easily known; for this knowl-
edge depends on future and uncertain events. It is well known
that the profit which this merchant might make at the fair did not
depend barely on his having a shop or booth in it; but it might
happen, either because of the great quantity of goods of the same
kind with his, or because of the scarcity of money and the small
number of buyers, or through other causes, that there would be but
little profit to be made, or perhaps none at all; and it might happen,
likewise, that because of the scarcity of those goods, the plenty of
money, and the great number of buyers, the profit would have
been great. So that it cannot be known exactly what this loss
may have amounted to. But even although it could be known ex-
actly what quantity of goods this merchant might have been able
to sell, and what gain he might have made, judging of his profit
by that which other dealers in the same commodity had made;
yet it would not be reasonable to charge all that loss on him who
ought to have furnished the shop. For besides that this merchant,
having still the goods in his possession, might yet make profit by
them, and perhaps more than he would have done at the fair for
which the shop was hired, nobody knew any thing at that time of
the events which might make the profit either greater or lesser, or
which might occasion, perhaps, that there would be no profit at all,
or that there would be loss, instead of gain. So that they did not
reckon that the penalty for the non-performance of the lease should
amount to the value of the greatest gain that this merchant could
hope for from a good market. But because he who has failed to
deliver the shop ought to suffer some punishment for his not per-
forming his bargain, it is Just to award, under all these views,
some reparation of damages, and to regulate the same according
to the circumstances.

1925. As to the third damage, which is that of the bankruptcy,
this unforeseen event having for its particular cause the condition
in which the affairs of the said merchant were at that time, it is
an accident with regard to him who had promised the shop, and
which consequently ought not to be laid to his charge.

1926. We may suppose, for a second case, that a merchant hav-
ing agreed with the master of a manufacture for a certain quantity
of goods, to be delivered to him on a certain day, that they
might be embarked on board a fleet appointed to sail at that time,
and that the merchant having paid beforehand the price of the said
goods, or a part thereof, and being come with carriages to receive


752 | THE CIVIL LAW. [PART I. BOOK IL


them, they are not delivered to him. We see also in this case et
eral damages, —the charges of the carriages, the loss of the profi
which this merchant might hope to have made by the sale of thee
goods in the place whither he purposed to send them, and that of
the gain which he might have been able to make upon other goods
which he would have bought up in the same place, and likewse
the interest of the money which he advanced. The charge @
the carriages are due to him without any manner of difficnlry,
as well as the interest of the money which he advanced. The
profit which he might hope to make upon the goods which be &
tended to buy up with the produce of his outward-bound cargo b
too remote from the act of the person who has failed to deliver
the goods for the embarkation, and ought not to be imputed &
him. And as for the profit which might have been made by thee
goods, if they had been embarked, we must consider, on the am
hand, that, for want of having had those goods delivered to him, t&
merchant is deprived of the hopes of the gain which he might he
expected, and that he who was bound to deliver them, having
failed in the performance of his engagement to do it, ought to tee
the punishment of his non-performance of his promise by making
some reparation of the damage. And on the other hand, likewise,
we ought to consider that this gain was not certain; that the slip
might perish by shipwreck, or fall into the hands of pirates ore®
emies; and that other accidents might have prevented the making
any profit at all. So that, in this uncertainty of events, it would
not be just that the reparation of damages should be equal to i


gain which one might hope for from a success altogether favoral.


TIT. v.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 753


the first case of the non-performance of the lease of the shop prom-
ised to the merchant, if we suppose that, instead of an eviction
or a seizure, which may have hindered the execution of the lease,
it had happened that the shop was burned by a fire communicated
from the neighbouring house, or that on the very day of the fair
the said shop had been set apart for some public office by the
authority of justice, and that the proprietor had not time nor op-
portunity to give notice to the merchant of the said changes;
seeing the said changes would be accidents which had happened
without any fault on his part, he would not be liable to any rep-
aration of damages, by the general rule that no body is to answer
for accidents, except there be some fault on his part.1 But if we
suppose that he who lets the shop to this merchant did afterwards
let it to another, and put him into possession of it, that he might
have a greater rent for it; this knavery will subject the owner of
the shop to a much greater reparation of damages, than if the non-
performance of the lease had been occasioned only by a seizure or
eviction of the shop. For whereas, in the case of an eviction or
seizure, we ought to moderate the reparation that is to be made
to the merchant for his loss in being disappointed of the sale of
his goods, according to the remarks which have been made, his
knavish dealing cuts off all pretensions to any mitigation of the
damages; and the sentence which condemns the party in dam-
ages ought to have the utmost extent that the rigor of the law
can give it, because the knavery implies a will and intention to do
all the hurt that is possible.

1928. We may conclude from all these remarks, that, in all the
cases where the question is to know if any damages are due, and
in what they consist, it is necessary to consider the quality of the
act which has occasioned the damage, the share which the person
who is charged with the damage may have had in the act, his in-
tention, whether the said act happened by accident, what have
been the consequences of it, either immediate or more remote, and
which may have proceeded from other causes. And it is by all
these views, and by a consideration of the particular circumstances
of every case, that the judges ought, according to their prudence,
to decide questions of this nature. As to which it is likewise
necessary to observe, that there are cases in which the conse-
quence of the non-performance of an engagement may be such,


4 See the ninth article of the third section of Covenants.


74 THE CIVIL LAW. [PART 1. BOOK fit.


that, although there were no bad intention on the part of him whe
has failed to perform his engagement, yet he might deserve, net
only to be condemned in a considerable sum of money, for repam
tion of damages, but also to be punished otherwise; as im the
ease of those who undertake to furnish arms, provisions, forage.
or other things for an army, and who fail in the performance of
their contracts. For in contracts of this importance, wherein th
public and state is concerned, imprudences and other faulta, let
them be never so small, are of such consequence that they deserve
to be punished with great severity,and are such as may be ranked
in the number of crimes, according to the circumstances.

1929. We may add to all these remarks, a distinction whieh i
is necessary to make between two sorts of cases where damage
happen that are to be estimated. One is of the cases where the
damage is present, and where the reparation may be known, and
regulated by a view of the events which have actually happened
And the other is of the cases where the damage is not present,
but to come, and depends on future and uncertain events,
although it be necessary to regulate the reparation for the dam
ages, before they happen. We may see in one and the same kind
of contract an example of each of these two sorts.

1930. If the lease of a farmer, which was only for one year, be
interrupted just before harvest, by a change of the proprietor, asi
the land was evicted from him who had leased it out, or if he wl
it, he ought to make good to the farmer the present loss which
suffers by not being allowed to gather the crop that is on te
ground; and it is no hard matter to adjust this reparation @


TIT. v.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 755


gains so as to be gainers, and that it is even the intention of the
proprietors that their farmers should reap some profit, the uncer-
tainty of these events is no reason why a reparation of damages
should not be due to this farmer. And all that human reason
can do in a case where it is necessary to decree a reparation of
damages to be made, and impossible to know what the damage
may amount to, is to take a medium of the profits which farmers
of such lands may commonly make, adding thereto the con-
siderations which the particular circumstances may deserve; as if
the farmer had enjoyed his farm for the greatest part of the time
of his lease with a great deal of profit, or a great deal of loss; for
in the first case, the reparation of damages ought to be less, and
greater in the second: if the said farmer found anywhere else an
opportunity of taking much such another farm; or if no such op-
portunity offered: if he had many years of his lease to come; for
in this case one ought not to allow for each year the same repa-
ration of damages as if there remained only one or two years
of his lease to run; because the farmer might provide himself of
another farm in so long a time, and he might have many more
casualties to fear. And we ought also to consider the cause of
the interruption of the lease; if it is an eviction that was not fore-
seen, a voluntary sale, or an accident: for according to the cause,
either there is no reparation due at all, as if the land was carried
away by a flood; or it might be lesser or greater, according as the
proprietor had more or less share in it.

1931. It is by all these views, and others of the like nature, that
we may regulate the reparations of damages of this kind. Which
may be reduced to the remark already made, that the reparation
of damages ought to be regulated by a view of the cause of the
damage, and of the events which are consequences of it.

1932. Hitherto we have said nothing of the vulgar distinction
in the matter of damages between those which are due for a
damage or loss that one suffers by a diminution of his present
goods, which he is actually possessed of, and those which are due
on the account of a gain that ceases. For it will be easier to dis-
tinguish these two sorts of damages after the other distinctions
that have been remarked. Thus, for example, in the case of the
merchant to whom the shop had been let, we see that the loss of
the charges of transporting his goods is of the first sort, and the
loss of the profit which he might have. made by the sale of them
is of the second; as well as that of the farmer, whose lease is in-


TIT. v.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 757


prisonments, unjust seizures of goods and executions, because the
liquidating of these sorts of damages depends on the considera-
tion of the quality and circumstances of the facts which occasion
them. Thus, for example, if a creditor causes his debtor to be
thrown into jail, when he has no right to use the said constraint,
whether it be that his debt does not give him that power, or that
the age of his debtor, or some other cause, does make the said
imprisonment to be unjust, and the said debtor is a day-laborer,
or other person who by his labor maintains his family, which for
want of this assistance suffered likewise other losses; it will de-
pend on the prudence of the judge to regulate a reparation, both
for the loss of the day’s work of this prisoner, and for the other
damages, according as the injustice of the said creditor may de-
serve, upon consideration of the circumstances.

1936. We have judged it necessary to make here all these re-
marks on the nature and principles of this matter of interest and
damages, in order to explain the difficulties which the laws them-
selves acknowledge to be therein; since we see a law of the
Emperor Justinian, in which, to prevent these difficulties and the
infinite number of questions that arise from thence, he reduced all
the cases where there happen any damages to two kinds. The
one is, of those cases where the question is about a certain quan-
tity, or which have their nature fixed and regulated, such as sales
and leases, and under this kind he comprehended all contracts.
The other kind is, of all the other cases whatsoever, without dis-
tinction, whatever might be the cause of the damage.

1937. As for the cases of the first kind, which have their nature
fixed, and where the question is concerning a certain quantity, he
established it for a rule, that the damages should not exceed the
double of the said quantity: and as to all the other cases where
there should happen any damages, he ordered that they should be
regulated by the prudence of the judge, according to the estimate
of the real damage that was sustained.‘

1938. Seeing this regulation which limits the damages to the
double in all contracts, and in the cases where the question is
about a certain quantity, and which have their nature fixed and
regulated, is a manner of deciding which does not unravel nor
resolve the difficulties, and which often would not do justice to


© Ordinance of Blois, article 145.
€ ZL. un. C. de sent. que pro eo quod int. prof.
VOL. I. 64


TIT. v.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 759


1941. Expenses. — There is also another sort of damages, which
is that of expenses due from the person who is cast in a lawsuit;
and that consists in the reimbursement of the charges which the
person who gains the suit has been at in carrying it on. But,
besides this reparation of damages, which the ordinances oblige
the judges to decree to all those who gain their lawsuits, there
were, in the Roman law, other costs and damages against those
whose demands or defences were found to be nothing but injus-
tice and cavil;! and the Romans, likewise, made use of this pre-
caution to oblige the plaintiff and defendant, and their advocates,
to make oath, at the very beginning of the suit, that it was not
out of malice, or for the sake of cavilling, that they carried on the
suit, but that they looked upon their cause to be just and well
grounded.” This oath is not in use with us in France, and it was
only a sure occasion of perjury. But the condemnation of those
in costs who prosecute or defend ill-grounded lawsuits has been
found so just, that Francis the First revived it, having ordained
that in all matters, civil and criminal, the costs occasioned by the
temerity of him who is cast in the lawsuit should be given
against him if they are demanded; and that they should be taxed
and moderated by the same judge who decides the lawsuit2 But
although this ordinance be not at present put in execution, and
we very seldom see such condemnations, yet the equity of the
rale is not abolished, neither can it be; and the judges are at
liberty to observe it on all occasions where the spirit of these laws
may require it.

1942. We shall not treat, under this title, of the matter of ex-
penses, because it is a part of the order observed in judicial pro-
ceedings. And as to the costs and damages which may be due
from those who prosecute or defend unjust lawsuits, these sorts of
costs and damages have no other particular rules than those of the
other kinds. And it is sufficient to take notice here of this rule,
which shall have its rank in this title, in its proper place.

1943. Restitution of Fruits. — There remains still another mat-
ter to be considered under this title, which is that of the restitu-
tion of fruits. We have added this matter to that of interest and
of costs and damages, because the restitution of fruits is a kind
of reparation of damages, which is due from him who has un-


§ See the ordinance of Charles IV. in 1324, of Charles VIII. in 1493, article'50, and the
ordinance of 1667, tit. 31, art. 1.

b § 1, in f- Inst. de pon. tem. litig. = Toto tit. C. de jurejur. propt. cal. dando.

® See the ordinance of 1539, art. 88 and 89.


760 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT 1. BOOK mL


justly enjoyed a land, the enjoyment whereof belonged to another
person; and because fruits are the revenue of lands, as interest is
that of money, or rather, because the interest of money has beea
invented after the example of the fruits of the ground, and be
cause interest of money is instead of those fruits, as has been
already observed.


SECTION I.
OF INTEREST.


1944. Arter the remarks that have been made in the preamble
to this title, on the differences between damages and interest, it is
not necessary to explain here what is the subject-matter of this
section, and of that which follows. Since it appears clearly
enough that the subject-matter of the present section is the repe
ration of damages which is due from debtors who owe sums di
money, and who fail in the payment thereof; and that the matter
of the other section comprehends all the other kinds of reparation
of damages.


Art. L


1945. Definition of Interest. — By interest is meant the repere
tion of damages which the law directs to be made to creditors ia
sums of money, by debtors who fail to pay what they owe.


IL


TIT. V. SEC. 1.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 761


proportion of so much in the pound, every year, and for more or
less in proportion.» And this interest is computed on this foot
from the moment that the debt beomes due till it is acquitted.


III.


1947. When tt becomes due. — Debtors incur the penalty of inter-
est by their delay to pay what they owe, according as the said
delay may be imputed to them, and may have that effect; which
depends on the nature of the credits and on the circumstances ;¢
for in some debts the bare default of paying at the term of pay-
ment makes the interest to run for the benefit of the creditor, al-
though he do not demand it; and in other debts this interest is
not due except from the time that a demand has been made of the
debt in a court of justice, although there was a term fixed for pay-
ment, which has expired. We shall be able to judge of this
distinction by the rules which follow.


IV.


1948. The Purchaser of Lands owes the Interest of the Price. —
The purchaser of a land or tenement who has got possession
thereof owes the interest of the price, if he does not pay it at the
term of payment, although it be not demanded of him, or if he
does not consign it in case the seller refuses to receive it. And
with much more reason would the interest be due if there was no
term fixed for payment of the price, or if it was agreed that the
buyer should pay ready money at the time that the lands should
be delivered to him, and he had failed to make payment;* for
this interest is due for the fruits of the ground. And although
the purchaser reaps less profit from the lands than the interest of
the price amounts to, or even by some accident the land yields
him no revenue at all, he will nevertheless be liable to pay
the said interest for the right of enjoyment; and the accidents
which deprive him of the enjoyment affect him as proprietor, and
do not discharge him of the interest, which ought not to cease nor


© Z. 1, D. de usur.;—/. 37, D. eod. This regulation of the interest of money, as well
as that of annuities, depends on the edicts which fix it differently according to the differ-
emt times, as has been observed in the preamble to this title.

© £. 17, § 3, in fin. D. de usur.

@ ZL. 32, D.deusur. Seo the remark upon the fifth article.

© ZT. 2, C. de usur.;—l. 18, § 1. D. de usur.;—lL 18, § 20, D. de act. empt. et vend. ;—
Z. 2, C. eod. See the fifth article of the third section of Covenants. As to the consigning
of the price, see the eighth article of the second section of Payments.

64°


TIT. V. SEC. 1.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 763


interest for the said sum, till after the said costs and damages
have been liquidated, and the creditor has demanded in a court of
justice the interest of the sum at which they have been taxed.
For in all these cases, the debt not producing interest in its own
nature, the debtor does not begin to owe any until the creditor
sets forth’ by his demand the damage which he suffers; and the
debtor, on his part, owes then the said interest, as a punishment
for his delay of payment.


VI


1950. A Case where one may stipulate Interest, when tt would
not otherwise be due by the Nature of the Debt.— There are cases
in which one may stipulate interest for sums of money which of
their own nature would yield none, and where the agreement makes
the interest to be lawful, according to the circumstances which
give occasion thereto. Thus, in a sale of movables which would
not produce any revenue, the seller may stipulate interest for the
price till it be paid; for that interest makes a part of the price.
Thus, in a transaction where the pretensions of the parties are
regulated at a certain sum of money which one party is to give to
the other, it may be covenanted that interest shall be paid for the
money, and that even from the day of the transaction, although
there be a term fixed for payment thereof. For this interest is
made a condition of the transaction, either to compensate what he
who stipulates the interest may remit in another respect, or for
other causes. And such a stipulation may be considered as having
the effect of a condemnation by the sentence or decree of a court
of justice. For transactions have the same authority as the de-
crees of a court.!


Vil.


1951. Interest of Marriage Portions. — The dowry given with a
woman in marriage ought of its own nature to produce interest,
without a sentence of condemnation; for it is given to the hus-
band to help him to bear the charges of the marriage This, how-


is not due till after demand thereof, that of damages; which is to be understood of
that sort of damages which shall be treated of in the second section, and not of interest,
which is the subject of this section, and which cannot produce interest, as shall be shown
in the ninth article of this section ; whereas damages may produce interest, for the reason
which shall be explained in the remarks on the tenth article.

i Z. 20, C. de transact.

1 7. ult. § 2, C. de jur. dot. See the second article of the first section of Dowries. We
have not put down in this article the delay of two years, which is regulated by this law for


"IT. V. SEC. 1.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 765


IX.

1953. The Debtor never owes Interest of Interest. — Whatever
delay there may be on the part of the debtor to pay the interest,
and whatever may be the cause of it, he is never bound to pay
second interest for the interest which he owes; and the creditor
cannot accumulate the arrears of interest with the principal sum,
in order to make the whole a capital, which may produce interest;
but the same will be reduced to the amount of the principal sum
which is capable of producing interest.°


X.


1954. But he may owe Interest for other Revenues.— We must
take care, in applying the preceding rule, not to confound with the
interest of money the revenues of another nature, such as the rent
of a farm, of a house, and others of the like kind. For these sorts
of revenues differ from the interest of money, because the interest
of money is not a natural revenue,? and is only, on the part of the
debtor, a punishment which the law inflicts on him for his delay
of payment, and on the part of the creditor it is a compensation
for the loss which he suffers by lying out of his money ; whereas
the price of the fruits of the ground and of the rents of a house is a
natural revenue, which on the part of the debtor is the value of an
enjoyment which he has reaped the benefit of, and on the part of

. the creditor is a real good, which in his hands makes a capital, as
, his other goods do. So that the debtor of the rent of a farm, or
of a house, justly owes interest for the same, from the time that it
has been demanded.!


© ZT. 28, C. de usur.

P L. 62, D. de rei vind. ; — 1. 121, D. de verb. sign.

q Z.17,§ 4,D. de usur.;—1. 54, D. locat. Annuities are of another nature than the
rents of a house or of a farm; for annuities are not the fruits of houses or lands, and have
for their principal only a sum of moncy which was the price of the purchase of the annu-
ity. So that the arrears of annuitics can never produce interest, nor be accumulated with
the principal, in order to make a capital for which the debtor may be obliged to pay new
interest.

¥¢ is to be remarked on this rule, that as we ought not to confound the fruits of lands
and houses with the interest of money, of which we cannot make a capital for producing
meow interest, so neither ought we to confound with the interest of money the damages

which are the subject-matter of the following section. For one may obtain a sentence
for the interest of sums of money arising from damages; as if a seller has been con-
demned in damages on account of an eviction, or an undertaker on the score of a building
that is faulty, or other persons, for causes of another nature. In all these cases, the dam-
ages having been adjudged and liquidated, if the person to whom they are due does not
receive payment of them, he may demand interest for the same in a court of justice. For


766 THE CIVIL LAW. [PaRT I. BOOK IIL


XI

1955. How we are to understand the Prohibition of taking Inter-
est of Interest. — The prohibition of taking interest of interest r-
lates only to the creditor who would take interest for the interest
that is still owing by his debtor ; for the said interest can never be
reckoned to him as a principal sum. But if a third person pap:
for a debtor interest to his creditor, the same, with regard to the
third person, is a principal sum, which he lends to the said debtor:
and if he should not receive payment of it at the term, he might
demand in a court of justice both the said principal, and the inter
est thereof*


XIL


1956. A Case where he who pays Interest for another cannot &-
mand Interest for that Sum.— We must except from the preceding
rule the creditor who, to secure his own mortgage, acquits the
principal sum and interest owing by his debtor to a creditor who
is prior to himself. For this second creditor cannot demand from
his debtor interest for the sum which he has paid to the first cred
itor on the score of interest that was due to him ; because he paid
the same as taking care of his own concerns, and not of the cor
cerns of his debtor; and seeing he paid for the debtor only with


this view of securing his own, he could not make the debtor's cr _
dition worse.*


XII.
1957. A Case where Interest of Interest is due.—'The m


TIT. V. SEC. 1.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 767


tutors and guardians are capitals, which their office obliges them
to lay out for the benefit of their pupils. And if they have failed
to do it, either through negligence, or because they have laid out
the money upon their own particular concerns, they are bound to
pay interest for it; that the same may be to the minors instead
of the profit which they would have reaped from lands, or houses,
or annuities, if their money had been laid out in the purchase of
such things.‘


XIV.


1958. Four Causes from whence Interest arises. — It follows from
all the rules which have been explained in this section, that we
may reduce to four sorts of causes all those which may give occa-
sion for paying interest of sums of money. For the same may be
due, either by the effect of an agreement, as if it has been stipu-
lated in a transaction: or by the nature of the obligation, as the
interest of a portion given with a woman in mariage, and that of
the price of houses or lands that are sold: or by a law, as that
which tutors and guardians are bound to pay to their pupils, for
the moneys which they have neglected to lay out for their behoof :
or as a punishment of the debtor who defers payment after the
creditor has made his demand in a court of justice, both of his
principal, and of the interest due for default of payment."


XV.


1959. Divers Views by which we may judge whether Interest be
due or not.— We have reduced here to these few articles the rules
concerning this matter of interest of money; for besides that in
every engagement we have marked under their proper title those
in which interest is due, it sufficeth that we have remarked in gen-
eral the several rules which comprehend the principles on which
the decisions of cases of this nature depend, and that we have
pointed out the use of them in some examples. To all which we
shall add, that, in order to discern aright between the cases where
interest is due and those where it is not due, it is necessary to
consider in every one what the debt is, as if it is a loan, a sale, or
other contract, or what other kind of engagement, and of what


* See the twenty-third, twenty-fourth. and twenty-fifth articles of the third section of
Twtors, with the remarks upon them.
" This article is a consequence of all the other articles of this section.


TIT. V. SEC. Il.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 769


Damages occasioned by Faults, in relation to the person who cuts
the ropes of a ship, in order to disengage his own vessel, which a
blast of wind had thrown upon the other, is a question of law; in
which it is necessary to judge whether this damage ought to be
imputed to him, or whether those who suffered it ought to bear it
as an accident.”


1008


1962. The Second Question is in what they do consist.— Exam-
ple of this Question. — This first question, whether any damages be
due, being decided, then follows the second question, which is to
know in what they do consist; that is, to discern, in the whole
extent of the damage which has happened, what part thereof
ought to be imputed to him who is obliged to indemnify, and
what ought not to be imputed to him. For it often happens as
has been mentioned in the preamble to this title, that one bare
act gives occasion to several damages, part whereof is not imputed
to him who is said to have been the cause of them. Thus, for
example, if he who has sold corn, and promised to the buyer to
deliver it on a certain day, in a certain place, does not keep his
word, and the said buyer is either obliged to buy other corn
at a dearer rate, or finding none other to buy, he loses the sale
thereof in another place, where he might have hoped to have made
profit by it; or for want of the said corn, which he designed
for the subsistence of a great many workmen, he by that disap-
pointment suffers the loss of their labor, and the interruption
of a work that is useful or necessary to him; these events will
give rise to the question, whether this seller shall be answerable
either for all these consequences, or a part of them; and what
shall be the damage that he will be obliged to make good. And
this question, which is to fix and ascertain what is the precise
damage that is to be repaired, is a second question of law, of
which we shall see another example in the following article.


b All questions are cither concerning matter of fact or law, de facto an de jure. L. ult.
D. de jurej. We call those questions of fact, where the matter is to know the truth of a
fact: if an event has happened or not; if the person whose inheritance is controverted has
made a testament, or if he has made none; if he who complains of damage has really
sustained some loss, or if he has sustained none. We call those questions of law, wherc-
in the matter is to know how we ought to judge, and where it is necessary to reason upon
principles and rules, in order to form the decision. <As to the ditference between ques-
tions of law and those of fact, see the first section of the Vices of Covenants.

e Z. 21, § 3, D. de act. empt. et vend. We have not put down in this article the exam-


VOL. I. 69


TIT. V. SEC. I1.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 771


performing his engagement, if it was possible to hire other car-
riages: and according to these circumstances, and others of the
like nature, the judge will determine whether he ought to make
some reparation of this damage, or none at all; and it would be
jast to acquit him of all damages, if he had been hindered from
performing his engagement by an accident which had happened
without any fault of his.


Me


1964. The Third Question about the Estimate of Damages.—
When the questions of Jaw have been decided, and it is deter-
mined that damages are due, and wherein they do consist, there
remains a third question, to know what they are to be estimated
at, which is to be looked upon only as a question of fact‘ Thus,
for example, if he who had sold corn which he promised to deliver
on a certain day, in a certain place, having failed in his promise,
it be adjudged by the circumstances that no other damages are
due, except on account that the said buyer was obliged to buy
other corn in the same place at a dearer rate; there is nothing
necessary for estimating this damage, but to inquire how much
dearer he has bought the other corn Which is only a matter of
fact.


VI


1965. Two Sorts of Damages which ought to be distinguished. —

It appears from the rules explained in the third and fourth articles,
that the damages and losses of which reparation may be demand-
ed are of two sorts. One is of the losses which are in such a
manner a consequence of the act of the person from whom rep-
aration is demanded, that it is evident they ought to be imputed
to him, as proceeding from no other cause. And the other sort, of
those losses which are only remote consequences of the said act,
and which proceed from other causes. Thus, in the case of the
ding article, the loss is of this first kind. Thus, for another
example of the same kind, if an architect, either out of ignorance
or through a defect in the materials which he was obliged to fur-


£ ZL. 24, D. de reg. jur.

& L. ult. D. de cond. trit.; —1. 59, D. de verb. oblig.

h See the preamble to this title.

® Z. 21, § 3, D. de act. empt. et vend.; —1. 31, D. de reb. cred. See the seventeenth arti-
ele of the second section of the Contract of Sale.


TIT. V. SEC. Il.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGEs. 773


of damages, it is necessary to adjust them according to the prin-
ciples which have been explained in this title, and from whence
we have drawn what shall be said relating thereto in the twelfth
article."


VIIL


1967. Difference in Damages, according as the Person who owes
them has acted fairly or unfairly. — In all the cases where damages
are due, it is necessary to consider the quality of the act which
has occasioned them, and to distinguish between the acts in
which there is no fraud or knavish dealing, and those in which
there is. For according to this difference, the damages may be
either greater or lesser, although all the other circumstances should
chance to be equal. Thus, for example, if the purchaser of a
house or lands is turned out of possession by an eviction, after he
has not only made necessary repairs and improvements, which
have augmented the revenue, but has also been at some charges
for embellishments, these useless and superfluous expenses will not
be comprehended in the damages for the eviction, if the seller has
acted honestly and fairly, having had reason to look upon himself
as the true owner of the house or lands which he had sold. For
the warranty ought not to be extended to such consequences, for
expenses which the seller could not well foresee, and which the
purchaser had laid out only for his pleasure. But if the seller
knew well enough that he was not the right owner of the house
or lands which he sold, and so sold knavishly a thing belonging to
another person, this circumstance of his knavish dealing would
give a larger extent to the warranty, and he would be bound to
refund the superfluous expenses, which the purchaser would not
have laid out if he had known any thing of the seller’s unfair
dealing with him. Thus, for another example, if a thing that was
sold happens to have some defect in it, which occasions some


= 7. 2%, § 4, D. locati ; — 1.33, in jin. eod. See the sixth article of the sixth section,
and the fourth article of the third section of Letting and Hiring. It is to be remarked
on this article, that, in the reparation of damages to be made to this farmer, we ought to
distinguish between that which relates to the estimate of the profit which he might have
hoped to make if his lease had not been interrupted, and another sort of damage which
he might suffer at the present; as if his having taken the farm had obliged him to buy
cattle, or other things necessary, or to scttle there, or put him to other charges of the like
nature, the loss of which would be a damage of the first kind, which might be estimated
at its just value, and separately from the loss which tho farmer sustains by not enjoying
the farm.

65 *


TIT. V. SEC, 1.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 775


IX.

1968. Of the Regard which ought to be had to the Quality of
the Act which has caused the Damage.— When there is neither
any design to hurt, nor any knavery in the act which has caused
the damage, it is necessary to inquire, in the next place, if the
damage has happened through any negligence, or any fault, or if
there is nothing that can be imputed to the person who is pre-
tended to be answerable for it. Thus, for example, if he who has
hired a horse rides him in a dark night, in a stony way, full of
bad steps, and the horse lames himself, or if, for want of care, he
is stolen, these sorts of faults may be imputed to the person who
hired him. But if without his fault the horse is lamed, or if he
is carried off by robbers, at noonday, in a highway, the owner of
the horse will bear the loss. For these losses are accidents which
fall upon the owner.’


X.


1969. Damages may be due, even although they have not been
occasioned by any Fault.— Although there be no fault on the part
of the person from whom a reparation of damages is demanded,
yet this is not always enough to discharge him of it. For there
are cases in which damages are due, although they have not been
occasioned by any fault; but are due by the bare effect of an en-
gagement. Thus, he who had sold honestly a thing which he be-
lieved to be his own is obliged to put a stop to the demand of the
person who pretends to be owner of it; and if he does not do it,
he will be liable to the damages of the eviction, although there be
on his part no unfair dealing, nor any other kind of fault. Thus,
he who fails to deliver what he has sold is accountable for the
damages which are occasioned by his failing to deliver it. And
these damages are bare consequences of the engagements which
the seller is under.!


terest therein. But if the party was guilty of any fraud or contumacy, that is, if it was a
wilful delay, the party who was injured thereby was allowed to give in upon oath an esti-
mate of the loss or damage which he sustained; and it was left to the discretion of the
judge to limit the oath to a certain sum, and even to mitigate the condemnation after
oath had been made. JL. 2, § 1, D. dein lit. jur.;—1. 5, § 1, eod.; —d.l.§ 2;—v». tit. C.
de in lit. jur.

P ZL. 28, C. de locato.

q L. 70, D. de evict. ; —1. 60, eod. Sce the tenth section of the Contract of Sale. L.1,
D. de act. empt. et vend. ; —l. 31, D. de rebus cred. See the sixteenth and seventeenth ar-
ticles of the second section of the Contract of Sale, and the fourth article of the third sec-
tion of Covenants.


TIT. V. SEC. I1.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 777


present losses, by the motives explained in the preceding article,
does much more oblige us to mitigate them in cases where the
losses are not present, and where the estimate thereof, depending
on future events which cannot be known, cannot be regulated on
any certain foot. Thus, in the case of the farmer mentioned in
the seventh article, it is necessary to adjust his damages by several
views; and to consider what is the cause which turns him out of
possession, as if the person who let him the farm is turned out of
possession by a recovery at law, or if he has sold it without
obliging the purchaser to stand to the lease; what have been the
profits or losses which this farmer hath already had; the number
of years which his lease had still to run; the quality of the fruits
of his farm, according as they were more or less obnoxious to
the injuries of the weather, and to other losses; the uncertainty
of the value of provisions; that of the opportunities which the
farmer might have had, or not have had, during the time of his
lease, to sell the said fruits; the usual profits made by other farm-
ers of the like revenues in the same places: and by all these
views, and others of the like nature, we may balance both the
profits which this farmer might hope to make, and the losses which
he had to fear; and may regulate by these considerations such a
reparation of damages as may be agreeable to equity."


XIII.


1972. The Prudence of the Judge in estimating Damages.— It
follows from all the preceding rules, that, as the questions relating
to damages arise always from acts which vary according to the
circumstances, it is by the prudence of the judge that they are to
be decided, he joining to the light which the principles of law and
equity may give him a prudent discernment of the circumstances,
and of the regard that ought to be had to them: whether it be for
lessening the damages that are to be adjudged, by cutting off pre-
tensions for distant losses, and upon other considerations, if there
be ground for it, as in the cases where no bad design nor any
fault can be imputed to the person who is bound to make good
the damage: or for increasing the damages which are to be given
in consideration of the intention to hurt, if there was any. Thus,
for an example of the lessening of the damages, in the case where
a seller, who has sold a thing which he verily believed to be his


* L.A, § 4, D. locat. Sce the seventh article.


TIT. V. SEC. II.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 779


equity, that it is agreeable to the law of nature, and that it has
been revived by the ordinances, it would be proper for the judges
to put it in execution whenever the injustice, the cavilling, and
vexatious humor of the parties may deserve it.*


XV.


1974. Stipulation of a certain Sum in Lieu of all Damages. —
The difficulties in settling the value of the damages which may
ensue upon the non-performance of an engagement, oblige some-
times those who contract together to agree on a certain sum,
which he who fails to perform what he has promised on his part
shall be bound to pay to the other, to be to him instead of a
reparation of damages. But, seeing these sorts of stipulations
are not so much a just estimate of the damage as a precaution
for engaging the contractor to a more exact fidelity, through fear
of incurring the penalty of paying the sum agreed on, it depends
on the prudence of the judge to moderate the said sum, if it ex-
ceeds the real damage. For he who has suffered the damage
cannot reasonably pretend to more than what may be lawfully
due to him. And this stipulation hath its just effect by a reason-
able satisfaction for the loss that is to be repaired. But if the
agreement is conceived in such terms as show that it was the
intention of the parties to limit the reparation of damages to a
certain sum in favor of the person who might be liable thereto,
and to prevent his being obliged to any thing beyond that sum,
although the damage should chance to be greater; in this case
the damage could not be estimated at more than the sum agreed
on. For the persons who have contracted in this manner had
power to mitigate the reparation of damages that might be due.


*% Improbus litigator et damnum, et impensas litis inferre adversario suo cogatur. § 1,
tn f. Inst. de pana tem. litig. ; — v. tit. C. de jurej. prop. cal. dand.

In all matters real, personal, and possessory, civil and criminal, there shall be judgment
for damages arising from the suit, and from the calumny and temerity of the person who
Joses the cause, which shall be taxed and moderated by the same sentence or judgment at
@ certain sum, provided always that the said damages have been demanded by the party
who has gained the cause, and of which the parties may give in a summary account in
the proceedings of the cause. Ordinance of Francis I., in August, 1539, art. 88.

Those persons who do not understand Latin must be here informed that the word cal-
wmany, in the above-mentioned ordinance, as well as in the Roman law, signifies the vexa-
tion and cavilling of those who knowingly and wilfally prosecute or defend unjust law-
suite.

Y L. ult. D. de stip. proctor. ;—§ ult. Inst. de verb. oblig. See the eighteenth article of the
fourth section of Covenanis.


TIT. V. SEC. IIl.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 781


XVIIL

1977. A General Remark on the Questions relating to Damages.
— As we have remarked, in the matter touching the interest of
money, the several views by which we may judge if any interest
be due, or not;” so we ought also to discern, in questions that arise
about damages, whether any be due or not. And this depends
on the quality of the act which may have given occasion to the
damage; if it is an accident, a slight fault, an imprudence, a
crime, an involuntary non-performance of an engagement, or some
other cause. And then inquiry is made, in the next place, what
the damages may consist in; giving them either the extent or
bounds which equity may demand, according to the different
causes of the damages, the diversity of the events, and the cir-
cumstances, observing therein the rules which have been ex-
plained.


SECTION III.
OF THE RESTITUTION OF FRUITS.


Art. L
1978. The Restitution of Fruits is a Reparation of Damages. —
The restitution of fruits is a kind of reparation of damages, which
is due from him who hath unjustly enjoyed the revenue of another.
For this restitution repairs the loss of the person who ought to
have enjoyed the revenue.


IL


1979. The Extent of this Restitution. — This term, restitution of
fruits, comprehends not only the obligation to restore those which
are in being; but although the enjoyment has been for several
years, and the fruits of those years be consumed, yet, seeing it
is the value of the said fruits which ought to be restored, and that
their value is instead of the fruits themselves, the restitution of the


» See the fifteenth article of the first section.

© This is a consequence of the preceding articles. ZL. un. C. de sent. quce pro eo quod

® As interest is the reparation of damages which is due from debtors who owe sums of
money, and are behindhand in payment, so the restitution of fruits is a reparation of
damages due from those who have unjustly enjoyed the revenues belonging to other


VOL. I. 66


TIT. V. SEC. I11.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 783


V.

1982. The Possessor who verily believed himself to be the right
Owner does not restore the Fruits which he has enjoyed during this
Belief. — Those who are honestly in possession of an estate, which
they believe to be their own when it is not, are not bound to any
restitution of what they have enjoyed during the time that they
were fully persuaded of their right and title to the said estate.
For the integrity of a possessor hath this effect, that he may look
upon himself as master of the thing which he possesses ; and this
upright persuasion of his, which he has reason to take for truth,
ought to put him in the same condition as if he were really mas-
ter Thus, the loss which the right owner sustains by not enjoy-
ing is, in regard to him, an accident which he cannot impute to
this possessor.


VI.


1983. The Upright Possessor restores the Fruits after a Legai
Demand.— The integrity of the possessor, which gives him the
right to enjoy the estate, ceases at the same time that his posses-
sion is called in question by a demand made by the right owner.
For, having once known the right of the true owner of the estate,
he cannot any longer deprive him of the enjoyment thereof. And
although he may pretend that the demand is ill-founded, and may
think that his defences against it are just, yet, if afterwards he
is condemned to restore the estate, his upright possession of his
own right and title when he defended himself will be of no avail
to him; and he will be obliged to make restitution of the fruits
from the time of the demand! For this belief of his own right,
let it be never so upright and sincere, cannot have the effect of
harting the true owner, who has known his right and demanded
his estate, or of counterbalancing the authority of a thing that is


adjudged.


» 7. 25,§1, D. de usur. ; — 1.48, D. de acg. rer.dom.; —1. 186, D. de reg. jur. See the fifth
article of the third section of Possession. See, concerning the cases where the upright
possessor restores the fruits which have been reaped before the demand, the ninth and
tenth articles of this section.

We call him an upright possessor who has just cause to believe himself to be master of
the thing, as if he has purchased an estate which he thought did belong to the person of
whom he bought it, if it has descended to him by inheritance, if it has been given him,
or if he has acquired it by some other just title, being ignorant of the right of the true


owner.
tL. 2 C. de fructib. et lit. exp. ; —1. 20, D. de rei vind. Sce the thirteenth article.


TIT. V. SEC. 111.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 785


the portion belonging to the other." For the title of heir only
gives him right to his own portion; and the portion of his coheir is
increased by the fruits which proceed from it. Thus, the integrity
of the heir who enjoys all the goods of the succession implies the
condition, that, in case it shall be found that he has a coheir, he
will do him justice as to his portion. And this distinguishes the
condition of this heir from that of another possessor who takes
himself to be the true owner, and who has no reason to think that
any body besides himself has a right in what he possesses.


X.


1987. Another Case of the like Nature.— If one copartner has
enjoyed alone a house or lands belonging in common to the whole
partnership, although he thought that he had the sole right to it,
and although his enjoyment thereof was honest, and with an up-
right intention, yet he will nevertheless be obliged to make restitu-
tion of the fruits for the shares of his copartners° Thus, for
example, if, in the case of a universal partnership of all goods
without distinction, one of the partners, to whom a relation or
friend had devised by will, or given by deed of gift, an estate, had
enjoyed the same apart by himself, believing, through an error in
law, that his copartners had no share therein, he will be bound,
notwithstanding his upright intention, to restore to them their por-
tions of the fruits of that estate,” because their partnership making
the said estate common to them all, the right of that partner was
restrained to his own portion; and his upright intention, which
had for its foundation only an error in law, did not give him a title
to enjoy the portions of the other partners.4


® 5.9, C. famil. ercis.;—1.17, C. eod. ;—l. 44, D. eod. ; —I. 20, § 3, in f. D. de heered.
patit.;—l. 2, C. de petit. hared. If the person who succeeded alone to an inheritance
which was not then claimed by any other heirs, having enjoyed it far several years, there
etarted up another heir, in the same degree with him, but whose relation was till then
waknown ; and if the heir who had enjoyed the whole inheritance during this long time
‘was not able to restore the fruits of the portion belonging to his cohcir without being
ruined, or very much incommoded thereby, it would be equitable to moderate the said
restitation by some temperament according to the circumstances. .

© L. 82, § 2, D. de usur.; —1. 38, § 1, D. pro socio.

P See the foarth article of the third section, and the first article of the fourth section of

ip. See, in the fourteenth article of this section, another case where a possessor

who believes himself to be the right owner restores the fruits. See the third article of the
third section Of those who receive what is not their Due, and the remark on the said article.

@ Seco the sixteenth article of the first section of the Vices of Covenants.

66 *


TIT. V. SEC. I11.] INTEREST, COSTS, AND DAMAGES. 787


only bound to make restitution of the fruits which he nas reaped,
but if, by his absence, or through negligence, and for the want of
cultivating, he has not reaped any fruits from the ground which he
was in possession of, or if he has reaped only a part of what the
ground might have yielded if it had been cultivated, he will be
accountable for the fruits which a good husband might have
reaped.* For the master of the ground might have enjoyed it in
this manner. But with regard to a fair possessor, who takes him-
self to be the right owner, and who is notwithstanding obliged to
restore the fruits, the restitution may be regulated differently, ac-
cording to the circumstances. Thus, a fair possessor, who believed
himself to be the right owner, having been sued by the master of
the thing which he is in possession of, may afterwards be com-
pared to an unjust possessor, and condemned to the same restitu-
tion with him, if, after the demand made by the right owner,
he has neglected the enjoyment thereof, or if he has diminished
the revenue by not making the necessary repairs; and he will be
answerable for it, as having done it in fraud of the restitution
which he had reason to be afraid of. But he who is obliged to
make restitution of fruits which he had honestly and fairly reaped
before any demand was made, as in the cases mentioned in the
ninth and tenth articles, might be excused, if, for want of repairs,
or by reason of any other neglect, he had not drawn from a
ground, ‘which he thought he might neglect with impunity, be-
lieving it to be his own, that profit which another person might
have made of it with greater care."


XIV.


1991. The Heir or Executor of an Unjust Possessor succeeds to
his Engagement.— The heirs or executors of unjust possessors
are bound to the same restitution as they are to whom they suc-
ceed, for they come in their place. And as they have the goods
and rights belonging to the said persons, so they bear likewise
their burdens, and enter into the same engagements which they
Were under; and although they may happen to be altogether


* Z. 33, D. de rei vindic. See the sixth article of the third section of Possession. See
the texts cited on the sixth article.

* Although the text cited on this article makes no distinction between possessors
who believe themselves to be the right owners of what they possess, and those who know
thas they possess what is another’s, yet it seems to be just ta distinguish them in the man-
fer they are distinguished in this article.


TIT. vi.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 789


whtich may be made of things which are let to hire by those who
make a trade of it, such as an upholsterer, who lets out a suit of


hangings.*
XVIL


1994. There is no Interest due for the Fruits, till after a De-
mand.-— Whatever number of years the enjoyment for which
restitution is to be made may have lasted, although the possessor
may have known that what he possessed was not his own, yet
there is due only the bare estimate of that enjoyment, without
any interest for the value of the fruits of each year. But if a
legal demand has been made of the said interest, the same will
be due from the time of the demand. For the value of the said
fruits, which are a real substance, is in lieu of a capital.*


TITLE VI.
OF PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS, AND OF AN OATH.


1995. What is a Proof.— We call that a proof which convinces
the mind of a truth: and as there are truths of divers sorts, so
likewise there are different kinds of proofs. There are truths
which are independent of the act of man, and of all sorts of events,
and which are immutable and always the same. Thus, with-
out meddling with the divine truths of religion, which are above
all certainty, because of the authority of God who reveals them
to us, and who makes us to feel and to love them, and also by
reason of other different proofs of an infinite force, which it is
mot our business to treat of here, we have in sciences the knowl-
edge of a great number of truths which are certain and unchange-
able: but there are others which are called truths of fact, that
is, of what has been done, of what has happened; as, for exam-
ple, that one has committed a robbery or a murder; that a testa-
ment is forged; that, in a fire, a thing which was saved out of it
‘was deposited in the hands of a neighbour, who denies the de-


‘8 7.19, D. de usur.
© ZL. 15, D. de usw. j—1. 51, § 1, D. de haved, petit.; —1. 64, D. locat.


TIT. VI.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 791


tainty of such a proof is of another kind than that of the truth
of a proposition clearly proved in a science, and has not the char-
acter of a demonstration; because it is not impossible that two
witnesses may be deceived, or even that they may have a mind
to deceive. But the force of this proof consists in this, that it is
presumed from their good sense that they are not deceived them-
selves, and from their probity, that they do not intend to deceive
others. So that this proof seems in effect to be grounded only on
presumptions. However, these presumptions of truth which
arise from the testimony of two witnesses are such, that the laws
both of God and man have appointed them to be held as a sure
proof, when the depositions agree with one another, and when
the witnesses are persons against whom there lies no exception.
And although it be true that this kind of proof has not the char-
acter of the certainty of a demonstration, because it is of quite
another kind, yet nevertheless it has another sort of certainty
which persuades fully, when the fidelity of the witnesses is well
known; because this proof hath its foundation in the certainty of
a truth which is a sure principle, and which is drawn from the
very nature of man, and from the causes which govern his ac-
tions. According to this principle, it is certain that two persons
who have reason, and who are not biased by some impression of
hatred, revenge, interest, or some other passion, can never agree to
bear false witness together in a court of justice, and that upon
oath. And we may conclude certainly, from the natural princi-
ples of our actions, that witnesses who swear that they will say
nothing but the truth do really tell it, if nothing changes in them
the natural order. And although it be true, that the judges can-
not always be sure that the witnesses are sincere, and that they
give their evidence without interest and without passion, and
that there are often even false witnesses; yet it would be unjust,
as well as absurd, to give credit to no witness at all, because we
cannot be certain of all witnesses that they do not lie. And it is
a sufficient justification of the rule, which declares the testimony
of two witnesses to be a sufficient proof, that it be true, in gen-
eral, that it is the natural order for men to tell the truth which
they know, when they cannot do otherwise without involving
themselves in the guilt of perjury: and in particular, if in the
evidence that is given there appear no reason which may make
us doubt of the fidelity of those who are produced as witnesses ; for
by that one judges that it is the truth which they have declared.


TIT. VI.| PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 783


which are drawn by a necessary consequence from a principle that
is certain; and when these sorts of presumptions are so strong
that one may gather from them the certainty of the fact that is to
be proved, without leaving any room for doubt, we give them the
name of proofs, because they have the same effect, and do establish
the truth of the fact which was in dispute. The other presump-
tions are all those which form only conjectures, without certainty ;
whether it be that they are drawn only from an uncertain founda-
tion, or that the consequence which is drawn from a certain truth
is not very sure.

2000. It is because of the difference between these two sorts of
presumptions that the laws have appointed some of them to have
the force of proofs, and have not left the judges at liberty to con-
sider them only as bare conjectures, because in effect these sorts of
presumptions are such that one sees in them a necessary connec-
tion between the truth of the fact that is to be proved, and the
certainty of the facts from whence it follows. Thus, for instance,
in France it is enacted by an edict of Henry IL, that, if a woman
has concealed her being with child, and is brought to bed pri-
vately, without any witness, and it be found that the child never
was christened nor had any public burying, she shall be reputed
to have murdered her child, and be punished with death.” And
there are other sorts of presumptions which the law directs to be
held as certain proofs; so that we ought to take good heed not to
distinguish the sense of the word presumptions from that of proofs
in such a manner as never to take presumptions to be proofs, see-
ing there are such presumptions as are sufficient to establish the
proof of a fact. But whereas the word proof is taken for a full
conviction, the word presumption is extended to all the consequences
which may be drawn from the several arguments that may serve to
prove a fact, whether it be that those consequences amount to the
evidence which may make a full proof, or that they leave some
doubt.

2001. We have thought it necessary to make here these reflec-
tions upon the nature of proofs and presumptions, in order to es-
tablish the principles of the rules concerning this matter, and to
discover the natural causes of that which may establish the cer-
tainty of the truth of matters of fact. For it is by these princi-


& See the edict of Henry II. of the year 1556, touching women who have concealed
their pregnancy. V. |. 84, ad leg. Jul. de adult.
VOL. I. 67


TIT. VI. SEC. 1.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 795


whereof the effect is left to the discretion of the judge. Thus, the
law will have the uniform depositions of witnesses that are unex-
ceptionable, and who are in the number required by law, to be
received as a certain proof of a crime or other fact. Thus, the
law establishes it for a sure proof of an agreement, if the contract
is signed by the parties, or, if they have not been able, or could not
write, if it is signed either by a notary and two witnesses, or
by two notaries without any witness, according to the different
usages of the places. But when there is nothing else but pre-
sumptions, tokens, conjectures, imperfect evidence, or other sorts
of proofs which the law has not directed to be held for certain, it
leaves it to the discretion of the judge to discern what may be re-
ceived as proofs, and what ought not to have that effect.»


TIL


2005. Facts which have no Need of Proof. — The use of proofs
does not concern facts that are naturally certain, and whereof the
trath is always presumed, if the contrary is not proved. But it
respects only facts which are uncertain, and of which the truth is
not presumed unless it be proved. Thus, for example, he who
demands a succession or a legacy, by virtue of a testament, has
no occasion to prove that the testator was in his right senses when
he made the testament, in order to establish from thence the valid-
ity of the testament. For it is naturally presumed that every one
has the use of his reason. But the heir of blood, or next of kin,
who, in order to annul the said testament, alleges the insanity of
the testator, ought to prove that fact. Thus, he who demands to
be relieved from an obligation, because of his minority, ought to
prove his age.° Thus, he who pretends to be proprietor of a house
or land which is in the possession of another person, ought to
make proof of it.4


IV.


2006. He who advances a Fact ought to prove tt.— It follows
from the preceding rule, that, in all the cases of a fact that is con-
tested, if it is such that it be necessary to make proof of it, it lies
always on the person who advances it to prove it. Thus, all those
who make any demands, that are founded upon some matter of


» See the fifth article of the fourth section.


¢ ZL. 9, C. de probat.
& ZT. 2, C. de probat. See the seventh article of the fourth section.


TIT. VI. SEO. 1.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 797


sorts of facts indifferently ; but the judge ought to receive the
proof only of those that are called pertinent, or relevant; that is,
from which one may draw the consequences which may serve to
establish the right of the person who alleges the said facts: and
he ought, on the contrary, to reject those facts of which the proof,
if they were true, would be useless. Thus, for instance, he who
should pretend to evict a house or land from the person who had
purchased it, believing himself to be proprietor thereof, because he
had lent the money for the purchase, would demand to no purpose
to be admitted to prove this fact; and this proof would be of no
manner of use to his pretension, seeing the property of the house
or land does not belong to him who advanced the money to the
purchaser.


19.6


2011. A Thing adjudged holds the Place of Truth. — Things
that are adjudged hold the place of truth with regard to those be-
tween whom they are adjudged, if they have not appealed, or if
there lies no appeal from the sentence. Thus, for example, if, in
the case of two brothers claiming eacli of them his share in their
father’s inheritance, one of them has been by sentence declared to
be a professed monk, this fact will be held for true, and well
proved: and he will be incapable of having a share in the inher-
itance.™" But the facts which have been formerly adjudged be-
tween other persons than those who contest them at present are
undecided with respect to these, and must be proved; for they
might have reasons to offer which had not been urged by the
others."


X.


2012. The Effect of the Proofs depends on the Prudence of the
Judge.—In all the kinds of proofs, whether by witnesses, or by
writing, or by other ways, the puestion whether a fact is proved,
or is not, depends always on the prudence of the judge, who ought
to discern whether the depositions of the witnesses, or the other
sorts of proofs, be sufficient or not.° And this implies two sorts


3 ZL. 21, C. de probat. See the fourth article of the fifth section.
™ LZ. 207, D. de reg. jur.
= LZ. 63, D. de re jud. ; — tot. tit. C. quib. res jud. non noc. ; — et tit. C. inter al. act. vel jud.
al. m. noc.
© L. 8,§ 2, D. de testib. ; —d. § in fine.
67°


TIT. VI.'SEC. 11.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 799


_ weight to their testimony; if there is no variation in a deposition ;
if the facts are notoriously evident, and confirmed by public fame,
in the cases where these circumstances may be considered; if
some of the witnesses be suspected of partiality, by reason of
favor or hatred to one of the parties. Thus, in proofs by writing,
and in all the other kinds of proofs, it depends on the prudence of
the judge to discern that which may suffice for establishing the
truth of a fact, and that which leaves it doubtful; to consider the
relation and connection which the facts resulting from the proofs
may have with those which are to be proved; to examine if the
proofs are concluding, or if they are only conjectures, signs, and
presumptions, and what regard ought to be had to them; and, in
a word, to judge of the effect of the proofs by all the different
views which one may have from the knowledge of the rules, and
from the reflections on the facts and circumstances.’


SECTION II.
OF PROOFS BY WRITING.


2015. Tue force of proofs by writing consists in this, that men
have agreed to preserve by writing the remembrance of things that
have been transacted, and to perpetuate the memory of them to
posterity, whether it be that they may serve as rules to the parties
themselves, or as a perpetual proof of what is written. Thus,
covenants are put down in writing, in order to preserve the mem-
ory of what the contracting parties have bound themselves to, and
to make to themselves thereby a fixed and unchangeable law, as
to what has been agreed on. Thus, testaments are written, that a
remembrance may be kept of what has been ordered by the testator,
who had a right to dispose of his goods, and that it may serve as
a rule to his executor, and to the persons to whom he has left leg-
acies. Thus, it is thought fit to write sentences and decrees of
courts, edicts, ordinances, and every thing which is to serve as a
title ora law. Thus, it is customary to write down in public reg-
isters marriages, christenings, and other acts which ought to be
recorded ; and other the like registers are kept as a public and per-
petual repository of the truth of the acts which are there recorded.


° L. 3, § 2, D. de testib. ; —1. 2, eod. ; —1. 21, § 3, cod. ; —1. 19, C. de ret vind.


TIT. Vi. SEC. 11.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 801


. hibited to receive other proofs than writing for covenants, where
the sum exceeds one hundred livres, as has been remarked in
another place.“ And it is for the same reason that the ordinances
have directed that there should be kept public registers of christen-
ings, marriages, deaths and burials, ordinations, admissions into
any religious order, to the end that people may easily come at
the certain proof of these sorts of facts.» Which does not hin-
der but that, in case the said registers should happen to be lost or
destroyed, one may be allowed to make use of the other kinds of

6


proofs.


Art. I.


2019. What are Written Proofs. — Proofs by writing are those
which are drawn from some written act, such as a contract, a
testament, or other writing, which contains the truth of the fact
in question.


IL.


2020. Use of these Proofs.— People put down in writing con-
tracts, testaments, and other acts, in order to preserve the proof
of what has been done by the testimony of the persons themselves,
who express therein their intentions.>


III.


2021. Written Proofs are the strongest.— Seeing the force and
validity of proofs by writing consists in this, that they are a testi-
mony which the persons who are parties to the said acts give
against themselves, and a testimony which is unchangeable, there


® See the remark on the twelfth article of the first section of Covenants in general. It
fe mecessary to observe, with respect to this prohibition by the ordinances of France
againet receiving the proof of covenants by witnesses, that it does not extend to things
deposited in a case of necessity, nor to the other cases explained in the third and fourth
articles of the twentieth title of the ordinance of the month of April, 1667.
® Ordinance of 1539, art. 50 and 51; of Blois, art. 181; of Jfoulins, art. 55. Declara-
om im July, 1556, art. 11. Ordinance of 1667, tit. 20, art. 7, 8, and 15.
© Ordinance of 1667, tit. 20, art. 14;—/J/. 2, § 1, D. de excus.
® ZL. 1, D. de fide instr.
b L. 4, D. de fide inst. ;—1.4, D.de pignor. Written acts are of several sorts, and they
be reduced to four kinds: private writings, acts made in the presence of public nota-
ies, those which are made in courts of justice, such as the naming of a tutor or guardian,
wad thoee which are made before other public persons, as matrimony in the presence of
@ clergyman, the promotion to holy orders, and other acts, of which public registers are


kept.


TIT. Vi. SEC. 11.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 803


or for acquiring to the said person a thing whereof the commerce
was prohibited to him.


VI


2024. Written Acts are not received as Proof, wnless they be in
due Form.— Written acts have not the force of proofs, except
they have all the formalities which the law prescribes. For these
formalities are necessary precautions for qualifying them to serve
as proofs, and are marks by which the law points out to us what
written acts it receives as proofs, and what it rejects. Thus, for
example, in the provinces where it is necessary to have seven wit-
nesses to a testament, it would be to no purpose to produce a
testament which had only six witnesses, although they were per-
sons of ever so great integrity. For besides that it is necessary
to observe the prescription of the law, the practice of authorizing
a testament barely in consideration of the probity of the wit-
messes would be opening a door to a thousand inconveniences.
Thus, for another example, a contract which the parties intended
to execute in the presence of a public notary and witnesses
would be without effect, if it were not signed, both by the parties
themselves, and by the witnesses who could write their names,
and by the notary. Thus, a private writing which is only written,
bat not signed by the party, would make no proof.


VIL


2025. The Witnesses to a Written Act will not be received to
prove the Contrary.— When the written acts are according to
form, not only are contrary proofs not received, but even not so
much as a hearing is granted to one of the parties who should
desire to have the witnesses to an act examined judicially, in
order to make some change in the act, or to explain it. For be-
sides the danger of some infidelity on the part of the witnesses, ©
the act having been committed to writing only with design that it
might remain unchangeable, its force consists in remaining al-
ways the same as it was made at first.”


bh 7. 2, C. plus val. quod agitur ; —1. un. § 3, C. de contr. jud.;—v.1. 46, D. de contr.
empt. ;—v. 1.10, D. de his q. ut ind. ; —U. 1,3, 40, D.de jure fisci. See the nineteenth and
¢wentieth articles of the first section of the Rules of Law, the preamble to the eighth sec-
tion of the Contract of Sale, and the first article of the same section.

8 § 3, Inst. de testamentis ordin.

1 7. 17, C. de fide instr. See the fifteenth article of the first section of Covenants.

= TL. 1, C.detestib. See the fourth and fifth articles.


TIT. VI. SEC. 1I.] | PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 806


XL

2029. Cases where the Copies of Acts and other Proofs may
serve when the Originals cannot be had.— If the original act or
instrument is lost, as if it has perished by fire, or other accident,
one may in that case prove the contents of the same, either by
copies thereof duly collated, or by other proofs, if there be any
such, which the judge in his discretion may think fit to be re-
esived.” Thus, for example, mention being made of a bond, in
the inventory of the goods of a person deceased, the guardian of
the heir who is under age might make use of the said inventory
to prove the truth of the said bond, if it should happen to be lost
through some accident." Thus, when a creditor receives from his
debtor payment of a rent, if he takes from him a copy of the
acquittance which he gives him, and if the said copy, which is
ealled a duplicate of the acquittance, be signed by his debtor, it
may serve as a proof of his title to the rent, if the title chances
to be lost. For it is the debtor himself who acknowledges the
truth of the creditor’s title by this act which he signs.


XIL


2030. When Mention is made of one Act tn another.— It is not
ground enough for demanding a debt, or claiming any other right,
that the title thereof be set forth in some other act which makes
mention of it. For this bare mention of it makes no proof, if the
title itself does not appear; unless the person against whom one
would make use of such a declaration had been a party to the
act which contains the said declaration; or that because of
other considerations it should appear to be equitable, and con-
formable to the intention of the law, that such a declaration
should be received as a proof; as in the case of the preceding
article.*


XIIL


2031. Acts that contradict one another.—If one and the same
person makes use of two written acts or titles, whereof the one
eontradicts the other, they destroy one another mutually, by the


® 7.5, C. de fide instrum.; —1. 7, C. cod. ;—l. 11, C. eed.

® ZX. 57, D. de adm. et per tut.

¢ Z. 19, C. de fide instr.

® Nov. 119, c.3;—v. 1. 37, § 5, D. de legat. 3; —I. ult. D. de probat.
VOL. I. 68


TIT. VI. SEC. I11.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 807


to third persons, whose interest may be prejudiced thereby.* Thus,
for example, if a father, in marrying his son, had given -him as a
marriage settlement, either a sum of money, or an estate in land, or
an office, taking from him a counter-letter, declaring that the gift
should be valid only for a lesser sum, or that the son should give
beck out of the land, or out of the office, a sum of money, such as
they had agreed upon among themselves ; this counter-letter would
have no effect with regard to the wife, and the children that should
be born of the said marridge, nor with regard to other third per-
sons who might be any ways interested therein, such as the credi-
tors of this son. For this agreement would be an infidelity con-
trary to good manners, and would destroy the fidelity and sincerity
that is due, not only to the wife and her parents, who would not
have consented to the marriage on the conditions of this counter-
letter, but to all the persons whom this fraud may any way con-
eer. And it is for the public interest to restrain the bad use
which private persons may make of the facility they have in their
families to collude together in order to deceive others by such like
clandestine acts.*


SECTION III.
OF PROOFS BY WITNESSES.


2034. The Subject-Matter of this Section.— We do not speak
here of the proof which witnesses make in contracts, in testaments,
and in the other acts where the law requires the presence of some
witnesses to confirm the truth of what is there transacted; for this
kind of proof is comprehended in the proofs by writing, of which
we have treated in the foregoing section. And in this section we
mean to speak only of the proof that is made by the depositions
of witnesses who are judicially examined, that the judge may
learn from their mouths the truth of facts for which no written
proofs can be produced, or where the proofs which may be alleged
are not sufficient. Thus, for example, if a fair and honest posses-
sor of an estate, who knows of no better right to it than his own,


® LZ. 10, D. de jurej. ; —1.74, D.de reg. jur.; —1. 2, C. plus val. quod ag. quam quod sum.
conc. ; — |. 4, eod.

= ZL. 27, C. de donation. Although this reference be to a law which has no relation to
counter-letters, yet it may be applied to them.


TIT. VI. SEC. 111.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 809


2037. This examination of witnesses, in order to preserve their
testimony to futurity, was used in the cases where any one fore-
seeing that he might have occasion for a proof by witnesses, and
fearing lest they should die, or that other changes should happen —
which might deprive him of his proof before his lawsuit was so
far advanced that he might be admitted to make his proof, or
that the judge could examine his witnesses, he demanded leave of
the judge to have them examined before the time, that their evi-
dence might be thereby perpetuated to futurity.° But this pre-
caution, which is attended with many inconveniences, has been
judged useless likewise for other reasons. For those who may be
in haste to make their proofs may take their measures accordingly ;
may make their demands, and allege their facts, in order to have
the proof of them decreed, if it be necessary, without having re-
course to a usage that is inconvenient and full of uncertainty.

2038. The General Inquest about Customs abolished in France.
-— It may not be amiss to observe here, in passing, that the same
ordinance of 1667 hath also abolished in France another kind of
examination of witnesses, which was called enquéte par turbes,
or a general inquest, and which was used in questions relating to
the interpretation of some custom. The usage of these inquests 2
was founded on this, that the particular dispositions of customs
were considered as facts.1 So that they received proof by wit-
nesses of the usage and interpretation of some article of a custom.
They called these inquests par turbes, because ten witnesses were
only reckoned as one; and these witnesses were chosen from
among the officers of the places, and the advocates, who were
the likeliest persons to know what was the usage and practice as
to the dispositions of their customs. But these inquests were at-
tended with an infinite number of inconveniences, as may easily
be perceived; and the superior judges have better ways to find
out the sense and meaning of customs, and to interpret that which
may require an explanation.


Art. I.


2039. Witnesses, and their Evidences. — Witnesses are persons
who are summoned to appear in judgment, in order to declare


b Z. 40, D.ad leg. Aquil.; —1. 3, § 5, D. de carbon. ed.
© Ordinance of 1667, tit. 13.
4 Seo the eleventh chapter of the Treatise of Laws, no. 20, towards the end.


68 °


TIT. VI. SEC. I11.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. Sil


borne false witness, or for writing a defamatory libel, or for other
crimes.© For these condemnations cast a blemish on the honor of
the person, and make him forfeit the reputation of probity. And
it would be the same thing, and that with much more reason, if it
were proved that the witness had received money to give his evi-
dence.»


VI


2044. Witnesses who are interested. — If the witness has any
interest in the fact concerning which he ia desired to give evidence,
he will be rejected! For one cannot be sure that he will make
a declaration contrary to his own interest.


VIL


2045. Witnesses engaged in the same Interest with the Party.—
The same reason which serves for rejecting the testimony of per-
sons interested in the facts that are to be proved makes the testi-
mony likewise of the father in the cause of the son to be rejected,
as also that of the son in the cause of the father. For the interest
of the one touches the other, as his own proper interest. And
although the father should offer to give evidence against his son,
or the son against his father, they would not be admitted to do it.
For this affectation and forwardness would render them suspected
of having an intention either to favor, or to hurt!


VIL


2046. Witnesses who are Relations, or Allies.— As we reject
the testimony of persons who are interested in the facts which are
to be proved, or who take part in the interest of those whom the
said facts concern, so neither do we receive the evidence of those
who are related by consanguinity, or by affinity, to the persons in-
terested in the said facts. And if there should be any enmity be-
tween those persons and the witnesses who are their relations or
allies, such witnesses ought to be rejected with greater reason.
And they may on their part refuse to give their evidences, espe-
cially in criminal prosecutions. We may reckon in the number of
allies, with respect to the use of this rule, those who are only so


K L.18, D. de testib.; —I. 8, § 5, cod. ;—L. 15, eod.; —1. 21, eod.
b 7. 3, § 5, cod.

i Z. 10, D. de testib. ; —- 1. 10, C. eod.

1 7.9, D. de testib.; —l. 6, C. de testib.


TIT. VI. SEC. IIt.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 813


probity of the witness be not called in question; it is moreover
necessary, that his declaration be steady and firm. For if he va-
ries in his account, deposing circumstances and facts that are dif-
ferent, or even contrary; or if he waver in his deposition, and be
himself in doubt of the fact which he relates; this uncertainty
and these variations rendering his evidence uncertain, they will
cause it to be rejected.’


XJIL
2051. There must be Two Witnesses to make a Proof.—In all


the cases where proof by witnesses may be received, it is neces-
sary that there be two of them at least; and that number may
suffice, except in cases where the law demands a greater. But
one single witness, of what quality soever he may be, makes no


proofs
XIV.


2052. One may produce many Witnesses. — Although two wit-
nesses be sufficient to prove a fact, yet seeing this proof consists
in the conformity of their depositions, and that it often happens
that the declarations of two witnesses do not agree in all points,
or that some essential circumstances are known only to one of the
witnesses, the other being ignorant of them, and that likewise it
may s0 fall out, that there may be some just objection against one
of the witnesses, or even against them both; for these reasons a
greater number of witnesses may be examined, and even several
out of one and the same house, such as the father and children,
that the evidence of the one may make up what is defective in the
testimony of the others, and that all of them together may make
up an entire proof of the truth. But the liberty of producing
many witnesses ought to be restrained by the prudence of the
judge, if the law has set no bounds to it.


XV.


2053. Several Views by which we are to judge of Proofs by Wit-
nesses. — It is necessary to add to all these rules, in relation to


© Z.1, D. de testib. ; —l. 2, eod.

® DL. 12, D. de testib. ; —I. 9, §.1, C. de testrb.

' Z. 1, § 2, D. de testib. ; —1. 17, eod. By the ordinances of France it is prohibited to
examine more than ten witnesses to each fact in civil matters. Ordinance of 1446, art.
$2; of 1498, art. 13; of 1535, chap. 7, art. 4. Ordinance of 1667, tit. 22, art. 21.


TIT. VI. SEC. 11I.} PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 815


of the truth of the facts and circumstances. And in order to give
to the evidence its just effect, it is necessary to gather the truth
out of all that appears to be certain in all the proofs together.*


XVII.


2055. Witnesses may be compelled to give Evidence.— The per-
sons who are summoned to give evidence are obliged to come
and declare what they know of the matter. For the consequence
of discovering the truth of facts necessary for the administration
of justice is what the public has an interest in. So that the judge
may compel those who refuse to come and give their evidence,
whether it be in civil matters, or in criminal


XVIIL


2056. The Witnesses ought to be examined by the Judge. — It is
not enough, to give to the declaration of a witness the effect which
it ought to have in justice, that the witness himself writes, or
causes another to write, his evidence, and that he gives it or sends
it to the judge; but it is necessary that he appear before the judge,
and that the judge himself interrogate him, and put down his dec-
laration in writing.

XIX.


2057. And ought to be first sworn.— Seeing it is to the judge,
and even to justice itself, that the witness gives his evidence, his
declaration ought to be preceded by an oath that he will speak
the truth; that the respect which he owes to religion may engage
him to give his testimony with all the fidelity and all the exact-
ness that justice and truth may require. And if he has no knowl-
edge of the facts about which he is interrogated, he must even
swear that those facts are unknown to him.*


XX.


2058. Excuses of Witnesses.—.If the witnesses have excuses
which hinder them from coming to give their evidence, they may


= ZL. 18, in f. D. de testib.

Y L. 3, in f. D. de testib.; —I. 16, C. de testib. If the witness does not appear on the
summons with which he is served, the judge condemns him in a fine, for which his goods
may be attached and sold, and even his person may be imprisoned, in case he does not obey
the sammons. See the eighth article of the twenty-second title of the ordinance of 1667.

® ZL. 3, § 3, D. de testib. ; —d.l. 3, § 4.

® ©. 9, C. de testib. ; —1. 16, eod. Sce the ninth article of the twenty-second title of the
ordinance of 1667.


TIT. Vi. SEC. 1v.| PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 817


nesses in it. For their testimony would be either suspected, if it
were in favor of the person whose cause they had defended, or
both uncivil and suspected, if it were against their client. And it
is the same thing as to proctors and attorneys, and other persons
who should happen to be under the same engagements.°


XXIV.


2062. The Expenses of the Witnesses paid by the Party who sum-
mons them.— The expenses which the witnesses are at for their
journey, and for their attendance to give their testimony, are re-
paid them by the party at whose instance they have been cited;
and that by virtue of an order of the judge, and according as he
shall tax them‘


XXV.


2063. A False Witness is punished. — lf it happens that a wit-
ness can be convicted of having given false evidence, or of being
guilty of some other misdemeanour, as if he has divulged the
tenor of his deposition to the party accused, he may be pun-
ished for it according to the quality of the fact and the circum-
stances.s


SECTION IV.
OF PRESUMPTIONB.


Art. I.

2064. Definition of Presumptions. — Presumptions are conse-
quences drawn from a fact that is known, to serve for the discovery
of the truth of a fact that is uncertain, and which one seeks to
prove. Thus, for example, in a civil concern, if there is a contest
between the possessor of a land or tenement, and another who
pretends to be proprietor thereof, it is a presumption that the said
land or tenement belongs to the possessor; and he will be main-
tained in it if the other does not prove his right; for it is usual
and natural that nobody takes possession of a thing without hav-
img a right to it, and that the proprietor does not patiently suffer


© Z. ult. D. de testid. f 7.11, C. de testib. ; —I. 16, inf. eod.
s ZL. 16, D. de testib.
VOL. I. 69


a -


FIT. Vi. SEC. 1V.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 819


IV.

2067. Presumptions are either Concluding, or Uncertain.— There
are presumptions of such a nature, that what is presumed passes
for truth, without any necessity of being corroborated by stronger
proofs, if the contrary is not proved: and there are presumptions
which have no other effect, if they are alone, than that they form
a bare conjecture, and do not make that which is presumed to


‘ pase for truth. Thus, in the case of a possessor which has been


mentioned in the first article, his possession makes it to be pre-
gamed that he is the true owner, and without other proofs he is
accounted as such, and will be maintained in his possession until
he who disturbs him therein establishes his right clearly. Thus,
on the contrary, in the case of him who had threatened another
‘with death, of which likewise mention has been made in the same
‘article, the threatening which preceded the death of the person
who was menaced makes against the person who threatened only
@ conjecture ; and although he should not prove his innocence, if
there were no other proof against him, this presumption would
not be sufficient to convict him of being the author of the crime.’


V.


2068. Two Sorts of Presumptions.— This difference between
presumptions which have the effect of proofs, and those which
leave some doubt, is the foundation of another distinction of two
sorts of presumptions: one is of those which are authorized by
the law, and which are appointed to be held as proofs; and the
other is of those of which the law leaves the effect to the pru-
“dence of the judge, who ought to discern what may or may not
waffice to give to a presumption the force of a proof. Thus, in
the same case of a possessor, the law will have him to be held for
the true owner, if it is not proved that he is not Thus, the laws
e&dain a thing that is adjudged to be held for truth! Thus, they
enact that he who is born of a married woman, and conceived
during the time of wedlock, shall be reputed the son of the hus-
wands Thus, they have regulated that, if a married woman be
found to have any goods or effects, and it is uncertain by what


~


@ Z. ult. C. de probat.;—I. 2, inf. C. de in lit. jur. See the preceding articles, and those
‘which follow, as also the preamble of this title.

® See the first article.

€ Z. 907, D. de reg. jur.

& L. 5, D. de in jus voc.; —1. 6, D. de his qui sui vel al. jur. sunt.


TIT. VI. SEC. Iv.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 821


principles and their custom; that every one usually governs him-
self by reason, and consequently acquits himself of his engage-
ments and of his duty: and we ought never to judge without
proof, nor presume that a father hates his children, that any
person abandons his own interest, that a wise man has committed
an action unworthy of his usual conduct, or that one has failed
in any point of his duty. Thus, in general, all facts which are
contrary to that which ought to happen naturally are never pre-
samed, unless they be proved.'


VUL


§ 2071. Et depends on the Prudence of the Judge to discern the Effect

 @f Presumplions. — It is by all these rules which have been just

S mow explained, that we are to judge of the use and effect of pre-

‘ gamptions; that we are to distinguish in every case the quality of

t the facts controverted, in order to judge which of them ought to

' be held as true, and which of them must be proved; and that we
otight to distinguish those presumptions which ought to be held
wis proofs from those which ought not to have that effect. And it
$s on the prudence of the judge that the use and application of all
fhese rules do depend, according to the quality of the facts and
the circumstances,” as will appear by the examples explained in
the articles which follow.


IX.


2072. Examples of a Fact which tt is necessary to prove. — If
fie relation between a person deceased, and him who pretends to
Be his heir at law or next of kin, were called in question, this rela-
fin would not be presumed without proof. For it depends on
Sicts which are naturally unknown, if they are not proved. Thus,
Ed whose relation is not acknowledged ought to prove it.


7 Rogo filia, bona tua quandoque distribuas liberis tuis, ut quisque de te meruerit
reg - sufficiet, si non offenderint ..... eos solos non admitti qui offenderunt. L.
a. 3s, D. de legat.2. It must be proved that they have failed in their duty.

{4 bonus miles antea estimatus fuit, prope est ut affirmationi ejus credatur. L. 5, § 6,
de re milit. Plerumque credendum est, eum qui partis dominus est, jure potius suo re
quam furti consilium inire. Z. 51, D. pro socio.
Preesumptionem pro eo esse qui accepit, nemo dubitat. Qui enim solvit, namquam ita
est ut facile suas pecunias jactet et indebitas effundat. L. 25, D. de probat.
= Ls3, § 2, in f. D. de testib. See the third article.
® L.1, D. de probat.
f9 *


TIT. VI. SEC. IV.]| PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 823


against an eviction, the case whereof did not fall out till after
making up all those accounts, or some other right of the like
nature.”


XIL


2075. Another Example, a Bond crossed or torn. — If a prom-
issory note or bond should chance to be found in the hands of the
debtor, or if it had been crossed, rased, or torn in pieces, it would
be a presumption that it had been acquitted or annulled, unless he
who should pretend to make use of it had clear proofs that the
debt was still owing, and that the said note or bond had been
rased, crossed, or torn in pieces,‘ or had fallen into the hands of
the debtor,’ only by some violence, or some accident, or other
event which would destroy the presumption that the debt was paid.


XIIL


2076. Example of a Presumption that proves nothing. — If a
tator who had no estate of his own, or by his wife, before he
entered upon the administration of his tutorship, is found to have
enriched himself during the tutorship, the minor cannot for that
pretend that those goods are his, or infer from thence that the
tutor has been unfaithful in his administration, if otherwise he
gives him in a true and just account. For it may happen that the
tutor may have acquired those goods either by his labor and in-


dustry, or by other ways.’


XIV.


2077. Example of a Presumption in an Ancient Fact.— When
the, question is to prove an ancient fact, of which there are no
written proofs or living witnesses, if the fact be such that it
ought to be admitted to proof; as, for instance, if the matter be to
know how long an estate has been in a family, at what time a
work was made, or other facts of the like nature; we receive the
declarations which witnesses are able to make of what they have
heard concerning the said facts from other persons who were then
alive: and the proof which is drawn from those declarations is
founded on this presumption, that, the persons whom the witnesses
heard give an account of those facts, as notorious in their time,


P L. 26, D. de probat. q
© Z. 15, C. de solut. et Aberat. ; —v. 1. 1, C. de fide inst. ‘


TIT. VI. SEC. IV.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 825


and that the son, not having survived the father, did not succeed
to him, and that therefore the inheritance of the father goes to his
heirs. But.seeing there is no way for determining which of these
events is the true one, the law has directed that, in such a case,
where it is necessary to take one side or other, and impossible to
know the truth of the fact on which the decision depends, it shall
be presumed that the father died first, and that, the son having
succeeded to him, the mother reaps the inheritance of the father
in that of the son." And this presumption is founded, on one
part, on the inclination to favor the mother, and, on the other part,
on the natural order; according to which the son ought to outlive
his father. Thus, in this event, where it remains uncertain what
nature has done, the law supposes that nature has done what
it seems reason would have desired.


XVI


2079. Another Kind of Presumption. — There is yet another sort
of presumptions, which do not relate to events or facts of which
it may be necessary to know the truth, as in all the cases which
have been mentioned in the preceding articles; but which regard
the secret of the intention of persons, when it is necessary to
know the said intention, and when there are no certain proofs of


= Cum bello pater cum filio perisset: materque filii, quasi postea mortui, bona vindi-
caret, agnati vero patris, quasi filius antea perisset: divus Hadrianus credidit patrem prius
mortaum. ZL. 9, § 1, D. de reb. dub.

The question concerning the succession of this father and son is to be understood ac-
cording to the written law of the Romans, or according to the right which the ordinances
and customs give to mothers in the successions of their children.

Although it be natural to presume, in the case of this article and in others of the like

nature, that the son survived his father, and that in general the children and descendants
outlive their fathers and mothers and other ascendants; yet we find a contrary presump-
tion in another law, where it is said, that, if it had been agreed between a father-in-law
and son-in-law, that if the son-in-law should outlive his wife, and she leave behind her a
child of a year old, the husband should have the wife’s whole marriage portion ; and that
if, on the contrary, the child should chance to die before the mother, the husband should
only retain a part of the said portion ; and it had happened that the mother and child of
a year old perished in a shipwreck, it would be probable that the child died first, and so
the husband would have only that share of his wife’s dowry which had been agreed on.
Inter socerum et generum convenit: ut, si filia mortua superstitem anniculum filium ha-
baisset, dos ad virum pertineret : quod si vivente matre filius obiisset, vir dotis portionem,
uxore in matrimonio defuncta, retineret. Mulier naufragio cam anniculo filio periit.
Quis verisimile videbatur, ante matrem, infantem perisse: viruam partem dotis retincre
placuit. Z. 26, D. de pact. dot. This presumption, that in this case the child died first,
is founded on the weakness of its age, which makes it to be judged that the child was less
able to resist, and that the mother lived some time longer than the child.


TIT. VI. SEC. V.} |§ PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 827


SECTION V.
OF THE INTERROGATION AND CONFESSION OF THE PARTIES.


2081. Different Ways of having the Confession of a Party as to
Facts.— Seeing it often happens that he who has occasion to
prove a fact that is contested has neither writing, nor witnesses,
nor presumptions, that may be sufficient, one therefore in that
case has recourse to draw from the mouth of the party a confes-
sion of the truth; and that is done three ways. One is, without
the intervention of an oath, when one party summons the other
by some act, and requires him to own the truth of a fact, whether
it be the same that is in dispute, or some other that may serve to
prove it; and this first way, which ought to be the only one, if
everybody acted always honestly and sincerely, may have its effect,
either when he who is summoned to declare the truth is sincere
enough to own it, or when his want of sincerity engages him to
make such answers as that one may draw from them some ad-
vantages against him.

2082. The second way of having the concession of a party is
by interrogating him on facts that are pertinent; that is, which
have relation to the dispute in hand. And this hath its use in the
cases where he who wants to prove a fact, having no proofs
thereof, and not being willing to refer it to the oath of his adver-
sary, demands that he be interrogated by the judge upon facts
which he draws up in the form of a libel, or allegation, dividing it
into several articles, and inserting therein the fact in question, and
other facts or circumstances which may have relation thereto, and
serve to prove it. And if the judge finds that the said facts or
circumstances, upon which it is desired that the party may be in-
terrogated, may serve to prove the fact in question, he orders the
party to be interrogated, and to make oath that he will speak the
trath of all that he knows concerning every one of the articles:
and the answers are taken down in writing; from which he who
demanded them draws the consequences which may turn to his
advantage, whether it be by the confessions, or denials, or varia-
tions of the party who has been interrogated.

2083. The third manner of having the confession of a party is
when he who cannot have proofs of a fact which he alleges refers
the matter to the oath of his adversary, and consents that the dec-


hice,


TIT. VI. SEC. V.] |§ PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 629


the sentence of condemnation which ought to follow thereupon.
And such a confession, if it is serious and positive, cannot be re-
voked, especially if it has been made judicially ;* unless there
were in the said confession some error which might be rectified, as
shall be shown in the following article.


IL


2087. A Confession through an Error in Fact. — He who
through error acknowledges a fact to be true which is not so,
may rectify the said error by proving the truth which he was
ignorant of.


TIL.


2088. Confession through an Error in Law.—If he who has
owned the truth of a fact pretends to have owned it only by mis-
take, upon pretext that out of ignorance of the law he had made
a confession contrary to his interest, he will not upon that pretence
be allowed to. revoke his confession.° Thus, for example, if a
minor, having borrowed money, and being come of age, gets him-
self relieved from his obligation, but confesses that he employed
the money to discharge a debt that was due from his father’s
inheritance, he will not be admitted to revoke the said declaration,
by saying that he made it only through mistake, believing that by
reason of his minority he would nevertheless be discharged from
his obligation. For it was in point of law that he erred, and not
in matter of fact; which does not alter the effect which his con-
fession ought to have.


IV.


2089. Interrogation of the Party ordered by the Judge. — When
one of the parties demands that the other be interrogated upon
facts which he deduces into articles, it depends on the prudence
of the judge to order the party to be interrogated, if the facts are
such that the knowledge thereof may be of service to decide the


® L.1, D. de confess. ; — |. 56, D. de re judic.;—t. un. C. de confess. In capital crimes
the confession of a criminal is not enough to condemn hin, if there be no other proofs ;
because it might so fall out, that such a confession were only the effect of a trouble of
mind, or of despair. V. /. 1, §§ 17 e 27, D. de queestion.
b 7. 2, D. de confess.
© L. 2, D. de confess.
VOL. I. 70


TIT. VI. SEC. V.] | PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 831


VIIL

2093. Effect of Interrogations.—If he who has been interro-
gated has owned the truth of the facts contested, or if it may be
gathered from his answers, his interrogation will have the same
effect as if he had consented to the sentence which condemns him
to pay what is demanded of him, if the said condemnation be
founded on the proofs which result from his answers.®

@


IX.


2094. They do not hinder the Effect of the other Proofs. — The
answers made by those, whom the judge has ordered to be interro-
gated upon facts alleged by their adverse parties, are not decisive
in their favor, and what they answer does not serve as a proof
for them, neither does it hinder the effect of the contrary proofs.
But the effect which the said answers ought to have in discovering
the truth of the facts in question depends on the prudence of the


judge."
x.


2095. Difference between these Interrogations and the Demand of
a Sight of the Writings belonging to one of the Parties. —- We may
place in the same rank with the confessions of parties that which
may result from the deeds or writings which one party demands a
sight of from the other, such as his journal, or other writing, if it
be exhibited by the party of whom it is demanded. But there is
this difference between a demand of the sight of the deeds and
writings belonging to a party who does not exhibit them in court,
and that of answers to interrogatories; that one may refuse to
produce papers if he himself does not make use of them, but one
eannot refuse to answer to facts that are pertinent. For the
parties ought to know the truth of all the facts, whereof the
knowledge is necessary for determining what is in dispute. And
this knowledge ought to be common to all the persons who have
an interest therein. But journals, and other papers which belong
only to one party, are not common both to the one and the other.
And these papers may chance to contain facts which ought to be
kept secret, and which perhaps have no relation to the matter in
dispute. Thus, one party cannot demand of the other to produce
or communicate a writing of which the said party does not offer


b Z. 11, §.9, D. de interrog. i See the law cited on the sixth article.


TIT. VI. BEC. VI.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 833


edge, such as persons skilled in some art or profession, to swear
that they will give a true testimony, or make a faithful report.
Thus, when one of the parties, not being able to prove a fact which
he advances, refers it to the oath of his adverse party, or the
jadge refers the matter to the oath of the party, he whose oath is
desired, whether it be by the judge or by the adverse party, is
bound to swear to what may be within his knowledge, and may
serve to decide the matter in dispute.

2097. The use of an oath on these and all other occasions has
been invented as a precaution against the inconstancy and infi-
delity of mankind, and to supply, by the firmness of so strict a tie
of religion, the want of other assurances, which he whose oath is
taken cannot give, or which it would not be just to require of
him. Thus, one cannot have any other security from a witness
that he will speak the truth, than what may be had from his oath
that he will be sincere and upright in his declaration, and from the
probability that he would not wilfully be guilty of perjury. Thus,
it would neither be just nor decent to require of an officer of jus-
tice that he should give surety for his faithful discharge of his
office, nor any other security besides that of his oath.

2098. An oath being a precaution that is easy to be taken, and
it being a corroboration of the engagement of the person who
swears, the use of an oath has been so far extended, that it has
been made use of even in bare covenants between particular per-
sons, the one swearing to the other that he would execute what
he had promised; and we still see that, in obligations and in
contracts, the notaries make mention of this oath. But seeing this
‘was a superfluous precaution, and an occasion of perjury, this usage
is abolished, and the parties contracting take no oath, although men-
tion be made thereof in obligations and contracts. There is like-
wise another sort of oath, now gone into disuse, which the Roman
laws required of all persons engaged in any lawsuit, obliging both
plaintifis and defendants, at the beginning of the cause, to swear
that their demands and their defences were sincere and upright,
without any intention to give unnecessary trouble, or to use quirks
and cavils.> And this usually served to no other purpose than to
be an occasion of perjury either to the one party or the other,
or sometimes even to both. And although this oath had been re-


b ZL. 2, Cod. de jur. prop. cal. dand.
7011 ¢


TIT. VI. SEC. VI.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 835


IL.

2101. The Oath is not taken unless it be directed. — As a party
is never made to swear in his own cause, except where there is a
deficiency of proof, so nobody is admitted to swear, unless the
aath be tendered to him, and directed by the judge, who is to
inquire whether the proofs be sufficient, or if it be necessary to
have recourse to the oath of the party.>


TIL


2102. How a Matter is referred to the Oath of the Party.— The
party who finds that he has no proofs at all, or that he has not
proofs sufficient, may refer the matter to the oath of his adversary ;
that is, submit to whatever he shall declare touching the matter,
after he has been sworn. And this oath, which the judge directs
and admits, if there be occasion, is often practised, and is useful
for putting an end to lawsuits.°


IV.


2103. The Judge may order the Oath, without the Desire of the
Party, if there be Occasion. — Although the party who is destitute
of proofs should not declare that he refers the matter to the oath
of his adversary, yet the judge may order the oath to be taken, if
he finds it reasonable. Thus, for instance, if a debtor from whom
a creditor demands a sum of money due by an obligation, which
he proves, alleges that he has paid it, but does not prove the pay-
ment, alleging only some circumstances which are not sufficient to
discharge him from the demand, the judge may, in condemning the
debtor to pay the debt, oblige the creditor to swear that he has
not received payment of it.4


V.


2104. The Party’s refusing to swear passes for a Proof.— He, to
whose oath his adverse party refers a matter of fact that is within
his knowledge, is obliged to swear, if the judge requires it: and
if he refuses to do it, the fact will be held as proved and confessed,
in order to found the sentence of condemnation which ought to


» £38, D. de jurejurando. See in the following article the mode in which a matter in
dispute is referred to the oath of the party, and how the oath is enjoined by the judge.

© Z.1, D. de jurejur. See the following article.

4 Ex auctoritate judicis. See the law quoted on the preceding article. L.3, C.de reb.
eved. ef jurejur.


TIT. VI. SEC. VI.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 837


him who first tendered it.— It follows from all the preceding rules,
that, when the matter is concerning an oath, whether it be that
one party tenders it to the other, or that he to whom it is tendered
desires to refer it back again to his adversary, it depends on the
pradence of the judge, according to the circumstances of the
quality of the facts, and the knowledge which the person whose
oath is desired may have of them, to direct it or not; and although
the oath be not demanded by the party, yet the judge may enjoin
it by virtue of his office, if there be occasion. And after the oath
has been directed, if it has been at the desire of one of the parties,
the duty of the judge is to take the oath of the party who has
been desired to give it, and to decree what ought to be adjudged
in consequence of his oath, whether it be that he should have what
he demands, or that he should be dismissed from the demand that
is brought against him. But if he should refuse to swear, when
he is made judge in his own cause, he will be either cast in his
own demand, or condemned to pay what is demanded of him.
And as to him who had referred the matter to his adversary’s oath,
and to whose oath his adversary refers it back again, if he has
just reasons for not swearing, as if the facts were not within his
knowledge, he ought not to be constrained to swear. But if he
refuses to make oath touching a fact that is within his knowledge,
it will be held as proved; and the judge will decree what shall be
Just according to the said fact. But if he swears, judgment will
be given according to his oath:


X.


2109. The Oath decides the Controversy. — When one of the
parties has referred the matter to his adversary’s oath, and he has
sworn, his oath will be decisive; and what he shall have declared
upon oath will be held for truth, and will serve asa rule. For it
was to decide the controversy that his oath was desired. Thus
it will have as much or more force than a thing that is adjudged;
and will have the same effect as a payment, if he of whom a sum
of money was demanded swears that he owes nothing; or as a
transaction, if it was a dispute of another nature.


1 7. 34, § 8, D. de jurejur. ; —d. I. 84, § ult.
1 7 2, D. de jurejur.; —I. 5, § 2, eod.; —1. 56, D. de re jud.; —1. 27, D. de jurejur.; —
L. 40, eod.


TIT. VI. SEC. VI.] PROOFS AND PRESUMPTIONS. 839


understood of all the cases which may happen in all civil matters,
when the facts and the circumstances may render the use of an
oath just and decent.° But in crimes, the accuser cannot put the
party accused upon his oath, nor can the accused oblige the ac-
cuser to swear, neither can the judge refer the matter to the oath
of either of them. For it would be contrary to justice and to
good manners, that the acquittal or condemnation of the party
accused should depend on an oath, which interest or passion might
influence contrary to truth, or that it should depend on any other
cause besides that of a full proof of the truth.


XIV.


2113. Effect of the Oath with Respect to Persons interested with
the Parties.— If in a cause decided by the oath of the party, he
who has sworn, or he who has referred the matter to his adversary’s
oath, be interested with others for the whole debt, so as that any
one of them alone may discharge the whole, or be compelled to
pay the whole debt; although one of them only has been in judg-
ment, yet the oath will have its effect with respect to them all,
either for or against them.”


XV.


2114. The Oath neither benefits nor hurts Third Persons. — The
decision made by the oath of the party respects only the parties
between whom the oath has been ordained, or those whose right 1s
in their hands, or their sureties, and the persons who represent
them ; but it cannot hurt third persons. Thus, for example, he to
whose oath the matter had been referred, in a demand of a thing
which he pretended did belong to him, and who had sworn that it
was his, could not plead this oath against another person who
should claim a right to the same thing.!


XVI.


2115. What Persons may refer the Matter in Dispute to the Oath
of the Party for others.— It is only the persons interested who
can refer the matter in dispute to the oath of the party, and those
who have a right to do it in the name of others, whether it be by


© L.8,§ 1, D. de jurejur.

P L. 28, D. de jurejur.; —d. |. 28, § 3. See the following article.

@ L. 3, § 3, in fine, D. de jurejur.; —l. 9, § ult. el. 10, eod. See, touching sureties, the
fifth article of the fifth section of the title of Sureties. ;


TIT. VII] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. , 841


without possession, until he brings his action against the pur-
chaser for the recovery of it.

2118. It appears by this example, that, seeing possession and
property may be separated, they are two different things, which
ought not to be confounded together. But although it may seem
by this distinction, that possession is nothing else but a detention
of that which one has in his custody, whether he have the prop-
erty of it or not; yet we must not take for a true possession all
sorts of detention, but only that of a person who detains a thing
as being master of it; whether it be that he himself has the
actual detention of the thing, it being in his own custody, or that
he exercises his right by the intervention of other persons to whom
he commits the custody of it, such as a depositary, a tenant, a
farmer; for in that case he possesses the thing by the hands of
those persons who hold it in his name. So that whereas there is
properly speaking only one true possession, which is that of the
master, we may distinguish three sorts of detention, according to
three different causes which it may have: that of the master,
when he has in his own custody the thing that belongs to him;
that of the persons who hold it for the master; and that of usurp-
ers, who detain it without any right or title.

2119. Three Causes of Detention. — The first of these causes of
the detention of a thing is the right of property, which gives to
the proprietor the right to have in his custody what is his own,
that he may use it, enjoy it, and dispose of it: and it is to this
first cause that the detention is naturally linked.

2120. The second cause of detention is the will of the owner of
the thing, which makes it to pass into the hands of another per-
son; as if it is a house which he lets, lands which he farms out,
or gives to be enjoyed by a creditor for a certain time, in satisfac-
tion of his debt; if it is a movable which he lends, or lets out,
which he deposits, or gives in pawn. In all these cases the deten-
tion passes into other hands than the master’s, but without de-
priving him of his possession. For he retaining always his right
of property, which implies the right to possess, and the detention
being in the hands of other persons only in his name, it is he who
possesses by the others, and they have only a borrowed possession
for some time, and which can never acquire to them the right of
property. And as he who appoints a factor or agent to sell, to
give, or transact, does himself sell, give, and transact, according as
the said factor or agent does it in his name; so the proprietor

VOL. I. 71


TIT. vit. POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 843


right of possession cannot be separated from the property. This
is not contrary to what has been said, that he who fairly and
honestly purchases lands, or any other thing, from one who was
not the owner of them, possesses them although he has not the
property ; for this purchaser is considered as proprietor, and there-
fore is looked upon as possessor. And although the master may
be deprived of the actual detention, by the detention of a usurper,
yet he always preserves his right to take possession, whenever he
is able to remove the usurpation: and the unjust detention of the
usurper has only the appearance of a possession, although he
has in effect hold of the thing, and enjoys it; because the vice of
this detention gives it another nature than that of the true posses-
sion, which ought to be founded on a just title.

2123. It is because of this difference between the true posses-
sion of the master, and all other detention, that we distinguish
two sorts of possession, which are expressed by the words of civil
possession, and natural possession, or otherwise by the words of
legal possession, and of corporeal or actual possession The
civil or legal possession is that of the master; and the natural or
corporeal possession is that of the persons who have only the bare
detention of the thing, such as the usufructuary, the farmer, and
others. This possession is called natural or corporeal, because it
consists dnly in the bare natural detention, without the right of
property ; and the other is called civil or legal, because it is joined
to the right which the law gives to possess as master, whether he
has likewise the natural detention of the thing in his own hands,
or whether he possesses it by the hands of another.

2124. Divers Meanings of the Word “ Possession.” — It is neces-
sary to remark on all these different expressions of the laws, some
of which appear to be inconsistent with one another, that it seems
as if divers meanings might be given to these words of possession,
and of civil and natural possession, and as if we might understand
these texts differently under different views, according to the said
different meanings, either giving to all manner of detention the
name of possession, even to that of a usurper, or giving it only
to that of the master. But it is of no great importance whether
we qualify these several sorts of detention with the name of pos-
session, or whether we distinguish them by peculiar words; pro-
vided that in confounding together the words possession and deten-


© L. 2,41, D. pro harede. f £.10, C. de acg. et ret. possess.


TIT. VII. SEC. I.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 845


possesses honestly and fairly acquires the property, if he had it
not before, provided his possession lasts during the time that is
regulated for prescription; and the property is likewise acquired
by the bare possession, without prescription, in certain cases,
as has been already remarked, and as will further appear in the
second section.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF POSSESSION.


Art. I


2127. Definition of Possession. — Possession, taken in a proper
sense, is the detention of a thing, which he who is master of it, or
who has reason to believe that he is so, has in his own keeping,
or in that of another persen by whom he possesses.*


IL


2128. Connection between Possession and Property. — Seeing
the use of property is to have a thing in order to enjoy it and
to dispose of it, and that it is only by possession that one can
exercise this right ; possession therefore is naturally linked to the
property, and ought not to be separated from it. Thus, posses-
sion implies a right and a fact; the right to enjoy annexed to the
right of property, and the fact of the real detention of the thing,
that it be in the hands of the master, or of another for him.”


III.


2129. There are not Two Possessions of one and the same Thing.
— As it is not possible, when two persons contend for the property
of one and the same thing, that each of them alone can have the
right of property ; so neither is it possible, when two persons dis-
pute about the possession of one and the same thing, for every
one of them alone to have the possession. But as there is only


® ZL. 1, D. de acq. vel am. poss. This definition results from what has been said in the
preamble, and from the second, sixth, eighth, ninth, and eleventh articles of this section.
See the twelfth article of the second section.

b 7. 8, C. de acquir. et retin. possess. ; —l. 1, § 8, D. de acq. vel amitt. poss. ; — 1. 49, eod. ;
—d.1.49,§1. See the thirteenth article of this section, the first article of the third sec-
tion, and the third and fourth articles of the second section.

71°


TIT. VII. SEO. I.} POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 847


. VIL

2132. Possession does not require a Continual Detention. — Al-
though possession implies the detention of what we possess, yet
this detention ought not to be so understood as if it were neces-
sary to have always either in our hand, or in our sight, the things
of which we have the possession. But after the possession has
been once acquired, it is preserved without an actual detention,’ as
shall be explained in the second section.


VIL


2133. Possession of Living Creatures. — As we may possess liv-
ing creatures, which it is not possible to have always in our power
and custody, so we retain the possession of them whilst we shut
them up, whilst we have them under the care of a keeper, or if,
being made tame, they return home without a keeper, as bees to
their hives, and pigeons to their dove-houses. But the creatures
which escape out of our custody, and do not come back, are no
longer in our possession, till we recover them again.


VIIL


2134. The bare Detention, without some Right in the Thing, ts
not a true Possession.— The bare detention of a thing is not
properly called possession: and it is not enough for possession, |
that we have actual hold of a thing, and have it in our custody ;
but we must have it, together with the right to enjoy it and to
dispose of it, as being masters of it, or as having just cause to
believe ourselves to be the right owners.! For he who detains a
thing without having this right, if he detains it against the will of
the owner, is not a possessor, but a usurper: or if it is with the
owner’s good will, this detention leaves to the owner his posses-
sion, and it is he who possesses!


TX.


2135. One may possess by others. — One may possess a thing,
not only by one’s self, but also by other persons. Thus, the pro-


S L. 4, C. de acquir. e ret. possess.

b 7.3, § 2, D. de acg. rer. dom.; —1. 8, § 15, D. de acq. vel amitt. poss. ;— d. 1. 8, § 16;
—d.1 3, § 13.

i 7. 22, § 1, D. de noral. act.;—1. 21, C. de furt. ; —1. 49, § 1, D. de acq. vel amitt. pos-
sees. See the second article.

I £.17,§1, D.deyos. Sce the following article, and the eleventh article of the fifth
section.


TIT. VII. SEC. 1.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 849


has just cause to believe that he is so, although it may happen in
effect that he is not; as it happens to him who buys a thing.
which he thinks belongs to the person whom he buys it of, and yet
belongs to another. The knavish possessor is he who possesses as
master, but who assumes this quality when he knows very well,
either that he has no title at all to it, or that his title thereto is
vicious and defective. We shall see the effects of these two sorts


of possession in the third section.
XIL


2138. A Clandestine or Surreptitious Possesston.— We must
reckon in the number of knavish possessors, not only usurpers, but
also those who, foreseeing that the right which they pretend to
have will be disputed, and fearing lest they should be hindered
from taking possession thereof, take some opportunity of getting

: into possession surreptitiously, without the knowledge of the per-
son from whom they expect the opposition.”


XIIL


. 2189. The Possessor is presumed to be the right Owner. — Al-
' though the possession be naturally linked with the property,
and ought not to be separated from it; yet we must not con-
found them, so as to believe that the one cannot be without the
other! For it often happens that, the property of a thing being
controverted between two persons, there is only one of the two
who is owned to be possessor, and it may be that it is the per-
gon who is not the right owner, and that thus the possession may
be separated from the property. But even in this case, the natural
@ommection which exists between the possession and the property
mnakes the law to presume that they are joined in the person of
the possessor; and until it be proved that the possessor is not the
tight owner, the law will have him by the bare effect of his posses-
saion to be considered as such. For seeing it is the owner who
@uaght to possess, it is natural to presume that he who is in posses-
@zion is also the right owner, and that the right owner has not suf-
fered himself to be turned out of possession.'


P Z.. 6, D. de acq. vel amitt. poss. ; —1. ult. in f. D. de ritu nupt. ; — v. 1. 10, si serv. vind.
% Seo the second article.

© ZL. 52, D. de acq. vel amitt. poss. ; —1. 12, § 1, eod.; —1. 1, § 2, D. uti possid.

® Bee the first article of the fourth section of the title of Proofs.


TIT. VII. SEC. 1.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 851


XVL

2142. If Two Persons pretend to be Possessors, he who has been
ts Possession for the Space of a Year ts preferred. — Seeing the
possession is in some cases sufficient of itself to maintain the
possessor therein, it often happens that the two parties who claim
the property of one and the same estate pretend likewise that
they are in possession of it, and that each of them on his part, in
order to be maintained in the possession, endeavours to make it
appear that he is possessor; and that they reciprocally molest
one another by acts which may show them to be in possession.
And in these cases, if it appears that one of the two has been in
peaceable possession for the space of a year, before the disturbance
given him by the other, he will be maintained therein.


XVII.


2143. The Question about the Possession is judged before that
of the Property. — The controversies whereof the matter in dispute
is to regulate between two persons, who pretend to be possessors
of one and the same thing, which of the two shall be maintained
in the possession, ought to be instructed and decided without
examining into the right of property. For the discussion of the
titles necessary for deciding the right of property often demands
delays, which the dispute about the possession cannot admit of.
And seeing it is of importance not to leave two possessors exposed
to the danger of the consequences of such a dispute, the matter
touching the possession is regulated in the first place, and it is
only after that the same is fully ended that inquiry is made into
the right of property.” Thus, he who is declared to be possessor


possessing the things which are in commerce, and that the ways of acquiring them are
indefinite, ecclesiastical benefices cannot be possessed but by persons who have a capa-
eigy proportioned to the quality of the function, and who are inducted therein by the ways
which the laws of the church have established for that purpose. So that the right of pos-
session in church benefices is judged, not by the bare possession, but according to the
clearest titles. De Prabend.c. eum qui lib.6;—de Reg. Jur.c.1, ib.6. See the ordi-
mances of 1453, art. 75; 1493, art. 58; 1535, chap. 9, art. 6; 1667, tit. 15, art. 2 and 6.

@ TZ. 1, § 2, D. de itin. actug. priv.;—d.l.§3;—l. 2, C. unde vi.

¥ L.35, D. de acq. vel amitt. poss.;—l. 3, C. de interdictis. By the ordinances of
VWrance, one cannot commence his action for the property till the question about the pos-
g@aesion has been decided, and he who shall have been condemned has fully satisfied the
gemtence, by restoring the fraits and paying the costs and damages, if any have been
g@warded; and the parties are not suffered to join these two demands of the possession
aud property together in one and the same action. See the ordinance of 1667, tit. 18,
ext. 4.and 5. See the following article.


TIT. Vil. SEO. II.} POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 853


property of a thing either acquires at the same time the posses-
sion thereof, or has a right to get it, and to recover it if he had lost
it.» Thus, there are as many different causes of possession as
there are different titles of property.


IL.


2147. Difference between acquiring the Right to possess, and
acquiring the actual Possession. — We must not confound the
ways of acquiring the right to possess, of which mention has
been made in the foregoing article, with the ways of entering and
getting into possession, and of having a thing in one’s power to
use it, to enjoy it, and to dispose of it. The ways of acquiring
the property of things, and by means of the property the right to
possess them, are infinite. For one acquires them by a sale, by
exchange, by donation, and by other different titles which the laws
have regulated. But there is only the effectual detention which
puts us into the real and actual possession of what is ours. And
this detention is acquired in the manner that shall be explained in
the sixteenth article, and the other articles which follow.4


III.


2148. In some Cases the Property may be acquired by the bare
Effect of Possession. — The connection between the possession and
the property has not only this first effect, that the property implies
and gives the right to possess; but it has also this second effect,
that the possession gives often the property. Thus, whoever ac-
quires the possession of a thing, of which he may likewise have
the property, and which belongs to nobody, himself becomes mas-
ter of it by the bare effect of the possession. For, by having in
his power that which nobody has a right to take from him, he
becomes at one and the same time-both possessor and proprietor
thereof* And this happens in several cases, which shall be ex-
plained in the fifth and other following articles.


® Z. 52, D. de acq. rer. dom.

© Z. 3, § 21, D. de acq. vel amitt. possess.

@ Qusramdum rerum dominium nanciscimur jure gentium quod ratione naturali inter
euanes homines perseque custoditur: quarundam jure civili; id est, jure proprio civitatis
mostre. L.1, D. de acg. rer. dom. ; —§ 11, Inst. de rer. divis. As to the distinction be-
teen the law of nations and the civil law, of which mention is made in this text, see
what has been said thereof in the Theatise of Laws, chap. 11, no. 1, 4, 82, 33, 39, and

numbers.

© § 12, Lest. de rer. divis.; —I. 3, D. de acg. rer. dom.

VOL. I. 72


"IT. VII. SEC. 11.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 855


VIL
2152. Property is acquired by Hunting and Fishing. — Wild
beasts, fowls, fishes, and every thing that is taken, either in hunt-
ing, fowling, or fishing, by those who have a right thereto, belongs
to them as their property, by virtue of the seizure which they
make of them:


VITL


2153. By Captures from the Enemy.— We acquire, likewise, by
captare and by the right of war, that which we take from the
enemy.!


IX.


2154. If one finds a Thing that ts relinquished, or thrown away
with Intention to give it to whosoever can catch it.— He who finds
a thing that is abandoned, that is, of which he who was master of
it quits and relinquishes the possession and property, not being
willing to keep it any longer, becomes master of it;™ in the same
manner ag if it had never belonged to any body. And it is with
much greater reason that those who gather up pieces of money,
or other things, which princes or other persons throw among the
multitude, out of magnificence, on some extraordinary occasions,
acquire what falls into their hands. For besides the possession of
a thing, which he who was master of it is not willing to keep any
longer, they have his intention, which makes over the things to
those who catch them.”


ventoris fiunt. § 18, Jnst. de rer. divis.;—1.8, D. eed. We have not put down this article
fm the general terms of an indefinite liberty to all persons to acquire the property of these
kinds of things, by discovering or finding them. For according to our usage, the precious
matters which are the produce of mines, for example, do not belong entirely to those who
@iscover them, even in their own lands; but the king has a right to a share of them,
which is regulated by the ordinances. See the fifth article of the second section of the
title of Things.

4 619, Inst. de rer. divis. ; —I. 1, § 1, D. de acq. rer.dom. It is to be remarked on this
article, that the liberty of hunting, fowling, and fishing is not permitted to all persons, in
ali places indifferently. See the eleventh article of the first section of the title of Things,
and the remark on the first article of the same title.

1 § 17, Inst. de rer. divis. It is also to be observed on this article, that the spoil and
Booty taken from the enemy do not always belong indifferently and entirely to those
who make the capture. For the admiral, for instance, has a right to a share of the prizes
that are taken at sea.

= £L.1, D. pro derelicto ; — § 47, Inst. de rer. divis. See the third, twenty-eighth, and
twenty-ninth articles.

® ZL. 9, § 7, D. de acg. rer. dom. ; — § 46, Inst. de rer. divis. ; — Nov. 105, c. 2, § 1.


TIT. VII. SEC. 11.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 857


augment the ground only in so much as does not appear to remain
still to its first master."


XIII.


2158. The Possession of the Building is acquired to the Master
of the Ground.— Buildings belong to those who are masters of
the ground on which they are built. For the edifice is an acces-
sion which is added to the ground, and which cannot take away
the ground from the proprietor. Thus, when one person builds
on the ground of another, the building is acquired to the master of
the ground. And when one builds on his own ground with mate-
rials that are not his own, he becomes master of them ; for, seeing
the materials cannot be separated from the ground but by demol-
ishing the building, which it is for the public good not to suffer,
the possession of the building belongs to the master of the ground,
and by virtue of that possession the property, with the charge of
paying the value of the materials. But if there was put into this
building any thing of great value, which it would be just to sep-
arate from it, such as a statue, or other ornament, it would be
restored to the person who was master of it. For the right of
hindering the separation of the materials is limited to what is
mecessary for the building, and which, being a part thereof, cannot
be easily separated from it. But if he who had made use of
materials which were not his own had done it knavishly, he
would be liable to costs and damages, and to other penalties,
which the quality of the act might deserve.'


XIV.


2159. It ts the same Thing in Respect of what ts planted. — It is
the same thing with respect to what is planted in a ground as it
is with buildings; and if it happens that the master of a ground
has planted in it trees which were not his own, or that the owner
of the trees has planted them in the ground of another person,
and that they have taken root in it, they will belong to the master
of the ground ;* but he will be obliged to pay the price of the
trees, and be liable to costs and damages, and other penalties, if


® ZL. 7, §§ 1 e 2, D. de acg. rer. dom.;—l. 1, C. de alluvion. See the sixth article of the
first section of Engagements which are formed by Accidents.
® L.7,§ 10, D. de acq. rer. dom.; —d. 1. § 12.
¢ Z. 7, § 13, D. de acg. rer. dom. ; —l. 5, § 8, D. de rei vindic. ; —1. 11, C. eod.
72°


TIT. VIL. SEC. I1.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 859


of some other person who had bespoke it. And by all these views,
and others of the like nature, one may determine who ought to
have the thing; and likewise regulate what he who keeps the
thing is to give, either for the matter or for the workmanship.


XVI.


2161. bs what Possession consists. — All that has been said in

the preceding articles relates to the causes which may give us the
possession, or the right to possess: and we are now to consider
how one becomes possessor, and the ways of entering upon a real
and actual possession. Seeing the use of possession is to exercise
the right of property, it implies three things: a just cause of pos-
gessing as master, the intention to possess in this quality, and
detention. This intention is not understood of that of a usurper,
or of a knavish possessor, who has the intention to possess as
master, but of him who is in reality master, or who possesses 80
as to have just reason to believe that he is master. The detention
is understood, not only of him who has the thing in his own hands,
of in his power, but likewise of him who holds it by the interven-
tion of other persons, such as a depositary, a tenant, a farmer.
Without the intention there is no possession. Thus, the pos-
sessor of a ground, in which there is a treasure unknown to him,
does not possess the treasure, although he possesses the place in
which itis. Without,the detention the intention is useless, and
does not make the possession. Thus, he whose thing has been
stolen does not possess it any longer. And without a just cause
the detention is only a usurpation


XVIL


2162. Possession which one takes of his own Accord, without a
preceding Right.— The possession of the things which we acquire
by their falling into our hands, such as that which we find, and
which has no master, that which we take in hunting, and those
things which we have a right to take from the owners, as the spoil
of an enemy, is acquired by the bare fact of our laying our hands
upon them.!


J See the eighth article of the first section. Z. 3, § 1, D. de acq. vel amitt. possess. ; —
d. 1. 3,§ 3;—l. 4, C. de acg. et retin. poss.; —1. 8, D. eod.; —1. 3, § ult. D. ad exhibend. ; —
&. 3. § 13, D. de acg. vel amitt. poss. We have explained in the preamble the difference
between this natural possession and that which the laws call civil. ZL. 38, § 3, eod.;—v.
£. 30, eod. See the first article of the first section. See the twenty-third article.

® § 18, Inst. de rer. divis. ;—§ 12, Inst. eod. Soe the third article of this section.


TIT. VII. SEO. II.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 861


XXI.

2166. Delivery and taking Possession of Immovables. — As to
immovables, those who alienate them, either by sale or by other
titles, strip themselves of the possession by declaring only either that
they will not possess any longer, or that, if they still hold the land
or tenement, it shall be only precariously, or by delivering the
keys, if it is a place that is locked up. And the possession passes
to the new master by the bare effect of the intention to possess,
joined to some act which denotes his right, as if he goes in person
to the land or tenement to take possession of it as master, although
he do not go over all the parts of it. And one may likewise take
possession of a land or tenement by a bare view thereof.4


XXII.


2167. Delivery and taking Possession of Things which consist in
Rights. — The delivery of that which consists in rights, such as a
jurisdiction, a right which the lord of a manor has to oblige all
his vassals and tenants to make use of his mills and ovens, an
office, a service, a rent, and other goods of this nature, is made by
giving up the titles, if there are any; and if there be no titles, by
the bare effect of the purchase, together with the common inten-
tion of the contractors that the purchaser should put himself into
possession. And one takes possession by acts which may have
that effect. Thus, one takes possession of a jurisdiction by nam-
ing officers to exercise it, receiving the fines and confiscations, and
by exercising the other rights which depend thereon. Thus, one
takes possession of an office by taking the rank and place which
it entitles one to, and by exercising some function thereof. Thus,
one takes possession of a service by using it for the purpose for
which it was intended, and of a rent which one has acquired, or of
another right, by giving notice of the assignment, or of the title
of the purchase, to the debtor, and by the enjoyment thereof.


ead. ;—1.1,§ 1, a1. 2, D. pro socio. See the sixth article of the second section of tho
Contract of Sale.

4 See the seventh article of the second section of the Contract of Sale. L.3,§1, D.de
Geq. vel amitt. possess. ; — 1.18, § 1, D.eod. According to the usage in France, instru-
ments of seizin, or taking possession, are drawn up by public notaries, in order to make
proof thereof. Which serves to mark the time from which prescription begins to run,
as well against those who should pretend to be proprietors, as against persons who have
other rights which are to last only a certain time, such as a power of redemption belong-
ing to the kindred of a family, or reserved by the contract of sale.

© See the fifth article of the first section of this title, and the ninth article of the second
section of the Contract of Sale.


TIT. VII. SEC. I1.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. — «868


XXVI.

2171. One may take Possession either himself, or by other Per-
sons.— One may take possession of a thing either himself, or by
a factor or agent. And he who gives it away may likewise de-
liver it either himself, or by his agent. And minors acquire the
possession by their guardians, as the guardians may also deliver
the goods of minors which are alienated.!


XX VII.


2172. The Possessor succeeds to the Right of his Author. — He
who enters into the possession of a thing which he acquires from
another succeeds to the same right, and possesses neither more
nor less than his author did possess. Thus, he who purchases
lands, and is put into possession of them, will possess, in the same
manner as the seller did, the services which may be due to the
said lands, and will be subject to the services which they may
owe.!


XXVIILT


2173. One loses the Possession of what one alienates or relin-
quishes.— As possession is acquired by the intention to possess,
joined with the actual detention of the thing, it is likewise lost by
the intention of not possessing any longer, the owner putting out
of his hands and out of his power that which he did possess;
whether it be that he alienates it to another, or relinquishes it, he
parting therewith with intention never to have it any more. And
the bare intention not to possess any longer is of itself sufficient
to deprive one of the possession, as it happens to the seller whom
the buyer entreats to keep for some time the thing that is sold;
for it is not any longer the seller who possesses it, but the buyer
who possesses through him.”


XXIX.


2174. Things that are lost, and those which are thrown into the
Sea in a Danger of Shipwreck, are not relinquished. — We must
not reckon in the number of things relinquished those which one


i 7.1, § 2, D. de acg. vel amitt. poss. ; —d. 1.1, § 20;—1. 20, § 2, D. de acg. rer. dom.;
—I. 13, eod.;—d. 1. § 1.

1 7. 20, D. de acq. rer. dom.

= ZL. 153, D. de reg. jur.; —1. 8, D. de acg. vel amitt. poss.;—l. 3, § 6, cod. ; —§ 47,
Inet. de rer. divis.


TIT. VII. SEC. I11.] POSSESSION AND PRESORIPTION. 865


Thus, possession is in one sense the cause of property; and, on
the contrary, it is the effect of it in another sense, im the cases
where one acquires the property before he can enter into posses-
sion; as if one buys a thing which is not delivered at the time of
the purchase. For, in this case, the property gives the right to
have the possession.


HI.


2178. Another Effect, to acquire the Property by a long Posses-
sion. — Possession hath likewise this effect, that if, in the time that
one acquires it, the property is not joined therewith, it follows the
possession, not in the same instant that one enters into posses-
sion, as in the case mentioned in the preceding article; but by a
possession that is continued during the time regulated for pre-
scribing. Thus, he who buys a thing which he believes the seller
to be owner of, and which yet belongs to another, does not become
master of it in the moment that it is delivered to him by the seller;
but if he continues to possess it during the time limited for pre-
scription, he will become master of it, even although the person of
whom he bought it had possessed it knavishly.°


IV.


2179. Another Effect is to make the Possessor be considered as
Master.— This is likewise another effect of possession, that the
possessor is considered as master of the thing, although it may
happen that he is not so.‘


V.


2180. Effect of a Fair and Honest Possession. — The possession
of him who possesses with a good conscience has this effect, that,
while he is ignorant of any better right to the thing than his own,
he enjoys and makes his own the fruits which he gathers, and not
only those which he reaps from the ground by his own industry,
but likewise those which the ground produces without culture.
For, as has been remarked in another place, his sincere and up-
right belief of his own right is to him instead of truth, and makes
him look upon himself, and be looked upon by others, as right
owner of the thing, whilst his upright belief is not interrupted by


© Inst. de usucap. et long. temp. prescr.; —v. 1. 36, D. de usu et usufr. leg.; —§ 7, Inst. de


weucap. et long. temp. preescr.
4 Seo the first article of the fourth section of Proo/s.


VOL. I. 73


TI?. VII. BEC. IV.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 867


SECTION IV.
OF THE NATURE AND USE OF PRESCRIPTION, AND OF THE MANNER
ie IN WHICH IT IS ACQUIRED.


2183. The Nature and Use of Prescriptions. — Nobody is igno-
rant of this advantage, among others, of prescriptions, that they
ascertain to possessors the property of estates, after a possession
that has lasted during the time regulated by law. But although
prescriptions seem naturally to be necessary for this use, yet they
were not so by the divine law, which ordained that the estates
which were alienated should return to the first possessors every
fiftieth year, to be computed from the day of establishing that
usage, and that one should have power to alienate only the enjoy-
ment of his estate for the number of years which should remain
from the day of the alienation to the said fiftieth year, which was
to restore all estates to the families of the first possessors. And like-
wise these alienations could not be made, except with a perpetual
power of redeeming the estate whenever they would. It was only
houses situated within walled towns, and which belonged to others
than Levites, that could be alienated for ever.*

2184. This divine law, which prohibited perpetual alienations,
in order to extinguish the desire of increasing our possessions,
abolished by that means prescriptions. But the letter of this law
being no longer in force, and alienations, which transfer the prop-
erty for ever, being allowed with us, the use of prescriptions is
wholly natural in the state and condition we are in; and so ne-
cessary, that without this remedy, every purchaser and every pos-
sessor being liable to be troubled to all eternity, there would never
be any perfect assurance of a sure and peaceable possession. And
even those who should chance to have the oldest possession would
have most reason to be afraid, if together with their possession
they had not preserved their titles.

2185. And therefore, although there were no other reason to jus-
tify the use of prescriptions besides the public advantage of ascer-
taining the quiet and tranquillity of possessors, it would be just to
prevent the property of things from being always in an uncer-
tainty, leaving still to the proprietors a time sufficient for recover-
ing the possession of their estates.» But it may be said further,


® Levit. xxv. 8. b L.1, D. de usurp. et usuc.


TIT. VII. SEC. IV.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 869


2188. Two Sorts of Rules concerning Prescriptions. — We must
distinguish two sorts of rules relating to prescriptions ; those which
concern the different manners in which the laws have regulated the
time for prescribing ; and those which respect the nature of pre-
scriptions and their use; that which may be subject to prescription,
and that which is not; that which renders prescription just or
vicious; the persons against whom prescription does not run; and
what sort of possession it is that is required for prescribing; what
may interrupt prescription; and other matters of the like nature.
These are natural rules of equity; but those which mark the times
of prescriptions are only arbitrary laws. For nature does not fix
what time is precisely necessary for prescribing. So that these
rules may be changed, and they are different in divers places: and
this diversity is seen even in the Roman law, where prescriptions
have been differently regulated in different times.

2189. Seeing the design of this book respects chiefly the rules
of equity, we shall explain here those which are of this kind in the
matter of prescriptions: and as to those rules which regulate only
the time of prescriptions, we have not thought proper to put them
down in articles, in the sections of this title, judging it to be sufh-
cient to take notice of them here in the preamble. For besides
that the times of prescriptions are differently regulated in many of
the provinces of France, there are even some of the provinces
which are governed according to the written law, in which they
do not observe the several times limited for prescription by the
Roman law. Thus, it will be sufficient to give here a short ab-
stract of what was in use touching this matter in the time of Jus-
tinian. And it will be easy for every one to see, in every place,
what the usage of that place is, as to the times of prescriptions,
and wherein the several usages differ from the Roman law, or
agree with it.

2190. Prescription in movables was acquired in the space of

# three years® As to immovables, the Romans made different dis-
tinctions in the prescription of them. The fair and honest pos-
sessor, who had a title, prescribed by a possession of ten years
among those who were present, and of twenty years among those
who were absent, although the person of whom he purchased had
possessed it knavishly. And they reputed those to be present


© L. un. C. de usuc. trans. ; — Inst. de usuc. et long. temp. prosscr.
73 *


TIT. Vil. SEC. IV.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 871


peace and quiet to those whom others would disturb in their
possessions, or in their rights, after the said time is expired.

2193. We must take notice here of the difference which the
Roman law makes between prescription in general and that kind
of it which they distinguished by the name of usucapio. By usu-
capto they meant the manner of acquiring the property of things
by the effect of them™ And prescription had also the same mean-
ing, but it signified, moreover, the manner of acquiring and losing
all sorts of rights and actions, by the same effect of the time regu-
lated by law. We make this remark here, only to acquaint the
reader that these two words, prescriptio and usucapio, which we
shall meet with in several laws quoted on this title, are to be
taken in the sense which the word prescription shall have in the
articles where the said laws shall be quoted. For we shall never
make use of the word usucapio ; that of prescription being com-
mon, by our usage, both to the manner of acquiring the. property
of things, and to that of acquiring and losing all sorts of rights, by
the effect of time.

2194. Besides these several sorts of prescriptions of the Roman
law which have been just now mentioned, there are in France
other sorts of prescriptions established by the ordinances, and
by some customs which have regulated the time, which may
be here added to the other sorts of prescriptions which have been
mentioned : —

The Power of Redemption belonging to the Kindred of a Family.
-—— The action which the kindred of a family have for redeeming
lands that are sold out of the family to strangers, which is estab-
lished in general throughout the whole kingdom, by an ordinance
of the month of November, 1581, and in particular, by several cus-
toms, prescribes in the space of one year, according to the said or-
dinance and the customs.

Rescissions. — Rescissions and restitutions of things to their

,former state prescribe in ten years, pursuant to the ordinance of
1510, art. 46, and that of 1535, § 8, art. 38, as shall be observed
in the preamble to the first section of the title of Rescission.

Servants’ Wages. — Actions for the wages of servants prescribe
in one year, according to the ordinance of 1510, art.67. And
some customs have also fixed to one year the fees or demands of
physicians, apothecaries, and surgeons.


m V.l. un. C. de usucap. transf. ; — Inst. de usucap.


TIT. Vil. SEC. IV.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 873


IIL
2198. When it is acquired. — Prescription being founded on the
duration of the possession during the time regulated by law, it is
acquired only after the said time is elapsed.°


IV.


2199. The Possessor joins to his Possession that of his Author.
-— If a possessor chances to die before he has acquired the prescrip-
tion, and his heir continues in possession, we join together the
time of the possession of the one and the other, and the prescrip-
tion is acquired to the heir after the possession of his author and
his own joined together have lasted the time regulated for pre-
scribing. And the same thing holds in the possession of the buyer
joined to that of the seller to whom he succeeds, and in the pos-
session of the donee and donor, of the legatee and testator, and in
the same manner of all those who possess successively, having
right the one from the other.*


© 71.6 e& 7, D. de usurp. et usuc.; —1. 15, D. de div. temp. prescr. We have conceived

this rule in these general terms, after the time of the prescription is elapsed, because in
‘whatever sense we understand this time, whether it be that we will have the prescription to
end at the beginning of the last day, or only the last moment of the last day, it holds still
true, that the time necessary to prescribe must be elapsed. Which we have done to avoid
saying that the prescription is acquired only at the last moment of the time regulated for
prescribing ; because this expression would be contrary to the texts cited on this article.
Bat according to our usage, prescription is acquired only at the last moment of the last
day. And a demand made on the last day would interrupt the prescription. For al-
though the effect of prescription be favorable, when it is once acquired yet this favor is
not extended so far as to shorten the time that is necessary for stripping proprietors of
their right. And that which can hinder the prescription before it be acquired ought to
be favorably received for reinstating the owner in his right. Thus, it is just to receive a
demand for interrupting the prescription, provided the last moment be not yet expired,
according to the rule which was observed in the Roman law for those kinds of actions
which were called temporal, in which prescription had not its effect till after the last mo-
ment was expired. L. 6, D. de obl. et action. Which was also observed, as we likewise do,
in computing the time of minority, which in France ends only at the iast moment of the
age of twenty-five years, as shall be shown in the twentieth article of the second section
of the Rescission of Contracts. And in fine, wherever ten, or twenty, or thirty years are
necessary for a prescription, the years ought to be understood according to the ordinary
computation, which comprehends all the moments of all the days necessary to make up
the year. And this computation is particularly just in the prescriptions which one law
terms odious. L. ult. Cod. de ann. excep.;—v.l. 2, D. de divers. temp. prescript. To
which we may add, that the texts cited upon this article do not speak of all sorts of pre-
seriptions indifferently, but only of that particular kind of prescription which the Romans
called usucapio, and therefore they ought not to be extended to the other kinds of pre-
scriptions which we do not distinguish from usucapio. See the difference between pre-
scription in general and that kind of it called usucapio, at the end of the preamble to this
section.


4 ZL. 14, $1, D. de div. tem. prascr. ;—1. 2, 4 20, D. pro emptore ; —1. 76, $1, D. de


TIT. VII. SEC. IV.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 875


VIL

2202. Intervals without any apparent Possession. — The intervals
in which the possessor ceases to exercise his possession do not
interrupt it, and do not hinder him from continuing his prescrip-
tion. Thus, when a possessor, being either absent or negligent,
ceases for some years to go upon his estate and to cultivate it, he
retains nevertheless his possession. And he joins not only the
times of his actual exercise of his possession, but he adds to them
likewise the interval wherein he ceased to exercise it.


VIII.


2203. Interval without a Possessor, which does not interrupt the
Prescription. — It may happen that there may be an interval with-
out a possessor, which does not interrupt the prescription. Thus,
when an executor, who was either absent or was ignorant of his
right, does not take possession of the estate till some time after
the succession has been open, he will nevertheless join to his pos-
session that of the deceased, and even the time of the interval be-
tween the falling of the inheritance and his entering to the posses-
sion of it. For the goods are preserved to the future heir or
executor, and are as it were possessed by the inheritance itself,
which holds the place of master!


IX.


2204. What Things may be prescribed.— We may acquire by
prescription all things which are in commerce, and of which we
may have the property,! if the law makes no exception thereto, as
will appear in the fifth section.


X.


2205. Rights and Actions prescribe.— The use of prescription
is not only to acquire the property to those who have, prescribed
by possession, and to divest the proprietors of it, who have suf-
fered others to prescribe ; but there is yet another use of prescrip-
tions, in which possession is not necessary, which is that of annul-


b 7. 4, C. de acq. et ret. poss. See the twenty-fourth article of the second section.

' 7.13, §5, in f. D. quod vi aut dam. ;—l. 31,4 5, D. de usurp. et usuc. This article
may be applied likewise to the heir at law, or next of kin, who succeeds to one dying in-
testate, although by our usage he be seized and possessed of the estate by the death of
him to whom he succeeds. For if he is ignorant of his right, he does not possess the
goods although he be master of them.

4) This is a consequence of the rules explained in the first two articles.


TIT. VII. SEC. IV.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 877


XIV.

2209. Prescription without a Title. — Seeing possession, joined
with a sincere belief of one’s own right, is sufficient for prescribing
things which are capable of prescription, and that it holds the
place of a title, although one have not any other; the possessor
who has prescribed, whether he be ignorant of the origin and cause
of his possession, or that, having had a title, he is not able to
justify it, will be maintained against the ancient proprietor who
shows a title. In the same manner as a debtor who has pre-
scribed the debt has no need of an acquittance to be discharged
from the demand of his creditor. For prescription annuls the
titles of the proprietors and creditors. And they ought to blame
themselves for having neglected their rights for so long a time."


© L.1, D. de usurp. et usucap.; —1. 8, C. de preesc. 30 vel 40 ann. See the ninth article.

It is necessary to take notice here, that what is said in this article, of its not being
necessary for prescribing to have a title, ought to be so understood as not to confound the
law of those provinces in France where there is only one prescription of thirty years,
which demands no title, with that observed in other provinces, where they distinguish,
according to the Roman law, this prescription of thirty years from that of ten and twenty
years, which presupposes a title, as has been remarked in the preamble to this section.

It is likewise to be observed, that we have not comprehended in this article the case
where the possessor never had a title; because we cannot suppose an honest, upright pos-
session which has not proceeded from some title or other; that is to say, which has not
had some just foundation in its beginning, and some lawful cause which gave a right
to possess, although there remain no deed or other proof thereof; for otherwise the pos-
session would be knavish and dishonest. And even he who should put himself in poeses-
sion of an estate that is vacant, such as any land that is part of an inheritance which is
abandoned, or any tenement belonging to one who has been absent for a long time, would
be a dishonest possessor, seeing he could not but know that he had usurped what another
ought tohave. L. 37,§ 1, 41. 38, D. de usurp. et usuc. ; — 1. ult. Cod. unde vi.

Bat although such a possessor be in the same condition with a usurper, sancimus ta-
lem possessorem (qui vacuam possessionem absentium, sine judiciali sententia detinuit)
ut predonem intelligi. D./. ult. C. unde vi. If, nevertheless, he has possessed for the
space of thirty years, which acquires a prescription without a title, the same law and the
eighth law, § 1, C. de prescr. 30 vel 40 annor., and likewise the first law, § 1, C. de ann.
except., will have him not to be troubled any more after so long a time, notwithstanding
he knew that he had no right to what he possessed. The meaning of which is not as if
these laws justified this possessor in point of conscience; but only that the civil policy
does not permit that possessors be molested after a long possession, or that they be obliged
to make good their tities, or even to declare the origin of their possession. For the pre-
text of inquiring after unjust possessors would disturb the peace and quiet of just and
lawful possessors. But as to the point of conscience, it is most certain that the length of
time does not secure unjust possessors from the guilt of sin, and that, on the contrary,
their long possession is only a continuation of their injustice. And therefore it is that
the canon law does not allow that an unjust possessor can ever prescribe, how long so-
ever his possession may have been. Possessor mals fidei ullo tempore non preescribit.
Reg. 2, de reg. jur. in 6; — C. ult. extra de preescript.

And it is likewise our usage, that, although the possessor who has prescribed be not

VOL. I. 74


TIT. VII. SEC. IV.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 879


whose bad conscience, or knowledge of his possessing another
man’s estate, will have hindered the prescription."


XVIII


2213. The Heir or Executor is answerable for the Knavery of the
Deceased. — We must not comprehend under the rule explained
in the sixteenth article the heir or executor who enters with a
good conscience on the possession of the goods of the inheritance.
For as he is universal successor, who inherits all the rights of the
deceased, and who obliges himself to all the charges the deceased
was liable to, so he is likewise answerable for all his deeds. Thus,
although the heir or executor were ignorant of the vice of the
possession of the deceased who had possessed with a bad con-
science, yet he could not prescribe what the deceased had usurped.*


XIX.


2214. But not the Legatee or Donee.— Legatees and donees are
not answerable, as the heir or executor is, for the deed of the tes-
tators and donors; because they do not succeed to all their goods
and to all their rights, and so are not bound for all their charges.
And if they have received with a good conscience what has been
bequeathed or given to them, although the testator or donor had
possessed the thing knavishly and with a bad conscience, know-
ing it to be another’s, yet that will not hinder them from prescrib-
ing, if they possess it peaceably during the time regulated by law.”


™ ZL. 5, C. de usuc. proemp. See the ninth and tenth articles of the fifth section.

= ZL. 11, D. de divers. temp. prescr. ; —v. l. 4, § 15, D. de usurp. et usuc. ;—1. ult. C. com.
de usuc. ;—l.11, C. de acq. et ret. poss. But if the heir or executor of him who had ac-
quired with a good conscience knows that the thing belonged to another person, will not
hie knowledge of the other’s right to the thing which he possesses, if the same is well
proved, hinder him from prescribing? It is said in some laws, that, if the deceased has
made the purchase with a good conscience, his heir shall prescribe, although he knows
that the thing belonged to another, and not to the seller. ZL. 2,§ 19, D. pro emptore ; —
&. umn. C. de usuc. transf. And another law makes this distinction in the matter; that if
the deceased had not begun to possess, and that the delivery of what the deceased had
bought was only made to his heir, who knows that the thing did not belong to the seller,
the heir shall not prescribe, because the good conscience is considered in the beginning of
the prescription. But if the delivery had been made to the deceased, and he had pos-
sessed with a good conscience, this possession, being continued in the person of the heir,
will acquire to him the prescription, although he know that the thing was not the seller's.
L. 43, D. de usurp. et usuc. One may judge by the remark which has been made on the
fourteenth article, that, if it were well proved that this heir knew what he possessed to
be another’s, the good conscience of the deceased ought not to justify his possession.

Y L.5, D. de divers. temp. preescr. See the seventeenth article. This article is not to


TIT. Vii. SEC. V.} POSSESSION AND PRESORIPTION. S8t


XXI.

2216. Prescription may be acquired, although we have not Pos-
session in our own Hands. — Seeing prescription is acquired by pos-
session, and that we may possess by other persons, we may there-
fore prescribe, not only by having the possession in our own hands,
but also by others who possess for us; as by a farmer, a tenant, a
depositary, a usufructuary, 2 tutor, a guardian, a factor, or agent.*


SECTION V.
OF .THE CAUSES WHICH HINDER PRESCRIPTION.


. Arr. L


2217. Causes which make the Prescription to cease. — The effect
of prescription ceases in the cases where the law renders it useless.
Which happens either through the nature of the thing, or by the
quality of the person against whom the prescription is pleaded, or
by reason of some vice in the possession, or because of the inter-
raption, as we shall see in the articles which follow.*


IL


2218. What Things cannot be prescribed. — Seeing prescription
is one of the ways of acquiring property, we can prescribe only
gach things as are in commerce, and of which we may become
masters. Thus, we cannot acquire by prescription the things
which nature or the law of nations destine to a common and
public use, such as the banks of rivers necessary for navigation,
the walls and ditches of towns, and other the like places. Neither
@an we prescribe that which the law renders imprescriptible, such
@s in France the king’s demesnes, which cannot be acquired by
‘prescription, even of a hundred years.®


® See the eighth and ninth articles of the first section.

® This article results from those which follow.

® Usucapionem recipiunt maxime res corporales, exceptis rebus sacris, sanctis, publicis
populi Romani, et civitatum. L.9, D. de usurp. et usuc.;— §1, Inst. cod. Preescriptio
loumgss possessionis, ad obtinenda loca juris gentium publica, concedi non solet. DL. 45, eod.
Bes fisci nostri usucapi non potest. § 9, Inst. de usuc. ; —l. 2, C. comm. de usuc. Viam
publicam populus non utendo amittere non potest. JL. 2, D. de via publica.

By the ordinance of Francis I., bearing date the 30th of June, 1539, every thing which
balemgs to the king’s demesnes is imprescriptible, even by a possession of a hundred

74°


FIT. VII. SEC. V.| POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 883


that they may recover their goods and their rights, this time does
not run against persons whom the laws do not allow to have the
administration of their own goods.


V.


2221. If a Major happens to be interested with a Minor. — If
one that is major happens to have a right undivided with a minor,
the prescription which could not run against the minor will have
no effect against the major. Thus, for example, if a service of a
passage is due to a major and to a minor, for a ground which is -
common to them both, the one and the other having ceased to
make use of this right during the time sufficient to prescribe, the
service which the minor could not lose by prescription will be
preserved likewise for the major.® For the service was due for the
whole ground, and the minor having his right undivided upon the
whole, there was no part of the ground for which he had not pre-
served the right of service.


¢


VI.


2222. In what Sense it is that Prescription does not run against
Absent Persons.— The same reason for which prescription does
not run against minors hinders it likewise from running against
those whom a long absence disables from pursuing their rights.
Which is to be understood, not only of an absence on the account
of public business, but also of other absences occasioned by acci-
dents, such as captivity. And if the absence has not lasted the
whole time of the prescription, the time which it has lasted is de-
ducted from it! But if the right which one should pretend to make


attained to ripeness of age, that is, to fourteen years in males and twelve in females, and
adults, that is, those who have attained to the said ripeness of age, but are still minors un-
Ger the age of five-and-twenty years. This distinction of the Romans consisted in this, that
thee adults not being any more under the direction of tutors, but under the care of cura-
tors, the prescription of thirty years began to run against them, but it did not ran against
fmfants who were under the age of adults. Z. 3, C. de prescr. 30 vel 40 ann. For since
@ecording to our usage in France minority lasts to the age of five-and-twenty years, and
that minors, being under guardianship, are excluded from the administration of thcir es-
@utes, prescription does not run against them.

© Z. 10, D. quem. serv. amitt. See the twenty-first article of the first section of Services
Bat if the ground that belonged in common to the major and to the minor had been di-
vided into shares or portions, the service which would be preserved for the portion of the
minor would be lost for the portion of the major; because in this case their cause was not
common.

6 7. 2, C. quibus non obyic. long. temp. preeser. ;—l. 4, eod.;—1.1, C. si per vim, vel alio
mod. abs. pert. sit poss. ; —1. 1, D. de divers. tempor. preescr. ; —l. 25, D. de stip. serv. We


TIT. VII. SEC. V.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 885


VIL

2224. Warranty does not prescribe.— The action of warranty
does not prescribe. For a seller, for instance, and every other per-
son who engages to warrant what he sells, assigns, or gives upon
any other title, obliges himself thereby to maintain the purchaser
in a peaceable possession, so as never to be molested therein by
any right precedent to the alienation. Thus, in what time soever
the eviction happens, as if, after a possession of a hundred years,
the purchaser ig evicted of an estate which is found to be part of
the demesnes of the crown, the heirs of his author will be bound
to warrant him against the said eviction.»


19.¢


2225. The Possessor’s knowing that the Thing belongs to another
hinders the Prescription.— There happen often in possessions
vices or defects which hinder prescription. Thus, the knavery of
the possessor hinders him from prescribing, whether it be that he
has seized upon the thing without any pretence of right, or that,
having a title, he was not ignorant of the defect thereof; as if he
has purchased that which he knew the seller could not alienate.
We shall see, in the following articles, the other vices of posses-
sions which may hinder prescription.


X,


2226. If several Possessions are to be joined together, a Good
Conscience ts necessary in every one of them.— If a possessor who
pretends to have acquired the prescription, not having possessed
the thing during the whole time that is necessary for prescribing,
has occasion to join to his own possession that of his author, as
of a testator, a donor, a seller, or other person from whom he de-
rives his right; it is not enough that he himself has possessed it
with a good conscience, but it is necessary likewise that the pos-
session which he joins to his own have been a possession held
with a good conscience! For all possession necessary for pre-
scribing ought to have been without knavery, and without con-
gciousness of another's right.


b 7.91, C. de evict. See the sixth article of the tenth section of the Contract of Sale.

§ J. 3,§ 3, D. de acq. vel amitt. poss.; —I. 12, D. de usurp. et usuc. See the sixth article
of the third section.

3 7.13, § 1, D. de acg. vel amitt. poss. ; — 1. 4, § 27, D. de doli mali a met. except. Seo
the third article of the third section, and the sixteenth article of the fourth section.


Mea


TIT. VII. SEC. V.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 887


acquire by this new title both the right to possess as master, and
the right to prescribe.’


XIIL


2229. A Vice in the Title hinders the Prescription. — It is likewise
@ vice in the possession, that it has begun by a false title, and of
which the defect was such that the possessor ought to have known
it, although he should pretend to have been ignorant thereof.
Thus, for example, he who buys of a tutor a house or lands be-
longing to his minor, without observing the formalities, cannot
prescribe it, under pretext that he verily believed that the tutor
had power to alienate it. For he ought to have known that the
goods of the minor could not be alienated except for necessary
causes, and when the formalities prescribed by the laws in such
alienations were observed. And this being such a rule, that his
ignorance thereof could avail, him nothing, his condition is not
distinguished from that of a purchaser who was apprised of the
defect of the title.‘ Thus, for another example, he who purchases
a house or lands held of a church-benefice, and which is alienated
by the incumbent without a necessary cause, and without observ-
ing the formalities, cannot prescribe them.


XIV.


2230. A Vice in the Title, which does not hinder Prescription. —
There may be vices in the titles which may be sufficient to annul
them, but not sufficient to hinder prescription. Thus, for exam-
ple, if the person to whom a house or lands have been devised,
has been put into possession thereof by him whom he took to be
heir, and after the said legatee had enjoyed the said house or
lands for a time sufficient to acquire prescription, it be found that
be who called himself heir was not the true heir, or that he had
coheirs, and that the true heir or coheirs trouble the legatee in his
possession, and allege against him nullities in the testament, as
that it was not attested by a sufficient number of witnesses duly
qualified, or that other formalities were wanting; these defects of
the testament will not hinder the effect of the prescription of this
legatee, whether he was ignorant of them, or whether he knew
them. For he had the apparent heir’s approbation of the testa-


® £. 19.41, D. de acg. vel am. poss.
t ZL. 31, D. de usurp. et usuc.;— 1. 2, § 15, D. pro emptore. See the ninth article of the
first section of the Rules of Law.


TIT. VII. SEC. V.] POSSESSION AND PRESCRIPTION. 889


possess houses and lands in common, the action entered against
any one of them by the creditor of the said debt, or by the propri-
etor of the said houses or lands, will interrupt the prescription
with regard to them all; for the demand was made for the whole


right?
XVIIL


2234. Force does not interrupt the Possession. — He whose pos-
session is interrupted only by an act of violence, without any form
of law or justice, is nevertheless considered as possessor, because
he has the right to enter again to his possession. Thus, the time
of the usurper’s possession does not interrupt his.*


® See the text cited on the preceding article. It is to be observed upon this and the
foregoing article, that it is no matter although there be no solidity, either among the debt-
ors of one and the same sum of money, or among the possessors of the same houses and
lands, or among the creditors or proprietors, and that it is sufficient to interrupt the pre-
scription with respect to them all by a demand made by any one, or against any one of
them, that it be one and the same thing, or one and the same right which is common to
them. Thus, for example, if the creditor of an inheritance demands his whole debt from
one of many heirs of his debtor, he will interrupt the prescription with regard to them all,
although each of them be indebted only for his portion. For this creditor may be igno-
rant of the number and right of the heirs; and although he should know it, yet he may
demand the whole debt from any one of them. Thus, when one of the heirs or executors
of a creditor demands from the debtor of the deceased what he owed him, he interrupts
the prescription for his coheirs or coexecutors. For he makes his demand for the whole
debt, and he has an interest that the whole debt be preserved entire.

* L.17, D. de acq. vel amitt. poss.


VOL. L 75


TIT. 1.] PAYMENTS. 891


2237. Order of the Titles of this Book.— Payments, which we
shall treat of in the first title of this book, are of the first of these
three ways: and compensations, which are nothing else but mu-
tual payments, and which shall be considered under the second
title, are of the same nature. Rescissions of contracts, and restitu-
tions of things to their first estate, which shall be the subject-
matter of the last title, belong to the second of these ways of
annulling engagements. And novations and delegations, which
shall be explained in the third and fourth titles, are of the third sort.

2238. Cession of goods, which shall be the subject-matter of the
fifth title, is a mixture of the first two of these three ways. For
it discharges a part of the debts, and if it happens that the effects
yielded up by a debtor be real estate which is sufficient to satisfy
some of the creditors who have preferable mortgages, their debts
are entirely acquitted and annulled; and the debts of the other
creditors, whom the remainder of the said real estate is not sufh-
cient to clear off, are diminished in proportion to what they re-
ceive. And if there be only movables, which are not sufficient to
clear off all the creditors, the cession of goods will not acquit any
one debt entirely, but diminish them all. For every creditor will
come in for his proportion of the price of the movables; as shall
be explained in the fifth title. And the cession of goods has like-
wise this effect, with regard to the creditors who might arrest the
person of the debtor, that it annuls in this his engagement, and
that after he has surrendered all his effects, he is no longer liable
to this arrest.

2239. As the matters of the preceding book, where we have
treated of all that can add to engagements, or strengthen and cor-
roborate them, are common to all sorts of engagements, whether
they have been formed by covenant or without covenant; so the
matters of this fourth book are likewise common to all sorts of
engagements of these two kinds.


TITLE I.
OF PAYMENTS.


2240. ALTHOUGH we understand commonly by the word pay-
ment only that manner in which those who are indebted in sums


“FIT. L SEC. 1.] PAYMENTS. 893


from debtors of sums of money, or of things of another nature,
but also from those who are obliged either to do some thing, as an
undertaker of a work, or to restore a thing which is not theirs, as
the depositary, and he who has borrowed a thing for use ;° so like-
wise we consider as payments or acquittals all the manners in
which one acquits or delivers himself from engagements of all
kinds.4


IV.


2244. Payment of what was not due, or what one could not have
been compelled to pay. 'The payment presupposing the debt, he
who has paid through mistake that which was not due may re-
cover it. But if he has paid nothing but what was due in equity,
although the debt had been such that he could not have been con-
demned in a court of justice to pay it, he cannot demand restitu-
tion of what he has paid! Thus, for example, if a minor, being
come of age, pays a sum of money which he had borrowed in
his minority, upon an obligation against which he could have
been relieved, he cannot revoke the payment which he has made.
For by paying the money he has confirmed and ratified his obli-
gation.“


Vv.


2245. One may pay before the Term.— If the debtor who had
@ term fixed for payment has a mind to pay beforehand, the credi-
tor cannot compel him to wait till the term. For all the time of
the delay is given to the debtor, that he may acquit himself when
he can." And if he cannot do it sooner, he ought to do it at the
term. But if he pays beforehand, he cannot take back what he
has paid, for he owed it.!


© ZL. 1, D. de reb. cred.

€ 7. 176, D. de verb. signif.

© 2.1, § 1, D. de cond. ind.

f ZL. 10, D. de obl. et act. See, touching payments of that which is not dae, the first
section Of those who receive what is not due to them.

& L.3,$1, D. de minor. See the eleventh article of the first section Of those who re-
ceive what is not due to them.

This article is conceived in this manner, that he who pays that which was not due
may recover it, and not that he who pays what he owed not may recover it. For if any
ome pays for another, although he was not obliged to do it, he cannot demand back what
he has paid. See the second article of the third section.

b LZ. 70, D. de solut.

' See the second article of the first section Of those who receive what is not dus to them.

75°


TIT. I. SEC. I.] PAYMENTS. 895


X.

2250. The Sale of the Pawn does not acquit the Debt, except in
so much as is raised by the Sale. —If a creditor who had taken
pawns for his security receives in payment the price of the pawn,
sold either by order of the judge, or by the debtor, and the money
raised by the sale of the pawns be not sufficient to acquit the
whole debt, he will remain still creditor for the overplus, although
the pawns should be worth more than the debt. For the personal
obligation, to which the pledge was only an accessory, subsists
still for what remains of the debt.» Unless it had been agreed,
that the pawns should be instead of an entire payment, without
any regard to the price which should be raised by the sale of
them.


XI.


2201. Several Acquittals for several Debtors, by one single Pay-
ment. — It often happens, that, by the effect of one single payment,
many obligations of divers persons are acquitted; as when a
debtor pays, by order of his creditor, to another person, to whom
the said creditor was indebted; which might run into several pay-
ments from one creditor to another. But although there appear
in such cases one single payment, yet there are in reality as many
payments made as there are debts paid. For it is the same thing
as if every one of those who are paid, and who pay to others by
this one payment, did receive from the hands of his debtor that
which is due to him, and deliver it into the hands of his creditor.
And these payments, which are eclipsed in outward appearance,
are true in effect.4


XIL


2252. Two Obligations of one and the same Debtor acquitted by
one single Payment. — It may also happen, that one and the same
payment acquits at one instant two obligations of one and the
same person to the same creditor; as, for example, if a testator
who is creditor to a minor, who might get himself relieved from
his obligation, leaves him a legacy upon this condition, that he
shall pay the debt to his executor. For in this case, the payment


P L.10, C. de ofl. et act.
@ L. 64, D. de solut. ;—. 3, 4 12, D. de don. int. vir. a uz.


TIT. L. BEC. 11] PAYMENTS. 897


XVL

2256. The Creditor is not obliged to divide his Payment.— The
creditor, having a right to demand the entire payment of his whole
debt, is not obliged to divide it, and to receive such part of it as
the debtor is willing to acquit* But if the debtor had any ground
to contest a part of the debt, and should offer to pay the remain-
der, it would be prudent for the judge, in this case, to oblige the
creditor to receive what should be offered, pursuant to the rule ex-


plained in another place.’


SECTION II.
OF THE SEVERAL WAYS OF MAKING PAYMENT.


Arr. L

2257. Divers Manners of Payment. — The most natural way of
paying a debt is to pay the same thing in kind which one owes,
as money for money, corn for corn.. But in what other manner
soever it happen that the creditor be satisfied, or ought to be satis-
fied, we consider as a payment every thing that is instead of it,
and which extinguishes the debt.» Thus, for example, a compen-
sation acquits on both sides that which is compensated, as shall
be explained in the following title.


IL


2208. Delegation is a Payment.— If a debtor delegates his
debtor to his creditor, that is, if he substitutes in his place his
debtor, who obliges himself to the creditor for the same thing, and
in such a manner that the creditor is contented with this new
debtor, and discharges the other, this delegation will acquit the
first debtor.»


IIL.


2259. An Assignment of a Debt, without Warranty, in Order to
be discharged, is a Payment.—If a creditor accepts from his
debtor an assignment of a debt, without warranty, and delivers


* L.21, D. de cred. See the eighth article of the second section.

Y See the fifth article of the second section of the Loan of Money.

® Z. 52, D. de solut. ; —1. 54, eod. See the second article of the first section.
» 7. 8,§ 3, D. ad Vell. ; —1. 18, D. de fidejuss. See the title of Delegations.


TIT. I. BEC. I1.] PAYMENTS. 899


things of this kind are not bound to restore the same individual
thing which they have borrowed; but they are indebted for as
much of the same kind.”


VIL


2263. If the Creditor succeeds to the Surety, or the Surety to the
Creditor. — If the creditor succeeds as heir to him who was surety
for his debtor, or the surety succeeds to the creditor, the obligation
of the surety is annulled; but the debtor, nevertheless, remains still
obliged. For the surety’s obligation, which is extinguished by
this change, was only accessory to the principal obligation.’ And
if there were more debtors, or more creditors, for one and the same
sum, and if one of the debtors should succeed to one of the credi-
tors, or one of the creditors to one of the debtors, the confusion
which would be made in the person of the said heir, being limited
to one portion of the debt, would make no manner of change with
respect to the others.


VIIL


2264. Consignment of the Debt, in Case the Creditor refuses his
Payment.— When a debtor, offering to pay all he owes, and in
the place where he ought to pay it, the creditor refuses to receive
it, it is lawful for the debtor to consign the money: and if the
consignment is made according to form, it will be held as a pay-
ment of the debt, and will put a stop to the rent or interest, if it
is a debt that bears interest.


TX.


2265. One cannot pay one Thing for another.— Payments ought
to be made of that which is due, and the debtor cannot, against
the will of his creditor, pay him another thing than what he owes,
although the value of what he should offer to give were equal, or


_ © See the fourth article of the first section of the Loan of Money. If the debtor owed
one of two things, and one of the two happens to perish, he will continue debtor of that
which remains. Concerning which, see the seventh article of the seventh section of the
Contract of Sale. V.1. 95, D. de solut.

' Z. 49, D. de solut. See the eighth and ninth articles of the fifth section of Cautions or
Sureties


1 7.9, C. de solut.;—1.19, C. de usur. Seeing the debtor is not permitted to consign
the debt, unless it appear that the creditor has refused to receive payment of it, and see-
ing it may happen that the creditor may have some just cause to refuse it, the debtor can-
mot safely consign the debt, unless he does it by order of the court.


TIT. 1. SEC. 111.] PAYMENTS. 901


ment would be altogether without effect, if the creditor should be
evicted of the estate which he had received in payment,” unless it
had been otherwise agreed between the parties. And as the dim-
inutions which might happen to the thing given in payment
would fall upon the creditor, so likewise he would reap the profit
of all that might render the thing better or more valuable.’


XIIL

2269. If a Part of the Land given in Payment is evicted from the
Creditor. — If, in the case of the preceding article, the creditor
having taken lands in payment, a part of them were evicted from
him, he might oblige the debtor to take back the rest. For it
might so happen that, because of the eviction of that part, the rest
of the land might be a burden to him, and that he took the land
in payment only that he might have it whole and entire*


XIV.

2270. A Payment made in a Spectes of Money that ts just going
to be cried down.— Payments of money ought to be made in
species which are neither cried down nor suspected But if the
creditor having delayed to receive his payment, the money should
chance to be cried down before the debtor had actually made a
tender of the money to his creditor, the loss which would be oc-
casioned by crying down the species that remained still in the
hands of the debtor would fall upon the debtor. For he was still
master of them while they were in his hands.


ig ete


SECTION III.
WHO MAY MAKE A PAYMENT, OR RECEIVE IT.


Art. I.

2271. Persons who are jointly bound for the same Debt, and
Sureties, may pay for the Debtor.— Persons who have interest
that a debt be acquitted may pay it. Thus, those who are jointly
bound together, each of them for the whole debt, may pay one for


P L. 46, D. de solut.;—v. 1. 24, D. de pign. act. «1 L. 94, Ce solut.
® L. 46, D. de solut. * 1. 99, D. de solut.


VOL. I. 76


TIT. 1. BEC. 111.] PAYMENTS. 903


TIL

2273. Of the Debtor who with the Money of another Person
pays their Common Creditor his own Debt.— If a debtor having
given his money to another person to pay the same for him to his
creditor, the said third person, being indebted to the same creditor,
gives him that money in payment of what he himself owes him;
this payment would seem to be useless both for the one and the
other of these debtors. For he who carried the money had no
power to employ it in the discharge of his own debt: and he who
gave it is not discharged by a payment that was not made for his
account. Thus, whilst things remained entire, and the effect of the
said fraud could be repaired, the payment would be rectified, and
placed to the account of him who had given the money. But if
the creditor, being ignorant of the knavery of him who carried the
money, had delivered him up his bond, and had disposed of the
money, there would remain nothing for him who gave the money
except his action against the person who had undertaken to de-
liver it to the creditor. But if, on the contrary, in the same case,
the creditor, who had delivered up the bond, had still the money in
his hands, he could not keep it, no more than a thing that was
stolen, which he would be obliged to restore to the owner® But
he who had given the money could not oblige the creditor to re-


cumstances which may help him to judge whether the assignments be just or unjust,
‘ and whether they ought to have their entire effect, or if the debtor may be admitted to
reimbarse the person to whom the assignment is made of the sum which he has actually
paid to the creditor, or even whether he who has accepted of the assignment ought not to
be punished for it, if on his part there were any misdemeanour which might deserve it. It
is because of these different effects of the assignments of litigious rights, that some authors
have been of opinion that these laws are not at present observed in France, because they
have seen that they have not been followed in many cases, which were excepted for par-
ticular reasons ; whereas others are of opinion that they are still in force here, because in
reality there are many cases where they are observed, and because it is just to restrain the
commerce of assignments of litigious rights on all occasions wherever equity may seem
to demand it. As to the assignments of litigious rights, the reader may consult the re-
marks at the effi of the preamble to the eighth section of the Contract of Sale.

© £17, D. de solut.;—v. l. 94; —d. l. § 2; —v. § 6,  § ult. Inst. de obl. que ex dedi.
The obligation of this creditor to give back the money, if it is in being, or to place it to
the account of the owner of the money, results from the terms of this law, which ordains,
that, if the money is no more in being, the person who delivered it to the creditor be ac-
quitted ; from whence it follows, that it would be otherwise if the moncys were still extant
in the hands of the creditor. For in this case the owner would claim them as a thing
stolen ; the laws reckoning in the number of thefts acts of such a quality as this of the
bearer of the money, and giving to the master of the thing stolen the right of challenging
i, in whose hands soever itis. V.d.§ 6 et § wit. Inst. de obl. que ex del. ;—I. 54, D. de


fat.j—d.L§ 1.


TIT. I. SEC. Iv.] PAYMENTS. 905


VIL
2277. Payment to one of more Creditors, each of whom has a
Right to receive the Whole.— If a thing is due to two or more
creditors solidly, that is, in such a manner that every one of them
has full and ample right to receive the whole, the payment that is
made to one of them will discharge the debtor from all the others.2


VIL


2278. One of many Heirs can receive only his own Portion. —
If there be no solidity among several creditors for one and the
same thing, that is, if each of them has not a right to receive the
whole thing, but only his portion of it, such as coheirs, none of them
can receive the whole for the others, unless they all consent to it.!


IX.


2279. Payment made to one who Kes wnder an Accusation of a
Orime.— Persons accused of crimes which are liable to be pun-
ished with confiscation of goods may, before their condemnation,
receive what is due to them, and pay what they owe. For other-
wise innocent persons, who chance to be accused, would be un-
jastly deprived of the use of their goods! But this liberty of re-
ceiving and making payments ought to be understood in such a
manner, as that there be no‘ fraud to elude the confiscation of
goods, and that the person who is accused give no acquittance
without receiving real payment, and that he do not pay but what
he lawfully owes.™


SECTION IV.
OF THE IMPUTATION OF PAYMENTS.


Arr. I.


2280. The Debtor of several Debts acquits whichsoever of them
he pleases. — If a debtor who owes to a creditor different debts


b Rx pluribus reis stipulandi, si unas acceptam fecerit, liberatio contingit in solidum.
L. 13, § ult. D. de acceptil. See the second section of Solidity among two, &.
i This is a consequence of the preceding article. See the eleventh and twelfth articles
of the first section of Deposit. V. 1.81, § 1, D. de solut.
1 71. 41 of 42, D. de solut.
= V.L 15, D. de donat.
76°


TIT. I. SEC. IV.] PAYMENTS. 907


be concerned, than to a debt of which the non-payment would not
be attended with such consequences. Thus, a payment is applied
to the discharge of a debt for which a surety is bound, rather than
to acquit what the debtor is singly bound for without giving any
security ; or to the discharge of what he owes in his own name,
rather than of what he stands engaged for as surety for another.
Thus, a payment is applied to a debt for which the debtor has
given pawns and mortgages, rather than to a debt due by a simple
bond or promise; rather to a debt of which the term is already
come, than to one that is not yet due; or to an old debt, before
@ new one; and rather to a debt that is clear and liquid, than to
one that is in dispute; or to a pure and simple debt, before one
that is conditional.*


IV.

2283. The Overplus of a Payment, after the Discharge of one
Debt, ts to be applied to the others. — When a payment made to a
creditor to whom several debts are due exceeds the debt to which
it ought to be applied, the overplus ought to be applied to the
discharge of the debt which follows, according to the order ex-
plained in the preceding article, unless the debtor makes another
choice.*


V.


2204. A Payment ts first applied to the Discharge of the Interest.
— If a debtor makes a payment to discharge debts which of their
nature bear interest, such as that of a marriage portion, or what is
due by virtue of a contract of sale, or the same be due by a
sentence of a court of justice, and the payment be not sufficient
to acquit both the principal and the interest due thereon ; the pay-
ment will be applied, in the first place, to the discharge of the
interest, and the overplus to the discharge of a part of the principal
sum.‘


VI.


2280. And that even although the Acquittance should mention
both Principal and Interest.— If in the cases of the foregoing arti-


€ 7. 3,§1, a1. 4, D. de solut. ; —I. 97, eod.; —I. 1, eod.; —I. 5, eod.

© L. 97, in f. D. de solut.

£ L.5,§ 2, inf. D. de solut. ; —1. 48, eod.; —1. 5, § 21, D. ut in possess. legat. aes
serv. caus. ess. lic.


FIT. 11. SEC. 1. COMPENSA TIONS, 800


another, so as that one of them alone may owe different debts, or
likewise both of them. In these and other the like cases, which
are infinite in number, it is natural not to make so many pay-
ments as there are debts, so as for one of the two to pay to the
other what he owes him, and to receive back again that which
is due to him; but such debts are compensated, that is, every one
retains in payment of what is due to him that which he owes to
the other, whether it be for the whole debt, if the sums are equal,
or by deducting a lesser debt out of a greater, So that compen-
sations are nothing else but two reciprocal payments, which are
made at the same time, the debtors giving to one another no other
thing but their bare acquittances, the debts being annulled for so
much as shall be found to be acquitted by the compensation.

2288. There are some Debts which are not to be compensated, —
Although it seems natural that every debtor who is on his part
creditor to the person to whom he is indebted may compensate,
yet the use of compensation is not extended indifferently to all
sorts of debts. For there are some debts which the debtors are
bound to acquit to those who are in other respects indebted to
them, without insisting on compensation, as shall be shown in the
second section.


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF COMPENSATIONS, AND OF THEIR EFFECT.


Art. IL
2289. Definition of Compensation.— Compensation is a recipro-
cal acquittal of debts between two persons who are indebted the
one to the other.*


IL


2290. Compensation prevents the Circuit of two Payments. — The
use of compensation is necessary to avoid the circuit of two pay-
ments, which would happen if each of the two persons who com-
pensate should be obliged first to pay what he owes, and then to
receive back again what is due to himself. And it is natural,
without fetching this compass, for every one to retain in payment


® ZL. 1, D. de compens.


TIT. 11. SEC. 11] COMPENBATIONS. 911


compensated fall due, that the interest may run, or cease to run,
according to the changes which the compensations and deductions
may make therein.


VI.


2294. The Judge may compensate by Virtue of his Office. — See-
ing compensation is made by the authority of the law, it is in
the power of the judge, and it is likewise his duty, in the cases
where there are mutual demands between parties, to compen-
sate of his own free motion the reciprocal debts in which com-
pensation may take place; whether it be that the compensation
have the effect to acquit totally the parties, or that, after the
compensation is made, one of the parties ought to be con-
demned to pay some overplus to the other‘


SECTION II.


AMONG WHAT PERSONS COMPENSATION TPAKES PLACE, AND IN WHAT
DEBTS.


Art. I

2295. One compensates only in his own Right. — Compensation
can only be made between persons who have in their own names
the double quality of creditor and debtor: and if a debtor exercises
against his creditor a right which is not his own, as a tutor does
who demands a debt due to his minor, or an attorney who sues
the debtor of the person who has given him a power so to do,
there will be no compensation made of what the said tutor or
attorney may owe in their own names to the said debtors.*


IL


2296. To compensate, it is necessary that the Debts be Clear and
Liquid. — It is not enough to make a compensation, that there be
a debt on the one side and the other, but it is, moreover, necessary
that both the debts be clear and liquid, that is, certain, and not
liable to dispute. Thus, one cannot compensate with a clear and
liquid debt a debt that is litigious, nor a pretension that is not


© L. 4, C. de compens. ; —1. 7, C. de solut. € § 30, Inst. de action.
® L. 28, D. de compens.


TIT. 1. 8EC. I.] COMPENSATIONS. 913


other debts which are not privileged, and which one owes to the
exchequer, may be compensated with what the exchequer owes to
the same person. Thus, for example, if in an estate fallen to the
crown by confiscation, by default of heirs, or by the death of an
alien, there be some of the effects consisting in debts, the debtors
whereof are found to be likewise creditors to the person to whom the
estate did belong, compensation of those debts will be allowed.


VL


2300. There ts no Compensation in a Thing deposited or lent.
-—— The depositary of a thing, and he who has borrowed a thing
for use, cannot compensate what they have by virtue of any of
these titles with a debt which the master of the thing deposited
or lent may owe to them. And if two persons had reciprocally
things belonging to another deposited in their hands, there would
be no compensation between them in this case, but each of them
would be obliged to restore the thing which had been deposited in
his hands.‘


VIL
2301. Compensation in Crimes and Offences, in what Respect tt
takes Place, and what not. — In crimes and offences one does not
compensate either the accusations or the punishments But
when the matter relates only to costs and damages, or to the civil
interest of the party, if the person accused be found to be a credi-
tor of the accuser’s, he may compensate.


VHL


2302. If Compensation is made of Two Debts, equal in the Sums,
but unequal in other Respects.— If one compensates two debts,
which, although equal in the sums, are distinguished by some dif-
ference which may be estimated, the same may be considered in
making the compensation. Thus, for example, if he who was to
pay a sum of money in a certain place, where it was the credi-
tor’s interest to have it paid, compensates it in another place, and
is by that means freed from the charges it would have cost to have


© L. 3, C. de compens. ; —1. 20, D. eod. ; — 1. 46, § 5, D. de jure fisct.

€ T, wlt. in f. C. de compens.;—I1. 11, C. depos. ; —I1. ult. C. de commod. ;—v. 1. 18, § ult.
D. commod. See the last article of the third section of Deposit, and the thirteenth article
of the first section of the Loan of Things to be restored in Specie.

S L. 2, § 4, D. ad leg. Ful. de adult. b T. 10, § 2, D. de compens.

VOL. I. T7


™
a ig
rc


TIT. Ill. SEC. I.] NOVATIONS. 915


same sum with that which has been bequeathed to him, without
making any mention of the legacy in the bond, and the said
legatee gives the executor an acquittance for the legacy; in this
transaction there will be no change of the persons, but only a
change in the nature of the engagement, an obligation for money
lent being substituted in the place of a legacy due by a testament.
And it is this first way which we call novation, and which shall
be the subject-matter of this title. Thus, for an example of the
second way, by the change of the person of the debtor, if he who
is indebted for money lent substitutes in his place another debtor,
who obliges himself for the same sum to the creditor, so that the
first debtor is discharged, the first engagement will be annulled
in regard of the first debtor, who will be no longer bound for the
money, and he who is substituted will become debtor in the place
of the other. And it is this second way which is called delega-
tion, whether the new debtor take upon him to acquit the first
obligation, which is suffered to remain in force, or whether the
first obligation is suppressed, and the new debtor obliges himself
by some other title; but always in such a manner that the engage-
ment of the first debtor is annulled by that of the new debtor,
who succeeds in his place, and this shall be the subject-matter
of the following title.°


SECTION I.
OF THE NATURE OF NOVATION, AND OF ITS EFFECT.


Art. I.

2305. Definition of Novation. — Novation is the change which
the creditor and debtor make, who in the place of one debt substi-
tute another; so that the first obligation subsists no longer, and
the debtor remains obliged only by the second.* Thus, for exam-
ple, if after a contract of sale, the price not being yet paid, the
seller takes a bond from the buyer as for money lent, for the same
sam which the price of the sale amounts to, so as that the con-
tract of sale be discharged, and no reservation made thereof in the
new obligation, the seller will have innovated his debt.


* [This method of annulling prior engagements, by substituting new ones in their
room, is in the ancient books of the common law of England described by the same name
of novation. Bracton, lib. 3, cap. 2, no. 13 ; — Fileta, lib, 2, cap. 60.]

® Z.1, D. de novat. et deleg.


TIT. III. SEC. 11.] NOVATIONS. 917


SECTION II.


WHAT PERSONS HAVE POWER TO MAKE NOVATIONS, AND OF WHAT
DEBTS.


Arr. I.


2310. Who may innovate.— All persons who are capable of
contracting may innovate both what they owe, and what is owing
to them. And those who cannot oblige themselves, such as prod-
igals who are interdicted, cannot make any novation, unless there-
by they better their condition.*


IL


2311. A Tutor may innovate for the Advantage of his Minor.—
Tutors and curators may make novations for those who are under
their charge, provided it be for their advantage.»


HL


2312. An Attorney may innovate, tf he has a Warrant so to do.
— Attorneys who have a special power to innovate, or who have
a general letter of attorney empowering them to take care of all
the goods and all the affairs of the person who constitutes them,
may innovate for the said person.°


IV.


2313. Any one of the Oreditors, who has Power to recewe Pay-
ment, may innovate.— If two persons are creditors for the same
debt solidly, that is, in such a manner that each of them alone has
a right to demand it, and to discharge the debtor, any one of them
may innovate the debt.‘


V.


2314. Novation by another Person than the Debtor. — As a third
person who is noways interested with the debtor may pay for
him, so likewise he may innovate his debt without him, he oblig-


® LZ. 3, D. de novat. et deleg.
& 7. 20, § 1, D. de novat. et deleg. ; —I. ult. § 1, eod.
© L. 20, D. de novat.; —d. 1. § 1.
€ ZL. 31, § 1, D. de novat. et deleg. See the seventh article of the third section of Pay-
ments, and the second section of the Solidity among two, &c.
77°


TIT. IV.| DELEGATIONS. 919


the first debtor is annulled, since he remains no longer bound, and
the delegation, making a new debtor, makes likewise for this rea-
son a new obligation. We make here this remark, because
although this distinction of the two manners of delegation be not
expressly and precisely marked in the texts which are quoted
upon the articles of this title, yet it is a natural consequence of
what they contain of the nature and effects of delegation.

2317. It follows from these remarks on the nature of novation,
and that of delegation, that all delegations imply a novation,
since in the place of a former obligation a new one is substituted.
But every novation does not imply a delegation, seeing the debtor
may innovate his first obligation by a new one, in which he may
oblige himself alone, without substituting any other new debtor in
his stead.°

Art. I

2318. Definition of Delegation. — Delegation is the change of
one debtor for another, when he who is indebted substitutes a
third person who obliges himself in his stead to the creditor; so
that the first debtor is acquitted, and his obligation extinguished,


and the creditor contents himself with the obligation of the second
debtor.*


II.


2319. Delegation requires the Consent of all Parties concerned.
— There is this difference between novation and delegation, that
whereas a third person may innovate the debt of the debtor with-
out his consent,° delegation is not made but by the consent both
of the debtor who delegates another in his place, of the person
who is delegated, and of the creditor who accepts the delegation,
and who contents himself with the new debtor.°


TIL


2320. Difference between Assignment of a Debt and Delegation.
— We must not confound delegation with the assignment which


* [What is here explained under the title of delegation is by the ancient authors who
treat of the law of England comprehended under the general name of novation. Bracton,
lib. 2, cap. 2, no. 13; — Fleta, lib. 2, cap. 60.]

® L.11, D. de novat. et deleg.; —1. 8, § 3, D. ad Velleian. ; —|. 26, § 2, D. mand. See
the seventh article.

> See the fifth article of the second section of Novations.

© Z.1, C. de novat. et deleg.


TIT. Iv.] DELEGATIONS. $21


VIL
2324. Delegation is a Kind of Novation. — Delegation is a kind
of novation; for the first obligation of the person who delegates
is extinguished by the obligation of him who is delegated.»


VIIL


2325. The Person delegated cannot revive the Former Obligation.
— He who is delegated by the debtor, being obliged himself to the
creditor, cannot revive the first obligation, which is annulled by
the delegation, nor mortgage the estate which the first debtor had
engaged. And the creditor on his part has no longer any recourse
against the person who has delegated, although the new debtor
should become insolvent, or even although he had been insolvent
at the time of the delegation. For one does not any more con-
sider the origin of the first debt, but only the second, which has
annulled the first. Which is to be understood of the case of a
true delegation which has innovated the debt.!


IX.


2326. The Person delegated cannot make Use of the Exceptions
which he had against him who delegated him. — In the same case
of a true delegation which has innovated the debt, if the person
who is delegated had just exceptions against the first debtor which
he had not reserved, he cannot make use of them against the cred-
itor, even although his exceptions should be grounded on some
fraud of the person who has delegated him. For the first obliga-
tion subsisting no longer, the second derives its nature from what
is transacted in the delegation between the person delegated and
the creditor, whose interest is altogether independent on what had
preceded between his debtor and the person who is delegated.
‘Thus, for example, if he who is delegated was indebted to the
person who delegated him only on the account of a donation
which he had made him, the person delegated cannot make use
of the exceptions which donors have against the donees, such as
the right of revoking the donation because of the ingratitude of
the donee, or of having some favor and indulgence in the payment
of a sum which was given asa mere bounty. Thus, for another
example, if the person delegated was indebted to him who dele-


b L. 2, C. de nowat. et deleg. ; —1. 3, eod. See the first article.
' Z. 30, D. de novat. et deleg. ;—1. 3, in f. C. cod. ; — 1. 26, § 2, inf. D. mand.


TIT. V. SEC. I.] CESSION OF GOODS. 923


ties which they have prescribed,’ that the cession of goods may
be attended with shame and confugion, in order to restrain the
too great facility and frequency of them. And although it might
seem reasonable to exempt from this disgrace those who are
reduced to make a cession of their goods by reason of losses
happened to them without their fault, which ought to distinguish
their condition from that of debtors who are reduced to that state
by their own knavery or bad conduct ;° yet the ordinance has
not made this distinction, that there might be no gap left open
for the encouragement of persons to make a cession of their
goods.

2329. Besides the benefit of the cession of goods, the laws of
France have granted to debtors that of respites or delays of one
year, or of five years, which the ordinances empower the judges to
grant to debtors, upon a judicial inquiry into the reasons they
have to offer for desiring the same, the creditors being called to
make their exceptions against it.4

2330. The respites in the Roman law depended on the credi-
tors themselves, who had it in their choice either to oblige the
debtor to make cession of his estate, or to grant him a delay of
five years. And it was by the plurality of voices among the
creditors that this choice was regulated, reckoning the plurality
not by the number of the creditors, but by the strength and force
of their credits; so that one single creditor, whose credit was more
than that of all the others, was master of this choice And the
debtor was obliged to give security, in order to obtain a delay.

2331. All debtors are not received alike to make cession of their
goods, nor to have the benefit of a respite; but there are many
causes which may hinder their obtaining these favors, as well on
the part of the debtor who is found to be unworthy of them, as
on the part of the creditor to whom this prejudice cannot be done,
either because of the privilege of his debt, or for other causes.
Thus, they do not allow the benefit of a cession of goods to one
who owes a civil interest adjudged for a crime: thus, a farmer
who has enjoyed the fruits of his farm is not allowed this benefit:


b The debtor in person, while the court is sitting, without a sword, and bareheaded.
Ordinance of 1510, art. 70, and that of 1490, art. 34.

© Nore. 135, in prafatione.

4 Ordinance of Orleans, art. 61.

© L. 8, D. de pactis ; — vid. |. ult. Cod. qui bon. ced. poss.

6 V.1. 4, C. de proccib. imp. off.


TIT. V. BEC. I] CESSION OF GOODS. 925


between the cases wherein the cession of goods and the respite
may take place, and those in which it would not be just or rea-
sonable to allow that benefit. Thus, one may apply them in the
cases where the fraud of the debtor may deserve it, although the
said cases should be different from those mentioned in the cus-
toms. We thought it convenient to explain in this place the par-
ticular causes which exclude debtors from the benefit of the cession
of goods, and of respite, because, the same being explained no-
where but in the customs of France, it would not have been
proper to set them down as rules in the articles of this section.

2334. It remains only that we remark on the cession of goods,
that not only it does not take place in bankruptcies in France, but
that by the ordinances fraudulent bankrupts are punished exem-
plarily, and even with death, and those who partake in their fraud
are also punished as their accomplices.®


Art, I
2335. Definition of the Cession of Goods. — The cession of goods
is the surrender which the debtor makes of all his estate to his
creditors, that he may either get out of prison, or avoid being cast
into it.*


II.


2336. The Cession of Goods does not wholly discharge the
Debtor. — The cession of goods acquits the debtor only for so
much as the value of the goods which he delivers up amounts to,
and does not exempt him from remaining still debtor for the over-


plus.*
IIL


2337. The Cession comprehends the Rights fallen to the Debtor.
-—— The goods which the debtor was not yet in possession of when
be made the cession of his goods to his creditors, but to which he
had then actually acquired the right, such as an inheritance which
he had not as yet entered upon, are comprehended in the cession:
and the creditors may exercise upon the said goods the rights of
the debtor.


& Ordinance of Orleans, art. 143; of Blois, art. 205 ; of Henry IV., in the year 1609.
® Z.1, C. qui bon. ced. poss. ; —l. ult. eod.

b £1, C. qui bon. ced. poss.

© Nov. 135,¢. 1.

VOL. I. 78


TIT. V. SEC. 11.] CESSION OF GOODS. 927


VIII.
2342. The Cession does not discharge the Sureties.— The ces-
sion of goods does not discharge the sureties of him who has
made it.> :


TX.


2343. The Cession made to some of the Creditors takes place
with regard to all.—If the debtor hath made a cession of his
goods to some of his creditors, it hath its effect with regard to the
others. For itis to all the creditors that the goods of him who
makes the cession are given up.!


SECTION II.
OF DISCOMFITURE, OR THE INSOLVENCY OF DEBTORS.


2344. The Subject-Matter of this Section.— To understand aright
this matter of discomfiture, or insolvency, it is necessary to dis-
tinguish three sorts of creditors: those who have a privilege;
those who have no privilege, but have a mortgage; and those who
have neither privilege nor mortgage. Among the creditors who
are privileged, and who have mortgages, the goods of the debtor
are distributed according to the order which they have either
by the preference of their privileges, or priority of their mort-
gages, pursuant to the rules which have been explained in the
title of Pawns and Mortgages, and of the Privileges of Credi-
tors. And as to the creditors who have neither privilege nor
mortgage, there being no preference nor priority among them,
the goods of the debtor are for that reason distributed among
them in proportion to the sums due to them; that is, that
the condition of the creditors being equal, every one of them has
his portion of the goods of the debtor, according to the quantity
of his claim: and if, for example, all the debts amount to the
double of what is to be distributed, each creditor will receive only
the half of the sum that is due to him. And this is what is called
contribution, which happens in two manners, either when the
goods are of such a nature that they are not capable of being
‘mortgaged, such as movables in France, or when the creditors


r
» 1. 60, D. de fideijuss.; —1. 21, § 8, inf. cod. ' ZL. 4, § 1, D. de cess. bon.


TIT. VI. RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS. 929


nay, and with much more reason, jf the owner of the thing had
given it to the debtor to sell for him.°


IV.


2348. The Case of a Conditional Debt.— If, among the credi-
tors who come in ratably for a share of the goods of a debtor in
the case of discomfiture or insolvency, there should be found any
one whose debt depended on the event of a condition, or which
ought not to be paid till a long time after, it would be necessary
either to leave so much of the goods as would come to this credi-
tor’s share, or that the other creditors who should receive the
same should bind themselves, and give security if it should be
found necessary, to pay back their several proportions of this cred-
itor’s share after the condition should happen, or the term of pay-
ment come.*


TITLE VI.


OF THE RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS, AND RESTITUTION OF
THINGS TO THEIR FIRST ESTATE.


2349. Difference between the Subject-Matter of this Title and
the Matters treated of in the other Titles of this Book.— There is
this difference between all the other manners of annulling or
diminishing engagements which have been explained in this book,
and these which are the subject of this title, that all the others
put an end to engagements without calling their validity in ques-
tion, whereas rescissions and restitutions of things to their first
estate respect the validity of the engagements, and make them


© L. 5, § 18, D. de tribut. act. But if the thing sold be not any more in the possession
of the buyer, will the seller have the preference before the creditors of a third person who
shall have purchased it from the buyer? There are some customs in France where they
make a distinction between the condition of a seller who has sold without any day or
term of payment, expecting ready money for his goods, and the condition of the seller
who has given time for payment; and they give a preference in the first case, but not in
the second. To which we may apply the words of the text cited upon this article : — Si
in creditam abii, si non abii. See the remark on the fourth article of the fifth section of
Pawns and Mortgages.

4 1.7. D. de trib. act.


78°


TIT. VI. SEC. I.] RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS. 931


annulling of covenants, yet the rules of rescissions and restitutions
are not explained in that title; but in this we are to explain the
said rules, such as those which respect in general the nature of
rescissions, their effects, their consequences, and those which par-
ticularly relate to the different kinds of rescissions; the cases in
which they take place; the restitutions of minors, and the other
rules of the like nature.

2353. All these sorts of rules, which are to be the subject-matter
of this title, may be reduced under three heads, which comprehend
them all, and we shall divide them into as many sections. The
first shall contain the rules which are common to all sorts of re-
scissions and restitutions; the second shall take in those which
respect the restitutions of minors; and the third shall comprehend
the rules which have relation to the restitution of majors, in the
cases where they may have just cause to sue for the repeal of
their contracts.


SECTION I.


OF RESCISSIONS AND RESTITUTIONS IN GENERAL.


2354. Ir is necessary to observe, touching this matter of rescis-
sions and restitutions in general, that, according to our usage in
France, the ways of nullity do not take place, that is to say, that
one cannot procure an act or deed to be annulled, to which he has
been a party, by barely alleging the grounds and reasons which
_ render it null; but it is necessary to procure letters from the prince,
in order to obtain a rescission of the deed, and restitution of things
to their first estate.

2355. It is likewise proper to take notice here, that all rescis-
sions and restitutions, upon what ground soever they be built,
whether it be fraud, violence, damage in more than the half of
the true value, or any other ground whatsoever, prescribe in ten
years, reckoning from the day of the act or deed which is com-
plained of, or from the time that the violence, or other cause which
may have hindered the party from bringing his action, shall have
ceased. And with respect to minors, the restitution prescribes in
ten years, counting from the day of their majority; and after
thirty-five years complete, the age of majority in France being


TIT. VI. SEC. 1.] RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS. 933


be just cause for it; as if he who complains be a minor who was
not defended in the suit, or even although he be major, if he can
show that his adversary has been guilty of some fraud, or offers
any other reason which the law approves of.


IV.
2359. Rescissions depend on the Prudence of the Judge.— Re-


scissions being founded upon facts and circumstances, as if the
party has been guilty of some fraud, if any force has been used
against him who prays to he relieved, if he has been drawn in by
some error or some surprise, or if there be any other cause
assigned which may be sufficient to obtain a rescission; the same
is not decreed till after a judicial hearing of the cause. And it
depends on the prudence of the judge to discern if the reasons
which are alleged be sufficient, and if it be equitable to decree the
act or contract to be rescinded.‘


V.


2360. They ought not to be granted easily.— Among the cir-
cumstances which are to be weighed in the grant of a rescission,
one ought to consider of what moment the thing in dispute is,
and what will be the consequences of the rescission if it is
granted. For it ought not to be easily granted under the circum-
stances, where the damage to be repaired is inconsiderable, and
where the rescission which is prayed on account of the said dam-
age might be attended with consequences which would amount
to some injustices


VI.


2361. Effect of the Rescission against Third Persons. — When
there is ground for granting a rescission, the same hath its effect,
not only against the persons whose act has given occasion to it,
but likewise against those who represent them, and against third
possessors. Thus, for example, if he who has purchased an estate
of a minor sells it to a third person, the restitution of the minor


°¢ L. 7,41, D. de tn int. rest. ; —1. 7, § 4, D. de mun. ;—d. 1. § ult. This is the founda-
tion of the use of civil requests, even for majors. The grounds of a civil request are ex-
plained in the ordinances. See the ordinance of 1667, in the title of Civil Requests, art. 34,
35, 36.

€ ZL. 1, D. de in integ. rest. ; — 1. 3, eod. ; —1. 7, eod.

& L. 4, D. de in int. rest.


TIT. VI. SEC. 1.] RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS. 935


sue for the rescission thereof; for the approbation makes a new
act which confirms the former. Thus, for example, if a minor,
being come of age, ratifies an obligation against which he might
have been relieved, he cannot afterwards sue for relief" Thus, he
who, being at full liberty, ratifies an act which he pretended he
was forced to consent to, cannot any more complain of it.


X.


2365. Reciprocal Effects of the Rescission. — If the rescission or
restitution is decreed, things are restored, on the part of him who
is relieved, to the same condition in which they would have been
if the act or deed which is annulled had never been made. But
as he enters again to the possession of his rights, and recovers
what ought to be restored to him, either in principal, or interest
and fruits, if there be ground for it; so ought he likewise on his
part to give back to his adverse party what profit he has reaped
thereby, so that he may draw no other advantage from the rescis-
sion besides the bare effect of entering again to his rights, his ad-
versary being likewise restored on his part to his rights, as far as
the effect of the rescission will permit. Thus, the seller who pro-
cures a contract of sale to be vacated, of which he had received
the price, ought to give back the said price. But if a minor is re-
lieved against a sale which he had made, or against the grant of
an annuity which he had made for borrowed money; he shall
restore of the price of the sale, and of the money he has borrowed,
only so much as shall be found to have turned to his benefit, by
a useful application thereof. Thus, the rescission is reciprocal
or not, according to the justice that may be due to him who is
relieved.°


XI


2366. Limits of the Rescission, if there be Matters in the Act or
Deed which it has no Relation to. — If, in the act or deed of which
the rescission is demanded, there were other matters besides those
which he who sues for relief may have ground to complain of,
and if they have no connection one with another, the rescission
would be limited to that which may give occasion for it, and


= L.2, C. si maj. fact. rat. habuer.; —1. 30, D. de min. See the twenty-third article of
the second section.

° L. un. C. de reput. que f. in jud. in int. rest. ;—1. 24, § 4, D. de minor. ; —d.l. un § 2,
C. de reput. que f. in jud. in integ. rest.


TIT. VI. SEC. I.] RESTITUTION OF MINORS. 937


the heir were a minor, his time would not begin to be added to
that of the deceased, till after the day of his majority. For he
would be relieved even against that, in that he had neglected to
demand restitution during his minority.


SECTION II.


OF THE RESTITUTION OF MINORS.


2371. Nosopy is ignorant who the persons are who are called
minors, and wherein they are distinguished from those who are
called majors. As to which the reader may consult what has been
said of this matter in the sixteenth article of the first section of
the title of Persons, and in the ninth article of the second section
of the same title.


Arr. L


2372. The Cause of the Restitution of Minors. — The restitution
of minors is founded on the weakness of their age, and on the in-
stability of their conduct, for want of experience and knowledge
in business. And seeing this condition exposes them, not only to
be imposed upon by others, but likewise to be mistaken often
in their own interest, the law gives them relief against all acts
and deeds by which their minority may have engaged them in
some damage.*


II.


2373. The Restitution is independent of the Honesty or Knavery
of the Party. — It follows from the preceding rule, that, the restitu-
tion of minors being founded on their weakness, and on their want
of experience and knowledge in affairs, the same is altogether
independent on the honesty or knavery of those with whom they
have treated. And whether it be that they themselves have been
mistaken, or that the persons with whom they have had to do
have overreached them, the restitution is equally granted to them,
with the effect which it ought to have. Thus, the law protects
minors, both against their own proper act and deed, and also


t 1.19, § 1, D. de minor. ® L.1, D. de minor.
VOL. I. 719


TIT. VI. SEC. 11.] RESTITUTION OF MINORS. 939


V.

2376. The Minor ts not relieved, when he cheats, or does any
Harm. — The minor who shall have cheated any one, or done
some damage, will not be relieved on the score of his minority,
so as to be discharged from repairing the damage he has done.
Thus, a minor who damnifies a thing which he has borrowed, or
which has been deposited with him, will not be restored so as to
be acquitted of the damage which he shall have caused.s


VI.


2377. Nor when he is guilty of any Crime or Offence. — In
crimes and offences the minority may give occasion to mitigate the
punishments, but it does not hinder the minor from being con-
demned to make reparation of the damage which he has done


VIL


2378. If a Minor gives tt out that he ts of Age.—If a minor
has given out that he is of age, and by producing a false certifi-
cate of the registry of his christening, or by some other way, has
made people believe that he is a major, he cannot be relieved
against those acts into which he shall have engaged any one by
this surprise. Thus, a minor having borrowed money: by such
means, although he has made no good use of it, yet his obligation
will nevertheless have the same effect as that of a major!


VIL


2379. Minors are relieved from all Manner of Damage, except
in the Cases of the preceding Articles.— Seeing minors are not
relieved indifferently in all cases, but according as the quality of
the facts and the circumstances may give occasion thereto, and
since we have seen in the foregoing articles the rules which relate
to the cases in which restitution is not granted; we shall next see,
in the articles which follow, how it takes place, whether the minors
have been deceived by the act of others, or by the weakness of


& LZ. 9,§ 2, D. de minor. ; —1. 2, C. si min. se maj. dir. ;—§ 8, D. ad Velleian.

b 7. 37, § 1, D. de minor. ; —d. l. 37, in fine; —l. 1, C. si adv. delict.; —1. 3, C. si min.
se maj. diz.

1 ZT. 2, C. si min. se maj. dir. ; —l. 3, eod.; —1. 82, D. de minor. This rule is to be un-
derstood only of the cases where the creditor has had some just reason to believe that the
minor was of age. For if there was no more than a bare declaration of the minor’s, who
pretended to be of age, the creditor ought to blame himself for his credulity. And there-
fore we have conceived the rule in these terms.


TIT. VI. SEC. 11.] RESTITUTION OF MINORS. 941


him, he will be allowed to retract his renunciation, and to accept
the inheritance" And if, on the contrary, he has accepted a suc-
cession that is burdensome, he may be relieved from it, and al-
lowed to renounce it, the creditors being called that he may
deliver up into their hands the goods belonging to the succession?
And he may likewise be relieved against the renunciation of a
legacy,‘ which would have been profitable to him, or against his
acceptance of one, if it was burdensome by reason of some charge,
or some disadvantageous condition.


XL


2382. If the Succession is profitable when the Minor enters to
tt, but becomes afterwards burdensome by some Accident. — If,
after that a minor has accepted an inheritance that is profitable,
it happens that the goods are diminished by some accident, as
if a house that is part of the succession perishes by fire, if some
of the lands or tenements are carried off by an inundation, or if
there happen other losses of the like nature, the minor, having
done in that case nothing but what every other person would and
ought to have done, he cannot have relief therein, so as to recover
and receive back from the creditors to the said succession that
which he had paid them:


® L.1, D. sicut om. hered.

° L. 7, § 5, D. de minor. ; —l. 57, § 1, D. de acg. vel om. hared. See the two following
articles.

P V. Nov. 119, c. 6.

q L. 7, § 7, D. de minor.

F Z. 11, § 5, D. de min. We have not put down in this article, that the minor who has
accepted a succession of which the goods are perishable may for this reason be relieved
from it; for tators are obliged by the ordinances to sell these sorts of goods, as has been
said in the thirteenth article of the third section of Zidors. And besides, when a minor
accepts a succession, provision is made both for his security and that of the creditors to
the succession, by the inventory which the tutor is obliged to make of the goods belong-
ing to the succession. For by the effect of this inventory the minor is always in a con-
dition to do justice to the creditors of the succession, and if afterwards it becomes burden-
some by losses of goods of the kind mentioned in this article, it is but just that his condi-
tion should be the same with that of an heir or executor who has the benefit of an inven-
tory, and who is never bound beyond the value of the goods of the inheritance, seeing the
inventory puts the minor and the creditors in the same condition. But if, the minor or
his tutor having employed the movable effects of the succession for discharging a part of
the debts, and having paid the rest of the debts with the minor’s own money, that the
immovable goods of the inheritance might be preserved entire to him, it should happen
afterwards that the said immovables should be lost by fire, by inundations, or by other
events ; this loss, which might happen to the most pradent persons, would not give a
right to the minor to demand back from the creditors that which he had given them in


7°


TIT. VI. SEC. 11.] RESTITUTION OF MINORS. 943


run him into lawsuits, expenses, or other consequences, which it
would have been his interest to have avoided and prevented; or if
he had accepted an inheritance encumbered with affairs that
would have required a long and tedious discussion."


XV.


2386. The Minor ts relieved against a Compromise. —If a
minor has referred some matter in dispute to an arbitration, he
may be restored against it, even although he had been authorized
by his tutor to compromise the matter* For although it be usual
for prudent and wise persons to put their rights into the hands of
arbitrators, yet the minor may have been deceived either in the
choice of the arbitrators, or in referring to arbitration a right that
is indisputable. And although his tutor had authorized him to
consent to the said reference, yet nevertheless he would be relieved


against it.’
XVI.


2387. Restitution against an Omission. — Minors are not only
relieved against what they may have done to their own prejudice,
but they may likewise have relief for having omitted that which
they were obliged to do, in the cases where this omission may be
repaired. Thus, for example, if the father of a minor, having pur-
chased an estate on condition that, if the price were not paid by a
certain time, the sale should be made void; the minor, heir to his
father, omits to pay the money within the time, and even al-
though the minor’s guardian have been summoned to pay the
same, and for default of payment the seller has been restored
to his estate, whether it were with the consent of the guardian or
by a sentence of the judge, yet the minor may be admitted to
take possession again of the estate, he paying the price.* Unless
it should happen that, by reason of particular circumstances, the
things were not any more in such a condition as that the minor
ought to be received to make payment; as if the sale had not been
vacated till after a long time, and after many delays granted to


* L. 6, D. de minor. ; —1. 4, tn f. D. ad senat. Trebell. Although this law has relation
to another subject, yet these words may be applied here. See the tenth article.

® L. 34, § 1, D. de minor.

Y See the nineteenth article.

® TL. pen. C. de in int. rest. min. ; —1. 38, D. de min. See the eighteenth article of the
fourth section of Covenants, and the twelfth article of the twelfth section of the Contract of
Sale.


TIT. Vi. SEC. 11.] RESTITUTION OF MINORS. 945


quality of the person to whom he is obliged, and that even
although his restitution should be to the loss of the other minor.
Thus, for example, if a minor had bound himself surety for a
debtor of another minor, he would be restored, although, the debtor
proving insolvent, the minor who is creditor should lose his debt.
And if it should happen that both the minors were wronged,
when there was no fraud on the part of the one or the other, he
who is under an engagement to the other, the performance where-
of would be prejudicial to him, will be relieved from it. Thus, for
example, if a minor, having borrowed money of another minor, has
no longer the said money in his possession, and has not laid it out
to any profitable account, he will be relieved from his obligation
to pay back the said money, although the other be a loser thereby.
For seeing, in all the cases of this nature, the obligation of the
minor for a cause which has no ways turned to his advantage
ought to be annulled, the consequence of the loss which happens
thereby to him who had treated with the minor does not alter his
right, nor validate his obligation. But this loss is considered
either as a mere accident, or as an event which he who had treated
with a minor ought to blame himself for. Thus, in general, when
two minors have had any dealings with one another, and when
there is damage done, either to one of them alone, or to both of
them, and it is not possible to restore both the one and the other
to the condition in which they were before ; the judgment in rela-
tion to the restitution ought to depend on the quality of the facts
and circumstances, and on the condition into which the event
shall have put the one and the other, to relieve him who shall be
found to be under an engagement, the execution whereof would
do him such a prejudice as might be a just ground for annulling
the engagement.


XIX.


2390. The Authority of the Tutor does not hinder the Restitution ;
and the Minor is restored even against the Act of the Tutor. —
Although the minor has been authorized by his tutor to pass the
act or deed against which he desires to be relieved, yet the resti-
tution will nevertheless have its effect, even although the tutor
were father of the minor, and intrusted with the management of
the son’s estate. And although it were an act sped in a court of


e¢ £.11, § 6, D. de min. ; —1. 34, eod.


TIT. VI. SEC. 11.] RESTITUTION OF MINORS. 947


XXIL

2393. Dispensation of Age.— When the conduct of minors
appears to be such, that, before they attain the years of majority,
they are judged capable of the administration of their own affairs,
the law allows the same to be granted to them by letters of dis-
pensation of age, which sons may obtain at the age of one-and-
twenty years complete, and daughters after they are past eighteen.
And this dispensation of age hath this effect, that they may take
the management of their estates into their own hands, and look
after them themselves, but they may not alienate them, nor mort-
gage them.' Thus, the dispensation of age does not hinder the
restitution of minors, except in what relates to this enjoyment of
their estates, and not as to acts or deeds which minors may do
afterwards to their prejudice, either by alienating or mortgaging
their estates, or otherwise. Neither hath the said dispensation of
age the effect to make those who have obtained it be reputed
majors, when the question is touching the accomplishment of a
condition of a legacy, of a substitution, or other matter which
should have its effect by their majority; unless the said condition
did mention the case of a dispensation of age™


XXIIL

2394. The Ratification of an Act, after one is come of Age, hin-
ders the Restitution. —If an act or deed, executed by a minor,
were not to take effect till after he arrived at the years of majority,
he would nevertheless be restored against it, if he were wronged
by it. But if, after he has come of age, he executes it, or does any
other act in approbation of it, he cannot afterwards be relieved
against it. And, in general, every act of approbation made by a
major of what he did in his minority makes the restitution to
- cease. Thus, he who during his minority had approved of the
testament of his father, which he might have procured to be an-
nulled, and who might have been relieved against his said appro-
bation thereof, will not be admitted to oppose it, if, after he has
attained the years of majority, he receives or demands a legacy
which his father had left him by the said testament. Thus, he
who might have been relieved against a bond which he had given
in his minority, but who after he is arrived at full age makes a pay-


lL. 8, C. da his qui ven. etat. impetr.; —d.l. §1;—v. 1.3, D. de min. ;—L. 1, ood.
_™ Li ult. C. de his qui ven. ot. impetr.


TIT. VI. SEC. I1.| RESTITUTION OF MINORS. 949


: XXV.

2396. Formalities observed in the Sale of the Immovables of
Minors. — To justify the alienation of any of the lands or tene-
ments belonging to a minor, it is required that the sale be made
for a necessary cause, such as paying off debts that are pressing,
of which the payment cannot be delayed, and which cannot be ac-
quitted any other way; that this sale be directed by a court of
justice, after it has been made appear, by producing an inven-
tory of the goods of the minor, and a stated account given in by
the tutor, that there is neither money nor movables nor debts nor
rents due, or to become due, nor other effects that may suffice
for the payment of the said debts; so that it is necessary to alien-
ate some of the lands or tenements. And it is likewise necessary
to make choice, for the said sale of the lands or tenements, of those
that are of least value, and that no more of them be sold than
what is absolutely necessary, that they be sold by cant or auction,
by order of the judge, after the delays which have been regulated,
and the advertisements for giving notice to the parties concerned,
and the buyers, and lastly, that the price of the sale be applied to
the payment of the debts.1


XXVI.


2397. A Sale made by the Tutor, without observing the Formali-
ties. — If the tutor, being pressed by the creditors of the minor,
and in order to prevent or stop a seizure of his goods, sells some
of the immovables of the estate without observing the formalities
required, the minor may be restored against the sale.


XXVIL


2398. Effect of the Rescission against the Tutor, if there be Ground
for tt, and also against the Possessor.— If the alienation of the
lands or tenements of a minor be liable to be rescinded, he will
have his action, not only against his tutor, if there be ground for


9 LZ. 1, § 2, D. de red. eor. qui sub tut.; —1. 5, § 9, D. eod. ; —d. 1. 5, § 11; —1. 5, C. de
preaed. et al. reb. min.; — 1. 5, § 15, D. de reb. eor. qui sub tut. The formalities for the sale
of the goods of minors are the same with those used in the sale of estates seized by
creditors, and sold by decree of a court of justice. And it is only a decree of a court of
justice, in due form, that can sufficiently secure him who purchases lands or tenements
belonging to minors.

° L. 47, D. de minor. See the nineteenth, the twenty-fourth, and twenty-fifth articles
of this section.

VOL. I. 80


TIT. VI. SEC. III.] RESCISSION IN FAVOR OF MAJORS. 951


case, he will recover the interest of the price from the day that he
paid it, he giving back to the seller the value of the fruits of which
he has reaped the advantage.* Unless it should appear to be just
and equitable to compensate the fruits with the interest.


SECTION III.
OF THE RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS IN FAVOR OF MAJORS.


2401. The Subject-Matter of this Section. — There are causes of
rescissions in favor of majors, which are common to all persons of
both sexes; as if one has been deceived by some trick, or forced
by some violence: and there are other causes which are peculiar
to some persons. Thus, by our usage, married women, although
of age, cannot oblige themselves without the authority of their
husbands; and by the customs of some provinces they cannot
bind themselves even although they have their husbands’ consent.
Thus, fathers, whose children, although majors, have borrowed
money for their debauches, may procure their-obligations to be an-
nulled, if it appear that the obligations have this vice in them;
and the sons themselves may have relief in this case, according to
the circumstances. As to what concerns the obligations of mar-
ried women, that has been explained in the remarks on the first
article of the first section of the title of Persons ; and what relates
to the dbligations of sons has been treated of in the fourth sec-
tion of the title of the Loan of Money, and of Usury; and here we
shall speak only of the other rescissions which are common to all
majors.

2402. Seeing the rescissions which majors may obtain are
founded on the vices which happen to be in the acts or deeds
which they complain of, such as those which have been treated of
in the title of the Vices of Covenants, we shall not therefore re-
peat here what has been said of this matter in that title: it will
suffice if we acquaint the reader, that the rules explained in that
title ought to be applied to rescissions in favor of majors, accord-
ing as the rules may be applicable to them; and that it is chiefly
from the said rules that we are to draw all the principles relating
to this matter; so that there remain but few rules concerning it
to be set down in this title.


* L. 27,4$1, D. de minor.


TIT. VI. SEC. III.] RESCISSION IN FAVOR OF MAJORS. 953


scinded, if they have sold any lands or tenements for less than the
half of their just value, pursuant to the rules which have been
explained in their proper place.*


V.


2407. Restitution on Account of Absence, or for some other just
Cause.— Majors not only procure acts or deeds to be rescinded,
to which they have been parties, when there is sufficient ground
for rescinding them ; but they likewise obtain reparation of what
has been done without their knowledge, if they have received any
prejudice thereby, and if they have just cause for demanding the
same to be annulled. Thus, a major who has been absent is
relieved against a prescription, pursuant to the rule that has been
explained in its place. Thus, an absent person, who has been
condemned for contumacy on the head of some accusation, is
admitted to make his defence when he appears. And, in general,
majors may obtain a redress of the wrong which they may have
suffered when they were not in a condition to exercise their rights,
or to defend themselves against any thing attempted to their
prejudice. And whether their demand be to recover the posses-
sion of any goods usurped from them, or to obtain reparation of
some loss, or even to recover some right which had accrued to
them, such as a legacy or an inheritance, and in all other cases,
provision will be made therein according as their pretension is
well or ill grounded, and according as equity may require in the
circumstances of the case: observing, likewise, this against majors,
that they be not allowed to reap any benefit, either by their ab-
sence, or by the other causes which procure them restitution to
their right, so as to cause any prejudice thereby to other persons.°


tion of Covenants. According to our usage, the party aggrieved may demand a new par-
tition, if the wrong done him be between a fourth and a third part.

d See the ninth section of the Contract of Sale.

© L.1, D. ex quib. caus. maj.;—d.l. in f.;—l. 26, § 9, eod.;—I1. 27, eod.; —l. 3, C.
quib. ex caus. maj. in int. rest. ; —l. 1, eod. ; —I. 140, D. de reg. jur. ; — 1. 21, D. ex quid. caus.
maj. See the sixth article of the fifth section of Possession. We have not put down in
this article that which relates to the effect of absence in majors, according to the usage of
the Roman law, with respect to sentences pronounced against them. For seeing by our
usage absent persons may be cited, in the manner regulated by the ordinances, and that
they have the remedy of appealing from sentences pronounced in their absence, after they
have been cited in due form, our usage does not allow of restitution against sentences.


END OF VOL. I.
