The History and Theory of Vitalism (Hans Driesch (Charles K. Ogden, trans.), 1914)
==========================================================
Vitalism's last great defense: entelechy against mechanism; embryology's philosophical classic. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (dli.ernet.523658).


THE HISTORY AND THEORY
OF VITALISM



MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited

LONDON • BOMBAY CA»CUTTA
MElBOURNE


1HL MACMILLAN COMPANY

NTW YORK • BOSTON CHICAGO
DALLAS • SAN FRANCISCO

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd.


TORONTO



THE


HISTORY &> THEORY
OF VITALISM


BY

HANS DRIESCH

PROFTSSOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE UMVPRSITY OP HEIDFLBBRO
AUTHOR 01* * I HE SCIENCE AND PHUOSOPHY 01- THE ORGANISM’
THE PROHl EM Ol INDIVIDUALITY,’ ETC.


AUTHORISED TRANSLATION BY

C. K. OGDEN

MAGDAI ENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE


RFV1SFD AND IN FART RE-WRITTEN FOR I HE ENGLISH
hDITlON BY THE AUTHOR


MACMILLAN CO., LIMITED

ST. MARTIN^^^ifesT, LONDON



COPYRIGHT.



TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

The many admirers of Professor Driesch in England
and America will, it is hoped, welcome this succinct
account of the Vitalism with which his name is so
prominently associated, both in its historical and
theoretical aspects.

Students of The Science and Philosophy of the
Organism, the Gifford Lectures, 1907-8, by which
Professor Driesch is perhaps best known to English
readers, will find in Part II. of this book an account
of the logical foundations of Vitalism, arranged in
a rather different and in many ways easier form.

As the author explains in his Foreword to Part
II., all the systematic section has been completely
rewritten for the English edition ; and its arrange¬
ment is precisely the reverse of that adopted in
the London Lectures, 1913, which are being pub¬
lished by Messrs. Macmillan almost simultaneously
with this work. In the historical section the
original text has been left substantially unaltered.
This will account for a certain discrepancy between
the philosophical views expressed in Part II. and
those occasionally implied in the earlier pages—in
particular as regards the author’s position towards
mechanical physics and metaphysics. The change
is due to the fact that he no longer believes that



vi TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

qualitative Energetics can take the place of a real
theory of matter (whether mechanical or electro¬
dynamical). He now regards a critical metaphysic
as possible, and no longer supports any kind of
conceptual phenomenalism as the final word of
philosophy.

My first debt as translator is, needless to say, to
the author himself, with whom I have been in com¬
munication throughout the work ; whom I also had
the advantage of consulting personally during a
visit to Heidelberg last summer, and on the occasion
of his lecture arranged by Professor James Ward
last October in Cambridge ; and who has moreover
most carefully revised the translation throughout.
I wish further to express my special indebtedness to
Miss 0. H. Persitz, of Newnharo College, for invalu¬
able assistance, both philosophical and linguistic,
at every stage of my labours.

From the Italian translation of this work by
Dr. Stenta of Trieste, I have derived many useful
suggestions, one of which is specially acknowledged
on page 48 ; while Dr. R. Assheton, Mr. C. F. Angus,
Mr. Wildon Carr, Mr. A. E. Heath, and Mr. K. R.
Lewin have very kindly read through portions of
the book in proof.

Where an English translation of a work quoted
in the text exists—as in the case of Dr. Bernard’s
Kant’s Kritik of Judgment —I have often availed
myself of it without considering acknowledgment
necessary.

C. K. OGDEN.

Magdalene College, Cambridge
March, 1914 .



CONTENTS


CRITICAL INTRODUCTION.

The Different Kinds of Teleology ... 1

PART I. HISTORICAL.


CHAPTER I.

THE OLD VITALISM.

( a ) Aristotle -.- 11

( b ) The New Science and the New Philosophy - 22

(i) The Old and the New.22

(ii) Harvey - 26

(iii) Georg Ernest Stahl.30

(c) Evolution, Epigenesis—and After - - 37

(i) The Outcome of the Dispute 37

(ii) Buffon. Needham. Maupertuis 40

(iii) Caspar Friedrich Wolff.44

(iv) Bonnet. Haller.49

. (v) Blumenhach ------- 57

( d ) KantCritique of Judgment” 66

(e) The Vitalism of the Nature-Philosophers - 93

(i) Oken.96

(ii) Beil - - ------ 98

(iii) Trevitanus ------- 100

(iv) The Dogmatic School ----- 107

(v) Johannes Muller.113

(vi) Liebig.118

(vii) Schopenhauer.121

(viiij The End of the Old Vitalism - - - 123


viii CONTENTS

CHAPTER II.

THE CRITICS: AND THE MATERIALISTIC
REACTION.

(a) Lotze.

( b ) Bernard.

(c) The Materialist-Darwinian Tendency -

CHAPTER III.

MODERN VITALISM.

1. The Tradition.

2. The Position op Philosophy -

(a) Eduard von Hartmann -

( b ) Other Philosophers.

(e) Psychologists.

(d) Edmund Montgomery

3. The Anti-Darwinian Theory op Descent

4. Neovitalism - -.

PART II. THEORETICAL.


Foreword ... .

A. Pure Logic ..

B. Nature.

C. Becoming --------

D. The Forms oe Becoming -

E■ Individualising and Singular Causality

F. The Empirical Proofs of Vitalism

O. The Problem of Sufrafersonal Individuality

H. Monism and Dualism.

/. Metaphysical Conclusions.


PAGE

127

132

137


149

158

158

161

161

163

167

170


187

189

190

191
195
202
207
216
223
232


CRITICAL INTRODUCTION.

THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF TELEOLOGY.

The main question of Vitalism is not whether the
processes of life can properly be called purposive : it
is rather the question if the purposiveness in those
processes is the result of a special constellation of
factors known already to the sciences of the inorganic,
or if it is the result of an autonomy peculiar to the pro¬
cesses themselves. For that there is, as a matter of
fact, much that is purposive in vital phenomena is
merely an immediate deduction from the definition
of the concept of purpose itself, and from the applica¬
tion of this definition to living beings.

Tn the language of everyday life, we designate
as purposive such actions as experience shows to
contribute directly or indirectly to a definitely
desired end—or of which this is at any rate assumed.
I judge all purposiveness in actions from my own
standpoint: that is to say, I know for myself when
my actions deserve the predicate purposive, because
I know my own objects. With this I start. The
actions of other men I describe as purposive if I
understand the object which they have in view :
that is to say, if I can imagine that that object could

A



2 INTRODUCTION

be my own, and consider them in relation to that
object.

But I do not limit the application of the word pur¬
posive to the actions of other men : I extend it
already in everyday life in two directions : and from
this extension arises, on the one hand, the application
of the word purposive or teleological to biology in
general, and, on the other, the fundamental problem
of biology itself.

I describe as purposive a great deal of animal
movement, not only in certain of the higher animals
whose movements are actually called actions, but
also that group of movements which, in view of their
constancy and coherence, are usually referred to not
as actions but as instincts or reflexes. From these
to the movements of plants which turn either
towards or away from the light is a very short step,
and it is only one step further to describe as pur¬
posive also those movements of growth which create
out of the germ the complete organisms of animals
and plants in a typical succession.

In this way, then, we finally get all phenomena in
the living being which can be shown to be directed
to a single point, thought of in some sense as an end,
subordinated to the purely descriptive concept of
purposiveness. From what we have said it will be
seen that a certain arbitrariness is unavoidable in the
designation of any event as teleological, for we can
only proceed here by analogy. This arbitrariness,
however, is not of any great consequence, as it may
be stated once and for all that the term is used at
this stage merely to give a certain orientation and
nothing more.



DIFFERENT KINDS OF TELEOLOGY 3

We have already said that, in order to describe a
process as purposive, it must be connected with the
idea of an end : it is thereby implied that the concept
of teleology is extended to many processes of very
different kinds, and also that it is limited to the
organic in the first place, at least in so far as so-called
natural objects in the narrower sense are concerned.
For it is only in relation to organisms that the pos¬
sibility of an end thus arbitrarily postulated can be
thought of, at any rate without further considera¬
tion. This is due, among other things, essentially to
the fact that relation to an end implies two things :
in the first place, the special adaptation of the process
in question to an end (or better, its position in a
system of objects thus typically adapted), and
secondly, its appearance in an indefinite number of
individuals or examples—in short, its unlimited
plurality. This is a postulate which in nature is
fulfilled in organic natural bodies, and at the first
glance only in them. We can therefore describe very
many biological processes as purposive.

We do, however, as a matter of fact, also describe
as purposive processes in certain objects which are
not organic, but which are not objects of “ nature ”
in the narrower sense—that is to say, in so far as we
can speak intelligibly if not strictly of “ culture ” as
an opposition to nature. The processes to which we
refer occur in artefacts due to the action of men.
Here we have our second extension of the concept
purposive of which we spoke, and here we may start
with our statement of the fundamental problem of
biology.

I do not think it wise to describe machines, as



4


INTRODUCTION


things, by the term purposive. This word should be
retained for processes, but every single process in a
machine is purposive. We may call the machine as
a whole “ practical ” : it is the result of purposive
action, of human action, but it is the fact that it
iB made for processes that distinguishes it from other
human artefacts, from works of art for instance.

There are, then, inorganic things, namely, those
made by men, which show us processes deserving
the predicate purposive. It is clear that here the
purposiveness of each single process rests on the
specific order of the specific parts of the machine,
and is determined by this order. In other words,
each single effect in a machine is only purposive in
so far as it is part of a higher specific whole ; and
this it is in virtue of the constitution or structure of
that whole.

Our reasoning has now brought us to a point at
which the problem which we have described as the
fundamental problem of biology presents itself for
consideration. We are confronted by the all import¬
ant question : are those processes in the organism,
which we described as purposive, perhaps only 'pur¬
posive in virtue of a given structure or tectonic, of
a “machine” in the widest sense, on the basis of
which they play their part, being purposive there¬
fore only in the sense in which processes in a
machine made by men are purposive ; or is there
another special kind of teleology in the realm of
organic life ?

It will be seen that we must first decide about the
ultimate laws of phenomena which we have hitherto
described only analogically in a more external



DIFFERENT KINDS OF TELEOLOGY 5


manner, for it cannot be too often repeated that the
mere assertion of purposiveness, mere teleology, to
use the general technical expression, is purely des¬
criptive. The term descriptive teleology will there¬
fore be used definitely throughout the whole of this
book to designate every descriptive view which deals
simply with the existence of purposiveness. Descrip¬
tive teleology leaves the most important point still
open, for life in particular this question : are the
processes of life to be judged teleological only in
virtue of their given order, only because a given
mechanical form lies beneath them, while every single
one is really a pure physical or chemical process—
or are the processes of life purposive because of an
unanalysible autonomy ?

For the future we shall use the terms static and
dynamic teleology to mark this opposition, in dis¬
tinction to merely descriptive teleology.

Static teleology leads to a mechanistic theory of the
organism : the process of life and its order is only a
special case of those laws which are valid elsewhere
and of the general order of the world. The constella¬
tion of all the single cosmic elements just happens to
be of such a nature that we also get amongst them
those processes which are grouped together as “ life.”
According to this view life is only distinctive as a
combination and not because of its own laws. The
question, whence comes the given order with which
static teleology operates, is insoluble; and it is pre¬
cisely owing to this circumstance that the life-
machine does appear to be something different from
technical machines whose origin we know, even if
the kind of purposiveness is the same in both cases.



6


INTRODUCTION


Dynamic teleology leads us to what is generally
called Vitalism ; it leads us to the recognition of the
“ Autonomy of vital processes.”

Which of these two views is the right one ?

The answer given in earlier times to this question,
and the answer which we ourselves give, it is the
purpose of this book to set forth ; and the object of
this introduction has been to prepare for such an
exposition.

The result of this introduction, the recognition that
is to say that there can be a static and a dynamic
teleology gives us a critical reagent, a criterion by
which we can test every body of doctrine offered by
history : with it we can ask what is the real meaning
of any theory, and we can do this even in those not
infrequent cases when an author himself is very far
from being clear as to the distinction between the
concepts descriptive-, static-, and dynamic-teleology.

Our introductory remarks have been written to
make easier our historical analysis and in consequence
the understanding of the whole : they must be con¬
sidered entirely as something preliminary and in no
way our final view with regard to purposiveness.

Turning, then, to the examination of the earlier
Vitalism and its development, we may remark once
and for all that our treatment is concerned less with
the personal element than with what is typical in the
view we may be considering ; and that consequently
no weight is laid on completeness in the sense of a
real history in the narrower sense, while on the
other hand a suitable choice of material is of all the
greater importance. If in spite of our search for the
typical it is impossible for us to make our exposition



DIEfERENT kinds or TELEOLOGY 1


appear not only as an historical but also at the same
time as a logical development or progress, such as we
find in standard histories of Mechanics or of the
theory of Heat, our failure Will only be blamed by
those who are ignorant of the peculiarities of our
subject. Mechanics is to a great extent an a priori
“ self-evident ” science, and the same is true of a
great part of physics, viz. thermodynamics : here
discovery is to a certain extent only getting clear
about one’s own views, and chance circumstances
play scarcely any part in questions of principle and
very little in the historical development. Biology
on the other hand is dependent in its progress in a
very high degree on such chance circumstances, on
“ discoveries ” in the narrower sense, and if its
history is not wholly composed of such yet they are
likely at any rate to obscure the really logical side of
its progressive development.


PART I.


HISTORICAL.


CHAPTER I.

THE OLD VITALISM.

(a) ARISTOTLE.

In an historical exposition of Vitalism which keeps
the typical always in view, Aristotle may on the
whole be regarded as representative of Antiquity.
Moreover, since his views on biological matters form
the basis of all theorising right into the eighteenth
century, he has also every right to be regarded as
representative of the medieval and early modem con¬
ceptions of life. The analysis of the Aristotelian
theory of life must therefore be one of the comer
stones of any historical work on biology.

Some parts of his works De Generaiione Animalium
and De Anima will come under consideration for
our purpose. We shall begin by analysing the
theoretical views exposed in the first of the above
works in order that, after we have seen how Aristotle
traces everything back to the activities of the soul,
we may turn to the statements of the other, which
are of a more fundamental nature.

It is highly interesting to realise that the first
exponent of a scientific “ vitalism ” takes as his



12 HISTORY OF VITALISM

point of departure the problems of formation, or
embryology as it is called to-day.

Already in this Aristotle is typical : and not only
is he a typical representative of antiquity and the
Middle Ages, but also a typical precursor of all
vitalistic theories until the most recent times. In
addition to the phenomena of co-ordinated animal
movements, those of formation from the germ have
always been the starting point of all Vitalism-

Male and female both contribute to the creation of
new life, for they both secrete seed (airep^u). But
the female secretion, which Aristotle identifies with
the monthly courses, supplies only the matter (vXtj),
whereas the male determines the form and principle 1
of the organic changes. The seed, as has been stated,
need not come from the whole body, for “ why can¬
not the seed at its origin be so created, that it can
turn into blood and flesh without itself having to be
blood and flesh ? ” The mingling of the male and
female secretion gives the germ (icv>]pa). It is of no
further consequence to us here that the germ divides
into eggs (<f>ov) and worms (er/cfoA^) according as to
whether the progeny springs from a part only—in
which case the rest serves as nutriment—or from the
whole of the germ.

What part now does the male seed play in the
development of that “ superior and more divine ”
element (fteXTiov k<i\ Qeiorepov), which is not materi¬
ally connected with the development.

Here begins Aristotle’s theory of development. It

1 etSos Koi dpxv -rijs /tu'jjtrews. The word kIvtjoii means in Aristotle
not only change of position : it is much more general. The same
is true of dpxv which means not only beginning in time.



ARISTOTLE


13


is introduced by a clear formulation of the problem.
“ We must examine more closely the way in which
a given plant or animal develops from the seed.
For everything must necessarily arise out of some¬
thing, and by something and as something (e<
Tivoi ica'i viro twos Kal Ti).” That from which it
arises is the matter supplied by the mother. “ We
are concerned here not with that out of which, but
with that by which the parts come into being.”

The supposition that this conditioning factor
by which the parts arise should be something
outside the seed is rejected as contradictory : it
therefore must lie within the seed, not indeed as
something separated from it, but as a real part of it
—transmitted to, and in turn becoming a part of
the progeny.

Aristotle knows through various observations that
the embryonic parts are not all simultaneously
present, but come successively into being ; and thus,
to use a modern term, we may call his theory
“ epigenetic.” How then do these parts come into
being : does the one form the other or do they simply
arise one after the other ? This somewhat dark
question is briefly answered. The heart, the first
visible part of the embryo, does not make the liver
and the liver again another part, but one part comes
into being after the other, just as the man succeeds
the boy, but does not come into being through him.
Otherwise, quite apart from the fact that there
would be no ground for the formation of the heart,
the nature and form of the liver would have to be
contained in the heart: for, according to Aristotle,
whenever anything is produced by nature or by



14 HISTORY OF VITALISM

art, there arises something which is potentially
(Svvdyei ov) through something which is in actuality
(eirreXe^da ov).

Thus we arrive at fundamental problems, and
moreover at fundamental difficulties of the Aris¬
totelian philosophy, and must therefore interrupt
our exposition.

The question is as to the words dynamis and ente-
lechy. By dynamis is not really meant what in
modern terminology would be called “ potentiality ”
or “ potential energy,” at least not that only, and in
any case not in the passage to which we have drawn
attention. The concept is much wider : by dynamis
the statue is already contained in the block of marble,
and indeed it is in this sense, as we shall see later on,
that Aristotle uses the word in our passage. Ente-
Iechy is that which “ is ” in the highest sense of the
word, even if it is not strictly a realised thing ; in
this sense the statue, before it is realised, exists in
the mind of the sculptor. We can see that the con¬
cept of entelechy rather than that of dynamis
corresponds, though not completely, to the modern
concept of the potential.

But further logical examination being foreign to
our present purpose we shall proceed with the
exposition.

There lies a manifest difficulty in the fact that,
as we have seen, one part of the growing body does
not, according to Aristotle, condition the formation
of another part, for this actually implies, to put it
briefly, that the cause of the differentiation of the
parts does not lie in the seed ; on the other hand, the
seed is to be regarded as a true part of the growing



ARISTOTLE


15


body. Yet it was stated earlier that the cause of the
differentiation cannot lie outside the germ.

How is this knot to be unravelled ?

An answer is found in the admission that, under
certain circumstances, a thing can come into being by
the action of something outside it. At this point
Aristotle reintroduces in a much wider form than
before that scheme, which he had not considered
applicable in the case of one organ being formed out
of another, for instance, the liver out of the heart :
“ there is something which forms the parts, though
not directly as an identifiable entity, nor yet as if
the final development were already existent in it.” 1

Morphogenesis as a whole is rather to be regarded
as a kind of artistic creation :

“ The manner in which each part arises must be
deduced from the principle that everything which
comes into existence either in nature or in art,
arises by something actually existent {inr’ evepyeta
ovroi), out of something, of a similar nature,
potentially existent (Suva/uet). Now the seed is
such, and with such an impulse and principle,
that, when the impulse ceases, each part comes
into being and comes moreover endowed with
soul.” *

This then is the main outline of the Aristotelian
theory of development. The view, also elaborated,
that each organic part is endowed with soul, that
for instance a dead eye is improperly so called, is

1 The original is : 8n fih o$v ion n 3 rote?, oi>x o#tms wt r6Se tL,

oWP ivfacapxov w* TcreXeofiivov t6 t pCrrov (De gen. an. IJ. i. 41.)

2 rb piv ovv <riripfia toioutov Kal tx €t Klvyjffty teal &PXV V TOtaisrrjv,
Gxrre fravofjLtvrjs Kirfyrew yIvcoOai {kogtov tQ>v popluv Kal tfupvxov.



16 HISTORY OF VITALISM

secondary to the chief contention : the seed forms
the body out of the matter supplied by the mother,
endowing it with a soul in virtue of a special prin¬
ciple ; this principle it derives from another entity,
from that which truly exists “'in activity.” It
therefore plays an intermediate part. That which
“ is ” in reality, from which everything derives, is
the creator or rather his soul.

A gap in the text interrupts any further exposi¬
tion ; but the foregoing embodies the essentials.

All development therefore resembles to a great
extent the production of works of art; Aristotle is
always returning to this simile. It is interesting to
notice with what nicety he points out the part of the
inanimate factors, both in development and art-pro¬
duction : hardness, softness, and other qualities
might well be influenced by heat and cold, but not
so the essence (tov Ao^or) of bones, for instance ; just
as heat and cold, though they make iron hard or soft,
yet produce no sword.

The distinction between a work of art and one of
nature is, however, not overlooked : “ art is the
source and form of what is becoming, working on
something outside itself; but the movement of
nature takes place in the thing itself, and proceeds
from a second entity which has this form
actually.”

It cannot be denied that Aristotle’s theory of
development is not entirely free from obscurities ;
indeed I venture to state that the obscurities of the
preceding argument are most probably not to be
ascribed exclusively to my manner of exposition,
however much this may leave to be desired. What



ARISTOTLE


17


in spite of all inspires us with the highest admiration
for the great Greek thinker is the way in which he
perpetually and manifestly struggles for clearness in
this hardest of all nature’s problems, how he turns
over and over again and goes deeply into the same
questions with the most delicate logical subtlety.
How clumsy compared to this is mostmodemresearch.

Aristotle briefly disposes of the question as to how
in each separate case the seed furnishes the develop¬
ing organism with a soul: it transmits to the secre¬
tion of the matrix the same movement by which it
is itself animated. This may happen because the
female is in reality a mutilated male and because
her monthly courses are seed which does not possess
the principle of soul.

Those different stages of the “ soul ” which to a
certain extent determine the various stages of the
organic are of more importance for us : plants
possess for their lifetime, and animals at the outset,
only the nutritive soul (to BpeirriKov), which is the
soul of growth (av^jjriKov) and also identical with
that generative {yewtjTiKov) already existing as a
principle in the seed. Later on animals are endowed
with the sensitive soul ( aio-drjTtKov ) connected with the
appetitive (opeicTiKov) ; it is precisely in virtue of
this that they are animals. Men alone have that
third endowment Reason (iW?), which alone comes
“ from without ” (Oupctdev) and is divine (6eioi>).

But this point leads into Aristotle’s theory of the
soul, and it will not be amiss to draw upon his three
books De Anima for a few elucidations of the
above exposition.

The possession of one of the stages of the soul

B



18 HISTORY OF VITALISM

above enumerated is sufficient to animate the body,
for life in its broadest sense is “ the nourishment,
increase and decrease of a thing through itself.” If
it possesses many stages of the soul then all the
lower are contained in the highest, “ as the triangle
is contained in the quadrilateral,” and each lower
stage serves the higher as a tool; for bodies are
after all only tools (opyavov) of the spiritual, and
“ exist only for the sake of the soul.”

It has already been explained that the soul as an
actuality, as an “ entelechy,” organises the body ;
here again, and in a yet higher sense, Aristotle calls
the soul “ the principle (apyri) of all things living,”
to reach later his famous definition that the soul in
the broadest sense is “ the first actuality (-n-pwrij
evreXeyeia) of a natural body, having in it the capa¬
city of life, and of one possessed of organs.”

This, if the words be rightly interpreted, conveys
all that the great thinker had to say : the soul is the
sufficient ground for the existence of the organic
body, for its mode of existence and for its behaviour
in every respect. The soul is actuality in the highest
sense, i.e. in that of “ scientific, not of immediate
knowledge.”

The question whether soul and body are one has
as little sense as in the case of wax and its form.
The soul cannot exist without a body, yet it is not
the body but rather something inherent in the body ;
“ if the eye were a living being, then eyesight would
be its soul, this being the substance as notion or
form of the eye ; and the eye would be the matter
of the eyesight.”

All the lower stages of the soul serve as has been



ARISTOTLE


19


said as tools to human reason (vovs), as the highest
stage. The passions belong to these lower stages ;
and it is not therefore the highest soul “ which is
angry or pities, but the man that does so with the
soul.” Old age, too, must be due to an affection not
of the soul as such but of the body, in which it has
its dwelling. “ Thought and the exercise of know¬
ledge weaken with old age, because something else
within decays ; thought itself is impassive.”

Reason alone is immortal since it has come from
without and is divine : when a body dies “ there is
neither memory nor love, for these never did belong
to the thinking faculty but to the composite whole
which has perished.”

This must suffice to make clear the general lines of
Aristotle’s view of life ; we cannot here enter on
more subtle logical disquisitions concerning the con¬
ceptions Dynamis, Entelecheia, and Energeia, or
into discussions about Matter Form (elSos), and
Substance ( ovala ) ; on Hegel, however, as is well
known, these conceptions exercised a great influence.

Aristotle’s theory of life is pure Vitalism, and I
may call it primitive or naive Vitalism, for it arose
from an entirely impartial contemplation of life’s
phenomena, and not as the result of struggle against
other doctrines. Only very rarely, as in the remark
that heat and cold do not yet make a sword, can
a careful observer see that Aristotle was so much as
aware of rival views : 1 yet we know he was opposed

1 In his De Anima ho once attacks the view of Democritus
that the soul must be moved in space because it can move.
There are, he says, four kinds of movement (kI^o-is) and not
only movement in space : the other three are qualitative change,
growth, and decay. Moreover, it is not necessary for that which
moves to be moved itself.



20 HISTORY OP VITALISM

by materialists of the Democritean school and that
Epicurus’ teaching at a later date was responsible
for yet other such adversaries. Perhaps Aristotle
thought that the firm foundation of his theory or
facts contrasted sufficiently with the airy hypotheses
of the Democritean school to absolve him from the
necessity of a detailed refutation.

Towards the end of the De Generatione Animalium,
Aristotle summarises what differentiates his con¬
cept of nature from that of his opponents. We
may appropriately introduce the passage at this
point, for it also summarises in concise language his
vitalistic theory—his viewabout the autonomy of life:

“ In the works of nature which conform to order
and to law individual things do not possess their
proper character in virtue of the fact that they have
had such and such qualities from the beginning : it
is rather because they are specifically such as they
are that they are produced with such qualities.
Their origin and development is determined by their
essence (ot 'ala) and are for the sake of that essence :
the essence does not depend on the origin. The old
nature-philosophers (cpvaioXoyoi) were of the opposite
opinion, because they failed to recognise that there
are several kinds of cause : they only knew the
material cause and the efficient cause, and even
these not according to their difference, and left out
of consideration the formal and final causes.”

Modem philosophy can, however, borrow from the
system of Democritus the concept of necessity in
nature on which Aristotle does not lay sufficient
stress—though the dogmas of the materialistic school
may seem to us of no value.



ARISTOTLE


21


The importance of Aristotle’sbio-theoreticalsystem
cannot be overestimated. Although basing himself
upon Plato, he rejected his influence in respect of
natural science in its narrower sense, owing to his
greater logical precision : in his conception of “ Ente-
lechy ” he created the link between idea and reality
which is lacking in Plato ; and this creation was just
what the theoretical investigation of nature required.
In biological, as in so many other matters, Aristotle
is the authority till right into the middle of the
eighteenth century, and for many right on into the
middle of the nineteenth century. In the following
considerations we shall meet with his views again
and again under various forms.

The fact that our modern standards enable us to
say : Aristotle “ asserts ” more than he proves,
naturally does not weaken his influence upon a
period which did not lay much stress upon verifica¬
tion. And we, who are proud of our insistence upon
rigorous demonstration, and whose intellectual con¬
science has reached so high a degree of refinement—
we, too, shall come to see at the end of this book
that Aristotle’s assertions have at any rate been
justified by recent research.



(i b) THE NEW SCIENCE AND THE NEW
PHILOSOPHY.

(i) THE OLD AND THE NEW.

The real and fundamental difference between
ancient and modern science is the habit, which
began with Galileo, of quantitative and analytic
thought about natural processes ; or one might also
attribute it to the acquisition of the conception of
natural law which dominates modem thought.

The ancients, it is true, knew of single quantitative
relations in nature, such as the principle of the lever
and the concept of specific gravity ; but those were
isolated instances : geometry alone among sciences
connected with nature (1 do not say “ natural ”
sciences) was developed in a complete and general
form.

We have the well-known description in the excel¬
lent works of Diihring and Mach how the great dis¬
covery of the law of falling bodies was followed by a
constant sequence of further contributions, all of
real importance for the understanding of natural
law ; until, through the great systematiser Newton,
there was effected a synthesis of all that had been
hitherto attained. But all that had been attained
was mechanics, both in the broad and narrow sense



DESCARTES. LEIBNITZ 23

—an insight into potential and existing motions and
equilibria of masses.

It is not surprising that so proud and victorious
an advance in a sphere of knowledge which at that
time was the sphere of knowledge, should have exer¬
cised its influence on the totality of all thought
connected in any way with nature, and therefore on
a great part of philosophy. Aristotle also had
been particularly influenced by that special sphere
with which he was most directly connected, that
is by biology, although neither his method of in¬
vestigation nor his information conform to the more
exacting claims of to-day.

Thus, with the great philosophers of the Renais¬
sance, the whole theory of nature is under the
influence of mechanics, and is mechanical : and
the theory of life also becomes mechanical.

In this book we need take philosophy into account
not for its own sake, but only in so far as it reflects
actual scientific thought. It will therefore suffice
for our purpose (all the more because we are writing
a history of Vitalism and not of the contrary theory)
to remark that both Descartes and Leibnitz adopted
a mechanistic view of life.

Nature as a whole, including the physical processes
of life in the broadest sense, is for both a mechanical
system, arranged by God. The spiritual, which they
do not count with nature, is of course for them
something thoroughly different, and therefore they
are not metaphysical materialist; and Leibnitz
particularly is at great pains to establish clearly the
relation between the two great divisions of Being.
But as far as nature itself, life included, is concerned,



24 HISTORY OF VITALISM

Descartes and Leibnitz and their followers behaved
like materialists. Only in man, acoording to Des¬
cartes, is the mechanical causality of nature broken
by the soul, but with Leibnitz there is not even a
question (to use modern terminology) of a “ psycho¬
physical causality.”

Such opposition as was forthcoming to the mechan¬
istic theories of the philosophers was by no means
suited to diminish their influence. Colourless
Aristotelianism, diluted mysticism, inherited from
the Middle Ages, was all that the supporters of
Vitalism could bring forward : only thoughts about
thoughts or about books, not, as with the great
mechanists, thoughts based on an immediate study
of nature. Hence one can readily understand how
mechanism exercised such a deep influence on the
schools 1 of the so-called Iatromechanists and latro-
chemists ; it was at least clear, one knew what it
stood for, whereas all that one got out of J. B. van
Helmont’s 4 Archeus, for example, was at best not
more than an inferior edition of Aristotle’s teaching
about the soul.

As we have mentioned Helmont, a few words with
regard to his personal views on the matter may be
introduced here.

The fact that he professes to cast Aristotle aside,
calling him ridiculous and ignorant (ridiculus and

1 Borelli (1608-1679), Hales (1678-1761), etc. Particulars in
vol. ii. of Cl. Bernard’s work mentioned in the prefaoe. Also
Boerhaave (1668-1738), whose Institutiones medicae (1708, 27th
edition, Leiden 1721), a very important work, in that its general
atmosphere is one of sober fact rather than of mere theory.

! 1677-1644. Chief work, Ortug Medicinae. New edition by
his son : Amsterdam, 1662.



HELMONT


25


naturae ignarus), need not affect our judgment: the
finished form, the end, cannot be an effective cause,
says the modern author in his zeal against the master
of antiquity. 1 Aristotle of course would never have
suggested such a thing. His conception of the etSoi ,
which appears as “ forma ” in Helmont, was too
much of a refinement for the latter’s mental
capacity. The eTSos is the absolutely and eternally
real, but, in respect of each single realisation, it
is the possible : as indeed the scholastics were well
aware.

But Helmont believes he is saying something new
when he introduces his Archeus (against Aristotle)
as the “ smith ” (faber) who bears within himself
the image of what he has produced and what he is
going to produce, and arranges the course of develop¬
ment in conformity with those images. 2 This is
really and unmistakably the Aristotelian teaching—
only less profound.

The fact, moreover, that Helmont is completely
under the spell of Hebrew-Christian dogma and
tradition (Paradise and Hell are constantly mentioned
in his discussions), does not exactly enhance the

1 “ Nam in primis, cum omnia cauaa . . . causato sit prior :
certe, forma compositi causa esse nequit producti : sod potius
Entelechia ultima generationis, ipsissimaque generati essentia,
atque perfectio.” The word “ Entelechy ” is here very imper¬
fectly understood. “ Forma enim, cum sit generationis finis, non
est mere actus generationis : sed generati.”

2 “ Quidquid enim Aristoteles tribuit formae, sive perfeotioni
postremae, in scena rerum, id proprie, directive et exsecutive
competit . . . Archeo seminali.” “ Ille inquam faber, generati
imaginem habet, ad cujus initium, destinationes rerum agendarum
componit. Constat Archeus vero, ex connexione vitalis aurae,
velut materiae, cum imagine seminali, quae est interior nucleus
spiritualis, foecunditatem seminis continens.”



26 HISTORY OF VITALISM

value of his teaching as compared with that of the
unfettered Greek.

Not until the reappearance of a physiology and a
theory of development independently founded on
observation, and to a certain extent experimental,
are the great problems of biology treated in a
manner worthy of closer discussion, and removed
from scholastic and materialistic dogma. The
reader will perhaps object to the word “ indepen¬
dently ” after having read the following sections
dealing with Harvey and Stahl; to such a degree
does everything remain dependent upon Aristotle’s
authority. Nevertheless, it is always new facts with
which they are dealing and about which they are
thinking, and their method is one which makes an
honest endeavour to win clearer views from a study
of the actual objects or ideas in question.

(ii) HARVEY.

William Harvey (1578-1657), the discoverer of the
circulation of the blood, and the champion of the
famous “ omne vivum ex ovo ” brings forward in
his book Exercitationes de generatione animalium 1
a large number of theoretical considerations con¬
cerning the nature of the process of development
which had forced themselves upon him in the course
of his observations.

We have already been warned by His not to look
for anything too modem in the “ omne vivum ”
phrase : Harvey was by no means opposed to the
theory of spontaneous generation ; which on the
contrary he adopted for worms, insects, etc. His
1 London, 1651.



HARVEY


27


phrase is only intended to mean that if there
are germs, their nature is uniform throughout the
organic world, and is merely opposed to Aristotle’s
division of all germs into “ eggs ” and “ worms.”

But this is not our chief concern. It is Harvey’s
theory of conception that is of capital importance.
It occurs “ per contagium aliquod ” as a kind of in¬
fection, just as illnesses occur ; but in opposition to
Aristotle, Harvey holds that both father and mother
play an essentially active part, that the function of
the latter is not only to supply the material.

Conception, as is well known, is called “ conceptio,”
just as the spontaneous appearance of series of
thoughts is called “ conception.” This is completely
justified : “ sunt ambae immateriales ” : neither of
the “ conceptiones ” are material, in fact the uterus
is in a way parallel to the brain.

It seems here as though Harvey had been led
astray through a mere form of words, through the
use of the word conception in two meanings without
further reference to its theoretical consequences.
The “ aura seminalis ” of later times is a true
offspring of Harvey’s theory of generation.

The egg which results from this process, and which
is ready for development, is a singular object; it is
in every respect a “ medium quid,” a mean, both
between “ principium et finis ” and between the
sexes, between the animate and the inanimate, and
between matter and something that has in itself
constructive capacity. It is not exactly a part
of the mother, but lives on her through its own
life as a fungus on a tree (propria sua vita). It is
a “ corpus naturale ” but a natural body endowed



28 HISTORY OF VITALISM

with soul, though not animated by the mother’s
soul ; it is not “ opus uteri ” but “ opus animae,”
the product not of the uterus but of the soul.

We recognise here both dependence on Aristotle
and an earnest struggle for clearness in the subject
itself ; Harvey looks, specially in matters of actual
fact, with great respect back on his teacher Fabricius
ab Aquapendente.

Before delineating the actual phenomena of
development, he expressly ascribes to the egg the
Aristotelian “ anima vegetativa,” “ actu,” the
“ anima sensitiva,” “ potentia.”

The development itself occurs “ potius per epi-
genesin quam per metamorphosin,” rather through
new—than through trans-formation (to anglicise the
Graeco-Latin words which have become technical
expressions).

The development occurs as though under the
direction of an “ opifex ” i.e. a master builder ; there
is a certain “ principium ” in tho germ cells, out
of which and from which (ex quo et a quo) they
issue. This principle could be called “ primordium
vegetale,” something in itself existing and capable
of taking on different forms. 1

All this goes little further than Aristotle and is
very indefinite. Harvey penetrates far deeper when
he tries to lay down the differences between his
“ principium ” and the conscious soul whose
“ higher ” faculties he endeavoured to characterise.
Certain of these characterisations closely resemble

1 “ Lieeat hoo nobis primordium vegetale nominare ; nempe
subetantiam quandam corpoream, vitam habentem potentia;
vel quoddam per se existenB, quod aptum sit, in vegetativam
formam ab intemo principio operante mutari,”



HARVEY


29


views, which we find expressed much later by
Johannes Miiller :

That which is indigenous and innate (connatum
et insitum) in the principle of nature, man has to
learn; he, therefore, who with no further remark
compares natural bodies with productions of art,
is not a competent judge (aequus aestimator) of
nature.

Harvey tries to improve matters with the words
“ deus sive natura naturans sive anima mundi ” ;
and he ends by saying, in an almost epistemological
form, that it only appears to our thinking (con-
ceptui nostro) as if there were intelligence in the
objects of nature, because we judge the divine
works of nature accordingly to our capacities. 1

Harvey is not a Vitalist in the interests of a pre¬
conceived theory any more than Aristotle; he
wishes to put into words what he has found out
about nature through experience ; and obviously
this to him takes the form of a peculiar vital auto¬
nomy. 2 He proves just as little as his great precursor,

1 “ Quoniam igitur in pulli fabrica are et providentia non minus
elucesount, quam in hominis ac totius mundi creations, necease
ease fatemur, in goneratione hominis, causam efficientem ipso
homine superiorem et prnestantiorem dari.—Nam, quod in nobis
operationum artificialium prineipium est, intellectus aut pro¬
videntia, id in natural]bus acquisitum. Ideoque, ad artificialia
qui respiciunt, haud aequi rerum naturalium aestimatores
habendi sunt.—Fatendum est in naturae operibus nec prudentiam
neo artificium neque intelloctum inesse ; sed ita solum videri
eonceptui nostro, qui secundum artes nostras et facultates de
rebus naturae divinis iudicamus.”

* According to His, Harvey’s teleology was rather indefinite
and metaphysical than conceived as real, and would consequently
be similar to the views of the later Philosophers of Nature. I
find myself unable to subscribe to this view, however, and on



30


HISTORY OP VITALISM


but he struggles with deep earnestness after a more
and more complete conception and exposition of the
unveiled mysteries.

Harvey’s theoretical conclusions did not have any
great influence ; and yet they are more critical and
more cautious than the views of that successor
who was considered during almost a whole century
as the authority in matters vitalistic, and whom we
shall now introduce.

(iii) GEORG ERNEST STAHL (1660-1734).

The originator of the phlogiston-theory in Che¬
mistry worked for many years as professor in Halle.
In his Theoria medico, vera , 1 he imparts his views on
life in general—views which be it said at once do
not strike one as at all modem, and which we shall
treat at some length only because of their great
influence. Almost every writer on biology until
the end of the Age of Enlightenment can be con¬
sidered from the point of view of his relation to
Stahl.

Stahl starts with a logical examination of the
concepts organism and mechanism and the difference
between them ; the latter, he says, is subordinate
to the former. Mixture and life (mixtio et vita)
differ in the same way, as also “ aggregatum et indi-
viduum ” ; the living body has a “ mixtio specialis ”
and an “ aggregatio specialis ” each of a great

the ground of his “ primordium vegetale,” “ anima vegetotiva,”
“ opifex,” etc., I believe that I am justified in seeing in Harvey a
true Vitalist, a dynamic teleologist.

‘Second edition, Halle, 1737.



STAHL


31


variety. It is just because of its extreme fragility
that the living body requires special powers of
preservation.

Chance (casus) then in the sense of Democritus or
Epicurus is not a sufficient explanation of a living
body; we must start from the everlasting laws,
“ leges aetemae,” of the ancients. He rejects any
machine theory in deliberate opposition to the
Cartesians “ qui corpus humanum machinam abso-
lutam esse volunt,” and who hold that the soul is
superimposed on the body (superinduci), as it were
for purposes of contemplation only.

The real conscious soul is the first cause of life.
It is a threefold being (ens triplex), that is to say,
an active, moving, reasoning being (ens activum,
movens et intelligens), and creates the body, because
it needs an “ instrumentum.” Therefore, only
because of and through the soul, and for no other
reason, does the organism exist; 1 the soul however
works upon the body by means of its passions
(pathemata). The soul without the body w r ouid
be impotent, both passively and actively. Its
peculiar activity however is motion, directed and
coordinated (motus, quos derigit et instruit).

If at this point we suspend our description for a
moment, the “ soul,” according to Stahl’s view,
appears as the fundamental principle both of the
origin of the body and also of all its functions. It
is, in modern terminology, the subject matter of

1 “ Non solum corpus simpliciter propter animam humanam,
rationalem inquam, existere necessario oportet, sed etiam
absolute propter nullam oliam rem.” “ Anima rationalis non
solum corpori huic in eat, sed etiam et per illud agit sentiendo,
et in illud agit, motus locales producendo.”



32 HISTORY OF VITALISM

functional physiology and of the physiology of
development . 1

Stahl knows very well that in ascribing all those
activities to the reasonable soul, to the “ anima
rationalis ” he is entering into disagreement with
most other physiologists. In addition to the
“ anima rationalis,” Aristole bad allowed the
“ anima vegetativa ” and the “ anima sensitiva ” ; to
the last two he ascribes a certain “ yvuxri^,” 2 to
the first alone does he grant “ intellectus.” Helmont
on the other hand, spoke of a soul with higher and
lower faculties, and this was moreover “ plausi-
bilis ” because whoever can do much can also do
little (“ quod qui potest plus, potest etiam minus ”).
But on the whole all these inquiries are “ steriles,”
and superfluous into the bargain : one can manage
quite well with the “ anima rationalis ” alone.

Quite untenable is the objection that the reason¬
able soul cannot set anything in motion because it
is immaterial: and in any case the difficulty, suppos¬
ing it to exist, is not removed by mediating factors ;
because they too are either material or immaterial,
so that at some point of the chain that transition
would have to take place.

Perhaps it could be urged that the reasonable
soul has no knowledge or record of the vegetative
functions (conscientia, recordatio et memoria) ; but
Stahl destroys this objection also, first by means of

1 “ Ipsa anima et struit sibi corpus, ita ut ipsius usibus quibus
solis servit, aptum sit, et regit illud ipsum, actuat, movet, directe
atque immediate, sine alterius moventis interventu aut con-
cursu.”

* Stahl uses the Greek word which means something such as
“ instinctive knowledge.”



STAHL


33


a “ scholastic ” 1 investigation (in a bad sense) and
then by a process of argument far less objectionable
a.nd almost modem, saying that when the soul
thinks or compares it does not know exactly what it
is doing, and that the act of remembering is as
such unconscious; 2 precisely the same may be
stated about the will, which does not really act with
consciousness. Therefore, the fact that the soul
is ignorant of anything does not disprove a causal
relation.

There is after these fundamental statements no
special interest in following Stahl’s more detailed
treatment, because with him single facts and their
explanation hardly come into consideration : and
only on what he says about the question of develop¬
ment of form need a few words be added.

It is an unnecessary multiplication of fictions
(supervacuae multiplicationes rerum fictitiarum) to
ascribe a “ vis plastica ” or a “ spiritus genitalis ”
to the sperm, because the reasoning soul is sufficient
for all ; for the rest, the fact of maternal impressions
is decisive in favour of the soul. What remains
doubtful is the question, how the parent soul can

1 He distinguishes the concepts \uy os and \bycauos : \lryos=
“ intellectus simplex, simpliciorum, imprimis autem subtilisai-
morum ” ; Aoytcr^oi— “ ratiocinatio atquc comparatio plurium
et insuper quidem per crassissimas circumstantial sensibiles,
visibiles et tangibiles notorum.”

* “ Imo altius cogitandum est, quod etiam in ipsis adeo ipsius
rationis absolute propriis actibus, eorumque specifica et formali
suprema determinations constituenda, anima neque ratio-
conscientiam, saltern quod hoc agat, ne dum memoriam sive
quomodo hoc egerit, quod tamen agit, habeat. Quotus quisque
enim, aut quoties, cogitat quod cogitet ? Quis hominum ration©
adsoquitur, quomodo cogitot ? Ne dum ut huius meminerit,
quomodo factum sit ? ”

C



34 HISTORY OF VITALISM

at all be related to a body in process of formation
and foreign to it. Now the soul is related not only
to the “ corpus formatum ” but also to the “ corpus
formandum,” not only to the formed body but also
to that which is to be formed—and whoever is not
satisfied with this explanation may propose some¬
thing better.

The necessary dividing up of the soul is quite
conceivable, because its functions, namely the
movements, are divisible . 1

I think the reader will not be unfair in describing
these statements as “ steriles et otiosae quaestiones,”
at any rate Stahl’s treatment of the question is rather
“ empty and idle.”

Before leaving Stahl, we will record his valuable
reflection that it is not the mother’s blood that
creates the embryo, and will also give our author
the chance once more to sum up his views.

“ Propterea vero haec toties repetenda sunt, ul
memori utique mente haereant, quod primae undique
partes perpetuo sint actionum, minime vero materia-
rum : at actionum quidem minime in materiis, sed
in materias : adeo ut hae ad illas simpliciter passive,
et generaliter indifferenter sese habeant et omnino
activae disposition! atque coaptationi in quamlibet
struoturam atque figuram pure obsequantur. Quod
notandum.”

Or as freely translated : “ It cannot be too often
repeated that the basis of Life consists of activity
not matter; and of activity not in matter but
operating on it in such a manner that the matter

1 “ Cura motus sit res adeo divisibilis, etiam movens videri
potest divisibile.”



STAHL


35


remains purely passive and indifferent, and merely
obeys the activity which distributes and orders it
in a given structure.”

Had such a theory really any claim to exercise
an influence over so many decades ? Can we detect
any advance however small on the biological views
of Aristotle—and must we not rather admit an actual
retrogression. Philosophy, in Stahl’s day, was
just awakening to the need for a critical theory of
knowledge, and in view of this fact is not the episte¬
mological framework of the whole unnecessarily
confused ? Certainly the fact that he was able to
found a “ school ” must be ascribed to a large
extent to the external authority which his name
acquired as that of a professor who had long exer¬
cised a wide influence in his official capacity. That
he was filled with a sense of his own importance is
clear from the tone which pervades all his work,
and from which nothing is further removed than the
spirit of scientific research : for he is essentially
a dogmatist, and scrupulously neglects everything
which is in any way inconvenient to his theories.

Yet the effect of Stahl’s book can also be under¬
stood without reference to such influences, even
though it is wanting in those positive foundations
which give such stability to Harvey’s theories. It
is the magnitude of his whole conception which
strikes us in reading Stahl ; and his prevision of all
logical consequences arising out of his views though
such consequences especially when they threaten
difficulties are often very summarily dealt with.
The whole structure was, in point of theory of know¬
ledge, not so clear as it ought to have been or indeed



36 HISTORY OF VITALISM

could have been, but it was at least free from
mysticism. It was after all something very different
from van Helmont’s phantasies.

Stahl gave us the first great scientific system of
theoretical biology after Aristotle ; and as such a
real system, as a logically constructed edifice, it
had more influence than earlier efforts, similar to it
but more phantastic (van Helmont); more influence
than contemporary constructions with a better
epistemological foundation but conceived in a
meaner style (Harvey); more influence, finally, than
contemporary systems of a weaker kind, 1 with
which it had to compete.

I doubt whether all those who later speak of
Stalil have read the Theoria vera. He was known
as a kind of type. I have never found anything
quoted out of him.

Stahl’s is an “ Animist,” not a “ Vitalist ” if
we draw a distinction here : yet the difference was
quickly lost sight of, and in the school of Mont¬
pellier, 2 where Stahl’s influence was specially great,
there were to be found Vitalists of every degree.

And now we shall consider some scientific theories
where matters of fact play a more important part
than in what we have described so far.

1 The originator of such a theory was, for instance, B. F.
Hoffmann (1660-1742): “ Philosophia corporis humani vivi et
sani,” 1718, Opuscula medico-practica, Halle, 1736.

* For details see Claude Bernard, XI.



(c) EVOLUTION, EPIGENESIS—AND AFTER.

(i) THE OUTCOME OE THE DISPUTE.

It is pre-eminently the discovery of a large number
of new facts that gives to the history of biology at
the close of the seventeenth century its peculiar
character ; and as a result of these very facts new
problems and new theories came into existence.
Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723) had discovered the
spermatozoa; 1 Swammerdam (1637-1680) and
Malpighi (1628-1694) and others had brought to
light a multitude of facts bearing upon the embry¬
ology of chickens, frogs and insects ; Bonnet (1720-
1793), Needham (1713-1781), Haller (1708-1777),
Wolff (1733-1794), extended and developed these
considerably; Reaumur (1683-1757), Trembley (1700-
1784), and Spallanzani (1729-1799), discovered
the power of regeneration in animals, chiefly
through experiments made upon fresh-water
polyps and worms. Any further treatment of
these discoveries belongs to a general history of
zoology.

It is the theories that were matured by the
discoveries which interest us ; but these theories

1 Or rather they were discovered under his direction. The
student Hamm was aotualJy the first to see them.



38 HISTORY OF VITALISM

are connected with the formulation of certain
problems, of which three rose into pre-eminence :
the question of the laws regulating the embryology
of the organism, the question of the laws which
govern regeneration, and the question of the origin of
the germ. The last question includes the problems
of generation, and of so-called heredity, and also
that of so-called “spontaneous ” generation.

The theories, or attempts at a solution of these
problems, group themselves in the following logical
framework.

Development can take place either on the ground
of a pre-existence of the form in the germ (in which
case it is only growth of something already existing),
or it is the construction of something differentiated
out of something more or less undifferentiated. This
division gives us, to begin with, the comprehensive
fundamental concepts of evolution and epigenesis.

Now the conception of evolution may be confined
to the actual development from the germ, whereas
the genesis of the germ itself is regarded as a new
formation, as epigenesis ; or on the other hand, all
new formation may be denied. The theory of
evolution then becomes the theory of “ emboite-
ment,” and it is asserted that all germs boxed up
in each other have pre-existed ever since the creation.
Here again a division takes place on the ground
as to whether the male or the female contribution
to the germ is the bearer of this enclosed element.
We thus get the two schools of the “ Animalculists ”
and the “ Ovulists.”

Epigenesis, on the other hand, may be thought of
not only as new formation of something organised



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 39

out of that which is absolutely devoid of order, but
also as the new formation of the highly organised
out of an organisation of a lower order.

This last concept leads us on to modern views ;
it reconciles to a certain extent evolution and epi¬
genesis. But it was just this concept which was the
last to be adopted by the older thinkers with whom
we are here concerned. Hence, we must beware
of attributing to them ideas which are familiar
enough to us. The mere fact that for them the con¬
ception of epigenesis, at any rate to begin with, is in¬
variably connected with the conviction of the reality
of spontaneous generation warns us to be careful.

The more important investigators distribute them¬
selves as follows among the various possible views
which we have distinguished.

Swammerdam, Malpighi, Bonnet, Haller, Spallan¬
zani and others are evolutionists in the strictest and
broadest sense, and “ Ovulists ” too ; Leeuwenhoek,
Hartsoeker and other's, of whom Leibnitz is one, are
“ Animalculists.” Needham and Maupertuis are
thorough-going supporters of epigenesis, and so is
Buffon for the genesis of the germ, though an
evolutionist as regards its development. Wolff and
Blumenbach may be reckoned the chief representa¬
tives of an improved epigenesis ; and with them we
reach the threshold of a new period.

All believers in epigenesis are Vitalists, and it is
just for this reason that the whole controversy is
of such great importance to us. And yet with
regard to their theoretical position a few only of
the writers we have named can be considered of
any importance; and some of the most eminent



40


HISTORY OF VITALISM


of the observers and experimenters, curiously all
evolutionists, are the least conspicuous for the
independence of their theorising. Such are Swam¬
merdam, Leeuwenhoek, Spallanzani, Reaumur,
Trembley and others.

We shall now endeavour to gain a somewhat
closer acquaintance with scientists of theoretical
importance during this period.

(ii) BUFFON. NEEDHAM. MAUPERTUIS.

In his famous Histoire Naturelle 1 George Louis
Leclerc Buffon submitted the processes of generation
and development to a searching analysis, and we
have already pointed out how to a certain extent
this analysis led him into both the opposed camps.

A tree, a polyp, in short all organisms which have
the power of readjusting their structure or of
multiplying by means of buds, are to be thought of as
consisting of nothing but small parts from which
they may spring again. These parts are as it were
the organisms themselves on a small scale, just
as the single crystals of a cube of salt are the cube
itself in miniature. In those organisms which
are deprived of the power of budding and of regene¬
ration, the germs at any rate are such wholes in minia¬
ture. All growth is thus only the putting together
of similar parts already present according to their
nature ; the tree is already in the grain.

This is orthodox evolutionism. But now the
question arises for Buffon : are all future grains
contained in that grain ? He answers this question
in the negative—to invent a theory which on the
1 Paris, 1749.



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 41

one hand makes him a Vitalist, and on the other
bears a certain degree of resemblance to Darwin’s
famous theory of Pangenesis. 1

It is an “ inner form,” a “ moule interne,”
which, already representing the whole as manifold,
directs its development, i.e. the mere growth, and
imparts order to the newly-set substance. This
order arises “ from the arrangement of all the parts
of the inner form.”

What is the origin of this “ moule interne ” ?
It does not lie in some other pre-existing form—that
would be absurd ; it is the result of peculiar forces
which are due to the element of life itself. It is
interesting to note that BufFon ascribes to these
forces that ordered juxtaposition of molecules which
arises from the ordered nature of the inner form ;
so that his own evolutionistic theory of development,
is also not properly a “ machine theory.”

But the forces of which the “ moule interne ”
is the result, act in such a way as to appropriate to
themselves all superfluities from the material which
promotes growth 2 and collect it in a specific order
in the genital organs ; here lies the analogy with
the theory of pangenesis. Like all our author’s
views which refer to the physiology of nutrition,
the details of the account remain more or less
obscure. At any rate the origin of the germs is

1 It should be noticed here that the ancient view, rejected
already by Aristotle, according to which the seed has its origin
in the whole body, was a precursor of Darwin’s theory.

- He sees in the spermatozoa superfluous particles forming
the “ moule ” : they would themselves severally be neither able
to develop nor to generate, and in any case they are not, as
Leeuwenhoek would have them, preformed animals.



42 HISTORY OF VITALISM

here interpreted in a truly vitalistic sense, and we
have already briefly noted that Buffon, in spite of
his evolutionistic theory of development, allows that
the formation of the germs is effected by peculiarly
vital forces.

In order to justify his position Buffon chiefly
combats the Cartesian theory : it seemed to him “ a
vain and baseless procedure to refuse to attribute
to matter any properties outside those which we
have already discovered it to possess.” The “ moule
interne ” is therefore a force quite as specific as
gravitation.

Here Buffon is clearly on quite modern paths ;
and in general he discusses scientific methodology with
so much acumen that I cannot refrain from quoting :

“ Le defaut de la philosophie d’Aristote dtoit
d’employer comme tous les effets particuliors, celui
de celle de Descartes est de ne vouloir employer
comme causes, qu’un petit nombre d’effets generaux,
en donnant l’exclusion a tout le reste. II me semble
que la philosophie sans defaut seroit celle ou 1'on
n’employeroit pour causes que les effets generaux
mais ou l’on chercheroit en memo temps a en aug-
menter le nombre, en tachant de generaliser les
effets particulars.”

Buffon lays stress upon the fact that he in no way
intends by his postulation of a special life-force to
cast any doubt on the fundamental principles of
mechanics, which do but describe the universal
workings of nature.

We shall I think meet with general agreement if
in summing up our critique of Buffon’s achievements
we judge the methodological justification of his



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 43

Vitalism more important than the Vitalism itself.
Vitalism he did not even try to prove by way of
trial, but the fact that Buffon did try to demonstrate
its scientific legitimacy raises a naive into a conscious
theory. Where Buffon is greater than Stahl (though
the latter’s analytic leaves Buffon far behind) is
in the fact that he deliberately affirms : I am saying
something new compared with the mechanistic
theory, but l have the right to say it.

Buffon’s influence was profound : and in particular
we find among his disciples two writers who
endeavoured to pass beyond their master in the
development of their own theories—the President
of the Academy of Berlin, Maupertuis, known
chiefly because of his mechanic “ principle of least
resistance,” and the English Jesuit, Needham.

Maupertuis laid down his views upon organic
formation in his work Venus physique (1746). He
tries to establish a parallel between organic formation
and phenomena of crystallisation, and in particular
the case of the “arbor Dianae,” which played a great
part in the literature of that time ; there is an
ordering force even in the product resulting from
the mixture of the male and female elements, and
this force decides the right combination of the parts
and later on maintains them in their growth. The
whole theory is clearly a variant on that of Buffon.

Turberville Needham 1 even expressly emphasises
his agreement with Buffon’s theories. Yet, Need-

1 NouveUes observations microscopiques, avec des dicouvertes
inUressantes sur la composition el la decomposition des corps
organises, Paris, 1750. Especially the section beginning:
“ Observ. nouv. sur la generation, la composition et la decom¬
position des substances animales et vege tales.”



44 HISTORY OF VITALISM

ham’s chief interest is directed towards something
other than these theories, namely, towards a
spontaneous generation from decomposed organic
substances. From its alleged existence he draws
all proofs that there is in nature a “ force reelle
productrice,” “ une force vegetale dans chaque
point microscopique de matiere vegetale ou animale.”
The fact that at the same time he denies the “ germes
preexistens ” in actual propagation, certainly results
from his general view, but in matters of detail he as
good as neglects properly morphogenetic problems
altogether. He emphasises even more than Buffon
the irreducible, or the vitalistic, element of the
doctrine.

Needham regards his view as compatible with the
general principles of mechanics, and he gives us
particularly disquisitions on matter and mechanics.
There too a great deal strikes us as very modem :
“ La matiere n’est qu’un pur phenomene, un resultat
complexe et un concours de plusieurs effets differens.”

Needham declares the intelligent soul to be some¬
thing entirely different from the formative forces of
nature.

We are hardly inclined to see any real progress
in his achievements as a whole. 1

(iii) CASPAR FRIEDRICH WOLFF.

Caspar Friedrich JFoZjJf (1733-1794) is usually looked
upon as the father of epigenetic descriptive embryo-

1 His in his Kurperform (pp. 221, 222) refers to various passages
in Needham’s works ; we read how Eve was formed by a sort
of budding, and learn that Needham discussed with his Jesuit
colleague, Spallanzani, the claims of evolution and epigenesis
from the point of view of orthodoxy.



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 45

logy. We meet with this opinion especially in the
historical sketches of materialistic Darwinians, and
Wolff is there sometimes claimed as a precursor
of Darwin. This fact shows that it has not always
been made clear that his theory of development was
not only epigenetic, but, like all epigenetic theories,
also vitalistic ; that is why Wolff interests us here.

His Theoria Generationis appeared in 1759; in
1896 Samassa arranged a German translation of
the Latin original.

The system of predelineation or preformation,
says Wolff, does not explain but rather denies
development. The chief thing is to deduce the
“ parts of the body and the manner of their struc¬
ture ” from principles and laws. Such a theory of
development or “ rational anatomy ” would be
related to descriptive anatomy like rational to
empirical psychology, or like philosophic and his¬
torical knowledge.

This is profound and extremely promising ; it
shows that the conception of something like our
modern “ physiology of development ” was vaguely
before Wolff’s mind.

Wolff then enters into a discussion of the principal
question :—“ How are life and machine connected
in organic bodies ? ” Are they both dependent
on one common cause, or on one another ; and
if the latter, is life productive of mechanism or
vice versa ?

The case of plant physiology is first adduced. The
force which drives water into the plant “ cannot be an
attractive force only ”; this “ is proved by transpira¬
tion.” Nor is the absorption of moisture dependent



46 HISTORY OF VITALISM

on the saturation of the atmosphere and its expansion
through heat; the fact that the moisture goes
first to the younger parts and the buds speaks
against it : “ Nature does not build up things of
such importance upon so changeable and uncertain
a basis.”

Hence Wolff constructs a peculiar vital force which
he calls vis essentialis : this force is endowed with
qualities corresponding to the work required ; “it
is sufficient for the purpose in view,” “ in any case
it produces the effects in question.”

Similar inferences can be drawn from the study
of animal development so greatly advanced by
Wolff. The main problem is : how does the nutritive
matter of the egg pass into the embryo ? This
happens not through a contraction of the heart or
of the vessels, nor through a compression of the
heart by means of an outer contraction of the
muscles, for at first the heart is not connected
with the arteries and does not even beat ; nor are
there any preformed canals to be found. So there
is again a peculiar force, a “ vis essentialis,” at
work ; it directs the epigenesis, as later on it will
direct the conservation of the mature body.

Of great interest is Wolff’s idea that his “ vis
essentialis ” can unite in a common work with the
agents of the inorganic, and the way in which this
is imagined : there again we see him proceeding
entirely like a modern.

The main point first of all is the greater or less
“ tenacity ” and “ capacity for solidification ” of
the parts directed by the new force ; and this force
itself can be weaker or stronger ; on the whole quite



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 47

a number of “ accessory principles ” can be added
to the vital principle, for it is “ clear, that with the
formation of the organic a body in general is also
formed, and this body is constituted an organic body
through special additional influences.”

An organic body requires “ influences ” from
outside, as, for instance, the addition of nourish¬
ment. But we must remember that “ those pro¬
cesses whose removal causes the cessation of life
cannot be described as vital processes ; ” any more
than the thread which supports a sword over a
man’s head is a vital process.

We may therefore sum up the results, and answer
our main question : “ the bodies implied in develop¬
ment are not machines.” “ We must carefully
distinguish the growing substance from the machine
which envelops it. But the machine must be
regarded as its product.”

Yet the developing substance works “ as far as
it is endowed with certain qualities,” not “ as far
as it is constructed in a certain way.” “ Only
accessory ” is every event in the organism which is
determined by its composition. It may influence or
modify “ but it does not belong to the causes which
determine the development.” Here we have a
static or tectonic teleology expressly rejected in favour
of a dynamic teleology, of a Vitalism ; and it could
not be done in more simple language.

Wolff then reaches a short settlement with his
opponents and with those whose views resemble
his own.

It cannot surprise us that he calls “ mechanical
medicine ” an “ imaginary system,” one, that is, to



48 HISTORY OF VITALISM

which nothing in the nature of things corresponds.
Much of course is executed by the machine, as,
for instance, the circulation of blood, breathing,
excretion, and mastication ; but these mechanical
events are only a “ small appendage of the animal,”
and are to be distinguished from the animal itself.

Wolff thinks his view related to those of the
botanist Ludwig, and of Harvey and Needham
the chief representatives of an epigenetic Vitalism,
though he calls the latter’s book “ intolerably con¬
fused,” and though he admits that they all (apart
from Harvey’s curious “ conception-theory ”) do
not go beyond the most general theses established
by Aristotle—that there is a generating power in
nature. He appears to consider that his theory
resembles most closely that of Stahl.

This remark appears strange, when we remember
that Stahl speaks clearly about the operations of
the rational soul; and we might doubt whether
Wolff knew Stahl’s work directly or only through
hearsay. He does not give any particulars, and
never once mentions even the title. 1

Wolff concludes his book with an idea which
sounds not less modem than that with which he
began it : he had “ not explained anything ” in
respect of the effects whose mechanical nature he
denies. He had only “ investigated the connexion
which exists between machine and life,” but “ had
not investigated any further the causes of the

•

1 Dr. Stenta in hia Italian translation of this work, has brought
forward evidence (pp. 379-383) which tends to show that Wolff
may after all not have regarded Stahl’s views as so similar to his
own.—Trans.



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 49

latter where it has no relation to machine.” This
at once recalls the language of Mach.

If we consider all that has been said, we find that
Wolff is the clearest and deepest representative of
Vitalism since Aristotle ; he at least tries to 'prove,
though certainly his proofs are open to objection.
He possesses great knowledge, great philosophical
training ; he does not talk of what he does not
know ; he is not satisfied with pseudo-solutions.
His theory is not so all-embracing as that of Stahl :
and hence it is more important biologically.

(iv) BONNET. HALLER.

We have already mentioned that Swammerdam
is the real originator of the idea of evolution in the
sense defined above : but in Bonnet and Haller we
have two of the thinkers whose work was of out¬
standing importance for the completion of the
theory. All evolutionists are, by the nature of
things, strenuous advocates of a static teleology, of
a tectonic foundation for the purposive. For them
Vitalism plays only a secondary part. They are
therefore of less importance for our purpose, and we
cannot devote so much space to their views as we
did to those of the supporters of epigenesis.

Charles Bonnet has chiefly explained his views in
his work Considerations sur les corps organists
(Amsterdam, 1762). 1 The real reason why he crossed
over into the evolutionist camp must have been his

1 C. O. Whitman’s splendid monograph on Bonnet’s teaching
may be recommended here : “ Bonnet’s Theory of Evolution.
A System of Negations.” Both this and the same author’s “The
Palingenesis and the Germ Doctrine of Bonnet” may be found
in the Biological Lectures, Woods Hall, for 1894. Boston, 1895.

D



50 HISTORY OF VITALISM

discovery of the parthenogenetic development of plant-
lice : there are, in fact, several generations in series
lying hidden one within another, for the eggs of
embryos already begin to develop : and here nature
presents to the eye that very “ emboitement ” de¬
manded by theory.

“ II n’est point dans la nature de veritable genera¬
tion ; mais nous nommons improprement Generation
le commencement d’un developpement qui nous rend
visible ce que nous ne pouvions auparavant aperce-
voir.” The essence of the whole theory of evolu¬
tion is expressed in these words ; with good right
has C. F. Wolff called it a negation, not an explana¬
tion of development.

Bonnet, the “ Ovulist,” lays particular stress on
the fact that the germ must exist in the egg as a
perfectly formed being before fertilisation ; and he
is critical enough to admit that the theory would
break down if the opposite were proved. But this
opposite is not proved : “ il est d6montre que le
Poulet existe dans l’ceuf avant la F6condation.”

Certainly no exact pre-existence of all proportions
of the germ must be supposed : “ Tandis que le
Poulet est encore dans 1’etat de Germe, toutes ses
Parties ont des formes, des proportions, des situa¬
tions qui different extremement de celles que
l’Evolution leur fera revetir. Cela va au point, que
si nous pouvions voir ce Germe en grand, tel qu’il
est en petit, il nous seroit impossible de le reconnoitre
pour un Poulet ” ; and for mammals and man the
same holds good. 1

1 “ li’homme et les Quadruples, dans l’6tat de Germe, ont
sans doute aussi des formes et des situations qui ne ressemblent
nullement & celles qu’ils acquierrent par le developpement."



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 51

In any case, alterations of form bears only on the
external : the essential is extended only during the
course of “ development.” Bonnet says in one
place that the germ possesses only the character of
species but not of individual; it is a horse but not
this horse.

Not even a finger ought to be accepted as a real
new formation ; this he had said before Haller, who
repeats it though he was as yet a believer in
epigenesis. We may be misled into imagining
the existence of a new formation because the
different parts develop with different degrees of
rapidity.

Bonnet hardly thinks it worth while to enter into
discussions with his opponents ; Buffon’s views are
discussed with a brief and sweeping characterisation
as “ des songes qui ne sont pas meme philosophiques.”

This is not the place to discuss the cosmic views
found in Bonnet’s PalingSndsie :

“ Toutes les pieces de l’Univers sont done Con-
temporaines. La Volonte Efficace a realise par un
seul acte tout ce qui pouvait l’etre.”

Its chief idea is that there is really no new forma¬
tion in nature. The details may be learned from
Whitman, who also deals with Bonnet’s views re¬
garding the relations subsisting between the theory
of evolution and the idea of resurrection . 1 We
hear of the various kinds of germs required by the
soul for the pre-Adamic, the present, and the future
world ; everything is treated on the analogy of the
metamorphosis of insects. There are also hints of

1 The belief in resurrection seems to have been the psycho¬
logical starting point of the whole of Bonnet’s theoretical work.



52


HISTORY OF VITALISM


theory of descent (preformed of course): monkeys
will perhaps one day generate the Newtons and
Leibnitzes, beavers the Vaubans.

It is more to our purpose instead of wasting time
on such phantasies to examine in greater detail the
way in which Bonnet conceived the process of
development through extension ; but what we are
told is only that the germ has very narrow meshes
between its simple parts, and that later on foreign
elements introduced by the process of nutrition
extend these meshes. “ Le Germe n’est, pour ainai
dire, compost que d’une suite de points, qui formeront
dans la suite des lignes.”

Though Bonnet evades many a difficulty, he
never neglected the task of throwing light on at
any rate the most important obscurities in his
theory that came to his notice. The results of
experiments on regeneration must have caused
special doubts—Trembley’s experiments on Hydra,
for instance : here it is said that Hydra is merely
a repetition of numerous minute polyp-germs,
which are only waiting for favourable circumstances
in order to develop. Only the question where the
souls for the many polyp-buds would come from
seems really difficult to Bonnet. He allows only
germs of complete organisms to serve as explanation
for processes of real regeneration and, not like
Weismann in recent years, of parts of the organism ;
the preformed complete germs are arranged in such
a way that they extend themselves in each par¬
ticular case only so far as to replace the part that is
lacking.

Thus Bonnet makes no use of active vital forces



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 53

of any kind—at any rate he believes that he does
not need any. A given structure, combined with
very simple modes of action, effects everything.
Hence Bonnet is not a Vitalist. For the rest it is
very odd how he sees no other solution than either
tectonic teleology, or a wild sort of mechanical epi¬
genesis. He does not perceive the possibility of an
enlightened Vitalism in some such sense as Wolff’s.

It may perhaps be objected that an investigator
whoso work makes so much use of soul as Bonnet
ought to be designated as Vitalist. But we can
make the general answer, as often before, by indicat¬
ing that the soul (corresponding to Aristotle’s vow)
is regarded by all thinkers in an age when the
theory of knowledge was still so confused, as
something not belonging to nature. The soul is a
counterpart of nature, not a part of it ; both are
apprehended as absolute realities. Here we see
the great influence of the philosophy of Descartes
and Leibnitz.

Swammerdam was the first to announce, and
Bonnet the founder of, the theory of evolution ; but
Haller is its real systematises

Albert Haller (1708-1777), the well-known savant
and poet, can best serve as the typical representative
of the theory of preformation ; almost the whole
of the eighth volume of his comprehensive Elementa
Physiologiae corporis humani 1 is devoted to it and
to discussions of a general nature. But we do not
find with him such a profound exposition or such

1 Bern, 1706 : I write Albert, not Albrecht, as Haller himself
says “ Albertus ” in the title of the book.



54


HISTORY OF VITALISM


an effort for clearness, as with Bonnet. Every¬
thing is treated more dogmatically, although
not in Stahl’s way. Perhaps it is to this
very circumstance, perhaps also his authoritative
position as professor, that we must attribute his
influence.

But even if Haller does not appear to us an
entirely original thinker, it would yet be a great
mistake to see in him the short-sighted fanatic
depicted in historical sketches of the materialist
Darwinian school. Already His has rightly em¬
phasised this. When condemning Haller it is usual
to refer to a rather superficial poem by Goethe:
but it is at least doubtful if it is not possible to dis¬
tinguish something like the “ kernel ” and the
“ shell ” in nature, and if he who sees only the shell
ought not to be described as the more fortunate.
In any case, Haller was not less misrepresented than
Wolff when his chief concern, his Vitalism, his
rejection of the machine-theory, was (one is tempted
to say) caenogenetically suppressed.

No thinker of that time paid so much attention
to the views of his opponents as Haller ; in per¬
fectly conscious opposition to these views (which
failed to convince him) he became an evolutionist :
for, as we remarked above, he began as an adherent
of the epigenetic school.

Haller seeks to present actual facts, and rejects
hypothesis in an almost Newtonian manner:
“ Hypothesin nullam admisi,” “ Hypotheseos neque
umbra subest.” No shadow of an hypothesis should
therefore be found in his works, but in point of fact
the wish is very far from being realised.



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 55

His objection to Wolff’s “ vis essentialis ” 1 is
that it gives no answer to the question why in any
given species that force maintains the type, and on
the other hand creates so many different types ;
whereas the inorganic matter can take any possible
shape. We shall certainly reply to Haller that in all
branches of natural science there is much that must
be simply accepted, and that his objection can be
well turned against himself.

Buffon, moreover, he says, knows so little about
his “ modulus interior,” that some people have
already said that a seventh sense is needed to
understand him. 2

But blind powers cannot, as Cartesians and
mechanists wish, create anything harmonious out
of disharmony,—an assertion which Descartes at
any rate, to whom nature was something ordered
once and for all, could hardly have made.

The organising activity of Stahl’s “ soul,” as a
purely conscious spiritual power, is only poorly
proved through “ monstra ” and the like.

The one remaining possibility is that the embryo
is already there when conception takes place. 3

1 “ Cur vis ea essentialis, quae sit unica, tam diverges in
animale partes semper eodem loco, semper ad eundem arche-
typum struit, si materies inorganica mutabilis et ad omnem
figuram recipiendam apta est ? Nulla datur responsio.”

1 “ Et primum, quid sit modulus interior ? adeo non intelligunt
clarissimi viri, ut ipsi fateantur, septimo sensu nos egere, ut
intelligamus.” Very much to the point is the objection urged
against Buffon that full grown animals often no longer possess
such organs (e.g. larval organs in the case of frogs and insects)
or do not yet possess them (e.g. the beard)—and nevertheless they
are inherited.

8 “ Superest id unicum ut fetus struotus et fabricatus sit,
quando conceptio accessit.”



56 HISTORY OF VITALISM

“ Nulla est epigenesis ” : there is no new forma¬
tion.

In this way Haller accepts Bonnet’s views : God
has created all structures; they do not develop but
only grow ; no one part is built before another;
are all there simultaneously : “ Nulla igitur in cor-
pore animali pars ante aliam facta est et omnes
simul creatae existunt.”

The subject of the hydra and the phenomena of
regeneration Haller disposes of similarly to Bonnet:
only the part taken by the male element which
appears to be superfluous gives him some diffi¬
culty : it probably contributes to the growth of
certain parts. 1 We cannot here consider his dis¬
quisitions about the formation of hybrids, which
are of course entirely hypothetical.

Everything is thus settled : if the fetus is already
enclosed in the egg and only nourishment is needed
to make it grow, then we have solved the paramount
difficulty of the construction of a highly artificial
fabric out of raw matter. 2

Matter, then, ordered but invisible, develops into
matter ordered and visible ; 3 this must be so. and
the fact that some people do not observe it proves
nothing.

1 “ Spero ostensurum me, esse in sernine musculo vim, quae
certarum partium corporis animalis incremontum promoveat et
tarnen fundamentum futuri animalis a rnatre esse.”

1 “ Si in matre est primordium fetus, si id structum in nvo est
et hactenus perfectum ut unice rocepto alimento egeat, ex quo
convalescat, soluta est ilia summa difficultas artificiosissimae
fabricae ex bruta materia struendae.”

3 “ Si viscera paulatim do statu invisibili prodire visa sunt, non
ex bruta materie in oonspicuam, sed ex male limitata in melius
terminatam transiisse adnotavi.”



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 57

Again we have the clearest expression of a machine
theory, of a static teleology—of anything but
Vitalism : and naturally enough, since Haller fails
to enlighten us with regard to those factors deter¬
mining growth which he, too, is of course forced to
assume. It remains obscure how far Haller meant
to indicate something of the nature of autonomous
forces in those physiological principles—especially
irritability 1 and contractability, which, though not
originated by him, are very thoroughly discussed in
his works ; they could only serve as general con¬
necting concepts.

We are not here called upon to deal with Spallan¬
zani, the prominent experimenter, who put forward
no original theory, following Bonnet and Haller in
all general questions ; and the same applies to many
other writers of repute.

(v) BLUMENBACH.

With J. F. Blumenbach (1752-1840) the old
Vitalism reaches its height, and with him this second
period on which we arc entering comes to an end.
The third stage which follows Kant and the Nature-
philosophy produced no work to rival the lucidity
of Blumenbach’s exposition.

Blumenbach profits by all the good qualities of
his predecessors and avoids their errors; coming at
the end of the fierce strife about epigenesis and
evolution, and subjecting all the arguments on both
sides to a comprehensive critique, he learnt one
quite definite lesson of controversy—that it was
essential to reflect once more with an open mind

1 This principle is due to Glisson (1596-1677).



58 HISTORY OF VITALISM

on the actual biological data. He thus reaches
something which at least looks like a real “ proof,”
and thus eventually takes a step beyond the point
reached by Aristotle.

Blumenbach expounded his views in two works
of no great length : the Institutiones physiologicae
(Gottingen, 1787) and the work t)ber den Bildungs-
trieb (Gottingen, 1789). The latter, by the way, is
the first work in German in this field. The Institu¬
tiones give us a good opportunity of examining more
closely Haller’s theory of the fundamental physio¬
logical functions which we have already had occasion
to mention.

Under “ vires vitales ” Blumenbach enumerates
in the usual way Contractability, Irritability, Sensi¬
bility : they are the fundamental physiological phe¬
nomena, which, together with the “ vita propria,”
the specific vital activity of the parts, condition the
work of the functions.

Blumenbach, like Haller, does not say more about
the nature of these powers, and it remains undecided
whether he saw there an autonomy of vital activities
or not.

Besides the above forces we have another forma¬
tive force—the “nisus formativus ”—directing mor¬
phogenesis, conserving the organic form by means
of nutriment, and restoring it after mutilation ; it
is a power peculiar to living bodies : “ peculiaris
vis corporibus organicis vivis connata et quamdiu
vivunt perpetuo actua et efficax.” It is called
“ nisus ” because it is logically subordinated to the
“ vires,” to the forces in a general sense, as one
“ vis vitalis ” among others.



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 59

All this is very briefly treated : and there is also
a very brief semblance of a proof of these statements
to be found in the assertion that the formative
impulse first comes into being after the mingling
of the sex-liquids 1 in the uterus ; hence the embryo
becomes visible, “ in spite of the perfection of our
modern optical instruments,” only during the third
week.

This is not a particularly valuable contribution.
Of greater importance are two methodological
remarks in the Institutiones : in the first place a
certain relation is affirmed between the nisus and
other nature-agents, on which the figures of Lichten-
berg and the crystals are based ; and secondly, we
have the important assertion that the “ nisus forma-
tivus ” is less a cause than an “ effectus quidam
perpetuus sibique semper similis ” ; it expresses an
effect ever recurring and ever like itself, and it is in
this sense and in no other that the words “ gravita¬
tion ” and “ attraction ” should be used.

This view is not only borne out by the facts, but is
greatly in advance of contemporary thought at any
rate in biology.

We find in Blumenbach’s work, Uber den Bildungs-
trieb, an amplified treatment of all the problems
which in the Institutiones were merely outlined : wo
have in fact a real system of Vitalism.

The treatise contains a good introductory his¬
torical sketch ; then comes a note on the author’s

1 According to Blumenbach the spermatozoa are only “ little
worms in stagnant liquid.” Their unimportant nature can be
seen by the fact that in animals which resemble one another the
spermatozoa are often very different, while in animals which
differ widely they are often almost identical.



60 HISTORY OF VITALISM

own position, that he himself had formerly been an
adherent of evolution, and had consequently gone
through a process of development directly opposite
to that of Haller. So this book contains “ the
confession of his own errors” ; but “ a corrected
error often becomes a truth far more important
than many a positive truth directly recognised as
such ” (Dc Luc).

Blumenbach then repeats the definition of the
formative impulse already given; he emphasises
again that this principle stands by the side of the
“ other kinds of vital force ” and next to the
“ general physical forces of nature.” There follows
a further explanation of that admirable methodo¬
logical observation with regard to the parallel
between formative impulse and gravity. Both
should serve to denote nothing else but the defini¬
tion of a force whose constant effect has been
recognised through experience ; but whose cause,
like the cause of the generally recognised powers of
nature, is for us a “ qualitas occulta.”

We cannot insist enough on the value of this
critical passage. If only all Vitalists had oeen con¬
scious of the necessity of similar exactitude there
would have been no need for the later criticisms and
rejections of the theory by a Lotze or a Claude
Bernard—justified as that criticism may have been
in view of the actual situation.

To emphasise the quality of Blumenbach’s insight,
we have only to remember how these same laws
were conceived by his contemporary, X. Bichat
(1771-1802), who did valuable work in histology
and pathology. Bichat, who died young, sup-



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER 61

ported a vitalistic theory, which it may be observed
he failed to prove, and which was in no way based
on the facts of morphogenesis. He also claimed to
place his “ propri6t&s vitales ” on the same level as
“ gravite, 61asticite,” etc. Here is a passage taken in
exlenso from the first volume of his Anatomie
gtfndrale, 1 which will best show the contrast:

“ Les lois physiques sont constantes, invariables ;
elles ne sont sujettes ni 4 augmenter ni a diminuer.
Dans aucun cas une pierre ne gravite avec plus de
force vers la terre qu’a l’ordinaire.” “ La formule
6tant une fois trouvee, il ne s’agit que d’en faire
l’application a tous les cas.” ... “ Au contraire,

4 chaque instant la sensibilite, la contractilite
s’exaltent, s’abaissent. et s’alterent; elles ne sont
presque jamais les memes.” “ Toutes les fonctions
vitales sont susceptibles d’une foule de variety.
Elles sortent frequemment de leur degre naturel (!);
elles echappent 4 toute espece de calcul; il fau-
droit presque autant de formules, que de cas qui
se presentent. On ne peut rien prevoir, rien pr6-
dire, rien calculer, dans leurs phenomenes. Que
deviendroit de monde, si les lois physiques etoient
sujettes aux memes agitations, aux memes varia¬
tions que lois vitales ? ”

A peculiar idea of the essence of natural law.

And yet Bichat makes many valuable contribu¬
tions, as for instance his separation of the “ pro-
prietes vitales ” from the “ propri^tds de tissu ” ;
the latter are conditioned only by structure and in
conjunction with the former produce the “ vita

1 Paris, 1801. Compare a!so Recherche* physiologigue* snr
la vie et la mort , fourth edition, Paris, 1822.



62 HISTORY OF VITALISM

propria.” There is also his description of animal
chemistry as “ l’anatomie cadaverique des fluides ”
and its exclusion from true physiology ; and his
demand that science shall “ remonter des pheno-
menes aux principes, et ne pas descendre des prin-
cipes aux phenomenes,” etc.

But Bichat’s writings display a lack of that
essential methodological principle, the recognition of
the absolute rigidity of natural law in vital phe¬
nomena : and it is precisely when contrasted with
a biologist whose service to science is so universally
admitted that Blumenbach’s importance is most
clearly brought into relief.

Returning then to the German thinker. A brief
reference not entirely to the point is made to Wolff,
whose “ vis essentialis ” really only supplies nutritive
matter, and thus is only “ a requisite ” of the form¬
ative impulse. 1 It is followed by a section on his
adversary Haller, couched in terms of the greatest
respect. Blumenbach then passes to the proofs of
his own theory. The following phenomena speak
against “ preformation ” and for “ epigenesis ” :
of primary importance are the galls; then the
formation of new blood-vessels round encapsuled
tumours and foreign matter ; thirdly, the formation
of new joints after fractures ; further, the appear¬
ance of hybrids, which evolutionists recognise as a
difficulty for their theory ; finally, simple observa¬
tion. During the course of development new
formations are still taking place, and these are con-

1 It comes into evidence, however, in the case of tumours ;
on the other hand it is not found in instances of bad nourishment,
in spite of the presence of a formative impulse. Here Blumen-
baoh obviously misunderstands Wolff.



EVOLUTION—AND AFTER


63


tained, as form, in the germ as little as the arbor
Dianae in silver-amalgam.

Blumenbach refers particularly to the history of
the development of algae and the buds of Hydra.

To be quite strict, these things prove only epi¬
genesis, not vital autonomy, as our author imagines.
The conception of the formative impulse of growth,
the conception of the inner structure is foreign to
him ; as a real proof for Vitalism we must adduce
the fact that formation of organism cannot be under¬
stood at all on the ground of a given minute structure
whose parts influence each other. Blumenbach’s
proofs, however, were the best at his disposal in
that age.

His theory is rendered the more profound by
notes on “ reproduction,” i.e. restitution in our
terminology : the new matter arises out of the old,
as with Hydra the regenerating stem becomes
smaller ; the same is true in the healing of large
wounds. An attempt had been made to solve the
difficulty by assuming pre-existing germs, but that
is unsatisfactory with phenomena of grafting or
when a Hydra, which has been slit from top to
bottom, closes itself by rolling up the edges of the
wound, or by forming a new digestive cavity.

We must strictly differentiate that kind of repro¬
duction where new matter is produced, from that
where “ only the disturbed formation has to be re¬
built ” : a reproduction which must be differentiated
and separated from the others the more carefully,
the less they can be compared with the hypothetical
germs, and the greater the predominance which they
give to the theory of a formative impulse.



64 HISTORY OF VITALISM

We might imagine here that we were listening to
a debate on physiology of development in the
nineties of the last century. Blumenbach is prior
both to Roux and to the author of this book in a
very important matter ; namely, in the establish¬
ment of the conception of restitution that is not
true “ regulation.” 1

And then comes a thought for which Blumenbach
can claim priority over Gustav Wolff. How, he
asks, can everything be preformed in healing and
similar phenomena in view of their casual nature ?
“ It would be presumptuous to try to persuade
anyone of such a thing.” Such is in its clearest
form the conception of “ primary purposiveness,”
which is used both by Blumenbach and G. Wolff
against preformation and in favour of the vitalistic
theory.

Compared with the above the details which Blu¬
menbach gives as to the mode of action of his
formative impulse are naturally of a very indefinite
and preliminary nature, and of much less import¬
ance : and at the most we need record his view
that even malformations follow special laws, although
here external causes disturb the results of the forma¬
tive impulse.

Thus we find ourselves at the end of the second
period of the old Vitalism and, as we have already
mentioned, at its height. If we compare the
beginning and the end of this period, i.e. Harvey
and Stahl on one hand and C. Fr. Wolff and Blumen-

1 Under “ Regeneration ” we only understand the separation
of damaged parts by “ sprouting ” from the wounded surface.



BLUMENBACH


65


bach on the other, we are struck by one thing :
biology, which used to be an appendage of philosophy,
borrowing its principles ready from existing philo¬
sophical dogmas (and almost all philosophy was
dogmatic then)—biology changes into a science,
clearly and firmly based. Only now, at the end of
the second period, do we get beyond the achieve¬
ments of Aristotle. This is due to C. Fr. Wolff—
and above all to Blumenbach.


£



(d) KANT —CRITIQ UE OF JUDGMENT.

The task we have set before us is not to write a
history of philosophy, nor even to indicate in the
systems of various philosophers what this one or
that may have thought about biological questions.
Only when a philosophical doctrine has exercised a
lasting influence upon the current Biology have we
briefly drawn attention to it. This occurred first
with regard to the teaching of Descartes ; the second
case of it will be in connexion with the theories of
the Nature-Philosophers and of Schopenhauer.

If we make an exception in the case of Kant, and
analyse his Critique of Judgment with particular
thoroughness, our reason will be the extraordinary
and far-reaching influence which this book has exerted
up to the present day. It is not that I imagine
any too many of our modem scientists to have read
Kant’s works ; I know, on the contrary, that only
too few have done so. But everyone has heard
about them from someone else, who also has heard
about them; and so everyone expresses his opinion
on the subject. It is time that an abuse so un¬
worthy of modern thought was stopped, and we
hope to contribute at least something towards its
remedy.



KANT


67


In itself and apart from its fundamental and
unique significance, Kant’s work would not require
such a close analysis in a book devoted to the
history of scientific doctrine. We may indeed pre¬
face our whole treatment of the work by emphasising
the following important consideration : it would be
a great mistake to suppose that the object which
Kant had in view in writing his Critique of Judgment
was the analysis of biological questions. Nor yet
was it the real aim of his book to establish the pro¬
position (complementary to his Critique of Reason)
that the existence of a personal Creator is not a
valid inference from the purposiveness of nature.

At the beginning and at the end of the book it is
clearly stated what Kant’s real intention was :—The
world of nature and the world of freedom are two
separate worlds, which in themselves have no
influence upon each other ; but the world of free¬
dom is meant, especially in human moral activities,
to gain influence over the other world. Hence
nature must be so conceived as to make this possible.
There must be a reason for the unity of the Super-
sensual which is at the basis of nature and of the
concept of freedom. This reason, or ground, is the
notion of design.

The object of the Critique is therefore ethical, not
scientific.

Man as noumenon is free. In this moral capacity
he is the highest purpose. His causality alone is
teleological in the world. At the same time, how¬
ever, the law by which he determines purposes is
conceived by him as independent of natural condi¬
tions and yet as necessary.



68


HISTORY OF VITALISM


Teleology then must reconcile nature and morality.

What this means—whether it is possible at all,
and whether it is possible in this Kantian form—
with these questions we have in this book absolutely
no concern ; but we must know what was Kant’s
intention if we do not wish entirely to misjudge his
exposition.

A distinguished authority 1 has characterised
Kant’s Critique of Judgment as the best of his works.
We do not wish to correct this judgment in so far
as the work as a whole is considered in relation to
the Kantian system. But where the contents of
the third Critique concern us more nearly with
regard to the specific development of a Critique of
tehological Judgment, we cannot join in the above
praise.

The exposition of this theme is widely removed
from the clearness of the Critique of Reason, especi¬
ally compared with the first half of the earlier work.
Perpetual repetitions, due in part to a peculiar
architechnic rigidity, weary the reader without
clarifying the exposition. The final conclusion
with regard to the biological problem itself remains
doubtful, or at any rate is not quite unambiguously
established. Hence, representatives of completely
different biological views have been able to construe
Kant’s book to their own advantage for the most
part, as we have said above, without any very
thorough examination of his teaching.—

Judgment is the faculty of thinking, the particular
as contained under the universal. Judgment is

1 W. Windelband, Immanuel Kant und seine Weltanschauuna
Heidelberg, 1904. ’’



KANT


69


determining when we subsume under the given
universal; it is reflecting when we seek the universal
for the given particular. If the sum of the data of
external experience is to be submitted to the
reflecting judgment, then we shall require a prin¬
ciple which is not borrowed from experience, but
which is supplied by the reflecting judgment itself.
Now there is one such principle, and it declares that
nature is to be regarded from the point of view of
a unity as if an understanding had adapted it to
our powers of cognition. But this implies a law
only for the reflecting judgment, not for nature.

Purpose is the concept of an Object in so far as it
also contains the ground of the actuality of the
Object. Purposiveness of the form of a thing is its
agreement with that constitution of things which is
only possible according to purposes. The pur¬
posiveness of nature is therefore that principle of
the reflecting judgment : and it is a transcendental
principle . 1

The maxims—Nature takes the shortest way (lex
parsimoniae) ; at the same time it makes no leaps
(lex continui ); its great variety in empirical laws is
yet unity under a few principles, etc. ; are illustra¬
tions 2 of what has been said. In all these cases it
is not stated how we do judge, but how we ought
to judge.

A sharp distinction must be drawn between the
general laws of the uniformity of nature which are

1 Hence no Category.

4 The first example clearly has a different character from the
other two : it relates to causality, to the law of change, wliile
the two last relate to the tectonic of nature. Kant himself, as
our exposition will shortly prove, draws this distinction.



70 HISTORY OF VITALISM

known a priori, and the specification of those laws
according to the principle of purposiveness. Ac¬
cording to what has been said, the variety of nature
corresponds to our requirements in respect to its
tectonic, not in respect to its general laws ; hence,
it is the discovery of the former, not the knowledge
of the latter, which is the ground of pleasure. 1

The aesthetic judgment judges formal purposive¬
ness by the feelings of pleasure and pain ; the
teleological judgment judges real purposiveness
through understanding and reason. The first judges
by a rule, but not by concepts ; the second is the
reflective judgment in general, and judges, like all
knowledge, by concepts, but only in respect of certain
objects of nature according to special principles. 2

So much for the introductory explanations. Then
follows the critique of the aesthetic judgment, which
does not concern us. It is followed by the Critique
of the Teleological Judgment—first of all as “ Ana¬
lytic.”

The Analytic begins by rejecting once again the
categorical nature of purpose. There is in the
general idea of nature no a priori reason why objects
of nature should be related to each other as means
and end, nor why its possibility is comprehensible
only by means of this causality. Teleology is only
problematically and by analogy brought to bear on
the investigation of nature without any pretence to

1 The later Philosophy of Nature proceeds from the concept
of the “ Tectonic of nature.”

8 Once more therefore : Teleology is according to Kant not a
category.



KANT


71


explain it, i.e. only in the sense of reflective judg¬
ment. Thus we have at least a rule as a principle
where causality, as we shall point out more in
detail, does not suffice.

Teleology is thus only a regulative principle of
judgment; to regard it as a constitutive principle
would mean “ introducing into natural science a
new causality which we borrow from ourselves
alone, and yet attribute to other beings—whom,
however, we at the same time refuse to regard as
like ourselves.”

Here we have the first passage in Kant’s work
which is of biological importance, and it must be
admitted that it is somewhat obscure. The point
at issue here is not, however, to what in particular
in nature the conception of purpose may be presumed
to apply; so that it is not yet made clear how far
a new causality would be introduced by allowing
purposiveness to be a constitutive principle either
as creation or as a mode of causality within nature.
One thing, however, is clearly laid down—that we
borrow this new causality from ourselves. Since,
however, “ we ” belong to nature, then somewhere
and somehow this new causality does exist in nature.

These remarks are only to secure our attention,
and we now advance a step further.

After a brief treatment of objective but merely
formal purposiveness, as for instance that of cer¬
tain geometrical figures in the solution of problems,
Kant proceeds to deal in order with the following
subjects : The relative Purposiveness in Nature,
Things as ends of Nature, and Nature as a system
of ends.



72


HISTORY OF VITALISM


We can speak of objective and material purposive¬
ness only when there is before us a relation of
cause and effect “ which we find ourselves able to
apprehend as legitimate only in this—that we intro¬
duce the Idea of the effect into the causality of
the cause as the fundamental condition of the
possibility of the effect.” Now, such purposiveness
is relative when it is merely a means to some other
end as, for instance, river mud to plants. In such a
case the effect can quite well be understood from the
cause without reference to teleology. We are dealing
here with “accidental” purposiveness, mere “ advan¬
tage ” to one thing through another which, of course,
has significance only when the existence of that to
which the advantage accrues is itself a real end of
nature. The relative purposiveness of the sexes is
the only instance of any deeper importance.

At this point I should like to insist that relative
purposiveness can be of great significance. For it
appears to us that the problem is more closely con¬
nected with that of “ Nature as a system of Ends ”
than Kant seems to assume.

Now a thing is inconceivable through the mechan¬
ism of nature. We are therefore obliged to introduce
a cause whose possibility of efficiency is determined
by concepts, in a case where the form of the thing
is not possible by means of the laws of nature alone
(i.e. of laws which, applied to sensible objects, can
be cognised by the understanding alone), but when
“ concepts of Reason ” come into play. The form
of such a thing appears to be causally contingent.

Kant now seeks for an example of this. It would
occur, for instance, if one were to discover the



KANT


73


drawing of a mathematical figure in a desert. The
chances against meeting with such a thing would
be so infinitely great that it would be “ just as if no
law of nature were capable of accounting for it ” :
and one would exclaim “ vestigium hominis video.” 1
The question would be that of an art product.

We have an “ End of nature ” when a thing is
(though in a double sense) both cause and effect of
itself. Kant then explains this by a description of
what we now call embryology or ontogeny, and
then passes on to a minute analysis :

For a thing to be an end of nature it must be
only in relation to the whole that its parts are
possible, and the parts must be reciprocally cause and
effect of each other’s form. The idea of the whole
must determine the form and connexion of all the
parts, “ not as a cause—for then it would be an
artificial product—but as the ground of cognition
for him who is judging it of the systematic unity
and combination of all the manifold contained in
the given material.”

It seems fitting to interpolate here the remark
that in the sense of a purely descriptive Teleology,
which takes no account of the laws of nature con¬
trolling natural purposes, Kant’s idea may most
advantageously be considered as an endeavour to
discover some characteristic of natural objects

1 Biitschli (Verb. Nat. Med. Verein Heidelbery, 7, 1904) has
rightly, as I think, objected to the “ vestigium hominis video ”
that solidified gelatinous solutions also give us regular geometrical
figures. He need merely have referred to snow flake. On the
other hand, we must remember that such figures even if they no
longer are possible only by means of art, are still grouped under
natural purposes. All crystalline phenomena are thus to be
considered as not only chemico-physical.



74 HISTORY OF VITALISM

which necessitates the introduction of a judgment
of the teleological kind and of the teleological kind
alone.

Kant now discusses at greater length the differ¬
ences between artefacts and natural purposes. In
the case of the artefact the producing cause lies not
in the nature of the material, but in a being which
can produce effects according to ideas. Thus the
artefact, if it is a machine, has merely moving
power ; but the organism has in addition formative
power. Thus organised nature is no “ analogon of
art ”—at any rate that would be saying too little.
It is rather “ analogon of life.” But in such a con¬
ception we must either endow matter as mere matter
with an attribute which is opposed to its very nature
(Hylozoism) or couple with it a foreign principle,
a soul. In this last case the possible alternatives
are to give the soul already organised matter as a
tool, which explains nothing, or to make the soul
the artificer of this structure, and thus remove the
product from (corporeal) nature.

To be quite exact, then, says Kant, the organisa¬
tion of nature has in it nothing analogous with any
sort of causality which we know—and this in spite
of the fact that man acting according to teleological
causality belongs to nature in the widest sense.

Natural purposes therefore cannot be explained
by any causality of nature in its widest sense. The
concept of a natural purpose is always and only
regulative for the reflective judgment. We always
speak “ as though ” there were something, but do
not wish to introduce a special ground of causality,
or to set up any “ master-builder ” over it all.



KANT


75


Here ends the discussion about things as “ ends
of nature,” and it will, I think, be granted that it
is in a high degree unsatisfactory for biological
questions proper.

It might seem at first as though Kant sought to
make clear the logical nature of judgments of the
descriptive-teleological kind only. But Kant does
not here treat biological matters in an exclusively
descriptive-teleological manner, since he includes
man in nature, and allows him, in reference to his
activity, to be subject to elementary laws of a teleo¬
logical kind, though he does not actually adduce
any analytic proof for the same. Man is, however,
a living being, so that for certain phenomena in
certain living beings Kant is a “ Vitalist ” according
to our definition, whether he draws the conclusion
himself or not.

After this introductory examination we wonder
why our philosopher rejects the possibility of a
universal knowledge of the mode of causality in
the organic.

The statement that organic nature is “ an analogon
of life ” rather than “ an analogon of art ” where it
is precisely life which is being examined, seems at
first very obscure. Then we find in the Meta¬
physical Principles of Science the following defini¬
tion : As opposed to the inertia of matter which
implies lifelessness, Life means the power of a sub¬
stance to determine on activity by an inner princi¬
ple—the power of a finite substance to determine
on change, of a material substance to determine on
movement or rest as a change of its state. The only
recognised principle of change of a substance is



70 HISTORY OF VITALISM

desire, and the only known inner activity is thought;
these grounds of determination are, however, not
“ representations of the outer senses ” and there¬
fore not “ determinations of matter as matter.”
Thus, according to Kant, all matter as such is life¬
less ; this and no more is what the law of the inertia
of matter says.

If we consider the sense of these words with
reference to the discussion of natural purposes, then
the latter might be understood to mean that
organised nature is no analogon of art, inasmuch as
it is not organised by something outside itself, is not
created; it is rather an analogon of life in the sense
of that human activity which alone is known to us
as a fundamental law, and which rests upon desire
and thought as internal factors. This conception
makes it clear that matter as mere matter cannot
“ live,” at least not in this (the hylozoistical) sense,
and renders untenable all subsequent life-stuff
theories with which we shall be concerned. 1 On the
other hand it is not clear why by coupling with
matter a foreign principle as the artificer of the
structure, i.e. of organised nature, the product
would be removed from nature ; for it is on the
ground of this supposed result that Kant rejects
any sort of Vitalism.

Yet he has expressly associated man as an active
being with nature : and man, he admits, possesses
teleological causality.

1 Cf. the passage in the Dialectic of the Judgment : “ But the
possibility of a living matter is unthinkable ; the concept con¬
tains a contradiction, for lifelessness, inertia, is the essential
characteristic of matter.” Only by a vicious circle, according
to Kant, can we deduce purposiveness out of the life of matter.



KANT


77


Why, then, we would ask in modem phraseology,
cannot the organised world be explained, or rather
formulated, at least hypothetically after the analogy
of this particular, and in the phenomenological
sense real, causality ?

It will now be recognised, as we said at the
beginning, that almost any view could find material
to support it in the Critique of Judgment, even though
it comprise what Kant rejects. What Kant rejects
is : firstly, that organised beings are created
machines ; secondly, that they derive from a
peculiar kind of matter; thirdly, that they are due
to particular vitalistic laws. To men, however,
he attributes such special laws. From these three
negations it would be possible to infer (and the
inference would harmonise with his conclusion as
regards the whole of the tectonic world) that he
reduces organised beings to machines which are
merely given and whose origin is not a matter for
investigation. In this case he would be a “ static
teleologist,” although the exception made for men
would still remain.

But static teleology would still be a positive
assertion ; something would be affirmed about the
nature of the purposive, namely, that it is deter¬
mined not according to any laws of its own but by
a tectonic, though its origin would remain in the
dark. With static teleology one of the two alter¬
natives would be affirmed; Vitalism would be
denied. But Kant does not wish to assert or to
deny anything about the laws or organisation, at
any rate not at this point. At the close of the
Analytic he expressly describes the concept of an



78 HISTORY OF VITALISM

end of nature as purely regulative, and this in spite
of the fact which must always be emphasised that
he reckons men, acting autonomously, as included
in nature.

It seems to us that Kant is here to be corrected,
and that with regard to organisation we should not
be content with such a descriptive, purely “ regula¬
tive ” teleology. For in our view there seems
absolutely no reason why between two clearly
recognised alternatives of a purely scientific character
a decision should not be fixed upon empirically.

But we shall soon come across further obscurities
in Kant’s treatment in yet another form, and
moreover with a somewhat more definite leaning
towards Vitalism; and we may turn briefly in
conclusion to the considerations on “ Nature in
general as a system of purposes."

To judge a thing to be on account of its internal
form a purpose of nature is something quite different
from regarding the existence of the thing as a purpose
of nature. To do this last significantly, one would
have to have knowledge of the ultimate purpose.
But this is lacking. It is therefore impossible to
treat the problem at all, and we need only add that
naturally things which are not purposes of nature
may also belong to a “ System of purposes.”

With this explanation, which from our biological
point of view is of minor importance, the “ Analytic
of the teleological judgment ” comes to an end.

In the Dialectic of the teleological judgment all
that has been discussed in the Analytic appears once
more, only injanother form, and always with the



KANT


79


conclusion that we are not in a position to prove
the existence of a Creator by an argument from
design. The antinomies devised for the sake of the
schematism of the Critique of Reason are of no
greater importance, and we can be even briefer
than we were in our discussion of the Analytic.

Above all. it must now be clearly recognised that
the realistic element in the Kantian point of view'
stands out far more clearly in the Critique of Judg¬
ment, and especially in that section of it which now
interests us, than in the Critique of Reason (especially
the first edition). Nature is always conceived as
a reality (ein Reales) w'hich could be other than
what it appears, and which could work in a manner
incomprehensible by our understanding. But
nature is not, according to Kant, that which is
given, or whose laws would be just such as he had
formulated, so that “ understanding ” and “ not-
understanding ” would not come into the question
at all.

We cannot, says Kant, in his realistic vein,
“ prove ” the impossibility of the mechanical pro¬
duction of organisms, because we do not under¬
stand the first inner ground of the infinite multiplicity
of the particular laws. The productive power of
nature may, however, suffice for what we are to
judge teleologically just as well as for that which
we believe to require merely a mechanical system.
That mechanism can afford no explanation, as far
as our powers of cognition are concerned, is quite
certain.

What is meant by saying that this “ power of
production in nature will suffice ” ? Does Kant



80 HISTORY OF VITALISM

mean that we have here before us an elementary
law of nature, but one which cannot be reduced to
mere processes of movement ? One sees in the
Metaphysical Principles that Kant, like the mecha¬
nists, requires all physics to be resolved into processes
of movement. If we were right, then this passage
should be understood in a vitalistic sense : and the
opposition of the mechanical character of nature
to its achievements through a productive power,
seems to confirm such an interpretation. There
would be then according to Kant special vital laws
(Eigengesetze) which, though subject to causality
could not be resolved into forms of motion and
were, therefore, in this sense not “ explicable.”

But does this meaning agree with what has been
ascertained above ? If this were the case one would
be obliged to say that Kant might have expressed
his thoughts rather more clearly than is the case.
He must then have meant something else ?

We shall not here attempt to settle definitely
what Kant realty meant, but one thing we may
legitimately say, and that is that by introducing
two dogmatic principles which led him on to illusory
problems, he rendered his task infinitely more
difficult, and the solutions of those problems ex¬
tremely confused. One of the dogmatic principles
is Realism., to which we have already referred ; the
second the Mechanism of Nature as found in the
postulate that all physics is to be reduced to mere
laws of motion. The fictitious problems arise from
the nominal proposal to undertake this analysis
for everything in nature. This, according to Kant,
is feasible in physics, but obviously not in biology.



KANT


81


It is our opinion that chemistry, which he also
excludes from the sphere of real science, might
here have supplied Kant with a compromise : and
we shall see later on that Schopenhauer advanced
in this direction.

But, after insisting once more that we do not
presume to have disposed of all the obscurities in
Kant’s discussions by our remarks, we must seek to
bring our exposition to an end.

There follows the often quoted assertion, that no
Newton can ever appear who will explain the pro¬
duction of so much as a blade of grass by laws of
nature which no purpose has ordered. To introduce
a lighter note for a moment, we may remind our¬
selves in passing that in the opinion of many authors,
though not in his own, Charles Darwin is supposed
to have been that Newton ; we may further point
out that the mention of Newton is very favourable
to our view, i.e. that in theorising Kant always
presupposed the necessity of resolving all processes
of nature into true mechanics.

The obscurity, however, remains that in this
passage about Newton : “ ordered laws of nature ”
may be understood to mean a given system of
separate laws (static teleology) as well as laws of
nature in which order, an ordering element, lies
(Vitalism). In our opinion, therefore, owing to his
too narrow interpretation of the concept of mecha¬
nism (always connected for him with the postulate
of reducing all the events of nature to motion,
a reduction which is entirely illusory precisely in
the case of living beings) Kant cuts himself off
from the impartial understanding of biology. It

F



82 HISTORY OF VITALISM

is true indeed that to postulate a world-creator as
the ground for the purposiveness of the world
would be to “ proceed quite tautologically ” ; but
it would also, and this is just the view for which
the Critique of Reason has prepared the way, be
an illegitimate logical procedure. On the other
hand, if because we find purposiveness in occurrences
in the world we seek to explain this a posteriori by
referring to a cause operating according to ends,
our procedure is indeed tautological, but legitimate
nevertheless.

For in the last resort all explanation is tautology.
But Kant, in spite of all his Critique, had not suffi¬
ciently grown out of the Cartesian view of nature
to appreciate this subtle elaboration of a yet more
refined criticism.

Kant, then, might be described as a Vitalist who
himself greatly increased the logical difficulties of
his doctrine by fictitious problems of his own
creation.

Considerations upon the manner in which mecha¬
nism and teleology are to be united lead up to the
Methodology of the teleological judgment. Such
a unification is possible ; but does not lead us to
substitute one for the other. They are related as
end and means ; but the law of working (Wirkungs-
gesetz) of the means requires for itself nothing pre¬
supposing a purpose.

Now this sounds once more thoroughly statically-
teleological, and in no wise remindb us of the “ pro¬
ductive force of nature ” ; we are therefore once
more in perplexity. In addition to this we read of



KANT


83


a primordial organisation of the mechanism of
nature. But let us proceed.

The general conclusion of the Methodology, viz.
that teleology belongs neither to theology nor to
science, but only to criticism, and to the Critique
of Judgment in particular, concerns us here less than
a few corollaries.

After it has been clearly established that the
“ products and events ” of nature must be ex¬
plained, as far as possible mechanistically,the way in
which mechanism and teleology might possibly be
unified is examined. “ Occasionalism ”—the view
that the supreme cause of the world would furnish
immediately the organic formation on the occasion
of every union of intermingling materials—is re¬
jected, as in this case “ all nature is lost.” The alter¬
native theory, that of Pre-established Harmony,
assumes that everything is once and for all pre¬
constructed.

The being produced can now be an “ educt,” and
we get the doctrine of Evolution or individual
pre-formation—which Kant rejects.

Or it is a “ product ” ; this gives the doctrine of
Epigenesis, or better of “ Generic pre-formation ”
or “ Involution.” The specific form is also according
to this view pre-formed, but “ virtually,” viz. in
the productive faculty of the generator and in its
inner purposive capacity.

Kant adopts Epigenesis : for here propagation, if
not the first beginning, is established as self-pro¬
ducing (selbst hervorbringend), and consequently
a great deal is left to nature.

Indeed he expressly embraces Blumenbaeh’s



84 HISTORY OF VITALISM

interpretation. Blumenbach, he declares, begins all
explanation of “ organised matter ” with an “ ori¬
ginal organisation,” and calls the power of matter
to fashion itself on the basis of this organisation a
formative impulse (Bildungstrieb).

The reader who has carefully followed our analytic
exposition of the history of Vitalism will be highly
surprised on reading these words.

Kant accepts epigenesis, talks of the “ productive
faculty of the generation,” asserts his agreement
with Blumenbach, the Vitalist, and then quotes
Blumenbach amiss, i.e. expressly in the sense
of a static teleology which rests upon “ original
organisation,” and in words which that writer
never used himself.

To sum up everything which has been said in our
detailed exposition about Kant’s attitude to the
fundamental questions of biology, his doctrine may
be used in support of the following :

First, of a purely descriptive and exclusively
“ regulatively judging ” teleology which abstains
on principle from pressing for any more final explana¬
tion : though for this abstention no valid ground is
adduced ;

Secondly, of a Vitalism which seems to him
doubtful only because he is preoccupied with the
dogma of the ultimate reducibility of all natural
phenomena to previous phenomena of motion, a
postulate which, at any rate in reference to living
beings is quite untenable ;

Thirdly, of a static teleology, or the theory of a
given structure on the basis of which everything



KANT


85


happens mechanically. It is true that this view
is implied more by the letter than by the spirit of
Kant’s phrases. An exception is also made, in a
vitalistic sense, in the case of man as an active
being.

Is it possible to find a satisfactory solution of this
strange enigma, a satisfactory reconciliation of what
seem at first to be flagrant contradictions in Kant’s
exposition ? By way of an attempt we may put
forward the two following considerations.

If we interpret Kant’s expressions Organisation
and Order not in the sense of an extensive tectonic,
of a structure, of a machine, of a juxtaposition of
different entities, but only as a specific representa¬
tion, a given ordering principle, then the statements
about Blumenbach, as well as other passages, could
be understood in the sense of a pure Vitalism.
Blumenbach was, after all, a pronounced Vitalist.
That Kant should have materially misunderstood
him seems almost impossible. A certain freedom of
expression in quoting is, however, not outside the
realm of probability in the case of a philosopher who
is accustomed in a large measure to construct his
own language.

On the other hand, we suggest the possibility of
thinking that Kant really did not clearly see the
distinction between static and dynamic teleology ;
that for him teleology not only in its formal but also
in its real meaning is to a certain extent one and
the same thing, and that in describing it he uses now
the terms which characterise one sort, now those
which characterise the other sort of teleology.
Kant would then be a Vitalist—though not quite



86 HISTORY OF VITALISM

consistent with himself. If it be remembered that
the aim of the Critique of Judgment was chiefly ethical,
and that teleology in general was all that therefore
really came in for consideration, this view will
perhaps gain in probability.

Our final attitude towards the biological content
of the Critique of Judgment is therefore as follows.
In the case of man and his actions Kant is indubitably
a Vitalist, while as regards the facts of organisation
he is only problematically so. He is not indeed
always clearly conscious of the logical distinction
between static and dynamic teleology, and is
dissatisfied with his own Vitalism because it is
thoroughly inconsistent with his ideal of what the
natural sciences should be. This ideal is the mistaken
notion of a rigorous mechanism in which (curiously
enough, though we can understand it from an
historical point of view) there is room for the activity
of souls though not soul-like natural agencies.

Throughout, the general critical discussion of his
contention that teleology can have no metaphysical
significance proceeds parallel to that of biological
problems : but the ultimate object of the whole is
neither biological nor metaphysical but ethical.

Our conclusion may appear unsatisfactory ; in
any case we believe we have shown that any biologist
who wishes to appeal to Kant—either in defence
of or in opposition to Vitalism—will do well to
proceed with some circumspection.



KANT


87


The above reproduces the contents of the original
chapter on Kant. It has, however, occasionally
been objected to me in the course of discussion,
that I have misunderstood Kant on a rather impor¬
tant point, and the fact of this objection (which
may in the meantime have appeared in print), causes
me to supplement what I originally wrote by the
following remarks. They will not relate to the
Kritik der Urteilskraft, but to the two other great
Critiques of the philosopher:

I am said to be wrong in asserting that Kant
allows the mechanical (in its exact sense) causality
of nature to be clearly and indubitably infringed by
the intervention of the “ soul ” of the acting man.
This is the reason why (as I said) Kant, at any rate
for a limited field of biology, clearly is a Vitalist, a
dynamic teleologist: for obviously man is part of
living nature. It is replied that the passages cited
by me merely refer to man as “ noumenon,” and his
“ freedom.” But if considered simply as an event
of nature , the causality of the acting man is according
to Kant also mechanical causality in the most
proper sense. Kant is said to subscribe to what is
to-day called psycho-physical parallelism.

I do not think that this view is right.

Let us begin by analysing some passages in the
Critique of Pure Reason (first edition).



88 HISTORY OF VITALISM

In the “ Paralogism of Simplicity ” an attempt
is made to show that “ simple consciousness ” is not
“ knowledge of the simple nature of our conscious
subject in so far as this is thereby distinguished from
matter as a composite being.” In this connexion
it is argued that matter is merely external appear¬
ance of whose substratum we can predicate nothing ;
that this substratum could therefore quite well be
simple, though it appears to us as extended and
composite ; and further, that it might even have
“ thoughts.” It is true that he goes on : “ In this
way the same object which in a certain respect is
called an extended body would in another respect
be a thinking being, etc.” But immediately after¬
wards “ hypotheses of that sort ” are described as
merely allowable for making argument easier. So
Kant’s own view about the matter which concerns
us here is not given in this passage at all; more
probably it is that of Leibnitz.

In the general considerations at the end of the
“ Paralogism ” the three possible views about the
“ communion between body and soul ” are critically
discussed : the system of “ physical influence, of
pre-established harmony, and of supernatural assist¬
ance.” The two latter explanations are in reality
only objections to imagined difficulties in the first;
but they would be without reason—for the theory
of “ physical influence ” would be metaphysical,
arid here there would be room for all possibilities,
everything in question being absolutely unknowable.
It is true that their metaphysical character would
be a critical (not a dogmatic) objection against the
doctrine of mutual interaction itself. So here again



KANT


89


we get no factual, but merely a methodical solution.
The real question of facts has not even been put,
i.e. if it would be sufficient for understanding the
changes of what we call nature to suppose a merely
mechanical causality.

Let us note in passing, in section 9, iii. of the
doctrine of “ Antinomy,” the proposition : “ If

all causality in the world of appearance were merely
nature . . .,” and then turn to those parts of the
Critique of Pure Reason which are the most important
for us. They are entitled “ The Possibility of
causality through freedom, in conjunction with the
general law of natural necessity,” and “ The explana¬
tion of the cosmological idea of freedom in con¬
junction with the general necessity of nature.”

We will not enter into a discussion of the Antinomy
between freedom and necessity and its supposed
solution. Wo only ask; does Kant regard his
“ necessity ” as equivalent to a coherent and merely
mechanical necessity, or not ?

Man has a faculty “ which is no object of sensuous
intuition,” but which “ nevertheless can be the
cause of phenomena.” This causality is in the first
sense “ intelligible,” in the second “ sensible ” ; in
this second sense, as we have already said, <- its
effect is seen in the phenomenon.” It has the
character of necessity whose law in any individual
case must be found by experience. The intelligible,
or “ noumenon, begins to act in the world of sense
spontaneously ” : but this does not imply that “ its
effects in the world of sense begin spontaneously,”
for the intelligible is determined for its special way
of acting on the world of sense by the same world.



90


HISTORY OF VITALISM


The doctrine of the “ empirical and intelligible
character ” which follows does not concern us here,
as it is ethical and metaphysical. Let us rather
ask : is there the smallest sign in all the above that
Kant dismisses the intervention of the “ soul ” in
the course of natural events, and that he defends
psycho-physical parallelism with its continuous
causality in a truly mechanical system ? It appears
to me that just the opposite is the case.

Keyserling has tried to establish a general theory
of life, a pure Vitalism, in a book 1 which is a quaint
mixture of good and bad, largely influenced by
Chamberlain ; he remarks that Kant has occasionally
done the same unconsciously. His “ freedom ”
would be a special form of a law of nature,”
namely, the form of action of the law of nature which
is man ; and with reference to his faculty of acting
in general not only in relation to morals. One need
only extend this principle to the organic in general
to get a complete theory of life. I believe that such
a view is not only right as an analysis of Kant but
also in itself ; it has much in common with my own
vitalism, of which Keyserling does not speak.

A few words more, however, on Kant.

In the general introduction to the “ Analogies of
Experience ” is to be found the important remark
that these analogies (the principles of the constancy
of matter, of causality and of mutual reaction) have
no constitutive but merely regulative force. This
practically annuls the difference, on which Kant as
a rule lays very much stress, between the “Analogies”


1 Das Qefvge der Well, Munich, 1906.



KANT


91


and Teleology, the object of his Critique of Judg¬
ment. 1

In my judgment, as will soon be explained more
widely, this would be perfectly right. The whole
question is important for the logic of any Vitalism.

From the Critique of Practical Reason some remarks
can be added similar to those quoted from the
Critique of Pure Reason, not only on the relation
of freedom to necessity but also on the possible
kinds of necessity. The most important passages
for our question are to be found in the “ Critical
Explanation of the Analytic of Pure Practical
Reason.” Kant affirms e.g. that the determining
reasons for necessity have ” psychological and not
mechanical causality, i.e. they effect action through
representations and not by bodily movements.” It
would even be possible to speak of a “ mechanism
of nature ” in a quite general sense of a universal
necessity of all events, “ although this does not mean
that things subject to this mechanism would have
to be real material macliines.”

Kant, then, is very far from being a dogmatic
“ parallelist,” or, to speak only of the physical side
of the parallelistic doctrine, a phenomenalistic
materialist. He leaves much undecided and writes
very indefinitely. In the Practical Reason especially
the distinction between, and supposed reconciliation
of, freedom and necessity is the only thing of
importance to him : and similarly the Critique
of Judgment has not really a biological-scientific, but
a moral end.

1 See also W. Ernst: “ Der Zweckbegriff bei Kant und sein
Verhaltnis in den Kategorien,” KanUtudien, Ergaazungshefte
No. 14, 1908.



92 HISTORY OF VITALISM

Finally, without any further comment I reproduce
the following passage from the “ Doctrine of Method
of the Practical Reason ” : “ The spectacle of a
countless multitude of worlds dwarfs into insigni¬
ficance my importance as an animal creature which
must render back to the planet the dust out of which
it has come, after having been endowed for a short
time (we know not how) with the force of life” 1

That seems to be a clear and unalterable declara¬
tion in favour of Vitalism, going even further than
the autonomy of mere action, but within the range
of the universal determination of natural phenomena.

So I believe that I can justify my chapter on Kant
in its original form. That it is not entirely satis¬
factory is to be attributed to Kant himself. Kant
has, as it were, two different notions of causality ;
firstly, the wide one which is quite compatible with
Vitalism, “ All that happens pre-supposes something
on which it follows according to a law,” and secondly,
a narrower mechanistic conception in conformity with
the ideas of his age. All obscurities arise from his
not having kept these clearly separated.

I conclude by adding a passage from the Critique
of Judgment: In section 8 he speaks of the “ vis
locomotiva” of the soul, ‘‘because actual motions
of the body arise, the causes of which are in its (i.e.
the soul’s) representations.” That hardly sounds
“ parallelistic.”

1 The italics are mine. Compare the words from Dreams of a
Spirit Seer : “ The principle of life seems to me of immaterial
nature.”



(e) THE VITALISM OF THE NATURE-
PHILOSOPHERS.

The philosophy of nature of Schelling and Hegel
probably set out ultimately from the idea of a
techtonic of peculiarities in nature which would
suit our “ power of judgment.” Nature is the
“ idea in its otherness ” ; natural objects, especially
organisms, are as it were solidified manifestations
of the idea.

All this is exposition and not explanation : it
gives us no doctrine of the laws of becoming. In its
most general aspect, then, the theory is irrelevant
for biology, especially for Vitalism ; it would accord
principally with a static and with a dynamic teleology,
both of which regard the organic forms as products
of law in opposition to products of chance. But
as soon as we try to connect the world of ideas with
the world of direct data, nature-philosophy enters
into relation with the problem of Vitalism. The
relation between pure nature-philosophy and its
attendant Vitalism is about the same as between
Plato and Aristotle. With Plato the link between
idea and reality was wanting, and for us, there¬
fore, he does not come into consideration ; Aristotle
established the connexion, and he thus becomes



94 HISTORY OF VITALISM

important biologically, and this in the direction
of Vitalism. We shall see that even the biologists,
setting out from a philosophy of nature of the
Schelling-Hegel school, became important in relation
to Vitalism. Schelling and Hegel themselves have
not got this importance and do not aspire to it, for
as we have said they expound but do not explain.
With reference to the doctrine of real organic
becoming and its laws Schelling is anything but
clear; he rather shows a continual hesitation
between vitalistic and teleological-mechanical views,
though with an inclination to the latter. 1 Hegel,
too, when he describes life as a continuous fight
against elementary forces of objectivity, 2 has indica¬
tions of a Vitalism, but nothing complete.

Nature-philosophy coincides on purely scientific
grounds with the creation of the conception of
what is called “ type,” which forms the basis of a
strictly systematic classification of living beings.
But we cannot here follow more closely the history
of biological systematics in so far as it is occupied
only with a realistic analysis of types, or in other
words, in the creation of a system. Further, we
may refer the reader to the history of the theories of
biology by Em. R&dl, as well as the later essays of
Rudolph Burckhardt. The investigator of types
becomes of importance to us only when treating
the problem of the law by which the type is realised
for the time being in the individual, or how

1 See his works : C. Weiss, vol. ii. p. 281 ff., and Metzger’s
valuable essays “ Schelling and the Fundamental Problems of
Biology ” (Arohiv f. Qesch. d. Naturw. 2, 1910), and “ The
Epochs of Schelling’s Philosophy, 1795-1802,” Heidelberg, 1911.

2 Kleine Logih, ed. Bolland, p. 288 ; cf pp. 229, 208, etc.



THE NATURE-PHILOSOPHERS 05

it changes its specificity, if such a change, i.e. a
descent, is otherwise assumed ; and if, supposing
it to be assumed, it is treated in a way different
from the typically materialistic 1 or substantially
insufficient. 2

It follows that in our exposition a man like Cuvier
cannot be more than barely mentioned : for though
he is “ vitalistic ” in the fundamental physiological
questions, he is not independent. This fact is not
surprising considering the substantially different
sphere of his work : in general he declares himself
in agreement with the theories of Bichat.

Even Goethe’s views on the philosophy of nature,
which, as is well known, deal particularly with the
concept of “ type,” but in which the word “ en-
telechy” is also found here and there, cannot
be more than mentioned here : they have hardly
meant any discernible progress for the history
of vitalism. Nor can we do more than refer to

1 As, for instance, by the Neo-Darwinians.

2 As such must be reckoned the theory of descent promulgated
by Jean Lamarck (Philoeophie zoologique, Paris, 1809), though it
contains many valuable ideas. It is a purely fictitious con¬
struction, and no proof is offered. At the foundation of the
formation of types, Lamarck puts a “ law of organisation,” which
he does not define further : use and disuse only make irregular
the regular stages founded on this law. The question of the
modus operandi of use and disuse (the effects of which he wrongly
imagines to be inherited), is left unoonsidered by Lamarck :
otherwise he would have recognised at any rate its teleological
or adaptive character, as Samuel Butler, August Pauly and other
“ Neo-Lamarckians ” have most decidedly done in recent times.
What he says about organic life in general is unimportant, and
he confuses condition (heat, electricity) with the essence of the
matter. For the rest he really admits an autonomy of vital
processes, and probably only combats the vitalistic theory out
of dread of introducing supernatural factors; but his views
here are far from clear.



96 HISTORY OP VITALISM

A. v. Humboldt’s allegory on vital power, “Her
rhodische Genius.” 1

The vitalistic views which we have first to consider
are unfortunately not calculated exactly to meet
with the reader’s approval.

(i) OKEN.

Lorenz Oken (1779-1851), the great anatomist,
wrote (like many of his contemporaries) a Manual
of the Philosophy of Nature . 2

Galvanism is described as the principle of life.
There is no other vital force, we are told, but galvanic
polarity. The heterogeneity of the three terrestrial
elements in a closed individual body is the vital
power, but of course “ it is combined with higher
actions,” and he rejects an elementary vita) force
only when it is described as a “ force.” His
thought is anything but clear, and when we hear
such sentences as, “ The Light shines upon water,
and the water is made salt. The Light shines upon
salt water and the water lives ”—and there are
many such sentences in the book—then we are likely
to lose our confidence in the nature of his reasoning
altogether. Rather than analyse such an idea
further, we might have done better to examine
minutely the pre-Aristotelian and medieval bio¬
logists

To a certain extent Oken’s book, Die Zeugung 3
offers us something better, though at the first glance

1 In AnsiclUen der Natur, ed. Bolsche (Reclam), pp. 383 ff.
In the explanatory note, however, Humboldt practically with¬
draws the substance of the allegory. A “ vital force " is for
him at any rate problematic.

2 2nd. Edn., JenR, 1831. * Bamberg and Wurzburg, 1806.



OKEN


97


there is also a propensity towards absurdities.
In spite of Spallanzani and his successors, Oken
rejects the origin of infusoria from germs and
attributes it to spontaneous generation ; 1 he em¬
phatically proclaims the principle, “ Nihil vivum
ex ovo,” etc.

But then follows an epigenetic-vitalistic theory of
generation : The sperm is a putrifying substance,
the spermatozoa are protozoa arising from it; at
fecundation the sperm (in this sense) unites jiitself
with the “ feminine vesicle,” and as soon as this has
happened the embryo is ready. The spermatozoa
have “ taken form ” in the feminine vesicle.

“ Generation ... is the synthesis of the infusoria
by means of the homogeneous but opposite pole of
the organic world.” “ The feminine vesicle provides
neither a germ nor elementary organic particles nor
anything material, but only the form which unites
the entering cercariae in such a way with each other
(through the organic activity which has come into
being with the vesicles), that, though still transparent,
they already represent in miniature the type of that
animal to whose genus they belong. The vesicle
could be simply called the force which gives the type.”

So the embryo is formed “ straight off, as soon as
the spermatozoa are united with the vesicles.”

This is a very convenient kind of epigenesis.
No doubt the reader will be amused, or perhaps he
will blame us for mentioning Oken at all when he
reads such wild nonsense as, “ The animal is the
highest union of polyp and plant, of line and circle

1 Not from inorganic matter in the strict sense, but (as with
Needham) from putrifying organic matter.

G



98 HISTORY OF VITALISM

—their fusion gives us an ellipse, a fact which
everybody can easily demonstrate for himself.”

But in spite of all that we reject, one thing should
not be forgotten : in substance even Oken’s curious
theories are based on the fundamental truth of
Vitalism, the irreducibility of the organic form.

But the kind of Vitalism which cannot be held
up as an example is sufficiently represented by our
one instance.

(ii) REIL (1759-1813).

If we wish to give a clear account of what J. Ch.
Reil, the type of a clear-headed biologist trained in
the philosophy of his age, looked upon as his pro¬
blem, we may best proceed from the contents of
a letter which he wrote (February 22, 1807) to
Autenrieth. The contents of this letter are given
in a work which we shall shortly have to mention.

He speaks there about the “ problem which no
natural philosophy has yet solved, how to reach the
matter from the idea.” We might indeed well ask,
why does the idea come to the matter at all, and why
must new matter constantly come in through nutri¬
tion and old matter be ejected through excretion 1

Reil tries to solve in his own way the difficulty
which presented itself in his articles “ Concerning
the Life-force.” 1

Everything is matter or representation ; a change
of matter is, on Cartesian principles, thinkable only
as motion ; representations are always accompanied
by simultaneous movements of the brain, though
of course not in the sense of a strict parallelism.
From this it follows that before the existence of the

1 Reil’s Archiv fiir die Phynologie, i. 1796, p. 8.



REIL


99


brain all natural occurrences must have been based
upon matter alone ; and this argument, conceived
in a sufficiently realistic manner, serves to refute
Stahl. But in a positive direction it leads us “ to
seek the cause of all the phenomena of the animal
body which are not representations ... in animal
matter—in the primary diversity of its elements and
in their combination and form.”

The power of matter (which with Kant is con¬
ceived dynamically) to produce phenomena which
depend on its form and mixture, is called the
“ property ” of matter.

The cause of the regular formation of animal
bodies lies originally in the nature of animal matter.

It must be understood that matter is here thought
of as a whole. Reil does not find the principle of
life in a mechanical organisation, although organisa¬
tion exists even to the smallest details ; 1 on the
contrary, “ the most general attribute of this
unique animal matter is a special sort of crystallisa¬
tion.”

“ We can describe as force the relation of this
property of the animal matter to its effects,” namely,
“ the adding of foreign substances from outside and
their purposive formation. This has been given
the name formative-force and formative impulse.”
Reil denounces only the names, but not the whole
conception. He strongly emphasises the fact that
his “ force ” has the character of natural law and
that it is combined with the “ dead forces ” in the
organism.

1 Reil expressly rejects the view that the order in generation,
alimentation and growth comes “ through instruments."



100


HISTORY OF VITALISM


We have no interest in going into further details
of Reil’s exposition : he does not offer real proof
of the objective truth ot his kind of Vitalism. We
will only mention the excellent definition of irrita¬
bility, as it is an example of his logical clearness :
“ The quality of animal organs which causes them
to change their present state through themselves
when stimulated by an external agency, is called
irritability.” The cause of irritability lies in the
mixture and form of the matter.

Reil is the first representative of a vitalistic theory
founded on the concept of living matter and thought
out clearly, perhaps too simply for the greatness
of the problem of how one “ comes from idea to
matter ” ; he merely endows the matter with the
idea. In a sense this too sounds quite modem ;
but we must not forget the sentence which we have
already quoted from Kant, “ The possibility of a
living matter is unthinkable ; the concept contains
a contradiction, for lifelessness, inertia, is the
essential characteristic of matter.” To those who
agree with this thesis Reil’s work can be no more
than a clever achievement erroneous from the very
start.


(iii) TREVIRANUS.

With G. R. Treviranus, if not already with Reil,
we have the beginning of a really dogmatic Vitalism,
i.e. Vitalism whose proof is no longer thought
necessary, the question being rather how it is to be
presented. At the same time with Treviranus
begins what might be called “ scholastic Vitalism ” ;
every general treatment of physiological theory now



TREVIRANUS


101


commences, as it were, with a vitalistic system, for
the most part not very different from its predecessors.
This continues till Johannes Muller, the last in this
group of Vitalists. In every case we notice the
secondary position taken by morphogenesis on which
interest was concentrated throughout the eighteenth
century; instead of it we get stress laid on the chemico-
physiological side, and especially the problem of
instinct; often also that of “ psychic life ” as a
natural phenomenon.

If, nevertheless, we treat Treviranus alone, it is
because he displays throughout his whole life an
anxiety for clearness in vitalistic matters, and be¬
cause there really are quite original ideas in his
work.

In the years 1802-1822, there appeared six volumes
of his Biologie, oder Philosophic der lebenden Natur,
and the first in particular is devoted to general
questions. In the long process of preparing his
book Treviranus changed his outlook on many
essential points ; so towards the end of his life he
gathered together his final views in a new work, to
which we shall refer later on.

It is worth noticing that with Treviranus the
word biology is used for the first time to designate
the whole of the theory of the living : “ The subject
of our researches will be the different forms and
phenomena of life, the conditions and law's under
which this state occurs, and the causes which
produce it. We shall designate the science which is
occupied with these things as biology or the theory
of life.”

Treviranus reproaches his predecessors for not



102 HISTORY OF VITALISM

having given a clear-cut definition of what they
were investigating ; if a definition was given it was
wrong, e.g. Stahl equates “ living ” and “ animate.” 1

“ The uniformity of phenomena in relation to
external influences ” is, according to Treviranus,
the fundamental criterion of life, and connected with
this definition are all those discussions which char¬
acterise his work in particular.

He shares Kant’s theory of matter. In the
inorganic, where the question is of matter alone,
one alteration alters all, because of the principle of
reaction. His definition of life would mean the
contrary of this. How is this contrary possible ? 2
Evidently through something extraneous to
matter.

We have shown that all matter is organised and
subject to constant change, but that in the organisa¬
tion and in the change there is something permanent
only so long as the external influences which cause
the latter remain unchanged. The matter of living
organisms cannot form an exception; it must,
for instance, be impenetrable. The exception, says
Treviranus, which the substance of living bodies
seems to constitute to the above can therefore be
only apparent. There must be a dam which breaks
the waves of the universe, in order to save living
nature from the universal whirlpool. This mediating
force is certainly not the primary force which is
needed for the possibility of matter. “ We call it

1 Simply by the consideration o£ the vitality of separate parts
of the organism on which representation has no effect.

* In reading Treviranus, it must be remembered that for him
the word “organic” designates “order” of every kind, and
consequently nature in general is an organic system.



TREVIRANUS


103


therefore vital force (vis vitalis) to differentiate it
from that primary force.”

Thus in any case mere form and combination of
matter does not contain the cause of life, at least,
not if we only admit the Kantian primary forces,
repulsion and attraction. But if more primary
forces were admitted the question would remain,
what holds them together ?

So “ life is something entirely extraneous to
matter ” ; and as something new we also find
“ spiritual nature,” Aristotle’s raw.

It must be especially noted that, taken in them¬
selves, the mechanical and chemical changes in
organisms are the same as in lifeless nature;
but they differ in that the external causes, to which
they owe their origin, influence the matter of living
bodies not directly but through the vital force.

There are three possibilities here :

Is there vital force only where there is matter
capable of life, such that the latter, beginning as a
product of the inorganic, when finally formed
“ wakes ” the vital force “ from its slumber ” ?

Or i3 matter capable of life a product of vital force ?

Or, thirdly, are they “ determined reciprocally
the one by the other ” ?

Treviranus decides for the third alternative in a
lengthy discussion where, amongst other things, the
vital force is considered quantitatively, and where
the conception of a “ vita minima ” is introduced.

So he uses two fundamental principles, the vital
force and matter capable of life. In this he differs
substantially from Reil. As might be expected,
however, he is somewhat obscure.



104 HISTORY OF VITALISM

His matter capable of life is in itself formless ; it
receives a determined form “ through combination
with elements of lifeless nature.” In death, which
thus becomes analogous to the transmigration of
souls, all passes through that formless matter. But
in particular the relation between vital force, form¬
less life-substance and external factors is imagined
by Treviranus in conformity with his definition of
the living as opposed to the material, in the following
way :

“ The nature of life consists in the faculty or power
to give relative uniformity to the absolute irregularity
of external agents. Different forms of life are
possible only if every kind of living organism
possesses that faculty solely for certain external
agents; in other words, if its vital force acts
only when influenced by certain powers, and if
all the other powers affect the matter of the living
organism, without having first been modified by
the vital force.”

This statement serves as an explanation of
different specific vital forms as well.

What depends on fortuitous external factors, what
on the vital force, and what part is to be taken by
the formless matter capable of life—all this can
hardly be made out from the discussion, though its
clear logic is deserving of special recognition.

From the later volumes of the Biology which are
more specialised we reproduce very little here.

In the second volume Treviranus once more
decides upon his third alternative : first of all,
because of the fact of spontaneous generation from
organic substance in a state of decomposition, a



TREVIRANUS


105


“ view which when demonstrated implies the de¬
monstration of the whole of biology,” and secondly,
because of the fact that organisms are liable to be
influenced by external factors like nutriment,
humidity, etc. These arguments can hardly be
considered happy.

In the fourth volume there is a good sentence :
“ The organ is a restriction, not the cause, of the
activity of the formative impulse.”

In the sixth volume the relation between reason
and the creative principle is elucidated by reference
to somnambulism, hysteria, etc. Here Treviranus
comes to the very modern conclusion (reminding us,
for instance, of E. v. Hartmann), that something
unconscious is the primary cause of life, affecting
the body on the one hand and the spirit on the
other. In language not quite clear from the critical
point of view the instincts are called “ unconscious
images.”

Towards the end of his life Treviranus, as has been
noted above, restated his views on the primary
principles of biology, 1 and did it in a substantially
altered form.

“ Purposiveness for itself,” as contrasted with
the artificial product, is what characterises life for
him ; and it is significant how the instinctive, the
unconscious, becomes to him the foundation of all
vitalistic theory; in the last volume of the Biology
there were already hints of such a view. Conscious¬
ness is not a mark of life ; in the instinct the aim
is unconscious, in the muscular movement, on the

1 Die Erscheinungen und Qeaetze dee organiechen Lebens,
Bremen, i. 1831 ; ii. 1832-3.



106 HISTORY OF VITALISM

other hand, “ we are conscious of the final aim, not
of the means.” Purposiveness is conceivable always
only as “an analogon to reason ” : in this sense
the sentence which Treviranus rejected in the
Biology with reference to Stahl is of value to him
now, “ Living beings and animated beings (Beseelt-
sein) are the same.”

He considers whether living bodies act and react
upon each other without the intervention of the
senses ; the regulative principle of the number of
births and deaths and of sex, and somnambulism,
support this view.

But by far the best illustration of the real essence
of biological phenomena is instinct. Instinct, in
bees for example, rests upon “ productive imagina¬
tion ” ; it is comparable to dreaming ; it originates
in an “ obscure consciousness.” And embryology
may be conceived on the analogy of instinct; it is
“ as if the germ of the wheat dreamt of root, shoot
and ear.” Johannes Muller, Schopenhauer and
Hartmann advocated a similar conception of morpho¬
genesis in later times.

And finally : “ All living things have organisation,
but organisation is the consequence of life. Life
is a state that is alien to matter as such. As soon
as life ceases, the elements of the body, which was
animate before, become united by different laws
than those prevailing in the former state.” Bio¬
chemical analyses have therefore but little value.
We may here recall Bichat’s “ anatomie cadaverique
des fluides.”

As for spontaneous generation, it now seems to
Treviranus “ at least unproved.”



THE DOGMATIC SCHOOL


107


(iv) THE DOGMATIC SCHOOL.

M. F. Autenrieth produced a very readable book
about the principal problem of biology, Ansichten
liber Natur- und Seelenleben (1836). But there
is little question of close analysis, and the way for
the later criticism of a Lotze is being made easy !
There is in life, he holds, something essentially
different from material substance; this “ vital
force ” is independent of the body. This is proved
through the spontaneous generation of infusoria
and of intestinal worms, and not less through the
fact that single organs or whole organisms, e.g. fishes,
can freeze and thaw again later on : here the vital
force, which is a really measurable force, had alto¬
gether or partly left the body.

The catastrophic theory, too, proves the inde¬
pendence of the vital force, and just as great a proof
are the facts of fertilisation ; the physical element
is unessential, as very few germs suffice.

The best part of Autenrieth, though it is similar to
what we find in Treviranus, is what he says about
instinct, which “ is based on the creative principle
of the vegetative vital force.” Instinct is not
reason, but it can be combined with it as in the case
of bees, cats, or dogs.—

F. Tiedemann 1 thinks the “ effort of metaphysics
to give a complete knowledge of nature by idea of
the reason (Yernunftideen) a failure and yet a deside¬
ratum.”

His own bio-theoretical inquiries introduce chemical
considerations which begin now to play a part, at
1 Physiologie des Mentchen, i. Darmstadt, 1830.



108 HISTORY OF VITALISM .

any rate incidentally. There are only binary com¬
binations in the inorganic ; therefore in the organic,
where they are ternary and quaternary, there
must be forces acting “ against the affinities.”
It is true that urea and oxalic acid have been
produced synthetically by inorganic means, but
these substances “ stand on the extreme limit
between organic and inorganic compounds ”—a
mode of expression which is equivalent to a con¬
fession of uncertainty as to the previous state¬
ment.

Organisms are by form more multifold than
the inorganic, but by “ mixture ” more uniform ;
whence can be deduced a force peculiar to the former,
a “ higher power which acts in formation.” This
power “ modifies ” the affinities, though it has its
limitations.

Further considerations concerning spontaneous
generation of infusoria and worms from decomposed
elements (or rather the capacity of revivification
when the substance is not quite dead) lead Tiedemann
—not very logically—to postulate the existence of
a “ vital matter ” such as Reil had already affirmed,
though by a more rigorous method. The material
substratum of organic bodies is a unique substance,
and possesses the property of forming itself ; it
was in fact contained in water and formed itself.
Thus everything is settled at once. But Tiedemann
has to admit that “ the main difficulty is not ex¬
plained.”

Further on our author refers to the “ peculiar
matter capable of life ” of Treviranus, but does not
penetrate into his predecessor’s not altogether clear



THE DOGMATIC SCHOOL 109

but much deeper conception; he also cites Buffon
and Needham with approval.

Blumenbach’s “ nisus formativus ” is described
as obscure ; we may, however, ask ourselves whether
Tiedemann’s conclusions, which never reach real
logical accuracy, are not themselves obscure in a
much higher degree.

He is at his best on certain details such as the idea
that the existence of inanimate bodies depends “ on
the state of rest which occurs in chemical composi¬
tion,” while the existence and conservation of
organisms is conditioned by continual changes of
composition. This reminds us of the modern con¬
ception of “ dynamic equilibrium.” The differ¬
ence between crystals and real “ individuals,” or
organisms, is also well discussed.

There is nowhere even so much as an attempt at
a real proof of vitalism, except the unfortunate
introduction about the relation between biology and
chemistry.—

Still more than the above-mentioned writers is
K. F. Burdach 1 under the spell of natural philosophy.

The life-principle is not a “ deus ex machina,” but
a “ deus ex vita ” ; no mechanical, no chemical
theory is sufficient to explain organic formation.
But the life-principle is not to be imagined as isolated
from matter ; it works “ through material means,”
through common activities of the organism such as
secretion, assimilation, etc. “ Matter is only an
accident, while activity is the substance of the
organism.”

1 Die Physiologie ala Erfahrungawiaaenaohaft, Leipzig, 6 vole. Of
special importance are v. 1830, and vi. 1840.



110 HISTORY OF VITALISM

In the course of development, he declares, the
progress of further formation is always stimulated
by that which already has been formed. This
really lucid epigenetic idea deserves particular
recognition.

So far the fifth volume ; in the last Burdach tries
to probe still deeper.

All forces of the inorganic world are certainly
active also in the organism ; this was an axiom
on which Descartes and the Iatromechanists had
built. They explained the mechanics of the articula¬
tion of limbs and some points in the circulation of
the blood, and then thought that they could explain
everything. In doing so they neglected the high
philosophical standpoint of Descartes.

But the materialists have not proved anything ;
any more than men like Buffon and Needham.

Materialism can explain only details, but never
their relation to the whole. But a general organic
matter endowed with special power is no explana¬
tion, quite apart from the fact that such a thing
cannot really exist, since life is developing towards
individualism. Electricity and heat cannot be the
cause of life, as they presuppose the variety of
living organic forms : explanations resting on
irritability and the like are simply classifications.
Stahl’s soul, too, is to be rejected no less than
a nerve-principle put in its place : there is life
without nerves. Finally, the term “ vital force ”
implies only “ that there must be a peculiar cause
for the peculiar phenomena of life.”

But what is to be done where all these theories
fail ?



THE DOGMATIC SCHOOL 111

Life must be explained “ by the cause of existence
alone.” A reference follows to Fichte and Schelling :
“ We find in the organism the same predicates in a
limited form which apply in an absolute sense to
nature in general.”

“ Vital force is the primordial thought realising
itself within certain limits.”

Is such a solution satisfactory ? Hardly, for a
true scientist. Reil’s question, how do we come
from the idea to matter ? must be raised and not
merely shelved.

Essentially, Burdach offers us no more than
Oken, except that he is kept from obvious absurdities
by logical training and critical capacity, which in
general make the study of his work agreeable reading,
and such as one can recommend.

Schopenhauer often quotes Burdach favourably ;
and what he valued was, of course, the metaphysical
element, the “ Will in Nature.” We must also
remember that Schopenhauer was not quite so far
from nature-philosophy as he himself believed.—

Karl Ernst v. Baer, the celebrated embryologist,
was a pupil of Burdach’s, and depends on him in his
early theorising, which alone interests us here. He
is also greatly influenced by nature-philosophy, and
it will become clear later on that in matters teleolo¬
gical he never got beyond such dependence. We
need not have referred to his book, 1 which, though
epoch-making for embryology has very little impor¬
tance for Vitalism, were it not for a sentence which
appears in the dedication to Pander ; that sentence

* Uber Entwrickelungsgeschichle der Thiere, KOnigsberg, i. 1828,
ii. 1837.



112 HISTORY OF VITALISM

unfortunately has often been quoted by materialist-
Darwinian authors in order to label Baer as one of
themselves :—

“ Many a man may get a prize ; but only he will
win the palm for whom it is reserved to trace the
creative powers of the animal body back to the
general powers (or vital tendencies) of the universe.
The tree which will supply the wood for his cradle
has not yet been planted.”

Such expressions show what is indeed also suffi¬
ciently indicated by the words “ vital tendencies,”
that Baer could not well be further from a materia¬
listic conception of nature, and that he thinks more
in the spirit of nature-philosophy. 1

“ There is one fundamental idea which runs
through all forms and stages of animal development,
and commands all relations. It is the same idea
which collected the scattered elements of matter
into spheres and combined them into solar systems,
the same idea which made the decomposed dust on
the surface of the metallic planet grow up into
living forms. But this idea is nothing else than life
itself, and the words and syllables which express it
are the different forms of all life.”

These might be the words of Oken ; it is certainly
far from being the expression of a clear attitude
towards the teleological problem, and of interest
only because of the light it throws on the author’s
personality.

The real embryological merit of the book consists,
as is known, in the differentiation of the conceptions

1 Baer also emphaaiseB the fact, for example, that explanations
by oxydation or electricity deal only with one side of the question.



THE DOGMATIC SCHOOL


113


“ type ” ( =Lageverhaltnis) and “ degree of organisa¬
tion ” ; also in the view that the type is conditioned
by the development in its embryological mani¬
festations.

But we must bring our remarks to a conclusion,
for we cannot deal in detail with every author in an
age when everyone thought vitalistically, and when,
therefore, every writer who happened to theorise
was responsible for a certain number of vitalistic
remarks. We will only mention, therefore, that
R. Wagner, the editor of the well-known Dictionary,
did not agree with the contents of the anti-vitalistic
contributions of his collaborator Lotze, with whom
we shall deal shortly : also that F. Magendie,
though he was interested in matters of fact more
than in the theory, differentiated between “ purely
physical and purely vital events,” but at the same
time was perfectly clear in his assertion of their inter¬
mixture. 1

And now we turn to consider that man who repre¬
sents to a certain degree the final type of the old
Vitalism.


(v) JOHANNES MULLER.

In his Manual of Human Physiology , 2 Johannes
Muller systematically summed up the dogmatic
Vitalism for the last time. Muller’s book surpasses
its predecessors in essentials, and had therefore a
wider influence ; and moreover, the old Vitalism

1 PtScih dUmentaire de Phyriologie, 1816. Amongst other
things we read of “ the harmful and perverse belief that, physical
laws have no influence on the living body.”

•Koblenz, 1st edition, vol. i. 1833, vol. ii. 1840. Fourth
edition, 1844.

H



114 HISTORY OF VITALISM

reached later generations chiefly in the form which
he gave it. Indeed, he is often regarded as its
typical exponent. This is true in a sense ; but
for the real consolidation of the great vitalistic
theory, Muller represents a true progress only in
two separate (though not unimportant) points ;
this, however, is sufficient for us to give him a
distinguished place, and to treat him as more than
merely the last of the school. But an essentially
new idea of really fundamental kind is not to be
found in his writings.

The book begins with that statement about
the chemical contrast of organisms and the in¬
organic which we know already from Tiedemann,
and which, as Muller emphasises, took a definite
place in every contemporary book on chemistry ;
even the problom of urea has almost literally the
same solution as with Tiedemann. Besides selective
affinity there is “ something else ” which rules
in life.

The Kantian view of the organic is next intro¬
duced, and the treatment of the conception of
individuality reminds us once more of other
predecessors. Somewhat more original, at least in
its form, is the idea that the harmony which exists
in the organism between structure and function is
sufficient for the characterisation but not for the
explanation of the organising powers, as the latter
had existed before.

Then Muller brings some arguments against the
embryologies! evolution theory ; epigenesis, on which
he touches only slightly, is improved in so far as
spontaneous generation of all kinds is definitely



JOHANNES MtfLLER


115


rejected, with reference to Spallanzani ; and in so
far as the permanence of organic matter is affirmed.

Muller finds the views of Stahl particularly con¬
genial, but we seriously doubt whether Stahl referred
not to the representing Soul, but to the “ organ¬
ising force expressing itself by a rational law.”
This formula, however, sums up Muller’s own theory.
It is certainly not new, and when he declares con¬
sciousness to be a creation of the organisation, and
further, to be attached to an organ, the nerve-
system, we cannot but remark the confused character
of his expression from a critical standpoint.

Whence arises the connection of that force with
organic matter is not for Muller a matter accessible
to human knowledge. This view implies a real
progress in comparison with earlier writers.

But this praise needs an immediate limitation
when with reference to Reil the question whether
or not that new element in life is material is described
as uncertain. Muller is here equally far from the
clear analysis of his problem, which led Reil to
his life-substance, and from the logical argument
of Treviranus, who was able to reject Reil’s solution.

The most important passages of Muller’s first
volume are those which arise from the discussion
on the so-called life stimuli, or integrating stimuli
(i.e. in our language the necessary conditions of
life), and from the treatment of the problem of
death. These stimuli vivify the organic forces
and strengthen them. Through the vegetable
world the vital force is increased from unknown
external sources. There must be such an increase,
since the organic force is multiplied in growth and in



116 HISTORY OF VITALISM

the reproduction of organic bodies : and hence we
must a dmi t “ the inconceivable theory that the
division of the organic force which takes place in
reproduction causes no diminution of the force itself.”
In death, on the other hand, the organic force is
resolved into its general natural causes, whence
it seems to be regenerated once more through the
vegetable world.

All these considerations do not seem at first sight
at all clear, nor are they all new ; indeed, we already
had occasion when dealing with Muller’s predecessors
to object to their habit of understanding the vital
force in a quantitative sense. But what is a really
original consideration is the way in which Muller,
though presupposing the wrong idea that the vital
force itself can be understood quantitatively, raises
the question of the origin of that quantity ; or,
in modern terms, the way in which he requires a
sort of “ source of energy ” for it. Truth and error
are mingled here ; rather we should say, of course,
there must be a source of energy for phenomena of
life, but that which really characterises them has
nothing to do with a source of energy.

After the manner of the Aristotelians, Muller
distinguished a vegetative power, a motive power,
and a sensitive power ; everything originates from
the “ primum movens,” whose creations become
more and more specific. The reason ascribed to
that “ primum movens ” is far mightier than human
reason ; “all problems of physics are determined by
this creative activity.” It is also the cause of the
instincts which, as by Treviranus, are regarded as
a form of dream.



JOHANNES MULLER


117


Besides the anxious demand for a “ source of
energy ” in life, Miiller, in the second volume of his
book, treats the so-called problems of psychic life
as really scientific problems of physiology ; though
he does it very confusedly, and uses the words
“ freedom,” “ sensation,” etc., in a very vague way.

The question whether soul and matter are neces¬
sarily connected is left open, like the question of the
connection of matter and vital force. “ The will sets
in activity the nervous fibres like the keys of a
piano.” All the rest is nothing but mechanism. The
existence of the soul does not depend on the un¬
injured brain, inasmuch as it was already latent 1 ;
and thus the soul cannot be sick, but only the brain.
But how that action on the nerves takes place is
perhaps an unanswerable question. In any case
it cannot be attributed to the intensity of an idea
of purpose, for in that case the movement would
have to increase with any increase in the intensity.
Nor can it be attributed to the fact that the soul
is filled with one single idea, for several movements
can be executed at once. All this cannot be regarded
as over critical, but a point which is worth mention
is the emphasis on the relation of will to attention
which recalls the writings of Wundt: while the
views of Lotze are foreshadowed in the theory of the
origin of volitional movements from the indefinite
movements of new-born babies through the medium
of experience. Particularly noteworthy is also
Muller’s doctrine of the unimportance of the brain

1 We may quote the passage : “ With the structure the acting
of the force already at hand (from the germ) is given ; the foroe,
then, does not ultimately depend on the structure of the brain,
though tho possibility of its working depends on this structure.”



118 HISTORY OF VITALISM

in spite of his theory of specific sense-energies. Loss
of brain substance never results in the loss of definite
ideational complexes, but in the diminution of the
clearness of all ideational activity.

Some very general remarks conclude the theore¬
tical part of Muller’s work, and with them we may
also close our examination—“ The relation of soul
and organism can in general be compared with the
relation of every physical force of a general nature
to the matter in which it is manifested : as, for
instance, light and the body in which it appears.
The enigma is the same in both cases.”

The effect of spirit on body or of body on spirit is
conceived by Muller according to the scheme of the
monadology of Herbart.

(vi) LIEBIG.

We may conclude this part of our exposition by
briefly examining the views of a famous chemist
on the phenomena of life. The passages where
Liebig refers in his Letters on Chemistry, 1 and less
profoundly in his Animal Chemistry , 2 to the fun¬
damental problems of biology are not concerned
specially with the details or the establishment of
Vitalism, but they are notable because they have a
certain general character, and because they also
show that the chemists of this age, of whom Liebig
may be taken as the representative, were very far
from being opposed to Vitalism.

Although chemical force and vital force are nearly

1 Leipzig, 1844 ; 4th edition, 1859.

2 Die Tier-Chemie in Hirer Anwendung auf Physiologie und
Pathotogie, Braunschweig, 3rd edition, 1840.



LIEBIG


119


related, and the chemist can already produce all
kinds of organic substances and will one day be
able to produce a great many more, chemistry will
yet never be in a position to create an eye, a hair, or
a leaf. The form, the qualities of the simplest
groups of atoms are determined by the chemical
force under the dominion of heat: while the form
and the qualities of the higher and organised atoms
are conditioned by the vital force. The latter, of
course, has its limitations, and cannot for instance
transcreate the elements.

The anti-vitalistic materialists have mostly pro¬
ceeded in far too summary a fashion, and of course
the same applies to the methods of the vitalists,
since they failed to realise certain possibilities.
But none the less the vitalistic view is the right one.

“ Only an insufficient acquaintance with the
forces of inorganic nature can account for the
frequent denial of the existence of a special force in
organic beings, and for the ascription to inorganic
forces of modes of action which are opposed to their
nature and which contradict their laws. Those who
venture on such a denial are ignorant that every
chemical combination presupposes not one but
three causes,” viz. besides heat and affinity £t the
formation force of cohesion and crystallisation.”

‘ ‘ In living bodies there is added yet a fourth cause
which dominates the force of cohesion and combines
the elements in new forms so that they gain new
qualities—forms and qualities which do not appear
except in the organism.”

Opponents of Vitalism are, according to Liebig,
mostly strangers to the sciences whioh investigate



120 HISTORY OF VITALISM

physical and chemical forces. His view reminds
us of the fact that in modem times physicists and
chemists have often been far less prejudiced in their
views than biologists. We have only to think of
Ostwald, Hertz.. Maxwell and others. One could
easily imagine that Liebig was writing in the sixties
or eighties of the past century, instead of many
decades earlier, when one reads his remarks about
“ dilettanti who have strolled as far as the portals
of scientific research, and then claim the right to
discourse to an ignorant and credulous public how
the world and life really arose and how far we have
got in the solution of the deepest problems,” of
whose disquisitions on the relation of body and mind
nothing remains when they are divested of all their
gaudy trappings, but the single assertion that we can
no more think without a brain than walk without legs.

Only if we regard it as an aberration of nature-
philosophy can we, according to Liebig, in some
degree find an excuse for materialism. But none
the less vital qualities are not to be regarded as an
exception to the laws of nature.

Our study has now brought us to a time when Vital¬
ism has at any rate to fight for its existence, when
there are other candidates in the field. But before
we enter in more detail on the new situation we will
give a second ending to this part of the discussion.
We began it with a reference to the nature-philosophy
of Schelling and Hegel, and we will conclude it
with another reference to philosophy—to one who,
if he were still alive, would perhaps take it very
much amiss to be mentioned in the same paragraph
as his enemies the “ Professors of Philosophy,” but



SCHOPENHAUER 121

who certainly neglected similarities in stressing
differences—to


(vii) SCHOPENHAUER.

We are not here concerned with Schopenhauer’s
metaphysic of volition any more than with the
rational systems of his opponents. When, in the
course of his work, he has to demonstrate the fact
that nature shows various stages of the “ objectifica¬
tion of the will,” of which the highest is the living
organism, he adduces a great number of biological
facts 1 regarded from a general vitalistic standpoint :
and these present a valuable field for scientific
analysis. 2

Of immediate scientific interest and methodological
importance is one definite thought which we find in
Schopenhauer. It is attached to his criticism of
the Kantian philosophy, and to the part dealing with
the teleological judgment in particular, and runs as
follows :

“ Kant rightly asserts that we can never succeed
in explaining the nature of organised bodies from
merely mechanical causes, by which he understands
the undesigned and regular effect of all the universal
forces of nature. Yet I find here a gap. He
denies the possibility of such an explanation merely
with regard to the teleology and apparent adaptation
of organised bodies. But we find that even where

1 Cf., in addition to the second book in both volumes of his
chief work, his publication On Will in Nature.

* Most important is the parallel between instinct and the
operation of organising nature in The World as Will and Idea,
vol. ii. book 2, chapter xxvii. (English Trans, by Haldane and
Kemp.)



122 HISTORY OF VITALISM

there is no organisation the grounds of explanation
which apply to one province of nature cannot be
transferred to another, but forsake us as soon as
we enter a new province ; and new fundamental
laws appear instead of them, the explanation of
which is by no means to be expected from the laws
of the former province. Thus in the province of the
mechanical, properly so called, the laws of gravita¬
tion, cohesion, rigidity, fluidity, and elasticity
prevail, which in themselves (apart from my explana¬
tion of all natural forces as lower grades of the
objectification of will) exist as manifestations of
forces which cannot be further explained, but
themselves constitute the principles of all further
explanation, which merely consists in reduction to
them. If we leave this province and come to the
phenomena of chemistry, of electricity, magnetism,
crystallisation, the former principles are absolutely
of no use; indeed the former laws are no longer
valid, the former forces are overcome by others, and
the phenomena take place in direct contradiction
to them, according to new laws, which, just like the
former ones, are original and inexplicable, i.e.
cannot be reduced to more general ones. . . . Such
an exposition would have been especially favourable
to his excellent remark that a more profound know¬
ledge of the real being, of which the things of nature
are the manifestation, would recognise both in the
mechanical (according to law) and the apparently
intentional effects of nature one and the same
ultimate principle, which might serve as the more
general ground of explanation of them both.”

These reflections do not quite harmonise with



SCHOPENHAUER


123


Kant’s ideal of a resolution of all physics into
phenomena of movement, but they are none the
less right. They are, moreover, of the greatest
importance both for the general method of science
and for biology in particular. They are extended
in Schopenhauer’s further doctrine that all the
elementary laws of nature are the more intelligible
the poorer they are in content, and the less intelligible
the richer in content. But biology he regards in a
vitalistic sense as an independent science with
special irreducible laws, though life for him is at the
same time only the last member of a series and in
no way contrasted with the rest of nature. 1

Schopenhauer’s whole conception has a peculiarly
modern ring with respect to questions of method,
and directly anticipates the ideas of Mach and Paul
du Bois-Reymond.

(viii) THE END OF THE OLD VITALISM.

It is said of political parties that they die out when
they no longer have opponents to contend with.

1 The idea that the different branches of natural science—
Mechanics, Physics, Chemistry, Biology—have to deal with
phenomena which ever grow more complicated, is also found in
Comte’s Coura de Philosophic positive, vol. iii. 3rd edition, Paris,
1869. His dread of metaphysics and “entities,” his “Posi¬
tivism,” prevented his understanding the real problem of
Vitalism. For his Positivism was in reality an imperfection,
since it overlooked the A priori necessity accompanying the
formation of concepts and judgments, and he also leaves it
uncertain whether he believed that in each branch of natural
phenomena there is an autonomy of a growing intensive com¬
plexity, or merely a complication of the configuration.
The first alternative seems to us the more likely. These few
words, however, must suffice on Comte, as in Claude Bernard we
shall later have to deal with a thinker who adopts the same
point of view, with a better scientific foundation and training.



124 HISTORY OP VITALISM

Something similar is also true of scientific and philo
sophic theories ; it is not as though they cease to
exist as such, but they lose their strength, their
capacity for being always ready to face an attack
which is always possible and perhaps not altogether
unjustified ; they become lax and careless in their
logical deductions ; they forget to justify every
assertion in the light of the theory of knowledge.
But what is worse still, they become careless with
regard to their fundamental principles : they regard
these as so certain that it is no longer worth
while to examine them, no longer worth while
even to mention them: still less do they en¬
deavour to establish them yet more strongly by
the new facts that might be adduced from actual
experiments.

In such circumstances a doctrine declines and
eventually dies. It may, of course, have never¬
theless been the right explanation, but what was
right in it was buried under a mass of confused and
false details. The opposing doctrine which takes its
place cannot be said to have refuted its predecessor
as a whole ; for it has refuted only certain par¬
ticulars which were wrong and not well founded on
it. It proceeds, however, with an acute and rigorous
logic ; it fights earnestly for its own existence ;
it attracts to itself all the unoriginal thought of
the time, and overlooks the fact that it has never
really touched the kernel of truth which lay in the
older theory, which has passed away through its
own carelessness.

But, finally, the old theory rises again in a new and
improved form, thankful for honest and well founded



THE END OF THE OLD VITALISM 125


criticism, even though that criticism was wrong
in its essentials—and that is exactly what happened
in the case of the old Vitalism.

It died for lack of opponents. Who of all those
writers whose doctrines we have examined had
during the last six decades really examined the
fundamental principles of his theory, who had
endeavoured to put forward an objective justification
of his own doctrine as opposed to others, who had
proved his conclusions ? Blumenbach was the last
of all these naturalists who really undertook this
task.

Thus it was that a critique came to the front which,
to all outward appearance, had set Vitalism on one
side for the time being. But Vitalism had not been
overthrown ; it had only been purified, and hence it
is that we lay stress on our statement that the old
Vitalism died literally by a process of self-extermina¬
tion.



CHAPTER II.


THE CRITICS: AND THE MATERIALISTIC
REACTION.

Of all the criticisms and negations which in the
middle of the nineteenth century and even somewhat
later were directed against the older Vitalism, there
are only two which are good, only two which do not
content themselves with mere verbalism. These
two, however, are first rate, and they emanate
respectively from Lotze and from Claude Bernard.
But it is curious to observe how, in spite of all
criticism and negation, both thinkers were forced
by the sheer weight of facts to admit the truth of
much in the vitalistic theories.

Their objections are indeed in the last resort
criticisms, and not actually refutations ; and what
claimed to be a complete refutation bore, as we have
already asserted, and shall now proceed to prove,
the most manifest superficiality.

The fact that in spite of their real import
both these critiques were, owing to the materia¬
listic and sensational tendency of the time, inter¬
preted entirely amiss and in a manner contrary
to the intentions of their originators as absolute



LOTZE 127

refutations, in no wise impairs the correctness of
our view.


(a) LOTZE.

H. Lotze’s article, “ Life and Life-force,” in the
first volume of Wagner’s Dictionary of Physiology
(Braunschweig, 1842) is the most solid of all attacks
upon Vitalism. And yet there were many mis¬
understandings. Thus when Lotze asserts that a
“ Life-force ” is out of court from the beginning,
because no natural event has only one cause, we can
reply that he could have dispensed with this apparent
attack if he devoted himself to Wolff or Blumenbach
rather than to his contemporaries. The “ Accessory
Principles ” of the former writer would certainly
have shown that the objection was beside the mark.

This is noticeable over and over again. Exag¬
gerated expositions of Vitalism had become so
numerous that the writers of the day easily lost
sight of what was still the correct view.

Against the “ matter capable of life ” of Tre-
viranus, the critic objects that it is really superfluous
since specific forms must result from the relations
of Life-force and outside factors. The objection
is valid : but it does not touch Vitalism as a whole.

And when Lotze turns to the migration of the
independent Life-force in Autenrieth’s sense, and
observes that the doctrine of the ancients, that
life-forms are ideas, was really better, we who profess
Vitalism are entirely on his side.

Schelling and his successors, according to Lotze,
“ never had a clear conception of the relation of a
" legislative idea to its executive means.” Their idea



128 HISTORY OF VITALISM

of the species as a legislative power is as it were an
equation for the curve of life. But with them the
equation not only determined but described the
path of the curve.

To this also we gladly subscribe : but it does not
seem to us so very new. We remember, for instance,
that the problem “ how to come from idea to
matter ” weighed heavily on Reil.

What Lotze really means in general is this : the
formative impulse can never “ explain ” anything,
as here the “ law ” is lacking. At the most, it
classifies.

What then is meant by “ explain ” and by the
“ law ” ? Lotze is probably thinking of quantitative
laws ; but where are they to come from when the
substance is not quantitative ? And what else is
meant by the “ explanation of events ” than their
subsumption under appropriate schemata ? This,
indeed, is our opinion, and Lotze is here preoccupied
with the intentions of mechanistic physics.

When Lotze goes on to say that the regulative
element in the processes of life is no proof of Vitalism,
since it is not always present, he is guilty of a
confusion too often made even to-day. A series of
facts can only serve as proof where it occurs, and
never where it does not occur. I cannot study optics
in a dark cave, without the aid of a light. Only when
a series of facts actually occurs can the question of
its validity as a proof arise.

But when Lotze sets the occurrence of “ monstra ”
in the scale against Vitalism, and speaks of the
“ horrible ” creations achieved by the liberation of
mechanism, we can only reply that Blumenbach



LOTZE


129


was quite aware of the actual facts and yet remained
a Vitalist.

The long disquisitions directed against the designa¬
tion “ life-force ” and against “ division ” of this
“ force,” are however quite to the point; but it
should be held in mind that the dispute is only
about a word which was actually avoided by many
Vitalists, and also that the great service of Lotze’s
contemporary, Johannes Muller, consisted in this,
that he sought to make plausible to himself the
concept of something like a source of energy for vital
phenomena.

It produces a curious effect, after all that has been
said, when we suddenly learn from Lotze that old
Stahl’s doctrine of the “ soul ” controlling all events
of life was not such a great mistake after all; for
here the soul is conceived of as a “ substance,” and
thus something at least which can produce an effect
is introduced.

It almost seems as though in the whole of Vitalism
Lotze had taken offence at the use of the word
“ force ” alone. But this would be erroneous. He
rejects Vitalism as a theory of the actual facts of
vegetative and formative processes, and at the end
of his observations on the matter he expressly
declares that organisms are “ machines,” a
concept which must be taken in a very broad
sense. 1

Up to this point, then, Lotze is a static teleologist.
A man of his stamp could obviously not sink to the

1 Later on tho formative impulse (conceived in a primitive
epigenetic manner) as well as the facts of physiology proper are
*. described as mechanical.

f



130 HISTORY OF VITALISM

absurdity of denying the irreducible uniqueness of
purposiveness.

But now comes the second part of the article,
which treats of the “ Life of the Soul ” 1 ; and now
the philosophic physiologist becomes a confessed
Vitalist. It was for this reason, no doubt, that
also in the sphere of vegetative Vitalism Stahl’s
view was to him the most sympathetic.

The “ soul ” as something entirely new in relation
to the rest of nature is able to provide an absolutely
new beginning for mechanical movement. Lotze
insists that this fact must also be accepted if there
really were such a thing as a healing power in organic
nature.

We see here clearly how on the one hand his false
dogmatic mechanism, and on the other his conception
of the soul as something that is alien to nature,
removed Lotze from a really unprejudiced inter¬
pretation of the subject.

Now how does the soul operate according to its
own laws ?

Thoughts, ideas as such, “ have not the slightest
power to move masses, or indeed to move anything.
They can, however, attain to such power in so far
as they are definite states, modifications, or move¬
ments of a reality, of a substance, viz. of the ‘ soul.’
That is to say, states of different substances belonging
to the same category are opposed to one another.
Cause and effect, however, apply to all that is ‘ real,’
regardless of whether it is body or spirit.” Thus
every difficulty is surmounted. The “ concept of

1 Cf. also the essays on “ Instinct ” and “ The Soul and Soul-
life ” by Lotze in vols. ii. and iii. of Wagner’s Dictionary.



LOTZE


131


substance ” which is common to spirit and to body
renders everything comprehensible.

Lotze even holds the immediate action of the soul
upon a foreign body to be possible. On the other
hand, he keeps before him the idea of really strict
laws of psycho-physical influence.

Thus, in spite of rejecting the actual, biological
Vitalism, Lotze came so extraordinarily near to it
in his soul-theory that his rejection of it is a cause
of perpetual astonishment. A closer analysis of
what he actually conceives the soul to be capable of,
makes the matter still clearer.

Images, feelings, desires, he says, are only modes
of appearance assumed by inner states of the soul-
substance for our own observations. As such they
have not the smallest power to move reality. On
the other hand, those inner, unconscious states of
the soul as substance, which are totally removed from
experience and never come within our view, can, in
conjunction with the states of that other reality,
the body, affect a given mass and initiate an
absolutely new movement.

Lotze, in fact, is a metaphysician, as is shown by
his conception of a real substance. Furthermore,
he admits an unconscious and yet purposive element
as an active factor in nature conceived as real : and
he even interprets the instincts in an expressly
non-mechanical manner . 1

Why then does he reject Vitalism ? Is his view
really anything but Vitalism in a special sphere,
i.e. in the case of active man, who after all is also a
living being ? Is there the slightest distinction

1 Cf. the artiole on “ Instinct ” already referred to.



182 HISTORY OF VITALISM

between his theory of the operation of the soul and
that of Johannes Muller ? At any rate, he claims
that the causal relation of body and soul is no harder
to understand than any sort of causality, and he has
a thoroughly clear conception of matter.

In truth, it was only contemporary exaggeration
of the real Vitalism in its narrower sense that moved
Lotze to reject as a whole what he yet accepted in
part; though, as in the case of Kant, fictitious
problems created by a mechanical dogmatism were
not without their pernicious influence.

(b) BERNARD.

To Claude Bernard is due the other important
critique of the older Vitalism. It has its origin
in the seventies, and is therefore really subsequent
to many sporadic anti-vitalistic criticisms which we
shall mention in due course ; but we shall neverthe¬
less deal with it here so as to preserve a certain unity
for the little really profound criticism which exists.

Many chapters of Bernard's Lemons sur les phino-
m&nes de la vie 1 are devoted to bio-theoretical
discussions of the most general character ; we will
expressly concentrate our attention upon the
historical excursus in the second volume which con¬
tains valuable matter concerning the history of
biology in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.

Bernard, like Lotze, is for the most part tilting
at windmills, i.e. what he attacks was indeed once
said by some exponent of Vitalism—chiefly by
Bichat—and it generally deserves his strictures :
but for all it was not really the Vitalism.

1 Paris, 1878-9, 2 vols.



BERNARD


133


Who, for instance, conceived of vital phenomena
as “ regies directement par un principe vital in-
terieur ” without dependence upon external con¬
ditions ? Certainly not Wolff, Blumenbach, or
Liebig. Who imagined only “ l’intervention d’une
force extraphysique, specials, independante ” ?
Surely only a few.

But Bernard does not confine himself to criticism
of exaggerations of the vitalistic doctrine, and when
he is occupied with the real theory he finds himself
to a certain extent in agreement with it.

“ Nous nous separons des Vitalistes, parce que la
force vitale, quel que soit le nom qu’on lui donne,
ne saurait rien faire par elle-meme, qu’elle ne peut
agir qu’en empruntant le ministere des forces
generates de la nature et qu’elle est incapable de se
manifester en dehors d’elles.—Nous nous separons
egalement des materialistes; car, bien que les
manifestations vitales restcnt placecs directement
sous l’influencc de conditions physico-chimiques,
ces conditions ne sauraient grouper, harmoniser les
phenomenes dans l’ordre et la succession, qu’ils
affectent sp6cialement dans les etres vivants.”

“ II y a dans le corps anime un arrangement, une
sorte d’ordonnance que l’on ne saurait laisser dans
l’ombre, parce qu’elle est veritablement le trait le
plus saillant des etres vivants.” The word “ force ”
is not a good designation for what is meant, “ mais
ici le mot importe peu, il suffit que la realite du fait
ne soit pas discutable.”

“ Les phenomenes vitaux ont bien ieur conditions
physico-chimiques rigoureusement determinees;
mais en meme temps ils se subordonnent et se



134 HISTORY OF VITALISM

succedent dans un enchainement et suivant une
loi fLx6s d’avanoe.”. . . “ II y a comme un dessin

pre6tabli de chaque etre et de chaquo organe.”

From the teleological point of view this is clearly
thought out, but it still leaves room for the two
alternatives of teleology, the static and the dynamic.
Did Bernard see this question quite clearly, or was
he still troubled by a certain obscurity which even
Kant had perhaps not quite fathomed ?

Bernard allows a “ plan organique,” but not the
“ intervention d’un principe vitale.” This last, a
“ force vitale,” is to be admitted at the most as a
“ force legislative,” but not as a “ force executive.”
This sounds like static teleology.

But then follows the passage : ‘‘La force vitale
dirige des phenomenes qu’ellc ne produit pas ; les
agents physiques produisent des phenomenes qu’ils
ne dirigent pas.” This might be taken in a vitalistic
sense.

For the more thorough understanding of Bernard’s
real view, wc must consider a chain of argument
where he appears, as it seems to us, at his best, and in
which he at least approaches the modern phenomenal-
istic school as represented, for instance, by Mach.

Every science, says Bernard, including, for in¬
stance, optics or electro-dynamics, knows only the
conditions (“ conditions physico-chimiques ”) under
which the modes of appearance which it is studying
manifest themselves; it knows only the “ d6ter-
minisme ” of the phenomenon. In the place of the
ancient cause appears this view, that certain condi¬
tions produce the “ ph&iomene.”

If the phenomenon is ascribed to a “ force ” (force),



BERNARD


135


then this latter is always “ metaphysical ” ; it is
only “ thought,” is never “ active.” The “ causes
premieres ” are “ inaccessibles.”

And—in this meaning of the words—the physio¬
logist should study “ le determinisme physico-
chimique correspondant aux manifestations vitales.”

Is that not Vitalism ? In connexion with the
above explanations, Bernard reproaches the Vitalists
with having denied this “ determinisme ” ; but apart
from the fact that to many, e.g. Blumenbach and
Wolff, this certainly does not apply, we may ask—
is that all he can charge them with ? In that case,
Bernard could be described as a critical Vitalist.

“ R y a des conditions materielles (physico-
chimiques) determinees qui reglen t 1’apparition des
phenomenes de la vie. II y a des lois preetablies
qui en r6glent l’ordre et la forme.” “ La vie n’est
ni plus ni moins obscure que toutes les autres causes
premieres.”

We cannot, however, be satisfied, in spite of all
that has been said, that Bernard’s attitude to the
problem of life is thus finally settled, and we shall
have to leave it at this, that he did not distinguish
the two sides of teleology sufficiently sharply. In
one place he says, “ conditions organiques ” instead
of “ lois preetablies,” which manifestly sounds more
in harmony with a mechanical theory. He claims,
moreover, with Leibnitz, that one should study life
“ as though ” no vital force existed ; though it is
hard to see why.

When, on the other hand, it is said that life is
indeed a “ principe ” but not a “ resultante ” of
the “ conditions,” this again sounds vitalistic.



136 HISTORY OF VITALISM

In short, Bernard’s standpoint, in spite of the
value of certain of his individual contributions, is not
in our opinion entirely unambiguous. And this is
due to his faulty analysis of the only possible meaning
that can be attributed to knowledge of natural
phenomena in general.

The last words with which at the close of the
second volume he once more sums up Mb “ vitalisme
physique,” still leave the actual “ vitalistic ” element
of this Vitalism in the dark—“ l’eldment ultime
du phenomene est physique; l’arrangement est
vital.”

This would be static teleology of the purest sort
had not Bernard proffered that admirably clear
argument about conditions and manifestations ; and
it is on the ground of this argument that we can
pronounce him a true Vitalist, who is only to be
charged with inconsistency in relation to his choice
of many expressions—perhaps because he did not
see quite clearly the distinction between static and
dynamic teleology.

Thus, criticism of the (partly misunderstood) older
theory led our critic himself to the enlightened
Vitalism.

If in conclusion we turn to some of Bernard’s more
specific contributions, especially his discussion of the
development of animals, here again a vigorous
struggle for clearness without complete success will
be apparent. Bernard possesses a clear conception
of what W. Roux nowadays calls self-differentiation ;
he knows that the parts of the embryo develop
in relative independence of each other. Since all
processes of life, like everything else, occur of



BERNARD


137


necessity, so on the ground of this “ self-differentia¬
tion,” when one of the parts is disturbed, we get
the “ necessary but illogical ” monstra. Here we find
Bernard’s thought closely allied to that of Lotze.

It is in uniformity with the above that Bernard
compares morphogenesis, the growth of individual
forms, to the work of a great factory in which those
who work at the parts of a product know nothing
of that product as a whole. Then, one would like
to say, the “ whole ” does exist in some active form
or other ? And again, the morphogenetic laws are
described somewhat obscurely as “ dormantes ou
expectantes,” but not as active. And yet in every
kind of regeneration the organism must be regarded
as an “ ensemble ou unite,” and the organic form is
expressly regarded as not being the result of the
nature of the protoplasm : “La forme et la matiere
sont independantes, distinctes.”

Thus, the analysis of Bernard’s views on specific
problems appears to confirm the impression derived
from our discuseion of the more general section of
his work.

(c) THE MATERIALIST-DARWIN IAN TENDENCY.

Four circumstances fundamentally determined the
character of all thought about nature, and indeed
on many other problems, in the second half of the
nineteenth century.

First of all, the rise of a materialistic Metaphysic
in express opposition to the idealistic identity-
philosophy.

Then Darwinism, which explained how by throwing
stones one could build houses of a typical style.



138 HISTORY OF VITALISM

Thirdly, the discovery of the law of the Conserva¬
tion of Energy by Robert Mayer—a proposition
which in spite of the poverty of its content enraptured
all the natural sciences.

Lastly, and of particular importance in reference
to Biology, the discovery and systematic investiga¬
tion of the delicate structures of living beings with
the help of improved optical instruments.

We may regard these four influences as inde¬
pendent, although they mutually strengthened one
another. In relation to the fundamental problems
of Biology, and in particular to Vitalism, each should
be considered on its own merits.

The materialistic metaphysic of Moleschott, Vogt,
and Buchner asserted all that is real is motion,
that qualities of a higher kind exist only as appear¬
ance.

Darwinism claimed to show how something pur-
posively constructed could arise by absolute chance ;
at any rate, this holds of Darwinism as codified in
the seventies and eighties. Darwin himself (as is
well known) had, to begin with, left the question of
the nature and measure of “ variability ” open ; a
course which reduced his doctrine to the self-evident
proposition that what was not capable of existence
could not exist (“ Natural Selection ”), but yet did
not render it obviously meaningless. 1 Already,
however, the single fact that there are possibilities
of regulation, such as that seen in the regeneration
of the salamader, confutes, as is well known, the

1 The modem mutation theory of de Vries, which makes
variations arise by leaps and natural selection merely do the
work of elimination, is, of course, not Darwinism. Darwin was
nearer to this view at the beginning of his career than later.



MATERIALIST-DARWINIAN TENDENCY 139


orthodox Darwinism of Darwin’s followers, for, in
its application to this case, the scheme becomes
utter nonsense. This cannot be too often empha¬
sised, and none of the other refutations of Darwinism
equal in drastic incisiveness that based upon the
facts of regeneration.

Concerning the Law of the Conservation of Energy,
it was not realised that it was only the law of causality
interpreted quantitatively.

But the discovery of the delicate structure of
microscopic organisms played the investigators
exactly the same trick as had their former ignor¬
ance. Formerly much had been accounted for as
the operation of an ultimate law of life, simply
because it was not known that there were very many
complications of a mechanical kind which would
have to be accounted for before any general explana¬
tion was attempted. Now, because a few things
were really understood on account of the delicate
structures having been recognised, it was thought
that everything must be comprehensible on the same
grounds. This, however, readily opened the doors
to a dogmatic mechanical theory.

The effects of the general conditions which we
have described varied considerably in the different
branches of Biology. Botany allowed itself to be
the least influenced ; it has preserved its continuity,
and on the whole even in this time of depression
remained a science. In the sphere of animal life,
in Physiology proper, the doctrine of the functions
did occasionally break loose and wander into blind
alleys, but never actually degenerated. The
thorough training of its representatives, together



140 , HISTORY OF VITALISM

with the circumstance that as a fairly severe discip¬
line it could permanently retain only the most gifted
minds, spared it from such a fate.

But Animal Morphology celebrated a perfect
witches’ orgy. It elaborated a phantastic con¬
struction of so-called “ genealogical trees.”

The idea of a genetic connexion of the different
specific life-forms, the idea of a “ Descent,” had
made its appearance, as is well known, already in
the eighteenth century and even in Antiquity. But
it had always been brought forward in a general
and problematic form with the consciousness that
here nothing positive could be said ; and far-seeing
persons, philosophers especially, had realised that
historical information could never constitute an
explanation, and that in comparison to real science
it was of very secondary importance. 1

But now Darwinism had apparently “ explained ”
Descent in general, 2 why should it not “ explain the
pedigree of individual species ” ? And so the old
comparative anatomy, which claimed to be nothing
but a classificatory preparation for the knowledge of
the type, of the rational in the forms of nature,
became the phantasy christened Phylogeny.

1 Cf. Hegel, Kleine Logik, ed. Bolland, Leyden, 1899, p. 522, and
Schopenhauer, Will in Nature, ed. Frauenstadt, fifth edition,
Leipzig, 1891, p. 44. The two opponents are here united. I
may refer the reader also to my work Die, Biologie als nclbulandigc
Onmdwissenschaft, Leipzig, 1893, 2nd ed. 1911. The problem of
history cannot be discussed here ; it is dealt with in my Gifford
Lectures.

* The doctrine of Descent and Darwinism must of course be
kept distinct ; the latter, which in its orthodox form we regard
as finally disposed of, is a subdivision of the former, which appears
probable in view of the results of Palaeontology and Geography,
though its laws are still very obscure.



MATERIALIST-DARWINIAN TENDENCY 141


Far worse were the “ laws ” whose discovery the
occasion facilitated. What was called “ general
zoology ” was here the chief playground for their
fabrication—which simply violated every principle
of the formation of scientific concepts. Wigand
has given a classic description of this state of affairs
which is not lacking in humour.

But we must not dwell any longer upon these
matters which do not really concern the history of
Vitalism, and the analysis of a single example will
suffice to show the depths to which the sense of
scientific method had fallen. For the Darwinian
Phylogenists all construction of form was accidental;
consequently, the totality of living forms of life
appeared to them as meaningless as, say, the forms
of clouds in their accidental peculiarity. But this
at once did away with any deeper meaning for
zoological classification. It was settled once and
for all; the question had no sense. And yet it was
investigated—though by imaginary means. But
why ? How could one spend one’s strength on a
task of the scientific worthlessness of which one was
convinced from the beginning as a thoroughgoing
Darwinian ? 1 The obvious answer is that no one
put to himself the all-important query—what after
all is the meaning of science itself ?

It was, on the one hand, the Physiology of form-
construction which originated in His, and was
materially advanced by Roux, and, on the other,


1 Darwin is unfortunately always mode to suffer for the sins
of his followers, and the words “ Darwinism,” “ Darwinian ”
are quite established. Darwin himself, though not always
critical, kept clear of the chief errors of “ Darwinism."



142 HISTORY OF VITALISM

the exact researches made upon variations, hybrids
and mutations, which began to put an end to the
unworthy state of zoology which we have described.

If we turn once more to our central thesis, the
position of Vitalism in the light of the sciences in
general, it is clear that the attitude of the repre¬
sentatives of the scientific spirit of the last generation
will be one of absolute negation. There was no place
in the chance-theory for a deeper interpretation of
the forms of life even in a merely static-teleological
sense.

We will indicate the attitude of that period to
Vitalism by means of two examples ; the views,
namely, of two of the best thinkers of the age whose
positive scientific achievements, in spite of their
subservience to the ruling tendency, are certain of
a fame which will last through generations. If we
find the statements even of such writers astonish¬
ingly hasty and superficial, we shall be forgiven for
passing over in silence the great mass of contemporary
deliverances on the question of the independence of
vital events.

Emil du Bois-Reymond dedicated to the refutation
of Vitalism the greater part of the Introduction to
the first volume of his Untersuchungen uber tierische
Elektrizitot (Berlin, 1848).

He is entirely caught in the trammels of mechanical
Physics. It is from this dogmatism that later his
famous “ Ignorabimus ” sprang, his assertion,
namely, that man would never be able to grasp
“ how matter could think ” : a problem which a real
critique of knowledge simply solves by the considera¬
tion that “ matter ” does not “ think.”



MATERIALIST-DARWINIAN TENDENCY 143

Starting from his standpoint of mechanistic in¬
vestigation of nature, Dubois begins in the usual
way by quarrelling with the term “ life-force.”
Force is never the cause but only the measure
of movement. As we already know, however, the
dispute is merely verbal.

He then endeavours to show in succession that
neither a special matter nor a special force of the
ultimate particles of matter—to which alone the
word force in its meaning of measurement can here
be applied—are at the base of the phenomena of life.

“ A particle of iron is and remains one and the
same thing whether it travels through the celestial
spaces in a meteor stone, crashes along the rails in
the wheel of an engine, or courses through a poet’s
temples in the blood-cell.”

In this resounding sentence the specificity of
living matter is rejected, but unfortunately by means
of an assumption of which it is and remains true to
say that it is in the worst sense metaphysical and
devoid of any clear meaning.

This, however, is not so important. We have
still to refute the assertion that the specific criterion
of vital processes is not to be found in the difference
between the forces of the material particles in organic
and inorganic bodies. Here, says our critic, there
is no difference. “ There is no life-force in the
vitalistic sense, because the operations ascribed to
it can be analysed into those which proceed from the
central forces of the particles. There is no such
force because forces do not exist independently and
cannot be arbitrarily allotted to and then removed
from matter.”



144 HISTORY OF VITALISM

In answer to the first objection, one can only
regret that the author did not carry out the analysis
in question. He, at any rate, cannot be assumed to
have succeeded.

The second sentence, however, first affords a
support to Vitalism, and then attacks this support.
It would have been better to have asked : Do the
facts compel us to assume that the phenomena of
life have a law of their own, or do they not ? And
of the proof of the negative we find in Dubois literally
not a trace.

That a life-force would contradict the law of the
conservation of energy forms the conclusion of E.
Dubois Reymond’s statements. We shall have a
better opportunity of testing this supposed objection
if we now turn to the opinions of the second of the
writers whose views we proposed to examine.

Helmholtz shall be our second example of an
opponent of Vitalism in the materialistic reaction.
We can fortunately be brief even as he is brief.
Indeed, he hardly deems Vitalism worthy of con¬
sideration at all.

With the assumption that Vitalism had regarded
freedom in the sense of a negation of law, the famous
physicist introduces the problem of Vitalism in many
parts of his writings on general subjects. 1 But had
this view of freedom, or even anything similar,
been maintained by any Vitalist ? And had not
Blumenbach and Wolff, for instance, expressly
asserted the contrary ?

1 Cf. the Vortrage und Reden, third edition, Braunschweig,
1884 .



MATERIALIST-DARWINIAN TENDENCY 145

Vitalism, it is said, contradicts most clearly of all
the law of the Conservation of Energy.

“ If the Life-force could momentarily suspend the
gravity of a body the latter could, without expendi¬
ture of physical energy, be raised at pleasure to any
height, and then, when its gravity was restored, be
rendered capable of accomplishing any amount of
work desired. If the Life-force could momentarily
abolish the chemical attraction of carbon to oxygen,
then carbonic acid could be decomposed similarly
without any consumption of energy, and the liberated
carbon would be capable of new work.” But we
do not find the “ slightest trace of the living organism
being capable of producing any quantum of work
whatever without a corresponding expenditure of
energy.”

This sounds well enough. Two details only seem
to have been overlooked. First, the fact that a bar
of sealing-wax to which friction has been applied
can temporarily suspend the gravity of, say, little
pieces of paper or of little balls of pith. In the
second place, Vitalism never asserted anything in
violation of the law of the Conservation of Energy,
for the very simple reason that no one was yet
conscious of its universal validity. But then
Helmholtz might object that the law had been
unconsciously violated, and that this violation was a
necessary feature of all Vitalism. But in that case
he could have laid claim to but a superficial know¬
ledge of vitalistic literature ? He ought at least
to have known the work of Johannes Muller. Yet,
as we have seen above, it is precisely Muller in
whom we find indications of an anticipation of the

K



146 HISTORY OF VITALISM

postulate of a “ source of energy ” for life 1 : but who
was nevertheless an adherent of the doctrine of the
autonomy of life.

' Thus, there is not so very much to be said for the
refutation of Vitalism on the ground of the law of
the Conservation of Energy : and Helmholtz is as
incapable as other opponents 2 of producing any
better objections.

We may then repeat at the close of the whole
section of our book which deals with the older
Vitalism what we said at the beginning of the present
chapter. The prevailing Vitalism was not crushed
by “ refutations ” ; most of the critics dealt only
with its exaggerations, and their “ refutations ”
did not touch it at all, but only effected certain
consequences conveniently attributed to it by the
critical imagination. Vitalism died of itself.

That it should have so died, though still apparently
at its zenith—as the doctrine of the schools—is to
be explained by a cause that lies particularly deep.

The problems of the physiology of morpho¬
genesis had already, since the beginning of the
nineteenth century, lost their hold on the interest
of biologists. But these problems are the peculiar
province of Vitalism, whence alone it really derives

1 In the second part of this book we deal with the facts of the
relation of life to energy.

* Here we may mention Karl Ludwig, who in the first volume
of his Lehrbuch der Physiologie des Menschen (second edition,
Leipzig and Heidelberg, 1858) rejects Vitalism and refers to
Dubois. But he is far from adopting the definite tone of Dubois.
He makes certain “ clear demands ” of Vitalism and rejects it
as unable to satisfy these demands ; though had this not been the
case he declares that he would never oppose the hypothesis,
however novel the arguments used in its favour.



MATERIALIST-DARWINIAN TENDENCY 147


its strength, at least in so far as it does not also
claim the “ soul ” as its object.

The New Vitalisln, to the consideration of which
we are about to turn, arose, in conformity with what
has been said, mainly as a result of the newly
awakened Physiology of development.

We may, in conclusion, say a few words with
regard to the state of psychology during the decline
of Vitalism. Psychology, as soon as it studies the
behaviour of men as phenomena of movement and
seeks to establish laws, must come strictly under
the heading of Natural Science, and even of Biology
—and it is, therefore, both characteristic and com¬
prehensible that the doctrine of so-called psycho¬
physical parallelism flourished contemporaneously
with materialistic science during the decadence of
Vitalism.

Human action was thus also subordinated to the
general materialism ; any natural event in it was
a mechanical event. A “ soul,” or whatever name
we like to choose, is not an element in the causality
of nature . 1

Johannes Muller, and even Lotze, the opposer of
vegetative Vitalism, had thought otherwise on this
question of man’s behaviour.

1 This is a suitable place to mention tho original contribution
of E. Hering : Uber das Oeddchtnia ala eine allgemeine Funktion
der organisierten Materie (Vienna, 1876). Hering had an open
mind, which allowed him to see in memory and in the capacity for
reproduction something analogous though very strange. But he
was too much influenced by the parallelistic theory to be able to
say : there is something new, something not inorganic here.
Hence, all his psychological expressions are only metaphorical,
and natural events are always really interpreted from the materia¬
listic point of view.



148 HISTORY OF VITALISM

Everything connected with Psychology will have
its place in this book only in an accessory manner,
and will concern us only when it is turned to account
by its representatives in a general, bio-theoretical
form ; it will, therefore, be as a side-issue that we
shall later on have to explain how with the awakening
of Vitalism there went, to use terms not very accurate
but yet intelligible, an awakening of “ psych o-
physical causality.” This, however, implies the
downfall of the theory of psycho-physical parallelism.



CHAPTER III.

MODERN VITALISM.

1. THE TRADITION.

A trite doctrine is never completely extinguished.
It may for a time be out-shouted by its opponents,
but there are always a few who, whatever may befall,
pursue their way, heedless of all the uproar of the
day. And indeed, tilings were not pleasant for the
few who, when materialism was at its zenith,
guarded the tradition of the old, i.e. of the vitalistic
biology. People would have preferred to have
locked them up in madhouses, had not “ senility ”
“ excused ” them up to a certain point.

Thus it was that in spite of all opposition, the
tradition of Vitalism was handed on. And—apart
from botany, which always remained intact—there
was also preserved, at any rate by a few, the tradition
of a method of animal morphology which set out
not merely to “ compare,” but also to establish
laws.

The Darwinian school studied the construction
and development of animals only so as to compare
them one with another, and to concoct genealogical



160 HISTORY OF VITALISM

trees with the help of their comparisons. Their
work was historical. But the old morphology had
sought by means of anatomy and embryology to
establish the laws, if any, which actually controlled
morphological phenomena. It sought, in fact, to
discover what morphogenesis really was. It sought,
moreover, to construct what was typical in the
varieties of forms, into a system which should be not
merely historically determined, but which should
be intelligible from a higher and more rational stand¬
point.

It is to the lasting credit of the late Wilhelm His
that he kept alive at any rate the principle of this
method of truly rational morphology, and the work
of Alexander Goette should not be forgotten. It was
to these writers that the later “ Mechanics of
Development ” attached itself, with its claim that
morphology should take its place amongst the real
sciences.

His and Goette had recognised that the true
processes of morphogenesis which appear in the
development of the individual require actual and
efficient causes for each single realisation. But it
was just this condition, without which no laws of
formation could be scientifically established, that
advocates of phylogenesis had overlooked. They
allowed “ heredity ” to stand as the cause of morpho¬
genetic processes, a theory which exhibited in a
new and aggravated form the same logical weakness
as that theory of the old nature-philosophy which
allowed the ideas to be sufficient grounds for the
organic form. In both cases the link was missing
which should unite the general to the particular.



THE TRADITION


151


But to resume : the next among the writers
who handed on the real Vitalism, or at least a
teleological conception of forms of life, was the aged
Baer, who again and again in the sixties and seventies
put forward his view in speeches and lectures. 1

It did not contain much that was new, as the part
which Baer played in the old Vitalism was a second¬
ary, or rather a dependent one. But small as it
was, it was good that his contribution should have
been made. In all his teleological exposition, Baer
enters the lists as an opponent of Darwinism, and
we may say here once and for ail that all who
during the ascendancy of materialism preserved the
vitalistic tradition, were at the same time opponents
of orthodox, i.e. materialistic, Darwinism. Indeed,
it was in its opposition to the theory founded on
chance that the tradition maintained its strength.

Baer's treatment of the subject strikes us now as
brilliant rather than precise, and it is hard to have
a very definite conception of what is meant when we
learn that he regarded the life-process not as the
result of the organic construction, but “ the rhythm
and also the melody to which the organic body
constructs and transforms itself.” The definition
also of the life-processes as “ creative thoughts which
build up their own bodies of themselves,” and his
likening of type and specificity to “ harmony and
melody,” are still only metaphors.

He is far more explicit in regarding the impulse
as “ something primitive, i.e. which does not proceed
from the bodily constitution but stands over and

1 C. E. v. Baer, Reden und Abhandlungcn, Braunschweig, second
edition, 188G.



152 HISTORY OF VITALISM

above it ” as “ a completion of the life-process.”
In a happy phrase he calls “ conscience ” the
“ highest form of instinct.”

He is obscure again where he describes the contro¬
versy about the life-force as “ futile ” ; and Blumen-
bach’s “nisus formativus ” is not very aptly placed
on the same plane as the “ faculties ” of a Fabricus
ab Aequapendente, 1 the fabrication of a barren
schematism. That Baer has in view a true Vitalism
and not merely one of static teleology, although he
does not see the fundamental distinction between
them, is quite clearly shown by the statement that
“ the whole life process is in no way the result of
physico-chemical events, but rather controls them.”
For him life is a process with peculiar laws of develop¬
ment. Exception might be taken here to certain
details in the wording.

Of Baer’s other contributions wc need only
mention that he corrected the so-called “ biogenetic
principle ” of the Darwinians by pointing out that
the history of development indicated only the
“ transition from general to more specific relations,
but not the transition from one specific relation
to another.” He expressed an exactly similar view
upon this important point when he declared that as
an embryo man does not pass through the fish stage,
but man and fish both pass through the same
general, less specified stage.

Human actions, the “life of the soul ” objectified,

1 The teacher of Harvey. He held that three processes,
generation, development and nutrition, are required for the pro¬
duction of a chicken. Each process needs two forces. Thus,
we get six faculties—immutatrix, formatrix, attractrix, retentrix,
cuicentrix, expultrix.



THE TRADITION


153


cannot, according to Baer, be analysed in terms of
matter, as is maintained in the doctrine of parallelism;
they represent an elementary autonomous fact.
In quite modern phraseology Baer points out how,
for instance, the effect of one and the same piece of
news differs completely in the case of different
persons, according to their previous history.

So much for the vitalistic conception as maintained
by Baer in spite of all attacks and misrepresentations.
Its existence is important to the history of Vitalism,
even though it has not added to our actual fund of
theories. Baer, a writer of high repute owing to
his services in the realm of embryology, could indulge
in his Vitalism without actually incurring abuse. In
the same way it was even tolerated when a man like
the founder of cellular pathology occasionally stated
that he was not really quite convinced of the possi¬
bility of the mechanistic interpretation of all life-
processes : though it is true that Virchow's theories,
as also later the statements of his follower
Rindfleisch, move only along the most general and
accepted lines.

J. v. Hanstein 1 again was excused for disloyalty
to the spirit of the age on the ground of his service
in another field. He was still more definite in the
statement of his views, though his theories contain
nothing new. With reference to formation out of
the germ, and contemporary mechanistic theories,
he asks : How, in the first stages of construction, does
everything come to be rightly divided, since for every
formation an initial nucleus must be packed up in

1 Johannes von Hanstein, Das Protoplasma ala Trager der
pflanzlichen und tierischen Lebenscrscheinungen, Heidelberg, 1880.



154 HISTORY OF VITALISM

the egg ? Must there not be organising architects
to direct the multitude of mosaic fragments ? He
rightly adduces in support of his thesis the processes
of regeneration. The Aristotelian statement that
the whole is prior to the parts, still holds good, he
says, to-day.

Organisms are controlled by a faculty of self¬
formation, and animals have also a similar power of
movement. It is closely connected with the pre¬
sence of certain material combinations, which it has
ordered and controls ; it distributes itself among
them, and when two or more such material groups
unite, then the centres of activity also unite into one.

Here we see how some of the ideas of the old
Vitalism are once again timidly appearing.

That Hanstein should subject the theory of
Natural Selection to the sharpest criticism was only
to be expected ; but the man who, though not
remarkable as an experimenter, must be regarded
as the really classic critic of Darwinism is Albert
Wigand. Wigand was not so easily forgiven for
his criticism and for his assertion, really a very timid
one, of vital autonomy.

I can myself bear witness that even so late as the
end of the eighties it was hardly considered respect¬
able to speak of Wigand’s great Critique 1 in any but
the most disparaging terms, or to regard the man as
other than an utter idiot.

We have here as little concern with Wigand’s
critical work as we have with criticism of Darwinism
in general. We have to do with the positive element

1 Darwinismus wnd die Naturforschung Newtons und Cuviers,
3 vols., Braunschweig, X874-7. See particularly vol. ii. chapter 3.



THE TRADITION


155


which is to be found in his achievement, and we
must at least briefly refer to the fact that his criticism
of the scientific formation of concepts exhibits great
independence, and raises him entirely above the
verdict of tradition. I would designate Wigand
as the first exponent of that scientific criticism of
concepts which was later founded systematically by
Mach. Let us not forget at this point that Schopen¬
hauer, and in certain respects Blumenbach, had in
reality also been precursors of the new tendency.

Wigand’s attitude to the problem of Vitalism is
clear from his epistemological position. The ques¬
tion whether there is a life force by means of which
we can explain vital phenomena, which is unique,
and does not operate in the rest of nature, is to be
answered partly in the affirmative, partly in the
negative. In the affirmative, if force is to mean
nothing more than what the words electricity and
gravity mean; in the negative, if there is meant a
supernatural principle independent of the universal
laws of nature, which does not manifest itself through
the law of cause and effect.

Even in the former sense the life force would not
explain anything—any more than those other forces
which also are only names for some “ qualitas
occulta ” ; indeed, it accomplished rather less, owing
to the lack of any quantitative import. In any case
we may at least admit a life force, so long as all the
known agencies fail to explain life.

It is clear that Wigand does not approach the
actual question of the proof of “ Vitalism ” at all, 1

1 I cannot forbear quoting an apposite passage from ZOllner’s
Natur der Komeien (1872), which Wigand cites : “ The assumption



156 HISTORY OF VITALISM

but he expresses himself more definitely on the
subject of teleology in the organism in general, and
in indicating the large amount of static (mechanical)
teleology which is actually to be found in the con¬
struction of the organised being, e.g. of the eye.
This necessarily constitutes the main point in his
critique of Darwinism, since it is just the purposive¬
ness in a complex organic formation which makes
the theory of chance appear so absurd. The
question of Vitalism could here afford to step into
the background.

Wigand succeeded as little as the other traditional
Vitalists whom we have mentioned in exerting any
influence upon the thought of his time. Perhaps the
attitude which they adopted was too tentative ;
perhaps the ground was all too unprepared in the
seventies ; perhaps their time was not ripe.

This last supposition is rendered more probable
when we consider the attention aroused about the
year 1890 by views in reality far less clearly defined
with regard to Vitalism than any of those previously
mentioned. I refer to the writings of G. o. Bunge.
Indeed, even the obscure utterances of Rindfieisch,
buttressed as they were by the theological point of
view and undeserving of a closer examination here,
succeeded in attracting the attention of the public.
Times evidently had changed.

In his essay “ Mechanism and Vitalism,” 1 which

of a now property of matter would only be necessary when it
had been logically proved that in the nature of the phenomena
conceptual elements were involved which were not in the
properties hitherto attributed to matter and which cannot be
deduced from it.”

1 The first section in his Handbook.



THE TRADITION


157


he later changed without advantage into “ Mechan¬
ism and Idealism ”—and into which he quite illegiti¬
mately, from the standpoint of theory of knowledge,
introduced psychological questions—Bunge is very
far from making a decisive stand for Vitalism.

But it is all only provisional, only an admission
that the mechanistic conception is “ not yet ”
sufficient. Indeed, it is Bunge who, when face to
face with the most complicated of all the facts
adduced by him as still unexplained, says : “ I
admit unconditionally the possibility that some day
all those phenomena will find a purely mechanistic
explanation.” Thus we have here a thoroughly
problematic Vitalism with even an inclination to the
opposite view.

In truth, that Bunge should have been unhesitat¬
ingly accepted as a Vitalist shows how extraordinarily
alien to the times was the whole conception of the
vitalistic problem ; it shows, on the other hand,
that now at last it was being realised that there
might, problematically at least, be something more
than materialistic dogmatism.

For Bunge had not taken sides with Vitalism any
more decisively than, for instance, His, when the
latter left it undecided at the outset whether any
part of the earlier content of the conception of the
life force could be resuscitated in a formula more
precise and in a terminology more suited to the age.

But Bunge had led us within sight of the most
recent phase of our subject. We have dealt with
him here because he at once belongs to, and yet in a
certain sense cuts himself off from, the line of the
other German upholders of the vitalistic tradition.



2. THE POSITION OF PHILOSOPHY.


We must now turn back for a moment, in order
to form an estimate of the philosophy of the seventies
and eighties as regards the Vitalistic problem.

(a) EDUARD VON HARTMANN.

The fact that we now propose to examine the
attitude of philosophy towards Vitalism, and head
our finst section with the name of Eduard von Hart¬
mann, might give the impression that we regard
Hartmann as typical of the new philosophy.

Hartmann is, as a matter of fact, anything but a
typical representative of modem philosophy, but
he is the only modem philosopher who comes into
consideration for the problem of Vitalism. According
to the plan of our work Hartmann’s metaphysic of
the Unconscious concerns us as a system just as
little as the Rationalism of Hegel or the Volitionaligm
of Schopenhauer. It must suffice to state that
Hartmann’s whole philosophy is biological, i.e. is
based upon biology, but that, with regard to morpho¬
genesis, the so-called instincts, and the relation
between psychical and physical in the actions of man,
he construes biology in every respect as Vitalism.



EDUARD VON HARTMANN 159

Only two trains of thought in Hartmann’s philo¬
sophy are of immediate interest to the historian of
biology as natural science.

One of them is purely conceptual and connected
with the metaphysical scheme of the universe
constructed by the philosopher: factors of con¬
sciousness are with him opposed to factors of the
unconscious; but between these two principal
factors there may be causal relations of a four-fold
kind. Causal relation between factors of the same
group Hartmann calls isotropic causality, and
allotropic causality is its opposite. As the higher
living beings consist of factors of both kinds and
constitute “ individuals,” we get the conceptions
of intraindividualist and interindividualist causality.
Consequently, the so-called “ psycho-physical causa¬
lity,” which with Hartmann takes the place of
“ psycho-physical parallelism,” is allotropic intra¬
individual causality ; between two individuals there
takes place directly, as far as we have definite know¬
ledge, 1 only interindividual isotropic causality, and
this in the unconscious sphere.

We may close this introduction with the remark
that Hartmann’s point of view is that of “ critical
realism,” and not the strictly idealistic standpoint
from which we are considering these problems.
This leads us on to examine his opinions concerning
the action of the vital factors of life in the system of
the material factors of the organism : for his fictitious
realism, which makes the whole of the material

1 Telepathic aotion would, of course, imply either inter-
individual isotropic causality in the field of the factors of oon-
t sciousness, or interindividua! allotropic causality.



160 HISTORY OF VITALISM

4 .

factors ultimately the work of a real mechanical
system, renders it necessary to investigate this action.

What we describe simply as material factors, Hart¬
mann calls strictly “ materiant agents,” i.e. agents
which bring about the appearance of the material.
Now all such agents have a potential and are divisible
into central forces. But the life-agents are not
“materiant agents” and have no potential, nor
are they combinations of “ central forces.” How
can they work upon the totality of the material
system without destroying the so-called principles
of energy which constitute the foundation of all that
happens in it, and yet be in opposition to the inor¬
ganic which for Hartmann’s mechanical realism is
nothing but mechanics ?

Hartmann’s theory is of special importance for
the history of Vitalism, because it is the first attempt
to make a precise application of the doctrine of the
autonomy of life, namely, to make out exactly the
relation of the elementary life-factors to the factors
of the inorganic. 1 So he gives to a theoretical
consequence of Vitalism a scientific content. But
Hartmann’s theory touches less upon Vitalism as a
question of fact. He offers no rigorous demonstration
of the impossibility of a mechanical solution of life.

A metaphysical conception, not an investigation of
details, constitutes the real centre of Hartmann’s
philosophy; and we may conclude our remarks
by recording that this philosopher, whose fruitful
career has recently been brought to a close, saw in

1 This endeavour is not found, as was assumed, in certain
passages in Maxwell and Helmholtz (see Driosch, Naturbegriffe
und Natururteile, Leipzig, 1904, p. 102 ft.). It is, however,
implied in some expressions of Lord Kelvin and of L. Boltzmann.



EDUARD VON HARTMANN


161


‘‘ finality,” in opposition to Kant, a pure Category 1
which has its place by the side of substance and
causality.


(fc) OTHER PHILOSOPHERS.

We have said that Hartmann is almost the only
philosopher of the last decades who comes under
discussion in a history of Vitalism ; indeed, we
should like to make mention of only one other
representative of general philosophy—Otto Iaeb-
mann.

With the exception of Hartmann, Liebmann is
almost the only modem “ philsopher ” who has
entered on a critical discussion of the problems of
life, and emancipated himself from the mechanistic
dogmas of Darwinism. Though he does not prove
Vitalism, yet he at least regards it as a possibility,
and he sees, for example, the historical importance
of an Alexander Ooetle ; he at any rate has doubts
where the theory of the age gave no possibility of
certainty.

Liebmann’s entirely critical treatment is unsuitable
for a short summary. 2 We will merely refer to his
characteristic predilection for the Aristotelian ex¬
pression “ Entelechy,” which was also used by
Goethe and occasionally by Baer.

(c) PSYCHOLOGISTS.

Vitalism becomes a much wider problem when we
include in it the question of what is the relation of
the soul or mind to nature. But it has been our

* Kategorienlehre.

» 8 Compare my artiole in Kantstudien, xv. 1910, p. 86.



162 HISTORY OF VITALISM

principle so far to consider the problem of psycho¬
physics only in those cases where psychological
writers themselves have seen the general importance
of their theories, as was the case, for instance, with
J. Miiller.

Modem writers have rarely if ever connected
Psychology with the vitalistic problem. Hardly any
have ever recognised the close relation between the
problem of mind and body and real Vitalism. It
is strange that not even physiologists like Pfliiger
and Goltz have seen this close connexion. I am
not thinking here of Pfliiger’s Teleological Mechanics, 1
where the teleology was purely formal, and really
said very little with its statement that every need
is the cause of its satisfaction ; but rather of his
theory about the “ Riickenmarksseele ”—the faculty
of the spinal cord of frogs, deprived of their whole
brain, to react to stimuli in a manner which resembles
action. In the case of Goltz I refer to the conception
of the “ Antwortsreaktion ”—the capability of
reaction in frogs deprived of the hemispheres but
possessing more of their central system than the
mere spinal cord—which was based on his endeavours
to locate the soul of the frog. 2 Pfliiger claims to
have shown for the functions of the spinal marrow,
and Goltz for those of the so-called lower brain-
centres, that their complication and their free
variability is too great for a machine to be assumed
as their basis. Hence, we must adopt an animistic
view.

1 Bonn, 1877.

2 Beitrage zur Lehre von den Funktionen der Nervenzentren
dea Froschea, Berlin, 1869.-



PSYCHOLOGISTS


163


Here we have Vitalism pure and simple. It is
very strange that like Lotze, neither Pfliiger nor
Goltz are clear in their minds that for a part of vital
phenomena at any rate this view implies a theory
of the autonomy of life, and the rejection of psycho¬
physical parallelism.

If we pass from the theories of the physiologists
Pfliiger and Goltz to the theories of the psycholo¬
gists, it is, as we said above, the question of paral¬
lelism which concerns a history of Vitalism. It
must suffice here to say that although psychological
parallelism is still the prevailing theory, the voices
of those (even apart from v. Hartmann) who support
psycho-physical causality are growing ever louder.
We may mention Busse 1 as one of the latest type of
psychological champion of this view, and those who
wish will find in his writings an account of the most
recent German 2 literature on this subject.

(<i) EDMUND MONTGOMERY.

The American biologist and philosopher who,
though originally a physician, for many years
dedicated a quiet life in the south of the United
States to the study of the principal problems of life,
is still comparatively unknown.

We cannot say that Edmund Montgomery really
discovered a new foundation for Vitalism, and we
have therefore ranged him with the vitalistic philo-

' l Oeist und Kdrper, Leipzig, 1903.

a In France Henri Bergson (Maiiere et Mtmoire) is the chief
advocate of psycho-physical causality ; in England, W. McDougall
(Body and Mind ); see also vol. ii. of my own Gifford Lectures.



164


HISTORY OF VITALISM


sophers of the last decades. He has, however,
treated the whole problem of vital autonomy so
originally, with such a peculiar combination of
science and philosophy, that we believe he deserves
individual consideration. 1

In spite of the work of Kant and Berkeley, Mont¬
gomery adopts a metaphysical realism, and it is
this realist Metaphysics that makes possible his
solution of the problems of the ego and of the
individual organisation.

Sense-experience does not remain to us a mere
mosaic of elements, but it becomes integrated by
synthesis, it becomes a complex unity. The
bodily organism on the other hand, is an indis-
cerptible whole, not a divisible aggregate. The
solution of both problems alike lies in a rightly
formulated concept of substance. As a result of
his realistic metaphysics Montgomery imagines his
substance as a specific chemical combination after
the manner of Red ; but from the specificity of this
life-substance he arrives at special new laws. The
combination as such, which certainly is not regarded


1 From the point of view of Vitalism the principal writings of
Montgomery are : “ The Substantiality of Life " (Mind, 1881,
p. 321); “ On the Theory of Muscular Contraction ” (Pfliiger’s
Archiv, 26, 1891) ; “ To be alive, what is it T ” (Monist, 1896);
Of primary importance for epistomology and psychology are :
“ The Dependence of Quality on Specific Energies ” (Mind,
1880); “The Object of Knowledge” (Mind, 1884); “Mental
Activity ” (Mind, 1890) ; “ The Integration of Mind ” (Mind,
1896); “ Are we Conscious Automata ? ” (Texas Acad. Sc., 1896),
and a few other works. In 1904 there appeared his book The
Vitality and Organization of Protoplasm (Austin, Texas, 1904).
In 1907 he published his Philosophical Problems in the Light of
Vital Organization (New York), which sums up his views on the
whole question.



EDMUND MONTGOMERY 166

as a chemical unit, a mere aggregate of separate
molecules, has a controlling power over the organisa¬
tion, as it also realises the synthesis of the manifold
in the conception of the ego ; it is the identical,
indivisible, perdurable, and self-sustaining substance,
of which the transient phenomena arising in con¬
sciousness are but inherent affections. A certain
similarity to Hartmann’s views is noticeable here,
and an “ Unconscious ” often appears in Mont¬
gomery’s works as basis for consciousness.

In matters more properly vitaiistic, Montgomery
expressly opposes any machine-theory as a basis
in itself of organic phenomena; and bases his
objection on an analysis of the movement of proto¬
plasm, of the contraction of muscles, of the divisi¬
bility of infusoria, and of regeneration in general. It
is the life-substance that constantly restores its own
integrity, and he is not here thinking of chemical
influences of a similar kind at all. Assimilation in
a way becomes to him the most important of all
biological phenomena, but it is the result of an
inwardly constituted autonomy. There are, he
says, evidently forces genetically organised at work
here, and these forces one can only regard as specific
energies.

When we come to expound our own views, it will
be seen that we find it impossible to accept either
Montgomery’s realistic metaphysics, or his vital
substance. But this does not diminish his historical
importance : he is a Vitalist as regards the principal
question, and even uses the word “autonomous.”
Where he is really original is in his unique method,
which, whether it meet with our approval or not, is



166 HISTORY OF VITALISM

as acutely applied as it is conceived. His method
is the endeavour to solve conjointly the two problems
of integration, referring the one to the organism and
the other to psychic life. But, besides his methods,
Montgomery has another claim on our attention, and
that is his peculiar recognition and formulation of
just those two problems from which, though perhaps
in a somewhat different form, every Vitalism must, as
a matter of fact, take its start. His formulation of
the problem which arises from the analysis of action
seems to us particularly happy ; but the problem of
organisation is not sufficiently analysed for a proof
to be possible.

If Montgomery had presented his concept of
substance as a category, instead of as a chemical
substance, we should have been able to agree with
his views almost completely.



3. THE ANTI-DARWINIAN THEORY OF
DESCENT.

If we knew more actual facts about the descent
of the organism than we do, we should have to
analyse in some detail the views which have been
expressed about the laws of a phylogenetic evolution,
supposing that such really occurs ; and we should
have to ask if these laws were mechanical or vitalistic.

Since, however, even the most simple facts with
regard to descent are purely hypothetical, all the
general laws of descent, inasmuch as they represent
purely imaginary constructions, are without any real
scientific value.

In his theory of mutation, de Vries, like many
enquirers into the formationof hybrids and variations,
and some entomologists of a quite recent date, has
endeavoured to ascertain the actual facts of the
derivation of one species from another, and to
demonstrate such derivation, at any rate in part, by
exact methods. But there is still no question of
any real immanent law having been established in
so far as a real descent is concerned, that is to say,
in so far as it is a question of mutation.



168


HISTORY OF VITALISM


Hence, we cannot do more than give the names
of the supporters of a general non-Darwinian theory
of descent under the various forms of law of evolution
or of perfection or of organic growth, all of them
representing an autonomous and vitalistic law of
organic transformation. 1 This is not an objection 2
against men like Kolliker, Wigand, Nageli, Eimer,
and others, to whom we must add Herbert Spencer;
for their more or less thorough opposition to the
pure Darwinian theory of chance was at any rate
a valuable service. We may add here the general
remark that a view of the problem of descent
opposed to Darwinism would be either vitalistic or
mechanical: in both cases it would be distinguished
from the principle that the species is a product of
chance in the Darwinian sense. But at first sight,
that is to say without a deeper analysis of the facts
than we are at present in a position to undertake,
it would be quite conceivable that organic species
are not the result of an elementary autonomous law


1 The Neo-Lamarckians, a special group of Anti-Darwinians,
of which Samuel Butler was the first representative, will be
briefly mentioned later. An immanent evolutionary law is not
established by this group of thinkers.

* We often find non-Darwinian theories of descent united with
theories of ontogenetio development which endeavour to explain
matters by imaginary pictures drown from a pseudo-mechanical
source. Even Darwinians, as for example, Weismann, apart
from Darwin himself, have imagined a development of this sort,
and we need only add the names of Spencer, Nageli, Wiesner.
We cannot here examine these fancy pictures more closely :
they are themselves for the most part somewhat confused, and
the real problem of Vitalism is only accounted for in a very
obscure manner, if at all, in their constructions. For the most
part they are only photographs of the problems, and they are well
criticised in Montgomery’s book. The Vitality and Organization
of Protoplasm.



ANTI-DARWINIAN THEORY 169

but of a pre-established configuration of cosmic
factors. Those, however, who reject the machine
theory for individual morphogenesis will not be likely
to admit it as an explanation of descent in a form
which has only hypothetical justification.



4. NEOVITALISM.

The newest phase in the history of Vitalism has
been termed Neovitalism, though the designation
is not quite suitable ; for at no time have vitalistic
theories completely died out, as those who gave the
name and in particular Emil du Bois-Reymond,
seemed to imagine.

In a different sense, however, the last epoch of
vitalistic thought may be styled new, in virtue,
that is to say, of its whole procedure, at any rate
as regards the methods of many of its representatives.
We may therefore adopt the term.

The novelty in the method is connected, though
its authors are not aware of the fact, with the pro¬
cedure adopted by Vitalism in the eighteenth, and
not with the prevailing theories of the nineteenth
century. It goes once more back to foundations,
and does not only deal with the implications of a
doctrine accepted without question. Once more an
endeavour is made to prove on one ground or another
that the vitalistic view of life, and only this view, is
necessarily true. In the eighteenth century this
resulted from the struggle with materialism; it



NEO VITALISM


171


now makes its appearance after the struggle with
Darwinism. It is thus due to its enemies that
Vitalism once more raises its head. The best
opponents of the traditional Vitalism have actually
been of direct service in causing its re-birth ; they
purified it of many errors and it became all the more
clear that there was a kernel of truth at its centre.
The cause of the real establishment of Neovitalism
was, as we have mentioned, the reappearance of
experimental morphology, the “mechanics of develop¬
ment ” represented by W. Roux. All new facts
which support the theory of the autonomy of life
have been won in this field of investigation, with the
exception, of course, of those which are derived
from the analysis of human action. This is not, of
course, quite what the initiator of this method
imagined. His conviction of the truth of the
mechanical view seems curiously enough to have
grown stronger as the years went by : for at the
beginning of his experimental work he at any rate
left the question of Vitalism open. 1

For the theoretical development of the logical
consequences derived from the principle of Neo¬
vitalism, two considerations are of importance.
On the one hand, the new theory of knowledge, in

1 Cf. W. Roux, Abhandlungen, ii p. 188 ff. : “ Whoever does
not regard as self-evident and not needing demonstration, which
would be a common “ petitio principii,” what ought to be the
tinal result of our researches, ought to keep in mind in causal
investigations into embryology that it i9 at any rate questionable
whether the processes which he observes can be regarded as the
result of forces already known ; or whether they necessitate
special “ modes of action ” such as differentiating action from a
distance and so forth, and thus load to the assumption of special
forms of energy.”



172 HISTORY OF VITALISM

so far as it was original and not a mere repetition
of Kant, had given rise to a rigorous subjectivism,
which in its turn put an end to a mechanistic
metaphysic. And in the second place, the science
of inorganic nature had acquired in its best repre¬
sentatives, as for instance in Mach, a special kind of
conceptual method, and became conscious that, since
it is the business of science merely to describe
phenomena, every question of absolute existence is
outside its sphere. We shall later have to describe
how Neovitalism incorporated the newly acquired
body of knowledge, which, however, does not
necessitate so complete a rejection of the philosophy
of Kant as many modern writers seem to think, but
rather tends to justify that philosophy.

In considering Neovitalism from an historical
point of view we shall, of course, particularly in this
section, have to confine ourselves to what is really
typical. It may seem, on first thoughts, that William
Roux should be mentioned as the earliest Neo-
vitalist, for he has repeatedly maintained that, at
least in functional adaptation, organic development
is directly influenced by non-mechanical or psychical
factors. He gives as an example the strengthening
of the muscles by exercise, in which the psychical
factors, the will or the instinct of self-preservation,
are essential determining forces.

But Roux never analysed these opinions and
never asserted that they directly implied vitalistic
forces, even in a restricted field. We shall, then,
not be mistaken in holding that Roux merely took
over these views as a legacy from certain earlier
theorists, in considering him in fact as a “ traditional



NEOVITALISM


173


Vitalist.” In this he is like Lotze who, in spite of
his rejection of vegetative Vitalism, attributed all
possible functions to the “ soul ” without seeing that
they, too, were expressions of Vitalism.

In 1890 F. Ehrhardt published Meehanismus und
Teleologie, a work written, as was usual in the days
of the older Vitalism, for the express purpose of
proving the logical possibility of a vitalistic con¬
ception of life, and emphasising the essential need
of its acceptance. The mechanistic theory, which
fails in many branches of physics and chemistry is,
according to Ehrhardt, far less comprehensive than
the causal theory. Teleology is not the antithesis
of causality, but subordinate to it. It is, of course,
inadmissible to consider “ final causes ” as implying
that an object or end is capable of having effect. No
event that has not yet taken place can possibly act.
But results are caused by the keeping of the end in
view, and it is in this way that the final becomes an
efficient cause. These final efficient causes are not
in the slightest degree metaphysical, for they derive
from organic matter.

This will suffice to show that the method of
Ehrhardt’s work is of much positive value. The
part in which he tries objectively to prove his
assertion is weaker, though still worthy of attention.
For, if the theory that the will has power to deter¬
mine action were based solely upon inner experience,
and if nutrition and reproduction were to be regarded
as expressions of pure vitalistic causality merely
because they rest on instinct, it could not have the
same weight as when demonstrated by accurate
scientific investigation.



174. HISTORY OF VITALISM

Of much more significance is a thought which
Ehrhardt expressed in his polemic against the static
teleology of Lotze. He urged that a static con¬
ception of the organism must be rejected not only
for the minor reason that it did not throw light on
the problems of nutrition and reproduction, and only
deferred their solution, but also because it failed to
take into account the constancy of the vital processes
which do not act as if by chance, but are daily
producing millions of typical organisms. For the
same reason, the mechanical explanations of elec¬
tricity or magnetism cannot be maintained. Physics,
too, has its own fixed and constant laws, which, if
they had resulted from the combination of more
simple natural laws, would most certainly have been
fluctuating and only approximately valid.

It may well be that no evidence of Vitalism will be
found in this direction, but the line of thought, at
any rate, is original, and, if only for that reason, is
worthy of notice. This cannot be said for Ehrhardt’s
further contributions to positive Vitalism, in which
he supports a theory of a sort of vital matter. When
certain chemical substances are combined in a
special way, they result not only in chemical, but
also in specifically organic forces. Although, there¬
fore, this spontaneous generation is actually pro¬
duced only by chance, the causes of its existence
are fixed according to natural law.

Gustav Wolff’s excellent critique of Darwinism
appeared in 1890, and fully merits its great reputa¬
tion. In spite of being (without any reflection on
its originality) behind the times as a criticism of
Darwinism, it is the first of its kind, arising, as it



NEOVITALISM


176


does, from the clear conviction that the fall of
Darwinism will bring a simultaneous revival of
teleology of great significance.

In the year 1894, Wolff followed his critique by
an experiment which was expressly undertaken as
a solution of the question : Darwinism or teleology.
His aim was to see whether an organism could restore
an organ extracted from it for the first time in its
development, and to examine how this restitution
was accomplished. “ Primary finality ” was to be
proved by the positive outcome of the experiment,
which would, on the one hand, reduce Darwinism
ad absurdum, and, on the other, through the fact
of purposive adaptation, go to support teleology in a
very significant form.

The experiment consisted in the extraction of the
lens, and nothing but the lens, from the eye of a
water-newt (Triton taniatus). A new lens was
generated, growing from the outer edge of the iris
in a way which, though not corresponding to the
ordinary development, 1 was, nevertheless, most
suitable for the purpose in question.

Thus was “ primary finality ” demonstrated.

Highly though we value Wolff’s acute writings,
which take a prominent place in modem biological
literature, it must be pointed out that although he
proved the significance of teleology he failed to
demonstrate its methods. His experiment might
only point to a pre-established static teleology to be
accepted simply as a given fact.

Wolff himself, in the works we have mentioned,
never entered into the difference between static and
t. 1 In the normal development, the lens grows out from the skin.



176


HISTORY OF VITALISM


dynamic teleology, although he certainly inclined
to the latter, that is, to Vitalism. Latterly 1 he has,
it is true, expressed his vitalistic views more definitely,
affirming that much is still inexplicable. I still
doubt whether his experiment could in itself demon¬
strate the methods of teleology.

For the rest, Wolff, in his psychiatric works, 2 fully
accepts the autonomy of psychic life and this, of
course, is quite vitalistic.

In 1893, influenced particularly by the methodo¬
logical writings of Wigand and Paul du Bois-Rey-
mond,® I myself came clearly to see that teleology
is an irreducible peculiarity of the phenomena of life.
Critical analysis of physiological and morpho¬
genetic phenomena led me to this conclusion. As
yet I had not realised the difference between static
and dynamic teleology, and my work Die Biologie
ale sellstandige Grundwissenschaft (1893, 2nd ed.
1911), vacillated, without my knowledge, between
the recognition of a creative principle and a natural
mechanistic teleology. In 1894 I expressed in my
Analytische Theorie der organischen Enturicklung a
thoroughly mechanical teleology in the form of
different “ given ” harmonising means, but here,
too, I did not perceive that I was pleading for one


1 Mechaniamus und Vitalismue, Leipzig, 1902. In Biol. Central-
blaU; 27, 1907,1 have answered the objections to my own vitalistio
viewB in the second edition of this work.

* E.g. Beitrage z. Lehre v. den Sprachslorungm, Leipzig, 1902.

8 XJber die Orundlagen der Erkentnie in den exakten Wiseen-
tohafien, Tubingen, 1890. In this work, the independence of
every province of physics and chemistry in relation to every other
is asserted (compare Schopenhauer), and a similar independence
is explained as possible with regard to Biology.



NEOVITALISM


177


of two rival teleological possibilities. When I
wrote my article on “ The Machine Theory of Life ”
in the year 1896, I was fully aware of this difference.
I repeated, in it, the essential substance of the two
works mentioned above, for they had in the mean¬
time been misunderstood. I further emphasised
the fact that my conclusions had supported not
vitalistic but mechanistic teleology, and pointed
out that they bore most resemblance to Lotze’s
ideas upon the vegetative functions of life. 1 I
confronted my static theory with its problematic
antithesis, which, though known to be a possible
theory of life, had not yet been expressed as such.
The conceptions later distinguished as static and
dynamic teleology were already to be found in this
book, although the words were adopted for the first
time in my book on localisation, of which I make
mention below.

The experiments of several years upon the power
which organisms possess of regulation of form, and
continual reflection on the collective results of
experiments on the physiology of development, upon
which I had been working since 1891, combined with
a logical analysis of the concepts of “ regulation ”
and “ action,” brought about an entire change of my
opinions and the gradual elaboration of a complete
system of Vitalism.

Already in 1895 I had become convinced, through
analysis of the problem of “ action,” of the necessity
of Vitalism. Nevertheless, my first publication was

1 1 might also have mentioned Goette, whose Law of Form,
which may here be referred to, implied a static teleology. Rostan
too, is of this opinion. For further information, cf. Bernard, ii.

M



178 HISTORY OF VITALISM

on the vitalistic theory of a separate problem of
form-structure, as this subject seemed to me, on
reflection, of wider application. The publication to
which I allude came out in the beginning of 1899
under the title Die Lolcalimtion morphogenetischer
Vorgange. Ein Beweis vitalistischen Geschehens. This
is the first work in which it is clearly demon¬
strated that certain at least of the processes of life
can only be understood as autonomous, obeying
only their own laws—in a word, as dynamic-teleo¬
logical.

In the work published in 1901 under the title Die
organischen Begulationen, I examined in the same way
as I had done in my Lokalisntion the" collective
results of the regulative workings of the living body ;
in this a new proof was added to my former vitalistic
theory.

In 1903 in my work Die * Sede ’ als elementarer
Naturfaktor, I analysed human action as an objective
phenomenon of movement. This was the theory
which had been the real outcome of my vitalistic
reflections. In the year 1904, under the title
Naturbegriffe und Natururteile, I published the
methodological justification of my system of thought,
and put it into relation with the concepts established
in physics and chemistry. In my Gifford Lectures
(1907-08) a complete system of Vitalism was formu¬
lated, and the logical justification of Vitalism formed
an important part of this system. Additions to
the logic of Vitalism were made in an article in
Kantstudien (vol. 16, 1911) and in parts of my
Ordnungelehre (1912). I need not here discuss
the contents of these writings, for the concluding



NEOVITALISM


179


part of this book will expound them in a concise
form as a special system of Vitalism.

In order to appraise the merit of other investiga¬
tions of the vitalistic question we must go back a
few years.

In the year 1899 Paul Nikolaus Cossmann
published his Elements der empirischen Teleologie
which was really complete in 1897. This book
specially sets out to frame a logical definition of the
concept teleology, and accordingly has several
points of contact with Kant’s Critique of Judgment.
In its study of actual natural science it is only
“formally teleological”; and besides, Cossmann
understands just as little as Wolff, and as I myself
in my first writings, the difference between static
and dynamic teleology.

Causality, he considers, has universal but not
exclusive validity, and he places teleology beside
it as a maxim of judgment. It deals with necessary
associations, for the idea of necessity is ever larger
than that of causality. The general formula:
C (Cause) = f (E) (Effect), suffices for the causal
theory, the words “ cause ” and “ effect ” being used
in a very general sense as summarising the totality
of everything which comes into consideration.
Teleology is expressed by the formula M = f (A, S),
in which M indicates Medium, and A, S, Antecedent
and Consequent.

The functional sign indicates in both cases logical
dependence or logical affinity of meaning.

Even if Cossmann does not solve the problem
“ Vitalism or Mechanism ? ” he at least determines
in a positive sense the validity of a profoundly



180 HISTORY OF VITALISM

significant vital teleology not explicable by mere
chance. A very large part of his book is devoted to
this purpose.

Eugen Albrecht, in his Vorfragen der Biologie
(1899), maintains that physics and physiology are
but different points of view relating to the same
reality. This seems to agree with the results of
Cossmann’s researches ; it does not go beyond my
own statements in the Analytische Theorie (1894).

Johannes Reinke has since 1899 devoted himself
with great energy to the teleological problem, and
has published a succession of books and articles 1
on the subject. His treatment is rather abstract
and does not refer much to facts. He asserts that
all specific movement is the result not only of
energy, but also of those forces which Lotze called
“ second-hand.” Reinke describes these forces by
the general term “ Dominants.” By this term he
evidently means not only the laws of mechanism,
but also the so-called “ constants.”

Latterly, Reinke has called these doubtful powers
“ system-forces,” when considering the facts of
physiology proper, and he is convinced of their
mechanical nature. In this he is a static Ideologist.
He now reserves the name “ Dominants ” for the
physiology of form and leaves their character
doubtful, so that in this field, he is at most a pro¬
blematic Vitalist; at times here too he even seems

to incline to the mechanical theory. He certainly

*

1 Die Welt ate Tat, Berlin, 1899 ; “ Gedanken uber das Wesen
der Organisation,” Biol. Zentralblatt, 19, 1899; Einleitung in
die theoretische Biologie, Berlin, 1901, etc. Reinke himself
considers his article “Die Dominantenlehre” ( Natur und Schule,
2, 1902) as his best production.



NEOVITALISM


181


expressly rejects the theory of parallelism for the
psycho-physical, and in this respect must be con¬
sidered a real Vitalist.

This acutely elaborated theory of “ Dominants,”
and the concentration of his researches on the
problem of their nature, is Reinke’s most valuable
achievement. He does not refer, however, to my
arguments on the autonomy of vital movement.

It should be mentioned that Fritz Noll pre¬
pared the way for a line of enquiry 1 which we con¬
sider as full of significance for Vitalism. But as it
principally concerns the analysis of particular facts,
it cannot be analysed here in detail.

Pauly 2 has lately been supporting a theory of
life with a psychological basis. His vital principle
works like a man who makes experience. I do
not think that any such formula can fully express
the dynamic-teleological phenomena of vegetative
life. The views of Jennings, Holmes and S. Becher,
and perhaps also Child are more or less similar to
those of Pauly. Schneider’s 3 Vitalism is more
valuable for the conceptual and ontological sections
than the doctrine which he expands. Semon’s
“ Mneme ” 4 is not vitalistic but expressly conceived
in a mechanical sense. For him the word “ memory”
is only a short way of summing up a complex of
mechanical factors not yet fully analysed.

The remainder of the vitalistic utterances of the

1 Landunrtsch. Jahrbiicher, 1900; Biolog. Zentralblatt, 25, 1903.

a DarwmismuB und Lamarckiam.ua, Munich, 1905.

’ Cf. his article on “ Vitalism ” in Zeitachrijt Jiir den Ausbau
der Entwickelungelehrc, vol. i. 1907.

1 Leipzig, 1904, second edition, 1910.



182 HISTORY OF VITALISM

immediate past do not throw any essential new light
on the subject, but confirm, more or less, in a slightly
altered form, the conclusions which we had already
reached. If we wished this work to be quite com¬
plete, we should have to touch upon the publications
of Auerbach, Bechterew, Bell, Dreyer, Fischel,
Franck, Gemelli, Haldane, Hartog, Herbst, O.
Hertwig, Japp, Lodge, Mackenzie, Morgan, Mos-
kowski, Neumeister, Ostwald , 1 Schmitz-Dumont,
Strecker and a few others ; and we should also have
to examine the antagonistic arguments of Biitschli,
Detto, Klebs, Julius Schultz and others. Even
more important are the works of Ourwitsch on
Determination, and his reflexions on heredity , 2
while Bergson's fundamental theories should be
studied in his own well-known writings,and especially
in Creative Evolution.

If anyone should wish to obtain further informa¬
tion, he might read the articles 3 in which I defined
my own position in relation to supporters and
opponents of my doctrines of autonomy ; and he
may also be referred to E. von Hartmann’s essay on
“ Mechanism and Vitalism in Modem Biology,” 4

1 Ostwald’s ‘ ‘geistige Energie ’' appears tome far too problematical
and not sufficiently analysed, to be brought forward in my text
as a real advancement of Vitalism. For further information,
cf. the essays mentioned in a later note. We shall, moreover,
consider the relations of Vitalism and energy in the systematic
section.

* Biol. Oentralblatt, 32.

■‘Biol. CentrcUblatt, 22, 1902; 23, 1903. Jensen’s latest

objections to Vitalism are very weak and by no means new.

4 Arch. f. syet. Philos., 9, 1903. The essay by W. Bieganski:
“ Neo-Vitalismus in der modemen Biologie ” ( Annul. Naturphil.,
4, 1904, p. 47) may also be reoommended, though with reserva¬
tions.



NEO VITALISM


183


and to the final work of this great thinker, Das
Problem des Lebens (1906).

History must cease when the battles of the present
begin.

And now, as one of the combatants, I propose to
trace, without reference to history, the systematic
development of the views which I myself consider
as correct in the fundamental questions of biology.


PART II.


THEORETICAL.


FOREWORD.

In the original German edition of this work (1905)
the historical portion is followed by a short Zweiter
Hauptteil, entitled Der Vitalismus als Lehre, in which
a condensed account is given of what I call the
proofs and indicia of the autonomy of life and of
the relation of “ entelechy ” to the two principles
of energetics as well as to the concept of substance.
As all these topics are dealt with in my Gifford
Lectures (1908) in a much broader, and, as I hope,
better manner, and as a sort of summary of the
Gifford Lectures is given in the first half of The
Problem of Individuality (1914), containing a course
of lectures delivered before the University of London,
it seemed best to leave out the Zweiter Hauptteil
in its original form, and to put something new in
its place.

The original Zweiter Hauptteil as well as the
Gifford Lectures and the new little book just men¬
tioned, proceeds in what might be called the ascend¬
ing or inductive way. They all begin with facts,
analyse them, form theoretical concepts on the
foundation of the analysis, compare these concepts
with those which have been created in the sciences
of the inorganic world, and—at least in the Gifford



188 * THEORY OF VITALISM

Lectures and the new book—finally try to formulate
the real logic of Vitalism and to sketch the problem of
“ universal teleology.” But it appears to me that
the reverse of all this might be of interest for the
reader ; a system of Vitalism namely that does not
ascend from the facts to a theory, but descends from
a theory, i.e. a logic of possibilities, to the fact,
i.e. to realities.

In my Ordnungslehre, ein System des nicht meta-
physischen Teiles der Philosophic mil besonderer
Berilcksichtigung der Lehre vom Werden (1912), this
method is already adopted, but with purely logical,
or better, categorical, aims ; in what is to follow I
shall try to develop what might be called “ deductive
Vitalism,” with special reference to the claims of
theoretical biology. Thus, deductive Vitalism as a
real union of logic and biology, or rather as a sort
of filling out of certain departments of logic with
biological facts, will be developed here for the first
time.

HANS DRIESCH.


Heidelberg, March, 1914.



A. PURE LOGIC.

Pure logic, as the general theory of order deals
with everything that is in the most general sense
of being. Being here means nothing but being had
by myself consciously in the form of a this. We shall
apply the word object—(Meinong’s “ Gegenstand ”)
—in this most general sense. Everything then that
may be “ consciously had,” is object—a sensation
or a feeling or a reproduction of a sensation or a
thought of whatever kind : and the totality of
objects in this sense is to be ordered.

Pure Logic starts with the irreducible concepts of
order : this, such, and relation. Among relations
are identity, difference (“ otherness ”) and con¬
sequence (i.e. a position is because there is another
position).

Whatever is an object is such, and its suchness
must be defined. Now definition not only analyses
the object, but, strange to say, also destroys it. For
the object is not the mere sum of its attributes : it
is their unity—it is all the attributes together.

Thus, the concept of wholeness is already found
in pure logic.



B. NATURE.


The objects of pure logic as the general theory of
order may be called immediate objects ; they are,
in fact, the immediate contents of consciousness.

Now there are some immediate objects which mean
or signify mediate objects or, as we generally say,
objects of nature. The objects of nature “ are ”
as if they had an independent being for themselves.
“ This dog,” for instance, is a mediate object or an
object of nature ; that is to say, whenever I think
“ this dog ” in any form whatever, I mean by my
thought, as an immediate object, a certain mediate or
natural object in its quasi-independent singleness.
In a similar way all so-called objects of nature are
“ meant.”

But when does an immediate object (a thought
or a sense-image, etc.) mean or signify an object
of nature, and when does it not ? For practical
purposes I almost always know when I have to
refer an immediate object, a “ givenness ” so to say,
to this strange quasi-independent realm which I call
nature, but logic demands a better criterion and is
not satisfied by the mere statement that “ dreams,”
“ real sensations,” and “ memory-images ” are
distinguished one from another quasi-instinctively.

In order to discover the criterion which we are
seeking we must first consider a very strange feature
of conscious life.



C. BECOMING . 1


At one moment I “ have ” this consciously, at
another I have that, and then again I have something
else, and so on. This is the so-called stream of
consciousness. But there is nothing like a stream
quite immediately given to me : on the contrary,
my having consciously is always a “ now,” or better
still, it is entirely unrelated to time. I have this
immediate object, this content, now—that is all.
But among the contents which I have consciously
there can be distinguished a very peculiar class of
what may be called signs ; and these signs, which
are had in a now, mean “ not now but then (i.e.
earlier) ”, and they may even mean “ earlier than.”

Thus it is as if I were always identical in
one respect, and yet at the same time not always
identical in another. I am always identical as one
who is a consciously having person in general, but
I am not always identical as one who has special
contents. This I formulate as follows : as having

1 B. Russell (Princ. of Math., i., Part vii., in particular p. 471;
ef. my Ordnungelehre, p 174, note 1) and his followers believe they
can do without such concepts as becoming and change. This
may be true for mere “ motion ” of a physical point, though even
here the introduction of a particular function in the place of
motion as a sometliing sui genesis does not afford a real
understanding. But such a mathematical reduction of becoming
(if I may say so) is quite impossible in the realms of biology,
history, etc. (of. Ordnungelehre, p. 210, note) ; and it neglects
the truly original meaning of becoming, i.e. its meaning with
respect to the ego.



192 , THEORY OF VITALISM

consciously in general I am enduring , as having
special contents I am becoming.

Here we meet for the first time the curious concept
of becoming; and this is at the very root of
“ categories ” substance and causality, as will be
shown at a later stage.

The next step is this : I look from my having at
what I have ; this, i.e. the totality of immediate
objects I call It, and then I say It becomes. In this
way a certain connexion between the different
contents of my consciousness at different “ nows ”
is established. But not very much would be gained
in this way if, firstly, the enduring part of the It
could not be shown, and if, secondly, something more
could not be said with regard to becoming.

In the concept of enduring in general, identity has,
so to speak, been thrown outwards ; enduring is
identity, but it means something that is always the
same in time, not merely as a concept : it is identity
petrified. But suppose the concept of consequence
could also be made more than a concept of pure
logic and could also be “ thrown outwards ” upon
the It. What, if becoming could be formulated as
if an earlier phase of it were always the reason of
a later phase, and a later phase the consequence of
an earlier one ? If this were possible then we might
cla im to understand becoming, to have rationalised it.

Now it is certainly quite impossible to fulfil the
logical demands mentioned here with regard to the
becoming of immediate objects as they are given
to me. Think of what you “ have ” consciously
during a period of, say, five minutes : there is an
enormous variety of contents of immediate objects.



BECOMING


193


but there is neither any clearly enduring It, nor any
sort of quasi-rational connexion in becoming itself.

Must we therefore deny the possibility of a logical
theory of becoming ? By no means.

It is quite true that the totality of what I con¬
sciously “ have ” as immediate objects cannot be
forced into the scheme of the theory of becoming
with its postulates of something that endures and
of rational connexion. But there is a certain
something which I mean by part of that which I
have as mediate : and this something, as we know,
is called nature or natural reality, and nature fully
obeys the postulates of the theory of becoming. In
nature we may successfully search for something
that endures, and in nature we may regard becoming
as if any phase of it were the “ reason ” of a later
phase and the “ consequence ” of an earlier one. We
may even go so far as to say : Nature is the one
mediate object that obeys the postulates of the
rational theory of becoming. In other words :
whether any immediate object that I consciously
have (an optical or other image, a thought, etc.) is
to be related to a mediate object in nature or not—
is decided according to the harmony or disharmony
of becoming in which this mediate object would
stand to those mediate natural objects which have
already been theoretically established. By this
argument and by this argument alone is “ natural
reality ” distinguished from the world of dreams and
from the world of imagination.

Nature, then, is the proper field of a theory of
becoming. What endures in nature may be called
substance , the rational connexion among the changes



194 . THEORY OF VITALISM

in nature may be called causality. Both concepts,
substance as well as causality, have been formed by
a special sort of transformation of meaning out of
the purely logical concepts identity and consequence
—(this and because). Thus pure logic, the pure
“ theory of order ” remains always the real founda¬
tion of all philosophy of nature : or, in other words,
the “ categories ” rest upon purely logical concepts.



D. THE FORMS OF BECOMING.

The concept of becoming, then, rests upon certain
signifying contents which are immediately “ had ” :
the concepts of substance and causality, on the other
hand, are founded upon certain logical concepts
applied to becoming in the manner of postulates :
the concept of nature in its exact sense rests upon all
these.

The question now arises whether we are not in
a position to say something more about natural
becoming a priori, i.e. starting merely from what
the concepts of becoming, substance, causality,
and nature mean. And we are indeed able to do
so—at any rate if we consider a certain feature
always connected with our having an immediate
object that “ means ” something in nature. We
may describe this feature as of an empirical character
taken for itself—just as the “ sign ” that means
then or before is of an empirical character—but
even then the following reasoning may be called
a priori since it only deals with possibilities, and does
not go into any details of real experience.

The special feature common to all our immediate
data that are related to nature is this : they all have
the sign of spatiality , they all mean not only a now



196 ’ THEORY OF VITALISM

but also a here. In fact, what we call our “ know¬
ledge ” of nature rests ultimately and exclusively
upon data of the form now-here-such.

All our knowledge about nature out of which
we form our experience about nature as a something
that is becoming or changing, must therefore also rest
ultimately upon data of the form now-here-such,
and upon nothing else. The importance of this is
obvious, for it means that all immediate experience
of nature is spatial experience—and this applies,
of course, with regard to change or becoming as well.

That is to say : Whatever the theory of natural
becoming may ultimately lead to, it always has to
start from “ a becoming in space,” i.e.. from two
spatial states between which we may say that there
is becoming. This “ becoming ” is to be rationalised.
It is to be regarded as if it were the consequence of
any “ other ” becoming earlier in time. That is
all that the rational theory of becoming postulates.
It does not postulate that the “ other,” earlier,
becoming, which is to be the cause of the immediately
given becoming, shall be also becoming in space,
or, in short, spatial becoming. It may indeed be
so, but that is not necessary : and this point, too,
is of very great importance.

But before we can realise its importance we must
return once more to the fundamentals of our rational
theory of becoming, i.e. to pure logic as the theory
of order in general.

Whenever there is something—in the sense of
being an object, a “ position ” 1 —because there is
something else, that which forms the reason must
1 See page 189.



THE FORMS OF BECOMING 197

always be richer in content, i.e. richer in attributes
than the other which is its consequence. We may
speak of the degree of manifoldness of a concept,
meaning thereby the number of different irreducible
(elementary) characters which enter into its complete
definition—these characters being suchnesses and
relations. The reason, then, is always of a higher
degree of manifoldness than the consequence. The
being of the concept “ dog ” is the reason of the
being of the concept “ animal ” : “ justice ” is the
reason of “ virtue ” : “ engine ” of “ manufactured
object,” etc. 1 Now in our theory of becoming one
becoming is to be regarded as if it were the con¬
sequence of an earlier one. The one becoming we
start from is, as we know, bordered by two spatial
states : each of these states may be signified by a
concept giving account of the different irreducible
“ things ” of the state, and of the relations between
the things. We may say, shortly, that each of the
two states which border on one immediately ex¬
perienced becoming has itself its proper degree of
manifoldness. What, then, we must postulate, if
our theory of becoming is really to provide us with
an analogy to the logical relation of consequence,
is the following : The degree of manifoldness of a
natural system can never increase of itself, i.e. without
a cause as its quasi-sufficient reason. To allow this
would be to abandon the rational theory of becoming.

1 We take the concept of reason in its moat fundamental sense,
and relate it to concepts not to proper “ judgments ” (see my
Ordnungslehre, pp. 53-86). With regard to the peculiarities of
arithmetical and geometrical concepts see Ordnungslehre, pp. 58,
120 f., 140 f.; but this topic, thought very important for the
problem of Systematica, may be left out of account here.



198 THEORY OF VITALISM

This, then, is the foundation of all further reason¬
ing about causality—taken together with the fact
that one spatial becoming always forms the im¬
mediate datum of all reflexion : whenever there is
an increase of the degree of manifoldness in the one
spatial becoming that is to be rationalised, there
must be a quasi-reason, i.e. a cause, for this increase
that is outside the system itself.

And now we are in a position to develop the a priori
theory of the different types or forms of becoming.

First type : Given a natural system that shows
different stages at the times t % and L between which
there was becoming transforming state B into
state C. If now B and C, though different in their
particular features, are of the same degree of mani¬
foldness ; and if a third state A of the system earlier
than B may be discovered which is also of the same
degree of manifoldness; then every singularity of
becoming between the states B and C may be causally
related to a singularity of becoming between A and
B. The problem of rationalising the becoming
between the times t 2 and t 3 has been solved.

This problem can also be regarded as solved if,
though the state A in the system itself is wanting,
so that there is a real increase of manifoldness with
regard to the system as such, yet there is spatial
becoming “ outside ” the system (in the spatial
sense of the word) : and from this the increase of
the system may be understood. In this case also
every singularity of the immediately experienced
becoming may be connected with a singularity of
earlier spatial becoming.

We propose to call this type of becoming or rather



THE FORMS OF BECOMING


199


this type of causality, singular or additive causality.
The manifoldness of the system is here a mere sum :
its different parts are changed in themselves, irre¬
spective of the others. This is the type of becoming
that is illustrated by the sciences of the inorganic
world. At present at an}' rate all so-called inorganic
processes may be understood according to this
scheme. And general principles—those of mechanics
and energetics—have been formulated to give
special expression to the various important aspects
of rational becoming in the case of singular causality.

Second and third types : These types of becoming
are of great importance for the general theory of
natural order, being the expression of certain a
priori possibilities. But they are not realised in
nature as far as we know, and need, therefore, only
be mentioned shortly here.

In view of what becoming means and of the fact
that immediately experienced becoming is always
spatial becoming, it is quite conceivable that between
the times t, and the number of elementary material
constituents (“ atoms ”) of a system might increase
without there having been a passage of atoms into
the system from “ outside ” in the spatial sense.
In order, then, to save the principle of rationality
in becoming, thing-crealing agents must be accepted
which have “ made ” these atoms.

And it is further conceivable that a system, hitherto
changeless, may begin to change at the moment t
without there being a moving cause anywhere in
space. Change-creating agents must have been at
work in such a case.

As has been said, nature seems not to have



200 THEORY OF VITALISM

realised these two possible types of becoming.
Certain psychologists who do not accept the theory
of “ psycho-physical parallelism,” have, it is true,
burdened the “ soul ” with the creation of material
energy, but the relation between “ body ” and
“ soul ” can, we think, also be conceived on the
basis of our fourth type of becoming.

Fourth type : Let there be a system of a given
number of things and a given number of different
relations among the things. Then between the
moments t 2 and t 3 there may be becoming which
changes the state of the system in such a way that
the number of different kinds of relations among the
things increases without there being any kind of
spatial agency that can be made responsible for
this increase. In this case “ immaterial ” or non-
spatial agents must have been at work if the ration¬
ality of becoming is to be saved at all. These agents
need not have been of the “ creating ” sort—it is
assumed that we know they are not. In other
words, there has been a sufficient reason in space for
“ becoming ” in general, i.e. there has been a supply
of spatial energy for what has happened; but it is
with regard to the peculiarities of becoming that
there is a lack of sufficient reason in spatial change.
There must have been non-spatial agents of a
controlling type, so to speak.

The most important form of this type of becoming
would be that in which a distribution of the things
in one system of the form of a mere sum would
be transformed into a distribution that would be
in some sense a unity or totality, without any spatial
mechanical predetermination of this totality.



THE FORMS OF BECOMING


201


To put it very simply but clearly : an arrangement
of things (atoms) of this form :

• tt*

• • • •

• • • •

• • o •

Figure 1.

i.e. an arrangement that may be defined by very
few terms, because it is of a very low degree of
manifoldness, may be transformed into an arrange¬
ment such as this :



without spatial preformation. There are sixteen
“ things ” in each case, but the first arrangements of
these things is clearly a sum, whereas the second
resembles in form—a “ fish.”

We shall call this type of becoming unifying or
individualising causality.

If a system passes through several phases of
becoming in succession, all controlled by unifying
causality, we may speak of the evolution of the
system : and every singularity of becoming that
leads to the unity as the final end may be called
purposive or teleological. But the concepts of unity
and of unifying causality are the more fundamental.

It will be shown that unifying causality is the
prototype of biological, i.e. vitalistic becoming.


E. INDIVIDUALISING AND SINGULAR
CAUSALITY.


We now enter the realm of Vitalism proper, i.e. the
theory of the autonomy of the processes of life.
And first of all we must study a little more intimately
the manner in which individualising causality
(established above as a logical possibility) may act
in the material universe, or rather with regard to a
given finite material system.

There is no creation either of matter or of the
prerequisites of change as such if pure individualising
causality is at work : there is only regulative or
controlling action in addition to energetical becoming
—as a special aspect of singular causality. What
does this mean ?

It means, firstly, that the so-called first principle
of “ Energetics ”—the principle of the conservation
of energy—is not violated by our individualising
agent. This is postulated by the theory, and—
we may say this already here—the experiments of
Rubner, Atwater and others have shown that it
holds empirically. The principle of the conservation
of energy holds good for the organism.

But what about the second principle of Energetics,
the “ principle of becoming ” (Satz des Geschehens)



CAUSALITY


203


in the terminology of Helm and Ostwald ? This
principle, which, like the first, is fundamentally
a priori, states that all becoming is space depends
on the existence of differences of what is called the
“ intensity ” of energy, as, e.g. temperature. May
this principle be saved also in spite of the action of
individualising causality ? I think it may, if only
we suppose that the non-mechanical agent which is
the bearer of individualising causality is able to
suspend such happening as is possible on the basis
of pre-existing differences of intensity and as would
occur without the suspension. Suspending possible
change and relaxing suspension would then be the
two modes of “ action ” of the bearer of individualis¬
ing causality which we shall henceforth speak of as
entelechy. The name, though well known in the
metaphysical terminology of Aristotle, is not here
used in the proper Aristotelian sense. 1

If in our figure 1 (p. 201) the points stand for
sixteen systems equal one to another and each
endowed with endless “ possibilities ” (in the form
of given differences of energetic intensities), we
can understand how this homogeneous distribution
of possibilities may be transformed into a hetero¬
geneous distribution of realities, figure 2. In order
that this may happen it is only necessary that
entelechy, which is supposed to have suspended all
possibilities so far, relaxes its suspension for each
system in a different way.

By our theory, that the action of entelechy con¬
sists in the suspension of given possibilities, we
avoid a very serious fault of almost all forms of
1 See p. 14.



204 THEORY OF VITALISM

ancient Vitalism (and of many forms of modern
Vitalism too). It has often been urged against
Vitalism that according to its doctrines the organism
should be omnipotent, whereas in fact, there are
limits to all regeneration, adaptation, etc. On the
basis of our theory, these “ limits of regulability,”
to express ourselves briefly, may readily be under¬
stood : it is on given, preformed, material conditions
that the action of entelechy depends.

It may be well to explain here in detail that
entelechy—or any other individualising agent, if
such there be—is itself neither “ an energy ” nor
“ a material substance ” of any special kind : such
an assumption would lead to absurdities. 1 Entelechy
is an agent sui generis, non-material and non-spatial,
but acting “ into ” space, so to speak ; an agent,
however, that belongs to nature in the purely logical
sense in which we use this word.

Another theory with regard to the possible rela¬
tions among material and non-material agents of
reality was developed by Descartes and later by
Eduard von Hartmann, the last great metaphysician
before Bergson. Both authors defend the view that
the non-mechanical agent—the “ soul ”—may alter
the direction of material particles, and by this action
also alter the directions of all forces which go out
from them. It is clear that this hypothesis starts
from a purely mechanical, as opposed to the more
energetical point of view. The theory is possible :
and the principle of the conservation of energy in its
most general form—(2(E) = Const.), though not for
the three axes of space separately—would also be
1 See Gifiord Lectures, ii. pp. 167 £E„ 249 fl.



CAUSALITY


206


preserved. But the fact that there are “ limits of
regulability ” would not be well accounted for by
such an assumption. My own hypothesis, on the
purely mechanical ground, is therefore as follows :
Wherever individualising causality is at work we
have systems embracing potential and kinetic
mechanical energy; both kinds of mechanical
energy are “ in suspension ” ; with regard to both
suspension may cease. Thus everything turns out
as in the energetic formulation. 1

A few general remarks may conclude this section.

If we say that entelechy, whenever it ceases to
suspend preformed material becoming, allows a
“ possible ” happening to become “ real,” we do
not mean to imply that any obstacle to becoming,
in the mechanical sense, is removed by entelechy ;
for such a removal in the mechanical sense, such an
Auslosung, would require energy, and entelechy is
per definitionem non-energetic. Entelechy only
allows that to become real which it has itself held
in a state of mere possibility—not what has been in
this state simply as a result of physico-chemical
influences.

It is useless to speak about the origin of ente-
lechial suspension in nature : useless, i.e. to discuss
the origin of life. It is absolutely impossible for
us to say anything definite on this subject. Similarly
it is useless to discuss the meaning of death. At the
end of this book a few words will be said about the
individuality or totality of the universe in general—
(about what is also called the problem of “ universal
teleology ”), and these problems will then be briefly
1 See Gifford Lectures, ii. pp. 218-225



206


THEORY OF VITALISM


mentioned, but there, too, only in a formal and
logical sense.

The foregoing has been written with reference to
a special problem of actual science, i.e. the problem
of the individual biological organism ; but it must
be borne in mind that it holds good for any kind of
unifying or individualising causality, and that it
was only for the purposes of the present exposition
that it was based on the specific concept of entelechy.



F. THE EMPIRICAL PROOFS OF VITALISM.

What we have tried to show so far is this : There
is the irreducible concept of a whole with its parts ;
there is the possibility of different forms of becoming,
for there are more possible forms of causality than
only spatial or singular, i.e. physico-chemical or
mechanical causality ; it is possible to formulate
an idea about the relations between mechanical and
non-mechanical causality (the theory of the “ sus¬
pending ” action of enteleehy).

We now proceed by showing that non-mechanical
causality exists in nature, at least in a certain limited
field. This is a purely empirical problem. It might
have turned out that the concept of unifying
causality was a mere concept of logic, having no
representative in nature as we have defined it. This
would be the case, if it were possible to conceive
all natural becoming mechanically. The concept
of wholeness or individuality might hold for nature
or parts of nature in this case also, in so far as there
were mediate objects in nature which were in¬
dubitably unities. But in the case of the possibility
of a mechanical conception of nature, no becoming
by which spatial wholeness is formed out of spatial
Hpn-wholeness would exist; all wholeness would



208


THEORY OP VITALISM


prove to be spatially preformed, just as wholeness
is preformed in a machine. A theory which applied
to nature the concept of wholeness but not the
concept of unifying causality might, indeed, properly
be called the machine-theory of nature, or, if life
alone were considered, of life. The machine-theory
would already be opposed to the conception of
nature (or life) as a mere field of chance.

Vitalism now tries to show that life is not only
not a mere field of chance, but that its phenomena
are not even covered by a machine-theory.

All proofs of Vitalism, i.e. all reasonings by which
it is shown that not even the machine-theory covers
the field of biological phenomena, can only be
indirect proofs : they can only make it clear that
mechanical or singular causality is not sufficient for
an explanation of what happens. Indirect proofs of
this sort may be given on three different and inde¬
pendent lines.

The first line of argument is this ■.

Analytic experimental embryology—Entwick-
lungsmechanik, as Roux has called it—has been able
to show that there are many kinds of embryonic
organs or even animals which, if by an operation
deprived of part of their cells, behave in the following
way : of whatever material you deprive these organs
or animals, the remainder, unless it is very small, will
always develop in the normal manner, though, so to
speak, in miniature. That is to say : there will
develop out of the part of the embryonic organ or
animal left by the operation, as might be expected,
not a part of the organisation but the whole, only on
a smaller scale. I have proposed the name of



THE EMPIRICAL PROOFS 209

harmonious-equipotential systems for organs or animals
of this type ; they are “ equipotential,” because all
their elements (cells) quite evidently must possess
the same morphogenetic “ potency,” otherwise the
experimental result would be impossible ; and their
elements work “ harmoniously ” together in each
single experimental case. It is only on the basis
of their equipotentiality and of their harmonious
working that the experimental results can be what
they are.

Among embryonic organs the cleavage stages and
the so-called germ-layers, for instance, are har-
monious-equipotential systems : take from the
blastula of a sea-urchin whatever you like (but not
more than three-quarters) and the rest will always
develop into a very small but complete “ Pluteus.”

Whole adult animals prove to be of the harmonious-
equipotential type in many cases of restitution
(regeneration), i.e. when they restore their form
after violations. The branchial apparatus of the
Ascidian Clavellina, for instance, is able to give rise
to a complete little organism by a mere rearrange¬
ment of its material without the formation of new
cells, and so in any part of this apparatus, cut it how
you will.

So much for the facts, which are very various and
numerous.

If now we turn to the theoretical analysis of the
facts, it might seem at the first glance as if no
further discussion were required: whenever an
organism or part of an organism, adult or embryonic,
is an harmonious-equipotential system , a homogeneous
n distribution of possibilities (i.e. cells which all have

o



210 THEORY OF VITALISM

the same morphogenetic potencies) is transformed
into a heterogeneous distribution of realities (i.e.
specific parts of cells with specific physiological
functions), and this is clearly the very scheme of
what we have called unifying or individualising
causality. Unifying, i.e. non-mechanical, causality
then seems to be at work whenever a harmonious-
equipotential system develops itself.

But the problem is a little more difficult than it
seems at first, though, it is true, our short reasoning
meets the main point.

Might there not be some sort of machine inside the
harmonious system, on the basis of which all its
evolutionary acts occur ? Weismann did regard
embryology in this way, and his theory was legiti¬
mate so long as there were no experiments. Experi¬
ments now show that any part of the system,
however large and wherever taken, may be cut away
from it without disturbing proportionate develop¬
ment. This proves that a “ machine ” cannot be
the basis of harmonious-equipotential differentiation :
for a “ machine,” i.e. a specific arrangement of
physico-chemical things and agents, does not remain
itself, if you take from it whatever you please, and the
organism, or, better, the non-developed harmonious
system does remain “ itself,” with regard to its mor¬
phogenetic faculties, after any operation whatever.

The harmonious system, then, is not a “ machine ” ;
it is, in fact, as it seemed to be from the beginning,
a something that is governed by Individualising
Causality. “ Entelechy,” as a non-mechanical agent
of nature, is at work in the harmonious-equipotential
system.



THE EMPIRICAL PROOFS 211

No other argument in favour of Vitalism meets so
well the purely logical requirements of the theory
of becoming as does the one that is based upon
harmonious differentiation. But there are still two
others, which as proofs of Vitalism, or, better, as
disproofs of the machine theory of life, are of equal
rank.

The first of them, which is at the same time the
“ second ” independent proof of Vitalism, runs as
follows :

There is another kind of equipotential system than
the harmonious-equipotential; and the ovary is an
instance of such a second type. The ovary is a
complex-equipotential system. Whilst in the har¬
monious-equipotential system the whole is formed
by the harmonious co-operation of all the single
elements, in the complex-equipotential system each
element for itself is capable of forming the totality ;
equipotentiality consists here in the fact, that all
elements are “ equally ” capable of so operating.

Now all this proves nothing for or against Vitalism
when taken for itself ; but it is different if we con¬
sider the genesis of an equipotential system of the
complex type. The ovary, for instance, has come
from one single cell in the course of embryology, i.e.
from its “ Anlage,” to use the untranslatable German
term which biology is adopting. This Anlage-cell
has been divided and re-divided innumerable times ;
the last products of this long process of divisions are
the eggs. We now simply say : How could a machine
(differentially built up in the three dimensions of
space as an embryological machine in any case
should be)—how could a machine he divided innumer -



212 THEORY OF VITALISM

able times and yet remain what it was ? No machine,
therefore, can be the test of embryology.

It appears, in short, that by this argument so-
called inheritance is shown not to depend on mecha¬
nical factors exclusively, material conditions, as
studied by Mendelism and in the experiments of
Boveri and Herbst, are only means of inheritance,
but are not its proper essential factor.

Whilst the second argument in favour of a non¬
mechanical interpretation of life has a certain
resemblance with the first one, the third proof of
the autonomy of life, which we must now try to
sketch shortly, follows a direction of its own.

What occurs in nature when a man acts ? What
does acting mean considered as a natural pheno¬
menon apart from all introspective psychology ? To
what general laws is the body of an acting man,
considered as a natural body, subject ?

Analysis shows that action of any kind whatever
does always bear these two essential features or
criteria. Firstly, it rests upon a basis of possibilities
which has been created historically, i.e. in the course
of the individual life of the acting person; or
shortly : it rests upon an historical basis of reaction.
That is to say, every action is determined—though
not exclusively—by everything that has occurred
to the acting person until this very moment of his
life. Had we not decided to put aside all psychology
in our argument, we might say that “ experience ”
based upon “ memory ” is one of the chief features
of all acting.

But—does not also the phonograph “ act ” upon
an historical basis of reaction ? Certainly it does.



THE EMPIRICAL PROOFS 213

and it is especially in order to distinguish the acting
organism from machines of the type of the phono¬
graph that a second criterion of acting must be added
to the first. The phonograph only gives off what
it has received, in its very specificity ; in the organism
the occurrences of individual life have only created
a general stock of possibilities for further acting, but
have not determined all further reactions quite in
detail. What really happens in any case of acting
—always upon the historical basis in general—occurs
according to a curious principle, which may be called
the criterion of individual correspondence. That is
to say : any real action is an individual “ answer ”
to an individual stimulus—founded upon the his¬
torical basis.

And this individual correspondence, occurring
upon an historically created basis, cannot be under¬
stood as a case of mechanical causality. For there
is not a “ sum ” on the side of the stimulus that
corresponds to a “ sum ” on the side of the reaction,
and, further, not even the possibilities of acting are
in any way “ performed.”

From this point of view, the brain and the nervous
system appear as nothing but as necessary means
for putting the “ acting ” factor into connexion with
material nature ; but they are not themselves the
acting factor.

These, then, are sketches of the three proofs of
Vitalism. Further proofs may be possible, and it is
to be hoped that others may be able to find them ;
but one proof, of course, is sufficient, if it is a real
“ proof.”

Besides what I regard as arguments proving the



214 THEORY OF VITALISM

ft

impossibility of a mechanical conception of life,
there are several arguments which, though not proofs
in the strict sense, may be called indicia of the
autonomy of life. These indicia of Vitalism can
only be shortly mentioned here, interesting as they
are ; in my Gifford Lectures a full and thorough
account of them may be found.

There are, firstly, the various facts regarding
complications in processes of restitution i.e. resti¬
tution of the second order or the “ restitution of
a restitution,” and the phenomenon of “equifin-
ality ” ; or the fact that the same regulatory result
may be reached on different morphogenetic lines.
Then there are the innumerable facts of active
adaptation—not of adaptedness as a mere state—
on the grounds of morphology as well as of physi¬
ology, and among animals as well as among plants.
The formation of what the theory of immunity
calls “ antibodies ” is the most remarkable case of
them. And, finally, there are the phenomena of
instinct and its regulations, which, unfortunately,
are not even as mere facts sufficiently analysed at
the present day.

All these facts are either reducible to those under¬
lying the first of our proofs of Vitalism, or they show
that the organism is of the type of an individual
unity in nature ; but they do not prove unifying
becoming. For to be of the type of a natural unity
is not the same as for a thing to owe its origin to
unifying becoming immediately, and it is with
unifying becoming alone that Vitalism has to do.
In the introduction to this book the difference
between “ static ” and “ dynamic ” teleology has



THE EMPIRICAL PROOFS 215

been urged. We have avoided in this sketch the
concept of teleology almost completely, having put
the concept of unity or individuality in its place and
having spoken of unifying instead of teleological
becoming. But it is clear without further discussion
that, if we were to apply the teleological concepts,
we might say that all “ indicia ” of Vitalism do not
prove “ dynamic ” teleology, i.e. Vitalism, but
only prove teleology in general, leaving the specifica¬
tion open, or “ static,” i.e. machine-like or preformed,
teleology. Therefore all these “ indicia,” and among
them even the strange facts of the formation of
antibodies, are more important in as far as they
state problems for future analytical research, than
as solutions of any question.

To sum up : the organism, as studied by the science
of biology, affords an instance of unifying or indivi¬
dualising causality, i.e. of one of the elementary
forms of causality, in so far as its morphogenetic
or moving behaviour is concerned. Whenever there
appears an harmonious-equipotential system in the
course of its morphogenetic behaviour, the organism
may even be said to be a quasi-verbal illustration
of what unifying causality, as one of the types of
possible non-mechanical forms of causality, means :
a sum (of possibilities of happening) is transformed
into a unity (of real results of happening) without
any spatial or material preformation of this unity.



O. THE PROBLEM OF SUPRAPERSONAL
INDIVIDUALITY.


Vitalism, so far, has been considered as a purely
biological theory. Individual biological becoming
is in fact an illustration of one of the elementary
forms of becoming that are possibly a priori ; the
words “ in fact ” are the main thing in this phrase ;
it is by them that a progress from mere logic into the
field of the philosophy of nature is made.

Now the problem that first of all arises is this :
Are there other “ systems ” in natural reality,
besides those which we call individual organisms, for
which we are able to prove, or at least to suppose,
that becoming with respect to them is also in fact
an illustration of the one possible type of causality
that we have called unifying or individualising
causality ? And this is an empirical problem, just
as was the problem of Vitalism proper.

It may as well be plainly stated at the outset that
we do not know in any case, whether there be any
further factual illustration of unifying cause, but
we may suppose that there is some such illustration
in various fields of reality.

If we start from pure logic we might at the first
glance suppose that there are very many cases, if



SUPRAPERSONAL INDIVIDUALITY 217


not of unifying causality, at least of factual unity.
Is not every concept a unity ? And might we not say,
therefore, that, wherever we have any concept that
“means ” as its mediate object an object of nature, we
also have conceived this object of nature as a unity ?

Our problem is, however, more complicated ; for
logical or conceptual unity does not warrant real
unity in the least way. We may take out of reality
anything, any “ system ” we want, and “ mean ”
this by one single term. The term as a logical
formation is then always a “ unity,” but it would
cause nothing; nay, it would disturb the concept of
real unity to say that the “ system ” as a natural
object is a unity also. To say so without a very
detailed consideration would deprive the concept
of real unity of that undoubted significance which
it may have if considered and applied carefully.

“ River,” “ island,” “ mountain,” “ the state,”
“ the organism,” “ England,” “ humanity,” “ a
street,” “ a lion ” are certainly all unities as concepts,
meaning certain natural (mediate) objects or classes
of natural objects. But, as to real unity, we know
so far only that “ the organism ” and “ a lion ” are
unities, built up by unifying becoming. With
regard to all the other objects a special investigation
is required.

What sort of an investigation is this to be ?

It would no doubt be best could we study in an
analytical way the “ becoming ” that has led to the
natural objects mentioned, as we have studied
analytically the becoming that has formed the
individual organism. And, in fact, this is possible
with respect to some of these objects. With respect



218 THEORY OF VITALISM

to “ river,” “ island,” “ mountain,” “ a street,” we
may say in fact, on the basis of our knowledge of
what we call geological and psychological becoming,
that the concepts of river, island, mountain, a street,
though unities as concepts, do not mean objects
which are unities. For the geological becoming that
has led to the presence of rivers, islands, and moun¬
tains, and the psychological or psycho-physical
becoming that has led to the presence of streets seem
clearly to be of the type of singular causality. In
short : as objects all these systems are sums and
nothing else. Certainly, they all owe their existence
to processes of complication ; but these complications
are cumulations and not evolutions —if by “evolution ”
we mean a complication from within, based upon
unifying becoming, and by “ cumulation ” a com¬
plication from without, based upon the mere circum¬
stance that one phase of singular becoming is
superimposed, so to say, upon the other. And the
latter is true for rivers, islands, mountains and
streets—so at least we are allowed to say without
quite a new kind of consideration not mentioned
as yet; so at least we may say on the basis of what is
commonly called “ science.”

But with regard to the objects signified by the
words “ the state,” “ England,” “ humanity,” we
know nothing as to their being the result of an
evolution or a cumulation. Can we know anything,
in this case, in the same way as we have a knowledge
of the evolutionary character of the processes that
lead to the individual organism ?

Phylogeny, and history as the continuation of
phylogeny, are the two great fields of reality we have



SUPRAPERSONAL INDIVIDUALITY 219


now to study ; the first of them is far more pro¬
blematic than the second, for with regard to so-called
phylogeny we do not even know, in the absolute
sense of the word, whether it has occurred at all,
though we may regard it as highly probable. Are,
then, phylogeny and history evolutions ? Is the
present state of mankind the result of any kind of
unifying causality ? Or, to put the question in
the language of this book, are the various single
processes of phylogeny and history dynamic-teleo¬
logical processes, if we call “ dynamic-teleological ”
any singularity in the midst of a totality of processes
controlled by individualising causality ?

Let us be brief about phylogeny. Wc may,
it is true, accept the theory of descent; but Dar¬
winism and Lamarckism do not touch the main
point of the problems ; they apply only to parts of
it which are of secondary importance. We do not
possess any real “ theory ” of phylogeny. May we,
at least, suppose phylogeny to be a suprapersonal
evolution 1 We may, but only for very general and
undetermined reasons ; along special lines there are
complications which we are not able to understand
from what we know in the other fields of biology. But
we are not even in possession of a warranted “system ”
of biological species, of a real “rational system.”

With regard to history we can say a little more,
because we ourselves stand in the midst of it—though
even this “ standing in the middle ” has, on the
other hand, a special and very strange dis¬
advantage with regard to real knowledge. For we
may even go as far as to say that because we are
standing in the middle of history as an evolution—



220 + THEORY OF VITALISM

granting that it be an evolution—we cannot and
shall never be able to appreciate in clearness its
evolutionary character. What could an em¬
bryonic cell, say of one of the germ layers, know
about the “ evolutionary unity ” of which it is a
part, if we could endow it with the faculties of
sensation and reasoning ? It would at the highest
“ suppose ” in a “ hypothetical ” manner that such
a unity exists. And we are in the place of the
reasoning embryonic cell with regard to supraper-
sonal unity.

And yet there are some peculiar features in
“ history ” or, rather, in the human community,
that seem to give us some signs of supra-individual
totality. The first of these signs is the general
biological fact of propagation. The second is what
Wundt has called the “ heterogeny of purposes,”
i.e. the fact that human action may have quite
different effects from what the agent expected—so
to speak in a creative manner. The third sign of
suprapersonality is morality or, rather, the fact of
moral feeling in the widest sense of the word.

We say here only a few words with regard to
morality as a sign of suprapersonal unity. By this
it is meant that the fact of moral feeling or, in short,
conscience, is to be understood, and can only be
understood, by the hypothesis that the single human
person plays a particular role in the midst of a real
evolution of mankind, and that his conscience shows
him, indirectly, what role he plays. Thus, morality
lends support to the hypothesis that mankind is
a suprapersonal unity in evolution, an hypothesis
which is by no means constructed ad hoc, i.e. simply



SUPRAPERSONAL INDIVIDUALITY 221


to “ explain ” the existence of morality, but owes
its origin to logical considerations. It is, of course,
necessary to assume, in order that the hypothesis of
mankind being a suprapersonal unity may really
“ explain ” morality, that the content of the moral
feeling in each person—with its two sides of pity and
duty—is in fact in accordance with the general goal
of human evolution, and does not mean what it
does though the goal of evolution might possibly
be considered as “ immoral.” But this additional
hypothesis is by no means artificial, though, of
course, it is an hypothesis.

By our conception of morality as a sign of supra¬
personal evolutionary unity, “ Ethics ” becomes a
part of “ Logic,” at least of the Logic of nature ; and
this is very important with regard to the system of
philosophy.

Returning, then, to the problem of suprapersonal
unity in general, with special regard to the problem
of history, it must be confessed that, apart from the
“ signs ” of unity spoken of, we are not able to say
anything more in detail about the evolutionary
character of history. What in the first place seems
to support the conception of history as an evolution
—the fact, namely, that everything has become so
complex and the so-called “ progress ” in art,
knowledge, manufacturing and general “ civilisa¬
tion ”-—all this may also mean nothing but what we
have called cumulation, and not evolution. In
other words, it may be that all these complications
rest only upon the faculty of the individual soul
to store, so to say, all its own experiences and
those of former generations. Even with respect to



222


THEORY OF VITALISM


moral “ progress,” it may behave like this ; the
abandoning of slavery and torture may not rest upon
a real evolutionary process, and we therefore cannot
know with certainty that both these institutions
will never be introduced again.

There certainly are cumulations in history, even
if we grant that a main line of real evolution runs
through it. And a sort of mixture of cumulation
and evolution will then be discernible in any
historically created system. If we call “ the State ”
the real evolutionary suprapersonal order of man¬
kind, we may not expect the political “ states ” of
our times to be pure suprapersonal unities for them¬
selves. They are each only part of the one supra¬
personal unity, mixed up with cumulative con¬
tingencies—if by contingency we understand what
does not belong to a special unity already recognised.
The mediaeval idea of one hierarchic state came
much nearer to the logical ideal of the one state as
the suprapersonal order of mankind than our modern
national states do.

Evolution and cumulation are certainly mixed in
history, if we grant to it its hypothetic evolutionary
character at all. And so it will probably be in
phylogeny also ; perhaps we may say here that the
theories of Lamarck and Darwin account for the
“ cumulations ” in phylogeny, whilst we are not yet
—and perhaps never shall be—in possession of a
theory that really tells us what sort of an “ evolu¬
tion ” phylogeny is.

The contrast between evolution and cumulation,
between contingency and unity in general now leads
us to further problems.



H. MONISM AND DUALISM.

In a previous paragraph of this article the concepts
of logic and of nature have been defined. Logic is
the theory of order in the widest sense of the word,
the concept of “ order ” being the indefinable basis
of all thinking. Nature is the totality of certain
“ mediate objects,” meant by immediate objects or
thought-contents, which behave as if they were
something for themselves. If now we bring the two
concepts of order and of nature together the following
postulate is at once before us.

Nature is to be conceived as the one order of natural
objects ; only if conceived in this way, can nature
be said to be “ understood ” ; for to understand is
to conceive as an order.

This, then, is the postulate of logic, or its “ ideal.”

Let us first try to see what this postulate means in
detail.

Strange to say, it destroys the difference between
“ mechanism ” and “ Vitalism,” or between singular
and unifying causality, which we have established
so carefully. For it abolishes mechanism. There is
no “ singularity ” any more in the face of the
general postulate of the one natural order ; the
universe is an organism, or rather is the one organism.



224


THEORY OF VITALISM


And the postulate of order destroys something
more, something that appears to be of the greatest
importance to science: it destroys the concept
of the law of nature. All so-called “ laws,” i.e. all
connexions of natural principles with regard to being
or becoming which are realised in so many “ cases,”
appear, at any rate, as nothing but features of the
behaviour of that agent which orders “ the nature,”
as features of the behaviour of the natura naturans.
And these features have no guarantee in themselves
of being immutable ; on the contrary, they must
be mutable, as certainly as nature is a something
in evolution. All natural becoming is like owe great
embryology ; but in biological embryology we know
that the “ law ” of mere cleavage, for instance,
holds good for, say, ten cell-divisions and is then
followed by the “ law ” of organ-formation.

Every singularity of being and becoming has its
own particular place in the order of nature—so
runs our postulate in another form.

We may call our postulate the 'postulate of monism
of order. All philosophers who have tried to work
a “ theodicy ” have seen this monism of order,
Plotinus, for instance, and Leibniz ; and all theo¬
logians who have written on “ providence ” have
also seen it.

It seems at the first glance as if the abolition of
the conception of “ law ” by means of our monistic
postulate entails a great disadvantage to science—
but only so long as we do not appreciate that some¬
thing else also is to be abolished by monism, a
something that may be said to be the greatest
enemy of thought: chance or contingency.



MONISM AND DUALISM


225


There is no contingency where there is mere order.

But now the great question arises : is the logical
postulate of order or monism really to be fulfilled by
what we know about nature empirically ? Can we
really say that we know that every singularity of
nature has its single place in one great ordered
totality ; that, as far as becoming is concerned, every
single event is purposive or teleological with regard
to a certain final state which we conceive as the
ordered state ? Or must we confess in spite of all
logic and all logical postulates that we do not know
that nature is one order, in which every singularity
of being or of becoming has its one peculiar place ?

This problem—the problem of monism or dualism
with regard to factual natural order—is not to be
solved in a final way. For, in spite of all the de¬
ficiencies of our positive knowledge with regard to
order, monism may always reason in the following
way :

Certainly, what we know and are even able to know
about nature does not form one order if taken
together ; there is chance, contingency, non-teleo¬
logy in what we know. But this is our fault and
not the fault of nature. For we have imagined we
had the whole of nature where we had only part;
and only that part which is such as to he accessible
to our form of apprehending reality. We can only
receive the one part of reality which appears to us
under the signs of spatiality. But only what we
call inorganic becoming is completely accessible to
us in the form of spatial signs ; even individual
organic becoming, as studied in biology, is marked
to us only by some spatial results but not as becom-



226 , THEORY OF VITALISM

mg ; for it is not spatial, i.e. in space, as becoming.
And who can say how' many kinds of being or
becoming there may be in reality which are absolutely
inaccessible to us, because they are not marked
by spatial signs at all ? And might it not be that
nature would appear to us as the one order we are
in search for, if only we knew all those parts of it
which, by our mental organisation, we are absolutely
incapable of knowing ?

Such reasoning is the ultimate ratio of a monism
of order. It explains our insufficiency in conceiving
monism by metaphysical possibilities, i.e. by the
hypothesis that there may be innumerable fields
of reality not marked to us by spatial signs ; it,
certainly, is quite uncontrollable. But it expresses
a possibility, and thus monism is not to be defeated
in an absolute manner.

Whoever lays stress upon what is empirically
bioum must accept the dualism of order and chance,
of unity and sum—of elSos and v\y in the last
resort.

In order to know where there are groups of natural
facts which we are naturally unable to conceive as
parts of a unity, let us first return to embryology
once more. We know that embryological becoming
is “ vitalistic,” that it is impossible to comprehend
it by the laws of physics and chemistry. But does
this statement apply to each singleness in the course
of embryology ? Certainly it does not: the position
of the single cells in the different organs of the
embryo or the adult is, probably in almost all cases,
contingent; and is different in each individual of the
same species. Unity and unifying causality apply



MONISM AND DUALISM 227

only to the arrangement of organs in general and to
the general features of form—say, of the single bones
of vertebrates—but not to any intimate details.

If we leave aside that large field of our ignorance,
phylogeny, and turn at once to history, we meet
contingency in another form. From another point
of view, as we have said before, there certainly are
cumulations and probably lines of evolution in
history. When we said this we had not yet formu¬
lated the logical postulate of monism of order, we
rather looked upon the “ signs ” of unity in history
as something very valuable though rare. That was
the method of naive empiricism. But now we start
from the postulate of monism of order and—do not
find it fulfilled : and it is now not merely cumulation
with regard to which we say that we are disappointed
as logicians—it is chance, it is contingency in its
crude and immediate reality, and, further, it is still
something else. We have tried to conceive ethics
as a part of the logic of reality, i.e. to conceive moral
feelings as a sign of the single man’s belonging to a
suprapersonal unity in evolution. Why, then, we
may now ask, are men not always “ good ” but
very often “ bad ” ; why is there the evil, the sin ?
Evil and sin seem to be non-evolutionary contin¬
gencies of the highest order. But in pure biology
we have their counterpart in illness and even death.

In any case we know there are historical con¬
tingencies—at least for our human knowledge, or,
better, as far as we believe that we have complete
nature in spatial nature. It must be granted that,
even apart from this argument our knowledge of
the main points in history is very imperfect, that



228 THEORY OE VITALISM

*

there may be “ signs of unity ” in it that might be
accessible to us, were we but carefully to study the
problem—Hegel’s concept of the “ List der Ver-
nunft ” is probably a suggestion that one day may
lead further. But, even then, in the one case
a shot reaches its mark and in another not, the
marks both times being historical persons, and this
appears to us to be contingent and nothing else ;
so long, at least, as our knowing ranks higher to us
than our postulating.

This is the right place to say a few words on the
methodology of history, and of all science of “ cul¬
ture,” from the purely logical point of view. The
problem has been very much discussed in recent
years, particularly in Germany, but the main point,
it seems to me, has generally been slurred over.
On the one hand, as first in the work of Windelband,
an endeavour is made to formulate what the actual
method of the writers of history is at the present
day ; the historian too, it is said, selects and orders
his material in relation to “ values,” i.e. centres of
interest. This is certainly done, but cannot be said
to be “ science ” ; were it the last word of history,
history would be a collection of curiosities, and
would, at the best, be of moral or ethical value alone.
But, on the other hand, we are told, and in par¬
ticular by Buckle, Taine, Lamprecht and others, that
history must try to find historical “ laws.” There
is no doubt that this is a real theme for the historian,
but, it seems to me, it is his theme more in his
capacity as a sort of psychologist than as a real
“ historian.” For these historical “ laws ”—quite
apart from their being mere regulae , of a cumulative



MONISM AND DUALISM 229

character, and not elementary laws—do not touch
history as one single evolutionary process ; they also
deprive history of its proper aspect of becoming.
This, then, seems to me to be the real goal of the
history of the future : to try to find signs of evolution
in history, signs of an evolution proper to it and to
nothing else ; in this way history would have its
place in the midst of the general theory of order
and would yet be a science for itself. Herder and
Hegel conceived history in this way, though not in
a manner quite satisfactory, and in our days Breysig
seems to follow them.

We now return to the question—monism or
dualism—to attack the very centre of the problem.

Monism of order is a postulate of logic ; the whole
universe should be conceived as one order. To do
this is impossible on the grounds of biology proper
and of history, because in both cases there is unity
mixed with chance and contingency. What now'
is to be said about our knowledge of unity, of the one
order with regard to so-called inorganic nature ?

It seems at first as if the gap between ideal and
reality is greater here than anywhere else ; for
empirical science, so far, has not even raised the
question of unity, as it has done in biology and
history, but has surrendered the whole material to
the scheme of singular causality without hesitation.
So, at least, it has been during the last decades of
the history of science. Must matters remain thus ?
Anyone who knows a little of the scientific literature
of the eighteenth century would hardly be inclined
to answer this question in the affirmative. For very
much was written in former days on the “ general



230 THEORY OF VITALISM

teleology,” the “ mutual harmony ” of what we call
to-day, rather carelessly, “ inorganic ” nature.

But perhaps all books about “ general ” and
“ mutual ” teleology or unity have been written in
a decidedly uncritical way ? Granted that they are
—is it not rather remarkable that a professor of
biological chemistry is working in quite the same
spirit at the present time ?

Professor Henderson of Harvard has recently
published a very remarkable book entitled The
Fitness of the Environment. I do not agree with
Henderson’s attitude towards the problem of
Vitalism ; he advocates what we should call the
machine-theory, i.e. a static teleological conception
of life, which does not seem to meet the point. But
this is quite immaterial if compared with his positive
work : he has not only once more realised the
problem of inorganic or, better, universal teleology,
as I may also claim to have done at the end of my
Gifford Lectures, but he has found the way to deal
with this 'problem in detail, and this on the firm ground
of physics, chemistry and physical chemistry. Water,
carbonic acid, and “ the ocean ” are the chief objects
of his study ; and the result of his researches is
that all phenomena of life are quite essentially
based upon the exceptional character of all the so-
called constants of H 2 0 and C0 2 , if compared with the
constants of all other compounds. The well-known
and often discussed fact that water has its greatest
density at -f 4° C. and not at freezing point is but
one out of very numerous topics of his argument.

This, then, is the old problem of the harmony of
nature in a modem and very exact form ; and this



MONISM AND DUALISM 231

harmony is nothing but a “ sign ” of unity or
individuality in the universe in general.

Unfortunately we must confess that it is the only
“ sign ” of universal unity that we know exactly.
But one is better than none, and, further, to have
one allows us to hope that we may have more some day
—perhaps when the distribution of land and water,
of the sidereal masses, of “matter” in general has
been studied with the special object of finding unity.

At present we have not more than the one sign
of unity ; that consists in certain features of “ fit¬
ness ” for life, with regard to “ inorganic ” unity,
i.e .—strange to say—with regard to our conceiving
the inorganic universe as an organism in the
strict sense. The rest is chance or contingency.
For nobody -would dare to say that he understands
under the point of view of unity—that “ these
stones here in this forest are lying just in the way
they are.” But for monism of order as a matter of
knowledge—and not as a mere postulate of logic as
the theory of order—this would be necessary.

This, then, is the general result of our inquiry :
Monism of order as a postulate, Dualism of order and
chance as the fact. And the only possibility of
saving the postulate of monism in spite of our know¬
ing about dualism, is to have recourse to meta¬
physical possibilities, unknowable in principle, i.e.
to the hypothesis that there may “ be ” certain areas
of reality which have no spatial signs, human
experience being bound to spatiality and therefore
not able to solve even the biological problem quite
satisfactorily. 1


* See above, page 225.



I. METAPHYSICAL CONCLUSIONS.

All our discussions on Vitalism, suprapersonal
unity, monism of order and dualism, and so on, with
one single exception, 1 have, so far, been absolutely
independent of any kind of metaphysics, have been
throughout non-metaphysical. This assumes that
the U'ord “ metaphysics ” is to signify a doctrine
that tries to deal with “ being ” without reference to
whether this being is consciously had by myself,
i.e. with being in itself. It appears to me that this
statement must be explained in some detail.

Logic as the theory of order deals with everything
that is object to myself, that is consciously had by
myself. The totality of immediate objects, then, are
my objects, and their order is my order ; the signs of
order, i.e. the irreducible fundamentals of logic as
“ this,” “ such,” “ relation,” etc., being found by
my introspection. And all postulates of the theory
of order, as regards geometry or the theory of
becoming or whatever else, are my postulates. And
if, further on, nature is regarded as a totality of
mediate objects, only “ meant ” or “ signified ” by
immediate objects or thought-contents, as a totality

1 See page 226, where we tried to “ save ” the monism of order
on the basis of certain metaphysical assumptions.



METAPHYSICAL CONCLUSIONS 233

that behaves as if it were something independent in
itself, in particular with respect to becoming—this
concept of nature is also my concept, is created by
myself in the service of the theory of order which
is mine.

But this solipsistic conception of logic and of logic
of nature is by no means dogmatic. For I have not
said : “ the world of my objects, both immediate and
mediate or natural, is only my world.” But I have
said: “ it is my world in any case,” or, in other words :
“ this it is that I know : it is my world.” We may
speak here of solipsism as a critical method or of
methodological solipsism ; and this methodological
solipsism is the true critical philosophy, i.e. the one
philosophy that tries to stand on firm ground and
not to say anything from a dogmatic point of view
that can be said non-dogmatically.

Thus, then, all our theory of nature, as a part of
the theory of order, has been non-dogmatic, and, in
particular, non-metaphysical. And this theory of
nature includes the theory of Vitalism proper, of
suprapersonal unity in its different possible forms,
of monism and dualism. All these theoretical
formulations are purely analytical and independent
of any metaphysical conception whatsoever. Those
who prefer it may regard these purely analytical
formulations as the last possible word with regard
to nature ; for them our work finishes here.

But, in my opinion, though overstepping the
boundaries of solipsism certainly means giving up
the firm ground of reasoning, solipsism is by no
means satisfactory. There is something in it that
appears as a gap. Or, in other words : for mere



234. THEORY OF VITALISM

reasons of order the solipsistie theory of order must
try to come out of itself , to become something other
than it was, namely, metaphysics, or a system of
hypothetical statements about something that is
not merely mine ; though, of course, it must have the
faculty to become also mine, otherwise I should
not be able to deal with it at all.

If we here neglect the problems of psychology
and of ethics, it is clear that it is the mere logical
concept of nature that forces us to go beyond
mere solipsism. Nature “ as if ” it were an inde¬
pendent community of (mediate) objects—this is
not a solution, but only the way to one. Why not
say : Nature the sign of “ real ” or “ absolute ”
independence ? At least we may do our best, i.e.
try to formulate a system of statements about
“ reality ” in a hypothetical form. This system of
metaphysical statements, of course, must be such as
to explain not only nature as an object but also my
consciously having nature ; in other words, the
purely solipsistie analytical theory of nature and of
my “ having ” nature must be a consequence of the
metaphysical theory—were it not, metaphysics
would be valueless.

Metaphysics, then, must start from my knowledge
of nature (and psychology); its method can be
nothing but “induction,” i.e. the endeavour to
formulate statements from which known statements
follow; for this is the deeper meaning of the
term “ induction.” Never, of course, can meta¬
physics become a system of statements that possess
absolute certainty: metaphysics always must be
hypothetical in the strict sense of the word. For,



METAPHYSICAL CONCLUSIONS 235

as was said, it goes from the consequences to the
reasons, and it is a well-known logical truth, that
“ affirmation of a consequence does not mean
affirmation of the reason,” or, in other words : a
consequence may have had various reasons.

It cannot be our aim here, of course, to develop a
system of metaphysics ; not even a sketch of a
metaphysical system can be given. We shall only
say a few words about those metaphysical questions
which are intimately connected with the problem of
Vitalism in the widest sense.

It is meaningless to raise the question, whether
any feature of natural reality in its empirical suchness
or quality be “ the same ” as the suchness of a
feature of absolute reality taken “ in itself,” or
whether it be only an “ image ” of the absolute
suchness. For in order to decide this question we
should have to compare a something “ for myself ”
with a something only in so far as it is “ in itself ” ;
and this is impossible, because the “ in itself ” must
become “ for myself ” in order to be known at all.

The question, then, is meaningless whether to
spatiality as experienced in nature corresponds a
something in the absolute sphere that is also
“ spatial.” But we may safely say that, just as
all experienced spatiality implies belonging to one
and the same special system of relations, so also
everything that corresponds to the quality of
spatiality in the Absolute belongs to one and the
same kind of system of relations, and not to different
systems. Space then—and the same holds for time,
though in a somewhat different way—is to us a sign
of one special system of relations in the Absolute.



236, THEORY OP VITALISM

Now we have seen that what we have called
singular causality fully appears to us in space, but
that unifying or individualising causality, as one of
the three other forms of possible becoming in nature,
has only, so to say, points of effect in space, but is
not in space as becoming. Quite apart from time,
then, there is certainly one special system of relations
in the absolute, besides the one that corresponds to
experienced spatiality ; and we only know about this
system in so far as it cuts, so to speak, across the
system which we know under the sign of spatiality.
It is for this reason that, even in the realm of the
mere theory of order, we only know about the
existence, but not about the suchness of entelechy
taken for itself.

Our knowledge of the absolute existence of more
than one special system of relations—apart from
time—only one of which, under the form of spatiality,
is signified to our experience in completeness, is of
fundamental importance for our comprehension of
Absoluteness in general ; it shows us at once that
there are features of the Absolute about which we
have no signified knowledge. Of what we may call
the “ vital system ” of relations we have at least
some incomplete signs—in our knowledge of the
points of intersection of this system with the system
signified by space. But how many systems of
relations may there be, of which we are absolutely
unable to know anything at all ? Let us recall how
by admitting the possibility of unknowable systems
of relations in the Absolute, we were able to save
monism of order in principle. 1

1 Cf. p. 226.



METAPHYSICAL CONCLUSIONS 237

The concept of universal determination governs the
whole of the theory of order, and the theory of
natural becoming in particular—in the form of a
connexion of becoming in itself, as if there were
reasons and consequences in it: and the greatest
difficulty of metaphysics is the problem whether
this concept of determination, with special regard to
becoming, holds good, i.e. means something in the
metaphysical sphere, or not. If not, the theory of
order would have to lose one of its most important
concepts in favour of metaphysics. We, indeed,
have pressed the concept of determination as far as
we could, and have even regarded history as a supra-
personal evolution determined in its becoming by
a suprapersonal entelechy. This predetermination
of historical becoming, it is true, was of no
practical use to us, for we do not know entelechies
apart from their manifestations ; but it was there
in principle, and this the theory of order had to
state ; and, according to this theory, it would be
possible to imagine a supra-Laplacian mind which,
in possession of a knowledge of all pure entelechies,
might predict historical evolutionary becoming.

We therefore raise the question whether the
theory of the predetermination and univocality of all
becoming is more than an outgrowth of the limited
character of the human mind ; whether at least
suprapersonal evolutionary becoming, as shown to
us in phylogeny and history, may not be undeter¬
mined or, to use a common word in its strict meaning,
may be free. Freedom is not to mean here that the
single individuals in a suprapersonal unity are free
from, i.e. completely independent of, one another ;



238 THEORY OF VITALISM

this possibility, or, in other words, a true monadistic
theory, is excluded by our concept of suprapersonal
unity from the beginning. But freedom means
that a stream, as it were, of undetermined becoming
of a really creative character runs through the
totality of individuals ; whereas, if metaphysics
decide not to admit freedom, an immaterial supra¬
personal agent would reveal itself in its own suchness
in the course of phylogeny and history. With the
first alternative there arises something that is really
new in the course of becoming ; with the second
there is nothing “ new ” as regards the principal
features of the manifoldness of what becomes, and
only its materialisation is something “ new.” Our
problem is the problem of pantheism or theism
in a special form; at least, if we call 'pantheism, the
one doctrine that reality is a something which
is making itself (“ dieu se fait,” in the words of
Bergson), whilst theism would be any theory accord¬
ing to which the manifoldness of material reality is
predetermined in an immaterial way. There is no
doubt that in this sense many of the emanation-
systems would be theistic systems also, and not only
those systems that accept the concept of creation
proper. In any case there seems to me to be a
greater difference between what we have called
pantheism and the systems of emanation, than
between emanation and creation—if emanation
means that all suchness and manifoldness of know-
able reality is predetermined in the Absolute in any
way.

The problem is, then, accurately formulated ; but
now we see at once that we cannot solve it ; and this



METAPHYSICAL CONCLUSIONS 239

for the very reason which prevents all metaphysics
from going beyond probabilities or even mere
possibilities.

What we know is the impossibility of a prediction
of further states of suprapersonal evolution from the
states already reached and known; what we
postulate in the field of the theory of order is that
impossibility of prediction does not mean ^deter¬
mination. The following metaphysical question
arises : does the Absolute agree with our postulate
or not ? But we only know about metaphysics
that its statement must be such as to render possible
“ experience ” in the widest sense. Now it is clear
that “ experience,” i.e. our knowledge of the impossi¬
bility of making predictions about future states of
evolution, would be equally what it is, whether there
be indetermination in the Absolute or a sort of
determination unknowable to us.

The problem of theism or pantheism, then, must
remain unsolved and surrendered to belief ; and
we may only say that those who regard the thesis
of the theory of order as necessary for everything
that is or can be, must accept theism and are not
allowed to speak of “ dieu qui se fait.” But to
accept theism would again mean to accept a number
of alternatives among which it is impossible to
decide.


GLASGOW : PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY ROBERT MACLKHOSR AND CO. LTD.


